Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. VII (1891-1892)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1891 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XVIII-XX) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc07soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  VIE
(CONTAINING PARTS XVIII.— XX.)
1891—92.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Lim
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.
1892.


London :

National  Press  Agency,  Limited,
13,  Whitefbiaes  Street,  E.C.


CONTENTS.

PAGE

Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.  By  Baron  von  Schrenck-
Notzing,  M.D.,  Munich  3

Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing. By  Thomas  Bark-

WORTH 23

On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.  Part  I.  By  Mrs.  Henry  SlDGWICK  .  30
Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne.  By  Leon  Marillier  .  .  .100
Supplement.

I. Professor  William  James's  "The  Principles  of  Psychology.''  By

F.  W.  H.  Myers ..Ill

II. Short  Notices  of  Books .134

III.  Circular  Letter  No.  4. —Hypnotism  :  Its  Conditions  and  Safeguards  .  137

IV.  Circular  Letter  No.  3.  (2nd  Edition. ) Appeal  for  Collaboration. .  141


V. Circular  Letter  No.  5. Importance  of  Publication  of  Names . .  144
On  Alleged  Movements  of  Objects,  without  Contact,  Occurring  not  in  the

Presence  of  a  Paid  Medium.  Part  I.  By  F.  W.  H.  Myers  .  .  .  14G
Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.  By  Dr.  Alfred  Backman  .  .  .  .199
A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness. By  Richard  Hodgson  . .  .  221

Supplement.

1. Third  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations . . .  259
II. On  Spirit  Photographs;  A  Reply  to  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace. By  Mrs.

Henry  Sidgwick  268

fill. Notices  of  Books. By  H.  E.  Wingfield  and  W.  Leaf . . .  290

The  Subliminal  Consciousness. By  F.  W.  IT.  Myers  298

Supplement  to  the  Paper  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance. By  Mrs.

Henry  Sidgwick ,  .  350

j  Note  on  a  Visit  to  Kalmar. By  F.  W.  H.  Myers  370

J Some  Recent  Thought-Transference  Experiments. By  Professor  Oliver
J.  Lodge,  F.R.S  "  374

j  On  Alleged  Movements  of  Objects,  without  Contact,  Occurring  not  in  the

Presence  of  a  Paid  Medium. Part  TI. By  F.  W.  II.  Myers  . .  .333

Supplement.
Reviews —

I. "  Kiddles  of  the  Sphinx." Reviewed  by  C.  0.  MASSEY


IT. "  The  Occult  Sciences  "

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  "  Edmund  Gurney  "  Library

List  of  Members  and  Associates

List  of  Members  ami  Associates  of  the  American  Branch  .


39.}
408
411
413


34091


c r c  r


Iff  c  >


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS OF GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  42nd  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall,  on  Friday,  December  5th,  1890,  at  8  30  p.m.

Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  read  part  of  a  paper  on  "  The  Evidence  for
Clairvoyance,"  printed  below,  and  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  read  an  account
of  a  case  of  apparent  mental  activity  during  coma,  recorded  by  Dr.
A.  S.  Wiltse  about  himself.


The  43rd  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
January  30th,  1891,  at  4  p.m.

A  continuation  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  on  "  The  Evidence  for
Clairvoyance  "  was  read  for  her  by  Mr.  F.  Podmore,  and  a  translation
of  a  paper  by  M.  Leon  Marillier,  on  "  Some  Recent  Apparitions  of
the  Virgin  in  Dordogne,"  was  read  by  Mr.  H.  Babington  Smith.
Both  of  these  are  printed  below.


The  44th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
March  6th,  at  8.30  p.m.

A  translation  of  a  paper  by  Baron  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  M.D.,
of  Munich,  on  "Some  Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference, "
was  read  by  Mr.  F.  Podmore. This  is  printed  below.

A  paper  by  Professor  William  James  and  Mr.  R.  Hodgson,  on  a,
case  of  double  personality  of  the  ambulatory  type  (that  of  the  Rev.
Ansel  Bourne),  which  it  is  proposed  to  publish  in  a  future  number  of
the  Proceedings,  was  read  by  Mr.  W.  Leaf.


The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  was  in  the  chair  on  each
occasion.


B


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc07soci


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought- Transference.  3


I.

EXPERIMENTAL  STUDIES  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

By  Baron  v.  Schrenck-Notzing,  M.D.,  Munich.

(Translation  revised  by  the  Author.)

"  The  subtiity  of  Nature  is  many  times  greater  than  the  subtilty  of  the  senses
and  of  the  understanding. " — Bacon,  Novum  Organum,  Bk.  1,  10.

I. — Introduction.

If  it  be  true  that  one  brain  can  impress  another  without  the
intervention  of  the  known  organs  of  sense,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a
discovery  of  great  and  far-reaching  importance  has  been  made.  And
if,  after  the  discovery  of  the  chain  of  physical  causation,  at  present
unknown  to  us,  but  certainly  existing,  the  centrifugal  effects  of  vivid
ideas  in  one  person  produce  in  another,  in  exceptional  cases,  sense
perceptions  extending  beyond  the  limits  of  our  ordinary  experience,
our  knowledge  of  the  functions  of  the  brain  would  thereby  be  much
enlarged.  It  is  possible  also,  however  unlikely  it  may  seem,  that  there
is  in  the  numerous  and  careful  observations  now  being  made  some
indication  of  a  latent  source  of  error,  which  has  hitherto  escaped  us
and  all  other  investigators,  and  which  would  afford  some  quite  simple
explanation  of  the  occurrences  in  question.  But  if  so,  such  a  discovery
would  be  an  important  step  forward,  and  would  put  an  end  to  many
errors.  In  the  time  of  Galvani,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to
foretell  that  the  present  immense  development  of  the  application  of
■electricity  would  result  from  his  observations  on  the  twitching  of  a
frog's  leg.  And  as  little  is  it  possible  to  foresee  the  future  of  our
branch  of  investigation,  now  in  its  earliest  infancy;  for  the  beginnings
of  a  new  science  are  often  so  trivial  that  they  are  easily  underrated,  or
even  rejected  a  'priori  when  they  do  not  fit  in  with  old  systems.  But
even  though  the  subject  before  us  may  seem  at  the  first  glance  to  have
no  connection  with  recognised  branches  of  science,  that  is  no  reason  for
turning  away  from  it.  On  the  contrary,  only  serious  critical  examina-
tion of  experiments  made  with  suitable  persons,  and  careful  observation
of  the  phenomena  which  occasionally  present  themselves  spontaneously,
will  enable  us  to  distinguish  truth  from  error,  and  to  settle  the  question
as  to  the  reality  of  the  alleged  facts;  and,  above  all,  to  banish  the
thick  fog  of  charlatanry  and  superstition  with  which  human  credulity
and  religious  enthusiasm  have  enveloped  the  phenomena  of  thought-
transference,  telepathy,  clairvoyance,  etc.

We  certainly  do  not  underrate  the  great  difficulties  which  beset
scientific  investigation  in  this  domain. Everywhere  self-deception


4


Baron  von  Schrench-Notzing.


needs  guarding  against  more  carefully  than  in  other  branches  of
science.  Everywhere,  besides  the  ordinary  sources  of  human  error,
there  are  some  quite  special  to  the  subject.  In  order  to  advance  the
knowledge  of  psychical  processes,  in  this  direction,  and  to  win  a  new
and  fruitful  held  for  scientific  work,  we  must,  firstly,  aim  at  the  careful
observation  and  record  of  each  individual  case,  with  the  utmost  possible
regard  to  known  causal  connections ;  and,  secondly,  endeavour  to  assign
to  it  its  place  among  a  large  number  of  similar  phenomena,  arranged  in
groups,  where  each  individual  case,  whether  it  be  an  experiment  or  an
observation  of  a  spontaneous  event,  must  be  classified  with  equal
exactness.

The  question  of  psychical  action  at  a  distance,  apart  from  the
experience  and  cisnviction  of  individuals,  appears  to  be  still  an  open
one  for  science,  in  Germany  at  least.  But  if  thought-transference,
in  the  sense  of  the  greater  part  of  the  observers,  does  not  exist,  there-
is  certainly  apparent  thought-transference ;  and  even  so  the  duty
of  scientific  investigation  is  clear.  For  in  any  case  a  careful  study  of  the
phenomena  might  greatly  enlarge  and  enrich  our  knowledge  of  the
action  of  the  human  mind.

Now,  in  spite  of  careful  consideration  of  all  accompanying  circum-
stances and  possible  sources  of  error,  a  number  of  cases  of  apparent
suggestion  mentale  remain  unexplained,  as  the  excellent  investigations
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  show.  For  the  range  of  the
sources  of  error  has  quite  definite  limits.  If,  for  exanqoile,  every  kind
of  internal  expression  of  thought  is  accompanied,  as  Jackson  and
Strieker  have  both  shown,  by  the  execution  of  a  definite  movement ;
if,  further,  we  assume  that  the  unintentional  expressive  movement,  the
involuntary  unconscious  suggestion,  may  sometimes,  in  spite  of  the
most  careful  precautions,  betray  a  part  of  the  mental  wish;  still  the
assumed  operation  of  this  factor  in  the  reproduction  of  drawings  when
agent  and  percipient  are  in  the  same  room,  is  not  even  an  approximately
adequate  explanation  of  the  occasionally  striking  agreement  between
reproduction  and  original ;  and  least  of  all  is  it  so  in  those  cases  in
which  it  is  precisely  the  deviation  from  the  original  which  proves  the
thought-transference.  My  experience,  like  that  of  Bichet  and  others,
shows  that  sometimes  the  half  successful  experiments — those,  for
example,  in  which  only  the  fundamental  principle  or  element,  or  only
the  form  of  the  original  has  been  grasped — are  more  instructive  and
convincing  than  the  completely  successful  ones.  Take,  as  an  instance,
the  case  where  the  original  drawing  is  a  star.  The  reproduction  in
one,  two,  and  three  attempts  gives  the  fundamental  element  of  the  star
— the  form  of  a  W.  Can  we  suppose  that  the  percipient,  in  such  a  case
of  successful  transference,  read  the  W  in  the  expression  of  the  agent,
-svho  was  thinking  not  of  a  W,  but  of  a  star  2 Or  should  we  suppose


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought- Transference.


5


that  the  percipient  really  perceived  the  star,  but  with  refined  and
deliberate  artfulness  did  not  reproduce  the  true  figure,  but  only  its
main  lines  slightly  altered  ?  One  supposition  is,  in  this  case,  as  improb-
able as  the  other,  and  the  second  falls  to  the  ground  altogether,  when
the  same  result  is  observed  with  several  percipients  unknown  to  each
•other.  In  general  the  psychical  echo — the  transformation  which  the
thought  undergoes  when  reconstructed  in  the  brain  of  a  percipient —
is  of  great  interest,  and  it  may  be  quite  decisive  as  to  the  evidential
value  of  an  experiment.

A  further  and  often  neglected  source  of  error,  upon  which  the
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  justly  insisted,  is  a
■corresponding  association  of  ideas  in  agent  and  percipient.  But  this
also  has  definite  limits.  It  is  of  no  importance  in  experiments  in
which  the  thing  to  be  done  is  decided  by  lot.  And  it  is  also  out  of  the
question  in  cases  in  winch  it  can  be  shown  that  the  cause  which
determined  the  choice  of  the  object  to  be  thought  of  was  not  common
to  the  brains  of  both  agent  and  percipient,  or  at  least  that  the  per-
cipient was  not  influenced  by  it.  If,  for  example,  I  vividly  imagine  to
myself  some  object  in  my  room,  my  attention  may  have  been  excited
by  the  object  itself,  and  the  percipient,  being  in  the  same  room,  may
guess  what  it  is  at  the  moment  when  I  look  at  it,  from  some  change  in
my  expression  connected  with  its  arresting  my  attention.  But  this
■objection  falls  to  the  ground  if  the  process  in  the  mind  of  the  agent
takes  place  as  follows:  I  wish  to  choose  some  object  in  the  room  to  be
guessed;  I  keep  my  eyes  fixed  on  a  particular  spot,  and  wander  round  the
room  in  imagination.  My  mental  eye  fixes  itself  on  a  basket  on  the
wall  behind  me,  in  which  there  is  an  Indian  handkerchief.  The  whole
wall  is  covered  with  all  sorts  of  things,  a  large  bookcase  stands  against
it,  and  many  objects  in  daily  use,  pictures,  and  so  on,  are  there.  Now,
I  ask,  how  is  it  possible  that  the  percipient  should  guess  from  my
■expression  that  I  am  thinking  of  that  Indian  handkerchief  ?  Even
supposing  that  I  made  some  movement  when  I  fixed  on  that  idea,  how
•could  the  movement  be  rightly  interpreted  1  A  movement  involun-
tarily made,  in  spite  of  efforts  to  the  contrary,  could  at  most  have
betrayed  the  neighbourhood  of  the  object,  the  tvhole  wall,  that
is,  where  there  were  hundreds  of  things  besides  the  one  thought
■of.  Whence  comes  it,  then,  that  from  this  supposed  movement,
unconscious,  but  perceived  and  rightly  interpreted  by  the  per-
cipient, she  names  exactly  the  right  object  out  of  hundreds  1  It
is  impossible  that  she  should  divine  the  nature  of  the  object  to  be
guessed  from  a  gesture  only.

I  must,  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  regard  a  successful
experiment  of  this  kind  as  tending  to  prove  thought-transference,  till
.some  opponent  has  given  experimental  proof  that  the  nature  of  a


6


Baron  von  Schrench-Notzing.


definite  object  thought  of  can  be  recognised  from  expression  or  gesture
alone.  The  same  holds  good  of  an  experiment  in  which  I  think  of
some  person,  and  the  percipient  does  not  name  that  person,  but  another
person  who  lives  in  the  same  house,  it  being  the  image  of  the  house
that  first  came  before  my  mind's  eye.  Is  it  possible,  I  ask,  that  the
expression  which  accompanies  the  thought  of  a  particular  person  or
a  particular  house  has  some  special  character,  not  belonging  to  other
gestures,  by  which  the  percipient  recognises  the  right  idea  1  Such  a
special  and  recognisable  character  of  gesture  or  expression  is  not  known
to  exist,  and  is  not  an  admissible  explanation,  so  long  as  its  possibility
is  not  proved.  Till  then  such  coincidences  are  to  be  explained  as
thought-transference;  and  I  therefore  feel  bound  to  relate  these  experi-
ments, especially  as  they  form  an  interesting  parallel  with  experiments
at  a  distance  and  under  other  conditions.  And  in  experiments  of
which  various  explanations  are  possible  it  is  just  the  observation  and
record  of  the  little  accessory  circumstances  which  make  the  experiment
worth  anything,  and  leave  the  reader  free  to  form  a  judgment  and  to
decide  whether  it  is  possible  to  relegate  this  or  that  experiment  to  the
realm  of  pseudo-thought-transference.

The  problem  of  mental  suggestion  is  for  us  an  open  question  ;  we
have  no  prejudice  in  favour  of  any  hypothesis,  and  are  accessible  to  any
information  that  may  throw  light  on  the  subject.  In  what  follows  we
conscientiously  communicate  our  observations,  both  positive  and
negative,  according  to  the  records  made  in  all  cases  during  the  experi-
ments. If  one  or  another  of  the  cases  could  perhaps  be  explained
according  to  principles  already  known,  there  would  still  remain  enough,
we  think,  to  constitute  unexceptionable  evidence  in  favour  of  the  reality
of  true  psychical  transference.

II. — Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  with  Drawings.

1st  Experiment. — January  15th,  1890.  Between  3  and  4  p.m.
Place,  the  author's  room  (see  plan  at  the  end  of  the  paper).  Agent,
the  author.  Percipient,  Graf  S.,  aged  20.  While  Graf  S.  is  sitting  in
the  armchair  (marked  4  on  the  ground-plan  of  my  study),  I  go  into  the
next  room,  and,  the  door  being  closed,  make  the  drawing  marked  1  (see
plates  at  the  end  of  the  paper)  at  the  little  table  e.  I  then  return
to  the  study,  where  Graf  S.  is  waiting.  The  drawing  is  held  in
such  a  manner  that  it  was  absolutely  impossible  for  the  percipient  to>
see  anything  of  it.  Graf  S.,  completely  awake,  and  sitting  in  the  arm-
chair, has  his  back  to  the  writing-table.  I  sit  down  at  the  writing-
table,  on  the  chair  marked  3,  and  think  as  vividly  as  possible  of  the
drawing  I  have  made,  but  holding  it  so  that  Graf  S.  could  have  seen
nothing  of  it,  however  he  might  have  turned  himself.  Without  giving
him  any  indication  of  what  my  drawing  is,  I  ask  him  to  draw.  He


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.  7


makes  the  reproduction  marked  1.  My  behaviour  could  not  have  given
him  the  least  hint. Time  of  experiment,  two  minutes.

The  original  and  reproduction  have  only  the  right  angle  in  common.
I  put  this  experiment  down  as  a  failure.

2nd  Experiment. — January  15th,  1890.  Between  3  and  4  p.m.
Agent,  the  author.  Percipient,  Graf  S.  Process  and  arrangement  of
experiment  exactly  as  in  Experiment  1.  I  prepare  the  original  in  the
next  room.  I  can  answer  for  it  that  the  percipient  did  not  see  my
drawing.  No  sort  of  hint  was  given.  The  percipient  sat  in  the  arm-
chair, the  agent  at  the  writing-table.  Nothing  was  said.  The  experi-
ment lasted  about  two  minutes.  Graf  S.  drew  reproduction  2.  In
neither  of  these  experiments  did  I  look  at  the  hand  of  the  percipient.

I  consider  the  experiment  successful.  The  percipient  drew  a
crescent-shaped  segment  of  a  circle,  something  like  a  moon.  If  the
point  which  I  discussed  in  the  introduction  should  be  raised,  whether
some  unperceived  cause  may  not  have  made  both  of  us  think  of  a
circle,  I  would  observe  that  this  can  hardly  apply  to  the  more  thickly
drawn  section  of  my  circle,  and  only  this  was  perceived.  The  point  of
the  crescent  running  upwards  into  a  line  shows  that  the  crescent
does  not  quite  reproduce  the  whole  figure.  With  regard  to  conditions  I
consider  this  experiment  unassailable. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  2.}

3rd  Experiment. — January  21st,  1890.  Between  4  and  5  p.m.
Place,  my  study.  Agent,  the  author.  Percipient,  Graf  S.  Arrange-
ments in  every  particular  the  same  as  in  Experiments  1  and  2.
Just  as  I  am  leaving  the  room  to  make  the  drawing,  I  think  of  a
square,  but  draw  a  triangle.  Baron  v.  Welden  is  present  at  this
experiment;  the  arrangements  have  been  carefully  explained  to  him,,
and  he  endeavours  not  to  influence  the  proceedings.  During  the
experiment  he  sits  on  a  lounge  behind  me,  and  looks  at  the  drawing
with  me.  The  percipient  could  see  nothing,  even  if  he  turned,  on
account  of  the  way  the  paper  is  held.  No  hints  are  given.  Graf  S.
draws  reproduction  3.  Duration  of  the  experiment,  about  two  minutes.
Although,  on  account  of  the  presence  of  three  persons,  and  the  con-
sequently increased  difficulty  of  control,  I  feel  more  hesitation  about
this  experiment,  yet  I  do  not  at  all  believe  that  it  was  possible  for  the
percipient  to  observe  anything.  We  did  not  look  at  his  paper  while  he-
was  drawing,  and  were  quite  silent.  The  experiment  may  be  considered
a  success. {Cf.  original  and  reproduction  3.)

ith  Experiment. — January  21st.  Circumstances  and  conditions  the
same  as  in  Experiment  3.  Graf  S.  draws  a  cup  instead  of  the  number  L
The  experiment  is  a  failure,  in  spite  of  a  certain  likeness — a  stem  and
something  on  it — in  both.  But  the  kind  of  failure  is  interesting.  (Cf.
original  and  reproduction  4.)


8


Baron  von  Schrench-Notzing.


5th  Experiment. — January  21st.  The  same  circumstances  and  con-
ditions as  in  the  last,  except  that  Baron  v.  Welden  acts  as  agent.  He
draws  original  5  in  the  next  room.  He  sits  on  the  lounge  and  looks
at  the  drawing,  while  the  percipient  draws,  sitting  in  the  armchair.  I
am  a  passive  witness,  know  nothing  of  the  original,  and  refrain  from
any  participation.  The  conditions  again  appear  to  me  strict.  I  could
discover  no  hidden  error,  in  spite  of  careful  observation.  Graf  S.
drew  reproduction  5,  a  comet.  Although  the  experiment  is  a  failure,
still  the  analogy  of  two  small  circles,  with  something  larger  attached
to  them  in  both  cases  (in  one  case  the  larger  circle,  in  the  other  the
tail),  is  striking.  Duration  of  experiment,  about  three  minutes.  (Cf.
original  and  reproduction  5.)

6</t  Experiment. — Time,  place,  and  conditions  as  in  Experiment  3.
Agent,  the  author.  I  draw  a  3  with  thick  lines  in  the  next  room.
Graf  S.  says  that  he  does  not  know  what  he  has  to  draw.  Even  a
hint  from  me,  "  I  am  thinking  of  a  number,"  does  not  put  him  on  the
track. This  experiment  fails  completely.

7th  Experiment. — January  20th,  1890.  4.30  p.m.  Place,  my  study.
Percipient,  a  patient  of  mine,  Fraulein  E.,  24  years  old,  suffering  from
hysterical  troubles.  Condi/ ions  of  experiment : — I  draw  the  original
on  the  table  e  in  the  next  room,  with  closed  doors,  while  the  percipient,
quite  awake,  is  sitting  in  the  armchair  (4)  in  the  study.  I  go  back
to  my  study  and  sit  down  at  the  writing-table,  without  showing  the
drawing  or  giving  any  hint,  and  always  holding  the  paper  so  that
nothing  can  be  seen.  I  do  not  look  at  the  drawing  Fraulein  E.  is
making  till  she  has  finished.  When  she  gives  me  the  drawing  she
.spontaneously  makes  the  following  remark,  which  I  took  down
word  for  word.  "  I  see  a  cross  which  persists,  and  is  sometimes
surrounded  by  a  square,  sometimes  by  a  circle,  sometimes  by  a
border  or  frame.  The  frames  wavered,  but '  the  cross  remained."  I
only  now  show  her  the  original.  The  experiment  is  to  be  regarded
as  successful,  and  the  conditions  seem  to  me  strict ;  unless  I  uncon-
sciously gave  indications  in  spite  of  efforts  to  the  contrary,  which  I  do
not  believe.  ((7/1  original  and  reproduction  6.)  Duration,  hardly  one
minute  after  my  return  from  the  next  room.

8th  Experiment. — January  20th,  1890.  All  the  circumstances  and
conditions  the  same  as  in  the  previous  experiment.  In  Experiments  8,
9,  and  10  the  reproduction  was  begun  directly  I  re-entered  the  room,
all  in  the  interval  between  4.40  and  5.15  p.m.  In  this  case,  Fraulein  E.
began  to  draw  as  I  opened  the  door,  and  I  had  hardly  seated  myself
before  she  had  finished  the  drawing,  and  believing  it  to  be  incorrect
began  the  two  others  by  it.  It  was  absolutely  impossible  for  her  to
have  seen  anything  of  the  original;  for  she  must  have  grasped  the  idea


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.


9


of  a  square  as  I  was  going  to  open  the  door.  I  cannot  say  whether
some  hidden  cause  may  not  have  called  up  in  both  our  minds  by
.association  so  common  a  figure  as  a  square.  But  in  this  case  there
assuredly  was  apparent  thought-transference.

Fraulein  E.  explained  about  her  drawing — "After  the  square,
wavering,  changing  figures  came  into  my  mind  ;  first  intersecting
squares,  then  right  angles,  then  circles,"  &c.  (Cf.  original  and
reproduction  7.)

9th  Experiment. — January  20th,  1890.  All  circumstances  as
in  the  last  experiment,  with  the  difference  that  I  stood  behind  the
armchair  while  Fraulein  E.  tried  to  reproduce  the  figure  I  had  drawn
in  the  next  room.  When  she  had  drawn  reproduction  8a,  I  said
it  was  wrong,  and  she  had  better  try  again.  No  other  word  was
spoken.  She  now  drew  reproduction  8b  under  my  eyes,  and  it  is
possible  that  I  expressed  my  assent  by  unconscious  gestures,  when  the
first  open  circle  was  drawn.  But  certainly  this  circumstance  could  not
have  indicated  to  her  that  she  should  put  another  open  circle,  in  which
the  reproduction  shows  a  remarkable  deviation  from  the  original,  upon
the  first.  If  this  experiment  is  not  quite  so  strict  as  some  of  the
previous  ones,  the  reproduction  is  too  characteristic  to  be  explained
by  any  of  the  sources  of  error  mentioned  above.  (Cf.  original  and
reproduction  8.)

10th  Experiment. — Conditions  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  9th.  I
stand  behind  the  percipient's  armchair,  concentrate  my  thoughts  on  the
drawing  I  have  made  in  the  next  room,  and  look  from  time  to  time  at
the  percipient's  hand  while  she  is  drawing.  To  reproduction  9a  I  say
"  Wrong."  To  reproduction  9b  I  say  nothing.  I  leave  the  percipient
to  follow  entirely  the  course  of  her  own  thoughts,  and  she  adds
reproductions  9c  and  9c?.  She  says,  "I  keep  seeing  something  like  a  W;
now  and  then  something  I  cannot  recognise  comes  in."  This  experi-
ment, like  the.  previous  one,  lasted  but  a  few  minutes.  I  only  showed
the  percipient  the  original — which  represents  a  star  composed  of  three
W's — after,  without  further  remark  from  me,  the  five  reproductions
had  been  finished.  The  reproduction,  which  is  only  partial,  is,  it  is  true,
not  a  success,  but  it  is  a  kind  of  failure  strongly  indicative  of  the  mode
of  transference.  I  do  not  venture  to  decide  whether  some  hidden
errors,  some  unconscious  suggestion  on  my  part,  had  any  share  in  it.
I  have  here  conscientiously  related  only  what  I  believe  that  I  observed.

\\th  Experiment. — August  31st,  1890.  9p.m.  Percipient,  Fraulein
A.,  a  patient  of  rather  hysterical  temperament,  fully  awake.  She  has
never  before  taken  part  in  such  experiments.  Agent,  the  author.
Place,  my  study.  Conditions  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  earlier  experi-
ments. In  this  and  in  all  the  succeeding  experiments  I  made  the


10


Baron  von  Schrench-Notzing.


drawings  on  the  table  in  the  next  room,  with  closed  doors,  and  care-
fully concealed  them  from  the  percipient  on  my  re-entrance.  Percipient
sits  on  chair  5,  with  her  back  to  the  door,  and  draws,  while  I  sit  in
the  armchair  opposite  her,  holding  the  paper  on  a  book,  the  book  held
perpendicularly  to  the  floor,  with  its  back  towards  the  percipient  and
the  paper  towards  me.  It  is  absolutely  impossible  for  her  to  see  the'
drawing.  Nothing  is  said.  Fraulein  A.  draws  a  square,  puts  down
the  pencil,  and  leaves  off.  Then  only  I  look  at  her  paper  and  see  that
the  figure  is  correct.  I  ask  her  to  go  on,  saying  that  the  figure  is.
right  so  far,  but  not  finished.  She  now  completes  the  figure  by  adding
diagonal  lines  and  draws  a  large  dot,  which  is  almost  like  a  small:
square,  in  the  middle.  When  she  has  put  down  the  pencil  I  show  her
the  original;  on  the  whole  it  agrees  with  the  reproduction:  both  figures,
are  squares,  both  enclose  something — the  original  another  concentric
square,  the  reproduction  a  large  -  central  dot  with  several  clearly
rectangular  corners.  I  consider  the  experiment  a  success  on  the  whole,
and  from  the  experimental  procedure  I  do  not  think  that  any
unobserved  error  is  the  cause  of  the  remarkable  coincidence.  Duration,
two  minutes. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  10.)

\2th  Experiment. — August  31st,  1890.  9  p.m.  Persons  taking  part,,
conditions,  etc.,  same  as  in  the  preceding  experiment.  Complete-
failure. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  11.)

\2>th  Experiment. — October  1st,  1890.  5.50  p.m.  Place,  my  study-
Percipient,  Frau  Eug.,  a  Pole,  aged  27  ;  it  was  her  first  experiment  of
the  kind.  I  sit  upon  chair  4,  the  percipient  on  chair  5.  As  I
wanted,  in  the  first  instance,  to  discover  whether  the  patient  was.
a  suitable  subject  for  such  experiments,  I  drew  a  3  on  a  sheet  of  paper
under  the  table,  which  was  covered  with  a  large  cloth.  The  lamp  was.
alight.  Frau  Eug.  could  not  possibly  know  what  I  had  drawn.  Nothing
was  said.  She  made  a  B  without  any  pause  for  reflection,  and  was
astonished  when  she  saw  its  likeness  to  the  original.  Although  the
conditions  were  not  so  strict  as  in  some  of  the  preceding  experiments,
the  astonishing  agreement  of  original  and  reproduction  can  hardly  be
explained  by  chance  or  mistake.  This  was  the  only  experiment  in
which  the  drawing  was  made  in  the  same  room.  It  hardly  aimed  at
being  a  real  experiment,  but  was  made  rather  for  my  own  information.
It  lasted  from  5.50  to  5.53  p.m. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  12.)

lifh  Experiment.  —  October  1st,  1890.  5.55  p.m.  Place,  the
author's  study.  Percipient,  Frau  Eug.,  sitting  at  the  table  on  chair  5.
Agent,  the  writer.  The  original  (No.  13)  was  prepared  in  the  next
room,  with  closed  doors,  and  was  carefully  concealed  from  the  per-
cipient. I  sit  upon  chair  4,  and  hold  the  paper  covered  by  a  book  as
in  the  11th  experiment. Before  we  begin,  I  say  to  the  percipient,  "  It


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.


1 1


is  not  a  number."  That  and  no  more  was  said.  The  percipient  now
draws  reproduction  13a.  I  look  at  her  hand,  and  when  she  has  done
say,  "  Right,  but  it  is  not  finished ;  draw  larger."  The  percipient
draws  reproduction  135.  I  say  nothing,  but  picture  the  original  very
clearly  and  vividly  to  myself.  The  percipient  now  draws  reproduction
13c,  which  completely  corresponds  to  the  original.  Time,  five  minutes.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  right  idea  came  suddenly  to  Frau  Eug.,  after-
figure  136  had  completely  deviated  from  the  original,  in  spite  of  my
words  at  reproduction  13a.  I  think  the  course  of  this  experiment  very
worthy  of  notice,  because  it  shows  that  in  spite  of  confirmatory  words
a  wrong  drawing  may  be  made.  As  every  detail  of  this  experiment  is-
related  with  exactness,  I  think  I  need  not  allude  to  explanations  by
chance  or  by  hidden  defects. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  13.)

15th  Experiment. — October  1st,  1890.  6.5  p.m.  Same  circum-
stances and  conditions  as  in  14th  exj)eriment.  The  percipient  says,  "  I
am  restless ;  I  cannot  do  any  more."  While  speaking  she  makes,
reproductions  a,  b,  c,  c?,  and  then  asks,  "Is  it  not  a  number,  a  zigzag,
a  letter  1 "  It  is  possible  that  as  this  went  on  I  made  some  negative
gesture.  Suddenly  she  says,  "  It  is  a  square."  I  say,  "  Right."  She
now  draws  unexpectedly  under  my  eyes  1 4e,  which  completely  repro-
duces the  original.  She  might  have  guessed  the  square.  But  it  is
certain  that  there  was  absolutely  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  figure
was  to  be  completed  by  4  small  squares  at  the  corners.  I  am  thoroughly
convinced  that  she  could  not  have  divined  from  my  looks  what  com-
pletion was  desired,  even  if  she  really  had  perceived  that  the  square
was  not  all  that  was  wanted.  The  percipient  exhibited  the  same
peculiarity  as  in  the  last  experiment — the  right  thought  came  suddenly
after  wrong  guesses,  and  also  the  figure  really  reproduced  the  original
exactly.

It  is  true  that  these  experiments  are  not  irreproachable,  because-
something  was  said,  and  if  they  stood  alone  I  should  never  think
them  convincing.  But  one  learns  most  from  these  half  successes,  for
they  form  a  transition  to  the  complete  ones.  (Cf.  original  and
reproduction  14.)

16th  Experiment. — October  14th,  1890.  Place,  my  study.  Time,.
5  p.m.  Persons,  conditions,  and  circumstances  the  same  as  in  the  14th
experiment.  Original  drawing  15  made  in  next  room,  with  the  door
shut.  The  percipient  guesses,  "  It  is  like  a  tower,  square  at  the
bottom — a  ball."  She  draws  reproductions  15  a,  b,  c,  d.  "It  is  like
a  pedestal."  She  then  draws  reproduction  15e, — which  has  a  distant
resemblance  to  the  original.  The  expressions,  "like  a  tower,"  "a  ball
underneath,"  and  "like  a  pedestal,"  should  be  noticed.  These  descrip-
tions recall  the  ship's  mast  of  the  original,  which  sticks  up  like  a.


12


Baron  von  Schrenck-Notzing.


tower  or  a  pedestal.  The  ship  itself  might  be  thought  of  as  half  a
ball.  In  this  way  the  words  show  some  connection  with  the  original.
Whether  my  expression  indicated  dissent  at  reproductions  15«-c,  or  of
assent  at  15(7,  I  cannot  say.  This  unconscious  suggestion  was,  no
doubt,  possible.  I  think  this,  in  any  case,  an  interesting  failure.  I
looked  at  the  percipient's  paper  while  she  drew.  Duration  of  the
■experiment,  about  five  minutes. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  15.)

17th  Experiment. — October  15th,  1890.  From  10.12  to  10.14  p.m.
Percipient,  Fraulein  A.  Agent,  the  author.  Place,  my  study.  Con-
ditions : — Agent  and  percipient  are  in  different  rooms,  separated  by  a
wall  and  a  closed  door.  The  percipient  is  sitting  on  chair  5,  in  the
study,  quite  awake,  as  are  all  the  persons  in  all  these  experiments.
Paper  and  pencil  are  on  the  table  before  her.  She  has  her  back
to  the  door  into  the  next  room.  I  am  at  the  table  e  in  this
mext  room,  with  my  back  to  the  door  of  the  study,  and  draw
on  the  table,  standing,  original  16,  the  staff  of  ^Esculapius  with
the  serpent.  Door  of  communication  closed.  I  call  "  Ready  1 "  The
percipient  says,  "Yes."  We  have  been  drawing  at  the  same  time  in
different  rooms.  On  returning  to  the  study  I  compare  the  drawings
and  see  with  astonishment  that  Fraulein  A.  has  drawn  a  serpent.
Even  the  open  mouth  and  the  thickened  end  of  the  tail  in  the  reproduc-
tion agree  with  the  original.  The  experiment  has  succeeded  in  its
essential  part,  and  as  regards  strictness  of  conditions  I  think  it  quite
unassailable.  Unconscious  suggestion  is  absolutely  excluded,  when
agent  and  percipient  are  in  different  rooms.  Any  corresponding
association  of  ideas  seems  to  me  also  impossible,  for  the  idea  of  the
.staff  of  ^Esculapius  first  occurred  to  me  in  the  other  room.  In  the
study  there  is  no  object  which  could  have  led  up  to  the  idea, — no
indication  which  could  have  pointed  out  the  way.

This  experiment  is  one  of  my  greatest  successes.  Any  hidden
error  is  inconceivable ;  the  only  alternatives  are  chance,  or  true  thought-
transference.  (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  1G.)

18th  Experiment.— October  15th,  1890.  From  10.18  to  10.20  p.m.
Same  persons,  conditions,  and  circumstances  as  in  17.  The  experiment
is  a  complete  failure.  The  idea  of  a  serpent-form  seemed  to  persist  in
the  percipient's  mind.  Hence  the  serpentine  line.  (Cf.  original  17
and  reproduction  17.)  Only  the  arrow-like  point  of  the  reproduction
at  all  recalls  the  original.

\§th  Experiment.~-Octohzv  15th,  1890.  10.21  to  10.23  p.m.
Persons,  conditions,  and  circumstances  as  in  17.  I  draw  the  original
18  on  table  e  in  the  next  room,  with  the  door  closed.  The  drawing-
was  done  in  the  following  way.  I  began  with  the  triangle,  and  then
drew  the  perpendicular  on  the  base. The  idea  that  thereupon  occurred


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference. ,  13.


to  me,  that  the  figure  was  too  simple,  induced  me  to  add  a  circle  and
to  prolong  the  perpendicular  to  the  circumference  ;  finally  I  added  the
horizontal  diameter.  The  percipient  was  drawing  at  the  same  time  at
table  b,  sitting  on  chair  5,  with  her  back  to  the  closed  door  of
communication.  Question  from  the  next  room,  "  Are  you  ready  1 "
Answer,  "Stop,"  as  I  am  about  to  open  the  door.  Then,  "Now."  I
open  the  door  and  enter  the  room.  The  two  drawings  agree  except
that  the  circle  and  the  horizontal  diameter  are  wanting.  Even  the-
perpendicular  of  the  triangle,  which  has  become  obtuse  angled,  is
prolonged  beyond  the  base,  just  as  in  the  original.  This  prolongation
and  addition  of  the  perpendicular  cannot  be  explained  by  any  tendency
of  ideas  to  recur  (diagram-habit).  Only  the  fact  that  a  triangle  was
drawn  might,  taken  alone,  be  explained  in  some  such  way.  I  consider
this  experiment  also  convincing  as  regards  the  strictness  of  its  arrange-
ment, and,  on  the  whole,  successful.  (Cf.  original  and  reproduction
18.)  The  experiments  17  and  19  are  the  best  of  the  whole  series  here-
given.

20th  Experiment.— October  15th,  1890.  10.25  to  10.30  p.m.
Same  conditions,  persons,  &c,  as  in  Experiment  17.  I  draw  a  five  of
diamonds  in  the  next  room  ;  reproductions  19«,  b  being  drawn  at  the
same  time,  with  the  door  closed.  I  look  at  them  without  showing  the
original  to  the  percipient,  say  "  Wrong,"  and  sit  down  on  chair,  con-
centrating my  thoughts  on  the  original,  which  I  hold  as  I  did  in  Experi-
ment 11.  Without  any  hint  from  me,  reproduction  19c  is  drawn.  The
percipient  says,  "I  can  do  no  more,"  and  makes  an  oval,  19c?,  which  shows
me  that  she  has  again  been  drawn  from  the  right  track.  This  experi-
ment is  a  failure,  but  the  mode  of  failure  is  noteworthy.  The  original
was  a  card  with  5  pips  [in  the  German  stars\,  of  which  the  centre  one-
attracts  the  eye  most.  Reproductions  19«  and  19&  show  that  the  idea
of  a  star  had  come  into  the  mind  of  the  percipient,  and  been  shaped  by
her  imagination.  Reproduction  19c  shows  two  quadi'angles  with  centres,
domino-like,  which  exhibit  an  unmistakable  analogy  with  the  original.
For  the  original  is  also  a  four-cornered  figure  with  a  centre ;  only  the
centre  is  four-cornered  also,  and  there  is,  moreover-,  another  diamond  in
each  corner.  All  through  there  is  some  connection  of  ideas, — a,  a  star,
b,  a  star,  c,  2  quadrangles  with  centres  domino-like.  Original  a  five  of
diamonds.  The  experiment,  unimportant  by  itself,  forms,  with  Experi-
ments 1 7  and  1 9,  a  remarkable  group.  Note  particularly  that  Experi-
ments 17  to  20  were  done  one  after  another  in  half  an  hour,  with  the
same  percipient  and  under  almost  the  same  conditions  throughout.  It
is  hardly  possible  to  express  arithmetically  the  chances  against  the
fortuitous  correspondence  of  so  many  details  in  only  4  experiments,
under  such  strict  conditions.  It  is  only  by  comparing  with  this  result
the  infinite  number  of  mere  guesses  required  to  produce  the  same


14


Baron  von  Schrenclc-Notzing.


amount  of  coincidence  that  one  can  estimate  the  importance  of  these
experiments. (Cf.  original  and  reproduction  19.)

21»<  Experiment. — October  17th,  1890.  11.10  a.m.  Place,  my
•study.  Agent,  the  writer.  Percipient,  Graf  S.,  as  in  Experiments
1  and  2.  Conditions  for  reproduction  20a  the  same  as  in  Experi-
ment 17.  On  re-entering  the  room  I  say  "  Wrong,"  without  show-
ing the  original.  Graf  S.  now  makes  reproductions  b,  e,  sitting  at
the  table,  on  the  chair  marked  5,  I  standing  behind  him  looking  at
what  he  draws.  A  certain  resemblance  in  the  circular  lines  to  the
handle  and  the  upper  rim  of  the  mug  cannot  fail  to  be  recognised.
When  I  show  the  original  to  the  percipient,  he  says  (too  late),  "  I
thought  of  crockery."  I  consider  this  experiment  a  failure.  (Cf.
original  and  reproduction  20.) Duration,  five  minutes.

22nd  Experiment. — October  17th.  11.15  a.m.  Everything  arranged
as  in  Experiment  17.  I  draw  in  the  next  room  an  anchor.  The  per-
cipient draws  as  reproduction  a,  two  concentric  circles ;  after  my  return
to  the  study  he  draws  as  reproduction  b,  a  leaf,  as  reproduction  c,  three
straight  lines  meeting  in  a  point,  and  as  reproduction  d,  a  very  obtuse
angled  triangle,  the  obtuse  angle  pointing  upwards,  with  a  straight  line
perpendicular  to  the  base  extending  downwards  from  its  middle  point,
so  that  the  figure  has  a  distant  resemblance  to  an  umbrella,  and  a  still
more  remote  one  to  an  anchor.  We  spoke  during  this  experiment.
I  regard  it  as  in  its  course  not  convincing,  and  in  its  result  a  complete
failure.  For  this  reason  I  considered  it  unnecessary  to  produce  the
drawings  ;  all  the  more  that  they  present  nothing  characteristic.

23  rd  Experiment.— October  23rd,  1890.  10.9  to  10.12.  Agent,  the
writer.  Percipient,  Fraulein  A.  (the  same  as  in  17).  Conditions
in  all  details  the  same  as  in  Experiment  17.  Separate  rooms.  I  say,
"  It  is  an  object  which  is  to  be  drawn,"  and  in  the  next  room  I  draw  a
quart-pot  (Literkrug).  Question,  "Ready?"  Answer,  "Yes."  I  return
to  the  study.  The  first  reproduction  represents  a  head,  and  on  my
saying  "  Wrong,"  a  second  reproduction  representing  a  fish  is  drawn  in
my  presence,  I  standing  behind  chair  5.  It  was  absolutely  impossible
for  the  percipient  to  see  the  original.  I  now  ask,  "What  am  I  thinking
of?"  Answer,  "An  apple."  "Wrong."  I  repeat  the  question.  Answer,
"A quart-pot."  "Right."  The  percipient  says,  "I  thought  of  that  first,
and  did  not  believe  it  was  right."  Now,  there  certainly  were  quart-
pots  standing  on  the  table  of  the  study,  but  I  am  sure  that  in  asking
the  question  I  did  not  look  at  them.  The  experiment  must,  neverthe-
less, be  regarded  as  a  failure.  The  conditions  during  the  last  part  were
defective,  and  guesswork  or  unconscious  suggestion  may  have  produced
the  result.  I  relate  it,  however,  because  it  so  often  happens  that  the  per-
cipients say  when  it  is  too  late, "I  thought  of  that  first,"  and  then


Experimental  iSiiic&es*  ih  W!iVitytel$b*&mfereiice.  15


allow  themselves  i'p '  be'  J«sd'  'away  by  -other  images  or  sense  impres-
sions ; — unless  these  iiippiemontapy  explanations  are  the  result  of
retro-active  memory-illusions.

2ith  Experiment.—  October  23rd,  1890.  10.19  to  10.22.  Persons
and  conditions  as  in  Experiment  17.  Question  (from  the  next  room,
door  closed),  "Are  you  ready?"  Answer,  "I  do  not  think  of  anything."
I  re-enter  the  study,  and  make  the  task  easier  for  the  percipient  by
saying  "  Letters,"  upon  which  she  writes  "  A,  H,"  I  standing  behind
the  chair.  She  then  says,  "They  are  entwined,"  and  makes  reproduction
215,  then  21c,  which  approaches  the  original  still  more.  This  experi-
ment is  a  half  success,  but  with  a  probability  of  guessing  right  by
chance  alone  of  1  in  24  ;  and  subject  to  the  need  of  making  due
allowance  for  the  natural  association  of  ideas,  since  the  percipient
would  be  likely  to  think  first  of  the  initial  of  her  own  name.  As  a
failure,  this  experiment  is  interesting  and  instructive ;  regarded  as  a
success  it  would  not  prove  thought-transference.  (Cf.  original  21  and
reproductions  21,  a,  b,  c.)

25th  Experiment. — November  1st,  1890.  4.30  to  4.35  p.m.  Agent,
the  writer.  Percipient,  Fraulein  K.,  an  easily  hypnotisable  patient
of  hysterical  temperament.  She  sits  in  armchair  4,  and  the  agent
stands  behind  her.  Original,  a  cup,  which  I  drew  in  the  next  room.
The  percipient  makes  several  beginnings,  and  tries  to  draw  an  eye.  This
image  of  an  eye  surged  up  in  her  mind  at  first  and  persisted.  Three
attempts  at  reproductions  showing  nothing  characteristic,  the  attempt
is  given  up. Complete  failure.

26th  Experiment. — November  1st,  1890.  4.48  to  4.51  p.m.  Percipient,
Praulein  K.,  completely  awake  as  in  the  previous  experiment.  Agent,
the  author,  draws  original  22  on  table  e  in  the  next  room,  with  closed
door.  The  percipient,  sitting  on  chair  4  in  the  study,  draws  at  the
same  time  reproduction  22«.  On  my  return  I  look  at  her  drawing,
and  say  "  Wrong,"  and  go  on  thinking  intently  of  the  original.  She
then  draws  reproduction  225, 1  standing  behind  her  chair  and  looking  at
her  paper.  I  say,  "  Wrong,  try  again."  The  percipient  now  draws  a
circle.  I  say,  "Right,  but  not  finished."  She  now  draws  reproduction
22c,  I  keeping  perfectly  still,  and  giving  her  no  further  hint  whatever.
This  experiment  is  to  a  certain  extent  successful  and  even  demonstra-
tive, though  the  plan  laid  down  was  not  quite  strictly  adhered  to.
The  percipient  might  have  guessed  triangle,  cross,  and  circle;  but
why  does  she  attach  to  the  circle  a  square  placed  so  very  unsyni-
metrically,  but  so  that  when  I  look  at  that  part  only,  ignoring  the
diameter  and  the  line  which  cuts  the  circle,  the  relation  of  the  lower
right-hand  corner  to  the  circle  corresponds  completely  to  the  original  ?
If  mere  association  of  ideas  produced  reproduction  22c,  much  more


1G


c c c c  f-  t r c c c c « _  t  - c  c-  -•  c  J  c (CC  "ft

c r  'Bdr&ti'toU'  ScJh'en'Cti-N'bfzing:.


natural  combinations;  of ',a.cjrp)p  jaii^l  a  ^square  mi^ht  have  occurred  to
her.  Thus,  in  spite  of  ffie  less  s£ri<&  conditions,  and  the  causes  of  error
which  we  have  taken  into  account,  something  remains  which  points  to
thought-transference  when  considered  with  the  results  of  earlier  experi-
ments. Taken  alone,  this  experiment  would  be  unimportant,  but  it  is
significant  in  connection  with  the  previous  ones.  (Cf.  original  and
reproduction  22.)

III. — Experiments  in  Guessing  Objects,  Persons,  <fec,  Thought  of.

It  remains  to  add  to  these  26  experiments  with  drawings  other
experiments  in  thought-transference  of  a  different  kind  which  were
carried  out  with  the  same  percipients.  My  object  in  these  experiments
was  to  study  for  myself  the  nature  of  communication  of  thoughts  with-
out observable  mediation  of  the  senses  ;  in  doing  which  I  kept  possible
sources  of  error  carefully  in  mind  in  each  particular  case.  The  follow-
ing method  recommends  itself  as  both  convenient  and  convincing.  Let
the  agent  think  of  some  object  or  person,  and  ask  the  subject,  "What
am  I  thinking  about?"  at  the  same  time  circumscribing  the  percipient's
task  by  words  if  desired.  I  made  the  following  expeidments  in  this
manner.

1st  Experiment. — August  31st,  1890.  10.5  to  10.7  p.m.  Agent,  the
writer.  Percipient,  Praulein  A.  We  are  sitting  at  the  table  and
talking.  I  say  suddenly,  "  I  am  thinking  of  a  person  we  both  know  :,
who  is  it  1 "

1st  answer:  "HerrK."  (Wrong.)

2nd  answer:  "HerrA."  (Right.)

2nd  Experiment — August  31st,  1890.  10.8  p.m.  Same  conditions  as
in  preceding  experiment.  The  same  question.  I  thought  of  a  person
who  lives  in  the  same  house  as  Praulein  A.  She  first  mentions  a  person
who  lives  next  door.  The  second  answer  was  quite  right.  No  hints  were
given.  As  we  have  probably  about  forty  acquaintances  in  common,
the  chances  for  a  correct  guess  in  Experiments  1  and  2  are  1  in  40.
That  any  latent  excitation  of  the  senses  should  have  aroused  the  same
thought  in  both  brains  twice  running  seems  to  me  improbable.  It  is
a  noteworthy  circumstance  that  the  percipient  immediately  followed
me  mentally  to  the  neighbourhood  where  the  person  thought  of  is
usually  to  be  found.  While  I  thought  of  the  person,  I  had  vividly
before  my  eyes  the  image  of  the  street  in  which  that  person  lives.
Unconscious  suggestion  is  here  excluded.

3rd  Experiment.— August  31st,  1890.  10.10  p.m.  Duration,  a  few
seconds.  All  conditions  and  circumstances  as  in  the  previous  experi-
ment. "I  am  thinking  of  an  object  in  this  room."  Answer:  "Beer
tankard." (Right.) I  had  purposely  refrained  from  looking  at  the


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.  17


tankards  on  the  table,  nor  was  my  attention  drawn  to  this  idea  uncon-
sciously, being  the  first  presenting  itself  to  me.  On  the  contrary,  I
chose  this  out  of  several  competing  ideas  because  it  was  easy  to  picture
to  oneself.  However,  I  do  not  object  to  this  experiment  being  regarded
as  a  case  of  pseudo-thought-transference.

ith  Experiment. — August  31st,  1890.  10.13  p.m.  Same  circum-
stances as  before.  I  should  explain  that  my  room  is  quite  over-
crowded with  objects,  pictures,  pots,  utensils,  books,  <fec,  so  that
I  often  do  not  know  where  to  put  a  thing  down.  I  now  think  of  an
Indian  silk  handkerchief,  which,  together  with  a  pair  of  red  Oriental
slippers,  is  in  a  basket  exactly  behind  me;  1J  yards  away  from  it  there
is  another  Eastern  handkerchief,  hanging  on  a  bookshelf.  The  two  are
alike  in  colour,  pattern,  and  size.  I  am  quite  certain  that  in  this
choice  my  gaze  was  not  unconsciously  attracted  by  this  handkerchief.
In  order  to  meet  any  objection  as  to  association  of  ideas,  or  unconscious
suggestion,  I  purposely  chose  something  behind  my  back.  My  question,
"What  thing  in  this  room  am  I  thinking  about?"  was  answered  at
once  by  the  percipient.  "About  the  red  Turkish  slippers."  I  reply,
"  Nearly."  The  second  answer  was,  "  The  Indian  handkerchief."
(Right.)  No  hint  led  her  to  this,  though  there  are  other  things  in  the
basket.  The  first  answer  seems  to  me  more  important  than  the  second.
How  comes  it  that  the  percipient  at  once  accompanies  me  mentally  to
the  place  where  the  selected  object  was,  just  as  in  the  2nd  experi-
ment? The  sources  of  error  mentioned  cannot  explain  it  ;  some
unknown  factor  seems  rather  to  be  concerned.

Experiments  5,  6,  7,  hi  which,  in  spite  of  the  percipient's  fatigue,  I
tried  to  make  her  guess  cards,  failed  completely.  So  did  Experiment  8,
in  guessing  an  object.

Experiment  9,  in  which  Frau  Eug.  tried  to  guess  one  of  10
numerals,  also  entirely  failed.

10th  Experiment. — October  15th,  1890.  8.30  p.m.,  with  Fraulein  A.,
who  sat  on  chair  7.  I  sit  on  chair  8.  A  black  fan  is  fastened,  anion"-
other  objects,  to  the  wall  of  my  study  over  the  sofa.  I  think  of  it
without  looking  at  it.  When  choosing,  I  at  first  thought  of  taking
Fraulein  A.'s  hat  as  the  object  to  be  guessed.  It  lay  upon  a  side  table.
Question,  "  Of  what  thing  in  the  room  am  I  thinking  ? "  Answer,  "My
hat."  Wrong,  but  wrong  in  a  noteworthy  way,  because  at  first  I  had  really
thought  of  choosing  the  hat.  I  may  remark  that,  sitting  on  chair  8,  I
had  the  fan  in  front  of  me,  so  that  though  unconscious  suggestion  by
an  unconscious  glance  would  have  been  easy  in  this  case,  the  guess  was
nevertheless  wrong.  I  carried  this  experiment  no  further.  At
10  o'clock  I  was  sitting  by  chance  on  chair  No.  4,  so  that  the  fan  was
behind  me.  The  experiment  occurs  to  me  again  and  I  ask,  "  What  did

c


18


Baron  von  Schrenclc-Notzing.


I  think  of?"  Answer,  "Fan."  (Right.)  The  interesting  17th  experi-
ment of  the  diagram  series  now  followed.  On  this  evening  with  No.
10  of  the  second  series,  and  Nos.  17,  18,  19,  20  of  the  first  series,
there  was  a  quite  inexplicable  series  of  strikingly  successful  experi-
ments, in  spite  of  the  greater  strictness  in  the  conditions.  One  is
inclined  to  believe  in  a  change  in  the  receptivity  of  the  percipients,
dependent  on  some  unknown  factors ;  as  may  be  also  concluded  from
the  experiments  of  Professors  Richet  and  Sidgwick.

IWi  Experiment.— October  23rd,  1890.  8.50  to  8.53.  Percipient,
Fraulein  A.  Agent,  the  writer.  Percipient  sits  on  chair  7,  agent  on
chair  8.  On  the  table  marked  b  are  a  number  of  different  objects  :  six
books,  two  newspapers,  a  stethoscope,  an  induction  coil,  five  electrodes,
an  ash-tray,  gloves,  a  lamp,  a  hat,  &c.  I  think  of  one  of  the  books,
bound  in  red,  which  is  on  the  table,  and  ask,  "  What  object  in  the
room  am  I  thinking  of?"  1st  answer,  "Hat";  2nd  answer,  "Book
with  red  binding."  Question,  "Which  book?"  The  percipient  points
out  a  book  which  lies  close  to  the  one  I  had  chosen,  and  which  also  has
a  red  binding.  I  do  not  believe  that  I  drew  Fraulein  A. 's  attention  to
the  table,  or  betrayed  myself  by  involuntary  indications ;  but  the
■objection  that  there  was  some  latent  exciting  cause  for  the  brains  of
both  persons  would  have  had  some  justification  had  the  experiment
.succeeded.  I  consider  this  experiment  a  failure,  and  that  even  had
it  succeeded  it  would  not  prove  anything.

\Wt  Experiment. — October  19th.  9.9  to  9.12.  Same  conditions
.and  persons,  &c,  as  in  No.  11.  On  the  cupboard  in  my  study  near
the  entrance  door  there  is  a  row  of  empty  letter-paper  boxes,  with
flowers  and  gilding  outside.  Again,  without  looking  at  the  object,  I
.ask,  "What  thing  in  the  room  ami  thinking  of?"  1st  answer,  "  Of  a
board  painted  with  flowers."  (The  analogy  is  striking.  There  is  such
s,  board  hanging  near  the  bow  window  in  quite  another  part  of  the
room.)  2nd  answer,  "Of  the  round  table."  3rd  answer,  "Of  the
blue  box  standing  on  it."  This  box  is  also  gilded.  The  box  and
flowers  agree  ;  the  other  points  are  wrong.  I  do  not  venture  to  decide
whether  these  3  answers  are  the  result  of  mere  guessing.  It  is  possible.
In  any  case  I  was  careful  to  make  no  sign.

13th  Experiment. — October  23rd.  10.35  to  10.40.  Circumstances
and  conditions  as  in  the  last.  Seven  numbers  of  two  digits,  written
clown  by  me  with  the  necessary  precautions,  are  to  be  guessed  in
.succession.

Originals:  4,  23,  16,  55,  83,  30,  12.
Guesses:  44,  68,  24,  50,  47,  18,  34.

\itli  Experiment.— October  23rd,  1890.  10.40  to  10.42.  Same
•conditions. Object  thought  of  :  the  lamp  shade.  Four  wrong  answers.


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.  19


15th  and  lQth  Experiments. — November  9th.  8.50  p.m.  The  same
persons  and  conditions  as  in  the  last  experiments.  A  friend,  E.,  is  also
present.  I  think  first  of  a  cigarette.  Three  answers  are  made  with-
out success.  Then  E.  writes  the  word  "  door  handle  "  in  another  part
of  the  room. Three  wrong  answers.

nth  Experiment. — November  1st,  1890,  with  my  patient  K.,  at
5.30. Thought  of — 14  ;  guessed — 7  and  22.

Besides  these  experiments  I  tried  three,  but  without  result,  with
another  person,  who  was  hypnotised.,

18th  Experiment. — Place,  drawing-room  of  Frau  K.  Time,  7.19  to
7.20  p.m.  Percipient,  the  daughter  of  Frau  K., — S.,  aged  17.  Present,
Frau  K.,  two  ladies,  and  myself.  The  daughter  is  in  the  next  room.  I
tell  the  others  that  no  one  is  to  glance  at  the  object  touched  and  chosen
by  me,  but  each  is  to  look  at  something  else,  thinking,  however,  of  the
thing  I  touch.  I  touch  the  sugar-tongs,  lying  on  the  sugar-basin,
among  30  or  40  things  on  the  table.  No  word  is  uttered.  I  call
the  daughter  in.  In  my  opinion  the  conditions  excluded  the  possibility
of  unconscious  indications  perceived  by  Fraulein  K.  While  she  was
still  in  the  doorway  she  said,  without  stopping  to  think,  "  Sugar-
tongs."  The  success  was  very  striking.  I  think  this  experiment  con-
vincing, as  I  watched  the  persons  present  closely.

The  19th  Experiment,  under  the  same  conditions,  is  a  failure.  The
clock  on  the  sideboard,  the  porcelain  dial-plate  was  thought  of,  and
the  answers  were  :  (1)  tray  ;  (2)  sweetmeats;  (3)  water.

20th  Experiment,  tried  with  the  same  lady  in  hypnosis.  Trans-
ference of  a  drawing. Complete  failure.

21st  Experiment,  under  same  conditions.  Thought  of,  a  top-hat  ;
nothing  was  guessed. Complete  failure.

Conclusion.

I  have  here  reported  all  my  experiments  from  January  to  Novem-
ber, 1890 ;  and  with  equal  fulness  on  the  positive  and  negative  sides.
Forty-five  experiments  with  percipients  in  a  normal  state  are  included,
one  of  which  is  made  up  of  several  (when  7  numbers  were  to  be
guessed).  Altogether,  therefore,  51  experiments,  with  6  persons ;  26
experiments  made  with  drawings,  and  25  with  guessing  of  persons,
objects,  numbers,  and  cards.

With  regard  to  the  susceptibility  of  the  persons  experimented  with,
their  ages  range  between  17  and  30  years  ;  one,  whom  I  tried  in
hypnosis,  is  not  susceptible  ;  with  another  only  one  experiment  suc-
ceeded, and  that  the  first.  The  other  five  show  more  susceptibility,
one  among  them  is  of  the  male  sex,  Graf  S.,  who  is  moderately  suscep-
tible. Fraulein  K.,  the  last  with  whom  the  drawing  experiments  were


20


Baron  von  Schrenclc-Notzing,


made,  appears  to  have  the  right  temperament,  but  to  be  insufficiently
developed.  There  are  three  others.  Frau  Eug.  draws  wrongly  at  first, — -
but  when  the  latent  capacity  is  excited,  the  thought  starts  up  with  the
suddenness  of  lightning,  and  the  figures  are  drawn  with  astonishing;
correctness  and  completeness.  Fraulein  A.  and  Fraulein  E.  show  the
greatest  susceptibility.  Fraulein  E.  seems  to  get  hold  of  the  elements-
of  the  drawing,  but  is  apt  to  reproduce  them  somewhat  altered  by
imagination.  Fraulein  A.'s  are  certainly  the  best  performances.  She,
as  well  as  Graf  S.,  displays  the  peculiarity  of  seizing  the  thought  almost
as  it  arises.  She  immediately  follows  me  in  thought  to  the  place  of
the  object  to  be  guessed.  For  example,  in  the  2nd  experiment  of  the
2nd  series,  what  first  occurs  to  me  is  the  house  and  the  street  in  which
the  person  I  decide  to  think  of  lives,  and  she  follows  me  there  mentally
at  once.  Or  I  think  of  selecting  an  object  among  those  in  a  basket
hanging  in  my  room,  and  choose  the  handkerchief,  though  the  red
slippers  first  present  themselves  for  mental  picturing.  Her  first  answer
is  "red  slippers."  In  two  cases  she  followed  me  immediately,  without
any  indication,  to  the  table  on  which  lay  a  number  of  objects,  from
among  which  I  intended  to  select.  She  chose  the  hat  I  had  thought
of  but  given  up,  and  the  book  lying  near  the  selected  one.  When
in  the  experiment  with  the  fan,  which  in  the  first  part  of  the  experi-
ment arose  in  my  mind  as  a  second  idea,  I  allowed  an  interval  of  more
than  an  hour  to  elajose,  and  then  took  up  the  idea  again,  this  time  as  a
first  idea,  she  guessed  it  at  once.  In  the  case  of  the  seven  numbers
she  guesses  only  the  first  right,  all  the  others  wrong.

The  same  thing  happens  with  the  drawings.  I  draw  two  con-
centric squares.  She  draws  immediately  a  single  square,  and  wishes
to  stop.  If  I  make  her  go  on  she  gets  wrong.  She  guesses  the  serpent
right  at  once,  in  spite  of  the  closed  door;  and  of  original  18  she
divines  what  I  first  thought  of,  a  triangle  with  a  perpendicular.  I
added  to  the  drawing  only  to  make  the  task  more  complicated.  What
is  added  as  the  residt  of  reflective  merited  labour  is  less  easily  recognised
by  many  percipients  than  the  idea  almost  in  the  act  of  surging  up  from
the  unconscious, — the  process  of  formation.

First  experiments,  as  in  the  case  of  Fraulein  K.  (Experiment  18,  2nd
series),  generally  succeed  the  best,  because  the  process  of  reflection
prevents,  or  at  least  acts  as  a  check  to  success.  The  more,  therefore,
the  character  of  exact  scientific  investigation  is  made  prominent  in
experiments  of  this  kind,  the  smaller  become  the  chances  of  success.
Thus  it  is  advisable  to  experiment  often,  and  little  at  a  time.  Now
and  then  this  strange  power  comes  over  persons  of  suitable  temperament
like  a  flash  ;  but  such  moments  are  impossible  to  foresee.  This  power
appeared  in  Frau  Eug.  like  lightning,  and  with  Fraulein  A.  on  one
evening  (October  15th)  it  was  so  intense  that  experiments  under


Experimental  Studies  in  Thought-Transference.  21


stricter  conditions,  at  a  distance,  succeeded  better  than  simpler  ones
on  other  occasions.

On  the  whole,  I  have  convinced  myself  that  persons  who  are  very
suggestible,  in  whom  imagination  is  active,  and  particularly  those  of
slightly  hysterical  temperament,  are  more  suitable  as  percipients  than
others.  The  power  does  not  appear  to  be  so  rare  as  is  believed  ;  the
■difficulty  lies  rather  in  seizing  the  moment  when  such  persons  are
in  the  right  mood.  The  psychical  process  is  comparable  to  artistic
activity.  Under  the  dissecting  knife  of  scientific  analysis  no  artistic
•creation  would  be  possible  :  it  needs  the  undisturbed  quiet  of  the
studio.

The  repetition  of  similar  ideas  both  in  percipient  and  agent  in  the
series  here  given  is  also  worthy  of  remark.  For  example,  Fraulein  A.
often  thought  first  of  some  object  near  her,  or  of  such  as  had  already
been  guessed.  In  reproduction  18  the  lines  of  the  serpent  are  still  to
be  seen.  "Hat"  and  "Quart-pot"  are  repeated  as  first  guesses,  because
these  objects  had  been  chosen  once.  A  critical  survey  of  the  objects
chosen  by  the  agent  is  equally  important.  For  example,  repetition,
certainly  unconscious  and  first  observed  in  putting  the  experiments
together,  occurs  as  follows: —

Originals  1,  6,  and  11 — three  crosses.

Originals  2,  22 — two  circles  (thought  of  by  me).

Original  5 — circles  (thought  of  by  Baron  v.  W.).

Originals  3,  13,  18 — three  triangles.  (In  originals  13  and  18  in
different  combinations,  with  circles.)

Originals  7,  10,  14,  22 —  four  squares  (concentric  squares,  a  figure
made  of  5  squares,  and  a  square  with  a  circle).

Original  20  and  that  of  Experiment  23 — two  mugs,  and  one  cup
(Experiment  25).

Originals  8  and  12  both  represent  the  figure  3.

As  the  percipients  were  different  in  different  cases,  this  recurrence
affects  the  value  of  the  experiments  very  little.  For  the  same  idea
cannot  be  shown  to  have  recurred  in  a  series  of  experiments  with  any
one  person.  And  in  first  trials  one  prefers  to  choose  simple  figures.
Besides  which,  the  manner  of  the  reproduction  is  often  decisive.  If,
for  example,  two  circles  are  placed  one  on  the  other  as  in  reproduction
8b,  it  is  certain  that  the  percipient  was  not  thinking  of  a  3,  but  that
a  figure,  without  definite  meaning,  was  impressed  upon  her.  Moreover,
the  reproduction  of  peculiarities  of  combination  and  the  correct  grasp-
ing of  little  accessories  are  very  convincing.  For  instance,  in  connection
with  Original  9,  a  W  was  seen,  though  I  was  thinking  intently  of  a  star;
with  Original  1 2,  a  B  was  seen,  instead  of  the  number  3 ;  with  Original  4,
a  cup,  instead  of  the  figure  1.  Drawing  15  was  seen  as  something  like  a
tower  or  pedestal ;  in  1 4  the  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  five  squares ;  in


22


Baron  von  Schrenck-Notzing.


reproduction  22c  the  relation  of  the  circle  with  regard  to  part  of  the
square.  Finally,  even  with  agent  and  percipient  separated,  a  quite
unlikely  figure  is  correctly  drawn  at  the  right  moment,  that  of  the
serpent.  These  obvious  and  important  results  do  not  fit  in  with  the
usual  explanations ;  and  chance  alone  will  not  produce  so  large  a
number  of  striking  successes.

After  full  allowance  for  possible  sources  of  error,  there  remains  in
the  way  in  which  the  results  were  obtained,  and  in  the  amount  of
coincidence,  something  inexplicable  which  calls  for  further  investigation,
and  seems  to  indicate  with  some  certainty  the  operation  of  a  factor  not
yet  perceptible  to  our  senses.


The  plates  which  follow  represent  (1)  the  ground  plan  of  the  rooms
in  tvhich  the  experiments  took  place  and  (2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,)  drawings
and  reproductions  made  in  the  experiments.  These  are  traced  from,  and
are,  facsimiles  of,  the  actual  drawings  of  agent  and  percipients.  It  will
be  noticed  that  the  drawings  are  numbered  consecutively,  but  that  ccs  the
drawings  corresponding  to  every  experiment  are  not  given,  the  number
ing  of  the  drawings  does  not  correspond  throughout  ivith  the  number
ing  of  the  experiments.  The  drawings  are,  liowever,  always  referred  to
by  their  own  members.


/


uyrt  of


0/  t'Lc  ffi-c


2  **« y  c?  CH


1

1


1  m


0


"Zi r.

/  I  ID  r


C


IK)


i


4/

s

r


h  </> ©  $


o

*  '


P3


FX


1 '  I  J


0/0  K 1°


6


Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing.


23


II.

SOME  RECENT  EXPERIMENTS  IN  AUTOMATIC  WRITING,

By  Thomas  Barkworth.


It  is  well  to  state,  at  the  outset  of  this  paper,  that  it  will  not  lie
found  to  contain  anything  new  or  startling.  Nor  does  it  seem  to  rne
that  these  characteristics  are  necessary  to  its  usefulness.  Eor  though
such  features  have  a  value  of  their  own  in  stimulating  inquiry,  and
in  forming  matter  for  assimilation  by  future  investigators  who  shall
have  ascertained  the  principles  or  laws  which,  in  our  present  state  of
knowledge,  we  are  only  groping  after,  they  at  present  rather  confound
than  assist  our  reason.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  we  gain  in
experimental  acquaintance  with  the  psychical  side  of  existence  in  the
living  subject,  the  more  likely  of  fruition,  because  the  more  easy  of
classification,  will  be  those  rare  and  sporadic  phenomena  which  may  be
gleaned  from  the  world  of  phantasm  and  of  second  sight.

While,  therefore,  facts  of  all  kinds  are  valuable  to  us,  the  most
hopeful  method  of  psychical  research  appears  to  me  to  proceed  from  the
known  to  the  unknown,  and  from  the  simple  to  the  complex,  and  thus,
by  studying  the  grammar  of  research,  to  find  gradually  the  meaning  of
fact  after  fact  which  at  present  convey  no  more  significance  to  us  than
so  many  undeciphered  hieroglyphics.

To  no  person  are  we  more  indebted  for  showing  us  this  path  to  the
knowledge  which  we  seek  than  to  Edmund  Gurney,  whose  experiments
in  hypnotism  have  thrown  a  new  light  upon  the  constitution  of  human
personality  in  the  living  man,  and  my  desire,  in  the  kind  of  experiments
I  am  about  to  record,  is  to  follow  humbly  in  his  footsteps.

In  comparing  hypnotic  experiment  with  automatic  writing,  we  find
both  advantage  and  disadvantage.  The  advantages  of  hypnotism  are
the  opportunities  for  studying  physiological  as  well  as  psychical
phenomena,  the  absolute  control  which  it  gives  us  over  the  subject,,
unchecked  by  his  self-consciousness,  fear  of  ridicule,  and  the  like,  and
the  greater  security  from  conscious  deception  or  prejudiced  ideas  which
it  assures  us  of  as  long  as  hypnosis  lasts.  On  the  other  hand,  granting
the  good  faith  of  the  automatic  writer,  we  can  obtain  nearly  as  full
results  on  the  psychical  side,  without  risk,  or  the  imputation  of  risk,  to
the  moral  or  physical  well-being  of  the  operator,  and  can  pursue  the
inquiry  at  any  spare  moment  and  with  no  further  appliances  than  a
pencil  and  a  sheet  of  paper.


24


Thomas  BarJcworth.


One  thing,  however,  is  essential,  and  that  is  an  unprejudiced  mind.
In  automatic  writing  we  are  confronted  at  once  with  a  mysterious
intelligent  agency,  operating  without  the  conscious  will  or  mental
participation  of  the  writer,  but  subject,  as  I  am  inclined  to  think,  to
suggestion  in  the  highest  degree.  Let  it  be  impressed  upon  the  mind
of  the  writer  that  this  seemingly  extraneous  intelligence  is  extra-
mundane  also,  and  it  will  respond  to  his  ideas  with  the  utmost  fidelity.
Let  him  believe  that  he  is  holding  intercourse  with  Satan,  and  it  will
hasten  to  assure  him  of  the  fact,  and  to  back  up  the  assertion  with
profane  language  ;  or  let  him  believe  himself  in  communication  with
some  other  spirit,  celestial  or  terrestrial,  and  to  the  utmost  of  his  own
knowledge,  possessed  or  forgotten,  will  he  be  humoured  to  the  top  of  his
bent.  In  all  this  we  see  just  what  might  be  expected  from  our
knowledge,  already  acquired,  of  the  workings  of  the  passive  conscious-
ness. Like  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter1  the  passive  consciousness
of  the  hypnotised  subject  accepts  the  part  assigned  him,  and  he  is
equally  ready  to  believe  himself  a  brooding  hen  or  a  water  pump,  and
to  spread  his  arms  for  wings  or  work  them  up  and  down  for  handles.
In  relating  the  few  facts  which  I  am  about  to  describe,  my  principal
object  is,  however,  not  to  sustain  or  assail  any  theories,  but  to  stimulate
inquiry.  My  hope  is  that  many  persons  may  be  induced  to  make
experiments  who  at  present  hold  aloof  from  fear  of  meddling  with  what
is  forbidden,  or  uncanny,  or  too  serious  for  what  they  would  deem
trifling.  In  the  Journal  for  July  I  appealed  for  assistance  in  these
experiments,  and  from  all  those  whom  it  reaches  I  only  got  rejilies
from  two  gentlemen,  neither  of  whom,  unfortunately,  could  use  the
planchette.  Is  there  no  one,  then,  among  our  700  members  and
associates  who  has  the  gift,  and  can  spare  fifteen  minutes  now  and  then
to  make  experiments  and  record  results  ?

The  operator  in  the  following  experiments  is  a  young  lady,  aged
fifteen,  an  inmate  of  my  household,  and  companion  in  study  with  my
own  daughter.  We  have,  therefore,  the  best  means  of  estimating  her
character  and  her  bona  fides,  which,  let  me  say  at  once,  are,  we  consider,
beyond  a  doubt.  She  had  not  previously  heard  of  Planchette,  and
Spiritualism  was,  to  her,  a  mere  name.  I  took  care  from  the  first  that
no  ideas  of  this  kind  should  be  instilled,  and  she  thus  approached  the
subject  without  any  foregone  conclusion.  Most  of  the  experiments
were  made  with  the  aid  of  the  planchette. But  latterly  a  pencil  was

1  This  simile  is  appropriate  in  the  above  particular  connection,  but  it  would  be
far  otherwise  in  a  general  description  of  the  passive  personality.  The  latter,  in  my
view,  is  passive  more  in  the  sense  in  which  a  locomotive  is  passively  under  the  control
of  the  driver.  But,  like  the  locomotive,  it  would  also  be  considered  liable  to
explosions,  as  of  emotion,  desperation,  &c,  and  to  misapplied,  irregular,  or  insuffi-
cient operation,  as  during  insanity  or  intoxication.


Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing.


25


tised,  held  vertically  between  the  points  of  the  fingers  and  thumbs  of
both  hands,  and  once  or  twice  the  pencil  was  held  in  the  ordinary  way.
These  changes,  however,  did  not  seem  to  affect  the  result.  The  first
experiments  were  attempted  by  this  girl,  whom  I  will  call  C,  in  con-
junction with  her  companion,  but  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  latter
was  merely  a  passenger,  so  to  speak,  and  that  C.  was  the  real  operator.
She  was  therefore  left  to  write  by  herself.  Unfortunately,  she  looked
upon  the  whole  thing  as  a  great  bore,  and,  as  I  was  unwilling  to  press
her,  the  experiments  have  only  been  few  and  far  between.  She  never
knew  what  she  had  written  till  it  was  looked  at,  and  there  was  often
some  slight  difficulty  in  deciphering  it.

Thus  the  first  question,  Who  are  you  that  write  ?  produced  what  at
first  I  took  to  be  mere  scrawling,  and  C.  shortly  after  left  the  room.
After  she  had  done  so  I  took  another  look  at  this  scrawl,  and  then  at
once  perceived  that  it  was  legible,  and  that  the  name  written  in  answer
to  the  question  was  "Henry  Morton."  I  at  once  followed  C.  upstairs,
and  asked  her  if  she  had  ever  heard  the  name,  and  she  replied  that  it
was  that  of  a  character  in  a  Christmas  play  she  had  acted  in,  more  than
a  year  previously.  Had  the  name,  as  it  easily  might  have,  been  that
of  some  deceased  friend,  it  is  obvious  what  inference  would  have  been
drawn.  I  give  the  next  three  questions  just  in  the  order  they  followed
on  the  next  evening

2.  Why  do  you  write  ? — A.  Because  I  must.

3.  "What  compels  you  to  write  1 — A.  I  do  not  know.

4.  Hemy  Morton,  do  you  know  you  are  part  of  me  1 — A.  Yes,
I  know.

The  last  question,  being  asked  in  a  tone  of  conviction,  amounted  to
a  suggestion,  and  was  adopted  accordingly.  This  docility  was  illus-
trated in  other  ways.  For  instance,  the  planchette,  having  taken  to
running  straight  off  the  paper  after  completing  an  answer,  was  told  not
to  do  so  again,  and  at  once  complied.  I  should  here  say  that  all  the
questions  and  instructions  to  the  planchette  were  first  dictated  by  me
and  then  repeated  aloud  by  the  operator.

Some  spelling  tests  followed.  C.  is  not  good  at  spelling,  and  feels
great  uncertainty  with  difficult  words.  Her  voluntary  spelling  of  such
is  very  hesitating,  and  does  not  therefore  give  any  suggestion  to  the
passive  consciousness.  The  two  personalities  acted,  therefore,  inde-
pendently of  one  another,  with  some  curious  results.  I  will  give  one
instance.

7.  Spell  psychical. — A  voluntary  attempt  was  first  made.  Result :
Sicickle.  C.  was  not  told  whether  this  was  right  or  wrong,  but  was
told  to  try  Planchette. Result :  Cicicle.

Some  questions  in  mental  arithmetic  were  put,  the  planchette


26


Thomas  Barkworth.


being  instructed  to  write  the  answers  only,  without  any  calculation.
I  am  informed  by  her  governess  that  C.  has  but  little  arithmetical
capability,  and  is  backward  for  her  age  in  this  subject.  Bearing  this
in  mind,  I  think  the  results  were  noteworthy.  Directly  the  question
was  put  the  instrument  began  to  write  the  answer.

28.  Divide  264  by  16.  First  of  all  an  attempt  was  made  to  work
the  sum  voluntarily,  and,  with  some  delay,  the  answer  given  was  "17
odd,"  which  was  wrong,  but  on  Planchette  being  appealed  to  it  at  once
wrote  16  and  8  over,  which  was  correct.  As  we  had  many  instances
of  the  passive  intelligence  thus  excelling  the  primary  activities  of  the
mind,  I  may  take  this  opportunity  of  saying  that  it  is  quite  in  accord-
ance with  what  I  had  expected,  and  have  elsewhere  spoken  of,  but
whether  this  superiority  is  essential  or  accidental,  whether,  that  is,  it  be
due  to  greater  power  or  to  greater  concentration,  cannot  at  present  be
determined,  at  all  events  evidentially.

12.  Divide  187,981  by  13. Answer,  14,463.

This  is  wrong  by  three  only,  and  considering  the  normal  powers  of
the  operator  above-mentioned,  I  think  it  a  somewhat  remarkable
answer.

I  now  come  to  a  class  of  questions  designed  to  test  the  memory  of
the  passive  consciousness.

What  happened  on  the  1st  June?

This  question  was  asked  in  the  last  week  of  July.  I  chose  the  date
at  hazard,  and  neither  C.  nor  I  had  any  recollection  of  it.  But
Planchette  answered  "Went  to  church,"  and  Ave  then  got  an  almanack
and  found  that  the  1st  June  was  a  Sunday.  This  kind  of  question  was
often  tried  with  inconclusive  results,  but  never  with  incorrect  ones,
except  on  one  occasion.  Being  asked  in  October  what  happened  on
13th  July,  the  answer  was  "Monday  lessons."1  If  Planchette
thought  the  day  was  Monday,  it  is  rather  curious  that  it  should  not
have  said  simply  "lessons."  In  reality,  however,  the  day  was  a
Sunday,  and  it  would  be  not  impossible  that  C.  had  during  that  Sun-
day been  worrying  herself  about  the  following  day's  work.

14.  Who  conquered  Peru?

The  answer  to  this  was  written  "  Spires,"  and  such  an  answer  being
unintelligible,  Planchette  was  made  to  repeat  it,  with  the  same  result.
It  then  occurred  to  C.'s  governess  to  fetch  the  volume  of  Collier's  History

1  The  manner  in  which  the  word  "lessons"  was  written  was  a  curiosity.  After
writing  Monday  the  tail  of  the  y  was  brought  back  with  elaborate  flourishes,  and  the
first  s  in  "lessons  "  was  written  ;  then  the  e  and  the  I  were  written  backwards  ;  then
the  pencil  was  carried  forward  with  more  flourishes  and  gyrations  to  the  second  s,
followed  by  the  other  letters  in  their  order.  So  florid  was  all  this  scroll  work  that  it
took  much  care  to  find  afterwards  what  route  the  pencil  had  taken,  though  the  word
was  entirely  legible.


Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing.


which  C.  had  been  reading  three  months  previously. At  the  head  of
one  of  the  chapters  was  a  table  of  dates  which  she  had  (at  the  time)
learnt  by  heart,  among  which  were  the  following  consecutively  : —
Reformers  called  Protestants  at

Spires 1529

League  of  Smalcald 1530

Pizarro  conquers  Peru 1533

The  name  of  Pizarro,  which  C.  had  forgotten,  is  placed  in  print
exactly  below  the  word  (Spires,  and  in  this  way  the  two  words  fell
together  under  C.'s  eye,  and  became  indelibly  associated  in  what  I  have
elsewhere  ventured  to  call  the  pictorial  memory  of  the  passive  con-
sciousness. The  next  experiments  I  shall  describe  exhibit  memory  in
another  aspect.

11.  Tell  me  something  I  don't  know. — A.  You  have  a  shot  in
your  eye.

On  examination,  I  found  a  small  blood  speck  on  the  margin  of  the
iris  of  one  eye.  This  C.  assured  me  she  had  no  idea  existed.  It  is
probable,  however,  that  she  had  at  some  time  seen  it  in  her  looking-
glass  when  her  mind  was  occupied  with  other  matters.

17.  Tell  me  something  more. — No  answer  but  scrawling.

18.  You  must  write  (peremptorily). — A.  Frank  Headley  ill.  (I
have  altered  the  name.)

In  answer  to  inquiries,  C.  said  this  was  the  name  of  a  boy  she  had
met  at  the  seaside  two  years  before,  but  she  knew  no  more  about  him,
not  even  where  he  lived. Accordingly  the  next  question  was,

19.  What  is  Frank  Headley's  address? — A.  Lord  Mayors-walk.
C,  who  lived  near  York,  thought  there  was  a  street  of  this  name

there,  but  was  not  sure.  It  was  not  till  she  went  home  for  the
holidays  that  she  ascertained,  through  mutual  friends,  that  Frank
Headley  went  to  school  in  Lord  Mayor's-walk,  so  that  Planchette  was
found  to  have  answered  correctly.  The  explanation  suggested  is,  that
when  he  met  her  two  years  previously,  he  had  mentioned  this  and  she
had  forgotten  it.  Planchette,  however,  was  unable  to  give  the  number
in  Lord  Mayor's-walk,  which  perhaps  he  had  never  told  her,  and  when
asked  what  he  was  ill  with,  replied  '•  Cold  in  head."

Some  experiments  were  made  with  the  right  and  left  hands  con-
secutively, thus —

27.  Give  the  name  of  one  of  the  principal  Elizabethan  statesmen.

Sight  hand  Answer. — Walpole.

Left  hand  Answer. — Walsingham.

The  last  group  of  questions  asked  referred  to  subjects  which  it  was
certain  C.  did  not  know  and  never  had  known.  For  instance,  "What  is
the  price  of  Egyptian  Unified  ? "  "  What  is  the  second  Christian  name


-28


Thomas  Barhwortk.


of  So-and-so  ? "  &c.  Invariably  these  questions  produced  no  reply  ;  the
instrument  only  made  scrawls.  It  may  be  quite  possible,  however,
that  had  an  answer  been  insisted  on,  one  would  have  been  written  (as
in  the  case  of  Frank  Headley's  alleged  cold  in  the  head),  and  neces-
sarily an  incorrect  one,  because  of  the  writer's  ignorance  of  the  facts,
combined  with  the  effects  of  suggestion  compelling  an  answer  of  some
kind.  This  I  am  inclined  to  think  may  be  the  explanation  of  Mrs.
Newnham's  answers  under  her  husband's  cross-examination1 — answers
which  he  says  were  foreign  to  the  conscious  intelligence  of  either
of  them,  and  which  contained  an  attempt  at  deliberate  invention
rather  than  plead  guilty  to  total  ignorance."  If,  under  suggestion,  a
hypnotic  subject  were  told  to  jump  over  a  house,  he  would  not  be  able
to  do  it,  but  he  would  jump  as  high  as  he  could.

Among  miscellaneous  questions  one  only  is  worth  recording.  It
was,  "Are  you  the  spirit  of  my  grandmother?"  This  was  the  only
time  the  idea  of  spirits  was  introduced,  and  as  it  was  obviously  put
jestingly,  it  did  not  convey  any  real  suggestion  of  their  agency.

The  answer  accordingly  was,  "  No,  I  was  in  —  "  ;  and  here

followed  a  remarkably  well-executed  outline  map  of  Africa,  such  as
few  persons,  and  certainly  not  C,  could  have  drawn  from  memory  ;
every  important  bay  and  promontory  being — as  we  found  on  com-
parison with  the  atlas — correctly  shown,  and  in  due  proportion.  At
one  point  only  was  it  in  error.

The  explanation  was  not  that  C.  was  guided  by  some  defunct
geographer  or  Africander,  but  that  she  had  been  getting  up  the
geography  of  Africa  that  morning  with  the  aid  of  the  map  ;  and  thus
had  the  pictorial  memory  of  the  passive  personality,  unconsciously  to
herself,  recorded  and  reproduced  this  complicated  observation,  which
she  had  made  without  effort,  and  which  was  merely  incidental  to  her
task.

1  [For  accounts  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham's  experiments,  in  which  she  wrote  with
jilanchette  and  without  conscious  knowledge  of  what  she  wrote,  appropriate  answers
to  questions  written  down  by  him  at  a  different  table  and  unknown  to  her,  see
Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  7-23,  and  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  03-71.
-En.]

2  These  were  all  answers  to  questions  not  spoken  aloud,  but  written  down  by  Mr.
Newnham  and  not  seen  by  Mrs.  Newnham.  It  is  a  ctirious  fact  that  while  the
questions  which  were  written  down  by  Mr.  Newnham  were  invariably  apprehended  by
Mrs.  Newnham,  the  answers,  which  were  in  some  cases  known  to  him  and  not  to  her
(e.g.,  Masonic  secrets),  were  either  not  apprehended  at  all,  or  only  in  a  very  imperfect
degree.  Can  it  be  that  for  effective  thought-transference  it  is  helpful  to  give  precision
and  definiteness  to  the  thought,  by  writing  it  down,  or  else  speaking  it  aloud  ?  (This
last  in  another  room,  of  course. )  That  the  force  of  all  suggestion  must  greatly  depend
upon  clear  definition  or  expression  is  natural  to  expect,  and  there  are  many  thoughts
which  float  through  our  minds  and  are  grasped  effectively  by  ourselves  without
verbal  formulas,  but  which,  nevertheless,  may  require  embodying  in  the  latter  to  make
them  transferable  to  other  minds.


Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing.


Such  are  the  few  and  slight  experiments  which  I  have  ventured  to
lay  before  the  society.  I  have  done  so  mainly  for  two  reasons  ;  firstly,
the  hope  that  sufficient  interest  may  be  aroused  in  those  who  hear  of
them  to  induce  other  and  more  important  essays  in  this  interesting-
method  of  investigation  :  and  secondly,  to  indicate  the  lines  on  which
it  may,  as  I  think,  be  most  profitably  pursued.

It  will  be  seen  that,  in  one  respect,  these  experiments  bear  in  much
the  same  direction,  and  towards  the  same  conclusions,  as  Miss  X.'s
interesting  paper  on  crystal-gazing.  It  would  seem  tlmt  nothing  is
ever  really  forgotten,  though  the  bygone  memories  evoked  by  pencil,  or
crystal,  may  appear  so  new  and  strange  that  we  fail  to  recognise  them
as  ever  having  been  included  in  our  experience.


30


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwiclc.


III.

ON  THE  EVIDENCE  FOR  CLAIRVOYANCE.
By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

PART  I.

Before  beginning  to  examine  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance  some
preliminary  discussion  as  to  what  it  is  that  we  have  to  investigate
seems  to  be  required.  The  word  clairvoyance  is  often  used  very  loosely
and  with  widely  different  meanings.  In  the  present  paper  I  intend  to
denote  by  it  a  faculty  of  acquiring  supernormally,  but  not  by  reading
the  minds  of  persons  present,  a  knowledge  of  facts  such  as  we  normally
acquire  by  the  use  of  our  senses.  I  do  not  limit  it,  notwithstanding
the  derivation  of  the  word,  to  knowledge  which  would  normally  be
acquired  by  the  sense  of  sight,  nor  do  I  limit  it  to  a  knowledge  of
present  facts.  A  similar  knowledge  of  past  and,  if  necessary,  of
future  facts  may  be  included.

On  the  other  hand,  I  exclude  the  mere  faculty  of  seeing  apparitions
or  visions,  which  is  sometimes  called  clairvoyance.  Clairvoyant
knowledge  may  reach  the  consciousness  of  the  percipient  in  the  form
of  a  vision,  but  no  vision  will  here  be  termed  clairvoyant  unless  it  be
at  least  veridical  ;  which,  it  is  needless  to  say,  many — probably  most —
visions  and  apparitions  are  not.

Again,  the  word  will  not  be  used  to  mean  supernormal  knowledge
of  a  simple  fact  such  as  we  ai^e  accustomed  to  think  of  as  the  result  of
telepathy.  A  dies,  let  us  say,  and  at  the  same  time  his  friend  B  at  a
distance  has  an  impression  about  A,  or  sees  an  apparition  of  A,  or
perhaps  even  knows  that  A  is  dying.  If  the  knowledge  goes  no  further
than  this  I  shall  regard  it  as  a  case  of  simple  telepathy,  as  distinct
from  clairvoyance.  But  it  sometimes  happens  that  B  seems  to  see  the
scene  of  A's  death  as  it  actually  occurred,  with  details  which  we  can
hardly  suppose  to  have  originated  in  the  mind  of  B  by  accident,  or  to
be  due  to  previous  knowledge  or  association,  and  which  are  unlikely  to
have  been  consciously  in  the  mind  of  A.  Such  a  case  as  this  may  be
conveniently  discussed  under  the  head  of  clairvoyance,  even  though  we
may  think  telepathy  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  facts,  because,  as
will  be  seen  in  the  sequel,  there  are  very  similar  cases  where  the
telepathic  hypothesis  is  difficult  to  apply.

One  class  of  cases — often  called  clairvoyant  by  old  writers — we
shall  exclude,  namely,  those  in  which  the  knowledge  exhibited  by  the
percipient  is  already  in  the  mind  of  some  person  present.  Experiment


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


31


lias  proved  that  percipients  will  seem  to  themselves  to  see  independently
scenes  which  have  no  existence  except  in  the  mind  of  a  person  present,
so  that  the  impression  if  supernormal  at  all  must  be  due  to  thought-
transference.  A  good  instance  of  this  is  given  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living  (Vol.  I.,  p.  96),  where  Mrs.  VvT.,  hypnotised  by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,
and  describing,  apparently  clairvoyantly,  a  room  unknown  to  her,  but
known  to  Mr.  Smith,  descried  on  the  table  an  open  umbrella  which
had  no  existence  except  in  Mr.  Smith's  imagination.  Cases  like  this
show  that  though,  if  a  faculty  of  independent  clairvoyance  exists,  it
may  doubtless  be  exercised  in  the  presence  of  persons  cognisant  of  the
facts  clairvoyantly  known,  it  can  hardly  under  these  circumstances
prove  its  existence.  But  though  the  evidential  reason  for  dividing  off
these  cases  from  clairvoyance  proper  is  clear,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say
that  the  line  so  drawn  has  much  scientific  value.  It  is  undeniable  that
such  evidence  as  we  have  of  clairvoyant  perception  of  things  at  a  dis-
tance is  often  very  much  mixed  up  with  evidence  of  similar  perceptions
possibly  due  to  thought-transference  from  persons  present,  and  this
suggests  the  possibility  that  clairvoyant  perception  of  distant  scenes  is
facilitated  when  it  can  be  led  up  to  by  thought-transference  from  those
present.

The  fact  is,  we  know  too  little  about  our  subject  to  be  able  at
present  to  define  it  scientifically,  and  it  is  very  doubtful  whether,  by
any  definition  that  could  be  framed,  we  could  mark  off  a  class  of
phenomena  having  any  common  explanation  peculiar  to  themselves.
All  we  can  do  now  is,  as  it  were,  to  define  provisionally  a  certain
region  to  explore,  in  the  hope  that  the  definition  may  aid  us  in  ascer-
taining what  facts  we  have  to  explain,  in  tracing  connections  with
already  known  facts,  such  as  telepathy  and  hyperpesthesia,  and  in
discovering  how  far  the  evidence  requires  us  to  extend  our  concep-
tions of  the  possibility  of  acquiring  supernormal  knowledge,  and  of
the  modes  in  which  such  supernormal  knowledge  may  be  obtained.
The  subject  as  we  have  defined  it  naturally  divides  itself  into  two
main  parts — clairvoyant  knowledge  of  facts  which  are  known  to
somebody  somewhere,  such  as  what  A  B  is  doing  at  a  distance  ;  and
clairvoyant  knowledge  of  facts  unknown  to  anyone  in  the  world,  such
as  a  number  drawn  at  random  from  a  bag  and  not  looked  at.  In  the
present  paper  I  propose  to  deal  with  the  first  kind  of  clairvoyance
only.

Before  pi'oceeding  to  the  evidence,  it  will  be  well  to  consider
briefly  the  sources  of  error  to  be  guarded  against,  and  the  possible
explanations  of  the  phenomena.  There  is,  of  course,  the  usual
possibility  of  absence  of  bona  fides.  The  probability  or  improbability
of  this  in  each  particular,  case  my  readers  must  estimate  for  them-
selves, but  in  the  present  paper  I  shall  not  bring  forward  any  cases


32


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


where  such  an  explanation  seems  at  all  probable  to  myself.  Further,
there  is  the  usual  allowance  to  be  made  for  inaccuracy  and  for  defects
of  memory,  many  of  the  records  not  having  been  made  at  the  time.
These  possibilities  have  been  fully  discussed  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  and  need  not  be  dwelt  on  further  here.  In  a  subsequent
paper  allowance  will  have  also  to  be  made  for  possible  mal-observation,
and  it  will  have  to  be  considered  whether  knowledge  supposed  to  be
inaccessible  to  the  clairvoyant  by  ordinary  means  really  was  so;  and
extended  sense  perception  (hyperesthesia)  and  latent  memoxy  are  further
explanations  that  will  be  chiefly  applicable  in  this  later  discussion.  The
possible  explanations  which  are  of  most  importance  in  the  present  paper
are  chance  coincidence,  shrewd  guessing,  and  finally  telepathy;  the  last
of  which  must  be  kept  in  view  throughout,  for,  as  we  are  dealing  with
a  percipience  of  facts  known  to  some  distant  person,  the  question  may
always  be  raised  whether  his  knowledge  had  anything  to  do  with  the
percipience.  With  this  hypothesis  in  view,  I  shall  try  as  far  as  I  con-
veniently can  to  arrange  the  cases  I  have  to  bring  forward  according
to  the  degree  of  difficulty  in  applying  it,  taking  into  account  the  con-
nection, if  any,  between  this  distant  person — whom  we  may  provision-
ally call  the  agent — and  the  percipient,  the  extent  to  which  the  agent
had  his  mind  directed  towards  the  percipient,  and  the  question  whether
any  crisis  was  at  the  moment  occurring  in  the  agent's  life.

I  shall  begin  with  cases  closely  parallel  to  many  which  have  been
included  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  as  cases  of  telepathic  clairvoyance,
and  in  which  telepathy  is  j)rivtd  facie  the  simplest  explanation.  In
these  cases  the  agent  is  clearly  designated,  and  also  his  connection  with
the  percipient ;  and  the  experience  of  the  supposed  agent  at  the  moment
is  generally  of  a  marked  and  exceptional  character.  Moreover,  in  most
of  these  cases  the  initiative,  or  at  least  the  psychical  disturbance  or
impulse  which  leads  to  the  vision,  is,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  entirely  on
the  side  of  the  agent,  the  percipient  being  in  an  apparently  normal
state  and  not  expecting  or  seeking  any  vision.

The  first  case  I  shall  give  comes  to  us  through  the  American
Branch  of  the  Society.  Mr.  A.  B.  Wood  writes  to  Mr.  F.  A.  Nims,
an  Associate  of  the  American  Branch,  as  follows : — •

"Muskegon,  April  29th,  1890.
(L.  868.)  "  In  compliance  with  your  suggestion,  supplemented  by  the
request  of  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  I  sought  an  interview  witli  Mrs.  Agnes
Paquet,  and  obtained  the  following  information  regarding  her  strange  experi-
ence on  the  day  of  her  brother's  death.  I  submit  the  papers  to  you  feeling
that  they  should  go  forward  with  the  fullest  and  clearest  information  obtain-
able, and  believing  that  you  may  suggest  other  questions  the  answers  to
which  may  have  important  bearing  on  the  case.

"  A.  B.  Wood."


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


33


Statement  of  Accident.

"  On  October  24th,  1889,  Edmund  Dunn,  brother  of  Mrs.  Agnes  Paquet,
was  serving  as  fireman  on  the  tug  Wolf,  a  small  steamer  engaged  in  towing
vessels  in  Chicago  Harbour.  At  about  3  o'clock  a.m.,  the  tug  fastened  to  a
vessel,  inside  the  piers,  to  tow  her  up  the  river.  While  adjusting  the  tow-
line  Mr.  Dunn  fell  or  was  thrown  overboard  by  the  towdine,  and  drowned.
The  body,  though  sought  for,  was  not  found  until  about  three  weeks  after
the  accident,  when  it  came  to  the  surface  near  the  place  where  Mr.  Dunn
disappeared."

ilX/'.s.  Paquefs  Statement.

"  I  arose  about  the  usual  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  accident,  probably
about  six  o'clock.  I  had  slept  well  throughout  the  night,  had  no  dreams  or
sudden  awakenings.  I  awoke  feeling  gloomy  and  depressed,  which  feeling  I
could  not  shake  oft'.  After  breakfast  my  husband  went  to  his  work,  and,  at
the  proper  time,  the  children  were  gotten  ready  and  sent  to  school,  leaving
me  alone  in  the  house.  Soon  after  this  I  decided  to  steep  and  drink  some
tea,  hoping  it  would  relieve  me  of  the  gloomy  feelings  aforementioned.  I
went  into  the  pantry,  took  down  the  tea  canister,  and  as  I  turned  around
my  brother  Edmund — or  his  exact  image — stood  before  me  and  only  a  few
feet  away.  The  apparition  stood  with  back  toward  me,  or,  rather,  partially
so,  and  was  in  the  act  of  falling  forward — away  from  me — seemingly  impelled
by  two  ropes  or  a  loop  of  rope  drawing  against  his  legs.  The  vision  lasted
but  a  moment,  disappearing  over  a  low  railing  or  bulwark,  but  was  very
distinct.  I  dropped  the  tea,  clasped  my  hands  to  my  face,  and  exclaimed,,
'My  God!  Ed.  is  drowned.'

"At  about  half- past  ten  a.  m.  my  husband  received  a  telegram  from  Chicago,
announcing  the  drowning  of  my  brother.  When  he  arrived  home  he  said  to
me,  '  Ed.  is  sick  in  hospital  at  Chicago  ;  I  have  just  received  a  telegram, '
to  which  I  replied,  '  Ed.  is  drowned  ;  I  saw  him  go  overboard.'  I  then  gave
him  a  minute  description  of  what  I  had  seen.  I  stated  that  my  brother,  as.
I  saw  him,  was  bareheaded,  had  on  a  heavy,  blue  sailor's  shirt,  no  coat,  and
that  he  went  over  the  rail  or  bulwark.  I  noticed  that  his  pants'  legs  were  rolled
up  enough  to  show  the  white  lining  inside.  I  also  described  the  appearance
of  the  boat  at  the  point  where  my  brother  went  overboard.

"I  am  not  nervous,  and  neither  before  nor  since  have  I  had  any  experi-
ence in  the  least  degree  similar  to  that  above  related.

"My  brother  was  not  subject  to  fainting  or  vertigo.

"Agnes  Paquet."

Mr.  Pitquet's  Statement.

"At  about  10.30  o'clock  a.m.,  October  24th,  1889,  I  received  a  telegram
from  Chicago,  announcing  the  drowning  of  my  brother-in-law,  Edmund
Dunn,  at  3  o'clock  that  morning.  I  went  directly  home,  and,  wishing  to  break
the  force  of  the  sad  news  I  had  to  convey  to  my  wife,  I  said  to  her  :  '  Ed.  is.
sick  in  hospital  at  Chicago  ;  I  have  just  received  a  telegram.'  To  which  she
replied  :  '  Ed.  is  drowned  ;  I  saw  him  go  overboard. '  She  then  described  to>
me  the  appearance  and  dress  of  her  brother  as  described  in  her  statement  ;.
also  the  appearance  of  the  boat,  &c.

"I  started  at  once  for  Chicago,  and  when  I  arrived  there  I  found  the-

D


34


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc.


appearance  of  that  part  of  the  vessel  described  by  my  wife  to  be  exactly  as
she  had  described  it,  though  she  had  never  seen  the  vessel  ;  and  the  crew
verified  my  wife's  description  of  her  brother's  dress,  &c,  except  that  they
thought  that  he  had  his  hat  on  at  the  time  of  the  accident.  They  said  that
Mr.  Dunn  had  purchased  a  pair  of  pants  a  few  days  before  the  accident
occurred,  and  as  they  were  a  trifle  long  before,  wrinkling  at  the  knees,  he  had
worn  them  rolled  up,  showing  the  white  lining  as  seen  by  my  wife.

"  The  captain  of  the  tug,  who  was  at  the  wheel  at  the  time  of  the  accident,
seemed  reticent.  He  thought  my  brother-in-law  was  taken  with  a  fainting  fit
or  vertigo  and  fell  over  backward ;  but  a  sailor  (Frank  Yemont)  told  a  friend
of  mine  that  he  (Yemont)  stood  on  the  bow  of  the  vessel  that  was  being
towed  and  saw  the  accident.  He  stated  that  my  brother-in-law  was  caught
by  the  tow-line  and  thrown  overboard,  as  described  by  my  wife.  I  think  that
the  captain,  in  his  statement,  wished  to  avoid  responsibility,  as  he  had  no
right  to  order  a  fireman — my  brother-in-law's  occupation — to  handle  the
tow-line.

"  My  brother-in-law  was  never,  to  my  knowledge,  subject  to  fainting  or
vertigo.

"  Peter  Paquet."

Mr.  Wood  writes  again  on  August  12th,  1890  :  —

"  In  accordance  with  request,  I  have  had  statements  made  in  first
person.

"I  have  made  diligent  inquiry,  but  cannot  place  the  sailor  Yemont.  A
letter  sent  to  his  last  known,  or  supposed,  address  has  been  returned,  marked
<  Not  called  for.'  ...

"A.  B.  Wood."

Here  Airs.  Paquet  not  only  had  a  vivid  impression  of  her  brother
•within  a  few  hours  of  his  death — not  only  knew  that  he  was  dead —
but  saw  a  more  or  less  accurate  representation  of  the  scene  of  his
•death.

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  her  impression  was  not  contempo-
raneous with  the  event  to  which  it  related,  but  occurred  some  six  hours
afterwards.  It  was  preceded  by  a  feeling  of  depression  with  which
she  had  awoken  in  the  morning,  and  one  is  at  first  tempted  to  suppose
that  she  had  dreamed  of  the  event  and  forgotten  it,  and  that  her  sub-
sequent vision  was  the  result  of  a  sudden  revivification  of  the  dream
in  her  memory.  But  we  do  not  know  enough  to  justify  us  in  assuming
this,  and  against  such  a  hypothesis  may  be  urged  the  experience  of
Mrs.  i-itorie  related  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  p.  370,
No.  134),  which  somewhat  resembles  Mrs.  Paquet's.  Mrs.  Storie  tells
us  that  all  the  evening  she  felt  unusually  nervous,  and  then,  when
she  went  to  bed,  she  bad  a  remarkable  dream,  in  which  she  saw  a
.series  of  scenes  which  afterwards  turned  out  to  have  a  clear  relation
to  the  death  of  her  brother,  who  had  been  killed  by  a  passing
train  four  hours  earlier.  In  her  case  the  nervousness  cannot  be
regarded  as  telepathic,  as  it  is  stated  to  have  begun  before  the  accident,


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


35


but  it  seems  quite  possible  that  the  nervousness  and  depression  may
have  had  to  do  with  some  condition  in  the  percipient  which  rendered
the  vision  possible.

Another  case  remarkably  like  Mrs.  Paquet's  and  exhibiting  the
same  characteristics  of  depression  and  deferment  is  No.  65  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  p.  268).  Compare  also  Cases  144  and  135  in  the
same  volume.  Mr.  Gurney  regarded  deferment  as  a  strong  point
■in  favour  of  a  telepathic  explanation  of  such  occurrences  (same
vol.,  p.  373).

The  next,  though  the  accident  was  fortunately  of  a  less  serious
nature,  is  a  very  striking  case,  and  the  fact  that  the  percipient
irecorded  her  vision  almost  at  once,  and  before  she  knew  it  to  be
veridical,  gives  it  a  very  high  evidential  value.  It  was  sent  to  us  by
Dr.  Elliott  Coues,  of  Washington,  a  week  after  its  occurrence.  Dr.
•Coues  writes  : — •

"1726,  N-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.,  January  21st,  188').

(L.  829.)  "Among  many  cases  which  are  within  my  knowledge,  of  the
possession  and  exercise  of  certain  psychic  faculties  on  the  part  of  persons
commonly  called  clairvoyant,  I  select  one  which  I  think  will  interest  your
-Society,  not  on  account  of  its  mystery  or  novelty,  but  of  its  extreme
simplicity  and  thorough  authentication.  The  incident  itself  is  of  the  most
trivial  character,  followed  hy  no  consequences  whatever  to  the  person  to
whom  the  little  accident  occurred,  and  I  can  see  no  reason  why  it  should
have  stimulated  a  clairvoyant's  faculties  into  activity,  more  than  any  one  of  a
thousand  little  occurrences  of  any  day  ;  unless  it  may  be  (as  is  indeed
probable)  that  some  specially  strong  magnetic  rapport  existed  between  the
unconscious  "agent  "  on  the  one  hand  and  the  surprised  "percipient  "  on  the
-other.  Both  parties  to  this  unexpected  and  unintended  experiment  in
psychic  science  are  well  known  to  me.  Mrs.  E.  A.  Conner,  who  kindly,  at
my  request,  allows  the  use  of  her  name,  is  widely  known  in  this  country  as  a
writer  and  speaker  of  no  ordinary  ability.  The  other  lady  desires  to  remain
unknown  by  name,  but  I  can  attest  her  rare  psychical  faculties  and  absolute
integrity,  after  an  intimate  acquaintance  of  several  years'  duration.

"The  case  is  simply  this:  In  Washington,  D.C.,  January  14th,  1889,
between  2  and  3  p.m.,  Mrs.  Conner  is  going  up  the  steps  of  her  residence,
No.  217,  Delaware-avenue,  carrying  some  papers.  She  stumbles,  falls,  is
not  hurt,  picks  herself  up,  and  enters  the  house.

"At  or  about  the  same  time — certainly  within  the  hour,  probably  within
30  minutes,  perhaps  at  the  very  moment-  -another  lady,  whom  I  will  call
Mrs.  B.,  is  sitting  sewing  in  her  room,  about  lh  miles  distant.  The  two
ladies  are  friends,  though  not  of  very  long  standing.  They  had  walked
together  the  day  before  (Sunday,  January  13th),  but  had  not  met  this  day
(the  14th).  Mrs.  B.  "sees"  the  little  accident  in  every  detail.  The  vision
or  image  is  minutely  accurate  (as  it  afterwards  proves).  Nevertheless,  it  is
so  wholly  unexpected  and  unaccountable,  that  she  doubts  it  were  not  a  pass-
ing figment  of  her  imagination. But  the  mental  impression  is  so  strong

D  2


36


Mrs.  H,  Sidgwick.


that  she  keeps  thinking  it  over,  and  sits  down  and  writes  a  letter  to  Mrs.
Conner,  which  I  enclose.  The  letter  is  written,  of  course,  without  any
communication  whatever  between  the  two  ladies.  Mrs.  Conner  receives  it
next  morning,  Tuesday,  the  15th.  I  happened  to  call  on  Mrs.  Conner  that
day,  on  another  errand,  when  she  hands  me  the  letter,  and  verities  it  in  every
essential  particular  to  me  verbally,  from  her  side  of  the  case.  The  little
accident  had  happened  exactly  as  Mrs.  B.  described  it  from  the  clairvoyant
image  she  perceived.

' '  You  are  at  liberty  to  use  the  letter  for  publication,  only  suppressing  the-
writer's  name.  Its  naivete  and  spontaneousness,  and  obvious  lack  of  any
possible  afterthought,  reflect  the  occurrence  so  perfectly  that  what  I  have
written  would  be  superfluous,  were  it  not  that  I  thus  am  able  to  attest,
from  Mrs.  Conner  herself,  that  the  psychical  impression  made  on  Mrs.  B.
was  the  exact  reflection  of  an  actual  occurrence.

' '  Elliott  Coues.  "

The  letter  referred  to  is  as  follows  : —

"  Honda!!  Evening,  January  lUh,  1889.

"My  Dear  Friend, — I  know  you  will  be  surprised  to  receive  a  note
from  me  so  soon,  but  not  more  so  than  I  was  to-day  when  you  were  shown
to  me  clairvoyantly,  in  a  somewhat  embarrassed  position.  I  doubt  very
much  if  there  was  any  truth  in  it,  nevertheless,  will  relate  it,  and  leave  you
to  laugh  at  the  idea  of  it.

"I  was  sitting  in  my  room  sewing,  this  afternoon,  about  two  o'clock,
when  what  should  I  see  but  your  own  dear  self  ;  but,  Heavens  !  in  what  a
position.  Now,  I  don't  want  to  excite  your  curiosity  too  much,  or  try  your
patience  too  long,  so  will  come  to  the  point  at  once.  You  were  falling  up
the  front  steps  in  the  yard.  You  had  on  your  black  skirt  and  velvet  waist,
your  little  straw  bonnet,  and  in  your  hand  were  some  papers.  When  you
fell,  your  hat  went  in  one  direction  and  the  papers  in  another.  You  got  up
very  quickly,  put  on  your  bonnet,  picked  up  the  papers,  and  lost  no  time
getting  into  the  house.  You  did  not  appear  to  be  hurt,  but  looked  some-
what mortified.  It  was  all  so  plain  to  me  that  I  had  ten  notions  to  one  to
dress  myself  and  come  over  and  see  if  it  were  true,  but  finally  concluded
that  a  sober,  industrious  woman  like  yourself  would  not  be  stumbling
around  at  that  rate,  and  thought  I'd  best  not  go  on  a  wild  goose  chase.
Now,  what  do  you  think  of  such  a  vision  as  that  ?  Is  there  any  possible
truth  in  it  ?  I  feel  almost  ready  to  scream  with  laughter  whenever  I  think,
of  it  ;  you  did  look  too  funny,  spreading  yourself  out  in  the  front  yard.
'  Great  was  the  fall  there*  >f . '

"  I  can  distinctly  call  to  mind  the  house  in  which  you  live,  but  for  the
life  of  me  I  cannot  tell  whether  there  are  any  steps  from  the  sidewalk  into
the  yard,  as  I  saw  them,  or  not.

"  Now  do  tell  me,  dear,  if  I  saw  correctly  or  not,  or  if  the  thing  was-
shown  me  simply  to  give  me  something  to  laugh  about  ?

"Hope  you  got  home  last  night  without  any  adventures.  And  now
♦  Good-night.'

"  Sincerely  your  friend, "

This  letter  came  to  us  in  an  envelope  addressed  :  Mrs.  E.  A.  Conner,
217, Del. Ave., N.E., Washington,  D.C.,  and with the  postmarks,


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


37


Washington,  D.C.,  Jan.  15,  7  a.m.,  1889,  and  Washington,  N.E.C.S.,  Jan.
15,  8  a.m. Some  further  letters  in  the  postmarks  are  illegible.

Mr.  Myers  wrote  to  Mrs.  Conner  (who  lias  now  moved  to  New  York)
disking  certain  questions  relating  to  the  incident,  to  which  she  replied  on
March  7th,  1889. The  questions  and  her  answers  are  printed  below.

■Question  1. — («)  "Did  Mrs.  B.'s  letter  give  a  true  description  of  the  accident

(as  you  have  already  said  to  Dr.  Coues  that  it  did)  ?  "
■(b)  "  Was  the  dress  ('black  skirt,  velvet  waist,  little  straw  bonnet')  correctly

described  1  and  was  this  the  dress  in  which  Mrs.  B.  had  last  seen  you  ?  "
Answer  1. — («)  "  I  can  only  repeat — Yes,  exactly."

{?>)  "  As  correctly  as  if  I  had  described  it  myself.  I  do  not  know  whether
it  was  the  dress  in  which  Mrs.  B.  had  last  seen  me  or  not,  but  it  was  one
she  had  often  seen. "

•Question  2. — "In  what  way  did  you  identify  the  time  of  the  accident?
It  looks  as  though  Mrs.  B.'s  vision — '  soon  after  2  ' — might  have
preceded  the  accident,  which  Dr.  Coues  speaks  of  as  occurring  'between
2  and  3."'

Answer  2.  —  "I  was  writing  that  day  in  the  Congressional  Library.  I
finished  my  work,  and  passed  out  through  the  Capitol  Building.  As  I
did  so,  I  glanced  at  the  large  clock  in  the  hall,  and  it  lacked  20  minutes
to  3.  It  was  not  more  than  a  minute  till  I  reached  the  steps  where  I
fell,  so  that  it  must  have  been  within  a  few  seconds  of  19  minutes  to
three.  I  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  whether  the  vision  preceded
the  accident. "

■Question  3. — "  Have  you  ever  heard  from  Mrs.  B.  that  she  had  any  vision  of
you  of  the  kind,  at  any  other  time  ?  and,  if  so,  was  it  correct  1  "

Answer  3. — "Mrs  B.  and  myself  are  intimate  friends.  She  had  seen  a
vision  of  me  once  or  twice  previously,  merely  as  an  appearance,  not
doing  anything  in  particular. "

•Question  4. — "For  form's  sake  I  will  ask  you  to  state  whether  a  slip  on  the
front  steps  like  this  is  unique  in  your  experience  ?  "

-Answer  4. — "  I  have  stumbled  and  fallen  a  few  times  in  my  life,  not  oftener
than  other  people."

*■ '  To  me  the  most  convincing  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  vision  is  a
sentence  you  will  find  like  this,  if  J  remember  right,  in  the  letter  :  '  I
do  not  know  if  there  are  steps  from  the  sidewalk  to  the  yard,'  &c.  The
queer  fact  is  that  there  were  two  steps  from  the  sidewalk  to  the  yard,
the  street  having  been  cut  down.  On  the  top  one  of  these  two  steps,  in
the  yard,  I  stumbled.  Mrs.  B.  had  never  seen  this  house,  I  having  only
removed  thither  a  few  days  before.

"Eliza  Aechard  Conner."

The  next  case,  also  American,  resembles  the  two  last,  except  that
the  percipient's  experience  was  a  dream  instead  of  a  waking  vision,  and,
therefore,  in  so  far  as  a  dream  is  a  more  common  experience  than  a
waking  vision,  more  likely  to  have  been  due  to  chance  coincidence,
though  the  correspondence  in  time,  and  the  vividness  and  definiteness


Mrs.  H.  Sidgivieh


of  the  dream  make  this  explanation  very  improbable.  The  percipient,
Mr.  H.  M.  Lee,  son  of  the  late  Dr.  Henry  Lee,  Bishop  of  Iowa,  writes
to  a  relative  as  follows  :  —

"Syracuse,  N.Y.,  December  16th,  1887-

(L.  869. )  "It  will  be  well  to  understand  that  there  was  a  peculiar  bond
of  affection  between  my  father  and  myself,  more  than  is  usual  between
father  and  son,  and  for  years  I  seemed  to  know  and  feel  when  he  was  in
danger,  though  many  miles  separated  us.  One  of  many  instances  I  recall.
During  the  war  my  father  had  occasion  to  go  to  Saint  Joseph,  Mo.  To-
reach  there  he  went  to  Quincy,  111. ,  taking  the  Hannibal  and  Saint  Joseph
R.R.  during  the  day.  While  I  was  attending  to  my  duties  in  the  bank,  I
suddenly  became  aware  that  my  father  was  in  danger  ;  and  upon  his  return
I  asked  him  about  it.  He  informed  me  the  car  he  was  in  left  the  track  and
turned  over  twice  in  its  descent  down  the  embankment.  The  shock  rendered
him  unconscious,  and,  in  fact,  he  was  carried  out  for  a  dead  man.  It  was
fully  twenty  minutes  before  he  returned  to  consciousness.  Of  course,  he
being  so  large  and  heavy,  he  was  severely  shaken  up,  but  was  able  to  con-
tinue his  journey,  and  perform  his  duties.  It  was  his  intention  to  say
nothing  about  the  accident,  as  we  were  all  of  us  anxious  about  him  during  his-
visitations,  the  times  were  so  troublesome  and  so  many  trains  derailed  and
fired  into;  but  when  he  found  I  knew  about  it — ]iov\  neither  of  us  knew — he
told  me,  in  confidence,  that  the  accident  occurred  at  the  time  I  was  made
aware  of  it.  Ever  after  that  I  seemed  to  follow  him,  and  knew  when  he  was.
in  danger,  though  powerless  to  prevent  the  disaster.

"  On  the  night  he  fell  downstairs  [in  1874],  I  had  returned  home  from
my  business  about  eight  o'clock,  after  a  very  hard  day's  work,  and  was  very
tired,  so  immediately  after  supper  I  retired.  It  is  my  practice  to  sleep  on
the  back  side  of  the  bed.  We  slept  with  our  head  to  the  north,  bringing  me-
on  the  west  side  of  the  bed.  I  went  to  sleep  as  soon  as  my  head  touched  the
pillow,  and  slept  the  sleep  of  exhaustion.  I  did  not  hear  my  wife  come  to
bed,  and  knew  nothing  till  I  saw  father  at  the  top  of  the  stairs  in  the  act  of
falling.  I  jumped  to  catch  him  and  landed  on  the  floor  on  my  feet,  with
considerable  noise.  My  wife  awoke  and  wanted  to  know  what  on  earth  I
was  trying  to  do.  I  by  that  time  had  lighted  a  lamp,  and  upon  looking  at
my  watch  found  it  was  a  quarter-past  two.  I  asked  my  wife  if  she  heard'
the  crash.  She  said  No.  I  then  told  her1  what  I  had  seen,  but  she  tried  to
laugh  me  out  of  it,  not  succeeding,  however.  I  slept  no  more  that  night  ;  in
fact  did  not  go  to  bed  again  ;  so  vivid  was  the  whole  thing  to  me  that  I  "knew?
father  was  badly  hurt.  Early  in  the  morning  I  went  to  town  and  telegraphed
home,  incpiiring  if  all  was  well,  and  received  a  letter  from  father  which  fully
corresponded  with  my  vision  to  tlte  very  minute.  The  sad  result  of  the  fall
we  all  too  well  know,  but  how  I,  fully  three  hundred  miles  from  him,  saw
him  fall  I  do  not  pretend  to  account  for,  and  if  you,  in  the  course  of  your
investigation,  can  throw  any  light  on  the  matter,  you  will  do  me  a  great
favour  by  kindly  writing  ms.

"H.  M.  Lee."

Mr.  Hodgson  received  the  following  independent  account  of  the  same
incident  from  the  Bishop  of  Algowa.


On  the  Evidence  foi


Clairvoyance.


39


"Toronto,  December 29th  [1887].
"  My  Dear  Sir, — The  incident  in  Bishop  Lee's  history,  referred  to  in
my  previous  letter,  was  as  follows  : —

"  Some  time  during  the  summer  of  1874  the  Bishop  occupied  for  the  first
time  a  new  residence  (in  either  Davenport  or  Burlington,  Iowa),  built  for
him  by  his  diocese.  Not  being  accustomed  to  the  interior  arrangements,  he
one  night  took  a  false  step,  turning  towards  the  stairway  instead  of  his  own
room,  and  fell  down  the  stairs,  a  Wight,  I  think,  of  twenty-one  steps.  As
might  be  expected,  he  was  very  seriously  injured,  though,  strange  to  say,  for
a  man  of  his  unusual  weight,  no  bones  were  broken.  Needing  special  care
and  medical  treatment,  the  Bishop  came  to  Hyde  Park,  near  Chicago,  in
which  city  I  was  then  residing.  At  the  time  of  the  Bishop's  fall,  one  of  hist
sons  was  resident  in  a  city  several  hundred  miles  west  of  Iowa — Denver,  I
think.  One  night  this  son  jumped  up  out  of  his  sleep  in  a  state  of  great
alarm  and  excitement,  crying  out,  '  Father  has  had  a  bad  fall. '  His  wife
endeavoured  to  calm  him,  saying  he  had  only  had  a  bad  dream,  but  his  reply
was,  '  No,  it  was  no  dream,  I  heard  the  fall. '  He  rose,  struck  a  light,  and
looked  at  his  watch.  It  was  the  very  night  on  which  and  almost  to  the
minute  the  very  time  at  which  the  Bishop  had  fallen.

"This  narrative  I  had  from  the  Bishop's  own  lips.  He  died  shortly  after,,
of  traumatic  erysipelas.

' '  Commending  this  remarkable  incident  to  the  attention  of  your  Society t
I  remain,  &c,

"  E.  Sullivan,  Bishop  of  Algowa."

A  case  singularly  like  this,  where  Canon  Warburton  starts  from
sleep  seeing  his  brother  fall  downstairs,  will  be  found  in  Phantasms  of
the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  p.  338,  No.  108).  Compare  also  No.  24  in  the  same
volume,  p.  202.

The  next  case  was  sent  .to  .us  in  August,  1890,  by  Madame  A.  de
Holstein,  of  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris,  an  Associate  of  our  Society
who  has  rendered  us  valuable  assistance  in  other  ways.  It  is  somewhat
less  well  evidenced  than  the  last,  since  the  dream  was  not  mentioned  to
anyone  before  its  veridical  character  was  recognised  ;  it  seems,  however,
to  have  made  so  much  impression  at  the  time  on.  Dr.  Golinski  as  to  make
it  improbable  that  the  details  have  been  read  back  to  any  great  extent.
The  case  is  unlike  those  we  have  already  quoted,  in  that  the  clairvoyant
impression  appears  to  have  been  due  not  to  any  connection  between
agent  and  percipient,  or  any  special  crisis  occurring  to  the  agent,  but
to  her  intense  anxiety  to  have  his  assistance.  The  narrative  was  sent
to  us  in  French  and  we  give  here  a  translation,  omitting  a  few  medical
details  which  do  not  materially  affect  the  case.

(L.  870.)  Dr.  Golinski,  practising  at  Krementchug,  in  Russia,  com-
municates to  us  the  following  incident  : —

"I  am  in  the  habit  of  dining  at  about  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and
of  sleeping  for  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half  after  the  meal. In  July,  1888,.


40


Mrs.  H.  Sidgivick.


I  lay  down  on  a  sofa  as  usual,  and  went  to  sleep  about  3.30.  I  dreamt  that
the  door  bell  rang,  and  that  I  had  the  usual  rather  disagreeable  sensation
that  I  must  get  up  and  go  to  some  sick  person.  Then  I  found  myself  trans-
ported directly  into  a  little  room  with  dark  hangings.  To  the  right  of  the
door  leading  into  the  room  is  a  chest  of  drawers,  and  on  this  I  see  a  little
paraffin  lamp  of  a  special  pattern.  I  am  keenly  interested  in  the  shape  of
this  little  lamp,  different  from  any  it  has  previously  happened  to  me  to  see.
To  the  left  of  the  door  I  see  a  bed,  on  which  lies  a  woman  suffering  from
.severe  haemorrhage.  I  do  not  know  how  I  come  to  know  that  she  has  a
haemorrhage,  but  I  know  it.  I  examine  her,  but  rather  to  satisfy  my
conscience  than  for  any  other  reason,  as  I  know  beforehand  how  things  are,
although  no  one  speaks  to  me.  Afterwards  I  dream  vaguely  of  medical
assistance  which  I  give,  and  then  I  awake  in  an  unaccustomed  manner.
Generally  I  awake  slowly,  and  remain  for  some  minutes  in  a  drowsy  state,
but  this  time  I  awoke  almost  with  a  start,  as  if  someone  had  awakened  me.
As  I  awoke  I  heard  a  clock  strike  the  half-hour.  I  asked  myself,  '  What
half -hour  is  it  then  ? '  and  looking  at  my  watch  I  saw  that  it  was  half- past  four.

"I  got  up,  smoked  a  cigarette,  and  walked  up  and  down  my  room  in  a
state  of  unusual  excitement,  thinking  over  the  dream  I  had  just  had.  Tt
was  rather  a  long  time  since  I  had  had  a  case  of  haemorrhage  of  any  sort
among  my  clients,  and  I  wondered  what  could  have  suggested  this  dream.

"About  10  minutes  after  I  awoke  the  door  bell  rang,  and  I  was
summoned  to  a  patient.  Entering  the  bedroom  I  was  astonished,  for  I
recognised  the  room  of  which  I  had  just  dreamt.  The  patient  was  a  sick
woman,  and  what  struck  me  especially  was  the  paraffin  lamp  placed  on  the
chest  of  drawers  exactly  in  the  same  place  as  in  my  dream,  and  of  the  same
pattern,  which  I  had  never  seen  before.  My  astonishment  was  so  great  that
I,  so  to  speak,  lost  the  clear  distinction  between  the  past  dream  and  the
present  reality,  and,  approaching  the  sick  woman's  bed,  said  affirmatively,
'  You  have  a  haemorrhage  ! '  only  recovering  myself  when  the  patient
replied,  '  Yes,  but  how  do  you  know  it  % '  .

"Struck  with  the  strange  coincidence  between  my  dream  and  what  I  saw,
I  asked  the  patient  what,  she  had  decided  to  send  for  me.  She  told  me  that
she  had  been  unwell  since  the  morning.  About  1  p.m.  a  slight  haemorrhage
commenced  and  some  pain,  but  she  paid  no  attention  to  it.  The  haemorrhage
became  severe  after  2  o'clock  and  the  patient  began  to  grow  anxious.  Her
husband  not  being  at  home  she  did  not  know  what  to  do,  and  lay  down,
thinking  it  would  pass.  Between  3  and  4  o'clock  she  was  still  undecided  and
in  great  anxiety.  About  4.30  she  decided  to  send  for  me.  The  distance
between  my  house  and  that  of  the  patient  is  20  minutes'  walk.

"  I  only  knew  her  from  having  attended  her  in  illness  some  time  before,
and  knew  nothing  of  her  present  state  of  health.

"  In  a  general  way  I  seldom  dream,  and  this  is  the  only  dream  I  ever  had
which  I  have  always  remembered,  on  account  of  its  veridical  character."

Dr.  Golinski  left  Paris  suddenly  for  Russia  without  having  signed  the
above  account,  which  was  taken  down  from  his  lips  in  Russian  by  Madame
ds  Holstein  and  translated  by  her  into  French.  Subsequently  he  wrote  to
Mr.  Myers  a  letter,  of  which  we  translate  part  as  follows  :—


Oil  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


41


"Lubny,  Government  of  Poltava,  Russia,  October  15th,  1890.
"  Sir, — I  have  received  from  Dr.  Holstein,  of  Paris,  a  letter  asking  me  to
confirm  all  that  he  has  written  to  you  as  to  the  veridical  dream  which  I  had
last  year  [really  two  years  before].  It  was  the  first  time  in  my  life  that  I
had  a  similar  sleep,  and  it  seemed  to  me  so  remarkable  that  I  related  it  to
my  friend  Dr.  Holstein,  asking  Madame  Holstein  to  take  notes  in  English
for  the  Psychical  Society  of  London.  I  have  re-read  the  notes  taken  by
Madame  Holstein,  concerning  a  dream  which  I  had  in  the  month  of  July,
1888,  and  I  can  state  here  that  these  notes  are  exact.  I  should  add  that  I
j>ractise  medicine,  and  that  psychological  questions  are  not  unfamiliar  to  me,
but  in  psychology,  as  in  science  in  general,  I  am  too  much  of  a  positivist  to
draw  conclusions  from  this  or  any  similar  facts.  Where  you  see  indubitable
psychical  action  I  see  only  a  chance  coincidence.  But  I  value  facts  above
theories,  and  it  is  for  that  reason  that  I  am  glad  to  be  useful  to  the  Psychical
Society  of  London.

"  C.  Golinski.  "

We  may  perhaps  compare  with  this  case  No.  141,  Phantasms  of  the
Living  (Vol.  I.,  p.  379),  though  the  parallelism  is  not  very  close.

I  pass  on  to  a  case  of  an  entirely  different  character,  and  which  is
specially  interesting  as  belonging  to  the  rare  class  of  "reciprocal"  cases
— cases,  that  is,  where  there  appears  to  be  a  mutual  perception  between
the  parties  concerned ;  both  are  agents  and  both  percipients.  In  the
present  instance  there  is  the  further  complication  that  a  third  person
•shared  the  percipience  of  one  of  them.  The  experience  of  only  one  of
the  persons  concerned — Mrs.  Wilmot — bears  on  our  present  subject.
She  seemed  to  herself  to  be  transported  to  the  distant  scene  where  her
husband  Avas,  and  did  actually  apparently  learn  some  details  about  his
surroundings  which  she  is  hardly  likely  to  have  imagined.  The  case  is
again  an  American  one.  The  first  letter  emoted  is  addressed  to  Colonel
T.  W.  Higginson,  an  Associate  of  the  American  Branch.

"Bridgeport,  Ct.,  December  Wth,  1889.

{L.  871.)  "If  the  enclosed  narrative  is  of  any  interest  to  the  Committee
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  it  may  be  placed  in  the  archives  or  be
published.  The  incidents  were  related  to  me  by  Mr.  S.  R.  Wilmot,  a  manu-
facturer of  this  city,  several  years  ago,  and  I  wrote  them  down  from  memory,
and  he  afterwards  revised  the  manuscript.  Mr.  Wilmot  and  his  wife  and
sister  are  still  living  here,  and  would,  no  doubt,  be  happy  to  answer  any
questions  about  the  matter.

"  He  does  not  know  that  I  have  had  his  narrative  compared  with  a  rile  of
the  New  York  Herald,  as  per  memorandum  appended.  It  seems  to  stand  the
test  pretty  well,  however.

' 1  If  published,  please  do  not  give  my  name,  as  I  have  simply  acted  as
scribe,  and  have  no  personal  knowledge  about  the  incidents.

"  W.  B.  H."

With  this  letter  was  sent  a  copy  of  the  original  manuscript,  which  runs
as  follows  : —


42


Mrs.  H.  Sidgivick.


"On  October  3rd,  1863,  I  sailed  from  Liverpool  for  New  York,  on  the
steamer  City  of  Limerick,  of  the  Inman  line,  Captain  Jones  commanding.  On
the  evening  of  the  second  day  out,  soon  after  leaving  Kinsale  Head,  a  severe
storm  began,  which  lasted  for  nine  days.  During  this  time  we  saw  neither
sun  nor  stars  nor  any  vessel ;  the  bulwarks  on  the  weather  bow  were  carried
away,  one  of  the  anchors  broke  loose  from  its  lashings,  and  did  considerable
damage  before  it  could  be  secured,  and  several  stout  storm  sails,  though
closely  reefed,  wrere  carried  away,  and  the  booms  broken.

"Upon  the  night  following  the  eighth  day  of  the  storm  the  tempest
moderated  a  little,  and  for  the  first  time  since  leaving  port  I  enjoyed  refresh-
ing sleep.  Toward  morning  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  my  wife,  whom  I  had  left
in  the  United  States,  come  to  the  door  of  my  state-room,  clad  in  her  night-
dress. At  the  door  she  seemed  to  discover  that  I  was  not  the  only  occupant
of  the  room,  hesitated  a  little,  then  advanced  to  my  side,  stooped  down
and  kissed  me,  and  after  gently  caressing  me  for  a  few  moments,  quietly
withdrew.

"Upon  waking  I  was  surprised  to  see  my  fellow  passenger,  whose  berth
was  above  mine,  but  not  directly  over  it — owing  to  the  fact  that  our  room
was  at  the  stern  of  the  vessel — leaning  upon  his  elbow,  and  looking  fixedly
at  me.  'You're  a  pretty  fellow, '  said  he  at  length,  'to  have  a  lady  come
and  visit  you  in  this  way. '  I  pressed  him  for  an  explanation,  which  he  at
first  declined  to  give,  but  at  length  related  what  he  had  seen  while  wide
awake,  lying  in  his  berth. It  exactly  corresponded  with  my  dream.

"This  gentleman's  name  was  William  J.  Tait,  and  he  had  been  my
room-mate  in  the  jmssage  out,  in  the  preceding  July,  on  the  Cunard  steamer
Olympus;  a  native  of  England,  and  son  of  a  clergyman  of  the  Established
Church.  He  had  for  a  number  of  years  lived  in  Cleveland,  in  the  State  of
Ohio,  where  he  held  the  position  of  librarian  of  the  Associated  Library.  He-
was  at  this  time  perhaps  fifty  years  of  age — by  no  means  in  the  habit  of
practical  joking,  but  a  sedate  and  very  religious  man,  whose  testimony  upon
any  subject  could  be  taken  unhesitatingly.

"  The  incident  seemed  so  strange  to  me  that  I  questioned  him  about  it,
and  upon  three  separate  occasions,  the  last  one  shortly  before  reaching  port,
Mr.  Tait  repeated  to  me  the  same  account  of  what  he  had  witnessed.  On
reaching  New  York  we  jjarted,  and  I  never  saw  him  afterward,  but  I
understand  that  he  died,  a  number  of  years  ago,  in  Cleveland.

"  The  day  after  landing  I  went  by  rail  to  Watertown.  Conn.,  where  my
children  and  my  wife  had  been  for  some  time,  visiting  her  jjarents.  Almost
her  first  question,  when  we  were  alone  together,  was,  '  Did  you  receive  a
visit  from  me  a  week  ago  Tuesday  V  'A  visit  from  you  ? '  said  I,  '  we  were
more  than  a  thousand  miles  at  sea.'  '  I  know  it,'  she  replied,  'but it  seemed
to  me  that  I  visited  you.'  '  It  would  be  impossible,'  said  I.  '  Tell  me  wdiat
makes  you  think  so.'

"  My  wife  then  told  me  that  on  account  of  the  severity  of  the  weather
and  the  reported  loss  of  the  Africa,  which  sailed  for  Boston  on  the  same  day
that  we  left  Liverpool  for  New  York,  and  had  gone  ashore  at  Cape  Race,
she  had  been  extremely  anxious  about  me.  On  the  night  previous,  the  same
night  when,  as  mentioned  above,  the  storm  had  just  begun  to  abate,  she  had
lain  awake  for  a  long  time  thinking  of  me,  and  about  four  o'clock  in  the


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


45


morning  it  seemed  to  her  that  she  went  out  to  seek  me.  Crossing  the  wide
and  stormy  sea,  she  came  at  length  to  a  low,  black  steamship,  whose  side  she
went  up,  and  then  descending  into  the  cabin,  passed  through  it  to  the  stern
until  she  came  to  my  state-room.  'Tell  me,' said  she,  'do  they  ever  have-
state-rooms  like  the  one  I  saw,  where  the  upper  berth  extends  further  back
than  the  under  one  ?  A  man  was  in  the  upper  berth,  looking  right  at
me,  and  for  a  moment  I  was  afraid  to  go  in,  but  soon  I  went  up  to  the  side
of  your  berth,  bent  down  and  kissed  you,  and  embraced  you,  and  then
went  away. '

' '  The  description  given  by  my  wife  of  the  steamship  was  correct  in  all
particulars,  though  she  had  never  seen  it.  I  find  by  my  sister's  diary  that  we
sailed  October  4th  ;  the  day  we  reached  New  York,  22nd  ;  home,  23rd.

"  With  the  above  corrections  I  can  very  willingly  subscribe  my  name.

"  S.  R.  WlLMOT.

' '  Should  you  desire  to  rewrite  this  and  have  me  sign  my  name  in  ink,  I
will  willingly  do  so,  and  my  wife  will  add  hers  to  the  correctness  of  hex*
dream.— S.  R.  W."

Later,  Mr.  W.  B.  H.  sent  the  original  manuscript  to  Mr.  Hodgson  to
examine,  saying  : —

"February  21st,  1890.
"I  send  you  herewith,  not  to  keep,  but  to  be  returned  to  me  after  examina-
tion, the  narrative,  as  I  wrote  it  down  some  five  years  ago,  after  hearing  him
[Mr.  Wilmot]  tell  the  story.  To  ensure  correctness,  I  sent  it  to  him  then  for
purpose  of  having  him  and  Mrs.  Wilmot  examine  it  and  make  any  needful
changes.  See  his  marginal  notes  in  pencil,  also  the  acknowledgment  that  it
is  correct,  and  his  signature. — Yery  truly  yours,

"  W.  B.  H."

"The  files  of  the  Herald  show  that  the  Citij  of  Limerick  left  Liverpool
October  3rd,  1863,  Queenstown  October  5th,  and  arrived  at  New  York  early
on  the  morning  of  the  22nd  of  October,  1863.

"Herald,  October  14th,  1863,  says  :—

"  '  Steamer  Africa  from  Queenstown  on  the  4th  inst.  put  into  St.  John's,.
N.F.,  yesterday  afternoon,  on  her  voyage  to  Boston  by  way  of  Halifax.
The  Africa  struck  on  the  rocks  near  Cape  Race  at  10  o'clock  last  Monday
night  (October  12th)  during  a  dense  fog.  She  was  put  about  before  she
struck,  but  took  ground  fore,  aft,  and  amidships.  There  was  considerable  sea
running,  with  a  southerly  wind  at  the  time.  The  steamer's  boats  were  got
ready,  but  not  launched.  The  Africa  floated  off  after  an  hour,  and  was;
.speedily  cleared  of  water  by  her  pumps.  Captain  Stone  then  headed  her  for
Halifax,  but  soon  deemed  it  prudent  to  put  into  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Both  cargo  and  vessel  were  badly  damaged.  When  our  last  despatch  was
forwarded  from  St.  John's,  the  Africa  was  making  a  large  quantity  of  water."

"  Found  no  report  of  severe  storm.  "A.  H.

"Jidy,  1889."

In  answer  to  incpiiries  Mr.  Wilmot  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson  :—

"Bridgeport,  February  2oth,  1890.
"As  to  whether  I  and  my  wife  have  ever  had  any  analogous  experiences,


44


Mrs.  H.  Sidgiuich.


will  say  for  myself,  Yes,  dreams  revealing  subsequent  events,  but  nothing  of
such  a,  joint  nature.1

"  I  only  spoke  of  my  dream  and  Mr.  Tait's  experience  to  my  sister  (who
was  with  me  then,  and  is  'now),  as  I  could  not  quite  divest  myself  of  the
thought  that  Mr.  T.  might  have  invented  his  part  from  witnessing  something
unusual  in  1113  while  asleep,  therefore  my  questions  to  him  when  about  to
disembark  at  N.Y.

"I  do  not  think  it  likely  that  Mr.  Tait  mentioned  to  others  on  board
whip,  or  if  he  had,  that  it  could  now  be  ascertained.

"  I  did  not  mention  these  things  to  any  but  my  sister  till  after  reaching
home  and  learning  what  I  did  from  my  wife.  That  astonished  me  ;  it  almost
took  my  breath  away.

"  S.  R.  WlLMOT."

Miss  Wilmot  writes  : —

"  In  regard  to  my  brother's  strange  experience  on  our  homeward  voyage
in  the  Limerick — I  remember  Mr.  Tait's  asking  me,  one  morning  (when
assisting  me  to  the  breakfast  table,  for  the  cyclone  was  raging  fearfully),  if  I
had  been  in  last  night  to  see  my  brother  ;  and  my  astonishment  at  the
■question,  as  he  shared  the  same  state-room.  At  my  '  No,  why  1 '  he  said  lie
saw  some  woman,  in  white,  who  went  up  to  my  brother  (who  was  too  seasick
to  leave  his  berth  for  several  days).  I  soon  went  in  to  see  [my  brother],  who  told
me  that  Mr.  Tait  had  wondered  at  my  coming  in  to  see  him,  and  I  think  he
.said  he  had  dreamed  of  seeing  his  wife  there,  but  in  the  imminent  danger
that  loomed  over  us,  I  did  not  fix  my  mind  on  their  after  conversations.

"  I  think  my  brother  must  have  written  to  Mr.  Tait  the  share  my  sister
had  in  the  vision — shall  I  call  it  ?  When  visiting  at  the  Taits'  in  Cleveland,
two  or  three  years  after,  he  spoke  of  the  wonderful  coincidence.  It  evidently
impressed  him. If  he  were  still  living,  I  would  refer  you  to  him.

"  Eliza  E.  Wilmot."

Mrs.  Wilmot  says  :—

"Bridgeport,  Conn.,  February  27th,  1890.

"...  In  reply  to  the  question,  Did  I  '  notice  any  details  about  the
man  I  saw  in  the  upper  berth  ? '  I  cannot  at  this  late  day  positively  say  that  I
did,  but  I  distinctly  remember  that  I  felt  much  disturbed  at  his  presence,  as
he  leaned  over,  looking  at  us.

"  I  think  that  I  told  my  mother  the  next  morning  about  my  dream  ;  and
I  know  that  I  had  a  very  vivid  sense  all  the  day  of  having  visited  my  husband  ;
the  impression  was  so  strong  that  I  felt  unusually  happy  and  refreshed,  to
my  surprise.

"In  regard  to  'other  analogous  experiences,'  the  following  may  seem  out
of  place,  perhaps,  but  I  will  give  it,  although  my  husband  had  no  part  in  it.
"  In  December,  1887  (I  believe  the  18th),  I  was  awakened  out  of  a  sound

■Mr,  Hodgson  called  on  Mr.  Wilmot  on  December  10th,  1890,  and  learnt  from
him  that  one  of  these  dreams,  which  occurred  to  him  when  a  lad,  was  apparently  of  a
•clairvoyant  kind.  He  dreamt  of  a  cow  bearing  a  calf  with  peculiar  marks  of  colour.
In  his  dream  he  saw  that  the  cow  had  broken  out  of  her  stall,  pulling  the  bars  down,
■and  the  calf  was  born  in  a  pool  of  dirty  water  and  was  in  danger  of  suffocation.
He  went  to  the  stall  before  breakfast,  owing  to  his  dream,  and  found  details  as  he
had  dreamt  them.


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


4£>


sleep  with  a  dreadful  realisation  that  my  daughter,  who  was  on  a  journey  to
California,  was  in  some  terrible  danger — everything  seemed  dark  and  frightful
and  full  of  confusion.

*  *  *  *  *

"It  seemed  more  strange,  because  that  very  Sunday  evening  we  were:
rejoicing  in  the  thought  of  her  safe  arrival  at  Los  Angeles,  expecting  next
morning  to  have  a  telegram  to  that  effect.  None  came  till  evening  ;  then
from  El  Paso,  with  the  startling  news  there  had  been  a  collision,  but  they
were  all  right.  I  immediately  thought  of  my  experience  of  the  night  before,
and  believed  it  was  at  the  same  time — calculating  the  difference  in  time —
about  ten  at  night,  when  they  came  very  near  being  thrown  off  a  steep*
embankment,  engines  smashed,  &c,  but  my  daughter  preserved.

*  *  *  *

•'Mks.  S.  R.  Wilmot."

This  is  a  very  remarkable  case,  and  merits  careful  examination.  It
is  somewhat  remote — the  account  was  not  written  apparently  for  more
than  twenty  years  after  the  occurrence,  and  one  of  the  percipients  is
dead  and  cannot  give  a  first-hand  account  of  what  he  saw.  We
must  not  assume  that  after  so  long  a  time  the  memory  of  the  witnesses,
however  good,  will  be  exact,  and  that  every  detail  can  be  absolutely
relied  on.  Still,  after  making  all  allowances,  it  is,  I  think,  clear  that
there  was  a  remarkable  correspondence  between  the  experiences  of  three
persons.  Mrs.  Wilmot  had — waking  or  sleeping — a  vision  of  her
husband,  in  which  she  correctly  perceived  some  part  of  his  surroundings  :
Mr.  Wilmot  dreamt  his  wife's  thoughts ;  and  Mr.  Tait  had  a  waking
hallucination  which  corresponded  with  the  main  features  of  Mr.
Wilmot's  dream.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  there  was  really  any
difference  in  kind  between  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilmot's  experiences.  Each
perceived  the  other  in  the  situation  in  which  the  other  supposed
himself  or  herself  to  be.  But,  in  so  doing,  Mrs.  Wilmot  was  made
aware  supernormally  of  certain  actual  facts  which  would  have  been
cognisable  by  her  senses  had  she  been  in  her  husband's  cabin  in  the
body. She  was,  therefore,  in  some  sense  clairvoyant  at  the  moment.

This  case  differs  from  those  that  precede  it.  In  them  the  clairvoyant
person  was  apparently  a  passive  recipient  of  the  telepathic  impulse
from  the  agent  which  led  to  the  clairvoyant  perception.  But  here,
Mrs.  Wilmot  seems,  as  it  were,  to  have  actively  sought  communication
with  her  husband.  I  should  still  hold  with  Mr.  Gurney1  that  this  is
no  reason  for  regarding  the  incident  as  other  than  telepathic,  for  there

1  In  connection  with  this  case  the  chapters  in  Phantasms  of  the  Liviny  on
Reciprocal  Cases  (Vol.  II.,  chap,  xvii.,  and  Supplement,  chap,  viii.)  should  be  read,  as
should  also  Case  35  (Vol.  I.,  p.  225),  Case  04  (Vol.  I.,  p.  319),  and  one  given  in  a  foot-
note Vol.  I.,  p.  110.  Several  cases  among-  these  will  be  found  to  have  much  analogy
with  the  one  before  us.  It  is  also  worth  turning  to  Case  341,  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  227i
though  this  is  not  clearly  reciprocal.


46


Mrs.  H.  SidgivicJc.


is  as  little  ground  for  supposing  that  Mrs.  Wilmot  could  have  perceived
psychically  any  cabin  as  there  is  for  thinking  that  Mrs.  Paquet  could
have  had  a  vision  of  any  death  scene.  In  other  words,  it  is  probable
that  the  presence  of  the  husband  and  brother  respectively  were
■essential  conditions  of  the  percipience,  which,  therefore,  depended  on
some  unknown  process  of  communication  from  -mind  to  mind.  The
fact  that  Mr.  Wilmot  at  the  same  time  dreamt  of  his  wife  seems  to  me,
if  anything,  to  strengthen  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  because  it  shows
that  there  was  actually  a  community  of  mental  impressions.

But  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  more  difficult  thus  to  account  for  Mr.
Tait's  seeing  a  figure  at  the  same  time  as  Mr.  AVilmot,  and  that  this  at
least  tends  to  show  that  Mrs.  Wilmot  was  actually  there  in  some  sense
other  than  a  purely  mental  one.  The  question  here  raised  is  the
•difficult  one  of  the  significance  of  Collective  psychical  experiences,  for  a
full  discussion  of  which  I  must  refer  my  readers  to  Phantasms  of  the
Living1  ;  for  though  it  may  no  doubt  prove  ultimately  to  be  of  great
theoretic  importance  in  connection  with  clairvoyance,  it  enters  too  little
into  the  evidence  for  this,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  been  collected,  to  require
more  than  a  brief  notice  here.  Briefly,  then,  besides  the  possibility  of  a
direct  telepathic  communication  between  the  primary  agent  and  both
percipients,  there  are  two  hypotheses  to  account  for  collective  hallucina-
tions,— assuming  of  course  that  they  are  not  due  to  suggestion  by  word
or  gesture.  One  is  that  there  is  some  kind  of  objective  presence,  some
•centre  of  "  phantasmogenetic  efficacy,"  2  located  in  space  and  within
range  of  the  operation  of  the  percipient's  senses.  The  other  is  that
the  primary  percipient,  B,  whether  his  own  impression  is  due  to  tele-
pathy or  is  purely  subjective,  becomes  an  agent  as  regards  the  secondary
percipient  C,  who  receives  his  impression  by  thought-transference  from
•or  through  B.

It  is  this  second  view  which  I  agree  with  Mr.  Gurney  in  thinking
the  most  probable,  and  I  may  mention,  as  an  example  of  cases  which  it
is  very  difficult  to  explain  on  any  other  hypothesis,  an  experiment  of

1  See  chapter  on  Collective  cases,  Vol.  II.,  especially  section  7,  p.  2G4,  and  Mr.
Myers's  note  on  "  A  Suggested  Method  of  Psychical  Interaction, "in  the  same  volume.

-  Phantasms,  Vol.  II.,  p.  289.  The  advocates  of  this  hypothesis  in  any  cruder  or
more  materialistic  form  than  that  adopted  by  Mr.  Myers  in  the  passages  referred  to,
would  probably  hardly  apply  it  in  the  present  case,  since  the  phantasm  was  not  seen
by  both  men  looking  at  the  same  spot  with  open  eyes,  but  Mr.  Wilmot's  dream  was
Mr.  Tait'.s  hallucination.  This  particular  type  of  collective  experience  seems,  how-
ever, to  be  comparatively  rare.  An  instance  is  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,
p.  438,  and  another  — rather  more  doubtful — in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,
p.  215,  No.  332  (also  quoted  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  87).  We  have  also  a
second-hand  case  (B.L.  91)  sent  by  the  Rev.  A.  Starkey,  who  heard  from  Mrs.  Ogden,
a  nurse — now  dead — that  when  sleeping  beside  her  kick  child,  she  dreamt  that  her
•deceased  husband  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  that  the  child  afterwards  stated
.that  he  had  seen  his  father  there.


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


47


Wesermann,  a  gentleman  who  interested  himself  in  thought-trans-
ference in  the  beginning  of  the  century.  By  concentrated  effort  of
thought,  he  had  more  than  once  imposed  dreams  on  distant  friends,  and
he  determined  to  make  Lieutenant  1ST.  dream  that  a  certain  lady,  who
had  been  dead  for  five  years,  came  to  him  and  incited  him  to  good  works.
He  supposed  that  Lieutenant  1ST.  was  at  home  and  asleep  at  the  time
selected,  but,  as  it  happened,  he  was  staying  in  a  different  town  with  a
friend,  Lieutenant  S.,  who  was  a  stranger  to  Wesermann,  and  both
•were  wide  awake  and  talking.  This  did  not  interfere  with  the  success
of  Wesermann s  experiment,  however,  for  both  gentlemen  saw  a  figure
resembling  the  lady  in  question  enter  the  room  noiselessly  by  a  door
that  usually  creaked,  make  gestures  of  greeting  and  go  out  again.1  It
will  hardly,  I  think,  be  contended  that  Wesermami  called  up  the  dead
lady,  or  that  he  himself  appeared  in  her  form,  or  that  Lieutenant
tS.  would  have  seen  her  if  Lieutenant  N.  had  not  been  there,  so  that
there  seems  to  be  no  reasonable  alternative  except  that  of  a  telepathic
•action  of  Wesermann's  mind  on  Lieutenant  1ST.,  communicated  in  some
way  through  him  to  Lieutenant  S.

The  five  cases  of  distinctly  telepathic  clairvoyance  above  given  are,
I  think,  fairly  representative,  though  they  have  been  selected  011  the
.simple  principle  of  taking,  so  far  as  I  know,  all  the  experiences  of  this
type  of  which  accounts  have  reached  us  since  the  publication  of  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living  and  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  and  thus  have  been  included  in  neither;  and  which
also  seem  to  reach  a  sufficiently  high  evidential  standard. -

Before  proceeding  further,  I  will  give  a  case  sent  by  Mrs.  Alfred
Wedgwood  which  it  is  difficult  either  to  estimate  or  to  classify.  The
dream  may  have  been  due  to  latent  memory,  Mrs.  Wedgwood  having
more  previous  knowledge  of  the  house  than  she  remembered.  It  may
have  been  telepathic,  depending  on  the  waking  or  sleeping  thoughts  of
the  cousin,  occupied  with  the  party  and  her  intended  guests.  Or  again,
it  may  have  been  a  case  of  clairvoyance  of  a  more  independent  kind.

February,  1884.

(M.  304.) "I  spent  the  Christmas  holidays  with  my  father-in-law  in

1  Wesermann  wrote  three  accounts  of  this  experiment.  The  fullest  is  in  a  book  by
him  called  Dcr  Magnetismus  und  die  allgemeine  Weltsi^rache,  published  in  1822.  This
account  was  not  known  to  the  writers  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  when  the  account
there  given  (Vol.  I.,  p.  101)  was  published.  An  account  giving  the  facts  as  gathered
from  Wesermann's  three  descriptions  was  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.
(printed  for  private  circulation  among  Members  and  Associates  only),  March,  18!)0.

2  There  are  two  cases  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.P.,  p.  397,  No.  23,  and
p.  464,  No.  51.  No.  51  includes  two  more  or  less  clairvoyant  experiences,  the  second
of  which  (6)  belongs  rather  to  the  class  of  cases  we  have  to  discuss  next  than  tothe
class  with  which  we  have  just  been  dealing.  Other  instances  of  telepathic  clairvoyance
will  be  found  in  Pkantasins  of  the Licing,  besides  those  to  which  I  have  already  referred.


48


Mrs.  H.  SidgwlcJe.


Queen  Anne-street,  and  in  the  beginning  of  January  I  had  a  remarkably
vivid  dream,  which  I  told  to  him  next  morning  at  breakfast.

"  I  dreamt  I  went  to  a  strange  house,  standing  at  the  corner  of  a  street.
When  I  reached  the  top  of  the  stairs  I  noticed  a  window  opposite  with  a.
little  coloured  glass,  short  muslin  blinds  running  on  a  brass  rod.  The  top  of
the  ceiling  had  a  window  veiled  by  gathered  muslin.  There  were  two  small
shrubs  on  a  little  table.  The  drawing-room  had  a  bow  window,  with  the-
same  blinds  ;  the  library  had  a  polished  flour,  with  the  same  blinds.

"  As  I  was  going  to  a  child's  party  at  a  cousin's,  whose  house  I  had  never
seen,  I  told  my  father-in-law  I  thought  that  that  would  prove  to  be  the
house.

"On  January  10th  I  went  with  my  little  boy  to  the  party,  .and,  by  mis-
take, gave  the  driver  a  wrong  number.  When  he  stopped  at  No.  20,  I  had
misgivings  about  the  house,  and  remarked  to  the  cabman  that  it  was  not  a
corner  house.  The  servant  could  not  tell  me  where  Mrs.  H.  lived,  and  had
not  a  blue-book.  Then  I  thought  of  my  dream,  and  as  a  last  resource  I
walked  down  the  street  looking  up  for  the  peculiar  blinds  I  had  observed  in
my  dream.  These  I  met  with  at  No.  59,  a  corner  house,  and  knocking  at
the  door,  was  relieved  to  find  that  it  was  the  house  of  which  I  was  in  search.

"On  going  upstairs  the  room  and  windows  corresponded  exactly  with
what  I  had  seen  in  my  dream,  and  the  same  little  shrubs  in  their  pots  were-
standing  on  the  landing.  The  window  in  which  I  had  seen  the  coloured  glass,
was  hidden  by  the  blind  being  drawn  down,  but  I  learnt,  on  inquiry,  that  it
was  really  there.

"Margaret  E.  Wedgwood."

Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  writes  :  —

"31,  Queen  Anne-street,  February  1th,  1884.
"My  daughter-in-law  told  me  her  dream  the  morning  after  it  occurred,,
and  described  her  recognition  of  the  house  when  first  I  saw  her  afterwards.
I  have  ascertained  that  she  did  make  the  inquiries  at  Mrs.  H.'s  house  of
which  she  speaks,  and  that  the  window  has  an  edging  of  coloured  glass.

" H.  Wedgwood."

Asked  whether  she  recognises,  when  she  wakes  from  a  dream,  that  it  is
one  which  will  turn  out  to  correspond  with  reality,  Mrs.  Wedgwood  says  that
she  does  :  that  though  these  dreams  are  not  more  vivid  than  others  which
she  has,  she  has  a  "presentiment"  which  haunts  her  about  the  ones  which
turn  out  true.

I  pass  on  now  to  cases  where  the  telepathy,  if  it  exists,  is,  as  a  rule,,
more  obscure — where,  though  the  knowledge  obtained  by  the  clairvoyant
was  certainly  possessed  at  the  time  by  other  persons,  it  is  less  clear  that,
its  possession  by  them  was  in  any  way  a  condition  of  its  being  obtained
by  the  clairvoyant.  For  in  these  cases — which  are  generally  more  or
less  experimental — we  find  that  not  only  is  it  the  percipient  who  is  in
the  abnormal  psychical  state  (generally  hypnotised),  and  with  whom,
the  psychical  activity  which  produced  the  clairvoyance  apparently
originates,  but  the  supposed  agent  is  often  entirely  normal,  passing


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


49


through  no  crisis  or  excitement  of  any  kind,  unconscious  of  any
psychical  interaction  between  himself  and  the  percipient  and  even
unaware  of  the  percipient's  existence.  It  will,  nevertheless,  be  noticed
that  in  some  instances  the  kind  of  percipience  suggests  mind-reading
rather  than  any  more  direct  method  of  acquiring  the  knowledge.

The  first  of  these  cases  belongs  to  the  period  of  mesmeric  activity
of  forty  years  ago,  but  was  fortunately  recorded  at  the  time,  and  before
the  truth  of  the  clairvoyant's  statement  was  known.  The  narrator,  Mr.
William  Boyd,  F.R.S.E.,  is  a  lawyer  residing  at  Peterhead,  in
Aberdeenshire.

(M.  18.) Clairvoyance  Forty  Years  Ago.

' '  The  particulars  I  am  to  relate  attracted  much  public  attention  at  the
time  when  they  occurred,  and  they  have  still  a  recognised  place  in  the
authentic  local  history  of  Peterhead.  I  nevertheless  accede  to  a  suggestion
which  lias  been  made  to  me,  that  I  should  place  them  on  record  in  these
Proceedings,  while  it  is  possible  to  adduce,  if  required,  the  evidence  of
persons  still  living  in  support  of  them.

"I  premise  by  saying  that  forty  years  ago  a  fleet  of  eleven  vessels,  includ-
ing two  named  respectively  the  Hamilton  Ross  and  Eclipse,  sailed  yearly,  in
early  spring,  from  the  Port  of  Peterhead  for  the  prosecution  of  the  seal  and
whale  fisheries  in  the  Arctic  seas.  These  vessels  carried  each,  on  an  average,
fifty  men  ;  their  annual  voyage  generally  lasted  from  three  to  six  months,  and
from  the  time  when  they  sailed  until  their  return,  communication  between
them  and  this  country  was  absolutely  impossible.

"In  the  year  1850,  what  was  then  familiarly  known  as  mesmerism  received
a  good  deal  of  attention  at  Peterhead,  and,  with  others  of  my  acquaintance,
I  was  interested  in  it.  At  that  time  I  acted  as  a  local  correspondent  of  the
Aberdeen  Journal  newspaper,  and  I  contributed  to  it  the  following  statement,
which  was  published  in  that  paper  on  May  8th,  1850  : —

"'Whether  the  science  of  mesmerism  is  real  or  fanciful  we  do  not
pretend  to  be  able  to  decide,  but  we  venture  to  narrate  a  few  facts,
which  have  come  under  our  observation,  and  which  are  no  less  curious,
than  capable  of  being  most  amply  authenticated.  On  the  23rd  of  last  month
(April)  a  lad  was  thrown  into  the  mesmeric  state  here,  and,  as  may
naturally  be  supposed,  the  first  questions  put  to  him  by  the  operator
related  to  the  vessels  engaged  at  the  seal  fishery.  The  patient  having
been  in  imagination  transported  to  the  icy  regions,  he  had  no  difficulty
in  satisfying  the  curiosity  of  his  querists.  He  stated  in  answer  that  the
first  ship  which  would  arrive  here  this  season  would  be  the  Hamilton
Boss,  and  that  he  at  that  moment  saw  the  captain  and  surgeon  of  the  \  essel
engaged  in  dressing  the  hand  of  the  second  mate,  Cardno,  who,  he  said,  had
accidentally  lost  part  of  some  of  his  fingers.

"'Next  evening  the  experiment  was  repeated,  and  the  lad,  when
asked  as  to  the  success  of  the  other  vessels,  and  in  particular  of  the
Eclipse,  said  that  Captain  Burnett,  of  the  Hamilton  Ross,  would,  on  his.
arrival,  inform  them  of  that,  as  he  was  then  engaged  in  conversation  with
the  captain  of  the  Eclipse,  who  he  said  was  giving  him  news. This  state-

E


50


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick


ment,  as  might  have  been  expected,  did  not  gain  the  confidence  of  even  the
most  credulous  advocates  of  the  truth  of  the  science,  and,  having  given  rise
to  a  little  amusement  and  speculation  at  the  time,  was  soon  forgotten.  On
May  3rd,  however,  the  first  whaler  of  the  season  arrived,  and,  agree-
ably to  the  statement  of  the  clairvoyant,  proved  to  be  the  Hamilton  Boss.
The  ship  having  been  brought  into  the  bay,  a  boat  came  on  shore  with
Captain  Burnett  (the  master),  and,  as  usual,  all  were  eager  to  hear  the  news.
As  the  boat  neared  the  quay,  the  appearance  of  a  man  sitting  in  the  stern
besides  the  captain  was  not  very  easily  accounted  for.  Soon,  however,  the
well-known  features  of  Cardno,  the  second  mate,  were  recognised,  and  on  its
being  discovered  that  one  of  his  arms  was  in  a  sling  a  general  cry  arose  from
the  assembled  crowd  to  the  effect  that  the  statement  which  had  been  made
respecting  him  had  proved  correct,  and  it  turns  out  that  he  had  actually
accidentally  shot  away  portions  of  some  of  his  fingers  when  at  the  fishing.
To  these  remarkable  coincidences  one  more  remains  to  be  added.  Captain
Burnett  left  the  ice  on  April  24th,  and  the  night  before  leaving  he
met  with  Captain  Gray,  of  the  Eclipse,  from  whom  he  received  the  most  of
the  information  which  he  has  brought  regarding  the  other  ships.  He  was
consequently  engaged  on  the  evening  of  April  23rd,  exactly  as  the  clairvoyant
had  described  him  to  be.  We  have  thus,  it  will  be  observed,  confined
ourselves  to  a  bare  recital  of  the  facts  of  this  (it  must  be  allowed)  extra-
ordinary case,  and  have  been  at  pains  to  advance  nothing  but  what  can  be
fully  authenticated,  and  as  we  have  before  confessed  ourselves  unable  to
fathom  the  mysteries  of  the  science,  we  forbear  to  offer  any  comment  ujion
them. '

' '  I  call  attention  to  what  is  obviously  a  slight  error  in  the  foregoing
statement,  in  the  dates  when  the  two  seances  described  are  reported  to  have
taken  place.  It  is  said  by  me  that  Captain  Burnett  was  found  to  have  been
■engaged  on  the  evening  of  April  23rd,  exactly  as  the  clairvoyant  had
described  him  to  be,  which  shows  that  I  should  have  stated  that  the  first
.seance  occurred  on  April  22nd,  and  the  second  on  April  23rd,  and  not  on
April  23rd  and  24th,  as  might  be  inferred  from  the  former  part  of  my  state-
ment, although  the  existence  of  the  error  is  made  apparent  towards  the  con-
clusion of  it,  as  well  as  by  the  other  evidence  to  which  I  shall  refer.

"  The  particulars  I  related  were  mainly  within  my  own  knowledge,  for  I
had  heard  of  the  clairvoyant's  statements  at  least  several  days  before  the
arrival  of  the  Hamilton  Ross,  and,  along  with  hundreds  of  others,  I  witnessed
her  arrival,  and  saw  the  boat  land  the  wounded  man.  I  also  heard,  with
feelings  which  I  shall  never  forget,  the  murmur  of  surprise  which  passed
throughout  the  assembled  crowd  when  it  was  discovered  that,  in  the  words
which  were  freely  used  around  me,  '  the  mesmerism  had  come  true.'

' '  Mr.  W.  L.  Taylor,  bookseller,  Peterhead,  who  then  acted  as  local
correspondent  for  the  Aberdeen  Herald  newspaper,  wrote  on  the  day  of
the  arrival  of  the  Hamilton  Ross  a  paragraph  to  a  similar  effect  as  that
written  by  me  for  the  Aberdeen  Journal,  which  appeared  in  the  Herald  of
May  11th,  1850,  with  the  addition  of  the  following  incredulous  remark  by
the  editor :  '  The  coincidence  would  have  appeared  more  curious  had  the
fact  been  stated  before  the  arrival  of  the  vessel.'  Mr.  Taylor  had,  however,
before  the  arrival  of  the  Ham  ilton  Ross,  received  from  Mr.  Wm.  Reid,  shoe-


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


51


maker  in  Peterhead,  who  operated  in  throwing  the  lad  into  the  mesmeric
•condition,  a  written  statement  of  what  had  taken  place  at  the  seances,  for  the
purpose  of  being  forwarded  for  publication  in  the  Herald,  but  he  was  dis-
suaded by  the  advice  of  a  friend  from  sending  it  to  the  editor  at  the  time
when  it  was  handed  to  him  in  case  it  might  prove  to  be  an  imposture.  In
■consequence,  however,  of  the  editor's  incredulous  remark  before  mentioned,
Mr.  Taylor,  on  seeing  it,  at  once  forwarded  the  original  manuscript  for
publication,  and  it  appeared  in  the  Aberdeen  Herald  of  May  18th,  1850.  The
following  are  extracts  from  Mr.  Reid's  statement  : —

' '  '  On  the  evening  of  April  22nd  I  put  John  Park,  tailor,  aged  22,  into  a
state  of  clairvoyance,  in  presence  of  twelve  respectable  inhabitants  of  this
town.'  (Here  follows  a  description  of  certain  statements  regarding  the  fate  of
Franklin's  expedition  and  the  ships  Erebus  and  Terror,  which  the  light  of
information  subsequently  received  proved  to  have  been  inaccurate.)  'He
(the  clairvoyant)  then  visited  Old  Greenland,  as  was  desired,  and  having
gone  on  board  the  Hamilton  Ross,  a  whale-ship  belonging  to  this  port,  saw
David  Cardno,  second  mate,  getting  his  hand  bandaged  up  by  the  doctor  in
the  cabin,  having  got  it  injured  while  sealing.  He  was  then  told  by  the
captain  that  they  had  upwards  of  100  tons  of  oil.  I  again,  on  the  evening  of
the  23rd,  put  him  into  a  clairvoyant  state. '  (Here  follow  some  further
particulars  regarding  Sir  John  Franklin's  expedition,  which  also  are  proved
to  have  been  inaccurate. )  '  I  again  directed  him  to  Old  Greenland,  and  lie
again  visited  the  Hamilton  Eoss,  and  found  Captain  Gray,  of  the  Eclipse,
■conversing  with  the  captain  about  the  seal  fishing  being  up.

(Signed)  'William  Reid.'

"  Both  Captain  Burnett,  of  the  Hamilton  Eoss,  and  Captain  Gray,  of  the
Eclipse,  died  many  years  ago,  and  it  is  believed  that  their  logs  and  ships'
papers,  which  might  have  thrown  some  light  on  the  concluding  portion  of
Mr.  Reid's  statement,  have  been  lost  or  dispersed.  But  Mr.  Taylor's  article
in  the  Aberdeen  Herald,  already  referred  to,  written  as  he  says  on  Captain
Burnett's  personal  assurance  of  its  accuracy,  contained  the  following  para-
graph :  '  It  only  remains  to  be  added  that  the  mate  Cardno's  hand  was
undoubtedly  hurt,  and  that  on  the  date  mentioned  Captain  Gray,  of  the
Eclipse,  was  on  board  the  Hamilton  Eoss.'  I  never  heard  of  this  assertion
having  been  contradicted,  but  Captain  Gray's  son,  who  is  still  alive,  and  was
then  serving  on  board  the  Eclipse,  testifies  that  a  meeting  between  his  father
and  Captain  Burnett  actually  did  take  place,  just  before  the  departure  of  the
latter  from  Greenland,  although  lie  says  it  was  on  board  the  Hamilton  Ross
and  not  the  Eclipse  as  was  stated.  And  the  possible  and  probable  date  of  the
meeting  may  be  deduced  from  the  following  facts.  The  Hamilton  Eoss,
which  was  a  sailing  vessel,  arrived  on  May  3rd,  and  the  ordinary  duration  of
the  voyage  of  such  a  vessel  from  Greenland  is  from  eight  to  ten  days.  It
f  ollows,  therefore,  that  April  23rd  must  have  been  about  the  date  of  the  com-
mencement of  her  return  voyage,  when  the  two  masters  could  have  conversed
as  stated  by  the  clairvoyant  about  the  seal  fishing  being  up.

"One  more  reference  to  Mr.  Reid's  narrative.  The  clairvoyant  stated
oil  the  occasion  of  the  first  seance  that  he  was  told  the  Hamilton  Eoss  had
'  upwards  of  100  tons  of  oil. '  The  success  of  Captain  Burnett  in  that
vessel  in  the  previous  year,  when  lie  had  only  about  19  tons,  was  noc


52


Mrs.  H.  Sidgtvich


likely  to  suggest,  or  lead  to  the  expectation,  that  he  would  be  so  fortunate
as  to  secure  upwards  of  100  tons  of  oil  in  1850,  yet  the  quantity  he  actually
brought  home  that  year  was  159  tons.

"Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Reid  are  both  alive.  They  have  seen  this  state-
ment and  approve  of  it  in  every  respect.

"  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  I  should  add  the  following  facts,  of
which  I  have  only  recently  heard,  in  case  it  should  be  supposed  that  they,  or
any  of  them,  have  a  bearing  on  the  case.

"  Some  years  prior  to  the  occurrence  of  the  events  I  have  recorded,  David
Cardno,  before  he  joined  the  Hamilton  lions,  and  while  serving  in  another
vessel,  met  with  an  accident  at  Greenland,  while  vising  a  winch,  whereby
he  lost  the  point  of  one  of  his  fingers.  Park  was  acquainted  with  Cardno,.
and  may  thus  have  known  of  his  former  accident.  Both  parties  are  now
dead.  Mr.  Reid,  the  operator,  was  intimately  acquainted  with  Cardno,  but
he  cannot  remember  whether  he  was  aware,  when  he  operated  on  Park,  of
Cardno's  former  accident,  or,  indeed,  whether  he  ever  heard  of  it,  until  a
few  days  ago,  when  he  was  told  of  it  by  me.

' '  The  figures  I  gave  at  the  outset  will  enable  anyone  who  may  wish  to'
do  so  to  calculate  the  odds  against  naming  successfully  the  ship,  the  man,
and  the  nature  of  the  accident,  to  which  the  statement  by  the  clairvoyant
related,  if  the  circumstances  narrated  are  to  be  referred  to  the  operation  of
that  which  is  termed  chance.

"William  Boyd,  F.R.S.E.

"October,  1890."

In  a  later  communication  Mr.  Boyd  adds  : —

"  On  receipt  of  your  letter,  I  had  pleasure  in  obtaining  (which  I  did  from
Mr.  Reid)  the  information  necessary  to  enable  me  to  reply  to  your  questions,,
and  I  shall  answer  them  in  their  order.

(1)  "The  only  occasions  on  which  Park  was  hypnotised  were  the  two-
mentioned  in  my  narrative  as  having  happened  on  two  successive  days.  In
Mr.  Reid's  words — 'Park  was  so  frightened  by  the  "astounding"  results-
which  followed,  that  he  would  never  try  it  again. '  On  both  occasions  he
readily  passed  into  the  clairvoyant  state,  the  operation  having  taken  on  each
occasion  6  to  7  minutes.

(2)  "Mr.  Reid  knew  Captain  Burnett  only  by  sight,  and  never  spoke  to
him,  either  before  or  after  the  occurrences  narrated.  He  is  sure  that  Park
also  knew  him  only  by  sight.  Mr.  Reid  cannot  recollect  having  known  any
of  the  crew  of  the  Hamilton  Ross  besides  Cardno,  with  the  exception  of  one
man  named  John  McNaughton.  .  .  .  Park  was  also  acquainted  with
McNaughton,  but  Mr.  Reid  does  not  know  whether  he  was  acquainted  with
any  others  of  the  crew  of  the  Hamilton  Moss."

It  is,  I  think,  difficult  to  suj>pose  that  either  chance  coincidence  or
shrewd  guessing  can  account  for  the  amount  of  correspondence  between
vision  and  fact  in  this  case,  even  assuming  that  Cardno's  previous  acci-
dent may  have  had  something  to  do  with  suggesting  an  injury  to  his
hand.  There  is,  however,  a  good  deal  to  be  said  in  favour  of  a  telepathic
explanation,  as  against  independent  clairvoyance,  although  it  involves


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


53


an  extension  of  our  conception  of  telepathy.  It  is  true  that  the
"'agents,"  if  we  may  regard  Cardno  and  Captain  Burnett  as  such,  were
.•sought  out  by  the  percipient,  and  that  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that
they  were  at  all  aware  of  any  psychical  interaction,  or  had  their
thoughts  in  any  way  directed  towards  the  percipient.  Still  Cardno,
-at  any  rate,  was  known  both  to  clairvoyant  and  hypnotiser,  and  we  are
perhaps  justified  in  assuming  that  such  acquaintance  was  an  important,
if  not  an  essential,  condition  to  success  with  this  particular  percipient,
because  he  failed  in  giving  correct  information  about  Sir  John  Franklin's
•expedition,  where  no  similar  link  was  possible.  Again,  it  will  be  ob-
served that  Park  conceived  himself  as  holding  a  conversation  with  the
captain — or  at  least  as  learning  from  him  orally — about  the  amount  of
oil  secured.  This  suggests  that  he  learnt  the  facts  telepathically  rather
than  by  any  method  independent  of  other  human  minds.

It  is  worth  noting  that  Park  did  not  simply  fail  to  give  information
•about  Sir  John  Franklin's  expedition  ;  he  gave  false  information.  Ex-
perience seems  to  show  that  clairvoyants  are  often — generally  perhaps
— unable  to  distinguish  true  impressions  from  false  ones.  The  scenes
they  seem  to  themselves  to  visit  may  be  the  work  of  their  own  imagina-
"tion,  or  of  the  verbal  or  mental  suggestion  of  others,  or  may  be
veridical,  as  in  the  cases  we  are  discussing,  without  the  clairvoyant
perceiving  any  difference.

(M.  650.)  I  will  take  next  accounts  of  a  clairvoyant  whom  we  will
•call  "Jane,"  and  who  was  the  wife  of  a  pitman  in  the  county  of
Durham. Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  who  collected  the  evidence,  writes  : —

"  She  has  never  received  any  fee,  or  made  any  exhibition  of  her  powers.
On  the  contrary,  she  has  most  carefully  concealed  her  faculty  from  all  her
neighbours  and  relations,  except  her  husband  and  sister,  for  fear  of  being
taken  for  a  witch.  The  witnesses  of  her  clairvoyance  have  consequently
been  few,  consisting,  mainly,  of  a  family  in  whose  service  one  or  two  of  her
relations  had  been.  We  have  the  testimony  of  three  members  of  this  family,
viz.,  the  Rev.  C.  Green  and  his  two  sisters,  who  are  now  Mrs.  Fraser  and
Mrs.  Myers  (wife  of  the  Rev.  T.  Myers,  of  Twinstead  Rectory,  Sudbury,  a
•cousin  of  my  own),  who  has  kindly  rendered  active  help  in  the  collection  of
•evidence.  To  these  are  added  some  notes  taken  by  their  friend  Mrs.  Russell.
We  have  also  the  contemporaneous  notes  of  a  Dr.  F.,  which  form  the  main
piece  of  evidence  still  subsisting  ;  though  they  do  not  appear  to  have  been
■contemporaneous  in  the  sense  of  being  made  before  the  truth  of  Jane's
statements  was  verified.  Singularly  enough,  it  appears  that  none  of  these
witnesses,  with  the  exception  of  Dr.  F.,  at  all  realised  the  rarity  of  Jane's
faculty,  and  hardly  any  notes  were  made  at  the  time.

"  She  was  mesmerised  at  intervals  through  a  long  period  of  years  from
1845  onwards,  for  the  sake  of  her  health, 1  and  when  in  the  mesmeric  state,

1  The  treatment  was  begun  by  the  arrangement  of  her  medical  attendant  with  a
-view  to  enabling  her  to  sleep  at  night. (See  Mrs.  Fraser's  account,  Appendix,  p.  89.)


5  4


Mrs.  H.  Sidgiuich,


she  almost  always  began  to  talk  in  a  childish  language,  and  to  ask  to  'travel,'
that  is,  to  be  guided  by  suggestion  to  places  which  she  should  clairvoyantly
visit.  This  was  done  accordingly,  partly  to  oblige  her,  and  partly  as  an
amusement,  and  whenever  her  reports  of  her  travels  could  be  verified  we  are
told  that  they  were  found  to  be  correct.  But  as  Jane  in  her  normal  state
shrank  from  all  mention  of  these  clairvoyant  wanderings,  very  little  was  said
about  them  to  anyone  outside  the  family  already  mentioned.  There  was  thus-
an  entire  absence  of  the  motives  which  may  often  prompt  to  the  simulation
of  clairvoyance  ;  and  although  the  fragmentai'iness  of  these  records  is  very
unsatisfactory,  it  may  be  remarked,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  would  be
difficult  to  imagine  a  case  in  which  the  faculty  was  less  desired  by  its-
possessor,  or  less  wondered  at  by  its  observers.  Even  Dr.  F.'s  notes  were
only  preserved  through  the  accident  of  their  having  been  copied  at  the  time-
by  Mrs.  Hargreaves  (ne'e  Procter)  of  Southport  "  [who  was  doubtless  specially
interested  in  them  on  account  of  what  Jane  said  about  Procter's  Mill  at
Wellington,  a  well-known  haunted  house  in  which  Mrs.  Hargreaves  had  lived
(See  Appendix.)].

When  Mr.  Myers  collected  the  evidence  in  1884,  Jane  was  still  living,
but  was  seriously  ill,  and  so  anxious  that  her  power  should  not  be  suspected,
by  her  neighbours  that  it  was  impossible  to  make  further  trial  of  it.

In  the  body  of  this  paper  I  shall  give  only  an  account  of  Jane  by
Mrs.  T.  Myers,  which,  though  written  from  recollection  after  many-
years,  is  interesting  as  giving  a  general  idea  of  what  wTent  on,  and  a
portion  of  Dr.  F.'s  notes.  As,  however,  the  reader  should  have  access,
to  all  the  evidence  we  have  about  this  clairvoyant,  the  remainder  will
be  placed  in  the  Appendix.  It  consists  of  (1)  Dr.  F.'s  notes  relating  to»
occasions  when  almost  all  that  the  percipient  is  recorded  to  have  said
either  might  haATe  been  read  from  the  minds  of  those  present  or  was
tmverifiable  ;  (2)  an  account  by  Mrs.  Fraser,  Mrs.  T.  Myers'  sister,  of
her  own  recollections ;  (3)  an  incident  recalled  by  their  brother,  the-
Rev.  C.  Green ;  (4)  another  fragment  by  Mrs.  T.  Myers  ;  (5)  a  corrobora-
tive letter  from  Jane's  sister  ;  and  (6)  contemporaneous  notes  of  a  more-
recent  sitting  taken  by  Mrs.  Russell,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Fraser's,  which,,
however,  can  hardly  be  said  to  record  anything  beyond  the  range  of
possible  thought-transference  from  herself.

Mrs.  Thomas  Myers'  Recollections  of  Jane.

'•  Twinstead  Rectory,  Sudbury,  Suffolk.  [1884.]

"  This  clairvoyante  has  been  known  by  me  since  I  was  a  child.  I  was-
taken  to  see  her  by  my  sister  and  remember  her  first  in  a  bed  in  the  upper-
room  of  a  small  house  in  Durham.  She  was  a  remarkably  refined  woman
for  her  rank  in  life,  sweet  and  gentle  looking,  with  delicately  cut  features-
and  wavy  dark  hair.  She  was  very  religious  and  conscientious,  and  even
when  mesmerised  and  under  the  influence  of  others  could  never  be  induced
to  read  letters  or  pry  into  things  which  she  knew  the  jjerson  visited  would
wish  to  keep  secret.  On  one  occasion  I  remember  taking  her  in  the  sleep*
to  see  a  young  lady  ;  she  said,  '  She  is  writing  to  her  lover.' '  What  is  she


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


55


saying  to  him? '  Indignant  answer  :  '  We  will  not  look;  would  we  like  any-
one to  look  over  we's  shoulder  when  we  writes  love  letters  ? '  I  was  early
taught  to  give  her  the  sleep,  so  to  me  there  has  never  been  anything  astonish-
ing in  clairvoyance  or  thought-reading,  therefore  I  never  took  notes  of  what
was  a  daily  occurrence.  This  is  to  be  regretted,  as  so  much  interesting-
matter  is  forgotten.  When  under  the  influence  of  the  sleep  she  is  quite  dis-
tinct from  herself  and  calls  her  body  '  we's  girl,'  and  does  not  like  her,  com-
plaining that  she  troubles  her  and  gives  her  pains  in  her  side  or  face,  nay,
anywhere  and  everywhere,  for  all  through  her  life  she  has  been  and  still  is  a
great  sufferer.  Out  of  the  '  sleep  '  she  never  murmurs  against  her  lot,  but
has  a  resigned  spirit  to  God's  will.

' '  In  the  sleep  she  is  on  an  equality  with  the  operator,  and  also  feels
-through  that  person  ;  her  own  body  possesses  no  sense  of  feeling.  She  dis-
likes the  touch  of  silk  very  much  and  hates  cats  in  the  room.  Her  dislike
to  black  is  great,  and  black  people  she  cannot  endure,  and  she  will  not
recognise  them  as  'men  and  brothers,'  not  even  when  appealed  to  to  regard
them  in  a  Christian  point  of  view.  '  We  do  not  like  them,  we  wdl  not  look
at  them,'  and  she  shudders  with  disgust  if,  when  taken  to  India  or  Africa,
she  gets  into  a  crowd  or  comes  into  contact  with  them  ;  for  in  the  spirit  she
still  feels  in  a  body,  and  expects  people  to  see  her  and  resents  being  jostled
in  a  crowd,  or  nearly  run  over  by  carriages  and  horses.  Once,  when  taking
her  to  see  a  friend,  she  called  out,  '  What  a  rude  man,  he  has  nearly  run  over
we  with  his  prancing  horses.'  '  Where  are  you  ? '  'In  the  drive  going  up
to  his  house.'  '  But  he  cannot  see  you.'  '  He  ought  to  see  we  ;  he  might
have  broken  we's  leg, '  and  immediately  added,  '  But  he  could  mend  it  if  he
had,  he  is  a  doctor  ;  he  does  not  give  nasty  medicines,  but  little  pills  and
tinctures. '  She  had  never  out  of  the  sleep  known  this  gentleman  or  any-
thing about  Homoeopathy,  and  she  was  at  this  time  in  the  North  of  England ;
he  was  in  Clifton.  I  asked  her  his  name  ;  she  spelt  on  the  doorplate  of
his  private  house,  '  Williams, '  quite  correctly,  and  described  him  and  his
house  and  family  most  correctly.

' '  She  intensely  dislikes  death  and  will  not  willingly  enter  where  anyone
is  dying  or  is  dead.  This  was  shown  very  strongly  once  when  taken  to  see
Dr.  Livingstone — she  found  him  in  a  tent,  but  would  pay  little  attention  to
him  because  a  man  lay  dying  in  the  corner.  I  rebuked  her  for  her  horror  of
death,  but  she  would  not  be  lectured  into  a  proper  frame  of  mind,  and  said,
very  angrily,  '  We  do  not  like  dying  people.  Why  has  that  man  come  here
to  die  1  he  had  better  have  stayed  at  home.'  I  said,  '  Well,  never  mind  him,
look  at  Dr.  Livingstone.'  '  He  is  ill  and  troubled — but  look  at  that  man —
there — he  is  dead.  Give  we  we's  coffee  '  !  I  have  never  heard  of  anyone
dying  in  that  year  (1871)  while  with  Dr.  Livingstone,  but  if  anyone  reading
this  has,  it  will  be  interesting  to  verify  her  statement.  He  was  a  white
man.

"  Whenever  Jane  wishes  to  come  out  of  her  sleep,  she  says,  'Give  we
we's  coffee.'  When  first  given  the  sleep,  she  had  a  cup  of  coffee  on  waking,
but  never  afterwards.  The  habit,  however,  continues  until  this  day,  and  the
imaginary  cup  of  coffee  is  taken — let  us  hope  with  benefit.  A  young  niece  of
mine  mesmerised  her,  at  her  own  request,  when  they  were  alone  together,
and  not  knowing  how  to  do  it  or  how  to  awaken  her,  my  niece  was  nervous.


56  Mrs.  H.  Sidgiiriek.

and  did  not  understand  the  request  for  waking.  So  Jane  kept  entreating,
'  Give  we  we's  coffee  ;  give  we  we's  coffee.'  At  last  she  thought  she  would
ask  Jane  to  tell  her  how  to  wake  her,  which  she  did.  We  rather  wondered
at  this,  as  in  the  sleep  she  is  another  person,  and  has  no  knowledge  of  what
.she  says  or  sees.

"She  is  not  always  to  be  depended  upon  in  the  matter  of  time.  Jane
counts  by  'suns,'  not  clays.  We  have  often  found  her  perfectly  correct  in  time,
as  in  the  cases  of  the  visit  to  Mrs.  Fraser  [Mrs.  Myers'  sister,  who  had  often
mesmerised  Jane],  when  she  told  of  my  sister  hitting  her  nose  against  a
screen,  and  also  of  the  lady  who  took  tea  for  her  lunch  in  London,  when
going  into  the  City  on  business,  and  the  gentleman  who  listened  to  the  old
white-haired  man  singing  in  the  streets  of  Durham.

"Jane  frequently  turns  lazy  in  the  sleep,  and  must  not  then  be  trusted
to  find  out  anything,  as  she  will  read  the  mind  of  the  mesmeriser  on  the  sub-
ject. This  can  be  in  a  great  measure  prevented,  but  not  always,  by  the
operator  turning  his  or  her  thoughts  into  another  line.  But  from  this  cause
Jane  has  often  proved  a  failure.  She  is  also  very  much  influenced  by  the
presence  of  believers  or  unbelievers.  She  does  not  see  or  hear  anyone  who
is  present  unless  the  mesmeriser  turns  and  looks  at  the  person.  In  a  very
uncomfortable  manner  for  polite  operators,  she  reads  the  mind  and  thoughts
of  those  she  is  called  to  look  at,  and  inquires  first,  'Is  he  one  of  we's  ?'  and
then  reviews  the  heart  in  a  religious  point  of  view.  One  day,  when  looking
at  a  man  (fortunately  not  in  the  room),  she  said,  '  We  do  not  like  him,  his
heart  is  as  black  as  his  hat ! '

"  She  was  once  taken  in  the  year  1845  to  visit  my  cousins.  She  said  the
eldest  had  measles,  and  then  noticed  a  cradle  with  a  baby  in  it,  rocking
rapidly  without  anyone  near  it.  This  was  thought  very  strange  by  the
operator,  but  on  writing  to  tell  the  friends  of  the  visit  they  said  she  was  quite
correct,  as  the  baby  used  to  rock  himself  with  his  elbows.  In  1871  I  took
her  [mentally]  to  a  cousin's  house  in  Clifton,  sister  of  the  'Baby  Willie,'  and
as  she  went  into  the  house  she  read  'Salve  '  on  the  tiles  before  the  glass
door  ;  then  entering  the  hall  she  exclaimed,  '  Here  is  a  gentleman.  It  is
"  Baby  Willie!"  "Baby  Willie"  grown  a  big  man.'  She  had  never  seen  him
since  she  saw  him  in  that  cradle,  and  her  joy  was  great  to  see  him  again.  I
was  not  aware  he  was  in  Clifton  at  that  time,  but  he  had  gone  for  a  few
Jays  to  see  his  sister.  I  found  this  out  on  writing  to  tell  what  she  had  said.
She  then  entered  the  dining-room  and  recognised  '  Baby  Willie's '  sister,
Mrs.  J.  D.  Wills,  and  said,  '  Miss  Lillie  is  a  matron  now,  so  altered.  May
we  go  upstairs  and  see  her  children  ? '  I  said,  '  Yes. '  So  up  she  went  and
entered  the  nursery.  She  looked  round  and  then  called  out,  '  Another  Baby
Willie  !  '  and  was  so  pleased  with  it,  then  described  the  other  children  and
nurses,  and  gave  them  their  names  correctly.  The  under-nurse  was  highly
commended.  The  '  Baby  Willie '  of  the  cradle  was  the  W.  Temple  Bourne
whose  ring  she  got  returned  to  him  (found  in  the  old  coat).

"Jane  was  taken  by  my  sister,  Miss  Green,  I  being  present,  and  a  Miss
A.  A.,  a  friend,  to  see  her  [Miss  A.  A.'s]  great  aunt,  who  was  ill,  but
refused  to  let  a  doctor  examine  her.  Miss  A.  A.  's  mother  had  gone  to  nurse
•her  at  a  town  far  away  from  where  we  were,  and  Jane  knew  nothing  of  any
of  the  parties  nor  did  we. She  entered  the  house and  immediately


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


57


exclaimed,  '  Oh,  for  shame  !  Oh,  for  shame  !  Two  bottles  and  a  cup  !  Look
in  the  closet  :  two  bottles  and  a  cup  !  !  She  fell  downstairs  and  has  broken
her  leg  :  she  does  not  wish  it  known.'  Miss  A.  at  once  wrote  to  her  mother,
who  looked  in  the  cupboard  and  found  two  empty  bottles  and  a  cup  !  The
doctor  examined  the  leg,  it  was  broken.  No  previous  suspicion  pointed  to
this  sad  discovery."

Dr.  F.'s  Notes.

The  following  notes  were  taken  by  Dr.  F.  in  the  summer  of  1853.  He
does  not  wish  his  name  to  be  published,  being  unwilling  to  be  troubled  with
correspondence  on  the  subject  ;  but  he  vouches  for  the  complete  freedom
from  bias  with  which  he  made  the  following  observations.

Experiment  I.

"  I  was  directed  to  sit  down  in  front  of  the  clairvoyante.  Whilst  taking
each  thumb  and  finger  in  my  opposite  hand,  I  fixed  my  eyes  steadfastly  upon
her.  In  about  two  minutes  her  head  began  to  droop  ;  when  my  two  hands
were  above  her  head  she  raised  it  gradually  up  to  the  erect  position.  She
made  some  remark,  and  grasping  her  hands  again,  I  commenced  the  experi-
ment by  saying,  '  We  are  beside  some  railings,  with  trees  in  them,  and
opposite  is  a  house,  which  I  wish  you  to  enter.'  I  must  here  premise
that  I  had  no  expectation  of  her  power,  and  intending  to  puzzle  her  at  once,
I  thus  refrained  from  giving  her  any  description  that  might  afford  her  the
least  hint  where  I  wished  her  to  go,  in  case  it  was  an  imposition.  She
immediately  replied,  '  Which  door  shall  we  enter  ? '  The  house  I  had  selected
is  that  inhabited  by  Mr.  Stephens,  Dockwray-square,  from  whom,  I  made  no
doubt,  I  could  afterwards  obtain  satisfactory  information  respecting  the  truth
or  untruth  of  the  description  that  might  be  given.  As  his  house  alone  in  the
whole  square  has  two  doors  upon  the  same  place,  I  was  surprised  at  the
answer,  and  remarked,  '  We  will  go  into  the  lower  door. '  '  Shall  we  go  along
the  passage  then,'  she  replied,  '  and  into  this  room  %  Who  is  this  lady  sitting-
there  l '  I  asked  whether  she  was  young  or  old.  '  Not  very  young,  and  not
very  old, '  she  returned  ;  '  but  she  is  sitting  there,  and  she  is  a  mamma. :

"  I  requested  her  next  to  proceed  further  along  the  passage,  when  she
immediately  said,  '  What  a  smell  !  what  a  smell  !  This  is  a  medicine  house. '
I  told  her  to  tell  me  what  she  saw.  She  replied  that  there  were  many  bottles
upon  the  shelves,  a  book  on  the  table,  a  young  man  with  a  knife,  taking
down  bottles  and  mixing  medicines,  and  a  head  in  the  room.  I  asked  what
the  head  was  like,  when  she  answered  by  asserting  that  it  was  not  a  '  live
head, '  and  had  no  brains  in  it.  I  at  the  time  supposed  that  she  meant  a
phrenological  bust,  but  have  been  since  informed  by  Mr.  Stephens  that
a  skull  was  actually  at  that  time  upon  the  table  of  his  surgery.  I
inquired  if  anyone  else  was  in  the  room,  when  she  described  a  man  with  a
shaggy  head  of  hair,  whose  name  she  spelt  as  Wilson.  I  have  been  unable
to  learn  whether  there  was  such  a  person  there  at  the  time,  but  one  called
Wilkinson  is  remembered  to  have  been  present.

L '  Thinking  that  she  had  guessed  that  this  was  my  own  house,  and  thus
imagined  the  rest,  I  determined  to  detect  her,  by  leading  her  to  my  own
residence.  I  therefore  said  :  '  We  will  leave  this  place,  pass  round  the  rails,
and  opposite  us  is  a  house. ' She  directly  replied  : '  Is  it  the  clean  house  % '


58


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick


This  remark  was  probably  elicited  by  the  house  having  been  painted  a  day
or  two  previously.  Telling  her  that  she  was  quite  correct,  I  requested  her
to  proceed.  I  said  :  '  Is  there  a  brass  plate  on  the  door  ? '  She  answered
'Yes,' and  upon  my  desiring  her  to  read  the  name  upon  it,  she  spelt  the
letters  [of  my  name].  She  asked,  'May  we  go  in? '  and  upon  receiving  per-
mission, seemed  to  enter  a  drawing-room,  when  she  exclaimed,  '  We  like
this  room,  don't  we?  and  here  is  our  mother  sitting  upon  a  sofa.'  I  inquired
what  her  occupation  was,  when  she  described  her  as  an  old  lady  reading  a
book,  with  spectacles  on,  and  having  previously  placed  some  stockings  in  a
drawer  in  another  room.  I  requested  her  to  tell  me  the  name  of  the  book,
but  she  stated  that  she  could  not  do  so,  on  account  of  the  print  being  so  small,
and  that  the  lady  had  laid  down  the  book  and  pushed  up  her  spectacles.  I
asked  her  what  she  saw  in  a  certain  part  of  the  room  where  I  knew  a  very
curious,  old-fashioned  cabinet  was  placed,  but  could  get  no  satisfactory  reply.
Her  mind,  by  constant  cross-questioning,  seemed  to  be  thrown  off,  and  she
commenced  talking  about  some  ladies'  work,  which,  I  was  afterwards
informed,  she  had  formerly  described  as  belonging  to  another  room  when  in
her  mesmeric  state.

"  Although  considerably  puzzled  to  account  for  the  accuracy  with  which
she  had  followed  me,  I  was  by  no  means  convinced  that  she  possessed  the
power  of  clairvoyance,  but  determined  to  give  the  subject  a  further  examina-
tion. It  was  certainly  curious  that  she  should  have  so  easily  lit  upon  the
house  of  Mr.  Stephens,  and  described  what  was  going  on  in  it,  but  I  imagined
that  this  might  have  arisen  from  the  association  in  her  mind  of  my  profession
with  the  mixing  of  drugs,  but  it  was  still  more  strange  that  if  it  was  an
imposture  she  should  have  guessed  the  next  place  to  be  my  own  house,  and
.should  be  able  to  describe  so  very  accurately  what  was  going  on.

'•  I  should  mention  that  upon  my  return  home  I  found  my  mother  still
sitting  in  the  room  and  in  the  place  in  which  she  had  been  described,  and
upon  my  asking  what  had  been  her  employment  she  stated  that  she  had  been
reading  '  , '  but  the  print  was  so  small  that  about  the  time  I  was  con-
ducting the  experiment  she  laid  it  down  from  inability  to  continue  her
reading. She  had  placed  the  stockings  in  a  drawer  in  the  morning."

It  may,  perhaps,  be  thought  that  the  facts  described  at  this  sitting-,
so  far  as  they  were  unknown  to  Dr.  R,  were  not  sufficiently  unusual  to
be  beyond  guesswork,  but,  if  so,  the  same  objection  certainly  cannot  be
made  to  Dr.  F.'s  next  experiment.

Experiment  II.

"  Before  commencing  the  sitting,  I  fixed  to  take  her  to  a  house,  without
communicating  my  intentions  to  any  of  the  parties  present.  In  the  morning
of  the  day  I  stated  to  a  patient  of  my  own,  Mr.  Eglinton,  at  present  resid-
ing in  the  village  of  Tynemouth,  that  I  intended  to  visit  him.  He  stated
that  he  would  be  present  between  8  and  10  p.m.  in  a  particular  room,  so  that
there  might  be  no  difficulty  in  finding  him.  He  was  just  recovering  from  a
very  severe  illness,  and  was  so  weak  that  he  could  scarcely  walk.  He  was
exceedingly  thin  from  the  effects  of  his  complaint.

"After  the  usual  state  had  been  obtained,  I  said,  'We  are  standing


On  the  Evidence  for  Chitrvoyance.


5»


"beside  a  railway  station,  now  we  pass  along  a  road,  and  in  front  of  us  see  a
house  with  a  laburnum  tree  in  front  of  it. '  She  directly  replied,  '  Is  it  the?
red  house  with  a  brass  knocker  ? '  I  said,  'No,  it  has  an  iron  knocker.'  I
have  since  looked,  however,  and  find  that  the  door  has  an  old-fashioned,
brass  handle  in  the  shape  of  a  knocker.  She  then  asked,  '  Shall  we  go  ivp  the
steps  ?  Shall  we  go  along  this  passage,  and  up  these  stairs  1  Is  this  a  window
on  the  stair  head  ? '  I  said,  '  You  are  quite  right,  and  now  I  want  you  to
look  into  the  room  upon  the  left  hand  side.'  She  replied,  'Oh,  yes,  in  the
bedroom.  There  is  no  one  in  this  room  ;  there  is  a  bed  in  it,  but  there  is
no  person  in  it.'  I  was  not  aware  that  a  bedroom  was  in  the  place  I
mentioned,  but  upon  inquiry  next  day  I  found  she  was  correct.  I  told  her
she  must  look  into  the  next  room,  and  she  would  see  a  sofa.  She  answered,
'  But  there  is  here  a  little  gallery.  Now  I  am  in  the  room,  and  see  a  lady
with  black  hair  lying  upon  the  sofa.'  I  attempted  t<>  puzzle  her  about  the
colour  of  her  hair,  and  feeling  sure  it  was  Mr.  Eglinton  who  was  lying;
there,  I  sharply  cross-questioned  her,  but  still  she  persisted  in  her  story.
The  questioning,  however,  seemed  to  distract  her  mind,  and  she  commenced
talking  about  a  lady  at  Whickham,  until  I  at  last  recalled  her  to  the  room  at
Tynemouth,  by  asking  whether  there  was  not  a  gentleman  in  the  room.
'  No, '  she  said  ;  '  we  can  see  no  gentleman  there. '

"After  a  little  she  described  the  door  opening,  and  asked,  witli  a  tone  of
great  surprise,  '  Is  that  a  gentleman  ?'  I  replied,  '  Yes  ;  is  he  thin  or
fat  V  '  Very  fat,'  she  answered  ;  '  but  has  he  a  cork  leg?'  I  assured  her
that  he  had  no  cork  leg,  and  tried  to  puzzle  her  again  about  him.  She,
however,  assured  me  that  he  was  very  fat  and  had  a  great  corporation,  and
asked  me  whether  I  did  not  think  such  a  fat  man  must  eat  and  drink  a  great
deal  to  get  such  a  corporation  as  that.  She  also  described  him  as  sitting  by
the  table  with  papers  beside  him.  and  a  glass  of  brandy  and  water.  '  Is  it
not  wine?'  I  asked.  'No,  she  said,  '  it's  brandy. '  '  Is  it  not  whisky  or
rum  ?  '  '  No,  it  is  brandy, '  was  the  answer  ;  '  and  now, '  she  continued,
'  the  lady  is  going  to  get  her  supper,  but  the  fat  gentleman  does  not  take
any.'  I  requested  her  to  tell  me  the  colour  of  his  hair,  but  she  only
answered  that  the  lady's  hair  was  dark.  I  then  inquired  if  he  had  any  brains
in  his  head,  but  she  seemed  altogether  puzzled  about  him,  and  said  she
could  not  see  any.  I  then  asked  her  if  she  could  see  his  name  upon  any  of
the  letters  lying  about.  She  replied,  '  Yes '  ;  and  upon  my  saying  that  the
name  began  with  E,  she  spelt  each  letter  of  the  name  '  Eglinton. '

"  I  was  so  convinced  that  I  had  at  last  detected  her  in  a  conqdete  mistake
that  I  arose,  and  declined  proceeding  further  in  the  matter,  stating  that,
although  her  description  of  the  house  and  the  name  of  the  person  were
correct,  in  everything  connected  with  the  gentleman  she  had  guessed  the
opposite  from  the  truth.

"  On  the  following  morning  Mr.  E.  asked  me  the  result  of  the  experiment,
and  after  having  related  it  to  him,  he  gave  me  the  following  account  : — He-
had  found  himself  unable  to  sit  up  to  so  late  an  hour,  but  wishful  fairly  to.
test  the  powers  of  the  clairvoyante,  he  had  ordered  his  clothes  to  be  stuffed
into  the  form  of  a  figure,  and  to  make  the  contrast  more  striking  to  his.
natural  appearance,  had  an  extra  pillow  pushed  into  the  clothes  so  as  to  form
a  'corporation.' This  figure  had  been  placed  near  the  table,  in  a  sitting


00


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


position,  and  a  glass  of  brandy  and  water  and  the  newspapers  placed  beside
it.  The  name,  he  further  added,  was  spelt  correctly,  though  up  to  that
time  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  writing  it  '  Eglington,'  instead  of  as  sjjelt
by  the  clairvoyante,  '  Eglinton.'  "

Experiment  V.

"July  20th,  185.3. — Sitting  commenced  at  quarter  to  nine,  finished  20
minutes  to  10.

"  She  was  very  dull  this  evening,  and  during  the  experiment  again  com-
plained of  the  girl  [meaning  herself]  troubling  her  and  that  she  would  not
love  the  girl.  She  had  been  engaged  the  whole  afternoon  and  evening
nursing  her  child,  who  is  weak  and  irritable  from  a  late  attack  of  measles.
Mr.  Owen  present.  In  about  two  minutes  she  fell  into  the  state.  I  had
previously  requested  Mr.  Gibb  to  watch,  which  he  did  between  half -past  8

and  10,  and  agreed  to  bring  her  to  the  College  of  Medicine  in  Street.

I  therefore  said  to  her,  '  We  are  near  a  railway  station,  let  us  go  along  the
road  and  turn  down,  and  opposite  to  us  is  a  door.'  '  May  we  go  in  here  { '
.she  asked.  On  entering,  she  described  a  gentleman  as  rather  stoutly  built,
•of  middle  size,  asking  if  he  was  a  gentleman  who  was  sitting  in  a  room,  which
was  not  an  ordinary  room,  but  was  a  place  for  people  to  come  to,  and  which
she  said  was  like  an  office  ;  he  was  sitting  doing  nothing.  She  asked,  '  Was
he  expecting  me  to  come  ? '  and  '  What  did  lie  want  with  me  ? '  She  did  not
.seem  to  observe  anyone  else,  but  was  by  no  means  clear.  Continually  she
-exclaimed,  '  What  a  strange  place,'  '  What  a  strange  place  this  is,'  '  What  do
they  do  here  V  She  'never  were  in  a  place  like  this  before.'  I  requested
her  to  proceed  upstairs,  when  she  said  they  were  very  queer  stairs,  and
■asked  what  those  were  sticking  in  the  wall.  I  replied  that  they  were  rafters.
She  asked  why  they  placed  them  there.  I  answered  to  support  the  roof.
She  thought  it  must  be  a  dangerous  place  if  the  roof  required  support.  She
■described  a  room  at  the  top  of  the  stairs  to  which  she  said  many  people  came,
but  could  not  imagine  its  use.  As  this  was  evidently  the  dissecting  room  or
lecture  room,  the  one  opening  into  the  other,  and  as  at  this  present  time  the
dissecting  room  is  empty,  I  asked  her  to  go  into  the  further  room  of  the  two,
when  she  repeated  her  observations  about  it  being  a  place  to  speak  in.  I
told  her  to  look  and  see  what  was  done  in  the  room,  when  she  replied  that
•she  saw  the  gentleman  speaking  to  a  number  of  persons.

"  At  this  stage  I  was  called  out,  and  found  that  Mr.  P.,  a  gentleman
belonging  to  the  Society  of  Friends,  wished  me  to  accompany  him  to  see  his
.son,  who  had  returned  from  Carlisle  after  taking  chloroform  during  the
■extraction  of  some  teeth.  I  requested  a  lady  to  supply  my  place  whilst  I
went  with  Mr.  P.  Jane  complained  bitterly  of  my  leaving  her,  and  insisted
on  following  me.  She  found  me,  she  said,  with  a  gentleman  with  a  broad-
brimmed  hat,  who  was  remarking  '  thou  knowest  it.'  She  next  described
the  young  gentleman  ill  from  the  effects  of  some  stuff  which  had  been  given
to  him  by  a  person  along  a  railway,  a  long  way  off,  which  had  done  him
harm,  and  that  the  person  fancied  himself  a  great  man,  but  was  not  one,  and
.should  not  meddle  with  such  things.  She  saw  the  room  and  one  lady  stand-
ing over  him,  and  recognised  two  other  young  ladies  she  had  before  seen,
asking  how  she  had  got  here.  This  was  all  correct,  excepting  that  I  do  not
remember  Mr.  P.  using  the  expression  above  named.


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


Gl


"  She  was  requested  to  continue  her  description  of  the  building  as  soon
as  I  returned.  I  again  took  hold  of  her  hands,  and  she  then  described  a
lecture  about  cutting  off  legs  and  arms,  and  such  like,  and  also  a  room  next
it  with  bones  and  skeletons  in  it,  and  things,  the  names  of  which  she  could
not  catch,  in  glass  cases  for  the  gentlemen  to  look  at  and  think  about."

The  important  part  of  Experiment  V.  in  relation  to  clairvoyance
is  Jane's  mental  following  of  Dr.  F.,  when  he  went  with  Mr.  P.,  since
the  account  of  the  College  of  Medicine  hardly  seems  to  have  included
details  unknown  to  or  unguessed  by  Dr.  F.  The  same  kind  of  know-
ledge of  what  Dr.  F.  is  doing  at  a  distance  is  shown  in  Experiments
VII.  and  VIII.,  which  follow,  but  in  the  latter  he  had  a  definite
intention  that  she  should  know  it.

Experiment  VII.

July  26th.

'•  I  have  classed  under  this  head  the  results  obtained  at  two  sittings,  but
I  was  not  present  myself,  the  clairvoyante  being  mesmerised  by  a  lady  (Mis.
H.  E.  Fraser),  who  had  been  previously  in  the  habit  of  doing  it.  I  was
visiting  a  lady  professionally  who  was  suffering  from  headache,  and  mentioned
to  her  the  subject  of  clairvoyance,  stating  that  I  would  'pay  her  a  visit  in
spirit. '  I  met  Mrs.  Fraser,  who  had  been  mesmerising  the  clairvoyante  that
morning,  who  said,  '  Who  is  this  lady  to  whom  you  have  promised  a  visit  ? '
She  then  stated  that  whilst  in  the  mesmeric  state  Jane  was  requested  to  find
me,  which  she  did,  stating  that  I  was  in  a  room  with  a  lady,  to  whom  I  was
addressing  the  words  I  have  before  used,  and  adding,  '  But  we  will  pay  her  a
visit  in  spirit.'  When  she  was  next  under  the  influence  of  Mrs.  Fraser,  she
recurred  to  this,  and  described  the  room  in  which  the  lady  with  whom  she  had
found  me  was  sitting,  stated  that  it  had  a  beautiful  sea  view,  was  very
handsomely  furnished,  and  that  in  the  corner  was  lying  a  thing  to  look
through,  also  some  ladies'  work.  In  all  this  she  was  perfectly  correct,
although  Mrs.  Fraser  was  not  in  the  slightest  degree  acquainted  with  the
house  or  the  lady."

Experiment  VIII.

July  2m,  9  p.m.

[Mrs.  Fraser,  who  was  present,  states  that  the  account  here  given  by
Jane  was  accurate,  though  by  an  accident  this  is  not  expressly  stated.]

"  Mrs.  B.  [i.e.,  Mrs.  Fraser]  put  Jane  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  then
bid  her  find  Dr.  F.,  who  had  previously  gone  into  the  next  room,  Mrs.  B.
not  knowing  how  he  intended  to  employ  himself  there.  Jane  was  a  few
minutes  before  she  could  say  anything  about  him,  and  then  exclaimed,  '  Why
he  is  putting  the  things  in  an  uproar  1  His  mamma  don't  like  him  to  put
things  in  an  uproar.  There  is  a  lady  with  him.  Is  it  our  own  Ave  ?  He  does
not  make  a  good  lady  ;  he  is  a  gentleman  lady  ;  our  lady  gone  now.  He  is
busy  with  his  toilet.  Does  he  think  himself  smart  ?  He  is  just  like  a  fool,  like
a  Punch.  Will  mamma  we  whip  him  for  turning  things  upside  down  ?  Does
she  like  him  to  amuse  himself  ?  Is  it  we's  own  we,  with  a  white  coat  on  ?
What  sort  of  a  coat  ?  The  cat  lady  put  his  coat  on  the  wrong  way  to  make
his  face  look  behind. She  now  put  a  pipe  in  his  mouth — just  like  Punch — ■


'62


Mrs.  H.  Sidgivick.


see  what  is  on  the  table — a  pipe,  and  the  cat — we  don't  like  the  cat,  and  a
lamp  on  the  table.  Is  that  a  cloak  he  has  got  on  1  How  monstrous  ugly  he
is,  too  ugly  for  a  lady,  we  think.  How  he  is  turning  the  room  upside  down,
looking  wrong  way  into  the  glass.  Does  he  like  to  amuse  himself  with  cats  ?
He  likes  live  cats  and  dead  cats,  and  live  dogs  and  dead  dogs,  and  arms  and
legs  to  cut  off,  and  bones  and  skulls,  and  all  them  sort  of  things.'

"As  Dr.  F.  then  left  the  room,  Mrs.  B.  tried  her  with  a  letter  which  Miss
C!.,  who  was  sitting  near,  had  in  her  pocket,  Mrs.  B.  not  knowing  the  writer.
Jane  was  bid  to  find  the  writer.  She  said  she  must  go  a  long  way  on  the
railway,  and  found  him  at  Carlisle,  with  a  toide  hat  on,  and  she  said  he  was
a  nice  gentleman,  and  had  a  good  mind,  but  she  said  he  would  not  believe
.about  the  sleep.  Mrs.  B.  asked  what  would  make  him  believe  it.  Jane  said
he  wished  to  see  miracles,  but  if  he  did  see  them  he  would  not  believe.  Then
she  said,  '  We  so  very  indignant  at  him  not  believing. '  She  then  got  so
excited  and  angry,  saying  she  would  not  look  any  more  at  him.  Mrs.  B.  then
tried  her  with  another  letter,  the  contents  of  which  were  known  to  Mrs.  B.,
hut  not  to  Jane.  She  said  the  letter  was  from  a  young  lady,  at  the  large
town  ;  that  it  was  about  we's  sleep,  and  about  the  gentleman  whom  she  had
been  to  search  for  in  the  cold  country  (Lieutenant  Pym),  but  that  the  writer
would  not  believe  in  the  sleep,  so  she  would  not  look  any  more  at  him."

In  Jane's  case  we  have  an  advance  on  the  Peterhead  one,  in  respect
of  the  difficulty  of  applying  a  telepathic  explanation,  because  she  seems  to
have  been  able  to  perceive  the  surroundings  of  distant  people  who  were
unknown  to  her,  though  known  to  her  hypnotiser  or  others  in  the
room.  In  the  most  marked  case  of  this,  however',  among  those  recorded
at  the  time,  Mr.  Eglinton,  though  unacquainted  with  Jane,  was  aware
that  an  attempt  to  see  him  clairvoyantly  was  to  be  made  at  that  hour,
and  was  not  only  interested  in  it,  but  made  somewhat  elaborate
arrangements  in  view  of  it,  so  that  we  may  almost  regard  him  as  a
conscious  "  Agent.''

We  may  take  next  a  group  of  four  cases  observed  by  Mr.  A.  W.
Dobbie,  of  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia  (an  Associate  of  the
S.P.R.),  with  various  hypnotic  subjects  of  his  own.  Mr.  Dobbie  has
practised  hypnotism  for  the  last  ten  or  twelve  years,  and  has  found
himself  to  be  a  very  successful  operator.  He  has  hypnotised,  he  tells
us,  more  than  500  persons,  chiefly  with  the  view  of  alleviating  suffer-
ing, and  has  come  across  a  few  who  seem  to  be  capable  of  clairvoyance.
It  will  be  convenient  to  take  the  four  cases  together,  not  because  they
resemble  each  other,  but  because  they  all  are  the  result  of  Mr.  Dobbie's
experiments.

The  first  is  a  comparatively  slight  case  of  the  type  of  Dr.  F.'s
Experiment  VIII.  with  Jane,  and  may  easily  be  explained  telepathi-
c-ally. We  extract  the  account  from  Mr.  Dobbie's  notebook,  which,
*vhen  he  was  in  England  in  1889.  he  allowed  us  to  study.


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


63


(M.  19.)  November  28th,  1884.  "  This  evening,  whilst  at  Mrs.  E.'s,
engaged  mesmerising  6  or  7  persons  for  clairvoyant  purposes,  Lilly  Thomas
came  to  me  from  the  Rev.  H.  T.  B.'s  to  be  cured  of  toothache.  Having
mesmerised  her  either  once  or  twice  before,  I  knew  she  was  an  easy  subject,
so  I  put  her  into  the  conscious  impressible  state  immediately,  and  cured  her
toothache.

"  I  then  asked  her  to  go  (clairvoyantly)  to  the  breakfast-room  of  the  Rev.
H.  T.  B.,  and  tell  me  who  was  there.  In  about  a  minute  she  said,  "  Mrs.
W.  B.  is  sitting  in  the  rocking-chair.'  '  Who  else  is  in  the  room  1 '  'The
two  little  girls.'  '  What  are  they  doing  ? '  'Sewing.'  '  Can  you  hear  them
talking?'  'Yes,  Mrs.  W.  B.  has  just  told  them  they  mustn't  do  some-
thing. '

"  I  afterwards  (the  same  evening)  visited  Mrs.  B.,  and  found  that  my
clairvoyant  had  told  me  quite  correctly.  I  then  asked  Mrs.  W.  B.  to  bring
her  into  the  room,  and  I  would  again  try  her  powers.  I  found  her  tooth-
ache had  not  given  her  any  more  trouble.  I  again,  in  a  few  seconds,  mes-
merised her,  and  went  into  another  room  and  placed  a  rocking-chair  and
cruet-stand  on  the  table,  and  coming  back,  I  said,  '  Now,  I  want  you  to  tell
me  what  is  on  the  table  in  the  breakfast-room. '  In  a  few  minutes  she  said,
in  evident  astonishment,  'The  rocking-chair  is  on  the  table.'  'Anything
else  ? '  I  inquired. '  Yes,  the  cruet-stand.'

' '  With  a  view  of  proving  whether  it  was  simply  thought-reading  or
genuine  clairvoyance,  I  asked  Mrs.  B.  to  go  into  the  room  and  do  something
unci  remain  there.  I  then  said  to  L.  T. ,  '  Is  anyone  in  the  room  1  '  '  Yes,
Mrs.  W.  B.'  '  What  is  she  doing?'  'Sitting  in  the  small  rocking-chair,
laughing,' I  hurried  to  the  room,  and  found  things  exactly  as  described.

"  It  being  now  10  o'clock,  and  I  four  miles  from  home,  I  was  reluctantly
compelled  to  hurry  away  without  further  experiments."

The  iirst  of  these  trials  may  have  been  an  instance  of  successful
guessing,  as  Lilly  Thomas  was,  we  presume,  familiar  with  the  ways  of
the  household,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that  anything  unusual
was  going  on.  The  second,  again,  may  have  been,  as  Mr.  Dobbie  sug-
gests, thought-transference  from  himself.  It  is  the  third  which  appears
to  be  a  genuine  instance  of  clairvoyance,  telepathic  or  other.

In  the  case  to  be  next  given  it  seems  likely  that  the  close  relation
of  father  and  daughter  may  have  facilitated  the  clairvoyance.  We
iigain  extract  the  account  from  Mr.  Dobbie's  notebook.

"June  10th,  1884.
(M.  20.) "  Up  to  the  present  time  this  has  been  the  most  interesting
case  I  have  had.

"  Lithe  first  instance  I  mesmerised  [Miss  — — ]  as  an  experiment  whilst
I  was  endeavouring  to  mesmerise  several  others.  I  found  her  an  easy  sub-
ject. I  afterwards  had  occasion  to  mesmerise  her  with  a  view  of  relieving  her
from  rheumatic  pains.  I  always  succeeded  in  removing  her  pains  and  curing
her  sore  throat,  whether  I  put  her  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  or  not.  As  with
several  other  patients.  I  can  entirely  remove  all  sensation  of  feeling  from  her


04


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwicl:


limbs,  so  that  she  can  be  severely  pricked  with  a  needle  without  experiencing-
the  slightest  inconvenience.  About  the  fifth  time  I  mesmerised  her  it  sud-
denly occurred  to  me  to  test  her  clairvoyant  powers,  and  I  was  delighted  to.
find  that  she  developed  this  wonderful  faculty.

"  The  following  is  a  verbatim  account  of  the  second  time  I  tested  her
powers  in  this  respect,  April  12th,  1884.  There  were  four  persons  present
during  the  seance.  One  of  the  company  wrote  down  the  replies  as  they  were
spoken.

*  -/-  *  *  *

"  Her  father  was  at  the  time  over  50  miles  away,  but  we  did  not  know
exactly  where,  so  I  questioned  her  as  follows  :  '  Can  you  find  your  father  at
the  present  moment  1 '  At  first  she  replied  that  she  could  not  see  him,  but
in  a  minute  or  two  she  said,  'Oh  yes,  now  I  can  see  him,  Mr.  Dobbie.'
'  Where  is  he  1 '  '  Sitting  at  a  large  table  in  a  large  room,  and  there  are  a
lot  of  people  going  in  and  out.'  'What  is  he  doing?'  'Writing  a  letter,
and  there  is  a  book  in  front  of  him.'  'Who  is  he  writing  to?'  'To  the
newspaper.'  Here  she  paused  and  laughingly  said,  'Well,  I  declare,  he  is.
writing  to  the  A.  B.'  [naming  a  newspaper].  'You  said  there  was  a  book
there.  Can  you  tell  me  what  book  it  is  ? '  '  It  has  gilt  letters  on  it.'  'Can
you  read  them,  or  tell  me  the  name  of  the  author?'  She  read,  or  pronounced
•slowly,  '  W.  L.  W.'  [giving  the  full  surname  of  the  author].  She  answered
several  minor  questions  re  the  furniture  in  the  room,  and  I  then  said  to  her,
'  Is  it  any  effort  or  trouble  to  you  to  travel  in  this  way  ? '  '  Yes,  a  little  ;  I
have  to  think.'

"I  now  stood  behind  her,  holding  a  half-crown  in  my  hand,  and  asked
her  if  she  could  tell  me  what  I  had  in  my  hand,  to  which  she  replied,  '  It  is-
a  shilling.'  It  seemed  as  though  she  could  see  what  was  happening  miles
away  easier  than  she  could  see  what  was  going  on  in  the  room.

"  Her  father  returned  home  nearly  a  week  afterwards  and  was  perfectly
astounded  when  told  by  his  wife  and  family  what  he  had  been  doing  on  that
particular  evening,  and  although  previous  to  that  date  he  was  a  thorough
sceptic  as  to  clairvoyance,  he  frankly  admitted  that  my  clairvoyant  was;
perfectly  correct  in  every  particular.  He  also  informed  us  that  the  book
referred  to  was  a  new  one  which  he  had  purchased  after  he  had  left  his.
home,  so  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  his  daughter  guessing  that  he  had
the  book  before  him.  I  may  add  that  the  letter  in  due  course  appeared  in
the  paper  ;  and  I  saw  and  handled  the  book."

Mr.  Dobbie  was  anxious  to  obtain  for  us  the  corroborative  testi-
mony of  the  family  in  this  case,  but  they  were  averse  to  giving  any
assistance  in  the  investigation.

The  next  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  Dobbie  by  letter  in  July,.
1886,  and  he  tells  us  that  the  notes  are  a  copy  of  the  notes  he  "wrote-
down  the  moment  the  words  were  uttered."

"July  &h,  1886.

(M.  (i.)  "  Striking  case  of  clairvoyance,  which  occurred  May  28th,  188(5,
in  the  presence  of  the  Hon.  Dr.  Campbell,  M.L.C.,  Hon.  David  Murray.
M.L.C.,  and  Chief  Secretary  of  South  Australia,  Mr.  Lyall,  and  Mr.
Fleming,  solicitor : —


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


65


"  The  circumstances  are  briefly  as  follows,  viz.  :  Dr.  Campbell,  being
present  at  one  of  my  usual  clairvoyant  evenings,  handed  me  a  gold  sleeve-
link,  at  the  same  time  telling  me  that  he  had  lost  the  fellow  one  to  it,  but
had  no  idea  as  to  what  had  become  of  it  ;  he  asked  me  to  give  the  remain-
ing one  to  one  of  my  clairvoyants  and  see  if  they  could  find  the  missing  one.
I  should  state  that  neither  of  the  clairvoyants  had  ever  seen  either  of  the
rooms  they  referred  to,  nor  did  they  know  the  names  of  the  children,  or
anything  in  connection  with  this  case,  so  that  it  is  either  a  case  of  genuine
clairvoyance,  or  else  a  most  remarkable  case  of  thought-reading.

"  I  first  handed  the  sleeve-link  to  the  younger  of  the  two  sisters  [Misses
Eliza  and  Martha  Dixon],  who  is  not  so  lucid  as  her  sister  (I  was  giving  the
elder  one  a  rest,  as  she  had  been  hard  at  work,  clairvoyantly,  for  the  past
hour).

"  Miss  Martha  began  by  first  accurately  describing  Dr.  Campbell's
features,  then  spoke  of  a  little  fair-haired  boy  who  had  a  stud,  or  sleeve-
link,  in  his  hand,  also  of  a  lady  calling  him  'Neil';  then  said  that  this
little  boy  had  taken  the  link  into  a  place  like  a  nursery  where  there  were
some  toys,  especially  a  large  toy  elephant,  and  that  he  had  dropped  the  link
into  this  elephant  through  a  hole  which  had  been  torn  or  knocked  in  the
breast  ;  also  that  he  had  taken  it  out  again,  and  gave  two  or  three  other
interesting  particulars.  We  were  reluctantly  compelled  to  postpone  further
investigation  until  two  or  three  evenings  afterwards.

"  On  the  next  occasion  (in  the  interval,  however,  the  missing  sleeve-link
had  been  found,  but  left  untouched),  I  again  placed  the  link  in  her  hand
and  the  previous  particulars  were  at  once  rej^roducecl  ;  but  as  she  seemed  to
be  getting  on  very  slowly,  it  occurred  to  Dr.  Campbell  to  suggest  placing  his
hand  on  that  of  the  clairvoyant,  so  I  placed  him  en  rapport  and  allowed  him
to  do  so,  he  simply  touching  the  back  of  her  hand  with  the  points  of  his
fingers.  As  she  still  seemed  to  have  great  difficulty  (she  is  always  much
slower  than  her  sister)  in  proceeding,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  it
would  be  an  interesting  experiment  to  place  Miss  Eliza  Dixon  en  tapport
with  Miss  Martha,  so  I  simply  joined  their  disengaged  hands,  and  Miss
Eliza  immediately  commenced  as  follows,  viz.  : —

"'I'm  in  a  house,  upstairs,  I  was  in  a  bathroom,  then  I  went  into-
another  room  nearly  opposite,  there  is  a  large  mirror  just  inside  the
door  on  the  left  hand,  there  is  a  double-sized  dressing-table  with  drawers
down  each  side  of  it,  the  sleeve-link  is  in  the  corner  of  the  drawer
nearest  the  door.  When  they  found  it  they  left  it  there.  I  know  why  they
left  it  there,  it  was  because  they  wanted  to  see  if  we  would  find  it.  I  can
see  a  nice  easy  chair  there,  it  is  an  old  one,  I  would  like  it  when  I  am  put  to
sleep,  because  it  is  nice  and  low.  The  bed  has  curtains,  they  are  a  sort  of
brownish  net  and  have  a  fringe  of  darker  brown.  The  wall  paper  is  of  a
light  blue  colour.  There  is  a  cane  lounge  there  and  a  pretty  Japanese
screen  behind  it,  the  screen  folds  up;  There  is  a  portrait  of  an  old  gentle-
man over  the  mantelpiece,  he  is  dead,  I  knew  him  when  he  was  alive,  his.
name  is  the  same  as  the  gentleman  who  acts  as  Governor  when  the  Governor
is  absent  from  the  colony,1 1  will  tell  you  his  name  directly — it  is  the  Rev.

1  Chief  J ustice  Way  is  the  gentleman  who  acts  as  Deputy  for  his  Excellency  when,
absent  from  the  colony. — A.  W.  D.

F


66


Mrs.  IT.  Sidgwick.


Mr.  Way.  It  was  a  little  boy  who  put  the  sleeve-link  in  that  drawer,  he  is
very  fair,  his  hair  is  almost  white,  he  is  a  pretty  little  boy,  he  has  blue  eyes
and  about  three  years  old.  The  link  had  been  left  on  that  table,  the  little
boy  was  in  the  nursery,  and  lie  went  into  the  bedroom  after  the  gentle-
man had  left.  I  can  see  who  the  gentleman  is,  it  is  Dr.  Campbell.  Doesn't
that  little  boy  look  a  young  Turk,  the  link  is  quite  a  handful  for  his  little
hand,  he  is  running  about  with  it  very  pleased  ;  but  he  doesn't  seem  to
know  what  to  do  with  it.  (A)

[Dr.  Campbell  was  not  present  from  this  point.]

' ' '  Now  I  can  hear  someone  calling  up  the  stairs,  a  lady  is  calling  two  names,
Colin  is  one  and  Neil  is  the  other,  the  other  boy  is  about  five  years  old  and
is  darker  than  the  other.  The  eldest,  Colin,  is  going  downstairs  now,  he  is
gone  into  what  looks  like  a  dining-room,  the  lady  says,  "Where  is  Neil?"
"  Upstairs,  ma."  "Go  and  tell  him  to  come  down  at  once."  The  little  fair-
haired  boy  had  put  the  link  down  ;  but  when  he  heard  his  brother  coming
up,  he  picked  it  up  again.  Colin  says — "Neil,  you  are  to  come  down  at
once."  "I  won't,"  says  Neil.  "You're  a  goose,"  replies  Colin,  and  he  turned
and  went  down  without  Neil.  What  a  young  monkey  !  now  he  has  gone
into  the  nursery  and  put  the  link  into  a  large  toy  elephant,  he  put  it  through
a  hole  in  front,  which  is  broken.  He  has  gone  downstairs  now,  I  suppose  he
thinks  it  is  safe  there.

"  '  Now  that  gentleman  has  come  into  the  room  again  and  he  wants  that
link  ;  he  is  looking  all  about  for  it,  he  thinks  it  might  be  knocked  down  :
the  lady  is  there  now  too,  and  they  are  both  looking  for  it.  The  lady  says —
"  Are  you  sure  you  put  it  there  V The  gentleman  says,  "  Yes."

"  '  Now  it  seems  like  next  day,  the  servant  is  turning  the  carpet  up  and
looking  all  about  for  it ;  but  can't  find  it.

' '  '  The  gentleman  is  asking  that  young  Turk  if  he  has  seen  it,  he  knows
that  he  is  fond  of  pretty  things.  The  little  boy  says,  "  No."  He  seems  to
think  it  is  fine  fun  to  serve  his  father  like  that.

"  '  Now  it  seems  to  be  another  day  and  the  little  boy  is  in  the  nursery
again,  he  has  taken  the  link  out  of  the  elephant,  now  he  has  dropped  it  into
that  drawer,  that  is  all  I  have  to  tell  you  about  it,  I  told  you  the  rest
before.'"

"July  15th,  1886.

"Since  writing  the  above  pages  I  have  handed  them  to  Dr.  Campbell
for  perusal,  so  that  he  might  check  the  account  and  ratify  it  or  otherwise,
and  after  going  carefully  through  it  he  has  returned  it  to  me,  accompanied
by  a  complete  ratification  in  writing,  which  I  herewith  enclose.

"  A.  W.  Dobbie."

Memo,  by  Dr.  Campbell.

"Adelaide,  July  9th,  1886.
"At  the  point  (A)  the  seance  was  discontinued  till  the  next  sitting,  when
I  was  absent.  The  conversation  reported  as  passing  between  the  children  is
correct.  The  description  of  the  room  is  accurate  in  every  point.  The
portrait  is  that  of  the  late  Rev.  James  Way.  The  description  of  the  children
and  their  names  are  true.  The  fact  that  the  link  was  discovered  in  the
■drawer,  in  the  interval  between  one  sitting  and  the  final  one,  and  that  the


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


07


link  was  left  there,  pending  the  discovery  of  it  by  the  clairvoyant,  is  also
correct,  as  this  was  my  suggestion  to  Mrs.  Campbell  when  she  showed  it  to
me  in  the  corner  of  the  drawer.  In  fact,  every  circumstance  reported  is
absolutely  correct.  I  know,  further,  that  neither  of  the  clairvoyants  has
ever  been  inside  of  my  door.  My  children  are  utterly  unknown  to  them,
either  in  appearance  or  by  name.  I  may  say  also  that  they  had  no  know-
ledge of  my  intention  to  place  the  link  in  their  possession,  or  even  of  my
presence  at  the  seance,  as  they  were  both  on  each  occasion  in  the  mesmeric
sleep  when  I  arrived. — Aulas  Campbell."

In  a  later  letter,  dated  December  16th,  1887,  Dr.  Campbell  writes  : —
"Dear  Me.  Dobbie,  —  Your  London  correspondent  asks  if  I  had  any
knowledge  of  the  conversation  that  the  clairvoyant  stated  had  passed
between  the  children.  I  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  this  conversation,
nor  the  circumstances  attending  it,  until  she  repeated  it.  It  was  subsequently
confirmed  to  me  in  part  by  Mrs.  Campbell,  such  part  as  she  herself  is
reported  to  have  taken  in  the  tableau.

"With  respect  to  the  large  toy  elephant,  I  certainly  knew  of  its
existence,  but  was  not  thinking  of  it  at  the  time  the  clairvoyant  was  speak-
ing. I  did  not  know  even  by  suspicion  that  the  elephant  was  so  mutilated
as  to  have  a  large  opening  in  its  chest,  and  on  coming  home  had  to
examine  the  toy  to  see  whether  the  statement  was  correct.  I  need  hardly
say  that  it  was  absolutely  correct.-— I  am,  yours  sincerely,

"Allan  Campbell."

Mr.  Dobbie  tells  us  that  "neither  he  nor  his  clairvoyants  had  any
opportunity,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  knowing  any  of  the  particulars
brought  out  by  the  clairvoyant."  He  afterwards  saw  the  room  described,
and  says  "  the  description  is  simply  perfect  in  every  particular."

There  are  several  noteworthy  points  about  this  rather  complicated
case.  In  the  first  place  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  greater  part  of  the
information  given  by  the  clairvoyants  might  have  been  obtained  by
thought-transference  from  the  mind  of  Dr.  Campbell,  who  was  present
most  of  the  time.  It  would  then,  at  any  rate,  be  a  very  remarkable
and  interesting  case  of  thought-transference,  but  so  far  it  would  not  be
clairvoyance  as  we  have  defined  it.  Further,  a  large  proportion  of  the
statements  made — all  about  the  little  boy  taking,  hiding,  and  restoring
the  sleeve  link — are  unverifiable.  But  there  is  one  important  point
unknown  to  Dr.  Campbell  (so  far  as  his  conscious  memory,  at  least,  was
concerned)  and  afterwards  proved  true,  and  that  is  the  existence  of  the
hole  in  the  front  of  the  toy  elephant.  The  introduction  of  this  peculiar
fact — which  if  learnt  by  mind-reading  must,  it  would  seem,  have  been
learnt  from  the  child,  or  some  other  person  quite  unknown  to  the  per-
cipient— is  so  remarkable  that  it  makes  it  seem  more  probable  than
not  that  the  hiding  of  the  sleeve  link  there  was  also  a  fact.  If  so,  it  is
greatly  to  be  regretted  in  the  interests  of  science  that  the  child  ever
took  it  out  again  ! I  attach  less  importance,  as  evidence  of  clairvoy-


68


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwicle.


ance,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  conversation  of  the  children  than  to  that
of  the  hole  in  the  toy  elephant,  because  it  is  more  the  kind  of  thing
that  might  be  guessed.

Another  noticeable  point  in  this  case  is  that  so  far  as  the  clair-
voyants' remarks  relate  to  the  actions  of  those  concerned — the  children,
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Campbell,  the  servant — the  descriptions  are  not  of  the
present  but  of  the  past.  A  knowledge  of  past  actions  was  similarly
shown  by  "Jane  "  when  she  said  that  Dr.  F.'s  mother  had  been  putting
stockings  away  in  a  drawer  (see  p.  58),  and  we  shall  meet  with  it  again
in  the  case  to  be  next  given.  This  clairvoyant  knowledge  of  the  past
seems  to  me,  if  true,  to  be  a  fact  of  great  importance,  and  to  afford  a.
strong  argument  against  any  kind  of  direct  perception  by  the  clair-
voyant.

In  the  case  just  discussed  the  clairvoyant  seems  cognisant  of  the-
surroundings  of  persons  with  whom  she  is  herself  entirely  unacquainted,
but  who  were  known  to  someone  present  with  her  and  possibly  en
rapport  with  her.  The  next  case  takes  us  a  step  further,  for  the  people
whose  surroundings  were  seen  were  absolutely  unknown  to  all  present.
Unfortunately,  the  case  is  less  well  evidenced  than  the  last,  because  Mr.
Dpbbie,  contrary  to  his  usual  practice,  omitted  to  make  notes  at  the-
time. He  says  : —

(M.  11.)  "  I  considered  that  it  would  be  so  very  improbable  that  my
clairvoyant  would  be  able  to  do  anything  with  so  little  clue,  that  I  did  not
think  it  worth  while  writing  a  single  note,  in  fact,  I  should  not  have  wasted
time  over  the  experiment  but  for  fear  of  being  thought  disobliging."

The  account  we  print  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  Dobbie  in  a  letter  contain-
ing other  narratives  as  well,  and  which  was  begun  in  January  and  finished
in  March,  1886.  The  part  relating  to  this  incident  is  dated  March  7th,  and
it  appears  from  Mr.  Dobbie's  notebook  that  the  incident  itself  occurred  early
in  January,  188G.

"One  evening,  whilst  I  was  busy  with  several  of  my  clairvoyants,  Mr.
Adamson,  J. P.  (one  of  the  leading  citizens  of  Adelaide),  called,  in  company
with  his  daughter,  and  handing  me  two  or  three  trinkets  which  had  been
susj »ended  to  her  watch-chain,  simply  remarked,  'We  have  lost  something.
Will  you  kindly  see  if  your  clairvoyant  can  help  us  in  the  matter?'

"  My  clairvoyants  all  being  asleep,  I  quietly  placed  the  trinkets  in  the
hand  of  the  one  called  Miss  E.  Dixon,  without  remark.  In  a  moment  or
two  she  proceeded  to  give  an  accurate  description  of  the  young  lady  who
owned  the  trinkets.  I  then  said,  '  Never  mind  the  young  lady,  something  is
lost  ;  try  and  find  it. '

' '  In  a  few  moments  she  commenced  to  describe  a  gold  pencil-case  which
•she  saw  '  lying  on  the  road  in  one  of  the  suburbs,  not  in  the  city,  it  is  not
there  now,  it  is  in  a  comfortable-looking  one-storey  house,  with  a  garden
.and  iron  railings  in  front  and  a  two-storey  building  opposite. ' She  then


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


60-


described  the  gentleman  who  had  possession  of  the  pencil-case,  whom  she  saw
with  his  wife,  and  also  quoted  a  remark  he  made,  '  We  will  lay  it  aside  and
see  if  anyone  claims  it, '  and  stated  that  it  was  placed  '  in  a  small  box. '  My
clairvoyant  seemed  unable  to  give  me  the  locality  of  this  gentleman  and  his
house  ;  howrever,  in  reply  to  an  advertisement  next  day  or  day  after,  a
gentleman  answering  the  description  given  by  my  clairvoyant  brought  the
lost  pencil-case  to  Mr.  Adamson,  who,  naturally  enough,  was  so  astounded
At  the  correct  description  of  a  person  none  of  us  had  ever  seen  or  known,  that
he  took  the  tram  and  visited  the  neighbourhood  and  house  in  which  the
gentleman  resided,  and  to  his  astonishment  he  found  that  the  description
was  exact,  in  fact  it  was  the  only  house  in  the  neighbourhood  having  iron
railings,  also  that  there  actually  was  a  two-storey  house  opposite,  which  was
also  the  only  one  in  the  neighbourhood.  Mr.  Adamson,  on  questioning  the
gentleman,  found  that  the  pencil-case  was  found  on  the  road  as  described  ;
also  that  it  had  been  placed  in  the  small  box  and  the  remark  made  re  wait-
ing to  '  see  if  it  woidd  be  claimed  '  by  the  gentleman.

"To  still  further  test  the  genuineness  of  the  clairvoyance,  I  arranged
(quite  unknown  to  my  clairvoyant,  of  course)  to  have  the  said  gentleman
present  with  about  twelve  other  persons, who  all  entered  the  room  after  I  had
put  my  clairvoyant  to  sleep,  and,  on  placing  the  trinkets  and  pencil-case  in  her
hands  again,  she  immediately  found  herself  at  the  same  house  again  and  saw
the  same  gentleman.  I  then  instructed  her  to  remember  (my  subjects
never  remember  anything  when  they  wake  up  unless  I  instruct  them  to  do
so)  the  features  of  this  gentleman,  so  that  if  ever  she  should  meet  him  in
the  future  she  would  recognise  him.  I  then  woke  her  up,  and  to  the
astonishment  and  delight  of  all  present  she  at  once  voluntarily  recognised
the  gentleman  as  the  one  she  had  seen  when  mesmerised.  Of  course,  you
will  see  at  once  that  the  fact  of  the  clairvoyant  recognising  the  gentleman
is  not  of  itself  of  much  scientific  value,  because  the  fact  that  I  by  this  time
knew  the  features  of  the  gentleman  makes  it  possible  to  bring  that  part
of  the  experiment  under  the  category  of  thought-transference,  but  taken
in  conjunction  with  the  previous  parts,  I  think  the  idea  of  thought-
transference  may  be  discarded.

"It  is  only  fair  to  mention  that  Mr.  Adamson,  J. P.,  is  universally
acknowledged  by  his  very  large  circle  of  acquaintances  to  be  one  of  the  most
common-sense  and  shrewdest  men  in  South  Australia,  and  occupies  leading
positions  on  many  of  the  public  committees  and  boards  of  our  city.

"A.  W.  Dobbie."

The  following  statement,  Mr.  Dobbie  tells  us,  was  handed  to  him  by  Mr.
Adamson  on  March  8th,  1886 : —

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  looked  through  that  portion  of  your  letter  on  pages
7  and  8,  and  agree  with  most  of  what  is  there.  You  had  best,  however,
leave  out  '  one  of  the  leading  citizens, '  &c.  The  following  is  my  version  of
the  affair  : —

4 '  Passing  your  house  one  evening,  in  company  with  a  daughter,  who  had
lost  a  trinket  of!  her  watch-chain  a  week  or  so  previous,  and  who  lamented
its  loss,  not  on  account  of  intrinsic  value,  but  as  an  old  keepsake,  I  said  to
her  :  '  Come  in  and  see  if  Mr.  Dobbie  can  find  it  for  you. ' We  told  you  our


70


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwiclc.


trouble,  that  something  was  lost  off  a  watch-chain,  and  asked  your  assistance
in  its  recovery,  promising  to  bring  you  next  evening  the  remaining  trinkets,
consisting  of  three  lockets.  You  said  it  was  a  difficult  case,  but  you  would
try.

"  You  had  three  clairvoyants  asleep  when  we  entered  your  room  ;
shortly  afterwards  you  placed  the  trinkets  in  the  hand  of  one  of  them,  a
female.  Soon  after  which  she  began  a  fair  description  of  my  daughter  ;
this  you  stopped,  informing  her  that  something  was  lost  which  we  wanted
to  find.  She  was  silent  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  then  said  :  '  I  think  I
see  it  now.  It  was  in  the  dust,  and  a  man  has  found  it.'  The  question  was
put  :  '  What  is  it  ? '  She  answered  :  '  A  ring  ;  there  is  something  on  it  ;  it
is  not  a  key,  oh  !  it's  a  pencil-case  ;  it's  bright  and  shining. '  She  was  then
asked  to  follow  the  man  home.  This  caused  a  long  silence.  At  length  she
said  :  '  I  am  there  now  ;  he  is  showing  it  to  a  woman.  I  think  it  is  his  wife.
He  is  putting  it  in  a  box,  and  saying,  ' '  We  will  leave  it  there  and  see  what
comes  of  it."  '  She  then  said  more  than  once,  'They  would  give  it  up  if  they
knew  who  it  belonged  to,  they  do  not  want  to  keep  it ;  oh,  I  wish  I  could
take  it  away,  they  seem  honest  people.'  She  then,  in  answer  to  questions
put,  described  the  house  in  which  the  people  lived,  and  the  neighbourhood
exactly,  but  could  not  give  the  locality,  as  she  had  never  been  there
before — described  the  house  as  old  and  comfortable,  like  within  a  garden,
a  wrought-iron  railing  in  front ;  no  church  could  be  seen  from  the  gate,  but
a  large  two-storey  building  opposite.  She  described  the  man  accurately
who  had  the  pencil-case,  and  advised  advertising  for  its  recovery,  as  she
was  sure  of  its  return  if  it  was  known  who  was  the  owner.

' '  I  may  here  say  that  this  had  already  been  done,  and  that  next  day,
after  the  interview,  the  article  was  returned  to  my  son  at  his  office  in  town  ;
the  man  who  brought  it  left  his  address,  and  I  have  since  visited  his  house
and  interviewed  him,  and  he  was  in  no  small  degree  astonished  when  he
found  that  we  had  known  so  much  about  him  and  his  proceedings.  I  may
state  that  I  was  almost  a  total  unbeliever  in  clairvoyance  until  the  above
incident,  but  am  now  compelled  to  change  my  ojjinion,  and  acknowledge  that
there  is  something  in  it  I  cannot  understand.

' '  Since  the  above  occasion  you  have  in  my  presence  traced  the  matter
further  by  the  clairvoyant  following  the  finder  to  Adelaide,  and  seeing  him
go  upstairs  to  my  son's  office  and  there  give  up  the  pencil-case.  Of  this,  as  of
all  former  knowledge  of  the  article  in  question,  she  must  have  been  in  total
ignorance.  "A.  Adamson."

The  advertisement  about  the  lost  trinket  in  this  case  appears  to  have
been  issued  before  the  clairvoyant's  statements  were  made,  and  it  is
therefore  conceivable  that  it  may  have  been  consciously  or  unconsciously
seen  by  her ;  but  this  could  not  have  helped  her,  in  any  normal  way,
to  a  knowledge  of  the  tinder  and  his  actions  and  surroundings,  which,
though  not  very  detailed  as  reported  to  us,  seems  to  have  been  too  much
so  to  have  been  the  result  of  chance.

The  percipients  in  this  case  and  the  last  are  two  young  ladies,  sisters,
who  have  a  large  school  for  young  children. They  have  very  frequently


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


71


assisted  Mr.  Dobbie  in  his  experiments,  but  have  no  pecuniary  interest
in  them  whatever.  It  may  be  of  interest  to  know  Mr.  Dobbie's  method
of  operating. He  writes  : —

' '  My  usual  method  of  operating  is  to  put  them  to  sleep  by  a  few  passes,
and  then  quietly  to  wait  until  they  tell  me  they  are  ready.  I  then  silently  slip
the  article  in  question  into  their  hands,  and  in  from  two  to  five  minutes  they
begin  to  speak  in  a  perfectly  natural  way,  and  I  write  down  what  they  say.
In  most  cases  when  the  specimen  is  the  hair  of  a  person  who  is  ill,  the
Misses  Dixon  will  simply  hold  the  hair  in  their  hands  for  an  interval  of  from
five  to  fifteen  minutes,  and  then  sit  up  to  the  table,  open,  their  eyes  (though
still  asleep)  and  write  out  a  diagnosis  of  the  case  and  prescribe  remedies.
In  most  cases  they  correctly  describe  the  ailments,  although  in  some  cases
(even  when  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  circumstances)  they  are  entirely  wrong.
Some  of  the  cures  have  been  very  remarkable  ;  but  I  am  not  prepared  to
positively  assert  whether  the  cures  were  effected  by  the  remedies,  or  were  the
result  of  faith,  or,  in  other  words,  the  action  of  the  mind  on  the  body. "

Mr.  Dobbie  obtained  many  instances  of  apparent  clairvoyance
with  the  Misses  Dixon,  and  with  a  Mr.  Williams — a  young  man  of  24.
But,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  the  result  was  unverifiable  or  might  be
due  to  thought-transference  from  those  present.  They  would  describe,
often  with  great  vividness  and  power  of  imagination,  some  scenes
supposed  to  be  connected  with  the  past  history  of  an  object  placed  in
their  hands,  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  the  historical  or  other  know-
ledge displayed  transcended  what  the  percipient  might  have  possessed
in  his  normal  state.  For  instance,  on  one  occasion  a  fragment  of  con-
glomerated or  petrified  bones,  said  to  be  the  bones  of  Christian
martyrs  slaughtered  by  wild  beasts  at  the  Coliseum  in  Rome,  was
placed  in  Mr.  Williams'  hand  and  produced  a  vivid  description  of  a
fight  between  men  and  beasts  in  an  amphitheatre.  In  this  case  there
appears  to  have  been  at  least  thought-transference,  for  no  one  in  the
room,  except  Mr.  Adamson,  who  brought  the  fragment,  knew  normally
what  it  was.  At  the  same  time,  if  we  suppose  the  percipient  to  have
got  from  Mr.  Adamson's  mind  the  ideas  of  Rome  and  Christian
martyrs,  there  may  have  been  material  in  his  own  mind  for  the
development  of  these  ideas  into  the  scene  at  the  Coliseum.  It  should
be  stated  as  regards  thought-transference,  and  as  making  rather  against
its  occurrence  with  these  percipients,  that  Mr.  Dobbie  says  : —

' '  I  have  scores  of  times  tried  my  level  best  to  cause  clairvoyants  to  see
pictures  and  visions  by  conjuring  up  in  my  own  mind  the  most  vivid  pictures
imaginable,  but  up  to  the  present  moment  I  have  never  succeeded  in  making
my  clairvoyants  think  one  thought  or  say  or  see  anything  I  have  tried  to
make  them  see  in  that  way."

It  is  further  worth  observing  that  like  all  clairvoyants,  so  far  as
I  know,  Mr.  Dobbie's  are  not  to  be  depended  on  to  give  correct  informa-
tion. He  remarks  : — ■


72


Mrs.  H.  Siclgvjick.


"  The  part  which  puzzles  me  most  is  the  fact  that  very  often  they  are
entirely  wrong,  even  when  I  am  fully  a  ware  of  the  nature  or  history  of  the
specimen  I  place  in  their  hands,  also  when  the  visitors  know."

And  again  : —

"  I  have  little  confidence  in  the  abilities  of  my  clairvoyants  to  track  the
Whitechapel  murderer.  I  tried  them  once  in  tracing  a  prominent  man  who
suddenly  disappeared  from  Adelaide  two  or  three  years  ago,  and  was  found
dead  a  fortnight  afterwards.  My  clairvoyants  insisted  that  the  man  was
alive  and  wandering  about  south  of  Adelaide,  whereas  he  must  have  been
dead  all  the  time,  and  was  found  north  of  Adelaide."

The  account  to  be  next  given  is  sent  by  A.  S.  Wiltse,  M.D.,  of
Skiddy,  Kansas,  U.S.A.,  an  Honorary  Associate  of  the  American
Branch  of  the  S.P.R.  Dr.  Wiltse's  own  comments  on  his  experiments
bring  out  the  noteworthy  points  so  fully,  that  no  further  remark  is,  I
think,  called  for  from  me.

(M.  21.)  Some  Experiments  in  Hypnotism.
"  Some  time  in  the  summer  of  1882  I  chanced  to  the  good  fortune  of
finding  an  excellent  subject  for  hypnotism  in  the  person  of  Fannie  G.,  aged
about  fifteen  years,  and  as  the  girl  was  serving  us  in  the  capacity  of  general
house  servant,  I  was  enabled  to  carry  on  my  experiments  for  several  weeks
together.

' '  I  regret  that,  having  then  no  idea  of  publishing  the  results  of  my
experiments,  I  took  no  notes  ;  but  as  I  seldom  take  notes  anyway,  and
never  keep  a  diary,  purposely  training  my  mind  to  retentiveness,  I  am  sure
I  can  recite  the  main  points  ;  and  as  the  experiments  were  witnessed  by  many
of  my  neighbours  I  think  some  of  my  statements  can  be  verified  by  the
testimony  of  some  of  these  eye-witnesses.

"I  had  placed  the  subject  under  the  full  hypnotic  trance  several  times
before  she  began  to  develop  clairvoyant  phenomena.

"In  a  former  paper  I  have  shown  under  what  thorough  test  conditions  I
worked,1  suffice  it  here  to  say  that  no  possible  gap  for  deception  was  left
open.

"  The  clairvoyant  powers  of  my  subject  were  first  brought  to  notice  by
some  spectator  asking  me  to  see  if  she  could  not  see  what  was  transjfiring  in
the  next  room.  The  experiment  was  tried,  and  succeeded  partially,  but
after  being  persisted  in  for  a  few  days,  she  developed  a  power  of  vision
(clairvoyant),  which  seemed  practically  to  have  no  limit.

n-  The  paper  referred  to  is  one  that  was  read  before  the  Owosso  Academy  of
Medicine,  in  1880,  and  of  which  a  copy  has  been  made  for  us  by  Dr.  Wiltse's  sister.
In  this  paper  Dr.  Wiltse  describes  the  tests  he  applied  to  make  sure  that  the  hypnotic
trance,  which  could  lie  induced  in  from  five  to  twenty  minutes,  was  genuine.  He  also
gives  accounts  of  Experiments  II.,  III.,  IV.,  and  V.  in  the  text,  which  agree  with
those  here  given.

The  following  passage  of  the  earlier  paper,  though  it  has  no  direct  bearing  on  the
subject  of  clairvoyance,  is  worth  quoting,  especially  as  the  transference  of  sensations
is  referred  to  in  the  corroborative  testimony  appended  to  Dr.  Wiltse's  account.

"After  several  sittings  I  discovered  that  although  the  girl  was  insensible  to  painful


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


73


Experiment  I.

' '  The  company  being  seated  along  the  two  ends  and  one  side  of  the  room,
closely  together,  like  children  at  a  spelling  match,  the  subject  was  thoroughly
hyjjnotised,  then  aroused  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  talk,  although  not  to  open
her  eyes,  and  a  watch  was  passed  back  and  forth,  secretly,  among  the  row  of
persons,  always  behind  their  backs.  I  was  often  myself  deceived  as  to
who  held  the  watch,  but  Fannie  invariably  indicated,  either  by  name  or
pointing  to,  the  person  who  held  the  watch.  Parties  would  frequently  change
hands  with  the  article  at  the  Very  instant  the  holder  was  named,  but  she
always  indicated  such  change  of  hands.

' '  She  could  not,  however,  tell  the  hour  indicated  upon  the  dial,  even
when  the  watch  was  held  by  a  person  in  front  of  her.  (Mrs.  Wiltse  tells
me  the  girl  could  not  tell  the  time  of  day  by  the  clock  when  in  normal
condition,  as  she  had  never  learned.)"

Experiment  II.

"  Miss  Florence  F.,  now  Mrs.  R.,  a  neighbour,  was  invited  to  attend  one
evening  with  tests  which  she  was  to  arrange  during  the  day.  She  came  and
told  the  subject  to  go  to  her  kitchen  and  tell  her  what  she  saw.  It  was  about
twenty  rods  to  Miss  F.'s  kitchen.  Subject  was  led  to  suppose  she  had  gone
to  the  kitchen,  and  being  asked  what  she  saw,  readily  answered  :  '  The  table
sits  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  upon  it  is  a  box  covered  with  a  cloth.'
'  What  is  in  the  box,  Fannie?'  I  asked.  '  Oh,  I  daren't  look  in  the  box  !  Miss
Florence  might  be  mad. '  '  Miss  Florence  is  willing  you  should  look  ;  raise
the  cloth,  Fannie,  and  tell  me  what  is  there.'  She  immediately  answered,
'  There  are  seven  loaves  of  bread  and  sixteen  biscuits  in  it. '  (Correct.)

"I  set  this  down  as  telepathy  because  Miss  Florence  F.  was  in  the
room,  and  undoubtedly  the  facts  were  prominently  in  her  mind,  having  been
purposely  so  arranged  by  her  for  a  test  ;  but  what  follows  is  not  so  plainly
telepathy.

"Miss  Florence  asked  Fannie  to  tell  her  what  was  in  her  stable.  She
answered,  '  Two  black  horses,  one  grey  horse,  and  one  red  horse'  (meaning  a
bay  horse).  Miss  Florence  :  '  That  is  wrong,  Fannie  ;  there  are  oidy  my
black  horses  in  the  stable. '  Ten  or  fifteen  minutes  later,  a  brother  of  Miss
Florence  came  to  the  house  and  told  Miss  Florence  that  there  were  travellers
at  the  house,  and  upon  inquiry  we  learned  that  the  grey  and  '  red  '  horse
belonged  to  them,  and  that  they  had  been  in  the  stable  half  an  hour  when
Fannie's  clairvoyant  eye  scanned  it.

' '  Of  course  we  recognise  the  fact  that  there  may  be  set  up  the  theory  that
Fannie  gleaned  her  knowledge  from  the  minds  of  some  of  the  parties  at  the

impressions,  as  far  as  her  own  person  was  concerned,  she  was  quite  sensitive  to  such
impressions  in  my  own  body.  Thus,  when  standing  behind  her  at  a  distance  of  several
feet,  with  my  hands  behind  me,  if  a  pin  were  thrust  into  my  right  hand,  her  right
hand  moved  and  attempted  to  evade  the  pin  thrust  ;  if  I  tasted,  though  never  so  slyly,
any  pleasant  substance,  no  sooner  was  the  sense  of  taste  fully  established  in  my  own
mouth  than  she  began  smacking  her  lips  as  if  she  tasted  something  agreeable.  If,  on
the  contrary,  I  tasted  something  bitter  or  nauseous,  she  made  wry  faces  and  feeble
efforts  to  eject  it.  Some  things  pleasant  to  me  seemed  unpleasant  to  her  :  for  instance,
I  must  refrain  from  smoking  while  she  was  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  as  it  nau-
seated her,  although  the  smoking  of  others  in  the  room  had  no  effect  upon  her.''


74


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwich


residence  of  Miss  Florence,  or  that  by  telepathic  sympathy  with  her  brother
or  father  Miss  Florence  was  unconsciously  aware  of  the  facts,  and  Fannie
gathered  her  information  from  that  unconscious  source  ;  but  in  attempting  to
establish  a  vera  causa  we  should  be  very  particular  to  bridge  our  way  to  it
with  theories  which  most  strongly  appeal  to  reason  and  sound  judgment,  as
probably  containing  fact,  and  the  latter  of  these  theories  at  least  will  seem
very  '  far  fetched  '  indeed. "

Experiment  III.

"  I  told  the  subject  to  go  with  me  to  Chattanooga  (ninety-eight  miles
distant  ;  a  city  she  had  never  visited.  Indeed  I  am  quite  positive  she  had
never  been  in  any  city).

"  '  Now  we  are  there,'  I  said  ;  '  tell  me  how  you  like  my  brother's  house.'
'  The  house  is  nice,'  she  said,  '  but  the  side-walk  is  awful  narrow.'  Which
peculiarity  was  in  my  own  mind  at  the  instant.  I  then  asked  her  to  go  with
me  into  the  house,  and  pretending  we  had  gone  in,  asked  her  to  tell  me  what
she  saw.  She  immediately  gave  an  accurate  description  of  the  furniture  of
the  sitting-room,  apparently  beginning  at  one  corner  and  passing  in  order
around  the  room,  but  coming  to  the  piano,  an  instrument  she  had  never  seen,
she  said,  '  There  is  something  funny,  what  is  it  1 '  and  described  it  very  well,
speaking  of  the  keys  as  pieces  of  white  bone  with  short  pieces  of  black  wood
(the  black  keys)  between  them.

"  Query  :  If  she  read  all  this  from  my  mind,  why  could  she  not  read  the
name,  or  at  any  rate  the  nature  of  the  piano  ?  They  were  there  in  more
legible  form,  it  seems  to  me,  than  the  rest  of  the  matter,  although,  as  Mr.
Hodgson  suggests, —  as  I  believe  correctly  solving  the  mystery, — she  saw
more  in  picture  form  than  otherwise."

Experiment  TV.

"Mrs.  S.  J.  W.,  whose  husband  was  the  manager  of  a  variety  theatre  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  some  hundreds  of  miles  distant,  asked  for  information  in
regard  to  him.  Proceeded  in  the  usual  manner,  but  got  no  results  except
useless  exclamations  of  surprise  about  '  tall  buildings, '  'lots  of  people,'  &c.
Finally  Mrs.  S.  J.  W. ,  who  is  a  believer  in  all  sorts  of  incantations,  witch-
craft, Ac,  took  a  ring  from  her  purse  which  she  said  she  had  taken  from  her
husband's  finger,  and  dropping  it  in  Fannie's  palm  said  :  '  May  be  that  will
put  you  on  the  trail  !  '

' '  By  what  I  think  may  firstly  be  set  down  as  a  curious  coincidence,
Fannie  began,  in  a  very  few  moments  afterwards,  to  describe  the  lady's
husband  (whom  she  had  never  seen,  but  I  had),  giving  an  excellent  descrip-
tion of  him,  and  said,  '  There  are  lots  of  people  coming,  and  he  is  giving
them  some  sheets  of  yellow  paper  with  reading  on  them,  but  he  has  little
cards  that  they  have  to  pay  him  for.'  To  all  present  it  seemed  plain  that  the
yellow  papers  were  the  programmes,  the  cards  the  tickets  ;  but  as  to
Fannie's  knowledge  of  such  things  during  her  normal  state,  I  doubt  if  she
knew  the  meaning  of  the  word  theatre.

"Fannie  now  went  on  to  describe  a  woman  who  she  said  was  talking
and  laughing  with  the  man,  and  particularly  described  a  ring  upon  her  finger,


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


75


when  Mrs.  S.  J.  W.  flew  into  a  tempest  of  rage,  naming  the  woman,  and  de-
claring that  the  ring  was  one  she  (Mrs.  S.  J,  W.)  had  given  her  husband.  It
may  be  proper  to  state  that  the  pair  had  separated.  As  to  the  truth  or  falsity
of  the  whole,  I  can  only  say  that  the  lady  wept  and  raved  by  turns,  and
Anally  gave  Fannie  a  liberal  gift  for  the  information.

"  The  results  of  this  experiment  are  so  doubtful,  however,  and  seem  to
encroach  so  far  upon  the  domain  of  the  gipsy  fortune-teller  that  I  put
little  confidence  in  it,  yet  it  ought  not  to  be  left  entirely  out,  as  the
seeming  effect  of  the  ring  placed  in  Fannie's  hand,  which  I  have  set  down  as
coincidence,  presents  a  point  which  the  seeker  after  fact  should  not  neglect
to  look  to  in  a  course  of  experiments.

"  The  known  is  but  a  narrow  strait,
The  possible  a  boundless  sea  ;
And  that  may  not  be  passing  strange
That  seems  impossible  to  me.

"  Who  shall  say,  for  sure,  but  what  the  thing  I,  in  ignorance  and  perhaps
pride,  have  set  down  as  superstition  and  coincidence,  may  be  the  footing  pre-
sented us  upon  some  hidden  but  none  the  less  natural  law  1

"  There  is  no  supernatural

In  highest  Heaven  nor  lowest  earth  :
If  Lazarus  rose,  'twas  by  some  law

As  fixed  as  that  which  gave  him  birth."

Experiment  V.

"  This  night  more  people  had  congregated  than  could  get  into  the  house.
The  building  had  but  three  rooms,  the  upright  being  divided  by  a  partition
near  the  centre.  The  kitchen  was  a  '  lean-to  '  running  the  whole  length  of
the  upright.

"  Mr.  William  Howard  had  supped  with  us,  but  Fannie  had  not  learned
his  name.  The  people  outside  lifted  Mr.  Howard  up  quietly  and  set  him
into  the  kitchen  through  the  window.  The  door  between  the  kitchen  and
the  room  we  occupied  was  closed,  so  that  the  kitchen  was  obscurely  dark.
No  one  inside  knew  of  the  movement  outside,  which  was  done  so  quietly  that
we  heard  no  noise.  Word  was  sent  in  that  Fannie  should  examine  the
kitchen.  Of  course  I  knew  by  this  that  some  test  had  been  arranged  there,
but  of  what  it  consisted  I  had  no  idea.  The  following  dialogue  then  occurred.
"Q.  :  'Fannie,  will  you  go  into  the  kitchen  and  tell  me  if  everything
is  all  right  there  ?  Will  you  1 '  (Shaking  her  gently. )  Fannie  :  '  Yes,  sir. '  Q. :
'  Well,  what  do  you  see  ?  Is  everything  all  right  there  ? '  Fannie  :  '  There
is  a  man  there  !  '  Q.  :  '  Who  is  he  1 '  Fannie  :  '  I  don't  know  his  name  ;
he  is  the  man  who  took  supper  with  us  to-night.'  Q.  :  '  What  is  he  doing,
Fannie  % '  Fannie  :  '  Oh,  he  is  standing  with  his  ear  up  to  the  door  and  he
has  your  flute  in  his  hand  ;  there,  he  has  laid  it  down  and  is  looking  at  his
watch.  Oh,  what  a  pretty  gold  watch  ! '  This  was  just  what  my  friend  in
the  kitchen  was  doing,  although  none  of  us  who  were  in  the  room,  neither
any  of  the  parties  outside,  knew  what  he  was  actually  doing.  I  did  not  even
know  the  flute  was  there  ;  it  did  not  belong  there,  but  had  been  carelessly
placed,  and  my  friend  accidentally  laid  his  hand  upon  it  in  groping  his  way
through  the  dark  room,  and,  when  he  overheard  Fannie's  remark,  he  put


70


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


it  down  and  took  out  his  watch  to  test  her  ability  to  describe  his  move-
ments."

Experiment  VI.

"  Mr.  Howard,  the  same  mentioned  in  Experiment  V.,  lived  six  miles
from  me.  He  had  just  built  a  large  frame  house  ;  our  subject  had  never  seen
the  house,  although,  I  presume,  she  may  have  heard  it  talked  of.  Mr.  Howard
had  not  been  home  for  some  days,  and  asked  that  Fannie  should  go  there
find  see  if  all  were  well.  She  exclaimed  at  the  size  of  the  house,  but  railed
at  the  ugliness  of  the  front  fence,  saying  she  would  not  have  '  such  an  old
torn-down  '  fence  in  front  of  so  nice  a  house.  '  Yes,'  said  Howard,  laugh-
ing, '  my  wife  has  been  worrying  the  life  out  of  me  about  the  fence  and  the
front  steps.'  'Oh,'  interrupted  Fannie,  'the  steps  are  nice  and  new  !  '
'  She  is  off  there,'  said  Howard,  '  the  steps  are  worse  than  the  fence.'
'Don't  you  see,'  exclaimed  Fannie,  impatiently,  'how  new  and  nice  the
steps  are  ?  Humph  !'  (And  she  seemed  absolutely  disgusted,  judging  by  the
tone.) '  I  think  they  are  real  nice.'

"  Changing  the  subject,  •  Howard  asked  her  how  many  windows  were  in
his  house.  Almost  instantly  she  gave  a  number  (I  think  it  was  twenty-six).
Howard  thought  it  was  too  many,  but  upon  carefully  counting,  found  it
exact.

"  From  my  house  he  went  directly  home,  and,  to  his  great  surprise,  found
that  during  his  absence  his  wife  had  employed  a  carpenter  who  had  built  new
front  stej^s,  and  they  had  been  completed  a  day  or  two  before  Fannie  had
scanned  the  premises  for  him  with  her  invisible  telescope.

"  Mr.  Howard's  son,  a  youth,  had  gone  into  an  adjoining  county  and
was  not  expected  back  for  some  days.  Fannie  was  acquainted  with  the  young
man  (Andrew).  Mr.  Howard,  having  business  back  at  the  station,  was  with
us  again  the  next  night.  His  faith  in  our  '  oracle  '  had  assumed  larger  pro-
portions, and  he  suggested  a  visit  home  by  means  of  Fannie's  wonderful
faculty.  She  described  the  rooms  excellently,  even  to  a  bouquet  on  one  of
the  tables,  and  said  that  several  young  people  were  there.  Asked  who  they
were,  she  replied  that  she  did  not  know  any  of  them  except  Andrew.  '  But,'
I  said,  'Andrew  is  not  at  home."  Fannie  :  'Why,  don't  you  see  him?'
Q.  :  '  Sure,  Fannie  ? '  F.  :  '  Oh,  don't  I  know  Andrew  ?  Right  there,  he
is. '  Mr.  Howard  returned  home  the  next  morning,  where  he  found  that
Andrew  had  returned  late  the  day  before,  and  that  several  young  people  in  the
neighbourhood  had  passed  the  evening  with  him.  So  we  got  another  lesson
of  faith.

"The  next  experiment  presents  a  complete  chain  of  evidence,  so  that
nothing  is  left  isolated  to  set  down  as  probable  or  even  possible  coincidence ;
and  suggestion,  either  conscious  or  unconscious,  being  entirely  excluded,  I
think  I  may  boldly  lay  claim  to  my  experiments  establishing  clairvoyance  as
a  fact  in  the  realm  of  the  known  and  thoroughly  demonstrated.

"  Since  beginning  this  article,  I  concluded  it  would  not  be  just  to  trust
entirely  to  my  own  memory,  and  sent  back  to  Tennessee,  where  the  experi-
ments were  made,  for  evidence  of  eye-witnesses  to  the  experiments.  The
evidence  arrived  by  to-day's  post,  January  12th,  1891,  and  I  take  pleasure
in  attaching  it  to  the  article."


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


Experiment  VII.

' '  Mr.  Wm.  Howard  and  Mr.  N.  Parker  called  upon  me  early  one
morning  (stating  that  they  had  called  by  request  of  neighbours)  to  ask  me
to  hypnotise  Fannie  for  the  purpose  of  possibly  gaining  some  knowledge  of
the  whereabouts  of  the  body  of  Uncle  Julian  Scott,  who  had  ridden  into  the
Emerald  River  late  the  night  before  and  was  drowned.  We  were  on  the
street  during  the  conversation,  and  I  replied  that  as  here  was  an  opportunity
to  settle  the  question  of  Fannie's  clairvoyance  being  anything  beyond  mere
mind -reading,  we  would  not  tell  Fannie  what  she  was  to  be  questioned  about
until  after  she  was  hypnotised,  so  that  her  mind  might  not  be  at  all  biassed
by  any  pre-supposed  knowledge  of  the  matter.

'*  We  went  to  the  house,  but  Fannie  seemed  very  unwilling  to  be  ques-
tioned without  being  first  informed  of  the  nature  of  the  subject.  This  was
the  first  time  she  had  been  approached  in  quite  so  ceremonious  and  official
a  manner,  and  it  altogether  aroused  her  suspicions.  The  truth  was,  Fannie
had  a  sweetheart,  and  was  exceedingly  fearful  that  someone  might  pry  into
his  and  her  secrets,  as  she  had  a  belief  that  she  would  answer  any  question
that  should  be  asked  her  during  her  trance,  so  that  I  had  always  to  assure
her  upon  my  word  of  honour  that  no  questions  of  this  nature  should  be
asked  her.  But  the  unusual  event  of  two  leading  citizens  calling  purposely
to  have  her  'go  to  sleep'  and  then  be  questioned  upon  a  subject  of  which
she  might  not  be  informed  beforehand,  was  a  grain  too  much,  and  she  quietly
rebelled.  The  matter  was  compromised,  however,  by  my  reducing  the
matter  in  hand  to  writing,  letting  Mrs.  Wiltse  read  it  and  assure  her  it  was
nothing  objectionable,  put  it  into  a  sealed  envelope,  and  hold  for  her  until
she  should  wake,  Mrs.  Wiltse  mounting  guard  over  her  while  asleep,  to  look
out  for  her  interests.  Under  these  conditions  she  passed  readily  enough
into  the  hypnotic  trance.

' '  I  then  stated  the  case  to  her,  asking  her  to  go  with  us  to  the  river,
where  we  would  take  a  skiff  and  look  for  the  body.  '  Is  Uncle  Julian
drowned  ?  Poor  old  man  !  '  she  exclaimed.  She  expressed  her  willingness
to  go  with  us,  only  stipulating  that  Mrs.  Wiltse  should  accompany  us.  I
pretended  to  get  horses,  and  we  started  (in  her  mind).

' '  It  was  three  miles  to  the  river.  On  the  real  road  lived  a  Mrs.  Hall,  a
widow,  and  Fannie  called  out  suddenly,  '  There  is  Mrs,  Hall's  place  !  Let
us  have  her  go  with  us  !  '  '  All  right,  Fannie,  she  says  she  will  go  with  us,
and  here  we  are  already ! '  A  few  moments  of  that  peculiar  deep  sleep  to  sug-
gest the  passage  of  time,  and  I  rouse  Fanny  again  by  a  gentle  shake,  and  say,
'  Here  we  are,  and  here  is  the  boat  ;  now  I  will  paddle  slowly  and  you  look
carefully  into  the  water.  Now  what  do  you  see  1 '  She  immediately  began
to  describe  rocks,  logs,  snags,  bottom,  &c.  (Suggestion.  I  had  constantly
to  repeat  the  question,  '  What  do  you  see  ?  Do  you  see  anything  1  Can  you
see  the  bottom  ?"  &c,  or  she  would  shortly  be  snoring.)

"  After  a  little  she  said  suddenly,  as  if  somewhat  excited,  'There  is  some-
thing over  yonder  ahead  of  us  !  '  Q.  :  '  Which  way,  Fannie  ?'  F.  :  '  Right
hand,  way  down  yonder.  Paddle  nearer  to  it.'  Q.  :  '  All  right.  Here  we
go  !  Now,  what  is  it  I '  F.  :  '  I  see  now.  It  is  a  hat, '  Q.  :  '  Where  ? '
F.  :  '  Don't  you  see  there  in  that  drift  ? '  (This  is  according  to  Mrs.  Wiltse's
recollection  of  the  affair. My  own  is  that  it  was  in  a  bush.) Q.  :  '  Describe


78


Mrs.  H.  Sidgivick.


the  place,  Fannie,  so  we  can  get  it  as  we  come  back.'  F.  :  '  Don't  you  seel'
&c. And  she  described  certain  peculiarities  upon  the  bank.

"  Soon  after  this  she  announced  an  object  near  the  left  bank  of  the
stream  and  asked  to  be  paddled  over  there.  Then  asked  if  we  did  not  see  an
old  tree  body  under  the  water  near  the  bank.  Q.  :  '  Yes,  Fannie,  what
about  it  ? '  F.  :  '  Why,  don't  you  see  ?  There  is  something  under  it. '  Q.  :
'  What  is  it,  Fannie  V  F.  :  '  I  can't  see.  Paddle  closer. '  Q.  :  '  All  right  !
Here  we  are  ! '  (Silence  on  Fannie 's  part. )  Q.  :  'What  is  it,  Fannie?'
F.  :  '  Some  big  dark  thing  ;  I  can't  see  what.  There  is  a  saddle  there.  Don't
you  see  it  1 '  Q.  :  '  Yes,  Fannie,  what  else  ? '  F.  :  '  Something,  but  I  can't
see  it  good  ;  the  water  is  muddy.  The  saddle  is  there.  I  can  see  it,  and  one
stirrup  is  gone.'  Q.  :  'All  right.  Can  you  see  anything  on  the  bank  that
we  may  know  the  spot  as  we  come  back  1 '  F.  :  '  Why,  of  course.  Don't  you
see  how  the  sand  is  worked  up  in  that  low  spot  around  the  roots  of  that
tree?'

' '  I  see  that  my  evidence  upon  the  points  in  regard  to  the  saddle  with  its
missing  stirrup  and  the  hat  is  not  as  explicit  and  at  first  hand  as  I  could  wish,
nor  indeed  as  I  intend  to  have  it  yet,  for  I  can  never  rest  quite  satisfied  upon
those  two  points  until  I  have  the  direct  evidence  of  eye-witnesses.  Upon
these  subjects  we  must  have  settled  facts.  But  although  I  lived  in  that  neigh-
bourhood for  some  time  after  that,  and  heard  a  great  deal  of  talk  upon  the
subject,  I  never  heard  the  points  brought  in  question.  In  fact,  so  far  were
the  people  at  large  from  doubting  that  I  had  performed  something  out  of  the
usual  line  that  many  of  them  were  afraid  to  come  near  me,  for  fear  I  might
take  a  notion  to  throw  some  horrible  spell  upon  them,  which  notion  was
strengthened  by  the  fun-loting  propensities  of  several  of  my  neighbours,
who  delighted  in  scaring  these  superstitious  ones.  Still,  however  much  cir-
cumstantial evidence  we  may  have,  I  advise  that  these  two  points  be  held
suspect  until  direct  evidence  is  obtained.  But  common  rumour  had  it  that
Fannie  was  right  upon  these  points.  As  to  the  rest  of  the  points,  I  was
witness  myself  to  the  accuracy  of  her  statements,  which  I  will  proceed  to
conclude.

"  We  passed  on  down  the  river,  Fannie  professing  inability  to  see  any-
thing more  of  interest,  and  after  a  few  minutes  complaining  of  being  tired
and  cold  and  teasing  to  go  back,  said  there  was  no  use  to  go  any  further,  that
they  would  not  find  Uncle  Julian  now,  and  repeated  her  curious  assertion
about  the  uselessness  of  going  any  farther  by  saying  with  considerable  stress,
'  It  will  be  no  use  ever  to  look  below  right  here  ! '  Q.  :  '  All  right,  Fannie.  We
will  go  back,  but  first  show  us  some  mark  by  which  we  shall  remember  the
place,  can  you  ? '  '  Why,  don't  you  see  ? '  she  exclaimed  in  a  tone  of  seeming
disgust.  Q.  :  'What  is  it,  Fannie?'  F.  :  'Oh,  don't  you  see  that  tall  bridge  ?'
Q.  :  '  Where,  Fannie  ? '  F.  :  '  Why,  right  there  !  We  just  now  passed  under
it,  right  there  it  is.'  (Note.  Bridges  in  these  parts  were  very  scarce.  The
Emerald  River  had  at  that  time  but  one  bridge  crossing  it,  an  iron  railroad
1  >ridge,  which  I  feel  sure  Fannie  had  never  seen,  as  there  was  no  public  road
to  it,  it  crossing  the  river  at  a  wild,  isolated,  almost  inaccessible  spot  in  the
mountains,  several  miles  from  where  we  were  sitting. )  '  What  kind  of  a
bridge  is  it,  Fannie  ? '  I  asked,  purposely  for  a  test  of  the  reality  of  her
vision,  for  she  was  now  back  into  the  realm  of  my  own  knowledge,  and  I  was


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


79


somewhat  surprised  at  her  correctness.  F.  (hesitating  for  a  space  as  if  taking
a  careful  view,  then  in  a  tone  of  curious  surprise)  :  '  Why,  it  looks  as  if  it
must  be  made  of  iron  !  '  (Suggestion.)

"Here  ends  the  absolutely  indisputable,  independent  clairvoyance  of  our
subject  in  this  experiment,  but  what  follows,  I  believe,  throws  much  light
into  the  dark  corner  of  natural  inquiry  into  reasons  why  one  should  be  inde-
pendently clairvoyant  at  one  moment  and  only  so  telepathically  the  next,
although  my  theory  would  not  be  in  place  in  the  present  article.

' '  J ust  as  I  had  suggested  that  we  were  on  the  way  back,  Mr.  Howard
was  called  to  the  door,  where  a  neighbour  informed  him,  in  so  low  a  tone
that  none  inside  heard  it,  that  the  body  had  been  recovered  and  conveyed  to
the  residence  of  his  (Uncle  J ulian's)  son,  who  lived  on  the  bank  of  the  river
near  the  ford  where  we  had  made  our  imaginary  start  with  a  boat.  The
message  had  all  the  appearance  of  truth.  Mr.  Howard  came  in  looking
rather  chagrined,  as  I  certainly  felt,  and  informed  me  in  a  whisper  of  the
news.  'Be  quiet,'  I  replied,  'I  will  try  another  experiment.'  I  didn't
believe  this  could  be  successful.

"  'Fannie,'  I  said,  '  here  we  are  now  at  the  landing.  We  are  all  of  us
cold.  Let  us  go  into  the  Scotts' and  warm.'  She  agreed.  I  pretended  we
had  entered  the  house,  when  Fanny  exclaimed  in  a  much  excited  manner,
'  Why,  there  he  is.'  Q.  :  '  Who,  Fannie  V  F.  :  '  Why,  don't  you  see  it  V
Q-  =  '  See  what,  Fannie  ? '  F.  :  '  Why,  they  have  found  Uncle  Julian  and  got
him  laid  out. '  She  then  went  on  to  speak  of  different  relatives  and  friends
who  were  there,  of  their  crying,  &c. ,  naming  such  persons  as  we  supposed  it
would  be  very  certain  would  be  there.

"Here  was  telepathy,  most  likely,  with  a  vengeance,  for  not  a  word  of
the  whole  thing  was  true.  The  body  was  not  recovered  until  fourteen  days
after  the  drowning,  when  it  was  discovered  by  a  train  hand  from  a  moving
train  crossing  the  bridge  Fannie  had  declared  we  had  'just  passed  under/
where  it  had  lodged  upon  an  old  drift  just  below  the  bridge.  Many  times
since  then  the  old  drift  has  been  pointed  out  to  me  from  the  bridge  as  the
spot  '  where  Uncle  Julian  was  found,'  and  I  have  as  often  thought  of  the
perfectly  apparent  prophecy  of  Fannie  in  her  emphatic  assertion,  '  We  have
just  passed  under  that  tall  bridge  and  it  will  be  useless  ever  to  look  for
Uncle  Julian  belov:  here  ! '  I  could  flip  a  marble  from  the  top  of  the  bridge
into  the  drift  where  rested  his  body  fourteen  days  after  her  curious  trip  by
water  to  that  identical  spot  by  way  oi—irhat  ?  I  listen  for  the  answer.  Had
I  possibly  demonstrated  the  soul,  as  I  began  experimenting  with  the  dismal
hope  of  perhaps  some  time  accomplishing  fifteen  years  prior  to  this,  which
hope  I  had  never  once  quite  relinquished  ?  "

Mrs.  Wiltse  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson  : —

"  Skiddy,  Morris  Co.,  Kansas,  January  16th,  1891.

"  My  husband  having  read  to  me  his  paper  entitled  '  Some  Experiments
in  Hypnotism,'  paragraph  by  paragraph  carefully,  I  hereby  certify  that  its
contents  correspond  substantially  with  my  own  recollection  of  the  experi-
ments as  I  saw  them  done  several  years  ago.

"Mrs.  Haidee  Wiltse."
^  Dr.  Wiltse  states  that  he  has  introduced  the  slight  differences  in  Mrs.
W  iltse's  recollection  and  his  own.


80


Mrs.  H.  Bidgwioh.


Mr,s.  Roberts,  the  Miss  Florence  F.  of  the  narrative,  writes  to  Dr.
Wiltse  :—

"Cardiff,  Tenn.,  January  loth,  1891.
' '  Your  letter  was  received  late  last  night,  and  I  hasten  to  reply.  Your
statement  [the  one  that  follows]  is  correct  as  far  as  it  goes.  But  if  you
remember  we  asked,  or  rather  you  asked  Fannie,  to  go  into  our  storeroom
and  see  what  was  in  there,  and  she  said  a  hind  quarter  of  beef,  which  was
true,  we  had  got  it  late  that  evening.  You  also  asked  her  to  go  in  the
kitchen  and  see  how  many  loaves  of  bread  she  could  find,  which  she  told,  and
on  counting  them  after  returning  home,  she  was  correct.  It  was  in  the
winter  of  '81  or  '82,  I  think,  either  December,  '81,  or  in  the  January  or
February  of  '82, 1  cannot  remember  the  month  ;  I  know  it  was  cold  weather.
If  you  remember  when  old  Julian  Scott  was  drowned,  it  was  about  that  time,
for  if  I  remember  right  you  were  trying  that  same  night  to  get  her  to  find
his  body.  I  think,  as  well  as  I  remember,  that  she  located  his  saddle,  and  a
few  days  after  it  was  found  in  a  place  that  she  described,  but  she  could  not
find  the  body.

"Mrs.  Florence  F.  Roberts."

Statement.

"Miss  Florence  F.  was  at  the  house  one  evening,  and  asked  Fannie  to
look  into  her  stable  and  tell  her  what  she  saw.  She  replied  that  there  were
two  black  horses,  one  grey  horse,  and  one  red  horse  (meaning,  of  course,  a
bay  horse).  Miss  Florence  said,  '  That  is  wrong  ;  there  are  only  my  two
blacks."  Soon  after  her  brother  came  in,  saying  there  were  some  travellers
at  the  house,  and  upon  inquiry  we  learned  that  these  travellers  had  a  grey
horse  and  a  bay  in  the  stable,  so  that  after  all  Fannie  was  right,  the  two
strange  horses  having  been  there  when  Fannie's  clairvoyant  vision  had  looked
into  the  stable.

"This  statement  is  correct.

"Mrs.  Florence  F.  Roberts."

Questions  answered  by  William  Howard  (Ex-Trustee).

Question  1. — "Was  Uncle  Julian  Scott's  saddle  found  in  the  river,  as
described,  before  its  finding  by  Fannie  G.  when  mesmerised  ? "

Answer  1. — "I  wasn't  present  when  it  was  found,  but  was  told  so  by  truthful
people. "

Question  2. —  "Was  one  stirrup  gone  as  she  said  1  "

Answer  2. — "I  was  told  the  same  about  the  stirrup  ;  also  his  hat."

Question  3.  —  "Was  his  hat  found  in  a  bush  in  the  water  at  the  point

described  by  her  1  "
Question,  4. — "Did  she  describe  your  new  doorsteps  to  you  before  you  knew

they  were  built  ?  "
Answer  4. — -"Yes."

Question  5. — "  Did  she  give  a  right  statement  of  your  holding  your  watch  in
your  hand,  jjutting  back  in  your  pocket  and  picking  up  a  flute  from  the
bed,  and  this  while  you  were  in  a  dark  room  with  a  wall  between  you?  "

Answer  5. — "  Yes."


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


81


Question  6. — "Did  she  describe  your  house  and  tell  you  Andrew  was  there
when  you  thought  he  was  away,  and,  if  so,  was  he  actually  at  home  as.
she  stated  1 "

Answer  6.  — "Yes."

Question  7. — "From  what  you  saw,  were  you  satisfied  that  Fannie  had,
when  mesmerised,  powers  of  imparting  knowledge  unknown  to  others
about  her  1  "

Answer  7-— "Yes."

Wm.  Howard.

Kismet,  Tenn.,  Morgan  Co.

"We  testify  to  these  questions,  asked  Wm.  Howard,  to  be  facts.  We
were  present  at  the  same  time  Mr.  Howard  was  when  Miss  G.  was  mesmerised
by  Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse.  We  further  state  that  when  any  of  us  would  prick  the
doctor  with  a  pin,  she  would  flinch  with  the  same  part  of  her  body.  Miss
G.  was  not  in  the  habit  of  the  use  of  tobacco.  The  doctor  was  in  a  different
room,  with  a  wall  between  them.  When  he  would  smoke,  she  grew  nause-
ated and  seemed  to  taste  the  same  as  he  did.

"  W.  T.  Howard  and  Lizzie  Howard."

With  this  case,  which,  if  the  saddle  was  correctly  located  by  Fannie,
carries  us  beyond  clairvoyance  of  facts  known  to  anyone,  I  must
conclude  the  present  paper.  In  an  Appendix  I  give  the  remaining-
evidence  about  "Jane,"  and  some  further  cases  sent  to  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  but  which,  on  account  of  remoteness  and  depend-
ence on  the  memory  of  a  single  individual,  seem  to  attain  a  lower
evidential  standard  than  those  I  have  already  quoted.

In  the  next  number  of  the  Proceedings  we  hope  to  print  a  paper  by
Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  of  Kalmar,  Sweden,  on  some  experiments  in  clair-
voyance of  his  own.  Besides  the  evidence  thus  sent  to  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  and  not  hitherto  published,  there  is  a  considerable
amount  of  evidence  for  clairvoyance  of  the  type  discussed  in  the  present
paper,  published  in  various  books  and  pamphlets,  and  in  the  Zoist  and
other  periodicals  devoted  to  mesmerism.  This  I  shall  hope  to  review
on  some  future  occasion,  as  in  attempting  to  form  a  judgment  on  the
subject,  it  is  important  to  have  all  the  available  evidence  before  us.

I  hope  also  in  a  future  paper  to  discuss  the  evidence  for  other  types
of  clairvoyance,  especially  for  clairvoyance  of  facts  unknown  to  any
human  being.


G


82


'Mrs.  IT.  Sidgiviek.


APPENDIX.

Further  Evidence  about  Jane.
Remainder  of  Dr.  F.'s  Notes.
Experiment  III.

I  was  determined  on  this  occasion  to  give  her  no  leading  questions,  and
fit  the  same  time  in  no  manner  to  cheat  or  deceive  her. After  the  sleep
was  produced,  I  said  :  ' '  We  are  on  a  railway,  and  can  see  a  large  building
like  a  mill ;  where  is  it  ? " "  Is  it  a  mill  for  grinding  food  ? "  she  replied.  I
said,  ' '  Yes. Can  you  find  by  what  means  the  mill  is  made  to  work  ? Is  it  a
wind-mill  ?" "No." " Is  it  the  water  that  turns  the  mill  ? " "  No,  it  is
•a  steam-mill." I  may  here  remark  that  the  mill  is  placed  by  the  side  of  a
stream  which  near  it  communicates  with  the  River  Tyne. She  then  asked,
*'  May  we  go  into  the  mill  ?  "  and  upon  my  giving  her  leave,  she  described
the  noise  of  the  machinery,  the  flour-dust  falling  like  snow,  the  miller,  in
white,  standing  by  a  "poke,"  and  was  proceeding  in  her  account  of  the
interior  of  the  building  when  I  stopped  her,  and  told  her  to  leave  the  mill
and  enter  the  house  near  it. "Is  it  the  small  house  ?  "  she  asked. I  told
her  "  No,"  it  was  the  larger  house  that  I  desired  her  to  look  into. She  said,
"Is  it  this  with  the  garden  in  front  i" "  Yes,"  I  replied,  "with  the  large
garden,"  for  I  was  under  the  false  impression  that  the  garden  was  ofpfleon-
rsiderable  size. "No,  the  garden  is  a  small  one,  and  just  in  front  of  the
house,"  was  the  answer ;  and  then,  as  usual,  she  asked,  "  May  we  go  in?"
She  said  a  gentleman  lived  in  the  house,  but  directly  afterwards  corrected
herself,  and  remarked  he  was  not  a  gentleman,  but  that  a  gentleman  had
formerly  lived  in  it. She  now  seemed  very  much  puzzled,  her  face  accur-
ately expressing  the  perplexity  of  her  mind. "Why  did  the  gentleman
leave  this  pretty  house  ?" "There  is  something  very  strange  about  this
house. I  can't  understand  this." "Can  we  not  tell  we  what  it  is  that  is  so
strange  here  ? " "Can  we  not  tell  we  why  this  gentleman  went  away?"
"  Oh,  yes,  it  is  something  about  a  lady." "  Can  it  be  this  gentleman's  wife
who  died  here,  and  thus  caused  him  to  leave  it  ?" All  these  questions  she
asked  rapidly  and  in  an  excited  manner,  very  different  from  her  ordinary
calm  bearing  when  in  the  mesmeric  state. At  last  she  said,  in  a  low  tone,
"Now  we  see  it  was  not  this  gentleman's  wife,  for  she's  alive  ;  it  was  a  vision
that  frightened  him  away." "  The  lady  was  only  a  vision."  "  Do  we  believe
in  visions  ? " "  We  don't  like  to  believe  in  visions,  do  we  ?  " "Tell  we  why
the  vision  came  to  the  gentleman." "  Had  he  done  anything  wicked  to  the
lady?" I  now  told  her  that  I  brought  her  to  that  house  for  the  purpose
of  finding  out  why  the  lady  haunted  that  house,  and  she  must  not  be  lazy,
but  find  out  the  cause. She  replied,  "  We  are  not  lazy,  but  the  lady  is
not  there  now,  but  if  we  will  tell  we  where  to  find  her,  we  will  go  and
look  for  it."

As  this  was  a  request  with  which  I  had  no  means  of  conqflying,  I  said  she
had  better  go  back  to  the  time  when  the  gentleman  lived  in  the  house.  She
directly  answered,  "  Yes,  we  will."  "Now  I  see  the  gentleman  has  a  wife
and  a  family,  and  I  see  the  vision  standing  before  him  ;  but  why  does  it


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


S3


make  these  noises  ?  Why  does  it  now  frighten  them  all  ?  and  why  does  it
frighten  the  servants  in  that  way  so  that  the  gentleman  is  forced  to  leave  ?
She  thinks  he  has  no  right  to  be  there,  but  why  has  he  no  right  to  be  there  ?
It  cannot  be  an  angel  of  light,  can  it  1  It  must  be  an  angel  of  darkness,  and
to  find  out  an  angel  of  darkness  we  will  have  to  go  a  long  way,  to  a  bad  place."
I  said  she  had  better  find  out  the  gentleman  himself.  She  immediately  said,
■"Shall  we  go  again  upon  the  railway  1  Now  we  have  come  to  a  large  town.
Shall  we  go  up  the  road  to  this  little  village  V  Finding  by  her  description
that  she  had  passed  the  house,  I  replied,  "No,  you  must  go  back  again  the
same  road  ;  you  are  a  little  too  far."  "Then  may  we  go  into  this  house,"
she  exclaimed,  "with  a  little  lodge  and  a  garden  ?"  I  again  told  her  she  was
too  far,  for  the  house  I  recognised  by  her  description  is  one  a  few  hundred
yards  beyond  the  one  I  wished  her  to  go  to.  ' 1  Now  we  have  got  to  the  right
bouse, "  she  remarked,  ' '  and  we  see  the  gentleman,  but  why  does  he  wear
his  hat  in  this  way  ?  and  what  a  wide  brim  it  is,  and  he  is  saying,  '  We  are
much  obliged  to  thee,  friend, '  and  '  I  hope  thou  art  well. '  Why  does  he  say
thee  and  thou  ?  we  don't  like  that  way  of  speaking,  do  we  ?  But  he  looks  a
kind  gentleman.  I  don't  see  why  the  vision  should  have  come  to  him."  She
continued  her  description  of  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  so
accurately  described  the  peculiarities  of  the  gentleman  that  no  one  who
knew  him  could  doubt  who  was  meant,  but  as  she  seemed  now  tired,  I
stopped  her  for  the  present,  and  she  fell  into  a  short  sleep.

Knowing  that  a  public  meeting  was  to  be  held  that  evening,  and  being
sure  that  she  had  never  in  her  life  been  in  that  street  in  which  it  was
intended  to  hold  it,  I  determined  to  test  her  powers  by  means  of  it.  I  there-
fore said  as  soon  as  she  awoke,  "We  are  standing  by  some  railings  with  some
trees  within  them  ;  now  we  pass  through  an  opening,  with  a  house  on  one
side  and  a  wall  on  the  other,  and  before  us,  at  some  little  distance,  is  a
bouse  with  a  portico."  She  immediately  said,  "  Shall  we  go  in  %  "  "But
there  is  a  glass  door  ;  shall  we  go  through  it  ?  "  "  Here  is  a  lady  sitting  in
a  room;  is  she  a  lady?"  I  replied,  "  I  want  you  to  go  upstairs  and  turn
into  the  room  on  the  left-hand  side."  She  slowly  answered,  with  some
expression  of  amazement,  "  What  !  this  room?  It  is  a  very  pretty  room;  very
pretty  indeed.  But  what  is  the  matter  ?  What  are  so  many  people  doing
here  ?  And  here  is  Mr.  Fraser  ;  what  can  he  be  doing  here  ?  Is  it  about  the
church?  Is  it  about  the  Bible  ? "  The  gentleman  she  had  detected  in  the
crowd  being  known  to  her  as  the  minister,  she  had,  no  doubt,  imagined
from  his  presence  that  such  must  be  the  subject  of  the  meeting  ;  but  I  told
lier  not  to  be  lazy,  but  find  out  why  the  meeting  was  held.  "  One  man,"  she
said,  "is  speaking,  but  it  is  neither  about  church  nor  Bible  ;  we  can't  under-
stand him.  It  is  humbug.  And  he  talks  so  much  about  himself,  does  he  not  ?
He  is  a  very  vulgar  man  ;  but  there  are  many  very  vulgar-looking  men  in  the
room,  and  what  a  noise  they  are  making."  This  experiment  had  lasted  so  long
that  she  looked  tired,  and  having,  before  sitting  down,  complained  of  head-
ache, I  feared  to  continue  it,  lest  she  might  be  worse  afterwards.  I,  therefore,
at  this  stage,  released  her  by  the  ordinary  means.

In  order  to  understand  the  first  of  the  experiments  of  this  evening's  sit-
ting I  must  now  explain  that  about  four  miles  from  North  Shields—  visible
from  the  Newcastle  and  North  Shields  Railway— is  a  steam  mill,  and  near  it  a

g  2


8+


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc,


house  with  a  garden  in  front,  and  some  cottages.  This  house  was  inhabited
some  years  ago  by  a  gentleman  of  the  Society  of  Friends  (Mr.  Procter),
who  eventually  left  it  on  account  of  the  annoyance  of  what  was  and  is  still
supposed  to  be  a  ghost.  As  I  am  no  more  a  believer  in  spirits  than  I  was  in
clairvoyance,  I  may  merely  mention  that  forty  different  persons  now  alive
have  stated  that  at  different  times  they  have  seen  this  appearance,  and  in  every
case,  except  two  or  three,  it  had  the  form  of  a  lady.  Besides,  however,  the
visionary  appearances,  the  noises  in  the  house  were  most  troublesome,  the
articles  of  furniture  being  often  violently  thrown  about.  The  gentleman  left
the  house,  and  the  noises  and  the  vision  have  gradually  disappeared.  Her
description  of  his  present  residence  was  in  every  respect  correct.  It  will,  no
doubt,  occur  to  many  that  the  clairvoyante  had  in  this  case  been  aware  of  the
whole  affair,  but  let  anyone  consider  the  improbability  of  her  catching  at
<>nce,  without  reflection,  the  very  place  I  desired  her  to  examine  from  the
very  slight  hint  I  gave  her.  I  have  since  ascertained  that  she  had  only
once — and  that  some  years  ago — been  upon  this  railway,  and  it  is  unlikely
that  upon  that  occasion  she  would  observe  this  particular  mill  so  as  to  be  able
at  present  so  minutely  to  describe  it.  Mills  near  railways  are  not  uncommon,
and  if  she  had  merely  guessed,  it  is  probable  that  she  would  at  once  have
imagined  the  place  to  be  some  mill  near  some  railroad  to  which  she  was
accustomed.  But  admitting  that  she  had  formerly  seen  the  mill  and  house,
as  she  rolled  rapidly  along  the  line — for  it  is  only  visible  at  one  point  of  the
railroad — and  that  the  whole  story  had  been  related  to  her,  how  was  a
.stranger,  living  in  a  little  street  miles  from  Shields,  able  to  find  out  the
present  residence  of  the  gentleman,  and  accurately  to  describe  him  ?  Add
to  these  considerations  the  surprise  that  she  manifested  when  afterwards
told  about  it,  and  her  denial  of  ever  having  heard  about  the  haunted
house,  and  few  can  reject  the  belief  that  there  was  no  trick  at  all  about
the  case.

The  second  case  is  still  clearer.  Mr.  Lindsay  is  one  of  the  candidates  to
represent  the  borough  of  Tynemouth  in  Parliament.  He  came  down  un-
expectedly on  Saturday  night,  and  bills  were  then  issued,  calling  a  meeting-
wherein  he  intended  addressing  the  electors  on  Monday.  She,  I  have  ascer-
tained, only  left  the  house  upon  the  Sunday,  and  walked  along  the  road  for  a
few  minutes,  and  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  she  would  there
see  the  announcement.  I  have  also  ascertained  that  she  was  never  in  her  life
in  the  street  in  which  the  meeting  was  held,  and  that  she  knows  nothing  of
the  town  at  all,  and  my  description  of  the  Assembly  Room  was  so  vague  that
few  who  have  lived  in  Shields  all  their  lives  could  have  guessed  it.  To  show
the  truth  of  this,  a  gentleman  who  had  been  for  many  years  resident  in
Shields,  and  who  was  protesting  strongly  against  clairvoyance,  was  asked  the
following  question  :  "Supposing  I  say  to  you,  We  are  standing  beside  some
rails,  with  trees  within  them  ;  we  now  go  through  an  opening,  and  see  a  house
with  a  portico  in  front  of  us — what  is  that  house  ?  "  Without  hesitation  he
immediately  mentioned  a  house  in  the  opposite  end  of  the  town.

Experiment  IV.

July  mh,  1853.

On  Thursday  she  arrived  at  Shields  by  train.  She  was  longer  than  usual
in  becoming  somnolent,  and  the  first  words  she  exclaimed  were,  ' '  Why  is


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


Ho-


that  girl  troubling  us  so  much  I  "  This  she  frequently  repeated.  The  word
"girl"  she  always  applies  to  herself,  and  the  above  expression  is  used  .when
she  is  not  likely  to  be  lucid.  She  looked  tired  and  anxious,  and  throughout
the  sitting  was  not  so  clear  as  on  former  occasions.

I  had  procured  some  handwriting  of  Lieutenant  Pym,  R.N.,  now  in  the
searching  expedition  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  but  not  being  acquainted  either
with  the  gentleman  himself  or  the  residence  of  his  relations,  I  was  very
doubtful  of  her  discovering  his  whereabouts.  I  placed  the  writing  in  her
hands  and  asked  where  the  gentleman  was  who  wrote  that.  She  re-
plied, "  The  gentleman  who  wrote  this  to  us— what  does  he  want  us  to  do  \
Is  it  about  a  sick  person— is  that  it  ? "  I  again  said,  "  You  must  discover
for  yourself  where  he  is  and  what  he  wants."  She  answered,  "  Let  us  go
by  the  railway  to  the  large  town,  and  into  this  house,  and  see  what  he  wants. "
I  replied,  as  she  seemed  in  great  doubt  and  hesitation,  "  You  had  better
look  abroad  for  him.  Go  across  the  sea  and  look."  "  Yes,"  she  answered  ;
*'  but  what  has  he  gone  here  for,  amongst  all  these  strange  people,  and  this
grand  place  ?  Is  he  (jovmj  to  fight  ?  Is  this  the  reason  of  his  coming  here  I
We  don't  understand  what  these  people  say  ;  they  don't  speak  our  language."
I  asked  if  it  was  France,  and  she  answered  that  she  had  been  here  before,
formerly,  and  she  believed  it  was  France.  I  should  here  mention  that,  as
many  will  remember,  Lieutenant  Pym  planned  his  Siberian  Expedition  im-
mediately before  going  in  the  searching  squadron,  and  travelled  on  the
•Continent  in  prosecution  of  his  plan,  but  at  the  time  I  did  not  remember
this,  and  therefore  told  her  to  look  where  he  was  at  the  present  time.  She
said  he  was  in  a  very  strange  country,  where  everyone  was  dressed  differently
from  here.  I  asked  whether  it  was  a  hot  or  cold  country.  She  answered,
"  Very  cold  indeed,"  and  grasping  me  tightly  by  the  hand  requested  me  not
to  leave  her  in  that  desolate  region.  I,  at  this  stage,  requested  a  lady  who
was  in  the  room  to  copy  down  all  her  words,  which  was  done.  "  What  lias
brought  the  gentleman  here  I"  I  asked.  "Has  he  gone  to  discover  some-
thing 1  "  was  the  reply  ;  "  we  don't  like  to  look  at  him.  He  has  got  a  cat
jacket  and  cap  on  ;  we  don't  like  to  touch  him."  She  always  in  this  state
■expresses  a  great  dislike  to  fur,  and  calls  it  cat-skin.  "  We  see  the  vessel.
All  those  about  him  have  the  same  sort  of  jackets.  Is  it  bear-skin  they  have
on  1  He  is  a  fine-looking  man,  all  fur.  This  is  a  very  white-looking  place.
It  is  all  white.  He  is  middle-sized,  with  darkish  hair,  but  he  is  so  covered  up
with  cat-skin  that  we  can  only  see  a  part  of  him.  This  is  not  like  we's  water  ;
we  can  walk  upon  it.  Why  have  they  come  to  such  a  place  as  this  1  It  is
winter  here.  Some  of  the  men  are  running  along. "  ' '  What  is  the  name  of  the
vessel  ?  "  I  inquired.  She  spelt  A.  R.,  but  would  go  no  further  ;  she  then
said,  "  We  will  spell  the  gentleman's  name.  It  is  a  short  name."  I  said  that
P  was  the  first  letter,  but  she  could  not  finish  it.  ' '  Has  he  come  to  seek
somebody  ?  "  she  asked.  "  What  is  he  so  intent  upon  ?  Is  it  to  go  further
he  thinks  so  much  about  '."  "  He  had  better,  we  think,  stay  where  he  is,
for  he  will  never  find  what  he  is  looking  for."  "  Is  it  a  vessel  and  a  gentle-
man he  is  looking  for  ?  "


[Some  further  details  of  the  same  kind  followed  here.]


86


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwiclc.


Experiment  VI.

July  21st,  1853. — Five  minutes  to  nine,  to  about  10  minutes  to  10  ;
pulse  80.

She  was  this  time  mesmerised  by  a  lady  who  has  been  in  the  habit  of  doing-
it  for  some  years,  and  her  lucidity  and  rapidity  of  utterance  were  very  strik-
ingly increased  compared  with  the  uncertain  slow  manner  in  which  she  spoke
when  under  my  influence.  This  lady  we  shall  call  Mrs.  B.  [Mrs.  Fraser].
The  process  consists  in  the  operator  taking  Jane's  thumbs  in  her  thumb  and
forefinger  of  her  opposite  hand,  and  looking  steadfastly  into  her  eyes.  This
was  continued  on  this  occasion  for  about  a  minute,  when  Jane  gave  a  slight
start.  Her  head  then  began  gradually  to  fall  forward,  when  the  operator
placed  her  hand  above  the  vertex,  moving  it  gradually  backwards.  The
head  seemed  to  follow  the  hand  by  slightly  jerking  motions  until  she  became
quite  erect  in  the  chair.  Mrs.  B.  then  asked,  "  Is  that  we's  light  1  Can  we
see  well  with  it  1 "

[Some  details  are  here  omitted.]
Here  she  again  slept.  "Let  us  go  out  again,"  said  she,  upon  awakening.
"  What  are  we  thinking  of  now  ?  "  asked  Mrs.  B.  "  Where  shall  we  go  ?  "
replied  Jane.  "Shall  we  come  back  here  again?"  "Yes,"  returned  Mrs.
B.,  "we  promised  to  come  back  to  this  place  same  sun,  so  we  must  keep  our
promises."  "Shall  we  look  at  it?"  was  the  answer.  "What  is  it  1  What  do>
you  call  it?"  "Is  it  a  vision?"  Mrs.  B.  replied.  "No,  that  is  not  the
name  ;  we  don't  like  it.  Why  can't  we  get  hold  of  the  word,  of  wre's  own
we's  word  ?  It  is  haunted  house.  What  an  ugly  word.  Why  do  we  want
to  look  again?"  "We  said,"  answered  Mrs.  B.,  "that  we  would  go  into  it."
"We  don't  care  for  it,  do  we?"  replied  Jane.  "It  looks  like  a  vision.  It  is.
a  lady."  "What  is  it  like  ?"  asked  the  operator.  "It  has  a  face,  but  not
like  we's  face.  It  is  very  white,  but  she  moves  about  so  quick ;  she  has  eyes,
but  no  sight  in  them ;  she  is  like  a  shadow."  "  Has  it  a  name  in  its  head?"
asked  Mrs.  B.  "No,  she  has  no  name  and  no  brains  :  she  is  just  like  a.
shadow,  and  flits  about  so  quickly  from  place  to  place.  We  don't  care  about
the  lady.  We  want  to  go  into  the  house  and  downstairs.  We  want  to  go-
into  the  cellar.  Is  there  a  way  to  the  sea  in  this  house  ?  We  will  go  down-
stairs into  the  lowest  part  and  take  a  candle.  We  are  not  a  coward.  We
will  examine  and  find  a  place  to  the  sea.  Let  us  look — there  is  a  cellar.
Could  not  the  gentleman  examine  the  cellar?  He  must  have  stronger  people
than  we  to  look  into  them,  we  are  too  weak.  We  can't  see  any  place  of
concealment.  Tell  him  to  bring  somebody  to  look  down.  There  must  be  a
place  of  concealment.  Like  it  ran  down  to  the  sea,  and  people  came  up  for
some  bad  purpose.  It  seems  like  something  about  the  sea.  We'll  tell  the
gentleman  with  the  broad  hat  about  this.  We's  not  afraid,  there  must  be
something  concealed  there,  and  it  might  be  found  out  in  this  cellar,  and  we
will  come  and  help  him.  Let  us  go  to  the  gentleman."  "  Would  he  like  to-
see  we's  sleep?"  said  Mrs.  B.  "We  want  this  place  looked  into,  and,
mind,  not  a  slight  examination,  for  something  will  be  found  there."  "Are
they  real  people,  then?"  asked  Mrs.  B.  "Well,  she  is  a  strange  one,  and
walks  about  so  quietly."  "Has  it  spoken  ?  "  said  the  operator.  "Yes  it
has  spoken.  But  there  are  so  many,  there  are  two  or  three  kinds  of  animals.
We's  only  a  coward  after  all." "What  are  the  animals  like?"  inquired


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance,  87

Mrs.  B.  "We  won't  be  afraid,"  was  the  reply.  "Do  we  like  to  look?
One  is  like  a  monkey,  and  another  like  a  dog.  Had  the  lady  dogs  and
monkeys  ?  They  go  all  about  the  house.  She  has  got  funny  things,  has  she
not  ?  We  don't  like  her.  What  is  that  other  one  ?  Do  we  know  what  we
call  it  ?  It  is  not  a  pussy,  it  runs  very  fast,  and  gets  amongst  feet.  It  is  a
rabbit,  but  a  very  quick  one."  "Are  they  real  animals?"  said  Mrs.  B.
"We  don't  touch  them  to  see,"  replied  she;  "we  would  not  like  a  bite.
What  a  very  violent  woman  she  is.  She  wants  to  stay  all  alone  in  that
house,  but  we  can't  see  into  her,  she  is  so  strange.  We  have  never  seen  her
eat  any  supper  nor  anything  else."  "Has  she  a  name  in  her  head?"  inquired
Mrs.  B.  "No,  she  has  no  brains.  She  is  now  going  upstairs,  and  it  is  ho
dark.  She  has  no  light  with  her,  but  we  have  light."  "  Are  the  animals
with  her  now  ?  "  said  Mrs.  B.  "  No,  they  are  not.  She  is  all  white  :  it  is
loose,  not  a  dress  like  we's,  but  something  loose  thrown  over  her.  She  dis-
turbs everybody."  "  Why  don't  they  catch  her?  "  asked  Mrs.  B.  "Because
she  moves  so  quickly.  But  the  mischief  is  in  the  cellar,  and  tell  the  gentle-
man to  look  there."

[Here  again  she  slept.]

Upon  awakening  she  said,  "We  won't  have  her  for  ours."  "Is  she
always  the  same  1 "  inquired  the  operator.  "  We  will  look,"  was  the  reply.
' '  Now  she  is  coming  downstairs  again  to  go  her  rounds.  She  makes  we
feel  cold.  Now  she  is  as  dark  as  the  devil.  It  is  very  strange  ;  we  don't
like  her."  "Look  and  see  what  her  dress  is  like, "  said  Mrs.  B.  "  We  will.
It  is  not  like  we,  for  it  is  all  dark.  Where  have  we  seen  anything  like  it  before  ?
It  is  not  like  we's  English  ladies'  dress.  Where  has  she  got  that  1  It  is  like
the  dress  we  saw  in  foreign  countries — a  Spanish  lady  kind  of  dress.  They
are  rich  things  she  has  on  ;  it  rustles  like  silk.  Is  it  not  strange  ?  She  is
just  like  a  devil."

[A  few  more  details  followed.]
Experiment  IX.

Jul,/  28th  or  29th,  1853.
She  was  again  sent  to  see  the  "  haunted  house,"  when  she  said  she  saw
the  figure  of  a  man  who  also  troubled  them.  Mrs.  B.  asked  her  if  it  was
not  a  real  man  she  saw.  Could  it  not  be  the  person  who  now  lived  there  ?
but  she  said,  "  No,  it  is  a  vision  ;  he  has  no  brains  in  his  head  ;  he  looks
very  fierce,  his  eyes  flash  like  a  torn  cat's — like  a  tiger's  ;  he  has  a  white
dress  on  like  a  surplice.  Oh,  how  angry  he  is  !  he  is  so  indignant  at  being
disturbed  ;  he  does  not  want  the  gentleman  to  find  out  what  he  is  there  for.
It  is  the  man  who  makes  the  noises  in  the  house  ;  he  goes  stamping  about.
We  did  not  like  the  woman,  but  the  man  is  far  worse.  Oh,  howr  angry  he
is  !  What  a  commotion  there  is  in  the  cellar  !  They  have  not  made  the
hole  large  enough  ;  it  is  not  close  enough  to  the  wall.  They  must  make  a.
wide,  deep  hole  close  to  the  wall,  and  they  should  take  down  the  wall."  Mrs.
B.  said,  "  But  perhaps  the  house  will  fall  if  they  take  the  wall  down."  She
replied,  "  Never  mind,  if  they  only  find  it  out."  She  said  that  the  woman
walked  about  with  her  hands  upon  her  breast  as  if  in  pain  ;  but  the  man  goes
stamping  about  very  angry.  "  Oh  !  how  indignant  he  is  that  the  gentleman
is  digging  in  the  cellar."


Mrs.  H.  Sidgivick.


She  was  also  taken  to  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  which  she  described  most
accurately.  Upon  first  entering  she  seemed  amazed  at  the  beauty  of  the
building,  and  said,  "  What  a  number  of  beautiful  figures  !  These  are  not
visions,  these  are  made  of  marble."  She  also  described  the  scutcheons,  and
the  stained  glass  windows,  and  the  Communion,  &c,  &c.  She  also  said
there  was  a  large  gallery  that  went  all  round,  and  that  there  was  a  sound  in
it.  It  was  not  music,  but  a  sound  which  went  all  round  inside  the  wall.
She  said  there  were  no  queer  monkish-looking  men  here,  as  she  saw  in  St.
Peter's  at  Rome.  Those  were  Popish  we's  ;  she  did  not  like  Popish  we's  ;
but  she  saw  a  clergyman  go  into  the  pulpit.  It  was  not  we's  clergyman.  She
also  seemed  very  much  to  admire  some  of  the  fine  old  oak  carving  and  a
picture.

Mrs.  Fraser's  Recollections.

In  the  year  1845,  I  first  became  acquainted  with  "Jane."  She  was  a
great  invalid,  not  able  to  leave  her  bed,  but  was  propped  up  with  pillows,
and  made  a  little  money  by  needlework.  One  day,  when  I  called  to  see  her,
I  was  told  by  her  sister  that  I  could  not  see  her  as  the  infirmary  doctor  had
just  mesmerised  her.  I  sent  up  a  message,  begging  that  I  might  be  admitted,
and  the  doctor  consenting  I  went  up.  I  asked  him  if  he  never  tried  any
experiments.  "  No,"  he  replied,  "  I  have  promised  her  not."  On  waking,
I  asked  her  consent.  So  the  next  day  I  took  with  me  a  phrenological  head.
Dr.  Maltby  went  to  the  closet  and  ate  something.  He  returned  to  "  Jane,"
and  placing  his  finger  on  "  gustativeness,"  asked  what  he  was  eating.  "  It
is  sugar. "  He  ate  something  else.  "What  am  I  eating?"  She  showed
great  disgust,  and  said,  "  Not  good."  He  whispered  to  me,  "  I  have  a  pill
in  my  mouth."

Next  visit  I  proposed  we  should  try  if  she  was  a  clairvoyante,  and  asked
Mr.  M.  to  take  her  to  our  house  and  find  out  what  I  had  been  doing  that
morning.  She  found  the  house  and  went  into  the  parlour,  and  there  seemed  to
see  me  in  an  armchair  with  my  feet  on  the  tender,  &c,  and  a  large  book
upon  my  knee.  She  was  quite  correct.  Then  she  was  taken  to  the  infirmary
and  accurately  described  one  of  the  wards,  and  particularly  mentioned  a
soldier  who  was  in  one  of  the  beds.  After  this,  Mr.  M.  took  her  to  other
places,  but  as  it  was  not  convenient  for  him  to  continue  to  give  her  the  sleep
I  took  his  place.  I  think  it  was  as  soon  as  I  was  left  alone  with  her  that  I
thought  I  would  try  another  experiment.  I  found  that  she  ate  very  little,
had  no  appetite,  and  took  no  butcher's  meat,  so  I  thought  I  would  get  her  to
eat  whilst  in  the  sleep.  Consequently  I  took  some  thin  slices  of  cold  roast
beef,  and  when  she  was  quite  over  I  got  her  to  eat  some,  but  before  she  had
finished  I  heard  Dr.  Trotter  downstairs,  so  I  awoke  her,  first  of  all  hiding
the  rest  of  the  meat  and  bread.  When  he  came  up,  amongst  other  questions
he  asked  if  she  had  eaten  any  breakfast  1  and  she  said  "  No."  Whereupon
I  said,  "  Oh,  Jane,  how  canyon  say  so  when  you  have  been  eating  both  meat
and  bread  1  "  and  then  I  pulled  out  the  remnant  of  her  feast.  Great  was
her  surprise,  and  of  course  Dr.  Trotter  was  astonished  also.

Dr.  Trotter  was  the  physician  for  the  infirmary  of  which  Jane  was  an
outdoor  patient.  He  was  out  at  dinner,  one  day,  with  Mr.  Williamson,  of
(iateshead,  brother  of  Sir  Hedworth  Williamson,  and  the  conversation  turned
upon  mesmerism,  and  Mr.  Williamson  said  at  one  time  he  had  ridiculed  it,


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


89


but  that  a  short  while  before  meeting  Dr.  Trotter  he  was  in  Paris  with  some
other  friends,  and  one  very  wet  day,  just  to  amuse  themselves,  they  proposed
to  try  and  mesmerise  the  cook,  and  to  their  great  surprise  they  were  quite
successful,  and  went  on  to  mention  some  more  particulars.  So  Dr.  Trotter
told  him  of  a  patient  of  his  who  could  not  sleep,  and  it  was  arranged  that
Mr.  Williamson  should  accompany  him  on  the  following  day,  and  put  her
into  the  mesmeric  sleep.  This  was  done,  and  then  Mr.  Maltby,  the  house
surgeon,  was  taught  how  to  put  her  over,  and  it  was  found  that  from  that  day
she  began  to  sleep  at  night.

At  that  time  Mr.  Williamson  knew  nothing  about  clairvoyance.  Some
months  after  he  came  to  Durham,  and  called  upon  us  in  order  to  try  and
mesmerise  Mr.  Green,  and  I  took  the  opportunity  of  telling  him  about
"  Jane's  "  powers.  He  said,  "  I  believe  in  mesmerism,  but  not  in  clair-
voyance." He  had  been  arranging  for  Jane  to  go  and  stay  with  him  for
some  time  that  he  might  be  able  to  mesmerise  her,  and  I  thought  he
would  soon  find  out  for  himself  whether  what  I  had  told  him  was  true  or
not,  so  I  said  nothing,  and  she  went,  and  as  I  expected,  the  first  time  he
mesmerised  her  she  began  with  her  usual  question,  "Where  shall  we  go
this  sun  ?  "  First,  of  course,  expressing  surprise  at  the  new  "  we  "  she  had
got.  "  It  is  not  Miss  Eliza  we,  and  it  is  not  our  black  we  "  (that  was  Jane's
.sister).  "  What  we  is  it?  "  Afterwards  she  called  him  her  "  very  own  we."
As  she  was  determined  to  go  somewhere,  he  asked  where  she  would  go  %
and  she  answered  along  the  road.  She  seemed  in  a  short  time  to  see  two
cottages,  and  said,  "May  we  go  into  this  cottage?"  and  to  the  great
astonishment  of  Mr.  Williamson  she  told  him  about  all  the  inmates.  Now,
as  she  was  an  utter  stranger  in  that  neighbourhood,  he  knew  quite  well
that  she  could  have  no  acquaintance  with  these  cottagers,  and  from  that  time
was  a  believer  in  her  wonderful  powers  of  clairvoyance,  and  took  her  to  one
place  after  another,  frequently  to  the  House  of  Commons.  She  took  quite  a
fancy  to  some  of  the  members,  saying,  "Ah,  there  is  we  Shott  "  (a  personal
friend  of  Mr.  Williamson),  "and  there  is  we's  " — mentioning  the  names  of
other  gentlemen  whom  I  cannot  just  now  remember.  Mr.  Williamson  took
her  now  and  again  to  some  place  of  entertainment,  and  she  greatly  enjoyed
being  at  Astley's,  and  laughed  heartily  at  seeing  the  tricks  of  the  clown,  and
expressed  much  surprise  at  seeing  the  horses  jump  through  hoops.

Mr.  Williamson  had  a  lady  staying  with  him  whose  mime  I  quite  forget  ;
he  was  mesmerising  her  for  her  health,  and  he  began  to  try  if  she  also  was
a  clairvoyante,  and  found  she  was,  and  a  very  eerie  effect  was  produced  upon
me  some  months  after,  when  I  had  Jane  asleep  in  our  own  house,  by  her  say-
ing, after  one  of  the  little  sleeps  which  she  had  begun  to  take  in  the  course  of
the  seance,  "Do  we  know  that  the  lady  we  is  here  I  Our  very  own  we  has
brought  her  to  see  we,  they  went  first  to  the  girl's  'Jane's  '  house,  and  then
came  here."

One  day  I  asked  Jane  what  was  the  cause  of  her  being  able  to  do  such
wonderful  things  as  to  see  into  people's  minds,  and  so  on.  She  answered  by
"  '  Lectricity."  She  spoke  in  a  very  childish  manner  when  asleep,  cutting
short  her  words.

It  was  very  extraordinary  the  insight  she  seemed  to  have  into  the  charac-
ter of  those  persons  she  saw  ;  for  instance,  when  visiting  one  gentleman  who


90


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc.


lived  at  some  distance,  and  who  had  never  been  mentioned  to  her,  she  said
at  once,  "  This  is  a  backslider."  When  she  was  taken  to  see  the  missionary,
Mr.  Moffat,  she  said,  ' '  Now  this  is  one  of  the  most  unselfish  men  we  ever
saw."  It  was  very  interesting  to  find  that  when  she  visited  these  far-off
jdaces  she  noticed  the  different  trees  to  what  she  had  seen  at  home,  and  she
certainly  felt  either  great  heat  or  great  cold.  I  especially  remember  one
day,  when  she  asked  to  get  away  from  Africa,  she  was  so  hot,  and  seemed  to
rejoice  in  the  cool  breezes  of  the  sea.  She  also  seemed  to  feel  the  scent  of
flowers.

I  forget  the  year  when  Isabella,  Queen  of  Spain,  was  married,  but  we
several  times  saw  her  at  the  time  the  marriage  was  talked  about,  and  Jane
expressed  great  sorrow  for  her,  saying  she  wished  to  marry  someone  else,
and  was  crying.  One  day  she  was  playing  with  the  tassel  of  my  silk  apron
in  her  sleep  when  suddenly  she  said,  "  That  is  a  nice  tassel,  but  nothing  to>
what  we's  little  Queen  has  ;  it  is  a  gilt  one."  I  asked  her  why  she  had  never
mentioned  it  before,  and  she  answered  quite  crossly,  ' '  Do  we  think  we  tell
everything  we  see  ?  "

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  her  sleep  is  that  time  seems  to  be  nowhere
with  her  ;  she  will  tell  you  of  something  which  seems  to  be  taking  place  at
the  time  she  mentions  it,  and  you  find  afterwards  that  it  occurred  some
hours  previously.  For  instance,  when  she  was  here  about  twelve  years  ago,
I  took  her,  at  the  request  of  a  lady  present,  to  see  her  sisters  in  Edin-
burgh. She  found  the  house,  described  the  furniture  and  ornaments  in  the
drawing-room,  and  a  lady  not  very  young,  then  she  added,  "  But  there  is  a
young  lady  here,  the  other  lady  is  her  aunt."  My  friend  was  sure  this  was  a
mistake,  for  her  niece  had  been  very  ill,  and  unable  for  many  weeks  to  visit
her  aunt.  However,  she  wrote  to  her  sister  in  Edinburgh,  and  asked  her,
"  Have  you  seen  our  niece  lately  ?  "  The  answer  came  that  her  niece  was  so
much  better  that  she  had  been  to  see  them  on  the  morning  of  such  a  day  ;
that  was  the  very  day  when  Jane  had  seen  her,  only  it  was  some  hours
after  the  real  time.

Some  people  have  said  Jane  only  knew  what  the  person  knew  who  gave
her  the  sleep.  This  was  a  very  great  mistake,  as  was  proved  on  one  occasion
in  a  very  remarkable  manner.  My  eldest  brother  had  a  friend  staying  with
him,  a  young  gentleman  from  Northumberland.  He  wished  her  to  be  taken
to  his  father's  house.  To  the  best  of  my  powers  I  took  her  there,  when,  to
my  utter  consternation,  she  began  to  express  the  greatest  horror  of  my
taking  her  to  such  a  house,  the  master  was  such  a  wicked  man,  and  had,  if  I
remember  aright,  hanged  himself  in  an  out-house  of  the  farm.  Mr.  Rae,
however,  soon  put  me  at  ease  by  saying  I  had  got  to  the  wrong  house.  What
Jane  had  mentioned  was  all  true  of  what  had  taken  place  at  a  short  distance
from  his  father's  house.

There  were  many  peculiarities  about  Jane's  sleep.  For  instance,  she
always  said  she  must  have  a  good  light  for  what  she  was  to  go  and  see,  and
this  light  she  got  by  the  mesmeriser  placing  both  hands  on  either  side  of  her
head.  She  was  sometimes  taken  to  see  invalids,  and  in  more  than  one
case  advised  what  medicine  should  be  given,  and  it  was  always  the  right  one
for  the  disease.

Mr.  Williamson  had  a  friend  called  Dr.  Meyer  ;  he  often  took  Jane  to  see


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


91


him,  and  once  she  had  a  good  deal  of  trouble,  as  he  had  left  the  place  where
Mr.  Williamson  took  her  ;  but  eventually  she  got  upon  his  track,  and  found
him  at  some  "watering-place  in  Germany.

My  sister-in-law  reminds  me  that  one  day  when  Dr.  F.  was  not  present,
she  said  in  her  sleep  that  he  was  very  sorry  for  the  girl,  and  was  going  to  give
her  some  money,  and  that  a  short  while  afterwards,  without  his  knowing  that
she  had  said  so,  he  gave  her  £2.

With  regard  to  the  excavations  made  by  Mr.  Procter  at  Willington,
nothing  was  discovered.

I  am  sorry  I  did  not  make  notes  at  the  time,  for  I  find  I  have  forgotten  so
many  things,  and  more  wonderful  things  than  those  I  have  related.

Eliza  Fraser.

12,  Moray-place,  Crosshill,  Glasgow.

Ax  Ixcidext  Recalled  by  the  Rev.  C.  Green.

Mr.  Charles  Green  was  interested  in  a  lady  in  London,  and  asked  that
Jane  should  be  sent  to  the  house,  to  find  out  what  was  going  on  there.  She
discovered  the  house,  went  upstairs,  and,  to  her  horror,  found  that  the  young
lady  was  dead,  and  the  corpse  laid  out.  Then  she  said,  "What  is  this  that
they  are  bringing  in— the  coffin  ? "  Then  she  went  and  looked  at  the  plate
upon  it,  and  read  aloud  the  girl's  name  and  age.  She  then  made  the  remark  :
'•The  family  is  in  great  sorrow,  but  they  sorrow  not  as  those  without  hope,"
and  "they  want  Mr.  Charles  to  officiate  at  the  funeral.  He  will  get  a  letter
in  the  morning,  as  they  have  written  to  him. "

Next  day,  the  letter  came  announcing  her  death,  and  requesting  Mr.
Charles  to  go  to  the  funeral.

Charles  Greex,

Yicar  of  St.  Paul's,  Beckenham.

Further  Statement  by  Mrs.  T.  Myers.

May,  1884.

Mrs.  S.  D.  Wills  remembers,  when  a  girl,  being  present  when  I  gave
"  Jane  "  the  sleep,  and  we  went  to  seek  my  father  and  mother  who  were  in.
London.  We  did  not  know  when  to  expect  them  home,  so  we  sent  her  to-
find  out.  She  said  they  were  busy  packing  up  and  we  should  see  them  home
next  clay.  And  certainly  they  arrived.  Mrs.  S.  D.  Wills  only  saw  Jane  a
few  times  and  was  much  struck  with  her  correctness.

Once,  when  disinclined  to  trouble  with  Jane  and  having  to  give  her  the
sleep  for  the  good  of  her  health,  I  told  her  she  must  take  a  tour  in  Scotland,,
by  herself,  and  enjoy  the  scenery.  My  mind  was  far  away  when,  suddenly,
she  said,  "What  is  this  ?  "  I  answered,  "How  do  I  know  ?  I  do  not  know
where  'we'  is."  Angrily,  "Don't  '  we  '  know  '  we  '  is  travelling  in  Scot-
land ?"  "Well,  where  are  'we'  now?"  "'We 'see  a  castle."  "Find
out  its  name,  for  I  have  no  idea  where  '  we  '  has  wandered  to."  She  said,
"  '  We'  is  on  a  steamboat,  and  'we  '  know  now  it  is  Dumbarton  Castle  !  "

In  the  sleep  she  sees  and  enjoys  very  much  all  the  beauties  of  nature,  and
also  enters  into  all  the  amusement  of  a  walk,  in  Scarboro'  on  the  See-Saw,
Hyde  Park,  and  other  gay  scenes  at  home  and  abroad.  She  visited  the
Exhibition  of  1862,  long  before  I  went  up  to  it,  and  she  described  the
entrance-door,  near  the  Golden  Obelisk,  and  was  much  struck  with  the  size


92


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


and  beauty  of  the  latter  ;  and  then  she  walked  about  and  enjoyed  herself
very  much.  She  made  me  promise  to  go  and  see  Emanuel's  jewellery  and
Minton's  china,  and  gave  me  directions  where  to  find  their  cases.  I  found
she  had  been  most  correct  in  her  description,  even  to  sets  of  jewels  and
china,  selecting  the  most  beautiful  to  her  thinking.  She  had  never  read
anything  about  the  Exhibition  or  been  told  anything,  for  Jane  is  in  lowly
life  and  does  not  hear  what  is  going  on  in  London  or  elsewhere.

Recollections  of  "Jane's"  Sister.

May  13th,  1884.

Dear  Mrs.  Myers, — I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  remember  much  about
my  sister  Jane  being  put  into  the  sleep.  I  remember  once  when  I  had  her
in  the  sleep  (we  being  upstairs  at  the  time)  a  gentleman  came  in  downstairs,
when  she  said,  "Who  is  that?"  I  said  I  did  not  know,  and  she  at  once
said,  "  Didn't  we  know  the  dark  gentleman  ?  "  I  did  not  know;  she  then
held  up  her  fingers  and  spelt  his  name,  which  turned  but  to  be  quite  correct.
On  another  occasion  sister  Bessie  had  been  out  making  purchases,  and  when
.she  returned  Jane  named  all  the  articles  that  Bessie  had  got  in  the  basket,
while  I  knew  nothing  that  she  had  got  in  the  basket.

I  also  remember  on  one  occasion  when  Mr.  Williamson  had  her  in  the
sleep,  she  gave  a  very  beautiful  and  correct  description  of  St.  Peter's
Church  at  Rome.  I  know  of  my  own  knowledge  that  when  she  was  out  of
the  sleep  she  knew  nothing  about  the  church  at  Rome.  I  should  have  been
glad  if  I  had  remembered  more  to  have  acquainted  you  with  it,  but  as  it  hap-
pened so  long  ago  the  particulars  have  almost  escaped  my  memory.

I  know  nothing  of  the  clergyman  at  Whickham,  but  I  remember  Mr.
Williamson  had  a  nephew,  a  clergyman  at  Darlington,  some  years  ago  (perhaps
20  years  ago),  but  I  seem  to  have  lost  sight  of  them  all  years  ago.

I  heard  from  Jane  yesterday,  and  she  is  still  very  poorly  ;  and  as  regards
myself  I  feel  that  I  am  getting  old  and  feeble,  but  I  have  much  to  be  thank-
ful for,  as  I  have  a  comfortable  home.

Charlotte  Hope.

Notes  of  an  Interview  with  "Jane,"  by  Mrs.  Russell.

July  22nd,  1883.

"Let  us  go  and  see  'Katie.'  Is  she  up?"  "  Yes,  and  she  is  a  great  deal
better  ;  but  they  should  not  speak  to  her  so  much,  they  will  weary  her.
Someone  is  speaking  to  her  with  a  hat  on,  I  do  not  know  who  it  is."
"Well,  look  into  the  back  of  her  heart,  and  tell  us  ;  get  the  spelling-book."
"  Bella,"  was  said  in  a  minute,  and  then  she  tried  to  spell  and  pronounce
Bainbrige,  which  she  did  not  quite  correctly.

"Why  did  Katie's  friends  not  meet  her  at  the  train  last  night?"
"Because  they  did  not  know  she  was  coming."  "  But  I  sent  them  a  post-
card in  time. "  "They  got  no  word  (emphatically)  but  it  does  not  matter
now,  she  is  all  right."

"Katie"  had  travelled  with  Mrs.  F.  the  day  before,  and  being  a  great
invalid,  her  friends  were  asked  to  meet  her.  Bella  Bainbridge  was  my
servant,  who  was  acquainted  with  "Katie,"  and  was  with  her  at  the  very
time  ;  she  had  on  a  hat.  When  she  returned  an  hour  or  two  after,  she
reported  to  Mrs.  F.  that  "Katie"  was  much  better. Her  friends  were


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


93


much  surprised  to  see  her  having  got  no  worse.  Mrs.  "Jane"  C.  was
familiar  with  Bella's  Christian  name,  having  often  seen  her,  but  did  not
know  her  surname.

"Let  us  now  go  to  Edinburgh,  where  we  have  never  been,  and  look  for
Merehiston-road,  and  a  house  called  Redfern,  and  see  the  gentleman  win  >
lives  there."  (After  a  pause.)  "A  large  house."  (This  was  said  in  an
inquiring  tone.)  "Yes,"  said  Mrs.  F.,  "and  let  us  go  in,  and  see  if  he
is  a  bachelor  or  married."  Mrs.  "Jane"  C.  apparently  did  not  hear  or
take  it  up  properly,  for  in  a  moment  she  said  in  a  reproachful  tone,  "  How
did  you  say  he  was  a  bachelor — there  is  a  lady  and  children  1 "  She  then
seemed  a  little  put  out,  and  said,  "  But  may  we  go  in,  does  we  know  them?"
(She  always  said  "  we.")  "Well — we  know  their  friends,  at  least."  She  then
said  "They  are  Mr.  Russell's  friends."  "Yes,"  and  then  looking  at  me,
"Who  are  we  looking  at?"  "Mr.  Russell's  lady."  Then  in  a  moment,
"The  gentleman  is  Mrs.  Russell's  brother."  "Look  and  tell  us  anything
you  can  see."  "  The  gentleman  has  something  on  his  mind — he  is  troubled
about  something."  "Well,  see  if  you  can  find  out  what  it  is."  (After  a
pause.)  "  He  has  a  sick  child, — no  not  a  child,  a  daughter — he  is  very  kind
— she  has  been  ill  a  long  time."  "  See  if  you  can  find  what  is  the  matter."
"It  is  the  same  as  the  young  gentleman"  (a  young  man  very  ill  with  his
lungs,  whom  she  had  been  lately  taken  to  see),  "  but  she  is  not  nearly  so  ill,
she  is  better  at  present  ;  but  the  heat  tries  her."  (I  think  it  was  at  this  time
she  said,  "  She  is  lying  down  to  rest.")  "  Now  look  if  we  can  do  her  any
good."  "No,  they  can  do  her  more  good  than  we  can — they  has  tried
everything — the  gentleman  is  very  kind."  "  Tell  us  what  other  children  you
see."  "Boys."  "Anything  about  them?"  "  They's  none  of  them  very
strong — not  that  they's  ill,  no,  no,  only  they's  not  particularly  strong,  one  of
them  is  like  '  we's '  boy."  This,  we  understood,  referred  to  John,  suffering
like  Arthur,  from  asthma.

"Now  we  shall  take  another  walk — to  Morningside  Bank — and  see
whether  ladies  or  gentlemen  live  there.  Have  we  come  to  the  house  ? "
"  Yes,  there  are  no  gentlemen,  and  none  of  the  ladies  are  very  young —
and  they  have  no  mamma  ?  Are  they  not  Mrs.  Russell's  sisters  ?  "  "Now,
let  us  go  to  the  drawing-room."  "  Oh,  what  a  pretty  room,  .so  pretty  !
There  is  a  lady  working  ;  she  is  a  nice  lady,  but  very  particular  ;  she  likes
things  all  right."  "  Is  there  more  than  one  lady  1  "  "  There  are  two  ladies
— one  a  younger  one."  "Well,  are  they  mother  and  daughter — or  sisters —
or  what  relation  are  they  to  each  other  V  "  They  are  aunt  and  niece  ;  the
young  lady  is  the  gentleman's  daughter,  and  she  has  come  to  see  her  aunt."

I  think  she  added  something  about  her  (the  young  one)  resting,  but
about  this  time  she  became  confused,  and  in  an  upbraiding  tone,  complained
to  Mrs.  F.  that  she  (Mrs.  F.)  was  stupid,  and  did  not  let  her  sleep
enough.  Mrs.  F.  replied,  "Oh,  yes,  I  am  stupid.  Now  take  a  sleep,"
and  let  her  alone  for  a  minute  or  two,  saying  to  me  (Mrs.  Russell),  "  The  fact
is  I  am  very  tired."

"Now  tell  us  anything  particular  you  see — look  round  the  room — is  there
anything  on  the  mantelshelf?"  "Yes,  a  pretty  clock — very  pretty."
"  What  is  it  like  ?  "  "It  is  " — here  she  began  to  try  and  spell  something  :
"no — m — 1,"  apparently  expecting Mrs.  F. to  help  her,  and  annoyed


94


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicM.


when  she  did  not.  And  then  she  said,  "  It  is  all  gold."  "  Look  round  the
walls — do  you  see  anything  1 "  "Oh,  yes,  brackets,  with  things  on  them  like
Miss  Anna's  room  "  (Mrs.  F.'s  sister).  "  What  is  the  carpet  like  1  "
"  Pretty,  pretty,  with  roses,  and  so  soft  ;  not  like  we's  carpet."  (Mrs.  F.'s
carpet  is  quite  old.)  "Now  tell  us  if  any  of  the  ladies  do  any  particular
work."  "  One  of  them  cuts  out  things. "  "  Is  it  out  of  wood  ? "  "  Yes,  and
she  thinks  so  much  of  them,  she  thinks  them  beautiful  ;  she  is  a  very  nice
lady,  but  particular  about  keeping  her  things  right.  She  has  a  little  room
where  she  works."

I  forgot  to  say  that  botli  at  Redfern  and  Morningside  Bank  she  seemed  a
little  uncomfortable  about  going  in,  saying,  at  Morningside,  "But  does  w<e
know  them  1 — the  lady  is  not  pleased  with  we  going  in.';  She  invariably  used
the  Avord  "we"  when  in  the  mesmeric  state.  The  question,  "  Can  we  do  her
any  good  ?  "  refers  to  her  having  twice  said  that  to  use  the  "passes"  upon
invalids  would  do  them  good.  One  of  the  parties  was  "Katie,"  on  whom
they  had  been  tried,  and  with  much  success.  When  spelling  any  name  she
spoke  of  the  "spelling-book."


(M.  371.) Experiments  by  Mr.  Theophilus  Criswick  with  Miss  R.

Swansea,  J une  16th,  1884.

"I  was  the  engineer  of  the  Plymouth  Iron  Works,  Merthyr  Tydvil,  and
left  in  1864.  It  was  some  few  years  previous  (I  should  think  from  1853  to
1858)  that  circumstances  or  inclination  induced  my  devoting  some  attention
to  satisfy  myself  as  to  whether  some  (so-called)  mesmeric  phenomena  were
true  or  not.

*  *  *  *  *

"  I  tried  to  send  some  persons  to  sleep,  &c,  by  gazing  into  their  eyes,  by
passes  from  the  head  downwards,  &c.,  and  found  several  sensitive.
One  of  those  that  was  susceptible  to  the  influence  was  a  Miss  R.  After
falling  into  the  so-called  mesmeric  sleep,  it  was  easy  to  induce  her  to  talk,  to
get  up,  &c. ,  and  in  her,  as  well  as  others,  I  was  always  struck  by  the  improve-
ment of  expression  during  the  sleep.

"Upon  one  occasion  she  was  seated,  and  an  aunt  of  mine  coming  in
front  of  her,  a  decided  shudder  took  place.  On  inquiring  the  cause  I  was
told  '  She  looked  so  nasty,'  and  further  inquiry  convinced  me  that  the  one
asleep  looked  into  or  perhaps  through  a  living  person.  I  am  not  sure
whether  it  was  then  or  subsequently,  but  we  were  in  the  same  room,  which
was  a  kind  of  room  used  for  meals,  and  Miss  R.  was  asleep,  that  I  asked
my  aunt  to  go  into  the  front  room  (fitted  up  more  as  a  drawing-room),  and
do  whatever  she  had  any  inclination  to.  This  was  done,  and  Miss  R.
correctly  described  what  was  done.  Now,  taking  a  direct  line  from  where
Miss  R.  was,  and  the  place  where  my  aunt  was  doing,  there  were  three  brick
partitions  of  Bin.,  and  a  stone  wall  of  20in.,  at  least,  say  a  yard  of  (so-called)
solid  material  interposed.  Perhaps  I  should  say  that  several  things  very
unusual  were  done  by  my  aunt ;  for  instance,  the  placing  of  a  chair  on  the
table,  and  changing  its  position  there,  turning  a  picture  on  the  wall,  &c,  the
whole  of  which  were  accurately  described  to  me  whilst  being  done.  Pray
remember  that  my  object  being  for  investigation  only,  and  having  no
interest  to  serve  in  any  way — conscious  there  was  no  collusion — I  was  com-


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


95


pelled  to  believe  she  had  either  seen  through  a  yard  of  wall  or  was  able
to  say  what  was  fact,  even  if  the  means  used  were  more  wonderful  than  look-
ing through  what  was  interposed.

"Several  tests  of  other  phenomena  were  also  made  with  the  same  per-
son. If  I  put  anything  in  my  mouth,  she  imitated  mastication,  &c,  and
described  the  taste.  Putting  a  tasteless  (or  nearly  tasteless)  substance  in
my  mouth,  and  thinking  of  the  taste  of  another  thing,  she  would  describe
the  taste  as  that  of  the  substance  thought  of,  or  without  placing  anything  in
my  mouth,  the  taste  of  anything  desired  would  be  stated.

"I  also  found  she  could  detect  a  wineglass  of  water,  although  put  in
any  position  with  others  precisely  similar,  provided  I  made  some  so-called
passes  down  it  after  filling.  Interrogated  as  to  the  difference  in  taste  (for  it
was  by  that  only  she  often  said  she  detected  it),  her  words  were  that  it  tasted
pleasanter. "

Mr.  Criswick  forwarded  to  Mr.  Gurney  a  paper  of  testimonials,  of  which
the  following  is  a  specimen  : —

"Duffryn,  Aberdare,  October  1st,  1878.
"I  have  long  known  Mr.  Theophilus  Criswick,  C.E.,  who  was  long  the
trusted  agent  of  the  late  Mr.  Anthony  Hill,  of  the  Plymouth  Iron  Works,
Merthyr,  and  who  in  that  capacity  acquired  great  experience  in  all  that
appertains  to  the  work  of  a  surveyor.  I  believe  him  to  be  a  man  not  only
of  great  practical  knowledge  and  ability,  but  of  high  character.

"  Aberdare."


(M.  1,900.) Experiments  by  Mr.  Glover  with  G.  F.

We  are  indebted  to  Mr.  J.  J.  T.  Glover,  of  124,  Stephen's  Green,
Dublin,  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.R. ,  for  the  following  account  of  some
■experiments  of  his  own,  which  he  wrote  out  at  the  request  of  Professor
Barrett,  on  February  9th,  1885.  The  incidents  themselves  occurred,  he  tells
us,  about  fifteen  years  earlier.

"On  another  occasion,  one  evening,  about  8  or  9  o'clock,  at  a  rather
numerous  party,  I  placed  the  young  man, G.  F.,  in  the  extreme  hypnotic  state,
and  after  several  present  had  tested  his  insensibility  by  sticking  pins  in  his
arms  and  passing  a  lamp  in  front  of  his  eyes  (the  pupils  remaining  unaffected),
I  tried  if  I  could  obtain  any  of  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance.

"  Avoiding  leading  questions,  he  faithfully  described  the  interiors  of  the
sleeping  rooms  of  many  of  those  present,  and  to  which  he  had  never  had
access,  also  the  show-cards  and  posters  on  the  platform  of  the  Tralee  Station
of  the  Great  Southern  and  Western  Railway,  but  those  he  had  often  observed
in  his  ordinary  condition.

' '  Someone  now  proposed  to  test  him  by  asking  for  the  description  of  a
locality  which  he  had  never  seen,  and  Kingstown,  near  Dublin,  was  sug-
gested. He  had  up  to  this  time  never  been  farther  from  home  than  Killar-
ney,  some  twenty  miles  distant.  He  gave  a  perfectly  correct  delineation  of
Kingstown  Harbour,  piers,  mail  steamer  at  station,  &c.  Directing  him  to
describe  anything  further,  he  answered,  '  I  see  a  large  vessel  coming  in. '  I
asked  for  more  particulars,  and  he  replied,  '  She  is  too  distant. '  I  then  told
him  to  take  a  boat  or  reach  her  by  any  means  he  liked. Seemingly  getting


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick


nearer  he  continued  in  a  few  minutes  :  '  It  is  a  large  ship,  and  she  has
troops  on  board,  I  can  see  the  soldiers. '  I  requested  him  to  ascertain  her
name.  '  The  Himallah  '  (sic)  was  his  reply,  adding  that  he  could  not  see
very  plainly.  I  encouraged  him  to  try  again,  and  he  repeated,  '  The
Himallyea,  or  Bim-a-leyah,'  each  time  using  a  tri-syllabic  word  as  nearly  as-
possible  resembling  '  Himalaya.'

' '  The  remarkable  circumstance  in  this  case  is,  that  two  days  afterwards
I  read  in  the  Irish  Times  of  the  ar  rival  in  Kingstown  Harbour,  from  India,
of  the  troopship  Himalaya,  bringing  soldiers,  &c.  It  was  utterly  impossible
for  any  one  present  to  have  had  the  slightest  inkling  of  this.  Certainly  I
knew  Kingstown  well,  and  as  well  as  I  can  recollect  was  aware  that  there  was
such  a  vessel  as  the  Himalaya,  and  that  she  was  employed  as  a  troopship,  but
there  all  ordinary  knowledge  ceased.  If  it  was  merely  a  haphazard  thought
of  mine  conceived  spontaneously,  and  in  some  way  transferred  to  G.  F.'s.
mind  without  contact  or  suggestion,  then  the  coincidence  with  actual  fact  was,
to  say  the  least,  very  remarkable  ;  but  my  own  impression  and  that  of  all
present  was  that  it  was  an  undoubted  instance  of  what  is  termed  clair-
voyance.

"  In  the  cases  of  the  contents  of  rooms,  &c,  which  lie  had  never  seen,  it
is  possible  that  he  became  conscious  of  the  thoughts  of  others  through  the
mind  of  the  operator,  for  by  no  means  could  anyone  communicate  by  sign,
sound,  or  otherwise,  any  idea  to  him,  unless  through  me,  the  operator.  In
fact  the  ordinary  theory  of  thought-transference  fails  to  account  satisfactorily
for  all  of  the  phenomena  that  are  here  described.  I  may  mention  that
this  was  the  last  experiment  I  tried  on  G.  ¥.,  inasmuch  as  his  father  called
on  me  the  next  day  and  requested  that  I  would  discontinue  further  investiga-
tion. Of  course  I  complied.

*  *  *  *

"J.  J.  T.  Glover."


(M.  .319.) Experiments  by  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys  with  E.  Maguire.

66,  Doddington-grove,  Kennington,  November,  1883.

In  the  year  1852  I  frequently  mesmerised  persons  who  were  in  the
employment  of  Joseph  Humphreys  and  Son  (the  latter  myself),  millers,  of
Kilmarow  Mills,  situated  in  the  southern  part  of  the  County  of  Kilkenny,
and  about  four  and  a-half  miles  from  Waterford.

One  evening  I  had  in  my  room  at  the  mill  Edward  Maguire,  a  man  who
had  then  been  employed  at  the  mills  for  more  than  12  years,  and  was  at  the
time  a  night  miller,  working  at  a  small  mill  belonging  to  us  about  a  mile  or
so  lower  down  the  stream.  He  had  come  in  previous  to  going  down  to  his
night's  work.  His  house,  in  which  he  had  been  sleeping  during  the  day,
was,  perhaps,  300  yards  more  distant  from  Waterford  than  the  mills  in  which
my  room  was.

I  put  him  to  sleep,  and  it  then  occurred  to  me  to  try  if  he  were  clairvoyant,
as  I  had  read  of  the  jjhenomenon,  but  had  never  witnessed  a  case.  I  asked
him,  "  Can  you  go  any  where  1  "  He  replied,  "  Yes,  I  can  go  anywhei-e."  I
said,  "  You  know  where  Malcolmson's  foundry  is,  on  the  Newtown  road,  just
beyond  Waterford?" "  Yes,"  he  said,  "I  am  there." "  Go  on,"  I  said,


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


97


"past  it  till  you  come  to  a  large  house  standing  in  from  the  road.  Next  to
this  is  a  row  of  four  houses,  and  next  beyond  it  is  another  large  house."
"I  see  it,"  he  said.  "Go  in,"  I  said,  "  through  the  gate.  You  see  to  the
left  hand  a  door  painted  green,  leading  into  the  garden  behind  the  house."
"  Yes,"  he  said.  "  Go  through  that  door  and  you  will  find  another  door  on
the  left  hand  into  the  kitchen,"  I  said.  "  Go  in  there.  Now,  who  is  there  1  "
"  Oh,"  he  said,  "  there's  Mary  Doyle  and  another  girl."

Mary  Doyle  was  a  girl  from  the  village  of  Kilmarow,  whom  he  knew  very
well,  though  he  could  not  have  seen  her  for  some  months,  as  she  had  been
for  a  considerable  time  cook  in  that  house.  The  distance  between  my  room
in  the  mill  and  this  house  on  the  Newtown  road  was  not  less  than  five  miles.
I  had  selected  this  house  that  I  might  be  certain  of  his  going  into  it,  as  his.
seeing  this  girl  would  afford  me  evidence  of  this,  and  now  finding  that  he
had  reached  the  right  house,  I  told  him  to  go  upstairs  and  tell  me  who  were
in  the  parlour.

He  told  me  that  sitting  round  a  table  in  the  parlour  were  a  lady  of  middle
age,  who  wore  a  cap,  and  three  young  ladies,  one  of  whom  wore  a  very  queer
kind  of  headdress,  which  came  round  her  face  and  under  her  chin,  covering
the  lower  part  of  the  face  and  also  concealing  her  hah'.  Further,  he  saw  a
small  boy,  and  a  lad,  who  was  reading.

This  description  was  to  me  satisfactory  as  representing  what  I  should
expect,  save  as  to  two  points.  I  could  not  think  of  any  lad  as  likely  to  be
in  the  house,  and  I  could  by  no  means  understand  the  queer  headdress  of
the  young  lady.  As,  however,  I  was  so  far  satisfied  that  the  man  could  not
have  obtained  what  he  had  told  me  by  reading  my  thoughts,  and  as  I  did  not
think  it  quite  justifiable  to  pry  needlessly  into  my  friends'  affairs,  I  recalled
the  man,  and  shortly  afterwards  wakened  him  and  sent  him  on  to  his  work.

Being  in  Waterford  next  day,  I  met  the  lady  of  the  house  to  which  I  had
sent  the  man  on  the  previous  evening,  and  on  asking  how  they  were  at  home,
she  replied  : — "Very  well,  but  poor  E.  has  been  suffering  from  toothache,
and  had  her  face  tied  up  all  last  evening,"  adding,  "W.  came  down  quite
unexpectedly  from  the  school,  and  spent  yesterday  evening  with  us. "  Even
had  I  not  obtained  this  information  unasked  for,  I  should  hardly  have  liked
to  let  this  lady  know  that  I  had  sent  such  a  messenger  to  see  her  family  in
this  way.  The  time  was  about  6  o'clock,  or  between  that  and  seven,  and  the
probability  was  that  the  lad  would  not  have  left  the  school  before  5  o'clock.
Ilis  coming  home  was  unknown  to  anyone  in  his  mother's  house  till  he
arrived  there,  and  in  any  case  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  the  man,
who  was  in  his  own  house  five  miles  off,  to  have  had  any  communication  with
anyone  save  it  had  been  through  some  of  my  own  family.  Moreover,  he  was
ignorant  even  of  the  name  of  any  member  of  the  lady's  family  and  had  never
known  any  of  them.  Although  he  knew  the  servant,  whom  he  at  once
recognised,  he  did  not  know  when  awake  where  she  was,  save  that  she  was
in  service  somewhere  in  or  about  Waterford.  Again,  if  the  very  improbable
event  had  occurred  of  any  person  from  the  village  having  been  to  the  house
mentioned  to  see  Mary  Doyle,  such  an  event  would  at  once  have  become
common  gossip  in  the  village,  and  I  should  have  heard  it  speedily.  Apart
from  any  such  considerations,  the  man  could  beforehand  have  had  no  idea  of
the  place  whither  I  sent  him,  and  in  his  waking  state  would  have  required

H


98


Mrs.  H.  Bidgwich.


information  as  to  locality  and  names  had  I  sent  him  in  the  body  with  a
message  to  the  house,  which  was  quite  unknown  to  him.

I  cannot  find  any  memorandum  made  at  the  time,  but  I  have  once  or
twice  given  an  account  of  the  circumstances  as  above  narrated,  which  became
at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  fixed  in  my  memory,  which  is  retentive.

H.  T.  Humphreys.


(M.  320.)  [From  a  gentleman  who  does  not  wish  his  name  to  be
published.]

When  what  is  popularly  termed  "biology"  came  into  vogue  some  40
years  ago,  a  near  relative,  a  physician,  still  living,  at  an  advanced  age,  made
it  a  branch  of  study.  Notwithstanding  that  he  gave  lectures  upon  the
subject,  he  never  actually  believed  in  it  as  a  true  science  or  jiower,  although
illustrating  his  lectures  by  throwing  persons  into  the  mesmeric  trance,  with
the  usual  manifestations.  This  strange  scepticism  I  cannot  account  for,  but
mention  it  as  told  to  me  by  himself.  Among  others  he  was  in  the  custom  of
mesmerising  a  boy,  whom  indeed  he  took  with  him  when  invited  to  lecture
at  a  distance  (he  was  by  no  means  a  professional  biologist).  This  boy  he
could  mesmerise  instantaneously.  I  never  was  present  at  any  of  his  lectures,
as  we  lived  at  a  considerable  distance  apart.  Being  on  a  short  visit  to  my
friend,  and  about  to  leave  by  the  stage-coach  at  4  p.m.,  he  suddenly
recollected  that  there  was  about  an  hour  to  spare,  and  that  if  he  could  find
the  boy,  he  might  be  able  to  show  me  a  case  of  clairvoyance.  We  did  find
the  youth  with  some  trouble,  and  at  quarter-past  3  o'clock  he  permitted
himself,  but  with  much  reluctance,  to  be  mesmerised.  It  ajupeared  that  he
always  suffered  afterwards.  The  moment  he  was  mesmerised  Dr.  B.  said  to
him  :  "  Now  be  quick,  as  this  gentleman  is  in  a  hurry.  Does  he  live  in  this
town?"  "No,  he  lives  about  24  miles  away"  (which  was  correct).
"  Where  ?  "  "I  don't  know,  but  it's  in  a  big  town."  "  Do  you  see  his
house  ?  "  "  Yes,  it's  at  the  top  of  a  brae  "  (ascent).  "  How  many  rooms  are
there  in  it  1  "  The  answer  was  perfectly  correct.  "  Do  you  see  any  people
in  it  ?  "  "Only  a  servant  and  a  child  in  the  cradle.  They  are  in  the  kitchen."
"What  is  the  servant  doing  ?  "  "  She  is  peeling  potatoes,  and  sometimes
rocking  the  cradle  witli  her  foot. "  "Are  you  sure  there  is  no  one  else  in  the
house?"  "Certain."  "  Is  there  nobody  in  any  of  the  rooms  ?  "  "No,
the  mistress  of  the  house  went  down  to  the  town  a  little  while  ago."

On  this,  my  friend,  who  had  faithfully  promised  the  boy  to  keep  him
only  a  short  time  under  the  mesmeric  influence,  asked  me  if  I  had  seen  and
heard  enough  to  satisfy  my  curiosity  and  to  test  the  probability  of  the
answers  being  correct,  and  on  my  expressing  my  satisfaction,  immediately
demesmerised  (is  there  such  a  word  ?)  him,  and  the  lad  decamped  incon-
tinently, evidently  glad  to  make  his  escajje.

On  arriving  at  home  in  the  evening,  I  made  careful  inquiry,  and  found
that  all  was  just  as  the  boy  had  stated.  The  time  was  easily  fixed  by  the
hour  at  which  my  wife  had  gone  out  for  a  walk.  She  had  "  gone  down  the
town"  about  3  o'clock,  and  had  ordered  dinner  at  4 o'clock.  At  the  moment
of  the  boy  being  mesmerised,  the  servant  was  undoubtedly  peeling  the  dinner
potatoes  in  the  kitchen,  and  at  the  same  time  attending  to  the  baby  in  the
•cradle.


On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


The  story  is  short  and  simple,  and  is  perfectly  unvarnished.  There  was
not  a  suspicion  of  collusion  (had  it  been  possible),  my  friend  being  a  physician
of  the  highest  honour,  and  held  in  an  esteem  of  which  he  recently  had  a  most
remarkable  public  proof,  yet  it  is  sufficient  "to  give  us  pause"  ere  treating  it
with  philosophic  contempt.  By  "  collusion,"  I  mean  that  the  boy  might  have
T^een  furnished  with  the  probabilities  ; — which  explanation  is  out  of  the
•question.

Clairvoyance  of  the  Past.
(M.  330.)  The  following  account  was  sent  by  Mrs.  Stella,  of  Cliieri,
Italy,  who  was  known  to  Mr.  Gurney,  and  who  was  the  percipient  in  Cases
198  and  274  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living.  Mr.  Gurney  suggested  that  this
.may  have  been  a  case  of  reading  of  A.'s  mind  through  its  affinity  to  B's,  who
.is  present.

' '  A  short  time  ago,  hearing  that  there  was  a  '  sonnambula  '  in  the  neigh-
bouring town,  I  went  to  '  consult '  her  out  of  pure  curiosity,  and  quite  pre-
pared to  be  hoaxed.  I  was  told  that  she  could  tell  you  all  about  yourself,
•and  any  other  person  in  whom  you  were  interested,  provided  you  gave  her
.an  object  belonging  to  that  person.  I  went  to  see  her,  and  asked  for  a
seance.  She  was  placed  in  a  state  of  trance  or  mesmeric  sleep  by  a  young-
girl,  who,  after  placing  my  hand  in  that  of  the  'sonnambula,'  left  the  house.
The  woman  first  gave  me  a  personal  description  of  myself,  nationality,  &c,
with  a  description  of  character,  which  was  perfectly  correct.  She  even
mentioned  a  slight  indisposition  from  which  I  was  suffering,  giving  me  a
Temedy  for  it.  I  then  gave  her  some  hair  which  I  had  combed  out  of  a  brush
in  my  stepson's  travelling  bag,  he  having  just  arrived  from  Spain.  (This  I
did  on  pan-pose,  in  order  to  puzzle  her.)  She  took  the  hair  in  her  hand,
placing  it  on  her  forehead,  and  at  the  same  time  leaving  her  hold  on  my
hand.  At  first  she  was  puzzled  and  confused,  but  soon  her  ideas  seemed
to  become  more  distinct,  and  then  she  told  me  his  relationship  to  myself,
giving  an  exact  personal  description  of  his  appearance,  character,  &c.  She
did  not  call  him  my  stepson,  but  'a  close  relation  without  consanguinity.'
I  then  asked  her  where  he  lived,  what  he  did,  &c.  She  told  me  all,  even  to
unimportant  details.  For  instance,  she  said,  '  Yesterday,  he  rode  into  the
country,  got  off  his  horse,  and  bought  some  cigars.  The  tobacconist  could
not  give  him  change,  so  seeing  two  friends  passing,  my  son  asked  them  to
change  the  note.'  I  knew  nothing  of  this,  but  asked  my  boy  when  I
returned  home,  and  found  it  true.

"  I  was  certainly  astonished,  and  my  disbelief  is  shaken.  All  the  answers
were  not  very  clear,  but  if  I  expressed  any  dissent  she  got  confused,  so  I
found  it  best  to  let  her  answer  my  questions  her  own  way.  Some  of  the
details  are  most  curious,  and  the  fact  of  the  hair  having  been  to  Spain  was
mentioned  by  her,  and  at  first  caused  her  some  confusion,  and  she  became
distressingly  irritated  at  not  being  able  to  '  see  '  clearly.  On  her  return  to
consciousness  she  appeared  exhausted,  and  professed  a  total  ignorance  of
what  had  been  asked  her.

' '  I  can  give  no  suppositions  on  the  matter,  and  only  state  what  I
witnessed."


100


Leon  MariUier,


IV.

APPARITIONS OF  THE VIRGIN IN  DORDOGNE.
By  Leon  Marillier.

(Translation  revised  by  the  author.)

In  the  summer  of  1889  there  appeared  in  the  Department  of  the-
Dordogne  a  sort  of  epidemic  of  hallucinations.  The  newspapers  of
the  district,  and  in  particular  VEclio  de  la  Dordogne,  concerned  them-
selves with  these  apparitions  of  the  Virgin  because  it  seemed  that  they
might  be  used  as  arguments  in  political  and  religious  controversies-
They  gave  rise  to  endless  discussions  between  Conservatives  and'
Republicans,  between  Catholics  and  Freethinkers  ;  but  it  hardly
occurred  to  anyone  to  deal  with  the  matter  scientifically.  For  this,
reason  it  is  impossible  to  trust  entirely  the  accounts  of  the  newspapers.
The  Echo  de  la  Dordogne,  however,  contains  some  definite  and  interest-
ing information  which  agrees  with  what  I  actually  heard  in  September,.
1889,  from  the  mouths  of  the  little  girls  who  first  saw  the  apparition,,
and  of  the  priests  who  followed  the  affair  from  the  beginning.

To  my  mind  the  interest  of  these  apparitions  consisted  not  in  the-
visions  themselves,  which,  according  to  the  accounts  current  in  the
district,  were  like  all  visions  of  mystics,  but  in  their  contagious-
character.  Many  epidemics  of  hallucinations  have  been  observed  (that
at  Corano,  in  Italy,  in  1885,  being  one  of  the  most  recent),  and  their
general  characteristics  are  pretty  well  known,  but  it  has  not  been
determined,  by  critical  examination  of  particular  cases,  how  much  is.
due  in  these  phenomena  to  verbal  suggestion,  and  how  much  to  true
infection. This  is  what  led  me  to  study  these  apparitions  in  detail.

A  little  girl  of  11  years  of  age  was  the  first  to  see  the  Virgin.
Her  hallucination  was  transmitted,  in  the  first  place,  to  other  children
of  her  own  age,  and  then  to  a  lai'ge  number  of  peasants,  both  men
and  women.  Grown  men  and  children  alike  saw  the  apparition,  but
they  all  saw  it  under  a  slightly  different  form.  The  central  fact  of
their  stories  is  the  same,  but  the  details  vary.  The  Virgin  is  sometimes-
in  white,  sometimes  in  black  ;  sometimes  she  has  her  face  bare,  and
sometimes  she  is  wrapped  in  a  veil ;  occasionally  her  body  is  luminous,
or  she  carries  lights  attached  to  her  shoulders  or  to  her  breast.  Some-
times she  is  large,  sometimes  small,  scarcely  as  tall  as  the  plaster
statuettes  which  are  found  on  the  mantel-piece  of  every  peasant's  house
in  Perigord.  The  surroundings  also  change.  Sometimes  the  Virgin
appeai-s  upon  the  lande  as  a  vague,  ill-defined  form,  which  £>asses  as


Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne.  101


though  wrapped  in  the  mist.  Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  to  one
who  looks  between  the  stones  heaped  up  at  the  foot  of  the  hazel  tree,
where  she  first  revealed  herself,  she  appears  all  resplendent  with  golden
light,  in  a  chapel  of  gold,  illuminated  by  the  light  of  wax  candles.

It  will  be  useful,  for  the  light  understanding  of  the  character  of
these  hallucinations,  to  describe  shortly  the  district  in  which  they  took
place,  and  in  particular  the  spot  where  the  Virgin  appeared.  The
little  seer 1  lives  some  miles  from  Perigueux,  in  a  country  of  low,  stony
hills,  where  grow  great  branching  chestnut  trees,  and  oaks  with  black
trunks.  The  red  tinge  of  the  soil  appears  through  the  scanty  herbage,
under  the  pitiless  light  of  the  blue  sky.  Mournful  heaths,  covered
with  line  herbs,  studded  with  thickets,  and  cut  up  by  small  half-ruinous
walls,  stretch  over  the  low  hills  between  the  silent  woods.  Sheep  are
feeding  here  and  there,  tended  by  a  little  girl  who  sits  at  the  foot  of
a  thicket  of  hazel  or  holly.  However  far  one  looks,  one  sees  hills
behind  hills  stretching  to  the  horizon.  There  is  nothing  to  arrest  the
eyes  or  to  fix  the  thought  in  this  indefinite  and  vague  landscape,  in
these  undulating  woods,  which  grow  blue  in  the  distance  like  a  silent
sea.  Nothing  is  heard  but  the  strong  voice  of  the  wind  which  blows
unceasingly  at  the  top  of  the  hills,  and  in  the  bottoms  of  the  valleys,
which  are  filled  with  tall  vegetation,  the  sound  of  the  streams  con-
tinually turning  the  mill-wheels.  The  farms  are  built  on  the  skirts  of
the  meadows,  at  the  foot  of  the  woods  which  rise  towards  the  sky ;  the
villages  stretch  along  the  river  ;  and  on  the  smooth  waste  beyond  the
woods,  where  the  heather  grows,  there  is  a  deep  calm,  a  solitude
disturbed  only  by  the  browsing  of  the  sheep,  and  the  short  bark  of  the
dogs,  answering  one  another  from  farm  to  farm.

It  is  in  the  midst  of  this  mild  and  mournful  country  that  the
Virgin  appeared  on  the  heath  of  Pontinet.  On  a  hot  summer  after-
noon I  went  to  the  new  sanctuary — a  few  stones  piled  up  by  the  side  of
a  bush.  On  a  piece  of  land,  which  is  half  field  and  half  heath,  where
grey  herbage  grows  with  difficulty  among  the  stones,  the  peasants  are
coming  and  going  with  a  solemn  air,  looking  rather  grave  and  frightened.
At  the  end  of  the  field  is  a  wall  of  old  stones,  loose  and  crumbling,
and  pierced  by  deep  holes.  Behind  the  wall  oaks  have  grown  scantily
upon  the  red  soil,  and  a  stunted  hazel  tree  has  emerged  from  a  heap  of
stones.  A  tent  has  been  made  with  a  white  cloth  and  four  sticks,  and
there,  on  the  boards,  are  spread  out  rosaries,  holy  images,  and  a
thousand  little  objects  which  have  been  brought  to  the  holy  Virgin  for
her  blessing.  These  rosaries  are  placed  upon  the  wall,  and  are  thus
sanctified ;  and  it  is  said  that  those  which  have  already  been  blessed
separate  themselves  from  the  others.

1Seer  is  used,  for  lack  of  a  better  word,  to  translate  voyante.


102


Leon  Marillier.


A  family  is  sitting  in  the  little  wood  beside  the  heath — pious,  but-
sceptical  people,  who  look  with  a  mocking  eye  upon  the  women  in
white  caps  or  in  many-coloured  muslins,  who  are  prostrating  them-
selves, moved  and  serious,  at  the  foot  of  the  old  wall  by  the  hazel
thicket.  A  little  girl,  Marie  Roussary(14  years  of  age),  puts  her  head
into  a  hole  in  the  wall  in  order  to  see  the  Virgin,  whom  she  has  come
to  seek  for  a  week  past,  and  has  not  yet  found.  She  is  stretched  out
at  full  length  upon  the  ground,  and  her  body  is  agitated  by  convulsive
movements.  She  groans,  and  wrings  her  hands.  Suddenly  she  sees-
at  the  bottom  of  the  hole  in  the  wall  a  golden  chapel,  and  in  the
chapel  there  is  the  Virgin  with  the  Child  in  her  arms,  and  all  about  her
are  flying  angels,  clothed  in  light.  The  child  gazes  in  ecstasy.  "  Ohr
how  fine  she  is  !  How  pretty  our  Lady  is  !  "  It  is  necessary  almost  to-
tear  her  away  from  the  wall.  Then  follows  a  woman  (Anna
Barbansais),  who  approaches  the  wall  devoutly,  and  looks  into  the
dark  hole.  At  the  bottom  of  the  hole  the  gilded  chapel  is  still  shining.
She  has  been  coming  to  the  sacred  bush  for  12  days  now,  and  this  is
the  first  time  that  she  has  seen  the  Virgin.  One  day,  however,  a  week
before,  she  had  seen  her  when  she  was  passing  over  the  heath  at  night-
fall. Next  follows  a  grave  peasant,  with  a  serious  and  distrustful  air,
who,  in  his  turn,  approaches  the  wall,  and  is  soon  seized  by  the  same
vision.  He  is  upon  his  hands  and  knees,  searching  with  a  troubled
gaze  the  crack  which  j>enetrates  between  the  stones.  He  is  silent,  and
trembling  all  over,  and  then  he  announces  that  he,  too,  like  the  others,
has  seen  the  Virgin.  Has  he  really  seen  her  %  or  is  it  false  shame  %
Is  he  unwilling  to  confess  that  there  was  before  him  nothing  but  a
heap  of  crumbling  stones,  without  chapel  and  without  God?  It  is
impossible  to  know.  He  gets  up  slowly  and  gravely,  with  a  serious
and  thoughtful  look.  When  he  departs,  another  takes  his  place,  and
all,  each  in  turn,  approach  the  sacred  spot.  All  do  not  see,  but
those  who  have  not  seen  depart  silently.  They  are  both  sad  and
humiliated.  In  this  manner  the  peasants  come  by  hundreds  every  day
to  this  corner  of  heath  hidden  behind  the  oaks  to  And  the  Virgin.
The  soil  is  beaten  hard,  as  if  herds  had  passed  over  it,  and  the  whole
crowd  is  silent,  composed,  and  grave,  and  it  seems  as  if  a  new  faith
and  a  new  form  of  worship  were  about  to  come  into  being.

In  the  morning  I  went  to  the  house  of  the  seer.  From  Savignac
we  had  followed  a  narrow  path,  which  led  through  the  tall  grass  of  the
meadows.  We  saw  in  a  held  a  little  girl,  thin  and  dark,  digging-
potatoes.  Near  the  field,  on  the  other  side  of  the  hedge,  was  a  farm-
house, with  a  red  roof,  and  a  fig  tree  against  it.  We  asked  the  child  if
it  was  La  Varenne,  and  if  she  knew  Marie  Magontier  (the  name  of  the
seer).  She  raised  her  large  black  eyes,  burning  with  an  ardent  fire,
and  looked  at  us  with  a  half-smile  of  her  expressive  mouth,  and  an  air


Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne.  103


that  was  at  once  bold  and  frightened.  It  was  Marie  Magontier.  As
she  walked  towards  the  house,  my  companion,  M.  Verdeney,  spoke  to
her  in  the  dialect  of  the  district,  but  she  answered  hardly  at  all,  and
only  in  short  sentences.  She  took  us  into  a  low  room,  where  a  woman
was  sitting  at  the  corner  of  a  great  fireplace,  nursing  a  baby.  A  tall,
strong  peasant  Avas  standing  near  the  door.  It  was  here  that  Marie
lived,  in  the  house  of  a  relation  who  had  taken  her  in.  She  stood
apart,  leaning  against  a  dresser,  and  looked  at  us  with  a  strange  and
disturbing  expression  of  mocking  hostility.  She  was  barely  12  years
old,  but  in  her  motions  and  in  her  manner  of  looking  and  of  smiling
there  was  a  penetrating  grace,  which  was  at  the  same  time  artless  and
studied,  a  sort  of  unconscious  and  crafty  coquetry.  She  was  still  a
child,  but  she  was  half  a  woman,  with  looks  which  were  in  turn  caress-
ing and  forbidding.  Her  rebellious  black  hair  made  a  tangle  of  wild
locks  upon  her  head ;  her  thin,  bare  legs  were  sunburnt  and  covered
with  mud,  and  while  she  looked  at  us  with  a  strange,  absent  look,
her  thin  childish  arms  were  crossed  behind  her  back.  I  cpiestioned  Marie
about  her  visions,  but  she  was  unwilling  to  talk  to  me  at  first,  and
remained  silent,  putting  on  the  bored  and  sulky  look  of  a  child  who  is
embarrassed  by  a  question.  One  felt  that  it  would  not  need  much
more  urging  to  produce  an  outburst,  and  that  she  would  soon  come  to
violent  and  coarse  language.  She  had  not  breakfasted  yet,  and  the
soup  which  was  smoking  upon  the  fire  seemed  to  interest  her  much
more  than  our  questions.  She  looked  at  us  and  then  at  the  door,  and
twisted  a  corner  of  her  jacket  between  her  fingers.  She  did  not
understand  why  we  had  come  so  far  to  ask  her  questions.  She  was
disturbed  and  disconcerted,  and  it  seemed  that  she  could  not,  without
repugnance,  speak  about  her  visions  to  people  who  had  not  yet  given
any  proof  of  their  simple  faith  and  entire  confidence  in  her.  We
understood  that  we  could  scarcely  expect  to  get  anything  from  her  so
long  as  she  had  not  become  familiar  with  us.  The  exuberance  and  flow
of  words  of  M.  Verdeney,  and  the  official  gravity  of  M.  Brun,  did
not  put  her  in  the  humour  for  talking,  and  the  presence  of  her  relations
seemed  to  embarrass  her  and  to  put  a  kind  of  constraint  upon  her ;  so
we  made  an  appointment  with  her  for  a  little  later,  and  went  to  obtain
information  from  the  Cure  of  Savignac.

The  account  given  us  by  M.  Mestaier,  Cure  of  Savignac,  was  as
follows  : —

Marie  Magontier  experienced  her  first  hallucination  on  July  16th,
the  day  of  the  Fete  of  Our  Lady  of  Carmel.  For  more  than  five
years  past  she  had  occasionally  seen  the  Virgin  appear  to  her,  but  it
was  not  certain  whether  these  apparitions  were  not  in  dreams.  Her
mother,  on  the  evidence  of  M.  Poujat,  Mayor  of  Mayac,  was  subject  to
hallucinations  ;  she  used  to  see  in  full  daylight  a^form  come  down  her


104


Leon  Marillier.


chimney  and  advance  towards  her  to  kill  her.  The  father  was
epileptic.  To  this  M.  Gerard,  of  Mayac,  in  whose  service  the  mother
had  been,  could  bear  witness.  The  child's  mind  was  tilled  with
ambitious  ideas.  She  said  that  she  was  "  more  than  the  priests,"
because  she  talked  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  the  Blessed  Virgin  talked
to  her.  She  kept  apart  from  the  other  children,  did  not  play,  and
was  deeply  impressed  with  the  mission  which  she  had  received.  Her-
self of  a  lofty  piety,  she  laughed  at  received  religious  practices,  and
broke  out  into  mockery  at  the  j>easants  because  they  took  their  hats  off
before  a  crucifix.  She  would  not  accept  advice  or  counsel  from  anyone.
She  said  that  she  was  rich,  and  had  no  need  of  money,  because  she  was
the  friend  of  the  Virgin  ;  but  at  the  same  time  she  would  accept  coins
given  her  by  those  who  were  brought  to  her  by  her  visions.  It  was
not  certain  that  she  did  not  believe  herself  authorised  to  take  what
did  not  belong  to  her,  when  she  desired  it.  She  had  taken  money.
"  Everyone,"  she  said,  "does  his  business  his  own  way."

She  had  lived  in  the  summer  in  the  village  of  Garabeau  (in  the
Commune  of  Saint  Vincent  de  lTle),  and  had  been  in  the  habit  of
taking  her  sheep  to  an  uncultivated  held  at  the  place  called  Le  Pontinet,
in  the  Commune  of  Savignac  les  Eglises.  One  day,  she  said,  she  saw  the
Virgin  appear  to  her  in  a  hole  in  the  wall.  The  figure  was  quite
small,  only  a  few  inches  high.  This  apparition  made  a  great  noise,  and
she  spoke  of  it  to  everybody,  and  soon  others,  too,  like  herself,  saw  the
Virgin  ;  namely,  Marguerite  Carreau  and  Marie  Gourvat,  both  living
at  La  Bourelie.  On  August  4th,  M.  Mestaier  examined  the  two
children  separately.  Marie  Magontier  told  him  that  it  was  Marguerite
Carreau  who  had  seen  the  Virgin  first,  but  that  now  it  was  to  her  that
she  appeared  every  time  that  she  went  to  Le  Pontinet.  Marguerite
Carreau,  on  the  other  hand,  maintained  that  neither  she  nor  the  little
Gourvat  had  seen  anything  until  the  day  when  Marie  Magontier  told
them  of  her  visions.  Our  further  inquiries  seem  to  have  proved  that
they  were  both  right ;  that  it  was  Marguerite  Carreau  who  was  the
first  to  experience  certain  vague  and  indistinct  hallucinations,  but  that
they  only  became  defined  under  the  influence  of  the  definite  vision  which
appeared  to  Marie  Magontier  on  the  heath  of  Le  Pontinet.  According
to  the  Cure,  Marie  is  a  clever  and  cunning  child  of  a  quick  intelligence,
who  has  always  exercised  a  sort  of  ascendency  over  children  of  her
own  age  and  even  over  grown-up  people.  She  has  in  the  district  the
reputation  of  being  a  witch,  or  nearly  so.  The  wolves  do  not  take  her
sheep,  for  she  has  prayers  against  them.  She  has  readily  given  advice
on  money  matters,  or  on  family  affairs.  She  lies  down  upon  the  ground,
with  her  head  in  the  crack  in  the  wall,  and  waits  for  the  answer  of  the
Virgin.  The  Virgin  appeared  to  her  dressed  in  black,  and  all  wrapped
in  veils,  because,  said  Marie,  she  was  wearing  mourning  for  France.


Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne.


105


It  would  seem,  however,  that  this  explanation  has  been  suggested  to  her
by  M.  Mestaiier.  The  Virgin  has  a  horror  of  red,  as  she  had  told
Marie  several  times.  In  this  it  looks  as  though  there  were  a  political
intention,  which  at  first  might  make  one  suspect  the  child's  sincerity  ;
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  attitude  of  the  clergy,  and  in
particular  of  the  Bishop  of  Perigueux,  has  been  from  the  first  very
reserved,  and  afterwards  definitely  hostile.

The  apparitions  soon  increased  in  number,  and  up  to  August  4th  there
were  more  than  a  dozen.  Every  time  that  the  seers  went  to  Le
Pontinet  they  saw  the  Virgin.  Children,  women,  and  even  men  went
in  crowds  to  the  miraculous  wall.  The  Virgin  aj>pearecl  every  day,
clothed  sometimes  in  black  and  sometimes  in  white.  She  was
occasionally  wrapped  in  a  garment  of  light,  and  certain  people  said
that  she  had  lighted  candles  upon  her  breast  and  her  shoulders.  They
told  their  beads  kneeling  upon  the  rough  ground  of  the  heath,  among
the  great  stones  scattered  here  and  there,  which  Marie  compared  to
tombstones  ;  they  sang  psalms  and  litanies,  and  burnt  tapers  ;  and
men  and  women  came  to  consult  the  seers  and  to  make  inquiry  about
the  future.

On  August  11th  more  than  1,500  people  came  to  Le  Pontinet,  and
the  Virgin  appeared  to  a  great  number  of  them  in  the  crack  of  the
wall.  On  the  part  of  the  women  faith  was  complete  ;  but  the  men
came  half  believing  and  half  doubting.  If  ecclesiastical  authority
had  been  lent  to  it,  a  new  form  of  devotion  would  very  quickly  have
been  produced.  On  festival  days  tents  were  erected  upon  the  heath,
where  rosaries,  statuettes  of  the  Virgin,  sausages  and  other  meats,
pears  and  wine  were  sold  indiscriminately.  At  another  time  of  year
the  news  of  the  apparitions  might  perhaps  have  taken  longer  time  to
spread,  but  August  6th  was  the  examination  day  for  elementary
certificates  at  Savignac  les  Eglises.  There  were  some  eighty  children
there,  and  their  relations  heard  the  people  of  Savignac  telling  about
Marie's  marvellous  visions.  They  spread  the  news  of  them  in  the
neighbouring  districts,  and  five  days  afterwards,  on  August  11th,
more  than  1,500  people  came  to  the  hazel  bush  where  the  Virgin  had
appeared.

At  about  one  o'clock  Marie  Magontier  came  again  to  find  us  at  the
inn.  She  was  less  shy  than  in  the  morning,  and  was  more  ready  to
allow  us  to  ask  her  questions.  She  had  no  longer  the  same  hostile  and
contemptuous  attitude,  but  she  seemed  still  to  be  uneasy  and  troubled,
and  she  sat  in  a  corner  of  the  room  with  her  eyes  obstinately  fixed
upon  the  ground.  M.  Verdeney  questioned  her  in  jxttois,  but  he  could
not  get  any  answer  from  her.  I  then  went  to  her,  took  her  hands,  and
spoke  gently  to  her,  stroking  her  cheek  and  her  hair,  and  looking  into
her  eyes. After  a  short  time  she  came  to  me  of  her  own  accord,  and


10G


Leon  Marillier.


after  that  she  willingly  answered  all  my  questions.  She  told  me  that  her
mother  also  had  had  visions,  that  she  saw  her  sister  appear  to  her,  and
that  at  night  she  saw  lights  pass.  She  herself,  one  night,  had  seen  her
mother,  who  was  dead,  as  a  tall  white  lady,  who  came  close  to  her.  She
heard  voices,  and  one  day  the  Virgin  had  spoken  to  her,  and  another
time  she  had  kissed  her.  Like  her  mother,  when  she  was  passing  over
the  heath  or  along  the  roads  in  the  evening,  she  saw  lights,  which
moved  along  in  the  darkness.  One  day  she  had  gone  to  Le  Pontinet
to  tend  her  flock,  and  had  sat  down  in  the  shade  of  the  hazel  clump,
when  it  occurred  to  her — she  does  not  know  why — to  look  into  the  dark
crack  which  gaped  between  the  mossy  stones  of  the  old  ruined  wall.
She  saw  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole  a  fismre  of  the  Virgin,  small  and
black,  less  than  a  foot  high.  She  only  saw  her  as  far  down  as  the
waist.  Then  the  black  lady  disappeared,  and  in  her  place  there  was  a
figure  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  all  wrapped  up  in  white  veils,  like  the
statues  of  the  Virgin  of  the  Immaculate  Conception,  which  are  to  be
seen  on  the  altars  of  the  small  churches  in  the  towns.  Soon,  two  other
figures  appeared  beside  the  Virgin.  Marie  was  alarmed  and  went  home,
and  next  day  she  came  back  with  a  bottle  of  holy  water.  The  Virgin,
clothed  in  white,  was  still  in  the  hole  of  the  old  wall.  She  threw  some
holy  water  on  the  stones  and  said,  "  If  thou  art  from  the  devil,  go
away.  If  thou  art  from  God,  speak  to  me."  The  Virgin  did  not
vanish,  and  on  another  day  she  spoke  to  her.  Once  she  saw  her
guardian  angel  beside  the  Virgin  ;  a  figure  which  she  had  seen  in  a
picture  hanging  upon  the  wall  of  the  church  at  Savignac.

Marie  started  with  us  for  Le  Pontinet.  She  chattered  all  the  way,
and  would  not  leave  me,  keeping  close  beside  me  and  holding  my  hand.
When  we  reached  the  heath  we  found  it  crowded  with  peasant
women.  The  little  seer  was  like  a  priest  in  the  midst  of  the  faithful.
They  surrounded  her,  and  listened  to  her,  and  came  to  consult  her.
When  we  left  this  barren  plain,  where  we  felt  ourselves  to  be  far  from
our  everyday  life,  transported  into  an  antique  world  of  the  time  of  the
visions  of  Assisi,  we  had  great  difficulty  in  preventing  Marie  from
coming  with  us,  so  unwilling  was  she  to  leave  us.  Had  she  attached
herself  to  us,  and  to  me  in  particular,  with  one  of  those  strange
childish  affections,  sudden  and  passionate,  which  sometimes  spring  up
in  young  minds,  when  they  are  uneasy  and  perturbed  like  hers  ?  Or
was  she  afraid  that  we  should  hear  ill  of  her  and  that  we  should  find
among  the  people  of  the  place  evidence  that  she  was  not  sincere  1  I  do
not  know  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  of  the  reality
of  her  visions.  In  my  opinion  she  certainly  saw  the  Virgin  in  the
crack  of  the  wall.  She  is  no  doubt  subject  to  hallucinations;  but
at  the  same  time  she  is  ill-balanced,  and  heavily  weighted  with  the
burden  of heredity. She  is  the  daughter  of  a  father  who  was


Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne.


107


epileptic  and  of  a  mother  who  was  doubtless  insane,  and  she  has  the-
bearing,  the  character — in  a  word,  all  the  appearance  of  one  suffering
from  hereditary  degeneration.  She  is  filled,  too,  with  the  morbid  self-
love  and  the  enormous  vanity  so  common  among  the  degenerated.  She
believes  that  she  has  a  mission,  and  it  is  certain  that  she  would  not
shrink  from  any  lie  for  the  purpose  of  making  others  share  her  convic-
tion. It  is  impossible  to  determine  in  what  degree  she  believes  in  her
stories.  She  has  no  apparent  physical  defects.  There  is  no  lack  of
facial  symmetry.  Her  mouth  is  well  made,  her  ears  properly  rimmed,
and  her  face  animated  and  intelligent  ;  but  I  had  neither  time  nor
means  for  testing  her  sensibility  or  for  examining  her  field  of  vision.
I  believe,  however,  that  it  was  with  a  degenerated  and  not  with  a-
hysterical  subject  that  we  had  to  do.

Before  leaving  Savignac  we  examined  the  two  other  little  seers.
Marguerite  Carreau  and  Marie  Gourvat,  of  the  village  of  La  Boure'lie.
Marguerite  Carreau  is  a  fair  child,  very  gentle  and  timid,  but  quite
ready  to  answer  questions  and  giving  an  impression  of  sincerity  and
frankness.  In  the  month  of  July  she  had,  during  the  course  of  a
week,  vague  and  indefinite  hallucinations.  She  saw  shadows  pass-
before  her.  Marie  Magontier  told  her  what  she  had  seen,  and  it
was  then  that  the  Virgin  appeared  to  her  in  the  miraculous  wall.  She
was  quite  small  and  dressed  in  black.  The  child  was  frightened,  and
after  some  clays  the  hallucinations  disappeared  and  had  never  returned.
Marguerite  Carreau  is  the  daughter  of  a  well-to-do  farmer,  and  had  not
lived  the  wandering  and  almost  vagrant  life  of  Marie  Magontier.  She
does  not  appear  to  be,  like  her,  an  ill-balanced — a  neurotic  subject,  but
visual  illusions  are  easy  in  this  country  of  woods  and  heaths,  still
full  of  pious  legends.  The  mysticism  developed  in  the  child's  tender
heart  by  the  preparation  for  the  first  Communion,  and  her  conversations
with  Marie  had  done  the  rest ;  but  Marguerite's  hallucinations  never
had  the  same  persistence  and  clearness  as  her  friend's.  Her  reading,,
also,  may  have  had  some  influence,  for  she  had  read  Undine  and
Hoffmann's  Contes  Fantastiques.

Marie  Gourvat,  according  to  the  Cure  of  Savignac,  is  a  pretentious
child,  bold  and  obstinate.  She  answered  all  our  questions  without
hesitation.  She  is  much  more  open,  more  on  the  outside  than  her
little  friends,  and  at  the  same  time  she  is  ruder  than  them  and  of  a
less  subtle  nature.  Apparently  she  was  influenced  by  the  two  little
seers,  and  had  no  vision  until  the  others  had  talked  to  her  of  the-
apparitions  which  they  had  seen.

Three  times  she  saw  before  her  a  black  shadow.  The  shadow  grew,,
and  the  outlines  became  defined.  It  grew  clearer  and  more  luminous,
and  at  last  the  Virgin  appeared,  clothed  in  white,  with  a  blue  girdle
and  a  shining  buckle. She  held  a  child  in  her  arms,  and  her  feet  were


108


Leon  Marillier.


bare.  There  was  in  the  house  of  the  Gourvat  family  a  statuette  of  the
Virgin  which  was  apparently  reproduced  accurately  in  Marie's  vision.

She  had  also  experienced  some  auditory  hallucinations.  The
Virgin  had  spoken  to  her,  and  had  predicted  the  future  ;  but  these
predictions  were  very  vague  and  generally  referred  to  family  affairs  or
money  matters.

After  the  visions  of  these  three  seers,  a  large  number  of  other
children  experienced  hallucinations.  Visual  hallucinations  predomi-
nated, while  those  of  an  auditory  nature  were  comparatively  rare.  The
visual  hallucinations  have  two  characteristics,  which  it  is  important  to
notice.  In  the  first  place,  it  often  happened — as  in  a  case  which  we
saw  with  our  own  eyes — that  on  the  heath  of  Le  Pontinet  several
children  and  several  women  saw  the  Virgin  at  the  same  time.  She
did  not,  however,  appear  to  all  of  them  under  the  same  aspect.  Some
saw  her  in  white  and  others  in  black.  For  some  she  was  wrapped  in
veils  ;  for  others  her  face  was  bare.  In  the  second  place  it  must  be
noted  that  these  hallucinations  were  formed  gradually,  that  they  grew
slowly,  and  that  for  each  of  the  original  seers,  and  afterwards  for  each
of  those  who  believed  in  the  visions,  a  sort  of  education  or  gathered
enthusiasm  was  necessary  in  order  that  they  might  see  the  apparition
with  full  clearness.  Generally  a  little  dark  figure  was  seen  at  first,
which  grew  larger  and  brighter  at  the  same  time.  Marie  Magontier
has  seen  the  Virgin  slowly  take  off  the  veils  in  which  she  was
shrouded.

Thus  the  principal  elements  of  the  visions  were  furnished  by  the
mind  of  each  person,  by  the  images  which  occupied  it,  and  by  his
individual  habits  of  thought  and  perception.  Nothing  was  com-
municated from  outside  but  the  idea  of  the  apparition  and  its  most
general  features — an  abstract  image,  so  to  speak,  a  sort  of  scheme
which  each  person  might  transform  and  modify  in  his  own  way.
Round  this  central  conception  the  details  grouped  themselves,  and  in
some  cases  a  long  time  was  needed,  several  hours  or  several  days,  before
the  new  image  which  thus  came  into  existence  could  gain  enough
intensity  to  become  objective  and  to  overcome  the  conflicting  sensations.
Thus,  properly  speaking,  there  is  no  contagion.  Each  hallucination  is
the  individual  production  of  the  person  who  experienced  it.  In  this
matter  there  can  be  no  question  of  suggestion  other  than  verbal  ;  and
whatever  opinion  may  be  held  about  the  reality  of  telepathic
phenomena,  mental  suggestion  is  here  clearly  irrelevant.  The  men  and
the  women  who  came  to  the  heath  of  Le  Pontinet  had  for  many  days
heard  talk  of  the  mysterious  visions  of  Marie  and  her  companions ;  they
expected  to  see  the  Virgin,  and  with  all  their  souls  desired  to  see  her.

In  reality  the  mechanism  which  is  at  work  here  is  very  different
from  the  mechanism  of  suggestion. There  is  not  in  this  case  an  idea


Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne.  10f>


or  an  image  which  at  once  impresses  itself  upon  the  mind.  The-
hallucinatory  image  is  not  like  a  stranger  among  the  other  images  and
the  other  ideas,  isolated  from  all  that  surrounds  it.  As  in  the  case  of
a  "  fixed  idea,"  and  as  in  the  case  of  ecstasy,  we  have  to  do  with  a
state  of  consciousness  which  gradually  grows,  which  by  its  intensity
throws  into  the  background,  attenuates  and  enfeebles  the  other  states
of  consciousness,  but  which  remains  in  connection  with  them.  The  ego-
retains  its  unity  and  imposes  its  form  upon  the  foreign  idea  which  has
come  from  outside,  and  which  for  a  moment  entirely  absorbs  it.

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that,  ordinarily,  hallucinations  and
illusions  have  a  definitely  individual  character,  that  they  rarely  affect
several  persons  at  the  same  time,  and  that,  even  when  they  do,  they
are  generally  limited  to  a  small  group  of  persons  placed  under  identical
or  at  any  rate  very  similar  conditions  of  life.  Here,  on  the  contrary,
peasants  and  peasant-women,  whose  minds,  I  admit,  do  not  differ
greatly  one  from  another,  who  have  the  same  beliefs,  the  same  super-
stitions, and  the  same  habits  of  thought,  but  who  are  not  acquainted
with  one  another  and  do  not  live  together,  experience  during  a  certain
period  hallucinations  which  in  their  general  character  are  very  like  one-
another,  and  in  some  cases  are  actually  simultaneous  hallucinations.

If  telepathic  phenomena  were  admitted  as  facts  of  nature  it  would
perhaps  be  right  to  consider  the  action  of  the  minds  of  the  seers  upon
the  minds  of  the  men  and  women  who  saw  the  Virgin  appear  to  them
as  the  cause,  not  necessarily  of  the  hallucinations  themselves,  but  of  the
special  mental  state  which  allowed  them  to  be  produced  and  to  develop.
It  appears  to  me,  however,  that  it  is  better  to  have  recourse  to  a
more  simple  explanation.  We  notice  first  that  the  hallucinations  with
which  we  are  dealing  are  for  the  most  part  visual ;  and  that  auditory
hallucinations,  when  they  occur,  are  determined  by  the  visual  halluci-
nations. Among  these  visions  we  must  separate  two  distinct  classes.
In  the  one  we  must  place  the  apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  the  crack  of
the  wall ;  and  in  the  other  the  apparitions  on  the  heath,  in  the  fields,
or  on  the  roads.  The  hallucinations  of  the  latter  kind  are  exceptional..
They  were  hardly  ever  experienced  but  by  those  who  had  already  seen
the  Virgin  in  the  wall  ;  or  else  they  were  of  a  confused  and  vague
character  which  separates  them  clearly  from  the  visions  of  the  other
class.  It  is  extremely  probable  that  no  attention  would  have  been
paid  to  them  if  they  had  not  coincided  with  the  marvellous  apparitions
of  Le  Pontinet.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  visions  seen  in  the  crack  of
the  wall  may  be  brought  into  connection  with  the  hallucinations  a
point  de  repere1  which  have  been  studied  by  MM.  Binet  and  Fere.

1  That  is,  hallucinations  formed  upon  an  external  nucleus,  "  gathering-point
hallucinations, "  as  we  may  call  them.


110


Leon  Marillier.


These  hallucinations  are,  in  truth,  only  a  special  form  of  illusions.  The
point  of  departure  is  a  real  sensation  round  which  images  are  grouped
and  crystallised.  Hallucinations  of  this  type  are  much  less  rare  than
hallucinations  of  purely  central  origin.  I  believe  that  it  is  possible  to
explain  in  this  manner  the  epidemic  of  hallucinations  in  question.  Around
•a  real  sensation,  which  is  the  same  for  all,  are  grouped  certain  images
which  have  a  strong  resemblance  to  one  another  and  a  tendency  to  become
•objective.  No  clear  visual  sensation  can  conflict  with  these  images  and
destroy  them  while  the  subject  is  looking  into  the  hole.  Thus  they
develop,  grow,  and  at  length  become  externalised.  The  images  only
differ  in  detail,  and  thus  all  the  visions  have  a  common  foundation
and  only  differ  in  secondary  characteristics.

This  interpretation  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  when  the  subject
goes  away  from  the  wall,  or  even  ceases  to  look  into  the  crack,  the
vision  disappears.  I  would  add,  also,  that  the  congested  condition  of
the  brain,  determined  by  the  position  of  the  head,  may  play  a  certain
part  in  the  genesis  of  the  apparitions.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  the  phenomena  which  we  have  been  studying
it  is  verbal  suggestion  that  played  the  principal  part;  if  "infection"
exercised  any  influence  it  was  at  any  rate  only  secondary,  and  at  best
only  engendered  a  state  favourable  to  the  appearance  of  the  hallucina-
tions. If  cases  exist  where  several  people  have  seen  an  apparition
simultaneously  without  any  verbal  suggestion  at  all,  these  cases  belong
to  a  different  category  of  phenomena.


supplement] W.  James,  "The  Principles  of  Psychology."  Ill


Professor  William  James  has  for  some  years  past — as  most  of  our  readers
will  know — contributed  to  Mind  and  to  other  periodicals  a  series  of  psycho-
logical essays  of  marked  originality  and  power.  These  essays,  along  with
much  new  matter,  he  has  now  incorporated  into  a  comprehensive  treatise  of
some  1,400  octavo  pages  on  "The  Principles  of  Psychology" — a  treatise
intended  primarily  as  an  advanced  text-hook  for  students,  hut  going  far
beyond  ordinary  examination  requirements,  and  embracing  perhaps  the
•eompletest  treatment  of  the  subject,  from  the  purely  scientific  side,  which
any  single  work  in  our  language  contains.

Some  notice  of  such  a  treatise  may  fitly  appear  in  our  Proceedings  ;  yet  I
shall  not  attempt  to  review  it  as  a  whole,  but  shall  content  myself  with  deal-
ing With  some  of  the  many  points  where  the  author's  exposition  comes  in
■contact  with  our  special  researches.

The  effort  to  make  this  selection  involves  the  somewhat  difficult  question:
What  relation  does  "Psychical  Research" — thus  vaguely  baptised  for  lack  of  a
more  definite  title — bear  to  Psychology  in  general  ?  What  parts  of  Psychology
■do  we  touch  ?  and  do  all  our  enquiries  lie  fairly  within  the  psychological


The  second  of  these  questions  may  be  answered  first.  A  hundred  years
ago,  or  fifty  years  ago,  our  subject-matter — consisting  on  the  one  hand  in
minute  experiment  among  strange  and  bizarre  regions  of  human  faculty,  and
on  the  other  hand  in  the  collection  of  testimonies  to  a  class  of  incidents  then
regarded  as  either  supernatural  or  fictitious — would  have  seemed  at  once  too
physiological  and  too  superstitious  for  a  place  in  a  dignified  treatise  on
"mental  philosophy."  But  during  the  last  generation  an  "experimental
psychology  "  has  been  developed,  depending  less  on  introspection — although
introspection  also  is  experiment — than  on  the  systematic  investigations  of
neurotic  hospital  or  psycho-physiological  laboratory  ;  and  welcoming,  more-
•over,  all  kinds  of  morbid  or  abnormal  experiences  as  an  indispensable
addition  to  the  tranquil  self-questionings  of  the  well-balanced  philosopher,
which  were  the  principal  data  with  whose  study  the  science  began.

Savants  of  the  experimental  school,  it  is  plain,  cannot  exclude  a  priori  from
psychology  either  our  subject-matter  or  our  method  of  treatment,  although
they  may,  of  course,  consider  that  the  subject-matter  is  unpromising  or  the
method  ill  pursued.

1  The  Principles  of  Psychology.  By  William  James,  Professor  of  Psychology  in
Harvard  University.  In  two  volumes.  [New  York:  Henry  Holt  and  Co.  London:
Macmillan


I.


THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY."  i
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


field  ?


112


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


On  analysing  that  subject-matter,  it  will  be  found  that  we  have  mainly
concerned  ourselves  with  such  questions  as,  while  admitting  of  statistical  or
experimental  treatment,  do  nevertheless  promise  to  throw  some  light,  one
way  or  the  other,  upon  those  deeper  controversies  as  to  the  existence  or
character  of  a  spiritual  principle  in  man  which  have  hitherto  been  mainly
conducted  rather  on  metaphysical  than  on  empirical  lines.  In  this  task  we
have  started — as  I  at  least  conceive  our  position — entirely  without  pre-
supposition or  prejudice.  Our  research  has  postulated  nothing  which  need
prevent  its  landing  us  in  that  "  psychology  without  a  soul  "  which  is  at
present  bolder  and  more  outspoken  than  any  other  creed.  And  in  fact
much  that  has  appeared  in  these  Proceedings  has  actually  made  for  that
negative  view.  There  has  been  much  reduction  of  alleged  supernatural
phenomena  to  causes  familiar  to  materialistic  science.  There  has  been  much
insistence  on  views  of  "multiplex  personality"  and  the  like,  which  are
dreaded  by  many  minds  as  destroying  the  spiritual  unity  of  man.  There
has,  in  short,  been  a  complete  acceptance  of  those  analytical  methods  to>
which  the  partisans  of  the  mechanical  view  of  the  universe  appeal  with  an
air  of  triumph  which  to  us  seems  at  least  jjremature.  But  on  the  other
hand  we  have  collected  much  new  evidence  of  a  positive  kind.  There  has
been  what  we  regard  as  adequate  evidence  of  telepathy — a  power  of  direct
communication  from  mind  to  mind  which  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the
ordinary  materialistic  synthesis.  There  has  been  evidence  also — less  in  quan-
tity, but  to  me  convincing — of  clairvoyance, — of  the  supernormal  acquisition  of
knowledge  as  to  present,  past,  and  jierhaps  even  future  things.  And  there-
has  been  evidence  which  points  prima,  facie  to  the  agency  of  departed  per-
sonalities,  although  this  evidence  has  also  been  interpreted  in  other  ways.

Such  has  been  our  subject-matter  in  general.  As  to  the  standpoint  from
which  it  is  viewed,  I  cannot  speak  for  others  than  myself.  The  bearing  of
my  own  view  upon  questions  of  ordinary  psychology  will  appear  in  the
course  of  the  present  review,  in  which  1  must  give  my  merely  personal
criticism  of  Professor  James's  general  attitude,  and  of  some  of  his  views  in
detail.

With  sound  judgment,  as  it  seems  to  me,  our  author  has  explicitly
abstained  ab  initio  from  ranging  himself  either  with  the  spiritualist1  or  with
the  materialist  school.

"I  have  kept  close,"  he  says  (Preface,  p.  v.),  "to  the  point  of  view  of
natural  science  throughout  the  book. Every  natural  science  assumes  certain
data  uncritically,  and  declines  to  challenge  the  elements  between  which  its  own
'  laws'  obtain,  and  from  which  its  own  deductions  are  carried  on.
This  book,  assuming  that  thoughts  and  feelings  exist,  and  are  vehicles  of

1  Professor  James,  like  many  other  English- writing'  savants,  uses  the  word  Spiritualist
(as  the  French  use  Spiritualiste)m  contrast  with  associationist. materialist,  mechanical,
or  purely  physiological  schemes  of  philosophy,  and  without  reference  to  "Modem
Spiritualism."  But  he  feels  obliged  to  use  the  same  word  again,  with  a  quite  different
connotation,  when  speaking  of  those  who  believe  that  the  departed  communicate-
with  survivors  through  "  mediums.''  This  confusion  is  most  awkward,  and  can  easily  be'
avoided  if  (as  has  been  previously  urged,  both  in  these  Proceedings  and  in  some
"  Spiritualistic  "  organs)  the  term  "Spiritist"  be  alone  employed  in  the  more
restricted  signification,  for  which  the  form  of  the  word  adapts  it,  and  "  Spiritualist  '*
be  left  as  a  philosophic  term  of  more  general  scope.


supplement.] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology."  113


knowledge,  thereupon  contends  that  psychology,  when  she  has  ascertained  the
empirical  correlation  of  the  various  sorts  of  thought  and  feeling  witli
definite  conditions  of  the  brain,  can  go  no  farther, — can  go  no  farther,
that  is,  as  a  natural  science.  If  she  goes  farther  she  becomes  metaphy-
sical. All  attempts  to  explain  our  phenomenally  given  thoughts  as  products
of  deeper- lying  cpmlities  (whether  the  latter  be  named  '  Soul, '  '  Transcendental
Ego,'  'Ideas,'  or  'Elementary  Units  of  Consciousness,'  are  metaphysical.

.  .  .  This  book  consequently  rejects  both  the  associationist  and  the
spiritualist  theories  ;  and  in  this  strictly  positivistic  point  of  view  consists
the  only  feature  of  it  for  which  I  feel  tempted  to  claim  originality.
I  have  therefore  treated  our  passing  thoughts  as  integers,  and  regarded  the
mere  laws  of  their  co-existence  with  brain  states  as  the  ultimate  laws  for  our
science.  The  reader  will  in  vain  seek  for  any  closed  system  in  the  book.  It
is  mainly  a  map  of  descriptive  details,  running  out  into  queries  which  only  a
metaphysics  alive  to  the  weight  of  her  task  can  hope  successf  idly  to  deal  with.
That  will  perhaps  be  centuries  hence ;  and  meanwhile  the  best  mark  of
health  that  a  science  can  show  is  this  unfinished-seeming  front."

Undoubtedly  this  is,  at  present,  the  most  reasonable  and  the  fairest  position
for  an  educational  treatise  on  psychology  to  take  up.  But  the  facts  and
inferences  thus  presented  to  us  with  a  kind  of  neutrality  will  in  their  turn
be  criticised  from  many  different  standpoints.  Some  criticisms  will  be
mainly  metaphysical,  and  will  probably  concern  the  relation  borne  by
Professor  James's  views  to  the  views  of  some  definite  philosophical  school.
Such  comment  we  need  not  here  anticipate.  But  even  among  those  critics
who  appeal  exclusively  to  observation  and  experiment  in  support  of  their
themes,  we  shall  find  theories  at  opposite  ends  of  the  materialistic-spiritual-
istic scale.  My  own  point  of  view — at  once  experimental  and  spiritualistic
(I  do  not  mean  spiritistic) — can  best  be  explained  by  first  citing  some  brief
and  powerful  statement  of  the  exactly  opposite  conclusions  which  experiment
is  with  equal  confidence  (and  much  more  frequently)  invoked  to  support.
I  select  such  a  statement  from  a  recent  article  by  M.  Jules  Soury  on  the
Physiological  Psychology  of  Protozoa,  in  the  Reime  Pliilosojihique  for  January,
1891.

' '  Unconscious  processes  of  knowledge,  along  with  motor  reactions
equally  unconscious — this  is  what  we  discover  at  the  distant  origin  of  human
understanding.  This  is  what  we  find  in  the  unicellular  organisms  from  which
the  Metazoa,  and  man  himself,  have  arisen.  It  is  at  any  rate  our  clearest
result  of  observation  and  experiment  upon  the  properties  of  living  pro-
toplasm, studied  in  its  smallest  particles  among  the  Protozoa  and  Protophyta.
But  it  will  be  possible  to  push  still  further  our  analysis  of  the  psychical
properties  of  living  matter  ;  for  these  psychical  properties  have  at  any  rate
no  narrower  limitation  than  the  limitation  of  life  itself.  I  hold,  in  fact,  with
Paul  Bert,  that  the  psychical  processes  in  their  most  elementary  form  must  be
sought  and  studied  in  the  molecular  processes  of  particles  of  protoplasm.  In
other  words,  it  is  in  the  properties  of  the  grains  and  molecules  which  make
up  particles  of  protoplasm  that  we  shall  discover  the  most  primitive  condi-
tions which  the  existing  world  can  show  us  of  those  very  psychical  processes
which  pass  in  our  own  brains,  of  which  we  ourselves  are  conscious."

' '  But  when  this  conception  is  reached,  we  have  the  right  to  infer  the=

I


114


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


existence,  I  do  not  say  of  a  correspondence,  or  of  a  relation,  but  of  an
absolute  identity  between  every  elementary  psychical  process  and  every
molecular  process  ;  that  is  to  say,  between  every  modification  of  a  psychical
state,  and  of  a  molecular  state,  of  any  organised  body  of  whatever  kind.  And
by  an  organised  body,  I  repeat,  we  must  understand  simply  a  portion  of
matter  whose  molecular  arrangements  are  more  complex  and  less  stable
than  the  molecular  arrangements  of  the  matter  which  we  term  inorganic.  In
a  word,  all  psychical  processes  are  ultimately  reducible  to  phenomena  of
molecular  mechanics. "

Let  me  try  to  meet  this  clear  statement  with  an  equally  clear  exposition
of  my  own  conflicting  view.  In  the  first  place,  I  entirely  accept  the  experi-
mental method  here  indicated.  I  make  no  appeal  to  any  religious,  moral,  or
metaphysical  argument.  I  am  willing,  if  microscopy  allows  it,  "to  study
psychical  processes  in  their  most  elementary  form  in  the  molecular  processes
of  particles  of  protoplasm. "  Only,  remembering  that,  how  far  soever  such
analysis  may  be  pushed,  we  shall  still  be  studying  psychical  processes  from
the  outside,  I  desire  that  experiment  from  within  should  also  be  pushed  to  its
extreme  limits — that  is  to  say,  to  the  highest  and  most  complex  phenomena
of  psychical  life.  And  over  against  the  purely  chemical  attractions  and
reactions  which  M.  Soury  discovers  in  his  protozoa,  I  claim  that  at  the  other
end  of  the  scale  we  can  set  the  discovery  of  supersensory  powers — clair-
voyance and  telepathy.  Just  as  M.  Soury  infers  from  his  experiments  that
the  psychical  life  of  the  lower  organisms  shades  insensibly  into  the  molecular
changes  of  lifeless  matter,  so  do  I  infer  from  our  experiments  that  the
psychical  life  of  the  higher  organisms  is  not  wholly  determined  by  terrene  or
corporeal  evolution,  but  slides  insensibly  into  the  conditions  of  a  life  not
dependent  on  the  concomitance  of  a  material  brain.  Nay,  further — it  fxoi
ffifxis,  6efiis  8e  rd\j]6!j  Xiyciv — I  will  even  add  that  I  find  the  transition  between
the  incarnate  and  the  discarnate  forms  of  life  no  more  improbable  than
the  materialist  finds  the  transition  between  the  crystal  and  the  speck  of
protoplasm.

Our  point  of  view  thus  made  clear,  we  may  proceed  to  detailed  criticism
of  such  special  passages  in  this  long  treatise  as  may  directly  concern  us.

After  a  brief  discussion  of  the  scope  of  Psychology,  the  book  opens  with
the  needful  anatomical  exposition  of  the  functions  of  the  brain,  and  the  con-
ditions of  brain-activity.

One  conclusion  needs  comment  here,  as  bearing  on  the  wide  question  of
the  degree  of  possible  inclusion  of  secondary  or  isolated  chains  of  memory
in  the  memory  which  accompanies  or  constitutes  the  so-called  conscious  or
primary  self.  "  We  can  affirm, "  says  our  author,  "  for  practical  purposes,
and  limiting  the  meaning  of  the  word  consciousness  to  the  primary  self  of  the
individual,  that  the  cortex  is  the  sole  organ  of  consciousness  in  man.  If
there  be  any  consciousness  pertaining  to  the  lower  centres,  it  is  a  con-
sciousness of  which  the  self  knows  nothing."

"  For  practical  purposes  "  this  may,  no  doubt,  be  true.  But  the  evidence
on  which  Professor  James  relies — evidence  drawn  from  experiment  upon  the
lower  animals,  or  from  traumatic  results  in  man,  seems  to  me  to  be  of  too
crude  and  objective  a  character  to  decide  alone  this  subtle  point.  It  should
be  supplemented,  I  think,  by  much  more  of  experiment  and  observation  of


supplement.] W.  James,  "The  Principles  of  Psychology."  115


mental  conditions  under  anesthetics,  during  recovery  from  fainting,  and
even  during  apparent  coma.  Professor  James  himself  cites  a  part  of  the
following  description  given  by  Professor  Herzen  (Le  Cerveau  et  L'Activite
Ce'rebrale,  p.  238,  &c.)  of  his  own  sensations  during  the  gradual  stages  of
return  from  profound  syncope  : —

"During  the  syncope  there  is  absolute  psychic  annihilation, — the  absence
of  all  consciousness  ;  then,  at  the  beginning  of  coming  to,  one  has  at  a  cer-
tain moment  a  vague,  limitless,  infinite  feeling — a  sense  of  existence  in
general,  without  the  least  trace  of  distinction  between  the  me  and  the  not
me.  One  is  thus  an  organic  part  of  Nature,  having  a  consciousness  of  the
fact  of  one's  existence,  but  none  of  one's  organic  unity  ;  one  has,  in  a  word,
■an  impersonal  consciousness.  This  feeling  may  be  agreeable  if  the  syncope
is  not  due  to  a  violent  pain,  and  very  disagreeable  if  it  is  ;  that  is  the  only
possible  distinction  ;  one  feels  oneself  live  and  enjoy  or  live  and  suffer,
without  knowing  why  one  enjoys  or  suffers,  and  without  knowing  what  is  the
seat  of  this  feeling.  A  great  number  of  facts  make  it  probable  that,  during
this  stage  of  awakening,  the  extremities  can  already  execute  spinal  reflexes,
in  reply  to  tactile  or  dolorous  excitations  ;  but  the  cephalic  centres  are  cer-
tainly still  incapable  of  entering  into  activity.  "

"We  cannot  here  discuss  Professor  Herzen's  facts  ;  but  there  is  surely  no
a  priori  impossibility  in  this  assumption  of  a  spinal  or  cerebellar  under  a
.cerebral  memory.  Such  a  process  would  even  bear  some  analogy  to  that
deeply  significant  fact,  the  production  by  hypnotic  suggestion  of  physiological
or  pathological  processes,  which  cannot  be  produced  by  the  waking  will,  or
even  watched  by  waking  observation,  so  deeply  are  they  withdrawn  from  the
normal  or  superficial  consciousness.

In  all  such  points  as  these  we  are  at  present  in  the  stage  of  early  artifice  ;
we  are  empirically  hitting  on  methods  of  extending  our  sway  deeper  into
that  vast  sub-limhial  region  over  whose  surface  we  habitually  skim.  At
present  it  seems  safest  to  press  the  analogy  of  our  ordinary  chain  of  memory,
admittedly  subject  to  lacunce  whose  forgotten  subject-matter  may  afterwards
(as  in  the  recollection  of  dreams)  be  partially  and  accidentally  recovered —
and  to  conjecture  that  not  the  brain's  life  during  sleep  alone,  but  all  nervous
action  may  be  so  far  conscious  as  to  be  capable  of  being  assumed  into  the
primary  chain  of  memories,  if  only  we  can  discover  the  appropriate  artifice
which  will  raise  those  submerged  sensations  above  the  ever-shifting  threshold
of  our  awake  or  empirical  being.

At  present  all  views  on  this  subject  must  be  equally  hypothetical  ;  and
the  main  purport  of  my  criticism  is  to  reinforce  the  contention  of  Professor
James  himself  (Yol.  I.,  p.  273,  and  see  Mhid,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  208)  as  to  the
urgent  need  of  further  experiment  under  anaesthetics.  This  kind  of  experi-
ment, indeed,  is  perhaps  more  rarely  fruitful  than  Professor  James  assumes.
Having  nryself ,  by  mere  good  fortune,  once  attained  under  nitrous  oxide  to
the  state  of  "impersonal  consciousness  "  which  Herzen  describes  (and  see
Foxwell  in  Appendix  to  Spencer's  Psychology),  I  have  endeavoured  in
Tain  to  repeat  the  experience.  Yet  the  psychological  instructiveness  of  this
unique  sensation  is  so  great  that  it  should,  I  think,  be  a  matter  of  course  for
the  experimental  psychologist  to  test  fully  his  own  capacity  of  getting  down
into  that  diffusive  sense  of  scarce-conditioned  existence  from  whence  the


116


F.  W.  H.  Myen


[Supplement.


notion  of  personality  itself,  and  the  specialised  senses  severally,  seem  slowly
to  define  themselves,  not  only  as  an  advance  and  a  development,  but  as  a
loss  and  a  limitation.  Through  all  these  stages  let  the  enquirer  pass  with
what  memory  he  may  ;  multi pertransibunt  et  augebitur  scientia.

I  pass  on  to  a  somewhat  similar  point  in  Chap.  V.  ("  The  Automatic
Theory  "),  where  our  author  is  arguing  that  the  ill-explained  phenomena  of
vicarious  function  indicate  that  consciousness  exerts  a  real  efficacy  of  regula-
tion or  choice.

"A  brain  with  part  of  it  scooped  out  is  virtually  a  new  machine,  and  during
the  first  days  after  the  operation  functions  in  a  thoroughly  abnormal  manner.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  its  performances  become  from  day  to  day  more
normal,  until  at  last  a  practised  eye  may  be  needed  to  suspect  anything
wrong.  Some  of  the  restoration  is  undoubtedly  due  to  '  inhibitions  '  pass-
ing away.  But  if  the  consciousness  which  goes  with  the  rest  of  the
brain  be  there  not  only  in  order  to  take  cognisance  of  each  functional  error,
but  also  to  exert  an  efficient  pressure  and  check  it  if  it  be  a  sin  of  com-
mission, and  to  lend  a  strengthening  hand  if  it  be  a  weakness  or  sin
of  omission,  nothing  seems  more  natural  than  that  the  remaining  parts,
assisted  in  this  way,  should  by  virtue  of  the  principle  of  habit  grow  back  to-
the  old  teleological  modes  of  exercise  for  which  they  were  at  first  incapaci-
tated. Nothing,  on  the  contrary,  seems  at  first  sight  more  unnatural  than
that  they  should  vicariously  take  up  the  duties  of  a  part  now  lost,  without
those  duties  as  such  exciting  any  persuasive  or  coercive  power."

So  far  as  I  know,  this  argument  is  a  new  one  ;  nor,  perhaps,  are  the  ex-
periments on  which  it  is  based  as  yet  sufficiently  wrell  understood  to  support
so  important  a  psychological  deduction.  I  would  suggest,  however,  that  it
may  derive  some  support  from  a  small  and  imperfectly  understood  group  of
cases  which  seem  to  point  to  a  somewhat  similar  independence  of  conscious-
ness— to  the  persistence,  that  is  to  say,  of  consciousness  under  pathological
conditions  which  would  seem  to  negative  its  possibility.

If  consciousness  be  a  mere  ejfiphenomenon — "a  foam,  aura,  or  melody" — ■
accompanying,  but  in  no  way  guiding,  certain  molecular  changes  in  the  brain,,
we  shall  of  course  expect  it  always  to  accompany  changes  of  the  same  kind.
We  may  suppose  (for  instance),  with  Herzen  and  others,  that  consciousness  is;
exclusively  linked  with  the  functional  disintegration  of  central  nervous-
elements,  and  varies  in  its  intensity  with  the  rapidity  or  energy  of  that  disin-
tegration.1 And  ordinary  experience,  at  least  within  physiological  limits,  will
support  some  view  like  this.  Yet  now  and  then  we  find  a  case  where  vivid
consciousness  has  existed  during  a  state  of  apparent  coma  ;  not  merely
accompanying  some  sudden  shock,  nor  provoked  by  some  discharging  lesion,
nor  even  limited,  as  in  Herzen's  case,  to  a  vague  sense  of  being,  but  (so  far
as  we  can  see)  tranquilly  and  intelligently  co-existing  with  an  almost
complete  abeyance  of  ordinary  vital  function.

It  is  mainly  in  the  study  of  telepathic  hallucinations  that  instances  of
this  kind  have  thus  far  been  observed.  The  remarkable  case  of  Dr.  Wiltse
(St.  Louis  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  November,  1889)  is,  so  far  as  I
know,  the  only  case  where  such  an  experience  has  been  immediately  and

1  See  Herzen,  op.  cit.,  p.  221  and  note.


Supplement.) W.  James,  "The  Principles  of  Psychology"  117


minutely  recorded  by  a  medical  man  on  his  return  from  a  condition  of
apparent  collapse.

Until  this  new  field  has  been  more  fully  worked — until  the  traces  of
memory  which  may  survive  from  comatose,  ecstatic,  syncopal  conditions  have
been  revived  (by  hypnotic  suggestion  or  otherwise),  and  carefully  compared,
we  have  no  right  to  make  any  absolute  assertion  as  to  the  concomitant
cerebral  processes  on  which  consciousness  depends.

This  problem  of  consciousness  meets  us  again  in  Chapter  VI.  ( ' 1  The  Mind-
stuff  Theory"),  in  the  form  of  a  discussion  of  the  familiar  question,  "Can
states  of  mind  be  unconscious  ? "  And  here  Professor  James  strikes  the
right  note  when,  in  reply  to  the  argument  that  "secondarily  automatic"
performances  ' '  must  consist  of  unconscious  perceptions,  inferences,  and
volitions,"  he  suggests  that  the  consciousness  of  these  actions  exists,  but  is
split  off  from  the  rest  of  the  consciousness  of  the  hemispheres.

But  surely  it  is  not  enough  to  press  this  point  with  reference  merely  to
.those  actions  which,  like  expert  piano-playing,  from  being  consciously  willed
have  become  automatic.  Rather,  as  I  think,  we  are  led  to  a  definition  of
'Consciousness  simple  enough  in  itself,  and  in  whose  light  many  of  the  habitual
•disputations  are  seen  to  be  purely  verbal.

To  describe  a  sensation  or  movement  as  conscious  is — I  venture  to  suggest
— in  effect  merely  to  assert  that  that  sensation  or  movement  is  capable  of
being  comprehended  in  some  chain  of  memory.  That  chain  may  be  the
primary  one  which  in  common  speech  we  identify  with  ourselves,  or  it  may
be  a  secondary  one,  either  spontaneous  or  artificially  created.  A  dream,  for
instance,  is  a  spontaneous  secondary  mnemonic  chain ;  the  sleep-waking  trance
•of  the  hypnotic  subject  is  an  artificial  one.  Suppose  that  I  dreamt  a  hundred
dreams  last  night,  and  remember  one  only,  in  the  midst  of  which  I  chanced
to  be  awakened.  Were  those  other  dreams  "unconscious  perceptions"
because  I  can  truly  affirm  that  I,  as  I  conceive  myself,  passed  the  night  in
profound  unconsciousness  1  Not  so  ;  these  dreams  also  were  conscious,  for
the  ninety  and  nine  which  remained  in  the  wilderness  of  subliminal  cerebra-
tion were  as  capable  as  the  hundredth  of  being  brought  home,  so  to  say,  on
the  shoulders  of  the  primary  self — of  being  comprehended  in  that  principal
chain  of  memories  which  alone  lies  above  the  threshold  of  waking  life.

Again  :  oidy  a  few  years  ago  it  was  maintained  by  Despine  and  others
that  all  a  man's  acts  in  the  hypnotic  trance  were  "  unconscious."  Few
would  now  maintain  this  ;  partly  because  we  have  grown  more  familiar  with
artifices  by  which  the  entranced  person  may  be  made  to  remember  or  to
Tecord  his  acts,  after  his  awakening  (Delboiuf,  Gurney,  &c),  and  partly
because  subjects  have  now  been  kept  so  long  (two  years  in  one  case)  in  the
hypnotic  trance,  with  no  apparent  loss  of  rationality,  that  it  would  seem
.absurd  to  maintain  that  during  all  that  period  they  had  been  more  of  automata
than  their  neighbours.

Yet  if  this  be  so,  if  the  acts  of  the  hypnotic  trance  are  potentially  as  "  con-
scious"— as  capable  of  recollection — as  the  acts  of  waking  hours,  some  start-
ling consequences  will  ensue.  It  will  follow  (as  already  hinted)  that  we  need
not  despair  of  comprehending  under  normal  memory  certain  organic  processes
which  the  hypnotic  self  can  carry  through — the  formation  of  a  blister,  for


118


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


instance, — processes  whose  mechanism  has  always  lain  wholly  outside  the-
normal  memory.

Bizarre  though  such  a  conception  may  seem,  it  becomes  less  strange  if  we
observe  the  great  difference  in  the  amount  of  the  lower  organic  processes-
which  different  persons  can  in  normal  states  perceive,  or  even  partly  regulate,
in  the  act  of  functioning.  The  better  we  realise  these  differences,  the  more
averse  shall  we  be  to  predicting  to  what  depth  into  our  cellular  being  such
perception  may  be  pushed  by  those  artifices  of  hypnotic  trance,  automatic
writing,  &c,  which  we  are  only  just  learning  to  employ.  Who,  even  now,,
can  maintain  that  there  is  any  true  psychological  line  of  distinction  between
those  processes  which  happen  to  rise  above  the  threshold  of  our  ordinary
consciousness — which  become  super-liminal — and  those  processes  which
happen  to  remain  sub-liminal  throughout  our  whole  bodily  life  ?  That
threshold  is  itself,  perhaps,  the  mere  result  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  and.
only  marks  off  those  vital  processes  which  it  was  most  important  for  our
ancestors  to  be  aware  of  from  those  vital  processes  which  they  could  with,
comparative  safety  ignore.

Professor  James's  discussion  of  consciousness  leads  on  to  the  central
psychological  difficulty  of  stating  intelligibly  the  connection  between  mind
and  brain.  For  his  own  part,  and  for  the  purposes  of  purely  scientific,  as
opposed  to  metaphysical,  psychology,  he  feels  justified  in  evading  that  diffi-
culty by  a  mere  statement  of  "  the  empirical  law  of  concomitance."

"The  consciousness,  which  is  itself  an  integral  thing  not  made  of  parts,.,
'  corresponds  '  to  the  entire  activity  of  the  brain,  whatever  that  may  be,  at
the  moment.  This  is  a  way  of  expressing  the  relation  of  mind  to  brain
from  which  I  shall  not  depart  during  the  remainder  of  this  book,  because  it
expresses  the  bare  phenomenal  fact  with  no  hypothesis,  and  is  exposed  to  no
such  logical  objections  as  we  have  found  to  cling  to  the  theory  of  ideas  in
combination."

By  thus  using  the  total  consciousness  of  the  moment  as  a  kind  of
psychological  unit,  Professor  James  is  able  to  discuss  many  problems  with
the  least  possible  encumbrance  of  a  metaphysical  kind.  But  obviously  the
unit  is  selected  as  a  convenience  in  calculation,  rather  than  as  expressing,
ultimate  fact.  The  total  consciousness  of  the  moment  is  a  function  of  some-
thing or  other,  rather  than  an  independent  entity.  We  must  look  for  our
veritable  unit  either  below  or  above ;  either  in  the  atoms  of  mind-stuff  from
which  we  may  imagine  the  complex  consciousness  to  be  upbuilt,  or  in  the  soul,
of  whose  existence  each  moment's  consciousness  will  form  a  transitory  phase.

n  Professor  James's  view,  the  determination  of  such  a  unit — mind-dust
or  soul — is  not  necessary  to  a  scientific  psychology.  But,  with  this  proviso,
he  briefly  reviews  the  various  theories,  and  among  conflicting  difficulties,
decides  that  in  his  own  personal  view  the  theory  of  a  soul,  or  controlling
spiritual  agent,  is  the  least  inconceivable.

"If  there  be  such  entities  as  souls  in  the  universe,  they  may  possibly  be
affected  by  the  manifold  occurrences  that  go  on  in  the  nervous  centres.  To
the  state  of  the  entire  brain  at  a  given  moment  they  may  respond  by  inward,
modifications  of  their  own.  .  .  .  The  soul  would  be  thus  a  medium  upon
which  the  manifold  brain  processes  continue  their  effects.  Not  needing  to  con-
sider it  as  the  '  inner  aspect'  of  any  arch-molecule  or  brain cell,  we  escape


Supplement.] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology."  119


that  physiological  improbability ;  and  as  its  pulses  of  consciousness  are  unitary
and  integral  affairs  from  the  outset,  we  escape  the  absurdity  of  supposing
feelings  which  exist  separately  and  then  '  fuse  together'  by  themselves.  The
separateness  is  in  the  brain-world,  on  this  theory,  and  the  unity  in  the
soul- world  ;  and  the  only  trouble  that  remains  to  haunt  us  is  the  metaphysical
one  of  understanding  how  one  sort  of  world  or  existent  thing  can  affect  or
influence  another  at  all.  This  trouble,  however,  since  it  also  exists  inside  of
both  worlds,  and  involves  neither  physical  improbability  nor  logical  contra-
diction, is  relatively  small."

Our  author,  however,  is  careful  not  to  postulate  a  soul  in  any  further
argument,  but  to  leave  it  as  a  hypothesis  (I  repeat)  lying  outside  experi-
mental or  naturalistic  psychology,  and  mainly  useful  as  a  means  of  showing
precisely  under  what  limitations  the  data  with  which  Psychology  works  can
be  used  as  though  they  were  really  valid.

In  Chapter  X.,  on  ilThe  Consciousness  of  Self,''  he  returns  to  this
subject : —

"  It  is,  in  fact,  with  the  word  Soul  as  with  the  word  Substance  in  general.
To  say  that  phenomena  inhere  in  a  Substance  is  at  bottom  only  to  record
one's  protest  against  the  notion  that  the  bare  existence  of  the  phenomenon
is  the  total  truth.  A  phenomenon  would  not  itself  be,  we  insist,  unless
there  were  something  more  than  the  phenomenon.  To  the  more  we  give  the
provisional  name  of  Substance.  So,  in  the  present  instance,  we  ought  cer-
tainly to  admit  that  there  is  more  than  the  bare  fact  of  co-existence  of  a
passing  thought  with  a  passing  brain-state.  But  we  do  not  answer  the  ques-
tion, '  What  is  that  more  ? '  when  we  say  that  it  is  a  '  Soul '  which  the  brain-
state  affects.  This  kind  of  more  explains  nothing  ;  and  when  we  are  once
trying  metaphysical  explanations  we  are  foolish  not  to  go  as  far  as  we  can.
For  my  own  part,  I  confess  that  the  moment  I  become  metaphysical  and  try
to  define  the  more,  I  find  the  notion  of  some  sort  of  an  anima  mundi  thinking
in  all  of  us  to  be  a  more  promising  hypothesis,  in  spite  of  all  its  difficulties,
than  that  of  a  lot  of  absolutely  individual  souls.  Meanwhile,  as  psycliologists
we  need  not  be  metaphysical  at  all.  The  phenomena  are  enough,  the
passing  Thought  itself  is  the  only  verifiable  thinker,  and  its  empirical  connec-
tion with  the  brain  process  is  the  ultimate  known  law."

I  have  quoted  this  passage  expressly  in  order  to  indicate  how  very  far,  in
my  view,  the  possibility  of  experiment  may  extend.  The  existence  of  an
anima  mundi  seems  at  first  sight  an  ontological  hypothesis  absolutely
incapable  of  test.  We  might  as  well  (as  one  has  said)  search  for  God  with  a
telescope  as  seek  the  World-soul  in  the  psycho-physiological  laboratory.  Yet
a  truer  parallel  may  be  found  if  we  compare  the  supposed  anima  mundi  to  the
cosmical  ether.  The  anima  mundi,  or  universal  consciousness,  can  be  best  con-
ceived by  finite  consciousnesses  in  the  aspect  of  a  universal  memory,  and  that
memory  in  the  form  of  a  universal  record  of  past,  present,  and  possibly  even
future  events.  Now  just  as  it  is  possible  so  to  adjust  our  physical  experi-
ments that  the  action  of  a  cosmical  ether — although  absolutely  imperceptible
in  any  direct  fashion — may  seem  the  most  probable  explanation  of  certain
phenomena  directly  observed,  so  also  it  may  be  possible  so  to  adjust  our
psychical  experiments  that  the  existence  of  a  cosmic  record — although  itself
absolutely  incognisable  in  any  direct  fashion — may  seem  the  most  probable
explanation  of  certain  phenomena  directly  observed.


120


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


Now  some  of  the  experiments  on  trance-conditions  recorded  in  Pro-
ceedings XVII.  were  precisely  of  the  character  here  suggested.  Statements
were  made  by  the  self-styled  Dr.  Phinuit — whose  existence  as  a  personality
ajjart  from  Mrs.  Piper  is  quite  unproved — containing  facts  not  known  either
to  Mrs.  Piper  or  to  any  person  present  at  the  time.  Professor  Lodge's  dis-
cussion of  these  messages  will  show  the  great  difficulty  of  assigning  their
origin.  Analogous  difficulties  arise  in  explaining  the  source  of  some  of  the
descriptions  of  facts  clairvoyantly  discerned  of  which  this  Part  of  the  Pro-
ceedings contains  some  detailed  specimens.  For  past  facts  are  thus  discerned
as  well  as  present  ;  and  moreover,  as  I  should  infer  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
paper  on  "  Premonitions"  (Vol.  V.,  p.  288),  it  will  not  be  easy,  if  any  clair-
voyant knowledge  whatever  be  admitted,  to  deny  altogether  its  extension
at  least  into  the  near  future.

Even  if  this  be  proved,  we  shall  still  be  on  the  very  threshold  of  our  sub-
ject. But  just  as  a  study  of  the  propagation  and  interference  of  light- waves
— depending  on  artifices  of  great  complexity-  -has  made  known  to  us  infer-
entially,  yet  not  the  less  certainly,  an  obscure  physical  entity  which  we  style
the  cosmic  ether  ;  so  also  may  experiments  on  the  propagation  and  interrup-
tions of  clairvoyant  or  telepathic  knowledge  or  memory  conceivably  reveal
to  us  inferentially,  but  not  the  less  certainly,  an  obscure  psychical  entity
which  we  can  best  describe  to  ourselves  as  an  anima  muudi  or  cosmic  record
of  all  things, — qu.ee  sint,  quce  fuerint,  quce  mox  ventura  trahantur.

Directly  connected  with  this  cosmic  problem  is  the  problem  of  the  insula-
tion of  the  single  intelligences  thus  possibly  bathed  in  a  universal  psychical
medium, — of  the  "closed  individuality  "  of  each  living  man.  After  a  discussion
{in  Chapter  VIII.)  of  the  various  splittings  and  severances  of  consciousness
lately  effected  by  Gurney,  Janet,  and  others,  the  author  concludes  that
whatever  use  we  may  henceforth  make  of  the  idea  of  an  individual  Soul,
we  must  in  no  way  prejudge  the  wider  question  of  the  interpenetration  of
intelligences  ;  the  relation  which  one  mind  bears  to  another  in  the  dynamics
of  the  conscious  world.

"One  great  use  of  the  Soul  has  always  been  to  account  for,  and  at  the
same  time  to  guarantee,  the  closed  individuality  of  each  personal  conscious-
ness. The  thoughts  of  one  soul  must  unite  into  one  self,  it  was  supposed,
and  must  be  eternally  insulated  from  those  of  every  other  soul.  But  we
have  already  begun  to  see  that,  although  unity  is  the  rule  of  each  man's
consciousness,  yet  in  some  individuals,  at  least,  thoughts  may  split  away  from
the  others  and  form  separate  selves.  As  for  insulation,  it  would  be  rash,  in
view  of  the  phenomena  of  thought-transference,  mesmeric  influence,  and
.spirit-control,  which  are  being  alleged  nowadays  on  better  authority  than
ever  before,  to  be  too  sure  about  that  point  either.  The  definitively  closed
condition  of  our  personal  consciousness  is  probably  an  average  statistical
resultant  of  many  conditions,  but  not  an  elementary  force  or  fact."

Oar  author  proceeds  to  illustrate  these  words  by  citing  certain  alterations
of  memory,  alternations  of  personality,  &c,  on  many  of  which  we  have
already  touched  in  these  Proceedings.1  And  then, — for  the  first  time,  I
think, in  any  accredited  manual  of  psychology, — we  come  to  a  frank

1  Two  of  the  most  striking  cases — those  of  Ansel  Bourne  and  of  Lurancy
"Vennum — will,  we  hope,  shortly  be  placed  before  our  readers  in  a  complete  form.


Supplement.] W.  James,  "The  Principles  of  Psychology."  121


recognition  of  the  existence  and  the  perplexing  character  of  those  so-called
"  mediumistic  "  trances  which  it  would  be  a  mere  shirking  of  difficulties  for
Science  any  longer  to  ignore.  And  in  Professor  James's  temper,  surely,
should  these  puzzles  be  attacked  ;  with  no  desire  either  to  minimise  the
observed  facts,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to  set  them  in  any  kind  of  opposition
to  facts  better  understood.  Here,  as  everywhere,  we  must  approach  the
unknown  througli  the  known  ;  we  must  exhaust  every  existing  analogy,  every
recognised  cause,  before  appealing  to  causes  new  to  Science,  or  placing  in  a
separate  basket  this  deep-sea  shell  which  she  has  picked  up  from  the  shore
■of  the  ocean  of  Truth.

"  In  ' mediumships'  or  'possessions  '  the  invasion  and  the  passing  away  of
the  secondary  state  are  both  relatively  abrupt,  and  the  duration  of  the  state
is  usually  short — i.e.,  from  a  few  minutes  to  a  few  hours.  Whenever  the
secondary  state  is  well  developed  no  memory  for  aught  that  happened  during
it  remains  after  the  primary  consciousness  comes  back.  The  subject  during  the
secondary  consciousness  speaks,  writes,  or  acts  as  if  animated  by  a  foreign
person  and  often  names  this  foreign  person  and  gives  his  history.
Mediumistic  possession  in  all  its  grades  seems  to  form  a  perfectly  natural
special  type  of  alternate  personality,  and  the  susceptibility  to  it  in  some
form  is  by  no  means  an  uncommon  gift,  in  persons  who  have  no  other
obvious  nervous  anomaly.  The  phenomena  are  very  intricate,  and  are  only
just  beginning  to  be  studied  in  a  proper  scientific  way.  ...  It  seems
exactly  as  though  one  author  composed  more  than  half  of  the  trance-messages,
no  matter  by  whom  they  are  uttered.  Whether  all  sub-conscious  selves  are
peculiarly  susceptible  to  a  certain  stratum  of  the  Zeitgeist,  and  get  this
inspiration  from  it,  I  know  not  ;  but  this  is  obviously  the  case  with  the
secondary  selves  which  become  '  developed '  in  Spiritualist  circles.  Thus  the
beginnings  of  the  medium  trance  are  indistinguishable  from  effects  of  hyp-
notic suggestion.  The  subject  assumes  the  role  of  a  medium  simply  because
opinion  expects  it  of  him  under  the  conditions  which  are  present ;  and  carries
it  out  with  a  feebleness  or  a  vivacity  proportionate  to  his  histrionic  gifts.
But  the  odd  thing  is  that  persons  unexposed  to  Spiritualist  traditions  will  so
often  act  in  the  same  way  when  they  become  entranced,  speak  in  the  name  of
the  departed,  go  through  the  motions  of  their  several  death-agonies,  send
messages  about  their  happy  home  in  the  summer-land,  and  describe  the
ailments  of  those  present.  I  have  no  theory  to  publish  of  these  cases,
several  of  which  I  have  personally  seen."

Difficult,  indeed,  must  such  investigation  into  the  possible  influence  of
unseen  intelligences  in  any  case  be.  But  it  will  not  be  difficult  only,  but
impossible, — it  will  lead  to  mere  confusion  and  bewilderment — if  it  be  under-
taken without  adequate  preliminary  conception  of  what  our  own  person-
alities, our  own  intelligences,  are  in  reality  and  can  actually  do.  The  most
ardent  Spiritist  should  welcome  a  searching  inquiry  into  the  potential
faculties  of  spirits  still  in  the  flesh.  Until  we  know  more  of  these,  those
other  phenomena  to  which  he  apjjeals  must  remain  unintelligible  because
isolated,  and  are  likely  to  be  obstinately  disbelieved  because  they  are
impossible  to  understand.

Following  our  author  through  his  successive  chapters,  and  deferring  our
notice  of  the  chapter  on  "Attention"  until  we  reach  the  chapter  on  "Will,"


122


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement,


we  find  in  his  discussion  of  "  Memory  "  a  passage  which,  while  true  enough
of  the  psychology  of  our  emergent  mental  strata,  is  seen  to  need  modification
if  we  take  into  account  the  subjacent  strata  as  well.

"All  these  pathological  facts,"  he  says,  after  enumerating  certain
revivals  of  memory,  which  I  cannot  regard  as  all  of  them  morbid,  "are
showing  us  that  the  sphere  of  recollection  may  be  wider  than  we  think  ;  and
that  in  certain  matters  apparent  oblivion  is  no  proof  against  possible  recall
under  other  conditions.  They  give  no  countenance,  however,  to  the  extra-
vagant opinion  that  nothing  we  experience  can  be  absolutely  forgotten."

It  would  be  extravagant,  no  doubt,  to  affirm  this  dogmatically  ;  but  I  see
no  extravagance  in  the  conjecture  that  no  lapse  of  memory  can  be  irrevocable.
From  the  superficial  strata  of  our  mind,  we  may  say,  memories  slip  .down-
wards to  uncertain  depths.  But  to  what  depths  they  sink,  or  by  what
stimulus  they  may  possibly  be  recalled,  is  a  question  approachable  only  by
experiment, — and  by  a  class  of  experiments  which  are  as  yet  in  their  infancy.
Even  now  we  have  found  one  artifice  after  another — hypnotic  trance,  auto-
matic writing,  crystal  vision— alike  successful  in  fishing  up  from  abysses  as
yet  unfathomed  much  which  we  supposed  either  to  have  been  forgotten  for
ever,  or  never  to  have  been  known  at  all.

Most  promising  of  all,  perhaps,  are  the  careful  experiments  in  the
induction  of  hallucinatory  pictures  by  gazing  into  reflecting  surfaces,
described  under  the  title  of  "  crystal-gazing, "  in  Proceedings,  XIV.  These
experiments  show  that  a  printed  sentence  which  has  come  within  the  visual
field,  but  which  cannot  easily  be  supposed  to  have  attracted  conscious  attention,
may  be  observed,  retained,  and  reproduced  as  a  hallucinatory  image  by  the
submerged  self,  which  may  thus  send  up  to  the  empirical  self  a  message  of
practical  value.  Is  it  not  safest,  with  such  facts  in  view,  to  say  that  although
all  memories,  unless  frequently  revived,  tend  to  slip  from  out  of  the  control
of  the  empirical  self,  we  have  no  proof  that  they  can  escape  entirely  from
the  total  or  transcendental  personality  ?  So  that  all  that  we  have  been
may  be  a  part  of  us  for  ever,  and  the  "lost  days  of  our  life,"  as  in  the
poet's  allegory,  may  meet  us  with  undeadened  remorsefulness  on  some
further  shore : —

"  And  I,  and  I  thyself,"— lo  each  one  saith, —
"  And  thou  thyself  to  all  eternity.'

Where  the  floating  iceberg  meets  the  sea  there  is  no  internal  line  of
stratification.  The  proportion  of  submergence  is  determined  by  nothing  in
the  iceberg's  essential  structure,  but  solely  by  the  relation  between  the
specific  gravities  of  water  in  different  states.  Even  so  the  water-line  between
the  empirical  and  the  subjacent  consciousness  in  man  may  be  determined  by
no  break  of  continuity  in  the  processes  which  take  place  within  him,  but
merely  by  the  relation  which  his  transcendental  self  bears  to  the  material
world  in  which  it  is  immersed.  There  is  no  obvious  reason  why  we  should
not,  by  suitable  inquiry,  bring  the  bulk  of  these  hidden  processes  under  the
cognisance  of  the  empirical  inquiring  self.  But  we  must  remember  that  in
such  a  quest  we  must  not  trust  to  Nature's  aid.  Nature  is  propagandist,  not
scientific  ;  she  has  fitted  us  out  to  use  her  hidden  processes  for  our  own  and
our  kind's  preservation,  not  to  pry  into  and  understand  them  with  mere
knowledge  as  our  end  and  aim. If,  therefore,  we  wish  to  know  as  well  as  to


supplement.] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology.'"  123-


be,  we  must  everywhere  replace  instinct  and  sensation  by  artifice  and  infer-
ence. By  artifice  and  inference  our  field  of  consciousness  may  be  extended
as  widely  as  by  instrument  and  calculation  we  have  extended  our  field  of
vision.  We  know  already  that  consciousness  is  not  the  trustworthy  thing
which  it  seems,  but  is  a  most  distorted  and  incomplete  reflection  of  the
world  which  it  professes  to  mirror.  We  may  now  realise  on  the  other
hand  that — distorted  and  incomplete  as  our  inward  transcript  of  reality
must  ever  be — there  is  at  any  rate  more  of  it  than  we  knew  ;  that  what
we  have  to  decipher  is  not  a  mere  manuscript  full  of  blots  and  lacunae,  but
rather  a  series  of  superimposed  and  as  yet  undeveloped  impressions  upon  an
infinitely  sensitive  and  infinitely  receptive  plate.

And  now  we  advance  to  a  question  more  complex  still.  Whence  come
the  impressions  on  that  plate  1  In  what  way  can  we  distinguish  the  plate's
own  blots  or  markings  from  the  lines  and  shadings  which  indicate  that  a
real  object  has  been  in  front  of  the  camera  ?  The  practical  answer,  indeed,
is  simple  enough.  Whatever  impression  all  plates  simultaneously  exposed
reproduce,  this  represents  a  real  object  ;  the  markings  inherent  in  the  plate
itself  will  be  different  for  each  plate  in  turn.  Objective  and  subjective
impressions,  plain  men  will  say,  can  only  be  confounded  when  practical
difficulties  prevent  us  from  testing  the  experience  of  one  mind  by  the-
experience  of  another.

"There  is,"  says  our  author  in  his  chapter  on  "Imagination"  (Vol.
II.,  p.  70),  "  between  imagined  objects  and  felt  objects  a  difference
of  conscious  quality,  which  may  be  called  almost  absolute.  It  is  hardly
possible  to  confound  the  liveliest  image  of  fancy  with  the  weakest  real
sensation.  The  felt  object  has  a  plastic  reality  and  outwardness  which  the
imagined  object  wholly  lacks.  Moreover,  as  Fechner  says,  in  imagination
the  attention  feels  as  if  drawn  backward  to  the  brain  ;  in  sensation  (even
of  after-images)  it  is  directed  forward  toward  the  sense-organ.  The
difference  between  the  two  processes  feels  like  one  of  kind,  and  not  like  a
mere  '  more  '  or  '  less  '  of  the  same."

Certain  experimental  facts,  however,  show  that  this  broad  distinction  is-
not  always  valid,  and  "force  us  to  admit  that  the  subjective  difference-
between  imagined  and  felt  objects  is  less  absolute  than  has  been  claimed,  and
that  the  cortical  jn'ocesses  which  underlie  imagination  and  sensation  are  not
quite  so  discrete  as  one  at  first  is  tempted  to  suppose.  That  peripheral
sensory  processes  are  ordinarily  involved  in  imagination  seems  improbable  ;
that  they  may  sometimes  be  aroused  from  the  cortex  downwards  cannot,
however,  be  dogmatically  denied."

In  thus  deciding,  Professor  James  does  but  reproduce  the  view  which,
(quite  apart  from  any  belief  in  telepathy,  &c.)  is  becoming  general  among
psychologists.  The  cortex  of  the  brain,  the  seat  of  our  highest  faculties,
may  itself  originate  hallucinatory  percepts,  without  any  derangement  of  the-
special  organs  of  sense.  This  fact  is,  of  course,  what  believers  in  telepathy —
in  veridical  hallucinations — would  anticipate  ;  and  it  suggests  some  curious-
reflections  as  to  the  relation  between  the  knowledge  which  reaches  us
through  the  sense-organs  ;  and  the  knowledge  which  reaches  us  in  hallucina-
tory fashion,  and  without  any  apparent  sensory  intervention.  I  will  venture
to  explain  my  meaning  by  aid  of  a  somewhat  homely  metaphor.


124


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


Let  me  compare  the  brain  to  a  chemist's  laboratory,  and  the  impressions
brought  in  by  the  sense-organs  to  port  and  sherry  which  the  chemist  buys.
Hallucinations — or  centrally-initiated  impressions — are  port  and  sherry
manufactured  by  the  chemist  himself.  Now  there  has  been  a  prejudice
against  these  products  ;  they  have  been  said  to  be  unwholesome,  and  to  be
unlike  the  genuine  wines.  But  we  now  urge  (1)  that  our  chemical  wines  are
often  just  as  fvll-flwoov/red  as  the  genuine  wines,  since  they  are  often  found
indistinguishable  from  them  (the  hallucinatory  image  appearing  as  distinct
as  the  image  of  an  external  reality) ;  and  moreover  (2)  that  our  chemical
wines  are  often  just  as  wholesome  as  the  genuine  wines  (since  hallucinations
may  be  as  truth-telling  as  the  sights  of  the  external  world).  Now  if  this  be
so,  then  even  if  a  million  bottles  of  port  are  grown  for  one  that  is  manu-
factured, it  will  nevertheless  be  true  to  say  that  chemistry  comprehends
wine-making,  and  that  vine-growing  is  only  one  special  empirical  method  of
manufacturing  wine.  And  similarly,  the  messages  brought  to  us  by  the
sense-organs  will  form  only  one  special  mode,  though  the  most  usual  mode,
of  our  acquisition  of  knowledge.

Nay  more  ;  inasmuch  as  the  chemist  on  our  hypothesis  does  not  find  his
alcohols  and  ethers  ready-made,  but  builds  them  up  from  simpler  elements,
he  can  arrest  processes  and  vary  products  in  a  way  which  nature  does  not
rival.  And  similarly  hallucinations,  or  centrally-initiated  messages,  may
affect  the  activity  of  some  one  cerebral  centre  which  in  our  dealings  with
the  external  world  almost  always  acts  in  concert  with  other  centres.  For
instance,  as  I  have  endeavoured  elsewhere  to  show  (Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,
p.  58,  &c),  any  one  of  the  four  main  processes  of  verbalisation  may  severally
originate  a  sujoernormal  (as  well  as  a  morbid)  hallucinatory  percept, —
although  in  our  ordinary  external  activities  two  or  more  of  these  several
processes  will  almost  always  be  found  in  action  together.

Just  as  the  chemist's  possible  products  are  far  more  varied  than  the  vine-
grower's — and  may  be  either  more  simple  or  more  complex  than  anything
which  the  soil  of  Xeres  or  Oporto  will  produce — so  also  are  our  centrally-
initiated  or  hallucinatory  sensations  potentially  far  more  varied — more  simple
and  also  more  complex — than  the  sensations  which  eye  or  ear  bring  to  us
from  the  external  world.  Nor  can  we  guess  without  actual  experiment  where
the  limits  of  our  mental  chemistry  lie.  We  neither  know  whence  we  get  our
chemicals,  nor  what  chemicals  we  have  got,  nor  what  use  we  may  ultimately
be  able  to  make  of  them.

I  must  not  treat  this  subject  fully  here,  but  must  confine  myself  to  such
remai'ks  as  are  directly  suggested  by  Professor  James's  pages.  I  cite  first  a
passage  from  his  chapter  on  "  Reality  "  (Vol.  II.,  p.  323)  : —

"A  set  of  facts  have  recently  been  brought  to  my  attention  which  I
hardly  know  how  to  treat.  I  refer  to  a  type  of  experience  which  has
frequently  found  a  place  among  the  '  Yes '  answers  to  the  '  Census  of
Hallucinations,'  and  which  is  generally  described  by  those  who  report  it  as
an  '  impression  of  the  presence  '  of  someone  near  them,  although  no
sensation  either  of  sight,  hearing,  or  touch  is  involved.  From  the  way  in
which  this  experience  is  spoken  of  by  those  who  have  had  it,  it  would  appear
to  be  an  extremely  definite  and  positive  state  of  mind,  coupled  with  a  belief
in  the  reality  of  its  object  quite  as  strong  as  any  direct  sensation  ever  gives.


Supplement.] W.  James,  i:  The  Principles  of  Psychology!'  125


And  yet  no  sensation  seems  to  be  connected  with  it  at  all.  Sometimes  the-
person  whose  nearness  is  thus  impressed  is  a  known  person,  dead  or  living,
sometimes  an  unknown  one.  His  attitude  and  situation  are  often  very
definitely  impressed,  and  so,  sometimes  (though  not  by  way  of  hearing),  are
words  which  he  wishes  to  say.

"  The  phenomenon  would  seem  to  be  due  to  a  pure  conception  becoming
saturated  with  the  sort  of  stinging  urgency  which  ordinarily  only  sensations
bring.  But  I  cannot  yet  persuade  myself  that  the  urgency  in  question
consists  in  concomitant  emotional  and  motor  impulses.  The  impression  may
come  quite  suddenly  and  depart  quickly  ;  it  may  carry  no  emotional
suggestions,  and  wake  no  motor  consequences  beyond  those  involved  in
attending  to  it.  Altogether,  the  matter  is  somewhat  paradoxical,  and  no-
conclusion  can  be  come  to  until  more  definite  data  are  obtained. v

Paradoxical  such  an  experience,  standing  alone,  undoubtedly  seems  ;  nor
could  the  critic  be  blamed  who  should  refer  it  to  mere  exaggeration  or
'•fancy."  To  me,  however,  on  grounds  to  be  stated  in  a  moment,  it  seems
quite  possible  that  the  impression  thus  described  may  sometimes  have  a  real
validity.  I  should  then  regard  it  as  an  illustration — not  evidentially  strong,
but  entirely  normal  and  predictable — of  a  thesis  which  actual  observation
may  be  invoked  to  support.  It  is  a  message,  I  should  say,  sent  upwards  by
the  submerged  to  the  superficial  Self  ;  and  the  messages  of  the  deeper  Self
are  not  necessarily  differentiated  into  our  recognised  categories  of  sense.
They  emanate  from  a  kind  of  continuum  of  sensation,  from  an  innate  and
undifferentiated  perceptivity  which  antecedes  sensory  specialisation,  and
which  the  specialisations  of  nerve-termini  to  which  terrestrial  evolution
conducts  us  may  restrict  as  well  as  clarify.

vovs  opd  ieai  vovs  dxovei  raWa  Kcotpa  Kai  TvcfiXd.

My  reasons  for  this  belief  are  to  be  found  in  what  I  deem  the  facts  of
telepathy  and  clairvoyance.  I  believe  that  impressions  as  ill-defined  as.
those  which  Professor  James  has  described  may  nevertheless  be  provably
truth-telling  or  "  veridical  "  ; — provably  veridical  either  in  the  sense  that  the
impression  coincides  with  a  cognate  but  distant  event  in  a  manner  too  marked
for  chance-coincidence  to  explain,  or  in  the  sense  that,  vague  as  the  feeling
is,  it  may  be  shared  independently  by  more  than  one  person,  and  may  thus
show  that  it  exists  in  some  fashion  or  other  outside  the  individual  mind.1

Telepathy  in  any  shape  whatever — and  especially  that  collectivity,  or  inde-
pendent sharing  of  the  telepathic  impression,  which  meets  us  in  many  forms,
— here,  I  say,  are  conceptions  destined  still  further  to  confound  our  already
doubtful  contrast  between  objective  and  subjective,  to  show  how  wavering
and  provisional  is  our  line  of  demarcation  between  "real"  and  "  unreal  "
things.  The  reader  who  is  disposed  to  follow  this  train  of  thought  may  be
referred  to  a  letter  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal  for  April,  1890.  I  cannot  here
pursue  the  theme,  but  must  pass  on  to  the  next  topic  which  our  author's
chapters  suggest.

The  question  of  the  "Perception  of  Space,"  with  which  Professor  James
deals  at  length,  affords  opportunities  for  testing  certain  views  which  I  have
already  expressed. I  have  spoken  of  information  acquired  or  possessed  by  the


1See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  240,  &c.


126


F,  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement,


subliminal  self  in  supernormal  ways.  I  have  suggested  that  such  faculty  of
knowledge  may  be  innate  as  well  as  acquired  ;  and  that  observation  or
experiment  may  reveal  in  us  traces  of  an  experience  which  no  terrene  history
will  explain.

I  believe  that  besides  telepathy,  or  the  acquirement  of  knowledge  by
supersensory  transmission  from  other  minds,  there  exists  in  nature  the
cognate  (or  perhaps  more  generalised)  power  of  clairvoyance,  or  the  acquire-
ment of  knowledge  by  supersensory  perception  of  facts  or  scenes,  not
necessarily  as  existing  in  other  minds,  but  as  discerned  by  an  innate  per-
ceptivity of  the  clairvoyant's  own,  exercised  in  various  ways,  but  mainly  by
a  quasi-visual — I  do  not  say  an  optical — act  of  perception.

And  herein  our  recorded  cases  fall  roughly  into  two  groups  ;  (A)  where
the  periphery  was  apparently  used  for  perception,  but  used  in  a  way  of  which
physiology  can  give  no  account  (as  where  Professor  Fontan's  subject  discerned
the  colours  of  wools  in  pitch  darkness,  or  through  glass,  and  with  a  screen
interposed,  but  only  when  he  touched  the  glass  with  his  fingers)  ;  and  (B)
when  the  peripheral  nerves  seem  to  play  no  part,  but  the  clairvoyant  has
direct  percejjtion  of  three-dimensional  scenes  at  a  distance.  Such  quasi-visual
perception,  like  quasi-visual  perception  resulting  from  telepathic  impact,  is
attended  by  striking  anomalies,  wrhich  illustrate  what  I  have  called  the  non-
optical  character  of  the  vision  attained.

It  is  obvious  that  a  belief  in  clairvoyance,  if  in  any  degree  admitted,
must  profoundly  modify  our  whole  theory  of  the  genesis  of  space-perception.
It  does  not,  indeed,  constrain  us  to  deny  either  that  space  may  be  a  necessary
""form  of  intuition,"  or  that  our  conception  of  space  may  be  the  result  of
experience  alone  ;  but  it  sets  back  that  form  of  intuition,  it  removes  that
experience,  to  some  non-terrene,  and  perhaps  pre-terrene  source.  It  seems
that  in  conditions  other  than  those  to  which  sensory  evolution  has  led,  we
can  conceive,  or  have  conceived  of  space  as  real,  and  are  still  able,  in  certain
states,  to  deal  with  space  with  a  freedom  which  waking  experience  has  never
known.

One  direction  in  which  a  view  of  this  kind  is  open  to  searching  test
lies  in  the  study  of  the  conception  of  space  formed  by  the  blind.  We
could  not,  indeed,  be  confident  a  priori  that  the  faculty  of  clairvoyance,
however  real,  could  subsist  without  the  existence  in  the  mind  of  a  stock  of
ordinary  visual  images  which  the  supernormal  vision  might  in  some  sort
employ.  Yet  if,  as  I  hold,  there  be  in  us  a  reserve  of  latent  perceptive
power,  antecedent  to  sensory  specialisation,  we  shall  expect  this  power  to
show  itself  here  and  there  by  novel  channels  where  specialised  sense  is  in
default.

(1)  Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  blind,  we  shall  not  only  be  prepared  for  all
kinds  of  auditory,  tympanic,  tactile  hypertesthesia,  but  we  shall  not  be
surprised  if  we  come  upon  cases  of  vicarious  function  carried  beyond  ordinary
physiological  limits,  and  analogous  to  the  alleged  epigastric,  frontal,  or  digital
discriminations  of  somnambulic  clairvoyance.  Just  as  in  cases  of  cerebral
mutilation  we  held  it  possible  that  recovery  of  function,  due  to  vicarious
fiction  of  uninjured  tracts,  might  be  such  as  only  a  directing  con-
sciousness could  have  effected,  so  with  the  blind  also  we  shall  conceive
that  the  relation  of  the  organism  to  the  directing  consciousness  may  be  a


supplement,] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology.'"  127


relation  resembling — not  that  of  the  instrument  to  the  workman  who  made
it,  but  that  of  the  instrument  to  the  savant  who  experiments  with  it,  and  who
may  put  certain  parts  of  it  to  novel  uses  which  the  workman  (represented  in
our  case  by  the  natural  selection  which  has  shaped  our  terrene  frames)  did
not  specifically  contemplate,  or  could  not  himself  have  devised.

(2)  Again,  we  shall  expect  our  supposed  innate  perceptive  power  to  show
itself  in  the  blind  in  all  those  channels  through  which  the  sub-liminal  self  is
wont  to  send  up  messages  to  the  superficial  consciousness.  All  forms  of
dream  and  hallucination  (whether  veridical  or  falsidical)  are  thus  likely,  in
my  view,  to  possess  for  the  bbnd  or  the  partially  blind  a  higher  visual  quality
than  their  waking  perceptions  can  realise  or  their  waking  memories  recall.
Nay,  I  will  push  the.  hypothesis  to  an  extremity,  and  conjecture  that  the
blind  man  will  be  capable  of  hallucinations  which  will  be  so  far  from  being
revivals  of  memory  that  they  will  be  such  as  no  memory  of  his  can  explain.
He  will  exercise  a  sight  which  he  does  not  recognise  as  sight,  which  belongs  in
fact  to  that  pre-natal  undifferentiated  continuum  of  perceptive  faculty  of
which  telepathic  and  clairvoyant  phenomena  show  us  the  vestigial  or
obsolescent  trace.

On  all  these  points  there  were  much  to  say  ;  in  spite  of  the  scantiness
of  appropriate  observations  thus  far  made  upon  the  blind.  But  I  will
confine  myself  to  illustrations  drawn  from  Professor  James's  book — a
treatise  assuredly  not  written  to  support  any  such  thesis  as  I  am  now
suggesting.

First,  then,  as  to  the  replacement  of  a  quasi- visual  perception  by  nerves
apparently  unsuited  to  the  task,  without  aid  either  from  tympanic  pressure,
or  from  a  sense  of  differing  temperatures.  Professor  James  quotes  from  Mr.
W.  Hanks  Levy,  known  as  a  blind  man  who  has  worked  for  the  welfare  of  the
blind  :—

' '  Whether  within  a  house  or  in  the  open  air,  whether  walking  or  standing
still, I  can  tell,  although  quite  blind,  when  I  am  opposite  an  object,  and  can
perceive  whether  it  be  tall  or  short,  slender  or  bulky.  I  can  also  detect
whether  it  be  a  solitary  object  or  a  continuous  fence  ;  whether  it  be  a  close
fence  or  composed  of  open  rails  ;  and  often  whether  it  be  a  wooden  fence,  a
brick  or  stone  wall,  or  a  quick-set  hedge.  .  .  .  The  currents  of  air  can
have  nothing  to  do  with  this  power,  as  the  state  of  the  wind  does  not
directly  affect  it  ;  the  sense  of  hearing  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  as  when
snow  lies  thickly  on  the  ground  objects  are  more  distinct,  although  the  footfall
cannot  be  heard.  I  seem  to  perceive  objects  through  the  skin  of  my  face,
•and  to  have  the  impressions  immediately  transmitted  to  my  brain.  Stopping
my  ears  does  not  interfere  with  it,  but  covering  my  face  with  a  thick  veil
destroys  it  altogether.  None  of  the  five  senses  have  anything  to  do  with
the  existence  of  this  power,  and  the  circumstances  above  named  induce
me  to  call  this  unrecognised  sense  by  the  name  of  facial  perception."

I  must  not  here  go  into  further  detail.  Enough  has  been  quoted  to
illustrate  the  parallel  already  suggested  between  the  modes  of  perceptivity
with  which  the  directing  consciousness — using  the  bodily  frame  as  the
savant  uses  his  instrument — endeavours  to  replace  the  special  sense-organ
which  the  blind  have  lost,  and  the  modes  of  perceptivity  which  the
.transcendental  self  employs  in  clairvoyant  vision,  when  the  normal  opera-


128


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


tion  of  the  sense-organ  is  occluded  by  mechanical  means,  or  shut  off  into
temporary  abeyance  by  the  conditions  of  trance.

I  pass  on  to  the  second  point, — the  manifestations  in  the  blind  of  a  latent
quasi-visual  perceptivity,  which  does  not  (as  with  Mr.  Levy's  ' '  facial  per-
ception ")  rise  above  the  threshold  into  the  habitual  use  of  the  superficial
consciousness,  but  is  discernible  only  in  those  "  messages  "  or  intimations
which  sometimes  reach  the  upper  life  from  that  laboratory  of  mingled  dream
and  wisdom  which  is  ever  at  work  below.

And  here  the  narrative  which  I  must  cite  from  Professor  James's  book  is
in  itself  so  bizarre,  and  fits  with  such  singular  and,  so  to  say,  improbable
aptitude  into  the  chain  of  my  argument,  that  I  would  willingly  have  led  up
to  it  by  many  references  to  the  behaviour  of  hallucinatory  percepts  occur-
ring under  more  ordinary  conditions.  Space,  however,  forbids  me  to  do-
more  than  remind  my  reader  that  hallucinatory  vision  has  often  shown  itself
independent  of  the  conditions  of  ordinary  vision,  and  that  the  subliminal
visualising  power  has  proved  itself  more  vivid  than  the  visualising  power
under  the  control  of  the  conscious  will.  The  percipient,  for  instance,  will
seem  to  see  the  hallucinatory  figure  in  a  position  quite  outside  his  possible
field  of  vision  ;  the  crystal-gazer — sometimes  (as  would  appear)  even  in  dark-
ness— will  see  figures  evolve  themselves  which  far  surpass  in  vividness  of
colouring  and  truth  of  motion  anything  which  his  normal  faculty  could
evoke.

Who  shall  say,  until  experiences  like  these  have  been  intelligently  sought
for,  that  even  the  following  incident,  which  occurred  to  a  friend  of  Professor
James',  may  not  have  many  parallels  ?

"  The  subject  of  the  observation,  Mr.  P.,"  says  Professor  James,  "  is  an
exceptionally  intelligent  wtiness,  though  the  words  of  the  narrative  are  his.
wife's."

"Mr.  P.  has  all  his  life  been  the  occasional  subject  of  rather  singular
delusions  or  impressions  of  various  kinds.  If  I  had  belief  in  the  existence
of  latent  or  embryo  faculties,  other  than  the  five  senses,  I  should  explain
them  on  that  ground.  Being  totally  blind,  his  other  perceptions  are
abnormally  keen  and  developed,  and  given  the  existence  of  a  rudimentary
sixth  sense,  it  would  be  only  natural  that  this  also  should  be  more  acute  in
him  than  in  others.  One  of  his  most  interesting  experiences  in  this  line  was
the  frequent  apparition  of  a  corpse  some  years  ago.  ...  It  was  a  very
familiar  occurrence  with  him  while  in  the  midst  of  work  to  feel  a  cool  draught
of  air  suddenly  upon  his  face,  with  a  prickling  sensation  at  the  roots  of  his
hair,  when  he  would  turn  from  the  piano,  and  a  figure  which  he  knew  to  be
dead  would  come  sliding  under  the  crack  of  the  door  from  without,  flattening
itself  to  squeeze  through,  and  rounding  out  again  to  the  human  form.  It  was
of  a  middle-aged  man,  and  drew  itself  along  the  carpet  on  hands  and  knees,
but  with  head  thrown  back,  till  it  reached  the  sofa,  upon  which  it  stretched
itself.  .  .  .  Mr.  P.  afterwards  traced  the  whole  experience  to  strong
tea.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  cold  tea,  which  always  stimulates  him,
for  lunch,  and  on  giving  up  this  practice  he  never  saw  this  or  any  other
apparition  again.  .  .  .  There  is  one  point  which  is  still  wholly
inexplicable.  Mr.  P.  has  no  memory  whatever  of  sight,  nor  conception  of  it.
It  is  impossible  for  him  to  form  any  idea  of  what  we  mean  by  light  or-


supplement.] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology."  129


colour.  ,  .  .  When  he  becomes  aware  of  the  presence  of  a  person  or  an
object,  by  means  which  seem  mysterious  to  outsiders,  lie  can  always  trace  it
to  slight  echoes  perceptible  only  to  his  keen  ears,  or  to  differences  in
atmospheric  pressure,  perceptible  only  to  his  acute  nerves  of  touch  ;  but  with
the  apparition  described,  for  the  only  time  in  his  experience,  he  was  aware
of  presence,  size,  and  appearance,  without  the  use  of  either  of  these
mediums.  The  figure  never  produced  the  least  sound,  nor  came  within  a
number  of  feet  of  his  person  ;  yet  he  knew  that  it  was  a  man,  that  it  moved,
and  in  what  direction  ;  even  that  it  wore  a  full  beard,  which,  like  the  thick
curly  hair,  was  partially  grey  ;  also  that  it  was  dressed  in  the  style  of  suit
known  as  'pepper  and  salt.'  These  points  were  all  perfectly  distinct  and
invariable  each  time.  If  asked  how  he  perceived  them,  he  will  answer  that
he  cannot  tell ;  he  simply  knew  it,  and  so  strongly  and  so  distinctly  that  it
is  impossible  to  shake  his  opinion  as  to  the  exact  details  of  the  man's
appearance.  It  would  seem  that  in  this  delusion  of  the  senses  he  really  saw,
as  he  has  never  done  in  the  actual  experiences  of  life,  except  in  the  first  two
years  of  childhood."

"  On  cross-examining  Mr.  P.,"  adds  Professor  James,  "I  could  not  make
out  that  there  was  anything  like  visual  imagination  involved,  although  he  was
quite  unable  to  describe  in  just  what  terms  the  false  perception  was  carried
on."

I  must  pass  on  to  the  theme  of  some  of  our  author's  most  striking-
chapters, — the  question  as  to  what  the  conscious  will  can  control,  what  is
involved  in  its  so-called  freedom,  or  negated  by  its  subjection  to  inevitable
law.

And  in  the  first  place  we  may  fully  agree  with  our  author  in  holding  that
"effort  of  attention  is  the  essential  phenomenon  of  will."  (Vol.  II.,  p.  562.)
There  is  no  need  to  postulate  anything  beyond  this.  If  our  supposed
agency  external  to  the  molecular  forces  can  dominate  the  attention,  its
victory  is  won  ;  it  has  its  hand  on  the  lever  which  sets  in  motion  all  the
work  of  body  and  mind.

In  his  chapter  on  "Attention"  our  author  gives  clear  expression  to  this
view.

"When  we  reflect  that  the  turnings  of  our  attention  form  the  nucleus  of
our  inner  self  ;  when  we  see  that  volition  is  nothing  but  attention;  when  we
believe  that  our  autonomy  in  the  midst  of  nature  depends  on  our  not  being
pure  effect,  but  a  cause, —

Principiimi  quoddam  quod  fati  fed  era  rumpat,
Ex  infinito  tie  causam  causa  sequatur—
we  must  admit  that  the  question  whether  attention  involve  such  a  principle
of  spiritual  activity  or  not  is  metaphysical  as  well  as  psychological,  and  is
well  worthy  of  all  the  pains  we  can  bestow  on  its  solution.  It  is,  in  fact,  the
pivotal  question  of  metaphysics,  the  very  hinge  on  which  our  picture  of  the
world  shall  swing  from  materialism,  fatalism,  monism,  towards  Spiritualism,
freedom,  pluralism,— or  else  the  other  way." (Vol.  I.,  p.  447.)

And  now  what  influence  will  the  views  which  I  have  advocated  exert  on
our  attitude  towards  this  central  problem  1

They  will  not,  assuredly,  tempt  us  to  suppose  that  we  can  answer  the
ultimate,  the  cosmic  question  as  to  the  free  or  fated  pathways  along  which

K


130


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


each  individual  being  moves  in  the  vastness  of  the  All.  Rather,  we  shall
perceive  with  new  clearness  that  the  question  is  insoluble,  that  even  when
the  materialist  view  of  man  is  set  aside,  the  problem  of  liberty  is  but
removed  into  a  region  whither  no  experiment  can  pursue  it.

But  so  far  as  the  terrene  aspect  of  that  problem  goes — the  question  as  to
what  goes  on  in  man's  brain  when  he  wills  an  action — our  effort  will  be  to
reduce  this  to  an  experimental  question  by  correlating  it,  if  possible,  with
other  problems  which  admit  of  a  more  direct  experimental  attack.

"Effort  of  attention,"  we  are  agreed  with  Prof  esor  James,  "  is  the  essential
phenomenon  of  will."  The  direction  of  attention  one  way  or  the  other
depends  immediately,  we  must  suppose,  on  the  determination  of  certain
molecular  movements  in  the  brain.  The  question  of  the  independence  of
our  will  (as  a  terrene  cause)  resolves  itself,  therefore,  into  a  question  whether
molecular  movements  are  ever  determined  by  a  cause  other  than  any  known
molecular  force.  I  leave  aside  for  the  present  the  question  whether  all
molecular  movements  whatever  must  not  originally,  and  in  the  last  resort,
have  been  determined  by  some  cause  other  than  any  molecular  force  which  we
know.  I  waive  also  the  question  as  to  whether  any  non-human  or  disembodied
agency  can  ever  be  detected  as  influencing  incarnate  minds,  or  molecular
matter.  But  confining  ourselves  to  mind  and  matter  as  we  know  them,  it  is
plain  that  there  are  three  ways  in  which  a  determination  of  molecular  (or
even  molar)  movement  by  causes  outside  known  molecular  forces  could  con-
ceivably be  exerted.  There  may  be  determination  within  the  subject's  own
mind  or  brain — which  would  be  the  act  of  free-will  which  we  are  discussing.
There  may  be  a  determination  exercised  from  one  mind  or  brain  upon
another.  And  there  may  be  a  determination  exercised  from  one  or  more
minds  or  brains  upon  the  ponderable  matter  of  the  world.

All  these  three  cases  will  be  analogous  ;  so  far  analogous  at  least  that  the
materialistic  objections  which  apply  to  one  apply  to  all.  When  Clifford
maintains  that  "  if  anybody  says  that  the  will  influences  matter,  the  state-
ment is  not  untrue,  but  it  is  nonsense,"  we  are  equally  obnoxious  to  his
scorn  whether  we  uphold  the  freedom  of  the  will,  or  the  induction  of  trance
at  a  distance,  or  the  movement  of  tables  without  contact  when  certain  persons
wish  them  to  move.

I  may,  then,  choose  my  own  ground  for  the  controversy  ;  and  since  the
freedom  of  the  will  seems  to  me  not  directly  provable,  and  the  telekinetic
movement  of  objects  not  yet  adequately  proved,  I  will  select  the  second
of  the  three  cases,  and  will  endeavour  to  meet  Clifford's  «  priori  negation  by
a  proof,  not  concealed  in  the  depths  of  our  own  mental  life,  but  definite  and
capable  of  repetition,  of  the  kind  of  influence  which  he  means  to  deny.

"  It  will  be  found  excellent  practice, "  Clifford  observes,  "  in  the  mental
operations  required  by  this  doctrine,  to  imagine  a  train,  the  fore  part  of
which  is  an  engine  and  three  carriages  linked  with  iron  couplings,  and  the
hind  part  three  other  carriages  linked  with  iron  couplings  ;  the  bond  between
the  two  parts  being  made  up  of  the  sentiments  of  amity  subsisting  between
the  stoker  and  the  guard."

To  this  I  reply  that  in  1885  I  actually  saw  a  train  of  this  composition
move  over  a  distance  of  more  than  one  kilometre.

When  Dr.  Gibert,  of  Havre,  did,  at  the  request  of  certain  inquirers,  of


supplement.] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology."  131


■whom  I  was  one,  and  at  an  hour  drawn  by  us  by  lot  from  a  hag,  entrance
Madame  B.  at  a  distance  of  nearly  a  mile,  and  by  an  "effort  of  will"  drew
her,  without  previous  warning,  to  traverse  in  the  hypnotic  slumber  the
streets  which  led  from  her  abode  to  his,  I  then  witnessed  an  operation  of
which  one  terminal  portion  consisted  in  the  normal  action  of  Dr.  Gilbert's
brain,  attending  to  the  idea  of  Madame  B.  's  entrancement  and  approach,  and
another  terminal  portion  consisted  of  the  normal  movement  of  Madame  B.  's
legs  in  response  to  a  stimulus  sent  down  from  her  motor  centres.  These
were,  to  use  Clifford's  metaphor,  concatenations  of  nervous  changes  as
material  and  as  definite  as  the  iron  couplings  which  link  up  the  two  halves  of
the  train.  But  what  was  the  influence  which  passed  from  one  end  of  the
train  to  the  other  1  which  carried  the  impulse  from  Dr.  Gibert's  study  to  the
room  where  Madame  B.  sat  at  work  1  It  was  the  telepathic  impact, — it  was
"the  sentiment  of  amity  subsisting  between  the  stoker  and  the  guard."

I  am  in  no  way  able,  and  I  am  in  no  way  bound,  to  say  more  definitely
what  kind  of  influence  this  telergy,  or  telepathic  impact,  may  actually  be.
I  will  not  call  it  (unless  for  mere  brevity's  sake)  a  force  or  energy ;  for  we  have
no  certain  proof  that  it  can  overcome  inertia  or  do  mechanical  work.  It  may
determine  the  exercise  of  pre-existing  forces  in  some  fashion  to  which  words
like  these  do  not  apply.  I  will  only  say  that  we  have  here,  as  it  seems  to
me,  an  overt  and  provable  effect  of  the  will  on  another  mind  which
resembles  that  hidden  and  unprovable  effect  of  the  will  on  its  own  mind
which  we  are  endeavouring  somehow  to  come  at.  If  Dr.  Gibert's  "  will-
power" could  influence  Madame  B.'s  organism,  why  not  suppose  that  it  could
influence  his  own  organism  ?  Why  should  there  not  be  another  of  those
impalpable  "coupling's"  before  we  come  to  the  material  couplings  which
represented  the  fixed  attention  of  his  own  brain  1  That  transcendental
power,  for  aught  we  know,  may  have  influenced  the  physician  all  his  life  long
as  potently  as  his  patient  for  an  hour.

And  yet,  as  I  have  already  implied,  even  were  all  this  granted,  although
we  should  have  proved  the  transcendental  origin  of  the  will,  we  should  not
have  proved  its  transcendental  freedom.  Suppose  that  a  soul  within  me
determines  my  choice  of  bodily  actions  by  suggestions,  resembling  Dr.
Gibert's  "mental  suggestion"  to  Madame  B.,  which  interfere  with  the  course
which  my  body,  if  a  pure  automaton,  would  have  followed.  Yet  who  can
tell  me  that  this  soul  of  mine  is  itself  free  ?  The  gods  of  Olympus  descended
with  mastering  energy  into  the  Trojan  fray  ;  but  behind  them  were  the
Fates,  fixing  from  eternity  the  issue  of  all  that  gods  could  do.  Who  knows
what  world-old  history,  what  cosmic  law,  may  now  be  prompting  the  very
impulses  of  my  transcendental  self,  and  embracing  not  my  terrene  existence
only,  but  unnumbered  existences,  past  and  future,  in  one  inevitable  doom  ?
The  problem  is  transported  into  the  order  of  infinity ;  we  can  mark  its  course
as  it  escapes  us,  but  we  can  do  no  more.

Somewhat  similar  are  the  reflections  suggested  by  our  author's  closing
chapter  on  "  Psychogenesis, " — an  attempt  "to  ascertain  just  how  far  the  con-
nections of  things  in  the  outward  environment  can  account  for  our  tendency
to  think  of,  and  to  react  upon,  certain  things  in  certain  ways  and  in  no  others,
even  though  personally  we  have  had  of  the  things  in  question  no  experience,
or  almost  no  experience,  at  all." He  concludes  that  "  the  features  of  our

K  2


132


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


organic  mental  .structure  cannot  be  explained  at  all  by  our  conscious  inter-
course with  our  environment,  but  must  rather  be  understood  as  congenital
variations  '  accidental '  in  the  first  instance  [as  belonging  to  a  cycle  of  causa-
tion inaccessible  to  the  present  order  of  research]  but  then  transmitted  as.
fixed  features  of  the  race."

Surely  to  say  that  human  experience,  reacting  upon  the  impressions,
which  Nature's  laws  convey,  will  explain  the  whole  structure  of  human
thought,  is  like  saying  that  the  past  moves  in  a  game  of  chess,  with  the
known  powers  of  the  pieces,  will  explain  the  actual  position  of  the  game.
Of  course  in  order  to  understand  that  position  we  need  also  to  know  in  what
arrangement  the  pieces  were  placed  at  first  upon  the  board.

All  the  present  arrangements  of  the  cosmos — not  least  its  highest  known
arrangements,  the  minds  of  men, — depend  ultimately  on  a  determination  of
potentialities  before  all  human  experience,  and  at  the  origin  of  things,  which
decided  that  heredity,  for  instance,  should  work  in  this  fashion  and  in  no
other,--  that  the  forces  which  build  the  living  organism  should  dispose  them-
selves along  these  and  no  other  lines.  Man's  brain  is  adapted  to  harbour
certain  thoughts,  as  his  blood  is  adapted  to  harbour  certain  microbes,  not  as
the  result  of  terrene  experience,  or  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  but  because-
the  first  arrangement  of  the  kindling  fire-cloud  was  such  that  all  this  must  be.

The  original  determination,  I  say,  of  natural  forces  was  as  essential  an
clement  in  shaping  the  cosmic  future  as  was  the  nature  of  those  forces  them-
selves. And  who  shall  say  what  cause  directed  the  distribution  of  atoms  in
the  primitive  nebula  ?  or  endowed  those  atoms  with  the  capacity  of  evolving;
into  not  a  dragon  but  a  man  1  None  can  affirm  that  Soul  was  not  there,  and
was  not  all ;  and  generated  the  age-long  procession  of  cause  and  change,  and
bade  the  hurtling  atoms  rain  through  the  unlitten  void.

Tllusory  indeed  is  any  attempt  to  simplify,  to  explain  away,  these
ultimate  mysteries.  They  must  be  faced,  and  not  forgotten,  when  any
philosophy  approaches  the  universe  with  a  too  readily  turning  key.  They
must  be  faced  and  not  forgotten  by  those  who  frankly  desire  to  base  all
knowledge  on  exjaeriment  and  observation  ;  aye,  though  the  experiment
suggested,  the  observation  made,  should  strike  on  the  ears  of  modern  Science
with  a  strangely  mystical  ring.  Which  is  the  mystical,  which  the  scientific
course  ? — on  the  one  hand  to  ignore  these  deeper  problems,  to  leave  them  to
faith  or  to  speculative  conjecture  ;  or,  on  the  other  .hand,  to  attack  them
with  conscious  weakness  indeed,  conscious  inadequacy,  but  with  the  same
weapons  which  in  abler  hands  have  laid  many  a  lesser  fortress  low  1  There
is  no  novelty  in  the  suggestion  that  there  is  a  Soul  in  man.  What  is  novel
is  merely  the  attempt  to  give  a  precise,  an  experimental  character  to  this
old  hypothesis  ;  to  define  our  psychical  concej)tions  by  actual  observation  of
effects  not  traceable  to  physical  forces,  rather  than  by  any  a  priori  imagina-
tions of  what  a  soul  must  be.

Such  has  been  the  leading  thought  of  this  review.  But  in  fairness  to  our
author  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  review  has  been  expressly  and
intentionally  one-sided  and  partial  in  its  scope.  It  would  be  unjust  to
Professor  James  to  suppose  that  a  mystical  tinge  overspreads  his  treatise.
On  the  contrary,  that  treatise  is  distinguished  throughout  by  its  adherence
to  the  methods  of  natural  science — by  its  copious  and  constant  reference  to


supplement.] W.  James,  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology."  133


proved  or  provable  fact.  I  do  not  presume  to  assign  Professor  James's
intellectual  rank  among  past  or  present  philosophers.  But  it  is  a  mere
matter  of  fact  that  no  other  treatise  in  our  language  contains  a  discussion  so
•candid  and  so  competent  of  so  great  a  mass  of  psychological  experiment
and  observation.  It  is  the  very  abundance  of  the  material  offered,  the
fairness  of  the  treatment,  which  has  enabled  me  from  my  point  of  view,  and
will  enable  others  from  standpoints  wholly  different,  to  find  so  much  in  this
treatise  on  which  to  dwell.  "  Hie  liber  est,"  one  may  say,  as  one  ought  to
be  able  to  say  of  any  couqn'ehensive  textbook  of  an  experimental  science  as
yet  in  its  first  stage  of  tentative  immaturity —

Hie  liber  est  in  quo  quserit  sua  dogmata  quisque,
Invenit  et  pariter  dogmata  quisque  sua.

An  experimental  science  in  its  infancy  ; — such  is  the  impression  which
we  derive  from  the  book  throughout.  From  every  page  it  suggests  to  us  the
absolute  need,  the  entire  feasibility,  of  an  immense  and  many-sided  exten-
sion of  definite  psychological  experiment.  Its  students  assuredly  will  have
no  excuse  for  lingering  in  the  antiquated  notion  that  jdiilosophy  is  a  kind  of
polygonal  duel  between  "systematic  thinkers,"  whose  opinions  are  to  be  the
stock-in-trade  of  subsequent  philosophers,  until  one  of  these  can  strike
out  a  new  system  of  his  own.

In  every  science  there  must  be  two  main  stages,  the  first,  of  such
speculation  as  man's  unaided  observation  suggests  ;  the  second,  of  such
definite  experiment  as  that  speculation  has  in  its  turn  suggested.  In  some
sciences  the  experiment  can  begin  almost  at  once,  and  the  preceding
speculations  are  soon  superseded  and  forgotten.  In  psychology,  on  the
other  hand,  the  preliminary  speculation  was  unusually  difficult  and  impor-
tant ;  nay,  much  of  it  was  in  its  nature  experimental,  and  was  destined  to
remain  as  a  substantial  part  of  the  final  structure.  Locke  and  Kant
assuredly  carried  psychology  further  than  Thales  or  Anaximander  were  able
to  carry  physics.  But  nevertheless,  by  the  mere  advance  and  example  of
cognate  or  ancillary  sciences,  a  change  resembling  that  which  has  passed
over  physics  is  even  now  passing  over  psychology.  As  its  biological  basis
grows  firmer,  it  is  developing  (I  believe)  into  the  great  experimental  inquiry
of  the  coming  century,  in  some  such  sense  as  biology  itself  has  been  the
great  experimental  inquiry  of  the  century  which  is  passing  away.

From  no  quarter  will  the  progress  of  experiments  be  more  eagerly  watched
than  by  those  who  in  these  Proceedings  have  advocated  views  too  often
associated  with  imperious  dogma  or  blank  obscurantism.  All  that  we  desire
is  that  psychological  experiment  and  observation  shall  be  absolutely  catholic,
absolutely  unfettered  by  foregone  conclusions,  or  by  that  "  contempt  prior
to  examination  "  which  has  delayed  so  many  discoveries  a  generation  beyond
their  time.  From  the  boldest  and  the  most  faithful  interrogation  of  nature
our  own  inquiries,  as  we  believe,  can  have  nothing  to  lose,  and  may  have
everything  to  gain.


Short  Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


IT.

SHORT NOTICES  OF  BOOKS.

Schriften  der  Gesellschqft  fiir  Psychologisclie  Forsclmng.  Erstes  Heft.
(Leipzig:  Abel.  1891.)

We  learn  from  a  prefatory  note  that  the  Munich  "  Psychologisclie  Gesell-
schaft"  and  the  "Gesellschaft  fur  Experimental-Psychologie  zu  Berlin"  united
in  November  last,  and  formed  a  German  "Gesellschaft  fiir  Psychologisclie
Forsclmng."  It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  new  society  will  meet  with  a
cordial  welcome  from  the  English  S.P.R.,  and  that  we  shall  look  forward  to
their  publications  with  warm  interest.

The  present  volume  of  90  pages  is  the  first  joint  publication.  It  is-
edited  by  Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  whose  name  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  know-
ledge and  care.  For  the  next  number  several  papers  are  promised,  of  which
two  at  least  should  be  of  great  interest  to  our  members.  One  by  Dr.  A
Moll,  on  "Rapport  in  Hypnosis,"  and  another  by  Dr.  Otto  von  Leixner,
entitled  "  Experimental  Researches  in  Dreamdife."  In  the  present  number
are  two  papers,  both  containing  matter  of  interest,  though  not  of  primary
importance.

The  first  is  by  Baron  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  a  name  already  familiar  in
England.  It  deals  with  the  importance  of  the  use  of  narcotics  in  hypnosis.
The  author  shows,  partly  from  his  own  experiments,  partly  from  the  publica-
tions of  Voisin,  Wetterstrand,  and  others,  the  marked  analogy  which  exists,
between  the  lighter  degrees  of  hypnosis  and  the  earlier  stages  of  narcotism
and  intoxication.  In  some  cases  a  few  respirations  of  chloroform  are
sufficient  to  bring  about  such  an  increase  of  suggestibility  that  complete
amesthesia  is  produced  by  suggestion  alone,  and  further  administration  of  the
drug  is  needless.  It  is  of  considerable  importance  to  know  that  persons  who
normally  are  refractory  subjects  for  the  hypnotiser  can  often  be  brought
easily  under  control  by  the  exhibition  of  a  weak  narcotic  ;  and  that  the
.same  means  will  often  enable  the  phenomena  of  deep  hypnosis  to  be  induced
where  the  ordinary  physical  procedure  does  not  succeed  in  bringing  about
more  than  the  initial  stages.  The  matter  has  a  theoretical  interest  as  well
as  casting  light  on  the  relations  between  natural  and  hypnotic  sleep.

The  second  part  of  the  paper  contains  the  author's  main  contribution  to
the  subject.  He  has  been  making  some  experiments  on  the  jjsychical  effects-
of  hashish — or  rather  of  the  Extractam  Cannabis  Indices  of  the  German  phar-
macopoeia. In  one  or  two  cases  he  met  with  great  success.  The  adminis-
tration of  3  or  4  grammes  of  the  drug  brought  about  a  condition  of  extreme
suggestibility,  without  any  of  the  common  hypnotic  processes.  Post-narcotic
suggestions  were  carried  out  just  like  post-hypnotic.  All  the  ordinary  phe-
nomena, catalepsy,  hallucination,  hyperesthesia,  analgesia,  &c,  were  obtained
without  difficulty.  The  effect  of  Indian  hemp,  which  produces  a  gradual
weakening  of  will-power,  while  only  partially  affecting  consciousness  and


Supplement.]


Short  Notices  of  Books.


135


memory,  makes  it  a  particularly  interesting  agent  for  the  investigation  of  the
psychical  conditions  of  suggestibility,  and  the  reader  will  find  it  interesting
to  follow  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's  detailed  account  of  his  experiments.

The  second  paper,  hy  Dr  Forel,  of  Zurich,  is  of  a  different  nature,  but
perhaps  at  the  moment  of  more  immediate  interest  to  the  English  Society.
A  certain  Frau  Fay,  of  Basel,  an  uneducated  woman,  was  arrested  by  the
Zurich  police  as  a  swindler,  and  referred  to  Dr.  Forel  as  an  expert  for  an
opinion  upon  her  physical  state  and  moral  responsibility.  He  here  prints  at
length  the  opinion  which  he  gave.  She  is  a  woman  of  57,  who  since  her
15th  year  has  been  subject  twice  a  day  to  attacks  of  involuntary  trance.  In
these  she  shows  all  the  familiar  symptoms  of  change  of  personality.  She
professes  to  be  controlled  by  a  spirit  named  Ernst,  and  in  this  state  has
been  in  the  habit  of  acting  as  a  medical  clairvoyant,  and  giving  advice  to  the
numerous  persons  who  consulted  her  as  to  their  ailments.  Dr.  Forel  came
unhesitatingly  to  the  conclusion  that  the  woman  was  in  her  normal  state
perfectly  honest ;  that  the  trances  were  not  simulated,  but  arose  from  involun-
tary auto-suggestion,  and  that  she  was  not  liable  to  punishment  as  a  swindler.
On  the  other  hand,  the  few  experiments  which  he  tried  showed  no  sign  of
clairvoyance  or  lucidity  of  any  kind.  Nothing  was  observed  beyond  a  con-
siderable shrewdness  in  acting  on  the  little  hints  and  suggestions  given  her,
purposely  or  involuntarily,  by  her  patients.  Dr.  Forel  found  little  difficulty
in  bringing  her  into  a  state  of  obedience  to  suggestion,  and  succeeded  for  a
time  by  this  means  in  curing  her  of  her  daily  trances  ;  but  he  adds  in  a  note
that  these  have  since  recurred,  as  he  expected  would  be  the  case,  when  she
had  been  long  enough  absent  for  the  effect  of  his  suggestions  to  wear  off.
One  cannot  help  wishing  that  a  little  more  pains  had  been  taken  to  inquire
into  her  powers  when  in  the  second  state.  The  few  experiments  recorded,
which  seem  to  be  all  that  were  made,  are  hardly  sufficient,  in  the  light  of
recent  experience,  to  justify  an  entirely  negative  conclusion  as  to  possible
lucidity.

A  still  more  explicit  and  welcome  recognition  of  the  work  of  our  Society
is  to  be  found  in  the  preface  which  introduces  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's
translation  of  Professor  Richet's  "  Relation  de  Diverses  Experiences  sur  la
Transmission  Mentale  "under  the  title  "  Experimentelle  Studien  auf  dem
Gebiete  der  Gedauken  ZTbertragung."  The  original  work  needs  no  notice  here  as
it  was  in  the  pages  of  these  Proceedings  that  it  was  originally  published.
(See  Vol.  V.,  pp.  18-108.)  The  preface,  however,  contains  some  very  welcome
new  matter,  in  the  shape  of  a  brief  review  of  the  most  important  utterances
on  the  subject  of  thought-transference,  to  which  Continental  physiologists
have  committed  themselves.  This  forms  a  very  convenient  summary  of  the
present  state  of  the  question,  and  shows  very  clearly  how  the  seed  sown  by
the  S.P.R.  is  slowly  but  surely  germinating  on  the  Continent.  In  France
it  may  almost  be  said  to  be  beginning  to  flourish,  thanks,  of  course,  before
all,  to  Richet  himself.  In  Italy  it  has  made  a  beginning  under  Professor
Lombroso ;  and  in  Germany  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  bids  fair  to  give  it
the  position  in  the  scientific  world  which,  up  to  the  present,  it  cannot  be
said  to  have  attained.  But  we  must  call  attention  to  one  important  member
of  the  European  concert  which  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  has  overlooked —


13G


Short  Notices  of  Books.


[Supplement.


Russia.  We  should  much  have  liked  one  of  his  brief  and  sober  expressions
of  his  opinion  on  the  work  of  our  colleague,  Mr.  Aksakoff.

W.  Leaf.


Aunales  des  Sciences  Psycltiques  :  Kecv.eil  d' Observations  et  d' Experiences,
paraissant  tons  les  deux  mois.  Edited  by  Dr.  Dariex.  No.  1,  January  and
February.  1891. (Paris  :  Felix  Alcan.)

The  above  is  the  title  of  a  new  periodical  which  is  likely  to  prove  a
valuable  coadjutor  in  the  researches  which  the  S.P.R.  was  founded  to
prosecute.  It  aims  at  forming  a  centre  to  which  well-evidenced  accounts  of
observed  facts  or  experiments,  bearing  on  the  various  departments  of
psychical  research,  may  be  sent.

Its  plan  seems  to  be  in  some  respects  intermediate  between  our  own
Journal  and  Proceedings,  giving  like  the  former  isolated  cases  of  apparent
telepathy,  premonitions,  &c,  but  including,  like  the  latter,  longer  papers
criticising,  analysing  and  classifying  the  information  received  ;  also  recording
systematic  experiments.  All  premature  theory — all  preconceived  opinion —
all  dogmatism  is  to  be  avoided. The  object  in  view  is  to  ascertain  the  facts.

The  present  number  contains  an  interesting  introductory  letter  from
Professor  Charles  Richet  to  the  Editor,  discussing  the  scope  and  objects  of
the  Aunales,  an  article  by  Dr.  Dariex  on  the  method  of  observation  in  cases
of  spontaneous  telepathy,  four  original  cases  of  apparent  telepathy,  all  good,
and  two  of  them  of  special  interest,  and  further  cases  taken  from  our  own
publications,  &c.

We  can  confidently  recommend  the  Annales  to  our  readers,  and  may
mention  that  arrangements  are  in  progress  by  which  a  limited  number  of
copies  may  be  obtainable  for  the  use  of  members  of  the  S.P.R.  at  a
reduced  rate. In  view  of  this  possibility,  early  application  is  invited.

Ed.


Supplement.]


Circular  No.  IV.


137


To  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.


CIRCULAR No.  IV.


19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  W.C.
HYPNOTISM: ITS  CONDITIONS  AND  SAFEGUARDS.


So  many  sensational  and  exaggerated  reports  of  the  effects  and  the
■dangers  of  hypnotism  have  recently  appeared  in  the  public  Press  that  a  brief
and  sober  statement  of  what,  so  far  as  our  present  knowledge  extends,
hypnotism  can  actually  effect  may  perhaps  be  beneficial.

It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  hypnotic  state  is
not,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  morbid.  It  has  many  affinities  with
natural  sleep,  and  in  many  of  the  discomforts  of  illness  may  be  made  to  lead
up  to  it  with  great  relief.  Those  who  are  strong  and  healthy  are  hypnotised
as  readily,  cceteris  paribus,  as  those  who  are  weak  or  in  bad  health.

In  the  next  place,  Englishmen  would  appear  to  be  less  susceptible  to
the  influence  than  the  inhabitants  of  some  Continental  countries.  Bernheim,
Liebeault,  Ochorowicz,  and  the  Dutch  observers  place  the  proportion  of
hypnotisable  persons  as  high  as  70  or  80  per  cent.,  including  in  these  figures
some  cases  where  the  effects  are  very  trifling  ;  but  the  results  of  English
experiments  would,  thus  far,  indicate  a  considerably  smaller  proportion.

Thirdly,  it  is  tolerably  certain — whatever  may  be  the  case  with  Orientals —
that  a  healthy  Englishman  or  Englishwoman  cannot  in  the  first  instance  be
hypnotised  without  his  or  her  full  knowledge  and  consent.

Supposing  this  consent  to  have  been  given,  and  the  subject  to  have
proved  susceptible  to  the  influence,  the  following  physical  phenomena,  or
some  of  them,  according  to  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  individual,  may  be
observed  :  He  will  fall  into  a  condition  somewhat  resembling  the  drowsiness
of  natural  sleep,  though  he  may  answer  questions  easily  and  some  of  his
senses  may  be  specially  acute.  His  limbs  may  remain  perfectly  limp  and
motionless  (lethargy),  or  they  may  be  moulded  into  any  position  at  the
pleasure  of  the  operator  (catalepsy),  and  may  even  be  made  perfectly  rigid.


138


Pircular  Ho.  IV.


[Supplement-


This  rigidity  may  be  maintained  much  longer  than  in  a  natural  state,  and
without  the  muscular  tremor  which  would  naturally  occur  after  a  few
minutes  if  he  were  not  hypnotised.  Lastly,  the  patient  may  be  made  in-
sensitive, in  the  whole  body,  or  in  any  part  of  it,  to  touch  (anaesthesia)  or
pain  (analgesia),  even  without  losing  consciousness.

These  muscular  and  nervous  phenomena  may  not  occur  in  their  full  develop-
ment during  the  initial  stages  of  hypnotism,  or  in  its  lighter  forms.  But
the  almost  invariable  characteristic  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  the  susceptibility
of  the  subject  to  suggestions  from  without.  It  is  this  characteristic
which  gives  the  chief  value  to  hypnotism  as  a  therapeutic  agent,  and  which
forms  the  source  of  its  chief  dangers,  real  or  imaginary.  In  this  state
illusions  of  the  senses,  the  memory,  or  the  will,  may  be  imposed  upon  the
patient  ;  sleep  may  be  induced,  and  pain  and  nervous  disabilities  of
various  kinds  may  be  removed.  But  the  influence  thus  exerted  by  the
operator  may  be  made  to  extend  beyond  the  actual  period  of  the  hypnotic
sleep.  Pain  and  physical  discomfort  may  be  got  rid  of  for  a  considerable
period  ;  the  healthful  activity  of  the  bodily  functions  may  be  assisted,  and
injurious  habits,  such  as  drunkenness  and  morphinism,  may  be  effectually
broken  off.  The  striking  results,  for  instance,  obtained  by  Dr.  Bramwell,  of
Goole,  in  producing  temporary  insensibility  to  pain,  and  by  the  Rev.  Arthur
Tooth  in  the  treatment  of  inebriety,  afford  very  recent  examples  of  what  can
be  effected  in  these  directions.

It  is  important  to  remember  that  hypnotic  suggestion  is  simply  an
exaggerated  example  of  what  takes  place  in  the  normal  state,  and  can
produce  only  results  similar  in  kind.  In  a  few  persons,  indeed,  presumably
of  an  abnormal  type,  suggestion  in  an  apparently  waking  state  operates  with
equal  facility,  and  self-suggestion  is  by  no  means  rare.  The  cases  of  "mind-
cure  "  and  "faith-healing"  may  probably  be  attributed  to  these  causes.  But
reports  of  such  cases,  unless  attested  by  experienced  medical  evidence,  must
of  course  be  received  with  reserve.

The  memory  of  what  has  taken  place  in  the  hypnotic  state  rarely  persists
into  the  waking  life,  and  this  characteristic  offers  occasion  for  the  most
striking  results.  Whatever  undertaking  the  subject  can  be  induced  to
promise  in  a  deep  hypnotic  state  he  will  faithfully  perform  after  waking,  and
will  believe  that  in  so  doing  he  is  acting  as  a  free  agent.  But  the  liability  of
the  normal  and  well-balanced  subject  to  be  influenced  by  suggestion  has  been
much  exaggerated.  The  operator  will  generally  require  patience  and  per-
sistence to  overcome  even  those  habits  which  the  subject  wishes  to  be  over-
come. Ideas  of  an  indifferent  or  beneficial  nature  will,  no  doubt,  be  readily
received,  but  the  moral  sentiments,  and  even  in  many  minor  cases,  the  fear
of  ridicule,  will  often  operate  to  annul  hurtful  or  ignominious  suggestions.

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  seen  that,  though  the  jJrobable  evils  of
hypnotism  have  been  much  exaggerated,  there  are  serious  dangers  to  be
guarded  against. It  is  indeed  by  no  means  a  subject  to  be  played  with.

I.  It  is  possible  for  an  ill  disposed  person  to  take  advantage  of  the
physical  helplessness  of  the  subject,  or  to  obtain  an  undue  influence,  which
may  be  used  to  the  subject's  disadvantage.  But  dangers  of  the  kind  need
only  be  indicated  to  be  avoided. It  should  be  made  a  rule  that  no  person


Supplement.]


Circular  No.  IV.


139


should  submit  himself  to  hypnotic  treatment  unless  accompanied  by  a  friend.
It  is  clear  that  no  one  should  place  himself  in  the  power  of  another  at  all
unless  he  can  fully  trust  in  the  other's  discretion  and  integrity.  Nor  should
anyone  suffer  himself  to  be  hypnotised  except  for  therapeutic  or  scientific
purposes.  In  the  rare  cases  of  persons  who,  through  a  long  course  of
hypnotic  treatment,  have  become  unduly  susceptible,  it  is  no  doubt  desirable
to  take  special  precautions.  In  such  cases  a  fresh  hypnotisation  by  a  doctor
or  other  responsible  person,  and  then  a  suggestion  by  the  new  operator  that
no  one  but  himself  can  influence  the  subject,  has  been  shown  to  be  effectual
in  shutting  out  the  undesirable  influence  for  a  considerable  time.  The  high
value  of  such  counter  suggestions  in  relieving  anyone  who  is  inconvenienced
by  the  dominance  of  any  operator  has  only  recently  been  acknowledged,  and
deserves  special  mention.

II.  There  are  also  dangers  arising  from  ignorance  or  carelessness  on  the
part  of  the  operator.  Of  these  the  principal  are  :  (a)  The  so-called  Cross-
Mesmerism.  If  the  patient  come  under  the  influence  of  more  than  one  person
during  a  single  sitting,  as  may  happen  with  a  sensitive  subject  if  merely
handled  by  other  persons,  a  peculiar  condition  is  sometimes  induced,  of  which
the  characteristics  are  violent  movements  and  physical  contortions,  and
refusal  to  yield  to  suggestions  and  commands  from  any  source.  It  is
extremely  difficult  to  arouse  the  patient  from  this  state,  which  generally
leaves  behind  it  headache  and  physical  discomfort,  not  removable,  as  is
generally  the  case,  by  suggestion.  (5)  Imperfect  Awakening.  It  not  un-
commonly happens,  with  an  inexperienced  operator,  that  the  subject  is
allowed  to  depart,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment,  before  being  fully
aroused.  He  is  thus  rendered  liable  to  all  the  discomforts  and  mischances
which  may  befall  a  person  not  in  full  possession  of  his  normal  consciousness.
It  is  also  safer  to  prevent  the  awakening  from  being  too  sudden.  Experienced
operators  are,  however,  fully  aware  of  these  risks,  and  it  may  be  anticipated
that  with  fuller  knowledge  of  the  subject  they  will  practically  disappear,  as
it  is  easy  to  avoid  them.

III.  Apart  from  these  definite  and  recognised  dangers,  there  are  vague
allegations  of  other  disastrous  consequences  to  be  apprehended,  such  as  the
weakening  of  the  subject's  will,  or  the  degeneration  of  his  character.  But
in  the  opinion  of  those  best  qualified  to  speak  with  authority,  these  appre-
hensions are  almost,  if  not  entirely,  without  foundation.  Where  hypnotism
is  employed  for  curative  purposes  the  treatment  has  proved  often  beneficial
and  always  harmless.  Professor  Beaunis,  for  example,  has  thus  hypnotised
a  patient  daily  for  six  months.  And  where  it  has  been  employed  for
experiment  and  demonstration  only,  the  effects  on  the  subject,  in  careful
hands,  have  proved  equally  satisfactory.  The  young  men  and  boys  on  whom
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  conducted  numerous  experiments,
extending  over  a  series  of  three  (and  in  one  case  of  six)  years,  have  always
been  and  remain  to  this  day  in  full  health,  physically  and  morally.

Appended  is  a  short  list  of  some  of  the  more  readily  accessible  books
dealing  with  the  subject : —

Hypnotism,  by  Dr.  Albert  Moll  (Translated  from  the  German).  London,
1890. Price,  3s.  6d.


40


Circular  No.  IV.


[Supplement.


Suggestive  Therapeutics,  by  Prof.  Beruheim  (Translated  from  2nd

French  Edition,  by  C.  A.  Herter). New  York,  1889.  18s.
Animal  Magnetism,  by  Profs.  Binet  and  Fere  (Translated  from  2nd

French  Edition). London,  1888.  5s.
Animal  Magnetism  (Article  in  Encyclopaedia  Britarmica,  9th  Edition,

1884),  by  Prof.  J.  G.  McKendrick,  F.E.S. 7s.  6d.
Psycho-Therapeutics  ;  or,  Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion,

by  Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey. 2nd  Edition,  1890.  5s.
Hypnotism;  its  History  and  Present  Development,  by  Bjorudrom

(Translated  from  the  Swedish). New  York,  1890.  2s.


July,  1890.


Supplement  J


Circular  Hfo\  III.


141


To  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.


CIRCULAR No.  III.

(2nd  Edition.)


19,  Buckingham  Steeet,  Adelphi,  Loxdox,  W.C,

The  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  desire  to  express  their
gratitude  to  such  of  the  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  as  have  up
to  the  present  date  contributed  evidence,  attempted  experiments,  or  other-
wise aided  in  the  several  branches  of  work.  At  the  same  time  they  must
express  a  strong  desire  that  such  help  should  be  offered  by  a  greater  number
of  persons.  The  success  of  the  Society's  work  must  largely  depend  on
the  amount  of  collaboration  received — on  the  number  of  centres  of  observa-
tion and  experiment  which  can  be  established  in  this  and  other  countries.

I.  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Phantasms  of  the  Bead,  Clairvoyance,

Premonitions.

The  Council  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  persons,  possessing  evidence
which  would  be  of  value  to  the  Society,  have  lately  thought  it  needless  to
proffer  such  evidence,  supposing  that  the  reality,  for  instance,  of  apparitions
at  death,  was  now  sufficiently  proved,  and  that  no  further  cases  were  wanted.
The  Council  wish  distinctly  to  state  that  their  view  is  altogether  different.
In  the  first  place,  they  hold  that  the  value  to  be  attached  to  the  evidence
already  collected  must  largely  depend  on  its  continuous  reinforcement  by
fres7i  cases  of  like  kind, — observed  with  care  and  recorded  without  delay.
In  the  second  place,  supposing  that  the  general  facts,  say,  of  telepathy  or  of
veridical  apparitions,  were  even  universally  admitted,  it  would  still  be  a
matter  of  prime  interest  and  importance  to  discover  as  much  as  possible  of
the  laws  which  govern  these  strange  phenomena,  and  it  is  therefore
impossible  to  assign  any  limit  to  the  number  and  variety  of  cases  which
should  be  collected  and  registered  with  this  end  in  view.

For  the  guidance  of  those  who  may  be  willing  to  assist  the  work  of  the
Society  by  collecting  and  preparing  evidence  on  such  spontaneous  phenomena


142


Circular  No.  III.


[Supplement.


as  phantasms  of  the  living  and  dead,  disturbances  in  haunted  houses,  clair-
voyance, previsions  and  premonitions,  the  Council  offer  the  following
suggestions  : —

(1)  A  written  statement,  dated  and  signed  with  the  full  name  (not
necessarily  for  publication)  should  be  procured  from  the  actual  witness ;  or
each  of  them,  where  more  than  one  shared  the  experience.  In  the  latter
case  it  is  important  that,  where  possible,  the  several  accounts  should  be
written  without  previous  consultation.

(2)  Similar  statements  should  be  obtained  from  all  persons  in  a  position
to  give  corroborative  evidence,  either  as  (a)  having  been  present  at  the  time
of  the  experience,  or  (b)  as  having  been  told  of  it  shortly  afterwards,  or  (c)
as  having  been  witness  to  any  unusual  effect  produced  on  the  percipient  by
the  experience.  Where  contemporary  documentary  evidence  is  in  existence,
in  the  shape  of  letters,  diaries,  notebooks,  &c,  it  is  important  that  this
.should  at  least  be  referred  to  ;  and  we  should  be  grateful  for  an  opportunity
of  seeing  the  actual  documents.  It  should  be  clearly  understood  that  the
request  for  corroborative  evidence  implies  no  doubt  on  our  part  of  the
integrity  or  the  accuracy  of  our  informants.  But  it  is  felt  that  where  the
matters  testified  to  are  so  strange  and  obscure,  the  evidence  will  win  more
acceptance  the  more  widely  the  responsibility  for  it  is  distributed.  In  such
cases  it  may  be  said  that  each  additional  witness  multiplies  by  his  own
testimony  the  value  of  the  testimony  given  by  his  fellow-witnesses.

(3)  It  is  further  requested  that  all  dates  and  other  details  may  be  given
as  accurately  as  possible  ;  and  that,  where  the  experience  relates  to  a  death,
the  full  name  of  the  deceased  may  be  given,  together  with  that  of  the
locality  in  which  he  died,  in  order  that  the  occurrence  of  the  death  as  stated
may  be  independently  verified.

(4)  Lastly,  in  all  cases  where  the  percipient  has  experienced  some
unusual  affection — such  as  a  sensory  hallucination,  vivid  dream,  or  marked
emotion — he  should  be  requested  to  state  whether  he  has  had  any  similar
experience  on  any  other  occasion,  whether  coincidental  or  not.

Hallucination  in  this  connection,  it  should  be  understood,  signifies  any
impression  made  on  the  senses  which  was  not  due  to  any  external  jihysical
cause.

II.  (A-x.iitx  of  Hallucinations.

Independently  of  the  investigation  above  referred  to  into  phenomena
which  apparently  have  relation  to  external  events,  an  inquiry  is  being  con-
ducted by  the  Society  into  the  phenomena  of  casual  hallucinations,  with  the
view  of  ascertaining  their  relative  frequency  and  the  laws  of  their  occurrence.
The  inquiry  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  not  merely  from  the  point  of  view
of  general  psychology,  but  in  particular  in  its  bearing  on  our  published
evidence  as  to  the  occurrence  of  coincidental  hallucinations.  Any  person
willing  to  aid  in  this  investigation  is  requested  to  communicate  with  Professor
Sidgwick,  Cambridge,  from  whom  the  necessary  forms  can  be  obtained.

Intending  informants  should  in  all  cases  be  assured  that  no  name  or
other  particulars  will  be  published  without  the  express  permission  of  the
persons  concerned. On  this  subject  see  Circular  V.,  enclosed  herewith.


Supplement.]


Circular  No.  III.


143


III.  Experiments in Thought-transference,  Automatic  Writing,
Crystal  Vision,  <L-c.

The  experiments  in  thought-transference  given  in  the  Journal  for
December,  1887,  &c,  and  the  experiments  in  automatic  writing  and  crystal
vision  published  of  late,  may  serve  to  show  with  how  little  of  preparation  or
trouble  (provided  the  work  be  done  with  complete  good  faith  and  care)
results  of  value  may  be  attained.  Experiments  in  hypnotism  require  more
caution  ;  but  here  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  an  experienced  hypnotist,  with  whose
name  readers  of  the  Proceedings  have  long  been  familiar,  will  be  glad  to  give
advice  or  instruction.  Persons  willing  to  experiment  in  any  of  these
directions  should  communicate  with  one  of  the  Hon.  Secretaries  of  the
Society,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge,  or  Mr.  Frank
Podmore,  12,  Millbank-street,  Westminster,  S.W.1  One  of  these  gentlemen
will  also  be  happy  to  call  on  members  or  their  friends  who  may  desire  to
communicate  information  by  word  of  mouth  on  any  of  the  subjects  with
which  the  Society  deals.  The  Council  wish  it  to  be  distinctly  understood
that  they  solicit  information  not  only  on  those  points  (such  as  apparitions  at
death)  on  which  much  evidence  has  already  been  forthcoming,  but  also  on
other  points  included  within  the  range  of  their  investigations,  especially  the
so-called  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  On  this  subject  Professor
Barrett,  6,  De  Vesci-terrace,  Kingstown,  Dublin,  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  the
Committee  established  by  the  late  President,  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,
will  be  glad  to  receive  communications,  or  accounts  of  cases  in  or  near
London  may  be  sent  to  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  for  immediate  investigation.
In  conclusion,  the  Council  would  remind  the  members  of  the  Society  that
they  have,  from  its  first  inception,  foreseen  and  announced  that  an  inquiry
so  novel,  complex,  and  important  must  of  necessity  be  a  prolonged  one,
needing  the  combined  efforts  of  many  persons  over  a  space  of  many  years.
While  attaching  great  value  to  the  results  already  published,  the  Council
feel  that  those  who  sympathise  with  their  object  must  be  invited  to  fresh
exertions,  if  a  progress  at  once  rapid  and  durable  is  to  be  made  in  a  research
whose  very  importance  and  interest  increase  the  difficulty  of  conducting  it
with  adequate  circumspection,  and  with  due  minuteness  of  care.

February,  1891.


1  Communications  from  persons  on  the  American  continent  should  be  sent  to
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  Secretary  of  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


144


Circular  No.  V.


[Supplement-


To  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.


CIRCULAR No.  V.


19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.

The  Literary  Committee  of  the  Society  fur  Psychical  Research  are  grate-
ful for  all  accounts  that  bear  on  their  subjects,  even  when  only  privately
attested.  But,  while  pledging  themselves  to  respect  the  wishes  of  their
informants  as  to  publicity,  they  cannot  too  strongly  urge  the  importance,
for  purposes  of  evidence,  of  publishing  with  each  narrative  the  name,  at  any
rate,  of  the  person  who  sends  it,  and  if  possible  those  also  of  the  persons
concerned  in  it.  In  some  cases,  no  doubt,  special  reasons  exist  which  render
the  mention  of  names  undesirable  ;  but  these  cases,  so  far  as  the  experience
of  the  Committee  goes,  are  a  very  small  minority.  And  since  the  mere  fact
of  a  correspondent's  having  taken  the  trouble  to  send  them  an  account  may
be  held  to  imply  a  desire  to  further  their  objects,  they  feel  justified  in
calling  the  attention  of  those  who  kindly  manifest  this  desire  to  the  best  and
most  obvious  means  for  its  fulfilment.  This  means  can  be  no  other  than  the
most  complete  attestation  of  all  the  evidence  given.  Where  a  person
refuses  to  a  phenomenon,  belonging  to  a  certain  class,  the  direct  testimony
which  he  would  give,  if  needful,  to  any  other  sort  of  personal  experience,  the
world  is  sure  to  take  the  view  that  he  lacks  that  complete  assurance  of  the
reality  of  the  experience  which  alone  can  make  his  evidence  worthy  of
serious  attention  ;  and  the  whole  class  of  phenomena  is  thus  discredited.
As  for  the  chance  of  being  ridiculed,  or  of  being  thought  superstitious,  such
an  apprehesision  is  not  unnatural,  and  it  commands  the  sympathy  of  the
Committee ;  though  they  are  persuaded  that  to  many  of  their  correspondents
it  will  not  seem  a  valid  ground  for  refusing  to  make  aid,  offered  towards  the
elucidation  of  an  important  subject,  as  effective  as  possible.  But  in  any  case
they  hold  that  the  fear  itself  has  but  little  real  basis  ;  and  that  the  subject
has  already  advanced  to  a  stage  where  courage  is  hardly  among  the  qualities
necessary  for  its  further  development.  They  can,  at  all  events,  safely
declare  that  the  necessary  attestation  has  been  given  by  so  many  of  their
informants  and  witnesses,  that  any  others  who  will  follow  this  example  may
count  on  finding  themselves  in  good  and  numerous  company.

February,  1891.


General  Meetings.


145


PROCEEDINGS OF GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  45th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  "West-
minster Town  Hall,  on  Friday,  April  17th,  at  4  p.m.

Part  of  a  paper  by  Mr.  Hodgson  on  Phenomena  of  Trance  in
the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  was  read  by  Mr.  Myers.  This  paper  will,  it  is
hoped,  appear  in  a  future  number  of  the  Proceedings.

A  paper  by  Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  of  Kalmar,  Sweden,  on  Experi-
ments in  Clairvoyance  was  read  by  Mr.  Podmore.  This  is  printed
below.


The  46th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place  on  Friday,
May  29th,  at  8.30  p.m.

A  paper  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  on  "  Spirit  Photographs,"  printed
below  in  the  Supplement,  was  read  by  Mr.  Podmore.

Mr.  Myers  spoke  on  "  Problems  of  Personality,"  illustrating  his
remarks  by  a  case  of  automatic  writing.  What  he  said  will  probably
form  part  of  future  papers  in  the  Proceedings.


The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  was  in  the  chair  on  both
occasions.


i.


146


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I.

ON  ALLEGED  MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS,  WITHOUT
CONTACT,  OCCURRING  NOT  IN  THE  PRESENCE
OF A PAID  MEDIUM.

By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Part  I.

The  late  President  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Professor
Balfour  Stewart,  formed  in  1887  a  small  Committee  to  consider  a
Report  on  the  phenomena  commonly  called  Spiritualistic.

The  Committee  has  collected  and  discussed  a  certain  number  of
narratives  of  alleged  movements  of  objects,  without  contact,  apart  from
the  presence  of  any  paid  medium.

They  do  not,  hoAvever,  think  that  the  time  has  come  for  any  collec-
tive expression  of  opinion,  and  I  have  been  asked  to  j^i'epare  an
ad  interim  account  of  evidence  received  (for  which  account  I  am  alone
responsible), with  the  object  rather  of  explaining  the  points  at  issue,  and
of  inviting  fresh  testimony,  than  of  pronouncing  on  the  true  meaning
of  the  testimony  already  received.

A  few  words  of  preface  seem  needed  to  explain  the  position  of  the
Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  with  reference  to  this
special  inquiry.  When  the  Society  was  founded  in  1882,  "Spiritualistic
Phenomena"1  formed  an  important  item  on  its  programme  for  investiga-
tion. At  that  time  several  of  us  had  for  many  years  tested  the  powers
of  nearly  all  the  paid  mediums  attainable,  with  results  which  were  not
in  my  opinion  wholly  unsatisfactory  ;  and  at  any  rate  were  not  such  as
to  make  it  appear  useless  to  continue  the  inquiry,  if  possible,  under
better  conditions.2  We  hoped,  then,  that  the  formation  of  the  Society
might  lead  persons  obtaining  similar  phenomena  in  private  circles  to
allow  us  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  them.  This  hope  has  been  to  a
great  extent  disappointed. It  appears,  in  fact,  that,  whatever  may  have

1  The  terminology  of  this  whole  subject  is  in  a  very  confused  state.  (See  Proceed-
in//s,Vol.VL,  pp.  008,  GOfl.)  It  seems  at  any  rate  better  to  use  the  term  "  Spiritism  " —
common  to  all  nations  except  the  English-American — for  the  belief  in  the  agency  of
spirits,  leaving  "  Spiritualism  "  to  its  older  meaning  as  the  opposite  of  Materialism  in
philosophy.  This  change  has  been  advocated  from  the  "  Spiritualistic  "  camp  ; — and
any  difference  of  theoretic  views  between  English  and  foreign  believers  can  be  much
better  expressed  in  a  more  direct  way  than  by  this  cumbrous  use  of  two  terms,  of
which  one  is  wanted  for  other  purposes.

2  Eor  an  account  of  some  of  these  investigations  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,
pp.  45-110.


Alleged  Movements,  Sc.


147


been  the  case  in  earlier  years,  very  few  of  such  private  circles  now  exist-
while  those  that  do  exist  seldom  report  their  results  even  in  the  Spirit-
istic Press.  And  thus,  since  the  foundation  of  our  Society  in  1882,
little  has  been  added  to  the  pre-existing  body  of  evidence  for  Spiritism,
excejtt  some  fresh  accounts  of  seances  with  paid  mediums,  and  especially
with  Mr.  Eglinton.  Mr.  Eglinton's  claims  to  the  production  of  physical
phenomena  were  discussed  in  our  Proceedings  and  Journal  in  1886-7,
and  he  has  since  that  date  retired  into  private  life.  Some  imitations  of
bis  performances  were  given  by  the  late  Mr.  Davey,  an  amateur  conjurer,
with  very  remarkable  results.  Not  only  were  almost  all  the  witnesses
•(who  were  told  to  form  their  own  opinion  on  the  matter)  convinced
that  some  occult  agency  was  at  work  (and  the  events,  as  they  described
them,  certainly  seemed  to  need  that  hypothesis) ;  but  even  after  Mr.
Davey  had  avowed  himself  a  conjurer,  and  had  explained  to  an  expert
in  conjuring  (now  a  member  of  this  Committee)  his  modus  operandi
throughout,  many  Spiritists  continued  to  believe  that  "  spirits  "  after
•all  had  aided  Mr.  Davey  in  achieving  his  marvels.  Considering,  then,
the  evidence  thus  and  otherwise  obtained  of  the  incapacity  of  ordinary
educated  persons  to  determine  the  limits  of  a  conjurer's  power,  and,
on  the  other  hand,  the  mass  of  evidence  tending  to  show  fraud  on  the
part  of  professional  mediums,  it  does  not  seem  worth  while,  as  a  rule,
to  examine  the  testimony  to  physical  marvels  occurring  in  the  presence
of  professional  mediums.

The  case  is  different  with  phenomena  where  no  professional  medium
intervenes.  Here,  even  when  the  marvellous  phenomena  are  such  as  might
«asily  have  been  produced  by  wilful  deception,  it  may  be  in  the  highest
degree  improbable  that  they  were  so  produced,  owing  to  the  absence  of
motive  and  the  probity  and  intelligence  of  the  persons  concerned.  Self-
deception,  no  doubt,  is  not  similarly  improbable,  and  is  a  vera  causa
that  must  always  be  carefully  kept  in  view.  But  its  probability  varies
~very  much  according  to  the  nature  of  the  marvels  recorded.  For  this
reason,  among  others,  it  will  be  well  to  begin  by  distinguishing,
broadly  and  briefly,  the  main  kinds  of  phenomena  alleged  by  Spiritists
to  occur,  always  confining  our  attention  to  those  in  which  no  paid
medium  was  concerned.

1.  Many  of  the  phenomena  referred  to  spirit  agency  occur  along  with
"what  we  already  recognise  as  phenomena  of  automatism,  of  which  auto-
matic writing  forms  a  leading  type ;  and  automatic  are  undoubtedly  liable
to  be  taken  for  Spiritistic  phenomena  by  witnesses  of  perfect  good  faith.
But  phenomena  of  this  kind  may  in  two  main  ways  extend  themselves
beyond  the  limits  which  any  recognised  human  automatism  can  cover.
Intellectually  they  may  transcend  those  limits,  if  the  facts  conveyed  in
the  automatic  messages  transcend  any  information  which  the  operators
can  ever  have  possessed. The  messages  in  that  case  will  be  such  as

l  2


148


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


unconscious  mental  action  cannot  be  pressed  to  explain.  But  the
extremely  interesting  line  of  inquiry  thus  suggested  lies  outside  of  our
present  purpose,  and  can  be  pursued  without  either  accepting  or
denying  the  Spiritistic  hypotheses  on  other  points.  Again,  pheno-
mena cognate  to  these  automatic  actions  may  physically  transcend  the
limits  of  recognised  human  automatism,  if  the  movements  occurring  in
connection  with  them  are  such  as  unconscious  muscular  action  cannot
be  pressed  to  explain.

2.  Such  motor  effects  as  these,  however,  stand  only  at  the  beginning'
of  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritism.  "We  find  testimony  to  the
actual  movements  of  objects,  not  in  contact  with  any  living  person
movements  not  hallucinatory,  but  leaving  permanent  trace  upon  the
ponderable  world.  These  lelekinetic  movements  (as  M.  Aksakof  calls,
them)  may  have  appeared  to  have  no  visible  cause,  or  they  may  have
seemed  to  be  caused  by  quasi-human  organisms  or  parts  of  organisms.

With  these  latter  I  shall  not  here  deal.  The  most  important  of
them,  putting  paid  seances  aside,  are  those  alleged  to  have  occurred  in
the  presence  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  on  which  Professor  Barrett  and  I
have  touched  in  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  Journal  for  July,,
1889.

In  this  paper,  however,  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  the  more
ordinary  displacements  alleged  to  occur  without  recognisable  terrene
cause.  And,  in  fact,  in  our  already  collected  testimony  on  other-
subjects  some  evidence  of  this  kind  has  been  recorded  which  should,,
it  is  plain,  be  considered  in  this  connection.

3.  Another  large  class  of  phenomena  ascribed  to  spirits  are  plainly
akin  to  certain  hypnotic  phenomena,  and  especially  to  so-called  clair-
voyance or  lucidity  ;  and  will  be  best  considered  in  that  connection.

Thus  far  it  would  seem  as  though  each  branch  of  the  phenomena
might  be  taken,  so  to  say,  on  its  merits,  without  our  involving  oui'selves
in  any  speculative  system  at  all.  There  must,  it  is  clear,  be  further
allegations  advanced  before  anything  like  a  cult  or  a  religion  can  be
evolved  from  these  premises.  And  these  additional  allegations  must
form  the  differentia  of  Spiritism.  On  examination  they  are  found
to  be  two,  one  relating  to  practical  method,  and  the  other  to  interpre-
tation.

4.  It  is  alleged  that  these  phenomena  are  not  solely  sporadic  and,,
spontaneous,  but  can  be  evoked  in  the  presence  of  certain  persons,
known  as  mediums.

5.  And  it  is  alleged  that  spirits  of  persons  long  dead  (not  necessarily
haunting  ghosts),  and  perhaps  also  unembodied  spirits  of  other  kinds,,
can  and  do  communicate  with  men  ;  so  that  the  explanation  which
the  spirits  give  of  the  phenomena  of  communication  has  an  authority
independent  of  our  own  intelligence.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


149


Now  it  will  be  seen  at  cmce  that  it  is  in  connection  with  these  two
latter  allegations  that  the  main  diseases  of  evidence,  so  to  say,  have
arisen.  The  Spiritistic  method  (which  may  quite  conceivably  in
itself  be  sound  and  necessary)  has  encouraged  the  craft  of  impostors,
trading  on  the  expectation  that  certain  persons  would  be  found  here
and  there  to  possess  occult  powers  which  made  their  aid  in  such
inquiries  invaluable.  And  the  Spiritistic  theory  (which  may  quite
•conceivably  in  itself  be  true  and  important)  has  encouraged  the
•credulity  and  superstition  of  those  who  should  have  been  observers,  but
liave  become  devotees.  It  has  encouraged  an  appeal  to  authority  in
the  very  inception  of  an  inquiry  in  which  rational  scepticism,  calm  dis-
engagement of  mind,  are  needed  in  an  even  exceptional  degree.

It  would  seem  desirable,  then,  if  it  be  possible,  to  make  in  some
sense  a  new  departure  in  this  inquiry  by  investigating  the  phenomena
as  they  stand,  without  taking  into  account  the  still  more  contentious
matter  connected  with  the  theories  by  which  they  are  commonly  bound
together.  Thus,  in  our  present  inquiry  as  to  physical  movements,  we
■can  classify  the  alleged  cases,  as  far  as  j>ossible,  according  to  the  special
.group  of  otherwise  attested  phenomena,  occurring  apart  from  regular
mediumship, — such  as  automatism,  telepathy,  post-mortem  apparitions,
and  the  like, — with  which  each  alleged  case  of  physical  movements  bears
some  apparent  connection.  If  we  do  not  find  any  trustworthy  cases  of
physical  movements  in  any  way  correlated  with  these  aforesaid  groups,
we  shall  not,  indeed,  have  disproved  the  physical  phenomena  peculiar
to  Spiritistic  seances  altogether ;  but  we  shall  have  deprived  them  of
collateral  support,  and  left  them  in  an  entirely  isolated  and  anomalous
position.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  evidence  as  to  physical
movements  is  good  and  widely  dispersed  in  connection  with  various
other  forms  of  psychical  events,  then,  though  we  shall  not  have  proved
the  physical  phenomena  peculiar  to  the  seance-room,  we  shall  have
prepared  the  way  for  their  acceptance  if  they  shall  turn  out  to  be
independently  well-attested.

If  there  be  any  truth  in  Spiritism,  it  must  surely  be  in  some
sense  continuous  with  other  truth.  The  evoked  phenomena  must  be  a
development  or  a  systematisation  of  the  spontaneous  phenomena,
rather  than  a  wholly  new  manifestation.  And  we  are  more  likely  to
understand  the  evoked  phenomena,  if  genuine,  by  taking  them,  so  to
say,  from  this  evolutionary  point  of  view,  than  by  assuming  that
"  the  Hydesville  rappings  "  inaugurated  a  new  era,  and  that  "  Modern
Spiritualism  "  has  supplied  already  a  body  of  revelation  which  we  are
bound  to  accept  as  our  guide  in  the  new  inquiry.

And  indeed  in  no  other  investigation,  (it  must  once  more  be
repeated),  has  pre-conceived  theory  exercised  a  more  damaging  effect
on  experiment. The  theory  here  has  been  attractive  and  interesting


150


F.  W.  H.  Myers


in  a  unique  degree  ;  it  has  imparted  a  strong  stimulus  to  hope  and
emotion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  phenomena  on  which  the  theory
rested  have  been  peculiarly  hard  to  come  at ;  they  have  been  rare,
elusive,  and  enigmatic.  There  has  consequently  been  a  tendency  to
take  some  of  the  phenomena  for  granted  without  further  trouble,  and
to  surround  others  with  all  kinds  of  glosses  which  may  keep  them  in
harmony  with  the  theory  whose  truth  is  so  earnestly  desired.  And
since  most  of  the  alleged  phenomena  are  easily  imitable  by  fraud,  an
unusual  field  has  been  offered  for  imposture.

In  this  Report  I  shall  at  any  rate  avoid  that  special  kind  of
suspicion  which  the  presence  of  pecuniary  motive  for  imposture  inspires.
Hence  I  shall  not  be  bound  constantly  to  assume  as  probable  fraudu-
lent intention  combined  with  practised  skill.  Of  course  there  may  be
many  motives,  other  than  pecuniary,  which  may  prompt  to  trickery..
There  may  be  a  morbid  or  malicious  desire  to  deceive  ;  there  may  be-
abnormal  states  in  which  fraud  is  unconsciously  practised  ;  or  there-
may  be  (especially  with  children)  a  mere  wish  to  attract  notice,  or  to-
be  amused,  without  any  serious  realisation  of  the  guilt  of  deceit.  And
quite  apart  from  conscious  or  unconscious  fraud,  mere  inaccuracy  of
observation  and  carelessness  of  record  have  often  transformed  very
ordinary  incidents  into  apparent  marvels.  It  is  with  full  recollection
of  these  various  sources  of  error  that  I,  nevertheless,  offer  the  following
narratives  as  well  worthy  of  my  readers'  attention.  With  the  excep-
tion of  phenomena  obtained  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  T).  D.  Home  (which
in  several  respects  form  a  group  by  themselves),  our  collection  includes,
the  bulk  of  such  fairly  well  attested  cases  of  physical  movements-
occurring  not  in  the  presence  of  paid  mediums  as  we  have  thus  far
been  able  to  discover.  Moreover,  it  includes  more  than  one  narrative-
of  pooi'  evidential  quality,  admitted  with  the  direct  object  of  indicating-
points  to  be  observed,  and  of  leading  to  further  experiment.

We  will  divide  our  cases,  as  already  suggested,  into  groups  corre-
sponding as  far  as  may  be  with  the  various  classes  of  psychical  incident
with  which  we  are  already  familial'.

A.  First  I  will  take  physical  movements  connected  with  automa-
tism ;  by  which  I  mean  physical  movements  not  definitely  pointing  to
the  operation  of  other  intelligences  than  those  of  the  persons  present.
This  will  be  our  most  extensive  class,  as  we  shall  include  in  it  some
cases  where  a  series  of  phenomena,  though  they  may  claim  connection;
with  some  departed  personality,  do  yet  cling  about  or  accompany  some
given  living  person,  or  "medium."  In  such  a  case  I  prefer  the  word
"  automatist," — as  not  prejudging  the  question  whether  spirits  other
than  the  medium's  own  are  at  work,  but  implying  merely  that  the  move-
ments, etc.,  in  some  way  depend  on  his  presence,  but  are  not  consciously
caused  by  him.


Alleged  Movements,  dr.


151


B.  Next  will  come  physical  movements  connected  with  telepathy
between  living  persons,  or  near  the  moment  of  death.

C.  Next  will  come  physical  movements  associated  with  phantasms  of
the  dead, — or  phantasms  of  that  obscure  type  with  which  cases  of
"  haunting  "  have  made  us  familiar.

D.  It  is  not,  of  course,  possible  to  divide  our  cases  with  accuracy
among  these  classes  ;  and  especially  there  are  certain  cases  of  sporadic
and  apparently  motiveless  movements  which,  if  not  due  to  some
ordinary  but  overlooked  cause,  nevertheless  afford  us  no  definite
indication  of  the  nature  of  their  supernormal  source.  Some  of  these
it  may  be  well  to  cite  at  the  end  of  our  list.

A.  Let  us  begin  with  the  simplest  of  all  cases.  Two  persons  place
their  hands  on  a  table,  and  it  moves  rapidly  and  fitfully  about.  They
feel  convinced  that  they  are  not  pushing  it.  Are  we  to  account  this  as
a  "  physical  phenomenon,"  a  movement  unexplained  by  ordinary  laws  1

The  answer  is,  No  ;  for  evidential  purposes  we  must  not  so  reckon
it.  We  need  not,  indeed,  assert  that,  could  Faraday's  test  be  applied
(which  it  cannot  be,  save  in  the  very  simplest  cases),  we  should  neces-
sarily find  that  the  force  at  work  all  came  through  the  sitters'  muscles
in  the  ordinary  way.  If  tables  ever  move  ivithout  contact,  then  the
force,  whatever  it  may  be,  which  makes  them  so  move  is  probably
operative  also  in  some  cases  where  contact  exists.  Just  similarly,  if
thought-transference  exists,  thought-transference  is  probably  operative
in  certain  cases  of  the  "  willing  game,"  where  there  is  contact  between
the  operator  and  the  person  willed.  But,  nevertheless,  when  engaged
in  proving  the  reality  of  thought-transference,  we  have  felt  it
necessary  to  exclude  from  our  evidence  any  case  where  contact  could
have  afforded  opportunity  for  some  slight  push,  even  were  it  uncon-
sciously given  and  unconsciously  received.  Muscle-reading — and  for
similar  reasons  all  kinds  of  gesture-reading — had  to  be  definitely  set
aside  before  thought-reading  had  any  chance  of  rigorous  demonstration.
And  so  with  the  case  of  these  table-movements.  Unless  in  cases  of  well-
observed  elevation  of  a  heavy  body  in  air,  when  touched  only  from
above,  it  is  not  safe  to  cite  instances  where  there  is  any  contact  as
proving  any  force  beyond  the  force  which  is  operative  when  some  con-
tact is  known  to  exist.  When  tables  move  rapidly,  it  is  difficult  to
know  exactly  where  the  hands  touching  them  are,  or  how  hard  they  are
pushing.  Undoubted  good  faith  in  the  operators  is  not  enough  to
reassure  us  ;  for  we  by  no  means  know  the  limits  of  unconscious
muscular  action.

And  now  another  difficulty  meets  us.  Among  the  phenomena  most
frequently  alleged,  raps  hold  a  prominent  place.  These  percussive
noises,  occurring  sometimes  apparently  in  the  woodwork  of  the  table,
sometimes  in  other  parts  of  the  room,  can  rarely  be  explained  by


152


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


any  unconscious  movements  of  the  persons  present.  They  may,  of
course,  be  due  to  fraud,  and  they  may  sometimes  be  produced  by
unconscious  movements  of  the  throat  or  of  some  joint  or  tendon.

But  assuming  for  argument's  sake  that  the  raps  are  genuine
"  psychical  phenomena  "  of  some  kind — and  for  this  there  is  a  great
deal  of  evidence — we  find  the  problem  of  their  true  nature  by  no  means
an  easy  one.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  actual  sound-waves  are  produced
in  the  air  ?  If  so,  of  course  the  smallest  "  rap  "  is  an  interference  with
the  ponderable  world  every  whit  as  definite  as  the  "  levitation  "  of  a
medium  on  to  the  table.  Or  are  they  mere  hallucinations — with
some  origin,  perhaps,  outside  the  minds  of  the  sitters,  but  operating
upon  these  minds  in  some  direct  fashion,  and  not  upon  the  air  of
the  room  ?

This  problem  is  not  altogether  new.  In  Phantasms  of  the  Living
Ave  had  to  consider  many  cases  where  noises  were  heard  by  several
persons  at  once.  And  in  some  of  these  cases — and  in  others  since
communicated, — we  have  found  that  the  sound  remained  unheard
by  some  person  who  must  have  heard  it,  had  it  been  propagated  by
vibrations  of  the  air  in  the  normal  way.  Hallucinatory  sounds  seem  to
run  parallel  in  this  respect  to  hallucinatory  sights.  They  may  be
perceived  by  one  out  of  many  persons  present,  or  by  some,  or  by  all.1
Nor  need  this  irregularity  seem  more  surprising  in  the  case  of  sounds
than  in  the  case  of  sights.  In  either  case  it  is  inexplicable  by
ordinary  laws  ;  in  either  case  the  mode  of  genesis  of  the  supernormal
impression  is  unknown.  [See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,
p.  105,  note.)

But  if  sounds  so  loud  and  marked  as  were  some  of  those  in  the  cases
above  alluded  to  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  must  be  treated  as  in
some  sense  hallucinatory,  and  not  as  real  physical  movements  of  the  air,
then  we  are  bound  to  extend  the  same  caution  to  our  accounts  of  raps.

In  some  respects,  it  is  true,  raps,  if  genuine  at  all,  have  a  higher
claim  to  be  considered  as  physical  movements  than  some  other  phantas-
mal sounds  possess.

Thus  (1)  they  are  often  more  continuous  and  capable  of  being  more
steadily  observed  ;  (2)  they  are  often  more  definite  in  quality,  corre-
sponding to  the  resonance  of  various  objects  in  or  upon  which  they  seem
to  occur ;  (3)  they  sometimes  occur  (as  alleged)  in  connection  with
unmistakable  physical  movements, — either  vibrations  accompanying
the  sounds,  or  other  movements  intercurrent  with  or  announced  by  the
sounds ;  (4)  and,  finally,  I  do  not  know  of  a  recorded  instance  where
raps  were  heard,  so  to  say,  electively, — that  is,  by  some  persons  only  out
of  those  who  were  physically  in  a  position  to  hear  them.

1  See  Society  for  Psychical  Research  Journal  for  April,  1890.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


153


We  must  bear  these  points  in  mind  ;  but  nevertheless  we  seem
bound  in  no  case  to  treat  mere  sounds  of  any  kind,  any  more  than
mere  sights,  as  proofs  of  physical  movement.  Rigorously  speaking,  we
have  no  proof  of  physical  movement,  unless  there  is  some  displacement
or  modification  of  the  material  world  which  is  capable  of  registration
by  automatic  agency — as  by  the  phonograph  or  the  sensitised  photo-
graphic plate.  The  phonograph,  as  now  improved,  might  successfully
be  applied  to  the  registration  of  raps  ;  and  the  experiment  is  one  that
we  hope  will  eventually  be  made.  Somewhat  similarly,  it  is  to  the
sensitised  plate  that  an  appeal  as  to  the  true  nature  of  apparitions
ought  to  lie.  But  waiving  what  lies  at  present  beyond  our  reach,  we
shall  of  course  consider  that  a  physical  movement  has  taken  place  if
the  position  of  objects  in  the  room,  as  discerned  by  our  ordinary  senses,
remains  permanently  changed  after  the  movement.  And  there  may,
moreover,  be  cases  where  the  movement  is  so  distinct,  so  persistent,  and
witnessed  similarly  by  so  many  persons,  that  the  evidence  for  its
reality  is  not  seriously  impaired  by  the  ultimate  reversion  of  the  object
to  its  former  place.  Thus,  the  repeated  rising  and  falling  of  a  heavy
table,  and  its  repeated  movements  over  the  floor  from  side  to  side,  as
described  in  the  Dialectical  Society's  Report,  pp.  10,  11,  15,  will
hardly  be  ascribed  to  collective  hallucination.  The  movement  probably
•did  occur,  and  if  it  was  not  genuinely  supernormal,  we  must,  it  would
seem,  ascribe  it  to  conscious  or  unconscious  fraud.

Group  A. Case  I.

Dialectical  Society's  Report  on  Spiritualism  (London  :  Burns,  1873),
pp.  10,  11,  15,  373-391.  This  may  serve  as  the  first  case  of  my  first
group, — the  group  which  by  some  stretching  of  terms  we  have  described
as  connected  with  automatism.  The  details  just  given  will  somewhat
explain  this  classification.  Had  the  table  merely  moved  while  the
hands  of  the  persons  present  were  touching  it,  we  should  undoubtedly
have  ascribed  such  movement  to  their  unconscious  muscular  action,
•even  though  the  movements  were  so  considerable  that  this  explanation
was  somewhat  strained.  And  in  these  cases,  in  fact,  the  table  began  by
moving  with  hands  in  contact  with  it,  and  only  gradually  gained  the
power  of  moving  untouched  by  anyone.  The  simplest  supposition,
therefore,  seems  to  be  that  if  some  force  unconsciously  exercised  by  the
sitters  caused  the  earlier  movements  in  the  series,  some  force  uncon-
sciously exercised  by  the  sitters  caused  the  later  movements  also.  This
is  at  any  rate  simpler  than  to  assume  that  there  was  any  direct  force
exercised  by  invisible  beings,  independently  of  the  sitters.  Ignorant  as
we  are,  however,  of  the  nature  of  any  such  supposed  force,  we  cannot
at  present  assume  to  classify  the  cases  of  its  display  in  more  than  a
superficial  manner.


154


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Group  A.  Case  II.
Another  case  already  printed  is  that  of  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)."  The
phenomena  obtained  by  this  gentleman  are  described  in  a  very  scat-
tered way  in  various  publications  of  which  several  are  out  of  print.
(Human  Nature,  March  to  August,  1874;  and  Spirit  Identity.)  It
is  greatly  to  be  wished  that  the  records  of  this  remarkable  case  should
be  gathered  together  and  placed  before  the  world  in  an  authentic  and
connected  form.  The  phenomena  described  included  raps,  music,  lights,
scents,  movements  of  objects  without  contact,  &c.  The  good  faith  of
the  writer  (a  clergyman  well  known  to  me  for  seventeen  years)  has,  so
far  as  I  know,  never  been  impugned,  and  I  consider  it  as  quite  beyond
question.

Group  A. Case  III.
Professor  Barrett's  cases. (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  29,  38.)

Group  A.  Case  IV.
Count  de  Gasparin's  experiments.  Les  Tables  Tournantes.  Par  le
Comte  Agenor  de  Gasparin.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  33,  35,  &c.  New  edition  in
one  volume,  Calmann  Levy,  Paris,  1888.  Also  a  pamphlet,  Les  Tables
Tournantes,  by  Professor  Thury,  now  out  of  print  and  rare.  Move-
ments of  a  table  obtained  without  contact,  by  seemingly  careful
observers.

We  shall  have  to  return  to  some  of  these  cases,  which  are  not
easily  accessible.  But  for  the  present  I  pass  on  to  some  unpublished
narratives.  I  begin  with  an  isolated  movement,  occurring  under
circumstances  which  seem  to  give  it  a  kind  of  coincidental  or  purposive
character.

Group  A. Case V. (S.  338.)
From  the  Rev.  Edward  T.  Vaughan,  Langleybury  Vicarage,  King's  Langley.

August  25th,  1884.

Some  three  or  four  years  back,  I  had  occasion  to  visit  a  parishioner  who
was  seriously  ill,  one  afternoon  in  the  winter  time  as  it  was  growing  dark.  I
had  seen  him  several  times  before  since  his  illness  commenced,  and  had
always  found  him  in  the  same  bedroom.  On  this  occasion  I  had  been  praying
with  him,  and  his  wife  was  kneeling  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  bed  to  myself.
As  I  was  saying  the  last  words  of  the  prayer,  we  (the  woman  and  myself)
distinctly  saw  a  small  table,  which  stood  about  a  yard  from  the  foot  of  the
bed,  rise  two  or  three  inches  from  the  ground  and  come  down  with  a  violent
thump  upon  the  floor,  so  loudly  that  the  man,  who  was  lying  witli  his  eyes
closed,  started  up  and  asked,  with  some  terror,  what  had  occasioned  it.  On
examining  the  table,  I  found  that  a  glass  with  medicine  in  it,  which  stood
upon  the  table  with  several  other  articles,  had  been  so  shaken  that  some  of
the  contents  were  spilt.  My  first  idea  was  that  something  had  been  thrown
down  in  the  room  below,  where  my  wife,  a  sister  of  the  woman's,  and  an


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


155


aged  uncle  were  sitting. On  going  downstairs  and  inquiring,  I  found  that
this  was  not  so  ;  that  they  had  been  all  sitting  perfectly  quiet  in  the  room,
and  thought  we  had  thrown  down  something  in  the  bedroom. There  was  no
one  else  in  the  house. The  man  died  about  a  week  after  this  took  place.
I  add  my  name  as  you  wish  to  show  this  to  others.

E.  T.  Vaughan,

Vicar  of  Langleybury.

To  this  case  the  following  letters  belong  : —

Langleybury  Vicarage,  King's  Langley.

Jime  27th,  1888.

I  enclose  according  to  your  wish  a  statement  from  Mrs.  Vaughan  of  what
she  remembers  of  the  curious  incident.  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  widow,  though
she  still  lives  in  this  village,  is  not  capable  of  writing  down  a  statement  of
what  she  saw  and  heard  that  evening,  though  she  can  give  a  very  cleas
account  of  the  circumstances  to  anyone  who  examines  her  orally.  The  man's
name  was  John  Wilson,  a  bricklayer  in  the  employ  of  the  Earl  of  Clarendon.
He  died  on  December  7th,  1881,  about  a  week  after  the  strange  occurrence.
I  have  never  since  experienced  any  similar  phenomenon.

Edward  T.  Vaughan.

Mrs.  Vaughan  writes  under  the  same  date  as  follows  : —

In  confirmation  of  the  story  of  Wilson's  deathbed,  I  can  say  I  was  sitting
in  the  room  below  the  sick  man's  with  two  other  people  (his  sister-in-law  and
uncle),  in  perfect  silence,  as  every  word  read  in  the  room  above  could  be
distinctly  heard  by  us.  Just  as  the  last  words  of  the  prayer  were  being  said,,
we  were  startled  by  a  loud  and  sudden  noise,  as  if  some  heavy  piece  of  furni-
ture had  fallen  in  the  room  above.  My  first  impression  was  that  the  man
was  taken  worse,  and  that  his  wife,  moving  hastily  to  him,  had  knocked  over
a  table.  "None  of  us  spoke,  though  we  started  and  looked  at  each  other,  and
expected  to  hear  some  one  called  ;  but  almost  the  next  minute  I  heard  Mr.
Vaughan  address  the  man  on  leaving,  and  come  downstairs  with  the  wife.  I
went  to  meet  them  with  her  sister,  and  though  nothing  more  was  said  by  any
of  us  than  "good-bye,"  I  saw  by  all  the  faces  that  something  unusual  had
happened.  As  soon  as  we  were  out  of  the  house  I  said  to  Mr.  Vaughan,,
"  What  teas  that  noise  just  as  you  were  reading  the  prayers  ?  "  and  he  told  me
the  story  you  have  heard,  and  it  formed  the  principal  topic  of  our  long  walk
home,  wondering  what  it  was,  and  trying  to  explain  it,  without  in  the  least
coming  to  any  conclusion  but  greater  wonder.

E.  L.  Vaughan.

This  is  a  brief  and  simple  incident ;  but  it  is  particularly  hard  to
explain  by  ordinary  causes — such  as  an  earthquake  or  a  mistaken
memory.

Group  A. Case  VI. (S.  4.)

A  somewhat  similar  case  was  sent  to  Mr.  Gurney  by  Miss  H.
Power,  of  19,  Spring-street,  Paddington,  in  May,  1887.  Mr.  Gurney  had
an  interview  with  Miss  Power,  and  considei'ed  her  a  good  witness.


156


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Under  date  May  6th,  1887,  Miss  Power  writes  as  follows  : —

In  1883  I  occupied  part  of  a  house,  43,  Fitzroy-street,  W.  I  had  been
given  a  book  written  by  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)"  [which  greatly  jarred  on  the  religious
faith  of  the  reader].  At  the  moment  when  I  felt  most  angry,  an  ordinary  ladies'
handbag,  containing  sundry  articles,  which  I  had  laid  down  in  the  centre  of
a  large  armchair,  was  flung  with  great  force  under  the  table,  making  a
considerable  noise  as  it  fell.  I  was  lying  on  the  sofa  at  some  distance.  At
the  same  time  loud  raps  came  in  different  places  on  the  wall.  An  old  man
to  whom  I  had  given  the  use  of  the  kitchen,  and  who  used  to  attend  on  me,
came  up  to  the  first  floor,  saying  I  had  been  knocking  on  the  floor  as  if  for
help.  I  felt  annoyed  at  the  disturbance,  but  did  not  say  anything  to  the  old
man  or  his  wife,  as  they  were  Irish,  and  would  very  likely  have  been  alarmed.
Shortly  after,  a  drawing-board  which  stood  in  an  empty  space  between  two
sides  of  a  writing-table,  slid  out  on  its  thin  edge  into  the  room  and  then  fell
■over,  about  a  yard  from  the  writing-table.

Miss  Power  mentions  some  other  small  incidents  which  might  possibly
have  been  due  to  a  servant ;  but  she  had  no  further  annoyance.  She
disliked  the  manifestations,  and  would  exert  her  will  to  prevent  their
recurrence.  She  has  had  no  hallucinations  of  sight  or  hearing,  but
she  has  on  two  occasions  been  conscious  of  contact  with  apparently
solid  bodies,  when  aware  that  none  such  were  near.  She  writes  easily
with  planchette,  and  has  a  tendency  to  the  cognate  form  of  automatism,
which  consists  in  hearing  certain  thoughts  formulated  as  "  internal
voices."  Miss  Power  referred  to  two  clergymen  to  whom  she  had
mentioned  the  matter  in  1883  ;  but  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Coxhead,  St.  John's
Vicarage,  Fitzroy-square,  has  only  "  some  hazy  remembrance  of  her
mentioning  something  of  the  kind."

The  case,  therefore,  rests  practically  on  one  person's  memory.  It  is
given  here  on  account  of  the  interest  of  the  fact  that  the  movement  of
an  untouched  object  occurred,  in  one  instance  at  least,  at  a  moment  of
strong  excitement  on  the  part  of  the  witness.  In  the  next  case  to  be
cited,  which  is  evidentially  much  stronger,  there  seems  to  have  been
absolutely  no  emotion  of  any  kind  involved.  The  movement  was  isolated
and  meaningless,  and  has  not  been  repeated.

Groihp  A. Case  VII. Graham  Case. (S.  5.)

Colonel  Taylor  writes  as  follows  : —

P.  M.  College,  Farnboro'.

July  18th,  1886*.

I  send  you  with  this  an  account  of  table  movements  which  I  suppose  will
be  of  use.  The  young  man  who  relates  the  story  was  about  18  years  old
when  the  things  he  speaks  of  took  place  about  two  or  three  years  ago  ;  he  is
now  in  a  W.  I.  regiment.

During  the  time  that  he  was  here  as  a  cadet,  he  told  me  the  story,  which
he  related  quite  in  the  same  way  as  he  has  now  done  on  paper.

' '  The  following  is  a  description  of  how,  on  two  occasions,  a  table  was


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


157


seen  to  move  without  any  visible  agency  and  which  was  ascribed  to  some
curious  power  called  into  existence  by  the  well-known  amusement  of  '  table-
turning.'

' '  At  the  time,  my  mother,  sister,  and  younger  brother  were  living  in  an
old-fashioned  house  in  a  country  village,  and  we  occasionally  passed  the
dusk  of  the  winter  afternoons  in  what  we  termed  '  turning  the  table.'

' '  We  tried  it  as  a  matter  of  curiosity  and  amusement  at  first,  but  after-
wards, when  we  became  almost  uniformly  successful,  as  something  to  be
investigated  as  far  as  possible.

"The  table  in  question  was  a  round  spider-legged  ladies'  work-table,
covered  with  red  cloth,  and  about  two  feet  in  diameter.  We  sat  round  it
with  our  fingers  touching  and  resting  lightly  on  the  top  and  edge  of  the  table.
Sometimes  there  were  three,  sometimes  four,  and  afterwards  now  and  then
only  two.  Our  custom  was  to  ask  the  table  to  speak  to  us.  This  it  did  by
momentarily  raising  one  leg  of  its  three  off  the  floor  half  an  inch  or  so,  twice
for  yes  and  once  for  no.  It  would  spell  words  and  sentences  to  us  by  raising
the  leg  a-certain  number  of  times  consecutively,  corresponding  to  the  number
of  the  required  letter  in  the  alphabet,  once  for  a — twice  for  b — three  times
for  c — and  so  on,  a  short  pause  intervening  between  each  letter.

"Sometimes  it  would  stubbornly  refuse  to  move,  and  on  these  occasions  no
amount  of  patience  could  prevail  upon  it  to  talk  with  us.  At  other  times  it
would  be  outrageous  in  its  behaviour — walking  round  the  room,  and  hop-
ping on  one  leg,  getting  on  chairs  and  performing  many  other  curious  evolu-
tions. We  all  considered  these  vagaries  of  the  table  very  extraordinary,  but
firmly  believed  in  the  good  faith  of  each  other  and  the  table,  and  agreed  to
consider  the  table  possessed  on  these  talkatively  and  athletically  inclined
occasions  with  a  certain  spirit.  We  often  talked  over  these  movements  of
our  table  and  expressed  a  belief  that  it  might  move  without  any  contact  with
our  joined  hands  if  we  could  only  obtain  sufficient  influence  over  it.  Accord-
ingly we  tried  sitting  round  the  table  without  joining  hands  or  placing  them
at  all  in  contact  with  it,  and  simply  wishing  earnestly  for  it  to  move — but  it
never  did  so  on  these  occasions.

"At  last  one  evening  after  we  had  concluded  a  talk  with  our  spirit,  lights  *
were  brought  and  we  sat  down  to  read. There  were  three  of  us  only  in  the
room,  my  mother,  young  brother,  and  myself. Our  relative  positions  were
as  shown  below  : —


1.  Our  small  table.

2.  My  brother.

3.  My  mother.

4.  Myself.

5.  Larger  table.


My  brother  was  sitting  near  the  fire  with  his  eyes  closed.  My  mother  and
myself  were  reading  at  the  large  table.  All  at  once  I  heard  a  scraping  sound
upon  the  carpet  as  if  something  was  being  dragged  over  it.  My  mother  and  I
looked  up  and  we  immediately  asked  each  other  if  it  could  possibly  be  our
table  moving  of  its  own  accord.  We  both  then  recommenced  reading.
Presently  the  sound  was  heard  again.  I  looked  quickly  at  the  small  table,  and


O  ->


OA


2
O


o,


158


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


saw  it  distinctly  move  for  about  six  inches  in  the  direction  shown  by  the
arrow.  My  brother  also  looked  up  and  started  from  his  chair  somewhat
alarmed.  My  mother  also  saw  it,  and  I  must  confess  we  all  felt  to  a  certain
degree  startled  by  what  we  had  seen,  and  not  wishing  to  see  any  more  just
then,  we  removed  it  from  the  room.

' '  The  next  occasion  on  which  it  moved  of  its  own  accord  was  a  week  or  so,
I  believe,  after,  when  I  was  the  only  witness.  I  was  left  alone  in  the  room,
the  others  had  just  left,  and  were  only  a  few  yards  or  so  from  the  door.  We
had  been  amusing  ourselves  by  making  the  table  walk  round  the  room,  but  it
had  become  so  violent  that  we  gave  it  up,  and  it  was  left  standing  a  few
feet  from  the  fire,  which  was  brightly  burning,  and  the  only  light  in  the
room .

"  It  occurred  to  me  to  try  if  I  could  make  the  table  move  by  subjecting  it
to  a  certain  amount  of  indignity,  as  it  had  always  proved  particularly  violent
when  treated  in  any  way  unceremoniously.

"I  then  picked  up  a  small  terrier  which  was  lying  on  the  rug  and  held  it
towards  the  table  as  if  to  place  the  animal  on  the  top.  To  my  intense  astonish-
ment the  table  jumped  towards  me,  rising  off  the  ground,  and  so  alarmed  the
dog  that  he  squeaked  and  ran  away.  The  table  moved  laterally  quite  six
inches  and  rose  in  the  air  about  the  same  distance.  I  left  it  lying  on  the
floor  and  went  to  tell  the  others.  Soon  after  this  I  left  home  for  school  and
I  don't  think  anything  further  of  the  kind  described  took  place.

"  H.  W.  Gore  Graham.
"  Mary  E.  Graham."

Mrs.  Graham  forwards  the  above  account  to  Colonel  Taylor,  "  with
her  assurance  of  the  accuracy  of  the  statements  contained."

Mr.  Graham's  brother  writes  : —

The  Grove,  Mbntepellier.

August  14th,  1886.

Mrs.  Graham  has  just  handed  me  your  letter,  and  in  reply  thereto  I  have
much  pleasure  in  corroborating  my  brother's  statements  with  regard  to  the
table  movements.  I  think  he  refers  more  particularly  to  the  years  1879  and
1880,  when  I  was  about  15  years  old.

G.  L.  Gore  Graham.
The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  George  Allman  Armstrong,  of  8,  Leeson-
place,  Dublin,  and  Ardnacarrig,  Bandon.  His  account  is  dated  June
13th,  1887.  He  vouches  for  the  perfect  good  faith  of  the  small  group
who  tried  these  experiments  together,  but  they  are  now  scattered, —
some  of  them  dead, — and  he  has  not  been  able  to  get  their  corroborative
testimony.  In  this  case  also  the  ordinary  table-tilting  seems  to  have
developed  into  independent  movements,  with  which,  as  will  be  seen,
raps  were  closely  associated.  The  experiments  were  made  during  the
years  1878-80.

Group  A. Case  VIII. Armstrong  Case. (S.  6.)

To  avoid  prolixity,  I  shall  classify  the  "higher  grade"  manifestations
under  their  several  heads  as  observed  by  me,  and  describe  them  as  they
occurred.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


159


(«)  Knocks  on  the  table.

Preceded  by  an  uneasy  motion  in  the  table,  which  moved  and  swayed
rapidly  from  side  to  side;  on  my  expressing  a  wish  for  "knocks"  on  it,
those  motions  would  suddenly  cease,  and  in  the  space  of  one  minute  or  so,  and
sometimes  at  once,  a  faint  knock  would  be  heard  in  the  woodwork  of  the
top,  the  knocks  gradually  increasing  in  number,  rapidity,  and  force,  till  they
resembled  the  driving  in  of  small  tacks  on  every  portion  of  its  surface.  All
this  time  our  finger-tips  alone  rested  on  the  table — neither  feet  nor  dress  in
contact.  I  could  at  will  cause  these  sounds  to  cease  or  reappear,  one,  two,
three,  or  any  number  I  demanded,  and  stranger  still,  I  could  induce  a
succession  of  knocks  of  various  degrees  of  intensity  and  so  delivered  as  to
"knock  out"  with  wonderful  accuracy  any  tune  I  asked  for.  I  can  now
recall  amongst  many  such  the  airs  of  "  Not  for  Joe,"  and  "  The  Blue-bells
of  Scotland,"  as  especially  well  marked.1

(b)  Rishtfj  or  Levitation.

This  manifestation  is,  perhaps,  the  most  unaccountable  of  any  which  I  have
met  with  in  my  experience.  Its  production  required  a  great  amount  of
concentrated  will  power, and  when  successful  the  results  were  startling,  and  the
ajyparent  physical  force  developed  really  wonderful.  The  "rising"  was
generally  preceded  by  a  continuous  fusillade  of  "knocks"  in  the  substance
of  the  table,  till  finally  they  resembled  the  sound  of  the  sparks  given  off  by
the  prime  conductor  of  a  large  Holtz  electrical  machine  when  charging  a
battery  of  Leyden  jars  ;  when  the  knocks  had,  as  it  were,  reached  a  climax,
the  table  slowly  swayed  from  side  to  side  like  a  pendulum,  stopped  com-
pletely, and  then,  as  if  imbued  with  life,  and  quite  suddenly,  rose  completely
off  the  floor  to  a  height  of  a  foot  or  14  inches  at  least,  and  nearly  always  came
down  with  immense  force,  which  would  have  proved  uncomfortable  for  any
human  foot  which  might  happen  to  have  been  in  its  vicinity,  and  on  several
occasions  proved  destructive  to  itself,  as  the  broken  limbs  of  the  table  we
used  at  Kinsale  could  testify.  This  table,  I  may  add,  was  a  round,  rather
heavy,  walnut  one,  with  a  central  column,  standing  on  three  claw  legs,  and
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  us  unaided  to  have  developed  the  force  (by
muscular  energy)  required  to  produce  this  manifestation.  In  this  instance
the  law  of  gravitation  was  quite  overcome,  the  table  being  repelled  from
the  floor  in  opposition  to  its  power,  and  afterwards  attracted  by  the  com-
bined force  of  gravity  and  the  unknown  force  developed.  On  several
occasions  I  have  succeeded  in  raising  the  table  without  contact,  the  latter
rising  to  our  fingers  held  over  it  at  a  height  of  several  inches,  like  the  keeper
to  a  strong  electro-magnet  ;  in  these  instances  the  table  swayed  slowly
in  mid-ah-  for  many  seconds  before  coming  down  with  a  crash.  The
production  of  this  mysterious  manifestation  appeared  to  require  a  great
expenditure  of  the  latent  energy  which  produced  the  phenomenon,  and  the
table  always  seemed  supercharged  with  the  "force-producing  fluid,"  if  I
may  be  permitted  to  use  the  term  ;  knocks  were  heard  on  every  portion  of
the  table's  surface,  the  chairs  we  sat  on,  and  even  on  various  articles  of
furniture  at  a  considerable  distance  from  us. Frequently  at  this  point  of  its

1  Xote  that  the  finger-tips  were  on  the  table  while  these  tunes  were  knocked  out
and  that  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  raps  within  a  table  from  raps  upon  it. — F.  W.  H.  M.


160


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


progress  the  table  would  rise  on  one  leg,  in  which  position  I  willed  it  to
remain,  the  united  efforts  of  the  rest  to  press  it  down  to  its  normal
position  being  utterly  fruitless,  and  often  resulting  in  a  fracture.  An
expressed  wish  of  mine  to  that  effect  immediately  released  it  and  forced  it  to
return  to  its  tilted  position,  when  this  extraordinary  resisting  power  was
again  fully  developed.  I  will  just  here  remark  that  I  have  on  several
occasions,  in  Dublin,  induced  a  table  to  "levitate,"  though  previously
heavily  loaded  with  large  books  ;  the  positive  danger  and  injury  resulting
from  its  subsequent  "attraction"  prevented  my  attempting  it  oftener.

(c)  Scratchings  and  muffled  sounds.

These  are  varieties  of  the  knocking  phenomena  and  resembled  the  sounds
produced  by  drawing  a  finger  nail  slowly  across  the  under  surface  of  the
table,  and  again  resembling  that  of  a  duster  being  hastily  "brushed  over"
the  same  place.  These  curious  phenomena  I  have  frequently  induced,  and
changed  same  to  knocks  and  vice  versa  at  will.  Miss  McDaniel  has  also  been
most  successful  in  producing  the  same.

All  the  manifestations,  excepting  that  referred  to  as  having  been  witnessed
in  Dublin,  have  been  the  result  of  our  investigations  in  Kinsale.

Geo.  Allman  Armstrong.

Ardnacarrig,  Bandon.

The  next  case  is  a  specimen  of  the  bell-ringing  class ; — in  which  the
usual  hypotheses  of  fraud,  rats,  hitched  wires,  &c,  seem  hard  to  apply.
The  care  and  fulness  with  which  it  has  been  recorded  will  enable  the
reader  to  judge  for  himself  more  easily  than  in  most  narratives  of  this
type.  Our  informant  is  a  gentleman  occupying  a  responsible  position  •
his  name  may  be  given  to  inquirers.

Group  A. Case  IX. (S.  7.)

November  1st,  1887.
Dear  Sir, — Some  occurrences  that  have  taken  place  in  this  house
lately  will,  I  think,  be  of  interest  to  the  Psychical  Society ;  I  will  give  a  some-
what detailed  account  of  them,  and  shall  of  course  be  very  glad  to  give  you
any  information  you  wish  in  case  you  find  it  of  sufficient  interest  to  pursue
further.

Perhaps  I  had  better  state  briefly  what  occurred,  first  of  all.  (I  should
say  that  I  am  writing  in  the  main  from  notes  taken  on  the  days  in  question,
not  simply  from  memory.)

On  Friday,  September  23rd,  I  took  my  four  pupils  to  a  circus,  my
lady  housekeeper  going  too,  leaving  nvy  two  servants  at  home.  We  left
at  about  2  p.m.,  or  earlier.  All  but  myself  returned  at  about  5.30,  and
found  the  two  servants  on  the  door-step,  telling  the  boys  not  to  go  in  by  the
area  door  (the  kitchens  being  below  ground),  and  explaining  that  all  the
bells  were  ringing  violently,  no  one  touching  them,  and  they  had  been
doing  so  almost  ever  since  we  left,  from  about  half-past  two.  When  I
came  back  I  found  the  same  state  of  things;  the  servants  almost  in  hysterics,
and  the  bells  ringing.  The  bells  hang  all  in  one  row  just  inside  the  area
door  and  opposite  the  kitchen  door, — nine  of  them.  There  is  one  bell  at  the
top  of  the  house  on  the  landing, — a  call  bell. Of  the  nine  bells  below,  eight


Alleged  Movements,  Sc.


161


of  them  rang  that  evening ;  the  ninth  (the  end  bell  ringing  from  the  back  of
the  house)  I  did  not  see  ring  at  all,  but  the  cook  said  it  did  ring  several
times  ;  I  cannot,  however,  vouch  for  that.  The  others  all  rang  at  different
times,  several  together  ;  my  impression  is  that  I  saw  and  heard  at  least  four
together  ;  I  certainly  several  times  saw  three,  and  from  what  the  servants
told  me  and  my  housekeeper  they  sometimes  almost  all  rang  at  once.  The
ringing  was  sudden  and  very  violent,  louder  than  we  ever  rang  a  bell  in  the
ordinary  way  ;  indeed  we  could  not,  I  believe  (though  we  can  ring  them
louder),  ring  them  with  such  a  sudden  and  violent  ring  by  pulling  the  handles.
I  thought  the  probability  was  that  a  cat  had  got  somewhere  where  all  the
wires  were  together,  had  got  entangled,  and  was  trying  to  get  out,  and  so
pulled  the  bells.  I  went  in  the  roof  and  found  only  two  wires,  one  that  of  the
end  bell,  which  rang  very  little  if  at  all  that  evening  (as  I  have  mentioned
before);  the  other  the  call  bell  at  the  top  of  the  house,  which,  I  believe,  did
not  ring  at  all  that  day.  However,  as  I  siqnposed  the  wires  might  run
together  elsewhere,  I  put  it  down  to  some  such  cause,  and  so  felt  no  trouble
in  leaving  the  house,  as  I  had  an  evening  engagement,  my  housekeeper  and
I  both  going  out  to  supper.  I  left  first,  and  when  she  came  to  the  friend's
house  she  said  the  last  thing  she  had  heard  was  all  the  bells  pealing  together.
(I  imagine  she  did  not  literally  mean  she  was  certain  that  all  the  nine  rang,
but  that  was  the  impression  it  gave  her.)  I  left  home,  I  think,  at  about
seven  o'clock.  At  about  9.30,  when  we  were  at  supper,  the  cook  came  over
(it  was  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  from  home)  to  say  we  must  come  back
as  there  were  such  dreadful  knockings  going  on  in  the  house.  We  went  off
at  once  of  course,  our  friends  returning  with  us,  being  much  interested.
What  had  occurred  in  the  meantime  was  this  :  soon  after  my  housekeeper
left,  viz.,  at  about  7.30,  the  knocking  or  hammering  began.  It  sounded  like
a  mallet  on  a  wooden  floor,  speaking  loosely.  The  laundryman  came  in
soon  after  it  began,  and  was,  I  believe,  quite  scared  ;  he  offered  to  stay  in
the  house  while  the  cook  went  for  her  brother,  who  lives  near  ;  and  she
fetched  him.  The  baker's  man  also  came,  and  was  convinced  that  there  was
a  man  in  the  house  hammering,  and  after  searching  the  house  and  finding-
nothing  he  went  straight  to  the  police-station  and  told  them  to  send  up.  As
soon  as  she  had  fetched  her  brother  the  cook  went  off  for  us,  and  her  brother,
who  is  a  middle-aged,  respectable,  and  I  should  say  intelligent  man,  a  teacher
in  the  Board  school,  was  so  scared  by  the  knocking  that  he  would  not  stay  in
the  house,  but  went  on  the  door-step  with  the  housemaid  and  stood  there
till  the  policemen  came,  the  noise  going  on  all  the  time.  (I  believe  the  bell-
ringing  was  not  so  frequent  while  the  knocking  went  on,  but  cannot  say  for
certain.)

When  I  came  back  I  had  the  felicity  of  finding  three  policemen  in  the
house,  and  the  noise  had  ceased.  I  believe  they  had  heard  and  seen  nothing,
except  seeing  all  the  "indicators"  of  the  bells  wagging  merrily.  So  they  soon-
cleared  out.  They  offered  to  search  the  house  if  I  liked,  but  I  was  so  per-
fectly acquainted  with  it  that  I  was  certain  no  one  could  be  in  hiding,  i.e.,
in  any  place  where  he  could  produce  all  the  sounds,  not  to  mention  the
unlikelihood  of  anyone's  wishing  to  do  so  if  he  were  in  hiding.  Nothing
occurred  till  my  friends  also  left,  and  then  at  about  10  p.m.  one  of  the  bells
rang  slightly,  when  no  one  pulled  it. I  then  went  upstairs  to  the  top  of  the-

M


162


F.  W.  H,  Myers.


house,  and  when  up  there  the  servants  and  my  housekeeper  heard  the  noise
once,  very  loudly,  as  it  evidently  frightened  the  latter,  who  had  not  heard  it
before.  I  did  not  hear  anything  in  particular,  but  that  was  simply  because
just  at  the  time  it  occurred  I  was  talking  and  shutting  the  door  (I  need  not
say  that  the  shutting  the  door  had  nothing  to  do  with  it),  and  the  noise  close
by  doubtless  rendered  the  other  less  noticeable.  However,  I  went  down-
stairs and  was  just  going  from  the  hall  down  the  stairs  into  the  kitchen  (the
two  servants  and  the  housekeeper  standing  all  together  in  the  hall),  when  I
heard  it.  Perhaps  I  can  best  convey  the  impression  it  gave  to  me  by  saying
that  having  been  somewhat  sceptical  before  and  thinking  it  had  been
exaggerated,  &c,  as  soon  as  I  had  heard  it  that  once  I  had  not  the  slightest
question  as  to  whether  it  were  imaginary,  or  a  cat,  or  any  noise  outside  or
connected  with  the  bell-wires,  &c.  ;  it  was  simply  as  clear  and  loud  a  noise
as  if  someone  had  hammered  three  times  in  succession  quickly  on  the  boards
of  one  of  the  rooms,  with  a  mallet,  just  about  as  hard  as  possible.  It  is  of
course  difficult  to  convey  an  idea  of  a  sound  like  that,  but  as  near  as  I  can
judge  a  (perhaps  slightly  muffled)  mallet  hammered  on  a  floor  gives  the  best
impression.  I  told  my  servant  to  rap  the  floor  to-night  with  the  knob  of  a
heavy  stick  as  hard  as  she  could,  while  I  was  downstairs  ;  the  sound  was
distinctly  sharper  and  so  far  clearer  than  the  original  sound,  but  I  may  say
literally  bore  no  comparison  to  it  in  point  of  intensity ;  roughly  speaking,  it
was  not  much  more  than  half  as  loud  ;  while  two  friends  that  were  with  me
to-night  confessed  that  that  noise  would  be  sufficiently  startling  if  heard
suddenly.

I  heard  it  again  a  few  minutes  later,  this  time  twice  repeated  in  succes-
sion, cpiickly.  It  gave  me  the  impression  of  being  in  the  dining-room  floor,
but  it  is  difficult  to  locate  a  sound  like  that  ;  I  am  not  inclined,  therefore,  to
pay  much  attention  to  what  other  people  said  as  to  that  point,  but  the
servants,  &c. ,  said  it  seemed  to  be  in  different  parts  of  the  house,  and
certainly  could  not  agree  as  to  any  one  definite  part.

Perhaps  what  I  wrote  down  at  the  time  in  regard  to  my  servant  (which
was  written  simply  from  the  point  of  view  of  whether  she  was  producing  it
mischievously,  and  not  from  the  wish  to  give  an  idea  of  how  loud  it  was)  will
convey  a  better  impression  of  it  ;  I  wrote  down  that  my  conviction  was  that
she  could  not  have  made  such  a  noise  with  a  hammer  even  if  she  tried.

I  have  perhaps  been  rather  unnecessarily  particular  in  regard  to  this,
because  I  wish  to  show  that  while  it  naturally  occurs  to  anyone,  as  indeed  it
did  to  me,  that  I  should  need  to  hear  it  several  times  before  I  was  sure  that
it  was  not  an  ordinary  "house  noise,"  or  connected  with  the  bell-wires,  or  the
supposed  cat,  &c,  as  a  matter  of  fact  as  soon  as  I  heard  it  once  I  said  to
myself,  "That  is  enough,  I  don't  need  to  hear  it  again  to  know  quite  well
•enough  what  it  is."  I  could  well  understand  that  the  cook's  brother  preferred
the  outside  of  the  house  when  alone  with  the  housemaid.

Nothing  more  occurred  that  night  ;  we  went  to  bed  at  about  12,  and  in  the
morning  I  got  up  at  7.15  approximately,  and  the  servants  then  mustered
sufficient  courage  to  go  downstairs.  I  should  say  they  had  not  been  down  five
minutes  before  the  bells  began  ringing.  By  the  way,  I  should  have  said  that
the  evening  before,  with  the  aid  of  the  policemen,  we  took  down  the  board  over
the  bells,  and  could  see  all  the  wires  and  how  they  ran. In  the  morning  I


Alleged  Movements,  &c,


163


examined  them  still  more  carefully,  with  the  result  that  I  felt  certain  (and
I  may  as  well  state  here  that  I  was  perfectly  correct,  as  the  bell-hanger  after-
wards proved)  that  the  wires  separated  directly  they  left  the  bells  and  ran
each  to  its  own  particular  part  of  the  house,  and  thus  entirely  knocked  on  the
head  the  cat  or  rat  theory  ;  since  there  was  no  point  anywhere  where  more
than  three  wires  ran  at  all  near  one  another  after  leaving  the  bells,  where
they  were  in  full  view.  It  would,  I  suppose,  if  there  were  no  other  reason  to
preclude  the  idea,  have  taken  at  the  very  least  four  separate  animals  ringing
in  concert.

The  end  bell  and  the  call  bell  upstairs  rang  merrily  that  morning,  and
till  the  others  as  well,  at  times.  I  suppose  they  rang  at  intervals  of  two,
three,  or  five  minutes,  not  often  longer  than  that  without  one  or  more  ring-
ing. They  rang  for  about  two  hours  and  then  subsided.

In  the  afternoon  they  rang  again  at  3.15  (when  I  was  alone  in  the  house
witli  the  two  servants),  and  rang  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  stopping  just
about  when  our  friends  who  had  come  the  night  before  called ;  and  we  had
no  more  that  day.

The  next  day,  Sunday,  I  woke  at  6.45,  heard  the  servants  go  down  at
about  7.30,  and  just  afterwards  the  front  door  bell  rang,  when  there  was
certainly  rro  one  there.  Nothing  more  occurred  that  day,  or  indeed  has
occurred  since,  except  on  one  Saturday  (October  8th),  the  front  door  bell  rang
in  just  the  same  way  when  they  came  down,  and  there  was  certainly  no  one
there.  The  possibility  of  a  runaway  ring  is  entirely  out  of  the  question,  as  I
will  try  to  show  in  describing  the  house.

That  was  the  last  we  heard  or  experienced.

It  is  of  course  impossible  in  writing  an  account  like  this  to  state  all  the
theories  that  occur  to  one's  mind,  and  my  reason  for  rejecting  the  ordinary
explanations';  I  may  say  that  I  believe  I  am  as  capable  as  the  average  of
people  of  investigating  the  matter,  and  I  was  extremely  careful  to  satisfy
myself  of  the  tenability  or  otherwise  of  the  hypotheses  that  naturally  occurred
to  me,  and  while  of  course  it  is  not  worth  while  to  go  into  all  these,  I  am
ready  to  give  my  reasons  for  rejecting  or  otherwise — or  confessing  that  I  had
not  thought  of — any  hypothesis  that  may  be  stated.

I  may  as  well,  however,  without  waiting  to  be  asked,  go  into  some  points
which  to  my  mind  effectually  dispose  of  certain  of  the  prima  facie  theories.

In  the  first  place,  as  to  the  possibility  of  cats  or  rats  doing  it  ;  this  is  a
new  house  ;  it  was  finished  about  a  year  last  May,  I  came  into  it  in  July,
having  had  it  papered,  &c.  We  have  never  seen  or  heard  the  slightest  trace
of  a  rat,  nor  have  we  ever  to  our  knowledge  had  a  strange  cat  in  ;  nor  indeed
could  one,  as  far  as  I  know,  get  into  the  floor  anywhere.  I  could  give  other
arguments  if  needful,  but  I  think  the  way  the  wires  run  makes  it  entirely
unnecessary.  The  bath-room  bell,  for  instance,  which  rang  more  perhaps
than  any,  is  on  the  same  wall  as  its  bell-pull,  which  is  on  the  first  floor  (i.e.,
two  floors  above  the  bell).  The  wire  enters  a  tube  in  full  view  close  by  the
bell,  goes  right  up  in  the  tube  to  close  to  the  handle  ;  the  tube  is  visible  to
within  perhaps  eight  inches  of  the  handle  ;  so  that  the  wire  is  completely
isolated  from  all  the  other  wires  from  the  time  it  enters  the  tube  close  by  the
bells.  Then,  as  I  have  said,  the  other  wires  diverge  from  close  by  the  bells,
in  full  view,  and  go  straight  to  their  own  handles  ;  not  all  going  into  the  roof

M  2


164.


F.  W,  H.  Myers.


as  is  so  often  the  case.  The  bell-hanger  entirely  agreed  with  me  that  ifr
would  be  an  impossibility  for  any  animal  or  even  animals  to  ring  them  all  as-
they  were  rung.

Next  as  to  the  question  of  trickery.  Apart  from  the  knowledge  I  have  of
my  pupils,  &c. ,  which  would  convince  me  that  they  had  nothing  to  do  with
it,  the  greater  part  of  all  the  phenomena  occurred  when  my  housekeeper  and
pupils  were  away,  and  very  much  of  it  when  only  the  two  servants  were  iiv
the  house  ;  so  that  clearly  no  one  of  us  was  the  guilty  party  ;  and  the  cook
was  out  for  some  time  while  it  went  on,  so  that  the  housemaid  was  the  only
one  left  in  the  house  all  the  time.  As  she  had  only  been  in  the  house  a  week
or  two  of  course  I  suspected  her  ;  but  I  can  say  positively  that  as  far  as  one
can  trust  the  evidence  of  one's  senses  she  was  without  doubt  entirely  free
from  any  complicity  in  it.  For  instance,  I  stood  in  the  passage  in  front  of
the  nine  bells  watching  them  ring,  with  both  the  servants  close  by  ;  I  had
them  in  the  hall,  the  dining-room,  and  other  places  while  the  bells  were  ringing  ;
and  once  in  particular  I  watched  the  housemaid  on  her  knees  in  the  middle
of  the  "  wash-house  "  at  the  back  of  the  house,  scrubbing  the  tiles,  while  the
front  door,  area  door,  and  bath-room  bells  were  pealing  violently.  I  could
give  other  reasons  for  feeling  certain  of  her  innocence,  and,  as  I  have  said,  no-
one  else  was  in  the  house  all  the  time  it  went  on.  Apart  from  this  (and  from
the  evidently  painful  way  in  which  they  were  both  affected,  which  in  itself  to
anyone  who  saw  them  would  be  sufficient  to  exculpate  them,  though  of  course
not  carrying  much  weight  when  coming  from  second-hand),  it  would,  I  think,
be  almost  a  mechanical  impossibility  for  any,  even  the  most  ingenious
mechanic  to  contrive  an  arrangement  for  ringing  the  bells  as  they  were  rung.
There  was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  nothing  done  to  the  bells  themselves  or  the  wires
near  them,  as  I  was  able  to  demonstrate  perfectly  easily  by  examining  them,
and  any  apparatus  for  connecting  the  wires  farther  up  would  be,  I  think,  next
door  to  an  impossibility.  Four  of  the  bedroom  bells  have  no  bell-pull,
nothing  but  about  an  inch  or  so  of  wire  projecting  at  the  cornice,  from  the
ceiling.  One  of  these  goes  simply  up  in  the  wall,  crosses  the  roof,  and  goes
down  some  two  feet  to  the  call-bell,  which  I  saw  ringing  merrily  on  the
Saturday  morning.

However,  I  cannot  describe  all  the  apparatus  here,  only  I  might  say  that
the  bell-hanger,  plumber,  and  architect  are  all  clear  that  it  would  prac-
tically be  an  impossibility  for  anyone  to  arrange  such  an  apparatus  as  would
be  necessary  to  ring  the  bells  so,  even  if  they  had  no  need  to  conceal  it.  The
same  reasoning  applies  even  more  forcibly  to  the  supposition  of  anyone  doing
it  outside  the  house.  The  house  stands  apart  from  any  other,  the  nearest  is
perhaps  50  yards  or  so  and  empty  ;  between  the  two  and  all  around  are  plots
of  building  land  growing  vegetables,  &c.  By  standing  at  the  front  door  one
can  see  up  and  down  the  road  for  perhaps  300  yards  each  way,  and  it  is  out
of  the  question  that  anyone  could  be  doing  anything  near  the  house  without
being  seen.  A  wall  runs  from  the  main  road  flush  with  the  house  on  each  side,
and  perhaps  40  yards  back,  so  that  the  outside  of  the  house  is  quite  open,  and
there  is  no  chance  of  anyone  playing  a  trick.  Of  course,  besides  having  this
knowledge  I  kept  a  good  look-out  while  it  was  light ;  especially  on  the  Satur-
day morning,  when,  e.g.,  I  stood  on  the  door-step,  whence  I  could  command
the  two  outer  doors,  while  both  of  them  and  one  indoor  bell  were  ringing.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


165


I  asked  the  bell-hanger,  &c,  whether  the  "  settling  clown  "  of  the  house
oould  be  the  cause,  as  I  know  such  occurrences  have  been  brought  about  by
this  ;  but  besides  a  priori  reasons  which  he  gave  why  the  house  should  not
settle  down,  he  said  he  was  certain  even  had  it  done  so  it  could  not  have
caused  such  ringing.  Moreover,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  house  shows  not  the
least  sign  of  settling  down  in  any  way.

I  ought  to  say  that  the  wires  of  the  bells  distinctly  pulled — it  was
not  only  the  bells  or  clappers  moving ;  indeed,  in  one  or  two  cases  they  could
be  heard  grating  under  the  floor. The  bell-handles  were  not  moved.

One  bell  (I  think  only  one)  was  more  than  once  "pulled  over,"  so  that  it
did  not  return  to  its  normal  position  ;  that  I  cannot  do  by  pulling  the  handle,
so  it  gives  some  idea  of  the  sharpness  of  the  pull.

I  have  had  a  friend  here  lately,  the  science-master  at  the  Grammar
School,  and  a  thoroughly  scientific  man,  and  he  says  he  is  sure  that  the
ringing  could  not  be  the  results  of  any  magnetic  influence.  There  was
nothing  remarkable  about  the  state  of  the  weather,  temperature,  &c.

As  to  the  knocking  the  following  may  give  some  idea  as  to  the  "reality"
of  it ;  two  of  my  deaf  pupils  felt  it  when  upstairs  going  to  bed  or  already  in
bed.  One  of  them,  whose  attention  I  often  cannot  get  by  stamping  as  hard  as
I  can  on  the  floor,  felt  it  directly,  and  going  to  the  door  hammered  it  with  his
fist  and  asked  if  a  man  was  downstairs  doing  so.  The  other  one  sat  up  in
bed  directly  I  went  up  and  asked  what  the  knocking  was.  So  that  they  not
only  felt  it,  but  sufficiently  for  it  to  create  a  considerable  impression  on
them,  and  without  having  been  told  of  the  knocking  from  any  other  quarter.
The  latter  can  hear  loud  sounds,  and  so  I  cannot  say  for  certain  whether  he
felt  or  heard  it  ;  the  other  must  have  felt  it,  as  he  is  quite  deaf.  Of  the
other  two  one  is  too  young  to  question  at  all  satisfactorily  on  the  point,  the
other  was  unwell  and  asleep  all  the  time  (of  the  knocking).

Besides  all  the  household  I  may  as  well  say  who  else  saw  and  heard  the
occurrences  ;  the  grocer,  and  one  or  two  men  working  in  the  gardens  near
the  house  heard  the  bell-ringing  ;  the  baker,  the  laundry^man,  and  the  cook's
brother,  who  are  all  entirely  independent  witnesses,  heard  the  knocking,  and
they  were  all  considerably  affected  by  it.

That  the  wires  were  not  connected  is  shown,  I  think,  by  the  fact  that
when  we  rang  one  bell  in  the  ordinary  way  it  did  not  cause  any  others  to
ring  ;  nor  have  we  ever  had  any  trouble  with  them  in  any  way.

I  think  perhaps  there  is  no  reason  to  add  anything  to  this  ;  but  I  shall  be
most  happy  if  you  should  wish  for  any  further  explanations,  or  to  have  more
evidence  on  any  point,  to  furnish  you  with  any  information  I  have,  or  what
is  perhaps  more  to  the  point,  to  say  if  I  have  not  the  information.  I  may
say  that  I  have  had  no  theory  proposed  which  is  to  my  mind  at  all  consistent
with  the  facts  ;  and  friends  are  quite  untiring  in  propounding  new  theories  !

While  extremely  interested  in  the  work  of  the  Psychical  Society,  I .  can
feel  sure  of  not  being  at  all  biassed  by  any  predilections  towards  explaining
things  by  means  of  "  Psychic  "  forces,  to  the  prejudice  of  any  more  simple
explanation.

I  am  not  aware  whether  any  of  the  Reports  deal  with  similar  occurrences ;
if  there  should  be  one  I  should  be  glad  to  have  it.  I  have  only  occasionally
seen  odd  numbers.


1GG


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


If  you  should  wish,  as  of  course  you  have  a  perfect  right,  to  have  any
testimony  to  my  reliableness  as  a  witness,  or  capability  of  weighing,  &c,
scientific  evidence,  I  have  no  doubt  I  could  satisfy  you.

November  11th,  1887.

Dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  letter,  and  am  glad  to  find
that  my  communication  is  of  interest.  I  shall  be  pleased  to  give  any  facility
for  investigation  that  I  am  able.

I  had  not  expected  to  be  able  to  give  any  further  news,  as  at  the  time  I
wrote  everything  had  been  quiet  for  some  time.  I  have,  however,  further
occurrences  to  report  which,  to  my  mind,  are  especially  interesting,  as  con-
firming, as  well  as  surpassing,  the  nature  of  the  previous  phenomena.  Un-
fortunately I  was  away  at  the  time  ;  however,  it  is  in  my  opinion  extremely
probable  that  my  absence  directly  contributed  to  what  took  place,  as  I  will
show  later  on,  and  therefore  I  ought  not  to  complain.

I  went  out  last  Saturday  morning,  November  5th,  leaving  the  household
constituted  as  I  have  mentioned  in  my  former  notes  ;  my  lady-housekeeper,
two  servants,  and  four  deaf  pupils.  I  was  away  for  the  Sunday,  and  on  the
Monday  morning  I  had  a  letter  from  my  housekeeper,  Mrs.  K.,  tell-
ing me  of  what  was  going  on.  I  returned  home  as  soon  as  possible,  but
everything  had  ceased  then  and  nothing  more  has  happened.

I  have,  therefore,  to  depend  on  what  Mrs.  K.  tells  me,  and  others  whc-
were  here.  Mrs.  K.  gave  me  a  full  account  on  the  Monday  evening  ;  and
Mr.  Smith,  who  was  here  most  of  Sunday  afternoon  and  night,  wrote  out  at
the  time  all  that  Mrs.  K.  told  him  and  all  that  occurred  while  he  was  there.
I  have  since  had  his  notes  and  find  that  they  agree  with  what  Mrs.  K.  told  me
in  every  important  particular ;  where  there  is  any  difference  I  will  note  it.  I
have  perfect  confidence  that  the  facts  as  told  me  are  entirely  correct.

On  the  Saturday  evening  the  servants  were  just  going  to  have  supper,  at
about  10  o'clock,  when  one  bell,  I  believe  the  bath-room,  rang  violently,  and
they  ran  upstairs  to  Mrs.  K.  in  a  fright.  (I  might  mention,  by  the  way,  that  it
is  an  additional  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  ringing  that,  I  believe  every
time,  it  has  left  no  doubt  in  our  minds  directly  that  it  is  not  the  ordinary
ringing,  it  is  so  much  more  violent  and  sharp. )

Mrs.  K.  sent  the  cook  immediately  for  the  bell-hanger,  as  we  had
promised  to  do  in  case  of  recurrence  of  the  ringing,  and  kept  the  housemaid
in  the  dining-room  with  her.  While  they  were  there,  and  just  as  the  cook
had  got  from  the  area  steps  into  the  garden,  the  bath-room  bell  rang  violently
again. (The  boys  were  all  sound  asleep.)

Nothing  more  occurred  ;  the  bell-hanger  could  make  nothing  of  it  ;  he
stayed  till  12  and  then  left.  The  housemaid  was  much  upset  by  it,  but
I  will  return  to  that  later  on.

Next  day  Mrs.  K.  took  the  boys  to  service,  and  when  they  came  back
they  found  the  following  phenomena  had  occurred.  The  cook  told  her  (and  I
believe  she  is  perfectly  trustworthy,  as  far  as  truthfulness  goes)  that  soon
after  they  left  the  bells  had  begun  to  ring,  two  of  them  at  least,  and  so
violently  that  at  last  she  got  the  steps  and  got  two  of  the  bells  off,  the  school-
room and  dining-room  bells  I  think.  After  that  they  heard  the  wires  pulled
in  the  floor,  &c.

They  then  went  upstairs  to  do  the  bedrooms,  Mary  (the  housemaid)


Alleged  Movements,  d&c*


107


clinging  to  her,  as  she  did  all  the  time,  being  too  scared  to  go  about  by  her-
self. When  they  had  got  halfway  up  the  "  knocking"  began,  just  as  on  the
previous  occasion,  and  as  I  had  heard  it,  in  sets  of  two  and  three  quickly
repeated  raps,  or  rather  blows.  They  ran  downstairs  directly,  in  a  fright.  At
last  they  summoned  courage  enough  to  go  up,  and  going  into  the  bedroom
where  two  of  the  boys  sleep,  they  found  the  hair-brush  belonging  to  one  of
them  on  the  floor  by  the  fireplace,  smashed  in  half.  It  was  broken  length-
ways, somewhat  thus,


and  only  holding  together  by  one  thread.  It  had  been  used  by  the  boy  only
just  before  he  went  out  ;  and  he  was  much  distressed  when  he  saw  it,  and
clearly  it  was  all  right  when  he  had  left  it.  The  cook  says  she  is  certain  Mary
had  not  been  up  at  all  since  the  boys  left.  The  brush  shows  no  signs  of  ill-
usage  except  the  breakage.

They  went  upstairs  to  the  top  floor,  and  were  there  some  minutes,  I
suppose,  Mary  keeping  close  to  the  cook  all  the  time  ;  when  they  came  down
to  the  first  floor  they  found  a  chair  that  had  been  in  the  bath-room  (is  always
there)  a  few  steps  downstairs  ;  i.e.,  it  had  got  along  the  landing,  about  loft.,
down  four  steps,  round  a  double  corner,  and  down  a  few  stairs  of  the  main
flight,  where  it  was  leaning  backwards,  on  its  "hind  legs,"  and  resting  on
the  stairs  above  it.  The  below  will  give  a  ' '  ground  plan  "  of  that  part  of  the
house.


A


L  LANDING

>

|o

LANDING

•  •

DOWK

\  T
s  1

STfl
|

IRS

1

<

X

1

*«  1

1

A.  Bath-room  door.  C.  My  bedroom  door.

B.  Front  bedroom  door. D.  Mrs.  K.  's  bedroom  door.

The  arrows  on  the  steps  are  supposed  to  point  downwards,  so  that  the
shaded  part  of  the  floor  is  lower  than  the  rest  of  the  landing.  It  is  about
15ft.  from  the  bath-room  door  to  the  top  of  the  four  steps.

The  double  CD  shows  where  the  chair  was  found.

In  addition  to  this  a  chair  had  "  come"  out  of  Mrs.  K.'s  room  and  was
situated  at  the  top  of  the  stairs,  I  am  not  sure  exactly  where  ;  some  things
which  had  been  on  it,  an  apron  and  a  scarf,  were  on  the  floor  near.

They  left  them  so  till  Mrs.  K.  came  home,  and  she  put  the  bath-room
chair  away,  and  set  the  other  in  the  corner  (  O  in  the  above  plan).  Mrs.  K.
replaced  also  the  apron  and  scarf,  and  went  up  again  soon  after  dinner  and
found  them  on  the  floor.

Meanwhile  the  "  call  "  bell  at  the  top  of  the  house  rang,  while  dinner  was


1G8


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


being  set,  so  after  dinner  the  cook  was  sent  to  fetch  the  bell-hanger  and  also
a  friend,  Mr.  S.,  who  had  promised  to  stay  with  them  in  case  of  need.

During  the  afternoon  Mrs.  K.  again  and  again  replaced  the  things  on  the
chair.  She  got  her  heaviest  boot  as  being  less  easily  moved  than  the  scarf,
and  put  the  apron  at  the  bottom,  then  the  boot,  then  a  cap  on  the  top  of  all.
When  the  cook  had  gone  out  Mrs.  K.  had  Mary  in  the  dining-room  with
her  ;  then  went  up  herself,  leaving  her  there,  and  found  them  off  (the
apron  and  scarf  she  had  found  off  twice  at  least,  before  she  put  the  boot
on),  the  boot  on  the  floor  two  steps  above  the  level  of  where  the  chair  was,
the  cap  near  my  bedroom  door,  the  apron  unfolded  on  the  floor  (near  the
chair,  I  suppose).

Mr.  S.  came  at  about  5.30,  and  Mary  let  him  in  and  then  went  down-
stairs. Mrs.  K.  took  him  up  and  showed  him  the  boot,  &c,  and  they  re-
placed them  on  the  chair.

(Mr.  S.  wrote  "boots"  all  through,  instead  of  boot.  He  says  he
thought  there  was  a  pair  joined  together,  but  had  not  noticed  particularly.
That  is  the  only  point  of  difference  all  through  between  his  notes  and  what
Mrs.  K.  told  me.)

Then  he  and  Mrs.  K.  went  to  the  top  floor  to  see  that  all  was  right,
having  carefully  shut  the  three  bedroom  doors,  A,  B,  C  in  the  sketch.
They  were  there  for  about  two  minutes,  and  within  hearing  and  all  but
within  sight  of  the  landing  below.  They  then  came  down  and  found  the  three
doors  wide  open,  and  the  chair  just  at  the  top  of  the  stairs,  that  is,  having
moved  about  three  feet. The  things  were  on  the  chair.

About  this  time  the  bell-hanger  came.  They  again  moved  the  chair  back
and  took  him  into  my  bedroom  to  tell  him  about  it  ;  they  were  there  about
one  minute,  and  came  out  ;  they  found  the  boots  and  cap  halfway  downstairs.

Once  Mrs.  K.  found  the  tilings  still  on  the  chair,  but  the  apron  on  the  top
of  the  boot,  instead  of  vice  versa ;  she  is  certain  of  this.

Mr.  Smith  also  saw  a  drawer  in  the  servants'  room  which  the  cook  says
had  been  shut.  She  said  the  night  before  that  she  thought  something  had
been  moved  in  her  room,  and  when  she  went  up  to  fetch  the  bed  down  to
Mrs.  K.'s  room  at  night  she  said  she  would  leave  the  drawer  open  and  see  if
those  things  were  moved  in  the  morning,  or  something  to  that  effect  ;  when
she  went  in  the  morning  she  found  the  drawer  shut,  as  far  as  the  contents,
which  were  sticking  out  (as  though  it  had  been  shut  carelessly),  would  allow.
She  was  certain  that  Mary  had  not  been  upstairs  in  the  interval.

The  last  of  these  occurrences  upstairs  was  about  8.20  p.m.  Mrs.  K.  went
upstairs  with  Mary  (who  dared  not  go  anywhere  by  herself  that  day)  and
saw  the  things  on  the  chair  as  usual,  and  saw  that  they  were  not  touched  by
Mary  ;  when  they  came  clown  the  cap  was  on  the  floor  close  to  my  bedroom
door.

During  the  afternoon  the  bell-wires  were  pulled  more  than  once  under
the  dining-room  floor  ;  the  bells  were  off,  so  of  course  there  was  no  ringing.

After  tea  the  proceedings  began  downstairs.  The  cook  came  up  at  about
7.45  and  said  that  her  hamper,  which  had  stood  on  a  chair  in  the  passage,
had  been  moved  on  to  the  floor  by  the  door.  They  all  went  downstairs  and
inspected  the  premises  and  came  up,  leaving  the  two  servants  below.  Very
soon  afterwards  the  cook  missed  the  coal-scuttle,  and  found  it  in  the  middle


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


169


of  the  scullery  floor.  Mr.  S.  is  certain  it  was  not  ■  there  when  he  looked
just  before.  There  is  no  passage  through  the  scullery  and  no  coals  or  fire
there,  so  that  the  servants  never  take  the  scuttle  through  there,  else  one
would  naturally  suppose  they  had  set  it  down  there  and  forgotten  it.

Soon  after,  Mary's  scarf  or  muffler  was  wanted,  and  it  had  disappeared.
It  had  been  hanging  over  the  bannisters  at  the  foot  of  the  kitchen  stairs.
The  bell-hanger  was  going  round  to  inspect  the  place  soon  after,  and  found  it
at  the  end  of  the  conservatory  (that  is,  on  the  floor  above  the  kitchen).  He
seemed  to  be  struck  especially  by  this,  feeling  sure  that  no  one  had  come  up-
stairs then.

The  wires  pulled  a  little  under  the  dining-room  floor  that  evening.
Nothing  further  happened  after  Mary  left  the  house  at  8.30;  the  bell-
hanger  stayed  all  night,  sitting  up. Nothing  has  occurred  since  then.

Of  course  any  one  of  the  above  movements  by  itself  must  necessarily
appear  incredible  and  ridiculous,  or  rather  (since  the  facts  are  certain),  it
would  be  absurd  to  suppose  any  extraordinary  cause,  and  one  would  suppose
/there  had  simply  been  some  oversight.  Taken  altogether,  however,  and  in
connection  with  the  bell-ringing,  &c,  I  think  they  are  of  much  more  im-
portance.

I  cannot  help  now  connecting  the  occurrences  with  the  housemaid  ;
though  perhaps,  since  there  is  no  direct  evidence  to  that  effect,  it  may  not
appear  so  to  others,  and  an  outsider  would  be  able  to  judge  that  better.  Of
course  I  do  not  want  in  the  least  to  let  her  know  I  think  this,  though  I  am
afraid  she  begins  to  suspect  it  herself  at  times,  as  she  naturally,  finding  that
the  things  never  happen  when  she  is  away,  puts  things  together,  and  has
said  it  seems  a  strange  thing  that  it  should  be  so.

I  am,  as  I  have  said,  perfectly  certain  that  she  had  nothing  to  do  volun-
tarily with  the  bell-ringing  ;  indeed,  the  more  I  think  of  it  the  more  I  am
convinced  that  it  would  be  literally  impossible  for  her  to  ring  the  bells  as
they  were  rung,  even  apart  from  any  necessity  to  conceal  the  method  of
doing  so.

If  any  further  proof  of  her  freedom  from  complicity  were  needed,  her
state  on  the  Saturday  night  would  be  enough  to  convince  anyone.  She  was
delirious  all  night,  at  least  till  four  in  the  morning  ;  she  slept  in  Mrs.  K.'s
room,  and  Mrs.  K.  and  the  cook  sat  up  with  her  all  night,  and  had  often  to
hold  her  down  ;  at  one  time  she  got  up  and  would  have  gone  out  of  the  room
had  she  not  been  prevented  ;  she  was  clearly  asleep,  though  most  of  the
time  her  eyes  were  wide  open,  I  suppose  in  the  ordinary  "  somnambulist"
state.  She  talked  incessantly  all  night,  very  much  about  the  bells,  &c,  and
in.  such  a  way  as  to  show  she  was  completely  alarmed  and  terrified  at  it.  She
also  went  through  all  her  week's  work,  they  said,  talking  about  everything,  and
coming  to  Sunday  she  went  through  almost  the  whole  of  the  Church  Service,
giving  the  responses  and  always  leaving  time  for  the  clergyman  to  do  his  part ;
she  sang  four  hymns  all  through,  intoned  the  Te  Deum,  went  through  the
Litany,  and  started  on  the  (alternate  verses  of  the)  Psalms,  but  I  suppose
did  not  remember  them,  for  she  did  not  complete  them  ;  then  she  left  about
20  minutes  for  the  sermon  !  They  thought  she  had  gone  off  to  sleep,  but
she  came  out  with  an  Amen,  or  something  which  showed  what  had  been  in
the  interval ;  then  she  greeted  her  friends  in  her  ordinary  tone  of  voice  ;  in


170


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


fact,  she  acted  the  whole  of  what  she  would  have  done  at  the  time.  She  did,
by  the  way,  let  out  one  small  secret  about  her  work  which  she  would  not
willingly  have  done,  so  that  I  think  anyone  would  be  convinced  that  had  she
had  any  hand  in  the  production  of  the  phenomena  she  must  have  given  a  hint
of  it  ;  however,  I  must  repeat  that  this  additional  evidence  was  certainly  not
needed.

One  might  have  thought  she  moved  the  things  in  a  somnambulic  state  ;
but  they  all  feel  certain  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  her  to  have
come  upstairs  and  done  most  of  the  things,  when  they  were  perfectly  within
hearing  and  almost  within  sight,  without  its  being  known.  Besides  this,
there  is  direct  evidence  that  she  had  been  in  the  dining-room  once  at  least
all  the  time  when  one  of  the  movements  took  place  ;  besides  the  fact  that
in  the  morning  prior  to  the  breaking  of  the  brush,  &c,  she  had  actually
been  with  the  cook  entirely,  being  afraid  to  leave  her.

In  addition  to  this  the  bath-room  door,  one  of  those  opened  when  Mr.
Smith  was  upstairs,  could  not  be  opened  by  the  handle  without  being
hammered  with  the  hand  at  the  top  at  the  same  time,  since,  when  pushed  any-
where in  the  middle,  the  top  stuck  ;  if,  however,  the  top  was  pushed  with  the
rest,  no  doubt  there  would  have  been  no  need  to  strike  the  top.  I  merely
mention  this  because  it  struck  them  at  the  time  that  it  was  conclusive
evidence  to  them  that  no  one  had  been  up  to  open  it,  else  they  would  have
heard  the  noise.

The  housemaid  was  sent  home  next  evening  (Sunday),  as  they  were  quite
afraid  she  would  have  brain  fever  if  she  passed  another  such  night.

You  will  see  that  the  occurrences  have  taken  place  almost  always,  if  not
always,  when  she  has  been  in  a  state  of  nervous  excitement ;  the  servants
were  both  rather  nervous  when  I  was  to  go  out  for  the  Sunday,  and  in  the
previous  instance  she  had  been  upset  in  her  nerves  for  some  days  i^reviously.
She  is  a  young  girl  and  has  never  been  out  to  service  before,  and  I  had  only
had  her  a  few  weeks  prior  to  the  first  occurrence  of  these  manifestations.

I  shall  be  very  glad  to  give  any  assistance  I  am  able  towards  investiga-
tion, and  shall  be  pleased  if  anyone  should  wish  to  stay  for  a  night  or  so  to
receive  them  ;  of  course  I  have  no  means  of  anticipating  any  recurrence,
but  you  may  wish  someone  to  see  the  position  of  the  bells,  &c,  and  I
shall  be  glad  to  do  anything  to  facilitate  an  inquiry.

November  23rd,  1887.

Dear  Sir, — I  am  afraid  my  last  letter  conveyed  a  slight  misapprehension,
judging  from  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith's  letter  of  November  14th.  I  did  not  intend
to  convey  the  impression  that  my  servant  had  left  permanently  or  for  any
length  of  time  ;  she  only  went  for  one  night,  and  returned  the  next  day.

Since  that  time  nothing  further  has  occurred  ;  and  unfortunately  for
investigation,  i.e.,  as  far  as  asking  anyone  to  come  for  the  purpose  is  con-
cerned, one  of  my  piq:>ils  is  ill  with  a  slight  attack  of  scarlet  fever,  which
would,  of  course,  make  it  rather  awkward  to  give  full  facilities  for  investiga-
tion ;  still,  of  course,  it  will  not  be  long,  I  hope,  before  that  is  quite  got  rid  of,
and  if  we  should  have  any  further  occurrences  I  shall  be  glad  to  telegraph  to
you,  only,  of  course,  these  things  are  apparently  so  sporadic  that  one  can
never  tell  how  long  they  are  going  to  last  when  they  once  begin,  as  far  as  one
can  judge  from  the  previous  experience.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


171


One  thing  within  the  last  few  days  has  afforded,  perhaps,  some  evidence  as
to  the  nature  of  the  bell-ringing,  or  may  do.  In  preparing  the  room  for  the
patient  mentioned  above  we  attached  a  cord  to  the  bell-wire  which  projects
from  the  cornice  about  two  inches  or  less,  so  as  to  have  communicatioTi  with
the  bell  ;  but  they  found  that  the  bell  did  not  ring,  and  I  have  little  doubt
that  the  wire  is  broken.  Under  present  circumstances  I  must  postpone
having  the  bell-hanger  till  we  can  have  him  safely,  but  when  he  examines  it,
it  may  throw  some  light  on  the  subject.  The  wire  appears  once  again  (under
the  bath)  before  it  reaches  the  bell,  and  there  I  find  it  is  perfectly  right,  and
in  full  communication  with  the  bell,  nor  is  there  any  sign  when  pulling
backwards  at  that  point  of  any  breakage  ;  hence  I  think  it  follows  that,
however  the  wire  was  broken,  it  could  not  have  been  done  by  pulling  in  that
place,  and  we  know  that  the  "handle  "  (i.e.,  the  inch  or  two  of  wire  in  the
bedroom)  was  not  pulled,  so  I  think  as  far  as  one  can  see  no  person  could  have
broken  it  there.  I  should  say  that  I  know  it  was  all  right  at  the  time  when
the  bells  "  rang,"  for  I  tried  it  by  means  of  a  pole  with  a  hook  at  the  end
(it  can  hardly  be  reached  without  something  of  the  sort),  and  they  did  not
break  it  when  tying  the  cord  on,  for  the  bell  did  not  ring  once.  Certainly,
judging  from  the  way  in  which  the  bells  rang,  it  is  not  surprising  if  a  wire
broke  ; however,  as  soon  as  possible  I  will  have  it  seen  to.

I  think  I  gave  some  account  of  the  way  in  which  I  tried  to  make  it  certain
that  neither  of  the  servants  had  anything  to  do  (mechanically)  with  ringing
the  bells;  and  certainly  I  proved  it  if  the  evidence  of  one's  senses  has  any
weight.  With  regard  to  the  other  occurrences  I  will  endeavour  to  state
clearly  what^roo/  there  is  of  this.  First,  however,  I  may  mention  one  or  two
additional  facts  about  the  bell-ringing.  I  did  not  lay  much  stress  on  this  in
my  first  letter,  as  I  had  not  been  able  to  speak  to  the  witness  referred  to,  but
I  have  lately  seen  him  (the  brother  of  my  cook,  whom,  I  believe,  I  referred  to
as  having  been  fetched  by  her  to  stay  in  the  house  with  the  housemaid  while
she  went  for  us,  when  the  "  knocking"  was  going  on).  He  tells  me  that  he
was  standing  with  the  housemaid  on  the  front  door-step  for  some  time  while
the  bells  were  ringing,  and  no  one  else  (except  the  boys,  who  were  upstairs)  in
the  house,  and  that  he  is  certain  she  was  not  and  could  not  be  ringing  them.
They  went  there  simply  because  they  did  not  like  staying  in  the  house  while  it
was  going  on.  I  understood  him  to  say  that  he  is  not  sure  that  there  was  any
knocking  while  they  were  there.  He  says  that  when  he  was  down  in  the
kitchen  the  knocking  was  clearly  in  the  floor  above,  i.  e. ,  the  dining-room
floor,  which  corresponds  with  my  own  experience.  At  other  times  he  says  it
was  in  various  parts  of  the  house.

The  other  thing  is  that  I  am  not  sure  whether  I  called  particular  atten-
tion to  the  time  when  one  of  the  bells  rang  on  Saturday  night  (November
5th)  ;  that  was,  I  think,  as  clear  evidence  as  possible  that  neither  servant  had
anything  to  do  with  it.  Mrs.  K.  had  the  housemaid  in  the  dining-room
with  her  while  the  cook  went  for  the  bell-hanger  ;  and  while  they  were  both
in  the  dining-room,  and  the  cook  had  just  got  to  the  top  of  the  steps  outside
the  house,  the  bath-room  bell  rang  violently,  so  loudly  that  the  cook  started
and  turned  round  and  made  some  exclamation.

With  regard  to  the  other  class  of  phenomena,  I  do  not  think  Mrs.  K.
took  particular  means  to  have  clear  proof  that  the  servants  were  distinctly


172


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


watched  and  unable  to  have  done  the  things  (assuming  that,  being  hysterical,
they  might  have  done  so  unconsciously),  except  in  one  case.  I  have
inquired  closely  into  that  and  I  think  it  is  definite  enough.  She  tells  me
that  on  the  Sunday  afternoon  there  was  at  least  one  time  when  she  knew  the
movements  of  all  in  the  house,  when  the  things  were  moved  off  the  chair.  It
was  when  the  cook  went  for  Mr.  Smith.  Mrs.  K.  saw  her  come  downstairs
and  saw  that  the  things  were  on  the  chair  ;  then  she  called  for  the  house-
maid to  come  up  from  the  kitchen  and  be  with  her  in  the  dining-room,  and
she  came  up  then,  only  going  into  the  school-room  on  the  way,  so  that  Mrs.
K.  (standing  in  the  hall)  saw  that  she  did  not  go  upstairs.  They  sat  in  the
dining-room  for  some  minutes,  and  then  Mrs.  K.  went  out,  leaving  the  house-
maid in  the  dining-room,  and  found  the  boot  on  the  floor  two  steps  higher
than  the  landing  where  the  chair  was,  the  cap  near  my  room  door,  and  the
apron  on  the  floor.  She  says  she  is  certain  she  had  Mary  under  her  eye  all
the  time  from  when  she  came  up  from  the  kitchen.  The  boys  were  quietly  in
the  school-room,  and  beyond  the  bell-ringing,  knew  nothing  of  the  occur-
rences all  the  time.

I  wish  they  could  have  given  clearer  proof  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the
servants  at  other  times.  Both  Mrs.  K.  and  Mr.  Smith  were  absolutely
certain  no  one  could  have  come  upstairs  when  they  were  above,  and  when
they  were  in  my  room  with  the  bell-hanger  ;  this,  however,  is  not,  of  course,
direct  proof  that  no  one  did.  I  believe,  however,  the  one  case  given  above  to
be  satisfactory  evidence,  so  far  as  it  goes.

I  might  mention  that  when  the  bell-hanger  came  he  very  wisely  did  set
himself  to  make  sure  of  that,  and  so  he  turned  the  gas  down  and  sat  in  a
room  on  the  top  of  the  stairs  to  watch  if  the  housemaid  came  wp  ;  unfortu-
nately the  cook  took  the  same  idea  into  her  head  at  the  same  time,  and  sat
at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs,  neither  of  the  two  knowing  of  the  other's  being
there,  so  that  between  them  they  defeated  their  own  ends,  — at  any  rate  the
housemaid  did  not  come  up  when  they  were  there,  but  I  don't  think  they
were  there  long,  so  that  is  not  much  evidence  in  her  favour.

I  am  not  sure  if  you  wished  me  to  tabulate  instances  in  connection  with
the  bell-ringing  and  knocking  to  show  that  the  servants  were  watched  carefully.
If  so,  I  will  do  so.  I  did  this,  however,  in  so  many  different  ways  that  I
did  not  take  account  of  them  all,  and  cannot  trust  my  memory  for  all  the
details,  so  that  I  should  only  give  the  five  or  six  cases  of  which  I  took  special
note  in  this  regard.  If  I  can  make  the  evidence  clearer  by  doing  so  I  will
tabulate  the  cases  that  I  know  of  which  are  certain,  of  all  kinds.

Mr.  D.'s  housekeeper,  Mrs.  K.,  confirms  as  follows  : —

Mr.  D.  having  read  over  the  account  to  me  of  the  occurrences  which
took  place  in  this  house,  I  find  that  they  agree  with  my  recollection  entirely.
April  3rd,  1890.

In  a  further  letter  (April  4th,  1890)  Mr.  D.  adds  :  "In  my  letter  of
November  23rd,  1887,  I  mentioned  the  fact  of  one  of  the  bell-wires  being  out
of  order.  I  should  say  that  upon  examination  it  was  found  to  be  not  broken,
but  only  fixed  so  tightly  that  it  could  not  be  pulled  by  the  handle.  This
does  not  alter  the  case  in  any  way,  except  that  I  had  assumed  the  breakage
to  have  been  caused  by  the  ringing;  if  the  fixing  were  caused  by  it,  it  amounts


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


173


to  the  same  thing  practically  ;  if  not,  it  is  clear  evidence  that  the  ringing  did
not  take  place  from  the  handle."

Group  A. Case  X. (S.  8.)

I  go  on  to  another  case  of  a  more  prolonged  and  complex  kind.

Account  of  Physical  Phenomena  Obtained  in  a  Family  Circle.

Professor  Alexander,  of  the  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  is  well-
known  to  rue,  and  I  have  also  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Davis  and  of  the  two  children.  I  feel  confident  that  the  following
narratives  have  been  written  with  candour  and  care.  Mr.  Davis
occupies  a  responsible  position  as  a  telegraphist.  The  power  of  the
children  has  not,  I  believe,  returned.

In  the  following  narration  of  phenomena  that  occurred  in  a  family  circle
at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  a  difficulty  is  felt  in  presenting  the  evidence  so  as  to  give
a  right  impression  of  its  value.  Facts  isolated  from  the  series  to  which  they
belong  are,  like  quotations  without  their  context,  apt  to  be  misleading.  And
yet  much  in  such  cases  as  the  following  is  of  too  private  a  nature  for  publicity.
There  are  names  and  circumstances  that  concern  outside  people,  and  that
must  not  in  consequence  be  mentioned  ;  and  there  is,  as  will  be  readily  under-
stood, much  that  is  too  intimate  to  be  referred  to,  even  in  what  regards
ourselves.  This  consideration  leads  me  to  exclude  what  is  after  all  of  small
importance — the  messages  themselves,  and  to  limit  myself  to  as  fair  a  de-
scription as  possible  of  the  physical  phenomena  through  which  they  were
obtained.

About  the  middle  of  1888  we  received  in  Rio  the  visit  of  the  notorious
Henry  Slade,  who,  after  an  unsuccessful  stay  of  a  few  weeks,  left  us  to  go  to
Buenos  Ayres,  whence  he  returned  to  Rio  after  about  six  weeks'  absence.
He  then  seemed  to  be  more  fortunate  in  his  sittings  ;  and,  although  in  this
account  I  should  prefer  refraining  from  even  a  passing  mention  of  public
mediumship,  it  is  only  just  to  attribute  to  him  the  great  interest  which  was
then  kindled  in  psychical  phenomena,  and  perhaps  the  awakening  of  the
power  through  which  they  were  obtained.  Mr.  Davis,  whose  acquaintance  I
made  at  the  time  of  Slade's  first  stay  among  us,  was  incited  to  form  a  circle
at  home.  He  was  living  in  a  small  country  house,  which  stood  alone  on  the
side  of  a  hill  overlooking  the  seashore  ;  but  in  the  month  of  November,  1888,
he  moved  to  a  residence  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  much  nearer  the  sea.
While  Slade  was  in  Buenos  Ayres,  some  25  or  more  daily  sittings  were  held
by  Mr.  Davis  without  the  least  result.

At  last,  on  August  14th,  some  slight  manifestations  were  obtained  with  a
tolerably  good  proof  of  identity,  and,  on  their  rapidly  increasing  in  power
and  frequency,  I  was  kindly  invited  to  form  part  of  the  circle.  The  sitters  who
thenceforward  composed  it  were  Mr.  Davis,  Mrs.  Davis,  their  daughters,  C.  and
A.  [who  were  respectively  twelve  and  a-half  and  nine  and  adialf  years  old],
Mrs.  Z. ,  their  maternal  grandmother,  and  myself.  To  these  we  may  add  a  Mr.
X. ,  one  of  Mr.  Davis's  friends,  who,  however,  was  not  quite  so  regular  in  his
attendance. Outsiders  were  admitted  some  three  times — just  often  enough  to-


174,


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


show  us  that,  although  ready  believers  in  the  greatest  marvels,  their  exclusion
was  in  general  a  wise  measure.  One  of  them,  an  illiterate  Brazilian,  whose
mediumship  we  wished  to  try,  stopped  all  real  phenomena,  and,  dozing  off
into  a  somnambulic  sleep,  told  us  that  St.  Bernard  was  present.  Another
became,  apparently,  self-mesmerised,  and  acted  foolishly.  The  third,  an
old  friend  of  Mr.  Davis's,  saw  some  weak  manifestations,  which  were  quite
sufficient  to  surprise  and  awe  him.  The  testimony  of  the  latter  might  be
obtained,  but  would  be  of  slight  importance.  The  evidence  depends  almost
entirely  on  the  members  of  the  circle,  and  must  be  measured  by  their
competence  as  observers  and  reputation  for  probity.

In  the  latter  part  of  August  and  during  the  ensuing  months  proof  came
upon  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  so-called  psychic  force,  and  of  the  strange  self-
assertive  intelligence  that  accompanies  it.  Heavy  objects  were  moved
without  conscious  effort  on  our  part,  and  sometimes  without  any  kind  of
contact.  What  seemed  to  be  direct  writing  came  on  the  walls  and  in  closed
books,  and  this  was,  moreover,  obtained  on  slates  under  the  more  exact
observation  of  the  regular  sittings.  Raps  were  very  frequent,  and  ranged
from  the  lightest  taps  to  the  heaviest  blows.  Impressions  of  fingers,  and
once  that  of  a  foot,  were  supernormally  made  on  flour.  Clairvoyance,  and  in
a  lesser  degree  clairaudience,  were  developed  ;  and  the  touches  and  grasp  of
hands,  not  seemingly  belonging  to  any  of  the  sitters,  were  sometimes  felt
even  by  myself.  Marked  characteristics  of  individuality  were  maintained
throughout  in  each  and  all  of  the  media  of  manifestation  ;  and  in  some
instances  there  were  more  decided  indications  that  the  intelligence  at  work  was
not  all  referable  to  the  subconscious  cerebration  of  the  persons  present.  The
phenomena  came  at  first  in  season  and  out  of  season  ;  the  instruments  through
which  they  were  evolved  were  simple  English  children,  and  their  only  effect
was  a  natural  elation  at  their  occurrence,  and  the  quickening  on  our  part  of
the  powers  of  observation  and  reasoning  by  the  stimulus  of  curiosity.  After
growing  in  intensity, and  giving  us  reason  to  expect  still  more  wonderful  mani-
festations, the  power  at  length  declined  so  much  that  it  was  at  one  time
reduced  to  mere  automatic  writing.  This  coincided  with  the  change  of
residence,  but  was,  I  think,  still  more  to  be  attributed  to  the  heat  of  an
exceptionally  bad  summer.  As  it  grew  cool  again  the  power  revived,  but
never  reached  the  pitch  to  which  it  had  attained  in  1888,  and  on  June  4th,
1889,  the  coming  of  Mr.  Davis's  family  to  England  put  an  end  to  our
sittings.

Now,  from  first  to  last  there  was  nothing  that  could  with  any  justice  be
referred  to  morbid  conditions  of  the  nervous  system,  whether  in  the  children
themselves,  or  in  the  adults  who  observed  them  ;  nor  were  any  of  the  sitters
during  these  occurrences  in  any  other  than  an  apparently  normal  state  of
consciousness.  Warned  by  failures  and  disappointments  in  other  quarters,
both  Mr.  Davis  and  I  were  disposed  to  subject  whatever  happened  to
rigorous  inquiry,  and  to  judge  each  single  phenomenon  on  its  own
merits.

From  the  notes  taken  at  the  time  and  from  my  own  memory,  corrected  by
that  of  the  other  sitters,  I  will  now  endeavour  to  give  the  details  of  our
phenomena  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  order,  I  will  classify  them,  not  so  much
according  to  their  sequence  in  time,  as  according  to  their  kind.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


175


Movements  of  Heavy  Bodies  Attributable  to  Psychic  Force.

At  the  first  successful  sitting  of  August  14th,  at  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Davis  and  the  two  children  C.  and  A.  were  present,  tahle-tilting  took  place,
the  hands  of  the  sitters  being,  according  to  their  usual  custom,  joined  on  the
table.  On  taking  down  the  letters  indicated  by  the  tilts,  the  name  of  a
relative  long  deceased  was  given  as  Fanny  Z.,  and  this  was  insisted  on,
although  the  sitters  supposed  it  to  be  Frances.  Mrs.  Z. ,  who  was  not  in  the
room  at  the  time,  was  then  called  in,  and  she  affirmed  that  Fanny  had
always  been  the  familiar  name  of  the  deceased,  although  her  real  name  was
Frances.  The  minds  of  the  sitters  were  positively  set  against  the  name  given
by  the  table,  until  it  was  corroborated  by  Mrs.  Z.

Thenceforward  the  power,  as  before  said,  developed  rapidly  ;  and  mani-
festations were  made  spontaneously,  or  could  be  had  for  the  asking  at  any
hour  of  the  day.  It  was  shortly  after  this  first  outbreak  of  phenomena  that
I  myself  went  up  by  invitation  to  Mr.  Davis's  house  to  take  part  in  a  sitting.
At  tea  the  dining-room  table,  round  which  were  seated  Mr.  Davis,  Mrs.  Davis,
their  five  little  daughters,  Mrs.  Z.,  and  I,  swayed  backward  and  forward,  or
rose  at  one  end  in  sudden  emphatic  movements,  which  often  meant,  according
to  the  usual  "  yes  "  or  "no"  signals,  approval  or  disapproval  of  assertions  made
in  the  conversation.  During  this  irregular  proceeding  of  the  table  the  two
elder  girls,  C.  and  A. ,  from  whom  the  power  seems  to  have  been  principally
drawn,  sat  quite  still,  one  on  each  side  of  their  mother,  who  was
favourably  placed  to  detect  any  interference  on  their  part.  The  same  thing-
occurred  on  other  occasions  when  I  was  present,  and,  as  Mr.  Davis  assured  me
at  the  time,  it  was  even  stronger  at  those  meals  in  which  the  members  of  the
family  were  alone.  The  table,  in  fine,  acted  like  a  restless,  living  creature
endowed  with  human  intelligence.  The  tone  adopted  in  conversing  with
these  strange  influences  was  rather  a  bantering  one  ;  and  once,  on  my  retiring
from  the  room  after  tea,  the  table  ran  after  me,  and  made  a  decided  attempt
to  hem  me  in.  C.  was  at  the  moment  the  only  other  person  present  in  the
room  ;  and,  as  far  as  I  could  see, she  did  not  even  touch  the  table, much  less  did
she  push  it.  On  another  occasion  the  table,  while  all  were  seated  round  it,  rose
and  fell  staidly  and  deliberately, in  a  manner,  that  is  to  say,  so  different  from
its  usual  behaviour  that  we  at  once  supposed  the  presence  of  a  new  influence.
The  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  repeated  ;  and  the  name  of  a  lady  was  given
"who  in  former  years  had  been  a  personal  accpiaintance  of  Mrs.  Z.'s.  The
others  had  merely  heard  of  her.  Her  age,  which  I  must  not  mention  here,  as
it  might  give  a  clue  to  her  identity  to  surviving  relatives,  was  then  spoken
of  ;  but  a  mistake  was  made  in  the  number  of  years,  against  which  the  table
immediately  protested,  correcting  Mrs.  Z.  in  the  units,  which,  it  seems,  were
5  and  not  4.  Mrs.  Z.  at  once  acknowledged  that  her  memory  had  betrayed
her,  and  that  the  invisible  influence  was  right.

Other  phenomena  of  a  spontaneous  character,  or  that  came  at  our  desire,
were  still  more  conclusive  of  the  presence  of  psychic  force  than  the  rather
uncomfortable  proceedings  of  the  tea-table.  The  high  chair  in  which  Amy,
a  child  then  13  months  old,  was  seated,  was  moved  backwards  and  forwards
about  10  or  12  inches,  between  the  table  and  the  wall,  this  being  done  so
abruptly  that  the  chair  was  sometimes  forced  partly  under  the  table,  and
threatened  to  fall  backwards. The  child,  instead  of  being  alarmed,  chuckled


17G


F.  W.  H.  Myers,


and  laughed,  though  we  older  people  were  sometimes  rather  anxious  lest  she
should  be  hurt.  At  our  request  the  chair  would  be  righted,  and  the  violence
of  the  movement  moderated.  On  the  right  hand  of  the  child  was  seated  Mrs.
Z.  ;  on  the  left  A.  The  chair,  while  moving,  kept  parallel  with  the  table,
i.e.,  it  was  not  twisted  round  as  would  be  the  case  if  it  were  drawn  forward
on  one  side  only  by  the  foot  of  either  of  the  neighbours  ;  and  it  generally  slid
across,  and  not  along  the  boards  of  the  Uoor,  which,  as  usual  in  Brazilian,
houses,  were  uncarpeted.  I  have  tried  moving  the  same  chair  myself,  when
seated  beside  Amy,  and  find  that,  although  I  have  rather  more  than  the
average  strength  in  my  lower  limbs,  the  push  can  be  given  only  with  consider-
able difficulty,  and  has  the  effect  of  turning  the  chair  half  round.  If,  then,
instead  of  having,  as  is  now  the  case,  every  reason  to  trust  Mrs.  Z.  and  her
granddaughter,  I  had  the  best  founded  motives  for  mistrust,  I  should —
in  the  absence  of  all  visible  mechanism — have  considered  that  particular
phenomenon  to  be  a  genuine  one.

Another  noteworthy  incident  occurred  with  a  favourite  dog,  called  Tiny,
which,  according  to  its  time-honoured  custom,  was  seated  on  a  chair,  which
stood  away  from  the  table  near  the  wall.  Nobody  being  near  it,  I  jokingly
challenged  the  invisible  influence  so  to  move  the  chair  that  the  dog  might  be
obliged  to  jump  down.  Nothing  happened  for  a  minute  or  so,  when  the  dog
left  the  chair — apparently  of  its  own  accord.  Two  or  three  seconds  elapsed
after  it  had  sprung  to  the  ground  ;  and  then  the  chair  tilted  before  us  all.
In  the  same  way  a  child's  swing,  hanging  in  a  nook  of  the  room,  was  at  my
desire  subjected  to  a  slight  but  very  visible  oscillation,  which  was  closely,
watched  by  Mr.  Davis  and  myself.  There  was,  it  is  true,  an  open  window  at
the  back  ;  but,  as  we  carefully  noted  at  the  time,  no  perceptible  breeze  came
through  it ;  the  temperature  inside  and  outside  the  house  was  more  or  less,
equal,  the  air  on  the  verandah  being  that  of  a  characteristically  motionless
Brazilian  night.

An  account  of  a  phenomenon  of  levitation  suggested  another  tea-table
experiment.  I  requested  C,  who  was  seated  two  places  from  me,  her
little  sister  D.  being  between  us,  to  place  her  hand  on  the  back  of  my
chair,  which  she  did,  touching  it  with  apparent  lightness.  The  chair  began
at  once  to  sway  from  side  to  side,  and  continued  to  do  so  after  I  had  taken
my  feet  from  the  ground.  There  was  an  application  of  great  power,  sufficient,
indeed,  to  give  ample  proof  of  the  action  of  psychic  force,  if  not  to  lift  me
from  the  floor.  All  this  while  C.  sat  immovable  ;  and  it  was  very  manifest
that  she  made  not  the  slightest  effort.  The  next  evening  Mr.  X.,  who  is  very
muscular,  took  C.'s  seat,  while  I  retained  my  own  ;  and  he  then  tried  to
produce  the  same  effect  under  exactly  the  same  conditions,  with  the  result
that  his  chair  slid  back,  while  mine  remained  immovable.  My  weight,  which
I  suppose  has  not  changed  to  any  considerable  degree  since  then,  I  find  to  be
13st.  61b.

Some  other  experiments  with  tables  were  made  under  the  more  direct
observation  of  the  regular  sittings,  at  which  I  soon  became  a  very  constant
attendant.  On  one  occasion  a  light  three-footed  table  was  inverted  ;  and  my
hands,  with  those  of  Mr.  Davis,  Mrs.  Davis,  and  the  two  girls,  were  lightly
placed  on  each  of  the  feet.  Care  was  taken  to  see  that  no  one  did  more  than
just  touch  the  feet  of  the  table  ;  and,  under  these  conditions,  it  sprang  rapidly


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


177


from  the  floor  into  the  lap  of  one  of  the  sitters,  and  thence  to  the  floor  again,
repeating  this  manoeuvre  for  each  of  us  in  turn.  In  the  Thursday  evening
stances  it  was  common  for  the  table  to  place  itself  in  the  necessary  position  on
our  sitting  down  to  it,  either  immediately  before  or  after  our  hands  had  been
placed  on  its  surface.  These  movements,  however,  nearly  always  took  us  by
surprise,  and,  as  we  had  in  view  the  study  of  far  more  important  phenomena,
we  did  not  subject  them  to  any  very  exact  tests.

An  interesting  case  of  apparent  alteration  in  the  weight  of  a  table  was
observed  by  Mr.  X.  when  C.  was  standing  by.  At  his  own  request,  and
while  he  held  it  in  his  hands  alone,  it  became  alternately  very  light  and  very
heavy,  so  much  so  that,  although  it  was  nothing  more  than  an  ordinary  card
table,  he  was  more  than  once  obliged  to  put  it  down.

I  will  include  here  the  account  of  an  interesting  phenomenon  witnessed
beforehand  with  Slade,  but  which,  in  the  case  of  a  professional  medium,  is
very  liable  to  be  attributed  to  conjuring.  Having  one  day  walked  over  the
hill  to  visit  Mr.  Davis,  I  found  on  arriving  that  the  children  were  just  finishing
their  morning  lessons.  It  occurred  to  me,  as  I  saw  the  slates  and  books  on
the  table,  that  I  might  try  with  A.  for  the  disappearance  of  a  solid  object  ;
and,  when  we  were  left  alone  in  the  room,  we  held  together,  at  my  suggestion,
a  slate  on  which  a  book  had  been  placed,  keeping  it,  according  to  precedent,
just  under  the  table.  The  slate  was  twisted  round  with  some  force,  and  the
book  fell  to  the  ground.  So  far  it  was  a  failure.  1  then  took  a  slate  pencil  of
about  the  usual  length,  which  was  lying  on  the  table,  placed  it  on  the  slate,
and  again  held  the  latter,  with  the  help  of  the  little  medium,  out  of  sight  in  the
shade  of  the  table.  After  a  few  moments  the  slate  was  drawn  out  by  us —
the  pencil  had  gone.  We  looked  for  it  on  the  floor,  under  the  table,  but  in
vain.  On  replacing  the  slate  in  position,  the  pencil  apparently  fell  on  to  it.
I  resolved  to  try  once  more  ;  and  the  second  time,  under  exactly  the  same
conditions,  the  pencil  disappeared.  This  time,  besides  looking  for  the  pencil
elsewhere,  I  obliged  A.  to  shake  her  arms  ;  and,  calling  Mr.  Davis  from  the
next  room,  I  explained  what  had  occurred,  and  asked  him  to  take  part  in  the
search.  Equally  unsuccessful  for  the  first  few  moments,  he  at  length  passed
his  hand  inside  the  crossbeam  of  the  table  that  runs  between  the  legs,  and
the  pencil  came  into  his  hand  as  if  put  there.  jSTow,  at  that  particular  spot
the  crossbeam  was  smooth  and  vertical  ;  the  pencil  itself  was  almost  point-
less, and  could  not  have  been  pressed  into  the  hard  viultatico  wood  of  which
the  table  was  made.  Add  to  this  that  the  experiment  was  to  the  little  girl
an  entirely  novel  one,  and  that  she  was  under  my  own  observation  in  broad
daylight,  and  could  hardly  have  let  go  of  the  slate  for  any  appreciable  length
of  time  without  my  perceiving  it.  Her  other  hand  was  joined  with  mine  on.
the  table.

Raps.

From  the  first  outbreak  of  the  phenomena  raps  were  the  principal  means'
used  for  announcing  the  supposed  spirit  presence.  They  came  on  the  floor,
on  the  table,  and,  more  rarely,  on  the  walls,  in  signals  which  from  the  beginning-
were  sharply  individualised  for  each  separate  influence,  the  same  individuality
maintaining  its  characteristics  throughout  the  sittings.  As  before  stated,
they  varied  in  loudness  from  hardly  perceptible  ticks  up  to  resounding  blows,
such  as  might  be  struck  by  a  large  wooden  mallet. In  the  quality  of  some:

N


178


F.  W,  H.  Myers.


of  these  sounds  there  were  also  marked  and  persistent  distinctions.  These
differences  are  given,  as  far  as  they  can  be  represented  in  dash  and  dot,  in
the  following  list,  taken  from  Mr.  Davis's  notebook,  which  is,  however,  by  no
means  complete.  The  size  of  the  marks  roughly  represents  the  comparative
loudness  of  the  raps  :

'•  16.


3.


*.


S.


6.


- I -  I  — —  - i—  IS,  (It

8l t ///  17. '  \ \ N \ \  1

9.  _  .  //

Now,  I  hold  it  to  be  extremely  improbable  that  any  of  us,  including  even
such  a  practised  telegraphist  as  Mr.  Davis  himself,  should  be  able  to  retain
in  his  memory  for  any  length  of  time,  at  least  without  special  study,  such  a
variety  of  sounds  so  as  to  give  them  at  the  end  of  a  series  of  sittings  in  exactly
the  same  way  in  which  they  were  given  at  the  beginning.  This  individuality
of  the  raps  was  early  forced  upon  our  notice  ;  and  we  learnt  to  recognise  them
•when  heard,  though  none  of  us  could  reproduce  more  than  a  very  few  from
memory.

One  evening  in  the  month  of  September,  1888,  Mr.  Davis  went  into  the
room  of  the  two  elder  girls,  where  A.  was  already  in  bed  and  asleep,  taking
C  with  him.  They  had  no  candle  ;  but  through  the  ventilating  aperture
over  the  door  came  in  sufficient  light  .to  show  the  position  of  the  persons
and  objects  in  the  room.  Both  sat  down  on  the  bedside  ;  C.  took
off  her  slippers  ;  and  heavy  blows,  like  those  that  might  be  dealt  by  a  muffled
sledge  hammer,  came  on  the  floor.  Mr.  Davis  then  obliged  C.  to  sit
on  the  floor  with  him,  placing  her  feet  on  his  knees,  and  holding  her  two

1  More  is  figured  here  than  mere  dash  and  dot  could  give  :  the  vertical  strokes
represent  a  sharp  sound  ;  the  horizontal  ones  a  sound  move  or  less  prolonged,  accord-
ing to  the  lengths  given.  The  intervals  between  the  strokes  show  approximately  the
intervals  between  the  raps  that  made  up  each  signal ;  and  the  thickness  of  the  strokes
indicates  the  comparative  loudness.  The  blot,  which  we  were  told  to  put  for  No.  G,
stands  for  a  very  heavy  thud,  usually  dealt  on  the  table.


Alleged  Movements,  <&e.


179


hands  in  his  own.  The  same  blows  came,  but  with  even  more  intensity  ;  and
they  were  finally  requested  by  Mrs.  Davis  from  another  room  not  to  make  so
much  noise,  as  they  would  wake  the  children  who  were  sleeping  in  other
parts  of  the  house.  The  blows  seemed  to  Mr.  Davis  to  shake  the  whole
building. Mr.  X.  also  witnessed  similar  phenomena  on  another  occasion.

.  On  the  night  of  April  25th,  1889,  Mr.  Davis  had  occasion  to  go  into  his
daughters'  room,  where  A.  was  lying  asleep,  and  heard  rapping  going  on
all  round  her.  At  the  sittings  the  raps  were,  of  course,  used  as  a  medium  for
messages,  in  which  they  seemed  to  us  to  be  more  reliable  than  the  automatic
writing,  and  equally  so  with  the  direct  writing.

On  April  18th,  1889,  at  one  of  our  Thursday  evening  sittings,  when  the
room  had  been  thoroughly  darkened,  nine  or  ten  silent  movements  made  by
Mr.  Davis's  finger  were  reproduced  in  raps  on  the  floor  at  the  other  end  of  the
room  ;  but,  on  his  calling  our  attention  to  this,  and  trying  to  obtain  it  again,
the  attempt  failed.  Another  experiment  was,  however,  more  successful.
Mr.  Davis  tapped  out  the  alphabet  from  A  to  Z  and  the  numbers  from  1  to  0
in  Morse  signals.  At  each  letter  given  the  same  sound  was  exactly  imitated,
the  raps  coming  again  near  the  elder  girl  on  the  floor  at  the  other  end  of  the
room.  The  imitation  was,  indeed,  so  perfect  that  Mr.  Davis  declared  it  was
his  own  "  sending. "  Nevertheless,  no  message  was  given  in  Morse  signals, the
reason  affirmed  being  that,  as  the  medium  did  not  know  telegraphy,  they
could  not  use  her  for  that  purpose.  Now,  Mr.  Davis  was  the  only  person
present  who  knew  anything  at  all  about  Morse  signals ;  and  1  found  after-
wards, on  trying,  that  only  after  repeated  failures  could  I  succeed  in  tapping
them  out  myself.  In  the  raps  that  came  on  this  occasion  one  only  mistake
was  made  at  the  letter  Q,  which  was,  however,  correctly  given  the  second
time.  All  the  other  letters  were  smartly  reproduced  without  the  slightest
hesitation.  On  other  occasions,  and  once  or  twice  when  Mr.  P.  was  present,
Morse  signals  were  in  the  same  way  struck  out  by  violent  blows  on  the  table,
even  after  the  legs  of  the  older  sitters  had  been  stretched  across  under  the
table  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  any  kicking  by  the  children.  But  the
principal  guarantee  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomenon  was  doubtless
the  fact  that  the  blows  imitated  Morse  signals,  the  more  so  that  Mr.  X.
found,  when  he  tried  alone,  that,  although  he  knew  telegraphy  well,  he
could  not  kick  out  the  signals  with  his  feet.

I  may  say  that,  in  spite  of  the  many  little  proofs  we  had  obtained  of  the
genuineness  of  our  phenomena,  my  attitude  and  that  of  Mr.  Davis  towards
each  repetition  of  the  manifestations  was  always  one  of  watchful  suspicion.
Protests  were  often  made  by  the  influences  at  work  ;  and  it  was  affirmed  that
we  hindered  their  action  by  our  persistent  doubts.  One  Sunday  evening,  on
our  sitting  down  to  the  accustomed  seance, raps  came  on  the  table  immediately ;
and  I  profited  by  them  to  ask  if  our  invisible  guest  would  choose  the  chapter
in  the  New  Testament,  which  was  always  read  on  those  occasions.  The  raps
answered  "  Yes,"  and  asked  for  the  alphabet,  whereupon  Mr.  Davis  wrote
the  letters  on  a  slate,  and  ran  over  them,  pencil  in  hand,  while  he  carefully  kept
them  out  of  view  of  the  other  sitters.  Raps  came  at  certain  letters  ;  but  they
made  no  sense,  so  that  he  passed  the  slate  to  me,  asking  me  to  try  in  my
turn.  I  held  the  slate  close  to  my  face  in  such  a  manner  as  to  allow  nobody
to  see  it  but  myself,  and  at  the  beginning  made  a  pause  with  the  pencil  at


180


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  first  four  or  five  letters  ;  but,  soon  recollecting  that  anyone  watching  me
might  count  the  movements  of  the  pencil  and.  so  be  aware  of  the  letter  to
which  I  was  pointing,  I  changed  to  a  continuous  movement,  and  thus  raps
came  at  M,  A,  R,  and  Q.  It  was  evidently  Mark;  and  the  sixth  chapter  and
fifth  verse  being  further  indicated,  we  found  on  opening  the  Bible  :  "And  He
could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  save  that  He  laid  His  hands  upon  a  few  sick
folk,  and  healed  them."  The  sixth  verse  continues:  "And  He  marvelled
because  of  their  unbelief."  Another  chapter  was  also  similarly  chosen,  in
which  there  was  an  example  of  the  power  of  faith  ;  but  so  many  chapters
contain  such  examples  that  we  cannot  prove  this  to  be  anything  more  than  a
coincidence.  As  none  of  us  are  in  the  habit  of  committing  chapter  and  verse
to  memory,  it  was  not  at  all  likely  we  should  be  able  to  point  out  any  one
passage  ;  and,  indeed,  previous  knowledge  of  the  whereabouts  of  the  above
verses  was  denied  by  all.  The  letters  obtained  by  Mr.  Davis  were  close  to
those  obtained  by  me.

After  the  trying  hot  season  of  1838-9  the  first  thing  that  returned  to  us
in  joyous  manifestations  was  the  raps  writh  all  their  old  individuality.

Other  Sounds.

A  peculiar  whistling  sound  was  heard  by  some — on  one  occasion  coming
from  behind  the  curtains  drawn  before  the  verandah  door,  and  on  another,
by  Mrs.  Z.  in  the  garden  path  leading  down  to  the  gate,  where  she  had  been
seeing  some  friends  out.  I  mention  this  as  it  seems  to  me  to  be  rather
frequent  in  physical  manifestations.  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  heard  it
myself.  The  only  other  objective  phenomenon  of  the  kind  worth  recording
is  that  of  a  note  sounded  in  fulfilment  of  a  promise  on  a  closed  piano,  while
we  were  sitting  at  tea  in  the  adjoining  room.  This  was  heard  by  Mrs.  Davis
and  myself,  we  being  both  favourably  placed  to  catch  the  sound.  The  note
was  a  faint  one,  but  quite  audible  enough  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to  its  nature
or  the  direction  whence  it  came.  At  the  time  all  the  members  of  the
household  were  assembled  round  the  table  ;  and  the  small  adjoining  room
in  which  the  piano  stood  was  lighted,  and  was  wholly  visible  with  all  its
contents — at  least  to  Mrs.  Davis.

Direct  Writing.

But  the  most  striking  phase  of  our  phenomena  was  the  rapid  develop-
ment in  the  two  girls  of  the  direct  from  the  automatic  writing.  The  latter
came  almost  immediately  after  the  first  successful  sitting,  and  the  former,
indeed,  appeared  about  the  same  time  on  the  walls  and  in  closed  books,  but
not  so  as  to  fall  under  our  direct  observation.  It  was  at  a  seance,  held  on
September  11th,  1888,  Mr.  Davis  and  his  family  being  alone  present,  that  a
first  mark  was  obtained  on  a  slate  held  a  la  mode  de  Ulade  in  the  shade  of  a
table.  On  September  16th,  I  being  also  present,  several  detached  words
were  written  in  the  same  manner  ;  and  on  the  23rd  of  the  same  month  our
seance  was  an  extraordinary  success.  O,  who  was  seated  next  to  her  father,
held  a  slate  on  which  pencil  dust  had  been  scraped  ;  and  it  was  hardly  placed
in  position  by  her  when  it  was  pushed  out  by  an  apparently  external  force,
and  showed  on  its  surface  a  line  stretching  right  across  it.  This  was  done
rapidly  time  after  time  ;  and  on  my  objecting  that  possibly  the  line  was
caused  by  drawing  the  slate  against  the  angle  of  the  table,  it  was  thencefor-


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


181


ward  lowered  on  being  taken  out  so  as  to  avoid  all  contact,  and  with  exactly
the  same  result.  Meanwhile  A.,  seated  at  my  right  hand,  held  a  slate
pencil,  as  if  for  automatic  writing,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  there  was
constantly  a  distance  of  two  or  three  millimetres  between  the  point  of  the
pencil  and  the  surface  of  the  slate.  The  movement  of  the  point  was  as
imperceptible  as  that  of  the  minute  hand  of  a  clock  ;  and  thus  were  appar-
ently precipitated  on  to  the  slate,  and  under  my  own  eyes,  letters  and
words,  which  not  only  were  far  superior  in  execution  to  the  child's  usual
hand,  but  would  do  honour  to  a  practised  writing  master.  C. ,  and  more
especially  A.,  soon  began  to  obtain  direct  writing,  either  by  holding  the
slate  alone,  or  with  other  persons,  in  whole  sentences,  written  apparently
with  fine  pencil  dust,  which  was  at  first  preferred  as  being  easier  to  manage  !
Afterwards  minute  pieces  of  pencil  were  used  ;  but  both  with  these  and  the
pencil  dust  the  writing  was  effected  silently,  and  very  often  away  from  the
pencil  itself.  If,  as  further  experiments  seem  to  show,  the  phenomenon
was  a  genuine  one,  the  words  found  upon  the  slates  must  have  been  due  to
some  unknown  process  of  precipitation.  The  influences  themselves  asserted
that  materialised  hands  were  formed  for  the  purpose,  though  that,  of  course,
it  is  more  difficult  to  admit.  With  somewhat  characteristic  unseasonableness
the  writing  sometimes  came  at  the  back  of  slates  lying  on  the  table  while
Mrs.  Davis  was  superintending  the  children's  lessons,  and  in  this  case  no
pencil  seems  to  have  been  used.

When  the  power  had  thus  reached  sufficient  intensity,  some  more
•conclusive  tests  were  tried.  On  one  occasion  some  12  or  14  pieces  of
pencil  were  placed  on  the  slate  ;  and,  on  holding  it  under  the  table,  writings
were  done  in  every  possible  direction,  corresponding  more  or  less  in  number
with  the  pieces  of  pencil  on  the  slate — and  this  in  a  time  far  too  brief  to  allow
o{  any  fraudulent  manipulation  of  the  slate  by  the  child  herself.  On  another
occasion  I  laid  a  clean  slate  in  the  centre  of  the  table,  placed  with  my  own
hand  a  minute  piece  of  pencil  on  its  upper  surface,  and  covered  it  with
another  slate,  which  was  also  first  seen  to  be  clean.  Then  all  the  persons
present,  including  the  little  medium  A.,  placed  the  tips  of  their  fingers  on
the  upper  slate,  which  began  at  once  to  slide  backward  and  forward  on  the
lower  one,  but  never  so  much  as  to  open  them  for  more  than  an  inch  or  so.
As  we  were  sitting  in  fall  lampdight  with  all  our  attention  concentrated  on
the  slates,  it  was  impossible  that  anyone  should  have  written  without  being
immediately  detected,  yet  on  the  urjper  surface  of  the  lower  slate  near
A.'s  fingers  there  came  writing,  which  "was  repeated  several  times.
Another  and  still  stronger  test  was  a  reproduction  by  A.  and  myself
•alone  of  an  experiment  I  had  read  of  in  Zollner's  work.  I  put  a  small  piece
of  pencil  in  the  middle  of  the  table  ;  then,  taking  a  couple  of  clean  slates,  I
placed  one  of  them  over  the  pencil,  and,  with  the  little  girl,  held  the  other  flat
against  the  under  surface  of  the  table,  as  nearly  as  possible  under  the  ivpper
slate.  In  this  position  writing  came  at  my  request  on  that  surface  of  the
lower  slate  which  was  pressed  against  the  table  !  No  previous  warning  was
given  that  the  experiment — a  novel  one  to  the  child — was  about  to  be  tried  ;
and  on  the  occasion  I  took  care  that  it  should  exclude  all  possibilities  of
conscious  or  unconscious  fraud.

After  the  hot  season  the  direct  writing  returned,  but  was  never  sufficiently


182


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


powerful  to  allow  of  rigorous  tests.  It  may  be  added  that  both  this  and  the
automatic  writing  were  often  as  well  individualised  as  were  the  raps.

Apparent  Matep>.ialisation  of  Hands  and  Feet.

Touches  were  sometimes  felt  by  the  more  sensitive,  Avhen  at  the  sittings
everybody's  hands  were  upon  the  table  ;  and  the  characteristic  cold  breeze
which  usually  precedes  physical  phenomena  was  frequently  perceived  by  all
of  us.  One  evening  at  a  dark  seance  in  the  lower  house,  while  I  held  A.'s
right  hand  under  my  left,  the  rest  of  the  sitters  being  away  from  us  on  the
other  sides  of  the  table,  I  felt  small  fingers,  said  to  be  those  of  a  near  relative,
stroking  the  back  of  my  hand.  I  at  once  inquired  if  Mr.  Davis  held  A.'s
other  hand  in  his,  and  he  replied  affirmatively.  C,  whose  hand  joined
mine  on  the  right,  was  in  her  accustomed  place  just  opposite  me  ;  and  the
fingers  felt  seemed,  from  their  position,  to  belong  to  a  person  standing  on
my  left  side.  Besides  this,  the  hand  that  caressed  mine  was  too  small  to
belong  to  any  of  the  adults  present,  though  it  might  well  have  been  that  of
the  influence  whose  name  was  given.

On  a  previous  occasion  on  the  evening  of  September  6th,  1888,  before  the
family  had  moved,  we  had  received  what  seemed  to  us  an  extremely  good
proof  of  the  reality  of  temporarily  formed  hands  and  feet — or,  at  least,  of
simulacra  of  them.  Mr.  Davis,  the  two  girls,  and  I  were  seated,  each  on  one
side  of  a  small  square  table,  in  full  lamp-light.  We  had  been  obtaining
specimens  of  direct  writing,  and  had  noticed  that  in  the  pencil  dust  strewn
on  the  slate  there  were  impressions  of  fingers  that  were,  some  larger,  and
others  smaller  than  those  of  the  little  medium.  We  therefore  had  in  the
flour  box  ;  and  I  heaped  flour  on  one  of  the  slates,  and  smoothed  it
carefully  over.  Mr.  Davis  then  obliged  his  daughter,  C,  to  hold  both  her
hands  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and,  bidding  her  sit  perfectly  still,  placed
the  slate  upon  her  knees.  To  prevent  the  thwarting  action  of  too  expectant
attention  I  continued  the  reading  of  an  American  humourist,  without  much
success,  however,  in  interesting  either  myself  or  the  hearers  in  the  contents
of  the  book.  Nevertheless,  after  an  interval  we  were  told  to  examine  the
slate  ;  and,  on  Mr.  Davis's  so  doing,  we  found  that  it  contained  impressions
of  fingers.  The  flour  was  smoothed  over  again  ;  C.  resumed  her  previous
position,  and  Mr.  Davis  again  placed  the  slate  on  her  lap.  We  begged  that,  if
possible,  the  impression  of  a  foot  might  be  given  as  a  more  crucial  test  ;  and,
after  waiting  for  another  short  interval,  we  obtained  our  desire.  When  Mr.
Davis  brought  the  slate  into  the  light,  we  all  observed  on  it  the  delicate  tracing
of  a  naked,  baby  foot,  such  as  would  have  been  caused  by  lightly  pressing  it
against  the  flour.  There  was  also  the  mark  of  a  large  human  finger  sinking
more  deeply  into  the  flour.  Both  impressions  were  perfect  in  their  kind.
Now,  none  but  the  four  persons  mentioned  were  present  in  the  room  at  the
time.  All  our  hands  were,  as  usual,  on  the  table.  The  children's  feet,
encased  in  laced  boots,  were  many  sizes  larger  than  the  foot  that  caused  the
impression  ;  and  from  first  to  last  neither  of  the  girls  had  the  slightest  chance
of  tampering  with  the  slate.  In  automatic  writing  the  impression  was  tri-
umphantly claimed  as  that  of  the  foot  of  a  little  relative  of  the  D.'s  who
had  passed  away  in  early  infancy.  Mrs.  Davis  and  Mrs.  Z.,  who  had  been
absent  from  the  room  during  the  evening,  and  could  not,  therefore,  be


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


183


supposed  to  be  under  the  influence  of  any  collective  hallucination  induced  by
the  sitting,  were  then  called  in  ;  and  they  saw  the  impression  as  distinctly  as
we  did.

Clairvoyance.

I  do  not  know  whether  I  should  attribute  to  clairvoyance,  or  consider  as
an  objective  phenomenon,  a  beautiful,  transparent, bluish  light  which  was  one
evening  seen  by  all,  except  Mr.  Davis  himself,  playing  on  Lis  left  shoulder.  At
my  desire  it  moved  to  the  right  shoulder,  but  seemed  to  have  some  difficulty
in  staying  there.  Though  there  was  no  regular  sitting,  the  room  at  the  time
was  partially  darkened,  but  not  enough  to  hinder  us  from  plainly  distinguish-
ing the  features  of  the  persons  present.

The  two  elder  gixis,  and  sometimes  even  the  two  younger  ones,  seemed
to  see  spirit  forms  clairvoyantly.  Once  at  that  marvellous  tea-table  I
was  much  struck  at  the  simultaneousness  with  which  the  former  clapped  their
hands,  burst  into  hearty  laughter,  and  gave  an  identical  account  of  some
invisible  fun  which  was  going  on  at  the  expense  of  their  father.  Again,
when  we  were  standing  on  the  verandah  one  dark  night,  the  slow  measured
bark  of  a  dog,  chained  outside,  attracted  our  notice.  We  saw  it  was  gazing
upward  at  something  which  Mr.  Davis  and  I  could  not  perceive.  The  girls,
however,  declared  that  they  recognised  a  well-known  spirit  form, standing  in
front  of  the  dog  ;  and  the  bark  was,  indeed,  expressive  of  much  canine  bewil-
derment. At  a  later  date,  when  the  family  were  living  at  the  lower  house,
the  youngest  girl,  still  hardly  more  than  a  baby, called  her  father's  attention
to  somebody  standing  at  the  door.  "  Man,  man,"  she  said  ;  but  to  other  eyes
no  man  was  visible  ;  and  at  last,  ere  she  could  succeed  in  making  him  see
what  to  her  eyes  was  so  evident,  her  look  changed  to  one  of  intense
astonishment,  and  she  uttered  her  usual  "All  gone,"  which  in  her  imperfect
language  meant  that  something  had  disappeared.  Now,  her  very  generic
"  man"  was  at  one  time  applied  by  her  to  me  ;  and  it  is  just  possible  that  she
had  an  hallucination  of  my  person.  The  phantasm  of  a  dog,  which  was  seen
by  myself  very  indistinctly  passing  close  to  my  knee  at  the  same  moment
that  it  was  perceived  by  Mrs.  Z.  with  all  clearness,  merits  a  passing  mention.
On  another  occasion  it  was  simultaneously  seen  by  Mr.  Davis  and  C.  passing
along  a  passage.  Such  an  appearance,  if  impinged  on  us  by  an  outside
intelligence,  would  probably  have  nothing  more  than  symbolical  import,  and
might  mean  guardianship.  The  simultaneous  perception  of  the  apparition  by
two  persons  on  each  occasion,  and  the  similarity,  exact  so  far  as  could  be
judged,  of  the  two  separate  visions  are  certainly  interesting  points.

But  it  was  at  one  of  our  later  sittings,  held  on  April  11th,  1889,  that
we  obtained  the  best  phenomena  of  this  kind.  We  had  darkened  the  room
completely  ;  and  throughout  the  seance  a  diffused  light,  in  which  the  forms  of
the  persons  seated  round  the  table  were  just  distinguishable,  was  alternated
with  the  most  intense  darkness.  All  saw  this  light,  and  at  first  we  were  inclined
to  attribute  it  to  the  candle  burning  in  an  adjoining  room,  where  Mrs.  Davis,
was  putting  the  younger  children  to  bed.  She  shortly  joined  us,  however,
and,  though  all  lights  in  the  house  were  then  extinguished,  the  phenomenon
continued  at  what  seemed  regular  intervals  ;  and  soon  the  girls  declared  they
saw  spirit  forms,  which  succeeded  each  other  at  a  certain  place  at  the  table.
On  our  asking  C.  to  describe  them  she  did  so. Besides  other  descriptions


184


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


of  apparitions  less  remarkable  or  verifiable,  one  was  given  of  her  maternal
grandfather  which  was  considered  to  be  exact.  It  seemed,  indeed,  to  Mrs.
Davis  and  Mrs.  Z ,  who  were  the  only  ones  who  had  known  him  in  his  earth-
life,  to  be  complete.  Mr.  Davis,  however,  thought  he  had  heard  speak  of  a
sword  cut  which  his  father-in-law  had  received  on  his  forehead,  and  he  also
recollected  some  mention  of  a  cut  on  his  lip.  He,  therefore,  asked  for  some-
thing still  more  characteristic.  On  this,  Mrs.  Davis's  memory  reverted  to  a
mutilated  finger  of  the  decedent,  while  Mrs.  Z.'s  mind  was  a  blank,  as  she  was
unable  to  imagine  what  more  could  be  required.  The  girl  looked  again  for  a  few
moments,  and  then  affirmed  that  she  saw  on  the  face  of  the  apparition  a
white  line  crossing  the  nose  and  another  stretching  under  the  left  eye.  This
was  exact.  On  making  after  inquiries,  I  found  that  neither  of  the  ladies
had  any  recollection  of  having  mentioned  this  circumstance  either  to  Mr.
Davis  or  the  children  ;  and  they  believed  it  had  lain  latent  in  their  memory
for  many  years.  I  examined  the  photographs  of  Mr.  Z.  with  a  magnifying
glass,  but  could  not  find  in  them  the  slightest  trace  of  any  such  mark.
A  daguerreotype,  however,  which  I  saw  afterwards,  has  a  very  faint  indi-
cation of  a  mark  on  the  nose,  that  certainly  would  not  be  noticed  or
understood,  unless  very  special  attention  were  drawn  to  it,  and  an  explana-
tion were  given  of  wdiat  it  was.  The  seam  under  the  eye  across  the  cheek,
which  was  seen  in  its  exact  position,  is  given  nowhere.  As  to  the
sword  cut,  it  had  never  existed  except  in  Mr.  Davis's  imagination.

In  concluding  this  brief  account  of  our  phenomena, I  may  say  that  we  were
visited  by  no  Shakespeares  or  Byrons.  Perhaps  they  did  not  think  us
congenial.  The  influences  purporting  to  be  busy  around  us  were,  in  general,
such  as  would  have  felt  the  liveliest  interest  in  the  family  had  they  been
clothed  in  the  flesh.

I  have  laid  some  stress  on  the  individuality  of  the  manifestations.  People
in  this  life  are  commonly  recognised  by  their  acquaintances,  even  after  a  long
absence,  by  persistent  habits  in  voice,  bearing,  facial  expression  and  thought,
and  rarely  by  mere  legal  proofs  of  identity.  Differentiation  takes  place  in
our  most  trivial  habits  ;  and,  perhaps,  no  two  people  ring  a  bell, or  knock  at  a
door  in  exactly  the  same  way.  The  theory  of  a  continued  intelligent  existence,
ia  which  imperfect  means  are  only  occasionally  offered  for  communication  with
the  world  that  is  left  behind,  will  always  seem  plausible  to  those  who,  like
ourselves,  have  been  witnesses  to  the  marked  individuality  maintained  for
cacli  manifesting  influence  in  physical  phenomena,  especially  when,  as  in  our
case,  tricks  of  speech  and  pet  names  long  forgotten  are  reproduced  by
mediums  who  in  all  probability  never  heard  of  them.  The  differences  were
evolved  in  the  phenomena  themselves,  and  not  in  the  children,  as  would  be
the  case  if  it  were  a  question  of  multiplex  personality.  Something,  of  course,
was  drawn  from  them  ;  their  normal  personality  was  not  always  kept  in  the
background  ;  but  it  was  generally  combined  with  elements  foreign  to  their
way  of  thinking,  and  sometimes  with  particulars  which  were  unknown  to
them.  While  the  influences  A,  B,  C  were  manifesting  by  raps,  direct  writing
or  apparitions,  the  little  mediums,  as  I  said  in  the  beginning,  would  be,  to
all  outward  appearance,  in  their  usual  condition.  Indeed,  had  any  mental
disturbance  been  observed  in  them — even  if  it  were  only  temporary — we
should  have  thought  it  high  time  to  suspend  our  sittings.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


185


Our  supernormal  experience  also  led  us  to  place  much  more  reliance  on
spontaneous  messages  than  on  answers  elicited  by  questioning.  The  delicate
psychic  current  seemed  to  be  turned  aside  by  too  positive  a  frame  of  mind,
and  to  be  hindered,  even  in  the  physical  manifestations, by  distrust  or  expectant
attention.  We  soon  recognised  this  ;  and,  though  we  could  never  entirely  rid
ourselves  of  all  distrust,  we  may  claim  the  merit  of  finally  allowing  the  facts
to  prove  themselves,  and  of  interfering  with  them  no  more  than  was  necessary
for  satisfactory  observation.

The  matter  of  the  messages  was  often  trivial,  which  was  partially  owing
to  the  playful  tone  which  we  adopted  ourselves.  Had  our  own  remarks  been
taken  down  at  the  time,  I  am  afraid  they  would  have  been  rated  at  no  higher
value.  Often,  however,  messages  were  written  of  moral  and  even  religious
import,  which,  whatever  might  have  been  their  source,  had  simple  merits  of
their  own.  These,  of  course,  are  nearly  all  of  too  private  a  nature  to  be
further  alluded  to.

The  frequent  reference  made  to  distrust  of  the  children  merely  signifies
that,  as  they  were  the  instruments  for  phenomena  which  in  their  public
aspect  are  largely  mixed  with  fraud,  and  were  subject  to  influences  not  well
understood  by  us,  we  felt  it  to  be  our  duty  to  ourselves,  and  to  those  who
might  care  to  examine  the  account  of  our  experience,  to  guard  jealously
against  the  introduction  of  conscious  or  unconscious  trickery.  These  con-
siderations led  us  to  be  ever  watchful — even  witli  the  familiar  members  of  our
family  circle.  Speaking  after  great  intimacy,  I  will  add  that  the  character
both  of  C.  and  A.  is  excellent.  In  all  the  ordinary  relations  of  life
they  are  truthful  and  affectionate  children  ;  and  I  am  sure  that  they  respect
both  their  parents  far  too  much  to  make  them  the  victims  of  wilful  and
persistent  deception.

Alfred  Alexander.

1889.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Davis  corroborate  this  account  as  follows  : —

Additional  Remarks  on  "  Account  of  Physical  Phenomena  observed

in  a  Family  Circle."

In  his  paper  Professor  Alexander  gives  so  exhaustive  an  account  of  the
physical  phenomena  observed  in  our  family  circle  that  I  feel  I  have  very  little
to  add.  The  various  phenomena  therein  described  were  critically  observed
by  us  all  with  an  earnest  desire  to  arrive  at  the  truth,  and  I  have  no  doubt
that  our  extreme  caution  did  in  a  great  measure  weaken  the  manifestations  ;
at  the  same  time  those  actually  observed  with  such  care  obtained  a  higher
value  in  our  estimation  than  more  powerful  ones  loosely  observed  could  have
done.

The  paper  professedly  deals  only  with  these  physical  phenomena,  and  lays
but  little  stress  upon  the  intelligence  manifested  by  their  means  ;  yet,  as  it
touches  upon  the  subject  of  the  individuality  of  tilts,  raps,  and  writing —
automatic  and  direct— I  may, perhaps, be  permitted  to  refer  to  this  part  of  the
subject.  When  this  individuality  was  forced  upon  our  notice  I  made  out  a
list  of  the  various  sounds  which  were  given  us  as  the  distinctive  "  signals  "  of
the  communicating  intelligences.  Upon  one  of  these  "signals"  being  rapped
or  tilted  out,  the  name  corresponding  thereto  was  asked  for,  and,  by  means  of


18G


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


the  alphabet,  spelled  out  ;  and  for  a  long  time  it  was  only  upon  reference  to
our  list  that  we  were  able  to  verify  their  accuracy.  Among  scores  of  such
instances  no  error  was  ever  detected.  The  same  consistent  identity  was  also
noticeable  in  the  writings.  The  manifesting  intelligences,  A,  B,  C,  &c,
would  each  assume  a  distinctive  handwriting  ;  that  assumed  by  A  was  never
signed  by  other  than  A,  or  that  assumed  by  B,  by  other  than  B.

Before  the  advent  of  genuine  raps  I  had  to  check  a  rather  absurd  tendency
in  the  children  to  answer  questions  by  tapping  with  their  pencils  on  the
slates. This,  however,  was  literally  above  board.

In  reference  to  the  raps  mentioned  as  having  occurred  in  my  daughter's
bedroom  I  will  state  that  my  object  in  making  this  experiment  was  by  a
crucial  examination  to  satisfy  myself  that  those  heard  on  other  occasions
were  not  clue  to  conscious  or  unconscious  simulation.  After  A.  had  retired
for  the  night  and  was  asleep,1  and  without  mentioning  my  intention  to  anyone,
I  took  C.  into  the  room,  and  together  we  quietly  sat  on  the  bedside.  After
waiting, perhaps  five  minutes,  faint  rappings  were  heard  upon  the  floor.  I  then
removed  my  shoes — no  alteration.  C.  removed  hers — raps  much  louder,
so  loud  as  to  awaken  A.  This  led  me  to  infer  that  by  closer  bodily  contact
with  the  floor  better  conditions  were  obtained.  I,  therefore,  made  A.
assume  such  a  position  in  bed  that  she  was  entirely  isolated  from  possible
contact  with  the  bedstead — arms  outside  clothes,  and  whole  body  perfectly
quiet  and  under  my  direct  observation — while  C.  and  I  seated  ourselves
on  the  floor,  her  feet  resting  on  my  knees,  her  two  hands  secured  in  mine.
Under  these  conditions  thundering  blows,  causing  the  whole  room  to  vibrate,
were  obtained,  answering  questions  and  rapping  out  an  intelligent  message.
There  was  no  candle  or  lamp  alight  in  the  room ;  but  the  ventilating  aperture
over  the  door,  which  was  a  foot  deep  and  of  the  same  width  as  the  door,
admitted  sufficient  light  from  the  adjoining  sitting-room  to  render  everything
perfectly  visible.

I  can  further  corroborate  all  the  details  given  respecting  the  impression
of  the  little  foot  obtained  at  the  sitting  of  September  6th  ;  but  I  think  it
important  to  add  that  slight  tracings  of  the  skin  itself  were  perceptible  on
the  flour.

From  the  time  that  decided  intelligence  was  recognisable  in  connection
with  the  phenomena,  persistent  efforts  were  made  by  us  to  obtain  positive
proofs  of  identity,  with  but  meagre  success  ;  nevertheless,  tricks  of  speech,
mannerisms,  &c,  were  frequently  to  be  observed  in  the  communications,
both  in  automatic  and  direct  writing,  which  in  our  opinion  went  far  to  prove
that  the  writing  really  emanated  from  the  person  whose  signature  it  bore.

To  me,  who  have  a  practical  knowledge  of  telegraphy,  one  of  the  strongest
proofs  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of  the  raps  was  the  obtaining  by  their
means  on  the  floor  and  on  the  table  the  repetition  of  Morse  signals,  so
perfectly  produced  that  they  reflected  back  my  own  "sending."  Those  on
the  floor  came  in  the  dark,  whereas  those  on  the  table  were  dealt  in  heavy
blows  under  a  strong  light.  Now,  in  telegraphy,  whatever  the  instrument
used,  every  operator  has  a  decidedly  characteristic  style  of  working,  just  as

1  In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Davis  says  that  he  was  careful  to  satisfy  himself  on
this  point.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


187


every  writer  has  his  own  style  of  handwriting  ;  and  a  good  operator  at  one
end  of  a  line  to  which  he  is  accustomed  can  recognise  his  fellow  operator  at
the  distant  station  simply  by  his  "sending."  It  is,  indeed,  as  difficult  for
one  operator  to  imitate  another's  style,  as  it  is  for  one  writer  to  imitate
another's  handwriting.

Admitting  the  possibility  of  spirit  intercourse,  those  united  by  blood  or
by  intimate  friendship  would  from  our  experience  appear  to  have  greater
facility  in  communicating.  In  September,  1888,  Mrs.  Z.  had  the  following
experience.  Her  bedroom  opened  directly  into  the  dining-room,  in  which  a
lamp  was  kept  burning  all  night.  Her  bedroom  door,  in  common  with  others,
always  remained  open.  She  had  been  to  sleep,  and  between  two  and  three
o'clock  from  some  unexplained  cause  was  awakened.  While  lying  still  and
endeavouring  to  resume  her  sleep,  she  suddenly  saw  her  deceased  husband
come  in  at  the  door,  and  stand  at  her  bedside.  He  appeared  dressed  in  blue
serge — a  suit  he  used  to  wear — and  carrying  a  handkerchief  in  the  left  hand —
a  frequent  habit  of  his.  He  was  as  clearly  seen  as  if  in  broad  daylight.  His
right  hand  was  placed  in  Mrs.  Z.'s  ;  some  words  were  spoken,  to  which
she  replied,  and  the  apparition  disappeared.  Thereupon  she  was  much
agitated.  The  clock  struck  three  immediately  after  the  disappearance.  In
the  morning  the  words  spoken  had  escaped  her  memory  ;  but  C.  recalled
them  to  her  by  automatic  writing.  They  were,  "  I  tried  hard  to  make  you  see
me,  and  I  have  succeeded  at  last."  To  which  she  replied,  "  Oh,  Dick,  dear,
how  you  startled  me!"  which  Mrs.  Z.  recognised  to  be  the  exact  words.
This  and  the  dog  were  the  only  apparitions  ever  seen  by  her.  The  children
also  testified  to  the  great  distinctness  of  the  various  forms  seen  by  them
clairvoyantly.

A  very  near  relation  of  ours  living  in  England  had  for  some  time  been  in
a  precarious  state  of  health.  The  decay  caused  by  old  age  and  the  hardships
he  had  suffered  in  his  country's  service  might  well  lead  us  to  suppose  that  he
would  not  be  much  longer  spared  to  us.  We  did  not,  however,  apprehend  im-
mediate dissolution  ;  nevertheless,  he  was  described  in  direct  writing  as  being
half  on  the  other  side,  and  his  almost  immediate  death  was  foretold.  Character-
istically enough  our  leading  questions— for  we  were  then  new  to  the  subject
— elicited  a  premature  announcement  of  his  decease.  Yet,  in  fact,  he  did  pass
over  in  about  ten  weeks'  time  after  the  prediction  ;  and,  although  the  exact
date  of  his  death  was  not  given,  his  wife,  who  had  gone  before  him,  was  absent
at  the  time  from  our  sittings,  and  was  said  by  the  other  influences  to  be  en-
gaged elsewhere.  When  Mrs.  Z.  and  I  received  the  news,  we  communicated
it  to  my  wife  only,  and,  warned  by  former  experience,  refrained  from  again
suggesting  anything  to  guide  the  mediums,  but  waited  patiently  for  a  spon-
taneous test.  It  came.  Shortly  afterwards — a  fortnight  before  mail  news
confirmed  the  telegraphic  notice — we  obtained  an  alphabetic  message  by  the
striking  of  a  slate  against  the  table,  the  slate  being  held  by  C.  and  Professor

Alexander. The  words  were  "  F  is  rising,"  and  they  were  supposed  to

be  given  by  the  hitherto  absent  influence,  who  now  once  more  returned  to
our  circle.  Admitting  again  the  possibility  of  spirit  intercourse,  these
incidents  seem  to  be  highly  suggestive.

An  instructive  instance  of  how  mediums  might  be  influenced  by  outside
intelligence  is  the  following. Much  automatic  writing  over  the  signature  of


188


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


a  person  not  directly  connected  with  us  was  received.  Upon  coming  to  Eng-
land, it  was,  through  a  mediumistic  relative  of  this  person,  declared  that  she
had  endeavoured  to  influence,  and  communicate  with  our  circle  in  South
America,  but  did  not  know  if  she  had  succeeded. — T.  H.  Davis.

I  have  read  the  above  accounts  and  certify  to  their  truth.  —  S.  A.  Davis.
1889.

Professor  Alexander  sends  us  the  following  corroboration  from  the  "Mr.
X. "  of  the  above  narrative  : —

Mr.  X.,  having  been  requested  to  write  down  his  recollections  and  im-
pressions of  the  sittings  at  which  he  was  present,  has  complied  in  the  follow-
ing statement  addressed  to  me.  He  desires  to  remain  incognito  in  the
printed  accounts,  but  his  real  name  and  address  have  been  given  to  Mr.
Myers.

"Your  account  of  psychical  phenomena  obtained  in  Mr.  D.'s  circle
reached  me  on  17th  inst.  I  have  carefully  read  it  through,  and  do  not
hesitate  for  a  moment  to  confirm  every  statement  contained  in  it  respecting
facts  which  were  witnessed  at  times  when  I  was  present.

"  As  I  took  no  notes  whatever,  I  must  trust  to  my  memory  for  the  brief
account  of  my  own  observations  which  I  am  about  to  give  you.

"Raps.

"  One  evening  in  the  month  of  October,  1888,  after  we  had  been  sitting,
Mr.  D.,  Mrs.  D. ,  C.  D.,  A.  D.,  and  I  went  into  the  children's  bedroom.

C.  D.,  A.  D.,  and  I  were  seated  on  the  bed  (feet  on  the  bed),  and  Mr.  D.
on  a  chair  close  to  the  bed.  As  to  Mrs.  D.  's  whereabouts,  I  cannot  quite
remember  it.  The  room  was  in  total  darkness.  We  had  not  been  seated
many  minutes  when  we  heard  raps,  which  seemed  to  increase  in  strength  ;
and  at  times  such  blows  were  given  on  the  floor  as  to  make  one  think  that
someone  was  using  a  mallet.

"As  far  as  I  recollect,  this  experiment  was  tried  in  consequence  of  similar
results  having  been  obtained  on  a  previous  occasion,  when  I  was  not  present.
On  the  same  occasion  lights  were  seen  by  Mrs.  D.  and  the  children.  On
another  occasion,  later  on  in  the  same  year,  I  was  present  at  a  sitting  when
raps  were  reproduced  on  the  floor,  corresponding  to  silent  movements  of  Mr.

D.  's  finger,  the  room  being  in  total  darkness.  I  have  also  heard  the  Morse
alphabet  tapped  out  on  the  table  by  Mr.  D.,  and  the  same  signals  reproduced
in  different  parts  of  the  room.  Several  times  I  have  heard  raps  on  the  case-
ment of  the  window,  close  to  which  I  was  sitting,  no  one  else  being  near
enough  to  touch  it.

"Direct  Writing.

"I  have  seen  direct  writing  many  times  ;  but  on  one  occasion  in  particular,
at  the  close  of  our  sitting,  A.  D.  held  the  slate  under  the  table  with  from
20  to  25  small  pieces  of  pencil  on  it.  In  the  space  of  about  half  a  minute,  I
should  think,  she  drew  the  slate  out,  and  we  found  '  good-night '  written
more  or  less  the  same  number  of  times  as  there  were  pieces  of  pencil — and
all  in  different  handwritings.  A.  D.  was  holding  the  slate  in  one  hand,  her
other  hand  was  on  the  table  joined  to  those  of  the  other  sitters.


Alleged  Movements,  Sc.


189


"I  regret  that  I  cannot  give  you  a  more  detailed  account  of  my  experience.
All  that  I  have  stated  is  well  stamped  on  my  memory  ;  and  I  have  refrained
from  making  any  statement  that  I  am  not  quite  clear  about.

"  Rio  de  Janeiro.  "X."
"February  19th,  1890.

Group  A. Case  XL (S.  9.)

The  following  case  is  of  a  surprising  character,  but  it  comes  to  us  on  very
good  authority.  Mr.  C  ,  the  writer  of  the  nai'rative,  a  gentleman  engaged  in
important  business  (and  whose  name  may  be  given  to  inquirers),  is  in  every
way  an  excellent  witness.  His  account  of  the  facts,  although  written  in  its
present  form  some  six  years  after  the  occurrences,  was  compiled  from  notes
taken  at  the  time.  Mr.  C.  mentioned  the  facts  shortly  after  they  occurred  to
the  Rev.  Edward  White,  who  communicated  them  to  Professor  Barrett,  and
Professor  Barrett  then  interviewed  Mr.  C.  on  the  subject.  I  also  know  Mr.  C. ,
and  have  seen  Mrs.  C.  and  Mr.  H.  Mrs.  C.  gave  me  verbal  confirmation  of  her
husband's  account.  To  Mr.  H.  the  subject  is  still  so  painful  that  he  cannot
be  approached  upon  it.  I  may  add  that  this  is  almost  the  only  case  within
my  knowledge  where  stances  have  been  followed  by  any  injury  beyond  some
little  temporary  fatigue  and  excitement.  Mr.  H.  is  still  a  strong  and  robust
man,  and  exercises  his  profession  as  usual,  but  his  nerves  have  not  recovered
from  the  shock  which  these  strange  phenomena  inflicted  on  them.  Mr.  C.
had  lost  sight  of  Miss  A.  before  we  obtained  his  account.

Mr.  C.'s  Account.

Some  eight  years  ago  I  had  a  few  experimental  sittings  in  my  own  house
with  a  few  friends,  obtaining  the  usual  results,  table  turning,  lifting,  raps,
&c.  This  decided  me  upon  trying  to  thoroughly  investigate  the  matter,
and  I  had  a  number  of  seances  with  friends,  and  also  with  professional
mediums.  These  were  held  in  various  places  and  under  a  variety  of
conditions,  the  results  being  as  follow  : —

I  was  firmly  convinced  that  the  results  obtained  were  apart  from  any
direct  action  of  the  medium,  who  had  no  control  whatever  over  the  nature
of  the  manifestations,  or  the  electrical  or  other  conditions  required  to  pro-
duce them.

I  was  not,  however,  convinced  of  the  supernatural  character  of  the
manifestations,  and  felt  that  it  was  impossible  to  thoroughly  establish  my
conviction  as  to  the  action  of  the  medium  unless  I  obtained  similar  results
in  my  own  circle,  without  the  presence  of  any  professional  medium,  and
under  conditions  rendering  imposture  impossible.  Such  an  opportunity
offered  six  years  ago.  I  was  staying  at  Lowestoft  with  my  wife,  a  young
lady,  and  a  gentleman,  an  old  and  intimate  friend.  We  decided  upon  trying
what  results  we  could  obtain.

All  these,  especially  my  wife,  were  unbelievers,  who  ridiculed  the  whole
thing.

We  sat  in  a  drawing-room,  on  the  first  floor,  with  the  door  locked,  and
the  key  in  my  pocket.  We  turned  down  the  gas,  but  it  was  a  full  moon,
shining  full  upon  the  windows,  and  the  whole  room  was  light  enough  for  us  to


190


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


see  one  another,  and  in  fact  everything  that  was  around  and  in  the  room.
The  table  was  an  oblong,  heavy,  walnut  one.  I  will  call  my  friend  F.  and
the  young  lady  A.

First  evening. — The  usual  manifestations  took  place.  Table  moved  about
the  room  ;  a  match-box  was  brought  from  the  other  end  of  the  room.
Communication  was  held  by  raps,  I  calling  out  the  alphabet,  and  many
questions  answered.  F.  was  declared  to  be  a  medium,  other  mediums
declared  doubtful.  The  only  message  given,  except  in  reply  to  questions
put,  was,  "  C,  I'm  in  love  !  "

Second  evening. — The  above  manifestations  were  repeated,  but  answers
fuller  and  more  coherent.  Lights  were  visible  floating  about  the  room,
especially  over  the  heads  of  my  wife  and  F.  F.'s  name  was  spelt,  my  Avife's
name  was  spelt,  and  she  was  declared  to  be  a  medium.  F.  complained
much  of  being  touched,  his  hair  pulled,  clothes  dragged,  &c,  and  during  the
whole  of  our  stances  this  was  constantly  the  case.  He  said  he  felt  "cold
hands  on  him."  Incidentally  I  may  observe  that  during  all  these  mani-
festations and  afterwards,  except  Avhen  our  circle  was  forcibly  broken,  we
never  ceased  to  hold  hands  tightly,  not  merely  lay  them  on  the  table,  as  is
often  the  case.

A.  was  touched  on  the  face  and  hands.  F.  asks  for  a  book  to  be  brought,
which  was  instantly  done,  one  from  another  part  of  the  room  being  thrown
on  to  the  table  before  him.  I  ask  for  further  proof.  F.'s  chair  is  suddenly
dragged  from  under  him,  his  foot  laid  hold  of,  and  he  is  thrown  down  on  the
floor,  still  holding  my  wife's  hand,  but  without  the  slightest  noise  or  injury.
On  turning  up  the  gas  Ave  find  him  in  a  trance,  the  book  balanced  in  an
impossible  position  (so  far  as  gravitation  goes)  upon  his  knee.  His  watch
and  a  ring  (which  latter  was  on  a  finger  of  the  hand  my  Avife  still  held)  Avere
on  a  sofa  at  the  other  end  of  the  room,  a  large  one  ;  a  small  key  fastened
upon  the  SAvivel  of  his  watch  chain  had  disajDpeared.  After  a  few  minutes
he  recovered,  I  having  lifted  him  on  to  a  sofa,  thought  he  had  been  asleep,
felt  cpiite  avcII,  and  was  unconscious  of  Avhat  had  taken  place,  or  that  he  had
been  on  the  floor.  When  Ave  sat  again  a  message  came,  "  I  love  F."  On
asking  Avho,  the  reply  Avas  "  Katie."  This  so  annoyed  him  that  we  discon-
tinued sitting.  Lights  Avere  frequently  appearing  all  through  the  evening,
and  a  broad  collar  of  flame  Avas  round  my  Avife's  neck  at  one  time.

Third  evening. — I  placed  a  paper  speaking  tube  on  the  table,  but  "they"
refused  to  use  it.  My  Avife  asks  for  a  book  ;  a  French  Avork  Avas  brought  to
her  from  under  a  pile  of  other  books  in  the  room.  She  is  a  very  fine  French
scholar.  She  asks  to  have  F.'s  watch  key,  lost  the  night  before,  returned.
It  Avas  at  once  thrown  on  to  the  table  before  her.  A.  is  touched  a  good  deal.
The  tube  is  floated  about  the  room,  and  then  thrown  down  on  the  table.
In  consequence  of  the  annoyances,  pinches,  &c,  F.  asks  to  sit  out.  He  goes
into  a  recess  in  a  bay  Avindow,  within  sight  of  us  all,  sitting  in  a  Avicker
chair,  which  creaks  loudly  at  the  slightest  motion,  and  smoking.  We  then
continue.  My  wife  is  violently  shaken  and  agitated  ;  a  figure  appears,  a
Avoman  in  dark  clothes,  gliding  gently  from  behind  me.  She  passes  A.,
takes  hold  of  F.'s  chair  (left  by  the  table),  moves  it  out  of  the  way,  and,
gliding  round  the  table,  approaches  my  wife,  Avho,  on  feeling  the  hands  of
the  figure  upon  her,  screams,  and  I  turn  up  the  gas. We  all  three  saw  the


Alleged  Movements,  &o.


191


figure  distinctly,  and  can  also  swear  that  F.  remained  in  the  chair  looking
out  of  the  window.  He  did  not  see  it  ;  a  rustling  noise  accompanied  its
progress.

F.  rejoined  the  circle.  By  my  request  he  asked  for  flowers  for  the
ladies.  Immediately  two  bunches  of  cut  hot-house  flowers,  double  stocks,
&c.  (it  being  October),  were  placed  in  front  of  them.

F.  sat  with  his  feet  round  the  legs  of  his  chair  to  prevent  its  being  drawn
away,  and  wore  Wellington  boots.  He  called  out,  "  They  are  taking  my  coat
off,"  was  thrown  down,  my  wife  holding  his  hand  tightly.  His  coat  was  off,
his  boots  were  on  a  sofa  10  yards  away,  his  handkerchief  tied  in  a  knot,  and
in  another  place.

We  sit  again  and  I  ask  for  something  from  home,  but  am  refused.  F.
asks  for  something  from  home,  becomes  violently  agitated,  is  thrown  into  a
trance,  and  a  photograph  of  a  young  lady  is  on  the  table  in  front  of  him.
My  wife  takes  it  up,  and  on  his  recovery,  which  took  some  15  minutes  or  so,
shows  it  him.  He  puts  it  into  his  pocket,  bursts  into  tears,  and  says,  "  I
would  not  have  had  that  happen  for  anything."

The  photo  was  the  only  copy  existing  of  a  portrait  of  a  young  lady  he  was
once  engaged  to.  It  was  in  an  album  in  a  drawer  with  two  locks  over  it  in
his  house  at  Bayswater.  On  our  return  to  town  it  had  disappeared,  and  his
wife,  being  quite  ignorant  of  our  having  had  seances,  told  us  that  at  that
very  hour  a  fearful  crash  occurred  in  his  bedroom,  and  brought  everyone  in
the  house  up  to  inquire  the  cause.

My  wife  asked  him  to  show  her  the  photo,  when,  to  his  dismay,  it  had
disappeared  from  his  pocket.  A  number  of  other  minor  manifestations
occurred  of  which  I  took  no  notice,  and  all  through  the  seances,  whenever
anything  happened,  F.  became  violently  agitated.  We  decided  not  to  sit
again,  but  he  was  so  upset  the  next  day  at  losing  the  photo,  that  my  wife
suggested  sitting  once  more  to  try  and  recover  it.

Fourth  evening. — My  head  was  violently  struck  as  if  by  a  sofa  pillow
thrown  or  some  soft  substance.  An  object  passed  over  our  hands  and  across
the  table,  feeling  soft  like  feathers.  F.  asks  for  fruit  and  flowers  ;  more
flowers  are  brought  and  aj^ples,  the  only  fruit  of  the  season,  which  we  had
not  in  the  house.  A.  asks  for  something  of  hers.  Her  pocket-book  is
brought  from  another  table.

My  wife  asks  for  something.  F.  is  thrown  down  instantly,  and  on  the
table  is  the  photo,  lost  the  night  before.

Instead  of  recovering  quickly,  F.  has  alternate  fits  of  unconsciousness
and  raving  delirium,  which  last  for  five  hours.  He  is  then  sensible,  but  very
weak.  The  next  day  he  begged  my  wife  to  destroy  the  photo,  which  they
burned  in  pur  presence. F.  had  a  mild  attack  of  brain  fever.

On  our  return  my  house  was  subject  to  noises,  knockings,  &c,  constantly,
and  is  still  at  times.  My  wife  has  seen  figures,  and  the  tricks  constantly
played  upon  her  were  most  annoying.

Often  I  have  seen  an  article  of  jewellery  disappear  as  soon  as  she  has
placed  it  upon  the  table,  and  be  found  afterwards  in  most  unaccountable
places.  We  were  touched,  sprinkled  with  water  in  the  night,  and  it  was
only  when  we  gave  up  the  entire  subject  that  the  annoyance  ceased.  Even


192


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


lately  a  singular  noise  has  followed  me  to  Bournemouth,  Hastings,  and  to  a
friend's  house  at  Camden  Town. F.'s  nervous  system  is  shattered.

During  these  seances  there  was  no  possibility  of  imposture,  and  the
people  concerned  were  all  thoroughly  reliable  and  incapable  of  it.  I  have
omitted  a  great  deal  of  the  detail  of  our  seances,  giving  you  merely  the
main  facts.

November  21th,  1876.

December  2nd,  1876.
In  a  subsecpient  letter  Mr.  C.  wrote  to  Professor  Barrett  : —
F.  is  thoroughly  reliable,  a  singularly  sensitive  man,  but  straightforward,
honest,  moral,  and  quite  incapable  of  trickery  or  deceit.  A.  is  a  timid  young
girl.  I  would  answer  for  both  of  them.  We  were  staying  in  apartments.
The  only  other  people  in  the  house  were  A.'s  father  and  mother  in
the  dining-rooms,  old  friends,  and  they  were  quite  ignorant  of  what  took
place  above.  I  myself  locked  the  door,  pocketing  the  kej",  on  each
occasion.

Not  the  least  remarkable  thing  is  the  extraordinary  influence  exerted  over
F.  by  both  my  wife  and  myself,  especially  the  former.  When  his  attacks
come  on  he  cannot  sleep  at  night,  and  the  only  cure  for  them  is  sleep.  If
he  lies  down  on  a  sofa,  it  is  sufficient  for  my  wife  to  sit  beside  him  to
send  him  to  sleep  at  once.

Probably  mesmerism  might  do  him  good.  It  would  not  do  for  you  to  see
him,  however.  For  five  years  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  has  not  been  men-
tioned to  him  ;  any  casual  allusion  to  it  by  a  stranger  even  causes  him
violent  agitation,  and  brings  on  these  attacks.

My  wife  also  has  often  told  me  on  going  home,  "You  were  talking  upon
the  forbidden  subject  at  such  an  hour  to-day,"  which  was  true,  although  she
could  have  no  means  of  knowing  except  by  her  nervous  sensations.

In  a  letter  in  Light,  January  20th,  1883,  Mr.  C.  again  mentions  some  of
these  facts.  And,  finally,  in  a  letter  to  myself  he  answers  some  further
questions.

April  25th,  1889.
Regarding  your  various  questions,  I  will  take  them  seriatim.

1.  F.  was  in  splendid  health  previous  to  our  seances  ;  he  had  spent  about
a  fortnight  with  us,  he  and  I  riding  together  daily,  and  had  not  the  least
symptom  of  approaching  illness.  He  was  perfectly  conscious  of  all  his
actions  at  the  time,  and  during  our  seances  conversed  in  the  usual  way.  He
expressed  surprise  at  the  results,  but  was  calm,  collected,  rather  jocular
during  the  first  two  evenings,  and  showed  no  sign  of  brain  excitement,
except  by  his  trances  and  bewilderment  for  a  minute  or  two  after  his  sudden
recovery  from  them.  The  theory  of  his  having  produced  the  phenomena,
except  possibly  as  an  unconscious  instrument,  is  in  my  opinion  quite
untenable.  1  had  then  known  him  intimately  for  10  years,  and  his  habits,
his  very  high  character,  honourable  and  chivalric  to  a  degree,  preclude
possibility  of  trickery,  nor  had  he  any  experience  which  could  qualify  him
for  such  performance.

2.  Conditions  as  to  light.  Our  gas  was  turned  low,  but  there  was
sufficient  light  for  us  to  see  distinctly  one  another  and  every  object  in  the


Alleged  Movements,  <i-e.


193


room.  In  addition  it  was  full  moon,  and  her  light  alone  streaming  in  through
two  windows  would  have  been  enough.  We  held  hands  firmly  throughout
the  seances.

3.  Our  seance  when  the  photo  came  took  place  about  10  to  11  p.m.  I
never  left  Mr.  F.  until  3  a.m.  By  afternoon  delivery  next  day  came
his  wife's  letter  describing  the  crash,  which  she  said  was  heard  next  door.
She  could  not  be  questioned  about  it,  as  she  knew  nothing  about  our  seances,
and  on  our  return  to  London  the  subject  was  tabooed  by  order  of  the
doctor,  the  slightest  allusion  to  it  exciting  F .  fearfully.

4.  I  never  heard  of  any  further  phenomena  occurring  to  Mrs.  F.

5.  On  our  return  home  my  wife  and  I  were  annoyed  constantly  in  various
ways.  Raps  and  noises  were  incessant.  Doors  thrown  open  again  and
again  when  carefully  closed,  and  in  some  instances  locked.  Our  servants
also  complained  of  the  same  annoyances  ;  sounds  as  of  a  drum  or  a  horn
close  to  us  in  the  night.  On  one  occasion,  in  bed  with  door  locked,  we  were
sprinkled  with  water  from  my  bath.  Various  small  articles  belonging  to  my
wife  disappeared,  and  were  found  afterwards  in  different  places,  in  one
instance  in  a  drawer  locked  previously.  We  were  touched  on  the  arm  by
invisible  hands.  When  we  avoided  all  reference  to  the  subject,  these  annoy-
ances gradually  ceased.

6.  The  only  clue  to  the  personality  of  the  figure  is,  that  previously  when
asked  with  whom  we  were  communicating  the  reply  was  "Katie."  Last  year
when  I  asked  the  same  question  in  Adelaide,  the  answer  was  "  Kate  Hope."
My  experiences  with  professional  mediums  were  much  of  the  same  character
throughout,  only  I  found  them  playing  tricks,  though  many  results  were
undoubtedly  beyond  their  control.

On  all  occasions,  both  at  seances  and  privately,  immediately  before  and
during  any  manifestation,  we  all  felt  a  sudden  chill,  like  either  a  wave  of
intensely  cold  air  passing,  or  a  rapid  decrease  of  temperature.  Also  a  current
of  electricity  appeared  to  pass  through  our  circle,  at  times  so  powerful  as  to
make  our  arms  quiver,  as  if  we  were  holding  the  handles  of  a  mild  battery.

It  will  be  observed  that  Mr.  C.  believes  Mr.  H.  to  have  been  in  normal
health  until  upset  by  the  seances.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  some
cerebral  trouble  may  have  been  already  impending,  of  which  Mr.  C.  saw  no
indication, — and  that  Mr.  H.  may  have  been  in  an  abnormal  state  during  the
seances,  and  have  performed  acts  of  which  he  was  not  fully  conscious.  This
view  is  pro  tauto  supported  by  the  very  fact  of  the  illness,  for  which  the
seances  seem  to  supply  no  adequate  cause.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  not
be  easy  to  explain  on  this  hypothesis  all  the  phenomena  which  Mr.  C,
records.

Group  A. Case  XII. (S.  10.)

The  communication  here  translated  was  sent  by  Dr.  X.  C.  Dariex  to
Professor  Richet,  who  has  discussed  the  phenomena  in  conversation  with
Dr.  Dariex,  and  has  forwarded  the  case  to  us  as  coming  from  trustworthy
observers.

Dr.  Dariex  has  allowed  me  to  see  the  original  of  the  Report  and  signatures.

0


194


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Dr.  Dakiex's  Account.

On  Friday,  the  30th  of  November,  having  some  friends  with  me,  one  of
whom  was  a  medical  man,  we  occupied  ourselves,  for  a  couple  of  hours  after
dinner,  with  some  experiments  in  table-tilting  in  my  study.  It  was  the  first
time  that  seances  of  this  nature  had  taken  place  in  my  rooms.  The  follow-
ing morning  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  when  my  servant,  an  honest  Bre-
tonne,  maintained  that  between  half -past  three  and  four  o'clock  a.m.  she  had
distinctly  heard  sounds  of  alternating  muffled  footsteps  and  little  raps  on  the
furniture,  proceeding  from  my  study,  which  was  next  the  room  in  which  she
slept.  I  imagined  that  she  had  localised  in  my  study  sounds  which  had
taken  place  above,  in  a  flat  identical  with  my  owrn,  and  only  occupied  at
night  by  M.D.,  a  lawyer,  and  his  wife.  Owing  to  the  persistence  with  which
my  servant  affirmed  that  the  noises  proceeded  from  my  study  and  from  no-
where else,  I  inquired  the  same  day  of  M.D.  whether  during  the  night,  after
three  o'clock,  anyone  had  been  walking  about  and  knocking  the  furniture  in
his  studj',  his  drawing-room,  or  his  dining-room.  He  replied  that  he  and
Madame  D.  had  retired  about  midnight,  and  that  nobody  could  have  been
walking  or  knocking  in  his  rooms  at  that  time.

In  spite  of  having  frecpiently  read  accounts  of  similar  occurrences,  I  did
not  at  once  decide  that  the  house  was  haunted  (as  did  my  servant,  a  native
of  the  land  of  legends)  ;  but  supposed  this  to  be  a  case  of  hallucination,
although  the  hypothesis  did  not  satisfy  me.  In  fact,  why  should  this  girl,  who
had  previously  had  no  hallucinations,  experience  them  just  on  this  night
when  we  had  been  making  experiments  in  table-tilting — a  science  of  which
she  had  never  heard,  and  which  could  not  have  influenced  her  imagination,
as  she  did  not  even  know  of  its  existence  ?  Moreover,  when  I  asked  her
whether  the  sound  of  the  carriages  interfered  with  what  she  believed  she
heard,  she  replied  in  the  affirmative.  This  does  not  appear  to  me  to  support
the  hypothesis  of  hallucination,  which  would  not  have  been  temporarily
destroyed  by  the  rumbling  of  the  carriages  passing  from  time  to  time.
It  points  rather  to  the  existence  of  a  real  noise,  outside  the  person  who
perceived  it.

The  phenomena  were  again  produced  on  three  occasions  :  on  the  14th  and
21st  of  December,  and  on  the  4th  of  January, — always  on  a  Friday,  and
always  between  half-past  three  and  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  lasting
for  about  half  an  hour.

The  table,  when  consulted,  invariably  said  that  the  sounds  were  produced
by  Madame  D.,  who  had  been  dead  several  months.  In  spite  of  my  doubts
as  to  the  existence  of  spirits,  and  consecpiently  as  to  the  reality  of  their  com-
munications, I  asked  Madame  D. ,  one  evening  when  her  spirit  was  said  to  be
present,  to  produce  something  more  tangible  than  the  sounds  which  only  the
servant  could  hear,  my  room  being  too  far  removed  from  where  they  took
place.  I  begged  her  to  turn  over  a  chair.  For  some  time  I  had  had  a  great
desire  to  witness  this  phenomenon,  and  for  eight  or  ten  days  had  every
evening  placed  a  chair  in  my  study,  so  inclined  that  the  slightest  effort  would
make  it  fall.  It  is  important  to  notice  this  desire  :  it  shows  that,  contrary
to  my  wish,  the  act  that  I  had  asked  for  was  not  yet  produced.  Madame  D.
promised  to  accede  to  my  request  and  approved  my  plan  of  arranging  a  chair
in  such  a  way  as  to  facilitate  its  overthrow. It  was  on  a  Friday,  the  11th  of


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


195


January,  1889,  that  I  made  my  request.  As  the  sounds  had  hitherto  always
taken  place  during  the  night  of  Friday,  I  asked  Madame  D.  whether  she
could  satisfy  my  curiosity  that  same  night.  She  replied  that  she  could.  The
following  morning  all  the  chairs  were  upright,  as  I  had  placed  them  the
evening  before,  including  the  one  whose  stability  I  had  so  greatly  decreased.
From  this  I  concluded,  a  little  hastily,  that  nothing  would  happen,  and  that
the  communication  of  the  preceding  evening  was  only  the  reflection  of  my  own
thought.  •  I  also  made  up  my  mind  not  to  ask  my  table  anything  more.  But
to  satisfy  my  conscience,  that  evening  1  again  placed  a  chair  in  the  manner  I
was  accustomed  to  do.  What  was  my  surprise  the  f ollowing  morning,  to  find
the  chair  upon  which  I  had  been  sitting  drawing  till  11  o'clock  at  night,  thrown
over  on  its  left  side  in  front  of  my  bookshelves  !  That  which  I  had  prepared
by  leaning  one  of  its  bars  against  the  key  of  the  drawers  of  my  writing-table,
was  just  as  I  had  left  it.  That  same  night,  between  half-past  two  and  three
o'clock,  besides  the  falling  of  the  chair,  which  had  greatly  alarmed  her,  my
servant  had  heard  little  raps  on  the  furniture,  raps  which  this  time  were  not
alternated  with  muffled  footsteps.  This  took  place  in  the  night  between
Saturday  the  12th  and  Sunday  the  13th  of  January.  Four  days  later,  during
the  night  of  the  16th,  the  prepared  chair  in  its  turn  was  overthrown.  On
this  occasion  the  servant  heard  nothing.  During  the  night  of  Saturday,  the
19th  of  January,  no  chair  was  thrown  down,  but  between  half-past  two  and
three  my  servant  heard  the  usual  raps  alternating  with  muffled  footsteps.
On  the  21st  of  January,  on  coming  home  a  little  before  midnight,  I
experienced  some  trouble  in  opening  the  door  of  my  room,  which  I  had  care-
fully locked  before  going  out :  a  chair  overturned  against  the  door  proved  to
be  the  obstacle.  On  the  23rd  of  January,  before  going  out  at  eight  o'clock,
I  locked  my  study,  and  sealed  all  the  entrances  :  on  returning  at  ten
minutes  past  twelve,  I  found  the  seals  in  perfect  condition,  and  in  this  room,
which  nobody  could  have  entered,  a  chair  bad  fallen  on  its  back.  The
servant  had  not  heard  the  noise  of  the  fall  ;  she  was  asleep  when  it  was
produced  ;  but  the  same  night,  a  little  after  three  o'clock,  she  heard  a  noise
of  another  s  ort.  Three  hard  strokes  had  been  violently  given  on  the  panel
of  the  door  leading  to  the  drawing-room  :  the  first,  being  isolated  and  the
least  violent,  had  not  attracted  her  attention  ;  she  had  taken  it  for  an
ordinary  sound,  and  had  not  attempted  to  discover  its  cause  ;  the  two  others,
more  violent  and  in  succession,  had  frightened  her.  These  noises,  it
appeared,  resembled  those  which  1  was  able  to  make  the  next  day,  by
violently  rapping  on  the  panel  of  the  door,  with  the  lower  end  of  my  fingers
and  my  fist  well  closed.  Finally,  on  the  24th,  at  a  quarter  to  one,  in  S2)ite  of
my  room  being  locked  and  sealed  as  on  the  previous  night,  I  found  not  only
one  but  two  chairs  overthrown.  I  could  no  longer  doubt  the  reality  of  the
fact ;  it  was  evident  to  me  that  chairs  were  displaced  in  my  room  during  the
night,  by  a  mysterious  force.  I  say  mysterious,  because  the  series  of  experi-
ments which  I  had  been  able  to  make  with  the  assistance  of  two  mediums  of
my  acquaintance,  had  produced  contradictory  results,  and  had  not  satisfied
me  to  the  point  of  admitting  that  it  was  really  Madame  D.  wdio  thus  pro-
duced these  strange  phenomena  as  she  had  promised  me.  I  decided  to  verify
this  overthrowing  of  chairs  by  others  than  myself,  who  should  take  all  the
precautions  they  desired  to  satisfy  themselves  ;  but  before  inviting  them,

o  2


196


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


although  I  was  not  convinced  of  the  existence  of  spirits,  I  wished  to  ask
Madame  D.  whether  she  could  again  produce  the  phenomena  which  I  wished
to  have  investigated.  In  a  communication  which  took  place  on  the  25th  of
January,  she  assured  me  that  the  experiments  would  succeed, and  in  reply  to
my  question,  added,  that  without  being  certain,  she  hoped  to  produce  the
phenomena  after  a  delay  of  three  days.  The  investigations  commenced  on
the  26th  of  January,  and  succeeded  completely,  as  is  shown  in  the  report,
and  it  was  on  the  third  day,  to  their  great  astonishment,  that  the  investi-
gators found  two  chairs  overturned.  Indeed  they  had  been  confident  that
on  account  of  the  precautions  taken  (precautions  which  excluded  the
hypothesis  of  fraud)  nothing  would  take  place,  and  that  if  I  had  not  been
hallucinated,  I  had  been  duped.  On  the  4th  of  February,  in  the  morning,
two  chairs  were  again  found  overturned,  and  those  who  had  lent  me
their  assistance  declared  themselves  sufficiently  convinced  of  the  reality  of
the  fact.  I  wished  to  push  my  investigations  still  farther,  and  anxious  to  hear
or  even  to  see  something,  I  slept  for  three  weeks  in  the  room  where  all  this
had  taken  place.  I  heard  nothing,  I  saw  nothing  ;  everything  had  suddenly
ceased,  to  the  great  disappointment  of  myself,  and  the  great  satisfaction  of
my  servant,  who  was  glad  no  longer  to  hear  the  noises  which  so  frightened
her.

Report  of  the  Occurrences  at  Dr.  Dariex'.s
From  the  26th  of  January  to  the  4th  of  February,  1889.
The  undersigned  certify  to  the  accuracy  of  the  facts  which  follow  : —
Dr.  Barbillion,  M.D.  of  Paris,  formerly  medical  officer  in  the  hospitals,
10,  Quai  d'Orleans,  Paris.

Besombes,  Paul,  surveyor  of  bridges  and  highways,  7,  Rue  Boutarel,
Paris.

Dr.  Meneault,  Johan,  M.D.  of  Paris,  formerly  medical  officer  at  the
Marine  Hospital,  Berck-sur-Mer,  51,  Rue  Monge.

Morin,  Louis,  apothecary  of  the  first  class,  9,  Rue  du  Pont-Louis-
Philippe.

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris,  having  believed  himself  able  to
state  that  strange  phenomena  occurred  in  his  study  during  the  night,  begged
the  persons  mentioned  above  to  verify  the  observations  he  had  already  made,
as  to  the  existence  of  such  phenomena.  The  question,  according  to  Dr.
Dariex,  concerned  the  turning-over  of  certain  chairs  in  his  study,  which  had
taken  place  on  several  occasions,  when  precautions  had  been  taken  to  exclude
trickery.  It  appeared  impossible  that  any  living  being  should  have  been  able
to  enter  the  room,  the  doors  and  windows  having  been  carefully  closed  and
sealed.  For  10  days,  from  the  26th  of  January  to  the  4th  of  February,  the
undersigned  had  met  regularly  at  Dr.  Dariex's,  in  the  evening  at  eight  o'clock,
and  in  the  morning  at  half -past  eight ;  sometimes  all  were  present,  sometimes
one  or  more  failed.  Dr.  Barbillion  has  not  missed  a  single  meeting,  and  has
been  able  to  be  present  at  the  whole  series.  Dr.  Dariex's  study  is  on  the
first  floor  of  No.  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  at  the  corner  of  that  steet  and  of  the  Rue
St.  Louis-en-Usle.  It  is  lighted  by  two  windows  which  look  on  to  the  street,
and  communicates  with  the  other  rooms  of  the  flat  by  two  doors  :  one  opening
inwards  to  the  drawing-room,  the  other  communicating  with  the  dining-room


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


197


and  opening  inwards  to  the  study.  The  accompanying  plan  explains  the
arrangement.  The  furniture  consists  of  a  bookcase,  a  writing-table,  an
ordinary  table,  an  armchair,  and  three  other  chairs.  There  is  no  cupboard  in
the  room.  After  having  carefully  examined  the  windows  and  doors,  as  well
as  the  different  pieces  of  furniture,  the  walls  and  the  floor,  the  undersigned
were  of  opinion  that  nothing  could  bring  about  the  overthrow  or  displacement
of  the  furniture  or  other  objects,  by  means  of  mechanism,  strings,  &c,  or  by
any  other  means  ;  that  it  was  equally  impossible  for  anyone  to  conceal  him-
self in  the  room,  or  to  get  in  after  the  closing  and  sealing  of  windows  and
doors.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  following  precautions  were  scrupulously
taken  every  evening.  The  window  shutters  were  closed  ;  the  windows  shut
and  seals  placed  on  the  bars  near  the  latch.  The  door  of  communication
with  the  drawing-room  locked  on  the  study  side.  The  key  was  kept  in  the
lock  by  means  of  a  ribbon  sealed  at  both  ends  ;  seals  were  placed  on  the
door,  and  a  band  was  fixed  by  one  end  to  the  door  itself  and  by  the  other  to
the  adjoining  wall.  During  the  whole  time  of  our  investigations,  this  door
remained  firmly  closed.  The  only  remaining  opening  was  the  door  between
the  study  and  the  dining-room.  The  chairs  in  the  study  then  being  placed
according  to  an  arranged  plan,  but  not  always  exactly  in  the  same  place,  we
left  the  room,  Dr.  Dariex  the  first,  and  each  one  giving  a  last  look  from  the
dining-room  to  make  sure  that  the  chairs  were  upright  and  in  position  ;  then
Dr.  Barbillion  locked  the  door,  and  took  the  key.  Seals  were  placed,  and  a
band  fastened  to  the  keyhole  ;  seven  or  eight  places  were  impressed  with  M.
Morin's  seal,  who  kept  it,  and  carried  it  away  with  him.  The  form  and
position  of  the  seals  were  carefully  noted.  These  precautions  having  been
regularly  and  rigorously  taken  every  evening  at  eight  o'clock,  we  met  again
the  next  morning  at  half-past  eight  to  remove  the  seals.  This  was  always
preceded  by  a  minute  examination  of  both  them  and  the  lock.

During  the  10  days  of  investigation,  this  is  what  has  been  verified.

1.  Night  of  Saturday,  26th  Jan.  ...  Nothing.

2.  ,, Sunday,  27th ,, ...  ,,

3.  ,, Monday,  28th ,, ...  Two  chairs  are overturned;  one


placed  near  the  bookcase  has
fallen  on  its  left  side  ;  the  other
placed  near  the  sofa,  is  turned
on  its  back  in  the  direction  of
the  window.


4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.


Tuesday,  29th


Wednesday,  30th ,
Thursday,  31st  ,
Friday,  1st  Feb.
Saturday,  2nd  ,,
Sunday,  3rd  ,,


Nothing.


Monday,  4th


Two  chairs  are  overturned ;  one
placed  near  to  the  table  is  on  its
left  side,  towards  the  sofa,  the
other  placed  near  the  armchair,
has  fallen  on  its  back  in  the
direction  of  the  window.


198


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


In  the  presence  of  these  facts  ;  of  the  precautions  taken  by  us.  to  exclude
all  trickery  ;  of  the  care  that  we  took  in  placing  the  seals,  and  in  examining
■  the  same,  we  are  convinced  :  — •

1.  That  no  one  could  have  remained  in  the  room  after  we  had  left  it.

2.  That  no  one  could  have  entered  it  during  the  night.
And  we  are  led  to  conclude  : —

That  during  the  night,  in  the  interval  of  10  days,  in  the  centre  of  a  com-
pletely closed  room,  into  which  no  one  could  have  entered,  chairs  were  over-
turned contrary  to  our  expectation  and  prevision.  That  this  manifestation  of
an  apparently  mysterious  force,  being  produced  outside  ordinary  conditions,
does  not  seem  referable  to  an  ordinary  explanation  ;  and  without  wishing,
to  prejudicate  the  intimate  nature  of  this  force,  or  to  draw  positive  con-
clusions, we  are  inclined  to  consider  the  phenomena  to  be  of  a  psychical
order,  analogous  to  those  which  have  been  described  and  verified  by  a  certain
number  of  investigators.

With  this  well-observed  and  well-attested  case  I  must  close  the  first
instalment  of  this  Report.  Some  further  narratives,  and  some  comments,
on  the  evidence  in  general,  are  reserved  for  a  subsequent  paper.  In  the
meantime  it  is  earnestly  to  be  hoped  that  the  publication  of  these  cases
may  lead  to  fresh  experiment.  It  must  always  be  remembered  that
the  evidence  thus  far  obtained  on  all  these  topics  is  the  outcome  of
scattered,  desultory  experiments,  often  undertaken  with  no  scientific-
purpose,  and  recorded  with  insufficient  care.  What  may  be  achieved
when  the  systematic  attention  of  careful  observers  is  directed  to  these,
questions,  it  is  at  present  impossible  to  say.


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.  199


II.

EXPERIMENTS IN  CLAIRVOYANCE.
By  Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  of  Kalmar,  Swedex.

The  experiments  to  be  recorded  below  do  not  claim  to  be  con-
sidered strictly  scientific,  but  I  describe  them  simply  as  I  have  made
them,  in  the  hope  that  others  may  be  incited  to  carry  out  similar
attempts  in  a  more  systematic  and  scientific  manner  than  my  practical
occupations  have  given  me  time  for.  It  is  at  the  request  of  some
prominent  persons  in  this  and  other  countries  that  I  publish  my
observations  on  the  reality  and  nature  of  clairvoyance,  and  I  am
further  induced  to  do  so  by  the  publication  of  similar  experiments
made  by  others.

Before  relating  specific  instances  of  clairvoyance  I  should  like  to
lay  before  the  reader  some  general  observations  that  I  have  made.

In  the  first  place,  I  have  found  that,  unless  I  have  been  un-
usually fortunate  in  meeting  with  clairvoyants,  they  are  not  so  rare
as  is  generally  supposed.  On  the  contrary,  a  great  number  of  persons
capable  of  being  hypnotised  have  clairvoyant  faculties.  Hitherto  I
have  experimented  only  with  Swedes,  but  I  believe  there  is  as  little
difference  in  this  respect  between  different  nations  as  between  different
sexes,  ages,  and  constitutions.  My  youngest  clairvoyant  subject  was  a
girl  of  14  years  old,  small  and  immature,  my  oldest  a  man  of  66  years  of
age.  The  characters  of  my  subjects  have  also  varied  very  much,  and  so
has  the  depth  of  the  hypnotic  state  in  which  the  phenomena  occurred.
This  latter  fact  led  me  to  the  discovery  that  it  was  not  only  unnecessary
for  them  to  reach  the  deeper  stages,  but  even  unnecessary  that  they
should  be  hypnotised  at  all.  Sometimes,  therefore,  I  have  not  hypno-
tised my  subjects,  and  I  have  almost  always  allowed  them  to  retain  the
memory  of  the  sleep  and  of  everything  that  has  taken  place  in  it ;  and,
contrary  to  the  assertion  of  Du  Prel  and  others,  the  subject  has  never
experienced  any  inconvenience  from  this.  The  result  of  it  has  been
that,  on  waking,  he  has  remembered  a  number  of  circumstances  per-
ceived during  the  clairvoyant  state,  but  not  mentioned  then.  Indeed,
it  seems  to  me  natural  that  the  subject,  on  awaking  and  recovering  the
complete  use  of  his  intellect,  should  be  better  able  to  co-ordinate  the
impressions  received  during  sleep,  and  so  produce  a  more  satisfactory
result.

I  have  never  refused  to  admit  that  some  descriptions  given  by  the


200


Dr.  Alfred  Backman.


somnambulist,  especially  such  as  are  familiar  to  any  person  present,
could  be  reasonably  put  down  to  thought-transference ;  but  though  I
recognise  to  the  full  the  possible  extension  and  great  importance  of
this  faculty,  still  for  many  reasons  I  hold  that  apparent  clairvoyance
should  very  seldom  be  explained  in  this  manner,  even  when  the  things
stated  by  the  somnambulist  are  known  to  one  or  more  of  the  persons
present.  But  at  the  very  least  such  experiments  afford  strong  evidence
of  the  reality  of  thought-transference,  and  that  is  undoubtedly  an
important  thing.

My  experiments  have  been  carried  out  in  various  ways.  I  have
generally  hypnotised  my  subjects  by  the  Nancy  method,  and  after  they
had  been  asleep  for  some  minutes  I  would  order  them  to  go  to  such
and  such  a  place  and  find  such  and  such  a  person,  after  which  I  would
ask  them  questions.  On  awaking,  the  subjects  would  again  be  asked
to  describe  their  experiences  during  the  sleep.  I  sometimes  suggested
a  "guide"  to  the  subject,  who  then  imagined  himself  to  be  getting
information  from  the  "  guide."1  Twice  (without  having  at  that  time
heard  of  such  a  thing  being  done  elsewhere)  I  made  the  subject  see
things  quite  unknown  both  to  her  and  to  me  in  a  crystal  (crystal-
gazing),  when  she  was  in  an  apparently  normal  condition.  Finally,  I
sometimes  left  the  subject  entirely  uninfluenced,  putting  questions
without  any  preliminary  process  whatever.

Most  of  my  attempts  having  been  made  merely  to  amuse  friends
and  persons  who  were  interested,  notes  were  not  generally  taken  nor
corroborative  evidence  obtained.  The  presence  of  witnesses,  some  of
whom  have  allowed  their  names  to  be  published,  is  a  guarantee  for  the
truthfulness  of  the  accounts.  It  will  also  be  seen  by  the  character  of
the  experiments  that  there  could  never  have  been  any  question  of
fraud  on  the  part  of  the  subjects  or  of  any  other  person,  and  that  it
could  not  have  profited  anyone  in  any  case  whatever.  Further,  the
experiments  have  been  made  with  different  subjects  and  different
operators,  and  sometimes  in  my  own  absence.

The  first  time  I  ever  tried  an  experiment  to  test  the  reality  of
clairvoyance  was  with  a  little  girl  of  14  years  old,  Anna  Samuelsson,
the  daughter  of  a  workman.  I  had  treated  her  for  a  grave  organic
disease  of  the  heart  (insufficiency  of  the  mitral  valves)  with  a  most  happy

1  To  illustrate  his  use  of  the  word  "Guide,"  Dr.  Backman  writes :  "For  instance,
in  the  case  of  the  murder  of  December  22nd,  1888  (see  p.  218,  below),  I  asked  Alma
to  call  up  Jack  the  Ripper's  last  victim  (whom  she  named  Kate),  and  ask  her  when
he  would  commit  his  next  crime.  She  imagined  that  she  saw  a  very  pretty  young
woman  in  a  ball-dress,  who  told  her  that  it  would  be  on  the  22nd  of  next  December,
&c.  Aim  \  did  not  speak  out  loud,  and  the  persons  present  observed  nothing  unusual.
I  have  thus  made  her  ask  for  information  from  persons  either  dead  or  living,  known  or
unknown."


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


201


result,  which  still  continues  after  two  and  a-half  years.  I  had  made
several  experiments  in  thought-transference  with  her,  in  which  she
told  several  times  running  what  numbers,  words,  &c,  a  person  present
had  written  on  a  folded  paper,  which  neither  she  nor  I  saw.  When
awake  she  also  saw  things  that  were  asked  me  in  writing,  I,  of  course,
not  helping  her  either  by  word  or  gesture.

Once,  when  she  and  some  other  patients  were  hypnotised  at  the
camp  of  the  regiment  of  Kalmar,  about  13  miles  from  the  town  of
Kalmar  where  I  live,  I  asked  her  to  "  go  to  Kalmar."  On  my  asking
if  she  were  there,  she  answered  "yes";  and  little  by  little  she  described
how  she  saw  a  great  town,  where  there  were  two  big  buildings,  one
having  several  steeples  (towers)  [the  church  and  the  castle]  ;  the
house  where  I  lived  was  a  yellow  house  two  stories  high,  and  I  lived
on  the  first  floor.  She  then  entered  the  apartments,  passed  the  lobby
and  one  room,  and  then  came  to  another  room  where  she  admired  "  so
many  beautiful  pictures,  especially  one  which  was  so  large."  She  then
entered  a  third  room  and  was  greatly  astonished  at  seeing  things  hanging
•on  the  walls;  she  had  never  seen  any  such  things  hanging  on  walls ;  they
"were  probably  made  of  wood.  [A  great  quantity  of  old  china  hangs
on  the  walls.]  In  this  room  she  saw  a  lady,  whom  I  recognised  from
her  description  as  my  wife,  and  a  little  boy  ;  but  there  was  something
strange  about  him,  she  saw  him  double.  [A  pair  of  twins,  both  boys,
extremely  like  each  other.]  So  far  I  was  not  surprised,  as,  in  order  to
give  this  information,  she  had  only  to  employ  her  faculty  for  thought-
reading,  but  after  this  my  thoughts  and  her  statements  began  to  differ.
There  was  an  old  lady  in  my  house,  and  expecting  that  the  girl  might
"  see"  her  also,  I  asked  if  she  did  not  see  another  lady,  to  which  she
answered  that  she  did  see  another,  a  young  girl,  whom  she  described  so
exactly  that  I  recognised  Miss  H.  W.  After  that  she  told  me  that  my
wife  dressed  and  went  out,  entered  a  shop  and  bought  something.
The  experiment  ended  here.

I  now  made  haste  to  write  to  my  wife  and  ask  if  Miss  H.  Yv.  had
been  in  our  house  that  day  (in  June,  1888),  and  if,  after  her  call,  my
wife  had  gone  to  a  shop  and  bought  something.  Some  officers  of  the
regiment  who  knew  of  the  case  were  with  me  anxiously  awaiting  the
answer,  which  came  by  return  of  post  and  was  imparted  to  them.1  It
expressed  my  wife's  great  surprise  (as  I  had  not  mentioned  the  means
by  which  I  had  learnt  the  facts)  and  said  it  certainly  was  true  that
she  had  spoken  to  Miss  H.  W.  on  that  day  and  hour,  and  had  after-
wards gone  to  a  shop  in  the  same  street  to  buy  something,  but  Miss
H.  W.  had  not  been  at  our  house  but  at  Ryssby,  20  kilometres  from
Kalmar,  and  had  been  talking  to  my  wife  through  a  telephone.


1  This  letter  cannot  now  be  found.


202


Br  Alfred  Backman.


I  have  already  published  in  the  German  magazine  Sphinx  (August,
1889)  an  account  of  another  trial  with  the  same  subject.  On  that
occasion,  notes  were  taken,  which  are  as  follows  : — -

Notes  of  Some  Psychological  Experiments.

The.se  experiments  were  made  on  June  20th,  1888,  at  11  a.m.,  with  a
girl  named  Anna  Samuelsson,  aged  14,  from  Hultsfred  Hals,  as  subject,  the
operator  being  Dr.  Backvnan,  in  the  presence  of  Messrs.  O.  Ahlgren,  captain
in  the  Reserve  of  the  Royal  Regiment  of  Kalmar,  Lieutenant  E.  Hageus,
Sub-Lieutenant  A.  Meyersson,  and  the  Quarter-master,  C.  Ericsson,  all
belonging  to  the  said  regiment.  The  experiments  were  made  at  Dr.  Back-
man's  room  at  the  State  Hospital  at  Hultsfred.

The  undersigned  Ericsson,  having  heard  the  marvellous  results  of  hypno-
tism talked  of,  happened  to  meet  Dr.  Backman  in  the  camp,  and  asked  his
permission  to  be  present  at  the  hypnotising  of  some  person.  This  request
was  quite  unexpected  hy  Dr.  Backman,  but,  nevertheless,  he  granted  it
instantly,  on  which  he  and  both  of  us  (Ericsson  and  Meyersson)  went  to  the
hospital.  On  the  way  they  were  joined  by  me,  Hageus,  without  any  pre-
vious agreement,  and  I,  Ahlgren,  came  in  after  the  seance  had  begun.

A  woman  named  L.  having  been  hypnotised  and  several  experiments  in
thought-transference,  &c. ,  having  been  made  with  her,  she  was  asked  to  tell
the  girl  Anna  to  come  up,  hut  Dr.  Backman  had  hardly  uttered  the  order,
when  Anna  entered  of  her  own  accord.  She  took  her  place  on  a  chair
opposite  to  Dr.  Backman,  and  he  told  her  to  shut  her  eyes,  but  not  to
go  to  sleep.  The  quarter-master  Ericsson  was  asked  what  experiments  he
would  like  to  have  made,  Dr.  Backman  remarking  that  the  girl  could  do  as
well  when  awake  as  when  hypnotised.  As  Ericsson  did  not  suggest  anything,
Dr.  Backman  told  Anna  to  enter  (as  he  expressed  it)  Ericsson's  pocket  and
purse  and  say  how  many  coins  there  were  in  it.  She  said  that  there  were
live,  which  was  discovered,  on  inspection,  to  be  quite  true,  though  neither
Dr.  Backman  nor  even  I,  Ericsson,  knew  what  the  number  was.  After
some  other  experiments  and  some  conversation,  the  following  dialogue  took
place,  in  about  these  words: — Dr.  B.  :  "Anna,  now  I  wish  you  to  go  to
the  quarter-master's,  to  the  entry  ;  are  you  there  now  ?  "  Anna:  "Yes."
Dr.  B.  :  "  Now  enter  the  room  to  the  right  of  the  entry  ;  are  you  there  ?  "
Anna:  "Yes."  Dr.  B.  :  "Is  there  anyone  in  the  room  ? "  Anna:
"Yes."  Dr.  B.  :  "  Man  or  woman  ?  "  Anna:  "It  is  a  man."  Dr.  B.  :
"Young  or  old?"  Anna:  "Old."  Dr.  B.  :  "Who  is  it?"  Anna:
"  The  under-quarter-master."  Dr.  B.  (Doubtingly) :  "What  is  he  doing  in
the  quarter-master's  room?"  Anna:  "  He  is  writing. "  Dr.  B. :  "Whatishe
writing?"  Anna:  "I  cannot  see."  Dr.  B.  :  "You  must  look  at  it  care-
fully; now,  what  is  it?"  Anna:  "He  is  writing  figures."  Dr.  B.  (In
allusion  to  the  arms  hanging  up  in  Ericsson's  house)  :  "Is  there  anything
hanging  on  the  wall,  near  the  door  ?  "  Anna:  "Yes."  Dr.  B.  :  "What  is
it?"  Anna:  "It  is  clothes."  Dr.  B.  (With  a  doubting  smile):  "Is
there  anything  leaning  against  the  wall?"  Anna:  "Yes."  Dr.  B.  :
"What  is  it?"  Anna:  "I  cannot  tell."  Dr.  B.  :  "Is  it  made  of  wood
or  metal?"  Anna:  "Of  wood."  Dr.  B.  :  "What  is  it  then?"  Anna  :
"A  large  stick."  Dr.  B.:  " Is  the  under-quarter-master  still  there?"  Anna:


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


203


"Yes."  Dr.  B. :  "  What  is  he  doing  now  ? "  Anna:  "He  is  going  out."
Dr.  B.  :  "Where  is  he  going?"  Anna:  "Towards  the  plain."  Dr.  B.  :
"  In  this  direction  or  in  the  direction  of  the  barracks?"  Anna:  "Of  the
barracks."  Dr.  B.  :  "  Is  anyone  with  him  ?  "  Anna:  "Yes,  one  person."
After  this,  we,  Ahlgren  and  Ericsson,  went  directly  to  the  quarter-master's,
house,  and  entering  the  apartment  of  the  under-quarter-master  (which  was  on
the  left  in  the  same  entry)  we  found  him  at  home.  On  being  asked  what  he
had  been  doing,  if  he  had  been  writing,  he  replied  that  he  had,  and  that  he^
had  been  writing  figures.  Coats  were  hanging  on  the  wall  to  the  left  of  the
door,  and  leaning  against  the  same  wall  in  the  corner  was  a  stick  about  two  yards
long,  which,  according  to  the  under-quarter-master,  had  been  put  there  without
any  particular  reason.  The  under-quarter-master  afterwards  told  me,  Ericsson,
that,  at  the  time  and  on  the  occasion  in  question,  two  corporals  had  come  to
him  and  there  had  been  some  talk  of  his  accompanying  them  to  the  store-
house, near  the  barracks,  in  order  to  give  them  some  things.  He  had  at
first  intended  to  accompany  them,  but  afterwards  gave  it  up,  on  which  the
two  corporals  left.

That  the  above  account  is  true,  that  any  supposition  of  fraud  or  collusion
is  entirely  without  foundation,  and  that  everything  happened  exactly  as
related  briefly  above,  we,  the  undersigned,  testify,  each  one  for  the  part  of
it  in  which  he  was  concerned,  and  all  on  our  honour  and  conscience.


Hultsfred.

One  of  the  officers  had  painted  two  pictures,  which  were  to  be  dis-
posed of  to  his  fellow  officers  by  means  of  a  lottery,  in  the  summer  of
1888.  I  think  the  number  of  lots  was  75.  When  the  list  was  signed
in  full,  I  asked  Anna  which  would  be  the  winning  numbers.  She
answered  that  Nos.  4  and  9  would  win,  and  I  told  the  officers  that
one  of  the  pictures  would  be  won  on  4  or  8,  and  the  other  on  9  or  18  ;
this  for  the  reason  that  I  believe  I  have  observed  that  just  as  the
clairvoyants  mistake  left  and  right,  so  they  very  often  tell  only  the
half  of  numbers  (perhaps  from  an  involuntary  mental  suggestion  of
the  experimenter's).  This  happened  a  whole  week  before  the  drawing-
of  the  lots.  I  was  unable  to  be  present,  but  what  happened  was  that
Captain  F.  B.  first  drew  No.  4.  For  the  next  number,  two  tickets
rolled  up  together  were  drawn  ;  he  decided  to  take  one  of  them,  but
just  as  he  was  going  to  take  it  with  the  fingers  of  his  left  hand  it-
dropped  on  the  floor.  The  one  left  was  then  opened  instead  and  was
found  to  be  No.  18.

In  the  winter  of  1889-90,  the  following  event  happened,  which  I
learnt  both  from  the  newspapers  and  from  Anna,  who  gave  the  same


(Signed)


f  C.  E.  Ericsson.
|  Oscar  Ahlgren.
I  E.  Hageus.


204


Dr.  Alfred  Backman.


account.  In  the  neighbourhood  where  she  lives,  a  young  man  had
disappeared,  and  it  was  supposed  that  he  had  fallen  under  the  ice  in  a
rather  large  lake  that  was  near.  It  was  dragged  thoroughly  to  find
the  body,  but  without  success,  and  at  last  a  trial  was  made  with  Anna,
who  was  hypnotised  for  that  purpose  by  a  physician  living  near  the
place.  While  hypnotised,  she  described  a  place  on  the  lake  where
she  said  the  body  must  be  looked  for — it  lay  at  a  certain  number  of
feet  from  the  shore  and  a  certain  number  of  feet  to  the  left.  The  place
described  was  dragged  and  nothing  was  found.  But  the  idea  arose,
some  days  later,  that  the  clairvoyant  this  time,  as  often  before,  had
mistaken  the  right  for  the  left.  The  lake  was  now  dragged  at  the
place  indicated,  but  to  the  right,  and  the  body  was  found.

The  subject  whom  I  consider  my  best  clairvoyant  is  named  Alma
Radberg.  She  is  a  maid-servant,  and  is  now  aged  about  26.  As  a  child
•and  young  girl  she  was  sickly  and  delicate,  but  now,  after  a  course  of
hypnotic  treatment,  she  is  healthy,  strong,  and  vigorous.  She  is  a
very  pious  and  good  girl,  of  some  intelligence,  and  by  no  means  a
hysterical  person.  She  has  kindly  allowed  me  and  some  others  to
make  innumerable  experiments  on  her,  and  she  is  extremely  susceptible
to  suggestion,  both  awake  and  hypnotised.  All  kinds  of  experimentSj
such  as  stigmatisation,  etc.,  have  been  made  on  her  successfully,  both
in  the  waking  and  the  hypnotic  state.  I  may  relate  in  passing  one
instance  that  seems  to  me  remarkable.  In  the  middle  of  an  experi-
ment, I  put  a  drop  of  water  on  her  arm,  suggesting  to  her  that  it  was
a  drop  of  burning  sealing-wax,  and  that  it  would  produce  a  blister,
which  would,  however,  be  healed  after  the  third  day.  During  the
progress  of  the  experiment,  I  accidentally  touched  the  water,  making
it  spread  on  her  skin,  whereupon  I  hastened  to  wipe  it  away.  The
blister,  which  appeared  the  next  day,  extended  as  far  as  the  water
had  run,  just  as  if  it  had  been  a  corroding  acid,  and  the  wound  healed
on  the  night  of  the  third  day.

The  object  of  most  of  the  experiments  made  with  Alma  has  been
to  describe  to  those  present  the  apartments  of  a  given  person,  itc. ;  and
the  occasions  on  which  she  has  described  the  situation  of  the  rooms,
furniture,  pictures,  etc.,  quite  correctly  are  so  numerous  that  I  can
only  give  a  few  instances,  not  being  able  to  recount  all.

In  October,  1888,  Captain  O.  and  his  wife,  who  were  in  Kalmar,  at
the  house  of  Alma's  master,  Baron  von  Rosen,  the  Captain  of  the  Pilotage,
asked  permission  to  be  present  at  an  experiment  of  this  kind.  This  was
granted,  and  Alma  was  hypnotised  and  then  told  to  go  to  Stockholm,  to
the  place  where  Captain  O.'s  mother-in-law  lived,  to  enter  her  apart-
inent  and  say  what  she  could  see.  She  then  described — quite  correctly,
as  was  afterwards  found — the  rooms  and  some  remarkable  objects  in


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


205,


them,  which  were  unknown  to  all  present,  except  to  Captain  and
Madame  O.  Among  other  things,  she  described  minutely  an  antique
cupboard  with  conspicuous  carving  on  the  doors,  and  metal  shining  under
it  [there  was  really  a  mirror  under  the  carving]  ;  also  a  bust  in  a
window,  a  group  of  flowers  near  a  door,  portraits,  &c,  everything  with
minuteness  and  perfect  accux'acy.  On  being  asked  what  Captain  O.'s
mother-iii-law  was  doing,  she  said  that  she  was  sitting  in  one  of  the
rooms,  talking  to  a  young  girl,  who,  however,  was  not  either  her
daughter  or  her  grandchild,  as  we  all  supposed,  but  someone  else.
[We  heard  some  days  later  that  the  lady  had  really  been  sitting  then
in  the  room  described  and  talking  to  her  maid-servant.]  At  Cajrtain
O.'s  wish,  Alma  was  asked  whether  his  mother-in-law  had  received  any
letter  that  day.  "  Yes,  she  had  ;  the  letter  contained  a  key  and  spoke
about  clothes."  Captain  O.  then  told  us  that  he  had  really  sent  a.
trunk  containing  clothes  to  his  daughter,  who  was  living  at  his  mother-
in-law's,  and  that  he  had  written  to  his  mother-in-law  about  the  trunk,
enclosing  the  key  in  the  letter.  On  awaking,  the  clairvoyant  gave*
Captain  O.  a  great  many  details  about  the  apartment  which  she  had
not  mentioned  before,  and  which  were  in  the  main  correct.

On  another  occasion  she  was  hypnotised  by  my  honoured  friend
Baron  von  Rosen,  and  the  following  is  his  account  of  what  took
place  : —

One  day  in  September,  1888,  in  the  afternoon,  Alma  Radberg  was
hypnotised  by  me  on  my  boat  Kalmar,  at  Krakelund,  on  the  east  coast
of  Sweden,  where  we  lay  at  anchor  for  the  night.  There  were  present  the
Director-General  of  Pilotage,  Ankarcrona  (who  has  kindly  allowed  his  name
to  be  published),  Captain  Smith,  commanding  the  Pilotage  at  Norrkopingr
my  wife  and  I.  The  clairvoyant  was  ordered  to  find  the  Director-General's
house  at  Stockholm  and  describe  his  apartment,  where  neither  she.  my  wife,
nor  I  had  ever  been.  She  then  described  the  lobby, — very  dark,  oblong,  a
table  near  a  wall,  and  a  carpet  on  the  floor;  the  drawing  room, — a  very  large
room,  with  the  tables,  sofas,  and  chairs  as  they  actually  were,  plenty  of
ornaments  (bibelots)  everywhere,  in  a  corner  a  number  of  plants,  of  which
she  remarked  that  some  were  artificial,  a  magnificent  chandelier,  and  on  one
wall  there  was  something  strange,  which  she  found  it  difficult  to  describe,  it
was  like  shelves  from  the  floor  to  the  ceiling,  covered  with  plush,  and  on
these  shelves  were  standing  many  pieces  of  plate,  on  which  "  something  was
written"  [testimonials  with  inscriptions].  She  also  described  correctly  a  large
picture  of  a  landscape,  and  a  large  portrait  of  King  Oscar,  which  was  placed
on  an  easel,  draped  with  a  red  cloth.  The  dining-room  was  dark,  with  a
high  dado  and  a  dark  fireplace ;  there  were  antique  things  standing  on  the
dado  ;  near  one  door  something  very  peculiar,  made  of  wood,  and  pointed
at  the  upper  end  [this,  which  she  could  not  name,  is  a  pair  of  carved  snow-
shoes,  placed  near  the  door]  ;  also  a  dark  chandelier  and  a  couple  of  large
old  chairs.  In  the  Director-General's  study,  she  described  the  carpet  on  the
floor,  the  sofa,  two  tables,  and  a  large  nosegay  in  one  corner,  and  said  that.


200


Dr.  Alfred  Bachman.


there  were  many  pictures.  On  being  asked  where  the  wife  of  the  Director-
General  was,  she  answered,  in  a  little  room, — in  the  study,  she  was  sitting
there  reading  a  newspaper.  When  told  to  say  what  newspaper  it  was,  the
•clairvoyant  answered,  after  very  great  efforts,  "  Sven-ska  Dag-bla-det."  She
said  the  lady  had  on  a  black  brocaded  dress,  of  some  thick  material.  On
being  asked  if  Madame  A.  had  been  at  home  the  whole  day,  the  clairvoyant
.answered  "  No  "  ;  and  went  on  to  say  that  Madame  A.  had  paid  a  call  at  a
place  quite  near,  at  the  house  of  a  young  couple,  and  she  described  one  of
their  rooms,  and  how  the  young  lady,  who  was  wearing  a  dark  blue  morning
dress,  was  playing  with  a  baby  a  few  months  old ;  she  also  gave  a  description
of  her  husband  and  of  a  maid-servant.  ' '  Do  you  recognise  the  young  lady,
Alma?"  "No — yes — now  I  remember  !  It  is  Mrs.  R."  (Here  she  gave  the
name  of  a  young  lady  whom  she  had  only  seen  once  for  a  moment,  a  year
before,  when  she  was  passing  through  Kalmar.)

At  the  request  of  Captain  Smith,  I  told  Alma  to  visit  his  home  in
Norrkoping.  She  obeyed,  though  unwillingly,  and  described  correctly  the
dining-room  and  bedroom.  In  the  latter  was  Madame  Smith,  giving
medicine  to  a  little  girl,  who  was  coughing,  and  about  whom  she  was  very
uneasy  ;  there  was  also  an  elderly  maid-servant  in  the  room.

Alma  was  now  awakened,  and  seemed  well,  healthy,  and  cheerful.  When
awake,  she  described  still  more  distinctly  the  homes  both  of  the  Director-
General  and  of  Captain  Smith.  According  to  information  given  later  by
the  Director-General,  verbally  and  also  in  writing,  Alma's  description  of  his
house  was  wonderfully  accurate  ;  also  his  wife's  dress,  the  call  that  she  paid,
the  young  couple,  and  even,  contrary  to  our  supposition,  the  newspaper  she
had  been  reading,  were  all  correctly  described.

Captain  Smith  also  said  that  all  she  had  said  of  his  house  was  correct.
The  little  girl  had  been  taken  very  seriously  ill  the  same  day,  which  was  the
cause  of  his  having  reached  Krakelund  with  his  pilot-boat  a  little  late,  but
he  had  not  told  the  reason  to  anyone  present.

That  all  this  is  true  and  corresponds  with  the  facts  is  attested  by

Robert  von  Rosen,  Baron,

Captain  of  Pilotage,  Kalmar.

So  far  the  Baron  von  Rosen.  I  have  received  orally  from  the
Director-General  a  full  account  of  how  everything  happened,  which
confirms  the  above  statements.1

Another  time  Alma  was  hypnotised  quite  unpremeditated  ly  and
received  an  order  to  go  to  Stockholm  to  the  house  of  the  Director-
General  of  Pilotage,  and  see  if  he  was  at  home. She  said  that  he  was,

1  Dr.  Backman  writes  later : — ■  .

' '  Baron  von  Rosen  made  at  once  a  sort  of  proces  vcrhal  of  the  experiment  on  board
the  steamboat,  and  sent  it  to  Madame  Ankarerona  to  know  how  much  of  it  was  true.
This  proces  verbal,  which  may  still  be  in  the  possession  of  the  Director-General,  was
read  to  me,  so  that  I  am  able  to  state  that  the  account  sent  to  you,  which  was  written
by  Baron  von  Rosen  in  J une,  1889,  is  true  and  similar  to  the  one  received  by  Madame
Ankarerona,  except  that  the  latter  had  many  more  details  in  it.  Further,  the  Director-
General  described  the  whole  experiment  to  me  this  summer,  and  his  account  corre-
sponded perfectly  with  that  of  Baron  von  Rosen." — Ed.


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


207


he  was  sitting  at  the  writing-table  in  his  study,  writing.  Among  other
things  that  she  observed  and  mentioned  was  that  there  was  a  bunch  of
keys  on  the  writing-table.  She  was  now  sharply  ordered  to  seize  the
keys  and  shake  them,  and  to  put  her  other  hand  on  the  Director-
General's  shoulder,  in  order  to  attract  his  attention.  This  was  repeated
"two  or  three  times,  and  Alma  declared  that  the  Director-General  really
observed  her.

The  Director-General,  who  had  not  the  least  idea  that  the  experi-
ment was  taking  place,  was  soon  after  informed  of  it,  and  has  kindly
told  me  the  following  particulars  about  it.  Before  he  heard  of  the
•experiment,  his  attention  had  been  fixed  on  the  day  and  hour  in
question,  because  he  had  then  experienced  a  very  strange  thing,  which
had  seemed  to  him  unusual  and  remarkable  in  more  respects  than  one.
On  that  occasion  he  was  sitting,  fully  occupied  with  his  work,  when,
without  any  reason  whatever,  his  eyes  fell  on  the  bunch  of  keys  lying
near  him  on  the  table.  He  then  began  to  consider  how  he  could  have
put  the  bunch  of  keys  there,  and  why  it  was  there,  when  he  knew  for
certain  that  he  was  never  in  the  habit  of  leaving  it  there.  While
reflecting  on  this,  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  woman.  Thinking  it  was
his  own  maid-servant,  he  attached  no  importance  to  it,  but,  when  the
occurrence  was  repeated,  he  called  her  and  got  up  to  see  what  was  the
matter.  But  he  found  nobody,  and  was  informed  that  neither  his
servant  nor  any  other  woman  had  been  in  the  room.  He  did  not,
kowever,  observe  any  rattling  of  the  bunch  of  keys  or  any  movement
of  the  keys.

The  next  experiment  is,  in  my  opinion,  most  important  and
significant,  because  thought-transference  seems  to  have  been  quite
excluded.  Though  in  this,  as  in  every  other  case,  inaccurate  or
incomplete  statements  occurred  amongst  the  correct  ones,  I  think  that
■everything  should  be  recorded.1

On  April  8th,  1890,  I  received  a  letter  from  Dr.  F.  Kjellman,  of
Stockholm,  in  which  he  asked  me  to  arrange  a  time  at  which  I  should
hypnotise  Alma,  of  whom  he  had  heard,  and  "ask  her  to  find  a  certain
Dr.  von  B.,  who  was  known  to  her,  and  describe  the  room  in  which  he  was,
the  other  persons  present,  the  arrangements  of  the  room,  &c.  Dr.  K.
had  purposely  hung  something  on  the  chandelier  that  is  not  generally
there,  in  order  to  make  the  experiment  more  crucial."  In  answer  to
this,  I  merely  sent  this  telegram,  "  From  1  to  2  to-morrow,  in  your

1  Dr.  Backman  says  that  all  the  notes  made  of  the  experiments  with  Dr.  Kjellman
•were  sent  to  the  latter  before  he  (Dr.  Backman)  knew  anything  about  whether  they
"had  been  successful  or  not.  It  is  these  notes  which  he  has  sent  us,  without  adding
anything  to  them. — Ed.


208


Dr.  Alfred  Backman.


apartment."  No  further  arrangement  was  made,  and  Dr.  Kjellman's
appearance,  as  well  as  his  apartment,  was  quite  unknown  both  to  me
and  the  clairvoyant,  and  also  to  all  the  persons  present  with  us.  Alma,
Avas  hypnotised  in  my  house  at  Kalmar,  and  the  record  made  of  the
sitting  is  as  follows  : —

April  9th,  1890,  at  1.40  p.m.  Alma  is  hypnotised  and  ordered  to  go  to
Stockholm  to  the  apartments  of  Dr.  Kjellman.  1.  "Is  Alma  there?"
"No."  2.  Question  l-epeated.  "Yes."  3.  "Is  Dr.  von  B.  in  the  apart-
ments?" "Yes."  4.  "Are  there  any  other  persons  besides  him  and  Dr.
Kjellman  in  the  same  room?"  "  Yes,  one  more  gentleman."  (She  could
not  see  anyone  besides.)  5.  "What  are  they  doing?"  "  One  is  sitting  at
a  writing-table."  0.  "  Who  is  it,  Dr.  von  B.  or  the  other  one?"  "The
other  one,  the  doctor."  7.  "  What  are  they  doing ? "  "He  is  doing  nothing ;
they  are  talking."  8.  "Are  they  dressed  in  an  uncommon  way?"  "No."
9.  "Is  there  a  chandelier  hanging  from  the  ceiling  ?  "  "No,  no  chandelier,
something  more  like  a  lamp."  10.  "Do  you  see  anything  particular  there?"
"  Something  long  and  narrow  is  hanging  in  the  chandelier."  11.  "What  is
it  made  of,  stuff  or  metal  ?"  "It  must  be  metal,  I  think,  and  stuff  also."
12.  "  Have  you  ever  seen  such  a  thing  ?  "  "  No,  I  never  saw  anything  like
it."  13.  "  Try  to  see  what  it  is,  or  what  it  is  called. "  (No  answer.)  14.
"  What  is  it  used  for  ?  "  "I  do  not  know  what  it  is  used  for. "  "Is  it  any-
thing used  by  physicians,  or  an  ornament?"  "More  like  an  ornament,
larger  than  a  ribbon. "  15.  "What  is  it  like,  what  colour  is  it?"  "  It  is
white."  16.  "  Are  there  several  colours  ?  "  "  It  is  also  red. "  17.  "What
is  the  metal  like?"  "It  is  white,  probably  silver."  18.  "Are  there  mount-
ings fixed  to  the  stuff,  or  stuff  on  a  piece  of  metal  ?  "  "I  think  the  stuff  is
wound  round  a  piece  of  metal."  19.  "How  long  and  how  broad  is  it?"
"A  quarter  of  a  yard  broad,  and  three-quarters  of  a  yard  long."  20.
' '  What  kind  of  stuff  is  it?"  " Probably  silk. "  21.  "Does  the  stuff  belong
to  the  piece  of  metal?"  "No,  it  is  wound  round  it  for  the  occasion."  22.
"  What  is  it  generally  used  for  ?  "  "It  ought  to  stand  on  a  writing-table."
23.  "What  is  the  use  of  it?"  (She  does  not  know.)  24.  "Is  it  fixed  to
the  lamp,  or  could  it  be  easily  taken  off?"  "It  is  not  fixed  firmly. "  25.
"  Can  you  take  it  off,  Alma  ?  "  "It  does  not  seem  to  move."  26.  "Look
at  the  stranger.  What  is  he  like?"  "A  very  tall  man."  27.  "Is  he
stout  or  slender  ?  "  "He  is  a  slender  middle-aged  man."  28.  "Dark  or
fair  ?  "  "  He  looks  fair."  29.  "Has  he  a  beard  ?"  "  He  has  a  beard,  but
it  is  partly  shaved  ;  moustache — whiskers — only  the  chin  is  partly  shaved. "
30.  "  What  colour  are  his  eyes  ?  "  "Blue."  31.  "  What  sort  of  nose  has
he  ?"  "Large,  broad  rather  than  thin."  32.  "  Is  there  anything  remark-
able in  his  face  ?  "  "He  has  sometimes  a  twitching  in  his  right  temple."
33.  "  Is  there  anything  peculiar  in  his  hands  ?  "  "Nothing."  34.  "  In  his
costume  ?  "  "  He  has  dark  clothes."  35.  "  In  his  watch-chain?  "  "There
is  something  like  a  ball  or  a  locket  hanging  on  it. "  36.  "  What  is  his  pro-
fession ?  "  "He  must  be  some  sort  of  teacher."  37.  "Look  at  the
room."  "  It  looks  like  a  study."  38.  "  Is  it  the  doctor's  reception-room  ?  "
"No.  There  are  striped  coverings  on  the  furniture,  a  large  table,  a  great  book
lying  open  on  the  writing-table,  a  printed  book,  with  no  pictures.  I  cannot
see  what  the  book  is  about. On  the  walls  are  several  little  pictures,  five  or


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


209


six,  mostly  portraits  of  elderly  persons.  There  is  a  cupboard  with  glass
doors.  1  believe  there  are  books  in  it."  She  cannot  possibly  tell  what  is
hanging  in  the  chandelier.  When  awake,  she  states  that  she  believes
it  was  a  pair  of  scissors  for  cutting  paper,  or  a  paper-knife,  that  was
hanging  in  the  chandelier  ;  and  it  was  probably  fixed  with  a  handkerchief.
There  was  also  in  the  room  a  very  long,  stuffed  easy-chair  that  could  be  pulled
down.  She  saw  that  Dr.  von  B.  had  spotted  clothes  on  and  was  sitting
nearly  half  asleep,  looking  upwards  and  reflecting.  She  thought  they  were
talking  about  something  then  happening  in  Stockholm,  probably  some
experiment  that  was  being  made  by  a  society.  She  judged  Dr.  Kjellman  to
be  of  middle  height,  with  dark  moustache,  rather  stout,  his  hair  combed  on
one  side  ;  she  thought  his  eyes  were  dark  brown,  and  his  nose  crooked.  The
third  man  was  either  a  physician  or  a  teacher.1  She  believed  there  were  two
windows  in  the  room,  which  was  a  large  one,  and  thought  the  curtains  were
dark  and  striped  ;  the  fireplace  was  dark.  She  had  not  seen  the  other
rooms,  she  entered  a  lobby  first  with  three  doors,  and  then  through  a  room
into  this  one. Present,  the  undersigned  : —

Philip  v.  Tell,  Kalmar,

Captain  in  the  Regiment  of  Kalmar.

After  having  communicated  to  Dr.  Kjellman  what  Alma  had  said,
I  received  from  him  two  letters  containing  the  following  information  : —

"  There  was  really  hanging  in  the  chandelier  a  large  pair  of  paper-scissors,
fixed  by  an  indiarubber  otoscope,  and  with  a  tea-rose  and  some  forget-me-
nots  in  one  of  the  handles  of  the  scissors.  There  was  a  large  easy-chair
that  could  be  pulled  down  in  the  room,  and  we  were  talking  about  an  experi-
ment, but  it  was  one  that  was  taking  place  just  then,  as  I  was  experiment-
ing on  a  hypnotised  subject.  Six  persons  were  in  the  room.  Most  of  the
other  things  are  wrong  or  prove  nothing.  It  seems  clear  to  me  that  she  saw
something,  but  she  must  have  been  confused  by  a  number  of  ideas  arising
from  the  operation  of  her  own  brain."

On  April  12th  Dr.  Kjellman  wrote  again  : — ■

"I  must  apologise  for  my  letter  of  yesterday, — written  during  a  recep-
tion,— being  so  badly  written  and  so  incomplete.

"  I  will  now  add  some  points  indicating  that  clairvoyance  was  going  on..
Her  statement  that  the  object  was  hanging  in  a  lamp,  not  in  a  chandelier,
was  right.  It  is  both  a  lamp  and  a  chandelier,  and  the  lamp  was  drawn
down  a  long  way  under  the  chandelier.  Another  interesting  thing  was  her
maintaining  that  it  was  my  study  ;  she  probably  calls  an  ante-chamber  a
reception-room,  as  many  people  do.2  The  fireplace  is  unusually  dark,  and
has  a  bookcase  with  glass  doors  standing  near  it.  There  are  three  doors  in
the  lobby,  and  it  is  necessary  to  pass  through  an  outer  room  to  enter  the  recep-
tion-room. But  here  her  successes  end;  the  rest  is  confused  or  wrong  (three
windows  in  the  reception-room,  not  two  ;  the  description  of  my  appear-
ance, of  Dr.  v.  B.'s  position,  &c).  The  dentist  Wessler  was  not  badly
described."

1  Teacher  in  Swedish  is  liirare  and  physician  is  lakare.

2  I  have  tried  this,  and  find  that  she  really  does  so. — A.  Backhan.

P


210


Dr.  Alfred  Backman.


On  April  19th  in  the  same  year,  another  trial  was  made,  this  time
with  two  subjects  at  once.  It  was  agreed  with  Dr.  Kjellman  that  he
should  write  something  in  large  letters  on  a  piece  of  paper  and  put  it  in
a  conspicuous  position  and  strongly  illuminated,  and  he  also  asked  me  by
a  telegram  to  try  to  make  them  see  "  what  there  was  on  the  large  table
in  the  middle  of  the  room."

This  is  the  record  of  what  was  going  on  at  Stockholm  : —

The  arrangements  in  Dr.  Kjellman's  reception-room  on  April  19th,  1890,
at  7.40  p.m.,  were  as  follows  : —

On  the  wall  between  two  windows  a  brightly  illuminated  sheet  of  paper
on  which  is  written  in  large  clear  letters  the  word  bordet  (the  table).  On  a
large  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  a  tray  on  which  are  placed  (1)  a  dead
hen,  of  a  yellow-white  colour,  with  a  silver  spoon  in  its  bill,  (2)  two  live
crayfish,  (3)  a  large  lamp  with  a  blue  shade.

The  persons  present  were  Dr.  von  B.,  Dr.  Claus,  Miss  M.  Kjellman,  Miss

Thelander,  the  dentist  Mr.  Wessler,  and  Dr.  Kjellman. A  large  yellow  dog

was  also  in  the  room. The  seance  finished  at  9.25. The  medium  of  the  party

became  slightly  entranced,  in  a  rather  agitated  way,  and  said  on  waking  at

S.15  that  somebody  seemed  to  have  been  looking  at  her. Her  hands  felt  cold.

/  C.  A.  Claus.

IF.  Kjellman.
(Signed) -i  r,  -o
v 5 ' )  C.  von  B.

\  John  Wessler.

After  the  trial  the  statements  of  one  of  the  clairvoyants,  Miss  H.

L  s,  were  found  to  be  all  wrong,  whereas  Alma  had  this  time  again

been  successful  in  some  points.  I  must  observe  that  neither  the  subject
nor  I  knew  anything  about  where  or  how  the  paper  was  to  be  placed.
My  record  runs  thus  (the  words  in  square  brackets  being  put  in
afterwards  by  Dr.  Kjellman)  : —

April  19th,  1890. 7.55  p.m. Alma  Radberg  speaking.

' '  On  an  oblong  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  something  high  is
•standing — it  must  be  some  kind  of  case,  it  is  dark  and  seems  to  be  engraved.
It  is  certainly  metal.  [No  such  object  on  the  oblong  table. — Kjellman.]
(May  it  not  be  the  lamp  ? — Backman.)  There  are  many  things  on  the  table —
there  are  candles — something  very  much  like  a  little  tray  standing  there,
with  several  small  objects  on  it.  I  really  do  not  know  what  they  are  used
for — they  must  be  instruments."

Alma  said,  when  awake,  that  ' '  on  one  corner  of  the  table  there  was  a
tray  with  small  objects  on  it,  long  and  yelloxv.  [The  tray  with  the  yellowish-
white  hen  was  standing  on  one  corner  of  the  table. — Kjellman.]  There  was
;something  on  one  wall,  made  of  stuff,  a  confused  mass.  I  wonder  if  it  was
not  part  of  the  curtain."

When  asleep,  she  said,  ' '  There  is  something  standing  upright  on  the
table — it  is  something  white,  some  paper — the  candles  are  beside  it — I  think
it  is  supported  by  a  book.  There  is  something  written  on  the  paper  and  it
is  that  we  have  to  read. I  see  the  letters  turned  the  right  way — the  first


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


211


letter  looks  like  an  A,  the  second  like  a  B — two  more  letters — the  paper  is
not  written  all  over,  I  think  there  are  four  letters,  the  third  letter  is  R,  the
fourth  looks  like  J  or  Y."

When  awake,  she  said,  "I  believe  the  word  was  '  Bard '  or  'Hard' — a  short
word  with  four  letters."  (The  paper  was  fixed  on  the  wall.  It  is  strange  that
both  the  clairvoyants  seem  to  have  seen  it  in  connection  with  the  table;)

When  asleep,  she  said,  "A  tall  dark  person,  I  think  a  woman,  is  able  to
see  me."  (The  order  to  go  up  to  that  person,  and  strike  her  on  her  shoulder
and  force  her  to  look  at  Alma,  is  mentally  executed. — Backman.)  "There  are
surely  four  people  there."  When  awake,  she  added,  "  one  had  spectacles."
[We  were  six  ;  I  wear  spectacles. — Kjellman.]  When  asleep,  she  said,
"  There  is  something  else  on  the  table — like  a  man — it  does  not  represent
anyone,  it  must  be  a  bust"  ;  and  when  awake,  "The  statue  looks  like  a  man,
and  is  standing  on  one  of  the  corners  of  the  table — there  are  many  candles,
so  that  there  is  a  clear  light  over  the  table."  [Wrong. — Kjellman.]  When
awake,  she  further  said,  "There  is  a  table  in  one  corner  with  glasses  and  a
decanter  on  it."  [Yes. — Kjellman.]  "On  a  fireplace  [Sofa. — Kjellman]  frieze
there  were  standing  either  high  candles  or  vases — some  persons  in  an  outer
room — some  kind  of  drapery  in  front  of  the  door."  [Wrong. — Kjellman.]
There  was  a  little  dark  gentleman  whom  she  thought  she  had  seen  before.
The  seance  ended  at  8.30.

About  this  I  may  remark  that  all  my  clairvoyants  have  on  similar
occasions  shown  that  they  take  great  pride  in  describing  correctly,  and
during  the  experiments  are  quite  able  not  to  tell  more  than  they  "wish.
Therefore  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that  the  clairvoyant  could  be  got
to  confess  that  she  saw  a  hen  with  a  silver  spoon  in  its  bill  and  live
crayfish  on  the  table  in  a  physician's  reception-room.  I  noticed  also
that  Alma  seemed  to  be  in  an  unusual  condition  that  time,  which
caused  me  to  remark,  in  a  private  letter  to  Dr.  Kjellman,  accompanying
my  record,  that  the  clairvoyant  had  evidently  not  been  well-disposed,
and  that  I  believed  the  result  was  not  very  good.  Even  in  this  case,
however,  there  were  some  statements  indicating  that  clairvoyance  was
going  on.

During  one  week,  at  a  certain  time  every  day,  Dr.  Kjellman  placed
in  his  room  a  paper  with  a  word  written  on  it  and  an  object  near  it.
Alma  was  not  hypnotised  for  this,  but  was  asked  to  try  by  herself  to
discover  what  was  written  on  the  paper  and  what  the  object  was,  before
the  end  of  the  week.  At  the  end  of  the  time,  she  said  that  the  word
began  with  the  letter  H,  and  referred  to  the  object  that  was  standing
by  it,  but  she  could  give  no  description  of  the  object.

Dr.  Kjellman  informs  me  that  the  paper  had  written  on  it  the  word
Hund  (dog),  and  beside  it  were  placed  a  pistol  and  a  vase  for  floM-ers.

Another  subject  had  said  that  the  object  was  a  glass  vase,  possibly
on  a  stand.

The  last  trial  made  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Kjellman  took  place  on

p  2


212


Dr.  Alfred  Backman.


May  1st  in  the  same  year,  at  1.30  to  2  p.m.  It  was  arranged  that
something  should  be  written  on  a  piece  of  paper  and  some  common
objects  put  on  a  table.  After  having  received  my  account,  Dr.
Kjellman  told  me  what  the  arrangements  had  been.  On  a  little  table
near  the  middle  window  was  placed  a  sheet  of  paper  supported  by  a
photograph  stand.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  paper  was  written  Land
(country)  and  below  Tory  (market-place).  On  another  table  there  were
several  piles  of  books  and  a  large  nickel  cup  to  hold  visiting  cards.
Two  ladies  and  Dr.  Kjellman  were  present.

With  regard  to  this,  Alma  said  that  the  paper  was  near  the
window  (when  awake,  she  said  "  on  the  wall  near  the  window  "),  that
two  words  were  written  on  it — the  first  letter  was  M,  the  second  A,  the
third  R  or  N — (when  awake,  that  "  the  word  suggested  something  like
spring,  when  you  looked  at  it").  "On  the  table  some  square  thing  was
lying.  I  think  it  is  leather, — it  looks  spotted — I  believe  it  is  something
to  keep  papers  in  (perhaps  the  cover  of  a  book  1 — Backman),  something
else  that  looks  like  a  basket — like  a  basket  for  fruit  [yes,  not  unlike. —
Kjellman],  quite  like  a  metal  fruit-basket.  I  do  not  think  there  are
more  than  three  people  in  the  room,  two  ladies  and  a  gentleman."

I  have  tried  several  times  to  make  the  clairvoyants  read  in  a
(so-called)  supersensuous  manner,  and  they  have  succeeded  pretty
well.  I  have  never  remarked  any  difference  in  the  results  when  the
hypnotiser  knew  the  words  or  when  they  were  quite  unknown  to  all
persons  present.  They  have  seldom  read  the  actual  words,  generally
they  only  give  a  summary  account  of  the  meaning.  I  shall  cite  a  few
such  experiments,  some  of  which  have  been  carried  out  by  the  clair-
voyant putting  the  writing,  well  enclosed  in  a  perfectly  opaque
envelope,  under  her  pillow,  and  trying  to  find  out  what  was  in  it
during  a  natural  sleep.

Record.  Miss  Ebba  Lundberg  received  on  February  7th  an  envelope
sealed  with  five  seals,  inside  which  Dr.  Backman  had  written  something
unknown  to  both  of  us.  I,  E.  Lundberg,  who  had  received  no  indication
as  to  the  content  of  the  writing,  returned  the  envelope  to-day  with  the  seals
unbroken  and  uninjured,  declaring  that  the  writing  contained  something
about  the  power  of  hypnotism  to  cure  illnesses,  if  only  it  is  believed  in.

The  writing,  which  could  not  have  been  read  by  any  ordinary  means,
was  opened  by  me,  Sophie  Louise  Posse,  and  was  found  to  contain  a
prescription  form,  on  which  was  written  in  large  letters,  "  Believe  and  you
will  be  healed  !  "

I  affirm  that  this  experiment  was  genuine  and  that  no  deceit  was
exercised.


(Signed)


Ebba  Lundberg.
Sophie  Louise  Posse.


Kalmar,  February  14th,  1890.


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


213


In  a  similar  experiment  at  another  time,  Miss  Lundberg  said  that
■  Kalmar  "  was  written  on  the  paper.  The  Avord  really  was  "  Karma,"
and  it  was  the  only  word  on  the  paper.

On  another  occasion  I  received  an  envelope  sealed  with  many  seals
from  one  of  my  colleagues.  He  said  that  it  contained  a  letter  and
begged  me  to  find  out  what  it  was  about.  It  was  not  possible  to  see
.anything  of  it  by  normal  eyes,  and  the  clairvoyants  (for  I  tried  two)
were  never  allowed  to  touch  it  while  they  were  alone,  or  in  a  way  that
rendered  deceit  possible.

Miss  Hilda  Ljunggren,  while  hypnotised,  gave  a  description  first  of
a  town,  plainly  enough  to  make  me  understand  that  it  was  not  a
Swedish  town,  also  a  minute  description  of  a  man  of  40,  with  luxuriant
chestnut  hair,  long  well-kept  whiskers,  nose  slightly  crooked,  deep  blue
eyes,  a  deep  wrinkle  from  the  root  of  the  nose,  fairly  tall  (may  not  all
this  apply  to  Braid  1 — Backman),  a  learned  man.  She  saw  him  sitting
at  a  table,  occupied  with  his  work ;  it  seemed  as  if  he  had  written  a
book,  which  treated  of  hypnotism,  and  something  more  also — something
scientific.  She  said  that  the  writing  inside  the  envelope  was  not  in
the  form  of  a  letter;  it  contained  about  six  lines  and  expressed  a  doubt
whether  hypnotism  could  help  in  certain  cases ;  two  persons  had
disputed  about  it.

I  communicated  all  this  to  my  honoured  colleague,  at  the  same  time
returning  the  envelope  undamaged  to  him.  He  sent  me  back  the
envelope  intact,  so  that  I  might  open  it  myself,  which  I  did.  It  con-
tained a  piece  of  notepaper,  on  which  was  written  in  four  lines  the
motto  used  by  Braid  in  his  book  on  Hypnotism  :  "  Unlimited  scepti-
cism is  equally  the  child  of  imbecility  as  implicit  credulity."

In  the  month  of  October,  1888,  the  neighbourhood  of  Kalmar  was
shocked  by  a  horrible  murder  committed  in  the  parish  of  Wissefjerda,
which  is  about  50  kilometres  from  Kalmar  as  the  crow  flies.  What
happened  was  that  a  farmer,  named  P.  J.  Gustafsson,  had  been  killed
by  a  shot  while  driving,  having  been  forced  to  stop  by  stones  being  put
on  the  road.  The  murder  had  been  committed  in  the  evening,  and  a
certain  tramp  was  suspected  because  Gustafsson,  in  his  capacity  of
under-bailiff,  had  arrested  him,  and  he  had  then  undergone  several
years'  penal  servitude.1

This  was  all  that  either  I  or  the  public  knew  about  the  case  on
November  1st  in  the  same  year  ;  the  place  where  the  murder  was
committed  and  the  persons  implicated  in  it  were  quite  unknown  both
to  me  and  to  the  clairvoyant.

II  afterwards  found  that  this  statement  about  the  tramp  being  suspected  was  only
invented  to  allay  the  fears  of  the  persons  really  suspected  of  the  crime.


214


Br.  Alfred  Bachmcm.


On  the  same  day,  November  1st,  having  some  reason  to  believe
that  such  a  trial  would  be  at  least  partially  successful,  I  experimented
with  a  clairvoyant,  Miss  Agda  Olsen,  to  try  if  it  was  possible  to  get
some  information  in  this  way  about  such  an  event.

The  judge  of  the  neighbourhood,  who  had  promised  to  be  present,
was  unfortunately  prevented  from  coming.  The  clairvoyant  was.
hypnotised  in  my  wife's  presence  and  was  then  ordered  "to  look  for
the  place  where  the  murder  had  been  committed  and  see  the  whole
scene,  follow  the  murderer  in  his  flight,  and  describe  him  and  his  home
and  the  motive  for  the  murder."  Miss  Olsen  then  spoke  as  follows,,
in  great  agitation,  sometimes  using  violent  gestures.  I  took  notes  of
her  exact  words  and  reproduce  them  here  fully.

"It  is  between  two  villages — I  see  a  road — in  a  wood — now  it  is  coming
— the  gun — now  he  is  coming  along,  driving — the  horse  is  afraid  of  the
stones — hold  the  horse  !  hold  the  horse  !  now  !  now  he  is  killing  him — he
was  kneeling  when  he  fired — blood  !  blood  ! — now  he  is  running  in  the
wood — seize  him  !  he  is  running  in  an  opposite  direction  to  the  horse  in
many  circuits — not  on  any  footpaths.  He  wears  a  cap  and  grey  clothes —
light — has  long  coarse  brown  hair,1  which  has  not  been  cut  for  a  long  time
— grey-blue  eyes  —  treacherous  looks  —  great  dark  brown  beard  —  he  is
accustomed  to  work  on  the  land.  I  believe  he  has  cut  his  right  hand.  He
has  a  scar  or  a  streak  between  his  thumb  and  forefinger.  He  is  suspicious-
and  a  coward.

"  The  murderer's  home  is  a  red  wooden  house,  standing  a  little  way  back
from  the  road.  On  the  ground-floor  is  a  room  which  leads  into  the  kitchen
and  from  that  again  into  the  passage.  There  is  also  a  larger  room  which
does  not  communicate  with  the  kitchen.  The  church  of  Wissefjerda  is
situated  obliquely  to  your  right  when  you  are  standing  in  the  passage.

"  His  motive  was  enmity;  it  seems  as  if  he  had  bought  something —taken
something — a  paper.  He  went  away  from  home  at  daybreak,  and  the
murder  was  committed  in  the  evening."

Miss  Olsen  was  then  awakened  and,  like  all  my  subjects,  she
remembered  perfectly  what  she  had  been  seeing,  which  had  made  a
very  profound  impression  on  her ;  she  added  several  things  which  I  did
not  write  down.

On  November  6th  (Monday)  I  met  Miss  Olsen,  and  she  told  me
in  great  agitation  that  she  had  met  the  murderer  from  Wissefjerda
in  the  street.  He  was  accompanied  by  a  younger  person  and  followed
by  two  policemen,  and  was  walking  from  the  police  office  to  the  gaol.
I  at  once  expressed  my  doubts  of  her  being  right,  partly  because
country  people  are  generally  arrested  by  the  country  police,  partly
because  they  are  always  taken  directly  to  gaol. But  when  she  insisted

1  On  seeing  the  supposed  murderer  for  the  first  time  several  months  later,  I  could
test  the  accuracy  of  the  description.  He  was  bald,  but  had  let  the  hair  on  his  neck
grow  long,  and,  by  combing  it  over  his  head,  hid  his  baldness  completely.


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


215


on  it,  and  maintained  that  it  was  the  person  she  had  seen  when  asleep,
I  went  to  the  police  office.

I  inquired  if  anyone  had  been  arrested  on  suspicion  of  the  crime
in  question,  and  a  police-constable  answered  that  such  was  the  case,
and  that,  as  they  had  been  taken  to  the  town  on  Sunday,  they  had  been
kept  in  the  police-station  overnight  and  after  that  had  been  obliged  to
go  on  foot  to  gaol,  accompanied  by  two  constables.  As  to  what
happened  at  my  visit  to  the  police  office,  the  police-constable,  T.  A.
Ljung,  has  kindly  given  the  following  account : — •

At  Dr.  A.  Backman's  request  I  give  here  an  account  of  the  occasion
when  he  came  to  the  police  office  and  asked  for  me,  who,  he  knew,1  had
assisted  in  arresting  the  former  farmer,  Niklas  Jonasson,  and  his  son,  Per
August  Niklasson,  at  Lassamala,  in  the  parish  of  Wissefjerda,  on  suspicion  of
having  murdered  the  farmer,  Peter  Johan  Gustafsson,  at  Buggehult.  Dr.
Backman  said  that  by  hypnotising  a  woman  he  had  obtained  some  informa-
tion about  the  murder  from  her.

P.  J.  Gustafsson  had  been  murdered  on  October  24th,  1888,  probably
about  4  p.m.,  on  the  public  road  between  the  villages  of  Buggehult  and
Lassamala.  On  November  4th  the  aforesaid  persons,  being  strongly
suspected  of  being  the  murderers,  were  arrested  by  J.  Malmberg,  the
superintendent  of  the  police  in  Kalmar,  on  which  occasion  I  was  present.

On  November  6th,  in  the  same  year,  Dr.  Backman  came  to  the  police
office,  wishing  to  speak  to  the  superintendent,  but  the  latter  not  being
present  at  the  moment,  he  addressed  himself  to  me  with  regard  to  a
memorandum  that  he  brought  with  him  and  read  to  me.  He  put  several
questions  to  me  about  the  place  where  the  murder  was  committed,  the
dwelling  of  the  persons  suspected  of  the  murder,  &c.  Dr.  Backman  on
this  occasion  described  quite  accurately  the  appearance  of  the  house,  its
furniture,  how  the  rooms  were  situated,  where  the  suspected  men  lived,  and
gave  a  very  correct  account  of  Niklas  Jonasson's  personal  appearance.
The  doctor  also  asked  me  if  I  had  observed  that  Jonasson  had  a  scar  on  his
right  hand.  I  had  not  then  observed  it,  but  since  then  I  have  ascertained
that  it  really  is  so,  and  Jonasson  says  that  he  got  it  from  an  abscess.

One  of  Dr.  Backman's  assertions — that  the  church  of  that  or  another
parish  could  be  seen  from  the  house  of  the  supposed  murderers — did  not
accord  with  the  facts.2

I  am  convinced  that  Dr.  Backman  could  not  possibly  have  got  this
information  in  any  ordinary  way,  and  I  also  know  that  the  hypnotised  subject
had  not,  up  to  that  time,  seen  the  parish  of  Wissefjerda  and  consequently
could  not  have  the  least  idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  place.

I  affirm  the  truth  of  this  account  on  my  honour  and  conscience.

(Signed  and  sealed)  T.  A.  Ljung,

Police-constable  at  Kalmar.

Kalmar,  June  27th,  1889.

1  A  constable  in  the  outer  room  had  told  me  this. — Backman.

-  It  is,  however,  correct  if  you  suppose  it  possible  to  see  through  a  large  forest. —
Backman.


216


Br.  Alfred  Backman.


The  trial  was  a  long  one  and  showed  that  Gustafsson  had  agreed  to
buy  for  Jonasson,  but  in  his  own  name,  the  latter's  farm,  which  was
sold  by  auction  on  account  of  Jonasson's  debts.  (This  is  what  is  called
a  thief's  bargain.)  Gustafsson  bought  the  farm,  but  kept  it  for  him-
self. The  statements  of  the  accused  men  were  very  vague ;  the  father
had  prepared  an  alibi  with  much  care,  but  it  failed  to  account  for  just
the  length  of  time  that  was  provably  enough  to  commit  the  murder  in.
The  son  tried  to  prove  an  alibi  by  means  of  two  witnesses,  but  these
confessed  that  they  had  given  false  evidence,  which  he  had  bribed
them  to  do  when  they  were  in  prison  with  him  on  account  of  another
matter.

But  though  the  evidence  against  the  defendants  was  very  strong,  it
was  not  considered  that  there  was  sufficient  legal  evidence,  and — there
being  no  jury  in  Sweden — they  were  left  to  the  verdict  of  posterity.

As  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  account,  I  have  sometimes  in
carrying  on  these  experiments  made  the  clairvoyant  look,  while  awake,
in  a  little  crystal,  placed  in  a  small  wooden  tablet  (Hansen's  model).
I  will  give  here  oidy  one  example,  and  one  which  might  be  explained
by  thought-transference — as  there  was  one  person  in  the  room  who
knew  of  the  events  described.

I  told  the.  clairvoyant,  Miss  Olsen,  to  see  in  the  crystal  what  Miss

 ,  who  was  present,  had  been  doing  the  night  before. After  a  few

moments,  she  said  that  she  saw  a  meadow  in  the  crystal,  and  in  it  a
certain  number  (giving  the  number  correctly)  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,
who  were  dancing  and  drinking  champagne.  This  seemed  to  her  very
improbable,  because  it  was  then  November,  a  season  that  is  not  chosen
in  this  country  for  picnics.  She  described  minutely  several  other
things  which  were  not  written  down,  but  were  quite  correct,  according
to  what  Miss  said  later  on.1

T  have  sometimes  tried  to  discover  whether  a  clairvoyant  could
really  see  something  that  had  not  yet  taken  place,  but  there  are
many  reasons  why  all  my  experiments  cannot,  at  least  for  the  present,
be  published.  I  will  give  only  two  instances,  which  seem  to  me
remarkable  in  several  respects.

1  In  a  letter  dated  December  10th,  1800,  Dr.  Backman  says  : —

"  Several  persons  were  present.  No  notes  were  taken,  but  the  story  made  so  much

sensation  that  it  has  not  been  forgotten. Miss  supplemented  the  account  to-day

by  reminding  me  that  on  looking  into  the  crystal,  Miss  Olsen  first  gave  a  perfect

description  of  a  lady  with  whom  Miss  had  talked  on  meeting  her  in  the  street

the  day  before;  she  described  her  face,  her  dress,  &c,  very  accurately,  and  said
besides  that  she  had  two  gold  rings  on  the  fourth  finger  of  her  left  hand  (a  sign  of

marriage). After  that  Miss  Olsen  suddenly  began  to  laugh  and  said  :  '  Miss  is

in  a  merry  company— they  are  dancing— the  corks  of  the  champagne  bottles  are
jumping,  &c.'  Miss— — cannot  remember  that  any  wrong  detail  was  given  by


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


217


Some  clays  before  Christmas,  1888,  I  hypnotised  Miss  Hilda
Ljunggren,  and  asked  her  to  go  to  the  castle  at  Stockholm  and  see  the
King's  Christmas  presents  as  they  would  be  arranged  on  Christmas
Eve.  She  then,  making  a  great  effort,  described  some  things  which  I
wrote  down ;  she  saw  them  placed  in  a  room,  and  described,  for
instance,  a  piece  of  stuff  of  an  artistic  kind,  such  as  is  found  at  the
■"Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Art  Needlework"  at  Stockholm.  It  was
spread  over  a  sofa,  but  she  could  not  tell  if  it  was  a  sofa-cover,  or  a
portiere,  or  a  curtain.  Another  thing — an  image,  as  she  called  it — she
could  not  look  at,  because  such  a  strong  light  was  coming  from  it  that
"  it  hurt  her  eyes."

The  editor  of  the  Kalmar  newspaper,  The  Barometer,  has  kindly
given  the  following  evidence  : —

According  to  Dr.  Backman's  request,  I  state  that  I  received  from  him
on  December  23rd,  1888,  a  sealed  envelope,  which  I  kept  carefully  locked
up.  On  December  28th  of  the  same  year,  I  opened  the  envelope  in  the
presence  of  M.  Jonsson,  the  sub-editor,  and  of  G.  Ekerot.  It  contained
the  following  writing  :  —


His  Majesty  the  King  will  receive,  among  other  Christmas  gifts,

(1)  A  piece  of  sculpture,  representing  an  equestrian  figure.

(2)  A  case  or  box  of  a  curious  yellow  colour.

(3)  Something  uncommon,  that  I  cannot  name,  shining,  and  about  one
foot  high,  the  lower  part  of  it  in  the  form  of  a  pillar.

(4)  A  brown  and  black  portfolio  containing  pictures  or  drawings.

(5)  A  clock.

(6)  A  piece  of  stuff  (or  a  sofa-cover)  of  art  texture.

(7)  An  image  with  quite  a  flood  of  light  about  it.

(8)  A  china  vase,  with  flowers  on  a  light  ground."


Kalmar,  June  Vtth,  1889.

We  testify  that  the  writing  which  was  enclosed  in  the  envelope  con-
tained exactly  what  has  been  quoted  above.


Miss  Olsen,  except  that  she  thinks  the  number  of  persons  present  was  not  correctly
given."

With  Dr.  Backman's  permission,  we  wrote  to  Miss  asking  for  her  confirmation

of  these  incidents,  and  she  has  kindly  replied  as  follows  : —

"  I  am  very  willing  to  give  you  a  description  of  what  I  saw  and  heard  at  Dr.
Backman's,  the  day  he  has  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  you.

"When  I  came  to  him,  he,  made  a  hypnotic  experiment  with  Miss  Olsen,  who
should  endeavour  to  find  some  papers  lying  somewhere  in  Dr.  Backman's  apartment,
and,  to  my  great  surprise,  she  succeeded  in  finding  them.  After  her  being  awakened,
Dr.  Baekman  gave  her  a  large  glass  button  and  asked  her  to  look  in  it  and  see  if  she
could  find  out  what  I  had  done  the  day  before.  She  succeeded  even  in  this  to  an
astonishing  degree."  This  letter  is  dated  March  8th,  1891.— Ed.


Kalmar,  December  23rd,  1888.


G.  Hj.  Petersson,
Editor  of  The  Barometer.


(Signed)


218


Br.  Alfred  Baclcman.


Unfortunately  I  could  only  refer  to  the  accounts  given  in  the
newspapers  to  verify  these  statements,  and,  in  them,  only  a  certain
number  of  the  King's  Christmas  presents  were  mentioned.  They
said  : — ■

' '  The  King  received  among  other  things  .  .  .  curtains  and  portieres,
and  candlesticks  for  his  writing-table.  From  the  Queen  an  antique  table  in
the  baroque  style,  with  gilt  and  carved  feet  ;  all  bought  from  the  Society
for  the  Promotion  of  Art  Needlework.  From  the  Prince  and  Princess
Royal  two  silver-plated  girandoles  of  chased  copper1  and  a  card-table.
From  Prince  Charles  a  leather  portfolio.  From  the  Princess  Royal  of
Denmark  a  china  vase.  Among  the  many  Christmas  presents  of  the  King
were  several  large  photographs."

We  certify  that  the  above  may  be  read  in  the  Kalmar  newspaper,  The
Barometer,  of  December  29th,  1888.

j  G'UNNAK  EKEKOT.

)  Martin  Jonsson.

Sometimes,  as  I  mentioned  before,  I  directed  the  clairvoyant  to
hear  answers  to  my  questions  spoken  by  a  so-called  "guide."  On  these
occasions,  Alma  has  surprised  everyone  by  generally  pronouncing
English  astonishingly  well,  though  she  had  never  heard  the  names
spoken,  and  has  also  shown  a  remarkable  power  of  finding  her  way
in  London  and  telling  the  situations  of  streets  and  places,  which  were
perfectly  unknown  to  all  present.

The  following  testimony  relates  to  such  an  experiment : —
In  conformity  with  the  wish  of  Dr.  A.  Packman,  I  assert  that,  on  the
13th  of  this  month,  he  gave  me  a  closed  and  sealed  envelope,  with  the
request  that  I  would  keep  it  and  open  it  on  a  day  that  he  had  fixed  ;  that  I
took  the  envelope,  and  kept  it  in  a  locked  drawer  in  my  house  ;  and  that
to-day,  at  Dr.  Backman's  request,  I  have  broken  the  seals  and  opened  the
envelope  and  found  that  it  contained  a  paper  with  this  writing  : —

"Kalmar,  December  8th,  1888.
' '  On  Saturday,  the  22nd  of  this  month  of  December,  the  Whitechapel
murderer  will  commit  his  last  murder  in  London. It  will  take  place  at
10.30  in  the  evening,  in  a  street  the  name  of  which,  according  to  the
Swedish  pronunciation,  begins  with  Black  (probably  Blakesley-street).

"  Alfred  Backman."
(Signed) Oscar  Mellin,  Alderman,  Public  Notary.
Kalmar,  December  28th,  1888.

In  The  Barometer  of  December  29th  appeared  the  following  : —

"Murder  in  London. — A  telegram  from  the  above-mentioned  town,
dated  the  22nd  of  this  month,  says  : — To-night,  in  the  quarter  of  Poplar,
a  woman,  about  thirty  years  of  age,  who  has  not  yet  been  identified,  was

1  The  castle  is  lighted  with  electric  light.


Experiments  in  Clairvoyance.


21ft


found  strangled,  under  circumstances  which  make  it  probable  that  she  was
the  victim  of  the  Whitechapel  murderer,  who  has  now  perhaps  begun  to
employ  a  new  method  of  murdering."

We  certify  that  the  above  account  is  to  be  found  in  the  Kalmar  news-
paper, The  Barometer,  of  December  29th,  1888.

(Signed)  /GitNNArEkekot
v  (  Martin  Jonsson.  1

No  one  can  be  more  sensible  than  myself  of  the  defects  in  the
experiments  which  I  have  here  related,  but  I  believe  with  Professor
Ilichet  that  such  trials,  though  we  can  never  command  success  in  them,
prove  that  we  have  to  do  here  with  a  human  faculty  not  yet  recognised
and  which  is  worthy  of  being  studied  and  established  by  scientific
experiments.

If  these  modest  attempts  of  mine  are  able  to  stimulate  others  to
further  investigations,  I  shall  have  attained  my  aim  in  publishing  them.

Alfred  Backman.

Kalmar,  August,  1890.

Case  accidentally  omitted  by  Dr.  Backman  and  sent  later.

Sub-Lieutenant  Werner  had  lost  a  little  silver  revolver,  about  3
cm.  long,  which  he  valued  very  much. He  lost  it  in  a  sandy  field,  and

1  We  have  made  inquiries  as  to  the  murder  reported  in  the  Kalmar  Barometer  and
find  that  the  Times  of  December  22nd,  1888,  has  a  report  of  an  inquest  held  upon  the
body  of  a  woman,  about  30  years  of  age,  found  in  Clarke's-yard,  High-street,  Poplar,
about  4  a.m.  on  December  20th.  The  inquest  was  held  on  the  21st,  and  the  divisional
surgeon  in  his  evidence  gave  his  opinion  that  death  was  due  to  suffocation  by  strangu-
lation. The  Times  observes  that  the  mystery  can  only  be  compared  to  that  which
attended  the  recent  series  of  crimes  in  the  same  district.  The  account  of  the  inquest
shows  that  the  body  was  discovered  very  soon  after  the  murder.  There  seems,  how-
ever, to  have  been  some  further  doubt  as  to  the  cause  of  the  death,  since  the  police
authorities  informed  us  in  answer  to  our  inquiries  that  the  woman,  who  was  named
Catherine  Millet,  died  in  a  drunken  sleep  and  not  by  homicidal  violence.  However,
the  Times  of  December  29th  states  that  "nothing  of  the  nature  of  a  clue  has  been
discovered,  and  the  medical  men  still  adhere  to  the  opinion  that  deceased  was  foully
murdered. "

The  discrepancies  between  the  English  accounts  and  that  appearing  in  the
Kalmar  Barometer  were  pointed  out  to  Dr.  Backman,  and  we  further  asked  him  if
supposed  Whitechapel  murders  were  often  reported  in  the  Swedish  newspapers,
or  if  this  was  the  only  case  about  that  time. He  replies  : —

"When  Alma  predicted  the  murder,  there  had  not  been  any  notices  about
'Jack'  for  two  or  three  months;  since  the  notice  about  the  woman  found  murdered
and  mutilated  in  the  Thames  at  the  end  of  the  summer  of  1888  up  to  the  middle  of
1889,  there  was  no  other  notice  of  a  murder  supposed  to  have  been  committed  by
'  Jack '  except  that  of  the  murder  of  December  22nd,  1888,  and  if  that  notice  was
not  true,  it  was  not  invented  in  Sweden.  It  appeared  in  all  the  Swedish  Press,  and  I
saw  it  first  in  the  journal  Dae/ens  Nyhctcr  of  December  28th."

It  will  be  observed  that,  whatever  the  facts  about  the  supposed  murder  were,
there  remains  a  very  striking  coincidence  between  Alma's  predictions  and  the  state-
ments in  the  Kalmar  Barometer. — Ed.


220


Dr.  Alfred  BdcJcmdrt.


eight  soldiers  searched  for  it  in  vain  for  half-a-day.  Some  days  after-
wards, I  hypnotised  Anna  Samuelsson  and  went  with  her,  still  asleep,
to  the  held,  where  I  told  her  to  search  for  the  revolver.  She  went  to
a  certain  spot  in  the  field,  where  she  kept  on  going  from  side  to  side,
but  could  not  find  the  revolver.  I  then  asked  if  she  could  tell  me
whether  I  should  succeed  in  finding  it.  Yes,  she  answered,  she  saw
Lieutenant  Werner  wearing  it  again.

Next  day  I  suggested  to  another  young  patient  named  Cecilia,  that
when  she  went  away  from  the  military  hospital,  where  we  then  were,
she  should  go  to  the  spot  where  the  revolver  was  lying,  take  it  out  of
the  sand,  and  give  it  to  me  on  the  following  day.

"When  she  came  to  me  on  the  following  day,  she  actually  brought
the  revolver  with  her.  Her  mother  told  me  that  when  Cecilia  went
away  from  the  hospital,  she  walked  straight  to  a  very  sandy  part  of
the  field  (which  I  afterwards  found  was  the  same  place  that  Anna
went  to),  removed  a  little  sand  and  found  the  revolver,  which  is  now
again  worn  by  its  owner.

A.  Backman.

Dr.  Backman  writes  later,  in  answer  to  inquiries : —
' '  As  to  the  revolver,  I  wrote  at  once  to  Lieutenant  Werner,  telling  him
the  circumstances  of  the  finding  ;  I  have  heard  him  repeat  them  several
times,  so  that  I  am  sure  that  I  have  neither  forgotten  nor  altered  anything
in  the  account  that  I  sent  you.

' '  I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  Cecilia  and  her  mother.  They  are  some-
where in  the  north  of  Smaland,  hut  as  soon  as  I  can  get  their  address  I  will
try  to  obtain  an  account  from  the  mother.  Both  she  and  her  husband  were
much  respected  in  the  parish  in  which  they  then  lived  and  she  was  a  very
pious  woman.  The  account  that  she  gave  me  is  therefore  probably  true,  and
in  any  case,  there  is  the  revolver  as  a  proof  of  it.  It  was  lost  on  about  June
20th  or  28th,  1889,  and  found  again  about  July  4th.  I  do  not  remember  the
exact  date."


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


221


III.

A CASE OF DOUBLE  CONSCIOUSNESS.
By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.

The  case  which  I  am  about  to  relate  has  many  points  of  interest.
The  secondary  condition  has,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  occurred  only
once  in  the  lifetime  of  the  subject ;  and  the  memory  of  it,  entirely
lost  during  waking  hours,  is  easily,  though  incompletely,  brought  back
by  putting  the  patient  into  the  hypnotic  trance.

Ansel  Bourne,  at  the  time  of  his  seizure,  was  an  itinerant  preacher
61  years  old,  and  residing  in  the  small  town  of  Greene,  in  the  State  of
Rhode  Island.  One  morning,  whilst  apparently  in  his  usual  state  of"
health,  he  disappeared,  and  in  spite  of  the  publicity  which  the  news-
papers gave  to  the  fact,  and  the  efforts  of  the  police  to  find  him,  he
remained  undiscovered  for  a  period  of  two  months,  at  the  end  of  which
time  he  turned  up  at  Norristown,  Pennsylvania,  where  for  the  previous
six  weeks  he  had  been  keeping  a  small  variety  store  under  the  name  of
A.  J.  Brown,  appearing  to  his  neighbours  and  customers  as  a  normal
person,  but  being,  as  it  would  seem,  in  a  somnambulistic  condition  all
the  while.  As  Elder  Bourne's  life  presents  at  least  one  other  incident
of  great  interest,  I  shall  give  a  sketch  of  its  entire  course,  as  an
introduction  to  my  account  of  the  episode  which  forms  the  main  sub-
ject of  this  paper.

Ansel  Bourne  is  of  New  England  parentage,  and  was  born  in  New
York  city,  July  8th,  1826.  His  maternal  grandfather  "  lost  his  mind  "
late  in  life  ("about  70  "),  but  seems  to  have  had  no  acute  form  of
insanity.  His  father  "became  dissipated,"  so  that  Ansel's  mother
and  he  separated  when  Ansel  was  only  seven  years  old,  and  the
boy's  early  life  was  spent  in  poverty,  with  little  schooling  and  much
work,  until  at  the  age  of  15  he  was  set  to  learn  the  carpenter's  trade
at  Olneyville,  Rhode  Island.  From  then  to  the  age  of  31  he  worked
at  his  trade  at  various  places  in  that  State.  Being  of  a  serious  turn
of  mind,  he  read  and  studied  a  good  deal  in  his  leisure  moments,  and
from  having  become  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church,  changed  at  last
into  a  convinced  atheist,  not  of  the  disputatious  and  aggressive  sort,
but  silent  and  stubborn,  as  he  is  wont  to  be  in  other  matters  which  are
exclusively  "  his  own  business."  Meantime  he  had  married,  in  1854,
and  had  children,  and  in  1857  was  living  at  Westerly,  R.I.,  next  door
to  Mr.  Taylor,  minister  of  the  so-called  "  Christian  "  Church,  for  whom


222


R.  Hodgson.


he  had  come  to  cherish  a  decided  feeling  of  enmity.  In  relating  the
crisis  of  that  year,  I  abridge  the  account  given  in  a  pamphlet1  which
has  had  a  wide  circulation.

On  Thursday,  August  6th,  1857,  he  was  brought  home  from  South  Kings-
ton in  a  condition  of  sickness,  perhaps  induced  by  labouring  beyond  his
strength  at  the  place  of  Mr.  Rowland  G.  Hazard.  After  reaching  home
{accompanied  by  Mr.  J.  E.  Brown),  he  rested  through  Friday,  Saturday,
and  Sunday,  and  was  very  much  restored.  Feeling  well  and  comfortable  on
Monday  morning,  August  10th,  he  was  disposed  to  return  to  his  work  at
South  Kingston,  a  distance  of  near  thirty  miles.  But  Mrs.  Bourne  per-
suaded him  to  relinquish  the  idea,  and  remain  at  home  that  week.  He
therefore  remained,  and  occupied  himself  with  labours  of  improvement  upon
his  own  place — painting  and  so  forth,  until  Thursday  night.  On  Friday,
August  14th,  the  hottest  day  of  the  season,  he  went  to  work  in  his  garden.
Between  the  hours  of  one  and  two  p.m.  he  experienced  much  pain  in  his
head,  and  was  obliged  to  relinquish  his  work  and  go  into  the  house.  After
staying,  perhaps,  three-quarters  of  an  hour  the  pain  left  him  and  he  returned
to  his  work  in  the  garden.  He  worked  until  it  was  dark,  at  night,  when  he
went  into  the  house,  and  enjoyed  refreshing  sleep  through  the  night.  In
the  morning,  on  Saturday,  he  felt  considerable  pain  in  his  head,  which  con-
tinued through  the  day.  At  night  the  pain  ceased  so  that  he  again  enjoyed
a  good  night's  rest.

On  the  afternoon  of  Sunday,  which  was  the  16th  of  August,  having  no
scruples  about  working  on  Sunday  as  freely  as  any  day,  he  went  to  work,
preparing  to  leave  home  again  for  awhile.  About  4  o'clock  he  went  out  to
cut  some  wood,  when,  having  some  feeling  in  his  head  which  he  does  not
remember  so  that  he  can  describe  it,  he  put  his  hand  to  his  head,  and  this
was  the  last  that  he  can  remember  that  took  place,  or  of  which  he  was  con-
scious at  the  time,  until  Tuesday,  the  18th.  From  Tuesday  morning  until
Wednesday  in  the  afternoon  he  was  perfectly  conscious  of  his  condition,
except,  as  friends  affirm,  that  he  was  a  little  delirious  on  Tuesday  night.  He
ran  down  rapidly  and  his  restoration  or  recovery  became  very  doubtful.
This  was  understood  to  be  the  judgment  of  his  physician,  Dr.  Thurston.
On  Wednesday  his  mother  visited  him.  She  asked  him  if  he  was  ready  to
die.  He  answered  that  he  was.  But  this  answer  was  given  without  a  single
thought  of  God,  or  a  state  of  existence  beyond  the  grave.  All  his  thoughts
of  anxiety  Avere  about  his  family. To  leave  them  was  painful.

Soon  after,  a  change  took  place,  and  he  rapidly  recovered.  In  about
three  weeks  he  was  able  to  return  to  his  work  at  South  Kingston.  It  was
on  Monday,  September  7th,  that  he  went  to  that  place. He  was  able  to

\  ''Wonderful  Works  of  God:  A  narrative  of  the  wonderful  facts  in  the  case  of
Ansel  Bourne,  of  West  Shelby,  Orleans  Co.,  N.Y.,  who,  in  the  midst  of  opposition
to  the  Christian  religion,  was  suddenly  struck  blind,  dumb,  and  deaf  ;  and  after  18
days  was  suddenly  and  completely  restored,  in  the  presence  of  hundreds  of  persons,  in
the  Christian  Chapel  at  Westerly,  on  the  15th  of  November,  1857.  Written  under  his
direction."  (Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1858,  by  Ansel  Bourne,
in  the  clerk's  office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  the  State  of
New  York. )


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


223


work  by  day,  but  could  not  rest  at  night,  on  account  of  neuralgia  and  a
severe  pain  in  his  head.  On  Friday,  by  advice  of  his  friends,  he  returned
home  again.  On  Monday,  September  14th,  Dr.  Thurston  visited  him,  and
continued  his  attendance  by  frequent  visits  until  about  the  1st  of  October.
During  this  month  he  broke  down  twice  in  attempting  to  work,  and  had  to
go  to  bed.  But,  on  the  whole,  he  improved,  so  that  by  the  28th  he  thought
himself  about  well.

On  Sunday  the  25th  of  October  he  spent  the  day  and  evening  at  his  own
house,  playing  at  cards.  He  was  so  settled  in  his  ideas  of  right  and  privilege
to  do  as  he  pleased  on  that  day,  that  if  the  Christian  minister,  who  lived
next  door  to  him,  Rev.  John  Taylor,  had  come  into  his  house,  he  is  sure  he
should  not  have  moved  from  his  seat.  Some  of  those  who  thus  spent  the
day  with  hirn  have  since  united  with  the  Christian  Church  in  Westerly.  This
playing  was  not  for  money,  but  merely  for  amusement.  He  has  never  played
for  money.

On  the  28th  of  October  he  started  for  the  village  of  Westerly,  about  one
mile  to  the  north  of  his  house.  When  he  had  gone  perhaps  a  quarter  of  a
mile,  and  had  begun  to  descend  towards  the  village,  he  was  perceived  by
some  persons  to  be  walking  quite  fast,  as  though  feeling  quite  well.  He  was
conscious  of  no  unusual  feelings,  until  a  thought  came  up  vividly  in  his  mind
that  he  ought  to  go  to  meeting  (i.e.,  to  church).  This  thought  was  connected
with  no  conscientious  feeling  of  duty  to  go  to  meeting,  but  seemed  a  mere
internal  and  unaccountable  suggestion.  To  the  suggestion  he  answered,
"Where  1  "  To  this  inquiry  he  was  answered  in  the  same  manner,  "To  the
Christian  chapel."  To  this  idea  his  spirit  rose  up  in  decided  and  bitter
opposition,  and  he  said  within  himself,  ' '  I  would  rather  be  struck  deaf  and
dumb  for  ever  than  to  go  there."  He  continued  onward  for  eighteen  or
twenty  rods,  when  a  friend  of  his  passed  by  him  on  a  lumber-reach,  to  whom  he
bowed  as  the  man  passed.  Immediately  afterwards  he  felt  dizzy,  and  desired
to  sit  down.  Looking  ahead  he  saw  nothing  that  he  could  sit  down  on.
Turning  back  he  saw  at  a  little  distance  a  flat  stone  close  to  the  side  of  a
stone  wall.  He  went  to  that  immediately  and  sat  down.  He  leaned  his
head  against  the  wall  and  felt  immediately  relieved  of  his  dizziness,  and
supposed  he  should  be  able  in  a  minute  or  two  to  proceed  on  his  business.  He
then  looked  up  the  road,  toward  home,  and  saw  an  aged  man,  Mr.  John
Thompson,  approaching  him,  on  foot,  beside  a  waggon.  Mr.  Thonqxson  was
near  the  place  where  he  had  been  a  few  minutes  before,  when  the  idea  was
suggested  to  him  that  he  ought  to  go  to  meeting.  In  an  instant,  after
beholding  Mr.  Thompson,  it  seemed  as  though  some  powerful  hand  drew
something  down  over  his  head,  and  their  over  his  face,  and  finally  over  his
whole  body  ;  depriving  him  of  his  sight,  his  hearing,  and  his  speech,  and
rendering  him  perfectly  helpless.  Yet  he  had  as  perfect  power  of  thought
as  at  any  time  in  his  life.  His  mind  instantly  went  back  to  the  conflict  of
his  thoughts,  some  eight  or  ten  minutes  before.  The  terrible  decision  and
choice,  ' '  I  would  rather  be  struck  deaf  and  dumb  for  ever,  than  go  to  the
Christian  chapel,"  came  before  him  with  awful  significance.  It  seemed  that
God  had  truly  taken  him  at  his  word,  and  given  him  what  he  had  chosen.
The  decision  of  ten  years  before,  ' '  If  there  is  a  God,  and  He  will  show  me
from  His  hand,  I  will  believe  in  Him,"  now  came  to  memory. In  this,  too


224


R.  Hodgson.


it  appeared  that  God  had  taken  him  at  his  word.  He  trembled,  and  his
soul,  as  though  sinking  in  deep  waters,  acknowledged,  "  There  is  a  God."
The  sins  of  a  whole  lifetime  came  before  his  mind  in  an  instant,  like  a  flash
of  lightning.  And  how  awful  was  everything  !  He  was  not  only  deaf  and
dumb,  but,  more  dreadful  still,  he  was  perfectly  blind.  He  saw  no  one — he
heard  no  one — he  could  call  no  one — and  all  his  strength  was  gone.  Then
the  dreadful  question,  "  Am  I  to  remain  in  this  condition  1  "  He  thought
that  lie  was  about  to  die.  And  he  dared  not  in  his  secret  soul  ask  God  to
take  him  to  Himself.  It  appeared  to  him  that  such  a  request  would  be  a
greater  insult  to  a  holy  and  just  God  than  even  all  his  former  sins.  He  dared
not  to  think  of  so  insulting  God.  He  could  not  speak  to  ask  forgiveness  of
those  whose  forgiveness  he  would  have  gladly  sought.

After  the  brief  space  of  what  he  thinks  could  not  have  been  more  than
two  or  three  minutes,  he  was  taken  irp  and  put  in  a  waggon,  and  carried  away.
He  was  perfectly  sensible  of  all  this,  although  he  could  hear  nothing,  see
nothing,  and  communicate  nothing.  He  felt  the  motion  of  the  .waggon  and
the  touch  of  hands,  and  supposed  he  was  being  carried  towards  home,  which
was  the  case.  He  knew  and  realised  perfectly  when  he  was  carried  into  the
house  and  placed  in  a  chair.  He  wondered  why  they  should  have  placed  him
in  a  chair  rather  than  on  a  bed.  In  a  little  time  after,  he  felt  the  touch  of
hands  again,  which  took  him  from  the  chair  and  placed  him  on  a  bed.

Dr.  William  T.  Thurston  was  called  immediately.  In  a  letter  which  he
wrote  to  the  Providence  Journal,  under  date  of  November  20th,  he  says  of
this  visit,  "  I  heard  nothing  more  of  him  (after  the  2nd  of  October)  till  the
28th  of  that  month,  when  in  haste  I  was  summoned  to  him.  On  reaching
his  bedside  I  found  him  perfectly  insensible — very  much  in  the  condition
of  a  person  in  a  fainting  fit.  The  pupils  of  his  eyes  were  quite  insensible  of
light,  widely  dilated  and  not  contracting  on  the  application  of  sudden  and
vivid  light. He  was,  in  fact,  perfectly  insensible."

Mr.  Bourne  does  not  wish  to  question  the  honesty  and  sincerity  of
Dr.  Thurston,  when  he  says,  "He  was,  in  fact,  perfectly  insensible."  He
supposes  the  doctor  might  have  thought  so,  for  he  gave  him  no  evidence
to  the  contrary.  Yet,  he  says,  he  was  perfectly  sensible  to  the  touch  of
hands,  which  he  supposed  at  the  time  to  be  those  of  Dr.  Thurston.  He
knew  perfectly  well  when  his  eyelids  were  touched  and  drawn  ;  yet  he  saw
nothing,  he  heard  nothing,  and  lay  helpless  as  an  infant.  When  different
hands  touched  him  he  reasoned  with  himself,  and  thought  he  knew  which
was  the  doctor  and  which  was  his  wife,  when  they  were  handling  him  in  any
way.  When  touched,  at  certain  times,  he  felt  confident  that  it  was  by  his
children.  He  was  not  insensible,  as  the  doctor  seems  to  have  supposed.
His  mind  was  perfectly  active  all  of  the  time,  but  he  was  unable  to
communicate  any  thought  or  feeling  which  he  had  to  others,  so  that  they
could  know  that  he  was  sensible  of  what  was  passing.  About  him  all  was  as
silent  as  though  there  were  neither  a  God,  nor  life,  nor  motion  in  the  whole
wide  universe.  This  silence  was  as  though  the  soul  had  been  cast  into  a
deep,  bottomless,  and  shoreless  sepulchre,  where  dismal  silence  was  to  reign
eternally.  He  fully  acknowledged  the  justice  of  God  in  his  condemnation,
and  spurned  from  his  soul  the  thought  of  insulting  God  by  asking  mercy  for
such  a  sinner. He  scorned  to  ask  for  mercy  when  it  was  not  his  due.


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


225


During  the  night  he  gained  some  strength,  and  at  a  time  which  he
supposes  to  have  been  near  morning  he  was  anxious  to  know  where  he  was,
and  whether  he  had  really  been  placed  in  his  own  house,  and  among  his
friends.  But  how  could  he  know?  He  recollected  the  form  of  the  bedstead
posts,  and  the  position  which  the  bed  occupied,  upon  which  he  supposed  he
was  then  lying.  He  felt  of  the  posts  and  thought  he  was  certain  of  their
identity.  He  reached  out  near  the  head  of  the  bed,  to  see  if  there  was  a
window,  and  found  there  was.  He  was  then  fully  satisfied  that  he  was  in  his
own  house.

At  a  certain  time  which  he  supposed  to  be  morning,  he  felt  movements
on  his  bed,  and  soon  was  satisfied  that  his  little  children  were  with  him  and
were  kissing  him.  Their  familiar  expression  of  "Pa  ' "  he  could  no  longer  hear,
nor  any  sound  which  their  movements  made.  He  could  see  nothing  of
these  loved  ones,  but  he  was  sure  they  were  there,  and  that  they  were  address-
ing him  as  they  had  done  before.  But  the  silence  was  too  deep  to  be
broken,  and  appeared  too  awful  to  be  endured.

In  the  afternoon,  about  twenty-six  hours  from  the  time  he  was  stricken
down,  when  subject  to  no  unusual  sensation  or  feeling  in  his  head,  Ids  sight  was
restored  in  an  instant.  He  saw  his  wife  and  one  of  his  neighbours  standing
near,  with  their  lips  in  motion.  They  appeared  to  be  addressing  him,  as
though  unconscious  of  his  inability  to  hear.  It  appeared  to  him  then  that
they  were  ignorant  of  his  deafness.  He  made  signs  of  writing  on  his  hand,
when  his  wife  immediately  procured  a  pen  and  paper.  While  she  was  gone
after  pen  and  paper  the  question  arose  in  his  mind,  "  Are  you  now  willing
to  ask  forgiveness  of  all  those  whom  you  have  injured  ?  "  To  this  question
he  answered  affirmatively.  When  she  came  to  him  he  took  pen  and  paper
and  wrote  that  he  could  not  hear.

During  the  forenoon,  remembering  the  enmity  he  had  cherished  toward
Rev.  John  Taylor,  he  wrote  upon  a  slate  requesting  that  he  might  be  sent
for.  This  request  was  complied  with,  and  Mr.  Taylor  came  immediately.
Mr.  Bourne  asked  his  forgiveness  by  writing.  Mr.  Taylor  seized  his  hand,
pressing  it  so  earnestly,  and  with  evident  sympathy,  that  he  felt  fully
assured  that  his  enmity  was  freely  forgiven.  Mr.  Bourne  inquired  of  him  if
he  would  go  after  Mr.  Joshua  Thompson,  Jun. — toward  whom  he  had
cherished  so  much  enmity,  that  he  had  said  if  he  saw  him  drowning  he  would
not  help  him.

Toward  evening  Mr.  Charles  W.  Thompson,  a  brother  of  Mr.  Joshua
Thompson,  Jun.,  came  in,  and  took  him  by  the  hand.  He  inquired  after
his  health,  and  then  added,  "Will  not  your  brother  come?"  Just  as  Mr.
Bourne  wrote  this  question,  and  put  it  to  Mr.  Thompson,  his  brother
entered.  He  saw  him  approach,  and  he  seemed  to  glide  up  to  him  like  a
shadow,  for  to  him  his  approach  was  as  noiseless  as  though  the  man  had  been
a  spirit  only.  He  then  took  the  slate  and  wrote,  "  Will  you  forgive  me  I  "
The  answer  of  Mr.  Thompson  relieved  him  greatly.

As  soon  as  he  had  effected  a  reconciliation  with  his  fellow  men,  he  felt
a  great  measure  of  relief.  He  then  felt  emboldened  to  approach  God.  He
began,  in  the  solemn  and  silent  depths  of  his  soul,  to  offer  unutterable
prayer.  His  tongue  was  chained  to  his  teeth  when  he  attempted  to  utter
words. He  could  use  it  freely,  when  eating,  to  move  his  food. He  could

Q


226


B.  Hodgson.


use  it  to  clean  his  teeth,  as  freely  as  need  he,  but  when  he  attempted  to
form  words  it  was  as  though  chained  to  his  forward  teeth.  He  says  that  the
idea  of  his  having  no  use  of  his  tongue  is  wholly  erroneous.  But  he  could
not  use  it  for  speech.  He  could  pray,  but  his  prayers  were  the  supplications
of  the  mind  ;  his  bodily  powers  not  participating  in  the  act  of  supjilication.

Mr.  Bourne  then  requested  a  prayer  meeting  at  his  house.  Although  he
could  lend  no  listening  ear  to  the  supplications  of  those  present,  yet,  as  he
saw  their  faces  turned  towards  Heaven,  and  their  lips  in  motion,  he  felt
assured  that  they  were  praying  for  him.  He  became  calm.  He  wrote  letters
to  his  friends  signifying  his  decision  to  be  henceforth  on  the  Lord's  side.  In
this  way  he  sought  to  confess  Christ.  To  these  letters  he  received  kind  and
affectionate  replies.

On  Wednesday,  November  11th,  just  two  weeks  from  the  time  that  he
was  stricken  down,  he  was  carried  to  the  Christian  Chapel.  As  he  passed
along  he  could  see  the  people  moving  and  receive  visible  tokens  of  their
recognition,  but  it  was  all  in  silence.  People  seemed  gliding  about  so  noise-
lessly that  to  him  it  was  as  though  he  was  among  the  moving  dead.  Passing
into  the  chapel,  his  feelings  were  very  deep,  as  he  entered  the  vestry  among
the  people  he  had  a  little  time  before  so  much  desjnised.  He  wrote  a  brief
message  upon  his  slate,  which  was  read  to  the  assembly.  He  then  wished
to  signify  to  the  people  his  determination  to  live  for  the  honour  of  God
by  standing  up  before  the  congregation,  and  holding  up  his  hands.

The  appearance  of  Mr.  Bourne  at  that  time  is  described  in  the  Christian
Messenger,  edited  by  Mr.  Cummings,  as  follows:  "He  was  carried  to  the
church,  his  communications  were  read,  after  which,  with  streaming  eyes,  he
arose  and  lifted  his  arms  towards  Heaven,  and  expressed  as  best  he  could
his  gratitude  for  God's  mercy."

During  this  week  he  went  several  times  to  the  chapel  service  in  deep
emotion,  but  with  his  aphonia  still  unbroken.  On  the  morning  of  Sunday,
November  15th,  Mr.  Bourne  says  he  felt  more  anxious  than  ever  to  sjDeak.
His  distress,  because  he  could  not  speak,  was  exceedingly  great,  and  he
tried  harder  than  ever  to  speak  to  his  wife  ;  but  he  found  it  impossible.
When  he  considered  he  had  the  most  free  use  of  his  tongue  for  everything
else  but  to  speak  with,  and  was  unable  to  utter  a  single  word,  it  seemed  to
him  more  than  he  could  endure.

He  went  to  chapel  twice,  and  what  happened  in  the  afternoon  is  thus
described.  He  wrote  on  the  slate  the  following  message,  which  was  read  to
the  congregation  by  the  minister  : —

'•  I  have  been  led  to  think,  while  sitting  here,  why  I  have  been  called
from  the  ranks  of  sinners,  and  I  have  been  led  to  think  that  God  has  some-
thing for  me  to  do.  Why  I  have  come  up  here  to  the  place  of  all  others
which  three  weeks  ago  I  would  have  shunned,  1  know  not.  But,  oh  !  how
marvellous  are  the  ways  of  God  !  But  here  I  am,  for  what,  I  know  not.
But,  O  God  !  show  me  what  Thou  wouldst  have  me  to  do,  and  with  Thy
help,  O  God,  I  will  do  it  !  O  sinners  !  you  cannot  say  this  is  excitement  !
O  no  !  for  I  had  not  attended  any  of  the  meetings  !  No,  I  have  heard  no
preaching — no  prayers  !  No,  all  has  seemed  still  to  me  !  Oh,  if  you  cannot
believe  now,  you  would  not  if  one  had  risen  from  the  dead  !  Oh,  I  feel  as
though  the  prayers  of  the  dumb  had  been  heard  ! Why  I  feel  as  I  do  this


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.  227

afternoon,  I  cannot  tell,  but  I  do  feel  as  though  God  was  about  to  speak
to  Westerly,  in  what  way  I  know  not — but  oh,  may  God's  will  be  done."

The  effect  produced  by  the  reading  of  this  communication  upon  the
audience  was  very  great ;  but  the  effect  of  what  immediately  followed  was
extraordinary  beyond  description.  At  the  suggestion  made  by  Mr.  Taylor
for  him  to  rise  as  he  had  desired  to  do,  he  arose  in  the  pulpit,  with  the  most
evident  calmness,  and  lifted  up  his  hands  toward  Heaven.  He  then,  feeling
happy,  clapped  his  hands  without  hearing  the  least  sound.  He  then
extended  his  hands  apart,  as  at  first,  when,  in  an  instant,  every  manner  of
sound  which  came  from  the  moving  things  of  nature  broke  upon  his  ear,
distinct  as  a  peal  of  thunder,  and  his  tongue  was  unloosed  instantly,  his
countenance  changed,  and  he  exclaimed,  in  the  hearing  of  the  whole  crowded
assembly,  "Glory  to  God  and  the  Lamb  for  ever."  Big  drops  of  perspiration
chased  each  other  downward  from  his  temples.

What  immediately  followed  is  described  by  the  editor  of  the  Cliristian
Messenger,  who  has  before  been  referred  to  as  being  present,  as  follows  :
"  He  fell  upon  his  knees,  and  soon  commenced  praying  in  a  soft,  clear  tone
of  voice,  and  praising  God  for  what  He  had  done.  He  then  gave  a  most
feeling  exhortation  to  his  friends,  neighbours,  and  all  present,  urging  them
to  seek  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  and  live  for  God.  We  do  not  think  it
an  exaggeration  when  we  say  there  was  not  a  dry  eye  in  the  place.  How
wonderful  are  the  works  of  the  Almighty  !  We  were  ready  to  exclaim,  as
some  said,  when  Jesus  cured  the  sick  of  the  palsy  :  '  We  have  seen  strange
things  to-day.'  All  seemed  to  be  amazed,  and  many  glorified  God  for  His
mighty  work,  which  He  did  in  the  presence  of  them  all.  His  hearing  and
speech  were  both  returned,  and  many  hundreds  witnessed  a  most  solemn
vow  from  him  to  spend  the  remnant  of  his  days  in  doing  the  will  of  God,  so
far  as  he  could  know  it."  1

1  Dr.  Thurston,  who  attended  Mr.  Bourne,  wrote  the  following  letter  about  the
case  to  the  Providence  Journal  : —

Westerly,  R.I.,  November  2bth,  1857.

On  a  visit  in  a  neighbouring  village,  a  day  or  two  since,  my  attention  was  directed
to  the  articles  in  your  journal  of  the  17th  and  18th  instants,  relating  to  the  "  Singular
Case,"  the  "  Tough  Story,"  the  "  Strange  Story  from  Westerly."  A  singular  case  it
certainly  was,  but  when  shorn  of  the  embellishments  attached  to  the  narrative  it
ceases  to  be  either  a  tough  or  a  strange  story.

The  case  of  Mr.  Ansel  Bourne  passed  under  my  professional  notice  and  care,
and,  with  your  permission,  I  will  give  a  truthful  description  of  the  same.

I  have  known  Mr.  Bourne  for  seven  years  past,  and  during  that  period  he  has
invariably  conducted  himself  with  propriety  in  the  community,  so  much  so  as  to
merit  and  retain  the  respect  of  his  fellow  citizens.  In  the  early  part  of  August  last,
or  rather  about  the  middle  of  the  month,  Mr.  Bourne  suffered  a  coup  de  soleil,  which
was  of  a  very  formidable  character,  and  from  its  effects  he  nearly  lost  his  life.
Having  nearly  recovered  from  the  illness,  he  thought  himself  able  to  return  to  his
occupation,  that  of  a  house  carpenter.  Contrary  to  my  advice,  and  without  my
knowledge,  he  left  his  home,  and  went  to  South  Kingston  to  superintend  the  com-
pletion of  a  dwelling-house  he  had  been  engaged  upon.  On  the  14th  of  September  he
was  brought  home  again  ill,  and  suffering  from  a  severe  cerebral  disturbance.  My
attendance  was  continued  till  the  2nd  of  October,  and  I  heard  nothing  more  of  him
till  the  28th  of  that  month,  when  in  haste  I  was  summoned  to  him.  On  reaching  his
bedside,  I  found  him  (perfectly  insensible) — very  much  in  the  condition  of  a  person

Q  2


22S


R.  Hodgson.


Mr.  Bourne's  use  of  his  faculties  from  this  day  onwards  has  been
complete.  But  two  weeks  after  the  last  event  in  the  chapel,  he  had,
whilst  in  bed  at  night,  a  vision  like  the  image  of  a  man  in  form,  only
with  a  face  like  the  sun  in  brightness,  lighting  up  the  room,  and  say-
ing, "  Settle  up  your  worldly  business,  and  go  to  work  for  me."  This
vision  came  back  several  times  in  the  same  night,  he  being  all  the
while  wide  awake,  and  speaking  of  it  to  his  wife,  who  saw  nothing.
The  result  of  all  these  experiences  was  to  make  Mr.  Bourne  adopt  the
profession  of  an  evangelist.  His  ministrations  were  in  great  request  in
many  country  towns,  and  for  thirty  years  more  or  less  he  has  worked
hard,  conducting  Sunday  services,  speaking  at  revivals,  officiating  at
funerals,  and  performing  strenuously  all  the  offices  which  the  position
of  an  unattached  minister  demands,  not  forgetting,  of  course,  to  cite
his  own  personal  experience,  when  necessary,  to  illustrate  the  power
of  the  Lord.  During  this  time  he  often  spoke  as  much  as  six  or  seven
times  in  the  week  ;  and  this,  with  the  incessant  travelling,  he  thinks
was  not  nearly  as  good  a  life  for  his  health  as  the  trade  of  a  carpenter,
to  which,  within  the  last  eight  years,  he  has  returned.  His  first  wife
died  in  1881,  and  his  second  wife,  formerly  Mrs.  Belle  Potter,  whom
he  married  in  1882,  disapproved  of  his  absences  from  home  in  the
course  of  his  preaching,  so  that  he  confined  his  labours  to  his  imme-
diate vicinity.  On  this  account  he  became  somewhat  troubled,  thinking
that  he  was  not  so  active  in  religious  work  as  he  should  be.  This
thought  that  In'  was  not  "on  the  path  of  duty"  weighed  on  his  mind,
and  he  seems  inclined  to  think  that  if  he  had  been  in  active  religious

in  a  syncope,  swoon,  or  fainting  fit.  The  pupils  of  his  eyes  were  quite  insensible  to
light,  widely  dilated,  and  not  contracting  on  the  application  of  sudden  and  vivid
light.  He  was,  in  fact  (perfectly  insensible).  Powerful  counter-irritants  were
applied,  to  which  he  gave  no  evidence  of  feeling.  Various,  and  I  may  say,  judicious
remedies  were  resorted  to,  which,  as  this  is  not  intended  to  be  a  medical  treatise,  it  is
not  necessary  to  enumerate.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  on  my  visit  to  him  on  the  following
Friday  I  found  consciousness  had,  in  a  measure,  been  restored.  (His  sight  was  then
evidently  perfect,  but  there  still  continued  great  disturbance  of  his  brain,  confusion
of  intellect,  with  vacant  staring.  I  mention  these  circumstances,  to  show  the  fact
that  Mr.  Bourne's  case  is  clearly  attributable  to  a  disturbed  and  disordered  condition  of
the  functions  of  the  brain,  and,  if  possible,  to  do  away  with  the  absurd  and  super-
.stitious  notion  that  there  is  anything  marvellous  or  miraculous  in  the  case.)

(The  loss  of  hearing  and  of  speech  was  owing  to  a  paralysis  of  the  motor  nerve  of
the  tongue,  known  as  the  hypoglossal  nerve,  and  of  the  auditory  nerve.)  The  recovery
was  owing  to  no  wonderful  nor  miraculous  power,  but  may  be  accounted  for  in  a  very
rational  and  philosophical  manner.  Mr.  Bourne  had  been  treated  actively  by  electro-
galvanism  and  those  remedies  which  intelligent  physicians  resort  to  in  the  treatment
•of  paralysis.

(The  legitimate  result  of  the  treatment  was  recovery.  It  was  not  sudden  nor
unexpected.)  (The  opinion  expressed  to  the  patient  and  his  friends,  that  the  remedies
used  were  well  calculated  to  restore  him,  and,  in  my  judgment,  would  do  so,  was
realised  ;  and  to  the  sober-minded  and  rational  portion  of  the  community  created  no
•emotions,  save  those  of  pleasure,  in  hearing  of  the  restoration  to  comparative  health  of


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


229


service,  and  therefore  contented  with  his  work,  the  experiences  which
he  subsequently  underwent  would  never  have  occurred.

January  17th,  1887,  he  went  from  his  home  in  Coventry,  R.I.,  to
Providence,  in  order  to  get  money  to  pay  for  a  farm  which  he  had
arranged  to  buy,  leaving  his  horse  at  Greene  Station,  in  a  stable,  expect-
ing to  return  the  same  afternoon  from  the  city.  He  drew  out  of  bank
$551,  and  paid  several  small  bills,  after  which  he  went  to  his  nephew's
store,  121,  Broad-street,  and  then  started  to  go  to  his  sister's  house  on
Westminster-street.  This  was  the  last  that  was  known  of  his  doings
at  that  time.  He  did  not  appear  at  his  sister's  house,  and  did  not
return  to  Greene,  where  his  horse  remained  for  about  three  weeks,
and  was  finally  taken  away  by  Mrs.  Bourne.

On  Thursday,  January  20th,  the  following  paragraph  appeared  in
the  Bulletin,  of  Providence,  R.I.,  the  information  having  been  given
by  the  police  : —

A  Missing  Preacher.
This  morning  Mrs.  Bourne,  the  wife  of  Rev.  Ansel  Bourne,  of  Greene
Station,  called  at  police  headquarters  and  reported  that  her  husband  had
been  missing  since  Monday  last.  Rev.  Mr.  Bourne  is  quite  widely  known
as  an  evangelist,  and  during  the  past  twenty-five  years  he  has  carried  on  his
religious  work  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States.  For  some  years,  it  is
said,  he  has  been  subject  to  attacks  of  a  peculiar  kind,  which  rendered  him
temporarily  insensible,  and  on  some  occasions  he  has  remained  in  an
unconscious  state  for  many  hours. He  came  originally  from  the  West,  and

a  fellow  citizen,  whose  deprivations  of  speech  and  hearing  had  elicited  sympathy  and
regi-et. )

Mr.  Bourne  is  a  sensible  and  intelligent  man,  and  views  his  own  case  in  a  rational
and  Christian-like  manner.

On  conversation  with  him,  since  Sunday  last,  at  which  time  his  hearing  and
speech  were  restored,  I  find  that  there  is  no  desire  on  his  part  to  encourage  the
absurd  opinion  that  he  has  been  the  subject  of  a  miracle,  but  that  he  attributes  his
recovery,  by  the  blessing  of  God  Almighty,  the  author  and  giver  of  every  good  and
perfect  gift,  to  the  means  and  measures  adopted  by  his  physician.

I  am,  sir,  very  respectfully  yours,

William  Torrey  Thurston,  M.D.

The  following  is  an  abridgment  of  a  reply  by  the  Rev.  A.  C.  Comings  to  Dr.
Thurston's  letter : —

Dr.  Thurston  admits  that  such  a  case  was  known  at  Westerly,  R.I.,  on  the  28th
day  of  October,  1857,  as  that  a  man,  whose  name  was  Ansel  Bourne,  suddenly  became
deaf,  dumb,  and  blind  ;  that  for  seven  years,  as  a  citizen,  he  had  enjoyed  the  respect  of
his  fellow  citizens  ;  that  the  physician  called  to  him  found  him  in  such  a  condition
that  he  judged  him  to  be  "perfectly  insensible"  ;  that  his  eyes  were  insensible  to
light ;  that  two  days  after  the  physician  was  first  called  to  Mr.  Bourne  he  found  his
sight  "evidently  perfect";  that  Mr.  Bourne's  powers  of  speech  and  hearing  were
restored,  without  the  doctor's  being  present,  on  Sunday,  November  15th,  although  lie
assumes  to  know  that  it  was  not  sudden,  which  Mr.  Bourne  affirms  was  sudden  and
instantaneous,  and  to  which  hundreds  also  were  witnesses  ;  that  Dr.  Thurston  con-
versed with  Mr.  Bourne,  who  then  only  attributed  his  recovery  to  the  blessing  of
God  Almighty,  and  his  physician. Mr.  Bourne  says  that  at  that  time  he  hesitated,  not


230


R.  Hodgson.


after  these  attacks  he  sometimes  expressed  an  intention  of  returning  to  his
native  State,  and  some  of  his  friends  think  he  may  have  started  for  the
West.  Rev.  Mr.  Bourne  was  60  years  of  age,  and  had  grey  head  and  long
grey  beard.  He  was  dressed  in  dark-coloured  clothes,  wore  a  brown  and
blue  neck-scarf  and  Derby  hat.  He  was  in  Providence  on  Monday,  but  he
did  not  return  to  his  home,  and  he  has  not  been  heard  of  since.

Notwithstanding,  however,  as  I  have  already  said,  the  publicity
given  to  the  fact  of  his  disappearance,  no  tidings  whatever  were
received  of  him  till  March  14th,  eight  weeks  later.  The  account  of
the  morning  of  March  14th,  as  given  to  us  by  Mr.  Bourne  in  reply  to
our  inquiries,  agrees  substantially  with  that  given  to  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell
(who  has  taken  much  interest  in  the  case  and  has  kindly  allowed  us  to
use  his  notes  in  the  preparation  of  this  paper)  a  year  ago  by  Mr.  Bourne,
and  with  that  furnished  to  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell  by  Surgeon-General  L.  H.
Bead,  who  was  summoned  to  examine  Mr.  Bourne  on  the  morning  of
March  14th,  soon  after  he  regained  his  ordinary  waking  consciousness.
The  contemporary  newspaper  accounts  which  we  have  seen  are  also  in
substantial  agreement  with  the  results  of  our  recent  inquiries.

It  appears  that  Ansel  Bourne  arrived  at  Norristown,  Pa.,  about
February  1st,  1887,  i.e.,  two  iceeks  after  his  disappearance  from  Provi-
dence, R.I.  Under  the  name  of  A.  J.  Brown  he  rented  a  store-room  at
252,  East  Main-street,  from  Mr.  Pinkston  Earle,  and  divided  the  room
into  two  by  means  of  curtains.  The  rear  portion  of  the  room  he  filled
with  furniture  and  used  as  a  "general  living"  apartment,  not  only

desiring  to  attribute  to  the  miraculous  power  of  God  what  could  by  any  possibility  be
accounted  for  upon  natural  principles,  and  he  was  slow  to  assume  that  he  had  been
the  subject  of  miraculous  power.  But  his  doubts  upon  that  subject  have  since  been
taken  away.

In  the  letter  of  Dr.  Thurston  are  distinct  errors  which  Mr.  Bourne  would  correct,
not  wishing,  however,  to  charge  the  Doctor  with  intentional  falsehood,  or  intentional
misrepresentation;  but  only  as  trying,  "  if  possible,  to  do  away  with  the  notion  that
there  was  anything  marvellous  or  miraculous  in  the  case."

Mr.  Bourne  has  the  kindest  feelings  toward  Dr.  Thurston,  and,  as  a  physician,
has  confidence  in  him.  But  in  relation  to  the  subject  now  in  question  he  must  speak
the  truth  : —

1.  The  Doctor  says  that,  on  the  28th  of  October,  he  found  Mr.  Bourne  "  perfectly
insensible."  To  the  Doctor  this  doubtless  appeared  so.  But,  although  he  was  helpless,
he  was  perfectly  sensible  of  all  around  him,  which,  deprived  of  his  powers,  he  could
recognise. His  thoughts  were  free  and  unrestrained.

2.  Doctor  Thurston  says  that  "  the  loss  of  his  hearing  and  speech  was  owing  to  a
paralysis  of  the  motor  nerve  of  the  tongue,  known  as  the  hypoglossal  nerve,  and  of  the
auditory  nerve."  Had  this  been  so  he  could  not  have  used  his  tongue  at  will,  for  any-
thing. But  he  had  a  free  use  of  his  tongue  for  everything  but  to  speak  with.

3.  Dr.  T.  says— speaking  of  the  medical  treatment  of  the  case:  "The  legitimate
result  of  the  treatment  was  recovery,  it  was  not  sudden  nor  unexpected."  The  answer
to  this  must  be  plain  and  simple.  The  recovery  took  place  in  the  presence  of  several
hundred  persons,  and  was  as  sudden  as  thought.  It  was  at  a  moment,  and  in  a  place
when  and  where  several  hundreds  of  persons  all  had  their  eyes  fixed  directly  upon
him,  and  witnessed  the  immediate  proofs  of  the  fact.


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.  231


sleeping  there,  but  preparing  his  own  meals  there  also.  The  front  por-
tion of  the  room  he  stocked  with  notions,  toys,  confectionery,  &c.  These
he  purchased  and  paid  for  in  Philadelphia,  which  he  visited  each  week
for  the  purpose  of  replenishing  his  stock.  He  fastened  a  sign  to  his
window,  reading  A.  J.  Brown.  The  room  which  he  rented  was  part  of
the  house  in  which  the  Earle  family  were  dwelling,  but  although  they
came  in  daily  contact  with  "  Mr.  Brown  "  there  was  nothing  in  his
manner  or  proceedings  which  suggested  anything  peculiar.  He  was  quiet
in  his  behaviour,  precise  and  regular  in  his  habits,  and  paid  his  bills
promptly.  He  was  especially  punctual  in  the  closing  of  his  store  at
9  p.m.  on  ordinary  week-days,  and  at  10  p.m.  on  Saturday.  He
attended  the  Methodist  church  on  Sunday,  and  on  one  occasion,  at  a
religious  meeting,  he  related  an  incident  which  he  said  he  had  witnessed
on  a  steamboat  years  previously  on  the  passage  from  Albany  to  New
York,  and  his  remarks  were  thought  particularly  relevant  to  the  point
under  consideration.  In  short,  none  of  the  persons  who  had  any  deal-
ings with  him  seem  to  have  conceived  any  suspicion  that  he  was  in  any
unusual  condition  or  labourmg  under  any  form  of  vagary.

On  the  morning  of  Monday,  March  14th,  about  five  o'clock,  he
heard,  he  says,  an  explosion  like  the  report  of  a  gun  or  a  pistol,  and,
waking,  he  noticed  that  there  was  a  ridge  in  his  bed  not  like  the  bed
he  had  been  accustomed  to  sleep  in.  He  noticed  the  electric  light
opposite  his  windows.  He  rose  and  pulled  away  the  curtains  and
looked  out  on  the  street.  He  felt  very  weak,  and  thought  that  he  had
been  drugged.  His  next  sensation  was  that  of  fear,  knowing  that  he
was  in  a  place  where  he  had  no  business  to  be.  He  feared  arrest  as  a
burglar,  or  possibly  injury.  He  says  this  is  the  only  time  in  his  life
he  ever  feared  a  policeman.

The  last  thing  he  could  remember  before  waking  was  seeing  the
Adams  express  waggons  at  the  corner  of  Dorrance  and  Broad  Streets,  in
Providence,  on  his  way  from  the  store  of  his  nephew  in  Broad-street  to
his  sister's  residence  in  Westminster-street,  on  January  17th.

He  waited  to  hear  someone  move,  and  for  two  hours  he  suffered
great  mental  distress.  Finally  he  tried  the  door,  and  finding  it  fastened
on  the  inside,  opened  it.  Hearing  someone  moving  in  another  room  he
rapped  at  the  door.  Mr.  Earle  opened  it,  and  said,  "Good  morning,  Mr.
Brown."  Mr.  B.:  "Where  am  If  Mr.  E.:  "You're  all  right."  Mr.  B.:
"  I'm  all  wrong.  My  name  isn't  Brown.  Where  am  1 ? "  Mr.  E.  :
"Norristown."  Mr.  B. :  "Where  is  that?"  Mr.  E. :  "In  Pennsylvania."
Mr.  B.:  "What  part  of  the  country?"  Mr.  E.:  "About  17  miles  west  of
Philadelphia."  Mr.  B.:  "  What  time  in  the  month  is  it  ? "  Mr.  E.:  "The
14th."  Mr.  B. :  "Does  time  run  backwards  here?  When  I  left  home  it
was  the  17th."  Mr.  E. :  "17th  of  what?"  Mr.  B.:  "17th  of  January."
Mr.  E.:  "It's  the  14th  of  March."


232


R.  Hodgson.


Mr.  Earle  thought  that  "Mr.  Brown"  was  out  of  his  mind,  and  said
that  he  would  send  for  a  doctor.  He  summoned  Dr.  Louis  H.  Read,
to  whom  Mr.  Bourne  told  the  story  of  his  doings  in  Rhode  Island  on
the  morning  of  January  17th,  and  said  that  he  remembered  nothing
between  the  time  of  seeing  the  Adams  express  waggons  on  Dorrance-
street,  on  January  17th,  and  waking  up  that  morning,  March  14th.
"These  persons,"  he  said,  "tell  me  I  am  in  Norristown,  Pennsylvania,
and  that  I  have  been  here  for  six  weeks,  and  that  I  have  lived  with
them  all  that  time.  I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  having  seen  one  of
them  before  this  morning."  He  requested  Dr.  Read  to  telegraph  to  his
nephew,  Andrew  Harris,  then  at  121,  Broad-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Dr.  Read  telegraphed,  "Do  you  know  Ansel  Bourne?  Please  answer."
The  reply  came,  "  He  is  my  uncle.  Wire  me  where  he  is,  and  if  well.
Write  particulars."

Later,  Mr.  Harris  journeyed  to  Norristown,  sold  the  goods  in  the
store  by  auction,  and  settled  up  the  business  affairs  of  "  Mr.  Brown,"
who,  as  Mr.  Bourne,  returned  with  him  to  Rhode  Island.  Dr.  Ptead
adds,  in  his  account  of  the  case  which  he  furnished  to  Dr.  Weir
Mitchell  :—

"He  said  he  was  a  preacher  and  farmer,  and  could  not  conceive  why
he  should  have  engaged  in  a  business  he  knew  nothing  about,  and  never
had  any  desire  to  engage  in  it.  When  asked  about  his  purchasing  and
paying  for  goods,  and  paying  freight  bills,  he  said  he  had  no  recollec-
tion of  any  such  transactions.

"The  family  with  whom  he  lived  say  that  after  the  occurrence  of  that
morning  he  was  greatly  changed.  He  was  annoyed  at  any  reference  to
his  store,  and  never  entered  it  afterward.  He  became  despondent,  took
no  food,  was  unable  to  sleep,  and  became  greatly  prostrated  both
physically  and  mentally,  and  from  information  recently  received,  those
conditions  are  said  to  continue.

"  There  are  a  number  of  circumstances  connected  with  and  pre-
ceding the  peculiar  dual  condition  that  have  satisfied  me  that  he  is  a
sincere  man,  and  not  an  impostor."

Early  in  1890  Professor  James  heard  of  the  case  from  one  of  our
Associates,  Mr.  J.  N.  Arnold,  who  was  the  means  of  putting  him
into  communication  with  Mr.  Harris  and  Mr.  Bourne,  and  for  whose
assistance  in  this  and  in  other  cases  we  are  much  indebted.

It  will  have  been  observed  that  no  account  was  forthcoming  of  Mr.
Bourne's  doings  between  the  time  of  his  disappearance  from  Providence
and  his  advent  in  Norristown  two  weeks  later,  and  Professor  James
conceived  the  idea  that  if  Mr.  Bourne  could  be  hypnotised  we  might
obtain  from  him  while  in  the  hypnotic  trance  a  complete  history  of  the
whole  incident,  and  at  the  same  time,  by  post-hypnotic  suggestion,
prevent  the  recurrence  of  any  such  episode. The  circumstances  had


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


233


naturally  left  a  painful  and  perplexed  impression  upon  Mr.  Bourne  ;
he  was  anxious  to  have  any  light  possible  thrown  upon  his  strange
experience,  and  he  readily  acquiesced  in  the  proposals  made  for
hypnotisation.

Mr.  Bourne  is  still  living  in  Greene,  R.I.,  and  in  accordance  with
our  arrangement 1  he  came  to  Boston  on  five  consecutive  days,  May
27th  to  31st,  and  submitted  to  our  investigations,  returning  each  day  to
Greene.  Professor  James  and  myself  also  visited  Mr.  Bourne  and
hypnotised  him  in  his  home  at  Greene,  R.I.,  on  June  7th,  1890.

On  May  27th,  we  questioned  him  in  detail  concerning  his  past  life,
and  ascertained,  inter  alia,  that  he  was  "mesmerised"  once,  about  forty
years  previously;  he  thinks  that  he  was  not  "transformed"  into  anyone
else  by  the  "  mesmerist,"  but  was  made  to  go  through  various  laugh-
able performances.  At  1.50.  p.m.  Professor  James  began  to  hypnotise
him — using  passes  —  and  he  proved  a  sensitive  subject,  becoming
entranced  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes.  He  was  unable  to  open  his
eyes,  to  unclasp  his  hands,  itc.  No  inquiry  was  made  on  this  occasion
concerning  the  "  Brown "  incident  ;  we  determined  simply  that  he
could  be  readily  entranced  and  readily  waked.

On  the  next  day  we  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  detailed  account  from
him,  while  in  the  trance  state,  of  his  doings  during  the  eight  weeks,
January  17th  to  March  13th,  1887.  The  following  statements2  were
elicited  from  him  after  he  had  been  enjoined  to  go  into  a  deeper
sleep  and  recall  everything  that  happened  on  January  17th,  1887,
and  afterwards.

He  said  that  his  name  was  Albert  John  Brown,  that  on  January
17th,  1887,  he  went  from  Providence  to  Pawtucket  in  a  horse-car,
thence  by  train  to  Boston,  and  thence  to  New  York,  where  he  arrived
at  9  p.m.,  and  went  to  the  Grand  Union  Hotel,  registering  as  A.  J.
Brown.  He  left  New  York  on  the  following  morning  and  went  to
Newark,  N.  J.,  thence  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  arrived  in  the  evening,
and  stayed  for  three  or  four  days  in  a  hotel  near  the  Depot.  He  then
spent  a  week  or  so  in  a  boarding-house  in  Filbert-street,  about  No.
1,115,  near  the  Depot.  It  was  kept  by  two  ladies,  but  he  could  not
remember  their  names.  He  thought  of  taking  a  store  in  a  small  town,
and  after  looking  round  at  several  places,  among  them  Germantown,
chose  Norristown,  about  twenty  miles  from  Philadelphia,  where  he
started  a  little  business  of  5  cent  goods,  confectionery,  stationery,  &c.

1  Mr.  Bourne  received  his  travelling  expenses,  and  in  addition  the  amount  which
he  would  have  earned  by  his  ordinary  work  as  carpenter.  He  arrived  in  Boston  about
11  a.m.  and  left  at  3  p.m.

"  I  here  give  a  general  summary  of  the  various  statements  made  by  Mr.  Bourne,
in  trance  at  our  different  sittings.  The  more  detailed  account  of  these  is  given  in
Appendix  A.


234


R.  Hodgson.


He  stated  that  he  was  born  in  Newton,  New  Hampshire,  J uly  8th,
1826  (he  was  bora  in  New  York  city,  July  8th,  1826),  had  passed
through  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  losses  of  friends  and  property ;  loss
of  his  wife  was  one  trouble — she  died  in  1881  ;  three  children  living,
— but  everything  was  confused  prior  to  his  finding  himself  in  the  horse-
car  on  the  way  to  Pawtucket ;  he  wanted  to  get  away  somewhere — he
didn't  know  where — and  have  rest.  He  had  six  or  seven  hundred
dollars  with  him  when  he  went  into  the  store.  He  lived  very  closely,
boarded  by  himself,  and  did  his  own  cooking.  He  went  to  church,  and
also  to  one  prayer  meeting.  At  one  of  these  meetings  he  spoke  about
a  boy  who  had  kneeled  down  and  prayed  in  the  midst  of  the  passengers
on  a  steamboat  from  Albany  to  New  York.

He  had  heard  of  the  singular  experience  of  Ansel  Bourne,  but  did
not  know  whether  he  had  ever  met  Ansel  Bourne  or  not.  He  had  been
a  professor  of  religion  himself  for  many  years,  belonged  to  the
"Christian"  denomination,  but  back  there  everything  was  mixed  up.
He  used  to  keep  a  store  in  Newton,  New  Hampshire,  and  was  engaged
in  lumber  and  trading  business  ;  had  never  previously  dealt  in  the
business  which  he  took  up  at  Norristown.  He  kept  the  Norristown
store  for  six  or  eight  weeks — how  he  got  away  from  there  was  all
confused;  since  then  it  has  been  a  blank.  The  last  thing  he  remembered
about  the  store  was  going  to  bed  on  Sunday  night,  March  13th,  1887.
He  went  to  the  Methodist  church  in  the  morning,  walked  out  in  the
afternoon,  stayed  in  his  room  in  the  evening  and  read  a  book.  He  did
not  feel  "  anything  out  of  the  way."  Went  to  bed  at  eight  or  nine
o'clock,  and  remembered  being  in  bed,  but  nothing  further.

The  statements  made  by  Mr.  Bourne  in  trance  concerning  his  doings
in  Norristown  agree  with  those  made  by  his  landlord  there  and  other
persons,  but  since  Mr.  Bourne,  in  his  normal  state,  has  heard  of  these,
they  afforded  no  presumption  in  favour  of  the  correctness  of  his  state-
ments concerning  the  first  two  weeks  of  his  absence,  those  which
immediately  preceded  his  arrival  in  Norristown.  The  register  books
of  the  hotels  had  been  destroyed,  so  that  we  were  unable  to  trace  his
travels  in  detail  by  finding  the  name  "A.  J.  Brown  "  at  the  hotels
which  he  described  himself  as  having  visited.  We  have,  however,
through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  William  Romaine  Newbold,  Lecturer  on
Psychology  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  ascertained  that  he
boarded  for  a  week  or  more  at  "The  Kellogg  House,"  Nos.  1,605-7,
Filbert-street,  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Newbold's  report  (see  Appendix  B)
seems  to  establish  the  general  trustworthiness  of  Mr.  Bourne's  account
(in  trance)  of  his  doings  before  going  to  Norristown,  although  his
recollections  may  be  inaccurate  as  regards  such  minor  points  as  the
number  of  the  boarding-house,  &c.

Mr.  Newbold  thinks  "the  reason  that  Bourne  found  his  way  into


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


235


'  The  Kellogg  House  '  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  it  is  the  first  house
in  Filbert-street  going  west  from  the  Pennsylvania  R.R.  Depot  that
displays  a  sign  such  as  would  be  likely  to  attract  a  man  of  moderate
means  but  staid  habits.  Indeed,  I  believe  that  it  .is  the  first,  house  in
that  direction  that  has  any  sign  at  all,  and  the  hotels  directly  in  view
upon  coming  out  of  the  station  all  have  the  general  appearance  of  the
ordinary  saloon.  'The  Kellogg  House'  is  plain  and  respectable  in
appearance."

It  may  be  worth  mentioning  here  that  the  Grand  Union  Hotel,
where  Mr.  Bourne  in  trance  states  that  he  stayed  in  New  York,  is  just
across  the  street  from  the  station,  and  that,  as  we  learn  from  Mrs.
Bourne,  he  had  stayed  there  on  his  honeymoon  trip  with  her  in
September,  1882,  and  had  previously  been  there  with  his  sisters.

Additional  corroboration  of  the  accuracy  of  his  trance-memory  has
been  furnished  by  statements  which  Mr.  Bourne  (in  trance)  made
concerning  the  money  and  other  property  in  his  possession  at  Norris-
town  on  the  night  of  the  13th  of  March,  1887.  We  have  satisfactory
reasons  for  regarding  these  statements  as  correct,  but  the  details  of  the
circumstances  connected  with  their  verification  involve  matters  which
we  do  not  feel  justified  in  publishing.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the
money  which  he  took  away  on  January  17  th  has  been,  in  our  opinion,
accounted  for,  though,  prior  to  our  inquiries  made  in  consequence  of
his  trance-statements,  there  was  an  unexplained  deficiency  of  about
$150.00.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  account  which  Mr.  Newbold  obtained  of  the
conversations  which  "Mr.  Brown"  had  with  Mrs.  Kellogg  and  the  waiter,
Mr.  Jackson,  that  Mr.  Bourne  in  his  secondary  state  recollected  certain
portions  of  his  past  life,  and  especially  the  character  of  his  own  trade.
His  memory  seems  to  have  been  considerably  better  during  his  eight
weeks'  spontaneous  "ambulatory  trance"  than  it  is  now  in  the  artificially
produced  trance,  and  it  may  be  worth  while  adding  that  it  appeared
to  be,  as  regards  some  details  of  his  entire  life,  more  obscure  in  our
latest  hypnotisations  than  in  our  earliest.  Many  of  our  questions  were
repeated  again  and  again,  and  we  have  not  recorded  all  these  in  full
detail,  but  the  result  suggests  that  the  "Brown"  state  is  much  less
coherent  now  than  in  its  first  inception  in  1887,  and  that  the  personality
of  "Brown"  is  slowly  disintegrating.

From  the  tests  of  the  sense  organs  made  upon  Mr.  Bourne,  both
waking  and  entranced,  it  would  seem  that  the  only  difference  between
trance  and  waking  as  to  sensibility  is  "  a  not  very  pronounced  analgesia
during  the  trance." (See  Appendix  C,  p.  255.)

We  made  attempts  while  Mr.  Bourne  was  in  his  normal  state  to
evoke  the  "Brown"  personality  by  automatic  writing,  &c,  and  similarly,
while  he  was  entranced,  we  endeavoured  to  "  tap  "  Mr.  Bourne,  but


236


R.  Hodgson.


our  efforts  were  unavailing.  So,  likewise,  were  the  attempts,  by
prolonged  passes,  to  produce  a  deeper  trance  in  which  the  "  Bourne  "
and  "  Brown "  personalities  might  be  unified.  We  could  get  no
manifestation  of  either  personality  while  the  other  was  to  the  front,
not  even  the  fulfilment  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  and  at  the  end
of  our  experiments  Brown  and  Bourne  seemed  as  far  as  ever  from
realising  that  each  belonged  to  the  other.

Taken  altogether,  the  case  is  not  a  little  perj)lexing.  In  the  Brown
state,  while  forgetting  some  of  the  most  important  events  of  his  past
life,  including  his  own  name  and  his  second  marriage,  and  the  place  of
his  birth,  he  remembered  the  date  of  his  birth  correctly,  the  date  of  his
first  wife's  death,  his  trade,  &c,  and  curiously  enough,  on  one  occasion
related  an  incident  that  occurred  on  a  steamboat  between  Albany  and
New  York,  and  which  in  his  Bourne  state  he  also  well  remembers.  In
trance,  on  May  28th,  he  recalled  that  he  had  children  living,  but  on
June  7th  he  had  no  recollection  of  them.  It  is  difficult  to  see  along
what  definite  channels  the  temporary  obliteration  of  Bourne's  memories
proceeded,  with,  as  consequence,  his  transformation  into  Brown.  We
learn  from  Mr.  Bourne  that  he  never  knew  a  Mr.  A.  J.  Brown,  and
never  lived  in  Newton,  N.  H.  Neither  Mr.  Bourne  nor  his  wife
could  suggest  any  clue  which  might  lead  to  any  explanation  of  his
adopting  A.  J.  Brown  as  his  name,  or  Newton,  N.  H.,  as  his  birth-
place.1 But,  indeed,  we  could  hardly  hope  to  trace  the  antecedents
of  his  peculiar  actions  in  detail.  And  it  remains  now  to  mention
some  additional  facts  which  appear  to  throw  some  light  upon  both
of  his  remarkable  experiences,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  suggesting
that  his  case  should  be  classified  in  its  essentials  as  belonging  to  a
well-recognised  type.

In  reply  to  our  inquiries  (see  also  Dr.  Hinsdale's  report,  Aj^pendix
C,  p.  254),  he  stated  that  he  injured  his  eyesight  as  a  young  man  by
too  much  study,  working  at  night  to  educate  himself.  His  vision
improved  after  his  strange  experience  in  1857,  and  remained  improved
until  1887.  He  used  to  have  headaches  frequently,  now  seldom.  They
diminished  as  he  began  to  lose  his  hair,  which  was  very  thick  in  1857.
(Of  course  the  loss  of  his  hair  may  not  have  been  the  cause  of  the
diminution  of  his  headaches.)

He  stated  also  that  he  had  been  subject  to  the  "blues"  since  child-
hood, but  these  had  not  been  so  frequent  for  a  year  and  a  half.  When
under  them  he  did  not  want  to  see  anybody  or  talk  to  anybody.  These
would  sometimes  last  a  few  hours,  sometimes  a  week.  Occasionally,

1  The  postmaster  at  Newton,  N.  H.,  in  reply  to  my  inquiry,  states  that  he  has
"asked  some  of  the  oldest  inhabitants,  and  none  of  them  ever  knew  of  any  A.  J.
Brown."


A  Case  of  Doable  Consciousness.


237


ab  such  times,  when  walking,  he  would  find  himself  two  or  three
miles  away  from  where  he  had  last  noticed  himself  as  being.

Mrs.  Bourne  informed  us  that  Mr.  Bourne  had  had  several  "  faint-
ing fits  "  in  the  course  of  his  life.  She  knew  of  four  such  occurrences.
The  first  of  these  happened  about  July,  1882,  two  months  before  her
marriage,  in  church.  Mr.  Bourne  had  gone  into  the  pulpit  just  before
the  service.  He  was  not  going  to  preach  that  day.  It  was  very  warm,
and,  as  Mr.  Bourne  was  coming  out  of  the  pulpit,  he  fell  down  uncon-
scious. The  second  occurred  about  December,  1882,  when  he  fell  off
a  lounge  in  the  room.  On  the  third  occasion  he  was  standing  by  the
side  of  the  carriage  after  harnessing  the  horses,  when  he  suddenly  fell
unconscious.  This  was  in  February,  1886.  The  last  time  occurred  soon
after  his  return  from  Norristown  in  1887.  He  was  sitting  in  a  chair
under  a  tree  in  the  shade,  and  he  slid  out  of  the  chair  to  the  ground.
On  these  occasions  he  remained  unconscious  for  several  hours,  probably
two  hom^s  at  least  and  six  hours  at  most.

These  facts,  taken  in  connection  with  his  experiences  in  1857
and  1887,  suggest  that  Mr.  Bourne  has  been  subject  to  some  form
of  epilepsy,  and  that  during  his  eight  weeks'  absence  in  1887  he
was  suffering  from  a  post-epileptic  partial  loss  of  memory.  I  suppose
that  on  January  17th,  1887,  he  may  have  had  a  mild  epileptic  seizure,
and  that  "  after  the  fit,  he  was  a  different  person,  although  in  the  same
skin ;  or,  as  the  popular  phrase  is,  the  post-epileptic  patient  '  was  not
himself.'1'1

In  the  Zoist,  that  storehouse  of  valuable  material,  deeply  instructive
even  by  the  very  errors  which  we  now  see  were  made  by  many  of  the
then  upholders  of  hypnotic  treatment,  I  have  found  two  cases  which  are
worth  mentioning  in  this  connection.  One  of  these  is  quoted  by  Dr.
Elliotson  (op.  cit.,  IV.,  p.  168)  from  Anselm  Ritter  von  Feuerbach's
collection  of  trials.  It  is  that  of  a  "poor,  innocent,  industrious  youth,"
named  Sorgel,  who  was  "subject  first  to  violent  epilepsy  and  then  to
jmroxysms  of  second  consciousness,  in  which  his  faculties  were  deranged,
in  which  he  had  delusions  and  ungovernable  criminal  propensities,  the
whole  of  which  he  was  ignorant  of  upon  returning  to  his  ordinary  state
of  consciousness,  though  in  his  morbid  state  he  remembered  the  occur-
rences of  his  natural  state."  "  In  one  of  his  two  states,  the  diseased,
preternatural  one,  he  was  decidedly  insane,  and  at  length  committed
a  murder."

1  The  Croonian  Lectures  on  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous  System,  1884,
by  J.  Hughlings  Jackson,  M.D.  See  also,  by  the  same  author,  Ophthalmology  and
Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System,  1885,  and  Temporary  Mental  Disorders  after  Epileptic
Paroxysms,  in  The  West  Riding  Lunatic  Asylum  Reports,  Vol.  V.  The  transition  of
Felida  X.  into  her  secondary  state  has  suggested  analogy  with  le  petit  mal  {Hypnotismc,
Double  Conscience,  ct  Alterations  de  la  Pcrsonnalite,  by  Dr.  Azam,  p.  88).


238


jR.  Hodgson.


The  other  case  is  that  of  a  lad  named  Russon,  fifteen  or  sixteen
years  of  age  {op.  cit.,  L,  pp.  340-349,  and  VIII.,  pp.  237-252),  who,  after
an  epileptic  fit,  became  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind.  Dr.  Todd,  of  the  King's
College  Hospital,  where  the  boy  was  taken  on  the  day  of  his  seizure
(April  2nd,  1843),  says  : —

"  The  only  history  we  could  obtain  of  him  was  that  he  had,  about  two
o'clock  in  the  morning,  walked  into  a  coffee-shop  in  Drury-lane,  where  he  was
found  sitting  in  one  of  the  boxes  speechless  and  insensible.  He  was  handed
over  to  the  police,  by  whom  he  was  brought  to  the  hospital.  The  house
physician  found  him  sitting  erect  on  a  chair,  his  eyes  widely  open  and
motionless,  pupils  dilated,  and  presenting  an  undulating  motion  when  the
candle  was  placed  near  them  ;  conjunctivae  rather  injected  ;  countenance
expressive  of  astonishment  ;  respiration  easy,  although  a  little  quicker  than
it  ought  to  be  ;  power  of  deglutition  perfect  ;  no  spasm  or  twitching  of  any
single  muscle.  The  most  remarkable  feature  was  his  utter  insensibility  to
every  external  impression  ;  even  the  roughest  treatment  produced  no  effect
upon  him  ;  the  splashing  of  cold  water,  shaking,  pinching,  shouting  in  his
ears,  seemed  to  make  no  impression.  He  had  walked  into  the  hospital
between  two  policemen  ;  whilst  in  the  surgery  of  the  hospital  he  never
altered  his  position  in  the  slightest  degree  ;  and  after  having  been  examined
in  the  surgery,  he  walked  upstairs  to  his  ward  without  dragging  his  feet,
but  aided  by  the  policeman. ' '

******

"On  the  second  day  after  his  admission  (the  4th)  he  made  signs  for
paper,  and  wrote  an  account  of  himself,  stating  that  he  had  been  subject  to
fits,  and  giving  the  address  of  his  father,  and  also  giving  a  history  of  himself
during  the  day  previous  to  his  admission  to  the  hospital.  But  it  was  very
remarkable  that  in  writing  he  seemed  to  trust  entirely  to  the  guidance  of
his  sense  of  touch,  for  during  the  whole  time  he  was  writing  he  kept  his  eyes
averted  from  the  paper,  with  a  fixed  gaze  directed  towards  the  ceiling,  and
when  a  handkerchief  was  applied  round  his  eyes  it  did  not  interfere  with
his  ability  to  write.  But  we  could  not  obtain  any  satisfactory  evidence  that
he  could  see,  or  hear,  or  smell.

"After  this  he  began  to  ask  for  food,  and  ate  with  the  most  extraordinary
eagei'ness,  snapping  at  everything  that  came  in  contact  with  his  lips,  even
pieces  of  paper,  which  he  chewed  and  swallowed.  In  the  afternoon  of  this
day  he  began  to  see,  and  amused  himself  reading  and  writing,  in  both  of
which  he  showed  himself  a  proficient."

He  still,  however,  remained  deaf  and  dumb,  and  continued  so  in
the  hospital  nearly  three  weeks  from  his  admission,  after  which  his
father  took  him  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  writes  as  follows  : —

"  The  account  given  to  me  by  the  father  was  that  the  boy  lived  with
him  at  Twickenham,  and  supported  himself  by  fetching  small  periodicals,
about  twice  a  week,  from  London,  and  distributing  them  in  the  neighbour-
hood. Rather  more  than  three  weeks  previously,  on  the  1st  of  April,  he
had  gone  as  usual  to  No.  4,  Brydges-street,  Covent-garden,  for  books  and
newspapers,  and  had  to  procure  four  dozen  of  Lloyd's  Weekly  London  News-
paper. He  put  two  dozen  upon  the  counter,  tvro  dozen  in  his  handkerchief,


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness,


239


with  the  books  on  the  top  of  the  latter,  intending  to  put  the  two  dozen
which  were  upon  the  counter  on  the  top  of  the  books,  and  tie  all  up  together  ;
but  he  forgot  those  on  the  counter,  and  tied  up  only  the  books  and  the
Lloyd's  which  were  in  the  handkerchief.  On  arriving  at  home  he  found
only  the  two  dozen  of  the  Lloyd's,  and  was  terrified  at  the  idea  of  his
father's  anger.  His  father  returned  home  at  eight,  accused  him  of  being
drunk,  being  himself  by  no  means  a  teetotaller,  and  of  having  spent  the
money  in  liquor.  The  boy  protested  he  had  tasted  only  water  and  tea  the
whole  day.  They  walked  to  Richmond,  and  the  boy  got  on  an  omnibus
to  go  to  London,  hoping  to  find  his  Lloyd's  where  he  had  left  them.  He
remembers  nothing  more  after  this  than  that  he  one  day  '  awoke  as  from  a
deep  sleep,  in  a  strange  place  ;  began  looking  around  him,  tried  in  vain  to
speak,  and  could  not  hear  any  noise  at  all.  Seeing  a  board  over  the  fireplace
with  the  words  King's  College  Hospital  upon  it,  he  learnt  where  he  was.'
The  father  ascertained  that  when  he  returned  to  the  newspaper  office  his
papers  had  been  carried  off  by  someone,  and  no  more  were  to  be  had  till  the
next  day  ;  that  he  had  gone  to  a  neighbouring  coffee-house,  been  seized  with
a  most  violent  epileptic  fit,  and  carried  by  the  police  to  King's  College
Hospital,  where  he  lay  perfectly  insensible  for  four  days  and  five  nights."

It  was  subsequently  ascertained  that  he  had  had  three  epileptic  fits
at  about  a  year's  interval  within  the  previous  four  years.  Dr.  Elliotson
"mesmerised"  him  daily  for  about  four  weeks,  at  the  end  of  which
time  (on  May  25th),  on  awaking  from  trance,  it  was  found  that  he
had  recovered  his  hearing.  Dr.  Elliotson  immediately  entranced  him
again,  and  after  a  short  time  he  made  efforts  to  speak,  finally  succeeded,
and  woke  "  in  the  midst  of  the  efforts."  He  was  then  apparently  per-
fectly cured,  and  was  taken  into  the  household  service  of  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson,  of  Yorkshire,  who  had  witnessed  the  cure.  Three  months
later,  August  24th,  the  boy  had  another  seizure,  concerning  which
Mr.  Thompson  wrote  to  Dr.  Elliotson  as  follows  : —

"  You  will  be  sorry  to  hear  of  our  reverses.  Thomas  is  again  deaf  and
dumb.  Yesterday  he  was  waiting  at  dinner,  and  the  conversation  turned
upon  the  effect  music  had  upon  insanity  ;  from  that,  I  know  not  how,  some
of  the  party  began  to  compare  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to  :  deafness  and
dumbness  and  loss  of  sight  were  mentioned  among  the  rest,  which  produced
such  a  sudden  excitement  in  the  lad  that  he  just  got  out  of  the  room  and
went  into  a  fit.  I  immediately  went  and  mesmerised  him.  In  half  an  hour
he  came  to  his  senses  and  made  signs  that  he  would  write,  and  that  he
could  not  speak,  or  hear,  or  see.  I  mesmerised  his  eyes,  when  he  opened
them,  but  the  pupil  was  dilated  and  they  appeared  to  be  quite  insensible  to
light.  I  mesmerised  him  again,  and  he  then  got  the  use  of  his  eyes,  but  he
still  continued  deaf  and  dumb.  I  have  not  mesmerised  him  for  some  time
lately,  and  I  imagined  the  boy  was  quite  well,  but  now  they  tell  me  that  he
has  been  very  odd  the  last  day  or  two,  walking  about  with  his  arms  folded,
and  that  they  thought  his  hearing  was  not  quite  so  good.  All  this  is
remembered  now.  I  shall  persevere  in  mesmerising  him  regularly,  and  hope
it  will  not  last  long. He  is  dreadfully  low."


240


R.  Hodgson.


On  the  same  date,  August  25th,  the  boy  wrote,  in  a  communication  to
Mrs.  Thompson  : —

"  I  was  not  listening  to  you  to  hear  what  you  were  talking  about,  but  I
heard  you  say  deaf  and  dumb,  and  when  you  said  it,  it  shook  me  all  right
through  me,  and  then  I  heard  Mr.  Thompson  say  blind,  and  then  it  shook  me
again  the  same  with  a  most  thrilling  pain  right  through  me,  and  I  felt  myself
trembling  and  I  tried  to  get  out  of  the  room,  but  I  do  not  know  that  I  did
get  out  of  the  room,  and  I  remembered  no  more  till  I  found  myself  in  bed,
and  I  tried  to  open  my  eyes  and  speak,  but  I  could  not,  nor  I  could  not  hear
any  noise,  but  I  felt  someone  mesmerising  me,  as  T  thought  ;  and  then  I
wanted  to  go  out  and  they  would  not  let  me  go  at  first,  but  they  let  me  go
afterwards  into  the  pantry,  and  then  I  wrote  and  told  you  what  T  felt  and
how  T  was  ;  but  I  hope  you  will  pardon  me  for  taking  this  liberty  to  write  to
you."

On  August  29th,  Mr.  Thompson  announced  his  recovery  to  Dr.  Elliot-
son  in  the  following  letter  : —

"August  29th.  I  cannot  help  writing  you  a  line  to-night,  as  I  am  certain
you  will  be  glad  to  hear  the  lad  has  recovered  his  hearing  and  speech  ;  to-day
I  mesmerised  him  still  more,  and  dropped  mesmerised  water  into  his  ears.
He  wrote  that  he  heard  a  roaring  like  a  waterfall,  and  a  sensation  as  if  I
thrust  a  hot  iron  into  his  ear.  However,  though  I  continued  to  mesmerise
him  for  an  hour  and  a  half,  there  was  no  symptom  of  his  recovering.  After
he  left  me  the  sensation  of  heat  increased,  and  he  began  to  feel  acute  pain
in  his  ears  and  back  of  his  head,  and  he  came  to  me  in  hopes  I  should  be
able  to  relieve  him.  I  mesmerised  him,  and  he  was  so  violent  that  another
man  and  myself  could  scarcely  hold  him  down.  .  .  .  He  at  last  fell
into  a  quiet  state,  and  after  he  had  remained  so  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  blew
in  his  face,  when  he  awoke.  At  first  he  was  not  aware  that  he  could  either
hear  or  speak,  and  was  much  astonished  to  find  that  he  was  restored."

The  resemblance  between  this  boy's  second  experience  and  that  of
Ansel  Bourne  in  1857  is  very  striking.  It  was  doubtless  in  each
case  the  result  essentially  of  a  self-suggestion,  and  it  is  perhaps  not
altogether  unwarrantable  to  assume  that  the  cure  in  both  cases  would
have  been  a  much  speedier  one  had  the  subject  been  hypnotised  and
treated  after  the  "suggestion  "  methods  of  Professor  Bernheirn.

A  case  of  double  personality,  apparently  very  similar  in  some
respects  to  that  of  Mr.  Bourne,  was  reported  by  Professor  Proust,  of
Paris,  and  published  last  year  in  the  Revue  de  V Hypnotisms.  An
abridgment  of  his  account  is  given  in  Appendix  D.  (  p.  255).  Here,
also,  the  subject  in  the  spontaneously  occurring  "  secondary  state  "
wandered  off  for  days  and  weeks  at  a  time,  and  knew  nothing  after-
wards of  his  doings. His  memory  of  them  was  revived  by  hypnotism.

Another  case  which  I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  place  in  the
Appendix  (E.,  p.  256)  is  entitled  by  Dr.  Trowbridge,  who  reported  it,
"A  Case  of  Epilepsy  with  Double  Consciousness."

Whether  Mr.  Bourne's  case is an instance  of "epilepsy"  —


A  Case  of  Doable  Consciousness.


241


"  masked  epilepsy  " — or  not,  it  suggests  a  group  of  "  states  "  which  are
worthy  of  the  most  profound  comparative  study,  viz.,  sleep,  hypnosis,
narcosis,  and  post-epileptic  mental  disturbance,  in  connection  with  the
last  of  which  I  need  hardly  indicate  the  possibly  great  importance  of
"suggestive  therapeutics."


APPENDIX  A.
Detailed  Account  of  Sittings,  &o.

May  28th.  R.  Hodgson  and  Dr.  Morton  Prince  present  in  the  morning,
the  latter  taking  notes. A.  Bourne  hypnotised  by  R.  H. — Passes.

Q.  :  "  What  is  your  name  ?  " A.:  "  Ansel  Bourne."

More  passes  were  made,  and  he  was  enjoined  to  go  into  a  deeper  sleep
and  recall  everything  that  happened  on  the  17th  of  January,  1887,  and  after-
wards. After  a  short  interval  :  Q.  :  "Where  did  you  go  from  Providence  ?  "

At  this  stage  a  curiously  perplexed  look  came  over  Mr.  Bourne's
countenance,  suggesting  a  struggle  for  remembrance.  A.  :  "Went  to
Pawtucket."  Q.  :  "  How  did  you  get  there?  "  A.:  "  Went  in  a  horse-car."
Q.  :  "Why  did  you  go  to  Pawtucket?"  A.:  "Don't  know."  Q.  :  "Where
did  you  go  then  ?  "  A.:  "  Took  train  to  Boston."  Q.  :  "  What  time  ? ''
A.:  "  Soon  after  getting  to  Pawtucket,  about  one  o'clock."  Q.  :  "What
line?"  A.:  "  New  York  and  New  England. "  Q.  :  "  What  did  you  do  in.
Boston?"  A.:  "Nothing."  Q.  :  "  Did  you  see  any  acquaintance  there  ?  "
A.:  "No."  Q.  :  "  Why  did  you  go  to  Boston  ?  "  A.:  "Don't  know."  Q.  :
"Where  did  you  go  then?"  A.  :  "New  York."  Q.  :  "  What  time  1"  A.  :
"  Three  o'clock.  New  York  and  New  England  Railroad."  Q.  :  "  The  same
day?"  A.:  "Yes."  Q.  :  "  What  time  did  you  get  to  New  York  ?  "  A.:
"Nine  o'clock."  Q.  :  "  What  did  you  do  there  ?  "  A.  :  "Put  up  at  the
Union  Hotel,  just  opposite  the  Depot."  Q. :  "Did  you  register?"  A.  :
"Yes."  Q.  :  "How?"  A.:  "A.  J.  Brown.  That's  my  name."  Q.  :
"What  is  the  '  A  '  for  I  "  A.:  "Albert."  Q.  :  "  And  the  '  J  '  ?  "  A.:
"Named  after  my  brother  John."  Q.  :  "Your  name  is  Albert  John
Brown?"  A.:  "Yes."  Q.  :"  When  were  you  born  ?  "  A.  :"  1826,  July
8th,  Newton,  N.H."  Q.  :  "Do  you  mean  you  put  up  at  the  Grand  Union
Hotel?"  A.  :  "Yes,  the  Grand  Union  Hotel."  Q.  :  "Did  you  have
supper  there?"  A.  :  "No, — went  to  bed."  Q.  :  "Were  you  alone?"
A.: "Yes." Q.  : "  Did  you  have  breakfast  there  ?  " A.:  "Yes."

Here  Dr.  P.  and  R.  H.  spoke  about  waking  him  up,  as  they  had  an
important  engagement  at  12  noon,  and  he  said,  in  reply  to  further  questions,
that  he  was  getting  "  mixed  up."  Being  then  asked  what  his  name  was,  he
replied  "  Bourne." He  was  then  waked,  11.55  a.m.

May  28th.  Afternoon.  Professor  William  James,  M.D.,  and  R.  Hodgson
present,  the  latter  taking  notes.

1.30  p.m.  Hypnotised  by  W.  J.  In  reply  to  inquiries  about  what  he  had
done  after  he  had  been  in  Dorrance-street,  said  he  had  already  told  it.
Being  asked  to  repeat  it,  and  in  reply  to  inquiries,  said  he  went  to

R


242


R.  Hodgson.


Pawtucket,  went  from  Pawtucket  to  Boston,  from  Boston  went  to  New  York
by  train.  Didn't  know  where  he  was  going.  .  .  .  Wanted  to  get  away
somewhere,  didn't  know  where  .  .  .  Went  to  hotel  in  New  York —
Grand  Union — stayed  there  till  next  day.  Got  his  breakfast  there.  Left
there  about  noon.  Went  to  Newark,  N.  J.  Got  there  an  hour  afterwards  or
so. Went  from  there  to  Philadelphia.

Got  to  Philadelphia  in  the  evening — went  to  hotel  close  to  Depot.  Stayed
there  three  or  four  days.  Registered  J..  J.  Brown,  "A"  for  Albert,  "J"
for  John. Went  there  for  rest.

J. :  "What  do  you  remember  before  going  to  Philadelphia,  Mr.  Brown?"
B. :  "Passed  through  great  deal  of  trouble.  .  .  .  Losses  of  friends,  losses
of  property."

Had  heard  of  Ansel  Bourne.  .  .  .  Had  heard  years  ago  of  his
singular  experience. Didn't  know  whether  he  had  ever  met  him  or  not.

About  60  years  old.  Had  been  all  over  the  country  ;  engaged  in  heavy
business,  lumber  and  trading  business.  Used  to  keejj  store  in  N.H.,  in
Newton.

Trouble  away  back  yonder  (pointing).  All  mixed  up,  confused.  Don't
like  to  think  of  it.

Can't  recall  name  of  hotel  in  Philadelphia.  Went  to  boarding-house
after  hotel,  to  have  rest.  Was  at  boarding-house  a  week  or  so,  in  Filbert-
street,  near  Depot — thinks  1,115 — two  women  kept  it.  (Resj^ectable  place  ?)
Yes.  .  .  .  Dozen,  15  or  20  people  there.  .  .  .  Some  young  people
there.  Didn't  meet  any  acquaintances  there.  Spent  time  reading  papers
and  seeing  city.  Theatre  one  evening  ;  he  thinks  two  evenings.  Felt  tired
and  beat  out  all  the  time.  Went  to  church — not  to  prayer  meeting.  Went
to  bed  early.

Started  little  business,  to  amuse  himself — kind  of  store.  Confectionery
goods,  5  cent  goods,  stationery.  J.  :  "Where  was  the  store?"  B.  :
"  Norristown.  .  .  .  20  miles  from  Philadelphia.  Was  looking  round
at  several  places.  Thought  of  taking  store  week  or  ten  days  before  he
did  it.  Not  that  kind  of  trading  engaged  in  before."  J.  :  "How  did
you  succeed?"  B.  :  "Had  judgment  of  my  own.  No  trouble  about  it.
Succeeded  very  well."  Had  six  or  seven  hundred  dollars  when  he  went
into  the  store.  Lived  very  closely.  Boarded  by  himself,  did  his  own
cooking. Most  of  the  time  low-spirited. . . . Troubles  of  a  lifetime.

Loss  of  liis  wife,  one  trouble.  Asked  what  her  maiden  name  was,
said  he  didn't  want  to  call  her  up.  Lived  round  at  different  places  with
her.  Three  children  were  living.  Doesn't  recollect  thinking  about  them
when  he  went  off.  .  .  .  All  disagreeable  remembrance.  .  .  .  Wife
died  in  1881. . . . Everything's  mixed  up.

J.  :  "  Who  was  your  landlord  in  Norristown?"  B.  :  "Bead — store  was
on  Main-street."  Thinks  number  was  255.  Made  no — what  you  may
call — acquaintances  there.  .  .  .  Would  eat  some  steak  and  ham  or
something  of  the  sort.  Health  was  £>oor  during  that  time.  No  particular
diseases.  Doesn't  remember  how  well  he  slept.  Went  to  no  places  of
entertainment.  Went  to  church.  Went  to  one  prayer  meeting.  J.:  "Did
you  speak  ?  "  B.  :  "Yes,  I  think  I  said  something  once.  Told  them  about
a  boy  that  prayed  on  a  steamboat  coming  down  from  Albany  to  New  York.


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


243


He  kneeled  down  and  prayed  in  the  midst  of  the  passengers."  J.  :  "  Was
Mr.  Bourne  on  the  boat  at  that  time  ?" B.  :  "  All  mixed  up."

J.  :  "Is  Mr.  J.  A.  Brown  a  relative  of  yours  ?"  B.  :  "No.  I  don't
think  so."  J.  :  "  Tell  us  anything  more  that  you  can  recollect."  B.  :  "It
was  a  terrible  thing. It's  all  mixed  up — mixed  up  witlx  two  or  three  things.

.  .  Mixed  up  with  other  parties  some  way.  There's  a  coming  out  of  it
some  way  or  other,  I  don't  know  how."  J.  :  "  Who  were  the  other  parties  1  "
B.  :  "  Don't  know.  .  .  .  Can't  remember  names  of  ladies  at  boarding-
house  in  Philadelphia.  They  called  him  by  his  name,  Mr.  Brown.  All  mixed
up.  Can't  get  back  of  going  to  Pawtucket.  Remember  leaving  Providence.
First  thing,  or  last  thing,  or  whatever  you've  a  mind  to  call  it,  was  on  board
of  horse-car  going  to  Pawtucket  in  North  Main-street.  .  .  .  Something  or
other  back  of  that,  can't  recall.  Had  several  hundred  dollars. "  J.:  "Wasn't
that  a  lot  of  money  ?"  B.  :  "I've  carried  a  lot  of  money  at  different  times."
J.:  "  Did  you  marry  again  after  loss  of  first  wife  ?  "  B.  :  "  Something  or
other  there  I  can't  tell  you.  Mixed  up."  J.:  "  Ever  dream  of  Norristown
experience?"  B.  :  "There's  something  there.  I  wish  I  could  get  at  it."
.J.  :  "  How  long  did  you  keep  store  in  Norristown?"  B.  :  "Some  six  or
eight  weeks.  .  .  .  How  I  got  away  from  there  is  all  confused.  .  .  .  Since
then  has  been  a  blank."  J.  :  "Any  other  periods  of  life  you  can  remember
like  this  one  ?  "  B.  :  "Got  into  a  spot — don't  know  how  I  come  there — ■
both  ends  are  blank."

J.  (Pricks  right  hand)  :  " Feel  anything  ?  "  B.  :  "Feel  you  touch  my
hand."  (Hands  apparently  partially  anaesthetic.)  J.  :  "Open  your  eyes
and  look  at  me. . . . Do  you  know  me  ?  "  B.  :  "  Have  seen  you  before."

Suggestions  given  to  feel  well,  not  to  be  troubled,  to  have  no  headache,
etc.,  and  then  waked  up.

May  29th.  Present,  Prof essor  W.  James  and  R.  Hodgson.  Hypnotised
by  W.  J.  at  11.30  a.m. About  two  minutes  after  closing  his  eyes,  pulse  65.

J.  :  "  What  have  you  been  thinking  of  since  the  conversation  of
yesterday?"  B.  :  "Nothing  special."  J.:  "  What  were  we  talking  about
yesterday?"  B.  :  "Oh,  back  a  while  ago."  J.  :  "  Tell  me  where  you  left
off."  B.  :  "I  told  you  about  starting  from  Dorrance-street,  going  to  Paw-
tucket, and  Boston,  and  New  York,  and  Newark,  and  Philadelphia. "  J. :  "  What
hotel  did  you  stay  at  in  Philadelphia  ?  "  B.  :  "I  don't  know  the  name  of
it  ;  about  opposite  City  Hall  in  Filbert-street. "  J.  :  "  What  was  the  number  of
the  boarding-house  where  you  stayed?"  B.  :  "  The  boarding-house  was  a
little  further  up,  near  the  station,  about  1,115."  J.  :  "What  made  you  go
there?"  B.  :  "  I  found  it  myself.  There  was  a  sign  out."  J.  :  "What
persons  did  you  meet  in  Philadelphia  ?"  B.  :  "Can't  give  any  names  of
persons  there.  Done  business  with  them,  and  have  the  bills."  J.  :  "  Have
you  ever  heard  of  the  Reverend  Ansel  Bourne  ?  "  B.  :  "  I've  heard  of  him.
I  don't  know  as  I  ever  heard  him  preach."

In  answer  to  further  inquiries  he  said  that  he,  Brown,  had  been  a
professor  of  religion  for  many  years — belonged  to  the  "  Christian  "  denomi-
nation. "  Back  there  all  mixed  up.  Seems  as  if  I  was  sot  right  down  there
in  Dorrancs-street  without  knowing  where  I  came  from.  .  .  .  What
became  of  the  store  I  don't  know  anything  about."


244


B.  Hodgson.


He  did  not  see  anything  about  Bourne  in  the  papers,  did  not  write  to
anybody  except  business  letters.  The  business  was  in  connection  with
orders  given  for  goods  in  the  store.  He  bought  a  suit  of  clothes  in
Philadelphia.

W.  J.  then  told  him  to  open  his  eyes  and  stand  up,  and  introduced  him  to
R.  H.,  whom  he  says  he  does  not  remember.  Asked  to  write  his.na.me,
several  times,  he  writes  A.  J.  Brown,,  in  large  hand,  three  times.  Told  to
write  it  smaller,  he  does  so.  He  is  then  told  to  write  William  James,  Ansel
Bourne,  and  Richard  Hodgson.  After  doing  this,  he  is  told  to  sit  down
again,  and  a  pencil  and  block-book  are  placed  in  his  hands  to  see  whether
there  is  any  tendency  to  automatic  writing.

J.  :  "Do  you  remember  any  past  time  when  you  couldn't  speak,  couldn't
hear,  and  were  blind?"  B.  :  "  It's  all  dark  there."  J.  :  "Troubles  any
clearer  in  your  mind  now  ?  "  B.  :  "No."  J.  :  "What  were  they  ?  "  B.  :
"  Losing  friends.  .  .  .  By  death."  J.:  "How  about  the  family  ties
there?" B.  :  "Mixed  up. . . . A  terrible  whirl  there  somewhere."

While  W.  J.  holds  Brown  in  conversation,  R.  H.  tries  to  get  B.  to  write,
whispering  "Ansel  Bourne,  write  down  what  you  last  remember  seeing  in
Providence,  January  17,  1887."  This  is  rejjeated  several  times,  and  appears
somewhat  to  disturb  Brown.  Finally  Brown  catches  the  question  distinctly
and  says,  "It's  all  dark  back  of  that."  No  indication  of  any  tendency  to
write.

W.  J.  tests  for  anesthesia  with  pin.  Sensibility  of  back  of  head  and
lingers  seems  unnaturally  small.  Thighs  tested  :  the  left  thigh  when  awake  (he
says)  is  "  numb  "  from  having  had  a  beam  fall  on  it.  He  feels  and  recognises
pin  pricks  on  right  thigh  now  ;  on  left  thigh  he  first  calls  them  "  touches  " —
then  "pins."  No  change  apparent  from  waking  state.  Pupils  contract  well
to  light.

W.  J.  sits  quietly  talking  with  him  and  making  suggestions  about  his
head  feeling  well  and  clear  and  his  mind  cheerful  and  young  when  he  goes
away  from  here.  J.  has  told  him  before  that  lie  was  in  Hodgson's  room  in
Boston.  He  now  suddenly  says,  "Do  you  say  this  is  Boston  ?  "  "Yes,
Mr.  Hodgson's  room,  5,  Boylston-place."  B.  :  "Where  do  yon  live?"
J.:  "Cambridge."  B.  :"  Cambridge  ?  Isn't  that  the  place  where  Parker —
Park  man  ? — was  murdered  ?  "  J.:  "  Yes,  Webster  and  Parkinan.  Where
were  you  at  that  time  ?  "  B.  :  "  Oh  !  I  don't  seem  to  know — Rhode  Island,
perhaps."

At  about  12.35  Hodgson  brings  in  dinner  and  "Brown"  eats  with
apparent  good  appetite  roast  beef,  potatoes,  omelet,  and  so  forth,  but  still
with  a  dejected  manner.  Asked  whether  he  would  like  some  wine  or  beer,
he  replies  that  he  never  touches  liquor.  Whilst  eating,  Hodgson  asks  again
if  lie  made  any  money  by  his  store.  He  turns  to  James  (juickly  and  asks  :
"What  became  of  that  store,  any  way  ?  "  J.  :  "It  is  let  to  someone
else."  B.  :  "I  haven't  been  settled  with.  I  don't  seem  to  get  right  about
what  became  of  that  store.  There's  something  back  there."  J.  :  "Don't
try  to  remember. "  B.  :  "It  troubles  me."  And  lie  sits  after  dinner  with
head  in  hand,  "trying  to  think  up."

12.58  p.m.  J.  seats  him  in  the  arm-chair  again  and  makes  passes  over
him  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour. After  waiting  five  minutes  longer  J.  asks


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


245


him  how  he  felt.  B:  "Been  asleep.  .  .  .  Feel  calm.  .  .  .  Wish
I  could  get  out  of  this — get  out  one  way  or  the  other — see  something  some-
where." J.:  "  Do  you  feel  perplexed? "  B.  :  "  I'm  hedged  in  either  way,
can't  get  back  and  go-ahead."  J.  :  "  Still  troubling  yourself  ?  "  B.  :  "Yes.
I  can't  help  it."  J.  :  "Did  you  feel  the  same  as  this  while  you  kept  the
store?"  B.  :  "I  wasn't  cheerful.  .  .  .  What  troubles  me  now  is  how  I
got  at  Dorrance-street  and  what  came  of  the  store."  J.  :  "  But  while  there,
were  you  troubled  like  this  ?  " B.  :  "No."

J.  gives  him  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  viz.,  to  write  details  of  leaving
Providence,  &c,  after  being  waked  up.

J.  asks  if  he  remembers  being  mesmerised  many  years  ago.  He  says
that  he  doesn't  remember  anything  about  it.

J.  wakes  him  at  2.5.  p.m.,  after  enjoining  freedom  from  perplexity  on
waking  up,  &c.  He  looks  at  his  watch  and  is  surprised  at  the  time.  J.  :
"  Do  you  feel  hungry  ?  "  B.  :  "No.  I  don't  feel  so  hungry  as  I  did  when
I  come."

Pencil  and  block-book  are  placed  in  his  hands  on  the  table.  We  talk
with  him.  He  tells  us  that  he  is  not  a  nervous  or  excitable  man  in  any
way,  not  afraid  of  anybody.  "There's  plenty  of  men  can  whip  me,  but
I'd  tell  them  what  I  think  and  be  cool  about  it,  and  not  be  afraid  of
them."

No  writing. (Post-hypnotic  suggestion  not  fulfilled.)

Friday,  May  30th,  1890.  Present,  William  James,  M.D.,  Edward
Cowles,  M.D.,  and  William  Noyes,  M.D.  Hypnotised  by  W.  J.,  at  12.b'
23. m. Six  passes  made,  and  subject  is  in  a  deep  sleep.

W.  J.  :  "What's  your  name  now?"  Long  hesitation  and  no  answer.
W.  J.  :  "  You  can't  open  your  eyes.  What's  your  name  ?  "  A.  B.  :
"Brown."  W.  J.  :  "  You  were  Brown  yesterday.  You  are  not  yet  Brown. "
Makes  many  passes  up  and  down.  "Let  go  of  Brown.  Haven't  come  to
Brown  yet.  Now  what's  your  name?"  A.  B.  :  "It  is  mixed  up  now."
W.  J.  :  "You  are  no  longer  Brown.  Now  who  are  you?"  No  answer.
W.  J.  :  "Now  give  me  your  name."  A.  B.  :  "Got  two  or  three  names,  I
guess."  (More  passes.)  W.  J.  :  "Give  me  some  of  the  names,  not  all  of
them."  No  answer.  (More  passes.)  W.  J.  :  "  Now  what's  your  name?"
Subject  sighs.

12.10  p.m.  W.  J.  :  "What  are  you  thinking  about?  What's  your
right  name  now?"  A.  B. :  "Brown,  haven't  got  any  other  name."  W.  J.  :
"I  will  count  eight,  and  I  want  you  to  wake  up  at  the  word  six. One, —

two, — three, — four, — five  " Subject  rubs  his  eyes,  and  leans  forward  on

right  hand.

W.  J. :  "You  are  Ansel  Bourne?"  A.  B.  (awake):  "Yes."  W.J.  :
"Shut  your  eyes  and  continue  Ansel  Bourne.  You  are  not  Brown  yet."
A.  B.  (eyes  shut — hypnotised):  "No."  W.  J.:  "You  are  going  to  be
Brown  by-and-by.  I  want  you  to  do  something  for  me.  I  will  give  you  a
pad  and  pencil,  and  you  will  write  something  down  on  paper.  You'll  talk,  and
the  talking  won't  interfere.  What's  your  name  now?"  A.  B.  :  "Mixed
up."  (Makes  no  attempt  to  write  on  paper.)  W.  J.  :  "Do  you  remember
our  talk?" A.  B.  :  "Yes. Where  am  I  now?" W.  J.  :  "In  Mr.  Hodgson's


246


R.  Hodgson.


rooms.  ,  Here,  is  a  gentleman  I  want  to  introduce  to  you,  Dr.  Cowles,  of
Somerville. "

E.  C.  :  "What  is  troubling  you?"  A.  B.  :  "Something  I  have  been
trying  to  get  out  for  a  long  time — where  I  am  and  where  I  am  going  to."
E.C.  :  "  Where  are  you  ?"  A.  B.  :  "He  says  I  am  in  Boston."  W.  J.  :
"  Tell  us  where  you  went  after  you  left  home."  (All  his  replies  to  this  ques-
tion were  not  taken  down,  as  W.  J.  stated  that  they  were  the  same  as  given
yesterday.)  A.  B.  :  "  Can't  tell  the  name  of  the  hotel  in  Philadelphia.  It
was  a  small  hotel  opposite  the  City  Hall."  W.  J.  :  "What  was  your  wife's
maiden  name  1  "  A.  B.  :  "Wish  I  could  remember  things,  but  I  can't."
W.  J.  :  "  Did  you  ever  have  any  other  wife  ?  "  A.  B.  :  "Everything  is  all
mixed  up.  Have  been  here  right  along.  Terribly  mixed  up  mess.  Woidd
like  to  get  at  something  or  other."

W.  J.  :  "  How  did  you  come  to  pick  out  Norristown  ?  Did  you  go  to
other  places?"  A.  B.  :  "Yes,  several  other  places.  Saw  in  a  paper  a
notice  of  a  store  to  let.  Was  an  empty  store.  What  has  become  of  that
store,  and  where  did  I  stop?  I  went  to  Germantown  to  look  round.  Wanted
to  do  something.  Thought  I  might  want  to  locate."  W.  J.  :  "  How  did
you  find  out  how  to  stock  your  store?"  A.  B.  :  "  Made  inquiries.  Saw
advertisements  and  displays  of  goods."

12.22  p.m.  W.  J.  :  "Did  you  make  any  acquaintances?  What  were
the  names  of  some  of  your  friends  there?"  A.  B.  :  "Read  was  the  name
of  one  man  in  Norristown.  Made  no  other  acquaintances. "  W.  J.  :  "  What
church  did  you  go  to  ?  What  was  the  pastor's  name  ?  "  A.  B.  :  "  Went  to
Methodist  church.  Pastor's  name  forgotten."  W.  J.  :  "What  was  the  state
of  your  mind  ?  What  did  you  read  ?  "  A.  B.  :  "  Read  the  papers.  Don't
remember  reading  books."  W.  J.  :  "  How  did  you  get  your  store  stocked?  "
A.  B.  :  "  Went  to  a  dozen  places  to  get  it  stocked.  Kept  candies,  con-
fectionery, nuts,  and  5  cent  articles."

.May  31st.  Present,  Professor  William  James,  R.  Hodgson,  and  Dr.
Morton  Prince.

While  H.  is  talking  to  Bourne,  not  yet  entranced,  J.,  sitting  close  by
Bourne's  side,  addresses  him  as  Brown  and  tells  him  to  lift  his  hand  if  he
hears  him.  Bourne  hears  and  repeats  some  of  the  words,  the  "Brown"
consciousness  apparently  not  being  reached.

J .  tells  Bourne  that  after  he  gets  into  the  hypnotic  sleep  he  will  write
what  he  did  during  the  time  he  was  away  from  home  as  Brown.  He  is  then,
about  11.15  a.m.,  hypnotised  into  the  Brown  state,  and  pencil  and  block-book
are  put  into  his  hand.  After  about  10  minutes'  waiting,  J.  asked  if  he  didn't
feel  like  writing  ? B.  :  "I've  nothing  to  write  about."

J.  gives  him  the  suggestion :  ' '  When  H.  blows  his  nose  and  coughs,  you
must  say  that  he  ought  to  close  the  window  and  not  have  a  draught."  He
is  then  waked  up.

Note. — When  B.  is  waked  up  by  being  told  to  count  8  and  wake  up  when
he  has  counted  C — he  does  not  count  beyond  6.  The  suggestion  seems  thus
not  to  continue  into  the  waking  state.

In  a  few  minutes  H.  blows  his  nose  and  coughs.  Bourne  takes  no  notice.
(Post-hypnotic  suggestion  not  fulfilled.)


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.  247


11.45  a.m.  Hodgson  entrances  him.  In  a  couple  of  minutes  says,
"  What's  your  name  ?  It's  Bourne,  isn't  it  ?  "  "  No  !  it's  Brown."  Wakes
him  up  again. Da  capo  :  he  is  Brown  at  the  first  touch  of  trance.

•J.  entrances  him — into  Brown  state — and  asks  him  about  his  store  m
Norristown.  J.  :  "Have  you  got  any  gum-drops?"  B. :  "Out  of  gum-drops
now." J.  :  "  What  do  you  sell  most  of  ?  " B.  :  "  I  sell  most  of  toffee."

J.  tells  him  to  open  his  eyes  and  stand  up,  and  asks  for  a  quarter-pound
of  toffee.  He  says,  "Where  is  it  ?"  J.  gives  him  a  piece  of  stone,  and  tells
him  that  it  is  toffee.  He  asks  for  scales.  A  book  is  shown  to  him.  He
says,  "That's  not  scales."  A  pair  of  scales  for  weighing  letters  and  books
is  pointed  out  to  him,  and  he  seems  partially  satisfied.  But  he  refuses  to
accept  stone  as  candy,  or  as  maple  sugar  ;  says,  "  Someone's  been  here.
Tilings  are  all  mixed  up."  He  describes  a  bag,  hat,  &c,  on  table  correctly,
when  asked  what  they  are.

J.  asks  about  the  landlord  of  the  store.  "Mr.  Read  is  landlord."
J.  tells  him  it  is  time  to  go  to  bed,  and  asks  him  what  he  feels  like  doing.
"Like  going  to  bed."  In  reply  to  questions,  says  that  he  eats  sometimes
once,  sometimes  twice  a  day — didn't  have  appetite  for  more.  .  .  .  Made
two  or  three  dollars  a  day  by  the  store.  He  purchased  from  a  firm  in
Market-street.  J.  :  "What  made  you  take  up  this  business  1"  B.  :  "  That
I  can't  tell  you."  J.  says:  "You're  not  in  the  store,  you're  back  here
in  Mr.  Hodgson's  room.  What's  the  last  tiring  you  remember  about  that
store  1 "  B.  replies  :  Going  to  bed — Sunday  night — had  been  to  Methodist
church  in  the  morning.  Walked  out  in  the  afternoon  ;  stayed  in  his  room
in  evening — read  a  book  he  had  there.  Took  a  meal  after  meeting.  "Don't
know  as  I  felt  anything  out  of  the  way."  Went  to  bed  at  8  or  9  o'clock;
remembers  being  in  bed. "That's  the  last  thing  I  do  remember."

(The  next  experiment  was  made  for  the  purpose  of  determining  if  he  would
spontaneously  wake  as  Bourne  after  the  suggestion  that  he  was  in  bed  in  his
store  on  the  night  of  March  13th.)  J.  :  "We  took  you  out  of  your  bed  and
brought  you  here.  Now  you're  back  in  your  bed  again,  you'll  have  a  good
sleep,  and  then  you'll  go  on  the  right  way.  .  .  .  It's  getting  on  towards
morning.  Time  to  wake  up  pretty  soon."  Dr.  Prince  says,  after  about  five
minutes,  when  B.'s  eyes  are  open:  "Are  you  waking  up?  It's  the  last
morning.  Are  you  going  to  get  up  ? "  Two  or  three  minutes  later  J.  asks
what  he  is  thinking  of.  He  still  calls  himself  Brown,  and  is  perplexed
about  the  store.

He  is  told  again  that  he  is  asleep  in  his  store  on  the  night  of  March  loth.
An  explosion  is  produced  by  a  small  powder-cap  near  his  ear.  No  result.
On  being  questioned,  he  still  maintains  that  he  is  Brown.

J.  wakes  him  by  upward  passes  without  injunction  ;  then  asks  him  about
the  process  of  waking.  He  says  that  he  woke  "slowly,"  and  on  being
questioned  says  that  he  prefers  waking  quickly.

J.  then  hypnotises  him  again,  and  tells  him  to  wake  up  when  he  counts
up  to  6,  and  that  he  is  to  keep  on  counting  up  to  8.  He  fulfils  this
injunction  (but  he  may  not  have  been  fully  awake  till  he  counted  8).

June  *7th,  1890.  We  visited  Ansel  Bourne  at  his  home  in  Greene,  R.I.,
arriving  about  10. 10  a.m.


248


11.  Hodgson.


Mrs.  Bourne  stated  that  Mr.  Bourne  had  taken  two  hank-hooks  of  his
children  away  with  him,  on  January  17th,  1887,  after  drawing  some  of  the
money,  but  had  brought  the  books  back  in  his  pocket  just  as  they  were  when
he  took  them  away.

About  10.45  a.m.  A.  B.  hypnotised  by  W.  James.  J.  :  "  What  is  your
name  ?"  B.  :  "  Brown."  J.  :  "You've  seen  me  before.  How  long  is  it
since  you  saw  me  ?" B.  :  "  A  few  minutes."

J.  tells  him  that  he  is  in  Ansel  Bourne's  house,  &c,  introduces  him  to
Mrs.  Bourne,  and  asks  him  to  inform  Mrs.  B.  of  his  doings  since  leaving
Providence  on  January  17th,  1887.  He  gives  the  same  account  as  before.
Mrs.  B.  :  "  Were  you  ever  to  Greene  ?  "  B.  :  "What  Greene  %  "  Mrs.  B.  :
"  Greene  in  Coventry,  R.I." B.  :  "Never  was  there."

In  reply  to  questions,  says  that  he  does  not  remember  anything  about

bank-books  in  Providence  Had  no  money  in  the  bank,  and

made  no  presents  to  anyone.  Had  somewhere  about  $600.00  when  he  got  to
Philadelphia. Spent  most  of  it  in  goods  and  furniture  for  the  store.

To  the  question  from  whom  he  hired  the  store,  he  replied,  "From  Read."
Asked  if  he  knew  Pinkston  Earle  :  "I  don't  know  but  that  was  his  name  "
(i.e.,  the  name  of  the  person  from  whom  he  hired  the  store).  Said  that  the
goods  in  the  store  were  worth  about  $400.00.  He  had  "no  family,"  "no
children  out  West."  ....  "  All  mixed  up."  Mrs.  B.  :  "  Don't  you
remember  the  young  man  out  to  West  Shelby  and  two  children  [B.  's  grand-
children]?" B. :  "No.  Wish  I  could  remember."  He  remembers  being
married,  and  that  his  wife  died  many  years  ago,  but  nothing  more  about  it.

[The  following  experiments  were  made  for  the  purpose  of  unifying  the
"  Bourne  "  and  "Brown  "  consciousnesses — without  success.]

J.  then  declares  to  him  that  his  life  and  Bourne's  are  closely  connected,
carries  him  back  to  Norristown,  and  tells  him  how  he  woke  up  hearing  a
report  like  a  pistol  and  found  that  he  was  in  a  strange  bed.  That  was
because  he  was  in  a  bed  that  Ansel  Bourne  did  not  know,  &c.  J.  explains  to
him  how  he  got  the  money  in  Providence  which  he  found  in  his  possession
on  the  Pawtucket  horse-car.  When  asked  if  he  remembers,  B.  replies,  "  Like
a  dream."

J.  :  "  Now  write  this  :  '  I  went  to  sleep  in  my  store  on  Sunday  night. '
The  next  thing  you  are  going  to  write  is :  'I  woke  and  found  that  I  was  Ansel
Bourne.'  You'll  wake  when  you  come  to  was,  but  you'll  go  on  writing
'  Ansel  Bourne.'  "  A.  B.  writes  as  suggested,  and  wakes  up  after  the  word
was,  just  as  he  is  starting  the  "A"  of  "Ansel."  He  stops  writing.  J.
tells  him  to  go  on  and  write  Ansel  Bourne.  He  does  so,  but  seems  not
to  remember  what  he  wrote  before  this.

We  then  tell  him,  in  the  Bourne  state — for  the  first  time  — of  his  revela-
tions concerning  the  first  two  weeks  after  his  disappearance  from  Providence.

J.  entrances  him  again,  tilling  him  to  repeat  the  following  sentence  :  "I
drew  the  money  from  the  bank  when  I  was  Ansel  Bourne,  and  got  into  a
Pawtucket  horse-car,  and  became  A.  J.  Brown,  and  started  on  the  Norris-
town expedition."  J.  tries  to  carry  his  memory  continuously  along  from
the  Bourne  into  the  Brown  state,  telling  him  that  he  must  repeat  the
sentence  and  that  he  will  pass  into  the  "  Brown  "  state  when  lie  gets  to  the
word  Pawtucket,  and  that  he  will  remember  what  he  has  been  saying  just


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


249


before.  A.  B.  passes  into  the  "Brown  "  state  at  the  word  Pawtucket,  but
does  not  complete  the  sentence,  and  does  not  remember  the  first  part  of  the
sentence.

J.  then  suggests  to  him  that  lie  is  in  the  store  at  Norristown,  and  tries
again  the  experiment  with  writing  ("I  went  to  sleep  in  my  store,"  &c.,)
described  above.  He  wakes  as  before,  and  when  asked  if  he  remembers
about  the  store,  replies,  "Like  a  dream."

He  is  again  told  to  repeat  the  sentence,  "I  drew  the  money  from  the
bank,"  &c,  to  pass  into  the  "  Brown  "  state  at  the  word  "  Pawtucket,"  &c.
He  becomes  "  Brown  "  dvdy,  but  again  fails  to  recall  what  has  preceded.

B.  is  then  told  to  repeat  orally  the  words  used  in  the  previous  writing
experiments  (" I  went  to  sleep  in  my  store,"  &c. ),  and  to  wake  up  at  the
word  ivoke  and  i-emember  the  first  part  of  the  sentence.  He  wakes  at  the
word  suggested,  but  again  fails  to  recall  the  first  part  of  the  sentence.  12  noon.

1.45  p.m.  Mrs.  Bourne  takes  B.'s  right  hand  in  hers,  and  J.  entrances
B. Brown  does  not  remember  Mrs.  Bourne.

J.  wakes  B.,  who  is  still  holding  Mrs.  B.'s  hand,  and  then  tells  Mrs.  B.
to  put  him  to  sleep.  J.  tells  B.  that  Mrs.  B.  will  \mt  him  to  sleep  by
counting  up  to  6.  She  counts,  and  at  "6"  Bourne  passes  into  "Brown,"
but  again  does  not  know  Mrs.  Bourne.

Tiiis  exj)eriment  repeated  again  twice,  and  each  time  "Brown"  is
emphatically  told  that  Mrs.  Bourne  is  his  wife,  that  he  is  Ansel  Bourne,
that  this  is  his  own  house,  &c. ;  but  he  seems  completely  unable  to  realise  it,
shakes  his  head  when  told  that  Mrs.  Bourne  is  his  wife.

3.10  p.m.  He  is  entranced  by  R.  Hodgson,  who  tells  him  before  the
trance  that  he  will  remain  Ansel  Bourne  after  being  hypnotised.  Unavailing.
He  passes  at  once  into  the  "Brown"  state.  R.  H.  then  enumerates  the  chief
incidents  of  Bourne's  life,  telling  "Brown"  that  he  is  "  Bourne  "  and  that
he  remembers  these  events.  This  is  repeated  several  times,  and  Mrs.  B.  and
W.  J.  reiterate  the  same  circumstances.  "Brown,"  however,  reaches
nothing  more  thair  a  faint  remembrance  of  the  year  of  his  birth,  of  the  fact
of  his  first  marriage,  and  of  the  death  of  his  first  wife.

3.25  p.m.  Hypnotised  by  W.  J.,  who  makes  passes  for  an  hour,  3.30 —
4.30,  without  any  apparent  effect  in  deepening  the  trance.  Further  attempts
to  produce  a  unity  of  memory  between  the  "  Brown  "  and  "  Bourne  "  states
unsuccessful.

Waked  at  4.35  p.m.

June  7th.  Between  1  and  2  p.m.  we  called  upon  Mr.  Tillinghast
(retired  farmer)  and  Colonel  C.  S.  Brown  (grocer),  residents  of  Greene,  who
stated  that  Mr.  Ansel  Bourne  had  always  been  highly  respected  in  the  com-
munity as  a  steady  and  industrious  man.  They  had  no  exjilanation  to  give
of  his  mysterious  absence  in  1887,  though  they  did  not  attach  any  blame  to
Mr.  Bourne.  They  had  "heard  of  such  things  happening  before  to  people."
There  were  a  few  persons  in  the  village  who  thought  there  was  "  something
wrong  "  about  it,  and  who  in  consequence  did  not  respect  Mr.  Bourne  so
highly  as  they  had  done  previously,  but  the  general  opinion  was  that  no


250


JR.  Hodgson.


blame  attached  to  Mr.  Bourne.  Previous  to  the  incident  Mr.  Bourne  had
been  universally  respected.


APPENDIX  P..
Report  by  Mr.  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold.

(Verification  of  Mr.  Bourne's  statements  in  trance.)

4,228,  Chester-avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  November  22nd,  1890.

I  went  to  look  up  that  house  on  Filbert-street  on  the  20th  inst. ,  and
although  I  wrote  out  a  full  account  of  the  matter  at  the  time  so  as  not  to
lose  anything  by  waiting,  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  the  time  to  write  it  out
in  a  legible  form  for  you  to  read.  I  merely  copy  here  what  I  wrote  on
Thursday.

I  inquired  at  Nos.  1,115,  1,315,  1,509,  1,511,  1,605-7,  Filbert-street,  and
found  that  the  last-named  house,  "the  Kellogg  house,"  Nos.  1,005-7  was
kept  by  two  sisters,  Mrs.  Kellogg  and  Miss  Lyon.  I  saw  Mrs.  Kellogg,
learned  that  she  had  been  there  for  about  five  years  ;  kept  a  register  now
but  had  only  done  so  recently,  and  had  no  account-books,  receipted  bills,  or
any  written  paper  that  could  tend  to  show  whether  any  given  person  had
been  there  in  the  early  part  of  1887.  I  then  produced  the  picture.  She
said  it  looked  familiar  and  grew  more  familiar  as  she  looked  at  it,  but  she
could  not  recall  where  or  when  she  had  seen  the  person  it  represented.
Asked  the  name.  I  excused  myself  from  mentioning  the  name  for  the
present,  saying  that  I  would  like  to  see  whether  anyone  in  the  house  could
remember  it.  I  asked  for  her  sister.  Her  sister  was  out  ;  she  was  very
sure  her  sister  would  not  remember  him  ;  their  waiter,  Franklin  Jackson  by
name,  would  be  far  more  likely  to  ;  she  would  show  him  it.  Went  out  and
soon  returned,  saying  that  Jackson  remembered  the  face  perfectly  but  could
not  remember  the  name.  She  asked  the  name  again.  "A.  J.  Brown,"  I  said.
She  thought  some  time  but  could  not  recall  it  at  all.  I  was  interested  in
him,  I  said,  because  he  had  at  one  time  lost  consciousness  of  his  own  identity,
and  it  was  believed  that  he  had  stayed  at  their  house  at  the  time.  She  could
not  remember  him.

I  asked  to  see  Jackson.  He  was  very  old,  she  said,  and  was  lying  down  ;
still  she  would  ask  him.  Presently  Jackson  appeared.  He  is  a  coloured
man,  seventy-two  years  of  age,  and  seemed  very  intelligent.  Did  he  re-
member that  man  ?  Perfectly.  How  long  was  he  there  ?  About  a  week,
he  thought.  Did  he  remember  anything  about  him  1  Very  little.  He  was
very  quiet ;  they  thought  he  was  like  a  minister.  Jackson  asked  his  name.
"A.  J.  Brown,"  I  said.  He  suddenly  left  the  room  without  saying  anything  ;
soon  returned,  bringing  a  book  filled  with  names  written  in  pencil.  "I  used
to  get  the  boarders  to  write  their  names  for  me  in  here,"  he  said,  "but  he
isn't  here."  I  took  the  book  to  look  over  it  myself  ;  as  I  did  so  Jackson
seemed  to  suddenly  recollect  something.  "Why,  Mrs.  Kellogg,"  he  said,
"  don't  you  remember  that  man  who  stayed  here  once  and  went  to  Norris-
town  afterwards  and  got  crazy  or  something  ?  Wasn't  he  named  Brown  ?  "
Mrs.  Kellogg  at  once  remembered  that  he  was.  I  picked  up  the  picture  and
asked  them  whether  this  was  the  man. Both  Mrs.  Kellogg  and  Jackson


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


251


immediately  identified  him  with  certainty.  The  greater  part  of  the  following
information  I  got  from  Jackson,  with  contrihutions  from  Mrs.  Kellogg.

Brown  was  there  about  two  weeks.  Was  very  quiet ;  said  little  to  anyone
except  Jackson.  Used  to  sit  in  the  dining-room  after  supper  and  talk  to
him.  He  said  he  was  a  carpenter  and  came  from  "  down  east  somewhere."
He  had  told  Jackson  the  name  of  the  town  in  which  he  lived,  but  he  could
only  remember  that  it  was  not  far  from  Boston.  Jackson  was  under  the
impression  that  he  said  that  he  had  a  "good  bit  of  money"  ;  had  a  faint
imjjression  that  he  said  he  had  a  family.  Used  to  tell  Jackson  about  the
houses  he  had  built,  of  which  Jackson  could  not  now  remember  any.  Used
to  say  that  modern  machinery  had  almost  ruined  the  carpenter's  trade.  In
old  times,  whenever  business  was  dull,  the  men  were  kept  busy  making
sashes,  doors,  &c.  Now,  in  such  times  they  were  idle  ;  half  of  them  didn't
know  how  to  make  a  sash.  He  had  in  his  shop  tools  for  making  such  things,
of  which  half  the  workmen  he  employed  could  not  tell  the  use.  He  said  he
never  would  pay  his  men  on  Saturday,  but  always  on  Monday.  Then  they
had  no  chance  to  go  off  on  sprees,  and  came  to  work  on  Monday  sober.  He
said  he  had  come  to  Philadelphia  to  go  into  business.  Mrs.  Kellogg  told
him  there  could  be  no  better  place  than  Philadelphia.  He  said,  No,  rents
were  too  high.  Every  day  he  used  to  go  out  and  look  for  a  suitable  place  to
begin  in.  After  a  while,  he  came  one  day  and  said  that  he  had  found  just
the  place  for  him,  and  that  was  Norristown.  It  was  a  nice  quiet  place,  and
he  thought  he  could  build  up  a  good  business  there.  Then  he  bought
goods  to  take  to  Norristown — comfortables  and  tinware  were  especially
mentioned,  all  of  which  he  gave  to  Jackson  to  keep  while  he  was  out  during
the  day.

During  his  stay  he  made  no  reference  to  his  past  life,  beyond  what  I  have
told,  or,  at  least,  none  that  my  informants  could  recollect.  Seemed
perfectly  himself  ;  never  gave  any  reason  for  wishing  to  commence  business
here.

They  afterwards  saw  the  accounts  in  the  papers,  and  recognised  the  man
there  referred  to  as  the  man  who  had  stayed  with  them.  They  were  under
the  impression,  however,  as  I  observed  while  talking  with  them,  that  he  had
become  crazy  after  leaving  them,  but  it  had  never  occurred  to  them  that  there
had  been  anything  wrong  with  him  while  with  them.

Jackson  asked  Mrs.  Kellogg  whether  she  hadn't  the  book  in  which  she
used  to  enter  her  boarders.  She  said  she  supposed  she  had  somewhere,  but
didn't  know  where.  I  asked  her  whether  she  wouldn't  look  it  up  for  me.
She  said  she  hadn't  an  idea  as  to  where  it  could  be,  but  if  ever  she  ran  across
it  she  would  let  me  see  it.

I  think  the  above  is  quite  accurate.  I  took  notes  of  all  that  was  said  at
the  time,  and  wrote  it  up  within  an  hour.  I  have  put  down  all  these  details
that  you  may  form  your  own  opinion  as  to  the  worth  of  their  identification.
I  also  thought  that  the  rather  characteristic  remarks  attributed  by  Jackson
to  "Mr.  Brown"  might  be  of  some  use  to  you  in  determining  whether  he
really  was  the  same  A.  J.  Brown  of  whom  you  are  in  search.  I  might  add
that  it  seemed  to  me  that  Mrs.  Kellogg  and  Jackson  were  giving  me  real
reminiscences,  and  I  feel  quite  sure  that  they  told  the  truth.  I  hardly  think
that  it  is  worth  while  to  see  the  other  sister,  Miss  Lyon,  but,  unless  you


252


R.  Hodgson.


think  the  above  enough,  I  shall  go  down  again  in  a  week  or  two  and  try  t;>
get  a  sight  of  that  record  of  Mrs.  Kellogg's.

Wm.  Romaine  Newbold.

P.S. — I  will  return  the  picture  after  I  have  showed  it  to  Miss  Lyon.  It
will  not  be  of  much  use,  but  I  might  as  well  do  it.

Mr.  Newbold  writes  later  -

4,228,  Chester-avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  December  6£/i,  1890.
*  *  *  *  *

I  purposely  delayed  visiting  Mrs.  Kellogg  for  awhile,  to  give  her  an
opportunity  of  finding  that  missing  book. Yesterday  I  went  again.

I  saw  Mrs.  Kellogg  and  asked  especially  after  Miss  Lyon.  Mrs.  K.
thought  she  was  out.  She  sent  for  Jackson  and  I  talked  with  him  and  Mrs.
Kellogg  for  some  time  without  learning  anything  of  importance.  He,  Jack-
son, repeated  in  almost  the  same  words  what  he  had  told  me  before.

No  boarders  are  now  in  the  house  who  were  there  when  "Brown"
was  there,  nor  could  I  learn  the  names  or  present  addresses  of  any  such.  It
is  scarcely  probable,  they  say,  that  anything  could  be  learned  from  them.
Most  of  their  boarders  take  breakfast  very  early,  and  are  off  shortly  after
six  o'clock.  "Brown"  rarely  came  to  breakfast  much  before  seven,  and
usually  was  alone  at  table. Then  he  would  chat  with  Jackson.

After  breakfast  he  used  to  go  out — always,  excejat  twice,  returned  to
luncheon  at  12  to  1.30  ;  went  out  again  and  returned  to  dinner  at  six.  When
not  in  the  dining-room  he  spent  nearly  all  his  time  in  his  room.  The  two
exceptions  above  referred  to  were  two  days  when  he  was  in  Norristown  and
was  absent  from  breakfast  until  dinner.  He  never  sat  in  the  parlour,  and
was  never  known  to  talk  to  any  of  the  other  boarders.  He  first  appeared  at
the  house  one  forenoon  shortly  before  lunchtime.  Engaged  his  room,  as  is
there  customary,  for  a  week.  He  went  away  two  weeks  from  that  date  after
breakfast.  Of  this  Jackson  felt  quite  sure,  for,  he  said,  he  remembered
having  remarked  at  the  time  that  if  he  had  stayed  to  luncheon  he  would
have  become  liable  for  another  week's  boai'd.  When  he  first  came  he  did
not,  so  far  as  Mrs.  Kellogg  could  recollect,  mention  where  he  came  from.
He  told  Jackson,  however,  several  times.  Jackson  only  remembers  that  it
was  a  village  near  Boston,  and  as  I  had  neglected  to  take  your  letter  with
me  I  was  not  able  to  ascertain  whether  he  could  recognise  the  name.  I
asked  Jackson  the  following  questions,  but  he  had  no  recollection  of  ever
having  heard  "Mr.  Brown"  say  anything  about  any  such  subjects:  "Did
he  ever  mention  the  denomination  to  which  he  belonged?"  "Not  that  I
remember.  I  don't  know  whether  he  was  a  Methodist  or  Presbyterian."
"  Did  he  ever  mention  church-going?"  "No  recollection  of  it."  "Ever
speak  of  Baptists  ?  Of  having  been  an  infidel  ?  Having  been  converted  !
Having  had  any  very  extraordinary  experience  ?  Having  ever  been  struck
blind  %  Deaf  ?  or  dumb  ?  Ever  mention  cards  %  Were  cards  ever  suggested
to  him  \  Did  he  ever  see  them  played  1"  At  this  point  Mrs.  K.  explained  that
he  never  associated  with  the  other  boarders  or  came  into  the  parlour.  "Ever
smoke  ?  Use  tobacco  in  any  form  ?  Drink  ?  What  did  he  do  on  Sundays  ?
Any  reason  to  suppose  he  went  to  church  ? "  Upon  all  these  points  my  in-
formants had  no  knowledge  whatever.


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


I  was  under  the  impression  when  I  last  wrote  that  he  had  intended  to
open  a  carpenter  shop  in  Norristown.  Jackson  says  no — that  it  was  a  sort  of
notion  store.  Besides  the  comfortables  and  tinware  I  mentioned  before,
Jackson  recollected  curtains,  toys,  candies,  and  long  rolls,  perhaps  five  feet
long,  four  inches  in  diameter.  Contents  unknown.  About  two  days  after
leaving  he  came  in  again  ;  saw  Jackson,  and  told  him  that  he  was  getting  on
very  nicely  in  his  new  enterprise.  I  thanked  Jackson  for  his  information,
and  said  I  would  not  trouble  him  further.

I  asked  again  for  Miss  Lyon.  Mrs.  K.  went  to  see  whether  she  was  in.
Returned,  saying  that  her  sister  was  in  ;  said  that  she  had  scarcely  ever
spoken  to  "Mr.  Brown."  Probably  never  would  have,  excejit  that,  as  her
room  was  No.  5  and  his  No.  7  she  occasionally  supplied  him  with  matches  or
such  little  necessaries.  The  only  thing  she  recollected  having  heard  him
say  was  that  he  had  secured  a  nice,  cpuiet  little  place  in  a  confectioner's  or
baker's  store,  where  he  had  two  rooms  all  to  himself,  and  would  be  secure
from  annoyance.  I  asked  Mrs.  Kellogg  to  show  Miss  Lyon  the  picture.
She  did  so,  and  said  that  Miss  Lyon  recognised  it  as  Mr.  Brown  instantly.

I  should  have  said  above  that  Jackson  thought  it  odd  that  "Brown"
should  have  made  no  mention  of  religious  matters,  for  he,  Jackson,  had
quizzed  him  once  or  twice  on  being  a  clergyman,  on  account  of  his  venerable
appearance.

Mrs.  Kellogg  had  not  yet  found  her  book.  Promised  to  search  for  it,
and  to  let  me  know  when  it  was  found.

Wm.  Romaine  Newbold.


APPENDIX  C.
(Reports  of  Medical  Examinations.)
Examination  by  Guy  Hinsdale,  M.D.

The  following  statements  are  extracts  from  Dr.  Hinsdale's  report  of
his  examination  of  Ansel  Bourne  in  April,  1888  : —

"  His  grandfather  (maternal)  was  in  his  latter  days  (when  past  70  years)
slightly  deranged — childish.  His  mother  was  a  descendant  of  General
Greene,  of  revolutionary  fame.  A  brother  died  aged  3  months,  cause
unknown.  Two  sisters,  older,  are  still  living  in  good  health.  It  is  said  that
the  subject,  Ansel  Bourne,  did  not  walk  until  two  years  old.  No  physical
cause  for  this.  Believes  that  he  has  had  the  ordinary  children's  diseases.
Does  not  recollect  that  he  ever  had  any  serious  illness  as  a  child.  Never
had  any  fever  of  any  kind.  His  early  days  were  not  characterised  by  mental
excitement.  Was  not  excited  at  all,  but  deliberate,  cool,  and  in  general
matters  always  characterised  by  presence  of  mind.  This  has  often  saved
him  from  injury  to  life.

"  Has  never  had  any  severe  injury  ;  no  blow  on  the  head  ;  was  not  in  the
war.

"  He  has  been  prostrated  sometimes  from  over- work,  more  from  physical
exhaustion  than  from  mental  excitement.  His  attitude  on  questions  is  never
impulsive.  He  moves  slowly,  consistently,  etc.,  and  never  had  any  illness
since  [the  remarkable  experience  of  1857 ].


254


It.  Hodgson.


' '  Has  been  a  total  abstainer  from  alcohol  and  tobacco  for  forty  years —
never  intoxicated  but  once.

"  Was  married  at  age  of  nineteen. No  venereal  history.

"  Never  had  rheumatism.  No  chest  trouble.  Digestion  good.  Appetite
good.  Tongue  coated  slightly.  Bowels  not  so  regular  (costive)  for  two  or
three  days.  Sleep  is  not  very  good — inclined  to  wakefulness.  Pain  of  late
in  his  right  side — under  the  right  floating  ribs. No  pain  to-day.

"  Is  a  tall  man  of  6ft.  height. Weight  158.

"  Eyesight  has  been  poor  for  a  good  while. Glasses  convex.

"No  disturbance  of  vision  except  as  above. No  diplopia."

Abridgment  from  Notes  by  E.  Cowles,  M.D.

May  30th,  1890.

His  own  melancholy  fits  come  a  dozen  times  a  year — sometimes  in
them  will  walk  off  2  or  3  miles  without  knowing  where  he  is.  No  aura
precedes.  No  exhilaration  afterwards.  In  early  life  studied  very  hard;
later  anxiety  of  meeting  congregations,  &c,  produced  a  "sinking  away, "not
exactly  fainting.  Tongue  occasionally  sore  at  end,  but  no  traces  of  biting.
Patellar  reflexes  normal.  No  clonus  of  foot.  Pupils  equal — react  readily.
Sensibility  to  light  touch  on  hands;  head  and  ears  normal.

Examination  of  Ansel  Bourne,  May  30th,  1890,  by  Wm.  Noyes,  M.D.

Mr.  Bourne's  sensibility  to  touch  (tested  with  fingers,  cotton,  pin,  and
testhesiometer)  appeared  entirely  normal  during  his  waking  state,  with  the
exception  of  a  region  about  4  by  3  inches  (roughly)  on  inner  side  of  left  thigh
where  the  sensibility  was  diminished.  No  antesthetic  or  tender  spots  could
be  discovered  on  back,  spinal  column,  chest,  or  limbs,  either  ujjper  or  lower.

In  the  hypnotic  state  there  was  some  diminution  of  sensibility  but  not
very  marked.  A  small  bit  of  cotton  let  fall  three  or  four  inches  on  his
head  where  he  was  bald  was  felt,  although  the  reply  was  given  very  slowly.
A  pin  could  be  stuck  into  the  back  of  his  hand  and  he  would  allow  it  to
remain.  Said  it  felt  about  one  quarter  inch  in  diameter.  Did  not  recognise
it  as  a  pin.  Patellar  tendon  reflexes  were  equal  and  normal,  and  pupils
responded  readily  to  light,  both  in  and  out  of  the  hypnotic  state.  Examina-
tion of  the  tongue  showed  nothing  that  could  be  definitely  identified  as  a
scar.  On  the  right  side  of  this  organ,  near  the  middle,  there  was  a  small
spot  about  3  by  1  m.m.  that  had  a  slightly  different  colour  from  the  surround-
ing tissues,  but  could  not  definitely  be  identified  as  scar-tissue.

(No  magnifying  glass  was  used.)

Notes  by  Professor  Wm.  James,  M.D.

May  30th,  1890.

He  was  tried  during  this  afternoon  by  Drs.  Wadsworth  and  Jack,  both
in  and  out  of  the  trance.  No  difference  of  vision  or  hearing  was  discovered
in  the  two  states.  He  recognised  tobacco  and  vinegar  in  the  trance  by  their
smell,  and  also  salt  and  sugar  on  his  tongue,  though  the  sugar  was  recognised
slowly.  I  found,  to  my  surprise,  that  he  discriminated  points  about  as  well
on  the  palmar  surface  of  hands  or  fingers  when  in  as  when  out  of  the  trance.
The  tardiness  of  his  replies  made  it  seem  as  if  he  must  be  more  insensitive.


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness,


255


The  only  difference  between  trance  and  waking  as  to  sensibility  seems  then  to
be  a  not  very  pronounced  analgesia  during  trance.

Produced  hallucination  of  red  cross  in  trance.  No  after  image.  Waked
him  by  upward  passes  made  without  warning.

Examination  of  Ansel  Bourne,  May  30th,  1890,  by  0.  F.
Wadsworth,  M.D.
Right  eye,  central  opacity  of  cornea,  about  2  m.m.  diameter  ;  left  eye,
two  dots  of  opacity  in  cornea  a  little  below  centre.  Pupils  react  well.
Field  of  vision  of  normal  extent  in  each  eye.  Discs  normal  for  age  ;  little
pigment  in  epithelial  layer  generally,  in  either  eye  ;  in  other  respects  fundus
normal.  Hypermetropia  shown  by  ophthalmoscope,  about  3  d.,  but  re-
fraction different  through  different  parts  of  cornea,  owing  to  the  opacities.
No  means  at  hand  for  testing  vision  accurately.

Report  of  the  Examination  of  Mr.  Brown's  Hearing,  by  Frederick

L.  Jack,  M.D.

May  30th,  1890.

The  hearing  power  for  the  voice  was  impaired  on  both  sides.  He  could
hear  the  tuning-fork,  "C,"  better  in  the  right  ear  than  in  the  left.  In
contact  with  the  cranial  bones  it  was  heard  more  distinctly  on  the  left  side.
Acoumeter  was  heard  at  about  four  (4)  inches  from  the  right  and  two  (2)
from  the  left  ear.  Tickings  of  the  watch  perceived  only  when  pressed
against  the  right  ear  ;  not  heard  on  contact  in  the  left.  When  watch  was
put  between  the  teeth  (bone  conduction)  nothing  was  heard.  Tests  in  the
patient's  natural  state  were  the  same,  but  answers  were  quicker.

APPENDIX  D.
Ambulatory  Automatism  in  a  Hysterical  Man.
By  Dr.  Proust,  Professor  of  Hygiene  at  the  Hotel  Dieu,  of  Paris.

(The  case  was  published  in  the  Revue  de  L'Hypnotisme,  March,  1890,  and
the  following  resume  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  May,  1890.)

Emile  X.,  JEt.  33,  is  a  barrister  in  Paris  ;  of  good  ability  and  education
in  classical  studies,  both  as  a  boy  and  at  the  university.  He  was  always  ner-
vous and  over-sensitive,  with  some  hysterical  attacks  and  functional  derange-
ments of  motion  and  sensation,  signs,  in  fact,  of  "  la  grande  hysterie."  He
could  be  hypnotised  very  easily,  and  while  M.  Luys  had  him  in  charge  he
could  be  put  to  sleep  by  a  loud  noise,  or  any  sudden  impression.  One  day
in  a  cafe  he  saw  himself  in  the  looking-glass  and  at  once  fell  into  a  hypnotic
state  which  frightened  his  friends  and  led  them  to  take  him  to  a  hospital,
where  he  recovered  without  any  difficulty.  Sometimes  his  attacks  were
different ;  he  would  seem  to  his  companions  to  undergo  no  loss  of  conscious-
ness, but  would  lose  the  memory  of  all  his  past  life  during  a  few  minutes  or
a  few  days  and  in  this  condition  of  secondary  consciousness  would  lead  an
active  and  apparently  normal  life  on  foot  or  on  horseback,  in  his  friends'
houses  or  in  shops.  From  such  a  state  he  woke  suddenly  and  was  entirely
without  memory  of  what  had  happened  to  him  in  this  secondary  state.  An
instance  of  this  occurred  on  September  23rd,  1888. He  had  had  a  quarrel


256


K.  Hodgson.


with  his  stepfather  in  Paris,  which  had  excited  him  considerably,  and  he  fell
into  his  second  state.  Three  weeks  later  he  woke  after  his  usual  fashion,
without  any  memory  whatever  of  what  had  been  happening,  and  found
himself  at  Villars-Saint-Marcelin,  in  the  Haute  Marne,  more  than  100  miles
from  Paris.  He  picked  up  from  various  sources  a  little  knowledge  of  what
he  had  done.  He  was  tolrl  he  had  visited  the  priest  of  the  village,  who  had
thought  him  "  odd  "  ;  that  he  had  also  stayed  with  one  of  his  uncles  who  was
a  bishop  in  the  Haute  Marne,  and  at  his  house  had  broken  various  things,
and  torn  up  some  MSS.  of  his  uncle's  ;  that  he  had  run  into  debt  to  the  extent
of  £20,  and  that  he  had  been  summoned  before  the  court  at  Vassy  on  some
charge  of  petty  theft,  and  in  his  absence  judgment  had  been  given  against
him.  Again,  on  May  11th,  1889,  he  was  breakfasting  at  a  restaurant  in
Paris,  and  two  days  later  found  himself  at  Troyes.  Of  what  had  happened
during  these  two  days  he  could  remember  nothing.  He  recollected  that
before  losing  his  consciousness  he  had  had  a  greatcoat  and  a  purse  in  it
containing  226fr.

These  facts  reminded  Professor  Proust  of  the  well-known  case  of  Felida
X.,  and  of  the  more  recent  case  of  Louis  V.  (Proceedings  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Rasearch,  XL,  497,)  in  which  the  memory  of  the  secondary
personality  was  recalled  by  hypnotism.  Emile  X.  was  easily  hypnotised,  and
in  that  state  could  give  a  full  account  of  what  had  happened  to  him  in  his
states  of  secondary  personality.  In  his  first  of  these  two  attacks  he  described
how  he  had  lost  some  of  the  £20  at  cards,  and  told  the  complete  story  of
what  he  had  done  when  staying  with  his  uncle,  the  bishop,  and  afterwards
with  the  priest.  In  the  same  way  as  to  his  visit  to  Troyes,  he  told  the  details
of  his  journey,  of  the  friends  he  had  dined  with  there,  and  where  he  had  left
his  overcoat  and  purse.  Notes  were  taken  of  his  hypnotic  account,  and  on
the  strength  of  these  he  wrote  to  the  hotel  keeper  at  Troyes  asking  for  his
coat  and  purse,  and  describing  where  he  had  left  them.  Two  days  later,  to
his  great  astonishment,  he  received  them  both,  and  the  226fr.  in  the  purse.
The  court  at  Vassy,  also,  when  his  true  condition  had  become  known,  reversed
the  judgment  given  against  him.


APPENDIX  E.

A  Case  of  Epilepsy  with  Double  Consciousness.

(Extract  from  an  article  by  G.  R.  Trowbridge,  M.D.,  assistant  physician
to  the  State  Hospital  for  the  Insane,  Danville,  Pa.,  published  in  the  Medical
Neivs,  February  21st,  1891. Lea  Brothers  and  Co.,  Philadelphia.)

The  patient  is  a  German,  male,  aged  fifty-two  years,  admitted  February
3rd,  1888 — his  second  admission  to  the  hospital.  He  is  about  5  feet  8  inches
in  height,  weighs  about  150  pounds,  and  is  thick-set,  and  very  muscular.
All  of  his  toes  have  been  lost,  and  his  fingers  more  or  less  disabled  by  frost-
bite. He  has  been  subject  to  epileptic  convulsions  since  1862,  and  was  first
attacked  while  working  on  a  Transatlantic  steamer,  where  he  was  a  stoker.  He
thinks  that  the  disease  was  caused  by  the  intense  heat  to  which  he  was  ex-
posed. There  is  no  family  history  of  epilepsy  or  of  any  other  nervous  affec-
tion, and  no  record  of  insanity. The  epileptic  attacks  are  of  a  most  violent


A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness.


257


nature  (grand  mal),  and  occur  about  once  every  month  or  six  weeks.  He  then
has  from  three  to  six  convulsions,  and  never  during  the  time  he  has  been
in  my  charge  has  he  had  single  convulsions  in  the  interval.  For  several  days
preceding  the  convulsions  he  complains  of  pain  in  the  left  inguinal  region,
and  says  that  it  is  "due  to  a  fall  he  had  when  on  board  ship."  There  is
no  evidence  of  anything  abnormal  in  this  region,  and  I  regard  the  pain  as  an
aura,  as  he  never  complains  of  it  except  just  before  the  attack.  Shortly  after
this  aura  (from  twenty-four  to  thirty-six  hours)  he  has  a  convulsion,  and  on
recovering  from  this  becomes  somewhat  irritable  and  sullen.  Other  convul-
sions follow  until  he  has  had  from  three  to  six.  His  irritability  and  sullen-
ness  increase  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  convulsions,  and  he  finally
lapses  into  a  perfect  condition  of  double  identity,  the  original  Eyo  being  com-
pletely destroyed,  and  during  this  period  of  second  self  it  is  necessary  to
place  him  in  seclusion.

The  time  occupied  during  the  transition  from  the  first  condition  to  the
second  is  from  two  to  four  days,  varying  according  to  the  interval  between
the  epileptic  attacks.

During  this  period  of  "second  self"  he  becomes  very  violent  and
abusive,  and  can  be  approached  only  after  being  physically  overpowered.
When  he  passes  into  this  condition  he  at  first  refuses  nourishment,  but
toward  the  latter  part  of  the  period  he  will  swallow  if  a  cup  is  held  to  his
mouth,  though  it  is  necessary  to  restrain  his  hands  and  feet.  If  left  to  him-
self he  is,  as  a  rule,  comparatively  quiet,  and,  as  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  his
sleej)  is  not  disturbed.

This  condition  lasts  from  five  to  ten  days,  and  his  return  to  a  normal  con-
dition rarely  occupies  more  than  twenty-four  hours,  though  on  one  or  two
occasion it  has  taken  somewhat  longer.  For  some  time  after  the  return  to
his  normal  condition  he  speaks  in  a  husky  voice,  and  complains  that  his
throat  is  sore,  and  for  some  days  he  is  abstracted  and  listless.

When  in  his  normal  condition,  the  man  is  of  a  pleasant  disposition,  and
does  a  great  deal  of  work  about  the  ward.  When  questioned  in  regard  to
his  sensations  during  the  periods  of  "  second  self,"  he  says  he  can  tell  no-
thing except  that  everybody  and  everything  is  strange  to  him,  and  that  he
knows  nothing  of  what  he  says  or  does.  But  he  can  describe  circumstances,
and  occurrences  which  took  place  before  the  development  of  his  "second
condition,"  i.e.,  during  a  previous  normal  period.

The  expression  of  his  face  during  the  period  of  "  second  self  "  is  altered,,
changing  from  a  rather  pleasant  expression  to  one  of  intense  anger  and
hatred.  In  short,  I  do  not  think  that  Stevenson's  ' '  Dr.  Jekyll  and  Mr.
Hyde  "  could  be  worse  than  this  man,  were  he  given  his  liberty.

On  one  occasion,  before  his  admission  to  this  hospital,  while  in  his  second
state,  he  was  disturbed  by  his  wife,  who  endeavoured  to  make  him  eat,  and
in  the  paroxysm  of  rage  caused  by  this  he  tried  to  kill  her  with  a  hatchet,
but  was  prevented  by  the  timely  interference  of  the  neighbours.  He  after-
wards said  that  he  had  no  recollection  at  all  of  the  matter.


S.


Supplement.]


Third  Ad  Interim  Report.


25Q


SUPPLEMENT.


i.

THIRD  AD  INTERIM REPORT  ON THE CENSUS  OF

HALLUCINATIONS.


England.
Up  to  July  1st,  1891.

The  total  number  of  answers  received  up  to  this  date  is  :


"  No."

"Yes."

Totals.

From  men

3854

365

4219

From  women

4360

697

5057

Totals

8214

1062

9276

Percentage  of  affirmative  answers,  11  "45.


Of  the  persons  answering  "  Yes,"  164  have  as  yet  sent  no  particulars.

The  number  of  persons  who  have  had  more  than  one  experience —
either  the  same  repeated  more  than  once,  or  different  experiences — is  300.
Of  these,  118  have  had  only  auditory  or  tactile  experiences,  generally  of  a
trivial  kind.  When  a  percipient  lias  had  more  than  one  experience,  but  has
not  described  them  singly,  his  experiences  are  counted  together  as  one  case
in  the  following  tables.

Of  the  experiences  described,  about  14-5  per  cent,  are  reported  by  our
informants  to  have  coincided  with  some  external  event  in  such  a  way  as  to
suggest  a  causal  connection  between  the  two.

The  experiences  recorded  have  been  classified  as  follows  : —


200  Third  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  [Supplement,


A. — Experiences  Affecting  More  Than  One  Sense.
I.  — Coincidental.


Representing

Totals.

A  Living
Person.

A  Dead
Person.

An
Animal.

An  In-
animate
Object.

Visual  and  Tactile

Visual,  Auditory,  and  Tactile
Totals

19
2
1
4

3
3

1

3

26
2
1
7

26

6

1

3

36

II. — Non-Coincidental.


Representing

o

O

o

w
0>

tZl

J-

"3

"3

Ph

tc

<u
Ph

11

a
°H

ject

Livin

eg

«

f

<

c

<:

5 -a
wO

<

<

ft

-5

12

23

20

o
O

1

10

4

6

5

1

1

3

o
O

4

1

3

Visual,  Auditory,  and  Tactile  ...

2

o

7

1

Totals

21

34

36

4

2

15

In  many  of  the  above  cases,  the  auditory  part  of  the  experience  was
non-vocal  (that  is,  not  of  a  kind  that  would  have  been  counted  if  another
sense  had  not  been  affected  at  the  same  time),  such  as  footsteps,  rustling,
crashes,  raps,  sounds  as  of  doors  opening  or  shutting,  or  vehicles  going  along
a  road,  music,  rushing  sounds  and  other  noises.  The  great  majority  of
these,  however  (viz.,  52  out  of  59),  occur  among  the  non-coincidental  cases.
These  noises  may  sometimes  have  been  real  sounds,  whose  origin  was  not
ascertained,  and  similarly  the  tactile  elements  of  the  sensations  may  some-
times have  been  due  to  real  muscular  sensations.

Of  the  coincidental  visual  and  auditory  cases,  3,  viz. ,  1  representing  an
animal  and  2  representing  inanimate  objects,  are  said  to  have  been
collective.  Of  the  non-coincidental  visual  and  auditory  cases,  14,  viz.,  2
representing  a  living  person,  1  a  dead  person,  4  an  unrecognised  person,  1


Supplement.]


Census  of  Hallucinations.


261


an  animal,  and  6  an  inanimate  object,  are  also  said  to  have  been  collective.
The  impressions  produced  on  the  several  percipients,  however,  were  not
similar  in  all  the  cases  which  are  here  called  collective.  In  one  of  the  cases
where  a  living  person  was  seen,  three  persons  saw  the  figure,  while  only  one
of  them  heard  its  footsteps  ;  and  in  the  other,  two  persons  heard  a  crash,
only  one  of  them  seeing  the  figure.  In  two  of  the  cases  where  an  unrecog-
nised figure  was  seen,  only  one  of  the  two  percipients  saw  the  figure,  while
both  heard  noises  corresponding  to  its  apparent  movements.  The  case  where
the  animal  was  seen  is  one  which  I  described  in  my  Address  on  the  Census  of
Hallucinations  last  year  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  433)  as  an  instance
of  a  probably  real  sound  being  the  possible  cause  of  different  visual
hallucinations.

B.— Experiences  Affecting  One  Sense  Only.
I. — Visum.

1.  Coincidental —

a.  Human  Apparitions  :

a.  Of  living  people 56  1

/3.  Unrecognised ... ... ... ... ... 11 J

b.  Non-human  apparitions  :

a.  Of  animals  (symbolic)  ... ... ... ...  3\

/3.  Of  inanimate  objects ... 7  J

2.  Non-coincidental —

«.  Human  Apparitions :

a.  Of  living  people... ... ... ... ...  141%

|3.  Of  dead  people 73  I

y.  Unrecognised 239  f 400 1

8.  Any  part  of  figure  other  than  head ... ... 7 J

b.  Non-human  apparitions  :  r*  526

a.  Of  animals ... ... 16 1  I

j3.  Of  inanimate  objects ... ... 50/

Total 603

Of  these,  87  (11  coincidental  and  76  non-coincidental  cases)  are  said  to
have  been  collective  experiences.  The  coincidental  collective  experiences
consist  of  5  apparitions  of  a  living  person,  1  of  an  unrecognised  person,  and
5  of  inanimate  objects  ;  and  the  non-coincidental  collective  experiences  con-
sist of  16  apparitions  of  a  living  person,  6  of  a  dead  person,  and  38  of  an
unrecognised  person,  1  of  an  animal  and  15  of  inanimate  objects.  Of  these
collective  experiences,  47  (3  coincidental  and  44  non-coincidental)  occurred
out  of  doors,  the  important  bearings  of  which  circumstance  I  discussed  in  my
address  on  the  subject  last  year. (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  431.)


671


r-  77


10  j


2G2


Third  Ad,  Interim  Report  on  the  [Supplement.


1.  Coincidental — ■


II. — Auditory  (Human  Voices).


a.  Recognised  living :

Name  called

Words  other  than  percipient's  name
Crying  or  sobbing

6.  Recognised  dead  :

Words  other  than  percipient's  name
c.  Unrecognised  :

Name  called

Words  other  than  percipient's  name

2.  Non-coincidental —

a.  Recognised  living  :

Name  called  on  one  occasion
Words  other  than  percipient's  name
Voices  heard  (once  or  more)
Various  (song,  screams)

/'.  Recognised  dead  :

Name  called  on  one  occasion
Words  other  than  percipient's  name
Voices  heard  (once  or  more)
.Sighs  ...

f.  Name  called  on  more  than  one  occasion,
recognised  or  not

</.  Unrecognised  :

Name  called  on  one  occasion
Words  other  than  percipient's  name
Voices  heard  (once  or  more)
Shrieks

Sighs  or  groans  ...

Sobbing  ...

Laugh

Singing


15  "I
14  j

2  \-  32-
i

lJ


2-
1)


voice


28  ^

34

20

3  r
2
1
4


■  43


11


52


77


249


95


Total 292


Of  these,  31  (4  coincidental  and  27  non-coincidental)  are  said  to  have  been
collective  experiences.  The  4  coincidental  collective  experiences  are  :  2  cases
of  calls  and  1  of  words  in  a  recognised  voice,  and  1  of  a  call  in  an  unrecog-
nised voice.  The  non-coincidental  collective  cases  are  :  11  of  the  voice  of  a
living  person  (8  calls,  2  words,  1  song),  5  of  the  voice  of  a  dead  person  (1
call,  1  words,  1  voices,  2  sighs),  1  of  calls  occurring  on  three  occasions  to  the
same  two  percipients,  and  10  of  unrecognised  voices  (4  words,  2  voices,  1
singing,  1  sobbing,  1  shriek,  and  1  groan).


Supplement.]


Census  of  Hallucinations.


263


III.— Tactile.


1.  Coincidental


a.  Recognised  touch  of  a  living  person

b.  Unrecognised


2.  Non-coincidental —


a.  Recognised  touch  of  a  living  person  :

a.  Single  touch

/3.  Recurring  touches


b.  Recognised  touch  of  a  dead  person  :

a.  Single  touch

/3.  Recurring  touches


}-  73


c.  Unrecognised  :
a.  Single  touch
(3.  Recurring  touches


3!>
26


Total


80


Of  these,  5  cases  (1  coincidental  and  4  non-coincidental)  are  said  to  have
been  collective  ;  the  coincidental  case  being  1  of  an  unrecognised  touch,  and
the  non-coincidental  cases  being  1  of  recurring  sensations  of  cool  breezes
and  3  of  single  touches.  In  one  of  the  latter,  one  percipient  saw  a  vague
figure  when  the  other  felt  a  touch.

We  have  in  this  Report  endeavoured  to  take  some  account  of  morbid
conditions,  and  have  counted  as  negative  answers  those  of  12  persons — 8
women  and  4  men — who  answered  "Yes,"  but  whose  experiences  seemed  to
be  clearly  due  to  fever,  or  to  a  blow  on  the  head,  or  to  some  similar  definite
cause.  In  our  final  Report,  this  question  of  illness,  as  well  as  the  numerous
other  questions  arising  out  of  the  information  received,  will,  of  course,  be
fully  discussed.

In  conclusion,  I  must  again  beg  my  readers  to  render  me,  if  possible,  fur-
ther assistance  in  collecting  answers.  A  report  on  the  Census  is  to  be  made
to  the  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology  which  will  meet
in  England  in  August,  1892,  and  we  ought  by  that  time  to  have  a  much
larger  number  of  answers  than  we  have  yet  received.  Indeed,  while  gladly
acknowledging  much  valuable  and  zealous  assistance,  I  must  admit  to  feeling
disappointed  at  the  comparatively  small  number  of  people  who  have  come
forward  to  help.  I  am  not  without  hope  that  I  may  still  obtain  co-operation
from  some  of  the  members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  who  have
not  yet  taken  part  in  the  collection.  Only  about  84  out  of  some  700  have  so
far  sent  me  any  answers,  though  I  hope  that  others  may  already  have  partly
filled  forms  which  will  reach  me  in  course  of  time.  One  great  object  aimed
at  in  forming  a  society  like  ours  is  that  the  members  may  co-operate  in
psychical  inquiries  when  opportunity  offers.  I  am  arranging  to  have  a  new
copy  of  the  collectors'  form  sent  to  each  member  of  the  Society  in  England
who  has  not  sent  me  one  filled  up,  in  the  hope  that  he  or  she  may  yet  be  able
to  collect  answers,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  correspond  with  anyone  else  who  is


264  Third  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  [Supplement.


willing  to  help  in  the  work.  Letters  should  be  addressed,  Professor  Sidgwick,
Cambridge.

Henry  Sidgwick.

P.S. — In  America  the  collection  is  being  carried  on  by  Professor  William
James,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  who  may  be  applied  to  for
the  necessary  forms.


i  France.

I

Up  to  April  30th,  1891.
Report  Presented  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
By  M.  Leon  Marillier,  Secretary  for  France.

The  statistical  inquiry  into  hallucinations  was  begun  in  France  on  April
15th,  1889  ;  its  first  period  ended  on  April  30th,  1891.  The  number  of
answers  collected  up  to  that  date  was  2,822. They  may  be  divided  thus  :


"No."

"  Yes."

Totals.

1702

260

1962

648

212

860

Totals

2350

472

2822

which  gives  16  "05  per  cent,  of  affirmative  answers.  Among  the  472  affirma-
tive answers  there  are  243  about  which  we  have  as  yet  been  unable  to  obtain
particulars.  The  229  affirmative  answers  about  which  we  have  received
information  may  be  classified  as  follows  : — ■


A. — Hallucinations  Affecting  More  Than  One  Sense.
I. — Coinciding  with  a  Real  Event  or  so  Reported.


Representing

Totals.

A  Living  Person.

A  Dead  Person.

An  Unrecognis-
ed Person.

Visual  and  Auditory
Visual  and  Tactile  ...

3

1
1

3

7
1

Totals

o

o

o
O

8

supplement.]  Census  of  HalLihcinatlons.  265

II. — Not  Coinciding  with  any  Real  Event.


Representing

Totals.

A  Living

A  Dead

An  Unrecog-

An

Person.

Person.

nised  Person.

Object.

Visual  and  Auditory

1

6

5

1

13

Visual  and  Tactile

1

3

4

Visual,  Auditory,  and  lactile

1

1

3

5

Visual  and  Olfactory

1

1

Auditory  and  Tactile

2

2

Visual,  Auditory,  Tactile,  and

Olfactory

1

1

Totals

2

9

14

1

26

B. — Hallucinations  Affecting  one  Sense  Only
I. — Visual.

1.  Coincidental —

«.  Human  beings  :

a.  Living  people

/3.  Unrecognised  people  ...
b.  Animals  and  objects  :

a.  Animal

i3.  Object

2.  Non-coincidental —

«.  Human  beings  :

a.  Living  people

,3.  Dead  people

y.  Unrecognised  people

5.  Parts  of  the  human  body

e.  Angel
b.  Animals  and  objects  :

a.  Animal

/3.  Objects


12}  14]
2  J


1}


12  I
20  j

25  V  611
3


J


H  13  i

12  f  10 )


90


II. — Auditory.

Coincidental — ■
«'.  Human  voices  :

a.  Recognised  voices
/3.  Unrecognised  voices
y.  Cries,  sighs,  groans,  coughs  ...
b.  Various  noises  ...


15-
14


29


266


Third  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  [Supplement.


2.  Non-coincidental —

a.  Human  voices  :

a.  Recognised  voices  of  living  people
ft.  Recognised  voices  of  dead  people
y.  Unrecognised  voices
8.  Cries,  sighs

b.  Various  noises


III. — Tactile.

1.  Coincidental. Unrecognised  persons  ...

2.  Non-coincidental  :

a.  Recognised  person  ...

b.  Unrecognised  persons

c.  Statue


Total 11

The  number  of  persons  who  have  had  several  hallucinations  is  48  ;  of
this  number  12  have  had  one  or  more  hallucinations  which  have  coincided
with  a  real  event.

The  number  of  collective  veridical  hallucinations  is  8 :  5  auditory,
1  visual,  2  visual  and  auditory.

The  number  of  collective  falsidical  hallucinations  is  7  :  3  visual,  3  audi-
tory, 1  tactile.

Of  the  229  hallucinations  about  which  we  have  been  able  to  obtain
particulars,  a  total  of  56  have  been  reported  to  us  as  veridical.

The  proofs  of  coincidence  furnished  to  us  have  in  general  been  very
weak,  and  among  these  56  cases  there  are  very  few  which  rest  on  a  consensus
of  testimony  sufficient  to  carry  conviction.  But  it  certainly  seems  that  the
hallucinations  which  we  have  placed  in  the  category  of  veridical  hallucina-
tions constitute  a  natural  group  and  present,  taking  them  all  together,
characteristics  which  mark  them  off  from  other  hallucinations.

Of  the  173  falsidical  hallucinations  only  7  were  collective  hallucinations  ;
of  the  56  hallucinations  said  to  be  veridical,  8  were  collective.

Of  the  7  veridical  hallucinations  which  were  both  visual  and  auditory,  3
represent  a  recognised  living  person  ;  of  the  13  falsidical  hallucinations  in
the  same  class,  only  1  represents  a  living  person  recognised  by  the
percipient.

Of  14  veridical  visual  hallucinations  representing  human  beings,  12
represent  a  living  person  known  to  the  percipient  ;  out  of  61  falsidical
hallucinations  in  the  same  category  there  are  the  same  number,  12,  repre-
senting a  living  person  whom  the  percipient  has  been  able  to  recognise.

In  the  category  of  veridical  hallucinations  affecting  the  sense  of  sight
only  we  find  no  apparitions  of  dead  people  ;  among  the  61  falsidical
hallucinations  of  this  class,  20  represent  dead  people.

In  15  cases  of  veridical  auditory  hallucinations  in  which  a  human  voice
was  heard,  there  are  4  in  which  the  voice  was  recognised  ;  while  in  47


Supplement.]


Census  of  Hallucinations.


267


falsidical  hallucinations  of  the  same  kind  there  are  6  cases  only  in  which  the
voice  was  recognised.

I  am  aware  that  these  comparisons  rest  on  too  small  a  number  of  facts
to  have  very  much  value,  but  it  has  seemed  to  me  useful  to  indicate  them.
It  is,  I  think,  by  this  method — inaugurated  by  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney —
even  more  than  by  accumulating  coincidences  of  which  the  exactness  is
sometimes  doubtful,  that  it  will  be  possible  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
hallucinations  called  telepathic  constitute  a  special  class  of  phenomena,
requiring  a  special  explanation.

Here  is  the  information  which  our  statistics  have  furnished  in  the  matter
of  ages.


"No."

Yes.

Total.

Under  21  years  of  age...

70

23

93

From  21  to  30  years  ...

750

152

902

,, 30  to  40  ,,

655

98

753

,, 40  to  50  ,,

432

90

522

,, 50  to  60  ,,

273

70

343

,, 60  to  70  ,,

121

25

146

49

12

61

Brittany  has  furnished  the  majority  of  the  veridical  hallucinations.

The  inquiry  will  be  continued  till  July  31st,  1892,  and  a  general  report  will
be  presented  to  the  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology  of
1892.  I  shall  be  much  obliged  if  any  persons  willing  to  co-operate  in  this,
inquiry,  in  France,  Switzerland,  or  Belgium,  will  kindly  send  me  their  names
and  addresses.  Letters  should  be  addressed  :  L.  Marillier,  7,  Rue  Michelet,
Paris.

L.  Marillier,

Maitre  de  Conferences  a  l'Ecole  des  Hautes-Etudes.
Paris,  May  2nd,  1891.


268


Mrs.  H.  Sidgtuick.


[Supplement.


II.

ON  SPIRIT  PHOTOGRAPHS  j
A  REPLY  TO  MR.  A.  R.  WALLACE.
By  Mrs.  Hexry  Sidgwick.

The  review  of  the  evidence  for  what  are  called  "spirit  photographs"
which  I  am  about  to  present  to  the  reader  was  substantially  written  in
1885  or  1886,  when  I  was  engaged  in  writing  an  article  on  Spiritualism
for  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  and  had,  therefore,  to  read  and
estimate  the  evidence  in  all  branches  of  the  subject.  I  did  not  offer
the  paper  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  because  its  attention
had  not  been  specially  drawn  to  the  subject  and,  as  will  be  seen,  my
conclusions  were  on  the  whole  negative.  It  appeared  to  me  that,
•after  eliminating  what  might  certainly  or  probably  be  attributed  to
trickery,  the  remaining  evidence  was  hardly  sufficient  in  amount  to
establish  even  a  prima  facie  case  for  investigation,  in  view  of  the
immense  theoretical  difficulties  involved.

But  recently  Mr.  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  in  an  article  entitled  "Are
there  Objective  Apparitions  ?  "  contiibuted  to  an  American  periodical,
The  Arena  (for  January,  1891),  has  again  appealed  to  Spirit  Photo-
graphs as  evidence  of  the  objectivity  in  question,  and  has  challenged  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  to  deal  with  this  evidence. He  says  : —

' '  This  long  series  of  photographic  ex2)eriments  and  tests  .  .  .  has  been
hitherto  not  even  alluded  to  by  the  investigators  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.  But  they  cannot  much  longer  continue  to  ignore  it,  because  they
have  entered  on  the  task  of  collecting  the  whole  of  the  evidence  for  psychical
phenomena,  and  of  fairly  estimating  the  weight  of  each  of  the  groups  under
which  that  evidence  falls.  Now  I  submit  that  this  photographic  evidence  is
superior  in  quality  to  any  that  they  have  hitherto  collected,  for  two  reasons.
In  the  first  place,  it  is  experimental  evidence,  and  exjueriment  is  rarely
possihle  in  the  higher  psychical  phenomena  ;  in  the  second  place,  it  is  the
evidence  of  experts,  in  an  operation  the  whole  details  of  which  are  perfectly
familiar  to  them.  And,  I  further  submit,  this  evidence  can  no  longer  be
ignored  because  it  is  evidence  that  goes  to  the  very  root  of  the  whole  inquiry
and  affords  the  most  complete  and  crucial  test  in  the  problem  of  subjectivity
or  objectivity  of  apparitions."

Mr.  Wallace  is  too  eminent  a  man  and  too  much  interested  in  our
investigations  for  such  a  challenge  to  pass  unnoticed  and  it  has,  there-
fore, been  thought  that  the  following  examination  of  the  evidence  to
which  he  appeals  had  better  be  published.


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


2G9


I  may  add  that  Mr.  Wallace  is  expressing  now  the  same  opinion
that  he  expressed  in  1874,  in  his  book  entitled  Miracles  and  Modern
Spiritualism,  He  said  then  of  spirit  photography  :  "  It  is  that  which
furnishes,  perhaps,  the  most  unassailable  demonstration  it  is  possible  to
obtain  of  the  objective  reality  of  spiritual  forms."

Spirit  photographs — or  at  least  those  species  of  them  which  I  pro-
pose to  deal  with  here 1 — are  photographs  representing  figures  or  objects
which  at  the  moment  the  photograph  seemed  to  be  taken  had  no
apparent  counterpart  in  the  field  of  view  discoverable  by  the  normal
sight.  A  photographer  with  the  faculty  of  producing  such  photo-
graphs would,  in  taking  a  portrait  of  a  human  sitter,  sometimes  obtain
that  of  some  other  person  on  the  same  plate.  If  the  sitter  was
fortunate,  it  would  be  that  of  a  deceased  relation.  Sometimes  persons
possessing,  or  supposed  to  possess,  the  faculty  of  seeing  spirits  said  that
they  saw  the  form  which  ultimately  appeared  on  the  plate  hovering
near  the  sitter,  though  invisible  to  ordinary  eyes.

As  this  paper  will  be  critical  rather  than  descriptive,  it  will  be
desirable  to  give  at  the  outset  a  brief  account  of  the  periodicals  and
books  where  evidence  on  the  subject  may  be  found,  which  will  have  the
further  advantage  of  saving  continual  references  as  we  go  on.

A  collection  of  the  evidence  on  the  subject  was  made  by  "  M.A.
(Oxon.)"  in  a  series  of  papers  contributed  to  Human  Nature  in  1874
and  1875,  and  this  is  the  best  summary  of  it  which  I  have  seen.  It
needs  supplementing,  however.  In  particular  Mr.  Beattie's  accounts  of
his  own  experiments  (see  British  Journal  of  Photography  for  1872
and  1873 ;  Spiritualist  for  July,  1872  ;  Spiritual  Magazine  for
September,  1872,  abbreviated  slightly  from  the  Spiritualist;  and
Spiritual  Magazine  for  November,  1873,  from  the  British  Journal  of
Photography)  should  be  read.  Some  of  the  evidence  scattered  through
the  Spiritual  Magazine  from  1872  to  1875  is  important,  though  the
best  is  given  by  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)  "  Also  much  light  is  thrown  on  the
subject  by  the  controversy  about  the  genuineness  of  Hudson's  photo-
graphs in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  and  Spiritualist  for  1872,  and  by
the  trial  of  Buguet,  for  accounts  of  which  see  various  numbers  of  the
Spiritualist  for  1875  and  1876,  and  esjiecially  Madame  Leymarie's
Proces  des  Spirites  (Paris,  1875).  Mr.  Wallace  devotes  several  pages
to  the  subject  of  spirit  photography  in  his  Miracles  and  Modern
Spiritualism.  The  Spiritual  Magazine  for  1869  gives  the  trial  of
Mumler,  and  the Spiritual  Magazine  for  1862  and  1863  contains

1  Mr.  Wallace  applies  the  name  also  to  photographs  of  so-called  "materialised
spirits."  In  the  case  of  "materialisations,"  however,  it  is  not  usually  the  genuine-
ness of  the  photographic  process,  but  merely  the  spirituality  of  the  figure  photo-
graphed which  the  sceptic  calls  in  question.


270


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


[Supplement.


some  account  of  Mumler's  early  performances  at  Boston.  To  these
references  I  must  now  (1891)  add  M.  Aksakoff's  Animismus  u?id
Spiritismus  (Leipzig,  1890),  in  which  a  long  chapter  devoted  to  the
subject  contains  some  additional  evidence.

We  may  divide  the  evidence  for  Spirit  Photographs  into  that  obtained
with  professional  photographers  who  made  a  profit  out  of  it,  and  that
obtained  by  investigators  apart  from  anyone  with  a  pecuniary  interest
in  the  result.  I  shall  begin  with  the  first  class,  because  it  is  by  far  the
largest.

Mumler  in  America,  who  began  operations  at  Boston  in  1862,
Hudson  and  Parkes  in  London  10  years  later,  and  Buguet  at  Paris,
who  nourished  and  fell  in  1874-1875,  have  been  the  principal  pro-
fessional Spirit  Photographers.  There  have  been  others,  especially  in
America,  but  they  are  less  well  known,  at  least  in  this  country,  and
at  any  rate  the  four  I  have  named  will  sufficiently  serve  as  types.  Of
these  four,  Mumler,  Hudson,  and  Buguet  produced  sham  Spirit  Photo-
graphs, whether  they  produced  real  ones  or  not.

Mumler  had  been  at  work  but  a  few  months  when,  early  in  1863,
it  appeared  that  a  living  person  figured  in  at  least  two  of  his
photographs  as  a  spirit  of  the  dead.  This  seems  temporarily  to  have
given  a  blow  to  his  credit  and  he  sank  into  obscurity.  In  1869  he
reappeared  at  New  York,  with  testimonials  mostly  dating  from  1862,
which  looks  as  if  he  had  not  done  much  in  the  interval.  It  was  a  few
months  after  he  settled  at  New  York  that  his  trial — referred  to  by  Mr.
Wallace — for  swindling  credulous  persons  by  what  he  called  Spirit
Photographs  took  place.  This  time  he  was  more  fortunate  than  in
1863.  Only  New  York  evidence  was  admitted,  and  the  only  definite
New  York  evidence  against  him  appears  to  have  been  that  of  Marshal
J.  H.  Tooker,  who  had  been  sent  by  the  Mayor  (it  was  a  public  prosecu-
tion) to  "  look  up  "  the  case.  This  he  did  by  assuming  a  false  name
and  having  his  photograph  taken  by  Mumler  ;  and  the  result  was  a
"  spirit  photograph,"  which  he  was  told  represented  his  father-in-law,
but  which  he  said  bore  no  resemblance  to  his  father-in-law,  or  any
other  person  he  had  known.  For  the  defence  was  brought  the
evidence  of  photographers  and  others  who  had  failed  to  discover  any
trick,  and  that  of  persons  who  had  obtained  recognised  likenesses  of
departed  friends.  The  trial  ended  in  Mumler's  acquittal,  the  judge
saying,  "That,  however  he  might  believe  that  trick  and  deception  had
been  practised  by  the  prisoner,  yet  ...  he  was  compelled  to
decide  that  he  should  not  be  justified  in  sending  the  defence  to  the
grand  jury,  as,  in  his  opinion,  the  prosecution  had  failed  to  prove  the
case."  (Spiritual  Magazine  for  June,  1869.)  This  acquittal,  consider-
ing that  the  previous  evidence  against  him  was  necessarily  excluded,
and  that  the  prosecution  seems  to  have  been  premature  and  hasty,


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


271


relying  on  the  a  priori  probability  that  he  cheated  and  not  on  proved
instances,  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  triumphant,  nor  as  in  any  way
invalidating  the  previous  evidence  of  fraud.

As  to  Hudson,  very  soon  after  he  began  the  business,  Mr.  J.
Enmore  Jones,  a  leading  Spiritualist,  discovered  on  some  of  his  photo-
graphs clear  signs  of  trickery.  Other  Spiritualists — some  of  them
expert  photographers — now  inquired  into  the  matter,  and  the  fact  was
clearly  established  that  there  was  something  wrong  about  many  of  the
photographs.  It  was  alleged  against  them  (see  Spiritualist  for  Sep-
tember, 1872)  that  they  showed  obvious  signs  of  double  exposure,  such
as  the  background  appearing  through  the  dress  of  the  mundane  sitter,
and  marks  in  the  background  appearing  duplicated ;  that  some  of  them
bore  evident  marks  of  having  been  altered  by  hand  ;  and  that  in  one
or  more  of  them  Heme,  the  medium,  had  sat  for  the  ghost.  The  marks
are  so  clear  that  Mr.  Beattie,  of  Clifton,  "pronounced  the  photographs
alluded  to  to  be  not  only  deception,  but  deception  of  the  stupidest ;
and  more,  that  the  evidence  was  so  palpable  that,  unless  we  are  to
become  as  'little  children'  in  common  observation,  and  very  weak
children  too,  we  could  not  but  see  them  as  such."

A  controversy  now  began  to  rage  among  Spiritualists : — Hudsonites,
headed  by  Mr.  Thomas  Shorter,  editor  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine,
supported  by  the  Medium,  against  anti-Hudsonites,  headed  by  Mr.  W.
H.  Harrison,  editor  of  the  Srpiritualist  (a  paper  which  at  that  time
held  much  the  same  position  that  Light  does  now).  Both  parties
believed  that  Hudson  produced  some  genuine  photographs,  and  the
appearances  of  double  exposure  were  not  denied  by  the  Hudsonites.
But  these  last  stoutly  maintained  that  there  was  no  proof  of  fraud
against  Hudson.  They  explained  that  the  effects  which  looked  like
those  of  double  exposure,  &c,  were  probably  produced  by  the  spirits.
Thus  "  spirits  "  told  them  that  "  the  success  of  our  manifestations  in
these  cases  is  to  bring  ourselves  within  the  sphere  of  the  sitter,  and  to
amalgamate  that  sphere  with  our  own.  When  rays  of  light  pass
through  this  mixed  aura  they  are  refracted  and  often  cause  things  to
be  apparent  on  the  plate  which  you  cannot  account  for."  (See
Human  Nature  for  October,  1872,  p.  448,  and  editorial  article  in
the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  November,  1872,  p.  482.)  Another  advo-
cate suggests  that  the  "  psychical  aura  "  may  produce  the  effect  either-
owing  to  its  having  the  property  of  double  refraction,  or  to  its  having
a  different  density  from  the  atmosphere  and  being  introduced  after
the  exposure  has  begun,  so  that  the  rays  of  light  are  differently
deflected  during  the  first  and  second  half  of  the  exposure.  Again,
it  is  suggested  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  1872,  p.  413,  that  the  spirits
may  produce  the  effect  by  slightly  displacing  the  camera.  "Photo-
graphers," the  writer  continues,  "  will  say  that  a  proof  of  that  would


272


Mrs,  H.  SidgpicJc.


[Supplement.


appear  upon  the  picture  of  the  sitters"  (which,  we  may  remark,  would  apply
also  to  the  last  mentioned  theory);  "hut  as  a  spirit  can,  in  the  sphere  of
some  mediums,  change  the  modes  of  material  substances,  can  a  spirit
not  also,  in  such  a  sphere,  so  modify  light  that  the  pictures  taken  by
him  shall  not  interfere  with  that  of  the  sitters  taken  by  the  photo-
grapher?" And  in  an  editorial  article  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for
October,  1872,  p.  465,  we  are  told  "when  professional  photographers
are  as  familiar  with  the  laws  and  methods  of  spiritual  photography,  as
the  more  scientific  members  of  the  profession  are  with  those  of
common  photography,  their  opinions  on  this  question  will  be  entitled
to  greater  weight.  Perhaps  by  that  time  they  may  have  learned  that
phenomena  of  spiritual  agency  are  not  to  be  wholly  judged  by  those
narrow  canons  of  professional  criticism  which  apply  well  enough  to
phenomena  of  purely  physical  and  mundane  origin."

Arguments  such  as  these  show  to  what  straits  Hudson's  defenders
were  reduced.  It  should,  however,  be  said  for  them  that  they  believed
that  a  Mr.  Russell,  of  Kingston-on-Thames,  experimenting  for  his  own
satisfaction,  had  obtained  Spirit  Photographs  with  Heme  and  Williams
as  sitters,  exhibiting  signs  of  double  exposure,  though  only  one  exposure
had  taken  place.  As,  however,  neither  the  negatives  nor  prints  from
them  were  ever  openly  produced  in  this  case,  and  as  their  disappearance
was  explained  by  saying  that,  "  unfortunately,  some  mischievous
gnome  .  .  .  used  means  to  obliterate  the  most  interesting  pictures
while  in  an  unfinished  state"  {Human  Nature,  November,  1872,  p.
499)  we  may  be  permitted  to  consider  this  evidence  as  worthless.
Hudson's  friends  also  argued  that  double  exposure  could  not  be  a  sign
of  fraud,  because  a  certain  photograph  obtained  by  Dr.  Dixon,  with  a
recognised  likeness  of  his  dead  son,1  showed  signs  of  it,  and  also  a
likeness  of  a  spirit  friend,  recognised  by  Mr.  H.  Clifford  Smith,  came  out
positive  on  the  negative  of  the  sitter.  To  most  of  us  it  will,  I  think,
appear  that  the  peculiarities  of  these  photographs  throw  doubt  on  the
value  of  recognition  as  a  test  of  genuineness  in  a  Spirit  Photograph,
rather  than  prove  that  genuineness  is  compatible  with  double  exposure.

Buguet's  fraud  is,  if  possible,  even  more  beyond  question.  He  was
brought  to  trial  for  swindling  by  the  French  Government  in  1875,  and
stated  at  his  trial  that  all  his  Spirit  Photographs  were  fraudulent  and
generally  done  by  means  of  cardboard  heads  and  dummy  figures  draped
at  discretion  and  produced  on  the  plate  by  double  exposure.  Later,
after  he  had  escaped  to  Belgium,  he  partly  retracted  this  and  said  that
some  were  genuine. But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  as "  M.A.

1  This  likeness  does  not  seem  to  have  been  very  successful  as  to  face  ;  a  peculiarity
of  dress  satisfied  Dr.  Dixon.  (See  Human  Nature  for  "November,  1874,  p.  485,  and
Spiritual  Magazine  for  1872,  pp.  321  and  484.)


supplement.]  On  Spirit  Photographs.  273


(Oxon.)  "  puts  it  (Human  Nature,  1875,  p.  334),  "a  recent  trial  in
Paris  has  furnished  clear  evidence  of  a  long  and  systematic  course  of
fraud.  .  .  .  Buguet,  by  his  own  confession  as  well  as  by  demonstra-
tion, stands  revealed  as  an  impostor."

Parkes,  the  fourth  professional  spirit  photographer  I  have  named,
produced  photographs  of  very  suspicious  appearance,  but  took  the  line
of  frankly  admitting  this  and  even  calling  attention  to  it,  while  he
attributed  it  to  the  peculiar  methods  of  operating  adopted  by  the
spirits,  tie  gave  investigators  less  opportunity  of  examining  into  his
processes  than  Mumler,  Hudson,  and  Buguet  seemed  to  do,  and  there
could,  therefore,  be  little  chance  of  proving  any  fraud  so  long  as  he
kept  clear  of  Mumler's  great  error — producing  living  people  for  dead
ones.  This  is  a  description  of  one  photograph  taken  in  his  studio  which
illustrates  what  I  mean  by  suspicious  appearances  : —

"It  was  taken  on  a  plate  freshly  purchased,  and  which  had  never  been  in
Mr.  Parkes'  possession.  The  plate  had  been  prepared  and  placed  in  the
shield,  when  a  photographer  who  was  present  requested  that  it  might  be
taken  out  and  turned  upside  down  before  the  exposure.  This  was  done,  and,
on  developing  the  plate,  a  rude  outline  of  a  figure,  composed  of  tv:o  busts,
appears  ;  the  busts  pointing  in  opposite  directions.  Had  this  occurred  on  a
plate  which  the  photographer  had  had  in  his  possession  before,  most  of  us
would  have  jumped  at  unfavourable  conclusions."  (Human  Nature  for
April,  1875,  p.  157.)

Probably  most  of  our  readers  will  still  arrive  at  "  unfavourable
conclusions  "  as  to  this  performance,  taking  into  account  the  conditions
described. I  may  observe  that  if  Pai'kes'  statements  are  accepted  as
trustworthy,  they  present  a  hard  nut  to  crack  to  those  who  maintain
that  spirit  photography  is  a  proof  of  the  objectivity  of  phantasms.  He
propounded  the  view,  in  the  course  of  a  discussion  on  the  subject
reported  in the Spiritualist for December 10th, 1875,  that  the
lens  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  spirit photograph. Also  that
the  "  spirit  light "  had  the  power  to  pass  through  opaque  substances,
such  as  the  skull  and  reflecting  mirrors. He  proved  this  to  his  own
satisfaction — so  he  said — by  experiment. Sitting  himself  and  inserting
a  mirror  in  the  camera  which  would  throw  his  image  on  to  a  sensitive
plate  at  the  side  of  the  camera,  and  placing  another  sensitive  plate  at
the  back  of  the  camera  behind  the  mirror,  he  says  he  obtained,  as  was.
natural,  an  inverted  image  of  himself  on  the  side  plate,  but  the
"spirit"  came  out  erect  on  the  back  one. The  "spirits"  told  him
that  "in  the  case  of  a  'spirit'  placing  himself  by  the  side  of  a  sitter,
it  was,  of  coui'se,  necessary  to  produce  an  inverted  image,  and  herein
was  one  of  their  greatest  difficulties  in  taking  spirit  photographs."
Mr.  Parkes  consequently  could  not  focus  his spirit  sitters.  He
generally  saw  them,  he  said,  but  moving  the  camera  made  no  difference

T


274


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc.


[Supplement.


to  their  appearance  as  seen  through  the  lens ;  he  had,  therefore,  to  place
it  so  as  to  harmonise  the  spirit's  appearance  with  the  sitter. 1  Parkes
also  said  that  he  could  obtain  spirit  figures  only  on  spiritually
sensitised  plates,  and  that  any  doubt  or  uncertainty  in  his  mind  as  to
whether  the  plate  had  been  spiritually  sensitised  prevented  success.

From  these  statements  of  Parkes  we  must  infer  either,  as  he
did  himself,  that  "spirit  photographs"  are  not  really  photographs  at
all,  in  which  case  spirit  photography  does  not  afford  an  unassailable
proof  of  the  objective  reality  of  spirit  forms  as  Mr.  Wallace  thinks  it
does  ;  or  that  Parkes  never  carried  out  the  experiments  he  described.

We  now  come  to  the  question  whether,  notwithstanding  the  fraud,
any  of  these  four  persons  ever  produced  genuine  Spirit  Photographs.
Those  Spiritualists  who  were  most  decided  in  maintaining  that  there
was  deception  contended  that  they  all  also  produced  the  genuine
article. They  thought  so  because

(1)  Competent  persons  had  watched  the  process  throughout  with-
out detecting  trickery  ;  and

(2)  Because  among  the  photographs  taken  a  certain  number  were
recognised  as  likenesses  of  some  dead  person.

It  is  on  the  first  of  these  considerations  that  Mr.  Wallace  relies  in
his  article  in  the  Arena.  And  I  think  some  force  must  be  allowed
to  it.  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  there  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  record
of  either  Mumler  or  Hudson  being  detected  in  the  act  of  committing
the  fraud,  so  that  the  proof  against  them  rests  only  on  the  results  pro-
duced. At  Mumler's  trial  evidence  was  given  by  a  photographer,
named  Silver,  who  had  sold  his  studio  and  apparatus  to  Mumler,  that
with  unusual  opportunities  for  observing,  and  working  with  him  from
November  to  March,  several  times  watching  the  process  he  went
through  as  closely  as  he  could,  he  at  no  time  detected  any  fraud  or
deception  on  his  part.  I  do  not  know  whether  Mr.  Silver  was  a  dis-
interested witness,  but  he  swore  that  there  was  no  collusion  between
them,  and  said  he  was  not  certain  that  the  impressions  were  produced

1  He  does  not  say  whether  the  spirits  stood  on  their  heads  to  make  this  possible,
Taut  I  may  observe  that  no  such  peculiarity  is  noticed  on  one  occasion  in  which  "  M.  A.
(Oxon. )"  believed  that  he  saw  the  "spirit"  while  he  was  being  photographed  by
Parkes.  "  M.  A.  (Oxon.)  "  says  : — "  In  my  clairvoyant  state  I  saw  the  child  standing
or  hovering  by  me  close  to  my  left  shoulder.  She  seemed  to  be  standing  near  the  table :
and  I  tried  in  vain  to  call  Dr.  Speer's  attention  to  her.  As  soon  as  the  exposure  was
•over,  and  I  awoke,  I  stated  what  I  had  seen,  and  on  the  plate  being  developed,  there
stands  apparently  on  the  table  a  little  child's  figure.  The  position  is  exactly  where  I
saw  and  felt  it. "  (Human  Nature,  1874,  p.  397.)  I  am  not,  under  the  circumstances,
disposed  to  attach  much  importance  to  this  correspondence  of  "M.  A.  (Oxon.)'s"
impression  and  the  photograph  as  evidence  of  genuineness,  partly  because  a  baby  sister
of  Dr.  Speer's  was  believed  of  ten  to  communicate  through  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)  "  at  seances,
and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  Parkes  knew  this.


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


275


by  supernatural  means.  (See  Spiritual  Magazine,  June,  1869,  p.  249.)
Mr.  J.  Gurney,  a  well-known  photographer  at  New  York,  and  a  Spirit-
ualist, also  stated  at  the  trial  that  he  had  failed  to  discover  any  trick  ;
but  I  confess  that  this  gentleman's  evidence  would  have  more  weight
with  me  had  I  not  seen  an  account  of  his  experience  with  another
medium,  Mrs.  French.  {Spiritual  Magazine  for  1861,  p.  433,  &c.)  A
third  photographer,  named  Slee,  of  Poughkeepsie,  about  whom  I  have  no
other  information,  wrote  to  the  New  York  Tribune  that  Mumler  had
produced  spirit  photographs  in  his  (Mr.  Slee's)  studio  and  with  his
apparatus,  &c,  and  under  the  closest  scrutiny  of  his  operator  and  him-
self and  assistants,  without  any  second  negative  or  mechanical  arrange-
ment whatever  being  discovered.  (See  Spiritual  Magazine,  June,
1869,  pp.,  264-266.) 1

About  Hudson  we  have  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Beattie,  already  men-
tioned, whose  honesty  is  beyond  suspicion,  and  who  had  himself  been
a  professional  photographer;  who  was,  moreover,  one  of  those  most
strongly  convinced  that  some  of  Hudson's  photographs  were  fraudulent.
He  and  a  friend,  an  amateur  photographer,  visited  Hudson  and  had
photographs  taken,  watching  the  process  with  care,  and  he  says  of  the
spirit  figures  which  came  out  : —

"They  were  not  made  by  double  exposure,  nor  by  figures  being  projected
in  space  in  any  way  ;  they  were  not  the  result  of  mirrors  ;  they  were  not
produced  by  any  machinery  in  the  background,  behind  it,  above  it,  or  below
it,  nor  by  any  contrivance  connected  with  the  bath,  the  camera,  or  the
camera-slide."  2

Similarly  Mr.  Traill  Taylor,  the  editor  of  the  British  Journal  of
Photography  (Human  Nature,  1874,  p.  477)  says  that  he  had  tried
experiments  in  Hudson's  studio  with  his  own  plates  and  collodion,  and
that  "at  no  time  during  the  preparation,  exposure,  or  development  of
the  pictures  was  Mr.  Hudson  within  10  feet  of  the  camera  or  dark  room.
Appearances,"  he  adds,  "of  an  abnormal  kind  did  certainly  appear  on
several  plates."

Mr.  Thomas  Slater,  optician,  of  136,  Euston-road,  again,  says  that  he
took  a  new  camera,  a  new  combination  of  lenses,  and  several  glass
plates,  and  then,  watching  the  process  throughout,  obtained  "  a  fine
spirit  picture." (Spiritual  Magazine,  June,  1872,  p.  258.) And  this

1  I  do  not  think  that  Mr.  Guay's  evidence  should  be  introduced  in  this  connection
as  it  is  by  "M.  A.  (Oxon. )  "  and  by  M.  Aksakof,  because  Guay  seems  to  have  been
Mumier's  assistant,  receiving  half  the  profits  of  the  business.  (See  Spiritual  Magazine,
18fi9,  p.  243.)

2  British  Journal  of  Photography  for  July  11th,  1873,  as  quoted  in  Human  Nature
for  November,  1874,  p.  479.  Mr.  Beattie  and  his  friend  had  four  photographs  taken  ;
the  first  (in  which  Mr.  Beattie  sat)  was  a  failure  ;  the  two  next  (in  which  Mr.  Beattie
sat),  successes,  the  last  (in  which  the  friend  sat)  was  again  a  failure.


276


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwich.


[Supplement.


was  after  having  twice  watched  the  whole  process  so  far  as  this  could
be  done  whilst  also  acting  as  sitter.

When  Buguet  came  to  England,  in  1874,  Mr  W.  H.  Harrison,  with
others,  witnessed  the  process.  Mr.  Harrison  sums  up  his  report  in  the
Spiritualist  of  June  26th,  1874,  as  quoted  in  Human  Nature  of  January,
1875,  p.  15,  after  describing  how  he  watched  throughout  all  that
Buguet  did  :  "  Obviously  it  is  not  possible  to  say  much  about  spirit
photography  on  the  slender  experience  of  observing  one  experiment,
but  I  do  not  know  how  to  produce  by  artificial  means  a  similar  picture,
under  like  conditions."

And  Mr.  Slater  (already  mentioned),  says  of  Buguet  (see  Proces
des  Spirites,  p.  145)  : — ■

"  J'ai  fait  avec  lui  plusieurs  experiences.  Comme  photographe,  j'assistai
a  toutes  les  manipulations  depuis  le  nettoyage  de  la  plaque  jusqu'au
developpement  de  l'image,  et  dans  aucun  cas,  il  ne  m'a  pas  trompe  ni  ne  l'a
pas  pu. J'ai  eu  le  portrait  de  ma  tante,  qui  a  6te  une  mere  pour  moi."

This  absence  of  detection  by  persons  watching  is  certainly  remark-
able ;  but  I  think  that  Mr.  Wallace  and  others  overrate  its  import-
ance. The  question  is  how  far  an  intelligent  person  ought  to  expect
to  detect  trickery  of  the  kind  here  supposed — which  is  practically
conjuring — how  far  he  ought  to  expect  to  see  all  that  goes  on  within  his
possible  field  of  vision  when  someone  else  is  trying  to  prevent  his  seeing
it,  and  I  believe  that  the  majority  of  persons  exj:>ect  too  much  of  them-
selves and  others  in  this  way.  It  is  not  a  proof  of  stupidity  to  be
unable  to  see  when  or  how  a  trick  is  done  ;  even  conjurers  cannot  do
this  always,  or  they  would  not  need  to  buy  each  other's  tricks.  The
ordinary  mistake  of  eye-witnesses  who  relate  experiences  of  this  kind
is  to  over-estimate  their  powers  of  observation  and  memory.  In
particular  the  assertion,  "  I  never  for  an  instant  lost  sight  of  so  and
so,"  if  the  "never"  extends  over  any  considerable  length  of  time,  is
generally,  I  think,  untrue,  and  is  almost  certain  to  be  untrue  if  the
observer  has  attempted  to  guard  simultaneously  against  all  the  ways  in
which  he  conceives  that  the  trick  may  have  been  done.  I  believe  that
any  one  who  would  endeavour  conscientiously  to  write  accounts  of  what
he  saw  at  a  conjuring  entertainment  would  convince  himself  of  this  ;
unless  he  convinced  himself — as  some  Spiritualists  have  done — that  the
conjurer  is  a  medium.  On  this  point  I  would  refer  to  Mr.  S.  J.  Bavey's
experiments  (Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  405-495),  which  appear  to  me
to  prove  conclusively  that  intelligent  persons  thinking  that  they  have
the  conditions  under  their  own  control  may  not  only  be  taken  in,  but
may  believe  the  event  to  have  occurred  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  the
particular  trick  actually  practised  impossible.

In  the  particular  case  of  spirit  photography  there  are  several  things
which  seem  to  make  it  especially  hard  to  detect  trickery, One  is,  the


Supplement.  ]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


277


great  complication  of  the  process  of  photography  and  the  number  of
ways  in  which  sham  ghost  pictures  may  be  done.  Then,  again,  if  the
watcher  be  also  the  sitter,  there  are  special  difficulties  in  the  way  of  his
observation.  For  instance,  "M.A.  (Oxon.)"  tells  us  in  Human  Nature
for  September  1st,  1874,  p.  395,  of  a  certain  photograph  of  which  he
gives  a  copy  : — "  This  particular  group  was  taken  under  strict  test  con-
ditions. Dr.  Speer  and  I  followed  the  plate  throughout.  .  .  .  We
never  lost  sight  of  the  plate  from  the  very  first,  and  can  give  unhesitat-
ing testimony  that  no  suspicious  element  presented  itself."  But  it  is
obvious  from  the  plate  itself  that  neither  Dr.  Speer  nor  "M.A.  (Oxon.)"
were  looking  at  the  camera  while  the  photograph  was  taken,  and  "M.A.
(Oxon.)"  at  any  rate  was  not  looking  at  the  photographer.  Trickery  is,
of  course,  also  made  immensely  easier  by  the  fact  that  the  photo-
grapher is  under  no  necessity  to  produce  a  Spirit  Photograph  at  all  if
detection  would  follow.

Taking  everything  into  consideration,  I  do  not  think  that  the  non-
detection  by  experts  affords  sufficiently  strong  ground  for  believing  that
the  photographers  in  question  have  sometimes  produced  genuine  Spirit
Photographs.

We  have  next  to  consider  whether  the  recognition  of  portraits  of
spirits  affords  the  required  evidence  of  genuineness.  This  is  not  quite
the  simple  question  it  looks,  and  incidentally  the  discussion  of  it  has
an  important  bearing  on  another  branch  of  Spiritualistic  evidence —
the  supposed  materialisation  of  recognised  spirit  friends.

In  the  first  place  we  must  observe  that  a  large  proportion  of  the
spirit  photographs  were  definitely  unrecognised1  ;  and  many  photo-
graphs were  recognised  which  never  ought  to  have  been.  As  "M.A.
(Oxon.)"  says  {Human  Nature  for  May,  1875,  p.  202): —

"  Some  people  would  recognise  anything.  A  broom  and  a  sheet  are  quite
enough  to  make  up  a  grandmother  for  some  wild  enthusiasts  who  go  with
the  figure  in  their  eye,  and  see  what  they  wish  to  see.  ...  I  have  had
pictures  that  might  be  anything  in  this  or  any  other  world  sent  to  me,  and
gravely  claimed  as  recognised  portraits ;  palpable  old  women  authenticated  as
'  my  spirit  brother  dead  seventeen  years,  as  he  would  have  been  if  he  had, '
&c."

When  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)  "  was  compiling  his  papers  on  spirit  photo-
graphy for  Human  Nature,  some  460  photographs  came  under  his
notice,  mostly,  I  think,  sent  by  persons  who  thought  them  interesting,
so  that  these  460  must  be  considered  as  a  selected  lot. Out  of  these,

1  Buguet  (see  Procis  des  Spirites)  named  50,  60,  and  70  per  cent,  to  clients  on  different
occasions  as  the  proportion  of  his  successes.  These  numbers  may  be  taken  as  the  largest
numbers  he  dared  give  without  risking  being  afterwards  regarded  as  an  impostor.
Probably  the  actual  proportion  which  were  thought  to  be  recognised  was  much  smaller.


278


Mrs.  H.  Sklgwick.


[Supplement.


he  could  only  select  90,  or  about  one-fifth,  for  description,  as  being
either  distinctly  recognisable  or  done  under  conditions  such  as,  in  his
opinion,  excluded  trickery,  and  of  these  90  I  think  some  82  are  counted
mainly  because  they  were  recognised.  For  evidential  purposes  this
number  must  be  considerably  reduced,  especially  when  it  is  remembered
that  even  when  a  recognised  likeness  was  obtained  it  was  very  seldom
that  of  a  particular  person  previously  expected.  "  M.A.  (Oxon.) ,r
says  {Human  Nature  for  June,  1876,  p.  268) :  "  Out  of  some  600
photographs  which  I  have  seen  and  examined,  and  of  most  of  which
I  have  heard  the  history,  I  do  not  know  of  half  a  dozen  in  which  the
expected  form  appeared."  And  if  I  may  infer  from  "M.A.  (Oxon's.)  "
descriptive  lists  which  the  half-dozen  are,  I  should  add  that  in  only
one  of  these  does  it  seem  to  me  that  there  is  not  reason,  apart  from
the  success,  for  thinking  that  the  photographer  knew  beforehand  what
was  expected.

I  think  that  we  must  as  a  general  rule  regard  recognition  as
evidentially  unimportant  in  the  following  cases  : —

(1)  Spirit  portraits  of  well-known  or  historical  people  and  leading
Spiritualists — Dumas,  Judge  Edmonds,  Allan  Kardec,  Livingstone,
President  Lincoln,  &c.

(2)  Photographs  of  near  connexions  of  well-known  Spiritualists,
since  it  would  clearly  be  natural  for  a  fraudulent  spirit  photographer
to  make  himself  acquainted  by  sight  with  as  many  Spiritualists  as  he
can,  and  to  obtain  likenesses  of  their  deceased  relatives.

(3)  Cases  where  an  appointment  made  in  advance  or  a  second
visit  gives  a  chance  of  preparation — especially  if  such  appointment  has
been  made  at  the  suggestion  of,  or  through  another  medium,  who  may
be  in  collusion.1  If  it  be  urged  against  this  that  it  would,  in  many
cases,  be  difficult  for  the  fraudulent  photographer  to  procure  a  likeness
of  a  deceased  friend  of  his  sitter,  it  may  be  replied  that  this  very  fact
may  be  the  reason  why  distinctly  recognisable  spirit  photographs  of
departed  friends  were  not  more  often  produced.  In  some  cases  it  is
easy  to  obtain  photographs  of  persons  not  long  dead  ;  and  with  regard
to  those  who  died  before  photography  was  known  it  may  be  remarked
that  the  length  of  time  since  they  were  seen  is  sure  to  have  caused
their  features  to  have  faded  somewhat  from  their  friends'  memories,
and  a  portrait  having  a  family  likeness  to  the  sitter  might  easily  be
produced  by  the  photographer,  and  would  in  some  instances  pass
muster  as  a  likeness. We  have  to  keep  clearly  before  our  minds  that

1  This  excludes  such  a  case  as  Mumler's  photograph  of  Mr.  Dow  and  Mabel
Warren  ;  also  such  a  case  as  Mr.  Livermore's,  who  obtained  an  unrecognised  figure
at  his  first  visit  to  Mumler,  and,  when  he  came  again  (on  which  occasion  he  thinks  he
was  recognised),  obtained  a  likeness  of  his  wife.


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


279


the  photographer  is  under  no  obligation  to  produce  a  spirit  photograph,
that,  if  he  does  produce  it,  it  need  not  be  a  likeness,  and  that  it  would
not  have  told  against  him  with  Spiritualists  had  he  produced  what
was  taken  for  a  double  of  the  sitter.

After  cutting  out  the  three  groups  above  mentioned,  there  doubt-
less still  remains  a  residuum  to  be  accounted  for ;  this,  however,
must  be  yet  further  reduced  owing  to  certain  considerations  as  to
the  value  of  recognition,  which  I  shall  now  proceed  to  discuss.  In
doing  so  I  shall  quote  as  instances  of  possibly  inadequate  recognition
photographs  of  which  some  would,  probably,  even  if  really  recognised,
be  excluded  from  an  evidential  list  on  one  of  the  above-mentioned
grounds.

One  important  consideration  is  that  in  the  majority  of  spirit  photo-
graphs the  head  is  surrounded  by  white  drapery  in  a  way  which  we
never  see  in  real  life,  and  which,  therefore,  makes  recognition  more
difficult.  This  unaccustomedness  of  the  appearance  seems  to  me  to
interfere  with  the  reality  of  the  recognition  in  several  published
cases.  Thus,  Mr.  Sutherland  (see  Human  Nature  for  November,
1874,  pp.  474,  475)  says  of  an  alleged  photograph  of  his  mother :
"I  do  not  think  anyone  but  myself  could  have  recognised  this
photograph  owing  to  the  unaccustomed  appearance."  In  a  photo-
graph representing  his  sister  he  touched  in  the  hair  as  it  was  habit-
ually worn  by  her  in  earth-life,  and  in  this  condition  it  was  at
once  recognised.  But-  perhaps  it  was  then  recognised  by  the  hair,
and  if  he  had  touched  in  the  hair  in  the  way  it  was  worn  by
some  other  relative  it  might  have  been  recognised  as  that  other.

"  M.A.  (Oxon.)  "  quotes  as  recognised  other  cases  where  I  cannot
think  the  recognition  was  adequate.  Thus  I  cannot  think  the  likeness
was  clear  which  Madame  Brocard  Boulland  discovered  after  a  quarter
of  an  hour's  examination.  (Human  Nature,  January,  1875,  p.  20.)
Nor  am  I  satisfied  with  the  identification  of  an  alleged  portrait  of  Mr.
Wallace's  mother,  of  which  he  says,  in  his  Miracles  and  Modern
Spiritualism,  pp.  190,  191,  footnote  : —

"  I  recognised  none  of  these  figures  in  the  negatives  ;  but  the  moment  I
got  the  proof  the  first  glance  showed  me  that  the  third  plate  contained  an
unmistakable  portrait  of  my  mother, — like  her  both  in  features  and
expression  ;  not  such  a  likeness  as  a  portrait  taken  during  life,  but  a  some-
what pensive,  idealised  likeness — yet  still  to  me  an  unmistakable  likeness.  The
second  figure  is  much  less  distinct  ;  the  face  is  looking  down  ;  it  has  a
different  expression  to  the  other,  so  that  I  at  first  concluded  it  was  a  different
person.  .  .  .  On  sending  the  two  .  .  .  portraits  to  my  sister,  she
thought  that  the  second  was  much  more  like  my  mother  than  the  third — was,
in  fact,  a  good  likeness,  though  indistinct,  while  the  third  seemed  to  her  to
be  like  in  expression  but  with  something  wrong  about  the  mouth  and  chin.
This  was  found  to  be  due,  in  part,  to  the  filling  up  of  spots  by  the  photo-


280


Mrs.  II.  Sidgwich.


[Supplement.


grapher  ;  for  when  the  picture  was  washed  it  became  thickly  covered  with
whitish  spots,  but  a  better  likeness  of  my  mother."  His  brother  writes  to
him  :  "I  looked  at  the  photograph  attentively,  and  recognised  your  face,  and
remarked  that  the  other  one  was  something  like  Fanny  (my  sister).  I  then
handed  it  across  the  table  to  Mrs.  VV.  and  she  exclaimed  at  once,  '  Why,
it's  your  mother  !  '  We  then  compared  it  with  a  photograph  of  her  we  had
here  and  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  the  general  resemblance,  but  it  has  an
appearance  of  sickness  or  weariness. "  "M.A.  (Oxon.)"  calls  it  (Human
Nature,  November,  1874,  p.  479)  "  a  very  clear  spirit  form."

Recognitions  depending  on  peculiarities  of  dress  are  of  very  doubt-
ful value.  I  cannot  regard  it  as  beyond  the  range  of  coincidence  that
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's  father  should  be  represented  with  a  pig-tail  (which  was
practically  the  only  point  of  identification),  since  pig-tails  were  the
ordinary  costume  not  so  very  long  ago,  even  if  Mr.  Hall's  father  was
one  of  the  last  to  wear  them ;  nor  that  Dr.  Dixon's  son  should  appear
to  be  draj^ed  in  a  "  hood  and  mantle  in  one,"  a  costume  which  it  appears
he  had  much  approved  of  in  his  earth-life.

Another  possible  source  of  error  has  been  suggested,  namely,  that
when  the  sitter  and  his  friends  set  to  work  to  guess  whom  among  their
deceased  friends  a  spirit  photograph  represents,  with  the  idea  that  it
probably  represents  one  of  them,  a  comparatively  small  amount  of
resemblance  may  mislead  and  satisfy  them.  This  may  explain  the
likeness  of  Dr.  Thomson's  mother.  Dr.  Thomson's  mother  had  died
at  his  birth,  44  years  before,  and  there  was  no  picture  of  her.  He
obtained  a  spirit  photograph  which  he  did  not  recognise,  and  sent  it  to
his  uncle,  "simply  asking  him,"  he  says,  "  to  let  me  know  if  he  recog-
nised in  the  figure  any  resemblance  to  any  of  my  relations  who  have
died,  and  he  has  written  to  say  that  he  recognises  in  it  the  likeness
of  my  mother."1

There  is  another  possibility  in  this  and  other  cases,  namely,  that  a
sketch  or  altered  photograph  of  the  sitter  himself  adapted  to  pass  as
a  mother  or  sister  may  serve  as  a  model  for  the  sjjirit  and  be  recog-
nised from  family  likeness.  I  think  the  evidence  about  31r.  Wallace's
mother  suggests  this,  and  the  following  case,  related  by  Mr.  Beattie,
does  so  also.  He  tells  us  in  a  paper  on  the  philosophy  of  spirit  photo-
graphy (see  Spiritual  Magazine  for  January,  1873,  p.  26)  that  he  has
before  him,  as  he  writes,  two  };>hotographs  of  the  same  gentleman.  In
one  of  them  is,  he  says,  a  figure,  "clearly  from  an  etching  of  a  face,

1  These  are  Dr.  Thomson's  own  words  (see  Spiritual  Magazine  for  October,  1873,
p.  475),  and  I  may  notice  by  the  way  that  the  field  of  inquiry  suggested  by  them  is  very
much  narrower  than  that  implied  in  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)V'  version.  "  He  sent  the  photo-
graph to  his  uncle  in  Scotland,  saying  that  he  was  sorry  he  could  not  recognise  it.
The  reply  was  that  that  was  not  surprising,  seeing  that  the  figure  was  that  of  Dr.
Thomson's  own  mother,  who  died  at  his  birth."  {Human  Nature,  October,  1874,  p.
426.)


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


2S1


with  a  profile  type  exactly  like  his  own  ;  in  the  other,  there  is  a  stand-
ing figure  extremely  tall  and  ill-defined.  In  both  cases  it  is  said  to
he  his  mother.  A  first-class  artist  examined  them  with  me,  and  no
likeness  coidd  be  discovered  between  the  two."  The  photograph,  already
referred  to,  which  Buguet  did  for  M.  Brocard  Boulland  again  suggests
this  procedure. He  says  : — •

"  Two  days  after  I  went  again  to  M.  Buguet  and  he  gave  me  my  photo-
graph ;  I  examined  it  with  the  most  minute  and  scrupulous  attention.  I
admit  that  the  white  hair  bothered  me  a  little  ;  but  all  at  once  I  recognised  my
mother,  smiling  at  me  with  the  same  smile  that  she  had  when  on  this  earth.

.  I  should  further  add  that  it  matters  not  to  whom  I  show  this  photo-
graph ;  everybody  sees  between  us  a  resemblance  which  was  frequently
observed  in  life."

The  difficulty  of  trusting  to  recognitions  is  yet  further  increased  by
a  curious  piece  of  evidence  that  came  out  at  the  Buguet  trial.  A
photograph  had  been  taken  by  Buguet,  which  "  M.A.  (Oxon.),"  before
Buguet's  detection,  speaks  of  as  (Human  Nature  for  February,  1875,
p.  82)  "  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  spirit-picture  with  which  I  am
acquainted."  .  .  .  "The  face  is  the  thoroughly  developed  face  of  a
living  man,  every  feature  distinct,  more  so,  in  fact,  than  the  faces  of  the
sitters."  A  cop}'  of  the  photograph  accompanies  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)'s  "
article,  so  that  all  can  see  for  themselves  how  clear  it  is.  The  process
of  photographing  was  carefully  watched  by  the  sitters,1  and  this  spirit
photograph  was  recognised  by  several  persons  as  the  likeness  of  a
Monsieur  Edouard  Poiret,  who  died  at  Pimprez  (Oise)  twelve  years
before.2  But  this  same  photograph  was  also  recognised  by  a  M.  Raymond
as  that  of  his  father-in-law,  still  alive  at  Dreux,  who  was  much
annoyed  at  being  sold  about  as  a  spirit  before  his  time.  ,  M.  Raymond
had  taken  steps  to  stop  the  sale  of  the  photograph  and  gave  evidence
on  the  subject  at  the  trial.  Now  what  happened  in  this  case  ?  "Were
M.  Poiret  and  M.  Raymond's  father-in-law  exactly  alike,  or  were  some

1  Monsieur  Carre,  Colonel  cTArtillerie,  said  at  the  trial  of  Buguet  :  "  Nous  avons
pris  la  plaque  nous-memes  ;  nous  l'avons  vu  mettre  dans  le  chassis,  que  nous  n'avons
pas  laisse  un  instant ;  en  un  mot,  nous  avons  suivi  et  termine  l'operation  entifere  avec
le  photographe ;  .  .  .  Buguet  n'a  pas  opere. "  (Proces  dcs  Spiriles,  p.  47. )  M.  Coehet
(p.  54)  says  much  the  same  :  "J'ai  vu  nettoyer  la  plaque;  .  .  .  j'etais  derrifere
les  operateurs  et  aucun  detail  ne  m'a  echappe.  Buguet  ne  prit  part  aux  operations
que  pour  mettre  l'appareil  au  point."

2  The  evidence  of  several  persons  was  brought  to  this  at  the  trial.  Thus  M.
Bastian,  aged  70,  says  :  "Or,  j'ai  parfaitement  reconnu  dans  cette  photographie  .  .  .
le  portrait  de  M.  Poiret,  un  de  mes  amis  avec  qui  j'ai  vecu  pendant  pres  de  trente  ans. "
(Proces  dcs  Spirites,  p.  55. )  In  his  written  testimony  M.  Bastian  uses  the  expression,
"  Avait  une  grande  ressemblance. "  Others  say,  "  beaucoup  de  ressemblance,"  "  quel-
que  ressemblance  "  (this  was  said  by  M.  Poiret's  nephew),  "  a  peu  pres  la  ressem-
blance," "  reconnu . . . la  ressemblance  "  (p.  177).


282


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick


[Supplement.


of  the  witnesses  mistaken  in  their  recognition  of  this  very  definite
likeness  1  1

Of  course  I  do  not  mean  to  draw  the  inference  that  no  evidence
could  be  obtained  from  recognition  of  spirit  photographs.  But  I  think
that  we  have  not  got,  and  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  obtain,  evidence
of  sufficient  quality  and  quantity  to  carry  conviction,  considering  the
character  of  the  photographers.  For  good  evidence  we  must,  in  the
first  place,  be  sufficiently  well  acquainted  with  the  witness  to  estimate
his  recognition  rightly.  Secondly,  we  must  be  very  certain  that  by  no
means  could  the  photographer  have  acquired  a  knowledge  of  what  the
spirit  photographed  was  like.  Thirdly,  we  must  be  sure  that  the
spirit  was  not  like  enough  to  the  sitter  for  the  portrait  of  the  latter
dressed  up  in  spirit  drapery  to  be  mistaken  for  the  spirit's.  Fourthly,
we  must  have  a  sufficient  number  of  likenesses  clearly  to  exclude
accidental  coincidences  like  that  of  Monsieur  Poiret.

We  have  still  to  consider  the  evidence  for  spirit  photographs
obtained  without  the  presence  of  a  professional  spirit  photographer.
Several  accounts  of  attempts  to  obtain  them  under  these  conditions
have  been  published.

Dr.  Williams,  of  Hayvvards  Heath  (see  Spiritual  Magazine,  Sep-
tember, 1873,  p.  423  ;  Human  Nature,  May,  1875,  p.  200  ;  Miracles  and
Modern  Spiritualism,  p.  193),  succeeded,  after  eighteen  months'  experi-
menting, and  exposing  some  hundreds  of  plates,  in  obtaining  three  plates
with  what  appeared  a  part  of  a  human  form,  one  of  them  having  "  the

1  There  undoubtedly  is  a  great  deal  of  apparent  evidence  to  recognition  as  regards
Buguet — especially  in  the  correspondence  about  his  photographs  published  in  the  Proces
dcs  Spiriles — a  great  deal  even  after  eliminating  cases  where  only  nine  people  out  of
twelve  recognise  the  likeness,  or  when  some  of  those  who  ought  best  to  know  hesitate
about  it.  And  there  are  one  or  two  cases  of  scars,  of  attitudes,  of  bare  places  on  the
head  where  a  lock  of  hair  had  been  cut  off  after  death.  One  would  like  to  see  these
photographs  and  know  how  definite  they  really  were.

It  must  be  remembered  that  if  one  frecpiently  sees  a  portrait  of  an  absent  person,
one's  recollection  is  of  the  portrait,  not  really  of  the  original,  so  that  once  a  person
had  clearly  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the  likeness,  his  recollection  of  the  original  would
adapt  itself.  It  is  not,  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  recognisers  should  not  be  shaken
by  Buguet 's  confession.  As  to  the  original  recognition,  cases  like  that  of  Poiret,  and
cases  where  the  sitter  does  not  recognise  the  portrait,  but  writes  afterwards  to  say  that
several  of  his  neighbours  see  in  it  a  likeness  of  A.  B.  who  died  in  his  village  some
years  ago — suggest  that  some  of  us  are  made  sufficiently  on  the  same  model  for  it  to
be  possible  to  buy  a  ready-made  portrait  like  ready-made  boots,  provided  the  scale  be
small ;  and  it  is  observable  that  Buguet  told  M .  Boyard  (Proces  dcs  Spirites,  p.  1 23)  that
for  large  photographs  "  il  lui  fallait  d^penser  beaucoup  plus  de  fluid e  ;  que  cela  lui
occasionait  beaucoup  de  fatigue,  et  qu'il  avait  besom  apres  d'un  on  deux  jours  de
repos."  Why  this  should  be  on  the  hypothesis  of  genuineness  it  is  difficult  to  see,
since  we  cannot  really  suppose  that  the  spirit  makes  itself  up  larger  in  order  to  be
photographed  on  a  larger  scale.  But  why,  if  it  was  all  fraud,  Buguet  should  prefer
doing  small  ones,  is  obvious.


Supplement.


On  Spirit  Photographs.


283


features  distinctly  marked,  the  eyes  and  nose  being  very  plain."  On  a
fourth  plate  he  perceived  a  well-formed  figure  of  a  man  standing  at  the
side  of  and  looking  at  the  sitter.  He  "saw  it  distinctly  for  several
seconds,  and  after  examining  it  proceeded  to  strengthen  it  by  further
developing,  which,"  he  continues,  "  I  succeeded  in  doing,  when  all  at
once  it  faded  away  before  my  eyes,  and  nothing  is  now  to  be  seen  of
it."  It  may,  therefore,  have  been  either  a  hallucination  or  an  illusion,
and  I  suspect  that  the  three  earlier  ones  were  not  beyond  the  range  of
some  accidental  flaw  resembling  part  of  a  human  figure.

The  following  experience,  of  which  we  received  the  account  only
a  few  weeks  ago,  may  be  compared  with  Dr.  Williams's  : — ■

March  15th,  1891.

One  fine  summer's  afternoon  in  July  or  August,  1888,  I  decided  to  be
photographed  in  the  small  yard  at  the  hack  [of  the  house]  with  my  baby  boy
on  my  shoulders.  His  mother,  as  you  know,  had  died  eighteen  months
before,  leaving  me  a  widower  at  27  years  of  age,  with  a  boy  scarcely  a
fortnight  old.  I  prepared  the  apparatus,  focussed  it,  and  instructed  my
"buttons"  how  to  expose  the  plate  and  then  took  up  my  position  with
the  child  crowing  with  delight  as  he  occupied  so  prominent  a  part  in  the
affair.  In  a  few  seconds  the  sun  had  done  its  share,  whereupon  I  retired
to  the  dark  room  to  develop  the  "picture."  I  was  watching  the  plate,
as  I  slowly  agitated  the  solution  it  was  in,  with  deep  interest  to  see  with
what  success  we  were  to  be  repaid  for  the  trouble,  when  suddenly  there
appeared  before  my  startled  eyes  the  form  and  lineaments  of  my  dead  wife  !
It  was  there  and  then  and  has  been  ever  since  absolutely  inexplicable.  The
very  idea  was  entirely  unthought  of  and  unknown  to  me.  I  had  not  then
even  heard  of  any  such  thing  as  spirit  photography.

Her  portrait  appeared  just  behind  myself  and  child,  between  us  and  an
ivy-clad  wall.  It  became  clearer,  and  then  slowly  faded,  though  still  dis-
cernible. When  I  had  passed  the  plate  through  the  hyposulphite  of  soda,
washed  it,  and  took  it  to  the  daylight,  the  likeness  was  no  longer  traceable.
As  a  photograph  it  was  wretched,  owing  to  over  exposure  and  the  child
having  moved.  Business  occupations  soon  caused  me  to  forget  the  incident
and  the  plate  was  probably  thrown  away  with  other  bad  ones.  Six  months
or  a  year  after  that  Dr.  P.  was  visiting  me,  and  knowing  he  believed  in  spirit
apparitions  I  told  him  the  above  particulars.  He  was  deeply  interested  in
the  occurrence  and  asked  me  to  seek  for  the  plate.  I  did  so,  but  never
found  it. That  is  all.

I  was  then,  and  still  am,  incredulous  as  to  the  power  of  spirits  departed
to  reappear  in  a  spiritual  imitation  of  a  material  form,  and  am  inclined  to
consider  the  "vision"  referred  to  above  similar  to  those  faces  and  forms
that  I,  for  one,  can  see  in  nearly  any  wall  paper  of  fantastic  design,  if
so  desirous.

Mr.  Christian  Reimers  is  quoted  as  having  been  successful  in  obtain-
ing spirit  photographs  in  private,  but  I  have  never  seen  any  good  account
of  them.  "  M.  A.  (Oxon.)"  quotes  in  Human  Nature,  May,  1875,  from  Mr.
Reimer's  account,  but  gives,  I  think,  a  wrong  reference. If  they  are  the


284


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


[Supplement.


photographs  referred  to  by  Mr.  Reimers,  in  Proces  des  Spirites,  p.  150,  as
I  presume  they  are,  they  were,  I  think,  done  with  Firman,  a  fraudulent
and  exposed  medium,  as  sitter,  and  suggest  the  procedure  described  in
Co?ifessions  of  a  Medium.  I  find  a  brief  account  of  the  experiments
in  the  Spiritualist  for  May  15th,  1874,  p.  238,  quite  insufficient  as  to
details.

Mr.  Thomas  Slater,  optician,  of  136,  Euston-road,  obtained  recog-
nised likenesses  of  dead  friends,  but  he,  again,  has  not,  so  far  as  I  have
been  able  to  discover,  published  sufficient  details  to  enable  one  to  judge
of  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  obtained.  He  and  his  family
were,  I  believe,  themselves  mediums  and  required  no  extraneous  assist-
ance.

M.  Augustin  Boyard  (Ingenieur  des  Arts  et  Manufactures  et
Chimiste,  104,  Avenue  de  la  Reine,  a  Bruxelles)  says  that  he  obtained
at  different  times  apparitions  on  plates,  of  which  he  had  shown  the
best  to  photographers  and  chemists  without  their  being  able  to  explain
it.  It  could  not  come,  they  thought,  "d'une  image  mal  effacee  d'un
cliche  anterieur."  (Proces  des  Spirites,  pp.  122-124.)  He  gives  an
account  of  his  experiments  in  the  Revue  Spirite  for  November,  1874,
but  again,  I  think,  a  quite  inadequate  one.  We  have  no  proof  that
a  trick  was  not  practised  upon  him,  and  the  account  seems  to  me  to
suggest  a  considerable  probability  that  it  was.

But  the  series  of  experiments  on  which  more  stress  has  been  laid
than  on  any  other  are  those  of  Mr.  Beattie,  of  Clifton.  M.  Aksakoff
regards  his  results  as  the  foundation-stone  of  the  whole  phenomenal
region  of  mediumistic  materialisations  in  general  and  of  transcendental
photographs  in  particular  (Psychische  Studien  for  May,  1886,  p.  210),
and  Mr.  Wallace  calls  them,  in  his  article  in  the  Arena,  p.  143,  "per-
haps the  most  remarkable  series  of  experiments  ever  made  on  this  sub-
ject." Mr.  Beattie,  whom  I  have  already  mentioned  more  than  once,
was  a  retired  photographer  who  enjoyed,  I  believe,  the  respect  of  all  who
knew  him.  Disgusted  with  the  evident  signs  of  fraud  in  some  of  Hud-
son's photographs,  he  determined  to  experiment  in  the  subject  himself.1
Accordingly,  in  1872,  he  arranged  with  an  intimate  friend,  Mr.  Butland,
a  good  trance  medium,  to  aid  him  in  his  experiments.  Dr.  Thomson  and
Mr.  Tommy  also  joined  him.  He  "next  went  to  Mr.  Josty,  a  professional
photographer,  and  arranged  with  him  for  the  use  of  his  studio,  glass,
instruments,  and  such  assistance  from  himself  "  as  might  be  required.

1  His  accounts  of  his  experiments  are  to  be  found  in  the  Spiritualist  for  July  15th,
1872,  and  in  the  British  Journal  of  Photo(/raphi/,l$72  and  1873,  and  the  Spiritual  Magazine
for  September,  1872,  and  November,  1873.  An  account  by  Dr.  Thomson  is  given  by  "M.  A.
(Oxon.),"  in  Human  Nature,  for  September,  1874,  but  it  is  less  full  than  Mr.  Beattie's,
and  makes  no  mention  of  Mr.  Josty,  whose  importance  in  these  experiments  has  been
unaccountably  ignored.


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


285


{Spiritualist,  July,  1872,  p.  55.)  Mr.  Beattie  tells  us  nothing  about
Mr.  Josty  or  what  previous  acquaintance  he  had  with  him.

The  first  day,  in  nine  exposures,  nothing  of  interest  occurred.  The
second  day,  on  the  ninth  exposure,  an  abnormal  appearance  developed
itself,  which  they  could  not  account  for.  Up  to  this  time  Mr.  Josty
had  laughed  at  the  whole  affair,  but  this  appearance,  Mr.  Beattie  tells
us,  staggered  him  a  little.  On  the  third  day  an  appearance  presented
itself  which  gradually  changed  and  developed  on  successive  plates.
During  one  of  the  exposures,  Mr.  Josty,  having  uncapped  the  lens,
suddenly  went  into  a  trance,  from  which  he  awoke  much  frightened.
"  After  that  took  place,  for  the  rest  of  the  evening,  he  could  not  be
induced  even  to  touch  the  camera  or  slide,  he  was  so  superstitiously
afraid."  The  next  day  no  results  were  obtained ;  the  next  time
twelve  exposures  were  made  with  no  results,  and  at  length,  both  Mr.
Josty  and  Mr.  Butland  being  entranced,  Mr.  Josty,  after  uncapping  the
lens,  moved  to  join  the  sitters  during  the  exposure ;  on  this  occasion
a  white  figure  came  out  in  front  of  him,  just  leaving  his  head  exposed.
Mr.  Josty  did  not,  he  said,  remember  having  placed  himself  among  the
sitters.  After  this,  it  seems  to  have  been  arranged  that  Mr.  Josty
should  sit  with  the  circle,  Dr.  Thomson  uncapping  the  lens.  Mr.
Josty  described  during  three  exposures  fogs  which  came  out  as
described,  and  Mr.  Butland  said  on  one  occasion  that  he  saw  a  figure
before  him  which  duly  appeared  on  the  plate.  At  the  next  seance
there  was  only  one  result  out  of  fifteen  attempts  ;  and  at  the
next,  strange  flames,  we  are  told,  in  each  case  minutely  described  by
both  mediums  as  to  number,  position,  and  brightness  during  exposure.
At  the  last  seance  three  exposures  succeeded  out  of  twenty-one.  Mr.
Beattie  says  that  he  himself  did  "all  the  photographic  manipulating,"
and  that  they  "  closed  every  door  from  which  there  was  the  remotest
suspicion  of  wrong  getting  entrance."

In  1873  the  experiments  were  repeated  "along  with  the  same
gentleman  and  under  the  same  conditions."  The  description  published
of  this  second  series  is  less  complete  than  the  first,  though  the  results
would  appear  to  have  been  more  striking.  This  time,  as  before,  the
failures  far  exceeded  the  successes.  There  were  two  mediums  present,
presumably  Mr.  Butland  and  Mr.  Josty  again.  "  The  medium  next
the  background,  we  are  told,  became  entranced  and  then  by  his  influence
he  caused  the  other  to  pass  into  some  sti'ange,  spiritual  condition,"  from
which  description,  in  connection  with  what  we  are  told  about  the  two  in
the  account  of  the  series  of  1872,  I  infer  that  the  second  was  Mr.
Josty.  He  used  to  describe  during  the  exposure  the  appearances
which  were  ultimately  found  on  the  plates,  generally  strange  lights  of
varying  shapes,  developing  through  a  series  of  three  or  four  exposures.
On  one  occasion  he  said  "  it  rose  up  and  over  another  person's  arms,


286


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc.


I  Supplement.


coming  from  his  own  boot,"  which  seems  a  pretty  definite  placing  of  it.
On  another  occasion  one  medium  said  he  saw  a  black  figure  and  the
other  a  light  one.  Both  appeared  on  the  plate  but  rather  faintly,  the
light  one  indefinite  in  form.

The  result  of  the  two  series  consists,  I  believe,  of  thirty- two  success-
ful photographs,  but  of  these  I  have  only  seen  sixteen  which  are  repro-
duced in  Psychische  Studien  for  April,  1886,  and  in  M.  Aksakoff's
Animismus  und  Siriritisimos.  The  figures  on  these  are  vague  splotches
of  light,  such  as  it  appears  to  me  might  have  resulted  from  some  method
of  letting  light  fall  on  the  sensitised  plate  through  a  crack  or  chink  of
some  sort.  One  of  these  looks  rather  like  a  dragon,  and  some  have
forms  vaguely  resembling  the  human  form,  but  so  vaguely  that  one  feels
the  resemblance  might  well  have  been  accidental.  If  we  can  suppose
that  Mr.  Josty  was  deceiving  the  others,  these  vague  figures  are  just
what  it  would  probably  be  easiest  for  him  to  produce  ;  and  as  the  room
and  apparatus  used  were  his,  and  as  it  is  clear  from  Mr.  Beattie's
account  that  the  camera  and  plates  were  not  kept  out  of  his  hands
altogether,  it  is  most  important  to  know  Avhether  he  was  a  man  who
could  be  completely  trusted.  We  accordingly  made  inquiries  at  Bristol
through  an  Associate  of  the  Society  residing  there,  who  wrote  on  January
27th,  1886:  "I  have  tracked  Josty  to  the  workhouse,  a  natural  and
fitting  conclusion  to  his  career,  according  to  all  accounts.  He  had  long-
been  going  down  hill ;  was  drunken,  insolvent,  and  in  money  matters
quite  unscrupulous,  having  still  many  unpaid  debts  about  here."  Under
these  circumstances,  deceit  by  Mr.  Josty  appears  to  me  to  be  too  probable
a  hypothesis  to  make  it  possible  to  attach  much  importance  to  Mr.
Beattie's  experiments  as  evidence  of  spirit  photography.  It  is  true
that  the  description  given  beforehand  by  Mr.  Josty,  and  sometimes  by
Mr.  Butland,  of  the  position  and  number  of  the  figures  counts  for  some-
thing evidentially.  But  if  Mr.  Josty  was  playing  tricks  he  would
naturally  have  some  information  as  to  this ;  and  we  do  not  know  that
on  the  comparatively  rare  occasions  when  Mr.  Butland  mentioned
them  he  did  so  without  suggestion  from  Mr.  J osty.

I  have  still  to  speak  of  one  series  of  experiments,  that  of  Dr.  1ST.
Wagner,  Professor  of  Zoology  at  St.  Petersburg,  made  in  1881,  and
described  in  Psychische  Studien  for  May,  1886,  and  in  M.  Aksakoff's
Animismus  und  Spiritismus.  Professor  Wagner  was  making  experi-
ments in  the  hopes  of  proving  a  theory  of  his  that  when  a  person  is
hypnotised  a  psychical  self  can  separate  itself  and  assume  a  form
which,  though  invisible,  can  be  photographed.  He  was  entirely
unsuccessful  in  this,  but  in  the  course  of  the  experiments  he  obtained
on  one  plate  (out  of  18  taken  under  the  same  conditions)  a  white  mark,
resembling  a  hand  with  part  of  a  full  sleeve,  some  distance  on  the  plate
above  the  portrait  of  the  hypnotised  sitter,  Madame  de  Pribitkow.


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


287


The  resemblance  to  a  hand  at  once  strikes  everyone  who  sees  the
photograph,  though  it  is  very  ill-defined  and  on  more  careful  inspection
is  seen  to  be  badly  formed.  The  experiment  is  more  carefully  de-
scribed by  the  persons  present  than  such  experiments  generally  have
been,  though  there  is  no  indication  that  the  accounts  were  written  at
the  time.  From  what  we  are  told,  taken  in  connection  with  the
photograph  itself,  of  which  a  reproduction  is  given  by  M.  Aksakoff,
it  is  almost  impossible  to  suppose  that  any  one  concerned  practised  any
deception.  Moreover,  the  camera  was  a  stereoscopic  one,  and  Professor
"Wagner  states  that  the  same  appearance  showed  itself  on  both
halves  of  the  plate,  so  that  it  cannot  have  been  due  to  a  flaw  on  the
plate  itself  or  to  an  accident  in  developing  ;  it  must,  it  would  seem,
have  been  caused  by  light  reflected  from  some  external  object  and
passed  through  the  lens.  Perhaps  if  the  photograph  were  a  better
one — it  was  not  sufficiently  exposed  and  the  definition  is  very  bad — -we
might  be  able  to  discover  what  the  object  was  ;  and  if  we  had  both  halves
of  the  stereoscopic  photograph  (only  one  of  which  has  been  reproduced
in  M.  Aksakoff  s  book)  it  might  enable  us  to  discover  the  position  of  this
object  relatively  to  the  medium — whether,  for  instance,  it  could  be  an
accidental  reflection  off  something  in  the  background.  But  in  any  case
it  must,  I  think,  be  held  as  more  probable  that  a  single  photograph  like
this  is  due  to  accident  than  to  spirits,  until  more  experimental  proof
of  so-called  spirit  photography,  produced  under  circumstances  where
trickery  is  out  of  the  question,  is  forthcoming.


Appendix.

It  should  be  mentioned  that  "M.A.  (Oxon.)'s  "  belief  in  Buguet
rested  on  evidence  somewhat  different  in  kind  from  any  that  has  been
discussed  in  this  paper,  and  depending  on  a  special  experience  of  his
own  interesting  enough  to  be  worth  describing  here,  though  not,  as  I
think,  leading  to  belief  in  Buguet  as  a  legitimate  conclusion.

Likenesses  of  a  living,  but  absent,  sister  obtained  through  Buguet
by  the  Comte  de  Bullet  suggested  to  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)"  that  he  might
obtain  a  spirit  photograph  of  himself.  He  therefore  arranged  with
Mr.  Gledstanes  to  go  to  Buguet's  studio  in  Paris  at  a  given  hour  to  try
for  this.  (See  Human  Nature  for  March,  1875,  p.  97,  et  seq.)  Mr.
Gledstanes  did  so  on  January  31st,  1875,  and  the  Comte  de  Bullet
was  also  present.  No  mention  is  made  of  precautions  to  prevent
Buguet's  knowing  what  was  expected,  but  it  is  not  stated  that  he  was
told.  Buguet  had  photographed  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)"  in  London  in  July,
1874.  (See  Human  Nature  for  January,  1875,  p.  13.)  "M.A.  (Oxon.)';
was  at  the  time  of  the  present  experiment  lying  on  his  bed  in  London


288


Mrs.  H.  SiclgivicJc.


[Supplement.


in  a  state  of  deep  trance.  The  following  is  his  description  of  the
results  obtained  : —

' '  On  the  first  half  of  the  plate  first  exposed  appeared  a  faint  and  indis-
tinct image  of  my  face.  The  features  were  barely  discernible,  but  Mr.
Glodstanes  has  no  doubt  that  they  are  mine.  A  second  exposure  .
produced  a  perfect  result.  The  first  half  of  the  plate  contains  a  decided
likeness  of  me  ;  the  second  half  one  of  an  old  man.  .  .  .  The  portrait  of
me  is  quite  unmistakable.  .  .  .  The  form  gives  the  idea  of  being  smaller
than  lam  naturally,  and  the  features  are  those  of  an  entranced  person."

So  far  there  is  no  particular  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the  occurrence
by  fraud.  But  now  comes  the  confirmation.  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)"  was  at
that  time  in  the  habit  of  receiving  communications  by  means  of  a
voice  not  audible  to  others,  but  appearing  to  come  from  a  distance.
On  the  morning  after  the  photographing,  before  he  received  any  news
from  Paris,  this  voice  informed  him,  and  by  automatic  writing  it  was
noted  in  his  book,  that  : —

"  Two  exposures  had  been  made  .  .  .  but  only  the  second  was  impor-
tant. On  the  first  half  of  the  plate  was  a  good  picture  of  me  as  I  appeared
personally  .  ■  .  and  on  the  other  half  the  picture  of  the  spirit  who  had
arranged  and  carried  out  the  operation."  1

Here,  therefore,  there  are  four  correspondences  between  what  "M.A.
(Oxon.)"  seemed  to  know  about  the  thing,  and  what  actually  happened,
viz.:  (1)  that  there  were  two  exposures,  (2)  the  first  unimportant,  (3)
the  second  a  good  likeness  of  "M.A.  (Oxon.)"  as  to  its  first  half,  and  (4)
with  another  figure  on  its  second  half.  If  it  be  regarded  as  very
improbable  that  this  amount  of  correspondence  should  occur  by  chance,
we  shall  have  at  any  rate  evidence  of  something  like  thought-trans-
ference or  clairvoyance.  But  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is  beyond  chance.
It  was  not  uncommon  to  make  two  exposures,  and  that  the  first  should
be  a  failure.  Nor  was  it  unusual  to  obtain  a  second  figure.  Still,  the
incident  is  undoubtedly  interesting,  and  goes  to  support  some  other
evidence  that  in  the  trance  state  "M.A.  (Oxon.)"  could  become  aware  of
what  was  happening  at  a  distant  place  where  his  thoughts  were.

To  "M.A.  (Oxon.)"  himself  the  evidence  afforded  by  this  incident  of

1  Another  peculiar  incident  occurred  in  connexion  with  this,  which,  however,  does
not,  I  think,  materially  affect  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  the  photograph.  The
information  was  further  given  to  "  M.A.  (Oxon.)  "  that  his  spirit  was  after  the  photo-
graphing taken  to  the  rooms  of  a  friend  of  his.  And  he  learnt  from  the  said  friend
that  at  the  hour  in  question  "he  became  powerfully  impressed  with  the  conviction
that  I  was  near,  or  was  about  to  enter  the  room.  He  looked  round  more  than  once,
expecting  to  see  me,  and  the  impression  was  so  strong  that  he  noted  the  exact  time,
and  conveyed  his  impression  to  me  the  same  evening,  remarking  that  it  struck  him  as.
curious,  considering  that  his  mind  was  occupied  with  other  subjects."  If  the  friend
was  unaware  that  "M.  A.  (Oxon.)"  was  engaged-  in  any  special  manner  at  the  time  this
looks  like  a  telepathic  incident.


Supplement.]


On  Spirit  Photographs.


289


the  genuineness  of  spirit  photography  is  of  a  different  kind.  I  do  not
consider  with  my  present  knowledge  that  there  is  sufficient  reason  to
conclude  that  his  "guides"  are  external  to  himself;  but  he  hrmly
believes  that  they  are  external,  that  he  has  known  them  long  and
tested  their  veracity,  so  that  to  him  what  he  seems  to  learn  from  them
comes  with  the  strength  of  a  friend's  assertion.  He  believes  that  the
photograph  was  a  genuine  photograph  of  his  "double"  because  his
"  guides  "  told  him  so.


u


290


H,  E.  Wingfield.


[Supplement.


III.

NOTICES OF  BOOKS.

The'rapeutique  Suggestive  :  sun  Mecanisme. By  Dr.  A.  A.  LiJsbeault.

(Paris,  1891.)


Dr.  Liebeault's  new  book  will  be  read  with  interest  by  all  students  of  the
subject.  It  is  almost  entirely  devoted  to  the  therapeutic  value  of  hypnotism,
and  is,  of  course,  a  most  important  contribution  to  the  subject.  The  first
part  deals  exclusively  with  hypnotism  in  its  medical  aspect,  while  the  last  is
devoted  to  the  discussion  of  hypnotic  phenomena.

Dr.  Liebeault  gives  us  a  selection  of  cases  which,  we  may  suppose,  are
types  of  those  with  which  he  has  dealt  during  his  long  experience,  and  which
will  form  a  valuable  index  of  the  kind  of  cases  in  which  hypnotism  may  be
tried.

While  all  will  j>robably  acknowledge  that  many  forms  of  nervous  disease
arise  from  a  more  or  less  disordered  state  of  mind,  it  is  somewhat  startling
to  find  that  he  believes  that  many  organic  diseases — even  cancer — may  arise
from  this  source.  He  believes  that  disease  may  be  produced  by  the  mind
being  unduly  directed  to,  or  withdrawn  from,  the  various  organs  of  the  body.
He  assumes  that  in  health  the  attention  has  a  certain  normal  distribution,  any
disturbance  of  which  will  produce  a  functional  disturbance,  and,  possibly,  an
organic  change  in  the  part  in  question.  This  idea — that  health  is  maintained
in  this  manner — is  so  novel  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  accept  it  at  once  ;
and,  indeed,  in  most  cases  of  disease  one  finds  no  evidence  of  any  mental
disturbance  having  originated  it,  so  that  there  is  much  difficulty  in  accepting
such  disturbance  as  a  cause  which  usually  gives  rise  to  diseases.  In  the  pro-
duction of  certain  diseases,  indeed,  mental  distress  seems  to  have  a  large  share
— e.g.,  in  diabetes;  but  can  anyone  imagine  that  the  disease  is  due  to  mal-
<ittention,  either  conscious  or  unconscious,  of  the  affected  organs,  or  perhaps
one  might  say,  in  many  cases,  the  disordered  function  ?  It  seems,  at  present,
at  least  premature  to  make  dogmatic  statements  with  regard  to  these  points.

Dr.  Liebeault  then  gives  his  results  in  a  large  number  of  cases  treated  by
suggestion.  Many  of  them  are  most  remarkable,  but  it  would  be  out  of  place
to  give  an  account  of  them  in  these  Proceedings.  The  most  remarkable  cases
are,  to  my  mind,  those  of  an;emia,  of  which  he  mentions  39  cases.  Of  these
sixteen  cases  were  radically  cured,  4  probably  cured,  and  the  symptoms  in  11
others  were  either  alleviated  or  temporarily  dispelled.  Such  a  result  appears
totally  inexplicable  with  our  present  knowledge.

He  gives  a  case  which  is  interesting  and  also  more  or  less  noteworthy,  as
showing  a  certain  fallacy  against  which  one  must  carefully  guard.  He
attempted  to  cure  a  goitre  by  suggestion,  and  in  this  case  the  patient,  after  a
time,  believed  that  the  swelling  had  vanished,  though,  in  reality,  it  remained
unaffected.  It  has  often  struck  me  that  when  patients  treated  hypnotically
.say  they  are  getting  better  their  improvement  is  really  imaginary,  though


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


291


this  result  is  by  no  means  to  be  despised.  Dr.  Liebeault  believes  that  this
case  was  really  the  result  of  a  badly  given  suggestion,  or  of  mal-infcerpreta-
tion  on  the  part  of  the  subject  ;  but  it  is  obvious  that,  in  those  cases  where
symptoms  are  described  by  the  patient,  and  whose  disease  cannot  be  demon-
strated to  the  eye  of  the  physician,  such  a  result  may  very  possibly  occur.

He  records  an  instance  of  drunkenness,  in  which  the  effect  of  alcohol  was
dissipated  by  self-suggestion.  I  have  myself,  on  one  occasion,  apparently  pro-
duced sobriety  in  a  drunken  man  by  first  commanding  him  to  sleep  and  then
suggesting  that  he  was  sober,  and  immediately  waking  him  up.

One  instance  of  acute  mania  is  recorded  as  cured,  and  one  only.  It
seems  disappointing  to  find  hypnotism,  so  far,  so  inefficient  a  remedy  against
serious  mental  disorder.  The  author  has  only  once  tried  to  hypnotise  an
idiot,  and  on  one  occasion  a  child,  aged  12,  who  was  more  or  less  imbecile.
He  failed  in  both  cases,  but  is  not  at  present  inclined  to  believe  that  it  is
not  possible  to  hypnotise  imbecile  subjects.

The  rest  of  the  cases  recorded,  and  there  are  a  very  large  number,
illustrate  a  large  variety  of  kinds.  One,  a  case  of  phthisis — treated  by
suggestion — though,  of  course,  not  cured,  yet  became  much  better  and
stronger  ;  and  this  case  is  illustrative  of  one  of  the  effects  of  hypnotic  treat-
ment, which  must  have  struck  all  who  have  visited  Nancy.  I  often  noticed
how  very  cheerful  many  of  the  patients  ^^jned,  and  to  remove  mental
distress  is  obviously  not  only  of  great  service  in  diminishing  suffering,  but,
as  is  well  known,  removes  a  hindrance  to  recovery  in  an  immense  number  of
cases.  In  fact  it  is  not  impossible  that,  if  hypnotism  came  into  vogue  in  this
country,  its  main  use  would  be  to  bring  this  about.

Turning  to  the  other  subjects  of  which  Dr.  Liebeault  treats,  the  most
remarkable,  and  almost  the  most  puzzling,  chapter  is  on  "  Zoomagnetism."
Dr.  Liebeault  wished  to  find  out  by  a  crucial  test  whether  the  so-called
"magnetised  water"  had  any  real  effect  or  no.  He  therefore  tried  it  as  a
therapeutic  agent  in  infants,  and  made  a  series  of  control  experiments  with
ordinary  "  unmagnetised  "  water.  I  need  scarcely  say  that  he  found  no
difference  between  the  two,  but  it  is  absolutely  astounding  to  read  that  he
found  both  (when  combined  with  suggestion  of  the  most  indirect  and  concealed
nature)  to  act  as  real  therapeutic  agents.  This  was  the  case,  it  must  be
remembered,  on  infants  only  a  few  months  old.  He  concludes  that  infants
are  susceptible  to  curative  suggestion  ;  a  view  which  is  so  important,  as  well
from  a  scientific  as  a  medical  aspect,  that  it  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  he
will  be  unable  to  continue  his  researches.  The  only  objection  which  one  can
see,  is  that  it  is  conceivable  that  recovery  took  place  in  these  cases  simply  in
the  course  of  nature,  and  not  owing  to  the  treatment  ;  but  some  of  the  cases
are  so  striking  that  this  appears  unlikely  in  the  highest  degree.

In  the  chapter  on  lucidity  are  recorded  some  experiments  in  clairvoyance
and  hypnotism  at  a  distance.  The  latter  deserves  special  notice  on  account
of  the  extreme  rarity  of  authenticated  instances.  Camille  S.  was  the  subject
of  experiments.  She  had  been  often  hypnotised  by  M.  Beaunis,  and  he  it
was  who  first  succeeded  in  inducing  sleep  at  a  distance  in  this  subject.  He
concealed  himself  in  M.  Liebeault's  garden,  and,  after  a  trial  of  18  minutes,
induced  sleep  in  Camille  at  a  distance  of  29  metres.  On  another  occasion
Dr.  Neilson,  who  had  never  hypnotised  her,  tried  the  same  experiment  and

u  2


292


H.  E.  Wingfield.


[Supplement.


failed.  M.  Liegeois,  who  had  frequently  hypnotised  her  before,  was  able  to
induce  sleep  in  8  minutes,  when  concealed  in  the  same  manner,  and  the  sub-
ject was  apparently  en  rapport  with  him  alone.  In  another  experiment,  M.
Liegeois  being  in  one  room  and  Camille  in  another,  at  24  metres'  distance,  the
result  was  negative,  after  20  minutes'  trial.

These  results  will,  of  course,  be  regarded  differently  by  different  in-
dividuals. Those  who  already  believe  in  telepathy  will  see  a  fresh  confirma-
tion of  their  views,  while  those  who  do  not  as  yet  see  sufficient  reason  for
belief  in  its  existence,  and  I  must  confess  that  I  belong  to  the  latter  class,  will
wait  to  see  this,  and,  of  course,  many  other  experiments  of  this  kind  repeated
again  and  again,  under  many  different  and  absolutely  strict  conditions,  before
pronouncing  any  opinion  as  to  their  meaning.

The  instance  of  apparent  clairvoyance,  or,  some  will  say,  spirit  message,
is  very  curious,  the  message  of  the  death  of  a  friend  being  received  by
automatic  writing  at  the  time  of  death.  This  case  was  sent  by  Dr.  Liebeault
to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  was  published  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  293.

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  book  will  be  widely  read  by  those  who  use
hypnotism  in  their  medical  practice.  It  is  no  mere  belief  in  the  curative
power  of  suggestion  that  20  years'  experience  has  given  to  Dr.  Liebeault.  It
is  an  absolute  conviction  in  th.e  power  of  the  mind  over  disease.  "  .
Uniquement  en  concentrant  son  attention  sur  l'idee  d'etre  gueri,  Ton  peut
devenir  plus  habile  sur  son  organisme  que  le  jjIus  savant  des  docteurs  avec
l'immense  materiels  de  fioles  et  de  pilules,  mis  a  sa  disposition."

To  Dr.  Liebeault,  who  has  just  begun  his  well-earned  rest  and  retirement,
we  owe  the  fact  that  hypnotism  is  seriously  considered  by  the  medical  pro-
fession in  the  present  day  ;  and  we  can  only  hope  that  in  the  interests  of
science  he  will  continue  to  make  experiments.  Especially  is  it  to  be  hoped
that  he  will  continue  them  in  the  direction  of  hypnotism  at  a  distance,  which
he  approaches  without  a  priori  beliefs  for  or  against  its  probability,  being
guided  entirely  by  the  results  of  his  experiments.

We  leave  the  book  in  the  hope  that  it  will  not  be  the  last  from  the  pen  of
the  father  of  modern  hypnotism.

H.  E.  Wingfield.


Die  Geisterhypothese  des  Spiritismus  unci  seine  Phantome. Von  Eduard
von  Hartmann. (Leipzig  :  W.  Friedrich. 1891. Pp.  12(5.)

This  work  is  the  third  stage  of  a  controversy  which  has  excited  great
interest  in  Spiritist  circles.  Mr.  Myers's  review  of  AksakofFs  Animismus
und  Spiritismus,  in  Proceedings  XVII.,  p.  665,  will  be  fresh  in  the  memory  of
members  of  the  Society  ;  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  recall  briefly  the  facts.
Von  Hartmann,  in  his  first  tract,  Der  Spiritismus  (1885,  not  1888  as  obviously
misprinted  in  Mr.  Myers's  article)  undertook  to  show  that,  even  accepting
the  evidence  given  by  Spiritists  as  correct,  all  the  phenomena  thus  attested
could  be  explained  by  the  assumption  of  a  "  nerve-force  "  exercised  by  the
medium,  together  with  thought-transference,  induced  hallucinations,  and
clairvoyance,  reaching  at  times  even  to  communication  with  the  source  of  all
knowledge  in  the  Absolute.  He  thus  maintained  that  the  hypothesis  of  the
agency  of  external  spirits  was  at  best  but  a  fifth  wheel  to  the  cart,  and  not


Supplement.)


Notices  of  Books.


293


admissible  as  an  explanation  of  the  facts  observed.  Aksakoff' s  book  was  a  re-
ply, arguing  first,  that  the  supposed  "  nerve-force  "  would  not  give  a  natural
explanation  of  the  alleged  phenomena  of  materialisation  ;  and  secondly,  that
thought-transference  and  induced  hallucinations  would  not  explain  the  cases
in  which  messages  had  been  given,  which  transcended  the  limits  of  possible
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  mediums  themselves  and  their  sitters.

Of  the  contest  fought  under  these  conditions  I  agree  with  Mr.  Myers
that  Aksakoff  has  the  best  of  it.  Von  Hartmann's  assumption  of  the  nerve-
force  which  issues  from  the  body  of  the  medium,  and  then  proceeds  to  set  up
fresh  centres  of  force  in  all  neighbouring  objects,  animate  and  inanimate —
even,  as  he  suggests,  in  the  particles  floating  in  the  air  of  the  room — while
it  still  remains  under  the  control  of  the  medium's  unconscious  will,  is,  at  least
under  the  present  conditions  of  physics,  as  unprovable  as  the  theory  of
Aksakoff,  that  the  spirits  can  make  for  themselves  temporary  material
organisms  out  of  the  matter  of  the  medium's  body,  and  can  use  it  as
the  spirit  of  the  living  man  uses  his  own  body  ;  one  theory  can  hardly
be  considered  more  "transcendental"  than  the  other.  Both  contestants
admit,  however,  that  these  physical  phenomena  cannot  under  any  circum-
stances afford  any  positive  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  spirits  of  the
departed  ;  both  agree  that  such  proof  can  only  be  found  in  the  establishment
of  the  individuality  of  the  "spirits  "  as  revealed  by  the  intellectual  contents
of  the  messages  which  profess  to  come  from  them.  It  is  only  this  part  of
the  discussion  which  can  be  considered  to  have  any  immediate  practical
importance  for  those  who  are  endeavouring  to  ajjproach  the  question  on  firm
grounds  of  evidence  rather  than  of  a  priori  theory  ;  and  it  is  to  this  portion
of  von  Hartmann's  book  that  I  propose  to  confine  myself.  When  physical
phenomena  and  materialisations  are  supported  by  a  mass  of  evidence  in  any
way  comparable  to  that  which  has  been  collected  for  thought-transference  and
telepathy,  it  will  be  worth  while  to  look  into  physical  theories  of  nerve-force.
Meantime,  to  those  who  cannot  accept,  even  as  a  basis  for  debate,  the
testimony  which  passes  muster  among  Spiritist  believers,  the  discussion  of
these  questions  seems  to  be  little  more  than  a  beating  of  the  air.

In  his  analysis,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  possibilities  which  have  to  be
taken  into  account  before  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  that  any  particular  piece
of  knowledge  could  not  have  been  in  the  medium's  mind  when  the  message
containing  it  was  given,  von  Hartmann  is  clearly  nearer  the  truth  than
Aksakoff.  He  has  no  difficulty  in  showing,  for  instance,  that  the  cases
quoted  by  the  latter,  where  messages  were  given  which  were  contrary  to  the
convictions  or  character  of  the  medium,  prove  nothing  ;  for  such  an  opposi-
tion between  the  upper  and  lower  consciousness  is  now  a  familiar  fact,  and
susceptible  of  experimental  proof  by  means  of  hypnotism.  When  we  come
to  deal  with  phenomena  which  show  a  different  mental  level  between  the
two  the  question  becomes  more  difficult,  though  essentially  analogous.  But
here  von  Hartmann  makes  one  remark  which  seems  to  be  of  wider  bearing
than  he  himself  indicates.  He  is  speaking  of  an  alleged  case  where  a  girl
who  had  never  learnt  music  wrote  down  notes  and  played  them  upon  the
piano.  In  playing  the  piano  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  practice  ;
that  is,  a  training  of  the  automatic  functions,  bringing  about  a  molecular
change  in  the  brain,  presumably  the  establishment  of  lines  of  communication


294


W.  Leaf.


[Supplement.


between  various  sub-cortical  centres.  Until  the  nervous  organism  is  thus
modified,  the  brain  will  not  work  at  the  suggestion  of  any  mind,  whether  of
that  which  ordinarily  dwells  in  it,  or  of  an  external  mind  which  may  suc-
ceed in  taking  temporary  possession .  ' '  Through  a  nervous  system  unprepared
by  practice,  even  the  most  powerful  spirit  could  no  more  produce  a  correct
and  clean  performance  on  the  piano  than  it  could  bring  clear  chords  out  of  a
piano  with  strings  missing  and  out  of  tune  "  (p.  34).  Such  a  case,  therefore,
remains  inexplicable  on  any  hypothesis,  and  is  no  support  to  the  supposition
of  the  interference  of  external  minds.

This  applies  with  equal  force  to  the  accounts  of  speaking  in  tongues
unknown  to  the  medium,  and,  perhaps  in  a  somewhat  less  degree,  to  the
many  alleged  cases  of  handwriting  recognised  as  that  of  the  departed.  It
seems  important  to  keep  in  mind  this  preliminary  difficulty,  which  separates
all  such  cases  from  those  where  it  is  merely  the  content  of  the  messages,  and
not  their  form  which  lies  outside  the  range  of  the  medium's  powers.  If  the
evidence  for  speaking  with  tongues  were  better  than  it  is,  it  might  be  worth
while  to  consider  how  far  the  hypothesis  of  auditory  hallucination  might
explain  it.  If  in  cases  of  telepathic  nature  it  sometimes  happens  that  the
telepathic  impact  clothes  itself  in  audible  words,  though  in  itself  consisting
probably  only  in  the  suggestion  of  an  idea,  it  might  be  conceived  that  in
cases  like  that  of  Mr.  Evangelides,1  the  idea  only  of  the  medium's  message
was  suggested  to  him,  and  that  its  expression  in  Greek  words  was  no  more
than  his  own  hallucinatory  translation  of  it  into  thinkable  form.  It  is
cei'tainly  remarkable  that  in  every  case  quoted  by  Aksakoff  where  a  conversa-
tion was  held  by  the  medium  with  a  foreigner  in  his  own  tongue  there  seems
to  have  been  no  one  else  present  who  spoke  the  language  as  a  native  and
could  thus  act  as  a  check  upon  the  possibility  of  hallucination.  In  Mr.
Evangelides'  case  we  have  only  his  own  assurance  that  the  language
spoken  was  Greek.  Among  the  many  defects  of  the  evidence  on  this  head
it  may  be  noticed  that  we  are  in  no  case  told  whether  the  medium  spoke
with  the  accent  of  a  native  or  a  foreigner  ;  and  yet  this  is  evidently  a  point
of  cardinal  importance  for  the  whole  question.

Passing  from  hence  into  the  region  of  facts  which  have  a  large  amount
of  evidence  to  support  them,  the  region  of  communications  whose  contents
were  certainly  not  in  the  conscious  knowledge  either  of  the  medium  or  of  any-
one present  at  the  time,  von  Hartmann's  assumptions  certainly  form  a  wide-
sweeping  net  for  the  capturing  of  all  possible  knowledge.  The  validity  of
many  of  them,  most  readers  of  the  Proceedings  will  perhaps  be  prepared  to
admit  ;  thought-transference  between  the  medium  and  sitters,  induced
hallucinations,  the  unbounded  retentiveness  of  the  ''subliminal"  memory,2

1  Mr.  Evangelides  was  introduced  to  Miss  Laura  Edmonds,  and  held  a  conversa-
tion in  Greek  with  her,  in  the  course  of  which  he  was  told  that  one  of  his  sons  was
just  dead.  A  letter  confirming  the  statement  came  some  days  afterwards.  Judge
Edmonds  gives  the  assurance  that  his  daughter  did  not  know  a  word  of  Greek.  Here
the  reading  of  the  telepathic  message  and  its  clothing  in  speech  form  two  essentially
disparate  problems.

-  Von  Hartmann  rightly  insists  upon  the  last  of  these,  which  Aksakoff  seems  to
lux  e  much  under-estimated.  The  phrase  "  hyperesthesia  of  memory,"  however,  seems
to  connote  a  morbid  state,  and  is  hardly  suitable.


Supplement.]


Notices  of  Books.


295


all  these  have  received  more  or  less  experimental  confirmation.  Between
them  they  will  account  for  the  reproduction  of  anything  that  was  ever  in
the  mind  of  anyone  present.  Nothing  of  which  this  can  be  predicated  can
be  safely  ascribed  to  the  action  of  any  spirit  of  the  departed.  A  further
source  of  mundane  knowledge  is  added  if  we  accept  telepathy.  Here  the
evidence  is  not  experimental,  and  stands  on  a  lower  plane.  Von  Hartmann,
however,  not  only  accepts  it,  but  is  prepared  to  take  the  further  step,  and
admit  clairvoyance  in  the  most  extended  sense  ;  a  power  in  the  human
mind  of  entering  into  the  knowledge  of  the  Absolute,  where  there  is  no
longer  any  past  or  future,  but  all  things  arc  in  the  present.  If  this  be  once
admitted  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  further  room  for  the  hypothesis  of
spiritual  aid  in  the  presenting  to  us  any  knowable  fact  whatever.  But  the
step  is  a  prodigious  one,  at  least  as  hard  to  take  as  that  to  the  belief  in  dis-
embodied spirits. Is  it  necessary  ?

To  me,  at  least,  it  seems  that  von  Hartmann  has  been  forced  into  it  by
unduly  limiting  the  range  of  the  powers  wdiich  he  has  previously  assumed.
In  his  first  work  he  assumes  that  telepathic  impressions  are  confined  to  the
production  of  hallucinations,  and  so  exposes  himself  to  some  telling  retorts
from  Aksakoff.  The  assumption  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  evidence.  The
instances  collected  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  no  doubt  show  a  great  pre-
ponderance of  hallucination  (Vol.  II.,  pp.  22-24).  But  there  is  abundant
evidence  not  only  for  hallucinations,  but  for  all.  sorts  of  subjective  effects,
ranging  from  mere  malaise  to  the  production  of  long  messages  in  automatic
writing,  and  this  von  Hartmann  might  admit  less  hesitatingly  than  he  does
in  the  work  before  us.  Again,  von  Hartmann  thinks  it  necessary,  in  order
to  establish  a  case  for  telepathic  impression,  to  find  some  special  rapport,  a
special  direction  of  the  mind  of  the  percipient  towards  the  agent.  This,
again,  is  not  required  by  the  evidence.  In  some  of  the  cases  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  the  rapport  was  of  the  slenderest  kind,  occasionally,  it  would
seem,  consisting  in  no  more  than  a  familiar  knowledge  of  the  same  locality
(ii.,  265-269).  And  finally,  von  Hartmann  seems  to  have  overlooked  the
consequences  which  result  from  the  joint  admission  of  the  reality  of  telepathy
and  the  infinite  retentiveness  of  the  subliminal  memory.  It  can  hardly  be
doubted  that  those  rare  telepathic  impressions  which  rise  to  the  level  of  con-
ciousness  are  but  a  fraction  of  those  which  the  under-self  is  continually
receiving.  Yet  each  one  of  these  must  be  stored  up  in  the  unconscious
memory,  and  be  capable  of  reproduction  under  favourable  circumstances.
If  we  further  admit  that  the  unconscious  self  is  cajaable  of  handing  on  such
impressions,  whether  by  telepathy  or  thought-transference,  though  they
have  never  risen  to  the  level  of  consciousness,  it  seems  that  we  have
removed  all  necessity  for  the  assumption  either  of  spiritual  agency  or  of
clairvoyance,  when  we  have  to  deal  with  a  piece  of  knowledge  which  may  at
any  time  have  been  in  the  mind  of  any  living  man.  The  assumption  is,
no  doubt,  a  large  one,  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge,  but  it  is  at  least
on  the  same  plane  with  others  which  are  winning  their  way  to  acceptance ;
and  it  must  be  fully  considered  before  we  pass  away  to  an  entirely  fresh
level  of  speculation,  as  we  do  when  we  assume  either  the  agency  of  disem-
bodied spirits  with  Aksakoff  or  "  telephonic  communication  through  the
Absolute  "  with  von  Hartmann.


296


W.  Leaf.


[Supplement.


There  still  remains  a  field  which  may  in  the  end  oblige  us  to  take  one  of
these  steps  ;  we  may  obtain  good  evidence  of  the  communication  of
knowledge  which  was  never  in  any  living  mind.  Yon  Hartmann  regards  the
foretelling  of  the  future  as  the  only  "chemically  pure"  form  of  clairvoy-
ance ;  but  even  here  it  would  seem  that  chemical  purity  must  be  restricted  to
the  cases,  if  any,  where  future  events  are  foretold  which  do  not  depend  on
the  agency  of  human  beings  in  the  present ;  for  here  there  is  always  the
possibility  of  a  shrewd  guess  by  the  agency  of  simple  thought-reading.  Any-
one who  had  the  power  of  reading  all  his  neighbours'  thoughts  in  a  conscious
state  would  have  little  difficulty  in  gaining  a  solid  reputation  as  a  prophet,  if
he  confined  himself  to  obvious  deductions  from  what  he  saw.  But  there  is
another  form  of  clairvoyance  which  seems  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  chemically
pure  as  the  foretelling  of  future  events.  This  is  the  discernment  of  objects
excluded  from  the  range  of  ordinary  sense  perception,  and  removed  from  the
possibility  of  knowledge  of  any  human  being  by  some  method  of  purely
random  selection.  The  conditions  of  such  an  experiment  are  fulfilled,  for
instance,  in  Professor  Lodge's  abortive  trial  to  obtain  from  Mrs.  Piper  the
reading  of  various  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  a  closed  box,  means  having  been
duly  taken  to  exclude  the  knowledge  of  the  letters  chosen  (Proceedings,  XVII. ,
p.  457).  If  that  experiment  had  succeeded,  it  seems  that  nothing  short  of
access  to  some  source  of  pure  knowledge  independent  of  human  brains  could
have  explained  the  phenomenon.

But  even  granting  clairvoyance,  von  Hartmann  argues  that  it  is  in  no
way  explained  by  the  assumption  of  the  intervention  of  the  spirits  of  the
dead.  To  suppose  that  death  gives  the  power  of  foreseeing  the  future  is  to
make  an  assumption  which  is  not  only  unproved,  but  absolutely  unprovable  ;
whereas  the  assumption  that  the  minds  of  the  living  possess  such  a  power,
if  true,  is  at  least  capable  of  proof  ;  and  indeed  there  is  already  a  certain
amount  of  evidence  to  support  it.  There  is  left,  therefore,  as  a  last  support
to  the  spirit  hypothesis  the  vague  test  known  as  the  recognition  of  identity.
This,  from  its  nature,  can  never  be  more  than  subjective,  and  can  convince
no  one  but  those  intimately  acquainted  with  the  deceased  ;  and  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  these  are  the  persons  who  are  the  most  likely  to  be  misled
by  illusion  or  hallucination,  penetrated  as  they  are  by  the  desire  to  be
brought  once  more  in  contact  with  their  lost  friends.

In  fine,  then,  I,  for  my  own  part,  think  that  von  Hartmann  is  assaulting
the  Spiritist  stronghold  on  right  lines  ;  but  his  position  seems  to  require  some
material  improvement  in  various  points  before  it  can  be  accepted  either  as  a
logically  successful  reply  to  Aksakoff,  or  as  a  working  hypothesis  by  which
to  examine  the  evidence.  As  a  philosophical  system  it  cannot  as  yet  be
accepted  ;  it  is  based  far  too  largely  on  worthless  testimony.  This  is,  of
course,  done  knowingly,  and  for  a  particular  purpose  ;  and  this  purpose  must
be  held  to  have  been  fulfilled  in  having  drawn  from  Aksakoff  so  sober  and
moderate  a  statement  of  the  Spiritist  case.  The  controversy  has  unquestion-
ably done  much  to  clear  the  field,  and  has  for  the  first  time,  perhaps,  shown
the  possibility  of  fair  argument  on  common  ground  with  believers  in
Spiritism.

W.  Leaf.


General  Meetings.


297


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  47th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall,  on  Friday,  July  17th,  1891,  at  4  p.m.

The  President  gave  an  address  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations
now  in  progress.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  continued  his  address  on  Problems  of
Personality,  begun  at  the  46th  meeting,  illustrating  it  with  cases  of
apparent  communication  from  the  dead  by  automatic  writing.  His
remarks  are  to  some  extent  incorporated  in  his  paper  on  the  Sub-
liminal Consciousness  printed  below.


The  48th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
October  30th,  at  4  p.m.

Mr.  Myers  read  an  account  of  his  visit  to  Dr.  Backman  at
Kalmar  in  Sweden,  printed  below.

Some  Supplementary  Cases  of  Telepathic  Clairvoyance,  also  printed
below,  were  read  for  Mrs.  Sidgwick  by  Mr.  Leaf.

Mr.  Myers  read  a  paper,  printed  below,  on  Movements  of  objects
occurring  under  circumstances  when  the  movements  could  not  appar-
ently be  accounted  for  by  known  physical  laws.


The  49th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
December  4th,  at  8.30  p.m.

Professor  Oliver  Lodge  read  a  paper  on  Some  Experiments  hi
Thought-ti'ansference,  printed  below.

Mr.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "  The  Mechanism  of  Suggestion,"
which  foi'ms  part  of  his  paper  on  the  Subliminal  Consciousness
printed  below.

The  50  th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place,  on  Friday,
January  29th,  1892,  at  4  p.m.

Part  of  a  paper  by  Mr.  Hodgson  on  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance
in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  was  read  by  Mr.  Leaf.

Mr.  Myers  gave  an  address  on  "  The  Mechanism  of  Genius."


The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  was  in  the  chair  on  each
occasion.


x


298


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I,

THE SUBLIMINAL  CONSCIOUSNESS.
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Chapter  I. — General  Characteristics  of  Subliminal  Messages.

Igrteus  est  ollis  vigor  eb  caelestis  origo
Serninibus,  quantum  non  noxia  corpora  tardant
Terrenique  hebetant  artus  moribiindaque  membra.

In  the  present  and  some  succeeding  papers  I  desire  to  combine
and  to  develop  various  lines  of  argument  which  have  already  been
laid  before  the  readers  of  these  Proceedings.

Since  my  paper  on  "The  Dremon  of  Socrates/'  published  two  years
ago,  was  written,  our  evidence  has  grown  rapidly  in  various  directions.
Recent  experiments  and  observations  have  thrown  fresh,  but  scattered
and  perplexing  lights  upon  the  workings  of  that  part  of  ourselves
which  lies  below  the  threshold  of  ordinary  consciousness.  And  it
seems  to  me  that  some  effort  at  arrangement  and  generalisation  is  now
much  needed,  were  it  only  for  the  sake  of  aiding  to  direct  experi-
mentation, which  is  at  present,  I  think,  apt  to  be  concentrated  on  too
small  a  portion  of  the  widely-opening  field.

A  few  words  may  remind  the  reader  of  the  stage  which  discussion
in  these  Proceedings  has  already  reached.  In  four  papers,  1884-9,  I
have  discussed  automatic  writing,  and  cognate  automatisms,  and  in  the
last  of  these,  Vol.  V.,  p.  522,  I  sum  up  the  results  arrived  at,  and
indicate  that  "  automatic  writing  is  but  one  among  a  whole  series  of
kindred  automatisms,"  which  are  "message-bearing  or  nunciative,  inas-
much as  they  present  themselves  to  us  as  messages  communicated  from
one  stratum  to  another  stratum  of  the  same  personality."  I  then
endeavour  to  show  that  such  messages  may  consist  equally  well  of
active,  motor  automatisms,  such  as  planchette-writing  and  trance-
utterance,  and  of  passive,  sensory  automatisms,  such  as  hallucinations,
visual  or  auditory.  I  suggest  that  monitory  voices,  such  as  those  of
Socrates  and  Joan  of  Arc,  may  form  an  important  class  of  such
messages  from  the  subjacent  Self.  And  I  promise  further  discussion
on  automatic  picture-drawing,  on  trance -utterance,  and  on  cases
indicating  the  action  in  these  messages  of  minds  external  to  the
automatist's  own.

Now  it  so  happens  that  almost  every  Part  of  the  Proceedings
which  has  since  appeared  contains  matter  bearing  on  one  or  other  of
these  points.  The  crystal-vision  dealt  with  in  Part  XIV.  (Vol.  V.,
p.  486)  introduces  us  to  a  passive  mode  of  getting  at  pictures  from  a
subliminal  source  much  more  direct  and  effective  than  is  the  drawing


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


299


of  such  pictures  by  the  automatically-moving  hand.  The  trance-
utterances  of  Mrs.  Piper  (discussed  in  Vol.  VI.,  p.  436,  and  to  be
further  noticed)  form  by  far  the  best  specimens  of  that  form  of  auto-
matism which  I  can  anywhere  find.  And  the  influence  exercised  upon
these  messages  by  minds  exterior  to  the  automatist's  own  has  been  very
fully  discussed  by  Professors  James  and  Lodge,  Dr.  Leaf,  and  Dr.
Hodgson.  I  have,  moreover,  printed  some  important  cases  of  this
■class  in  a  supplement  to  my  "  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead."
{Vol.  VI.,  p.  314.)

It  seems,  then,  that,  for  the  most  satisfactory  of  reasons — namely,
the  inflow  of  fresh  evidence  from  various  quarters — the  continuance
-■of  my  papers  on  "Automatic  Writing"  on  the  precise  plan  laid  down
is  no  longer  appropriate.

My  task  has  become  at  once  in  some  ways  simpler  and  in  some
ways  more  difficult.  It  is  simpler,  in  so  far  as  much  which  was
altogether  denied  and  scouted  when  I  began  the  argument  has  now
found  general  acceptance.  The  wide  extension  of  hypnotic  experiments
in  France  and  elsewhere  has  incidentally  brought  into  common  know-
ledge certain  facts  not  lying  on  the  direct  road  of  therapeutic  inquiry,
but  essential  to  the  present  argument.  Thus  it  is  now  at  any  rate
admitted  by  all  serious  students  that  such  a  phenomenon  as  automatic
writing  does  actually  exist ;  that  writing  professedly  obtained  without
the  writer's  being  aware  of  what  he  writes  is  not  necessarily  the  product
of  morbid  fancy  or  of  semi-conscious  fraud.  And  more  than  this;  it  is
now  recognised  (thanks  largely  to  the  work  of  Gurney  in  England  and
of  Pierre  Janet  in  France)  that  two  or  more  distinct  trains  of  memory,
feeling,  will,  may  co-exist  in  the  same  personage,  and  may  become
accessible  to  us  by  artifices  of  various  kinds.  Thus  much  I  can  now
assume  as  matter  of  common  knowledge ;  and,  so  far  forth,  my  task  is
simpler  than  it  was  a  few  years  ago.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  very  fact  that  there  are  now  so  many  more
observations  to  be  co-ordinated  increases  the  complexity  of  the  inquiry.
For  the  hypothesis  which  I  have  already  elsewhere  briefly  proposed,
and  which  I  shall  now  have  to  amplify,  aims  at  nothing  less  than  the
provisional  co-ordination  of  all  these  subliminal  phenomena.  I  hold
that  both  that  group  of  facts  which  the  scientific  world  has  now  learnt
to  accept  (as  the  hypnotic  trance,  automatic  writing,  alternations  of
personality,  and  the  like),  and  that  group  of  facts,  for  which  in  these
Proceedings  we  are  still  endeavouring  to  win  general  scientific  accept-
ance (as  telepathy  and  clairvoyance),  ought  to  be  considered  in  close
alliance  and  correlation,  and  must  be  explained,  if  explicable  at  all,  by
some  hypothesis  which  does  not  need  constant  stretching  to  meet  the
exigencies  of  each  fresh  case.  .

I  demur  on  this  ground  to  the  explanations  thus  far  proposed  by


300


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


French  savants,  whether  of  the  Paris  or  of  the  Nancy  school,  which  seem
to  me  in  different  ways  insufficient.  The  Nancy  school,  as  is  well  known,
use  the  word  suggestion  as  though  this  were  in  itself  an  explanation  of
the  way  in  which  the  phenomena  are  produced,  instead  of  a  mere
definition  of  the  artifice  which  the  operator  uses  in  order  to  produce
them.  Insisting — and  I  believe  with  perfect  truth — that  hypnotism
is  in  no  way  a  morbid  phenomenon,  but  is  joroducible  [n  sane  and
healthy  men,  they  nevertheless  seem  hardly  to  think  it  needful  or
possible  to  inquire  how  it  comes  to  jnass  that  a  sane  man's  psychical
balance  is  capable  of  being  thus  suddenly  disturbed.  "With  the
exception  of  Professor  Delbceuf  (not  precisely  a  member  of  the
Nancy  school),  to  whose  ideas  we  shall  hereafter  recur,  I  know  of
no  writer  who,  starting  from  the  dictum  that  hypnotism  is  not  morbid,
has  even  shown  that  he  feels  the  need  of  explaining  how  a  group  of
phenomena  so  extraordinary  can  spring  by  natural  outgrowth  from  the
physiological  and  the  j^sychical  life  of  man.

The  Parisian  school  have  in  some  sense  evaded  this  difficulty  ;  but
at  the  cost  of  a  cramping  assumption  which  is  now  hardly  accepted
anywhere  beyond  the  radius  of  Salpetriere  influence.  They  boldly
affirm  that  hypnotism  is  itself  a  disease, — or  at  least  that  its  phe-
nomena are  morbid  incidents  which  may  be  developed  in  the  course  of
hysteria  and  other  nervous  degenerations.  Having  so  said,  they  are  in
a  sense  absolved  from  further  explanation.  They  are  bound,  indeed,
to  show  that  these  phenomena  form  some  regular  pathological  series, —
resemble  in  some  way  the  course  of  a  real  malady.  Their  attempts  to
do  this — to  produce  a  classical  type  of  hypnotism,  with  definite  stages
brought  on  by  diffei'ent  stimuli — have  not  produced  conviction  in
the  scientific  world  outside.  And  their  primary  assumption,  "Only
the  morbid  can  be  hypnotised,"  is  peiqjetually  coming  into  more  and
more  unpleasant  conflict  with  notorious  fact.  It  now  needs  to  be
defended  by  the  bold  and  simple  argument  that  the  Nancy  subjects,
for  instance,  must  be  hysterical  because,  as  Dr.  Babinski  says,  "They
present  in  the  hypnotic  trance  contractures,  paralysis,  amesthesia,  all
the  symptoms  of  hysteria.  Now,  suggestion  alone  would  be  unable  to
j>rovoke  the  appearance  of  these  physical  symptoms.  Suggestion  has
acted  as  a  revealer  of  hysteria."  1

This  argument  hardly  proves  Dr.  Babinski's  case,  since  it  assumes
the  very  point  in  dispute,  i.e.,  that  certain  phenomena,  known  to
occur  in  hysteria,  cannot  be  producible  by  other  causes  as  well.  But,
nevertheless,  it  suggests  a  question  which  the  Nancy  school  have  made,
as  I  have  said,  but  little  attempt  to  answer.  How  is  it  that  this  easy
"suggestion," — which  in  itself,  one  would  think,  can  have  little  more

•

1  Dr.  Babinski,  in  Revue  dc  rHypnotisme,  July,  1891,  p.  24.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


301


efficacy  than  the  mere  utterance  of  a  charm — can  often  at  once  pro-
duce effects  which  years  of  medical  and  surgical  treatment  would  fail
to  secure  ?  Nay,  and  not  only  therapeutic  effects,  of  a  kind  which
ordinary  medicine  can  at  any  rate  aim  at,  but  profound  modifications
of  nervous  condition — changes  whose  mechanism  we  are  entirely  un-
able to  understand  1

So  long  as  we  try  to  explain  all  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism,
double  consciousness,  &c.,  as  mere  morbid  disaggregations  of  the
■empirical  personality — repartitions  among  several  selves  of  powers
habitually  appertaining  to  one  alone — so  long,  I  think,  shall  we  be
condemning  ourselves  to  a  failure  which  will  become  more  evident
with  each  new  batch  of  experiments,  each  fresh  manifestation  of  the
profundity  and  strangeness  of  the  subliminal  forces  at 'work.  We
shall  find  ourselves,  so  to  say,  explaining  the  action  of  a  group  of
geysers  on  the  assumption  that  they  are  springs  fed  by  the  ordinary
rainfall.

I  will  ask  the  reader,  then,  to  bear  in  mind  that  in  what  follows  I
am  not  attacking  any  recognised,  coherent  body  of  scientific  doctrine.
Rather,  I  am  making  a  first  immature  attempt  to  bring  some  kind  of
order  out  of  a  chaotic  collection  of  strange  and  apparently  disparate
observations.  My  hypothesis — developed  here  from  briefer  indications
in  earlier  papers — cannot  possibly,  considering  the  novelty  of  the
inquiry,  be  true  in  all  details.  But  it  may  be  of  use  at  least  in
pointing  out  the  nature  and  the  complexity  of  the  problems  which  any
valid  hypothesis  must  recognise  and  solve.

I  suggest,  then,  that  the  stream  of  consciousness  in  which  we
habitually  live  is  not  the  only  consciousness  which  exists  in  connection
with  our  organism.  Our  habitual  or  empirical  consciousness  may
consist  of  a  mere  selection  from  a  multitude  of  thoughts  and
sensations,  of  which  some  at  least  are  equally  conscious  with  those  that
we  empirically  know.  I  accord  no  primacy  to  my  ordinary  waking-
self,  except  that  among  my  potential  selves  this  one  has  shown  itself
the  fittest  to  meet  the  needs  of  common  life.  I  hold  that  it  has
established  no  further  claim,  and  that  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  other
thoughts,  feelings,  and  memories,  either  isolated  or  in  continuous
connection,  may  now  be  actively  conscious,  as  we  say,  "  within  me," —
in  some  kind  of  co-ordination  with  my  organism,  and  forming  some
part  of  my  total  individuality.  I  conceive  it  possible  that  at  some
future  time,  and  under  changed  conditions,  I  may  recollect  all  ;  I  may
assume  these  various  personalities  under  one  single  consciousness,  in
which  ultimate  and  complete  consciousness  the  empirical  conscious-
ness which  at  this  moment  directs  my  hand  may  be  only  one  element
out  of  many.

Before  we  draw  out  the  implications  of  such  a  statement,  let  us


302


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


pause  to  consider  the  obvious  reasons  which  a  man  may  give  for
considering  his  empirical  consciousness  as  identical  with  his  total  self.

The  first  remark  of  the  ordinary  reader  will  probably  be  that  if
there  were  in  fact  any  other  consciousness  within  him,  he  would
certainly  be  aware  of  it.

This,  however,  is  simply  to  beg  the  question.  We  must  reply  that
the  dicta  of  consciousness  have  already  been  shown  to  need  correction
in  so  many  ways  which  the  ordinary  observer  could  never  have
anticipated, — the  world  of  realities  (so  far  as  we  can  get  at  any
intelligible  notion  of  it)  is  so  utterly  unlike  what  our  empirical
consciousness  suggests  to  us, — that  we  have  no  right  to  trust  our  con-
sciousness, so  to  say,  a  step  further  than  we  can  feel  it ; — to  hold  that
anything  whatever — even  a  separate  consciousness  in  our  own  organism
— can  be  proved  not  to  exist,  by  the  mere  fact  that  we  (as  we  know
ourselves)  are  not  aware  of  it.

But  dropping  this  first  untenable  demurrer,  a  man  may  still  give
two  reasons,  which  look  valid  enough,  for  supposing  that  there  can  be
comparatively  little  psychical  action  going  on  within  him  of  which  he
cannot  give  an  account.  He  may  say,  in  the  first  place  :  "  The  deeds
which  I  have  done  in  life — the  movements  which  my  body  has  made —
have  been  executed  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  my  conscious  self.  There
has  been  no  room  for  the  operation  of  any  imaginary  will  in  the  back-
ground. "  And,  in  the  second  place,  he  may  add:  "  Besides  this  active
life  there  has,  of  course,  been  a  passive  life  as  well.  Besides  the  sensa-
tions and  movements  originating  in  my  own  frame,  there  have  been
sensations  and  movements  impressed  upon  me  from  without.  But  all
this,  though  I  could  not  control  it,  I  can  nevertheless  remember.  I  can
feel  sure  that  nothing  of  importance  has  happened  to  me  which  I
cannot  recall  by  voluntary  act  of  recollection.  Here  again,  therefore,
there  is  no  room  for  the  operation  of  an  imaginary  memory  beneath
the  threshold.  In  short,  to  put  the  matter  in  a  nutshell,  I  receive  my
letters  at  my  front  door,  and  I  give  my  orders  in  my  library.  Why
should  I  suppose  that  my  house  is  governed  by  an  imaginary  conspiracy
in  the  kitchen?"

Now  I  need  not  examine  how  far  contentions  like  these  would  be
valid  if  we  kept  to  the  realm  of  pure  philosophical  speculation.  For
we  happen  to  be  able  to  prove,  by  actual  and  easy  experiment,  that
they  are  entirely  inconclusive.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  now  well  known  that  very  often  if  a  man
in  the  hypnotic  trance  be  ordered  to  perform  a  certain  act  after
he  has  been  awakened — to  execute,  as  it  is  called,  a  posthypnotic
suggestion — he  will  execute  that  suggestion,  in  complete  unconscious-
ness of  having  received  a  command,  and  in  the  full  belief  that  he  is
acting  from  his  own  choice,  and  with  complete  freedom  of  will.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


303


I  have  already  repeatedly  dwelt  elsewhere  on  the  deep  significance
of  this  easily  verified  fact.  It  is  enough  to  show  that  a  man's  belief
that  his  acts  have  been  willed  by  his  ordinary  conscious  self  is  no  proof
whatever  that  they  have  primarily  been  so  willed.  They  may  have
been  primarily  willed  by  some  subjacent  stratum  of  his  being — as  in
the  case  of  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion — and  may  yet  appear  to  his
supraliminal  self  as  absolutely  of  its  own  choosing.

Again.  The  chain  of  memory  of  which  our  superficial  self  is
master,  and  which  in  common  parlance  is  spoken  of  as  extending  over
the  whole  past  life,  is  seen  on  closer  inspection  to  be  imperfect  and
interrupted  in  a  high  degree.  For  all  men  it  omits  the  periods  of
infancy  and  of  sleep  ;  for  many  men  there  are  further  gaps  representing
delirium,  hypnotic  trance,  and  various  disturbances  of  consciousness.

And  here  again  hypnotic  experiment  has  made  all  the  world
familiar  with  a  fact  which,  until  recent  times,  could  only  have  been
inferred  from  a  few  scattered  instances.  This  fact  is  that  not  only
may  these  gaps  in  our  superficial  memory  possess  a  chain  of  memory  of
their  own,  but  that  such  secondary  chain  of  memory  is  actually  in  some
sense  more  continuous  than  the  primary.

We  all  know  that  the  hypnotised  subject  as  a  rule  remembers
waking  life,  but  that  the  awakened  subject  as  a  rule  has  wholly
forgotten  the  events  of  his  hypnotic  trance.  The  full  significance  of
this  fact — which  has  hardly  yet,  I  think,  been  realised  in  any  quarter
— will  appear  more  clearly  as  we  proceed.  For  the  present  it  is  enough
to  point  out  that  this  fact  alone  destroys  any  possible  claim  of  our
primary  memory  to  be  our  sole  memory,  and  thus  shows  us  that  we
cannot  rest  upon  our  empirically  conscious  memory  any  more  than  upon
our  empirically  conscious  will  as  indicating  that  the  empirical  self  to
which  these  belong  is  in  any  way  a  complete  expression  of  our  being.

What,  then,  is  the  practical  conclusion  to  be  drawn  as  regards  the
mode  of  conducting  our  present  inquiry  1  It  is  simply  this  :  that  we
must  regard  this  ordinary  stream  of  waking  consciousness — in  which  I
write  these  words  and  my  readers  read  them — with  just  the  same
impartial,  objective  scrutiny  which  we  apply  to  the  consciousness,  say,
of  a  person  in  spontaneous  somnambulism  or  in  hypnotic  trance.

If  we  wished  to  form  a  judgment  as  to  his  activity  of  psychical  con-
dition in  such  a  trance,  we  should  examine  his  sensory  and  motor
capacity,  his  intelligence,  his  memory  ;  and  should  note  in  what  points
there  was  either  diminution  or  increase  of  his  known  powers  in  waking
life.  And  this  would  be  an  easy  task  ;  since  we  should  be  aiming  only
at  describing  state  B — the  somnambulic  state  before  us — in  terms  of
state  A,  the  ordinary  waking  condition.

But  this — although  it  is  pretty  nearly  all  that  has  been  hitherto
attempted in this direction — stands to a  complete  experimental


304


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


psychology  in  something  the  same  relation  that  the  digging  a  pit  in
my  garden  stands  to  a  knowledge  of  the  earth's  crust.  I  can  easily
discover  that  after  digging  (say)  through  a  stratum  of  gravel  I  come
to  clay,  and  I  can  describe  the  clay  as  damper  and  less  healthy  than
the  gravel.  As  a  householder  I  may  accept  this  stratum  of  gravel
above  the  clay  as  an  ultimate  and  satisfactory  fact.  As  a  geologist  I
am  bound  to  ask  what  it  all  means.  Why  is  the  gravel  on  the  top  1
Why  is  there  clay  below  it  1  What  is  there  below  the  clay  1  Do  the
strata  always  occur  in  the  same  order,  or  must  the  gravel  at  any  rate
always  be  on  the  top  1  I  can  no  longer  say,  "My  house  is  built  on
gravel,"  as  though  that  were  all  I  need  know.  It  is  built  upon  an
unknown  number  of  strata,  of  which,  for  an  unknown  reason,  the
gravel  is  uppermost  at  this  particular  point.

Now  I  maintain  that  the  prevalent  French  mode  of  treating  these
subjacent  psychological  states — although  they  have  proved  in  more  than
one  case  capable  of  beneficially  supplanting  the  superficial  state — as
though  they  were,  nevertheless,  mere  morbid  variations  or  splittings-up
of  the  superficial  state,  resembles  the  reasoning  of  a  man  who  should
.say  that  the  clay,  or  chalk,  or  granite  which  he  found  beneath  the
gravel  was  a  kind  of  degenerate  gravel — an  agglomeration  of  particular
elements  in  the  gravel,  but  nothing  really  new.

I  think  that  the  time  has  come  for  a  rather  deeper  investigation.
I  think  that  we  have  now  observed  enough  out-croppings  of  subjacent
strata  to  enable  us  at  least  to  seek — I  do  not  say  as  yet  to  find — some
sort  of  provisional  law  of  stratification  which  does  not  assume  as  a
primary  truth  that  because  gravel  is  the  stratum  on  which  we  have
chosen  to  build  our  houses,  gravel  is  therefore  the  normal  type  which
ought  always  to  be  uppermost,  and  of  which  all  other  minerals  are  a
degenerate  modification.

Not  so;  phenomena  of  so  far-reaching  a  significance  as  these  demand
a  wider  purview  than  the  mere  pathologist's  in  those  who  would  explain
them.  They  open  questions  as  to  man's  psychical  being  which  have
always  been  deemed  to  lie  inter  apices  philosophies.  We  shall  not  get
at  their  true  meaning  if  we  discuss  them  only  in  the  atmosphere  of  a
hospital-ward  full  of  hystero-epileptics.  There  will  be  need,  of  course,
to  verify  any  hypothesis  as  strictly  as  we  can  ;  but  we  must  not  fall
back  upon  hypotheses  manifestly  too  narrow  because  we  despair  of
being  able  as  yet  to  submit  wider  conceptions  to  exact  proof.

The  hypothesis  which  I  offer  may  be  attacked,  I  fear,  with  some
apparent  reason,  from  two  opposite  quarters — both  as  antiquated  and
as  revolutionary.  Its  central  conception  is  ancient  enough.  The  idea
of  a  soul  which  precedes  and  outlasts  the  body,  and  which  retains
memories,  or  receives  intimations,  belonging  to  a  world  in  which  the
body  does  not  dwell — this  assuredly,  whether  as  religion  or  as  philo-


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


305


sophy,  as  revelation  or  as  speculation,  has  been  one  of  the  dominant
tenets  of  the  traditional  Wisdom  of  the  Past.

But  on  the  other  hand,  that  so-called  wisdom  has  never  either
appealed  to,  or  been  recognised  by,  the  rival  wisdom  of  modern
physiology.  There  is  something  unpleasing  to  many  minds  in  the
mere  attempt  to  deduce  from  these  quasi-hysterical  phenomena  an
argument  for  man's  higher  destinies.  To  the  savant  such  a  juxta-
position suggests  charlatanism  ;  to  the  philosopher  it  savours  of
degradation.

That  task  must,  nevertheless,  be  attempted.  Yet  it  will  be  well  to
avoid  the  use  of  terms  which,  like  the  words  soul  and  spirit,  carry  with
them  associations  which  cannot  fairly  be  imported  into  the  argument.

Some  word,  however,  we  must  have  for  that  underlying  psychical
unity  which  I  postulate  as  existing  beneath  all  our  phenomenal
manifestations.  Let  the  word  individuality  serve  this  purpose  ;  and
let  us  apply  the  word  personality,  as  its  etymology  suggests,  to  some-
thing more  external  and  transitory — to  each  of  those  apparent  char-
acters, or  chains  of  memory  and  desire,  which  may  at  any  time  mask
at  once  and  manifest  a  psychical  existence  deeper  and  more  perdurable
than  their  own.

For  such  is  my  hypothesis.  I  suggest  that  each  of  us  is  in  reality
an  abiding  psychical  entity  far  more  extensive  than  he  knows — an
individuality  which  can  never  express  itself  completely  through  any
corporeal  manifestation.  The  Self  manifests  through  the  organism  ;
but  there  is  always  some  part  of  the  Self  unmanifested ;  and  always,
as  it  seems,  some  power  of  organic  expression  in  abeyance  or  in  reserve.
Neither  can  the  player  express  all  his  thought  upon  the  instrument,  nor
is  the  instrument  so  arranged  that  all  its  keys  can  be  sounded  at  once.
One  melody  after  another  may  be  played  upon  it ;  nay, — as  with  the
messages  of  duplex  or  of  multiplex  telegraphy, — simultaneously  or  with
imperceptible  intermissions,  several  melodies  can  be  played  together;
but  there  are  still  unexhausted  reserves  of  instrumental  capacity,  as
well  as  unexpressed  treasures  of  informing  thought.

All  this  psychical  action,  I  hold,  is  conscious ;  all  is  included  in  an
actual  or  potential  memory  below  the  threshold  of  our  habitual  con-
sciousness. For  all  which  lies  below  that  threshold  subliminal  seems
the  fittest  word.  "Unconscious,"  or  even  "subconscious,"  would  be
directly  misleading  ;  and  to  speak  (as  is  sometimes  convenient)  of  the
secondary  self  may  give  the  impression  either  that  there  cannot  be  more
selves  than  two,  or  that  the  stqwaliminal  self,  the  self  above  the
threshold, — the  empirical  self,  the  self  of  common  experience — is  in
some  way  superior  to  other  possible  selves.1

1  I  here  use  the  word  "self  "  as  a  brief  descriptive  term  for  any  chain  of  memory
sufficiently  continuous,  and  embracing  sufficient  particulars,  to  acquire  what  is


306


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


I  hold  (to  continue)  that  this  subliminal  consciousness  and  sub-
liminal memory  may  embrace  a  far  wider  range  both  of  physiological
and  of  psychical  activity  than  is  open  to  our  supraliminal  conscious-
ness, to  our  supraliminal  memory.  The  spectrum  of  consciousness,  if
I  may  so  call  it,  is  in  the  subliminal  self  indefinitely  extended  at
both  ends.

At  the  inferior,  or  physiological  end,  in  the  first  place,  it  includes
much  that  is  too  archaic,  too  rudimentary,  to  be  retained  in  the  supra-
liminal memory  of  an  organism  so  advanced  as  man's.  For  the  supra-
liminal memory  of  any  organism  is  inevitably  limited  by  the  need  of
concentration  upon  recollections  useful  in  the  struggle  for  existence.
The  recollection  of  processes  now  performed  automatically,  and  need-
ing no  supervision,  drops  out  from  the  supraliminal  memory,  but  may  be
in  my  view  retained  in  the  subliminal.  To  this  point  we  shall  again
recur.  In  the  second  place,  and  at  the  superior  or  psychical  end,  the
subliminal  memory  includes  an  unknown  category  of  impressions
which  the  supraliminal  consciousness  is  incapable  of  receiving  in  any
direct  fashion,  and  which  it  must  cognise,  if  at  all,  in  the  shape  of
messages  from  the  subliminal  consciousness.

To  this  category  I  refer  telepathic  and  clairvoyant  impressions,
which  I  believe  to  be  habitually  received,  not  by  aid  of  those  sensory
adits  or  operations  which  the  supraliminal  self  directly  commands,  but
by  aid  of  adits  and  operations  peculiar  to  the  subliminal  self,  and  fall-
ing under  some  system  of  laws  of  which  supraliminal  experience,  if
standing  alone,  could  give  us  no  information.  And  I  believe  that  some
of  those  impressions  which,  though  in  no  clear  way  connected  with
sight,  we  include  under  clairvoyance,  do  in  some  sense  transcend  the
limitations,  of  time  as  well  as  of  space,  within  which  all  supraliminal
consciousness  necessarily  falls.

Varying  our  metaphor,  we  may  say  that  the  range  of  sensation
covered  by  our  supraliminal  consciousness  or  memory  resembles
the  range  of  temperature  covered  by  our  ordinary  thermometers.  The
thermometer's  range  represents  but  a  small  segment  of  the  temperatures
whose  existence  in  the  Cosmos  is  implied  by  the  very  nature  and  con-
stitution of  the  planet  on  whose  surface  our  short  range  of  tempera-
tures prevails.  Even  so  our  supraliminal  consciousness,  with  its
short  range  of  sensation  and  memory,  is,  1  think,  demonstrably
based  upon,  demonstrably  implies,  a  consciousness  of  wider  scope.
That  wider  consciousness,  again,  may  conceivably  extend  from  the
absolute  zero,  or  point — wherever  that  may  be — where  no  conscious-
ness has  yet  begun,  up  to  a  point  of  expansion  where  it  may  transcend

popularly  called  a  "character"  of  its  own.  There  will  thus  be  one  distinct  supra-
liminal self  at  a  time  ;  but  more  than  one  subliminal  self  may  exist,  or  may  be
capable  of  being  called  into  existence.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


307


any  analogy  which  we  can  employ.  For  just  as  we  know  of  no  superior
limit  to  heat,  unless  it  be  that  point  where,  in  consequence  of  the  com-
plete dissociation  of  matter,  the  energy  which  we  call  heat  must  change
its  character  in  some  unknown  way,  so  also  we  know  of  no  superior
limit  to  consciousness,  unless  it  be  that  point  where  individual  con-
sciousness, individual  memories,  may  be  merged  in  some  vaster  and
unknown  form  of  life.

There  may  thus  be,  in  my  view,  an  unknown  amount  of  psychical
operation  proceeding  in  our  individuality,  and  in  connection  with  our
organism,  of  which  operation  only  a  small  fraction  habitually  rises
into  the  cognition  of  the  empirical  self.  What  shall  so  rise,  and  what
shall  not  so  rise,  may  well  have  been  originally  determined  by  some
process  of  natural  selection.

The  matters  of  which  we  are  superficially  conscious  have  been
selected  from  among  the  matters  of  which  we  might  have  been  con-
scious, much  as  the  matters  to  which  we  attend  are  selected  from  among
the  matters  to  which  Ave  might  attend.  I  must  needs  attend  to  the
voice  of  one  who  calls  to  me  ;  I  may  leave  unattended  to  the  buzzing
of  a  fly  in  the  room  after  I  am  conscious  of  it.  Even  so,  in  a  more
general  way,  my  superficial  self  must  needs  be  conscious  of  sounds
transmitted  to  me  by  air-waves,  but  may  ignore  messages  which  reach
me  by  the  less  practical  method  of  telepathic  impact  from  other  minds.

In  each  case  the  object  of  the  selective  process  may  have  been  the
preservation  of  the  race  and  of  the  individual.  When  another  object  is
proposed,  the  selective  process  may  take  another  form.  And  in  fact  the
object  of  civilised  men  has  now  considerably  altered  its  character.  It
is  knowledge,  not  mere  self-preservation,  at  which  we  aim.  We  may,
therefore,  hope  that  just  as  many  matters  rise  into,  say,  the  naturalist's
attention  which  the  hunting  savage  has  not  perceived,  so  also  many
matters  may  now  be  made  to  rise  into  our  superficial  consciousness
which  our  purely  practical  ancestors  could  in  no  wise  reach.

It  will  be  seen  that  I  do  not  suppose  that  there  is  any  definite
or  impassable  barrier  between  the  various  strata  of  the  Self.  They  are
strata  (so  to  say)  not  of  immovable  rock,  but  of  imperfectly  miscible
fluids  of  various  densities,  and  subject  to  currents  and  ebullitions
which  often  bring  to  the  surface  a  stream  or  a  bubble  from  a  stratum
far  below.

But  observe  that  so  soon  as  this  is  understood — so  soon  as  I  admit
and  assert  that  the  existence  and  nature  of  subliminal  capacities  in
the  self  is  to  be  inferred  only  from  actual  phenomena  observed  and
interpreted  by  that  empirical  self  by  whose  aid  science  does  her  work
— so  soon  does  my  theory  lose  its  air  of  mysticism,  and  ranges  itself
among  hypotheses  which  may  be  erroneous,  but  are  not  plainly  un-
scientific.


308


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


It  is  my  object  to  test  that  theory  by  all  the  facts  at  my  command.
And  perhaps  it  will  tend  to  clearness  if  I  begin  by  pointing  out  what
kind  of  phenomena  we  may  logically  expect  to  find,  if  the  theory  be
true,  and  if  I  then  go  on  to  show  to  what  extent  I  can  claim  that  the
phenomena  actually  observed  correspond  to  my  anticipation.

And  first,  perhaps,  it  may  be  well  to  deal  with  the  question  of
morbidity,  of  abnormality,  which  is  so  prominent  in  many  men  s  minds
in  connection  with  any  messages  from  the  subliminal  consciousness.

Now  assuredly  I  do  not  hold  that  the  subliminal  self  is  free  from
disturbance  and  disease,  any  more  than  the  supraliminal.  "The
Subliminal  Self  "  is  a  name  for  an  aggregate  of  potential  personalities,
with  imperfectly  known  capacities  of  perception  and  action,  but  none
•of  them  identical  with  the  assumed  individuality  beneath  them,  nor
■entitled  to  share  in  any  kind  of  "imperturbability,  indiscerptibility,
incorruptibility,"  which  the  philosopher  may  ascribe  to  an  incorporeal
soul.  There  must  needs,  therefore,  in  my  view,  be  subliminal  disturb-
ances, and  these  must  needs  make  themselves  felt  in  the  supraliminal
being.  How  shall  we  distinguish  these  subterranean  from  the  superficial
storms  ?  How  shall  we  recognise,  for  instance,  a  disturbance  of  the
il  hypnotic  stratum  " — as  we  may  style  for  convenience'  sake  that  group
of  potential  perceptions  and  reactions  which  are  readily  evoked  in  a
suitable  subject  by  the  hypnotic  trance?  It  would  be  absurd  to  attempt
to  explain  ignotum  'per  ignotius, — the  aetiology  of  disease  by  its  relation
to  hypothetical  strata  of  the  subliminal  self.  But  one  remark  I  must
make,  since,  crude  as  it  may  be,  it  offers  at  least  a  chance  of  light
upon  a  subject  at  present  hopelessly  confused.

I  say,  then,  that  our  most  plausible  conception  of  a  morbid  disturb-
ance of  the  hypnotic  self  would  consist  in  a  derangement  of  functions
or  capacities  habitually  observed  in  the  hypnotic  state,  and  in  that
state  alone.  I  should  say  that  the  reason  for  referring  the  source  of
such  derangement  to  the  hypnotic"'  self  would  be  increased  if  the  sub-
ject were,  when  hypnotised,  aware  of  the  exciting  external  cause  of
such  derangements,  and  capable  of  modifying  them  in  a  way  impossible
to  him  in  waking  life.

Now  it  is  a  striking  characteristic  of  the  hypnotic  self  that  it  can
exercise  over  the  nervous,  the  vaso-motor,  the  circulatory  systems  a
degree  of  control  unparalleled  in  waking  life.  Told  to  hold  out  his  arm,
the  hypnotised  subject  will  hold  it  out  for  an  indefinite  time  in  a  state
of  painless  contracture,  and  with  no  disturbance  of  pulse  or  respira-
tion. Told  that  the  ammonia  which  is  held  to  his  nose  is  otto  of  roses,
he  will  inhale  it  with  unwinking,  unwatering  eyes.  Told  that  he  has
burnt  himself  in  a  given  spot,  his  skin  will  redden  or  even  form  a
blister.  Told  to  sleep,  he  will  sleep  profoundly  until  told  to  awake.
I  do  not  here  attempt  to  explain  wlx  y  that  obedience  is  rendered.  But


The  Subliminal


Consciousness.


309


the  power  of  obeying  such  commands — that  is  the  function,  the  pre-
rogative, the  secret  of  the  hypnotic  self.

Are  we  aware  in  practice  of  any  malady  or  group  of  maladies  in
which  these  functions,  these  capacities,  are  the  subject  of  special  dis-
turbance? Are  there  cases  of  prolonged  and  apparently  causeless
contracture  ?  Are  there  anpesthesise  appearing,  shifting,  and  disappear-
ing as  rapidly  as  the  suggested  anaesthesia  of  hypnotism  ?  Are  there
anomalous  vaso-motor  disturbances,  which  seem  to  follow  the  patient's
mere  caprice  1

The  reader  will  answer  with  the  word  hysteria.  And,  meaningless
or  misleading  though  that  term  be,  it  is  in  fact  our  first  and  obvious
reply.  Not  indeed  all,  but  almost  all  the  phenomena  which  can  be
induced  by  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  state  occur  spontaneously  in
hysterical  patients.

But  this  will  not  complete  our  answer.  From  the  point  of  view  of  our
present  analogy  the  differentia  of  hysteria  will  be  simply  an  irrational
self-suggestion  in  regions  beyond  the  power  of  the  waking  will  ; — a
morbid  or  uncontrolled  functioning  of  powers  over  the  organism  which
effect  profounder  modifications  than  the  empirical  self  can  parallel.
Thus  the  production  of  patches  of  anaesthesia  or  analgesia  is  a
characteristically  hysterical  symptom,  and  it  implies  a  power  of  modify-
ing the  sensibility  to  touch  or  pain  which  we  cannot  imitate  under
ordinary  conditions.

But  when  hysteria  is  thus  regarded,  it  is  seen  that  several  other
maladies  fall  under  the  same  category.  "  Attaques  de  sommeil"
"association-neuroses,"  "  Zwangs-Vorstellungen,"  and  a  host  of  mono-
manias show  a  similarly  morbid  functioning  of  precisely  that  class  of
powers  which  hypnotism  exhibits  to  us  in  harmless  or  beneficent  opera-
tion. They  are  self-suggestions  of  an  irrational  and  hurtful  kind.  They
are  diseases  of  the  hypnotic  stratum.  Hypnotism  is  not  a  morbid  state  ;
it  is  the  manifestation  of  a  group  of  perfectly  normal  but  habitually
subjacent  powers,  whose  beneficent  operation  we  see  in  cures  by
therapeutic  suggestions  ;  whose  neutral  operation  we  see  in  ordinary
hypnotic  experiment ;  and  whose  diseased  operation  we  see  in  the
vast  variety  of  self-suggestive  maladies.1

I  would  offer  this  view  to  the  consideration  of  those  who  justly
realise  the  close  connection  between  hypnotism  and  hysterical  pheno-
mena, but  mistakenly  endeavour  to  force  all  the  hypnotic  phenomena
into  the  hysterical  category.

1  The  self -suggestive  psychoses  pass  into  insanities  dependent  on  organic  lesion
by  gradations  on  which  physicians  themselves  are  hardly  agreed,  and  which  lie  quite
outside  my  province.  I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  to  assert  that  delusions  unmodifiable
by  suggestion,  and  depending  on  actual  lesions  (as  the  megalomania  of  general
paralysis),  belong  to  the  hypnotic  more  than  to  any  other  stratum  of  personality.


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


M.  Babinski,  for  instance,  as  we  have  seen,  argues  as  follows  on
behalf  of  the  Salpetriere  view  that  all  hypnotic  subjects  are  hysterical.
The  Nancy  subjects,  he  says,  although  asserted  by  Nancy  doctors  to  be
non-hysterical,  yet  show  in  the  hypnotic  trance  phenomena  which  we
observe  elsewhere  in  hysteria  alone.  For  that  reason  they  must  in  fact
be  hysterical.  This,  surely,  is  to  reason  in  a  somewhat  obvious  circle.
And  those  Avho,  with  the  great  majority  of  competent  judges,  are  con-
vinced that  non-hysterical  persons  may  most  assuredly  be  nevertheless
hypnotisable,  must  seek  some  other  explanation  for  the  similarity  of
phenomena  in  the  two  states.  That  explanation  I  have  here  attempted
to  give  by  suggesting  that  hysteria  (and  many  cognate  troubles)  should
rather  be  said  to  fall  under  hypnotism  than  hypnotism  under  hysteria.
Those  self-suggestive  troubles  exhibit  the  disordered  working  of  a
stratum  of  the  self  which  is  per  se  as  normal  and  as  essential  to  man's
completeness  as  any  other,  and  which  surpasses  the  superficial  stratum
in  the  degree  of  power  which  the  will  informing  it  can  exercise  over
the  organism.

Yet  one  word  more  to  those  who,  without  stigmatising  either
hypnotism  or  subliminal  manifestations  in  general  as  necessarily
morbid,  are  yet  disposed  to  style  them  abnormal,  and  to  regard  them
as  a  mere  curiosity  which  can  never  be  closely  inwrought  with  human
progress.

'•  The  normal  man  "  is  apt,  I  think,  to  become  as  cmestion-begging
an  individual  in  physiological  as  "  the  natural  man  "  in  theological
treatises.  What  is  man's  nature  ?  and  what  is  man's  norm  ?  If  we
were  answering  for  any  lower  species  we  should  undoubtedly  say  that
the  norm  of  that  sjjeeies  was  such  adaptation  to  its  environment  as
best  secured  its  existence  and  its  diffusion  over  our  planet.  Answering
for  mankind,  we  should  demur  to  this  crudely  propagandist  view.  We
should  hesitate  to  assume  that  Brigham  Young  had  fulfilled  man's  end
and  aim  more  successfully  than  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  Man's  end  and  aim
are  not  so  simple  as  a  rabbit's;  he  must  choose  between  ideals;  he  must
pursue  the  higher  objects  even  at  some  sacrifice  of  the  lower.  And
whether  we  contemplate  his  highest  aim  under  the  aspect  of  Virtue  or
of  Knowledge,  we  must  agree  that  such  aim  can  only  be  attained  by  a
rise  into  fullest  consciousness — by  a  completest  control  and  exercise  of
"  those  high  capacious  powers  which  lie  folded  up  in  man."

Hitherto,  indeed,  almost  all  experimentation  on  human  subjects
has  been  directed  to  practical,  to  therapeutic  ends  ;  to  the  remedy  of
the  wear  and  tear  which  interfere  with  the  every-day  working  of  the
organism.  Approached  even  on  this  merely  practical  side,  that  organ-
ism has  shown  itself  at  once  far  more  complex  and  far  more  modifiable
than  the  early  physicians  supposed.  But  we  have  found,  too,  that  for
such  modification  we  need  quite  unlooked-for  artifices — appliances


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


311


which  it  has  taken  centuries  to  perfect,  and  of  which  Hippocrates  and
Galen  did  not  dream.

Thus  much  for  one  side  of  man's  nature. How  as  to  the  other  ?

Psychological  experiment  is  still,  as  it  seems  to  me,  at  much  the
same  point  as  was  medical  experiment  in  the  days  of  Hippocrates.
We  are  still  in  the  stage  of  mere  logical  and  descriptive  analysis  of
the  psychical  nature  with  which  we  have  to  deal.  We  have  scarcely
yet  invented  any  instruments  for  probing  or  artifices  for  modifying  it.

Nay,  the  very  idea  of  trying  to  modify  our  psychical  selves  by
deliberate  scientific  experiment  is  as  foreign  and  unacceptable  to  most
men  as  the  idea  of  modifying  his  death-rate  by  sanitation  is  to  the
African  savage.  There  is  in  most  of  our  minds  a  vague  assumption
that  our  race  stands  at  its  highest  point,  and  that  any  change  must
imply  degeneration.

No  one,  of  course,  can  offer  scientific  defence  of  such  an  assump-
tion as  this.  Yet  how  great  would  the  difference  be  if  it  were  altogether

■ousted  from  every  mind  ! If  it  were  admitted  that  we  are  borne

however  slowly — on  an  ascending  curve,  and  that  we  can  assign  no
necessary  limit  to  the  powers  over  our  own  personal  mind  and  matter,
and  over  mind  and  matter  without  us,  which  we  may  be  able  to  exert
when  we  have  gained  fuller  consciousness  6f  all  that  lies  hid  within !

The  foregoing  remarks,  I  trust,  may  have  cleared  the  way  for  an
inquiry  on  which  we  ought  to  enter  unfettered  by  any  prejudice  against
the  unknown  within  us  simply  as  unknown.  We  have  now  briefly  to
consider  what  kind  of  phenomena  should  be  observable  if  our  theory
is  a  true  one ;  in  what  fashion  we  can  suppose  that  a  subliminal  realm
of  psychical  action  such  as  I  have  assumed  will  be  likely  to  make
itself  perceptible  to  the  superficial  consciousness.  Such  tentative
answer  as  we  can  give  to  this  question  may  at  least  help  to  show  us
for  what  phenomena  we  are  bound  to  be  on  the  watch.

If,  then,  there  be  in  each  of  us  an  undefined  pre-existing  potency
of  sensation,  thought,  and  will,  which  can  at  best  manifest  itself  but
irregularly  and  imperfectly  through  the  bodily  organism,  we  shall
expect  that  each  mode  of  perception  of  which  the  superficial  self  is
capable  will  be  from  time  to  time  made  use  of  by  the  underlying-
intelligence.  There  will  be  a  transmission  of  messages  (so  to  name  any
kind  of  manifestation,  be  its  purport  true  or  false)  from  the  lower
to  the  upper  strata,  in  all  modes  of  which  the  upper  strata  are
accustomed  to  take  cognisance.  And  since  we  must  not  assume  that
the  subliminal  self  is  necessarily  confined  to  the  special  modes  of
sensory  communication  which  the  supraliminal  self  enjoys,  we  may
anticipate  that  in  these  upward-passing  messages  there  will  be  indica-
•cations  of  some  such  wider  or  less  differentiated  perceptivity  as  we
may  suppose  to  be  operative  in  the  depths  of  our  being.


312


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


JSText  as  to  the  contents  of  these  messages.  In  the  first  place,  we
shall  have  absolutely  no  reason  to  anticipate  that  all  the  messages  will
be  wise  or  important.  Although  I  call  them  messages,  for  the  sake  of
a  general  term,  and  because  they  all  convey  some  sort  of  knowledge  of
what  is  passing  beneath  the  threshold,  yet  we  must  not  assume  that
they  are  necessarily  purposive  or  voluntary.  They  may,  as  in  dreams,
be  the  expression  of  some  jmrposeless  and  involuntary  subliminal
activity ;  or,  as  in  hysteria,  of  some  subliminal  activity  of  a  distinctly
morbid  kind.  Or,  without  actual  disease,  they  may  communicate  sheer-
error,  sheer  folly,  sheer  wickedness.  It  is  not  likely  that  any  stratum
of  our  being,  even  though  it  have  some  directer  access  to  wisdom,  is
itself  entirely  wise.

Nevertheless,  my  initial  hypothesis  will  assuredly  not  be  justified
unless  we  can  discover  a  certain  proportion  of  subliminal  messages
which  do  actually  communicate  truths  of  which  the  superficial  self  was
not  otherwise  aware,  or  effect  ends  which  the  superficial  self  could  not
otherwise  effect.  And  such  messages — veridical  in  content,  or  bene-
ficently self -suggestive  in  operation — ought,  in  my  view,  to  be  seen
flashing  out  along  the  whole  spectrum  of  superficial  consciousness,  and
also  (as  already  implied)  beyond  either  end  of  that  habitual  spectrum.

Beyond  the  inferior  or  physiological  end  of  that  spectrum,  we  ought
to  find  traces  of  a  beneficent  power  over  physiological  processes  which
are  not  within  the  control  of  the  supraliminal  will.  Coincidently
with  that  spectrum  we  ought  to  find  traces  of  a  completer  than  the
supraliminal  memory,  of  a  keener  than  the  supraliminal  sense-perfec-
tion, of  a  sounder  than  the  supraliminal  judgment.  And  beyond  the
superior  or  psychical  end  of  our  metaphorical  spectrum  we  ought  to
find  traces  of  a  knowledge  subliminally  acquired  by  methods  unknown
to  the  supraliminal  self,  and  from  sources  to  which  that  self  has  no-
access.  How  far  such  supernormal  powers  may  extend  we  cannot,  of
course,  predict.  But  we  shall  anticipate  that  whatever  supernormal
powers  are  discovered  will  be  discovered  in  the  subliminal  and  not  in
the  supraliminal  realm  ; — will  reach  the  superficial  self  in  the  form  of
messages  whose  source  and  whose  mode  of  composition  will  be  discerned,
not  directly,  but  inferentially ; — will  be  subject,  not  to  the  laws  of  the
known  molecular  world,  but  to  laws  of  that  unknown  world  in  which
the  specific  powers  of  the  subliminal  self  are  assumed  to  operate-
Such,  roughly  speaking,  will  be  our  anticipation  as  to  the  modes,  and
as  to  the  content,  of  subliminal  manifestations.  We  shall  have  some-
what similar  grounds  for  preliminary  conjecture  on  other  points,  and
notably  as  to  the  probable  relation  of  subliminal  messages  to  the  supra-
liminal memory.

But  this  point  we  will  for  the  present  defer.  Our  subject  is  so  com-
plicated that  we  shall  gain  rather  than  lose  by  an  arrangement  which


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


313


bids  us  at  times  to  retrace  our  steps,  and  to  grow  familiar  with  our
labyrinthine  way.

Let  us,  therefore,  turn  now  to  the  actual  messages,  and  let  us
arrange  them  in  the  first  place  according  to  their  different  modes  of
manifestation,  the  channels,  through  which  they  reach  the  superficial
self.  We  shall  find  that  the  observed  cases  fall  broadly  into  four
categories : —

1.  First  come  messages  neither  definitely  sensory  nor  definitely
motor,  but  consisting  of  vague  or  anomalous  impressions  or  impulses.

2.  Secondly,  we  have  messages  mainly  sensory,  or  passive  automa-
tism.

3.  Thirdly,  we  have  messages  mainly  motor,  or  active  automatism.

4.  Lastly,  we  have  messages  at  once  motor  and  sensory,  which  tend
to  occupy  the  whole  psychical  field,  and  to  pass  on  into  states  of  trance,
or  of  alternating  personality.

1.  The  first  of  these  classes — theoretically,  perhaps,  the  most
interesting  of  all — must  be  very  briefly  touched  upon  here.  The
time  has  not  come  for  its  full  discussion — can  hardly  come  until  we
have  a  greater  mass  of  skilled  and  careful  records  of  subjective  feeling.
Nothing  is  harder  to  describe  than  these  vague  impressions  which
seem  to  lie  beneath  the  foundations  of  ordinary  sensation  and  ordinary
motion  alike.  The  student  of  our  published  narratives  will  note  in
how  many  different  ways  this  difficulty  is  felt  and  met — how  inadequate
nve  our  "  matter-moulded  forms  of  speech  "  to  express  some  unique
experience  which  is  often  even  more  impressive  to  the  percipient  from
its  own  strangeness  than  from  the  message  which  it  carries.

One  point,  however,  needs  clear  recognition.  These  subliminal
messages  seem  very  often  capable  of  being  developed  with  equal  ease
into  impressions  of  sight  or  into  impressions  of  hearing,  or  into  motor
impulses.  Let  us  take  the  case  which  is  so  often  the  simplest — that
of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  If  a  vague  suggestion,  say  of  danger,
is  conveyed  to  several  hypnotised  patients,  to  be  developed  after
their  awakening,  each  will  realise  the  hallucinatory  danger  in  a
different  way  ;  voice  of  enemies — smell  of  fire — sight  of  a  wild  beast
advancing  ;  it  is  a  chance  which  sense  is  used  to  express  the  dominant
idea.  The  idea  suggested  will  rise  into  manifestation  by  whatever
•channel  the  "  psychostatical "  condition  of  the  subject  may  render
•easiest  at  the  moment.

Somewhat  similar  is  the  case  with  many  veridical  hallucinations.
They  begin  with  a  vague  feeling  which  is  neither  sight,  sound,  nor
motion  ;  then  they  develop  gradually  into  a  phantom,  a  voice,  an
impulse  to  writing  or  to  utterance.  If  the  same  person  has  several
successive  experiences,  these  will  often  tend  to  clothe  themselves  in  the
same  sensory  shape.

Y


314


F.  W.  II.  Myers.


The  importance  of  this  fact  is  seen  when  a  claim  is  put  forward
that  an  apparition,  if  veridical,  is  necessarily  also  objective — has  some
independent  reality  outside  the  percipient's  brain.  Not  so,  we  reply  ;  in
many  cases  that  manifestation  has  developed  so  gradually,  so  unmis-
takably from  within,  that  we  cannot  logically  deem  that  an  objective
figure  was  suddenly  intruded  into  a  series  of  impressions  so  plainly
subjective  in  its  first  inception.  As  well  say  that  while  the  hypnotised
boy  was  straining  his  ears  to  catch  the  angel's  music  there  suddenly
came  to  him  the  real  note  of  a  heavenly  harp.

I  am  not  maintaining  that  all  veridical  hallucinations  are  of  this
primarily  subjective  type.  I  have  elsewhere  argued,  indeed,  that  the
terms  objective  and  subjective  lose  in  some  of  these  cases  all  clear
meaning,  and  that  in  the  case  of  a  collective  hallucination,  for  example,
we  can  often  do  no  more  than  record  the  experience  of  each  person
concerned,  being  absolutely  unable  to  say  on  what  laws  the  collectivity
of  the  hallucinatory  experience  could  possibly  depend.  But,  never-
theless, it  is  the  obscure  internal  origin,  rather  than  the  sudden  flash-
ing out,  as  though  upon  an  external  organ  of  sense,  which  is  the  most
instructive  characteristic  of  these  subliminal  messages.  The  flash,  no
doubt,  may  often  be  all  that  we  can  observe  ;  but  the  question  is  what
has  heated  to  flashing-point  the  inflammable  parts  within.

2.  We  thus  pass  onwards,  without  sudden  transition,  from  obscure
indefinite  messages  to  definite  sensory  messages, — full-blown  hallucina
tions.  And  here  we  cannot  say  what  determines  the  development  or
leads  to  the  increase  of  definition  in  the  message  received.  It  is  not
necessarily,  I  think,  a  great  intensity  of  the  message  ;  for  the  vague
messages  may  be  prolonged  and  disturbing  ;  the  visual  or  auditory
hallucinations  may  be  unexciting  and  transient.  But  be  they  of  what
quality  they  may,  it  is  important  to  realise  that  all  hallucinations  of
the  senses  may  be  in  some  sort  messages  from  the  subliminal  self.
They  may  be  so  when  merely  fantastic  just  as  truly  as  when  they  are
veridical.

Dreams  form  at  once  the  weakest  and  the  commonest  form  of
sensory  hallucination.  And  dreams,  of  course,  already  give  manifest
signs  of  having  been  manufactured  below  the  threshold  of  our  ordinary
consciousness.  Sometimes,  as  T  have  pointed  out  elsewhere  {Con-
temporary Review,  February,  1885),  a  single  dream  seems  to  involve
more  than  one  level  of  subliminal  consciousness.  And  already  in
dreams — even  in  meaningless  and  fantastic  dreams — we  begin  to  come
across  signs  of  intensified  power.  The  occasional  prolongation  of
dream-figures  into  the  first  waking  moments  seems  to  indicate  that  an
intensity  of  visualising  power  has  been  exercised  in  the  dream  which
the  waking  subject  could  not  imitate.  And  these  hypnopompic
illusions,  if  I  may  so  term  them — illusions  which  attend  the  departure


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


315


of  s  eep — are  paralleled  by  the  hypnagogic  illusions  which  attend  the
on-coming  of  sleep,  and  which  have  been  described  by  Maury  and  other
authors.

It  is  well  known  that  at  or  near  the  moment  of  falling  asleep,
scenes  or  faces  will  sometimes  present  themselves  with  a  startling  vivid-
ness which  no  voluntary  effort  can  rival.  Very  likely  other  bad
visualisers,  besides  myself,  have  derived  from  these  occasional  flashes
some  notion  of  the  good  visualisers  habitual  capacity,  which  otherwise,
as  being  beyond  imagination,  might  have  remained  for  us  beyond  belief.

The  lesson,  then,  of  these  illusions  Itypnagogiques  is  that  even  in  the
shallowest  and  most  meaningless  messages  from  the  subliminal  self  there
may  be  indications  of  previously  unknown  capacity.  Nay,  this  is  the  case
even  when  the  subliminal  messages  are  directly  originated  by  disease.
In  delirium  tremens  the  type  of  the  hallucinatory  figures  is  determined
by  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and  by  previous  associations.  But  the
vividness  with  which  that  type  is  realised  is  in  itself  an  indication  of
intensified  capacity.  The  patient,  when  in  ordinary  health,  could
not  summon  up  pictures  of  rats  or  snakes  with  anything  like  that
vividness  and  reality  which  so  terrify  him  now.  With  other  deliriums,
also,  the  case  is  similar.  The  vivid  illusions  of  the  opium-eater  and
of  the  haschisch-eater  are  notorious.

ISTow  in  most  of  these  cases  it  is  the  morbid  element  which  has
usually  attracted  attention.  The  vivid  visions  have  been  looked  upon
as  symptoms  of  poisoning,  to  be  removed  as  soon  as  possible.  But  to
the  psychologist  these  visions  have  an  interest  of  a  much  deeper  kind.
Just  as  it  is  the  business  of  the  physician  to  look  out  for  degenerations
— to  avert  dissolution — so  it  should  be  (though  it  has  not  often  been)
the  business  of  the  psychologist  to  look  out  for  extensions  of  capacity
— to  recognise  evolution.  And  these  morbid  visions  take  on  a  new
importance  if  they  are  regarded  as  indications  of  a  power  of  visualisa-
tion, of  combination,  of  invention,  existing  in  subliminal  strata  of  our
being,  and  accidentally  revealed  by  the  volcanic  upheaval  of  fever.

We  may  extend  this  argument  to  cases  where  there  is  no  fever,  but
the  indication  of  disordered  function  lies  in  the  hallucination  itself.

The  most  rudimentary,  in  one  sense,  of  all  forms  of  visual  halluci-
nation is  the  recurrence  of  an  after-image.  The  microscopist  has  been
gazing  long  and  steadfastly  at  some  tiny  network  of  cells.  Laying-
aside  the  microscope,  he  feels  nothing  unusual.  But  perhaps  some
hours  afterwards  the  network  will  start  up  before  him  in  an  objectified
form,  so  clearly  that  he  may  again  study  forgotten  details.  Now  this  is
the  result  of  unduly  prolonged  attention  ;  it  is  a  morbid  stereotyping  of
impressions  which  should  pass  swiftly  away.  But  although  it  is  thus  on
the  whole  a  retrogressive  or  dissolutive  phenomenon,  it  has  a  progressive
or  evolutive  aspect  as  well. It  indicates,  that  is  to  say,  the  possession


31 G


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


of  an  intensity  of  faculty  previously  unknown.  No  one  could  have
asserted  that  so  exact  an  image  of  the  microscopic  object  was  still
preserved  in  the  obsei'ver's  brain ;  nor  could  he  himself  have  evoked
such  an  image  by  conscious  effort.

Somewhat  similarly  we  find  that  sudden  vivid  revivals  of  memory
or  faculty  in  dying  persons  are  explained  by  physiologists  as  indicating
that  when  any  nervous  centre  is  discharged  with  disintegrating  violence
a  number  of  stored-up  memories  are  thus  set  free,  which  would  never
have  been  evoked  by  the  gentle  discharges  of  healthy  life.

In  all  these  cases,  as  will  be  seen,  my  argument  in  no  way  prompts
me  to  minimise  the  morbid  characters.  On  the  contrary,  I  hold  that
since  we  possess  certain  subliminal  faculties,  which  at  present  we  can
only  get  at  by  a  variety  of  empirical  methods,  it  was  antecedently
probable  that  disease  would  be  one  of  these  methods.  It  is  likely,  of
coui'se,  to  be  a  wasteful  and  incomplete  method;  bearing  something  the
same  relation  to  experiment  that  a  volcanic  eruption  bears  to  the
digging  of  a  mine.  Yet  it  may  bring  to  us  a  certain  amount  of  con-
fused knowledge  as  to  subjacent  strata — a  knowledge  which  it  is  our
business  to  make  definite  by  properly  directed  excavation.

But  here  an  objection  will  be  raised  to  my  argument, — so  serious
that,  at  the  cost  of  some  delay,  I  must  endeavour  to  forestall  it.
*'  You  have  no  right,"  my  critic  will  say,  "to  extract  evidence  of  some
new  subliminal  capacity  from  phenomena  which,  like  the  hallucinations
•of  delirium  tremens,  are  obviously  the  mere  concomitants  of  nervous
dissolution. In  such  cases  we  have  the  uncontrolled  irregular  working
•of  such  of  the  higher  nervous  centres  as  have  so  far  escaped  paralysis
from  the  alcoholic  poisoning.1 You  must  not  treat  defect  of  inhibition
■as  if  it  were  a  positive  power. In  all  our  sense-organs  there  is  a
certain  margin  of  capacity  beyond  what  we  habitually  use.  This
margin  renders  possible  many  helpful  adaptations  to  new  difficulties  ;
but  also  it  inevitably  admits  of  wasteful  outpourings  when  control  is
removed. Take  a  case  of  purely  mechanical  trouble. Say  that  too
much  wax  accumulates  in  my  ears. My  reserve  of  auditory  capacity  is
now  called  upon,  and  I  hear  fairly  well  in  spite  of  the  obstruction.
The  surplus  wax,  however,  is  removed; — and  straightway  I  hear  my
friend's  voice  as  a  shout,  and  his  cab  like  rolling  thunder. Do  you  call
this  an  uprush  of  subliminal  capacity  % The  fact  simply  is  that  my
ears,  which  had  adjusted  themselves  to  special  difficulties,  take  some
little  time  in  readjusting  themselves  to  ordinary  circumstances. It  is
as  simple  a  matter  as  my  feeling  your  study  hot  when  I  come  in  out  of
ihe  cold  air."

This  is  all  true,  I  reply  ;  but  my  first  object  is  precisely  to  discover


1  See  Dr.  Hug-hlings  Jackson  in  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  April,  18^7.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


317


what  margins  of  capacity  our  known  sensory  centres  possess  ; — in  the
hope  of  discovering  whether  we  have  other  capacities  not  dependent
upon  the  senses  that  we  know.  And  we  must  not  class  all  these  mani-
festations of  latent  capacity  together  ; — they  are  of  many  kinds,  and
teach  many  different  lessons.

The  case  of  intensified  hearing,  for  instance,  tells  me  comparatively
little.  I  believe  already  that  some  of  my  ancestors  could  hear  more
acutely  than  I ;  and  my  reserve  power  in  this  direction  could  indicate
at  most  that  degrees  of  capacity  once  acquired  do  not  always  die  out
with  disuse  (like  sight  in  cave-fishes),  but  may  remain  latent,  and
ready  for  some  descendant's  special  need.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  my
ancestors  could  visualise — could  call  up  imaginary  images — any  better
than  I  can.  If  then  by  drinking  brandy  I  succeed  in  visualising  a
hallucinatory  rat,  I  have  come  upon  a  degree  of  faculty  which  I  had
no  previous  reason  to  suspect  myself  of  possessing.  That  faculty,  let
us  say,  has  arisen  incidentally  during  the  development  of  my  visual
centres. It  has  been  a  useless  bye-product  of  human  evolution.

But  note  that  the  more  useless,  irrelevant,  episodic,  incidental  such
a  bye-product  is,  the  more  significant  is  it  for  our  present  purpose.
Bye-products  such  as  these  do  not  follow  on  the  incoherent  action  or
such  organisms  as  man  can  himself  construct.  A  loom  is  a  man-made
organism ;  it  is  a  product  of  artificial  selection,  of  modifications  imposed
from  without,  with  no  spontaneous  variations  arising  within.  Throw
it  partly  out  of  gear  and  it  will  perhaps  work  violently;  but  there  will
be  no  method  in  its  madness ;  its  incoherence  will  be  absolute  ;  it  will
not  incidentally  turn  out  patterns  more  complex  than  any  which  it  has
previously  made.  You  will  find  out  nothing  about  it  which  you  did  not
know  before ;  for  there  is  nothing  in  it  which  you  did  not  put  there
yourself.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  when  you  disarrange  the  human
organism  by  alcohol  you  get  something  more  than  incoherence  ;  not
only  tossing  movements  and  vague  cries,  but  also  the  projection  of
jihantasmal  figures,  more  vivid  than  the  patient's  healthy  imagination
ever  produced.

And  note  that  this  very  power  of  externalising  visual  images  has  in
certain  cases  (a  well-known  story  of  a  portrait-painter  is  copied  from
book  to  book)  been  of  actual  artistic  value  to  its  possessor.  It  is  a
bye-product  of  the  same  general  type  as  musical  and  mathematical
genius; — those  "gifts"  whose  brilliance  and  strangeness  have  prompted
Mr.  ^Vallace's  suggestion  that  they  may  have  been  intooduced  into  the
human  mind,  or  fostered  there,  by  some  agency  like  that  of  a  breeder
or  gardener,  outside  of  the  normal  course  of  evolution.  I  do  not
claim  that  the  drunkard's  "blue  devils"  have  any  supernatural  source.
But  I  would  suggest  that  if  ever  we  are  to  learn  whence  those  "sports  "


318


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


on  which  natural  selection  so  largely  depends  have  originated,  and  what
their  jDossible  range  may  be,  we  can  only  find  this  out  by  analysing
whatsoever  within  us  lies  off"  the  main  track  of  self-preserving  and
race-preserving  adaptation.  Explain  to  me,  I  would  ask,  not  how
Mithridates  came  to  have  a  family  at  eighty,  but  how  Gauss  came  to
discover  the  method  of  least  squares  at  eighteen.

Man's  life  on  earth  starts  from  an  x  of  some  sort ;  and  for  my
present  argument  it  matters  not  whether  you  call  x  a  carbon-atom  or
an  immortal  soul.  Whatever  it  was,  x  had  certain  potentialities,
which  must  have  dated  in  any  case  from  some  age  anterior  to  its
existence  upon  our  recent  planet.  Theories  of  evolution  have  taught
us  something  of  the  ways  in  which  x  may  have  been  modified  during
its  terrene  existence;  but  we  have  yet  to  learn  what  that  was  on  which
earth's  forces  began  their  play.  Are  there  indeed  any  residual  pheno-
mena, bye-products  of.  evolution,  useless  vestiges,  enigmatic  rudiments,
which  if  once  we  could  interpret  them  could  carry  us  back  beyond
j>rotozoic  life  to  some  more  ancient  history,  some  more  perdurable
law?

It  will  be  seen  as  I  go  further  that  there  are  certain  facts  which
can,  I  think,  throw  light  on  this  problem  • — which  strongly  countenance
the  hypothesis  of  a  pre-existing,  an  informing,  a  surviving  soul.  In
the  meantime  the  necessary  logical  arrangement  of  my  matter  places
my  argument  at  a  disadvantage.  For  I  have  to  begin  with  small  and
scattered  observations,  themselves  explicable  on  hypotheses  narrower
than  mine,  and  needing, — to  show  their  true  connections,  their  con-
tinuous trend  towards  the  stranger,  the  supernormal  phenomena, — a
wide  ingathering  and  long  cumulation  which  neither  my  space  nor  my
knowledge  enables  me  here  to  offer.

But  I  must  content  myself  with  thus  appealing  to  my  reader  to
study  the  whole  series  of  ray  facts  before  he  dismisses  my  interpreta-
tion. For  the  present  I  must  return  to  my  immediate  topic,  and
must  continue  to  trace  in  order  the  various  classes  of  visual  hallucina-
tions— from  the  morbid  or  fantastic  up  to  the  veridical,  and  even  to
the  collective  class.

Next  above  the  visual  hallucinations  of  disease  I  should  place  those
which  many  persons  can  summon  up  by  the  empirical  process  of  gazing
at  a  crystal,  dark  mirror,  or  other  clear  surface.  These  "  crystal-
visions"  appear  to  run  parallel  to  the  whole  range  of  visual  hallucina-
tions. Some  of  them  closely  resemble  dreams  ;  appearing  to  be  rnere
casual  modifications  of  past  experience.  Others,  again,  exhibit  a  super-
normal revivification  of  past  events — a  hypermnesic  character — on  which
we  shall  hereafter  have  to  dwell.  In  other  cases  the  vision  seems  to
have  a  telepathic  origin.  In  others,  again,  the  crystal  shows  a  message
purporting  to  have  come  from  a  deceased  person. In  others,  again,  it


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


319


shows  scenes  apparently  depicting  the  remote  past,  or  the  futui'e,  and
not  clearly  traceable  to  any  individual  intelligence.  Nor  can  we  at
present  discriminate  by  any  difference  in  the  characteristics  of  the
vision  itself  what  its  origin  or  its  meaning  may  be.

I  need  hardly  say  that  in  using  the  convenient  term  "  crystal-
visions  "  I  am  not  attributing  any  real  importance  to  the  crystal  or
other  speculum  used,  nor  even  assuming  that  it  is  always  needful  to  use
a  speculum  at  all.  The  important  point  is  that  by  use  of  empirical
means,  which  vary  with  different  persons,  a  good  many  observers  can
succeed  in  inducing  visual  hallucinations  in  a  harmless  and  convenient
form.  The  crystal-visions  seem  akin  to  the  faces  and  other  forms  seen
in  the  dark  by  many  persons  while  fully  awake.1  It  is  natural  at  first
to  suppose  that  the  crystal-seers  are  slightly  self-hypnotised  by  the
steady  gaze  ;  and  in  some  instances  this  is  probably  the  fact.  But  in
some  of  the  best  marked  cases  of  crystal-vision  which  I  have  seen
there  is  no  indication  whatever  of  modification  of  the  normal  waking
state.2  Crystal-vision  in  my  view  is  not  a  branch  of  hypnotism,
but  rather  an  additional  method — due,  like  hypnotism,  to  accidental
discovery — of  bringing  into  the  cognisance  of  the  supraliminal  self
some  part  of  the  processes  which  are  ceaselessly  going  on  below.

Further  experiments  on  crystal-vision  are  much  needed.  But  the
■cases  already  published  will  serve  to  show  that  these  visions  may  rise
from  very  different  depths  in  the  psychical  being — may  come  only  "  from
dreamful  wastes  where  footless  fancies  dwell,7'  or  may  be  fashioned  by
somewhat  within  us  which  is  cognisant  of  forgotten  memories,  and  of  far-
distant  things.  In  one  point  nearly  all  observers  concur.  These  visions
imply  a  visualising  power  greater  than  the  seer  can  exercise  by  volun-
tary effort.  The  distinctness  and  artistic  quality  of  these  crystal-
pictures  can  be  estimated  more  truly  than  that  of  hypnotic,  or  even
•of  post-hypnotic  hallucinations,  on  account  of  the  subject's  more
thoroughly  normal  state.  And  the  illumination  of  the  pictures,  the
movement  of  the  figures,  often  causes  the  seer  great  surprise.  The
effect  is  said  to  be  not  like  that  of  "  conjuring  up  a  scene,"  but  rather
of  looking  tranquilly  into  a  camera  obscurer,  where  light  and  movement
are  given  correctly,  and  with  no  effort  of  one's  own.

The  study  both  of  hypnotically-suggested  hallucinations  and  of
crystal-visions  forms  an  important  prerequisite  for  the  right  compre-
hension of  that  remarkable  class  which  remains  to  be  mentioned, — the
casual  or  isolated — falsidical  or  veridical — hallucinations  of  the  sane.
Beaders  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  will  remember  how  Mr.  Gurney
has  brought  out  the  strong  analogies  which  subsist  between  all  phan-

1  See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  473.

2  See  the  paper,  "  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal- Vision,"  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,
p.  48(5.


320


F.  IF.  H.  Myers.


tasmal  experiences  of  this  kind — between  those  which  we  must  assume
to  be  merely  subjective,  and  those  which  we  regard  as  having  a  tele-
pathic origin,  a  veridical  content.  He  has  shown  how  beneath  all
differences  both  of  aspect  and  of  content  they  are  wont  to  give  indica-
tion of  somewhat  the  same  process  of  subliminal  manufacture.

.Before,  however,  we  can  decide  to  class  all  visual  phantasms  fts
messages  from  the  subliminal  self,  we  must  take  into  account  the
important  fact  that  these  phantasms  are  in  many  cases  collective — that
they  are  observed  by  several  persons  simultaneously — perhaps  even  by
animals  as  well.  Are  we  not  bound,  it  has  been  asked,  to  regard  such
collective  phantasms  at  any  rate  as  objective  entities,  in  no  way
dependent  upon  the  self  of  the  percipient  1

In  reply  I  would  say  (as  I  have  said  at  greater  length  elsewhere),
that  I  see  no  objection  to  describing  these  collective  hallucinations  as
objective,  so  long  as  it  is  understood  that  their  objectivity  implies  only
that  they  have  a  source  outside,  the  percipients'  minds,  and  does
not  imply  that  they  are  necessarily  discerned  by  the  percipients  in
accordance  with  ordinary  optical  laAvs.

Our  records  of  collective  phantasms  show  at  any  rate  that  even
when  more  persons  than  one  perceive  the  phantasm  it  is  not  safe  to
conclude  that  all  the  persons  present  will  perceive  it.  Nay,  more;  those
who  do  perceive  it  will  sometimes  perceive  it  to  different  extents — one,
for  example,  hearing  only  ;  another  both  hearing  and  seeing.  It  is  even
doubtful  whether  the  perceptions  of  the  different  percipients  are  in  all
cases  fully  consistent  with  each  other,  or  do  not  rather  indicate  that
some  initiating  cause  acts  on  each  percipient  in  a  manner  determined
by  his  own  psychostatical  condition.  Collectivity,  in  short,  is  in  such
percipience  more  truly  styled  electivity.  It  may  be  the  case  that  A  and
B,  who  are  together,  both  see  the  same  phantom ;  but  this  fact  gives  us
no  guarantee  that  if  C  was  there  with  them  he  would  see  the  same
thing.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  a  phantom  thus  electively  perceived — perceived,
that  is  to  say,  by  one  person  in  {^reference  to  another,  equally  well
situated — cannot  be  perceived  by  the  superficial  self,  according  to
ordinary  optical  laws.  Yet  certainly  in  some  instances  the  phantasmal
image,  say,  of  a  dying  man,  does  affect  in  much  the  same  way  more
percipients  than  one, — and  percipients  of  whom  some  may  be  strangers
to  the  presumed  agent,  and  so  not  likely  to  have  received  the  impres-
sion from  him  by  direct  telepathic  impact.  To  meet  this  difficulty  it
has  been  suggested  that  when  A  is  dying,  and  A's  phantom  is  perceived
by  B  and  C,  of  whom  C  is  a  stranger  to  A,  then  B  perceives  it  by
direct  telepathic  impact  from  A,  and  C  by  further  or  secondary  tele-
pathic impact  from  B.  Where  the  difficulty  is  so  great,  and  our  know-
ledge so  small,  Ave  must  not  hastily  reject  any  attempt  at  explanation.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


321


But,  personally,  I  am  led  to  think  that  there  is,  as  I  have  elsewhere  sug-
gested, some  "centre  of  phantasmogenetic  activity,"  bearing  some-
relation  to  space,  and  affecting  B  and  C  simultaneously  and  directly.

The  phrase  here  cited,'  in  spite  of  its  unavoidable  vagueness,
may  now  be  seen  to  possess  an  intelligible  meaning.  I  have
already  urged  that  the  impulse  which  ultimately  generates  the
phantom  is  in  no  case  directly  received  by  the  superficial  self,  but
always  by  the  subliminal  faculties,  in  some  unknown  fashion.  I  have-
suggested  that  this  impulse  is  not  in  itself  of  any  definite  sensory  or
motor  quality,  but  is  generally  capable  of  being  translated  to  the  super-
ficial self  in  either  sensory  or  motor  terms,  according  to  the  subject's
psychos tatical  condition, — perhaps  according  to  the  predominance  of
visile,  auclile,  or  motile  imagery  in  his  habitual  psychical  operations..
To  explain  these  collective  or  elective  cases,  with  their  similarities  in
the  general  image  but  differences  in  detail,  we  should  have,  on  this  view,
further  to  suppose  that  the  said  impulse  is  sometimes  of  a  kind  which
affects  the  subliminal  self  of  all  suitably  constituted  persons  within  a
certain  area,  and  which,  although  modified  in  each  observer's  case  by
individual  conditions,  has  yet  a  j^repotent  tendency  to  translate  itself
into  02ie  special  form  of  imagery — so  that  the  phantom  which  each,
observer  perceives  is  similar,  although  not  identical.

Difficult  as  such  a  hypothesis  may  be,  it  indicates,  I  think,  a  more-
likely  road  towards  the  solution  of  this  crowning  puzzle  of  collective
hallucinations  than  is  afforded  by  those  who  maintain  that  a  phan-
tasm seen  or  heard  by  more  than  one  person  must  be  a  real  part  of
the  objective  world  ;  so  that  failure  to  see  or  hear  it  would  arise-
from  some  mere  defect  of  eyes  or  ears — some  such  purely  physio-
logical limitation  as  prevents  some  men  from  hearing  the  shrill  cry
of  the  bat.

What  has  here  been  said  of  hallucinations  of  sight  will  apply,
mutatis  mutandis,  to  hallucinations  of  the  sense  of  hearing,  and  of
the  sense  of  touch — to  the  phantasmal  sound  of  human  voices,  or
pressure  of  human  hands.  "  The  sense  of  touch,"  however,  is,  of
course,  a  mere  popular  term  which  covers  a  variety  of  classes  of
sensation  as  yet  imperfectly  known.  At  any  rate  the  sense  of  contact,,
the  sense  of  temperature,  and  (of  course)  the  sense  of  pain  are  known
to  admit  of  being  isolated  as  separate  modes  of  perceptivity.  What
messages,  we  may  ask,  does  the  subliminal  self  send  upwards  in  con-
nection with  these  senses  1

As  regards  the  sense  of  temperature  the  answer  is  complex  and
obscure,  involving  what  seems  to  be  a  new  group  of  sensibilities  to-
magnets,  metals,  etc.  An  elaborate  system  of  these  supposed  sensi-
bilities was  drawn  up  long  ago  by  Reichenbach  in  his  book,  Der  sensi-
tive Mensch,  and  similar  systems  have  since  been  elaborated  by  Barety


322  F.  W,  H.  Myers.


de  Rochas,  and  others.  In  the  absence  of  further  corroboration  all
these  schemes  must  be  considered  as  at  least  premature.  Neverthe-
less, there  is  in  France  a  growing  belief  that  certain  metals,  even  wrapped
up  or  concealed,  so  as  to  avoid  suggestion  or  hyperesthesia  of  ordinary-
touch,  do  produce  definite  and  unexplained  sensations,  among  which  are
.sensations  of  temperature,  apparently  not  depending  on  the  smoothness,
weight,  or  other  known  property  of  the  metals  used.  Thus  a  burning-
sensation  from  gold  seems  one  of  the  commonest  of  these  phenomena.

The  sensations  alleged  to  be  felt  from  magnets  fall  under  a  kindred
•category.  Professor  Pitres  in  a  recent  work  asserts  that  these  results
have  now  been  obtained  with  an  electro-magnet,  the  percipient  not
knowing  whether  the  current  was  turned  on  or  off ; — a  precaution  on
which  we  have  repeatedly  insisted  in  these  Proceedings.1  It  is  to  be
hoped  that  observers  in  other  countries  may  soon  be  fortunate  enough
to  find  subjects  equally  sensitive.

While  we  must  accept  the  accounts  of  these  experiments  with  due
reserve  as  to  possible  effects  of  suggestion  and  self-suggestion,  it  does
yet,  I  think,  become  yearly  more  probable  that  this  influence  of  metals
(ill-named  by  Pitres  and  others  liapliahjesia,  since  it  is  by  no  means
always  painful)  and  this  kindred  influence  of  magnets  do  actually  exist.
And  if  such  influence  exists,  it  would  appear  to  exist  for  the  most  part
subliminally ;  for  it  becomes  perceptible  by  the  superficial  consciousness
only  or  mainly  in  conjunction  with  other  phenomena  which  have  a
manifestly  subliminal  initiation.

It  seems,  then,  quite  possible  that  we  may  here  have  a  real  approach
to  certain  obscure  physical  laws  by  means  of  the  help  afforded  by
indications  arising  from  a  stratum  within  us  in  which  the  range  of  per-
ception is,  as  I  have  already  suggested,  enlarged  in  divers  unpredict-
able ways.

And  next  as  to  sensibility  to  pain.  In  what  relation  does  the  sub-
liminal self  .stand  to  this  prominent  characteristic  of  our  superficial
being  1 — a  characteristic  originally  acquired,  we  may  suppose,  for  pro-
tective purposes,  but  now  in  many  of  its  forms  useless,  and,  when  useless,
noxious,  and  even  dangerous  to  life.  We  know,  of  course,  that  sensi-
bility to  pain  is  one  of  the  functions  most  easily  modified  by  hypnotic
or  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  Painless  operations  "in  the  sleep"  formed
the  most  impressive  theme  of  the  early  mesmerists.  Operations  per-
formed in  the  waking  state,  but  rendered  painless  by  previous  sugges-
tion during  trance,  are  now  equally  familiar.  The  painless  accouche-
ments  of  winch  the  hypnotic  journals  now  report  a  pretty  constant  series
furnish  some  striking  examples  of  the  removal  of  pain  while  other
sensibilities  and  energies  persist  undisturbed. Self-suggestion,  too,

He  does  not,  however,  explicitly  state  that  all  danger  of  suggestion  from  the
.slight  click  which  accompanies  magnetisation  was  avoided.


The  Su bli m  in al  Consciousness.


323


will  with  many  persons  relieve  pain  in  a  marked  degi*ee,  as  in  the
so-called  "Faith-Cure."  Analgesia,  moreover,  seems  generally  to  be
present  in  spontaneous  ecstacy.  And  it  is  found  in  combination  with
hallucinations; — as  when  a  sudden  removal  of  pain  follows  upon  a  sense
of  phantasmal  touch  on  the  part  affected.

Thus  far  we  have  been  speaking  of  analgesia,  as  opposed  to
anaesthesia  ;  of  the  removal  of  the  sensibility  to  pain  but  not  of  the
sensibility  to  contact.  I  need  not  say  that  anaesthesia  also  is  common
in  trance  and  in  hysteria.

A  curious  point  here  arises.  We  may  lay  it  down  as  pretty
certain  that  in  all  cases  of  hysterical  anaesthesia  the  feeling  of  the
anaesthetic  limbs  is  not  absolutely  lost,  but  subsists  as  part  of  a  sub-
jacent chain  of  memory.  Professor  Janet's  book,  L'Automatisme
1'sychologique,  contains  abundant  illustration  of  this  fact,  which  is
quite  in  accordance  with  what  we  should  exj^ect.  But  is  the  pain
which  is  evaded  by  the  superficial  self  felt  by  the  subliminal  ?
The  answer  to  this  question  is  not  equally  clear.  On  the  one  hand,
in  some  trilling  experimental  instances,  the  pricks,  etc.,  inflicted
on  the  anaesthetic  hand  have  been  observed  and  complained  of  by
a  subjacent  consciousness.  Whether  they  are  really  felt,  however,  is
very  doubtful.  For  in  the  more  serious  cases — amputations,  accouche-
ments,  etc.,  there  is  often  no  sign  whatever  in  the  countenance  of
pain.  Occasionally,  indeed,  there  are  such  signs  ;  but  this  seems  to
be  an  indication  that  the  trance  is  not  deep.  Very  rarely  indeed
has  any  memory  of  serious  pain  been  afterwards  shown  by  any
subjacent  personality.  In  fact,  it  seems  plain  from  the  behaviour
of  the  organism  that  the  disturbance  caused  by  pain  has  been
veritably  and  profoundly  absent.  Delbceufs  well-known  experiment
with  the  two  burns  goes  to  prove  the  same  thing.  Making  two
symmetrical  burns  on  the  arrns  of  a  consenting  subject,  he  suggested
that  one  of  them,  which  he  specified,  would  give  no  pain.  The  result
wras  much  less  inflammation  in  that  than  in  the  equivalent  wound,  and
a  more  rapid  healing.  Similarly  when  chorea  is  cured  by  hypnotic
suggestion  the  ruorbid  movements  entirely  cease — they  do  not  reappear
in  a  trance-condition.  On  the  contrary,  they  disappear  first  from  the
trance-condition,  and  then  from  waking  life.

It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  pain  or  disturbance  is  not
merely  transferred  by  suggestion  to  a  deeper  stratum,  but  disappears
altogether.  And  this  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  when  morbid
appetites  (for  brandy,  opium,  etc.)  are  removed  by  suggestion  from  the
superficial  self,  we  do  not  find  any  trace  of  their  persistence  in  the
subliminal  self.  The  healing  suggestion  may  of  course  be  insufficient,
and  the  morbid  tastes  may  reappear ;  but  they  reappear  in  the  super-
ficial self,  as  before.


324


F.  W.  H.  Myers,


The  problem  thus  suggested  is  one  of  wide-reaching  importance.
To  what  extent,  we  may  ask,  is  the  result  of  hypnotic  suggestion
merely  translative  ?  and  to  what  extent  ablative  ?  Have  we  a  right  to
say  that  when  a  power  or  capacity  is  removed  from  the  supraliminal
self  it  is  merely  transferred  to  the  subliminal,  but  that  when  a  disease
or  an  incapacity  is  removed  from  the  supraliminal  self  it  is  abolished
altogether'?

It  seems  surprising  that  a  problem  of  such  interest  should  not,  so
far  as  I  can  discover,  have  been  previously  discussed,  or  even  clearly
stated.  But  in  fact  the  very  idea  that  functions  removed  by  suggestion
from  the  supraliminal  self  may  in  reality  be  transferred  rather  than
abolished  (an  idea  so  obvious  on  the  theory  of  personality  here  pre-
sented) is  a  comparatively  new  one,  as  is  shown  by  the  care  with  which
Professor  Janet  proves  this  point  in  relation  to  suggested  systematic
amesthesire,  in  his  often-cited  work.  The  elder  mesmerists  habitually
consider  any  function  or  phenomena  which  the  "passes"  have  inhibited
as  being  for  the  time  altogether  non-existent.  From  our  present  point
of  view  the  problem  widens  greatly  ;  and  ultimately  involves  the
question  of  the  relation  of  our  assumed  underlying  individuality  to  the
various  personalities  through  which  it  finds  partial  and  temporary
expression.

We  will  return  to  this  inquiry  when  we  discuss  the  relation  to  each
other  of  subliminal  and  supraliminal  memories.  But  in  the  first  place
we  must  continue  our  brief  enumeration  of  the  various  forms  which
the  subliminal  message  may  assume.

3.  Alongside  of  these  passive  automatisms — or  sensory  presentations
from  a  subliminal  region — with  which  we  have  thus  far  been  dealing,
there  runs  a  similar  series  of  active  automatisms — or  motor  impulses
similarly  initiated  below  the  level  of  ordinary  consciousness.  These
have  been  the  main  subject  of  my  previous  papers  ■  and  in  my  last
paper,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  52G-535,  several  of  the  more  important  were  de-
scribed in  a  connected  way.  I  need  not,  therefore,  return  to  them
here.  The  reader  will  remember  that  they  consist  largely  of  affections
of  the  active  processes  of  verbalisation — word-writing  and  word-utter-
ance— and  of  gestures,  such  as  table-tilting,  which  are  practically
equivalent  to  speech.  They  include  other  gestures  also,  which  some-
times claim,  as  we  shall  see,  to  be  imitative  of  the  bearing  of  deceased
persons.  And  these  motor  automatisms,  moreover,  even  when  isolated
and  transitory,  may  be  inhibitory  as  well  as  impulsive.  They  may
consist,  not  in  an  impulse  to  action,  but  in  an  obscurely-felt  restraining
power.1

In  hysterical  subjects,  also,  these  transferences  of  control  over  the


1  See  "  A  Record  of  Telepathic  and  other  Experiences,"  Vol.  VI.,  p.  353.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


325


motor  system  from  one  stratum  of  the  personality  to  another  form  a
familiar  and  interesting  symptom.

4.  Thus  far  the  subliminal  messages  which  I  have  been  describing
have  in  a  strict  sense  deserved  that  name.  They  have  been  intimations
of  one  sort  or  another  which  the  subliminal  self  has  initiated  and
which  the  supraliminal  self  has  received.  In  most  cases  these  message;?
have  been  automatisms,  active  or  passive,  which  have  in  no  wise
interfered  with  the  automatist's  habitual  stream  of  consciousness.  He
has  observed  them  or  left  them  unnoted,  as  he  pleased  ;  he  has  in  no
way  been  identified  with  them.  To  this  general  rule  dreams  have
formed  a  partial  exception.  The  dreamer  is  for  the  time  being  identified
with  his  dream  ;  only  in  rare  instances  can  he  watch  it  in  progress,
aware  that  he  is  dreaming.  And,  in  fact,  the  dream-messages  are
usually  lost  to  the  waking  self,  since  few  dreams  survive  the  departure
of  the  sleep  which  begat  them.  We  have  thus  in  sleep  a  first  familiar
example  of  that  shifting  of  the  strata  of  personality  which  we  shall
meet  with  under  so  many  aspects.  Sleep  may  pass  into  so-called  deeper
states — hypnotic  trance,  spontaneous  somnambulism,  etc.  And  here
again  some  truth  may  be  discerned  in  the  paradoxical  statement  some-
times put  forward  from  Nancy,  viz.,  that  the  hypnotic  trance  is  identical
with  ordinary  sleep.  Surely  not  identical ;  yet  it  is  true  that  sleep  and
not  hysteria  is  our  truest  spontaneous  analogy  to  hypnotic  trance.  The
slightest  of  all  changes  of  personality — sleep — exists,  as  it  were,  to  show
.us  the  possibility  of  such  changes,  and  not  only  their  possibility  but
their  advantage.  Or,  to  speak  with  more  accuracy,  though  with  seeming
paradox,  sleep  is  in  fact  our  earliest  or  primary  form  of  consciousness,
and  waking  life  is  a  secondary  form  of  consciousness  developed  to  meet
external  needs!

For  our  present  purpose,  however,  it  is  enough  to  point  out  that  at
this  very  early  stage  of  subliminal  messages  we  begin  to  see  the  possi-
bility that  the  subliminal  self  may  displace  the  supraliminal,  and  may
make  its  deliverances  without  caring,  so  to  say,  whether  the  supra-
liminal self  attends  to  them  or  no.  Hysteria  and  insanity  afford  our
next  examples,  this  time  of  a  morbid  displacement  of  the  empirical
self,  which  may  be  more  or  less  complete  according  to  the  degree  of
intensity  which  the  idces  delirantes,  the  sensory  hallucinations,  or  the
diseased  motor  impulses  have  obtained.

And  following  our  whole  series  .of  messages  as  above  described,  we
find  that  the  emergence  of  each  class  of  subliminal  message  is  apt  to
•carry  with  it  at  least  a  tendency  to  the  temporary  dominance  of  that
subliminal  phase  of  personality  from  which  the  message  in  question
springs.  Thus  even  momentary  visual  hallucinations  are  sometimes
accompanied  by  trance-like  states.  The  experimentally  induced  halluci-
nations of  crystal- vision  occasionally  lead  to  trance. And,  passing  over


320


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


other  sensory  automatisms,  we  find,  when  we  come  to  motor  automa-
tisms, that  the  automatist  has  often  a  vivid  sense  of  £>ossm£o?2 — of
being  taken  hold  of  by  some  alien  intelligence,  and  made  to  write  or  to
utter  unpremeditated  speech.

The  transition  from  the  control  of  the  empirical  to  the  control  of
the  subliminal  self  is  a  gradual  one,  and  may  be  effected  in  many
ways.  The  change  of  control  may  take  place  in  one  limb  at  a  time.
For  instance,  a  hand  may  first  write  automatically,  but  so  that  the
writing  can  be  checked  at  will;  and  may  then  go  on  to  write  irresistibly,
and  may  become,  first  analgesic,  and  then  anaesthetic,  as  control  over
it  is  more  and  more  fully  withdrawn  from  the  superficial  self.  And
when  this  withdrawal  has  reached  a  certain  stage  it  is  likely  that
trance  will  supervene  and  that  the  centre,  so  to  say,  of  the  crystallisa-
tion of  personality  will  shift  for  the  whole  organism.  It  will  be
desirable  to  deal  with  these  displacements  of  psychical  strata  at  greater
length  hereafter,  with  especial  reference  to  the  relation  of  the  new
memories  thus  created  to  that  empirical  memory  with  which  we
identify  ourselves  in  ordinary  life.  For  the  moment  I  am  merely
pointing  out  that  such  displacements  form  a  final  and  an  important
class  among  those  many  forms  of  subliminal  message  which  we  have
been  engaged  in  reviewing.

And  here  I  must  close  this  brief  introduction;  proceeding  in  a  second
chapter  to  the  most  important  part  of  my  task  ;  namely,  the  analysis  of
the  content  of  those  subliminal  messages  whose  mere  external  forms  I
have  thus  far  been  describing.  The  description  and  the  logical  arrange-
ment of  the  forms  of  these  messages  is,  I  think,  an  absolute  prerequisite
for  any  valid  analysis  of  their  confused  and  complex  content.  Up  to
this  time  I  have  seen  no  discussion  of  that  content,  whether  from  the
spiritualistic  or  from  the  materialistic  side,  which  has  not  seemed  to  me
to  suffer  for  lack  of  sufficient  area  of  comparison.  Neither  from  the
hysterical  ward  nor  from  the  Spiritist  seance-room  alone  shall  we  learn
enough  of  these  bewildering  phenomena  to  entitle  us  to  form  a  final
opinion  even  on  what  we  may  have  witnessed  with  our  own  eyes.
There  must  be  a  thicker  harvest  of  facts,  a  freer  communication
between  opposing  schools,  a  wider  basis  for  induction,  before  we  can  be
sure  of  explaining  rightly  even  the  apparently  simplest  of  subliminal
phenomena.  It  must  be  enough  if  some  notion  has  here  been  given  at
once  of  the  variety  and  of  the  strange  interrelations  of  the  phenomena
which  are  waiting  to  be  explained.

We  are  collecting,  so  to  say,  from  palimpsest  and  mummy-case
fragments  of  writing  in  many  languages  and  in  many  alphabets.  Some
of  these  alphabets  are  still  in  use.  Others  are  found  in  bilingual
inscriptions,  which  give  a  clue  to  their  significance.  Others  are  as  yet
absolutely  indecipherable. At  first  sight  our  ever-growing  collection


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


327


appears  a  meaningless  chaos.  But  we  are  sure  that  there  must  be  an
order  beneath  the  confusion,  since  from  that  order  our  modern
-world  has  grown.  And  enough  is  already  interpretable  to  encourage
us  to  further  effort ;  to  show  us  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  things
ancient  and  wonderful,  and  of  thoughts  other  than  those  we  know.


Chapter  II. — The  Mechanism  of  Suggestion.

I  endeavoured  in  the  first  chapter  to  indicate  a  point  of  view
from  which  a  great  number  of  scattered  and  apparently  disparate
phenomena  might  be  studied  in  true  and  fruitful  connection.  I
tried  to  show  that  however  different  the  act  of  dreaming  might  be,
for  instance,  from  the  act  of  automatic  writing,  or  a  hallucination  from
a  trance,  yet  all  these  had  something  of  common  origin  from  which
their  investigation  might  begin.  For  my  contention  is  that  such
phenomena  as  these  are  not  initiated  by  that  ordinary  or  empirical
chain  of  conscious  states  which  in  common  parlance  we  identify  with
ourselves,  but  rather  by  some  faculty  or  intelligence  which  lies  beneath
the  level  of  ordinary  consciousness,  and  forms  another  stratum— or
more  strata  than  one — of  that  total  individuality  of  each  of  us  where-
of all  that  we  wittingly  are  and  do  is  but  a  limited  and  incomplete
manifestation.  This  region  of  hidden  activity  I  have  called  the
subliminal  consciousness — or  even,  when  contrasting  it  with  supra-
liminal operation,  the  subliminal  self.  And  I  have  explained  that  by
these  names  I  wish  to  protest  against  the  undue  extension  of  such
phrases  as  "unconscious  cerebration,"  and  to  insist  that  we  have  as
good  ground  for  attributing  consciousness  to  some  at  least  of  these
subliminal  operations  in  ourselves  as  we  have  for  attributing  con-
sciousness to  the  intellectual  performances  of  our  neighbours.  Only
the  "  solipsist  " — that  inflexible  logician  who  refuses  to  ascribe
consciousness  to  any  man  in  the  world  except  himself — only  he
can  consistently  deny  consciousness  to  operations  tvitJiin  himself
which,  however  removed  from  his  ordinary  ken,  do  yet  equal  or
transcend  in  complexity  the  operations  with  which  he  identities  his
intellectual  being.

In  my  first  chapter  I  confined  myself  to  tracing  the  various  channels
by  which  the  "  messages  "  of  this  subliminal  self — the  indications,  that
is  to  say,  of  processes  going  on  beneath  the  threshold — are  brought
upwards  into  the  cognisance  of  the  empirical  self  ;  the  various  artifices
by  which  they  are  translated  into  its  familiar  tongue,  and  inscribed  in
its  ostensible  history.

When  the  language — so  to  call  it — of  these  subliminal  messages  is
undei'stood,  their  content  remains  to  study. And  in  fact  the  content  of


328


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


tliese  messages  (as  here  defined)  has  throughout  been  the  main  topic
with  which  these  Proceedings  have  been  concerned.  We  have  discussed
supernormal  phenomena  ;  we  have  dwelt  on  the  knowledge  which
reaches  us  otherwise  than  through  the  recognised  organs  of  sense.
And  it  is,  I  hold,  in  the  subliminal  region  that  such  phenomena  are
initiated,  and  that  such  knowledge  is  primarily  gained.

My  present  purpose  is  not,  of  course,  to  repeat  the  evidence
already  given,  but  to  present  it  in  a  somewhat  new  connection,  and  to
supplement  it  by  new  matter  at  several  points.  It  is  possible,  I  think,
to  frame  a  rough  provisional  scheme  or  synthesis  into  which  the
various  phenomena  thus  far  noted  may  naturally  fall,  when  they  are
considered  simply  as  messages  passing  from  one  stratum  to  another  of
the  percipient's  mind  ;  passing  upwards  from  a  subliminal  region  of
wider  knowledge  and  faculty  into  the  supraliminal  realm  of  ordinary
empirical  life.  It  will  be  our  business  to  analyse  the  contents  of  these
messages,  and  to  consider  what  kind  of  knowledge,  what  kind  of  faculty
may  be  therein  implied.

And  here  I  must  recur  for  convenience'  sake  to  a  metaphor  already
suggested.  I  shall  speak  of  our  habitual  range  of  consciousness  as  of  a
visible  spectrum,  bounded  at  one  end  by  organic  functions  which  we
cannot  by  any  effort  assume  under  conscious  control,  and  at  the  other
end  by  the  highest  efforts  of  reason  to  which  the  mind  can  attain.
Below  the  physiological  limit  of  the  spectrum  lie  a  vast  number  of
complex  processes  belonging  to  the  body's  nutrition  and  well-being :
processes  which  our  remote  ancestors  may  possibly  have  been  able  to
modify  at  will,  but  which  to  us  seem  so  entirely  withdrawn  from  our
sphere  of  volition  that  if  we  wish  to  alter  them  we  do  so  from  the  out-
side, so  to  say,  and  by  drugs  and  medicaments  ;  and  in  just  the  same
way,  whether  the  body  to  be  treated  is  our  own  or  our  neighbour's.

Near  to  or  above  the  psychological  limit  lie  those  "inspirations  of
genius"  which  the  reason  can  neither  explain  nor  renew,  and  all  that
unknown  realm  of  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  which  it  is  our  special
task  to  explore.  There  is,  indeed,  no  ground  for  supposing  that  this
spectrum  of  our  habitual  consciousness  is  in  any  sense  a  continuous
one.  It  probably  includes  only  those  rays  of  knowledge  to  which
natural  selection  has  forced  us  to  become,  and  to  continue,  sensitive,
and  it  may  therefore  be  studded  with  dark  lines — full  of  gaps  and
interruptions  where  some  form  of  perception  which  might  have  con-
ceivably existed  for  us  on  the  same  plane  as  our  recognised  senses  has
either  never  been  developed  (as  a  "magnetic  sense"),  or  has  declined
(like  the  sense  of  smell)  from  its  ancestral  potency.

And  again,  there  is  not  necessarily  any  deeply-lying  distinction
between  powers  which  I  have  classed  as  infra-physiological  and  powers
which  I  have  classed  as  supra-psychological, — beyond  the  respective


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


329


limits  of  ray  imaginary  spectrum.  For  aught  we  know,  these  powers
may  go  often  together,  and  an  intelligence  which  is  still  sensitive  to
perceptions  organic  and  in  common  life  forgotten  may  be  sensitive  also
to  perceptions  supernormal  and  in  common  life  unattained.

And,  indeed,  the  interrelation  of  these  unknown  powers  can  only
gradually  and  empirically  become  discernible  to  our  experiment  and
observation.  Our  supraliminal  consciousness  is  but  a  floating  island
upon  the  "  abysmal  deep  "  of  the  total  individuality  beneath  it ;  and  the
waves  which  wash  under  one  end  of  our  narrow  standing-place  are
continuous  with  the  waves  which  wash  under  the  other.

Nevertheless,  if  used  with  caution,  our  distinction  between  the
infra-physiological  and  the  supra-psychological  prolongations  of  the
spectrum  of  consciousness  may  be  of  service  in  grouping  into  two
or  three  main  masses  the  sporadic  phenomena  with  wdiich  we  have
to  deal.  Any  grouping,  indeed,  which  suggests  even  partial  truths
will  here  be  of  service ;  so  incoherent  are  the  separate  observations
which  are  still  every  month  recorded  as  noteworthy  ;  so  unexplained
by  psychologist  or  physician  are  even  those  observations  which  have
been  so  often  repeated  as  no  longer  to  be  worth  recording.

It  will  be  convenient  to  deal  first  with  the  infra-physiological
phenomena ;  and  among  these  it  will  be  convenient  to  begin  with  such
phenomena  as  the  practice  of  hypnotism  is  rendering  tolerably  familiar.

The  time  has  certainly  not  arrived  when  either  psychology  or
physiology  can  offer  a  logical  or  complete  conspectus  of  these  new
facts.  Every  year — almost  every  month — has  its  fresh  surprises,  and
each  group  of  experiments  still  depends  so  inexplicably  on  the  personal
qualities  both  of  operator  and  of  subject  that  it  would  be  absurd  to  argue
as  though  we  had  all  the  phenomena  before  us.  For  my  present  pur-
pose three  rough  divisions  will  suffice.  I  will  take  first  what  may  be  called
the  great  dissociative  triumph  of  hypnotism,  namely,  the  inhibition
of  pain  under  conditions  of  nerve  and  tissue  with  which  under  ordinary
circumstances  pain  seems  inevitably  connected.  Secondly,  I  shall
take  what  I  may  call  the  associative  or  synthetic  triumphs  of  hypnotism,,
namely,  the  pi'oduction  and  control  of  organic  processes  which  no  effort
of  the  ordinary  man's  can  set  going,  or  in  any  way  influence.  And
thirdly,  I  will  take  the  intellectual  or  moral  achievements  of  hypnotism ;
achievements  based,  no  doubt,  upon  physiological  changes  resembling
the  changes  involved  in  the  two  previous  classes  of  effect,  but  which,
nevertheless,  must  needs  have  for  us  a  deeper  significance,  and  suggest
problems  still  more  profound.

1.  The  suppression  of  pain,  by  whatever  means,  is  in  itself  so
welcome  a  result  that  men  have  not  been  apt  to  look  closely  into
its  psychological  concomitants.  Yet  it  is  obvious  that  psychologically
the  whole  interest  lies  in  the  question  whether  pain  is  suppressed

z


330


F.  W.  II.  Myers.


along  with  sensation  of  every  kind,  or  whether  other  modes  of  sensation
persist,  and  only  pain  is  inhibited.  Our  ancestors,  one  may  say,  had
already  a  rough  practical  knowledge  of  this  distinction.  They  knew
that  if  you  felled  a  man  with  a  club,  and  stunned  him,  he  would  not
for  some  time  feel  the  pain  of  the  blow.  And  they  knew  also  that  if
you  ran  pins  into  particular  points  on  a  witch's  body,  the  witch,
although  perfectly  awake,  would  feel  no  smart.

Now,  the  second  of  these  practical  discoveries,  although  often
derided  by  enlightened  persons,  and  called  "  the  meanest  of  paganish
and  popish  superstitions,"  was  in  reality  of  much  greater  importance
than  the  first.  By  stunning  your  enemy  you  only  proved  that  vital
functions  could  continue  unimpaired  while  the  brain's  action  was  so
far  disturbed  that  all  consciousness  was  for  the  time  abolished.  By
pricking  the  witch  in  her  so-called  "  marks  " — we  should  now  call  them
analgesic  zones  or  patches — you  proved  that  pain  was  a  dissociable
accident  of  organic  injury,  that  other  sensations  might  persist  and  only
the  sensation  of  pain  be  in  some  way  inhibited.1  The  world  grew  more
humane,  and  the  poor  women  who  had  been  tortured  under  the
meaningless  name  of  witches  were  pitied  or  laughed  at  under  the
almost  equally  meaningless  name  of  hysterics.  Physicians,  indeed,
were  still  loth  to  draw  any  lessons  from  phenomena  so  morbid  and  so
"  fraud ulescent."  But  whenever  Science  resolutely  attacks  any  amalgam,
however  ^cunningly  compounded,  of  charlatanism  and  fact,  the  time
must  soon  come  when  "the  bowling  beats  the  batting,"  when  tests  are
devised  and  rules  of  evidence  laid  down  which  the  half-educated  impostor
cannot  meet.  So  it  has  been  with  hysteria,  which  to  the  psychologist
at  any  rate  has  now  become  more  instructive  than  any  other  group  of
physical  derangements.  And  the  analgesia  or  insensitiveness  to  pain
which  runs  wild  in  hysteria  is  now  being  directed  into  useful  channels
by  that  power  which  we  shall  have  to  discuss  as  "hypnotic  suggestion."
The  inhibition  of  pain,  indeed,  is  now  practised,  so  to  say,  no  longer  as
a  laboratory  experiment,  but  on  a  commercial  scale ;  and  while  the
rearguard  of  the  medical  confraternity  still  deny  its  possibility,  the
pioneers  are  showing  to  the  world  many  of  the  patients,  say,  of
the  Hopital  Civil  at  Nancy  traversing  the  phases  of  their  various
organic  maladies  with  scarcely  more  than  malaise,  and  laying  down
their  nervous  sufferings  in  the  out-patients'  room  as  easily  as  their
cloaks  and  hats.

My  object  here,  however,  is  not  to  discuss  either  the  obvious
advantages  or  the  possible  dangers  of  this  suppression  of  the  ancient

1  Local  analgesia  occurs  also  in  some  rare  cases  in  diseases  affecting  certain  tracts
of  the  spinal  cord.  I  am  assuming  in  the  text,  for  simplicity's  sake,  that  with  some
witches,  as  with  some  hysterics,  these  patches  were  analgesic  only>  and  not
ivn:esthetic.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


331


curse.  Rather  I  am  concerned  to  show  that  some  intelligence  is
involved  in  a  suppression  thus  achieved — achieved  not  as  narcotics
■achieve  it,  by  a  wholesale  deadening  of  consciousness  of  all  kinds,  but
by  the  selection  and  inhibition  from  among  all  the  percipient's  possible
sensations  of  precisely  those  which  will  be  in  any  way  disagreeable  to
him.  It  is  not  the  mere  an?esthetisation  of  some  particular  segment  of
the  body  or  particular  group  of  nerve-endings — such  as  cocaine,  for  in-
stance, might  produce — but  a  removal  also  of  a  number  of  concomitant
feelings  of  nausea,  exhaustion,  anxiety,  not  always  directly  dependent  on
the  principal  pain,  but  needing,  one  would  say,  to  be  first  subjectively
■distinguished  as  disagreeable  before  they  are  picked  out  for  inhibition.

And  note  that  this  freedom  from  pain  is  achieved  without  either
deadening  or  dislocating  the  general  nervous  system  ;  with  no  approach
■either  to  coma  or  to  hysteria.  Even  the  so-called  hypnotic  trance  is  no
longer  a  necessity  in  these  experiments.  With  some  subjects,  and  in  long
operations,  it  may  be  needful  to  induce  it;  but  many  minor  deliverances
from  pain  are  effected  either  by  simple  suggestion  in  the  waking  state
or  by  post-hypnotic  suggestions  given  in  the  trance,  but  destined  to
fulfil  themselves  after  the  awakening.  And  if  trance  there  be,  that
trance  is  often  no  mere  lethargy,  but  a  state  fully  as  alert  and  vivid  as
waking  life  ;  as,  for  instance,  in  a  case  recorded  by  Professor  Delbceuf
and  Dr.  Fraipont,  where  a  woman  laughed  and  joked  during  the  crisis
•of  a  severe  confinement.1

In  view  of  cases  like  this  it  is  plain  that  hypnotic  analgesia  is  by  no
means  a  mere  ordinary  narcotic — a  fresh  specimen  of  the  methods
already  familiar  for  checking  pain  by  checking  all  conscious  cerebration.
It  is  a  new  departure  ;  it  is  the  first  successful  attempt  at  dissociating
forms  of  sensation  which  throughout  the  known  history  of  the  human
organism  have  almost  invariably  been  found  to  exist  together.

Now  if  this  achievement  were  due  to  the  ingenuity  of  some
physician,  we  should  surely  hail  him  as  the  master  mind  of  the  age.
Must  we  not  still  admit  that  there  is  intelligence,  although  that
intelligence  works  unseen?  Let  all  due  honour,  indeed,  be  given  to
the  hypnotist,  who  directs  that  hidden  knowledge  towards  the  relief  tf
human  pain.  But  he  directs  the  knowledge  ;  he  does  not  himself  create
or  even  .possess  it.  Professor  Bernheim's  command,  "  Feel  pain  no
more  ! "  is  no  more  a  scientific  instruction  how  not  to  feel  pain  than  the

1  Revue  clc  I'Hypnotisme,  April,  1891.  This  carefully  recorded  case  presents  several
significant  points  ;  e.g.,  the  increased  power  of  the  entranced  patient  to  accelerate  the
efforts  of  nature  (pp.  291,290)  ;  the  recollection  in  a  subsequent  hypnotic  state  (p.293)  ;
the  influence  of  suggestion  in  producing  the  secretion  of  milk  at  a  fixed  hour  (p.  294\
In  this  same  subject  a  cyst  on  a  tendon  at  the  wrist,  which  had  always  reappeared
after  crushing,  was  crushed  in  the  hypnotic  state  with  the  suggestion  that  it  should
not  reappear,  and  appeared  no  more.

z  2


332


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


prophet's  "  Wash  in  Jordan  and  be  clean  '  "  was  a  pharmacopoeal
prescription  for  leprosy.

I  have  dealt  thus  far  with  this  new  faculty  of  dissociation  in  its
simplest  and  most  massive  form.  But  the  mere  production  of  general
analgesia — the  mere  severance  of  sensations  of  pain  from  sensations  of
contact,  temperature,  &c, — is  by  no  means  the  only  dissociation  which
hypnotic  suggestion  can  effect.  The  "  negative  hallucinations  "  or
"  system atised  ansestheshe,"  which  are  so  familiar  in  hypnotic  experi-
ment, are  in  fact  segregations  of  particular  groups  of  sensory  impres-
sions, which  are  then  transferred  from  the  supraliminal  to  the  hypnotic
self.  You  may  say  to  a  good  hypnotic  subject :  "  After  you  are
awakened  you  will  not  see  Mr.  A.,  nor  hear  his  voice,  nor  feel
his  touch " ;  and  in  fact  the  subject,  awakened  and  apparently
normal,  will  be  irresponsive  to  those  special  stimuli — will  seem
and  in  a  sense  will  be  absolutely  incapable  of  seeing,  hearing,  or
feeling  Mr.  A.  But  nevertheless — and  this  result,  which  experiment
has  in  many  cases  actually  detected,  is,  from  our  standpoint,  probable
enough — the  sights,  sounds,  and  touches  which  are  unperceived  by
the  subject's  supraliminal  are  habitually  j^erceived  by  his  subliminal
consciousness  ;  and  in  fact,  he  must  somehow  or  other  hear  and  dis-
tinguish Mr.  A. 's  voice  in  order  to  know  when  not  to  hear  him, — feel  and
distinguish  Mr.  A.'s  touches  in  order  to  know  what  touches  are  not  to
be  felt.  This  observation,  which  Professor  Janet,  for  example,  has
worked  out  with  great  delicacy,  strikingly  shows  the  inadequacy  of  the
old  views  which  saw  nothing  in  hypnotism  except  a  narrowing  of  pre-
existing powers,  a  focussing  of  the  intelligence  on  such  ideas  as  the
hypnotiser  might  choose  to  suggest.  "The  hypnotiser,"  such  men  would
say,  "lixes  the  subject's  attention  on  himself;  and  the  subject  is  con-
sequently incapable  of  seeing  or  hearing  Mr.  A."  Now  this  explana-
tion applies  well  enough  to  cases  of  fascination,  where  the  operator
keeps  the  subject's  eyes  fixed  on  his  own  and  the  subject's  whole  mind
intent  on  watching  his  movements.  But  in  the  more  delicate  experi-
ment above  described  the  case  is  entirely  different.  The  subject  pays
no  special  attention  to  the  hypnotiser,  and  may  be  superficially  occupied
on  anything  you  please.  But  meantime  his  subliminal  consciousness
'  is  attending  to  its  special  task  ;  it  is  singling  out  and  keeping  apart  the
sights,  sounds,  touches  which  proceed  from  Mr  A.;  it  is  adding  to  the
perceptivities  of  ordinary  vigilance  this  special  watchfulness  of  its  own.

2.  This  segregation  of  a  group  of  sensations  which  I  have  just
been  describing  may  be  classed  with  equal  justice  as  a  dissociative  or
as  an  associative  act.  The  group  of  sensations  is  severed  from  the
main  supraliminal  current,  and  thus  far  the  act  is  dissociative.  But
the  group  itself  has  somehow  to  be  formed  ;  and  when  we  begin  to  see
complexity  in  the  group,  strangeness  in  the  synergy  which  it  involves,


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


333


then  we  may  fitly  begin  to  dwell  on  the  associative  side  of  the  achieve-
ment. I  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  inhibition  of  all  the  pain
consequent  on  an  operation  is  in  reality  a  complicated  associative  pro-
cess, and  involves  the  singling  out  and  fitting  together  of  a  great
number  of  sensations  which  have  only  the  subjective  bond  of  being-
disagreeable  to  the  subject, — with  a  view  of  then  inhibiting  this  whole
complex  of  sensations,  and  leaving  the  supraliminal  consciousness  in
perfect  ease.  The  cases  on  which  I  am  now  about  to  dwell  are  funda-
mentally akin  to  that  previous  type  ;  but  they  have  this  difference,
that  the  groups  of  sensations  which  suggestion  calls  into  being  are
formed  to  be  felt,  not  to  be  unfelt — are  themselves  no  longer  the  absent
or  deleted  background,  but  the  prominent  and  conspicuous  phenomenon.

And  here  let  us  pause  for  a  while — in  accordance  with  a  plan  which
I  have  already  suggested — and  consider  whether  we  have  any  sort  of
guide  as  to  what  we  may  expect  in  this  new  direction.  This  is  exactly
the  moment  for  such  a  review.  For  as  we  gradually  gain  power  over
our  organisms  we  may  expect  to  observe  various  vital  phenomena
passing  through  three  stages.  First,  they  will  occur  spontaneously.
Next,  they  will  be  empirically  produced.  And  lastly  they  will  be  pro-
duced scientifically  ;  produced,  that  is  to  say,  with  real  knowledge  of
the  conditions  on  which  they  depend.  And  with  regard  to  these
phenomena  of  nervous  association,  of  organic  process,  presently  to  be
■described,  we  are  now  just  entering  the  empirical  stage;  the  stage  at
which  we  can  sometimes  set  the  machinery  going,  but  have  no  notion
how  it  works.  It  is  therefore  important  to  take  stock,  so  to  say,  of  the
whole  range  of  spontaneous  phenomena  corresponding  to  the  phenomena
which  we  are  endeavouring  to  produce.  We  shall  thus  learn  how  far
we  are  likely  to  be  able  to  go,  and  we  may  get  hints  as  to  the  quickest
line  of  pi'Ogress.

What  we  have  to  consider,  then,  are  the  instances  of  the  so-called
"  action  of  the  mind  on  the  body  "  which  have  attracted  notice  before
hypnotic  suggestion  was  known.  Now,  of  course,  there  is  no  real  line
of  delimitation  between  those  actions  of  the  mind  on  the  body  which
have  been  considered  wonderful  and  those  which  have  been  taken  as
matters  of  course.  That  I  should  be  able  to  hold  my  pen  because  I
wish  to  hold  it  is  ultimately  just  as  great  a  mystery  as  that  I  should
develop  stigmata  from  meditating  on  the  Crucifixion.  But  we  must  let
this  pass  ;  and  even  as  we  have  already  taken  for  granted  a  habitual
spectrum  of  consciousness,  so  also  we  must  take  for  granted  a  habitual
range  of  will,  within  which  our  mental  impressions  are  accustomed
to  produce  effects — mainly  but  not  solely  motor  effects — upon  our
organism.  The  cases  now  to  be  cited  are  those  where  mental
impressions  have  produced  effects,  either  voluntary,  but  outside  of
the  usual  range  of  volition,  or  involuntary  (so  far  at  least  as  the


334


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


supraliminal  will  goes),  and  extending  below  the  physiological  limit  of
the  conscious  spectrum, — involving  organic  processes  which  we  cannot
wittingly  initiate  or  control.1

Let  us  take  first  those  small  extensions  of  ordinary  power  over  the
organism  which  some  men  can  achieve  by  the  exercise  of  waking  will-
Next,  let  us  take  the  unspecialised  effects  of  emotion  upon  the  organism.
And  thirdly,  let  us  take  the  specialised  effects — the  cases  where
unintended  external  suggestion  or  involuntary  self-suggestion  has
produced  results  no  longer  vague  and  massive,  but  corresponding  witli
something  like  intelligent  or  purposive  exactness  to  the  nature  of  the
shock.

(1)  The  extensions  of  man's  waking  power — his  power  in  "  cold
blood  "  as  we  say — over  his  organism  are  not  as  yet  very  numerous.

We  have  some  instances  of  advanced  control  over  the  digestive  system,
"voluntary  rumination, "and  acceleration  of  peristaltic  movements.  We
have  Colonel  Townsend,  with  his  historic  power  of  cmickening  and  slow-
ing the  heart's  action.  We  have  alleged  instances  of  voluntary  con-
traction and  dilatation  of  the  pupil.  And  we  have  a  few  dubious-
cases  like  that  of  the  great  preacher  Irving,  who  is  said  to  have  checked
choleraic  symptoms  by  supreme  effort  of  will — to  have  stayed  the
advancing  army  of  microbes  (si  credere  dignum  est)  by  the  intensity
of  the  tonic  stimulus  given  through  the  brain  to  his  own  heart  or
secretions.

The  list  of  man's  conquests  over  his  organism,  as  old  text-books
give  it,  hardly  goes  further  than  this.  I  shall  have  to  show  further  on
how  far  this  list  is  from  exhausting  the  possibilities  of  the  case.

(2)  Let  us  go  on  to  the  unspecialised  results  of  emotion,  by  which
I  mean  the  effects  which  are  determined  in  one  direction  or  another
rather  by  the  antecedent  conditions  of  the  organism  than  by  the
specific  character  of  the  emotion  itself.  The  emotion,  of  course,  will  pro-
duce different  classes  of  effects  according  as  it  is  of  a  tonic  or  of  a
depressing  character  ;  but  the  direction  winch  the  exaltation  or
(oftener)  the  depression  takes  will  follow  the  lines  of  least  resistance  or
of  readiest  overflow.  Tonic  mental  impressions  have  improved  the
general  health  in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  and  have  caused  gout  and
rheumatism  to  disappear. Depressing  shocks  have  affected  almost

1  Most  of  the  cases  here  briefly  mentioned  will  be  found  in  Dr.  Hack  Tuke's  useful
work  on  The  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body.  (London:  Churchill;  2nd  Edit.,
1884.)  The  cases  cited  in  that  book  are,  some  of  them,  admittedly  remote  and  ill-
recorded  ;  but  few  will  dispute  the  general  truth  of  Dr.  Hack  Tuke's  evidence.  I
may  add  that  my  principle  of  arrangement  is  quite  different  from  his,  and  that  he  is
in  no  way  committed  to  the  use  here  made  of  his  facts.  A  collection  of  more  recent
cases  will  be  found  in  a  tract  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince  on  "Association  Neuroses,"
reprinted  from  the  Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease  (Boston,  U.S.A.),  May,
1891.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


335


every  organ  in  the  body.  Nausea,  purgation,  sweating,  shivering,  arrest
of  milk,  whitening  of  hair,  are  familiar  results.  We  also  find  cases  of
deafness,  blindness,  aphasia,  spasmodic  asthma,  and  jaundice  thus
induced.  Chorea,  epilepsy,  rupture  of  pulmonary  vessels,  tetanoid
convulsions,  hemiplegia,  idiocy,  may  also  follow,  and  syncope  or  apoplexy
may  kill  on  the  spot.  These  varied  effects  show  how  vast  and  vague  is
the  power  which  the  highest  cortical  centres  possess  over  the  organism.

(3)  Our  third  class  has  to  consist  of  results  specialised,  not  by  the
previous  condition  of  the  organism,  but  by  the  nature  of  the  exciting-
cause  itself.  These  are  partly  suggestions  from  without,  partly  self-
suggestions, — not  of  a  purposive,  but  of  a  morbid  or  arbitrary  kind.
The  most  important  of  these,  if  fully  established,  would  certainly  be
those  definite  influences  which  are  perhaps  exerted  on  the  embryo
through  the  mother's  organism.1  But  there  are  also  sympathetic  pains
or  marks  which  sometimes  follow  upon  the  sight  of  suffering  or  accident
— as  ecchymosis  from  seeing  a  friend  bled ;  swelling  of  the  lips  from
seeing  a  child  press  its  knife  between  its  lips ;  or  a  red  mark  on  the
ankle  from  seeing  a  gate  likely  to  fall  against  a  child.2

Such,  too,  are  the  cases  of  uncontrolled  or  morbid  imitativeness ;
beginning  with  imitative  yawning,  and  including  imitative  spasms
and  paralyses,  on  the  type  of  croup,  epilepsy,  paraplegia,  &c.

In  these  cases  there  is  a  strong  suggestion  from  without,  morbidly
accepted  by  the  organism.  In  other  cases  the  external  stimulus  may
be  very  slight,  but  the  patient's  self-suggestion  gives  it  some  peculiar
power.  Thus  Dr.  Morton  Prince  cites  a  case  where  a  lady  believed —
had  in  fact  effectively  suggested  to  herself — that  the  mere  presence  of  a

1  Few  subjects  stand  more  in  need  of  statistical  and  experimental  investigation
than  this  question  as  to  the  degree  of  definiteness  of  the  influence  which  the  mother's
sensations  and  emotions  can  exercise  upon  the  unborn  child.  See  Hack  Tuke,  op.  cit. ,
Vol.  II.,  pp.  08,  09,  and  cases  in  Liebeault,  Lc  Som.rn.eil  et  les  etats  analogues,  and  in
the  British  Medical  Journal,  1880,  Vol.  I.  In  the  Revue  cle  VHypnotismc,  August,
1801,  p.  52,  Dr.  Liebeault  describes  a  case  where  Madame  L.  received  so  great  a  shock
from  suddenly  meeting  a  woman  with  port-wine  mark  over  half  the  face  that  durin
the  whole  of  a  pregnancy  which  was  then  beginning  (although  as  yet  unknown  to
herself)  she  suffered  from  a  distressing  hallucination  which  represented  many  of  the
strangers  whom  she  met  as  disfigured  in  this  special  way.  She  had,  however,  no
brooding  or  anxiety  about  her  child.  When  the  child  was  born  the  hallucination
disappeared,  but  the  child  had  a  port-wine  mark  over  half  the  face.  Dr.  Liebeault
inferred  that  this  woman  would  prove  easily  suggestible  ;  and  this  was  the  case.  He
proposes  that  physicians  should  suggest  to  pregnant  women  marks  of  a  definite  but
harmless  kind,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  direct  experimental  proof  of  a  pre-natal
influence,  which,  if  it  exists,  might  obviously  be  utilised  for  the  child's  good.  And
indeed  some  striking  analogies  between  these  alleged  cases  cf  maternal  influence  on
the  unborn  child  and  the  now  known  results  of  suggestion  after  birth  furnish  a  strong,
though  indirect,  argument  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  embryo  may  receive
definite  and  localised,  as  well  as  massive  and  pervading  impressions  from  shocks
undergone  by  the  mother's  organism.

2  Hack  Tuke,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  35.


33G


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


rose  in  the  room  brought  on  violent  catarrh  and  weeping.  And  in
fact,  whenever  she  smelt  a  rose  these  symptoms  did  occur.  Her
physician  at  last  bethought  him  of  a  remedy  which  matched  the
disease.  He  suddenly  presented  to  her  an  artificial  rose,  which  she
took  to  be  real.  The  distressing  symptoms  followed  at  once.  But
when  he  showed  her  its  innocence  of  scent  or  pollen  the  mental  shock
restored,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  sanity  of  her  subliminal  nasal  self.  The
self-suggestion  was  broken,  and  she  could  thenceforth  smell  roses  as
safely  as  her  neighbours.

The  interest  in  this  case  lies  in  the  strength,  the  definiteness,  and
the  isolation  of  the  "  association-neurosis"  or  morbid  self-suggestion.
In  hysteria,  I  need  not  say,  fresh  association-neuroses  may  be  formed
every  day,  and  the  whole  range  of  action  seems  dominated  by  that
random  self-suggestiveness  which  I  have  already  described  as  a  disease
of  the  hypnotic  self.

Of  course,  spontaneous  self-suggestions  may  be  beneficial  as  well  as
noxious.  The  patient's  notion  that  particular  things  will  do  him  good
may  be  as  efficacious  as  his  notion  that  particular  things  will  do  him
harm.  And  before  hypnotic  suggestion  was  heard  of,  the  adroit
physician  had  taken  advantage  of  this  "power  of  the  imagination"  to
effect  many  a  cure.  No  drug  has  produced  such  striking  and  various
effects  as  a  bread  pill.  The  empty  chloroform  bottle  has  produced  an
insensibility  as  deep  as  chloroform  itself  can  engender.

But  here  we  are  passing  insensibly  into  the  "  suggestive  medicine  "
of  the  modern  hypnotic  physician.  Nor  is  this  matter  for  surprise.
For  if  hypnotism  be,  as  I  maintain,  a  name  for  a  group  of  empirical
practices  by  means  of  which  we  can  manage  to  get  hold  of  subliminal
faculty,  we  must  expect  that  some  of  those  practices  will  fit  themselves
on  to  simple  rules  already  known.  And  in  fact  these  spontaneous
manifestations  of  subliminal  associative  power  operating  below  the
physiological  limit  of  our  habitual  spectrum  of  consciousness  repeat
themselves  throughout  all  their  range  in  our  hypnotic  experiments,
with  the  difference  that  they  are  now  no  longer  random  but  purposive,
and  can  be  ingeniously  directed  into  subtler  channels  than  hazard  or
disease  could  shape.

This  is  not  the  place  for  any  complete  enumeration  of  the  modes  of
intimate  control  over  the  organism  with  which  hypnotic  suggestion  is
yearly  making  us  more  familiar.  I  will  but  cite  instances  enough  to
show  how  varied,  complex,  and  penetrating  that  authority  has  already
shown  itself  t<>  be.

Professor  Beaunis  and  Dr.  Krafft-Ebing  have  slowed  the  pulse  by
hypnotic  suggestion;1  and  these  savants,  as  well  as  Professor  Bernheim,

1  Beaimis,  Lc  Somvambulisme  Provoque ;  and  see,  for  list  of  articles  on  vesication
liy  suggestion,  Professor  Pitres'  UHystiric  ct  UHypnolisme,  Vol.  II.,  p.  17'J.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


337


M.  Focachon  and  others,  have  pi-oducecl  redness  and  blisters  by
the  same  means.  Drs.  Mabille,  Ramadier,  Bourru,  Burot,  have  pro-
duced localised  hypersemia,  epistaxis,  ecchymosis.1  Dr.  Forel  and
others  have  restored  arrested  secretions  at  a  precisely  fixed  hour.'-'
Dr.  Krafft-Ebing  has  produced  a  rise  of  temperature  at  moments  fixed
by  himself, — a  rise,  for  instance,  from  37deg.  to  38.5deg.  C.3  Burot  has
lowered  the  temperature  of  a  hand  as  much  as  lOdeg.  C.  by  suggestion.4
He  supposes  that  the  mechanism  employed  is  the  constriction  of  the
brachial  artery,  beneath  the  biceps.  "How  can  it  be,"  he  asks,  "  that
when  one  merely  says  to  the  subject,  'your  hand  will  become  cold,'  the
vaso-motor  nervous  system  answers  by  constricting  the  artery  to  the
degree  necessary  to  achieve  the  result  desired  1  C'est  ce  qui  depasse
noire  imagination."

Two  or  three  instances  may  be  given  more  at  length.

The  following  is  an  abstract  of  Dr.  Levillain's  account  of  an  experi-
ment performed  by  Professor  Charcot  before  a  large  class  at  the
Salpetriere.5

Some  few  hysterical  patients,  it  appears,  suffer  from  a  swelling  with
local  cyanosis  and  low  surface  temperature,  styled  by  Professor  Charcot
"  blue  oedema."  Professor  Charcot,  indeed,  claims  to  have  been  the  first  to
describe,  in  June,  1889,  this  exceedingly  rare  hysterical  abnormality.  It
then  occurred  to  him  to  try  whether  he  could  produce  the  condition  by
hypnotic  suggestion.  "  On  April  26th,  1890,  a  hysterical  woman  was
deeply  hypnotised,  and  it  was  suggested  to  her  that  her  right  hand  and  wrist
would  swell  and  become  cyanosed.  After  she  was  woke  this  suggestion
gradually  realised  itself,  and  in  four  days  the  right  hand  was  in  the  condition
of  that  of  the  patients  who  had  had  spontaneous  attacks.  There  was  a
smooth  surface,  hardly  any  pitting  on  pressure,  but  much  dull-blue  mottled
swelling  (which  had  obliged  her  to  discontinue  wearing  her  rings)  and
anesthesia.  A  bright  red  patch  was  produced  by  touch.  .  .  .  M.  Charcot
re-hypnotised  the  patient,  and  assured  her  that  her  hand  was  quite  natural
again,  helping  his  suggestion  with  a  little  massage.  After  a  quarter  of  an
hour  the  anaesthesia,  venous  colour,  and  swelling  were  gone."

The  subliminal  consciousness,  it  will  be  seen,  was  able  to  turn  out

1  See,  for  a  brief  account,  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  December,  18S7,  p.  183.
-  Revue  clc  VHypnotisme,  April,  1889,  p.  29S.

3  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  March,  1890,  p.  278.  Compare  the  inexplicable  rises  of
temperature  in  Dr.  Teale's  case,  Lancet,  1875,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  340,  343,  457,  Vol.  II.,
p.  107,  and  1881,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  797,  842.  This  apparent  isolability  of  temperature-
changes,  generally  so  delicately  indicative  of  conditions  of  the  entire  organism,  is  a
phenomenon  quite  as  noteworthy  as  the  dissociability  of  pain  from  organic  injury.

4  Revue  de  VHypnotisiue,  January,  1890,  p.  197.

5 Revue  de  VHypnotisinc,  June,  1890,  p.  353,  Proyres  Med.,  October  11th  and  18th,
1890,  and  see  Practitioner,  January,  1891,  p.  50.  It  would  be  well  to  be  able  to  state
explicitly  in  experiments  of  this  class  that  the  consent  of  the  subject  had  teen
previously  obtained.


338


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


to  order  the  most  complicated  novelty  in  the  way  of  hysterical  freaks
of  circulation.  Let  us  turn  to  an  equally  marked  disturbance  of  the
inflammatory  type,  the  production,  namely,  of  suppurating  blisters  by
the  word  of  command.  This  phenomenon  has  a  peculiar  interest,  since,
from  the  accident  of  a  strong  emotional  association  with  the  idea  of
stigmata  on  hands  and  feet,  this  special  organic  effect  has  been  antici-
pated by  the  introverted  broodings  of  a  line  of  mystics,  from  S.  Francis
of  Assisi  to  Louise  Lateau.  A  strange  confirmation  of  ancient  legend!
A  singular  testimony  to  the  intensity  of  the  meditations  of  that  great
saint  who

Nel  crudo  sasso  intra  Tevere  ed  Arno
Da  Cristo  prese  l'ultimo  sigillo,
Che  le  sue  membra  due  anni  portarno.

I  will  give  one  or  two  of  the  most  striking  and  least  known
examples  of  this  suggested  vesication.

The  following  experiment  was  performed  by  Dr.  J.  Bybalkin,  in
presence  of  his  colleagues,  at  the  Hopital  Marie,  at  St.  Petersburg.1
Dr.  Rybalkin  had  previously  experimented  in  the  same  way  with  his
subject.

The  subject  was  Macar  K.,  a  house-painter,  aged  16,  hysterical  and
almost  wholly  anaesthetic.  He  was  hypnotised  at  8.30  a.m.,  and  told  :  "When
you  awake,  you  will  be  cold  ;  you  will  go  and  warm  yourself  at  the  stove,  and
you  will  burn  your  forearm  on  the  line  which  I  have  traced  out.  This  will
hurt  you  ;  a  redness  will  appear  on  your  arm  ;  it  will  swell  ;  there  will  bo
blisters."  On  being  awakened,  the  patient  obeyed  the  suggestion.  He  even
uttered  a  cry  of  pain  at  the  moment  when  he  touched  the  door  of  the  stove,
— which  had  not  been  lighted.

Some  minutes  later,  a  redness,  without  swelling,  could  be  seen  at  the
place  indicated,  and  the  patient  complained  of  sharp  pain  on  its  being
touched.  A  bandage  was  put  on  his  arm,  and  he  went  to  bed,  under  our
eyes.

At  the  close  of  our  visit,  at  11.30,  we  observed  a  considerable  swelling,
accompanied  with  redness  and  with  a  papulous  erythema  at  the  place  of  the
burn.  A  mere  touch  anywhere  within  four  centimetres  of  the  burn  caused
severe  pain.  The  surgeon,  Dr.  Pratine,  placed  a  bandage  on  the  forearm,
which  extended  up  to  the  superior  third  of  the  arm.

When  the  dressing  was  removed  at  10  next  morning  we  saw  at  the  place
of  the  burn  two  blisters,  one  of  the  size  of  a  nut  and  the  other  of  a  pea,
and  a  number  of  small  blisters.  Around  this  tract  the  skin  was  red  and
sensitive.  Before  the  experiment  this  region  had  been  aniesthetic.  At
3  p.m.  the  blisters  met  in  one  large  blister,  as  is  seen  in  the  photographic
plate  herewith.  In  the  evening  the  blister,  which  was  full  of  a  semi-
transparent  yellowish  fluid,  burst,  and  a  scab  formed  on  the  raw  skin.  A
week  later  ordinary  sensibility  returned  to  the  scar,  and  after  a  fortnight
there  was  only  a  red  mark  in  the  place  of  the  burn.


1  Jtcvuc  de  VHypnotisjne,  June,  1800,  p.  301.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


339


Still  more  striking  is  a  case  of  cruciform  marks, — not  hitherto
published,  though  printed  in  the  S.  P.  R.  Journal  for  May,  1887,  pp.
100-5,  with  comments  by  the  late  Edmund  Gurney,  which  express  for
the  first  time,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  very  kernel  of  the  problem
which  these  strangely  intellectual  modifications  of  the  organism  involve.

(M. — 376  )

From  Dr.  Biggs,  of  Lima.  We  owe  the  record  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.
R.  Roxburgh,  of  1,  Victoria-buildings,  Weston-super-Mare,  to  whose  brother
the  account  was  addressed.

October  18th,  1885.

Dear  Mr.  Roxburgh, — In  reply  to  your  favour  of  1st  ult.,  asking  me  to
give  you  a  statement  in  regard  to  the  cross  which  you  saw  on  Maria's  arm,
and.  which  I  caused  to  appear  there  hy  acting  on  her  mind  while  in  magnetic
sleep,  it  was  done  in  this  way  :  — I  put  her  into  a  magnetic  or  mesmeric
sleep  by  laying  my  hand  on  her  head  for  about  a  minute.  I  then  said :  "Maria,
do  you  hear  me  ?  "  Answer:  "Yes."  "  Are  you  thoroughly  magnetised  ? "
Answer  :  "  Yes."  "  Now  listen  attentively  ;  a  cross  is  going  to  appear  on  your
right  arm,  and  remain  there  until  I  tell  it  to  go  away.  Here  is  where  it  is  to
appear."  (I  then  described  a  cross  with  my  forefinger  on  the  inner  side  of  her
right  forearm.)  "  Have  you  understood  what  T  have  said  to  you  ?  "  Answer  :
"Yes."  I  then  awakened  her  by  two  or  three  up-passes  ;  for  the  next  two
or  three  days  she  seemed  sulky  and  out  of  sorts,  would  now  and  then  rub
her  right  arm,  over  the  part  where  the  cross  was  to  appear  ;  when  asked
why  she  did  this,  said  there  was  an  itching  and  she  could  not  help  scratching
the  place,  although  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  that  could  cause  the
irritation.  I  then  magnetised  her  as  before,  and  asked  :  "  Do  you  recollect
what  I  told  you  the  other  day  about  the  cross  that  is  to  appear  on  your  arm  1 "
Answer  :  "Yes."  "  Will  it  appear  ?"  Answer :  "Yes."  "  When?"  Answer :  "In
a  few  days."  "  Well,  it  must  come  out  in  three  days  ;  do  you  understand  ?  "
Answer  :  "  Yes."  By  the  time  appointed  a  dusky-red  cross,  four  or  five  inches
long  and  about  three  inches  wide,  made  its  appearance.  At  first  we  pretended
not  to  notice  this,  although  we  could  often  see  the  lower  part  of  it  when  her
sleeve  was  partly  rolled  up  in  some  of  her  duties  in  and  about  the  house  ;
she  was  our  housemaid.  It  was  only  at  intervals,  when  thrown  into  the
magnetic  sleep,  that  we  could  get  a  full  view  of  the  cross  ;  never  a  word  had
been  said  to  her  about  the  cross  in  her  waking  moments,  for  some  time,
several  weeks,  until  one  day  I  pretended  to  have  caught  sight  of  the  strange
mark  on  her  arm,  and  said  :  "  Why,  Maria,  what  is  the  matter  with  your
arm  ?  have  you  hurt  it  ?  What  mark  is  this  %  Let  me  see  ;  pull  up  your
sleeve."  She  did  so  with  a  slightly  sulky,  ashamed  air.  "  Why,  it  looks  like  a
cross ;  where  did  you  get  this  1"  "I  don't  know,  sir  !  "  " How  long  has  this  been
on  your  arm?"  "More  than  a  month,  sir."  "Have  you  felt  anything  ?  "  "JSTo,
sir  ;  only  at  one  time  I  had  a  great  deal  of  itching  and  burning,  and  a  few
days  afterwards  this  mark  came  out  on  my  arm."  After  this  we  frequently
spoke  to  Maria  about  the  cross,  and  when  requested  to  she  would  roll  up  her
sleeve  and  show  it  to  visitors,  although  she  always  seemed  reluctant  to  do
so. Many  months  afterwards  she  left  our  service,  and  in  about  two  weeks


2iO


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


.she  made  her  appearance  at  my  office  in  town,  asking  me  to  remove  the  cross
from  her  arm  as  it  attracted  the  notice  of  the  family  with  whom  she  was
now  living,  and  she  was  much  annoyed  at  the  many  questions  asked  her.  I
magnetised  her,  and  then  told  her  that  the  cross  would  disappear  in  a  few
■days,  and  she  would  be  no  more  troubled  with  it.  I  saw  her  a  few  days
.afterwards  at  Salto  ;  the  cross  had  disappeared.

Another  case,  which  I  recollect  having  told  you  of  :  this  was  the  first  of
•this  kind  of  experiment  that  I  tried  ;  it  was  in  Santa  Barbara,  California.  I
was  staying  there  in  1879  with  a  friend,  Mr.  G. ,  a  long-resident  chemist  in
that  town.  His  wife  had  a  kind  of  half  servant  and  half  companion,  a  girl  of
.about  18,  who  complained  to  me  one  day  of  a  pain  through  her  chest.  With-
.out  her  knowing  what  I  intended  to  do,  I  tried  magnetism  ;  she  fell  into  a
■deep  magnetic  sleep  in  a  few  minutes.  With  this  subject  I  tried  many  inter-
.esting  experiments  which  I  will  pass  over.  One  day  I  magnetised  her  as  usual
and  told  her  in  a  whisper  (I  had  found  her  to  be  more  susceptible  this  way
than  when  I  spoke  aloud  in  my  usual  voice) :  "You  will  have  a  red  cross
appear  on  the  upper  part  of  your  chest,  only  on  every  Friday.  In  the  course
of  some  time,  the  words  Sancta  above  the  cross,  and  Cruris  underneath  it  will
.appear  also  ;  at  same  time  a  little  blood  will  come  from  the  cross."  In  my  vest
pocket  I  had  a  cross  of  rock  crystal.  I  opened  the  top  button  of  her  dress,
and  placed  this  cross  on  the  upper  part  of  the  manubrium,  a  point  she  could
not  see  unless  by  aid  of  a  looking-glass,  saying  to  her :  ' '  This  is  the  spot  where
the  cross  will  appear."  This  was  on  a  Tuesday.  I  asked  Mrs.  G  to  watch  the
girl  and  tell  me  if  anything  seemed  to  ail  her.  Next  day  Mrs.  G.  told  me
she  had  seen  the  girl  now  and  again  jDut  her  left  wrist  over  the  top  part  of
her  chest,  over  the  dress  ;  this  was  frequently  repeated,  as  if  she  felt  some
tickling,  or  slight  irritation  about  the  part,  but  not  otherwise  noticed  ;  she
.seemed  to  carry  her  hand  up  now  and  then  unconsciously.  When  Friday
came,  I  said,  after  breakfast,  "Come,  let  me  magnetise  you  a  little  ;  you
have  not  had  a  dose  for  several  days."  She  was  always  willing
to  be  magnetised,  as  she  always  expressed  herself  as  feeling  very
much  rested  and  comfortable  afterwards.  In  a  few  minutes  she  was
in  a  deep  sleep.  I  unbuttoned  the  top  part  of  her  dress,  and  there,  to  my
complete  and  utter  astonishment,  was  a  pink  cross,  exactly  over  the  place
where  I  had  put  the  one  of  crystal.  It  appeared  every  Friday,  and  was  in-
visible on  all  other  days.  This  was  seen  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  G.,  and  my  old
friend  and  colleague,  Dr.  B.,  who  had  become  much  interested  in  my  experi-
ments in  magnetism,  and  often  suggested  the  class  of  experiments  he  wished
to  see  tried.  About  six  weeks  after  the  cross  first  appeared  I  had  occasion  to
take  a  trip  to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  Before  going,  I  magnetised  the  girl,
told  her  that  the  cross  would  keep  on  showing  itself  every  Friday  for  about
four  months.  I  intended  my  trip  to  the  Islands  to  last  about  three
months.  I  did  this  to  save  the  girl  from  the  infliction  of  this  mark  so
strangely  appearing  perhaps  for  a  lifetime,  in  case  anything  might  happen  to
me  and  prevent  me  from  seeing  her  again.  I  also  asked  Dr.  B.  and  Mr.  G.  to
write  me  by  every  mail  to  Honolulu,  and  tell  me  if  the  cross  kept  on  appear-
ing every  Friday,  and  to  be  very  careful  to  note  any  change  should  any  take
place,  such  as  the  surging  of  blood  or  any  appearance  of  the  words  "  Sancta
Crucis." I  was  rather  curious  to  know  if  distance  between  us,  the  girl  and


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


341


myself,  over  2,000  miles,  made  .any  difference  in  the  apparition  of  the  cross.
While  I  was  at  the  Sandwich  Islands  I  received  two  letters  from  Mr.  G.  and
one  from  Dr.  B.,  by  three  different  mails,  each  telling  me  that  the  cross  kept
on  making  its  appearance  as  usual  ;  blood  had  been  noticed  once,  and  also
part  of  the  letter  S  above  the  cross,  nothing  more.  I  returned  in  a  little
less  than  three  months.  The  cross  still  made  its  appearance  every  Friday,
and  did  so  for  about  a  month  more,  but  getting  paler  and  paler  until  it
became  invisible,  as  nearly  as  possible  four  months  from  the  time  I  left  for
the  Sandwich  Islands.  The  above-mentioned  young  woman  was  a  native
Californian,  of  Spanish  parentage,  about  18  years  of  age,  of  tolerably  good
health,  parents  and  grandparents  alive.  She  was  of  fair  natural  intelligence,
but  utterly  ignorant  and  uneducated.

The  third  case  was  thus  :  A  lady  asked  me  to  try  the  power  of
magnetism  in  reducing  the  size  of  a  large  goitre  which  troubled  her.  Her
neck  was  42  centimetres  in  circumference.  Within  a  few  days  it  began  to
decrease  :  it  gradually  came  down  to  374  centimetres,  and  it  gave  her  no
further  annoyance.  This  lady  felt  the  magnetic  power  in  a  very  limited  and
singular  way  ;  her  eyelids  would  close  in  a  few  minutes,  and  she  could  not
open  them  until  demagnetised,  but  she  retained  the  use  of  all  her  faculties
perfectly,  so  that  while  I  was  magnetising  her,  and  occasionally  manipulating
the  goitre,  we  usually  kept  up  quite  a  lively  conversation  on  different
subjects,  she  being  a  highly  educated  and  clever  woman.  She  speaks  several
languages  with  great  fluency.  One  day  I  conceived  the  idea  of  making  a
cross  appear  on  the  goitre,  on  which  I  was  manipulating.  I  took  the  little
crystal  cross  out  of  my  vest  pocket,  and  gently  placed  it  on  the  goitre  for  a
few  seconds,  desiring  as  strongly  as  I  could  that  a  corresponding  mark  should
appear  there  as  soon  as  possible.  I  am  sure  she  did  not  perceive  my  doing
this,  or  she  would  most  certainly  have  made  some  inquiries.  She  was
conversing  all  the  time  on  some  indifferent  subject.  I  usually  went  to  see  her
every  day  at  a  certain  hour  ;  the  magnetising  and  manipulation  usually
occupied  about  20  minutes.  Every  day  I  anxiously  looked  for  an  appearance
of  the  cross  for  a  week  or  so,  and  then  made  up  my  mind  that  the  experiment
had  failed,  until  one  day,  about  six  weeks  afterwards,  she  received  me  in
rather  an  excited  manner,  and  taking  hold  of  both  my  hands,  she  said,  "  Did
you  ever  wish  that  any  mark  should  appear  on  any  part  of  my  body  1  and
what  was  it  ?  "  I  said,  much  astonished  myself,  "Yes,  nearly  two  months
ago  I  wished  that  a  cross  should  appear  on  the  goitre."  She  immediately
removed  her  collar,  and  said,  "  There  it  is."  Sure  enough  there  was  a  pink
cross.  She  then  told  me  that  the  evening  before  her  dressmaker  had  come
in  to  try  a  new  dress  on,  and  exclaimed,  "  What  a  curious  mark  is  on  your
neck  ? "  She  immediately  went  to  the  looking-glass  and  saw  it,  and
afterwards  showed  it  to  her  husband.  This  mark  only  lasted  two  or  three
days,  gradually  fading  away.

In  the  case  of  the  Californian  girl,  it  might  be  asked  why  I  conceived  the
idea  of  making  a  cross  appear  only  every  Friday.  It  was  because  I  once  saw
in  San  Francisco,  in  1873,  a  girl  who  every  Friday  became  cataleptic,  in  a
position  as  if  she  were  nailed  to  the  cross.  She  had  marks  of  the  nails  on
hands  and  feet,  blood  oozing  from  them.  The  medical' man  in  attendance
said  there  was  the  wound  in  her  side  also  bleeding. This  girl  was  a  proteyie


342


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


of  the  Catholic  Archbishop  Alemario  of  San  Francisco.  She  was  very  fervent
at  her  prayers,  and  strict  in  all  her  church  observances.

The  San  Francisco  papers  of  the  beginning  of  1873  had  a  great  deal  to  say
about  her.  These  cases  have  not  been  infrequent.  I  then  supposed  it  to  be
a  case  of  ouio-magnetisation,  and  my  experiments  since  have  proved  it  to
have  been  so,  to  my  own  satisfaction  at  least.  I  once  sent  word  to  the
Archbishop  that  I  thought  I  could  explain  to  him  the  how  and  the  wherefore
of  these  wonderful  occurrences  ;  all  could  be  accounted  for  through  the  power
of  animal  magnetism.  His  answer  (by  a  mutual  friend)  was  "  that  magnetism
was  of  the  devil,  and  he  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  subject."  So  the
poor  girl  was  first  called  a  saint  full  of  miracles,  and  afterwards  condemned
as  an  imjuostor  and  expelled,  if  not  from  the  Church,  at  least  from  the  kind
protection  of  the  Archbishop.  M.  H.  Biggs,  M.D.

After  discussing  the  possible  mechanism  by  fvhich  the  tingling  of  a
ringer,  when  we  think  steadily  of  one  finger,  may  be  brought  about,
Mr.  Gurney  goes  on  to  say  : —

"  But  difficulties  increase  as  we  go  on.  However  the  finger  was  affected
by  the  idea  of  it,  the  idea  of  it  was  at  any  rate  a  distinct  thing — an  image
which  could  be  clearly  detached  in  the  mind.  This  cannot  be  said  of  all  the
parts  of  the  body  which  have  been  affected  by  suggestion  ;  for  instance,  a
small  area  on  the  arm  or  neck  is  not,  like  a  finger,  clearly  detachable  in
thought.  I  am  not  aware  that  redness  has  ever  been  produced  in  such  an
area  by  internal  causes,  except  under  the  influence  of  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  I
have  myself  seen  a  red  patch  so  produced  in  a  vei*y  few  minutes  on  a  '  subject '
of  Dr.  Liebeault.  And  another  and  still  longer  step  has  to  be  made  when  we
come  to  actual  inflammation  and  vesication,  which  involve  a  metabolism  of
tissue  over  and  above  mere  local  erethism,  and  not  to  be  accounted  for  merely
by  the  dilatation  of  the  small  arteries.  What  can  we  suppose  to  be  the  complete
physiological  history  of  such  a  tissue-change,  produced  under  the  influence
of  an  idea,  and  presumably  therefore  by  efferent  nervous  impulses  ?  This
is  a  question  which  probably  no  physiologist  would  profess  satisfactorily  to
answer.

"The  results  above  recorded  (if  not  produced  by  rubbing,  and  apart  from
the  telepathic  feature  in  the  last  case)  seem  to  involve  an  equally  long  step  in
another  direction.  If  it  was  hard  to  conceive  the  correspondence  of  a  patch
of  minutely  localised  erethism  with  the  idea  of  the  locality,  what  are  we  to
say  when  the  patch  corresponds  with  the  idea  to  the  extent  of  being
cruciform  ?  It  cannot  be  pronounced  impossible  that  the  cerebral  area
involved  in  the  idea  of  a  cross  should  itself  be  cruciform  ;  since  the  same
elements  are  no  doubt  involved  as  where  a  cross  is  visibly  presented,  and  in
the  case  of  a  visible  cross  the  configuration  with  which  the  fibres  start  from
the  stimulated  part  of  the  retina  maybe  preserved  at  their  central  terminus.
But  no  one  has  ever  supposed  that  a  nervous  impulse  transmitted  from
ideational  tracts  to  lower  centres,  and  thence  to  the  periphery,  was  conveyed
by  fibres  which  retained  precisely  similar  spatial  relations,  so  that  the  course
of  the  discharge,  wherever  cut  aci'oss,  would  present  a  similar  section.  Pass-
ing inwards  from  the  periphery  along  the  track  of  nervous  disturbance,  should
we  find  cruciformity  of  area  all  the  way  ? And  if  not,  where  does  it  stop  1


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


343


And  if  it  stops  anywhere,  what  is  the  connection  between  the  cruciform
effect  at  the  periphery,  and  the  cause  (even  if  we  assume  that  to  be  cruci-
form) in  the  brain  ?  In  this  case,  moreover,  there  would  be  considerable
difficulty  in  applying  the  hypothesis  of  a  hallucination  of  pain  which  sets  up
the  appropriate  physical  condition.  For  it  seems  doubtful  whether  a  cruci-
form pain  can  be  truly  imagined,  at  any  rate  as  occupying  a  small  area  of  the
body.  I  do  not  suggest  these  difficulties  as  insuperable  objections  to  the
hypothesis  of  a  direct  effect ;  I  believe  that  hypnotic  facts  carry  us  considerably
bsyond  any  physiological  explanations  that  are  yet  possible.  But  phrases
about  '  the  influence  of  the  mind  on  the  body  '  are  so  often  loosely  adduced
as  though  they  were  themselves  the  explanation  needed,  that  it  is  as  well  to
keep  the  real  obscurity  of  the  physiological  problems  in  view."

There  is  yet  one  more  case  to  which  I  must  allude  before  I  pass
on  ; — a  case  in  which  the  intellectual  character,  as  I  have  termed  it,  of  the
organic  process  which  responds  to  suggestion  is  illustrated  in  a  striking
and  complex  way.  Mdlle.  lima  S.,  a  subject  observed  by  Drs.
Jendrassik  and  von  Krafft-Ebing1  (mainly  at  Gratz),  was  ultimately
cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion  (or  so  Dr.  Krafft-Ebing  claims  in  1888)
of  a  life-long  tendency  to  hysteria  and  melancholy,  such  as  had  driven
her  grandfather,  father,  brother,  and  sister  to  suicide.  She  was  there-
fore on  the  whole  a  great  gainer ;  but  her  extreme  susceptibility  to
blistering  by  suggestion  amounted  to  a  real  risk  in  the  absence  of
careful  guardianship.  Once  at  least  she  was  much  injured  and  offended
by  the  culpable  act  of  a  medical  student  who  laid  a  pair  of  scissors
upon  her  chest,  telling  her  that  they  were  red-hot. — and  thus  created  a
serious  wound,  which  took  two  months  to  heal.  Krafft-Ebing  made  a
humane  variation  on  this  risky  experiment.  Like  Dr.  Biggs  in  our  last
case,  he  ordered  the  production  of  red  ]K(tches  of  definite  shapes, —
which  were  to  be  formed  without  itching,  pain,  or  inflammation.  The
history  of  the  process  thus  set  up  is  a  curious  one.  The  organism  had
to  perform,  so  to  say,  a  novel  feat ;  which  took  a  great  deal  longer  than
the  rough  and  ready  process  of  vesication.  From  February  24th  to
May  3rd,  1888,  a  livid  red  hyperasmic  surface  corresponding  to  the
letter  K,  was  slowly  and  painlessly  developing  itself  on  a  selected
and  protected  area  between  the  shoulder-blades.  It  seems  doubtful
whether  this  performance  was  not  altogether  a  new  one, — whether  any
precisely  similar  trophic  changes  have  ever  occurred  spontaneously.
The  support  thus  given  to  Dr.  Biggs'  narrative  is  most  striking  ;  and
one  lesson  of  the  experiments  of  both  physicians  undoubtedly  is  that
science  need  not  be  the  loser  by  a  careful  adherence  to  the  rules  of
ordinary  humanity.

But  it  is  the  incident  next  to  be  cited  which  speaks  the  moat

1  "  An  Experimental  Study  in  Hypnotism,"  by  Dr.  R.  von  Krafft-Ebing,  trans-
lated by  C.  Q.  Chaddock,  M.D-,  New  York,  1889.


344


F.  IF.  H.  Myers.


strongly  for  the  educated  character — so  to  say — of  the  intelligence-
presiding  over  these  organic  suggestions.

Mdlle.  lima  S.  was  permanently  anaesthetic  on  the  right  side; — and
that  side  was  therefore,  in  my  view,  likely  to  be  more  immediately  subject
to  subliminal  control.  At  any  rate  it  appeared  that  when  any  object  was-
pressed  on  her  left  side,  and  suggested  as  hot,  no  mark  followed  at  the
place  of  contact ;  but  a  corresponding  brand  appeared,  symmetrically
and  reversed,  upon  the  right  side.  For  example,  an  initial  letter,  K,
was  pressed  by  Dr.  Jendrassik  on  her  left  shoulder.  In  a  few  hours,
a  Kdike  blister,  "with  quite  sharp  outlines,"  came  on  the  corresponding
spot  on  the  right  side.  But  note  that  the  new  K  (the  letters  are-
figured  in  Krafft-Ebing's  work)  was  by  no  means  an  exact  reproduction
of  the  original  one.  It  was  of  about  the  same  size,  but  of  a  different
type ; — in  fact  a  capital  K  in  another  fierson's  handwriting.  Just  as  in
Dr.  Biggs'  cases  it  was  the  idea  of  cruciformity  which  was  induced  by
suggestion,  so  here  it  was  the  idea  of  K-shape  ;  and  insomuch  as  this
suggested  mark  corresponded  to  an  intellectual  idea,  that  idea  under-
went some  idiosyncratic  modification  in  the  subject's  subliminal  intel-
ligence, and  the  resultant  mark,  though  identical  in  significance,  was
different  in  contour.1  And  here  again  we  have  confirmation  of  one
of  the  most  curious  of  Dr.  Biggs'  phenomena, — the  tardy  appearance-
of  part  of  an  S — an  attempt  at  SANCTA — as  the  result  of  suggestion,

1  Conscious  that  the  reporter  of  experiments  such  as  these  would  even  a  few  years
ago  have  been  derided  as  the  victim  of  vulgar  imposture,  Krafft-Ebing  fortifies  himself
with  the  often-quoted  words  of  Arago:  He  who  uses  the  word  impossible  outside  the
sphere  of  pure  mathematics,  is  at  least  careless.  As  soon  as  one  is  concerned  with
the  living  organism,  caution  becomes  a  duty."  Agreed  ;  but  has  our  eminent  specialist
himself  consistently  adhered  to  this  prudent  dictum  ?  "  We  did  not,"  he  says  (p.  120),
'  concern  ourselves  further  "  (after  a  brief  trial  of  the  alleged  influence  of  medicaments
at  a  distance)  "with  experiments  as  to  a  possible  transposition  of  sense.since  until  now
it  has  shown  itself  as  error  and  deception,  and  is  opposed  to  the  elementary  laws  of
physiology.  We  also  put  clairvoyance  aside,  since  it  contradicts  one  of  the  first  prin-
ciples of  empirical  psychology,  and  an  increase  of  the  patient's  mental  functions  was  in
no  way  observed.  The  single  experiment  with  a  suggestion  mcntale  for  the  divining  of
the  experimenter's  thought  was  a  fiasco,  i.e.,  had  to  be  given  up  ;  for  the  patient
fatigued  herself  painfully,  and  was  in  danger  of  having  a  hystero-epileptic  attack.  The
supposition  that  in  all  cases  where  mental  suggestion  is  said  to  have  succeeded,  a  self-
deception  through  unintentional  suggestions  on  the  part  of  the  experimenter  played  a
rOle,  seems  to  me  authorised."

Is  it  surprising  that  rare  and  delicate  phenomena  are  not  discovered  when  they
are  looked  for— or  looked  away  from — in  such  a  fashion  as  this  ?  And  is  it  surprising
that  sweeping  ' '  suppositions, "  supposed  to  be  ' '  authorised  "  on  the  strength  of  a  single
experiment  not  instantly  successful,  should  fail  to  impress  those  whose  aim  it  is  to
apply  to  this  special  group  of  experiments  precisely  the  same  care  and  diligence  which
are  even  now  but  barely  rescuing  Dr.  Krafft-Ebing's  own  experiments  from  the
undiscriminating  scorn  which  so  lately  ranked  stigmata  as  even  a  more  staring  im-
posture than  telepathy  ?  Let  each  climber  take  time  at  least  to  settle  himself  com-
fortably on  the  top  of  his  own  tree,  before  he  proclaims  to  mankind  that  in  all  the
forest  there  is  no  tree  higher.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


345


tmaided  by  the  physical  contact  of  any  S-shaped  object,  but  in  its  due
position  above  the  suggested  cross.1

No  further  instances  are  needed  to  show  the  strangeness,  the  pro-
fundity of  the  influence  over  organic  processes  to  which  hypnotic
suggestion  introduces  us.  It  is  an  influence  at  first  sight  bewildering,
almost  incredible.  One  might  as  well  believe — one  will  probably  next  be
called  upon  to  believe — that  warts  can  be  charmed  away  by  saying  the
Lord's  Prayer  backwards.  The  alleged  powers  seem  equally  mysterious
in  their  source  and  in  their  direction.  How  can  they  originally  have
•come  into  beino-? And  who  or  what  is  it  that  wields  them  now?

Let  us  take  these  two  questions  separately  ;  and  let  us  begin  by
considering  the  possible  source  or  origin  of  this  control  over  intimate
organic  processes.  When  we  find  any  faculty  existing  in  man  or  other
animals  we  are  wont  to  ask  ourselves  from  what  ancestors  this  faculty
has  been  inherited — in  response  to  what  external  needs  it  has  been
maintained  and  developed  1  Can  we,  then,  find  anything  in  our  ancestry
which  suggests  to  us  these  internal  powers  of  modifying  circulation,
quickening  cell-proliferation,  altering  trophic  processes  in  unknown
ways  1

Any  analogies  to  which  we  can  appeal  are  certainly  vague  and
remote.  Yet  we  can  point  to  the  general  fact  that  in  man  and  the
higher  animals  an  increase  in  the  power  of  modifying  the  action  of  the
organism  as  a  whole  has  apparently  been  purchased  by  a  decrease  in
the  power  of  modifying  its  internal  parts  or  constituent  elements.  The
self-shaping  powers  of  the  amceba,  the  self-regenerating  powers  of  the
worm  or  crab,  die  gradually  away  into  the  comparative  fixity  of  the
organism  of  the  higher  mammalia.

But  it  is  possible  that  this  fixity  is  more  apparent  than  real.  We
may  regard  the  human  organism  as  an  aggregation  of  primitive  uni-
cellular organisms,  which  have  divided  their  functions,  and  complicated
their  union,  in  response  to  the  demands  of  the  environment,  and  along
.such  lines  of  evolution  as  were  possible  to  the  original  germ. It  is

1  As  this  paper  passes  through  the  press,  a  remarkable  case  of  stigmatisation  is
reported  from  America;  as  yet  only  in  a  newspaper  [Courier- Journal,  Louisville,
December  7th,  1891),  but  on  the  authority  of  Dr.  M.  F.  Coomes  and  of  several  other
physicians.  According  to  Dr.  Coomes'  account,  a  certain  Mrs.  Stuckenborg  seems  to
have  bled  from  spontaneously  formed  stigmata  on  every  Friday  since  the  beginning
of  June.  There  are  wounds  on  the  hands  and  feet,  a  wound  on  the  side  (from  whence.
Issues  a  watery  exudation  tinged  with  blood),  a  cross  on  the  forehead,  a  large  cross
and  a  heart  on  the  chest,  and  the  letters  I.H.S.  on  the  right  shoulder.  From  three  to
six  every  Friday  there  is  profound  trance,  with  superficial  anaesthesia,  but  much
convulsive  movement  and  manifestation  of  inward  pain.  If  we  may  rely  on  Dr.
Coomes'  account,  which  seems  a  careful  one,  simulation  is  quite  out  of  the  question.
The  patient  seems  to  desire  neither  money  nor  notoriety.  She  is  a  devout  Catholic,
but  does  not  talk  about  religion  ;  and  complains  much  of  the  pain  and  exhaustion  due
to  the  wounds  and  the  convulsive  trance.

2  A


34G


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


possible,  too,  that  all  these  processes — beginning  with  the  amoeboid
movements  of  the  primitive  cell — were  accompanied  by  a  capacity  of
retaining  the  impress  of  previous  excitations — a  rudimentary  memory
which  at  first  constituted  all  the  consciousness  which  our  lowly  ances-
tors possessed.  And  further—  may  we  not  suggest  1 — as  evolution  went
on  and  more  complex  operations  were  developed,  while  the  primitive
processes  of  cell-change  became  stereotyped  by  long  heredity,  the  memory
which  represented  these  earlier  changes  sank  to  a  lower^isychical
depth ; — became  subliminal,  and  could  no  longer  be  summoned  by
voluntary  effort  into  the  supraliminal  sequence  of  conscious  states.
How  do  we  know  that  any  psychical  acquisition  is  ever  wholly  lost  ?
or  even  that  a  memory  is  the  weaker  because  it  has  sunk  out  of
voluntary  control  ?  It  may  be  possible  by  appropriate  artifices  to  recall
jmmeval  memories,  and  to  set  in  motion  any  physiological  process
which  could  at  any  moment  of  our  ancestral  history  have  been  pur-
posively,  however  blindly,  performed.  Speculations  such  as  these,
however,  can  only  be  justified  by  the  extreme  difficulty  of  the  problem
before  us;  and  I  am  glad  to  quote  a  passage  which  shows  that  one  of
the  most  philosophical  of  hyjmotists  has  been  led  to  a  somewhat  similar
hypothesis.  Professor  Delbceuf,  as  will  be  seen,  is  in  no  way  committed
to  the  conception  of  a  subliminal  self ;  and  his  conjecture  may  prove
the  more  impressive,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  forced  into  the  service  of  any
wider  theory.

Phenomena,  says  Professor  Delbceuf,1  such  as  those  which  Louise
Lateau  presented,  and  experiments  like  those  of  M.  Focachon  (the  produc-
tion of  a  blister  by  mental  impression)  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  action  of
the  moral  on  the  physical  may  be  almost  if  not  quite  equal  to  that  of  the
physical  on  the  moral.  Thence  it  follows  that  the  idea  of  physical  mischief
may  produce  mischief  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  idea  of  absence  of
mischief  may  bring  about,  or  at  least  favour,  a  cure.  It  is  this  deduction
which  was  verified  by  the  experiment  of  the  two  burns.  [It  was  suggested  that
one  of  two  symmetrical  burns  would  not  give  pain  or  become  inflamed.  The
wound  thus  specified  gave  no  pain,  was  not  inflamed,  and  healed  before  the
other.]

How  are  we  to  explain  the  mechanism  of  this  inverse  action  of  the  moral
on  the  physical  ?  If  we  set  aside  the  theory  of  a  mesmeric  fluid,  we  are
forced  to  admit  that  the  influence  of  the  will  is  more  extended  than  we
used  to  suppose.  It  must  be  able  to  act  not  oidy  on  the  reflexes,  but  on  the
vaso-motor  system,  on  the  unstriped  muscles,  on  the  apparatus  of  secretion,
&c.  If  a  contrary  opinion  has  till  now  prevailed,  this  is  because  observa-
tion has  been  exclusively  directed  to  the  normal  exercise  of  the  will.  In
ordinary  life,  in  fact,  our  attention  is  mainly  concentrated  on  the  external
world,  the  principal  source  of  our  pleasures  and  our  pains,  and  our  will  is
devoted  to  perfecting  our  means  of  attack  and  defence. The  care  of  the

1 1  quote  his  latest  statement,  taken  from  a  tract  published  in  1890  :  Be  VEtendue
d»  V  Action  Curative  de  VHypnotismc,  p.  6.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


347


vegetative  life  has  been  handed  over  by  the  will  to  nervous  mechanisms
which  have  learnt  to  regulate  themselves,  and  which  in  general  fulfil  their
task  to  perfection.  Thus  the  rapid  changes  of  external  phenomena  mask
the  regularity  of  internal  phenomena,  which  accomplish  themselves  habitually
without  our  knowledge.

But  in  the  hypnotic  state  the  soul  is  in  part  drawn  aside  from  the  life  of
relation,  while  at  the  same  time  it  preserves  its  activity  and  power.  It  can
then,  under  the  impulsion  of  the  hypnotiser,  employ  those  powers  to  regulate
movements  which  have  become  irregular,  or  to  repair  injuries  to  the
organism.  In  a  word,  hypnotism  does  not  depress,  but  exalts  the  will,  by
permitting  it  to  concentrate  itself  entirely  upon  the  point  where  disorder  is
threatened.

Let  us  assume,  then,  for  argument's  sake,  that  the  fact  that  the
cellular  structure  of  some  of  our  lowly  ancestors  admitted  of  centrally-
initiated  modifications  which  our  own  structure  under  ordinary
circumstances  no  longer  allows  may  have  been  an  indispensable
prerequisite  of  this  centi'ally-initiated,  definitely-localised,  blood-
determmation,  cell-proliferation,  &c,  which  hypnotic  suggestion  can
even  now  call  forth.

3.  But  is  even  this  hypothesis  wide  enough  to  cover  the  facts  ?
Can  all  the  effects  of  hypnotic  suggestion  be  explained  by  even  the
completest  revival  of  ancestral  memories  2  Or  is  there  not  a  point
beyond  which  such  analogies  will  not  carry  us  1  Let  us  consider  for  a
moment  that  third  class  of  hypnotic  achievements  to  which  allusion
has  already  been  made— the  moral  or  psychological  changes  which
suggestion  can  effect.

These  changes  must,  of  course,  rest  on  a  physiological  basis ;  but
that  basis  implies  a  well-developed,  a  human  brain.  The  knowledge
of  cortical  centres  which  must  somewhere  exist  to  make  such  changes
possible  can  scarcely  have  been  inherited  from  pre-human  ancestors.
Nothing,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  inquiry  is  of  deeper  interest  than
the  possibilities  thus  dawning  upon  us  of  disentangling  from  the
cerebral  labyrinth  which  represents  a  man's  tastes  and  character  the^
special  brain-processes  which  stand  for  some  special  temptation —
say  those  which  represent  the  reaction  of  his  organism  to  alcohol..
What  is  the  hidden  process  that  to  one  patient  makes  brandy  as
nauseating  as  it  is  to  a  cat — that  in  another  patient  makes  the  morphia-
craving  as  impossible  as  it  is  to  a  rabbit  1  That  strongest  of  all  human,
passions — that  desire  which  it  is  death  to  yield  to,  and  too  often
suicide  to  resist — the  injection  of  morphia  itself — becomes  absolutely-
indifferent.1

1  See,  for  instance,  a  case  of  Dr.  A.  Voisin's,  Revue  dc  VHypnotisme,  January,  1889,.
p.  197,  where  morphinomania  of  several  years'  standing  was  cured  in  a  month  by
seven  suggestions.  The  patient  said  that  subsequent  injections  "ne  lui  donnaient
pas  la  sensation  agreable  de  chaleur  qu'elle  eprouvait  auparavant."

2  A  2


348


F.  W.  IL  Myers.


In  close  connection  with  these  reactions  to  drugs  come  certain
other  moral  effects.  With  one  patient  the  cure  of  drunkenness  was
accompanied  by  the  removal  of  kleptomania.1  In  another  desperately
had  case  of  dipsomania  Dr.  Voisin  combined  two  forms  of  suggestion.
He  rendered  alcohol  repugnant,  and  at  the  same  time  he  brought  back
the  religious  convictions  and  the  habit  of  prayer  which  had  long  given
place  in  the  poor  degraded  lady  to  a  bitter  and  blasphemous  unbelief."

Other  physical  temptations,  depending  on  the  imagination  move
closely  than  does  the  craving  for  stimulants,  have  been  controlled  by
similar  suggestions.  The  faults  of  childhood  may  thus  be  overcome —
even  faults  such  as  fear,  anger,  indolence,  which  one  might  have
supposed  to  depend  upon  conditions  too  diffused  and  intangible  to  be
readily  isolated  or  removed.3

I  will  not  here  dwell  either  on  the  practical  importance,  or  on  the
wider  philosophical  significance  of  achievements  such  as  these.  My
present  point  is  merely  this  :  that  when  we  find  that  results  of  a  class
which  we  are  accustomed  to  use  all  our  educative  skill,  or  all  our
self-controlling  energy,  to  secure  are  effected  for  us  by  some  agency  as
yet  obscure,  we  are  compelled  in  fairness  to  class  that  agency  as  itself
intelligent.  The  power  involved  may  be  a  power  within  our  own
possession,  but  it  can  at  least  rank  no  lower  than  our  conscious  mind
and  will.

And  here  I  think  that  the  reader,  whatever  hesitation  he  may  feel
as  to  the  explanation  for  which  I  am  myself  arguing,  will  at  any  rate
begin  to  inquire  with  some  urgency  what  is  the  usual,  the  orthodox
■explanation  of  the  mode  of  production  of  effects  like  these  1  "  What
is  this  power,"  lie  will  say,  "  from  which  no  organ  and  no  thought  is
•exempt  or  free  ?  which  can  charm  away  the  pangs  of  childbirth,  and
shed  sleep  around  the  surgeon's  knife  1  What  is  this  which  can
summon  the  secretions,  and  retard  the  pulses,  and  arrest  the  breath  ?
which  can  check  the  perilous  habit  and  dispel  the  dolorous  dream?
which  can  turn  longing  into  loathing  and  abhorrence  into  desire,  and
sway  with  an  impalpable  dominance  the  very  tides  of  the  human  heart  1 "

Three  main  lines  of  explanation  have  been  offered,  singly  or  in
•conjunction,  for  hypnotic  phenomena.  Two  of  these  contain,  I  believe,
some  measure  of  truth  ;  but  they  are  plainly  inadequate. The  third  is

1  Dr.  Berillon,  in  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  September,  1S90,  p.  75.
-Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  September,  1887,  p.  <>9.

3  See  for  instance  Professor  Bernheim,  in  Revue  de  VHypnotisme.  December,  1887,
p.  178  ;  and  Dr. Berillon,  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  January,  188!),  p.  197.  Dr.  de  Jong,  of
the  Hague,  reports  (Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  September,  18!)1)  a  cure  of  theft  in  a  girl  of
11,  "  voleuse  d'un  raffinement  incroyable,"  and  a  thorough  reform  in  a  boy  of  7,
"paresseux,  menteur,  brutal,  idiot  moral."  "Son  caractere  fut  tellement  change
qu'il  ne  fut  presque  plus  reconnaissable."  See  also  Dr.  Schrenck-Notzing,  Revue  de
rHiipnotismc,  July,  1890,  p.  15.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


349


wider  in  scope,  but  it  is  in  reality  no  explanation  at  all ;  it  is  a  mere
restatement  of  the  problem  in  a  more  definite  form.

1.  The  first  explanation  was  that  of  Mesmer  himself,  who  ascribed
the  observed  effects  to  an  effluence  or  fluid  which  passed  from  operator
to  subject.  The  notion  of  a  fluid  is  now  out  of  date  ; — although  there
is,  as  seems  to  me,  important  evidence  which  makes  for  the  existence  of
an  influence  not  discernible  by  the  ordinary  senses.  It  would,
however,  be  beside  the  purpose  to  dwell  on  this  evidence  here.  For
inasmuch  as  experiment  has  plainly  shown  that  all  kinds  of  hypnotic
l'esults  can  be  obtained  under  circumstances  where  the  supposed  specific
influence  has  no  chance  to  operate,  it  is  plain  that  we  must  look  further
for  a  solution  of  our  hardest  problems.

2.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  express  hypnotic  phenomena
in  terms  of  cerebral  action  as  at  present  known  to  us.1  Thus,  for
instance,  Heidenhain,  whose  view  was  in  fashion  when  Mr.  Gurney
and  I  began,  in  1883,  to  write  on  hypnotism  in  these  Proceedings,
attributed  the  hypnotic  state  to  "  an  inhibition  of  the  action  of  the
ganglion  cells  of  the  cerebral  cortex,  induced  by  continued  weak  stimu-
lation of  other  nerves."  To  this  we  replied  that  "  the  theory  of  the
short-circuiting  of  the  nervous  current — of  the  response  of  action  to
suggestion  without  any  knowledge  of  the  matter  being  passed  through
consciousness  at  all — is  only  plausible  in  cases  where  the  subject
mimics  or  obeys  his  hypnotiser  in  a  quite  mechanical  way."2  The  great
development,  since  that  date,  of  hypnotic  phenomena  which  manifestly
need  some  thought,  some  initiative  on  the  subject's  part,  has  made
Heidenhain's  explanation  still  more  obviously  imperfect.  Nor  is  it
needful  to  go  here  into  other  speculations  as  to  the  modifications  of
coi'tical  nutrition,  etc.,  which  may  accompany  the  hypnotic  trance.  It
is  something  more  and  other  than  the  mere  production  of  trance  that
we  have  to  deal  with — something  more  and  other  than  the  mere
phenomena  of  fascination,  rnimicry,  rigidity,  which  are  to  be  seen
on  every  itinerant  mesmeriser's  platform.  Discussions  on  cerebral
circulation,  on  inhibition  and  dynamogenesis,  are  useful  and  needful  on
the  outskirts  of  the  problem  ;  they  may  give  precision  to  our  conception  of
the  condition  in  which  the  deeper  phenomena  begin;  but  they  cannot
explain  the  novel  powers  to  which  those  phenomena  introduce  us, — the
increased,  the  penetrating  control  of  the  brain  over  the  organism.3

1  For  a  resume  in  English  of  some  of  these  theories,  see  Dr.  Moll's  Hypnotism,
p.  203,  scjq.,  or  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey's  Psiieho-Theraijcutics,  3rd  edit.,  chaps,  iv.  and  ix.

2  Nineteenth  Century,  October,  ISfc'o,  p.  701.

3  It  is  probable,  in  my  view,  that  inhibitory  phenomena,  as  the  most  amenable  to
purely  physiological  artifice,  will  usually  be  the  first  to  appear  in  any  hypnotic  series.
This,  I  think,  is  actually  the  case  ;  and  I  suspect  that  some  simple  consideration  of
this  kind  may  have  much  to  do  with  whatever  truth  underlies  the  Salpetriere  scheme
of  hypnotic  stages  evolved  successively  in  a  fixed  order.


350


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


3.  And  indeed  among  those  who  are  most  actively  engaged  in
exploring  the  range  of  hypnotic  effects,  little  is  heard  of  these  various
theories  as  to  the  physiological  processes  involved  in  the  induction  of
trance.  Trance  itself  becomes  less  and  less  a  central  phenomenon ;  the
methods  or  artifices  used  to  achieve  desired  results  become  more  and
more  simple,  rapid,  perfunctory.  Some  term  is  needed  of  almost
indefinite  extensibility,  to  signify  a  power  which  seems  so  indifferent
as  to  its  medium  of  application.  "  Suggestion  "  is  the  chosen  word  ;
the  operator  suggests  the  results  to  the  subject,  and  the  results  appear
because  the  subject  is  suggestible.  And  this  is  a  useful  verb,  a  con-
venient adjective.  But  what  do  they  explain?  If  I  call  any  given
occurrence  a  "  result  of  suggestion,"  what  am  I  really  saying  except
that  the  thing  happened  because  somebody  said  that  it  was  going  to
happen  1  Our  old  friend,  the  "  dormitive  efficacy  "  of  opium,  at  least
confined  itself  to  one  special  achievement.  The  "  suggestive  efficacy  :'
of  the  hypnotisers  command  is  a  far  grander  formula ;  for  it  gives  us
no  hint  of  what  it  means  to  do,  any  more  than  of  how  it  means
to  do  it.

Surely,  then,  as  I  have  already  said,  this  doctrine  of  suggestion  can
only  be  regarded  as  a  completer  mode  of  stating  the  fundamental
problem  ;  as  a  protest  against  narrower  theories  founded  on  inadequate
experience  ;  whether  such  theories  would,  with  the  old  mesmerists,
ascribe  all  the  results  to  the  direct  inflow  of  the  "  magnetic  fluid  "
upon  the  receptive  organism  ;  or,  with  Charcot,  would  regard  hypnotism
as  a  nervous  malady,  akin  to  hysteria,  and  running  through  definite
stages  of  its  own  ;  or,  with  Heidenhain,  Preyer,  Lehmann,  &c,  would
insist  on  the  supposed  cerebral  mechanism  of  the  commoner
phenomena,  without  taking  into  view  the  mysterious  initiative,  the
complex  domination  over  the  organism  which  hypnotic,  somnambulic,
even  hysterical  states  unite  in  manifesting.  As  against  all  these  the
protest  of  Nancy  is  needed  and  effectual ;  but  it  is  a  protest  and
nothing  more.

It  is,  therefore,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  a  field  almost  clear  of  hypo-
theses that  I  suggest  my  own ; — my  view  that  a  stream  of  consciousness
flows  on  within  us,  at  a  level  beneath  the  threshold  of  ordinary  waking
life,  and  that  this  consciousness  embraces  unknown  powers  of  which
these  hypnotic  phenomena  give  us  the  first  sample,  the  scattered
indications  ; — powers  sometimes  exercised  (as  we  shall  presently  see)
"spontaneously,"  or  at  the  bidding  of  some  higher  will ;  but  sometimes
also  obedient  to  a  summons  sent  downwards  from  the  supraliminal
self.

How  we  are  to  explain  this  obedience  we  shall  consider  presently.
But  first  it  will  occur  to  everyone  that  there  is  one  way  in  which  such
a  concejation  as  this  can  be  tested  at  once. If  the  most  advanced


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


351


effects  of  suggestion  are  really  due  to  an  agency  within  the  subject,
the  subject  ought  to  be  able,  if  anyone  is  able,  to  start  that  agency
himself.  The  words  of  others  cannot  be  of  fundamental  importance.
Self-suggestion,  in  short,  must  be  the  central  type,  and  suggestion  from
without  must  be  no  more  than  an  aid  to  the  subject's  own  belief.

It  appears  to  me  that  actual  observation  does  largely  bear  out  this
view.  Whichever  theory  of  therapeutic  hypnotism  has  been  prevalent,
I  believe  that  the  main  difficulty  has  often  lain  in  overcoming
the  patient's  self-suggestion  that  he  was  not  going  to  be  cured.1  I
observe  in  the  Zoist  that  the  patient  who  begins  by  deriding  the
"  passes,"  and  who  needs  hours  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  patient  work  to
influence  him,  will  sometimes  end  by  being  able  to  throw  himself  into
"  the  sleep  "  without  the  doctor  to  help  him.  I  observe  that  in  the  Sal-
petriere,  the  special  manipulations  which  were  at  first  deemed  needful
to  transfer  the  subject  from  catalepsy  to  lethargy,  from  lethargy  to
somnambulism,  are  often  pretermitted,  and  the  malade  passes  through
the  three  "  classical  stages  "  at  her  own  sole  impulse.  And  I  observe
that  with  the  Nancy  school  the  external  suggestion  often  passes  in-
sensibly into  self-suggestion,  the  hypnotiser's  influence  being  less  and
less  obtruded,  till  Dr.  Burot  (for  instance),  teaches  self-suggestion  to
a  patient,  who  sends  herself  into  the  trance,  determining  beforehand
the  time  for  which  it  is  to  last,  and  the  effect  which  it  is  to  produce.2
Another  patient  is  instructed  to  throw  himself  into  a  trance  in  order
to  remember  and  divulge  a  criminal  suggestion  made  to  him  in  a
previous  trance.3  Other  physicians  begin  to  note  with  care  the  effects
of  involuntary1  or  voluntary5  self-suggestion  in  their  own  persons.
One  physician,  indeed — whose  book,  disfigured  by  a  barbarous  title,
and  published  in  what  was  at  that  date  a  provincial  town,6  has  been
less  known  than  it  deserves — insisted  more  than  twenty  years  ago  upon
the  needlessness  of  any  external  influence  to  bring  most  of  his  subjects
into  a  state  of  " artificial  somnambulism." "I  have  found,"  says  Dr.

JThis  self-suggestion,  often  latent,  sometimes  amounts  to  an  overt  fixed  idea.
See  a  case  m  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  July,  1890,  p.  10,  where  Professor  Bernheim's  cure
of  a  most  painful  and  dangerous  malady  was  delayed  for  nearly  three  years  by  the
patient's  obstinate  refusal  to  submit  to  hypnotisation — a  reluctance  which  the  physi-
cian at  last  overcame.

-  Re cue  de  I' Hypnotismc,  June,  1887.

3  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  November,  1S87.

4  Professor  Forel,  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  March,  1889.

5  Dr.  Coste  de  Lagrave,  Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  December,  1889.  See  also  a  case
(Revue  de  VHypnotisme,  May,  1889,  p.  339),  where  a  sufferer  from  toothache,  angry  at
the  dentist's  refusal  to  hypnotise  her  for  a  trifling  operation,  "sends  herself  off"
triumphantly  in  the  dentist's  chair  and  eludes  his  twinges  in  spite  of  him.  Si  natura
ncyat,  facit  indiynatio  somnunt.

6  Statuvolism,  or  Artificial  Somnccmbulism.  By  W.  B.  Fahnestock,  M.D.,  Chicago,
18G9  and  1871. See  pp.  71,  203,  &c.


352


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Fahnestock,  "  that  persons  always  enter  this  state  better  without  any
contact,  looking,  passes,  or  anything  of  the  kind,  particularly  when  they
are  assured  that  they  have  some  competent  person  to  take  care  of,  and
to  converse  with  them  while  in  it ;  and,  by  observing  carefully  the
instructions  which  I  have  given,  it  is  possible  for  any  person  to  throw
themselves  into  this  state  at  pleasure,  independent  of  anyone."  Dr.
Fahnestock  was  one  of  the  earliest  authors  to  declare  the  efficacy  of
post-hypnotic  suggestions,  and  he  insisted  that  these  suggestions
had  precisely  the  same  efficacy  when  made  by  the  self-entranced
subject  to  himself.  "This  lady  could  create  or  relieve  pain  in  any
part  of  her  body,  or  even  forget  her  own  name  when  she  awoke,  if  she
made  the  resolution  to  do  so  while  in  this  state."

Dr.  Fahnestock's  book  and  Mr.  Hugh  Wing-field's  paper  on  "The  Con-
nection of  Hypnotism  with  the  Subjective  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,"'
(S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  279,)  are  written  from  very  different
standpoints  ;  but  those  who  will  comjaare  the  two  and  note  the  remark-
able concordance  between  the  earlier  observer  in  his  remote  private
practice,  and  the  later  one  experimenting  upon  healthy  Cambridge
undergraduates,  will  probably  incline  to  think  that  the  future  in
hypnotism  lies  with  those  who  can  best  develop  their  patients'  self-
suggestive  power.1

Assuredly  I  do  not  suppose  that  any  rationale  of  hypnotism  which
can  as  yet  be  given  can  long  hold  its  ground  without  modification.  We
watch  a  developing  group  of  empirical  processes,  which  may  yet  touch
the  confines  of  science  at  many  an  unexpected  point.  But  to  me  the
view  here  suggested  has  at  least  the  practical  merit  of  enabling  us  to
see  hypnotic  phenomena  no  longer  as  something  isolated  or  exceptional,
but  as  falling  naturally  under  wider  laws  whose  bearings  we  are  else-
where beginning  to  discern.  As  indicating  communication  between  our
supraliminal  consciousness  and  a  subliminal  consciousness  dowered  with
powers  as  yet  unknown,  these  phenomena  form,  as  I  believe,  a  depart-
ment of  that  far  wider  realm  of  communications  between  state  and
state,  consciousness  and  consciousness,  personality  and  personality,
within  the  same  individual,  which  forms  the  subject  of  these  present
j>apers, — the  main  theme  to  which  these  discussions  of  hypnotism  are
no  more  than  incidental.

Yet  before  this  discussion  closes  there  is  one  point  more  which  can-
not be  avoided  if  I  would  escape  the  charge  of  manifest  inconsistency.
I  have  tried  to  suggest  the  source  of  these  subliminal  powers ;  but

1  The  so-called  "  Faith-Cure  "  is  virtually  an  attempt  to  persuade  patients  that
they  possess  the  power  of  self-suggestion.  Much  success  is  claimed  for  it  in  America  ;
classes  are  held,  and  fees  are  paid  ;  but  all  the  accounts  of  supposed  cures  which  I
have  seen  have  been  so  loose  and  vague  that  I  can  form  no  estimate  of  what  has
really  been  done.


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


353


what  explanation  can  I  give  of  this  subliminal  obedience?  "Your
theory,"  the  critic  may  say,  "  is  an  attempt  to  prove  the  Dtemon  of
Socrates  identical  with  Mr.  Merriman.  You  assume  a  mystic  guide
with  pre-terrene  experience,  ultra-mundane  sagacity,  and  you  set  him
to  drink  paraffin  oil  by  the  tumblerful  without  being  sick.  It  may  be
grand  to  know  how  to  make  blisters,  but  the  subliminal  self  should  be
made  of  sterner  stuff  than  to  try  that  trick  on  himself  whenever  he  is
told.  '•Est  dens  in  nobis ;  agitante  calescimus  illo' ; — but  it  seems  hard  to
hold  the  indwelling  divinity  so  strictly  to  his  word,  and  not  to  let  him
go  till  he  has  raised  your  temperature  at  least  two  degrees  Centigrade.
It  is  well  to  be  able  to  take  hints,  but  it  is  not  well  to  take  all  hints  ;
and  when  I  tell  a  man  on  a  platform  that  there  is  a  fly  on  the  end  of
his  nose,  is  not  that  just  the  occasion  when,  in  Clifford's  phrase,  the
inward  Monitor  ought  to  whisper,  Bosh  ? "

Before  I  attempt  to  explain  these  seeming  incongruities  I  must
remind  the  reader  that  the  puzzle  is  in  reality  none  of  my  making.
Xo  one  has  any  explanation  to  give  of  the  obedient  fulfilment  of
post-hypnotic  suggestions.  When  a  man  is  told,  say,  to  do  several
absurd  things  ten  days  hence,  and  does  them  punctually  when  the
time  comes  round,  we  may,  indeed,  attempt  to  guess  how  it  is  that  his
hypnotic  self  remembers  the  commands,  but  we  have  no  notion  why  it
obeys  them.  To  call  such  actions  merely  reflex  would  be  a  misuse  of
terms  ;  to  say  that  the  man  is  suggestible  is  only  to  restate  the  fact.

The  mystery  of  this  unquestioning,  dog-like  obedience  cannot  be
fully  cleared  up  until  we  know  much  more  than  we  at  present  know
of  our  own  intimate  structure.  Yet  it  seems  to  me  that  a  ray  of  light
is  shed  upon  it  by  the  theories  which  I  am  now  advancing.

If  man's  individuality  be  such  as  I  conceive; — if  there  be  various
strata  of  consciousness,  possessed  of  differing  powers,  and  communicating
with  each  other  in  obscure  and  imperfect  ways,  we  are  likely  to  come
upon  many  acts  which  are  not  distinctly  referable  to  any  one  given
stage  or  stratum  of  the  total  individuality.  Take  the  two  adjacent
strata  of  sleep  and  ordinary  waking  life.  There  are  faculties  common
to  both  states  ;  and  each  state  has  its  faculties  which  the  other  does
not  share.  It  is  as  impossible  for  the  waking  man  to  excrete  the  pro-
ducts of  brain-waste  as  it  is  for  the  sleeping  man  to  lead  a  charge  of
horse.  But  under  certain  conditions — and  I  am  not  now  assuming  any
state  profounder  than  common  sleep — the  sleeper  will  begin  to  exercise
in  a  random  way  some  of  the  powers  which  belong  properly  to  waking
life.  He  will  strike  out  witli  his  limbs,  or  spring  to  the  floor,  under
the  impulsion  of  a  disturbing  dream.  Meantime  the  waking  self, — the
proper  ruler  of  the  faculties  of  pi'ogression  and  balance, — stands  aside,
and  for  the  moment  these  faculties  obey  the  random  commands  of  the
sleeping  usurper. But  if  these  faculties  are  too  rashly  drawn  upon  the


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


sleeper  will  awake;  and  the  waking  self  will  resume  its  sway  before
serious  harm  is  done.

Now  I  would  suggest  that  somewhat  similarly,  in  these  cases  of
blind  obedience  to  hypnotic  suggestion,  Ave  see  a  certain  knowledge,  con-
sciousness, memory,  which  are  properly  subject  to  the  will  which  com-
mands one  stratum  of  the  personality,  falling  temporarily  into  a
dreamlike  compliance  with  impulses  which  reach  them  from  a  stratum
not  their  own.  For  the  moment  the  subliminal  will  stands  aside  ;
but  just  as  the  waking  will  resumes  its  sway  when  the  dreamer
becomes  too  violent,  so  also  does  the  subliminal  will  intervene  if
the  obedience  to  hypnotic  suggestion  is  in  danger  of  being  pushed
too  far.  And  this  will  explain  a  peculiarity  in  the  effect  of  sugges-
tion which  was  at  first  thought  to  indicate  that  the  obedience  was
merely  simulated,  and  which  since  the  idea  of  simulation  has  been
dropped  has  remained  a  jjuzzle  to  many  observers.  I  mean  the  fact
that  it  is  often  easier  to  induce  a  subject  to  commit  some  great
imaginary  crime, — say  to  put  arsenic  in  his  aunt's  tea, — than  to
perform  some  trifling  act  of  manifest  inconvenance, — such  as  taking  off
his  boots  in  public.  It  is  urged  that  somewhere  within  him  there
must  be  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  the  supposed  arsenic  really  came  out
of  the  sugar-basin.  And  yet  this  saving  knowledge  can  hardly  be
located  in  his  waking  stratum,  which  retains  absolutely  no  memory
of  the  incident.  I  should  suggest  that  a  complete  comprehension  of
the  suggested  act  exists  in  his  subliminal  strata,  and  that  when  grave
need  arises  the  subliminal  self  will  generally  avoid  compliance ; — not  by
awakening  the  organism  into  ordinary  life,  but  by  plunging  it  into  a
hysterical  access,  or  into  a  trance  so  deep  that  the  unwelcome  order
loses  its  agitating  power.  Thus  much  as  to  the  interrelation  of  supra-
liminal and  subliminal  impulses  I  think  that  we  begin  to  discern.  But
none  the  less  the  problem  of  suggestion  must  still  reach  down  into
insolubility  ;  for  it  does  but  present,  in  a  form  complex  indeed,  but
definite  and  as  it  were  experimental,  that  ancient  question  as  to  the
influence — resistible  or  irresistible — of  man's  physical  organism  upon
his  moral  choice, — the  issues  of  that  world-old  conflict  in  which  "  the
flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh."

We  shall  find,  indeed,  as  we  go  on,  that  there  are  certain  cases
where  a  subliminal  will,  invoked  or  evoked  by  hypnotic  artifice,  has
proved  itself  no  mere  "  slave  of  the  lamp,"  but  has  insisted  on  employ-
ing its  own  faculties  in  its  own  way.  But  these  instances  must  be
dealt  with  in  their  place, — among  those  "  messages,"  or  examples
of  subliminal  communication,  whose  place  is  above  what  I  have  termed
the  psychological  limit  of  the  spectrum  of  ordinary  consciousness.  To
these  we  must  now  proceed;  and  we  shall  henceforth  find  ourselves
dealing  for  the  most  part  with  phenomena  of  spontaneous,  not  of


The  Subliminal  Consciousness.


355


'experimental  origin.  Yet  the  fact  that  these  higher  phenomena  also,—
these  phenomena  of  telepathy,  clairvoyance,  perhaps  premonition, — do
sometimes  show  themselves  under  hypnotic  conditions,  is  one  of  the
most  encouraging  which  we  have  to  remember.  For  nothing  is  more
important  to  us  than  the  power  of  extending  the  bounds  of  experiment,
—of  ourselves  ascending,  with  steps  however  slow  and  toilsome,  the
Mount  at  whose  foot  we  have  waited  so  long  in  helplessness  till  the
voice  or  thunder  came.

There  will  be  no  cause,  indeed,  for  surprise  if,  as  time  goes  on,
man's  experiments  on  the  world  without  him  should  yield  in  interest
and  importance  to  his  experiments  upon  himself.  "  Inward  the  course
of  empire  takes  its  way"; — and  all  man's  progress  has  been  a  slow
unfolding  of  the  capacities  of  the  primal  germ.  Every  sense  that  he
has  developed,  every  faculty  that  he  has  won,  has  been  but  an  entry
upon  the  fruition  of  what  was  stored  already  in  that  treasure-house  of
23rehistoric  gold.  All  that  he  has  learnt  without  himself  has  but  been
a  means  to  the  comprehension  of  that  which  was  within.  And  these
hypnotic  experiments,  for  all  their  strangeness  and  grotesqueness,  are
following  in  the  same  sure  track ;  their  lesson  also  is  of  a  concealed
•dominion ;  they  too  teach  that  by  "  self-reverence,  self-knowledge,
self-control,"  man  may  become  the  ruler  of  his  own  spirit,  and  the
fashioner  of  his  own  fate.


356


Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


II.

SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  PAPER,  ON  THE  EVIDENCE
FOR  CLAIRVOYANCE.
By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick. (Seep.  30.)

Part  I.

I  append  here  three  cases  which,  had  they  been  received  in  time,
would  have  been  included  in  the  paper  on  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance
printed  in  an  earlier  part  of  this  volume.

The  first  two  belong  to  the  class  in  which  a  crisis  in  the  "  agent's  "
life  appears  to  be  the  primary  cause  of  the  supernormal  perception —
the  "percipient"  neither  seeking  nor  expecting  any  communication;
but  where,  nevertheless,  the  actual  situation  of  the  agent  is  presented
to  the  percipient  as  though  he  were  present  with  him.  One  of  these  is
a  case  of  an  apparition  or  vision  of  a  friend  at  the  time  of  his  death,
and  will  remind  the  reader  of  Mrs.  Paquet's  experience,  p.  32  ;  the
second  is  a  vision  or  dream  of  a  brother  at  a  moment  of  great  danger
and  excitement,  and  somewhat  resembles  Mr.  Lee's  vision  of  his
father,  p.  38.

The  third  case  is  one  where  the  activity  is  apparently  entirely  on
the  percipient's  part,  the  persons  seen  going  through  no  special  crisis
or  excitement  whatever.  It  recalls  the  experiences  with  "Jane,"
pp.  53-62.

(L.  890.)  The  writer  of  the  following  narrative,  whom  I  will  call
Mr.  D.,  is  a  lawyer,  and  is  well  known  to  a  friend  of  mine  on  whose
judgment  that  he  is  a  specially  good  witness  I  thoroughly  rely.  He
does  not  wish  names  to  be  published,  as  it  might  be  disliked  by  relatives
of  the  deceased  gentleman.

July  tth,  1891.

The  incident  which  I  am  about  to  describe  occurred  on  the  morning  of
the  8th  July,  1858.  At  that  time  and  for  some  years  previously  I  had  been
in  partnership  and  on  very  intimate  terms  with  Mr.  X.  Y.  As  it  may  be
somewhat  pertinent  to  the  tale  I  may  observe  that  some  six  or  seven  months
before  that  date  I  had  been  told  by  the  physician  attending  Mr.  X.  Y.  that
he  was  suffering  from  angina  pectoris  and  that  in  all  probability  his  death
would  be  very  sudden.  The  medical  man,  who  was  our  mutual  friend,  told  me
at  the  same  time  not  to  allude  to  his  danger  in  any  conversation  I  might  have
with  him.  From  that  peril  id  up  to  the  8th  July,  X.  Y.  was  apparently  in
his  usual  good  health.

On  the  evening"  of  the  7th  I  sat  with  him  in  his  own  room  for  a  consider-
able period  talking  upon  various  matters  of  business  which  had  no  reference
to  him  individually. He  was  well  and  cheerful. I  should  now  describe


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.


357


my  bedroom.  It  had  one  window,  close  to  the  head  of  the  bed  and  on
the  side  on  which  I  slept.  There  was  a  Venetian  blind  not  quite  drawn
close.  On  that  night,  or  rather  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  I  awoke
with  a  sensation  of  fear  or  distress.  Day  had  dawned  and  the  light  fell
through  the  bars  of  the  Venetian  blind  upon  the  floor,  and  there  I  saw  in
the  light,  which  awas  quite  sufficient,  the  vision  of  X.  Y.  He  lay  upon  the
floor  in  his  nightdress,  his  knees  drawn  up,  his  hands  thrown  back  above
his  head  with  the  backs  of  his  hands  upon  the  ground.  He  was  perfectly
white  and  the  jaw  fallen.  It  was  X.  Y.  dead.  I  groaned  somewhat  loudly
and  awoke  my  wife,  who  seized  me  by  the  arm  and  shook  me,  asking  me
what  was  the  matter.  I  was  leaning  upon  my  elbow  looking  down  upon
the  vision.  I  replied,  "I  see  X.  Y.  dead  upon  the  floor,"  and  as  I  spoke  the
vision  faded  away.  My  wife  said,  "  Oh,  you  are  dreaming. "  I  remember
that  I  had  asked  myself  the  question,  "Am  I  dreaming  V  before  my  wife
shook  me  and  while  the  vision  was  distinct.  The  feet  of  the  vision  were
towards  the  window  and  the  face  looking  almost  directly  at  me  and  towards
the  light.

After  some  time  I  went  to  sleep.  When  I  awoke,  strangely  enough,  I
had  forgotten  the  incident,  nor  did  my  wife  allude  to  it.

I  went  to  the  offices,  and  was  called  away  upon  some  pressing  business  as
soon  as  I  got  there.  The  offices  were  attached  to  the  house  of  X.  Y.  I
returned  about  11  o'clock,  being  absent  about  an  hour.  The  clerk  informed
me  that  Mr.  X.  Y.'s  housekeeper  was  alarmed,  as  she  could  not,  after
knocking  at  his  door,  get  an  answer.  In  an  instant  the  vision  of  the  early
morning  came  back  upon  me  and  I  told  the  clerk  at  once  to  get  a  ladder
and  ascend  to  his  window,  which  was  not  very  high.  The  clerk  did  so  and
ascended,  was  apparently  greatly  shocked,  and  descended,  almost  falling  from
the  ladder. He  told  me  that  he  saw  X.  Y.  on  the  floor.

He  got  a  large  hammer  used  for  breaking  coals  and  forced  the  door.
I  entered  the  room  with  him.  On  the  floor  lay  the  body  of  X.  Y.  exactly  in
the  attitude,  position,  and  dress  of  the  vision  that  I  had  seen.  It  was  the
exact  counterpart  of  the  vision.  He  had  apparently  got  up  and  partly  drawn
up  his  blind  when,  being  seized  with  a  fit  of  angina,  he  had  managed  to
pour  out  a  half  glass  of  ammonia  which  stood  upon  his  dressing  table,
but  had  fallen  back  dead  in  the  effort.  His  housekeeper  informed  me  that
it  was  his  custom  to  get  up  about  daybreak  and  draw  up  his  blind.

Is  it  possible  that  any  intense  and  agonising  thought  of  a  man  in  his
last  moments  could  be  said  to  have  produced  any  such  effect  as  that  I  have
described  ?  His  heir-at-law  was  a  man  whom  he  regarded  with  the  utmost
hostility.  On  the  other  hand,  he  had  a  nephew  to  whom  he  was  greatly
attached.  He  was  a  man  of  considerable  property  and  would  have  left  all
to  this  favoured  nephew.  On  the  day  of  his  death,  in  searching  amongst  his
papers,  a  will  so  disposing  of  his  property  was  found  unexecuted.

Immediately  after  the  discovery  of  the  body  I  went  home  and  as  soon  as
I  saw  my  wife  I  said,  "X.  Y.  is  dead."  She  replied,  "  Oh,  the  dream  of  last
night  ;  how  very  singular."

I  have  thought  the  matter  over  for  many  years  and  have  discussed  the
matter  with  very  many  people,  but  can  never  arrive  at  any  reasonable
solution  of  the  matter. From  the  moment  of  the  incident  until  now  I  have


358


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc.


always  been  certain  that  it  was  not  a  dream.  I  mean  I  was  not  unconscious
from  the  moment  I  opened  my  eyes  and  saw  the  vision.  The  distress  at  the
moment  of  awakening  was  indescribable.  It  was  somewhat  the  feeling  of
one  awakened  from  deej)  sleep  by  a  sudden  shock  and  to  a  terrible  sight.  It
is  33  years  ago,  but  everything  is  as  clear  in  my  memory  as  if  the  matter
had  occurred  yesterday.

Mrs.  D.  writes  the  following  account  of  the  incident : —

July  2Mh,  1891.

I  have  a  perfect  recollection  of  the  vision  or  dream  of  which  Mr.  D.  has
written  to  you,  and  on  his  waking  me,  and  relating  it,  with  a  good  deal  of
distress,  I  said,  "Oh!  you  are  dreaming."  His  reply  was,  "No,  I  am  not-
asleep  ;  look  on  the  floor  ;  I  see  X.  Y.  lying  there  quite  distinctly,  just  by
the  streak  of  light."  Of  course  I  did  not  see  it,  and  we  did  not  mention  it
to  each  other  again,  until  his  return  home,  when  he  told  me  what  had
happened,  and  I  then  exclaimed,  "  Oh  !  your  dream."

Mr.  D.  writes,  enclosing  this  letter  and  saying : —

Herewith  you  have  a  letter  from  my  wife  recording  her  remembrance  of
the  event.  Her  account  (which  I  have  just  read)  varies  slightly  from  mine,
but  after  the  lapse  of  33  years  this  can  scarcely  be  wondered  at.  I  think  I
must  have  used  the  words  as  given  by  her,  because  they  seem  to  have  been
so  clearly  stamped  upon  her  memory.  My  impression  is  that  the  vision
faded  as  I  spoke,  but  of  course  I  might  have  finished  speaking  before  it-
became  quite  invisible.

We  asked  Mr.  D.  whether  the  evidence  of  anyone  who  had  seen,
the  body  as  it  was  found  could  be  obtained,  but  he  replies  :  —

It  is  so  long  ago  that  nearly  all  those  who  at  the  time  were  acquainted
with  the  fact  are  dead.  The  clerk  who  ascended  the  ladder,  and  who  after-
wards entered  the  bedroom  with  me,  has  been  dead  more  than  20  years.

The  housekeeper  has  long  since  died. Dr.  ,  to  whom  I  have  often

talked,  died  5  years  ago. I  have  had  an  idea  that  there  might  be  some-
living  who  remembered  the  incident  of  the  ladder  and  other  circumstances-
but  up  to  this  time  I  have  not  discovered  anyone.

An  examination  of  the  Register  at  Somerset  House  shows  that  Mr.
X.  Y.  died  on  July  5th,  1858,  not  on  July  8th.  The  death  was  regis-
tered on  the  8th.  There  is  therefoi'e  a  slight  error  in  Mr.  D.'s  account,
but  not  one  of  any  consequence,  since  his  recollection  of  the  date  of
the  vision  is  obviously  not  independent  of  his  recollection  of  the  date
of  the  death.  An  old  cash  book  and  other  documents  in  Mr.  D.'s
possession,  which  he  has  since  examined,  confirm  the  fact  that  the
death  was  on  the  5th.

July  5th,  1858,  was  a  Monday,  and  Mr.  D.  writes  as  to  this: —

It  certainly  has  escaped  my  memory  that  the  day  of  my  last  conversation
with  him  was  Sunday.  I  often  called  upon  him  on  Sunday.  I  sat  with  him
probably  an  hour.  It  was  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  I  recall  the  scene  now
very  distinctly,  and  I  am  sure  we  talked  of  nothing  that  was  personal  to
himself,  for  the  next  day,  after  the  discovery  of  the  body,  I  remember  to


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Glairvoyance. 35 9:


have  recalled  our  interview  with  the  intention  of  finding  a  reason  for  so-
singular  an  incident  as  the  vision. I  think  I  may  say  with  equal  certainty

that  between  the  time  when  Dr.  warned  me  about  his  malady  and  the-

day  of  his  death — a  period  of  many  months — I  never  had.  any  conversation
as  to  that  malady,  or  as  to  death,  or  in  fact  anything  but  the  matters  of
business  of  the  firm  and  the  ordinary  topics  of  conversation.

It  will  be  noticed  in  this  case  that  the  way  in  which  the  vision
presented  itself  was  somewhat  peculiar.  There  was  a  sort  of  economy
of  hallucination — the  real  window  and  floor  in  the  percipient's  room
being  made  to  do  duty  for  the  window  and  floor  of  the  agent's  room,
and  the  agent's  figure  arranged  in  a  corresponding  position  with  regard
to  them.  Nevertheless,  we  are  justified,  I  think,  in  including  the  cas&
as  one  of  telepathic  clairvoyance,  because  the  unusual  and  unlikely
position  and  attitude  of  the  dead  or  dying  man  was  correctly  perceived.
Cases  like  this  show  that  clairvoyant  percipience  cannot  be  explained
by  the  simple  supposition  of  a  change  in  the  position  from  which  the
percipient  mind  apprehends  the  external  world.

In  the  next  case  there  is  a  more  complete  apparent  ti'ansportation
of  the  percipient  to  the  scene  described,  clue  probably  to  the  fact  that
he  was  less  fully  awake,  and  thus  less  vividly  conscious  of  his  own
actual  surroundings.

(L.  891.)  The  case  comes  to  us  through  the  American  Branch
of  the  Society.  The  event  occurred  in  1873,  and  we  have  accounts
written  within  a  few  months  of  the  time  and  others  written  recently.  At
the  risk  of  being  tedious  I  have  thought  it  best  to  give  both.  They  throw
some  light  on  each  other,  and  the  general  accordance  between  them  tells
very  favourably  for  the  accuracy  of  the  narrators,  though  it  will  be
observed  that  one  of  the  recent  narrators  introduces  a  degree  of  exact-
ness of  time  coincidence  which  was  never  proved.  This  is  a  point  in
which  the  tendency  of  memory  to  simplification  renders  it,  as  Mr.
Gurney  has  pointed  out,  peculiarly  liable  to  error.

A  letter  to  a  newspaper  from  which  the  following  are  extracts  led
to  a  coiTespondence  between  Mr.  HarloAV  S.  Gale — a  student  of  philo-
sophy and  member  of  the  Society — and  the  agent  and  percipient  in  the
case.

I  was  living  in  Wallingford  at  that  time,  raising  small  fruit.  My
principal  helper  was  a  young  man  named  Frederic  Marks,  a  graduate  of
Yale  Scientific  School.  Frederic  had  a  brother  named  Charles,  who  was
living  then  in  central  New  York,  near  Oneida  Lake.  One  rainy  afternoon
Frederic  went  upstairs  to  his  room  and  lay  down  on  a  lounge.  An  hour  or
so  after  he  came  back  and  said  he  had  just  seen  his  brother  Charles  in
vision,  he  thought,  as  he  was  not  conscious  of  having  been  asleep.  Charles
was  in  a  small  sail-boat,  and  a  companion  with  him,  who  sat  in  the  stern
steering.  There  seemed  to  be  a  wild  storm  prevailing,  for  the  sea  ran  high.
Charles  stood  in  the  bow  grasping  the  mast  with  one  arm,  with  the  other  he


3G0


Mrs.  H.  Sidgiuick.


had  hold  of  the  boom,  which  appeared  to  have  broken  loose.  His  danger-
ous position  so  frightened  Frederic  that  he  awoke,  or  the  vision  departed.
Most  of  the  family  were  of  opinion  that  he  had  unconsciously  fallen  asleep
and  this  was  only  a  dream.

Three  or  four  days  after  this,  however,  Frederic  received  a  letter  from
Charles,  giving  an  account  of  a  peculiar  adventure  he  had  just  met  with  on
Oneida  Lake.  On  the  morning  of  the  day  in  question  he  and  a  companion
went  to  the  lake,  hired  a  boat,  and  went  out  for  a  sail.  As  the  day  was  tine
they  went  down  the  lake  as  far  as  Frenchman  Island,  some  20  miles  distant.

In  the  afternoon,  as  they  were  returning,  a  furious  storm  came  up.
Charles  was  kept  busy  baling  out  the  water  while  his  companion  steered.
At  the  height  of  the  storm  the  boom  gave  way.  Charles,  seeing  their
danger,  sprang  into  the  bow  of  the  boat,  and  grasping  the  mast  with  one  arm
and  the  boom  with  the  other,  managed  to  make  it  fast  again.  They
succeeded  in  keeping  the  craft  afloat  until  she  struck  on  the  beach,  when
they  leaped  out  and  reached  shore  in  safety.

Oneida  Lake  is  about  300  miles  west  of  Wallingford,  and  by  taking  into
account  the  difference  in  time,  it  was  found  that  the  accident  to  the  boat  and
Frederic's  vision  or  dream  must  have  occurred  within  the  same  hour,
possibly  the  same  minute.  The  temperaments  and  disposition  of  these
brothers  are  unlike,  and  no  uncommon  affinity  appears  to  exist  between
them.  Frederic  is  now  living  in  Santa  Anna,  Cal.,  Charles  in  New  York
City.  B.  Bristol.

Short  Beach.

Mr.  Frederic  Marks  writes  to  Mr.  Gale  as  follows  : —

Santa  Anna,  Los  Angeles  Co.,  Cal.,  March  18th,  1889.

The  incident  you  ask  me  to  relate  occurred  fifteen  or  sixteen  years
a^o,  and  had  passed  out  of  mind  till  the  reception  of  your  letter.  I  was  at
that  time  studying  in  New  Haven,  and  had  returned  home  and  gone  to  my
room.  I  sat  down  on  the  side  of  my  bed  and  soon  dropped  back  on  my
pillow.  I  do  not  think  I  fell  asleep,  nor  did  I  seem  fully  awake.  At  once
I  seemed  to  be  facing  a  severe  storm  of  wind  and  rain.  As  I  looked  into
the  storm  a  small  boat  with  a  sail  came  driven  almost  helplessly  along
through  a  seething,  boiling  mass  of  water.  Two  young  men  were  in  it,  one
trying  to  steer  and  control  the  boat,  the  other  apparently  trying  to  clip  out
water  and  work  on  the  sail.  One  of  the  two,  in  a  moment  of  greatest  peril,
tried  to  tear  down  the  sail  from  its  mast.  The  face  of  my  brother  came
clearly  into  view  with  an  expression  on  it  that  remains  with  me  now.  The
boat  righted  and  sped  on.  I  saw  a  low  shore  that  it  was  driving  towards.
The  boat  grew  fainter  as  it  neared  the  shore,  and  consciousness  came  back
to  me,  and  whatever  it  was.  whether  a  dream  or  vision,  passed  away.  The
other  person  in  the  boat,  I  learned  afterwards,  was  Arthur  Bloom — a  chum
of  my  brother's.

F.  A.  Marks.

p.S. — I  purposely  left  untold  that  several  days  after  the  above  occurrence
I  learned  through  a  journal  that  "  Charles  Marks  and  Arthur  Bloom  had  a
narrow  escape  from  drowning  while  out  on  Oneida  Lake  in  a  storm,"  thinking
that  your  correspondence  with  my  brother  would  bring  to  light  anything  you
wished  to  know.


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.  361


Mr.  Charles  Marks  writes  : —

5,  Leonard-place,  Albany,  N.Y.,  March  31st,  1889.
Your  letter  of  the  22nd  duly  received.  In  reply  I  enclose  the  accounts,
or  letters,  of  myself  and  brother  which  were  published  in  the  local  paper
some  three  months  or  so  after  the  occurrence  happened.  I  think  of  nothing-
further  to  add  to  this  now  ;  only  in  answer  to  your  query,  "whether  you
knew  of  your  brother's  apparently  seeing  the  same  at  the  time,"  would  say,
that  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  I  was  not  conscious  of  my  brother's  seeing;
me.  I  think  my  thoughts  and  attention  were  solely  engrossed  on  what  I
was  about,  when  standing  on  the  seat  and  endeavouring  to  get  down  the  sail,
which  is  the  moment  when  my  brother  saw  me  in  his  vision,  or  hallucination,
as  you  have  it.  Knowing  my  brother's  habits  (he  is  an  unusually  strong  and
healthy  man)  should  say  he  was  sound  asleep  at  the  time,  for,  with  his
healthy  robust  constitution,  when  disposed  he  can  go  to  sleep  almost  instantly
during  the  day  time,  and  not  unfrequently  indulges  in  an  afternoon  nap.
During  his  residence  at  Wallingford,  Ct. ,  he  was  a  student  at  the  Yale
Scientific  School  (Sheffield).

C.  ft.  Marks.

The  following  is  the  account  published  in  the  Oneida  Circular,
January  19th,  1874: —

A  Peril  and  a  Vision.
Perhaps  our  readers  will  remember  an  account  in  the  Circular  of  a  terrible
storm  which  two  of  our  young  men  encountered  last  fall  in  a  voyage  on
Oneida  Lake.  Their  adventure  seems  to  have  been  a  matter  of  interest  in,
the  other  world  as  well  as  in  this.  At  any  rate  a  brother  of  one  of  the
voyagers,  living  at'  Wallingford,  two  hundred  miles  distant,  by  some  mystical
illumination,  saw  them  in  the  critical  moment  of  their  peril.  Thinking  that
the  reality  and  the  vision  deserved  to  be  brought  together,  we  have  obtained
from  the  brothers  the  following  details  of  their  experiences  : —

The  Peril.

On  a  beautiful  day  in  October,  Arthur  Bloom  and  I  sailed  down  the  lake
in  a  small  open  boat  to  Frenchman's  Island,  where  we  stayed  over  night.
When  we  awoke  next  morning  the  wind  was  blowing  hard,  the  clouds  were
dark  and  threatening,  and  the  lake  was  rougher  than  I  had  ever  seen  it  before.
We  supposed  it  impossible  to  sail  in  such  a  sea,  and  so  had  resolved  to  wait
for  the  wind  to  go  down  ;  but  during  the  forenoon  a  boat  with  two  men
in  it  came  to  the  island  from  the  land  about  a  mile  away.  As  they  landed
near  us  we  asked  one  of  them,  who  proved  to  be  an  old  sailor,  his  opinion
of  our  boat.  He  thought  it  was  rather  small,  but  said  that  it  appeared  to  be
well  made,  and  if  it  were  his  he  would  go  where  he  chose.  This  was  enough
for  us.  True,  we  knew  little  or  nothing  about  sailing,  and  had  before  us  a.
voyage  of  eighteen  miles  up  the  lake  to  our  Joppa  station.  ' '  But  what  of
that  1  We  shan't  have  a  better  chance  to  learn,"  said  we.  So  for  an  experi-
mental trip  we  sailed  to  a  small  island  a  quarter  of  a  mile  away.  Succeeding
very  well  in  this,  we  concluded  to  make  the  homeward  stretch.  When  we
were  about  to  leave,  our  landlord  cordially  shook  hands  with  us  and  inquired
if  we  were  good  swimmers  and  "  dingers."  On  our  replying  we  thought  we
were,  he  comfortingly  said  if "we  kept  a  stiff  upper-lip  we  might  get

2  B


362


Airs.  H.  Sidgwiclc.


through  all  right  "  ;  at  the  same  time  his  advice  was  decidedly  against  the
venture.  On  leaving,  which  was  at  a  quarter  before  three  o'clock,  we
imagined  the  wind  had  slackened  somewhat  ;  so  we  let  out  the  sail  to
nearly  its  full  capacity,  as  we  wished,  if  possible,  to  get  to  the  other  end  of
the  lake  before  dark.  Our  positions  were  as  follows  :  Arthur  was  in  the
stern  of  the  boat,  steering  and  tending  the  sail  ;  I  was  lying  in  the  forward
part,  holding  the  halyards  and  ready  for  all  work,  such  as  baling,  hauling
down  sail,  and  dodging  from  one  side  to  the  other  as  the  lurches  of  the  boat
and  shifting  of  the  sail  demanded.

We  started  from  the  lee  side  of  the  island  where  the  water  was  com-
paratively still ;  but  as  we  got  out  where  we  began  to  feel  the  full  force  of
the  wind,  we  soon  saw  into  what  a  scrape  we  had  fallen.  The  little  boat  was
driving  along  at  a  fearful  rate,  throwing  the  water  in  sheets  of  foam  from  the
bows  ;  and  yet  we  knew  the  waves  were  comparatively  moderate  to  what  we
might  expect  when  we  should  reach  the  middle  of  the  lake.  There  was  no
choice  as  to  where  we  should  go  ;  we  could  do  but  one  thing,  that  is,  go
ahead  directly  before  the  wind,  which  was  driving  us  towards  the  upper  end
of  the  lake  eighteen  miles  away.  We  were  silent — each  busy  with  his  own
thoughts,  preparing  for  the  worst.  To  add  to  our  apprehensions  it  began
raining,  and  the  wind  instead  of  slacking  was  evidently  increasing.  We  had
gone  about  two  miles  when  I  was  startled  by  a  cry  from  Arthur  to  "  look  out
for  the  sail  !  "  as  it  was  shifting  to  the  other  side.  I  lay  down  to  let  the  sail
pass  over  me,  and  got  on  to  the  other  side  of  the  boat  to  counteract  the
effect  of  the  sail.  This  is  told  in  a  few  words,  but  the  actual  event  seemed
to  take  a  long  time.  When  down  in  the  boat  I  heard  and  felt  the  swash  of
the  waves  coming  in,  and  for  a  moment  I  had  the  impression  that  Arthur
"was  already  in  the  water  and  that  it  would  soon  be  my  turn.  But  on  look-
ing round  I  saw  he  was  still  in  his  place,  and  also  that  we  had  shipped  con-
siderable water.  The  next  thing  was  to  take  in  sail,  and  that  quickly.  I
let  go  the  halyards,  but  the  sail  would  not  come  down,  as  it  was  held  by  a
miserable  toggle  at  the  top.  In  the  excitement  of  the  moment  I  jumped
upon  the  seat  at  the  imminent  risk  of  caj)sizing  the  boat,  and  pulled  down
the  sail  as  far  as  it  would  go,  which  left  it  about  six  feet  high.  This  was
.still  dangerous,  as  the  slack  of  the  sail  was  distended,  looking  like  a  huge
bag.  This  was  remedied  by  cutting  away  the  rings  in  the  lower  part  of  the
sail  and  winding  up  the  lower  yard.  After  this,  with  considerable  baling,
we  got  along  tolerably  well.  We  expressed  our  confidence  in  God,  and  a
■desire  to  be  reconciled  to  His  will,  and  to  learn  the  lesson  which  might  be
intended  for  us.  Gradually  our  spirits  rose,  and  we  got  considerable  enjoy-
ment from  the  rest  of  the  voyage,  especially  the  last  five  or  six  miles,  when
we  were  passing  swiftly  by  the  houses  and  small  towns  on  the  beautiful
northern  shore.  There  was  also  to  me  a  comical  side  to  the  adventure.
Arthur,  who  was  steering  with  a  rude  paddle,  could  not  stir  from  his  position
without  very  great  risk  ;  while  every  few  minutes  the  water  would  come
pouring  in  on  his  back,  tilling  his  pantaloons,  and  subduing  any  undue  exulta-
tion. Our  landing  was  quite  thrilling.  It  was  growing  very  dark  when  we
turned  in  for  the  shore,  where  we  supposed  our  home  to  be.  We  were  soon
rushing  through  a  sea  of  foam  ;  then  came  a  heavy  lurch,  followed  by  a
violent  shock,  which  nearly  sent  us  out  of  the  boat. Then  came  a  second


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.  363


shock,  when  we  jumped  into  the  water  and  soon  dragged  our  boat  out  of  the
way  of  the  waves.  We  started  for  Joppa,  which  was  about  a  mile  from  our
landing,  with  thankful  hearts  that  we  had  escaped  a  terrible  death,  with  no
damage  worse  than  wet  clothing.  It  was  a  quarter  to  six  when  we  landed  ;
so  that  it  took  us  just  three  hours  to  come  up  the  lake,  the  same  distance
that  it  took  us  full  seven  hours  in  going  down  the  day  before.

Charles  R.  Marks.

The  Vision.

W.  O,  January  Uth,  1874.

Dear  H., — You  -wish  the  simple  facts  of  my  dream.  They  are  these  : —
One  afternoon  in  October,  being  tired,  I  lay  down  to  rest.  I  soon  fell
?isleep  ;  at  least  I  have  no  reason  for  thinking  that  I  did  not  sleep.  I  was
not  on  the  bed  more  than  a  few  minutes.  During  this  time  I  dreamed  of
being  near  a  large  body  of  water.  I  knew  it  to  be  the  Oneida  Lake.  The
wind  was  blowing  violently,  and  the  waves  ran  exceedingly  high.  While
standing  near  the  lake  I  felt  under  a  strong  disposition  to  sleep.  My  eyes
were  heavy,  they  would  close  themselves.  It  was  with  an  exertion  that  I
kept  them  open.  I  was  like  a  man  under  nightmare  ;  struggling  to  rouse
myself,  yet  only  partially  successful.  Darkness  was  settling  over  me.
Suddenly,  when  the  wind  was  blowing  a  gale  and  the  waves  seemed  rolling
one  over  the  other,  a  small  sail-boat  broke  upon  my  sight,  driven  wildly
before  the  storm.  For  the  moment  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  be  lost.  It
appeared  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  waves,  for  they  rose  high  above  its  sides
and  almost  concealed  it  at  times.  It  was  manned  by  two  persons — one  in  the
after,  part  ;  the  other  truing  to  pull  down  the  sail  !  Their  situation  was
critical.  At  this  moment  a  feeling  of  horror  shot  through  me  as  I  recognised
in  the  man  whose  full  length  I  saw  standing  near  the  mast  and  struggling
with  the  sail  my  brother  Charles  !  The  man  in  the  stern  I  did  not  recognise.
Tn  the  time  of  the  greatest  peril,  something — I  can  scarcely  tell  what—  I
dare  not  call  it  an  apparition — gave  me  the  impression  that  good  beings  wero
interested  and  watchful  over  the  voyagers.

The  shock  I  received  on  seeing  my  brother  did  not  allow  me  to  sleep  long.
On  awaking  I  was  troubled,  and  thought  I  would  immediately  write  to
Charles,  entreating  him  to  be  careful.  Afterwards,  thinking  it  merely  a
dream,  I  turned  my  attention  from  writing,  but  I  mentioned  to  Frank
Smith  that  I  had  a  troubled  dream  about  Charles.  After  this  experience,
perhaps  three  or  four  days,  a  letter  was  received  from  Mrs.  Mallory  giving
an  account  of  Charles'  condition  when  he  returned  to  the  Joppa  station.1

This  letter  recalled  the  dream  ;  and  the  coincidence  of  time  and  circum-
.stances  made  a  deep  impression  on  me,  though  I  was  unable  then,  and  am
now,  to  accurately  identify  the  time  of  my  vision  with  the  time  of  actual
peril  described  in  Mrs.  Mallory's  letter.  (The  letter,  however,  came  so  soon
as  to  make  it  certain  that  the  peril  and  the  vision  were  nearly,  if  not
exactly,  simultaneous. )

On  my  late  visit  to  O.  O,  I  narrated  my  dream  to  Charles,  and  so  true
wras  it  to  the  facts  that  we  were  both  convinced  there  was  some  spiritual
telegraphy  that  made  me  see  his  danger.  Perhaps  at  that  awful  moment
when  he  struggled  with  the  sail  he  thought  of  me  and  his  mother  at

1  Published  in  the  Circular,  October  27th,  p.  349.

2  b  2


3G4


Mrs.  H.  SidgwicJc,


Wallingford,  and  on  that  thought  the  angels  carried  to  me  in  my  half-sleep
a  picture  of  his  situation,  with  an  intimation  of  their  care  over  him.  Who
can  suggest  a  better  philosophy  for  the  facts  ?

Frederic  A.  Marks.

The  paragraph  and  letter  published  in  the  Oneida  Circular  for
October  27th,  1873,  need  not  be  given  here.  They  contain  a  brief
account  of  the  adventure  agreeing  with  the  above.

Mr.  B.  Bristol  wrote  to  Mr.  Hodgson  on  February  24th,  1890,
again  giving  an  account  of  the  vision.  He  says :  "A  summer  shower-
had  driven  us  to  the  house.  Frederic  went  upstairs,  ike.  .  .  .  The-
dream  or  vision  left  him,  and  he  came  down  not  certain  that  he  had
been  asleep.  In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  when  the  family  were-
all  together,  the  subject  was  discussed  at  some  length.  The  general!
opinion  was  that  it  was  merely  a  dream."  I  quote  this  to  show  that
Mr.  Bristol  believes  the  vision  to  have  been  discussed  before  the  news;
of  the  adventure  was  received.

It  is  worth  considering  whether  "  the  summer  shower  " — violent,
enough  according  to  Mr.  Bristol's  recollection  to  drive  the  party  into-
the  house — may  have  resembled  the  storm  sufficiently  to  produce  a
community  of  ideas  between  the  brothers,  facilitating  the  telepathic
communication.

Mr.  Bristol  adds  about  the  brothers :  "  Both  are  men  of  high
character,  and  their  veracity  will  be  unquestioned  where  they  are
known."

I  proceed  to  the  third  and  more  definitely  clairvoyant  case.

(M.  24.)  We  have  received  the  following  from  our  Corresponding
Member,  Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  of  Kalmar,  who  has  kept  the  original
account  of  the  brothers  Suhr,  sending  us  a  translation.

In  answer  to  a  letter  asking  Mr.  A.  Suhr,  photographer  at  Ystad,  in
Sweden,  whether  he  could  remember  anything  about  a  hypnotic  experiment
made  by  Mr.  Hansen  many  years  ago,  in  the  presence  of  the  brothers  Suhr,
Dr.  Backman  received  the  following  account : —

"It  was  in  the  year  1867  that  we,  the  undersigned  brothers,  were  settled
as  photographers  at  Odense  [in  Denmark],  and  very  often  visited  our  common
friend,  the  hypnotist,  Mr.  Carl  Hansen,  who  was  living  near  us.  A  lawyer,
Mr.  Balle,  who  is  now  an  advocate  in  Copenhagen,  and  whom  we  met  daily,
was  strongly  influenced  hypnotically  by  Hansen,  and  wished  one  evening  to
be  put  into  so  deep  a  hypnotic  sleep  as  to  become  clairvoyant.

"The  first  time  it  happened  was  on  the  16th  of  January,  at  9.30  in  the
evening,  as  we  can  see  from  some  notes  taken  at  the  time,  and  which  we  still
possess.  Mr.  Hansen  made  Mr.  Balle  sit  down  in  a  chair  and  lay  his  head
back,  and  by  steadily  making  passes  he  put  him  into  a  very  deep  sleep.  Mr.
Hansen  showed  that  when  he  opened  the  eyelids  one  could  only  see  the
white  of  the  eye,  declaring  the  pupils  to  be  turned  inwards.  Mr.  Hansen
took  his  hand  and  asked  him  if  he  could  hear  what  he  said,  and  having
jepeated  the  question  several  times,  got  the  answer  'Yes,'  but  with  a  hollow


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.  365


and  toneless  voice.  Mr.  Hansen  now  tried  whether  he  could  see  with  his
forehead,  holding  a  small  bottle  over  his  head  and  asking  if  he  could  see
what  it  was.  Mr.  Hansen  having  breathed  on  his  forehead  and  several
times  repeated  the  question,  Mr.  Balle  said  correctly  that  it  was  a  little  bottle.
He  then  took  other  objects,  which  Mr.  Balle  also  saw.  Hansen  now  believing
Balle  to  be  clairvoyant  made  him  go  mentally  to  other  places  to  see  and  tell
him  what  he  saw.  He  put  different  questions  to  him  about  persons  and
things,  which  Balle  answered  correctly  and  in  accordance  with  the  fact,  but
as  it  would  take  too  long  to  tell  them  all,  and  as  they  were  of  minor  impor-
tance, we  will  confine  ourselves  to  some  examples  that  seem  to  us  to  be
specially  important,  and  for  the  truth  and  trustworthiness  of  which  we  are
answerable.

"I.  We  had  a  relative,  Officer  of  Woods  and  Forests,  Carl  Bloch,  who  lived
about  two  miles  [about  12  English  miles. — Backmaii]  from  Odense,  at  the
country  house  Langesoe,  but  unknown  to  both  Hansen  and  Balle  ;  we  also
knew  that  neither  of  them  had  ever  visited  our  relative.  We  wished  then
to  know  how  he  and  his  wife  were,  and  asked  Hansen  to  make  Balle  go  to
them  and  see. The  questions  and  answers  ran  as  follows  : —

"  Hansen  :  '  Go  to  the  place  of  which  I  am  now  thinking  and  try  to  find
the  person  of  whom  I  am  thinking  but  whom  I  have  never  seen. '

"Balle;  'Now  I  am  there.  A  little  man,  with  moustaches,  is  sitting  in  a
room  and  is  reading  in  the  Dagbladet  about  the  naval  captain  Muschoklt  and
Bothe  ;  he  is  reading  aloud  ;  now  he  speaks  ;  he  says,  "  It  is  ridiculous  that
the  Government  should  not  have  given  Bothe  the  same — such  is  the  reac-
tionary business. "  There  is  also  a  lady  present  who  is  sewing,  and  a  little
boy.  Now  he  falls,  but  that  did  not  hurt  him — he  stands  up  again  now.  The
lady  says,  ' '  It  is  astonishing  that  Valdemar  has  not  let  us  hear  anything  of
himself!  What  was  it  that  he  meant  to  bring  us?"  He  answers,  "I  don't
know,  but  he  will  explain  when  he  comes  again."  '

"Hansen:  'What  is  the  room  like?'  Balle:  'Very  nice.  Four  arm-
chairs or  "Fouffes."  A  drawing,  which  I  know,  is  hanging  over  the  sofa —
a  dog.1

"Hansen:  'Are  there  other  pictures  ? '  Balle  :  '  Yes,  a  hunting  piece,  a
stag.'  Hansen  :  'Is  there  nothing  else  remarkable?'  Balle:  'Oh,  yes,  there
is  no  mirror.'  Hansen:  'What  colour  are  the  walls?'  Balle:  '  They  are  red.'
Hansen:  'Are  they  good  people?' Balle:  'Yes,  very  good,  excellent  people.'

"  We  may  remark  that  the  description  of  the  persons  and  the  room  was
completely  correct."

So  far,  as  we  do  not  know  that  the  actual  conversation,  &c,  at
Langesoe  was  correctly  described,  we  cannot  say  that  Mr.  Balle's
statements  involved  knowledge  not  in  the  mind  of  any  person  present.
But  in  the  next  experiment  we  get  beyond  this.

"II.  Our  mother  lived  at  that  time  at  Boeskilde,  in  Seeland.  We
asked  Hansen  to  cause  Balle  to  visit  her.  It  was  late  in  the  evening,  and
after  some  hesitation  on  Mr.  Balle's  part  he  made  the  journey  in  a  few

1  The  undersigned  Valdemar  Bloch  Suhr  had  in  reality  sketched  the  dog  of  the
wood-officer  Bloch,  and  given  the  drawing  to  him.  Balle  had  really  seen  me  work-
ing at  the  drawing,  and  my  relative  had  hung  it  over  his  sofa  in  a  frame.


366


Mrs.  H.  Siclgwich.


minutes.  He  found  our  mother  sick  and  in  bed,  but  with  a  slight  cold  only,,
which  would  pass  off  in  a  short  time.  We  did  not  believe  this  to  be  true,
and  Hansen  asked  Balle  to  read  on  the  corner  of  the  house  the  name  of  the
street.  Balle  said  it  was  too  dark  to  read,  but  Hansen  insisted  and  he  read
'  Skomagerstrcede.'  We  believed  this  to  be  quite  wrong,  for  we  knew  that
our  mother  lived  in  quite  a  different  street.  After  several  days  we  got  a  letter
from  our  mother,  saying  that  she  had  been  sick  and  had  removed  to>
Skomagerstrtede.

"III.  The  undersigned,  V.  B.  Suhr's  wife,  then  Miss  Clara  Vilhelmine
Christensen,  was  witness  to  a  third  experiment.

"  My  wife  lived  at  this  time  at  Stora  Goothaab,  a  large  farm  which  lies
on  the  Goothaab  road,  near  Copenhagen,  but  she  had  gone  to  Odense  to  see
a  relative  and  Mr.  Hansen  and  his  wife,  who,  as  already  stated,  were  at  that
time  settled  at  Odense.  The  seance  took  place  in  the  before-mentioned
room.

"  My  wife  wished  to  know  how  tilings  were  at  home,  at  Stora  Goothaab,  in
the  house  of  the  telegraphic  engineer,  Schjotz,  with  whose  family  she  lived,
and  she  therefore  asked  Mr.  Hansen  to  ask  Mr.  Balle  about  it.  She  knew
very  well  that  neither  Mr.  Hansen  nor  Mr.  Balle  had  ever  been  at  the  place
in  question.  Mr.  Hansen  now  took  a  letter  written  by  my  wife  and  put;
it  on  the  forehead  of  the  hypnotised  Mr.  Balle,  saying  :  '  Try  to  find  the
place  where  the  writer  of  this  letter  lives.'  Balle:  'It  is,  of  course,  not
necessary,  she  is  here  in  the  room.'  Mr.  Hansen  now  insisted  strongly  that
Mr.  Balle  must  find  the  house,  and  after  some  reluctance,  first  because  he
must  cross  the  water  (the  Hora  Bait),  and  then  because,  as  he  said,  when  he
reached  the  Goothaab  road,  '  It  is  so  dark  here.'  '  Lighten  up  your  spirit
and  see,'  said  Hansen,  and  Balle  went  on.  'Now  I  am  here,'  he  said  a
little  later.  Hansen  :  '  What  do  you  see  ? '  Balle  :  '  It  is  like  a  castle. '
H. :  '  Go  in  to  the  house. '  B.  :  '  Here  are  broad  stairs. '  H .  :  '  All  right !  Now
you  must  go  into  the  lady's  room.'  B. :  'There  is  nobody  there.'  H.  :  'Is
there  no  living  creature?'  B.  :  'Oh  yes!  a  canary  bird  in  a  cage.'  H.  :
'  Where  is  it  standing  1 '  B.  :  Upon  a  chest  of  drawers.'  My  wife  remarked
that  this  was  not  right,  because  the  cage  always  stood  in  the  window,  but
Balle  insisted  upon  it.

' '  There  were  four  children  in  the  family,  and  my  wife  wished  to  know  how
it  fared  with  them.  H.  :  '  Go  in  to  the  family  and  see  how  the  children  are. '
B.:  '  Here  are  two — in  bed.'  H.  :  '  You  must  find  more.'  Balle  searched  much
to  find  the  others  ;  at  last  he  exclaimed  :  '  Here  is  one  more  !  Oh  no,  it  is  a
doll,'  he  said  indignantly,  and  moved  his  hand  as  though  he  were  throwing
something  away.  In  spite  of  Mr.  Hansen's  insistence,  Mr.  Balle  continued
to  be  unable  to  find  more  than  two  children.  But  he  found  a  lady  in  bed  and
very  ill,  nearly  dying.  My  wife  knew  this  to  be  correct.  It  was  a  Miss
Marie  Kruse,  a  sister  of  Mrs.  Sehjotz.  She  was  very  ill  when  my  wife  left
Copenhagen,  and  the  doctor  did  not  think  she  could  live  as  she  was  con-
sumptive in  the  highest  degree.  H.  :  '  How  is  it  with  Miss  Kruse  ? '
B.  :  '  She  is  very  ill. '  II.  ;  '  Will  she  die  or  recover  ? '  B.  :  '  She  will  recover. '

"  When  my  wife  went  back  to  Stora  Goothaab  she  said  nothing  about
what  had  occurred,  but  asked  Miss  Caroline  Kruse,  another  sister  of  Mrs.
Sehjotz,  if  her  canary  bird  had  been  well  while  she  was  away,  and  if  he


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.  367


always  stood  in  the  window.  Miss  Kruse  answered  that  he  had  always  been  in
the  same  place  in  the  window  except  at  night  ;  then  she  had  put  him  on  the
chest  of  drawers  to  save  him  from  the  cold.  And  about  the  children  she
said  that  two  of  them,  just  on  the  clays  in  question,  had  been  visiting  their
father's  brother,  the  tobacco  manufacturer  Schjotz,  Kjobmagergade-street,
Copenhagen.  The  sick  lady  is  still  alive,  and  has  been  for  many  years
manager  in  a  large  and  well  thought-of  school  for  girls  at  Fredriksbergs
Alle,  near  Copenhagen.

"Signed  in  witness  of  the  truth  of  the  above,

"Anton  Vilhelm  Suhr,  Photographer,

"  Ystad  [Sweden]. August  30th,  1891.
"  Valdemar  Bloch  Suhr,  Dramatic  Artist  and  Painter."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Anton  Suhr  tells  me  on  a  postcard,  dated
October  9th,  1891:  "The  notes  that  you  have  got  are  an  abridgment  of
the  protocol  (my  brother  has  it  in  his  possession,  and  he  wrote  it  at  the  clair-
voyant experiments)  and  are  in  just  the  same  words."

Alfred  Backman.

We  first  heard  of  this  case  of  clairvoyance  from  Mr.  Hansen,  who
kindly  wrote  out  for  us  the  following  account  of  his  own  recollection
of  the  circumstance,  and  referred  us  to  Mr.  Anton  Suhr  for  confirma-
tion. It  was  some  time  before  we  had  the  opportunity  of  communi-
cating with  Mr.  Suhr  in  Swedish.

May  13th,  1889.

In  conversation  with  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  I  happened  to  mention  an  instance
of  what  I  consider  independent  clairvoyance.  Dr.  Myers  then  requested
me  to  put  it  down  in  writing.  I  now  proceed  to  do  so  and  shall  endeavour
to  record  the  facts  as  concisely  as  I  can,  believing  that  my  memory  serves  me
correctly  ;  should  I,  however,  make  any  mistakes,  then  these  may  be  rectified
by  two  gentlemen  who  were  present  at  the  occurrence  and  whose  names  I
shall  give.

In  the  year  1867  I  was  living  in  Odense,  Denmark,  and  often  received
visits  from  two  young  gentlemen  established  in  that  town  as  photographers  ;
they  are  brothers,  the  elder  one  named  Valdemar  Bloch  Suhr,  the  younger
one  Anton  Suhr,  sons  of  a  famous  landscape  gardener,  and  nephews  of  the
then  favourite  preacher,  the  Rev.  Bloch  Suhr,  at  Helliggeistes  Church,
Copenhagen.  Besides  these,  I  often  saw,  as  a  visitor  in  my  house,  a
young  man  named  Valdemar  Balle,  who  is  now  established  as  a  lawyer  in
Copenhagen.

On  several  occasions  I  had  hypnotised  Mr.  Balle  but  only  tried  to  let  him
fall  into  the  hypnotic  state  characterised  by  lethargy  and  antesthesia,  or  else
to  induce  illusions  or  hallucinations,  in  fact  the  experiments  had  been  made
more  for  the  entertainment  of  my  two  friends,  the  brothers  Suhr,  than  for
any  purpose  of  investigation.  Mr.  Balle,  however,  who  at  that  time  was
studying  and  working  very  hard,  felt  himself  very  much  refreshed  and
strengthened  after  eacli  magnetic  sleep,  and  would  sometimes  ask  me  to  put
him  to  sleep  for  a  short  time,  after  which  he  generally  felt  very  lively  and
took  a  very  active  part  in  the  conversation.  On  two  or  three  such  occasions
he  gave,  during  his  sleep,  indications  of  clairvoyance,  the  circumstances,


368


Mrs.  H.  SidgivicJc.


however,  have  been  forgotten  by  me  ;  may  be  that  my  friend,  Bloch  Suhr,  who
has  an  excellent  memory,  can  remember  them.  The  following  occurrence,
however,  stands  clear  in  my  memory.

One  evening,  when  I  had  hypnotised  Mr.  Balle,  and  he  was  fast  asleep  in
an  easy-chair,  the  elder  of  the  brothers  Suhr  requested  me  to  try  if  Balle
mentally  could  travel  to  Roskilde,  a  town  in  Seeland,  distant  about  75  or  80
English  miles,  16  of  which  are  sea,  and  there  see  if  Suhr's  mother  was  well.
I  consented  to  try,  and  told  Balle  to  go  to  Roskilde.  He  at  first  was  unwilling
to  do  so  ;  afterwards  he  said,  "  I  am  in  Nyborg  "  (a  town  16  miles  distant)
"  but  I  do  not  like  to  cross  the  water,  it  is  so  dark."  I  told  him  not  to  mind
but  to  go  on  to  Roskilde.  Shortly  after  he  said,  "  I  am  in  Roskilde."
"  Well  then,  find  Mrs.  Suhr,"  was  my  reply.  The  moment  after  he  said  that
he  was  standing  outside  Mrs.  Suhr's  abode.  I  asked  him,  in  order  to  verify
his  correctness,  ' '  Where  does  she  live  ?  "  He  gave  me  the  name  of  the  street,
and,  if  I  remember  rightly,  said  it  was  the  corner  house.

As  I  did  not  know  Mrs.  Suhr  nor  her  address,  I  looked  round  at  Mr.
Suhr,  my  face  expressing  the  question,  "  Ts  it  correct  ?  "  but  Suhr  shook  his
head  and  made  such  gestures  as  told  me  that  the  clairvoyant  was  mistaken.
I  then  said  to  Balle  that  he  was  mistaken  and  should  look  again.  He,  how-
ever, in  a  rather  indignant  tone  of  voice,  told  me  he  was  not  mistaken,  say-
ing, "What!  cannot  I  read?  There,  the  name  of  the  street  is  written,  you  can
see  it  yourself."  I  believe  the  name  of  the  street  was  Skomagerstnede,  but
am  not  sure  of  this.  I  remember,  however,  that  the  two  brothers  Suhr  both
told  me  it  was  the  wrong  street.  As  the  clairvoyant,  however,  seemed
offended  at  my  trying  to  correct  him,  I  made  no  more  remark  to  him  about
•what  we  thought  his  mistake,  but  requested  him  to  enter  the  house  and  see
if  Mrs.  Suhr  was  well.  He  at  first  seemed  unwilling,  and  made  the  excuse
that  the  door  was  shut.  I  told  him  not  to  mind,  but  to  go  in  all  the  same.
"I  am  in,"  was  his  next  reply,  and  then  I  asked  him,  How  is  Mrs.  Suhr  ?
"  She  is  in  bed,  not  quite  well;  the  illness,  however,  is  of  no  moment;  it  is
only  a  slight  cold.  She  is  thinking  of  Valdemar;  she  will  write  him  a  letter,
and  there  are  three  things  she  will  write  about."  He  then  mentioned  three
things  relating  to  business.  What  they  were  I  have  forgotten.  I  then  woke
him  up,  the  brothers  Suhr  remarking  that  the  information  he  had  given  was  of
no  value  as  there  was  a  decided  mistake  in  it,  namely,  with  regard  to  their
mother's  address,  as  she  did  not  live  where  Balle  had  said.  I  believe  it
was  two  days  after  when  Valdemar  Suhr  received  a  letter  from  his  mother,
which  proved  that  Mr.  Balle  had  been  in  the  right.  Mrs.  Suhr  had,  namely,
removed  to  the  house  mentioned  by  Balle  during  the  hypnotic  state  without
her  sons  having  . any  idea  that  she  was  going  to  do  so.  She  had  really  had  a
.slight  cold,  and  she  did  write  to  her  son  about  the  three  matters  mentioned
by  Balle,  and,  as  I  remember  being  told,  nearly  in  the  same  words  he  had
used.

Now,  I  must  mention  that  neither  Mr.  Balle  nor  I  knew  anything  of  Mrs.
Suhr.  We  had  never  seen  her  ;  neither  of  us  had  ever  been  in  the  town
Roskilde,  nor  did  we  know  the  names  of  the  streets  there  ;  therefore,  it
seems  to  me  that  there  could  be  no  telepathy  in  this  case,  as  the  clairvoyant
could  not  read  an  address  we  had  no  idea  about,  nor  would  it  be  likely  to
come  into  his  brain  from  any  unconscious  memory. In  fact,  T  have  looked  at


Supplement  on  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance.  369


the  case  from  all  the  points  of  view  that  I  can,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  the
finding  of  the  town  and  the  address  are  pure  clairvoyance,  whereas  from  the
moment  the  clairvoyant  entered  the  room  of  Mrs.  Suhr,  he  seems  to  have
hecome  a  thought-reader.

Carl  Hansen,  Hypnotiseur.

We  have  in  this  case  three  definite  facts  mentioned  by  the  clair-
voyant which  were  unknown  to  all  present  and  not,  so  far  as  we  can
see,  likely  to  be  guessed ; — namely,  the  street  in  which  Mrs.  Suhr  lived,
the  position  of  the  canary,  and  the  absence  of  the  children.  And  the
last  one,  as  described,  looks  more  like  independent  clairvoyance  than
any  kind  of  thought-reading,  because  had  Mr.  Balle  obtained  his
information  from  the  mind  of  any  person  at  Stora  Goothaab  one  would
suppose  that  he  would  at  once  have  said,  "The  other  childi"en  are  away,"
instead  of  mentally  searching  the  house  and  not  finding  them.


370


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


III.

NOTE ON A VISIT TO  KALMAR.
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  account  given  in  Part  XIX.  of  Dr.  Backman's  experiments
with  several  clairvoyantes  will  no  doubt  have  awakened  the  interest
and  curiosity  of  our  readers.  Dr.  Back  man,  it  will  be  remembered,
began  by  disclaiming  scientific  precision  in  his  earlier  and  more  striking
experiments,  which  were  made  before  the  full  importance  of  the  inquiry
was  realised.  He  readily  complied,  however,  with  our  request  that  he
would  continue  his  researches  as  soon  as  practicable,  and  he  was  kind
enough  to  offer  a  welcome  to  any  of  us  who  might  care  personally  to
witness  further  trials  of  the  same  kind.  In  response  to  this  invitation,
a  party,  consisting  of  Professor  Richet,  M.  Houdaille,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,
and  myself  disembarked  at  Kalmar  on  August  12th.1

We  were  most  cordially  received,  and  were  allowed  to  witness  and
to  conduct  experiments  with  all  the  subjects  at  the  time  attainable.
Among  these,  however,  Alma  Radberg  was  the  only  one  whom  we
were  able  to  see  sufficiently  often  to  overcome  the  shyness  and  timidity
which  stood  in  the  way  of  a  fair  trial  in  the  presence  of  strangers.
Even  with  Alma  there  was  much  difficulty  of  this  kind  ;  and  we  do
not  consider  that  our  own  series  of  experiments  was  long  enough  to
justify  an  independent  conclusion  ; — although,  as  will  be  seen,  we  had
two  successes  decidedly  corroborative  of  Dr.  Backman's  results.  Per-
haps the  most  important  outcome  of  our  visit  was  the  conviction  which
we  all  of  us  gained  as  to  the  absolute  candour  and  disintei-ested  desire
for  truth  with  which  Dr.  Backman's  experiments  are  conducted,  and
the  simplicity  and  good  faith  of  the  subjects  whom  he  employs.

I  will  now  recount  two  experiments  which  we  class  as  at  least
partial  successes.  In  the  first  of  them  the  conditions  were  slightly
defective ;  in  the  second  they  were,  I  think,  satisfactory.

Experiment  I.  August  15th. — Alma  lightly  hypnotised  by  Dr.
Backman.  Professor  Richet  gives  her  a  letter  written  in  French,  which
she  does  not  know,  and  so  folded  as  to  be  unreadable.  This  she  holds
in  one  hand,  with  shut  eyes.

"  This  letter,"  she  says,  "  comes  from  a  long  way  off ;  from  a  man
of  middle  age,  dark,  but  not  extremely  so  ;  high  forehead,  curved  nose,


1  This  paper  has  been  revised  by  Professor  Richet  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers.


Note  on  a  Visit  to  Kalmar.


371


a  teacher  ;  hah'  very  short,  small  beard ;  moustache  and  imperial,
whiskers  small  or  none.  He  rests  one  hand  on  his  hip,  and  seems  to
stoop  slightly  to  one  side.

"  The  letter  asks  for  information  ;  something  about  time ;  when
something  will  happen  or  be  clone  ;  it  is  a  rendezvous  ;  several  persons
are  to  meet;  one  of  them  is  tall  and  very  dark  ;  the  meeting  is  about
a  journey ;  the  tall  dark  man  is  M.  Richet,  or  is  like  him  ;  they  are  to
meet  in  a  town  and  to  have  a  conference."

Alma  was  then  awakened  ;  but  (as  usual  with  Dr.  Backman's  sub-
jects) she  remembered  her  trance-sensations,  and  was  able  to  add
further  details.

"  The  writer  has  marked  features ;  a  noticeable  face  ;  aged  about
45  or  50,  name  of  three  syllables,  beginning  with  R.  or  B.  His  hair
is  dark  brown  with  some  grey  in  it."

Now  this  letter  was  in  fact  from  Professor  Nicolas  G.,  of  Moscow,
asking  Professor  Richet  when  he  would  be  in  Moscow,  and  inviting
him  and  myself  to  meet  him  in  Moscow  and  make  a  trip  to  his
country-seat  and  other  places  ; — the  primary  object  of  the  meeting
being  a  kind  of  "conference."  The  description  of  Professor  G.  is  also
practically  correct.

The  account  given,  therefore,  was  satisfactory  on  almost  all  points
except  the  name  of  the  writer.

This  experiment  was  tried  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  when  Alma
failed  in  reading  cards  placed  back  upwards  upon  her  laj:> ;  and  the  con-
ditions were  defective  in  the  following  ways  : — (1)  "I  had  already,"
says  M.  Richet,  "  half  an  hour  before,  handed  the  letter  to  Mr.  Myers
to  read,  and  he  had  replied  'good.'  Alma,  who  was  asleep  at  the  time,
had  not  remarked  this,  and  was  absolutely  ignorant  that  the  letter
handed  to  her  was  the  same."  (2)  M.  Richet,  who  knew  the  contents
of  the  letter,  remained  in  the  room,  although  he  took  care  to  say
nothing  and  to  give  no  indication.  He  sat  with  his  back  turned,  and
his  face  to  the  wall.  (3)  I,  who  took  notes,  knew  the  contents  of  the
letter  ;  but  I  checked  my  notes  by  those  of  Dr.  Myers,  who  did  not
know  the  contents.

Experiment  II. — It  is  easy  to  avoid  these  possibilities  of  unconscious
suggestion;  and  on  August  17th,  after  more  failures  with  cards,  we  tried
the  impressions  derived  from  letters  under  more  careful  conditions.
M.  Richet  handed  to  me  a  letter  unknown  to  me,  and  left  the  room.  I
gave  it  to  Alma  to  hold,  and  took  down  notes  of  what  she  said  (as
translated  from  Swedish  into  French  by  Dr.  Backman),  which  notes  I
completed  before  I  learnt  anything  of  the  letter.  There  was  thus  no
possibility  of  unconscious  suggestion.

Alma's  words,  then,  were  as  follows : —


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


' '  The  writer  expresses  a  desire.  Wishes  to  arrive  at  something — to
see  something  ;  something  which  is  to  be  accomplished  in  a  town — a
thing  which  they  are  to  have  at  that  place.  A  desire  to  see  something,
or  to  travel.  A  request  or  command  to  do  something  ;  something
about  a  visit.  Tt  concerns  something  of  metal ;  the  metal  object  can
be  open  and  shut  again  (movement  with  hands).  Part  of  the  metal  is
polished  and  part  is  black.  It  is  something  which  one  uses  in  travel-
ling— about  half  a  yard  long  and  six  inches  broad  (signs)  ;  oblong,  like
a  screen  (ecran).  It  is  a  command  rather  than  a  wish, — a  question  of
time  and  opportunity.  The  writer  asks  about  something  which  he  has
received  or  sent.  It  is  a  person  who  wishes  to  meet  another.  At  the
end  of  the  letter  he  speaks  of  the  moment  of  this  meeting.  It  is  a
thing  which  will  be  decided  when  the  persons  meet ; — something  scien-
tific which  will  be  settled."

The  letter  related  to  a  flying-machine  which  Professor  Richet  is
engaged  in  constructing  with  the  aid  of  the  friend  who  writes.  I  sub-
join a  translation  : —

"Paris,  April  Uth,  1891.

"  My  dear  Friend, — I  had  left  Havre  when  your  letter  arrived
there,  but  have  now  received  it  in  Paris.  As  I  telegraphed  to  you,  we
had  satisfactory  weather  on  Wednesday  evening  and  on  Thursday  till
10  a.m.  We  tried  the  small  machine,  which  behaved  much  better  than
its  still  smaller  brothers  ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  always  turned  over  on
the  same  side.  This  seems  to  result  from  the  current  of  air  on  the
beach.  It  made  nearly  the  same  journey  as  our  large  machine  last
year,  and  fell  in  about  the  same  spot.  The  working  of  the  blades  was
absolutely  perfect."

A  criticism  on  a  rival  flying-machine  concludes  the  letter.  There
is  no  actual  appointment  of  a  meeting  ;  but  Professor  Richet  says  that
the  need  of  a  meeting  between  himself  and  his  friend  is  clearly  im-
plied. The  machine  is  in  fact  roughly  oblong  and  screw-shaped,  and
partly  metallic;  but  the  great  model  is  larger  than  described  by  Alma;
nor  do  the  wings  open  and  shut.

On  the  whole,  however,  and  considering  the  absolute  unexpected-
ness of  the  subject-matter  to  Alma,  the  coincidences  are  striking
enough.

We  tried  Alma  with  two  other  letters,  but  her  accounts  of  these
were  vague  and  incorrect.

Experiments  of  this  kind  are  no  doubt  less  definite  and  cogent  than
experiments  in  the  naming  of  cards,  numbers,  names, — or  something
which  admits  of  a  definite  calculation  of  chances.  If  a  clairvoyante
could  correctly  name  an  unseen  card  six  times  running,  the  possibility  of
clairvoyance  would  be  quickly  settled. But  Ave  know  too  little  of  the


Notes  on  a  Visit  to  Kahnar.


373


nature  of  this  obscure  power  to  allow  us  to  demand  any  one  feat  as  the
condition  of  our  belief.  It  is  possible  that  supernormal  knowledge
may  reach  the  percipient  less  readily  when  of  a  purely  impersonal  kind
(as  of  a  card  in  an  envelope)  than  when  it  has  some  vivid  connection
with  other  minds,  as  with  a  letter  from  a  person  at  a  distance.  We
are  bound  to  try  all  methods,  trusting  to  care  and  repetition  to  ovei*-
come  the  evidential  weaknesses  to  which  each  method  is  liable.

One  more  word  may  be  added  as  to  the  temper  of  mind  in  which
these  inquiries  should  be  carried  on.  "Where  jjroper  conditions  have
been  agreed  upon  beforehand,  and  are  strictly  observed,  it  may  very
likely  be,  as  Dr.  Backman  thinks,  a  positive  advantage  that  the
operator  should  vividly  believe  that  the  rarer  phenomena  are  likely  to
appear.  We  do  not  yet  know  the  whole  power  of  suggestion ;  and
much  as  the  Salpetriere  subjects  are  unconsciously  trained  into  a  cer-
tain sequence  of  physical  conditions  rarely  observed  elsewhere,  so  also
may  it  be  possible  for  the  operator's  expectation  to  stimulate  the
subject's  hypnotic  self  into  the  exercise  of  a  lucidity  which  might  else
have  remained  dormant.

The  fact  that  these  higher  phenomena  so  seldom  appear  may  thus  be
largely  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  so  little  believed  in,  and  so  seldom
looked  for.  In  this,  as  in  so  many  branches  of  our  research,  the  one
thing  needful  is  to  substitute  careful,  widespread,  persistent  experi-
ment for  the  loose  talk,  whether  of  credulity  or  of  negation,  which  is
already  to  hand  in  quite  sufficient  quantity.

To  Dr.  Backman  the  thanks  of  serious  students  are  already  due ; —
and  will  be  due  in  still  larger  measure  if  his  engagements  should  allow
him  to  carry  on  systematically  the  series  of  experiments  so  promisingly
begun.


374


Oliver  J.  Lodge.


IV.

SOME  RECENT  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  EXPERIMENTS.

By  Oliver  J.  Lodge.


While  staying  for  a  fortnight  this  autumn  in  the  house  of  Herr
von  Lyro,  at  Portschach  am  See,  Carinthia,  I  found  that  his  two  adult
daughters  were  adepts  in  the  so-called  "  willing-game,"  and  were
accustomed  to  entertain  their  friends  by  the  speed  and  certainty  with
which  they  could  perform  actions  decided  on  by  the  company ;  the
operator  being  led  either  by  one  or  by  two  others,  and  preferring  to  be
led  by  someone  to  whom  she  was  accustomed.  Another  lady  staying
in  the  house  was  said  to  be  able  to  do  things  equally  well,  but  not
without  nervous  prostration.

On  the  evening  when  I  witnessed  the  occurrences  nothing  done
could  be  regarded  as  conclusive  against  muscle-reading,  though  the
speed  and  accuracy  with  which  the  willed  action  was  performed  exceeded
any  muscle-reading  that  I  had  previously  seen,  and  left  me  little  doubt
but  that  there  was  some  genuine  thought-transference  power.

Accordingly  I  obtained  permission  to  experiment  in  a  more  satis-
factory manner,  and  on  several  occasions  tested  the  power  of  the  two
sisters,  using  one  as  agent  and  the  other  as  percipient  alternately.  Once
or  twice  a  stranger  was  asked  to  act  as  agent,  but  without  success.

The  operations  were  conducted  in  an  ordinary  simple  manner.
One  of  the  sisters  was  placed  behind  a  drawing  board,  erected  by  me
on  a  temporary  sort  of  easel,  while  the  other  sat  in  front  of  the  same
board;  and  the  objects  or  drawings  to  be  guessed  were  placed  on  a  ledge
in  front  of  it,  in  full  view  of  the  one  and  completely  hidden  from  the
other.

Naturally  I-  attended  to  the  absence  of  mirrors  and  all  such  obvious
physical  complications.  The  percipient  preferred  to  be  blindfolded,  but
no  precaution  was  taken  with  reference  to  this  blindfolding.  Agent
and  percipient  were  within  reach  of  one  another,  and  usually  held  each
other's  hands  across  a  small  table.  The  kind  and  amount  of  contact
was  under  control,  and  was  sometimes  broken  altogethei-,  as  is  sub-
sequently related.

The  ladies  were  interested  in  the  subject,  and  were  perfectly  willing
to  try  any  change  of  conditions  that  I  suggested,  and  my  hope  was
gradually  to  secure  the  phenomenon  without  contact  of  any  kind,  as  I
had  done  in  a  previous  case  (Vol.  II.,  p.  189);  but  unfortunately  in  the


Some  Recent  Thought-Transference  Experiments.  375


present  instance  contact  seemed  essential  to  the  transfer.  Very  slight
contact  was  sufficient,  for  instance  through  the  backs  of  the  knuckles;
but  directly  the  hands  were  separated,  even  though  but  a  quarter  of  an
inch,  the  phenomena  ceased,  to  reappear  again  directly  contact  was
established.  I  tried  whether  I  could  bridge  over  the  gap  effectively
with  my  own,  or  another  lady's,  hand;  but  that  did  not  do.  I  also  once
tried  both  sisters  blindfolded,  and  holding  each  other  by  one  hand,  while
two  other  persons  completed  the  chain  and  tried  to  act  as  agents.
After  a  time  the  sisters  were  asked  to  draw,  simultaneously  and  indepen-
dently, what  they  had  "seen";  but  though  the  two  drawings  were  close
imitations  of  each  other,  they  bore  no  likeness  to  the  object  on  which
the  agents  had  been  gazing.  (See  Plates  at  the  end  of  this  paper}
Plate  I.,  R.  1  (a)  and  R.  1  (b).)  My  impression,  therefore,  is  that
there  is  some  kind  of  close  sympathetic  connexion  between  the  sisters,
so  that  an  idea  may,  as  it  were,  reverberate  between  their  minds  when
their  hands  touch,  but  that  they  are  only  faintly,  if  at  all,  susceptible
to  the  influence  of  outside  persons.

Whether  the  importance  of  contact  in  this  case  depends  upon  the
fact  that  it  is  the  condition  to  which  they  have  always  been  accus-
tomed, or  whether  it  is  a  really  effective  aid,  I  am  not  sure.  I  have
explained  to  them  the  desirability  of  securing  the  results  without
contact,  if  possible,  and  it  may  happen  that  with  some  practice  they
will  find  themselves  able  to  dispense  with  it.  The  time  at  our  joint
disposal  was  limited,  and  I  was  not  able  to  do  more  than  set  things  in
train  for  more  striking  success  later,  provided  they  try  experiments
occasionally  and  do  not  get  tired  of  them.

So  far  as  my  own  observation  went,  it  was  interesting  and  new  to
me  to  see  how  clearly  the  effect  seemed  to  depend  on  contact,  and  how
abruptly  it  ceased  when  contact  was  broken.  While  guessing  through
a  pack  of  cards,  for  instance,  rapidly  and  continuously,  I  sometimes
allowed  contact  and  sometimes  stopped  it ;  and  the  guesses  changed,
from  frequently  correct  to  quite  wild,  directly  the  knuckles  or  finger
tips,  or  any  part  of  the  skin  of  the  two  hands,  ceased  to  touch.  It  was
almost  like  breaking  an  electric  circuit.  At  the  same  time,  partial
contact  seemed  less  effective  than  a  thorough  hand  grasp.

It  is  perfectly  obvious  how  strongly  this  dependence  on  contact
suggests  the  idea  of  a  code  ;  and  I  have  to  admit  at  once  that  this  flaw
prevents  this  series  of  observations  from  having  any  value  as  a  test
case,  or  as  establishing  de  novo  the  existence  of  the  genuine  power.  My
paper  only  appeals  to  those  who,  on  other  grounds,  have  accepted  the
general  possibility  of  thought-transference,  and  who,  therefore,  need  not
feel  unduly  strained  when  asked  to  credit  my  assertion  that  unfair
practices  were  extremely  unlikely ;  and  that,  apart  from  this  moral  con-
viction, there  was  a  sufficient  amount  of  internal  evidence  derived  from


376


Oliver  J.  Lodge.


the  facts  themselves  to  satisfy  me  that  no  code  was  used.  The
internal  evidence  of  which  I  am  thinking  was  :  (1)  the  occasionally
successful  reproduction  of  nameless  drawings  ;  (2)  the  occasional  failure
to  get  any  clue  to  an  object  or  drawing  with  a  perfectly  simple  and
easily  telegraphed  name ;  (3)  the  speed  with  which  the  guesses  were
often  made.

I  wish,  however,  distinctly  to  say  that  none  of  the  evidence  which
I  can  offer  against  a  prearranged  code  is  scientifically  and  impersonally
conclusive,  nor  could  it  be  accepted  as  of  sufficient  weight  by  a  sceptic  on
the  whole  subject.  It  is  only  because,  with  full  opportunity  of  forming
a  judgment,  and  in  the  light  of  my  former  experience,  I  am  myself
satisfied  that  what  I  observed  was  an  instance  of  genuine  sympathetic
or  syntonic  communication,  and  because  such  cases  seem  at  the  present
time  to  be  rather  rare,  that  I  make  this  brief  report  on  the  circum-
stances.

I  detected  no  well-marked  difference  between  the  powers  of  the  two'
sisters,  and  it  will  be  understood  that  one  of  them  was  acting  as  agent
and  the  other  as  percipient  in  each  case.  Sometimes  the  parents  of  the
girls  were  present,  but  often  only  one  or  two  friends  of  my  own,  who
wei'e  good  enough  to  invite  the  young  ladies  to  their  sitting-room  for
the  purpose  of  experiment ;  though  such  experiments  are,  when
carefully  performed,  confessedly  rather  tedious  and  dull.

In  the  early  willing-game  experiments,  such  things  were  done  as.
taking  a  particular  ring  from  one  person's  hand  and  putting  it  on
another's  ;  selecting  a  definite  piece  of  music  from  a  pile,  taking  it  to
the  piano,  and  beginning  to  play  it.  The  last  item  (the  beginning  to
play)  I  did  not  happen  to  witness,  but  I  was  told  of  it  by  several
persons  as  more  than  could  be  accounted  for  by  muscle-readiDg.  A
sceptic,  however,  could  of  course  object  that  imperfect  bandaging  would
easily  enable  a  title  to  be  read.

One  of  the  things  I  suggested  was  aimed  at  excluding  the  operation
of  unconscious  muscular  guidance  as  far  as  possible,  and  it  consisted  in
desiring  that  the  lady  while  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room  should
kick  off  her  shoes  without  touching  them  and  begin  to  sing  a  specified
song.  Success,  however,  was  only  partial.  After  one  or  two  attempts
to  wander  about  the  room  as  usual,  she  did  shuffle  a  shoe  off,  but  though
she  did  not  actually  touch  her  feet  she  stooped  so  that  the  held  hand
came  very  near  them.  She  then  stood  some  little  time  uncertain  what
to  do  next,  and  at  last  broke  silence  by  saying  "  Shall  I  sing  1 "

The  first  attempt  at  the  more  careful  experiments  was  not  at  all
successful,  but  novelty  of  conditions  may  fairly  be  held  responsible  for
that.  On  the  second  and  subsequent  evenings. success  was  much  more
frequent:  on  the  whole,  I  think,  more  frequent  than  failure.  I  proceed
to  give  a  fairly  complete  account  of  the  whole  series.


Some  Recent  Thought-Transference  Experiments.  377


The  first  object  was  a  teapot ;  but  there  was  no  result.

The  first  drawing  was  the  outline  of  a  box  with  a  flag  at  one  corner  ;
but  that  produced  no  impression.

Next,  for  simplicity,  I  explained  that  the  object  this  time  was  a
letter  (Buchstabe),  on  which  it  was  correctly  guessed  E.  Another  letter,
M,  was  given  quite  wrong.  A  childish  back-view  outline  of  a  cat  was
given  oval  like  an  egg  ;  some  other  things  were  imperceived.

On  the  second  evening  I  began  by  saying  that  the  object  was  a
colour  ;  on  which  red  was  instantly  and  correctly  stated.

A  blue  object  which  followed  was  guessed  wrong.

An  outline  figure  of  a  horse  was  correctly  named.  So  was  the
letter  B.  I  then  drew  a  square  with  a  diagonal  cross  in  it  and  a  round
ring  or  spot  just  above  the  cross,  the  whole  looking  something  like  the
back  of  an  envelope.  After  a  certain  interval  of  silence  (perhaps  two
minutes)  the  lady  said  she  was  ready  to  draw  what  she  had  "  seen,"  and
drew  the  thing  almost  exactly,  except  that  the  dot  was  put  right  on
the  centre  of  the  cross  instead  of  above  it,  and  a  superfluous  faint
vertical  stroke  was  added.  (See  Plate  I.,  O.  2  and  R.  2.)  Its  possible
resemblance  to  an  envelope  was  not  detected,  nor  did  the  reproduction
suggest  the  idea :  it  was  drawn  as,  and  looked  like,  a  nameless
geometrical  figure.

The  reproductions  were  nearly  always  much  smaller  in  size  than  the
originals.  The  agent  did  not  look  on  while  the  reproduction  was  being
made.  It  is  best  for  no  one  to  look  on  while  the  percipient  draws,  to
avoid  the  possibility  of  unconscious  indications.  The  original  drawings
were  always  made  by  me,  sometimes  before,  sometimes  during  the  sitting.
These  conditions  were  all  satisfactory.

On  the  third  evening  I  began  with  a  pack  of  cards,  running  through
them  quickly  ;  with  2  reporters,  one  recording  the  card  held  up,  the
other  recording  the  guess  made,  without  knowing  whether  it  was  right
or  wrong.  I  held  up  the  cards  one  after  the  other  and  gave  no  indica-
tion whether  the  guesses  were  right  or  wrong.  The  suit  was  not
attempted,  so  that  the  chances  of  error  were,  I  suppose,  12  to  1.

On  comparing  the  two  lists  afterwards,  out  of  1 6  guesses  only  6  were
wrong.  Full  contact  Avas  allowed  during  this  series.  The  lists  are
reproduced  below.

The  card  guessing  is  obviously  not  of  the  slightest  use  unless  bona
fides  are  certain,  but,  given  that,  it  affords  the  readiest  method  of  study-
ing the  effect  of  varied  conditions,  interposed  obstacles,  and  such  like.
The  whole  pack  was  always  used  and  I  simply  cut  it  at  random  and
held  up  the  bottom  card.  About  10  or  12  cards  could  be  got  through
in  a  minute.

The  following  is  the  list  of  the  first  card  series.  Full  contact
allowed  : —

2  c


378


Oliver  J.  Lodge.


CARD  LOOKED  AT.

CARD  GUESSED.

Seven  of  Spades

Seven

Six  of  Hearts

Six

Queen  of  Spades

  King

Nine  of  Spades

Nine

Three  of  Spades

  Six

Eight  of  Diamonds  ...

Eight

Ace  of  Clubs

  Ace

Knave  of  Diamonds  ...

Queen

Five  of  Diamonds

Five

Two  of  Spades

Ace

Ten  of  Hearts

Six

King  of  Diamonds

  King

Ace  of  Spades

  Ace

Nine  of  Diamonds

  Six

Eight  of  Hearts

  Eight

Fc  >ur  of  Spades

Four

Thus,  out  of  the  sixteen  trials,  10  were  correct  and  6  were  wrong-.

Some  guesses  were  made,  both  with  cards  and  objects,  on  another
evening,  Avithout  contact,  but  none  were  successful.  With  contact
there  was  success  again.

I  then  went  back  to  simple  drawings  ;  with  the  result  that  a  cross
was  reproduced  as  a  cross  (Plate  II.,  O.  3  and  R.  3) ;  a  figure  like
4  petals  was  reproduced  in  two  ways,  one  of  them  being  a  vague
5-petalled  figure. (Plate  II.,  O.  4  and  R.  4.)

An  object  consisting  of  an  ivory  measure  standing  on  end  like  an
inverted  V  was  drawn  as  shown  in  the  diagram,  Plate  II.,  R.  5  (a)  and
R.  5  (b).

A  sinuous  line  was  reproduced  as  a  number  of  sinuous  lines
(Plate  III.,  O.  6  and  R.  6)  ;  a  triangle  or  wedge,  point  downward,  was.
reproduced  imperfectly. (Plate  III.,  O.  7  and  R.  7.)

On  other  evenings  more  of  the  same  sort  of  thing  were  tried,  such
as  the  diagram  marked  O.  8,  reproduced  as  R.  8  (a)  and  R.  8  (b)
(Plate  IV.)  ;  a  face,  reproduced  as  3  rounds  with  dots  and  cross
(Plate  TV.,  O.  9  and  R.  9)  ;  and  a  figure  like  an  A  with  an  extra  long
cross  stroke,  which  could  be  easily  signalled  as  an  A,  but  which  was
reproduced  correctly  as  a  geometrical  diagram  with  the  long  stroke
prominent. (Plate  V.,  O.  10  and  R.  10  (a),  (b)  and  (c).)

A  circle  with  3  radii  reproduced  as  a  circle  with  roughly  inscribed
triangle. (Plate  V.,  O.  11  and  R.  11.)

The  number  3145  reproduced  orally  and  very  quickly  as  3146  ;
715  also  quickly  as  "  714,  no  715."  The  written  word  hund  repro-
duced correctly,  but  with  a  capital  initial  letter.

And  being  told  that  they  had  previously  thus  reproduced  a  word
in  an  unknown  language  (not  unknown  character),  viz.,  Hungarian,  I


Some  Recent  Thought-Transference  Experiments.  379


tried  the  G  reek  letters  <f>ai8<o  ;  this,  however,  was  considered  too  puzzling
and  was  only  reproduced  as  Uaso.  A  French  high-heeled  shoe,  made  of
crockery,  being  set  up  as  object,  it  was  drawn  by  the  percipient  very
fairly  correctly,  and  said  to  be  something  like  a  boot,  and  a  protuber-
ance was  tacked  on  where  the  heel  was. (Plate  V.,  R.  12.)

A  white  plaster  cast  of  a  child's  hand,  next  tried,  failed  to  give  any
impression.  An  unlighted  candle  in  candlestick  was  unsuccessful,  and
it  was  objected  that  there  was  too  much  glare  of  light.  Subsequently
the  percipient  said  she  had  seen  the  general  outline  of  a  candlestick  but
did  not  think  of  its  being  the  thing.  A  teapot  and  a  cup  both  failed,
and  two  of  the  drawings  did  not  succeed  in  getting  any  colourable
imitation.  Lastly,  another  set  of  card  trials  were  made,  with  the
object  of  testing  the  effect  of  vai'ious  kinds  of  contact :  a  card  series
being  quick  and  easy  to  run  through.


Contact  with  tips
fingers  only


of


Contact  with  one
finger  of  one  hand.


No  contact.


No  direct  contact,  hut
gap  bridged  by  other
person's  hand....

Slight  contact  of
knuckles


Full  contact  again.


CARD

CARD

EXHIBITED

NAMED  BY

TO  AGENT.

PERCIPIENT.

("  Nine  ...

.  Nine

1  XT*

I  King  ...

.  King

I  Knave...

Two

|  Nine

.  Nine

H  Nine

.  Ten

j  Queen ...

.  Two

[Eight

.  Eight

fFive

.  Six

I  Seven  ...

.  Seven

J  Three

.  Four

"'Ten

.  Six

Queen  ...

.  Two

Ace ,

.  Ace

f  Ace

.  Four

\  Knave...

.  Five

riving  ...

1  Four

Four

Eight

1  Ten

Seven

C  Eight

Six

Ace

1  Two

Two

,  Knave...

.  Ace

Seven

Six

1  Three

Three

\  Four  ...

Four

Ace  of  diamonds

Ace — red — diamond

Nine  of  clubs  held  sideways

Nine — clubs

The  record  of  this  series  is  more  complete  than  that  of  another
varying  contact  series,  but  it  did  not  strike  me  as  so  instructive  at


380


Oliver  J.  Lodge.


the  time  ;  and  as  it  came  toward  the  end  of  an  evening  there  was
probably  some  fatigue.

The  last  two  entries  represent  attempts  to  get  the  suit  as  well ;
but  as  the  particulars  are  given  in  stages  there  is  no  particular  advan^
tage  in  thus  naming  a  card  completely,  and  it  takes  a  longer  time.

On  another  evening  the  amount  of  contact  was  varied,  but  I  omitted
to  call  out  to  the  reporter  the  position  of  the  hands  with  reference  to
each  other.  One  hand  of  each  person  lay  on  a  table,  and  I  sometimes
made  them  touch,  sometimes  separated  them,  all  the  time  going  on
with  the  card  series.  My  impression  at  the  time  was,  as  expressed
above,  that  pronounced  failure  began  directly  I  broke  contact,  but  that
mere  knuckle  contact  was  sufficient  to  permit  some  amount  of  success.

I  can  only  give  the  record  as  it  stands.  I  believe  we  began  without
any  contact.

Second  Card  Series. Varying  amount  of  contact :  sometimes  none.

CARD  SHOWN.  CARD  GUESSED.


Two  of  Spades

Knave

Ace  of  Diamonds

r  lve

Knave  of  Diamonds  ...

Knave

10  of  Diamonds

9

6  of  Hearts

5

8  of  Hearts

9  '■•

9  of  Diamonds

Ace

King  of  Diamonds

King

10  of  Hearts

10

9  of  Clubs

9

Ace

Ace

Queen

Two

Queen

Queen

Knave

Ace

King

King

Eight

Eight

Eight

Eight

Seven

Eight

Ace

Ace

Knave

Knave

Seven

Seven

Four

Four

9  ..

6

Queen  ...

3

King

King

Ace  ...

(

Ace

5

5  ...

10

Some  Recent  Thought-Transference  Experiments.  381


CAED  SHOWN.  CARD  GUESSED.


5

4

6

  7

5

  3

6

  (5

2

o

... ...  o

3

  6

4

  4

2 8

4 5

3 4

3  ... ... ... ...  Knave

Where  lines  are  drawn  it  is  because  I  called  out  some  change  in  the
contact ;  but  I  made  other  changes  whose  occurrence  is  not  recorded.

The  only  use  to  be  made  of  the  record  of  this  series,  therefore,  is  to
treat  it  as  a  whole  and  to  observe  that  out  of  39  trials  16  were  correct
and  23  wrong.

On  this  occasion  there  was  one  reporter  who  wrote  down  both  what
he  saw  and  what  he  heard ;  and  the  operation  was  so  rapid  that  he  had
sometimes  barely  time  to  do  the  writing.  Towards  the  end  of  a  series,
fatigue  on  the  part  of  either  agent  or  percipient  generally  seemed  to
spoil  the  conditions.

It  is  manifest  that  these  experiments  should  not  be  conducted
too  long  consecutively,  nor  repeated  without  sufficient  interval ;  but
if  common  sense  is  used  there  is  nothing  deleterious  in  the  attempt,
and  if  more  persons  tried,  probably  the  power  would  be  found  more
widely  distributed  than  is  at  present  suspected.

I  wish  to  express  gratitude  to  the  Fraulein  von  Lyro  and  their
parents,  for  the  courtesy  with  which  they  acquiesced  in  my  request  for
opportunities  of  experiment,  and  for  the  willingness  with  which  they
submitted  to  dull  and  irksome  conditions,  in  order  to  enable  me  to  give
as  good  evidence  as  possible  to  the  Society.


The  illustrations  which  follow  are  traced  from  drawings  and  repro-
ductions made  in  the  experiments,  but  though  facsimiles  in  form  they
do  not  always  represent  satisfactorily  the  relative  clearness  and  faintness
of  some  of  the  lines.  0.  in  all  cases  stands  for  Original  drawing,  and
It.  for  Reproduction.


ft.


HZ


0.6


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


383


V.

ON  ALLEGED  MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS,  WITHOUT
CONTACT,  OCCURRING  NOT  IN  THE  PRESENCE
OF  A  PAID  MEDIUM.

By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

Part  II.

In  Part  XIX.  of  these  Proceedings  I  began  a  review  of  certain
cases  of  physical  movements  of  objects  which  it  seemed  difficult  to
explain  by  ordinary  laws.  I  divided  these  cases  roughly  into  four
classes,  premising  that  the  lines  of  demarcation  were  often  indistinct.
In  Class  A  I  placed  movements  which  seemed  a  development  of
automatism,  referable,  apparently  (if  not  to  ordinary  causes),  to  some
power  residing  in  the  automatist  or  "  medium  "  himself,  with  no
convincing  indication  of  any  external  source.  The  twelve  cases
which  I  quoted  all  belonged  to  Class  A.  Class  B  was  to  contain
cases  of  movement  apparently  connected  with  the  death  of  some
"agent"  at  a  distance;  Class  C,  movements  having  apparent  con-
nection with  some  agent  already  dead.  Class  D  was  reserved  for
some  anomalous  cases  in  which  no  indication  of  any  kind  as  to  the
source  of  the  movement  could  be  discerned.

I  now  proceed  to  give  a  further  instalment  of  our  evidence,  in
the  shape  of  a  case  which  may  provisionally  be  placed  in  Class  A,
but  which  illustrates  the  difficulty  of  deciding  under  what  conditions
an  influence  from  a  deceased  person  may  be  deemed  probable.

In  this  case  there  were  no  "  intellectual  phenomena,"  nothing  but
the  apparently  meaningless  throwing  about  of  pieces  of  wood — directed,
however,  by  some  intelligence,  so  as  to  attract  attention  without  doing
harm.  But  nevertheless  the  witnesses  of  these  phenomena  seem
generally  to  have  interpreted  them  as  caused  by  a  man  recently  dead,
in  order  to  terrify  a  man  still  living  into  an  act  of  honesty.  That
purpose  (as  they  believe)  was  attained,  and  the  disturbances  ceased.

If  on  other  grounds  we  considered  this  view  plausible,  the  gro-
tesqueness  and  vagueness  of  the  manifestations  themselves  would,  of
course,  be  no  objection.  We  cannot  tell  what  kind  of  power  it
might  be  possible  to  exert.  The  movements  of  objects  which  occurred
were  of  a  type  within  the  familiar  experience  of  the  supposed  agent ;
and  they  were  effective  for  the  end  supposed  to  be  in  view.  It  is
especially  noteworthy  that  no  one  person's  presence  seems  to  have  been
essential  to  the  production  of  these  movements.


3S4


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Group  A,  Case  XIV. [S.  12.]
The  two  following  letters  are  from  Mr.  Bristow,  now  a  master
joiner,  to  Professor  Sidgwick  : — ■

Stordale,  Withington  Road,  Whalley  Range,  Manchester.

June  27th,  1891.

Dear  Sir, — I  have  pleasure  in  complying  with  your  request  to  be
furnished  with  an  account  of  certain  "Strange  experiences  and  eerie
phenomena  "  which  occurred  several  years  ago  at  the  village  of  Swanland,
some  few  miles  from  Hull,  in  the  East  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  and  which  are
referred  to  by  Mr.  Hebblewhite  in  his  letter  to  you.  The  building  in  which
the  disturbances  took  place  was  of  one  storey,  about  10ft.  high,  with  three
slender  tie-beams  placed  across  at  intervals,  and  was  quite  open  to  the  roof,
its  length  being  about  40ft.,  and  its  width  17ft.  or  18ft.

It  was  a  joiner's  shop,  in  which  I  served  an  apprenticeship  which  had
expired  some  12  or  15  months  prior  to  the  occurrences  in  question.

The  building  was  quite  detached,  being  bounded  on  the  one  side  by  a
country  road,  whilst  the  other  (in  the  centre  of  which  was  the  doorway)  faced
a  grass  field,  beyond  which  stood  the  nearest  building  in  that  direction,  some
500  yards  away.  Down  the  centre,  commencing  at  one  end,  were  arranged
two  joiners'  benches  which,  placed  end  to  end,  extended  about  half  the
length,  of  the  shop,  leaving  the  other  half  a  comparatively  open  space;  a,
couple  of  small  benches  only  being  fixed  to  the  wall,  which  were  at  the  time
unoccupied. [See  plan  on  p.  388.]

On  the  forenoon  of  the  day  when  the  disturbances  commenced  I  could,,
from  my  position  at  the  bench  near  the  wall,  observe  every  movement  of  my
two  fellow  workmen  in  front  of  me,  having  at  the  same  time  an  unobstructed
view  of  the  doorway  and  its  approaches,  when  the  man  on  my  right*
suddenly  started  up,  saying,  "You  fellows  had  better  keep  your  pieces  of
wood  to  yourselves,  and  get  on  with  your  work,"  and  on  our  asking  him  what
he  meant,  he  replied,  "  You  know  very  well  what  I  mean  ;  one  of  you  has
pelted  this  piece  of  wood  at  me,"  picking  up  at  the  same  time  a  small  piece
about  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a-half  square.

The  two  of  us  protested  we  had  done  nothing  of  the  kind.  The  other
man,  I  was  certain,  had  never  for  a  moment  ceased  working. Neither  had  1.

The  subject,  being  allowed  to  drop,  was  soon  forgotten,  when,  after  the
lapse  of  a  very  few  minutes,  the  second  man  started  up  as  suddenly  as  the
first  one  had  done,  exclaiming,  "  Now  you  are  at  me  ;  this  piece  "  (pointing
to  a  rough  block  not  larger  than  a  match-box  lying  at  his  feet)  "  has  come  at
me,  and  there  is  nobody  for  it  but  you,"  meaning,  of  course,  myself.

There  being  two  to  one  I  had  to  bear  the  blame,  my  emphatic  denial
notwithstanding.  I,  therefore,  laughingly  said,  "You  have  each  had  your
piece,  it  is  my  turn  next."  The  words  were  scarcely  out  of  my  mouth  when
a  piece  came  sailing  along  and  gave  me  a  gentle  dig  in  the  ribs.  "I've  got
it  at  last,"  I  said.  "  There  is  something  mysterious  about  this  which  puzzles
me  beyond  measure.  Let  us  have  a  search  for  the  cause,"  and,  acting  at  once
on  my  suggestion,  we  set  to  work  and  searched  the  nooks  and  corners,  both
inside  and  out,  so  carefully  that  even  a  mouse  could  scarcely  have  escaped
us,  but  with  no  result  save  disappointment.  The  mysterious  disturber  of  our
peace  remained  undiscovered.


Alleged  Movement*,  &c.


3S5


We  discussed  the  situation,  getting  more  and  more  perplexed,  and  then
returned  to  work.  I  have  said  that  three  tie  beams  ran  across  the  shop,  and
on  one  of  these  beams,  just  above  my  head,  were  piled  about  a  dozen  window-
sashes,  which,  by  reason  of  their  having  lain  there  for  several  months,  were
covered  with  dust  and  hung  with  cobwebs.  I  had  barely  resumed  work  when
those  sashes  began  to  rattle  and  shake  as  though  they  would  fall  in  pieces.
We  thought,  "  Now  we  have  something  or  somebody,"  and  getting  a  small
ladder  Iran  up,  to  find  the  dust  and  cobwebs  absolutely  undisturbed.  As  I
was  descending,  and  my  head  being  on  a  level  with  one  of  the  beams,  a  piece
of  wood,  about  the  size  of  two  fingers,  and  which  had  previously  lain  on  the
floor,  came  dancing  along,  taking  about  two  feet  at  a  bound,  on  a  thin  board
which  happened  to  be  laid  on  the  beams,  making  a  full  stop  just  at  my  ear.
Hastening  down,  I  said  to  my  companions  in  bewilderment,  ' '  There  is  some-
thing more  than  a  trick  in  this.  There  is  no  one  but  ourselves  near  the  place,
neither  has  there  been  for  some  time.  I  am  half  inclined  to  think  there  is
something  of  the  supernatural  about  it,  what  say  you  ?  "  One  of  them
agreed  with  me.  The  other  maintained  it  was  only  a  clever  trick  being  played
upon  us  somehow.

Whilst  this  little  discussion  was  going  on,  the  two  men  were  standing
together  some  three  or  four  yards  in  front  of  me,  the  sceptical  one  wearing  an
old  tall  silk  hat,  when  I  saw  a  piece  come  from  the  far  corner  of  the  roof  and
knock  his  hat  crown  partly  in.  The  expression  which  his  suddenly-elongated
countenance  wore  at  that  moment  was  a  sight  not  to  be  easily  forgotten.
His  scepticism  seemed  to  vanish  on  the  instant.  Occasionally  a  piece  which
had  but  a  short  time  previously  been  cut  off,  falling  to  the  floor,  would  leap
upon  the  bench  and  come  dancing  along  amongst  the  tools.  I  may  just  say
we  were  unable  to  catch  or  lay  hold  of  any  piece  when  in  motion,  every
attempt  so  to  do  was  eluded.  One  piece  I  distinctly  remember  taking  a
leap  from  the  bench  to  a  trestle  about  three  yards  away,  from  which  it  took  a
second  one  to  some  other  object,  finally  settling  down  to  rest  at  the  end  of
the  shop.  Another  piece  moved  in  a  line  straight  as  the  flight  of  an  arrow,
about  a  yard  from  the  floor,  striking  noiselessly  as  a  feather  the  door  of  a
closet  at  the  end  of  the  shop  in  which  nails  were  kept.  Anon,  a  piece  would
move  as  though  borne  along  on  gently  heaving  waves.  Again  a  piece  would
dash  out  from  the  most  distant  part  of  the  roof,  in  an  oblique  direction,  and
quietly  drop  near  your  feet.  Some  three  or  four  hours  after  those  disturb-
ances began,  our  foreman,  an  old  Scotchman,  named  John  Clark,  came  to
the  shop  from  a  new  building  in  course  of  erection,  a  considerable  distance
away,  where  he  and  a  number  of  other  men  were  employed,  in  order  to  bring
and  explain  to  me  a  drawing  which  he  had  made  on  a  board  of  a  piece  of  work
which  he  wanted  me  to  execute.  Full  of  the  all-engrossing  subject,  I  at
once  said,  "  John,  we  have  some  strange  work  going  on  in  this  shop  to-day,"
telling  him  what  had  taken  place,  at  the  same  time  hinting  at  its  possible
supernatural  character.

The  old  man  looked  at  me  with  a  serio-comic  expression  of  countenance,
and  said,  "I  should  have  thought  you  had  more  common-sense  than  to  believe
such  nonsense  for  a  moment.  I  gave  you  credit  for  knowing  better,  &c,
&c."  He  had  just  finished  his  little  lecture,  and  was  proceeding  to  point
out  the  details  of  the  drawing  on  the  board  lying  in  front  of  us,  each  having  a


386


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


linger  upon  it  about  an  inch  apart,  when  a  piece  with  a  somewhat  sharp
point  came  dashing  from  a  distant  part  of  the  roof,  and  struck  into  the
hoard  betwixt  our  lingers.  The  hard-headed  old  Scot  stood  aghast,  and  for
the  moment  almost  speechless,  forbearing  to  make  further  allusion  to  my
•common-sense.

The  foregoing  is  a  fair  specimen  of  what  occurred  during  the  first  day,
and  this  state  of  things  was  kept  up  with  more  or  less  frequency  during
the  following  six  weeks,  and  always  in  broad  daylight.  Occasionally  we
would  be  left  in  comparative  peace  for  a  day  or  two,  during  which  not  more
than  one  or  two  manifestations  (if  I  may  so  term  them)  would  take  place.
We  would  then  have  a  busy  season  of  it,  as  though  making  up  for  lost
time.  On  one  of  those  latter  occasions  I  remember  a  workman  had  come
in  from  the  building,  and  was  engaged  in  working  a  French  window-sill  on
the  bench  by  my  side,  and  seeing  a  piece  about  Gin.  square  and  lin.  thick  rise,
and  after  describing  about  three-fourths  of  a  circle,  say  5ft.  in  diameter,  in
its  course  strike  the  window-sill  with  considerable  force  just  in  front  of
him.  This  was  the  largest  piece  I  ever  saw.  Generally,  an  ordinary  match-box
would  represent  their  bulk,  althoughof  every  variety  of  shape.  I  preservedsome
of  those  mysteriously  projected  missiles  for  a  long  time,  one  of  which  I
remember  was  the  end  of  a  ladder  stave  3in.  or  4in.  long.  The  last  piece  I
ever  saw  was  of  oak,  about  lin.  thick  and  from  2in.  to  2iin.  square.  It
came  in  the  afternoon  from  a  distant  corner  of  the  roof  towards  me,  and
in  its  course  described  what  might  be  likened  to  a  geometrical  stair  or  cork-
screw of  about  18in.  diameter.  I  may  here  remark  that  in  every  instance,
without  exception,  the  moving  pieces  had  been  cut  off  work  in  the  shop.
Never  was  a  piece  seen  to  come  in  at  the  doorway.

The  fact  of  pieces,  in  number  more  than  I  can  tell,  getting  from  the
floor  at  your  feet  at  the  one  end  of  the  shop  to  the  farthest  point  of  the
roof  at  the  other  end  in  some  mysteriously  invisible  fashion  seemed  to  be
one  of  the  strangest  features  of  the  whole  thing.  Never  in  a  solitary
instance  did  any  of  our  workmen,  of  whom  there  were  sometimes  six  or
eight  in  the  shop,  nor  any  of  our  watchful  visitors  who  favoured  us  with
their  comjjany  during  the  course  of  those  six  weeks  of  disturbance  detect
the  slightest  indication  of  anything  moving  upward  towards  the  roof.

And  yet  a  piece  cut  off  and  falling  on  the  floor  would,  in  spite  of  the
lynx-eyed  watchers,  speedily  make  its  way  to  the  roof  at  the  other  end,  and
come  dashing  down  from  a  point  where  there  had  been  nothing  a  minute
before.  As  the  time  wore  on  we  became  accustomed  to  the  thing,  and  the
movement  of  those  blocks  of  wood,  which  seemed  to  be  instinct  witli
life,  and  in  some  few  instances  almost  with  intelligence,  caused  but  little
remark.  It  were  easy  to  multiply  instances,  but  those  which  I  have  given
being  fair  specimens  of  the  whole  may  well  suffice.  In  the  foregoing  plain,
unvarnished  narrative  of  facts  there  may  be  points  upon  which  you  may
desire  further  information,  and  I  have  only  to  say  that  I  shall  be  pleased
at  any  time  to  answer  any  questions  or  supply  any  additional  information
which  it  may  be  within  my  power  to  give.

To  have  any  additional  light  thrown  upon  or  further  explanation  given
of  what  I  deem  to  have  been  the  most  remarkable  episode  in  my  life
would  afford  unspeakable  pleasure  to — Dear  sir,  yours  faithfully,

John  Bristow.


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


387


Withington-road,  Whalley  Range,  Manchester,  Jaly  18th,  1891.

Dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  your  inquiries  anent  the  Swanland  mystery,  I  beg
to  say  the  disturbances  were  not  dependent  upon  the  presence  of  any  one
person  or  number  of  persons.  Having  a  somewhat  extensive  jobbing  or
repairing  business,  workmen  were  frequently  sent  out.  The  three  of  us  who
chanced  to  have  the  shop  to  ourselves  on  the  day  when  the  disturbances  com-
menced were  away  several  times  during  their  continuance,  and  more  than
once  were  all  away  at  the  same  time.  Not  the  slightest  cessation  was  per-
ceptible during  our  absence,  the  thing  went  on  just  the  same.  Every  several
man  we  had  was  away  at  one  time  or  another  during  those  six  weeks,  making
no  difference,  our  mysterious  disturber  still  kept  "pegging  away."

Those  facts  were  justly  held  to  exonerate  every  workman  about  the  place
from  all  suspicion  of  complicity  in  the  affair.

I  had  two  masters,  William  Habbershaw  and  John  Gray,  the  latter
dying  within  twelve  months  of  the  affair  ;  the  former,  with  whom  I  lived,
after  carrying  on  the  business  some  eighteen  months  after  his,  Gray's,  death,
retired,  settling  down  in  Hull.  I  give  the  following  names  of  eye  and  ear
witnesses  who  could  corroborate  what  I  have  stated,  but  seeing  it  is  now  30
years  since  the  occurrence  of  the  strange  phenomena,  very  probably  several
of  them  are  scattered;  two,  I  know,  are  dead,  viz.,  my  master,  John  Gray,
and  Thomas  Conder.  Another  one,  James  Hodsman,  emigrated.  Of  the
rest,  with  one  exception,  I  have  heard  nothing  since  shortly  after  the  events
in  question.

John  Clark,  our  foreman,  wrote  me  from  Hartlepool,  a  little  over  four
years  ago,  where  he  was  then  living  with  his  son ;  unfortunately,  I  cannot  lay
hands  on  his  letter  containing  his  address.

John  Turner,  joiner,  Swanland.

Thomas  Smith,  joiner,  Welton,  near  Hull.

John  Crowther,  independent  gentleman,  who  used  to  make  a  point  of
coming  in  to  watch  the  course  of  events. His  address  :  "  Swanland."
John  Harper,  Swanland.
"Watson  Harper,  Swanland.

I  may  just  say  that  most  exaggerated  reports  got  abroad,  notably  in  Hull,
where  it  was  said  that  planks  5  or  6  feet  long  were  being  hurled  about.

It  would  have  been  easy  at  the  time  to  get  the  written  testimony  of  half
a  score  of  witnesses.  I  have  pretty  copious  memoranda,  but  apart  from  that
the  whole  thing  lives  in  my  memory,  and  is  as  vividly  present  to  my  mind  as
though  it  were  an  experience  of  yesterday,  and  will,  I  am  persuaded,  so  con-
tinue to  the  end  of  the  mortal  chapter. — I  am,  dear  sir,  yours  faithfully,

John  Bristow.

The  plan  of  the  building  described  by  Mr.  Bristow,  which  follows,
was  drawn  by  him  from  memory.


3S8


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


II


a

!


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


389


The  next  paper  is  an  account  of  an  interview  which  I  had  with
Mr.  Bristow,  who  appeared  to  me  a  careful  and  trustworthy  informant.

Notes  on  Mr.  Bristow's  Case.

Manchester,  July  31st,  1891.
I  have  just  called  on  Mr.  Bristow,  at  his  house  in  Withington-road,  and
he  has  kindly  supplied  me  with  some  further  facts  relating  to  the  disturb-
ances at  Swanland.  He  has  also  presented  me  with  his  MS.  notes  dated
1854.  .  These  notes  seem  wholly  concordant  with  his  account  sent  to  Prof essor
'Sidgwick.  The  longer  account,  indeed,  is  little  more  than  a  transcript  of
the  rough  notes,  with  the  explanations  necessary  to  make  the  narrative
intelligible  to  a  stranger.  Mr.  Bristow  left  Swanland  in  1852,  but  revisited
it  in  1854,  and  wrote  his  notes  (as  he  has  not  the  slightest  doubt)  after  that
visit.  I  made  notes  of  his  conversation,  which  I  now  write  out  under  several
heads,  and  shall  send  to  him  for  revisal,  and  print  as  revised.

1.  Position  of  building.  On  one  side  the  long  joiner's  shed  abutted  on
the  macadamised  road  of  the  village.  There  were,  however,  no  houses  very
near.  Mr.  Bristow  lodged  in  a  house  about  50  yards  off,  which  was  the
nearest  on  the  same  side.  On  opposite  side  of  road  was  a  house  standing
behind  a  garden.  The  other  sides  of  the  shed  were  in  a  field  :  no  house
nearer  than  Swanland  House,  then  building,  about  500  yards  off.  No  cover  of
any  kind  near  the  shed.

2.  Windows  and  accesses.  The  windows  (which  would  not  open)  were  low,
so  that  anyone  inside  could  easily  see  out  of  them.  No  one  was  ever  detected
at  the  windows,  and  no  missile  ever  came  in  by  windows  or  door.  All  the
missiles  were  pieces  of  wood  cut  off  from  work  in  the  shop,  sometimes
identifiable  as  bits  which  had  dropped  to  the  ground  some  ten  minutes  before.

3.  Independence  of  any  sj)ecial  person's  presence.  This  point  was
specially  noticed  at  the  time,  as,  for  want  of  better  explanation,  each  new
observer  was  at  first  inclined  to  suspect  some  one  of  the  other  workmen.

4.  Noiselessness  of  fall  of  missiles.  On  some  few  occasions  noise  was
heard  ;  but  as  a  rule  the  missiles  fell  absolutely  noiselessly,  although  with
a  force  which  would  have  made  loud  clatter  under  ordinary  conditions.

5.  Frequency  and  hours  of  the  falls.  At  first  there  were  perhaps  8  or
10  in  an  hour.  Later  there  were  only  two  or  three.  The  falls  would  begin
at  about  9  a.m.  and  last  till  4  or  5.  They  always  occurred  by  daylight.
The  first  was  at  about  10  a.m.  from  N.E.  (on  a  Tuesday,  the  Hull  market-
day,  when  there  were  only  three  of  us  left  in  the  shed) ;  the  last  from  S.W.
at  about  2  p.m.

6.  Direction  from  which  missiles  came.  There  seemed  no  special
preference  for  any  one  direction.  Sometimes  they  seemed  to  come  from
the  floor  ;  sometimes  from  near  the  roof.  No  one  ever  saw  a  missile
actually  starting  on  its  course.  It  seemed  as  though  one  caught  sight  of
them  at  about  6  inches  from  their  initial  point.

7.  This  leads  on  to  the  point  that  the  missiles  seemed  to  be  intention-
ally started  when  no  one  was  looking,  or  expecting  them.  Thus  the  first
that  struck  me  struck  me  half  a  minute  or  so  after  I  had  put  the  matter
out  of  my  mind.  Sometimes  one  of  us  would  look  fixedly  for  many  minutes
at  a  bit  of  wood  on  the  floor. It  never  moved  while  we  looked  at  it.  But


390


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


once  let  our  attention  be  relaxed  and  that  very  bit  of  wood  would  come
flying  at  us  from  some  distant  point.  Mr.  Crowther,  who  was  a  man  of
leisure  and  moderate  independent  means,  used  sometimes  to  sit  in  the-
shed  for  two  or  three  hours  at  a  time,  watching  to  see  a  piece  of  wood  start
on  its  course.  He  never  saw  one  start  ;  though,  like  the  rest  of  us,  he  saw
many  which  seemed  to  have  just  started.  We  could  never  make  up  our
minds  whether  the  pieces  began  their  flight  invisibly,  or  only  when  our
attention  was  diverted.

8.  Path  of  the  missiles.  Sometimes  the  path  of  the  missiles  would  appear
to  be  absolutely  straight.  But  often  it  was  undulatory,  rotatory,  or  sinuous.
Sometimes  it  would  make  a  series  of  jumps.

Thus  on  one  occasion  a  piece  of  wood,  starting  from  somewhere  near  me,
made  a  series  of  some  three  or  four  jumps,  like  a  frog,  along  the  bench,  about
nine  feet  in  length,  at  which  I  was  sitting  at  work  ;  then  sprang  from  the
bench,  about  3  yards,  upon  a  trestle,  only  some  4  inches  wide  ;  then  from
the  trestle  on  to  a  wheel-stool  (arrangement  for  making  a  wheel),  and  thence-
straight  at  a  closet  door  where  we  kept  nails,  &c,  where  it  came  to  rest.

Other  pieces  came  down  through  the  air  in  corkscrew  fashion.

The  largest  piece  that  ever  fell  described  about  three-fourths  of  a  circle
thus  :  One  of  us,  John  Turner,  was  working  at  a  large  French  window-sill.
He  wanted  to  turn  it  over,  and  raised  it  up,  leaning  against  his  body. I  was-
a  few  yards  from  him,  and  I  saw  a  large  piece  of  wood  rising  behind  him  and
flying  round  him. It  lodged  itself  in  between  him  and  the  window-sill.

9.  Accuracy  of  aim  of  the  missiles.  I  have  mentioned  the  alighting  of  a
missile  upon  the  narrow  trestle.  Others  showed  a  still  more  exact  aim.
Thus  when  the  foreman  and  I  were  poring  over  the  drawing  together,  as  I
have  described,  our  two  fingers  were,  I  should  think,  hardly  an  inch  apart  ;,
yet  the  missile  fell  and  struck  just  between  our  fingers.

Again,  I  was  once  holding  a  chisel  in  my  hand,  and  a  piece  of  wood  came
and  sent  it  flying  from  between  my  fingers,  without  touching  my  fingers.  In
no  case  did  the  missiles  hurt  anybody.  Once  one  flew  into  a  pot  of  paint
which  an  apprentice,  Thomas  Conder,  was  mixing  ;  but  they  did  no  real
harm.  For  the  most  part  they  were  only  about  as  big  as  a  matchbox — you
might  grasp  as  you  liked  at  these  missiles  ;  there  was  no  catching  them.

10.  Impression  made  on  witnesses.  Perhaps  30  or  40  persons  witnessed
the  disturbances  at  different  times.  Not  one  of  them  could  suggest  any
ordinary  explanation.  All  without  exception  were  convinced  that  there  was1,
some  unknown  cause.  Most  of  them  were  more  or  less  alarmed  ;  Mr.
Gray  by  far  the  most  so,  for  a  special  reason.

11.  Suggested  cause  of  the  disturbances.  John  Gray  had  a  brother,  a
farmer,  who  died  bankrupt,  and  left  an  only  son,  John  Gray  (the  same  name
as  his  uncle's).  This  son  became  an  apprentice  to  his  uncle,  working  on
the  bench  next  to  me.  About  the  termination  of  his  apprenticeship  con-
sumption laid  hold  on  him,  and  he  died  about  the  age  of  22  or  23  years.
He  was  hardly  more  than  a  boy,  and  some  few  weeks  before  the  disturb-
ances began  rumour  said  that  his  father's  creditors  had  not  received  all
the  money  (said  to  be  £100)  which  ought  to  have  been  paid  to  them,  and
that  his  uncle  was  responsible  for  this.

My  master,  Mr.  Habbershaw,  had  been  married  four  times,  and  John


Alleged  Movements,  &c.


391


Turner  was  his  stepson.  I  knew  John  Turner  well  ;  and  he  told  me  that
young  John  Gray's  last  request  had  been  that  his  uncle  would  repay  the
money  due  to  his  (young  John  Gray's)  father's  creditors.

This,  I  understand,  the  elder  John  Gray  did  not  at  once  do.

I  can  personally  vouch  for  his  excessive  terror  when  the  disturbances
began.  One  day  especially  he  took  me  with  him  driving  to  a  job  on  the
estate  near  Tranby  Croft  (not  built  in  those  days),  which  was  a  couple  of
miles  or  so  from  our  workshop,  and  began  to  talk  to  me  about  the  phenomena,
as  though  he  wished  to  get  me  to  put  them  down  to  some  natural  cause.
I  refused  to  do  so,  and  he  could  make  no  reply  nor  suggest  any  natural
cause.  His  manner  was  that  of  a  man  almost  petrified  with  terror.  I  felt
convinced  that  he  had  had  disturbances  of  which  we  knew  nothing.

He  repaid  the  money — as  was  said — and  the  disturbances  at  once  ceased.
Of  course  I  cannot  vouch  at  first  hand  for  the  repayment  of  the  money,  but
on  one  point  I  can  speak  from  observation.  Before  the  disturbances
began  there  was  no  tombstone  to  young  John  Gray.  When  they  began  the
uncle  put  one  up  in  North  Ferriby  churchyard,  which  I  suppose  is  there
now. I  cannot  answer  for  the  exact  year.

12.  Witnesses  now  forthcoming.  I  much  regret  that  I  did  not  at  the
time  ask  for  signatures. I  could  easily  have  got  twenty.

John  Gray  and  Thomas  Conder  are  dead.  James  Hodsman  emigrated.
John  Clarke  was  living  6  years  ago,  as  I  have  said,  but  I  have  lost  his
address.  He  lived  with  his  son,  also  John  Clarke,  who  was  a  draper  at
Hartlepool.  He  might  therefore  possibly  be  traced.  [Letter  returned  ;  he
is  probably  dead.  — F.W.H.M.]

John  Turner,  stepson  of  Mr.  Habbershaw,  Mr.  Gray's  partner,  is,  I
believe,  doing  business  as  a  joiner  at  Swanland,  and  Thomas  Smith  at
Welton,  near  Hull.

John  Crowther,  if  alive,  is  likely  to  be  still  in  his  house  at  Swanland.

John  Harper  and  his  brother  Watson  Harper  were  labourers,  but  intel-
ligent men. If  alive,  they  are  likely  to  be  still  at  Swanland.

Notes  written  out  same  evening. F.  W.  H.  Myers,  July  31st,  1891.

Corrected  and  approved.  John  Bristow.

It  was  obviously  important  to  find  other  surviving  witnesses,  who
might  confirm  or  modify  Mr.  Bristow's  account.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  visited
Swanland  on  Sejatember  '29th,  1891,  and  her  account  is  subjoined.

Notes  of  a  visit  to  Swanland,  made  within  a  few  hours  of  our

interviews.

September  29th,  1891.

Miss  Allen  and  I  went  to  Swanland  this  morning.  Swanland  is  a  village
two  miles  from  North  Ferriby,  the  second  station  from  Hull  on  the  Hull  and
Doncaster  line.  We  first  visited  the  churchyard  of  North  Ferriby,  close  to
the  station,  in  order  to  discover  the  tombstone  of  John  Gray.  We  found
two  tombstones  which  bear  on  our  case — one,  to  the  memory  of  Stephen
Gray,  died  August,  1827,  aged  27,  and  his  wife,  who  died  in  1842,  and
to  his  son,  John  Gray,  who  died,  aged  22,  on  January  5th,  1849.

The  other,  exactly  similar,  was  to  the  memory  of  John  Gray,  died  1851,
aged  48,  and  his  wife  Anne,  who  died  1854,  aged  45.


392


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  first  John  Gray  is  doubtless  the  nephew  and  the  second  the  uncle,
and  the  occurrences  in  question  must  have  taken  place  in  1849.

We  then  went  on  to  Swanland,  and  first  addressed  ourselves  to  an  elderly
blacksmith  who  was  looking  out  of  his  shop,  and  said  we  were  in  search  of
John  Turner,  who,  we  believed,  could  tell  us  about  some  wonderful  occur-
rences of  pieces  of  wood  flying  about  in  the  shop,  <fec.  John  Turner  had
been  dead  for  some  time,  it  appears,  but  our  blacksmith  remembered  hearing
about  the  thing,  and  thought  some  of  the  old  people  could  tell  us  about  it.
He  called  an  old  cobbler,  Edward  Harper,  who  lived  a  few  doors  off,  who
had  not  personally  seen  anything,  but  remembered  the  affair  well,  and  the
sensation  it  caused,  people  coming  over  from  Hull  to  see  the  place.  He  knew
John  Bristow,  and  was  interested  in  hearing  of  him,  and  we  gathered  that
Mr.  Bristow  had  been  both  liked  and  respected  in  the  place.  Harper  also
remembered  how  John  Crowther  had  interested  himself  in  the  thing,  and
after  being  sceptical  had  become  convinced  of  its  mysterious  character.  But
John  Crowther  is  now  dead,  and  Harper  could  not  think  of  anyone  now  alive
who  had  actually  seen  the  movements  going  on  except  ' '  Tommy  Andrews. "
Harper's  account  of  what  went  on  was  graphic,  and  corresponded  well  with
Mr.  Bristow's,  except  that  he  increased  the  size  of  the  pieces  of  wood  to  the
■size  of  a  man's  head.  The  belief  that  the  disturbances  arose  from  wishes  of
young  John  Gray's  respecting  money  being  unfulfilled  by  old  John  Gray
was  evidently  the  current  belief  in  the  village  at  the  time.

We  then  went  to  see  Thomas  Andrews — an  old  man,  rheumatic,  and
retired  from  work.  He  impressed  us  as  a  clever,  sensible  sort  of  man.  He
has  a  very  expressive  face,  and  I  can  quite  imagine  his  being  the  man  ' '  the
expression  of  whose  elongated  countenance  "  Mr.  Bristow  speaks  of.  Miss
Allen  remembers  that  Harper  spoke  of  Andrews'  hat  being  knocked  in  by  one
•of  the  pieces  of  wood,  but  we  neglected  to  ask  him  about  this,  nor  did  I  in-
quire of  him  about  specific  phenomena  mentioned  by  Mr.  Bristow,  but  rather
tried  to  draw  out  his  own  independent  account  of  things.  He  told  us  that
the  pieces  of  wood  certainly  did  fly  about  for  the  space  of  five  or  six  weeks,
that  he  was  working  in  the  shop  at  the  time  and  believed  he  was  one  of  the
first  to  see  them,  that  he  believed  it  to  be  a  trick  at  first.  I  asked  whether
he  was  sure  it  was  not  a  trick,  and  he  said  he  was  sure,  because  they
searched,  and  no  one  could  have  played  it,  and  because  the  pieces  of  wood
could  not  have  taken  the  course  they  did  had  they  been  thrown.  To  illustrate
this  he  made  us  hold  his  stick  and  showed  how  a  piece  would  come  along  and
go  round  the  stick  as  it  were,  and  "no  one  could  throw  it  like  that."  Asked
as  to  explanations,  said  that  some  gave  one  and  some  another — but  the  only
one  we  got  out  of  him  was  the  one  about  John  Gray  junior's  unfulfilled
wishes  and  the  tombstone,  which  he  said  was  afterwards  put  up.  This  was
his  own  belief  as  to  the  explanation,  but  he  said  that  John  Gray,  senior,
when  asked  about  it,  shuffled  the  matter.  The  only  specific  incident  I  re-
member his  mentioning  was  about  the  Scotch  foreman  and  the  piece  that  came
down  as  he  was  looking  at  the  plan.  Mr.  Andrews  afterwards  himself  took
the  business  and  occupied  the  shed  for  a  time — was  often  in  it  at  night,  &c. — ■
but  never  saw  anything  mysterious  except  during  those  six  weeks.  I  think
he  corroborated  the  fact  that  the  phenomena  happened  independently  of  any
•one  person's  presence — but  am  not  sure. He  was  a  little  deaf,  and  it  was


Alleged  Move)  iients,  &c.


393


not  quite  easy  to  make  him  understand  our  questions.  We  asked  when  it
happened,  and  he  calculated  back  that  it  must  have  been  between  40  and  50
years  back.  He  too  was  keen  to  hear  about  John  Bristow,  whom  he
remembered  well — said  he  was  an  apprentice  in  the  shop  at  the  time.
Mr.  Andrews  also  knew  about  Mr.  Crowther's  investigating.

We  saw  the  shed.  As  you  come  into  Swanland  from  Ferriby  it  is  a  few
doors  to  the  left  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  road,  and  is  still  used  as  a  car-
penter's shop.  It  cori'esponds  to  Mr.  Bristow's  general  description  of  it,  except
that  it  now  has  a  door  on  to  the  village  street,  a  door  in  two  divisions,  the
upper  one  of  which  was  opened  by  a  man  who  looked  out  as  we  came  up  to  it.
We  spoke  to  him,  but  he  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  ;  he  was  young  and  a
new-comer.  We  looked  in  through  the  open  half  of  the  door,  and  saw  that
the  interior  of  the  shed  and  the  general  surroundings  corresponded  as  far  as
we  saw  to  Mr.  Bristow's  plan,  but  we  did  not  go  into  the  yard.

Mr.  Andrews'  account  of  the  size  of  the  pieces  of  wood  made  them  some-
what larger  than  Mr.  Bristow's — about  4  inches  square.

Altogether,  all  we  saw  and  heard  went  to  confirm  Mr.  Bristow's  account,
except  that  the  tombstone,  which  Mr.  Andrews  also  said  had  been  put  up  to
John  Gray  junior  after  the  disturbances,  was  really  put  up  to  his  father  and
mother  as  well,  and  we  cannot  say  whether  John  Gray  senior  really  erected
it  to  the  whole  family  then,  or  whether  he  added  the  name  of  the  young  man
then,  which  led  to  the  rumour.

We  are  not  sure  whether  John  Crowther  has  left  any  family  in  Swan-
land,  but  doubt  whether,  if  he  did,  it  would  be  worth  asking  them  for
notes,  as,  from  the  way  he  was  spoken  of,  it  hardly  seemed  to  us  likely  that
he  had  taken  any.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.
Eleanor  Wardell  Allen.

P.S. — October  Id. — I  have  just  been  looking  through  Mr.  Bristow's  rough
notes,  and  see  that  Thomas  Andrews  was  the  man  who,  according  to  him,
had  his  hat  knocked  in.  Miss  Allen  did  not  know  this,  so  that  the  fact
of  Edward  Harper,  according  to  her  recollection,  remembering  that  Andrews
was  said  to  have  had  his  hat  knocked  in  must  be  regarded  as  confirmation
of  Mr.  Bristow's  account.  It  is  also  in  Mr.  Bristow's  favour  that  a  witness
he  did  not  refer  us  to — T.  Andrews — should  confirm  him  as  he  did.

E.  M.  S.

[The  rough  notes  of  1854  begin  with  the  words :  ' '  On  Tuesday  forenoon
Tom  Smith,  Tom  Andrews,  and  myself  were  working  in  the  shop"  ;  and  later
on  says  :  "  I  noticed  a  piece  come  from  the  farthest  corner  of  the  roof,  and
partially  knock  in  the  crown  of  Andrews'  tall  hat." — F.  W.  H.  M.]

These  various  recollections,  independently  obtained,  and  the
observation  of  the  still-standing  shed  and  its  surroundings,  confirm
the  accuracy  of  Mr.  Bristow's  memory  in  a  somewhat  unusual  way,
considering  that  more  than  42  years  had  elapsed  between  the  events
and  the  complete  collection  of  evidence.  We  may,  I  think,  be  pretty
sure  that  the  paper  of  1854  contains  a  substantially  accurate  account
of  the  events  of  1849.


394


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


It  is,  I  think,  hard  to  doubt  that  in  that  year  a  long  series  of  inex-
plicable movements  of  objects  took  place  ;  that  these  movements
occurred  in  full  daylight,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  number  of  adult  York-
shiremen  at  work  on  their  ordinary  occupations ;  and  that  no  observer
was  able  to  suggest  any  explanation  except  the  agency  of  a  deceased
comrade.  It  cannot  now  be  proved  in  the  same  first-hand  manner
that  on  the  execution  of  this  deceased  comrade's  dying  wish,  the  mani-
festations ceased.

The  apparent  connection  with  this  departed  person  may  possibly  be
a  mere  coincidence.  But  in  any  case  the  movements  themselves  will
remain  to  be  explained ;  and  no  plausible  explanation  by  ordinary  laws
has  as  yet,  I  think,  been  suggested.

Further  discussion  must  be  left  for  a  subsequent  paper.  In  the
meantime  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  each  fresh  instalment  of  testimony  of
this  perplexing  type  may  prompt  to  a  wider  collection  of  similar
records.  Considering  how  very  little  serious  effort  has  as  yet  been
made  in  this  direction,  the  amount  of  evidence  which  has  already  come
to  hand  is  enough  to  suggest  that  a  good  many  sporadic  phenomena  may
be  taking  place  in  this  world  of  which  science  hears  little,  and  might
with  advantage  hear  more.


Supplement;


"  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx."


395


SUPPLEMENT.

I.

"RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX."  1

There  is  an  operation  in  Joint  Stock  Company  finance  known  as  the
Reduction  of  Capital. When  a  dividend  cannot  he  paid  on  the  amount
originally  subscribed,  and  embarrassing  liabilities  are  threatened,  solvency
is  restored  by  bringing  down  the  nominal  value  of  the  investment  to  a
remunerative  point, The  concern  is  saved  from  liquidation  by  a  necessary
sacrifice. And perhaps  the verdict  of  philosophy  on  this  remarkable
book  may  be  analogous in effect. A  high  speculative  value  may  be
conceded  to  it,  on  condition  that  its  pretensions  to be  a  solution  of
"ultimate"  problems  are  abated. For  what  may  be  called  the  work-
ing  conceptions of the author  are not really inconsistent with  the
continued  suspense  of  metaphysical  problems,  which  find  here  a  treatment
more  original  and  heroic  than  easily  acceptable. The  author's  primary
postulate  —an  original  plurality  of  existences— may  retain  its  validity  for  a
metaphysical  conception  of  the  world  and  the  world-process,  even  if  it  is
pronounced  more  than  problematical from  the  standpoint of  absolute
ontology. For  even  in  a  metaphysical  exposition,  we  may  disembarrass  our-
selves of  metaphysics  with  which  the  aim  of  the  exposition  is  not  co-extensive.
Now,  the  advantage  of  conceiving  the  world— as  our  author  conceives  it— from
the  standpoint  of  Evolutionism  is  that  it  presents  to  Reason  a  problem  limited
and  defined.  And  the  possibility  of  this  limitation  of  the  problem  lies  in  such
a  definition  of  "  the  world  "  as  shall  not  include  "  existence  in  general,"  and
to  which,  therefore,  any  questions  Reason  may  ask  concerning  existence  in
general  are  irrelevant.  But  to  attempt  to  make  absolute  and  final  for  Reason
the  data  obtained  from  the  standpoint  of  Evolutionism  must  inevitably  raise
the  very  question  which  was  ostensibly  disclaimed. The  Pluralism  of  the
author is therefore, ex hypothesi,  a  historical starting-point,  however
idealistically  conceived,  and accordingly we cannot concede  to  it  the
character  of  a  genuine  or  final  ontology.

With  this  important  limitation,  we  may  acknowledge  that  the  skill  with

1  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx.  A  Study  in  the  Philosophy  of  Evolution.  By  "A
Troglodyte." London  :  Swan  Sonnenschein  and  Co.,  1891,


2  d  2


396


0.  G.  Massey.


[Supplement.


which  we  are  prepared  for  the  statement  of  the  author's  problem,  the
statement  itself,  and  the  solution,  exhibit  philosophical  power  of
a  high  order.  In  the  chapter  on  "The  Metaphysics  of  Evolution,"
we  are  led  to  see  the  necessity  of  teleology,  and  what  teleology
imports.  The  merely  scientific  application  of  the  Historical  Method
fails  wholly  as  an  explanation  of  the  higher,  more  complete  and
complex  result  which  it  traces  to  its  lower  and  simpler  beginning  in  the
order  of  time.  "  Unraetaphysical "  Evolutionism  is  in  fact  "  pseudo-meta-
physical," for  it  is  driven  to  insert  in  its  original  datum  the  germ  or  poten-
tiality of  all  into  which  it  develops.1  But  when  we  come  to  close  quarters-
with  this  potentiality,  and  ask  what  it  means,  we  find  that  we  have,  with
Aristotle,  to  conceive  it  as  the  metaphysical  actuality  of  the  potential.

"  And  that  actuality  must  be  not  only  prior  (in  Time,  if  the  process  is  con-
ceived as  one  in  Time,  or  only  in  idea,  or  in  both),  but,  by  the  very  terms  of  the
hypothesis,  external  to  the  evolving  world,  non-material  and  non-phenomenal.
For  since  the  whole  of  the  material  and  the  phenomenal  was  supposed  to>
have  been  derived  out  of  the  pure  potentiality,  the  reality  presupposed  by  that
potentiality  cannot  itself  have  formed  part  of  the  material  and  phenomenal
world.  And  thus,  so  far  from  dispensing  with  the  need  of  a  Divine  First  Cause,
the  theory  of  Evolution,  if  only  we  have  the  faith  in  science  to  carry  it  to  its*
conclusion,  and  the  courage  to  interpret  it,  proves  irrefragably  that  no  evolu-
tion was  possible  without  a  pre-existent  Deity,  and  a  Deity,  moreover,  trans-
cendent, non-material,  and  non-phenomenal.  And  for  the  power  of  such  a
Deity  to  produce  the  world,  the  pure  potentiality  'with  which  evolution  starts  is-
merely  the  expression.  And  the  world  as  actual  is  prior  to  the  germ  which
potentially  contains  it,  simply  because  the  world-process  is  the  working  out  of
an  anterior  purpose  or  idea  in  the  divine  consciousness.  And  as  all  things  are,
as  far  as  possible,  directed  to  the  realisation  of  that  end  or  purpose,  the
real  nature  of  things  is  to  be  found  in  their  final  course,  and  not  in  their  his-
torical antecedents,  which,  just  because  they  take  precedence  in  Time,  are
means  to  an  end,  and  of  inferior  significance  in  truth." (Pp.  198-9.)

"What  comes  first  in  science  comes  last  in  metaphysics.  It  is  in  the
higher  and  subsequent  that  the  explanation  of  the  lower  and  anterior  is  to  be
sought.  And  instead  of  being  simpler  and  more  susceptible  of  explanation,  the
lower  stages  of  the  process  are  really  the  obscurer  and  more  unintelligible,
because  they  do  not  so  clearly  exhibit  the  drift  of  the  process.  Hence  their
explanation  comes  last,  just  because  in  the  historical  process  they  came  first.
We  must  not  therefore  hastily  conclude  that  because  the  teleological  method  is-
true,  it  will  be  at  once  possible  to  give  a  teleological  explanation  of  the  physical
laws  of  nature.  The  physical  laws  of  nature  are  the  earliest  and  lowest  laws  of
the  world-process,  the  first  attempts  at  the  realisation  of  its  End,  and  so  are  the
very  last  to  become  intelligible.  If  we  ever  arrive  at  a  teleological  explanation
of  them,  it  will  be  only  after  we  have  worked  down  to  them  from  the  higher
laws  of  the  more  complex  phenomena.  The  basis,  in  other  words,  for  a  teleo-
logical interpretation  of  nature  will  not  be  found  in  sciences  like  physics  and
mechanics,  but  in  sciences  like  sociology  and  ethics.  "  (Pp.  205-0.)

1  This  is  especially  apparent  if,  according  to  the  most  recent  scientific  correction
of  the  theory  of  evolution,  Natural  Selection  is  deprived  of  the  factor  of  "  acquired  "
individual  differences,  such  acquisitions  nob  penetrating  to  the  germ-cell,  and  being,
therefore,  non-transmissible.  (See  Professor  Weismann's  Essays  on  Heredity  and
Kindred  Biologiced  Problems.  Tr.  by  E.  B.  Poulton,  F.R.S.  Oxford  :  Clarendon
Press,  1891.)


Supplement.]


"■Riddles  of  the  Sphinx."


397


Thus  at  the  very  outset  of  the  inquiry  we  obtain  a  theistic  datum,  as  a
first  necessary  postulate  of  a  world-process  that  shall  be  at  all  intelligible.
xl Nature"  is  the  "Becoming"  of  the  world,  and  thus  phenomenal;  and
therefore  God,  as  the  metaphysical  reality  and  cause,  is  outside  Nature.  In
fact  the  process,  as  here  conceived,  might  be  described  as  Dens  naturans  (as
its  completion  is  Dens  naturabus),  were  it  not  that  the  moments  of  "  becom-
ing "  are  not  purely  representative  of  the  action  of  the  supreme  Agent,  but
result  from  the  interaction  of  two  factors, — God  and  the  individual  spirits  or
Egos — as  agent  and  re-agents,  and  thus  nature  is  the  product  of  a  re-action.
"  The  cosmos  of  our  experience  is  a  stress  or  interaction  between  God  and
ourselves. "

But  before  arrival  at  this  point,  the  "atomic"  constitution  of  the  world
had  been  considered  by  the  author  as  possibly  antecedent  to  consciousness.
The  atom  is  a  centre  of  Force,  and  is  provisionally  defined  as  "  a  constant
manifestation  of  Divine  Force  or  Will,  exercised  at  a  definite  point."  For
"Matter"  is  found  to  be  "a  metaphysical  fiction  designed  to  provide  forces
with  a  vehicle"  (p.  272).  "  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  an  unknowable
'  Matter  '  is  an  ultimate  reality,  merely  because  phenomenal  things  have
the  attribute  of  materiality.  Matter  is  not  the  only  conceivable  substratum  of
Force."  The  true  substratum  of  Force  is  discoverable  in  what  we  know
— intelligence— and  the  Force-atoms,  or  centres,  are  modes  of  what  we  also
know,  viz.,  Will.  "  Historically  it  is  undeniable  that  Force  is  depersonalised
Will,  that  the  prototype  of  Force  is  Will,  which  even  now  is  the  Force  par
excellence,  and  the  only  one  we  know  directly"  1  (p.  274).  Thus  "  our  '  force-
atoms  '  will  have  developed  into  '  monads, '  spiritual  entities  akin  to  ourselves. "
"It  is  this  closer  reference  to  our  own  consciousness  which  makes  Force  a
more  satisfactory  explanation  of  things  than  Matter  ;  it  is  nearer  to  the
higher,  and  therefore  more  capable  of  really  explaining  than  the  lower."
"  To  use  causation  without  a  reference  to  our  own  wills  is  to  use  a  category
•which  has  been  reduced  to  a  mere  word  without  meaning."  "  The  unity  of
philosophy  and  of  the  universe  is  vindicated  by  the  discovery  of  the  funda-
mental identity  of  Matter  and  Spirit,  and  the  ultimate  reduction  of  the
former  to  the  latter."  But  then  the  difficulty  arises  of  determining  "the
nature  of  the  intelligence  which  Matter  is  divined  to  conceal,  and  to  discover
what  is  the  function  of  this  disguise  of  Spirit" — in  other  words,  "the
nature  of  the  intelligence  of  the  force-atoms."  Foregoing  the  assistance  he
might  receive  from  Mr.  Crookes's  theory  of  the  individualism  of  atoms — of
which  an  account  was  given  in  Chapter  vii. — till  that  theory  has  received  fuller
confirmation,  the  author  recognises  the  limitation  of  consciousness  to  living
beings  "out  of  which  it  is  historically  probable  that  our  highly-evolved  con-
sciousness has  developed."

Space  is  regarded  as  subjective,  an  idea  obtained  by  abstraction  :  Time,
on  the  other  hand,  is  held  to  be  real  in  a  relative  sense,  and  finite.
"  The  reality  of  Time  is  involved  in  the  reality  of  the  world-process,"
and  "the  subjectivity  of  Time  would  destroy  the  whole  meaning  and
reality  of  the  world-process,  and  negate  the  idea  of the  world  as  an

1  This  conception  was  expounded  many  years  ago  by  Dr.  James  Martineau,  in  his
essay  on  "Materialism"  (Cont.  Rev.,  March,  1876).  See  also  Fechner  :  "Einige
Ideen  zur  Schopfungs  und  Entwickelungs-geschichte  der  Organismen."


39S


C.  C.  Massey  .


[Supplement.


evolution."  The  reasoning  will  hardly  seem  conclusive  to  a  consistent
idealist  ;  but  we  can  follow  the  author  with  more  satisfaction  when
he  says  with  St.  Augustine,  "Non  est  f actus  mundus  in  tempore,  seel  cum
tempore."  In  other  words,  the  world-process  is  a  beginning  of  time,  just
because  it  is  the  origination  of  consciousness  in  that  mode,  or  possibly  its
descent.  And  with  like  reason  we  can  conceive  an  end  of  time  in  a  con-
sciousness not  representative  of  change.  Such  is  the  author's  conception  of
the  consummation  of  the  world-process  by  complete  development  of  the  mun-
dane factor — the  Egos — in  perfect  adaptation  to  the  Divine  Will  and  the-
Ideal  world.  This  result  would  be  analogous  to  the  hypothetical  ' '  motion
in  a  perfect  fluid,"  which  is  equivalent  to  rest,  all  transition  being  instan-
taneous in  the  absence  of  retardation.

The  world-process  being  thus  conceived  as  "a  gradual  harmonising  of
the  Deity  and  the  Ego,"  and  as  denoting  "increase  in  the  intercourse  and
interaction  between  them,"  the  author's  theory  of  the  Ego  and  of  its  realisa-
tion in  personal  development  now  claims  attention.

The  pre-cosmic  "atom"  represents  limitation  of  consciousness  to  the
zero  point,  or  as  near  thereto  as  the  conception  of  phenomenality  will
permit.  But  as  an  "ultimate  reality"  the  individual  factor  cannot  be
resolved  into  this  phenomenon.  Thus  the  true  "  Ego  "is  "  transcendental,"
the  constant  "I  "  "with  all  its  powers  and  latent  capacities  of  development  "
which  is  the  identical  substratum  of  all  the  changes  of  conscious  personality.
It  is  thus  identifiable  essentially  with  the  smaller  "self  "of  consciousness,
which  represents  it  inadequately,  but  by  progressive  approximation,  from  the
primary  interaction  with  Deity,  which  is  manifest  phenomenally  in  the  atom,
to  the  glorified  consciousness  of  perpetual  and  associated  mankind,  in
adaptation  to  the  Divine  Idea,  at  the  final  consummation  of  the  process.
The  limitation  of  our  problem  to  the  cosmos  and  its  time-process  forbids,  of
course,  any  question  as  to  the  pre-cosmic  state  of  the  Egos.  The  author
seems  to  hold  that  for  the  realisation  of  the  Divine  design  it  was
necessary  that  the  Egos,  with  their  great  powers  of  resistance  and
interference,  should  be  reduced  to  complete  torpor,  for  the  initiation  of
the  process  of  their  adaptation,  and  this  torpor  is  represented  by  the
phenomenal  condition  of  inorganic  materiality.  A  sort  of  "statuvolence"
is  thus  induced,  and  the  analogy  of  Hypnotism  is  found  applicable  to
the  different  stages  of  the  process.  For  "it  is  far  easier  for  the  operator  to
put  his  hypnotised  subject  asleep  than  to  produce  the  higher  manifestations
in  which  the  consciousness  of  the  subject  is  called  forth,  but  guided  by  the
will  of  the  operator,  and  these  require  far  more  elaborate  and  delicate
preparations,  fin  this  analogy,  then,  we  may  say  that  the  lower  animals  are
still  entranced  in  the  lower  stage  of  brute  lethargy,  while  we  have  passed  into
the  higher  phase  of  somnambidism, which  already  permits  us  strange  glimpses
of  a  lucidity  that  divines  the  realities  of  the  transcendental  world  "  (p.  294).
And  there  is  yet  another  use  of  this  analogy.  It  is  not  apparent  a  priori
how  the  interaction  between  the  Deity  and  the  Egos  should  result  in  an
objectivity  of  the  world  common  to  all  the  "  pez-cipients."  Why  should  the
reaction  be  modally  identical  in  each  and  all  of  the  latter  ?  Why  is  there
not  for  each  a  "  subjective  cosmos  "  ?  In  the  similar  case  of  the  different
dreams  which  might  be  excited  in  different  persons  by  the  same  waking


Supplement  ]


"Riddles  of  the  Sphinx."


399


experience,  each  dreajn  would  indeed  be  a  symbol  of  the  same  real  occasion,
and  so  far  dreams  illustrate  the  relation  of  the  phenomenal  world  to  its
causal  reality.  But  parallel  or  corresponding  dreams  or  hallucinations  of
different  people  have  been  rarely  recorded — the  cases  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living  are  referred  to — and  the  author  rjrefers  the  analogy  of  the  collective
hallucinations  which  can  be  induced  in  several  hypnotised  subjects,  of  which
instances  have  been  published  in  these  Proceedings.  And  it  seems  quite
supposable,  on  the  hypothesis  we  are  considering,  that  uniformity  of  presen-
tation would  be  easily  secured  at  the  most  depressed  stage  of  psychical
individuality,  with  subjective  difference  at  its  minimum.  The  persistence  of
uniformity  in  later  stages  of  the  process  may  be  regarded  as  a  natural
survival  of  established  solidarity,  cosmical  community  beginning  at  the  base
of  experience,  and  subsequent  differentiation  being  concerned  with  a  con-
sciousness superior  to  the  physical,  finding  its  own  eventual  tendency  to  social
harmony  and  correspondence  in  evolutionary  conformity  to  the  Divine
plan.

But  that  we  may  not  be  misled  by  the  author's  analogy,  one  difference
must  be  noted,  that  whereas  the  hypnotiser  seeks  only  automatic  conformity
to  his  will,  the  purpose  of  the  Deity  requires  a  true  voluntary  conformity  or
adaptation,  and  thus  depression  of  independent  functions  is  only  preparatory
to  their  re-establishment  with  radically  new  dispositions.  The  whole  process
of  Evolution  is  shown  to  be  conducive  to  this  result.  "  If  we  think  out  the
relation  which  on  our  theory  must  exist  between  the  Deity  and  the  Egos,  we
shall  perceive  that  matter  is  an  admirably  calculated  machine  for  regulating,
limiting,  and  restraining  the  consciousness  which  it  encases  "  (p.  293).  The
reinterpretation  of  the  facts  on  which  Materialism  relies  is  as  apparent  on  the
author's  theory  as  it  is  admirably  expounded,  and  leads  us  to  the  conclusion
that  "Matter  is  not  that  which  produces  consciousness,  but  that  which  limits
it  and  confines  its  intensity  within  certain  limits  ;  material  organisation
does  not  construct  consciousness  out  of  arrangements  of  atoms,  but  con-
tracts its  manifestation  within  the  sphere  which  it  permits "  (p.  295).
Thus  the  body  is  to  be  regarded,  not  only  as  the  organ  of  consciousness,  but
as  "  a  mechanism  for  inhibiting  consciousness,  for  preventing  the  full  powers
of  the  Ego  from  being  prematurely  actualised."  But  advance  in  organisation
liberates  consciousness  by  making  unnecessary  its  preoccupation  with  the
lower  functions  of  life,  and  marks  an  increase  of  intercourse  and  interaction
between  God  and  the  Egos.  Every  positive  attainment  by  consciousness  is
the  relatively  unconscious  of  a  subsequent  stage,  and  thus  heredity,  as  develop-
ment of  aptitudes,  sets  consciousness  free  for  the  pursuit  of  the  higher
results  which  are  the  responses  of  new  susceptibility  to  Divine  influence.
' '  The  essential  meaning,  then,  of  material  organisation  in  the  evolution  of
the  individual  is  mechanism,  and  structure  is  essentially  a  labour-saving
apparatus  which  sets  free  consciousness.  And  this  estimate  of  the  function
of  matter  and  the  meaning  of  complexity  of  organisation  in  the  individual  is
confirmed  by  its  applicability  to  the  organisation  of  society.  For  both  the
complex  structure  of  higher  societies  and  their  elaborate  material  machinery
are  essentially  contrivances  for  liberating  force,  and  enabling  them  to  pro-
duce a  higher  intelligence,  which  shall  be  competent  to  deal  with  higher
problems  "  (p.  293).


400


G.  C.  Massey.


[Supplement.


The  author  justly  claims  for  his  system  the  merit  of  substituting
concrete  realities  for  abstractions  in  its  formula  for  the  world-process.

"  For  while  all  the  terms  of  the  other  definitions  of  Evolutions,  'hetero-
geneity,' '  motion,'  '  matter,'  'consciousness,'  &c,  are  abstractions  which  stand
for  qualities  of  reality,  which  could  never  exist  by  themselves,  terms  like
'individual,'  'person,'  and  'society'  designate  realities.  Atoms  (?),  crystals,
animals,  and  men,  the  successive  embodiments  of  the  process  towards
individuality,  are  all  of  them  real,  and  as  such  possess  an  infinity  of  attri-
butes "  (p.  239).

And  in  the  theory  of  the  Transcendental  Ego,  of  the  reduction  of  its
powers  to  latency,  and  of  its  gradual  regeneration  by  the  development  of  a
conscious  self  that  shall  eventually  be  its  fully  adequate  representative,  and
divinely  actuated  realisation,  we  are  prepared  for  the  statement  that  the
individuality  of  our  present  phenomenal  self  is  still  inchoate.  And  this
introduces  us  to  considerations  of  especial  interest  for  Psychical  Research,
and  avowedly  due  to  the  influence  of  that  study.  We  all,  as  a  matter  of
course,  make  acknowledgment  of  the  moral  and  intellectual  imperfection
of  mankind,  without  having  in  the  least  understood  the  psychological
significance  of  the  admission.  The  true  defect  of  the  individual  is  11011-
attainment  of  individuality.  The  Transcendental  Ego  is,  so  to  speak,  a
schema  of  perfection,  an  ideal  for  consciousness  to  fulfil.  The  new  school  of
psychology,  which  studies  the  phenomena  of  human  abnormality,  with  a
view  to  the  better  interpretation  of  man,  has  suggested,  but  not  quite
explicitly  anticipated,  this  inference  from  its  facts.  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,
indeed,  in  passages  quoted  by  the  author,  has  come  very  near  to  a  statement
of  it.  But  generally  the  phenomena  in  question — "  multijdex  personality"
and  some  cognate  facts — have  been  treated  rather  as  derogating  from  this
established  unity  of  the  person,  than  as  indicative  of  an  imperfect  evolution
of  personality.  We  may  note  three  stages  in  the  treatment  of  these
phenomena.  First,  there  was  the  pathological  stage,  in  which  pre-
suppositions of  morbidity  actually  (as  there  can  now  be  little  doubt)  inter-
fered with  due  scientific  observation  of  the  facts  themselves,  preventing
recognition  of  such  as  could  not  be  accommodated  to  the  medical  hyjjothesis,
and  of  which  the  mere  statement  would  discredit  the  observer  in  public  or
in  professional  estimation.  This  stage  is  now  being  hopefully  replaced  by
that  of  scientific  verification.  But  "facts"  do  not  lead  directly  to  ideas  ;
or  rather  we  do  not  arrive  at  facts  in  any  systematic  order  unless  observation
is  guided  by  conceptions.  If  the  latter  belong  to  principles  already  recog-
nised in  science,  we  may  have  an  extension  of  knowledge  on  the  surface  but
no  deepening  of  its  foundations.  And  should  the  facts  be  referable  to  a
stratum  of  nature  below  the  surface  already  won,  "science"  alone  is  helpless
to  deal  with  them  ;  they  are  only  explicable  in  the  light  of  a  philosophy
which  they  cannot,  in  themselves,  be  adequate  to  prove.

But  to  judge  of  the  relevance  of  the  author's  theory  to  the  problem  in
question,  it  is  proper  that  we  should  hear  himself  on  the  point  : —

"  The  phenomenal  self,"  he  says,  "  is  that  portion  of  the  Transcendental  Ego
which  is  at  any  time  actual  (exists  eVepyei'a)  or  present  in  consciousness,  and
forms  but  a  feeble  and  partial  excerpt  of  the  Ego.  But  the  Self  is  as  yet  alone
real,  and  as  in  the  progress  of  its  development  it  unfolds  all  its  hidden  powers,
it  approximates  more  and  more  to  the  Ego,  until  at  last  the  actual  and  the


'Supplement.]


"Riddles  of  the  Sphinx."


401


potential  would  liecome  co-extensive,  the  Self  and  the  Ego  would  coincide,  and
in  the  attainment  of  perfection  we  should  be  all  we  are  capable  of  being.  And
this  account  of  the  relation  of  the  Ego  to  the  Self  is  not  only  metaphysically
necessary,  but  supported  also  by  the  direct  scientific  evidence  of  experimen-
tal psychology.  For  it  seems  to  provide  an  explanation  of  the  exceedingly
perplexing  phenomena  of  double  or  multifold  and  alternating  consciousness,
multiplex  personality,  and  'secondary'  selves.  These  curious  phenomena
forcibly  bring  home  to  us  what  a  partial  and  imperfect  thing  our  ordinary
consciousness  is,  how  much  goes  on  within  us  of  which  we  know  nothing,
how  far  the  phenomenal  falls  short  of  being  co-extensive  with  our  whole
nature.  And  yet  we  must  either  include  these  changes  of  personality  within
the  limits  of  our  own  'self,'  or  ascribe  them  to  possession  by  'spirits.'  And
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  foimer  theory  is  in  most  eases  obviously
preferable.  The  secondary  selves  show  such  close  relations  to  the  primary,
display  such  complications  of  inclusive  and  exclusive  memories,  betray  such
constant  tendencies  to  merge  into  or  to  absorb  their  primaries,  that  we  cannot
exclude  them  from  our  '  selves.'  Indeed,  it  is  often  difficult  to  decide  which  of
several  personalities  is  to  he  regarded  as  the  primary  self.  .  .  .  By  the
theory  suggested  all  these  difficulties  may  be  solved.  They  merely  illustrate
the  contention  that  our  ordinary  selves  are  neither  our  whole  selves  nor  our
true  selves.  They  are,  as  Mr.  Myers  phrases  it,  merely  that  portion  of  the  self
which  has  happened  to  come  to  the  surface,  or  which  it  has  paid  to  develop  into
actual  consciousness  in  the  course  of  Evolution.  They  are  our  habitual  and
normal  selves,  more  or  less  on  a  par  with  the  secondary  selves,  and,  like  them,
phenomenal.  But  the  Ego  includes  them  all,  and  this  inclusion  justifies  us  in
reckoning  these  phenomena  part  of  ourselves.  In  it  the  phenomenal  selves  unite
and  combine,  and  as  a  beginning  of  this  fusion  it  is  interesting  to  find  traces  of
coalescence  in  the  higher  stages  of  personalities  which  at  lower  stages  had
seemed  exclusive  and  antagonistic"  (p.  281,  et  seq.).

The  author  had  already  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  some
lower  forms  of  life  we  see  this  imperfect  co-ordination  expressed  physically,
in  the  multiplication  of  complete  physical  individuals  by  mere  fission.
And  it  is  perhaps  an  evidence  of  life  at  a  similar  stage  in  the  psychical
order,  when  we  find  repeated  in  that  order  an  apparently  analogous
phenomenon.  The  significance  of  the  contemporaneous  development  of  such
differences  of  character,  within  a  common  subjectivity,  as  are  apparent  in
some  of  our  cases,  will  be  adverted  to  later  on.  But  the  whole  conception  of
the  gradual  realisation  in  consciousness  of  a  schema  of  individuality,  such  as
is  the  "Transcendental  Ego"  in  original  potentiality,  seems  to  necessitate
the  idea  of  successive  storages  of  distinct  experiences  converted  into  special
faculty  and  characteristic  tendencies.  We  are  not,  however,  on  this  account
obliged  to  attribute  to  the  partially  realised  Transcendental  Ego  a  transcen-
dental consciousness  overlooking,  as  it  were,  the  consciousness  of  its  pheno-
menal moment,  and  distinct  therefrom.  For  just  as  the  greater  part  of  the
phenomenal  self  or  character  is  in  latency  or  abeyance  in  the  pre-occupation
of  any  special  moment  of  its  experience,  so  the  case  may  be  similar  with  the
Transcendental  Ego,  which  may  invest  the  whole  of  its  consciousness  in  its
present  constructions  through  the  phenomenal  life  in  progress.  But  as  in
our  own  experience,  as  phenomenal  persons,  there  sometimes  intrudes  a
phase  of  our  interest  or  character  irrelevant  to,  and  interruptive  of,  the
business  in  hand,  so  may  occasionally  be  broken  that  concentration  or  pre-


402


C.  C.  Massey.


[Supplement.


occupation  of  the  more  collective  personality  of  the  Transcendental  Ego
which  is  indispensable  to  the  continuity  of  our  phenomenal  life.

However  that  may  be,  the  author  is  clear  ' '  that  the  Ego  is  not  a  second
or  alien  consciousness  concurrent  with  and  distinct  from  the  selves.  The
self  or  selves  are  simply  the  actually  conscious  part  of  the  Ego,  which
represents  the  potentialities  of  their  development  on  the  one  hand  and
their  primary  and  pre-cosmic  condition  on  the  other.  The  Ego  is  both  the
basis  of  the  development  and  its  end,  but  within  the  process  the  selves
alone  are  real"  (p.  410).  It  is,  however,  left  problematical  whether,  "in
the  intervals,  as  it  were,  of  its  incarnations,"  the  Ego  recovers  a  conscious-
ness and  memory  of  its  past  lives  ;  but  in  that  case  ' '  these  lucid  intervals,
though  they  might  produce  great  moral  effects,  would  not  in  themselves
form  part  of  the  phenomenal  development,  and  the  latter  would  appear  to
be  continuous  from  phase  to  phase  of  phenomenal  consciousness. "

In  the  possibility  of  a  successive  multitude  of  objective  lives,  develop-
ing distinct  characteristics  within  the  integrity  of  a  true  individuality,  we
have  already,  it  would  seem,  the  potentiality,  the  ideal,  and  the  type  of  a
social  integration.  A  transcendental  individuality  capable  of  and  needing
exjiression  in  a  long  succession  of  distinctly  characterised  phenomenal  lives
is  itself  a  social  microcosm  of  at  least  a  family  type.  We  see  what  we  call
different  "sides  "  or  "aspects  "  of  individual  characters  on  earth,  and  they
are  sometimes  so  independent  of  a  central  control  as  to  disturb  the  uni-
formity of  a  career,  making  it  a  manifestation  of  different  and  even  opposed
tendencies.  The  individual  is  then  described  as  "  eccentiic, "  as  if  eccen-
tricity were  itself  a  characteristic,  instead  of  being  the  negation  of  consis-
tent character,  and  an  evidence  of  immature  personality.  By  the  light  of
the  hypothesis  we  are  considering,  we  may,  perhaps,  see  in  it  what  would
normally  require  a  duality  of  incarnations  comprised  in  one.  And  it  will
no  longer  be  surprising  if,  occasionally,  the  duality  should  be  subliminal
and  only  emerge  under  abnormal  conditions.  Such  disturbances  of  the
phenomenal  personality  may  be  purposive,  but  they  are  more  easily  conceiv-
able as  testifying  to  an  imperfect  co-ordination  and  assimilation  of  the  ingene-
rated  experiences  of  the  transcendental  individuality.  But  in  any  case  we
cannot  place  the  latter  quite  outside  the  process,  considered  comprehensively,
for  it  has  evidently  a  function  in  the  process  analogous  to  the  organic.  The
development  of  the  Ego  as  a  realised  individual  requires  the  jjerfect  asso-
ciation or  integration  of  all  the  potential  elements  which  have  been  brought
to  consciousness  through  phenomenal  conditions.  The  possibility  of  the
ultimate  social  solidarity,  which  is  the  consummation  of  the  world-process,
depends  on  the  perfect  accomjjlishment  of  the  social  process  in  the  in-
dividual. Only  as  a  true  microcosm  is  it  an  eventual  element  in  the  macro-
cosm. For  this  internal  development  educes  the  affinities  which  make
external  combination  possible.  Botli  processes  are  alternately  necessary,
and  perhaps  we  may  compare  the  phenomenal  life  to  the  activity  of  a  day-
time, and  the  subjective  interval  to  the  sleep  in  which  digestion  and
assimilation  prepare  the  organism  for  a  renewal  of  voluntary  functions.

If  these  speculations  should  be  thought  too  remote  from  verification,  it
should  at  least  be  remembered  that  we  are  driven  to  speculation  by  the
course  of  scientific  inquiry  ;  and  that,  as  the  author  remarks  (p.  237),


Supplement]


"  R  iddles  of  the  Sphinx."


403


"  there  are  many  facts  about  our  constitution  which  it  is  difficult  to  explain
except  on  the  theory  that  from  a  higher  point  of  view  our  individuality  would
appear  almost  as  shadowy  and  imperfect  as  that  of  a  zoophyte  does  to  us."
And  the  more  probable  this  appears,  the  less  probable  is  it  that  an  eschato-
logy  can  be  independent  of  philosophy,  or  that  we  shall  be  able  to  settle  the
question  of  "a  future  life"  by  mere  appeal  to  empirical  facts.  Even  the
best  evidence  of  this  sort — and  the  author  describes  the  evidence  as  "prob-
ably the  vastest  body  of  unsystematised  testimony  in  the  world,  varying
in  value  from  the  merest  hearsay  to  the  carefully  recorded  experience  of  the
ablest  and  most  competent  men " — carries  us  a  very  little  way,  and  its
character  is  often  such  as  to  provoke  new  doubts  and  raise  new  difficulties.
Should  we  not  expect  this  to  be  the  case  if  our  phenomenal  life  is  only  a
transient  moment  of  an  individuality  which  it  only  partially,  perhaps  even
only  minutely,  represents  1  On  the  other  hand,  what  is  positive  in  the
evidence  seems  to  be  just  what  we  should  also  expect  on  that  very  supposi-
tion. For  then  ghostly  and  spiritistic  manifestations  would  be  mere
memorial  survivals,  and  this  is  just  what,  when  the  evidence  of  identity  is
at  its  best,  they  are.  "Alas,  poor  ghost !  "  Poor  remnant  of  an  experience
from  which  all  the  use  and  vitality  has  been  extracted.  Perhajis,  after  all,
the  general  indifference  of  mankind  to  the  question  of  the  future  life,  which
the  author  censures  and  deplores,  may  be  really  a  confirmation  of  his  own
theory  of  immortality.  For  if  that  is  true,  the  future  life  of  the  phenomenal
person,  in  the  distinct  and  unambiguous  sense  of  the  continuity  of  a  realised
consciousness,  is  at  most  conditional.  The  life  we  know  is  a  special  concentra-
tion, a  contraction  of  the  sphere  of  the  Ego.  With  the  withdrawal  of  the
conditions  of  its  experience  and  habitual  activity,  all  that  is  significant  and
concrete  in  the  conception  of  identity  would  seem  to  be  lost.  If  the  truth
of  our  immortality  is  the  absorption  of  the  phenomenal  in  the  transcendental
person,  to  the  great  majority  of  mankind  this  would  be  hardly  a  degree
less  indifferent  and  insignificant  than  absorption  in  Pan.  Immersed  in
objective  interests,  consciousness  ihas  not  developed  the  modes  of  its  sub-
jective survival,  nor  forged  the  links  of  a  realised  identity  with  our  eternal
principle.  If,  then,  the  true  immortality  is  a  return  to  the  subjective  and
transcendental,  it  is  at  least  a  wise  instinct  that  prevents  men  from  seeking  it
where  alone  they  could  seek  it  with  interest  and  concern,  in  a  false  con-
tinuity of  externa]  manifestation.  And  yet  in  such  manifestations,  studied
without  prejudice  and  without  misplaced  hope,  we  may  find  proof  enough  to
confute  the  grosser  sort  of  materialism,  and  suggestion  enough  to  guide
psychical  research  to  results  that  shall  be  more  than  speculative.

In  the  chapter  on  "Immortality,"  the  necessary  distinction  is  made
between  the  identity  of  the  Transcendental  Ego  in  all  its  upward  manifesta-
tions from  the  lowest  form  of  life  to  the  life  of  man,  and  the  self-identifica-
tion which  depends  on  memory.  For  the  latter  we  thus  arrive  at  a
"graduated  "  immortality  : —

"If  we  can  conceive  a  future  life,  the  reality  of  which  depends  on  memory,
it  will  admit  of  less  or  more.  And  if,  as  seems  natural,  the  extent  to  which
the  events  of  life  are  remembered  depends  largely  on  the  intensity  of  spiritual
activity  they  implied,  it  follows  that  the  higher  and  intenser  consciousness  was
during  life,  the  greater  the  intensity  of  future  consciousness. Hence  the  amoeba


C.  C.  Massey.


[Supplement,


or  the  embryo,  with  their  infinitesimal  consciousness,  will  possess  only  an  infini-
tesimal memory  of  their  past  after  death.  And  this  for  a  twofold  reason  :  not
only  must  the  impress  life  produces  upon  so  rudimentary  a  consciousness  generate
only  a  very  faint  memory,  but  the  contents  also  of  life  will  present  little  that  is
capable  of  persisting  and  worthy  of  being  retained.  Thus  the  lowest  phase  of
spiritual  existence  will  have  nothing  to  remember,  and  hardly  any  neans  of
remembering  it.  We  cannot,  therefore,  ascribe  to  them  any  vivid  or  enduring-
consciousness  of  their  past  lives,  and  yet  need  not  deny  it  altogether.  They
have  a  future  life,  but  it  is  rudimentary."  "  By  a  self-acting  arrangement  the
condition  of  consciousness  hereafter  will  accurately  correspond  to  its  attain-
ments here.  Just  in  proportion  as  we  have  developed  our  spiritual  powers  here
will  be  our  spiritual  future.  Those  who  have  lived  the  life  of  beasts  here,  a  dull
and  brutish  life  that  was  redeemed  by  no  effort  to  illumine  the  soul  by  spiritual
enlightenment,  will  be  rewarded  as  '  the  beasts  that  perish.'  They  will  retain
little  of  what  they  were,  their  future  life  will  lie  brief  and  faint.  On  the  other
hand,  we  need  not  hesitate  to  attribute  to  the  faithful  dog,  whom  the  strength
of  pure  affection  for  his  master  has  lifted  far  above  the  spiritual  level  of  his  race,
at  least  as  much  immortality  as  the  brutal  savage,  whose  life  has  been  ennobled
by  no  high  thoughts  and  redeemed  by  no  elevated  feeling — '  Nicht  nur  Verdienst,
auch  Treue  wahrt  uns  die  Person.'  Those,  again,  whose  activities  have  been
devoted  to  the  commission  of  evil  deeds,  that  burn  their  impress  on  the  soul,
will  be  haunted  by  their  torturing  memory.  Those  who  have  habituated  them-
selves to  high  and  noble  activities,  who  have  disposed  their  thoughts  towards
truths  which  are  permanent,  and  their  affections  towards  relations  which  are
enduring,  will  rise  to  life  everlasting.  .  .  .  Thus  each  of  us  will  be  the
master  and  maker  of  his  own  self  and  of  his  own  immortality,  and  his  future  life
will  be  such  as  he  has  deserved."

That,  however,  is  memorial  survival  ;  but  the  true,  metaphysical,
immortality  is  unconditional. That  is  to  say,

"  To  the  extent  to  which  we  are  to  be  identified  with  ultimate  existences
and  Transcendental  Egos,  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  we  are  immortal.
And,  further,  as  the  whole  world-process  is  a  process  taking  place  in  the
interaction  between  the  Egos  and  the  Deity,  the  different  stages  of  material
evolution  must  correspond  to  different  phases  of  that  spiritual  interaction.
Parallel,  therefore,  to  the  physical  evolution,  there  runs  a  spiritual  evolution,
related  to  it  as  meaning  and  motive  to  outward  and  visible  manifesta-
tion. And  there  is  no  reason  why  this  process  should  not  be  the  develop-
ment, not  of  Spirit  in  general,  but  of  particular  spirits,  why  a  single  Ego
should  not  pass  through  the  succession  of  organisms  and  developments  of  con-
sciousness, from  the  amoeba  to  man,  and  from  man  to  perfection.  This  gives,
as  it  were,  the  spirit  mil  interpretation  of  the  descent  of  man  from  the  beasts,  and
at  the  same  time  assures  him  of  his  due  and  proportionate  share  in  the  immor-
tality of  the  ultimate  spirit."

The  answer  to  the  question:  "  What  is  the  relation  of  such  an  eternal
spirit  to  its  successive  phases,  which  form  our  phenomenal  existences,  and
in  what  sense  can  these  be  said  to  have  a  future  life  ?  "  is  thus  already
evident.  "  They  persist  as  factors  in  the  development. "  "All  the  elements
of  the  lower  phases  of  life  that  are  capable  of  development  are  transformed
into  the  higher,"  the  rest  being  rejected  in  accordance  with  "the  law
whereby  all  organisms  take  up  and  assimilate  what  they  can  utilise,  i.e.,
what  serves  their  purposes,  and  reject  what  they  cannot."


Supplement.]


"  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx."


405


"  Nevertheless  it  is  not  until  the  higher  stages  of  individuality  and  spiritual
development  are  reached  that  the  phenomenal  self  of  any  single  life,  i.e.,  the
memory  of  its  past,  can  he  supposed  to  form  a  predominant,  or  even  an  im-
portant, factor  in  the  total  or  final  consciousness  of  the  Ego,  or  one  that  can
display  any  great  permanence.  The  lower  phases  of  Evolution  do  not
generate  sufficient  psychical  energy  to  attain  to  any  eonsiderahle  degree  of
immortality."

On  mere  "memory,"  however,  we  should  not  lay  too  much  stress.  For
as,  on  the  one  hand,  "  it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  remember  all  we
did  ten  years  ago  in  order  to  feel  ourselves  the  same  persons  now  as  .then,"
so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  result  of  experience  is  much  more  than  memory  ;
it  is  the  development  of  faculty  and  intelligence.  And  that  is  at  once  the
interest  of  the  Transcendental  Ego  in  the  phenomenal  life,  and  also  the  true
preservation  of  whatever  in  the  latter  is  fitted  to  survive.

The  difficulty  supposed  to  be  offered  by  Heredity  to  the  conception  of
Pre-existence  is  met  by  the  author  alternatively  in  two  wrays.  For,  first,  it
may  be  said  that  heredity,  while  offering  the  conditions  of  individual  mani-
festation, cannot  show  the  selective  determination  which  results  in  the  actual
individual  character.

"The  parents  possess  an  indefinite  number  of  potentialities  that  may
possibly  lie  inherited,  and  these,  again,  may  be  commingled  in  an  indefinite
number  of  ways.  But  the  character  actually  inherited  is  a  definite  combina-
tion of  these  potential  qualities,  and  what  determines  the  way  in  which  it
is  actually  combined?  It  is  not  enough  to  know  generally  that  the  parents
supply  the  materials  of  the  new  combination  ;  we  must  know  also  what  arranges
the  materials  in  a  definite  order.  Now  if  we  supposed  that  this  proportion  in
which  the  various  dispositions  of  the  parents  entered  into  the  character  of
the  offspring  was  really  determined  by  the  character  of  the  spiritual  entity
which  the  parents  were  caj>able  of  providing  with  a  suitable  organism,*  we
should  at  all  events  have  devised  a  method  which  rendered  pre-existence  com-
patible with  heredity.  For  there  is  no  apparent  break  in  the  chain  of  natural
causes  :  the  whole  character  of  the  offspring  is  inherited  from  the  parents.  But
as  the  limits  within  which  heredity  is  possible  are  very  wide,  the  spiritual  selec-
tion is  supposed  to  work  within  them."

Or,  secondly,  we  may  have  immediate  recourse  to  teleology,  allowing
that  the  character  of  the  offspring  is  definitely  determined  at  birth,  but
insisting  that  it  is  just  so  determined  in  the  interest  of  the  true  individuality
which  has  to  be  developed.

"As  the  ultimate  explanation  of  everything  is  teleogical,  i.e.,  relative  to
the  end  of  the  world-process,  the  parents  must  be  in  the  last  resort  held  to
transmit  certain  qualities  to  their  offspring  in  order  to  further  the  develop-
ment of  the  pre-existing  spirits.  For  the  parents  are  such  as  they  are,  their
parents  are  such  as  they  are,  and  so  on,  everything  is  such  as  it  is,  until  the
metaphysical  or  first  cause  of  the  world-process  is  reached,  which  is  also  its
final  cause,  and  acts  in  a  certain  way  in  order  to  promote  that  process."

The  identification  of  the  Transcendental  Ego  with  the  lower  phenomenal
stages  of  the  process,  perhaps  even  with  man,  is  relieved  from  obvious
difficulty  by  a  supposition  which  has  both  presumption  and  evidence  in  its
favour.  The  Ego  may  manifest  concur  ret  My  in  different  organisms.  At  the
base  of  the  phenomenal  process  only  a  gwtsi-individuality  is  apparent.


406


G.  C.  Massey.


[Supplement.


"  And  the  analogy  of  the  '  secondary  selves  '  within  ourselves  will  enable  us
to  understand  how  several  relatively-separate  selves  of  consciousness  can  co-
exist within  the  same  entity,  and  how  unsafe  it  is  to  argue  from  temporary
exclusiveness  to  ultimate  distinctness.  We  may  hold,  then,  that  the  indi-
vidual cells  of  a  tree,  or  the  individual  polypes  of  a  zoophyte  are  the  'secondary
selves '  of  the  lower  organisms  ;  nor  need  the  fact  that  they  possess  distinct
physical  organisations  and  are  under  the  proper  conditions  capable  of  spatially
distinct  existence,  perplex  us  when  we  reflect  that  Space  was  not  found  to  he
an  ultimate  reality."

And  in  higher  strata  of  life,  including  the  human,  we  seem  to  get  hints  of
the  same  severance.  "  Multiplex  personality,"  to  which  the  author  hero
again  refers,  is  perhaps  rather  the  converse  phenomenon  of  undue  inclusion,
within  a  single  organism,  of  distinct  psychical  combinations  which  might
claim  distinct  objective  expression.  But  the  ulterior  significance  may  be
similar.  And  in  the  division  of  the  sexes  has  often  been  seen  a  suggestion  of
sundered  individuality  ;  "  for  neither  men  nor  women  are  sufficient  in  them-
selves or  complete  representatives,  either  physically  or  spiritually,  of
humanity."

A  summary  characterisation  of  this  book  may  specify  as  its  key-note  the
idea  of  the  relation  between  rational,  or  teleological,  causation,  and  historical
antecedents  or  conditions.  The  whole  world-process  is  the  effectuation  of
the  first  through  the  second,  the  accommodation  of  the  second  to  the  first.
This  is  the  adjustment  of  science  to  philosophy,  of  phenomena  to  the  truth
of  things.  And  as  our  conception  of  the  final  end  to  be  attained  becomes
clearer  and  more  definite,  so  will  our  understanding  of  the  stages  of  the
process  be  more  complete.  Naturally,  the  first  fallacy  as  to  final  causation
is  "  anthropocentric  "  ;  phenomenal  man  is  for  all  things  the  end,  and  "  cork
trees  grow  in  order  to  supply  us  with  champagne  corks."  A  metaphysical
idea  is  conceived  unmetaphysically.  But  when  we  see  that  a  perfect  social
integration — our  highest  ideal — implies  perfection  in  the  individual  elements
to  be  integrated,  the  conception  of  teleology  obliges  us  to  reinterpret
the  transient  self  as  a  furtherance  of  true  individuality.  For  it  is  then
also  apparent  that  all  defect  in  the  individual  is  a  falling  short  of  individuality.
The  potentiality  of  man  is  the  metaphysical  idea  of  his  being  ;  in  the  words
of  a  late  American  writer,  elucidating  a  cognate  conception  in  Indian  philo-
sophy, "  an  ideal  capability  stands  fast  in  us  as  the  real  substance  of  our-
selves."1 There  are  many  who  feel  and  acknowledge  this  sentiment,  yet
decline  the  attempt  to  give  it  metaphysical  form  or  validity.  It  is  the
merit  of  this  book  that  it  has  made  the  attemjjt  fearlessly,  attacking  the
problem  with  remarkable  powers  of  philosophising  from  assumed  data.  And
if  it  should  be  objected  that  the  Transcendental  Egos,  emptied  of  all  content
at  the  origin  of  the  world-process,  seem  too  unreal  for  the  conception  of  sub-
jectivity to  attach  to  them,  it  may  be  replied  that  the  difficulty  is  not  essen-
tially greater  than  that  which  we  daily  overcome,  in  the  recovery  of  latent
consciousness.  Nor  is  it  at  all  more  easy  to  conceive  function  as  originating
with  exercise  than  as  anteceding  it.  We  may  be  perplexed,  indeed,  to
understand  how  the  author  can  have  persuaded  himself  that  his  hypothesis
really "  begins  at  the  beginning." It  is  at  least  as  easy  to  represent

1  Johnson  :  Oriental  Religions,  p.  383. (The  Sankhya.)


Supplement.]


"  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx."


407


the  anarchy  of  unrelated  wills,  necessitating  their  imposed  paralysis  and
dormancy,  as  consequent  on  a  "Fall"  into  self-centred  Egoism,  as  to
suppose  it  an  absolutely  original  condition.  And  if  such  conceptions  are
to  be  admitted  into  philosophy,  perhaps  a  finer  and  juster  supposition
■would  be  that  of  a  gradual  reduction,  to  the  zero  point  of  extinction,  sus-
tained by  consciousness  through  progressive  astringency  and  contraction  of
the  individual  wills  which  had  departed  from  the  community  of  dependence
on  a  universal  centre.  Thus  the  divine  agency  would  begin  with  the  cosmic
process,  as  a  refilling  of  the  vacant  forms  of  consciousness,  and  a  re-eliciting,
in  response  to  stimulation,  of  the  human  energies,  as  conceived  by  the
author.  But  a  philosophy  of  evolution  properly  and  necessarily  takes  as  its
starting  point  the  chaos,  however  caused,  of  the  elements  of  the  future
cosmic  combination.  The  objection  of  philosophy  is  to  the  author's  con-
tention that  this  beginning  must  be  regarded  as  absolute.

It  may  be  remarked,  in  conclusion,  that  the  special  interest  of  this  book
for  Psychical  Research  lies  in  the  suggestion  of  non-equivalence  of  the
phenomenal  self-consciousness  to  a  true  subjectivity.  The  idea  is  certainly
not  new,  but  it  is  here  given  a  systematic  expression  in  the  relation  of  tele-
ology to  Evolution.  And  another  very  fruitful  idea  for  our  study  is  that  which
discovers  an  essential  connection  between  the  development  of  individuality
and  human  solidarity.  If  a  perfect  society  implies  perfect  community  of
sympathetic  life,  we  must  conceive  the  individual  as  in  formal  correspon-
dence with  all  the  modes  of  a  true  humanity,  and  the  special  affinities  mani-
fested in  phenomena  of  telepathy  may  be  regarded  as  faint  anticipations  of
&  general  rapport  which  will  be  similarly  immediate.  The  development  of
man  will  be  marked  and  accompanied  by  continuous  retreat  of  the  threshold
of  his  consciousness,  and  the  connection  between  his  moral  state  and  his
spiritual  powers  will  be  constantly  more  apparent.

C.  C.  Massey.


408


"The  Occult  Sciences."


[Supplement.


n.

"THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES."  1

"It  is  .  .  .  an  unpretending  but  useful  task,"  says  Mr.  Edward  Waite,
' '  which  we  have  set  ourselves  to  perform  in  the  present  volume,  which
embraces,  as  we  would  claim,  in  a  compressed  and  digested  form,  the  whole
scope  of  occult  knowledge,  expressed  in  the  language  of  a  learner."

Whether  such  a  task  is  or  is  not  "  unpretending  "  will  partly  depend  upon
what  "  the  whole  scope  of  occult  knowledge,"  as  conceived  by  the  author,
turns  out  to  be.  The  evidence  for  so-called  occult  science  is  diffused  over-
many  literatures  ;  it  includes  at  any  rate  a  very  large  admixture  of  deliberate
fraud  and  childish  folly  ;  and,  if  it  is  to  be  presented  seriously,  it,  above  all
tilings,  needs  the  support  of  some  modern  experiment — some  kind  of  proof
that  there  is  some  kind  of  reality  in  some  at  least  of  the  marvels  which  are
copied  from  book  to  book  as  matters  of  such  ordinary  occurrence.

Let  us,  then,  in  a  very  few  words,  consider  Mr.  Waite's  claims  to  learning,,
to  critical  acumen,  and  to  the  production  of  experimental  evidence.

The  very  defective  "  List  of  Authorities  "  at  the  end  of  the  book  gives  no
high  notion  of  the  author's  qualifications  as  a  scholar.  His  range  of
languages  does  not  go  beyond  English,  French,  and  Latin  ;  and  through-
out his  work  the  misprints  (?)  and  mis-spellings  are  of  just  that  type  which
indicates  a  somewhat  shallow  or  second-hand  acquaintance  with  at  least  his
Latin  authorities.  With  such  books,  on  the  other  hand,  as  Lee's  Glimpses  of
the  Supernatural,  Frances  Lord's  Christian-Science  Healing,  Dr.  Hartmann's
Magic,  and  Colonel  Olcott's  Theosophy,  Religion,  and  Occult  Science — all  of
these  quoted  as  "authorities  " — we  are  disposed  to  allow  our  author  a  much
fuller  acquaintance.

T<>  illustrate  Mr.  Waite's  critical  acumen  it  is  only  necessary  to  open  the
book  at  random.  On  page  69,  for  instance,  we  find  these  words,  spoken  in
all  seriousness  :  "  For  the  practical  part,  or  the  method  of  communicating
with  demons,  the  Grimorium  Yerum  and  the  Grand  Grimoire  are  said  to  be
entirely  sufficient."  Who  says  so  ?  We  suppose  it  is  one  of  those  "  living
writers  who  are  specialists  in  distinct  branches  of  esoteric  science,"  who,  as
Mr.  Waite  tells  us  in  his  preface,  have  lent  him  their  valuable  aid.

We  must,  however,  in  fairness  add  that  although  our  author  intellectually
believes  in  the  Black  Magic  of  the  Grand  Grimoire,  he  morally  disapproves,
of  it,  and  points  to  a  more  excellent  way.  "  Every  practical  power,"  he  says,
p.  58,  "  which  Black  Magic  can  at  the  utmost  offer  to  its  initiates  is  guaran-
teed with  tenfold  additional  capacity  ...  by  the  branch  which  is
denominated  Divine.  '  To  be  a  Christian  is  hard,'  said  the  impressed  but
vacillating  pagan,  and  the  heights  of  mystical  sanctity  are  also  laborious  in

1  The  Occult  Science* ;  a  C'ompenlium  of  Transcendental  Doctrine  and  Experiment.
By  Arthur  Edward  Waite. Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner  and  Co.,  1891.


Supplement.]


':  The  Occult  Sciences."


409


their  ascent,  but  the  apex  of  adeptship  is  far  more  easily  attained  by  the
humanity  which  is  called  thereto,  than  is  the  diabolical  condition  which  the
Black  Magic  that  is  behind  Black  Magic  requires  of  its  professors."

After  this  solemn  warning  we  shall  do  well  to  turn  our  impressed  but  vacil-
lating minds  to  the  experimental  proof  which  Mr.  Waite  offers  us  of  the  reali-
ties underlying  his  chapters  on  "  Composition  of  Talismans,"  "  Kabbalism,'"
and  so  forth.  That  some  such  verification  is  necessary  he  does  at  least  profess
to  discern.  "  The  experiments,"  he  says,  "which  were  the  foundation  of
magical  doctrine  and  magical  hypothesis  are  facts  which  are  not  to  be
evaporated  by  the  severity  of  critical  analysis  ;  they  are  the  synthesis  of  the
experiments  of  the  ages,  and  they  can  be  verified  by  those  who  desire  it."'
We  turned  over  many  a  page  of  Mr.  Waite's  work  in  search  of  these  verifying
experiments.  At  last,  in  the  last  chapter,  the  cat,  if  such  an  expression  be
allowed  us,  issued  gently  from  the  bag. "In  the  year  1874,  Madame-

Blavatsky"  it  is  the  story  of  the  duplicated  teacup  after  all.  What

more  is  there  to  say  1  Let  him  who  still  believes  in  the,  miracles  of  Mr.
Sinnett's  Occult  World  as  facts  believe  in  Mr.  Waite's  Occult  Sciences  as
theory. Atqne  idem  jimgat  vulpes,  et  mulgeat  hircos.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


411


ED  MUX  D GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1891.


Additions  since  the  list  in  "Proceedings,"  Vol.  VI.


ENGLISH


James  (Prof essor  William),  The  Principles  of  Psychology  (2  vols.),

London,  1890

Kingsbury,  G.  C,  M.D.,  The  Practice  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion,

Bristol,  1891

Ochorowicz  (Dr.  J.),  Mental  Suggestion,  with  a  preface  by  Prof.

Ch.  Richet New  York,  1891

TuCKEY(Dr.  C.  Lloyd),  Psycho-Therapeutics.  3rd  edition,  revised

and  enlarged London,  1891

FRENCH.

Archives  du  Magnetisme  Animal. Publiees  par  M.  le  Baron

D'Henin  de  Cuvfflers. (8  vols.)  Paris,  1820-3

Rerillon  (Dr.  Edgar),  Les  indications  formelles  de  la  Suggestion

Hypnotique,  en  Psychiatrie  et  en  Neuropathologie  Paris,  1891

Rerillon  (Dr.  Edgar),  Hypnotisme  et  Suggestion  Paris,  1891

Rerxheim  (Professor H.),  Hypnotisme,  Suggestion,  Psycho-

therapie  ;  Etudes  nouvelles  Paris,  1891

Cagliostro,  Memoires  Authenticpies  pour  servir  a  l'Histoire  du

Comte  de. 2nd  Edition 1785

Cagliostro  DEmasque'  a  Yarsovie. Par  un  Te'moin  oculaire  ...  178G
Charcot  (Dr.  J.  M.),  CEuvres  Completes. Tome  IX.  Metallo-

therapie  et  Hypnotisme,  &c  Paris,  1890

Cheyreul  (E.),  De  la  Baguette  Divinatoire  Paris,  1854

Despine  (Dr.  P.),  Etude  Scientifkjue  sur  le  Somnambulisme,  Paris,  1880
D'Hentn"  de  Cuvillers  (M.  le  Raron),  Le  Magnetisme  Eclaire

ou  Introduction  aux  Archives  du  Magnetisme  Animal,  Paris,  1820
Du  Potet  (Le  Raron  de  Sennevoy),  Cours  de  Magnetisme. ..Pa ris,  1840
Gasparin  (Comte  Ag.  de),  Tables  Tournantes.  2nd  Edition,  Paris,  1888
LiisBEAUi/r  (Dr.  A.  A.),  Therapeutique  Suggestive  Paris,  1891


412


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


Noizet  (General),  Memoire  sur  le  Somnambulisme  et  le  Magne-

tisme  Animal Paris,  1852'

Pitres (Professor A.), Legons cliniques sur l'Hysterie  et

l'Hypiiotisme. (2  vols.) Paris,  1891

Register  (Dr.  L.  R.),  Hypnotisme  et  Croyances  Anciennes,  Paris,  1891

Thouret,  Extrait  de  la  Correspondance  de  la  Societe  Royale  de

Medecine  relativement  au  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1785*

GERMAN.

Gesellscha.it fur  Psychologische  Forschung.  Schriften.

Heft  I  Leipzig,  1891

Wetterstrand (Dr. Otto  G.),  Der  Hypnotismus  und  seine

Anwendung  in  der  praktischen  Medicin Vienna,  1891


A  full  catalogue  of  the  books  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  was  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  A  supplementary  catalogue  was-
printed  at  tlie  end  of  Vol.  VI.  Separate  copies  of  these  catalogues  are  still  on-
hand,  andean  he  obtained-  from  the  Secretary.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


413


LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

(January,  1892.)


PRESIDENT.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Cambridge.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  S.W.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Crossdeep  Lodge,  Twickenham.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.

Hon.  Roden  Noel,  St.  Aubyns,  West  Brighton.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon,

COUNCIL  FOR  1892.


O.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.

Thomas  Barkworth.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.

The  Earl  of  Crawford  and

Balcarres,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  M  acalister,  M.  D. ,  F.  R.  S.


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Frank  Podmore.

Professor  W.  Ramsay,  Ph.  D. ,  F.  R.  S.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.

Sydney  C  Scott.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Babington  Smith.

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.


A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.

HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Frederic  W,  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Frank  Podmore,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

SECRETARY  FOR  FRANCE.
Leon  Marillier,  7,  Rue  Michelet,  Paris.

SECRETARY  FOR  THE  UNITED  STATES.
Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


414


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


HONORARY  MEMBERS.

William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  "VV.
The Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P., Hawarden  Castle,
Chester.

Sir  Frederick  Leighton,  Bart.,  P.R.A.,  2,  Holland  Park-road,  W.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Lord  Tennyson,  Farringford,  Freshwater,  Isle  of  Wight.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.G.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  Kalmar,  Sweden.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  28,  Rue  cle  Courcelles,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  G,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Bei-lin,  W.

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor Stanley Hall, Clark University, Worcester,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.
Professor  Dr.  Heinrich  Hertz,  The  University,  Bonn.
Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Bourg-la  Reine,  France.
Mahadeva  Vishnu  Kane,  B.A.,  Dharwar,  Bombay.
Professor  Kovalevsky,  The  University,  Kharkof,  Russia.
Dr.  A.  A.  Libbeault,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.
Hans  Natge,  Berlin-Tempelhof,  Berlin.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.
Dr.  F.  Freiiierr  Goeler von Ravensburg, 4,  Nettelbeckstrasse,
Berlin,  W.

Tn.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris.
Dr. Freiherr  von  Schrenk-Notzing, 29,  HerzogWilhelmstrasse,
Munich.

H.  Taine,  Menthon  St.  Bernard,  Haute  Savoie,  France.
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


415


MEMBERS.

Allan,  T.  S.,  L.R.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.,  Ed.,  Salford House,  Tunbridge,  Kent.
Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S. "W".
Atkinson,  Miss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy-gardens,  Tynemouth.
Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  5,  Warwick-gardens,  West  Kensington,  W.
Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton -gardens,  S.  W.
Balfour,  Lady  Frances,  32,  Addison-road,  London,  W.
Balfour,  G-.  W.,  M.P.,  67,  Addison-road,  London,  W.
Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Balliston,  W.  H.  T.,  6,  Down-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Banister,  Major  Fitzgerald  M.,  R.  A.,  Junior  Army  and  Navy  Club,W.
Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.
Barkworth,  Thomas,  J. P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.
Barrett,  Ashley  William,  M.B.  (Lond.),  42,  Finsbury-square,  E.C.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Bective,  The  Countess,  39,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E.

Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Best,  R.  Lloyd  Storr,  Burlington-crescent,  Goole.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bibby,  Charles  Hesketh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bidder,  G.  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.
Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Bramwell,  John  Milne,  M.B.,  Goole,  Yorkshire.
Bridson,  Joseph  Ridgway,  Belle  Isle,  Windermere.
Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.
Bundy,  Colonel  John  C,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow  on-the-Hill.
Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Carpenter,  Major  G.  W.Wallace,  28,  Ashley-place,  Victoria-st.,  S.W.
Castle,  Robert,  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford.
Cave,  Charles  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-square,  London,  S.W.
Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
Coffin,  Walter  H,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Coles,  Donald  A.,  M.D.,  Sydney  House,  Sutton  Court-road,  Chiswick,W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Cavendish-
square,  London,  W.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.


416


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  36,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.

D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120,  Ptue  de  Bac,  Paris.

Dakin,  Rev.  Edward,  Selsley,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.A.,  Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Dawkin,  William,  61,  Clifton-street,  Larkhall-lane,  S.W.

De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  N.B.

Dixon,  Edward  Travers,  Cave  House,  Cambridge.

Dodgson,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Downing,  Charles,  Athelston,  High-road,  Streatham,  London,  S.W.

Dugdale,  Mrs.  Stratford,  Merevale  Hall,  Atherstone.

Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Elder,  Mrs.,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Elder,  Miss  M.  C,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.  A.,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London,  E.C.

Eno,  J.  C,  W'ood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ewing,  Lieut.-Colonel  A.,  The  Lawn,  Taunton.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redcliffe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

Flower,  Mrs.  Cvril,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.

Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  58,  Marine  Parade,  Brighton.

Forster.  Anthony,  6,  Anglesea-terrace,  Gensing-gardens,  St.  Leonards.

Fountain,  Alfred,  Highfield,  Hillingdon,  Uxbridge.

Freer,  Miss,  6,  Westbourne  Grove-terrace,  London,  W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlow-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Gardner,  Herbert,  M.P.,  46,  Down-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Gary,  Baron  Raymond  de,  17,  P^ue  d'Anjou  St.  Honore,  Paris.

Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.  D.,  Marton,  Basechurch,  Salop.

Goodiiart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  Sheffield.

Goodman,  Louis  Henry,  Bertram  House,  170,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.

Graham,  ^William,  19,  Ashley-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W.

Graham,  Mrs.,  19,  Ashley-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Griffin,  Francis  Charles,  Junior  Athenaeum  Club,  Piccadilly,  W.

Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  S.W.

Gurney,  Henry  G.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  W.

Gurney,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.

Hayward,  M.  Cecil,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Henlev,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Hewetson,  H.  Bendelack,  F  L.S.,  M.R.C.S.,  11,  Hanover-square, Leeds.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


417


Holt,  H.  Sherwin,  Wave  Cottage,  Chelmsford.

Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.

Howard,  Robert  Henry,  Sowerby,  Thirsk.

Hughes,  Major  Henry  Morgan,  F.R.G.S.,  Birchington,  Margate.
Hume,  A.  O.,  C.B.,  The  Chalet,  Kingswood-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Hutchinson,  Frederick  W.  H.,  B.A.,  1,  Emmanuel-road,  Cambridge.
Hutchison,  Rev.  R.  P.,  M.A.,  Martyr  Worthy  Rectory,  Winchester.
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.
Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland.

Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Chester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.
Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wim pole-street,  London,  W.

Joyce,  S.,  Junr.,  158,  Princess-road,  Alexandra  Park,  Manchester.

Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester.

Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.

Lafone,  Alfred  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.G.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales.

Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  of,  The  Deanery,  Lincoln.

Lodge,  Professor  0.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R..S.,  21,  Waverley-road,  Liverpool.

MacColl,Rev.Canon  Malcolm,M.A., Devonshire  Club,  St. James's,S.W.

Macfarlane,  A.  W.,M.D.,  F.R.C.P.  (Edin.),  6,  Manchester-square,W.

Mackay,  Mrs.,  7,  Buckingham-gate,  London,  S.W.

Macqueen,  Mrs.,  7,  Trevor-terrace,  Rutland  Gate,  S.W.

Manders,  H,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough.

Marshall,  John  William,  M.  A.,  The  Holt,  Godalming.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Massey,  Charles  C,  121,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Matthews, FrankH.,  M. A.,  Ivy  Villa,  Beulah  Hill,Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley.

Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,F.R.G.S.

Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,  Walsingham  House,  Piccadilly,  W.

Montefiore,  F.,  4,  Great  Stanhope-street,  London,  W.

M^ount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Shelley  House,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Murray-Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.

Myers,  A.  T.,  M.D.,  2,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  The  Rectory,  Southwick,  Brighton.

Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.

Nicoll,  Augustus,  M.B.,  99,  Elm  Park  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

Paschkoff,  A.,  Quai  Gagarine,  10,  St.  Petersburg.


418


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Islands.
Petrovo-Solovovo  [Solovoy],  Michael,  9,  Mohovaia,  St.  Petersburg.
PilcheRj  Giles  T.,  Kingswood  Hanger,  Gomshall,  Guildford.
Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.
Powys,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Pye,  William  A.,  24,  Daleham-gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.  A.,F.L.S.,  Botanic  Gardens,  Singapore.
Robertson,  C.  Lockiiart,  M.D.,  Guns  Green,  The  Drive,  Wimbledon.
Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  E.H.,M.  A.,  Vicarage,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-on-Thames.
Rogers,  George  Frederick,  B.A.,  24,  St.  Andrew's-street,  Cambridge.
Ross,  A.  Galt,  7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Rucker,  Professor  Arthur  W.,  F.R.S.,  Errington,  Clapham  Pk.,  S.W.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Amberley  Cottage,  Maidenhead.
Rylands,  Thomas  G.,F.L.S.,F.G.S.,Highfields,Thelwall,  nr. Warrington.
Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  40,  Portland-place,  London,  W.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,London,S.E.
Selous,  Edmund,  Barton  Mills,  near  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.
Shove,Miss  E.,K.Q.C.P.I.,M.B.,25,St.Mark's-cres.,  Regent's  Pk.,  N.W.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.;  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W.
Sisley,  Rjchard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Smith,  Martin  Ridley,  13,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.
solovioff,  wsevolod.
Soltykoff,  Prince  Alexis.

Stack,  J.  Herbert,  30,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.

Stanhope,  The  Right  Hon.  E.,  M.P.,  111,  Eaton-square,  London,  W.

Stanley,  Henry  M.,  D.C.L.,  L.L.D.,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  S.W.

Stapelton,  Josiah  G.,  47,  Lee-terrace,  Lewisham,'  S.E.

Stead,  William  T.,  Mowbray  House,  Norfolk-street,  Strand,  W.C.

Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stock,  St.  George,  M.A.,  8,  Museum-villas,  Oxford.

Stogdon,  John  Cole,  M.A.,  18,  Clement's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.  A.,  2,  Gloucester-place, Portman-square,  London,  W.

Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent.

Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Tattersall,  Robert  W.;  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


419


Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.

Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W.

Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Royal  Military  College,  Cam-

berley,  Surrey.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Thomson,  Professor  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.
Tcckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  14,  Green-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
Tweedie,  George  R.,  F.C.S.,  54,  Hawley-square,  Margate.
Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.
"Vicars,  G.  R.,  M.D.,  Bridge  House,  Revesby,  Boston,  Lincolnshire.
Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  2,  Ridgeway-road,  Redhill.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  107,  Florence  road,  Finsbury  Park,  1ST.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley-place,  Great  Warley.  Essex.
Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Rosemont,  Hyeres,  France.
Wingfield,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  42,  Ted  worth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Wisden,  Thomas  Faulconer  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
Woodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Woodruffe,  Miss  Adelaide,  18,  Shooter's  Hill-road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES.

Carlile,  W.  A.,  165,  Bevington-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.

Curtis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.

Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  Rye  Croft,  Fulford-road,  Scarborough.

Hayes,  Joseph  W.,  1,  George's-street,  Enniscorthy.

James,  Captain,  10,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  31,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.

Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  York-terrace,  Bi'ewery-road,  Southend.

Kirk,  Joseph,  1,  Ripon-villas,  Upper  Ripon-road,  Plumstead,  Kent.

Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  43,  Hill  Side-road,  Stamford  Hill,  London,  N.

Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13,  The  Crescent,  Gateshead.

Robertson,  Miss  K,  1,  Oakley-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.

Scudamore,  Mrs.,  3,  TolHngton  Park,  Holloway,  London,  N.
Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifford  Rectory,  Essex.

Shufeldt,  Dr.  R,  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution, Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Sudgen,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

Walwyn,  Mrs.,  9,  Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Wingfield,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.


420


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


ASSOCIATES.
Adair,  Mrs.,  Glenavon,  Oookstown,  Co.  Tyrone.

Adams,  Rev.  J.  M.Goold,  M.  A.,  TheVicarage,  Rossdo wney,  Londonderry.
Adams,  Mrs.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.
Ainslie,  Ainslie  Douglas,  15,  Lower  Grosvenor-place,  S.W.
Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford.
Allen,  C.  F.  Egerton,  B.A.,  Heywood  Cottage,  Tenby.
Allen,  Frederic,  Sidmouth-road,  Newcastle,  Staffordshire.
Allen,  Henry  J.,  14,  Ailesbury-road,  Donnybrook,  Co.  Dublin.
Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  140,  Cambridge-street,  London,  S.W.
Anderson,  James  Arbutiinot,  46,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Amery,  W.  O,  13,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.
Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Adbury  House,  Newbury.
Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.
Ashcroft,  Rev.  Thomas,  The  Manse,  West  Leigh,  near  Manchester.
Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.
Badelier,  Emile,  R,angoon,  British  Burmah.
Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.
Ball,  Thomas  Stanley,  Spring  Bank,  Fulwood,  near  Preston.
Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  Glengariff,  Co.  Cork.
Barkwortii,  Lieut.  John  R.,  R.E.,  R.A.  and  R.E.  Mess,  Malta.
Bates,  Colonel  Charles  Ellison,  35,  Oxford-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  care  of  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  Christ's  College,  Brecon.
Bazley,  Sir  Thomas  S.,  Bart.,  J. P.,  M.A.,  Hatherop  Castle,  Fairford,
Gloucestershire.

Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redcliffe-square,  S.W.
Beatty,  Octavius,  Killevey,  Darleston-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterfield-gardens,  London,  W.
Bell,  Bainbridge  R.,  The  Rectory,  Cheltenham.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Benson,  R.  Hugh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.
Berkeley,  Captain  H,  Fitzhardinge,  R.N.,  Warwick  Lodge,  Rivers-
court,  Hammersmith,  W.
Berrey,  Walter  F.  M.,  M.A., Western  Lodge, Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Bevan,  Rev.  C.B.,  M.A.,  30,  St.  Andrew's-road,  Southsea.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.
Bewley,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Netherton  House,  Clapham  Common,  S.W.
Bickford-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,Endymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,S.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


421


Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bicknell,  Norman  L.,  Foxgrove,  Beckenham,  Kent.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Junr.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Bird,  George,  M.D  ,  49,  Welbeck-street,  London,  W.

Birks,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Birrell,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Down  View-road,  Worthing.

Blaikie,  Miss  J.  L.,  10,  Stratford-place,  London,  W.

Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.

Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  W.

Boldero,  Lieut. -General  G.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.

Bolland,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.

Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  c/o  A.  Scott  and  Co.,  Rangoon,  Burmah.

Bonus,  Joseph,  Major-General,  R.E.,  The  Cedars,  Strawberry  Bill,

near  London.
Boorne,  Herbert  H,  Sydenham  House,  Reading.
Boscq  de  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Airel  (Manche),  France.
Bostock,  Miss  E.  A.,  Penmaen  Gower,  Swansea.

Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.

Bouverie,  Edward  O.  P.,  M.A.,  93,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.

Bovill,  Mrs.  Alfred,  9,  St.  Andrew's-place,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Highclere  Rectory,  Newbury.

Bowness,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington, London,  W.

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Boyd,  William  Henry,  Ballymacool,  Letterkenny.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  41,  Dingwall-road,  Croydon.

Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Weybridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brazier,  John  J.,  The  Park,  Heath-road-gardens,  Twickenham.
Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.
Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.
Briggs,  Mrs.,  Rawdon  Hall,  near  Leeds.
Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E.
Brown,  Mrs.,  21,  South-street,  Park -lane,  W.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  c/o  Miss  Holland,  35,  Duke-street,  Southport.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Brownlow,  The  Countess,  Ashridge,  Berkhamsted.
Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Notting  Hill-square,  Campden  Hill,  W.
Buckle,  W.  T.,  M.B.  (Lond.),  5,  Vicarage  Villas,  Willesden,  N.
Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bulmer,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York.


422


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.G.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Butcher,  Miss,  22,  Collingham-place,  London,  S.W.

Butler,  G.  W.,  B.A.,F.G.S.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton,  Surrey.

Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.

Buxton,  Mrs.  Sydney,  15,  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.

Caird,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London.

Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  57,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.

Campbell,  James  A.,  Barb  reck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B.

Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.

Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Grey  well  Hall,  Winchfield.

Caudee,  Miss,  care  of  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  Founders-
court,  Lothbury,  London,  E.C.

Cave-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W.

Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.

Chandler,  Rev.  H.  0.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

Charlesworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  Westtield  College,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.

Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L,  V.C.,  S.O.,  28th  Bombay  Pioneers,  Kirkee,
Bombay.

Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C  S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill.
Clavequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.
Clayton,  Charles  E.,  Hillcote,  Highcroft-villas,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Colchester,  Rev.  H.B.,  M.A.,  1,  Leinster-place,Paddington,London,W.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Coles,  Miss  Alice  I.,  Elmfield,  Streatham,  London,  S.W.

Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.

Colthurst,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.

Colvile,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,  W.

Comnence,  The  Princess  Eugenie,  7,  Comeragli-road,  S.W.

Coombe,  Miss,  Blackburn  House,  Liverpool.

Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  52,  Rue  des  Drapiers,  Brussels.

Cort  van  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  W.  A.,  Amsterdam,  Holland.

Coues,  Dr.  Elliott,  1726,  N.  Street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Cox,  John,  M.A.,  McGill  University,  Montreal,  Canada.

Cox,  Mrs.,  9,  Bessborough-street,  South  Belgravia,  S.W.

Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valley  field,  Penicuik,  N.B.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.

Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rio  Maior,  Portugal.

Crews,  Richard  G.,  Glenholme,  Mount  Park,  Ealing,  W.

Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  24,  Cornwall-road,  Westbourne  Park,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


423


Crowther,  William  F.,  Hailsham,  Sussex.

Cunningham,  G., D.M.D.  (Harvard, U.S.A.), 2, King's  Parade,
Cambridge.

Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge.

Daintrey,  Charles  J.,  Petworth,  Sussex.

Daniel,  A.  M.,  B.A.,  Temple  Chambers,  London,  E.C.

Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.

Dahley,  Lady,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.

Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenham.

Davis,  A. E.,  L.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.I.,  20,  Great  George-sq.,  Liverpool.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  The  Western  and  Brazilian  Telegraph  Company,

Caixa,  453,  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.
Debenham,  Ernest  Ridley,  B.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Devlin,  Richard  Theodore,  Poste-restante,  Monaco,  France.
Dickinson.  Goldsworthy  L.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dickinson,  Mrs.,  Bramblebury,  Wandsworth  Common,  S.W.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Wickham  House,  East  Park  Parade,

Northampton.

Dobbie,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Doubleday,  Mrs.  Frances  G.,  care  of  Drexel,  Harris  and  Co.,  37,

Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
Doveton,  F.  B.,  Glencroft  House,  Lyndhurst-road,  Exeter.
Dowson,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S. I.,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  Redcliffe-

square,  London,  S.W.
Duckworth,  A.  C,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Dunn,  Edmund  A.,  92,  Regent-street,  London,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Newport,  near  Barnstaple.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  Quernfield,  Latchford,  Warrington.
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.
Elliot,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  63,  Wim pole-street,  London,  W.
Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.
Elliott,  Rev.  W.  A.,  Matebele  Land,  via  Mafeking,  British  Bechuana

Land,  South  Africa.
Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.
Ellison,  Rev.  John  H,  M.A.,  4,  Warwick-square,  London,  S.W.
Elton,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.
Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brompton,  London,  S.W.
Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Evans,  Mrs.,  The  Great  House,  Llanmaes,  near  Cowbridge,  Glamorgan.
Farncombe,  George  Richard,  B.A.,  40,  Belgrave-street,  Birmingham.


424


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  Newnham-Paddox,  Lutterworth.
Felton,  Alfred,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Finch,  Heneage  Wynne,  Jun.,  The  Manor  House,  Stokesley.
Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartjian,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.
FitzGerald,DesmondG.,M.S.T.E.,46,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W.
FitzGerald,  Miss,  Clareville,  Galway.

Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  Roby,  M.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of

Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Flynt,  William  Garnett,  7,  Walmer-road,  Birkdale  Park,  Southport.
Forjett,  C,  66,  Quentin-road,  Lee,  London.
Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  66.  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Fraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Public  Works  Dptmt.,  Madras  Presidency.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C  ,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W,
Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.
Garbett,  Edward  H.,  Barcombe  House,  Hull.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Fawley  Vicarage,  Wantage.
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-square,  W.
Garet-Charles,  G.  G.,Woodleigh,  Gough-road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham,
Garry,  Francis  N.,  M.A.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Reading.
Gessmann,  Gustav.,  Junr.,  Zwolfers  Gasthof,  Altmansdorf,  Vienna.
Gibotteau,  Aime,  M.D  ,  Villa  Bearnaise,  Biarritz.
Gilcriest,  W.  F.,  A.I.C.E.  (Ireland),  Sligo.

Gladstone,  Miss  Catherine  Annie,  Shedfield  Cottage,  Botley,  Hants.

Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

Godfrey',  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  C.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.

Goodman,  Roger  N,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Brookfield,  Cambridge.

Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

Gover,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  1,  Garden-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Meadowside,  Heald-place,  Rusholme,  Manchester.

Grantham,  F.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Gray,  Rev.  A.,  M.A.,  21,  Shakespeare-road,  Bedford.

Green,  C.  T.,  M  R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.

Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rector}',  Cambridge.

Grier,  Captain  George  R.,  Bagshot  Lodge,  Athlone.

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essenden,  Hatfield,  Herts.

Grubbe,  Hubert  H,  National  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.AV.

Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.

Guinness,  Miss  Henrietta,

Gunton,  Rf.v.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.
Gunton,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


425


Gurney,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  St.  John's  Cottage,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton
Abbott.

Hackett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  2,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Kensington,  W.

Hansford,  Charles.  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-i-oad,  Southport.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  J.  Chantry,  Neiv  Zealand  TimesOfiice,  Wellington,  New  Zealand.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Fawkham,  via  Dartford.
Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.
H.AYF.s,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.
Heaton,  Charles,  M.R.C.S.,  Watford,  Herts.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hox.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.

Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll-villas,  Cheltenham.

Herbert.  Hox.  Auberox,  M.A.,  Burley,  RingwoocI,  Hants.

Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.

Hibbs,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.

Higgix,  F.  C,  Killiney  Castle,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin.

Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Instowe,  Cheltenham.

Hill,  Henry,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.

Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle.

Hoddixg,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's-cross,  Salisbury.
Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixhara.
Hollaxd,  Mrs.,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Holsteix,  Madame  Alexaxdra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Hook,  Rev.  Cecil,  M.A.,  Hook  Memorial  Vicarage,  Leeds.
Hooper,  Gordox,  L.D.S.R.C.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st., W,
Hopkinson,Professor  A.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Lodge, 3 2,  Heme  Hill, S.E.
Horne,  Alderson,  10,  Norfolk-street,  London,  W.
Howard,  Harry  W.,  Maitland  House,  Greenwich,  S.E.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Howorth,  Henry  H.,  M.P.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
Hubbe-Schleidex,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Neuhausen,  near  Munich.
Huddleston,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hughes,  Frank  Septimus,  12,  Millbank-street,  S.W.
Hughes-Hughes,  Mrs.,  25,  Seymour-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Humfrey,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park-mansions,  London,  W.
Humphreys,  Edward  H.  P.,  Denmark  Hill,  London,  S.E.
Hutchins,  D.  E.j  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town,
Inglis,  Rev.  D.,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.

Ixxes,  Lieut.-Colonel  P.  R.,  11,  Cheniston-gardens,  London,  W.

2  F


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Irving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon- Major,  Government  House,  Ganesh  Khind,
Bombay.

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Penwartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.H.  H.,M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.  A ,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Myn-yr-Afon,  Ruabon.

Jennings,  Mrs.,  16,  Lower  Sloane-street,  S.W.

Johnson,  William  Ernest,  B.A.,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.

Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  16,  Gunterstone-road,  West  Kensington,  W.

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cramner  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.

Keatinge,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  12,  Onslow-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  2,  Lloyd-ptace,  Blackheath, London,  S.E.

Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.

Kimber,  Mrs.,  3,  Roland-gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.

Kingsbury,  George  G,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.

Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W.

Knox,  Nathaniel  A  ,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Konstamm,  Edwin  M.,

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  M.A.,F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford.

Laing,  R.M.,  M.  A.,  B.Sc,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Lancaster,  .Ernest  Le  C,  M.B.,  St.  George's  Hospital,  S.W.

La  Touche,  Mrs.,  Harristown,  Brannoxtown,  Co.  Kildare,  Ireland.

Leaf,  Arthur  H,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.

Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leigh,  W,  Austen,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London, W.
Leigiiton,  Miss,  19,  Wilton-place,  London,  S.W.
Lewis,  C.  W.  M  Ansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.
Leymarie,  P.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.
Lilly,  William  Samuel,  J.P  ,  27,  Michael's  grove,  S.W.
Limond,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.
Lindsay,  Mrss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.
Lindsay,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  59,  Caversham-road,  London,  N.W.
Lloyd,  Francis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland -gate,  London,  S.W.
Lodge,  Robert,  Saxonhurst,  Fox  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Longstaff,  G.  B.,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Highlands,  Putney  Heath,  S.W.
Lyttelton,  Sybella,  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Macalister,  Professor,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Cambridge.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair.  W.

Maclagan,  Miss  M.  M.,  4,  West  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.
MacNaughton,  PtEV.  Samuel,  M.  A.,  Rose  Bank,  Addison-road,  Preston.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


427


Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.
Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-roacl,  London,  N.W.
Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Malmesbury,  Susan  Countess  of,  25,  Sloane-gardens,  S.W.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  5,  South  Bank-terrace,  Surbiton.
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumbcr-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  George  W.,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.,  Holmbush,  Upper  Richmond-
road,  Putney,  S.W.
Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  23,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Marshall,  Mrs.,  50,  Eaton-place,  Brighton.
Marson,  Gervase,  3,  Park-road,  Southport.

Martin,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),  France.
Martin,  W.  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.

MATHFAYS,G.B.,B.A.,9,MenaiArie\v-terrace,UpperBangor,:NortliWa!es.
McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Miller,  Robert,  6,  Chester-street,  Edinburgh.

Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

Milman,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  17,  Southwell-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Minot,  Dr.  C.  Sedgwick,  25,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  U.S.A.

Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.

Money,  Charles  L.,  Northbrook  Cottage,  Petersfield.

Monte ag le,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  3,  South  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.

Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

Moore,  Major-General  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Norwood,  S.E.

Mordan,  Miss  C.  E.;  15,  Queen-square,  W.C.

Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Pemnark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.

Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  Morison  House,  Hetland,  Ruth  well,  N.B.

Morison,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.

Moul,  Mrs.  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Moule,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts.

Moulton,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  6,  Rue  Daubigny,  Place  Malesherbes,  Paris.

Mulholland,  Mrs.,  Woodrising  Hall,  Shipdham,  Norfolk.

Munro,  Henry  Acland,  B.A.,  17,  Vincent-square,  S.W.

Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.

Murray,  Oswald,  38,  Parliament  Hill  road,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  Hill,  London.

Muhray,  R.  M.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.P.  (Edin.),  10,  Hope-st.,  Edinburgh.

Musk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.


42s


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Mylne,  Mrs.,  122,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Nathan,  S.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Neild,  Frederick,  The  Yews,  Fernhurst,  Sussex.

Neate,  Percy  John-,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Rochester.

Nevill,  The  Lady  Dorothy',  45,  Charles-street,  London,  W.

Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.

Newbold,  Miss  A.,  9,  Claro-terrace,  Richmond-road,  S.W.

Newsom,  John,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Nicholl,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.

Niciiolls,  Rev.  T.B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tyne mouth.

Nichols,  Miss  Irene,  Lawford  Hall,  Manningtree.

Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  Tlie  Grange,.

Totteridge,  Herts.
Nicolson,  Sir  Arthur,  K.C.I.E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Consulate  General,,

124,  Andrassy-street,  Buda-Pesth,  Hungary.
Noakes,  I).  W.,  23,  Nelson-street,  Greenwich,  S.E.
Noel,  Hon.  Roden,  St.  Aubyns,  West  Brighton.
Norris,  William  Alfred,  Pine  Hill,  Ore,  Hastings,
Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotham,  Kent.
Oakeley,  Miss  H.  D.,  97,  Warwick-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W.
Oman,  Mrs.,  St.  Philip's  Lodge,  Painswick-road,  Cheltenham.
Oman,  Charles  W.  O,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.
O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,M.B.,  140,  Elizabeth-st.,Sydney,New South  Wales,
Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide.
Osborne,  James,  Ph.O,  Hersham,  near  Walton-on-Thames.
Pagan,  Miss  O,  Richmond  Cottage,  Uley,  near  Dursley,  Gloucestershire.
Paget,  Lady",  The  Embassy,  Vienna.

Paice,  William,  M.A.,  1,  Portman  Mansions,  Baker-street,  W.

Palmer,  Lieut.  H.R.,  R.A.,  The  Grand  Depot  Barracks,  Woolwich.

Parker,  Miss  E.  A.,  The  Elms,  Gosforth,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Parry",  Rev.  William  Edwards,  B.A.,  1,  Bell-terrace,  Clewer, Windsor.

Passingiiam,  Mrs.,  11,  Morton-crescent,  Exmouth.

Peake,  C.  W.,  B.A  ,  c/o  Mr.  Wood,  High-street,  Newport,  Salop.

Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  Apollo-st.,  Bombay.

Perry,  Edwin  C,  M.A.,  The  College,  Guy's  Hospital,  London,  S.E.

Plummer,  J.  W.,  Oockermouth.

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street,  London,  W.

Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

Ponsonby',  Miss,  Glensouthwell,  Rathfarnham,  Co.  Dublin.

Pope,  George  H,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Porstmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W..


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


429


Postgate,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E,
Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  Bushey,  Herts.

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Pretious,  Mrs.  W.  T.,  Newnham  House,  Loughton,  Essex.

Pribitkof,  V.,  23,  Troitzky  Pereoulok,  St.  Petersburg.

Prickett,  Miss  L.  M.,  Southcliffe  Sanatorium,  Ilfracombe.

Prothero,  Mrs.,  63,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge.

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela.  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  8,  Ennismore-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Raleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbroke-road,  London,  W.

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.I).,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W.

Raper  R,  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Rawson,  Henry  G.,  68,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Reiciiel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor.

Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  Thorncliffe,  Cheltenham.

Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.

Riddiford,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Barnwood  Cottage,  near  Gloucester.

Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.

Rigg,  Thomas  S.  J.,  B.A.,  General  Post  Office,  Sydney.

Ritchie,  Miss,  131,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W.

Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.

Roberts,  Rev.W.W.,  Brook  Dene,  14,  Strawberry  Hill-road,  Twickenham.

Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.

Robin,  Perc?  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Robinson,  Edward,  4,  Castelnau-gardens,  Barnes,  S.W.

Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.

Robinson,  Mrs.  Lionel,  19,  Kensington-square,  London,  W.

Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.

Rosenbach,  Dr.  P.,  Kaiserliche  Medicinische  Akademie,  St.  Petersburg.

Rossi-Pagnoni,  Professor  G.F.,  4,  Via  Sabbatini,  Pesaro,  Italy.

Rouse,  Rolla  E.,  M.D.,  2,  Tisbury-road,  West  Brighton.

Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.

Russell,  John,  B.A.,  16,  Somersneld-road,  Finsbmy  Park,  London,  N.

Russell,  Mrs.  Rosetta,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.

Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath.

Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.

Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone,  Padstow.

Saunders,  Thomas  Bailey,  M.A.,  13,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  S.W.

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  B.A.,  Gersau,  Lake  of  Lucerne,  Switzerland.

Scholefield,  Rev.  C.  C,  M.A.,  32,  Lowndes-street,  S.W.

Schram,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.

Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.


430


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.
Shaen,  Rev.  Richard,  M.A.,  West  Cottage,  Royston,  Herts.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.
Sheppard,  W.  F.,  M.A.,  2,  Temple-gardens,  E.C.
Siiilton,  Alf  red  J.,  F.C.S.,  3G,  Castle-street,  Reading.
Siiuttlewortii,  John,  Withington,  Manchester.
Sidebotham,  Edward  J.,  Earlsdene,  Bowden,  Cheshire.
Sidgavick,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  S.W.
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,' Oxford.
Sladen,  Douglas  B.  W.

Sloman,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Birkenhead.
Sloman,  Samuel  George,  Jun.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.
Smart,  J.  Naisii,  Sydney  House,  Burnhara.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  H.  B  ,  M.A.,  Hotel  de  l'Ermitage,  Hyeres,  France.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  2,  Howlett's-road,  Heme  Hill,  S.E.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Riverbank,  Putney,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  John  George,  Jun.,  Hill  House,  Surbiton.

Smith,  R.  Morris,  3,715,  Chestnut-street,  W.  Philadelphia,  LT.S.A.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  52,  Stanhope-gardens,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.

Smith,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Wallace  A.,  34,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,  W.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York  street,  Portman-square,  W.

Sperling,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Stackiiouse,  Mrs.  M.  F.,  Stackhouse,  Settle.

Stanway,  Miss  Emily,  17,  Park-street,  Taunton.

Staples,  Miss,  Dunmore,  Durrow,  Abbeyleix,  Ireland.

Staple y,  Alfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  George,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta,

Stewart,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.

Stillman,  W.  J.,  3,  Challoner-street,  West  Kensington,  W.

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport.

Stout,  George  F.,  B.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Sturge,  Miss  Emily,  Tyndall's  Park,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Sturges,  Mrs. William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  London, W..

Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere-street,  London,  S.W.

Swanwick,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.

Symonds,  John  Addington,  M.A.,  Davos-Platz,  Switzerland.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


431


Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigniore-street,  London,  W.

Tancred,  Mrs.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Tanner,  Ernest,  3,  Windsor-terrace,  Penarth.

Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.

Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.

Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.

Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.  A.,  Churchstanton  Bectory,Honiton,  Devon.

Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  Montague.  House,  Vanbrugh  Park,  S.E.

Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  Woodstock,  Waverley-rd.,  Liverpool.

Thorold,  Edward  S.,  Larkby,  Exeter.

Todd,  Mrs.,  Maclean,  Clarence  Biver,  New  South  Wales.

Tooth,  Bev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  Woodside,  Croydon.

Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville  Park,  Lewisham,  S.E.

Thurstan,  Frederick,  W.,  M.A.,  La  Martiniere,Luckno\v,  India.

Townley,  Miss  F.  M.,  47,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.

Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J. P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  B,ev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris.
Tuker,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Underwood,  Rev.  Canon  C.  W.,  M.A.,  Histon  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.

Venman,  Hezekiaii,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.

Venn,  J.,D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Summerleigh,  Chine  Crescent-rd.,  Bournemouth.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.

Vian-Williams,  PvEV.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place.  North  Shields.

Villam arina,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France.

Vivian,  H,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Vores,  Arthur,  M.R.C.S.,  8,  Mansfield-street,  Cavendish-square,  W.
Walker,  Reginald  T.,  1,  Furnival's  Inn,  Holborn,  E.G.
Warburton,  Rev.  Walter  T,  M.A.,  The  Vicarage,  Rock  Ferry,
Birkenhead.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs., 10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  N.B.

Warter,  Mrs.  Tatham,  10,  Upper  Phillimore-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
AYassell,  H.  A.,  F.B.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa,01d  Swinford, Stourbridge.
Wateriiouse,C.H.,M.D.,56,  KarlLudwig  Strasse,Ober-Dobling,  Vienna.
Watson,  Mrs.  W.  O,  39,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Wtebber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-a venue,  London,  W.
Wedd,  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W.
Wemyss,  Miss  A.,  Washwell  House,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.


432


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Berniiard,  27,  Upper  Bedford-place,  W.C.
Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Maltitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
Whitehead,  John,  Esplanade,  Guernsey.

Whitridge,  Frederick  W.,  University  Club,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Wig  an,  W.  L.,  Larkfield,  near  Maidstone.

Willan,  Miss  Florence  M.,  50,  Weymouth-street,  Portland-place,  W.
Willett,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Linclfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  Lady,  Llanfoist,  Clifton  Down,  Bristol.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  63,  Queen  Victoria-street,  E.C.
Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G.,  M.A.,  East  Meon,  Petersfield,  Hants.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  The  Woodlands,  Athlone.

Windeyer,  The  Hon.  Chief  Justice,  Judge's  Chambers,  High  Court

of  Justice,  Sydney,  Australia.
Wingfield,  Mrs.  Edward,  40,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  W.
Witherby,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Withers,  John  James,  B.A., 2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-street

Bloomsbury,  W.C.
Wittig,  Gregor  C,  2,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.
Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.
Woodhead,  John  E.,  171,  West  Washington-street,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London,  W,
Wild,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.
Young,  Rev.  Charles  John,  F.R.A.S.,  Stafford-place,  Halifax.
Young,  Professor  William  H.,  67,  Kriegstrasse,  Karlsruhe-in-Baden.
Youngman,  Miss,  Hillside,  St.  Margaret's,  Ipswich.


No  List  of  Members  and  Associates  having  been  published  in  1891,  the
presod  List  includes  some  who  belonged  to  the  Society  during  last  year,  but  do
not  remain  in  it  for  1892.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant- Secretary,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,
London,  W.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  433


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

(Januaky,  1892.)


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  when  another  Country  is  named.


MEMBERS.

Blackmar,  Paul,  406,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  1,  Nassau-st.,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Cory,  C.  B.,  8,  Arlington-street,  Boston,  Mass.
•Craig,  John  W.,  Box  291,  San  Bernardino,  Cal.
Gale,  Harlow  S.,  75,  Sternwarten-strasse,  111r,  Leipzig.
Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Hudson,  Woodward,  Concord,  Mass.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Mai-lborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  142,  E.  18th-street,  New  York.
Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Sawyer,  Hon.  Chas.  H.  Dover,  New  Hampshire.
Smith,  Mrs.  Mott,  101,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  229,  Madison-avenue,  New  York.
Sutherland,  J.  G.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.

Woodman,  Walter,  M.D.,  64,  Sparks-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES.
Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.
Rees,  Mrs.  Runtz,  Wayside,  Scarsdale,  New  York.
Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S.,  Skiddy,  Kansas.

ASSOCIATES.

Adams,  Mrs.  George  E.,  530,  Belden-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Albree,  John,  Junr.,  122,  Concord-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Alexander,  Don,  513,  McCallie-avenue,  Chattanooga,  Tenn.
Allen,  Rev.  T.  E.,63,  Glenham-street,  Providence,  Rhode  Island.
Almy,  Francis,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Andrew,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Old  Colony  Hill,  Hingham,  Mass.


434


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Andrews,  Mrs.  J.  A.,  307,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Annes,  A.  L.,  -116,  3rd-a  venue  S.,  Wausau,  Wis.

Arnold,  J.  N.,  19,  College-street,  Providence,  R.I.

Auel,  Mrs.  C,  65,  Lefferts-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Avery,  Miss  M.  H.,137,  Academy-st.,  Poughkeepsie,  New  Yoidr.

Ayer,  J.  C,  Puritan  Club,  50,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Ayers,  George  D.,  Maiden,  Mass.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  1,712,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Baker,  Dr.  Smith,  Winston-building,  Utica,  N.Y.
Baldwin,  Henry  C,  172,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Yernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Banker,  Mrs.  George  H.,  46,  Sterling  place,  Brooklyn,  New  York.
Barnes,  T.  W.,  c'oH.  P.  Starbuck,  62,  Wall-street,  New  York.
Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central  Avenue,  Dover,  N.H.
Beale,  C.  W.,  Arden,  North  Carolina.
Bigelow,  Horace  P.,  Waterville,  Oneida  County,  N.Y.
Bigelow,  Dr.  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Blackford,  A.,  322,  South  Main-street,  Findlay,  Ohio.
Blackmar,  Gen.  W.W.,  70,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Blake,  Francis,  Keewaydin,  Weston,  Auburndale,  P.O.,  Mass.
Blodgett,  O,  M.D.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.
Bowditcii,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bowditch,  Professor  H.  P.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass-

Bradley,  Mrs.  W.  L.,  Hingham,  Mass.

Braggiotti,  Isidore,  208,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Briggs,  Dr.  E.  O,  125,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brimmer,  Martin,  17,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Alexander  C,  c/o  P.R.R.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Brooks,  Rev.  Phillips,  233,  Clarendon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Delass  S.,  309,  Main-street,  Peoria,  111.

Brown,  John  F.,  16,  Baldwin-street,  Newton,  Mass.

Brown,  Mrs.  J.  F.,  16,  Baldwin-street,  Newton,  Mass.

Brown,  Wilbur  C,  P.  O.  Box  2,684,  Boston,  Mass.

Browne,  G.  H,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Bruen,  Mrs.,  79,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brunt,  Cornelius  Yan,  74,  Courtlandt-street,  New  York.

Brush,  Miss  Helen  C,  71,  West  47th-street,  New  York.

Buffett,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.J-

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bundy,  Colonel  John  O,  92,  La  Salle-street,  Chicago,  111.

Burge,  Miss  Marie  L.,  132,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Butler,  Miss  Yirginia,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Carey,  A.  A.,  1,  Brimmer-street,  Boston,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


435.


Carey,  Mrs.  Arthur,  1,  Brimmer-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Carleton,  Will  M.,  420,  Greene-avenue,  Brooklyn,  New  York.
Carpenter,  Frank  B.,  Tiffany  Building,  337,  4th-avenue,  New  York.
Carr,  Lucien,  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.
Catlin,  Captain  R.,  Soldiers'  Home,  Washington,  D.C.
Chanler,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Messrs.  Morris  &  Steele,  16,  Exchange-place,.
New  York.

Cheney,  Dr.  Fred.  E.,  Hotel  Bristol,  Boston,  Mass.

Chenowith,  Mrs.  C.  Van  D.,  64,  East  86th-street,  New  York.

Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  60,  Buchtis-a venue,  Akron,  Ohio.

Cleaves,  N.  Porter,  3,  Central  Wharf,  Boston,  Mass.

Cochran,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  1,306,  First-street,  Louisville,  Ky.

Coffin,  Charles  A.,  178,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Coffin,  C.  P.,  209,  Washington-street,  Room  3,  Boston,  Mass.

Cone,  J.  W.,  Union,  Wilson  Co.,  Texas.

Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  K.,  220,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.

Cooper,  James,  P.O.  Box  1,942,  Montreal,  Quebec,  Canada.

Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Corning,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  122,  State-street,  Portland,  Maine.

Cotton,  Mary  H,  M.D.,  200,  West  83rd-street,  New  York.

Cowles,  Dr.  E.,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,  Mass.

Crafts,  James  M.,  59,  Marlborough-strett,  Boston,  Mass.

Crafts,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Craigie,  Ernest,  134,  Peel-street,  Montreal,  Canada.

Cressey,  John  P.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pennsylvania,

Crocker,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  P.  O.  Box  59,  Columbus  Junction,  Iowa.

Crosby,  Professor  W.  C,  Society  Natural  History,  Boston,  Mass.

Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Garden-road,  Brookline,  Mass.

Croswell,  James  G.,  6e,  45th-street,  New  York.

Curtis,  Mrs.  Greely  S.,  28,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Curtis,  Professor  John7  G.,  127,  East  35th-street,  NewYoi-k  City,  N.Y.

Curtis,  W.  E.,  14,  West  20th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Davidson,  Thomas,  239,  West  105th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Davis,  Samuel  G.,  120,  Highland-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.

Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont- street,  Longwood,  Mass.

Dietrick,  Mrs.  Ellen  B.,  176,  Huntin^ton-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Dimmock,  George,  P.  O.  Box  15,  Canobia  Lake,  NH.

Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  11,  Prospect-street,  East  Orange,  New  Jersey.

Dodge,  J.  T.,  340,  VV.  Washington-ave.,  Madison,  Wis.

Dole,  Nathan  H,  "  Hedgecote,"  Glen-road,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Donald,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  Winchester,  7,  W.  10th  Street,  New  York.

Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H,  18,  Commonwealth -avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Dork,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.


4:JG


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Drown,  T.  Pickering,  351,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Duncan,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Congregational  House,  Boston,  Mass.
Dunham,  Miss  E,  L.,  37,  East  36th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Dunham,  Dr.  W.  R.,  Troy,  N.H.

Eddy,  Miss  Mary  E.,  265,  Benent-st.,  Providence,  Rhode  Island.

Edmunds,  Albert  J.,  553,  North  1 6th-street,  Philadelphia.

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  c/o  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H,  Keene,  N.H.

Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  330,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Errain,  Mrs.  Charlotte,  118,  East  26th-street,  New  York.

Esterly,  Mrs.  G.  M.,  Whitewater,  Wisconsin.

Esty,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.

Evans,  Mrs.  Edgar  B.,  80,  Chester-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Evans,  Mrs.  Edwin  T.,  189,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Miss  M.  S.,  80,  Chester-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Evans,  Frederick,  Junr.,  Newark  Daily  Advertiser,  Newark,  N.J.

Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  53,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Everett,  Torrey.  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.

Felton,  Thomas  C,  The  Charlesgate,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Ferry,  D.M.,  Detroit,  Mich.

Fields,  Mrs.  James  T.,  118,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Fillmore,  Dr.  C.  W.,  305,  Point-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Fletcher,  J.  B.,  31,  Thayer  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Fluhrer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  Grand  Rapids,  Michigan.
Foote,  Dr.  E.  B.,  120,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Forbes,  John  M.,  Milton,  Mass.

Ford,  Professor  Darius  R.,  D.D.,  Elmira  College,  New  York.
Frothingiiam,  Dr.  Langdon,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Neb.
Frothingham,  O.  B.,  118,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Frothingham,  P.  R.,  Eighth-street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.
Fuller,  Miss  S.  E.,  121,  West  23rd-street,  New  York.
Fullerton,  C.  W.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago.

Fullerton,  Professor  G.  S.,4;l  16,  Spruce-street, West  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Gage,  J.  Lyman,  470,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Gardiner,  Professor  EL.  N,  23,  Craft's-avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Portland,  Maine.

Ghost,  A.  M.,  Room  16,  Ghost  Block,  Denver,  Col.

Gibbens,  Jos.  M.,  153,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Giles,  Mrs.  Grace  M.,  19,  Baltimore  Block,  Atlanta,  Georgia.

Gill,  Wm.  Fearing,  3,  East  86th-street,  New  York.


List  of  Members  and  Associates..  437


Gilman,  Benjamin  I.,  62,  Cedar-street,  New  York.
Goodnow,  H.  R.,  32,  Renisen-street,  Brooklyn,  New  York.
Goodridge,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Goodwin,  Warren  C,  West-town  Boarding  School,  West-town,  Pa.
Gray,  Mes.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Gridley,  J.  N,  Virginia,  111.

Grifping,  Mrs.  C.  R.  P.  O.  Box,  U  White  Plains,  N.Y,

Groot,  Mrs.  E.  K.  de,  c/o  Miss  Hawley,  Atlanta-st.,  Stamford,  Conn.

Grover,  Rev.  G.  W.,  Nashua,  New  Hampshire.

Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.

Hale,  George  S.,  5,  Exeter-sfo-eet,  Boston,  Mass.

Hall,  Miss  Harriet  M.,  45,  William-street,  Providence,  R.I.

Hall,  Professor  James,  New  York  State  Museum,  Albany,  N.Y.

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.

Hamblet,  Eugene,  Box  12,  Dracut,  Mass.

Hardaway,  W.  A.,  M.D.,  2,710,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Harris,  Rev.  J.  A.,D.D.,  St.  Paul's  Rectory,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia.
Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,914,  23rd-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  B.C.
Harwood,  C.  H,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.
Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  150,  Waterman-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Haslett,  O.  C,  403,  Spear-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Hawkins,  William  M.,  6,  Coit  Block,  Buffalo,  New  York,
Haworth,  George  D.,  20,  Groveland  Park,  Chicago,  111.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Heard,  John,  Junr.,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hedges,  Mrs.  Sidney  M.,  76,  Highland-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.
Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.
Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  117,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Hoffman,  Professor  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.
Hogg,  Mrs.  John,  50,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Holbrook,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York.

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Rev.  Samuel  V.  V.,  Richfield  Springs,  N.Y

Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  Spuyten  Duyvil,  New  York.

Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hooper,  N.  L.,  16,  Louisberg-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Hurley,  A.  M.  ,  corner  of  Firstand  Monmouth-sts.,  Independence,  Oregon.

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Mahlon,  103,  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Hyslop,  223,  East  llth-street,  New  York.

Jackson,  Mrs.  E.  B.,  244,  Dallas-street,  Houston,  Texas.

James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,627,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.


438


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Jayne,  H.  La  Barre,  505,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Jewett,  Miss  S.  O.,  Berwick,  Maine.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.
Judah,  J.  H.,  545,  Shelby-street,  Memphis,  Teim.
Kehew,  Mrs.  William  B.,  317,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Knowles,  Edward  R.,  West  Sutton,  Mass.

Kxjhn,  Mrs.  Hartman,  36,  Commonwealth  avenne,  Boston,  Mass.
Lang,  B.  J.,  Messrs.  Chickering  and  Sons,  Boston,  Mass.
Langley,  Professor,  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Latham,  Miss  V.  A  ,  B.Sc,  58,  East  University-ave.,  Ann  Arbor,  Mich;
Lathrop,  John,  10,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawrence,  Mrs.  Amory  A.,  59,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  142,  E.  ISth-street,  New  York.
Lee,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  c/o  L.  Plinedale,  Esq.,  Carlisle  Buildings,  Cincin-
nati, Ohio.

Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22nd-street,  Philadelphia.

Leonhardt,  J.  S.,  M.Sc.  M.D.,  1,452,  O-street,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

Libbe,  A.  B.,  M.D.,  Haller  Block,  Seattle,  Washington.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.

Librarian,  Cutting's  Free  Library,  Lunenburg,  Vermont.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.

Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass.

Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Nebraska  University,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Denver,  Colorado.

Librarian,  Rochester  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  New  York.
Librarian,  San  Francisco  Free  Public  Library,  San  Francisco  Cal.
Librarian,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  700,  Park-avenue,  New  York.
Librarian,  University  of  Tennessee,  Knoxville,  Tennessee.
Littlefield,  J.,  c/o  White  &  Co.,  12th  &  Chestnut-sts.,  Philadelphia.
Livermore,  Mrs.  Mary,  Box  565,  9,  Emerson-street,  Melrose,  Mass.
Lockwood,  Colonel,  J.  S.,  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lodge,  Mrs.  John  E.,  31,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Long,  George  E.  J.,  Jos.  Dixon  Crucible  Company,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Long,  Rev.  J.  D.,  Babylon,  Long  Island,  New  York.
Lounsberry,  C.  A.,  Fargo,  Nor tli  Dakota.

Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Macdonald,  Dr.  R.  C,  34,  Parmenter-street,  Boston,  Mass.

McHenry,  Mrs.  J.  Howard,  Pikesville,  Balto.  Co.,  Ind.

Macqueary,  Rev.  PIoward,  Canton,  Ohio.

Macy,  Mrs.  Arthur,  17,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Marshall,  Henry  Rutgers,  74,  Wall-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


439


Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York.
Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason,  Miss  Ida,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason,  H.  L.,  39,  Common  wealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
McEwen,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York.
McGee,  W.  J.,  TJ.  S.  Geological  Survey,  Washington,  D  C.
McIlwraith,  H.  P.,  Muskegon,  Mich.
McVicker,  J.  H.,  McYicker's  Theatre,  Chicago,  111.
Mendeniiall,  Nereus,  M.D.,  Guilford  College,  N.C.
Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Peterborough,  Madison  Co.,  New  York.
Millet,  Josiah  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Milliken,  George,  3,614,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Mills,  Professor  C.  K.,  1,909,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
MinoTj  Professor  Charles  S.,  22,  Marlborough-streefc,  Boston,  Mass.
Moore,  Dr.  P.,  Ill,  East  45th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Newcomb,  C.  A.,  1,145,  Woodward-avenue,  Detroit,  Mich.
Newcomb,  Professor  Simon,  Washington,  D.C.
Newcomb,  W.  L.,  Taunton,  Mass.

Newell,  Miss  Lavinia  H.,  255,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York  City.
Nichols,  Miss  A.  B.,  211,  St.  James's-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Nims,  F.  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.
Norris,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Marion,  Ohio.

Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119  1-2,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.
'Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Page,  Dr.  F.  W.,  Hotel  Cluny,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Park,  Miss  M.  P.,  117,  West  49th-street,  New  York.
Parker,  G.  H,  Bank  of  Montreal,  Brockville,  Ontario,  Canada.
Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Parkman,  Miss  M.  R.,  Hotel  Huntington,  Huntington-ave.,  Boston,  Mass
Peabody,  John  E.,  183,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Peckham,  Dr.  Grace,  25,  Madison-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  III.
Pedigo,  Dr.  Lewis  G.,  Lock  Box  259,  Roanoke,  Yirginia.
Pellew,  George,  Xatonah,  N.Y.

Pendleton,  Miss,  1,522,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Penfield,  Sophia,  M.D.,  Danbury,  Conn.

Perkins,  Franklin  R.,  294,  Linwood  -avenue,  Buffalo,  New  York
Perkins.  Mrs.  A.  T.,  112,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Perkins,  Mrs.  E.  H.,  5,  East  40th-street,  New  York.
Perrin,  Mrs.  E.  O.,  Stanton,  Florida.
Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  Forest  Hill-streetj  Jamaica  Plain.
Phelps,  Orwin  A.,  Gaylord,  Mich.


440


List  of  Members  and  Associates..


Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  cor.Berkeley  &  Marlboro'-sts.,  Boston,  Mass.
Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Plummer,  J.  W.,  52,  East  Lake-street,  Cliicago,  111.
Preston,' Mrs.  William  G.,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston,  Mass.
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  71,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Pumpelly,  Raphael,  Newport,  R.I.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  O,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Putnam,  George,  24,  Quincy-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Putnam,  Dr.  .James  .J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.
Quincy,  Josiah  P.;  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Ransom,  Frank  BL,  1,298,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  NY.
Ransom,  Paul  C,  1,298,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  NY.
Richardson,  Dr.  W.  L.,  225,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Ricker,  James  W.,  City  Collector,  City  Hall,  Boston,  Mass.
Rivers,  Miss  Mary,  Milton,  Mass.

Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  7,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Robbins,  Miss  H.  L.,  116,  West  21st-street,  New  York  City,  NY.
Rodman,  Miss  Emma,  174,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Rolfe,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.
Rollings,  Rev.  Henry,  Manitowaning,  Ontario,  Canada.
Ropes,  Johin  C,  99,  Mount  Yernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Rotcii,  Miss  Joanna,  Milton,  Mass.

Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Rumsey,  Mrs.  B.C.,  cor.  Delaware-ave.  &  Tracey-st.,  Buffalo,  New  York.

Ryan,  Carroll,  289,  St.  Martin-street,  Montreal,  Canada.

Salter,  W.  M.,  c/o  S.  Burns  Weston,  1,602  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia.

Sampson,  Charles  E.,  193,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sargent,  Mrs.  Winthrop,  207,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass..

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  25,  Concord-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Sawyer,  G.  C,  Utica  Academy,  Utica,  N.Y.

Sawyer,  Roswell  D.,  58,  West  57th-street,  New  York.

Scudder,  Samuel  H.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Sears,  John  D.,  Upper  Sandusky,  Ohio.

Siiaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  84,  Huntingdon-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Shaw,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Shed,  Z.,  832,  I7th-street,  Denver,  Colorado.

Sheets,  John  C,  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill,  Ohio.

Siiimmin,  Miss  Blanche,  229,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sims,  John  C,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia.

Smith,  H.  W.,  410,  Laurel-avenue,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota.

Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


441


Smith,  Mrs.  Franklin  W.,  Saratoga  Springs,  New  York.
Smith,  Horace  J.,  6,  East  Pemi,  Germantown,  Philadelphia.
Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-roacl,  London,  S.W.,  England.
Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111.

Stansell,  Mrs.  E.  T.,  A-l,  High  School-terrace,  Denver,  Colorado.
Stebbins,  Walter  G.,  City  Hospital,  Boston,  Mass.
Steedman,  J.  C.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Stone,  Colonel  W.  L.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Storer,  Albert,  40,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Strauss,  Albert,  124,  West  97th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  78e,  East  Washington-street,  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.
Sturtevant,  S.  C,  105,  Washington-street,  Hartford,  Conn.
Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Talbot,  Edward  A.,  2,  Elmo-street,  Dorchester,  Mass.
Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  247,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Taylor,  Edward  Wyllys,  43,  Hancock-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  25,  E.  77th-street,  New  York.
Thayer,  Mrs.  S.  V.  R.,  191,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Thompson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Tkorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  2,  Peinberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Thorpe,  Joseph  G.,  Junr.,  115,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Tickell,  J.  A.  Arscott,  Narcoossee,  Florida.
Totten,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street, Washington,  D.C.
Towner,  Judge  J.  W.,  Santa  Ana,  California.
Toy,  Professor  C.  H.,  7,  Lowell-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Turnbull,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Turner,  Miss  Mary  J.,  11,  Faxon-avenue,  Quincy,  Mass.
Tutton,  Mrs.  Sara,  2,318,  Jay  St.,  Denver,  Colorado.
Tweedy,  Edmund,  P.O.  Box  53,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.
Twinch,  Frederick,  455,  West  57th-street,  New  York.
Tyler,  J.  C,  Magnolia  Ave.,  cor.  Olive  St.,  Knoxville,  Tenn.
Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D..  Elmira  College,  Elmira,  N.Y.
Van  Norden,  Theodore  L.,  16,  West  48th-street,  New  York  City.  N.Y.
Van  Slyke,  J.  M.,  23,  North  Pinckney-street,  Madison,  Wis.
Vaughan,  Miss  Virginia,  c/o  G.  F.  Donthill,  Esq.,  286,  Fifth-avenue,
New  York.

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  349,  North  Clark-street,  Chicago.
Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.
Watson,  Sereno,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborougb-street,  Boston,  Mass.

2  G


442


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Watson,  Dr.  William  H.,  720,  Genesse-sfcreet,  Utica,  NY.
Watts,  H.  M.,  "The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Webster,  David  L.,  332,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Westbrook,  Dr.  R.  B.,  1,707,  Oxford-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.

White,  Professor  Frances  E.,  1,533,  North  15th-st.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

White,  Henry  G.,  32,  Irving-place,  Buffalo,  New  York.

White,  James  T.,  765,  Broadway,  New  York.

White,  Mrs.  Florence  D.,  765,  Broadway,  New  York.

Whitman,  Russell,  1,007,  The  Tacoma,  Chicago,  111.

Whiton,  Rev.  James  M.,  Ph.D.,  18,  W.  9th-street,  New  York  City.

Whittier,  John  Greenleaf,  Danvers,  Mass.

Williams,  Rev.  W.  H.,  14,  Chestnut-street,  Wakefield,  Mass.

Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  222,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

AVilson,  Mrs.  John  L.,  Box  19,  Framingham,  Mass.

Winter,  Mrs.  W.,  17,  3rd-ave.,  New  Brighton,  Staten  Island,  New  York.

Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Common  wealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Woodcock,  Perct,  "  Waterniche,"  Brockville,  Canada.

Wright,  James  A.,  1,127,  Sherbrook-street,  Montreal,  Canada.

Wright,  Dr.  J.  P.,  Lt.-Col.,  Med.  Depmt.,  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kansas.

Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  36,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX to VOL.  VII.


A.

PACK

Aksakoff,  Alexander  N.,  Controversy  between,  and  E.  von  Hartmann  292

Alexander,  Prof.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena lT.'i

Alleged  Movement  of  Objects  without  Contact  occurring  not  in  the
Presence  of  a  Paid  Medium 146-198,  383-894

American  Branch  of  the  .Society  for  Psychical  Research— List  of  Members  433

'•  Annales  des  Sciences  Psyehiques,"  Review  of 136

Anonymously  contributed  Cases 98,  283

Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne,  Leon  Marillier  on 100

Armstrong,  George  Allruan,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena  ... ...  158

Automatic  Writing,  Barkworth,  Thomas,  Some  Recent  Experiments  in  ...  23

Instances  of 23,  25-28,  180,  187,  238,  298

,,  ,,  ,, by  Hypnotised  Subjects 292

Automatism,  Phenomena  of

See  Physical  Phenomena  and  Subliminal  Consciousness


B.

B.,  Madame,  Case  of  (Leonie) 131

Babinski,  M.,  Theory  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena 300,  310

Backman,  Dr.  Alfred,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  ... ..  199,370

Balle,  Valdemar,  Case  of  Hypnotic  Clairvoyance ...  364,367

Barkworth,  Thomas,  Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing  ...  23

Barrett,  Prof.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena 154

Beattie,  Mr.,  Evidence  as  to  "  Spirit-Photography  "  269,  271,  275,  280,  284-86
Bernheim,  Prof,,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of ,.. ...  351


IV


Index  to  Vol.  VII.


PAGE

Biggs,  Dr.  M.  H. ,  Cases  recorded  by ... ... 339

Blind,  Cases  of  Hyperesthesia  in  the ... ... ... ...  126,127,128

Bourne,  Ansel,  a  Case  of  Double  Consciousness,  B.  Hodgson  on  ...  221-257

Boyd,  W.,  F.R.S.E.,  Case  contributed  by 49

Bristol,  B. ,  Case  contributed  by  ... 359,  364

Bristow,  John,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena  ... ... 384


Buguet,  M.,  Alleged  "  Spirit  Photographs"  of 270,  276,  277,  281,  282,  287


C.


C,  Mr.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena 189

Carreau,  Marguerite,  Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne  to ... 104,  107

Charcot,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of ... ... ... 337

Circulars  issued  by  the  Society —

Collaboration,  Appeal  for ... .. ...  141

Hypnotism;  its  Conditions  and  Safeguards ... ...  137

Publication  of  Names,  Importance  of ... ... ...  144

Clairvoyance —

,,  Backman,  Dr.  Alfred,  Experiments  in ...  199-220,  370

,,  Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  On  the  Evidence  for.,.. 30,356

Coues,  Prof.  Elliott,  Case  contributed  by 35

Collaboration,  Appeal  for,  Circular  (No.  3)  issued  by  the  Society 141

Conner,  Mrs.  E.  A.,  Case  con trilm ted  by 35,  37

Consciousness,  A  Case  of  Double  ... ... ... ...  221-257

Evolution  of 399  407

,,  James,  Prof. ,  Theory  of ... ... ... Ill

,,  Subliminal,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 298-355

Coomes,  Dr.  M.  F.,  Case  recorded  by ...  345

Council  of  the  Society ... ... ... ... ...  See  Officers  and  Council

Cowles,  Dr.  E.,  Note  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne  251

Criswick,  Theophilus,  Case  contributed  by 94

Crystal  Vision,  Experiments  in 29,  216,  217,  318,  319


D.

D.,  Me.,  Case  contributed  by 356

D.,  Mr.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena  ... ... ... 160

Dariex,  Dr.  X.  C,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena 193,  194

Davis  Family,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena  in ... 173,  185,  189

Delbceuf,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of .; 223,  331,  346

Dialectical  Society,  "  Report  on  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism' 153

Dobbie,  A.  W.,  Experiments  ia  Hypnotic  Clairvoyance ... 62,  63,  64,  68,  71

Dordogne,  Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in,  Leon  Marillier  on 100

Double  Consciousness,  Ansel  Bourne,  a  Case  of,  R.  Hodgson  on  .  .  221-257

Epilepsy  and 237-240,256

Memory,  Conditions  of,  in  231-237,239,240,241-

250,  255  257

Duplex  Personality,  Phenomena  of ... ... 135,221

  Sec  also  Subliminal  Consciousness


Index  to  Vol.  VII.


v


E.

PAGE

Elliotson,  Dr.,  Cases  recorded  by ...  237,238

Ericsson,  C.  E.,  Case  recorded  by 202


F.


F.,  Dr.,  Notes  on  Experiments  with  the  Clairvoyante  "  Jane" ... 57-62,  82

Fahnestock,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 351,  352

Forel,  Dr.,  Case  recorded  by 135

Eraser,  Mrs.,  Notes  on  Experiments  with  the  Clairvoyante  "  Jane  " ...  88

G.

Gale,  Harlow  S.,  Case  collected  by 359

Gasparin,  Comte  Agenor  de,  Experinieuts  in  Physical  Phenomena  ..  154
"  Gesellachaft  fur  Psycliologische  Forschung,"  Formation  of,  and  Review

of  Proceedings .. ... ...  ... ...  ... ...  134

Gibert,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 130

Glover,  J.  J.  T. ,  Case  contributed  by ... .. ... ... ... ...  95

Golinski,  Dr.  C,  Case  contributed  by 39

Gourvat,  Marie,  Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne  to 104,  107

Graham,  H.  W.  Gore,  Evidence  as  to  "  Spiritistic "  Phenomena  ... ...  156

Green,  Rev.  C,  Note  of  Experiments  with  the  Clairvoyante  "Jane"  ...  91
Gurney,  Edmund,  Notes  on  Cases  of  Hypnotic  Stigmatisation ...  339,342


H.

Hallucinations,  Epidemic  of,  in  Dordogne 100-110

,,  New  Census  of,  Ad  Interim  Reports ... .... 259,  264

Theory  of  the  Genesis  of 313-321

Hansen,  Carl,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  under  Hypnotism  ...  364,  367
Hartmann,  Eduard  von, "Die  Geisterhypothese  des  Spiritismus  und

seine  Phantome,"  Review  of  ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  292

Higginson,  Col.  T.  W.,  Case  collected  by ...  41

Hinsdale,  Guy,  M.D.,  Notes  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne 253

Hodgson,  Richard,  A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness  (Ansel  Bourne)  221-257

Holstein,  Madame  A.  de,  Case  contributed  by 39

Hudson,  G,  Alleged  "  Spirit  Photographs  "of 269  273,  275

Humphreys,  H.  T.,  Case  contributed  by 96

Hypnotism,  Action  a  Distance ... 130,  131,  291,  292

Clairvoyance  under  ... 49-81,  82-99,199-220,364-369,370-372

,,  Conditions  and  Safeguards,  Circular  (No.  4) 137

Curative  Effects  of 290-292,  322,  323,  336,  337,  341,  343,  347,  34S

,,  Epilepsy  and  237-240,  256

,, Hypnotic  Anesthesia  and  Analgesia  72,  73,  95,  322,  323,  330

337,  338,  351


VI


Index  to  Vol.  VI 1.


PAGE

Hypnotism,  Hypnotic  Memory 233-236,  240,  241-250,  255,  256

,,  ,, Suggestion,  Human  Personality  in the  light  of

54-56,  135,  233-236,  241-250

„  ,,  „  Post-Hypnotic 243-246,  313

,,  ,,  ,,  Self- 351,  352

,, ,, ,, Stigmatisation  and  Kindred  Pheno-
mena produced  by 337-347

,, Hysterical  or  Morbid  Nature  of  Phenomena  of — consideration

of  the  question ... ...  298-327

,,  Infants,  Experiments  with  .. 291

,,  Narcotics,  Experimental  Use  of,  in ... ... ... ...  134

Predictions  under 203,217-219

,, Subliminal  Consciousness  and  the  Phenomena  of ... ...  298

,, Transference  of  Sensation  under  ... ... ...  72,  73,81,88,95


I.

Intemperance  cured  by  Hypnotism 347,  348


J.

Jack,  E.  L. ,  Note  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne 255

James,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  Ansel  Bourne 232-236,  241-250,  254
,,  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  by,  Review  of ... ... ...  Ill

Jane,"  .Record  of  Experiments  with  the  Clairvoyante ... ... 53-81,  82

Janet,  Prof.,  Experiments  of ' 299,  323,  324,  332

Jong,  Dr.  de,  Moral  Cures  by  Hypnotism ... ... ... ... ...  348

Josty,  Mr.,  Alleged  "  Spirit  Photographs  "  of 284-287


K.

Kalmar,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  at ... 199,370

,, Notes  on  a  Visit  to,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers 370

Krafft-Ebing,  Dr.  R.  von,  Pulse  and  Temperature  affected  and  Stigmata,

&c.,  produced  by  Suggestion  under  Hypnotism  ... ... 337,  343,  344


E.


LAGRAVE,  Dr.  Coste  de,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 351

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt  D.,  Review  of  "  Die  (leisterhypothese  des  Spiritismus

und  seine  Phantome,"  by  E.  von  Hartmann 292

Lee,  H.  M.,  Case  contributed  by 38

Levi] lain,  Dr. ,  Case  recorded  by 337

Levy,  W  Hanks,  A  Case  of  Hyperesthesia  of  the  Blind 127

Library,  "  Edmund  Gurney,"  Supplementary  Catalogue,  1891 411

Liebeault,  Dr.  A.  A.,  Case  recorded  by  ... ... .. 335


"  Therapeutique  Suggestive,"  by,  Review  of ...  290


Index  to  Vol.  VII.


vii


PAGE

Ljunggren,  Miss  Hilda,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  with  ... ... 213,  217

Lodge,  Prof.  Oliver  J.,  F.R.S.,  Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-
Transference 374

Lundberg,  Miss  Ebba,  Experiments  in  Claiivoyance  with ... ... ...  212

Lyro,  The  Fraulein,  Thought-Transference  Experiments  with ... ...  374


M.

"  M.  A.  (Oxon,")  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena 154

"Spirit-Photography" 269,277-280

Maguire,  E.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with 96

Marill  ier,  Leon,  On  the  Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne ... ...  100

,,  Census  of  Hallucinations,  Ad  Interim  Report  (for  France)  264

Marks,  C.  R.  and  F.  A.,  Case  contributed  by  359-361,  363

Massey,  C.  C,  "  Riddles  of  tire  Sphinx,"  by  "  A  Troglodyte,"  Review  of  395

Meetings  of  the  Society,  Ordinary 1,  145,  297

Multiplex  Personality  ... See  Double  Consciousness,  Duplex  Personality,

Hypnotism,  Secondary  and  Subliminal  Consciousness

Mumler,  Alleged  "  Spirit  Photographs  "of 269,  270,  274,  275

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Alleged  Movements  of  Objects  without  Contact


occurring  not  in  the  Presence  of  a  Paid  Medium

146,  383

J!

Case  of  the  Clairvoyante  "  Jane  "

...  53

1  )

Notes  on  Mr.  J.  Bristow's  Case

...  389

>>

,, on  a  Visit  to  Kalmar

...  370

l>

Review  of  "  The  Principles  of  Psychology,"  by  P

rof.

W.  James

...  Ill

Subliminal  Consciousness,  The .. .

. . .  298

Myers,  Mis.  T.,  Notes  on  Experiments  with  the  Clairvoyante  "Jane"  53,  54,  91


N.

Names,  Importance  of  the  Publication  of,  Circular  (No.  5) ...  144

Newbold,  W.  Romaine,  Notes  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne ... ...  250

Noyes,  W. ,  M.  O. ,  Notes  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne 254


O.

Officers  and  Council  of  the  Society 413


P.

Paquet,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 32,  33

Parkes,  Mr.,  Alleged  "  Spirit  Photographs  "of 270,  273.  274

Personality. Sec  Double  Consciousness,  Duplex  Personality,  Secondary

and  Subliminal  Consciousness


viii


Index  to  Vol.  VII.


PAGE

Physical  Phenomena,  Alleged  Movement  of  Objects  without  Contact  and

not  with  Paid  Mediums,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  146,  383

,,  Analysis  of  Phenomena... ...  146-154

"Materialisation" 182,190,191

,,  Physical  Movements  and  Automatism  (Class  A)  153,

154-156,  158,  160,  173,  189,  193,  194,  383

Bell-ringing 160-173

"Slate-writing" 180-182,  186,188

Wood-throwing 383-393

Terminology,  Suggested  adoption  of ...  112,146,150

Pitres,  Prof.,  Experiments  with  Magnets ... ... ...  322

Power,  Miss  H.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena ... ... 155,  156

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  Case  recorded  by ... ... 335

Proust,  Prof.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  ... ...  240,255


R.

Radberg,  Alma,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  with ... 204-212,  218,  370

Reviews '  111,  134,  135,  136,  290,  292,  .395,  408

Richet,  Prof.  C,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance ... ... ...  370-372

"  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,"  by  a  "  Troglodyte,"  Review  of 395

Rosen,  Baron  von,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ...  205

Rybalkin,  Dr .  J. ,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... ... ... ...  338

Russell,  Mrs.,  Notes  on  Experiments  with  the  Clairvoyante  "  Jane  " ...  92


S.

S.,  Mdlle.  Ilma,  Case  of 343,  344

Samuelsson,  Anna,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  with ...  200-204,  219

Schrenek-Notzing,  Raron  von,  Experimental  Studies  in  Thought- Trans-
ference ... ... ... ... ...  3

,,  ,, Hypnotic  Experiments 134,  135

Secondary  Consciousness,  Phenomena  of ... 25-28,  114-133,  221.  298-327
,,  ,,  .., ... ... See  also  Subliminal  Consciousness

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance  ... 30,356

,,  ,, Notes  on  Mr.  Bristow's  Case  ... 391

,,  ,, Spirit  Photographs  :  A  Reply  to  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace ...  268

,,  Prof.,  Third  Ad  Interim  Report  of  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  259
Society  for  Psychical  Research  —

General  Meetings,  Ordinary ... 1,  145,  297

Members,  Associates,  and  Honorary  Members 413

,,  ,,  ,,  American  Branch...  433

Officers  and  Council 413

Spirit  Photographs,  A  Reply  to  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  by  Mrs.  Henry

Sidgwick  268

Starkey,  Rev.  E.,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... ... ... ... ...  46

Stella,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by.. ... 99


Index  to  Vol.  VII.


ix


PAGE

Stigmatisation  and  Kindred  Phenomena —

Hypnotic ... 337-344,  346

Spontaneous ... 338,  345

Storie,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... 34

Subliminal  Consciousness,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  298

Analysis  of 305-313

,, ,, Individuality  and  Personality,  Definition  of ...  305
,, ,, Subliminal Messages, General  Character-
istics of 298

Suggestion,  Mechanism  of ...  327

Suhr,  Messrs.  A.  and  V.,  Case  contributed  by ...  364

Sullivan,  The  Right  Rev.  E.,  Bishop  of  Algoa,  Case  contributed  by 38,  39


T.


Taylor,  Lieut. -Col.  G.  L.  le  M.,  Case  contributed  by  156

Thompson,  H.  S.,  Case  recorded  by 239,  240

Thought-Transference —

,, Experimental  Evidence-
Numbers 18,  19

Objects 16-19,  378,  379

Playing  Cards ... 17,  377-381

Pictures  and  Diagrams 6-16,  21,  374,  377-379

Words  and  Names 16

,,  Lodge,  Prof.  0.  J.,  Recent  Experiments  in ... ... ...  374

,,  Schrenck  Notzing,  Baron  von,  Experimental  Studies  in ...  3-23

,,  Syntonic  or  Sympathetic ... ... ... ... ... 374  376

Thurstan,  Dr.  W.  T.,  Note  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne 227,  229

Thury,  Prof.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena 154

Trowbridge,  G.  R.,  M. D.,  Case  recorded  by ... 240,  256

V.

Vaughan,  Rev.  E.  T.,  Evidence  as  to  Physical  Phenomena 154

Voisin,  Dr.  A.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of . 347,  348


W.

Wadsworth,  Dr.  0.  F.,  Notes  on  the  Case  of  Ansel  Bourne 255

Wagner,  Prof.,  Experiment  bearing  on  the  Question  of  "  Spirit-Photo-
graphy " 286

Waite,  E.,  "  The  Occult  Sciences  "  by,  Review  of ,..408

Wallace,  A.  R.,  Spirit  Photographs,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  Reply  to 268

Wedgwood,  Mis.  Alfred,  Case  contributed  by 47

Wesermann,  H.  M.,  Experiment  by ... ... ... ... .., ..  47

Wilmot,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 41


X


Index  to  Vol.  VII.


Williams,  Dr.,  Experiments  in  "  Spirit-Photography " 282

Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S.,  Case  contributed  by ...  70

Wingfield,  H.  E.,  Review  of  "  Therapeutique  Suggestive,''  by  Dr.  A.  A.

Liebeault ... ... '  090

Wood,  A.  B.,  Case  collected  by 32

X.
