Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXXII (1922)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1922 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXXXII-LXXXIV) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc32soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXXII

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXXXII,  LXXIII  &'  LXXXIV)

1922


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1922

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW:  MACLEHOSE,  JACKSON  &  CO.,  73  West  George  Street
AMERICA:  THE  F.  W.  FAXON  CO.,  83  Francis  Street,  Bosto.v,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc32soci


CONTENTS


PART  LXXXII.
July,  1921.

y.iOK

I.  A  Further  Report  on  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard. By  Mrs.

W.  H.  Salter  1

Supplement  :  Reviews  :

I.  Dr.  A.  V.  Schrenck-Notzing's  "  Physikalische  Phaenomene

des  Mediumismus." By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Se. -  144
II.  Dr.  Max  Dessoir's  "  Vom  Jenseits  der  Seele." By  F.  C.  S.

Schiller,  D.Sc.  --------  146

TH.  Dr.  W.  J.  Crawford's  "  The  Psychic  Structures  at  the

(  Goligher  Circle." By  E.  J.  Dingwall - - -  147


^  PAPtT  LXXXIII.

r

July,  1921.

I.  Problems  of  Hypnotism  : An  Experimental  Investigation.

By  Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz - - - - - -  151

II.  The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization. By  the  Rev.  Herbert

Thurston,  S.J.  179


PART  LXXXIV.
January,  1922.

I.  Report  on  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  -  -  -  -  209
II.  The  Modus  Operandi  in  so-called  Mediumistic  Trance.  By

(Una)  Lady  Troubridge  344


21^62


c


Dr.  W-illiam  'Brown's "  Psychology  and  Psychotherapy  "  ;
Dr.  Constance  E.  Long's  "  Collected  Papers  on  the  Psycho-
logy of  Phantasy  "  ; Mr.  A.  G.  Tansley's  "  The  New
Psychology  and  its  Relation  to  Life." By  T.  W.  Mitchell,
M.D.  379


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXXII.
June,  1921.


A  FURTHER  REPORT  ON  SITTINGS  WITH


MRS.  LEONARD.
By  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.

PAGE

Introduction  2

Part  I. Evidence  obtained  by  New  Sitters.

§1.  Personal  Appearance  of  Communicators - - -  13

§  II.  Circumstances  and  Physical  Symptoms  Associated

with  a  Communicator's  Death  - - - -  23

§  III.  Names  and  Initials -------  24

§  IV.  Various  Topics  which  recur  frequently - - -  27

,§  V.  A  Successful  First  Sitting  28

Part  II. Evidence  obtained  by  Old  Sitters.

§  I.  Sittings taken by  Miss Radclyffe-Hall and  Una,

Lady  Troubridge ------  44

§11.  J.  D.'s  Sittings -------  68

I  III.  Mrs.  Beadon's  Sittings ------  69


A


2


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Introdfction.

The  sittings  which  I  propose  to  discuss  in  this  report  are
some  of  those  which  were  held  during  the  period  of  three
months,  from  January  14  to  April  15,  1918,  when  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  entered  into  an  agreement
with  Mrs.  Leonard  to  the  effect  that  she  should  give
sittings  only  to  people  for  whom  appointments  were  made
by  the  Society.

All  the  necessary  arrangements  with  regard  to  the
choice  of  sitters,  the  obtaining  of  records  and  so  forth,
were  put  into  the  hands  of  a  Committee  (referred  to  below
as  the  Leonard  Committee)  specially  appointed  by  the
Council  for  this  purpose  ;  and  of  this  Committee  I  was
the  secretary.  As  to  the  arrangements  for  sittings,  the
following  procedure  was  adopted  :

(a)  The  names  of  all  persons  wishing  to  have  appoint-
ments with  Mrs.  Leonard  must  be  submitted  to  the
Committee,  with  whom  should  rest  the  decision  whether
an  appointment  should  be  given  or  not.

(&)  When  it  had  been  decided  that  an  appointment
should  be  given,  the  date  of  this  appointment  was  deter-
mined by  me,  as  secretary,  in  consultation  with  the
prospective  sitter,  whose  attention  was  particularly  drawn
to  the  importance  of  not  mentioning  the  appointment  to
any  one,  except  perhaps  to  some  member  of  his  or  her
immediate  family,  from  whom  it  could  not  well  be  con-
cealed.

As  to  the  question  of  obtaining  satisfactory  records,,
with  a  very  few  exceptions,  appointments  were  given  only
to  people  who  were  willing  that  a  recorder  selected  by
the  Leonard  Committee  should  be  present  at  the  sitting,
and  that  a  copy  of  the  record  obtained  should  be  handed
over  to  the  Society.  Most  of  the  records  were  made  by
one  or  other  of  three  persons,  Una,  Lady  Troubridge,  Miss
Radclyffe-Hall (both of  them members of  the  Leonard


Lxxxir.]


Introduction.


3


Committee),  and  myself.  On  one  occasion  the  record  was
made  by  Miss  Newton,  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  and  on
two  occasions  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington.  Exceptions  to  the
general  rule  concerning  the  presence  of  a  recorder  were
made  in  the  case  of  one  or  two  old  sitters  who  had  been
in  the  habit  of  sitting  regularly  with  Mrs.  Leonard  and
could  not  therefore  be  entirely  excluded  during  the  period
under  review.  A  few  of  these  records  made  by  old  sitters
are  in  our  possession,  but  I  shall  make  very  little  use  of
them  in  this  report. ^

With  regard  to  the  records  from  which  I  shall  quote,
it  is  to  be  observed  that  they  were  not  made  in  shorthand.
But,  as  Lady  Troubridge  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  have
already  said  in  their  report  on  their  earlier  sittings  with
Mrs.  Leonard  {Proc.  S.P.B.,  Part  LXXVIII.),  it  is  possible
by  dint  of  practice  and  by  establishing  a  good  under-
standing with  Mrs.  Leonard's  "  control,"  Feda,  to  obtain
an  accurate  and  a  substantially  verbatim  record  of  what
occurs.  A  special  point  was  always  made  of  taking  down
everything  that  was  said  by  the  sitter,  so  that  if  any
information  was  thus  conveyed  to  the  medium  this  fact
might  be  apparent  in  the  record.

The  total  number  of  sittings  given  by  Mrs.  Leonard
during  the  period  under  review  was  seventy -three  ;  thirty-

1 1  should  like  to  make  it  clear  that  in  thus  putting  aside  these
records  made  by  old  sitters  I  do  not  intend  to  cast  any  doubt  upon  their
bona  fides.  But  experience  has  shown  that  people  differ  much  in  their
capacity  for  making  an  exact  record,  and  many  sitters  do  not  realise
the  importance  of  noting  everything  they  say  themselves.  Moreover,
even  if  a  sitter  is  skilled  and  experienced  in  the  art  of  recording,  there
is  a  distinct  advantage  in  having  the  record  made  by  some  one  whose
attention  is  not  distracted  in  any  way.  In  recording  my  own  sittings —
which  I  have  done  on  several  occasions — I  have  noticed  two  tendencies  :
(a)  my  mind  may  be  given  temporarily  to  the  problem  of  what  response,
if  any,  it  is  desirable  tha't  I  should  make  to  some  statement  or  Cjuestion,
and  my  record  may  sixffer  in  consequence  ;  (6)  I  have  noticed  in  myself
a  tendency,  against  which  I  think  sitters  should  be  on  their  guard,  to
record  more  carefully  and  minutely  statements  which  I  know  to  be  of
evidential  value  than  statements  which  I  know  to  be  confused  or
incorrect.  Close  attention  to  the  process  of  recording  flags  in  pro-
portion to  the  flagging  of  the  sitter's  interest  in  what  is  being  said,
and  if  this  tendency  is  not  immediately  checked,  correct  and  evidential
statements  will  of  course  have  undue  prominence  in  the  record.


4


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


one  appointments  were  given  to  twenty-five  new  sitters,
of  whom  one  had  three  sittings  and  four  had  two  sittings
each  ;  all  these  new  sitters  were  anonymous  except  three  ;
two  had  made  appointments  with  Mrs.  Leonard  in  their
own  name  before  she  entered  into  the  agreement  with  the
Society,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  had  two  sittings,  was
known  to  Mrs.  Leonard  through  having  called  upon  her
to  talk  over  the  terms  of  the  agreement.  Forty-two
appointments  were  given  to  persons  who  had  sat  with
Mrs.  Leonard  before  ;  of  these  forty-two  sittings  thirteen
were  taken  by  Lady  Troubridge  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall,
one  of  them  acting  as  sitter  and  one  as  recorder,  as  is
their  usual  habit  ;  twenty-nine  sittings  were  given  to
other  old  sitters,  and  of  all  but  nine  of  these  sittings
careful  records  are  in  the  possession  of  the  Society.
Putting  aside  therefore  the  nine  sittings  of  which  no
adequate  record  is  available,  we  have  a  total  of  sixty-four
sittings,  of  which  .thirty-one  were  given  to  new  sitters,
that  is,  persons  who  had  never  sat  with  Mrs.  Leonard  at
any  time  prior  to  January  15,  1918,  and  thirty-three  to
old  sitters,  that  is,  persons  who  had  sat  with  her  at
least  once  before  that  date.

I  propose  in  this  report  to  classify  the  results  under
consideration  according  to  whether  they  were  obtained  by
new  or  old  sitters,  and  to  concern  myself  mainly  with
those  obtained  by  new  sitters.  One  great  advantage  we
possess  in  the  case  of  these  new  sitters  is  that  it  is  a
comparatively  easy  task  to  determine  in  weighing  the
evidence  what  allowance  must  be  made  for  any  normal
knowledge  Mrs.  Leonard  may  have  had  concerning  them.
In  the  case  of  anonymous  sitters — and,  as  I  have  stated
above,  we  believe  all  but  three  ^  of  the  new  sitters  to
have been anonymous — we have only to consider  what

1  It  is  worth  noting  as  a  point  in  favour  of  the  complete  trust-
worthiness of  Mrs.  Leonard  that  the  results  obtained  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
who  had  two  sittings  and  whose  name  was  known  to  Mrs.  Leonard,
were  amongst  the  least  successful  during  the  period  i^mder  review.  The
results  obtained  by  Mr.  G.  W.  Balfour  in  the  course  of  three  sittings
were  also  poor.  Mr.  Balfour  went  anonymously,  but  had  Mrs.  Leonard
been  in  the  habit  of  assisting  the  production  of  apparently  supernormal
phenomena  by  any  adventitious  means,  it  is  to  be  supposed  under  the


LXXXII.]


Introduction.


5


general  a  priori  assumptions  Mrs.  Leonard  might  make  about
them  and  what  she — or  Feda — might  infer  during  the  sitting.

In  the  case  of  old  sitters  we  must  of  course  take  into
account  all  the  information  that  may  have  been  given  at
former  sittings,  or  in  the  course  of  ordinary  conversation  ;
for  some  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  old  sitters  have  come  to
know  her  well,  and  she  has  frequently  been  in  their
company  when  in  her  normal  condition.  With  old  sitters
such  as  Lady  Troubridge  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall,  who
from  the  very  first  have  not  only  kept  careful  records
of  their  sittings,  but  of  any  conversations  they  have  had
with  Mrs.  Leonard  in  the  course  of  which  some  infor-
mation concerning  their  affairs  might  have  been  given  to
her,  it  is  possible  by  consulting  these  records  to  ascertain
whether  a  particular  piece  of  evidence  is  vitiated  or
modified  in  any  way  by  some  earlier  incident.  But  many
old  sitters  have  kept  but  scanty  records  of  earlier  sittings,
and  no  records  at  all  of  conversations.  In  their  case,
therefore,  it  is  often  impossible  to  determine  how  much  of
the  later  evidence  must  be  discounted.  Almost  the  only
type  of  evidence  which  can  be  taken  at  its  face  value
is  apparent  knowledge  of  events  which  have  occurred
since  the  sitter  last  held  any  communication  with  Mrs.
Leonard,  and  which  are  such  that  they  would  have  been  very
unlikely  to  come  to  Mrs.  Leonard's  knowledge  through
any  other  normal  channel.  Knowledge  of  this  kind  is
often  displayed  during  sittings  with  Mrs.  Lepnard,  but  it
happens  that  there  are  not  many  good  instances  of  it
during  the  period  under  review.

In  the  discussion  of  evidence  to  which  I  shall  now
proceed  I  shall  assume  that  my  readers  are  familiar  with
the  earlier  reports  on  Mrs.  Leonard's  phenomena  that
have  appeared  in  the  Proceedings,  and  I  shall  only  say
that  in  all  the  sittings  with  which  I  am  here  concerned
Mrs.  Leonard  was  in  trance  and  ostensibly  "  controlled,"
by  Feda, in  most  cases, and  on  one  or  two  occasions

circumstances  that  she  would  have  familiarised  herself  with  the  personal
appearance  of  prominent  members  of  the  S.P.R.  and  have  collected  a
little  useful  information  about  them — not  a  difficidt  matter  in  Mr.
Balfour's  case,  nor  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's.


6


Introduction.


[part  lxxxii.]


by  A.  V.  B.i  (see  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,  p.  339  fif.).
I  use  the  word  "  control  "  for  convenience  to  designate
a  well-marked  psychological  phenomenon.  I  do  not  propose
to  discuss  in  this  report  what  may  be  the  cause  of  this
phenomenon,  or  the  relation  between  Mrs.  Leonard  and
the  supposed  personalities  who  "  control  "  her.

1  See  below,  pp.  59  ff.  A.  V.  B.  never  piuports  to  control  except
at  sittings  taken  by  Lady  Troubridge  or  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall.


PART  I.

Evidence  obtained  by  New  Sitters.

I  WILL  now  proceed  to  consider  the  evidence  obtained  by
the  twenty-five  new  sitters  who  were  introduced  to  Mrs.
Leonard during the period of her agreement with  the
Society In  justice  to  Mrs.  Leonard  it  should  be  pomted
out that the phenomena obtained in these  circum-
stances are  not  Hkely  to  be  as  interesting  or  remarkable
as  those  obtained  by  sitters  who  have  sat  regularly  with
Mrs.  Leonard  during  some  months  or  even  years.  J^irst
sittings,  even  when  they  are  on  the  whole  successful,  are
apt  to  be  of  a  rather  tentative  nature,  and  they  usually
follow certain conventional lines. Moreover, they  afford
little scope for evidence concerning the character  and
personality  of  the  supposed  communicator. For  one  thing,
such  evidence  is  largely  cumulative  in  its  effect,  and  for
another, whether it is obtained by telepathy  between
Mrs Leonard and the communicator, or between  Mrs.
Leonard  and  the  sitter,  or  by  some  combined  interaction
of all three minds together, it is likely that a  well-
established  raj>port  between  Mrs.  Leonard  and  her  sitter
will  facilitate  matters. I  think  there  is  a  general  agree-
ment amongst  those  who  have  sat  repeatedly  with  Mrs.
Leonard— amongst whom I may include myself— that
good evidence of surviving personality is  sometimes
obtained.'^

But  a  review  of  the  evidence  obtained  during  a  number

lA  very  striking  example  is  quoted  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  on
"Book-Tests"  (see  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXXI.  p.  253  H),  but  this  incident,
be  it  observed,  occurred  during  Mrs.  Talbot's  second  sitting.

7


8


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


of  first  sittings,  even  if  it  does  not  yield  any  incidents
of  a  striking  character,  is  not  without  a  certain  interest
of  its  own.  A  great  many  people  have  neither  opportunity
nor  inclination  for  a  protracted  study  of  trance-phenomena  ;
they  visit  a  medium  once,  or  perhaps  twice,  with  the
avowed  intention  of  getting  into  touch  with  some  dead
friend  or  relative,  if  they  can,  and  therefore  both  from
a  practical  and  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view  it  is
worth  while  to  consider  what  sort  of  results  such  people
seem  likely  to  get.

In  order  to  form  an  opinion  on  this  point  it  is  necessary
that  we  should  have  under  review  a  considerable  number
of  sittings  for  purposes  of  comparison,  and  this  is  just
what  the  individual  sitter  can  very  seldom  do.  He  knows
what  has  occurred  at  his  own  sitting  and  can  judge  how
far  the  statements  made  are  applicable  to  his  particular
circumstances.  What  he  cannot  judge,  unless  he  sets
himself  deliberately  to  enquire  into  the  matter,  is  to  what
extent  the  statements  made  at  his  sitting  might  have
been  applicable  to  the  circumstances  of  some  other  sitter,
and — a  more  important  point — to  what,  extent  statements
made  appropriately  to  him  have  also  been  made  to  other
sitters  whose  circumstances  they  did  not  fit.  This  point,
I  say,  is  important,  because  the  comparison  of  a  number
of  first  sittings  reveals  the  fact  that  certain  typical  lines
of  structure,  so  to  speak,  tend  to  recur  with  slight  modi-
fications, and  a  statement  which  is  accepted  by  one
sitter  as  good  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  purporting
communicator  will  obviously  lose  much  of  its  evidential
value  by  frequent  and  indiscriminate  repetition.

What  I  have  termed  these  typical  lines  of  structure  are
most  apparent  in  sittings  at  which  the  general  level  of
evidence  for  any  supernormal  source  of  knowledge  is  poor.
There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  when  Feda  is
at  a  loss,  when  for  one  reason  or  another  she  is  not  able
to  get  any  genuine  impressions  of  a  supernormal  character,
sooner  than  remain  silent  she  resorts  to  what  may  be
termed  her  "  stock-in-trade,"  and  pads  freely. ^ She  frankly

1  Cf.  similar  observations  made  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  regard  to  Mrs.
Piper's  control,  Phinuit,  and  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington  in  regard  to  Mrs.
Thompson's  control,  Nelly.


Lxxxii.] Evidence  obtained  by  Neiv  Sitters.


9


recognises  this  tendency  herself  (although  she  puts  the
responsibility  for  it  upon  the  communicator),  alleging  in
excuse  that  unless  a  free  and  more  or  less  continuous
flow  of  communication  can  be  established,  the  stream  is
apt  to  dry  up  entirely.  In  a  sitting  taken  by  Dr.  T.  W.
Mitchell  on  April  12,  1918,  at  which  Lady  Troubridge
recorded,  the  following  passage  occurred  :

Feda.  And — a  spirit  what  Feda  asks  advice  of  said  some
j)eoples  would  be  shocked,  but  not  you — you  know
when  spirits  comes,  they  sometimes  all  seems  to  say
the  same  thing  ;  like  a  young  man  will  say  he's
wTitten  a  "portant  letter.  And  after  two  or  three
has  said  it,  Feda  says  :  Say  something  new,  that's
not  proper  evidence  ;  "cos  every  one  says  that."
Then  they  says  :  Oh,  I  want  mother  to  know
it  " — and  if  you  stops  'em,  you  shuts  the  door  on
their  saying  other  things  what  may  be  evidence.
And  then  that  one  thing  becomes  a  key  what  is  easy
tapped  and  played  upon  in  her  [Mrs.  Leonard's]  mind  ;
so  if  Feda  lets  'em  play  about  a  bit,  it  gives  'em  a
feehng  of  confidence  ;  and  though  Feda's  thinking  all
the  time  ""  oh,  they  all  say  that,"'  Feda  mustn't  be
cross  about  it.  And  the  medium  was  cross  ;  'cos
several  sitters  told  her  their  sons  had  given  good
tests  about  letters  they  had  sent  two  days  before
they  passed  over,  and  she  said  to  Feda  :  "  Can't  you
give  something  better  than  that  ?  Everyone  has  sent
letters.".  .  .

Often  Feda  has  to  let  the  si^irits  talk  just  of
anything,  to  get  them  on  a  flow  ;  'cos  if  they  only
thinks  of  tests,  they  gets  all  stiff  and  frozen  up  ;  and
they  all  has  written  letters,  and  all  boys  loves  their
mothers,  so  it  does  no  harm.

This  statement  of  Feda's  receives  practical  corroboration
from  the  fact,  which  many  sitters  with  Mrs.  Leonard
must  have  observed,  that  any  deliberate  effort  made  to
give  a  particular  "  test,"  in  response,  e.g.  to  a  question
asked  by  the  sitter,  is  apt,  as  it  were,  to  block  that  line
for  the  time  being,  although  a  quite  correct  answer  may


10


iMrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


afterwards  be  given  spontaneously.^  There  is  an  obvious
analogy  in  the  experience  everyone  has  had  of  trying  to
remember  a  half -forgotten  name  ;  a  deliberate  effort  to
remember  the  name  has  an  inhibiting  effect,  but  if  we
let  our  mind  run  on  other  matters,  the  name  will  rise
into  consciousness.  Similarly  it  would  appear  that  if
during  Mrs.  Leonard's  trance  the  stream  of  obvious  and
commonplace  communications  is  allowed  to  flow  un-
checked it  may  be  made  to  serve  as  a  vehicle  for  matter
which  is  of  evidential  value.  In  a  note  appended  to  the
extract  from  Dr.  Mitchell's  sitting  quoted  above,  the
recorder.  Lady  Troubridge,  says  that  she  had  noticed

that  on  several  occasions  this  stereotyped  evidence  was,
as  it  were,  made  the  peg  upon  which  to  hang  some  really
striking  piece  of  evidence.  For  instance,  out  of  the  usual
meandermg  anent  a  watch,  worn  on  the  wrist,  would
emerge  some  little  evidential  fact  anent  the  nature  or
whereabouts  of  some  other  watch  possessed  by  the  com-
municator. Or,  to  quote  an  actual  instance,  on  one
occasion,  when  the  obvious  allusion  was  made  by  the
communicator  to  a  gold  signet  ring,  obviously  a  man's,
worn  by  the  sitter,  great  surjjrise  was  expressed,  and
be-\vilderment,  at  the  fact  that  the  sitter  possessed  such
a  ring.  And  this  surprise  was  evidential  in  view  of  the
fact  that  the  original  ring  had  gone  to  the  bottom  of
the  sea  with  the  communicator,  the  one  worn  hy  the
sitter  having  been  specially  made  to  the  old  pattern
subsequently  to  the  communicator's  death.  It  will  be
seen,  therefore,  that  Feda's  explanation  to  the  effect  that
she  allows  novice  communicators  to  practise  and  acquire
confidence  by  the  use  of  stereotyped  evidence,  found,  as
it  were,  ready  to  hand  in  the  medium's  brain,  and  that
thereby  they  are  encouraged,  and  gain  the  necessary
confidence  for  giving  something  really  good,  is  borne  out
by  the  facts  observed.

In  our  almost  complete  ignorance  concerning  the  con-
ditions governing  trance  communications,  Feda's  word  as

1  See,  for  example,  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,  pp.  444  ff.


LXXXII.]


Evidence  obtained  by  New  Sitters.


11


to  how  the  production  of  good  evidence  may  be  facilitated
is  worth  at  least  as  much  as  anyone  else's,  and  it  is
probably  wiser  for  new  sitters  to  let  her  take  her  own
course.  Nevertheless  it  must  be  admitted  that  anything
that  can  be  described  as  mere  padding  is  from  an
evidential  standpoint  regrettable,  and  when  a  friendly
rapport  has  been  established  between  Feda  and  the  sitter
much  may  be  done  to  check  this  kind  of  talk.  Feda
herself,  as  the  extract  given  above  indicates,  has  a  keen  sense
of  what  constitutes  valuable  evidence  and  has  shown  her
desire  to  obtain  it  whenever  possible.

To  return  to  the  question  of  what  kind  of  statements
are  habitually  or  frequently  made  at  first  sittings,  there
is  one  particular  line  of  thought  which  constantly  recurs,
partly,  no  doubt,  as  a  result  of  the  fact  that  during  the
last  few  years  the  great  majority  of  sitters  have  lost  a
friend  or  relative  in  the  war,  with  whom  they  desire  to
communicate,  and  it  now  ^  appears  to  be  Feda's  habit  to
assume  that  such  is  the  case.  On  each  of  the  twenty-five
occasions  which  I  am  now  considering,  when  a  new  sitter
was  present  for  the  first  time,  communications  were
received  purporting  to  come  from  a  young  man,  or  at
least  a  man  in  the  prime  of  life,  whose  appearance  and
the  circumstances  of  his  death,  as  described  by  Feda,
strongly  suggest  that  he  was  a  soldier.  In  most  cases
the  sitters  had  in  fact  lost  some  friend  or  relative  from
whom  the  communications  might  be  supposed  to  come,
but  on  three  occasions  young  soldiers  purported  to  com-
municate whom  the  sitters  were  not  able  to  identify  at
all.  It  is  not  to  be  assumed  that  because  they  were
unidentified  they  were  necessarily  fictitious  characters,  but
from  an  evidential  standpoint  we  can  only  judge  of  such
matters  as  they  present  themselves  to  us,  and  all  we  can
say  of  these  supposed  communicators  is  that  they  did  not
"  make  good."  On  another  occasion  when  a  sitter  had
lost  a  relative  in  the  war,  this  relative  was  a  naval
officer ;  a  communicator  presented  himself  who  gave  some

^  This  statement  is  made  in  relation  to  sittings  given  during  1918.  To
what  extent  it  still  holds  good,  I  do  not  know.


12


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


evidence  of  identity,^  but  no  indication  of  any  connexion
with  the  sea  was  obtained  ;  on  the  contrary  statements
were  made  which  appeared  to  imply  some  association
with  fighting  on  land,  the  conditions  of  life  in  the  trenches
and  so  forth.  These  results  suggest  that  Feda  has  what
might  be  termed  a  military  habit  of  mind  ;  she  takes  it
for  granted  first  that  communication  with  a  young  man
is  desired,  and,  secondly,  that  any  young  man  who
presents  himself  is  a  soldier.  On  one  occasion  a  sitter
desired  to  communicate  with  his  daughter,  a  quite  young
girl,  who  had  lately  died.  The  supposed  communicators
who  spontaneously  presented  themselves  on  this  occasion
were  (1)  a  young  man,  who  from  the  statements  made
about  him  was  presumably  a  soldier  killed  in  the  war  ;
(2)  an  "  elderly  lady  "  said  to  be  a  relative  ;  (3)  an  old
man  with  a  grey  beard  ;  (4)  another  "  elderly  lady  "  said
to  be  much  with  the  first.  Neither  of  the  men  was
recognised  at  all  by  the  sitter,  the  two  women  only
doubtfully.  Then,  at  the  recorder's  suggestion,  the  sitter
asked  whether  communication  with  his  daughter  was
possible.  A  spirit  was  then  said  to  be  "  building  up,"
whom  at  first  Feda  could  not  clearly  see  ;  later  on  she
gave  a  description  of  this  spirit  which  the  sitter  recognised
as  applicable  to  his  daughter,-  and  some  evidence  of
identity  was  also  obtained.  Now  the  circumstances  in
this  case  were  peculiar — it  would  not  often  happen,
especially  during  the  war,  when  so  many  men  were  losing
their  lives,  that  the  dead  person  with  whom  communi-
cation was  desired  would  be  a  young  girl  ;  the  result
appears  to  indicate  that  during  the  early  part  of  the
sitting  Feda's  statements  were  based  rather  upon  a  priori
assumptions  as  to  what  the  sitter's  circumstances  were
likely  to  be  than  on  any  real  knowledge  of  those  circum-
stances supernormally  acquired.  First  she  assumes  that  he
wishes  to  communicate  with  a  soldier,  perhaps  a  son,  that
being  in  her  experience  the  most  likely  contingency  ;
failing  that,  she  assumes  that  he  wishes  to  communicate

1  Further  evidence  of  a  more  striking  character  was  obtained  from  the
communicator  at  two  later  sittings.
^  See  Appendix,  p.  94.


Lxxxii.] Evidence  obtained  hy  Neiv  Sitters.  13

with  some  middle-aged  or  elderly  relative,  perhaps  a  wife,
perhaps  a  father  or  mother.  It  is  not  until  she  has  been
set  in  the  right  course  by  a  direct  question  from  the
sitter  that  anything  of  evidential  value  is  obtained.

There  is  then  a  strong  probability  that  the  first  supposed
communicator  to  present  himself  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.
Leonard  will  be  a  soldier,  said  to  have  been  killed,  or  at
least  to  have  died  in  the  war.  After  some  statement
from  him  it  frequently  happens,  as  on  the  occasion  I  have
just  described,  that  various  persons  whom  we  may  call
secondary  communicators  make  their  appearance  ;  they
are  usually  said  to  be  older  members,  or  sometimes  friends
-of  the  young  man's  family,  spirits  who  "  helped  him  when
he  passed  over."  Allusions  may  also  be  made  to  other
persons  who  are  not  alleged  to  be  present  themselves  at
the  sitting,  but  concerning  whom  statements  are  made  by
a  communicator  ;  occasionally  other  young  men  are
referred  to  who  are  said  to  be  soldier  friends  of  the
first  communicator.  Another  frequent  type  of  com-
municator is  the  child  who  has  died  young,  or  was  still-
born and  has  "grown  up  on  the  other  side."^  These
communicators  do  not  usually  take  much  active  part
in  the  sittings  ;  they  are  described  as  having  come  from
a.  higher  sphere  to  give  their  assistance  ;  sometimes  they
■are  said  to  act  as  "guides"  to  the  sitter.

Taking  it  then  as  established  that  at  a  first  sitting
with  Mrs.  Leonard  certain  groups  of  communicators  will
normally  present  themselves — this  method  of  procedure
being,  as  it  were,  the  scaffolding  upon  which  the  whole
sitting  is  built  up — we  must  next  consider  to  what  extent
the  individual  members  of  each  group  are  clearly  differ-
entiated one  from  another,  and  what  kind  of  evidence  of
personal  identity  they  are  able  to  give.

§1. Personal  Appeaeance  of  Communicators.

When  a  communicator  is  said  to  be  present  at  a  sitting,
Teda  usually  begins  by  giving  a  description  of  his  or  her

^  A  similar  tendency  was  observed  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  control,  Nelly,
see  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  261  ff.


14


Mrs.  W.  H  Salter.


[part


personal  appearance.  A  comparison  of  a  considerable
number  of  such  descriptions  suggests  that  in  a  good  many-
cases  they  represent  types  rather  than  individuals  ;  they
are  frequently  recognised  by  the  sitters  and  said  to  be
good  descriptions,  but  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  the
sitters  know  who  the  individual  is  whom  they  hope  to
hear  described  ;  the  personal  appearance  of  this  individual
is  clearly  in  their  mind's  eye,  and  therefore,  provided  that
the  description  given  by  Feda  is  not  positively  inapplicable,
they  will  quite  unconsciously  fill  in  the  gaps  themselves
and  accept  the  description  as  an  accurate  representation'
of  the  person  they  have  in  their  thoughts.  It  happens
occasionally  that  descriptions  are  given  which  are  in-
dividually characteristic  and  not  widely  applicable.  Such,
for  example,  was  the  description  of  the  communicator
called  A.  V.  B.  (Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,  p.  355  ff.)  ;  it
was  a  very  detailed  description,  and  was  such  that  to
anyone  familiar  with  A.  V.  B.'s  manner  and  personal
appearance  it  would  be  likely  to  suggest  her  identity
without  her  name  having  been  mentioned.  This  detailed
description,  however,  was  not  given  at  a  first  sitting.  In
the  sittings  now  under  consideration  I  have  found  no
descriptions  which  for  accuracy  of  detail  could  compare
with  that  one,  but  here  and  there  a  personal  characteristic
is  clearly  noted.  At  a  sitting,  for  example,  on  April  4,
1918,  after  a  rather  vague  description  of  a  communicator's
appearance  which  left  the  sitter  in  some  doubt  as  to
which  of  two  possible  communicators  was  intended,  the
following  statement  was  made  :

Feda  (to  the  communicator). ^  What  about  a  spot  near  your
nose  ?  (Feda  points  vaguely  to  the  region  of  the
nose,  mouth  and  jaw.)

Sitter. The  mouth  ?

Feda.  Yes  ;  he  had  a  mark  here.  (Feda  passes  her  finger
across  the  cheek  between  the  side  of  the  mouth  and

1  Those  of  my  readers  who  have  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  will
be  familiar  with  Feda's  mannerisms.  When  she  is  addressing  a  supposed
commimicator  or  repeating  something  that  a  communicator  has  said,
so  as  to  be  sure  that  she  has  got  it  correctly,  her  remarks  are  in  the
nature  of  asides,  usually  half  whispered.


Lxxxn,] Personal  Appearance  of  Communicators.  15

the  jaiy  bOne.)  Anyhov^  -he  '^liash't'-.  got  it  now.
(Feda  begins  stroking  the  jawbone.)  Feda  thinks  it
was  just  there  ;  he'd  had  it  for  some  time  ;  Feda
thinks  that  it  might  have  been  much  worse  than
it  was.  It's  not  round,  it's  more  long-shaped  and
not  quite  straight ;  Feda  thinks  it  must  have  spoilt
the  side  of  the  jaw  a  little.

The  sitter's  comment  is  as  follows  :

This  is  correct.  B  [the  communicator]  had  two  serious
operations  on  his  jaw,  and  a  part  of  the  bone  was  removed
four  months  before  he  passed  over.  Had  he  lived,  the
right  side  of  the  jaw  would  have  apjoeared  shortened  from
the  ear  to  the  chin.  Feda  pointed  to  the  right  side  of
the  face,  which  was  correct,  and  to  the  exact  spot  where
would  have  been  the  long  irregular  scar  (white)  left  after
the  first  unsuccessful  operation  which  had  to  be  repeated.

Now  that  is  quite  a  good  clear  piece  of  evidence,  not
easily  explicable  by  chance-coincidence,  since  few  peojDle
have  marked  blemishes  of  any  kind  upon  the  jaw.  But,
so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  observe,  evidence  of  that
particular  kind  is  not  frequently  obtained  at  first  sittings
with  Mrs.  Leonard.  Statements  concerning  the  personal
appearance  of  communicators  are  usually  of  that  vague  and
general  character  which  one  associates  with  passports,  and
they  exhibit  several  noticeable  limitations.  For  example,
Feda  frequently  remarks  that  she  is  unable  to  see  the
colour  of  the  communicator's  eyes,  and  if  she  hazards  a
statement  on  this  point  she  is  as  likely  to  be  wrong  as
right.  In  some  cases  this  difficulty  may  be  natural  enough
(there  are  people  in  whose  company  one  could  be  for
many  weeks  without  observing  what  colour  their  eyes
were),  but  there  are  instances  in  which  Feda  has  either
failed  to  give  any  indication  about  a  communicator's  eyes
or  has  described  them  wrongly,  when  according  to  the
sitter  the  eyes  were  the  most  noticeable  feature  of  his
face.^

The  colour  of  a  communicator's  hair  is  another  point
upon  which  Feda's  statements  are  apt  to  be  indefinite  ;

^  See  Appendix,  p.  83.


16  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

the  hair  is  said"  to.  .1b:e- . brown  -or!  ''"of '  si  browny  colour,"
"  rather  on  the  light  side  "  or  "  the  dark  side,"  as  the
case  may  be.  Where  soldiers  are  concerned,  whose  hair
is  always  said  by  Feda  to  be  cut  very  short,  perhaps
not  much  more  than  this  could  be  expected — by  far  the
greater  number  of  Englishmen  have  hair  of  some  shade
of  brown — but  one  might  have  hoped  for  some  more
precise  differentiation  in  the  case  of  other  communicators,
especially  women.

A  more  general  and  more  important  limitation  is  that
Feda  with  a  very  natural  consideration  for  the  sitter's
feelings  invariably  draws  a  communicator's  portrait  in
favourable  terms.  In  all  the  sittings  under  consideration
not  one  admittedly  plain-featured  communicator  has  been
portrayed.  Feda  occasionally  permits  herself  to  comment
with  kindly  criticism  upon  the  personal  appearance  of
people  still  alive,  but  de  mortuis  nil  nisi  honmn.  Now,
if  any  one  will  set  himself  the  task  of  describing  as
graphically  as  possible  and  without  prejudice  the  appear-
ance of  some  tolerably  presentable,  but  not  strikingly
handsome  member  of  his  acquaintance,  he  will  find  that
the  aesthetic  blemishes  of  a  face  characterise  it  as  much
as  its  beauties.  He  will  observe,  it  may  be,  that  his
friend's  eyes  are  rather  too  small,  or  his  nose  is  rather
too  long,  but  of  such  characteristics  as  these  Feda  tells
us  almost  nothing.

The  lack  of  precise  detail  which  marks  many  of  her
personal  descriptions  is  most  conspicuous,  as  we  might
expect,  in  the  case  of  soldiers.  I  say  "  as  we  might
ex]3ect,"  because  the  average  young  British  officer  con-
forms to  type  in  a  way  that  must  make  it  a  difficult
matter  to  give  any  description  that  will  at  once  and
clearly  differentiate  him  individually  from  his  fellows.
Nevertheless,  if  the  evidence  is  in  fact  weak  in  this
respect  it  is  important  that  this  weakness  should  be
recognised.  I  will  quote  in  illustration  of  my  point  an
incident  which  occurred  at  one  of  my  own  sittings.

A  young  man  was  said  to  be  present  who  had  died  in
the  war  ;  he  was  described,  with  a  rather  unusual  amount
of  detail,  in  the  following  terms  :


Lxxxii.] Personal  Appearance  of  Communicators.  17

He  [the  communicator,  my  father]  thinks  he  is  tall,
and  well  built,  but  in  breadth  he  is  about  medium,
not  a  very  big  tall  man.  Mr.  Arthur  [Feda's  name
for  the  communicator]  j^ulls  himself  up,  Feda  thinks
that  means  that  the  young  man  is  straight.  His  face
is  towards  long-shaped  with  a  well-shaped  chin  with-
out being  unduly  broad,  the  mouth  is  medium  size
and  he  has  good  teeth.  It's  a  good  shaped  mouth,
not  too  full,  about  medium.  The  lips  are  curved,
and  the  mouth  is  inclined  to  turn  uj)  at  the  corners.
One  corner  turns  up  a  little  more  than  the  other
corner.  That  was  just  a  little  habit  he  had,  it  could
be  verified  with  a  photograj^h.  His  eyes  smiled  too  ;
though  he  had  that  habit,  it  doesn't  give  him  a
smiKng  ajDpearance  because  his  mouth  and  chin  are
too  strong  and  too  decided.  The  nose  is  not  quite
straight,  you  can  see  the  bridge  a  little,  it's  a  nice
shape,  not  large,  medium,  and  the  nostrils  are  well
opened.  And  here,  you  see,  the  outside  of  the  nostril
is  well  formed  ;  it's  rather  deeply  curved  (Feda
outlines  the  ring  of  the  medium's  nostril  with  her
finger)  that  helps  to  take  away  from  the  funny  look
of  the  mouth  ;  he  kept  his  mouth  closed,  not  loose.
His  skin  is  clear  and  on  the  fair  side  rather  and
there  is  a  little  colour  just  in  the  cheeks,  not  all
over.  Oh  dear,  the  colour  of  his  eyes  is  difficult  to
get  at.  Feda  don't  .  know,  can't  tell ;  Feda  can't
sense  the  colour.  What  you  call  a  blue  or  bluey
grey  Feda  thinks,  not  a  very  decided  colour.  There's
&  little  streakiness  in  them  or  two  colours.  The
eyebrows  are  broadly  marked,  but  they  don't  look
heavy  because  they  are  brown,  not  black.  His
forehead  is  squarish  and  a  good  shape,  just  on  the
temples  it  is  rather  full,  and  then  it  is  a  little
flatter  below.  His  hair  is  brown  and  pretty  thick,
tut  rather  short.  It's  short  at  the  back  and  the
sides  but  as  he  brushes  it  at  the  top  it's  a  little
longer  and  sticks  up  a  bit  on  his  forehead.  It's  a
little  ruffled  looking  on  top,  Feda  thinks  it  would
get  like  that  unless  he  was  always  pushing  it  down.

B


18


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


That's  exactly  like  him.  He's  got  good  hands,  not
girlish,  but  Mr.  Arthur  says  they  are  a  good  point.
Oh  dear,  Feda  can't  see  that.  Mr.  Arthur  thinks  he
takes  nines  in  boots.  He  thinks  it  might  be  a  good
test,  Feda  don't  know  why  he  says  that.  His  hands
are  a  bit  broad  across  the  back,  but  he's  not  got
stumj^y  fingers,  they  are  long.  And  his  thumb  sticks
out  from  his  hands  and  curves  back.  (Feda  holds
out  her  hand  and  indicates  a  wide  division  between
the  thumb  and  fingers,  and  apparently  a  thumb  much
curved  back.)
H.  S. Do  you  mean  his  thumb  is  flexible  ?

F. No,  it's  rather  stiff ; Feda  would  think  he  had  a  good
firm  grip.

Now  if  I  were  drawing  up  a  list  of  people  who  on
a  2>^'iori  grounds  might  not  improbably  attempt  to  com-
municate with  me,  I  should  place  upon  it  the  names  of
three  young  men  who  have  been  killed  in  the  war.  To
one  of  these  young  men  Feda's  description  does  not  seem
to  me  to  apply  at  all,  but  with  a  few  slight  modifications
it  might  suit  either  of  the  other  two.  As  regards  each
of  them  parts  of  the  description  are  inexact,  and  Feda
has  missed  at  least  one  characteristic  feature  which  anyone
observing  closely,  as  she  appears  to  do,  would  be  likely
to  note.  I  may  say  that  since  this  description  was  given
the  young  man  described  above  has  made  several  attempts
to  identify  himself  to  me,  but  without  success  ;  I  am
still  in  complete  uncertainty  as  to  who  he  may  be.  But
the  point  I  wish  to  emphasise  here  is  that  the  description
given  by  Feda,  which  I  have  carefully  com^jared  with
photographs  of  the  two  young  men  to  whom  I  thought
reference  was  perhaps  intended,  might  apply  to  either  of
them  ;  and  yet  in  life  these  two  young  men  could  not  be
said  to  resemble  each  other  at  all,  except  in  so  far  as
each  conformed  to  the  normal  type  of  well-grown  young
Englishman.  The  inference  which  it  seems  reasonable  to
draw  is  that  mere  general  descriptions  of  features  and
colouring,  such  as  the  one  I  have  quoted,  are  of  little
evidential  value  unless  the  identity  of  the  person  described


Lxxxii.] Personal  Appearance  of  Communicators.  19

can  be  established  by  some  other  means.  Fortunately,
evidence  of  other  kinds  is  frequently  available,  and  personal
descriptions  in  themselves  rather  slight  and  superficial  are
sometimes  accompanied  by  allusions  to  characteristic  habits
or  to  bodily  infirmities,  which  would  not  be  generally
applicable,  but  are  recognised  by  the  sitters  as  apph'ing
to  some  particular  friend  or  relative.  I  have  given  one
instance  of  this  already  ;  another  occurred  at  a  sitting
on  January  31,  when  the  following  description  was  given  :

There's  a  lady  in  the  spirit  woiid  with  him — she  comes
to  you  too — and  a  gentleman  with  her.  Feda'U  try  to
describe  her.  The  age  about  60  to  65 — about  medium
build,  but  holds  herself  well — very  nice-shaped  face — rather
long-shaped,  towards  the  oval.  When  she  turns  sideways,
she's  got  a  nice  profile.  She's  got  a  photo  turned  side-
ways, taken  some  years  ago.  It's  old-fashioned.  She's
pale  rather,  but  she'd  had  a  nice  complexion,  but  had
lost  it  a  little  ;  the  chin  had  fallen  a  little  ;  the  nose
straight,  about  medium-size,  not  an  aquihne  nose,  more
straight  ;  the  eyebrows  brown,  the  eyelashes  brown  ;  her
hair — she's  showing  it  brown,  but  it  had  gone  grey  before
she  passed  over.  She'd  had  some  weak  condition  to  do
with  the  lower  joart  of  the  body  for  some  time  before  she
passed  over,  but  on  the  top  of  that  she  got  another
condition,  more  like  in  the  chest,  a  bit  to  the  left  side,
before  she  passed  over  ;  her  physical  strength  was  under-
mined, internally  she  was  getting  weaker,  but  she  wouldn't
give  in.

Concerning  this  description  the  sitter  comments  thus  :

This  my  mother  and  I  agree  is  a  good  description  of
my  grandmother.  She  was  however  seventy-two  years  old
when  she  died,  but  looked  younger.  She  had  been  very
beautiful  and  was  distinctly  vain  of  her  fine  profile.  Even
in  her  old  age  she  kept  a  little  trick  of  turning  her  head
so  as  to  bring  it  to  your  notice.  Her  hair  was  grey,  but
she  wore  a  brown  wig.  She  was  very  sensitive  on  the
subject  of  her  age.  I  had  a  dim  recollection  of  such  a
photograph  as  Feda  describes  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.
It  was  coloured,  and  the  artist  had  given  her  a  wonderful


20


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


complexion.  My  mother  says  of  it  :  At  first  I  felt  sure
she  had  never  had  a  photograph  taken  in  profile.  Then
I  remembered  that  she  did  have  one  taken  and  coloured,
with  gold  earrings  and  a  shawl  with  black  and  lavender
stripes.  It  was  not  good  and  I  put  it  out  of  sight  in
her  lifetime  and  have  never  seen  it  since  ;  she  however
liked  it.  I  forget  when  it  was  taken,  but  it  was  after
she  was  fifty.""  The  descrij^tion  of  her  health  at  the  time
she  died  is  very  good  and  she  "  would  not  give  up.'  In
fact,  she  did  not  believe  she  was  seriously  ill  and  feared
to  be  thought  old.  Her  death  was  sudden  and  unexpected
and  was  due  to  over-exertion  on  a  hot  day.

In  this  case,  not  only  is  Feda's  description  said  to  be
generally  applicable  to  the  sitter's  grandmother,  but  it  is
such  as  to  indicate  correctly  the  communicator's  character
as  well  as  her  personal  appearance  ;  the  emphasis  laid
upon  the  good  profile  and  the  photograph  in  which  it
appeared  to  advantage,  the  preference  for  brown  hair
and  the  determination  not  to  yield  to  physical  in-
firmities ^  are  all  characteristic  traits  which  considerably
enhance  the  evidential  value  of  the  description  taken  as  a
whole.

I  have  given  these  instances  to  illustrate  what  appear
to  be  the  strong  and  weak  points  of  descriptions  given
through  Mrs.  Leonard.  Before  I  pass  on  to  consider  other
kinds  of  evidence  I  will  discuss  very  briefly  some
theoretical  problems  which  these  descriptions  raise  con-
cerning the  source  from  which  is  derived  any  knowledge
(supernormally  acquired)  and  concerning  the  manner  in
which  this  knowledge  presents  itself  to  Mrs.  Leonard  in
trance.  There  has  been  some  discussion  of  this  matter
in  the  Journal,'^  and  three  theories  have  been  propounded,
according  to  one  of  which  the  explanation  is  to  be  found
in  telepathy  from  the  sitter,  according  to  another  in
telepathy from the communicator, and according to  a

1  The  evidential  value  of  this  last  point  is  weakened  by  the  fact  that
some  such  statement  is  very  frequently  made  concerning  old  or  elderly
communicators.

2  See  .Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVIII.,  pp.  187  ff.  and  213  ff.


Lxxxii.] Personal  Appearance  of  Comtminicators.


21


third  in  a  quasi-materialising  power  in  the  communicator,
who  unconsciously  recreates  a  semblance  of  his  body  as
it  existed  when  he  was  alive.  Now  the  first  hypothesis,
telepathy  from  the  sitter,  seems  to  break  down,  because,
as  has  been  pointed  out,  communicators  are  sometimes
well  described  and  subsequently  identified  whose  personal
appearance  was  quite  unknown  to  the  sitter ;  moreover,
there  is  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  of  other  kinds  to
show  that  telepathy  from  the  sitter  is  not  the  only  source
of  Mrs.  Leonard's  supernormal  knowledge  ;  why,  then,
should  we  suppose  that  as  regards  one  particular  kind  of
knowledge  she  is  limited  to  that  source  1

With  regard  to  the  materialisation  theory,  several
difficulties  present  themselves.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  by  whom
this  theory  has  been  put  forward  in  the  8.P.R.  Journal
(Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  213),  speaks  of  communicators  having
a  materialising  power  akin  to  that  which  we  possess  here,
by  which  we  build  up  our  own  bodies.  It  would  seem,
however,  as  if  communicators  can  not  only  materialise
their  own  bodies,  but  also  any  inanimate  objects  to
which  for  evidential  reasons  they  wish  to  call  Feda's
attention.  Feda  at  any  rate  makes  no  distinction  in  this
respect  between  persons  and  things.  According  to  her  own
account  she  sees  before  her  not  only  the  spirit  who  is
communicating  but  the  chair  in  which  he  used  to  sit,
or  the  stick  he  used  to  carry.  The  communicator,  she
says,  is  building  these  things  up  or  showing  them  to  her.
It  is  theoretically  possible  to  suppose  that  spirits  can
materialise  chairs  and  sticks,  but  that  power  is  surely
not  akin  to  the  power  we  now  possess  of  shaping  our
own  bodies.  To  materialise  a  chair  by  thinking  about  it
is  a  thing  we  cannot  do  at  all,  and  if  spirits  can  do  this,
the  analogy  between  their  powers  and  our  own  seems  to
break  down.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  that  the
chair  which  Feda  sees  is  only  an  externalised  mental
image,  why  should  we  seek  any  other  explanation  to
account  for  her  visions  of  people  ?

Then,  again,  we  have  to  account  for  the  fact  that  she
can  describe  living  people  as  well  as  those  who  have
died. For  example, at  a  sitting  in  February, 1918,  at


22


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


which  communications  from  a  young  man  were  received,
Feda  made  the  following  statement  :

F.  There's  a  gentleman  on  the  earth  plane  that  he  [the
communicator]  goes  to  see.  And  who,  he  thinks,  knows
he  goes  to  see  him.  More  an  elderly  gentleman,  not  old,
but  elderly,  just  past  middle  age.  Moustache  rather  a
faded  colour,  going  grey,  it"s  been  brown  ;  the  face  not
full,  thinnish  ;  bluey-grey  coloured  eyes,  rather  deep-set,
the  eyebrows  marked,  the  hair  thin  on  top  (touching
the  upper  part  of  the  temples  and  clearly  indicating  the
upper  psirt  of  the  forehead  as  what  was  meant)  ;  at
the  back  the  hair  is  all  right,  but  it's  getting  bare  on
the  temples.  He's  rather  tall,  pretty  straight,  leans  his
head  a  little  forward,  holds  himself  well  when  he's
thinking  of  it,  stoops  a  little  sometimes.  This  is  someone
on  the  earth  plane,  the  young  man  goes  to  see  him  on
the  earth  plane.

On  this  the  sitter  notes  :  "  An  excellent  description  of
the  communicator's  father."

It  happens  that  I  am  myself  acquainted  with  the  man
who  is  here  described,  and  certainly  the  description  strikes
me  as  a  good  pen-sketch,  above  Feda's  average.  The
anonymity  of  the  sitter  was  carefully  preserved,  and  there
is  no  reason  to  think  that  Mrs.  Leonard  can  have  had
any  normal  knowledge  concerning  her  family  circumstances
and  connexions.

It  is  surely  difficult  to  suppose  in  such  a  case  that  the
man  who  is  described  was  taking  any  part  in  the  sitting,
that  he  was  materialising  himself.  The  description  seems
to  fall  into  the  same  class  as  the  descriptions  of  inanimate
objects  to  which  I  have  referred  ;  the  agent  would  seem
to  be  the  purporting  communicator  who  is  seeking  to
establish  his  own  identity.  I  put  forward  these  objections
to  the  materialisation  theory  briefly  and  tentatively  for
the  consideration  of  my  readers.  For  my  own  part,  I  am
inclined  to  adopt  as  a  working  hypothesis  the  theory  that
the  appearances  which  Feda  describes  are  more  or  less
externalised  mental  images  telepathically  induced,  but
deriving, in  some  cases  at  any  rate,  from other  sources


Lxxxii.]  Symptoms  associated  with  Comm  unicator  s  Death.  23

than  the  mind  of  the  sitter,  perhaps  from  the  mind  of
the  ostensible  communicator.


§  II. Circumstances  and  Physical  Symptoms  associated
WITH  A  Communicator's  Death.

After  describing  a  communicator's  personal  appearance
Feda  will  often  go  on  to  give  some  account  of  what  she
calls  the  passing-over  conditions."  At  a  first  sitting
there  is  not  usually  any  attempt  at  a  detailed  diagnosis  ;
the  circumstances  of  the  death  or  the  physical  symptoms
preceding  it  are  described  only  in  general  terms.  In  the
case  of  communicators  who  have  died  in  the  war  Feda
almost  invariably  asserts  that  their  death  has  been  speedy,
and  here  again  we  can  probably  trace  a  tendency  to
a  priori  reasoning  and  a  desire  to  comfort  the  sitter.
I  do  not  know  what  the  exact  statistics  may  be,  but
I  imagine  that  of  those  who  have  died  in  the  war  the
majority  have  died  at  least  within  a  few  hours  of  being
wounded,  and  Feda  usually  follows  her  assertion  that
the  death  was  "  sudden  "  or  that  the  communicator  died
"  rather  quickly  "  by  an  assurance  that  he  did  not  feel
any  pain.  Doubtless  sitters  have  often  questioned  her  as
to  whether  the  communicator  suffered  much,  with  a
strong  hope  of  obtaining  an  answer  in  the  negative.

In  the  case  of  communicators  who  have  presumably
died  natural  deaths,  some  attempt  is  usually  made  to
locate  the  bodily  ailment  from  which  they  suffered  ;  for
example,  Feda  will  say  that  it  was  connected  with  the
throat  or  with  the  heart,  that  there  was  some  pain  in  the
region  of  the  kidneys,  and  so  forth.  An  instance  has
already  been  given  above  in  which  the  physical  condition
of  a  communicator  during  the  last  years  of  her  life  was
correctly  indicated  (see  p.  19)  ;  another  instance  occurred
at  a  sitting  on  February  25,  1918.  Feda  was  speaking  of
an  '■  elderly  lady  "  whom  the  communicator  thought  to
be  his  mother,  and  remarked  :

This lady didn't pass over suddenly like the  young
man. Her  passing  over,  when  it  carae,  was  pretty  peaceful,


24


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


but  she'd  been  ailing  for  some  time.  There  was  some
poor  condition  in  the  blood,  something  internal.  She's
not  very  jjale,  but  the  condition  of  the  blood  was  not
good  for  some  time,  not  clotted,  stagnated  somehow.
Feda  should  think  the  legs  or  feet  had  felt  it.  She  pats
herself  on  the  legs.

Upon  this  the  sitter  comments  thus  :

My  mother  had  a  long  illness,  but  died  suddenly  at  the
last.  She  died  from  tubercular  disease,  which  developed
at  the  knee  joint,  and  before  her  death  her  leg  was
amputated.

The  strength  of  the  evidence  in  this  case  lies  in  the
fact  that  Feda  rarely  locates  ailments  of  any  kind  in
the  legs,  and  they  are  not  a  frequent  seat  of  fatal  disease.
The  incident,  therefore,  is  not  easily  explicable  by  chance-
coincidence.

§111. Names  and  Initials.

At  almost  every  sitting  a  considerable  number  of  letters
of  the  alphabet  are  given,  said  to  be  the  initial  letters  of
names,  either  of  persons  or  j^laces  connected  with  the
communicator.  Sometimes  these  letters  are  spoken  by
Feda,  who  represents  herself  as  repeating  what  the  com-
municator has  said  to  her,  sometimes  they  are  drawn  in
the  air,  or  on  the  sitter's  hand,  and  have  to  be  inter-
preted by  the  sitter  or  the  recorder.  This  second  method
is  not  under  any  circumstances  a  very  satisfactory  one,
since  there  is  often  considerable  difficulty  in  correctly
interpreting  Feda's  drawing  ;  with  inexperienced  and
perhaps  indiscreet  sitters  it  is  decidedly  unsatisfactory.
It  will  inevitably  hajjpen  that  they  sometimes  interpret
as  a  letter  which  they  know  to  be  relevant  a  scrawl
which  in  the  eyes  of  the  ignorant  and  therefore  unpre-
judiced recorder  is  not  clearly  decipherable.  Feda  herself
is  quite  aware  of  this  danger,  and  I  have  heard  her  ask
a  sitter  not  to  interpret  her  drawings,  but  to  let  her
interpret  them herself  and name the letter  which  they


LXXXII.]


Names  and  Initials.


25


are  intended  to  represent.  This  she  will  usually  do,  if
given  time.

At  a  good  sitting  it  will  generally  be  found  that  only
a  few  initials  are  given,  of  which  most,  if  not  all,  can  be
interpreted  by  the  sitter  as  representing  relevant  names.
But  even  at  its  best  this  particular  kind  of  evidence
cannot  carry  much  weight  ;  too  much  is  left  to  inter-
pretation, and  too  much  scoj^e  given  for  chance-coincidence.
When,  for  example,  a  communicator  is  said  to  be  "  build-
ing up  "  a  letter  which  either  stands  for  his  own  name
or  the  name  of  someone  closely  connected  with  him,  or
might  even  stand  for  a  place  with  which  he  was  closely
associated,  it  is  as  likely  as  not  that  some  name  fulfilling
one  or  other  of  these  conditions,  and  having  the  given
initial,  could  be  found  in  the  circumstances  of  almost  any
communicator.  At  bad  sittings,  when  it  seems  as  though
little  or  no  supernormal  knowledge  of  any  kind  can  be
obtained,  Feda  is  apt  to  resort  largely  to  this  giving  of
initials,  showering  them  out  apparently  in  the  hope  that
one  or  two  will  hit  the  mark  and  perhaps  afford  her  a
point  de  repere  from  which  to  proceed  to  something  more
distinctive.

The  giving  of  names,  especially  of  surnames  or  of  rare
Christian  names  is  a  far  more  satisfactory  form  of
evidence,  and  some  communicators  appear  to  have,  or
at  any  rate  to  acquire  with  practice,  a  considerable
facility  in  giving  names  ;  but  it  is  rather  unusual  for  any
names  beyond  the  more  ordinary  Christian  names  to  be
given  at  a  first  sitting.  There  is,  however,  one  case  in
the  period  under  review  in  which  a  quite  uncommon
name  was  correctly  given  to  a  new  and  anonymous
sitter.  This  incident  occurred  in  a  sitting  which  was
remarkable  in  some  other  respects  also.  But  is  not
further  discussed  in  this  report.  An  elderly  man  was
purporting  to  communicate,  and  after  a  good  description
of  him  had  been  given  and  other  relevant  statements
made,  Feda  observed  :

Feda. He's trying  to  say  a  name,  it's a  name more  like
Moison  or  Morrison.


26


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Sitter. Like  Morris  ?

F.  Yes, Morrison. [SoUo voce  : Mois, Morris.) It's  not

quite  as  long  as  Morrison.  Mois — Morris — Morris.
[Feda  begins  drawing  in  the  air,  and  draws  the
following  letters  m.  u.  r.  k.  o  u  g.]  It's  a  funny
name  !  Even  now  Feda  can't  say  it  ;  it's  something
he  thought  you  would  recognise.

Sitter. I  do,  and  it's  very  good.

The  sitter  identified  the  purporting  communicator  as  her
uncle,  whose  Christian  name  was  Murrough.  It  will  be
seen  that  the  name  was  correctly  given  with  the  exception
of  the  final  H,  and  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  letters
drawn  by  Feda  were  on  this  occasion  interpreted  by  the
recorder  to  whom  the  relevance  of  the  name  Murrough
was  not  known.

The  difficulty  that  communicators  apparently  find  in
giving  their  own  or  their  friends'  names  is  often  adversely
commented  upon  by  sceptics.  Is  it  reasonable  to  suppose,
they  say,  that  nearly  all  those  who  communicate  have
forgotten  an  item  of  knowledge  so  familiar  to  them  as
their  own  names  ?  But  this  criticism  overlooks  the  fact
that  we  are  not  warranted  in  assuming  that  a  com-
municator has  forgotten  a  thing  because  he  cannot  com-
municate it,  or,  in  other  words,  because  the  necessary
brain  mechanism  whether  for  sjieech  or  for  writing  is  not
set  in  motion.  Whatever  the  ultimate  source  of  a  com-
munication may  be,  there  is  no  question  but  that  the
brain  of  the  automatist  is  used  in  recording  it,  and  it
appears  a  priori  probable  that  some  unusually  strong
stimulus  might  be  necessary  before  an  automatist  would
give  utterance  to  a  name  with  which  she  was  quite
unfamiliar,  a  name  with  which  she  had  no  ready-made
associations  tending  to  evoke  it.  Some  support  is  lent  to
this  suggestion  by  the  fact  that  upon  the  only  two
occasions  during  the  period  under  review  when  the  surname
of  an  anonymous  sitter  was  given  by  Feda  as  a  name
closely  connected  with  the  supposed  communicator,  it  can  be
proved  that  Mrs.  Leonard  had  some  previous  knowledge
of  these names, and had associated  them in her  mind


Lxxxn.]  Names  and  Initials.  27

with  possible  sitters.  The  circumstances  were  as  follows  :
each  of  the  two  sitters  had  had  some  correspondence  with
Mrs.  Leonard  under  their  own  names  with  a  view  to
obtaining  an  appointment,  which,  however,  Mrs.  Leonard
had  been  unable  to  give  them.  Subsequently  they  got
into  touch  with  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  and
obtained  a  sitting  through  the  Leonard  Committee.  They
had  never  seen  Mrs.  Leonard,  and  so  far  as  I  have  been
able  to  ascertain  she  had  no  normally  acquired  knowledge
which  would  lead  her  to  conclude  that  the  anonymous
sitters  whom  the  S.P.R.  sent  to  her  on  two  particular
days  were  a  particular  two  out  of  the  large  number  of
people  who  had  recently  written  to  her  for  appointments
and  failed  to  get  them.  At  the  same  time  it  seems
likely  that  Mrs.  Leonard's  previous  acquaintance  with  their
names  was  a  relevant  factor  in  the  case  ;  Feda,  as  she
herself  sometimes  expresses  it,  found  the  names  "  ready  in
the  medium's  brain."


§IV. Various  Topics  which  recur  frequently.

There  are  several  other  topics  to  which  allusion  is
frequently  made  at  sittings,  such  as  articles  belonging  to,
or  closely  associated  with,  the  supposed  communicator,
anniversaries  of  important  events  in  the  lives  either  of  the
communicator  or  of  the  sitter.  I  have  not  thought  it  worth
while  to  discuss  any  such  incidents  in  detail  here,  but  in
the  appendix  to  this  paper  I  have  included  a  considerable
number  of  extracts  from  sittings  grouped  under  various
headings,  which,  in  conjunction  with  the  information
supplied  by  sitters  as  to  the  correctness  or  incorrectness
of  the  statements  made,  will  enable  readers  to  form  their
own  conclusions  as  to  the  value  and  significance  of  the
evidence  thus  obtained.  Briefly,  it  may  be  said  that,
whilst  the  evidential  value  of  these  recurring  topics  is
inevitably  diminished  by  the  mere  fact  of  their  recurrence,
they  do-  occasionally  form,  as  suggested  above,  p.  10,  a
point  de  repere  for  really  good  evidence  of  knowledge  super-
normally  acquired.


28


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


■  ■■  §V. A  Successful  First  Sitting.

I  now  propose  to  give  an  account  in  some  detail  of  a
sitting  which  I  consider  to  be  on  the  whole  the  best  first
sitting  obtained  during  the  period  under  review.  The
sitter  on  this  occasion  was  Mrs.  Montagu  and  I  acted  as
recorder.  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  lives  in  Devon,  sat  anony-
mously, and  except  the  immediate  members  of  her  family
and  the  members  of  the  Leonard  Committee  no  one  knew
anything  of  her  appointment.  The  sitting  took  place  on
March  5,  1918.

After  the  usual  whispers  which  herald  Feda's  arrival,  on
this  occasion  rather  prolonged,  Feda  opened  the  conversa-
tion thus  :

F.  Do  you  know  any  one  missing  ?

Mks.  M. Yes.  •
F.  A  condition  of  some  one  on  the  earth  plane  wants  to

get  in  touch,  some  one  missing  in  the  war.  On
the  earth  plane,  not  in  the  spirit  world.  There's  a
lot  of  spirits  round  helping  him.  Quite  a  young
man  comes  who  has  passed  over,  tall,  rather
slight,  not  broad,  on  the  narrow  side,  holds  himself
straight,  not  fat  at  all,  the  face  rather  thin,  rather
towards  the  oval,  the  chin  too  square  to  be  called
oval — the  nose  shows  the  bridge  a  bit,  a  little
longer  than  yours — the  lips  about  medium — the
eyes  blue  or  bluey  grey — the  eyebrows  brown,  not
very  broadly  marked,  a  little  arched — the  hair
brown,  short — the  eyes  not  quite  right,  he  says
[i.e.  the  description  of  them] — the  hair  cut  short,
smooth,  neat  and  tidily  brushed  flat,  away  from
the  face — it  looks  straight,  but  he  brushes  it
straight — a  fine-looking  forehead.  He  passed  over
in  the  war,  not  quite  instantly.  He  was  hurt  in
two  or  more  jDarts  of  the  body,  chiefly  in  the  head.
It  kept  him  from  feeling  pain  !  He  shows  a
picture  of  a  man  he's  trying  to  hel]!  for  you  on
the  earth  plane. He  shows  a  letter  [Feda  draws].

Mrs.  M.  p.


LXXXII.]


A  Successful  First  Sitting.


29


F.  An  initial  Feda  thinks. We're  all  helping,  he  says,

as  much  as  we  can.

Mrs.  Montagu's  elder  son,  who  was  in  the  flying  corps,
was  reported  missing  after  a  raid  over  Hudova  on  the
Bulgarian  front.  She  comments  thus  on  the  extract  given
above  :

I  heard  definitely  that  my  son  had  been  killed  about
three  weeks  before  my  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  but
when  the  sitting  opened  so  suddenly  with  the  question  :
■■  Do  you  know  any  one  missing  ?  — I  was  so  startled
that  I  replied  without  jDausing  to  reflect.  I  suppose  it
fitted  in  with  my  own  unconscious  hopes.  I  had  waited
and  hoped  for  news  for  three  months.

The  description  of  the  first  spirit  described  by  Feda
applies  very  well  to  my  youngest  son,  who  was  killed  at
the  battle  of  Neuve  Chapelle,  March  10,  1915,  except
that  his  eyebrows  ivere  strongly  marked.  He  was  well-
built,  but  his  height  (nearty  six  foot  two)  made  him
appear  slighter  than  he  really  was.

He  was  hit  in  the  head,  and  lived  only  a  few  minutes,
but  was  quite  conscious,  according  to  the  account  of  his
soldier-servant  who  stayed  by  him.

Commenting  on  the  initial  P,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  that
the  name  of  her  missing  son  was  Paul.

Feda  then  stated  that  some  one  in  the  spirit  world
was  helping  who  gave  a  letter  J  ;  this  person  Mrs.  Mon-
tagu says  might  be  her  aunt  Julia,  who  was  much
attached  to  her.

Next  Feda  described  two  other  young  men  who  were
said  to  be  helping  the  missing  one."  These  Mrs.  Mon-
tagu has  not  been  able  to  identify.  "  My  son,"  she  says,
"  had  hosts  of  friends  in  England  and  Australia,  and  since
his  death  was  known  I  have  received  letters  from  people
I  never  even  heard  of  lamenting  his  loss."

Feda  then  continued  :

There's  one  spirit  of  a  much  older  gentleman,  past
middle  age,  on  the  elderly  side.  He's  tall,  has  been  well-
built,  but  stoops  slightly. He's  got  hair  on  his  face,  'cause


^0  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  ■  [part

Feda  can't  see  the  mouth  distinctly.  A  greyish  moustache
shading  the  mouth— the  cheek-bones  showing  a  little.  The
nose  shows  the  bridge  a  little,  then  its  rather  straight.
The  eyes  deepset,  on  the  dark  side,  rather  grey,  but
difficult  to  see— the  eyebrows  grey,  arched  a  little,  a
darldsh  brown  before  they  were  grey— a  fine  forehead—
the  hair  thin  on  the  top,  grey  at  the  sides  and  back.
He's  looking  after  the  missing  man.  This  older  gentleman
passed  over  before  the  others.  Before  he  passed  over,  he
used  to  suffer  from  his  heart,  not  always,  now  and  again,
and  some  pain  at  the  lower  side  of  his  back.  Don't  get
a  name  and  initial,  but  he's  been  trying  to  help  you.
You've  had  so  much  trouble,  not  only  sorrow,  but  sus-
pense, more  than  usual.  He  says  something  about  two
children,  not  sure  if  he  means  in  the  spirit  world  or  on
the  earth  plane— think  on  the  earth  plane.

Mrs.  Montagu  comments  thus  :

The  description  aj^plies  to  my  father.  He  suffered  from
his  heart  now  and  then  and  also  from  kidney  trouble.
By  the  "  two  children  "  my  two  daughters  may  be  indi-
cated ; both  are  living.

Late  in  the  sitting  Feda  returns  to  the  subject  of  the
"  elderly  gentleman,"  thus  :

The  elderly  gentleman  seems  to  come  to  you  and
to  another  lady  on  the  earth  plane.  He  keeps  on
saying  about  two  children,  as  if  you'd  understand.
They  may  not  be  little  children,  but  he  speaks  of
them  as  children.

Feda thinks this  gentleman had  lived a  good

part  of  the  time  in  the  country — yes,  he  had  a

good  distance  away  from  London.  At  any  rate  a
good  part  of  his  earth  life.  He's  related  to  you.
He's  very  fond  of  you  and  often  comes  to  you.
He's  speaking  of  M  too.  A  lady  in  the  spirit
world  who's  with  him,  a  lady  related  to  you  called
M  and  related  to— and  another  lady  [Feda  draws]  E,
a  lady called  E and a lady called M and  he,


Lxxxn.]


A  Successful  First  Sitting.


31


closely  connected  together,  and  a  large  letter  like
that. [Feda  draws.]

Mes.  M.  a.

F.  They're  all  connected  together.

Upon  these  initials,  M,  E  and  A,  Mrs.  Montagu  notes
that  "  they  might  mean  my  father's  sisters  Margretta,
Emma  and  Annie.  There  was  a  fourth  sister  called
Elizabeth." Feda  continues  :

When  this  gentleman  was  on  the  earth  plane  he  was  an
awful  good  man.  He  was  rather  what  you  call  orthodox —
that's  the  word.  He  didn't  think  he  was,  but  he  was.
Feda  don't  think  he'd  have  liked  spiritualism  very  much.
He'd  a  very  clever  brain.  He  had  a  good  many  books
round  him,  a  room  almost  full  of  books  round  him,  more
in  the  earlier  part  of  his  earth  life.

Mrs.  Montagu  comments  thus  :

He  was  distinctly  orthodox,  but  prided  himself  on  his
liberal  religious  views,  because  he  chsbelieved  in  eternal
punishment  !  Being  a  Scotsman  he  was  brought  up  a
Presbyterian.  His  little  study  at  Bideford  was  lined  with
books,  but  he  was  middle  aged  then.

Feda  continues  :

F.  {s.v.  What  ? Yes,  wait  a  minute. Bridge,  bridge,  is

it  a  place  or  a  name  ?)  He  gives  Feda  a  name
like  Bridge,  a  place  he"s  lived  at  Feda  thinks,  or
an  important  bridge  there. Do  you  remember  ?

Mrs.  M.  Yes.

F.  Like  a  j)lace  you'd  remember. It  seems  as  if  he'd  got

somewhere  outside  the  town,  as  if  he'd  live  outside
the  real  town.  .  .  .  The  ground  about  there  isn't
level  like  here,  it's  more  hilly.  Outside  the  town
it's  very  hilly.  You  can  see  hills  in  the  distance,
like  big  fat  mounds  of  hills.

Mrs.  M.  Yes.

F.  When  you  get  more  outside,  you  see  the  big  mounds.

But  even  the  streets  is  not  very  level.  There's  one
street  lopsided. The  houses  on  the  right-hand  side


32


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


is  lower,  and  the  houses  on  the  left — there  isn't
much  on  the  left,  but  they's  like  higher.  To  get
to  one  you'd  have  to  go  up  steps  to  it.  The
gentleman  had  to  go  to  this  street.  Feda  can  see
this  uneven  street.  A  little  terrace  of  houses  and
between  this  terrace  and  another  house  a  little
alley  cutted  through.  When  he  passed  up  there,
he  used  to  see  it  on  one  side.

Mrs.  Montagu  comments  thus  :

Bideford  [where  her  father  lived]  has  an  old  and  famous
bridge.  We  lived  about  half  a  mile  outside  the  town.  A
very  good  description  of  the  town  and  the  hilly  country
all  round  it.

In  the  midst  of  her  description  of  the  place  where  the
"  elderly  gentleman  "  lived,  Feda  made  two  interpolations.
Immediately  after  the  reference  to  a  bridge,  she  said  :

F.  (whispering).  Mow,  Molesey,  Mouston.  He's  giving  Feda  a
name  sounds  like  Molesey,  a  name  much  connected
with  this  place  that  he  went  into.  Feda  thinks
you'll  remember  after.

Mrs.  M. I  remember  now. The  name's  not  quite  right.

F.  That's  the  nearest  Feda  can  get.

This  reference,  Mrs.  Montagu  interprets  as

probably  Captain  Molesworth,  usually  called  "  Old
Moley  "  by  his  friends.  He  was  greatly  interested  in
Bideford  and  Westward  Ho  !  and  their  development,  and
was  always  starting  schemes  for  building  and  for  bringing
people  into  the  neighbourhood.

Feda  then  gave  an  account  of  another  old  resident  in
the  town  whose  name  began  with  B  and  whom  the  com-
municator met  at  a  chemist's  shop,  which  was  described
in  some  detail.  None  of  this  conveys  anything  to  Mrs.
Montagu.

After  the  reference  to  the  "  uneven  street  "  and  "  the
little  alley,"  Feda  continued  :

He  also  knew  some  one  there  like  Grimshaw —
sounds like that — not quite  right. Some one  he


LXXXII.]


A  Successful  First  Sitting.


33


knew  there  too  he's  met  in  the  spirit  world.  Quite
an  old  gentleman  with  grey  hair  longer  than  people
wear  now  and  a  grey  moustache  drooping.  A
strong  shaped  nose,  Roman  shape,  broad  strongly
marked  eyebrows — the  hair  a  little  long  at  the
sides,  tiifty  at  the  sides,  almost  white — white  more
than  grey — a  broad  forehead,  rather  bald  on  top —
pretty  tall,  but  not  very  ui^right  towards  the  end
of  his  life.  He  used  to  walk  about  this  place,  his
head  a  bit  forward,  his  head  on  his  chest.  Some
one  your  gentleman  often  talked  to  there.  He  was
a  very  good  gentleman.  He  passed  over  some  time
ago.  He  metted  your  spirit  gentleman,  and  they
have  long  talks.  They  used  to  have  talks  on  the
earth  plane,  but  they  didn't  always  agree.  They'd
be  like  friendly,  but  sometimes  they  didn't  agree
about  it.  {S.v.  Ask  her  if  she  remembers.)  He
wants  to  know  if  you  remember  the  old  gentle-
man.

Mrs.  M. Yes,  I  do.

F.  It  made  him  laugh,  because  when  that  old  gentleman

passed  over,  he"d  expected  such  a  different  place.
It  was  so  interesting  taking  him  round  and  showing
him  all  the  spirit  places.  He  couldn't  help  being
relieved  when  he  saw  it,  because  in  spite  of  his
theories  and  other  things  about  his  earth  life — like
^  his  profession — he  was  a  materiahst.

Mrs.  M. I  don't  think  that.

F.  He  liked  material  things,  his  chairs,  his  tables,  things

like  that.  It  was  like  a  contradiction.  When  he
passed  over,  he  was  surprised  to  find  soUd  things.
They  seem  to  think  this  rather  a  joke.  Spite  of
all  his  theories  he  had  a  good  hold  on  to  the
material.  He  was  a  man  what  liked  to  imderstand
things.  He  didn't  Avant  things  to  be  intangible.
P'raps  you  can  understand  it  that  way.

Mhs.  M. Yes. Is  he  helping  too  ?

F.  Yes. He  was  a  man  with  a  firm  mind  and  strength

of  purpose. It  was  that  kept  him  here  as  long  as
he  did. Can  you  remember  if  he  had  anything  any
o


34


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


one  might  call  a  seizure  ? That's  not  quite  right,

but  the  nearest  word  they  can  get.
Mrs.  M. Yes,  I  think  you  might  call  it  that.
F.  Like a sudden collapse. Then he picked up,  but

didn't  get  quite  right. His  passing  over  was  quite

peaceful.

The  spirit  comes  with  them  of  a  lady,  an  elderly
lady,  a  kind  sweet  face,  a  little  serious-looking.
People  might  think  she  was  severe,  but  when  you
look  a  second  time,  you're  sorry  you  thought  that
about  her.  Not  tall,  about  medium  height —
spreaded  out  in  figure,  like  elderly  people  get
without  being  fat — her  face  had  got  a  little  bit
haggard,  a  little  bit  drawn  round  the  mouth —
towards  the  end  of  the  earth  part  the  chin  sagged
a  little.  On  the  dark  side — it's  hard  to  tell,
because  her  hair  had  been  getting  grey.  It  looks
like  brown  hair,  no  fringes  on  her  forehead,  the
hair  brushed  back  rather  straight.  It  fell  apart  a
little  in  the  middle.  There's  a  photo  shows  the
little  parting,  taken  some  time  before  she  passed
over.  A  little  pale  in  face.  She'd  not  been  well
for  two  or  three  years  before  she  passed  over,  not
been  strong,  like  weak  internally  all  through  her,
not  been  able  to  digest  her  food  properly.  She
had  suffered  from  her  nerves  too,  but  she'd  tried
to  keep  them  under  control.  {8. v.  What  do  you
say  ?  What  is  it  ?  Not  getting  mixed  up  with
him  ?  Twitch,  twitch.)  Not  sure  if  she  means
herself  or  the  sj^irit  gentleman.  She  keeps  saying
about  a  twitching,  not  always,  for  a  time,  like  not
keeping  the  head  or  neck  quite  steady.  She  says
it  wasn't  always,  like  a  temporary  twitching,  a
nervous  movement.

She  seems  to  be  with  the  spirit  gentleman,  the
first  elderly  one,  not  the  one  with  the  beard.

Concerning  the  above  extract,  Mrs.  Montagu  notes  :

These  seem  to  me  to  be  an  elderly  couple  whom  I  knew
from  childhood  and  of  whom  I  was  very  fond. I  have


LXXXII.]


A  Successf  ul  First  Sitting.


35


been  unable  to  find  out  whether  the  details  of  her  last
illness  were  correct.

I  now  return  to  an  earlier  part  of  the  sitting  to  take  up
the  thread  of  the  two  young  men,  the  one  said  to  be  dead
and  the  other  alive,  but  missing.

F.  The  one  who's  missing  this  is  again — has  been  reported
being  killed.  They  say  he  was  wounded  but  not  very
seriously  they  think.  Some  one  should  have  brought
news  lately.  If  you  haven't  seen  some  one  recently  they
must  be  on  the  way,  a  man,  they  give  a  letter  B.  This
is  a  man  who  should  be  able  to  give  news,  because  he
was  with  him  ujj  to  the  time  he  was  lost — not  just  when
he  was  lost,  but  a  very  short  time  before  that,  saw  him
tumbling,  tumbling  over  something,  he  says.  That  was
the  last  they  saw  of  him.

And  again  later  :

F.  (whispering).  Gar — Garson,  Feda  don't  know  who  this  is.
It  sounds  like  Garstin,  Garland,  some  name  like  that,
hasn't  passed  over  either.  He  was  missing  about  the
same  time. Garside  it  might  be — hasn't  passed  over.

Mrs.  Montagu  comments  thus  :

This  was  unintelligible  to  me  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,
but  when  I  showed  the  notes  to  my  youngest  daughter
on  March  14  she  brought  me  two  letters  from  a  Captain
Burgen,  one  received  by  her  on  January  30,  in  which  he
said  that  he  had  heard  that  Gubbin,  the  man  vho  was
brought  down  at  the  same  time  as  Paul  had  been  sub-
sequently reported  a  prisoner,  and  he  wondered  if  Paul
had  also  been  taken  prisoner.

In  the  second  letter,  dated  February  2,  191S,  he  says  :
"  Both  machines  were  seen  to  come  down  from  about
11,000  ft.  Everyone  thought  both  were  killed."  But  later
Gubbin  was  reported  ''  prisoner  of  war,"  and  Paul  "sup-
po.sed  to  be  killed."'

Just  after  the  reference  to  the  man  B,  who  is  said  to
have  news  of  the  "  missing  one,"  Feda  remarked  :


36


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


F.  Did  you  know  the  one  who's  missing  got  cut  off

from  others  ?
Mrs.  M.  Yes.

F.  He got cut off. It wasn't like with  others  in  a

group.  The  others  got  scattered,  had  to  get  back.
They  couldn't  follow  to  find  out  what  had  hap-
pened.

Seem  to  Feda  like  a  hilly  place  they  were  over
at  the  time.  They  give  Peda  a  letter  L.  Must
have  been  near  a  place  called  L  at  the  time  it
happened.  .  .  .

.  .  .  {8.V. Wait a bit. Flying. Who's flying  ?
Wait  a  bit. Flying. Do  you  mean  in  a  machine  ?
They  were  trying  to  tell  Feda  about  flying  in  a
machine.)
Mrs.  M.  Yes.

P.  There's  such  a  lot  and  sometimes  they  all  speak  at

once.  Because  of  the  one  that's  missing  they  comes
round.  {S.v.  Flying  in  a  machine.  That's  how  it
happened.  Engine  trouble  as  well.)  Don't  know
what  it  means.  They  keep  saying  "  engine  trouble
as  well."

Mrs.  M.  Yes.

F.  [S.v. Engine trouble.) Feda thinks he means  two

things  were  wrong.  {S.v.  Engine  trouble  as  well.)
It's  the  first  young  man  gives  this,  but  Feda's  not
sure  who  he's  giving  it  about.

And  later,  after  an  allusion  to  the  missing  man  :
Mrs.  M. Where  is  he  ?

F.  (S.v. Can you see where he is  ?) That's  funny.

They  say  he  was  in  a  church.  [S.v.  In  a  church.
That  is  funny.  In  a  church.  In  a  church  ?)
That's  quite  right,  they  say,  he  was  in  a  church.
Funny  thing,  he  seems  to  have  been  alone  in  a
church.  Feda  must  be  careful.  Like  he  was  in  it,
but  alone,  or  if  there  was  any  one  else,  they
didn't  count.  He  was  in  a  church  they  keep
saying.  (S.v.  He  was  in  a  church  ?)  Mar —  (S.v.
Mar — Is that connected  with  the church  ?)  In


Lxxxii.]  A  Successful  First  Sitting.  37


connection  with  the  church  they're  trying  to  give
Feda  a  name  starts  M  A.  Either  the  church,  or
the  place  the  church  is  in.  Must  be  in  connection
with  the  church,  and  a  letter  L  again.  He's  not
near  a  place  called  L  now,  but  he  was  near  it.

Comment  by  Mrs.  Montagu  :

The  statement  that  the  one  who's  missing  got  cut  ofif
from  the  others.  .  .  .  The  others  got  scattered  .  .  .  they
could  not  follow  to  find  out  what  had  happened — is
correct.

On  the  7th  September,  1917,  my  son  Paul  had  an
extraordinary  and  almost  incredible  escape  from  death,
owing  to  engine  trouble.

The  evening  before  my  son  went  over  to  Hudova  on
his  last  raid,  he  dined  in  a  church  with  several  other
officers.

Earlier  in  the  sitting  the  following  passage  occurred  :

F.  Feda  feels  a  relation  of  that  missing  one  has  passed

over.  {S.v.  Wait  a  minute.  A  man.  Wait  a
minute.)  Before  he  was  missing,  just  before,  a
man  who  passed  over  not  Idig  before.  A  relation
must  have  passed  over,  a  man  Feda  thinks,  before.
It's  through  these  people  they're  tracing  him.  You
know  they've  tried  to  tell  you  this  before.

Mes.  M. No,  I've  got  nothing  from  the  spirit  world.

F.  Had  they  tried  to  impress  some  one  else  to  tell  you  ?

Mrs.  M.  Yes,  a  sister  of  mine  will  not  believe  the  official
news.

F.  It  seems  to  Feda  it's  no  wonder  she  won't  beUeve,

because  they've  tried  to  impress  her.  They  keep
on  saying  "reported  killed."  Do  you  know  who
they've  been  going  to  see  on  the  earth  plane
called  M  ?

Mrs.  M. I  can't  think  at  the  moment.

F.  (S.v.  Is  it  a  lady  ?) Feda  thinks  a  lady, but  not

sure. They  keep  saying  "M  will  help."

This  first  spirit's  very  happy  in  the  spirit  world,
but  trying  to  help  in  the  other  case,  because  there


38


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


was  a  little  uncertainty  about  his  passing  over  for
a  time.  His  uncertainty  was  cleared  up  fairly
soon,  but  the  little  bit  made  him  terribly  worried
for  fear  some  one  should  be  anxious  about  it.
Feda  thinks  one  of  the  spirits  should  be  called  R,
like  that  [F.  draws  an  R.]  {S.v.  Going  up — can't
have  been  in  winter  then — rather  a  hot  climate —
this  is  March.)  The  spirit  says  something  about  a
hotter  climate,  he  seems  to  have  been  very  hot.
Feda  thinks  he  means  when  he  was  on  the  earth
plane,  but  Feda  didn't  want  to  get  it  mixed  up
with  the  one  who's  missing.

And  a  little  later  :

J''.  {S.v. Wait a  bit. Margery. Wait  a  bit.)  Keep  on

getting  a  name,  not  sure  if  it's  Margery  or  Mar-
garet. Not  the  letter  M  Feda  got  before.  There's
some  one  on  the  earth  plane,  rather  a  young
person,  whom  one  of  these  young  men  goes  to  see.
Feda's  almost  sure  it's  Margery.  You  may  hear
about  this  after.

Mrs.  M. Is  that  the  first  young  man  ?

F.  Feda  thinks  so. He  goes  to  see  Margery  and  tries  to

help  her  very  much.  .  .  .

Upon  this  Mrs.  Montagu  comments  that  the  relation
who  has  passed  over  may  be  her  younger  son  to  whom
she  referred  the  description  given  at  the  beginning  of  the
sitting.  The  lady  on  the  earth  plane  called  M  whom  the
communicators  go  to  see  may  be  Mrs.  Montagu's  sister
Marion,  to  whom  reference  had  just  been  made,  but
without  mentioning  her  name.  As  to  the  reference  to  a
hot  climate,  Mrs.  Montagu  notes  :

The  brother  who  was  killed  was  in  Bermuda  with  his
regiment  during  the  summer  of  1914,  before  the  war
broke  out.

The  statement  that  there  was  ever  any  uncertainty  as
to  the  fate  of  the  son  who  was  reported  killed  is  incorrect,
nor  does  the  initial  R  mean  anything  to  Mrs.  Montagu.


Lxxxii.]  A  Successful  First  Sitting.  39

Margery,  she  thinks,  was  "  my  niece  Margery  of  whom  my
youngest  son  was  very  fond."

The  names  Stanley  or  Stanton,  Bell  and  Williams  or
Williamson  were  also  given  as  being  those  of  spirits  who
had  known  the  missing  man  and  were  now  helping  him.
None  of  these  names  convey  anything  to  Mrs.  Montagu.

There  was  also  an  allusion  to  the  spirit  of  a  girl  who
"  passed  over  very  young  "  ;  she  was  said  to  be  united  to
Mrs.  Montagu  by  a  blood-tie,  and  to  be  helping  also  on
that  account.  Mrs.  Montagu  was  not  able  to  identify
her.

Now  it  will  be  seen  from  the  numerous  extracts  I  have
given  that  whilst  this  sitting  is  in  many  respects  typical —
built  up  on  what  I  have  described  as  the  usual  scaffolding
— -it  is  conspicuous  by  reason  of  the  large  number  of
correct  and  evidential  statements  which  it  contains  and
the  proportionately  small  amount  of  padding  and  error.
It  will  be  worth  while  to  analyse  and  tabulate  the  evidence
obtained  with  a  view  to  estimating  its  value.

Two  principal  communicators  took  part  in  the  sitting,
a  young  man  identified  by  Mrs.  Montagu  as  one  of  her
sons,  and  an  old  man  identified  as  her  father.  In  proof
of  the  young  man's  identity  we  have  the  following  points  :

1.  Description  of  personal  appearance.

This,  according  to  Mrs.  Montagu's  testimony,  is  good,
but  not  entirely  correct.  Feda  is  wrong,  she  says,  in
stating  that  the  eyebrows  are  "  not  very  strongly  marked,"
and  this  is  a  point  upon  which  one  would  not  expect  a
good  observer  to  be  mistaken,  for  strongly  marked  eye-
brows are  a  conspicuous  feature  in  any  face.

2.  The  circumstances  of  death.

Feda  is  correct  in  saying  that  the  communicator  died  in
the  war,  "not  quite  instantly,"  and  that  he  was  hit  in
the  head.  She  is  wrong  in  saying  that  he  was  also  hit  in
other  parts  of  the  body,  and  in  suggesting  that  there  was
ever  any  doubt  as  to  whether  he  had  been  killed  or  not.
Two  other  veridical  points  which  this  communicator  gives
are the allusion to a hot climate, he having been  in


40


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Bermuda  just  before  the  war,  and  the  allusion  to  Margery
as  the  name  of  someone  he  tries  to  help,  Margery  being
identified  by  Mrs.  Montagu  as  her  niece.

In  regard  to  the  older  man,  more  evidence  is  given.

1.  Description  of  personal  appearance  and  bodily  symptoms.
The  description  is  not  very  detailed,  but  is  said  to  be

correct  so  far  as  it  goes,  and  it  is  immediately  followed  by
a  correct  statement  concerning  physical  symptoms,  the
heart-trouble  and  the  pain  in  the  lower  side  of  the  back.

2.  Description of  places and persons connected with  the

communicator.

Several  good  points  are  made  concerning  the  place  and
circumstances  in  which  the  communicator  lived  ;  the  place
is  said  to  be  far  from  London,  to  be  in  the  midst  of  hilly
country,  the  town  has  irregular  streets  built  on  a  slope,
the  communicator  is  said  to  live  a  little  way  outside  this
town  and  emphasis  is  laid  upon  a  bridge.  All  these
statements  are  perfectly  intelligible  to  the  sitter  in  refer-
ence to  the  communicator's  home  at  Bideford.  The
religious  standpoint  of  the  communicator  is  correctly
indicated — that  he  was,  in  fact,  more  orthodox  than  he
thought  himself,  an  appropriate  reference  is  made  to
books  and  some  evidence  is  given  concerning  friends  whom
he  knew  at  Bideford.  He  names  three  and  only  three
initials  ;  they  are  said  to  be  those  of  women  now  dead
who  are  closely  connected  with  him  and  with  each  other.
These  initials  are  those  of  his  four  sisters,  two  of  the
sisters  having  names  which  begin  with  the  same  letter.
He  also  makes  a  quite  intelligible  reference  to  two  chil-
dren, said  to  be  alive,  whom  Mrs.  Montagu  identifies  as
her  two  daughters.  The  only  statement  of  any  importance
made  by  this  communicator  which  Mrs.  Montagu  could
not  place  at  all  was  the  description  of  the  friend  called  B
whom  he  used  to  meet  at  a  chemist's  shop.

The  theme  with  which  both  these  communicators  are
principally  concerned — apart  from  offering  evidence  of  their
own  identity — is  the  fate  of  Mrs.  Montagu's  elder  son,
and  their  statements  upon  this  matter  involve  considera-


Lxxxn.]


A  Successful  First  Sitting.


41


tions  of  some  interest  and  significance.  On  the  one  hand,
not  only  is  the  fact  instantly  apprehended  that  Mrs.
Montagu  has  been  in  great  anxiety  and  suspense  concern-
ing the  fate  of  a  young  man  reported  missing  at  the  front,
but  a  considerable  amount  of  knowledge  is  shown  in
regard  to  him.  The  initial  P  is  given,  his  name  having
been  Paul ;  an  appropriate  reference  is  made  to  flying  ;  it
is  intimated  correctly  that  a  man  whose  name  begins
with  B  can  give  some  news  of  him  and  that  another  man
reported  missing  at  the  same  time  is  still  alive ;  in
connexion  with  this  man  Feda  makes  several  shots  at  a
two-syllabled  name  beginning  with  a  hard  G,  the  name
being  in  fact  Gubbin.  Finally  it  is  stated  that  the  missing
man  "  was  in  a  church,"  he  having  dined  in  a  church  on
the  night  before  he  was  reported  missing,  as  was  known
to  Mrs.  Montagu.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  clearly  and  expressly  intimated
throughout  the  sitting  that  the  missing  man  is  still  alive,
whereas  humanly  speaking  it  is  certain  that  he  was  at
that  time  dead.  Into  the  theoretical  questions  which  this
raises  I  will  not  go  at  any  length,  but  I  will  put  one  or
two  points  forward  for  consideration  of  my  readers  and
I  will  draw  one  practical  conclusion.  On  two  other
occasions  during  the  period  I  am  considering  sitters  were
present  who  had  near  relatives  missing  at  the  front,  and
this  fact  was  recognised  at  the  sittings.  On  both  occasions
the  missing  men  were  declared  to  be  alive,  and  details
were  given  of  their  whereabouts  ;  in  both  cases  no  news
has  so  far  been  received  of  these  men.  Whether  they
were  alive  or  dead  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  is  to  some
extent  an  open  question,  and  in  all  probability  we  can
never  have  any  proof  that  they  were  already  dead,
although,  if,  as  appears  to  be  the  case,  they  are  dead
now,  it  is  likely  that  they  were  dead  then  ;  for  they  had
already  been  missing  a  very  considerable  time.  These
three  cases  taken  together  suggest  that  it  is  Feda's  ten-
dency to  say  that  missing  men  are  alive.  In  this  she
may  be  actuated  by  that  same  sympathy  for  the  sitter  to
which  I  have  already  referred — no  one  is  willingly  the
bearer of ill-tidings — or she may be  unconsciously


42


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


influenced  by  the  hopes  and  desires  of  the  sitter.  However
this  may  be,  it  would  certainly  appear  that  the  source  of
her  supernormal  information  is  such  that  she  cannot
clearly  discriminate  as  to  whether  a  particular  individual
is,  as  she  would  express  it,  "  on  the  earth  plane  "  or  "in
the  spirit  world."  This  hypothesis  is  corroborated  by  the
fact  that  on  at  least  two  recorded  occasions  she  appears
to  have  made  the  opposite  error,  bringing  forward  as
purporting  communicators,  men  who  are  still  alive.^

The  practical  conclusion  which  I  shall  draw  from  these
facts  is  that  it  is  useless,  and  indeed  worse  than  useless,
to  endeavour  to  obtain  from  mediums  information  about
the  fate  of  people  who  are  missing.  If  crucial  mistakes
•are  liable  to  occur  even  in  unusually  good  sittings,  such
as  Mrs.  Montagu's,  what  guarantee  can  we  ever  have  as  to
the  trustworthiness  of  the  statements  which  are  made  ?  It
should  be  stated  that  at  Mrs.  Montagu's  second  sitting,
which  does  not  fall  within  the  period  discussed  in  this
paper,  the  young  man  who  on  the  first  occasion  was  said
to  be  alive  and  missing  appeared  as  a  communicator
together  with  his  brother ;  he  gave  his  full  name  Paul,
•only  the  initial  P  having  been  given  before.  No  statement
was  made  as  to  his  having  died  since  the  previous  sitting,
■so  that  the  earlier  mistake  would  appear  to  have  been
rectified.  This,  however,  does  not  change  the  fact  of  its
having  been  made.

If  we  scrutinise  the  evidence  obtained  at  Mrs.  Montagu's
first  sitting  in  the  light  of  our  general  knowledge  of  what
is  usually  obtained  at  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  we  shall
see  that  its  value  consists  in  the  fact  that  not  only  are
the  correct  statements  numerous  in  proportion  to  those
which  are  incorrect,  but  they  are  of  a  distinctive  kind.
We  do  not  find,  for  instance,  at  sittings  with  Mrs.
Leonard  frequently  repeated  descriptions  of  an  old-fashioned,
irregularly  built  town  surrounded  by  hilly  country  and
containing  an  important  bridge.  When,  therefore,  such  a
•description  is  given  and  is  appropriate  to  the  purporting

1  See  below  p.  133  for  one  of  these  cases.  The  other  case,  in  which  a
:good  deal  of  rather  striking  evidence  of  identity  was  obtained,  does  not
fall  within  the  period  under  review  here.


ixxxii.]  A  Successful  First  Sitting.  43


communicator,  that  is  a  good  point.  Again,  allusions  to
flying  are  rare,  and  since  airmen  are  few  in  jDroportion
to  the  total  number  of  soldiers,  that  also  is  a  good  point.

I  have  tried  in  this  section  of  my  paper  to  give  my
readers  some  idea  of  the  results  obtained  at  typical  first
sittings,  good,  bad  and  indifferent.  The  various  points  to
which  I  have  referred  are  coj^iously  illustrated  in  the  extracts
from  sittings  given  in  the  Appendix  to  this  paper,  from
which  readers  can  draw  their  own  conclusions.  In  con-
clusion I  should  like  again  to  call  attention  to  the  fact
that  evidence  obtained  at  first  sittings  does  not  represent
at  all  the  best  that  is  obtainable  from  Mrs.  Leonard,  or,
for  that  matter,  from  any  other  genuine  "  trance-medium."

I  now  turn  to  the  consideration  of  a  few  selected
incidents  occurring  at  sittings  taken  by  "  old  sitters  "
during  the  period  under  review.


44


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


PART  II.

Evidence  obtained  by  Old  Sitters.

As  I  have  stated  above,  the  object  of  this  paper  is  mainly
to  consider  what  kind  of  evidence  is  hkely  to  be  obtained
at  a  first  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard.  I  shall  include,,
however,  a  few  extracts  from  sittings  taken  by  old  sitters,
which  have  been  selected  partly  for  their  intrinsic  interest
and  partly  because  they  can  be  easily  detached  from
their  context.  The  greater  number  of  these  incidents
occurred  in  sittings  taken  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and
Una,  Lady  Troubridge  ;  evidence  obtained  in  this  particular
series  of  sittings  has  the  great  advantage,  to  which  I  have
already  alluded,  that  a  complete  record  of  every  sitting
with  Mrs.  Leonard  taken  by  these  two  ladies  is  in  exist-
ence, and  a  very  full  and  careful  statement  concerning
the  manner  in  which  they  first  got  into  touch  with
Mrs.  Leonard,  and  the  kind  of  evidence  obtained  at  their
earliest  sittings  not  onh^  exists,  but  is  available  to  readers
of  the  Society's  Proceedings  {Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,
p.  339  £E.).

§  I. Sittings  taken  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and
Una,  Lady  Troubridge.

During  the  period  under  review  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and
Lady  Troubridge  had  thirteen  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard
which  formed  part  of  the  long  series  of  weekly  sittings
which  they  have  had  for  some  time  past.  I  shall  assume
that  my  readers  are  familiar  with  their  report  on  some
of  their  earlier  sittings,  published  in  Proceedings,  and  it
will  suffice  to  say  here  that  in  these  later  sittings  also
the purporting  communicator  was A.  V.  B., as she  has


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Roddy ffe- Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  45

been  called,  an  intimate  friend  of  Miss  Radclyffe-HaH's
who  died  in  1916.  At  each  of  these  thirteen  sittings  a
considerable  amount  of  time  was  occupied  in  giving  a
"  book-test/'  but  this  part  of  the  evidence  has  already
been  discussed  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  {Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.
XXXI.).  I  propose  here  to  give  several  instances  in
which  the  purporting  communicator  gave  evidence  of
continued  memory,  especially  of  names  with  which  she
had  been  familiar  during  her  lifetime,  and  some  instances
also  in  which  knowledge  of  an  apparently  supernormal
character  was  shown  concerning  recent  events.

1.  The  Dog  Rufus.

At  a  sitting  on  March  6,  1918,  at  which  Lady  Trou-
bridge was  the  sitter  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  the  recorder,
good  evidence  was  obtained  concerning  a  collie,  called
Rufus,  belonging  to  Miss  RadclySe-Hall,  which  had  lately
died.  The  sitting  opened  with  a  further  allusion  to  Lady
Troubridge's  terrier,  Billy  (see  Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,
p.  487),  and  the  following  passage  then  occurred  :

F.  .  Do  you  remember  another  dog  altogether,  a  really
big  dog  ?  A  dog  that  had  a  back  that  high  ?
(Feda  indicates  with  her  hand  about  the  height  of
a  coUie  or  a  retriever  dog,  U.  V.  T.^  gave  it  as
being  about  two  foot  six  inches).  His  hair's
longer  too,  it's  nice  hair,  softer,  silkier  hair,  and
it's  not  quite  straight,  it  goes  like  that.  (Feda
makes  a  gesture  indicative  of  hair  turning  ujj
shghtly  at  the  ends.)  It's  a  kind  of  browny
colour.  He's  got  a  big  head  and  face,  he's  got
quite  a  sharp  pointed  face.  (Feda  indicates  a  long
pointed  muzzle.)  He's  got  bigger  ears,  and  on
the  tips  of  them  there's  some  longer  hair  than  on
the  rest  of  the  ears,  it's  wavy,  Feda  don't  mean
that  he's got  long  hair like a woman's on  his

^  Lady  Troubridge,  who  is  usually  referred  to  by  Feda  as  "  Mrs.
Una."  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  appears  in  these  records  as  M.  R.  H.,  or,
where  Feda  is  quoted,  as Mrs.  Twonnie."


46


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


ears, but towards the tips it's longer and  not
quite  straight.
M.  R.  H.  What  about  this  dog  1

F.  He's  in  the  spirit  world,  and  it's  one  you'll  like  to

see  when  you  go  over.
U.  V.  T. Who'll  like  to  see  him  1

F.  You, Mrs. Una. (8. v. Not  Mrs. Una  ?) No,  not

Mrs.  Una,  that's  not  right,  it's-  a  dog  what  Ladye
knew.  She  hadn't  always  got  him  with  her  when
she  was  here,  'cos  she  wasn't  for  animals  like  you
is,  nothing  like  as  much.  .  .

U.  V.  T. When  did  that  dog  jjass  over  ?

F.  Not  just  lately,  Feda  thinks  he  was  on  the  Earth

Plane  when  Ladye  was  here,  and  that  he  passed
over  a  good  while  after  Ladye  did,  a  good,  long
while.  She  was  very  surprised  too,  Ladye  was,
she  was  very  surprised  to  see  it,  but  she  says  it's
evidently  come  to  stay.  She  says  Mrs.  Twonnie
will  know  it  too,  she'll  know  it  when  she  goes
over.  It  had  quite  an  imposing  name  she  says,
a  good  name,  a  name  like  there's  a  kind  of  mean-
ing to  it  apart  from  being  a  dog's  name,  not  like
only  a  name  you  gives  to  dogs.

U.  V.  T. I  won't  talk,  I'll  let  her  say  it.

F.  She  said  it  seemed  pleased  to  be  with  her,  but  she

says  she  takes  more  interest  in  animals  now  than
she  did  when  she  was  here.

U.  V.  T. Does  she  ?

F.  She  says  these  dogs  is  connected  with  other  people

and  that  when  they  come  over  they'll  be  pleased
to  see  them.  .  .  .

M.  R.  H.  I  wish  she  could  give  some  more  about  the  browny
dog.

F.  Listen,  it's  a  good  dog,  nice,  but  it's  lumpier  than

that  kind  of  dog  (points  to  U.  V.  T.'s  terrier  2),
it's  got  feet  that's  longer  at  the  bottom  part  than

1  For  the  sake  of  clarity  sentences  have  been  omitted  from  the  record
here  and  there  which  are  in  no  way  relevant  to  the  incident  under
discussion.

-  This  dog,  a  wire-haired  terrier,  was  present  at  the  sitting.


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  47


he  has  (points  to  the  terrier),  and  you  see  there's
like  longer  hairs  that  sticks  out  on  his  foots  and
makes  them  look  bigger.  This  dog  has  got  like —
Feda  don't  know  how  you  call  the  colour  of  dog's
eyes,  but  he's  got  like  hazel  coloured  eyes.  The
rims  is  black  on  his  eyelids,  they's  beautiful  eyes,
■  they  isn't  near  together.

M.  K.  H.  Give  us  some  details  about  that  dog's  life.

F. . Feda  thinks  he's  got  something  darker  on  his  nose.

He  was  a  clever  dog  too  when  he  was  on  the
Earth  Plane,  yes,  she  says  he  was.  He  lived  at
a  house  that  was  properly  in  the  country  ;  (s.v.
used  to  come  up  in  the  mornings  ?  what  ?).  She
says  he  used  to  come  up  in  the  mornings,  Feda
don't  know  what  she  means.  Early  in  the  morn-
ings he  used  to  run  about  in  a  garden  place,  and
then  he  would  be  let  to  come  up  into  the  house.
It's  a  big  house  standing  by  itself,  and  it  seems
to  be  raised  up  as  if  there  was  a  kind  of  bank
had  been  built,  and  the  house  builted  on  top  of
it.  Feda  don't  know  what  you  say,  but  there
seems  to  be  several  steps  going  up  to  the  door,
not  just  two  or  three,  and  the  ground  floor  windows
seems  a  bit  high,  as  if  there  was  a  space  between
them  and  the  ground,  they's  higher  than  is  usual
for  ground  floor  windows,  it's  like  when  you's
standing  in  the  path  you  look  up  at  the  windows
a  bit.  There  was  a  gentleman  used  to  be  at  that
house  often.  What  do  you  say  1  The  house  was
not  his  own  house  perhaps.  She's  showing  Feda
what  he's  like,  he  was  a  tall  man,  about  the
middle  of  life,  but  he  looked  young,  he  had  a
moustache,  not  a  tiny  one.  Feda  thinks  she  would
call  him  a  fine  looking  man  ;  his  eyes  is  bluey
grey,  the  hair  and  moustache  brown.

M.  R.  H.  I  don't  place  him.

F.  Looks  to  Feda  as  if  he  had  on  a  tweed  suit.

M.  R.  H.  Where  is  all  this  ?

F.  Wait  a minute, she  was  going to tell  you.  This

gentleman  seems  to Feda  as  if  he often  had  a


48


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


stick  or  something  under  his  arm.  Ladye's  showing
him  to  Feda  as  if  he's  coming  up  the  path  towards
the  front  of  the  house,  as  if  he  was  going  to  the
door,  and  then  he  doesn't  go  to  the  door,  he
turns  round  a  path  to  the  left,  and  he  looks  as
if  he's  shouting  to  someone  at  the  window.

U.  V.  T. I  don"t  think  I  know  which  dog  she  means.

F.  The  man  knew  the  dog,  and  was  at  the  same  time,

she's  speaking  of  seven  years  ago,  she  gives  that
distinctly.  People's  liked  that  gentleman,  Ladye
knew  him.  Seems  to  Feda  as  if  he  had  comed
from  a  walk,  as  if  he  had  walked  from  a  distance
to  that  house.  Feda  knows  she's  got  it  on  the
tip  of  her  tongue  to  give  Feda  a  name  or  some-
thing {s.v.  The  letter  M.  Force — Force — Force —
Perforce — Berforce.  It's  got  something  else  before
it,  but  it  finishes  up  like  Berforce,  and  Prang —
Prank — Prang)  and  there  was  a  name  that  seemed
to  start  like  that  too.

U.  V.  T. I've  not  caught  on  yet.

F-  She  says  you'll  have  to  write  this  down  and  put  it

by,  it  will  come  out  quite  clearly  afterwards.

U.  V.  T.  (Who  was  not  sure  that  Feda  had  made  an  M.)
How  did  she  make  that  M.  Feda  ?

r.  Like that (Feda draws on the arm of U.  V.  T.'s

chair).

U.  V.  T. If  that's  an  M.,  it's  facing  you  Feda.

F.  No  ! (Feda  draws  a  W.  clearly  in  the  air.)

U.  V.  T. That's  a  W.  Feda.

F.  Yes,  Feda  often  makes  a  mistake  between  an  M.  and

a  W.  {S.v.  Perrington — Perrington — )  Can't  get
that  very  clearly,  but  it  sounds  like  that  to  Feda.

M.  R.  H.  I  think  I'm  getting  on  to  it.

F.  {S.v. Perrington — Perrington.) That's  the  name  that

Feda's  trying  to  get  that  sounded  ]i\e  Pang.

M.  R.  H.  Ask  Ladye  if  the  first  letter  is  right,  I  don't  think
it  is.

F.  NO.

U.  V.  T. Can't  you  get  it  ?

F.  Shell  try. (Draws  on  U.  V.  T.'s  hand.)


Lxxxn.]  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  49


U.  V.  T. I  can't  understand  that.

F.  Mrs.  Twonnie,  look  ! (Draws  in  the  air,  and  M.  R.  H.

carmot  understand.)  {S.v.  Ferrin — S-ss — Ger — Ger.)
Not  that,  that  isn"t  right.  You  see  she  wants
you  to  know  that  it's  like  that  word  which  is
something  Errington.  {S.v.  Werrmgton.)  Not  that,
that's  not  right,  anyhow  it's  a  word  that  sounds
hke  that. {S.v. Berrington — Berrington  !)

M.  R.  H.  That's  right.

F.  The  P.  and  the  B.  sounds  aUke  sometimes.

U.  V.  T.  Yes.

M.  R.  H.  Is  the  dog  and  B.  connected  1

F,  No  they  isn't ! ! She  Imows  what  you're  thinking  of

Mrs.  Twonnie,  you've  got  half  right  and  not  the
other  half.  Berrington  is  the  right  name  she  says.
She  says  there's  some  kind  of  a  connection,  the
dog  and  Berrington  is  not  quite  connected,  and
yet  there  is  some  sort  of  a  connection.

TJ.  V.  T. Can't  you  get  the  fii'st  letter  of  the  dog's  name  ?

F.  Wait  a  minute  Ladye. It's  towards  Mrs.  Twonnie

she's  making  it.  It  seems  to  start  Jer — Jer — Jer.
Feda  can't  get  him.  Feda  don't  know  why  she
keeps  on  building  up  an  R.  now,  look  Mrs.
Twonnie,  she's  building  it  towards  you  !

M.  R.  H.  That's  right  for  one  dog,  but  I  can't  make  out
which  dog  this  is.

F.  It's really not connected with Berrington, no  it's

not.  {S.v.  After  the  R.  it's  over  hke  that.)
(Feda  draAvs  in  the  air  towards  M.  R.  H.,  the
draAving  is  not  clear,  and  U.  V.  T.  hands  a  block
and  a  pencil  to  Feda,  Feda  begins  scribbMng  and
remarks  nice  place  !  "  Subsequent  examination
showed  that  Feda  had  tried  to  dra^w  a  house  not
very  successfully.)

U.  V.  T.  Now  after  the  R.,  what  comes  ?  (M.  R.  H.  gets  up
and  hands  a  fresh  block  to  U.  V.  T.,  who  gives
it  to  Feda.  Feda  begins  writing  all  over  the
block.)

F.  Wait a minute, Ladye  ! (Feda draws  without

looking  at  the  block,  her  head  is  shghtly  turned


50


Ilrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


away.) It's all dirty places now  ! (Hands  the
block  to  U.  V.  T.  which  is  witten  all  over  with
names,  among  them  appears  the  name  "  Rune.^  ")
U.  V.  T.  (to  M.  R.  H.). She's  written  Rune.

F.  She  was  reaUy  trying  to  write  that  name  up  in  the

air. She  knows  all  those  names  what's  written.

M.  R.  H.  Am  I  to  take  it  that  Rune  and  the  dog  are  con-
nected ?

F.  Yes, they's connected, but in a different way  to

what  you  tried  to  suggest  that  Berrington  and  the
dog  were  connected.

M.  R.  FT.  Yes,  I  understand.

F.  (S.v. Rune, Runie. But  it  doesn't  spell  Runie,  it

spells  Rune  !  but  she  says  Runie.)  Feda  knows
how  to  spell  Rune,  but  she  calls  it  Runie.  Is  it
right  Ladye  ?  Yes,  she  says  it's  right.  That's  a
funny  name  !

Concerning  the  description  of  the  dog  given  above,  Miss
Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge  in  their  notes  to  the
sitting  state  that  it  is

correct  for  M.  R.  H.'s  sable  collie  who  died  on  January
18,  1918.  .  .  .  Feda  goes  a  little  wrong  when  she  speaks
of  his  having  longer  hair  that  is  wavy  on  the  tips  of  his
ears.  The  collie,  whose  name  was  Rufus,  had  not  got
perceptibly  long,  and  certainly  not  wavy,  hair  on  the  end
of  his  ears,  though  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  hair
grew  down  slightly  beyond  the  tips.  Feda  is  right  when
she  states  that  his  coat  was  not  quite  straight,  however.

Feda's  statement  that  this  dog  is  lumpier  "  than  Lady
Troubridge's  terrier,  that  its  feet  are  longer  and  bigger,
and  that  it  has  longer  hairs  sticking  out  from  the  end  of
its  feet  is  also  said  to  be  correct.  Witli  regard  to  the
colour  of  the  dog's  eyes  they  were  not  hazel,  as  stated  by
Feda,  but  they  were  also  not  dark  like  the  eyes  of  the
terrier.

^  There  were  five  names  besides  Rune,  all  apparently  names  of
persons  ;  four  out  of  the  five  are  known  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  to
have  been  the  names  of  friends  of  A.  V.  B.'s.


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Trouhridge.  51

They  were  of  a  light  golden-brown  colour  ;  they  were
beautiful  eyes,  as  she  says  ;  the  rims  were  black,  and  the
eyes  wide  apart.  It  is  not  quite  apparent  what  Feda
means  when  she  says  that  the  dog  had  something  darker
on  his  nose.  The  dog's  nose  was  black,  but  what  she
may  have  noticed  is  that  the  hair  receded  a  little  on  the
bridge  of  the  nose,  exjaosing  the  black  skin.
A  more  detailed  description  of  this  dog  was  obtained
at  a  later  sitting  (see  below,  p.  55).

There  is  some  confusion  at  first  concerning  the  owner-
ship of  the  dog.  In  reply  to  a  question  it  is  intimated
that  Lady  Troubridge  will  like  to  see  him  when  she
"  goes  over  to  the  spirit-world "  ;  this  statement  is  at
once  corrected,  and  it  is  said  that  the  dog  was  one  which
A.  V.  B.  knew.  In  point  of  fact,  although  it  is  correct
to  say  that  A.  V.  B.  knew  the  dog,  he  belonged  to  Miss
Radcly£fe-Hall,  as  was  recognised  at  a  later  sitting.  A
good  point  is  made  when  it  is  stated  that  A.  V.  B.
'■  takes  more  interest  in  animals  now  than  she  did  when
she  was  here,"  since  during  her  lifetime  A.  V.  B.  had  not
been  much  interested  in  animals.^  Feda's  statement  con-
cerning the  date  of  the  dog's  death,  that  he  had  died
"  a  good  long  while  "  after  A.  V.  B.  but  not  "  just
lately  "'  may  be  considered  fairly  correct,  but  is  not  very
definite.  The  dog  had  been  dead  about  seven  weeks  at
the  time  of  this  sitting  and  had  died  nineteen  months
after  A.  V.  B.,  the  date  of  whose  death  Feda  must  be
held  to  know  approximately,  since  at  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall's
first  sitting,  in  August,  1916,  A.  V.  B.  was  correctly  said
to  have  died  recently.

In  reply  to  a  request  for  "  some  details  about  that  dog's
life  "  Feda  describes  a  house  in  the  country  ;  she  also
describes  a  man  in  some  way  connected  with  this  house
and  gives  two  names.  The  house  is  identified  by  Miss
I  Radclyffe-Hall  as  Highfield  House,  one  of  two  houses  at
i  Malvern  Wells  in  which  the  dog  had  spent  most  of  his
life.  Highfield  House  had  already  been  described  by
A.  V.  B.  through  Feda  (see  Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,
p. 383)  ; the  distinctive  feature  in  the  later  description

1  Cf.  Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,  pp.  362  and  495.


52


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PABT


with  which  we  are  here  concerned  is  the  allusion  to  the
house  being  raised  up,  "  as  if  there  was  a  kind  of  bank
had  been  built  and  the  house  builted  on  top  of  it."
Highfield  House,  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  states,

stood  upon  a  high  terrace,  and  the  terrace  had  evidently
been  built,  as  it  was  supported  by  a  strong  stone  wall.
Feda  says  there  is  a  flight  of  steps  going  up  to  the  door
'"not  just  two  or  three,"  and  that  the  ground-floor  windows
seem  a  bit  high.  There  was  such  a  flight  of  steps
leading  up  to  the  door  of  Highfield  House,  and  the  ground-
floor  windows  were  perhaps  higher  than  is  customary.

After  the  description  of  the  house  Feda  describes  a  man
in  country  clothes  who,  she  says,  used  to  go  frequently
to  the  house  ;  she  then  gives  two  names,  first  a  name
"  like  Berforce  "  and  in  connexion  with  it  a  letter  M,
subsequently  corrected  to  W  in  reply  to  a  question  from
Lady  Troubridge,  and  secondly  a  name  that  is  first  said
to  "  start  like  "  Prang  and  is  afterwards  given  as  Per-
rington.

There  would  seem  to  be  some  confusion  in  connecting
the  man  whom  Feda  describes  with  Highfield  House,  for
in  connexion  with  that  house  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  can
remember  no  such  person.  She  says,  however,  that  the
description  would  apply  well  to  a  certain  "  Squire  Ber-
rington  "  who  occasionally  visited  A.  V.  B.  and  herself  at
The  White  Cottage,  Malvern  Wells,  the  house  to  which
Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  moved  from  Highfield  House  ;  "he
always  wore  a  tweed  suit  and  invariably  carried  a  stick  ;
he  knew  the  dog  Rufus  quite  well."  In  view  of  the  fact
that  the  name  Perrington  is  spontaneously  given  and  ^  after
Feda  has  been  told  that  the  initial  letter  is  wrong  is
eventually  corrected  to  Berrington,  there  seems  little  doubt
that  it  was  to  Mr.  Berrington  that  the  communicator
intended  to  refer. But  if  so.  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  says,*

a  mistake  is  certainly  made  when  Feda  describes  his
walking  round  the  house  and  shouting  to  some  one  at
the  window,  as  Mr.  Berrington  was  not  an  intimate  friend
and  would  never  have  been  so  informal.


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Raddyjfe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  53

This  allusion  would  seem  to  be  a  picturesque  addition  by
Feda.

The  supposition  that  reference  to  Mr.  Berrington  was
intended  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  in  connexion
with  the  man  in  the  tweed  suit  and  the  name  that
"  starts  like  "  Prang,  given  afterwards  as  Perrington,  an
attempt  is  made  at  a  name  hke  "  Berforce."  Miss  Rad-
clyffe-Hall  says  that  at  Malvern  Wells  she  and  A.  V.  B.

knew  a  Mr.  Wilberforce,  who  was  also  a  friend  of  Mr.
Berrington's.  -  There  is  a  special  reason  why  A.  V.  B.
should  remember  this  Mr.  Wilberforce,  and  he  was  entirely
connected  with  that  part  of  her  life  that  was  associated
with  Malvern  Wells  and  the  collie,  but  with  the  White
Cottage,  and  not  with  Highfield  House.

Mr.  Wilberforce  formed  one  of  the  little  group  of  Roman
Catholics  that  included,  among  others,  A.  V.  B.,  Miss
Radclyffe-Hall  and  Mr.  Berrington.  It  would  certainly
appear  as  if  the  statements  made  at  the  sitting  were,  in
part  at  least,  derived  from  a  group  of  A.  V.  B.'s  memories,
the  communicator  having  by  a  natural  sequence  of  ideas
passed  from  the  recollection  of  one  house  at  Malvern
Wells  to  that  of  another  without  the  transition  being
made  apparent.  A  similar  confusion  arose  on  the  occasion
of  an  earlier  reference  to  Highfield  House  and  The  White
Cottage  (see  Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,  p.  383).  Whether
such  a  confusion  exists  in  the  mind  of  the  communicator,
or  only  occurs  in  the  process  of  transmitting  ideas  to  the
medium,  is  a  problem  which  we  have  no  means  of  solving
until  we  know  far  more  than  we  do  at  present  of  the
method  of  communication.

Partly  in  consequence  of  the  confusion  described  above,
the  sitters  were  not  absolutely  certain  to  what  dog  Feda
was  referring.  In  reply  to  a  question  as  to  what  was  the
first  letter  of  the  dog's  narne,  she  suggests  that  the  name
starts  with  a  sound  like  "  Jer.'"  She  then  apparently
corrects  this  statement  by  saying  that  A.  V.  B.  is  drawing
the  letter  R.  Having  been  told  that  this  letter  would  be
correct  in  reference  to  one  dog,  and  having  been  given  a
block  and  pencil,  Feda  proceeds  to  draw  first  a  house  and


54  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

then  a  group  of  names,  amongst  them  in  large  letters  the
name  RUNE,  which  in  reply  to  a  question  she  says  is
connected  with  the  dog.  The  dog's  name,  as  has  been
mentioned  above,  was  Rufus,  but  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall
frequently  called  him  Rune.  The  writing  of  this  name
by  Feda  therefore  constitutes  an  excellent  point  of  evi-
dence, which  is  further  strengthened  by  Feda's  remark
that  although  A.  V.  B.  has  written  "  Rune,"  she  says
"  Runie."  "  Runie  "  was  another  form  of  the  dog's  pet
name  often  used  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall.  Upon  the
question  of  what  knowledge  derived  from  normal  sources
Mrs.  Leonard  might  have  had  concerning  the  dog.  Miss
Radclyffe-Hall  informs  us  that  in  August  1917,  when
Rufus  was  still  alive,  Lady  Troubridge  had  mentioned  to
Mrs.  Leonard  that  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  possessed  a  collie.
This  information  was  given  during  a  short  visit  to  Mrs.
Leonard  in  Devonshire  for  the  purpose  of  holding  sittings  ;
a  record  was  kept  of  the  various  points  mentioned  during
that  visit.  Mrs.  Leonard's  love  of  dogs  led  to  a  reference
being  made  to  the  collie,  but  no  mention  was  made  of
his  name,  or  nickname,  and  no  description  was  given  of
the  dog  beyond  naming  his  breed.  Moreover,  at  the
sitting  of  March  6,  1918,  the  dog  is  represented  as  being
^'  in  the  spirit-world,"  whereas  in  August  1917  Rufus  was
alive  ;  his  death,  in  January  1918,  did  not  occur  in  Miss
Radclyffe- Hall's  house  ;  it  was  sudden,  and,  in  view  of  the
possibility  that  it  might  be  mentioned  in  a  sitting,  care  was
taken  that  as  few  people  should  know  of  it  as  possible.
But  even  if  Mrs.  Leonard  had  heard  by  accident  of  the
dog's  death,  she  could  not  have  learnt  his  nickname
except  by  particular  enquiry.  In  the  early  days  of  their
sittings,  steps  were  taken  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady
Troubridge  to  ascertain  whether  Mrs.  Leonard  was  by  way
of  making  enquiries  concerning  her  sitters,  and  the  residt
of  this  investigation  was  entirel}^  favourable  to  Mrs.
Leonard.

Three  other  points  were  given  at  the  sitting  of  March  6,
1918,  as  having  some  connexion  with  the  dog  Runie,  as
follows:  a  name  like  "  Maggiore,"  a  person  whose  name
began  with  S,  and  a  place  with  a  name  of  which  the  first


liXXXii  ]  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge .  55

three  letters  were  drawn  by  Feda  as  LIN.  The  reference
to  the  name  Maggiore  is  not  understood  by  the  sitters  ;
A.  V.  B.  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hal]  had  visited  Lago
Maggiore  together,  but  this  visit  had  no  association  with
the  dog.  The  man's  name  beginning  with  S  might  be
that  of  the  veterinary  surgeon  with  whom  the  dog  had
been  boarded  on  several  occasions.  This  interpretation  is
confirmed  b}^  the  allusion  immediately  afterwards  to  a
place-name  beginning  LIN.  The  veterinary  surgeon's
kennels  were  at  Malvern  Link,  commonly  known  as
The  Link.

We  may  now  pass  on  to  consider  the  further  references
made  to  the  dog  at  a  later  sitting  on  April  17,  1918.
This  sitting  took  place  immediately  after  the  period  of
three  months  discussed  in  this  paper,  but  it  will  be
convenient  for  obvious  reasons  to  include  it  here.

The  relevant  extract  from  the  sitting,  at  which  Lady
Troubridge  was  again  the  sitter  and  Mss  Radcly£fe-HaU
the  recorder,  runs  as  follows  :

Feda.  {S.v.  .  .  .  What  is  it,  a  dog  ?  Whose  dog  ;  wait
a  mmute,  wait  a  minute,  can't  quite  see  him
Ladye.)  Feda  can"t  quite  see  him  but  she's  got
a  big  dog  with  her,  quite  a  big  one.  He's  not
the  short  haired  kind,  he's  got  long  hair,  on  his
shoulders  it  seems  to,  go  like  that  (Feda  makes  a
gesture  indicative  of  hair  turning  up  at  the  ends),
it  turns  out  and  looks  pretty  on  his  shoulders.
It's  nice  and  long  all  over  him.  He's  got  a
.  , pretty big head, and he's got a long face  like

that  (indicates  a  pointed  muzzle),  a  long,  sloping
face,  and  his  forehead's  rather  broad.  Somehow
you  would  call  his  a  forehead,  not  all  animals  you
wouldn't  say  that  about,  but  you'd  say  he  had  a
no-bel  forehead,  like  you  would  for  Soliver  [Sir
Oliver  Lodge],  'cos  he  has  that.  Look,  Ladye
says  dignified.  His  eyes  isn't  set  close  together
like  most  dogs'  eyes,  there's  a  space  between,
and  they's  a  beautiful  broAvny  colour,  almost  like
a  hazelly  look,  and  the  rims is dark, and  they


56


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


droops  a  little  at  the  comers  (Feda  indicates
outside  corner  of  eye),  and  it  gives  him  a  proud
look.  Looks  to  Feda  as  if  he  was  darker  £at
the  end,  here  (touches  nose),  and  he's  got  some
— no  they  isn't  spots,  some  kind  of  little  marks,
just  round  the  end  of  his  slope.
U.  V.  T. You  mean  his  muzzle  ?

F.  Why  muzzle  ? You  puts  that  on  !  .  '

U.  V.  T. A  dog's  nose  is  called  a  muzzle.

F.  How funny  ! There's little dots what shows  up

rather  plainly  Feda  thmks,  around  his  mouth  and
nose. Can  you  say  his  chin  ?

U.  V.  T.  Yes.

■*F.  His  chm  looks  a  little  bit  setted-looking.  .  ■

M.  R.  H.  What  about  this  dog  ?

F.  He's  a  nice  dog,  he's  in  the  Spirit  World  with  Ladye,

and  Laclye  is  keeping  him  for  you.
U.  V.  T. For  whom  ?

F.  For  her  (indicates  M.  R.  H.). Look,  on  his  legs  his

hair  isn't  so  long,  and  on  the  front  of  his  legs  his
hair  is  glossy  and  smooth,  it's  like  velvet  and
smooth,  it's  all  smooth  and  close  to  the  skin ;  it
was  so  silky  that  sometimes  it  nearly  shone.  You
laiow  his  feet  ?  well  his  toes  was  nicely  divided,
and  it  seems  as  if  they  was  lighter  at  the  ends.
His  toes  isn't  very  pointed,  they's  rounded,  and
you  can  feel  they's  fat,  nice,  little  short,  fat  toes
goes  round  his  foot,  and  they's  properly  divided.
His  feet  is  somehow  different  to  other  dogs'  feet.
He  had  nice  thick  straight  legs,  not  like  this
(makes  gesture  indicative  of  bandy  legs),  he  holds
his  head  up  straight,  that's  what  makes  him
no-bel  looking.

U.  V.  T, Has  he  got  a  tail  Feda  ?

F.  Yes,  he's  got  one,  Feda  can't  see  it  plainly  'cos  he's

sitting  on  it.  Feda's  sure  he's  got  one,  'cos  out  of
the  back  of  him  there  sticks  a  thing  like  a  feather,
like  the  soldiers  what  sits  on  horses  has  on  their
hats  !  Oh,  now  he's  sta.nding  up,  Ladye  went
like this to him (Feda snaps her fingers),  and


Lxxxn.]  Miss  Raddyjfe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  57


Feda  sees  that  he  isn't  holding  it  up  on  his  back,
like  what  Ching  does,  he's  holding  it  like  a  little
down  and  out.  Give  Feda  something  and  she'll
draw  it.  (A  block  and  pen  are  handed  to  Feda,
who  draws  the  hind  quarters  of  a  dog,  and  a
line  indicative  of  the  angle  at  which  a  collie
carries  his  tail.)  It's  feathery  at  the  ends.
M.  R.  H.  Does  he  laiow  I  am  here  ?

F.  'Course  ! that's what he comes for. He's got  a

really  faithful  face  ;  he  nearly  speaks.

M.  R.  H.  I've  missed  him  very  much,  I  wish  he  could  under-
stand.

F.  He understood an awful lot on the earth  plane

Ladye  says  ;  well,  she  says,  he  understands  a
thousand  times  more  now.  Ladye  says  that  now
you  don't  have  to  try  and  tell  him,  'cos  you  can
see  by  the  twinkle  in  his  eye  and  by  his  smile
that  he  understands.  Ladye  says  you  know  he  had
a  wonderful  expression  before,  on  the  earth  plane,
she  says  perhaps  everyone  thinks  their  dogs  has
an  expression,  but  she  says  that  everyone  says
that  this  one  has  a  wonderful  expression,  she  says
^  you  can truthfully say  he  smiles  or  looks  serious..

She  wants  to  say  that  he  often  goes  to  Mrs.
Twonnie  and  he  listens  to  her.  Ladye  says  he
understands  how  much  she  loved  him,  and  he's
always  sajdng  m  a  confidential  and  re-assuring
way,  "  It's  all  right,  and  you  can  tell  me  all  that
when  you  come  over."  Ladye  says  you  needn't
pour  yourself  out  to  him,  'cos  he  sits  and  looks
at  you  and  says,  "  Don't  worry,  don't  worry,  we
can  talk  about  that  when  you  come  over."

M.  R.  H.  Do  dogs  talk  on  your  side  ?

F.  No ! he  says  it  with  his  mind. Look,  Ladye  says

they  don't  speak,  but  you  remember  that  she  told
you  before  that  when  peoples  gets  tired  of  speaking
in  the  Spirit  World  how  beautiful  and  comforting
it  was  to  be  able  to  project  thoughts  ;  well,  that's,
how  IVIrs.  Twonnie  and  the  dog  -v^dll  talk  to  each,
other.  .  .  .


.38


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


M.  R.  H.  I'm  so  glad  you've  brought  that  big  dog.

F.  She's  often  wanted  to  bring  him, but  just  because

you  wanted  so  much  it  was  difficult,  she  feels  as
if  she's  tried  for  months  and  months.  If  peoples
only  knowed,  telepathy  is  a  most  difficult  thing.
The  dog  is  over  by  Mrs.  Twonnie  now.

M.  R.  H.  I'm  glad.

F.  He  is  sitting  there  just  by  your  side,  and  he  does

this  (makes  a  gesture  of  lifting  up  the  paws)  ;
keep  your  hand  out  so  he  can  put  his  head  under
it.  His  head  is  like  velvet  too,  he  puts  his  head
a  little  bit  on  one  side  ;  he  is  standing  up  now,
he  looks  like  a  judge,  he  holds  his  head  a  bit  on
one  side.  You  know  when  he  wants  to  look  at
you  straight,  he  doesn't  always  look  straight,  he
looks  kind  of  sideways.  It's  easier  to  get  the  dog
when  you  sits  Mrs.  Una,  'cos  you  doesn't  want
him  so  much,  but  Ladye  says  he's  been  before  ;
he  goes  to  see  her  every  day  (indicates  M.  R.  H.).
He's  an  awful  big  dog  to  get  on  the  bed,  but  he
gets  on  to  it,  he  lays  the  side  of  his  head  by
Mrs.  Twonnie's  ear.  Ladye  says  he  comes  up
mostly  in  the  mornings  on  the  bed.  There's  a
good  many  dogs  in  the  Spirit  'World,  several  dogs
that  you  and  Mrs.  Twonnie  will  be  pleased  to  see,
but  this  is  a  very  special  dog,  he's  more  than  a
dog  he's  a  person,  and  he  lives  in  the  house  not
in  a  kennel,  he  lives  like  what  you  call  a  Christian.
Ladye  says  he  understands  so  much.  (S.v.  He
used  to  have  a  plate,  a  plate,  a  plate,  don't  know
what  it  is  Ladye,  when  he  was  here  ?)

M.  R.  H.  I  don't  understand  that.

F.  It  was — look,  it  had  a  kind  of  rim  deeper  than  most

plates,  he  didn't  have  it  all  day  but  he  had  it
sometime  like  specially.  You'll  remember  after,
looks  to  Feda  like  a  plate  a  person  would  have.

M.  R.  H.  Can  you  see  the  colour  of  his  fur  ?

F.  (Begins drawing on  U.  V.  T.'s  hand.) (S.v.  She's

trying  to  write  his  coat.)
U.  V.  T. That's  a  B.


ixxxii.]  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  59


F.  Then  like  that  (draws  on  U.  V.  T."s  hand  B.R.O.W.N.)

(S.v.  Yes  but  she  says  it  isn't  quite  an  ordinary
brown,  they  wouldn't  call  it  brown  ;  they'd  call
it  another  colour,  but  brown  is  as  near  as  Feda
can  get.)  Ladye  says  they'd  call  it  a  different
sounding  name  altogether.  (Feda  begins  to  draw
on  U.  V.  T.'s  hand.)


u.

V.

T.

Whats  that  ?

F.

Can't  get  him  properly.

U.

V.

Write  that  first  letter  in the air  (Feda  di'aws
intelligibly  in  the  air).

un-

u,

V.

T,

I  thought  I  understood  that  first  letter.

After  it  comes  a  letter  like  that  (draws  in  the
unintelligibly).

air

U.

V.

T.

Do it on my hand (Feda draws  something
U.  V.  T.'s  hand). Is  that  printed  ?

on

F.

No,  wroted.

TJ.

V.

T.

Never  mind  I  can't  follow.

F.

It  looked  like  an  S.  to  Feda.

V.

V.

T.

Yes,  she  did  an  S.  in  the  air.

The  description  of  the  dog  which  is  said  to  be  present
■a,t  the  sitting  of  April  17,  1918,  so  closely  resembles  the
■earlier  description  given  on  March  6,  1918,  that  on  that
.score  alone  it  would  appear  almost  certain  that  the  same
■dog  was  referred  to  upon  each  occasion,  and  any  doubt
there  might  be  on  the  point  is  removed  by  further  refer-
ences to  the  matter  made  by  the  A.  V.  B.  control  later
in  the  sitting  of  April  17,  thus  :

M.  R.  H.  I'm  glad  you  brought  that  dog.

A.  V.  B.  I've  brought  him  over  and  over  again,  and  I  told
you  his  name,  but  I  didn't  connect  it  up  with
him.  I  gave  you  his  name  and  it's  most  im-
portant.

And,  again,  after  some  references  to  another  topic  :

A.  V.  B. Rune,  I  knew  you  would  be  pleased,  darling.

M.  R.  H.  It  was  sweet  of  you  to  bring  him.

A.  V.  B. You  knew  I'd  have  him,  and  he  does  love  you.


60


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


It  will  be  remembered  that  at  the  sitting  of  March  6,
1918,  the  name  Rune  was  given  as  being  in  some  way
connected  with  the  dog  there  described,  although  the
nature  of  the  connexion  was  not  clearly  indicated.  It  i&
doubtless  to  this  slight  confusion  that  A.  V.  B.  is  alluding
above  when  she  says  :  "I  told  you  his  name,  but  I  didn't
connect  it  up  with  him."  It  will  be  remembered  that  on
the  earlier  occasion  (see  above,  p.  46)  there  was  some
confusion  in  regard  to  the  ownership  of  the  dog  ;  on  this
occasion  the  dog  is  clearly  recognised  as  having  belonged
to  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall,  for  A.  V.  B.  is  said  to  be  "  keeping
the  dog  for "  her.  The  description  of  the  dog  given  on
April  17,  1918,  is  good  and  more  detailed  than  the  de-
scription of  March  6,  1918.  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  says  in
her  note  :

Feda  makes  a  good  jjoint  when,  in  describing  the  hair
on  the  dog's  shoulders,  she  says  that  it  turns  out.  and
indicates  by  gesture  hair  turning  upwards  at  the  ends.
This,  although  not  at  all  classical  in  a  collie,  was  char-
acteristic of  the  collie  Rufus.  Feda  is  correct  when  in
speaking  of  the  eyes  she  implies  that  they  are  not  of  a
very  dark  brown.  The  little  marks  at  the  end  of  the
muzzle  to  which  Feda  alludes,  are  probably  the  little
marks  at  the  root  of  the  whiskers  that  are  visible  on  the
muzzles  of  many  dogs,  and  which  were  particularly  visible
in  Rufus,  whose  muzzle  was  white.  As  Feda  states,  the
hair  on  Rufus 's  legs  was  glossy  and  extremely  velvety
and  smooth.  A  good  point  is  made  regarding  his  toes,
which  are  said  to  be  nicely  divided  ;  a  photograph  of
him  in  my  possession,  which  has  never  been  seen  by
Mrs.  Leonard,  shows  this  peculiarity  of  rather  markedly
divided  toes  very  clearly.  Feda  says  that  the  toes  look
Ughter  at  the  ends,  which  would  be  true  of  one  foot
which  was  white,  the  leg  being  brown  ;  Rufus's  other  legs
and  feet  were  white  laearly  all  over.  Feda  makes  another
good  point  when  she  says  the  toes  are  not  pointed,  but
are  rounded,  and  that  you  can  feel  that  they  are  "  little,
short,  fat  toes."  This  was  a  peculiarity  of  Rufus,  so
much  so  that  a  lady  who  knew  him  used  to  remark  that


xxxxii.]  Miss  Roddy ffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  61

his  feet  and  ankles  reminded  her  of  an  old  gentleman
of  the  foppish  type,  wearing  very  tight  boots  and  tight
white  spats.  On  March  6th,  1918,  Avhen  describing
Rufus's  feet,  Feda  said  that  they  were  bigger  and  longer
than  those  of  U.  V.  T.'s  terrier  Benjamin  (see  above,
p.  46),  and  that  also  was  correct,  as  owing  to  his  breed-
ing, and  the  fact  that  he  is  a  small  dog,  Benjamin  gives
the  appearance  of  having  hardly  any  feet  at  all,  a  marked
characteristic,  and  a  show  point  of  prize-bred  wii-e-haired
terriers  ;  therefore,  although  Rufus's  feet  were  plump  and
round,  and  tight-looking,  they  were  bigger  and  longer
than  are  Benjamin's.  Just  after  the  reference  to  the  feet
in  the  sitting  of  April  17  Lady  Troubridge  asked  a  trick
question,  namely  whether  this  dog  had  got  a  tail.  She
wondered  whether  Feda  would  describe  a  short  tail  like
Benjamin's,  or  no  tail  at  all,  as  she  had  done  when
referring  to  a  bob-tailed  sheep  dog  at  another  lady's
sitting.  But  Feda  was  not  caught  out,  for  she  proceeded
to  give  a  correct  description  of  a  collie's  tail.

After  Miss  Radclyfie-Hall's  statement  that  she  had
missed  the  dog  very  much  and  wished  he  could  under-
stand, Rufus  is  represented  as  saying,  "in  a  confidential
and  re-assuring  way,'"  "  It's  all  right,  and  you  can  tell
me  all  that  when  you  come  over."  "  Don't  worry,  we
can  talk  about  that  when  you  come  over."'  Now  Miss
Radclyffe -Hall's  words  do  not  on  the  face  of  them  imply
anything  more  than  natural  regret  at  the  loss  of  an  old
pet,  but  the  reply  put  into  the  dog's  mouth  seems  to
imply  that  Miss  RadclylJe-Hall  had  been  worried  about
something  which  she  would  like  to  have  an  opportunity
of  explaining  to  the  dog.  And  this  was  in  fact  the  case.
Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  had  been  feeling  some  remorse  in
regard  to  the  dog  Rufus,  ever  since  his  death  on  January
18,  1918,  for  a  reason  which  she  thus  explains  in  her
note  :

The  dog  was  sent  to  board  in  the  country  in  the
summer  of  1917,  as  he  could  not  be  taken  to  the  lodging-
house  where  I  spent  my  holiday.  On  my  return  in  the
autumn  [to  London]  I  had  intended  to  have  Rufus  home.


62


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


but  the  air-raids  became  so  bad,  and  Rufus  had  showed
such  terror  of  them  in  the  past  that  it  was  decided  to
leave  him  where  he  was  until  I  settled  in  a  country
abode.  .  .  .  The  order  had  just  been  given  to  send  the
dog  to  Datchet  when  a  telephone  message  came  through
in  the  evening  to  say  that  he  was  dying.

Owing  to  the  breakdown  of  a  motor,  Miss  Radclyffe-HalL
was  unable  to  reach  Rufus  before  he  died,  and  con-
sequently it  had  been  much  on  her  mind  that  the  dog,,
having  spent  his  last  months  away  from  herself,  to  whom
he  was  devoted,  had  died  alone.  It  was  therefore  appro-
priate that  Feda  should  ascribe  to  the  dog  words  which
seem  to  imply  on  the  part  of  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  a  desire
to  clear  up  some  misunderstanding.  As  already  stated,
precautions  had  been  taken  to  keep  any  knowledge  of  the
dog's  death  from  Mrs.  Leonard,  and,  except  Lady  Trou-
bridge,  no  living  person  knew  that  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall
thought  she  had  anything  to  reproach  herself  wath  in
regard  to  Rufus.

After  a  digression  concerning  the  terrier  Benjamin
(omitted  above),  some  further  statements  are  made  about
Rufus,  all  but  one  of  which  were  correct.  The  habit  of
holding  "  his  head  a  bit  on  one  side  "  and  looking  "  kind
of  sideways  '"  was  characteristic  of  the  dog,  and  used  to
be  commented  on  when  he  was  alive.  It  is  also  appro-
priate to  say  of  Rufus  that  "he  lives  in  the  house,  not
in  a  kennel,  he  lives  like  what  you  call  a  Christian."
The  dog  during  his  lifetime  was  always  kept  in  the  house,
and  Feda  makes  a  correct  distinction  upon  this  point
between  Rufus  and  Lady  Troubridge's  terrier  Billy,  con-
cerning whom  she  said  at  a  sitting  on  December  6,  1916,
that  he  was  not  kept  in  the  house,  but  "  just  outside "
(see  S.P.R.  Proc,  Vol.  XXX.,  p.  487).  Mere  guessing  on
Feda's  part  might  have  led  her  to  surmise  that  a  dog  as
large  as  the  one  she  had  described  on  April  17,  1918,.
would  be  kept  out  of  doors.

In  reply  to  a  question  as  to  the  colour  of  the  dog's
coat,  Feda  says  it  is  brown,  but,  she  says,  it  would  be
called  by  another  name. She  does  not  get  nearer  to  this


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  63


name  than  to  give  the  first  letter,  S.  The  dog  was  a
sable  colhe.

The  point  upon  which  Feda  goes  wrong  is  in  describing
a  particular  plate  which  the  dog  is  said  to  have  used.
Rufus  never  had  a  plate  of  his  own,  but  it  is  not  an
uncommon  thing  for  a  dog  that  is  much  petted  to  have
a  special  plate,  and  Feda  would  seem  to  be  indulging  her
fancy  here  by  adding  what  seems  to  her  a  likely  touch.


2.  A  Group  of  Names.

On  several  occasions  during  this  period  unusual  names
with  which  A.  V.  B.  had  been  very  familiar  during  her
life  were  spontaneously  given  in  the  trance.  One  of  these
incidents  occurred  on  March  13,  1917,  during  a  "personal
control,"  that  is  to  say,  when  A.  V.  B.  was  pur-
porting to  communicate  directly,  by  using  the  medium's
organism  herself,  and  not  through  the  usual  intermediary
Feda. The  relevant  extract  from  the  record  is  as  follows  :

A.  V.  B. Morizion, Moritza, Morenze, oh isnt it annoying  !

It's something I wanted to remember, a  name.

More,  Moren,  Moren,  Moren,  Moren  was  the  word,

with  something  else  after  it,  Moren.
M.  R.  H.  I  think  you're  getting  near.
A.  V.  B. Morena,  Morena,  Morenie,  Morena  !

M.  R.  H.  I  think  you've  said  a  word  I  recognise.  I  recognise
Morena.

A.  V.  B.  I  know,  Morena  was  quite  good  to  get  through,  it
isn't  an  ordinary  word,  is  it  ?  There's  something
so  excruciatingly  funny  about  these  sittings  some-
times, just  getting  words  through.  Morena  is
more  to  do  with  the  past,  and  B.,  oh  darling
some  wretched  word  that  begins  with  a  B,  too.

M.  R.  H.  Quite  right.

A.  V.  B.  And  some  awful  and  wretched  word  too —  and
some  wretched  person  whose  name  begins  with  an
L  too,  they're  all  wretched  when  I  can't  get  their
names.


'64


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Commenting  on  the  above  extract,  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall
says  :

Morena  was  a  nickname  given  by  A.  V.  B.  to  a  friend,
the  lady  to  whom  this  name  was  given  being  very  dark.
Nobody  except  A.  V.  B.  and  I  ever  called  her  by  this
name.  A.  V.  B.  is  correct  when  she  says  that  Morena
is  more  to  do  with  the  past,  she  is  also  correct  when
she  links  up  with  this  name  the  letters  B  and  L.  Two
intimate  friends  of  Morena 's,  both  people  very  well  known
to  A.  V.  B.,  have  names  that  begin  with  a  B  and  with
an  L.  These  two  people  were  intimately  associated  with
the  whole  of  A.  V.  B.'s  friendship  with  Morena.

Again,  on  March  27,  1918,  w^hen  Lady  Troubridge  w^as
the  sitter  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  the  recorder,  a  block
and  a  pencil  were  given  to  Feda,  who  was  controlling  at
the  time,  and  she  wrote  upon  it  the  name  Robert.  Later
in  the  sitting  the  following  incident  occurred  :

U.  V.  T. Ladye,  shall  I  ask  you  a  question  to  amuse  you  ?

You  wrote  a  name  here  (indicates  the  block)  called
Robert.  You  knew  a  Robert,  but  you  didn't  call
him  Robei't,  what  did  you  call  him  ?

F.  She"s  laughing. (Feda  begins  drawing  in  the  air,  but

her  letters  cannot  be  followed.)

IT.  V.  T. Make  it  a  printed  letter.

F.  A  stroke  down  and  a  piece. (Feda  draws  a  vertical

line  in  the  air  ■\\itli  a  horizontal  line  sticking  on  to
the  side  of  it.)

U.  V.  T. That  is  no  letter  at  all.

F.  She  says  it  is,  the  piece  is  a  curve. (Feda  draws

unintelligibly  on  U.  V.  T."s  hand.)

U.  V.  T. That's  like  a  mouse  walking  over  your  hand.

F.  She  says  don  t  think  her  silly, but  when  you  said

that,  it  reminded  her  of  something  to  do  with
Robert,  now  she"s  building  this  up  (Feda  draws
an  R.  followed  by  other  unintelligible  letters).

U.  V.  T. I  think  she's  Avriting  Robert.

F.  She  says  no  !  she  doesn't  want  to  write  Robert  !


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Radclyjfe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Trouhridge.  65


U.  V.  T. Ladye,  do  try  and  write  in  capitals.

F.  One  straight  line,  and  another  straight  line,  and  a

bar  across  him.  (Feda  draws  H.  distinctly  in  the
air.)

U.  V.  T. That's  an  H.

F.  Now  like  this. (Feda  draws  an  I.  in  the  air.)

U.  V.  T. Yes,  H.I.

F.  Do  it  again,  now,  after  the  I.  Ladye. (She  draws

indistinctly  on  U.  V.  T.'s  hand.)  Can  you  get
that  ?  it's  a  round  thing  mth  a  piece  on  him.
(Feda  leaves  U.  V.  T.'s  hand  and  draws  a  D.  in
the  air.)

U.  V.  T. Yes,  that's  a  D.

F.  No,  Ladye,  that's  not  right,  well  like  this  ?  (Feda

draws  an  A.  in  the  air.)  Not  quite  right  Ladye,
she  must  go  back.  (Feda  draws  in  the  air  H.I.D.A.
and  then  a  letter  that  is  not  understood.)

U.  V.  T. Can  you  print  the  letter  after  A.  Ladye  ?

F.  Yes  she  must. Ladye,  that  isn't  a  printed  letter  !

(Feda draws a printed G. in the air.)  {S.v.

Hidagio. Hidagio. Hidag. Hidagil.  Hidagio.)

What  a  funny name  ! Well she's doing that. —

(Feda draws in the air H.I.D.A.G.O.)  (S.v.

Hidaljo  ! Hidaljo  !) She  forgot  the L., but  she

can  say  it.^
U.  V.  T. How  ?

F.  Hidaglio. (This was pronounced as if it  were

Italian.) Yes,  but  she  put  a  G.  in  it,  that's  not
•  ■ how  she  spelt  it! [S.v.  Hidaglio.)

It  will  be  seen  that  in  reply  to  a  question  as  to  what
was  the  name  which  A.  V.  B.  gave  to  a  friend  of  hers
called  Robert,  Feda  drew  the  letters  H  I  D  A  G  0  and
stated that a letter L had been omitted between  the

^Possibly  the  omission  of  tlie  letter  L  was  due  to  a  confusion  with
the  word  "  dago,"  meaning  a  foreigner,  a  word  probably  known  to  Mrs.
Leonard.

'  E


66


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


letters  A  and  G,  thus  giving  Hidalgo.  Commenting  upon
this,  Lady  Troubridge  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  say  :

The connexion between Robert and the  nickname

Hidalgo  is  very  interesting. Robert  C  ■  was  a  great

friend  of  A.  V.  B.'s  and  M.  R.  H.'s  ;  he  is  rather  Spanish-
lookmg  and  in  consequence  was  always  called  Hidalgo  by
A.  V.  B.  There  appears  to  have  been  some  difficulty  in
making  Feda  pronoimce  this  unusual  nickname,  but  she
finally  managed  to  say  Hidaljo,  and  then,  giving  the  name
an  Italian  pronunciation,  Hidaglio.  Tactful  questioning
has  elicited  the  fact  that  J\Irs.  Leonard  once  tried  to  learn
Spanish,  but  did  not  proceed  very  far.  The  connexion
between  Robert  and  the  mouse  is  not  understood,  but  may
be  correct.

A  third  case  of  a  distinctive  name  bemg  given
occurred  on  April  3,  1918,  during  a  personal  control,  thus  :

A.  V.  B.  I'm  beginning  to  be  able  to  think.  (S.v.  Selber —
Selbar — )  I  can't  get  it,  darling.  Sem — Sem —
Sember — Samber — Sembar —  isn't  it  stupid  !  Sem —
ber — ru — ne — ne — ne.  Sem — ber — ne — Sem — ben —
ne— nel — ned.

M.  R.  H.  That's  very  near.

A.  V.  B.  I  know  when  I'm  near,  but  it  doesn't  make  it  easier
to  get  it.  Next  time  I  get  it  it's  changed  mto
something  else.  {S.v.  Sembenet — Sem-bennett — -
Sembennett — Sem  Bennett — Sem  Bene-e-e-)  Per-
haps if  I  sing  it  !  I've  got  Sem  Ben  ;  Sem
Bennetti — Sem  Bennetti — Benetti — Benetti— Ti — te —
Sem — Benetti — Sem  Benetti — netti — nette — nett —
Tis — ti — tis — tenni.  (MeanwhUe  A.  V.  B.  is  feeling
U.  V.  T.'s  face  with  her  hand.)  Oh  darling  t
I  didn't  know  I  was  pinching  Una's  nose.  (The
voice  here  was  very  like  A.  V.  B.'s.)  Let  me  get
another  breath  and  try  again.  Fi — Sembenet — fi —
fit. (Some  unintelligible  whispering.) I'm  getting

P  mixed  up  with  it  now,  and  I  do  want  to

get  it,  it's  so  amusing  ! (More  inarticulate  whisper-


Lxxxii.]  Miss  Eadclyjfe-Hall  and  Una,  Lady  Troubridge.  67

ing.)  I  can  get  so  far,  and  can't  get  any  further.
Sem  Benett — Sem  Benetti.  I  wish  I  could  get
further  than  that,  but  I  can't.

The  name  which  A.  V.  B.  was  apparently  trying  to
give  on  this  occasion  was  that  of  the  well-known  Italian
poet  Sem  Benelli.  She  gets  as  near  to  this  name  as
Sem  Benetti.  In  order  to  make  it  clear  why  A.  V.  B.
might  wish  to  mention  this  name,  some  account  must  be
given  of  two  incidents  which  occurred  at  previous  sittings.
On  March  20,  1918,  A.  V.  B.  gave  a  book-test  from  a
row  of  Italian  books  at  Miss  Radclyffe-Hairs  flat  in
London  specially  set  aside  for  that  purpose  ;  it  was  said
at  this  sitting  that,  in  accordance  with  a  suggestion
previously  made  to  her,  A.  V.  B.  was  collaborating  with
a  communicator  whom  we  will  call  E.  A.  ;  in  the  course
of  giving  this  test  she  referred  to  a  picture  or  photograph
said  to  be  in  one  of  the  "  test-books.""  Several  of  those
books  were  by  Sem  Benelli  and  had  photographs  of  the
author  pasted  inside.

On  March  26,  1918,  at  a  sitting  taken  by  Mrs.  D.  (see
below,  p.  68),  E.  A.  purported  to  communicate  and  to
give  a  test  from  the  same  row  of  books  from  which
A.  V.  B.'s  test  had  been  taken  on  March  20,  1918.  It
was  said  on  this  second  occasion  that  there  was  a  picture
connected  with  the  test  books,  the  picture  was  said  to  be
black  and  white,  and  Feda  endeavoured  to  pronounce  a
word  which  she  said  was  connected  with  this  picture.
She  did  not  however  get  beyond  ejaculating  :  "  Ser —
Se — Se."  She  described  the  picture  as  being  three-
quarter  length,  and  when  given  a  block  and  pencil,  she
wrote  :  "  South,  Sul,  Sir,"'  and  then  "  Se  "  followed  by
an  indeterminate  letter.  The  book-test  began  by  the
mention  of  this  picture  in  which  E.  A.  evinced  consider-
able interest.  The  description  given  by  him  through  Feda
would  apply  to  one  of  the  photographs  pasted  into  the
test-books,  and  the  description  given  by  A.  V.  B.  on
March  20,  1918,  would  apply  to  another.  It  is  therefore
easy  to  understand  why  A.  V.  B.  should  be  interested  in
the  name  Sem  Benelli  and  should  endeavour  to  mention


68


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


it  at  the  sitting  of  April  3,  1918,  especially  as  Sem  Benelli
is  a  personal  friend  of  Lady  Troubridge's.

§11. J.  D.'s  Sittings.

Three  sittings  were  held  during  the  period  under  review
by  a  lady  whose  name  is  known  to  the  Society  (of  which
she  is  a  member),  but  who  will  be  referred  to  here  as
J.  D.  J.  D.  has  had  a  considerable  number  of  sittings
with  Mrs.  Leonard,  at  which  a  friend  of  hers,  whom  we
\^dll  call  E.  A.,  has  purported  to  communicate.  I  have
selected  for  mention  here  two  incidents,  of  which  one
seems  to  indicate  some  knowledge  of  a  contemporary
event  unknown  at  the  time  to  the  sitter.

"  -  •  Extract  from  sitting  of  February  22,  1918.  ■  :■

Fbda. He says what's the matter with the top of  the

house  ?  ■ - .  ...

J.  D. My  house  in  the  country  ?

Feda. Yes, he's  laughing, he  says  he  explores. He  says

there  is  something  the  matter.
J.  D. I  must  look.

Feda. He says he explores and sees automatically  and
thinks, "  Oh, I'll tell J. that next time."  He
.  doesn't  mean  to  say  he  jumps  down  chimneys,  but

he  naturally  has  access  to  different  parts  of  the
house  to  what  you  have.

■  '• ■ .  ' Comment  by  the  sitter.  :  '

When  I  arrived  home  at  6  p.m.  the  evening  after  the
sitting,  the  first  thing  I  heard  was  that  the  smoking-
room  chimney  had  been  on  fire  that  day  about  12.30
[p.m.],  the  very  time  E.  A.  asked  me  if  anything  was
wrong.

The  contemporary  record  of  the  sitting  notes  that  it
began  at  11.35  a.m.  and  ended  at  1.10  p.m.  The  reference
to  there  being  "  something  wrong  with  the  top  of  the
house  "  occurred  towards  the  end  of  the  sitting,  probably


Lxxxn.]  J.  D.'s  Sittings.  69

between  12.30  and  12.45  p.m.  The  allusion  to  "  jumping
down  chimneys  "  suggests  that  the  connexion  of  the
trouble  with  a  chimney  has  been  imperfectly  transmitted.

The  second  incident  I  shall  quote  here  occurred  during
a  part  of  the  sitting  when  E.  A.  was  purporting  to
control  the  medium  directly.

Extract  from,  sittmg  of  March  26,  1918.
E.  A. Do you remember a dog's name beginning  wdth
a  T  ?

J.  D. No,  I  don't.

E.  A. ...  And  Ger — ,  I  think  it  was  G  or  J,  it  had  a

J  sound.
J.  D. A  dog  ?

E.  A. Yes,  not  a  pig,  my  dear.

J.  D.  (To  the  recorder.)  Make  a  particular  note  of  the
pig.

E.  A.  Yes,  the  pig  is  pork  long  ago  !  Dear,  where  you
photographed  with  the  pig  ?

J.  D. Yes,  you  had  a  photograph  of  me  with  the  pig.

E.  A.  Yes,  isn't  there  a  line  running  along  the  lower  part
of  the  photograph  behind  you,  suggesting  a  path-
way ?

J.  D.  Yes.

E.  A. And  a  border,  a  rather  narrow  border.
J.  D.  Yes.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

Six  or  seven  years  ago  I  had  a  pet  pig  that  I  had
brought  up  from  a  tiny  thing  with  a  bottle.  I  gave
E.  A.  in  1912  a  snapshot  of  myself  with  the  pig.  I  was
standing  on  a  grass  path  with  a  border  of  high  flowers
behind.

§  III. Mrs.  Beadon's  Sittings.

Mrs.  Beadon  is  a  member  of  the  Society,  and  an
incident  which  occurred  at  one  of  her  sittings  with  Mrs.
Leonard  has  already  been  recorded  in  the  Jo^irnal  (Vol.


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


XIX.,  p.  226)  ;  some  of  her  book-tests  also  are  recorded
in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  recent  paper  (Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXXI.,
I).  260  ff).  On  the  occasion  referred  to  below  she  took  the
notes  of  the  sitting  herself,  as  she  usually  does.  She  is
an  experienced  sitter  and  a  careful  recorder.  The  pur-
porting communicator  is  her  husband,  Colonel  Beadon  ;
the  names  of  the  other  persons  concerned  are  known  to
the  Society,  but  pseudonyms  are  used  here  ;  in  selecting
the  pseudonym  Redhorn  (see  opposite)  care  has  been
taken  to  represent  as  accurately  as  possible  the  degree  of
success  attained  by  Feda  in  giving  the  real  name.

Extract  from  the  sitting  of  March  16,  1918.

Peda.  He  [the  communicator]  was  much  worried  about  her
[his  sister].  He  didn't  think  she  was  well.  .  .  .
There's  something  worrying  in  her  condition.  She
is  very  worried  about  some  one  and  the  worst  of
it  is  she  can't  do  anything,  but  there  is  some  one
on  this  side  helping. ^

He  keeps  on  giving  [R  2]

He  shows  the  picture  of  an  elderly  man  between
fifty  and  sixty,  taller  than  Mr.  Will  [the  com-
municator], wears  glasses.  He  is  on  the  earth
plane.  (Feda  draws  in  the  air  [AND  RE  W^]).
.  .  .  The  news  is  not  so  bad  as  Mr.  Will
expected  it  to  be.  It  is  not  that  nothing  ha-s
happened  ;  it  is  bad  enough  and  a  proper  worry,
but  not  so  bad  as  he  thought  it  was  going  to  be.

Comments  by  the  sitter.

1  She  [communicator's  sister]  had  just  heard  (a  few  days  previous
to  the  sitting)  that  her  son  was  wounded  in  Palestine.  She
could  get  no  details  and  was  terribly  anxious.  This  was  known
to  me,  but  not  to  the  mediiom.

^  Her  son's  name  is  [Richard],  and  though  he  is  always  called
[Dick]  I  took  it  to  mean  his  initial.  What  follows  further  on
makes  me  think  it  may  have  been  the  one  referred  to  as  "some
one  on  this  side  helping." [See  opposite.]

'  This  is  accurate  of  the  father  of  the  wounded  boy.  He  is
(I  think)  52,  tall,  wears  glasses  ; name  [Andrew].


IXXXII.]


Mrs.  Beadon's  Sittings.


71


Isn't  there  somebody  who  is  going  to  send  a
telegram  ?  ^

.  .  .  M  [communicator's  sister]  isn"t  ill  except
with  anxiety. Someone  else  is  iU  connected  with

Now  do  you  know  who  this  is  who  is  with
Mr.  Will  ?  He  is  helping  the  one  they  are
worried  about.  Tail  well  buUt,  very  nice  shaped
face,  clear-cut  features,  good  nose,  rather  straight
mouth.  The  chin  shows  the  line  of  the  jaw,  not
a  fleshy  chin  ;  rather  deep-set  eyes.^

He  writes  up. (Feda  draws  in  the  air  :

[W  illiam  dhorn*]

Feda  can't  get  two  of  the  letters.

He  smiles  when  Feda  says  ['"William"].  He
says  that  wasn't  what  he  was  generally  called.^

He  says  he  saw  you  last  at  a  place  where  there
were  a  lot  of  people  all  bowing  to  each  other,  a
party.®  He  says  he  is  happier  here  than  he  was
before.  He  was  lonely  in  his  soul,  though  he  was
with  other  people.  He  has  a  sensitive  face.  He
builds  up  H  \\'hich  stands  for  some  people  he
knew  and  you  knew  very  well.''

Comments  by  the  sitter.

1  I  sent  a  telegram  to  Cox's  agent  in  Palestine  and  asked  him
to  wire  particulars.  We  had  none  at  this  date  and  of  course
ieared  it  might  be  a  wound  that  woiild  permanently  disable  the
Tjoy.  Some  days  later  the  cable  came  saying  he  was  shot  through
the  forearm,  no  permanent  injiu'y.

^  Her  second  son  was  on  sick  leave  and  causing  anxiety.

^  This  was  a  very  good  description  of  the  man  whose  name
follows.

*  I  knew  a  [William  Redhorn],  the  son  of  om-  family  doctor  ;
he  died  25  years  ago. He  was  a  young  doctor  himself.

^  He  was  always  called  [Bill].

*  I  last  saw  him  at  a  dance.  He  got  pneim:ionia  three  days
later  and  died  within  a  week.

'  We  had  some  friends  called  H who  lived  near  us  both

and  whom  we  were  both  very  intimate  with.


72


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Sitter. Can  he  tell  me  anything  else  which  will  be  a  clue  ?
F.  He says: "John." You will understand. He  is

so  glad  to  come. He  tried  to  come  before.  .

He  says  John,  John,  John,  he  is  here.^ There  was

a  little  girl  related  to  [William],  she  i3assed  over.

He  was  sorry  for  somebody  else's  sake  more  than

his  own  .2

Getieral  comment  by  the  sitter.

I  should  like  to  say  that  I  had  seen  nothing  of  [W.  R.]'s

family  smce  we  left  our  old  home  at  R 24  years  ago.

I  had  however  met  his  sister  in  the  street  a  few  days
previous  to  the  sitting,  which  caused  some  memories  of
old  days  to  pass  through  my  mind  vaguely.  I  did  not
dwell  on  them.  This  has  happened  to  me  at  many
sittings,  i.e.  that  I  have  had  communications  connected
with  some  one  I  have  met  within  a  few  days  of  the
sitting.

Comments  by  the  sitter.

1  He  had  a  brother  John  who  was  a  very  dear  friend  of  mine
and  who  died  of  consumption  some  years  later.

^  I  do  not  know  about  this.


Lxxxn.]


Appendix.


73


APPENDIX

(The  extracts  from  sittings  which  appear  heloiv  are  intended  to  illustrate
various  points  discussed  in  Part  I.  of  this  j;aper.  Thet^  are  all  taken
from  first  sittings.)

§  I.  Description  of  Personal  Appearance  :

1.  Young  Men  - -  -  -

2.  Older  Men - -  -  -

3.  Women  - - -  -  -

4.  Persons  still  alive  -

§  II.  Circumstances  and  Physical  Conditions  Associated
with  a  Communicator's  Death  :

1.  Young  Men  99

2.  Women  and  Older  Men . - - .  105-

§  III.  Descriptions  of  Articles  said  to  have  belonged  to

or  been  associated  with  a  Communicator - -  110

§  IV.  Descriptions of Places associated with a  Com-
municator --------  124

§  V.  References  to  Anniversaries - - - - - ]  26

§  VI.  Extracts  from  Two  Sittings  at  which  the  same

Communicator  purported  to  be  present - -  130

§  VII.  Some  E\ddence  of  Apparent  Communication  from

a  Person  still  alive - - - - - -  133^


PAGE

74
85
91

96.


74


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


§  I.  Descriptions  of  Personal  Appearance.
1.  Young  Men.

Extract,  from  sitting  of  January  15,  1918.

Feda.  Feda  wants  to  describe  one  of  the  youngish  men.  He's
about  twenty-eight  or  thirty,  it's  a  bit  difficult  to
judge.  He's  tall  and  well-built,  holds  himself
straight.  He's  about  medium  build  and  he  walks
well,  when  he  moves  about.  He's  got  a  fine-looking
face — good  features.  His  face  slopes  a  bit  towards
the  chin,  the  chin  isn't  quite  square.  The  mouth  is
about  straight,  very  nice  shape.  His  nose  shows  the
bridge  a  bit,  it's  narrow  about  the  middle  and  narrow
about  the  tip,  broadening  towards  the  nostrils.  The
eyebrows  are  well-marked,  a  little  arched,  brownish.
The  forehead  is  square,  not  prominent.  There's  not
much  hollow  between  the  forehead  and  nose.  You'd
notice  that  if  you  have  a  photo  taken  sideways.  His
hair  is  short,  a  little  away  from  the  face.  He's  got
a  brown  skin,  a  little  pale,  but  not  naturally.  That's
the  passing  over  conditions.

The  sitter  notes  that  the  age  of  the  communicator,
whom  she  identifies  as  her  husband,  is  correctly  given.
He  was  twenty-eight  when  he  died.  The  description  she
considers  "  quite  fairly  good,"  but  no  point  in  it  appears
to  have  struck  her  as  especially  characteristic.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  17,  1918.

Feda.  He  ^  brings  forward  a  young  man — tall  and  well-built —
medium  across,  not  broad — well-proi^ortioned — fine-
shaped  face,  rather  long,  not  thin — a  little  bit
rounded — the  chin  not  pointed — a  little  bit  square —
from  sideways  it's  not  prominent — the  full  face  gives

^  An  "elderly  man"  identified  by  the  sitter  as  her  father.


LXXXii.] Description  of  Personal  Appearance.


75


an  impression  of  strength.  The  lips  curved,  very
nice  shape — :the  nose  not  quite  straight — a  good  skin,
on  the  fair  side,  very  clear,  very  clean-looking.  Can't
see  the  eyes  yet — eyebrows  brownish,  well-marked —
not  arched  from  the  nose,  sweeping  up  a  bit.  The
forehead,  good — a  straight  line  up — the  head  a  good
shape.  The  hair  very  short,  thick,  straight  on  top —
he  brushes  it  backwards — it  grows  up  a  bit.  A  smart
appearance.

This  is  said  by  the  sitter  to  be  a  good  description  of
her  son  killed  in  the  war.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  26,  1920.

Feda.  First  Feda  wants  to  describe  a  young  man  who  seems
most  impatient  ;  {s.v.  wait  a  minute,)  he's  above
medium  height,  on  the  tall  side,  well  builted,  not
stout  or  over  broad,  a  nice  shaped  face,  a  bit  more
oval  than  round  ;  good  features,  j^retty  regular.  A
nice  mouth,  about  medium  size  and  fullness.  His
nose  is  nearly  straight,  but  the  tip  is  rounded,  not
pointed.  The  bridge  shows  quite  a  little  bit,  but  it
doesn't  make  it  a  aquiline  nose,  the  eyebrows  are
darkish,  bro-mi,  and  a  little  arched,  and  he  has  a
forehead  what  shows  a  bit  square  at  the  temples.
His  hair  is  bromi  and  quite  short,  brushed  away
from  his  forehead,  (Feda  indicates  Avith  gesture,  hair
brushed  backwards).

Feda  feels  he  has  tried  to  get  into  communication
with  Feda  before,  somewhere.  His  skin  is  nice,
about  medium  colour,  and  he  holds  his  head  straight.
His  chin  isn't  pointed,  it's  round  although  the  face
slopes  to  it.  It's  a  nice  shaped  chin  and  a  very
nice  shaped  face  altogether.

The  sitter  notes  that  the  communicator's  height  is
wrongly  given.  He  was  "  if  anything  under  medium
■height,  but  well  made."'  Of  the  other  statements  he
says  :  "  Quite  an  accurate  and  detailed  description.
Photographs  can  prove."


76


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


  Extract  from  sitting  of  January  28,  1918.

Feda.  Raymond  and  Bim  are  helping  a  young  man  to  talk
to  this  young  man  [the  sitter].  He's  tall— about
medium— well-built,  and  holds  himself  well ;  his  face
,  .  is  not  quite  round,  it  slopes  a  bit  towards  the  chin —
the  chin  is  rounded,  pretty  broad  ;  it's  not  a  pointed
face — a  firm  mouth  about  medium  sized,  the  lips  a
little  full ;  he  holds  his  mouth  straight,  close  together.
The  nose  shows  the  bridge  a  little,  it  comes  down
straight  and  the  tip  is  round— it's  not  aquiline.  His
nose  broadens  a  little  at  the  nostrils — it's  not  broad
at  the  bridge.  Feda  can't  see  his  eyes— blue  or
bluey-gi-ey,  the  eyebrows  brown,  well-marked,  not
very  much  arched  from  the  centre  part,  brown,  a
good-shaped  forehead,  rather  a  straight  line,  not  full  •
the  hair  brown,  cut  short  at  the  sides — it  sticks  up
a  little  at  the  top  ;  he  combs  it  back  and  a  little
sideways  ;  he  doesn't  agree  it  sticks  up,  but  it's  a
little  raised  at  the  top,  fuller.

The  sitter  notes  that  "  this  is  quite  a  good  descriptioa
of  the  communicator  I  hoped  to  meet,  i.e.  my  brother."

Later  in  the  sitting  Feda  made  a  further  reference  to
the  same  communicator's  appearance,  thus  :

Feda. A  mark. {S.v.  Is  it  the  neck  or  face  or  chin  1)  It's
the first spirit speaking again. He speaks of  a
• • mark, he  rubs  the  side of  his  face, something  at
.  .' . the  side,  not  a  large  ugly  mark,  something  small.

He  had  it  towards  the  end  part  of  his  earth  life,  to
the  side of  the  face, on  the  left  side,  somewhere
, under. [Indicates  a  point  under  the  chin  near  the
ear.]

■  This  allusion  to  a  mark  was  not  understood  by  the
sitter.^ ■  '  ■ .. .

1  Cf.  the  correct  allusion  to  a  mark  in  the  sitting  of  April  4,  1918
(see  above,  p.  14).  These  are  the  only  occasions  during  the  period
tmder  discussion  when  allusions  were  made  to  a  mark  on  the  face.


ixxxn.]


Description  of  Personal  Appearance.


77


Extract  from  sitting  of  January  29,  1918.

Feda.  There's  a  young  man  on  the  other  side  wants  to  speak
to  you.  He  kept  saying  a  funny  thing.  Feda'll
describe  him. He's  above  the  medium  height,  about

■  '  . medium  in  build,  nice  shaped  face,  a  bit  too  long  to

be roimd — a nice skin and complexion — the  chin

■  , . firm,  but  kind — the  mouth  not  large,  medium,  the
. ".. lips  not  very  full,  a  little  curved — the  lower  part  of

the  face  has  got  such  a  kind  look,  almost  like  a
girl's — the  nose  almost  straight,  not  sharp,  a  tiny  bit
broader at the tip — the eyes rather like yours  in
colour, the eyebrows a little bit arched,  brown — a
nice  forehead,  well- developed — pretty  broad — the  hair
you'd  call  brown,  short,  a  little  longer  at  the  top
and  with  a  crisp  Avay  of  sticking  up  at  the  forehead —
.~ he brushes it away from the forehead — when  he
brushes  it  away,  he's  got  a  little  bit  sticking  up  a
.  little  at  the  top. He's  been  to  you  before — he  tried
"  .  to  get  through  several  times. Wait  a  minute.  He
feels you've felt him. He comes at  night-time
mostly,  a  bit  in  the  day-time.

,  Comment  by  the  sitter.

The  description  given  of  my  son  is  quite  a  good  one.
The  bit  of  hair  sticking  up  on  the  top  of  his  head,  his
horn,  as  we  called  it,  was  a  personal  touch.  His  lips,
described  as  not  very  full,  was  wrong  ;  he  had  a  very  full
underlip,  a  pecuUarity  of  his  father's  family.  The  photo-
graph, which  I  enclose  .  .  .  shows  the  almost  womanish
sweetness  of  expression  described  by  Feda.

I  give  below  an  extract  from  a  sitting  on  April  9,  1918.
This  extract  is  included  at  this  point  (out  of  its  order  in
time),  because  the  two  sitters  on  January  29  and  April  9,
1918,  respectively,  were  mother  and  daughter,  and  the
ostensible  communicator  was  the  same  man,  son  to  one
sitter  and  brother  to  the  other.  It  is  therefore  of  interest
to  compare  Feda's  statements  on  each  occasion.  Nothing


78


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


was  said  to  Mrs.  Leonard  to  indicate  any  connexion
between  the  two  sitters,  and  there  is  an  interval  of  over
two  months  between  them.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  two
descriptions  are  generally  speaking  consistent.  There  is  a
slight  discrepancy  in  regard  to  the  shape  of  the  eyebrows,
and  in  the  sitting  of  April  9,  1918,  the  words  given  on
January  29,  1918,  in  reference  to  the  lips — "  not  very
full " — are  omitted.  There  is,  however,  no  indication  of
the  marked  fvillness  of  the  underlip  to  which  the  sitter  of
January  29,  1918,  refers.  Below  (see  p.  130)  I  give
further  extracts  from  these  two  sittings  to  indicate  other
points  of  connexion  between  them.

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  9,  1918.

Feda.  {Sotto  voce.  Yes.  I'm  coming.  Want  to  speak  to
her.  Wait  a  minute.)  Good  morning.  Give  Feda
your  hand.  There's  a  spirit  here  of  a  man  rather
young.  He  looked  at  you.  He  thought  some  one
else  might  be  here  as  well.  He's  tried  to  com-
municate before,  been  to  Feda  before.  He  wants
Feda  to  describe  him.  He's  on  the  tall  side,  straight,
well-built,  good  shoulders,  not  fat,  well-proportioned.
He's  above  medium  in  height  but  not  in  breadth.
His  face  is  not  round,  it's  a  httle  strong  round  the
jaw,  it's  too  long  to  be  called  round.  Good  features,
shows  the  bridge  a  little  of  the  nose — the  nose  about
medium  length,  the  tip  round,  a  little  full — the  mouth
medium  size,  not  small,  the  lips  a  little  curved— the
chin  rounded — the  eyebrows  well-marked,  rather
straight,  brown — the  forehead  square,  straight,  good-
shaped — the  hair  brown,  cutted  short,  even  on  the
top  it's  pretty  .short — he  never  wore  it  long,  but  he
cut  it  even  shorter  towards  the  end  of  his  earth  life.
He  brushes  it  up  away  from  his  forehead.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  31,  1918.

Feda.  There's  several  people  on  the  other  side  trjdng  to  get
through. A  man-sijirit  first. Feda  thinks  he  looks


Lxxxn.j Description  of  Persoyial  Appearance.  79

about  as  old  as  you  [the  sitter].  He's  rather  tall,
not  fat,  about  medium,  taller  than  medium  in  height  ;
the  shoulders  broad,  not  a  fat  body,  a  fine -looking
face — good  chin,  a  little  square— not  a  long  square,
a  rounded  squareness — rounded  cheeks.  They  got  a
little  straighter  before  he  passed  over.  The  mouth  is
about  medium,  the  underlip  a  little  bit  fuller  than
the  top — not  a  large,  full  mouth,  but  the  underlip  a
little  fuller — the  nose  shows  the  bridge  a  bit — a  good
shape — a  little  bit  on  the  big  side — not  broad  at  the
bridge,  but  broader  at  the  base — the  eyebrows  a
darkish  brown,  straight  shaped  ;  a  fine  forehead — the
hair,  short,  brushed  back — shows  the  temples  rather
plainly  ;  the  head  broadens  a  little  at  the  temples,
it's  well-developed.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

This  description  seemed  to  me  an  excellent  one  of
C.  J.,  a  friend  killed  early  in  the  war.  But  that  he
should  ap23ear  as  a  communicator  was  unexpected  and
puzzling,  as,  though  I  was  very  fond  both  of  him  and  his
wife,  I  was  not  one  of  their  oldest  or  most  intimate
friends,  and  none  of  the  statements  made  applied  to  me,
nor  did  I  know  if  there  was  any  truth  in  them.

It  is  of  some  interest  that  the  description  on  this
occasion  was  sufficiently  distinctive  to  recall  C.  J.  at  once
to  the  sitter's  mind,  although  she  was  not  expecting  him
to  appear  as  a  communicator.  Some  further  statements
were  made  which  were  applicable  to  C.  J.  (see  below,
p.  98  and  p.  124),  but  they  were  not  sufficiently  definite
to  make  identification  certain.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  1,  1918.

Feda.  Now  the  younger  man  who  comes  is  tall,  above  medium
height,  on  the  tall  side  in  height.  He's  pretty  broad
shouldered,  his  moustache  is  brownish,  not  very  long,
it's  not  one  of  those  what  comes  dowTi.  it's  cutted
to the sides of  his mouth. His mouth is  about


80  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

medium  size,  or  a  bit  larger,  and  his  lips  are  a  bit
full.  His  face  might  be  a  bit  broad,  but  it's  not
fat,  so  it  looks  about  medium.  His  nose  is  not
quite  straight,  'cos  it  does  show  the  bridge  a  little,
;  then  it  goes  straight,  and  it's  broader  at  the  bottom

part.  His  eyebrows  are  darkish  brown,  pretty  well
marked,  rather  straight,  and  sloping  down  a  bit  at  the
ends.  He  has  a  good  shaped  forehead,  his  hair  is
straight  Feda  thinks,  not  curly,  and  it's  cutted  very
short.  It's  darkish  brown,  and  it's  brushed  away
from  his  forehead.  This  gentleman  has  passed  on,
jjassed  over.

{Later  in  the  same  sitting.)  Now  Feda  wants  to  tell
you  that  in  the  spirit  world  with  him  he  has  quite
a  young  man,  like  a  boy,  who  Feda  thinks  passed
over  before  him.  He  looks  about  eighteen  to  Feda,
not  more,  rather  tall  and  rather  slight  in  build,  but
well  proportioned  and  builted  with  it.  He  has
rather  a  oval  face,  it's  not  thin  and  it's  a  nice
shape,  his  mouth  is  medium  size,  the  nose  is  straight
and  he  has  a  nice  shaped  chin  and  it's  round,  not
pointed,  though  the  face  is  oval.  The  eyebrows  is
well  marked  and  a  little  arched,  they  looks  to
Feda  to  be  brown,  on  the  dark  side,  but  his  com-
plexion isn't  dark,  he  has  a  nice  pink  colour  in
his  cheeks  and  a  clear  skin.  His  hair  is  dark
brown,  and  cutted  rather  short;  it  grows  rather
thickly  and  has  got  a  shade  on  it  of  a  lighter
colour.

The  sitter  notes  in  regard  to  these  two  descriptions  that
they  may  refer  to  two  near  relatives  killed  in  the  war,
hnt  the  descriptions  do  not  appear  to  have  struck  her  as
strikingly  good.

Extract  f row,  sitting  of  February  7,  1918.

Feda. Well,  he  wants  to  come,  a  young  man,  he's  with  an
older  man  and  a  lady  as  well,  but  the  young  man
;r ' wants  to  be  described. He's  on  the  tall  side,  not


Lxxxn.] Description  of  Personal  Appearance.  81


fat,  builted  a  bit  on  the  slim  side,  but  well  set  up.
He's  got  a  nice  face,  a  clear  skin  on  the  fair  side,
a  little  colour  in  his  cheeks  but  not  much,  his  cliin
is  round;  mouth  medium  size,  lij^s  not  too  full,  but
well  shaped,  the  lower  part  of  his  face  is  well  shaped.
His  face  seems  to  be  toward  oval,  the  eyes  blue  or
bluey  gray,  his  nose  shows  the  bridge  a  very  little,
and  is  medium  length,  it  broadens  from  the  tip  to
the  nostril.  His  eyebrows  are  a  little  arched,  and
his  forehead  is  a  good  shape,  not  quite  square,  he
has  brown  hair  cut  rather  short  at  the  sides  and
back,  but  a  little  longer  on  top  ;  and,  where  it's
growing  across  the  forehead  it  just  comes  up  a  bit
as  if  he  brushed  it  back.  {8. v.  Wait  a  minute  now.)
There's  a  photograph  taken  like  what  Feda's  de-
scribing him.  He's  got  a  very  frank  expression,  he
had  a  way  of  looking  straight  at  people  before  he
would  answer  them,  there's  a  frank  look  about  his
face.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

The  description  is  not  very  good.  There  are  several
photographs  which  might  be  referred  to.

He  [sitter's  son]  was  about  medium  height,  5  ft.  9  in.,
very  6;-oa(i-shouldered,  could  not  therefore  be  called  slim.
He  would  be  called  on  the  fair  side.  He  had  a  generous
curved  mouth,  sensitive,  free  from  any  suggestion  of
sensuality,  though  the  lips  were  rather  full.  Chin  more
square  than  round  and  with  a  deeply  marked  dimple.
Eyes  a  grey-green  hazel,  nose  straight  and  rather  full,
though  not  wide  at  the  tip.  The  rest  of  the  description
will  pass.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  14,  1918.

Peda.  Feda  sees  quite  a  young  man  ...  A  nice  boyish  face,
rather  round,  a  merry  looking  face,  a  fresh  com-
plexion— round  cliin — the  mouth  medium,  curved  a
little.  You  know  the  part  between  the  nose  and
mouth,  the  groove  between  ?  He'd  got  that  very
plain. It  made  his  mouth  a  cupid-bow  shape.  The


82


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


nose  is  rather  straight,  shows  the  bone  a  little  bit,
the  tip  rounded,  a  little  bit  broader  from  the  tip  to
the  nostril.  The  eyebrows  brown,  not  black,  arched
—the  forehead  a  good  shape,  very  good,  browny  hair,
cut  very  short — he  does  it  away  from  his  forehead,
brushed  across  and  back — it  shows  the  forehead
plainly. He  passed  over  rather  quickly.

The  sitter  notes  that  she  is  unable  to  identify  this
young  man  at  all.

Extract  from  sittmg  of  February  25,  1918.

Feda.  There's  a  young  man,  a  spirit,  trying  to  show  himself,
but  he  drifts  away  again.  He's  tall,  well-built  too —
well-built  shoulders — a  fine-looking  form.  His  face —
wait  a  minute,  not  oval  and  not  round — a  little  too
square  at  the  jaw  to  be  called  round — the  mouth  a
bit  big — well  formed  lips — strong  teeth — when  he
smiled  he  showed  them — the  nose  shows  the  bridge
a  bit,  rather  straight,  broadens  at  the  tip,  not  a
long,  pointed  nose,  medium  length — the  eyebrows  not
quite  regular,  very  little  arched,  straight,  sweeping
out  a  little  at  the  edge — can't  see  his  eyes— the
forehead  squarish — brown  hair,  short  at  the  sides,  bit
longer  at  the  top,  brushed  back.

Comment  by  the  sitter.
The  description  of  the  young  man  "  would  easily  fit
my  brother,  aged  44,  who  was  killed  in  the  war.  The
build  is  right  ;  shape  of  face  is  right  ;  lips,  teeth  and
smile  right.  Eyebrows  more  or  less  right,  though  I  do
not  think  I  should  have  called  them  ''not  quite  regular"  ;
forehead  right,  hair,  colour  right,  otherwise  not  very
accurate  ;  his  hair  was  always  short  and  scanty  at  the
temples;  this  might  be  called  "brushed  back"  perhaps.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  11.  1918.

Feda.  {S.v.  And,  yes,  wait  a  minute,  a  young  man  who
passed  over.)  A  young  man  who  passed  over,  and
that  lady  was  awful  pleased  to  see  him. A  young


/


Lxxxii.] Description  of  Personal  Appearance.  '  83

man  of  slim  build,  not  terribly  thin,  but  slim.  He's
got  a  fine  face,  towards  the  oval  in  shape,  his  nose
shows  the  bridge  a  little  bit,  but  it  would  be
straight  but  for  that  ;  he's  got  a  mouth  wha.t  has
lips  would  be  a  little  curved,  but  he  holds  them
straight  and  firmly.  His  chin  is  a  bit  too  broad  to
make  his  face  a  pure  oval.  (S.v.  Don't  like  very
oval  faces  !)  His  hair  is  brown  and  cut  very  short,
and  Feda  thinks  it  might  be  a  bit  wavy,  it  sticks
up  a  bit  here,  (Feda  makes  a  gesture  of  brushing
back  the  hair  on  top  of  the  head)  ;  he's  got  a  nice,
frank,  open  look  about  his  face  ;  he  looks  people
straight  in  the  face  in  a  kind,  straight  way,  when
talking  to  them.  He's  got  a  sensitive  face  here,
(Feda  touches  the  lower  portion  of  the  medium's  face)
he  kept  it  in  good  control,  but  Feda  feels  it  was
sensitive.

According  to  a  note  by  the  sitter,  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,
the  description  might  apply  to  a  nephew  killed  in  the  war,
but  is  not  strikingly  good  ;  his  face,  she  says,  was  "  dis-
tinctly not  oval."

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  14,  1918.

Feda.  A  sj)irit  of  gentleman,  youngish  man,  rather  tall,  well-
builted,  on  taller  side,  nice  shaped  face,  squarish  at
chin,  the  mouth  firm,  not  small ;  features  good
shape,  nose  shows  bridge,  eyes  a  little  on  dark  side
but  can't  see  shade  exactly  ;  eyebrows  dark  brown,
arched  ;  hair  dark  bro^vn  cutted  short,  doesn't  look
curly.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

Not  a  definite  description  ;  my  son's  eyes  were  his  most
striking  feature  and  his  hair  was  very  curly  ;  otherwise  it
is  sufficiently  near.


Extract  from  sitting  of  March  18,  1918.

Feda. There's  a  spirit  coming,  a  young  man,  keeps  on  coming
forward. He's been wanting to come for a  long


84


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


■~  .  time. He's  young,  on  the  taller  side,  medium  build

holds  himself  quite  well,  rather  straight,  not  stout,
not  fat,  on  the  thin  side.  Nice  shaped  face,  oval
rather  than  round.  Chin  not  pointed,  round.  Good
•  features.  Nose,  bridge  showing,  then  coming  straight  \
down,  narrow  at  the  bridge  and  then  broadens  to
the  tip.  Can't  see  eyes  yet.  Eyebrows  straight,  a
little  arched,  outer  part  dark  brown — not  black.
Forehead  good,  not  prominent,  medium.  Good  shaped
intelligent  face.  Hair  brown,  short  at  the  back  and
sides,  longer  at  the  top,  brushed  back.  (S.v.  wait  a
minute.)  Nice  skin,  pale,  but  Feda  don't  think  he
was  pale  on  the  earth  plane.  |

The  supposed  communicator  was  not  recognised  by  the  i
sitter.  i

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  21,  1918.

Feda. Two gentlemen is here, one Feda thinks she's  seen
before. The  first  is  a  youngish  gentleman,  looks  tall,
well-builted. A  good  shaped  face,  pretty  strong,  not
long,  but  not  round,  between  the  two — the  chin  and  |
jaw  is  broad,  his  mouth  about  medium,  not  too  full —
about  medium — a  nice  shaped  underlip,  a  little  fuller  1
than  the  upper — the  nose  shows  the  bridge  a  little  '
bit,  then  comes  straight  down,  broader  at  the  tip- —
the  eyebrows  brown,  well-marked,  more  straight  than
arched. A good  forehead, square-looking, the hair  i
cut  short,  sticks  uj)  a  little  on  top — he  brushes  it  j
across  and  back  from  his  forehead.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

I  thought  the  description  of  the  "  youngish  man  "
[identified  as  sitter's  brother]  pretty  good,  except  that  he
was  very  fair  and  his  eyes,  his  most  striking  feature,  she
said  she  couldn't  see.

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  15,  1918.

Feda. There  is  a  young  man  here  .  .  . He  is  not  broad,  but
well-built,  but  on  the  slender  side  ; a  straight  back,


I


Lxxxii.] Description  of  Presonal  Appearance.  85

holds  himself  well  upright,  medium  height,  good
features,  but  on  the  long  side  ;  nice  mouth,  very,
eyebrows  dark  brown,  slightly  arched,  smooth  skin,
clean  shaven,  but  as  though  he  had  hair  on  the
upper  lip.  Hair  dark  brown,  short  at  the  back  and
a  piece  stuck  up,  but  it  was  smoothed  back  from  the
front  ;  good  forehead,  straight  forehead,  nose  straight,
but  with  a  slight  bump  on  the  bridge,  rounded  at
the  tip,  but  well  formed  ;  chin  from  the  front  firm,
but  from  the  side  not  so  noticeable,  a  very  nice
chin.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

My  son  was  very  tall,  6  ft.  3  in.  in  his  boots,  weight
13  stone,  age  2\\  years  when  we  last  saw  him  in  June
1916  ;  dark,  nearly  black  eyes,  brows  black.  These  are
the  differences  ;  otherwise  correct,  but  as  far  as  we  know
he  never  grew  a  moustache,  but  always  shaved.  His  hair
did  not  stick  up  at  the  crown.  The  description  of  the
nose  is  quite  good.


2.  Older  Men.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  17,  1918.

Feda.  There's  spirits  on  the  other  side.  A  gentleman  middle-
aged  and  a  young  man  too.  These  two  are  together.
Feda'U  describe  the  elderly  man.  Been  well  set  up —
before  he  passed  over  he  lost  flesh  a  little — his  face
falling  a  little  at  the  cheeks — lost  shape  a  little.
He's  got  hair  over  his  mouth,  not  a  small  mouth,
a  good  shaped  mouth — the  under-lip  a  little  further
[gesture  indicates  standing  out  beyond  the  upper  lip]
— the  nose  a  little  Roman,  showed  the  bridge,  curved
a  little,  narrow  at  the  top,  broadening  at  the  tip —
eyes  greyish  colour — Feda  can't  see  plainly — they're
a  little  deep-set — the  eyebrows  straight,  sticks  out  in
the  middle,  bushy — the  forehead  good,  the  hair  going
a  little  back  at  the  front  and  sides — otherwise  a  good
head  of  hair — thicker  on  top,  short  at  the  back.


86  3Irs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

This  description  was  recognised  by  the  sitter  as  referring
to  her  father.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  1,  1918

Feda.  He's  got  a  gentleman  with  him  about  sixty  years  old,
he's  in  the  spirit  world,  and  he  passed  over  some
'  time  ago.  He  is  tall  and  he  is  on  the  fuller,  broader
side.  He  got  like  that  as  he  got  older.  He's  got
some  hair  on  his  face,  it's  grey,  but  Feda  can't  see
it  very  'stinctly ;  he's  got  whiskers  on  some  of  the
lower  part  of  his  face.  His  nose  is  not  a  heavy
Roman  nose,  it's  a  medium  Roman  shape,  he  has
fine  eyes  rather  deep  set,  his  eyebrows  are  straight
and  rather  thick,  they  are  well  marked  and  the  hairs
on  them  look  thick  and  strong.  He  has  a  good
shaped  forehead,  broad  and  high  too  ;  his  hair  is
longer  at  the  sides  than  the  young  man  wears  his,
but  at  the  top  he  hasn't  much  hair  ;  at  one  time  he
used  to  comb  some  of  the  side  part  over,  but  before
he  passed  over  he  didn't  even  bother  to  do  that  it
got  so  thin  ;  he  had  been  very  upright,  but  before
he  passed  on  he  got  into  the  habit  of  letting  his
shoulders  go  a  bit.

[Later  in  the  same  sitting.]  He  has  with  him  a
quite  old  gentleman  with  a  long  full  beard,  not  a
pointed  beard  .  .  .  The  other  one  hasn't  got  a
beard,  he's  got  a  full  grey  moustache  drooping  over
his  mouth,  but  this  one  has  a  full  beard,  Feda  feels
they's  connected,  they's  alike.  His  nose  shows  the
bridge  a  bit,  it's  a  good  shape  ;  the  tip  is  round  ;
not  pointed.  The  hairs  of  his  eyebrows  are  very
long  in  the  middle,  especially  one  of  them.  His
eyebrows  are  straight,  they  had  been  arched,  but  he
got  into  the  way  of  drawing  them  down  and  his
eyes  are  rather  twinkly,  with  a  -good  deal  of  expres-
sion. Feda  can  just  see  his  mouth  and  the  under
lip  looks  a  bit  full.


Lxxxii.] Description  of  Personal  Appearance.  87

Comment  by  the  sitter.

{Referring  to  the  first  description.]  This  might  be  any
old  man,  possibly  my  uncle  G.  or  my  grandfather,  both
of  whom  bore  a  remarkable  family  likeness  to  my  father.

[Referring  to  the  second  description.]  A  good  likeness  of
my  father.

Extracts  from  sitting  of  February  14,  1918.

Feda.  There's  two  spirits.  Feda'll  try  to  describe  the  older
gentleman.  He's  rather  tall— well-built— a  fine-looking
man — got  a-  little  stoop  before  he  passed  over.  He's
got  hair  on  his  face  round  the  lower  part — the  mouth
-  is  about  medium— the  lower  lip  a  little  full — more  as
he  got  older — a  good  shaped  nose,  shows  the  bridge
a  little— not  a  big  Roman  nose,  but  showing  the
bridge  a  little— the  eyes  shaded  a  bit  by  the  eye-
brows— they  were  sticking  out  a  bit  as  he  got  older —
a  little  line  between  the  eyes— rather  keen  eyes,
inteUigent— a  good  forehead ;  the  hair  getting  thin,
back  from  the  forehead— at  the  sides  the  hair  is  a
tiny  bit  longer  than  young  men  wear  it  now.  .  .  .
He's  often  been  to  you  before.  Feda  thinks  this
gentleman  was  connected  with  you.  He"s  bringing
another  gentleman  with  him,  like  a  clergyman,  rather
dark  hair,  but  as  if  it  had  turned  grey  before  he
passed  over — dark  eyebrows,  dark  eyes — striking
•  features — rather  pale — a  dark  paleness — a  striking-
looking  man.  Rather  nervous,  no,  a  quickly  moving
face. Feda  don't  think  he's  related  to  you.

SiTTEE.  Can  you  see  his  hands  ?

Feda.  Can't  see  them  now.  [There  then  followed  some  state-
ments, omitted  here,  concerning  the  clergyman's
character  and  activities.  These  statements  were  said
by  the  sitter  to  be  applicable.]

Feda.  Feda  see'd  one  hand — rather  bony  knuckles — they
showed  up.  The  fingers  are  bent  or  something —
Feda  couldn't  see  all  the  fingers.  The  hands  is
'  knobbly — the  joints  is  swelled. They're  not  pretty


88


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


hands.  His  knees  was  like  that  too.  You  didn't
see  them.  If  you  see  any  one  that  saw  them,
they'd  be  able  to  tell  you  that.  His  Imee-joints  look
like  two— specially  the  right  one — hke  in  two  bumps —
Hke  a  bump  and  then  another  bump  and  then  the
leg  below  the  knee  is  not  quite  straight.  Feda  gets
Hke  an  inflammation,  an  ache  in  his  joints  and  a
stiffness — a  great  deal  in  his  hands,  because  he's
rubbing  them.

Later  in  the  sitting  the  following  passage  occurred  :
Sitter.  My  own  father,  do  you  see  him  1

Feda.  Feda  thinks  he"s  coming  up  now.  '  He's  not  as  tall  as
the  other  man,  not  very  tall,  broad  built,  not  fat.
Feda  can't  see  the  lower  part  of  the  face,  but  he's
got  a  well-developed  forehead — the  hair  rather  white-
looking,  growing  uneven  at  the  sides — the  eyebrows
.  a  bit  bushy— the  eyes  deep-set — they  got  more  deep-
set  and  faded,  as  he  got  older.  Good  features,  a
good  nose,  coming  out  at  the  bridge  a  bit  and  then
straight  down — the  cheek-bones  a  little  prominent.
Feda  can't  see  the  lower  part  distinctly — rather  a
good  shaped  mouth,  the  mouth  rather  straight.

Of  the  three  descriptions  quoted  above,  the  sitter  takes
the  first  and  the  third  to  be  descriptions  of  her  father,
the  later  description  being  in  her  opinion  the  better  of
the  two.  It  will  be  observed  that  this  description  was
given  in  reply  to  a  direct  question,  and  Feda  does  not
seem  to  realise  that  she  is  now  describing  a  spirit  who
has  already  appeared  and  been  described  earlier  (if  the
sitter's  supposition  is  correct).  The  second  description,
that  of  the  dark  clergyman,  is  said  by  the  sitter  to  apply
very  well  to  a  friend  of  hers,  a  connection  by  marriage.
In  reply  to  the  sitter's  question  as  to  whether  the  clergy-
man's hands  could  be  seen,  Feda  at  first  says  that  she
cannot  see  them,  but  a  little  later,  apparently  still  with
reference  to  the  clergyman,  she  describes  a  hand  crippled
by  rheumatism.  There  would  appear  to  be  some  con-
fusion at  this  point. The  clergyman's  hands,  the  sitter


Lxxxn.] Description  of  Personal  Appearance.  89

notes,  were  remarkably  beautiful,  but  her  father's  hands
were,  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  crippled  b}^  rheu-
matism and  he  had  a  trick  of  rubbing  them.  In  so  far
as  Feda's  remarks  are  veridical,  they  appear  to  indicate
that  she  gets  her  impressions  in  a  fragmentary  way.  She
could  hardly  fit  one  man's  hands  to  another  man's  body
if  she  saw  the  two  men  standing  whole  and  distinct
before  her.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  4,  1918.

Fed  A.  A  spirit  of  a  gentleman  is  with  them,  an  oldish  gentle-
man, rather  broad,  a  little  on  the  fat  side  ;  a  grey
beard  and  moustache  ;  the  nose  a  little  bit  towards
Roman,  the  eyes  a  bit  dark,  deep-set,  the  eye-brows
look  bushy  ;  the  hair's  straight  and  long,  the  hair
sticks  out  at  the  sides — rather  bald  on  top.  There's
a  photo  on  the  earth-plane  shows  him  like  Feda
says,  hair  at  the  sides  and  back,  not  on  top.  A
fine-looking  broad  forehead.

This  description  was  not  recognised  by  the  sitter.


Extract  from  sitting  of  March  11,  1918.

Feda.  There's  a  gentleman  standing  beside  you.  Can  you
hear  Feda  ?  He's  not  a  young  gentleman,  a  old
gentleman,  and  he  looks  to  Feda  as  though  he  had
been  a  well-builted  man,  but  towards  the  end  of  his
life  he  let  his  shoulders  stoop  a  bit  and  dragged  his
feet  a  bit  slow,  before  he  passed  over.  He's  got
some  grey  hair  on  his  face,  so's  you  can't  tell  what
shape  his  chin  is.  His  nose  shows  the  bridge,  it
isn't  broad  at  the  bridge,  but  it  broadens  a  bit  to
the  nostrils.  His  eyes  look  to  Feda  rather  deep  set
and  so  it's  difficult  to  tell  the  colour,  perhaps  he
will  open  them  later  more.  He's  got  rather  pro-
minent eyebrows,  more  straight  than  arched,  they
sticks  out  in  the  middle  more,  they  has  long  hairs  in
the  middle, like  coarser  hair, and  they  sticks  out


90


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


more  on  the  left  eyebrow  than  on  the  other.  The
eyes  are  deep  set,  not  prominent.  He  has  a  fine-
builted  forehead,  at  the  eyebrows  it  comes  out  a  bit
prominent,  and  here  too,  (Feda  indicates  above  the
temples)  He  hadn't  got  very  much  hair  on  top  of
his  head,  it  had  got  thin,  he  has  got  it  now  though.
Here  at  the  sides,  (Feda  touches  the  side  of  the
medium's  head)  it  Avas  a  bit  longer  than  is  usual
now  ;  it  sticks  out  a  bit  above  the  ears  and  at  the
back  of  the  ears.  He's  got  good  shaped  ears,  not
small  ones,  and — Feda  has  to  notice  everything —
Feda  don'no  if  it's  both  ears,  that's  not  quite  flat
to  his  head.  They  comes  out  just  a  little  bit,  not
badly  like  Englishes  does.

The  sitter  on  this  occasion  was  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  whose
identity  was  known  at  the  time  to  Mrs.  Leonard.  Con-
cerning the  above  description,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  comments
thus  :

The  description  of  the  old  gentleman  fits  fairly  well  to
my  husband  as  shown,  e.g.  in  the  portrait  at  the  S.P.R.
rooms.  The  left  eyebrow,  as  compared  to  the  right
eyebrow,  was  generally  slightly  raised  next  to  the  nose,
owing  to  a  scar.  The  hair  was  no  doubt  thinner  than  it
had  been  on  the  top  of  his  head,  but  he  was  not  bald.
He  did  not  stoop  or  drag  his  feet,  unless  it  may  have
been  in  extreme  weakness  at  the  end.  He  was  only  62
when  he  died,  hardly  so  old  a  gentleman  as  is  suggested.

Mrs.  Leonard  had  not  visited  the  S.P.R.  rooms  at  the
time  of  this  sitting  and  could  not  therefore  have  seen  the
portrait  of  Dr.  Sidgwick  which  hangs  there,  but  it  may
well  be  that  she  had  at  some  time  seen  his  portrait
elsewhere,  though  she  is  not  aware  of  having  done  so.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  14,  1918.

Feda.  Can  you  remember  a  gentleman  in  your  family  with  a
beard  and  moustache,  nose  prominent  at  the  bridges
rather  a  decided  nose,  eyes  a  little  deep  set,  eyebrow,


Lxxxn.j


Description  of  Personal  Appearance.


91


bushy,  fine  broad  forehead,  not  much  hair  on  the  top
of  his  head,  grey  at  the  sides  and  back,  sticks  out  a
bit  above  his  ears.  Been  a  fine  looking  man  but
he  got  a  little  stooped.  He  comes  up  with  the  lady,
as  though  he  was  with  her.  It  seems  as  if  he'd  a
lot  of  colds  or  bad  condition  of  chest  and  throat.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

I  had  an  uncle  who  died  about  thirty-five  years  ago  of
consumption  to  whom  this  might  apply.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  18,  1918.

Feda.  a  gentleman,  grey  beard,  darkish  in  colour,  grey  beard,
grey  moustache,  eyes  deep  set,  brows  prominent,
bushy,  sticking  out.  Roman  nose,  thin  cheek  bones,
flesh  fell  from  them.  Bald,  hair  on  sides,  not  on
top,  makes  forehead  rather  high.  Towards  the  end
stooped  forward,  but  Feda  thinks  he  was  tall  and
well  setted  up.

This  description  was  not  recognised  by  the  sitter.


3.  Women.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  17,  1918.

Feda.  A  lady — Feda  can  see  her.  These  two  passed  over
before  the  young  man.  She's  about  medium  height —
got  a  look  of  her  figure  having  broadened — the  face
not  full — sunk  a  little  at  the  sides — chin  a  little
fallen — the  mouth  not  full — lips  not  full — blue  or
bluey  grey  eyes,  not  distinct  in  colour — the  nose
straight — -the  eyebrows  brown,  well-marked — the  hair
grey — back  from  the  ears  and  up,  done  towards  the
crown  of  the  head — done  rather  plainly  back,  parted
or  else  it  parts  naturally.

This  description  was  recognised  by  the  sitter  as  referring
to  an  aunt  of  hers. The  statement  that  she  had  "  passed


92  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  |.  [part

over  before  the  young  man,"  identified  as  the  sitter's  son,
was  correct.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  28,  1918.

Feda.  He's  got  a  lady  with  him  in  tlie  spirit  world  who
passed  over  before  him.  She's  not  big,  an  elderly
lady  about  medium  height,  rather  stout  in  build — the
face  full — the  chin  twice  here  [indicates  double  chin] —
a  little  full — the  mouth  about  medium — the  nose
straight  at  the  bridge — the  eyes  greyish — the  eyebrows
darkish  brown — grey  hair,  brushed  back,  at  the  crown
of  her  head — full  altogether  in  build — a  very  kind
face.  She  passed  over  some  time  before  him  ;  she's
a  relation  once  removed,  he  says,  as  though  some  one
else  would  come  in  between.

This  description  was  not  recognised  by  the  sitter.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  1,  1918.

Feda.  He's  got  a  lady  with  him  about  medium  build,  she  has
a  nice  face,  it's  gone  rather  thin  at  the  sides  and
it's  pale.  She  has  nice  features,  her  hair  is  grey,
and  done  back  rather  plainly.  She  wears  black,  like
a  silky  stuff  and  black.  She  had  got  a  dress  what
is  the  one  she  has  on  now,  with  a  figured  pattern  on
it,  rather  old  fashioned.  She's  been  in  the  sj)irit
world  some  time,  and  she's  got  a  very  sweet  face,
she's  between  colours,  and  Feda  thinks  she  was
rather  pale.  She  had  been  getting  very  weak  before
she  passed  over,  here.  (Feda  makes  a  gesture  which
the  recorder  cannot  see.)

Recorder. Where  ?

Sitter.  Her  heart.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

My  mother  had  a  dress  she  was  very  fond  of  which
answers  to  this  description.  I  have  her  portrait  in  which
she  has  it  on.  She  was  very  deficate  and  suffered  from
her  heart.


LXXXII.]


Description  of  Personal  Appearance.


93


Extract  from  sitting  of  March  14,  1918.

Feda.  There's  a  lady  comes  to  you,  related  to  you,  a  olderly
lady,  about  medium  height,  yes.  She'd  had  a  nice
figure,  but  lost  flesh  rather  quickly  towards  the  end
of  her  earth  life,  lost  the  shape  of  her  face,  the  nose
a  little  bit  prominent,  lips  a  little  full,  the  chin
round,  medium  size,  face  fallen  in  a  little  at  the
sides.  Eyes  on  the  dark  side,  hair  gone  grey,  but
would  have  been  darkish  brown,  eyebrows  dark,
arched,  skin  sallow  looking  towards  the  end  of  her
earth  life.  Builds  up  a  letter  E,  builds  it  up
between  you,  a  leter  E.  Feda  not  sure  what  it
means.  Something  connecting  you  and  her.  This
lady  was  hailing,  no.  ailing,  in  health  for  a  good
time  before  she  passed  over.  Feda  get  a  tired
feeling.  Towards  the  end  she  used  to  sit  forward,
dropping  a  little.  She  was  a.  good  lady  when  she
was  here.  She  was  a  little  irritable,  or  fanciful
sometimes,  but  Feda  thinks  it  was  because  of  her
health.  She  hadn't  always  lived  in  London.  Spent
a  good  part  of  her  life  quite  away.  She  came  from
a  family  quite  a  long  way  from  London,  right  across
the  country,  right  across  England — like  going  to  the
other  coast.  She  sprung  from  a  family  that  came
from  there.  Some  people  she's  related  to  lived  at  a
place  called  D,  a  hilly  place,  not  like  here.  Feda
thinks  this  lady's  related  to  you.

Comment  by  the  sitter.
This  describes  my  mother  fairly  well, but  she  always
lived in London or its environs. Her father  however
came  from  Cumberland.

Extracts  from  sitting  of  March  18,  1918.
I.

Feda.  He's  got  a  lady  in  the  spirit  world,  lady  older,  much
older.  {S.v.  Wait  a  minute.)  Lady  more  middle
age,  past  middle  age,  not  tall,  medium  height.  (S.v.


94


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Wait  a  minute.)  Nice  figure,  lost  flesh  a  little
towards  the  end  of  her  earth  life.  Face  falling  in.
Chin  small.  Mouth  medium  size.  Got  to  droop  at
the  corner  [Feda  felt  her  face  and  pulled  down  the
corners  of  her  mouth].  Nose  rather  straight.  Arched
'eyebrows,  eyes  on  the  dark  side,  perhaps  grey.  Hair
brown,  done  it  plainly,  went  back  each  side  of  the
head,  coiled  at  top  part  of  head.

Later  in  the  sitting  :

II.

Feda.  She  thinks  you  ought  to  remember  some  one,  a  lady,
elderlj',  but  fuller  in  build,  fuller  face,  rather  spreaded
out,  full  in  the  figure,  much  stouter.  These  two  a
great  deal  together  in  the  spirit  world.  Stouter  one
very  tidy  about  the  dress.  She  wore  a  large  brooch,
old  fashioned.  {S.v.  Wait  a  minute.)  Didn't  always
wear  it  when  she  was  here  {s.v.  but  she  had  it  in  her
possession  and  she's  been  seen  to  wear  it)  but  thinks
it  has  gone  into  some  one's  possession  in  the  family.
It's  not  a  thing  most  people  would  like  to  wear.
Rather  large  heavy  brooch.  Some  sort  of  picture  or
design  on  the  front  part.  Dressed  in  black,  not
blouse  and  skirt,  but  like  a  proper  dress.  .

Again  later  :

III.

SiTTEE.  Is  my  daughter  possible  to  communicate  with  ?

Feda.  There's  a  spirit  here  Feda  can't  see.  .  .  .  She's  trying
to  build  up  now.  She  seems  not  big,  not  broad,  to
Feda.  {S.v.  Wait  a  minute.  Wait  a  minute.)  Not
builded  up  as  well  as  others,  difficult  to  build.  Not
very  broad,  naturally  well  shaped  girl,  naturally
bright  and  cheerful.  {S.v.  Wait  a  minute.  Now.)
Thin  figure.  Yes  got  thin  frame,  not  well-covered.
Face  towards  oval  rather  than  round.  Face  slopes
towards  chin,  chin  not  full,  medium.  Cheeks,  slope
towards  it.  Mouth  about  medium  size,  lips  not  full,
upper  being  thinner. On  the  pale  side  in  colour.


Lxxxn.]


Description  of  Personal  Appearance.


95


Nose,  small  bridge,  straight  down  broadening  between
the  tip  and  the  nostrils.  Eyebrows  brown  and  a
little  arched.  Complexion  medium,  rather  clear,  pale.
Hair  brown.  {S.v.  What  !  she  done  it  different
towards  the  end  1)  Dunno.  {S.v.  Patting  her  hair.
Done  different  to  what  she  would  have  it  done.)

Comment  by  the  sitter.

I.  This  lady  evidently  refers  to  my  mother.

II.  The  elderly  stouter  lady  may  be  .  .  .  the  mother  of
my  mother's  greatest  friend  .  .  .  The  description  tallies
with  the  four  photographs  I  have  since  seen,  but  I  can
get  no  information  about  the  brooch.  She  always  wore
black.

III.  As  a  description  of  my  daughter  this  is  perfect.
Instead  of  having  her  hair  loose  for  the  last  nine  months
of  her  life,  she  wore  it  in  a  plait  in  accordance  with  the
regulations  of  the  girl-guides.^

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  21,  1918.

Fed  A. There's  an  elderly  lady  with  him.
SiTTEE.  Who  is  it  1

F.  She's  rather  under  medium  height,  not  big  in  build,  a
bit  spreaded  out,  makes  her  look  broader,  her  face
rounded,  lost  shape  a  bit,  the  chin  fallen  in  a  little,
a  bit  pale.  The  hair  is  plain  back  from  the  forehead,
twisted  on  the  top  of  the  head — the  hair  grey.
He  hasn't  got  much  power  left  to  tell  about  the  lady.
She  was  there  before  him,  she's  been  very  kind  to
him.  She  was  there  when  he  woke  up.  She  came
the  first  time  he  came  to  see  you  after  he  passed
over.

The  description  was  not  recognised  by  the  sitter.


*  Cf.  above,  p.  12,  No  further  evidence  of  identity  was  given  in
regard  to  the  two  elderly  ladies.


96


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Extract  from  sitting  of  A])ril  15,  1918.

Feda. He  has  an  elderly  lady  with  him  who  looks  after  him  ;

rather  dark,  rather  thin  ;  [she  was]  not  well  but
[had]  plenty  of  energy  and  will  power.  She  is
related  and  very  kind  to  him.  Medium  height,
cheeks  pale,  hair  plainly  combed  back,  coiled  at  back
[indicates  position]  ;  a  good  woman,  orthodox  in
behef.  She  did  not  beheve  in  spirituahsm  on  the
earth-plane.

The  sitter  notes  that  this  is  a  good  description  of  his
mother,  the  communicator's  grandmother.


4.  Persons  still  alive.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  15,  1918.
Feda. He  goes  to  see  a  lady  on  the  earth  jilane,  an  elderly
lady with grey hair — medium build, bright  eyes,
quick  to  understand. Eyebrows  a  little  arched,  well-
^  marked, not thick, the chin not large, but  well-

shaped,  the  nose  not  broad,  straight,  shows  the
bridge  a  little. It's  some  one  he  goes  to  see.

This  description  was  not  recognised  by  the  sitter.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  19,  1918.
Feda. There's  a  young  lady  he  goes  to  on  the  eafth  plane —

about his own age or a bit younger — well-built —

rounded.
SiTTEE.  PlumjD  ?

F.  Yes,  got  a  face  would  be  to  the  oval,  but  the  cheeks
are  a  bit  too  round — nice  features — bib  on  the  dark
side — nice  skin.

S. Has  she  got  much  colour  ?

F. Got  a  bit  in  the  cheeks,  not  all  over  the  face.  .
3  Her  eyes  ? What  colour  are  they  ?  • :  .•


LXXXII.]


Description  of  Personal  Appearance.


97


F.  Can't  see  distinctly.  Her  hair's  brown — rather  nice^ —
not  light,  but  warm-looking — looks  pretty  thick — she
seems  to  do  it  sideways — drawn  a  bit  to  the  side —
not  much  over  the  face — a  bit  back — looks  glossy,  as
if  she  kept  it  glossy — her  eyes  are  brownish— the
'  eyebrows  are  dark  brown,  rather  arched  in  the
middle — good-shaped  nose,  rather  straight— looks
pretty  strong,  as  if  she  could  move  about.

S. Ask  her  name,  I  can't  tell  who  it  is.

F.  Some  one  he  knows — he  knows  two  other  people  con-
nected with  her — she  doesn't  live  at  C she  lives

in  a  town — it's  at  a  big  town  he  goes  to  see  her —
he  met  her  through  some  other  people — seemed  as  if
he  liked  her — he  thought  she  was  like —

S. They  used  to  play  golf  and  tennis  together  ?

F. Yes,  that's  right.

S. But  you  made  a  mistake,  she's  got  very  blue  eyes.
F. Feda  couldn't  see  them  plainly.

As  the  above  extract  indicates,  the  description  was
taken  by  the  sitter  to  refer  to  a  girl  the  communicator
i[sitter's  son]  had  known  well  when  alive.  But  the  colour
of  the  eyes  was  wrongly  given  (see  above,  p.  15).

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  26,  1918.

Feda.  [To  communicator.]  Wait  a  minute,  that's  not  a
young  lady  you're  showing  Feda  now.  It  seems  to
Feda  as  if  one  of  the  people  he  goes  to  see  there  is
middle  aged,  a  little  past  middle  aged,  she  would  be
pleased,  he  says,  if  you  called  her  middle  aged.
She's  not  exactly  stout,  but  she's  a  bit  spreaded,  her
face  is  round  and  a  nice  shape,  not  much  colour,  a
little  in  the  cheeks  but  not  much.  Her  hair  is  grey
or  going  grey,  it  is  grey,  she  does  it  back  off  her
■ears  coiled  on  top  of  her  head.  It  looks  tidy
looking,  in  front  it's  a  little  bit  raised  ;  it's  just  a
little  puffed  on  top  in  front,  and  it's  smoother  at  the
■.sides. {S.v. Puts  on  something  white  ?) He  wants

G


98  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

•  -  to  say  that  she  sometimes  wears  something  white  on

.  ' - the  front  of  her,  it's  something  special.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

Evidently  his  [communicator's]  mother.  I  understand
she  wears  a  long  lace  jabot,  or  tie,  in  the  evenings  on
special  occasions.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  31,  1918.

Feda.  He's  trying  to  describe  a  lady  he  goes  to  see  with  O —
an  older  lady — older  than  you,  a  lot — not  as  tall —
not  very  big  in  build — only  about  medium — not  dark,
nor  fair,  between  colours — rather  pale — the  face  thin
at  the  sides,  rather  pinched  looking — the  mouth  not
full — a  small  chin,  rounded,  not  fat — a  straight  nose —
eyes  grejdsh — the  hair  faded,  gone  grejdsh — does  it  a
bit  full  [F.  indicates  the  top  of  the  head] — rather
back  from  the  ears.  This  is  some  one  on  the  earth
plane — some  one  he  and  0  go  to  see.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

This  is  a  good  description  of  Mrs.  J.  [the  wife  of  the
man  whom  the  sitter  thought  to  be  communicating  (see
above,  p.  78)],  for  whom  Feda  had  apparently  taken  me
from  the  beginning  of  the  sitting.  She  was  mistaken  in
thinking  her  much  older  than  I  am,  though  I  think  there
is  a  difference  of  some  years.  Feda  herself  seemed  to
have  doubts,  for  she  remarked  sotto  voce,  touching  me
d,nxiously  :  ''Is  she  young  ?  Yes  "  ;  and  having  endowed
me  with  a  youth  I  fear  I  cannot  claim,  proceeded  con-
fidently. Mrs.  Salter,  who  has  seen  Mrs.  J.,  thought  the
description  good.


Lxxxii.]  Conditions  Associated  with  Communicator' s  Death.  99


§  II.  Circumstances  and  Physical  Conditions  Associated
WITH  A  Communicator's  Death.

1.  Young  Men.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  15,  1918.

Feda.  He  passed  over  suddenly.  There  was  a  condition
affecting  the  top  part,  the  head,  and  a  chokiness  in
the  throat.  Feda  thinks  he  was  unconscious  when
he  passed  over. He  keeps  saying  : "I  didn't  suffer."

Comment  by  the  sitter.

He  [the  communicator,  sitter's  husband]  was  unconscious
some  short  time  before  he  passed  over.  He  died  of
wounds  received  on  September  26 — on  September  28  [1917].
So  far  as  I  know  he  was  not  wounded  in  the  head,  but  he
had  a  chest  wound.  The  vital  wound  was  an  abdominal
penetrating  one.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  17,  1918.

Feda. That  young  man — the  lady's  been  looking  after  him.

Feda's  sure  he  passed  on  suddenly.  Something  made
him  unconscious — a  good  thing  that  because  it  didn't
hurt  him — he  passed  over  quickly.  Feda  feels  he'd
been  jumping  or  running  just  before  he  passed  over —
He's  telling  Feda  this  because  he  thinks  you'll  have
heard  of  this — running  forward  fast — cumbered  up
with  something.  Then  he  slipped  forward  on  his
face.  The  ground  was  uneven,  very  uneven — like  a
mound,  then  something  going  in  like  a  hole.  He
didn't  feel  frightened.  He  shows  Feda  what  looks
like  wires — something  he'd  been  holding  just  before
he  passed  over.  "  She  ought  to  know  about  that  "
he  says.  .  .  .

You didn't seem to have particulars. He  kept
trying  to  shout  at  you  that  he  hadn't  suffered.  He


100


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


thought  you  might  think  he'd  been  left  lying  there
and  wanted  to  drink  or  something.

Do  you  know  if  he  was  hurt  in  the  head  ?
Sitter.  No,  the  lungs.

Feda.  He  didn't  feel  it  in  the  lungs.  No,  no,  he  shakes  his
head.  Perhaps  a  doctor  could  tell  you  it  would
affect  his  head  in  that  way.  "  I  felt  choky  in  the
throat,"  he  says.  He  must  have  lost  consciousness.
Something  more  about  his  head.  He's  very  per-
sistent. He  won't  go  away.  He  keeps  saying  :
"  Don't  let  it  rest  at  that."  He's  tapping  his  head
near  the  ear.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  extract  that  the  position
of  the  fatal  wound  is  not  correctly  given  ;  but  Feda,  as
often  happens,  tries  to  explain  away  the  mistake.  The
sitter  states  that  her  son,  whom  she  identifies  as  the
communicator,  died  in  hospital,  whereas  various  expres-
sions used  in  the  above  extract  strongly  suggest  that  he
died  on  the  battlefield.  ,

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  26,  1918.

Feda.  Feda  can  feel  his  passing  over  conditions,  he  passed
quicldy,  and  was  unconscious  rather  quick ;  Feda's
not  sure  that  he — wait  a  bit,  Feda's  not  sure  that
he  was  killed  intant-taneously,  but  it  was  as  good  as
that  to  him,  as  he  felt  nothing.  Feda  gets  a  full
feeling  in  the  head,  but  most  of  them  gets  that,  and
there's  a  feeling  in  the  chest  as  though  the  breath
went  quickly  from  the  body,  it  doesn't  hurt.  Feda
feels  that  he  passed  very  quickly  and  can't  remember
his  passing  conditions,  though  he  gives  them  to  Feda.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

He  [the  communicator]  was  only  slightly  wounded,  but
the  wound  turned  septic  through  neglect,  necessitating  re-
moval of  his  left  arm.  He  died  the  following  day  after
the  amputation.


Lxxxn.]  Conditions  Associated  with  Communicator's  Death.  101


Extract  from  sitting  of  January  29,  1918.

Feda.  He  passed  over  suddenly — a  peculiar  feeling  right  at  the
top  of  the  head — not  a  pain^ — like  neuralgia  when  the
pain  goes  and  leaves  a  dull  pain.  He  had  it  for
about  half  a  minute,  then  he  went  unconscious.  He's
tapping  the  lower  part  of  his  body,  but  that  wasn't
important.  But  what  he  felt  most  was  in  his  head.
He  felt  something  lower  down.

Comment  by  the  sitter.
This  is  quite  accurate.  He  [the  communicator]  was
wounded  in  the  arm  and  side  (which  Feda  touched  when
she  said  he  was  tapping  himself  lower  down)  ;  an  attempt
was  made  to  move  him  to  a  place  of  safety  and  on  the
way  he  was  shot  through  the  head  and  killed  instan-
taneously.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  31,  1918.

Feda.  Feda  gets  a  sudden  weakness  with  this  gentleman.  His
passing  over  was  quick — a  sudden  collapse — all  the
power  giving  out.  He  hadn't  been  well  for  some
time — been  rather  a  struggle  to  keep  uj).  When  he
slipped  out,  he  went  pretty  quick.  He  was  worried
when  he  first  passed  over — money  matters,  business
for  some  one  on  the  earth  plane.  He  says  he  knows
somebody  Feda  knows  and  he  tried  to  get  a  message
through  before.  He  tried  to  get  a  message  through
to  you.  He  thinks  he  has.  He  got  through  another
lady  too.  When  he  comes  close,  Feda  feels  a  choky
feehng  in  the  throat.  Feda  thinks  he  felt  that  when
.  he  passed  over.  That  was  all  he  felt — then  he  was
unconscious  when  he  passed  over  ;  very  choky,  then
a  terrible  weak  feeling  in  the  body.  He  just  seemed
to  fall  back  and  collapse.

Comment  by  the  sitter.
He  [the  communicator]  was  shot  through  the  head  by  a
sniper  in  the  trenches.


102


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Extract  from  sitting  of  February  1,  1918.

Feda. This  one  passed  over  suddenly,  (s.v.  a  head  condition  ?)

Yes,  something  to  do  with  his  head  ;  before  that  he'd
had  something  to  do  with  a  very  low  down  part,
the  side  of  his  stomach  or  his  thigh.  (Feda  touches
the  medium's  groin  on  the  right  side.)  But  that
wasn't  what  he  passed  over  with,  he  passed  over
with  a  strange  feeling  in  the  head.

i

Comment  by  the  sitter.

[The  communicator]  was  wounded  in  the  lungs  at  the
beginning  of  the  war,  recovered,  went  out  again,  and  was
killed  instantaneously  shortly  afterwards.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  7,  1918.

Feda.  His  passing  was  painless,  he  was  afraid  you  would  hear
to  the  contrary  and  say  "  oh  dear  !  I  hope  he  didn't
suffer,"  he  thinks  now  you  know  that  he  didn't.

SiTTEK.  That's  right.

F. He's  tried  to  impress  that  on  you  since  he  jDassed.
SiTTEE.  Yes,  he  has.

F.  He  remembers  feeling  faintness,  and  a  stunned  feeling,
he  must  have  lost  consciousness  quickly.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

[The  communicator]  was  killed  by  a  high  explosive  shell
which  pitched  about  6  yards  from  him,  while  he  was
controlling  the  fire  of  his  guns.  He  became  unconscious
at  once,  so  I  am  assured,  and  died  in  twenty  minutes
without  recovering  consciousness.  He  was  wounded  in  the
left  side  of  the  head  and  the  stomach,  and  both  wounds
were  fatal.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  14,  1918.

Feda.  Feda  thinks  he  passed  over  quickly — like  a  collapsed
feeling — no  pain  with  it.  A  feeling  of  not  being  able
to breathe — a choky feeling and a peculiar  weak


Lxxxii.]  Conditions  Associated  ivith  Communicators'  Death.  103


feeling  through  the  body,  as  if  the  breath  had  left
very  quickly — no  time  to  feel  pain.  ...

He  must  have  passed  over  quickly,  very  quickly.
{S.v.  He'd  been  on  land  before  he  passed  over,  not
long  before.  He  seemed  to  go  back  on  the  boat
after  he  called  at  one  place.)  He  seemed  to  have
called  at  one  place.  He  was  all  right  there,  but  he
passed  over  soon  after.
SiTTEE.  In  the  south  ?

F.  Oh  yes,  in  the  south.  Feda  wonders  if  it  was  very
warm  there.  Feda  feels  like  going  like  that  [breathes
.  deeply] — like  he  hadn't  been  able  to  breathe  properly.
It  feels  very  hot.  His  forehead  felt  very  hot  soon
before  he  passed  over,  a  feverish  feeling,  a  weak
feeling  inside,  not  long  before  he  passed  over.

A  good  deal  of  information  was  given  concerning  this
supposed  communicator,  but  the  sitter  was  quite  unable
to  identify  him.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  25,  1918.

Feda.  (S.v.  Did  you  pass  over  quickly  ?)  Yes,  he  says,  he
passed  over  suddenly,  didn't  have  much  pain  ;  he
got  into  the  spirit-world  prettj'  easily.  He  seems  to
-  think  he  passed  over  quick  like  that  [slaps  her  hands
together].  But  there's  some  one  thought  he  didn't.
Feda  thinks  he  was  unconscious  and  didn't  feel
anything.  Something  had  happened  to  him  before
he  passed  over — it  was  nothing,  but  he  felt  it  more.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

[The  communicator]  was  at  first  reported  "  wounded  and
missing,"  later  killed."  We  heard  after  that  a  man
next  him  heard  him  call  out:  My  God,  I'm  hit."  His
body  was  found  the  next  day,  lying  alone,  shot  through
the  chest.  My  sister  worried  very  much,  as  she  imagined
him  lying  wounded  and  untended  for  hours  in  the  desert.
(He  was  killed  in  Mesopotamia.)  News  came  to  hand
after  that  he  must  have  died  pretty  quickly.


104


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Extracts  from  sitting  of  March  14,  1918.

Fed  A.  He  passed  over  quite  suddenly  .  .  .  He  was  afraid  at
first  you  wouldn't  realise  he'd  passed  over.  You
didn't  at  first.

Comment  by  the  sitter.
[The  communicator]  was  declared  missing  for  a  month
before  I  heard  he  had  been  killed.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  18,  1918.

Feda.  Passed  over  quickly.  Looks  as  if  there  was  something
the  matter  with  his  head.  Not  pain,  like  a  sudden,
quick,  sensation.  {S.v.  wait  a  bit.)  He  didn't  feel
pain  when  he  passed  over.  He  doesn't  remember.
He  did  feel  a  sudden  numbness  in  his  head  and
quick  weakness  took  possession  of  his  body.

The  supposed  communicator  could  not  be  identified.

Further  extract  from  sitting  of  March  18,  1918.

Feda.  Something  came  into  her  mouth  like  a  pain,  almost
choked  her,  she  gasped  and  passed  over.  {S.v.
Something  about  your  teeth,  teeth  ?)  Can't  get  that
from  her.  {S.v.  Or  her  mouth  ?)  Something
about  her  mouth  or  her  teeth.  Not  anything  to  do
with  when  she  passed  over,  earlier  in  illness,  some-
thing that  worried  her,  keeps  on  tapping  her  teeth.

I  have  quoted  this  as  another  instance  in  which  a
correct  impression  may  have  been  misinterpreted  by  Feda.
The  symptoms  of  the  supposed  communicator's  last  illness
are  not  well  described  and  she  had  no  special  trouble
with  her  teeth.  The  sitter,  however,  the  communicator's
father,  was  by  profession  a  dentist  and  his  daughter,  had
she  lived,  was  to  have  qualified  to  be  his  partner.

Extracts  from  sitting  of  A]ml  15,  1918.

Feda.  When  he  passed  over  he  had  lost  consciousness  and
when  he  came  to  he  thought  he  was  in  a  hospital


Lxxxil.]  Conditions  Associated  with  Communicator's  Death.  105

but  it  was  too  beautiful  for  that.  He  suffered  with
his  head  .  .  .

SiTTEE.  Was  the  throat  the  cause  of  his  passing  over  ?
Feda  (quite  decidedly). No,  the  head.
Sitter.  Are  you  certain  it  was  not  the  throat  ?  >
Feda. He  had  a bad  throat a  long  time but  it  was  the
head  .  .  .

Sittek.  What  caused  him  to  pass  over  ?

Feda.  His  head  not  well,  but  quite  quickly  as  though  he  had
been  hit  on  the  right  side.  The  throat  not  right,
but  his  head,  bruised  on  the  head  and  was  uncon-
scious, no  pain  whatever.

Comment  by  the  sitter.-
[The  communicator]  had  suffered  from  a  cough  caused
by  a  bad  throat  and  this  finally  caused  him  to  pass
over.  Death  certificate  states  "  Oedema  Glottis,''  and  he
died  in  hospital  at  the  base  in  Salonika.  An  operation
was  performed,  but  it  was  of  no  use.

2.  Women  and  Older  Men.

Extract  from  the  sitting  of  January  29,  1918.

Feda.  When  [the  communicator]  passed  over  he  was  met  by  a
lady  and  gentleman.  An  elderly  lady,  about  medium
height,  or  scarcely — not  very  big  in  build.  Feda
thinks  at  one  time  she'd  been  a  nice  shape,  but  soon
before  she  passed  over  the  flesh  fell  away.  The
face  had  been  round,  but  had  fallen  away.  She'd
had  a  nice  chin,  but  it  had  fallen.  She"d  been
pretty — had  nice  features.  The  mouth  was  a  little
compressed — the  eyes  grey,  as  if  they'd  got  a  bit
faded,  the  eyebrows  brown,  arched — the  hair  had
been  brown,  but  was  fading,  greying  before  she
passed  over.  She  does  it  rather  plainly,  brushed
back  up  from  the  neck — more  to  the  higher  part  of
the  head — does  it  rather  neat  back  from  the  forehead.
She  wasn't  well  for  a  long  time  before  she  passed


106


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


over — a  sort  of  internal  weakness,  and  an  awful
nervy  state.  Her  Tierves  were  so  bad,  she  used  to
try  to  get  the  best  of  it,  but  she  couldn't.  She  got
in  an  awful  weak  state.  About  two  weeks  before
she  passed  over  there  was  a  great  change — she  almost
collapsed.  Up  to  that  she'd  been  trying  to  keep
herself  up.  But  she  hadn't  any  strength  left.  Then
she  floated  out.  She  was  tired  of  her  physical  body
— awful  tired.  Yet  she  didn't  seem  to  want  to  go
at  one  time.  After  that  two  weeks  she  didn't  care
what  happened.  She  just  floated  out  almost  in
sleep.  The  worst  part  had  been  before.  She'd  been
weak  and  ailing  for  about  two  years.  She'd  had  a
very  severe  illness  about  fifteen  years  before  she
passed  over.  She  seemed  to  get  over  it — to  get
better.  Then  it  seemed  to  get  some  condition  of  a
different  nature,  but  what  she'd  had  fifteen  years
ago  had  weakened  her  system.  She'd  had  some
worry  about  eight  years  before  she  passed  over — she
was  worried  about  some  one — not  illness — connected
with  some  one  else.  Not  just  a  short  worry.  That
was  the  gentleman,  Feda  thinks.  It  seemed  to  cause
her  a  great  worry,  a  mental  worry.  It  wasn't  a
thing  she  could  help  herself — she  was  tied  hand  and
foot — she  felt  herself  powerless.  She  was  naturally
rather  energetic,  liked  to  manage  things — a  kind
motherly  person.  This  worry  got  on  her  nerves  it
^  was  undermining  her  constitution.  She  oughtn't  to
have  had  that.  It  was  nothing  to  do  with  her.  It
had  to  do  with  a  man. It  wore  her  out.

Comm,ent  by  the  sitter.

The  lady  referred  to  here  is  probably  a  cousin  of  mine
with  whom  I  was  very  intimate.  She  died  Avhen  my
children  were  young  ;  they  were  mutually  devoted  to  one
another.  [The  alleged  communicator  was  sitter's  son.]
Her  mental  and  physical  sufferings  before  her  death  were
quite  such  as  are  described  by  Feda  ;  at  the  same  time
she  did  not  want  to  die  and  resisted  with  all  the  strength
of a strong will. Just near the end, worn out  with


Lxxxn.  Conditions  Associated  with  Communicators  Death.  107

physical  suffering  and  weakness,  she  longed  for  release.
I  don't  remember  her  having  a  severe  illness  15  years
before  her  death.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  1,  1918.

Feda. He  must  have  had  strong  views  on  Life  and  Religion  ;

Feda  don't  know  if  he  used  to  have  a  room  with  a
good  many  books  in  it  ?  Feda  ssems  to  see  a  good
many  books,  he  seems  to  study  them  a  lot  .  .  .

Wait  a  bit,  a  little  while  before  he  passed  over  he
got  a  nasty  feeling  of  his  chest,  when  he  comes  close
to  Feda,  Feda  wants  to  clear  her  throat.  (Feda  does
so.)  When  he  actually  passed  he  M'ent  very  quickly,
he"d  had  this  chokey  feeling  for  some  time  before,
but  Feda  feels  he  hadn't  much  pain.  Wait  a
minute,  there  was  a  change  in  his  condition  about
four  days  before  he  passed  over,  you  can  ask  some-
one.

The  sitter  identifies  this  communicator  as  her  father.^
She  states  that  "  he  was  deeply  religious.  For  the  last
few  years  of  his  life  he  spent  nearly  the  whole  day  in
his  own  room,  reading."  The  description  of  physical
symptoms  the  sitter  states  to  be  correct.  As  to  the
statement  that  there  was  a  change  four  days  before  he
passed  over,"  she  says  :

I  think  this  was  so.  He  was  very  ill  for  four  months,
unconscious  most  of  the  time,  but  he  passed  away  very
suddenly  indeed.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  14,  1918.

Feda.  {S.v.  Afraid  of  tumbling — wait  a  bit.)  Do  you  know
if  he  was  afraid  of  falling  in  the  end  part  of  his
life  ?

SiTTEB.  He  was  very  tottery.

F.  It  must  be  that.  Feda  saw  him  on  the  stairs,  cUnging
to  the  bannisters. And  his  hands  seem  not  quite

1  Cf.  p.  86  above.


108


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


steady.  He'd  try  to  put  his  hands  in  his  pocket
and  had  to  feel  for  it.  But  he'd  had  pretty  good
health.  Instead  of  getting  ill  in  the  ordinary  way,
do  you  remember  a  change  four  or  five  days  before
he  passed  over  ?
Sitter.  He  wanted  to  live.

F.  Yes,  that  kept  him  from  going.  He  had  strong  will-
power, a  wonderful  vitality.  .  .  .  This  tottery  feeling
had  gone  on  some  time.  Five  days  before  he  passed
over,  there  was  a  change — very  weakening.  But  even
then  bis  will-power  kept  him  up.

The  sitter  states  that  in  regard  to  her  father,  with
whom  she  identifies  the  alleged  communicator,  it  is  correct
to  say  that  there  was  "  a  change  four  or  five  days  before
he  passed  over."  A  close  similarity  will  be  noticed
between  what  was  said  on  this  occasion  and  what  was
said  in  the  immediately  preceding  extract  from  the  sitting
of  February  1,  1918.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  11,  1918,

Feda.  Feda  thinks  this  gentleman  had  not  been  well,  he'd  had
failing  health,  for — Feda  thinks  two  or  three  years
before  he  passed  over  ;  but  he  was  not  in  bed  he
says.  {8.V.  em — wait  a  minute,  please.)  He  says
that  though  he  had  not  been  well  he  tried  to  make
the  best  of  it  and  to  take  an  interest  in  books  and
things.  He  says  just  about  ten  days  before  he
passed  over  there  was  a  distinct  change  in  his
condition  ;  you'll  have  to  think  it  over,  he  felt  it
before  that,  it  was  coming  a  few  days  before  the  ten
days,  but  it  wouldn't  have  been  noticeable  to  others
till  the  ten  days.  He  says  he  kind  of  collapsed  as
though  he'd  been  holding  on  as  long  as  possible.
(Feda  clears  her  throat.)  He  gives  Feda  a  bit  of  a
thick  feeling  in  the  throat,  as  though  he  had  had  it.
(S.v.  What's  that  ?  Is  it  your  feet  or  your  legs  ?)
(Feda  feels  the  medium's  legs.)  He  used  to  have  a
peculiar  feeling  in — Feda  thinks  it  was  his  feet  and


Lxxxii.]  Conditions  Associated,  with  Communicator' s  Death.  109

legs  ;  he  didn't  have  to  have  a  lot  done  for  it,  but
it  was  always  there,  they  feels  kind  of  cold,  not  a
proper  circulation.  Feda  feels  his  blood  was  sluggish
'cos  he  couldn't  take  proper  exercise.  {S.v.  Feda'll
tell  her,  well,  don't  forget.)

Comment  by  the  sitter  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

My  husband  [the  supposed  communicator]  died  of  cancer,
internal,  nothing  to  do  with  throat  or  legs,  and  the
description  of  the  illness  is  not  good.  He  was  known  to
be  seriously  ill  about  four  months  before  he  died.  There
was  a  distinct  change  for  the  worse  about  a  fortnight
before  the  end,  but  before  that  he  was  known  to  be
dying.

*

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  12,  1918.

Feda. {S.v. Wait  a  bit,  and  there  was  a  younger  man,  not
the  one  what  came  yesterday,^  one  what  had  passed
over  long  ago.) He's  [the  communicator]  met  also  a
young  man  that Feda  feels must have been  con-
nected with  him,  he  is  nothing  to  do  with  the  one
what came yesterday, and he passed over  quite
young and had to finish his development in  the
spirit world. He must  have been connected  with
you,  he  must  have  passed  over  with  intense — he  says
intense  twice — weakness. Feda  feels  like  perspiration,
hands all wet and damp, Feda don't think  that
young  man  was  ever  very  strong  on  the  earth  plane,
it  was  a  good  thing  perhaps  he  passed  over,  "cos  he
never  would  have  been  strong, Feda  gets  his  con-
ditions all  cold,  damp,  face,  head,  neck  and  hands.
In regard to this statement the sitter says that  it
might  refer  to  a  nephew  of  her  husband,  the  supposed
communicator,  who  "  died  of  a  sort  of  decline, — increasing
weakness  ; but he died a good many  years after  my
husband." If,  then,  the  allusion  is  to  this  young  man,
there  is  confusion  in  regard  to  the  date  of  his  death.


1  March  11,  1918,  when  the  same  sitter  was  present.


110


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


§  III.  Descriptions  of  Articles  said  to  have  belonged

TO,  OR  been  associated  WITH  A  COMMUNICATOR.

Extract  from  the  sitting  of  January  26,  1918.

Feda.  [After  reference  to  a  place,  said  to  be  connected  with
the  communicator  but  not  clearly  identified.]  He
says  don't  confound  it  with  a  road  that  he  knew,
put  this  down  carefully,  a  road  that  he  had  very
good  reason  to  know,  4iut  the  other  was  a  place.
He's  got  a  very  important  motive  Feda  can  feel
for  talking  of  the  road.  {S.  v.  What  is  it  ?
Something  wrong  with  wheels  ?  Something  wrong
with  wheels.)  What  is  it  ?  He's  trying  to  show
Feda  that  before  he  passed  over  he'd  been  very
much  interested  in  something  on  wheels.  He  had
given  a  hand  to  push  along  hard,  something  on
wheels,  the  ground  was  difficult  to  do  it  on,  several
men  helped.  He  was  doing  this  not  long  before  he
passed  over.  {S.  v.  Oh,  wait  a  bit,  it's  some-
thing to  do  with  a  photograph  ?  Wait  a  minute.)
There's  been  a  photograph  of  this  thing  on  wheels,
and  he's  not  quite  sure  if  he  was  taken  in  it  or  not,
but  any  one  who  had  the  photograph  would  know  it
Avas  connected  with  him.  He  had  been  in  one
j)hotograpli  with  this  thing  on  wheels,  but  he's  not
sure  if  he's  in  this  one.  It  was  taken  out  of  doors,
but  there's  at  the  right  hand  side  something  what
would  make  you  think  it  was  a  building  or  shed.
There  was  a  building  near.  .  .  .  And  he's  very
particular  about  that  thing  on  wheels  ;  it  had  to  go
quick,  but  it  wanted  a  lot  of  pushing  at  first.  Feda
thinks  it  would  have  more  than  two  wheels,  Feda
thinks  four  perhaps,  'cause  there  were  men  at  each
wheel  pushing,  oh,  he  calls  it  "  lugging  it  along."

Comment  by  the  sitter.
I  do  not  know  whether  this  refers  to  something  at  the
front or to his life in Canada before he [the  sitter's


LXXXiT.] Articles  Associated  with  a  Communicator.  Ill

brother,  killed  in  France]  joined  up.  The  enclosed  photo-
graph was  among  his  other  photographs,  but  I  do  not
know  if  it  is  he  or  not.  It  is  a  heavy  petrol-driven
"  trolley,"  much  used  along  railways  which  are  under
construction,  and  doubtless  used  by  him  also.

The  photograph  mentioned  by  the  sitter  represents  a
man  lying  full  length  under  a  "  trolley which  he  is
apparently  engaged  in  repairing.  Only  his  legs  are  visible  ;
hence  the  doubt  as  to  his  identity.  The  trolley  has  four
wheels  and  is  proceeding  along  a  railway  track.  There  is
no  building  in  the  picture,  as  Feda  suggests,  but  on  the
right  of  the  track  (from  the  point  of  view  of  the  photo-
graph) there  is  a  thicket  with  a  number  of  thin,  close  set,
tree  trunks  standing  up  like  "  scaffolding  poles  against  a
dark  background  ;  these  might  at  a  cursory  glance  suggest
a  building.  The  rest  of  the  picture  is  occupied  by  the
track,  the  trolley,  and  a  piece  of  open  ground  on  the  left
of  the  track.


Extract  from  sitting  of  January  28,  1918.

Feda.  A  photograph,  a  larger  picture  done  from  a  smaller
one  ;  he  wanted  a  smaller  one  done  too,  a  little
tiny  one,  what  you  call  a  miniature.  A  larger  one
has  been  done,  like  copying  a  small  one  into  a  large
one.  Do  you  know  the  one  thafs  a  head  and
shoulders,  almost  straight,  rather  serious  looking,  not
an  awful  good  one, — he's  got  no  hat  on — do  you
know  that  one  ?

Sitter.  I  know  there  is  one  like  that.

F. He  wants  you  to  have  a  little  one.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

An  excellent  miniature  of  one  of  my  brother's  [the
communicator's]  photographs — full  face,  head  and  shoulders
— was  done  for  us  shortly  after  his  death,  but  I  know  of
no  reproduction  on  a  larger  scale.


112


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Extract  from  sitting  of  January  28,  1918.

Feda. Do you know what's become of the watch on  hi&

wrist  ?
SiTTEK.  Yes.

F.  He  wanted  it  given  to  some  one  to  wear,  but  he  hasn't
seen  it.  He  wasn't  sure  where  it  was.  He  had
two — ^it's  the  one  he  had  on  his  wrist.  It's  a  small
one,  about  the  size  of  two  shillings.  A  lady  had  it
for  a  time,  Feda's  not  sure  if  she's  got  it  now.

Comment  by  the  sitter.
I  am  wearing  one  of  my  brother's  [the  communicator's]
watches,  a  gold  wrist  watch. My  mother  kept  it  for  me
for  about  a  couple  of  months,  while  I  was  in  France  last
autumn.

In  view  of  the  claim  often  made  (and  sometimes — -it
would  seem — with  justification)  that  communicators  are
able  to  scent  out,  as  it  were,  articles  which  have  belonged
to  them,  it  is  worth  noting  that  on  this  occasion  the
communicator  was  apparently  unaware  of  the  location  of
his  wrist  watch,  although  it  was  actually  being  worn,  on
the  sitter's  wrist.

A  little  later  on  in  the  same  sitting  of  January  28,
1918,  Feda  said  :

Feda.  {S.v.  Decoration,  before — don't  know  what  he
means.)  He's  pleased  about  the  decoration,  Feda
don't  think  it's  himself — since  he's  passed  on.  There's
two  things  he's  wearing  on  the  other  side,  something
here  [indicates  the  chest],  he  would  have  worn  it  on
the  earth  plane,  like  a  ribbon  on  his  chest.  He
ought  to  have  had  it  here.  There  ought  to  have
been  two  things,  on  two  occasions  he  did  something
special.

Sitter.  Yes.

F.  He  ought  to  have  got  two,  but  Feda  thinks  he  only
got  one.  But  it  isn't  that  he's  pleased  about.  He's
pleased  about  some  one  on  the  earth  plane  whose


Lxxxn.] Articles  Associated  with  a  Communicator.


113


name  has  been  mentioned,  some  one  he  cares  about
very  much,  a  decoration  ;  this  must  have  happened
lately,  he's  pleased  about  it.

Comment  bij  the  sitter.

My  brother  was  awarded  the  mihtary  cross  before  he
was  killed,  about  a  month  before  ;  and  just  before  his
fatal  wound  he  was  recommended  again  and  ahnost  cer-
tainly would  have  had  a  bar  to  the  M.C.  had  he  lived.
His  death  stopped  this,  however,  automatically.

The  statement  that  someone  about  whom  the  communi-
cator cared  very  much  had  received  a  decoration,  or  been
mentioned,  was  not  understood  by  the  sitter.  Possibly
Feda  misinterpreted  the  impression  she  got  that  something
had  happened,  or  might  have  been  expected  to  happen
after  the  communicator  died,  the  reference  being  to  the
bar  to  the  Military  Cross  which  the  communicator  earned
but  never  actually  received.  Her  statement  on  this
point  however  must  be  reckoned  as  unverified  and  probably
incorrect.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  11,  1918.

Feda.  When  the  older  man  was  trying  to  tell  about  the
photograph— the  young  man  says  he's  got  one  almost
,  hke  it.  (S.v.  No  'taint  all  dark.)  His  is  lighter
at  the  edges,  'cos  the  shadow  part  turns  to  light
at  the  edges.

Sitter.  Is  it  vignetted  ?

F. Yes, Feda will remember that, vignetted.  (S.v.

Yours  or  the  other  gentleman's  ?)  The  young  man
thinks  something  has  been  done  about  his  photograph,
since  he  passed  over.

S. Yes  ?

F. Like  a  co]3y  made,  and  he  seemed  pleased  about  it.

One  has  been  done  from  the  other,  and  it  seems  to
Feda  that  that  one  has  been  a  success  ;  one  is  much
larger  than  the  other.

H


114  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

Comment  by  the  sitter  Mrs.  Sidgwich.

I  think  his  [the  supjjosed  communicator's]  photograph
has  been  successfully  enlarged  (I  believe  the  copy  I  have
is  an  enlargement).

Extract  from  the  sitting  of  March  14,  1918.

Feda. They  give a  name  like  that [Feda  draws G].  {S.v.

Gerald.) Do  you  laiow  Gerald  1
SiTTEB.  Yes,  I  very  much  want  to  know  about  that.
F. ...  Do  you  know  if  that  Gerald  is  moving  from  one

jjlace  to  another  ?
S.  Yes.

F.  But  he  won't  be  in  the  second  place  long.  The
younger  one  says  they're  hoping  something  important
will  happen  to  him  at  the  second  place.  Do  you
know  if  he's  going  to  be  near  a  place  called  M  1

S.  Yes.

F.  They  say  something  about  M.  Gerald  is  going  to  get  a
^  chance,  he's  been  doing  the  up  hill  work.  .  .  .  Do

you  know  if  Gerald's  wearing  anything  belonging  to

him  ?

S. I  don't  know.

F.  Well,  he  ought  to.  Do  you  remember  the  younger  one
had  a  watch  what  he  wore  there  ?  [Feda  indicates
the  wrist]. He  can't  find  it.

S. Why  does  he  want  it  ?

F. He  wanted  Gerald  to  have  it.

S. He  doesn't  know  where  it  is  ?

F.  No,  he  doesn't.  He  says  he'd  have  liked  old  Gerald  to
have  it.  Do  you  know  any  one  Gerald  knows
called  Mac  ?

S. Yes,  but  Mac  isn't  all.

F. No, some one must have called him Mac.  {S.v.

Mackie,  Macldnny.)  MacKen,  a  bit  more  than  that,
but  Feda  can't  get  him.  Do  you  know  if  that  one's
all  right  ■?

S. Has  he  been  ill  ?

F.  Yes,  that  [Mackenzie]  one.  That  one  didn't  seem  to
know  he  was  there. He  couldn't  help  him.  He's


Lxxxn.] Articles  Associated  ^vith  a  Communicator.  115

been  pretty  bad  Feda  thinks.  His  nerves  have
suffered  with  it.

S. Has  he  got  any  message  for  that  one  ?

F.  He'd  like  to  send  his  love.  He  doesn't  think  he  ought
to  go  into  bad  conditions.  He  oughtn't  to  go  into
war  conditions.  He  oughtn't  to  have  different  tem-
peratures. He's  had  a  good  shaking  up,  that  one.
Tell  him  he  knows  about  him  being  ill.  He  seems
like  going  from  one  place  to  another,  but  in  quite  a
different  way  to  Gerald.

[There  follows  a  description  of  a  girl  (said  to  be
living)  in  the  course  of  which  the  following  statement
was  made  :]  She's  got  rather  a  nice  figure,  but
slight  ;  very  nice  hands,  awful  nice-shaped  hands.
He  particularly  noticed  that.

In  selecting  a  pseudonym  for  the  sitter  of  March  14,
1918,  who  prefers  for  family  reasons  that  her  name  should
not  be  given,  care  has  been  taken  to  represent  as  accurately
as  possible  Feda's  approximations  to  the  name,  which  she
finally  gave  correctly  (see  extract  above).  This  was  one
of  the  two  occasions  referred  to  on  p.  26  in  which  the
sitter  had  previously  written  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Leonard
asking  for  an  appointment,  which  she  was  not  able  to  get.

Comment  by  Mrs.  Mackenzie.

My  eldest  son's  name  is  Gerald  [brother  to  the  alleged
communicator].  Gerald  has  been  at  Malta  where  he  has
just  been  given  command  of  an  important  ship.  He
moves  to  and  fro  constantly  and  hitherto  was  having  for
the  most  part  a  very  uninteresting  time.

[Concerning  the  allusion  to  a  WTist-watch]  in  the  Kst  of
things  [the  communicator]  was  wearing  which  was  sent  to
me  by  the  German  Red  Cross  to  be  returned  to  me  later,
the  watch  was  not  mentioned.  It  had  evidently  been
taken.  It  is  also  curious  that  it  was  my  younger  son,
subsequently  mentioned  as  McKen  "  who  constantly  said  :
"If  only  I  could  have  had  his  watch."


116  .■■ • Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [paet

[With  reference  to  the  allusions  to  "  McKen "]  this
applies  to  my  younger  son,  who  has  been  very  ill  and  has
just  gone  to  S.  Africa  for  his  health.

[The  description  of  the  girl  (not  identified)]  is  interesting
from  the  fact  that  [the  communicator]  was  always  especi-
ally interested  in  hands.  .

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  15,  1918.

Feda.  He  keeps  looking  at  that  ring  [a  ring  on  the  sitter's
hand].  Seems  as  if  he's  wearing  something  like  it
;  himself.  He  held  out  his  hand  as  if  he  was  putting
a  ring  on  his  small  finger.  He  keeps  showing  it.
Not  that  one,  it's  this  one — can  you  see  ?  He  keeps
on  showing  Feda  a  ring.  It  looks  plainer,  like  a
plain  gold  ring  on  his  little  finger.  It  seems  almost
symbolical.  He  seems  to  want  you  to  know  he's
wearing  it.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

The  plain  gold  ring  I  gave  my  husband  [the  com-
municator] and  he  always  wore  it,  as  I  am  wearing  it  at
present. It  is  and  has  always  been  most  symbolical.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  21,  1918. ^

Feda. {Sotto  voce. What  about  the  other  ring  ?) He's  wearing

a  ring.  '  '

Sitter.  Yes,  I  know.

F. He  says  he's  wearing  a  ring. He's  going  to  wear  it

till  you  go  over.
S. I  didn't  give  it  to  him.

F. No,  but  he  regards  it  as  symbolical. He  always  wore

it  here.
S. Yes,  I  know  it  well.
F. He's  regarding  it  symbolically.

^  See  also  pp.  1 1  and  84.  .  ..  "


Lxxxii.] Articles  Associated  with  a  Communicator.


117


Comment  by  the  sitter.

About  the  ring  I  can't  understand  why  he  [the  com-
municator, sitter's  brother]  should  regard  it  symbolically,
as  it  was  my  father's  signet  ring  ; he  always  wore  it.

This  and  other  passages  in  the  sitting  strongly  suggest
that  Feda  had  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  the  communi-
cator was  the  sitter's  fiance.  Hence  her  allusion  to  a
symbolical  ring.

Extract  from  the  sitting  of  January  31,  1918.

FfiDA. Then on  the other  side a  letter  like this  [drawing].

Can  you  see,  Mrs.  NeUie  [the  recorder]  ?
H.  S. Yes,  E.

F.  E  is  a  lady  in  the  spirit  world.  The  man  she's  got
with  her  is  tall,  an  elderly  man.  He's  been  very
tall,  but  he  wasn't  quite  as  straight  as  he  oifght  to
have  been — got  his  head  a  httle  bent  forwards  before
,  he  passed  over.  Fine-looking  features — the  cheek-
bones show  a  little — the  eyes  look  a  bluey  colour,
when  he  was  younger — got  a  little  faded — sunken  a
little.  The  eyebrows  straight,  a  bit  bushy,  standing
out.  He's  got  a  line  between  his  eyes — a  broad
forehead — the  eyes  and  forehead  more  developed  than
the  lower  part.  There's  some  hair  on  his  face  below.
Feda  can't  see  the  lower  part  distinctly.  Rather
pale,  but  a  kind,  nice  look — the  hair  a  little  thin  on
the  top — longer  than  the  younger  man.  He  had
some  difficult  condition  of  breathing  and  his  chest,
before  he  passed  over — that's  what  made  him  bend.
Feda  thinks  he'd  had  a  cough — a  sort  of  thicltness
in  the  throat — rather  wheezy — makes  a  noise  like
that  [imitates  wheezing].  Feda  thinks  he  had  that
very  bad  before  he  passed  over.  Wait  a  bit.  G  or
C  coming  up  now — wait  a  minute — coming  up  close
to  him.  He  was  a  good  man,  when  he  was  here —
he  was  clever  too  mentally — had  a  fine  brain.  He'd
known  a  lot  of  people — lots  of  people  liked  him  and
noticed  what he said. He'd  been connected  with


118


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


another  town — quite  away  from  London.  He's  tried
to  get  through  to  you  before.  .  .  .

He  wanted  this  put  down  sj)ecialiy  carefully — this
is  the  older  gentleman  what's  speaking — can't  think
what  it  is — like  a  piece  of  cardboard — like  a  certificate
— not  quite  that — he  keeps  smiling,  but  that's  not  a
bad  word.  The  top  part  is  like  fancy  letters — the
first  letter  is  very  big,  scrawly  scroUy — underneath  is
something  thick  and  then  some  more  ordinary  writing
— ^in  three  different  styles.  It  isn't  all  scrawly,  but
it's  all  rather  difficult  to  read.  Scrawly  at  the  top,
rather  thick  below,  and  then  more  ordinary  writing
at  the  bottom.  At  one  corner — Feda  don't  know
which — when  he  said  left  he  showed  right — there's  a
fancy  kind  of  design — rather  round — in  the  right
hand  corner — this  is  important  Feda  thinks — rather
round  in  shape  and  with  a  scrawliness  outside —
{S.v.  Crowned  with  something)  can't  get  that  quite — •
not  so  much  a  crown,  Feda  thinks,  as  something
being  crowned.  This  was  something  he  thought  a  lot
of — it's  still  in  existence.  It  was  once  hung  up,  but
he  isn't  sure  if  it  is  still.  It  had  to  be  taken  down
for  some  j)urpose.  You  might  make  enquiries.  It
would  be  a  test.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

Elizabeth  was  ^he  name  of  a  favourite  cousin.  .  .  .  But
there  is  another  possible  E,  Elizabeth,  my  grandfather's
sister  ;  for  the  man  mentioned  as  bemg  with  her  is
evidently  meant  for  my  grandfather.

In  regard  to  my  grandfather,  who  died  before  I  was
born,  I  shall  quote  my  mother  to  whom  I  sent  the  notes
of  the  sitting  without  comment  of  any  sort.  She  says  of
this  man  :  "In  some  ways  like  my  father,  but  he  was
not  very  tall,  but  did  bend  over,  because  his  back  troubled
him.  He  had  a  line  between  his  eyes.  Except  when  on
his  deathbed  he  had  no  trouble  with  his  breathing.  He
was  '  a  good  man,'  and  had  a  fine  mind,  and  had  known
many  people  of  many  nations  and  kinds.  He  was  liked
by  many  people  and  what  he  said  was  generally  interesting


Lxxxii.] Articles  Associated  ivith  a  Communicator.


119


and  remembered.  Though  English  by  birth,  he  was  a
naturaUzed  American,  and  much  connected  with  Phila-
delphia, where  two  of  his  brothers  lived,  and  Avhere  he
owned  proj^erty."

[With  regard  to  the  piece  of  cardboard,  etc."]  my
mother  says  :

"  I  think  this  very  interesting.  My  father  would  not
find  it  easy  to  identify  himself  to  my  daughter,  because
there  was  nothing  very  marked  in  his  life, but  as  the

brother of Dr. , it would be more easy.  Feda

describes the Resolutions passed by the Academy  of

Natural  Sciences  of  Philadelphia,  of  which  my  uncle

was  President  for  eight  years.  On  his  death  the  Academy
presented  the  family  with  a  very  beautiful  copy  of  these
Resolutions  written  on  parchment  and  illuminated.  The
writing  is  '  in  three  different  styles  '  and  there  are  many
signatures  in  the  right-hand  corner  at  the  bottom.  The
frame  had  my  uncle's  crest,  of  which  he  was  very  fond,
on  the  top.  "  This  is  something  he  thought  a  lot  of,  it's
still  in  existence  '  would  be  true  of  my  father's  feeling  for
it,  and  until  his  death  it  hung  in  his  room.  After  his
death,  it  was  packed  up  by  my  mother  and  destroyed  in
a  fire,  but  I  have  a  photograph  of  it,  and  some  of  my
cousins  have  the  duplicate  that  belonged  to  their  father."

I  remember  the  photograph  very  Avell.  It  hangs  outside
my  bedroom  door  in  America.  I  thought  of  it  when  Feda
Avas  describing  "  the  certificate,"  but  was  puzzled  by  her
saying  it  was  cro\vned  with  something — the  photograph  is
not — and  by  the  fact  that  I  knew  it  concerned  my  great-
uncle,  not  my  grandfather.

Extract  from  sitting  of  February  7,  1918.

Feda.  He's  trjdng  to  show  Feda  a  kind  of  satchel — he's  left
the  joke,i  he's  jumped.  The  satchel  is  a  brownish
colour,  and  it  seems  to  fasten  at  the  side,  and  where
you  undoes  it — it's  not  only  a  bag,  it's  got  a  place
you  can  stuff  things  into.

SiTTEE.  What's  in  it  ?

^  Discussed  in  the  immediately  preceding  part  of  the  sitting.


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


There's  a  good  many  things  in  it,  one  thing's  a  funny
rather  shiny  dark  thing,  it's  got  a  dark  cover,  it's
about  a  foot  long.  It's  got  a  light  metal  cap  at  one
end  of  this  dark  thing,  like  silver  looking.  He  had
that  with  him  and  he's  not  sure  if  it  was  sent  back
in  the  satchel.

You  never  got  what  was  inside  the  dark  cover.

Feda  don't  think  anything  was,  he  used  to  use  it,  take
it  all  in  his  hand,  and  there  was  something  that  as
though  when  he  touched  it  went  click,  it  was  like
an  instrument.

I  think  I  know  it.

{8.V.  Then — what's  that  ?  something  he  used  to  wash
himself  with  ought  to  have  been  in  the  satchel  too.)
He  says  he  was  not  able  to  wash  much  just  before
he  passed  over.  He  says  there  was  washing  material
rolled  up  at  the  bottom  of  the  satchel.  He  says  a
case  or  book  with  papers  in  it  was  in  there  too,
when  you  ojoened  it  the  paper  seemed  to  be  fixed  or
stuck  in,  fixed  in  so  as  not  to  fall  out,  that's  on  one
side,  on  the  other  side  was  a  compartment,  that
seems  to  have  been  there  too.  Another  thing  he  has
been  looldng  for  is  his  watch.

I  got  that.

It's  one  like  this  (touches  a  wrist  watch  on  the  sitter's
wrist).  .  .  .  It's  like  this  one  isn't  it  ?  (Touches
wrist  watch  again.)

Yes,  one  of  them  is.

He  says  did  a  case  come  back  with  a  little  photograph
in  it  ?

No,  I  want  to  know  about  that.

He  says  he  had  it  with  him  when  he  passed  over,  it
was  not  a  thing  he  would  give  to  anyone,  he's  sure
he  had  it  with  him.  Feda  noticed  him  pause  about
that,  and  Feda  thinks  that  at  one  time  he  had  an
idea  of  leaving  that  somewhere,  but  he  says  he  had
it  with  him.

Could  he  say  who  was  in  the  photograph,  or  who  I

ought  to  write  to  about  it  ?
He  thinks  he  had  it  all  the  time.


Lxxxir.] Articles  Associated  with  a  Communicator.


121


S. But  who  was  in  the  photograph  ?

F. He's  telling  about  a  letter  Uke  that,  (Feda  draws  a  G

in  the  air)  Feda  thinks  it's  a  G.
S. A  writing  G.

F.  Now  G.  has  something  to  do  with  someone  who  could
throw  light  on  the  matter.  He's  pretty  sure  they
should  be  able  to. Now  wait  a  minute —

S. Can  he  describe  the  photograph  to  me  ?

F. (S.v. Yes he's trying to do that, something  circular.)

He's  drawing  a  shape  like  this  (draws  an  oval  on  the
sitter's  hand)  and  he  shows  Feda  that  it's  sunk  in  a
little,  and  has  a  little  raised  ujd  rim  around.  (Here
Feda  claps  her  hands  together  softly.)  Feda  don't
know  what  he's  doing,  he  keeps  opening  and  shutting
his  hands  {s.v.  he  seemed  to  put  that  between
something).  There's  three  materials  go  to  the  making
of  that  case,  take  that  Uterally  he  says,  he's  puzzled
at  your  not  having  it.

S. Who's  in  the  photograph  ?

F.  ,  He  knows,  but  it's  not  easy  to  get  it  through,  it's
better  to  get  what  he's  thought  of,  if  he  does  get  it
through  Feda  will  tell  you. {S.v. Wait  a  minute,

are  you  sure  you're  not  mixing  it  up  with  S-  ?)

He  says  you've  got  at  home  something  that  he's  not
sure  if  it  belonged  to  him  for  not.  He  says  he  must
explain  it's  something  he  eels  is  being,  or  has  been
sent  to  you,  that  belongs  to  someone  else.  It  will
be  sent  as  belonging  to  him.

S. I  haven't  got  it  yet.

F.  He's  patting  either  his  neck,  or  the  front  part  of  his
chest,  (Feda  touches  just  below  the  collar  in  front)
he  says  you  haven't  got  all  his  things  yet.

S. I  certainly  haven't.

F.  He  says  it  must  take  a  long  time  !  Something  this  is
that  he's  already  see'd.  Oh  !  talking  about  photo-
graphs, he  says  did  you  know  he  had  some  photos
taken  not  mounted,  they  was  soft  paper  things.
They  was  taken  away  from  home,  a  few  weeks
before  he  passed  over,  Feda's  only  guessing  the  time.

S. Less  than  a  few  weeks.


122


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


F.  Towards  the  end  part  of  his  earth  life,  he  had  several
taken,  and  he  Says  they  went  into  different  people's
hands.

S. Was  there  more  than  one  person  in  the  photograph  ?

F.  In  one  he  was  alone,  but  on  some  there  was  certainly
more  than  one  person,  he  says  that's  whj^  they  were
divided  up.  In  one  Feda's  not  sure  if  he's  sitting  or
leaning  against  something,  but  looldng  at  the  photo-
graph something  is  raised  up  on  the  left  hand  side,
it's  about  half  way  up  the  picture  and  it  makes  a
line  across  the  picture.  (Feda  makes  a  gesture
indicating  a  horizontal  line  slanting  upwards)  whatever
this  is  it  goes  at  the  back  of  him  too,  looks  like  a
bulky  thing.  The  photograph  is  taken  outside,  not
in  a  room.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

I  certainly  received  a  satchel,  but  there  were  7io  papers
of  his  [the  communicator's]  in  it.  I  got  none  of  his  old
letters  or  papers.

There  was  an  old  memorandum  diary  or  two  among  his
things,  and  an  empty  tobacco  pouch,  but  not  such  a  thing
as  Feda  describes.

As  I  have  received  no  photographs  at  all  so  far,  I  can't
verify  the  statements.

Every  medium  I  have  ever  been  to  has  mentioned  the
photograph  of  himself  with  two  or  more  officers  and  one
medium  has  described  some  huts  near  which  it  was  taken.
Two  have  said  it  was  in  a  leather  case  and  one  said  on  a
postcard.  One  other  medium  mentioned  the  round  or  oval
case  which  Feda  speaks  of  earlier  and  which  I  believe
contained  a  photograph  of  me.

It  will  be  seen  that  Feda's  statements,  so  far  as  the
sitter  has  been  able  to  verify  them,  are  not  accurate,  and
so  far  as  they  correspond  with  ascertained  facts,  not  beyond
chance-coincidence.  The  fact  that  the  sitter  has  had
references  made  by  several  mediums  to  a  photograph  of
the  communicator  taken  wdth  other  officers,  which  she  has
been  unable  to  trace,  suggests  that  such  statements  are  of


Lxxxn.] Articles  Associated  with  a  Communicator.  123

frequent  occurrence  at  sittings,  and  unless  a  photograph  is
accurately  described  in  some  detail  not  much  importance
can  attach  to  these  statements.

Extract  from  sitting  of  A'pril  15,  1918.1

Fed.4.  Did  you  receive  his  [the  communicator's]  pocliet  book,
six  inches  by  four  and  a  half,  two  compartments  ?
It  had  a  photo  in  it  and  a  letter  written  only  two
days  before,  but  not  posted.

SiTTEE.  We  have  not  received  it.

Comment  by  the  ■•sitter.

I  am  writing  to  the  army  for  information  as  to  his
belongings. We  have  received  nothing  whatever.

Additional  note.  I  wote  the  foregoing  on  16th  and
17th  April,  [1918]  ;  this  part  I  write  on  18th  June,  1918.
I  received  a  parcel  from  the  War  Office,  Woolwich,  over
twelve  months  after  his  passing  over,  containing  his
personal  effects.  The  parcel  had  been  under  sea  water
and  the  old  wrapping  destroyed,  but  in  it  was  the  pocket
book  of  the  size  mentioned  and  a  mass  of  photographic
postcards  stuck  together,  and  above  all  there  was  the
letter  to  us,  quite  a  long  and  exceptional  letter  for  him  to
write.

This  incident  is  of  some  interest  because  the  knowledge
shown  concerning  the  pocket  book  and  its  contents  was  not
possessed  by  the  sitter  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  The
coincidence,  however,  is  not  very  striking.  Most  men  on
active  service  would  possess  a  pocket  book  of  about  the
size  mentioned,  and  it  must  fairly  often  have  happened
that  an  unposted  letter  was  found  amongst  a  soldier's
belongings  after  his  death.

1  The  notes  on  this  occasion  were  made  by  the  sitter.  Immediately
after  the  reference  to  the  pocket  book  quoted  here,  the  sitters  name
was  correctly  given  {see  above,  p.  26).


124


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


§  IV. Descriptions  of  Places  associated  with  a
Communicator.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  15,  1918.

Feda.  The  house  with  the  two  steps  leading  to  the  room.  If
you  go  up  the  stairs  you  go  up  two  steps  to  a
room — you  turn  round  to  a  landing.  It's  some
place  he's  been  at  with  you,  some  time  ago.  Up
two  steps  into  a  room  or  turn  to  the  right  up  two
more  steps  to  a  landing.  Some  place  you've  been
to  in  early  days.

Sitter.  Yes,  quite  good.

Feda.  It's  a  happy  place.  Feda  don't  know  why  he  thought
of  it. The  country  round  about  is  rather  hilly.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

This  is  excellent.  It  is  a  correct  description  of  the
house  I  am  at  present  staying  at  and  the  room  up  two
steps  referred  to  is  my  husband's  [the  communicator's]
study,  at  present  used  as  a  nursery.

This  room  has  more  associations  with  my  husband  than
any  other.

Extract  from  sitting  of  Jannary  31,  1918.^

Feda.  He's  building  up  a  letter.  [Feda  draws.  Interpretation
very  doubtful.]  K  and  J,  but  the  J  isn't  to  do
with  the  K.  This  spirit  has  tried  several  times  to
get  through.  He's  taking  Feda  to  a  town  by  the
sea — a  place  he  had  to  be  at  in  his  earth  life  in
rather  an  important  part  of  his  life.  It's  not  an
ordinary  sea-side  place — it's  as  it  proper  ships  go
there.  The  coast  goes  in  there.  If  you're  standing
on  the  land  looking  to  the  left,  it's  a  rough  coast —
lumpy — but  to  the  right  is  the  town,  spreading  out —
that's  looking  from  the  land,  not  from  the  sea.  The
town  lies  a  bit  low,  sloping  up  a  bit.  The  town's
not got very high buildings — some higher,  some

1  Cf.  pp.  78,  98  and  101.


Lxxxil.] Places  Associated  ivith  a  Communicator.  125

lower.  As  you  go  up  from  the  harbour,  you  go  up
a  winding  road.  About  the  middle  of  the  town  the
road  opens  out  into  a  square  place.  1,  2,  3,  l
turnings  out  of  that — and  a  kind  of  hotel  place,  a
bit  to  the  left  as  you  come  away  from  the  sea.
Something  that  makes  a  dingle  and  a  rumble — sounds
like  trams — electric  trams.  It's  not  a  big  town  like
London,  much  smaller — it's  busy  place — at  some
times  it's  a  quieter  place.  Big  ships  goes  there  with
sails  and  steamers.  An  important  letter  connected
with  that  place.  [She  draAvs  in  the  air.]  Stroke
down,  stroke  down,  and  one  across.  [The  recorder
could  not  see  the  drawing.  It  was  interpreted  by
the  sitter  as  A.]

Sitter.  Quite  right.

F. When  you  go  away  from  the  town,  it  gets  a  bit  hillier.

On  the  left  as  you  face  the  sea,  it's  a  bit  rocky.
On  the  rocks  they've  built  something  out — there's  a
building  sticking  up — about  as  high  a  building  as
there  is.  It's  built  near  the  water.  The  ground
raises  a  bit  on  the  right — there's  a  bit  near  the
water  is  lower,  but  behind  it's  raised  up.  When  he
was  there,  he  went  a  little  journey,  back  a  little — a
sort  of  joining  place — it  was  rather  a  nuisance  going
there.  He's  impressing  that  strongly,  as  if  it's
important.  After  the  letter  A  comes  a  small  one
[draws].

SiTTEE.  I  can't  see.

F. Round  and  a  little  loop — over  again — this  is  the  third

letter — and  then  a  long  letter  going  up.
SiTTEE.  I  think  I  know  from  the  first  letter  what  the  place  is.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

J  is the first  letter  of [the  supposed  communicator's]
name. What  follows  is,  it  seems  to  me,  a  good  description

of  Alexandria  where  I  first  met  the  J  s. I  have  taken

the  trouble  to  verify  several  points  with  a  map  of  the
to\TO,  and  to  go  over  the  description  with  Mrs.  Salter
who  thought  it  quite  good. It  is  not  perfectly  correct


126


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


but  it  is  a  more  accurate  description  than  I  could  have
given  from  memory,  though  I  lived  there  for  nearly  a
year.  Feda  has  taken  the  town  from,  to  me,  its  most
unfamiliar  point  of  view,  the  harbour,  which  except  on
arrival  or  departure  I  seldom  visited.  It  is  true  that  as
you  leave  the  harbour  you  go  along  a  winding  road  until
you  reach  the  Place  Muhammad  Ali,  from  which  four
principal  streets  do  start.  There  is  a  large  cafe  there,
but  I  cannot  remember  the  position.  There  are  also
electric  trams.  Alexandi'ia  is  an  important  port,  and
certainly  a  busy  place,  and  the  statement  "  at  some  times
it's  a  quieter  place  "  is  very  characteristic.  During  the
winter  large  steamers  come  in  weekly  from  Europe  and
America,  bringing  hordes  of  tourists.  Winter  is  also  the
transport  season.  In  the  summer  all  this,  bustle  stops.
Summer  is  also  the  time  when  all  of  the  European  colony
who  can  depart  for  Europe.  The  statement  "  when  he
was  there  he  went  a  little  journey  back,  a  sort  of  joining
place,  it  was  rather  a  nuisance  going  there.  He's  im-
pressing that  strongly  as  if  it's  important  "  is  also  a  good
point.  Mex,  where  the  regiments  went  for  rifle  practice^
was  a  long  and  most  wearisome  ride  from  Ramleh,  the
suburb  where  we  all  lived,  and  my  husband  and  niost^  of
the  officers  used  to  grumble  bitterly  about  it.


§  V. References  to  Anniversaries.

Extract  from  sitting  of  January  15,  1918.

Feda.  February,  something  interesting  in  February,  another
month  from  now,  as  near  as  he  [the  communicator^
sitter's  husband]  can  get  it,  something  about  which
he  wants  to  be  specially  near  you.  He  feels  you
might  be  looking  back  and  regretting  something.  An
anniversary  connected  with  him.  Feda  thought
something  connected  with  the  child,  but  he  shook
his  head.  An  anniversary  of  something  he  did  here.
If  you  remember,  he  doesn't  want  you  to  be  un-
happy.


LXXXII.]


References  to  Anniversaries.


127


Comment  by  the  sitter.
A  wedding  took  place  just  a  month  and  a  day  after  my
sitting  which  chiefly  concerned  the  family,  and  at  the
time  of  my  sitting  there  was  no  thought  of  a  wedding.
Our  wedding  day  was  always  kept  as  a  special  fete  day
and  the  anniversaries  were  each  time  marked.


Extract  from,  sitting  of  January  28,  1918.

Fed  A.  He's  speaking  about  himself  now,  an  anniversary  that
he's  interested  in.  {S.v.  :  well,  you're  wrong,  this
isn't  February.)  It's  near  February,  the  anniver-
sary is  in  February.  He's  been  anticipating  this
anniversary  for  some  weeks,  hoping  some  one  wouldn't
be  sad  on  it.  He  doesn't  regret  anything  at  all.
This  anniversary  affects  some  one  else,  he's  afraid  that
some  one  else  will  be  miserable  on  it.

Feda  thinks  very  soon  there's  another  anniversary,
not  of  the  same  Idnd,  not  a  date,  something  he  did.
something  very  important  in  the  latter  part  of  his
earth  life.  It  had  a  bearing  on  his  passing  on.  If
he  hadn't  done  this,  he  mightn't  have  passed  over.
Something  he  did,  some  kind  of  journey  or  change.
'  .  .  .  Two  anniversaries,  the  date  affects  some  one  on
the  earth  plane  ;  he's  trying  to  tell  them  not  to  be
sad,  to  have  the  hump.  The  other  anniversary  is
quite  different,  but  it  happened  about  the  same  time.
He  took  a  journey  unexpectedly.  If  he  hadn't  made
that  change,  he  mightn't  have  passed  on,  but  he
doesn't  regret  it.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

My  mother's  [also  the  communicator's  mother]  birthday
is  coming  on  very  shortly  during  this  month  [February].

I  don't  know  of  [the  second]  anniversary  [mentioned  by
Feda].


Extract  from  sitting  of  February  25,  1918.

Feda. [S.v. March, that's next month.) He keeps  say-
ing there's something in March connected  with


128


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


him,  an  anniversary.  {S.v.  Is  it  to  do  with  you  or
some  one  else  ?)  Can't  get  that  quite.  Not  this
month,  next  month,  March.  Two  people  on  the
earth-plane  will  be  thinking  of  that  and  worrying.
It  is  to  do  with  him.  Something  he  did,  not  the
anniversary  of  his  passing  over,  but  something
important  that  led  up  to  his  passing  over.  He  gives
the  impression  of  packing  up.  They  call  it  an
anniversar}^,  but  it  isn't  a  day  like  a  birthday.
There  is  an  anniversary  close  now,  but  that  isn't
what  he  spoke  of  just  now.  He  says  it's  right  to
call  it  an  anniversary,  but  it  didn't  happen  on  one

■  day.  There  is  something  that  happened  just  now  on
one  day,  more  like  a  birthday.  Feda  don't  know  if
it's  connected  with  him  or  some  one  on  the  earth-
plane. When  Feda  said  anniversary,  that  put  him  in

■  mind  of  the  second  thing  which  is  more  like  a
birthday,  but  it  wasn't  what  he  was  giving.

The  sitter  notes  that  the  communicator,  his  brother,
arrived  at  Basra  on  March  8,  1916.  Since  he  was  killed
about  a  month  later,  it  might  be  said  that  he  did  some-
thing which  ■'  led  up  to  his  passing  over,"  something
which  gives  Feda  the  impression  of  "  packing  up  "  in
March.  The  other  anniversary  referred  to,  which  is  said
to  be  "  more  like  a  birthday  "  means  nothing  to  the
sitter.  -

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  4,  1918.

Feda.  One  of  the  changes  you  know  about  he  made  about
this  time  of  year.  {S.v.  What's  the  month  ?
March.)  It's  about  now,  it's  in  his  mind  about
this  time.  {S.v.  This  is  March.)  Feda's  telling
him  it's  March.  It's  due  about  now,  the  more
important  change.  There  was  a  delay.  He  antici-
pated it,  but  there  was  a  delay.  If  he  hadn't  made
the  second  change,  he  mightn't  have  passed  over.

,  This  statement  was  not  understood  by  the  sitter.


LXXXII.]


References  to  Anniversaries.


129


Extract  from  sitting  of  March  21,  1918.

Feda. Spirit people are always interested in  anniversaries.

There's  something—  {S.v.  This  is  March.  It  isn't
quite  now  ?)  There's  something  about  this  time  of
year  that  he  regards  as  an  anniversary.  Not  like
a  birthday,  more  Hke  a  time  or  change  connected
with  him.

Sitter.  In  April  I  know,  but  not  March.

F. Feda knew it wasn't quite close. He wondered  if

you'd  been  anticipating  it.
S.  Yes.

F.  He'll  be  specially  near  you  then.  It  means  something
to  you  both.

S. I'll  remember.

F.  {S.v.  :  Six,  sixth.)  There  was  something  in  con-
nexion with  this—  not  quite  it—  that  happened
on  the  sixth.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

I  do  not  recall  anything  about  the  6th  April  ;  perhaps
it]  was  the  day  they  arranged  to  recall  him  [the  com-
municator], I  cannot  say.  He  was  killed  on  April  27th,
which  is  of  course  the  anniversary  I  have  been  anticipating.


Extract  from  sitting  of  April  15,  1918.

^.  He  [the  communicator]  says  there  was  two  anniversaries
^ about  now,  one  that  leads  up  to  his  passing  over.

Comment  by  the  sitter.

The  two  anniversaries  are  March  2nd  and  May  12th,  the
former  my  birthday,  the  latter  the  day  he  passed  over.


I


130


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


§  VI. Extracts  from  Two  Sittings  at  which  the  same
Communicator  purported  to  be  present.

As  noted  above  (p.  77)  the  sitters  on  January  29  and
April  9,  1918,  respectively,  were  mother  and  daughter,  and
the  same  young  man  (apparently)  tried  to  communicate  on
the  two  occasions.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  sitting
on  April  9,  1918,  Feda  observed  that  the  communicator
had  "  tried  to  communicate  before,  been  to  Feda  before,"
but  the  connexion  between  the  two  sittings  was  never
clearly  recognised.  The  extracts  given  below  show  the
most  definite  points  of  contact  ;  there  was  nothing  in  the
two  sittings  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  that  the
same  communicator  was  present  at  each.


Extracts  from  sitting  of
April  9,  1918.

(1a)  He  passed  over  pretty
quickly.  He  tried  to  say  this
before.  He  did  pass  over
pretty  quickly.  He  didn't  feel
anything.  He  felt  his  con-
sciousness going.  He  heard
two  noises,  one  first,  then  he
felt  dizzy,  and  then  another
and  everything  went  blank.
Except  he  thinks  whatever  it
was  knocked  him  on  the  head.
It  felt  as  if  some  one  had
given  him  a  knock.  He  thinks
it's  p'raps  been  found  out
something  hit  him  on  the
head.  He  has  tried  to  say
before  that  he  felt  nothing
more.

(1)  Comment  by  the  sitter  of  January  29,  1918.  This  is  quite
accurate.  He  was  wounded  in  the  arm  and  side  (which  Feda
touched  when  she  said  he  was  tapping  himself  lower  down)  ;  an


Extracts  from  sitting  of
January  29,  1918.

(1)  He  passed  over  suddenly,
a  peculiar  feeling  right  at  the
top  of  the  head  ;  not  a  pain,
like  neuralgia  when  the  pain
goes  and  leaves  a  dull  pain.
He  had  it  for  about  half  a
minute,  then  he  went  uncon-
scious. He's  tapping  the  lower
part  of  his  body,  but  that
wasn't  important.  But  what
he  felt  most  was  in  his  head.
He  felt  something  lower  down.


Lxxxri.]


Extracts  from  Two  Sittings.


131


attempt  was  made  to  move  him  to  a  place  of  safety,  and  on  the
way  he  was  shot  through  the  head  and  killed  instantaneously.


(2)  When  Feda  was  first
talking  he  was  saying  he  was
worried  about  another  young
man  on  the  earth  plane —
some  one  in  great  danger —
he's  trying  to  help  some  one.
Some  news  he  thinks  has
abeady  been  got  through.
He's  so  afraid  of  it's  being
exaggerated.  It's  some  one
he  knows  on  the  earth  plane,
very  well.  It's  inevitable  that
something  should  happen,  but
he  doesn't  want  it  exaggerated.
And  to  another  lady  too,  the
news  will  come  to  two.  It'll
look  bad  on  the  face  of  it  ;
he  wants  you  to  remember
what  he  said  and  that  it's
exaggerated.  [Feda  draws  in
the  air  the  letter  R]  and  C
or  G.  It  doesn't  mean  R  C
or  R  G.  It's  two  separate
names,  C  or  G,  and  R  as
well.


(2  a)  Feda  thinks  there's
another  lady  on  the  earth
plane  that  he  expected  to  see
as  well  as  you.  He  kept
looking  round  .  .  .  There's
you  and  another  lady  and
another  young  man,  three  of
you  .  .  .

He's  been  with  you  a  good
deal,  with  the  three  of  you,
the  other  lady  and  the  young
man.  There  are  others  look-
ing after  the  young  man.
He's  been  anxious  about  this
young  man  lately.  He  wasn't
where  he  expected  to  find  him
in  the  last  few  days.  Perhaps
you'll  hear  .  .  .

He  builds  up  a  letter  like
that  [draws  R  in  the  air].
{S.v.  Wait  a  minute,  what's
the  other  ?)  This  is  both
letters  he's  interested  in.
[Draws  C  in  the  air].  Not  a
G.  He  builds  up  both  those
letters.


(2)  Comment  by  the  sitter  of  January  29,  1918.  I  don't  under-
stand this  entii-ely.  R  C  are  the  initials  of  my  younger  son,  who
is  mentally  deficient.  We  have  not  been  able  to  get  his  entire
discharge  from  military  service,  that  is,  he  has  to  have  his
exemption  renewed  every  six  months.  The  time  was  just  running
out  when  I  had  the  sitting,  but  when  it  did,  we  had  no  difficulty
in  getting  his  further  exemption.  I  was  feeling  very  anxious  lest
they  should  take  him  this  time  ;  this  may  account  for  my  son's
reference  to  anxiety  about  the  boy.  He  was  also  very  fond  of
telling  me  that  I  exaggerated  the  danger  there  might  be,  if  tlie
boy  had  to  serve.


132


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PABT


(3)  He's  building  up  A,  some
one  he  met  over  there  in  the
spirit  world,  some  one  he's
met.  He  wanted  you  to  know
he'd  not  been  lonely.  He  met
several  people  belonging  to  the
family.  He  also  met  some
friends  who  had  passed  over
before  him.  There  was  a
young  man  passed  over  within
an  hour  of  himself.  They
met  almost  immediately.  Do
you  remember  one  he  knew
who  was  missing  ?  (Sitter.
Yes.)  You  loiow  he's  passed
over  now  ?  {Sitter.  Yes.)
His  people  didn't  think  at
first  he  had,  they  thought  he
was  a  prisoner.  Nothing  was
found  out  about  him  for  some
time.  It  was  through  an
unofficial  channel  it  was  estab-
lished he  had  passed  over.  It
was  difficult  to  find  the  body.


(3  a)  He  builds  up  another
letter  in  a  different  connexion
[Feda  draws  in  the  air  A],  as
if  he  were  pushing  it  nearer  to
you,  as  if  it's  more  an  earth
plane  condition  .  .  .

He's  got  a  lot  of  friends
with  him,  two  or  three  young
men  ...  As  well  as  the  fair
one  there's  a  darker  one  .  .  .
He  passed  over  in  the  war.
There  was  something  rather
peculiar  about  his  passing  over,
like  something  worrying,  would
upset  people  who  were  fond  of
him.  Feda  should  think  there
was  some  delay  in  hearing
about  him.


(3)  Co7nment  by  sitter  of  January  29,  1918.  A  may  refer  to  a
cousin  who  went  over  before  him  or  to  a  friend  who  followed  him
a  few  months  later.  The  man  who  passed  out  within  an  hour  of
himself  was  probably  a  fellow-officer  for  whom  he  had  a  strong
affection.  He  was  the  last  man  my  son  spoke  to  before  going
over  the  top.  which  they  did  together.  Within  an  hour  both
were  dead.

This  reference  to  the  young  man  who  was  missing  is  quite  good.
He  was  very  devoted  to  my  son.  There  was  great  difficulty  in
finding  out  anything  about  his  death  ;  it  was  quite  unofficially
established  that  he  had  been  killed  and  his  place  of  bm-ial  was
found.


Lxxxii.]  Apparent  Communication  from  Person  still  alive.


133


§  VII. Some  Evidence  of  Apparent  Communication
FROM  A  Person  still  alive.

The  following  report  of  a  sitting  taken  by  Dr.  L.  P.
Jacks  is  of  special  interest,  because,  together  with  refer-
ences perfectly  intelligible  to  the  sitter,  statements  were
made  about  a  supposed  communicator  which  might  have
applied  to  a  son  of  Dr.  Jacks,  then  fighting  at  the  front,
and  some  knowledge  was  shown  which  might  have  been
taken  as  going  some  way  to  establish  the  identity  of  the
communicator,  had  Dr.  Jacks'  son  been  dead  at  the  time
of  the  sitting.  In  point  of  fact,  he  was,  and  is,  still
ahve.  This  was  the  first  sitting  Dr.  Jacks  had  had  with
Mrs.  Leonard,  and  he  sat  anonymously.

Record  of  the  sitting  of  April  5,  1918. ^

Feda.  a  young  man  comes  who  knows  this  gentleman.  He's
about  twenty-two,  on  the  tall  side,  about  medium
breadth,  very  straight,  holds  himself  straight,  got  a
straight  way  of  looking.  His  chin  is  a  good  shape,
firm,  a  tiny  bit  square,  the  jaw  not  heavy,  but  the
chin  square.  The  mouth  is  medium,  the  lips  a
Httle  curved,  his  nose  showing  the  bridge  a  httle  bit,
rather  straight,  not  quite  aquiline,  a  little  bit  broad
from  the  tip  of  the  nostrils.  The  eyes  grey-blue  ;
the  eye-brows  not  much  arched,  brown,  nicely  marked,
a  good  forehead,  square,  the  hair  short,  sticks  up  a
little  on  top.  He  brushes  it  away  from  his  forehead.
He  brushes  it  sideways  and  back,  not  parted  in  the
middle.  He  passed  over  suddenly.  He's  tried  to
communicate  before.  He's  not  building  up  in
uniform,  in  a  suit  rather  hke  this  [indicates  the
medium's  grey  tweed  coat  and  skirt].  It's  one  he
used  to  wear  in  earth  life,  not  quite  at  the  end.

^  Almost  the  whole  of  the  record  is  quoted.  A  few  words  have  been
omitted  here  and  there  which  have  no  bearing  upon  questions  of
evidence.


134


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


He's  tried  to  communicate  before.^  There's  a  lady
on  the  earth  plane  he  wants  to  meet  as  well  as  you.^
There's  an  older  lady  with  him  in  the  spirit  world,
medium  build,  got  thin  a  little  before  she  passed
over,  neatly  dressed,  tidy  ;  the  face  rather  round
here  [indicates  the  cheeks],  sloping  to  the  chin,  the
nose  rather  straight,  the  mouth  gone  a  little  thin.
She'd  been  ill  for  some  time  before  she  passed  over.
Her  face  was  sunken  towards  the  end  of  her  earth
life.  The  chin  not  large,  very  nice  shaped.  Can't
see  the  eyes  distinctly,  the  eyebrows  a  brownish
colour,  not  black,  rather  a  dark  brown,  a  little
arched  ;  a  nice  skin,  but  she  shows  herself  a  bit
pale.  The  hair  is  done  a  bit  plainly,  smooth  to  the
side  of  the  head,  not  over  the  ears,  done  towards  the
crown  of  the  head.  Not  sure  if  it's  parted,  but  it
goes  off  the  face,  smooth  back.  It's  going  grey,  but
it  had  been  on  the  dark  side.  Judging  from  her
skin  Feda  thinks  she'd  been  on  the  dark  side.  A
very  nice  smooth  soft  skin  she'd  had.  She  hadn't
been  well  for  some  time  before  she  passed  over.  She
had  some  internal  weakness.  She  had  it  for  some
time,  but  it  hadn't  got  so  serious  till  a  few  months
before  she  passed  over.  She  builds  a  letter  like  that
near  her  [Feda  draws  an  A  in  the  air].  She'd  lived
a  good  deal  in  the  country,  a  country  house  and  a
country  town  more  than  London.^

'  Comment  by  the  sitter.  I  cannot  identify  him.  I  thought  at
first  it  was  my  son.  Captain  S.  Jacks,  at  the  front,  as  the  de-
scription tallies  at  several  points.  I  was  afraid  he  might  have  been
killed. I  now  know  he  was  alive  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.

*  Tills  might  refer  either  to  the  sitter's  wife  or  to  his  daughter,
both  of  whom  are  living. H.  S.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  The  description  of  the  older  lady  fits
my  own  mother  fairly  well.  Her  name  began  with  A.  She  died
20  years  previously.

It  is  worth  observing  that  on  my  showing  this  part  of  the  report
to  various  members  of  my  family  some  months  after  the  sitting,
they  all  identified  the  "  spirits  "  differently.  My  own  jdentification
■of the first "spirit" as my son was immediately  challenged  in


LXXXli.]  Apparent  Communication  f  rom  Person  still  alive.  135


The  young  man  she's  interested  in  passed  over
since  her.  She's  looking  after  him  for  some  one  on
the  earth  plane.  Between  him  and  you  is  a  letter  R
and  a  C  or  G,  not  sure  which.  He  builds  it  up
like  a  circle.

L.  P.  J. Is  it  0  ?

F.  Feda  see  it  better  in  a  minute.  {S.v.  Can't  quite  get
that  letter,  the  letter  that  comes  after.)  He's  been
trying  to  communicate  before  with  some  one  else,
tried  to  come  to  Feda  before  to  get  some  message
through.  (S.v.  Been  near  a  place  beginning  with  B
before  he  passed  over.^)  Feda  don't  think  he  was
right  in,  but  quite  close.  He  thinks  you  can  find
out,  and  a  place  called  M  close  to.

Feda  get  a  feeUng  in  the  head  before  he  passed
over.  Feda  get  a  sudden  tight  sort  of  bursting
feeling  in  the  head.  He  felt  that,  not  a  pain,  but
most  uncomfortable.  And  round  his  chest  a  tight
feeling,  as  if  he  couldn't  breathe.  It  didn't  last
long.  It  didn't  hurt.  Having  that  feeUng  in  the
head  prevented  him  from  feeling  any  pain.  He
suddenly  lost  consciousness  and  he  didn't  know  any
more.

Something  has  happened  since  he  passed  over
which  makes  him  feel  he  may  have  moved  after,  but
he  didn't  know  he  did.  He  speaks  of  feeling  dizzy
before  he  passed  over,  and  he  heard  a  noise  very
close,  several  noises.  He'd  been  with  other  people  a
little  time  before,  but  he  felt  suddenly  alone ,^  or
away  from  the  others.^
L.  P.  J. Does  he  know  how  long  it  is  since  he  passed  over  ?

favour  of  another  young  man  whom  the  description  fits  about
equally  well. This  shows  how  uncertain  such  identifications  are.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  B  might  mean  Birmingham,  where  I
once  lived.

^  This  description  of  physical  symptoms  at  the  time  of  death  is,  of
coxirse,  wholly  inapplicable  to  Captain  Jacks,  to  whom  Dr.  Jacks  thought
at  the  time  of  the  sitting  reference  might  be  intended.  If  some  other
man  is  referred  to  here,  Dr.  Jacks  cannot  identify  him. H.  S.


136


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


F. Not  very  long, Feda  thinks,  not  a  matter  of  years.

{S.v.  He'd  expected  to  go  to  a  hospital.)  When  he
woke  on  the  other  side  he  thought  it  was  a  hospital
he  was  in.  (S.v.  A  young  man  he  knew  before  has
passed  over  just  lately,  a  friend.  His  name  began
with  M.^)  And  B  as  well,  two  people  he  knew.  He
thinks  you've  got  a  small  photo  and  a  larger  one  ;
two  photos.  One  has  been  done  much  later  than
the  other.  He  thinks  either  you've  got  them  or
you've  seen  them.^

L.  P.  J. That's  a  photo  of  him,  or  of  M  ?

F.  Of  him.  {S.v.  S  too,  a  friend  of  his.)  He  builds  up
a  letter  S.  It's  connected  with  him.  He  builds  up
a  big  letter  S  at  the  side  of  him.  There's  two
young  men  here,  this  one  and  one  by  the  side  of
him.  The  other  one  is  a  bit  darker.  The  two  is
together.

L.  P.  J. Is  he  dark  or  fair  ?

F.  Rather  bluey  eyes  and  a  fair  skin.  The  other  one  is
darker.  One  keeps  building  the  letter  M  between
them.  And  a  letter  like  a  circle.  Feda  thinks  it
must  be  0.  These  two  have  been  together  in  the
spirit  world.  They  both  want  to  come  to  you  this
morning.  But  there's  a  lady  on  the  earth  plane
they  go  to,  not  young,  about  the  middle  of  life..
S,  M  and  0  they  build  up,  and  what's  that  K  or  H  ?
[Feda  draws  K  in  the  air.]

L.  P.  J.  K.

F.  Those  letters  is  connected  with  them  ^  .  .  .  One  of  the
young  men  lived  in  a  place  called  L.  He  wants  you
to  think  about  that  after.  S  has  got  to  do  with  a
place,  to  do  with  the  fair  one.

L.  P.  J. Is  it  where  he  lived  ?  .

1  See  below.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  As  I  have  had  to  do  with  young  men.
for  many  years,  the  photographs  have  too  many  appHcations  tO'
make  this  of  any  value.

Comment  by  the  sitter.  S,  M,  O  are  the  initials  of  three  of  my
sons  in  the  reverse  order  of  their  ages.  They  were  all  alive  at
the  time  of  the  sitting. I  can  make  nothing  of  K.


Lxxxii.]  Apparent  Communication  from  Person  still  alive.  137


F. Yes. Not  the  S  that's  a  name.
L.  P.  J. Is  S  his  name  ?

F.  Feda  thinks  so.  S  a  place  and  S  a  name.  He  didn't
always  live  at  S.  {S.v.  Machinery  of  some  kind.)
Do  you  know  if  for  some  time  he'd  been  interested
in  machinery,  very  important  machinery,  as  if  con-
centrated in  a  small  space  ?  Like  as  if  he  had  to
bend  down  and  look  at  this.  P'raps  more  like
apparatus.  He  feels  machinery  suggests  something
too  coarse.  Like  a  box-shaped  thing  with  a  little
door  and  holes  in  the  side,  and  something  makes  a
whirring  noise.  He  shuts  something,  like  shutting
something  oif.

L.  P.  J. Was  it  something  he  used  to  ride  with  ?

F. Yes, it used to make a whirring sound  .  .  .  {S.v.
Maurice.)

L.  P.  J. Maurice. [Repeated  to  the  recorder, who  had  not

caught  Feda's  whisper.]
F. He's  saying  Maurice.

L.  P.  J. Does  he  want  to  send  a  message  to  Maurice  ?
F. He's  helping  Maurice  i  he  says.

[There  follow  some  allusions  to  Maurice's  supposed
circumstances  at  the  time,  which  were  not  under-
stood.]

F. There's  a  girl  and  a  younger  lady  and  a  gentleman  not
with  hair  on  his  face.

L.  P.  J. I  should  like  to  talk  to  that  gentleman.

F.  He's  showing  himself  at  the  back.  A  fine-looking  face,
rather  sensitive.  He's  looking  anxious  now.  Acrosl.
the  upper  part  of  the  face  he's  a  little  broader,  then
a  little  thinner  below.  Rather  a  good-looking  face.
The  nose  comes  out,  a  little  bit  to  the  Roman  kind,
rather  a  straight  line  between  the  nose  and  mouth,'
the  under  lip  comes  out  a  tiny  bit,  towards  the  end

'  Comment  by  the ,  sitter.  This  is  the  name  of  my  second  son,
Captam  Maurice  Jacks.  I  had  been  thinking  a  lot  about  Maurice
on  the  day  of  the  sitting. It  is  odd  Feda  should  give  this  name


138


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


of  his  earth-life  the  under  lip  was  a  tiny  bit  fuller.
The  mouth  not  small. ^
L.  P.  J. Did  he  know  me  in  earth  life  ?

F.  Feda  think  so.  He  was  a  very  good  man  when  he  was
here.  Feda  thinks  something  in  his  earth  life  was  a
preparation  for  the  other  side.  He's  got  something
important,  he's  going  to  do  work  with  you  and  he's
already  started.  He's  going  to  influence  you  in
speaking  and  writing,  as  if  he  was  going  to  tell  you
what  to  say.  You're  going  to  carry  on  and  elaborate
something  he  had  to  leave  undone  when  he  passed
over. Had  he  a  connexion  with  another  country  ?  ^

L.  P.  J. I  think  he  had.

F.  He  comes  close  to  you,  but  in  a  different  way,  more  as
if  there  was  a  spirit  bond  between  you  than  an
earth  bond.  He  keeps  on  holding  up  a  book  as  if
he  was  passing  it  on  to  you.

L.  P.  J.  Yes.

F.  As  if  he  were  putting  this  book  into  your  hands.  He
pointed  to  himself  first.  He's  opening  the  book  and
pointing  to  something  inside.

L.  P.  J. Can  he  make  some  letters  ?

[Feda  draws  in  the  air,  C]

L.  P.  J. Yes,  I  understand  C.

F. He's  trying  to  form  a  word. [She  draws  C,  h  (un-
certain), a.] That  comes  in  the  word.
L.  P.  J.  Yes.

F.  [She  draws  m,  b.]  He  spells  these  letters,  but  it's  not
complete.  [She  draws  r,  s  (uncertain).]  He's  missed
something.

L.  P.  J. Tell  him  I  think  1  understand.^

1  Comment  by  the  sitter.  This  is  quite  a  good  description  of  my
late  friend,  Professor  J.  Royce  of  Harvard.  N.B.—l  had  been
wondering  if  he  would  turn  up.  He  and  I  worked  on  much  the
same  lines,  had  much  in  common  and  were  great  friends.  And
I  had  recently  published  an  article  on  him  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly.

2  Comment  by  the  sitter. Yes,  America.

3  Comment  by  the  sitter.  We  have  got  C  A  M  B  R  [S] — Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts,  where  Royce  lived  and  where  we  were
together  in  1886,  1907,  1912.


Lxxxn.]  Apparent  Communication  from  Person  still  alive.  139


F. He'll  be  able  to  manifest  better  as  time  goes  on.  A,

he  builds  up.
L.  P.  J. Can  he  give  the  country  ?

P.  A  and  M  too.  Feda  think  the  country  he  spoke
about — it  wasn't  just  for  a  holiday  he  was  interested
in  it,  but  in  a  serious  way.^  He'd  got  a  strong
interest  in  a  public  building,  stone,  not  brick.  A
book  again.  He  must  have  been  fond  of  books  M^hen
he  was  here.  He  shows  shelves  of  books.  You've
got  a  book  connected  with  him.  Do  you  know  he's
already  tried  to  write  through  you  ?

L.  P.  J.  Yes.2

F.  He  says  through  you.  He  seems  to  work  your  brain
and  your  hand.  It  isn't  only  when  you're  writing,
but  when  you're  walking  along,  he  can  tell  you  what
to  write.

L.  P.  .J.  Yes.

J". He  gave  you  something  lately  that  was  on  a  subject

beginning  with  R.
L.  P.  .J. Ask  him  to  get  the  next  letter.

[Feda  draws  in  the  air  R  0.]

L.  P.  J.  0.

F. [She  draws  in  the  air  Y.] Don't  know  what  it  means.
L.  P.  J. Are  you  sure  R  is  right  ?

F. [She draws Roy.] It looks like that to  Feda.

Not  quite  right,  something  like  it,  but  not  quite
right.

L.  P.  J. He's  getting  on  very  weU.

F. R,  R.  he  says,  R.

L.  P.  J. Yes,  I  understand,  R.

F. He  says  it,  but  Feda's  not  sure  about  it's  being  the
letter.

L.  P.  J. R's  quite  clear  to  me.

F. Ar,  Ar,  like  the  sound  of  Ar. Not  R-r-r,  but  Ar.
L.  P.  J.  Yes.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  A,  M —  America.  What  follows
seems  to  refer  to  (1)  college  buildings,  (2)  studies  and  books—
quite  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  our  connexion.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  I  meant  no  more  by  this  than  that
his  ideas  had  influenced  me  in  my  own  writing.


140


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


F. He  can't  get  it  yet.^

L.  P.  J.  Ask  him  if  he  remembers  anything  we  did  together.
F.  He  thinks  you  ought  to  remember  about  the  building.
L.  P.  J.  Yes.

A  particular  building  at  a  place  called  E.^
L.  P.  J. I  don't  remember.
F. Then  there  was  a  building  called  M.
L.  P.  .J. Yes,  I  remember  M.

F.  It's  connected  with  a  building.  He  went  from  one
building  to  another,  like  travelling  round  them.  AIL
these  buildings  used  to  hold  a  lot  of  people,  a  great
number  of  people. ^  He  had  an  idea  of  his  own  in
regard  to  a  building,  but  he  wasn't  able  to  carry  it
through.  He  had  a  kind  of  ideal  in  his  mind.  He
wasn't  able  to  accomplish  this  ideal.

L.  P.  J.  Does  he  remember  what  the  building  was  to  be
made  of  ?

F. He's smiling. Not bricks, not even ordinary  stone.

He's  drawing  a  letter  like  that  [she  draws  G  It
would  have  a  good  deal  of  that  in  it.  It  was  a^
funny  building.

L.  P.  J.  Yes.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  There  seems  to  be  a  muddle  here
between  ROY,  the  first  three  letters  of  his  own  name,  and
L  O  Y,  the  first  three  letters  of  "  Loyalty,"  which  was  the  title
of  one  of  his  books  and  also  the  title  of  an  article  I  had  written
about  him. I  can't  make  out  what  the  '  Ar  '  sound  means.

"  Comment  by  the  sitter.  This  might  be  the  Emerson  Hall  at
Harvard,  which  was  the  building  in  which  Royce  used  to  lecture
and  where  we  were  often  together.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  It  might  be  Manchester  College,  Oxford,
where  Royce  gave  lectures  for  a  period  in  1913,  and  was  daily
with  me.  The  going  from  E  to  M — the  passage  from  lecturing  in  j
Emerson  Hall  to  lecturing  in  Manchester  College.  The  next  point  i
struck  me  as  the  most  significant  part  of  the  sitting.  The  tran-  i
sition  from  the  idea  of  the  college  building  to  the  ideal  spiritual  i
building  is  in  keeping.  His  last  books  were  all  about  a  spiritual  i
building  which  he  called  the  Ideal  of  the  Great  Community  and  it  ;.
was  on  this  idea  that  we  had  often  conversed.  (See  my  article  |
on  him  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly,  February,  1918.)  I

*  See  below.


I


Lxxxn.]  Apparent  Communication  from  Person  still  alive.  141

F. It  was  a  kind  of  ideal  in  his  head.

L.  P.  J. Is  that  what  he  wants  me  to  help  him  to  build  ?

F. He  says  : "  Yes,  but  not  quite  as  I  planned  it.  It'll

be  different  now."
L.  P.  J. Yes,  I  understand.

F.  Something  beyond  him  will  make  it  different.  As  soon
as  he  came  he  began  to  talk  about  a  building.

L.  P.  J. Tell  him  I'm  glad  he's  still  interested  in  that  building.

F.  He  didn't  think  you'd  think  he  would  forget  about  that
building  .  .  .

L.  P.  J. Can  he  tell  me  what  name  to  give  to  the  building  ?
F. He  looks  upon  it  as  a  palace. He  doesn't  want  to

call  it  that.
L.  P.  J. Is  palace  large  enough  ?

F.  A  palace  of  truth,  a  palace  of  knowledge.  You  can
call  it  temple,  if  you  like  ;  it'll  be  different  to  any
other  temple.

L.  P.  J. Does  he  remember  we  used  to  give  it  a  bigger  name  ?
F. Yes  he'd  like  to  get  it  through.
L.  P.  J. Shall  I  tell  him  ?

F.  No,  he'll  try  to  give  it.  He  wants  to  get  to  it  by
stages.  First  palace,  then  temple,  then  (s.v.  what  ?
God).

L.  P.  J.  (to  recorder). Did  you  hear  that  ?

H.  S. I  heard  "  God."

F. Funny  this,  can't  get  it.

L.  P.  J. I  think  he's  said  enough.

F. (S.v. God, says something about God. God's K —

K— K— con— K—  Ken—)
L.  P.  J. Does  he  mean  "  kingdom  "  ?

F.  Feda  thinks  so.  Can  only  get  K  and  an  N  sound.i
He  has  others  on  the  other  side  helping  him  .  .  .
This  time  we  shall  carry  it  through,  he  says.

•  Comment  by  the  sitter.  A  spiritual  building,  not  made  with
hands,  was,  roughly,  Royee's  interpretation  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
The  building  in  question  was  a  community  of  souls — the  main
theme  of  Royee's  later  philosophy.

It  has  since  occurred  to  me  that  the  word  Feda  was  trying  to
make  was  not  "  kingdom,"  as  I  suggested,  but  "  community."
Observe  that  she  didn't  quite  accept  "  kingdom." Community  is


142  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part

L.  P.  J.  Yes.

F. He  says  the  time  is  nearly  right  now.
L.  P.  J. Why  does  he  think  it's  right  ?

F. {S.v. Evolution,  evolution.) It's  rolling  towards  it  now.

In  some  way  the  war  helps.  In  a  lesser  way  it
creates  difficulties,  but  it  opens  the  way.  If  it
hadn't  been  for  the  war  we  might  have  had  to  wait.

L.  P.  J. Is  that  what  he  helped  me  to  say  ?

F.  Yes,  and  very  forcibly  too.  You've  got  to  keep  on
telling  them  that.  That's  the  key-note  ^  .  .  .
Deacon,  deacon,  he  says.

L.  P.  J. Is  that  a  man's  name  ?

F. Feda  thinks  it's  over  there  in  the  spirit  world.  Don't

know  if  it's  a  name,  or  what  he'd  be  called.
L.  P.  J. I  don't  understand  Deacon.

F. Deacon  is  right,  but  there's  more  to  it. {S.v.  Arch.)

It's  not  a  name,  it's  a  title,  archdeacon.  He  keeps
giving  like  a  bridge  with  his  finger.  Archdeacon  on
his  side.

L.  P.  J. Is  the  archdeacon  some  one  with  him  ?

F. Yes,  some  one  he's  got  an  affinity  with,  and  somebody

called  M,  belongs  to  his  band.-
L.  P.  J. Would  the  young  man  like  to  come  back  1
F. Yes,  he  gives  his  love  .  .  .

L.  P.  J.  Does  the  young  man  want  me  to  give  his  love  to
any  one  ?

F. To  a  lady  on the  earth-plane and  to  Maurice.  He

wants  to  be  remembered  to  E.
L.  P.  J. Is  E  a  lady  ?

a  key-word  in  Royce's  writings.  It  sliould  be  borne  in  mind  that
I  had  myself  been  thinking  and  writing  about  this  '  community '
about  the  time  of  the  sitting.

1  Comment  by  the  sitter.  It  is  the  key-note  of  what  I  had  said
in  the  article  nientioiied  above.

^  Comment  by  the  sitter.  Quite  unintelligible.  I  know  no  Arch-
deacon and  have  had  nothing  to  do  with  "  deacons."  [This  is
possibly  a  working  out  of  the  earlier  aliusion  to  the  sound  "  Ar  "
(see  above,  p.  139). H.  S.]


Lxxxn.]  Apparent  Communication  from  Person  still  alive.  143


F.  Not  sure.i  The  power  is  weakening.  The  young  man
was  glad  to  come.  He's  all  right,  he  says,  getting
on  splendidly.  Goodbye.

General  note  by  the  sitter.

Had  the  whole  sitting  been  of  the  character  of  the  first
part,  I  should  have  said  it  was  the  common  stock-in-trade
of  a  professional  medium,  throwing  out  vague  generalities
(mostly  fitted  to  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  the  war,
etc.)  on  to  which  excited  persons  might  force  a  particular
meaning  according  to  their  hopes  and  fears.  But  in  the
second  part  the  medium  seems  to  have  tapped  my  mind
about  Royce — especially  the  article — and  that  inclines  me
to  think  that  she  was  also  telepathically  tapping  me  in
the  first  part,  my  mind  being  much  preoccupied  at  the
time  with  anxieties  about  my  sons  and  losses  of  young
friends  in  the  war.

The  total  impression  left  on  my  mind  is  similar  to  that
left  by  many  common  dreams.  There  is  the  same  muddle
and  incoherency  at  first,  in  which  definite  personalities
seem  to  appear  for  a  moment  and  then  change  into  some-
body else,  the  facts  getting  hopelessly  mixed  up,  the  action
of  one  person  shading  off  into  that  of  another.  And  then
towards  the  end  the  dream  becomes  more  coherent  and
interesting,  keeping  up  a  definite  character  for  a  time,
with  a  sudden  return  to  nonsense  (the  Archdeacon,  etc.)
and  a  momentary  reappearance  of  the  people  first  on  the
scene.

1  Comment  by  the  sitter.  E  is  the  initial  of  my  only  daughter.
This  made  me  think  again  that  it  might  be  my  son  Stopford
sending  a  message  to  his  sister.  I  know  of  no  other  young  man
"  on  the  other  side  "  who  would  want  to  send  a  message  to  E.


144


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


REVIEWS.


I.  Physikalische  Phaenomene  des  Mediumismus,  Studien  zur
Erforschung  der  TeleJcinetischen  Vorgdnge.  By  Dr.  A.  v.
ScHRENCK  NoTziNG.  Pp.  X,  201  ;  15  Plates.  (Munich  :
E.  Reinhardt.  1920.)

Dr.  von  Schrenck  Notzing's  remarkable  work  is  composed  of
studies  of  tele  kinetic  movements  of  objects  which  have  been
recorded  as  occurring  in  the  mediumship  of  Stanislava  Tomczyk,
by  Prof.  Ochorowicz  and  himself ;  of  Eusapia  Paladino,  by
many  investigators  including  himself ;  and  of  several  private,
i.e.  unprofessional,  mediums  recently  observed  in  Germany  by
himself,  together  with  an  extensive  account  of  Dr.  Crawford's
first  two  books  on  the  Goligher  Case,  and  a  discussion  of  the
lecture  on  "  Supranormal  Physiology  and  the  Phenomena  of
Ideoplasty  "  given  by  Dr.  Gustave  Geley  to  the  Institut  Psycho-
logique  in  the  College  de  France  in  January,  1918.  To  explain
these  cases,  the  theory  advocated  is  that  telekinetic  effects  are
less  developed  stages  of  the  teleplastic  phenomena  exhibited  by
*  Eva  C.,'  and  so  fully  described  in  Dr.  v.  Schrenck  Notzing's
big  book  on  The  Phenomena  of  Materialisation,  and  like  them
are  ultimately  inherent  in,  and  relative  to,  the  medium's
mentality.  Dr.  v.  Schrenck  Notzing  supposes  that  the  move-
ment is  ardently  desired  and  its  achievement  is  dreamt,  where-
upon the  medium's  creative  imagination  evolves  '  pseudopodia,'
or  '  efflorescences,'  out  of  the  body,  which  proceed  to  produce
mechanically  the  effects  observed.  Such  emanations  were,  he
shows,  frequently  described  by  sitters  with  Eusapia  Paladino,
they  are  represented  in  the  Tomczyk  Case  by  the  very  fine
.'  threads,'  connecting  the  medium's  hands,  shown  on  some  of
the  photographs,  they  are  indicated  also  in  the  Goligher  Case,
though  Dr.  v. .  Schrenck  Notzing  had  not  then  heard  of  Craw-


Lxxxn.]


Reviews.


145


ford's  photographs  of  '  psychic  cantilevers,'  which  look  so
singularly  like  the  'plasma'  produced  by  'Eva  C  On  the
other  hand,  he  differs  from  Crawford  in  wholly  rejecting  the
agency  of  '  spirits,'  and  wUl  not  admit  that  the  beUefs  of  the
mediums  and  sitters  are  well-founded.

Of  course  at  present  any  theory  other  than  fraud  about
these  staggering  phenomena  must  appear  anomalous.  And  if
there  was  fraud,  it  must  have  been  facilitated  by  incredible
carelessness  on  the  part  of  the  observers,  and  all  their  very
precise  statements  about  the  conditions  of  experiment,  and
their  examination  of  the  mediums  before  and  after  their
performances,  must  be  wholly  unworthy  of  credence.  Dr.  v.
Schrenck  Notzing,  moreover,  does  not  rely  solely  on  his  pre-
cautions as  regards  the  '  threads  '  seen  in  the  Tomczyk  photo-
graphs ;  he  also  provides  plates  to  show  how  different  they
look,  when  magnified,  from  any  natural  fibre.  If  fraud  can
definitely  be  excluded,  and  at  present  one  who  has  not  himself
seen  the  phenomena  will  hardly  feel  that  they  have  been
repeated  and  varied  sufficiently  to  justify  this  confidence,  the
field  is  open  for  a  variety  of  explanations,  and  in  the  actual
state  of  our  knowledge  the  choice  among  them  is  largely  a
matter  of  taste.  It  may  be  that  '  spirits  '  in  themselves
explain  nothing.  Again,  it  may  be  argued  that  if  there  is  a
'  soul,'  as  a  substantive  entity,  at  all,  it  must  have  the  plastic
power  of  building  up  its  body  according  to  its  idea  of  its
form  ;  this  art  it  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  wholly  lost,  and
conceivably  the  abnormal  improvisation  of  temporary  limbs,
where  its  normal  equipment  does  not  suffice,  may  be  a  mani-
festation of  it.  '  Materialisation  '  would  thus  become  a  quasi-
natural  process  :  but,  if  so,  it  must  conform  to  mechanical
laws — as  Dr.  Cra-n'ford  has  argvied,  and  more  or  less  shown —
and  the  difficulties  of  conceiving  the  functioning  of  a  material-
ised limb  are  peculiarly  great  precisely  on  the  mechanical  side.
It  is  no  less  perplexing  to  read  (p.  3)  that  "  the  lively  wish  of
lifting  an  object  from  a  distance  leads  to  the  associated  idea
of  a  thread,  with  which  the  experimentjf  might  be  performed  :
thereupon  the  objective  phantom  of  a  thread  is  brought  into
being  by  a  hallucination  that  realizes  itself  in  matter."  Thus
we  are  literally  required  to  believe  that  '  wishes  are  horses  '
and  mediums  can  ride  them  ; but  what,  pray,  is  an  '  objective

K


146


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


phantom  '  ?  And  how  can  a  '  hallucination  '  convert  itself  into
a  material  reality,  even  -for  an  instant  ?  These  queer  creatures
seem  to  have  one  foot  in  the  world  of  .  reality  and  the  other  in
a  dream,  and  suggest  a  confusionj/^of  thought  and  reaUty
worthy  of  the  maddest  idealism.  Still  the  notions  with  which
the  human  mind  apprehends  new  facts  always  seem  at  first
absurd,  and  will  correct  themselves  ifj  they  conduce  to  effective
handling  of  the  facts  ;  while  if  these  things  are  facts,  science
must  assume  that  they  are  capable  of  being  understood.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.

II.  Vom  Jenseits  der  Seele.  Die  Geheimwissenschaften  in
Kritischer  Betrachtimg.  By  Max  Dessoir.  Pp.  xvi,  362.
(Stuttgart  :  Ferdinand  Enke.  1920.)

Prof.  Dessoir  is  one  of  the  few  psychologists  who  [  has  had
the  courage  to  face  the  problems  of  psychical  research  and  to
envisage  seriously  the  possibilities  of  the  supernormal.  Indeed
he  appears  to  have  done  not  a  little  actual  investigation,  e.g.
with  Slade,  Eusapia  Paladino,  and  Anna  Rothe,  and  his
sceptical  conclusions  are  by  no  means  merely  the  expression  of
a  theoretic  bias.  His  general  attitude  is  that  of  a  very
critical  psychical  researcher,  like  that  of  the  late  Frank  Pod-
more,  and  even  this  demands  a  deal  of  courage  in  Germany,
where  authoritarianism  and  a  priori  dogmatism  have  always
been  at  home,  and  the  mental  atmosphere  seems  still  to  be
very  similar  to  that  prevailing  in  England  forty  years  ago.  It
is  not  surprising  therefore  that  he  should  always  carefully
disclaim  any  personal  sympathy  with  '  superstitions,'  should
apologize  for  condescending  to  dabble  in  such  rubbish,  and
should  castigate  the  misguided  followers  of  dissenters  from
scientific  orthodoxy  who  have  made  a  certain  impression  even
on  the  German  mind.  For  it  is  clear  that  in  Germany  also
there  has  been  a  pretty  extensive  recrudescence  of  superstitions,
which  appears  to  have  been  exploited  in  the  interest  of  his
'  theosophy '  or  '  anthroposophy'  by  Dr.  Rudolf  Steiner,  who
gets  properly  snubbed  by  Prot.  Dessoir.  On  the  other  hand,
he  is  uniformly  appreciative,  and  very  respectful,  towards  the
work  of  the  S.P.R.,  to  which  he]  refers  extensively,  and  admits
that  the  Piper  Case,  particularly,  contains  a  residuum,  when


Lxxxn.]


Reviews.


147


all  conceivable  deductions  have  been  made,  of  which  there  is
not,  so  far,  any  normal  explanation.  For  the  rest  it  may  be
briefly  noted  that  the  '  beyond  '  of  the  soul  referred  to  in  the
title  means  its  unconscious  depths,  that  the  account  of  '  Pro-
fessor Bert  Reese  '  (pp.  129-34)  is  a  valuable  contribution  to
the  history  of  the  fraudulent,  and  that  of  Anton  Johansen,  to
that  of  the  apparently  genuine,  supernormal.  The  book,  which
was  first  published  in  1917,  reached  its  fifth  edition  in  1920,

and  deserves  its  success.  n  c<

C.  S.  Schiller.

III.  The Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle. By W.  J.

Crawford,  D.Sc. Pp.  vi.  161. London  :  John  Watkins.  1921.
In  the  volume  before  us  the  late  Dr.  W.  J.  Crawford  continued
the  summary  of  the  results  which  he  believed  he  had  obtained
through the instrumentality of the Gohgher Circle in  Belfast.
The  two  previous  volumes.  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenome-na  and
Experiments in Psychical Science dealt in a very general  and
sketchy  manner  with  a  series  of  experiments  in  telekinetic  phe-
nomena which  were  conducted  under  the  most  favourable  circum-
stances. In  the  present  volume  these  experiments  are  continued
and  the  book  is  enriched  by  specimens  of  some  of  the  flashlight
photographs  which  have  been  secured  of  the "  plasma  "  which,
it  is alleged,  extrudes  from  the body of  the principal  medium,
Miss  Kathleen Goligher. Now  that  Dr. Crawford  is  no  longer
here  to  defend  his  thesis  it  may  seem  unfair  to  some  to  critidze
his  work  in  any  but  a  commendatory  spirit,  but,  after  all,  the
books are unique in their fine and deserve the careful  con-
sideration of  all  those  interested  in  the  physical  phenomena  of
spirituaHsm. On re-reading the first two volumes and  then
comparing  them with the one before us  the conclusion  seems
difficuh to avoid that these are not records of  experiments
systematically  conducted,  but  merely  summaries  of  results  obtained
through  a  system  of  procedure  concerning  the  details  of  which  the
reader  is  left  in  ignorance. We  do  not  believe  that  Dr.  Crawford
omitted  to  record  the  phenomena  of  each  seance  with  its  appro-
priate detail  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  his  full  notes  may  be
preserved  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not  content  with  bald
statements  of  occurrences  which  are said  to  have  taken  place.
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  experiments  outlined  in  these
volumes  were  principally  conducted  by  one  man  in  a  circle  of


148  E.  J.D.  [PAET

some seven  persons  and  it  is  only  to be  expected  that  under
these  conditions  the  method  of  research  was  not  one  which  would
appeal  to  many  of  the  more  critical  students  of  psychical  phe-
nomena. The  books  are,  in  fact,  as  the  author  himself  suggests
on  p. 151 of  the  present  volume,  popular  expositions  and  not
scientific treatises in any proper sense of that term. If  this
preliminary  supposition  is  granted  (and  it  seems  one  difficult  to
evade) it may appear an impertinence  to ofier criticism  of  a
destructive  rather  than  a  constructive  nature,  yet  it  is  necessary
to  counteract  the  opinion  widely  held  in  spiritualistic  circles  that
the books are models  of scientific  accuracy  and  therefore  pro-
portionately  valuable. On the other  hand even popular  hand-
books ought  to  contain  those  details  which  are  essential  to  an
intelligent appreciation of the matter under review. In  the
present  case  Dr.  Crawford  has  so  often  omitted  these  bare  facts
that  at  times  we  are  tempted  to  throw  the  books  down  and
give  up  trying  to  obtain  any  rational  idea  of  the  phenomena  of
which  they  treat. A  few  examples  of  these  and  certain  other
points  calling  for  some  comment  may  be  found  interesting.

Firstly  then,  the question  of  fraud. We  do not propose  to
say  anything  on  this  subject  ourselves  but  to  confine  our  remarks
to pointing out some of the extraordinary theories  apparently
held  by  the  late Dr. Crawford. Let  us  turn  to  the  catalogue
of  points  against  fraud  noted  in  R.P.P.,  p. 10  seq. The  first
"  fact  "  which  shows  that  the  phenomena  are  genuine  is  that  the
family  are  convinced  spiritualists. The  second  is  that  the  seances
are  looked  upon  as  religious  institutions. The  fifth  is  that  the
medium  is  a  private  one,  and  there  are  others  equally  irrelevant.
The  springs  of  human  conduct  are  far  too  deep  to  be  analyzed
in  this  fashion  and  discoveries  in  modern  abnormal  psychology
show  that problems of motive are some of the most  baffling
phenomena  with  which  it  has  to  deal. Again  compare  the  "  test  "
instituted  by  Dr.  Crawford  in  order  to  see  if  the  medium  could
move  her  feet  when  tied  {Psychic  Structures,  p.  35). He  "  allowed
her  to  do  her  utmost  with  her  feet,  but  she  was  incapable  of
doing  anything."  ^

This  is  surely  a  remarkable  "test,"  almost  as  remarkable  as
the  naive  assumption  on  p.  34  when  dealing  with  precautionary
measures  that  the  "  medium  and  members  of  the  circle  were  just
as  interested  as  I  was  .  .  .  in  order  to  render  the  results  as
1  Cf.  also  p.  64  of  the  saint)  book.


LXXXII.]


Reviews.


149


certain  as  possible  and  beyond  any  reasonable  suspicion  of  doubt."
These  observations  do  not  reflect  in  the  least  on  the  purity  and
integrity  of  the  Goligher  Circle.  We  merely  present  them  as
specimens  of  Dr.  Crawford's  attitude  in  the  face  of  grave  per-
plexity and  we  can  scarcely  consider  such  methods  as  likely  to
prove  convincing  to  those  who  have  not  the  opportunity  of
observing  these  phenomena  at  first  hand,  or  becoming  personally
acquainted  with  the  mediums.  We  pass  on  to  the  lighting
arrangements.  From  the  volumes  before  us  it  is  quite  impossible
to  get  any  real  notion  of  the  amount  of  light  that  was  used  at
the  seances.  "  A  subdued  kind  of  light  issuing  from  a  large
surface  of  ordinary  gas  flame  {R.P.P.,  12)  :  a  gas  jet  (76.,  6)  :
strong  red  illumination  {P.S.,  33)  :  a  red  electric  light  (lb.,  89).
We  want  to  know  the  size,  illuminating  surface  and  quality  of
the  gas  jet  as  well  as  the  voltage,  etc.,  of  the  electric  lamp.
Yet  all  these  elementary  details  are  omitted.  One  further  ex-
ample will  suffice ;  it  is  the  test  box  (excellent  device)  described
on  p.  88  of  Psychic  Structures  and  illustrated  in  Fig.  46.  We
are  told  neither  the  length,  breadth,  height  nor  thickness  of  the
wood.  The  variety  of  wood  employed  is  not  given,  although
this  is  a  mere  detail,  since  we  do  not  remember  that  the  kind  of
wood  of  which  the  seance  table  is  constructed  has  been  yet
given.  In  the  case  of  the  box  the  size  of  the  holes  is  not  given,
nor  the  length  of  the  screws  which  secure  the  top  piece  to  the
sides.  In  fact,  it  is  merely  stated  that  a  test  box  was  employed
just  as  is  usually  done  in  a  summary  of  results  obtained.  A
point  that  may  be  considered  in  this  connexion  is  the  statement
on  p.  93  of  Psychic  Structures,  that  when  the  medium  wore
high  boots  and  her  feet  were  placed  in  the  test  box  they  were
so  tightly  wedged  as  to  be  immovable.  We  can  understand
that  she  would  have  been  unable  to  move  her  legs,  but  what
prevents  her  from  raising  the  front  portion  of  her  feet  from  the
floor  of  the  box  we  are  unable  to  say.  Perhaps  her  power  of
moving  her  feet  during  the  sittings  is  in  abeyance  just  as  Mr.
Morrison's  sensibility  seems  so  acute  that  when  he  is  touched  on
the  boot  he  is  able  to  describe  it  as  something  as  soft  as  the
flesh  of  a  baby  (p.  65).

We  do  not  wish  to  lay  too  great  an  emphasis  on  points  of  this
kind,  as  such  criticism  may  perhaps  tend  to  distract  attention
from  the  value  which  these  volumes  undoubtedly  possess.  After
all,  even  assuming  that  they  are  summaries  and  that  some  of  the


150


E.  J.  D.


[part  Lxxxn.]


experiments  are  incomplete,  tiiey  contribute  the '  first  reasoned
attempt  to  account  rationally  for  the  physical  phenomena  of
spiritualism  and  for  telekinetic  phenomena  in  particular.  The
experiments  with  clay  and  methylene  blue  indicate  the  possibilities
that  may  be  achieved  in  this  line  of  research  and  might  themselves
be  considerably  amplified.  It  is  a  peculiar  circumstance  that  if  the
structures  succeed  in  carrying  about  ordinary  matter  like  clay
and  various  colouring  agents  it  is  not  possible  to  employ  some
substance  of  a  viscous  nature  which  may  spread  evenly  over  the
materialized  end  and  so  render  it  clearly  visible  moving  about.
The  use  of  luminous  cardboard  also  is  useful  in  all  these  experi-
ments and  it  seems  a  pity  that  Dr.  Crawford  did  not  make  more
use  of  it.

Not  the  least  interesting  part  of  the  volume  before  us  is  the
collection  of  photographs  which  have  been  admirably  reproduced.
Just  before  Dr.  Crawford's  death  we  had  the  opportunity  of
inspecting  the  much  larger  collection  containing  those  specimens
which  Dr.  Crawford  thought  unsuitable  for  publication.  We
regret  their  omission,  as  they  constitute,  in  our  opinion,  one  of
the  most  important  links  in  a  chain  of  experiments  of  which
very  little  is  known  outside  well-informed  circles.^  Indeed  we
may  say  that  the  existence  of  these  photographs  and  their  ac-
cumulation in  the  case  of  this  and  other  mediums  may  be  the
ultimate  means  of  understanding  the  mechanics  of  these  pheno-
mena. The  author  of  these  books  having  passed  away,  it
remains  for  others  to  carry  on  his  work  and  to  revise  and  com-
plete his  experiments.  The  works  he  has  left  can  scarcely  fail
to  be  regarded  in  the  future  as  the  most  important  contributions
towards  the  study  of  telekinesis  which  have  appeared  up  to  the
time  that  their  author  met  his  untimely  end.

E.  J.  D.

^  By  the  generosity  of  an  anonymous  donor  a  complete  set  of  the  photo-
graphs of  the  Goligher  phenomena,  taken  by  the  late  Dr.  Crawford,  has
been  presented  to  the  Society.  They  were  on  view  at  the  conversazione  on
May  20,  1921,  and  will  shortly  be  available  for  the  inspection  of  members
at  the  Society's  Rooms.


PROBLEMS  OF  HYPNOTISM.


An  Experimental  Investigation.

By  Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz,  Lecturer  on  Psychology  at
the  University  of  LTpsala.

{This paper was read before the Society  for  Psychical
Research  on  October  4,  1920.^)

Introdticiory .

As  is  well  known,  the  old  hypnotists,  Mesmer  and  his
followers,  proclaimed  the  existence  of  some  sort  of  subtle
fluid  which  emanated  from  the  body  of  the  hypnotizer
and  was  projected  onto  the  subject.  This  theory  is  nearly
dead  in  our  days,  still  a  few  investigators  of  more  modern
date  have  accepted  it  in  one  form  or  other.

Another  view  was  held  by  Braid,  the  father  of  modern
hypnotism.  He  maintained — at  least  during  his  first
period — that  by  visual  and  mental  concentration  the
subject  can  be  put  into  a  new  state,  the  hypnotic,  charac-
terized by  certain  symptoms,  which  in  their  turn  are
capable  of  being  modified  by  physical  means,  e.g.  by  cold.
Consequently,  Braid  did  not  believe  in  any  fluid,  nor  in
the  power  of  the  hypnotizer's  will  alone  to  influence  the
subject.  And  only  later  on  did  he  attribute  any  im-
portance to  the  imagination  of  the  subject,  or  to  what
we  now  would  call  the  factor  of  suggestion.

Charcot  and  his  school  ought  to  be  classified  under
this  head,  because  they  considered  that  difi^erent  kinds
of sense-stimulus, e.g. light and sound, could as  such

Certain  omi.ssions  and  additions  have  been  made  in  the  paper  as
now  published. S.  A.


152


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


produce  hjrpnosis,  and  because  they  believed  that  certain
semi-hypnotic  phenomena  could  be  obtained  by  magnets,
metals,  etc. They  also  proclaimed  the  existence  of  definite:
forms  of  hypnosis  at  least  in  regard  to  hysterical  patients  j
and  of  hemi-lateral  or  half-sided  hypnosis,  even  of  hetero-i
lateral  hypnosis,  or  of  such  a  state  where  one  half  of  the
body  is  in  one  hypnotic  state,  the  other  half  in  another
one.


In  our  days  the  suggestive  school  reigns  nearly  supreme,  |
that  is  to  say,  suggestion,  direct  or  indirect,  is  held  to'
be  the  cause  and  the  sole  necessary  one  not  only  of'
hypnotization  itself,  but  also  of  all  the  phenomena  which;
can  be  produced  during  hypnosis. ^

The  first  problem  which  I  have  tried  to  solve  is  whether
any  "  fluid  "  or,  to  put  it  more  broadly,  whether  any
nervous  effluence  of  some  kind  exists.  Are  all  nervous
systems  really  so  well  isolated  that  a  specific  influence
at  a  distance  from  one  to  the  other  cannot  take  place
even  under  favourable  conditions  ?

We  know  that  in  hypnotizing  use  is  sometimes  made,
especially  by  the  mesmerists,  of  passes,  that  is  to  say,  the
hypnotizer  makes  strokes  over  the  skin,  clothes,  etc.,  of
his  subject,  but  without  touching  him.  The  question  then
is  :  Can  the  fingers  or  the  hands  of  a  person — whether
moving  or  kept  still — without  any  contact  and  after  all
known  factors  of  importance,  such  as  the  usual  stimulation
of  the  senses,  expectation,  suggestion,  telepathy,  simu-
lation, etc.,  have  been  eliminated  or  at  least  made  im-
material, and  after  the  subject  has  been  put  in  hypnosis,
bring  about  certain  changes  in  his  organism,  for  instance
in  the  skin  (the  dermal  sensibility)  or  in  the  muscles
(the  neuro -muscular  apparatus)  ?  It  is  of  course  better
to  begin  our  investigations  with  certain  hypnotic  experi-
ments such  as  these  than  to  try  to  establish  the  effects  i

1  Some  of  Bramwell's  cases,  treated  by  hypnotic  "  meaas,  where  no
sjTnptoms  of  induced  hjrpnosis  were  obtained  and  where  the  evidence
as  to  the  very  remarkable  therapeutic  results  being  due  to  "  suggestion  "
alone  was  by  no  means  convincing,  are  from  this  point  of  view  inter-
esting (Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  1906,  p.  421  S.)  :  They  seem  to  prove
some  efficacy  of  the  methods used,  independent  of  suggestion.


Lxxxm.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


153


of  passes  on  the  act  of  hypnotizing  itself,  as  it  is  in
this  latter  case  much  more  difficult  to  avoid  suggestions
of  various  kinds.

Sensibility  ;  the  Senses.

In order to  eliminate  the  above-mentioned  sources  of
error  I  fix  a  sheet  of  glass  by  means  of  a  stand  and
,  clip  above  one  or  both  of  the  subject's  arms,  and  also  cover
I  his  head  completely  with  a  black  cloth. Such  an  arrange-
i  ment naturally excludes the possibility of thermal  or
I  mechanical  stimulation  of  the  skin  from  the  passes  {e.g.
by  currents  of  air),  and  thus  the  subject  cannot  get  any
dermal  sensations  which  he  might  use  as  a  starting-point
for  auto-suggestions. Of  course  no  word  is  spoken.

Let  us  now  suppose  that  I  make,  say  with  my  left
hand,  downward  passes  above  the  sheet  of  glass  placed
above  the  right  arm  and  hand  of  the  subject,  whom  we
suppose  to  be  in  light  hypnosis  and  therefore  over -sensi-
tive,^ and  that  I  do  not  do  anything  at  all  with  my
right  hand.  Then,  if  I  make  say  10  to  16  passes  during
about  I  minute,  complete  insensibility  of  the  skin —
analgesia  and  anaesthesia — is  obtained,  but  only  beneath
the  sheet  of  glass.  The  other  parts  of  the  body  do
not  change  their  over-sensitiveness,  with  the  exception  of
the  opposite  symmetrical  part  of  the  body ;  in  this  case
the  other  left  arm  and  hand,  which  become  still  more
over-sensitive  than  before  :  they  get  what  I  call  an
"  extra  "-oversensitiveness  (for  shortness'  sake  called  in
the  following  only  :  extra-sensitiveness).  That  is  to  say,
you  can  prick  the  right  arm  as  much  and  as  hard  as
you  like  even  with  a  needle,  and  place  hot  or  cold  metal
on  it  without  getting  any  reaction,  but  the  moment  you
touch  the  skin  on  the  left  arm  ever  so  lightly  with  the
point  of  a  needle  or  with  my  "  algesimeter "  even  at  its
lowest  pressure (2  grammes) the subject reacts  violently

^  In  light  hypnosis  three  of  my  principal  subjects  show  spontaneously
a  hyperaesthesia,  an  over-sensitiveness  not  only  in  regard  to  the  skin  but
also  in  regard  to  the  other  sense-organs,  and  the  neuro -muscular  irrita-
bility is  also  increased.


154


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[PART


(a dermal-muscular reflex action), and says he felt  a
sharp  prick. The  same  extreme  sensitiveness  exists  also
in  regard  to  thermal  stimulation,  so  weak  that  it  other-
wise would  not  affect  him. In  point  of  fact,  the  threshold-  \
values  for  the different  skin-senses  get  more  and  more  \
increased on the surface above which the  •  downward
passes are made and more and more lessened on the  ;
opposite  one. (As  to  exact  figures,  see  below.)

If  I  now  make  upward  passes  above  the  subject's
insensible  right  arm,  sensibility  is  restored  gradually  till
the  over-sensitiveness  which  characterises  the  light  hyp-
nosis comes  in.  If  I  continue  the  passes  still  further
I  obtain  an  ever- increasing  extra-sensitiveness.  That  is
to  say  :  whilst  downward  passes  lower  the  sensibility,
upward  ones  heighten  it.

When  trying  to  ascertain  the  properties  of  different
substances  in  regard  to  their  power  to  transmit  the
effects  of  the  passes,  I  found  the  important  fact  that  all
substances  do  not  behave  in  the  same  way  in  this  respect.
Glass  and  metal  have  been  found  to  be  transparent,
whilst  cardboard,  paper,  flannel,  wool,  etc.,  are  more  or
less  opaque  to  this  influence.

This  makes  the  following  experiment  possible.  Before
the  glass-sheet  in  the  stand  and  clip  is  placed  above  the
bared  skin  of  the  subject,  it  is  partially  covered,  for
instance,  with  a  flannel  cloth.  If  I  now  make  downward
passes  above  it,  I  find  only  the  skin  beneath  the  uncovered
part  of  the  sheet  of  glass  insensible,  the  other  parts
retaining  their  sensibility.  This  combined  method  can  of
course  be  varied  in  many  ways.

Fig.  1  shows  the  arrangement  I  now  generally  use.
The  arms  of  the  subject  are  wholly  enclosed  in  boxes
with  panes  of  glass  as  lids  and  as  frontpieces.

If,  as  in  this  case,  the  subject's  right  arm  is  covered
with  glass  and,  flannel,  the  left  arm  only  with  glass  and
I  make  downward  passes  with  both  hands  simultaneously
— as  the  figure  shows — then  only  the  left  side  becomes
analgesic  and  anaesthetic,  the  right  arm  showing  the
corresponding  extra-sensitiveness.  This  simultaneous  metJiod
gives  of  course  added  safety — the  subject  in  such  a  case


Fig.  1  (see  p.  154).


LXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


155


not  even  being  able  to  know  or  hear  on  which  side  to
expect  the  primary  effect.  (I  can  here  add,  that  I  have,
of  course,  sometimes  clogged  the  ears  of  the  subject  but
nevertheless  obtained  the  usual  results.)

In  Fig.  2  the  subject  is  in  deep  hypnosis,  that  is  to
say,  he  is  in  a  condition  induced  by  making  a  lot  of
downward  passes  generally  over  the  whole  body  of  the
subject  when  he  is  in  light  hypnosis.  He  then  becomes
completely  analgesic  and  anaesthetic  over  the  whole  body,
the  irritability  of  the  neuro-muscular  apparatus  being  also
diminished— as  we  shall  see  later  on.  The  subject  makes
no  movements  and  usually  does  not  hear  or  answer  even
the  hypnotiser.

Now  in  this  condition  downward  passes  have  no  appre-
ciable effect  on  the  skin — quite  as  we  ought  to  expect.
But  upward  ones  have  ;  they  restore  the  sensibility.

In  this  experiment  I  use  the  simultaneous  and  combined
methods  in  this  way  :  on  both  sides  is  a  sheet  of  glass,
but  the  one  above  the  subject's  right  arm  is  covered
beforehand  with  a  woollen  cloth.  If  I  now  make  simul-
taneously on  both  sides  upward  passes,  the  sensibility  on
the  subject's  left  side  is  restored — more  or  less  according
to  the  number  of  passes  made  ;  the  right  arm  remains
insensitive.

The  selective  absorption  occurring  when  the  combined
method  is  used  is  specially  well  shown  by  the  following
experiment,  which  also  excludes  all  possibility  of  the
subject's guessing  the  exact  nature  of  the  arrangement.

The system of screens consists of a large sheet  of
cardboard  which  covers  the  whole  hand  (35  by  25  cm.),
with  a  piece  cut  out  3  cm.  broad  and  II  cm.  deep,  and
a  sheet  of  glass  or  metal. These  two  sheets  are  placed
one on  top of the other, sometimes with  the  glass  or
metal sheet  on  top, sometimes  the cardboard one,  but
preferably  the  latter,  and  are  fixed  in  a  stand  over  one
j  hand  of  the  subject  so  that  the  gap  in  the  cardboard
sheet  lies  above  one  of  his  outstretched  and  spread-out
,  fingers. Passes  are  then  made — descending  ones  in  light
I  hypnosis, ascending ones in deep hypnosis — over  the
whole  system.


156


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


Already  10  experiments  of  this  kind  have  been  carried
out  extending  over  several  years.  My  choice  of  finger
has  been  pure  chance.  The  examination  has  been  done
with  3  kinds  of  stimuli,  beginning  on  one  of  the  end
fingers  and  running  through  all  of  them,  backwards  and
forwards.  That  finger  or  those  fingers  which  twitched
were  considered  sensitive,  the  others  not.  Result  :  In
seven  experiments  the  correct  finger  was  effected  ;  in
two  the  correct  finger  and  an  adjacent  one  ;  in  one  an
adjacent  finger  first  and  then  the  right  one.

As  the  gap  was  a  little  broader  than  a  finger  and
no  guarantee  existed  that  the  subject  held  his  fingers
quite  still,  the  incorrect  results  may  be  explained  in  this
way.

We  must  now  turn  our  attention  to  experiments  made
with  the  non-informed  method,  that  is,  a  method  which
does  not  allow  even  the  experimenter  to  know  the  arrange-
ment made  use  of.  They  are  important,  firstly,  because
they  give  increased  safety  in  regard  to  the  subject's
ignorance  of  the  arrangement  ;  secondly,  because  they
e  iminate  the  possibility  of  telepathy  from  the  experi-
menter being  the  real  and  sole  cause  of  the  effects  obtained
in  these  kinds  of  experiments  ;  thirdly,  because  when  the
experimenter  does  not  know  what  results  to  expect,  he
cannot  make  the  following  examination  of  the  skm  in
a  way  favourable  to  the  right  result.

Let  me  now  give  you  a  few  examples  of  these  non-
informed  or  non-knowing  experiments.  They  can,  of
course,  be  made  in  several  ways.  The  following  group
refers  to  subject  No.  1.

Sitting  20.  26/12,  1910.  The  subject  in  light  hypnosis ;  a
cloth  over  the  face.

Dr.  von  Bahr  fixed  a  belt  of  cottonwool  about  6-7  cm.
wide  to  and  under  a  brass  plate — I  did  not  see  where  the
belt  was.  Then  he  held  the  plate  over  the  subject's  right
arm  and  hand  (the  latter  being  closed).  I  made  descending
passes  for  a  minute  and  then  tested  the  sensibihty  (still
unaware  of  where  the  belt  was). I  found  the  whole  hand  as


Lxxxm.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


157


far  as  the  wrist  sensitive,  the  rest  insensible.  This  was  right,
i.e.  the  cotton  belt  had  been  situated  just  above  the  hand.

.  .  .  15.  I  then  asked  Dr.  von  Bahr  to  cut  out  a  round
piece  of  cotton  this  time,  not  a  belt,  and  fasten  it  to  the
brass  plate  and  then  I  would  try  to  find  where  it  was.  During
the  test  which  followed  I  immediately  found  two  more  or  less
round  places,  one  fairly  near  the  coat-sleeve  and  one  just
above  the  ^vrist.  I  was  astonished  to  find  two.  Only  then
Dr.  von  Bahr  showed  me  the  brass  plate  from  underneath,  and
there  I  saw  two  circles  stuck  fast.  One  coincided  exactly
with  the  upper  sensitive  circle,  but  the  other  had  been  situated
some  centimetres  lower  down  on  the  arm  (above  the  wrist).

Sitting  37. The  subject  in  light  hypnosis.

Professor  Svedberg  was  allowed  to  do  as  he  liked.  I
went  out  of  the  room.  S.  then  came  and  told  me  that  he
had  used  a  screen  of  tin-plate  over  the  whole  of  the  left  arm
and  hand  and  put  a  large  matchbox  (irox7  cm.)  on  top  of
this  screen  at  its  highest  part  and  had  then  made  descending
passes  for  one  and  a  half  minutes.  He  had  not  expected
any  certain  result  himself.  The  result  he  obtained  was  that
the  topmost  belt — corresponding  fairly  accurately  to  the  match-
box— -was  stiU  sensitive,  but  the  other  part  of  the  arm  and
hand  was  insensible  to  the  algesimeter  (and  even,  as  it  proved
later  on,  to  metal  objects)  :  the  right  arm  was,  on  the  con-
trary, extra-sensitive.  The  result  was  thus  regular,  i.e.  in
accordance  with  my  general  results.

Sitting  38. 29/10,  1911. The  subject  in  light  hypnosis.

Sister  L.,  who  was  quite  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the
experiments,  was  allowed  to  choose  between  ascending  and
descending  passes,  right  and  left,  a  brass  screen  and  a  card-
board screen  (two)  :  there  were  thus  eight  possibUities  present.
Period  of  excitation  :  one  minute.  After  Sister  L.  had  carried
out  her  task,  I  went  in  and  first  investigated  the  left  side
(which  at  my  request  L.  now  for  the  first  time  said  she  had
operated  on).  I  found  no  difference  between  left  and  right,
and  then  Sister  L.  informed  me  that  she  had  used  the  card-
board screens  on  the  left  side  and  made  descending  passes.
(Regular  result.)  ■


158


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


Sitting  44.  10/12,  1911.  At  my  house.  A  cloth  over  the
subject's  face. Light  hypnosis.

...  3.  Mr.  Olof  Rosen,  Fil.  Lie,  was  asked  (outside  the
seance  room)  to  use  a  large  screen  of  zinc  and  to  place  a
wooUen  cloth  above  this,  either  over  the  forearm  or  the  hand
and  (in  doing  so)  to  choose  either  the  left  or  the  right  (side).
Mr.  R.  made  the  experiment,  and  when  I  entered  I  found
undeniable  insensibiUty  to  the  algesimeter  (6  gm.),  metal
(stimulus  of  cold)  and  cotton-wool  (tickling),  on  the  left  fore-
arm. Both  hands  were  about  normal  for  light  hypnosis  and
the  right  forearm  was  somewhat  "  hyper."  R.  had  put  the
zinc  screen  over  the  left  side  and  the  woollen  cloth  on  it,
above  the  hand,  and  made  downward  passes  above  the  system.
R.  had  had  no  ideas  as  to  the  result,  which  was  regular.

Sitting  48.  17/2,  1912.  Prese^it :  Mrs.  E.  L.  mid  Mrs.  A—z.
I  showed  Mrs.  L.  in  another  room  hoiv  the  various  passes  were
made.  She  did  not  know  their  S2)ecific  effects  or  those  of  the
different  screens.  W.  vms  in  deep  hypnosis  and  insensible  on
both  sides. A  cloth  was  put  over  his  face.

1.  Mrs.  E.  L.  was  allowed  to  choose  (without  my  knowledge)
between  right  and  left,  ascending  and  descending  passes,  and
these  were  to  be  made  above  a  zinc  plate,  at  the  bottom  part
of  which  there  was  a  woollen  cloth  folded  four  times  (corre-
sponding to  the  hand).  The  period  of  stimulation  was  one
minute.  Only  Mrs.  A — z  was  present.  After  the  treatment
I  went  in  and  found  the  same  condition  as  before,  E.  L.
had  actually  made  descending  passes  over  the  left  side.  (Mrs.
A — z  was  astonished,  as  she  had  absent-mindedly  expected  the
sensibility  to  be  restored.)  The  result  was,  however,  quite
regular.

2.  E.  L.  was  again  allowed  to  choose  between  the  same  four
possibilities.  She  was  alone.  I  came  in  afterwards  and  found
the  right  hand  insensible,  but  the  right  arm  sensitive  to  pain —
my  algesimeter  (6  gms.) — to  cold  and  to  cotton- wool ;  the
left  side  was  insensible.  1  then  said  to  E.  L.  that  she  had
made  ascending  passes  on  the  right  side,  which  was  right.

In  the  following  experiment  (No.  105^)  we  have  a
combination experiment with a zinc box and  paraffin.


FiCi.  :>  (see  |i.  l.j!)).


Lxxxm.]


Problerns  of  Hypnotism.


159


which  was  carried  out  according  to  the  non-informed
method  by  Dr.  Klapper  and  myself  and  where  the  material
in  question,  the  paraffin,  showed  a  greater  power  of
absorption  than  zinc  alone. (See  Fig.  3.)

Sitting  105.  11/12,  1915.  Psychol.  Laboratory.  Dr.  Klapper
as  my  assistant.  ... 9.  Deep  hypnosis.

An  experiment  made  with  the  zinc  box  one  half  of  which
was  filled  \\dth  paraffin  the  lid  being  on,  and  the  box  placed
above  the  left  arm,  resulted  in  restitution  (after  three  series
of  ascending  passes  by  me  with  the  right  hand)  of  sensibility
to  a  needle,  cold  and  cottonwool  m  the  hand  and  half  the
forearm,  not  in  the  upper  half  of  the  forearm,  which  corre-
sponded fairly  well  to  the  boundary  Ime  in  the  box.  The  lid
was  not  taken  off  until  after  the  examination  of  the  skin  and
the  paraffin  was  found  to  lie  above  the  upper  part  of  the
forearm. None  of  us  knew  the  position  of  the  paraffin.

Irradiation.

We  may  now  go  to  the  phenomena  of  what  I  will
term  irradiation.  If  I  make  more  passes  than  are  needed
to  obtain  a  local  effect,  say  an  anaesthesia  of  the  left
arm,  then  the  insensitiveness  spreads  to  the  whole  of
the  left  side  of  the  body,  the  whole  other  half  becoming
extra-sensitive.  And  the  middle  sagittal  line  of  the  body
becomes  strictly  the  borderline.  Thus,  if  I  make  a  super-
fluous number  of  downward  passes  over  the  left  arm  and
examine  the  left  side  of  the  fore-hand  with  cottonwool,
no  tickling  is  felt  and  no  reaction  results.  But  as  soon
as  I  pass  the  middle  line  the  reflex  action  ensues  and
strong  tickling  is  felt.  This  inhibition  or  decrease  of
function  through  or  by  irradiation  on  the  same  half  of
the  body  is  proportionate  to  the  dynamogenic  increase  on
the  other  half.  If  instead  of  downward  passes,  upward
ones  are  made  on  one  half  of  the  body  beyond  what  is
required  to  obtain  a  local  effect,  and  an  increased  hyper-
sensitiveness  of  that  half  of  the  body  is  thus  obtained,
then  the  other  half  gets  its  sensibility  lowered  in  pro-
portion.


160


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[PART


But  this  heterolateral  change  of  function  exists  not  only
in  regard  to  the  dermal  sensibility,  but  in  regard  to  all
the  other  senses  and  the  neuro -muscular  apparatus  as  well.
Let  us  take  smell,  for  instance.

Fig.  4  shows  an  experiment  where  the  left  side  has
been  made  insensitive,  the  right  side  extra-sensitive  ;
the  right  nostril  was  then  clogged,  the  left  one  left  open.
A  piece  of  cottonwool  drenched  in  turpentine  is  neither
smelt  nor  reacted  upon  when  held  to  the  left  nostril.

Fig.  5.  The  left  nostril  is  now  clogged,  the  right  open,
the  right  side  being  extra-sensitive.  A  strong  effect  is
obtained  in  this  case,  even  at  a  distance,  as  is  seen  in
the  figure.  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  these  results
with  a  new  subject  at  the  very  first  sitting  I  had  with
him,  this  experiment  being  also  the  first  of  all  then  made.

Exact  determinations  of  the  acuity  of  smell  on  the
extra-sensitive  side  have  been  made  by  Dr.  Backman  and
myself  with  the  help  of  the  smelling  box  of  Zwaardemaker,
in  which  mixtures  of  smelling  substances  of  different
concentration  can  be  evaporated.

The  mixtures  were  given  to  the  subject  in  irregular  order,
and  pure  water  was  also  given  as  a  control-experiment  ;
no  mistakes  were  made  by  him.

Without  giving  exact  figures  I  can  say  that  on  the
extra-sensitive  side  the  gustatory  acuity  for  vinegar  was
twice  as  great  as  in  the  waking  condition,  for  benzaldehyd
five  times  as  great.

As  to  the  pain-sense,  a  pressure  of  0-8  grams  made  with
the  needle  of  Thunberg's  algesimeter  gave  no  pricking  sensa-
tions in  the  waking  condition,  only  (secondary)  itching
sensations,  but  on  the  extra-sensitive  side  a  pressure  of
only  0-1  gram  gave  pricking  sensations.

When  examining  the  thermal  senses  in  a  certain  degree
of  lowered  sensitiveness  I  found  that  a  sheet  of  silver
of  4  square  cm.,  \  mm.  thick  and  heated  to  a  temperature
of  64°  Cent.,  gave  m  this  condition  only  paradox
sensations  of  cold  and  jiressure  sensations,  thus  showing
that  the  warm-sense  falls  away  before  the  cold-sense.
In  point  of  fact  the  skin-senses  disappear  in  this  sequence
pain-,  warmth-,  cold-  and  pressure-sense.


Fig.  5  (see  p.  160).


LXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


161


The  threshold  of  pressure-discrimmation  is  also  strongly-
affected.  In  waking  condition  the  distance  between  two
points  placed  on  the  skin  must  be  25-35  mm.  in  order  to
be  distinguished  as  two  (forearm,  volarside,  for  subject
No.  1).  In  light  hypnosis  this  distance  can  be  lessened
to  2-4  mm.

I  must  put  other  senses  aside,  and  turn  to  sight.  We
find  on  the  extra-sensitive  side  a  strong  increase  in  the
acuity  of  vision  far  above  the  normal,  also  an  expansion  of
the  fields  of  vision  and  of  colour,  an  increased  sensitiveness
value  for  light  and  colour,  a  lengthening  of  the  spectrum,
an  alteration  in  the  mutual  positions  and  lengths  of  the
colours  of  the  spectrum  and  an  enhanced  brightness  of
these  colours,  which,  when  extreme,  leads  to  the  subject
seeing  the  whole  of  the  spectrum  as  a  bright  white.
These  forms  of  visual  hjrperaesthesia  are  proportionate  to
the  degree  of  hjrper-sensibility  of  the  skin  on  the  same
side  and  are  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  decrease  of
function  (hypoaesthesia)  in  the  skin  and  eye  of  the  other
side.  Here  we  find  more  or  less  strongly  diminution  in
the  acuity  of  vision,  contraction  of  the  fields  of  vision
and  colour,  weakness  or  absence  of  the  colour-sense,
etc.

After  this  survey  let  me  give  a  few  figures.  Sub-
ject 1,  who  is  emmetropic,  has  in  the  waking  condition  an
acmty  of  vision  (V.)  =  0-9  ;  in  light  hypnosis  on  each  eye
separately  :  V.  =  somewhat  more  than  1  ;  with  both  eyes  :
V.  >  1-2  ;  in  light  hypnosis  on  the  extra-sensitive  side :
V.=  l-8  at  the  most,  and  when  diagrams  not  seen  before
by  him  are  used.  On  the  other  eye  V.  is  then  only  =0-25.
This  phenomenon  is  brought  out  very  neatly  if  you  make
passes,  upwards  or  downwards,  above  the  same  arm  as
the  eye  used  during  his  reading,  his  ability  to  read
smaller  type  increasing  or  decreasing  respectively.

As  to  the  fields  of  vision  and  of  colour,  I  shaU  only
give  two  pictures  showing  that  their  extension  goes
parallel  to  the  sensibility  of  the  skin.

Fig.  6.  The  innermost  field  A  shows  the  extension
of  the  field  of  vision  when  subject  3  was  awake.  She
on one occasion, being a hysterica gravis, was  then,


162  Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.  [part

although awake, analgesic and anaesthetic. The middle  ■
field  B shows how it gets larger when  I restore the  il
sensibility  half-way  on  the  same  side  by  upward  passes,  "
which  were  made  above  her  arm  and  through  a  sheet  of
glass, so that she could neither see nor hear nor  feel
tkem. The  outermost  field  C  shows its  extension  when
I restored the sensibility by the same means to  the
greatest  extent  possible. These  examinations  were  made
with  the  help  of  a  perimeter  and  with  a  white  mark  of  ^
1  square  centimeter.

Fig.  7  shows  the  fields  of  colour.  Here  I  used  a  red
mark.  A  shows  the  extension  when  the  subject  is  anaes-
thetic and  analgesic,  B  when  the  subject  is  restored  as
much  as  possible.  All  these  five  fields  are  quite  correct
in  relation  to  each  other  physiologically.  Now  the
examination  itself  was  made  by  an  assistant  physiologist  '
who  took  down  the  values  with  both  the  marks  and  in
the  difi^erent  directions  irregularly  and  who  was  unaware
of  their  ideal  concentricity  until  the  experiment  was  i
ended  and  the  fields  drawn  up.  ]

Figs.  8  and  9. In  order  to  find  the  threshold  of  the
sense  of  light  I  used  Prof.  Gullstrand's  photoptometer.  An
electric lamp inside the instrument sends out its  light
through a window in front consisting of 900  holes,  of
which  as many  as  you  like  can  be  opened  or  shut  at
the  time. By  this  means  a  square  piece  of  white  paper
is illuminated  in  the  dark  room. The  same  subject, 3,  |
when nearly insensitive, was found to be able just  to
see  the  white  square  after  35  minutes  of  dark-adaptation,
if  about  50  holes  were  opened. When  the  sensibility  was
half-way  restored  she  needed  only  13  to  19,  when  restored
as  much  as  possible  7  to  9,  and  when  the  sensibility  was
lowered  as  much  as  possible  with  the  help  of  downward
passes, as  usual  through  a  sheet  of  glass, 150-180  holes  |
were  needed. Here  also  the  examination  was made  by  ;
an  assistant-physiologist,  who  in  most  cases  did  not  know
how  many  holes  he  exposed each time. Of course  the
number  of  holes  can  be  transformed  into  different  values  ^
of  illumination,  but  this  is  not  necessary  for  our  purpose.
The  given  number  of  holes  represents  quite  correctly  the


Fig.  8  (see  p  162).


Fie;.  'J  (sec  p.  1G2).


LXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


163


degree  of  illumination  needed  in  each  condition,  that  is,
the  threshold  of  the  rods  for  white  light.

Turning  now  to  the  spectrum,  I  have  made  my  most
numerous  and  my  best  experiments  with  subject  2,  who
sees  the  spectrum  quite  normally  from  720  /j-ij.  to  400  mM;
when  using  a  pocket  spectroscope  allowing  him  to  read
off  the  wave-lengths  directly.  In  light  hypnosis  he  sees
all  the  colours  clearer  and  lighter.  '  When,  however,  I
begin  to  make  upward  passes  above  his  bare  arm — as
usual  through  a  sheet  of  glass — on  the  same  side  as  the
observing  eye,  the  alterations  mentioned  before  take  place
gradually  and  in  a  manner  exactly  parallel  to  the  degree  of
extra-dermal  sensibility  which  I  produce  by  my  passes.
Thus  the  subject  sees  the  spectrum  further  and  further
out,  especially  at  the  red  end.  Here  he  sees  red-brown,  and
bro-svTi  so  far  out  as  to  800  And  when  using  a  kind  of

spectroscope,  the  anomaloscope  (Nagel),  where  the  different
lights  are  seen  isolated,  he  sees  as  far  as  about  900  mm
■even  without  any  special  dark-adaptation.  At  the  same
time  the  colours  not  only  become  brighter  and  brighter,
they  also  change  quality  or  tone.  Yellow  gets  first
whitish  and  at  last  quite  white,  whilst  the  colours  on
both  sides  of  it,  orange  and  red  on  one  side,  yellow-
green  and  green  on  the  other,  get  more  and  more  yellow.
I  cannot  here  relate  all  the  phases  of  the  process,  but  I
may  say  that,  after  yellow,  red  and  green  nearly  simultane-
ously are  transformed  into  white,  blue  retaining  its
colour  to  the  last.

If  downward  passes  now  are  made  everything  goes  back,
xintil  the  visual  state  characteristic  for  the  usual  light
hypnosis  is  reached  and  then  the  dermal  sensibility  is  of
course  equal  on  both  sides.  If  I  continue  the  downward
passes  the  spectrum  gets  darker  and  darker,  shrinks
more  and  more  and  at  last  only  grey  in  different  grades
of  lightness  is  seen — the  brightest  part  being  as  before
the  place  where  yellow  was  seen  :  A  =  575-585  ,UM.

Can  we,  however,  be  sure  that  all  this  is  not  the  effect
of  suggestion,  imagination  or  simulation  1  I  can  only
assert  that  all  the  statements  of  these  subjects  show  a
perfect  inner  consistency  ; that  subject  No. 1  shows  the


164


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


same  principal  phenomena,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  hyper-
aesthetic  state  increased  length  and  brightness  of  the  ,
spectrum  and  also  the  transformation  of  yellow  into  white  ;
that  the  subject  also  makes  right  statements  when
coloured  glasses,  e.g.  Wratten  light-filters  of  different  power
of  absorption  are  placed  in  front  of  the  instrument  ;
that  when  a  single  light  is  shown  him  in  the  anomaloscope
and  upward  or  downward  passes  are  made  (see  Fig.  10)
his  statements  of  its  changes  up  and  down  are  just  those
which  he  ought  to  make  judging  by  his  description  of  a
general  spectrum  ;  and  that  stereoscopic  tests  where  I
give  the  hyperaesthetic  eye  one  kind  of  colour  and  the
hypoaesthetic  another  kind,  also  give  results  which  per-  ;
fectly  well  agree  with  results  otherwise  obtained.

But  do  not  irregular  results  sometimes  ensue  ?  Certainly,,
but  I  think  that  by  now,  i.e.  after 10  years  of  research-
work  in  this  field,  I  pretty  well  know  the  reasons  why  ;
they  occur,  even  if  I  cannot  always  prevent  these  irregu-  j
larities. The  causes  of  irregular  results  are (1)  changes
in  the  hypnotic  sleep  itself — if  during  the  experiment  the
light  hypnosis  changes  into  deep,  you  get  a  spontaneous
change  or  mixture  of  sensibility,  which  spoils  the  results  i
of  the passes  ; (2) if  the  subject's  peculiar  sensitiveness  j
towards  this  nervous  radiation  is  less  than  usual,  you  do  j
not  get  the  usual  resvilt  without  increasing  the  number
of  passes  ; if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  greater  than  usual —
and  this  happens  especially  when  you  have  worked  with
a  subject a long  time — then  you  get  through  irradiation
the  whole  side  changed, instead  of  only  getting  a  local
change  as  you  expected. When  Sir  William  Barrett  did
me  the  pleasure  of  attending  my  experiments  at  Upsala
he himself made a number of different  experiments,,
simple  and  combined, of  which  all  but  one  turned  out
quite regular. In this single experiment, where  the
position  of  the  filtering  paper  beneath  the  metal  screen
was  unknown  to  us, the  skin  beneath  the  paper  ought
not to have become insensitive. However, it was so.  \
But  we  omitted  to  examine  the  condition  of  the  dermal
sensibility  on  other  parts  of  that  half  of  the  body,  simply
because  at  that  time  these  irradiation-phenomena  did  wot


Fig.  10  (see  p.  164).


LXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


165


occur  so  much  or  were  not  known  by  me.  The  experi-
ment may  of  course  have  been  wrong,  but  it  may  also
have  been  right.  Because  the  examination  of  the  skin
was  made  in  an  unsatisfactory  manner,  this  experiment
must  be  cancelled  and  cannot  be  counted  as  a  failure.
(3)  The  opaque  substances  do  not  seem  to  be  quite  opaque
to  this  influence — if  you  go  on  making  passes  you  generally
get  an  effect  at  last,  possibly  depending  upon  the  screen
itself  getting  charged  with  the  effluence  and  so  becoming
a  secondary  source  of  force.  (4)  You  have  to  reckon  with
what  Charcot  called  consecutive  oscillations,  that  is  to
say,  a  change  in  the  dermal  sensibility  on  one  side  has
a  tendency  to  transfer  itself  after  a  while  spontaneously
not  only  to  the  other  side  but  also  back  again  to  the
first  one,  and  so  on — especially  when  a  superfluous  number
of  passes  are  made.  I  have  by  experiment  found  this
to  be  true.  But  it  is  a  very  disturbing  process  to
encounter.  (5)  The  condition  of  the  dermal  sensibility
depends  upon  the  functioning  of  the  other  senses — which
I  found  out  rather  late  to  my  regret.  E.g.  stimulation
through  light,  i.e.  opening  of  the  eyes,  diminishes  the
over-sensitiveness  of  the  skin  in  light  hypnosis.

The  important  point  is  therefore  :  do  you  get  so  many
right  results,  i.e.  results  which  agree  with  the  direction
of  the  passes  and  the  kind  of  arrangements  used,  that
this  percentage  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  chance,  auto-
suggestion or  simulation  ?  I  am  sorry  that  space  does
not  permit  me  to  give  complete  statistics.  I  can  only
give  you  some  extracts.

Out  of  21  experiments  with  combined  methods  made
up  to  a  certain  date  and  where  no  experimental  faults
had  been  committed,  17  gave  quite  regular  results,  2  haK-
regular  and  only  2  irregular.  Of  these  21  experiments
10  were  made  with  the  non-informed  method.  I  have
already  given  the  statistics  for  the  experiments  made
with  a  system  consisting  of  a  sheet  of  glass  and  a  piece
of  cardboard  with  a  gap  for  one  finger  with  subject  No.  1.
Once  I  placed  this  system  above  the  hand  and  fingers
of  subject  No.  2  and  in  a  series  of  10  trials  I  only
'pointed  towards  one  of  his  fingers. Every  trial  resulted


166


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[PAET


in  movements  and  certain  sensations  in  only  that  special
finger.  In  these  last  experiments  telepathy  as  well  as  the
gaze  can  play  a  part,  however.  I  shall  treat  of  this
later  on.

In  a  series  which  Prof.  Ohrvall  made  with  the  subject
No.  2  and  where  downward  and  upward  passes  were  made
irregularly,  the  subject  looking  the  whole  time  in  the
anomaloscope,  every  downward  pass  resulted  in  a  darkening
and  a  change  of  colour  in  a  certain  direction  of  the  light
observed  and  vice  versa  for  the  upward  passes.  The
subject  had  a  cloth  over  his  head  and  the  passes  were
made  above  a  sheet  of  glass  as  usual.  The  series  com-
prised 23  trials  and  no  irregular  result  was  obtained.

As  to  statistics  of  experiments  made  under  conditions
unknown  to  the  experimenter,  78  per  cent,  of  the  experi-
ments made  up  to  a  certain  date  showed  regular  results.
Here  even  telepathy  must  be  considered  ruled  out  of  the
question.  And  in  all  the  eleven  experiments  that  were
carried  out  to  find  out  whether  my  thoughts  or  my  wish
could  prevent  a  certain  effect  of  passes  from  taking  place,
the  passes  prevailed  over  this  possible  telepathic  effect.

Motility.

We  are  also  able  to  produce  and  show  an  effect  of
passes — or  of  pointing  with  the  finger  of  the  operator —
on  the  neuro -muscular  system.

Let  me  give  a  few  examples  of  this.  The  subject's
whole  arm  and  hand  have  sometimes  been  enclosed  in  a
cylinder  of  glass,  the  whole  arm  and  hand  lying,  e.g.  with
their  dorsal  side  upwards,  the  hand  clenched.

Fig.  11  shows  an  assistant  young  anatomist  making  an
experiment  under  these  conditions.  He  points  at  the  long
extensor  muscle  of  the  thumb  and  the  result  is  that  only
this  is  extended.  The  reproduction  given  here  seems
to  show  that  the  forefinger  was  extended  also,  but  this
was  not  the  case  :  it  is  the  cottonwool  underneath  which
causes  this  illusion.  On  the  negative  you  can  see  quite
distinctly  that  the  forefinger  is  not  extended.

Fig.  12 shows the assistant pointing at the  general


Fig.  14  (see  p.  1 67).


liXxxni.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


167


extensor  of  the  fingers  and  you  see  how  all  of  them  this
time  became  extended  and  not  the  thumb.  These  2
experiments  are  especially  interesting,  because  the  original
position  was  the  same  for  both.

Fig.  13  shows  how  the  effluence  can  effect  sinews — the
operator  pointed  this  time  with  a  rod  of  glass  through
a  sheet  of  glass  at  the  sinew  of  the  forefinger  of  the
common  extensor.  Of  course,  this  reaction  is  also  to  be
considered  as  a  reflex -action.  I  wish  to  point  out  that
by  this  method  you  can  extend  any  fingers  you  hke,
and  in  an  irregular  order.

If  you  touch  the  skin  and  in  this  way  exert  a  pressure
on  the  muscles,  sinews  or  nerves,  you  get  a  stronger  and
more  immediate  effect.

Fig.  14  shows  this  on  subject  No.  3.  This  is  the  effect
of  pressure  with  my  finger  on  the  motor  spot  of  the  long
flexor  of  the  thumb.

If  pressure  is  exerted  on  a  motor  nerve,  e.g.  on  n.
facialis,  you  also  get  a  quite  right  effect  from  a  physio-
logical point  of  view.  This  stronger  effect  may,  however,
as  I  said  before,  depend  on  the  mechanical  pressure  in
itself.  This  kind  of  stimulus  doubtless  exists,  because  if
•a  rod  is  made  to  exert  a  pressure  on  a  muscle  or  motor
spot  you  get  a  distinct  effect,  a  contraction,  even  if
nobody  holds  the  rod.  The  same  happens  if  pressure  is
made  on  nerves  and  sinews.  In  all  these  cases,  however,
auto-suggestion  cannot  be  excluded  ;  on  the  contrary  it
may  easily  enter  into  play.  But  when  right  results  are
•obtained,  as  here,  on  subjects  who  know  nothing  of
anatomy  and  physiology,  they  cannot,  at  least  not  the
first  time,  essentially  be  the  product  of  suggestion.

Now  this  increased  mechanical  sensitiveness  in  certain
hystero-hypnotic  conditions  had  already  been  detected  by
Charcot.  He  called  it  the  neuro-muscular  hyper-excit-
ability, and  according  to  him  it  existed  only  in  the
lethargic  state  of  hypnosis.  If,  e.g.,  miisculus  quadratus
labii  superioris  on  both  sides  was  excited  with  a  rod,  a
contraction  ensued  which  drew  the  whole  upper  lip  and
the  nostrils  upwards.  But  if  one  eye,  e.g.  the  left  one,
then was opened, the lethargic state changed into  the

M


168


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


cataleptic  one  on  the  same  side,  the  contraction  ceased,
but  solely  on  this  side  and  the  left  upper  lip  and  nostril
retook  their  normal  position.

As  said  above,  this  phenomenon  follows  anatomical
laws  much  too  closely,  even  the  first  time  the  contractions
take  place,  to  allow  of  an  explanation  by  suggestion  solely.
This  is  also  the  opinion  of  many  investigators,  including
some  who  cannot  be  considered  as  pupils  of  Charcot.  '
What  they  have  not  understood,  however,  is  that  nervous
effluence  can  play  a  part  in  these  contractions.

Reflexes.

But  if  these  phenomena  exist, we  ought  also  to  find
increased  tendon  reflexes. In  fact, Charcot  had  already  |
found  this  to  be  the  case.

I  have  examined  the  knee-jerk  reflex  with  the  help
of  Sommer's  reflex-multiplicator,  which  is  shown  on
Fig.  15.  A  string  is  fastened  to  a  band,  which  goes  round
the  ankle.  The  string  goes  over  a  wheel  at  the  top  of
a  support  and  is  fastened  to  a  registering  apparatus,  by
the  help  of  which  you  can  get  the  jerk  written  on  the
revolving  cylinder,  when  the  sinew  of  the  knee  is  tapped
by  the  help  of  a  hammer,  falling  from  a  certain  height.
The  figure  shows  also  a  hood,  which  can  be  let  down
in  front  of  the  subject,  thus  making  the  covering  of  his  |
head  unnecessary.

As  to  curves,  we  must  content  ourselves  with  observing
the  immense  difference  between  the  jerk  when  you  register
it  on  the  insensitive  side  or  on  the  hyper-  or  extra-
sensitive  side  of  a  subject  in  light  hypnosis.  Fig.  16
shows  that  when  the  tapping  was  made

on  the  hyper-sensitive  side  4  trials  gave  :  very  great  effect^

with  one  excep-
tion ;

,, insensitive  4 ,, ,, hardly  any  effect ;

hyper-sensitive ,, again  4 ,, great  effect  ;

when  deep  hypnosis  was  induced  : 7  trials  gave  no  effect
to  speak  of.


I


LXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


169


These  curves  were  taken  all  on  the  same  side  and  as  fast  as
the  changing  of  the  hypnotic  condition  permitted.  The
time-marker  indicates  i  of  a  second.

The  type  of  jerk  is  also  altered  on  the  hyper-sensitive
side  in  comparison  to  the  waking  state  :  the  swinging
tendency  is  increased.

Electric  Irritability .

This  is  however  not  all  :  the  electric  irritability  is  in-
creased in  usual  light  hypnosis  and  on  the  extra-sensitive
side,  while  it  is  lowered  in  deep  hypnosis.  The  threshold
of  stimulation  of  the  motor  spots  in  regard  to  the  galvanic
current  is  in  other  words  altered  in  one  direction  or
another.

I  will  give  a  few  figures  :  the  threshold  for  the  motor
spot  of  m.  abducens  pollices  brevis  was  found  on  one
occasion,  when  shutting  the  current  and  when  the  cathode
was  used  as  stimulus-electrode,  to  be  :

in  waking-condition  : 1-8  milli-ampere  (M.  A.)  ;
in  usual  light  hypnosis :  1-1
and  in  deep  „ 2-25 „  „

On  another  occasion  the  same  motor  spot  needed  :

in light hypnosis and on the hyper-sensitive side  :

0-25-0-30  M.A.  ;
in  waking  condition  immediately  afterwards  :

0-50-0-55  M.A.

Over  a  nerve,  N.  medianus,  the  following  values  were
obtained  during  a  sitting  :

in  deep  hypnosis  :  4-5-5-3  M.A.  ;
in  light „  0-6-0-7

These  different  values  show  that  the  changes  in  the
nervous  irritability  in  the  different  hypnotic  states  not
only  stretch  themselves  to  the  spinal  column  (which  the
knee-jerk-reflex  proves)  but  also  to  the  peripheral  motor
nerves.

Magnetic  and  Electric  Fields  of  Force.

We  have  thus  seen  that  when  the  subject  is  in  a
hypnotic  state,  where  his  neuro-muscular  apparatus  shows


170


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


a  heightened  sensitiveness  towards  nervous  effluence,  his
motor  irritabihty  is  increased  as  such.  But  how  about
the  dermal  sensibihty  ?  Here  the  same  thing  exists.
Not  only  is  the  subject  hyper-sensitive  to  ordinary
cutaneous  stimuli  on  those  surfaces  which  are  specially
sensitive  to  the  nervous  effluence,  but  he  there  also  shows
a  specific  sensitivity  to  certain  other  forms  of  energy
which  do  not  usually  produce  any  effect  on  the  dermal
senses.  The  subject,  in  point  of  fact,  experiences  decided
and  specific  sensations  in  magnetic  and  electric  fields  of
power  (electro-magnets  and  static  electricity)  even  if  he
is  kept  non-informed  and  all  possible  sources  of  error
are  eliminated.  We  can,  therefore,  say  very  generally  :
the  subject's  sensitiveness  towards  nervous  effluence  is
only  one  form  or  aspect  of  a  very  general  hyper-sensitive-
ness existing  in  certain  hystero -hypnotic  states.

The  Effect  of  the  Eye  or  of  the  Gaze.

Another  factor  often  used  when  hypnotizing  is  the  eye,
or  the  gaze,  and,  as  we  know,  it  has  been  contended  that
also  here  we  have  some  sort  of  specific  effluence  in  play.
In  point  of  fact,  if  really  the  radiation  that  is  found  to
emanate  from  the  experimenter's  fingers  is  due  especially
to  the  large  number  of  peripheral  nerves  ending  here,
then,  when  discussing  the  question  whether  also  other
parts  of  the  body  than  the  fingers  may  represent  sources
of  this  new  form  of  energy,  suspicion  must  naturally
in  the  first  place  fall  on  the  eye,  as  the  whole  optic
nerve  terminates  and  is  spread  out  at  the  bottom  of  the
eye.  A  priori  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  different
media  must  render  such  an  effluence  outwards  impossible,
as  we  have  found  in  our  experiments  that  materials  that
are  to  a  certain  extent  analogous  to  them,  e.g.  glass,  do
not  act  as  a  preventive  screen.

The  experiments  made  prove  that  the  gaze  really  has
an  efi^ect  on  the  sensibility  similar  to  that  of  passes,  even
when  conditions  are  just  as  severe,  for  instance  when  a
system  of  transparent  and  non-transparent  materials  is
used. When  the  gaze  is  directed  at  muscles  or  sinews —


Lxxxni.]


Problems  of  Hypyiotism.


171


even  through  a  pane  of  glass — the  corresponding  move-
ments take  place.

Respiration.

We  may  now  ask  how  such  a  function  as  respiration
i  behaves,  especially  in  the  heterolateral  hypnosis,  respiration
I  of  both  lungs  being, as is  known, a  function  which  is
unified  in  a  high  degree.

In  subject  No.  1  the  respiratory  frequency  is  in  light
hypnosis  increased  from  about  14  up  to  30-32  per  minute  ;
in deep hypnosis it can  go down  to 8-10. In  hetero-
lateral hypnosis the frequency lies about 22-24.  The
respiration  in  deep  hypnosis  approaches  the  type  that  is
;  obtained  in  animals  through section  of  the 10th  nerve,
N.  vagxis. This  might  be  expected,  because  in  deep  hyp-
nosis the  usual  stimulation  of  this  and  other  centripetal
nerves must be diminished by  the general  insensibility.
I  The  respiration in light hypnosis, on the other  hand,
resembles  the  type  observed  when  iV.  vagus  is  stimulated —
this  corresponds  with  the  general  hyperaesthesia  in  light
hypnosis. In the heterolateral condition you get  a
mixture or a medium between the types of light  and
i  deep hypnosis — in relation to frequency as well as  to
j  type. This is of special interest, as the  heterolateral
j  hypnosis  with  insensitiveness  on  one  half  of  the  body  and
I  hyper-sensitiveness  on  the  other  really  represents a  state
where  deep  hypnosis  reigns  on  one  half  of  the  body  and
light  hj^pnosis  in  an  extreme  degree,  at  least  as  far  as
the  sensibility  of  the  senses  and  the  neuro -muscular  system
is  concerned,  on  the  other  half.

The  Effects  of  the  Thoughts  of  the  Operator  and  of  the

Subject.

My  experiments  seem  to  prove  that  the  non-expressed
thoughts  of  the  operator  can  bring  about  alterations  of  the
sensibility,  although  the  effect  tends  to  become  generalized,
i.e.  the  sensibility  not  only  of  the  surface  thought  of,
but  also  of  the  whole  of  the  same  side,  is  altered  in  the
same  direction.


172  Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.  [pabt  i

On  the other hand, the power of the hypnotizer  to
wake the subject  from the  hypnotic condition  only by  j
thought  and  will  has  been  proved  beyond  doubt. With  I
my  three chief subjects I practically  never  fail  in  this  t
respect. A  black  cloth  having  or  not  having  been  thrown  j  ]
over  the  subject's  head,  he  begins,  after  a  certain  time,  ']
varying from  15  seconds  to 2  minutes, to make  move-
ments,  stretch hinself, etc. He then throws away the  1
cloth  and  opens  his  eyes,  generally  now  nearly  fully  awake.  (
The  sittings  generally  last  2  hours  and  I  make  the  experi-
ment  when I like during this period of time. During  1
my "  willing  " I  have  walked  about  or  sat  still, whilst  :
other  persons  present have either  talked or kept quiet.  ,  ]
Generally  I  have  kept  my  mouth  closed  (with  the  help  \
of one of my hands) in order to avoid unintentional  i
whispering. At  least  50  such  experiments  have  been  made  i
by  me  and  all  but  one  have  been  successful. This  shows
clearly  the  legitimacy  of  considering  telepathy  as  a  possible  ;
source of  error  in  all  experiments on  nervous effluence,  |  :
at  least  during  hypnosis.  I  '

In  all  the  experiments  made  to  find  out  whether  my  '
thought  or  my  wish  could  prevent  a  certain  effect  of
passes  to  take  place,  when  willing  or  wishing  in  an
opposite  direction  to  that  which  it  was  expected  the
passes  would  act  in,  or  when  willing  or  wishing  that  no
such  effect  would  occur,  the  passes  prevailed  over  this
possible  telepathic  factor.  When  subject  No.  1  is  in  light
hypnosis  I  can,  of  course,  alter  his  sensibility  by  the  help
of  verbal  suggestion.  On  the  other  hand,  this  subject  can
even  in  hypnosis  only  with  difficulty  and  only  to  a
certain  degree  lower  his  sensibility  by  auto-suggestion  alone.
I  have  purposely  made  only  a  very  few  experiments  of
this  kind  so  as  not  to  awaken  in  him  any  unpleasant
tendencies  in  this  respect.  The  important  point,
however,  seems  to  me  to  be  that  experiments,  made
intentionally  for  the  solving  of  this  problem,  have  shown
that  the  subject  is  unable  to  resist  the  effect  of  the
passes,  even  when  he  tries  his  utmost  to  do  so,  although
the  effect  is  delayed  or  weakened  to  some  extent.  Eleven
experiments  were  made,  and  in  all  the  result  was  the  same.


x,xxxni.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


173


Conclusions  and  Theories.

Coming  now  to  the  conclusions  I  have  reached,  I  shall
try  to  put  forward  my  views  in  as  condensed  a  form  as
possible.

My  conclusions  are  :

1.  There  exists  a  nervous  effluence  from  the  human
hody.  Other  human  beings  of  a  certain  type  and  in  a
certain  condition  can  be  affected  by  it.

2.  Certain  substances  are  almost  wholly  transparent  to
this  effluence,  other  substances  absorb  it  more  or  less.
It  can  further  be  reflected,  e.g.  against  a  sheet  of  glass  or
metal,  and  it  can  also  be  conducted  through  a  rod,  bent
at  right  angles  or  twisted  in  some  way  or  other.  These
results  agree  with  the  experiments  on  the  conductibility
of  this  nervous  force  made  by  Boirac.

3.  Certain  properties  shown  by  this  effluence  make  it
impossible  to  consider  it  solely  as  a  form  of  some  energetic
radiation,  i.e.  as  vibrations  in  a  medium  of  some  kind.
This  is  shown  conclusively  by  Boirac's  experiments,  but
also  by  the  following  experiment  made  by  me  on  a
hysterical  lady  :  when  I  or  somebody  else  applies  my  or
his  finger  to  her  skin  on  a  certain  muscle,  this  muscle
is  contracted.  When  the  lady  is  put  into  hypnosis  by
me,  nobody  but  myself  can  provoke  contractures  in  this
way.  Also  if  I  press  a  metal  rod  to  her  skin,  the  under-
lying muscles  are  contracted.  But  if  somebody  else  does
the  same  thing  with  the  same  rod,  nothing  results —
unless  I  touch  this  third  person  with  my  hand.  The
subject's  eyes  are  of  course  bandaged,  covered,  or  kept
closed  by  somebody,  and  it  is  clear  that  these  experiments
can  be  made  in  such  a  manner  that  the  subject  by  the
help  of  her  senses  can  get  no  sufficient  aid  to  enable  her
to  guess  when  or  by  whom  she  is  touched.  I  once  let
a  physician  present  hypnotize  the  lady  and  then  /  could
get  no  results  unless  I  was  put  in  actual  touch  with  the
hypnotizer.  I  have  later  found  that  Ochorowicz  has  made
the  same  experiment  with  the  same  results  on  a  subject
of  his.  These  and  other  experiments,  belonging  to  what
we  may  call  the  class  of  "  isolated  rapport,"  show  that


174


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[PAET


there  can  be  or  must  be  at  least  an  element  of  a  corpus-
cular character  in  this  effluence.

4.  Barety's  main  results  in  regard  to  his  principal
subject  were,  that  passes  made  in  the  same  direction  as
the  distribution  of  the  nerves,  i.e.  in  a  centrifugal  direction
for  the  extremities,  anaesthetize  the  skin,  contract  the
underlying  muscles,  and  put  the  subject  to  sleep — whereas
passes  made  in  the  opposite  direction  produce  the  opposite
effect. These  conclusions  perfectly  conform  with  my  own.

5.  In  explaining  these  different  hystero -hypnotic  states,  we
may  first  of  all  say,  that  the  hyper-sensitiveness  of  all  the
senses  and  the  hyper-irritability  of  the  neuro -muscular
apparatus  which  exists  in  light  hypnosis  are  secondary
dynamic  products,  depending  on  a  diminution  of  the
higher  mental  functions  brought  about  by  the  hypnotiza-
tion.  The  usual  inhibitive  action  of  the  higher  centres
on  the  lower  ones  is  lessened  and  the  latter  thereby  get
their  irritability  increased.  Turning  to  the  process  of
irradiation,  we  can  say  that  when  we,  e.g.  make  a  super-
fluous number  of  downward  passes  above  an  arm  and
gradually  produce  insensitiveness  on  the  whole  of  that
side,  we  are  really  putting  that  side  in  another  hypnotic
state,  deep  hypnosis,  because  the  state  of  that  insensitive
side  is  quite  the  same  as  the  state  of  deep  hypnosis,
at  least  as  far  as  the  two  can  be  compared.  What  kind
of  state  the  other  side,  the  extra-sensitive  side  is  in,  is
more  difficult  to  decide.  It  may  be  some  kind  of
waking  state.  Deep  hypnosis  itself  is  a  state  where  the
irritability  of  the  whole  cerebro-spinal  nervous  system
seems  to  be  lowered,  but  how  this  can  be  accomplished
by  purely  radiative  and  dynamic  means  is  a  problem
which  calls  for  special  experiments.

6.  In  light  hypnosis  the  conductibility  of  the  nervous
system  is  increased,  at  least  in  hysterical  subjects  ;  or,
from  another  point  of  view,  the  intimacy  and  inter-
action between  aU  those  parts  of  the  nervous  system
which  are  not  directly  inhibited  by  the  hypnotization  is
increased.  Let  me  give  a  further  instance  of  this.  If
you  let  subject  No.  1  open  his  eyes  during  light  hypnosis
the over-sensitiveness of the  skin  is diminished, the  in-


LXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


175


creased  stimulation  of  the  sense  of  sight  evidently  craving
an  increased  amount  of  nervous  energy,  which  conse-
quently is  taken  away  or  drained  off  from  other  sense-
organs.  Hypnosis,  especially  in  hysterical  subjects,  thus
facilitates  in  a  high  degree  the  experimental  study  of  the
inhibitive  and  dynamogenic  processes  in  the  nervovis
system.  We  may  further  get  to  know  by  the  help  of
this  method,  as  I  have  shown,  that  our  organs  of  sense
are  capable  of  performing  more  and  better  work  than
they  generally  do.  And  we  may  say  that  in  ordinary
life  every  sense  is  subjected  to  a  rather  large  amount  of
functional  inhibition  from  the  other  senses  and  also  from
other  parts  of  the  nervous  system.

7.  As  to  the  process  of  hypnotization,  I  think  we  may
say  that  nervous  effluence  alone,  whether  from  the  hands
or  the  eyes  of  the  hypnotizer,  can  bring  about  hypnosis
under  certain  circumstances  ;  so  also  can  telepathy  alone  ;
so  also  can  strong  physical  stimulation  (bright  lights,  loud
sounds)  alone,  at  least  in  hysterical  persons  (fright-  or
shock-hypnosis).  The  contentions  of  Charcot  and  his
school,  that  such  fright-hypnosis  can  be  obtained  without
suggestion,  have  by  Schaffer  been  proved  to  be  right.
By  suggestion  alone  we  can,  as  is  well  known,  hypnotize,
but  it  may  be  that  a  nervous  effluence  or  a  telepathic
impulse  is  a  necessary  completing  factor  the  first  time.

I  must  here  say  a  word  about  telepathic  hypnotizing
and  dehypnotizing.  As  Boirac  has  already  put  forward,
the  subject  generally  does  not  know  ivhy  he  goes  to  sleep
or  awakes — he  gets  no  idea  from  the  hypnotizer's  mind  ;
he  only  does  awake.  It  is  not  telepathy  in  a  true  sense
consequently  :  onl}^  a  telepathic  impulse,  if  I  may  say
so.

In  general  practice  it  is  probable  that  nearly  aU  these
factors  are  active,  as  well  as  others  which  in  an  indirect
manner  contribute  to  induce  sleepiness  or  fatigue,  e.g.
visual  and  mental  concentration  (Braid),  repose,  etc.

8.  As  to  other  statements  of  Charcot,  e.g.  the  existence
of  hemilateral  and  heterolateral  hypnosis,  the  specific
sensitiveness  in  regard  to  magnets  and  the  existence
independent  of  suggestion  of  certain  characteristic  features


176


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part


of  the  different  hypnotic  states,  whichever  these  may  be,
I  am  of  the  opinion,  judging  by  my  own  experiments,
that  he  so  far  was  right.

9.  As  to  the  experiments  on  nervous  effluence  made  by
this  Society,  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  the  right  thing
for  me  to  claim  space  for  a  description  of  them.  You
will  get  much  better  information  if  you  go  to  the  Pro-
ceedings and  the  Journal  of  your  Society.  However,  as
you  well  know,  Gurney  inclined  towards  an  explanation
along  the  lines  of  a  nervous  effluence,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and
Miss  Johnson  tried  to  explain  them  by  telepathy.  I
should  here  only  wish  to  put  forward  :  (1)  that  according
to  my  opinion  these  experiments  were  not  differentiated
so  far  that  definite  conclusions  as  to  the  nature  of  the
forces  in  play  can  be  drawn  with  certainty  ;  (2)  that  the
efiect  of  the  human  gaze  as  a  special  factor  was  not  taken
into  consideration  ;  (3)  that  it  is  not  perhaps  quite
legitimate  to  put  the  problem  thus  :  "  radiation  or  tele-
pathy," because  both  may  have  come  into  play  in  these
.experiments  ;  and  (4)  that  what  I  have  called  the  non-
informed  method  was  not  used  sufficiently  to  decide  the
question.  However,  judging  from  the  details  of  the
experimental  results,  I  am  tempted  to  suppose  that  a
nervous  effluence  really  existed  in  at  least  some  of  these
experiments.  But  how  far  this  may  have  been  the  case
I  am  not  prepared  to  say.

Because  experiments  of  this  kind  can  be  conducted
with  the  help  of  methods  and  apparatus  common  to  modern
psychology  and  physiology  ;  because  they  can  be  made
by  anyone,  once  the  subject  is  put  in  a  suitable  hypnotic
state  ;  and  because  the  nervous  effluence  does  not  demand
for  its  explanation  so  many  suppositions  foreign  to  the
scientific  mind  as  real  telepathy  does  ;  just  because  of  all
this  I  dare  to  believe  that  hypnotic  experiments  such  as
I  have  now  put  before  you  will  perhaps  more  easily  than
other  branches  of  psychical  research  be  able  to  command
the  attention  of  science.  And  there  are  many  reasons
why  the  attitude  of  science  in  this  respect  ought  to  be
changed.  It  must  be  admitted  that  science,  whether  we
take  psychology  or  physiology,  is  not  at  present  capable


liXXXIII.]


Problems  of  Hypnotism.


177


of  advancing  in  any  marked  degree  the  problem  of  the
connexion  between  mind  and  body,  taking  this  problem
in  a  real  and  concrete  sense.  Here  science  ought  to
accept  the  opportunity  offered  by  psychical  research.
And  certain  signs  seem  to  show  that  in  fact  this  is
already  happening.

Literature,  referred  to  in  this  paper.

Bakrett,  W.  F.  : Some  recent  hypnotic  experiments.  S.P.R.

Jour. 1912. Pp.  178-188.
Chahcot,  J.  M.  : Oeuvres  completes. Tome  IX. Paris,  1890.
Barety,  a.  : Le  magnetisms  animal  ou  force  nemique.  Paris,

1887.

BoiKAC,  E.  :  La  psychologie  inconnue.  Paris,  1908.  Also  in
English.  Psychic  Science.  W.  Rider  &  Son,  1920.  See  also
his  book  :  The  Psychology  of  the  Future. Kegan  Paul,  1920.

OcHOKOWicz,  Z.  : De  la  suggestion  mentale. Paris,  1887.

Braid,  J.  :  Neurypnology. London,  1843.

GtTRNEY,  E.  :  Different  articles,  Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  II.
Pp.  201-205.  Vol.  III.  Pp.  401-423.  Vol.  V.  Pp.  14-17  ;
254-7.

SiDGWiCK,  H.,  Mrs.,  and  Johnson,  A.,  Miss  :  Experiments  in
Thought-transference,  Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  VIII.  Pp.  577-
596.

NOTE.

In  the  foregoing  paper  I  have  confined  myself  to  the  treatment
of  nervous  radiation  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  shown  to  act  on
the  sense-organs  and  the  neuro-muscular  apparatus  of  another
human  organism  of  a  certain  unstable  nervous  character.
But  apart  from  this  the  organs,  nerves  and  muscles  acted
upon  are  in  a  healthy  condition.

Other  investigators  have,  however,  as  is  known,  tried  to
prove  the  existence  of  this  nervous  radiation  on  certain  human
organisms  or  organs,  also  on  animals,  even  on  plants,  bacilli
and  photographic  plates,  etc.,  with  more  or  less  success  in
different  instances.  Of  course  1  cannot  enter  on  all  these
problems  here.


178


Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz.


[part  lxxxiii.]


English  readers  may  however  be  reminded  that  Edmund
Gurney  attached  great  importance  to  the  fact  that  Dr.  Liebault
of  Nancy  later  in  life  on  account  of  experiments  made  on
forty-six  sick  children,  of  which  the  large  majority  were
under  three  years  old,  candidly  confessed  the  belief  that  "  the
organic  changes  produced  must  have  been  due  to  a  transmitted
nervous  influence."  His  statement  is  considered  by  Gumey
all  the  more  valuable  as  it  is  opposed  to  the  view  maintained
by  Liebault  jireviously — that  the  theura]Deutical  influence
of  hypnotism  is  always  and  wholly  a  matter  of  suggestion
and  imagination  {Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,  p.  253).

Experiments  closely  related  to  those  given  in  my  article
are  described  by  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  in  his  book  on
Psychical  Research  (Home  University  Library),  p.  198-199,
and  were  made  by  him  and  Gurney  in  the  early  years  of
the  S.P.R.  Sir  William  states  that  "  any  particular  book,
or  coin,  or  other  object  over  which  the  hypnotizer  had  made
a  few  passes  or  even  pointed  his  fingers,  could  be  detected
by  a  sensitive  subject  who  was  subsequently  brought  by  us
into  the  room,  from  which  the  hypnotizer  had  m  the  meantime
been  excluded  and  the  positions  of  objects  then  changed  by
us."  Similar  experiments  were  already  made  by  Mesmer  (see
Ochorowicz's  article  Hypnotisme  et  Mesmerisme  in  the  Diction-
naire  de  Physiologie,  ed.  by  Ch.  Richet),  and  I  have  myself
made  a  few  experiments  which  seem  to  prove  that  those
kinds  of  sheets  or  materials  which  prevent  the  action  of  the
nervous  effluence  from  passing,  m  some  way  absorb  this
emanation  and  even  may  become  secondary  sources  of  force,
as  in  Barrett's  and  Gurney 's  experiments.

In  this  connection  may  be  considered  experiments  which
apparently  reveal  an  influence  on  photographic  plates.  Quite
lately  a  fresh  imx^ulse  to  this  line  of  research  has  been  given
by  Dr.  Aigner  of  Munich.^

S.  A.

1  See  an  article  "  Eine  miaufgeklarte  Einwirkung  der  menschlichen
Hand  auf  die  Photographische  Platte  "  in  Die  Wunschelrute,  Verlag
'''Das  Wasscr,'' 1921,  where  literature  also  is  given.


THE  PHENOMENA  OF  STIGMATIZATION.


By  the  Rev.  Heebert  Thurston,  S.J.

It  has  always,  I  take  it,  formed  part  of  the  programme
of  the  Society  to  concern  itself  not  only  with  invasions
of  the  individual  consciousness  from  outside,  or  in  other
words  with  such  problems  as  those  of  communication  and
telepathy,  but  also  with  the  internal  workings  of  the
human  organism  and  especially  with  the  range  of  the
influence  exercised  by  the  mind  iipon  the  body  and  its
physical  processes.  Among  the  most  remarkable  pheno-
mena of  the  latter  kind  is  that  of  stigmatization.  Perhaps
I  should  explain  that  I  refer,  of  course,  to  religious
stigmatization,  and  that  throughout  this  paper  in  speaking
of  stigmata  I  mean  those  physical  counterparts  of  the
wound  marks  of  Christ  which  are  alleged  to  have
manifested  themselves  outwardly  in  the  hands,  feet  and
side  of  many  mystics  from  the  time  of  St.  Francis  of
Assisi  down  to  the  present  day.  It  is  a  little  unfortunate
that  the  word  "  stigmata  "  is  commonly  used  by  patho-
logists to  denote  the  characteristic  symptoms  of  hysteria,
but  my  readers  will  understand  that  I  am  here  employing
the  term  in  its  hagiological,  not  in  its  medical  sense.

Fifty  years  ago,  when  the  case  of  Louise  Lateau,  the
Belgian  stigmaUsee,  first  began  to  be  widely  discussed,
the  late  Sir  Samuel  Wilks,  M.D.  and  F.Pv.S.,  dealing  in
the  Guy's  Hospital  Reports  with  an  alleged  case  of
haematidrosis  (sweat  of  blood),  quoted  a  passage  from
the  Lancet  to  the  following  effect  : — "  Louise  Lateau 's
meditations  on  the  crucifixion,  actively  excited  by  the
Friday,  at  last  culminated  in  the  flow  of  blood  corres-
ponding to that from the wounded side.  Such

179


180


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


affection,  brooded  over,  would  naturally  enough  be
followed  by  the  appearance  of  the  other  stigmata."

Commenting  upon  this,  Sir  Samuel  goes  on  : — "  This
is  certainly  a  most  remarkable  utterance  to  proceed  ex
cathedra  from  a  medical  journal,  for  if  excessive  anguish
can  cause  an  exudation  of  blood  through  the  skin,  it  is
extending  our  views  of  the  influence  of  the  mind  over
the  body  to  a  much  wider  range  than  is  generally  allowed,
and  to  admit  that  such  exudation  might  occur  at  those
spots  where  the  whole  power  of  the  will  is  concentrated
is  certainly  propounding  a  very  startling  doctrine."  ^

No  doubt  this  doctrine  will  not  now  be  accounted  quite
so  startling  as  it  appeared  to  Sir  Samuel  in  1872.^  With-
out definitely  accepting  or  rejecting  the  view  thus  enun-
ciated, it  will  be  my  object  iii  the  present  paper  to
bring  this  theory  into  relation  with  the  observed  facts
in  order  that  we  may  be  in  a  better  position  to  decide
how  far  it  can  be  relied  upon  to  explain  them.

Out  of  some  sixty  cases  of  complete  or  partial  stigma-
tization  with  the  evidence  for  which  I  have  endeavoured
to  acquaint  myself,  we  may  take  for  our  first  illustration
a  quite  modern  example  from  the  life  of  Gemma  Galgani.
She  was  a  young  girl  of  the  middle  class  born  near  Lucca
in  Tuscany  in  1878,  and  she  died  there  in  1903  aged
twenty-five.  Her  life  was  written  by  her  Confessor,
Padre  Germane,  Passionist.  An  English  translation  of  it
has  been  published  with  a  very  laudatory  introduction  by
Cardinal  Gasquet.^  There  are  many  things  in  the  book
which  will  probably  strike  the  normal  English  reader  as
incredible,  unnatural,  or  extravagant,  and  I  should  like
to add  that in certain respects I do  not in  any  way

^  Guy's  Hospital  Reports  (series  iii.  vol.  17),  1872,  p.  219.

^  The  earliest  to  propound  the  view  that  the  stigmata  were  the-
physical  effect  of  mental  concentration  seems  to  have  been  P.  Pompo-
nazzi  in  the  sixteenth  century.  It  was  revived  by  A.  Maury  in  the
Revue  des  deux  Mondes  for  1854.  (See  his  work  La  Magie  et  V Astrologie,
1861,  p.  385.)  Since  then  this  explanation  has  been  adopted  by  many
others,  e.g.  by  Sir  William  Barrett  in  his  book  On  the  Threshold  of  a
New  World  of  Thought,  p.  79.

'  Father  Germanus,  The  Life  of  Gemma  Galgani,  London,  Sands  &  Co.„
1914.


CtEmma  Galgani.
Born  1878,  died  1903.
Beproduced  by  the  kind  permission  of  Messrs.  Burns,  Oates  and  Wasfdioi'rne.


Lxxxiil.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.  181

identify  myself  with  the  author's  point  of  view, but  so
j far  as  regards  the  description  of  phenomena  I  have  seen
no  reason  to  doubt  his  accuracy.

Gemma,  from  her  earUest  years,  had  given  herself  to
!  the  practices  of  an  extreme  asceticism.  At  the  age  of
fifteen  she  fell  ill  of  a  "  dangerous  complamt  " — nature
not  specified — "  which  kept  her  in  bed  for  three  months."
At  nineteen  she  developed  a  curvature  of  the  spine.
Meningitis  supervened,  together  with  a  total  loss  of
hearing.  "  Large  abscesses  formed  in  her  head,  one  of
which  seemed  to  make  its  way  down  through  her  chest
and  settled  in  her  side.  Then  her  hair  fell  off,  and
finally  her  limbs  became  paralysed."  ^  After  more  than  a
year  of  acute  suffering,  she  got  up  on  March  3rd,  1899
— suddenly,  and,  as  it  was  believed,  miraculously,  cured.
Four  weeks  later,  on  Maundy  Thursday,  March  30th,
Gemma  had  her  first  ecstasy.  "  While  spending  part  of
the  night  in  prayer,"  to  copy  the  account  she  afterwards
gave  in  obedience  to  her  director,  "  all  of  a  sudden  I
lost  the  use  of  my  senses.  I  was  able  with  difficulty
to  stand  up  and  lock  the  room  door.  Where  was  I  1
I  found  myself  before  Jesus  Crucified.  He  was  bleeding
all  over  ...  I  prostrated  myself  with  my  forehead  to
the  ground  and  there  remained  for  several  hours.  I
came  to  myself  with  the  wounds  of  Jesus  so  deeply  im-
pressed on  my  mind  that  they  have  never  since  left  it."^

A  week  or  two  later  she  had  a  second  vision  in
which  Christ  showed  her  again  His  five  open  wounds,
saying  to  her  :  "  Look,  my  child,  and  learn  how  to  love."

Finally,  on  June  8th  : — "  Jesus  appeared  with  all  His
wounds  open  ;  but  from  those  wounds  there  no  longer
came  forth  blood,  but  flames  of  fire.  In  an  instant
these  flames  came  to  touch  my  hands,  my  feet,  and  my
heart.  I  felt  as  if  I  were  dying  ...  all  vanished,  and
I  found  myself  kneeling,  but  I  still  felt  great  pain  in
my  hands,  feet,  and  heart.  I  rose  to  go  to  bed  and
became  aware  that  blood  was  flowing  from  those  parts
where  I  felt  pain."  ^

'  The  Life  of  Gemma  Qalgani,  p.  39.


4


182  Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.  [part

This  was  the  beginning  of  the  phenomenon,  and  her
biographer  goes  on  to  describe  how  :  "  From  this  day
forward  the  phenomenon  continued  to  repeat  itself  on  the
same  day  every  week,  namely  on  Thursday  evening  about
8  o'clock  and  continued  until  3  o'clock  on  Friday  after-
n'oon.  No  preparation  preceded  it  ;  no  sense  of  pain  or
impression  in  those  parts  of  the  body  affected  by  it  ;
nothing  announced  its  approach  except  the  recollection  of
spirit  that  preceded  the  ecstasy.  Scarcely  had  this  come
as  a  forerunner  than  red  marks  showed  themselves  on
the  backs  and  palms  of  both  hands  ;  and  under  the
epidermis  a  rent  in  the  flesh  was  seen  to  open  by  degrees  ;
this  was  oblong  on  the  backs  of  the  hands  and  irregularly
round  in  the  palms.  After  a  little  the  membrane  burst
and  on  those  innocent  hands  were  seen  marks  of  flesh
wounds.  The  diameter  of  these  in  the  palms  was  about
half  an  inch,  and  on  the  backs  of  the  hands  the  wound
was  about  five-eighths  of  an  inch  long  by  one-eighth
wide.

"  Sometimes  the  laceration  appeared  to  be  only  on  the
surface  ;  at  other  times  it  was  scarcely  perceptible  with
the  naked  eye  ;  but  as  rule  it  was  very  deep  and  seemed
to  pass  through  the  hand — the  openings  on  both  sides
reaching  each  other.  I  say  '  seemed  to  pass,'  because
those  cavities  were  full  of  blood,  partly  flowing  and  partly
congealed,  and  when  the  blood  ceased  to  flow  they  closed
immediately,  so  that  it  was  not  easy  to  sound  them
without  a  probe.  Now  this  instrument  was  never  used  ;
both  because  of  the  reverential  delicacy  inspired  by  the
Ecstatic  in  her  mysterious  state,  and  because  the  violence
of  the  pain  made  her  keep  her  hands  convulsively  closed,
also  because  the  wounds  in  the  palms  of  her  hands
were  covered  by  a  swelling  that  at  first  looked  like
clotted  blood,  whereas  it  was  found  to  be  fleshy,  hard,
and  like  the  head  of  a  nail  raised  and  detached,  and
about  an  inch  in  diameter.  In  her  feet,  besides  the
wounds  being  large,  and  livid  around  the  edges,  their
size  in  an  inverse  sense  differed  from  those  of  her
hands  ;  that  is,  there  was  a  larger  diameter  on  the  instep
and  a  smaller  one  on  the  sole  ; furthermore,  the  wound


liXxxiii.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.  183

in  the  instep  of  the  right  foot  was  as  large  as  that  in
the  sole  of  the  left.  Thus  it  must  certainly  have  been
-with  our  Saviour,  supposing  that  both  His  Sacred  Feet
were  fixed  to  the  Cross  with  only  one  nail.

"  I  have  said  that  the  opening  of  these  wounds  was
•effected  by  degrees,  that  is,  in  five  or  six  minutes,  begin-
ning underneath  the  skin  and  ending  with  the  bursting
asunder.  At  times,  however,  this  was  not  the  case  ;
their  opening  was  then  instantaneous,  and  came  from  the
-exterior  like  a  violent  transfixing.  Then  it  was  agonising
to  see  the  dear  martyr,  thus  stricken  all  of  a  sudden  and
trembling  in  every  fibre  of  her  body."  ^

The  wound  in  the  side,  which  was  never  seen  by  the
director  himself,  but  by  ladies  whom  he  commissioned  to
■examine  it,  was  crescent  shaped.  It  was  about  two
inches  long  and  half  an  inch  wide.  It  did  not  bleed  on
the  Fridays  alone,  but  any  great  emotion  was  liable  to
■start  the  haemorrhage  afresh.  The  quantity  of  blood  lost
was  considerable.  "  Those  who  lived  with  and  assisted
Jier,"  her  biographer  writes,  "  were  ready  to  declare  on
oath  that  from  her  side  alone  came  so  much  blood  that,
if  not  stopped,  it  flowed  down  to  the  ground."  But
perhaps  the  most  remarkable  circumstance  in  the  pheno-
menon was  the  disappearance  of  the  wounds.  "  As  soon
.as  the  ecstasy  of  the  Friday  was  over  the  flow  of  blood
from  all  the  five  wounds  ceased  immediately,  the  raw
flesh  healed,  the  lacerated  tissues  healed  too,  and  the
following  day,  or  at  latest  on  the  Sunday,  not  a  vestige
remained  of  those  deep  cavities,  neither  at  their  centres,
nor  around  their  edges  ;  the  skin  having  grown  quite
Tiniformly  with  that  of  the  uninjured  parts.  In  colour,
however,  there  remained  whitish  marks,  showing  that
■there  had  been  the  wound  of  the  day  before — which  would
"be  opened  again  as  at  first,  in  five  days,  and  closed  in
"the  same  way.

"  At  the  time  of  Gemma's  death,  two  years  after  the
marvel  of  the  stigmata  had  ceased,  the  marks  of  the
w^ounds  still  remained  and  were  then  easily  observable  on
her  body,  particularly  in  her  feet,  which  in  her  lifetime

^Ibid.  pp.  61-62.


184


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


could  only  with  great  difficulty  be  uncovered  during  her
ecstasies."  ^

Besides  the  stigmata,  strictly  so-called,  Gemma  GalganL
was  also  liable  under  the  influence  of  strong  religious  ,
emotion,  e.g.  when  by  chance  she  heard  some  blasphemous,
utterance  in  the  street,  to  experience  a  sweat  of  blood  I
and  to  shed  tears  of  blood.  This  sweat  of  blood,  how-
ever, did  not  occur  in  her  ecstasies  when  the  stigmata,
were  bleeding.  On  the  other  hand,  in  March  1901,  over
and  above  the  ordinary  stigmata,  she  reproduced  also  in
her  body  the  terrible  effects  of  the  scourging.  She  had
at  this  time  been  given  a  home  with  a  family  of  position-
in  Lucca,  that  of  the  Chevalier  Giannini,  who  wished  to
afford  her  protection  from  the  curiosity  of  importunate
visitors.  Gemma's  parents  being  dead,  Signora  Cecilia
Giannini  became  to  her  a  sort  of  adopted  mother.  It  is
she  who  gives  the  following  account  of  Gemma's  condition,
on  March  21st,  1901,  being  the  Friday  before  PassiorL  j
Week,  then  kept  as  a  Feast  of  the  Precious  Blood.

"  Her  state  was  something  indescribable — wounds  every-
where that  must  have  been  nearly  half  an  inch  deep.
But  after  two  or  three  days  they  disappeared  .  .  .  This-
is  how  they  were  disposed  ;  two  on  one  arm  from  two
to  three  inches  long,  and  very  deep  ;  two  on  one  leg,
round  and  about  the  size  of  a  florin  ;  one  near  the  middle
of  her  breast  in  the  direction  of  her  throat  ;  two  very
large  oblong  ones  above  the  knee  "  and  so  on — a  long,
catalogue,  and  the  writer  added  :  "If  you  wish  to  form
some  idea  of  it,  recall  to  mind  the  large  crucifix  that  we
have  in  the  house  before  which  Gemma  was  in  the  habit
of  praying  ;  she  was  like  that.  The  same  livid  marks,
the  same  torii,  open  gashes  in  the  skin  and  flesh,  in  the  same
parts  of  the  body,  equally  long  and  deep  and  equally  horrify-  '
ing  to  behold.  Blood  came  from  her  wounds  in  great
abundance  ;  when  she  was  standing  it  flowed  to  the
ground,  and  when  in  bed  it  not  only  wetted  the  sheets  but
saturated  the  whole  mattress.  I  measured  some  streams
or  pools  of  this  blood,  and  they  were  from  twenty  to-
twenty-five  inches  long  and  about  two  inches  wide."  ^

1  Ihid.  p.  65  •  ^  Ihid.  p.  69.


LXXXUT.]


The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.


185


It  will  be  readily  seen  why  I  emphasise  the  fact  that
the  wounds  in  Gemma's  body  corresponded  in  position
and  size  with  those  of  the  great  crucifix  before  which
she  was  in  the  habit  of  praying.  This  evidence  is  the
more  valuable  because  it  comes  from  a  witness  who  was
persuaded  that  the  whole  phenomenon  was  supernatural,
and  who  never  suspected  that  she  was  supplying  materials
for  quite  another  interpretation.

By  way  of  comparison  with  this  modern  example  some
details  may  be  given  from  the  contemporary  biography
of  the  nun  Lukardis  of  Oberweimar,  who  was  born  about
1276  and  died  in  1309.  The  case  is  conspicuous  for  the
touching  and  poetical  feeling  displayed  and  for  the  Sister's
intense  desire  to  be  marked  by  what  the  mystics  of  that
age  were  wont  to  call  the  Minnezeichen  (tokens  of  love).
Lukardis  had  already  led  a  hfe  of  rigorous  austerity,  and
somewhere  about  the  year  1298  she  seems  to  have  been
possessed  with  this  ardent  longing  for  suffering.  Hence,
says  her  biogxapher,  she  was  heard  in  the  end  according
to  her  desire  :

"  For  she saw in the spirit that she ought to  pass
through  a  certain  door  in  which  she  found  Jesus  Christ
as  it  were  recently  fastened  to  the  cross,  scored  with  the
weals of  the scourges and  most pitifully dripping  with
blood. As  she  looked  intently  upon  Him  the  servant  of
God  fell  at  His  feet  swooning  and  almost  lifeless.  Then
our Lord said to her  : '  Rise up,  my child,  and  help
Me  '  ; by which  she  understood that  she  ought  not  to
be content with merely calling His sufferings to  mind
but that she was meant to helj^ Him by  voluntarily
sharing in his Passion. At Christ's word,  accordingly,
recovering  at  last  something  of  her  strength,  she  answered
tremblingly  : '  How  can  I  help  Thee,  my  Lord  1  '  And
thereupon  raising  her  eyes  she  saw  His  right  arm  loosened
from  the cross and  hanging  feebly  down, by which  it
seemed  to  her  that  the  pain  of  the  suffering  Christ  was
greatly  intensified. So  the  beloved  handmaiden,  drawing
near  in  tender  compassion,  strove  to  tie  up  the  arm  again
to  the  cross  with  a  thread  of  silk, but  she could  not
succeed. Accordingly she began to hft His arm  with


186


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[PAET


her  hands  and  with  deep  groanings  to  hold  it  in  its
place.  Then  our  Lord  said  to  her  :  '  Place  thy  hands
against  My  hands,  and  thy  feet  against  My  feet,  and  thy
breast  against  My  breast,  and  in  such  wise  I  shall  be
so  much  helped  by  thee  that  My  pain  will  be  less.'
And  when  the  servant  of  God  had  done  this,  she  felt
interiorly  the  most  bitter  pain  of  the  wounds  both  in
her  hands  and  in  her  feet  and  in  her  breast,  although
the  wounds  were  not  yet  manifest  to  the  outward  eye.
It  was  after  this  that  she  formed  the  habit  of  knocking
her  hands  together  with  great  force  so  that  the  noise
was  heard  far  and  wide  as  from  the  collision  of  two
planks."

This  is  all  so  curious  that  I  feel  I  shall  be  excused
for  quoting  still  farther.  Nothing  could  more  signi-
ficantly illustrate  the  intensity  of  the  mental  influences
which  were  at  work,  and  which  were  at  the  same  time
using  physical  expedients  to  produce  the  desired  result.

"  Also  with  regard  to  the  hammering  in  of  the  nails
of  Christ's  cross,  as  she  carried  the  memory  of  them
inwardly  in  her  heart,  so  she  represented  it  outwardly  in
action.  For  again  and  again,  with  her  middle  finger,
she  would  strike  violently  the  place  of  the  wounds  in
each  palm  ;  and  then  at  once  drawing  back  her  hand  a
couple  of  feet  (ad  distantiam  unius  cubiti)  she  delivered
another  fierce  blow  in  the  same  spot,  the  tip  of  her
finger  seeming  somehow  to  be  pointed  like  a  nail.  Indeed
though  it  appeared  a  finger  to  sight  and  touch,  neither
flesh  nor  bone  could  be  felt  in  it  and  those  who  had  handled
it  declared  that  it  had  the  hardness  of  a  piece  of  metal.
When  she  struck  herself  in  that  way  there  was  a  sound
(tinniebat)  like  the  ring  of  a  hammer  falling  on  the  head
of  a  nail  or  on  an  anvil.  On  one  occasion  a  person  in
authority,  thinking  this  kind  of  blow  was  a  sham  or  a
mere  trick,  in  order  to  find  out  the  truth,  put  his  hand
in  the  way.  But  when  she  had  struck  but  once  he
liastily  drew  back  his  hand,  declaring  that  if  he  had
waited  for  a  second  blow  he  would  have  lost  the  use  of
it  for  ever.  With  the  same  finger,  at  the  hour  of  sext
and  again  at  none,  the  servant  of  God  used  to  strike


Lxxxni.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.  187

herself  violently  on  the  breast  where  the  wound  came.
The  noise  that  she  made  was  so  great  that  it  echoed
through  the  whole  convent,  and  so  exactly  did  she  keep
to  the  hour  of  sext  and  none  in  this  practice  that  the  nuns
found  the  sound  more  trustworthy  than  the  clock.  .  .  .

"  Furthermore,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  servant  of
God,  before  the  stigmata  appeared,  endeavoured,  out  of
her  great  longing,  to  open  the  places  of  the  wounds  in
her  feet  by  boring  them,  as  it  were,  with  her  big  toe
{sua  majori  pedica  quasi  fodiendo)."

No  doubt  all  this  sounds  very  extravagant,  and  we
may  suspect  the  writer  of  a  good  deal  of  exaggeration,
but  the  account  abounds  with  psychological  touches  which
are  borne  out  by  what  we  know  of  other  similar  ecstatics.
Moreover,  it  is  plain  that  the  last  thing  the  biographer
dreamed  of  was  to  cast  any  doubt  upon  the  supernatural
character  of  her  mystical  experiences.  He  tells  us  quite
plainly  that  these  practices  had  been  persisted  in  for
two  years  before  the  stigmata  showed  themselves,  but  he,
nevertheless,  narrates  how  the.  wounds  eventually  developed
as  the  result  of  a  nocturnal  vision.  A  most  beautiful
and  delicate  youth,  who  was  himself  marked  with  the
stigmata,  appeared  to  her  and  pressed  her  right  hand
against  his  right  hand,  saying  :  "I  wish  thee  to  suffer
along  with  me."  To  this  she  gave  consent,  and  on  the
instant  in  her  own  right  hand  a  wound  was  formed.
About  ten  days  later  the  left  hand  was  similarly  marked,
and  in  course  of  time  the  feet  and  the  side.  We  are
further  told  that  Lukardis,  "  fearful  of  vain  glory  and
the  adulation  of  men,"  hid  the  wounds  by  wearing  some-
thing in  the  nature  of  gloves,  but  that  afterwards  she
was  supernaturally  admonished  to  allow  the  marks  to  be
seen  "  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  devotion  of  the
faithful."  The  wounds,  as  in  the  case  of  many  other
stigmatics,  bled  regularly  on  Fridays,  but  not  seemingly
on  other  days.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  earhest
example  in  which  we  have  definite  mention  of  periodic
bleeding.  1

^  See  the  Life  of  Lukardis  in  the  Analecta  Bollandiana,  vol.  xviii.
pp.  314-317,  and  cf.  pp.  322,  328,  353.


188


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J .


[part


One  other  illustration  may  be  given  from  a  case  which
was  going  on  in  England  until  quite  recently.  The
following  brief  extracts  are  taken  from  certain  notes
which  have  been  regularly  kept  from  week  to  week  by
the  girl's  confessor.  She  is  not  a  nun,  but  a  simple,
good  girl  in  humble  life,  and,  except  for  her  own  parents
and  her  own  person,  the  phenomenon,  I  understand,  has  been
kept  secret  from  all  others  in  the  place  where  she  lives.
At  the  same  time  I  am  satisfied  of  the  accuracy  and
good  faith  of  the  record  which  I  quote  :

May  5th,  1916.  On  the  morning  of  this  day,  Jesus  Christ
(as  she  believed)  came  to  her  after  Holy  Communion,  and
said  :  "  Prepare  yourself,  my  little  child,  for  to-day  I  come  to
crucify  you.  You  shall  not  receive  the  wounds — that  cannot
be  at  present  ;  but  take  courage,  I  await  you  on  Calvary,
and  there  you  shall  have  aU  the  pains  your  Jesus  suffered
on  the  cross."

That  evening  she  was  crucified,  but  there  were  no  external
bleedings.  Ecstasy  accompanied  the  suffering,  which  was  very
great.  The  slightest  touch  upon  the  palms  or  back  of  the
hands  caused  her  to  wince,  though  otherwise  the  alienation  of
the  senses  was  complete  .  .  .

April  6th,  1917  (Good  Friday).  On  this  occasion,  bleeding
in  the  hands  and  feet  took  place,  but  so  alarmed  was  she  on
adverting  to  what  had  happened  that  she  begged  our  Lord
to  take  all  external  marks  away,  and  He  did  so.

June  29th,  1917  (Friday).  Stigmata — on  the  palms  were
two  great  red  patches  (the  backs  were  normal)  from  which
blood  had  flowed  in  fair  abundance — sufficient  to  form  a
patch  upon  the  floor  of  her  room  (whereon  she  lay  in
ecstasy)  about  the  size  of  a  florin.  On  the  soles  of  her  feet
too  (red  on  the  upper  parts)  were  marks  of  blood,  similar  to
the  j^atches  on  the  palms  of  the  hands.

July  13th,  1917  (Friday.)  Stigmata.  On  this  occasion  there
were  two  large  spots  on  the  ]3alm  and  the  back  of  the  hands
— about  the  size  of  half-a-crown  on  the  backs,  larger  on  the
palms. The  feet  bore  similar  marks  on  both  sole  and  instep.

A7ig.  10th,  1917.  The  wounds  in  the  hands  and  feet  were
as  usual,  but  this  time  more  ]:)ronounced,  suggesting  the  idea


xxxxin.]


The  Phenomena  of  Stigmafization.


189


of  having  been  caused  by  nails,  though  the  skin  was  not
broken.  The  blood  had  oozed  through  the  pores  in  such  a
way  as  to  form  a  ring — miniature  crater — in  the  centre  and
had  spread  thence  over  a  surface  quite  the  size  of  half  a
cro^^'n.  [The  confessor  added  in  a  note  :  '  I  have  only  once
seen  the  skin  broken,  I  have  seen  it  tender  often.']

Nov.  23rd.  1917.  Crucifixion.  On  this  occasion  she  went
through  the  different  scenes  of  the  Sacred  Passion,  personating
(so  to  speak)  our  Blessed  Lord,  suffering,  as  He  suffered,
blows,  wounds,  etc.  She  suffered  also  the  lance-thrust,  and
bled  copiously  at  the  side  .  .  .

March  29th,  1918.  Good  Friday.  Stigmata  more  pro-
nounced than  ever  before.  At  mid-day  she  had  her  hands
raised  over  her  head,  in  them  two  great  wounds  which  had
bled,  the  flow  of  blood  having  been  very  copious.  Her
fingers  were  contracted — the  arms  were  stiff  and  hard  ;  her
legs  were  drawn  up,  one  foot  over  the  other,  and  in  them
also  were  two  wounds.  On  her  face  was  a  look  of  greatest
agony.  While  I  was  present  she  came  out  of  ecstasy  for  a
while  and  tried  to  put  out  her  hand  to  me.  She  could  not.
It  was  as  if  nailed  there.  She  had  been  like  that  since
about  11.30  or  so.  I  left  her  about  12.45  and  saw  her  again
shortly  after  2.  She  was  still  in  the  same  position  and  once
more  in  ecstasy  .  .  .  Shortly  after  3  one  arm  came  down
to  her  side — then  the  other — her  body  relaxed  and  she  came
to  herseK.  On  this  occasion  she  suffered  the  wound  in  the
side  and  bled  there.  ^

The  first  question  which  is  naturally  suggested  by  these
descriptions,  and  by  a  multitude  of  other  similar  cases
which  might  be  quoted,  is  "  Are  the  facts  reliable  ?  "
"  Can  we  be  assured  that  the  writers  are  not  romancing
or  exaggerating  ?  "'

I  venture  to  think  that  any  investigator  who  will
study  the  evidence  carefully  and  compare  case  with  case  will
in  the  end  have  his  suspicions  allayed — at  any  rate,  so  far
as  regards  the  phenomenon  of  the  bleeding.  Undoubtedly
there  have  been  impostors.  It  would  be  easy  to  quote
details  of  several  cases  if  there  were  any  object  in  doing

'  I  have  since  learned  that  these  manifestations  have  now  entirely
ceased.  ...


190  Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.  [part

so.  It  also  occasionally  happens  that  fraud  seems  to  be
indicated  even  when  the  phenomena  are  genuine.  Gemma
Galgani,  partly,  I  think,  from  an  exaggerated  sense  of
modesty — when  quite  a  child  she  would  not  allow  her
own  father  to  kiss  her — had  a  horror  of  being  examined
by  doctors.  She  told  her  first  confessor,  Mgr.  Volpi,
that  if  he  sent  a  doctor  to  examine  her,  the  doctor
would  see  nothing.  The  confessor  persisted,  and  the
doctor  came  one  Friday  when  Gemma  was  in  ecstasy
and  the  stigmata  were  already  bleeding.  "  The  doctor  took
a  towel,  dipped  it  in  water,  and  wiped  Gemma's  hands
and  forehead.  The  blood  immediately  disappeared  and
the  skin  showed  no  signs  of  cicatrix,  scratch  or  puncture^
as  if  there  had  never  been  any  laceration."  ^

For  a  while  the  gravest  suspicion  of  fraud  naturally
rested  on  the  whole  of  these  manifestations  ;  but  the
stigmata  still  continued  to  appear  and  bleed  on  Fridays.
In  fact,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  involve  the  biographer
himself,  reputed  a  most  saintly  man,  together  with  a
group  of  ecclesiastics  including  two  archbishops,  as  also
the  highly  respectable  Giannini  family,  with  a  number  of
other  persons,  amongst  whom  Cardinal  Gasquet,  in  a
bonspiracy  of  imposture,  I  do  not  see  how  we  can
set  aside  the  evidence.  In  the  presence  of  such  an
account  as  that  given  by  the  Archbishop  of  Camerino,  it
seems  to  me  that  there  is  no  middle  term  between  either
accepting  the  story  as  substantially  accurate  or  accusing
the  writer  of  deliberate  falsehood. ^

So  again  in  the  case  of  Padre  Pio  of  Foggia  we  have
the  suspicious  circumstance  that  Dr.  A.  Bignami,  Professor

^  Life  of  Gemma  Galgani,  p.  85.  It  should  be  noticed,  see  above,
p.  4,  that  the  Director  himself  says  that  though  more  commonly  the
laceration  was  very  deep,  on  some  occasions  it  was  scarcely  perceptible
to  the  naked  eye  {Gemma  Galgani,  p.  62).

^  Life,  pp.  89-90:  '"I  went  to  her  room  with  Don  Lorenzo  Agrimonti
and  beheld  her  in  ecstasy.  I  remained  in  the  room  for  more  than
two  hours  and  a  half,  being  determined  not  to  leave  until  I  had  seen
at  least  the  flow  of  blood  with  my  own  eyes.  .  .  .  After  an  hour
she  began  to  shed  blood  from  her  head  in  such  abundance  that  the
pillows  and  sheets  were  soaked  with  it.""  So  wrote  Father  Peter  Paul,
afterwards  Archbishop  of  Camerius,  in  1901,  shortly  after  the  incident.


i-xxxiii.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization .  191

of  General  Pathology  in  the  University  of  Rome,  found
the  scars  in  his  hands  and  feet  stained  with  iodine.
Padre  Pio,  however,  who,  as  one  learns  from  every  side,
is  the  most  humble  and  simple  of  men,  shrinking  from
the  notice  and  veneration  which  the  wounds  in  his  hands
and  feet  have  brought  him,  had  enquired  of  a  brother
Capuchin  what  a  person  could  do  to  stop  the  exudation
of  blood  from  a  wound,  and  was  told  to  use  iodine.
So  far  from  making  any  display  of  the  stigmata,  it  is
with  the  greatest  possible  difficulty  that  the  devout
pilgrims  who  travel  to  Foggia  can  find  any  means  of
gratifying  their  curiosity.  The  marks  can  ordinarily  be  seen
only  by  stealth  or  subterfuge.  Professor  Bignami,  who  writes
as  an  agnostic,  rejects  the  hypothesis  of  conscious  fraud,
believing  it  incompatible  with  the  impression  of  sincerity
which  results  from  any  personal  intercourse  with  Padre
Pio.  He  describes  the  marks  as  due  to  neurotic  necrosis
of  the  skin,  but  is  puzzled  by  their  symmetrical  arrange-
ment, thinking,  however,  that  this  may  be  due  to  a
phenomenon  of  auto-suggestion.  The  stigmata  were  not
bleeding  on  the  day  he  paid  his  visit.  The  interest  of
Padre  Pio's  case  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  seems  to  be  the
only  well  attested  example  of  complete  stigmatization  in
a  male  subject  since  the  time  of  St.  Francis.  But  it
must  be  admitted  that  even  in  this  instance  the  lesions
are  apparently  confined  to  the  epidermis,  and  though
clearly  marked,  are  of  a  very  slight  character.  Wlien
Dr.  George  Festa,  a  distinguished  Catholic  doctor  of
Rome,  saw  him  four  months  later  (November,  1919)  and
subjected  him  to  a  thorough  medical  examination,  he
found  that  there  was  a  considerable  and  continuous
discharge  of  sanguino -serous  fluid  from  the  wound  in  the
breast.  Though  the  use  of  the  iodine  had  been  discon-
tinued, the  lesions  were  still  there  and  even  more  clearly
marked  than  at  the  visit  of  Professor  Bignami. ^

*  I  have  also  had  accounts  of  the  case  from  two  eye-witnesses.  One
of  these,  Mgr.  Kenealy,  Archbishop  of  Simla,  visited  Foggia  in  the
svunmer  of  1920.  Being  himself  a  Capuchin  and  a  prelate,  he  was
able  to  exercise  a  certain  authority  over  the  young  Father  (he  is  now
thirty-four  years  of  age),  but  Padre  Pio,  after  allowing  his  hands  to


192


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J .


[part


But  we  have  not,  of  course,  to  depend  for  our  evidence
of  the  reahty  of  this  phenomenon  of  stigmatization  upon
the  reports  of  cases  occurring  at  the  present  day.  Far
more  remarkable  examples  have  been  recorded  in  past
ages.  In  the  canonization  of  Santa  Maria  Francesca
delle  Cinque  Piaghe  her  confessor.  Padre  Nitti,  deposed
on  oath  that  he  had  seen  her  stigmata  many  times
{moltissime  volte)  during  Lent,  and  that  the  perforation
of  her  hands  was  such  that  he  had  made  his  index  finger
and  his  thumb  meet  through  the  hole.  Saint  Veronica
Giuliani  was  subjected  to  an  official  examination  by  her
bishop,  Mgr.  Eustachi,  and  the  functionaries  of  the
Inquisition.  The  phenomena  which  she  exhibited  in
response  to  the  tests  imposed  by  Father  Crivelli  were  of
a  nature  highly  suggestive  of  hypnotic  ,  influence.  For
example,  the  stigmata  seemed  always  to  open  and  bleed
at  his  command.  Then,  in  the  presence  of  himself  and
the  Bishop,  the  wounds  closed  and  reunited  while  they
ivaited.  "  The  wound,"  says  the  biographer,  following  the
sworn  statements  made  in  the  process,  "  was  completely
healed  and  covered  with  natural  skin  like  the  rest  ;  the
only  thing  which  was  left  to  mark  the  spot  being  a  very
slight  discolouration."  ^

be  examined,  begged  so  piteously  to  be  excused  from  any  further
inquisition,  that  the  Archbishop  felt  he  could  not  insist  ;  still  his  testi-
mony as  to  the  reality  of  the  wound-marks  in  the  hands,  which  are
always  hidden  from  view  by  mittens,  is  positive.  My  other  informant,
a  lady,  who  was  able  to  obtain  a  momentary  view  of  the  palms  of
the  hands  during  Padre  Pio's  Mass,  paid  her  visit  to  Foggia  during
the  April  of  this  year,  1921.  I  am  further  indebted  to  the  kindness
of  the  Archbishop  of  Simla  for  copies  of  the  two  medical  reports  referred
to  above.  All  the  witnesses  agree  that  the  marks  appeal  V>oth  in
the  palm  and  back  of  the  hands,  that  they  are  circular  and  a  little
more  than  two  centimetres  in  diameter — "  about  the  size  of  half-a-
crown. "  They  are  reddish -brown  in  colour  and  sharply  marked  ofl
from  the  surroimding  skin  which  is  perfectly  normal  and  without  any
sign  of  inflammation.  A  dark-looking  scab  covers  the  wounds  which
detaches  itself  piecemeal  from  time  to  time.  Exactly  similar  lesions
appear  in  the  instep  and  sole  of  each  foot.  The  wound  in  the  breast
is  cruciform,  and  on  the  left  side.  The  bleeding  is  not  periodic,  but
there  seems  to  be  a  continuous  exudation  of  sanguino-serous  fluid
from  all  the  woimds  especially  from  the  breast.

'  Salvatori,  Life  of  S.  Veronica  Giuliani  (Oratorian  Trans.),  p.  161.


ZLXXxni.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization .


193


Again,  in  the  first  years  of  the  sixteenth  century,  at
the  instance  of  Duke  Hercules  d'Este  of  Ferrara,  a  strict
investigation  was  made  of  the  case  of  Saint  Lucia  di
Narni.  Her  hands,  on  the  Thursday,  were  enveloped  in
gloves  and  sealed  up  in  such  a  way  that  she  could  not
chafe  or  puncture  the  surface.  Nevertheless,  when  the
seals,  which  remained  intact,  were  broken  on  the  Friday
afternoon,  and  the  gloves  were  removed,  her  hands  were
found  to  have  bled  as  usual.^

The  same  glove  experiment  was  tried  with  Louise
Lateau,  but  Dr.  Warlomont,  being  dissatisfied  with  the
test,  as  he  thought  that  friction  might  still  be  employed
through  the  glove,  had  an  apparatus  constructed  in  the
nature  of  a  glass  cylinder.  In  this  Louise's  arm  was
sealed  up,  it  being  absolutely  impossible  for  her  in  any
way  to  get  at  the  hand  so  imprisoned.  There  was  no
sign  of  bleeding  when  the  hand  was  inserted  on  Thursday,
21st  January,  1875,  but  on  the  Friday  when  the  apparatus
was  examined  in  the  presence  of  medical  witnesses,  some
of  them  anti-clericals  and  up  to  that  time  quite  sceptical,
the  hand  was  found  to  have  bled.^  The  Belgian
Academy  of  Medicine  in  consequence  passed  a  resolutiou
affirming  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon,  though  several
of  the  members  still  rejected  any  supernatural  interpretation.

But  perhaps  one  of  the  most  satisfactory  cases  I  have
<!ome  across  from  an  evidential  point  of  view  is  that  of
Blessed  Diomira  Allegri,  a  young  nun  at  Florence,  twenty-
six  years  of  age.  In  1677  she  had  a  very  serious  illness
from  which,  in  fact,  she  never  properly  recovered.  She
was  so  ill  that  two  nuns  sat  up  with  her  after  she  had
lain  in  a  sort  of  swoon  for  twenty -four  hours.  During
the  night — it  was  the  early  morning  of  Ash  Wednesday,
March  3rd, 1677 — a  change  came over  her. She  thrust

1  Duke  Hercules  makes  himself  guarantee  for  the  whole  in  a  letter
printed  in  a  contemporarj'  brochure  Spiritualium  Persona  rum  Facta
admiratione  digna,  of  which  there  is  more  than  one  copy  in  the  British
Mu.seum.  Cf.  Dr.  Edmund  Gardner's  Dukes  and  Poets  in  Ferrara,
pp.  366-381.

^Warlomont, Louise Lateau — Rapport Medical, Bruxelles, 187.5,  [ip.
39-45.


194


Rev.  Herhert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


out  her  right  hand,  crying  "  fermate,  fermate,"  then  her
left,  so  that  she  lay  with  both  arms  at  right  angles  to
her  body,  the  fingers,  with  a  sort  of  convulsive  movement,
being  bent  back  to  the  palms.  Between  the  fingers  they
saw  a  trickle  of  blood,  and  the  two  watchers  thought  the
gesture  so  extraordinary  that  one  of  them  went  to  rouse
two  other  nv^ns  who  slept  close  by.  Meanwhile  she
pulled  up  one  leg,  then  the  other,  into  the  attitude  of
the  figure  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  Finally,  seeming  to
be  suffering  great  anguish  in  the  side,  she  brought  back
one  hand  for  a  moment  to  lift  the  clothes  off  it,  saying,
"  non  piu,  non  piu,  Gesu  mio."  Then  she  lay  still,,
almost  like  one  dead,  for  three  hours,  but  after  that  she
seemed  to  revive,  looked  at  her  hands,  saw  them  bleeding
and  hastily  hid  them  under  the  clothes.  The  confessor
was  fetched  to  bring  her  communion,  and  he  ordered  her
under  obedience  to  allow  one  of  the  sisters  to  examine
her,  he  himself  having  seen  the  blood  and  the  swelling
in  her  hands.  There  were  marks  on  the  hands,  both
palm  and  back,  with  a  trickle  of  blood.  The  feet  were
not  bleeding,  but  there  were  round  bhsters  both  on  instep
and  sole,  filled  with  blood.  On  the  side  also  was  a  large
oval  swelling,  very  inflamed.

Now  these  witnesses,  namely  the  two  watchers,  the
others  who  were  summoned,  the  confessor  and  the  doctor,
who  was  sent  for  later,  all  gave  evidence  on  oath  regard-
ing these  facts  in  the  process  of  canonization.  Some
weeks  later,  on  Good  Friday,  the  feet  also  opened  and
bled,  and  a  little  later  still  the  side  as  well.  Diomira
died  in  the  December  of  the  same  year.  She  had  never
had  any  similar  wounds  before  that  night  when  the
watchers  beside  her  saw  her  arms  stretched  out.'^

We  seem  justified,  therefore,  in  admitting  the  reality
of  these  manifestations,  though  hardly  any  two  examples
are  exactly  alike.  But  amid  a  very  great  diversity  in
the  character  of  the  wounds,  the  order  of  development,
the  periodicity  of  the  bleeding  and  so  on,  there  are
certain  features  found  in  nearly  all  the  cases  known  to

1  The  facts  <are  all  detailed  in  the  process  of  canonization,  Sonimario,
pp.  175-202,  Rome.  1730.


Lxxxiii.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.


195


us  in  any  detail.  First  the  medical  antecedents  of  the
mystic  are  bad,  whether  apart  from  or  in  consequence  of
the  austerities  she  has  practised.  When  there  are  not
strongly  marked  symptoms  of  hystero-epilepsy,  there  are
generally  those  of  tuberculosis  or  of  a  scrofulous  diathesis.
Secondly,  there  has  usually  been  a  vivid  realization  of
and  concentration  upon  the  wounds  of  the  Passion  for
some  time  before  any  bleeding  stigmata  have  shown
themselves.  In  quite  the  majority  of  cases  intense  pain
has  been  felt  for  months,  sometimes  for  years,  in  the
places  where  the  wounds  subsequently  opened.  Thirdly,
the  character  and  position  of  the  wounds  is  very  various
(for  example,  some  have  the  wound  in  the  breast  on
the  right  side,  some  on  the  left  ;  in  some  cases  the
orifice  is  straight,  in  some  it  is  triangular,  in  some  it
is  cruciform,  in  a  few  it  is  crescent  shaped,  in  a  few
others  there  is  more  than  one  wound),  but  so  far  as
we  can  trace  the  previous  conceptions  of  the  sxibject —
which,  unfortunately,  is  rarely  possible — the  development
of  the  stigmata  follows  their  previous  conceptions.

Equally  striking  as  a  concomitant  of  the  development
of  the  stigmata,  wherever  we  have  the  opportunity  of
studying  the  subject's  frame  of  mind,  is  the  intensity  of
the  mental  impression.  One  would  think  that  if  any
imagination  could  produce  a  powerful  physical  effect  upon
the  body  it  would  be  such  as  is  revealed  to  us  in  some
of  these  stigmatics.  We  have  already  noted  the  case  of
Lukardis.  But  there  are  many  others,  in  whom  the
desire  of  sharing  in  the  suiferings  of  the  Passion  by
enduring  the  pain  of  the  wounds  was  very  strongly
marked.  How  deep  those  feelings  were  in  those  mystics
who,  in  a  state  of  ecstasy  or  trance,  enacted  all  the
scenes  of  the  Passion  ^  may  be  judged  from  a  curiously
well  authenticated  Relazione  formerly  in  the  library  of  the
Grand  Duke  of  Parma  :

In  February,  1497,  a  number  of  gentlemen,  twenty-one
in all,  assembled to witness the ecstasy of a  certain

^  At  least  a  score  of  them  could  be  named,  begimiing  with  Elizabeth  of
Herkenrode  in  the  thirteenth  century.  One  of  the  most  remarkable
•examples  was  Margaret  Parisot  in  the  seventeenth  century.


196


Rev.  Herhert  Thurston,  S.J.


[PART'


Stefana  Quinzani  who,  it  seems,  was  rapt  out  of  herself
in  this  way  every  Friday  morning.  At  dawn  they  beheld
her  completely  identified  with  our  Lord  in  the  scene  of
the  scourging.  She  stood  entranced,  her  hands  above
her  head,  boimd  with  invisible  cords  to  an  invisible
pillar.  The  hands  and  feet  never  moved,  but  the  body
writhed  in  anguish.  Several  of  the  company  used  all
their  strength  to  shift  the  position  of  the  arms,  but  they
could  not  succeed.  They  could  not  so  much  as  bend  a
finger.  She  stood  like  this  enduring  in  imagination  the
scourging  for  an  hour.  Her  cries  and  moans  were  piteous
beyond  description .

Leaving  out  much  detail,  it  is  desirable  to  note  that
in  the  scene  of  the  crowning  with  thorns,  as  it  presented
itself  to  her  in  the  trance,  we  are  told  that  no  pen  or
human  tongue  could  convey  an  idea  of  the  torments,,
sweats  and  spasms,  she  experienced.  During  the  qviarter
of  an  hour  this  lasted,  she  was  bathed  in  perspiration  from
head  to  foot.  Then  for  a  space  she  stood  motionless  in
ecstasy,  and  during  that  interval,  if  anyone  touched,,
however  lightly,  with  a  thread  {filo)  or  any  other  tiny
thing  (and  it  was  an  experiment  which  many  tried)  there
was  a  return  of  all  the  pains  and  cries  and  lamentations
for  the  anguish  caused  by  the  thorny  crown.  Then  she
seems  to  have  thrown  herself  on  the  ground.  "  The
right  arm,"  we  are  told,  "  is  extended  as  if  the  hand
were  being  really  and  immovably  nailed  and  at  once
the  muscles  (nervi)  are  seen  stretched  and  tense,  the
veins  swell  and  the  hand  grows  black,  and  just  as
if  it  were  indeed  being  fastened  with  a  material  nail
she  utters  a  terrible  shriek  (grido)  followed  by  piteous
moaning.  Then  the  left  arm  is  extended  in  a  simi-
lar manner  to  the  right,  but  stretched  considerably
beyond  its  natural  length  {assai  sopra  la  hingagine  siia
natumle)."

After  this  we  have  an  account  of  the  nailing  of  the
feet  ;  the  whole  body  is  drawn  vxp  except  the  hands,,
which  remain  absolutely  motionless,  "  just  as  if  they  had
been  securely  fastened  to  a  piece  of  timber  with  nails  of
iron." And  here  there  appears  a  red  spot  on  the  foot


Lxxxiii.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.  197


about  the  size  of  a  marcello.^  She  lay  thus  for  some
time,  but  we  have  an  indication  of  the  drinking  from  a
sponge,  and  after  that  the  whole  body  is  convulsed  as
though  it  were  pierced  with  the  lance.

What  constitutes  the  exceptional  interest  of  this  docu-
ment is  that  it  is  signed  by  twenty-one  witnesses,  all  of
them  evidently  men  of  position,  who  appended  their  seals.
Amongst  them  was  a  high  official  of  the  Inquisition,  who
was  also  concerned  in  investigating  the  stigmata  of  Saint
Lucia  di  Narni.  Moreover,  they  were  not  content  with
simply  writing  their  names,  but  each  added  a  few  words
of  comment.  Bonafinus,  Archdeacon  of  Vicenza,  for
example,  says  that  he  endorses  everything  in  the  state-
ment, and  had  seen  it  all  mth  his  own  eyes,  but  that  he
had  not  noticed  any  red  patch  on  the  foot.  Carohis
Benzoni,  doctor  of  both  civil  and  canon  law,  also  failed
to  observe  the  red  patch  on  the  foot.  Another  doctor
utrivsque  juris  saw  no  redness,  but  he  did  think  the
invisibly  tied  hands  seemed  blacker  on  accovmt  of  their
swollen  condition.  Battista  di  Piacenza  declared  that  he
used  his  utmost  strength  in  the  attempt  to  move  her
arm,  and  had  failed ;  further,  he  had  very  specially
noted  the  redness  on  the  foot.  James  Figato  had  tried
in  vain  to  bend  her  fingers,  but  saw  no  redness.  How-
ever, a  note  is  here  added  by  himself  later,  to  the  effect
that  on  Good  Friday  he  was  present  again  and  had  a
better  view,  and  "  in  particular,"  he  says,  "  I  saw  that
reddening  of  the  feet  which  I  had  not  noticed  in  February. ^  "

Clearly  all  this  points  to  the  intense  influence  which
an  absorbing  preoccupation  in  the  Passion  of  Christ  is
capable  of  exercising,  particularly  m  the  entranced  subject.
We  do  not  here  find  any  actual  effusion  of  blood,  but

1  The  editor  of  the  document  says  that  a  marcello  was  a  Venetian
half  lira  which  was  coined  for  the  first  time  by  the  Doge  Niccol6
Marcello  in  1473. Hence  its  name.

2  Gompendio  della  Vita  della  B.  Stefana  Quinzani,  Parma,  1784,  pp.  55-
68.  One  may  readilj'  admit  that  similar  phenomena  are  not  at  all
uncommon  in  epileptic  or  cataleptic  patients  and  also  in  the  hypnotic
trance.  But  the  apparent  elongation  of  the  arms  seems  to  be  a  new
feature  and  the  "  immobility  "  spoken  of  suggests  something  more
than  mere  rigidity.


198


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


there  was  the  red  patch  in  the  foot  which  apparently
became  more  pronounced  on  some  occasions  than  on
others.  Those  who  insist  upon  the  supernatural  character
of  the  stigmata  lay  great  stress  upon  the  difficulty —
some  say  the  impossibility — of  the  blood  exuding  through
the  skin  as  long  as  the  epidermis  remains  intact.  There
may  be  congestion  of  the  veins  and  capillaries  owing  to
a  relaxation  of  the  control  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves — this
is  a  phenomenon,  of  course,  which  is  illustrated  every
time  a  young  person  blushes — but  it  seems  to  be  denied
by  certain  physiologists  that  any  forcing  of  the  blood
through  the  skin  can  ever  take  place  without  actual
disease.  An  author  I  have  consulted  puts  it  this  way  :
"  There  is  not  a  single  example  of  an  internal  lesion
which  can  be  attributed  to  suggestion  alone  ;  now,  with-
out lesion  there  can  be  no  haemorrhage,  since  haemorrhage
cannot  take  place  if  the  epidermis  or  the  epithelium  is
healthy,  for  the  very  sufficient  reason  that  both  epidermis
and  epithelium  are  entirely  destitute  of  blood  vessels."

I  have  not  the  medical  knowledge  which  would  justify  me
in  forming  any  opinion  on  the  point.  But  this  I  can  attest  :
that  there  are  a  number  of  cases  on  record  of  incipient
stigmatization,  which  cause  congestion  of  the  vessels  in
hands,  feet,  side,  forehead,  etc.,  but  which  seem  to  stop
short  of  the  actual  effusion  of  blood.  As  in  the  Sal-
petriere  cases  of  dermographisme,  the  congested  or  possibly
extravasated  blood  produces  an  intense  reddening,  or  even
blackening  of  the  skin  in  the  affected  parts,  but  there  is
often  no  haemorrhage.  A  curious  example,  that  of
Blessed  Magdalen  de  Panateriis (1503),  is  thus  described.
We  are  told  that  on  Good  Friday  "  she  so  completely
shared  Christ's  torments  that  they  were  represented
outwardly  in  her  body,  not  only  by  action  and  gesture,
but  by  the  flow  of  her  blood.  At  the  time  of  Christ's
bloody  sweat  the  blood  showed  between  the  flesh  and  the
skin  {pellem  inter  et  carnem)  on  her  forehead  ;  at  the  time
of  the  scourging,  on  her  arms  and  shoulders  ;  at  the
crowning  with  thorns,  on  the  head  ;  and  finally  at  the
nailing  to  the  cross,  in  her  hands  and  feet. Further,  dur-

^  Acta  Sanctorum,  Auctarium  Octobris,  p.  174.


Lxxxiii.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.  199

ing  the  crowning,  the  blood  was  seen  to  stream  down
her  face  and  to  bedew  the  other  members  of  her  body
{videbatiir  sanguis  in  rivi  modum  faciem  aliaque  corporis
membra  copiosius  irrigarej."  ^  This  clearly  implies  that
the  blood  did  exude  copiously  from  the  brow  while  she
was  picturing  to  herself  the  crowning  with  thorns,  but
apparently  it  was  unable  at  other  times  to  get  through
the  epidermis.  If  the  statements  made  are  accurate,
they  would  thus  almost  seem  to  imply,  first  that  the
delicate  epidermis  of  the  forehead  was  more  permeabl
than  that  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  secondly  that  the
intense  local  concentration  involved  in  the  thought  of
crowning  produced  actual  haemorrhage  in  that  part,
though  the  idea  of  the  sweat  of  blood,  being  more  diffused,
did  not.

In  the  case  of  Louise  Lateau  we  know  from  a  multitude
of  descriptions  by  medical  observers  that  when  the  forehead
bled  there  was  no  apparent  lesion  of  the  skin.  The  blood
percolated  through,  stood  there  in  beads  and  then  the
drops  began  to  run  together  and  trickle  down  the  face.
This  moisture,  as  it  showed  in  any  quantity,  was  con-
stantly wiped  off  by  the  bystanders,  but  almost
immediately  it  exuded  again.  Even  a  strong  lens
revealed  no  proper  laceration  of  the  epidermis,  the  blood
apparently  forced  its  way  out  through  the  sweat  ducts. ^
The  curious  inequality  between  the  sexes  in  this  matter
of  stigmatization  suggests  the  question  whether  the
feminine  epidermis  may  be  more  readily  permeable  than
the  masculine  ;  though  it  should  perhaps  be  remembered,
on  the  other  hand,  that  haemophilia  seems  to  be  an
exclusively  masculine  disorder.  Further,  there  is  no
adequate  ground  for  explaining  the  haemorrhage  of  the
stigmata,  in  spite  of  its  frequently  periodic  character,  as

^  Acta  Sanctorum,  Auctarium  Octobris,  p.  174.

2  Dr.  Lefebvre  says  :  "  When  the  bleeding  points  are  examined  with
a  lens  the  blood  is  seen  to  filter  through  minute  abrasions  of  the
epidermis.  Most  of  these  are  triangular  in  shape,  like  the  bite,  one
would  say,  of  a  leech,  but  a  leech  of  an  almost  microscopic  kind,  for
these  abrasions  are  scarcely  visible  to  the  naked  eye."  Louise  Laieau —
a  Medical  Study,  Engl.  Ed.  p.  21.

()


200


Rev  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


belonging  to  the  class  of  vicarious  secretions.  We  know
definitely  that  in  a  certain  number  of  stigmatisees,  for
example  in  Louise  Lateaia,  the  ordinary  processes  of
nature  were  not  interfered  with.  It  has  also  been  alleged
that  the  bleeding  of  stigmata  has  begun  or  at  any  rate
been  continued  after  the  age  of  fifty,  but  I  must  confess
that  I  do  not  know  any  instance  in  which  this  has  been
established  upon  satisfactory  evidence.

On  a  review  of  the  facts  as  a  whole,  so  far  as  we  have
been  able  to  consider  them  in  this  necessarily  very  rapid
survey,  it  may  be  admitted  that  although  the  phenomena
of  stigmatization  do  seem  to  postulate  an  astoundingly
wide  range  for  the  influence  of  the  mind  over  the  body,
still  there  is  so  far  nothing  which  necessitates  our  having
recourse  to  a  supernatural  explanation.  Cases  of  haema-
tidrosis,  though  very  rare,  still  do  occur  in  ordinary
pathology.  It  cannot  now  be  maintained  that  diapedesis
(i.e.  the  oozing  of  blood  through  the  unruptured  wall  of
the  capillaries)  does  not  exist  in  nature.  Neither  can
we  say  that  the  epidermis  is  always  absolutely  impermeable
to  the  passage  of  blood.  Whether  the  blood  be  conveyed
by  the  sudoriferous  or  the  sebaceous  ducts,  or  in  some
other  way,  it  does  sometimes  get  through  without  any
actual  rupture  of  the  skin.  At  the  same  time  it  still
seems  to  be  true,  as  Professor  F.  Lefebvre  contended  in
1872,1  that  no  satisfactory  parallel  can  be  adduced  to
the  haemorrhage  from  the  stigmata.  The  epidermis  in
the  palms  of  the  hands  and  the  soles  of  the  feet  is  much
less  delicate  than  in  other  parts  of  the  body.  So  far
as  hjrpnotic  suggestion  has  ever  produced  an  exudation
of  blood  through  the  skin — and  the  cases  are  extremely
rare  2— these  haemorrhages  have  been  of  the  most  trivial
character. For  the  symmetrical  arrangement  and  narrowly

1  See  Louise  Latmii — a  Medical  Study,  Engl.  Trans.,  pp.  50-100,  with
the  Appendices.

^  May  one  venture  to  suggest  that  there  has  been  some  exaggeration
in  these  matters.  The  mythopoeic  or  teratopoeic  faculty  is  not  entirely
limited  to  the  clergy.  For  example,  the  sensation  produced  by  Charcot's
"  blue  oedema,"  some  thirty  years  ago  (see  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in  S.P.R.
Proceedings,  Vol.  VII.,  ji.  337)  has  rather  fizzled  out,  or  so,  at  least,  my
medical  friends  tell  me.


Lxxxni.]


The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization,


201


limited  area,  the  periodicity  extending  over  a  long  term
of  years,  and  for  such  deep  wounds  as  we  read  of  in
the  case  of  Gemma  Clalgani,  Domenica  Lazzari  or  St.
Maria  Francesca  delle  Cinque  Piaghe — wounds  that  never
suppurate  but  heal  with  extraordinary  rapidity — there
seems  to  be  no  adequate  analogy  either  in  the  records
of  general  pathology  or  hypnotic  suggestion.  There  are
no  doiibt  a  certain  number  of  instances  of  blisters  pro-
duced artificially  by  suggestion.  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell,
in  his  standard  work  on  hypnotism,  mentions  a  few,  but
he  adds  :  "I  have  never  been  able  to  produce  a  blister
by  suggestion.  In  several  instances,  however,  I  have
seen  local  redness  of  the  skin  appear  under  circumstances
which  apparently  excluded  fraud  or  mal-observation."  ^

The  celebrated  case  of  lima  S.  treated  in  1887  by
Professor  R.  von  Krafft  Ebing,  offers  several  interesting
features.  This  Hungarian  girl  seems  to  have  been  one
of  the  most  suggestible  subjects  on  record.  We  are  told
of  her  that  a  sheet  of  writing-paper  bound  on  her  leg
produced  redness  and  a  small  blister  on  the  following
morning.  Also  that  the  edge  of  a  match-box  and  the
edge  of  a  medicine  glass  pressed  on  her  forearm  with
the  suggestion  that  they  were  red-hot  prodviced  in  the
afternoon  a  blister  and  a  brand  wound  in  the  form  of
the  objects  named,  leaving  permanent  scars.  On  one
occasion  a  pair  of  scissors  were  pressed  against  her  flesh
with  the  same  suggestion  that  they  were  red-hot.  This
left  a  permanent  scar,  and  the  Sister  of  Charity  in  charge
of  the  patient  declared  that  a  suppurating  wound  was
produced  which  required  two  months  to  heal.^  At  the
same  time  we  are  told  that  even  in  this  subject  "  fever
could  not  be  caused  by  suggestion,"  and  that  "  the
suggestion  of  bleeding  was  quite  as  unsuccessful  ;  simple
red  spots  (hyperaemia)  appeared  in  the  places  of  sugges-
tion." I  confess  I  get  the  impression  that  if  bleeding
stigmata  have  never  been  artificially  produced  at  the
Salpetriere, at  Nancy  or  elsewhere, it  has  not  been  for

1  Milne  Bramwell,  Hypnotism,  3rd  ed.  (191.3),  pp.  83-84.
^  R.  von Krafft Ebing, An Experimental Study in the Domain  of
Hypnotism,  New  York,  1889.

02


202


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


want  of  trying,  and  also  that  any  successful  experiment
in  that  direction  would  not  have  failed  to  attract  atten-
tion and  become  very  widely  known.  M.  Pierre  Janet,
in  his  book  Nevroses  et  Idees  Fixes,  gives  a  picture  of
an  excoriation  of  the  epidermis  resulting  from  a  pemphegus
pustule  occurring  in  his  subject  "V.  K."  after  a  cruci-
fixion illusion.  But  of  a  continuous  or  spontaneously
recurrent  haemorrhage  resulting  from  suggestion  or  occur-
ring otherwise  in  a  hysterical  patient  imder  medical
observation  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  any  trace.
We  may  perhaps  fairly  draw  the  conclusion  that  the
auto-suggestion  of  the  mystic — if  indeed  it  be  auto-
suggestion— is  an  immensely  more  powerful  influence  than
hypnosis,  and  ceteris  paribus  is  so  far  more  deserving  of
study.  However,  let  me  admit  that  with  regard  to  the  mani-
festations hitherto  described,  the  difference  between  mystical
phenomena  and  hypnotic  phenomena  seems  to  be  one  of
degree  rather  than  of  kind.  Very  probably  it  is  all  a  matter
of  vaso-motor  control,  but  the  fact  that  such  a  disorder
as  haemophilia  is  apparently  traceable  to  a  congenital
defect  in  the  coagulating  power  of  the  blood  suggests
other  possibilities  that  have  not  perhaps  as  yet  been
sufficiently  investigated.

We  might,  then,  rest  content  with  the  solution  that
the  wounds  of  the  stigmatized  mystic  were  produced  by
auto-suggestion,  if  the  problem  were  limited  to  the  data
which  we  have  so  far  been  occupied  in  considering.  But
this  is  not  the  end  of  the  matter.  There  are  other  alleged
phenomena — ^phenomena  for  which  very  respectable,  if  not
convincing,  evidence  is  producible,  which  demand  a  still
further  extension  of  the  range  of  the  mind's  influence  over
the  body.  We  are  informed  upon  the  testimony  of  surgeons
of  note  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  that
in  the  case  of  several  stigmatized  persons  the  tissues  of
the  heart,  as  revealed  in  a  post-mortem  examination,
have  been  found  exhibiting  unmistakable  traces  of
tremendous lesions or indurations of old date,^  lesions

^  It  will  be  remembered  that  tlio  blow  of  the  lance  was  commonly
supposed  by  mystical  writers  not  only  to  have  pierced  the  side  of
our  Saviour,  but  also  to  have  reached  the  heart.


Lxxxiii.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.  203

which  would  under  normal  circumstances  have  rendered
the  continuance  of  life  impossible  for  more  than  a  few
minutes.  Our  first  impulse  would  naturally  be  to  dismiss
these  statements  as  mere  fairy  tales,  but  they  are  not
quite  so  easily  disposed  of.  They  rest,  in  many  cases,
upon  the  sworn  evidence  of  medical  men  who,  though
belonging  to  a  less  scientific  age  than  ours,  were,  never-
theless, experienced  anatomists.

Although  St.  Theresa  was  never  in  any  proper  sense
stigmatized,  her  history  supplies  a  famous,  even  if  ill-
attested,  example  of  the  phenomenon  of  which  I  am
speaking.  She  tells  us  quite  plainly  in  her  autobiography
that  she  had  a  vision  of  a  glorious  angel  who  thrust  a
long  golden  spear  with  a  fiery  point  right  into  her  heart. ^
We  have  also  some  indication  of  the  impression  this
incident  produced  upon  the  Saint  in  the  fact  that  she
made  it  the  subject  of  a  hymn  still  preserved  to  us.
St.  Theresa's  heart  was  extracted  after  death  and  in  it,
we  are  told,  was  found  a  wide  horizontal  fissure  which
may  still  be  seen  in  the  heart  to  this  day.  There  is
not,  however,  any  satisfactory  evidence  that  this  wound
was  not  made  in  the  operation  of  removal,  which  was
performed  by  unskilled  hands.

A  better  example,  resting  upon  the  testimony  of  several
eye-witnesses  whose  depositions  are  still  preserved  to  us,
is  the  wound  in  the  heart  of  Caterina  Savelli  of  Sezze.
This  is  a  stigmatic  (she  died  in  1691)  who  has  escaped
the  researches  of  Dr.  Imbert  Gourbeyre.  When  kneeling
before  the  Blessed  Sacrament  exposed  in  the  Jesuit
church  of  Sezze  in  1659  she  saw  in  a  trance  five  rays
come  from  the  Sacred  Host  which  wounded  her  hands,
feet  and  side.  She  prayed  that  the  stigmata  might  not
become  known,  and  her  prayer  was  so  far  heard  that  no
marks  appeared  on  the  hands,  though  the  side  remained
open,  and  blood  or  serum  flowed  from  it  at  intervals.
After  death,  however,  the  traces  of  wounds  in  the  hands
and  feet  became  perfectly  plain,  and,  what  was  most
noteworthy,  the  heart  being  extracted  there  was  found
in  it  a  deep  fissure  of  old  date. The  physician  and  the

1  Autobiography,  Ch.  XXIX,,  pp.  16  and  17.


204


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  S.J.


[part


surgeon,  who  with  many  ecclesiastics  signed  the  final
attestation,  declared  that  without  supernatural  inter-
vention it  would  have  been  impossible  for  anyone  to
live  with  such  a  wound. ^

I  have  spoken  at  some  length  of  the  case  of  Diomira
Allegri.  She  died  nine  months  after  that  extraordinary
ecstasy  of  the  Ash  Wednesday  morning  in  which  she
received  the  stigmata.  Two  surgeons,  held  in  their  own
day  to  be  eminent  men,  made  the  post-mortem.  They
found  an  aperture  in  the  breast,  of  which  they  exactly
describe  the  size  and  shape.  They  found  the  lungs  in  a
very  diseased  condition,  but  in  a  part  of  the  organ  which
was  apparently  sound  they  detected  an  open  passage  (of
which  again  they  indicate  the  diameter)  between  the
outer  wound  and  the  heart.  Finally,  in  the  heart  itself
they  discovered  a  cicatrix  of  which  they  each  drew  a
figure.  To  quote  the  words  of  one  of  them  :  "  Passing
now  to  the  observation  of  the  heart,  I  recognised  that
the  pericardium  was  in  its  natvu'al  state,  but  on  the
outside  of  the  heart  I  found  a  cicatrix  of  a  roughly  oval
shape  of  the  size  I  here  indicate.  It  was  unmistakably
marked  out,  both  by  its  texture,  which  was  harder  and
more  resistent  to  the  knife,  and  by  its  pallid  colour,
which  was  totally  different  from  the  substance  of  the
rest  of  the  heart."  -

Still  more  remarkable  are  the  extraordinary  things
which  are  asserted  and  apparently  confirmed  by  comjjetent
medical  testimony  concerning  the  heart  of  St.  Veronica
Giuliani.  She  believed  that  the  "  instruments  of  the
Passion,"  cross,  scourges,  pillar,  ladder,  nails,  etc.,  were
actually  reproduced  in  miniature  in  the  substance  of  her
heart,  and  during  her  life  she  even  drew  a  plan  of  the
arrangement  of  these  objects.  When  she  died,  a  post-
mortem was  performed  by  a  surgeon  and  a  physician,
in the presence of several ecclesiastics and others.  A

'  The  documents  will  be  found  printed  at  length  in  G.  B.  Memmi,
S.J.,  Vita  delta  Serva  di  Dio  Suor  Caterina  Savclli,  Rome,  1733,  pp.  132-
142.

"  See  the  Summarium  in  the  "  Positio  de  Virtntibus  "  in  the  Process  o
Beatification.


Lxxxni.] The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization.


205


formal  instrument  was  drawn  up,  signed  by  the  medical
men  and  by  all  present,  attesting  the  actual  discovery  of
all  these  symbols.  They  were  quite  hard  in  texture  and
clearly  defined  in  shape,  and  were  found  in  the  relative
positions  previously  indicated.  What  the  evidential  value
of  this  document  is  I  do  not  pretend  to  say,  but  it  was
a  sworn  deposition  signed  by  all  present  and  it  was
treated  seriously  by  the  officials  concerned  in  the  beati-
fication process.  The  document  itself  is,  I  believe,
reproduced  in  full  in  the  printed  Summarium.  Unfor-
tunately, I  have  hot  yet  been  able  to  obtam  access  to
a  copy.

There  are  several  other  examples  of  the  same  kind.
To  show  that  the  evidence  for  these  extraordinary  physio-
logical marvels  is  not  entirely  contemptible  I  would  refer
to  an  account  of  the  shrine  of  St.  Clare  of  Montefalco
which  is  given  by  the  late  Mr.  John  Addington  Symonds
in  the  Cornhill  Magazine  for  October,  1881  (pp.  446-447).
Mr.  Symonds  will  not  be  suspected  of  excessive  ecolasiasti-
cism,  but  he  states  after  viewing  the  still  incorrupt  body
of  the  saint,  who  died  in  1308  :  "I  have  rarely  seen
anything  which  surprised  and  touched  me  more."  His
account,  in  any  case,  fully  bears  out  the  statements
made  by  eye-witnesses  regarding  the  condition  of  the
same  remains  two  hundred  or  three  hundred  years  earlier.^
Then  he  goes  on  :  "  St.  Clare's  shrine  was  hung  round
with  her  refics  ;  and  among  these  the  heart  extracted
from  her  body  was  suspended.  Upon  it,  apparently
wrought  into  the  very  substance  of  the  mummied  fiesh,
was  impressed  a  figure  of  the  crucified  Christ,  the  scourge
and  the  five  stigmata.  The  guardian's  faith  in  this
miraculous  witness  to  her  saintship,  the  gentle  piety
of  the  men  and  women  who  knelt  before  it,  checked  all
expressions  of  incredulity.  ...  1  have  often  asked  myself,
Who  then  was  this  nun  ?  What  history  has  she  ?  Is
she  a  rival  [to  St.  Clare  of  Assisi]  or  a  counterfeit  1  "  But
the  problem,  suspended  by  lack  of  active  curiosity  at
Montefalco, has  never  smce  been  solved. A  description

^  Several  of  these  deaeriptions  will  be  found  cited  in  the  Bollandist  Acta
Sanctorum,  August,  vol.  iii.  p.  675.


206


Rev.  Herbert  Tlmrston,  S.J.


[part


of  the  heart,  in  substantial  accord  with  Mr.  Symonds'
account,  will  also  be  found,  with  an  engraving,  in  the
same  volume  of  the  Acta  Sanctorum,  in  which  St.  Clare's
Life  was  originally  printed  two  hundred  years  ago.

Even  if  we  accept  the  deep  and  periodically  bleeding
wounds  of  the  more  remarkable  stigmatics  as  the  natural
effect  of  auto-suggestion,  can  we  so  far  extend  the  power
of  mind  over  matter  as  to  believe  that  it  can  substantially
modify  the  tissues  of  so  delicate  and  vital  an  organ  as
the  heart  ?  Or  can  we  believe  that  in  the  hands  and
feet  of  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  there  were  produced  not  only
fissures,  which  went  right  through,  but  also  a  hard  and
horny  substance  in  the  form  of  nails  which  were  clinched
behind  in  such  a  manner  that  a  finger  could  be  inserted
between  the  flesh  and  the  protruding  end  bent  back  ?
Historically  speaking,  there  is  quite  good  evidence  for
this  feature,  such  evidence  as  would  be  considered  fair
security  for  any  fact  less  marvellous.

Somewhat  less  astonishing  than  this,  but  still  very
curious,  are  the  instances  of  espousal  rings  which  many
stigmatized  mystics  believe  to  have  been  placed  on  their
finger  by  Christ  our  Lord  in  token  of  their  spiritual
nuptials  with  Him.  The  late  Dr.  Imbert  Gourbeyre,
who  has  written  two  books  on  the  svibject  of  stigmatiza-
tion,  and  who  was  brought  into  personal  relation  with
Louise  Lateau  and  several  other  stigmatisees,  was  assuredly
not  a  critically-minded  investigator.  Still  I  believe  his  per-
sonal good  faith  to  have  been  above  suspicion,  and  he
occupied  for  thirty-six  years  the  position  of  Professor  at
the  Medical  School  of  Clermont.  Amongst  the  subjects
in  whom  he  was  interested  was  a  certain  Marie -Julie
Jahenny.  He  had  the  sanction,  and  indeed  the  warm
encouragement  of  the  Bishoj)  of  the  diocese  in  making  a
special  study  of  the  case,  and  he  saw  the  girl  repeatedly,
keeping  in  touch  with  her  during  a  period  of  some
seventeen  years.

Marie-Julie,  then  about  twenty-three  years  old,  exhibited
in  successive  stages  the  various  phenomena  of  stigmatiza-
tion,  beginning  in  March,  1873.  These  were  crowned  in
the  February  of  the  following  year  by  the  appearance  of


LXXXIII.]


The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatization


207


a  mystical  ring,  i.e.  a  hoop  of  vivid  red  encircling  the
ring  finger  of  her  right  hand.  After  fonr  years'  interval
this  appearance  was  further  enhanced  by  the  addition  of
three  black  points  in  the  place  where  the  bezel  of  the
ring  would  naturally  be  looked  for  ;  but  at  a  somewhat
later  date  the  circlet  was  transformed  into  a  pattern  of
dots  and  dashes,  a  facsimile  of  which  is  also  given  by
Dr.  Imbert  Gourbeyre  {La  Stigmatization,  II.  p.  86).
The  first  appearance  of  the  ring  was  formally  made
known  to  Marie-Julie  some  time  beforehand,  and  when
in  ecstasy  she  spoke  of  these  forthcoming  mystic  espousals
and  declared  that  witnesses  ought  to  be  present  when
they  occurred.  The  actual  day  was  named  (February  20,
1874),  and  Dr.  Gourbeyre  explains  that  he  had  in  his
possession  a  letter  from  her  confessor,  the  Abbe  David,
written  in  January  and  definitely  announcing  this  date.
On  Friday,  February  20th,  everything  had  occurred  as
had  been  prophesied,  and  two  days  afterwards,  says  Dr.
Gourbeyre,  I  received  the  following  letter  :

God  be  praised.  Yesterday  we  had  the  most  consoling  daj^
imaginable.  Everything  previously  foretold  has  been  realised
.  .  .  In  accordance  with  the  directions  of  Monseigneur  (the
Bishop)  I  had  made  arrangements  beforehand.  There  were
fourteen  men  there  to  act  as  witnesses,  seven  from  Blain,  one
from  Cambon,  two  from  Gavre,  three  from  Nantes  sent  from
the  Cathedral,  and  one  from  La  Fraudais  (the  hamlet  in  which
Marie-Julie  resided).  At  half  past  eight  we  had  satisfied
ourselves  that  the  wounds  were  quite  dry,  that  the  ring
finger  of  the  right  hand  was  in  a  healthy  state,  pale  as  death
without  any  trace  of  a  ring.

At  nine  o'clock  all  the  wounds  (the  stigmata)  began  to
bleed.  At  about  a  quarter  past  we  perceived  that  the  finger
was  becoming  swollen  and  reddening  under  the  skin.  About
a  quarter  to  ten  blood  was  running  from  the  upper  and  lower
surface  of  the  finger,  and  by  degrees  we  saw  the  ring  take
shape.  It  is  now  clearly  marked  for  all  her  life  to  come  .  .  .
Monseigneur  is  full  of  enthusiasm.^

Dr. Imbert Gourbeyre, writing in 1894, remarks  :

'Imbert  Gourbeyre,  La  Stigmatisation  (1894),  vol,  ii  p.  116.


208


Rev.  Herbert  Thurston,  8.J. [part  lxxxiu.]


"  Marie- Julie's  ring  remains  to  the  present  day.  I  saw
it  again  in  October,  1891,  still  a  ring  made  in  the  fleshy
tissues  {toujour s  fait  dans  les  chairs),  like  a  hoop  of  red
coral  which  had  sunk  into  the  skin."

What  judgment  are  we  to  form  of  these  and  other
alleged  phenomena  of  the  same  kind  ?  No  doubt  it  is
possible  to  discredit  the  evidence,  which  cannot  in  any
case  be  regarded  as  satisfactory.  Further  investigation  is
certainly  needed.  But  can  any  physiologist  definitely
assign  a  limit  to  the  power  of  suggestion  over  metabolism
and  the  structure  of  organisms,  or  is  this  a  case  in  which
to  quote  some  recent  words  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  "  it
may  even  be  found  that  a  few  of  the  things  now,  and
on  the  whole  wisely,  relegated  to  the  ash-pit  of  super-
stition, will  have  to  be  disinterred  and  reconsidered  ?  "


REPORT  ON  A  SERIES  OF  SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

Introduction  :  p^qe

§  1.  Preliminary --------  209

§2.  The  Present  Investigation - - - - -  211

Chap.  T.  General  Account  of  the  Sittings  :

§  1.  The  Seance  Room 213

§2.  Conduct  of  the  Seances 216

§  3.  The  Control 219

§  4.  General  Account  of  the  Phenomena - - -  223

Chap. II.  Detailed  Report  of  the  Sittings - -  226

Chap.  III.  The  Hypothesis  of  Fraud - - . .  309

Chap.  IV.  General  Conclusions 332

Appendices 336


INTRODUCTION.
§  1.  Preliminary.

Amongst  the  so-called  physical  phenomena  of  spiritualism
materialization  is  probably  the  rarest  and  the  least
credible.  Eminently  suitable  for  fraudulent  representation
and  at  the  same  time  extremely  popular  with  the  less
educated  layman,  such  phenomena  have  attracted  but
little  attention  from  scientific  men.  When  Sir  William
Crookes  studied  the  materializations  which  were  alleged
to  take  place  in  the  presence  of  Florence  Cook,  the
scientific  world  was  unmoved,  except  by  derision,  and
indeed  the  data  that  were  presented  did  not  permit  of
any  confident  judgment  being  expressed  one  way  or  the
other.  Materializations  are  reported  to  have  taken  place
occasionally  in  the  presence  of  Eusapia  Palladino,  but  in
the  majority  of  these  instances  the  appearances  consisted


210


A  Series  of  Sittings  tvith  Eva  C.


[part


of  more  or  less  complete  plastic  forms,  and  not  the
rudimentary  and  crude  productions  of  the  medium  under
consideration  in  this  report.  Similar  phenomena  have
been  noticed  occasionally  with  other  mediums,  but  such
appearances  have  been  usually  of  a  fleeting  character,
and  few  photographs  have  ever  been  taken  of  them.
In  the  present  instance  Eva  C.  is  said  to  have  materialized
full  forms  at  the  Villa  Carmen  in  Algiers,  and  only  later
began  to  develop  that  peculiar  form  of  mediumship  which
is  now  usually  associated  with  her.  There  is  little
evidence  that  phenomena  of  this  sort  accompanied
the  phantasms  in  Algiers,  and  though  Dr.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing  has  since  his  study  of  the  case  of  Eva  C.  de-
scribed somewhat  analogous  cases,  we  are  not  aware  of  any
absolutely  similar  phenomena  being  previously  recorded.^
The  elaborate  investigation  of  this  medium  by  Dr.  von
Schrenck-Notzing  described  in  his  work  Materialisations-
Phdnomene,  recently  translated  by  Dr.  Fournier  D'Albe
[Phenomeyia  of  Materialisation,  Kegan  Paul,  35s.),  and
by  Madame  Juliette  Bisson  in  her  companion,  though
smaller  work,  Phenomenes  de  Materialisation  (Alcan),  and
the  subsequent  experiments  by  Dr.  Geley  described  in
his  La  Physiologie  dite  supra  normale  (Paris,  1918)  have
given  the  case  of  this  medium  peculiar  significance.

At  the  time  that  the  English  seances  took  place  she
was  about  thirty -four  years  of  age.  She  first  began
her  career  as  a  medium  in  1903,  and  in  1905  she  was
giving  materialization  seances  in  Algiers,  at  some  of  which
Prof.  Richet  was  present.  In  1908  she  came  to  Paris
and  began  to  give  private  sittings  under  the  auspices
of  M.  and  Mme  Alexandre  Bisson.  Dr.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing  joined  the  circle  in  1909,  and  with  the  assistance

^  In  the  seventeenth  century  it  is  sometimes  recorded  that  hysterica
vomited  curious  substances.  Thus  the  girl  Christian  Shaw  is  said  to
have  exhibited  hair  and  a  substance  resembling  candle  grease  in  her
mouth  which  were  rapidly  withdrawn  when  an  attempt  was  made  to
pull  them  out  (Sadducismus  Debellatus,  London,  1698,  p.  4).  Sucli
curious  vomits  had  also  been  noticed  in  those  persons  who  were  supposed
to  be  possessed  (see  Traicti  des  marques  des  possedez.  Par  P.  M.  Esc.
D.  en  M.,  Rouen,  1644,  pp.  H  seq.),  and  similar  accounts  abound  in  the.
witchcraft  trials.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


211


of  Mme  Bissoii  began  to  insist  upon  those  methods  of
scientific  control  which  have  more  or  less  persisted  up  to
the  present  time.  For  a  fuller  account  of  the  earlier
history  of  the  medium  see  the  article  by  J\Irs.  Salter
(Helen  de  G.  Verrall)  in  Volume  XXVII.  of  the  Society's
Proceedings,  pp.  333-369.

Mrs.  Salter's  article  carries  the  history  of  Eva  C.  up
to  1914.  There  is  little  of  importance  that  need  be  said
concerning  events  occurring  after  that  date.  A  certain
number  of  experiments  were  conducted  in  Paris  with
various  investigators  during  the  period  of  the  war,  and
Dr.  Gustave  Geley  arranged  with  Mme  Bisson  for  a
year  and  a  half's  experimental  work  with  two  sittings  a
week.  He  confirms  the  observations  of  Baron  von
Schrenck-Notzing  and  Mme  Bisson,  but  his  detailed
reports  have  not  yet  been  published  and  cannot  therefore
be  examined.  In  1919  representatives  of  the  English
Society  for  Psychical  Research  were  in  communication
with  Mme  Bisson,  and  in  April,  1920,  on  their  invitation,
she  kindly  consented  to  visit  England  with  the  medium,
the  resulting  investigation  being  the  subject  of  this
report.

§  2.  The  Present  Investigation.

The  object  of  the  present  investigation  was  to  enable
the  phenomena  of  Eva  C.  to  be  studied  at  first  hand
by  members  of  the  Society,  in  the  hope  that  the  con-
clusions of  the  Continental  investigators  might  be  con-
firmed and  a  basis  laid  for  further  study  of  the  physical
phenomena,  which  up  till  now,  with  the  exception  of
Eusapia  Palladino,  had  been  somewhat  neglected  by  the
Society,  owing  to  the  great  difficulty  of  persuading
mediums  to  submit  to  scientific  investigation,  and  also
to  the  fact  that  when  mediums  did  give  sittings  fraud
was  almost  invariably  discovered.  As  criticism  in  this
country  had  therefore  been  mainly  directed  upon  the
alleged  fraudulent  aspect  of  the  phenomena,  it  was  hoped
that  by  the  exercise  of  a  stringent  control  the  possibility
of  fraudulent  manipulation  might  be  still  further  reduced.


212


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C. [part  lxxxiv.]


The  time  at  the  disposal  of  the  Society  was  of  too  short
a  diiration  to  enable  the  Committee  to  make  any  elaborate
psychological  or  pathological  investigation.  To  satisfy
themselves  as  to  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  and  at
the  same  time  to  endeavour  to  observe  more  closely
the actual  formation  and  disappearance  of  the  so-called

psycho-plastic  "  substance,  which  the  earlier  investigators
had  postulated  as  the  raw  material  from  which  the  more
complex  phenomena  were  formed,  was  the  most  that
they  could  attempt  during  the  short  time  that  it  was
possible  for  Mme  Bisson  and  the  medium  to  remain
in  this  country.

With  a  view  to  making  all  the  necessary  arrangements
for  the  reception  of  Mme  Bisson  and  the  medium  and
for  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena,  the  Council
appointed  a  Committee  of  three  persons  with  power  to
co-opt.  The  three  original  members  of  the  Committee
were  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  Mr.  W.  Whately  Smith
and  the  Hon.  Research  Officer,  Mrs.  Salter.  The  co-opted
members  were  first  Mr.  W.  W.  Baggally  and  Dr.  V.  J.
Woolley,  and  later  (after  the  ninth  sitting)  Mr.  E.  J.
Dingwall.  Other  persons  were  from  time  to  time  present
at  the  sittings  at  the  invitation  of  the  Committee.


CHAPTER  I.


GENERAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SITTINGS.

§  1.  The  Seance  Room.

The  room  chosen  by  the  Committee  for  the  seances  was
one  of  the  Society's  own  rooms  at  20  Hanover  Square,
London,  W.  The  room,  carpeted,  but  sparsely  furnished,
measures  15  ft.  3  ins.  by  15  ft.  G  ins.,  and  it  was  here
that  the  cabinet  was  set  up  for  the  seances.  This
structure,  measuring  inside  5  ft.  8  ins.  long,  4  ft.  3J  ins.
wide  and  6  ft.  11  ins.  high,  was  placed  ^in  a  corner  of
the  room,  one  side  making  an  angle  with  the  window.
Formed  out  of  black  casement  cloth  nailed  to  stout
laths,  it  was  provided  with  a  roof,  and  at  the  sides  and
back  the  cloth  was  brought  under  and  over  the  bottom
lath  making  a  solid  framework  flush  with  the  floor.  In
front,  a  couple  of  black  curtains  ran  along  a  polished
brass  rod  supported  in  the  centre  by  a  hook,  whilst
the  floor  was  covered  with  a  black  cloth  extending  22|
inches  beyond  the  front  of  the  cabinet.

The  window  was  fitted  with  black  light-proof  shutters
screwed  to  the  frame,  one  of  which  was  furnished  with
hinges  enabling  daylight  to  be  admitted  at  will.  Over
the  side  of  the  cabinet  next  to  the  window  was  thrown
a  dull  red  cloth,  to  exclude  from  the  cabinet  any  light
from  the  window,  when  the  light-proof  shutter  was  open.
Usually,  however,  the  only  light  for  the  experiments  was
furnished  by  a  clear  glass  electric  bulb  of  32  watts  in  a
plum-coloured  sateen  bag.  It  was  surrounded  by  an
opaque  screen,  starting  from  the  left  front  of  the  cabinet,
and folded into the shape of a triangle, whence  the

213


214


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivifh  Eva  C.


[part


light  emanated.  Over  the  top  of  this  triangle  a  light
bine  cloth  was  flnng.  By  altering  the  position  of  the
surrounding  cloths  the  light  from  the  lamp  could  easily
be  increased  or  reduced,  and  this  was  often  done  at
Mme  Bisson's  suggestion  during  the  course  of  the  sittings.


■DOOR  '
/SF.'-  Sins.

A. A.  Controller's  chair. B.  Mmo  Bisson's  chair. M.  Medium's  chair.
D.  White  light. E.  Shaded  white  light, F.  Ruliy  shaded  light.

To  the  left-hand  side  of  the  front  of  the  cabinet
immediately  in  front  of  the  screen  was  placed  a  small
table  at  which  the  observer  sat  who  was  taking  notes,
and  upon  this  table  lay  a  30  watt  lamp  of  ruby  glass
enclosed  in  a  red  handkerchief.  The  light  from  this
lamp  was  further  reduced  by  a  camera  case  which  was
placed  in  front  of  it,  thus  preventing  the  light  from
falling  directly  on  to  the  front  of  the  cabinet.  Hanging
just  on  a  level  with  the  top  right-hand  corner  of  the
cabinet  was  a  clear  glass  electric  lamp  which  was  removed


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


215


immediately  tlie  medium  entered  into  trance  and  was
not  again  lighted  till  she  left  the  cabinet  at  the  conclusion
of  the  seance.  An  electric  torch  was  also  provided
for  a  closer  inspection  of  the  phenomena  than  was  possible
with  the  ordinary  illumination,  and  this  was  occasionally
made  use  of  by  the  observers  as  recorded  in  the  detailed
report.^

Within  the  cabinet,  immediately  opposite  the  opening
of  the  front  curtains,  with  its  front  legs  a  couple  of
inches  from  the  front  line  of  the  curtains,  was  placed
the  medium's  seat,  a  somewhat  dilapidated  but  thoroughly
comfortable  wicker  arm-chair,  the  lowest  part  of  the
seat  being  10  ins.  from  the  ground,  the  back  2  ft.  1  in.
and  the  highest  part  of  the  arms  11  ins.  from  the  outer
edges  of  the  seat.

Immediately  opposite  the  cabinet  and  accurately  focussed
upon  the  medium  as  she  sat  well  back  in  her  chair  were
the  two  cameras  which  had  been  kindly  lent  by  Messrs.
Elliott  and  Fry,  of  55  Baker  St.,  London,  and  were  under
the  control  of  Mr.  Jarraud  of  the  same  firm.  We
should  like  to  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  Messrs.
Elliott  and  Fry  for  their  assistance  and  co-operation  in
the  experiments,  and  we  desire  to  place  on  record  our
appreciation  of  Mr.  Jarraud's  kindness  in  giving  us  the
benefit  of  his  experience  in  the  course  of  investigations
which  must,  at  times,  have  seriously  interfered  with  his  own
personal  convenience.  The  installation  comprised  firstly  an
ordinary  field  camera  fitted  with  a  3  B.  Dalmeyer  portrait
lens  which  was  usually  focussed  on  the  medium's  shoulders
as  she  sat  in  her  customary  position  in  the  arm-chair.
The  second  camera  was  a  Goetz-Anschutz  snapshot  camera

Generally  speaking  the  light  was  such  that  Mr.  Feilding,  who  usually
«at  from  five  to  eight  feet  from  the  front  of  the  cabinet,  reported
that  he  was  able  to  distinguish  the  face  of  each  sitter  if  he  had  pre-
viously known  who  they  were,  and  could  see  the  medium's  hands
outside  the  curtains,  though  not  sufficiently  clearly  to  distinguish  the
fingers.  It  was  therefore  sufficient  for  the  controllers,  who  sat  as
close  as  possible  to  the  medium,  clearly  to  see  her  hands,  and  to
appreciate  the  appearance  of  a  "  phenomenon  "  even  inside  the  curtains
of  the  cabinet,  but  not  to  see  it  in  any  detail  without  the  help  of  an
electric  torch.


216  A  Series  of  Sittings  loith  Eva  C.  [part

with  Zeiss  lens  which  stood  a  little  to  the  left  of  the
larger  portrait  camera.  Just  behind  Mme  Bisson's  seat
stood  the  electrical  and  smokeless  flash-light  apparatus.
The  pear  for  igniting  the  flash  was  connected  to  a  long
rubber  tube  which  enabled  it  to  be  placed  within  easy
reach  of  the  sitters  in  readiness  when  required.  On
certain  occasions  other  cameras  were  employed,  but  un-
fortunately the  phenomena  were  too  rare  for  the
observers  to  be  able  to  make  much  use  of  them.  Gener-
ally speaking,  the  Committee,  whilst  fully  appreciating
the  value  of  photographic  evidence,  believed  that  an
attentive  examination  of  the  phenomena  under  the  light
of  the  torch  would  probably  be  of  greater  service  than
the  taking  of  a  great  number  of  photographs.  As  it  was,
however,  there  was  such  an  extreme  paucity  of  phenomena
that  even  had  it  been  the  Committee's  intention  to  secure
a  large  collection  of  negatives  it  would  have  been  impos-
sible, but  those  photographs  which  were  taken  included
some  of  exceptional  interest.

§  2.  Conduct  of  the  Seances.

Before  the  arrival  of  the  medium  and  Mme  Bisson
the  seance  room  was  aired,  the  photographic  and  flash-
light apparatus  set  up,  and  the  cabinet  and  arm-chair
thoroughly  examined.  Paper  and  pencils  were  put  in
readiness  for  the  recorder,  and  the  electric  torch  was
tested  and  placed  on  one  of  the  chairs  destined  for  the
observers.  The  costume  to  be  worn  by  the  medium  was
also  examined  by  one  or  more  members  of  the  Committee,
and  the  Research  Oflicer's  room  prepared  for  the  reception
of  Mme  Bisson  and  the  medium.  On  their  arrival  they
were  conducted  direct  to  this  room,  which  immediately
adjoined  that  prepared  for  the  seances,  and  here  the
medium  proceeded  to  change  her  clothes  and  put  on
the  garments  which  she  was  accustomed  to  wear  during
the  sittings.  These  consisted  of  a  pair  of  dark  grey
stockinette  combination-tights,  made  in  one  piece  with  hose
complete  and  fastening  at  the  wrists  and  half-way  up  the
back  with  white  thread. Over  the  tights  she  usually  wore


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  217


a  loose  black  pleated  smock  of  coarse  cotton,  furnished
with  sleeves,  which  fitted  close  to  the  wrists,  and  fastened
at  the  back  with  a  couple  of  buttons.  Within  the
smock  was  a  small  pocket  which  does  not  seem  to  have
been  used  by  the  medium  and  which  was  habitually
turned  out  before  the  seances.  These  garments  were
those  that  the  medium  had  been  accustomed  to  wear
and  had  been  brought  over  from  Paris  by  Mme  Bisson.
From  the  twentieth  to  the  thirty-sixth  seance  (inclusive)
the  medium  wore  over  her  head  a  fine  black  net  veil
sewn  on  to  the  neck  of  her  tights.

After  the  tights  and  smock  had  been  examined  the
medium  undressed  entirely,  this  operation  being  super-
intended either  by  Dr.  WooUey  and  Mrs.  Salter  or  by
Mrs.  Salter  alone  or  by  another  of  the  ladies  present
when  Mrs.  Salter  was  unable  to  attend.  The  medium
having  put  on  the  tights,  they  were  sewn  up  by  one  of  the
controllers,  the  medium's  mouth,  nose,  ears  and  hair  were
inspected,  the  smock  put  on  and  her  hands  held  till  she
was  ready  to  accompany  the  investigators  to  the  seance
room.  When  the  signal  was  given,  the  medium,  still
holding  the  hands  of  one  of  the  controllers  and  accom-
panied by  Mme  Bisson  and  the  rest  of  the  observers,
entered  the  seance  room,  the  door  of  which  was  locked  and
bolted  and  the  room  lighted  by  the  clear  electric  lamp
hanging  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  cabinet.  Having
taken  her  place  in  her  chair  with  Mme  Bisson  sitting
exactly  opposite  to  her  on  a  low  seat,  she  placed  her  two
hands  within  those  of  Mme  Bisson,  who,  holding  her  two
thumbs  and  gazing  into  her  eyes,  proceeded  to  hypnotize
her.  Usually  after  about  thirty  seconds  the  medium  began
to  moan  slightly,  her  head  drooped  over  to  one  side,  she
sank  back  into  her  chair  and  the  trance  came  on.  Her
hands  were  once  more  examined  and  then  passed  into  the
care  of  the  controllers,  who  sat  at  right-angles  to  her  and
close  up  to  the  folds  of  the  front  curtain.  The  instant
that  the  controllers  had  hold  of  her  hands  the  curtains
were  drawn  in  front,  the  clear  lamp  put  out,  the  recorder's
red  lamp  lighted  and  the  cloths  arranged  round  the  bulb
hidden  behind  the  screen.


218


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


Eva's  condition  during  the  sittings  did  not  vary  greatly
except  just  before  the  appearance  of  the  phenomena.
Generally  speaking  she  remained  quietly  resting  in  her
chair,  there  being,  however,  decided  variations  in  the
pulse  rates  and  occasionally  a  marked  feeling  of  chill
in  the  hands,  these  sometimes  becoming  quite  cold  and
somewhat  clammy.  The  phenomena  themselves  were
usually  ushered  in  by  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  respira-
tion, by  sighs  and  groans  and  often  by  a  flow  of  thick
white  saliva  which  dripped  from  the  medium's  mouth.
The  timbre  of  the  breathing  changed  as  the  phenomena
approached  ;  resjDiration  became  rapid  and  throaty  ;  the
medium  struggled  and  often  uttered  strident  cries  cul-
minating occasionally  in  shrieks.  At  this  stage  of  develop-
ment, which  Mme  Bisson  usually  signalled  by  saying  that
the  medium  was  "  prise  par  les  forces,''  Eva  was  wont  to
call  upon  the  observers  to  lend  her  aid  by  urging
the  phenomena  to  show  themselves.  The  sitters  were
advised  to  call  in  chorus,  ''Venez!  venez  I "  etc.,  and
Mme  Bisson  urged  the  medium  to  give  herself  up  to
the  forces  which  were  possessing  her.  Sometimes  the
attack  passed  off  and  nothing  appeared,  but  during  our
sittings  the  especially  violent  convulsions  were  almost
always  followed  by  the  appearance  of  the  phenomena.
The  medium  would  lean  forward  out  of  the  cabinet  and
show,  for  example,  the  end  of  a  white  object  beginning
to  form  itself  between  her  lips,  or  she  would  press  her
cheek  against  the  back  of  the  chair,  whereupon  the  sitters
perceived  a  large  Avhite  packet  emerging  from  her  mouth.
If  the  phenomena  were  favourably  placed  for  a  photo-
graph, one  was  taken  by  means  of  the  flash-light  apparatus,
and  the  cameras  immediately  prepared  for  another,  if
necessary.  During  the  continuance  of  the  phenomena
Mme  Bisson  would  frequently  turn  the  torch,  which  she
usually  controlled,  on  to  them,  so  that  they  could  be
more  closely  examined.  As  this  mode  of  examination
seemed  to  agitate  the  medium  and  to  cause  her  to  shrink
from  the  increased  light,  the  beam  was  only  thrown
intermittently  for  periods  of  a  few  seconds  at  a  time,
so that really continuous observation was  impossible.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  219

After  the  phenomena  had  disappeared  and  the  medium
had  given  us  to  understand  that  she  felt  nothing  more,
the  seance  closed  and  the  controllers  assisted  lier  to
rise  from  her  chair  and  leave  the  cabinet.  The  lamp
over  the  cabinet  was  then  relit,  and  she  was  conducted,
as  before,  still  in  trance  state,  to  the  dressing  room,  where
she  was  subjected  to  exactly  the  same  control  as  before
the  seance.  When  she  had  completed  her  toilet  she  left
the  building  with  Mme  Bisson  and  did  not  enter  it
again  until  the  next  sitting.  Meanwhile  the  observers
again  examined  the  cabinet,  the  medium's  chair  and  her
seance  costume,  when  she  had  removed  it,  and  after  they
had  finished,  the  room  was  locked  up  and  the  key  given
into  the  charge  of  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Society.

§  3.  The  Coi^trol.

We  have  already  indicated  above  the  method  of  control
that  was  adopted  both  before  and  after  each  seance.  At
the  earlier  sittings,  especially  at  the  first  five  which  were
held,  the  Committee  was  not  altogether  satisfied  as  to
the  degree  of  strictness  of  control  at  the  beginning  and
end  of  each  seance.  No  blame  for  this,  however,  is  to
be  imputed  to  Mme  Bisson,  or  to  the  medium,  who
readily  consented  to  the  increased  strictness  of  control
imposed  from  the  sixth  seance  onwards,  the  medium
being  completely  stripped  and  the  process  of  disrobing
being  more  accura,tely  observed.

During  the  seances  themselves  the  control  was  excellent
in  every  way.  The  hands  of  the  medium  were  either
held  by  the  controllers  at  either  side  of  her,  or  were
allowed  to  rest  on  her  own  or  upon  their  knees,  thus
remaining  perfectly  visible  throughout  the  entire  sitting.
It  was  only  upon  the  rarest  occasions  that  they  dis-
appeared behind  the  curtains,  and  then  only  for  a  fraction
of  a  second,  the  controllers  immediately  opening  the
curtains  and  again  taking  possession  of  them.  It  must
indeed  be  said  in  justice  to  the  medium  that  she
appeared  to  do  everything  in  her  power  to  assist  in  the
proper  control  of  her  hands and  feet. The  latter  were


220  A  Series  of  Sittings  witJi  Eva  G.  [part

usually  placed  on  the  floor  in  front  of  her  or  upon  the
controller's  feet,  but  on  many  occasions  the  medium
turned  sideways  in  her  chair,  and,  asking  one  of  the
controllers  to  hold  her  hands,  placed  both  her  knees
between  his.

The  Committee  were  of  the  opinion  that  a  gynaecological
examination  of  the  medium  before  each  sitting  was  not
necessary.  Such  an  examination  would  have  been  ex-
tremely irksome  to  the  medium  herself  and  it  would
have  been  found  difficult  to  insist  upon  it  before  every
seance.  So  long  as  the  control  of  the  hands  during  the
sitting  was  satisfactory,  the  introduction  of  objects,  either
by  internal  concealment  or  by  other  methods,  was  of
secondary  importance.  In  such  conditions  the  costume
worn  would  render  the  extrusion  of  such  objects,  if  there
had  been  any,  an  absolute  impossibility.  The  main  care
of  the  controllers  was  therefore  to  see  that  the  hands
played  no  part  in  the  possible  abstraction  or  manipulation
of  objects  which  the  medium  had  previously  concealed
about  her.  This  task  was,  as  has  already  been  said,
singularly  simple,  since  the  medium  made  no  attempts  to
evade  the  control  in  any  manner  whatsoever.  Acting
upon  these  principles  the  Committee,  whilst  taking  all
reasonable  precautions  against  the  deliberate  introduction
of  objects,  concentrated  their  attention  upon  the  control
during  the  seance  and  made  no  undue  demands  upon  the
medium  before  and  after.  What  this  control  in  fact
amounted  to  can  best  be  seen  from  a  perusal  of  the
following  accounts,  which  have  been  drawn  up  by  those,
who  most  often  exercised  it.

Mrs.  Salter's  Account.

Report  on  the  method  of  searching  adopted  at  the  sittings
ivith  Eva

On  those  occasions  when  I  was  present  the  method  of
searching  was  as  follows  :

The  medium  and  Mme  Bisson,  when  they  arrived,  went
straight  into  the  room  adjoining  the  seance  room,  which  had


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


221


been  set  apart  for  the  purpose  of  the  searching.  Then  in
my  presence  the  medium  stripped  herself  entirely  and  stood
with  her  arms  extended,  and  hands  open  so  that  I  might  see
she  had  nothing  concealed  in  them  or  in  the  armpits.  She
allowed  me  to  look  at  her  both  from  the  front  and  the  back.
She  then  took  uji  the  stockinette  costume,  which  had  been
previously  examined  by  at  least  one  member  of  the  Committee,
and  slipped  her  legs  into  it,  pulling  it  up  over  her  body.
She  then  pulled  it  over  her  arms  and  I  took  hold  of  the
costume  by  the  neck  and  looked  to  see  if  there  was  anything
in  the  way  of  a  thread.  I  then  sewed  it  up  the  back  with
white  thread.  Next  I  handed  her  the  black  cotton  pinafore
which  had  also  been  previously  examined.  This  she  slipped
over  her  arms  and  I  buttoned  the  two  buttons  at  the  neck.
On  those  occasions  when  it  was  expected  that  she  would
wear  the  j^inafore  throughout  the  sitting,  I  sewed  the  cuffs  of
the  pinafore  close  up  round  her  wrists,  sewing  them  through
to  the  under  dress  of  stockinette.  On  one  or  two  occasions,
owing  to  the  heat,  it  \Yas  suggested  that  the  medium  should
be  allowed  to  take  off  the  pinafore.  On  those  occasions  the
cuffs  of  the  pinafore  were  left  open  but  the  stockinette  sleeves
were  sewn  tightly  round  her  wTists.  When  Dr.  WooUey  was
present,  he  came  in  after  the  jDinafore  had  been  put  on  and
examined  the  medium's  hair,  mouth,  ears,  etc.  When  Dr.
Woolley  was  not  present,  I  made  this  examination  myself.
In  dressing  her  hair  the  medium  Avore  nothing  but  a  few
ordinary  metal  hairpins,  and  two  small  side-combs.  I  examined
these  more  than  once  and  found  nothing  unusual  about  them.
After  the  pinafore  had  been  put  on,  the  medium's  hands  w^ere
examined  front  and  back,  to  see  if  there  were  anything  in
the  nature  of  a  thread.

Her  hands  were  then  taken  by  one  of  the  Committee —
usually  Dr.  WooUey  or  Mr.  Dingwall — and  she  was  led  into
the  seance  room  and  put  in  her  chair.

At  the  first  two  sittings  at  which  I  was  present  (April  24
and  26)  the  medium  showed  some  objection  to  my  seeing  her
stark  naked,  and  Mme  Bisson  held  open  the  black  pinafore
between  me  and  the  medium  till  she  had  slijDped  the  stockinette
dress  over  her  legs.  At  the  fourth  and  fifth  sittings  (April  28
and  30)  at  Avhich  a  hairy  substance  and  a  hard  object  Avere


222


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


observed,  I  was  not  present,  and  cannot  say  what  took  place.
At  subsequent  sittings  Mme  Bisson  never  came  anywhere  near
the  medium  when  the  searching  was  taking  place,  and,  as
observed  above,  I  had  a  full  view  of  the  medium  absolutely
stri^Dped.  She  never  upon  any  occasion  took  mto  the  seance
room  any  of  the  clothing  she  had  \\'orn  wiien  she  arrived
at  20  Hanover  Square.

After  the  sittings,  on  all  occasions  upon  which  any  phenomena
had  been  observed,  the  medium  was  taken  straight  into  the
dressing  room,  one  of  the  Committee  holding  her  by  the  hands.
I  then  cut  the  thread  with  which  the  two  garments  worn
at  the  sittings  were  sewn  up  and  stripped  the  medium.  The
garments  were  then  handed  to  one  of  the  Committee  for
examination.  The  medium  then  proceeded  to  put  her  ordinary
clothes  on.  During  the  process  of  dressing  Mme  Bissou
usually  woke  the  medium  from  trance,  but  she  never  came
near her  until  after  the  strippmg  off  of  the  seance  clothes.

Upon  those  occasions  when  the  medium  wore  a  veil,  the
veil  was  sewn  to  the  neck  of  her  tunic  after  she  had  put  on
the  tunic  and  slipped  the  veil  over  her  head.  It  was  not
thought  necessary,  when  she  wore  a  veil,  to  take  her  hair  down
and  search  it  ;  otherwise  the  method  of  search  was  the  same
as  usual.


Dr.  Woolley's  Account.

On  all  the  occasions  when  I  was  present,  1  examined  the
oral  cavity,  ears  and  hair  of  the  medium.

Her  mouth  was  widely  open  and  I  was  able  to  depress  her
tongue  with  a  spoon  and  also  to  separate  the  cheek  from  the
gum  to  satisfy  myself  that  no  object  was  concealed  in  any
part  of  the  mouth.

Her  hair  was  let  down  and  carefully  felt  all  over  ;  after
which  I  handed  her  her  hairpins  to  fasten  it  up  again.

At  the  sittings  at  which  Mrs.  Salter  was  not  present  I  took
her  place  in  the  dressing  room  and  carried  out  the  pro-
cedure which  she  has  already  described,  but  it  was  only  after
about  half  a  dozen  sittings  that  the  search  became  as  thorough
as  Mrs.  Salter  has  described.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


223


In  these  earlier  sittings  I  do  not  think  that  anyone  saw
the  medium  completely  undressed,  our  view  being  that  over-
insistence  at  an  early  stage  of  the  series  might  appear  un-
sympathetic to  the  medium  and  tend  to  hinder  phenomena.
On  those  occasions  when  Mrs.  Salter  was  present  I  did  not
enter  the  dressing  room  until  after  the  medium  had  put  on  lier
stockinette  costume.

§  4.  General  Account  of  the  Phenomena.

It  must  be  admitted  with  regret  that  this  London
series  of  sittings  was  singularly  lacking  in  phenomena
of  such  a  character  as  necessarily  to  enforce  conviction
of  their  authenticity.  Not  only  were  the  larger  phenomena
as  recorded  by  Baron  von  Schrenck-Notzing  and  Dr.  Geley
altogether  absent,  but  on  no  single  occasion  (save  for
one  rather  doubtful  exception)  did  anything  which  pur-
ported to  be  a  materialization  appear  from  any  other
part  of  the  medium's  body  than  her  mouth.  In  the
investigations  which  had  been  previously  conducted,  the
flat  pseudo-hands  and  heads  not  only  appeared  spon-
taneously, but  left  the  neighbourhood  of  the  medium,
and  showed  themselves  at  the  parting  of  the  curtains
or  at  a  distance  from  her  in  the  cabinet.  Again,
the  full  form  phantasm,  described  and  photographed  by
Mme  Bisson  and  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  never  appeared,
and  upon  no  single  occasion  did  we  have  the  opportunity
of  studying  the  fully  developed  and  life-like  human
hands  which  have  been  noticed  by  former  investigators.
This  paucity  of  phenomena  made  the  task  of  judging
the  case  impartially  by  no  means  easj^  This  was  all  the
more  unfortunate,  since  it  had  been  hoped  that  the  series
of  sittings  held  by  the  Society  would  have  definitely
established  the  validity  of  the  phenomena  concerning
which  grave  doubts  had  been  expressed.  Circumstances,
however,  prevented  us  from  attaining  the  wished-for
goal,  although  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  fault  was  our
own,  or  arose  from  other  causes.  Mme  Bisson  rather
inclined  to  the  view  that  our  mentality  was  unfavourable,
and  seemed  to  imagine  that  the  Committee  was  thinking  of


224  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  [part

nothing  but  fraud,  and  the  possibilities  of  trickery.  Such
an  opinion  was  manifestly  based  on  a  misapprehension  which,
however,  we  foxnid  it  difficult  to  dispel.  Whatever  may  '
have  been  the  reasons  for  the  meagre  character  of  the  t
phenomena,  they  attained  a  certain  degree  of  variety,
and  now  and  then  were  of  an  extremely  interesting  kind.
The  saliva,  which  was  copious  and  very  white,  was  difficult
sometimes  to  distinguish  from  the  '  substance  '  which
often  much  resembled  it  although  in  a  more  solidified
form.  According  to  Mme  Bisson,  the  appearance  of  the
'  substaiace,'  which  she  regards  as  the  materialized  basis
from  which  the  formations  are  gradually  built  up,  is
often  preceded  by  the  flow  of  normal,  although  peculiarly
thick,  white  saliva  from  the  medium's  mouth.  The
'  substance  '  itself,  however,  according  to  the  earlier
experimenters,  does  not  only  proceed  from  the  medium's
mouth,  but  also  from  the  other  bodily  orifices  and  occa-
sioiiially  also  from  the  fingers,  the  neck  and  the  back.
In  our  own  experiments  we  had  unfortunately  no  clear
evidence  of  this.

The  phenomena  proper  may  be  roughly  divided  into
twelve  groups  which  could,  if  desired,  be  again  sub-
divided into  various  categories.  These  groups  may
conveniently  be  arranged  thus  :  —

I.  Small  spots  and  patches  of  seemingly  luminous
substance  which  appeared  on  various  parts  of
the  medium's  body.  E.g.  April  26,  4.50  p.m.  ;
May  17,  10.2  p.m.
11.  White  objects  of  indeterminate  shape.  E.g.  May  6,
6.13  p.m.  ;  May  10,  6.30  p.m.  ;  June  21,  10.57
p.m.

III.  Flat  whitish,  yellowish  or  greyish disc-like  objects,

which  usually  showed  themselves  at  the  medium's
mouth  or  adhering  to  various  parts  of  her  face.
E.g.  June  11,  11.21  p.m.  ; June  21,  11.20  p.m.

IV.  Vague masses of soft, white substance  closely

resembling  cream  cheese.  E.g.  June  5,  6.3  p.m.
These  seemed  occasionally  semi-liquid  and  may
possibly  have  been  sometimes  saliva. Cf.  April  30,


Lxxxiv.]  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  225

6.18  p.m.; May  31,  6.40  p.m.  ;  Jmie  2,  6.14  p.m.;
June  24,  10.40  p.m.,  etc.
V.  Black  substance  like  black  thread  on  the  medium's
tongue. E.g.  June  5, 5.46  p.m. A  dark  fibrous
substance,  April  28,  5.52  p.m.
VI.  White pointed objects, hard to the touch  and
generally protruding from the medium's  mouth.
Occasionally these  objects  resembled  fingers,  and
rough nail marks were sometimes visible.  E.g.
May 28, 5.48  p.m. (on  this occasion  the  object
was  seen  sticking  out  of  the  mouth  through  the
veil)  ; June 2, 6.15 p.m.  ; June 5, 5.15 p.m.  ;
June  26,  7.45  p.m.
VII.  Dark coloured membranes and pieces of  material
resembling thick dark skin appearing in  the
medium's  mouth  and  in  her  hands. E.g.  April  28,
6.7  p.m.  ;  June  21, 11.35  p.m.  ; June  24,  10.47
p.m.  ; June  26,  6.33  p.m.  and  7.49  p.m.
VIII.  Roughly drawn  flat  faces as if sketched  in  black
or coloured crayons. E.g. May 21, 7.30 p.m.  ;
June  21,  11.21  p.m. Cf.  also  June  16,  9.35  p.m.
IX.  Flat faces more perfectly formed than  those
above, resembling photographs, and  sometimes
.  coloured. E.g. on April 28 the  photograph
showed  a  female  face  surrounded  by  thick  fibrous
hair. Again  on  May  10  the  photograph  showed
a  similar  face,  though  this  time  of  a  child  and
apparently  joined  to  a  white  hand. Cf.  June  26,
6.37  p.m.

X.  Small white flat hands of varying sizes.  E.g.
April  26  and  May  10,  6.37  p.m.
XI.  A  cold  breeze. June  26,  6.5  p.m.
XII.  A  touch  through  the  curtain. May  25,  5.20  p.m.


Q


CHAPTER  II.


DETAILED  REPORT  OF  THE  SITTINGS.

Seance  I.
April  23,  1920.

[This  was  a  preliminary  sitting,  its  object  being  to  accustom
the  investigators  to  the  general  conditions  obtaining  at  the
seances  of  Eva  C.  The  medium  was  neither  undressed  nor
examined  and  no  rigid  system  of  control  was  exercised.j

Present.  Mme  Bisson,  Dr.  WooUey,  the  Hon.  E.  Feilding  and
Mrs.  Feilding,  Mr.  Whately  Smith,  Mr.  Beaufort  (of  Messrs.
Elliott  &  Fry)  and  Mr.  Jarraud  (the  photograjjliic  operator).*

CoJSTTROL.  W.  S.  on  right  of  medium  and  W.  on  left.  Mme
B.  on  this  as  on  all  subsequent  sittings  sat  exactly
opposite  the  medium  and  the  opening  cf  the  curtains.

[The  seance  began  at  5.55  p.m.  Mme  B.  hypnotized  the
medium,  the  white  light  was  put  out  leaving  only  the
clear  glass  electric  light  covered  with  a  red  cloth.  The
medium's  hands  remain  always  visible  to  W.  S.  and  W.
and  are  held  intermittently  by  Mme  B.  The  latter
continually  looks  through  the  partially  opened  curtains.]

1  Throughout  the  reports  Mme  B.  =Mme  Bisson,  Mrs.  F.  =Mrs.
Feilding,  W.  =Dr.  Woolley,  F.  =Mr.  Feilding,  W.S.  =Mr.  Whately  Smith.
The  abbreviations  for  the  names  of  other  sitters  will  be  indicated  as
they  are  introduced.

F.  when  present  habitually  sat  at  the  small  table  and  took  notes
except  when  otherwise  stated.

The  notes  consist  of  current  comments,  dictated  by  the  controllers
or  given  in  reply  to  questions  by  the  note-taker.  Much  was  seen  later  to
be  of  no  real  importance,  but  it  is  reproduced  for  the  sake  of  com-
pleteness.

226


[part  lxxxiv.] a  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


227


6.9  p.m.  W.  holds  medium's  left  hand  and  W.  S.  her
right.

6.15  p.m. Mme  B.  takes  both  the  medium's  hands.

6.20  p.m.  Hands  remain  free.  Medium  says  that  she
feels  nothing.  The  magnesium  flash  is  tried
and  two  photograjihs  are  taken.  The  seance
closes.


Seance  II.
Avril  24,  1920.

Present. Mme  B., Mrs.  F., Mrs.  Salter (Mrs.  S.), F.,  W.,

W.  S.,  IVIr.  Beaufort  and  the  operator.
Control. Mrs. S. and W. superintended the control  both

before  and  after  the sitting. During  the  seance  W.  S.

was  on  the  right  of  medium  and  W.  on  left.

[The  seance  began  at  4.10  p.m.  The  white  light  behind
the  screen  was  shaded  by  the  cloth  being  arranged  round
it,  and  F.  records  that  he  can  see  medium's  hands  quite
plainly  at  a  distance  of  about  eight  feet.]

4.15  p.m.  A  few  drops  of  phosphorescent  matter  come
from  medium's  mouth  and  run  down  the
left  side.  They  form  a  small  puddle  in
her  lap  and  then  appear  to  lose  their
luminosity.  More  drops  then  appear  from
the  mouth  and  run  down  the  left  arm.
Since  the  matter  first  appeared  W.  S.  has
been  holding  medium's  right  hand  and
Mrs.  S.  says  that  both  hands  have  been
continuously  visible.

4.26  p.m.  The  stuff  is  still  quite  visible  on  the  lap
and  arm.

4.30  p.m.  At  Mme  B.'s  request  a  slight  reduction  of
light  is  made.  W.  S.  says  that  change  is
hardly  noticeable  except  within  the  cabinet.
F.  records  at  this  stage: — "The  light  is
sufficient  for  me  to  be  able  to  write  straight


228


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


and  see  the  words  I  write  but  not  to  read
them.  I  can  recognize  everyone  in  the
room."

4.38  p.m.  Nothing  further  visible.  Hands  as  before,
left  hand  holding  curtain  visible  on  knee
and  W.  S.  holding  right  hand.  Mme.  B.
says  that  she  has  seen  a  few  luminous
points  inside  the  cabinet,  and  that  it  is  a
good  sign. No  one  else  has  seen  them.

4.45  p.m.  Mme  B.  takes  both  the  medium's  hands  for
a  moment,  and  then  they  remain  spread  out
and  visible  on  the  knees.

5.7  p.m.  Mme  B.  says  that  the  light  still  falls  too
strongly  on  the  medium's  face,  and  dimin-
ishes it  by  arranging  the  cloth  over  the
screen.  F.  reports  : — "  The  light  is  sensibly
less,  but  I  can  still  see  the  hands  quite
plainly  from  where  I  am."  W.  and  W.  S.
now  have  the  hands  of  the  medium  which
they  began  holding  when  Mme  B.  rose.

5.20  p.m.  Medium  says  that  the  '  general  fluid '  is  very
good  and  favourable,  and  Mme  B.  asks
that  if  possible  the  same  sitters  should  be
retained  until  the  phenomena  begin  to
appear.

5.30  p.m. Seance  closes.


Remarks  on  Seance  II.

This  was  the  first  sitting  in  which  matter  seeming
to  possess  a  luminosity  of  its  own  appeared  from  the
medium's  mouth.  Subsequent  experiments  showed  that
this  was  not  the  case,  and  that  the  saliva  was  not
actually  phosphorescent.  Although  throughout  the  sittings
the  medium  continued  to  produce  what  seemed  to  be  an
unnaturally  thick  foamy  saliva,  analysis  showed  that  its
constituents  were  the  same  as  ordinary  saliva  and  no
chemical  difference  was  detected  in  it.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  220


Seance  III.
April  26,  1920.

Present. Mme B., Mrs. F., Mrs. S., F., W., W.  S.,  IVIr.

Beaufort  and  the  operator.
Control. As  at  seance  II.

[The  seance  began  at  4.20  p.m.,  the  medium  being
hypnotized  by  Mme  B.,  and  then  as  in  all  subsequent
sittings  the  white  light  over  the  right-hand  corner  of
the  cabinet  was  turned  out,  the  shaded  light  behind  the
screen  and  the  reader's  lamp  being  left.  The  medium's
hands  remain  visible  upon  her  knees.]

4.25  p.m. Medium  makes  a  loud  gurgling  noise,  followed

by  squeaks,  whereupon  W.  and  W.  S.  take
her  hands  and  report  that  they  did  not
lose  sight  of  the  hands  before  they  took
them.

4.26  p.m. Medium  opens  curtains  and  shows  saliva,  which

appears  rather  less  luminous  than  before,
running  down  her  left  shoulder.

4.35  p.m. Light  slightly  reduced  at  Mme  B.'s  request.

4.38  p.m.  Medium  asks  Mme  B.  to  see  if  there  is  some-
thing on  her  left-hand  side.  Nothing  how-
ever is  visible.

4.50  p.m.  Medium  frees  her  hands,  but  leaves  them
visible  upon  her  knees.  W.  reports  small
spot  of  luminous  substance  on  medium's
left  shoulder.  Mme  B.  says  that  this  is
the  real  '  substance.'

4.54  p.m.  Curtains  opened  and  more  of  this  substance
is  seen.  It  disappears  whilst  it  is  being
observed.

5  p.m.  Medium  crosses  her  hands  and  gives  them
to  W.  and  W.  S.
5.1  p.m.  Curtains  again  opened  and  she  shows  a
splash  of  substance  on  her  shoulder.  It
disappears  in  about  30  seconds.  Hands
replaced  as  before.


230  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  [part

5.6  p.m. Screen again adjusted at medium's  request
for  less  light.

5.6|  p.m.  Whitish  patch  of  indeterminate  shape  appears
on  left  shoulder  near  medium's  mouth,  her
head  being  bent  on  to  the  same  shoulder.

Note. — ^The  phenomena  that  follow  were  not  described
as  they  were  occurring,  but  the  account  below  was  written
out  immediately  afterwards.

For  some  time  the  whitish  patch  that  was  first  observed
on  her  left  shoulder  appeared  to  be  attached  to  her  mouth
and  moved  about  with  her  head.  She  worked  it  about
with  her  mouth,  lifting,  replacing,  and  shaking  it  as  a
dog  would.  Mme  B.  said  that  she  wanted  it  to  form
into  a  head,  but  the  medium  said  that  it  would  be  a
hand.  Presently  she  left  it  on  her  shoulder,  turning  her
head  away.  It  was  then  seen  to  be  a  small  fiat  white
hand  as  though  cut  out  of  paper.  It  suddenly  vanished,
not  appearing  to  go  into  her  mouth.  The  curtain  was
now  partly  closed  for  a  moment,  but  Mrs.  S.  and  W.  S.
managed  to  see,  through  the  slit  between  the  curtains,
the  hand  fall  from  her  right  shovilder  into  her  lap.  The
curtain  was  now  again  opened  showing  the  hand  lying
on  her  lap.  It  now  seemed  to  give  a  series  of  three
jumps,  and  landed  eventually  upon  the  medium's  left
shoulder,  being  apparently  moved  by  something  from
within  her  dress.  During  these  phenomena  the  medium's
hands  were  held  by  W.  S.  and  W.  She  now  leant
forward  to  show  it  more  clearly,  and  Mrs.  S.  controlled
the  left  hand  which  W.  had  previously  held.  The  flash
then  went  off  and  a  photograph  (Plate  I.)  was  taken.
Almost  immediately  afterwards  the  hand  fell  into  her  lap,
and  holding  both  her  controllers'  hands  she  pushed  it
forward  close  to  W.  S.'s  hand,  Avho  did  not  however
actually  touch  it.  The  phenomenon  now  assumed  a
different  appearance,  resembling  a  piece  of  thick  soft
crvimpled  paper.  The  mode  of  its  disappearance  was  not
remembered,  but  W.  S.  says  that  he  thinks  it  went  into
the  medium's  left  hand  and  he  did  not  see  it  afterwards,


liXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  SitBngs  ivith  Eva  C.


231


although  when  the  hand  was  examined  immediately  after-
wards it  was  found  to  be  empty. The  sitting  then  closed.

The  photograph  (Plate  I.)  on  being  developed  showed  the
greater  part  of  the  head  of  the  medium  inclined  towards
the  left  shoulder.  The  rest  of  her  body  is  partially  obscured
by  Mme  Bisson,  whose  right  hand  touches  the  medium's
left,  at  the  same  time  holding  back  the  curtain  on  that
side.  On  the  medium's  left  shoulder  is  lying  what  at
first  appears  to  be  the  plastic  model  of  a  left  human
hand,  but  which  the  observers  shortly  before  had  reported
as  appearing  flat.  It  is  lying  palm  downwards,  the  thumb
nearest  the  neck,  the  first  and  second  fingers  separated,
the  second  and  third  being  close  together  and  seem-
ingly bent  over  a  ragged  piece  of  light  coloured  sub-
stance which  hangs  from  them.  The  fourth  finger,  widely
separated  from  the  others,  is  thin  and  tapering,  whilst  a
white  thread,  apparently  attached  to  the  third  finger,
passes  over  the  fourth  and  is  attached  to  a  flat  oblong
piece  of  whitish  substance  extending  from  the  middle  of
the  back  of  the  hand  backwards  towards  the  shoulder.


Seance  IV.
A^ril  28,  1920. ■ • •  •

Present.  Mme  B.,  W.,  F.,  W.  S.,  Mr.  BaggaUy  (B.),  :\Ir.  W.
K.  Towell  (a  stenographer),  (T.),  Mr.  Beaufort  and  the
operator.  .

Control.  The  control  before  and  after  the  sitting  was  exer-
cised by  Miss  Newton.

[The  seance  began  at  4.25  p.m.  The  medium's  right
Tiand  is  held  in  W.  S.'s  left  and  her  left  in  W.'s  right.
At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  Mme  B.  remarked  that  if
any  of  the  observers  noticed  anything  suspicious  or  any
appearance  of  fraud  during  the  course  of  the  seance,  this
should  be  remarked  at  once  so  that  an  immediate  examina-
tion could  be  made.]

4.33  p.m. Medium  makes  a  squeaking  noise.


232  A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  [part

4.40  p.m. White  saliva  is  seen  upon  the  left  shoulder.

Mme  B.  says  that  this  is  the  '  substance.'
Whilst  it  is  being  watched  it  suddenly
disappears  having  been  there  only  ten
seconds.  The  medium  keeps  up  an  inter-
mittent squeaking  and  humming  noise  which
Mme  B.  explains  as  indicating  that  the
phenomena  are  beginning  to  develop.

Mme  B.  is  asked  if  there  is  any  objection
to  touching  any  '  substance  '  which  may
appear.  Mme  B.  says  that  the  medium
herself  will  allow  it  to  be  touched,  though
it  should  not  be  seized  or  snatched.  On
the  other  hand  the  fact  of  touching  it  has
the  effect  of  immediately  stopping  further
development  of  the  phenomenon.  She  ad-
vises that  the  phenomenon  be  allowed  to
develop,  that  this  occurs  gradually  and  that
only  at  later  sittings,  after  better  results
have  been  obtained,  should  the  substance
be  touched.  Mme  B.  further  explains  that
if  the  medium's  hands  are  in  contact,  the
substance  sometimes  appears  between  the
thumbs.

4.50  p.m. W. S. and W. hold medium's hands  close
together.

F. Suddenly  we see  a  white  substance  over

the  wrists.
W.  says  it  is  wet.

F.  Medium's  hands  are  projected  through
the  curtains,  her  head  not  being  visible.
A  whitish  viscous  fluid  appears  on  her
right  hand.

4.52  p.m. W.  says that the medium is pressing  the

back  of  his  hand  against  her  abdomen  to
express  that  something  was  coming  there.
W.  feels  nothing.

4.53  p.m. Medium  says  it  is  coming.

Mme  B.  explains  that  she  thinks  that  pro-
bably the phenomenon is already  there


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


233


and  the  medium  says  that  it  is  a  head.
Mme  B.  says  that  she  believes  the  pheno-
menon appears  sometimes  in  a  black  form
and  that  it  is  only  later  that  it  becomes
white  so  as  to  reflect  light  and  become  visible.
5  p.m.  Mme  B.  says  that  the  phenomenon  seems  to
develop  originally  in  the  mouth  of  the
medium  against  the  gums  and  palate,
and  that  it  is  helpful  if  she  is  able  to
disengage  it  with  the  fingers.  Mme  B.
wishes  however  that  this  should  not  be
permitted  during  the  early  sittings  until
the  Committee  is  convinced  of  the  reality
of  the  phenomenon.
Mme  B.  says  medium  hopes  phenomenon  will
show  itself  while  her  hands  have  been
continually  held,  which  up  to  now  has  been
the  case.

5.3  p.m.  W.  Medium  draws  her  hands  towards  her
abdomen  and  squeezes  them  together  as
if  to  try  and  pull  something  out.

5.5 p.m. Owing  to  the  length  of  time  of  the  develop-
ment, Mme B. asks for the light to  be
slightly  diminished.
The  light  is  just  sufficient  for  W.  to  see  the
time  by  a  watch  close  to  the  curtains.

5.10  p.m.  W.  S.  There  are  dribbles  of  saliva  down  the
medium's  chest.  It  appears  to  be  luminous.
Mme  B.  explains  that  medium  says  she  feels
that  it  is  there,  that  it  is  very  long  showing
itself,  but  that  it  will  do  so.
To  test  the  luminosity  of  the  saliva  seen,  the
light  is  switched  out  for  a  moment  and  it
was  no  longer  visible.  It  appears  therefore
not  to  be  self-luminous.

5.35  p.m. Till  now,  nothing  has  happened. The  hands
have  been  visible  on  medivim's  lap  the  whole
time, held by W. and W. S. — Medium
....  sometimes  speaking  and  sometimes  grunting

for  long  periods.


234


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


The  curtains  are  parted  and.  the  medium's
head  is  faintly  visible  in  the  interior  of  the
cabinet.

5.40  p.m. W.  S.  sees  a  small  white  patch  on  the  left

shoulder which disaj)pears again  almost

immediately.
Medium  crosses  her  hands. Her  right  hand  is

held in W.'s right and her left hand  in

W.  S.'s  left.
5.42  p.m. Hands  changed  back  again.

5.45  p.m. Medium is heard to speak, and Mme  B.

explains  that  medium  says  that  she  feels
there  is  a  head  there.  She  does  not  know
whether  it  is  big  or  little.  She  does  not
know  whether  it  will  show  itself.  She  says
the  substance  is  coming  from  the  navel  and
it  has  to  get  through  the  dress  fabric,  which
takes  longer  than  if  it  had  come  from  the
mouth.

5.48  p.m. Medium calls out to  Mme  B., "  Don't  you
see  it  ?  "
F. There  is  nothing  visible.

Mme  B.  says  that  it  is  now  coming  from  her
breast.

Medium  wants  W.  S.  to  touch  it,  but  in  view
of  what  Mme  B.  had  said  he  does  not  do  so.
5.50  p  m. W.  S. There  are  small  light  patches  on  her
left  breast.

-5.52  p.m.  A  dark  sausage  -  shaped  thing  appears  in
front  of  medium's  face  from  her  mouth.
She  jjuts  the  back  of  W.'s  hand  against  it.
W.  says  it  is  certainly  solid.

Mme  B.  begs  it  to  change  colour  so  that  it
may  become  visible.

W.  cannot  see  clearly  enough  to  tell  what  it
is  like.  It  felt  like  fabric  or  material.
W.  says  it  appeared  like  a  beard  covering
medium's  mouth  and  chin  with  white
strands  at  the  bottom  like  ribbon.  The
beard  disappears.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  235

Some  of  medium's  hair  tumbles  over  her  face  and
she  asks  W.  to  replace  it  as  it  bothers  her.

5.58  p.m. A white material appears from  medium's

mouth  and  disappears  almost  immediately.
W.  could  not  see  where  it  went  to.

5.59  p.m. W. It  now  reappears  on  her  shoulder.

W.'s  head  is  right  inside  the  cabinet  within
a  foot  of  the  medium's.
6.0 p.m. M.  shows  her  face  again.

There  is  a  large  black  mass  over her  mouth

like  a  moustache  or  beard.
Medium  asks  for  more  light.
Mme  B. takes  red  electric  light  from  steno-
grapher's small  table and  puts  it  in  front
of medium's face momentarily. The  dark
mass  is  seen  more  plainly.
6.2 p.m. Photo  Taken.

Immediate!}^  after  the  flash  something  appeared
between  medium's  hands  like  a  tassel  of
hair.

W.  S. Medium  makes  W.  S.  and  W.  feel  her
hair  and  the  back  of  her  neck  apparently
to  make  certain  her  own  hair  is  all  tied  up.
6.7 p.m.  Something  appeared  between  medium's  hands.

B.  feels  it  and  says  it  feels  like  a  soft
veil.

Medium  picks up something and puts it  in

her  mouth.
6.10  p.m. Photo  Taken.

W.  S. The substance appeared between  the

medium's  hands  and  seemed  a  dark  brown

colour  with  whitish  streaks.
W.  felt  it  and  it  seemed  like  a  dry  fibrous

fabric.

B.  agrees,  as  he  touched  it.

B.  The  medium  appeared  to  bend  forward
and  seize  the  substance  in  her  mouth  from
her  hands  as  the  photograph  was  taken.

W.  S.  The  substance  was  produced  twice
more  after  the  photograph  was  taken.


236


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


[The photographic apparatus not being ready  again
in  time  for  these  second  and  third  appearances,  no  other
photos  were  taken.]
6.15  p.m. For  some  time  medium  makes  constant  efforts
to  show  something  else — the  curtains  being
apart.

6.17  p.m.  Medium  suddenly  makes  a  loud  cry  and  a  big
sausage-shaped  object  is  again  seen  coming
from  the  mouth.
Mme  B.  says  that  although  she  does  not
interfere  with  W.  a  better  phenomenon
would  be  obtained  if  he  refrained  from
putting  his  head  quite  so  much  in  the
cabinet.

6.25  p.m.  W.  S.  Small  white  patches  on  left  shoulder
which  disappear  again.

Mme  B.  says  that  it  is  all  over  and  explains
that  the  phenomenon  is  always  marked  at
the  beginning  and  the  end  by  the  appear-
ance of  this  liquid.

W.  takes  medium's  right  hand  and  now  has
both.

Medium  wishes  W.  to  take  hold  of  both  her
hands  so  that  it  shall  not  afterwards  be
said  that  the  object  may  have  disappeared
in  some  other  way. Sitting  closes.


Remarks  on  Seance  IV.

The  phenomena  at  this  seance  were  particularly  striking
and  might  have  been  much  more  so  had  the  control  been
perfectly  satisfactory  at  the  commencement.  (See  Miss
Newton's  note.)  The  appearance  of  the  thick,  dark,  fibrous
matter  which  the  camera  revealed  later  surrounding  a
small  female  face  was  especially  interesting  although
under  the  circumstances  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  strictly
evidential.

Of  the  three  photographs  taken  at  this  sitting  one  only
is  suitable  for  reproduction  (Plate  II.). Of  the  other  two


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  237

the  first  is  merely  a  blurred  copy  of  Plate  II.  although
taken  from  a  slightly  different  angle,  and  it  presents  no
new  feature,  whilst  the  second  is  also  too  indistinct  to
permit  of  a  successful  reproduction  being  made.  The
plate  gives  an  enlarged  view  of  Eva's  head,  which,  inclined
towards  the  left  shoulder,  seems  partially  to  support  a
mass  of  dark  fibrous-looking  hair  surrounding  a  small
photograph  of  a  laughing  female  face.  The  eyes  are
almost  hidden  and  from  the  mouth  appears  to  issue  a
ragged  streamer  of  white  material  which  lies  over  the
black  fibre.  From  the  hairy  matter  and  just  on  a  line
with  the  eyes  of  the  photograph  a  couple  of  whisker-like
projections  protrude  beyond  the  fibrous  mass  on  to  the
left  arm,  whilst  from  the  lower  portion  of  the  dark
matter  hangs  what  looks  like  a  tail  or  plait  of  the  same
material  terminating  in  a  sort  of  globular  structure.

In  the  second  photograph  the  medium  is  shewn  holding
the  same  phenomenon  in  her  mouth,  her  teeth  apparently
gripping  it  from  behind  and  just  above  the  small  face.
A  part  of  the  streamer  now  forms  a  loop,  whilst  another
portion  hangs  down  in  a  thick  cord-like  strip.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.

On  this  occasion,  April  28,  I  searched  the  medium  in
the  dressing  room  and  was  satisfied  that  she  was  con-
cealing nothing  on  her  person  or  in  the  tights  when  she
put  the  latter  on.  But  I  cannot  vouch  for  anything
beyond  this,  for  I  realized  later,  but  unfortunately  not
until  after  the  seance  had  begun,  that  there  had  been
opportunities,  had  the  medium  wished,  for  slipping  some-
thing down  the  neck  of  the  tights,  first,  while  I  was
occupied  in  sewing  up  the  back  of  the  tights  and  Mme
Bisson  was  standing  in  front  of  the  medium  and  leaning
closely  over  her  shoulder  to  speak  to  me,  and  secondly,
when  the  overall,  which  had  been  brought  by  Mme
Bisson  from  the  seance  room,  was  held  by  her  between
me  and  the  medium  for  at  least  a  minute  before  the
medium  put  it  on.  I  have  no  grounds  for  thinking  that
the  medium  availed  herself  of  these  opportunities,  but  I


238


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


realized  that  it  was  only  possible  for  a  complete  search
to  be  made  when  two  searchers  were  present  at  the  same
time.  But  apart  from  this,  I  omitted  to  search  the
pocket  of  the  overall  both  before  and  after  the  sitting,
and  I  was  not  in  the  dressing  room  when  the  medium
and  Mme  Bisson  returned  to  it  after  the  sitting.

I.  Newton.


Seance  V.
Ajml  30,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Mrs.  F.,  Capt.  Bennett  (Capt.  B.),  B.,  W.,
W.  S.  and  the  operator. W.  acted  as  note-taker.

Control.  Before  and  after  the  seance  the  medium  was
examined  by  Mrs.  F.  and  W.,  who  agreed,  after  watching
her  change  of  clothing,  that  she  did  not  bring  any  foreign
body  into  the  seance  room  concealed  on  her  person  nor
did  she  have  any  foreign  body  on  her  when  she  changed
her  clothes.  During  the  seance  W.  S.  sat  on  the  right
of  the  medium  and  Capt.  B.  on  the  left.

4.27  p.m.  Seance  begins.  W.  S.  holds  the  medium's
right  hand  and  Capt.  B.  the  left.

4.33  p.m.  A  white  patch  appears  on  Eva's  left  shoulder  :
it  fades  away.

4.53  p.m. More  saliva  is  seen  on  the  left  shoulder.

5.15  p.m.  Eva  says  that  she  feels  that  the  phenomena
are  coming.

5.38  p.m.  Medium  says  that  the  phenomena  will  occur
on  the  right  side.

5.45  p.m.  Mrs.  F.  is  asked  to  place  her  hand  on  W.  S.'s,
who  is  holding  the  medium's  right  hand.
Eva  gives  a  series  of  swaying  movements
and  leans  forward  several  times.

6.3 p.m. Eva  complains  of  pain  in  her  back.

6.18  p.m. A  white  blob  appears  in  the  medium's  mouth.

It  is  touched  by  W.  S.,  who  says  that  it
feels  like  wet  tissue  paper  compressed.


Plate  III.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  \vith  Eva  C.


239


6.20  p.m.  It  falls  on  to  her  lap  and  moves  about.  The
cameras  are  prepared  and  a  photograph  is
taken.  Both  hands  have  been  controlled
throughout.

6.25  p.m.  Mme  B.  says  that  she  can  see  the  object
between  Eva's  legs.  A  round  white  object
rises  up  into  Eva's  right  hand.  It  is
touched  by  W.  S.,  producing  in  the  medium
a  sudden  spasm  and  for  a  moment  the
object  is  lost  to  view,  but  it  suddenly  re-
appears on  her  chest.  A  second  photo  is
taken.  (Plate  III.)
W.  says  that  he  saw  the  object  on  the
medium's  shin  a  few  inches  below  her  hand
into  which  it  rose.

6.30  p.m. Eva's hands are crossed. She touches  the
right  side  of  her  nose  with  her  thumb  and
.  then weaves her hands about as  though

producing  threads.

[The  notes  as  regards  the  end  of  the  sitting  are  incom-
plete. W.  S.  recorded  afterwards  that  when  the  "  round
white  object  "  came  into  the  medium's  right  hand,  it  was
pressed  between  her  palm  and  his,  and  he  felt  something
like  a  thread  against  his  hand.]


Seance  VI.  .
May  4,  1920.

Present.  IVIme  B.,  Lady  Barrett,  M.D.,  (Lady  B.),  Capt.  B.,
Mrs.  S.,  W.,  F.,  B.,  and  the  operator.

Control.  Before  and  after  the  seance  the  control  was  under-
taken by  Lady  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  and  W.  During  the  seance
W.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  Lady  B.  on  the
left,  holding  the  medium's  right  and  left  hands  respectively.

5.40  p.m.  Seance  begins.  Lady  B.  says  that  medium's
pulse  at  first  was  beating  evenl}^  but  then
became  very  slow  and  irregular  becoming
then  more  rapid  and  now  being  104.


240


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


5.47  p.m. Stertorous  breathing  begins  on  the  part  of  the
medium.

Lady  B.  says  that  pulse  has  become  slower
and  more  feeble.
5.49  p.m. Whitish streak  appears on  left  shoulder  and
disappears  after  about  five  seconds.

5.53  p.m. Pulse  is  now  112.

5.54  p.m. Some  more  saliva  is  visible.

5.57  p.m. More  saliva  again  visible. Medium  cries  out.

6.0  p.m. Saliva  flows  down  front  of  dress  and  Mme  B.

says  that  it  is  the  substance.

6.1  p.m. Respiration is 112. Up to now Lady  B.

and  W.  have  been  holding  medium's  hands.
6.20  p.m. Pulse  is  now  104,  but  very  intermittent.
7.0 p.m. Medium  asks  W.  to  look  at  her  back  as  she

thinks that there is something there.  He

does  so,  but  nothing  is  visible.
7.3 p.m. Pulse quiet and steady at 80. For a  long

time  medium  has  been  quite  quiet.
7.20  p.m. Medium  says  that  nothing  will  appear.  Sitting

closes.


Seance  VII.
May  6,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  Mrs.  F.,  W.,  B.,  F.,  and  the
operator.

Control.  Before  and  after  the  seance  the  control  was  under-
taken by  Mrs.  S.,  Mrs.  F.  and  W.  The  medium  was
completely  stripped,  the  investigators  being  fully  satisfied
with  the  result.  During  the  sitting  W.  sat  on  the
medium's  right  holding  her  right  hand  and  B.  sat  on  her
left  holding  lier  left  hand.

4.18  p.m.  Seance  begins.  After  hypnotization  the  pulse
was  100  and  both  strong  and  regular.

4.33  p.m. Medium  begins  to  groan  and  strain. Pulse  124.

4.40  p.m.  A  horizontal  white  blur  appears  on  the  left
shoulder  and  disappears. Immediately  after-


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


241


wards  it  reappears,  but  again  vanishes  whilst
under  close  observation  by  B.

5.5  p.m.  Medium  announces  that  something  is  forming,
The  curtains  are  opened  from  time  to  time
but  nothing  is  seen.

5.10  p.m.  Medium  says  that  it  is  beginning  to  form  over
her  hands.  W.  and  B.  report  that  her
hands  are  wet  and  slimy,  as  if  moistened
with  spittle.  It  was  possible  for  some
saliva  to  have  come  down  over  her  wrists.

5.12  p.m.  Medium  says  that  something  is  forming  on  her
right  shoulder.  Curtains  are  opened  and  a
white  streak,  about  three  inches  long,  is
seen  on  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder.

5.17  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  feels  it  on  her  neck
and  asks  for  it  to  be  looked  at.  There  is
however  nothing  visible.

5.34  p.m.  Medium  again  says  that  she  feels  it,  but  on
opening  the  curtains  nothing  is  seen.  Mme
B.  asks  Mrs.  F.  to  put  her  hand  on
medium's  left  in  addition  to  B.'s.  She  does
so  for  some  time.

5.37  p.m.  Medium  again  opens  curtains  and  leans  for-
ward. Nothing  is  yet  visible.

5.48  p.m.  She  presses  both  her  hands  (still  held  by  W.
and  B.l  to  her  forehead.

5.51  p.m.  Mme  B.  asks  W.  to  hold  his  right  hand  on
Eva's  forehead,  the  former  position  being
however  resumed  immediately  after.

6.0  p.m.  Medium  becomes  very  excited.  She  constantly
opens  the  curtains  and  shows  her  head,
recj[uesting  Mme  B.  to  call  for  the  pheno-
mena.

[During  the  seances,  especially  just  before  the  appear-
ance of  the  phenomena,  the  medium  was  accustomed  to
ask  the  observers  to  call  upon  the  phenomena  (or  the
"  intelligences  "  producing  them)  to  show  themselves.
Thus  she  would  often  cry  out  to  Mme  Bisson,  AppelU,
Juliette,  a-ppelle,"  to  which  at  Mme  Bisson's  request  the

R


242  A  Series  of  Sittings  tvith  Eva  C.  [part

observers  would  reply  in  chorus,  "  Venez,  venez,  venez !  "
etc.  These  repeated  requests  seemed  on  frequent  occasions
to  stimulate  the  medium  to  fresh  efforts  and  the  result
was  sometimes  that  the  medium  was  fully  "  prise  "  and  the
phenomena  appeared.]

6.3  p.m. The  curtains  are  opened  and  the  medium  is

seen  with  her  head  bowed  and  for  a  short
time  her  forehead  rests  upon  her  hands.

6.4  p.m. Medium  says  that  it  is  a  hand. The  curtains

have  been  opened  and  her  head  is  outside,
but  nothing  is  visible.
6.13  p.m. A white object is seen on medium's  chest.

She  asks  W.  to  put  his  finger  into  her
mouth  to  see  that  she  has  no  thread.  It
moves  sideways  whilst  his  finger  is  there.
F.  suggests  that  a  photograph  should  be
taken,  hut  Mme  B.  says,  "  Let  it  develop."
The  curtains  are  closed,  but  are  opened
again  a  few  moments  after  and  the  object
is  again  seen  on  the  chest,  but  it  is  not  so
bright  or  so  definite  in  shape.  It  disappears
whilst  Mrs.  S.,  Mrs.  F.,  W.  and  B.  are
looking  at  it.

6.19  p.m. Medium  seems  to  strain  a  good  deal  and  her
respiration  is  very  fast.
Nothing  further  is  seen  and  the  sitting  closes
after  a  long  period  of  waiting.

Remarks  on  Seance  VII.

This  sitting  was  remarkable  for  the  number  of  times
that  the  medium  seemed  to  think  that  the  phenomena
were  present  when  as  a  matter  of  fact  nothing  was  visible
to  the  observers.  This  is  qixite  a  common  occurrence
during  seances  with  this  medium,  and  it  is  possible  that
occasionally  she  sees  forms  of  objects  which  are  invisible
to  the  spectators.  The  white  object  seen  towards  the  end
of  the  sitting  was  variously  described  by  the  observers.
W.,  B.  and  Mrs.  S.  saj^  that  to  them  it  seemed  to  be  a


LXXXIV.]


A  Sei'ies  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


243


pear-shaped  object,  about  three  inches  in  length.  Mrs.  F.
said  that  to  her  it  appeared  more  the  shape  of  a  cigar,
an  opinion  which  may  well  be  due  to  her  having  observed
it  from  a  different  angle  of  vision  from  that  of  the  others,
as  she  was  standing  up  at  the  time  and  was  watching  the
phenomenon  from  above.


Seance  VIII.
May  7,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  F..  W.  S.,  W.  and  operator.

Control.  Before  and  after  the  sitting  W.  controlled  the
medium,  whilst  during  the  seance  W.  S.  sat  on  the
medium's  right  holding  her  right  hand  and  W.  on  her  left
holding  her  left  hand.

5.46  p.m.  Seance  begins.  After  hypnotization  the  pulse
is  124  and  is  regular  and  strong.

6.9  p.m.  A  trickle  of  saliva  is  visible  on  her  left
shoulder.

6.55  p.m. Pulse  116. Up  till  now  nothing  has  happened.

After  a  short  period  of  rather  stertorous
breathing  which  occurred  at  the  beginning
of  the  sitting  the  medium  remained  quite
quiet.  She  says  that  something  is  there
and  keeps  asking  Mme  B.  to  call  for  the
phenomena.

7.7 p.m. Medium says that she does not think  that

anything  is  going  to  happen.
7.25  p.m. Seance  closes.


Seance  IX.
May  10,  ,1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  F.,  B.,  W.,  W.  S.,  and  the  operator.

Control.  Before  and  after  the  sitting  Mrs.  S.  and  W.  con-
trolled the  medium,  whilst  during  the  seance  W.  S.  held
her  light  hand  and  W.  her  left.


244


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


[At  this  sitting  four  cameras  were  employed.  Mme
Bisson  had  set  up  her  own  camera  that  she  had  brought
from  Paris  and  Dr.  Woolley  had  brought  his  small  stereo-
scopic camera.

At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  Mme  Bisson  related
how  after  the  preceding  seance  the  medium  had  been
prise "  in  the  night  by  an  influence  which  said  that  it
had  been  trying  to  manifest.  An  "  incarnation  "  took
place,  the  "  control  "  giving  the  correct  name  of  a  soldier
whom  Mme  B.  had  nursed  in  a  hospital.  He  recalled
himself  to  her  mind  by  speaking  of  a  white  lock  of  hair
over  his  forehead  which  she  well  remembered.  According
to  Mme  B.'s  account  this  man  was  quite  unknown  to
the  medium.]

4.20  p.m. Seance  begins.

4.50  p.m.  Medium  is  not  yet  "  prise  "  but  she  says  that
she  thinks  that  something  is  coming.

4.58  p.m.  Medium  begins  to  groan  slightly,  and  the
stertorous  breathing  commences.  This  does
not  last  long  however  and  she  soon  becomes
quiet  again. Pulse  120.

5.21  p.m.  Small  amount  of  saliva  on  left  side  of  cheek.
5.40  p.m. Nothing  further  happens. Mme  B.  asks  Mrs.  S.

and  F.  to  take  the  medium's  hands  for  a
short  time  in  order  to  change  the  "  fluids."
They  lean  over  and  do  so  for  half  a  minute,
when  the  medium  asks  for  the  former
controllers  to  take  charge  again.

5.55  p.m.  Further  efforts  and  complaints  on  the  part
of  the  medium.  The  breathing  becomes  very
rapid.  She  says  that  "  she  feels  it  and
that  it  hurts  her."

6.0  p.m.  Medium  says  that  it  is  there,  and  putting  her
head  out  of  the  curtains  says,  "  Look."
Nothing  is  visible.

6.3  p.m.  She  says  the  same  thing  several  times  and
asks  to  be  examined.  Again  nothing  is
visible.  The  curtains  are  constantly  being
opened and the hands, held since  the


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


245


beginning  of  the  sitting,  remain  always
perfectly  visible.
6.10  p.m.  Still  nothing  has  appeared.  Mme  B.  suggests
that  the  controllers  should  hold  the  medium's
wrists  leaving  her  hands  free  so  that  the
"  fluid "  may  collect  between  the  finger
tips.  Medium  however  will  not  have  it
and  insists  on  fully  grasping  the  controllers'
hands.

6.17  p.m.  As  nothing  has  yet  appeared,  the  observers
succeed  in  persuading  Eva  to  adopt  the
wrist  control.  This  is  tried,  but  does  not
last  long,  and  the  former  method  is  soon
resumed.

6.25  p.m.  Medium  becomes  rather  excited.  She  breathes
heavily  and  keeps  on  repeating,  "It  is
there,  help  me  ! help  me  !  "

6.30  p.m.  W.  took  her  hand  and  closely  looked  at  a
white  object  which  appeared  on  her  thumb.
She  then  raised  her  hands  together  with
the  object  and  put  them  to  her  mouth.
[W.  S.  reported  after  the  sitting  that  it
'  looked  to him like a piece of stiff  white

paper  about  2  inches  long  by  |  inch
broad,  with  sharp  edges  and  rectangular
in  shape.  W.  and  Mrs.  S.  agreed  with  this
description,  whilst  B.  said  that  he  did  not
see  it  at  all  and  F.  had  only  a  partial
glimpse  from  behind.]

6.37  p.m.  Small  hand  seen  on  left  shoulder  and  photo-
graph taken.  It  was  afterwards  seen  on  the
right  shoulder  and  W.  S.  says  that  it  looked
as  if  the  fingers  were  cut  off  at  the  knuckles
or  closed.  [Mrs.  S.  reported  after  the  sitting
that  she  saw  this  phenomenon  particularly
well,  and  what  struck  her  most  was  that
at  first  it  seemed  to  her  like  a  kind  of  will
o'  the  wisp  or  flickering  light,  then  suddenly
forming  into  a  complete  hand.  W.  said
that he thought the hand was of  normal


246  A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  [part

proportions. All the observers agree  that
the  hands  of  the  medium  were  never  released
although  the  fingers  were  occasionally  free.]
6.55  p.m. Seance  closes.

Remarks  on  Seance  IX.

From  the  accounts  of  the  observers  during  this  seance
it  is  difficult  to  determine  clearh^  of  what  the  phenomenon
actually consisted. That the hand appears  to have  de-
veloped whilst  under  direct  observation  seems  to  be  certain
from  what  Mrs.  Salter  reported  after  the  sitting,  although
it is hard to understand exactly how this  occurred.
Fortunately  the  photograph  proved  an  excellent  one  as  the
accompanying  enlarged  reproduction  will  show  (Plate  IV.).
The medium is seen  seated  as  usual  in  her  chair,  whilst
her  hands  are  held  on  either  side  by  the  controllers.  On
her  left  shoulder,  towards  which  her  head  is  inclined,  are
seen the four fingers of a roughly designed left  hand
which  looks  as  if  it  were  made  of  some  inflated  material.
The  fingers  appear  to  be  jjartially  webbed,  and  a  piece
of  white  material  adheres  to  the  tips  of  the  first  and
second. From the root of the fourth finger hangs  a
white thread, whilst below, although not in any  way
attached,  is  another  white  thread  seemingly  looped  over
a  fold  in  the  medium's  dress. The  back  of  the  hand  is
not  formed,  being  composed  of  a  white  mass  of  indeter-
minate  shape, and  joined  to the  upper  part  of it is  a
small  face  of  a  pleasant-looking  child,  closely  resembling  a
photograph. The hair is evidently shaded on to  the
forehead  and  the  whole  head  is  surrounded  by  a  sort  of
whitish  hood  which  is  somewhat  pointed  towards  the  right-
hand  side. It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  face,  probably
owing  to  the insufficiency of light, was  not  noticed  by
any  of  the  observers  during  the  sitting,  its  existence  being
made known only by means of the photograph.  The
second  photograph  shows  the  same  phenomenon  from  a
slightly  different  point  of  view,  but  there  are  no  additional
characteristics  worthy  of  notice.


Plate  IV


ixxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  247


Seance  X.
May  12,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  INIrs.  S.,  Capt.  B.,  F.,  W.  S.,  Mr.  Dingwall
(D.),  and  the  operator.

Control.  Mrs.  Salter  controlled  the  medium  both  before  and
after  the  sitting,  whilst  during  the  seancu  W.  S.  sat  at
the  right-hand  side  of  the  medium  controlling  her  right
hand,  whilst  iVIrs.  S.  sat  on  her  left  and  controlled  the
hand  on  that  side.

5.17  p.m. Seance  begins,

5.52  p.m.  The  medium  has  been  quiet  up  till  now.  A
noise  in  the  throat  commences  which  is
followed  by  slight  groaning,  but  subse-
quently all  is  quiet  again.

5.55  p.m.  Capt.  B.  moves  from  the  place  he  occupied
at  the  beginning  of  the  seance  behind
Mme  B.  and  seats  himself  to  the  right  and
slightly  behind  D.

6.10  p.m.  Hands  are  now  controlled  by  the  wrists  only:
when  examined  the  hands  are  found  to  be
empty.

6.15  p.m.  Saliva  visible  on  right  shoulder.  The  little
fingers  of  the  controllers  are  now  being
grasped  by  the  medium.

6.20  p.m.  Medium  now  appears  to  be  about  to  be
"  prise,"  a  kind  of  grumbling  respiration  begins.

^6.22  p.m.  Medium  opens  curtains  and  leaning  forward
shows  a  mass  of  scattered-looking  liquid  on
her  right  breast.  Mme  B.  says  that  so  far
there  is  nothing  because  it  is  still  liquid,
but  perhaps  the  phenomena  will  form  from
it.

6.25  p.m.  Curtains  again  opened.  Some  saliva  that
seemed  semi-luminous  is  visible  on  the  right
side  of  her  breast  (?).  It  quickly  runs  down
producing  the  effect  of  quicksilver.

t6.27  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  feels  the  substance
coming  from  the  navel.


248


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


6.30  p.m.  Mrs.  S.  reports  that  on  looking  closely  at  the
medium's  chest  she  saw  a  streak  of  thin
liquid,  first  faint  but  afterwards  brighter,
appear  upon  the  surface  of  the  clothing.
She  did  not  see  any  come  from  the  mouth,
and  it  looked  as  if  the  substance  had  oozed
out  through  the  tights.

6.40  p.m.  Medium  has  become  quite  quiet  again,  nothing
further  having  happened.

7.0  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  feels  nothing  and  the
seance  is  therefore  closed.


Seance  XI.
May  13,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  F.,  W.,  B.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Befoie  and  after  the  sitting  W.  and  Mrs.  S.  During
the  seance  W.  on  the  right  of  medium  and  B.  on  the  left.

[At  the  conclusion  of  the  preceding  sitting  Mme  Bisson
had  suggested  that  the  controllers  should  in  the  future
leave  the  medium's  hands  free,  and  allow  them  to  remain
visibly  lying  on  her  knees.  The  reason  for  this  was  that
it  was  possible  that  constant  holding  of  the  hands  absorbed
the  "  fluids."  During  the  present  sitting  this  advice  was
acted  upon  when  it  was  thought  advisable,  and  when  the
medium  would  herself  permit  it.  It  may  here  be  observed
that  the  medium  seemed  obsessed  by  the  idea  that  it
was  necessary  that  her  hands  should  always  be  held,
and  even  when  the  controllers,  in  deference  to  Mme
Bisson's  suggestion,  sought  to  release  them  from  their
hold,  whilst  retaining  them  under  visual  observation,  the
medium  almost  invariably  at  once  seized  their  hands
again.  It  is  important  to  note  in  this  connexion  that
the  hands  were  fully  under  control  from  the  moment
that  the  light  was  turned  off  until  the  eyes  got  sufficiently
accustomed  to  the  illumination  for  them  to  be  able  to  see
the  hands  clearly.  This  rule  was  observed  throughout  the
entire  series  of  seances  and  will  wot  be  mentioned  again.]


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


249


5.21  p.m. Seance  begins.

5.34  p.m. Medium's  hands  remain  free  upon  her  knees.

5.44  p.m. Medium  is  still  quiet  ; her  pulse  is  116,  and

she  says  that  she  thinks  that  something  is
coming.

5.45  p.m. Saliva  falls  on  left  side.

6.5  p.m.  Up  till  now  the  hands  have  remained  visible,
and  quietly  resting  on  her  knees.  She  now
asks  for  them  to  be  held  and  begins  to
groan  a  little  as  if  she  felt  that  the  pheno-
mena were  acting  upon  her.  Mme  B.  says
that  she  is  certainly  "  prise.''

6.10  p.m.  Medium  opens  the  curtains,  but  nothing  is
visible.  The  crisis  gradually  subsides  and
nothing  appears.

6.15  p.m. Slight  resumption  of  the  "  travail.'^  "

6.20  p.m. Medium  says  several  times  that  "it  is  going

to  come."

6.21  p.m. At  this  point  unfortunately  F. sneezes  three

times  violently.  The  medium  starts  in  terror
and  partly  comes  back  to  herself.  Mme  B.
asks  permission  to  open  the  curtains,  and
showing  that  her  hands  are  empty  re-
hypnotizes  the  medium.  Her  pulse  is  100  and
Mme  B.  says  that  she  is  sleeping  too  deeply
and  must  be  recalled.  Holding  her  hands
(still  held  by  W.  and  B.)  she  recalls  her
to  a  speaking  state.  When  W.  and  B.
have  satisfied  themselves  that  her  hands  are
empty  she  again  places  them  on  her  knees
where  they  are  perfectly  visible  and  her
wrists  only  are  held.

6.35  p.m. The  "  travail  "  again  begins.

6.38  p.m.  The  hands  which  have  hitherto  been  warm
are  reported  by  W.  and  B.  to  have  become
colder.

^  This  word  is  used  by  Mme  Bisson  to  express  the  physical  efforts
made  by  the  medium  when  she  is  about  to  produce  phenomena,  or
apparently  expects  to  produce  them.  As  will  be  seen  from  this  report,
these  efforts  do  not  always  have  any  visible  result.


250


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  G.


[part


6.40  p.m. Medium  keeps  on  repeating,  "  It  is  coming."

6.50  p.m. Nothing  further  and  everything  quiet.

7.5  p.m.  Everything  still  quiet,  but  when  the  medium
is  asked  as  to  her  impressions  says  that
she  feels  "  them  "  all  round  her.

7.25  p.m.  No  further  developments  and  so  the  sitting  is
closed.


Seance  XII.
May  14,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  F.,  W.,  D.,  and  the  operator.
Control. IVIrs.  S.  and W. superintended the control  before

and  after,  whilst  during  the  seance  W.  sat  on  the  right

and  D.  on  the  left  of  the  medium.

4.16  p.m.  Seance  begins.  After  hypnotization  medium's
hands  are  examined,  before  the  light  is
turned  out.

5.10  p.m.  Up  till  now  the  medium  has  been  quiet,  her
hands  tightly  grasping  those  of  the  con-
trollers, which  she  refuses  to  relinquish  even
when  asked  to  do  so.  She  says  that  the
phenomena  are  coming.

5.13  p.m.  Mme.  B  asks  for  the  light  to  be  slightly
reduced,  which  is  accordingly  done.  W.
says  that  he  can  still  see  the  time  by  F.'s
watch  even  when  it  is  close  to  the  curtains.

6.25  p.m.  Nothing  has  happened  hitherto.  Against  the
wishes  and  struggles  of  the  medium  the
controllers  succeed  in  loosening  her  grasp
of  their  hands,  and,  withdrawing  them,
allow  hers  to  rest  in  full  view  upon  her
knees. She still objects strongly, and  at

6.37  p.m.  she  insists  on  holding  both  D.'s  hands,  saying
that  she  can  draw  power  from  him.
Shortly  afterwards  she  declares  that  she
can  feel  the  "  fluid "  se  degager.  A  little
saliva  appears.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


251


6.53  p.m.  Medium  says  that  it  is  useless  to  continue
and  that  it  will  not  se  degager.  The  sitting
closes.


Seance  XIII.
May  15,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  F.,  W.,  D.,  and  the  operator.

Control. Before  and  after  W.  controlled  the  medium,  whilst

during  the  sitting  W.  sat  on  the  right  and  D.  on  the  left

of  the  medium.

11.12  a.m.  Seance  begins.  Immediately  after  hypnotiza-
tion,  before  the  light  is  turned  out,  both
the  hands  of  Mme  B.  and  of  the  medium
are  examined.

11.41  a.m.  W.  and  D.  report  that  the  medium's  hands
are  much  colder  than  they  were  at  the
beginning  of  the  sitting.  They  have  been
continuously  visible  from  the  start  and  the
left  is  now  resting  on  D."s  and  the  right  on
W.'s  knee.

12.20  p.m.  A  little  saliva  is  observed  on  the  medium's
left  breast.

1.0  p.m.  Up  till  now  the  medium  has  been  perfectly
quiet.  Asked  if  she  feels  anything  she
repHes  in  the  negative  and  the  sitting  is
therefore  closed.


Seance  XIV.
3Iay  17,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Mrs  S.,  Mrs  F.,  F.,  B.,  W.,  D.,  and  the
operator.

Control.  Mrs.  S.  and  W.  controlled  before  and  after,  whilst
durmg  the  sittmg  W.  sat  on  the  right  and  B.  on  the  left
of  the  medium.

In  arranging  the  position  of  the  sitters  we  wished  to  place
D. between Mme  B. and B., but Mme  B. asked that  he


252


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


should  be  seated  behind  her  with  Mrs.  S.  and  Mrs.  F.  on
either  side,  as  such  an  allocation  of  the  sexes  was  a  favourable
condition.  As  the  magnesium  apparatus  was  behind  Mme  B.
and  there  was  not  room  for  another  seat  D.  took  his  place
to  her  left  and  only  slightly  behind  her.

[At  the  conclusion  of  the  previous  sitting  Mme  Bisson
had  said  that  she  feared  that  the  fact  that  in  London
the  medium  was  always  held  by  strange  controllers  instead
of  by  herself  as  in  Paris  might  partl}^  account  for  the
non-appearance  of  the  phenomena,  as  the  medium  was
accustomed  to  her  control  and  lacked  confidence  without
it.  We  therefore  suggested  that  we  should  try  the
Paris  conditions,  a  proposition  to  which  Mme  Bisson
objected,  since  she  said  that  success  would  involve  her  in
a  natural  suspicion.  She  then  said  that  if  we  returned
to  the  conditions  usually  obtaining  at  Paris,  she  should
insist  on  being  controlled  as  well  as  the  medium,  and
with  this  end  in  view  she  proposed  that  a  tulle  curtain
should  be  hung  l^etween  the  medium  and  the  sitters.  To
this  proposition  IMr.  Feilding  objected  on  the  ground  that
such  a  curtain  would  offer  a  serious  olistacle  not  only
to  seeing  the  phenomena,  but  also  to  touching  them.  In
hopes,  therefore,  of  meeting  her  views,  he  suggested  an
overall  for  Mme  Bisson  which  she  promptly  accepted,  and
Mrs.  Feilding  therefore  made  a  tulle  dress  wdth  sleeves
which  she  thought  would  answer  the  purpose  satisfactorily.
When  the  finished  dress  was  shown  to  Mme  Bisson,  she
criticized  it  saying  that  it  ought  to  have  been  more  like  a
bag,  completely  enclosing  her  head,  hands  and  feet.  A
compromise  was  however  effected  by  her  pulling  up  the
sleeves  of  her  dress,  the  tulle  sleeves  being  then  fastened
tightly  round  her  arms.  The  overall  was  then  sewn
together  all  round  under  her  feet,  so  that,  except  for  her
head  and  hands,  she  was  more  or  less  completely  enclosed
within  a  bag.  Her  hair  was  not  examined.  Before  the
sitting  began  she  asked  permission  for  W.  and  B.  to
act  as  controllers,  as  she  objected  to  D.'s  control  on
the  ground  that  it  was  too  rigid  {trop  dur).  In  this  con-
nexion she also suggested that we should allow  the


XXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


253


phenomena  to start  and  not  impede  their  ever  starting
by  an  unduly  harsh  and  critical  attitude. If  the  pheno-
mena  were permitted to begin they  could  be  observed,
and  once  this  was  done  under  good  conditions  she  was
sure  that  our  mental  attitude  would  change.]
8.35  p.m. Seance  begins. Although  it  had  been  intended
that Mme B. should hold the  medium's
hands after hypnotizing  her, this was  not
possible  as  the  latter  insisted  on  laying  her
hands  on  W.'s  and  B.'s.
9.11  p.m. Up  till  now  the  medium  has  been  quite  quiet.

W.  managed  to  release  his  hand  some  few-
moments  before  and  the  medium's  hand
has  been  resting  on  his  knee  ever  since,
except  for  about  two  seconds,  when  it  dis-
appeared behind  the  curtain.  The  medium
now  begins  to  moan  slightly,  and  a  little
saliva  falls  on  to  the  front  of  her  frock.
D.  feels  it  :  it  is  wet  and  viscous,  but  he
thinks  not  more  so  than  ordinary  saliva
would  be  under  similar  circumstances.
■9.17  p.m.  B.  releases  his  hand,  leaving  the  medium's
left  hand  resting  on  her  knee  and  perfectly
visible.

■9.18  p.m.  Both  hands  still  visible  on  knees.  Notwith-
standing the  overall  Mme  B.  still  refuses
to  take  the  medium's  hands,  as  her  own  are
not  enclosed  in  bags.

9.37  p.m. Sahva is noticed under the left hand.  W.

lights  it  up  with  the  pocket  electric  torch.
It  appears  black  and  shiny  under  the  light.
B.  reports  that  the  hands  are  very  cold.

■9.50  p.m.  Eva  is  groaning  a  good  deal.  She  says  that
it  is  coming  from  her  chest  and  asks  if
there  is  anything  there.  The  curtains  are
opened  by  W.,  who  looks  in,  but  does  not
see  anything.  Mme  B.  now  takes  the
medium's  hands  and  tries  to  encourage
her.

■9.56  p.m. Nothing happens, and Mme B.  relinquishes


254


A  Series  of  Sittings  tvitli  Eva  C.


[part


the  medium's  hands,  which  remain  resting
on  Eva"s  knees.  Shortly  after  Mme  B.  gives
the  medium's  hands  back  to  W.  and  B.
10.2  p.m.  A  stream  of  saKva  is  seen  trickling  from  the
left  shoulder.  Curtains  closed  and  then
immediately  re-opened  by  the  medium,  who
shows  a  white  spot,  the  size  of  a  large  pea,
on  her  left  breast.  The  saliva  on  the  left
shoulder  appears  to  be  no  longer  there  and
the  white  spot  may  also  have  been  saliva,
but  stationary.

10.10  p.m.  Eva  opens  the  curtains  wide  and  shows  her-
self, but  no  phenomena  are  visible.

10.15  p.m. Much moving, straining and moving of  the

hands  outside  the  curtains.

10.16  p.m. Curtains  opened  by  the  medium  and  a  long

stream  of  very  white  saliva  is  seen  trickling
from  the  right  shoulder.  Curtains  closed
and  when  re-opened  immediately  after  several
drops  of  white  substance  are  seen  upon  the
lap.  This  when  illuminated  by  the  torch
shows  white  under  the  light,  and  Mme  B.
says  that  it  is  a  piece  of  the  "  substance,"
still  amorphous  and  mingled  with  saliva.

10.30  p.m.  F.  asks  Mme  B.  to  take  Eva's  hands,  but
the  medium  says  that  the  present  control
is  not  disturbing  to  her.  Mme  B.  thereupon
remarked  that  it  was  "  not  the  same  as
she  said  yesterday,  when  on  putting  her  to
sleep  she  said  that  it  did."  W.  and  B.
release  their  hands,  but  Mme  B.  still
refuses  to  take  Eva's,  which  are  lying  on
her  knees,  as  the  latter  evidently  does  not
wish  it,  and  Mme  B.  desires  that  the
medium  should  remain  quiet.

10.45  p.m.  Eva  insists  on  taking  W.'s  and  B.'s  hands,
saying  that  she  likes  it  better  so.

10.48  p.m.  Renewed  disquiet  taking  the  form  of  moans,
groans  and  struggles.  Hands  remain  held
and  plainly  visible.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


255


10.49  p.m.  Eva  opens  the  curtains  and  shows  a  long
stream  of  white  curly-looking  stuff  lying
motionless  on  her  breast.  It  disappears
almost  at  once,  but  B.  touches  what  re-
mains and  receives  a  damp  sensation.  Mme
B.  says  that  it  is  the  '  substance,'  which
however  has  not  strength  enough  to  take
any  distinct  form.

10.55  p.m.  A  Wimshurst  machine  is  revolved  for  a  few
moments  inside  the  cabinet  in  order  to
ozonize  the  air.

11.4 p.m. Nothing  further. Seance  closes.


Seance  XV.
May  18,  1920.
Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  F.,  and  W.

CoNTKOL. Mrs.  S.  and  W.  controlled  the  medium  before  and
after  the  sitting,  Mrs.  S.  being  on  the  left  and  W.  on  the
right  of  the  medium  during  the  seance.
Mme  B.  wears  her  overall  as  before,  and  after  the  medium
has  been  hypnotized  her  hands  are  held  by  Mme  B.  and  W.,
but presently W. releases his, leaving the medium's  hand
lying  on  her  laiee  whilst  Mrs.  S.  holds  the  other.

6.15  p.m. Seance  begins.

6.40  p.m. Eva  asks  W.  to  give  her  his  hand. Up  till  now
both  hands  have been  continuously  visible.
6.42  p.m. Pulse  114.

6.50  p.m. Medium  says  that  it  is  coming  {ga  va  venir).

7.0  p.m.  Some  saliva  on  shoulder  is  observed  trickling
down  on  to  the  breast.

7.26  p.m.  Nothing  further.  Hands  have  been  some-
times held,  and  sometimes  allowed  to  be
free,  but  always  visible.

7.50  p.m.  A  good  deal  of  saliva  is  visible.  W.  takes
some  in  a  small  bottle  for  the  purpose  of
subsequent  analysis.

8.0 p.m. Seance  closes,  as  nothing  has  appeared.


256


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


Seance  XVI.
May  19,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  F.,  W.,  D.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Mrs.  S.  and  W.  before  and  after,  whilst  during  the

sitting  W.  sat  on  the  medium's  right  and  B.  on  her  left.

Mme  B.  wore  her  overall  and  her  hands  were  also  enclosed

in  tulle  bags.

[Before  the  sitting  commenced  Mme  B.  again  complained
of  the  attitude  which  she  thought  was  taken  up  by  D.,
and  suggested  that  his  control  should  not  be  so  "  rigid  "
as  she  thought  it  on  a  previous  occasion.  This  was  at
once  conceded,  and  D.  no  longer  kept  up  the  same  watch-
ful attention  that  he  had  exercised  before.]

5.19  p.m. Seance  begins.

6.55  p.m.  Nothing  has  happened  hitherto.  The  medium
has  remained  quite  quiet,  and  now  she
suggests  that  she  should  strip  to  the  waist
in  order  to  assist  the  phenomena  to  show
themselves.

F.,  D.,  and  the  operator  retire.
7.10  p.m. Seance closed. Mrs. S. and W. report  that
nothing  has  happened.

Seance  XVII.
Maij  21,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  F.,  B.,  D.,  and  the  operator.

Control.  Mrs.  S.  and  W.  before  and  after,  whilst  during  the
sitting  W.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  B.  on
the  left.  Mme  B.  wore  her  overall  with  her  hands  en-
closed in  tulle  bags  as  before.

[At  the  conclusion  of  the  last  sitting  Mme  Bisson  had
remarked  that  a  possible  cause  of  the  weakness  of  the
phenomena  was  to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that  the  medium
seemed  to  be  tired  and  languid  and  so  she  suggested  that


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


257


Dr.  Woolley  should  prepare  a  tonic,  which  he  accordingly
promised  to  do  as  soon  as  possible.]

5.16  p.m. Seance  begins. Mme  B.  hypnotizes  the  medium

somewhat  more  deeply  than  usual,  as  she
thinks  this  will  enable  her  to  become  less
conscious  of  her  immediate  environment.

5.55  p.m.  The  hands  have  been  held  continuously  by
W.  and  B.  Crisis  now  begins  but  soon
subsides  : nothing  appears.

6.7  p.m.  Eva  gives  a  cry  :  the  curtains  are  opened
but  nothing  is  visible.

6.20  p.m.  At  Mme  B.'s  request  Eva  releases  her  hands
from  W.  and  B.  and  places  them  on  her  lap,
where  they  are  perfectly  visible.  Shortly
afterwards  however  she  resumes  her  hold
of  W.  and  B.'s  hands.

6.55  p.m.  The  light  is  slightly  reduced.  Immediately
afterwards  Eva  leans  forward  and,  showing
a  small  white  spot  on  the  left  shoulder,
says  that  it  is  coming."  [At  the  reduc-
tion of  the  light  the  medium  strongly
■  .  '  protested,  saying  that  she  did  not  wish  it

and  that  M.  Dingwall  ne  -pent  voir.'''  D.
was  sitting  on  the  left  of  Mme  B.  and  had
an  excellent  view.]  More  white  substance
appears  on  the  right  shoulder  and  the
medium's  pulse  is  136.  Eva  keeps  on
opening  the  curtains,  declaring  that  it  is
there  and  that  she  feels  it,  but  nothing  is
visible.

7.17  p.m. Light again reduced. It is now  very  dark,

and  Eva  insists  on  again  holding  the  hands
of  the  controllers.
7.25  p.m.  Eva  asks  for  the  torch  to  be  turned  on  to
her  lap,  saying  that  she  feels  something,  but
does  not  know  what  or  where.  Nothing  is
visible.

Great excitement. Mme B. says that  she
thinks something is coming and asks  for


258  A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  [part

a  better  light,  which  is  accordingly  increased,
but  it  is  still  darker  than  usual.

7.30  p.m.  A  thing  somewhat  similar  in  shape  to  a
child's  bib  is  seen  hanging  from  the  medium's
mouth.  Shortly  afterwards  Eva  leans  for-
ward, and  W.  says  that  the  thing  looked
like  a  picture  in  chalk  done  on  paper.

7.37  p.m.  Medium  gives  the  signal  for  the  flash  to  be
taken.  Mme  B.  says  that  if  it  comes
again,  we  must  examine  it  with  the  torch.
Excitement  continues  and  Eva  asks  the
controllers  to  note  that  she  has  never
moved  her  feet  from  theirs  and  then
demands  that  the  light  from  the  torch  be
thrown  into  her  mouth.  This  is  done,  but
nothing  is  visible.  Immediately  she  says
"  C'est  fini.''

7.45  p.m. The  sitting  closes.


Remarks  on  Seance  XVII.

Immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the  seance  the
observers  were  requested  to  dictate  their  impressions  to  F.,
as  owing  to  the  excitement  and  the  difficulty  of  speaking
amid  the  general  disturbance  it  was  found  to  be  im-
possible to  take  sufficient  notes  whilst  the  phenomena
were  in  progress.  The  following  are  the  accounts  thus
received.

W.  said  that  the  order  of  the  proceedings  was  as
follows  :  a  whitish  object  dropped  from  her  mouth  into
her  lap.  He  tried  to  get  his  hand  or  the  torch  to  it,
but  by  bringing  her  two  hands  (still  held  by  the  con-
trollers) together  in  front  of  it  she  prevented  him  from
getting  any  observation  of  it.  She  then  put  it  into  her
mouth  with  her  left  hand,  and  he  flashed  the  torch  on  to
it.  B.  was  controlling  her  left  hand  at  the  time  and  she
brought  his  hand  as  well  as  her  own  up  to  her  mouth.
The  object,  when  illuminated  by  the  torch,  looked  like  a
piece  of  paper  about  four  by  three  inches  in  size  and
filling  her  mouth. It  seemed  to  have  on  it  a  face  roughly


i


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


259


drawn  in  coloured  crayons.  (Mrs.  S.  had  independently
noted  that  it  seemed  to  her  to  have  some  colour  which
she  thought  was  red). The  photograph  was  then  taken.

B.  said  that  the  first  thing  he  saw  was  a  white  thing,
oval  in  shape,  coming  from  her  mouth.  Suddenly  she
dropped  it  into  her  lap.  He  did  not  notice  her  pick  it
up,  but  when  he  looked  again  at  her  mouth  there  was
something  in  it  which  looked  quite  different  from  what
he  had  first  seen.  The  first  object  had  seemed  smooth
and  white,  whilst  the  second  was  square  in  form,  the
edges  being  cut  and  serrated  as  if  by  scissors.  There
were  marks  on  the  surface  which  seemed  to  him  to  have
a  reddish  tint,  although  he  had  not  distinguished  any
design  of  a  face.  From  the  beginning  of  the  appearance
of  the  phenomena  he  had  never  let  go  the  hand  of  the
medium  for  an  instant.

D.  said  that  the  first  thing  he  saw  was  an  irregularly
shaped  whitish  object,  about  three  and  a  half  by  two
inches  broad.  He  had  seen  it  only  for  a  couple  of
seconds,  when  he  saw  it  drop  on  to  the  medium's  lap.
It  seemed  to  him  to  be  smaller  when  it  was  lying  on  her
lap  than  it  was  when  it  was  in  her  mouth.  He  then
saw  her  put  both  her  hands  over  it  on  her  lap  and  raise
it  with  them  to  her  mouth.  When  she  lowered  them
again  he  saw  in  her  mouth  an  object  like  a  piece  of
paper  bent  so  that  its  two  edges  were  held  within  her
lips. Cf.  Fig.  2. He  next  saw  a  piece  of  white  substance


hangmg  from  the  left  side  of  her  mouth  and  on  its
surface  a  roughly  drawn  face.  It  appeared  as  though  the
piece  previously  bent  back  had  now  opened  and  fallen
below  her  mouth.  The  face  itself  seemed  to  him  to  be
like  Fig.  77  in  Mme  Bisson's  book,  though  without  the
edges  which  surrounded  the  face  on  that  occasion.

Mrs.  S.  said  that  she  saw  a  white  object  apparently
hanging  from  the  medium's  mouth. It  fell  into  her  lap


Fig.  J.


260


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


and  she  pulled  her  hands  together  over  it  and  raised  it
to  her  mouth.  Mrs.  S.  said  that  she  did  not  see  in  which
hand  the  medium  held  it,  but  when  W.  flashed  his  torch
on  it,  she  distinctly  saw  some  reddish  marks,  and  inferred
from  the  shape  that  it  was  probably  a  head  although  she
could  not  distinguish  any  features.  .

On  developing  the  plates  exposed  at  this  sitting  (Plates
v.  and  VI.)  a  surprise  awaited  the  committee.  The  photo-
graphs show  the  medium  lying  back  in  her  chair,  her  head
bent  forward  and  her  chin  tightly  pressed  against  her  chest.
Between  her  chin  and  her  dress,  as  if  gripped  by  the
former,  hangs  what  appears  to  be  the  small  photograph
of  a  himian  face,  surrounded  by  a  narrow  frame  of  torn
and  ragged  paper.  This  face,  to  the  astonishment  of  the
observers,  in  no  way  resembled  that  seen  by  them,  being
a  much  more  finished  and  artistic  product  than  that
momentarily  revealed  by  the  light  cast  from  the  torch.
In  place  of  a  rough  drawing  as  if  rudely  sketched  in
chalk,  appears  what  seems  to  be  a  photograph  of  a  human
face  which  has  something  calm  and  even  dignified  about  it.
The  forehead  is  not  visible,  the  nose  is  exceptionally  long,
and  a  piece  of  the  ragged  edge  obscures  a  portion  of  the
mouth.

Seance  XVIII.
May  23,  1920.

Present. Mme  B., Mrs.  Woolley, Mrs.  F., Mr.  Houdini  (H.)

B.,  D.,  F.,  W.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Before and after the sitting Mrs.  F., and W.  ;

during,  W.  on  the  right  and  H.  on  the  left  of  the  medium.

[On  examining  the  medium's  garments  before  this
seance  D.  discovered  in  a  pleat  of  the  medium's  frock
just  below  the  neck,  a  piece  of  white  substance  adhering
to  a  thick  saliva  stain  upon  the  surface  of  the  cloth.
The  substance  itself  was  flat,  roughly  circular  in  shape,  and
measured  about  6  mm.  x  5  mm. On  being  examined  again


Plate  V.


Platk  VJ.


Lxxxrv.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


261


later  microscopically  by  W.  the  substance  proved  to  be  a
piece  of  paper  somewhat  similar  in  texture  and  appearance
to  certain  varieties  of  Japanese  rag  or  other  soft  papers.
This  discovery  was  not  made  known  to  Mme  B.  or  to
the  medium  before  the  sitting  for  fear  of  disturbing  their
mental  condition,  which  might  be  harmful  to  the  pro-
duction of  the  phenomena.]

5.35  p.m. Seance  begins.

5.40  p.m. Some  saliva  is  seen  on  the  left  shoulder.

6.0 p.m. At  Mme  B.'s  request  the  light  is  reduced.  F.

reports,  "  From  my  seat,  about  four  or  five
feet  from  the  controllers,  I  can  see  their
faces  and  hands  dimly."

6.34  p.m. Eva  begins  to  moan  and  asks  us  to  call  for

the  phenomena.  A  white  patch  is  visible
on  the  right  shoulder.

6.35  p.m. White  patch  on  left  shoulder.

6.50  p.m.  A  good  deal  of  frothy  stuff  is  visible  on  the
breast  and  thigh.

7.12  p.m.  Eva  says  she  feels  nothing  but  "  fa  va  et
vient."  H.  takes  her  two  hands  and  Mme
B.  asks  W.  to  put  his  hands  on  Eva's
neck  and  forehead.  She  then  flashes  the
light  on  the  medium's  face  from  whose
mouth  a  great  deal  of  froth  is  seen  issuing.
In  order  to  shield  the  medium's  eyes  Mme
B.  asks  W.  to  cover  them  with  his  hands,
while  D.  lights  up  her  face  for  a  further
examination.

7.35  p.m.  Eva  says  that  she  feels  nothing  and  the
sitting  is  abandoned.


Remarks  on  Seance  XVIII.

Mme  Bisson  had  recently  made  the  acquaintance  of
Mr.  Houdini,  and  herself  suggested  that  he  should  be
invited  to  some  sittings.  She  was  of  course  aware  of  his
reputation  as  a  conjurer.


262


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivitk  Eva  C.


[part


Seance  XIX.
May  25,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  B.,  D.,  F.,  W.  S.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Before  and  after  the sitting  Mrs.  S.  ; during,  D.

on  the  right  and  B.  on  the  left  of  the  medium. Mme  B.

wore  her  white  tulle  costume.

[Before  the  sitting  F.  suggested  to  Mme  B.  that  the
medium  should  wear  a  veil  sewn  to  her  tights  and
entirely  enclosing  her  head  ;  the  idea  being  that  if  any
phenomenon  then  appeared  inside  the  veil,  the  only
hypothesis  that  would  be  suggested  to  account  for  it  by
normal  means  would  be  that  of  regurgitation,  while  if
one  appeared  both  within  and  without  the  veil,  even  that
would  have  to  be  discarded.  Mme  B.  however  was  not
inclined  to  agree  to  this  suggestion,  as  she  said  that  the
medium  was  already  too  hostile  for  her  to  venture  to
propose  it,  and  advised  postponement.]

4.30  p.m. Seance  begins.

5.20  p.m.  D.  thinks  that  he  was  touched  on  the  left
arm  by  something  inside  the  curtain.  Both
hands  were  held  by  him  and  B.  at  the
time.

5.23  p.m.  Light  reduced.  Eva  says  that  it  is  too  dark
and  it  is  increased  slightly.  F.  reports
"  the  light  is  dim  hxit  I  can  see  the  hands
from  where  I  am,  four  or  five  feet  from
the  curtain."  Eva  says  that  she  feels
something  round  her,  but  does  not  know
whether  it  will  manifest  itself.

6.15  p.m.  Up  till  now  medium  has  been  quite  quiet,
talking  occasionally  and  at  times  breathing
rather  rapidly,  but  no  crisis  of  any  kind
has  supervened.

Shortly  after,  F.  and  W.  S.  were  obliged
to  leave  and  the  sitting  was  continued
without  them.

6.47  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  feels  nothing  and  owing
to  the  great  heat  the  sitting  was  closed.


liXxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  263

Remarks  on  Seance  XIX.

This  sitting  was  the  only  one  at  which  any  of  the
sitters  were  '  touched '  during  the  entire  course  of  the
Society's  seances  with  this  medium.  The  touch  itself
partook  more  of  the  nature  of  a  decided  poke  and  was
felt  at  a  distance  of  about  fourteen  inches  from  the
wrist.  Unfortunately  it  was  not  repeated  and  so  experi-
ments as  to  its  origin  could  not  be  carried  out.

Seance  XX.
Maij  27,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  B.,  D.,  F.,  W.,  and  the  operator.

Control.  Mrs.  S.  and  W.  btfore  and  after,  whilst  during  the
sitting  D.  sat  at  the  right  and  B.  at  the  left  of  the
medium.  The  medium's  veil  was  sewn  on  by  Mrs.  S.,
whilst  Mme  B.  also  wore  her  tulle  costume.

[On  the  day  preceding  this  seance  the  medium,  having
probably  heard  of  F.'s  suggestion,  reported  in  the  last  seance,
had  herself  suggested  that  she  should  wear  a  veil  which
would  completely  cover  her  face.  The  Committee  accepted
the  suggestion,  and  consequently  a  veil  was  provided  and
was  worn  by  the  medium  for  the  first  time  at  the  present
sitting.  This  veil  consisted  of  an  ordinary  piece  of  black
gauze  made  of  silk  and  cotton  fibres,  the  size  of  the  mesh
being  3  mm.  square.  Before  the  seance  Mrs.  S.  sewed
1;his  veil  to  the  medium's  tights,  an  opening  being  left
behind,  which  was  later  sewn  up  with  white  thread  before
she  put  on  her  outer  tunic.  The  medium  was  thus  en-
closed in  a  bag  leaving  only  her  hands  free,  the  neck
of  the  tunic  coming  well  above  the  line  of  stitches
fastening  the  veil  to  the  tights.]

5.5 p.m. Seance  begins. Hands  held  by  D.  and  B.

5.17  p.m. White  patch  of  saliva  visible  on  left  shoulder.

■5.20  p.m.  A  rather  larger  quantity  of  saliva  is  seen  on
the  left  forearm  just  above  the  elbow.  The
light  is  stronger  to-day  than  is  usuallj"  the
case.


264  A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  [part

6.18  p.m. Saliva  on  lap.

6.35  p.m.  Eva,  who  has  been  moaning  gently  and
rapidly  for  some  time,  now  asks  Mme  B.
to  call  for  the  phenomena  ("  Aqypelle,  ma
Juliette,  a^ipelle.")
.  6.55  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  feels  it  all  round  her.
7.3  p.m.  Eva's  hands  are  left  free,  but  lie  visibly  on
her  knees.

7.30  p.m.  Eva  has  been  asked  several  times  if  it  is
worth  while  going  on.  She  says  that  she
thinks  she  feels  something  to  her  right  and
prefers  to  go  on  a  little  longer  in  the  hope
that  it  will  show  itself.

7.40  p.m.  She  says  that  her  feeling  has  diminished  and
the  sitting  is  abandoned.


Sea>T'e  XXI.
Maij  28,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  F.,  D.,  and  the  operator,  who  took  notes
from  dictation.

Control.  Mrs.  F.  controlled  the  medium  before  the  sitting,
sewing  the  veil  as  before  at  the  back,  but  was  unabfe
to  stay,  and  left  before  the  seance  began.  During  the
sitting  F.  sat  on  the  right  and  D.  on  the  left  of  the
medium,  whilst  at  the  conclusion  a  partial  control  only
was  exercised  by  D.  and  F.,  the  medium  remainmg  in  her
tights.  The  veil  was  worn  as  before.  Glass  of  the
torch  covered  in  orange  paper.

4.52  p.m. Seance  begins.

5.6 p.m. Eva's  hands  are  free,  but  they  remain  visible

outside  the  curtains
5.14  p.m. Medium  asks  for  her  hands  to  be  held.  They

are taken by D. and P., but  later  Eva

requests D. to take them both and  she

puts  her  knees  between  his.
5.21  p.m. On  account  of  the  heat  it  is  suggested  that

the medium's frock should be  removed.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  265

D.  and  F. thereupon  remove  the  garment,
the  hands and  arms beuig  fully  controlled
throughout  the  process.
5.24  p.m. Medium  opens  the  curtains  wide  bvxt  nothing
is  visible. A  crisis seems to be  approach-
ing.

5.29  p.m.  Medium  appears  to  be  "  prise  "  and  asks
for  the  cameras  to  be  prepared.  D.  is
holding  both  her  hands  and  with  the  cur-
tains wide  open  he  is  able  to  see  right
into  the  cabinet.  Eva  occasionally  leans
forward  showing  her  face  at  the  front  of
the  curtains,  and  panting  like  a  dog  ;  she
declares  that  it  is  coming.

5.35  p.m.  Eva  says  that  "  it  is  here  "  and  calls  for
help  so  that  she  can  prodvice  the  phenomena
outside  the  veil.  She  leans  forward  and
F.  says  that  he  has  the  strong  impression
that  a  white  object  is  coming  out  on  a
level  with  her  mouth  through  the  veil.
He  sees  her  face  and  head  in  profile  and
the  object  appears  white  and  fluffy,  one
and  a  half  inches  in  length  and  resembling
a  feather  covered  with  swan's  down.

[D.  says  that  he  saw  a  whitish  strip
about  one  and  a  half  inches  long  by  a  half
inch  in  breadth,  which  seemed  to  be  coming
from  the  left  corner  of  her  mouth  and  to
be  lying  flat  against  her  cheek.  It  is
doubtful  whether  this  is  the  same  object
as  seen  by  F.  as  the  latter  could  not  see
the  left  side  of  Eva's  face  from  his  position.
As  D.  was  sitting  almost  opposite  the
medium  he  may  have  seen  what  F.  des-
scribed,  but  foreshortened.]

5.39  p.m. Medium  asks  for  the  curtain  to  be  closed  as

she  is  trying  to  get  the  phenomenon  through
the  veil.

5.40  p.m. Eva  says  that  it  has  passed  through  the  veil,.

because  she  saw  it.


'266


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


5.43  p.m.  Eva  opens  the  curtains  and  says,  "  There  it
is."  Nothing  is  visible  and  the  curtains
are  closed.

5.43i  p.m. Eva  leans  forward  and  tells  Mme  B.  that  it
is  on  her  shoulder. Nothing  is  visible  and
the  curtains  are  again  closed.
5.45  p.m. She  again  leans  forward  and  says  it  is  about
her  head,  but  nothing  is  seen.

5.46^  p.m.  She  again  leans  forward  and  says,  "  Don't
you  see  it  ?  "  Nothing  is  visible.
5.48  p.m.  A  white  waxlike  pointed  object  is  seen  coming
from  the  medium's  mouth  inside  the  veil.^
It  seemed  to  be  about  as  long  as  the  little
finger  and  according  to  F.  strongly  re-
sembled, in  appearance  though  not  in  colour,
the  pistil  of  an  arum  lily.  He  was  not
quite  sure  whether  it  was  in  or  outside
the  veil,  but  on  feeling  it  with  his  hand,
he  found  it  was  outside.  The  medium
raised  D.'s  hands  to  her  mouth  and  he
felt  the  object  scrape  over  the  back  of  his
hand.  The  torch  was  turned  on  it  and
both  F.  and  D.  saw  that  it  was  sticking
out  of  her  mouth  through  the  veil.  The
medium  then  asked  for  the  photographs
to  be  taken,  and  after  the  flash  she  again
asked  for  the  object  to  be  examined  outside
her  mouth.  F.  and  D.  both  saw  the  object
in  her  movith  and  to  D.  the  part  outside
the  veil  seemed  to  be  shorter  than  before.
She  lowered  her  head  towards  her  hands
and  seemed  for  a  moment  to  put  the  object
into  them,  and  we  again  turned  the  torch
onto  the  phenomenon.  She  then  appar-
ently put  it  back  into  her  mouth,  and
turning  her  head  round  as  far  as  she  could
prevented  us  from  seeing  the  exact  way  in

^  D.'s  record  written  at  7.30  p.m.  the  same  evening  reads  :  "  Then  again
a  white  object  protruded  from  her  mouth  inside  the  veil,  and  then  I  saw  it
outside.


Lxxxrv.]  A  Series  of  Sittings  tvith  Eva  C.  267


which  it  disappeared.  She  then  asked  for
the  veil  to  be  examined  again  with  the
torch,  but  the  object  was  no  longer  visible.

6.2  p.m. Eva asks for the observers to call  for  the

reappearance  of  the  phenomenon,  but  nothing
is  now  visible.

6.3  p.m. Eva  says  that  she  feels  a  pain  in  her  chest

and  keeps  plucking  at  her  dress  with  her
hands  which  were  still  held  by  D.  Her
breathing,  which  had  previously  been  rapid
and  panting,  became  suddenly  inaudible  and
she  remained  seated  in  her  chair  in  an
absolutely  quiescent  condition.  Later  she
came  to  herself.
6.15  p.m. The  sitting  closes.

After  the  medium  had  left  the  cabinet  F.
and  D.  made  a  minute  examination  of  the
veil.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mouth
it  was  intact,  but  at  a  point  about  4  inches
below  the  neck  a  small  space  in  the  front
seam  which  had  been  imperfectly  sewn  was
detected.  This  hole  was  sufficient  for  the
insertion  of  a  forefinger,  and  under  a  differ-
ent method  of  control  it  might  have  been
physically  possible  to  force  a  previously
prepared  object  in  and  out  as  desired.  But
an  action  such  as  this  would  have  neces-
sitated the  lifting  of  the  veil  (which  hung
drooping  over  the  seam),  the  discovery  of
the  opening  in  the  darkness,  and  the  insert-
tion  and  withdrawal  of  the  object  through
it,  whilst  the  hands  were  held  the  whole
time  by  one  of  the  controllers,  who  was
keenl}?^  alert  for  the  slightest  indication  of
any  suspicious  movement.  At  the  discovery
of  this  opening  both  Mme  Bisson  and  Eva
appeared  much  upset,  and  it  was  only
with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  the  medium
was  sufficiently  calmed  for  her  to  proceed
home. The  photographs  on  being  developed


268


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


were  unfortunately  so  badly  blurred  as  to
be  worthless  for  the  purpose  of  reproduction.
The  medium  had  lent  so  far  forward  in.
her  chair  in  order  to  show  the  phenomenon
that  she  was  quite  out  of  the  focus  of
both  cameras.  A  part  of  the  veil  is  shown
tucked  into  her  mouth,  and  the  object  which
has  been  described  above  as  like  the  pistil
of  an  arum  lily  is  seen  held  between  the
medium's  lips.  All  that  part  of  it  which  is
visible  appears  to  be  about  the  size  of  a
small  finger  and  the  part  outside  the  veil
appears  to  be  about  1'.  inches  long.  But
owing  to  the  blurring  of  the  photograph,,
it  is  impossible  to  form  an  exact  estimate.


Remarks  on  Seance  XXI.

In  this  sitting,  which  from  the  evidential  point  of  view
was  probably  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  whole
series,  the  '  materialized  substance  '  appeared  to  pass
through  the  veil  without  in  any  way  injuring  the  meshes
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mouth.  The  fact  that  an
opening  in  the  lower  seam  was  discovered  after  the  sitting
is  not  in  our  opinion  one  which  need  in  any  way  trouble
the  serious  student.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  it  was
unfortunate  that  this  opening  was  not  noticed  before  the
seance.  Such  mal-observation  only  indicates  too  clearly
that  the  most  extreme  caution  is  always  necessary  when
conducting  investigations  of  this  nature.  With  regard  to
the  actual  use  of  this  opening  by  the  medium  little  need
be  said.  We  are  quite  convinced  in  our  own  minds  that
as  a  matter  of  fact  Eva  did  not  so  use  it,  and  even
assuming  that  the  phenomenon  was  brought  about  by
normal  agency,  we  are  not  of  opinion  that  the  opening
could  have  been  employed  for  its  production.  Before
the  next  sitting  the  veil  was  doubly  sewn  round  the
tights  with  a  sewing-machine,  thus  making  it  for  the
future  absolutely  secure.


XXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


269


Seance  XXII.
May  31,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Dr.  W.  J.  Crawford,  B.,  D.,  F.,  W.,  W.  S.,

and  the  operator.
Control. Before  and  after,  W.,  during  the  sitting  B.  sat  on

the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  cn  the  left. The  medium

wore her veil, but  Mme  B. no longer wore her  tulle

costume.

4.42  p.m. Seance  begins. Hands  held  by  B.  and  D.

4.55  p.m. Both hands transferred to D.,  who  is  asked

by  Eva  to  hold  them  more  tightly.
5.15  p.m. D. reports that the whole of the  medium's

hands are now enclosed within his  own

including  the  thumbs.
5.20  p.m. Mme  B.  points  out  that  the  medium  is  not

able  to  get  any fluid  "  if  she  insists  on

having  her  hands  held  from  the  beginning.

D.  therefore  withdraws  his  hands,  and  Eva's

are  left  lying  visibly  on  her  knees.
6.7 p.m. A  spot  of  saliva  is  visible  on  medium's  arm.
6.20  p.m. Eva  again  takes  D.'s  hands  saying  she  gets

force from them. B. and D. agree  that

her hands have not yet approached  her

head.

A  crisis  seems  to  be  approaching.

6.40  p.m.  D.  sees  a  white  object  like  frothy  saliva  in
her  mouth  inside  the  veil.  He  reports  that
she  lifts  her  hands  to  the  veil  while  holding
his.  At  Mme  B.'s  suggestion  B.  turns  the
torch  on  to  Eva's  face.  Nothing  is  seen
and  half  of  her  face  is  hidden  through
being  pressed  against  the  back  of  the  chair.
Mme  B.  explains  to  the  medium  the  im-
portance of  lighting  up  the  phenomenon
w^hile  it  is  inside  the  veil.

6.53  p.m. Crisis is continued but is not very  strong.

Eva  is  breathing  rapidly  and  says  it  is
still  there. Mme  B.  says  it  often  happens


270


A  Series  of  Sittings  loith  Eva  C.


[part


that  the  force  comes  and  then  appears  to

go  off  to  return  later.
7.3 p.m. There has been complete silence for  some

time. Mme  B.  asks  if  "  it  "  has  gone,  but

medium  says,  "  Wait."
7.11  p.m. Medium  says  that  she  still  feels  nothing,  and

the  sitting  is  closed.

Note. — Mme  Bisson  was  of  opinion  that  as  phenomena
had  actually  occurred  when  both  she  and  the  medium
were  practical^  enclosed  in  bags,  she  had  sufficiently
established  her  own  non-complicity  in  their  production.
She  therefore  suggested  that  it  was  no  longer  necessary
for  her  to  wear  the  tulle  costume.  As  it  had  only  been
imposed  in  deference  to  her  own  wishes,  the  Committee
readily  concurred.


Seance  XXIII.
June  2,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Mrs.  Desmet,  Mr.  Beaufort,  D.,  F.,  W.,  and
the  operator.

Control.  Before  and  after,  W.  Mme  B.  did  not  wear  her
costume,  but  the  medium  wore  her  veil,  which  was  examined
before  the  seance  by  both  W.  and  D.  During  the
sitting  W.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on
the  left.

5.0  p.m.  Seance  begins.  The  hands  are  lying  visible
on  the  knees,  the  controllers  just  touching
the  wrists.

5.50  p.m. The  medium  gives  both  hands  to  D.

6.9 p.m. D.  reports  some  saliva  on  the  left  shoulder.

6.14  p.m. Some  white  stuff  (saliva  froth  ?)  in  mouth.

6.15  p.m. W.  flashes  torch  on  to  Eva's  mouth  and  sees

a  white  object  projecting  about  half  an
inch.  Mme  B.  regrets  the  lighting  of  the
phenomenon  at  this  stage  as  she  says  it
hinders its proper development. A  crisis


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


271


seems  to  be  approaching  in  the  medium,
who  is  breathing  heavily  and  groaning.

6.25  p.m.  Eva  keeps  on  saying  that  there  is  something
on  her  shoulder,  but  it  is  not  yet  in  a
condition  to  be  shown.  Mme  B.  examines
it  with  the  torch,  but  findg  nothing.

6.28  p.m.  Eva  says  it  is  behind  her  ear,  but  nothing  is
seen.

7.0  p.m.  As  nothing  has  yet  appeared  the  seance  is
concluded.


Seance  XXIV.
June  4,  1920.

Present. IVIme  B.,  INIrs.  S.,  D.,  F.,  and  the  operator.

COjSttkol.  Before  and  after,  Mrs.  S.,  during  the  seance  Mrs.
S.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  D.  on  the  left.  The
medium  wore  her  veil  as  before,  but  Mme  B.  did  not
wear  her  tulle  costume  either  at  this,  sitting  or  at  any
subsequent  one.

[On  examining  the  frock  before  this  sitting  D.  dis-
covered in  one  of  the  front  pleats  a  piece  of  substance
similar  in  ajDpearance  to,  but  rather  smaller  than  that  found
on  the  evening  of  Sunday,  May  23.  This  was  carefully
removed  from  the  dry  saliva  to  which  it  was  adhering  and
taken  away  by  W.  for  microscopic  examination.  Like
that  found  on  May  23,  it  proved  to  be  paper.]

4.55  p.m.  Seance  begins.  Eva's  hands  are  visibly  lying
in  front  of  her,  the  controllers  just  touching
them  with  one  finger.

5.15  p.m.  Eva  asks  D.  to  take  both  hands,  and  he  does
so.

5.48  p.m.  D.  lets  go  of  the  medium's  hands  and  they
remain  clearly  visible  outside  the  curtain.
A  few  minutes  after  however  she  again
takes  his  hands.

5.53  p.m. Medium  says  that  she  feels  it  in  her  mouth.

6.0 p.m. Eva leans forward and says that there  is


272


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


something  inside  the  veil  on  the  left  side
Mme  B.  looks  into  the  cabinet,  but  sees
nothing  in  the  veil  at  present.
6.30  p.m.  The  medium  remains  quiet.  She  says  there  is
something  all  round  her  and  touching  her
on  the  head  and  shoulders,  but  nothing  is
visible.

6.55  p.m.  Eva  asks  to  be  lighted  by  the  torch,  as  she
wants  to  see  if  anything  is  visible.  This
is  done,  but  nothing  is  seen.

7.25  p.m.  Eva  says  that  it  is  coming  and  begins  to
breathe  hard.

7.27  p.m.  D.  releases  the  medium's  hands,  which  lie
clearly  visible  in  her  lap.  She  reaches
forward  almost  at  once  and  again  takes  D.'s
hands. F.  leaves.

7.45  p.m.  Nothing  has  yet  appeared  and  the  sitting  is
closed.


SEANCli  XXV.

June  5,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  j\Irs.  S.,  Mr.  Salter  (S.),  D.,  and  the  operator.
At  this  sitting  Mr.  Salter  sat  at  the  table  usually  occupied
by  F.  and  took  notes  when  it  was  considered  necessary.

Control.  Before  and  after,  Mrs.  S.  ;  during  the  seance  Mrs.  S.
sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.

2.5 p.m. Seance begins. Medium's hands  are held  by

D.  and  her  feet  rest  on  his.
2.17  p.m. Eva  now  takes  Mrs.  S.'s  left  hand  with  her

right  and  D.'s  thumb  with  her  left.
2.25  p.m. D.'s  hands  again  taken  by  the  medium.
2.35  p.m. D. releases his hands and allows Eva's  to

remain  lying  visible  on  her  knees.
2.45  p.m. Mme  B.  puts  her  hands  on  D.'s  shoulders  in

order to make a chain for "  the  force,"

and  encourages  the  medium  saying,  "  Allans,

ma  petite,  allons,''  etc.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittiiigs  with  Eva  C.  273


3.7  p.m. Eva's  hands  are  now  behind  the  curtain  but

held  by  D.

3.12  p.m.  Medium  continues  to  groan  and  moan,  which
she  has  done  intermittently  for  some
time.

3.55  p.m. Knocking at the door of the seance  room.

Medivim  starts  in  terror  and  is  only  calmed
with  difficulty.  (The  knocking  was  pro-
bably catised  by  a  member  of  the  Society
who  Avished  to  exchange  a  book.  As  the
Society's  rooms  are  not  open  on  Saturday
afternoons,  the  in(]uirer  found  the  office
shut  and  then  knocked  at  each  of  the
other  doors  in  turn.)

4.8  p.m. Eva's hands are reported to be  slightly

cold.

4.55  p.m.  Medium's  hands  held  by  Mrs.  S.  D.  enters
cabinet  and  with  one  hand  presses  Eva's
forehead  and  with  the  other  the  back  of
her  neck.  (This  is  done  to  increase  the
state  of  hypnosis,  as  whilst  the  pressure  is
being  applied  strong  suggestions  of  sleep
are  given).  Medium  begins  to  pant
slightly.

5.2  p.m.  Eva  begins  to  utter  strident  cries  culminating
in  shrieks.

5.4  p.m.  Medium  asks  for  the  light  :  the  electric  torch
is  directed  onto  her  mouth  and  a
whitish  ball  is  seen  between  her  teeth
inside  the  veil.  It  appears  to  be  about  one
inch  in  diameter.

5.7 p.m. The  flash  goes  off  and  photographs  are  taken.

5.15  p.m.  A  long  whitish  tongue-like  object  2|  by  |
inches  in  size  is  seen  protruding  from  her
mouth  inside  the  veil.

5.20  p.m.  A  similar  object  still  seems  to  be  in  the
to  medium's  mouth,  but  this  time  it  is  more

5.25  p.m.  like  a  finger.  Mme  B.  flashes  the  torch  on
to  it  and  declares  that  she  sees  a  finger-
nail at  the  end  of  the  object. D.  does  not


274


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  G.


[part


see  the  nail  and  asks  for  the  torch  agam.
It  is  flashed  on  to  Eva's  mouth  and  he  sees
that  at  the  end  of  the  object  is  a  V-shaped
mark.  The  upper  lip  of  the  medium  appears
to  be  much  thicker  than  the  lower.

5.30  p.jTi. Another  piece  of  substance  is  now  visible,  about

three  inches  in  length  and  one  inch  in  breadth,
which  is  lying  lengthways  in  the  medium's
mouth  inside  the  veil.

5.31  p.m. The  substance  begins  to  hang  down  towards

the  right  of  Eva's  mouth.

5.32  p.m. It is again level with the mouth,  and  the

medium  says  that  she  cannot  get  it  through
the  veil,  because  it  is  too  soft.
5.40  p.m. Substance  is  still  seen  within  the  veil,  although
it  is  of  a  different  shape.

5.45  p.m. Medium calls for the  light, and the  torch

shows  a  part  of  the  veil  tucked  into  the
mouth.

5.46  p.m. Substance  again  visible  in  the  mouth  : it  is

slowlj^  withdrawn  and  as  it  disappears  D.
says  that  he  sees  a  formation  like  a  tiny
little  hand  (four  fingers  and  thumb)  at  the
corner  of  the  mouth.  Shortly  after  the
mouth  was  shown  empty.  Mrs.  S.  later
.saw  a  black  line  round  the  outside  of  the
medium's  tongue,  ^  inch  from  the  edge.
It  followed  the  curve  of  the  tongue,  and  the
appearance  was  also  noted  ])y  D.  and  also
by  S.

fi.O p.m. Eva  shows  a  piece  of  the  veil  and  of  her  own
hair  inside  her  mouth.

6.3  p.m. The  medium  shows  her  tongue  covered  with  a

soft  white  creamy  substance,  parts  of  her
tongue  showing  through.  D.  touches  it
through  the  veil  and  reports  that  it  feels
like  soft  warm  putt3^

6.4  p.m. Substance  still  visible  but  more  solid.

6.5  p.m. Mouth  shown  empty.
6.20  p.m. Seance  closes.


Lxxxrv.j A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


275


Remarks  on  Seance  XXV.

The  account  which  follows  is  D.'s  report,  which  was
written  out  on  the  afternoon  cf  Sunday,  June  6,  1920,
taken  from  notes  made  at  6.50  p.m.  the  previous  Saturday,
that  is  to  say,  thirty  minutes  after  the  sitting  had  finished.

This  seance  proved  a  very  remarkable  one.  Towards
3.30  the  medium  appeared  to  be  "  prise,''  but  the  crisis
passed  off  and  nothing  appeared.  At  4.30  I  suggested
that  we  should  close  the  sitting,  but  the  medium  refused
saying  that  "  ca  va  venir."  At  about  4.50  another  crisis
set  in.  Eva  began  to  beg  us  to  call  for  the  phenomena
to  appear,  and  her  breathing  again  began  to  be  rapid  and
"  throaty."'  At  times  she  would  call  out,  "Oh,  ina
Juliette,  ma  Juliette,  il  me  fera  mal,"  and  then  she  would
utter  sighs  and  groans  finally  ending  in  shrieks.  As  the
pain  seemed  inclined  to  pass  off,  she  explained  that  she
had  not  the  courage  to  allow  herself  to  be  gripped,  as  the
pain  was  more  than  she  could  bear.  Some  minutes  later
the  pain  again  came  on,  and  Eva  began  to  utter  a  series
of  strident  cries  finally  culminating  in  shrieks  as  before.
She  began  to  struggle  violently,  twisting  her  arms  about
so  as  to  make  it  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  keep  hold
of  her  hands.  Then  she  put  her  head  outside  the  curtains
and  we  saw  a  longish  piece  of  substance  protruding  from
her  mouth.  It  was  greyish  in  colour  and  seemed  to  be
worked  about  between  her  lips.  When  her  head  again
appeared  the  substance  was  longer  and  Mme  Bisson  threw
the  torch  full  upon  it.  It  was  a  strip  of  waxy  material
about  two  and  a  half  inches  long  and  a  half  inch  in
width.  Mme  B.  said  that  she  saw  a  resemblance  to  a
finger  and  noticed  a  nail.  I  did  not  see  this,  and  asked
her  to  light  it  again.  She  did  so,  and  I  saw  the  mark
to  which  she  had  referred.  All  the  medium's  efforts  now
seemed  to  be  directed  to  getting  the  substance  through
the  veU.  In  response  to  her  request  we  all  cried  in
chorus,  "  Sortez,  sortez  du  voile  !  "  This  however  proved
unavailing,  and  when  the  phenomenon  appeared  again,  it
had  changed  its  appearance.  Between  her  lips  there  now
showed what has been described as a ''  paqiiet  de


276


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


substance.''  This  was  an  amorphous  mass  of  material
exactly  resembling  a  piece  of  cream  cheese.  It  was  being
worked  about  in  the  medium's  mouth,  and  I  constantly
heard  the  sound  of  sucking  as  she  pressed  and  moulded  it.
Unlike  cream  cheese,  when  bitten  and  pressed  it  did  not
seem  to  break  up,  but  bent  and  curled  round  the  teeth
as  chewing  gum  is  said  to  do.  We  were  enabled  to
observe  the  entire  process  of  this  strange  mastication,  as
Mme  Bisson  kept  the  torch  full  upon  her  mouth  for  about
15  seconds  whilst  we  examined  it.  After  a  few  seconds
we  saw  the  substaiace  being  gradually  drawn  back  into
the  mouth.  Just  as  one  of  the  corners  was  being  drawn
in,  it  seemed  to  me  to  break  up  and  form  Avhat  I  can
only  describe  as  a  tiny  hand  (fingers  and  thumb),  which
appeared  to  wave  towards  us  before  it  finally  vanished.
No  one  else  observed  this  "  hand,"  and  I  myself  attach
no  importance  to  it,  merely  remarking  on  the  curious
shape  of  the  substance  and  the  impression  that  it  made
upon  me  at  the  time.  After  the  substance  had  vanished
a  series  of  strange  appearances  began.  For  example,  the
medium  opened  her  mouth,  and  by  throwing  a  beam  of
light  into  the  cavity  we  saw  her  tongue  covered  with
the  material  in  what  seemed  to  me  a  semi-liquid  state.
Next  time  we  looked  in  (or  was  it  before  ?)  ^,  we  saw
what  Mme  Bisson  described  as  the  "  substance  noire."
On  the  medium's  tongue  lay  what  I  should  have  described
as  a  piece  of  black  thread,  but  to  the  other  sitters  it  did
not  seem  so  plain  as  this.  This  soon  vanished  and  the
"  cream  cheese  "  appeared  again.

The  photographs  were  unfortunately  again  spoilt,  as
the  medium  leant  so  far  forward  that  she  was  completely
out  of  focus.  In  one  a  long  round  white  object  rather
like  a  limp  candle  is  seen  hanging  from  the  left-hand
corner  of  her  mouth,  and  in  the  other  the  same  object
is  seen  hanging  from  the  middle  of  her  mouth,  although
it  appears  somewhat  broader  at  the  part  in  contact  with
her  lips.

1  The  contemporary  record  shows  tliat  the  black  substance  came
before  the  white  liquid  mass  on  the  tongue.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  277


Seance  XXVI.
June  7,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Dr.  Fournier  D'Albe  (F.  D'A.),  D.,  F.,  and
the  operator.

Control.  Dr.  WooUey  controlled  the  meduim  before  the
sitting,  but  was  unable  to  stay  longer.  There  there-
fore no  control  at  the  conclusion,  whilst  during  the  seance
F.  D"A.  sat  on  the  medium's  light  and  D.  on  her  left.
Veil  worn  as  before.

[When  examining  the  veil  prior  to  this  sitting  D.  dis-
covered two  small  pieces  of  skin-like  fibre  which  were
tightly  adhering  to  the  mesh  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  mouth.  These  were  removed  for  examination  and
proved  to  be  fibres  such  as  those  found  in  cheap  kinds  of
paper.]

4.49  p.m. Seance  begins.

5.10  p.m.  Heavy  breathing  begins.  Eva  says  that  "  ra
va  venir.''  D.  reports  that  he  has  heard
a  burbling  sound  in  the  throat.  This
sound  had  been  previously  heard  on  June  5.
and  is  now  noticed  for  the  second  time.
The  hands  have  been  variously  held  :  some-
times by  F.  D'A.  and  D.,  sometimes  by
D.  alone,  and  occasionally  allowed  to  re-
main lying  on  Eva's  lap,  but  at  all  times
perfectly  visible.

5.33  p.m.  Very  slowly  medium  becomes  cj^uite  quiet
again  and  so  remains.

6.25  p.m.  Eva  says  that  she  feels  absolutely  nothing
and  the  sitting  is  abandoned.


Seance  XXVII.
June  9,  1920.


Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  B.,  F.,  D.,  W.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Before and after, Mrs.  S. and W. Durmg  the


278


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


seance  B.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the
left. Veil  worn  as  before.

4.40  p.m.  Seance  begins.  Mme  B.  suggests  that  the
light  should  be  increased.  Eva's  hands
are  free,  but  visible  and  widely  separated.

4.50  p.m.  Mme  B.  suggests  that  D.  should  take  both
the  medium's  hands  in  order  to  "  give
force."  Shortly  after  Mrs.  S.  takes  Eva's
hands,  whilst  D.  slips  oft"  the  medium's  frock,
as  she  finds  it  too  hot.  He  then  retakes
Eva's  hands.

4.54  p.m.  D.  releases  his  hands  and  allows  the  medium's
to  lie  fully  visible  on  her  knees.

5.5 p.m. Eva  begins  to  strain  and  moan.

5.9  p.m.  D.  is  again  holding  the  medium's  hands  :
she  is  breathing  rapidly  and  occasionally
straining,  but  according  to  Mme  B.  is  not
yet  "  prise.''

5.11  p.m. Hands  again  free,  but  visible  on  lap.

5.25  p.m. Hands held by D. Eva  is  breathing  rather

heavily,  but  is  otherwise  quiet.
5.40  p.m. Eva  begins  to  groan  again,  but  is  constantly

disturbed  by  the  loud  banging  of  doors.
6.35  p.m. Medium has been quite quiet for a  long

time  ; we suggest abandoning the  sitting,

but  she  says  that  she  still  feels  something.
7.5 p.m. Medium  says  that  she  now  feels  nothing  and

the  seance  is  abandoned.


Remarks  on  Seance  XXVII.

During  the  whole  of  this  seance  noises  occiu'ring  in  the
building  were  found  to  be  disturbing  to  the  medium.
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  seance  room  adjoined
on  one  side  another  room  which  was  used  by  Messrs.
Knight,  Frank  and  Rutley  as  their  advertising  depart-
ment. Upon  this  occasion  the  door  to  this  room  was
continually  being  banged  by  the  firm's  assistants,  and  on
one  occasion  during  the  sitting  a  telephone  bell  suddenly
rang, at which the medium appeared so terrified  that


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  279

she  had  to  be  held  in  her  chair,  and  was  only  calmed
Avith  the  utmost  difficulty  by  Mme  Bisson.  These
noises  had  an  extremely  bad  effect  on  the  production
of  the  phenomena,  as  just  when  Eva  was  about  to
be  "  prise  ",  some  sudden  noise  would  startle  her,  and
the  entire  process  would  have  to  be  begun  over  again.
Subsequent  sittings  were  therefore  held  in  the  evenings
after  the  firm's  assistants  had  left,  an  arrangement  which
permitted  the  seance  to  be  conducted  in  the  most  absolute
silence,  excepting  for  the  conversation  of  the  sitters  and
other  movements  which  formed  an  integral  part  of  each
seance.


Seance  XXVIII.
June  11,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Sir  George  Beilby,  B.,  D.,  F.,  F.  D'A.,  W.,
and  the  operatcr.

Control.  Before  the  seance  W.  superintended  the  control  of
the  medium,  whilst  during  the  sitting  B.  sat  on  the  right
of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.  At  the  conclusion
the  control  was  only  partial  and  was  exercised  by  F.  and
D. Veil  AA'orn  as  before.

,  8.25  p.m. Seance  begins.

8.30  p.m. Eva  begins  to  groan  and  breathe  rapidly.

8.40  p.m.  Crisis  continuing  and  augmenting.  Hands  have
always  been  separate  and  visible.

Note  by  E.  The  light  is  exceptionally
good  to-night.  Mme  B.  is  sitting  well
back,  her  knees  being  distant  about  1|  ft.
from  those  of  the  medium.

8.48  p.m.  D.  takes  both  hands.  Eva  is  now  quite
quiet  again.  Mme  B.  says  that  she  has  not
yet  been  properly  "  'prise,"  although  she
hoped  she  was  going  to  be  during  the  late
crisis.

8.52  p.m.  D.  now  frees  the  medium's  hands  and  they
are  placed  separate  upon  her  knees.


280


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


9.10  p.m. Eva  says  that  it  is  beginning.

9.25  p.m. Medium has been quite quiet all  this  time.

She  now  asks  Mme  B.  to  open  the  curtains
and  see  if  there  is  anything.  The  curtains
are  pulled  open,  but  nothing  is  visible.

9.30  p.m.  Eva  insists  that  there  is  something  on  her
shoulder.  Mme  B.  flashes  the  light  on  to
the  medium  and  a  small  quantity  of  white
matter  (saliva  ?  )  is  visible  on  her  right
shoulder.

9.42  p.m.  Eva  stretches  out  both  her  hands  and  gives
them  to  D.

9.45  p.m.  Mme  B.  asks  W.  to  put  the  medium  into  a
deeper  sleep  by  putting  his  hands  on  her
forehead  and  neck.  This  is  done  and
immediately  Eva  begins  to  strain  and  groan,
W.  still  holding  her  inside  the  curtains.
A  fresh  crisis  starts.  D.  is  still  holding
her  hands.

9.51  p.m.  Medium  insists  that  there  is  a  head  :  she
opens  the  curtains  and  leans  forward,  but
nothing  is  visible.

9.54  p.m.  Eva  is  quiet  again.  D.  puts  her  hands  on
her  knees  outside  the  curtains.  She  keeps
on  saying  that  she  feels  it  on  her  left
shoulder,  and  Mme  B.  flashes  on  the  light,
but  nothing  is  visi])le.

9.56  p.m. Eva  again  takes  D."s  hands.

9.59  p.m.  As  an  experiment  Mme  B.  suggests  that  we
try  stimulating  appeals.  The  sitters  ac-
cordingly call  loudly  and  appealingly  for
the  space  of  three  or  four  minutes,  but
with  no  result,  so  they  soon  cease  and  all
is  qiiiet  again.

10.4  p.m.  The  curtain  is  now  held  by  B.  closed  above
the  medium's  hands,  which  lie  visible  upon
her  knees.  She  says  that  the  phenomenon
is  there.

10.7 p.m. D.  resumes  control  of  the  hands.
10.15  p.m. Hands  again  freed,  but  remain  visible.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


281


F.  asks  Mme  B.  if  it  would  be  a  good  thing
for  W. to  put  the medium into a  deeper
sleep. She agrees to the  proposal, so  W.
enters  the  cabinet  to  hypnotize  the  medium.
W.  returns  and  reports  that  Eva  is  now  in  a

deep  stage  of  hypnosis.
Eva  exhibits  cataleptic  contractions  and  stiff-
ness of  arms  and  hands  :  IMme  B.  asks
D.  to  make  some  passes  in  order  to  re-
lieve it,  which  he  does,  and  Avhich  she  also
makes  in  her  turn.  The  contraction  soon
resolves  and  Eva  again  gives  her  hands
to  D.

Hands  are  again  freed,  but  remain  visible.
Eva  says  that  something  is  hurting  her  eye,

but  asks  us  not  to  look  at  present.
Eva  leans  right  forward  and  strains  violently,
showing her face at the opening of  the
curtain and making repeated noises  and
loud  retchings.

11.7  p.m.  Eva  is  at  last  "pise": D.  still  holds  both  her
hands.

11.15  p.m. W.  leaves,  having  to  catch  a  train.

11.20  p.m. B. also leaves for the same purpose.  His

place is taken by Sir George  Beilby,  and
the latter's seat is now occupied by  F
D'A.

11.21  p.m. The  curtains  are  opened  and  Mme  B.  points

out  the  phenomenon.  It  was  too  dark  to
see  very  distinctly,  but  on  Eva's  left  shoulder,
seemingly  held  up  by  her  chin,  appeared
to  be  lying  an  object  rather  like  a  biscuit
in  shape,  being  round  and  with  a  rough
surface.  From  the  hasty  glance  that  the
sitters  got  of  the  object  before  the  curtain
was  agaiia  closed  it  was  impossible  to  say
definitely  whether  the  phenomenon  was  inside
or  outside  the  veil.
11.24  p.m.  Curtains  again  opened,  but  nothing  is  now
visible.


10.20  p.m.

10.24  p.m.

10.25  p.m.


10.40  p.m.

11.5  p.m.

11.6  p.m.


282


A  Series  of  Sittings  loith  Eva  C.


[part


11.27  p.m.  Medium  leans  forward  and  Mme  B.  flashes
the  torch  on  to  her  face.  An  object  re-
sembUng  a  round  flannel  pen-wiper  is  seen
protruding  from  her  mouth.  It  appears  to
be  blackish-grey  in  colour.

11.30  p.m.  Eva  again  leans  forward,  and  imder  the  light
of  the  torch  the  object  looks  like  a  mass  of
grey  or  white  "  plasticine  "  between  her  teeth.
D.  touches  it  and  finds  it  soft  and  warm.

11.34:  p.m.  The  torch  is  again  lighted  and  a  line  of  white
stuff  is  seen  along  the  medium's  lips  which
is  probably  the  same  substance  as  before.

11.35  p.m.  Eva  leans  forward  and,  opening  her  mouth,
shows  that  there  is  nothing  within.

11.37  p.m.  Medium  again  leans  forward.  F.  D'A.  said
that  he  saw  a  tuft  of  white  stuff  on  Eva's
left  shoulder  resembling  cotton  wool.  D.
did  not  see  it,  and  F.  and  Sir  G.  Beilby
could  not  have  seen  it  owing  to  their  posi-
tion. On  further  examination  nothing  is
visible,  and  although  the  medium  constantly
calls  out  to  be  inspected,  nothing  further  is
seen.  D.  and  F.  both  note  several  small
pieces  of  white  substance  sticking  to  the
veil  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mouth.

11.50  jD.m.  Seance  closes.  On  the  medium  leaving  the
cabinet  F.  and  D.  accompany  her  to  the
dressing-room.  The  veil  is  intact,  but  the
little  white  flecks  of  material  are  still  cling-
ing to  the  veil  and  the  meshes  near  the
mouth  seem  to  be  covered  with  a  whitish
secretion.  F.  and  D.  carefully  remove  the
pieces  of  white  substance,  during  which  the
medium  complains  of  faintness  and  at  last
almost  falls  into  Mme  B.'s  arms.  The  collected
material  is  put  into  a  test-tube  and  re-
moved for  examination.  After  the  tights
have  been  taken  off  D.  removes  them  to
the  Secretary's  room  for  further  examina-
tion the  following  morning.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


283


Remarks  on  Seance  XXVIII.

One  of  the  most  interesting  features  of  this  seance  was
the  appearance  and  subsequent  collection  of  flecks  of  white
material  which  were  observed  on  the  veil.  The  micro-
scopic and  chemical  examination  revealed  the  fact  that
these  specimens  were  made  of  wood-pulp  fibres  similar
to  those  found  in  cheap  papers.  (See  Appendix  I.)  Mme
Bisson  suggested  two  sources  from  which  these  specks
may  have  been  derived.  In  the  first  place,  she  stated
that  the  medium  wore  certain  hair  papers  and  that  a
piece  may  have  been  chewed  by  the  medium  and  thus
have  been  ejected  with  the  "  substance."  Secondly,  she
said  that  it  was  possible  that  Eva  had  eaten  a  piece  of
cake  paper  which  had  stuck  in  her  teeth  and  had  been
ejected  in  a  similar  manner.  Specimens  of  all  these
papers  were  obtained  and  submitted  to  expert  analysis
with  the  results  set  forth  in  the  appendix.  When  the
veil,  was  examined  the  next  day  a  great  many  whitish
strands  of  material  were  found  tightly  adhering  to  the
veil  which  strongly  resembled  the  fibres  found  on  the
flecks  themselves.  In  order  to  examine  these  strands  at
greater  leisure  the  veil  was  removed  from  the  tights  and
put  away  until  a  further  examination  could  be  made.
With  regard  to  the  flecks  themselves,  the  evidence  is  too
scanty  for  any  deflnite  statement.  If  the  medium  con-
stantly chews  paper  it  is  remarkable  that  it  seems  to  be
so  seldom  ejected  with  the  materializations.  It  is,  how-
ever, noteworthy  that  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  during
his  experiments  with  this  medium,  on  one  occasion  dis-
covered some  white  particles  on  the  floor  of  the  cabinet
after  a  seance,  which  on  examination  also  proved  to  be
paper.  1

Whatever  the  origin  of  this  paper  may  have  been
(and  Dr.  von  Schrenck's  explanation  does  not  read  very
convincingly),  its  appearance  is  decidedly  curious,  and
together  with  the  result  of  the  examination  of  the  other
particles  found  during  our  sittings  needs  to  be  carefully
considered  when  discussing  the  phenomena  under  review.

1  Materialisationsphdnomene,  Munchen,  1914,  p.  333  (Eng.  trans.,  p.  193).


284


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


Seance  XXIX.
June  14,  1920.

Present.  Mme  B.,  Mrs.  F.,  D.,  F.,  F.  D'A.,  W.,  and  the  operatoi.
Control. Before and after, Mrs.  F. and W. During  the

sitting  W.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  T>.  on  the

left.

[As  the  veil  had  been  removed  for  the  purpose  of
examining  the  white  particles  adhering  to  it  the  Com-
mittee determined  to  do  without  it  for  the  remaining
seances.  The  advantages  attached  to  its  removal  seemed
to  outweigh  any  that  might  be  obtained  from  its  con-
tinued use.  It  had  been  suggested  also  that  it  should
be  dispensed  Avith  on  the  ground  that,  although  it  evi-
dently did  not  impede  the  production  of  small  phenomena
inside  it,  it  might  have  a  disadvantageous  effect  on  the
production  of  large  ones,  and  that  it  would  be  preferable
to  get  these  and  study  them  rather  than  run  the  risk
of  getting  nothing  more  than  we  had  had  up  to  the
present.  On  arrival,  however,  the  medium,  who  was
anxious  to  repeat  under  flawless  conditions  her  feat  of
producing  a  phenomenon  first  inside  and  tlien  outside
the  veil,  absolutely  refused  to  sit  without  it,  and  it  was
therefore  again  soAvn  by  Mrs.  Fell  ding  and  further  tested
by  both  D.  and  W.]

8.53  p.m.  Seance  begins.  Eva's  hands  are  first  held  by
W.  and  D.,  and  when  the}"  have  become
accustomed  to  the  light  the  medium's  hands
are  allowed  to  remain  resting  upon  her  knees.
10.20  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  feels  nothing  and  the
seance  is  abandoned.

Seance  XXX.
June  15,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  D.,  F.  D'A.,  and  W.

Control. Before  and  after,  W. Duruag  the  sitting  W.  sat
on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


285


7.30  p.m.  Seance  begins.  Hands  held  and  relinquished
as  usual.

8.10  p.m.  Eva  begins  to  strain  and  cry  out  :  both
hands  are  now  held  by  D.  The  attack
passes  off.

9.15  p.m. Seance  abandoned.


Seakoe  XXXI.
June  16,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  Mrs.  S.,  B.,  D.,  F.  D"A.,  and  the  op-rator.

Control.  Before  and  after,  IVIrs.  S.  During  the  sittino-  B.
sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.  Veil
MTva  as  before,  medium  still  refusing  to  sit  without  it  on
the  ground  that  if  the  phenomena  then  appeared  the  fact
would  be  regarded  as  suspicious.

7.20  p.m. Seance begins. Eva's hands are held  as
usual.

7.45  p.m. D.  holds  the  curtains  together  with  his  right

hand. The  medium's  hands  lie  visible  upon
her  knees. She  begins  to  moan  and  groan.
7.56  p.m. More  groaning  on  the  part  of  the  medium.

8.7  p.m. Eva  begins  to  strain  and  breatlie  heavily.

8.8  p.m. More  straining  and  some  retching  : the  hands

remain  always  visible.

8.9  p.m. Great  straining  and  retching.

8.10  p.m. Medium  makes  a  series  of  choking  sounds.
8.12  p.m. More  choking.

8.14  p.m. Crisis  passes  oft".

8.30  p.m. Eva  says  that  she  has  "  des  douleurs  d'estomac.'''

8.46  p.m. D. enters the cabinet and hypnotizes  the

medium,  putting  her  into  a  deeper  sleep
by  holding  her  forehead  and  the  back  of
her  neck,  and  by  making  suggestions  to  her.
Whilst  he  is  inside  B.  holds  the  medium's
hands.

8.49  p.m.  D.  withdraws  from  the  cabinet  and  Eva's
:  hands  remain  visible  on  her  knees.


286


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivitk  Eva  C.


[part


9.15  p.m. Medium  asks  the  sitters  to  call  for  the  pheno-
mena and  says  "  ca  vient."
9.17  n.m. D.  touches  the  medium's  hands.

9.19  [).m. Eva  says,  "  Je  le  sens.  Juliette,'^  and  then

9.20  p.m. "  Je le  sens  d la  figure." Eva retches  and

gives  a  sharp  scream,  "  le  cri  du  pheno-
mene."

9.25  p.m. D.  holds  both  hands.

9.27  p.m.  Heavy  breathing.  Eva  asks  for  the  curtains
to  be  closed. The  hands  are  still  held.

9.30  p.m.  Eva  coughs  several  times  :  the  heavy  breath-
ing has  ceased  and  the  hands  are  still  held.

9.33  p.m. Stertorous  breathing  recommences.

9.35  p.m.  The  curtains  are  opened  and  a  whitish  object
somewhat  resembling  a  piece  of  newspaper
rolled  up  and  about  two  and  a  haK  inches
in  length  is  seen  lying  in  the  bag  of  the
veil  near  to  the  mouth  and  rather  to  the
left  of  the  face.  Curtain  closed  but  almost
immediately  re-opened  and  a  sort  of  rough
flat  face  is  seen  hanging  over  the  mouth,
apparently  from  the  nose  and  inside  the
veil.  Some  of  the  edges  are  apparently
turned  over  and  the  size  was  approximately
4  by  3  inches.  The  torch  was  turned  on
momentarily  several  times,  but  not  long
enough  for  a  detailed  examination  to  be
made.

9.41  p.m. Torch flashed on, but everything has  dis-

appeared.

9.42  p.m. A  further  crisis  appears  to  be  setting  in.
9.47  p.m. Eva  says  that  she  feels  it  "  dans  le  dos."
9.50  p.m. Curtains are closed. D. still holds  the

medium's  hands,  who  starts  groaning  again.
She  asks  us  to  look  with  the  torch,  saying
that  she  feels  it  and  that  it  is  "  une  force
d'homme."  Nothing  however  is  visible.
10.0  p.m.  Seance  closed.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
sitting  the  observers  compared  notes  as  to
what  they  had  seen  and  a  certain  amount


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


287


of  disagreement  was  expressed  between  them.
Owing  to  the  rapidity  with  which  the
phenomena  followed  each  other,  and  the
difficulty  of  simultaneously  dictating  impre-
sions.  it  was  found  impossible  to  include
many  of  the  details  in  the  contemporary
notes.  Mrs.  Salter,  who  took  the  notes  for
this  seance,  thereupon  requested  D.  a  few
days  later  to  write  a  short  account  of  what
seems  to  have  occurred,  and  the  following
is  an  extract  from  his  reply.  It  is  dated
June  19,  1920,  and  runs  as  follows  :

With  regard  to  the  seance  on  June  16th  some  confusion
appears  to  have  arisen.  Some  of  the  observers  seem  to  have
seen  four  phenomena  whilst  others  affirm  that  they  saw  only
tliree.  There  is  also  some  discrepancy  in  the  accounts  given
as  to  the  "  face  "  which  was  seen  upon  the  substance.  The
following  is  the  account  of  what  I  saw  (or  thought  I  saw)
drawn  from  the  notes  that  I  make  after  each  sitting.  In
this  case  I  see  that  they  were  written  down  at  11.5  p.m.
the  same  night.

(11  I  first  saw  a  piece  of  substance,  seemingly  of  a  greyish
colour,  rounded  and  pointed  and  about  2|  to  2f  ins.  long.
This  object  was  lying  loose  in  the  veil  towards  the  medium's
left-hand  side.  In  appearance  it  reminded  me  strongly  of
the  other  pointed  pieces  of  substance  that  have  been  noticed
before.

(2)  The  next  phenomenon  that  I  saw  was  a  flat,  yellowy
grey  object  of  indeterminate  shape  lying  against  the  medium's
right  cheek.  The  torch  was  fixed  on  this  appearance  for  so
short  a  time  that  I  had  but  a  fleeting  glance.

(3)  The  third  and  last  phenomenon  that  I  saw  was  another
flat  object  similar  to  the  last,  but  round  lilie  a  large,  thiir
Bath  Oliver  biscuit.  This  was  seemingly  hanging  from  the
medium's  mouth  and  seemed  to  me  to  be  of  a  waxy  rather
than  of  a  papery  nature.  Upon  the  surface  there  were
certain  markings  which  gave  the  appearance  of  a  "  face  "
very  rudelj^  drawn,  or  as  it  seemed  to  me  at  the  time,  indented
on  the  surface. Whether  this  was  so  or  not,  it  is  impossible


288


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


to  say,  as  the  torch  was  thro^vn  upon  it  for  too  short  a  time
to  make  absolutely  sure.  Mr.  Baggally  thought  he  saw  a
"face"  on  the  substance  which  was  lying  against  the  cheek
and  net  on  that  which  came  from  the  mouth.  I  naturally
thought  that  1  had  transposed  this  "  face  "  from  the  one  to
the  other  in  a  lapse  of  memory,  but  Dr.  F.urnier  D'Albe
says  he  saw  it  on  the  object  from  tlie  mouth  in  the  same  way
as  I  thought  I  did.  Whether  Mr.  Baggally  saw  a  face  on
the  cheek  phenomenon,  or  whether  he  transposed  it  seems
rather  difficult  to  determine,  unless  his  observations  are  re-
corded in  ycur  contemporary  notes.  [It  will  be  seen  that
they  were  not.]  Mme  Bisson  and  Dr.  Fcurnier  D'Albe  both
say  that  they  saw  a  fourth  phenomenon,  namely  a  bib-like
appearance  under  the  medium's  chin,  but  neither  Mr.  Baggally
nor  I  apparently  saw  this.


Seance  XXXII.
June  17,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  B.,  D.,  F.,  F.  D'A.,  W.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Before and after, W. During  the  sitting B.  sat
on the  right  of the medium and D. on the  left.  Veil


as  usual.


7.23  p  m.  Seance  begins.  Mme  B.  asks  for  more  light
and  this  is  accordingly  increased.  F.  re-
ports :  I  can  at  a  distance  of  about  six
feet  see  very  plainly  each  individual  finger
of  the  medium's  hands  as  they  lie  upon  her
lap.

8.30  p.m. Heavy  breathing  begins.

8.45  p.m.  Eva  cries  out  loudly.  It  seemed  as  if  the
crisis  was  about  to  come  on.  but  nothing
happened.

!l.O p.m. All  is  quiet  again.

9.14  p.m.  At  Mme  B.'s  request  D.  enters  the  cabinet
to  hold  the  medium  and  to  give  her  '"force."
B.  holds  both  her  hands.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  289

9.16  p.m.  D.  returns  from  the  cabinet  and  Eva's  hands
remain  on  her  lap.  They  have  become
rigid,  and  remain  so  about  three  minutes.

9.20  p.m. D.  again  holds  Eva's  hands.

9.35  p.m.  At  Mme  B.'s  suggestion  W.  takes  D.'s  place,
whilst  she  takes  W.'s  and  D.  hers.  D.
retains  his  grasp  of  the  medium's  hands.

9.53  p.m. A chain is formed to try to stimulate  the
phenomena. The light is slightly  reduced,
i  ■; ■  A  long  wait  ensues,  and,  when  asked,  the

medium  says  that  there  is  something  there,
but  that  it  does  not  "  take  "  her.  D.  is
again  asked  to  enter  the  cabinet  and  give
her  "  force,  "  which  he  does.
10.35  p.m.  Nothing  has  appeared  and  so  the  seance  is
abandoned.


'  M  - ■ Seance  XXXIII.

June  18,  1920.

Present. Mine  B.,  Mrs.  F.,  B.,  D.,  F.,  H.,  and  the  operator.
Control. Before  and after, Mrs.  F. During the  sitting  B.

sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.  Veil

worn  as  before.

7.45  p.m. Seance  begins. Medium's  hands  held  as  usual.

7.50  p.m.  Mme  B.  changes  places  with  H.,  who  takes
D.'s  chair,  D.  meanwhile  taking  the  place
that  Mme  B.  has  just  vacated.

8.7 p.m. Slight  groaning  begins.

8.20  p.m.  All  is  now  quiet.  There  were  signs  of  an
approaching  crisis,  but  they  have  passed  off.

9.35  p.m. Slight  groaning  begins  again.

9.42  p.m.  B.  holds  Eva's  hands  whilst  D.  enters  the
cabinet  in  order  to  give  "  force."

9.45  p.m. D.  withdraws  from  the  cabinet.
10.5 p.m. Eva  says  that  she  still  feels  something  around
her.

10.7 p.m. Rapid  breathing  begins.


290


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


10.20  p.m. A  crisis  seems  to  be  beginning.

10.30  p.m.  Crisis  appears  to  be  developing  :  medium  has
leant  forward  several  times  and  shown  her
face  at  the  opening  of  the  curtains.  Noth-
ing is  visible,  and  the  deep,  heavy  and  rapid
breathing  continues  together  with  straining
cries.

10.35  p.m.  The  crisis  ceases.  Medium  says  that  "  cela
me  Idche.''

10.45  p.m.  Eva  says  that  she  feels  nothing  now.  The
seance  is  abandoned.


Seance  XXXIV.  .
June  21,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  B.,  D.,  F.,  H.,  and  the  operator.

Control.  There  being  no  doctor  or  lady  present  at  this
seance  a  partial  control  before  and  after  the  sitting  was
alone  possible.  D.  therefore  examined  the  veil  both
before  and  after  the  seanc?,  with  negative  results,  and  also
made  a  cursory  examination  of  the  medium's  hair,  etc.,
which  was  also  negative.  During  the  sitting  B.  sat  on
the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.

[At  the  previous  sitting  the  medium  has  asked  that  in
order  to  meet  the  regurgitation  theory  she  should  be
given  a  cup  of  coffee  and  a  biscuit  immediately  before
the  next  sitting.  This  was  accordingly  done,  the  medium
drinking  the  coffee  and  eating  the  biscuit  after  the  tights
had  been  put  on  and  just  before  the  veil  had  been  sewn
on  by  Mme  B.  and  examined  by  D.]

7.57  p.m. Seance  begins. Hands  held  as  usual.

9.20  p.m.  Heavy  breathing.  Eva  leans  forward  and
shows  her  face,  but  nothing  is  visible.
Almost  immediately  after  she  leans  forward
again  and  a  stream  of  saliva  is  seen  which
is  dripping  from  her  mouth  through  the
veil  and  on  to  her  tights.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


291


9.30  p.m. More heavy breathing and then  complete
silence.

9.45  p.m. A crisis seems to be developing.  Medium
says  that  it  is  coming.

9.49  p.m. All  is  quiet  again.

9.50  p.m. Eva  says  that  she  has  felt  something  at  the

tips  of  her  lingers. Nothing  is  visible.

Note.  The  hands  are  visible  outside  the  curtain  and
are  held  by  B.  and  D.  They  have  remained  visible  from
the  beginning  of  the  seance  and  at  times  have  been  held
as  now  by  B.  and  D.

9.53  p.m. Eva  opens  the  curtains  and  calls  out,  Aide-

moi,  nia  Juliette.  Je  le  sens.''  The  cur-
tains are  opened  wide,  but  nothing  is  visible.

9.54  p.m. The  heavy  deep  breathing  begins  again.

9.59  p.m.  Eva  leans  forward.  A  white  strip  about
5  inches  long  by  -\  to  h  inch  in  breadth
is  seen  inside  the  veil.  It  extends  perpen-
dicularly from  just  above  her  nose  to  the
bottom  of  her  chin.  The  curtain  is  closed
again  immediately.^
10.30  p.m.  Nothing  further  has  happened.  Mme  B.  gives
us  an  account  of  some  remarkable  pheno-
mena which  occurred  in  Paris,  and  says
that  it  is  a  good  thing  to  speak  of  the
phenomena  during  the  seances.  The  sitters
encourage  the  medium,  urging  the  "  intelli-
gence to  show  itself.

■•^  In  D.'s  account,  drawn  from  notes  made  at  12.45  a.m.  on  June  22,
1920,  this  phenomenon  is  described  thus  :  "  A  white  line  of  foamy
matter  rising  from  the  middle  of  the  right-hand  side  of  the  nose  toward
the  eye.  The  medium,  whilst  showing  it  to  us,  declared  that  it  was
moving  upwards  by  itself,  and  was  supported  in  this  by  Mme  Bisson.
None  of  the  other  observers  however  confirmed  this  observation."  From
the  above  it  is  evident  that  D.  saw  the  white  strip  in  a  different
position  from  that  described  in  the  contemporary  record.  It  had
apparently  risen  to  a  certain  extent,  although  there  seems  to  be  no
evidence  that  it  had  done  so  by  itself  as  asserted  by  both  the  medium
and  Mme  Bisson.  What  probably  occurred  was  that  the  veil  had
been  pulled  up  somewhat,  thus  giving  the  impression  that  the  strip,
which  showed  up  strongly  on  the  black  mesh,  was  moving  upwards
by  itself.


292


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


Still  nothing.  F.  asks  Mme  B.  to  trj^  the
effect  of  taking  the  medium's  hands.  For
some  time  she  says  that  it  is  useless,  but  at
last  does  so.  The  medium's  hands  remain
outside  the  curtain.  Mme  B.  urges  and
encourages  her.  She  makes  great  efforts
and  a  crisis  seems  to  be  beginning  again.
Eva leans forward and shows herself,  but

nothing  is  visible.
Medium again leans forward. "  Tu le  vois,

tna  Juliette  i  "  Nothing  is  visible.
Eva  leans  forward  again  twice.  Something
white  appears  to  be  hanging  from  her  nose.
Medium  again  leans  forward  several  times  and
shows  what  to  B.  and  F.  seems  to  be  a
white  object  standing  out  horizontally
from  the  tip  of  her  nose  as  far  as  the  veil.
This  appearance  is  about  \h  inches  in  length.
D.  and  H.  do  not  agree  with  B.  and  F.  as
to  the  appearance  of  the  object.  They  say
that  it  was  nothing  but  foamy  matter
adhering  to  the  veil  exactly  opposite  the
nose.

Note.  D.'s  record  reads  thus  :  "  On  the  medium's
nose  appeared  what  seemed  to  some  of  the  observers  to
be  a  piece  of  substance  apparently  growing  out  of  the  tip.
Messrs.  Feilding  and  Baggally  and  Mme  Bisson  apparently
agree  as  to  this,  but  H.  and  D.  are  of  a  different  opinion.
The  substance  was  a  foamy  mass  of  saliva  adhering  to
the  veil  and  opposite  the  tip  of  the  nose.  When  the  veil
fell  over  the  nose  the  appearance  naturally  seemed  part
of  the  feature,  but  when  the  head  was  projected  forwards
I  distinctly  saw  a  space  of  at  least  half  an  inch  between
the  substance  and  the  nose.  Even  when  the  veil  was
away  from  the  nose  those  opposite  could  not  see  the
space,  and  this  I  believe  caused  the  illusion."

11.2 p.m. Eva  leans  forward  again,  but  nothing  is  visible.

The  torch  is  flashed  on  her,  but  still
nothing  is  seen.


10.45  p.m.

10.53  p.m.
10.55  p.m.
10.57  p.m.
10.59  p.m.


A  Series  of  Siitings  with  Eva  C.  293

Medhim  constantly  cries  out,  saying  that  it
hurts  her,  and  leans  forward.  Nothing  is
visible.

Very  stertorous  breathing  begins.  Mme  B.
is  still  holding  Eva's  hands,  which  remain
always  visible.  D.  now  takes  them.
The  curtains  are  held  wide  open  for  haK  a
minute  by  Mme  B.  Medium  protests  saying,
■'  Per  Inez  ma  maison.''  Nothing  has  been
seen.

The  stertorous  breathing  has  continued.  Mme
B.  says  she  is  sure  that  there  is  something
there  and  begs  it  to  show  itself.
The  torch  is  flashed  on  the  medium's  face  to
see  if  anything  is  visible. An  object  some-
what  resembling a court, plaster,  irregular
in  shape  and  about  2  inches  square,  is  seen
covering  the  medium's  left  eye.
Note. D.'s record reads  : "  A discoloured  whitish
yellowy  patch  rather  the shape of an  eye-protector  was
seen  covering  the  left  eye."

11.21  p.m.  Eva  again  leans  forward  and  the  torch  is
flashed  on  to  her.  The  same  or  a  similar
thing  is  seen  hanging  in  the  veil.  D.  says
that  it  is  a  terra-cotta  red  face  nearly
upside  down  resembling  a  cardboard  picture
in  black  made  out  of  a  rough  wood  block.
♦  Shortly afterwards the torch was  again

flashed on and  the object was seen  more
than  half  drawn  in  to the mouth.  Later
nothing  was  seen.
Note. D.'s  record  reads  :

"  A  rounded  oval  object  similar  in  size  and  shape  to
the  '  eye  patch  '  was  seen  lying  in  the  veil  towards  the
right-hand  side.  Mme  B.  immediately  threw,  the  torcli
on  it,  and  twisting  my  head  round  I  saw  what  it  was.
The  surface  ground  colour  was  a  brick  red  and  on  it
were  the  features  of  a  human  face  as  if  printed  from  a
rude  wood  block. These  were  in  black,  and  were,  I  think,


LXXXIV.]

11.6  p.m.
11.9  p.m.
11.12  p.m.

11.16  p.m.
11.20  p.m.


294


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


of  too  regular  a  nature  to  be  drawn,  but  looked  as  if
they  had  been  actually  printed.  This  head  was  exactly
like  the  heads  of  those  flat  toy  cardboard  figures  which
used  to  be  popular  amongst  children  and  are  now  occa-
sionally used  for  advertising  purposes.  After  the  torch
had  been  on  the  appearance  for  about  ten  seconds  the
medium  lowered  her  head  calling  out  'Juliette  I  0,
Juliette  '  !  until  shrinking  back  into  her  chair  and  covering
the  object  still  more  ;  the  torch  was  put  out  and  the
object  vanished."

11.25  p.m.  Stertorous  breathing  and  panting  continue  as
if  a  further  effort  to  start  the  phenomena
again  were  being  made.

11.29  p.m. Torch flashed on, but nothing is  visible.

Eva  is  lying  with  her  head  back  and  her
face  against  the  top  of  the  chair.  D.
and  B.  are  holding  her  hands.

11.32  p.m.  Medium  asks  for  the  torch  to  be  lighted
saying,  "  Allume  I  "  She  is  carefully  ex-
amined with  the  torch,  but  nothing  is  seen.
This  is  done  three  times,  but  without  result.

11.35  p.m.  Eva  says  that  it  is  in  her  mouth,  and  asks
if  she  may  take  it  out  with  her  hands.
She  puts  her  hands  up  to  her  mouth,  D.
still  holding  her  wrists.  She  gradually
pulls  the  object  out  of  her  mouth  whilst
Mme  B.  throws  the  light  of  the  torch  upon
it.  It  looks  like  a  membrane  or  oilskin.
Suddenly  it  disappears  whilst  the  light  is
on  it.

Note. D."s  record  reads  :

"  The  medium  asked  D.,  who  was  holding  her  hands  at
the  time,  to  allow  her  to  take  the  substance  out  of  her
mouth  as  she  felt  a  piece  was  inside.  This  was  immedi-
ately granted  and  the  following  then  took  place.  Putting
her  hands  (still  controlled  by  D.)  up  to  her  mouth  she
began  to  manipulate  through  the  veil  an  object  which  was
slowly  pushed  out  of  the  mouth.  The  torch  was  immedi-
ately  turned on and the following operation then  took


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  295

place.  The  whole  process  was  distinctly  visible,  my  own
eyes  I  should  say  being  less  than  six  inches  from  the
medium's  mouth.  Slowly  being  worked  and  pulled  out  of
the  mouth  was  what  looked  like  a  ragged  strip  or  strips
of  thin  semi-transparent  membrane  of  a  highly  elastic
nature.  The  nearest  normal  substance  would  be  a  ragged
longish  piece  of  very  thin  white  rubber  or  gold-beaters'
skin.  This  was  pulled,  moulded,  and  worked  b}^  the
fingers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mouth,  finally  ap-
parently disappearing  in  a  most  curious  manner."

11.40  p.m. Light is again flashed on, but nothing  is
visible. Sitting  closed.

Remarks  on  Seance  XXXIV.

The  thirty-fourth  seance  was  one  of  the  most  remark-
able of  all  those  held  by  the  Society.  From  certain
points  of  view  some  of  the  phenomena  appeared  exceed-
ingly suspicious  and  indicative  of  fraud  or  at  the  least
of  trance-deception.  It  should  be  said  that  the  dis-
appearance of  the  membrane  was  consistent  with  a  well-
known  method  of  "vanishing  objects"  which  is  familiar  to
magicians.  These  incidents  will  be  found  fully  discussed
in  the  section  of  the  report  devoted  to  fraud  (pp.  309-331)
and  we  need  not  recapitulate  them  here.  One  point
however  seems  to  be  worthy  of  special  attention.  It  will
be  remembered  that  during  the  seance  of  Friday,  May  21,
1920,  an  object  was  observed  hanging  from  the  medium's
mouth  upon  which  appeared  to  be  drawn  the  outline  of  a
rudely  executed  face  in  black  chalk.  On  the  photograph
being  taken  and  developed  no  trace  of  the  roughly  drawn
face  appears,  but  instead  there  is  seen  v/hat  looks  like  a
small  photograph  of  a  man.  There  seem  to  be  two
explanations  of  this  curious  phenomenon.  Either  the
small  photograph  developed  from  the  rough  face  which
was  first  observed,  or  it  was  already  at  the  hack  of  it,  the
medium  turning  it  round  between  the  time  that  the  first
face  was  observed  and  the  taking  of  the  photograph  by
the  flash.  The  appearance  of  the  eye-patch  in  to-day's
sitting,  taken in conjunction with the rude face  seen


296  A  Series  of  Sittings  ivifh  Eva  C.  [part

inside  the  veil,  rather  leads  one  to  suppose  that  the  latter
is  the  more  probable  alternative.  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  eye  patch  and  the  face  seen  in  the  veil
Avere  the  same  object,  the  first  quite  naturally  falling
down  into  the  veil  from  its  former  position  over  the
eye.  In  this  case  we  must  assume  that  the  eye-patch
was  really  the  back  of  the  face  and  what  was  seen  in
the  veil  was  the  front  of  the  same  object.  How  far
these  conclusions  throw  any  light  on  the  origin  and
nature  of  the  phenomena  it  is  difficult  to  say,  it  being
merely  sufficient  here  to  indicate  briefly  the  circumstances
which  gave  rise  to  such  conjectures.

#

Seance  XXXV.
June  23,  1920.  '

Present.  Mme  B.,  Dr.  Wereide,  B.,  D.,  F.,  H.,  W.,  and  the
operator.

Control.  Before  and  after,  W.  During  the  sitting  B.  sat
on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.  Veil
worn  as  before.

[Owing  to  the  success  which  had  attended  the  holding
of  the  medium's  hands  by  Mme  Bisson  at  the  previous
seance,  it  was  agreed  that  henceforth  she  should  be  allowed
to  resume  her  role  of  thus  taking  the  medium's  hands
when  required,  as  she  had  been  accustomed  to  do  in
Paris.  Up  till  the  present  sitting  Mme  Bisson  had  by
her  own  wish  refrained  from  touching  the  medium's  hands
after  the  first  hypnotization  except  upon  one  or  two
special  occasions.]

7.47  p.m.  Seance  begins.  Hands  held  as  usual  by  B.
and  D.

8.30  p.m.  Medium  calls  attention  to  some  saliva  upon
her  left  knee.

8.40  p.m.  Mme  B.  takes  the  medium's  hands  and  begins
to  encourage  her  saying,  "  Allans  !  Allons !
Venez  ! Venez  !  " etc. As nothing  occurs


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sitfmgs  ivith  Eva  C.


297


she  replaces  Eva  s  hands  on  her  knees,  which
-  remain  visible  outside  the  curtains.

9.30  p.m. Eva  says  that  she  feels  nothing.
10.0 p.m. Sitting  closed  as  the  medium  still  feels  nothing.


Seance  XXXVI.
JiDie  24,  1920.

Present. Mme  B., D., F., F.  D'A., H. The  photographic

operator  was  not  present  at  this  sitting.
Control. There  being  no  doctor  or  lady  present  the  control

before  and  after  the  seance  was  only  partial  as  on  June  21.

The  condition  of  the  veil  was  as  usual  examined  before

the  sitting,  and  during  the  seance  H.  sat  on  the  right  of

the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.

[Before  the  sitting  Mme  Bisson  said  that  she  preferred
to  continue  the  seances  with  the  veil  until  the  last  two
sittings  in  the  hope  that  certain  of  the  phenomena  would
penetrate  it.  If,  however,  they  failed  to  do  so  she  sug-
gested that  the  last  two  sittings  should  be  held  without
the  veil.]

7.45  p.m. Seance  begins.

8.6 p.m. Medium  says  that  "it  is  there."

8.14  p.m.  Stertorous  breathing  begins  and  a  crisis  seems
to  be  approaching.  Mme  B.  encourages  the
medium,  saying, "  Allons  ! Donnez  !  "'  etc.

8.22  p.m.  Eva  leans  forward  to  show  herself.  D.  re-
ports that  her  comb  has  fallen  from  her
hair  and  is  hanging  in  the  veil.  F.  sug-
gests that  Mme  B.  should  replace  it  as  it
gets  in  the  way.  She  tries  to  do  so,  but
'  on  feeling  the  veil  says  that  the  comb  is

not  there  and  the  veil  itself  is  soaking  wet
("  tmit  trempe  "').  D.  says  that  he  certainly
saw  something  in  the  veil,  but  Eva  says
that  it  is  not  the  comb.  We  do  not  use
the  torch  for  fear  of  interrupting  the
possible  development  of  the  phenomenon.


298


A  Series  of  Siftings  with  Eva  C.


[part


8.29  p.m. Mme B. takes the red  light  ^ and holds  it

near  to  the  medium,  but  nothing  is  visible.

8.30  p.m. H. says  that  something  is coming  from  the

medium's  mouth  like  froth  and  is  falling
on  to  her  breast.  The  crisis  continues  and
seems  to  be  increasing  in  intensity.

8.40  p.m. Crisis  appears  to  be  weakening.

9.0 p.m. Crisis  seems  to  be  recommencing.

9.3  p.m.  Medium  leans  forward  and  says,  "  Regardez  !  "
Nothing  is  visible.

9.8 p.m. Eva  becomes  quiet  again.

9.12  p.m. Medium  again  says  that  it  is  coming.

9.19  p.m.  Eva  insists  that  something  is  there,  and  bring-
ing the  left  side  of  her  face  forward  shows
it.  The  torch  is  turned  on,  but  nothing  is
seen.

9.40  p.m.  Eva  again  leans  forward,  but  still  nothing  is
visible.

9.53  p.m.  Medium  complains  that  her  comb  has  fallen
inside  her  veil.  Mme  B.  replaces  it  in
her  hair  and  the  crisis  recommences  im-
mediately.

9.55  p.m.  Eva  leans  forward  to  show  herself,  but  nothing
is  visible.

9.59  p.m.  Eva  asks  D.  to  give  her  ''force."  D.  accord-
ingly enters  the  cabinet  and  holds  the
medium's  forehead  and  neck  whilst  H.
controls  her  hands.  Very  rapid  breathing
follows  and  D.  soon  withdraws  from  the
cabinet.

10.2  p.m.  Crisis  returns.  Eva  leans  forward  and  the
torch  is  flashed  on  her,  but  nothing  is
visible.

10.6  p.m.  Crisis  continues.  Mme  B.  takes  Eva's  hands,
who  leans  forward  and  shows  herself,  but
again  notliing  is  visible.

^  This  refers  to  the  ruby  electric  bulb  covered  with  a  dark  cloth
which  lay  on  the  table  at  which  the  observer  sat  who  was  taking  the
notes.  This  was  usually  kept  burning  during  the  seances,  except
occasionally  during  the  long  periods  of  waiting,  when  it  was  turned  out.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  299


10.9  p.m. Medium again leans forward,  but nothing  is

seen.

10.10  p.m. Medium  again  leans  forward  and  the  torch  is

flashed  on  her,  but  nothing  is  visible.

10.11  p.m. Eva leans forward and the curtains  are

opened,  but  nothing  is  visible.

10.12  p.m. Medium  repeats  several  times, "  I feel  it  !  I

feel  it  !  "

10.14  p.m.  Medium  bends  forward  and  Mme  B.  feels  her
veil  and  reports  that  her  hair  and  slides
have  fallen  down  into  the  veil.

10.16  p.m. Eva  again  leans  forward,  but  nothing  is  seen.

10.17  p.m. She  does  so  again  with  the  same  result.

10.19  p.m. Eva  says Regardez ma bouche." The  light

from  the  torch  is  cast  into  her  mouth,  but
nothing  is  seen  within.

10.20  p.m. D.  says that  the  medium  keeps  plucking  at

her  tights  in  front  as  if  to  free  something.
Eva  says  that  she  feels  it  all  over  her,"
but  nothing  is  yet  visible.
10.34  p.m.  Mme  B.  says  that  she  thinks  the  medium's
nose  is  whiter  than  it  ought  to  be  and
something  is  probably  preparing  there.

10.39  p.m. Medium  screams.

10.40  p.m. A white object is seen in Eva's  mouth.

D.  and  H.  both  touch  it. It  is  like  the
round  and pointed  end  of  a  pencil  in  ap-
pearance, but is not hard,  but soft  and
'  resilient like a  piece of oilskin rolled  up.

Shortly  afterwards  she  says  Eclair ez,''
and  on  turning  on  the  torch  a  mass  of
white  stuff  is  seen  lying  along  the  upper
lip.

10.44  p.m.  Eva  asks  D.  to  pull  the  object  out  of  her
mouth,  but  he  feels  nothing.  Then  she
opens  her  mouth  wide  and  we  see  a  mass
of  substance  like  chewed  candle  grease
lying  on  her  tongue.

10.47  p.m.  Eva  puts  her  hands  up  to  her  mouth  and
pulls out of it a strip of  elastic-looking


300


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


stuff  about  four  inches  long  and  half  an
inch  broad.  It  is  twisted  in  appearance
and  sandy  in  colour,  except  where  it  is
stretched  out ;  this  part  is  lighter  in  shade.^
Mme  B.  rapidlj^  cuts  off  the  veil  so  that
we  can  examine  it  better.


10.54  p.m. Eva  leans  forward  and  pulls  a  sort  of  mem-


brane-like substance  from  her  mouth  with
both  hands.  Whilst  she  is  doing  so  the
light  from  the  torch  is  cast  directly  upon  it.


10.55  p.m. Eva  continues  to  pull  and  mould  the  mem-

brane.

10.56  p.m. The  substance  disappears  and  she  says  it  has

gone.

10.57  p.m. Seance closes. With the help of Mme  B.


and  under  cover  of  the  medium's  frock  the
tights  were  immediately  removed  and  ex-
amined by  the  observers,  although  with
negative  results.

Remarks  on  Seance  XXXVl.


Although  the  phenomena  obtained  at  this  sitting  were
small  and  insignificant  and  only  appeared  after  a  pro-
tracted period  of  waiting,  the  reappearance  of  the  mem-
brane-like substance  which  had  formerly  been  observed
on  June  21  permitted  the  investigators  to  studj'^  it  in
greater  detail  than  was  possible  on  the  previous  occasion.
When  pulled  out  of  the  mouth  it  appeared  to  be  highly
elastic  and  was  drawn  down  in  two  directions  thus  :


When  stretched  out  it  extended  to  about  half  an  inch
below  the  level  of  the  medium's  chin,  and  D.  on  feeling
it  said  that  to  the  touch  it  exactly  resembled  a  piece  of


1  The  twisted  cord  seen  on  this  occasion  strongly  resembled  that
photographed  by  Mme  Bisson  on  May  .31,  1913,  and  reproduced  in
her  book.  Fig.  164.


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  loith  Eva  C.  301


some  animal  membrane.  When  it  was  being  pulled  out
sideways  he  noticed  that  in  texture  it  was  semi-trans-
parent and  that  its  surface  seemed  to  be  perforated  by
minute  holes  the  size  of  pin-pricks.  At  the  conclusion  it
was  brought  up  to  the  medium's  mouth  and  vanished,  the
mouth  being  almost  immediately  opened  in  order  to  show
that  it  had  disappeared.

Another  interesting  point  in  connection  with  the  sitting
was  the  number  of  times  the  mediiim  declared  that  the
phenomena  were  present,  when  they  were  invisible  to  the
spectators.  Accepting  the  theory  of  materialization  the
incident  might  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  assuming  tliat
in  their  early  stages  the  phenomena  are  cloudy  or  semi-
fluidic,  thus  being  invisible  to  any  but  the  medium  herself.
During  the  process  of  development,  the  guess  might  be
hazarded,  these  cloud-like  formations  slowly  solidify,
and  in  time  become  the  dense  material  objects  which
constitute  the  actual  phenomena  as  they  are  observed
by  the  investigators.  Experiments  conducted  on  a  large
scale  would  be  necessary  before  these  points  could  be
finally  elucidated.


Seance  XXXVII.
June  25,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  B.,  D.,  F.,  H.,  and  the  operator.

Control.  As  there  was  neither  a  doctoi  nor  lady  present  the
control  was  only  partial,  as  on  former  occasions.  No  veil
was  worn  at  this  sitting,  the  medium's  ears,  mouth,  etc.,
being  examined  by  D.  During  the  seance  B.  sat  on  the
right  of  the  medium  and  D.  on  the  left.

7.50  p.m. Seance  begins.

9.40  p.m.  All  has  been  quiet  till  now.  Mme  B.  says
that  she  has  seen  some  luminous  spots  on
the  curtains  and  that  it  is  the  first  time
that  she  has  seen  them  in  England.  They
nearly  always  indicate  a  good  seance.
10.25  p.m.  The  medium  says  that  she  does  not  feel
,  anything  and  the  sitting  is  abandoned.


302


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


Seance  XXXVIIT.
June  26,  1920.

Present. Mme  B.,  D.,  F.,  F.  D'A.,  and  the  operator.

Control. A partial control only as before. During  the

sitting  F.  D'A. sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium  and  D.

on  the  left. No  veil

4.22  p.m. Seance  begins.

5.15  p.m.  Eva  begins  to  take  a  series  of  long  breaths  :
she  says  that  the  phenomena  are  going  to
come. A  period  of  quiet  supervenes.

6.5  p.m.  A  cold  wind  comes  strongly  out  from  between
the  parting  of  the  curtains.  A  crisis  is
developing  and  the  breeze  continues  at
intervals.  D.  puts  his  hand  down  to  the
medium's  feet  and  notes  that  although  the
wind  cannot  be  felt,  there  is  a  distinct
sensation  of  cold.

6.33  p.m.  Eva  holds  her  hands  out  in  front  of  the
curtains  and  pulls  out  between  them  a
dark-coloured  substance.  It  looks  to  me
[i.e.  E.  who  is  taking  the  notes]  like  a  sort
of  dark  veil.  Suddenly  a  white  thing  appeared
in  the  middle  of  the  darker  stuff  and  then
shot  out  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Mme  B.
turns  the  white  light  on  to  it  and  it  now
looks  to  me  like  a  woolly  medallion  or
"  Agnus  Dei,"  oval  and  measuring  about
2  X 1  in.  A  tag  of  wool  is  hanging  from
it,  and  under  the  woolly  surface  is  a  face
apparently  in  slight  relief.  The  light  being
kept  on,  the  medium  made  a  quick  gesture
inwards,  and  it  disappeared,  the  medium's
hands  Ijeing  free  at  this  moment.

After  the  seance  D.  said  that  to  him  the  substance
looked  like  a  dark  grey  membrane  similar  to  that  observed
on  June  24.  To  him  and  also  to  F.  D'A.,  and  the
operator the substance appeared semi-porous and  with


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  G.


303


several  perforations.  F.  D"A.  said  tliat  it  was  about  an
eighth  of  an  inch  thick,  and  D.  managed  to  feel  it  twice.
First  of  all  at  an  earlier  stage,  when  it  was  still  invisible,
he  felt  a  single  tough  thread  between  the  medium's  haiads.
Then  at  a  later  stage,  when  he  touched  it,  it  felt  like  a
membrane,  but  dry,  rather  like  thin  parchment.

D.'s  account,  taken  from  notes  made  immediately  after
the  sitting  and  written  out  two  days  later,  read  as
follows  :

The  medium  began  to  work  her  hands  about  outside
the  curtain  as  if  drawing  something  from  the  fingers.
I  passed  my  own  finger  through  the  opening  between  hers
and  felt  what  seemed  like  a  strong,  tough,  elastic  thread.
On  my  coming  in  contact  with  it  the  medium  shuddered
and  drew  back,  the  hands,  however,  remaining  in  full
view.  The  drawing  of  the  fingers  now  continued  and  I
then  saw  a  greyish  thread  between  them  Avhich,  when
worked  about,  soon  assumed  the  shape  of  an  irregular
piece  of  membrane.  I  then  seemed  to  see  what  I  can
only  describe  as  a  white  flash,  when  the  medium  opened
her  hands  and  showed  a  most  curious  object  lying  between
them.  It  was  something  like  a  medallion  in  shape,  about
2|  ins.  by  1  inch  in  size,  and  as  I  saw  it,  it  seemed
made  of  thick  skin,  dark  grey  in  colour.  On  the  surface
were  two  white  patches,  one  as  big  as  a  penny,  and  the
other  smaller,  and  more  oval  in  appearance.  F.  says
that  he  saw  a  small  full  face  on  the  under  surface,  but
I  did  not  see  this.  We  had  the  torch  full  on  it  till  the
medium  drew  back  complaining,  and  then  it  suddenly
vanished.

6.37  p.m.  D.  and  F.  D  A.  say  that  a  white  object  is
hanging  from  the  medium's  mouth.  It  is
in  shape  rather  like  an  icicle,  about  four
inches  in  length  and  with  more  than  one
tag  giving  the  appearance  of  a  sort  of
beard.  The  cameras  are  prepared  and  a
photo  is  taken.  After  the  flash  the  torch
is  turned  on  and  the  object  is  examined.
. It looks to me  {i.e. F.) like a  triangular


304


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  G.


[part


piece  of  medical  bandage  with  a  tag  hanging
from  it  and  attached  to  the  medium's
upper  lip.  D.  saw  it  closer  and  says  that
it  showed  a  coloured  face  in  semi-profile
upon  it.  The  cheeks  were  pink,  the  eyes
blue  and  the  general  background  grey.
F.  D'A.  saw  only  a  coloured  pattern,  but
did  not  distinguish  a  face.  Eva  shrinks
back  in  her  chair.  She  requests  an
immediate  mouth  control,  which  is  refused
in  the  hope  of  further  development.

D.'s  account  reads  :

On  opening  the  curtains  again  I  saw  hanging  from  the
medium's  mouth  two  or  three  threads,  from  one  of  which
a  whitish  blob  was  suspended,  giving  a  grotesque  appear-
ance. A  photo  was  taken.

When  I  looked  again,  I  saw  a  roundish-shaped  object
hanging  from  the  medium's  mouth.  Torch  was  turned
on  to  it,  and  I  saw  a  piece  of  greyish-white  membrane,
upon  which  was  a  female  face.  It  reminded  me  of
Fig.  7  in  Geley's  book  and  was  in  colours.  The  cheeks
were  pinkish  red,  the  eyes  bluish  and  the  other  features
drawn  in  dark  grey  or  black.  The  face  was  flat  and
about  two  inches  by  one  and  a  quarter  in  size.  After
the  torch  had  been  turned  off  the  object  vanished.

7.45  p.m.  Eva  shows  something  within  her  mouth  which
she  says  is  a  finger.  The  torch  was  not
flashed  upon  it,  and  so  it  could  not  be  seen
distinctly.  It  resembled  a  curved  piece  of
white  substance  like  a  candle.  The  cameras
were  again  prepared  and  a  photo  was
taken. The  object  then  vanished.

7.49  p.m.  A  membrane  appears  between  the  medium's
fingers  whilst  D.  is  holding  her  hands.
Her  fingers  are  quite  outside  the  cabinet
and  the  light  of  the  torch  is  thrown  upon
the  material.  It  suddenly  vanished.  D.
was  holding  the  medium's  hands  open,  the
four  fingers being between his thumb  and


IXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


305


fingers,  thus  leaving  the  ends  of  the  medium's
fingers  free.  The  membrane  disappeared
suddenly  whilst  the  hands  were  still  being
held,  a  slight  upward  jerk  being  given  by
the  medium  at  the  moment  of  the  dis-
appearance, whilst  the  substance  was  being
played  about  with.  Whilst  this  was  going
on  F.  D'A.  felt  Eva's  lips,  as  she  had
turned  towards  him  for  the  purpose.  He
felt  nothing  unusual.  Mme  B.  says  that
the  force  is  extremely  good  and  that  some-
thing ought  to  be  able  to  show  itself  at
the  curtain.  The  torch,  however,  has  some-
what impeded  its  development.

D.'s  account  reads  :

"  The  medium  asked  me  to  hold  her  hands,  which  I  did,
my  fingers  being  next  to  her  palms  and  my  thumbs  on
the  top  of  her  hands.  This  allowed  her  fingers  free  play,
and  soon  they  began  to  move  as  before  with  a  drawing
motion.  A  greyish  thread  now  began  to  be  drawn  out
from  the  fingers,  and,  as  before,  it  soon  formed  into  a
membrane.  I  touched  it.  It  felt  like  a  piece  of  soft,
smooth  rubber.  The  medium  half  put  it  into  my  hands,
whilst  we  observed  it  with  the  torch.  Whilst  she  was
working  it  about,  she  asked  Dr.  Fournier  D'Albe  to
examine  her  mouth.  This  he  did  without  the  torch,  and
tells  me  that  he  felt  all  round  the  medium's  lips,  but  did
not  come  into  contact  with  a  thread  of  any  kind.  Soon
after,  whilst  I  was  still  holding  the  hands,  the  membrane
vanished  with  an  upward  jerk,  the  medium  immediately
-showing  both  hands  empty,  saying,  '  C'est  fini.'  The  seance
then  closed."

7.57  p.m. In order  to produce an  effect of  confidence

in  the  medium  the  torch  is  put  away
altogether  and  we  let  her  hear  us  do  it,
hoping  for  bigger  phenomena.

7.58  p.m. Eva groans and gives a sudden  shudder

saying,  "  it's  gone  !  " Seance  closes.

X


306


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[fart


Remarks  on  Seance  XXXVIII.

This  seance  was  undoubtedly  the  most  mterestmg  of  all
those  held  under  the  auspices  of  the  Society.  In  the
variety  and  character  of  the  phenomena  the  sitting  was
easily  the  most  valuable  from  the  evidential  point  of  view,
although  it  was  but  poor  when  considered  in  comparison
with  those  formerly  held  in  Munich  and  Paris.  The  cold
breeze,  which  was  felt  by  all  present  and  which  is  so
common  an  accompaniment  of  mecliumistic  phenomena,  was
noticed  for  the  first  and  only  time,  although  it  had  been
several  times  recorded  by  Mme  Bisson  and  the  previous
investigators.  The  sudden  disappearance  of  the  membrane
from  between  the  fingers  whilst  the  hands  were  being
held  was  an  exceptionally  good  piece  of  evidence  for  the
supernormal  character  of  the  phenomena,  although  it
might  have  been  conceivably  accomplished  by  normal
means,  as  discussed  elsewhere.  Unfortunately,  the  pheno-
mena were  far  too  small  and  fragmentary  to  furnish  any
connected  story  as  to  their  origin  and  development.

The  two  photographs  when  developed  and  printed
showed  almost  precisely  what  the  observers  had  noticed,
except  that  in  the  first  photograph  the  face  is  shown
quite  clearly,  whereas  the  sitters  only  saw  the  face  after  the
photograph  had  been  taken  (Plate  VII.).  The  medium  is
shown  leaning  back  in  her  chair,  whilst  her  two  hands  are
tightly  grasping  the  parted  curtains  of  the  cabinet.  Some
stray  locks  of  hair  have  fallen  over  her  face,  whilst  from
her  mouth  hangs  what  looks  like  a  small  flat  face  seen
in  semi-profile.  Below  is  a  sort  of  oval  flap,  or  what
Dr.  Geley  calls  U7i  corps  emhryonnaire,  which  is  about  the
same  size  as  the  head  and  in  which  a  fold  is  clearly
discernible.  At  the  right  edge  of  the  flap  and  seemingly
hanging  down  from  a  part  of  the  face  is  a  strip  of  dark
substance  which  descends  to  about  two  inches  below  the
neck  of  the  tights.

The  second  photograph  is  unfortunately  blurred  and  is
therefore  not  suitable  for  reproduction.  It  shows  the
medium  leaning  forward  slightly,  whilst  from  her  chin  is
apparently  protruding  a  white finger-like  object,  which  is


Plate  VII.


Lxxxn'.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  vnth  Eva  C.


307


much  bent,  so  that  the  jooi'tion  which  extends  from  about
one  and  a  half  mches  from  the  tip  is  pointing  downwards
towards  the  groimd.  In  appearance  the  object  strongly
resembles  those  other  waxy,  pointed  objects  which  had
been  observed  on  previous  occasions.


SEA2S-CE  XXXIX.
June  28,  1920.

Present. Mme  B..  3Irs.  Baggally. :\Irs.  F., Dr.  Gates, B..  D.,

F.,  F.  D'A.,  and  the  oioerator.
Control. Before the seance 3Irs.  F. controlled the  medium

whilst  during  the  sitting  B.  sat  on  the  right  of  the  medium

and  D.  on  the  left. Xo  veil  was  worn  and  there  was  no

control  after  the  seance.

7.47  p.m. Seance  beguxs.
10.0 p.m. Eva says that she feels nothing, and  the
seance  is  abandoned.


Seance  XL.
June  29,  1920.

Pre-ienf. :\Ime  B.. :\Irs.  Baggally. Mrs.  F., Dr.  Gates, B.,  D.,

F.,  F.  D"A.,  and  the  operator.
Co>"TEOL. As  in  the  previous  sitting.

7.2.3  p.m. Seance  begins.

7.4.5  p.m.  Eva  begms  to  groan  slightly,  but  is  soon
quiet  agam.

7.58  p.m. Groaning  begins  again  together  -nith  a  sort  of

humming  noise  on  the  part  of  the  medium.
8.7 p.m. "  Cela  va  venire

8.12  p.m.  Eva  says  that  she  feels  the  curtain  damp
just  over  her  knee.  D.  and  Dr.  Gates  feel
it  and  find  that  it  is  so.  Mme  B.  thinks
that  this  mdicates  that  the  "  substance  "  is
coming  from  the  knees.


308


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C. [part  lxxxiv.]


8.45  p.m. Indications  of  heavy  breathing  begin.
8.52  p.m. "  A'ppelle,  Jtdiette:'

8.55  p.m.  Mme  B.  takes  Eva's  hands  and  tries  to
stimulate  her,  bnt  without  result,  so  she
gives  it  vip  and  replaces  the  medium's  hands
on  her  knees.

9.50  p.m.  D.  enters  the  cabinet  to  put  the  medium  into
a  deeper  stage  of  hypnosis.  When  he
returns  her  right  hand  is  rigid,  but  it
gradually  relaxes.

10.3  p.m. The  sitters  endeavour  to  stimulate  the  medium

by  calling  in  chorus,  "  Venez,  venez,  venezl"
etc.

10.5  p.m. A cool  breeze seems to come from  between

the  hands  of  the  medium.  D.  thinks  that
it  is  caused  by  the  medium's  own  breath.

10.6  p.m. Heavy  breathing  begins,  but  soon  subsides.
10.35  p.m. F. D'A. takes  Mme B.'s  place and,  holding

the  medium's  hands,  tries  to  give  her
"  force,"  but  she  refuses  to  permit  him  to
hold  her  hands.

10.37  p.m. D.  now  tries  to  hold  Eva's  hands  and  Mme  B.

and  F.  D'A.  resume  their  former  places.

11.0  p.m.  F.  and  Mrs.  F.  leave.  F.  D'A.  changes  his
position  and  now  sits  behind  Mrs.  Baggally,
who  is  seated  at  the  side  of  B.  D.  releases
the  medium's  hands,  which  now  rest  upon
her  knees.

11.4  p.m. The  sitters  again  make  a  general  appeal,  but

without  any  result.

11.5  p.m. "  Qa  ne  vient  pas''
11.9 p.m. Seance  closes.


Remaeks  on  Seance  XL.

This  sitting  was  the  last  of  those  which  had  been
arranged  for  by  the  Society.  On  the  following  day  Mme
Bisson  and  the  medium  left  England  and  returned  to
Paris.


CHAPTER  III.


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  FPvAUD.
By  E.  J.  Dingwall.

There  have  been  few  phenomena  in  the  history  of
psychical  research  which  have  been  more  prodvictive  of
fraud  than  materiahzations.  In  the  early  days,  when
full  form  "  phantoms  "  were  common  in  the  seance  rooms,
fraud  must  have  been  extensive^  employed,  as  it  is  still
to-day  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States.  Test
conditions  were  little  understood,  and  the  necessity  of  a
stringent  control  scarcely  realized.  Conditions  are,  how-
ever, rapidly  changing,  not  only  in  the  general  character
of  the  materializations,  but  also  in  the  methods  of  con-
trolling the  mediums.  The  question  of  fraud,  however,
still  remains  a  thorny  obstacle  in  the  path  of  any  elaborate
scientific  investigation.  Scientific  men  are  not  usually
acquainted  with  deceptive  psychology  and  the  scope  of
misdirection,  whilst  their  training  in  no  way  fits  them
to  detect  suspicious  movements  or  manipulations.  In
this  connexion  the  phenomena  of  materialization  offer  a
more  than  usually  complicated  field  in  which  the  senses
are  peculiarly  liable  to  illusions  of  every  kind.

Amongst  those  materializing  mediums  who  have  most
unreservedly  offered  themselves  for  scientific  investigation,
Eva  C.  is  a  distinguished  example.  I  shall  not  attempt
to  discuss  here  the  difficulties  associated  with  the  experi-
ments at  the  Villa  Carmen  and  the  identity  of  Bien-Boa.
The  present  series  of  sittings  were  concerned  solely  with
the  later  phase  of  Eva's  mediumship,  and  although  the
Bien-Boa  case  has  certain  points  of  affinity  with  Eva's
later  efforts,  this  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  them.  The

309


310  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  [part

investigation  of  Eva  C.'s  alleged  mediumistic  power  can
be  divided  naturally  into  four  main  groups  :

(a)  The  investigations  of  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing.

{h)  The  personal  observations  of  her  protectress,  Mme
Juliette  Alexandre-Bisson.

(c)  The  investigations  of  Dr.  Geley.

{d)  The  investigation  of  the  English  Society  for  Psychical
Eesearch.

In  order  to  gauge  accurately  the  true  weight  of  the
hypothesis  that  fraud  only  is  at  work,  1  jiropose  to  deal
with  these  four  series  of  observations  in  order,  detailing
points  of  interest  as  they  occur,  and  trying  to  indicate  the
extraordinary  difficulties  which  confront  this  hypothesis.
Before  commencing,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  consider
one  objection  which  will  immediately  be  raised.  That
question  is  of  course  concerning  the  position  of  Mme
Bisson.  However  distasteful  such  a  subject  may  be,
it  seems  quite  obvious  that  it  must  be  met,  and  Mme
Bisson  herself  would  be  the  first  to  recognize  it.  In  the
first  place,  it  is  well  to  state  clearly  the  impression  that
Mme  Bisson  made  upon  the  S.P.R.  Committee  and  upon
those  of  the  members  who  were  privileged  to  meet  her.
Deeply  interested  in  psychic  phenomena,  she  appeared  to
us  a  woman  of  high  intellectual  attainments  and  j)ossessed
Avith  a  genuine  love  of  scientific  inquiry.  A  passionate
believer  in  the  genuine  character  of  Eva's  mediumship,
her  Gallic  temperament  appeared  at  times  to  overrule  her
scientific  prudence,  especially  when  she  thought  that  scepti-
cism had  reached  its  limits.  It  need  scarcely  be  said
that  not  a  shred  or  particle  of  evidence  exists  which
implicates  Mme  Bisson  in  any  way  Avhatsoever  with  the
alleged  fraudulent  aspect  of  the  phenomena  of  Eva  C.
During  the  preceding  investigations  Mme  Bisson  had
attended  the  sittings,  not  only  as  a  privileged  observer,
but  as  the  sole  director  of  the  proceedings.

Generally  speaking  she  encourages  and  supports  Eva
during  the  sittings,  the  medium  being  so  dependent  on
her  that  she  refuses  to  sit  unless  her  protectress  is
present.  Whatever  we  may  think  of  these  conditions,
it  seemed  clear  to  the  Committee  that  no  sittings  would


xxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  311

have  been  possible  unless  jMme  Bisson  had  been  per-
mitted to  take  her  accustomed  place.  Such  indeed
were  the  actual  conditions  which  were  accepted  hy  the
Society  before  the  arrival  of  Mme  Bisson  and  the  medium
in  this  country.  It  -will  be  seen  that  owing  to  some
suggestions  offered  by  Mme  Bisson  herself,  the  Committee
instituted  for  a  time  a  "partial  control  of  her.  The
Society  was  faced  with  the  dilemma  of  either  having  no
investigation  at  all,  or  of  accepting  those  conditions  Avhich
had  been  customary  with  previous  investigators.  Of  the
two  alternatives  they  chose  the  latter.

It  may  be  thought  by  some  that  such  conditions  were
xinfortunate  and  that  certainty  is  never  likely  to  be
attained  as  long  as  either  (a)  Mme  Bisson  remains  an
observer,  or  (6)  she  does  not  subject  herself  to  that
degree  of  control  that  may  be  deemed  to  be  necessary.
Whatever  may  be  the  truth  of  this  point  of  view,  it
must  be  understood  that  I  am  here  dealing  primarily
"with  the  case  of  the  medium  herself.

As  regards  any  part  which  those  unacquainted  with
Mme  Bisson  may  suppose  her  to  play,  I  can  only  record
that  although  she  was  not  subjected  to  the  same  rigorous
control  as  was  the  medium,  nothing  ever  arose  to  give
grounds  for  the  slightest  susj)icion,  or  for  the  supposition
that  her  role  was  otherwise  than  that  of  an  independent
■observer  deeply  interested  in  the  phenomena  and  sacrificing
jnuch  time,  patience,  and  money  in  the  study  of  them.

The  Investigations  of  Baron  von  Schrenck-Notzing.

In  the  course  of  his  researches  Dr.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing  became  entirely  convinced  as  to  the  reality  of
Eva's  phenomena.  The  objectivity  of  the  materializations
was  assured  by  the  use  of  photographic  apparatus,  and
according  to  the  Baron  himself  fraud  ^  was  prevented
through  the  stringent  control  he  exercised. Indeed,  this

^  Although strictly speaking fraud cannot be attributed to  persons
in  trance,  I  use  the  word  for  the  sake  of  convenience  as  its  meaning  is
generally  understood. The  reality  of  Eva's  hypnotic  state  is,  I  think,
:not  generally  questioned.


312


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


is  in  reality  his  main  argument.  Because  he  had  never
found  anything  suspicious  on  the  medium's  person  during
the  searching,  "  the  honesty  of  the  medium  is  therefore
not  a  probability,  but  a  certainty  placed  beyond  all
question  "  {Materialisations-Phdnomene,  p.  495,  Eng.  Trans.,
p.  275).  We  must  now  endeavour  to  ascertain  how  far
such  a  statement  is  true.  The  point  in  which  I
am  personally  interested  is  as  to  the  extent  of  Dr.  von
Schrenck-Notzing's  knowledge  of  those  methods  commonly
used  by  magicians  (especially  handcuff  performers)  ior
concealing  their  apparatus  when  in  a  nude  condition.
With  all  due  deference  to  Baron  von  Schrenck's  scientific
attainments,  I  cannot  help  asking  myself  whether  he  is
capable  of  detecting  fraudulent  manipulations  during  the
control  before  and  after  the  seances.  As  far  as  I  know,
no  one  fully  acquainted  with  trick  methods  has  ever
assisted  at  this  all-important  control,  for  the  simple
reason  that  experts  in  this  branch  of  magic  are  rarely
medical  men  or  women.  The  advantage  of  being  a
female  medium  therefore  is  obvious  and  cannot  be  wholly
ignored.^  During  many  of  the  sittings  Dr.  von  Sclirenck-
Notzing  admits  that  the  medium  used  her  hands  in  order
to  arrange  the  phenomena  and  to  fix  them  up  so  that
they  could  be  easily  observed  (Eng.  Trans.,  p.  265).
Indeed,  he  even  surmises  that  these  phenomena,  which
according  to  his  hypothesis  were  formed  ideoplastically
out  of  the  medium's  own  organism,  have  been  affixed  to
the  walls  and  curtains  of  the  cabinet  by  means  of  pins
(p.  263)  !  Thus  on  August  21,  1912,  Dr.  A.  drew  his
attention  to  a  whole  series  of  pin  holes  on  the  left-hand
curtain  and  also  at  the  back  of  the  cabinet.  Dr.  von  Schrenck
is  at  pains  to  explain  the  existence  of  these  pin  holes,
which  corresponded  roughly  to  the  position  of  the  materiali-
zations. He  points  out  that  his  photographer  had  pinned
a  piece  of  newspaper  to  the  curtain  when  focusing  the
cameras  and  that  this  might  account  for  the  holes.  He
also finds refuge in his former theory that "  the  con-

1  This  objection  naturally  applies  to  all  investigations  (our  own  included)
where  the  control  before  and  after  the  seances  is  exercised  by  persons
unacquainted  with  the  principles  of  misdirection.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


313


ditions  under  which  the  sittings  took  place  excluded  the
introduction  of  pictures  and  other  objects."  Now  the
first  thing  that  must  strike  even  the  most  casual  reader
is  that  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  did  not  discover  the  pin
holes.  These  were  found  hy  a  visitor,  Dr.  A.,  who  was
compelled  to  point  them  out  to  the  Baron.  If,  therefore.
Dr.  von  Schrenck  had  not  even  succeeded  in  discovering
"  groups  of  pin  holes  in  pairs,"  just  where  materializations
had  appeared  and  inside  the  cabinet,  which  he  could  have
examined  at  leisure,  is  it  too  much  to  suppose  that  he
failed  to  discover  the  pins,  assuming  that  they  had  been
surreptitiously  introduced  ?  I  confess  that  I  do  not
find  it  difficult  to  assume  that  the  pins  were  introduced
by  Eva  before  the  seance  and  taken  away  again  after  it
was  over.  Granting  that  this  was  possible,  is  it  too  far-
fetched a  theory  to  suppose  that  certain  of  the  materiali-
zations were  brought  in  and  taken  out  by  precisely  those
deceptive  movements  which  would  be  necessary  under  the
circumstances  1  The  methods  for  concealing  such  objects
are  manifold  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  detail  them
here.  But  it  may  be  understood  that  if  it  is  a  fact
that  nothing  is  concealed  where  it  might  be  easily  dis-
covered, as,  for  example,  under  the  arms,  some  other
hiding  place  would  have  to  be  employed.  A  gynaeco-
logical and  rectal  examination  would  reveal  any  foreign
body  thus  concealed,  but  an  insistence  on  such  an
examination  could  not  of  course  be  too  often  made.  Nor
would  there  be  any  need  for  such  a  control  if  the  tights
were  always  sound  and  free  from  holes.  At  the  seances
held  by  the  Society  several  holes  were  found  in  the
tights,  one  as  big  as  a  threepenny  piece  and  in  the
region  of  the  genitals.  Whether  these  were  due  to  the
wicker  work  of  the  chair  tearing  the  material  or  to  other
reasons  it  is  difficult  to  say,  the  Committee  favouring
strongly  the  former  explanation.  When  discovered  (May
23,  1920)  they  were  sewn  up  with  white  thread,  and  no
further  ones  appeared.  The  point,  however,  to  be  insisted
on,  is  how  far  this  careful  inspection  and  repair  of  the
tights  were  carried  on  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  and
the other investigators. Once the tights are  sound.


31-4  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  ■  [part

control  is  comparatively  simple,  and  nothing  could  in  any
way  be  found  objectionable  by  the  medium  even  in  its
most  severe  application.

On  August  30,  1912,  during  the  examination  of  the
cabinet  after  the  seance  some  small  white  particles,  the
largest  of  which  was  the  size  of  a  pea,  were  found  on
the  floor,  and  inside  tlie  tights  fine  dust  was  discovered
adhering  to  the  material.  On  examination  these  particles
were  found  to  consist  of  paper,  the  existence  of  which
Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  explains  by  assuming  that  a
sitter  had  brought  them  in  and  left  them  in  the  cabinet,
as  they  gave  the  impression  of  having  been  crushed  by
a  shoe.  He  explains  the  dust  in  the  tights  (which  proved
to  be  composed  of  wood  fibre)  by  suggesting  that  the
garment  had  fallen  on  the  floor  and  gathered  some  dust.

As  far  as  I  know  this  was  the  only  occasion  when
paper,  or  a  product  closely  resembling  paper,  was  dis-
covered by  Dr.  von  iSchrenck-Notzing.

As  will  be  seen  from  the  detailed  report,  the  S.P.R.
Committee  found  paper  on  no  less  than  four  separate
occasions,^  and  on  at  least  one  of  these  it  was  perfectly
clear  that  the  paper  came  from  the  medium's  mouth.
The  explanation  given  by  Mme  Bisson  for  this  discovery
is  that  Eva  is  accustomed  to  wear  hair  papers  and  that
a  piece  may  have  fallen  into  her  moiith  and  stuck  in  her
teeth.  Another  theory  which  Mme  Bisson  brought
forward  was  that  a  piece  of  cake  paper  had  likewise  got
stuck  in  the  medium's  teeth  and  had  been  ejected  in  the
■course  of  the  materializing  process.  Whatever  we  may
thiiik  of  these  theories,  it  seems  quite  clear  that  there
are  some  groimds  for  suspecting  the  genuine  character
of  the  phenomena.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  examine
afresh  the  case  of  the  Miroir  portraits.  Mrs.  Salter  has
already  given  a  clear  account  of  the  circumstances  in  the
Proceedings  of  July,  1914,  and  it  woidd  serve  no  useful
purpose  to  recapitulate  them  here.  In  the  case  of  the
head  of  President  Wilson,  Dr.  von  Schrenck  admits  that
the  materialization  shows  unmistakable  signs  of  folding,
and  he  has  successfully  cut  out  the  picture  and  folded  it

1  On  May  23,  June  4,  June  7  and  June  11.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


315


lip,  thus  demonstrating  that  the  creases  fit  accurately
(Eng.  Trans.,  p.  220).

It  would  be  useless  to  criticize  this  incident  without
having  seen  exactly  Avhat  took  place,  and  reading  Mme
Bisson's  account  of  the  same  occurrence  will  not  be  likely
to  assist  us  in  coming  to  any  satisfactory  conclusion.
That  a  certain  number  of  the  materializations  are  derived
in  some  way  from  the  Miroir  portraits  seems  to  be  an
imdoubted  fact,  and  this,  coupled  Avith  the  fact  that  the
letters  miro  appeared  on  a  part  of  one  of  the  materiali-
zations, cannot  fail  to  arouse  suspicion  which  it  is  certainly
very  hard  to  allay. ^

Before  passing  on  to  the  experiments  of  Mme  Bisson
it  seems  necessary  to  discuss  briefly  one  more  incident
which  has  been  raised  against  the  accurate  observation
of  Dr.  von  Schrenck.  On  August  11,  1911,  May  25,
1912,  and  August  9,  1912,  there  is  some  reason  to  suppose
that  Eva  occasionally  pretended "  that  her  hands  were
lying  visible  before  her,  when  as  a  matter  of  fact  one
of  them  at  least  was  performing  functions  connected  with
the  arrangement  of  the  phenomena.  I  shall  say  nothing
about  the  ethics  of  these  manipulations  beyond  stating
that  they  prove  very  little  one  way  or  the  other.  The
important  point  to  note  is  that  on  August  11,  1911,
Dr.  von  Schrenck  apparently  failed  to  note  them  until  the
photographs  gave  the  true  state  of  affairs.  A  similar
incident  seems  to  have  occurred  in  a  sitting  with  another
medium  (see  M.  von  Kemnitz,  Moderne  Mediumforschimg,
Miinchen,  1914,  p.  56),  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  it
occurred  on  other  occasions  when  we  are  told  that  the
medium's  hands  remained  visibly  lying  on  her  knees.  These
facts  are  unfortunate,  and  it  appears  to  me  necessar}^  to
take  Dr.  von  Schrenck's  testimony  as  to  what  he  has
observed  with  a  certain  amount  of  reserve.

It  ought  perhaps  to  be  pointed  out  that  photographic  enlargements
of  these  heads  prove  conclusively  that  they  are  not  sheets  of  paper
actually  torn  from  Le  Miroir  :  the  process  markings,  which  ought  to
be  clearly  visible  if  the  heads  had  been  illustrations  from  Le  Miroir,
are  never  visible  at  all,  and  there  are  other  objections  which  have  been
fully  dealt  with  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck  in  his  Der  Kampf  um  die
3Iaterialisationsphdnomene,  pp.  74-120.


316


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


It  ought,  however,  to  be  pointed  out  to  certain
triumphant  sceptics  that  to  assume  that  the  whole  of  the
phenomena  recorded  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  are
fraudulent  requires  a  series  of  hypotheses,  which  to  my
mind  are  almost  as  difficult  of  acceptance  as  the  supposi-
tion that  folded  packets  containing  botched  portraits  of
celebrities  are  manufactured  through  the  teleplastic  forces
of  Eva  C.

The  Observations  of  Mme  Bisson.

In  considering  the  testimony  of  Mme  Bisson  the  sceptic
finds  himself  in  considerable  difficulty.  He  has  either  to
state  boldly  his  opinion  that  the  phenomena  are  fraudulent
and  that  Mme  Bisson's  observations  are  worthless,  or  he
has  to  consider  seriously  whether  the  hypothesis  of  fraud
could  jjossibly  account  for  the  occurrences  that  Mme
Bisson  says  that  she  has  studied  when  alone  with  the
medium.^

Now  there  is  not  one  particle  of  evidence  which  he
can  adduce  against  Mme  Bisson,  this  lady  being  held  in
the  highest  esteem  by  all  who  know  her.  There  is  there-
fore a  dead  weight  of  probability  against  him  and  he  has
to  fall  back  upon  the  extraordinary,  although  conceivable
possibility,  that  Mme  Bisson  is  herself  deceived  or  halluci-
nated or  both.  This  solution  is  possibly  easy  to  those
who  are  unacquainted  with  Mme  Bisson,  and  who  know
little  about  deception  and  less  about  hallucination,  but  to
others  the  problem  is  not  so  simple.

The  Investigations  of  Dr.  Geley.

The  results  attained  by  Dr.  Geley  have  been  sum-
marized by  him  in  a  pamphlet  published  in  Paris  in  1918,
and  reprinted  from  the  Bulletin  of  the  Institut  General
Psychologique, Nos. 1-3,  1918.2 ^he  full  reports of  Dr.

1  I  refer  principally  to  such  phenomena  as  those  occurring  for  example
on  September  10,  1911,  October  31,  1911,  or  December  8  and  17,  1911.
(See  pp.  64-68;  70-71;  84-85;  in  Mme  Bisson's  book  and  p.  136  of
the  Eng.  Trans,  of  Dr.  von  Sohrenck's  volume.)

3  Cf.  also  Dr.  Geley's  From  the  Unconscious  to  the  Conscious  (London,
1920),  pp.  51  seq.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


317


Geley's  experiments  have  not  been  published  and  it  is
therefore  impossible  to  discviss  them.  The  same  objec-
tions apply  to  him  as  to  Dr.  von  Schreuck-Notzing,
inasmuch  as  his  control  before  and  after  the  seances
may  conceivably  have  been  favilty.  Notwithstanding,  Dr.
Geley  declares  that  he  does  not  say  merely  that  "  il  7i  y
a  pas  eu  de  fraude,"  but  "  il  n'y  avait  jms  possibilite  de
f ramie,''  and  the  data  are  not  sufficient  for  us  to  be  able
even  to  criticize  him.  Certainly  some  of  the  phenomena
observed  appear  to  me  to  be  absolutely  inexphcable  on
any  theory  of  fraud.  The  following  phenomenon,  for
example,  is  prima  facie  quite  inexplicable  except  by  some
supernormal  mediumistic  faculty  on  the  part  of  Eva  C.

"  Une  tete  apparait  tout  a  coup,  a  environ  75  centi-
metres de  la  tete  d'Eva,  au-dessus  d'elle  et  a  sa
droite.  C'est  une  tete  d'homme,  de  dimension
normale,  bien  formee,  avec  ses  reliefs  habituels.  Le
sommet  du  crane  et  le  front  sont  parfaitement
materialises.  Le  front  est  large  et  haut  ;  les  cheveux
tallies  en  brosse  et  abondants,  chatains  ou  noirs.
Au-dessous  des  arcades  sourcillieres,  les  contours
s'estompent ;  on  ne  voit  bien  que  le  front  et  le  crane.

La  tete  se  derobe  un  instant  derriere  le  rideau  ;
puis  reparait  dans  les  memes  conditions  ;  mais  la
face,  incompletement  materialisee,  est  masquee  par  un
rideau  de  substance  blanche.  J'avance  la  main  ;
je  passe  mes  doigts  a  travers  les  cheveux  touffus  et
je  palpe  les  os  du  crane,  .  .  .  Un  instant  apres,  tout
avait  disparu." (P.  13.)

L^nfortunately  Dr.  Geley  does  not  give  the  necessary
details  for  us  to  be  able  to  understand  the  precise  con-
ditions which  were  obtaining  when  the  above  phenomenon
took  place.  It  is  clear  that  the  head  was  not  perfectly
formed  except  in  its  upper  part,  and  this  Dr.  Geley  was
able  to  feel  and  even  press  with  his  fingers.  How  this
is  to  be  accounted  for  on  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  I  do
not  know,  unless  we  assume  that  the  observers  are  in-
capable of  any  accurate  observation  at  all.  Dr.  Geley's
full reports will be awaited with interest, especially  in


318


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


view  of  the  fact  that  the  phenomena  remarked  by  him
appear  to  have  been  of  a  slightly  different  order  from
those  previously  recorded  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing.

The  Investigation  of  the  English  Society  eoe  -
Psychical  Research.

At  the  invitation  of  the  Committee  which  had  been
formed  to  investigate  the  phenomena  of  Eva  C,  I  was
permitted  to  attend  twenty-nine  out  of  the  forty  seances
held  by  the  Society.  Of  these  sittings  eight  only  were
positive,  which  gave  me  some  opportunity  to  study  the
phenomena  at  close  quarters,  and  thus  to  try  to  solve  the
vexed  question  of  fraud  and  its  application,  if  any,  in
the  case  of  this  medium.  It  will  be  seen  from  the
detailed  reports  that  on  many  occasions  I  was  controlling
one  or  both  hands  of  the  medium  throughout  the  sitting,
this  permitting  me  to  examine  carefully  the  phenomena
which  were  produced  without  their  aid  or  intervention.
These  occurrences  I  now  propose  to  examine  simply  from
the  point  of  view  of  a  practical  "  inagician  "  or  illusionist,
and  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  exactly  how  far  these  effects
might  be  produced  through  normal  agency.  The  success
or  otherwise  of  this  attempt  may  perhaps  be  found  of
use  in  gauging  the  possibility  or  impossibility  of  fraudulent
manipulations.

There  are  two  assumptions  that  must,  I  think,  be  made
if  we  wish  to  hold  the  opinion  that  the  phenomena  of
Eva  C.  are  fraudulently  produced.  They  are  (a)  that
the  medium  possesses  the  power  of  regurgitation  or
rumination,^  and  {b)  that  she  secretes  a  peculiarly  thick,
white  saliva.

There  is,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  no  escape  from  accepting
both of these preliminary hypotheses. Regurgitation  or

^  An  easier  method  of  concealing  objects  is  sometimes  found  in  the
East.  Thus  in  the  Medical  Press  and  Circular  for  1889,  Vol.  II.,
p.  189,  I  read  that  amongst  Indian  criminals  an  ingenious  method  is
used  for  hiding  articles.  A  pouch-like  recess  is  formed  at  the  base  of
the  epiglottis.  This  is  formed  by  means  of  a  bullet,  |^  in.  in  diameter,
which  is  allowed  to  slide  down  and  remain  for  varying  periods.  This
operation  is  repeated  many  times  daily  until  the  pouch  is  formed.  In
this  way  articles  are  secreted,  defying  all  search,  the  pouch  interfering.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


319


merycism,  as  it  is  often  called,  is  not  common,  but  it  is
occasionally  found  in  hysterical  subjects,  and  is  sometimes
used  for  purposes  of  public  exhibition.  Thus  Dr.  Gulat-
Wellenburg  has  brought  forward  the  case  of  Herman  Wittich
who  swallows  frogs  and  fish,  and  when  experimented  upon
produced  the  same  effects  with  rolls  of  chiffon  and  rubber
gloves.  Similar^  a  Belgian  used  to  perform  these  tricks
with  balls  of  paper,  and  indeed  such  methods  are  well
known  amongst  strolling  performers  of  a  certain  kind.
Dr.  von  Schrenck  denies  that  Eva  is  a  ruminant,  in  spite
of  some  amount  of  evidence  that  points  in  that  direction.
According  to  his  own  conclusions  regurgitation  would  not
account  for  manj-  of  the  phenomena  that  he  himself  has
observed,  as  these  did  not  appear  to  have  originated  in
the  medium's  mouth.  During  the  S.P.R.  investigation,
however — so  far,  at  least,  as  concerns  those  sittings  at
which  I  was  myself  present — it  seemed  to  me  that  no  evidence
was  obtained  excluding  the  hypothesis  that  every  materiali-
zation originated  thus,  and  on  no  single  occasion  did  we
have  the  opportunity  of  observing  the  large  phenomena
described by other  investigators.

Assuming  therefore  the  possibility  of  regurgitation,  let
us  examine  some  of  the  phenomena,  presupposing  that
they  are  fraudulently  produced.  In  this  connexion  I
shall  only  touch  upon  those  sittings  at  which  I  was
myself  present,  since  it  is  obvious  that  I  can  usefully
discuss  only  those  phenomena  which  I  myself  witnessed.

Sea^ice  XVII.,  May  21,  1920.^

In  this  case  we  must  assume  that  the  materialization
was  previously  prepared  on  a  piece  of  thin,  papery  material,

with  neither  speech  nor  respiration.  In  Calcutta  upwards  of  twenty
prisoners  were  found  to  possess  these  pouches,  in  which  jewels,  money,
etc.,  can  be  easily  secreted.

On  June  28,  1920,  the  medium  at  her  own  request  was  taken  to  a
laryngologist  for  the  purposes  of  examination,  but  the  lamp  connected
with  the  laryngoscope  refused  to  work  and  the  examination  had  to  b&
abandoned.  The  medium  was,  however,  perfectly  willing  for  the  inspec-
tion to  be  made  and  even  demanded  it. (See  Appendix  IT.)

1  Before  considering  these  remarks  the  reader  is  asked  to  turn  back
to  the  detailed  report,  and  refresh  his  memory  as  to  the  phenomena
themselves  and  the  order  of  their  appearance.


320  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  [part

folded  up  and  swallowed.  On  the  one  side,  when  opened
out,  was  a  roughly  drawn  face  and  on  the  other  side  a
small  photograph  was  stuck,  the  rough  edges  of  the  paper
forming  a  sort  of  frame  round  the  head.  Once  got  into
the  mouth  by  regurgitation,  the  paper  is  unfolded  through
the  instrumentality  of  the  tongue  and  teeth,  and  when
bent  in  its  median  fold  is  allowed  to  protrude  from  the
mouth,  giving  the  appearance  as  noted  at  7.30  p.m.
The  front  flap  now  falls  over  and  the  rough  face  becomes
visible.  In  this  case  we  must  assume  that  it  has  been
unfolded  the  wrong  way,  so  that  what  is  seen  is  the  back
of  the  photo.  Whilst  the  curtains  are  closed  and  the
cameras  prepared  (a  period  in  this  case  of  seven  minutes),
the  medium  turns  round  the  paper  and  when  the  photo
is  taken  it  of  course  reveals  a  small  photograph  surrounded
by  its  paper  frame.

Seaijce  XXI.,  May  28,  1920.  At  this  sitting  occurred
the  very  remarkable  phenomenon  of  a  pointed  waxy  object
which  waiS  first  observed  inside  and  then  outside  the  veil.
As  this  occurrence  might  be  supposed  to  be  clear  proof
of  something  supernormal,  it  may  be  well  if  we  consider
it  at  some  length.

Now,  supposing  that  the  phenomena  are  genuine,  have
we  any  reason  to  imagine  that  a  "  materialized  "  substance,
having  originated  in  the  mouth,  could  come  through  the
meshes  of  a  closely  woven  veil  without  injuring  the
strands  ?  It  is  quite  possible,  of  course,  that  it  might
issue  forth  in  liquid  or  gaseous  form  and  then  solidify
outside  the  veil,  but,  having  once  materialized  inside,  it
seems  quite  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  it  would  then
pass  through.  The  advantage  of  a  veil  is  therefore
obvious,  and  as  we  were  assured  that  the  materializations
originated  from  other  parts  of  the  medium's  body  we
naturally  wished  to  see  such  phenomena  for  ourselves.
But  nothing  of  the  kind  ever  happened.  Phenomena
showed  themselves  in  the  medium's  mouth  and  nowhere
else,  and  except  on  one  occasion  never  came  through  the
veil.  This  occasion  was  on  May  28,  and  it  is  this  pheno-
menon that  we  are  about  to  examine.

A  pointed,  waxy  object,  hard  to  the  touch,  was  seen


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  321

sticking  out  of  her  mouth  through  the  veil  which  had
been  drawn  into  the  cavity.  How  are  we  to  account  for
this  phenomenon  from  the  point  of  view  of  fraud  ?
Now  I  may  say  at  once  that  I  do  not  propose  to  lay  the
slightest  stress  upon  the  hole  in  the  veil  which  was  found
at  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting.  My  reasons  for  this
will  be  found  in  the  notes  and  remarks  at  the  end  of  the
detailed  report.  What  we  have  to  try  and  discover  is
some  method  by  which  the  same  effect  could  be  produced
by  normal  means.  Such  a  solution  does  not  in  the
least  imply  that  the  method  was  actually  employed  on
this  occasion.  Its  sole  value  lies  in  the  doubt  that  it
casts  on  the  veil  as  a  satisfactory  method  of  obtaining  an
infallible  proof  of  the  genuine  character  of  certain  pheno-
mena.

It  seems  at  first  quite  clear  that  the  easiest  way  to
produce  such  a  phenomenon  would  be  to  pass  the  material
through  the  meshes  of  the  veil  in  a  liquid  state,  and  then
to  solidify  it  outside.  Supposing  therefore  that  the
medium  had  a  piece  of  wax  which  would  easily  melt  if
held  in  the  mouth  but  would  soon  solidify  if  brought  into
contact  with  the  air,  it  seems  possible  that  such  a  pheno-
menon might  be  produced.  The  wax  might  be  contained
in  some  insoluble  receptacle  and  then  swallowed.  If  it
were  brought  up  by  regurgitation  and  the  veil  were  drawn
into  the  mouth,  the  container  might  be  broken,  the  wax
melted  and  thus  got  through  the  meshes  of  the  veil.  By
drawing  quick  respirations  through  the  mouth  the  wax
would  be  cooled  and  then  forced  slowly  through  the  lips,
assuming  the  pointed  shape  that  was  observed.  Industrial
chemists  tell  me  that  such  waxes  are  known  and  might
be  used  in  the  way  described,  although  I  have  not
myself  tried  the  experiment.

Now  I  can  well  imagine  the  reader  thinking  to  himself
that  this  theory  is  far-fetched  and  grotesque,  and  in  this
I  heartily  agree  with  him.  Yet  it  is,  as  far  as  I  can  see,
the  only  theory  which  could  account  for  the  phenomena
under  the  conditions  observed  at  the  sitting.  It  is  quite
useless  to  assume  that  the  object  was  brought  in  with
the  medium  and  taken  out  again  at  the  conclusion  of  the

y


322


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


seance. That  assumption  does  not  explain  how  the  object
was  seen  first  inside  and  tlien  outside  the  veil. Nor  can
it with any degree of plausibility be maintained  that
we  were  deceived  or  hallucinated,  since  under  the  direct
light of the torch both Mr. Feilding and I saw  the
object free from the veil, and its bare point  scraped
over the Ijach of my hand. Such theories as  these
are conducive neither to the cause of honesty nor  to
that of truth and the sooner they are discarded  the
better. The only  refuge  for  the  sceptic is melted  wax
or something like it, and that supposition hi  itself
requires  proof. Many of  the most  obstinate  sceptics  of
psychical  jjhenomeiia  are  like  those  persons  who  on  going
to a magical entertainment think that the  experiments
are explained  by  saying  that "  they  are done  somehow
with  mirrors  or  wires." Such  observations  explain  nothing,
and it would be far better  to face the facts  squarely
than  to  devise  solutions  which  can  only  make  the  inventor
look  ridiculous. If  a  medium  is  condemned  as  fraudulent,
a  possible  solution  should  at  once  be  worked  out  in  detail.
On  a  later  occasion,  when  the  phenomena  again  take  place,
the theories should be tested until there remains  no
reasonable doubt  as  to the real  character  of  the  mani-
festations. In  the  present  instance  I  had  made  my  plans
for  testing  the  wax  theory  if  the  veil  was  again  penetrated
by the substance. Unfortunately it was not  repeated
and  so  it  was  impossible  to  prove  the  theory  either  way.
However,  on  June  5  (Seance  XXV.)  a  similar  appearance
was  observed  inside  the  veil. As  it  is  necessary,  assuming
the wax is melted, for  the veil  to be drawn into  the
mouth,  I  thought  that  it  might  be  a  useful  test  to  prevent
this  manoeuvre,  which  was  accordingly  done,  and  it  is  to
be noted that the substance did not on this  occasion
pass  through  the  veil. This  in  itself  proves  nothing,  but
it is an experiment which might be tried at  intervals
in  the  future.

Seance  XXV.,  June  5,  1920.  This  seance  was  especi-
ally interesting  in  relation  to  the  wax  theory  as  developed
above.  In  this  case  we  nuist  assume  that  the  white
object  seen  at  5.15  p.m.  was  the  piece  of  wax  enclosed  in


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


323


its  container  and  in  a  serai-solidified  state.  As  conditions
were  not  suitable  for  an  attempt  to  be  made  to  pass  it
through  the  veil,  the  medium,  by  closing  her  mouth,
began  to  melt  it,  and  thvis  when  again  seen  at  5.46  p.m.
it  was  like  a  piece  of  cream  cheese  in  a  transparent
envelope.  This  container  is  then  broken,  and  we  must
now  assume  that  the  black  thread  seen  on  the  tip  of  the
tongue  was  the  ligature  which  had  tied  up  the  neck  of
the  transparent  envelope.  Once  having  broken  the  sheath
the  wax  would  soon  melt  and  spread  over  the  tongue
in  a  creamy  mass  as  noticed  at  6.3  p.m.,  a  part  being
still  probably  within  the  envelope  which  had  contained  it.

Seance  XXXI.,  June  16,  1920.  At  this  sitting  the
phenomena  came  and  disappeared  so  rapidly  that  there
was  some  disagreement  amongst  the  observers  as  to  what
actually  occurred.  There  seem  to  have  been  two  objects,
(a)  the  pointed  waxy  object,  and  (b)  the  flat  round  disc.
As  in  the  sitting  of  June  11  there  seems  too  little  to  say
from  the  standpoint  of  fraud  once  the  possibility  of
regurgitation  is  accepted.

Seance  XXXIV.,  June  21,  1920.  This  sitting  was  again
an  interesting  one.  The  first  phenomenon  was  the  white
substance  which  the  medium  and  Mme  Bisson  asserted
was  moving  up  the  veil  by  itself.  As  previous  investi-
gators had  decided  that  the  teleplastic  substance  possessed
a  mobility  of  its  own,  we  were  especially  desirous  of
confirming  their  observations.  Unfortunately,  however,
the  present  example  of  its  movement  was  almost  un-
doubtedly due  to  an  illusion,  and  this  is  important  as
showing  the  liability  to  such  mistakes  under  the  existing
conditions.  A  mass  of  white  saliva  was  visible  on  the
veil,  and  by  moving  the  head  the  medium  was  enabled
to  draw  the  veil  up,  thus  giving  the  appearance  of  moving
saliva.  As  the  movement  of  the  black  veil  was  invisible
in  the  dark  cabinet,  the  saliva  alone  was  seen  apparently
moving  up  over  the  surface  of  the  veil.  The  next
phenomenon,  an  hour  later,  was  what  at  first  sight
appeared  to  be  a  remarkable  elongation  of  the  medium's
nose.  This  was  in  reality  another  mass  of  saliva  on  the
veil  and  just  on  a  level  with  the  nose. When  the  veil


324  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  G.  [part

was  close  to  the  face  the  mass  touched  it,  and  showed  no
break  between  the  sahva  and  the  skin,  but  on  leaning
forward  to  show  the  phenomenon  the  medium  caused  the
veil  to  fall  forwards  and  Mr.  Houdini,  Mr.  Baggally,  and
myself  saw  at  least  half  an  inch  between  the  white  mass
and  the  tip  of  Eva's  nose.

The  next  appearance  was  the  curious  oval  patch  seen
over  the  medium's  left  eye,  followed  a  minute  after  by
the  terra-cotta  red  face  seen  sideways  in  the  veil.  If  the
phenomenon  is  fraudulent  it  is  probable,  as  I  have  indi-
cated in  the  detailed  report,  that  the  eye  patch  was  the
hack  of  the  face  and  that  they  were  not  two  distinct
phenomena.  In  any  case  we  have  to  assume  that  the
object  was  brought  up  by  regurgitation  and  then  swallowed.
Fourteen  minutes  after,  the  strip  of  ragged  elastic  substance
appeared  in  the  mouth,  was  pulled  and  stretched  by  the
medium's  hands,  and  then  disappeared  suddenl5^  On  the
assumption  of  fraud  the  following  would  possibly  be  the
explanation  of  this  phenoinenon.  The  substance,  having
been  brought  into  the  mouth,  a  part  is  gripped  between
the  teeth.  It  is  then  pulled  out  of  the  mouth  and  moulded
and  twisted  with  the  hands.  Rolled  up  between  the
fingers  it  is  allowed  to  spring  back  into  the  mouth  and  is
immediately  swallowed,  but  the  mouldiiig  still  continues  as
if  the  substance  were  still  there.  Pulling  the  veil  out,  and
still  apparently  moulding  the  substance,  the  fingers  are
suddenly  opened  out  and  the  illusion  of  a  sudden  dis-
appearance is  perfect.  Both  Mr.  Houdini  and  myself
agreed  that  the  effect  could  have  been  thus  produced,  and
I  think  that  there  is  little  doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of  our
oVjservations.  How  far  this  suggestion  throws  doubt  upon
the  honesty  of  the  medium  is  open  to  question.  Even  if  the
disappearance  was  effected  as  suggested,  such  a  "  trick "
could  doubtless  be  interpreted  as  a  subconscious  wish  to
increase  the  effect  of  the  phenomenon,  and  by  no  means
implies  that  the  whole  of  the  manifestation  was  spurious.
Such  trance-deceptions  are  well  known  and  make  the
interpretation  of  certain  of  the  physical  phenomena
singularly  difficult.  The  important  point  for  us  to  note
is  that  if  on  this  occasion  the  sudden  disappearance  of


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


325


the  substance  was  effected  by  so  subtle  a  device,  how
far  are  we  able  to  trust  the  observation  of  persons  who
know  nothing  of  such  methods,  and  who  have  described
equally  puzzling  phenomena  which  they  say  that  they
have  observed  ?

Seance  XXXVI.,  June  24,  1920.  At  this  sitting  a
similar  piece  of  elastic  substance  was  observed  as  on
June  21.  This  time  it  was  openly  put  back  into  the
mouth  by  the  medium  and  did  not  suddenly  vanish  as
before.  When  stretched  out  the  surface  showed  a  whole
series  of  tiny  pin  pricks,  and  in  general  appearance
resembled  a  piece  of  some  animal  membrane  such  as
mesentery.

Seance  XXXVIII.,  June  26,  1920.  This  sitting  was
one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  seances  that  I
attended.  At  6.5  p.m.  the  cold  breeze  began  and  con-
tinued for  about  25  seconds.  I  know  of  no  method  for
producing  this  wind  under  the  conditions  obtaining  at
the  time.  The  medium  was  breathing  very  rapidly  and
audibly,  and  she  could  not  possibly,  in  my  opinion,  have
produced  it  by  her  breath.  A  frequently  reported  accom-
paniment of  mediumship.  the  appearance  of  this  breeze
rather  points  to  the  conclusion  that  supernormal  pheno7nena
do  sometimes  occur  in  the  presence  of  this  medium.

The  next  phenomenon  was  the  appearance  of  the  tough
thread  between  Eva's  fingers  followed  by  the  development
of  the  membrane  and  thick,  skinny,  medalHon-shaped
object.  After  their  sudden  disappearance  a  beard-like
appendage  was  seen  hanging  from  the  medium's  mouth,
and  after  the  flash  we  saw  the  flat  coloured  face  hanging
from  her  lips.  About  an  hour  later  a  waxy  pointed
object  appeared  in  her  mouth  and  then,  whilst  I  was
holding  her  hands,  Eva  produced  a  membrane  between
them,  which  finally  chsappeared  whilst  still  being  mani-
pulated. At  the  same  time  Dr.  Fournier  D'Albe  inspected
and  felt  the  medium's  lips  to  see  that  there  was  no
thread  attached  to  them.

Now,  if  we  had  to  account  for  these  occurrences
in  a  normal  way,  there  are  certain  assumptions  that
it  would  be  necessary  to  make  in  order  to  indicate  the


326  A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  [part

sort  of  explanation  that  one  is  forced  to  offer  if  one
wishes  to  adopt  the  hypothesis  of  fraud.  In  considering
this  question  the  reader  must  not  imagine  that  the
Committee  has  accepted  these  explanations  of  the  pheno-
mena. These  suggestions  are  merely  put  forward  in
order  to  demonstrate  how  far  the  idea  of  fraud  is  capable
of  furnishing  any  satisfactory  explanation  at  all.

The  first  point  of  importance,  then,  is  the  appearance
of  the  membrane  in  the  fingers  which  was  observed  at
6.33  p.m.  At  first  sight  this  appeared  as  if  it  had
sprung  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  no  doubt  such
phenomena  have  led  some  persons  to  imagine  tihat  the
substance  does  in  reality  "  se  degage  "  from  them.  Thus
Dr.  Geley  speaks  of  the  "  exteriorisation  de  la  sidwtance
par  les  doigts,"  and  on  March  6,  1913,  a  band  of  substance
was  seen  joining  the  two  hands  of  the  medium.  These
observers  seem  to  have  no  doubt  that  the  substance  has
come  from  the  fingers  and  this  opinion  (which  might  be
founded  in  many  cases  upon  a  very  simple  deception),
was  doubtless  fostered  by  the  belief  that  the  medium's
liands  are  visible  throughout  and  do  not  approach  her
mouth.  But  is  it  not  possible  for  the  mouth  to  approach
the  hands,  when  the  ciu'tains  are  closed  ?  If  one  grips
the  curtains  and  closes  them,  it  is  perfectly  easy  to
bend  the  head  down  and  with  two  fingers  to  withdraw
a  piece  of  material  from  the  mouth.  On  this  occasion
it  is  probable  that  this  actually  happened,  as  I  tested
the  theory  at  the  moment  that  the  ciirtains  were  closed
by  poking  the  fold  just  above  the  medium's  hands.
My  finger  came  in  contact  with  the  crown  of  Eva's
head  which  was  evidentl}'  bent  down  to  meet  her  hands.
If,  then,  we  assume  that  the  membrane  and  medallion-
shaped  object  had  been  brought  into  the  mouth,  they
could  both  be  put  into  the  hands  as  above  described.
Connected  to  them  from  the  mouth  might  be  elastic
cords  (see  Fig.  131  in  Mme  Bisson's  book),  and  at  a
convenient  moment  the  two  are  brought  down  between
the  upper  part  of  the  legs  and  perhaps  the  medallion
is  pushed  down  between  them.  The  membrane  is  then
unfolded,  and  as  the  hands  cover the medallion this  is


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Siitings  with  Eva  C.


327


brought  up  suddenly,  a,nd  the  membrane  flies  back  to
the  mouth  where  it  is  either  swallowed  or  retained.  The
medallion  later  follows  the  same  course,  its  ragged  ends
forming  the  "  beard "  appearance  which  was  observed  at
6.37  p.m.  The  coloured  face  which  was  seen  later  might
have  been  the  side  of  the  medallion,  which  was  not
visible  as  it  lay  in  the  medium's  hands, ^  and  could  have
been  put  out  of  the  mouth  whilst  the  cameras  were  being
prepared.

The  next  phenomenon  of  importance  was  the  appearance
of  the  membrane  in  the  fingers,  whilst  I  was  holding  the
medium's  hands.  This  substance  might  have  been  trans-
ferred from  the  mouth  to  the  hands  as  before  and  then
held  out  just  in  front  of  the  curtain.  As  I  was  holding
Eva's  hands  at  the  time,  I  was  unable  to  determine  the
existence  of  a  thread  leading  to  her  mouth.  As  if
reading  my  thoughts  she  turned  her  head  right  round
towards  Dr.  Fournier  D'Albe  and  asked  him  to  look  at
her  mouth.  The  lips  were  closed  and  on  feeling  them  he
detected  nothing  unusual.  Unfortunately  this  test  was
not  entirely  satisfactory,  for  the  medium  had  placed  her
head  in  one  of  the  two  positions  when,  if  the  thread  had
been  there,  it  would  not  have  been  felt.  It  is  clear  that
if  her  hands  were  in  front  holding  an  object  connected
to  her  mouth  with  a  thread,  the  fact  of  twisting  her  head
round  at  right  angles  would  have  taken  the  thread  into
the  extreme  corner  of  her  mouth,  and  so  passing  the  fingers
over  the  lips  would  have  been  useless.  On  discussing  the
incident  with  Dr.  Fournier  D'Albe  I  learnt  that  the  lips
were  shut  and,  whilst  he  was  touching  them,  the  mouth
never  opened  for  a  moment.  The  disappearance  of  the
membrane  could  be  accounted  for  in  the  same  way  as
previously.  The  thread,  by  a  quick  upward  movement
and  at  the  saine  time  l)y  a  strong  inward  breath,  is
drawn  into  the  mouth,  bringing  the  membrane  along
with  it.

The  above  suggestions  have  been  given  simply  as
specimens  of  the  sort  of  foundation  stones  upon  which  the
hypothesis  of  fraud  must,  if  true,  be  built. It  has  often

^  F.  noted  the  fact  that  he  saw  a  face  under  the  medalHon.


328


A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


[part


been  said  that  such  explanations  are  worthless,  since  even
if  one  magician  fails  to  discover  a  method  for  producing
a certain phenomenon another might possibly do  so.
Arguments like these exercise a profound influence  on
laymen with sceptical minds. Even if a  competent
magician  is  convinced  as  to  the  reality  of  certain  psychical
phenomena,  they  comfort  themselves  by  saying  that  another
magician  would  have  detected  the  "  trick." No  evidence
is therefore possible for such persons. Just as  some
people  say  that  spirits  are  responsible  for  all  the  physical
phenomena,  so  do  these  declare  that  all  are  due  to  trickery.
The  magician  becomes  a  real  wonderworker,  and  deception
omnipotent. Such  opinions  are  due  to a  complete  mis-
understanding  as to the scope and  limits of  deception.
There  are  a  vast  number  of  things  that  a  magician  cannot
do. For  example, at the present moment I could  7iot
produce  a  billiard  ball  from  the  ends  of  my  fingers.  The
simple  reason  for  this  is  that  the  nearest  billiard  ball  is
in  my  property  box  at  the  other  end  of  the  room,  and
I could not get it without rising from my chair  and
actually  fetching  it. Now, if  my  two hands  were  held
and  I  was  put  into  a  cabinet  and  the  lights  were  turned
down,  it  would  be  still  impossible  for  me  to  produce  that
billiard  ball unless a confederate handed  it to me.  If
the  possibility  of  confederacy  were  eliminated,  it  would  be
an  absolute impossibility  to bring off  the "  trick,""  and
if  that  billiard  ball  then  appeared  between  my  fingers,  and
if  it  were  photographed,  it  would  be  a  supernormal  pheno-
menon. No  magician  in  the  world  could  devise  a  method
of  producing  a  billiard  ball  if  there  was  no  billiard  ball
to produce. If the conditions are known and can  be
accurately  determined  at  every  point  of  the  inquiry,  it  is
quite  possible  to  eUminate  fraud  absolutely. I  have  said
elsewhere  and  now  repeat  that  I  consider  these  require-
ments were  met  at  the  S.P.R. sittings  with  Eusapia  at
Naples  in 1908, and  that  therefore  I  am  forced  to  the
conclusion  that  Eusapia  Palladino  possessed  genuine  super-
normal powers. With  regard  to  Eva  C.  the  case  is  some-
what different. Speaking  purely  for  myself  I  cannot  say
that I altogether rely upon the observations of  her


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


329


continental  investigators,  whilst  the  sittings  in  England
were  too  few  and  the  phenomena  too  insignificant  ?^to
enable  any  satisfactory  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at.

It  may  be  convenient  here  to  sum  up  the  main  points
for  and  against  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  in  addition
to  those  already  outlined  by  Mrs.  Salter  in  the  Proceedings
for  July,  1914,  'pp.  364-366.

The  Case  against  the  Phenomena.

(1)  It  is  always  open  to  doubt  whether  controllers
untrained  in  methods  of  trickery  can  prevent  prepared
objects  from  being  brought  into  the  seance  room.

(2)  A  certain  number  of  the  "  heads  "  appear  as  if  made
of  paper.  Actual  paper  has  been  found  upon  five  separate
occasions.

(3)  Without  being  able  definitely  to  say  that  the  medium
employed  deceptive  methods  for  the  production  and
disappearance  of  the  phenomena,  it  is  notewortJiy  that  the
manipulations  in  question  are  by  no  means  inconsistent
with  those  which  would  have  been  necessary  if  normal
methods  had  been  employed.

(4)  The  S.P.R.  Committee  never  observed  anything
which  led  them  to  suppose  that  materializations  do
actually  originate  elsewhere  than  from  the  mouth.  The
single  example  in  Seance  XXXVIII.  might  be  explained
by  the  medium  having  produced  the  membrane  from  her
mouth  previously  to  its  exhibition.

(5)  The  nature  of  the  materializations  is  such  that  an
enormous  weight  of  evidence  would  have  to  be  adduced
before  their  reality  became  a  matter  of  certainty.

The  Case  for  the  Phenomena.

(1)  There  is  no  proof  whatever  that  the  medium
possesses  the  power  of  regurgitation  or  has  any  acquaint-
ance whatever  with  deceptive  methods  or  contrivances.
The  "  tricks  "  suspected  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  and
the  S.P.R.  Committee  may  be  merely  subconscious
attempts  to  increase  the  eftect  of  the  phenomena.


330  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  [part

(2)  The  materializations  are  clearly  often  not  made  of
paper,  chiffon,  or  any  similar  substance.  This  is  evident
from  photographic  enlargements,  besides  being  excluded
by  the  fact  that  on  certain  occasions  they  changed  their
shape  whilst  under  direct  observation.

(3)  The  medium  has  never  been  detected  in  the  prepara-
tion or  secretion  of  any  article  likely  to  be  of  service  in
the  seances.

(4)  If  Mme  Bisson  and  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  be
accepted  as  even  moderately  good  observers,  no  amount
of  fraud  could  explain  certain  phenomena  that  they  say
that  they  have  observed.

(5)  Comparative  studies  show  that  Eva  C.  is  not  the
only  medium  producing  these  manifestations.  Accounts
of  the  phenomena  with  other  mediums  are  remarkably
similar  to  those  occurring  with  her.

(6)  The  appearance  of  the  cold  breeze  rather  leads  one
to  suppose  that  mediumistic  phenomena  do  occur  in  Eva's
presence.

From  the  above  remarks  it  may  be  thought  at  first
that  the  case  against  the  phenomena  is  so  strong  that  the
subject  may  be  at  once  dismissed.  Such  a  standpoint
would  in  my  opinion  be  entirely  mistaken  and  would
show  clearly  that  its  supporter  had  not  the  smallest
appreciation  of  the  difficulties  of  judging  psychical  pheno-
mena. To  suppose  that  Eva  C.  possesses  powers  of
deception  which  she  must  undoubtedly  wield  in  order  to
produce  the  phenomena  is  an  absolutely  unwarranted
assumption  which  has  hardly  a  shred  of  evidence  to
support  it.  Although  in  strictly  scientific  work  personal
evidence  and  opinion  count  for  little,  they  possess  a
certain  value  which  it  would  be  foolish  to  ignore.  Thus
to  suppose  that  Mme  Bisson  is  an  accomplice  in  a  shame-
less fraud  which  has  already  lasted  eleven  years  is  a
hypothesis  which  can  scarcely  be  considered  probable.
It  is,  of  course,  possible.

Granting  her  innocence,  many  of  the  phenomena  become
inexplicable  and  unaccountable.  That  an  object  looks
like  a  hand  made  out  of  paper,  is  an  insufficient  reason


Lxxxiv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  331


for  saying  that  it  is  such  a  hand,  if  the  evidence  is
such  as  to  make  this  improbable.  If  the  phenomena
are  supernormal,  all  we  can  do  is  to  take  them  for
what  they  are  and  carefull}"  observe  them.  We  cannot
dictate  as  to  the  sort  of  phenomenon  we  wish  to  see
and  always  expect  to  get  it.  Even  though  we  may
want  a  full  form  phantasm  and  only  get  a  botched
portrait  of  President  Wilson  with  a  black  eye,  it  does  not
follow  of  necessity  that  the  latter  is  so  curious  that  its
supernormality  may  be  denied  a  priori.  For  if  spirits  exist
their  actions  may  be  as  unaccountable  as  those  of  mortals,
and  in  the  process  of  influencing  matter  the  most  singular
distortions  may  be  produced.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
the  materializations  are  non-spiritistic  teleplastic  products,
as  Dr.  von  Schrenck  believes,  then  the  portrait  of  Mr.
Wilson  might  be  a  dream  image,'"  intentionally  disguised
through  some  obscure  subconscious  process.  It  must
be  remembered  that  Eva  is  not  by  any  means  alone
in  producing  this  variety  of  materialization.  There  are
other  mediums  now  undergoing  examination  whose  pheno-
mena strongly  resemble  those  of  Eva  C.  The  investigation
of  these  mediums  should  be  conducted  with  the  greatest
possible  care  and  the  results  correlated  with  those  already
obtained.  Such  work  would  yield  the  most  valuable
material  and  quite  possibl}^  would  result  in  the  final
substantiation  of  phenomena  which  at  the  present  moment
remain  still  doubtful  and  perplexing.


CHAPTER  IV.


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS.

In  recording  our  general  impres.sions  we  much  regret  that
we  are  unable  to  come  definitely  either  to  positive  or  to
negative  conclusions.  The  phenomena  were  too  scanty  and
the  sittings  too  few  for  us  to  be  able  to  determine  with  any
degree  of  accuracy  the  real  nature  of  the  phenomena.
Taken  by  themselves  these  were  remarkably  unimpressive.
On  no  single  occasion  did  we  observe  the  larger  materiali-
zations as  described  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  nor
did  the  phenomena  in  sufficiently  observed  conditions
emerge  from  any  other  part  of  the  medium's  body  than
her  mouth.  If  we  had  not  been  acquainted  with  the
work  of  previous  investigators  we  might  have  felt  inclined
to  draw  negative  conclusions  from  our  own  observations.
It  is,  however,  impossible  to  ignore  the  contributions  of
Mme  Bisson,  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  and  Dr.  Geley.
Even  if  the  phenomena  we  observed  were  few  in  number
and  poor  in  quality,  they  were  of  the  same  type  as  those
studied  by  our  predecessors.  The  aim  of  our  investi-
gation was  scarcely  as  ambitious  as  that  which  had  been
pursued  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck  and  by  Dr.  Geley.  Above
all  we  wished  to  determine  the  reality  of  the  phenomena,
and  to  have  the  opportunity  of  studying  at  first  hand
the  problems  associated  with  so  called  teleplastic  medium-
ship.  It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted  that  it  was  not  until
the  thirty-eighth  seance  that  the  phenomena  began  to
assume  an  impressive  character.  We  believe  that  if  the
seances  had  continued  for  another  couple  of  months,  we
should  have  been  able  to  come  to  a  definite  conclusion
one way or the other. We consider the evidence  for


[part  lxxxiv.] a  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.  333

even  unconscious  fravid  to  be  of  the  slenderest,  although
at  the  same  time  we  fully  recognise  the  difificulty  of
accurate observation  and correct deduction. We  believe

I  that  our  own  control  almost  unquestionably  eliminated
any  fraudulent  method  for  the  production  of  the
phenomena  other  than  regurgitation,  and  it  is  unfortunate
that  nothing  occurred  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  convince
us  of  the  impossibility  of  that  hypothesis.  Whether
regurgitation  as  a  basis  for  the  phenomena  is  sufficient
to  explain  them  is  a  question  which  is  open  to  grave
doubt,  while  it  is  clear  that,  assuming  the  accuracy  of
their  observations, it  is certainly insufficient to  explain

S  the  major  phenomena  described  by  our  predecessors.  Mr.
Dingwall  has  in  his  study  of  the  sittings  attempted  to
consider  what  must  have  been  the  methods  employed  if
the  phenomena  are  to  be  attributed  entirely  to  trickery.

'  Although  the  Committee  as  a  whole  have  not  his  qualifi-
cations as  a  conjurer  to  estimate  the  possibility  of  the
methods  which  he  finds  himself  driven  to  suggest,  they
concur  with  his  view  that  to  suppose  that  these  were  in
fact  the  methods  employed  is  only  a  lesser  strain  on  possi-
bilities than  the  adoption  of  the  ideoplastic  hypothesis
put  forward  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing.  If  this
applies  to  our  own  observations  it  naturally  applies  in  a  far
greater  degree  to  the  observations  of  our  predecessors.
The  student  has  therefore  to  decide  whether  the  major
phenomena  can  be  explained  through  other  fraudulent
devices,  together  with  mal-observation  and  careless  re-
porting, or  whether  they  can  be  considered  as  genuine
occurrences.  As  our  own  conclusions  must  be  strictly
limited  to  material  gathered  from  personal  observation  we
cannot  enter  into  a  discussion  of  that  problem.

It  only  remains  for  us  to  say  a  few  more  words  on  the
subject  of  this  report.  With  regard  to  the  medium  it
must  be  said  that  her  conduct  deserves  the  highest  appro-
bation. Patient  under  every  control,  she  appeared  to  do
all  in  her  power  to  assist  the  observers  in  an  investi-
gation which  at  times,  owing  to  the  frec^uency  of  the
sittings  and  the  extreme  heat  which  prevailed,  could  not
fail to be wearisome both to the  sitters and to  her.


334


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


[part


Mme  Bisson's  conduct  also  was  deserving  of  much  praise.
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  phenomena  were  disappointing,
she  preserved  an  almost  unbroken  demeanour  of  courteous
tolerance,  and  was  always  willing  to  acquiesce  in  sugges-
tions made  by  the  Committee.  Fully  convinced  herself
apparently  of  the  genuine  character  of  the  materializations,
she  naturally  showed  some  impatience  when  she  thought
that  the  doubts  of  the  observers  were  founded  neither  upon
logic  nor  reason.  Since  they  were  unable  to  speak  English
with  any  degree  of  fluency,  and  lacked  such  social  companion-
ship as  that  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed  in  Paris,
it  may  be  feai'ecl  that  these  ladies'  stay  in  London  was
not  as  pleasant  as  they  might  have  anticipated.  It  may
be  possible  that  these  difficulties,  coupled  with  a  natural
anxiety  about  the  issue,  may  have  had  an  adverse  effect
on  the  production  of  the  phenomena.  Further,  Mme
Bisson,  perceiving  certain  precautions  taken  by  the  con-
trollers in  the  earlier  sittings  before  her  general  attitude
and  mentality  were  known  to  them,  for  a  long  time  took
such  ostentations  pains  to  dissociate  herself  from  any
possible  suspicion  of  complicity,  by  refusing  to  touch  the
medium  or  even  to  approach  her  during  the  experiments,
that  unfamiliar  conditions  were,  contrary  to  the  expressed
wish  of  tlie  Committee,  introduced,  and  may  not  un-
reasonably be  thought  to  have  resulted  in  an  inhibitory
influence  on  the  free  development  of  the  phenomena.
The  laws  governing  these  occurrences  are  not  yet  known,  and
although  we  think  it  hardly  likely  that  the  actual  mentality
of  the  observers  can  have  any  deleterious  effect  upon
them,  it  is  not  improbable  that  if  their  mentality  is
believed  ])_y  the  medium  to  be  hostile,  and  she  thereupon
becomes  suspicious  and  resentful,  such  an  attitude  on  her
part  might  altogether  obstruct  the  free  development
of  the  psychic  forces.  In  the  present  case  it  was  inevit-
able that  the  mental  attitude  of  the  observers  was  one
of  doubtful  and  attentive  scrutiny.  That  it  was  not,  as
Mme  Bisson  frequently  supposed,  one  of  convinced  hostility,
should  be  sufficiently  clear  from  the  terms  of  this  report ;  but
it  is  possible  that  this  impression  regarding  it,  communicated
to  the  medium,  may  have  affected  the  results  unfavourably.


LXXXIV.]


A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


335


I  Summing  up  then  our  impressions,  we  believe  that  the
only  possible  hj^othesis  to  account  hy  means  of  trickery
for  the  phenomena  that  we  ourselves  observed  would  be

I  the  postulation  of  the  medium's  power  of  regurgitation,
for  which  there  is  absolutely  no  direct  evidence.  While
the  phenomena  studied  by  others  appear  to  have  been
of the same character, they were of so much  greater

I  magnitude  that  we  are  unable  to  hold  the  view  that
■  regurgitation  is  a  sufficient  explanation  of  these.  To
suppose  them  all  fraudulent  would  involve  a  further
supposition  that  former  investigators  were  deceived  through
a  long  period  of  years  by  methods  of  which  we  had  no
indication  in our own  experiments, a proposition  which

I  we  have  no  adequate  grounds  for  advancing.  It  remains
only  therefore  to  state  that  for  ourselves  the  phenomena
were  not  sufficient  for  us  to  determine  their  genuine
character,  but  from  the  evidence  of  others  fortified  by
the  extreme  difficulty  of  accounting  reasonably  by  trickery
even  for  certain  of  the  phenomena  observed  by  ourselves,
we  feel  we  cannot  discard  the  possibilitj'  of  their  super-
normal character.  Ho^^ever  unsatisfactory  our  own  in-
vestigation may  have  been,  we  cannot  conclude  without
saying  that  in  our  opinio'n  these  phenomena  deserve  the
most  careful  and  earnest  attention  that  it  is  possible  to
bestow  upon  them.  We  have  been  forced  to  forgo  any
investigation  into  the  psj^cho-pathological  side  of  the
case,  though  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  final  solution
as  to  the  form  and  character  of  such  materializations  can
probably  onh^  be  arrived  at  through  a  long  and  patient
study  of  the  medium's  own  unconscious  mechanisms.
Before,  however,  commencing  a  study  of  this  nature,  the
validity  of  the  phenomena  themselves  must,  in  our  opinion,
be  firmly  established  and  placed  beyond  all  doubt.
Towards  that  end  have  our  own  efforts  been  directed,  and
however  unsuccessful  they  may  have  been,  it  is  to  be
hoped  that  they  may  contribute  something  to  the  study
of  this  peculiar  and  suggestive  form  of  mediumistic
activity.


APPENDIX  I.


It  will  be  remembered  that  after  the  twenty-eighth  seance
on  June  11,  1920,  some  small  white  particles  were  found  on
the  veil.  On  examination  these  proved  to  be  paper  and  Mme
Bisson  suggested  that  they  might  be  accounted  for  by  a  piece
of  hair  or  cake  paper  which  had  lodged  in  the  medium's
teeth  and  had  been  ejected  during  the  course  of  the  material-
izing process.  Specimens  of  these  papers  were  sent  by  Mme
Bisson  and,  together  with  the  test  tube  specimens  were  sub-
mitted to  analysis.  The  following  is  the  result  as  certified
hy'ljDv.  J.  N.  Goldsmith,  the  consulting  chemist  to  whom
the  specimens  were  sent.

(1)  Cake  Paper.

This  is  a  parchment  paper  not  easih''  disintegrated.
The  paper  was  teased  out'  in  water,  and  dyed  in  a
hot  2h  per  cent,  solution  of  Congo  Red,  washed,  dried,
and  mounted  in  Canada  Balsam.  It  is  a  wood  pulp
paper  containing  many  crushed  fibres.

(2)  Hair  Paper  (Brown).

Preparation  and  mounting  as  in  the  previous  slide.
This  paper  is  easily  disintegrated.  It  is  an  ordinary
cheap  wood  pulp  paper.

(3)  Hair  Paper  (White).

Preparation  and  mounting  as  before.  This  was  easilj"
disintegrated  ;  it  is  an  ordinary  cheap  wood  pulp  paper.
The  microscopic  appearance  of  the  portion  mounted  is
not  identical  with  the  test  tube  s^iecimen.

(4)  Test  Tube  Specimen  (of  Particles  found  on  medium's  veil).

Treatment  and  mounting  as  before.  The  slide  shows
Avood  pulp  fibres  similar  to  those  found  in  cheap  papers.

336


[part  lxxxiv.] a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.


337


This  slide  contains  certain  vegetable  cells  which  are  not
visible  in  the  three  previous  slides  ;  it  may  be  accidental,
sometimes  several  slides  of  a  paper  must  be  made  before
all  the  characteristic  cells  can  be  identified,  as  so  many
cells  are  broken  up  in  the  manufacture.

Since  wood  pulp  papers  are  very  common  it  would  be
exceedingly  difficult  to  prove  the  identity  of  the  test
tube  specimen  with  another  sample  of  paper  even  if
the  microscopic  picture  were  the  same.  In  the  present
case  the  microscopic  picture  is  not  the  same.  As  far
as  these  observations  go  the  probabilit3'  is  that  the
test  tube  specimen  is  different  from  either  of  the  three
paper  samples.  Further  work  would  be  necessary  if  a
final  opinion  is  required  on  this  point.  As  an  ordinary
microscopic  examination  no  interest  whatever  would
attach  to  these  four  specimens.

The  Phloroglucin  Test  for  wood  pulp  was  tried  and  gave
a  marked  jaositive  result  with  the  Cake  Paper,  a  very  faint
positive  result  Math  the  Brown  Paper,  and  a  negative  result
with  the  White  Hair  Paper  and  with  the  Test  Tube  Specimen.
This  test  gives  a  pink  colour  with  mechanical  wood  pulp,  but
no  reaction  ^dth  comjDletely  bleached  chemical  wood  pulp  or
with  cotton  and  linen.


APPENDIX  II.


One  day  the  medium  suggested  that  she  should  visit  a
physician  in  order  that  a  careful  examination  of  her  throat
might  be  made.  Accordingly  on  June  28th  she  was  taken
to  see  Mr.  W.  M.  Mollison,  F.R.C.S.,  who  proceeded  to  make
a  careful  examination  of  her  throat  and  adjacent  parts.  His
report  reads  as  follows  :

23  Devonshire  Place,
Upper  Wimpole  Street,  W.  1,
June  28,  1920.

I  saw  Eva  C.  this  afternoon.  Examination  of  her  nose,
nasopharynx,  pharynx  and  larjaix  reveals  no  abnormality.
The  pharyngeal  irritability  is  normal.  Her  tongue  is  rather
fissured  and  is  suggestive  of  dyspepsia,  though  as  a  matter  of
fact  she  does  not  have  dyspepsia.

(Signed) W.  M.  Mollison.

After  the  medium's  throat  had  been  examined  in  the  ordmary
way  she  inquired  if  a  more  careful  insi^ection  could  net  be
made.  Dr.  Mollison  replied  that  he  could  examine  her  oeso-
phagus if  she  insisted,  but  that  it  was  a  rather  painful  pro-
ceeding. The  medium,  however,  demanded  the  examination,
and  her  throat  was  cocained  prior  to  the  passage  of  the  tube.
Unfortunately,  however,  the  electric  lamp  connected  with  the
apparatus  refused  to  work  and  the  examination  had  to  be
abandoned.

It  will  be  of  interest  to  state  that,  as  we  have  been  in-
formed, Mme  Bisson  has  been  able  during  the  period  of  time
which  has  elapsed  since  our  experiments  took  place  gradually
to  improve  the  conditions  of  the  seances,  holding  them  fre-
quently in  full  daylight,  and  that,  although  the  phenomena

3,S8


[part  lxxxiv.] a  Series  of  Sittings  ivith  Eva  C.


339


are  of  less  magnitude  than  those  reported  in  her  book,  results
of  great  interest  have  been  observed.  An  account  of  one
of  them  was  read  by  Mme  Bisson  at  the  International  Congress
on  Psychical  Research,  recently  held  at  Coi^enhagen,  and  will,
we  understand,  be  included  in  the  Report  which  is  to  be
published  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Congress.

As  a  result  of  the  frequent  suggestions  that  Eva  C."s  pheno-
mena could  be  explained  bj'  regurgitation,  Madame  Bisson  took
her  in  May  of  this  year  to  be  examined  by  two  radiologists,
in  order  to  ascertain  whether  there  was  anything  abnormal  in
the  appearance  or  functioning  of  the  oesojihagus  and  stomach.
With  Madame  Bisson's  permission  we  print  below  the  certificate
given  by  the  radiologists  as  a  result  of  the  examination.


■ '  Certificat.
Nous  soussignes  |

Louis  Beaupbez,  Dodeur  en  medeciyie  de  la  Faculte  de  Paris,
ancien  interne  des  asiles,  ancien  ^repara/ew  de  radiologie
a  I'HSpital  Broca,  Medecin-Exj^ert  pres  les  Tribuneaux,
demeurant  a  Paris,  32  rue  Desaix,

et  Emile  Vallet,  Docteur  en  medecine  de  la  faculte  de  Paris,
ancien  interne  de  Saint-Lazare,  Chevalier  de  la  Legion
d'Honneur,  demeurant  a  Paris,  72  rue  Cardinet,

Certifions  avoir  procede  le  24  3Iai  1921  a  Vexamen  radiologique
de  Vcesophage  et  de  Vestomac  du  medium  de  Madame  Bisson,
Mademoiselle  Eva  Carriere,  dgee  de  34  ans,  que  Vun  de  nous
{le  Dr.  Beauprez)  connatt  _perso>i.e^Zeme/ii  ^jowr  Vavoir  vue  a
plusieurs  reprises  chez  Madame  Bisson  dans  des  seances  an
cours  desquelles  ce  medium  a  donne  des  inaterialisations .
Uexamen  a  ete  pratique  a  dix  heures  du  matin,  Mademoiselle
Eva  Carriere  etait  a  jeun  ;  nous  lui  avons  fait  ingurgiter  iin
lait  de  bismuth  et  nous  avons  pu  constater  que  le  passage  du
bismuth  dans  Vcesophage  se  fait  d'une  fagon  absolument  normale
et  que  Vcesophage  ne  presente  aucune  particularity,  telle  que
retrecissement,  dilatation  oxi  diverticule.  L'estomac  lyresente  une
poche  a  air  de  volume  normal,  le  remplissage  de  cet  estomac  se
fait  normalement  et  apres  absorption  d'environ  250  grammes  de
lait  de  bismuth  on  observe  une  image  de  Vestomac en  piied  de


340  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C. [part  lxxxiv].

bas  "  dont  le  2^oint  decline  se  trouve  a  un  centimetre  au-
dessous  de  Vombilic.  Des  la  fin  du  remplissage  des  contractions
segmentent  les  trois  quarts  inferieurs  de  Vestomac  et  amorcent
rivacuation  duodenale.  Cette  evacution  se  fait  normalement  et
I  071  n' observe  pas  d^hyperkynesie  gastrique,  pas  jdus  que  de  mouve-
ments  antiperistaltiques  ni  de  regurgitations.  De  profit,  les  faces
gastriques  ont  un  contour  regulier,  sans  lacunes  ni  diverticules.

En  resume,  nous  2JOuvons  conclure  de  Vexamen  que  nous  avons
pratique  que  Mademoiselle  Eva  Carrieee  presente  un  cesophage
et  un  estomac  normaux  dont  le  fonctionnement  est  normal.

Paris,  le  30  Mai  1921.

[Signed]  Beaijpbez.

7  juin  1921.

Vallet.
Paris,  12  juin  1921.

It  will  be  seen  that  according  to  the  above  statement
the  stomach  and  oesophagus  of  Eva  C.  when  submitted  to
a  radiological  examination,  presented  a  normal  appearance.
On  the  other  hand,  a  professional  "  regurgitator,"  giving
2Jerformances  in  Paris,  who  has  recently  been  examined  by
the  same  method,  jiresented  several  marked  peculiarities.


APPENDIX  III.
Note  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

My first opinion, at  the sittings held  with Eva C, in  the
rooms  of  the  Society  for  Psychical Research, at which I  was
present, was  that  as  some of  the  objects  which made  their
appearance  were  seen  to  issue  from  the  mouth  of  the  medium,
she had the power of regurgitation. I concluded that  she
had swallowed them before coming to the rooms and  then
regurgitated them. I was aware that there were  public
performers like Roniski, the Russian, who swallowed  gold-
fish, frogs, etc., and then caused them to issue from  his
gullet  in  full  view  of  his  audiences. The  phenomena  of  Eva  C.
I  considered  to  be  of  the  same  character,  the  difference  being
that  the  objects  swallowed  by  her  were  smaller. But  as  the
sittings  continued,  I  had  to  alter  my  opinion  as  to  Eva  C.'s
phenomena being a case of simple regurgitation.  Elements
of a puzzling nature presented themselves. Some of  the
objects  were  of  such  a  character  that  it  was  difficult  to  under-
stand how  they  could  have  been  concealed  in  the  gullet  of  the
medium. As  an  example  I  would  refer  to  the  black  material
which  covered  the  lower  part  of  Eva's  C.'s  face,  like  a  beard,
at the sitting of 28th April, 1920, and which was  subse-
quently seen on her right hand, which ^vas at the  time
under control. If this material had issued from her  gullet
it would be natural to suppose that it would have  been
moist. I felt it and found it to be dry. To the  touch
it  was  Uke  a  crumpled-up,  stiff,  veil.

At  the  same  sitting  a  flash-light  photograph  \\as  taken
of  an  object  which  was  seen  resting  on  the  medium's  right
breast.  When  the  photograph  was  developed  it  showed  a
small  female  face  surromided  by  a wide  circular  frame  con-

341


342  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  [part

sisting  of  aiDparently  the  same  kind  of  material  as  that  which
had  been  seen  on  Eva  C.'s  face  and  hand.  It  is  difficult
to  understand  how  the  medium  could  have  concealed  material
of  this  nature  in  her  gullet.  This  material  was  not  seen
to  issue  from,  nor  to  re-enter  her  mouth,  but  at  the  seance
of  the  21st  June,  1920,  when  Mr.  DLngwall  was  controlling
the  medium's  hands,  a  substance  was  seen  to  issue  from  her
mouth  under  perplexmg  conditions.

I  will  quote  from  my  notes  of  this  sitting  :

"Before  the  sitting  began  Eva  C,  at  her  own  sugges-
tion, drank  a  cup  of  coffee  and  ate  a  biscuit  to  prove
that  she  had  nothing  concealed  in  her  gullet.

"  Eva  C.  asked,  towards  the  end  of  the  sitting,  to
be  allowed  to  have  her  hands  free.  This  was  granted
while  Dingwall  still  held  her  wrists.  She  then  began  to
pull  something  from  her  mouth  with  both  her  hands.
I  had  a  good  view  of  this  as  my  face  was  within  a  foot
from  her  mouth.  She  kept  pulling  this  something  from
her  mouth  and  stretching  it  out  in  different  directions.
It  appeared  to  be  of  a  grey  colour  of  an  irregular  shape.
It  suddenly  vanished  while  I  was  intently  watching
it.  Immediately  after  its  disappearance  Eva  C.  said
'  Examme  my  mouth.'  This  was  at  once  done  with  the
electric  torch.  Nothmg  was  seen  in  her  mouth.  During
the  whole  time  that  the  phenomenon  occurred  the  strong
light  of  the  electric  torch  was  used."

Madame  Bisson,  in  her  book,  Les  PMnomenes  dits  de  Materia-
lisation, refers  repeatedly  to  the  sudden  manner  in  which
the  objects,  that  present  themselves  at  Eva  C.'s  seances,
disappear. (See  pp.  290,  293,  302.)

The  perplexing  disappearance  of  objects  was  also  noticeable
at  our  seances,  and,  whatever  be  the  method  by  which  it
was  brought  about,  it  appears  difficult  to  believe  that  it
was  by  the  use  of  the  medium's  hands,  when  the  way  they
were  controlled  is  considered.  I  was  present  at  twenty-one
sittings.  I  controlled  Eva  C.'s  left  hand  during  six  of  these
sittings  and  her  right  hand  during  eleven.  I  can  confidently  say
that  during  the  whole  of  these  sittings  the  control  of  the
medium's  hands  by  Mr.  Dingwall  and  myself  was  most  rigid.


Lxxxrv.] A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  343

When  the  hands  were  not  held,  they  were  always  in  sight.
Not  for  a  moment  was  our  attention  relaxed.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  seances  could  not  have  been
continued  as,  towards  their  end,  there  appeared  to  be  increasing
evidence  of  a  supernormal  element  coming  into  play.  It  is
also  to  be  regretted  that  no  full  form  figures  made  their
appearance  at  our  sittings  like  those  shown  in  some  of  the
illustrations  in  Mme.  Bisson"s  book.  Had  they  done  so
we  should  have  been  more  able  to  form  a  definite  opinion
as  to  the  real  nature  of  Eva  C.'s  phenomena.


THE MODUS  OPERANDI  IN  SO-CALLED
MEDIUMISTIC  TRANCE.

By  (LTna)  Lady  Teoubeidge.

As  a  preliminary  to  what  I  am  going  to  say  about  the
trance  phenomena  observable  in  the  persons  of  so-called
mediums,  I  am  anxious  to  make  it  quite  clear  that
I  am'  not  purporting  to  relate  any  remarkable  new
evidence  received  for  or  against  the  theory  of  personal
survival  of  bodily  death,  and  although  evidence  of  this
type  received  through  a  medium,  Mrs.  Leonard,  will
incidentally  be  mentioned,  its  value  from  that  standpoint
will  not  be  the  reason  for  its  inclusion  in  this  paper.  It
is  with  the  question  of  the  actual  modus  O'permidi  involved
in  the  reception  by  certain  subjects  when  in  trance
of  impressions  derived  from  sources  apparently  not  avail-
able to  the  same  subject  when  in  a  waking  state,  that
I  wish  to  deal  ;  with  the  conditions  which  may  affect,
favourably  or  adversely,  the  production  of  the  phenomena
whose  source  is  the  subject  of  so  much  discussion.

My  reason  for  selecting  this  subject  is  that  I  have  a
strong  feeling  that  the  entire  question  of  so-called  medium-
istic  phenomena  is  just  now  at  a  very  important  stage
in  its  evolution.

It  is  now  nearly  forty  years  since  a  few  courageous
individuals  founded  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
for  the  avowed  purpose  of  investigating  as  scientifically
as  possible  what  had  up  to  that  time  been  regarded  by
most  of  their  contemporaries  as  material  beneath  serious
consideration  ;  namely,  the  various  reports  of  hallucina-
tions, hauntings,  premonitions,  phantasms,  and  the  move-
ments  of  inanimate objects without  visible cause,  which

344


[part  lxxxiv.]  'Modus  Operandi'  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  345

were  held  by  some  of  those  witnessing  or  experiencing
them  to  point  to  ultra-mundane  intervention,  and  generally,
by  those  not  involved  in  the  experiences,  to  be  due  to
indigestion,  or  a  taste  for  romance.

Although  the  work  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
has  from  its  initiation  been  one  of  steadilj'  maintained
progression,  I  think,  nevertheless,  that  it  is  only  within
the  last  few  years  that  one  of  its  most  definite  aims  has
been  accomplished.  We  may  regard  Mrs.  Henry  Sidg-
wick's  Paper  on  the  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance
Phenomena  as  a  milestone  at  which  it  behoves  us  to
pause  and  consider.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  terminates  this  Paper
by  stating  that  study  of  the  Piper  phenomena  has  led
her  to  the  belief  that  in  the  trance  state  Mrs.
Piper's  "  normal  powers  transcend  in  some  directions
those  of  her  ordinary  waking  self,  as  is  often  the  case
in  hypnosis.  And  further — what  makes  her  case  of
great  importance — she  can  obtain  imperfectly,  and  for
the  most  part  fragmentarily,  telepathic  impressions.  Or
rather,  as  it  would  perhaps  be  more  correct  to  say,
such  impressions  are  not  only  received  by  her  as  the
result  of  her  own  telepathic  activity  or  that  of  other
spirits — spirits  of  the  living  or  maybe  of  the  dead — but
rise  partially  or  completely  into  the  consciousness  operat-
ing in  the  trance  communications,  and  so  are  recognised."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  not  been  the  first  of  those  seriously
engaged  upon  psychical  investigation  to  reach  the  con-
viction that,  after  the  exclusion  of  all  conceivable  fraud,
conscious  or  unconscious,  and  taking  also  into  consideration
coincidence  and  all  known  normal  explanations,  there
remains  among  the  phenomena  studied  by  herself  and  her
colleagues  a  residuum  which  demands  an  explanation  that
is  not  as  yet  forthcoming.  For  some  years  past  a  number
of  our  most  distinguished  members  have  devoted  much
time  and  energy  to  the  study  of  the  phenomena  known  as
cross-correspondences  ;  the  automatic  script  involved  in
the  production  of  these  has  largely  been  obtained  through
the  agency  of  automatists  whose  integrity  is  so  above  all
question,  that  the  explanation  of  conscious  fraud  has  not
even required consideration. Without going into  any


346  (Una)  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

detail,  we  may  say  that  their  study  of  the  cross-corre-
spondences has  led  these  investigators  to  the  same  con-
clusion as  that  expressed  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  her  Paper
on  the  Piper  Phenomena,  and  it  will,  I  think,  be  admitted
that  few  unprejudiced  and  capable  observers  will  now
deny  the  possible  existence  of  telepathy  at  any  rate,  even
if  they  do  not  care  to  go  further.

It  would  be  difficult  to  over-estimate  the  importance
of  such  an  advance  from  a  condition  of  pure  surmise,
but  much  remains  to  be  done.  It  becomes  at  once
imperative  not  only  to  proceed  further,  but  to  do  so  by
that  particular  road  which  is  best  calculated,  perhaps
among  several  available  roads,  to  lead  us  to  the  next
stage  of  the  journey.  The  most  interesting  road  is  not
necessarily  the  best,  and  short  cuts  are  as  dangerous  as
they  are  alluring.

In  this  matter  of  psychical  investigation,  side  by  side
with  the  question  of  the  existence  or  non-existence  of
the  alleged  phenomena,  there  has  always  appeared  the
enthralling  question  of  what  might  be  their  source,  and
granted  the  recognition  of  the  existence  of  super-normal
phenomena  as  an  established  fact,  it  is  this  question  of
the  source  thereof  which  may  now  be  considered  by  many
serious  students  of  Psychical  Research  to  be  the  problem
to  which  thev  should  devote  themselves.  -

Now  it  is  my  conviction  that  another  stage  of  the
investigation  should  precede  the  attempt  to  ascertain  the
source  of  the  phenomena  ;  a  stage  quite  as  important,  if
less  attractive  to  the  imagination  and  the  ambitions.
Being  myself  deeply  and  perhaps  primarily  interested  in
the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  phenomena  we
are  observing  point  to  the  action  of  entities  who  have
survived  bodily  death,  I  am  the  better  able  to  realise
the  interest  of  this  absorbing  question  to  a  large  number
of  investigators.  It  is  incidentally  the  main  point  upon
which  are  based  the  prejudice  and  ill-feeling  that  so  often
enter  into  discussions  of  the  subject  of  psychical  pheno-
mena as  a  whole,  both  in  the  Press  and  in  other  publications.
It  is  the  entry  of  this  question  into  the  subject  of  Psychical
Research  which  I  cannot  but  feel  has  often  had  a  regret-


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  347

table  effect  upon  the  way  in  which  the  whole  subject  is
regarded  by  many  persons  whose  assistance,  would  they
give  it,  could  only  benefit  the  investigation.

Few  persons  of  real  intelligence  are  stimulated  to
enquiry  by  being  told  insistently,  without  adequate
explanation,  the  solution  of  a  problem  before  they  have
themselves  gone  into  its  processes.  And  when  the  problem
in  question  appears  to  be  solved  by  two  conflicting
parties  with  equal  conviction  in  two  diametrically  opposite
ways,  it  is  rarely  that  the  potential  enquirer  cares  to  seek
further,  or  even  suspects  the  existence  of  competent
persons  who  are  less  sweeping  in  their  judgments.  Definite
pronouncements  made  upon  an  inadequate  rational  basis
are  powerful  irritants.  There  also  results,  among  many
intelligent  persons,  a  prejudice  that  involves  not  individual
opinions  only,  or  their  exponents,  but  the  entire  Society
for  Psychical  Research,  which,  being  less  clamorous  in  its
methods,  does  not  always  get  the  merit  due  to  it  for
its  sedulously  temperate  and  neutral  policy.  There  are
many  quite  intelligent  persons  who  honestly  believe  that
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  exists  mainly  for  the
purpose  of  proving  or  disproving  personal  survival  of
bodily  death  and  communication  with  the  departed.

Possibly  could  it  be  made  clearer  that  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research  is  not  only  equally  interested  in  the
proving  or  disproving  of  this  important  question,  but  is
anxious  that  any  conclusions  on  this  matter  should  be
postponed  until  more  is  known  regarding  the  phenomena
involved,  we  might  gain  many  useful  workers,  trained  in
other  branches  of  science,  and  save  ourselves  from  the
risk  of  what  I  will  call  skipping  a  vitally  important  stage
of  the  investigation.

I  feel  strongly  that,  to  whatever  conclusions  each  in-
dividual investigator  may  come  as  to  the  possible  source
of  the  phenomena,  his  conclusions  will  always  be  open
to  doubt,  so  long  as  he  is  obliged  to  confess  an  almost
total  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  the  processes  whereon
they  are  based.

I  am  quite  aware  that,  in  suggesting  that  the  main  line
of investigation  now  to be  pursued is  the  examination


348


(Una)  Lady  Troiibridqe.


[part


and  the  attempted  comprehension  of  the  ynodus  operandi
involved  in  the  production  of  Psychical  Phenomena,  I  am
suggesting  an  advance  into  almost  total  darkness,  and
advocating  a  course  only  to  be  paralleled  by  requesting
a  physiological  student  to  study  practical  vivisection  in
a  country  devoid  of  animal  life.  Mediumistic  trance
phenomena  of  a  pronounced  type  are  rare.  Where  the
faculty  exists  and  is  recognised,  it  is  either  concealed  by
the  possessor  as  an  undesirable  peculiarity,  or  it  is  a
valued  possession  for  one  reason  or  another.  Sometimes
it  is  a  source  of  religious  consolation,  in  other  cases  it
procures  interest  and  admiration  for  an  individual  who
would  otherwise  command  neither,  and  sometimes  it  is  a
means  of  livelihood  with  which  it  would  not  be  legitimate
to  tamper.  At  all  events,  subjects  are  not  going  to  be
plentiful,  who  will  risk  the  possible  diminution  or  loss  of
this  remarkable  faculty  by  submitting  it  without  reserve
to  the  experimentation  of  operators  who  cannot  pretend
to  foresee  results.

In  any  case,  with  the  most  complaisant  subject,  and
perhaps  most  of  all  with  such,  the  scientific  investigator
is  in  honour  bound  to  consider  above  all  other  things  the
possible  results  of  his  experiments  upon  the  subject
submitted  to  his  examination,  and  this  consideration
very  considerably  limits  the  field  of  legitirhate  experi-
ment.

But  in  spite  of  this  fact,  there  does  appear  to  me
to  be  one  road  of  investigation  which  could  be  legitimately
pursued,  without  fear  of  harming  the  subject,  and  along
which  there  comes  towards  us  perhaps  a  very  faint  ray
of  light.i

In  dealing  with  this  matter  I  will  take  as  an  example
the  medium  Mrs.  Leonard,  her  trance  phenomena  being
those  of  which  I  have  personally  had  the  fullest  experience.
I  have  sat  with  her  either  as  sitter  or  recorder  about
one hundred and  eighty  times, and I shall quote  her

^  This  paper  was  written  before  the  publication  of  Mr.  Whately
Smith's  paper  on  "  A  Suggested  New  Method  of  Research  "  (Proc.
S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXXI.,  p.  401  ff.),  and  I  do  not  therefore  discuss  the
interesting suggestions which  he there makes.  _  .  ,^


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  349

also  as  being,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  one  of  the  best
trance  mediums  at  present  alive  -  and  in  this  country.
Now,  whether  or  no  Mrs.  Leonard  be  an  intermediary
between  incarnate  and  discarnate  human  beings,  does  not
here  concern  us.  A  less  debatable  point  will  suffice
for  the  purpose  of  this  paper  ;  Mrs.  Leonard,  who  alter-
nates between  a  very  normal  "  normal  consciousness,"
a  slight  drowsiness  or  haziness  productive  of  automatic
script,  a  partially  analgesic  trance  followed  by  almost
total  amnesia  on  waking,  in  which  she  shows  the  charac-
teristics of  a  personality  quite  foreign  to  her  waking  self,
and  yet  a  fourth,  also  apparently  a  trance  condition,  in
which  she  reproduces  with  more  or  less  success  the  vocal
characteristics  and  mannerisms  of  deceased  persons  of  both
sexes,  who  were  never  known  to  her  during  their  lives,  is
certainly  a  case  of  abnormal  psychology.  And  from  this
fact  comes  m}^  postulated  ray  of  light.

The  abnormal  psychology  of  Mrs.  Leonard  is  in  some
respects  similar  to  that  of  recorded  and  published  cases
among  patients  studied  by  curative  experts.  It  abounds
in  features  common  to  many  pronounced  examples  of
what  is  known  as  Multiple  Personality.  In  this  respect,
therefore,  there  may  possibly  be  much  to  be  gained  by
careful  observation  as  to  the  extent  to  which  it  is  possible
to  bring  the  abnormal  psychology  of  Mrs.  Leonard  and
other  trance  mediums  into  line  with  the  abnormal  psycho-
logy of  those  who  are  not,  to  all  appearance,  mediums,
but  who  only  share  Mrs.  Leonard's  peculiarities  in  some
other  respects.  We  should  by  this  means,  at  any  rate,
reduce  the  totally  unclassifiable  portions  of  Mrs.  Leonard's
abnormal  psychology  to  that  portion  wherein  she  definitely
differs  from  any  so  far  classified  case.  The  accomplish-
ment of  this  much,  taking  into  consideration  how  much
yet  remains  hypothetical  in  the  classification  of  even
non-mediumistic  examples  of  multiple  personality,  might
merely  lead  us  up  a  blind  alley,  but  that  is  a  risk  which
must  be  taken  by  the  pioneer.

The  line  of  enquiry  that  I  am  suggesting  is  not  a
new  departure  ;  ever  since  the  publication  of  the  re-
cords of  the earliest observed and recognised cases  of


350


(Una)  Laxly  Troubridge.


[part


Multiple  Personality,  careful  investigators  of  psychical
phenomena  have  remarked  a  similarity  between  certain  of
the  complexes,  or  personalities,  produced  by  dissociation,
and  a  not  unusual  type  of  so-called  "  Control "  who
directs  the  proceedings  during  many  mediumistic  trances.
A  salient  example  of  this  kind  was  the  "  Sally  "  of  the
Miss  Beauchamp  case  recorded  by  Doctor  Morton  Prince.
Anyone  who  has  sat  much  with  trance  mediums,  and  who
has  become  familiar  with  the  type  of  girl  or  child  control
so  often  met  with,  and  who  reads  of  Sally,  can  hardly
fail  to  remark  the  analogies.  If  we  rule  out  the  purport-
ing production  of  information  super-normally  acquired,
Mrs.  Thomson's  control  "  Nellie,"'  the  Minnehaha  control
of  Doctor  Hyslop's  medium  Mrs.  Chenoweth,  and  others
of  the  same  type  have  a  strong  family  likeness  to  Sally,
to  the  "  Leontine  "  Personality  of  Doctor  Pierre  Janet's
Leonie  Case  and  also  to  a  trance  entity  whom  I  have
lately  been  able  to  study — the  "  Moyenne  "  personality
developed  under  hypnosis  by  the  young  Polish  medium
Miss  Tomczyk,  who  gave  a  series  of  test  seances  to  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  some  five  years  ago,  and
who  is  also  known  to  us  through  the  reports  of  Doctor
Ochorowicz  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques.  Indeed
Moyenne  is  an  especially  interesting  case,  owing  to  the
difficulty  experienced  in  attempting  to  classify  her  even
provisionally  as  being  definitely  either  Spirit  Control  "  or
"  Secondary  Personality."  She  does  not  fit  comfortably
into  either  class,  and  whichever  one  she  is  placed  in  she
proceeds  to  overflow  into  the  other.  If  we  classify  her
as  a  "  Spirit  Control  "  we  are  met  by  the  difficulty  that
her  claim  to  be  such  is  not  only  inadequate,  but  is  of
recent  date.  Taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  of
late  years  Miss  Tomczyk,  in  her  capacity  of  an  interesting
psychical  subject,  has  inevitably  met  and  known  many
convinced  spiritualists,  we  need  seek  no  further  for  an
explanation  of  Moyenne's  rather  tardy  decision  that  she
is  a  spirit  invasion.  She  can,  moreover,  adduce  nothing
evidential  in  support  of  this  claim,  she  does  not  tell  us
why  she  opened  her  career  by  asserting  that  she  was
merely  a  part  of  Miss  Tomczyk,  or  what  reasons  caused


Lxxxiv.] 'Modus  Operandi'  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  351

her  to  change  her  mind  on  this  subject  ;  she  offers  no
proofs  of  identity  with  any  person  formerly  incarnate,
and  any  questions  as  to  her  origin,  or  regarding  her
surroundings  when  "  away  "  from  Miss  Tomczyk,  are
effectually  and  unsatisfactorily  quenched  by  the  mere
assertion  on  her  part  that  she  was  never  incarnate  at  all
as  a  human  being,  and  that  she  is  forbidden  by  certain
convenient  rules  to  tell  anything  connected  with  her
discarnate  conditions,  past,  present  or  future.

Under  these  circumstances  it  would  seem  obviously  the
proper  course  to  disregard  Moyenne\s  inadequately  sustained
pose  of  "  Spirit  invasion,"  and  set  her  down  firmly,  as  I
understand  Miss  Tomczyk  herself  is  inclined  to  do,  as
merely  a  dissociated  complex.  But  just  here  we  are  met
by  a  feature  which  at  once  tends  to  push  her  back  into
the  Spirit  Control  "  department  ;  for  it  is  only  when
Moyenne  holds  sway  that  Miss  Tomczyk  is  able  to  produce
those  physical  phenomena — levitations,  apparent  de-
materializations,  apports,  etc.,  which  have  been  obtained
through  her  mediumship  under  test  conditions  entirely
satisfactory  to  the  investigators,  to  whom  she  uncondi-
tionally submitted  herseK.

If  we  disregard  the  alleged  super-normal  powers  exhibited
by  Moyenne,  she  conforms  in  most  respects  admirably  to
the  recognised  features  of  a  certain  type  of  Secondary
Personality.  Like  Sally,  Moyenne  is  whimsical  ;  appealing,
often  pathetic,  and  often  amazingly  attractive.  Like
Sally  and  Leontine,  she  is  animated,  irresponsible,  noisy
and  irrepressible,  and  on  occasion  intractable.  Like  Sally
too  she  exhibits  genuine  if  sometimes  misplaced  humour,
and  like  Sally,  Leontine  and  also  Margaret,  another
Secondary  Personality  of  whom  we  will  treat  presently,
Moyenne  either  cannot  or  will  not  sleep,  and  is  utterly
unscrupulous  in  depriving  the  organism  she  uses  of  that
uninspiring  but  necessary  restorer.

The  mention  of  Margaret  leads  me  at  once  to  a  com-
parison which  I  have  been  making  for  many  months  past  ;
that  between  Mrs.  Leonard's  Control  Feda  and  the  Margaret
Personality,  who  usurped  such  a  lion's  share  of  the  daily
life  of  the  girl  whose  case  is  recorded  in  that  valuable


352


(Una)  Lady  Troubriclge.


[PAET


work  "  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality."  ^
We  will  for  the  present  ignore  the  claim  of  the  author,
Dr.  Walter  Prince,  that  Margaret  displayed  at  times
evidences  of  clairvoyant  or  super-normal  faculty,  and
restrict  ourselves  to  the  characteristics  exclusive  of  such
a  claim  in  both  Margaret  and  Feda.  I  have  studied  the
Doris  Fischer  Case  rather  carefully,  and  indeed,  when  I
first  obtained  it,  I  was  at  once  struck  by  the  apparent
likeness  of  the  Margaret  Personality;'  described  to  the  Feda
with  whom  I  am  so  familiar. ^

Feda  and  Margaret  are  both  of  them  very  pronounced
individualities  ;  there  are  few  semitones  to  be  observed
in  either  of  them,  a  fact  which  facilitates  comparison.  It
must,  however,  be  recognised  that  Feda  is  tame  as  com-
pared with  Margaret.  Nevertheless,  those  characteristics,
which  blaze  in  Margaret  with  melodramatic  force,  are
generally  observable  in  a  modified  degree  in  Feda.  i,

Margaret  in  her  early  stages  actively  hates  and  maltreats
the  unfortunate  Doris,  and  even  in  her  later  stages  of
reformation  it  is  clear  that  Margaret  considers  the  Doris
a  poor  thing.  Feda,  on  her  part,  has  not  a  high  opinion
of  Mrs.  Leonard,  and  though  she  will  conscientiously,  if
rather  obviously  against  the  grain,  do  her  any  kindness
in  her  power,  she  never,  in  my  experience,  conveys  any
impression  that  she  likes  her.  She  frequently  indeed
expresses  open  scorn  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  opinions,  likes  or
dislikes,  and  speaks  of  her  as  of  a  not  very  satisfactory  and
distinctly  inferior  instrument,  who  must  be  protected  and
humoured  merely  because  such  as  she  is,  there  is  none
better  to  hand.  Her  instinctive  antagonism  for  Mrs.
Leonard  is  repressed,  tempered  by  a  certain  recognition
of  Mrs.  Leonard's  good  qualities  which  her  honesty  will
not  let  her  deny,  but  the  antagonism  is  unmistakably
there.  Mrs.  Leonard,  on  the  other  hand,  while  giving
Feda  full  credit  for  her  merits  (like  Doris,  she  only  learns
of  the  other  Personality  through  revelations  made  to  her

1  This  work is familiar to the Members  of the Society through  Dr.

T. W. Mitchell's  Paper, portions  of  which  were  read by  him  at  the

meeting  of  the  Society  in  July,  1919.  while  the  entire  Paper  has
since  been  published  in  the  Proceedi/iijs,  Vol.  XXXI.,  p.  30.


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  353


by  other  people),  undoubtedly  bestows  upon  Feda  no
more  than  a  rather  patronising  liking,  often  obscured  by
distinct  irritation.  She  resents  actively  the  suggestion
that  has  been  made  to  her  by  certain  spiritualistic  sitters,
to  the  effect  that  Feda  is  her  higher  self,  justifiably
pointing  out  that  her  normal  self  does  not  share  many  of
Feda's  childish  weaknesses  and  limitations.  The  attitude
of  Doris  towards  Margaret,  or  so  much  of  Margaret's
character  as  she  could  gauge  by  the  agency  of  Doctor
Prince  and  the  letters  written  to  her  by  Margaret  during
the  latter's  periods  of  manifestation,  was  very  similar.^

Feda  also  shares  with  Margaret  a  total  lack  of  compre-
hension and  appreciation  of  the  accepted  values.  Margaret
being  told  that  a  painful  corn  would  improve  if  cut,
attempted  with  a  table  knife  to  amputate  Doris's  toe.
Feda,  when  a  sitter  accidentally  singes  a  few  hairs  of
her  medium's  fringe,  suggests  that  were  a  bonfire  made
of  the  entire  chevelure  of  Mrs.  Leonard,  the  latter  might
replace  it  to  advantage  by  a  blonde  transformation  more
to  Feda's  taste.  Margaret  hacked  to  pieces  Doris's  bed,
reducing  Doris  to  sleeping  on  a  chair.  Feda,  according
to  Mrs.  Leonard,  has  twice  presented  to  casual  sitters
Mrs.  Leonard's  wedding  ring,  has  once  thrown  it  in  the
fire,  from  which  a  distressed  sitter  rescued  it,  and  once
ordered another sitter to bestow it upon an  itinerant

1  At  the  time  of  writing  the  above,  I  had  in  my  study  of  the  Doris
Case  confined  myself,  owing  to  lack  of  time,  entirely  to  the  two  first
volumes  of  that  work  containing  Doctor  Prince's  Record  of  the  case.
It  was  not  until  after  I  had  witten  this  Paper  that  I  found  time  also
to  examine  the  third  volume  in  which  Doctor  Hyslop  records  his  share
of  the  investigation.  It  was,  therefore,  an  interesting  surprise  to  me
to  find  that  Doctor  Hyslop  has  been  as  much  struck  as  I  was  myself
by  the  remarkable  similarity  apparent  between  certain  aspects  of  so-
called  Multiple  or  Dissociated  Personalities,  especially  as  observed  in
the  Doris  Case,  and  examples  of  alleged  spirit  controls.

It  was  in  consequence  of  a  study  of  Doctor  Hyslop's  records  that  I
added  the  mention  of  Minnehaha  to  the  examples  which  I  have
quoted  of  "  Child  Controls."  If  I  have  in  this  Paper  trespassed  upon
ground  already  marked  out  by  Doctor  Hyslop,  and  in  some  cases  merely
repeated  what  he  has  said,  I  know  my  readers  will  accept  my  assurance
that  I  did  so  before  I  was  aware  of  what  he  had  written  on  the
subject,  and  that  they  will  be  lenient  towards  the  efforts  of  a  younger
and  less  experienced  student  of  Psychical  phenomena.


354


{Una)  Laxly  Tro abridge.


[part


organ  grinder.  This  despite  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Leonard
values  the  ring  and  is  superstitious  regarding  its  removal
from  her  hand.  Woe  betide  Mrs.  Leonard,  however,
should  she  by  accident  or  intent  dispose  of,  or  even
contemplate  disposing  of,  any  article  which  Feda  regards
as  her  own.  Just  as  Margaret  visited  with  fury  and
condign  punishment  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  Doris
to  tamper  with  what  Margaret  considered  hers,  and  even
in  the  last  stages  of  her  gradual  extinction  leapt  out  to
this  stimulus  after  others  had  ceased  to  affect  her  ;  so
Feda  exhibits  the  least  regenerate  aspects  of  her  nature
in  protecting  from  any  encroachment  by  the  medium  any
object  which  she  regards  particularly  as  hers.  While
I  was  well  aware  that  Mrs.  Leonard  went  in  fear  of  un-
pleasant consequences  of  some  sort  arising  in  the  event
of  her  displeasing  Feda,  it  did  not  strike  me  till  quite
lately  to  ask  Mrs.  Leonard  what  exact  form  those
consequences  might  be  expected  to  take.  Mrs.  Leonard
then  informed  me  that  Feda  if  really  annoyed  simply  did
not  come  ;  as  sittings  under  these  circumstances  could
not  take  place,  Mrs.  Leonard's  means  of  livelihood  were
thus  removed  until  Feda  considered  the  offence  expiated.
Sitters  frequently  present  trifles  to  Feda,  during  Mrs,
Leonard's  trance,  and  it  is  invariably  Feda's  habit  to
remark  jealously  upon  such  occasions,  "  It's  Feda's,  not
hers  ",  or  words  to  this  effect.  Only  if  an  object
really  fails  to  please  Feda,  is  it  relegated  to  Mrs.  Leonard
as  being  good  enough  for  her.  Mrs.  Leonard,  on  the  other
hand,  on  one  occasion  when  I  gave  her  in  the  normal
state  a  little  ornament  promised  to  Feda,  explained  to
me  with  obvious  embarrassment  that  she  must  not  venture
to  thank  me,  lest  Feda  should  interpret  her  doing  so  as
a  claim  to  the  gift.

I  have  a  record  of  an  incident  which  brought  into
play  conjointly  Feda's  ignorance  of  accepted  values,  and
her  jealousy  regarding  any  encroachments  upon  her  personal
property.  One  day,  prior  to  a  sitting,  Mrs.  Leonard
asked  me  whether  I  would  beg  Feda  to  allow  her  to
present  to  a  certain  poor  child,  v/ho  had  seen  and  longed
for  it,  a  shilling  toy  which  had  been  given  to  Feda  ;  I


Lxxxiv.] '  Modvs  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  355

undertook  the  embassy,  and  obtained  from  Feda  a
distinctly  cold  concession  to  the  effect  that  the  child
could  have  Feda's  toy,  only  on  condition  that  Mrs.
Leonard  bestowed  her  own  valuable  ruby  ring  upon  a
certain  young  woman  in  domestic  service  designated  by
Feda  as  "  the  cook  girl  "  ;  Feda  was  emphatic  that  this
latter  gift  should  in  any  case  be  made.  It  must  also  be
recorded  that  on  receiving  this  message,  Mrs.  Leonard,
although  at  the  time  she  stopped  short  of  acting  upon
it,  was  visibly  uneasy  upon  the  possible  consequences  to
herself  involved  in  the  disregard  of  Feda's  behests.  Some
months  later,  on  my  alluding  to  the  occurrence,  Mrs.
Leonard  informed  me  that,  Feda  having  on  several  occasions
sent  her  further  peremptory  messages  by  various  sitters
regarding  the  ruby  ring,  she  had  thought  it  unwise  to
resist,  and  had  therefore  bestowed  her  ring  as  directed  by
Feda.

Another  respect  in  which  Feda  resembles  Margaret  is
that  a  certain  delayed  infantilism  of  pronunciation  is
common  to  both.  Doctor  Prince  tells  us  in  his  record
that  in  this  respect  correction  never  produced  upon
Margaret  any  lasting  improvement,  and  during  the  three
years  that  I  have  sat  with  Feda,  any  attempts  made  by
her  at  correcting  her  verbal  idiosyncrasies — attempts
evoked  by  the  frequent  hilarity  which  they  provoke  in
sitters,  an  amusement  which  Feda  is  far  from  sharing —
have  been  very  transient.  I  must,  however,  mention
one  exception.  Up  to  November  9th,  1918,  Feda
habitually  alluded  to  herself  as  "  Feda  "  ;  since  then  she
has  maintained  with  few  exceptions  the  use  of  the  first
person  singular,  and  in  reply  to  a  question  put  by  me,
she  informed  me  that  this  reformation  was  accomplished
with  much  difficulty  in  compliance  with  a  sitter's  request.
Barring  this  one  exception  Feda's  English,  unless  she
purports  to  be  quoting  the  exact  words  of  a  "  Com-
municator," is  peculiarly  her  own.  For  some  reason
unknown  she  seldom  fails  to  substitute  an  L  for  an  R
(a  habit  which,  by  the  way,  she  shares  with  Moyenne),
and  the  recorder  is  occasionally  put  to  it  to  find  intel-
ligible  spelling for her impromptu creations. At  times


356


(Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


immediate  comprehension  is  difficult,  and  it  took  me — on
one  occasion  which  I  remember — several  seconds  to
interpret  the  first  appearance  of  Feda's  term  "  asnenemyn-
alien  "  as  applied  to  a  German  subject.

Like  Margaret  again,  she  adopts  and  obstinately  clings
to  her  own  perversions  of  the  names  of  her  acquaintance,
both  among  the  living  and  among  the  purporting  com-
municators. She  will  spell  out  or  pronounce  accurately
such  names  as  "  Johnnie  "  or  "  Gerald  "  or  "  Radclylfe,"
but  the  bearers  of  these  names  will  none  the  less  remain
in  her  vocabulary  as  "  Twonnie,"  "  Gelly  "  and  "  Raddy  "
respectively,  and  one  is  reminded  of  Margaret's  constant
substitution  of  "  Papo  "  for  "Papa."

Like  Margaret,  Feda  is  winsome.  Incomprehensible  as
it  may  appear,  in  view  of  the  certain  amount  of
apparently  incorrect  matter  which  in  some  sittings  fills
in  the  gaps  between  the  good  and  accurate,  or  merely
unverifiable  matter  retailed,  Feda  has  a  deep  respect  for
the  truth,  and  to  the  best  of  my  belief  conscientiously
seeks  to  be  truthful.  Nor,  in  my  opinion,  are  we  qualified
to  ascribe  conscious  mendacity  to  Feda  until  we  know
more  of  the  manner  in  which  impressions  reach  her,  or
of  what  means  are  available  to  her  for  the  disentanglement
or  classification  of  the  various  facts  which  reach  her
consciousness.  However  that  may  be,  she  very  often
appears  scrupulously  anxious  to  convey  only  what  is
strictly  accurate,  and  we  may  perhaps  seek  the  reason
for  this  in  one  of  her  own  utterances,  when  enlarging  upon
her  duties  as  an  honest  and  conscientious  control.  "  This
work  is  Feda's  ploglession,  if  Feda  told  lies,  Feda  wouldn't
plogless."  In  any  case  her  tender  conscience  is  recog-
nisably  akin  to  that  which  led  Margaret  to  tell  Dr.
Prince  :  "  Papo,  I  think  I  thunk  a  lie."

I  will  be  quite  irrelevant  for  a  moment  and  make  a
frank  confession.  I  love  Feda.  Neither  she  nor  Margaret
would  be  exactly  comfortable  folk  to  live  with  per-
manently, but  Doctor  Prince  also  loved  Margaret.  He
tells  us  that  her  final  disappearance  left  him  feeling  as
though  he  had  lost  a  loved  child  ;  he  informs  us  that
her  last  Will  and  Testament  which  he  reproduces  in  his


Lxxxiv.] 'Modus  Operandi'  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  357

record  was  duly  executed  by  him  so  far  as  was  possible,
and  it  is  quite  unmistakable  that  Doctor  Prince  mourned
Margaret.  I  am  thankful  that  it  is  not  my  duty  to
ensure  Mrs.  Leonard's  greater  advantage  by  attempting
to  squeeze  or  suggest  Feda  out  of  existence  ;  I  should  not
like  the  task.

I  will  not  here  attempt  in  any  detail  to  go  into  the
complicated  question  of  how  far  there  is  apparent  co-
consciousness  between  the  normal  Mrs.  Leonard  and  her
various  psychic  lodgers.  I  will  only  touch  upon  the  fact
that  here  again  there  are  parallels  to  be  drawn  between
her  case  and  that  of  Doris  Fischer.  Mrs.  Leonard  has
almost  total  amnesia  of  all  that  occurs  while  Feda  or  any
so-called  personal  control  holds  sway.  I  use  the  term
almost  total  amnesia,  because  Mrs.  Leonard  states  that
occasionally,  especially  if  she  allows  herself  to  sit  quiet
and  composed  after  awaking  from  trance,  isolated  names,
or  the  impression  of  some  subject  or  topic,  will  recur  to
her  mind  ;  and  subsequent  questioning  of  a  sitter  has
enabled  her  to  ascertain  that  these  fragments  were
memories  of  the  preceding  trance.

Feda,  on  her  part,  claims  the  option  of  being  au  fait,
when  she  chooses,  not  only  with  the  thoughts  and  life  of
Mrs.  Leonard,  but  with  all  that  occurs  at  a  sitting  during
the  purporting  personal  controls.  She  also  claims  the
power  to  perceive  Mrs.  Leonard's  dreams  during  the
latter's  normal  sleep.  According  to  Feda's  own  statements
she  does  not  by  any  means  always  exercise  these  powers,
but  the  analogy  is  there  with  Doris  Fischer,  who  con-
sciously remembered  nothing  of  the  intervals  when
Margaret  or  one  of  her  other  personalities  were  demonstrat-
ing, whereas  Margaret  made  good  her  claim  to  an  almost
unceasing  consciousness,  irrespective  of  whether  she  was
manifesting  or  submerged,  and  another  personality  of  the
Doris  Fischer  Case,  Sleeping  Margaret,  likewise  claimed
optional  co-consciousness.

Of  course,  many  persons  will  maintain  that,  failing
evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  must  be  assumed  that  in  both
Mrs.  Leonard's  case  and  that  of  Doris  Fischer  all  the
personalities  involved  and  manifesting  through  one  organism


358


(Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


are  merely  different  aspects  of  one  and  the  same  individual,
but,  nevertheless,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  two  cases  in
this  respect  also  present  analogies  that  may  be  worth
studying.

Undoubtedly  Margaret  possessed  and  used,  not  to  say
misused,  the  power  to  compel  Doris,  from  within,  to  act
sometimes  according  to  her  wishes.  In  some  instances
Dr.  Prince  makes  it  clear  that  Doris  was  nonplussed  and
displeased  at  finding  herself  performing  actions  or  using
expressions  foreign  to  her  conscious  inclination.  Feda
does  not  claim  any  extensive  power  to  influence  Mrs.
Leonard  in  this  way,  but  I  was  able  to  verify  that  upon
one  occasion  she  did  so  up  to  a  certain  point.  Feda
claimed  that  having  seen  and  much  coveted  a  yellow  air-
balloon  in  a  Windsor  shop,  she  compelled  Mrs.  Leonard
to  purchase  it  ;  that  on  her  way  home  to  Datchet  Mrs.
Leonard  becoming  embarrassed  at  her  childish  burden,
turned  aside  into  a  field  and  gave  it  as  a  plaything  to
her  Pekinese  who,  according  to  Feda,  "  sat  on  it  with  his
flont  and  bursted  it."  Not  long  after  receiving  Feda's
account  of  this  affair  I  obtained  spontaneously  from  Mrs.
Leonard  full  corroboration  of  the  incident  ;  Mrs.  Leonard
volunteering  that  she  could  not  imagine  what  impulse  had
led  her  to  buy  a  silly  thing  which  she  was  ashamed  to
walk  home  with.

Margaret,  though  affectionate,  was  inaccessible  to  senti-
ment. With  the  exception  of  a  certain  sympathetic
interest  which  she  displayed,  especially  during  the  middle
and  latter  part  of  her  existence,  towards  the  real  Doris
and  the  other  Personality  known  as  Sick  Doris,  she  knew
not  sympathy  for  another's  troubles.  Feda  also  is
affectionate  and,  when  dealing  with  bereaved  sitters,
perfunctorily  decorous,  while  discouraging  emotion,  but
this  can  only  thinly  veil  her  entire  lack  of  emotional
understanding  of  or  sympathy  for  human  sorrow.  Upon
one  occasion  when  I  visited  Feda  accompanied  by  my
friend  and  fellow-worker  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall,  in  whose
company  I  have  more  often  than  not  visited  Feda,  and
whose  loss  would  deeply  pain  me,  Feda  ejaculated  with
a  hilarious  chuckle  that  it  would  indeed  be  fun  for  me


Lxxxiv.] 'Modus  Operandi'  in  Mediumisfic  Trance.  359

when,  having  survived  my  friend.  I  should  attempt  post-
mortem communication  with  her  through  Mrs.  Leonard.

There  is  another  aspect  in  which  the  two,  while  dis-
similar in  attainment,  are  as  one  in  their  desires.  Mar-
garet, at  least  during  her  youth  and  prime,  consistently
desired  to  usurp  every  possible  enjoyable  moment  of
Doris's  daily  life.  Avoiding  only  such  periods  as  were
fraught  with  uninteresting  routine,  or  with  the  painful
consequences  of  her  own  misdeeds,  she  voraciously  grabbed
the  consciousness  of  every  available  pleasure,  even  to  the
sugar  on  top  of  the  cake,  which  she  devoured,  granting  to
Doris  only  the  uninteresting  remains.  Feda's  powers  of
usurpation  are  up  to  the  present  very  much  more  cir-
cumscribed. Constrained  to  remain  submerged  unless  the
medium  consciously  invites  her  to  come  forth,  her  enjoy-
-  ment  when  in  occupation,  her  reluctance  to  end  her
periods  of  rule,  her  resentment  when  asked  to  abdicate
temporarily  in  favour  of  another  control  are  closely
identical  with  Margaret's  better  realised  desires.

Many  more  comparisons  could  be  made  which  would
strengthen  the  case  for  similarity  between  Feda  and
Margaret,  but  space  forbids,  and  the  above  will  suffice.
These  being  made  we  are  left  face  to  face  with  the
residual  phenomena  associated  not  only  with  Feda,  but
with  Mrs.  Leonard's  psychology  as  a  whole.  And  this  is
a  subject  that  demands  a  study  and  treatment  far  beyond
my  abilities  ;  even  an  adequate  summary  of  the  features
observed  by  me  wherein  Mrs.  Leonard's  case  differs  from
any  recorded  case  of  dissociation  which  I  have  studied,
and  of  the  points  wherein  it  offers  aspects  which  may  or
may  not  be  paralleled  in  such  cases,  would  be  a  long
affair,  and  one  upon  which  I  should  fear  to  embark  even
were  sufficient  space  at  my  disposal.

In  venturing  to  mention  some  of  what  I  will  merely  call
"  Things  that  do  happen  "  during  Mrs.  Leonard's  trance,
which  have  struck  me  as  possibly  significant,  and  in
further  venturing  to  express  here  and  there  an  opinion
as  to  a  possible  explanation,  I  am  only  presuming  upon
my  extensive  experience  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  trance,  and  so
far  from  expecting  my  opinions  to  be  taken  as  being  of


360


{Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


importance,  I  am  exclusively  concerned  with  the  hope  that
something  I  may  chance  to  write  may  awaken  the  interest
of  persons  better  qualified  than  myself  to  investigate  for
themselves  with  useful  results.

In  alluding  to  my  experience  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  trance,
and  in  discussing  the  aspects  of  that  trance  which  appear
to  differentiate  her  case  from  the  recorded  cases  of
Multiple  Personality,  I  must  first  of  all  admit  that  there
is  one  trance  or  semi-trance  state,  to  which  Mrs.  Leonard
is  apparently  subject,  of  which  I  have  no  personal
experience  at  all.  I  have  already  mentioned  this  con-
dition when  enumerating  her  various  states  ;  it  is  that
semi-hazy  condition  during  which  she  produces  script  in
varying  hand-writing,  which  has  proved  on  several  occasions
to  convey  accurate  knowledge  of  contemporaneous  or
recent  events  occurring  at  a  distance  and  normally  un-
known to  the  medium.  I  have  seen  some  of  the  script
produced  in  this  manner,  and  in  alluding  to  its  super-
normal value  I  am  relying  on  the  opinion  expressed  by
the  recipient  of  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Leonard  of  which  the
said  script  was  a  portion.  He  is  a  conscientious  observer
of  phenomena,  and  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  he  has  made
all  due  allowances  for  chance  coincidence  or  any  other
normal  explanation  before  ascribing  evidential  value  to
the  script.

As  regards  the  manner  of  production  of  this  and  similar
scripts,  our  only  authority  is  Mrs.  Leonard  herself,  as  this
phenomenon  occurs  only  when  she  is  alone,  or  in  her
husband's  presence,  and  then  only  when  in  the  act  of
writing  personal  letters  to  certain  individuals.  At  some
stage  in  the  writing  of  such  letters,  she  tells  me  that  her
hand  appears  to  be  controlled,  and  that,  while  she  remains
conscious  to  a  certain  extent  of  what  is  being  written,
she  none  the  less  feels  obliged  while  the  impulse  lasts
to  continue  writing  matter  conveying  no  intelligible
meaning  to  her  conscious  mind.  Two  or  more  hand-
writings will  sometimes  be  involved  in  one  script,  these
differing  in  some  cases  notably  from  the  habitual  hand-
writing of  the  normal  Mrs.  Leonard.  On  one  occasion,
an  initial  signature  appended  having  led  the  recipient  to


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  361

suspect  that  the  script  originated  from  a  particular  source,
I  submitted  the  script  in  question  to  the  inspection  of  a
person  well  acquainted  with  the  hand-writing  of  the
suspected  deceased  author.  The  hand-writing  did  not  tally
with  that  of  the  presumed  signatory.  Nevertheless,  it
was  this  actual  script  which  contained  an  unmistakable
allusion  to  events  quite  outside  Mrs.  Leonard's  normal
knowledge.

Before  passing  on  to  the  subject  of  Mrs.  Leonard's
trance  condition  as  it  is  generally  witnessed  by  myself
and  the  majority  of  sitters,  I  desire  to  point  out  another
problem  which  awaits  solution,  and  in  this  respect  I  wish
incidentally  to  put  forward  a  tentative  suggestion.  If
Mrs.  Leonard  is  in  an  abnormal  state  when  she  produces
script,  and  if  we  add  to  this  state  the  trance  condition  in
which  Feda  takes  the  field,  have  we  perhaps  in  these  two
conditions  two  different  hypnotic  levels,  namely,  a  relatively
light  hypnosis  in  which  the  primary  consciousness  remains
passively  observant,  and  which  is  not  followed  by  any
amnesia,  and  a  deep  somnambulism  followed  by  almost
total  amnesia  ?  In  this  latter  deep  trance  the  medium,
while  displaying  all  the  aspects  of  a  not  unfamiliar  type
of  secondary  personality,  is  physically  to  a  great  extent
anaesthetic  and  analgesic,  but  would  appear  to  be  some-
what hyperaesthetic  of  hearing.  In  this  state  also  she
gives  evidence  of  a  power  of  acquiring  the  knowledge  of
facts  without  the  assistance  of  the  recognised  organs  of
sense.

If  it  be  a  tenable  hypothesis  that  these  two  conditions
represent  two  different  hypnotic  levels,  how  then  are  we
to  classify  another  state  to  which  Mrs.  Leonard  is  also
subject  ?  I  allude  to  that  condition  which  is  familiar
-  to  only  a  few  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  sitters,  and  in  which,
without  any  apparent  intermediate  return  to  normal
consciousness,  Feda  gives  way  to  that  condition  which
purports  to  be  Personal  Control  by  a  deceased  friend  or
relation  of  the  sitter.  This  supposed  phenomenon  forms
a  large  part  of  the  repertoire  of  many  inferior  mediums,
degenerating  very  often  in  their  case  into  a  kaleidoscopic
succession  of  completely  uninteresting  impersonations,  none


362


(Una)  Lady  Trouhridge.


[part


of  Avhich  are  able  to  put  forward  anything  of  interest  as
a  basis  for  their  claim  to  any  particular  identity,  and
many  of  which,  under  the  aegis  of  the  most  exalted  and
renowned  names,  give  forth  platitudinous  prattle  emanating
from  the  hysterical  sub-consciousness  of  the  partially
educated  medium.

In  Mrs.  Leonard's  case  the  state  in  which  this  personal
control  ostensibly  occurs  is  only  witnessed  by  a  very
few  of  her  sitters,  and  seldom  by  any  who  have  not  sat
with  her  regularly  during  some  months.  Not  long  ago
Feda  informed  me  that  not  more  than  half  a  dozen
entities  had  ever  controlled  Mrs.  Leonard,  and  though
several  personal  controls  have  arisen  since  then,  their
number  is  still,  and  I  trust  will  remain,  very  limited.

In  Mrs.  Leonard  this  condition  varies  very  markedly
from  the  Feda  state,  and  displays  features  which  suggest
to  me  that  it  is  possibly  yet  another  hypnotic  level.
In  it  the  motor  faculties  are  largely  in  abeyance.  Where
Feda  can  sit  erect,  sway  or  jerk  her  body,  wave  her
arms,  move  her  legs,  and  has  even  been  known  to  walk
about  the  room,  and  where  Feda's  strident  tones  are
frequently  audible  outside  the  seance  room,  rising  if  Feda
be  so  inclined  to  a  robust  shout,  each  successive  personal
control  in  its  incipient  stages  struggles  amid  silent
intervals  to  achieve  a  barely  audible  whisper.  Movement,
or  indeed  anj/  control  of  the  physical  organism,  is  very
limited,  and  when  a  personal  control  is  manifesting,  the
medium  generally  either  lies  against  the  chair  like  a  log
or  flops  limply  upon  the  sitter's  shoulder.  Even  a  much
practised  personal  control  achieves  but  a  very  limited
command  of  the  organism  as  regards  motion  and  vocal
energy  ;  it  has  apparent  difficulty  in  keeping  the  vertebral
column  erect,  and  in  maintaining  an  ordinary  conver-
sational volume  of  tone.  The  power  of  mental  concen-
tration appears  partially  wanting,  and  immense  effort  is
required  to  produce  evidential  matter  which  would  be
freely  given  by  Feda.

On  the  other  hand,  a  totally  different  faculty  is
demonstrated,  sometimes  to  a  startling  degree  ;  that  of
the  reproduction  with  varying  success  of  intonations,  vocal


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  363

mannerisms  and  general  characteristics  pertaining  to
deceased  persons  whom  the  medium  had  never  known.
It  is  difficult  to  convey  an  accurate  impression  of
these  personal  controls  to  anyone  who  has  never  wit-
nessed the  production,  through  the  agency  of  a  really
fine  medium,  of  phenomena  of  this  description.  Any
assertion  regarding  these  impersonations  is  naturally
open  to  the  suspicion  that  the  imagination  and  ex-
pectation of  a  witness  may  play  a  very  considerable
part  in  the  impression  received.  There  is  present  in
nearly  all  such  cases  the  auto-suggestion  that  one  par-
ticular familiar  character  is  to  be  personated,  and  the
sitter's  mind  is  consciously  and  unconsciously  attuned
to  perceive  even  accidental  or  imaginary  resemblances.
On  the  other  hand,  where  the  purporting  personal
control  fails  in  the  attempted  impersonation,  there  is
always  to  hand  the  excuse  that  the  medium's  organism
is  bound  to  colour  and  affect  to  some  extent  any-
thing that  is  received  through  that  organism.  Neverthe-
less, in  my  own  experience  these  objections  have  been
countered  to  a  great  extent  by  the  fact  that  the  purport-
ing personal  control  with  which  I  am  most  familiar,  that
referred  to  as  the  A.  V.  B.  Control  in  the  paper  on  Leonard
phenomena  by  Miss  Radclyiie-Hall  and  myself,  published
in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  has  in  the  majority  of  cases
been  witnessed  by  both  myself  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall,
who  generally  make  a  habit  of  accompanying  each  other
to  Leonard  sittings.  Under  these  circumstances  it  has
very  often  happened  that  the  intonation  of  some  particular
sentence,  or  the  reproduction  of  some  familiar  mannerism
by  the  A.  V.  B.  Control,  has  struck  us  simultaneously,  and
on  occasions  when  I  have  been  the  recorder  during  the
A.  V.  B.  Control,  subsec|uent  questioning  of  Miss  Radclyffe-
Hall,  before  her  inspection  of  the  record,  has  revealed
that  the  points  of  resemblance  which  had  impressed  her
were  precisely  those  indicated  as  remarkable  in  the  record.

Another  interesting  aspect  of  these  personal  controls,
which  is  not  demonstrated  in  the  A.  V.  B.  Control  but
which  I  have  witnessed  on  various  occasions,  is  the  repro-
duction  with considerable success of a male timbre  of


364


(Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


voice  when  the  entity  purporting  to  control  the  medium
is  a  man.  In  my  opinion  ventriloquism,  as  frequently
witnessed  by  me  in  public  exhibitions  by  experts,  does
not  account  for  this  aspect  of  the  Leonard  phenomena.
Mr.  Arthur  Prince,  the  leading  professional  ventriloquist
of  our  day,  whose  public  performance  seldom  lasts  more
than  twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour,  during  part  of
which  time  he  is  speaking  in  his  natural  voice,  exhibits,
as  his  performance  proceeds,  every  sign  of  the  exhaustion
consequent  upon  the  execution  of  a  difficult  feat.  Despite
the  fact  that  he  must  have  carefully  trained  himself  to
conceal  all  evidences  of  strain,  those  evidences  are  visible  ;
though  he  is  carefully  made  up,  and  quite  obviously  at
pains  to  conceal  the  effort  entailed  by  his  performance,
I  have  never  seen  him  achieve  his  turn  without  the
perspiration  pouring  down  his  face,  necessitating  the  use
of  his  handkerchief,  and  his  final  bow  is  that  of  a  man
who  has  worked  hard  to  earn  the  applause  of  his  public.
I  have  in  my  possession  my  own  record  of  a  Personal
Control  at  which  I  was  present  some  months  ago  in  Mrs.
Leonard's  house  at  Datchet.  Following  upon  a  Feda
Control  of  some  length,  an  elderly  Scotch  gentleman
purported  to  control  the  medium  for  forty  minutes.  The
Control  was,  as  far  as  my  experience  goes,  an  unusually
strong  one.  It  spoke  throughout  most  of  its  duration  in
robust  and  fully  audible  tones  of  a  surprisingly  masculine
quality,  interriapted  at  intervals  by  paroxysms  of  coughing
and  wheezing  characteristic  of  the  bronchial  asthma  which
had  afflicted  the  gentleman  purporting  to  control  during
his  lifetime.  The  fits  of  coughing  were  very  violent,  con-
veying to  me  the  impression  of  unavailing  efforts  to
break  up  accumulations  of  phlegm  obstructing  the  bronchial
passages.  The  entire  effect  was  unquestionably  that  of
a  masculine  sufferer,  and  the  timbre  of  the  speaking
voice  was  not  only  masculine  in  quality,  but  gave  every
appearance  of  acquiring  this  quality  in  a  normal  and
effortless  manner  from  the  larynx.  Except  for  the  wheez-
ing, I  did  not  receive  any  impression  of  the  voice  being
strained  or  forced.  From  this  control,  lasting,  as  I  have
stated,  forty minutes, Mrs. Leonard awoke to  normal


Lxxxiv.] 'Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  365

consciousness  in  less  than  one  minute.  Her  face  showed
no  signs  of  perspiration  or  exhaustion,  she  entered  immedi-
ately into  conversation  with  myself  without  a  trace  of
hoarseness,  and  appeared  as  devoid  of  all  cough  or  chest
obstruction  as  she  had  been  before  the  sitting  and
during  the  Feda  Control.

I  will  now  briefly  enumerate  a  few  other  features
wherein  these  Personal  Controls  differ  markedly  from  the
Feda  Control.  Feda's  appearance  is  invariably  heralded
by  a  few  moments  of  mere  quiescence  upon  the  part  of
the  medium,  who  sits  silently  with  closed  eyes  until  the
moment  when  Feda  begins  to  whisper,  then  to  speak
audibly,  and  the  sitting  commences.  The  interval  which
divides  the  departure  of  Feda  from  the  appearance  of  a
personal  control  invariably,  in  my  experience,  shows  in  a
more  or  less  marked  degree  one  quite  distinct  feature.
Feda  having  announced  her  departure,  a  moment's  absolute
quiescence  on  the  part  of  the  medium  is  followed  by  a
long  and  steady  exhalation  of  breath,  sometimes  prolonged
to  a  surprising  extent.  I  have  myself  compared  the  effect
produced  to  that  which  would  be  obtained  by  steady
pressure  upon  a  partially  unscrewed  air-cushion,  and  it  is
sometimes  difficult  to  understand  how  any  normal  lungs
can  produce  an  exhalation  of  such  duration.  Mrs.  Salter
is  familiar  with  this  phenomenon,  which  she  has  witnessed
with  interest  on  several  occasions.  I  have  not  so  far
attempted  to  time  this  exhalation  of  breath  with  a  stop-
watch, but  it  might  be  interesting  to  do  so.

Both  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  myself  are  of  the  impres-
sion that,  when  under  what  purports  to  be  personal  control,
Mrs.  Leonard's  body  gradually  acquires  a  dead  weight  of
total  unconsciousness  which  is  absent  in  the  Feda  Control,
but,  of  course,  in  this  respect  full  allowance  must  be
made  for  the  fact  that  in  the  case  of  the  A.  V.  B.  Control
the  sitter  is  almost  invariably  partially  supporting  the
limp  form  of  Mrs.  Leonard.  The  sitter  therefore  becomes
tired  as  the  control  proceeds,  and  would  probably  derive
a  fictitious  impression  of  the  body  gradually  increasing
in  weight.  Another  more  certainly  distinctive  feature  of
at  least  one  personal  control,  namely,  the  A.  V.  B.  Control,


366


{Una)  Lady  Trouhridge.


[part


is  a  pronounced  hyperaesthesia  of  touch  affecting  the
fingers,  and  complained  of  as  being  actually  distressful.
Feda,  on  the  other  hand,  is,  as  has  been  said,  to  some
extent  anaesthetic  and  analgesic.

But  the  peculiarity  of  the  personal  controls  which  to
my  mind  chiefly  suggests  their  involving  a  lower  hypnotic
level  than  either  the  semi-conscious  automatic  state  of
Mrs.  Leonard  or  the  Feda  state,  is  the  apparent  impos-
sibility of  maintaining  them  for  more  than  a  short  time,
and  their  tendency  to  merge,  in  spite  of  much  apparent
effort  and  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  complex  involved,
either  into  the  Feda  state,  or  more  usually  into  Mrs.
Leonard's  normally  conscious  condition.

In  previously  mentioning  a  personal  control  lasting
forty  minutes,  I  alluded  to  one  of  the  longest  I  have  ever
witnessed,  and  the  purporting  control  in  question  had
been  developed  during  many  months  of  frequent  practice.
The  A.  V.  B.  Control,  also  a  very  fully  developed  one
through  over  two  years  of  frequent  sittings,  has  upon
one  occasion  achieved  a  record  of  sixty  minutes,  but  this
is  exceptional.  Half  an  hour  is  an  average  duration,
and  incipient  personal  controls  seldom  manifest  for  more
than  a  few  minutes,  whereas  Feda  will,  if  encouraged  or
permitted,  chatter  on  occasion  for  three  hours  on  end,
and  quite  recently  has  so  extended  her  periods  of  occupa-
tion that  steps  have  had  to  be  taken  to  curtail  a  length
of  trance  considered  prejudicial  to  Mrs.  Leonard's  health.
The  personal  controls,  on  the  other  hand,  while  conveying
every  appearance  of  desiring  to  remain  on  the  scene,
are  often  cut  off  actually  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,,
the  sitter  having  to  remain  during  the  wane  of  the
control,  alert  to  catch  Mrs.  Leonard's  body  as  the  final
spark  of  animation  departs  from  it,  and  prop  her  safely
into  her  chair.  LTsually  she  returns  within  about  one
minute  to  normal  consciousness,  and  this  after  a  personal
control  of  any  duration  is  invariably  the  case,  but
occasionally  an  incipient  personal  control  extending  over
a  few  minutes  only  will  be  replaced  by  Feda  prior  to  the
medium's  waking.  It  may  be  objected  that  the  fact  of
the personal controls invariably following upon a  Feda


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  367

control  would  in  itself  be  sufficient  to  account  for  the
tendency  shown  by  these  latter  to  merge  back  into  the
primary  consciousness.  With  a  view  to  ascertaining
whether  or  not  this  was  the  case,  and  whether  a  personal
control  if  allowed  to  supervene  during  the  early  part  of
the  sitting  would  not  contrive  to  hold  the  field  during
as  long  a  time  as  that  generally  achieved  by  Feda,  Miss
Radclyffe-Hall  and  myself  upon  several  occasions  persuaded
Feda  to  allow  the  A.  V.  B.  Control  to  supplant  her  soon
after  the  commencement  of  the  sitting.  The  duration  of
the  A.  V.  B.  Control  under  these  circumstances  was  neither
more  nor  less  than  is  customary  on  occasions  when  Feda
is  permitted  to  remain  on  the  scene  for  an  hour  or  longer.
The  A.  V.  B.  Control,  having  set  in  with  high  hopes  of
enjoying  an  extended  period  of  occupation,  began  to  wane
as  is  usual  after  a  certain  time,  and  the  only  result  of
the  experiment  was  a  considerable  curtailment  of  the
sittings  at  which  this  experiment  was  tried.

I  will  now  leave  the  subject  of  the  personal  controls
and  restrict  myself  to  that  of  the  state  most  frequently
involved  in  the  production  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  phenomena  :
that  in  which  Feda  is  the  agent  conveying  information.
Mtmbers  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  are  not
unfamiliar  with  this  aspect  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  phenomena.
Some  of  them  have  actually  tested  Mrs.  Leonard's  powers
for  themselves,  and  others  know  of  them  through  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  book  Ray^nond  and  through  the  various
papers  which  have  been  read  at  the  meetings  of  this
Society.  I  will  instance  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Paper  upon
the  incidents  of  "  Faunus  "  and  the  "  Group  photograph,"
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick's  recent  Paper  upon  the  book  tests,
Mrs.  Salter's  Paper  upon  the  results  obtained  during
three  months'  investigation  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  phenomena
l)y  our  Society,  and  the  two  Papers  upon  a  series  of
Leonard  sittings  held  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  myself,
which  were  read  before  the  Society  by  Miss  Radclyffe-
Hall.  From  these  Papers  even  those  members  who  have
never  sat  with  Mrs.  Leonard  will  have  attained  a  general
idea  of  what  happens  during  a  Feda  Control.  Bearing
in  mind  that  the  entire  object  of  the  sitting  is  invariably


368


{Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


the  conveying  of  evidence  for  personal  survival  of  bodily
death  ,1  we  note  that  this  aim  is  approached  by  many
methods.  At  one  time  Feda  will  devote  herself  to  personal
descriptions  of  the  appearance  of  the  departed,  at  another  to
peculiarities  of  temperament  or  character  which  they  are
asserted  to  have  possessed.  Incidents  in  their  past  lives,
places  visited  by  them  either  in  company  with  the  sitter,
alone,  or  otherwise  accompanied,  articles  owned  by  them,
associations  grave  or  humorous  shared  with  the  sitter  or
with  other  relations  or  friends,  names  of  communicators,
names  of  their  relations  or  friends  living  or  deceased,
nicknames  used  in  bygone  years,  domestic  pets  formerly
in  their  possession  and  names  or  characteristics  pertaining
to  these,  anything,  weighty  or  trivial,  tragic  or  humorous,
that  the  sitter  might  be  expected  to  recognise  or  to  be
able  subsequently  to  verify,  is  considered  by  Feda  as
matter  worth  retailing.  Whether  it  be  the  memory  of  a
birthmark,  or  of  a  scar  acquired  by  accident,  or  some
detail  of  the  final  illness,  provided  it  offers  features
sufficiently  distinctive  to  render  chance  coincidence  unlikely,
all  is  fish  that  comes  to  Feda's  net,  and  with  this  much
of  her  point  of  view  I  emphatically  agree.

Another  not  infrequent  aspect  of  the  phenomena  is  the
attempt,  sometimes  in  my  experience  surprisingly  successful,
to  convey  a  purporting  communicator's  knowledge  of  the
actions  and  mental  processes  of  persons  far  distant  at  the
time  of  the  sitting,  but  in  some  way  connected  either  by
relationship  or  intellectual  or  material  interest  with  either
the  communicator  or  the  sitter.  Together  with  statements
regarding  the  actions  and  mental  processes  of  a  certain
individual  will  sometimes  be  given  a  prognosis  of  certain
events  likely  to  result  from  them.  In  all  these  very
dissimilar  lines  of  effort  there  is  a  varying  degree  of
success  and  failure,  which  can  be  studied  to  a  certain
extent  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  in  the  various
papers  to  which  I  have  alluded  ;  special  consideration
should be given to what is perhaps up to now  the

^  Mrs.  Leonard  sits  for  this  object  and  this  object  only,  and  never
consents  to  sit  with  a  view  to  supplying  any  information  materially
beneficial  to  the  sitter.


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  369

most  ambitious  type  of  phenomena  produced  by  the
agency  of  the  Feda  control,  namely,  the  Book  Tests
dealt  with  in  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick's  Paper.  It  is  not
here  within  my  scope  to  attempt  any  estimate  as  to  the
extent  to  which  the  records  of  the  Feda  phenomena,
published  and  unpublished,  make  good  their  claim  of
eliminating  normal  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  medium,
and  in  some  instances  knowledge  on  the  part  of
any  person  present,  or  on  the  part  of  any  person  who
could  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  in  close  telepathic
rapport  with  any  person  present  at  the  sitting.  It  is,
however,  admissible  to  point  out  that  the  possibility  of
such  comprehensive  telepathic  rapport  has  never  been
satisfactorily  proved  by  any  experiment,  and  is  so  far
quite  as  little  established  as  any  other  hypothesis  that
we  may  care  to  consider.

I  am  for  the  purpose  of  this  Paper  only  interested  in
the  possibility  of  obtaining  a  clue,  not  as  to  the  source
whence  the  various  impressions  reach  Feda,  but  as  to
the  manner  in  which  they  are  impressed  upon  her  con-
sciousness. And  in  our  enquiry  we  must  always  bear
in  mind  that  throughout  the  sittings  Feda  employs  a
vocabulary  of  very  limited  extent  wherein  erudite
psychological  terms  have  no  place.  Beyond  the
occasional  emergence  of  such  non-committal  spiritualistic
terms  as  "I  sense  "  or  "I  get  an  impression  of,"  Feda
is  content  to  tell  the  sitter  that  she  "  sees,"  "  hears,"
"feels,"  or  "smells,"  as  the  case  may  be,  though  the
medium's  eyes  are  invariably  closed  and  neither  the
sights,  sounds,  sensations  nor  smells  described  are  perceptible
to  the  sitter.

Now  there  are  certain  aspects  of  the  Feda  phenomena
which  leave  me  very  doubtful  as  to  whether  these  simple
sensory  terms  convey  any  accurate  analogy  with  the
processes  really  involved.  In  any  case,  of  course,  the
sensory  impressions  could  only  be  hallucinatory,  but  even
with  this  reservation  there  are  many  instances  in  connec-
- tion  with  which  Feda's  terminology  leaves  me  dissatisfied.

Our  late  President,  Doctor  L.  P.  Jacks,  has  recently
in  our  Jourrial  opened  an  interesting  discussion  regarding

2  B


370


(Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


the  origin  of  the  personal  descriptions  of  the  appear-
ance of  the  departed  as  given  by  mediums  when  in
trance  and  particularly  by  Feda.  The  point  which
exercised  his  mind  was  whether  the  descriptions  given
approximated  to  the  deceased  person's  impression  or
memory  of  his  own  appearance  before  bodily  death,  to
his  actual  appearance  after  bodily  death,  or  to  the
sitter's  memory  of  the  personal  appearance  of  the
deceased.  This  question  remains  of  great  interest,  and
one  cannot  but  be  glad  that  attention  has  been  drawn
to  this  aspect  of  the  phenomena,  and  that  in  this  way
members  of  this  Society  have  been  encouraged  to  con-
tribute to  the  Journal  any  suggestions  or  hypotheses  that
may  occur  to  them.  But  there  is  another  question  that
has  often  arisen  in  my  mind  while  listening  to  these
detailed  personal  descriptions,  and  indeed  to  other  detailed
descriptions  as  given  by  Feda.  If  we  put  aside,  as  I
have  tried  to  do  throughout  this  paper,  the  question  of
their  source  or  origin,  in  what  form  do  they  reach  or  are
they  presented  to  Feda  ?

This  problem  is  one  that  equally  requires  consideration
whether  Feda  be  taken  to  be  describing  a  bodily  or  a
spiritual  actuality,  the  sitter's  memory  of  a  person  or
place,  or  someone  else's  memory  of  the  same.

In  my  experience  Feda  invariably  prefaces  her  descrip-
tions with  the  statement,  "  Feda  sees  "  such  an  one  or
such  a  thing,  or  she  may  say,  "  They  are  building  them-
selves up  for  Feda,"  or  words  to  that  effect,  and  she
then  proceeds  to  describe  what  she  "  sees."  Thus  far
the  thing  is  simple,  but  it  becomes  sensibly  less  so  when
after  many  months  of  "  seeing  "  A.  V.  B.  regularly  once  a
week  and  sometimes  oftener,  she  asks  one  day  with
perfect  nonchalance  whether  A.  V.  B.  ever  did  her  hair  in
the  one  and  only  manner  ever  adopted  by  A.  V.  B.,  or
when  Feda,  announcing  that  A.  V.  B.  is  showing  her  a
picture,  goes  on  to  describe  to  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  with
accuracy  and  in  great  detail  a  portrait  of  Miss  Radclyjffe-
Hall  herself  which  is  now  in  my  possession.  Feda — until
subsequently  questioned  by  me,  at  the  termination  of  the
description of the picture — sees this picture. She  tells.


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  371

us  of  its  colouring,  of  the  pose  of  the  figure  and  hands,
that  the  expression  is  serious,  even,  she  avers,  what  she
terms  "  soosillious."  She  further  tells  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall
that  the  subject  of  the  portrait  is  a  pale,  interesting-
looking  woman,  though  young  in  years,  and  that  the
picture  is  a  striking  one  that  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  would
look  at  more  than  once,  and  that  A.  V.  B.  likes  the  said
picture,  but  Feda,  who  sees  this  picture  and  is  able  to
describe  it  at  such  length,  never  apparently  for  a  moment
grasps  the  fact  that  the  picture  being  described  by  her
is  a  portrait,  and  a  striking  resemblance  at  that,  of  the
very  familiar  sitter  to  whom  she  is  speaking.  Miss
Radclyffe-Hall,  I  am  compelled  to  state,  emphatically
denies  having  telepathically  assisted  Feda  in  her  descrip-
tion of  the  portrait  !

It  is  such  incidents  as  I  have  described  above  that
have  led  me  to  suspect  that  in  many  instances  where
Feda  describes  persons  and  objects,  she  uses  the  term
"  seeing "  merely  as  a  habit  of  speech,  and  that  the
process  involved  may  more  likely  be  a  series  of  impressions
received  by  her  telepathically  one  at  a  time,  or  collected
by  her  telepathically  one  by  one  from  some  mind  incarnate
or  discarnate  as  the  case  may  be.^  This  hypothesis
would  also  account  for  the  manner  in  which  the  descrip-
tions are  often  dealt  out,  bit  by  bit,  conveying  to  the
recipient  or  listener  the  impression  of  someone  finding
isolated  pieces  all  connected  with  one  jig-saw  puzzle  and
dealing  them  out  one  by  one  with  a  view  to  their  being
fitted  together  by  the  recipient  into  an  intelligible  whole.

It  is  surely  incredible  that  Feda  or  anyone  else  should
see  a  person  minus  their  most  striking  peculiarity  of
features  or  colouring,  and  yet  this  must  frequently  be
presumed  to  be  the  case  if  Feda's  seeing  is  to  be  accepted
at  face  value.  I  have  myself  known  her  purport  to  see
clearly  a  communicator  whose  appearance  she  minutely
described,  giving  a  perfectly  accurate  account  of  his
features, complexion, expression, including the  fact  that

1  A  further  instance  which  appears  to  support  this  hypothesis  will  be
found  in  Mrs.  Salter's  "  Further  Report  on  the  Phenomena  of  Mrs.
Leonaid,"  Proc.  S.P.R.,  vol.  xxxii.,  p.  87  ff.


372


(Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


I  [part


he  was  remarkably  handsome  and  struck  her  as  having
what  she  most  evidentially  described  as  "a  clear  look,"
but  she  remained  to  all  appearance  in  ignorance  that  the
most  distinguishing  features  of  his  appearance  were  pre-
maturely snow-white  hair  of  remarkable  abundance,  and
eyes  of  a  peculiarh^  vivid  blue.

Feda's  alleged  hearing  is  open  to  the  same  criticism
and  question.  Mrs.  Leonard's  hearing  as  her  sight,  when
in  the  normal  state,  is  good  to  an  average  degree.  She
claims  that  just  before  a  sitting  when,  as  she  would  put
it,  she  "  feels  Feda  about,"  she  acquires  a  marked  hyper-
aesthesia  of  hearing,  and  this  claim  is  corroborated  by
her  husband,  but  has  not  otherwise  been  tested.  It
may,  however,  be  remarked  that  Mrs.  Leonard  told  me
of  this  hyperaesthesia  of  hearing  when  asking  me  to  warn
prospective  sitters,  whom  I  accompanied  to  her  house  as
recorder,  against  mentioning  to  me  any  evidential  matter
after  entering  the  house.  Mrs.  Leonard  said  she  feared
that  she  might  inadvertently  overhear  them,  even
though  there  might  be  several  walls  between  her  and  the
speaker.

To  return,  however,  to  the  subject  of  Feda's  hearing.
This  appears,  as  regards  mundane  matters,  to  be  rather
specially  acute.  She  will  often  notice  and  draw  a  sitter's
attention  to  such  sounds  as  a  distant  aeroplane  or  church
bell  which,  though  audible  when  attention  is  drawn  to
them  and  they  are  listened  for  in  silence,  would  not
reach  the  consciousness  of  the  sitter  or  recorder  through
the  more  insistent  sound  of  Feda's  conversation.  When,
however,  Feda  claims  to  "  hear  "  names  or  words  spoken
by  the  purporting  communicators,  her  hearing  appears  to
be  much  less  reliable,  if  indeed  "  hearing "  be  not  yet
again  her  conventional  word  for  some  inexpressible  means  of
perception.  She  will  claim  that  a  communicator  is  telling
her  a  certain  name,  she  will  lean  forward  in  her  chair
with  her  head  inclined  as  though  concentrated  upon
listening  to  some  dimly  apprehended  sound,  she  will
whisper  to  herself  attempted  equivalents,  and  she  will
often  abandon  of  her  own  accord  the  attempt  to  hear,
and  will  resort  to  drawing  one  by  one,  with  her  finger  in


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  373

the  air,  or  perhaps  upon  the  sitter's  sleeve,  letters  that
she  avers  are  being  "  written  "  or  "  built  up  "  by  the
communicator  for  her  to  see.  Sometimes  she  will  not
await  the  completion  of  a  word  by  this  process,  but
having  spelt  up  one  syllable  or  two  will  suddenly  remark,
"  Oh,  it's  such  and  such  a  name."  Sometimes,  on  the
other  hand,  she  will  write  up  the  entire  word  letter  by
letter,  before  she  makes  any  attempt  to  utter  it.  But
even  then,  it  is  not  always  the  word  as  it  would  be
phonetically  pronounced  from  the  written  letters  that  she
utters.  Having  written  up  a  word  accurately  she  will
on  occasion  pause,  as  though  listening,  and  pronounce  the
word,  which  in  some  cases  may  be  a  foreign  one  or  some
nickname  unfamiliar  to  her,  with  a  correct  though  perhaps
unusual  emphasis  on  a  given  syllable.

On  one  occasion  I  remember  a  somewhat  similar
occurrence  when,  having  written  up  the  letters  R.U.N.E.,
as  the  pet  name  of  a  dog,  she  remarked  that  the  com-
municator, however,  was  not  saying  Rune,  but  Runie,
and  both  variants  of  the  name  were  accurate.  Yet  Feda
appeared  unable  to  hear  either  until  she  had  gone  through
the  process  of  spelling  up  the  separate  letters  of  the
former  variant.

Without  going  further  into  the  question  of  the  examples
that  have  struck  me,  I  will  merely  say  that  I  am  as
doubtful  of  the  face  value  of  what  Feda  terms  "  hearing  "
as  I  am  of  that  of  her  alleged  "  seeing."

There  is  another  aspect  of  the  phenomena  which  in
my  opinion  points  to  a  succession  of  mental  impressions
telepathically  conveyed  in  the  form  of  isolated  facts  from
some  source  to  the  medium's  mind.  Be  they  alphabetical
letters,  a  name  or  word,  or  the  description  of  a  scene
or  of  a  mental  state,  I  have  often  received  a  strong
impression  that  as  a  description  proceeded  Feda  knew  as
little  as  I  did  what  would  be  the  next  brick  in  the
edifice.  She  will  often  hazard  an  unlikely  but  correct
detail  with  every  appearance  of  diffidence,  in  an  apologetic
manner  seeming  to  discount  expected  ridicule  or  expostu-
lation from  the  sitter.  She  will  make  an  accurate  state-
ment regarding  some  unlikely  detail  and  go  on  to  comment


374


{Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


on  the  possibility  of  her  not  having  correctly  apprehended
this  particular  point.  Sometimes,  it  is  true,  her
descriptions  are  such  as  might  be  given  by  a  person
contemplating  an  individual,  a  scene,  or  a  picture,  and
recounting  as  they  came  to  her  notice  the  various  details
observed,  but  often  the  impression  conveyed  suggests  an
entirely  different  process.

This  is  especially  the  case  when,  as  occasionally  happens,
we  meet  with  examples  of  compound  descriptions.  That
is  to  say,  when  Feda  gives  us  a  personal  description  of
one  individual  combining  the  characteristics  of  two  or
more  persons  known  to  the  sitter,  who  have  borne  the
same  surname  or  who  have  some  point  of  similarity  in
appearance  or  circumstances,  or  when  a  communicator  is
made  to  describe  as  one  event  matters  occurring  upon
two  or  more  occasions  of  a  rather  similar  nature.

If  we  accept  as  possible  that  the  facts  retailed  to  us
by  Feda  are  either  projected  on  to  her  brain,  or  are
collected  hj  her  from  some  other  mind  incarnate  or
discarnate,  then  it  would  seem  possible  that  the  clarity
of  the  impressions  largely  depends  upon  the  conscious  or
unconscious  faculty  of  concentration  in  the  mind  tapped
or  conveying  the  facts.

For  convenience'  sake  we  will  at  this  point  postulate  an
intentional  communicator,  either  living  or  dead.  Although
the  evidence  so  far  obtained  for  telepathy  between  the
living  leaves  it  an  open  question  whether  or  no  concen-
tration by  the  agent  upon  the  idea  to  be  conveyed
militates  for  or  against  success — and  indeed  the  experi-
ments recorded  in  Mr.  Hubert  Wales'  recent  Paper  would
appear  to  show  that  in  his  case  the  impressions  which
reached  Miss  Samuels  were  in  no  case  those  which  he  had
consciously  tried  to  convey — nevertheless,  it  must  not  be
overlooked  that  Feda  definitely  claims  that  the  purporting
communicators  not  only  throughout  the  sittings  exert
every  faculty  to  impress  her  with  those  particular  incidents
or  facts  which  they  desire  to  convey,  but  she  constantly
states  that  in  many  cases  they  utilise  the  intervals  between
sittings  for  the  preparation  of  what  they  shall  say  when
the  sitter  arrives.


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  O'perandi  '  in  Ilediumistic  Trance.  375

While  admitting  the  possibility  that  the  process  is
quite  other,  and  that  Feda  merely  selects  from  some
source  the  facts  which,  independent  of  the  communicator's
consciousness,  happen  to  be  the  most  accessible  to  her
percipience,  we  must  nevertheless  admit  that  her  own
description  of  the  method  employed  may  be  the  more
correct ;  and  indeed  I  think  the  phenomena  as  I  have
observed  them  tend  to  support  her  statements.  Even
remarkably  successful  telepathic  experiments,  such  as  those
recorded  by  Mr.  Wales,  are  of  a  fragmentary,  scrappy
nature  such  as  might  credibly  be  the  result  of  a  per-
cipient fishing  in  the  agent's  unconscious  mind  for  any
available  small  fry  of  fact  that  may  take  the  bait.  I
do  not  think  experimental  telepathy  has  ever  obtained
the  transfer  of  a  lengthy  consecutive  description  of  some
incident  or  event  entailing  divers  names,  details  and
memories,  such  as  are  not  infrequently  given  by  Feda.

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  Feda,  having  tapped
in  some  unconscious  mind  a  bare  fact  concerning  some
memory  or  event,  could  continue  for  perhaps  nearly  an
hour  weeding  the  unconsciousness  of  the  said  mind  and
selecting  for  repetition  only  such  mental  material  as
would  bear  upon  the  theme  selected.  I  confess  that  I
find  it  easier,  at  any  rate  in  the  case  of  the  lengthy  and
detailed  descriptions  pertaining  to  one  topic,  to  conceive
of  them  as  emanating  intentionally  and  consciously  from
some  agent  having  to  some  extent  the  power  to  choose
what  impressions  shall  or  shall  not  reach  Feda.

Upon  this  hypothesis  it  would  appear  that,  so  long  as
the  communicator  can  keep  some  given  portion  of  his
mind  exclusively  upon  the  one  fact  or  event  which  he
desires  to  give  or  describe  as  evidence,  Feda's  descriptions
will  be  relatively  clear  and  accurate.  Should,  however,
the  communicator's  mind  wander  ever  so  little,  his  irrele-
vant thought  will  be  as  likely  to  reach  Feda  as  any  thought
relevant  to  the  subject  in  hand,  and  when  it  does  so  will
appear  in  some  form  in  her  narrative.  Feda  apparently
cannot  always  disentangle  relevant  from  irrevalent  impres-
sions, nor  does  it  always  appear  as  though  the  hypo-
thetical communicator were aware of the exact  extent


376


{Una)  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


to  which  his  unintentional  thoughts  may  be  conveyed  to
her.

Supposing,  for  instance,  I,  being  deceased,  wished  to
describe  through  Feda  my  country  residence  and  its
garden  with  ornamental  pond,  and  that  I  should  allow
the  thought  to  cross  my  mind  that  upon  some  particular
occasion  friends  came  down  to  view  the  garden  who  had
admired  the  pond  and  particularly  enjoyed  a  good  supper
of  lobster  salad,  I  might  easily  appear  in  Feda's  utterances
as  a  demented  spirit  who  asserted  that  I  had  owned  an
ornamental  pond  in  which  I  kept  lobsters  and  grew
salad  !  I  have  known  an  improbability  of  this  kind
followed  by  indications  denoting  excitement  on  the  part
of  the  communicator.  I  have  known  this  excitement
either  bewildering  Feda,  or  being  interpreted  by  her  as
denoting  the  spirit's  eagerness  to  emphasize  that  the
unlikely  statement  is  correct,  and  I  have  been  unable  to
resist  picturing  myself  as  an  unfortunate  communicator  fully
able  to  gauge  the  extent  to  which  my  communication  had
gone  wrong,  and  making  matters  worse  by  conveying  tele-
pathically  an  unintelligible  chaos  of  excitement  and  dismay..

Sometimes  the  compound  description  is  not  difficult
to  unravel,  and  an  example  of  this  kind  occurred  during
one  of  the  sittings  taken  by  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  which  I
recorded.  The  purporting  communicator  known  as  A.  V.  B.
apparently  wished  to  describe  one  or  two  experiences  of
a  religious  nature  which  she  had  undergone  during  her
lifetime,  and  during  her  friendship  with  Miss  Radclyffe-
Hall.  It  remains  doubtful  to  this  day  whether  the  event
which  it  was  intended  to  describe  was  a  private  audience
with  the  Pope  at  the  Vatican  which  A.  V.  B.  had  some
years  before  her  death,  or  a  Retreat  made  by  her  at  a
convent  shortly  before  she  died.  Features  recognisable  as
belonging  to  both  these  occurrences  appeared  in  the
descriptions  given  by  Feda,  although  all  the  points  given
were  said  to  be  in  connection  with  one  event.  Granted
the  possibility  that  all  these  details  were  being  obtained
from  the  mind  of  the  supposed  communicator,  I  can
hardly  conceive  her  having  been  able  to  think  of  one
of  these  events  without  also,  however  involuntarily,  being;


Lxxxiv.] '  Modus  Operandi  '  in  Mediumistic  Trance.  317

reminded  of  the  other.  A.  V.  B.  was  not  a  woman
given  to  constant  religious  practices.  She  was  a  good
CathoKc,  but  not  excitable  about  her  religion,  and  the
two  events  of  which  we  have  spoken  were  in  many-
years  the  only  two  striking  events  of  her  life  closely-
associated  with  the  ceremonial  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church.  There  were  many  points  of  similarity  between
the  two  events,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  wearing  of  a
special  black  dress  and  veil,  benedictions  received,  a
certain  amount  of  mental  and  spiritual  preparation  in-
volved, which  might  easily,  had  the  communicator  lived
to  be  very  old,  have  become  confused  in  her  own  mind
whilst  alive  ;  it  would  not,  therefore,  be  surprising  if  any
attempt  to  convey  one  or  other  event  by  a  telepathic
process,  or  by  any  indirect  process,  should  result  in
confusion  of  the  two  events.

Occasionally,  if  the  topic  touched  upon  should  be  one
in  which  Mrs.  Leonard  is  herself  interested,  figments  of
her  own  opinions  and  associations  will  also  intrude,
rendering  the  compound  yet  more  complex.

I  remarked  an  instance  of  this  type  of  triple  compound
during  a  sitting  at  which  I  recorded  for  our  former
President,  Doctor  L.  P.  Jacks.  He  has  already  in  a
public  utterance  alluded,  though  in  a  somewhat  disguised
manner,  to  this  occurrence,  bvit  he  neglected  to  mention
the  following  circumstance.  The  compound  entity  pro-
duced by  Feda  of  an  old  and  a  j^oung  man,  who  both
bore  the  same  surname,  but  although  related  to  each  other
differed  widely  in  their  circumstances,  and  at  a  later
sitting  were  disentangled  correctly  as  two  separate  persons,
contained  at  the  earlier  sitting  elements  of  yet  another
bearer  of  the  same  surname.  The  origin  of  this  last
intrusion  was  in  my  opinion  Mrs.  Leonard's  not  entirely
dormant  association  of  the  surname  in  question  with  a
celebrated  young  author  killed  in  the  War,  whose  Christian
name,  quite  dissimilar  from  that  of  either  of  the  two
other  entities  involved  in  the  compound,  was  murmured
doubtfuUj^  several  times  by  Feda.

There  are  many  other  instances  which  I  could  quote
as examples of "  Things which do happen  " in  Mrs..


378


{Una)  Lady  Troubridge. [part  Lxxxiv.]


Leonard's  trance,  and  indeed  in  the  trance  of  any  genuine
medium,  whether  producing  mental  or  physical  phenomena,
and  which  call  for  an  explanation  not  as  yet  forthcoming,
but  I  think  the  examples  which  I  have  already  given
suffice  for  my  purpose.

That  purpose  is  to  urge  upon  all  and  any  who  may
be  actual  or  potential  workers  in  the  field  of  Psychical
Research  my  conviction  that  there  is  a  wide  field  for  common
work  between  those  who  regard  the  observed  phenomena
as  pointing  to  survival  of  bodily  death,  those  in  whose
opinion  these  phenomena  tend  to  disprove  it,  and  those
who  genuinely  keep  an  open  mind.  Whatever  may  be
the  ultimate  possibilities  of  establishing  a  scientific  solution
of  this  all-important  problem,  there  is  in  the  meantime
no  lack  of  work  that  should  be  acceptable  to  any  unpre-
judiced person  interested  in  the  subject,  none  being  able
to  foresee  whither  the  study  of  the  modus  operandi  involved
will  lead.


REVIEW


Psychology  and  Psychotherapy.  By  William  Brown,  M.A.,
M.D.  (Oxon),  D.Sc.  (Lond.).  London  :  Ed-\vard  Arnold,
1921. Pp.  xi,  196.

Collected  Papers  on  the  Psychology  of  Phantasy.  By  Dr.
Constance  E.  Long.  London  :  Bailliere,  Tindall  and
Cox,  1920. Pp.  xii,  216.

The  New  Psychology  and  its  Relation  to  Life.  By  A.  G.
Tansley.  London  :  George  Allen  and  LTnwin,  Ltd.  1920.
Pp.  283.

The  three  books  at  the  head  of  this  notice  are  a  selection
from  many,  dealing  with  similar  topics,  which  have  apj^eared
during  the  last  two  years.  They  are  all  concerned  with  new
outlooks  in  psychology  which  have  grown  out  of  the  pioneer
work  of  Freud.  None  of  the  writers  is  a  true  Freudian,  yet
each  of  them  has  been  greatly  influenced  by  Freud's  "writings,
and  each  of  them  accepts  some  of  the  conclusions  at  which  he
has  arrived.

Dr.  Brown's  attitude  towards  Freudian  doctrine  is  of
particular  interest  because  he  was  one  of  the  first  academic
psychologists  in  this  country  to  give  sympathetic  consideration
to  the  views  of  the  psycho-analysts  and  to  expound  their
teachings.  In  pre-war  days  one  felt  that  Dr.  Brown  was  more
favourably  disposed  towards  Freud's  views  than  in  this  book
he  shows  himself  to  be,  and  it  is  permissible  to  think  that  his
present  standpomt  has  been  arrived  at  largely  as  a  result  of
his  practical  experience  of  the  war  neuroses.  Like  some  other
eminent  psychologists  who  had  an  opportunity  of  observing
and  treating  cases  of  shell-shock,"  Dr.  Brown  readily  accepts
certain  important  tenets  of  the  psycho-analytic  school  such  as,

379


380


Review


[part


for  example,  Freud's  "  theory  of  the  cause  of  mental  disso-
ciation, viz.,  that  it  is  the  result  of  mental  conflict  and  involves
repression  of  emotional  states  "  ;  but  he  cannot  fully  subscribe
to  the  libido  theory  of  the  neuroses  and  therefore  does  not  call
himself  a  Freudian.

On  the  psychological  side  Dr.  Brown  gives  a  good,  although
necessarily  brief,  account  of  the  theory  of  dissociation  and  an
exposition  of  Freud's  theory  of  dreams  and  of  the  Unconscious.
In  a  chapter  on  "  Theories  of  Emotion,"  he  contrasts  the
views  of  Ribot,  Shand  and  M'Dougall  with  "  Freud's  theory
of  instinct."  The  latter  he  considers  vague  and  incomplete,
and  he  thmks  it  suffers  from  lack  of  historical  relationship
Avith  the  work  of  expert  psychologists.  Not,  however,  until  he
takes  up  the  psychotherapeutic  aspect  of  his  subject  do  we
clearly  realize  the  distance  which  separates  Dr.  Brown's  views
from  those  of  the  psycho-analysts  ;  and  yet  the  method  of
treatment  which  he  considers  "  the  most  helpful  therapeutic
process  in  dealing  with  the  majority  of  war  psychoneuroses  "
is  the  method  which  formed  the  historical  starting  point  of
psycho-analysis.  This  is  the  method  of  '  abreaction  ' — the
process  of  working  off  repressed  emotion  during  hypnosis —
devised  by  Breuer  forty  years  ago  and  described  in  these
Proceedings  by  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers  as  far  back  as  1894.
{S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  12.)

Dr.  Brown's  record  of  the  efficacy  of  abreaction  in  the
treatment  of  the  war  neuroses  is  very  interesting  and  instruc-
tive ;  for  with  the  development  of  Breuer's  method  in  the  hands
of  Freud,  and  the  extension  of  the  original  theory  of  the
causation  of  hysteria,  the  peculiar  value  of  abreaction  tended  to
be  lost  sight  of,  and  not  much  corroboration  of  the  early  work
of  Breuer  and  Freud  has  been  afforded  by  subsequent  observers.

Dr.  Brown  tells  us  that  his  most  striking  results  were
obtamed  by  means  of  abreaction  during  light  hypnosis.  He
does  not,  however,  make  clear  what  he  means  by  light  hyp-
nosis ;  and  this  he  should  have  done  seeing  that  he  gives
expression  to  somewhat  heterodox  opinions  on  the  relation
between  suggestion  and  hypnosis.  He  does  not  accept  those
degrees  of  hypnosis,  ranging  from  slight  somnolence  to  profound
"  sleep,"  which  have  been  universally  recognized  by  followers
of  the  Nancy  School. For  him  hypnosis  begins  at  the  stage


LXXXIV.]


Review


381


^'  when  the  memory  continuum  of  the  patient  is  broken
across,"  and  this  he  regards  as  "  a  psychological  phenomenon
quite  distinct  from  that  of  suggestibihty  and  calling  for  a
distinct  explanation."

By  most  authors  this  stage  is  regarded  as  just  the  point
at  which  light  hj^pnosis  ends  and  deep  hypnosis  begins,  so
that  when  Dr.  Brown  speaks  of  light  hypnosis  he  must  be
referring  to  a  grade  or  degree  of  what  is  more  commonly
called  deep  hypnosis  or  somnambulism.  And  indeed  Dr.  Brown
agrees  with  Janet  that  hypnosis  is  the  reproduction  of  an
hysterical  somnambulism  in  an  hysterical  subject.  But  if
that  be  so  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  Dr.  BroAvn  could
control  the  depth  of  the  hjrpnosis  so  as  to  ensure  that  it  was
"  light."  Whether  it  was  "  hght  "  or  "  deep  "  would  depend
on  the  degree  of  dissociation  accompanying  the  original
"  hysterical  "  somnambulism  whose  reproduction  was  brought
about  by  the  hypnotising  process.

According  to  Dr.  Brown  there  are  four  fundamental  and
relatively  independent  i:)sychic  factors  at  work  in  the  cure  of
mental  illness.  These  are  (1)  psycho-synthesis  or  re-association
of  the  forgotten  memories  ;  (2)  psycho-catharsis  or  abreaction  ;
(3)  autognosis — a  term  introduced  by  Dr.  Brown  to  indicate
a  method  devised  by  him  which  seems  to  be  a  mixture  of
analysis,  .suggestion,  persuasion  and  re-education  ;  and  (4)  the
personal  influence  of  the  physician  (suggestion).  The  last  of
these  four  he  rightly  considers  of  the  utmost  importance
"  since  it  is  a  determining  condition  of  the  effective  working
of  the  other  three  factors."

In  Part  IV.  of  this  book,  under  the  headmg  "  Lessons  of
the  War,"  Dr.  Brown  gives  an  interesting  account  of  his
personal  experience  in  the  treatment  of  war  neuroses  both  in
the  field  and  in  the  hospitals  at  home.  The  heading  of  this
section  is  perhaps  misleading,  for  it  may  suggest  that  what  is
here  written  contams  new  knowledge  concerning  the  cause  or
the  cure  of  the  psychoneuroses.  But  it  is  notorious  that  in
no  department  of  medicine  has  less  advance  been  made  as  a
result  of  war  experience  than  in  psychopathology  and  psycho-
therapeutics. All  the  methods  used  in  dealing  with  the
neuroses  of  the  war  had  already  been  in  everyday  use  in  the
therapeutics of pre-war days. What the war did was  to


382


Review


[part


increase  enormously  the  number  of  people  acquainted  with  the
theory  and  practice  of  psychotherapeutics,  but  in  no  direction
did  it  lead  to  any  important  addition  to  our  knowledge  of
these  matters.

The  last  few  pages  of  the  book  a.re  devoted  to  Psychical
Research.  Although  Dr.  Brown  seems  to  be  favourably  in-
clined towards  the  scientific  investigations  into  Spiritism  he
wishes  to  sound  a  note  of  caution, — "  to  suggest  that  all  this
borders  very  closely  on  the  realm  of  pathological  psychology,
and  that  in  such  investigations  you  need  to  be  quite  sure  that
the  mind  concerned  is  a  normal  one  .  .  .  that  the  states
described  are  not  simply  pathological  mental  states,  rather
than  something  that  is  completely  normal."  Dr.  Brown  here
seems  to  be  harbouring  a  very  common  misconception  regarding
the  kind  of  evidence  that  is  relevant  and  important  in
Psychical  Research.  To  expect  mediumistic  phenomena  to
occur  in  a  mind  that  is  "  completely  normal  "  is  almost  a
contradiction  in  terms  ;  but  whether  the  state  of  a  medium's
mind  is  one  of  normality  or  abnormalitj^  is  surely  quite  irre-
levant and  unimportant  so  far  as  the  supernormality  of  the
manifestations  is  in  question.  As  I  wrote,  in  a  former  contri-
bution to  these  pages  :  "In  regard  to  supernormal  phenomena
it  does  not  matter  in  the  least  what  the  term  hysteria  may
connote.  The  supernormality  of  an  automatic  script  has  to
be  determined  by  other  considerations  than  the  psychological
state  of  the  aiitomatist.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  any  hysteric
really  has  the  gift  of  clairvoyance  or  any  other  supernormal
power,  it  will  be  just  as  good  evidence  as  if  he  were  a  normal
person.  If  physical  objects  do  move  without  contact  in  the
presence  of  anyone  who  is  said  to  be  hysterical,  it  is  just  as
wonderful  as  if  they  so  move  in  '  the  jDresence  of  some  one
who is not." {S.P.B.  Proceedings, Vol. XXVI., p.  275.)

Dr.  Constance  Long's  Collected  Papers  on  the  Psychology  of
Phantasy  are  a  series  of  essays  in  that  "  Analytical  Psy-
chology "  which  was  founded  by  Jung,  and  they  afford  some
indication  of  the  lines  along  which  Jung  has  departed  from  the
Freudian  position.  Written  in  bright  and  non-technical
language,  suited  to  the  lay  audiences  to  which  most  of  them
were  delivered,  these  papers  x^ossess  the  advantages  and  clis-


LXXXIV.]


Review


383


advantages  which  such  a  mode  of  exposition  entails.  They
are  full  of  interest  and  information  which  cannot  fail  to  be
helpful  to  those  who  come  to  the  study  of  these  topics  for
the  first  time,  but  they  sometimes  lack  the  precision  of
language  which  the  serious  student  of  the  subject  demands.
Thus,  for  example,  on  the  second  page  "  the  unconscious  "  is
defined  as  "  all  that  exists  in  the  psyche,  of  which  we  are  not
aware  at  a  given  moment.  .  .  .  The  unconscious,  the  sub-
conscious, or  the  subliminal  (as  it  is  called  by  different  authors)
contains  all  our  memories  from  our  earliest  existence  to  the
present."  On  page  16  it  is  said  :  "  The  unconscious  mind  is
pre-existent  to  the  conscious  mind.  It  is  a  racial  possession,
common  to  all,  and  is  not  acquired  during  the  life-time."  On
page  77  we  read  :  "I  shall  use  the  word  '  unconscious  '  in  the
sense  introduced  by  Freud."

These  statements  taken  by  themselves  are  misleading  and
incompatible  one  with  another  ;  and  although  no  one  who
reads  Dr.  Long's  book  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  need
have  any  doubts  about  her  views  on  "  the  unconscious,"
nevertheless  the  persistent  use  of  the  same  term  in  so  many
different  senses  must  j^ro^^©  confusing  to  many  readers.

It  is  needless,  here,  to  describe  in  detail  or  to  criticise  the
doctrines  put  forward  by  Dr.  Long.  They  are  a  faithful
exiDosition,  so  far  as  they  go,  of  the  teachmgs  of  Jung,  and
our  opinion  of  their  theoretical  and  practical  importance  will
depend  on  the  judgments  we  may  have  formed  regarding
Jung's  views  as  these  are  presented  to  us  in  the  fuller  exposi-
tions afforded  by  his  own  works.  As  an  introduction  to  the
views  of  the  Ziirich  school  this  book  can  be  confidently  recom-
mended, and  on  the  practical  side  it  will  be  found  to  contain
much  acute  observation  and  sound  advice.

Perhaps  the  woist  thing  about  Mr.  Tansley's  book,  The  New
Psychology,  is  its  title.  Over  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  there
was  a  "  new  psychology "  from  which  much  was  expected —
the  so-called  "  experimental  psychology '"  ;  but  it  is  now
commonly  admitted  that,  as  Mr.  Tansley  says,  much  of  the
admirable  work  done  in  this  field  is  not  investigation  of  the
mind  at  all  but  merely  a  department  of  physiology.  There
is already  some danger that a somewhat similar  fate  may


384


Review


[part  lxxxiv.]


overtake  the  New  Psychology  of  to-day  if  we  stress  too  much
the  newness  of  it.  Dr.  Long  tells  us  in  her  preface  to  the
Psycliology  of  Phantasy,  that  a  candid  friend,  who  is  an
a^cademic  psychologist,  bade  her  refrain  from  using  such  a  title,
saying  that  the  book  had  nothing  to  do  with  psychology.

There  is  the  less  justification  for  the  adoption  of  such  a
title  as  Mr.  Tansley  has  chosen  in  that  his  avowed  aim  is  to
present  a  picture  of  the  structure  and  Avorking  of  the  normal
human  mind  which  combines  the  biological  view  of  the  mind
■ — as  represented,  for  instance,  in  Dr.  M'Dougall's  well-known
Introduction  to  Social  Psychology — with  the  concepts  which  we
owe  mainly  to  Freud  and  Jung.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  new
psychology  which  Mr.  Tansley  presents  to  us,  but  the  old
psj'chology  as  it  is  modified  by  certain  facts  discovered  by  the
psychopathologists .

Both  Dr.  Brown  and  Dr.  Long,  in  the  books  under  review,
are  occupied  with  joarts  of  the  same  subject-matter  as  Mr.
Tansley  deals  ^^ith,  but  both  the  former  writers  very  largely
restrict  themselves  to  the  domain  of  psychopathology  and
psychotherapeutics.  Mr.  Tansley  takes  a  wider  outlook  and
endeavours  to  point  out  the  consequences  of  applying  the  new
doctrines  in  the  psychology  of  the  normal,  and  to  indicate
the  bearing  of  these  doctrines  on  all  the  problems  and  activities
of  human  life.

This  is  assuredly  a  work  which  is  necessary,  but  it  is
doubtful  if  the  time  is  yet  ripe  for  its  satisfactory  performance.
Many  of  the  new  views  are  of  so  tentative  a  character  and  so
liable  to  revision  in  the  light  of  fresh  facts,  that  any  attempt
to  incorporate  them  in  a  systematic  exposition  of  the  "  science
of  human  life  "  is  ajDt  to  lead  to  errors  which  time  and
fui'ther  knoAvledge  would  have  eliminated.  Nevertheless,  Mr.
Tansley 's  attempt  to  do  this  necessary  Avork  here  and  now  is
a  notable  achievement,  and  no  student  of  contemporary  psy-
chology can  afford  to  disregard  this  book.

T.  W.  Mitchell.


I


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XXXII
(PARTS  LXXXII-LXXXIV)

1922

Abnormal  Psychology,  Problems  in - -  - - - 349,  37!)

Abreaction  380

Aigner,  Dr.,  Eine  imaufgekliirte  Einwirkung  der  menschlichen

Hand  auf  die  Photographische  Platte,  Reference  to 178  (footnote)

Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Problems  of  Hypnotism  :  An  Experimental

Investigation - - - - -  - - -  -151

Baggally,  W.  W. See  Eva  C,  Sittings  with.

Baggally,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  307

Balfour,  The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  4-5  (footnote)
Barety,  A.,  Reference  to  his  experiments  in  hypnotism - -  174

Barrett,  Lady,  M.D.,  Sitting  with  Eva  C.  239

Barrett,  Sir  William,  Experiments  in  hypnotism  -  164-165,  178
Beadon,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  -----  69-72
Beanchamp  Case  of  Multiple  Personality,  Similarities  "between

"  Sally  "  and  some  medimnistic  "  Controls  "  -  -  350,  351
Beaufort,  j.,  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  -  -  226,  227,  229,  231,  270
Beilby,  Sir  C4eorge,  Sitting  with  Eva  C.  -  -  -  -  -  279
Bennett,  Captain  E.  N.,  Sittings  with  Eva  C.  -  -  238,  239,  247
Bien  Boa. See  Eva  C,  Algiers,  Materializations  at.

385


386


Index  to  Vol.  XXXll.


[parts


Bisson, Mme. Juliette, Personal observations of Eva  C."s

mediumship 210,  211,  223,  224,  244,  306,  310,  315,  316,  326,  330,

332,  338-339,  342,  343.
See  also  the  Society's  Report  on  A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C.
Boirac.  E.,  Reference  to  his  experiments  on  the  conductibility

of  nervous  effluence - - - - - - - 173,  175

Book-tests,  Reference  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  examination  of

7  (footnote),  45,  70

Braid,  James,  Reference  to  his  hypnotic  tlieories - - -  151
Bramwell,  Dr.  J.  Mihie,  On  bhstering  by  suggestion  - - -  201
,,  ,,  Therapeutic  results  in  conditions  un-

associated  with  symptoms  of  hyjD-
nosis.  Reference  to  - - 152  (footnote)
Breuer,  References  to  work  of ------ -  380

Brown,  William,  M.D.,  Psychology  and  Psychotherapy,  Review  of  379

Charcot,  Reference  to  his  hypnotic  theories

151-152,  165,  167-168,  175-176
Chenoweth,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of - - - - -  350

Child  Controls 350,  353  (footnote)

Collected  Papers  on  the  Psychology  of  Phantasy ,  by  Dr.  Constance  E.

Long,  Review  of  37(>
Communicators —

A.  V.  B.  14,  44-68

Beadon,  Colonel  70-72

E.  A. 67,  68-69

Controls —

A.  Y.  B. 6,  59,  63,  66-67

Personal ----- 363,  365-366,  367

E.  A.  69

Feda, Similarities between, and  Margaret  in  the  Doris

Fischer  case 351-359

Controls,  Similarities  between  secondary  personalities  and  -  349-359
Cook,  Florence,  Reference  to  the  mediumship  of  -  -  -  209
Crawford,  Dr.  W.  J.,  Experiments  in  Psychical  Science,  and  The

Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena,  Criticism

of  147-150

,,  ,,  The  Psychic  Structures  at  the  Goligher  Circle,

Review  of - - - - - -  147

Sitting  with  Eva  C.  269

Crookes,  Sir  William,  Reference  to  his  experiments  with  Florence

Cook  209


D.,  Mrs.  J.,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard  -  -  -  -  67,  68-69
D'Albe,  Dr.  Fournier. See  the  Society's  Report  on  Eva  C.


Lxxxii-Lxxxiv.] lyidex  to  Vol.  XXXII.


387


Desmet,  Mrs.  270

Dessoir,  Pi-ofessor  Max,  Vom  Jenseits  der  Seele,  Review  of  - -  146
Ding-wall,  E.  J.,  Phenomena  of  Eva  C,  The  Hypothesis  of  Fraud  309
,,  Review  of  Dr.  Crawford's  The  Psychic  Structures

at  the  GoUgher  Circle - - - • -  147
See  also  the  Society's  Report  on  Eva  C.  :  Sitters.

Diomira  AUegri,  Stigmata  of 193-194,  204

Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality,  Similarities  between

Margaret  and  Mrs.  Leonard's  control  - - - -  851-359

E.  A.  Communicator  -------- 67,  68-69

Control  69

Elliott  and  Fry,  Assistance  given  in  the  experiments  with  Eva  C.  215
Eusapia  Paladino,  Telekinetic  phenomena  . - - - 144,  146
Eva  C'\  Report  on  a  Series  of  Sitti7igs  with - - - -  209

Algiers,  Villa  Carmen,  Materializations  at.  References  to 210,  309
Bisson,  Mme.,  Question  of  the  position  of - 310-311,  330,  334
„ Partial  Control  of -  252,  255,  256,  262,  263,  270
Committee  of  Investigation - - - - - -  212

Conclusions ---------  332

Detailed  Report  of  the  Sittings  -----  226-308

Hypothesis  of  Fraud  309

Case  for  and  against  the  phenomena - - -  329-330
Investigations  of  tlie  medivun,  former  - - - -  210-211
,,  ,,  ,, present,  object  of  - -  211-212

Medimn,  Condition  during  the  Sittings - - - -  218
,, Examination  of,  with  reference  to  the  theory  of

regurgitation 338-340

History  of  210-211

,,  Hypnotic  trance  of  -  -  -  -  311  (footnote)
Miroir  portraits.  Reference  to  -  -  314-315  (and  footnote)
Phenomena,  General  account  of  - - - - -  223-225

Cold  breeze 225,  302,  306,  325,  330

Luminosity,  Apparent  - -  227-228,  229,  233,  284,  285

"  Substance,"  teleplastic 224,  229,  232,  234,  235,  240,  247-
248,  254,  255,  274-276,  282,  283,  307,  323

Touches 262,  263

Photographic  operator -------  226

Photographs -  231,  236,  239,  246,  260,  26L  306

Regurgitation  theory 210  (footnote),  290,  318-327,  329,  333,  335,

339,  340,  341-342.
„  „ Examination of the mediimi  with

reference  to  319  (footnote),  338-340

Sittings,  General  Accouiit - - - - - - -  213


388


Index  to  Vol.  XXXII.


[PABTS


"  Eva  C",

Conduct  of  the  seances - - - - -  216-219

Control  219-223

Veil  worn  by  medium - - - - 262,  263-301

Notes  taken 226  (footnote)

Seance  room  213-216

Sittings,  Detailed  Report - - - -  :; - -  226-308

Sitters —

Abbreviations  for  the  names  -  -  -  226  (footnote)
Baggally,  W.  W. 212.  231,  238,  239,  240,  243,  248,  251,  256,

258-  259,  260,  262,  263,  269,  277,  279,  285,  288,  289,  290,
292,  296,  301,  307,  324,  341-343.

Baggally,  Mrs.  - -  307

Barrett,  Lady  239

Beaxifort,  J. - - -  - 226,  227,  229,  231,  270

Beilby,  Sir  George  279

Bennett,  Captain  E.  N. - - - - 238,  239,  247
Bisson,  Mme.  JuHet 214,  216,  217,  218,  219,  220,  221-222,
223-224,  226,  227,  228,  229,  230,  231-236,  237-238,  239,
240,  241-242,  243,  244-245,  247,  248-249,  250,  251-258,

261,  262,  263,  264,  267,  269-273,  275,  276,  278,  279-283,
288-294,  296-300,  301,  302,  305,  307-308,  314,  323,  334,  336.

Bisson,  Mme.  Juhet,  Question  of  position  of  310-311,  330,  334

Crawford,  Dr.  W.  J.  269

D'Albe,  Dr.  Fournier  277,  279,  282,  284-289,  297,  302-304,
305,  307-308,  325,  327.

Desmet,  Mrs.  270

Dingwall,  E.  J. 212,  221,  247,  250-253,  256-257,  259,  260-261,

262,  263,  264-267,  269,  270,  271-276,  277-278,  279-282,
284-295,  296-305,  307-308,  309,  342.

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard  212,  215  (footnote),  226,  227,  228,
229,  231,  232,  234,  239,  240,  243,  247,  248,  250,  251,  252,
255,  256,  260,  262,  263,  264,  265,  266,  267,  269,  270,  271,
277,  279,  282,  284,  285,  288,  289,  290,  292,  296,  297,  301,
302,  307.

Feilding,  Hon.  Mrs.  Everard 226,  227,  229,  238,  240,  242,

251,  252,  260,  264,  284,  289,  307.

Gates,  Dr.  307

Houdini,  Mr. . - . . 260,  289,  290,  296,  301

Salter,  W.  H.  272

Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.  212,  217,  220-222,  223,  227,  229,  230,

239,  240,  242-243,  245,  246,  247,  248,  250,  251,  255,  256,

259-  260,  262,  263,  271,  272,  274,  277,  285,  287.

Smith,  W.  Whately,  212,  226,  227,  228,  229,  230,  231,  232,
233,  234,  235,  236,  238,  239,  243,  245,  247,  262,  269.


Lxxxii-Lxxxiv.] Index  to  Vol  XA'XII.


389


"  Eva  C",  Sitters—

Wereide,  Dr.  296

Woolley,  Dr.  V.  J.  212,  217,  221,  222-223,  226.  227,  229,

230,  231,  232,  233,  234,  235,  236,  238,  239,  240,  241,  242,
243,  244,  245,  248,  249,  250,  251,  252,  253,  254,  255,  256,
257,  260,  263,  269,  270,  277,  279,  280,  281,  284,  288,  296.

Woolley,  Mrs.  260

'■  Eva  C."',  Teleplastic  phenomena  in  the  mediiiinship  of - 144,  145

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard. See  above  :  Sitters.
Feilding,  Mrs. .See  above.

Freud's  views.  Reference  to - - - - - -  379-384

Galgani,  Gemma,  Stigmata  of  -  -  -  -  180-185,190,201
Gates,  Dr.,  Present  at  sittings  with  Eva  C.  .  .  -  .  307
Geley,  Dr.  Gustav,  Investigation  of  Eva  C.

210,  211,  223,  316-318,  326,  332
,,  ,,  Supranormal  Physiolog^■  and  the  Phenomena

of  Ideoplasty,  Reference  to - - -  144

Goldsmith,  Dr.  J.  N. 336-337

Goligher,  Kathleen,  Mediumship  of - - -  144-145,  147-150

Photographs  of  the  phenomena.  Collection  of  -  -  -  150
Gurnej-,  Edmund, Reference to hypnotic experiments  and

theories  176,  178

HouDiNi,  Mr.,  Present  at  sittings  with  Eva  C.  260,  289,  290,  296,  301
Hypnotism,  Phenomena  of —

Anaesthesia  and  Analgesia. See  Dr.  Ah-utz"s  Problems  of
Hypnotism.

Experiments,  References  to . . . .  164-165,  174,  178
Hyperaesthesia. See  Dr.  Alrutz's  Problems  of  Hypnotism.
Janet.  Dr.  Pierre,  Reference  to  his  case  of  V.  K.  202
Kraft -Ebing,  Dr.  R.,  Reference  to  his  experiments  with

lima  S. -  201

Methods 152,  170,  175

Mystical  and  hypnotic  phenomena,  analogy-  in  kind - -  202
Passes,  Efficacy  of. See  Dr.  Ah'utz"s  Problems  of  Hypnotism.
Specific  Effluence,  Question  of - - - - - -  152

Experiments  to  solve ------  153-172

Experimenter's  conclusions  and  theories  -  -  173-177
Stigmatization  and  hypnotism  -  -  197  (footnote),  200-202
Theories  and  researches,  References  to

151-152,  165,  167,  168,  175-176,  178,  201
Thought -Transference ... - 171-172,  175,  176


390


Index  to  Vol.  XXXII.


[parts


Hypnotism,  Problems  of,  by  Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz  -  -  -  151
Hyslop,  Dr.  J.  H.,  Reference  to  his  investigation  of  the  Doris

Fischer  Case  353  (footnote)

Hysterics,  Cases  of  regurgitation - - - - 210  (footnote)

Idboplasty,  Phenomena  of - - - - - 144-145,  147

J.  D.'s  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard 67,  68-69

Jacks,  Dr.  L.  P.,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard -  133-143,  377

Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  Case  of  "  V.  K."  cited  202

,, Leonie  case ------ 350,  351

Jarraud,  Mr.,  Assistance  given  in  the  experiments  with  Eva  C.  215
Johansen,  Anton,  Reference  to  l^"^

KRAFT-EBiNCi,  Dr.  R.  von.  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  Ihna  S.,
Reference  to

Lateau,  Louise,  Stigmata  of - -  179-180,  193,  199,  200,  206

Leonard,  Mrs.,  The  Trance  Phenomena  of —

Automatic  Scripts 360-361

Communicators  :

A.  V.  B.  1*

Colonel  Beadon  ^0-72

  67,  68-69

Compared  with  examples  of  Multiple  Personality  348-349,  351-378
Controls  :

A  Y  B 6,  59,  63,  66-67

E.'a.' 69

Personal 361-367

Control's  inability  always  to  discriminate  as  to  whether  a

particular  individxial  is  living  or  dead - - -  41-42
Some  evidence  of  apparent  communication  from  a

person  still  ahve  133-143

Descriptions  of  personal  appearance  of  Communicators,  strong

and  weak  points -----  13-20
„  Problems  concerning  the  som'ce  of,  and  the

manner  in  which  the  knowledge  presents

itself  to  the  control  20-23

Eeda,  Comparisons  between,  and  Mrs.  Thompson's  control,

;[vfglly  8  (footnote),  13  (footnote)

Hyperaesthesia  of  hearing  ^61,  372

Inhibitory  effect  of  effort  to  give  a  "  test  "  in  response  to

question  ^^'^^

Imtials  13  (footnote)

Medium,  Trustworthiness  of - - - - 4-5  (footnote)


Lxxxii-Lxxxiv.] Imlex  to  Vol.  XXXll.


391


Leonard,  Mrs.,  The  Trance  Phenomena  of —

Medium,  Normal  knowledge  concerning  the  sitters,  question  of  4-5
Names,  Communicator's  difficulty  in  giving - - -  26-27
New  Sitters,  General  natm-e  and  limitations  of  first  sittings,
and  the  kind  of  statements  that  are  made

7-8,  11-13,  15-16,  23-25,  27,  43
Padding,  Feda's  recourse  to  and  excuse  for  -  -  -  8-11
,,  a  point  de  repere  for  good  evidence - - -  10,  27

Personal  Appearance  of  Communicators - - - -  13-23
Discussion  of  problems  and  theories - - . -  20-23
„  Telepathy  from  the  Sitter - - -  21

„  „  „  Dead - - -  22-23

,,  Theory  of  quasi -materialisation - -  21-22

Report,  A  Further,  on  Sittings. By  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter -  1
Introduction  2
Arrangements  regarding  the  choice  of  sitters  and  obtain-
ing of  records - - - - - - -  2-3

Arrangements  for  sittings.  Procedure  adopted - -  2
Classification  of  i-esults.  Mode  of  - - - - -  4

Number  of  Sittings  3.4
Recorders  2-3
Records  used - - - - - -  3  (and  footnote)

Evidence  obtained  by  New  Sitters

Aimiversaries,  References  to . . . .  126-129

Circumstances  and  Physical  Symptoms  associated  with

a  Communicator  s  death 23-24,  30-34,  39-40,  99-109

Young  Men  99-105

Women  and  Older  Men  105-109

Communication,  Some  evidence  of  apparent,  from  a

Person  still  alive 42,  133-143

Communicator,  The  same,  purporting  to  be  present  at

two  sittings  130-132

Descriptions  of  Articles  said  to  have  belonged  to,  or

been  associated  with  a  Communicator - -  110-123
Descriptions  of  places  associated  with  a  Communicator

31-33,  40

Pirst  Sittings,  A  successful  sitting - - - -  28-43

,, ,, Tentative  nature  of - - - -  7

,, ,, Typical  lines  of  structm'e.  Statements

frequently  made - - - -  27

Names  and  Initials -------  24

Case  in  which  an  uncommon  name  was  correctly

given --------  25-26

Personal  Appearance  of  Communicators - - 13,  74-98


392


Index  to  Vol.  XXXll.


[PARTS


Leonard,  Mrs.,  The  Trance  Phenomena  of —
Evidence  obtained  by  New  Sitters

Descriptions,  General  character  -  -  -  14,  15-16
Instances  of  personal  characteristics  14-15
of  Young  Men  -----  74-85

of  Older  Men  85-91

of  Women  91-96

of  Persons  still  alive - - -  96-98
Various  topics  which  recur  frequently  - - - -  27
Evidence  obtained  by  Old  Sitters —

Communicators  :  Colonel  Beadon - - . .  70-72

Controls  :  A.  B.  V.  G,  59,  63,  66-67

E.  A.  69

Knowledge  of  contemporary  events - - - - 5,  45

Memory  of  names -------  45

„ of  places  47,  51-52

Malvern  Wells,  Highfield  House  47,  51-52

Leonie  Case,  Reference  to  350,  351

Liebault,  Dr.  A.  A.,  Reference  to  his  theories  of  hypnotism -  178
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Theory  to  account  for  veridical  descriptions  of

the  Departed  given  by  Controls,  Reference  to - - -  21-22
Long,  Dr.  Constance  E.,  Collected  Papers  on  the  Psychology  of

Phantasy ----------  379

Lukardis,  Stigmata  of 185-187,195


Materializations. See  the  Report  on  Eva  C.

Mediumistic  Trance,  The  "  Modus  Operandi  "  in - - -  344
Mesmer,  References  to  his  theories  and  experiments - - 151,  178
Mind  upon  the  Body,  Influence  of. See  Stigmatization,  The
Phenomena  of.

"  Minnehaha Control 350,  353  (footnote)

Missing  people,  Uselessness  of  trying  to  obtain  from  mediums

information  about  the  fate  of ------  42

Mitchell,  Dr.  T.  W.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  -  -  -  9,  10
Review  of  Dr.  William  Brown's  Psychology
and  Psychotherapy  ;  Dr.  Constance
Long's  Collected  Papers  on  the  Psychology
of  Phantasy  ;  Mr.  A.  G.  Tansley's  The
New  Psychology  and  its  Relation  to  Life  379

"  Modus  Operandi,'"  The,  in  So-called  Mediumistic  Trance,  by

(Una)  Lady  Troubridge  344

Mollison,  M.  W.,  F.R.C.S.  338

Montague,  Mrs.,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard  -  -  -  -  28
"  Moyenne,"  Control. .See  Tomczyk,  Stanislava,  Mediumship  of.


Lxxxii-Lxxxiv.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXII.


393


Multiple  Personality,  Example  of,  compared  with  the  abnormal

psychology  of  Mrs.  Leonard  and  other  trance  mediiuns  348-360

"  Nelly  "  Control  350

Newton,  Miss  I.,  Control  exercised  by,  in  Sittings  with  Eva  C.

231,  237-238

!>  Recorder  at  a  Leonard  sitting  - - - .  3

OcHOROWicz,  Dr..  Experiments  in  telekinesis ... -  144
3,  Re^Dorts  on  Miss  Tomczyk's  mediumship -  350

Ohi-vall,  Professor,  Experiments  in  hypnotism - - - -  166

Palladino,  Eusapia,  Materializations  in  the  iDresence  of

209-210,  211,  328
Personal  Appearance  of  the  Departed  as  described  by  Con-
trols 20-23,  370-372,  374

Discussion  of  the  theoretical  problems  raised - 20-23,  369-370

Question  as  to  the  Control's  mode  of  perception  -  -  369-377
Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism  . - -  144-146,147-150

See  also  "  Eva  C."
Physikalische  Phaenomene  des  Mediumismus,  Studien  zur  Er-

forschung  der  Telekinetischen Vorgiinge, by Dr. A.  von

Schrenck-Notzing,  Review  of - - - - - -  144

Piddington,  J.  G.,  Recorder  at  a  Leonard  Sitting  ...  3
Pio  of  Foggia,  Padre,  Stigmata  of  -  -  190-191,  192  (footnote)
Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  phenomena  of . - . .  146-147,345

Prince,  Dr.  Walter 352,  355,  356-357,  358

Problems  of  Hypnotism  :  An  Experimental  Investigation,  by  Dr.

Sydney  Alrutz  151

Psychic  Structures  at  the  Goligher  Circle,  by  W.  J.  Crawford,  D.Sc,

Review  of  - - - - - - . . . .  147

Psychology  and  Psychotherapy,  by  Dr.  William  Brown,  Review  of  379
Psychology,  The  New,  and  its  Relation  to  Life,  by  A.  G.  Tansley,

Review  of  -  -  .  -  -  -  -  .  -  .  379
Psychology  of  Phantasy,  by  Dr.  Constance  E.  Long,  Review  of -  379

Psycho-plastic  substance 212,  224,  240

Radclyffe-Hall,  Miss  M.,  and  (Una)  Lady  Troubridge—

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  4,  5,  6  (footnote),  44-68,  363,  365,

370-371,  376.

On  a  Series  of.  Reference  to 3,  6,  10  (footnote), 14,  44,

45,  51  (and  footnote).  53,  62.  363,  367.
On  the  Records  made  of  - - 2,  3,  4,  5,  9,  10,  44


"  Reese,  Professor  Bert,"  Reference  to  .  -  .  .  147
Regurgitation,  Cases  of - -  - 210  (footnote),  319,  341


394


Index  to  Vol.  XX XII.


[parts


Report,  A  Further,  on  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard ...  1
Report  on  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eva  C. See  "  Eva  C."
Reviews —

A.  G.  Tansley's  The  New  Psychology  and  its  Relation  to  Life  379
Dr.  A.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's  Physikalische  Phaenomene  des
Mediumismiis,  Studien  zur  Erforschung  der  Telekinetischen
Vorgdnge - - - - - • - - -  144

Dr.  Constance  Long's  Collected  Papers  on  the  Psychology  of

Phantasy ---------  379

Dr.  W.  J.  Crawford's  The  Psychic  Structures  at  the  Goligher

Circle  147

Dr.  William  Brown's  Psychology  and  Psychotherapy  -  -  379
Professor  Max  Dessoir's  Fow  Jenseits  der  Seele ■ - -  146

Richet,  Professor  Charles  210

Rothe,  Anna,  Reference  to  investigations  with  - - - -  146

S.,  Ilma,  Case  of -------- -  201

Salter,  W.  H.,  Present  at  Sittings  with  Eva  C. - - - -  272

Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.—

A  Further  Report  on  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Leonard  - - -  1
Personal  Apj^earance  of  the  Dejiartecl  as  described  by  Con-
trols 20-23

Recorder  at  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard - . . .  3


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud  (Eva  C),  References  to  211,  314,  329
See  also  the  Society's  Report  on  Sittings  with  Eva  C.
Schiller,  Dr.  F.  C.  S.,  Reviews  :

Dr.  A.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's  Physikalische  Phaenomene  des
Mediumismiis,  Studien  zur  Erforschung  der  Telekinet-
ischen Vorgiinge - - - - - - - -  144

Professor  Max  Dessoir's  Vom  Jenseits  der  Seele  -  -  -  146
Secondary  Personalities  and  "  Spirit  Controls,"  On  the  similarities

between 349-359

Shaw,  Christian - - - - - - - 210  (footnote)

Schrenck-Notzing,  Dr.  von.  Investigations  of  the  medium  Eva  C.

210-211,  223,  311-316,  319,  329,  331,  332,  333
„  ,, Physikalische  Phaenomene  des

Mediumismiis,  hy.  Review  of -  144
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  An  Examination  of  Book-tests,  References

to - 7  (footnote),  45,  70,  367,  368-369
,,  ,,  On  the  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance

Phenomena,  References  to -  345-346
,,  ,,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard

4  (and  footnote  4-5), 83,  90,  109,  114
Sittings  with  Eva  C,  Report  on  209


Lxxxii-Lxxxiv.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXII.


395


Slade,  Reference  to  investigations  with - - - - -  146
Smith,  W.  Whately. See  the  Society's  Report  on  Sittings  with
Eva  C.

Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Gift  to,  of  photographs  of  the

GoHgher  phenomena  150  (footnote)
On  the  work  of -  146,  344-345

Stigmatization,  Apparently  hypnotic  - - - - - -  192

Cases  of 178,  179,  185,  188,  190-191,  192,  193,  196,
198,  201,  202,  203,  204,  205,  206.
„  Cases  of.  Characteristic  features  in - -  194-195

Modern 180-185,  188-189,  190-191,  192  (foot-
note).

Problems  of 198-208

Stigmatization,  The  Phenomena  of,  by  the  Rev.  Herbert  Thm-ston,

S.J.  '  179

Talbot,  Mrs.,  Book-test,  Reference  to  -  -  -  7  (footnote)
Tansley,  A.  G.,  The  New  Psychology  and  its  Relation  to  Life  -  379
Telekinesis,  Phenomena  of  .  .  .  -  .  144,  147-150
,,  On  the  Theories  concerning  -  -  .  -  144-146
Teleplastic  phenomena,  relation  between,  and  telekinetic  effects  144-146
Thompson,  Mrs.,  Trance  phenomena  of —

Comparisons  between  Nelly  and  Mrs.  Leonard's  Control  Feda

8  (footnote),  13  (footnote)
„ ,, ,, Some  Secondary  Personalities  -  350
Thurston,  The  Rev.  Herbert,  S.J.,  The  Phenomena  of  Stigmatiza-
tion  179

Tomczyk,  Stanislava,  Mediumship  of - - -  144-145,350-351
Trance-phenomena,  References  to  Mrs.  Piper's - - 8  (footnote)
References  to  Mrs.  Thompson's 8  (footnote),  13  (footnote),  350
Troubridge,  (Una)  Lady,  On  Stereotyped  evidence  at  sittings -  10
„  „  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  - - -  348

See  also  Radclyffe-Hall.  Miss  M.
,,  ,,  The  "  Modus  Operandi  " in  so-called

Mediumistic  Trance - - -  344

Vorn  Jenseits  der  Seek,  by  Max  Dessoir.  Re\-iew  of - - -  146

"Wak,  Neuroses  of  the 381-382

Wereide,  Dr.,  Present  at  a  sitting  with  "  Eva  C." - - -  296
Wilks,  Sir  Samuel,  M.D.,  On  the  doctrines  of  Stigmatization  179-180
WooUey,  Dr.  V.  J. See  the  Society's  Report  on  Sittings  with
"  Eva  Cr
