Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXV (1911-1913)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1911 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXII-LXIV and Appendix) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc25soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXV

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXII,  LXIII,  LXIV,  AND  APPENDIX)

191  I


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED

UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
191 1

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Maryleeone,  W
GLASGOW:  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vinxent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Trehont  Street,  Boston,  Mass


All  rights  reserved


CONTENTS


PAET  LXII.
March,  1911.

PAOE

I. Commemorative  Address :  William  James  and  Frank  Podmore.

By  H.  Arthur  Smith,  -  1
II. Frank  Podmore  and  Psychical  Besearch. By  Mrs.  Henry

SlDGWICK, -  -  5

III.  In  Memory  of  William  James. By  W.  M'Dougall,  11

IV.  William  James  as  Philosopher. By  Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead,  30

V. Professor  Pigou  on  Cross-Correspondences. By  the  Bight  Hon.

Gerald  W.  Balfour, -  -  -  38

VI. Report  on  a  Further  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino
at  Naples  :

I. General  Report. By  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding

and  W.  Marriott,  57

II.  Statement  by  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  59

III.  Detailed  Account  of  the  Table-lifting  Incident, -  63

IV.  Comments  on  the  Above. By  Alice  Johnson, -  67

V.  Note  on  the  Report. By  W.  W.  Baggally, - -  69

Supplement  :
Reviews :

Mr.  F.  Podmore's  "  The  Newer  Spiritualism." By  the  Rev.
M.  A.  Bayfield,  70

Open  Letter  to  Dr.  Stanley  Hall.  From  Andrew  Lang,  -  90
Dr.  Tanner's  "Studies  in  Spiritism." By  Mrs.  Henry

Sidgwick,  -  102
"The  One-Horse  Dawn": Additional  Note  on  an  Experiment

described  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX. By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall, -  109

PART  LXIII.
June,  1911.

I. Evidence  of  Classical  Scholarship  and  of  Cross-Correspondence
in  some  New  Automatic  Writings.  By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  :
Introduction, - -  ------  113

Part  I.  Concerning  the  Script  of  February  4,  1910,  -  -  120
Part  II. Concerning  the  Script  of  February  10,  1910,  - -  147


140853


...

...

iv  Qovle^ls:.


II.  Notes  on  Mrs.  Wiile.tt's  Scripts  of  February,  1910. By  Mrs.

A.  W.  Verrall,  -  -  176

I. History  of  the  Period  from  March,  1908,  to  March,  1910,  177
II. Sources  and  Correspondences  of  Phrases  in  Mrs.  Willett's

Script, -  -  -  190

III.  Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script. By  Alice  Johnson  :

Introduction, -  -  -  218

Cross-Correspondences,  -  -  229

The  Principle  of  Selection  in  the  Production  of  Scripts, -  282

Appendices,  -  -  293

IV.  Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "Cup." By  Mrs.  A.  W.

Verrall, ----------  304

V. Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908  :  a  Correction  and

an  Addition. By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verhall, -  - -  320

VI. The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis. By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  -  338

Supplement  :

Reviews:

"An  Adventure," -  -  353

Professor Robinson Ellis's "  The  Tenth  Declamation  of

(Pseudo-)  Qnintilian." By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc,  -  -  361

PART  LXIV
August,  1911.

General  Meetings, -  ... -  .  363

[. Presidential  Address. By  Andrew  Lang,  -  364

II. Poltergeists, Old  and  New.  By  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  377

III.  Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  de  Spiritisme  :  Quelques  Difficultes.

Par  le  Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  -  413

IV.  On  the  a  priori  Argument  against  Physical  Phenomena.  By

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  -  -  447

V. A  Case  of  Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.  By

G.  Lowes  Dickinson, -  ...  455

Supplement  :
Review  :

Professor  Flournoy's  "  Esprits  et  Mediums." By  the  Rev.

M.  A.  Bayfield,  -  468

APPENDIX  TO  PART  LNIV
December,  1911.

Officers  and  Council  for  1911, -  -  477

List  of  Members  and  Associates,  -  478

Index  to  Vol.  XXV,  -  ....  520


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXII.
March,  1911.


I.

COMMEMOBATIVE  ADDBESS  : 1
WILLIAM  JAMES  AND  FEANK  PODMOEE.

By  H.  ARTHUR  SMITH.

A  few  days  ago  I  took  from  my  bookshelves,  not  for  a  first
or  second  perusal,  that  delightful  little  volume  from  the  pen
of  Frederic  Myers,  which  has  appeared  since  his  death,  entitled
Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  a  work  which  is  doubtless
known  to  many  of  you.  It  recalled  to  my  memory  many
illustrious  names  of  those  now  gone  from  us,  who  in  the  past
countenanced  and  encouraged  us  in  our  researches.  I  need
not  speak  of  the  well  known  names  of  those  who  have  pre-
ceded me  in  this  chair  or  have  otherwise  been  closely  associated
with  us,  such  as  Henry  Sidgwick,  Balfour  Stewart,  Edmund
Gurney,  and  Dr.  Hodgson.  But  I  dare  say  that  there  are
many  of  our  more  recent  adherents  who  are  not  aware  that

1  This  Address  and  the  two  papers  that  follow  were  read  at  the  Private
Meeting  of  the  Society  on  November  8th,  1910.


2


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


our  roll  of  membership  has  included  such  notabilities  (only
to  name  a  few)  as  Lord  Tennyson,  Euskin,  Professor  Adams,
Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  Dr.  Goodwin  (the  late  Bishop  of
Carlisle),  Richard  Holt  Hutton,  Lord  Leighton,  G.  F.  Watts,
Professor  Lombroso,  and  Mr.  Gladstone.

My  thoughts  have  been  drawn  in  this  direction  by  the
fact  that,  since  last  we  met,  our  Society  has  suffered  a  double
bereavement,  and  two  other  names  of  distinction  have  to  be
added  to  the  honourable  list  of  past  supporters.  It  will  have
caused  no  surprise,  therefore,  to  any  of  you  that  this  meeting
should  take  the  form  which  has  been  announced  of  a  Memorial.
Our  Society  and  the  cause  of  Psychical  Research  generally
have  suffered  incalculable  loss  by  the  passing  away  within
a  few  days  of  each  other  of  Professor  William  James  and
Prank  Podmore,  names  which  have  been  closely  connected
with  our  work  since  its  commencement,  and  will  surely  always
be  remembered  in  the  same  connexion  as  long  as  this  work
continues.  This  being  so,  it  will,  I  think  be  recognised  by
all  as  obviously  appropriate  that  we  should  devote  our  after-
noon to  a  commemoration  of  services  so  long  continued  and
of  such  inestimable  value.

The  Society  is  fortunate  that  the  task  has  been  undertaken
by  such  competent  judges  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  M'Dougall,
neither  of  whom  needs  any  introduction  by  me.  Under  these
circumstances  I  may  confine  myself  to  a  few  brief  comments
by  way  of  introduction  to  the  subject,  one  on  which,  as  your
President  for  the  time  being,  I  should  certainly  not  like  to
be  silent.

As  you  all  know,  Professor  James  was  one  of  the  most
distinguished  of  our  Presidents,  and  for  many  years  devoted
much  of  his  strenuous  life  to  the  inquiries  with  which  we
are  concerned.  Of  his  general  work  in  the  field  of  philosophy
I  feel  that  I  am  not  competent  to  speak  to  any  purpose.
Justice  can  only  be  done  to  a  thinker  so  original  and  so
profound  by  one  who  has  pursued  the  study  of  psychology
much  more  closely  than  I  have  been  able  to  do ;  and  this
advantage  we  have  this  afternoon.  As  President,  however,  I
wish  at  this,  the  very  first  opportunity,  to  acknowledge  the
immense  service  he  rendered  to  our  Society  in  its  early  days
by  so  intimately  associating  his  great  name  with  our  researches.


LXII.]


Gommemorat  ive  A  ddress.


3


I  have  seen  it  somewhere  stated  that  whereas  his  brother
Henry  James  has  written  fiction  in  the  spirit  of  a  philosopher,
William  James  wrote  philosophy  with  all  the  grace  of  a
novelist.  We  have  been  fortunate  indeed  in  having  had  for
so  many  years  the  countenance  and  co-operation  of  a  genius
which  may  perhaps  without  exaggeration  be  described  as  unique.

Mr.  Podinore  was  personally  known  by  most  of  us.  Of
the  tragic  circumstances  of  his  sudden,  and  as  it  would  seem,
untimely  death,  I  need  not  speak.  As  a  young  man,  fresh
from  a  brilliant  academic  career  at  Oxford,  he  identified
himself  with  our  work,  and  he  was,  I  think,  for  more  than
twenty-five  years  a  member  of  our  Council.  His  co-operation
with  Gurney  and  Myers  in  the  production  of  The  Phantasms
of  the  Living  is  alone  sufficient  evidence  of  the  value  of
his  services,  and  it  is  evidence  also  that  he  had  a  far  more
open  mind  in  regard  to  many  of  our  inquiries  than  some
have  supposed.  To  the  last  (his  most  recent  publication  has
appeared  since  his  death)  Mr.  Podmore  devoted  his  exceptional
gifts,  scientific  and  literary,  to  the  consideration  of  the  various
matters  which  from  time  to  time  have  attracted  our  attention.
His  general  attitude  towards  them  is  well  known  to  all  our
readers  and  need  scarcely  be  enlarged  upon.  Podmore  was
essentially  a  critic,  in  his  later  years  a  sceptical  critic  if  you
will,  and  as  such  must  have  been  prepared  to  face  the
disapproval  of  those  whose  enthusiasm  yearns,  impatiently
perhaps,  for  definite  affirmative  answers  to  the  questions
which  present  themselves.  It  is  easy  to  understand  and  in
some  degree  to  sympathise  with  the  impatience  which  has
sometimes  found  expression  in  our  meetings  at  what  some
have  regarded  as  the  excessive  caution  or  even  timidity  of
the  critic.  But  on  the  other  hand,  having  regard  to  the
novelty  and  the  in  many  respects  peculiar  character  of  our
investigations,  I  cannot  but  feel  and  acknowledge  our  in-
debtedness to  one  who  has  so  often  effectively  reminded  us
of  the  desirability,  nay  even  of  the  necessity,  of  making
haste  slowly.  I  think  I  may  say  with  truth  and  confidence
that  one  of  the  chief  characteristics  which  has  distinguished
our  Society's  reports  from  the  conclusions  so  hastily  expressed
by  less  cautious  inquirers,  has  been  our  willingness  to  give
due weight to any and every objection and criticism,  to


4


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


consider  with  candour  and  fairness  any  and  every  suggested
explanation  of  the  phenomena  before  us,  however  disappointing
to  more  impressionable  seekers.  In  this  respect  I  venture  to
think  that  Mr.  Podmore's  attitude  has  been  of  high  value
and  deserves  a  full  acknowledgment  from  those  who  are  left
to  carry  on  the  work  which  so  long  and  so  continuously
occupied  his  thoughts.  Such  tribute,  I  think,  is  his  due  and
will  be  cordially  and  sympathetically  accorded.

We  are  indeed  inestimably  poorer  if  we  have  lost  the
services  of  two  workers  so  qualified  and  so  indefatigable  as
James  and  Podmore.  But  have  we  lost  them  ?  I  think  that
one  of  the  results  of  our  researches  has  been  to  make  many
of  us  less  ready  than  once  we  were  to  apply  to  the  departed
the  despairing  words  of  George  Eliot,  to  speak  of  their  lives  as

"  Gathered  like  a  scroll  within  the  tomb,
Unread  for  ever."

We  are  rather  encouraged  to  apply  other  familiar  words  of
the  same  writer,  albeit  in  very  different  sense  from  that  in
which  she  used  them :

■

"  Oh  may  I  join  the  choir  invisible
Of  those  immortal  dead  who  live  again."

Have  we  then  lost  their  services  ? We  shall  see.


lxii.] Frank  Poclmore  and  Psychical  Research.


5


II.

FRANK  PODMORE  AND  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.

By  MRS.  HENRY  SIDGWICK.

By  the  death  of  Mr.  Frank  Poclmore  on  August  14th,  1901,
at  the  age  of  fifty-four  and  in  the  midst  of  vigorous  work,  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  lost  another  of  its  earliest  and
best  workers.  Mr.  Poclmore  was  almost,  though  not  quite,  an
original  member  of  the  Society ;  he  was  elected  to  its  Council
in  the  first  year,  and  served  on  it  for  an  unbroken  period  of
twenty-seven  years.  He  also,  after  the  death  of  Mr.  Gurney
in  1888,  held,  jointly  with  Mr.  Myers,  the  office  of  Honorary
Secretary  of  the  Society  for  some  eight  or  nine  years.  Merely
on  the  administrative  side,  therefore,  he  did  much  for  the
Society.  But  he  was  also  from  the  beginning  active  in
investigation,  and  as  previous  experience,  scientific  training,
and  critical  ability  combined  with  patience  and  industry  to
make  him  a  valuable  worker,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  be
found  on  more  than  one  of  the  early  investigating  committees.

His  experience  as  a  psychical  researcher  began  when  he
was  an  undergraduate  at  Oxford.  He  had  entered  the  Uni-
versity with  a  classical  scholarship,  and  while  there  obtained
a  first-class  in  Science,  so  that  he  must  have  been  an  under-
graduate of  some  distinction.  Those  were  days  when  interest
in  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism  had  been  greatly  roused  by
Sir  William  Crookes's  investigations  and  by  Mr.  Alfred  Russel
Wallace's  adhesion  to  the  cause.  The  fame  of  the  medium
D.  D.  Home,  who  had  only  retired  two  or  three  years  before,
was  wide  spread,  and  to  those  who  were  admitted  behind  his


()


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


anonymity  the  experiences  of  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses  were
very  impressive.  With  the  impetuosity  of  youth  Mr.  Pod  more
seems  to  have  become  convinced  rather  rapidly  of  the  genuine-
ness of  the  alleged  facts  and  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrines
of  modern  spiritualism.  In  1875  and  1876  he  was  a  con-
tributor to  a  considerable  extent  to  the  spiritualistic  magazine,
Human  Nature,  and  showed  already  the  agreeable  ease  of
style  and  power  of  clear  exposition  which  characterise  his
later  works.  In  1876  we  find  an  account  by  him  of  a
seance  he  had  with  Slade,  the  once  famous  slate-writing
medium.  It  was  a  very  ordinary  seance  apparently,  but  in  an
address  to  the  National  Association  of  Spiritualists  in  1880
he  says  of  this  seance  that  he  remembers  writing  on  the  day
following  that  it  had  finally  solved  his  doubts  as  to  the
truth  of  spiritualism.  This  tendency  impulsively  to  accept
evidence  on  the  positive  side — to  welcome  it  at  first  sight  as
convincing — never  left  him,  I  think.  It  was  on  second
thoughts  that  doubts  came  in.

Whether  any  special  cause  led  him  in  early  days  to  the
more  sceptical  attitude  I  do  not  know.  It  may  have  been
due  to  the  discovery  of  fraud  where  he  had  suspected
none,  or  it  may  have  been  merely  a  reaction  from  too
facile  belief  that  came  with  larger  views.  Probably  both
causes  co-operated.  It  at  any  rate  seems  likely  that  the
knowledge  that  he  had  at  one  time  been  too  easily  con-
vinced developed  in  him  the  very  cautious  and  critical
spirit  he  exhibited  as  a  member  of  our  Society.  The  dis-
illusionment seems  to  have  been  gradual.  In  1880  he
addressed  the  National  Association  of  Spiritualists  as  a
spiritualist,  though  with  "a  voice  from  Laodicea."1  And  though
he  said  that  so  far  from  believing  in  the  spiritualistic  theory,
he  could  not  even  say  that  he  believed  the  most  elementary
facts  which  he  had  witnessed  and  on  which  that  theory  is
based,  the  general  trend  of  the  address  is  rather  to  maintain
that  from  psychological  causes  he  and  others  like  him  cannot
maintain  their  belief — not  because  they  discover  the  evidence
to  be  bad,  but  because  the  experiences  that  for  a  moment
convince fit in so little with the  ordinary facts and  ex-

1  This  was  the  title  of  his  lecture,  see  Spiritualist  newspaper  for  March  26,
1880.


lxil] Frank  Poclmore  and  Psychical  Research.


7


periences  of  life  that  the  mind  instinctively  rejects  them  as
soon  as  the  first  vivid  impression  has  worn  off.

It  is  probable,  however,  that  at  the  time  he  gave  the  address
he  had  already  come  to  the  opinion,  which  he  certainly  held
later,  that  there  was  very  little,  if  any,  really  good  evidence
for  Spiritualism.  And  what  is  really  interesting  about  Mr.
Podmore  and  what  made  him  so  valuable  a  member  of  our  Society
was  that  he  suffered  this  set-back  from  a  position  too  hastily
taken  up  without  losing  his  belief  in  the  great  importance  of
Psychical  Research ;  that  he  remained  to  the  end  of  his  life
willing  to  give  the  great  amount  of  time  and  trouble  he  did
to  the  investigation.  He  was  rewarded  by  some  positive  con-
clusions. Of  the  reality  of  telepathy  between  living  persons
he  had  no  doubt.  The  address  to  which  I  have  already
referred  shows  us  that  he  had  been  convinced  of  this  from  a
very  early  date.  "Some  six  years  ago,"  he  says  in  1880,
"  when  I  first  believed  in  Spiritualism,  I  instituted  a  few
experiments  in  table-turning  with  a  circle  of  intimate  friends.
The  results  most  convincingly  proved  the  possibility,  under
certain  conditions,  of  mind  influencing  mind  without  the  ordi-
nary means  of  communication."  From  this  belief  and  a
perception  of  the  great  importance  of  it  I  have  no  reason
to  think  he  ever  swerved,  and  he  certainly  held  it  strongly
during  all  the  later  years  of  his  life.  In  his  last  book,
The  Newer  Spiritualism,  which  he  left  ready  for  publication,
but  which  only  appeared  after  his  death,  he  concluded  by
saying :  "  If  we  reject,  for  the  present,  at  any  rate,  the  explana-
tion ...  of  communication  from  the  dead,  we  must  seek  for
some  other  cause  adequate  to  the  effects.  There  remains  only
the  agency  which  has  been  provisionally  named  telepathy  .  .  .  .
The  establishment  of  such  a  faculty  .  .  .  would  surely  be  a
result  worth  all  the  labour  spent.  .  .  ."

And  labour  on  it  and  on  all  branches  of  Psychical
Research,  as  I  have  already  said,  he  never  grudged.  From
being  an  active  member  of  investigating  committees  of  our
Society  in  early  days,  he  became  a  collaborator  with  Mr.
Gurney  and  Mr.  Myers  in  the  book  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
which  was  the  first  great  attempt  at  co-ordinating  the  fruits
of  the  Society's  work.  Mr.  Gurney  was,  as  we  know,  mainly
responsible  for  the  actual  writing,  as  well  as  for  most  of  the


8


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


theoretical  discussion  in  the  book,  but,  as  is  stated  in  the
preface,  "  the  most  difficult  and  important  part  of  the  under-
taking— the  collection,  examination,  and  appraisal  of  evidence —
has  been  throughout  a  joint  labour ;  of  which  Mr.  Podmore
has  borne  so  large  a  share  that  his  name  could  not  possibly
have  been  omitted  from  the  title-page."  This  was  in  1886,
and  I  may  point  out  that  his  co-operation  in  this  work  is
itself  a  proof  that  Ins  work  was  not  entirely  destructive,  as
some  people  seem  to  think.  Later  he  contributed  several  im-
portant studies  and  many  reviews  to  our  Proceedings.  The  most
important  papers  are  "  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  from  another
Point  of  View,"  in  1889  (Vol.  VI.),  "Poltergeists,"  in  1896
(Vol.  XII.),  both  of  which  are  based  in  part  on  cases  he  had
himself  investigated;  and  "Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena
of  Mrs.  Piper,"  in  1898  (Vol.  XIV.)  All  these  contain
important  evidential  discussion,  and  much  of  the  matter  in
them,  with  occasionally  some  modification  of  view,  has  been
incorporated  in  the  appropriate  parts  of  the  books  on  Psychical
Research  which  he  has  since  published.1

These  books  cover  nearly  the  whole  range  of  Psychical
Research,  and  are  valuable  as  giving  the  results  in  a  popular
and  readable  form  without  sacrifice  of  exactness  of  statement.
In  fact,  with  a  candid  and  impartial  mind  and  a  good
judgment,  a  pleasant  style  and  a  faculty  for  clear  arrange-
ment and  lucid  exposition,  a  wide  and  thorough  knowledge
of  the  subjects  dealt  with,  both  through  historical  reading,
personal  investigation,  and  careful  following  of  the  investiga-
tions of  others,  he  could  not  but  be  an  excellent  exponent
as  well  as  a  good  critic.  His  Modern  Spiritualism  is  likely,  I
think,  to  remain  a  standard  work  on  the  history  of  that  subject.
But  it  is  not  only  in  narrative  or  descriptive  writing  that  he
is  good  ;  he  can  also  put  succinctly  and  clearly  discussions
of  theoretical  questions — physiological  or  psychological — as  an
instance  of  which  I  may  mention  the  chapter  on  "  Hallucina-
tion in  General "  in  Apparitions  and  Thought-Transference.

What  his  writings  are  apt  to  lack  is  the  quality  of  inspirit-

1  The  books  are:  Apparitions  and  Thought- Transference,  1894;  Studies  in
Psychical  Research,  1897 ;  Modern  Spiritualism,  1902 ;  The  Naturalisation  of
the  Supernatural,  1908 ;  Mesmerism  and  Christian  Science,  1909 ;  The  Newer
Spiritualism,  1910.


LXII.]


Frank  Podmore  and  Psychical  Research.


9


ingness,  if  I  may  coin  a  word.  It  is  not  every  one  who  has
the  courage  and  perseverance  of  Mr.  Podmore  himself,  and  the
critical  attitude  he  maintains  is  apt  to  produce  on  less  vigorous
investigators  the  effect  of  a  douche  of  cold  water  from  which
they  cannot  react,  and  from  which  therefore  they  instinctively
recoil.  I  think  it  is  this  which  has  made  some  members  of  the
Society  impatient  with  him.  Not  realising  how  open-minded  he
really  was,  and  how  honest  his  search  for  truth,  they  have
regarded  him  as  almost  in  antagonism  to  advance  in  a  positive
direction.  This  is,  I  am  sure,  a  great  mistake.  He  would
have  rejoiced  as  much  as  any  of  us  in  the  attainment  of
positive  conclusions,  though  more  cautious  than  some  of  us  in
accepting  them.

In  the  meanwhile,  on  the  way  to  these  conclusions,  there  is
no  doubt  that  Mr.  Podmore's  critical  attitude,  combined  with
his  wide  and  thorough  acquaintance  with  facts  and  theories,
actual  and  historical,  concerning  the  subjects  with  which  the
Society  deals,  was  of  immense  value  in  our  work.  Psychical
Eesearch  suffers  far  more,  I  think,  from  ignorance  than  from
deliberate  opposition ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  most
harm  is  done  by  the  ignorantly  credulous,  who  accept  appear-
ances too  readily  at  their  face  value  and  theorise  without
taking  into  account  all  the  facts,  or  by  the  ignorantly
incredulous,  who  do  not  take  the  trouble  to  find  out  what  it  is
they  are  attacking.  Ignorant  criticism  we  can  get  plenty  of,
but  when  not  harmful  it  is  usually  quite  useless.  What  it  is
not  easy  to  find  is  a  man  with  unflagging  energy  in  keeping
his  knowledge  up  to  date,  unflagging  belief  in  the  importance
of  the  investigation,  who  yet  can  put  himself  outside  it  and
view  it  from  an  impartial,  impersonal,  and  mainly  critical
standpoint.  All  real  scientific  investigators,  of  course,  however
sanguine  and  enthusiastic,  endeavour  to  maintain  a  critical
attitude  ;  but  there  is  a  distinct  advantage,  at  least  in  investi-
gations so  difficult  and  elusive  as  ours,  in  having,  so  to  speak,  a
professional  critic.  It  is  a  useful  division  of  labour,  and  an
investigator  of  sanguine  temperament  can  more  easily  let  himself
go  in  speculations  and  hypotheses  of  a  daring  kind  if  he  knows
that  what  he  says  will  be  closely  criticised  by  a  competent,  but
colder  and  more  cautious  colleague,  and  possible  weak  points
discovered  and  exposed  for  discussion.


10


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


The  Society  will  be  fortunate,  indeed,  if  it  finds  another
critic  equally  friendly,  learned,  painstaking,  and  accurate,  to
take  Mr.  Podmore's  place  and  put  the  brake  on  when  there
are  any  signs  of  running  too  fast.  And  it  will  be  still  more
fortunate  if  those  who  are  working  for  the  Society  find  in  their
new  critic  so  kindly  and  unselfseeking  a  colleague  as  Frank
Pod  more.


LXII.]


In  Memory  of  William  James.


1  1


III.

IN  MEMORY  OF WILLIAM  JAMES.

By  W.  M 'DOUG  ALL.

At  the  end  of  August  of  this  year  [1910]  the  telegraphic  cables
carried  to  every  part  of  the  civilised  world  the  news  of  the
death  of  William  James,  and  in  every  country  many  hundreds
of  men  and  women  felt  that  one  of  the  great  lights  was  gone,
one  of  the  great  forces  withdrawn.  It  was  no  occasion  for
bitter  regret  ;  for  James  was  approaching  the  usual  term  of
man's  active  life,  and,  though  there  had  been  good  reason  to
anticipate  further  additions  to  his  intellectual  output,  he  had
already  made  a  rich  and  splendid  contribution  to  the  thought
of  our  age  ;  he  had  achieved  a  world-wide  fame  and  was
regarded  with  intense  admiration  and  affection  by  a  host  of
readers  and  a  large  band  of  personal  friends.  We  had  rather
to  be  glad  in  the  knowledge  that  his  death  was  preceded  by
no  severely  disabling  and  prolonged  malady,  and  that  he
enjoyed  until  the  last  days  the  active  exercise  of  his  great
powers.

It  is  fitting  that  at  this,  the  first  meeting  of  the  Society
since  his  death,  we  should  record  our  sense  of  his  services  to
the  Society ;  and  that  we  should  spend  a  little  time  in  bringing
before  our  minds  the  nature  and  extent  of  those  services,  and
in  making  clear  to  ourselves  the  attitude  towards  the  work
and  aims  of  the  Society  of  one  whose  opinion  in  regard  to
that  work  and  those  aims  was  entitled  to  carry  more  weight
than  the  opinion  of  any  person  now  living.

I  could  wish  that  the  honour  of  voicing  our  tribute  to
William  James  had  fallen  to  one  who  could  claim  old-standing


12


W.  M'Dougall.


[part


friendship  with  him,  one  who  could  give  you  some  intimate
glimpses  of  his  noble  and  strenuous  character  and  of  the
growth  and  working  of  his  clear-shining  intellect.  My  own
personal  acquaintance  with  James  (I  hope  I  may  say  friend-
ship, for  he  won  my  heart  at  our  first  meeting)  was  of  few
years'  standing  only.  But  for  nearly  twenty  years  I  have  been
an  enthusiastic  reader  of  all  his  works,  and  for  nearly  the
same  period  have  known  him  to  be  the  largest  influence
affecting  my  intellectual  life.

I  must,  then,  be  content  to  try  to  put  together  an  outline
sketch  of  James'  work  and  influence  in  relation  to  our  Society.

James  was  happy  in  that  his  life  was  in  a  quite  exceptional
degree  a  unified  system  of  activities.  Beginning  with  a
thorough  study  of  the  biological  and  medical  sciences,  he
actively  pursued  these  until  near  his  fortieth  year  as  assistant
professor  of  physiology  at  Harvard.  He  was  then  appointed
to  a  chair  of  psychology  in  the  same  University  and  devoted
himself  chiefly  to  that  subject  for  more  than  twenty  years.
The  appearance  in  1891  of  his  great  book,  the  Principles  of
Psychologij,  secured  for  him  a  world-wide  reputation  as  the
greatest  psychologist  of  his  age,  perhaps  (as  Prof.  Dewey  has
lately  said)  the  greatest  of  any  age.  From  that  time  onward
his  productive  activity  turned  more  and  more  towards  the
problems  of  general  philosophy,  and  since  1902,  when  he
became  professor  of  philosophy  at  Harvard,  it  was  devoted
almost  wholly  to  those  problems.  This  may  well  be  regarded
as  an  ideal  course  of  intellectual  activity :  would  that  all  our
philosophers  could  approach  their  tasks  with  the  same  expert
knowledge  of  the  natural  sciences  and  of  psychology '

During  the  period  of  his  philosophic  activity  James  made
himself  the  acknowledged  leader  of  a  school  of  thought  (the
pragmatic  and  radical  empiricist  school)  which,  whatever  fate
be  in  store  for  it,  has  been  a  most  active  ferment  in  the
philosophical  world ;  to  it  has  been  largely  due  that  great
revival  of  philosophical  activity  which  marks  the  opening  years
of  the  twentieth  century.

James'  active  interest  in  "  Psychical  Eesearch,"  which  ex-
tended through  the  last  thirty  years  of  his  life,  was  not  some-
thing apart  from  and  disconnected  from  the  main  system  of  his
activity ;  rather  it  was  for  him  an  integral  part  of  the  whole,


LXII.]


In  Memory  of  William  James.


13


a  part  most  intimately  connected  with  the  rest.  It  was  the
expression  of  the  same  tendencies  of  mind  which  shaped  all
his  philosophical  work ;  to  it  he  brought,  or  rather,  to  it  he
was  brought  by,  just  those  peculiar  qualities  of  mind  that
made  him  so  original  and  successful  in  the  more  strictly
academic  fields  of  philosophy  and  psychology.

In  any  attempt  to  define  these  special  qualities,  the  first
place  must  be  assigned  to  his  direct  vision  of,  and  to  bis
keen  sense  of  the  importance  of,  the  concrete  realities  of
human  life.  Always  he  comes  back  to  empirical  realities,  to
the  immediate  experience  of  men  in  general  as  the  ground
and  test  of  all  theoretical  constructions.  This  was  the  key-
note of  all  his  efforts,  of  all  that  was  most  original  in  his
psychology  {e.g.  his  description  of  the  stream  of  thought  with
which  the  Principles  sets  out),  of  his  pragmatism,  of  his
radical  empiricism,  of  his  pluralism,  of  his  epoch-making  study
of  the  religious  consciousness,  and  of  his  keen  interest  in
"  Psychical  Eesearch."

It  was  this  keen  sense  of  reality  which,  in  spite  of  his
large  tolerance,  led  him  to  occasional  expressions  of  impatience
directed  against  what  he  called  vicious  intellectualism,  and
against  the  rationalistic  construction  of  theories  of  the  universe
that  are  totally  indifferent  to  the  actual  nature  of  the  world
we  know.  It  was  this  which  forbade  him  to  attempt  to
impose  system  and  order  where  none  can  be  discerned,  forbade
him  to  aim  at  constructing  a  finished  picture  of  the  universe,
and  led  him  to  prefer  a  "  thick "  to  a  "  thin "  philosophy  ;
meaning  by  the  "  thin "  highly  abstract  and  purely  logical
procedures  such  as  those  which  lead  to  the  conception  of  the
Absolute  as  the  only  reality ;  and  by  the  "  thick "  a  way  of
thinking  that  involves  constant  reference  to,  and  faithful  regard
for,  the  largest  possible  mass  of  empirical  fact.  "  A  large
acquaintance  with  particulars,"  he  said,  "  often  makes  us  wiser
than  the  possession  of  abstract  formulae,  however  deep."

Another  striking  characteristic  was  his  wonderful  open-
mindedness.  He  was  always  ready  and  anxious  to  find  the
possible  grain  of  truth  in  every  belief,  the  possible  gleam  of
insight  in  every  human  utterance,  whether  in  a  philosophical
system  of  the  kind  least  attractive  to  him,  in  the  wildest
assertions  of  religious  exaltation,  or in  the  crude  expressions


14


W.  M'Dougall.


[part


of  less  gifted,  and  especially  younger,  colleagues.  He  had  the
keen  eye  of  the  great  scientist  for  the  significance  of  the
exceptional,  the  seemingly  irregular  and  unintelligible  pheno-
menon. I  well  remember  a  Fellow  of  the  Eoyal  Society  saying
to  me  :  "  I'm  not  interested  in  anything  until  I  can  understand
it."  James'  attitude  was  just  the  opposite  of  that.  He  was
most  interested  in  whatever  was  most  difficult  to  understand,
most  problematic.  I  venture  to  say  that  that  is  the  truly
scientific  attitude  characteristic  of  all  great  discoverers.  The
smaller  minds  are  not  interested  in,  they  cannot  apperceive  or
become  aware  of,  phenomena  that  will  not  fit  into  their  par-
ticular system  of  pigeon-holes,  and  will  not  wear  any  one  of
their  stereotyped  labels.

This  large  openness  of  mind,  together  with  his  native
kindliness,  rendered  him  wonderfully  appreciative  of  the  work
of  other  men ;  also  it  prevented  his  thought  from  crystallising
in  any  rigid  forms,  and  allowed  his  intellect  to  go  on  growing
till  the  last.  To  his  generous  appreciativeness  many  a  younger
and  obscure  colleague  in  the  fields  of  philosophy  and  psychology
could  bear  grateful  witness.  It  was  finely  displayed  when,
two  years  ago,  James  introduced  the  ideas  of  Prof.  Bergson  to
an  Oxford  audience.  Instead  of  regarding  his  younger  and
less  widely  famous  colleague  as  a  rival  to  be  jealously  criticised,
he  gave  a  glowingly  eulogistic  account  of  his  teaching,  admitted
that  it  had  worked  a  revolution  in  his  own  mind,  and  ranked
himself  as  a  disciple.  The  same  fine  trait  was  strikingly
displayed  again  in  the  last  published  work  of  his  pen,
the  article  on  a  Pluralistic  Mystic  in  a  recent  number  of  the
Hibbert  Journal.

Thirdly,  it  was  characteristic  of  James  that  he  took  his
philosophy  very  seriously.  For  him  it  was  no  merely  academic
game  in  which  each  player  plays  for  his  own  hand,  striving
to  devise  some  system  peculiar  to  himself;  rather,  in  his  view,
the  advance  of  philosophy  was  a  matter  of  the  greatest
practical  importance  for  the  welfare  of  mankind.  Constantly
he  had  in  view  human  needs  and  aspirations,  human  limita-
tions and  human  possibilities.  In  all  his  writings  there  is
manifested  (and  more  and  more  clearly  if  they  are  considered
in  the  order  of  their  production)  his  earnest  wish  to  come  to
agreement  with  others,  to  achieve  a  view  of  the  world  that


lx  i  r.  ]  >>  >fyh ;  §(zifho>ry  °pf\ illia,in\  James.  1 5

shall  be  acceptable  to  all  men ;  his  strong  desire  to  bring
increase  of  •  -philosophic/  undemanding  father  than  merely  to
develop  and  establish  -  his '  'o'wn  circle  of  ideas.  The  same
earnestness  was  shewn  by  the  continuance  of  his  strenuous
activity  after  his  retirement  from  his  chair  at  Harvard  at
an  age  at  which  he  might  well  have  claimed  the  right  to  rest
on  his  laurels.

If  to  these  three  distinctive  qualities  of  his  mind  we  add
a  penetrating  and  versatile  intellect,  a  strong  sense  of  humour,
and  great  powers  of  expression,  we  have,  I  think,  the  main
psychological  keys  to  the  understanding  of  his  intellectual
achievements.  That  the  style  is  the  man  was  eminently  true
of  James  ;  his  lively  and  forcible  style,  which  made  everything
he  wrote  a  delight  to  his  readers,  reveals  everywhere  the
qualities  we  have  noted,  the  keen  eye  for  empirical  fact  and
the  faithful  acceptance  of  it  as  the  foundation  and  test  of
all  theoretical  constructions  and  of  all  beliefs ;  the  open-
mindedness ;  the  interest  in  and  generous  appreciation  of  the
ideas  of  other  men ;  the  earnest  desire  to  harmonise  all  human
knowledge  in  one  continuously  advancing  body  of  pragmatic
truth.

Such  in  barest  outline  was  the  man.  Let  us  now  record
with  gratitude  his  services  to  the  cause  of  "  Psychical  Research."
Most  obvious  to  the  world  at  large  and  of  inestimable  benefit
to  this  Society  was  the  fact  of  his  open  and  active  espousal
of  its  cause,  his  lending  his  name  and  prestige  at  a  time
when  to  be  a  prominent  member  of  the  Society  was  to  incur
risk  of  ridicule,  or  worse.  The  Society  has  been  fortunate  in
counting  among  its  members,  especially  among  its  presidents
and  vice-presidents,  a  number  of  names  of  the  highest  intel-
lectual distinction  ;  but,  with  the  single  exception  of  that  of
our  revered  first  President,  no  name  probably  has  been,  or
could  have  been,  of  so  much  service  to  the  Society  as  that
of  William  James.  For  his  claims  to  be  heard  with  respect
on  all  branches  of  our  work  were  unique.  No  other  man
of  our  time  has  made  an  equal  mark  in  science,  philosophy,
and  religion ;  no  one  has  moved  with  so  much  mastery  in  all
these  three  great  fields  of  thought.

But  James  was  not  content  to  serve  as  our  figure-head,
and  to  lend  us  moral  support  and  the  prestige  of  his  name.


16  W.  M'-Donqall. ,  Tpart

■  °  •  ""•  •  o  "  o „s  s  <•;.<•  5-  i>°!c":"'t

He  has  done  much  hard  spade-work  for  the  Society.  He
was  one  of  the  founders .  of  the' -American'  Society,  and  one
of  its  most  active  leaders  from  its  inception  in,  1884  until
its  union  with  our  parent  Society  in  1890.  He  was  the
discoverer  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the  first  carefully  to  investigate
and  report  upon  her  trances ;  and,  after  Dr.  Hodgson  went  to
America  to  take  up  her  case,  James  supported  that  prince  of
investigators  with  active  help  and  warm  friendship.  To  the
Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  he  contributed  papers  on
hypnotism  and  automatic  writing  based  on  personal  investiga-
tion. He  was  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the  English  Society
from  1884-1889,  a  Vice-President  from  1890-1910,  and
President  during  the  years  1894-5.  Besides  his  presidential
address,  he  contributed  a  number  of  papers  to  our  Proceedings
and  undertook  a  large  amount  of  work  in  connexion  with  the
census  of  hallucinations.

James  wrote  also  at  least  three  weighty  expositions  of  the
work  and  aims  of  the  Society  in  three  of  the  leading  popular
magazines  of  the  United  States ; 1  and  he  brought  together
parts  of  these  in  an  essay  published  in  the  very  widely  read
volume  entitled  "  The  Will  to  Believe."  That  essay  must,  I
think,  be  regarded  as  the  most  powerful  and  convincing  of  all
apologies  for  this  Society.

But  James'  moral  support  of,  and  his  active  participation
in  the  work  of,  the  Society  were  neither  the  whole  nor  the
chief  part  of  his  services  to  "  Psychical  Research."  If  James
had  never  been  a  member  of  our  Society,  if  even  he  had
never  heard  of  it  and  its  work,  we  should  still  have  to
recognise  him  as  a  great  influence,  perhaps  the  greatest
individual  influence  of  our  time,  making  for  the  progress  and
extension  of  our  enterprise.  For  the  main  tendency  and  aim
of  all  his  widely  influential  teaching  was  identical  with  what
I  take  to  be  the  deepest  lying  aim  which  the  Society  pursues
along  its  highly  special  line  of  inquiry — namely,  the  reconcilia-
tion of  science  and  religion  on  empirical  grounds.

That  the  reconciliation  of  science  with  religion  is  the
essential  task  of  philosophy  has  long  been  widely  recognised.
But  no  such reconciliation has yet  been  achieved.  James

1Scribner,s  Magazine,  March,  1890;  The  Forum,  July,  1892;  The  American
Magazine,  1908.


LXII.]


In  Memory  of  William  James.


17


found  himself  in  a  world  in  which  almost  all  influential
thinkers  accepted  one  or  other  of  two  types  of  philosophy.
On  the  one  hand  was  the  naturalistic  school,  which  held  fast
to  the  world  of  empirical  fact,  and  to  the  principle  that  the
laws  of  mechanism  hold  undisputed  sway  throughout  the
universe ;  its  utmost  concession  to  religion  being  such  recogni-
tion of  an  Unknowable  power  behind  all  things  as  Herbert
Spencer  taught.  On  the  other  hand  were  the  transcendental
idealists,  who,  having  capitulated  to  empirical  science  as  regards
all  the  phenomenal  world,  claimed  to  have  learnt  from  Kant
and  Hegel  how  to  preserve  a  quasi-religious  sphere  of  thought
by  constructing  a  purely  logical  scheme  of  reality  that  bore
no  relation  whatever  to  the  world  of  empirical  fact,  one  which
would  remain  equally  valid  no  matter  what  might  be  the
nature  of  our  human  experience  of  the  world  in  which  we
live  our  daily  lives — a  time- less,  space-less,  cause-less,  un-
changing, infinite  whole.

However  widely  different  were  the  tempers  and  teachings  of
these  two  dominant  schools  of  the  Unknowable  and  the
Absolute,  they  agreed  in  one  point  of  fundamental  importance,
namely,  they  acknowledged  the  absolute  sway  of  mechanical
principles  in  the  empirical  world  ;  that  is  to  say,  both  alike
were  thoroughly  mechanistic.  To  both  these  schools  James
resolutely  opposed  himself.  He  doubted  whether  the  human
mind  would  ever  achieve  the  ideal  of  philosophy,  a  system  of
knowledge  complete  and  harmonious  in  all  its  parts ;  he  was
very  certain  that  no  such  system  has  been,  or  can  yet  be,
constructed.  "  The  actual  universe,"  he  said,  "  is  a  thing  wide
open,  but  rationalism  makes  systems,  and  systems  must  be
closed."  1  He  protested  and  rebelled  against  all  closed  systems ;
he  saw  on  every  hand  the  raw  edges  of  our  knowledge ;  but
that  did  not  lead  him  merely  to  seek  more  facts ;  he  was
a  genuine  and  original  philosopher  in  that  he  persistently
sought  better  ways  of  understanding  the  facts  we  have.  He
firmly  believed  that  human  knowledge  is  but  at  the  beginning
of  its  course  ;  and  he  believed  that,  if  only  because  human
knowledge  is  growing,  the  universe,  of  which  that  knowledge
is  a  part,  is  growing  also. "  Eeality,"  he  said,  ".  .  .is  still

1  Pragmatism :  a  New  Name  for  some  old  ways  of  thinking,  London,  1907,
p.  27.

B


18


W.  M'BougaU.


[part


in  the  making,  and  waits  part  of  its  complexion  from  the
future  .  .  .  the  universe  is  still  pursuing  its  adventures." 1

The  only  reality  recognised  by  Eationalism  of  either  type
he  found  intolerably  unreal.  He  could  not  away  with  the
optimism  of  the  Absolutist  rationalism  which  condones  the
miseries  of  man  as  necessary  parts  of  the  Absolute's  perfection ;
he  recognised  the  looseness  of  the  reasoning  by  which
Absolutism  seeks  to  establish  itself,  and  affirmed  the  absurdity
of  the  claim  of  that  reasoning  to  compel  our  assent  to  its
conclusions.  He  boldly  asserted  that  the  only  view  of  the
universe  acceptable  to  him  was  one  that  regards  it  as  capable
of  becoming  something  better  than  it  is,  and  as  one  in  which
the  moral  efforts  of  men  may  contribute  towards  that  result.
His  philosophic  aim  was  to  conceive  the  universe  in  accord-
ance with  these  demands,  and  to  shape  a  philosophy  capable
of  development,  consciously  incomplete,  looking  to  the  empirical
sciences  for  aid,  and  requiring  for  its  completion  the  co-
operative efforts  of  many  generations  of  thinkers ;  a  philosophy
which  shall  work  in  the  scientific  spirit  rather  than  in  that
of  rationalistic  dogma,  regarding  its  most  cherished  conceptions
as  but  hypotheses  to  be  constantly  tested  and  evaluated  by  the
pragmatic  method,  that  is  to  say,  with  regard  to  their  signifi-
cance and  value  as  guides  to  human  life.

James,  therefore,  rejected  as  unproven  and  improbable  the
assumption  common  to  both  the  dominant  schools,  the  assump-
tion of  the  absolute  sway  of  mechanical  causation  in  the
empirical  world  ;  and  in  standing  out  thus  against  the  mechanistic
dogma,  he  was,  of  course,  striking  a  powerful  blow  for  "  Psychical
Eesearch."  For  of  all  the  considerations  that  lead  men  to
ignore  and  deny  the  aims  of  "Psychical  Eesearch,"  to  affirm
the  impossibility  of  the  happenings  we  record,  the  mechanistic
dogma  is  by  far  the  most  influential ;  "  these  things,"  they
say,  "  cannot  happen,  for  they  are  incompatible  with  our
mechanical  first  principles."

James'  brilliant  attack  on  the  two  most  prevalent  philo-
sophies has  swept  away  this  dogma  from  the  minds  of  many,
and  has  shaken  its  hold  on  the  minds  of  many  more  ;  it  has
shewn  that  these  are  not  the  only  possible  philosophies  for  a
self-respecting  man  of  modern  culture ;  it  has  taught  all  who

1  Pragmatism,  p.  257.


LXII.]


In  Memory  of  William  James.


19


have  felt  its  force  to  keep  open  minds,  to  recognise  the  uncer-
tainty of  all  philosophic  conclusions,  to  respect  empirical  fact,
and  to  recognise  that  in  our  present  state  of  ignorance  it  is
absurd  to  pretend  to  say  that  this  or  that  cannot  happen.

Every  part  of  James'  work  contributed  towards  this  effect,
so  favourable  to  "  Psychical  Eesearch " ;  for  it  was  all  of  a
piece.  His  pragmatism  was  primarily  an  extension  of  the
scientific  attitude  of  mind  towards  the  problems  and  theories
of  philosophy.  As  the  instrumental  theory  of  truth  it  became
a  powerful  lever  for  the  uprooting  of  the  dogmas  of  both
naturalism  and  absolutism.  His  radical  empiricism  was  the
natural  supplement  of  his  pragmatism,  and  his  pluralism  the
natural,  if  not  the  inevitable,  outcome  of  their  conjunction.
Together  they  made  strongly  for  the  rescue  of  human  person-
ality from  the  position  of  indignity  and  insignificance  to  which
it  had  been  reduced  by  both  the  prevalent  systems.  They
made  plausible,  or  at  least  possible,  a  belief  in  some  survival
after  death,  the  belief  in  a  personal  God  and  in  a  real  com-
munion between  God  and  man,  and  even  the  belief  in  the
objective  efficacy  of  prayer  and  of  moral  effort.

James  treated  psychology  as  one  of  the  natural  sciences ;
but  he  consistently  refused  to  reduce  all  consciousness  to  the
level  of  an  epiphenomenon  or  silent  spectator ;  he  insisted
always  on  the  real  efficiency  of  our  consciousness,  our  feelings,
our  efforts,  our  thoughts  as  teleological  co-determinants  of  our
bodily  movements.  He  discovered  an  unsuspected  wealth  of
detail  in  the  stream  of  consciousness ;  and  he  restored  to  that
stream  its  unity,  rejecting  root  and  branch  the  mechanical
descriptions  and  explanations  of  associationism.  He  restored
effort,  activity,  desire,  in  short,  the  will,  to  its  rightful  place.
He  was  the  first  academic  psychologist  to  make  adequate
recognition  of  the  importance  of  modern  medical  studies  of
hysteria  and  of  the  reality  and  theoretical  importance  of
hypnotism,  automatic  speech  and  writing,  and  states  of  dissocia-
tion in  general.

Above  all  he  was  the  first  to  grasp  firmly  the  thorny  subject
of  the  psychology  of  the  religious  consciousness ;  boldly  to
admit  the  pathological  character  or  affinities  of  many  of  its
manifestations,  and  yet  to  affirm  their  value  and  to  find  in
them  empirical  evidence  of  the  truth  of  religion. His  Varieties


20


W.  M'Dougall,


[part


of  Religious  Experience  was  immensely  successful.  Psychology
had  been  regarded  as  the  natural  enemy  of  religion.  All  that
was  changed  at  once,  and  the  few  years  that  have  elapsed
since  the  appearance  of  that  book  have  seen  the  birth  of
several  journals  wholly  devoted  to  religious  psychology,  and
the  publication  of  a  dense  stream  of  books  and  pamphlets  on
the  same  subject,  mostly  written  by  religiously-minded  persons,
many  of  them  by  theologians  and  eminent  divines.

In  all  these  ways,  then,  James'  philosophical  activity  ran
parallel  in  a  larger  orbit  with  the  work  of  the  S.P.E.  It  was
a  philosophy  which  justified  our  methods  and  our  aims,  and
rendered  possible  at  least  the  hope  of  finding  in  the  general
scheme  of  things  an  intelligible  place  for  the  facts  we
aim  at.

In  these  three  ways,  then,  James  rendered  immense  service  to
"  Psychical  Eesearch."  Let  us  ask — What  did  the  Society  do
for  him  ?  What  in  his  view  has  it  achieved,  and  what  was
the  importance  for  his  thought  of  that  achievement  ?

James  distinguished  broadly  what  he  called  the  mechanical
and  the  personal  views  of  nature — "  science,"  he  said,  "  essentially
only  stands  for  a  method  and  for  no  fixed  belief;  yet  as
habitually  taken,  both  by  its  votaries  and  outsiders,  it  is  identi-
fied with  a  certain  fixed  belief — the  belief  that  the  hidden  order
of  nature  is  mechanical  exclusively,  and  that  non-mechanical
categories  are  irrational  ways  of  conceiving  and  explaining  even
such  things  as  human  life."  To  this  "  mechanical  rationalism,"
as  he  called  it,  James'  whole  drift  and  striving  were  opposed ;
for  him  the  personal  view  of  nature  was  the  true  one ;  and
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  greatly  strengthened  in
this  belief  by  his  knowledge  of  the  results  of  "  Psychical
Eesearch."

As  early  as  1890  he  proclaimed  Mrs.  Piper  as  his  'one
white  crow,'  meaning  that  her  case  had  made  it  impossible  to
accept  the  principle  that  our  knowledge  comes  to  us  only  by
the  channels  of  sense.  And,  needless  to  say,  his  conviction
of  the  supernormal  origin  of  her  trance-knowledge  was  but
strengthened  by  his  later  acquaintance  with  that  remarkable
woman.  This  case,  together  with  other  evidence,  convinced
him  that  our  minds  can  and  do  communicate  in  some  way
that cannot be reconciled with the mechanical categories ;


LXII.]


In  Memory  of  William  James.


21


or,  in  other  words,  that  telepathy  is  a  fact  of  nature,  and
that  it  is  not  explicable  on  physical  principles.

To  have  found  adequate  empirical  evidence  of  this  trans-
cendence of  the  mechanical  categories  was  of  crucial  importance
for  James'  system  of  thought.  If,  as  he  held,  the  proof  is
conclusive,  mechanistic  rationalism  is  finally  shattered  by  it,
and  the  personal  view  of  nature  established,  and  it  was  this
he  had  in  view  when  he  wrote  that  our  Society  has  restored
the  continuity  of  history.1

In  his  lectures  at  Oxford,  two  years  ago,  James  announced
his  firm  conviction  that  "  most  of  the  phenomena  of  psychic
research  are  rooted  in  reality,"  and  it  was  obvious,  I  think,
to  those  who  knew  him,  that  the  results  of  "Psychical  Eesearch"
had  played  a  greater  part  in  shaping  the  thought  of  those
lectures  than  he  judged  it  expedient  explicitly  to  affirm  before
an  audience  so  ignorant  of  the  facts.

In  a  recent  number  of  the  American  Magazine,  James'
undertook  to  state  the  principal  effect  upon  his  opinions  of
"  twenty-five  years  of  dabbling  in  1  Psychics.' " The  following

■"'Religious  thinking,  ethical  thinking,  poetical  thinking,  teleological,
emotional,  sentimental  thinking,  what  one  might  call  the  personal  view  of  life
to  distinguish  it  from  the  impersonal  and  mechanical,  and  the  romantic  view  of
life  to  distinguish  it  from  the  rationalistic  view,  have  been,  and  even  still  are,
outside  of  well-drilled  scientific  circles,  the  dominant  forms  of  thought.  But
for  mechanical  rationalism,  personality  is  an  insubstantial  illusion.  The  chronic
belief  of  mankind,  that  events  may  happen  for  the  sake  of  their  personal
significance,  is  an  abomination.  .  .  .  But  the  S.P.R.'s  Proceedings  have,  it
seems  to  me,  conclusively  proved  one  thing  to  the  candid  reader  ;  and  that
is  that  the  verdict  of  pure  insanity,  of  gratuitous  preference  for  error,  of
superstition  without  excuse,  which  the  scientists  of  our  day  are  led  by  their
intellectual  training  to  pronounce  upon  the  entire  thought  of  the  past,  is  a
most  shallow  verdict.  The  personal  and  romantic  view  of  life  has  other  roots
besides  wanton  exuberance  of  imagination  and  perversity  of  heart.  It  is
perennially  fed  by  facts  of  experience.  ...  It  is  the  intolerance  of  science  for
such  phenomena  as  we  are  studying,  her  peremptory  denial  either  of  their
existence  or  of  their  significance  (except  as  proofs  of  man's  absolute  innate
folly),  that  has  set  science  so  apart  from  the  common  sympathies  of  the  race.
I  confess  that  it  is  on  this,  its  humanizing  mission,  that  the  Society's  best
claim  to  the  gratitude  of  our  generation  seems  to  me  to  depend.  It  has
restored  continuity  to  history.  It  has  shown  some  reasonable  basis  for  the
most  superstitious  aberrations  of  the  foretime.  It  has  bridged  the  chasm,
healed  the  hideous  rift  that  science,  taken  in  a  certain  narrow  way,  has  shot
into  the  human  world"  (Essay  on  "Psychical  Research"  in  the  vol.  Will  to
Believe,  pp.  324-326).


22


W.  M'Dougall.


[part


are  the  main  points  of  his  confession.  "  I  am  baffled  as  to
spiiit-return,  and  as  to  many  other  special  problems."  He  held
the  spiritistic  hypothesis  unproven  ;  and  it  was  not  consistent
with  his  view  of  personality ;  nevertheless,  with  his  invariable
largeness,  he  kept  an  open  mind  in  that  direction.  As  regards
"  Physical  phenomena "  he  wrote :  "  I  find  myself  believing
that  there  is  '  something  in '  these  never-ending  reports  of
physical  phenomena,  although  I  haven't  yet  the  least  positive
notion  of  the  something.  It  becomes  to  my  mind  simply  a
very  worthy  problem  for  investigation."  The  main  ground  of
this  opinion  was  the  accumulation  of  evidence  to  form  what
he  called  a  faggot,  and  the  constancy  of  type  of  the  phenomena.

He  affirmed  the  frequency  of  automatic  writing,  and  its
constancy  to  type.

He  affirmed  "  the  presence,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  humbug,
of  really  supernormal  knowledge.  ...  In  really  strong  mediums
this  knowledge  seems  to  be  abundant,  though  it  is  usually
spotty,  capricious  and  unconnected."

He  inclined  ' '  to  picture  the  situation  as  an  interaction
between  slumbering  faculties  in  the  automatist's  mind  and
a  cosmic  environment  of  other  consciousness  of  some  sort
which  is  able  to  work  upon  them.  If  there  were  in  the
universe  a  lot  of  diffuse  soul-stuff,  unable  of  itself  to  get
into  consistent  personal  form,  or  to  take  permanent  possession
of  an  organism,  yet  always  craving  to  do  so,  it  might  get  its
head  into  the  air,  parasitically,  so  to  speak,  by  profiting  by
weak  spots  in  the  armor  of  human  minds,  and  slipping  in
and  stirring  up  there  the  sleeping  tendency  to  personate.  It
would  induce  habits  in  the  subconscious  region  of  the  mind
it  used  thus,  and  would  seek  above  all  things  to  prolong  its
social  opportunities  by  making  itself  agreeable  and  plausible.
It  would  drag  stray  scraps  of  truth  with  it  from  the  wider
environment,  but  would  betray  its  mental  inferiority  by
knowing  little  how  to  weave  them  into  any  important  or
significant  story."

He  added  his  conviction  that  "  the  phenomenon  is  actuated
by  will  of  some  sort  anyhow,"  meaning  that  the  messages  of
"  automatic  speech  and  writing"  are  not,  as  the  term  seems  to
imply,  the  products  of  merely  mechanical  neural  processes,  but
express  desire,  intention  and  design.


lxii.]  In  Memory  of  William  James.  23


He  concluded  by  asserting  the  enormous  complexity  of  the
phenomena  and  the  necessity  for  suspension  of  judgment  and
prolonged  and  patient  inquiry.  "  That  is  why  I  personally  am
as  yet  neither  a  convinced  believer  in  parasitic  demons,  nor  a
spiritist,  nor  a  scientist,  but  still  remain  a  psychical  researcher
waiting  for  more  facts  before  concluding."

"Hardly,  as  yet,  has  the  surface  of  the  facts  called  'psychic'
begun  to  be  scratched  for  scientific  purposes.  It  is  through
following  these  facts,  I  am  persuaded,  that  the  greatest  scientific
conquests  of  the  coming  generation  will  be  achieved."

These  few  extracts  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  nature  of  the
effect  in  James'  mind  produced  by  the  work  of  this  Society ;
they  show  that  this  effect  was  of  very  great,  in  fact,  of  crucial
importance.  They  show  also  that  his  attitude  towards  the
work  of  the  Society  was  truly  scientific  in  the  higher  sense  of
that  word,  and  that,  while  he  remained  thoroughly  critical  and
chary  of  forming  positive  conclusions,  he  confidently  regarded  the
results  hitherto  achieved  as  but  a  small  and  imperfect  sample
of  a  splendid  harvest  of  knowledge  still  to  be  reaped  by
"  Psychical  Eesearch."  To  my  mind  his  attitude  seems  wholly
admirable,  a  model  to  be  held  up  for  all  of  us  to  copy  as
nearly  as  our  powers  will  permit.

While,  then,  James  rendered  great  services  to  our  Society,
the  work  of  the  Society  powerfully  influenced  his  thought.
The  relations  between  him  and  the  Society  were  fruitful  and
reciprocally  advantageous  in  a  high  degree.  By  this  action
and  reaction  between  his  philosophical  principles  and  the
results  of  "  psychical  research,"  James'  thought  was  led  to  a
definite  issue  upon  the  problem,  which  is  at  once  the  central
problem  of  all  philosophy,  and  the  immediate  and  special
problem  for  the  illumination  of  which  this  Society  exists,
namely,  the  problem  of  the  nature  of  human  personalities  and
their  position  in  the  universe.

In  his  Principles  of  Psychology,  James  took  up  decidedly  the
antimechanical  view  of  the  human  organism,  criticising  most
effectively  and  destructively  those  various  formulations  of  the
relation  of  mind  to  body,  which  deny  all  real  efficiency  in  the
physical  world  of  our  consciousness,  our  thought,  feeling,  and
will,  the  epiphenomenalism  of  Huxley  and  most  naturalists,  and
the  various  forms  of  psycho-physical  parallelism. Classing  all


24


W.  M'Dougall.


[part


these  together  under  the  head  automaton-theory,  he  wrote  "  My
conclusion  is  that  to  urge  the  automaton  theory  upon  us,  as
it  is  now  urged,  on  purely  a  'priori  and  ^fist-metaphysical
grounds,  is  an  unwarrantable  impertinence  in  the  present  state
of  psychology."1  And  he  affirmed  that  "it  is  to  my  mind,
quite  inconceivable  that  consciousness  should  have  nothing  to
do  with  a  business  which  it  so  faithfully  attends  "  ;2  meaning
the  processes  of  the  brain.

Throughout  he  never  wavered  in  his  opposition  to  the
mechanical  philosophy,  whether  in  the  form  of  mechanical
materialism  or  the  mechanistic  rationalism  of  the  transcen-
dental idealists  or  absolutists.

ISTow  throughout  the  history  of  thought  the  great  rival  to
all  the  mechanistic  theories  has  been  the  soul-theory,  the
animistic  theory  that  man's  body  is  animated  by  a  soul,  an
immaterial  thinking  being,  which  is  the  ground  of  his  indi-
viduality, and  is  capable  of  surviving  the  death  of  his  body,
and  preserving  all  or  something  of  his  personality  beyond  the
grave.

It  might  have  been  expected  that  James'  rejection  of  all
the  mechanistic  doctrines  would  have  led  him  to  embrace  the
soul-theory.  But  he  never  did  accept  it.  In  the  Principles
he  presented  the  soul-theory  forcibly  and  sympathetically,  and
confessed  "  that  to  posit  a  soul  influenced  in  some  mysterious
way  by  the  brain-states  and  responding  to  them  by  conscious
affections  of  its  own,  seems  to  me  the  line  of  least  logical
resistance,  so  far  as  we  yet  have  attained." 3  But,  though
treating  the  theory  with  respect,  and  asserting  that  "  it  is  at
any  rate  less  positively  objectionable  than  either  mind-stuff  or  a
material  monad  creed,"4  he  insisted  that  "  it  does  not  strictly
explain  anything,"5  that  the  conception  of  the  soul  is  not
required  by  psychology,  and  that  the  passing  thought  of  each
moment  of  consciousness  is  the  only  subject  logically  required
for  the  intelligible  description  of  our  mental  life.

In  the  Principles,  then,  James,  refusing  to  accept  the  soul-
theory,  left  open  the  question  of  the  nature  and  ground  of
personality ;  and  in  his  later  writings  we  find  him  more
decidedly  opposed  to  the  soul-theory. In  his  Oxford  lectures

1  Principles,  vol.  i.  p.  138.  '  Ibid.  p.  136.  3  Vol.  i.  p.  181.

4  Op.  cit.  p.  182.  5  Op.  cit.  p.  371.


LXII.]


In  Memory  of  William  James.


25


of  two  years  ago  he  returned  to  the  question  and  said —
"  Souls  have  worn  out  both  themselves  and  their  welcome,
that  is  the  plain  truth.  Philosophy  ought  to  get  the  mani-
folds of  experience  unified  on  principles  less  empty.  Like
the  word  '  cause,'  the  word  '  soul '  is  but  a  theoretic  stop-
gap— it  marks  a  place  and  claims  it  for  future  explanation
to  occupy." 1  And  he  complained  that  the  conception  of  the
soul  has  no  pragmatic  significance ;  which  for  him  was  equiva-
lent to  saying  that  it  is  useless,  and  therefore  invalid.2

This  is  not  the  occasion  for  any  examination  of  James'
reasoning.  We  have  rather  to  seek  to  grasp  as  clearly  as
possible  what  his  own  view  was :  and  this  is  worth  doing
because  his  view  was  unfamiliar,  distinctive,  and  by  no  means
easy  to  seize.  James'  frequent  and  sympathetic  references  to
Myers'  conception  of  the  Subliminal  Self  may  easily  lead  the
casual  reader  to  suppose  that  he  accepted  Myers'  hypothesis
or  one  very  similar  to  it.  But  that  would  be  an  error.  We
must  recognize  clearly  that  Myers'  doctrine  was  a  development
and  extension  of  the  soul-theory  and  that  James  rejected  that
theory.

Yet  it  is  equally  clear  that  James  believed  and  taught  that
the  mind  of  man  is  not  wholly  destroyed  at  death,  that  in
some  sense  and  in  some  degree  it  survives  the  death  of  his
body.

In  the  Principles  James  criticised  very  forcibly  and  de-
cisively rejected  the  view  that  individual  human  consciousness
can  be  regarded  as  compounded  of  lesser  consciousnesses,
sensations,  or  units  of  feeling,  or  fragments  of  consciousness
of  any  kind.  And  he  recognised  that  the  only  logical
alternative  to  this  doctrine  of  mind-stuff  (of  atoms  of  con-
sciousness capable  of  being  compounded  into  larger  and  larger
wholes  of  consciousness)  seems  to  be  the  soul-theory ;  but  yet,
as  we  have  seen,  he  rejected  that  theory  and  left  open  the
problem  for  further  investigation.

In  his  Ingersoll  Lecture  on  Human  Immortality?  he  adopted
a  peculiar  theory  of  the  function  of  the  bodily  organism  or
of  the  brain  in  our  mental  life,  one  which  he  called  "  the
theory  of  separation "  or  "  the  transmission  theory."  By  these
names  he  implied  the  notion  that  there  exists  a  great  sea

1  A  Pluralistic  Universe,  p.  210.  "Ibid.  3 Boston,  1898.


26


W.  M'Dougall.


[part


of  consciousness  or  thought ;  that  the  consciousness  of  each
one  of  us  is  but  a  ray  of  this  univeral  consciousness ;  and
that  the  brain  of  each  man  is  a  translucent  or  half-transparent
spot  in  the  veil  of  nature  through  which  a  ray  of  the  uni-
versal consciousness  intermittently  struggles  to  illumine  for
brief  moments  the  material  world.  According  to  this  view,
then,  the  bodily  organism  is  the  principle  of  individuality ;
mind  or  consciousness  is  essentially  one ;  and  our  individual
consciousnesses,  so-called,  are  but  distorted  beams  filtered  out
from  the  universal  consciousness  by  our  brains ;  and,  when
those  brains  decay,  the  beams  cease  to  be  thus  transmitted.
It  is  clear  that  this  "  transmission  theory  "  escapes  materialism,
but  it  is  equally  clear  that  it  does  not  provide  for  any
survival  of  human  personality  after  the  death  of  the  body.

James  returned  to  the  transmission  theory  in  his  lecture  on
the  "  Energies  of  Men,"  developing  it  from  the  point  of  view
that  in  our  moral  and  intellectual  efforts  each  of  us  draws
spiritual  energy  from  that  larger  whole  of  which,  according
to  the  hypothesis,  his  mind  is  but  a  fragmentary  manifestation;
and,  in  accordance  with  his  invariable  tendency,  he  adduced
in  a  striking  and  original  way  new  empirical  evidences  of  the
reality  of  such  influx  of  the  greater  tides  of  life  through  the
channels  of  human  personality.1

But  his  later  utterances  show  that  he  was  not  satisfied  with
the  position  defended  in  the  Ingersoll  lecture.  It  was  obvious  to
him  that  it  was  hardly  consistent  with  his  rejection  of  the  notion
of  the  compounding  of  consciousness.  For  the  reabsorption  of
individual  consciousness  in  the  universal  sea  implies  such  com-
pounding. Acordingly  he  returned  to  the  problem  in  his  Oxford
lectures.  He  told  us  how  he  had  wrestled  long  and  long  with  this
notion  of  the  compounding  of  consciousness,  and  how,  approach-
ing it  now  from  the  side  of  over-individual  consciousness,  rather
than,  as  in  the  Principles,  from  the  side  of  composition  of  individual
human  consciousness  from  lesser  parts,  he  had  reversed  his
opinion,  thrown  over  his  own  brilliant  demonstration  of  the
absurdity  of  the  notion,  and  made  it  the  keystone  of  his
philosophic  scheme  of  the  universe.  After  this  revolution,  it
was  possible  to  modify  the  doctrine  of  the  Ingersoll  lecture
in  a  way  that  made  it  less  intangible,  less  a  matter  of  metaphor

1  Philosophical  Review,  1907.


lxil]  In  Memory  of  William  James.  27

and  vague  suggestion  merely.  He  modified  it  in  the  direction
of  assimilating  it  to  Fechner's  panpsychic  view  of  the  universe.
"  The  drift,"  he  said,  "  of  all  the  evidence  we  have,  seems  to
me  to  sweep  us  very  strongly  towards  the  belief  in  some  form
of  superhuman  life  with  which  we  may,  unknown  to  ourselves,
be  co-conscious.  We  may  be  in  the  universe,  as  dogs  and  cats
are  in  our  libraries,  seeing  the  books  and  hearing  the  conversation,
but  having  no  inkling  of  the  meaning  of  it  all.  . .  .  The  analogies
with  ordinary  psychology  and  with  the  facts  of  pathology,  with
those  of  psychical  research,  so  called,  and  with  those  of  religious
experience,  establish,  when  taken  together,  a  decidedly  formidable
probability  in  favour  of  a  general  view  of  the  world  almost
identical  with  Fechner's." 1  And  Fechner's  view  or  vision  of
the  world  was  one  of  a  hierarchy  of  consciousnesses,  each  member
of  the  hierarchy  being  at  once  both  a  consciousness  for  itself
and  a  part  of  a  more  widely  inclusive  consciousness  of  a  higher
level  or  order.  James  expressed  his  conception  of  the  relation
of  the  individual  human  consciousness  to  the  more  inclusive
consciousness  as  clearly  perhaps  as  it  is  capable  of  being
expressed  in  the  following  words :  "  Out  of  my  experience,  such
as  it  is  (and  it  is  limited  enough)  one  fixed  conclusion  dogmati-
cally emerges,  and  that  is  this,  that  we  with  our  lives  are  like
islands  in  the  sea,  or  like  trees  in  the  forest.  The  maple  and
the  pine  may  whisper  to  each  other  with  their  leaves,  and
Conanicut  and  Newport  hear  each  other's  foghorns.  But  the
trees  also  commingle  their  roots  in  the  darkness  underground,
and  the  islands  also  hang  together  through  the  ocean's  bottom.
Just  so  there  is  a  continuum  of  cosmic  consciousness,  against
which  our  individuality  builds  but  accidental  fences,  and  into
which  our  several  minds  plunge  as  into  a  mother-sea  or
reservoir.  Our  '  normal '  consciousness  is  circumscribed  for
adaptation  to  our  external  earthly  environment,  but  the  fence
is  weak  in  spots,  and  fitful  influences  from  beyond  break  in,
showing  the  otherwise  unverifiable  common  connection.  Not
only  psychic  research,  but  metaphysical  philosophy  and  specula-
tive biology  are  led  in  their  own  ways  to  look  with  favour
on  some  such  '  panpsychic '  view  of  the  universe  as  this."  2

1 A  Pluralistic  Universe,  p.  309.

2  The  American  Magazine,  "  The  Confidences  of  a  Psychical  Researcher, ,"
1908.


28


W.  M'Dougall.


[part


He  refused  to  identify  this  wide  mother-sea  of  consciousness
with  the  absolute  mind  of  idealistic  monism,  basing  his  refusal
chiefly  on  moral  grounds.  Even  the  widest  consciousness  of
all  he  regarded  as  less  than  the  whole  universe.  "  However
much  may  be  collected,  however  much  may  report  itself  as
present  at  any  effective  centre  of  consciousness  or  action,
something  else  is  self-«overned  and  absent  and  unreduced  to
unity." 1  This  is  the  essential  character  of  his  pluralistic
universe.  To  what  more  inclusive  forms  our  individual
consciousnesses  belong  he  did  not  pretend  to  say ;  but  that
they  do  so  belong  was  his  main  thesis  ;  and  he  believed  that
the  mystic's  experience  of  union  and  absorption  of  the  self
in  a  higher  power  is  what  it  claims  to  be ;  and  it  is  after
that  model  that  he  would  have  us  conceive  the  life  beyond
the  grave.  It  is  clear  that  this  view  implies  no  personal
immortality ;  the  life  of  the  individual  man  is  but  a  temporary
and  partial  separation  and  circumscription  of  a  part  of  a
larger  whole,  into  which  it  is  reabsorbed  at  death,  and  the
body  remains  the  individualising  principle.  But  he  held  that
this  view,  besides  being  more  consonant  than  any  other  with
all  the  empirical  evidence,  is  pragmatically  justified  on  moral
grounds ;  because,  as  organs  of  the  larger  whole,  we  play  a
part  in  determining  its  development  and  welfare;  "our  thoughts
determine  our  acts,  and  our  acts  redetermine  the  previous
nature  of  the  world "  ; 2  and  so  we  may,  in  a  very  real  sense,
hold  ourselves  to  be  co-workers  with  God,  helping  Him  to
make  the  universe  something  nobler  than  it  yet  is.

More  than  any  other  man  of  our  time,  James  was  qualified
by  his  openness  of  mind,  his  courage  and  originality,  his
powerful  intellect,  his  wide  knowledge  of  empirical  fact  and
philosophical  speculation,  and  his  prolonged  and  earnest  wrest-
ling with  the  fundamental  problems,  to  express  conclusions
that  must  command  a  deeply  respectful  hearing.  To  many
members  of  this  Society  it  must  be  a  disappointment  that
such  a  leader  should  have  reached  a  conclusion  adverse  to  the
survival  of  human  personality.  But  it  is  much  that  his  final
position  is  one  which  affirms  the  real  efficiency  and  abiding
value  of  the  moral  and  intellectual  efforts  of  mankind.  And
our Society  may  well  renew  its  courage  and  its  conviction

1  A  Pluralistic  Universe,  p.  322.  20/?.  cit.  p.  318.


lxii.]  In  Memory  of  William  James.  29

of  the  value  of  its  work,  in  recognising  that  that  work  played
no  small  part  in  enabling  James  to  reach  and  maintain  that
position.  And  let  us  bear  in  mind  the  deliberate  expression
of  his  mature  judgment.  "  Hardly,  as  yet,  has  the  surface  of
the  facts  called  '  psychic '  begun  to  be  scratched  for  scientific
purposes.  It  is  through  following  these,  I  am  persuaded,  that
the  greatest  scientific  conquests  of  the  coming  generation  will
be  achieved."

That  such  a  leader  in  the  world  of  thought  has  published
to  the  world  this  high  estimate  of  the  importance  of  the
Society's  work,  and  has  generously  avowed  the  large  influence
of  that  work  upon  his  constructive  efforts,  must  permanently
strengthen  the  Society  and  must  support  us  in  the  conviction
that  we  have  set  our  hands  to  no  mean  task.


30


Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead.


[part


IV.

WILLIAM  JAMES  AS  PHILOSOPHER.

By  PROFESSOR  J.  H.  MUIRHEAD.

I  have  a  double  difficulty  in  accepting  the  Editor's  invitation
to  write  a  short  article  on  this  subject.  I  am  writing  from
the  point  of  view  of  general  philosophy  in  a  periodical  devoted
to  psychical  research,  and  I  am  writing  on  a  philosopher
whom,  in  spite  of  great  admiration  and  respect,  I  have  never
been  able  to  accept  as  my  own  leader.  I  may  thus  be  said
to  be  an  outsider  to  the  second  power.  I  justify  myself  in
view  of  the  first  of  these  disqualifications  by  saying  at  once
that  a  philosopher's  attitude  to  at  least  some  of  the  aims  of
psychical  research  is  to  a  large  extent  dependent  on  his  philoso-
phical view  in  general,  and  that  I  believe  Professor  James's
was  so  in  a  particular  degree.  The  second  disqualification  is
more  serious  in  an  article  like  the  present.  But  I  believe  it
is  less  fatal  in  my  own  case  than  it  might  be  in  the  case  of
other  abler  critics,  seeing  that,  while  differing  widely  from  Pro-
fessor James  in  letter,  I  find  myself  in  far  greater  sympathy
with  his  spirit  than  I  do  with  many  present  day  writers
with  whom  I  am  in  greater  literal  agreement.

If  we  would  know  what  that  spirit  is,  we  have  to  turn  to
the  general  movement  of  philosophic  thought,  and  particularly
to  that  of  our  own  time.  The  history  of  science  and  philo-
sophy has  been  written  from  many  points  of  view.  The  most
helpful  is  that  from  which  it  is  regarded  as  a  series  of  ever
deeper  reactions  from  the  abstract  to  the  concrete,  from  ab-
sorption in  conceptions  too  narrow  for  the  facts  of  human  life
and experience back to the fulness of reality. For  such


lxil]


William  James  as  Philosojiher.


31


reactions  all  the  great  philosophers  from  Socrates  to  Hegel  may
be  shown  to  stand.  To  understand  our  own  time  we  have
to  realise  that  we  are  ourselves  living  in  the  middle  of  just
such  another.  From  a  period  of  obsession,  both  in  physical
and  social  science,  by  the  idea  of  rigid  mechanical  laws  to
which  human  ideals  have  to  be  subordinated,  we  have  passed
to  the  advocacy  of  the  central  place  of  human  purposes,  and
the  subordination  to  them  of  scientific  generalisations  as  things
partial,  tentative,  provisional.  The  writings  of  Poincare,
Boutroux  and  Bergson  in  France,  of  Wundt  and  Eucken  in
Germany,  of  Karl  Pearson  and  James  Ward  among  ourselves
are  sufficient  indication  of  this  general  drift.  Together  they
stand  for  the  assertion  by  man's  spirit  of  the  claim  to  be
master  in  its  own  house,  and  to  see  everything  sub  specie
humanitatis.

It  is  the  fighting  part  he  has  taken  in  this  movement,  since
the  publication  of  the  Will  to  Believe,  in  1897,  that  gives  its
significance  to  "William  James's  work.  There  are,  I  believe,
thousands  to  whom  that  book  and  his  other  popular  works,
by  their  broad  humanity,  their  cheerful  faith  in  the  open-
ness of  all  roads,  have  seemed  to  have  lifted  the  intel-
lectual sky  as  with  the  promise  of  Spring.  It  is  this,  far
more  than  the  actual  doctrines  they  contain,  that  has  been
the  source  of  his  deserved  and  unique  popularity.  Whether
his  influence  will  be  a  permanent  one  it  is  too  early  perhaps
to  say.  What  a  close  study  of  his  works  has  brought  home
to  my  own  mind  is  that  his  controversy  with  the  school  in
England  and  America,  which,  not  less  than  he,  has  set  itself
against  the  abstractions  of  a  barren  intellectualism,  is  likely
to  prove  a  source  of  weakness  rather  than  of  strength,  and
that  just  in  so  far  as  he  himself  in  the  constant  development
of  his  ideas,  which  is  one  of  the  most  attractive  features  of  his
writings,  stops  short  of  their  conclusions,  his  work  is  likely
to  lose  in  fruitfulness.

An  article  like  the  present  would  be  no  suitable  place  for
a  review  of  his  philosophy  as  a  whole.  What  I  desire  to  do
is  to  try  within  its  limits  to  show  by  one  or  two  examples,
first,  that  what  he  claims  for  the  world  as  a  whole  is  true
of  his  own  thought :  it  has  no  fixed  statuesque  outlines,
but on the contrary is always undergoing expansion  and


32


Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead.


[part


development;  in  the  second  place,  that,  notwithstanding  this,
and  mainly,  I  think,  because  of  imperfect  emancipation  from  the
intellectualist  presuppositions  which  he  lives  to  combat,  he  fails
in  the  end  to  make  the  best  of  the  position  he  has  won.
I  take  three  points  which  will  be  recognised  as  crucial — his
doctrine  of  the  meaning  of  truth,  his  antagonism  to  intel-
lectualism  founded  on  the  antithesis  between  sense-experience
and  conception,  and  his  pluralism.

(1)  The  first  is  stated  and  restated  in  a  hundred  passages
in  which  we  are  implored  to  disabuse  ourselves  of  all  academic
and  scholastic  definitions  of  truth,  and  to  face  the  question
squarely  as  to  what  truth  consists  in  as  a  matter  of  fact  and
experience.  When  we  do  so,  we  are  assured,  what  we  shall
find  is  that  truth  is  no  rigid  system  to  which  the  soul  ascends
over  a  series  of  rigid  conceptions,  as  to  a  marble  shrine  over
marble  steps,  but  the  felt  fitness  of  an  intellectual  attitude  to  the
requirements  of  a  concrete  situation — its  power  to  bring  us  into
fruitful  relations  with  it  and  enable  us  to  make  capital  out  of  it.
Truth-seeking  is  thus  literally  truth-making — verity  is  verification.

No  one  who  has  gone  through  James's  books  with  the  single
aim  of  understanding  this  contention  can  rise  from  the  study
without  feeling  that  his  ideas  of  the  process  known  as  verifica-
tion have  been  widened  and  deepened.  Many  of  James's  state-
ments of  it  are  purple  patches  in  the  psychology  of  cognition.
What  the  student  cannot  help  regretting  is  that  the  earlier  ones
should  have  contained  so  much  that  was  ambiguous,  and  left
so  much  to  be  supplied  by  the  reader.  The  author  himself
pathetically  complains  of  the  obtuseness  of  his  critics,  and
even  of  his  friends,  "  who  have  boggled  at  and  refused  to
take  the  spirit  rather  than  the  letter  of  our  discourse."
This  is  apt  to  recall  Carlyle's  juryman  who  complained  that
he  had  never  met  eleven  such  obstinate  men  in  the  same
room  in  his  life.  A  whole  generation  of  scholars  does  not
go  obstinately  wrong  over  a  theory  which  has  been  stated
with  reasonable  clearness  and  the  necessary  qualifications.
By  the  emphasis  on  the  feeling  of  satisfaction,  as  well  as  by
the  name  Pragmatism  itself,  it  was  inevitable  that  the  theory
should  suggest  the  old  Protagorean  heresy,  /u-erpov  avOpwiros,
and  be  met  with  the  taunt  that  willing  to  believe  was  tanta-
mount to  believing  as  you  will.


LXII.]


William  James  as  Philosopher.


S3


If  James's  own  mind  ever  gave  harbour  to  such  an  idea,
he  has  made  ample  amends  by  the  clearness  with  which  he
states  his  true  view  in  his  later  articles.  In  the  first  place,
by  satisfactoriness,  he  tells  us,  he  does  not  mean  mere  practical
utility.  Man  has  logical  as  well  as  practical  needs.  Con-
sistency is  the  breath  of  the  soul's  life,  as  air  is  of  the  body's.
"  After  man's  interest  in  breathing  freely,  the  greatest  of  all
his  interests  is  his  interest  in  consistency." 1  And,  in  the
second  place,  this  consistency  has  an  objective  counterpart :  it
is  a  guarantee  to  us,  the  only  guarantee  we  have,  of  corre-
spondence with  that  "  matrix  of  experiential  circumstances "
which  we  call  reality.  "  The  pragmatist,  being  himself  a  man
and  imagining  in  general  no  lines  of  true  belief  contrary  to
ours  about  the  '  reality '  which  he  has  laid  at  the  base  of
his  epistemological  discussion,  is  willing  to  treat  our  satisfac-
tions as  possibly  really  true  guides  to  it,  not  as  guides  true
solely  for  us."  2

In  view  of  such  a  statement,  the  long  wearisome  controversy
as  to  the  meaning  of  the  will  to  believe  may  well  be  laid  to
rest.  But  agreement  on  this  point  between  pragmatism  and
its  critics  only  raises  a  new  question,  which  unfortunately  we
have  no  longer  the  opportunity  of  discussing  with  James.
Granted  that  satisfactoriness  is  satisfactoriness  "  in  the  long
run  and  on  the  whole  " — that  the  harmony  we  seek  is  harmony
with  the  totality  of  experience,  is  not  such  an  ideal  experience
just  what  we  mean  by  the  "  matrix  of  experiential  circum-
stances "  ?  Can  reality  be  anything  else  for  us  ?  If  it  cannot,
it  seems  as  though  James  to  complete  his  theory  must  advance
a  step  further  in  the  direction  of  the  intellectualist,  or,  as  I
should  prefer  to  call  it,  impersonal  idealism,  which  he  opposes,
and  hold  that  the  mark  of  reality  is  just  this  harmonious
setting  in  an  ideal  experience.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we
are  asked  to  conceive  the  possibility  of  a  reality  without
relation  to  such  an  experience,  is  this  not  just  an  appeal
to  the  idea  of  an  absolute  or  unknown  in  its  worst  possible
form  ?  In  reading  such  passages  as  that  just  quoted,  or
again  that  in  which  he  claims  that  his  theory  of  truth
is  "  purely  epistemological "  and  "  prejudges  nothing  as  to
the constitution of  realities, so  that the  most  diverse  meta-

1  The  Meaning  of  Truth,  p.  211.  "Ib.,  192.

0


34


Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead.


[part


physics  can  vise  it  as  their  foundation,"1  one  cannot  but  feel
that  James  fails  to  carry  his  Pragmatism  to  its  legitimate
conclusion,  and  to  reap  the  full  fruits  of  it  as  an  answer  to
all  forms  of  agnosticism  and  pessimism.  Are  not  his  opponents
here  the  truer  pragmatists  when  they  insist  that  such  a  "  thing
in  itself"  unrelated  to  experience  as  we  know  it,  save  as  an
incognisable  duplicate,  belongs  to  the  lumber-house,  not  to  the
utilisable  furniture  of  the  human  mind  ?

(2)  The  second  of  the  above  points  is  equally  fundamental.
Granting  we  can  experience  reality  as  it  truly  is  (and  James
as  well  as  Bergson,  whom  he  takes  here  as  his  master,
constantly  assumes  that  we  can),  what  is  the  medium  of  this
insight  ?  James's  answer  to  this  question  is  well  known.
Conception,  the  very  eye  of  the  soul  according  to  "  intellect-
ualism,"  merely  serves  to  short-cut  the  real  processes  of
apprehension.  It  is  like  a  measuring  rod  laid  along  the
surface  of  the  ground  touching  it  here  and  there,  but  merely
as  a  guide  to  hand  or  eye  and  giving  no  real  contact  with  its
actual  outline.  For  this  we  have  to  dip  back  into  the  stream
of  sense-experience  where  we  can  feel  ourselves  into  its  strains
and  pressures,  its  real  directions,  and  its  living  meanings.  If
this  article  were  upon  James  as  a  psychologist,  it  would  be
necessary  again  to  express  our  gratitude  to  him  for  the  service
he  has  done  mental  science  by  the  emphasis  he  has  laid  upon
the  presentational,  or  immediately  given  element  in  the  cogni-
tive life.  This  is  only  equalled  by  our  debt  to  him  for  his
exposition  of  the  instinctive,  or  immediate  element  in  the  cona-
tive.  But  the  question  is  of  the  relation  of  conception  to
reality,  and  it  is  just  here  that  we  have  to  notice  the  same
kind  of  ambiguity  as  we  found  in  his  doctrine  of  truth.  As
in  the  latter  he  started  with  an  uncritical  account  of  what  is
meant  by  satisfaction  and  only  gradually  arrived  at  a  statement
of  the  two  different  senses  it  may  bear,  so  here,  I  think,
it  can  be  shown  that  he  started  with  a  theory  of  conception,
which  philosophy  had  already  outgrown,  and  was  only
beginning  to  realise  its  imperfections  when,  unfortunately,  his
life  was  cut  short.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  may  use  con-
ception in  the  sense  of  a  class  notion  or  a  general  formula,
the leading feature of  which seems to  be the  omission  of

1  Meaning  of  Truth,  p.  215.


LXII.]


William  James  as  Philosopher.


35


particulars. But  already,  long  before  James  and  Bergson  had
begun to write, this notion of the "  abstract universal "
had been subjected to a destructive criticism, just  on
the ground which these writers urge, of the partial  and
schematic  view  that  general  ideas  give  of  the  concrete  reality.
Here  there  is  no  difference,  as  James  himself  recognises  when
he classes Hegel among  the  "  thick " writers  as  contrasted
with  the  alleged  thinness  of  his  English  interpreters.1  Where
difference begins (and it is a vital one) is in the  plan
that is proposed for the correction of this  abstractness.
To the idealist from Plato to Hegel the  half  truths  of
the understanding have to look for correction, not  back
to  the  uncriticised life  of  sense-experience,  but  forward  to  its
fuller interpretation by the aid of synthetic reason, —
the  resolute  endeavour  of  thought  to  see  the  part  in  relation
to  the whole, — which  gives  it  its  meaning. Do  James  and
Bergson  mean  to  deny  this  ? In  view  of  a  careful  collation  of
the  relevant  passages  in  both,  I  cannot  myself  believe  it.  To
say  that  to  get  into  touch  with  the  truth  about  the  world  we
have to turn our  backs  upon the systematising,  correlating
intelligence,  and  merge  ourselves  in  the  unsifted  experiences  of
the  sensory  world,  is  like  saying  that  in  order  to  live  truly  we
must  set  aside  all  reflection upon the  meaning  of  life — all
attempt  to  bring  our  impulses  into  harmony  with  one  another
and  with  the  recpurements  of  social  life,  and  fall  back  upon
uncriticised instinct. Here also I venture to think  that
Professor James, by permitting himself to be led  into
exaggeration  by  his  generous  enthusiasm  for  the  real  and  the
concrete,  has failed to make full use of  the truth  which
he  grasped. It  surely  is  no  part  of  Humanism  to  depreciate
the  place  of  the  organising  intelligence,  whether  in  theory  or
practice. Let  the  faith  in  this  once  be  abandoned  (and  with
it  our  faith  in  our  intellectual,  moral  and  aesthetic  ideals),  we
have yet to learn what hold we can establish  through
philosophy  on  the spiritual world, the vindication of  whose
reality  is  the  underlying  motive  of  all  James's  works.

1"He  plants  himself  in  the  empirical  flux  of  things  and  gets  the  impression
of  what  happens.  Concepts  were  not  in  his  eyes  the  static  self-contained
things  that  previous  logicians  had  supposed  hut  were  germinative  and  passed
beyond  themselves  into  each  other."  A  Pluralistic  Universe,  "Hegel  and  his
Method,"  p.  89  foil.


36


Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead.


[PART


(3)  The  third  point,  the  theory  of  "  a  Pluralistic  Universe,"
has  been  in  principle  disposed  of  in  what  has  been  already
said.  If,  as  we  have  just  seen,  the  conception  of  the  unity
of  the  intelligence  with  the  world  which  it  knows  is  a
presupposition  of  our  experience :  if,  as  James  himself  assures
us,  "there  is  a  push,  an  urgency  within  our  very  experience
against  which  we  are  on  the  whole  powerless  and  which
drives  us  in  the  direction  that  is  the  destiny  of  our  belief"
— a  destiny  he  explains,  as  we  have  seen,  as  fulness  and
consistency ;  if  the  same  presupposition,  mutatis  mutandis,
underlies  our  practice  and  is  the  inspiration  of  all  our
art,  how  is  it  possible  for  the  pragmatist  to  hold  that  the
world  falls  into  disconnected  parts  ?  In  the  admission  of
such  a  possibility  have  we  not  again  only  the  ghost  of  the
Absolutism,  against  which  the  whole  theory  is  a  revolt  ?
Given  such  independent  parts,  would  we  not  have  just  the
kind  of  Absolute  we  desire  to  exclude  ?  Or  (if  this  is  one  of
the  wiredrawn  arguments  against  which  James  protests)  what
is  the  pragmatic  value  of  such  an  idea  ?  It  gives  us,  we  are
told,  the  sense  of  liberty.  In  a  way  it  does.  It  gives  us
the  liberty  of  believing  in  the  Devil,  of  supposing  that  the
world  may  be  quite  otherwise  than  it  appears,  and  that  the
"push"  or  urgency  that  James  speaks  of  may,  all  unknown  to
us,  be  counteracted  by  another,  which  in  the  end  will  falsify
all  our  beliefs  and  bring  to  nought  all  our  efforts.  But  into
what  "  fruitful  reforms "  has  such  an  idea  ever  led  mankind  ?
The  one  true  ultimate  basis  of  freedom  is  faith,  not  in  the
contingency,  but  in  the  rationality  of  the  world.  James  com-
plains of  the  statuesque  unity  of  the  world  as  the  Platonist
conceives  it.  But  Plato  himself  recognised  that  there  are
other  kinds  of  unity  besides  that  of  the  statue.  There  is  the
unity  of  a  living  thing,  and  there  is  the  unity  of  a  purposeful
act ;  there  is  unity  in  the  general  tendency  of  biological
evolution,  and  there  is  unity  in  the  stumbling  progress  through
trial  and  error  of  which  human  life  seems  to  consist.  With  the
recognition  of  this  we  come  back,  I  do  not  say  to  Monism,  for
that  is  ambiguous  in  its  turn,  but  to  something  quite  different
from  Pluralism — a  world  that  seems  in  a  way  we  are  still
far  from  understanding  pledged  to  honour  the  drafts  our  logical
and  ethical  ideas  make  upon  it.


LXII.]


William  James  as  Philosopher.


37


If  space  had  allowed,  I  believe  I  could  have  shown  here
also  that  James,  like  all  great  thinkers,  has  himself  provided
us  with  the  means  of  correcting  his  own  exaggerations.  But
perhaps  I  have  said  enough  to  indicate  the  place  this  paper
would  claim  for  him  in  the  pantheon  of  modern  philosophy.
He  has  himself  told  us  that  humanism  is  a  spirit  rather
than  a  formulated  doctrine,  "  like  one  of  those  secular  changes
that  come  upon  public  opinion  overnight,  as  it  were  borne
upon  tides  '  too  deep  for  sound  or  foam,'  that  survive  all  the
crudities  and  extravagances  of  their  advocates,  that  you  can
pin  to  no  one  absolutely  essential  statement,  nor  kill  by  any
decisive  stab."  This  is  truly  and  eloquently  said.  I  for  one
am  far  from  desiring  to  kill  it.  On  the  contrary,  I  desire  to
see  it  kept  alive  in  the  spirit  of  its  distinguished  founder,
and  going  on  from  more  to  more.  To  attain  this  object  it  is,
I  believe,  necessary  that  it  should  free  itself  from  earlier  limita-
tions and  come  out  more  whole-heartedly  and  consistently  on
the  side,  if  not  of  the  will  to  believe,  at  any  rate  of  the
belief  in  the  will  and  the  ultimate  harmony  between  the  make
of  things  and  its  deepest  impulses  and  ideals.


38


Rigid  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


V.

PKOFESSOK  PIGOU  ON  CKOSS-CORKESPONDENCES.

BY  THE  RIGHT  HON.  GERALD  W.  BALFOUR.

Those  who  see  in  the  phenomena  now  familiarly  known  as
"  cross-correspondences  "  something  beyond  mere  fraud  or  chance
would  appear  at  first  sight  to  have  two  explanations  to  choose
from.  Either  the  observed  concordances  must  be  wholly  as-
cribed to  telepathic  action  between  the  subconscious  selves  of
the  automatists  (the  agency  of  their  conscious  selves  being
supposed  to  be  ex  hypothesi  excluded,  or  at  least  reduced  to  a
minimum) ;  or  else  we  must  assume  the  intervention  of  some
intelligence  external  to  the  automatists — an  intelligence  which,
if  it  cannot  be  connected  with  any  living  person,  presumably
is,  what  the  script  habitually  claims  it  to  be,  a  disembodied
spirit.

In  an  interesting  paper  which  was  published  in  the  Proceedings
of  June,  1909  (Vol.  XXIII.  pp.  286-303),  Professor  Pigou  main-
tains the  thesis  that  this  choice  of  explanations  is  not  really
open  to  us,  at  all  events  so  far  as  the  evidence  from  cross-
correspondences  is  concerned  ;  that  upon  that  evidence  taken
alone  we  are  not  entitled  even  to  suspend  judgment,  but  are
bound,  in  accordance  with  the  recognised  methods  of  science,
to  decide  in  favour  of  subliminal  as  against  spiritual  agency.

A  criticism  of  Professor  Pigou's  paper  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
appeared  in  the  Society's  Journal  for  October,  1909,  followed
by  a  reply  from  the  author  and  a  further  rejoinder  from  his
critic  in  November.

Although  these  later  contributions  to  the  discussion  have  done
a  good  deal  to  clear  up  the  issues  raised  in  the  original  paper,


lxii.] Professor  Pigou  on  Gross-Correspondences.


39


it  appears  to  me  that  much  still  remains  to  be  said :  and
something,  at  least,  of  this  I  will  try  to  say  here.

Professor  Pigou's  argument  may  be  reduced  to  three  main
propositions  and  a  conclusion.

(1)  The  Bamsden-Miles  experiments  show  that  the  pro-

duction of  a  simple  correspondence  is  not  outside
the  known  powers  of  the  subliminal  self.

(2)  The  results  of  Dr.  Verrall's  attempts  to  get  a  certain

Greek  phrase  reproduced  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic
script  show  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  can
also  produce  the  complementary  element  in  a  comple-
mentary correspondence.

(3)  The complementary element  exhibited in what  for

shortness'  sake  we  may  call  the  Verrall  Case  is
comparable  in  all  essentials  with  the  complementary
element  in  the  best  cross-correspondences  recorded  in
the  Proceeding?,  up  to  the  date  of  Professor  Pigou's
paper.

The  conclusion  which  follows  from  these  premises  is  that
the  production  of  complementary  correspondences  of  the  best
type  between  two  or  more  automatic  scripts  is  within  the
known  powers  of  the  subliminal  self;  and  accordingly,  in  the
absence  of  other  or  further  evidence,  we  are  bound  by  the
recognised  canons  of  scientific  investigation  to  accept  the  sub-
liminal consciousness  acting  within  its  known  powers  as  a  more
probable  cause  of  complementary  correspondences  than  discarnate
entities  whose  existence  is  admittedly  hypothetical.

Professor  Pigou's  conclusion  would  be  an  important  one  if
established,  and  this  makes  it  the  more  necessary  to  subject
the  three  main  propositions  on  which  it  is  founded  to  searching
examination.

According  to  proposition  (1)  the  Eamsden-Miles  experiments
in  thought-transference  show  that  the  production  of  simple
correspondences  between  the  automatic  scripts  of  different  writers
is  within  the  known  powers  of  the  subliminal  consciousness.
How  is  this  proved  ?  Professor  Pigou  starts  from  the  fact
observed  by  Miss  Eamsden  that  among  the  impressions  she
received  from  Miss  Miles  "  those  which  are  the  most  surprisingly


40


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


correct  are  some  which  were  never  intentionally  transferred  at
all."  From  this  experience — not  an  uncommon  one  in  connection
with  experimental  thought-transference — he  infers  that  the
subliminal  self  of  A  is  sometimes  capable  of  influencing  the
perceptions  of  B  apart  from  conscious  will.  If,  now,  A  and
B  are  two  automatic  writers  and  A's  subliminal  self  possesses
the  capacity  of  influencing  B's  perceptions  apart  from  conscious
will,  we  are  entitled  to  conclude  that  A's  subliminal  self  is  able
to  exercise  a  similarly  independent  influence  on  B's  script.  And
since,  ex  hypothcsi,  it  can  influence  A's  script,  it  is  evidently  in
a  position  to  bring  about  a  simple  correspondence  between
the  two.

The  critical  step  in  this  argument  is  the  inference  that  the
subliminal  self  of  one  person  is  sometimes  capable  of  influencing
another  person's  conscious  perceptions  apart  from  conscious
will.

In  the  Bamsden-Miles  experiments  the  general  plan  adopted
was  that  Miss  Bamsden  should  think  of  Miss  Miles  regularly
at  7.0  p.m.  on  every  day  that  an  experiment  was  to  be  tried,
and  write  down  the  impressions  that  came  to  her.  "  Miss
Miles  on  her  side  had  no  fixed  time  for  thinking  of  Miss
Bamsden,  but  thought  of  her  more  or  less  during  the  whole
day,  and  in  the  evening  noted  briefly  what  ideas  had  been
most  prominently  before  her  mind  during  the  day,  and  which
she  wished  to  convey,  or  thought  might  have  been  conveyed,
to  Miss  Bamsden"  (Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  p.  71).

It  seems  to  me  impossible  in  these  conditions  to  infer  with
any  certainty  that  the  conscious  will  of  one  or  the  other  or
both  of  the  experimenters  was  not  an  essential  and  determining
factor  in  the  result.  On  the  one  side  we  have  the  conscious
will  to  transmit  impressions,  on  the  other  the  conscious  effort
of  expectant  attention,  each  experimenter  meanwhile  fixing  her
thoughts  on  the  other.  These  are  the  invariable  accompani-
ments of  the  phenomena.  How  can  they  be  eliminated  or
safely  disregarded  ?  The  fact  that  the  impressions  received  by
Miss  Bamsden  were  not  always  those  which  Miss  Miles  in-
tended to  convey  does  not  prove  that  the  subliminal  self  of
Miss  Miles  was  capable  of  influencing  Miss  Bamsden's  percep-
tions apart  from  Miss  Miles'  conscious  will,  but  only  that  the
particular  impression  transferred  was  sometimes  independent  of


LXII.]


Professor  Pigou  on  Cross-Correspondences.


41


Miss  Miles'  conscious  will.1  The  attitude  of  Miss  Miles'
conscious  self  may  have  been  the  conditio  sine  quel  non  of
there  being  any  thought-transference  at  all.  Moreover,  even
if  we  were  entitled  to  ignore  the  factor  of  Miss  Miles'
conscious  will,  there  remains  the  possible  effect  of  Miss
Eamsden's  conscious  will  still  to  be  considered.  There  is
nothing  in  these  experiments,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  that  would
warrant  us  in  excluding  the  hypothesis  that  the  true  "  agent "
in  the  case  was  Miss  Eamsden's  conscious  self,  and  that  the
process  was  one  of  "  tapping "  Miss  Miles'  thoughts,  conscious
or  subconscious,  rather  than  of  passively  receiving  impressions.
Other  observations  of  psychical  phenomena  might  perhaps  justify
the  contention  that  the  subliminal  self  of  one  person  is  capable
of  influencing  the  perceptions  of  another  person  without  the
exercise  of  conscious  will  on  the  part  of  either  supraliminal
self;  but  this  cannot,  I  think,  be  proved  from  the  Eamsden-
Miles  experiments  taken  alone.

Still  less  do  these  experiments  prove  a  power  on  the  part
of  Miss  Miles'  subliminal  self  deliberately  to  influence  Miss
Eamsden's  perceptions.  Even  if  we  consent  to  treat  the
conscious  will  of  one  or  both  of  the  supraliminal  selves  as
negligible  factors  in  the  result,  the  transference  of  impressions
may  have  been  a  mere  automatic  effect  of  interaction  between
two  psychical  entities  in  which  deliberate  intention  played  no
part  whatever.  It  is  difficult  to  be  quite  sure  of  Professor
Pigou's  attitude  towards  this  important  Cjuestion  of  intention.
When  he  argues  from  the  experience  of  Miss  Eamsden  and
Miss  Miles  that  "  the  subliminal  self  of  (say)  Mrs.  Verrall
could  probably  bring  about  a  simple  correspondence  between
her  automatic  script  and  that  of  some  other  scribe,"  and  speaks
of  the  subliminal  self  as  the  "  agent "  who  is  "  responsible "
for  the  result ;  still  more  when  he  claims  to  have  shown  that
the  "manufacture"  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.  p.  294)  of  simple
correspondences  is  within  its  known  powers,  or  speaks  of  the
subliminal  self  of  one  automatist  as  "trying"  {pp.  cit.  p.  2  95)

i  The  fact  that  all  the  impressions  conveyed  had  formed  part  of  the  contents
of  Miss  Miles'  supraliminal  consciousness  at  some  time  during  the  same  day,
and  that  Miss  Miles  was  thinking  of  Miss  Ramsden  more  or  less  during  the
whole  day,  makes  the  case  weaker  still  from  the  point  of  view  of  Professor
Pigou's  argument.


42


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


to  impress  a  given  idea  on  the  automatic  script  both  of  herself
and  of  some  other  automatist,  are  we  or  are  we  not  to
understand  that  he  uses  these  terms  in  a  sense  implying
deliberate  purpose  on  the  part  of  the  subliminal  consciousness  ?

If  the  answer  is  "  yes,"  then  I  must  insist  in  reply  that
the  mere  fact  of  a  simple  correspondence  occurring  cannot,  of
itself,  form  any  ground  for  inferring  intention.  Other  evidence
of  intention  may  be  forthcoming :  for  instance,  an  intimation
given  in  one  script  that  an  attempt  has  been,  or  will  be,
made  to  obtain  in  another  the  emergence  of  the  particular
word  or  idea  that  forms  the  subject  of  the  correspondence.
Similarly  we  know  from  the  testimony  of  Miss  Miles'  normal
self  that  she  intended  to  convey  certain  impressions  to  Miss
Eamsden  :  but  this  cannot  by  any  possibility  be  made  to  prove
that  Miss  Miles'  subliminal  consciousness  could  form  such  an
intention  on  its  own  account.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  answer  is  in  the  negative,  if,  that
is,  we  are  to  understand  that  he  does  not  attribute  deliberate
purpose  to  the  subliminal  self,  the  question  immediately  arises
whether  some,  at  least,  of  the  simple  correspondences  recorded
in  the  Proceedings  cannot  be  shown  to  have  been  deliberately
produced  by  whatever  agency  was  at  work.  Now  that  many
unmistakable  cross-correspondences  are  claimed  in  the  script  to
be  the  deliberate  work  of  the  controls,  and  that  this  claim  is
constantly  put  forward  before  the  cross-correspondences  have
been  discovered,  are  facts  familiar  to  all  who  have  studied  the
literature  of  the  subject.  It  will  hardly  be  disputed  that  these
facts  constitute  at  least  prima  facie  evidence  of  intention.
Unless  this  evidence  can  be  discredited — and  Professor  Pis;ou
has  made  no  attempt  to  discredit  it— I  must  hold  that  his
argument,  even  if  valid  as  regards  involuntary  correspondences,
falls  short  of  what  is  required.  The  known  powers  of  the
subliminal  self  will  not  have  been  proved  to  cover  all  the
phenomena  which  even  simple  correspondences  sometimes
present.

Professor  Pigou's  second  proposition,  to  which  I  now  pass,
refers  exclusively  to  the  complementary  element  in  a  comple-
mentary correspondence.  As  the  Eamsd en-Miles  experiments
were supposed to show that the  powers  of  the  subliminal


lxii.] Professor  Pigou  on  Cross-Corresjoondences.


43


consciousness  extend  to  the  independent  production  of  simple
correspondences,  so  the  Verrall  case  is  now  appealed  to  as
proving  that  the  production  of  the  complementary  element  in  a
complementary  correspondence  is  also  included  in  those  powers.

To  make  my  criticism  of  this  proposition  intelligible  it  is
necessary  to  recapitulate  the  facts  of  the  case  as  set  forth  in
Professor  Pigou's  own  statement.

In  April,  1901,  Dr.  Verrall  wrote  down  a  phrase  from  a
passage  of  Euripides,  set  for  translation  in  the  Classical  Tripos
of  1873  when  he  was  a  candidate.  The  phrase  consists  of
three  Greek  words,  fxovoirwXov  e?  aw,  the  more  obvious  meaning
of  which  would  be  "  towards  the  one-horse  dawn,"  though
according  to  an  interpretation  which  Dr.  Verrall  inclines  to
favour,  the  real  meaning  may  be  "  towards  the  lonely-
wandering  dawn."  Dr.  Verrall's  intention,  which  he  was
careful  not  to  reveal  to  anybody,  was  to  try  for  a  reproduc-
tion of  this  phrase  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic  script.

A  large  number  of  what  seem  to  be  fragmentary  repro-
ductions of  the  words  or  meaning  of  the  phrase  occurred  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  during  the  course  of  the  next  five
months.  Of  these  Professor  Pigou  selects  four,  which  he  gives
as  follows :

July  4  :  Yellow  is  the  colour  of  the  dawn.
Sept.  2  :  e?  to.

Sept.  1 1  :  /xoVo?  fxera  6eov  ovSe  aWov  two?  (alone  with

God  and  none  other).
Sept.  18:  e(9  «7T7ro?  (one  horse).

In  addition  to  these  four  "  relevant  passages,"  as  he  calls
them,  Professor  Pigou  selects  three  others  not  in  the  nature
of  reproductions,  but  capable  of  being  interpretated  with  some
plausibility  as  applicable  to  incidents  associated  with  the
phrase  in  Dr.  Verrall's  mind  or  connected  with  the  Tripos
examination  in  which  it  occurred. The  passages  in  question  are :

Aug.  20:  "The  long  room with the many windows  is

near  this  hot  room,  he  was  outside."
Sept.  20:  "There  were  others  there  but  he  knew  more

than  the  rest."

Sept.  9  :  "  Find the herb inoly, that  will  help — it  is  a
guide."


44


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


Professor  Pigou  contends  that  if  we  suppose  the  four
partially  reproductive  passages  "  to  have  occurred  in  the
writings  of  separate  automatists,  we  have  all  the  conditions  of
a  typical  cross-correspondence,"  and  that  the  other  three
passages  add  a  finishing  touch  to  the  analogy  and  make  it
complete.  Let  us  pass  this  claim  by  for  the  moment,  and
enquire  how  far  he  has  succeeded  in  proving  that  the  com-
plementary element  in  the  case  originated  in  the  subliminal
activities  of  Dr.  or  Mrs.  Yerrall  or  both.

A  satisfactory  proof  of  subliminal  origin  must  at  least  exclude
two  other  possibilities — origin  from  a  discarnate  intelligence,  and
origin  from  Dr.  Verrall's  supraliminal  consciousness.

Professor  Pigou  dismisses  the  intervention  of  a  discarnate
intelligence  on  the  ground  of  superfluity — Dr.  Verrall's  conscious
self  being  already  there  to  discharge  any  function  for  the  sake
of  which  we  might  otherwise  be  tempted  to  invoke  spiritual
agency.  There  is  no  doubt  force  in  this  contention.  We  do
not  invoke  spiritual  agency  to  explain  thought-transference  in
the  case  of  Miss  Miles  and  Miss  Eamsden.  Why,  it  may  be
asked,  should  we  do  so  as  between  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall  ?

The  argument  from  superfluity  is  not  perhaps  absolutely
conclusive,  but  at  all  events  I  do  not  propose  to  contest  it.
Granted,  however,  that  we  have  no  reason  to  call  in  the  aid
of  discarnate  intelligences,  the  possible  agency  of  Dr.  Verrall's
conscious  self  still  remains  to  be  disposed  of.

Professor  Pigou,  as  we  have  seen,  draws  a  distinction
between  a  complementary  correspondence  and  the  comple-
mentary element  in  a  complementary  correspondence.  Replying
to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  the  Society's  Journal  of  November,
1909,  he  admits  that  the  script  relating  to  Dr.  Verrall's  test-
words  "  did  not  originate  in  subliminal  activities,  but  in  Dr.
Verrall's  conscious  purpose."  To  infer  from  the  script  that
a  complementary  correspondence  can  originate  in  subliminal
activity  would  not,  in  Professor  Pigou's  opinion,  be  legitimate.
But  to  infer  from  it  that  the  complementary  element  in  a
complementary  correspondence  can  so  originate,  is  legitimate,
for  the  reason  that  "  it  is  clear  that  the  complementary  relation
between  Mrs.  Verrall's  different  scripts  formed  no  part  of  Dr.
Verrall's  intention."

If,  however,  intention  is  to  be  the  test  of  origin,  are  we  to


lxii.] Professor  Pigou  on  Gross-Correspondences.


45


understand  that  Professor  Pigou  considers  the  complementary
relation  between  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  to  be  due  to  intention
on  the  part  of  one  or  both  of  the  subliminal  consciousnesses  at
work  ?  It  would  seem  he  ought  to  do  so ;  otherwise  why  is
the  argument  from  absence  of  intention  valid  against  origin
in  Dr.  Verrall's  conscious  self,  and  not  equally  valid  against
subliminal  origin  ?  On  the  other  hand  the  general  tenor  of
Professor  Pigou's  paper  rather  suggests  that  in  his  view  the
complementary  element  in  this  case  (and  therefore  probably  in
all  other  cases)  is  not  intentional  at  all,  but  is  a  kind  of
by-product  arising  out  of  the  limitations  to  which  subliminal
agency  is  subject.

These  inconsistent  points  of  view  have  their  root  in  an
ambiguity  which  seems  to  haunt  Professor  Pigou's  argument
throughout.  I  have  already  called  attention  to  it  when  dealing
with  his  inferences  from  the  Kamsden-Miles  experiments.  We
then  saw  that  in  claiming  for  the  subliminal  consciousness
power  to  bring  about  a  simple  correspondence,  Professor  Pigou
used  expressions  which  appear  to  imply,  though  without
definitely  affirming,  that  in  this  operation  the  subliminal  self
was  to  be  regarded  as  an  agent  acting  with  deliberate  intention.
That,  at  least,  appears  to  be  the  natural  interpretation  of  the
language  he  employs,  though  its  precise  meaning  is  never,
perhaps,  made  clear  beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt.

A  similar  obscurity  meets  us  here  in  connection  with
Professor  Pigou's  second  proposition,  and  will  meet  us  again  in
connection  with  his  third.

Complementary  correspondences  may  be  divided,  in  respect  of
their  complementary  character,  into  two  classes ;  to  the  first
belong  those  in  which  the  division  of  the  idea  as  a  whole  into
complementary  parts  or  aspects  seems  to  proceed  upon  a  deliber-
ately calculated  scheme  or  plan  ;  to  the  second,  those  of  which
this  cannot  be  said.  Let  us  agree  to  call  the  former  purposive,
and  the  latter  non-purposive — descriptive  terms  which  will  also
apply  to  the  complementariness,  or  complementary  element,  in
them.

Professor  Pigou  is  of  course  alive  to  the  distinction  between
the  two  classes  ;  indeed,  in  speaking  of  the  less  complex  comple-
mentary cases  he  tells  us  himself  that  absence  of  intention
deprives  the  complementariness  of  all  significance. On  the  other


46  Rigid  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.  [part


hand  he  never  clearly  states — I  may  almost  say  he  is  careful
to  avoid  clearly  stating — whether  in  his  opinion  the  comple-
mentary element  in  the  Verrall  case  is  or  is  not  intentional.
His  argument  seems  to  rest  sometimes  on  one  view,  sometimes
on  the  other.  When  he  contends  that  the  complementary
element  in  the  case  could  not  have  originated  in  Dr.  Verrall's
supraliminal  self  because  the  complementary  relation  between
Mrs.  Verrall's  different  scripts  formed  no  part  of  Dr.  Verrall's
conscious  intention,  he  is  really  employing  a  test  which  is
applicable  only  to  the  purposive  class :  when  he  contends  that
it  must  therefore  have  originated  in  subliminal  activities,  this
test  is  dropped,  the  distinction  between  the  two  classes  is
allowed  to  fall  into  the  background,  and  the  reader  is  left  free
to  treat  the  correspondence,  if  he  so  please,  as  purely  non-
purposive.

Now,  complementariness  of  the  non-purposive  order  being,  as
Professor  Pigou  says,  "  of  no  significance,"  if  the  complementary
element  in  the  Verrall  case  is  wholly  of  this  character,  the
subliminal  origin  claimed  for  it  is  hardly  worth  calling  in
question.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  of  use  to  point  out  that
even  for  this  lower  form  of  complementariness  Dr.  Verrall's
supraliminal  activities  may  have  been  largely  responsible,  and
that  this  possibility  is  not  shut  out  by  the  mere  fact  that  the
complementary  relation  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  formed  no  part
of  Dr.  Verrall's  conscious  intention.  There  are  various  ways
in  which  complementariness  of  the  non-purposive  kind  may  be
supposed  to  arise.  For  instance,  it  might  be  the  purely  accidental
result  of  a  number  of  tentative  approximations  to  an  idea  which
is  never  itself  clearly  grasped.  Or  it  might  have  its  source
in  the  changing  moods  of  the  percipient,  if  there  be  only  one
as  in  the  Verrall  case,  or  in  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  different
percipients  if  there  be  more  than  one,  as  in  the  cross-corre-
spondences described  in  the  Proceedings.  Or  again,  it  might
result  incidentally  from  thought-transference  from  a  consciousness
which,  without  any  deliberate  intention  to  produce  comple-
mentariness, dwells  now  on  one,  now  on  another,  aspect  of  the
idea  to  be  transferred,  with  corresponding  modification  of  the
impressions  produced.

If  we  consider  the  passages  quoted  by  Professor  Pigou  as
contributing  to  form  the  complementary  element  in  the  Verrall


lxii.] Professor  Pigou  on  Gross-Correspondences.  47


case,  we  shall  see  reason  to  think,  at  least  with  respect
to  one,  and  that  perhaps  the  most  striking  of  all,  that  the
explanation  last  given  is  probably  the  true  one.  "  On
Sept.  18,"  writes  Mrs.  Verrall,1  "the  script  got  vaguely  hold
of  the  only  idea  not  hitherto  reproduced,  namely,  that  of
'  horse  '  in  the  ordinary  view  of  the  meaning  of  /j.ov6ttu>\o<;,
'  having  one  horse.' "  (The  writing  on  that  date  may  be  read
eunriro<;,  i.e.  of  goodly  horses,  or  et?  77T7ro?,  i.e.  one  horse.  The
latter  is  the  reading  adopted  by  Professor  Pigou).  "  On  this
occasion,"  continues  Mrs.  Verrall,  "  while  I  was  writing  in  one
room,  my  husband  sitting  in  another  definitely  fixed  his  mind
on  the  notion  of  '  horse  '  which  had  so  far  been  conspicuously
absent."  In  this  instance,  then,  the  evidence  is  entirely
opposed  to  Professor  Pigou's  contention.  Dr.  Verrall,  from  his
examination  of  the  script,  knew  that  something  was  wanting
and  tried  successfully  to  supply  it.

Indeed  it  might  fairly  be  claimed  for  this  particular  contri-
bution to  the  complementary  element  in  the  scripts  that  it
really  did  originate  not  merely  in  Dr.  Verrall's  conscious
thought,  but  in  his  conscious  purpose.  And  if  each  fragmentary
contribution  had  a  similar  history,  we  should  be  obliged,  I
think,  to  class  the  correspondence  as  purposive,  and  attribute
it  wholly  to  Dr.  Verrall's  conscious  self.  As  a  matter  of  fact
this  is  not  the  case,  and  the  complementariness,  taken
altogether,  must,  in  my  opinion,  be  classed  as  non-purposive.
But  all  the  fragments  cited  by  Professor  Pigou,  with  one  single
exception,  might,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  have  had  their  origin
in  the  conscious,  though  undesigned,2  direction  of  Dr.  Verrall's
thoughts  at  different  times  to  different  parts  of  the  Greek
phrase,  to  its  general  meaning,  or  to  the  various  associations
connected  with  it.  The  one  fragment  concerning  which  we
can  definitely  say  that  his  conscious  self  could  not  have  been
the  direct  source  of  inspiration  is  the  sentence  "  Find  the
herb  moly,  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide."  The  connection  of
the  "herb  moly"  with  the  Classical  Tripos  of  1873  had  been
entirely  forgotten  by  Dr.  Verrall,  and  therefore  the  reference  to
it  could  not  have  been  directly  due  to  any  conscious  mental
activity  on  his  part. But even here his desire  to  give  "  a

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.  p.  164.

2 I.e.  undesigned  so  far  as  the  production  of  complementariness  is  concerned.


48


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


clue "  may  have  had  some  general  influence  on  the  script
produced,  and  have  been  the  real  motive  power  without  which
subliminal  activity  could  not  have  come  into  play.

It  thus  appears  that  if  we  make  deduction  of  all  the
contributions  to  the  complementary  element  in  the  case  which
it  is  possible  to  ascribe  to  Dr.  Verrall's  conscious  mental
activities,  what  is  left  is  hardly  sufficient  to  prove  subliminal
origin  even  of  non-purposive  complementariness  against  any  one
who  cared  to  dispute  it  ;  while  of  evidence  to  prove  that  the
production  of  purposive  complementariness  is  within  the  powers
of  the  subliminal  self  Professor  Pigou  has  not  brought  forward
so  much  as  a  vestige.  In  the  absence  of  such  evidence,  his
second  proposition,  even  if  true  in  a  sense,  will  remain  without
relevance  to  the  general  argument  so  long  as  there  is  ground
for  suspecting  purpose  in  the  complementary  element  in  any
of  the  examples  with  which  the  Verrall  case  is  put  into
comparison.

This  brings  us  to  Professor  Pigou's  third  proposition,  which
asserts  that  the  complementary  element  in  the  Verrall  case  is
comparable  in  all  essentials  with  what  we  find  in  the  best
complementary  correspondences  recorded  in  the  Proceedings.

In  examining  the  question  here  raised  1  may  begin  by
clearing  two  considerations  out  of  the  way.  They  are  not  with-
out interest,  but  they  do  not  reach  the  heart  of  the  matter.

In  the  first  place,  the  things  compared  are,  on  the  one  side
complementary  fragments  distributed  between  different  auto-
matists,  on  the  other  side  complementary  fragments  presented
consecutively  in  the  script  of  a  single  automatist.  Professor
Pigou  himself  calls  attention  to  this  difference,  but  only  to
set  it  aside  as  of  no  importance.  I  do  not  altogether  agree
with  him,  but  am  ready  for  the  nonce  to  accept  his  stand-
point and  treat  the  complementary  fragments  in  the  Verrall
case  as  if  they  had  been  distributed  contemporaneously  among
several  scripts  instead  of  appearing  consecutively  in  one.

In  the  second  place,  if  we  had  nothing  before  us  but  the
isolated  passages  quoted  by  Professor  Pigou  from  Mrs.  Verrall's
script — but  which  we  are  now  to  imagine  scattered  between
various  automatic  writers — it  is  more  than  doubtful  whether
even Mr.  Piddington's  ingenuity would ever  have  connected


LXII.]


Professor  Pigou  on  Cross-Correspondences.


49


them  together,  or  referred  them  to  the  fxovoirwXov  e?  am  of
Euripides.  Both  the  connection  and  the  reference  really
depend  on  the  knowledge  we  possess,  apart  from  the  script,
concerning  Dr.  Verrall's  attempt  at  thought-transference.  On
the  other  hand,  in  the  best  examples  of  cross-correspondences
to  be  found  in  the  Proceedings,  either  the  complementary
parts  cohere  sufficiently  to  tell  their  own  tale  to  the
intelligent  student  of  the  scripts,  assisted,  of  course,  by  their
approximately  contemporaneous  appearance,  or  the  scripts
themselves  give  us  helping  hints  enough  to  point  our  attention
in  the  right  direction.

I  do  not  insist  further  on  the  difference  here  indicated,
because  it  may  be  urged  that  it  is  only  one  of  degree ;  and
in  many  of  the  examples  given  in  the  Proceedings  I  should
be  prepared  to  concede  this.  A  little  more  or  a  little  less  of
coherence  between  the  fragments  might  easily  be  sufficient  on
the  one  hand  to  raise  doubtful  correspondences  into  certain
ones,  on  the  other  to  prevent  even  the  suspicion  of  a  corre-
spondence from  ever  arising.

In  the  best  cases  of  complementary  correspondence,  however,
I  believe  the  difference  is  not  merely  of  degree,  but  of  kind.
It  is  the  old  issue  once  more — presence  or  absence  of  design.
But  the  old  issue  is  also  the  important  one,  and  I  do  not
think  Professor  Pigou  has  fairly  faced  it.

As  I  have  already  said,  the  complementary  element  in  the
Verrall  case,  taken  as  a  whole,  must  be  regarded  as  non-
purposive.  If  we  were  justified  in  assuming  that  the  com-
plementary element  in  all  other  cases  known  to  us  was
non-purposive,  then  I  should  be  willing  to  admit  that  the
complementary  fragments  in  the  Verrall  case,  if  distributed
between  several  autotnatists,  presented  a  fair,  though  by  no
means  a  favourable,  example  of  the  class  generally.  But  to
assume  this  would  be  an  obvious  begging  of  the  question.
For  suppose  a  single  case  in  which  there  was  good  reason  to
infer  a  purposive  correspondence  either  from  the  form  of  the
fragments  and  their  interrelation,  or  from  some  indication
given  in  the  script  itself,  then,  so  far  as  that  case  was  con-
cerned, the  analogy  of  the  Verrall  case  would  have  broken
down.  A  correspondence  of  the  purposive  class  is  not  in  all
essentials  comparable  with  one  of  the  non-purposive  class.

D


50


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


I  do  not  suggest  that  Professor  Pigou  has  been  guilty  of
this  obvious  petitio  principii.  But  the  procedure  he  has
adopted  leads  insensibly  to  much  the  same  practical  result.
He  does  not  in  so  many  words  affirm  that  the  complementary
element  in  all  correspondences  is  non-purposive.  He  simply
avoids  the  point  altogether.  The  question  of  intention,  he  now
tells  us,  is  a  secondary  one.  According  to  him  a  more  satisfactory
method  of  procedure  is  "  to  leave  it  aside  altogether,  and  ask
quite  directly  :  '  Do  the  complementary  correspondences,  the
authorship  of  which  is  now  under  investigation,  differ  in  any
marked  degree  from  other  complementary  correspondences  that
we  have  grounds  for  attributing  to  subliminal  agency  ? '
This,"  he  adds,  "  is  all  we  need :  for  if  the  answer  is  in  the
negative,  we  know,  without  delving  behind  the  facts  for
explaining  intentions,  that  the  phenomena  which  we  are  study-
ing fall  within  the  capacity  of  subliminal  agents,  and  therefore,
on  the  principles  here  adopted,  are  probably  due  to  them."

I  venture  to  think  that  Professor  Pigou's  supposed  improve-
ment in  method  is  no  improvement  at  all,  and  that  its
adoption  has  led  to  unfortunate  results.  For  I  do  not  believe
it  possible  to  make  a  useful  comparison  between  the  comple-
mentary correspondences  in  the  Proceedings  and  the  novoirwkov
case,  without  asking  the  very  question  which  he  eliminates
as  being  of  secondary  importance.  It  may  not  always  be
easy  to  answer  the  question  with  confidence ;  but  unless  we
ask  it,  it  will  be  still  more  difficult  to  decide  whether  there
is  a  "  marked  degree  of  difference  "  between  any  given
complementary  correspondence  and  the  one  which  he  sets  up
as  a  standard  of  comparison.  To  ask  whether  the  comple-
mentary element  in  a  correspondence  is  purposive  or  non-
purposive  is  a  help,  not  a  hindrance,  in  determining  whether
it  differs  "  in  a  marked  decree  "  from  that  which  Dr.  Verrall's

D

experiment  exhibits.

It  seems  to  me  that  we  are  entitled  to  press  Professor
Pigou  for  an  answer  to  these  two  questions :  First,  does  the
relation  of  the  complementary  fragments  in  the  Verrall  case
show  design,  or  does  it  not  ?  Secondly,  is  there  or  is  there
not  any  ground  for  inferring  design  in  the  distribution  of  the
complementary  fragments  between  different  automatists  in  the
best  examples  to  be  found  in  the  Proceedings  ? In  his  paper


lxil]


Professor  Pigou  on  Gross-Correspondences.


5  J


he  has  avoided  a  definite  answer  to  either  question  ;  but  if
brought  to  bay  and  compelled  to  reply,  I  think  he  must
needs  answer  both  in  the  negative,  or  else  frankly  abandon  his
second  and  third  propositions  as  untenable.

My  own  answer  to  the  first  of  these  questions  has  already
been  given.  The  complementary  element  in  the  Verrall  case
is  in  my  judgment  non-purposive — or  if  any  trace  of  purpose
can  be  detected  in  it,  we  must  ascribe  this  to  Dr.  Verrall's
conscious  desire  to  till  up  an  observed  gap  in  the  automatic
script,  and  not  to  the  subliminal  activities  either  of  himself  or
of  Mrs.  Verrall.  The  second  question  still  awaits  discussion.
If  it  can  be  answered  in  the  affirmative — if,  that  is,  it  be
possible  to  show  that  the  complementary  element  in  the  best
cross-correspondences  is  purposive — the  counter-case  to  be  made
in  reply  to  Professor  Pigou's  paper  will  be  complete.

This  aspect  of  the  subject  was  discussed  in  an  article
contributed  by  me  to  the  Eibbert  Journal  of  January,  1909,
shortly  after  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  "  Concordant  Auto-
matisms " 1  appeared,  and  I  am  unwilling  to  labour  over  the
same  ground  again.  I  will  therefore  deal  with  it  as  briefly
as  I  can.

I  had  occasion  to  point  out,  earlier  in  this  paper,  that  a
simple  correspondence,  that  is  to  say,  a  straightforward  con-
cordance between  two  or  more  automatic  scripts,  cannot  be
made  to  yield  proof  that  an  intelligent  will  has  been  at  work
to  produce  the  concordance.  Evidence  of  intention  in  such  a
case  can  only  come  from  something  added  to  the  concordance
— for  instance,  a  subsequently  verified  claim  in  the  script
itself  that  a  given  word  or  idea  is  the  subject  of  a  corre-
spondence which  has  been,  is  being,  or  is  about  to  be
produced  under  conditions  which  exclude  normal  communica-
tion between  the  automatists.

Complementary  correspondences  have  in  this  respect  an
advantage  over  simple  ones.  Evidence  that  the  complementari-
ness  is  intentional  may  be  derived  not  only  from  supplementary
indication  of  purpose  afforded  by  statements  in  the  script,  but
also  from  the  distribution  of  the  complementary  parts  and
the  nature  of  the  relations  between  them.

To  illustrate  this,  let  us  suppose  that  four  automatists  sit

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.


52


Rigid  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


independently  on  the  same  day,  and  produce  scripts  each  of
which  contains  a  reference  to  the  Ace  of  Hearts.  Here  we
have  a  simple  correspondence,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the
nature  of  the  concordance  between  the  scripts  to  prove  that
it  may  not  have  resulted  from  the  blind  operation  of  psychical
laws,  and  not  at  all  from  the  deliberate  action  of  an  intelligent
will.

Next  suppose  that  instead  of  all  four  scripts  containing  a
reference  to  the  Ace  of  Hearts,  one  of  them  mentions  the  Ace
of  Hearts,  another  the  Ace  of  Diamonds,  a  third  the  Ace
of  Clubs,  and  the  fourth  the  Ace  of  Spades.  Here  we  have
a  complementary  correspondence.  The  complete  idea  would  be
the  combined  aces  of  the  pack,  and  the  distribution  of  a
different  ace  to  each  automatist  cannot  but  suggest  the
possibility  that  design,  and  not  merely  chance,  has  been  at
work.

Let  me  now  take  a  very  extreme  illustration,  and  suppose
that  instead  of  four  automatists  we  have  fifty- two,  and  that
each  separate  script  names  a  different  card  of  the  pack.  In
this  case  the  complete  idea  is  evidently  the  whole  pack,  and
the  distribution  and  mutual  relation  of  its  parts  is  such  as  to
make  the  presence  of  design  a  practical  certainty.

I  repeat,  this  is  an  extreme  illustration,  and  I  do  not  for
a  moment  pretend  that  any  real  example  we  can  point  to
approaches  it  for  cogency.  But  that  some  of  the  examples  in
the  Proceedings  do  make  probable  the  existence  of  design  in
the  distribution  and  relation  of  the  complementary  parts  is  a
conclusion  which  I  find  it  difficult  to  resist.  Two  of  the  best
cases  of  this  kind  are  described  in  Mr.  Piddington's  paper
under  the  headings  "  Light  in  West "  and  "  Euripides." 1  As
regards  these,  I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  refer  to  my  article
in  the  Hibbert  Journal,  where  they  are  dealt  with  at  some
length.  Here  is  another  example  which  I  choose  for  its  com-
parative simplicity.

On  the  16th  of  April,  1907,  Mrs.  Holland,  in  India,
produced  a  script  of  which  these  were  the  opening  sentences  :

Maurice. Morris.  Mors.

And  with  that  the  shadow  of  death  fell  upon  him,  and  his
soul  departed  out  of  Iris  limbs.

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  241-281.


lxil]


Professor  Pigoit  on  Cross-Correspondences.


53


On  the  following  clay,  during  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance,  the  word  Sanatos  was  uttered,  but  altered  immediately
afterwards  to  Tanatos.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  was
a  misapprehension  or  mispronunciation  of  Thanatos  ;  and  on
the  23rd  the  word  emerged  in  its  correct  form.  {Thanatos
is  of  course  the  Greek,  and  Mors  the  Latin,  for  Death).

On  the  29  th  of  April  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  a  piece  of  script
wholly  occupied  with  references  to  Death.  It  contained,  inter
alia,  no  less  than  four  quotations,  one  from  Landor,  one  from
Virgil,  one  from  Horace,  and  one  from  Shakespeare,  all  directly
involving  the  idea  of  death,  although,  as  Mr.  Piddington  justly
remarks,  the  word  itself  seems  to  be  studiously  shunned.
Mors  indeed  occurs  in  the  passage  from  Horace ;  but  the
Shakespearian  quotation  "Come  away,  come  away,  [Death]"
appears  in  a  truncated  form  with  the  significant  noun  omitted.

On  the  30th  Mrs.  Piper  again  uttered  the  word  Thanatos
during  the  waking-stage,  repeating  it  three  times  over  in
close  succession.

In  this  case  the  same  idea  is  expressed  by  all  three
automatists,  and  the  complementary  element  lies  in  what
seems  to  be  a  calculated  difference  of  form.  Mrs.  Piper  is
totally  ignorant  of  Greek :  Mrs.  Holland  is  quite  unfamiliar
with  Latin.  Yet  Mrs.  Piper's  utterance  is  confined  to  the
bare  Greek  equivalent,  which  she  evidently  does  not  under-
stand ;  the  Latin  equivalent  is  the  prominent  word  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script ;  and  the  emergence  in  both  cases  suggests  a
sound  heard  rather  than  an  idea  apprehended,  the  Maurice,
Morris,  Mors  of  Mrs.  Holland  answering  to  the  Sanatos,
Tanatos,  Thanatos  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Meanwhile  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  there  appears  to  be  a  deliberate  avoidance  of  the  word
"  death,"  the  idea  being  conveyed  entirely  by  means  of  literary
allusions.

I  should  be  strongly  inclined  to  suspect  intelligent  purpose
in  the  peculiarities  of  an  arrangement  like  this,  even  without
taking  into  account  the  numerous  intimations  of  intention  so
often  given  by  the  scripts  in  connection  with  cross-correspon-
dences. But  these  intimations  cannot  be  ignored  if  we  are
to  form  a  right  judgment  on  the  question  now  before  us.  No
doubt  in  most  instances  the  claim  put  forward  in  the  scripts
only  applies  to  the  production  of  a  cross-correspondence,  not


54


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


to  the  production  of  a  complementary  element  in  it.  The
latter  would  of  course  imply  the  former,  but  not  vice  versd.

Passages  may  also  be  found,  however,  which  must  be  con-
strued as  intimations  that  the  distribution  of  different  parts  of
an  idea  to  different  automatists  is  intentional.  The  Ave  Roma
immortalis  correspondence,  which  is  one  of  the  two  selected  by
Professor  Pigou  for  comparison  with  the  Verrall  case,  is  an
instance  in  point.  The  completed  idea  here  is  that  of  a  well-
known  picture  in  the  Vatican.  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  gives
various  details  of  the  picture,  unmeaning  to  herself,  but  all
brought  into  an  intelligible  whole  by  the  phrase  Ave  Roma,
immortalis  occurring  a  few  days  later  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.
The  nature  and  distribution  of  the  complementary  parts  in  this
case  may  be  faintly  suggestive  of  design,  but  are  certainly
not  unmistakeably  so.  On  the  other  hand  their  appearance  in
each  script  is  accompanied  by  comments  which  throw  further
light  on  the  matter.  For  on  March  2nd,  when  the  cross-
correspondence  begins,  Mrs.  Verrall  is  told  by  the  script  that
word  will  be  sent  her  "  through  another  lady,"  and  that  after
some  days  she  will  easily  understand  what  the  scribe  says :
and  on  March  7th,  when  the  cross-correspondence  ends,  Mrs.
Holland's  contribution  is  followed  by  the  words  "  How  could
I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the  clue  ? "  These
two  comments  taken  together  can  only  mean  (1)  that  a  cross-
correspondence  was  being  deliberately  brought  about ;  (2)  that
the  complementary  element  in  it  was  purposive,  the  object
being  to  keep  back  from  Mrs.  Verrall  a  clue-giving  fragment
of  the  whole  idea.

For  another  very  interesting  illustration  of  the  way  in  which
the  intentional  and  purposive  character  of  a  cross-correspondence
can  be  brought  out  by  comments  in  the  script  itself  I  may
refer  to  the  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  case,  published  in  the  latest
volume  of  the  Proceedings?-  since  Professor  Pigou's  paper  was
written.

Let  me  now  try  to  summarise  the  results  of  this  long  dis-
cussion. If  I  am  right,  Professor  Pigou's  argument  fails  at
almost  every  point.

The  Eamsden-Miles  experiments  do  not  prove  that  a  simple
correspondence  can  originate  in  subliminal  activities  apart  from

1Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  264-3-26.


lxii.] Professor  Pigou  on  Gross-Correspondences.  55


the  conscious  will  of  a  supraliminal  self.  Still  less  do  they
prove  that  a  subliminal  self  acting  on  its  own  account  can
deliberately  produce  a  simple  correspondence.

The  Verrall  experiment  does  not  prove  that  the  comple-
mentary element  in  a  purposive  correspondence  can  originate  in
subliminal  activities.  Even  as  regards  complementariness  of
the  non-purposive  order  the  experiment  seems  to  prove  little
or  nothing.  But  complementariness  of  this  kind  has  no  special
significance.  We  may  readily  admit  the  probability  that  its
source  is  often  subliminal ;  and  in  a  sense,  therefore,  it  may
be  said  to  be  within  the  powers  of  the  subliminal  self  to
produce  it.  In  this  connection,  however,  it  would  be  less  mis-
leading to  speak  of  the  impotence,  or  the  limitations,  of  the
subliminal  self  than  of  its  powers.

Finally,  Professor  Pigou's  contention  that  the  complementary
element  in  the  Verrall  case  1  is  in  all  essentials  similar  to  that
of  the  best  correspondences  to  be  found  in  the  Proceedings  is
not,  in  my  opinion,  tenable.  His  argument  tacitly  implies
either  that  all  these  correspondences  are  non-purposive,  or  else
that  purposiveness  is  a  negligible  feature  in  the  cases  which
show  evidence  of  it.  The  latter  alternative  has  nothing  to
commend  it :  the  former  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  borne
out  by  the  facts.

My  conclusion  is  that  Professor  Pigou  has  not  succeeded  in
proving  that  the  production  of  complementary  correspondences
of  the  best  type  is  within  the  known  capacities  of  the  sub-
liminal self.  It  may,  indeed,  be  within  the  capacities  of  the
subliminal  self  to  plan  and  carry  out  such  complementary
correspondences  :  but  this  is  hypothesis,  and  until  it  is  proved
we  are  entitled  to  set  against  it  another  hypothesis,  and  to
suspend  judgment  between  the  two.  I  confess  that  this  is
still  my  own  attitude.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  find  firm
ground  anywhere  ;  we  must  continue  to  feel  our  way  cautiously
in  more  than  one  direction.  At  the  same  time,  I  doubt
whether  any  final  verdict  is  likely  to  be  reached  along  the
lines  followed  by  Professor  Pigou.  He  rests  the  whole  weight
of  his  argument  on  experimental  telepathy.  Now,  in  experi-
mental telepathy  we  must,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,
start from  supraliminal activity. Starting from  supraliminal

xFor  additional  Note  by  Mrs.  Verrall  oa  this  case,  see  below,  p.  109. — Ed.


56


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


activity,  is  there  any  point  at  which  we  are  logically  justified
in  cutting  loose  from  it,  even  where  the  idea  transferred  is
not  consciously  present  in  the  mind  of  the  presumed  agent  ?
To  put  the  difficulty  in  another  way,  in  proportion  as  we
eliminate  supraliminal  activity,  we  eliminate  also  the  experi-
mental character  of  the  enquiry,  and  find  ourselves  dealing  with
nearer  and  nearer  approximations  to  the  very  automatic  states
whose  capacities  we  set  out  to  ascertain  by  an  appeal  to  ex-
perimental analogies.  Thus  we  are  no  further  advanced,  and
our  problem  lies  still  unsolved  before  us.


LXII.] Further  Sittings  with  Etbsapia  Palladino.


57


VI.

EEPOET  ON  A  FURTHER  SERIES  OF  SITTINGS
WITH  EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AT  NAPLES.

I.

General  Report.
By  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding  and  W.  Marriott.

Naples,  December  5th,  1910.

With  a  view  to  attempting  to  confirm  either  the  favourable
report  on  Eusapia  Palladino  issued  by  Messrs.  Feilding,
Baggally  and  Carrington,  published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.
(Part  LIX.,  November,  1909),  or  the  unfavourable  one  by
Mr.  W.  S.  Davis  in  the  American  S.P.R.  Journal  for  August,
1910,  a  short  series  of  five  sittings  was  held  in  Naples  in
November  and  December,  1910. The  sitters  were  as  follows:

Stances  I.  and  II. — Count  and  Countess  Perovsky-Petrovo-

Solovovo  and  Mr.  Feilding.

Seance  III. — Count  Solovovo,  Mr.  W.  Marriott,  Mr.  Feilding.
„ IV. — As  in  No.  III.  and  Countess  Solovovo.
V. — Mr.  Marriott  and  Mr.  Feilding.

At  Seance  I.  the  control  was  at  the  time  considered  so
unsatisfactory  that,  although  fraud  was  not  specifically  proved,
neither  Count  Solovovo  nor  Mr.  Feilding  is  disposed  to  attach
any  evidential  importance  to  the  few  small  phenomena  which
occurred.

Seance  II.  was  the  only  one  at  which,  with  the  possible
exception  of  table  levitations,  any  phenomena  of  the  slightest
interest  occurred.  They  were,  however,  of  so  insignificant  a
character  that,  especially  in  the  light  of  the  possible  fraud  at


58  Farther  Sittings  with  Eusdpia  Palladino.  [part


the  first  Seance,  and  the  undoubted  fraud  in  the  last  three,
■none  of  the  three  sitters  is  disposed  to  draw  any  positive
conclusions.  Seances  III.,  IV.,  and  V.  were  in  the  opinion  of
all  those  present  unquestionably  mainly,  and  in  the  opinion
of  Mr.  Marriott  wholly,  fraudulent.  The  medium  evaded
throughout  any  effective  control,  frequently  making  it  impossible
for  the  sitter  on  her  left  side  to  prevent  her  from  releasing
her  left  hand  or  foot,  and  took  advantage  of  this  to  make
constant  use  of  them,  as  well  as  of  her  elbow,  for  the
production  of  spurious  phenomena.  Such  phenomena  con-
sisted of  (1)  shaking  movements  of  the  curtain,  throwings  of
it  over  her  shoulder,  surreptitious  pullings  at  it  with  her  hands
or  elbow,  kickings  at  it  with  her  feet.  (2)  Touches  with  her
left  foot  on  her  neighbours.  (3)  Upsetting  of  the  cabinet  table
with  her  elbow.  (4)  Moving  of  a  chair  with  her  foot.  (5)
Lifting  of  the  cabinet  table  with  her  hand  after  effecting  its
release, — not  by  substitution,  but  merely  by  removing  it  from  the
back  of  the  controller's  hand,  this  position  being  the  only  form
of  control  she  would  usually  permit.  As  regards  this  last  effect,
it  may  be  added  that  though  Messrs.  Feildiug  and  Marriott
distinctly  saw  the  movement  of  the  medium's  hand  and  arm
against  a  background  of  luminous  paint,  Countess  Solovovo,
who  was  controlling  the  hand  in  question  on  the  table  and
under  the  curtain,  had  the  distinct  impression  of  its  continuous
grasp.  Count  Solovovo  is  inclined  to  consider  the  hypothesis
of  some  abnormal  suggestive  influence  on  the  part  of  the  medium
to  account  for  this  impression.

With  this  tentative  exception,  all  the  sitters  are  agreed
that  the  whole  of  the  above-named  phenomena  were  entirely
fraudulent.  As  regards  the  table  movements,  consisting,  in  the
last  three  seances,  of  only  one  total  and  two  partial  levitations,
Mr.  Marriott  is  strongly  of  opinion  that  these  also  were
fraudulent,  inferring  from  the  position  of  the  hands  that  they
were  accomplished  by  a  balance  of  the  table  between  the  left
hand  and  foot,  and  by  an  upward  throw  of  her  (E.  P.'s)  fingers
respectively.  Mr.  Feildiug,  who  was  actually  observing  the
hands  at  the  time,  disputes  the  conclusion  that  these  actions
did,  in  fact,  take  place,  but  is  not  disposed  to  lay  any  stress
upon  a  few  phenomena  sporadically  occurring  among  others  of
an unquestionably fraudulent character. He is further  of


lxil] Farther  Sittings  with  Euscipia  Palladino.


59


opinion  that  the  table  movements  were  the  only  phenomena
which  in  any  way  resembled  the  occurrences  at  the  former
Naples  series  of  experiments,  and  states  that  the  conditions  of
control  permitted  were  wholly  different  from  those  permitted
in  that  series.

The  seances  in  question  appear  identical  with  the  seances
described  by  Mr.  Davis.  The  medium  pleaded  illness  and
fatigue  throughout,  and  although  it  had  been  intended  to  hold
a  series  of  ten  or  twelve  seances,  it  was  not  thought  worth
while  to  continue  any  longer  in  the  circumstances.

At  the  termination  of  the  series  Eusapia  was  informed  of
the  negative  conclusions  which  had  been  arrived  at  and  of  the
spurious  nature  of  the  phenomena  which  had  been  presented.
While  not  disputing  the  justice  of  these  conclusions,  she  stated
that  she  had  no  recollection  of  anything  that  transpired  after
the  close  of  the  table  movements  which  usually  occupy  the
first  part  of  her  sittings,  after  which  the  light  is  reduced  for
other  phenomena.  She  pleaded  her  state  of  health  as  an
excuse  for  her  failure  to  give  satisfaction.  She  nevertheless
accepted  her  full  fee.

IT.

Statement  by  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.

December,  1910.

Whilst  substantially  agreeing  with  the  above  report,  I  feel
bound  to  make  the  following  reservations  and  observations :

With  regard  to  Seance  II.  some  of  the  things  which  happened
impressed  me  favourably.  I  was  twice  touched  on  my  right
side ;  a  little  table  in  the  "  cabinet "  was  suddenly  and  violently
overturned ;  and  one  of  the  objects  which  then  fell  off  it
moved  along  the  floor  for  a  very  appreciable  period  of  time.
The  hand  and  foot  control  seemed  to  me  very  satisfactory ;  at
least  we  repeatedly  said  so  at  the  time,  and  1  wrote  so  in  my
notes  the  day  after.  I  think  in  such  incidents  it  is  the  im-
pression felt  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  (I  am  speaking  of
experienced  enquirers  only)  which  must  really  count — -not  the
one  produced  by  subsequent  unfavourable  circumstances  (unless
revealing  sources  of  error  hitherto  unsuspected),  or  even  merely
"  as  time  goes  on." Of  course  into  my  expressed  conviction


60


Farther  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  [part


of  the  efficacy  of  the  hand-control  there  entered  even  at  the
time  an  appreciable  element  of  uncertainty  due  to  the  fact  that,
as  usual,  E.  P.  did  not  allow  her  hand  to  be  grasped  (I  will
revert  to  this  point).  In  my  note  on  the  sitting  in  question
I  say  also  that  "  the  conviction  1  here  express  .  .  .  does  not
apply  to  the  possible  hypothetical  use  of  an  apparatus."

With  regard  to  Seance  III.  and  the  incident  in  connection
with  my  wife  controlling,  it  should  be  noted  that  at  the  time
the  table  was  lifted  up  as  if  by  Eusapia's  hand,  her  right  hand
ivas  linlcecl  with  F.'s  on  the  table  uncovered  and  dimly  visible  (as
stated  in  my  note  written  out  on  the  next  day),  whereas  her
left  was  'under  the  curtain  (also  upon  the  table)  and  invisible.
Our  impression  at  the  time  (as  expressed  by  E.)  was  that
"  substitution  was  impossible  "  (see  my  next  day  note).  And  to
quote  my  wife's  words  in  her  written  statement  (made  the
next  day)  :  "  I  positively  deny  having  lost  contact  with  E.  P.'s
hand  a  single  moment  during  the  incident  described."

I  may  mention  that  before  our  sittings  had  begun  I  had
said  to  Mr.  Feilding  that  it  seemed  to  me  very  desirable  to
make  some  decisive  step  in  advance  with  regard  to  the  con-
ditions of  the  "  phenomena,"  and  in  view  of  all  the  doubts
and  discussions  to  which  the  question  of  hand-holding  with
E.  P.  gives  rise,  I  suggested  that  we  should  "  count"  only
those  "  phenomena "  which  should  occur  with  at  least  one  of
the  meelium's  hands  visible.  Neither  of  us  seemed  afterwards
inclined  to  adhere  unreservedly  to  so  high  a  standard !  But
in  the  incident  under  consideration  we  seem  to  have  come
within  measurable  distance  of  it !  And  though  the  unavoidable
lack  of  information  as  to  certain  particulars — for  instance  as
to  the  exact  distance  separating  Eusapia's  two  hands — is  much
to  be  regretted,  this  occurrence  has  on  the  whole  seemed  to
me  to  be  very  instructive  and  tending  to  give  support  to  the
theory  that  a  "  medium  "  is  occasionally  able — whether  con-
sciously or  unconsciously — to  induce  in  the  person  controlling
him  something  like  a  tactile  hallucination,  for  which  view
there  is  to  my  mind  very  strong  evidence  on  record  in  the
"chair-threading"  experiments  with  Sambor.1

1  These  experiments  (at  least  those  made  with  this  special  aim  by  myself  and
my  friends)  have  absolutely  convinced  me  that  either  passage  of  matter
through  matter  is  a  fact,  or  that  a  medium's  hand,  even  when  very  well  held


lxii.] Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  61


With  regard  to  the  table  movements,  I  agree  with  Mr.
Feikling  in  thinking  most  of  them  inconclusive ;  but  I  con-
sider that  one  partial  table-levitation  (away  from  Eusapia)  which
we  witnessed  at  the  end  of  the  third  sitting,  in  a  bright
light,  three  persons  (Mr.  Feikling,  Mr.  Meeson,  the  stenographer,
and  myself)  controlling  E.  P.  and  Mr.  Marriott  looking  on,  was
rather  remarkable,  and  I  thought  it  difficult  at  the  time  to
admit  that  Mr.  Marriott's  explanation  (as  given  in  the  report)
could  be  the  true  one.  I  may  add  that  from  what  he  told  me
I  inferred  that  he  had  not  actually  seen  E.  P.  throw  up  the  table
with  her  fingers,  but  had  concluded  that  this  was  her  method.

On  the  whole,  and  though  I  am  by  no  means  absolutely
certain  that  any  table  movements  and  levitations  we  witnessed
were  genuine,  I  think  that  here  is  matter  for  further  investi-
gation. The  conditions  under  which  these  things  occur  make
me  think  that  they  are  or  may  be  suitable  for  scientific
enquiry  and  I  hope  they  may  be  investigated  again.  Even  an
exposure  of  E.  P.'s  levitations  so  extremely  damaging  to  her
mediumistic  reputation  as  W.  S.  Davis's  does  not  explain
everything,  and  gives  us  no  right  whatsoever  to  answer  the
question  definitely  in  the  negative.

On  the  other  hand,  E.  P.'s  "  cabinet  phenomena,"  as  I
have  witnessed  them  (both  in  Naples  in  1910  and  in  St.
Petersburg  in  1898),  have  left  me  under  the  impression
that  here  matters  ought  to  be  seriously  mended  before  we  in-
vestigate them  further.  I  agree  with  Mr.  Marriott  in  thinking
that  the  hand  control  she  usually  admits  when  such  "  pheno-
mena "  occur  is  practically  non-existent.  She  throws  every
obstacle  in  the  way  of  this  hand  control.  In  my  experience,
at  least,  she  constantly  objected  to  my  holding  even  her  thumb
or  her  little  finger. She  constantly  complained  of  my  squeez-

(not  in  the  least  as  Eusapia's  hands  are),  can  liberate  itself,  and  afterwards
return  to  its  original  position  without  the  controller  becoming  aware  of  it.
And  after  some  conversations  I  had  on  the  subject  with  Mr.  Marriott  (an
expert  in  conjuring)  I  am  even  more  than  before  inclined  to  see  in  this  "chair-
threading"  some  unusual  form  of  "supernormal  suggestion,''  and  shall  not
believe  this  to  have  been  a  trick  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  until  I
have  been  shown  the  same  thing  by  a  regular  conjurer.

On  the  other  hand,  I  still  maintain  that  we  have  no  good  evidence  whatever
of  the  possible  production  of  collective  hallucinations  at  spiritistic  seances,
visual  or  other  [Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  436-482).


62


Further  Sittings  vnth  Eusapia  Palladino.  [part


ing  her  hand  too  much.  She  insisted  on  her  hands  being
covered  (with  the  curtain),  and  even  asked  that  they  should
be  brought  nearer  to  one  another,  and  this  at  the  most
successful  sitting  of  the  series, — the  2nd !  The  hand-sub-
stitution I  noticed  repeatedly.  Apart  from  this,  she  constantly
changes  the  respective  positions  of  her  limbs — both  feet  and
hands.  The  latter  especially  are  a  regular  pierpetuum  mobile.
Now  this  circumstance  is  extremely  important,  for  as  the
conditions  of  the  control  are  perpetually  and  ceaselessly
changing,  illusions  of  memory  as  to  the  exact  conditions  under
which  something  occurred  are  eminently  apt  to  spring  up.
Of  course  the  presence  of  a  shorthand  writer  will  to  a  great
extent  eliminate  this  source  of  error ;  but,  seeing  that  no
shorthand  writer  was  present  at  the  great  majority  of  obser-
vations in  the  case  of  E.  P.,  my  present  impression  is  that  the
great  bulk  of  the  evidence  re  her  "  cabinet-phenomena "  is  of
no  decisive  importance.

In  my  experience,  then,  with  such  control  as  E.  P.  admits,
complete  conviction  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  is  strictly  speaking
unattainable.  And  what,  I  ask,  is  the  use  of  "  relative  convic-
tion "  like  the  one,  say,  I  felt  as  to  the  efficacy  of  the  control
at  Seance  II.  ?  The  fact  that  I  had  this  impression  at  the
time  is  interesting ;  but  it  does  not  carry  us  one  step  further.
At  most  we  are  driven  to  the  "  supernormal  suggestion  "  theory.
At  future  scientific  seances  E.  P.  must  either  allow  her  hands
to  be  plainly  visible  to  all,  or  allow  them  to  be  grasped  (as
Sambor  invariably  did,  as  I  have  said,  during  the  experiments
with  the  "  chairs,"  thus  giving  something  amounting  to  absolute
conviction).  The  foot-control,  in  which  she  places  her  foot
upon  that  of  her  neighbour,  should  also  be  done  away  with.
These  demands  are  eminently  reasonable.  It  is  simply  prepos-
terous to  assert  that  they  could  act  negatively  on  the  "  pheno-
mena." Enough  time,  money  and  work  has  already  been  spent,
and  strictly  speaking  to  no  avail.  A  new  departure  must  be
made  at  last.

If  E.  P.  consents  to  the  above  conditions,  well  and  good ;
if  she  does  not,  she  must  either  be  left  alone ;  or — a  course
of  action  I  should  recommend — in  future  experiments  we  should
no  longer  investigate  the  "  cabinet-phenomena "  themselves,  but

the  conditions  of  the  control  at  the  time  such  "phenomena "  are


lxil] Farther  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  63


occurring.  Any  "  manifestations "  taking  place  with  both  of
E.  P.'s  hands  invisible  (supposing  they  are  controlled  as  un-
satisfactorily as  they  are  now)  should  not  be  taken  into  account
at  all.  And  particular  attention  should  be  given  to  making
clear  whether  anything  will  happen  with  either  one  or  both  of
the  medium's  hands  visible.  In  the  former  case  we  shall
have  to  give  full  weight  to  the  "  supernormal  suggestion "
theory  ;  and  only  in  the  latter — if  positive  results  are  obtained
— shall  we  really  have  to  face  the  hypothesis  of  a  new  "  physical
force "  and  the  like.  If,  on  the  contrary,  after  a  new  series
of  experiments  it  is  clearly  shown  that  no  "  cabinet-phenomena  "
occur  when  both  the  medium's  hands  are  visible,  this  negative
conclusion  will  be  also  very  important  and  will  make  it
probable  that  in  former  experiments  too  we  need  not  look
beyond  errors  of  observation,  illusions  of  memory,  etc.  (coupled
perhaps  sometimes  with  some  kind  of  "  suggestion  ")  to  account
for  the  most  puzzling  of  Signora  Palladino's  performances.

Of  course  the  question  of  the  foot-control  too  is  of  vital
importance,  since  I,  for  my  part,  have  little  doubt  that  the
medium's  feet  may  more  than  once  have  played  a  fundamental
part  in  "  spirit "  touches  and  grasps.

III.

Detailed  Account  of  the  Table-Lifting  Incident.

(a)  Extract  from  Mr.  Feilding's  Notes  on  Seances
III.  and  IV. {November  26  and  28,  1910.)

December  1,  1910.

In  the  course  of  the  two  seances  the  "  phenomena "  pro-
duced consisted  of  a  few  raps  of  doubtful  origin,  apparently
not  in  the  table ;  a  few  slides  of  the  table  of  about  an  inch
at  a  time,  not  shown  to  be  fraudulent  but  under  unsatisfactory
conditions  ;  an  upsetting  of  the  cabinet  table  to  all  appearances
accomplished  by  [E.  P.'s]  elbow;  bulgings  of  the  dress  (quite  unlike
any  bulgings  which  I  have  previously  seen)  and  apparently
done  with  the  foot ;  a  few  movements  of  the  curtain  clearly
seen  to  have  been  done  with  the  hand  after  substitution  had
been  effected ; a  movement  of  a  chair  close  to  the  medium,


64  Farther  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  [part


evidently  done  by  the  foot  after  substitution  bad  actually  been
notified ;  and  the  lifting  of  the  cabinet  table  clearly  seen  by
Marriott  and  myself  against  a  card  of  luminous  paint  to  have
been  done  with  the  hand  controlled  by  Countess  Solovovo.
Also  one  total  and  two  or  three  partial  levitations,  as  to  which
there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  between  Marriott  and  the  rest
of  us.  It  would  be  absurd  to  lay  stress  on  small  matters  of
this  kind  following  on  a  series  of  purely  fraudulent  phenomena.
The  chief  point  of  interest  is  the  lifting  of  the  cabinet  table
visibly  by  Eusapia's  hand,  notwithstanding  that  the  Countess
insisted  on  her  not  having  lost  control  of  the  hand  in  questioc
No  substitution  had  been  effected,  her  right  hand  being  visible
in  mine,  and  the  only  apparent  alternatives  are  either  the
formation  of  a  fiuidic  hand  on  Countess  Solovovo's  (a  theory
put  forward  by  Cavaliere  Chiaja)  to  lift  the  table ;  or  else  a
mere  lapse  in  her  observation.  Taking  the  case  on  its  own
merits,  the  latter  is  of  course  the  more  reasonable  assumption.

(b)  Note  on  Seance  of  November  28,  1910.
By  Count  Solovovo.

November  29th,  1910.

My  wife  controlling  all  the  time  on  E.  P.'s  left,  F.,  Mr.
Marriott,  Meeson,  then  E.  again  on  her  right.

The  seance  may  be  safely  put  clown  as — to  say  the  least — of
an  extremely  suspicious  character  throughout,  with,  however,
one  exception.  At  a  certain  moment  when  an  attempt  was
being  "  mediumistically "  made  to  pick  up  something  in  the
cabinet  from  the  floor,  F.,  who  was  controlling  E.  P.  on  her
right,  saw  against  a  luminous  background  E.  P.'s  left  arm  pro-
ducing the  movement.  Mr.  Marriott,  who  was  under  the  table
holding  E.  P.'s  feet,  saw  the  same  thing.  The  medium's  right
hand,  linked  with  F.'s,  was  on  the  table  uncovered  and  dimly
visible.  The  medium's  left  hand,  which  my  wife  controlled,
was  also  upon  the  table,  but  covered  with  part  of  the  curtain.
On  E.  asking  my  wife  whether  she  had  not  let  E.  P.'s  hand
go,  she  emphatically  denied  it,  stating  that  E.  P.,  though  not
allowing  her  to  hold  her  hand  all  the  time  in  the  proper  sense,
did  not  withdraw  it  for  a  single  moment,  and  repeatedly
clutched  at  it.


lxii.] Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  65


As  F.  said  at  the  time,  substitution  was  impossible.  I  also
dimly  saw  E.  P.'s  right  hand  linked  with  his  over  or  on  the  table.

My  wife's  conviction  that  at  the  time  she  had  not  released
the  medium's  hand  was  absolute.  But  it  is  of  course  possible
that  after  being  told  over  and  over  again  by  that  cleverest  of
conjurers,  Mr.  Marriott,  that  she  was  mistaken,  she  may  feel  less
certain  about  the  matter.  But  we  should  not  allow  such
suggestions  to  work — whether  one  way  or  the  other ;  and  in
justice  to  E.  P.  my  wife's  original  and  complete  conviction
should  be  put  on  record.

(c)  Note  by  Countess  Solovovo.

November  29th,  1910.
I  positively  deny  having  lost  contact  with  Eus.  P.'s  hand  a
single  moment  during  the  incident  described,  and,  as  my  hand
with  her  left  one  was  under  the  curtain,  on  the  table,  whereas
her  right  was  visible,  though  it  is  true  very  dimly,  and  held
by  F.,  and  not  near  enough  to  mine  to  touch  me  with  it,  she
was  not  able  to  make  one  of  her  hands  do  duty  for  two.

[In  reply  to  questions,  the  following  further  details  of  the
incident  were  sent  to  us  by  Countess  Solovovo. — Ed.]

January  16  th,  1911.

(1)  I  was  holding  E.  P.'s  hand  very  lightly,  because  she
complained  of  being  scpieezed  too  tightly  each  time  I  tried  to
hold  her  hand  fully  in  mine,  and  most  of  the  time  she  had
her  hand  on  my  hand  and  pressed  it  very  strongly  each  time
a  movement  occurred,  or  was  patting  it,  but  not  for  a  second
did  I  lose  contact  with  it ;  and  when  Mr.  FeildinQ  said :  "  She
is  using  her  hand,  because  I  saw  it  clearly  trying  to  lift  up
the  little  table,"  I  did  not  think  he  was  speaking  of  the  hand
/  held  (I  was  so  sure  of  having  had  it  on  mine  all  the
time),  and  when  he  told  me  I  must  have  let  it  go,  I  posi-
tively denied  it,  and  up  till  now  I  am  as  sure  as  one  can
be  of  anything  that  she  did  not  use  the  hand  that  was  in
mine  (or  on  mine).

(2)  Her  hand  was  not  motionless,  for,  as  I  said  before,  she
moved  it  about  over  mine,  patted  me,  pressed  my  hand  very
strongly  sometimes,  sometimes  let  me  hold  hers  fully  in  mine,

E


66  Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  [part

then  would  turn  my  hand  down  and  put  hers  over,  but  all
the  time  without  taking  it  off  entirely  ;  and  when  her  hand
was  over  mine,  I  several  times  turned  my  hand  and  felt  with
my  fingers  if  her  fingers  were  on  my  hand,  and  each  time  I
felt  them  I  tried  to  do  the  same  thing  with  my  thumb,  and
I  felt  also  that  it  was  the  same  hand  I  held  all  the  time.
Our  hands  were  on  the  table  and  covered  by  the  end  of  the
left  part  of  the  curtain.

(3)  My  attention  was  all  the  time  concentrated  on  holding
her  hand,  as  I  was  sure  of  her  foot,  Mr.  Marriott  controlling
both  feet  under  the  table.  He  told  me  a  few  days  later
that  most  likely  my  attention  had  been  too  much  concen-
trated on  holding  her  hand,  and  that  on  account  of  the
tension  of  my  mind  I  had  not  remarked  when  she  had
slipped  away  from  me ;  but  I  am  sure  that  if  I  had  said
my  mind  had  been  quite  free  during  the  time  I  held  her,
and  that  I  was  not  entirely  and  only  occupied  in  observing
the  hand  I  held,  Mr.  Marriott  would  have  said  I  had  been
"  distraite,"  and  had  not  remarked  when  Eusapia  took  away
her  hand.

I  think  also  that,  had  she  taken  away  her  hand  for  a
short  time  and  afterwards  brought  it  back  again,  I  should
have  felt  a  difference  in  my  sensations  before  and  after  she
had  removed  her  hand,  whereas  I  felt  no  difference  at  all,
and  continued  feeling  her  hand  in  or  on  mine.

The  little  table  was  not  lifted  on  to  the  table  we  sat  at
(as  far  as  I  remember,  perhaps  I  am  wrong);  it  seems  to  me
it  was  lifted  behind  the  curtain  and  then  fell  down  again.
But  it  was  only  Mr.  Feilding  and  Mr.  Marriott  who  could  see
what  was  going  on  behind  the  curtain ;  I  could  not,  as  I  was
not  sitting  facing  the  opening  in  the  middle  of  the  curtain,
but  just  behind  it ;  that  is,  the  left  half  of  the  curtain  was
opened  in  the  middle,  near  E.  P.'s  head  and  shoulder,  and,  as
I  was  sitting  on  her  left-hand  side,  I  could  not  see  what  was
going  on  inside  the  cabinet  unless  I  bent  very  much  forward,
and  at  that  moment  I  was  absorbed  only  in  attending  to  the
hand  I  held.

My  impression  is  that  she  did  not  use  her  left  hand  in
lifting  the  little  table,  and  during  all  the  sitting  it  seemed  to
me  she  was  trying  very  hard to  move  the  objects,  but  not


lxii.] Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  67


with  her  physical  hands,  but  with  some  inner  power,  and  she
seemed  to  suffer  and  to  be  very  tired  each  time  something
had  moved.

I  think  this  is  all  I  remember  of  the  sitting ;  it  is  very
incomplete,  but  I  have  a  very  bad  memory  for  details,  and
remember  only  my  impressions.

Barbara  Perovsky-Solovovo.
IV.

Comments  on  the  Above.
By  Alice  Johnson.

Countess  Solovovo's  careful  and  detailed  description  of  her
sensations  during  this  incident  seems  to  me  to  show  clearly  that
it  was  not,  as  Mr.  Feilding  suggests,  through  any  "  mere  lapse
in  her  observation "  that  she  let  Eusapia's  hand  go ;  while
the  fact  that  the  hand  had  somehow  become  free  was  proved
by  the  joint  observations  of  Mr.  Feilding  and  Mr.  Marriott.

A  lapse  of  attention  or  observation  is  a  thing  that  frequently
occurs  in  ordinary  life ;  everybody  must  be  familiar  with  the
experience  of  failing  to  notice  an  object  directly  within  his
view  when  he  is  thinking  of  something  else.  In  some  cases  this
may  almost  amount  to  what  is  called  a  "  negative  hallucination."
But  this  is  quite  different  from  what  Countess  Solovovo
describes.  Instead  of  failing  to  notice  the  presence  of  an
object,  she  had  a  clear  perception  of  its  presence  while  it  was
absent :  that  is,  she  had  a  distinct  and  full-blown  positive
hallucination  or  illusion,  lasting  evidently  for  a  perceptible
period  of  time.

I  am  especially  interested  in  this,  because  I  have  long
been  convinced  that  a  similar  experience  happened  to  me
during  my  second  sitting  with  Eusapia  at  Cambridge  in
1895.  On  that  occasion  Eusapia  was  standing  up,  Mr.
Myers  standing  on  one  side  and  holding  her  right  arm  and
hand,  and  I  on  the  other  side  holding  her  left  arm  and  hand,
my  right  arm  being  interlaced  with  her  left.  The  two  other
persons  present  were  sitting  on  the  floor  behind  her,  so  as  to
see  her  dimly  outlined  against  the  white  ceiling,  the  room
being extremely dark. These witnesses saw an  elongated


68  Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.  [part


object  proceeding  from  her  body,  moving  about  and  often
changing  in  shape  and  length.  It  was  too  dark  for  them  to
see  how  it  was  attached  to  her,  or  how  the  controllers  were
holding  her  ;  but  if  her  left  arm  had  got  free,  it  could  easily
have  executed  all  the  movements,  and  in  doing  so  would  have
presented  just  the  appearance  they  described.  The  evidence
that  the  arm  was  not  free  depended  solely  on  my  conviction
that  I  was  holding  it.  I  was  certain  at  the  time  that  I  was
holding  it ;  but  later,  in  view  not  only  of  the  systematic
frauds  discovered,  but  also  of  my  observations  of  various  illu-
sions experienced  at  these  sittings,  I  became  convinced  that
my  impressions  as  to  holding  her  arm  on  that  occasion  were
purely  hallucinatory.

The  evidence  for  this  is,  of  course,  not  so  clear  as  in  Countess
Solovovo's  case,  since  at  the  Cambridge  sitting  it  was  too  dark
for  the  witnesses  actually  to  see  whether  the  elongated  object
was  Eusapia's  arm  or  not ;  and  as  they  supposed  at  the  time
that  I  was  holding  the  arm,  they  took  the  object  to  be
something  else.  At  the  Naples  sitting  there  was  more  light,
for  the  background  was  of  luminous  paint  instead  of  an  ordinary
white-washed  ceiling,  and  here  the  arm  that  lifted  the  small
table  was  seen  to  be  attached  normally  to  Eusapia's  left  shoulder.
If  it  had  been  too  dark  to  see  this,  the  sitters  would  probably
have  regarded  the  movement  as  supernormally  performed,  on
the  strength  of  Countess  Solovovo's  conviction — apparently  so
well  founded— that  she  was  holding  Eusapia's  left  hand.

In  my  paper  "  On  the  Education  of  the  Sitter "  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXL,  pp.  483-511)  I  brought  forward  evidence  derived
from  various  different  sources  in  support  of  the  hypothesis
that  some  mediums  have  an  unusual  power  of  imposing  illusions
and  hallucinations  on  their  sitters,  and  that  this  may  account
for  some  of  the  most  remarkable  records  of  apparently  telekinetic
phenomena.  The  case  described  above  tends  to  confirm  this
hypothesis.  It  does  not,  of  course,  explain  all  the  phenomena
reported  on  good  evidence  to  have  occurred  in  the  presence  of
Eusapia ;  but  it  suggests  that  those  which  depend  for  their
authenticity  on  the  testimony  of  one  witness  as  to  the  control
exercised — and  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  best  cases  come
under  this  definition — must  be  seriously  discounted.


LXir.] Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino.


Git


V.

Note  on  the  Eepokt.
By  W.  W.  Baggally.

I  should  like  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  above  Beport.
Both  the  American  sittings  and  those  lately  held  with  Eusapia
Ballaclino  differ  materially  in  many  respects,  but  principally  in
the  following,  from  those  held  by  Mr.  Feilding,  Mr.  Carrington
and  myself  in  Dec.  1908.  In  the  American  and  in  the
recent  Naples  sittings  no  phenomena  were  obtained  under  the
following  conditions :  "  when  both  the  medium's  hands  were
distinctly  visible  away  from  or  quietly  resting  on  the  seance
table,  or  both  hands  clearly  seen  when  being  held  by  the
controllers  and  at  the  same  time  her  body  was  in  view  down
to  her  feet."  In  these  cases  the  supposition  that  the  phenomena
were  produced  fraudulently  through  the  substitution  or  release
of  one  of  her  hands  or  feet  could  not  be  entertained.

It  was  the  phenomena  under  the  above  test  conditions,
which  we  obtained  at  our  seances  in  Dec.  1908,  that  greatly
impressed  me,  and  I  laid  particular  stress  on  them  (and  gave
some  examples)  in  my  final  note  in  the  Report  of  our  Naples
sittings.  So  far  I  have  not  met  with  any  satisfactory  explana-
tion of  how  Eusapia  could  have  produced  these  phenomena  by
normal  means.  It  is  certain  that  no  accomplice  was  present,
and  we  had  satisfied  ourselves  by  examination  that  no  apparatus
was  being  used.

I  am  afraid  I  cannot  accept  Miss  Johnson's  theory  that
Eusapia  possesses  the  power  of  inducing  a  continuous  halluci-
nation of  the  sense  of  touch  in  the  minds  of  her  sitters.
Experienced  investigators  are  well  aware  that  a  temporary
hallucination  of  this  nature  can  be  induced  when  a  medium's
hand  is  surreptitiously  removed  for  a  moment  from  the  con-
troller's hand.  We  were  unceasingly  on  our  guard  against
such  an  occurrence  at  our  Naples  sittings.  It  should  be  noted
that  Mr.  Feilding  states  that  the  conditions  of  control  permitted
in  the  recent  sittings  were  wholly  different  from  those  permitted
in  the  former  Naples  sittings.  In  a  letter  that  I  have  received
from  Mr.  Feilding,  he  says :  "  Everything  this  time  was  different
[from  our  previous  seances]  and  exactly  like  the  reports  given
of  the  American  conjurers'  sittings."


70


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield,


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEW.

The  Newer  Spiritualism. By  Frank  Podmore.
(Fisher  Unwin,  London,  1910. Svo,  pp.  320,  8s.  6d.  net.)

This  book,  which  Mr.  Podmore  brought  to  completion  only  a  short
time  before  his  death,  is  a  closely  reasoned  and  temperate  review  of
the  evidence  for  the  reality  of  supposed  communications  with  the
spirits  of  the  dead,  and  for  the  genuineness  of  certain  physical
phenomena,  which  has  been  accumulated  since  the  publication  of
F.  W.  H.  Myers'  Human  Personality.  It  is  the  work  of  an  acknow-
ledged master  in  these  subjects,  and,  as  such,  deserves  the  attention
of  all  serious  students  of  them,  whatever  may  be  their  prepossessions.
The  discussion  is  copiously  illustrated  by  detailed  descriptions  and
analyses  of  many  of  the  most  important  cases,  and  the  reader  is
thus  enabled  to  form  his  own  judgment  upon  the  evidence  as  the
inquiry  proceeds.  Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  author's  previous
writings  will  hardly  need  to  be  told  that  the  book  possesses  the
added  attraction  of  an  excellent  literary  style,  and  that  there  is  not
a  dull  page  in  it — not  even  in  the  welcome  index.

The  ultimate  purpose  of  Human  Personality  was  to  prove  the
survival  of  the  soul  after  death.  With  this  tremendous  question
Mr.  Podmore  is  not  here  concerned,  and  he  offers  no  opinion  upon
it.  When  he  leaves  the  physical  phenomena,  he  addresses  himself
solely  to  the  inquiry  whether  the  supposed  communications  from  a
spirit  world,  obtained  through  trance  or  automatic  writing  or  other
means,  are  really  what  they  profess  to  be,  or  are  not  rather  derived
telepathically  from  the  minds  of  the  living.  Myers'  theory  of  a
subliminal  consciousness  is,  however,  so  intimately  bound  up  with


LXII.]


Review.


71


the  whole  matter,  that  Mr.  Podmore  considers  it  not  inconsistent
with  his  purpose  to  devote  an  introductory  chapter  to  its  consider-
ation. In  view  of  the  manifold  and  far-reaching  bearings  of  Myers'
great  conception,  the  chapter  is  of  cardinal  importance.

Mr.  Podmore  gives  an  adequate  statement  of  the  theory,  of  which
the  substance  may  be  quoted.

"Now,  the  peculiar  contribution  of  Myers  to  modern  psycho-
logy lies  here.  He  accepts  to  the  full  the  results  of  modern
research.  He  recognises  that  human  consciousness,  as  we  know
it,  is  a  highly  composite  and  unstable  thing,  having  neither
completeness  nor  essential  unity.  Consciousness  is,  to  employ
his  own  simile,  a  selection,  like  the  visible  spectrum,  accidental,
interrupted,  and  variable,  from  a  much  larger  potential  whole.
But  at  this  point  Myers'  views  diverge  from  those  of  the
recognised  schools.  To  him  the  surface  consciousness,  the  only
thing  which  we  know  as  consciousness  in  ordinary  life,  is  com-
paratively unimportant.  'I  award  no  primacy,'  he  writes,  'to
my  ordinary  waking  self,  except  that,  among  many  potential
selves,  this  one  has  shown  itself  the  fittest  to  meet  the  needs
of  common  life.'  It  is  the  hidden  life  which  counts — the  self
which  the  struggle  of  the  market-place  and  the  senate  has
thrust  back  into  the  darkness,  or  has  not  yet  called  into  conscious
activity.

"The  subliminal  consciousness,  he  supposes,  may  embrace  a
far  wider  range,  both  of  physiological  and  psychical  activity,
than  is  open  to  the  normal  personality.  The  invisible  spectrum
of  consciousness  stretches  indefinitely  in  either  direction,  extend-
ing on  one  side  to  physiological  processes  which  have  long
dropped  out  of  human  knowledge,  on  the  other  to  supernormal
faculties,  of  which  only  stray  hints  have  reached  us  in  our
present  stage  of  evolution."

He  completes  the  account  by  a  reference  to  those  hystero-epileptics
who  in  their  conscious  state  may  be  almost  completely  without  the
senses  of  touch,  sight,  and  hearing,  and  whose  memory  is,  as  to  a
great  part  of  their  life,  a  blank ;  but  who,  when  placed  in  the
deepest  hypnotic  trance,  largely  recover  these  senses,  and  are  able  to
fill  up  the  blanks  in  the  memory,  and  to  give  a  clear  account  of  the
shock  which  brought  on  their  illness — a  thing  which,  when  conscious,
they  were  unable  to  do.  The  trance  has  brought  to  the  surface  the
real  self  which  the  calamity  had  obscured.  As  is  well  known,
Myers  saw  in  these  sad  cases  a  significant  analogy. Man,  in  his


72


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


present  environment,  he  believed,  may  be,  as  compared  with  his  real
and  potential  self — the  self  of  his  subliminal  consciousness — no  more
than  the  crippled  and  shrunken  thing  which  these  poor  sufferers  are,
under  the  grip  of  their  infirmities. To  quote  Mr.  Podmore :

"  In  that  larger  potential  consciousness,  which,  as  we  have
warrant  for  inferring,  surrounds  the  narrowed  personality  which
suffices  for  our  common  every-day  life,  he  believed  himself  to
discern  traces  of  faculties  too  large  for  merely  terrestrial  needs,
and  signs  of  a  guiding  power  wise  with  more  than  human  fore-
sight. This,  in  effect,  is  Myers's  case.  There  need  be  no  fear,
he  proclaims,  lest  the  soul  of  man  should  be  disintegrated
with  the  disintegration  of  the  body ;  because  it  exhibits  '  traces
of  faculty  which  this  material  or  planetary  life  could  not  have
called  into  being,  and  whose  exercise  even  here  and  now  involves
and  necessitates  the  existence  of  a  spiritual  world.' "

Mr.  Podmore  admits  the  cogency  of  the  argument,  but  disputes
the  premises.  "What,"  he  asks,  "is  this  'subliminal  self,'  and  what
are  its  chief  properties  ? "  In  his  answer  he  admits  that  "  certain
pathologic  cases  .  .  .  show  that  there  may  exist,  below  the  personality
exhibited  to  us  in  ordinary  life,  another  personality,  larger,  freer,
saner";  and  that  "the  hypnotic  memory,  too,  is,  as  a  rule,  wider
than  the  waking  memory " ;  and  he  takes  note  of  the  remarkable
phenomena  produced  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  But

"the  secondary  personality  in  the  case  of  Felida  X.  and  the
'Misses  Beauchamp'  is  obviously  the  product  of  pathologic  con-
ditions, whilst  in  the  hypnotic  subject  it  seems  probable  that  it
is  simply  the  result  of  training.  Apart  from  these  special  cases,
and  from  a  few  sporadic  instances  of  latent  faculty  emerging  in
dreams,  or  through  the  planchette  and  the  crystal,  there  is
scanty  support  for  the  assumption  of  a  hidden  personality  in
man.  There  is  little  evidence,  in  other  words,  that,  in  normal
persons,  there  is  below  the  surface  any  sequence  of  memories  or
separate  form  of  consciousness,  so  far  organised  or  so  stable  as
to  deserve  the  name  of  a  secondary  personality ;  and  there  is
still  less  evidence  of  interference  with  the  operations  of  the
work-a-day  self  by  any  such  subterranean  agencies."

His  conclusion  is,  that — while,  "  in  these  lofty  regions  where  we
almost  lose  sight  of  terrestrial  analogies,  we  have  no  right  to  use
the  word  'impossible,'  perhaps  not  even  the  word  'improbable'" —
the  present  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  subliminal  self  is  insufficient.


LXII.]


Review.


73


That  our  present  evidence  is  far  from  amounting  to  demonstration,
may  be  readily  granted ;  but  Mr.  Podmore's  admissions  are  consider-
able, and  his  arguments  seem  to  leave  the  balance  of  probability
still  on  the  side  of  Myers's  illuminating  theory.  To  say  nothing  of
the  evidence  afforded  by  automatic  writing  1  and  crystal-gazing  which
Mr.  Podmore  is  disposed  to  minimise,  but  which  is  not  to  be
neglected,  we  may  ask  whether  it  is  fair  to  the  argument  to  lay  so
much  stress  on  the  pathologic  features  of  some  of  the  cases,  and
whether  he  is  justified  in  refusing  to  attach  weight  to  the  evidence
furnished  by  those  which  are  of  this  nature.  Moreover,  a  large
number  of  the  cases  are  not  pathologic.  And  if  we  take  three
typical  cases,  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  in  only  two  of  which  the
pathologic  element  appears  to  be  present,  what  do  we  find  1  One  of
Dr.  Bramwell's  patients,  a  Miss  A.,  could,  in  obedience  to  hypnotic
suggestion,  count  11,470  minutes,  and  then,  in  a  waking  state,  make
a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper.  In  55  such  experiments  she  was
successful  45  times.  This  can  hardly  be  the  result  of  training ;  it
would  rather  appear  to  indicate  the  liberation  of  a  remarkable  latent
power,  already  existing  fully  developed.  Again,  Huxley  cited  the
case  of  a  man  "who  had  suffered  some  injury  to  the  brain,  which
induced  occasional  accesses  of  automatism.  In  the  automatic  state
he  would  write  from  dictation,  without  looking  at  the  paper,  and
would  be  able  to  correct  what  he  had  written,  crossing  the  fs  and
dotting  the  i's  with  perfect  accuracy,  though  a  sheet  of  cardboard
was  interposed  between  his  eyes  and  the  writing."  On  this  and
similar  cases  Mr.  Podmore  observes,  "  The  power  is  possibly  to  be
explained  as  a  special  development  of  the  muscular  sense."  But
this,  even  if  it  should  prove  to  be  a  proper  description  of  the  faculty
employed,  is  not  an  explanation  ;  it  is  no  more  than  a  re-statement
of  the  fact.  It  does  not  matter  what  sense  or  faculty  was  at  work.
The  significance  of  the  performance  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  man
appears  to  have  possessed  an  extraordinary  latent  power,  not  merely
existing  in  germ,  but  full-grown,  which,  owing  to  his  condition  at
the  time,  when  other  powers  were  compulsorily  dormant,  could
emerge  and  come  into  play.  In  his  ordinary  condition  the  man  was
cramped  by  the  necessities  of  his  environment ;  he  could  not  afford
(if  that  is  the  right  word)  to  '  specialise '  in  this  way,  but  must
practise  a  more  or  less  levelling  economy  of  his  powers.  But  the
emergence  of  this  hidden  faculty  entitles  us  to  infer  the  presence  of

1  The  evidence  afforded  by  automatic  writing  may,  I  think,  prove  to  be
overwhelming — -see  below,  p.  82,  ff.


74


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


others  no  less  extraordinary  and  abnormal ;  and  this  brings  us  to
Myers's  subliminal  consciousness,  and  goes  far  to  justify  his  apt  simile
from  the  visible  and  invisible  spectrum,  which  Mr.  Podmore  considers
misleading.  It  is  but  a  step  further  to  imagine,  with  Myers,  a  con-
dition of  life  in  which  all  man's  powers  ma}7  be  free  to  exhibit  and
exert  themselves  to  the  same  and  an  even  greater  degree.  Once  more,
we  have  the  case  of  the  calculating  boys,  whose  condition,  so  far  as
I  am  aware,  we  have  no  reason  for  supposing  to  be  pathologic.  Of
these  Mr.  Podmore  writes,  "The  power  of  extracting  cube  roots  and
calculating  logarithms  at  sight  can  at  no  period  have  been  a  common
endowment  of  the  race."  This  is  to  beg  the  question,  and  one
naturally  asks,  why  not  1  True,  the  race  as  we  know  it  in  its
present  environment  has  not  the  power  in  esse;  but  the  point  is,
does  the  race  possess  these  powers  in  posse  1  To  use  the  old  philo-
sophic terms,  have  we  the  Svvafiis,  though  we  may  be  denied  the
ivepyeia  1  Even  from  the  cases  before  us — apart  from  numerous
other  strong  indications — it  seems  a  reasonable  inference  that  there
are  within  every  individual  abilities  both  transcending  and  out-
numbering those  of  the  every-day  self,  and  ready  to  come  forth  for
recognition,  whenever  by  some  happy  or  unhappy  chance  the  prison
door  is  unlocked.  Moreover,  it  is  well  known  that  hypnotism  can
stimulate  the  will  and  elicit  a  surprising  strength  in  the  moral
region ;  from  which  it  would  appear  that  the  subliminal  includes
both  the  mental  and  moral  qualities — that  is,  embraces  the  whole
man.  Our  dreams,  indeed,  are  often  nonsense,  and  our  dream
actions  sometimes  reprehensible  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  and
abhorrent  to  our  waking  selves, — as  when  one  dreams  that  one  has
quietly  cut  off  all  one's  brother's  fingers  with  a  pair  of  scissors
— but  that  hardly  affects  the  question ;  we  do  not  know  what  the
will  is,  nor  the  conditions  and  limits  of  its  control.

If,  then,  Mr.  Podmore  is  right  when  he  says  that  the  years  that
bave  elapsed  since  Myers's  death  have  produced  no  fresh  evidence
to  support  his  "  great  synthesis  " — a  statement  which  might  be  dis-
puted— neither  do  I  find  in  Mr.  Podmore's  criticisms  anything  by
which  it  is  materially  weakened.  His  own  confessedly  great  know-
ledge of  the  subject  has  produced  no  obstinate  fact  which  refuses  to
be  fitted  in.

The  two  opening  chapters  of  the  main  inquiry  give  an  interesting
risume"  of  the  various  phenomena  exhibited  by  D.  D.  Home.  These
performances  the  author  regards  as,  for  the  most  part,  pure  im-
posture, successful,  where  it  was  successful,  through  mal-observation


LXII.]


Review.


75


or  hallucination  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses.  In  a  careful  discussion
of  the  famous  case  of  levitation,  when  Home  appeared  to  float  into
an  upstairs  room  through  the  window,  he  shows  that  the  witnesses
could  have  had  no  positive  assurance  that  Home  had  ever  been
outside  the  window  at  all.  By  some  of  the  fire  tests,  however,
and  one  instance  at  least  of  the  alleged  elongation  of  Home's  body-
Mr.  Podmore  confesses  himself  puzzled,  and  he  abstains  from
pronouncing  an  opinion.

"  I  cannot  readily  represent  to  my  imagination  the  mental
processes  by  which  two  intelligent  men  holding  a  lighted  candle
and  taking  special  steps  to  correct  their  measurements,  .  .  .
could  have  supposed  Home's  body  to  be  abnormally  lengthened,
when  he  was  really,  let  us  say,  only  standing  on  tip-toe  and
stretching  himself."

"  The  difficulty  is  quite  as  great  with  the  red-hot  coal  per-
formance. .  .  . The  testimony  to  Home's  feats  is  abundant ;  and
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  Sir  W.  Crookes,  if  in  possession  of
his  normal  senses,  could be  mistaken  in  describing  the  flames
licking  Home's  fingers."
As  to  Eusapia  Palladino,  whose  trial  also  extends  over  two  chapters,
Mr.  Podmore,  as  was  already  well  known,  will  have  none  of  her.
Her  performances,  including  the  seances  held  at  Naples  at  the  end
of  1908,  are  examined  at  considerable  length,  but  the  conclusion
is  that  she  is  no  more  than  the  fine  fleur  of  the  art  of  trickery.  She
is  finally  dismissed,  with  some  impatience,  if  not  to  limbo,  at  least
to  the  limbo  of  detected  frauds  of  which  one  has  had  more  than
enough.

Whether  one  believes  that  the  Naples  committee  were  deceived,
or  not,  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  who  are  interested  in  these
matters  owe  them  a  large  debt  of  gratitude  for  the  painstaking
inquiry  which  they  conducted.  Their  labours  have  produced  at
least  one  lasting  result.  We  have  on  the  one  hand  the  fact  that
three  exceptionally  capable  investigators  were  convinced  that  they,
at  any  rate,  had  not  been  deceived  by  Eusapia ;  on  the  other  hand,
we  have  the  undisputed  fact  that  she  has  over  and  over  again,
and  up  to  a  quite  recent  date,  been  detected  in  imposture.  The
conjunction  of  these  two  facts  makes  it  clear  that  in  future  no
investigation  of  physical  phenomena — however  skilled  may  be  the
investigators — will  be  thought  to  be  of  any  practical  value,  unless
the  tests  applied  are  mechanical  and  automatic.  If  these  are  want-
ing, the observations of  the witnesses may  carry  conviction  to


76


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


themselves,  but  the  outside  public  must  remain — I  will  not  say
uninfluenced,  but  unconvinced.

In  a  chapter  preceding  detailed  examinations  of  the  mediumship
of  Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.  Thompson,  Mr.  Podmore  makes  some  just
and  discriminating  remarks  on  the  moral  diathesis  of  trance  mediums
in  general.  In  feats  of  clairvoyance  pure  and  simple — as  distinct
from  the  power  of  acquiring  knowledge  telepathically  from  the  mind
of  a  living  person — he  puts  no  credence.  He  does  not  believe  the
faculty  exists.  He  is  convinced  that  Stainton  Moses  and  the  Eev.
C.  B.  Sanders  (a  Presbyterian  clergyman  of  Alabama,  who  developed
a  secondary  personality  calling  itself  X  +  Y  =  Z)  had  themselves
hidden  the  '  lost '  articles  which  they  professed  to  discover  ;  and
that  Alexis  Didier — whom  the  famous  conjurer  Houdin  failed  to
detect  in  fraud — had  already  seen,  as  he  rapidly  turned  the  leaves
of  the  almost  closed  book,  the  words  he  professed  to  read  from  a
page  lying  some  distance  underneath  one  of  the  two  pages  which
became  visible  when  the  book  was  laid  open.  But  he  is  disposed
to  think  the  trickery  was  not  necessarily  conscious.

"  Alexis  may  well  have  been  quite  unconscious  of  the  channel
through  which  he  derived  his  information.  It  is  possible  that
one  may  be  justified  in  taking  an  equally  charitable  view  of
the  performances  of  X  +  Y  =  Z,  and  that  the  right  hand  of  Mr.
Stainton  Moses  may  not  have  known  what  the  left  hand  was
doing."

Accordingly,  in  speaking  of  these  cases,  the  word  '  fraud '  must
only  be  used  with  a  reservation.

"  A  trance  medium  is,  ex  hypothesi,  in  an  abnormal  condition  :
and  there  are  other  indications  that  the  dissociation  of  conscious-
ness frequently  involves  impaired  moral  control.  In  using  the
word  'fraud,'  therefore,  in  this  connection  we  do  not  necessarily
imply  a  higher  degree  of  moral  responsibility  than  when  we
pass  judgment  on  the  play-acting  of  a  child.  Conjuring  tricks
and  sham  telepathy  seem  to  be  merely  part  of  the  automatic
romance."

By  this  standard,  and  with  this  reservation,  the  author  would
judge  certain  doubtful  incidents  in  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Piper
and  Mrs.  Thompson.

We  now  come  to  the  great  question  of  the  supposed  communica-
tions with  discarnate  spirits  through  the  trance  mediums  and  the
cross-correspondences. In  reviewing  the  early  sittings  of  Mrs. Piper


LXIT.]


Review.


77


Mr.  Podmore  notes  some  facts  which  must  affect  our  judgment  of
the  more  recent  phenomena.

"The  significant  point  in  these  early  sittings  is  that  the
information  given  about  the  sitter's  living  friends  seems,  generally
speaking,  to  have  been  as  vivid,  as  copious,  and  as  accurate  as
the  information  given  about  the  dead,  and  that  there  is  no
means,  as  a  rule,  of  discriminating  between  them  either  as
regards  substance  or  source — -that  is,  the  statements  about  the
dead  and  the  living  alike  are  given  as  if  they  proceeded
directly  from  Phinuit's  own  knowledge.  Sometimes,  on  the  other
hand,  where  the  dead  are  concerned,  the  utterances  are  put
into  their  mouths,  but  there  is  rarely  any  indication  that  this
is  more  than  a  traditional  dramatic  device."

Of  the  Piper-Hodgson  communications  he  would  give  the  same
explanation  as  that  implied  here — that  is,  the  telepathic.  He  fully
recognises  the  extraordinary  vraisemblance  of  the  dramatic  impersona-
tion, but  he  points  out  the  important  fact  that  no  test  questions
were  answered,  and  that  the  control  showed  ignorance  of  several
matters  which,  considering  what  he  apparently  did  remember,  he
might  reasonably  be  expected  not  to  have  forgotten.  He  suggests,
however,  another  conceivable  explanation :

"If  we  could  suppose  that  sometimes  the  real  Hodgson  com-
municated through  the  medium's  hand,  and  that  sometimes,
more  often,  when  he  was  inaccessible,  the  medium's  secondary
personality  played  the  part  as  best  it  could,  these  difficulties
would  no  doubt  be  lessened.  It  may  be  justifiable,  as  a  guide
to  further  investigation,  provisionally  to  entertain  such  a  hypo-
thesis ;  but  it  seems  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  at  this  stage,  at
any  rate,  it  cannot  be  seriously  defended."

With  the  development  of  cross-correspondences  the  problem  became
more  complicated.  In  these  Mr.  Podmore  recognises  the  directive
action  of  an  intelligence  other  than  that  of  the  automatists,
but  he  fails — as  others  of  us  have  failed — to  find  sufficient  evidence
for  believing  the  intelligence  at  work  to  be  that  of  a  discarnate
spirit.  In  discussing  the  Browning-Hope-Star  incident  and  the  Latin
message,  he  draws  attention  to  a  significant  fact.  After  dictating
the  message,  Mr.  Piddington  had  impressed  on  the  Piper-Myers  the
importance  of  the  scheme  of  cross-correspondences  in  general.1  The

1  Mr.  Piddington  of  course  made  no  allusion  to  the  peculiar  (i.e.  the  supple-
mentary) kind  asked  for  in  the  Latin  message.


78


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


control  replied,  "  If  you  establish  telepathic  messages,  you  will  doubt-
less attribute  all  such  to  thoughts  from  those  living  in  the  mortal
body." On  this  Mr.  Podmore  remarks  :

"The  answer  shows  conclusively  that  the  Piper-Myers  had
not  grasped  the  plan  of  complex  cross-correspondences  which
the  Verrall-Myers,  according  to  the  hypothesis,  had  been
actively  elaborating  for  some  years  previously ;  and  further,
that  the  Piper-Myers  at  that  date,  Jan.  18,  1907,  had  not  yet
succeeded  in  translating  the  Latin  message."

The  word  'conclusively'  is  perhaps  too  strong;  but  as  coming  from
one  who  professes  to  be  identical  with  the  other  Myerses  who  have
so  long  been  furnishing  supplementary  cross-correspondences  and
emphasising  their  value,  the  remark  of  the  control  is  certainly  inex-
plicable. The  sitting  of  Feb.  27,  1907,  has,  however,  been  relied
upon  as  showing  that  at  that  later  date,  at  any  rate,  MyersP  under-
stood the  whole  matter.  This  seems  to  me  disputable.  It  is  true
that  at  that  sitting  MyersP  pointed  to  the  Browning-Hope-Star
incident,  and  offered  it  as  his  answer  to  the  Latin  message,  but,  like
the  unintentionally  witty,  he  may  have  been  doing  better  than  he
was  aware.  Did  he  know  how  good  his  answer  was  1  The  differentia
of  the  'supplementary'  cross-correspondences,  which  gives  them  their
peculiar  value,  is  that  the  scripts  of,  say,  three  automatists  concerned
are  not  fully  intelligible  when  considered  separately,  but  when
compared  with  one  another,  are  found  to  be  connected  by  a  common
idea  which  is  the  key  to  the  whole.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that
MyerSp  understood  this  to  be  the  point  of  the  experiments,  though
naturally  his  wave  of  the  hand — so  to  call  it — towards  the  Browning-
Hope-Star  incident  was  at  once  recognised  as  remarkably  significant.
Yet  surely  the  real  Myers,  having  grasped  the  Latin  message — as  ex
hypothesi  he  had  done — would  not  have  omitted  to  make  such  a
crucial  detail  clear.

But  the  fact  is — as  Mr.  Podmore,  I  think,  shows,  and  most  people
have  probably  concluded  for  themselves — the  Piper-Myers  never  did
really  understand  the  Latin  message,  though  he  seems  to  have
gathered  from  some  source  or  sources — among  which  telepathy  may
be  included — that  it  referred  to  cross-correspondences.  This  fact
has  always  seemed  to  me  peculiarly  damaging  to  his  claims.  In
the  utterances  of  the  various  mediums  the  'spirit'  has  given  no
signs  of  intellectual  decay.  He  is  alert  and  intelligent  ;  and  the
automatic  scripts,  both  in  matter  and  style,  are  at  times  not
unworthy  of  the  real  Myers. How,  then,  should  he  be  unable  to


LXII.]


Review.


79


translate,  from  a  language  as  familiar  to  him  as  English,  a  couple
of  sentences  which,  highly  idiomatic  though  they  are,  would  present
no  difficulty  to  an  able  sixth-form  boy  1

The  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  one  or  two  individual  words  in
the  message  Mr.  Podmore  would  attribute  to  the  use  of  a  dictionary
by  the  medium  when  in  an  unconscious  state ;  but  he  is  careful  to
add :

"To  recognise,  however,  that  the  knowledge  shown  by  the
entranced  Mrs.  Piper  was  perhaps  derived  from  a  dictionary
does  not  imply  bad  faith  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper  whom  her
friends  know  and  esteem  in  the  waking  state.  Nor  does  it
seriously  invalidate  the  evidence  in  the  other  cases,  since  no
dictionary  could  have  told  Mrs.  Piper  what  Mrs.  Verrall  was
writing;  in  Cambridge  or  Mrs.  Holland  in  India."

The  matter  is  summed  up  in  the  following  words  :

"  It  would  appear,  then,  from  the  four  months'  trial  of  the
Latin  message  that  the  trance  personality  which  the  experi-
menters call  MyeiSp,  or  the  Piper-Myers,  had  not  even  at  the
end  of  the  sittings  grasped  the  scheme  of  complex  cross-
correspondences  :  was  so  far  from  grasping  it,  indeed,  that  not
even  the  numerous  hints  given  in  the  course  of  the  dialogue
succeeded  in  conveying  that  idea.  From  this  it  would  seem  to
follow,  not  merely  that  the  Piper-Myers  is  an  intelligence  of
distinctly  inferior  capacity,  but  that  it  is  not  identical  with  the
intelligence,  claiming  to  emanate  from  the  same  source,  which
has  for  years  past  been  elaborating,  through  Mrs.  Verrall's  hand,
a  scheme  of  complex  cross-correspondences."

It  is  only  fair  to  note  here  that  upholders  of  the  spiritistic  inter-
pretation of  the  phenomena  believe  MyersP  to  be,  not  the  real  Myers,
but  a  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  (corresponding  to  the
subliminal  self  of  the  automatic  writers),  which  receives  communi-
cations from  him.  (See  Miss  Johnson  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  262  f.)
Thus  the  utterances  of  MyersP  may  be  at  one  time  a  true  message
repeated  accurately,  at  another  time  a  true  message  imperfectly
delivered,  at  another  a  mere  invention.  Mr.  Podmore  was  certainly
well  acquainted  with  this  view  when  he  wrote  the  passage  quoted
above ;  but  his  point — as  I  understand  him — is  that,  in  the  absence
of  any  sure  criterion  by  which  to  distinguish  true  messages  from
false,  and  in  face  of  the  discrepancies  between  the  two  personalities,
it  is  difficult  to  believe  there  is  a  real  Myers  behind  either  of  them.


80


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


Coming  to  the  more  recent  evidence,  Mr.  Podmore  confesses
himself  to  be  strongly  impressed  by  the  Lethe  incident  in  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings.

"  It  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  method
of  answering  the  Lethe  question  was  well  devised ;  that  this  is
precisely  the  kind  of  evidence  demanded  for  the  proof  of  spirit-
identity  ;  and  that,  though  no  single  case  can,  of  course,  be
conclusive,  yet  that  if  evidence  of  this  kind  could  be  multiplied,
the  presumption  in  favour  of  the  reality  of  sjnrit  communication
might  at  length  become  irresistible."

But  he  finds  two  difficulties.  The  first  arises  from  the  discrep-
ancies between  the  knowledge  shown  in  these  sittings  by  the
medium's  writing  hand  and  her  utterances  in  the  waking  stage.
The  hand  is  frequently  unable  to  explain  at  a  subsequent  sitting
what  the  voice  had  spoken.  Thus,  on  one  occasion  the  voice  mur-
mured something  that  sounded  like  "pavia";  it  then  added,  "Mr.
Myers  is  writing  on  the  wall,"  and  spelt  out  "  c,  y,  x."  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  "pavia"  was  meant  for  papavera  (poppies),  and  it
was  afterwards  made  certain  that  the  letters  c,  y,  x  were  intended
for  the  name  Ceyx.  Yet  the  hand  explained  "  c,  y,  x"  as  "chariot,"
and  "pavia"  as  "Pomona."

"But  the  successful  allusions,"  writes  Mr.  Podmore,  "whether
written  or  spoken,  are  counted,  for  the  purpose  of  the  corre-
spondence, as  proceeding  from  the  same  intelligence;  and
indeed  some  of  the  utterances  in  the  waking  stage  are  prefaced
with  the  remark  '  Mr.  Myers  says.'  It  is  extremely  difficult  to
reconcile  this  ignorance  or  forgetfulness  with  the  identity  of  the
spirit  purporting  to  communicate  alike  by  hand  and  voice."

The  second  difficulty  is  connected  with  the  name  Ceyx.

"The  name  written  Ceyx  is  a  dissyllable;  and  not  only  so,
but  both  vowels  are  long — Ce-yx  (pronounce  Kay-eeks).  But
it  would  seem  that  both  the  hand  and  voice  in  their  efforts  to
recall  the  exact  word  represent  it  as  a  monosyllable.  .  .  .
Now,  this  misconception,  improbable  in  a  scholar  who  was
familiar  with  the  original  poem  where  the  word  occurs  repeatedly,
would  be,  one  must  think,  impossible  to  a  scholar  who  was
also  a  poet,  for  whom  the  sound  of  a  word  must  be  of  primary
importance."

Myers,  however,  pronounced  the  word  as  See-ix,  which  might  sound
more  like  a  monosyllable. But  so  also  would  Mr.  Dorr  pronounce  it.


lxil]


Revieiv.


81


On  the  Dorr  sittings  as  a  whole  Mr.  Podmore  suspends  judgment,
finding  the  difficulties  and  improbabilities  involved  in  a  telepathic
explanation  as  serious  as  those  which  attach  to  a  recognition  of
spirit  agency.

"  If  all  these  stores  of  classical  learning  really  came  from
Mr.  Dorr's  mind,  we  have  to  credit  him  with  a  capacious
forgetfulness,  if  the  phrase  may  be  allowed,  hardly  less  remark-
able in  its  way  than  the  powers  of  telepathic  assimilation  which
we  must  ascribe  to  the  trance  intelligence."

This  is  certainly  true ;  and  for  myself,  I  must  confess  that,  while
I  nevertheless  lean  to  the  telepathic  solution,  I  find  the  contem-
plation of  the  amazing  powers  with  which  Mrs.  Piper  must  then
be  credited  far  more  staggering  than  would  be  the  proof  of
communication  with  a  departed  spirit.  As  against  the  telepathic
explanation,  attention  may  be  called  to  another  point.  The  river,
with  its  name  Lethe,  is  a  quite  subordinate  feature  of  the  tale,  and
is  perhaps  the  last  detail  one  would  have  expected  to  emerge  if
one  could  have  revived  Mr.  Dorr's  memories  in  connexion  with  the
story.  Even  when  the  whole  of  the  fragments  of  the  puzzle-picture
were  set  before  him,  he  was  unable  to  piece  them  together.  And
yet,  on  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  it  is  by  this  one  weak  link  of
association  that  Mrs.  Piper  is  able  to  recover  the  whole  train  of
recollections.

On  the  other  hand,  neither  did  (could?)1  the  Piper-Myers  put
the  fragments  together  as  a  connected  whole;  and  the  omission,  or
inability,  to  do  so  is  suspicious.  If  he  was  the  real  Myers,  he  knew
the  story ;  why,  then,  did  he  not  tell  it  in  a  plain  manner  ?  Why
present  it  in  just  that  fragmentary  condition  in  which  we  have
many  reasons  for  supposing  it  may  have  survived  in  some  deepest
cells  of  Mr.  Dorr's  memory  1

Another  highly  important  case,  the  famous  Sevens  Incident,
formed  the  subject  of  an  article  by  the  author  in  the  Contemporary
Review  for  September,  1909.  Examining  it  again  here,  Mr.  Podmore
reiterates  his  conviction  that  it  is  purely  telepathic.  It  arose  from
Mr.  Piddington's  'posthumous'  letter  about  the  number,  or  rather
from  his  continuing  obsession  by  it,  and  he  is  a  recognisable  instance

1  In  one  sitting  Mr.  Dorr  said  to  the  control,  "I  see  no  connexion  between
Iris  and  Lethe."  To  which  Myersp  replied,  "No,  only  Iris  shot  an  arrow  into
the  clouds  and  caused  a  rainbow.  It  brought  it  to  my  mind  simply."  What
an  answer  to  come  from  what  professed  to  be  the  spirit  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers
recalling  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  !

F


82


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


of  what  has  long  been  sought  for — an  agent  external  to  the  automatists,
originating  the  cross-correspondence.  But  Mrs.  Verrall — who  would
appear  to  have  much  to  answer  for — is  held  to  be  the  chief  agent
in  the  dissemination  of  the  idea.

"  Mr.  Piddington  tells  us  he  was  not  thinking  specially  of
his  letter  during  the  three  months  over  which  the  cross-corre-
spondences extended,  though  few  days  of  his  life  passed  without
his  thinking  of  the  subject.  It  would  appear,  then,  as  if  some
other  factor  were  needed  to  reinforce  Mr.  Piddington's  uncon-
scious telepathy.  That  other  factor  must  be  sought  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  agency.  We  find  traces  of  her  influence  in  the  Dante
allusions.  An  attempt,  then,  may  be  made,  of  course  provision-
ally and  in  very  crude  fashion,  to  sketch  the  mental  processes
which  seem  to  be  involved.  Mr.  Piddington  had  for  years
been  repeating  Seven  for  all  the  world — that  is  all  the  world
within  the  range  of  his  telepathic  influence — to  hear.  His  is
a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,  however,  until  it  happens  that
Mrs.  Verrall  reads  the  Divine  Comedy,  and  the  idea  of  Seven,
already  latent  in  her  mind,1  is  reinforced  by  a  series  of  Dante
images.  Mrs.  Verrall,  then,  apparently  a  much  more  powerful
telepathic  agent  than  Mr.  Piddington,  swells  the  stream  of
telepathic  influence,  and  the  effects,  in  the  remaining  automatists,
rise  to  the  surface  of  the  dream  consciousness."

Miss  Johnson,  who  is  a  controversialist  of  not  inferior  acumen,
has  combated  this  view,  and  in  more  than  one  friendly  encounter
with  the  author  has  undoubtedly  scored  some  points.  Her  view
may  be  summed  up  in  her  own  words :

"  It  appears  to  me,  in  short,  that  many  of  the  items  of  this
cross-correspondence  afford  strong  evidence  of  the  design  or
agency  of  some  intelligence  which  was  cognisant  of  the  whole
scheme,  as  finally  revealed  ; — I  refer  especially  to  the  use  made
of  the  Latin  verses  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  and  to  the  veiled
allusions  to  Mr.  Piddington's  letter  in  the  Verrall  scripts ; — and
it  seems  to  me  difficult  to  attribute  so  complete  a  knowledge
of  it  to  the  subliminal  consciousness  either  of  Mrs.  Verrall  or
of  Mr.  Piddington."

This  conclusion  seems  to  me  just,  though  not  exactly  for  the
reasons  specially  mentioned  here. It  is  difficult,  I  think,  for  any  one

1  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  self  would  appear  to  have  had  some  knowledge  of
the  letter  at  about  the  very  hour  when  it  was  being  written.


lxil]


Review.


83


who  studies  the  cross-correspondences  of  this  class  without  prejudice
to  resist  the  conclusion  that  some  intelligence  originates  each  experi-
ment, and  perhaps  to  some  extent  influences  its  course.  The
evidence  for  this  is  even  stronger  in  the  Sesame  and  Lilies  case,1
which  Mr.  Podmore  does  not  discuss,  than  in  the  Sevens  Incident.
Prof.  Pigou  has  suggested  that  the  difference  in  the  details
which  emerge  in  the  various  scripts  may  be  due  to  chance  rather
than  to  selection ;  but  the  cause  seems  inadequate,  and  there  is
ample  evidence  scattered  about  the  cases  that  some  one  knows  a
cross-correspondence  is  being  attempted.  Thus,  in  the  Sesame  and
Lilies  incident  we  have  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,

"  Then  besides  the  Lilies  there  is  to  be  another  word  for

you,  and  for  her  Lilies  and  a  different  word 2 — So  that  Lilies  is.

the  catchword  to  show  what  words  are  to  be  put  together.
And  your  second  word  is  gold. Think  of  the  golden  lilies

of  France.

You  will  have  to  wait  some  time  for  the  end  of  the  story,
for  the  solution  of  the  puzzle — but  I  think  there  is  no  doubt
of  its  ultimate  success."

Clearly  there  is  an  author,  who  is  possibly  also  prompter  and
stage-manager,  behind  the  scenes.

But  it  may  be  asked,  do  we  yet  know  enough  of  the  powers
of  the  subliminal  consciousness  to  preclude  the  presumption
that  the  some  one  who  originates,  and  perhaps  directs,  may  be
one  of  the  subliminals  concerned  ?  For  myself,  I  must  confess  I
have  had  almost  from  the  beginning  a  steadily  growing  suspicion
that  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal — which  from  the  first  professed  to  be
controlled  by  spirits — should  have  the  credit  for  most,  at  any  rate,
of  these  highly  elaborated  and  ingenious  experiments.  It  appears  to
have  been  the  originator  of  the  idea,  which  emerged  in  her  script
as  early  as  March,  1901, 3  and  to  have  made  repeated  attempts  to
carry  it  out  in  the  years  that  followed,  but  with  no  very  striking
results  until  we  come  to  the  triumphant  successes  of  1907.  Through-

1  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  admirably  clear  analysis  of  this,  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,
pp.  264  ff.

2  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  script  failed  on  this  point.

3  See  Miss  Johnson's  paper,  Proc,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  375  ff. ,  where  a  large  number
of  references  to  the  scheme  are  collected  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.  These
numerous  hints,  however,  were  understood  by  no  one  until  the  early  part  of
1906,  when  Miss  Johnson,  with  great  acuteness,  detected  the  supplementary
nature  of  many  of  the  cross-correspondences.


84


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield,


[part


out  these  latter  correspondences  there  may  be  found,  as  I  think, —
at  any  rate  by  any  one  who  knows  Mrs.  Verrall  well,  and  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Verrall  have  been  my  most  intimate  friends  for  many  years —
constantly  recurring  indications  that,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases
the  central  idea  in  each  emanates  from  her.  I  find  these  signs  as
conspicuous  as  anywhere  else  in  the  remarkable  Sesame  and  Lilies
case,  which  has  been  claimed  as  peculiarly  strong  evidence  for  the
spiritistic  view.

Now,  considering  the  notoriously  non-moral  character  of  all  sub-
liminal consciousnesses,  it  will  hardly  be  denied  that  Mrs.  Verrall's,
having  once  evolved  the  idea  of  supplementary  cross-correspondences,
with  a  view  to  proving  its  spirit  inspiration,  would  be  quite  capable
of  devising  one,  and  of  attempting  to  carry  it  out.  It  would
naturally  continue  to  sustain  the  fiction  of  spirit  agency  with  all
possible  ingenuity  and  resource.  To  take  the  next  step,  I  venture  to
offer  the  following  suggestion  of  a  possible  modus  operandi,  hoping
that  a  consideration  of  what  we  already  know  of  the  powers  of  the
telepathic  faculty  may  be  held  to  redeem  it  from  the  charge  of
rashness.

First,  then,  this  subliminal  consciousness  launches,  and  continues
to  launch,  into  the  void — not  necessarily  by  any  special  effort,  but
merely  as  a  result  of  the  process  of  thought — the  ground-idea  of
such  a  correspondence,  to  be  assimilated  by  any  other  automatists
(including  trance-mediums)  who  can  receive  it.  This  idea — after
many  abortive  onesided  experiments  had  been  patiently  pursued
by  its  author — is  at  last  grasped  by  other  automatists.  Then
comes  a  time  when  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  proclaims  in  a  similar
manner,  and  as  it  has  often  done  before,  a  subject  for  an  experi.
ment,  and  the  others  proceed  to  execute  the  congenial  task  with
enthusiasm, — for  they  too  are  interested  in  maintaining  the  illusion
of  a  spirit  agency.  Avoiding,  as  a  rule — for  they  have  been
inspired  so  to  do — any  definite  expression  of  the  leading  idea,  they
commit  to  their  scripts,  rather,  associated  ideas,  anything  thai  occurs
to  them  as  their  thoughts  in  butterfly  fashion  flutter  about  it.1  We
then  may  get  from  different  automatists,  at  various  dates,  scripts
like  the  following,2  with  other  matter — perhaps  fragments  of  another

1  The  amount  of  control  which  a  subliminal  may  have  over  its  thoughts  is
a  point  outside  my  present  purpose.  There  is  much  evidence  that  it  is  often
very  imperfect.

-I  wish  to  state  emphatically  that  these  imaginary  scripts  are  not  written
in  mockery. They  are  meant  to  be  a  fair  and  serious  representation  of  the


tXII.]


Revieiv.


85


cross-correspondence — intermixed.  Spirit  signatures  would,  of  course,
be  appended.

From  Mrs.  Verrall.  (a)  Brown  is  the  colour  brown  cloth —
the  little  furry  creatures  were  brown  too  some  of  them —
brun  bruns  House  of  Brans — I  am  weak  to-day  my  thoughts
wander1 — vermin  ermine* — disiecti  membra  poetae.  Tu  vero
collige,  ita  totum  redintegrabis.2  TrapdftaWe  Parable — it  is  a
sort  of  parable.  irapafiaXov  but  there  was  no  boat.  Not  the
Styx,  another  river.3

(//)  Tom  Tom  the  Piper's  son — Pippa  the  pipper  passes4 —
mixtis  carminibus  non  sine  fistula — fistula  cum  lyra.  There  were
children — antro  seclusa  relinquit.5  Hamel — Du  Hamel  Kremlin.
They  had

Sparkling  eyes  and  flaxen  curls.*
His  eyes  were  green  as  leeks 6

No  you  have  got  it  wrong

And  sharp  blue  eyes,  each  like  a  pin.*

(c)  As  thick  as  leaves  in  7 — what  1  Not  a  valley  but  a  river.
He  swam  the  Esk  river  where  ford  there  was  none.8 Kop  kopje

manner  in  which  the  subliminal  consciousness  appears  to  work.  No  one  can
value  more  highly  than  I  do  both  the  experiments  and  the  devotion  of  the
experimenters.  Whatever  may  be  the  knowledge  gained  from  them,  it  will,
in  my  judgment,  be  priceless.

1  These  words  occur  in  one  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  own  scripts,  which  contain
other  similar  remarks,  purporting  to  express  Myers'  own  condition.  As  a
spirit's  excuse,  they  look  suspicious  ;  but  they  would  come  naturally  enough
from  a  subliminal  striving  to  recover  a  half-lost  memory.

2  "  Limbs  (or  fragments)  of  the  dismembered  poet"  (quotation  from  Horace).
But  do  you  collect  them  ;  then  you  will  restore  the  whole.

3  Trapaj3aWe  (para-balle),  put  side  by  side,  compare.  Trapa/SaXou  (parabalou),  lay
her  alongside,  put  to  shore,  shouted  by  Charon,  in  his  boat  on  the  Styx,  in  a  play
of  Aristophanes.

i  Pippa  Passes  is  the  title  of  a  poem  by  Browning.

5 "  With  mingled  music  of  flute  and  pipe" — "pipe  and  lyre,"  Horace.
"  She  leaves  them  shut  up  in  the  cave,"  Virgil.

6  Shakspeare.

7  Imperfect  reminiscence  of  Milton's  "  Thick  as  autumnal  leaves  that  strow  the
brooks  In  Vallombrosa  "  (of  the  fallen  angels  in  the  lake  of  fire).

8  From  Scott's  Lochinvar.


86  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.  [part

Spion  Kop  another  shameful  hill.  It  was  a  hill  Koppe[lberg] —
successimus  antro.1  Lasciate  ogni  speranza — but  they  did  not
die — Pennsylvania  [Transylvania].  Iv  o-ir^c  yXa^vpiZ.2  He  never
can  cross  that  mighty  top* — Chavez.  But  this  was  long  ago.
Et  ineluctabile  fatum.3

(d)  Without  father  without  mother4  Melchisedech.

(e)  There  was  no  guessing  his  kith  and  kin.*

Wherever  he  sat  down  and  sung
He  left  a  small  plantation.5

From  Automatist  B. (/)  Robert  toi  que  j'aime  but  it  is  not
the  opera,  though  he  was  a  singer. She  sang  too — -My  Romney

The  rest  in  order,  last  an  amethyst.0

(g)  Boys  and  girls  come  out to play — one was  lame — the
lame  and  the  halt — Treloar.7

(h)  The  pipe  and  tabor  is  in  their  feasts8  pipe  and  tabor.*
Note  that,  it  is  a  clue. Another  will  help.

Orpheus  with  his  lute  made  trees
And  the  mountain  tops  that  freeze
Bow  their  heads  when  he  did  sing.9

motley  *  Motley's  Dutch  10 — no  another  country — motley's  the  only
wear.9

(j)  guilders*  Guildhall  the  Lord  Mayor. Pay  pay  pay,  but
that  is  Kipling. Till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost  farthing.11

1  "We  entered  the  cave,"  Virgil.  What  follows  is  part  of  Dante"s  famous  line,
"Lasciate  ogni  speranza,  voi  che  entrate,"  Abandon  every  hope,  all  ye  that  enter.

2  "  In  a  hollow  cavern,"  Iliad.

3  "  And  unescapable  doom,"  Virgil.

4  "  Without  father,  without  mother,  without  descent,"  of  Melchisedech,  Ep.  to

the  Hebrews.

5  Tennyson,  Amphion.

"Last  line  of  Mrs.  Browning's  Aurora  Leigh,  in  which  Romney  Leigh  is  a  chief
character.

7  Reminiscence  of  Sir  Wm  Treloar 's  Homes  for  crippled  children.  He  was
once  Lord  Mayor.

8  "The  tabret,  pipe,  and  wine  are  in  their  feasts,"  Isaiah.

9  Shakspeare.

10  A  hint  at  Motley's  History  of  the  Dutch  Republic.

11  From  the  Parable.


LXII.]


Review.


87


From  Automatist  C.  (k)  The  children  ran  after  the  music —
there  is  a  poem — Robert — Robert  and  Richard  were  two  merry
men.  jSTo  not  that.  It  is  an  old  legend — he  wrote  the  story.
The  Caliph's  kitchen.*

(I)  It  was  magic  music

For  it  was  in  the  golden  prime
Of  good  Haroun  Alraschid.1

(m)  Oh,  young  Lochinvar  came  out  of  the  west.'2

The  subject  of  the  supposed  correspondence,  as  most  readers  will
easily  have  discovered,  is  Robert  Browning's  Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin,
actual  quotations  from  which  are  marked  with  a  *.

Now,  this  imaginary  script  (producible  in  five  minutes  by  merely
abandoning  all  control  of  the  thoughts)  is,  I  submit,  not  a  parody,  but
a  sober  parallel  to  the  supplementary  cross-correspondences  in  our
records,  which  exhibit  passim  the  same  liability  to  boggle  over
names,  and  the  same  curious  tendency  to  wander  off  to  absolutely
alien  topics,  however  weak — or  even  grotesque — may  be  the  link  of
association.  And  in  other  real  scripts,  confessedly  not  even  tele-
pathic, there  is  plenty  of  evidence  that  the  subliminal  at  times
suffers  from  a  similar  loss  of  control,  producing  similar  aberrations,
and  has  difficulty  in  recalling  its  memories.  On  the  other  hand,  we
have  no  good  evidence  that  these  characteristics  of  the  scripts  arise
from  a  spirit's  inability  to  convey  its  own  thoughts  clearly  through
the  medium ;  for  such  incoherent  utterances  are  intermingled,  in
the  same  script,  with  other  matter  lucid  in  thought  and  sure  in
expression,  but  which  differs  also  in  this,  that  it  does  not  make
the  same  demands  upon  the  subliminal  memory.  It  is  difficult,
therefore,  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  we  are  dealing  with  sub-
liminals  which  have  received  nothing  from  outside,  except  (in  the
case  of  automatists  other  than  Mrs.  Verrall)  the  cardinal  conception
of  a  supplementary  cross-correspondence,  and  (where  they  are  not
the  originators)  the  subject  of  the  correspondence  in  hand — unless
we  add  occasional  telepathic  messages  such  as  "  young  Lochinvar "
above,  which  is  supposed  to  be  an  echo  from  the  "  Esk  river "  of
another  automatist.  That  a  real  spirit's  mind  may  wander  after
the  manner  of  the  scripts,  is  surely  a  solution  of  the  matter  which
believers — or  would-be  believers — in  the  spirit's  survival  will  accept
only  after  every  other  has  been  proved  untenable.

The  evidence  of  design,  then,  in  the  scripts  is  irresistible ;  but  if

1  Tennyson.  2  From  Scott's  Lochinvar.


88


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


once  it  is  granted  that  two  or  three  subliminals  could  be  brought
to  understand  what  is  meant  by  a  supplementary  cross-correspondence,
we  need  not  go  beyond  the  automatists  themselves  to  find  the
designer;  it  might  be  any  one  of  the  circle  of  sensitives.  Prof.
Pigou  felt  it  necessary  to  suggest  a  reason  why  the  various  auto-
matists do  not  hit  upon  the  same  details  oftener  than  they  do ;
but  surely  it  is  unlikely  that  they  would,  where  the  subject  of  the
experiment  is  fairly  wide.  A,  B,  and  C,  searching  their  memories,
may  well  recall  different  points  in  a  subject  of  moderate  extent,
and  the  number  of  conceivable  associated  ideas  is  obviously  un-
limited. At  the  same  time,  even  the  most  far-fetched  of  these  latter,
if  one  gets  enough  of  them,  help  to  identify  the  central  idea,  and
to  swell  the  evidence  of  design.

Further  argument  in  support  of  this  view — which  is  of  course
merely  provisional — would  be  out  of  place  here,  and  I  must  content
myself  with  what  has  been  already  said.  I  will  only  add,  that  I
believe  a  minute  examination  of  the  scripts  would  reveal  much
evidence  in  its  favour.

To  return  to  Mr.  Podmore,  it  will  be  seen  that  his  views  remain  sub-
stantially what,  from  his  published  utterances,  they  have  been  known
to  be  for  many  years.  He  unduly  minimises,  as  I  think,  a  good  deal  of
scattered  evidence  for  clairvoyance  and  certain  physical  phenomena,
but  on  the  larger  question  of  spirit  communications  most  people
will  probably  consider  that  he  takes  a  very  strong  position.  In  a
highly  interesting  chapter,  entitled  "The  Stage  Setting  of  the
Trance,"  he  makes  a  formidable  general  assault  on  the  genuineness
of  all  spirit  controls,  and  his  arguments  are  certainly  difficult  to
meet. Some  years  ago  he  wrote,  in  his  Modem  Spiritualism:

"  Mrs.  Piper  would  be  a  much  more  convincing  apparition  if
she  could  have  come  to  us  out  of  the  blue,  instead  of  trailing
behind  her  a  nebulous  ancestry  of  magnetic  somnambules,  witch-
ridden  children,  and  ecstatic  nuns."
He  reaffirms  the  opinion  now. He  points  out  that  dissociation  of
consciousness is frequently  accompanied by  the  sense of  a  new
personality,  which  naturally  demands  a  new  name — a  fact  notorious
in  those  cases  where  the  dissociation  is  complete  and  lasting.  In
view  of  this,  he  asks  what  substantial  grounds  we  have  for  believing
Mrs.  Piper's  latest  controls  to  be  different  in  kind  from  their  prede-
cessors. Just  as  in  former  days  the  secondary  personality  called
itself  by  names  suggested  by  the  medium's  earlier  surroundings,  so
now — as  I  understand  Mr.  Podmore — it  has assumed fresh  ones


LXII.]


Review.


89


adapted  to  and  reflecting  her  more  recent  associations ;  and  there
is  no  more  reality  in  the  "Myers"  and  "Hodgson"  and  other
controls  of  to-day  than  there  was  in  the  "  Phinuit "  (that  "pre-
posterous scoundrel,"  as  one  sitter  called  him),  and  "  Mrs.  Siddons,"
and  "Sebastian  Bach,"  and  "Chlorine,"  and  "General  Vanderbilt,"
and  "  Loretta  Ponchini  "  of  long  ago.

From  which  it  would  appear  that  some  secondary  personalities,  at
any  rate,  are  a  sort  of  psychic  chameleon  !

Nevertheless  the  labours  of  the  experimenters  are  very  far  indeed
from  being  wasted ;  and  so  far  from  discouraging  them,  Mr.  Podmore's
last  word  is  that,  though  the  buried  gold  which  some  of  us  are
expecting  to  find  may  be  visionary,  there  will  result  from  this
industrious  digging  of  a  very  fruitful  vineyard  rewards  of  another
kind,  perhaps  even  richer.

M.  A.  Bayfield.


90


Andrew  Lang.


[part


OPEN  LETTER  TO  DE.  STANLEY  HALL.

From  ANDREW  LANG.

Alleyne  House,
St.  Andrews,  December  1st,  1910.

Dear  Sir,

Excuse  the  liberty  which  I  assume  when  I  throw
my  reflections  on  some  recent  work  of  yours  into  the  old-
fashioned  form  of  a  "  Familiar  Epistle  to  an  Author."  I  have
been  reading  with  interest  Dr.  Tanner's  Studies  in  Spiritism,
with  an  Introduction  by  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.1  Your
own  contributions  to  what  you  style  such  a  "  searching,  im-
partial, critical  estimate "  of  the  work  of  the  English  Society
for  Psychical  Research  as  that  Society  has  never  enjoyed
before,2  attracted  my  particular  attention.  I  do  not  disparage
the  performances  of  Miss  Tanner,  Ph.D.,  when  I  say  that  the
work  of  the  Master  interested  me  even  more  than  that  of  the
impartial  Disciple.

In  all  studies  and  in  all  discussions  every  man  or  woman
who  takes  a  part  has  a  natural  or  artificial  bias, — or  plenty
of  both.  My  bias  in  the  matter  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  her  per-
formances is  identical  with  your  own.  Thus  you  say,  "  we  all
have  fathers,  but  somehow  it  seemed  to  me  vulgar  to  hold  the
intercourse  which  I  should  love  to  "  (hold  ?)  "  with  my  father's
spirit  in  such  a  way  as  this,"  namely,  through  Mrs.  Piper.:i

I  have  elsewhere  expressed  precisely  the  same  sentiments,
to  which  I  adhere.4

You  write,  "  we  dishonour  our  immortal  parts "  (or  rather,
perhaps,  the  immortal  parts  of  our  dead  friends  ?)  "  by  thinking


1  D.  Appleton  and  Co.,  London  and  New  York,  1910.  2  Op.  cit.  p.  xxxiii.
3  Op.  cit.  p.  xxviii.  4  In  The  Making  of  Religion,  chapter  vii.


LXII.]


Review.


91


that  we  find  them  here";1 — in  Mrs.  Piper's  parlour!  Your
sentiments  are  mine :  nothing  could  induce  me  to  intrude  on
the  denizens  of  the  next  world  through  the  agency  of  Mrs.  Piper,
(whom  I  never  met,)  or  of  any  other  "  entranced "  medium,
savage  or  civilised.

But  Science  must  "  do  diverse  and  disgusting  things "  in
the  search  for  Truth,  and  you  have  clone  diverse  and  dis-
gusting things  to  Mrs.  Piper  ;  prodding  her  with  an  esthesio-
meter,  and  filling  her  nostrils  with  camphor  and  ether  ;  her
mouth  with  sugar  and  salt,  which  she  "  took  very  uncon-
cernedly," to  quote  Claverhouse  (pp.  236-239).  Volenti  non
fit  injuria,  you  might  also  have  exhibited  snuff,  and  found  out
whether  it  made  her  "control"  "Hodgson"  sneeze  or  not.
A  scientific  study  of  Mrs.  Piper  is  one  thing ;  serious  con-
sultation of  the  dead  through  Mrs.  Piper  is  another,  and,  I
agree  with  you,  is  a  vulgar  thing.

Thus  far  we  are  in  accord  ;  and,  again,  I  am  in  a  state
of  absolute  agnosticism  about  Mrs.  Piper's  case :  I  can  go
further,  I  have  never  seen  in  the  published  reports  any  proof,
for  me,  that  she  is  in  touch  with  even  an  off-current,  so  to
speak,  of  the  consciousness  of  any  persons  discarnate.  Some
of  her  performances  puzzle  me,  for  example  the  replies  of  her
"  Hodgson "  to  Professor  William  James,  the  answers  of  her
"Mr.  Myers"  to  questions  on  Eoman  mythology;  and  so  forth.2
I  am  puzzled ;  and,  (here  we  approach  the  main  point  of  my
difficulty,)  I  am  inclined  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper,  in  her
normal  condition,  could  not  have  given  the  replies  which,  as
"  Hodgson  "  and  as  "  Myers,"  she  did  give  to  the  questions  of
Mr.  James  and  of  Mr.  Dorr.  The  abnormality  of  her  con-
dition seems,  in  some  way,  to  help  her,  but  is  her  condition,
in  fact,  abnormal  when  she  gives  sittings  ?

We  now  reach  the  question  to  which  your  answers,  in  Dr.
Tanner's  book,  appear  to  me,  (excuse  my  frankness  in  a  matter
of  Science,)  to  be  so  lacking  in  coherence  as  to  resemble  the
utterances  of  "  split  personalities."  Is  Mrs.  Piper,  to  your
mind,  when  she  gives  a  "  sitting," — -when  she  is  "  entranced  "■ —
really  dans  son  assiette,  really  in  possession  of  her  normal
intelligence,  and  of  ber  senses  five  ? If  so,  she  must  be  a

1  Studies  in  Spiritism,  p.  267.

2  For  these  see  Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Parts  LVIII.  and  LX.


92


Andrew  Lang.


[part


common  forthright  impostor  (or  strangely  self-deceived  by
self-suggestion) ;  for  she  says  that  she  is  "  in  trance  " ;  that  her
normal  consciousness  is  in  abeyance ;  while,  when  restored  to
her  normal  consciousness,  she  retains  no  memory  of  what  she
said,  did,  and  suffered  while  in  trance.  Such  are  her  pro-
fessions, and  if,  while  seeming  to  be  in  trance,  she  is  really  in
full  persistent  normal  consciousness,  she  says  what  she  knows
to  be — erroneous.

Is  it  a  conceivable  hypothesis  that  in  her  assumed  "  trance  "
she  is  normally  conscious,  but  that  she  has  suggested  herself
into  so  firm  a  belief  in  her  own  unconsciousness  that,  after
the  trance,  she  actually  retains  no  memory  of  having  been
conscious  ?  Has  she  successfully  administered  to  herself  a
"  post-hypnotic  suggestion "  not  to  remember  things  of  which
she  was  as  conscious,  in  her  "  trance,"  as  a  hypnotised  patient
is  conscious  in  his  of  what  he  is  told  to  do  or  abstain  from
doing  ? If  so  she  is

liSo  false  she  wholly  takes  herself  for  true."

If  I  had  to  wairer,  and  if  the  wager  could  be  decided,  I
would  lay  five  to  one  that  after  her  trance  she  really  retains
no  memory  of  what  occurred  in  it.  That  is  only  an  im-
pression for  what  it  is  worth.  Nor  is  the  analogy  of  a  patient
hypnotised  by  another  person,  close  and  exact ;  for  Tie,  it
seems,  can  be  hallucinated  by  the  external  suggestion,  whereas,
on  the  hypothesis  which  I  indicate,  Mrs.  Piper  is  widely
awake  to  the  external  world,  but  is  hypnotised,  by  herself,
into  remembering  nothing  about  it.

Perhaps  you  have  some  such  solution  of  the  problem  in
your  mind  when  you  doubt  as  to  whether  Mrs.  Piper's
"  method  be  a  conscious  invention  on  her  part,"  or  "  a  method
unconsciously  drifted  into  "  (p.  xx).  If  you  adhered  firmly  to
this  line  of  conjecture,  and  if  it  means  that  Mrs.  Piper
hypnotises  herself  by  self-suggestion,  and  gives  herself  a  "post-
hypnotic suggestion "  to  forget,  my  only  difficulty  would  be
that  I  know  not  whether,  in  a  hypnotic  condition,  a  patient
can  be  keenly  conscious  of  every  minute  event.  Your  ex-
planation, if  I  understand  you,  of  some  effects  of  Mrs.  Piper
which  have  astonished  observers,  and  have  been  ascribed  to
"  supernormal " influences, telepathic  or spiritual, is  that  in


Review.


93


trance  her  sense  of  hearing  is  acute  and  vigilant ;  her  powers
of  inference  and  observation  and  of  normal  memory  exceed-
ingly keen,  and  that  thus  she  can  amaze  spectators  by  her
statements.  All  this  I  am  not  disputing,  but  do  you  steadily
maintain  that  her  senses,  and  memory,  and  powers  of  deduc-
tion, in  ':  trance,"  are  normal,  or  perhaps  even  above  the
powers  of  her  every-day  intelligence  ?

On  this  all-important  and  very  interesting  question,  you
appear,  if  I  may  use  a  Shakespearian  phrase,  to  "  speak  with
two  voices,"  and  to  hold  irreconcilable  opinions.  I  may  very
probably  be  mistaken :  it  is  so  easy  and  so  natural  to  mis-
understand an  argument.  I  can  only  quote  various  state-
ments of  yours  which,  at  present,  I  cannot  reconcile.

Your  contributions  to  Dr.  Tanner's  book,  taken  in  the  order
in  which  they  were  obviously  written,  are  "  Current  Notes  by
Dr.  Hall"  (pp.  259-273),  the  matter  in  pages  177-185,  and
the  "  Introduction "  (pp.  xv-xxxiii).  As  to  your  "  Current
Notes"  you  say  that  they  were  "jotted  down  with  no  thought
of  their  publication,  least  of  all  in  their  present  form "
{Introduction,  p.  xxxiii).  "  Their  present  form,"  I  presume,
is  the  form  in  which  they  were  originally  written  by  you,
while  the  impressions  received  by  you  from  the  "  sittings "
were  fresh  in  your  memory  ?  Yet  I  am  not  certain  on  this
point;  the  "jotted  notes"  are  sarcastic  and  eloquent.  "Are
they  tempting  sirens  that  would  lure  us  to  our  destruction,
or  are  they  angelic  beckonings  to  a  higher  world  ? "  This
reads,  does  it  not?  like  a  passage  of  deliberate  rhetoric,  not
like  a  jotting.  Indeed  the  whole  chapter  has  the  air  of
being  a  studied  composition.  As  evidence,  it  would  be  much
more  valuable,  (according  to  the  ideas  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Eesearch,)  if  it  really  were  contemporary  with  the  sittings ;
were  really  "  a  few  notes  on  the  Piper  sittings  jotted  down
with  no  thought  of  their  publication,  least  of  all  in  their
present  form  "  (p.  xxxiii).  Is  the  "  present  form "  or  is  it
not,  the  original  form  of  the  jotted  notes  ?  If  not,  the
original  notes  are  much  to  be  desired.

Leaving  the  notes  and  the  Introduction  for  a  moment,  we
observe  (p.  190)  that  "before  Mrs.  Piper  entered  the  trance
.  .  .  Dr.  Hall  explained  to  her  that  we  had  no  doubt  at  all
about  the  genuineness  of  her  trance  or  of  her  own  honesty."


94


Andrew  Lang.


[part


Now  you  confessedly  thought  it  de  bonne  guerre,  (and  here  I
agree  with  you,)  to  deceive  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper, — that  is,
the  so-called  "  Hodgson," — by  saying  the  thing  that  was  not ;
by  "  my  involuted  lie"  (p.  179).  I  do  not  deem  this  a  moral
fib,  but  a  scientific  and  experimental  stratagem.  But  I  suppose
that,  when  you  assured  Mrs.  Piper,  in  her  ordinary  state,  of
your  belief  in  her  "  honesty "  and  in  "  the  genuineness  of  her
trance "  you  were  not  telling  an  "  involuted  lie."  I  take  this
for  granted.

The  point  that  puzzles  me  is,  do  you  still  retain  your  belief
in  the  "  genuineness  "  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "  trance  "  ?  Your  remarks
on  this  question,  in  your  "  Introduction  "  and  "  Current  Notes"
perplex  me;  partly  because  of  the  terminology  which  you
employ :  to  this  point  I  will  return.

As  to  trance,  genuine  trance,  it  is  fair  to  take  it  in  the
sense  of  Dr.  Tanner's  definition.  "  Trance  states  are  by  no
means  the  exclusive  possession  of  mediums.  They  are  common
in  hysterical  subjects,  and  in  cases  of  secondary  personality,
and  can  be  produced  by  hypnosis  or  suggestion  with  proper
subjects.  While  in  the  trance  the  victim  is  more  or  less
unconscious  of  what  is  going  on  about  her,  and  on  recovering
remembers  her  feelings  more  or  less  dimly.  The  state  has
many  resemblances  to  somnambulism.  Neither  the  causes  nor
cure  of  it  are  as  yet  well  understood  "  (p.  xxxvi).  This  I  accept
for  the  sake  of  argument.

If  Mrs.  Piper  be  "  honest," — as  you  told  her  you  believed
her  to  be, — in  trance  she  is  "  more  or  less  unconscious  of  what
is  going  on  about  her."  She  retains,  she  says,  no  memory  of
what  was  going  on,  after  she  wakens.  But,  if  honest,  she
cannot  tell,  when  she  wakens,  whether,  when  entranced,  she
was  conscious  of  what  was  going  on  around  her  or  not.  When
we  say  that  we  have  had  a  dreamless  sleep,  we  only  mean  that
we  retain  no  memory  of  having  dreamed.  In  some  cases  it
can  be  proved,  by  a  bedfellow  who  heard  us  talking  in  our
sleep,  that  we  really  did  dream.  If  Mrs.  Piper  be  dishonest,
we  cannot  trust  her  report ;  if  she  be  honest,  her  report  is  of
no  value,  for  she  merely  does  not  remember  having  been
conscious  of  her  environment :  whether  by  self-suggestion  or
not.

We  are  thus  dependent  on  your  opinion  as  to  the  extent


LXII.]


Review.


95


of  her  normal  consciousness  of  all,  or  of  much,  that  passes  in
her  room  while  she  is  entranced.  Now  I  cannot  discover  what,
in  this  matter,  your  opinion  really  is.  (For  my  part,  I  have  no
opinion  as  to  whether  or  not  the  "  trance  "  is  "  genuine.")  You
say  (p.  xix)  that  the  sitter  has  the  impression  that  Mrs.  Piper
"  is  almost  as  much  out  of  the  game  in  this  state  as  if  she  were
dead."  The  sitters,  therefore,  at  last  come  to  talk  quite  freely,
and  your  theory  is  that  Mrs.  Piper  listens  to  even  the  faintest
sounds,  and  tries  to  make  her  profit  out  of  what  she  hears ;
for,  you  say,  in  fact,  "her  ear  is  awake  and  alert"  (p.  xix).
If  so,  then  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  (as  far  as  I  can  understand.)  is
not  genuine ;  for,  following  Dr.  Tanner's  definition,  "  in  trance
the  victim  is  more  or  less  unconscious  of  what  is  going  on
about  her";  whereas  you  say  that,  at  least  often,  she  is  acutely
conscious  even  of  things  concealed,  as  when  Mr.  Dorr  pretends
to  go  out,  opening  and  shutting  the  door,  but  slips  back  again
(pp.  214-215).

As  this  is  so,  how  could  you  tell  Mrs.  Piper  that  you
believed  in  "  the  genuineness  of  her  trance "  ?  You  believe
no  such  matter,  if  you  accept  Dr.  Tanner's  very  moderate  defini-
tion of  the  amount  of  ordinary  consciousness  in  trance.  You
write  "  it  often  seemed  that  only  her  eyes "  (hidden  in  a
cushion)  "  were  out  of  the  game,  and  all "  (my  italics)  "  her
mental  and  emotional  powers  were  very  wide  awake"  (p.  xx).
But  not  only  "  her  eyes  were  out  of  the  game,"  for  "  general
sensibility  [is  also]  shunted  out  .  .  .  and  certainly  her  respiratory
functions,  taste,  smell,  general  tactile  sensibility  and  motor
innervation  are  asleep"  (p.  268).

On  this  showing  a  great  deal  of  Mrs.  Piper  is  certainly
asleep ;  so  a  great  deal  of  her  trance  is  certainly  genuine.
Meanwhile  her  ears,  or  one  of  them,  and  all  her  mental  and
emotional  powers  were,  on  your  showing,  very  wide  awake.
So  far  her  trance  is  not  genuine,  nor  is  she  honest.  You  add,
"  and  yet  I  am  by  no  means  convinced  that  she  acted  her
sleep-dream.  ..."  (p.  xx).

You  know,  as  well  as  I,  that  in  the  dreams  of  sleep  the
sleeper  is,  at  most,  but  faintly  and  erroneously  conscious  of
the  sounds  in  his  environment,  and  that  when  such  sounds
give  occasion  to  a  dream,  the  dream  dramatizes  and  misinter-
prets them  out  of  all  resemblance  to  the  objective  cause  of  the


96


Andrew  Lang.


[part


hallucination.  Mrs.  Piper,  on  the  other  hand,  you  say,  is,  as
regards  her  mental  powers,  "  often  very  wide  awake,"  in  a
"  sleep-dream  "  which,  none  the  less,  you  are  not  "  convinced  "
that  she  feigns.  Yet  you  are  (apparently)  convinced  that  she
"  acts  "  the  "  sleep-dream,"  for  you  are  convinced  that,  "  often  at
least  her  mental  powers  are  very  wide  awake."  Now,  in  sleep-
dreams,  as  an  all  but  universal  rule,  our  "  mental  powers  "  are
very  remote  from  being  "  wide  awake," — we  could  not  cheat,
in  a  "  sleep-dream,"  or  try  to  cheat,  observers  who  were  watching
us. Yet  Mrs.  Piper  apparently  tries  to  do  nothing  else.

You  go  on  to  give  "  abundant  evidence," — in  the  same  page,
— "  that  Mrs.  Piper-Hodgson's  soul  is  awake  and  normal."  If
by  "  soul "  you  mean  Mrs.  Piper's  ordinary  intelligence,  and  if
that  be  awake  and  normal,  when  she  is  acting  the  part  of
Hodgson,  then  she  is  not  in  a  trance,  as  Dr.  Tanner  defines
trance,  and  is  an  impostor ;  like  Mr.  Pickwick  I  will  be  more
explicit  and  say  "  a  humbug."  But  then,  that  she  is  "  acting
her  sleep-dream,"  one  of  your  split  selves  is  "  by  no  means
convinced."  Like  Malvolio,  you  "  think  nobly  of  the  soul,"  as
our  immortal  part.  If,  when  you  speak  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "soul"
as  "  awake  and  normal "  in  her  assumed  trance,  you  mean,  not
her  normal  intelligence,  but  her  "  soul "  in  the  Platonic  sense,
then  you  agree  with  Sir  Thomas  Browne.  "  There  is  some-
thing in  us  that  is  not  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Morpheus  .  .  .
we  are  somewhat  more  than  ourselves  in  our  sleep ;  and  the
slumbering  of  the  body  seems  but  to  be  the  wakening  of  the
soul."  Perhaps  that  is  what  you  mean  ?  Perhaps  you  mean
that,  in  trance,  Mrs.  Piper's  "  soul,"  or  immortal  part,  is  its
true  unconditioned  self?  But  if  you  mean  that,  in  trance,
Mrs.  Piper's  every-day  intelligence  ':  is  awake  and  normal,"
then,  once  more,  you  are  cpaite  convinced  that, — often  at  least,
— she  "  acts  her  sleep-dream  "  ;  for  in  "  sleep-dreams  "  nobody's
every-day  intelligence  is  "  awake  and  normal."  Without
banter,  I  am  so  perplexed  by  your  statements  of  your  opinion
that  an  explanation  will  be  welcome  to  an  earnest  inquirer.

If  your  position  is  that  (p.  xix)  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  ear
"  is  awake  and  alert,"  keenly  aware  of  everything  audible,  if
her  ear  is  on  the  catch  for  every  whisper  of  external  sug-
gestion, if  her  normal  'cuteness  is  watching  for  every  oppor-
tunity to  cheat, — if  this  be  your  opinion, — why  do  you  express


lxil]


Review.


97


a  very  different  theory  in  your  "  Current  Notes  "  on  your  six
sittings  with  this

"  Daughter  of  Debate,
That  discord  still  doth  sow  1 "

In  these  notes  (p.  265)  you  write:  "Thus,  the  auditory  centres
were  not  asleep,  but  seemed  in  full  function,  and  at  first  we
thought  that  there  was  some  hyperacuity,  although  we  were
not  infrequently  asked  to  repeat  as  if  to  keep  up  the  illusion
that  the  hand  was  hard  of  hearing.  Yet  here,  too,  subsequent
observation  suggests  obtuseness  and  subnormality  that,  while  the
ear  heard,  it  did  so  dimly  and  sleepily,  or  else  tended  to  drop
off  into  the  slumber  in  which  the  eye  and  other  orienting
faculties  were  wrapped.  On  the  whole  we  incline  to  the  idea
that,  although  we  have  here  "  (in  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  and  very
acute  sense  of  hearing,)  "  the  source  of  by  far  most  of  the
information  the  control  seems  to  possess  that  appears  super-
normal, that  the  ear  itself  in  point  of  fact  is  not  very  wide
awake,  and  most  of  the  time  is  only  a  little  above  the  middle
state  between  sleeping  and  waking."

Here,  sir,  in  apparent  contradiction  of  what  you  say  (p.  xix)
— "  her  ear  is  awake  and  alert," — you  write  that,  at  first,  this
ear  "  seemed  in  full  function,"  yet  that,  in  fact,  it  was  not  in
full  function,  not  "  alert,"  but  "  tended  to  drop  off  into  the
slumber," — heard  "  dimly  and  sleepily,"  and  so  forth,  and  most
of  the  time  is  only  a  little  above  the  middle  state  between
sleeping  and  waking,"  in  which  state  we  hear  in  the  vaguest
and  most  dislocated  fashion.  By  your  account  "  most  of  the
time "  Mrs.  Piper's  ear  is  not  "  awake  and  alert,"  and  not  on
the  catch  for  even  whispered  hints.  We  have  here  a  clearly
drawn  and  most  important  distinction  between  the  impressions
made  on  you  by  your  earlier  and  your  later  studies  of  the
alertness  of  Mrs.  Piper's  ear,  or  sense  of  hearing.  Your
"  Current  Notes,"  in  which  Mrs.  Piper's  ear  hears  "  dimly
and  sleepily,  or  tended  to  drop  off  into  slumber,"  were,  or
ought  to  have  been,  written  under  the  vivid  recent  impression
of  your  interviews  with  that  lady.  Have  you  "got  them  down
in  your  notes "  ?  Your  Introduction,  I  presume,  was  written
later,  after  the  book  of  Miss  Tanner,  Ph.D.,  was  finished.  In
your  Introduction,  all  is  changed,  the  ear  has  now  become

G


98


Andrew  Lang.


[part


"  keen  and  alert."  I  know  not  how  you  could  write  this
statement,  if  you  remembered  what  you  had  written  in  your
"Current  Notes."

Your  "  searching,  impartial,  critical  "  estimate  of  Mrs.  Piper
has  now  been  treated  to  an  examination  which  I  can  honestly
call  "  impartial."  I  do  not  wish  to  be  captious :  I  am  sincerely
unable  to  understand  why,  in  the  conclusions  of  your  Intro-
duction you  appear  to  forget  what  "  later  observation  "  taught
you.

Your  theory  of  what  some  reckon  Mrs.  Piper's  successes
seems  to  rest  on  the  discovery  that,  when  she  is  "entranced,"
her  normal  intelligence  and  her  sense  of  hearing  are  at  once
extremely  alert  "  often " ;  and  yet,  usually,  or  "  most  of  the
time,"  are  somnolent  and  beclouded,  "  sleepy "  and  "  dim."

I  may  have  overlooked,  I  certainly  have  failed  to  discover,
any  mode  of  reconciling  so  many  conclusions  which  to  me
look  like  contradictions  in  terms.  But  Dr.  Tanner's  con-
clusions "  are  in  substantial  agreement "  with  yours,  and  you
are  "  satisfied  and  shall  probably  never  want  more  sittings."
Were  I  you,  I  should  pine  for  more  sittings  in  the  hope  of
discovering  whether  I  really  thought  that  Mrs.  Piper's  ear  is
"  keen  and  alert " ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  as  "  subsequent
observation  suggests,"  "  heard  dimly  and  sleepily,  or  else
tended  to  drop  oil'  into  the  slumber  in  which  the  eye  and
other  orienting  faculties  were  wrapped"  (p.  265).  How  can
both  of  these  conclusions  be  correct  ?  Why  do  you  express
(pp.  xix-xx)  in  your  Introduction  the  conclusions  which,  as
reported  in  your  "  Current  Notes,"  subsecpuent  observation
proved  to  be  mistaken  ?  Conclusions  which  are  apparently
irreconcilably  contradictory  cannot  be  the  basis  of  discussion.

The  problem  of  determining  the  presence  or  absence  of  very
wide-awake  normal  intelligence  and  keen  sensitiveness  to  im-
pressions in  a  person  whose  "  general  sensibility  is  shunted
out,"  and  whose  "  respiratory  functions,  taste,  smell,  general
tactile  sensibility  and  motor  innervation  are  certaiidy  asleep,"
(p.  268)  is,  of  course,  very  difficult!  If  I  understand  you,
Mrs.  Piper  can  somehow  "  shunt  out "  all  the  faculties  which
she  does  shunt  out,  and  yet  "  often  "  retain  her  normal  intelli-
gence, her  powers  of  hearing,  comparing,  and  inferring,  while
also  "  most  of  the  time "  her  hearing  is  very  somnolent  and


lxii.]  Review.  99

therefore  her  inferences  from  what  she  dimly  hears  must  be
the  vaguest  of  dreams.

Puzzled  as  every  conscientious  reader  must  be,  one  turns
to  the  "Notes  of  the  Sittings,"  pp.  166-258.  Here,  one
hopes,  will  be  found  contemporary  records  of  the  general  keen
alertness,  and  of  the  usual  somnolent  inefficiency,  of  Mrs.  Piper's
normal  sense  of  hearing.

The  theory  and  method  of  the  sittings  is  that  Mrs.  Piper,
or  her  spiritual  "  control,"  can  only  hear  what  is  spoken  loud
to  her  right  hand,  which  the  control  dominates.  Your  theory
is  that  (a)  Mrs.  Piper's  ear  has  its  normal  powers  of  hearing ;
and,  again,  (b)  that  it  has  not.  In  the  records  taken  during
the  sittings  I  find  only  the  following  notes  which  assert  the
reaction  of  Mrs.  Piper,  or  of  Hodgson,  to  sounds  other  than
remarks  shouted  into  her  writing  hand.

(1)  p.  195.  "Hodgson  seems  to  break  in,  in  response  to
some  unnoted  remark  from  Mr.  Dorr."  The  remark  of  Mr.
Dorr  being  "  unnoted "  we  can  say  no  more.

(2)  p.  229.  Dr.  Tanner  had  said  to  Dr.  Hall  "with  a
laugh "  that  some  undecipherable  writing  by  Mrs.  Piper
"  looked  as  if  it  might  be  the  be"innimr  of  '  Hell  and  damna-

o  o  o

tion.' "  The  writing;  hand  remonstrated  against  what  Dr.
Tanner  had  said.

In  this  instance  Mrs.  Piper,  or  "  Hodgson "  certainly  heard
what  Dr.  Tanner  said,  with  a  laugh,  about  Hell  and  damna-
tion. This  is,  I  think,  the  only  instance  of  such  hearing
which  is  not  matter  of  presumption  and  conjecture.

(3)  p.  229.  A  reference  to  Mr.  Dorr's  return  to  the  room
whence  he  had  made  a  pretence  of  departing.  It  is  inferred
that  Mrs.  Piper  heard  some  sound  whence  she  inferred  that  a
trick  was  being  played.

(4)  "  We  talked  to  each  other  a  minute  or  so.  Presumably
the  control  heard,  and  went  on"  (p.  241).  But  nothing  in  the
context  suggests  that  "  the  control  heard "  your  conversation.

(5)  There  followed  (Fifth  sitting)  some  futile  attempts  at
experiments  to  detect  Mrs.  Piper's  powers  of  hearing,  and  Dr.
Tanner  says  "  I  whispered  to  Dr.  Hall  to  try  to  fool  the
control  .  .  .  but  1  think  that  he  heard  me  "  (p.  243).

This  is  only  a  conjecture  of  Dr.  Tanner's  :  the  "  control,"  in
these  experiments,  was  not  always  easily  "  fooled."


100


Andrew  Lang.


[part


(6)  On  p.  251  (Sixth  sitting)  several  experiments  on  hearing
are  tried,  and  "  doubtless  the  control  heard,  the  first  time  the
question  was  asked,"  but  this  is  the  common  "  doubtless "  of
science  and  means  no  more  than  that  you  prefer  to  suppose
that  the  "  control "  heard  the  question.

(7)  p.  256.  A  case  of  hearing  what  you  and  Dr.  Tanner  said
to  each  other.  What  you  said  to  each  other  involved  an  obvious
misinterpretation  of  what  Mrs.  Piper  (or  "  the  control ")  had
been  saying  to  you,  and  "  the  control "  kept  insisting  on  his
own  opinion.

I  can  only  find,  as  contemporary  records  of  the  acute
hearing  of  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance,  these  few  cases,  conjectures,
and  presumptions.

Of  the  somnolence  of  the  ear,  "  most  of  the  time,"  I  find  no
contemporary  record.

To  return  to  the  contrast  between  your  scanty  contemporary
notes  of  your  guesses  that  Mrs.  Piper  hears  acutely  in  "  trance,"
on  one  side,  and  your  large  general  assertion,  on  the  other,
that  her  hearing  is  acute,  you  say  (p.  204),  "The  left  ear  is
certainly  awake,  because,  over  and  over,  murmured  words
between  those  present,  steps,  rustles,  laughs,  and  many  other
noises  are  heard  and  reacted  to,  sometimes  unexpectedly,  by
the  writer."

Where  are  your  contemporary  records  of  these  many  "  re-
actions "  ?  You  give  to  the  general  reader  your  large  assertion
on  p.  264,  lines  1-5.  You  contradict  it  (as  far  as  I  can
understand  you)  on  page  265,  and  all  the  exact  evidence  you
offer  for  the  assertion  on  page  264  is  your  "doubtless,"  your
"  I  think,"  your  "  presumably,"  with  one  or  two  certainties.
Yet  on  your  theory  of  Mrs.  Piper's  acute  hearing,  you  base
your  theory  of  her  alleged  successes :  surely  there  ought  to
be  more  proofs  both  of  the  vigilance  and  of  the  somnolence
of  her  sense  of  hearing.

Once  more,  you  are  singularly  inattentive  to  your  own  con-
temporary reports  of  your  six  sittings.  At  the  Fourth,  after
you  had  told  your  "  involuted  lies "  to  "  Hodgson,"  Hodgson
said  "  I  am  interested  in  seeing  how  many  stories  you  can
tell  in  a  minute.  They  (sic)  awfully  bad.  They  are  awful
whoppers"  (p.  228).  In  the  Sixth  sitting  (p.  255),  Hodgson
says  "  I  have  felt  so keenly  your  various  whoppers  all  this


LXII.]


Review.


101


time.  ...  I  think  I  told  you  so  before."  (The  dates  of
sittings  are  not  given.)

Your  report,  incredible  as  it  seems,  actually  goes  on :  "  which
he  certainly  had  not,  having  been  trustful  to  the  point  of
credulity."  Thus,  when  you  reach  page  255,  you  have  for-
gotten, beyond  recall  even  by  your  proof  sheets,  what  you
had  chronicled  on  page  228, — namely,  "Hodgson's"  detection
and  denunciation  of  your  "  awful  whoppers."  You  do  not
remember  all  this  even  when  "Hodgson"  (p.  255)  says,  "I
think  I  told  you  so  before."  You  reply  "  which  he  certainly
had  not."  Yet  he  had  !  Poor  "  Hodgson's "  memory  is  much
better  than  yours  and  Dr.  Tanner's  combined.  It  is  you
who  here  "  display  the  inability  that  we  should  expect  from
a  secondary  personality.  .  ."

These  notes  deal  only  with  the  method  and  logic  of  your
contributions  to  the  book  of  Dr.  Tanner.  Concerning  Mrs.
Piper,  it  is  my  opinion  that  if  it  were  possible  to  put  her
fleshly  ears  out  of  action,  without  in  any  way  injuring  these
organs,  "  Hodgson,"  Eector  and  Co.  would  be  deaf,  and,  of
course,  could  not  answer  questions  which  could  not  reach
them,  unless  by  dint  of  telepathy  between  the  quick  and  the
dead.  If  these  spirits  replied,  and  replied  correctly,  to  ques-
tions asked  mentally  by  the  sitters,  their  case  would  be  much
stronger,  though,  of  course,  not  a  crucial  test.  "  Nevertheless
the  experiment  ought  to  be  made  by  some  competent
person,"  writes  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  When  physical  hearing
has  been  put  out  of  action,  then  sitters  need  not  shout,  they
may  put  their  questions  mentally.  But  till  these  conditions
are  secured,  I  venture  to  think  that  experiments  with  Mrs.
Piper  are  nugatory.

I  remain,

Your  obedient  servant,

A.  Lang.


102


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


REVIEW.

Studies  in  Spiritism. By  Amy  E.  Tanner,  Ph.D. (D.  Appleton  &
Co.,  New  York  and  London,  1910,  pp.  408.)

Mr.  Lang  deals  above  with  Professor  Stanley  Hall's  share  in  Dr.
Tanner's  book  Studies  in  Spiritism.  A  brief  notice  of  the  book  as
a  whole  should  perhaps  be  added.

But  first  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  Mr.  Lang's  concluding
paragraph,  which  it  seems  to  me  unduly  depreciates  Mrs.  Piper's
phenomena.  I  agree  with  him,  as  I  think  all  who  have  sat  with
her  in  England  do,  in  believing  that  the  trance-personality  hears  in
a  normal  manner  through  Mrs.  Piper's  ears,  and  that  its  impression
of  hearing  with  the  hand  is  a  matter  of  self-suggestion.1  (It  is  a
pity  that  Mr.  Hall  and  Miss  Tanner  did  not  succeed  in  stopping
the  ears  so  as  to  put  this  beyond  the  possibility  of  question.)  I
also  agree  with  Mr.  Lang  that  answers  to  mental  questions  would
greatly  add  to  the  evidence  for  thought-transference  from  the
sitter,  though  scarcely  at  all,  I  may  remark,  to  that  for  thought-
transference  between  Mrs.  Piper  and  other  automatists,  for  which
the  evidence  is  in  my  opinion  strong.  But  I  cannot  agree
with  his  view  that  without  answers  to  mental  questions  from
the  sitter  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  are  nugatory ;  and  in  this
I  think  that  most  of  those  who  have  studied  fully  the  published
reports  of  her  sittings  would  agree  with  me.  Does  he  perhaps,  like
Professor  Hall  and  Dr.  Tanner,  believe  that  the  records  are  so
incomplete  that  even  important  remarks  by  the  sitter  are  omitted  1
Certainly  at  sittings  at  which  I  have  been  present  either  as  manager
or  sitter  this  has  not  been  the  case.  It  has  never  been  assumed  by
me,  nor  I  think  by  other  English  sitters,  that  any  remark  or  sound
made  in  the  room  was  inaudible  to  the  trance-personality,  and  it
surprises  me  that  Mr.  Hall  and Miss  Tanner  should  ever  have

1  Compare  Mr.  Myers'  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  192.


LXII.]


Review.


]  OM


acted  as  if  this  were  so — for  instance,  in  the  case  referred  to  by  Mr.
Lang  above,  No.  5,  p.  99.  I  do  not  know  Mr.  Dorr's  view,  but  it
seems  to  me  unlikely  that  in  telling  them — if  he  did  so — that  they
might  talk  freely  to  each  other  he  meant  to  imply  that  they  could
count  on  not  being  heard  by  the  trance-personality.

It  does  not  appear  that  the  report  by  Professor  Hall  and  Dr.
Tanner  gives  a  complete  account  of  all  that  happened  at  their  six
sittings,  but  probably  what  is  reported  is  enough  to  enable  us  to  form
a  fair  judgement  of  the  whole.  Nor  does  it  seem  likely  that  the
omission  to  note  all  their  own  remarks  (an  omission  which  they
complain  of — or  perhaps  too  readily  assume  to  have  occurred — in
the  case  of  other  sitters)  has  seriously,  if  at  all,  lessened  the  value
of  their  sittings,  which  in  other  respects  give  the  impression  of
being  carefully  recorded,  and  which  form  a  useful  addition  to  the
material  for  studying  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  state.  Having  no  interest
in  keeping  on  friendly  terms  with  the  trance-personality,  they  were
able  to  use  methods  scarcely  open  to  those  who  wish  to  continue
experimenting — in  fact,  in  the  language  of  the  Hodgson  control,
they  told  him  "awful  whoppers."  They  thus  induced  HodgsonP
to  admit  comradeship  and  common  reminiscences  with  Professor
Hall,  who  says  he  never  met  Hodgson  in  the  flesh ;  and  they
succeeded  in  obtaining  messages  from  wholly  fictitious  friends
and  relations.  Similarly,  by  substituting,  unknown  to  the  trance-
personality,  or  at  least  without  his  betraying  that  he  detected  the
imposture,  other  objects  for  Hodgson's  "influences,"1  they  showed
that  the  effect  of  these  is  probably  due  to  suggestion,  as  in  the
case  of  bread  pills.  These  results  will  not,  I  think,  surprise  any
of  the  English  investigators,  but  it  is  useful  to  have  experimental
demonstration  of  them.

Attempts  to  persuade  HodgsonP  to  deny  his  own  identity  failed
completely,  though  I  notice  that  Professor  Hall  is  convinced  that
he  could  have  been  bluffed  out  of  existence  had  the  effort
been  persisted  in  (p.  xxiii.).  Personally,  I  doubt  whether  the  most
tactful  handling  would,  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  induce  a  supposed
communicator  to  deny  the  identity  he  claimed ;  but  doubtless  such
communicators  can  be  suppressed  or  encouraged  by  the  sitters.

Mr.  Hall  and  Miss  Tanner  also  confirmed  and  extended  some

1  "Influences,"  that  is  objects  which  have  been  in  physical  contact  with  the
supposed  communicator  when  in  the  body,  though  not  a  necessity,  are  supposed
to  help  communication.  They  may  serve  to  concentrate  the  attention  of  the
-trance-personality,  or  their  use  may  be  purely  suggestive.


104  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


experiments  of  Dr.  Hodgson's 1  showing  comparative  insensibility  of
various  kinds  during  trance.  Their  attempts  at  Freudian  psycho-
analysis were  incomplete  and  of  little  interest.

The  accounts  of  the  six  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  by  Mr.
Hall  and  Miss  Tanner  occupy  about  one  fourth  of  the  book.  There
is  also  a  little  chapter,  interesting  from  a  psychological  point  of  view,
called  "The  medium  in  germ,"  on  two  cases  of  incipient  mediumship
which  had  come  under  Miss  Tanner's  notice.  The  rest  of  the  book
consists  of  discussions  of  Mrs.  Piper's  phenomena  generally,  of  cross-
correspondences,  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  furnished  by  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  and  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  of  a  chapter  on  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  a  discussion  of  the  Census  of
Hallucinations.  Unfortunately  brevity,  hasty  reading,  and  forgetful-
ness  of  "  the  tremendous  influence  of  a  preconceived  theory  on  one's
interpretations  of  facts"  (see  p.  105)  very  much  diminish  the  value
of  what  Professor  Hall  describes  as  Miss  Tanner's  "searching,  im-
partial, critical  estimate"  (p.  xxxiii).  In  fact  her  presentation  of
facts  and  arguments  cannot  be  assumed  to  be  fair  without  reference
to  the  originals.  For  persons  with  the  original  accounts  before  them
her  remarks  might  sometimes  be  useful,  but  my  impression  is  that
they  would  seldom  be  found  to  add  anything  of  value  to  what  is
put  before  the  reader  in  the  case  as  originally  described,  and
they  constantly  misrepresent  the  case  and  are  essentially  mis-
leading. I  have  not,  indeed,  compared  the  criticism  with  the  matter
criticised  in  all  cases  myself,  and  if  I  had  it  would  obviously
be  impossible  to  follow  Miss  Tanner  throughout  within  the  limits  of
this  notice.  I  will  therefore  content  myself  with  giving  a  few  of
the  instances  of  inaccuracy,  misinterpretation  or  curious  reasoning
that  have  struck  me  in  reading  her  book.

(a)  On  p.  296,  in  discussing  "The  Case  of  Mrs.  Verrall,"  Miss
Tanner  says  :  "  At  various  times  the  script  attempted  a  word  to  be
sent  as  a  test  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  finally  giving  the  words  Ariadnes
stella  coronaria,  and  making  an  allusion  to  another  constella-
tion, Berenice's  hair.  Dr.  Hodgson  in  reply  said  that  he  had
thought  about  syringas  in  connexion  with  her  script,  and  that
syringas  had  a  special  significance  for  him.  Now  the  Latin  name
for  syringa  is  Philadelphus  Coronarius,  and  the  combined  reference
to  Ariadne's  crown  and  Berenice's  hair  is  supposed  by  Mrs.  Verrall
to  be  intended  to  recall  Philadelphus  or  brotherly  love.  7'his  is  rather
far-fetched,  however." I  raise  no  objection  to  the  abstract  till  we

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  4.


LXII.]


Revieiv.


105


come  to  the  part  I  have  put  in  italics.  Mrs.  Verrall  says  nothing
about  brotherly  love.  What  she  does  say  is  "  that  the  introduc-
tion of  Berenice  was  accounted  for,  if  what  was  wanted  was  not
only  coronarius  but  Philadelphia  "l ;  and  in  case  by  chance  any  one
should  fail  to  remember  the  close  association,  in  history,  of  the
names  Berenice  and  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  she  refers  to  it  in  a
foot-note. This  is  not  far-fetched  at  all.

(b)  Here  (pp.  136,  137)  is  an  attempt  to  provide  a  common  train
of  thought  in  three  automatists  to  account  for  cross-correspondences
on  the  words  'cup'  and  'Diana,'  and  (in  two  of  them)  references
to  Macbeth.  Miss  Tanner  says  :  "  We  got  a  clew  here  in  the  fact
that  Henry  Irving  played  'Macbeth'  and  'The  Cup'  in  London
that  winter,  though  we  are  not  told  just  when."  She  doubtless
refers  to  a  conjecture  of  Mr.  Piddington's  as  to  association  of  ideas
in  one  of  the  scripts.  He  says  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  206):  "The
conjunction  of  allusions  to  Macbeth,  The  Cup,  and  a  '  Henry  '  [in  Mrs.
Holland's  script]  was,  perhaps,  due  to  an  association  of  ideas  with
Henry  Irving,  who  produced,  and  acted  in,  these  two  plays."
"That  winter"  is  an  interpolation  of  Miss  Tanner's  and,  as  that
winter  was  1906-7,  and  Henry  Irving  died  in  1905,  and,  I  may  add,
at  no  time  acted  in  Macbeth  and  The  Cup  in  the  same  year,'2  is
obviously  an  erroneous  one. So  that  clue  fails.

(c)  The  following  is  a  specimen  of  Miss  Tanner's  arguments.  On
p.  344  she  refers  to  the  case  of  Miss  R.  seeing  the  face  of  Mrs.  J.  W.
in  two  places  nearly  or  quite  at  once  on  the  night  of  Mr.  J.  W.'s
death  (Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XII,  p.  317).  Miss  R.  unfortunately
failed  to  note  the  experience  in  writing,  though  she  specially
observed  the  hour,  till  two  days  later  when  she  heard  of  the  death.
"This,"  says  Miss  Tanner,  "is  an  excellent  illustration  of  the  defects
in  all  testimony  in  which  the  vision  is  not  written  out  prior  to  the
knowledge  of  the  death.  What  proof  is  there  that  this  is  not  an
illusory  memory,  especially  if,  as  seems  to  be  the  case,  Miss  R.
is  given  to  vivid  images  and  feelings  of  premonition  1"  (Whence  she
gets  this  impression  about  Miss  R.'s  tendencies  to  vivid  images,  etc.,
I  do  not  know.  Miss  R.'s  own  statement  is:  "To  the  best  of  my
belief  I  have  never  seen  an  appearance  of  any  similar  kind  before.")
The  case  would,  of  course,  have  been  more  cogent  if  a  note  had  been

1  See  Pi-oceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  .309.

-  The  Ctip  was  produced  by  Irving  at  the  Lyceum  in  1881,  and  has  not  been
played  in  London  since.  Macbeth  was  played  by  him  in  1875  and  again  in
1888.


106


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


made,  but  even  taking  Miss  Tanner's  abridged  account,  and  still
more  with  the  details  given  in  the  original,  it  appears  to  me  to  be
one  where  illusion  of  memory  is  improbable.  However,  Miss  Tanner
thinks  differently,  and  having  persuaded  herself  that  there  probably
was  illusion  of  memory,  she  goes  further  and  actually  regards  the
case  as  evidence  that  such  illusions  are  common.  She  says:  "Such
a  case  .  .  .  convinces  us  that  illusions  of  memory  even  within  a  few
days  of  the  event  may  be  so  common  as  to  invalidate  every  case
except  those  in  which  the  hallucination  is  written  out  in  detail  at
the  time  and  before  the  corresponding  event  is  known."

(d)  Here  is  another  specimen  of  Miss  Tanner's  arguments.  She
refers  with  well-merited  admiration  to  Mr.  Davey's  experiments
(Proc,  Vol.  IV.),  showing  how  inaccurate  observation  and  memory  of
conjuring  tricks  is.  Then,  criticising  the  evidence  for  apparitions  at
the  time  of  death,  and  referring  to  the  paucity  of  contemporary
documents,  she  says  (p.  352):  "Does  it  not  seem  curious  that  a
committee  [the  Census  Committee]  cognisant  of  Mr.  Davey's  brilliant
demonstration  of  the  transpositions  and  lapses  of  memory  within
even  one  hour  after  the  event  should  base  a  supposedly  scientific
argument  for  telepathy  on  evidence  of  this  sort?"  The  value  of  the
evidence  is  of  course  greatly  diminished  by  absence  of  contemporary
notes.  At  the  same  time,  the  kind  of  lapse  of  observation  and
memory  involved  in  misstatements  in  the  case  of  accounts  of  Mr.
Davey's  conjuring  tricks  is  very  different  from  that  in  accounts  of
apparitions  at  the  time  of  death.  For  instance,  I  should  unhesitat-
ingly assume  Miss  Tanner's  account  of  a  conjuring  trick  witnessed  but
not  understood  by  her  to  be  inaccurate,  though  given  immediately
after  witnessing  it,  because  I  should  know  that  the  conjuror  had  tried
to  give  her  false  impressions  at  the  time,  and  because  I  should
feel  sure  that  the  numerous  small  incidents  which  went  to  make
up  the  whole  occurrence,  and  to  which  she  had  no  clue,  would  tend
to  get  misplaced  or  forgotten  even  when  observed.  But  if  Miss
Tanner  told  me  that  Miss  Smith  called  on  her  at  three  o'clock  on
Saturday  afternoon  I  should  have  no  reason  to  doubt  her  word ;
though,  of  course,  if  anything  of  importance  turned  on  the  exact
day  and  hour  of  the  call  it  would  be  desirable  to  enquire  whether
she  or  others  could  bring  forward  corroborative  circumstances  con-
firming her  recollection.

(e)  Here  is  an  instance  of  Miss  Tanner's  conjectural  explanations
{p.  58).  At  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  which  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was
managing, and  at  which he was himself  taking  notes, a "  Mr.


LXII.]


Review.


107


Wilson,"  deceased,  professed  through  the  Phinuit  control  to  send
messages  to  his  son,  who  was  not  present.  The  following  is  an
extract  from  the  report :

"... He  lives  somewhere  in  your  neighbourhood
0.  J.  L. Yes  he  does.

and  has  got  a  friend  named  Bradley — a  very  great  friend
of  his. He  thought  first  of  being  a  doctor.  ..."

The  son  had  never  thought  of  being  a  doctor,  but  when  the
remark  was  made  at  the  sitting  Sir  Oliver  thought  it  correctly
represented  something  he  had  been  told  by  the  son.  His  inference
from  this,  and  from  the  fact  that  of  other  statements  made  by
'Mr.  Wilson'  those  only  referring  to  matters  known  to  Sir  Oliver
were  correct,  is  that  "a  great  deal  of  this  looks  obviously  like
thought-transference."  On  this  Miss  Tanner  comments,  "Doubtless
there  was  thought-transference,  but  it  was  done  by  Sir  Oliver
involuntarily  betraying  his  opinion  to  Phinuit,  I  would  venture  to
say."  Now  how  does  one,  when  there  is  no  beating  about  the  bush,
involuntarily  betray  an  impression  of  the  sort  in  question  1  Does
Dr.  Tanner  think  that  Sir  Oliver  unconsciously  whispered  "  he
thought  first  of  being  a  doctor"  and  that  Phinuit  repeated  it  after
him  ?  Or  does  she  believe  that  Sir  Oliver's  contemporary  notes  are
as  much  abbreviated,  or  abstracted  with  a  bias,  as  the  accounts  of
cases  in  her  book  ?  Surely  in  this  case  a  more  plausible  alternative
hypothesis  to  telepathy  would  be  that  Phinuit  made  a  guess  which
accidentally  coincided  with  Sir  Oliver's  idea.

Dr.  Tanner  gives  two  chapters  to  "Telepathy  and  other  Allied
Phenomena,"  and  rather  strangely  says  (p.  321)  that  under  the  name
of  telepathy  "  are  grouped  all  such  things  as  crystal  gazing,  veridical
dreams,  death  warnings,  premonitions  that  come  true,  automatic
writing,  and  even  spirit  communication  itself  by  some."  In  the  first
of  the  two  chapters  she  discusses  spontaneous  and  experimental
thought-transference.  (I  am  interested,  by  the  way,  to  learn  that
the  experiments  at  Brighton  in  1889-90,  in  which  I  took  a  large  part,
"are  now  discredited,"  p.  326.  This  is  news  to  me.)  In  the  second
of  the  two  chapters  Miss  Tanner  discusses  the  "  Census  of  Hallucina-
tions." It  is  curious  to  find  her  saying  after  this  (p.  365)  :  "  The
great  trouble  with  the  cases  for  all  sorts  of  telepathy  is  that  it  is
almost,  if  not  quite,  impossible  to  collect  all  the  negative  instances,
for  that  would  mean  devoting  one's  time  to  writing  down  the
thoughts  which  bring  up  persons.  We  cannot  even  begin  to  calculate
the  probabilities  in  the  case  until  we  know  something  more  of  the


108


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


numbers  of  negative  cases."  It  was  a  principal  object  of  the
"  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  to  compare  the  number  of  coincidental
with  non-coincidental — -positive  with  negative — hallucinations,  and
Miss  Tanner  actually  discusses  the  chapter  on  recognised  apparitions
where  the  proportion  of  these  occurring  within  twelve  hours  of  the
death  of  the  person  seen  is  compared  with  the  proportion  of  such
coincidences  that  chance  alone  would  give  (and  shown,  of  course,
enormously  to  exceed  it).  It  seems  possible,  however,  that  she  has
not  altogether  understood  the  object  of  a  calculation  which  she  has
certainly  failed  to  follow,  and  of  which  she  gives  an  account  on
p.  350,  which  is  neither  correct  nor  intelligible.

I  could  multiply  instances  of  inaccuracy  and  misrepresentation,
also  of  the  use  of  misleading  phrases,  such  as  those  by  which  Miss
Tanner  seems  to  suggest  that  "  the  Psychical  Researchers  "  are  collec-
tively responsible  for  the  opinions  of  any  one  interested  in  Psychical
Research.  But  I  have,  I  think,  said  enough.  It  is  likely  enough
that  the  book  will  impress  those  who  derive  their  knowledge  of
the  evidence  discussed  from  it  alone ;  but  a  very  different  view  will
be  formed  by  those  who  are  able  to  check  Dr.  Tanner's  version  of
the  evidence  by  reference  to  the  original  sources.  As  Dr.  Tanner
is  a  professional  psychologist,  and  presumably  therefore  aims  at
learning  and  expounding  the  truth,  the  book  must  be  regarded
as  failing  in  its  object.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.


LXII.]


"  The  One-Horse  Dawn."


109


"  THE  ONE-HOESE  DA.WN:"

Additional  Note  on  an  Experiment  Described  in
"Proceedings,"  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  156-167.

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.

In  the  account  given  in  Proc.  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XX.,  of  an  attempt
made  by  my  husband  without  my  knowledge,  to  convey
to  my  script  three  Greek  words  occurring  in  a  passage  from
the  Orestes  of  Euripides  set  for  translation  in  the  Classical
Tripos  of  1873,  I  gave  what  I  believed  to  be  a  complete  list
of  the  allusions  in  my  script  to  that  experiment.  But  I
have  lately  found  what  appears  to  be  a  reference  to  the
context  of  the  words  fiovoircoXov  eg  aS>  and  to  the  name  of
the  play.

The  script  in  question  was  obtained  on  June  30,  1901,
between  what  I  had  regarded  as  the  first  and  second  refer-
ences to  the  "three  Greek  words"  (p.  387).  I  quote  here
the  relevant  part,  omitting  only  a  wholly  disconnected  intro-
ductory phrase  and  a  concluding  portion,  introduced  by  the
name  "  Gurney "  and  ended  by  the  signature  "  E.  Gy."  which
purports  to  represent  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  a  "  Sidgwiek-
control "  to  make  an  evidential  statement  about  a  MS.  play.1

Script  of  June  30,  1901. 9  p.m. Eiffel  Alp.

Facto  superposito  superpone  semper  quod  infacetum  viderit —
sic  in  cacumina  pervenies.  A-aprots  AapraS>7</>o/)w  .  arcton  stella
in  caelo  /3oott?v  sequitur.  fmm  in  originem  retro — SrjXrjnjpiov
Sekrov  a8eA<£os  8e\(f>iKr)  o/xt^y  xPWeTaL  ingenium  adhibe — pone
mentem  tuam,  interpretationem  caecam  veritatis  Dei. Ill  and

'See  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  279-280;  416  for  the  play;  305-307  for  the  form
of  signature,  "  E.  Gy."


110


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[PART


then  3  more,  put  nine  and  count  the  days  listen  that  night —
the  bird  will  come  1'  uccel  di  Dio.  in  the  everlasting
snows — you  cannot  fail  to  note. Peace  and  a  sword.

The  point  appears  to  lie  in  the  words  from  \apnrdg  to
Xp)'i<T€Tat.  They  follow  upon  a  general  instruction 1  to  "  go
on  superposing "  "  so  will  you  reach  the  height,"  and  precede
injunctions  to  apply  ingenuity  to  their  interpretation.  They
may  be  thus  represented  in  English :  "  a  torch  to  the  torch
bearer ;  Arcton  (Great  or  Little  Bear)  a  star  in  the  sky
follows  Bootes  (the  Charioteer).  A  river  back  to  its  source—
deleterion  (?)  of  a  tablet — a  brother  will  use  the  Delphic
voice."

Arcton  is  probably  a  slip  for  Arctos ;  in  any  case  the  next
sentence  makes  it  clear  that  the  intention  is  to  describe  a
reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  the  stars ;  Bootes,  the  Charioteer,
otherwise  Arcturus,  instead  of  following  the  Bear,  is  himself
followed  by  the  Bear.  This  idea  is  repeated  in  the  next
sentence ;  the  river  flows  back  to  its  source.  The  next  word
(S>i\i]T>'ipioi>)  certainly,  and  the  second  (SeXrov)  probably,'2  is
meaningless  and  may  merely  represent  a  feeling  after  the
following  words  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  57).  The  last  four
words,  however,  are  intelligible,  and  applicable  to  Orestes ;
Orestes  the  brother  of  Iphigenia  and  Electra,  did  carry  out
the  orders  of  the  "  Delphian  voice."  I  can  think  of  no  other
"  brother "  who  did  this.  Here,  then,  may  be  an  allusion  to
the  Orestes.

The  reversal  of  natural  phenomena  in  the  Orestes  describes
only  the  reversed  movement  of  the  sun.  The  script  introduces
two  instances.  The  first  closely  recalls  the  illustration  in  the
Orestes,  suggesting,  as  Euripides  does,  a  revolution  of  the  heavens
from  West  to  East.  I  have  found  no  classical  prototype  for
the  pursuit  of  Bootes  by  the  Bear.  The  second  illustration,
the  backward  flowing  of  a  river,  recalls  the  Chorus  in  the
Medea  (1.  409)  avw  7roTu/uun'  tepwv  ywpovo-i  -way at  (The  mystic
river-head  flows  upwards).

The  use,  however,  of  Latin  suggests  that  the  reminiscence  is

1  The  grammatical  forms  are  inaccurate,  and  precise  rendering  is  not  possible.

-This  may  refer  to  the  tablet  which  is  the  means  of  identifying  Orestes  as
the  brother  of  Iphigenia  in  the  I.  T.


LXII.]


"  The  One-Horse  Datvn."


Ill


rather  of  a  Latin  passage.  Ovid1  uses  the  same  image  twice
(Her.  v.  29  and  Trist.  ii.  8.  1).  In  the  passage  in  the  Tristia,
which  contains  two  of  the  words  introduced  into  the  script,
retro  and  flumina,  he  writes  not  only  of  the  backward-flowing
river  but  of  the  reversal  of  the  chariot  of  the  sun  :

"  In  caput  alta  suum  labentur  ab  aequore  retro
Flumina,  conversis  solque  recurret  equis,"

thus  recalling  the  reversed  movement  described  in  the  passage
of  the  Orestes,  /j.ov6irw>\ov  e?  dw.

The  words  Xufx-jra?  Xu/x7raS>]Cp6pto  '  a  torch  to  the  torch-
bearer  '  confusedly  recall  the  famous  simile  in  the  Agamemnon
(1.  324).  They  appear  to  me  to  belong  to  the  introductory
portion  of  the  script,  and,  like  the  remarks  about  "  super-
position," to  suggest  co-operation  of  some  sort.

But  the  reversal  of  natural  phenomena  and  the  brother  who
is  to  use  the  Delphian  voice  appear  to  relate  to  the  context  of
the  "  three  Greek  words  "  and  to  the  title  of  the  play.

The  appointment  which  the  script  made  was  not  kept,  and
no  "bird"  of  any  kind  had  a  chance  of  appearing  on  July  15,
1901.  But  in  the  later  attempts  from  August  13,  1901,
onwards,  to  guess  the  three  words,  a  cock  plays  a  large  part ;
an  "  incredible  bird "  also  appears  in  the  first  script  dealing
with  the  subject,  on  June  16,  1901,2  so  that  "the  bird"
constitutes  a  point  of  contact  with  other  scripts  containing
references  to  fxovoirwXov  e?  aw.

1  Quoted  in  Paley's  edition  of  the  Medea  of  Euripides.

2  A  "  cockyoly  bird  "  had  attracted  my  attention  in  the  script  of  May  11,  1901.
See  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  328-330.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXIII.

June,  1911.


I.

EVIDENCE  OF  CLASSICAL  SCHOLARSHIP  AND  OF
CROSS-CORRESPONDENCE  IN  SOME  NEW  AUTO-
MATIC WRITINGS.

BY  SIR  OLIVER  LODGE.

Introduction.

Membeks  of  the  Society  who  have  followed  the  subject  of  Cross-
correspondence  are  aware  that  in  recent  years  several  ladies,
some  of  them  previously  strangers  to  us,  have  proved  able  to
produce  script  containing  evidential  matter  which  purports  to
come  from  deceased  members  of  the  S.P.R.,  amon»  others  from
the  late  Mr.  Myers ;  and  one  of  these  ladies,  now  known  to  us
as  Mrs.  Willett,  seems  to  be  endowed  with  exceptional  power
and  productiveness,  though  no  report  of  her  work  has  yet  been
made  to  the  Society.

It  is  probable  that  eventually  a  Report  of  considerable  magni-
tude will  be  made  upon  this  case,  which  is  turning  out  to
be  important, but meanwhile  the present paper  deals  with

H


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


some  communications  which  I  have  had  with  Mrs.  Willett
through  the  post,  after  hearing  about  her  through  Mrs.  Verrall
and  seeing  some  of  the  material  which  she  had  produced.

Concerning  Mrs.  Willett  herself  the  following  statements
have  been  made  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  a  letter  to  me,  dated
23  February,  1910.

Statement  by  Mrs. Verrall  concerning  Mrs.  Willett.

She  is  not  a  member  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  has  never  seen  anj'
papers  whatever  in  proof.  She  knows  no  one  who  attends  meetings,
and  it  is  therefore  most  unlikely  that  she  should  even  know  the
names  of  papers  read  there,  and  impossible,  I  think,  that  she  should
know  anything  of  the  contents.  She  has,  however,  read  and  anno-
tated Mr.  Piddington's  paper  (Vol.  XXII.),  and  has  similarly  read
Miss  Johnson's  paper  (Vol.  XXL).

I  have  notes  stating  exactly  what  scripts  she  has  seen.1  .  .  .  When
I  stayed  with  her  in  January  last  ...  I  was  extremely  careful  to
say  nothing  about  any  of  the  recent  unpublished  papers  prepared
for  the  forthcoming  volume  of  Proceedings.  .  .  .

She  knows  that  there  have  been  cross-correspondences  between
Helen  and  me  in  England  and  Mrs.  Piper  in  America.  She  knows
absolutely  nothing  in  detail.  .  .  .

I  have  had  many  opportunities  of  checking  Mrs.  Willett's  accuracy
of  memory  and  statement,  and  have  always  found  it  very  marked.
She  is  an  excellent  witness  in  every  way,  and  her  own  statement
could,  I  feel  sure,  be  entirely  depended  upon.

So  much  for  Mrs.  Verrall's  statement  concerning  this  lady.

Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Eesearch  Officer  to  the  S.P.K.,  has  now
made  her  acquaintance,  and  has  formed  a  very  favourable
impression. Appended  is  her  first-hand  statement.

1  In  the  course  of  my  correspondence  with  Mrs.  Willett  I  found  that
references  to  her  had  been  made  in  the  scripts  of  other  automatists,  and
as  her  collaboration  was  helpful  in  the  elucidation  of  such  references,  I
have  sent  her  from  time  to  time  copies  of  my  daughter's  scripts  and  my  own,
as  well  as  of  some  parts  of  the  Mac  scripts  (now  published  in  Proc.  Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  -264).  It  will  be  seen  that  a  few  of  the  phrases  in  the  scripts
quoted  in  this  paper  are  derived  from  these  sources.  For  fuller  information
on  this  subject  see  my  supplementary  paper,  which  follows. — M.  de  G.  V.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Nexv  Script.  115


Miss  Johnsons  Statement  concerning  Mrs.  Willctt.

July  22nd,  1910.

I  was  introduced  by  Mrs.  Verrall  to  Mrs.  "Willett  in  the  early
part  of  this  year,  and  have  had  several  opportunities  of  talking  with
her  about  her  script  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  has  been
produced.  As  to  the  result  of  these  interviews,  I  concur  absolutely
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  opinion  expressed  above.  I  am  confident  that  Mrs.
Willett's  testimony  is  given  under  a  strict  sense  of  responsibility
and  with  ever}'  care  to  make  it  as  accurate  as  possible.  She  is  by
no  means  devoid  of  critical  faculty,  and  is,  I  think,  accurate  by
nature  in  regard  to  essentials  of  evidence.  I  should  without  hesita-
tion accept  any  statement  from  her  as  to  the  extent  of  her  normal
supraliminal  knowledge  of  topics  in  her  script,  and  I  believe  she  is
extremely  careful  to  give  whatever  information  she  possesses  that
would  bear  on  this  point,  or  on  the  equally  important  question  of
matters  that  mav  once  have  been  within  her  knowledge  and  since
forgotten.

Supplementary  Preliminary  Statement  by  0.  J.  L.

For  my  own  part  T  am  assured  not  only  of  Mrs.  "Willett's
good  faith,  and  complete  absence  of  anything  that  can  be  called
even  elementary  classical  knowledge,  but  also  of  the  scrupulous
care  and  fidelity  with  which  she  records  her  impressions,  and
reports  every  trace  of  normal  knowledge  which  seems  to  her
to  have  any  possible  bearing  upon  the  script.  We  are  able
in  fact  to  regard  her  as  a  colleague  in  the  research,  in  the
same  sort  of  way  that  we  are  able  to  regard  Mrs.  Holland.

I  may  also  emphasise  the  fact  that  the  scripts  dealt  with
below  were  copied,  and  the  copies  sent  to  me  at  once,  by  Mrs.
Willett.  Occasionally,  when  anything  seemed  specially  import-
ant, the  original  was  sent  to  me — either  with  or  without  a
copy ;  and  when  this  was  not  done,  the  original  was  always
deposited,  in  a  sealed  envelope,  with  some  responsible  person
living  in  another  house, — so  as  to  get  a  postmark  and  an
endorsement  of  receipt,  that  there  might  be  no  sort  of
mistake  or  question  about  the  date,  if  that  happened  to  turn
out  to  be  an  important  item.  This  is  a  good  precaution  to
take  in  such  cases,  when  possible  cross-correspondence  may  be


116


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART


anticipated,  and  when  the  writing  as  it  comes  is  largely  unin-
telligible to  the  automatist.

Edmund  Gurney  is  supposed  to  be  the  chief  communicator
or  manager  of  Mrs.  Willett's  automatism,  and  many  messages
come  from  him;  but  occasionally  we  are  told  that  "Myers"  is
in  touch  with  "  the  machine,"  and  some  episodes  connected
with  what  it  is  convenient  to  call  Myersw,  shall  be  narrated.

The  chief  portion  of  what  I  have  first  to  report  takes  its  origin
in  a  question  which  Mr.  Dorr,  of  Boston,  U.S.A.,  asked  of  a
Myers  control,  through  Mrs.  Piper,  in  America  in  March,  1908.

The  answers  then  and  there  received  have  been  studied  by
Mr.  Piddington,  were  found  to  be  of  singular  interest,  and  were
reported  on  by  him  to  a  private  meeting  of  the  Society  held
on  Oct.  28,  1909 — his  paper  being  read  to  the  meeting  by  Miss
Helen  Verrall.  At  this  date  Mrs.  Willett  was  living  in  a  remote
part  of  the  country  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
she  ever  saw  the  Journal  of  the  Society.  Moreover,  no  details
at  all  are  given  of  this  paper  in  the  Journal.  It  is  only
referred  to  (in  October  and  November,  1909)  under  the  title,
"  Some  Classical  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance,"  and  was  not
published  in  the  Proceedings  (Part  LX.)  until  April,  1910.

I  myself  had  heard  of  the  paper  beforehand  and  had  read
parts  of  it ;  so  in  September  it  occurred  to  me  that  it  would
be  instructive  to  ask  the  Myers-like  influence  operating  through
Mrs.  Willett  the  very  same  question  as  had  been  asked  of  the
Myers  control  working  through  Mrs.  Piper.  At  this  period  I
had  not  had  first-hand  experience  of  Mrs.  Willett's  phenomena,
though  I  had  made  her  acquaintance  in  London  on  the  17th  of
May,  1909;  but  inasmuch  as  the  character  of  the  "Myers"
communications  coming  through  her  had  favourably  impressed
me,  I  wrote  with  some  care  to  her  on  28  Sept.,  1909,  enclos-
ing a  question  in  a  sealed  envelope  for  her  to  open  at  any
convenient  time  when  it  seemed  likely  that  script  would  be
forthcoming.

Letter  from  0.  J.  L.  to  Mrs.  Willett,  dated  28th  Sept.  1909.

I  want  to  ask  F.  W.  H.  M.  a  question  a  projws  of  nothing,  and
propose  to  enclose  it  for  you  to  use  when  you  have  an  opportunity.
It  is  a  very  short  one,  but  more  important  than  it  will  sound.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  117
It  may  be  best  not  to  open  it  till  you  feel  ready  to  communicate

it.

The  answer  may  take  some  time  before  it  is  complete,  but  a
record  of  everything  said,  gibberish  or  otherwise, — perhaps  especially
on  the  first  occasion — may  be  important.

The  envelope  enclosed  in  this  letter  of  mine  to  Mrs.  Willett
was  stuck  up  and  endorsed  by  me  as  intended  for  F.  W.  H.  M.
through  Mrs.  Willett,  under  date  29  Sept.,  1909.

It  happened  that  she  was  not  doing  any  automatic  writing
at  this  time,  and  therefore  did  not  open  the  envelope  till
some  months  later.  It  was  subsequently  returned  to  me  at
my  request  for  inspection,  and  on  the  tongue  is  now  written
in  Mrs.  Willett's  writing  :

"  Opened  by  me
Feb.  4,  1910


The  sheet  of  paper  enclosed  in  the  envelope  runs  as  follows:

Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  29  Sept.  1909.

My  dear  Myers,  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question — not  an  idle  one.
What  does  the  word  Lethe  suggest  to  you?
It  may  be  that  you  will  choose  to  answer  piece-meal  and  at
leisure. There  is  no  hurry  about  it. Oliver  Lodge.

My  object  of  course  was  to  see  whether  what  we  may  call
the  "  Willett-Myers "  could  exhibit  a  train  of  recollection
similar  to  that  of  the  "  Piper-Myers,"  when  stimulated  by  one
and  the  same  question.  And  the  circumstances  were  such  that
even  if  identically  the  same  train  of  memories  were  tapped —
which  on  any  hypothesis  was  improbable — the  evidence  would
be  good  for  something  supernormal,  though  in  that  case  it
might  have  to  be  assumed  that  the  supernormality  was  limited
to  telepathy  from  the  living.

But  the  answers  that  I  got  through  Mrs.  Willett  were  supple-
mentary to,  and  by  no  means  identical  with,  those  obtained
through  Mrs.  Piper.  They  contain  a  common  element,  and  in
my  judgement  are  characteristic  of  the  same  personality,  but
they  are  not  identical.


118


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


In  speaking  for  the  moment  of  "  the  same  personality,"  I
must  guard  against  the  supposition  that  I  regard  the  Piper-
Myers,  the  Willett-Myers,  the  Verrall-Myers,  the  Holland-
Myers,  as  all  exactly  the  same.  On  the  assumption  that  they
all  include  something  of  a  real  "  Myers,"  the  mixed  or  com-
pound personalities  should  all  contain  a  common  element,  and
this  common  element  may  he  dominant  or  recessive,  according
to  circumstances ;  but  on  any  hypothesis  we  must  expect  the
messages  as  we  receive  them  to  be  more  or  less  sophisti-
cated by  the  instrument  through  which  the  communications
are  made.  The  personalities  would  probably  differ,  as  Miss
Johnson  has  clearly  pointed  out  (Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  262),
somewhat  as  chemical  compounds  may  differ  when  they  all
contain  a  common  element.  In  no  case  do  we  get  the  Myers
element  pure  and  undiluted.  Sometimes  it  comes  out  more
clearly  than  at  others,  but  it  must  surely  be  influenced  by
the  material  channel  through  which  it  conveys  its  intelligence
—especially  j^erhaps  as  regards  the  literary  form  which  the
communications  take, — and  we  may  expect  that  the  range  of
"  Myers "  reminiscences  which  can  be  tapped  by  such  means
must  be  limited,  or  at  least  curbed  to  some  extent  in  power
of  expression,  by  the  range  of  memory  and  association — or
as  some  might  say  by  the  brain  deposit — of  the  person  through
whom  the  answers  are  obtained.

In  the  case  of  an  entranced  medium,  like  Mrs.  Piper,  I
should  anticipate  that  more  complete  control  could  be  exer-
cised, and  that  the  inevitable  sophistication  would  be  less —
when  the  conditions  are  favourable — than  with  a  medium
not  entranced ;  and  it  may  thus  be  possible  sometimes,  and
with  difficulty,  to  get  recorded  words  or  signs  alien  to  the
mind  of  the  automatist ; — who  indeed  is  then,  I  am  inclined
to  think,  not  so  much  an  automatist  influenced  tele-
pathically,  as  an  automaton  or  agency  or  machine  "  possessed  "
for  the  time  by  some  experienced  and  managing  "  control,"
who  operates  dynamically  or  telcrgically.  That  at  any  rate
seems  a  legitimate  working  hypothesis ;  but  in  all  probability
the  grades  and  shades  of  mediumship  are  very  various,  and
for  my  own  part  I  have  not  found  any  two  precisely  alike.
With  more  experience  we  shall  be  able  to  classify  them,  I
expect ; but  the  classes  will  probably,  as  usual,  shade  off  into


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  119

each  other,  and  there  will  be  no  clear  lines  or  boundaries  of
demarcation.

It  is  becoming  clear  to  me  that  when  communications  are
being  sent,  in  such  cases  as  those  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland,
and  Mrs.  Willett,  the  process  consists  in  a  kind  of  selection
rather  than  in  creation  or  origination.  Original  thoughts  may
sometimes  be  passed  through,  but  the  easiest  method  is  to  find
in  the  mind  or  perhaps  in  the  brain  of  the  medium  some  deposit
of  reminiscence  which  can  be  evoked  or  stimulated,  and  which
can  convey  approximately  something  like  the  idea  required.  It
does  not  appear  to  be  at  all  easy  to  impress  people  with
meaningless  or  foreign  words  or  sentences,  but  reservoirs  of
partial  knowledge  can,  it  appears,  be  tapped  sometimes  and
utilised  in  such  a  way  that  an  intelligent  and  patient  reader
can  clearly  make  out  the  underlying  meaning  and  connexion,
from  what  is  "  got  through."

But  on  this  hypothesis  it  is  manifestly  natural  that  the
associations  expressed  through  different  channels  shall  be
differently  worded,  shall  fall  into  different  groups,  and  shall  be
very  far  from  being  identical  in  phrase  and  detail.  Part  of
these  differences  may  be  reasonably  attributed  to  an  intelligent
desire  of  the  control  to  avoid  direct  telepathy,  or  any  appearance
of  direct  telepathy,  between  the  automatists.  But  another  part
may  I  think  be  reasonably  attributed  to  the  fundamental
difficulties  grouped  round  the  subject,  and  to  the  conditions
under  which  alone  communications  of  this  kind  are  possible.

A  statement  made  by  Myersw  is  of  interest  in  this  connexion.
He  recognises  that  the  use  of  different  automatists  to  convey
a  single  idea  necessitates  attention  to  various  forms  or  modes
of  expressing  that  idea;  for  in  a  Willett  script  of  Feb.  10,
1910  (reported  more  fully  in  Part  II.  below),  occur  the  words:

That  I  have  to  use  different  scribes  means  that  I  must  show
different  aspects  of  thought,  underlying  which  unity  is  to  be  found.1

For  a  further  discussion  of  this  matter,  the  section  in  Miss
Johnson's  paper  below  on  "  The  Principle  of  Selection  in  the
Production  of  Scripts "  may  be  referred  to.

llt  will  he  observed  that  the  Willett  script,  like  that  of  Airs.  Holland,  uses
the  word  "scribe"  in  the  sense  of  automatist.


120


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


PART  I.

CONCERNING  THE  SCRIPT  OF  4  FEBRUARY,  1910.
Chap.  I. The  Lethe-Dork  Episode  in  Willett  Script.

I  will  first  briefly  summarise  the  answers  which  were  given
to  Mr.  Dorr's  question  about  Lethe,  when  first  addressed  to
the  Myers  control  through  Mrs.  Piper  in  America,  and  then
I  will  reproduce  and  fully  discuss  the  answers  which  were
given  to  the  same  question  when  put  by  me  to  the  communicator
through  Mrs.  Willett  in  this  country.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  object  of  the  interrogator  in  the
two  cases  somewhat  differed.  Mr.  Dorr's  object  was  to  stimulate
the  classical  interest,  and  tap  the  classical  and  literary  reminis-
cences, of  the  Piper-Myers.  Hence  he  asked  many  questions,  of
which  that  concerning  Lethe  was  one.  Whereas  my  object  was
chiefly  to  ascertain  whether  the  Willett-Myers  could  show  any
recollection  of  the  previous  question,  and  whether  it  would
give  at  all  similar  answers.  In  the  result  I  may  say  at  once
that  a  recollection  of  Mr.  Dorr  as  having  been  associated  with
this  question  was  clearly  indicated  ;  and  I  may  further  say  that
the  answers  obtained  in  the  two  cases,  though  they  both
si  lowed  remarkable  classical  knowledge  decidedly  beyond  that  of
the  questioner,  did  not  on  the  whole  relate  to  the  same  topics.
In  answer  to  this  particular  question,  MyersP  referred  mainly  to
incidents  narrated  by  Ovid, — Myersw  mostly  to  subjects  treated
of  by  Virgil ;  though  undoubtedly  both  controls  showed  a
familiarity  with  Virgil,  as  well  as  with  other  literature.  And
in  some  cases  there  was  an  overlapping  of  reminiscence  of  a
very  appropriate  and  remarkable  kind.

To  give  any  adequate  idea  of  the  force  and  meaning  of  all
the  allusions  will  need  a  detailed  analysis,  such  as  has  already
been  performed  in  Part  LX.  (Vol.  XXIV.)  and  in  other  volumes
of  the  Proceedings  by  those  who  have  written  the  papers  con-
tained therein.  Every  such  analysis  involves  labour,  as  well
as  knowledge  and  ingenuity,  and  I  am  glad  to  say  that  Mrs.
Verrall  will  supplement  my  paper  by  an  analysis  of  this  kind,
applied  to  two  of  the  Willett  scripts.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  121


The  answers  to  the  Lethe  question  obtained  through  Mrs.
Piper  are  now  published  in  Part  LX.  (March,  1910)  of  the
Proceedings  (Vol.  XXIV.).  They  contain  references  to  "  cave,"
"  Olympus,"  "  Iris,"  "  flowery  banks,"  "  Somnus,"  "  Morpheus,"
"  Ceyx,"  •  and  "  poppies,"  all  of  which  are  explained  by  Mr.
Piddington  as  reminiscences  of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  Book  XI.

They  also,  however,  contain  the  word  "  Sibyl."  which  suggests
a  Virgilian  connexion  with  Lethe ;  for  it  was  in  the  company
of  the  Sibyl  of  Cumse  that  ^Eneas  saw  the  river  of  Lethe
flowing  by  the  Elysian  fields.

Other  classical  references  from  the  same  and  the  preceding-
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses  were  likewise  given  to  Mr.  Dorr
through  Mrs.  Piper  in  connexion  with  his  Lethe  question, —
involving  such  names  as  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  Pygmalion,
Hyacinthus.  The  real  intention  of  none  of  these  references
was  understood  by  Mr.  Dorr  at  the  time,  as  is  clear  from  his
own  contemporary  comments  upon  them.1

Willett  Script.

I  shall  now  give  the  answers  which  were  written  through
Mrs.  Willett's  hand,  when  she,  in  solitude,  on  Eeb.  4,  1910,
had  opened  my  question  and  read  it  (so  to  speak)  to  the
intelligence  which  at  the  time  was  controlling  her  hand  and
producing  automatic  writing.

I  must  first  explain  that  in  the  automatic  writings  of  Mrs.
Willett,  the  name  of  the  ostensible  communicator  not  only
comes  at  the  beginning,  but  is  repeated  at  intervals  throughout
the  script.  The  object  of  this  repetition  of  the  name  is  not
quite  clear,  but  it  seems  to  be  a  plan  adopted  of  fixing  the
communicator's  own  attention  to  the  matter  in  hand  ;  while  it
occasionally  serves  as  a  sort  of  punctuation-mark  or  break,  like  a
full  stop  or  the  beginning  of  a  new  paragraph.  It  also  has
the  effect  of  keeping  constantly  before  us  the  identity  of  the
ostensible  communicator ;  but  in  reading  it  is  best  to  ignore
most  of  these  interruptions.

1  In  her  paper  below  Mrs.  Verrall  gives  summarised  details  concerning  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  during  December,  1908,  and  March,  1909, —
which  are  dates  later  than  those  of  the  sittings  dealt  with  in  Mr.  Piddington's
paper.


122


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART


The  writing  of  the  script  is  legible  enough.  Unlike  Mrs.
Piper's,  but  like  much  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  it  is  continuous,  the
words  all  running  together.  The  hand-writm"  does  not  seem
to  me  to  be  like  any  one's  in  particular :  it  is  large  and  feature-
less. I  have  at  a  later  stage  seen  this  script  being  pro-
duced ;  it  is  rapidly  written,  and  appears  to  come  quite
automatically.  Occasionally  it  contains  remarks  addressed  to
the  automatist  herself,  such  as  "take  a  fresh  pen,"  "let  the
hand  go,"  "  don't  scrawl,"  etc.,  etc.

In  sending  me  the  script,  Mrs.  Willett  accompanied  it  by  a
letter  written  on  the  same  clay  and  posted  on  the  next,  which
ran  thus :

I  opened  your  sealed  envelope,  No.  1,  to-day  during  the  script
which  I  now  send.  It  is  the  most  "scrappy"  sc.  I  ever  had,  and
the  first  in  which  a  word  is  printed  (it  took  some  time  to  do)  ;
the  printed  word  is  "PEAK."  The  script  seems  full  of  bits  from
other  scs.  or  poems.  I  feel  like  sending  you  the  sc.  itself,  so  1
have  marked  off  the  words  with  a  red  pencil,  and  I  also  send  a  cop}'
ami  notes  of  what  I  know  of  the  quotations — but  the  sc.,  as  a  whole,
suggests  nothing  much  to  me — I  only  hope  it  may  to  you.1

Script  of  Feb.  4.

Here  is  the  Script  in  as  near  facsimile  as  ordinary  printing
can  make  it,  the  two  portions  in  parentheses  near  the  begin-
ning beins;  the  words  of  Mrs.  Willett  herself:

(Scribble)

Myers  yes  I  am  here
I  am  now  ready  to  deal
with  the  question  from  Lodge
Before  you  open  the  envelope
reread  his  letter  to  you
the  one  that  accompanied
the  letter  to  me

(I  did  so —

"  I  want  to  ask  F.W.H.M.  a  question  a  propos  of  nothing,  and
propose  to  enclose  it  for  you  to  use  when  you  have  an  opportunity.
It  is  a  very  short  one,  but  more  important  than  it  will  sound.  It

1  See  Appendices  A  and  B,  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  Supplementary  Paper.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Neiu  Script.  123


may  be  best  not  to  open  it  till  you  feel  ready  to  communicate  it.
The  answer  may  take  some  time  before  it  is  complete,  but  a  record
of  everything  said,  gibberish  or  otherwise, — perhaps  especially  on
the  first  occasion — may  be  important."

The  script  continued)

Yes  now  open  the  Question  |  the  envelope  containing  the  question
(I  did  so  and  read  it  through  twice

"  My  dear  Myers,  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question — not  an  idle  one.
What  does  the  word  Lethe  suggest  to  you?
It  may  be  that  you  will  choose to  answer piece-meal  and  at
leisure. There  is  no  hurry  about  it. Oliver  Lodge."

The  script  began  at  once)

Myers  the  Will  again  to  live

the  Will  again  to  live  the

River  of  forgetfulness

not  reincarnation

Once  only  does  the  soul

descend  the  way  that  leads

to  incarnation  the  blending

of  the  Essence  with  the

instrument  Myers  tu  Marcellus

Eris  you  know  that  line

you  [Mrs.  Willett]

T  mean

Write  it  nevertheless  and  add

Henry  Sidgwicks

In  Valle  Redueta

Add  too  the  Doves  and  the

Golden  Bough  amid  the

Shadows  add  too

Go  not  to  Lethe

Myei  s

Myers  there  was  the  door  to
which  I  found  no  key
and  Haggi  Babba  too
This  is  disconnected  but  not
meaningless  the  shining  souls

shining  by  the  river  brim The  pain  forgotten  but  there
is  another  meaning  another


124-


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


more  intimate  link  and  connection

that  now  I  cannot  give

it  does  not  escape  me  I  see

the  bearing  Rose  fluttering  rose  leaves  blown

like  ghosts  from  an  enchanter

fleeing  Myers  and  Love

Love  the  essential  essence

not  spilt  like  water  on

the  ground  far  off  forgotten

pain not not (A  break  and  pause  here)

Darien  the  Peak

in  Darien  the  Peak

Peak  PEAK (Another  pause)

m  Myers  I  have  not  done  yet
to  Lodge  this  may  have  meaning
to  Lodge  this  may  have  meaning
Let  him  remember  the  occasion
Myers  I  am  not  vague
I  am  not  vague

I  want  an  answer  to  this to  this
Script  from  Lodge
Myers  tell

him  I  want  an  answer
Does  he  recognise  my  recognition
Does  he  recognise  my  recognition
Myers pause (did  so) Let  Lodge  speak  (?)
speak  let  him  speak
Myers  enough  for  to-day  Myers
let  Lodge  speak
F.

(End  of  Feb. 4  Script.)

Some  notes  accompanied  this  script  when  sent  to  me,
indicating  the  amount  of  Mrs.  Willett's  normal  knowledge ;
these  will  be  referred  to  in  Appendix  A.

Now,  I  have  to  confess  with  some  shame,  though  the  fact  of
my  ignorance  really  improves  the  evidence,  that,  at  the  time,
these  various  literary  references  did  not  seem  to  me  at  all  satis-
factory as  an  answer  to  my  question  ;  and  I  sent  a  message,  to


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Neiv  Script.  125

be  read  to  Myersw  at  some  future  time,  saying  that  I  expected
something  better. (See  Appendix  B.)

But  gradually  I  have  perceived,  partly  with  the  help  of
explanatory  notes  by  Mr.  Piddington  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  and
partly  by  my  own  reading,  that  the  answers  are  admirable ;
as  I  will  later  on  endeavour  to  explain.

Meanwhile,  however,  on  the  very  next  day  (February  5th),
and  therefore  before  I  had  been  made  aware  of  the  existence
of  the  script  of  Feb.  4,  Mrs.  Willett  was  conscious  of  a  special
effort  being  made,  and  she  obtained  a  remarkable  script,  con-
cerning the  coming  of  which  she  makes  the  statement  annexed  :

Statement  by  Mrs.  Willett  concerning  her  reception  of  the
script  of  February  5th,  a  facsimile  and  a  transcription  of  which
follow.

5  Feb.,  1910.

Note  about  6.10  p.m.  I  came  downstairs  from  resting  and
suddenly  felt  I  was  getting  very  dazed  and  light-headed  with  a
hot  sort  of  feeling  on  the  back  of  my  neck — I  was  looking  at  the
Times  newspaper — I  did  not  think  of  script  until  I  felt  my  hands
being  as  it  were  drawn  together — I  could  not  seem  to  keep  them
apart  and  the  feeling  got  worse — and  with  a  sort  of  rush  I  felt
compelled  to  get  writing  materials  and  sit  clown,  though  [people]
were  in  the  room  and  I  have  never  tried  for  Sc.  except  alone
(with  the  exception  of  the  time  with  Mrs.  V.).  The  enclosed  Sc.
came — the  most  untidy  Sc.  I  ever  had — a  long  pause  after  the
word  "spell  it."

After  the  sheet  (1)  I  thought  the  Sc.  was  finished  and  began  in  a
few  minutes  to  copy  it  out  when  I  felt  my  hands  "  going  "  again  and
took  another  sheet  (2)  when  some  more  Sc.  came.

I  am  giving  the  original  Script  and  this  note  to  now,

as  I  do  not  feel  a  copy  can  be  made  of  the  writing,  some  of  which
is  unlike  any  I  ever  had.

I  still  feel  very  dazed  and  uncomfortable.  The  Sc.  has  no
meaning  whatever  to  me. I  take  the  word  in  large  letters  to  be

Dorr,

and  this  I  know  is  the  name  of  some  man  in  America  concerning
whom  Mrs.  Verrall  sent  a  message  [to  the  Willett  communicators]
in  the  summer  to  say  that  his  sittings  (with  Mrs.  Piper,  I  think)
had  brought  good  evidence — I  know  she  has  written  a  paper  about


126


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


these  sittings  —  but  I  know  nothing  whatever  about  them,  nor
about  the  person  named  "Dorr,"  except  that  he  exists,  and  is
American.

P.S. — As  there  is  no  post  out  from  here  after  6.30  (the  Sc.  finished
at  6.25  p.m.  and  I  looked  at  the  clock  at  once)  and  this  cannot  catch
it  as  post-box  is  some  minutes  walk  away,  I  am  giving  the  Sc.  and
notes  to  [a  relative]  so  that  the  date  may  be  attested,  in  case  it  has
any  importance — and  he  will  keep  the  envelope  and  post  it  to  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  to-morrow.

[This  carefulness  suggests  subliminal  stimulus  or  planning,
in  order  to  prevent  any  such  direct  telepathy  from  me  as
might  be  stimulated  by  the  reception  of  the  Feb.  4  script.
I  did  not  receive  that  first  script  till  Feb.  6.  The  portion
written  now, on  Feb.  5,  I  received  on  Feb.  7. 0.  J.  L.]

Copy  of  Sc.  of  5  February,  1910,  ended  6.25  p.m.

You  felt  the  call  it  I  it  is  I  who  write  Myers.  I  need  urgently
to  say  this  tell  Lodge  this  word  Myers  Myers  get  the  word  I
will  spell  it (scribbles) Myers yes  the  word  (1)  is  DORR

[end  of  sheet  1]

We  (?) H (scribbles,  perhaps  M)
Myers  the  word  is
(Scribbles) D  DORR
Myers  enough

F  [end  of  sheet  2]

In  reply  to  this  0.  J.  L.  wrote  to  Mrs.  Willett  herself,,
as  follows :

7  Feb.  1910.

This  is  just  a  line  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  the  script  through
your  friend  this  morning  and  to  say  that  the  word  communicated
has  a  meaning  and  a  good  one. I  will  say  no  more.

Facsimile  of  short  Script  received  from  Mrs. Willett  on
5  February,  1910.

After  the  first  sheet  had  coine  it  appeared  to  have  finished,
and  she  was  beginning  to  copy  it  when  she  felt  another  impulse,,
and  the  second  sheet  came.  The  point  of  interest  is  the
exceptional  mode  of  obtaining  the  word  Dorr.

Now  it  is  manifest  that  this  obtaining  of  the  word  Dorr  as  an


v  u


/■


/\Kir


i  1  /PI


u  4

f ,  i

lw thy

1  w

{  y

If) /j  j

¥  U

r

//


p.  120.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Nexv  Script.  127


.  answer  to  the  question  "  What  does  Lethe  suggest  to  you  ? "  is
specially  noteworthy,  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  classical  or  literary
association  about  it  that  could  be  drawn  from  memory  :  it  could
be  nothing  but  sheer  information,  obtained  either  telepathically
from  some  member  of  the  S.P.E.  or  as  part  of  the  recollection
of  a  Myers  personality.  Xo  connexion  in  fact  exists  between
Lethe  and  Dorr,  except  the  fact,  unknown  to  Mrs.  Willett,  that
a  Mr.  Dorr  of  Boston  had  asked  a  Myers  control,  through  the
entranced  Mrs.  Piper,  a  question  about  Lethe — the  same
question  as  the  one  which  I  now  addressed  to  what  purported
to  be  the  same  personality  communicating  through  Mrs.  Willett.

Miss  Johnson  informs  me  that  Part  LX.  of  Proceedings,  though
dated  March,  1910,  was  not  issued  from  the  printer  till  April  9,
also  that  she  posted  a  special  copy  to  Mrs.  AVillett  on  April  19.
Before  that  date  Mrs.  Willett  was  entirely  in  ignorance  of  the
answers  which  Mr.  Dorr  had  obtained  through  Mrs.  Piper,  and
indeed  of  the  fact  that  any  such  question  had  been  put.

Further  references  to  this  matter,  emphasising  the  importance
of  it  as  seen  from  "  the  other  side,"  appear  in  later  scripts.

On  February  10th,  1910,  for  instance,  the  script  begins  as
follows :

Myers  yes I  am ready I know what Lodge  WANTS  he
wants  to  prove  that  I  have  access  to  knowledge  shown  elsewhere
Myers.

[Then  after  a  few  literary  references  it  goes  on  :]

Dorr's  scheme  excellent  Myers  that  I  have  to  use  different
scribes  means  that  I  must  show  different  aspects  of  thought
underlying  which  Unity  is  to  be  found.1

The  first  intimation  that  the  normal  and  supraliminal  Mrs.
Willett  had  of  the  real  meaning  of  the  name  Dorr  in  this
connexion  was  through  Part  LX.  of  the  Proceedings  S.P.E.,  con-
taining Mr.  Piddington's  paper.  This  was  received  by  her  for
the  first  time  on  20th  April,  1910,  as  she  thus  reported  to
me  on  April  2  9  th,  1910  :

Miss  Alice  Johnson  sent  me  the  last  Proceedings.  I  have  only
had  time  to  glance  through  part  of  it — but  you  can  imagine  my
surprise  when  I  caught  sight  of  the  words

Lethe  .  .  .  Dorr.

JAs  noted  above,  the  word  "scribe"  is  used  in  the  sense  of  automatist.


128


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


I  could  hardly  believe  my  eyes.  And  I  think  I  see  parts  of  my
Script  about  Lethe  have  links  with  the  answers  through  Mrs.  Piper.

This  is  a  tremendous  encouragement  to  me,  for  'they'  are  ofcen  so
puzzling  and  confusing  that  I  get  fits  of  discouragement  about  the
value  of  my  script.

In  any  communications  subsequent  to  this  date,  April  20,
1910,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  newly-published  Part
LX.  has  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett.

Subsequent  references  in,  Willett  Scrijrt,  to  the  Dorr- Lethe  episode.
On  May  1st,  1910,  the  following  came  from  Myersw :

I  laboured  terribly  to  get  clear  with  Dorr.  The  same  plan  might
be  carried  out  with  more  intelligence  and  less  confusion  to  trance
personalities.  That  is  the  difficulty.  If  the  sitter  has  not  got  the
knowledge  which  makes  the  matter  intelligible,  he  blunders  in  and
as  it  were  alters  the  "  points,"  switching  the  trains  on  to  wrong
points.  But  if  on  the  other  hand  the  sitter  has  got  the  knowledge,
then  you  will  say  that  it  is  merely  subliminal  Piper  groping  about
in  the  mind  of  the  sitter. Those  are  the  horns.

Quite  true ;  and  of  the  two  horns  I  prefer  the  former.

But  this  Dorr  episode  was  not  quite  finished  with,  even
now;  for  on  June  5th,  1910,  I  received  the  following  script
by  post  from  Mrs.  Willett  :

Pluto  and  Bees
Re  Lethe

I  said  there  was  a  pun  somewhere

I  meant  in  my  own  Sc  not  in  Plu  (scribble)  not  in  either  plato
or  others  I  Myers  made  a  pun  I  got  in  a  WORD  I  wanted
by  wrapping  it  up  in  a  QUOTATION

Later  I  got  the  WORD  itself  after  an  effort  which  disturbed
my  Machine  and  which  Gurney  deprecated  as  being  an  exp
exemplification  of  the  End  justifies  the  Means  Gurney  tell  me
Lodge  can  you  find  it  now  Myers  I  got  the  WORD  in  by  choosing
a  quotation  in  which  it  occurs  and  which  was  known  to  the
Normal  Intelligence  of  my  Machine Write  the  word  Selection

Who  selects  my  friend  Piddington?

I  address  this  question  to  Piddington Who  Selects.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  129


Some  expansion  of  this  important  topic  of  "  selection  "  will
be  found  in  a  paper  on  the  subject  by  Miss  Johnson  below,
p.  282.

The  statement  about  the  pun  had  come  in  a  script  of  March
7th,  1910,  before  Mrs.  W.  had  received  Part  LX.  of  Proceedings,
in  this  way :

Write  again  the  Nightingale
1  want  that  seen  to 1

Pluto  not  not  Plato  this  time  but  PLUTO
Bees  Bees  the  hum  of  Bees

Myers  there  was  a  pun  but  I  do  not  want  to  say  where.

We  had  taken  this  to  refer  to  some  classical  pun,  and  I
had  a  long  and  fruitless  hunt  for  it.  The  script  of  June  5th,
1910,  which  I  have  already  quoted,  was  in  answer  to  a  written
statement  about  my  failure  to  find  a  pun  in  connexion  with
either  Bees  or  Pluto  or  Lethe.  The  explanation  given  on
June  5th  clearly  showed  me  what  pun  was  intended,  especially
when  taken  in  connexion  with  the  following  communication
which  had  come  on  May  6th,  1910:

Edmund  Gurney  Tell  Lodge  I  don't  want  this  to  develop  into
trance. You  have  got  that,  we  are  doing  something  new.

[It  then  went  on  to  say  that  the  method  now  usuallj'  employed
was  telepathic,  not  telergic,  and  added — ].

If  you  want  to  see  the  labour  of  getting  anything  telergic  done
here  [you]  can  see  the  word  Dorr.

That  word  had  to  bo  given  in  that  wa37,  after  efforts  had  been
made  to  convey  it  telepathically  without  success.

It  was  a  great  strain  on  both  sides.

We  don't  want  to  move  any  atoms  in  the  brain  directly.

Very  well  then,  the  meaning  clearly  is  that  the  pun  was  in
connexion  with  the  word  "  Dorr " ;  that  is  to  say,  the  word
"Dorr"  had  first  been  given  as  part  of  a  quotation  familiar

1  The  Nightingale  was  mentioned  on  Feb.  10,  1910,  in  the  second  Lethe
script,  quoted  below,  p.  148,  and  was  at  once  identified  as  Keats'  "  Nightiugale  "
(p.  158).  The  desire  expressed  by  Myers,v  to  have  it  again  written  and  "seen
to"  suggests  that  at  this  time  the  whole  point  had  not  been  apprehended;  and
in  fact  the  complete  associations  with  the  word  were  not  worked  out  till  con-
siderably after  March  7,  1910  (see  below,  p.  159,  and  Mrs.  Vertall's  paper,
pp.  206-9).

I


130


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


to  the  automatist,  though  inasmuch  as  it  would  probably  not
in  that  form  be  recognised,  it  was  given  next  day  with
special,  almost  unjustifiable,  effort,  in  a  quite  exceptional
manner,  so  as  to  get  it  clearly  and  unmistakably  recorded
the  day  after  the  envelope  containing  the  question  had  been
opened.

I  naturally  looked  back,  therefore,  to  see  what  familiar
quotation  was  intended,  in  the  script  that  had  come  immediately
after  the  envelope  had  been  opened  (Feb.  4),  and  it  quite
plainly  was  the  following :

Go  not  to  Lethe  Myers

Myers  there  was  the  door  to  which  I  found  no  key  and  Haggi
Babba  too

This  is  disconnected  but  not  meaningless.

The  introduction  "  Go  not  to  Lethe "  (from  Keats 's  Ode
to  Melancholy — quoted  also  in  a  script  of  Miss  Helen  Verrall's
of  Nov.  5,  1908,  which  Mrs.  Willett  had  seen — )  is  employed
here,  1  presume,  merely  as  a  quotational  way  of  switching
the  subject  straight  back  to  Lethe  before  introducing  the  word
required  to  be  given  in  answer  to  the  question  "  What
does  Lethe  suggest  to  you."  The  answer  intended  is  that
one  of  the  suggestions  conveyed  by  the  word  Lethe  was  the
recollection  of  Mr.  Dorr,  who  in  America  had  asked  precisely
the  same  question  through  Mrs.  Piper.  And  the  mode  of  trans-
mission adopted,  in  order  to  get  this  meaningless  name  recorded,
is  by  stimulating  the  automatist  to  reproduce  a  familiar  quota-
tion from  Omar  Khayyam — "  There  was  the  door  to  which  I
found  no  key."

By  "  Haggi  Babba  "  I  understand  an  attempt  at  Ali  Baba,  of
Ali  Baba  and  the  Forty  Thieves,  and  a  reference  to  the  door  of
"  Open  Sesame."  But  whether  or  not  that  is  so,  the  pun  is
clearly  on  the  woi'd  "  door,"  showing  that  an  effort  was  made
to  give  this  sort  of  key-word  on  the  very  first  occasion  the
question  had  been  seen  (Feb.  4);  though  it  was  not  till  the
next  day  that  it  could  be  given,  by  special  effort,  in  an  unmis-
takable, properly  spelt,  and  clearly  recognisable  fashion.

For  further  information,  see  Mrs.  Verrall's  supplementary
paper,  below.

(End,  of  "  Dorr  "  erpisode.)


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  131


Chap,  II. Lethe  and  "  The  Will  to  live."

I  now  take  the  more  literary  references  in  this  same  piece
of  Willett  script  recorded  above,  p.  123,  as  produced  on  4th
Feb.,  1910,  and  quote  them  in  order.

The  first  answer,  given  directly  the  question  had  been  read,
was :

The  Will  again  to  live the  Will  again  to  live
the  River  of  forgetfulness.

Now,  to  any  one  familiar  with  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  JEneid
(as  I  regret  to  say  I  then  was  not,  though  perhaps  for
evidential  reasons  my  ignorance  was  in  this  case  useful),
"  the  Will  again  to  live "  is  an  admirable  sentence  to  be  sug-
gested by  the  idea  of  Lethe.  For  it  is  when  iEneas,  while
visiting  the  Underworld  in  company  with  Anchises,  sees  the
river  of  Lethe,  that  he  also  sees  mustering  on  its  banks  the
souls  who  have  been  purified  from  the  stains  of  their  former
existence,  and  who  are  destined  to  live  on  earth  once  more.
They  assemble  on  the  banks,  like  bees  humming  round  lilies,
waiting  until  their  turn  comes  to  drink  the  water  of  forget-
fulness  so  that  they  may  wish  for  a  new  terrestrial  existence.

This  is  a  famous  passage  of  Virgil,  and  has  been  translated
by  Myers  himself  in  his  Essay  on  Virgil  (Classical  Essays,
p.  174):

"  And  last  to  Lethe's  stream  on  the  ordered  day,
These  all  God  summoneth  in  great  array  ;
Who  from  that  draught  reborn,  no  more  shall  know
Memory  of  past  or  dread  of  destined  woe,
But  all  shall  there  the  ancient  pain  forgive,
Forget  their  life,  and  will  again  to  live."

Thus  the  actual  words,  "  will  again  to  live,"  occur  in
connexion  with  Lethe  in  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  poem  ;  and  these
words,  it  must  be  noted,  had  not  long  ago  caught  the  eye  of
Mrs.  Willett  herself,  for  in  her  annotations  on  the  script,  when
it  was  sent  to  me,  there  is  at  these  words  the  following  note  :

I  recognise  this  as  a  quotation  from  one  of  Mr.  Myers's  Poems,—
I  think,  but  am  not  certain — from  his  Essay  on  Virgil.  [For  fuller
detail  see  letters  quoted  on  pp.  142,  3  below.]


132


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


She  did  not  appear  to  have  noticed  any  connexion  between
these  words  and  Lethe — -and  she  had  not  yet  seen  Part  LX.
of  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  where  in  a  footnote  a  connexion  is
indicated.

Nevertheless,  if  this  were  the  only  incident,  we  should
have  to  assume  that  this  part  of  the  answer  emanated  from
her  subconscious  and  lapsed  memory.

I  find,  indeed,  that  the  stanza  just  quoted  occurs  not  only
in  the  Essay  on  Virgil,  but  was  incorporated  by  Mr.  Myers,
in  modified  form,  in  his  original  and  published  poem  called
"  The  Passing  of  Youth."  (See  the  Renewal  of  Youth  and  other
Poems,  p.  136.)

"God  the  innumerous  souls  in  great  array
To  Lethe  summons  by  a  wondrous  way,
Till  these  therein  their  ancient  pain  forgive  ;
Forget  their  life,  and  will  again  to  live."

It  may  be  noted  here  that  the  very  first  answer  given  by
the  Piper-Myers  to  Mr.  Dorr's  question,  as  soon  as  he  had  got
the  word,  was

Lethe.  Do  you  refer  to  one  of  my  poems  1  (See  Proc.  XXIV.,
p.  87.)

A  recollection  of  the  above  quoted  passage  may  well  be
supposed  to  underlie  and  to  justify  this  reference;  which
hitherto  has  been  thought  by  us  to  be  inappropriate,  since  Mr.
Piddington  had  failed  to  discover  a  reference  to  Lethe  in
F.  W.  H.  Myers's  original  poems.

Coming  back  now  to  Mrs.  Willett  again,  I  say  that  if
"  the  will  again  to  live "  had  been  the  only  answer  to  the
question  about  Lethe,  although  we  should  have  recognised  its
extreme  appropriateness,1  we  should  have  had  to  refer  it  to
the  subconsciousness  of  Mrs.  Willett,  because  she  had  certainly

1  For  instance,  Mrs.  Verrall  makes  note  concerning  it  as  follows  : — The  point
here  to  my  mind  is  that  exactly  the  right  reminiscence  was  selected  for  the  first
answer.  Ninety-nine  people  out  of  a  hundred  would  associate  Lethe  with  forget-
fulness,  whereas  here  it  is,  quite  characteristically  of  its  supposed  authorship,
associated  with  life  upon  this  planet.  That  is  the  association  for  Plato  and
for  Virgil.  Virgil  thinks  of  re-incarnation  ;  that  idea  [the  idea  of  re-incarnation
on  this  earth]  is  contradicted  by  Myersw.


lxiu.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  133


read  the  translation  in  Mr.  Myers's  Essay  on  Virgil.  But
the  script  goes  on,  after  "  the  Eiver  of  forgetfulness," — which
being  an  idea  in  general  popular  knowledge  is  useless  for  our
purpose — first  of  all,  singularly  enough,  to  contradict  what
would  appear  to  be  the  significance  of  the  phrase,  "  will  again
to  live,"  and  to  say :

Not  reincarnation

Once  only  does  the  soul  descend  the  way  that  leads  to  incarnation.

This  I  take  merely  as  an  assertion  of  the  present  opinion
of  Myersw  on  that  subject — thrown  in  gratuitously  as  it  were
— not  as  a  literary  reference ;  though  it  does  contain  an
expression  "  descend  the  way "  which  recalls  a  line  in  a  poem
of  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  To  Tennyson:

"When  from  that  world  ere  death  and  birth
He  sought  the  long  descending  way."

If  I  may  venture  an  interpretation  of  so  mystical  a  matter,
I  apprehend  the  implication  of  the  script,  and  of  the  poem  just
quoted,  to  be  that  the  souls  awaiting  incarnation  on  Lethe  shores
may  be  regarded  as  drinking  it  to  forget  previous  existence  amid
other  surroundings,  or  under  other  conditions,  before  descending
into  earth  life, — thus  teaching  a  doctrine  of  pre-existence  indeed,
but  not  exactly  re-incarnation, — i.e.  not  necessarily  or  not
at  all  the  kind  of  pre-existence  which  Virgil  suggests — the
kind  most  likely  to  occur  to  an  ancient  writer — a  previous
existence  on  this  earth.

Then  the  script  goes  on  :

The  blending  of  the  Essence  with  the  instrument
tu  Marcel! us  Eris.  .  .  .
In  Valle  Reducta

Add  too  the  Doves  and  the  Golden  Boucfh  amid  the  shadows.
Add  too  Go  not  to  Lethe.

And  then,  after  the  Omar  Khayyam  Door  episode,  which
appears  in  rather  smaller  writing,  as  if  interpolated  in  the
main  message,  it  continues  :

The  shining  souls  shining  by  the  river  brim
the  pain  forgotten.


134.


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


To  take  this  last  sentence  first :

"  The  pain  forgotten "  clearly  represents  F.  W.  H.  Myers's
poetic  translation  in  his  Essay  on  Virgil,  p.  174,  already
quoted :  "  the  ancient  pain  forgive  Forget  their  life,"  etc. ;
and  the  only  word  not  ohviously  explicable  in  this  sentence  of
the  script  is  the  adjective  "  shining."  I  take  the  word
"  shining "  partly  to  mean  that  the  assemblage  is  the  brilliant
posterity  of  iEneas,  the  triumphant  leaders  of  future  Rome.
For  instance  the  one  who  is  to  be  or  who  would  be  Marcelius,
if  the  fates  were  propitious,  is  described  by  Virgil  as  "  ex-
cellent in  beauty  and  glittering  in  arms."  But  partly  also
— and  this  is  probably  more  to  the  purpose — the  epithet
"  shining  "  signifies  that  the  whole  group  is  depicted  as  purified
by  much  tribulation,  their  guilt  having  been  blown  out  of
them  by  hungry  winds,  or  washed  out  in  ocean  depths,  or
burned  out  as  by  fire,

"  till  length  of  days  completing  time's  circle  takes  out  the  clotted
soilure  and  leaves  untainted  the  ethereal  sense  and  pure  spiritual
flame." — Mackail,  JEneid,  p.  141.

Or,  in  the  version  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers  himself, — the  deliver-
ance from  sin  :

"cleansed  of  the  fire,  abolished  in  the  sea"  .  .  .
"  Hath  left  unsoiled  by  fear  or  foul  desire
The  spirit's  self,  the  elemental  fire."

Myers,  "Essay  on  Virgil,"  p.  174.

The  sentence  and  epithet  may  also  recall  Bunyan's  pilgrims
looking  across  the  river  of  death  into  the  land  of  Beulah.

Now  we  will  return  to  the  beginning  of  the  above  four
lines  of  quotation  from  the  script.  "  The  blending  of  the  essence
with  the  instrument "  is  not  a  phrase  or  an  idea  which  could
be  obtained  from  any  part  of  Mr.  Myers's  Essay  on  Virgil —
not  for  instance  from  the  translation

"Each  breathing  thing  obeys  one  Mind's  control,
And  in  all  substance  is  a  single  Soul "  ;

but  the  idea  does  occur  in  the  JEncid  itself,  in  the  explana-
tory speech  of  Anchises  concerning  the  Lethean  spirits,  in
answer to ^Eneas'  question how  it happens  that  any  souls


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  135


desire  to  return  to  sluggish  bodies, — "  Whence  comes  their  mad
desire  for  life  ?  "

Anchises'  explanation  contains  inter  alia  the  following  sen-
tence :

"An  intelligent  principle  pervading  every  member  puts  the  whole
mass  in  action,  and  blends  itself  with  the  mighty  frame  of  the
Universe,"

which  clearly  conveys  an  idea  capable  of  being  expressed  by
some  such  phrase  as  a  "  blending  of  the  essence  with  the
instrument."

Professor  Mackail  translates  the  sentence  in  this  form  :

"  A  soul  shed  abroad  in  them  sways  all  their  members  and  mingles
in  the  mighty  frame."

And  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  verse  translation  has  just  been  quoted
(p.  134).

The  Latin  (Jfi.  vi.  736  and  7)  is :  .

Spiritus  intus  alit,  totamque  infusa  per  artus
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet.

These  two  lines  are  well  known  ;  but  on  asking  Mrs.  Willett
what  knowledge  of  Virgil  she  possessed,  she  said  her  only
acquaintance  with  him  was  Church's  Story  of  the  JEneid — a  book
which  happened  to  be  in  her  house.  But  she  has  also  read
F.  W.  H.  M.'s  "  Essay  on  Virgil,"  and  moreover  is  an  ordinarily
educated  lady.  She  knows  no  Latin,  however,  and  on  referring
to  the  book  specified  by  her,  which  contains  only  an  abbreviated
version,  I  find  that  this  particular  passage  does  not  occur.

An  extract  will  be  given  later  from  this  book  in  order  to
show  that  the  further  Virgilian  references  cannot  have  been
thus  obtained,  subliminally  or  otherwise.  (See  Appendix  A.  to
this  portion,  p.  142.)

In  Tennyson's  great  poem  "  To  Virgil "  this  idea  of  the
immanence  of  an  Anima  mundi  in  creation  is  probably  referred
to  by  the  lines :

"  Thou  that  seest  Universal  Nature  moved  by  Universal  Mind  " ;

but,  however  familiar  these  lines  may  appear  to  be  to  every
one,  they  cannot  constitute  a  normal  source  of  the  reference
to  that  subject  in  the  form  taken  by  the  script ;  moreover,


136


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Mrs.  Willett  informed  me  that  she  had  not  read  the  poem,  though
she  had seen the  line quoted somewhere,  "  Golden  branch
amid  the  shadows." Months  later,  on  25th  October,  1910,  I
read  the  poem  to  her.
The  script  goes  on  :

Tu  Marcellus  Eris.

and  breaks  off  to  tell  Mrs.  Willett  that  she  knows  that  line ;
which  was  true.  The  reason  she  knows  it  is  because  it  had
already  been  quoted  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  dates  between
April  29  and  May  20,  1909,  which  had  been  given  her  to
annotate1 — a  fact  explained  to  me  later  by  Mrs.  Verrall.

It  is  not  therefore  the  mere  occurrence  of  these  words,  but
the  occurrence  of  them  in  a  Lethe  connexion,  that  is  important ;
for  there  had  been  nothing  previously  to  show  any  such  con-
nexion. But  there  is  a  connexion  ;  for,  in  Virgil's  Sixth  Book,
iEneas  was  told  that  one  and  the  most  notable  of  the  souls
standing  by  the  river  bank  ready  to  be  incarnated,  would,
when  his  time  came,  be  Marcellus.  This  reference  to  Marcellus
is  reproduced  in  Church's  "  Stories,"  but  the  word  "  Lethe "
does  not  occur  in  them.  The  complete  sentence  "  Tu  Marcellus
eris,  Manihus  date  lilia  plenis"  is  quoted  in  Proc.  Pt.  57,
p.  300,  in  connexion  with  the  "  Thanatos — mors — death"  cross-
correspondence  ;  and  this  Part  of  the  Proceedings  Mrs.  Willett  had
read  :  but  again  there  is  no  mention  of  Lethe  there.  The  episode
of  the  young  Marcellus  is  referred  to  obscurely  in  the  con-
clusion of  Myers's  "  Essay  on  Virgil,"  and  is  associated  with
the  strewing  of  lilies :

"Give,  give  me  lilies;  thick  the  flowers  be  laid
To  greet  that  mighty,  melancholy  shade  " ;

but  the  name  Marcellus  is  not  there  given.  He  is  only  spoken
of  as  "that  last  and  most  divinely  glorified  of  the  inhabitants

1  Her  attention  had  indeed  been  specially  called  to  it,  because  Mrs.  Verrall
had  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett  for  experimental  purposes  on  May  19,  1909,  certain
questions,  which  she  had  also  given  to  Miss  Verrall,  namely  :  (1)  "Please  make
clear  the  connexion  between  '  Tu  Marcellus  eris '  and  '  Jam  satis '  (beginning  of
an  ode  of  Horace  mentioned  in  contemporary  H.  V.  script),"  and  (2)  "  Please
explain  why  the  Golden  Bough  is  mentioned  ? "  There  was  no  opportunity,
however,  for  transmitting  these  questions  to  a  Communicator,  and  accordingly
no  answer  was  obtained.  For  further  details,  see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  below,
pp.  180,  186.


Lxur.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Scriirt.  137


of  the  under  world"  {/E.  vi.  883),  about  whom  it  was  pro-
phesied that  he  should  die  prematurely.  T  am  of  opinion  that
there  was  no  normal  association  of  Marcellus  with  Lethe  in
Mrs.  Willett's  mind.

Then  her  script  goes  on  :

Write  it  nevertheless  and  add
Henry  Sidgwick's
In  Valle  Reducta.

Now  In  Valle  Reducta  (in  a  sheltered  vale)  is  the  opening
phrase  of  Virgil's  description  of  the  river  of  Lethe  (JE.  vi.  703).
It  and  its  context  are  thus  translated  by  Bryce  (Bohn's  Scries) :

"  Meanwhile  iEneas,  in  a  winding  vale,  observes  a  lonely  grove,
and  brakes  that  rustle  in  the  woods,  and  the  Lethean  stream  which
skirts  those  peaceful  homes.  All  around  were  flitting  countless
crowds  and  troops  of  ghosts  ;  even  as  when,  on  a  peaceful  summer's
day,  bees  in  the  meadows  settle  on  the  various  flowers,  and  swarm
around  the  snow-white  lilies  ;  the  whole  plain  buzzes  with  their
humming  noise."  1

I  quote  the  whole  passage  now,  though  the  reference  in
the  script  to  the  bees  and  the  lilies  comes  later.  Note
that  the  sheltered  or  lonely  vale  through  which  Lethe  runs
is  expressed  in  Virgil  by  the  phrase  ///  valle  reducta ;  and
these  words  in  the  script  are  called  "  Henry  Sidgwick's "
because  Henry  Sidgwick  had  been  represented  as  communi-
cating them,  through  what  is  called  the  "  Mac  "  script,  in  July,
1908.  This,  it  is  true,  had  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett,  but  it
contained  no  reference  to  Lethe,  though  the  phrase  in  valle
reducta  is  followed  by  the  words  "  ^Eneid  6,"  and  preceded  by
"  yEneas."  There  is  no  mention  of  Marcellus  in  the  Mac
script,  and  therefore  at  no  time  any  reason  for  her  connecting
In  valle  reducta  with  Marcellus  or  Lethe.  There  may  have
been  (see  foot-note  on  p.  136)  an  obscure  reason  in  her  mind
for  connecting  the  Golden  Bough with  Marcellus,  but  none

'The  word  "winding,"  in  the  first  line  of  this  translation,  hardly  represents
the  usual  significance  of  the  word  reducta, — which  is  "withdrawn,"  rather  than
"bent  back"; — the  latter  meaning  is  associated  with  redunca.

So  also  a  better  translation  of  the  concluding  words  is — "all  the  plain  is
murmurous  with  their  humming."


138


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


for  connecting  "  the  Golden  Bough "  with  In  vallc  rcducta.
(See  Mrs.  Verrall's  supplementary  paper  below.)

The  fact,  however,  that  both  these  Latin  phrases,  tit  Maredlvs
eris  and  in  voile  reducta,  had  passed  through  her  mind,  seems
to  have  made  it  possible  for  Myersvv  to  make  her  quote
these  two  passages  in  the  original  Latin — a  thing  usually
difficult  or  impossible.

It  is  the  combination  and  juxtaposition  that,  is  notable,  not
the  occurrence  of  the  phrases  themselves.

The  fact  that  Virgil  compares  the  souls  on  the  banks  of  the
river  of  Lethe  to  bees  humming  round  lilies,  taken  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  phrase  "  tu  Marcellus  eris,"  is  of  possible  interest,
since  the  immediate  context  of  "  tu  Marcellus  eris "  is  "  Mani-
bus  date  lilia  plenis " — "  give  lilies  with  full  hands."  Mr.
Piddington  considers  that  this  double  allusion  to  lilies  in  the
script,  although  only  implicit,  strengthens  the  conjecture  in  his
(then  unpublished)  Lethe  paper  of  a  connexion  in  the  mind  of
Myersp  of  lilies  with  Lethe  (Proc.  Vol.  XXIV,  p.  135).

As  for  "  the  Doves  and  the  Golden  Bough  amid  the  shadows,"
— the  Golden  Bonsh  is  the  branch  which  xEneas  had  to  obtain
before  he  could  enter  the  infernal  regions  ;  and  the  Doves  are
the  doves  of  his  mother  Venus,  which,  by  fluttering  about,
directed  him  to  the  spot  in  the  woods  round  Avernus — the
entrance  to  the  under-world — near  which  grew  the  Golden  Bough,
which  was  to  be  the  key  whereby  he  was  enabled  to  effect
an  entrance  and  so  ultimately  to  arrive  at  the  river  of  Lethe.

It  is  quite  possible,  and  rather  Myers-like,  that  this  hunting
about  for  the  mode  of  obtaining  entrance  suggested  the  form
of  the  almost  immediately  succeeding  Omar  Khayyam  reference,
about  "  the  door  to  which  I  found  no  key,"  and  the  open-
sesame  reference  which  immediately  followed  it,  as  recorded
on  page  130.  Besides,  the  door  of  Omar  Khayyam  also  repre-
sented an  entrance  into  mysteries.1

This  is  the  Virgilian  description  of  "  the  doves "  mentioned
in  script :

"  They,  feeding  as  they  go,  flew  forward  just  so  far  that  the  eyes
of  those  who  follow  keep  them  in  view,  and  then,  when  they  reached

'There  may  have  been  another  reason  for  the  reference  given,  as  I  have
since  learnt  there  was  a  "door  and  key"  cross-correspondence,  which  is  narrated
by  Mrs.  Verrall  below,  pp.  193-204.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Neiv  Script.  139


the  jaws  of  fell  Avernus,  they  ascend  in  rapid  flight,  and  floating

through  the  air,  they  both  sit  down  together  on  their  chosen  spot

above  the  bough,  from  which  the  golden  hue,  discordant  with  the

tree,  "learned  through  the  branches."  /T, , „ . .  .

°  &  (Bryces  Translation.)

And  this  is  the  Virgilian  description  of  "  the  golden  bough
amid  the  shadows"  (also  mentioned  in  the  above  Willett  script):

"  On  a  shaded  tree  there  hangs  a  bough  concealed  from  view,
golden  in  its  leaves  and  pliant  stem,  held  sacred  to  Juno  of  the
nether  world  [i.e.  Proserpine].  This  the  grove  covers  and  the
winding  glades  shut  out  from  view."

But  this  idea  of  the  shaded  or  hidden  bough  is  clearly
given,  and  is  given  in  almost  the  precise  phrase  of  the  script
(though  without  mention  of  the  doves)  in  Tennyson's  poem
To  Virgil,  which  had  been  referred  to  in  one  of  Miss  Verrall's
scripts.  This  script,  with  a  note  attributing  it  to  Tennyson,  had
been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett ;  who  herself  informed  me  of  the
fact,  after  her  usual  careful  fashion.  The  line  is :  "  Golden
branch  amid  the  shadows."

That  this  gorgeous  poem  of  Tennyson's,  full  of  Virgilian
spirit  and  references,  appealed  strongly  to  F.  W.  H.  Myers — so
strongly  that  it  would  be  natural  to  suppose  that  the  recollec-
tion of  it  would  persist  into  another  state  of  existence,  if  any-
thing of  earthly  memory  can  persist — is  clear  from  several
passages  in  his  writings ;  it  is,  in  fact,  quoted  in  his  Essay  on
Virgil  (p.  148),  and  is  prefixed  to  that  Essay  as  a  motto;  but
I  find  it  referred  to  in  a  specially  appropriate  manner  in  a
letter  or  short  memoir  on  Tennyson,  which  at  the  request  of
Lord  Tennyson  he  wrote  in  order  that  it  might  be  appended
to  that  Life  of  his  father  which  Lord  Tennyson  was  pre-
paring. Thence  I  quote  it : —

"  But  most  Virgilian  of  all  are  the  two  central  lines :

'  Light  among  the  vanish'd  ages ;  star  that  gildest  yet  this  phantom
shore ;

Golden  branch  amid  the  shadows,  kings  and  realms  that  pass  to
rise  no  more.'

Ay,  this  it  is  which  lives  for  us  out  of  the  confused  and  perishing
Past  !  The  gross  world's  illusion  and  the  backward  twilight  are  lit
by  that  sacred  ray.


140  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

And  how  iioble  a  comparison  is  that  of  the  elect  poet  himself  to
his  one  golden  bough  in  Avernus'  forest,  which  gleamed  amid  the
sea  of  green  !

Talis  erat  species  auri  frondentis  opaca
llice  ;  sic  leni  crepitabat  bractea  vento.

We  are  here  among  things  that  shall  endure."


Chap.  III. Lethe — continued.

Not  yet,  however,  are  we  through  the  truly  remarkable
piece  of  script  which  came  on  Feb.  4,  1910.  Immediately
after  the  line  about  "  the  shining  souls  shining  by  the  river
brim  "  we  get, —

The  pain  forgotten  but  there  is  another  meaning  another  more
intimate  link  and  connection  that  now  I  cannot  give  It  does  not
escape  me  I  see  the  bearing

Rose  fluttering  rose  leaves  blown  like  ghosts  from  an  enchanter
fleeing  and  Love  Love  the  essential  essence  not  spilt  like  water
on  the  ground  far  off  forgotten  pain.

"  Forgotten  pain "  may  readily  refer  to  Lethe ;  and  as  for
"  Love  the  essential  essence  not  spilt  like  water  on  the  ground  "
— the  eternity  of  love,  no  matter  what  happens  to  the  Physical
Universe,  is  the  burden  of  The  Renewal  of  Youth  as  well  as
of  many  another  poem  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

For  instance  in  Classical  Essays,  p.  99  :

"  Now  from  about  thee,  in  thy  new  home  above,
Has  perished  all  but  life,  and  all  but  love."

Also  in  St.  Paul :

"Love  shall  survive  and  love  be  undiminished
Love  be  imperishable,  love  be  young."

But  it  also  suggests  a  phrase  of  In  Memoriam.  lxv.  :

"  Love's  too  precious  to  be  lost
A  little  grain  shall  not  be  spilt."

This  section  of  In  Memoriam  immediately  follows  one  which
is  closely  connected  with  it  in thought ; the  earlier  section


lxiil] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  141


suggests  that  we  shall  learn,  at  some  time  "far-off,"  that  no  pain
or  desire  is  purposeless ;  and  it  claims  for  the  departed  a
splendid  outlook  and  copious  vision  as  compared  with  their
previously  cabined  and  restricted  earthly  estate.  To  a  mind  so
richly  stored  with  subtle  literary  allusions  and  connexions  as
Myers's  was,  this  contiguity  or  sequence  may  have  had
significance,  and  to  it  a  sympathetic  reader  may  be  inclined  to
attribute  the  next  line  of  the  script,  which  occurs  after  a  pause
— a  pause  perhaps  for  thought —

Darien the  peak  in  Darien
The  Peak Peak  PEAK

"  I  have  not  done  yet  " — he  continues.1

No  indeed  he  had  not  done  yet!  For  this  idea  of  the
vision  as  from  a  mountain  top,  comparing  things  past
present  and  to  come,  seems  to  have  brought  up  in  his  mind
a  multitude  of  instances  in  Literature  where  the  condition  of
future  existence  was  compared  with  that  of  earth — sometimes
to  its  advantage,  sometimes  to  its  disadvantage,  and  thus
filled  him  with  reminiscences  of  passages  in  Virgil  and  Homer
and  Horace  as  well  as  in  poems  of  his  own  ;  with  recollec-
tions of  Achilles  and  Anchises,  of  Ulysses  and  -.Eneas — till,
as  we  may  fancifully  imagine,  the  rush  of  ideas  is  too  over-
whelming at  that  stage  of  the  day's  script,  and  he  can  only
await  a  further  opportunity  of  disburdening  himself  of  some
fraction  of  his  thoughts.

'In  Keats'  Sonuet,  On  first  lookhnj  into  Chapman's  Homer  "a  Peak  in
Darien"  was  the  summit  whence  Cortez  and  his  followers  viewed  for  the  first
time  the  expanse  of  the  Pacific.  It  was  used  symbolically  of  course  to
represent  the  outlook  opened  up  to  Keats'  sympathetic  e3Tes  by  this  translation
of  Homer.

"  Then  felt  I  like  some  watcher  of  the  skies

When  a  new  planet  swims  into  his  ken  ;
Or  like  stout  Cortez  when  with  eagle  eyes

He  stared  at  the  Pacific — and  all  his  men
Look'd  at  each  other  with  a  wild  surmise —

Silent,  upon  a  peak  in  Darien."

And  the  phrase  was  employed  by  Frances  Power  Cobbe,  and  occasionally
adopted  by  the  founders  of  the  S.P.R.,  to  signify  cases  when  dying  persons
seemed  to  catch  glimpses  of  another  world.  These  cases,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  tells
me,  rather  specially  interested  Mr.  Myers.  (See  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.
p.  31.)


142


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Hence  the  short  residue  of  the  script  of  that  first  day  consists
of  adjurations  to  me  to  let  him  know  if  I  am  able  to  under-
stand what  has  come  through,  so  far.

I  have  not  done  yet.

To  Lodge  this  may  have  meaning.

Let  him  remember  the  occasion

[i.e.  the  occasion  appropriate  to  the  peak  of  Darien,  as  I  take  it]

I  am  not  vague I  am  not  vague

I  want  an  answer  to  the  script  from  Lodge

Tell  him  I  want  an  answer

Does  he  recognise  my  recognition

(repeated)
Let  Lodge  speak
Speak let  him  speak
Enough  for  to-day
Let  Lodge  speak

I  endeavoured  to  carry  out  these  instructions  so  far  as
understanding  the  script  goes,  though  slowly  because  of  pressure
of  other  work,  and  the  process  took  time.  As  to  informing
Myersw,  it  seemed  better  not  to  give  the  automatic  writer  too
much  normal  information  at  first,  lest  it  should  spoil  future
evidence ;  still  I  have  gradually  conveyed  the  idea  that  much
of  what  he  had  said  was  understood.

[End  of  discussion  of  Script  of  Feb.  4-]

Appendix  A.

Mrs. Willctt's  normal  knoiolcdgc.

Some  notes  were  written  by  Mrs.  Willett  to  show  how
much  she  recognised  at  the  time  as  derived  from  her  normal
information  on  the  subjects  referred  to  in  her  script  of  Feb.  4th,
1910.  These  notes  were  sent  to  me  at  the  same  time  as  the
script,  which  I  received  on  Feb.  6  ;  but  they  only  amount  to
this — that  she  had  seen  some  of  the  Latin  and  other  phrases
in  H.  V.  script  and  Mac  script  (where,  in  notes,  the  sources
were  given,  as  will  be  more  exactly  reported  by  Mrs.  Verrall).
She  had  seen  the  phrase  "  Will  again  to  live "  in  one  of  Mr.
Myer  s'poems — "  I  think,  but  am  not  certain,  from  his  Essay


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  143


on  Virgil "  (she  writes) — and  had  seen  the  phrase  "  Peak  in
Darien,"  without  understanding  it,  while  turning  over  the  pages
of  Human  Personality. And  in  a  concluding  note  she  says :

I  know  nothing  of  Virgil  except  Church's  "Stones  from  Virgil,"
or  some  such  name,  a  shilling  book  that  happens  to  be  in  the
house.

I  accept  Mrs.  Willett's  statement  made  in  her  letter  of
Feb.  5  quoted  on  page  122,  that  the  script  as  a  whole  "suggests
nothing  much  to  me — I  only  hope  it  may  to  you,"  and  con-
sequently that  she  was  for  all  practical  purposes  ignorant  of
Virgil.  Nevertheless  the  fact  that  an  English  abridgement  of
Virgil  had  been  seen  by  her — how  casually  we  do  not  know —
rendered  it  necessary  that  this  book  should  be  examined  to
see  how  far  it  could  have  supplied  the  apposite  Virgilian
quotations.  Could  it,  for  instance,  have  prompted  the  connexion
of  Manibus  date  lilia  plenis  (i.e.  tu  Marcellus  cris)  and  in  vallc
reducta  with  each  other  and  with  Lethe  ?

It  seems  to  me  that  it  could  not,  but  I  quote  from  it  some
relevant  passages :

Relevant  Extracts  from  the  version  of  the  JEneid  luhich  had
been  in  Mrs.  Willett's  hands, — namely,  "  The  Story  of  the
JEneid,"  also  ccdlcd  "  Stories  from  Virgil,"  by  the  Rev.  Alfred
J.  Church,  Professor  of  Latin  in  University  College,  Lonelon.

Chapter  XIV.  is  called  "The  Dwellings  of  the  Dead."  It
opens  with  the  visit  of  iEneas  and  the  Sibyl  to  the  Infernal
Eegions,  in  order  to  visit  the  Shade  of  his  Father.  After
they  have  seen  many  things,  and  asked  the  way  of  Museeus,
the  story  goes  on  to  relate  the  meeting :

Then  they  beheld  Anchises  where  he  sat  in  a  green  valley,  re-
garding the  spirits  of  those  who  should  be  born  in  aftertime  of
his  race.  And  when  he  beheld  iEneas  coming,  he  stretched  out
his  hands  and  cried,  "  Comest  thou,  my  son  ?  Hast  thou  won  thy
way  hither  to  me?  Even  so  I  thought  that  it  would  be,  and  lo  !
my  hope  hath  not  failed  me."

And  ^Eneas  made  answer,  "  Yea,  I  have  come  a  long  way  to  see
thee,  even  as  thy  spirit  bade  me.  And  now  let  me  embrace  thee
with  my  arms."

But  when  he  would  have  embraced  him  it  was  as  if  he  clasped
the  air.


144


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Then  JEneas  looked  and  beheld  a  river,  and  a  great  company
of  souls  thereby,  thick  as  the  bees  on  a  calm  summer  day  in  a
garden  of  lilies.  And  when  he  would  know  the  meaning  of  the
concourse,  Anchises  said,  "These  are  souls  which  have  yet  to  live
again  in  a  mortal  body,  and  they  are  constrained  to  drink  of  the
water  of  forgetfulness."  And  ^Eneas  said,  "Nay,  my  father,  can  any
desire  to  take  again  upon  them  the  body  of  death  1 "  Then  Anchises
made  reply :  "  Listen,  my  son,  and  I  will  tell  thee  all.  There  is
one  soul  in  heaven  and  earth  and  the  stars  and  the  shining  orb
of  the  moon  and  the  great  sun  himself ;  from  which  soul  also
cometh  the  life  of  man  and  of  beast,  and  of  the  birds  of  the  air,
and  of  the  fishes  of  the  sea.  And  this  soul  is  a  divine  nature,
but  the  mortal  body  maketh  it  slow  and  dull.  Hence  come  fear
and  desire,  and  grief  and  joy,  so  that,  being  as  it  were  shut  in  a
prison,  the  spirit  beholdeth  not  any  more  the  light  that  is  without.
And  when  the  mortal  life  is  ended,  yet  are  not  men  quit  of  all
the  evils  of  the  body,  seeing  that  these  must  needs  be  put  away
in  many  marvellous  ways.  For  some  are  hung  up  to  the  winds,
and  with  some  their  wickedness  is  washed  out  by  water,  or  burnt
out  with  fire.  But  a  ghostly  pain  we  all  endure.  Then  we  that
are  found  worthy  are  sent  into  Elysium  and  the  plains  of  the  blest.
And  when,  after  many  days,  the  soul  is  wholly  pure,  it  is  called
to  the  river  of  forgetfulness,  that  it  may  drink  thereof,  and  so  return
to  the  world  that  is  above."

[Thereupon  iEneas  and  the  Sibyl  were  led  to  a  hill  whence
they  could  see  the  whole  company,  and  Anchises  pointed  out
a  considerable  number  of  souls  who  were  destined  to  be
famous  descendants, — mentioning  them  by  name,  and  fore-
shadowing the  glory  of  Koine.]

Then  [Anchises]  spake  again:  "Regard  him  who  is  the  first  of
all  the  company  of  conquerors.  He  is  Marcellus  ;  he  shall  save  the
state  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  put  to  flight  Carthaginian  and  Gaul."

Then  said  JEneas,  for  he  chanced  to  see  by  his  side  a  youth  clad
in  shining  armour,  and  very  fair  to  look  upon,  but  sad,  and  with
downcast  eyes,  "Tell  me,  father,  who  is  this?  How  noble  is  he!
What  a  company  is  about  him  !  But  there  is  a  shadow  of  darkness
round  his  head."

And  Anchises  made  answer:  "0  my  son,  seek  not  to  know  the
greatest  sorrow  that  shall  befall  thy  children  after  thee. This  youth


LXin.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  145


the  Fates  shall  only  show  for  a  brief  space  to  man.  .  .  .  Alas  !  for
his  righteousness,  and  truth,  and  valour  unsurpassed  !  0  luckless  boy,
if  thou  canst  haply  break  thy  evil  doom  thou  shalt  be  a  Marcellus.
Give  handfuls  of  lilies.  I  will  scatter  the  bright  flowers  and  pay
the  idle  honours  to  my  grandson's  shade."

Tims  did  Anchises  show  his  son  things  to  be,  and  kindled  his
soul  with  desire  of  glory.

It  appears  to  me  that  this  material,  even  if  read  by  Mrs.
Willett — and  she  has  no  conscious  recollection  of  having  read
it — would  fail  to  furnish  her  with  the  Virgilian  quotations  and
references  which  her  hand  produced  in  response  to  the  simple
stimulus  of  "Lethe" — a  word  singularly  enough  not  mentioned
by  Church  in  this  book.

The  episode  of  the  Golden  Bough  is  related  however.  It
comes  in  a  previous  chapter,  about  8  pages  before  the  extracts
reproduced  above,  and  I  will  quote  this  too :

Then  the  Sibyl  spake,  saying,  "  Son  of  Anchises,  it  is  easy  to  go
down  to  hell.  The  door  is  open  day  and  night.  But  to  return,
and  struggle  to  the  upper  air,  that  is  the  labour.  Few  only
have  done  it,  and  these  of  the  lineage  of  the  Gods  and  dear  to
Jupiter.  Yet  if  thou  wilt  attempt  it,  hearken  unto  me.  There
lieth  hid  in  the  forest  a  bough  of  gold  which  is  sacred  to  the
Queen  of  hell.  Nor  may  any  man  go  on  this  journey  till  he
have  plucked  it,  for  the  Queen  will  have  it  as  a  gift  for  herself.
And  when  the  bough  is  plucked,  there  ever  groweth  another  ;
and  if  it  be  the  pleasure  of  the  Gods  that  thou  go,  it  will  yield
to  thine  hand.  But  know  that  one  of  thy  companions  lieth
dead  upon  the  shore.  First  must  thou  bury  him,  and  after
offer  due  sacrifice,  even  black  sheep.  So  shalt  thou  approach
the  dwelling  of  the  dead."

[Nine  lines  omitted]  ....

But  when  ./Eneas  beheld  the  forest,  how  vast  it  was,  he  said
"  Now  may  the  Gods  grant  that  in  this  great  forest  the  bough
of  gold  discover  itself."  And  as  he  spake,  lo  !  two  doves  flew
before  his  face,  and  settled  on  the  grass,  and  he  knew  them
to  be  the  birds  of  his  mother,  and  cried,  saying,  "  Guide  me
now  to  the  bough  of  gold,  and  thou,  my  mother,  help  me  as
before."  Then  the  birds  flew  so  that  he  could  still  see  them
with  his  eyes,  and  he  followed  after  them.  '  But  when  they


146


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


came  to  the  mouth  of  Avernus,  they  sat  both  of  them  on  the
tree.  And  lo !  the  bough  of  gold  glittered  among  the
branches  and  rustled  in  the  wind.  Right  gladly  did  iEneas
break  it  off,  and  carry  it  to  the  dwelling  of  the  Sibyl.

Appendix  B.

0.  J.  Z.'s  normal  knowledge.

On  February  6th,  1910,  the  day  I  received  the  important
script  of  Feb.  4  hitherto  commented  on,  I  was  very  busy,  but
I  sent  three  hasty  replies  to  it  at  different  periods  of  the
day. These  replies  had  better  be  reproduced,  as  showing

(1)  how  little  information  could  at  that  time  have  been
extracted  from  my  mind,

(2)  how  much,  or  little,  information  was  imparted  to  Mrs.
Willett  when  she  read  them.

They  were  in  three  sealed  envelopes,  and  she  opened  and
read  them  to  Myersw  on  Feb.  10,  as  is  reported  later.

(No.  1)  Well  Myers,  but  I  want  more  from  you  about  Lethe
and  its  suggestions  than  that.  It  must  awaken  literary  and
classical  reminiscences  in  your  mind.  What  you  have  said
so  far  seems  naturally  sophisticated  a  little  with  what  your
Scribe  has  been  reading.1  But,  while  you  have  been  thinking,
perhaps  more  has  occurred  to  you.  I  had  better  say  no  more
at  present.

(No.  2)  The  phrase  "  peak  in  Darien "  occurs  in  your  book — 1
remembered  it  dimly  and  have  looked  it  up.  Miss  Cobbe
collected  some  cases  of  clairvoyance  of  the  dying,  wherein,
shortly  before  death,  they  showed  themselves  aware  of  some-
one in  the  spirit  who  had  only  recently  died,  and  of  whose
death  they  had  no  normal  means  of  knowing.  She  seems  to
have  published  this  little  collection  of  cases  under  the  title

1  This  quite  unnecessary  and  erroneous  suspicion  had  reference  to  a  paper
which  I  had  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett  in  January — a  chapter  on  Incarnation  out
of  my  book  '.'  Reason  and  Belief."  It  will  be  seen  below  (p.  170)  that  I  am
rebuked  by  Myersw  for  having  sent  it,  and  also  for  imagining  a  possible  con-
nexion between  it  and  what  was  recorded  on  Feb.  4.  Note  also  that  I  am
here  using  the  word  "Scribe"'  in  the  sense  of  automatist, — as  the  communi-
cators do.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  147

"The  Peak  of  Darien."  (So  says  Proc.  S.P.E.,  Vol.  V.,
p.  459.  Paper  by  Gurney  completed  by  Myers.)
(No.  3)  "A  Peak  in  Darien"  is  reminiscent  of  Keats.  Perhaps
that  is  what  you  wanted  me  to  perceive.  But  do  not  be
afraid  of  my  literary  ignorance,  which  is  great ;  because  I
have  means  of  ferreting  out  any  literary  allusions  if  they  are
known  to  man.  So  don't  think  of  me  or  of  what  I  shall
understand,  but  let  your  own  thoughts  luxuriate,  and  trust
to  their  being  understood — though  perhaps  not  immediately.

0.  J.  L.

I  will  not  add  any  comment  to  emphasise  the  ludicrous
insufficiency  of  these  hasty  and  immediately  contemporary
replies.  It  must  be  disappointing  to  any  Intelligence,  who
has  sent  answers  so  excellent,  to  have  them  received  with
ignorance — however  completely  that  ignorance  subsequently
disappears ;  but  the  communicating  intelligences,  whatever  they
are,  are  patient,  and  the  response  on  Feb.  10  was  as  worthy
as  that  of  Feb.  4.


PART  II.

Concerning  the  Script  of  10  February,  1910.

Chap.  IV. Evidence  of  supernormal  access  to  knowledge.

We  now  pass  on  to  consider  more  particularly  the  matter  written
by  Mrs.  Willett's  hand  on  Feb.  10,  1910.  And  in  the  first
instance  it  may  be  convenient  to  quote  the  whole  of  it,  as  it
stands,  just  as  I  did  with  that  of  Feb.  4,  on  p.  123.

I  am  assured  that  Mrs.  Willett  did  not  show  my  question  to
anyone  after  opening  the  envelope  on  Feb.  4,  and  made  no
enquiries  on  the  subject  of  Lethe,  or  on  any  other  classical
subject,  between  Feb.  4  and  Feb.  1 0  ;  which  was  the  next
available  occasion  for  the  production  of  ordinary  script — ordinary,
I  mean,  as  distinguished  from  the  interjected  and  exceptional
writing  of  Feb.  5  ;  and  what  came  on  Feb.  10  was  definitely
regarded  by  Mrs.  Willett  as  a  continuation  of  the  communi-
cation of  Feb.  4.


148


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Here  then  is  the  Script  of  Feb.  1 0  ;  but  I  must  explain  once
more  that  the  frequent  interjection  of  the  name  of  the  ostensible
communicator  is  a  peculiar  feature  of  these  scripts,  and  that
in  reading  it  these  mechanical  or  auxiliary  interruptions  or
punctuations  can  be  omitted.

Complete  Copy  of  Willctt  Script  of  Feb.  10,  1910.

Myers  yes  I  am  ready I  know
what  Lodge  wants he  wants  me
to  prove  that  I  have  access  to
knowledge  shown  elsewhere
Myers  give  me  his  3  answers
all  all  together

(The  answers,  printed  on  p.  146,  were  here  opened  and  read.)

Myers  there  is  an  Ode  I  want

an  Ode  Horatian

Lydia I  referred  to  the

Ode  elsewhere

Write write  the  word

Seneca

Again  Filial  piety  that  was
the  motive  that  led  him
the  son  to  the  Father
Virgil

But  Ulyss there  is  a

paralel  Ulysses

this  is  confused  in  Myers

confused  in  the  script  but  not

in  my  mind. The  confusion

is  not  in  my  thought  but

in  the  expression  of  it  as  it

reaches  you  Lodge

The  nightingale  but

but I  no  no  no

Myers  begin  again

the  nightin Nightingale  but  Shelley
too  Myers  as  well
Once  more  ye  Laurels
Myers  this  seems  incoherent
Myers  but  don't  be  discouraged


LXlll.] Classical  Scholars! dp,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.


149


Myers

Myers  Dorrs  scheme
Excellent  Myers  that
I  have  to  use  different  Scribes
means  that  I  must  show  different
aspects  of  thoughts  underlying
which  unity  is  to  be  found
Strew  on  her  Roses  Roses
Ganymede.

Myers  Mrs.  Verrall  might

make  something  of  that

Myers  homeless  in  the  heart  of

Paradise  Myers

Where  was  the  Sybil

flavicomata.

Myers  I  have  not  finished

Myers  Myers  wait

Myers  the  draught  of  forgetfulness

What  is  Anaxagoras  for  not

Anchises that  is  not  what

I  want

Which  only  I  remember  which
only  you  forget there  is  a  line
of  Swinburne's  I  want
that  Pagan  singer  of  fair
things  and  all  dead  things
Go  thither  and  all  forgotten
days Myers  something
like  that  Swinburne
By  the  Waters  of  Babylon
we  sat  down  and  wept  when
we  remembered  thee  oh
Zion

Myers  Myers  get  thee  to  a
Nunnery

The  Shepherds  pipe  the  Muses
dance  and Better  to  Rule  among
no  to  slave  among  the  living
that  King  it  mid  the
Dead

Sleep  the  dream  that  flits  by


150


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART


night Sleep  and  his  twin
Brothers not  Brothers
single  Brother
His  name  was  writ
in  water

Myers  Homer  and  Horace  the
thought  allied  but  I  cannot
get  it  clear
Watts  Watts
you  are  getting  Myers
you  are  getting  dim  Enough
'  F

(End  of  Script  of  10  Feb.  1910,  ended  at  12-lfi  p.m.)

Now  when  trying  to  understand  the  meaning  of  any  person,
especially  one  who  is  speaking  under  physical  difficulties,  it  is
customary,  legitimate,  and  indeed  necessary,  for  the  hearer  to
put  himself  into  an  attentive  and  receptive  attitude, — trying  to
catch  each  partially  expressed  meaning,  and  to  eke  out  obscure
hints  or  allusions  by  painstaking  and  sympathetic  interpreta-
tion. Only  in  that  way  is  an  understanding  to  be  secured.
And  in  ordinary  cases  a  test  of  success  in  interpretation  is
furnished  by  the  subsequent  approval  or  acceptance  of  the
speaker ;  indications  furnished  in  the  course  of  conversation
give  a  listener  his  clue  and  make  him  aware  whether  he  is
pursuing  the  right  train  of  thought  or  not.  This  sort  of  clue
is  necessarily  absent  in  the  case  of  script,  unless  it  is  obtained
subsequently,  so  that  special  effort  is  needful  when  endeavouring
to  interpret  the  meaning  which  underlies  the  more  or  less
fragmentary  utterances  obtained  through  the  various  channels
of  a  cross-correspondence.

It  is  manifest,  however,  that  in  so  far  as  any  correspondences
detected  relate  to  scripts  which  have  been  printed  and  published,
some  difficulty  arises,  and  stringency  of  criticism  becomes
necessary  ;  especially  if  any  of  the  writings  of  the  past  have
been  seen  by  the  automatist  who  is  producing  fresh  material.
In  that  case  the  evidence  of  knowledge  shown  must  be  severely
criticised,  and  everything  that  can  be  supposed  stored  in  either
the  conscious  or  the  sub-conscious  mind  of  the  automatist  must
be  reasonably  and  frankly  allowed  for,  in  drawing  conclusions.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  151

All  this  being  understood  and  premised,  we  will  go  through
the  above  script  in  detail.


Chap.  V. Comparison  of  States.

And  first  we  may  remember  that  when  trying  to  enter
sympathetically  into  the  soul  of  the  communicator,  as  he
brought  his  script  of  Feb.  4,  1910,  to  a  necessary  provisional
end,  with  the  ejaculation  "  I  have  not  done  yet,"  we  made  a
guess  or  fanciful  suggestion — as  printed  on  p.  141 — that,  arising
out  of  this  idea  of  the  vision  of  one  world  from  another,  there
flowed  into  the  mind  of  Myersw  such  a  multitude  of  ideas
that  the  script  had  to  cease  for  a  time  ;  since  a  rush  of  this
kind — at  least  in  my  own  experience — usually  has  an  inhibi-
tory effect  for  a  few  moments.  But  the  ideas  themselves
begin  to  emerge  on  the  next  opportunity  afforded  him  for
the  customary  kind  of  script — namely,  on  Feb.  10,  1910.

When  Mrs.  Willett  sat  clown  to  write,  the  first  words  that
came  were  these  : —

Myers  yes  I  am  ready  I  know  what  Lodge  WANTS  he  wants
me  to  prove  that  I  have  access  to  knowledge  shown  elsewhere  Myers
give  me  his  3  answers  all  all  together.

Myersw  opens  by  saying  that  0.  J.  L.  wants  to  prove  that
he  (Myers)  has  access  to  knowledge  shown  elsewhere.  ("  Else-
where "  may  be  understood  to  mean  through  Mrs.  Piper  during
Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  chiefly,  though  not  necessarily  exclusively.)
This  quite  correct  statement  is  the  clue  to  what  follows.

So  Mrs.  Willett  opened  the  three  envelopes  sent  by  0.  J.  L.
in  answer  to  the  Script  of  Feb.  4,  1910,  and  read  them  in
order.  Their  contents  are  printed  above  (p.  141),  but  they  are
unimportant.

Then  the  script  began  again :

Myers  there  is  an  Ode I  want  an  Ode  Horatian
Lydia I  referred  to  the  Ode  elsewhere

A  question  sent  by  Mrs.  Verrall  to  Myersw  through  Mrs.
Willett,  which  is  quoted  in  a  foot-note  to  p.  136,  above,  must
be  assumed  to  have  directed  Mrs.  Willett's  attention  to  the


152  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Ode  of  Horace,  I.  2,  beginning  Jam  satis.  Neither  this  Ode  how-
ever, nor  I.  28,  mentions  "  Lydia."  The  subject  of  the  Archytas
Ode,  I.  28,  had  appeared  through  other  automatists  and  had
been  already  dealt  with  at  considerable  length  by  Mr.  Piddington
in  Proc.  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XXII.,  which  Mrs.  Willett  had  seen.  But
more  was  written  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  150  ff.)  than
had  yet  been  published ;  and  the  above  seems  to  allude  to
the  subject  matter  of  this  subsequently  published  portion,
because  the  script  continues  :

Write write  the  word  Seneca

Again  Filial  piety that  was  the  motive  that  led  him

the  son  to  the  Father
Virgil

Now  it  was  precisely  filial  piety — a  desire  to  communicate
with  his  dead  father  Anchises — that  led  iEneas  to  visit  the
Underworld.  The  name  "  Seneca,'  as  Mrs.  Verrall  suggests,
is  possibly  introduced  in  the  script  during  an  effort  to
express  the  idea  of  filial  piety — Seneca  having  written  De  con-
stantia,  ad  Helviarn  matrem,  a  discourse  addressed  to  his  own
mother  on  his  father's  death.  It  seems  most  unlikely  that
Mrs.  Willett  has  any  such  association  with  Seneca.

The  script  continues,  after  the  word  "  Virgil "  written  in
connexion  with  the  visit  of  iEneas  to  the  Under-world, —

But  Ulyss  there  is  a  paralel  Ulysses.  This  is  confused  in
Myers  confused  in  the  Script  but  not  in  my  mind.  The
confusion  is  not  in  my  thought  but  in  the  expression  of  it  as
it  reaches  you  Lodge.

Here  then  a  parallel  is  indicated  between  iEneas  and
Ulysses,  in  connexion  presumably  with  the  Lethe  episode.
And  I  find  that  on  page  172  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Essay  on
Virgil,  a  parallel  of  this  kind  is  distinctly  elaborated.  When
./Eneas  sees  the  souls  on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  Lethe
waiting  for  "  re-incarnation,"  he  is  astonished  that  anyone
should  want  to  live  again  on  earth,

"And  the  form  of  the  question  which  he  asks  (A.  vi.  719)  is  in
itself  highly  significant.  Compared,  for  example,  with  the
famous  contrast  which  the  Homeric  Achilles  draws  between
even  the  poorest  life  on  happy  earth  and  the  forlorn  kingship


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.


153


of  the  shades,  it  indicates  that  a  change  has  taken  place  which
of  all  speculative  changes  is  perhaps  the  most  important,  that
the  ideal  has  heen  shifted  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,
from  the  material  to  the  spiritual  world —

"  0  father,  must  I  deem  that  souls  can  pray
Hence  to  turn  backward  to  the  worldly  day?
Change  for  that  weight  of  flesh  these  forms  more  fair,
For  that  sun's  sheen  this  paradisal  air?"

Extract  from  F.  W.  H.  M.'s  Essay.

The  corresponding  Homeric  incident,  presumably  alluded  to
in  the  script,  occurred  during  the  visit  of  Ulysses  to  the  Shades
when  he  meets  with  Achilles,  who — in  the  famous  saying
wherein  occur  the  words  eirdpovpos  or  adscriptns  glebce  (cf.
Proc.  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  400) — maintains  that  it  is  better  to  be
a  slave  among  the  living  than  a  king  among  the  dead ;  thus
taking  a  very  different  view  of  the  relative  advantages  of  the
two  states  from  that  taken  by  iEneas.

The  fact  that  F.  W.  H.  Myers  had  himself  drawn  the  parallel,
which  is  indeed  obvious,  between  the  two  visits,  and,  what  is
less  obvious,  had  contrasted  the  two  mental  attitudes — that  of
iEneas  as  described  by  Virgil  and  that  of  Achilles  as  described
by  Homer, — makes  it  clear,  I  think,  on  any  hypothesis  as  to
source,  that  this  same  parallel  is  the  one  referred  to  in  the
script.

And  this  explanation  is  clinched  by  the  occurrence  a  little
later  on  in  the  script — as  soon  as  the  thought  of  the  com-
municator had  again  become  clear,  we  may  suppose — of  the
words,

Better  to  Rule among no  to
slave  among  the  living
[than]  King  it  mid  the  Dead.

This  phrase  makes  clear  which  Horatian  Ode  was  in  the
communicator's  mind  during  the  production  of  the  first  four  words
of  this  script.

I  may  as  well  quote  Mrs.  Verrall's  remarks  on  the  passage
about  Virgil  and  Ulysses  already  commented  on :

The  point  here  is  the  appropriateness  of  those  reminiscences.
Myers's  Essay  on  Virgil  (p.  172)  connects  Lethe  and  the  Homeric


154  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part


Achilles,  and  a  classical  scholar  remembers  that  ^Eneas'  visit  to
Anchises  is  reminiscent  of  the  Homeric  story  of  Odysseus  (Ulysses)
and  the  Underworld.  Hence  it  is  natural  to  say  that  "  there  is  a
parallel"  after  mentioning  Virgil  and  Ulysses, — natural  I  mean  to
Myersw,  but  not,  I  think,  to  Mrs.  Willett.1  [For  further  comment
on  these  allusions  to  Homer  see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  below,  p.  188.]

And  now  that  the  notion  of  comparing  ideas  of  different
ages  and  different  writers,  concerning  the  condition  of  humanity
in  earthly  existence  as  contrasted  with  the  condition  in  a
future  state, — now  that  this  idea  has  occurred  to  Myersw,  it  is
pursued  into  further  developments ;  for,  after  a  reference  to
Shelley,  Tennyson,  and  Keats,  the  script  concludes  :

Myers  Homer  and  Horace  the  thought  allied
but  I  cannot  get  it  clear
Watts  Watts

Readers  of  Mr.  Piddington's  recent  papers  will  remember
his  notable  discovery  of  the  deep-seated  correspondence  between
Horace  Ode  i.  28  and  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  published  poem  called
"  Immortality."  The  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  the
identification  or  alliance  should  be  looked  up  in  the  then  already
published  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  397-401,  and  in  the
(at  that  time — February,  1910)  unpublished  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIV.,  pp.  150-169,  which  for  the  first  time — explicitly  at

1  The  name  of  Ulysses  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Essay  on  Virgil  (above
quoted),  and  must  therefore  have  come  into  the  script  from  some  other
source.  Mrs.  Willett's  note  on  her  recollections  of  the  Essay  on  Virgil  shows
some  confusion  in  her  mind  between  ^Eneas  and  Ulysses,  but  no  knowledge  of
any  parallel  between  them.  Thus,  whereas  in  her  first  letter  of  February  5,
1910,  accompanying  the  script,  she  wrote  :

"'Will  again  to  live.' I  recognise  this  as  a  quotation  from  one  of  Mr.
Myers's  poems — /  think,  but  am  not  certain,  from  his  Essay  on  Virgil ;  "
a  month  or  two  later,  on  June  17,  1910,  in  answer  to  a  request  from  O.J.L.  to
write  down  the  "  connexion  or  context  or  significance  of  the  phrase  (the  will
again  to  live),  without  looking  it  up  specially,"  she  wrote  as  follows:

"I  am  vague  as  to  what  the  piece  of  poetry  is  in  which  the  words  occur.
It  must,  I  suppose,  be  a  translation  from  Virgil.  My  impression  is  that  it  is
said  by  a  Father  to  a  Son  (either  Ulysses  or  Aeneas — I  never  can  remember
which  belongs  to  Homer  and  which  to  Virgil)  who  went  down  to  Hell  to  see
bis  Father."

It  is  possible  that  some  such  confusion  in  the  automatist's  mind  prevented
the  completion  of  the  intended  parallel.  All  such  confusion  must  in  fairness
be  attributed  to  her,  for  it  is  carefully  disclaimed  by  Myersw.


lxiil] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  155

least — introduces  Homer  as  a  third  member  of  the  alliance.1
Suffice  it  here  to  say  that  Horace  in  that  "  Archytas "  ode
takes  a  pessimistic  view  of  death,  regarding  with  gloom  the
future  destiny  of  men  whose  earthly  career  had  been  brilliant,
— thus  suggesting  something  not  altogether  unlike  the  feeling
expressed  by  the  Homeric  shade  of  Achilles.

The  fact  that  the  thought  expressed  in  the  words  quoted
from  Homer  is  allied  to  the  "  Archytas "  ode  of  Horace,  is
not  at  all  familiar ;  and  though  something  is  explained  in
the  published  Vol.  XXII.  (p.  397  et  seq.)  which  Mrs.  Willett
had  read,  it  is  unlikely  that  she  had  grasped  the  idea ;
moreover,  the  word  "  Watts "  in  her  script  seems  to  show
knowledge  of  the  unpublished  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV,  p.  187.  For
the  allusion  to  "  Watts "  is  presumably  a  reference  to  G.  F.
Watts's  picture  of  Orpheus  and  Hurydice, — a  legend  full  of  the
endeavour,  though  of  fruitless  and  pathetic  endeavour,  to  exchange
one  state  for  another.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  this  picture
had  been  already  referred  to  by  MyersP  in  his  answers  con-
cerning Lethe  to  Mr.  Dorr  through  Mrs.  Piper  (Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,
pp.  130,  132),  and  it  was  closely  associated  with  the  0 vidian
answer  then  given  to  the  Lethe  question  ;  and  this  picture  has
also  possibly  been  referred  to  in  Miss  Helen  Verrall's  script,
see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  187.  It  was  one  of  the  pictures
specially  selected  for  notice  in  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  poem  "  On
Mr.  Watts'  Collected  Works,"  in  the  stanza:

"  For  here  the  Thracian,  vainly  wise,

Close  on  the  light  his  love  has  led,- —
Oh  hearken  !  her  melodious  cries
Fade  in  the  mutter  of  the  dead  :■ —
'  Farewell  !  f  rom  thy  embrace  I  pass,
Drawn  to  the  formless  dark  alone  :
I  stretch  my  hands,— too  weak,  alas !
And  I  no  more,  no  more  thine  own.'  "

(Fragments,  p.  191.)

In  fact,  taking  the  whole  into  account,  it  seems  certain  that
knowledge  is  shown  of  the  references  to  the  Horace  Ode  in
Dorr's  sittings  described  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  his  then
unpublished  paper,  (now  published  in  Vol.  XXIV.) ;  and  the

1  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  below,  p.  189.


156


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


script  may  in  a  sense  be  regarded  as  confirmatory  of
Mr.  Piddington's  interpretation  of  those  references.  Further-
more, it  now  appears  that  a  contribution  is  made  in  this
script,  through  the  "  Waters  of  Babylon "  and  "  Watts,"  to  the
cross-correspondence  on  "Exile";  as  explained  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper  below,  p.  209.

The  script  of  Feb.  10,  1910,  seems  to  imply  that  corre-
sponding ideas  concerning  the  relationship  between  present  and
future  existence,  and  the  relative  value  and  dignity  of  the  two
states,  are  to  be  found  in  Shelley,  Keats,  and  Tennyson ; — a
hint  which  is  conveyed  by  the  sentences  or  quotations  introduced
in  the  middle  of  those  references  to  comparison  of  states, —

Sleep  the  dream  that  flits  by  night
Sleep  and  his  twin  brother
His  name  was  writ  in  water.

The  first  of  these  sentences  suggests  Shelley's  Queen  Mab ;
the  second  Tennyson,  as  well  as  Shelley  ;  and  the  third  Keats.

To  display  the  meaning  possibly  intended,  the  following
verses  may  be  quoted :

From  Adcmais, —

"  He  hath  awakened  from  the  dream  of  life
Tis  we  who,  lost  in  stormy  visions,  keep
With  phantoms  an  unprofitable  strife."

"  He  has  outsoared  the  shadow  of  our  night."

"  What  Adonais  is  why  fear  we  to  become  ?"

"  The  soul  of  Adonais,  like  a  star,
Beacons  from  the  abode  where  the  Eternal  are."

The  whole  poem  expresses  anything  but  enthusiasm  for  the
conditions  of  terrestrial  existence.

But  indeed  it  is  difficult  to  say  anything  more  sympathetic
as  regards  Shelley  from  this  point  of  view  than  what  F.  W.  H.
Myers  says  in  "Human  Personality,"  Vol.  I.,  p.  97,  about  the
larval  indications  of  wings  found  in  the  grub  which  fore-
shadow the  butterfly.

The  third  poet  referred  to,  Keats,  often  emphasised  the  gain
to  be  expected  on  transition  from  worldly  existence,  though  no
doubt  he  regarded  its  possibilities  differently  in  different  moods.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  157


As  for  the  second  poet, — such  a  quotation  as  "  Death  and

his brother" would have  been interpreted  as  Shelley,  but

"  Sleep  and  his  twin  brother  "  suggests  Tennyson.  So  I  quote
some  portions  thus  possibly  recalled,

From  In  Memoriarn  —

lxxi. "  Sleep,  kinsman  thou  to  death  and  trance "

lxviii.  "When  in  the  down  I  sink  my  head,

Sleep,  Death's  twin-brother,  times  my  breath  ;
Sleep,  Death's  twin-brother,  knows  not  Death,
Nor  can  I  dream  of  thee  as  dead."

It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  "  Sleep,  Death's  kinsman,"
occurs  in  JEncicl  vi.  278,  consanguineus  Leti  Sopor;  so  that
this  is  what  may  have  suggested  the  reference.  I  may  quote
also  from  sections  of  In  Memoriarn  comparing  the  two
states  ;  since,  as  is  fairly  plain  from  the  context,  it  is  for  that
reason  chiefly  that  the  references  are  introduced  into  the
script.  The  passages  preceding  and  following  the  references  to
Death  and  Sleep  in  the  script  are  preceded  by  "  Better  to
slave  among  the  living  than  King  it  mid  the  dead,"  and
followed  by  "  Homer  and  Horace  the  thought  allied."

The  following  lines  occur  in  preceding  sections  of  In
Memoriarn :

lxi. "If,  in  thy  second  state  sublime."  .  .  .

lxiv. "  Dost  thou  look  back  on  what  hath  been,
As  some  divinely  gifted  man,
Whose  life  in  low  estate  began,
And  on  a  simple  village  green."

On  these  sections  Professor  A.  C.  Bradley  (p.  157  of  his
"  Commentary  ")  comments  thus  : —

"  The  poet's  friend  is  almost  throughout  imagined  as  he  is  in
that  '  second  state  sublime '  which  the  poet  conceives  to  be  far
superior  to  the  earthly  state  in  which  he  himself  remains.  Tennyson
himself  had  to  point  this  out  in  connection  with  xcvii."

A  man  so  keenly  interested  as  F.  W.  H.  Myers  was  in
problems  connected  with  a  possible  future  state  would  assuredly


158  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

have  been  impressed  by  these  sections,  and  might  well  have
associated  them  with  utterances  of  Homer  and  Virgil  and
Horace,  such  as  have  now  been  quoted,  as  well  as  with
passages  in  his  own  poems.


Chap.  VI. Lethe  and  Knowledge  of  other  Scripts.

But  we  have  been  led  on  to  the  end  of  this  script  of
Feb.  10,  1910,  without  having  nearly  exhausted  its  earlier
part.

Let  us,  therefore,  return  to  a  plainly  Lethean  reference,
written  at  an  earlier  stage,  immediately  after  the  reference  to
Virgil  and  Ulysses :

The  Nightingale  but  but  (scribbles)  no  no  (scribbles)
Myers  begin  again

the  Nigh  in  Nightingale  but  Shelley  too  Myers  as  well
Once  more  ye  Laurels Myers  this  seems
incoherent  but  don't  be  discouraged

Further  on,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  script  makes  a
very  plain  reference  to  Keats,  by  the  phrase,

His  name  was  writ  in  water

— itself  a  simple  and  easy  Lethean  reference  to  any  man  of
letters,  or,  for  that  matter,  to  Mrs.  Willett.

So  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  Keats'  poem,  Ode  to  a
Nightingale,  that  is  here  referred  to  by  the  word  "  Nightin-
gale." It  is  evident,  also,  that  the  reference  constitutes  a  good
answer  to  the  question,  "  What  does  Lethe  suggest  to  you,"
for  its  first  verse  begins  thus :

"My  heart  aches,  and  a  drowsy  numbness  pains
My  sense,  as  though  of  hemlock  I  had  drunk,
Or  emptied  some  dull  opiate  to  the  drains
One  minute  past,  and  Lethe-wards  had  sunk."

So  that  reference  is  quite  clear.  And  it  may  be  the  occur-
rence here  of  the  word  "  hemlock,"  which  suggests  an  ampli-
fication of  this  word  in  the  next  important  script  which
arrived  about  a  month  later. (See  Chap.  VII.  below.)


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  150


But  then,  after  mentioning  "  nightingale,'  the  script  goes
on  :

but  Shelley  too  as  well
Once  more  ye  Laurels

This  seems  incoherent  but  don't  be  discouraged.

Now  it  is  true  that  the  word  "  nightingale  "  occurs  in  several
of  Shelley's  poems — in  Rosalind  and  Helen,  for  instance,  and  also
in  one  specially  called  The  Woodman  and  the  Nightingale ;  but
neither  of  these  corresponds  either  to  Lethe  or  to  knowledge
shown  elsewhere  ;  so  the  object  of,  as  it  were,  bracketing  Shelley
with  Keats  in  this  connexion  was  not  apparent.

The  key  is  found  in  the  next  sentence  of  the  script :

Dorrs  scheme  excellent  Myers  that  I

have  to  use  different  scribes  means  that  I  must

show  different  aspects  of  thought

underlying  which  Unity  is  to  be  found.

Prompted  by  this  hint,  Mrs.  Verrall  made  a  note  in  May
1910,1  as  follows:

The  "  nightingale "  I  took  to  refer  to  Keats'  poem  which  gives
the  word  " Lethewards."  But  "Shelley  too"  puzzled  me,  as  I
could  not  think  what  reference  by  Shelley  to  a  nightingale  was
important  in  this  connexion.  The  next  words  "Once  more  ye
laurels"  gave  me  the  clue, — thus:  "Once  more"  etc.  is  a  quotation
from  Milton's  Lycidas  which  is  a  prototype  of  Shelley's  Adonais.
That  sent  me  to  Adonais,  stanza  xvii.,

"  Thy  spirit's  sister,  the  lorn  nightingale,
Mourns  not  her  mate  with  such  melodious  pain,"

which  is  a  covert  allusion  to  Keats'  poem.  Note  that  stanza  xv.
refers  to  "Echo,"  and  stanza  xvi.  to  "Hyacinth"  and  "Narcissus."
These  subjects  had  been  referred  to  by  MyersP  in  connexion  with
Lethe,  as  described  in  Mr.  Piddington's  (then  unpublished)  paper
in  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  ;  this  coincidence  can  hardly  be  accidental,  but
seems  to  justify  the  claim  of  Myersw  to  "show  different  aspects  of
thought "  by  the  use  of  "  different  scribes."  Here  we  have  another
group  of  references  to  the  Ovid  stories,  closely  followed  by  the
word  "Ganymede"  [see  below].  I  believe  the  omission  of  the
name  Ovid  by  Myersw  to  be  intentional.

1  See  also  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  209.


160


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Mr.  Piddington  agrees  with  the  suggestions  contained  in  this
ingenious  piece  of  literary  criticism.  It  will  be  observed  that
the  above  quotation  from  Adonais  effectually  welds  together
Shelley,  Keats,  and  Nightingale.  (See  also  a  discussion  of  the
part  played  by  Mrs.  Willett  in  the  cross-correspondence  "  Echo  "
and  "Nightingale"  in  Miss  Johnson's  paper  below,  p.  244.)

The  script  having  finished  the  sentence  about  showing
different  aspects  of  a  single  thought  through  different  scribes
(meaning  thereby  different  automatists)  goes  on  :

Strew  on  her  Roses  Roses
Ganymede

Mrs  Verrall  might  make  something  of  that
homeless  in  the  heart  of  Paradise.
Where  was  the  Sybil  1
Flavicomata

I  have  not  finished,  wait,
the  draught  of  forgetfulness.

"  Strew  on  her  roses  "  is  a  quotation  from  Matthew  Arnold's
well-known  poem  Reqidescat,  familiar  to  Mrs.  Willett;  it  describes
the  passing  of  the  spirit  from  the  confinement  of  life  to  the
"  vasty  halls  of  Death."

Tt  is  not  apparent  to  a  reader  why  the  name  Ganymede
occurs,  but  it  appears  to  have  a  cross-correspondence  significance,
and  the  following  suggestions  may  be  made : — The  story  of
Ganymede  is  told  in  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  Book  X,  immediately
before  that  of  Hyacinthus,  which  had  been  introduced  by  MyersP
in  connexion  with  the  Lethe  question  put  by  Mr.  Dorr.
Again  in  the  first  book  of  the  JEneid  (1.  28)  the  name  of
Ganymede  occurs  in  connexion  with  the  wrath  of  Juno,  a
subject  discussed  at  considerable  length  in  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper ;  and  one  of  Mr.  Dorr's  questions  (Proc.  Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  175)  concerned  the  immediately  preceding  line  (1.
27).  The  next  words  of  the  script,  "Mrs.  Verrall  might  make
something  of  that,"  i.e.  of  the  name  of  Ganymede,  are  therefore
appropriately  spoken  by  anyone  who  knew  that  the  story  of
Ganymede  is  alluded  to  in  xEncid  I.  and  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had
written  a  paper  dealing  largely  with  the  knowledge  of  that
book  shown  by  MyersP.  Neither  of  these  facts  was  known  to
Mrs.  Willett.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  161


The  phrase,  "  Homeless  in  the  heart  of  Paradise,"  is  a  quotation
from  Myers's  poem  called  "  Immortality  "  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.,
p.  399)  connected  by  Mr.  Piddington  with  Horace's  Archytas
Ode  (I.  28).  Taken  in  connexion  with  the  opening  words  in  this
script,  it  points  to  an  intention,  underlying  the  whole  script  of
Feb.  10,  to  refer  to  that  particular  ode  of  Horace.

"Where  was  the  Sibyl?"  seems  a  reminiscence  of  Mr.  Dorr's
question,  "Where  did  the  Sibyl  live?"  {Proc.  Vol.  XXIV,
p.  144  ff.)

As  to  the  word  "  flavicomata  "  I  condense  notes  received  from
Mr.  Piddington  and  Mrs.  A^errall.

Flavicomata  means  yellow-haired.  The  word  is  not  extant,
but  is  correctly  formed.  With  this  word,  Mrs.  Willett  had  the
following  association, — she  had  seen  it  in  a  script  of  Mrs.
Verrall's,  where  on  Jan.  16,  1908,  it  was  written  (incorrectly)
in  two  portions,  "  tiavi  comata  "  and  applied  to  a  tree,  probably
a  laburnum,  thus :

"What  is  the  foreign  name  of  the  tree — something  su^'ests  its
yellow  hair — flavi  comata  (yellow  haired)."

The  application  of  the  epithet  flavicomata  to  a  tree  undoubtedly
recalls  to  a  Virgilian  scholar  the  auricomos  fetus,  "  gold-haired
branches,"  of  the  tree  which  iEneas  was  to  seek  in  the  woods
round  Avernus,  where  the  Sibyl  lived  {JEn,  VI.  141).  But  Mrs.
Willett  is  no  Virgilian  scholar,  and  it  is  difficult  to  discover
any  reason  in  her  literary  memories  for  the  transition  from  the
Sibyl's  dwelling  place  to  the  word  flavicomata.  Moreover,  as
Mr.  Piddington  points  out,  there  may  well  have  been  another
reason  for  the  introduction  at  this  point  of  the  word  flavi-
comata into  Mrs.  Willett's  script.  As  already  stated,  it  had
occurred  in  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett,
But  a  word  almost  equivalent  in  meaning,  and  of  the  same
grammatical  formation,  had  occurred  in  another  script  of  Mrs.
Verrall's,  which  Mrs.  Willett  had  not  seen,  but  which,  written
on  September  9,  1903,  is  printed  in  full  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,
pp.  427-428.  I  here  quote  only  such  parts  of  it  as  are
relevant  to  our  immediate  purpose  :

Auricomata  goldhaired,  Camilla's  yellow  hair
reminds.

flava  eomam —
L


162


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


nexit  in  hastam
Oritella

Coronata
Ariadne's  crown  in  the  sky.
C  comes  Ononis.

Auricomata — like  flavicomata,  a  non-existent  but  correctly
formed  word — means  "golden-haired,"  and  is  exactly  equivalent
to  the  auricomos  of  Am.  VI.  141.

Flava  comam  means  "  yellow  as  to  the  hair  "  and  is  equiva-
lent to  flavicomata.

Comes  Orionis  means  "  companion  of  Orion  "  and  is  a  quota-
tion from  Horace,  C.  I.  28,  the  "  Archytas "  Ode.

If  Mrs.  Willett's  flavicomata  he  regarded  as  referring  back
to  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  September  9,  1903,  with  its  "auri-
comata " — "flava  comam  " — and  "  comes  Orionis"  it  supplies  yet
another  proof  of  the  communicators  having  "  access  to  know-
ledge shown  elsewhere " ;  for  in  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper,  MyeiSp  had  spontaneously  shown  that  he  knew  that
Orion  is  associated  with  the  Ode  which  was  the  subject  of
the  "Horace  Ode  question"  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV,  pp.  150-
169  and  especially  pp.  157-158).  Flavicomata  thus  killed
three  birds  with  one  stone.  Implicit  in  it  were  allusions  to
the  Golden  Bough,  the  Sibyl,  and  Horace,  C.  I.  28.  For
economy  and  neatness  of  method,  this  pregnant  use  of  a
single  word  could  hardly  be  surpassed.

But  indeed  it  is  indisputable  that  many  words  in  the
Willett  script  now  under  consideration  allude  to  episodes  in
Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  which  are  discussed  by  Mr.  Piddington  and
Mrs.  Verrall  in  the  then  unpublished  volume  of  Proceedings
(Part  LX.).  Thus,  Ganymede  recalls  questions  in  Dorr's  sit-
tings about  the  context  of  passages  from  the  jEncid  (see
Proc.  Vol.  XXIV,  pp.  69-73);  "homeless"  etc.  recalls  the
Horace-ode  question  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  399)  which
was  the  subject  of  spontaneous  reference  by  MyersP  in  Dorr's
sittings  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  153);  "where  was  the
Sybil "  recalls  Dorr's  question  at  those  sittings  (see  Proc.  Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  144);  "the  draught  of  forge  tfuln  ess "  alludes  to
the  Lethe  question  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  91).

The  last  three  references  represent  the  three  subjects,  and
the  only  three  subjects from  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  which  are


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  163


dealt  with  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  his  then  unpublished
paper.

On  my  informing  Myersw,  by  message  in  sealed  envelope
(posted  25  Feby.  1910,  opened  and  read  by  Mrs.  W.  on  March
7),  how  good  and  clever  we  thought  the  whole  intention  of
"  Flavieomata,"  the  response  came,  on  March  7,  1910,

Yes  that  point  I  knew  had  a  good  chance.
It  was  Sidgwick  who  suggested  it
Hes  He  is  not  able  to  do  much  with  this
Machine but  he  can  through  me  assist
via  my  Machine  here.

I  expect  to  have  more  to  say  some  day  about  the  implication
of  a  sort  of  mediumship  on  that  side,  mingled  with  the  possibility
of  what  I  am  inclined  to  guess  may  be  an  ethereous  body,
which  is  here  indistinctly  suggested.  But  all  this  would
open  a  large  subject  which  can  well  await  further  treatment
hereafter.  Compare,  however,  a  hint  in  my  own  previously
published  little  book  "  The  Ether  of  Space,"  end  of  Chapter
VIII.

Then  the  script  of  March  7,  1910,  goes  on:

Write  again  the  Nightingale
I  want  that  seen  to

Pluto  not  not  Plato  this  time  but  PLUTO
Bees  Bees  the  hum  of  Bees.

Now,  "  Nightingale,"  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  recognised  reference
to  Lethe,  and  so  is  the  "hum  of  Bees,"  pp.  137,  138,  and  144.
Upon  it  Mrs.  Verrall  noted  in  May,  1910  :

There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  reference  here  is  to
Am.  vi.,  the  bees  round  the  lilies  at  Lethe's  stream.  The  word
hum  represents  the  Latin  "  strep  it  omnis  murmure  campus."  This  I
think  very  remarkable, — the  reference  I  mean  to  "  hum  of  bees  "  as
a  reminiscence  evoked  by  Lethe.  J.  O.  P.  will  tell  you  of  the  special
interest  that  the  passage  has  in  connexion  with  "lilies  and  poppies"
in  his  Lethe  paper.  And  if  I  have  not  sent  you  a  reprint  of  a
recent  article  of  mine  in  the  Classical  Review  I  will  do  so.

This  paper  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  in  the  Classical  Review  for
March,  1910, has reference to the association of  Bees  and


164


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Lilies  in  Virgil,  with  the  special  significance  which  he  probably
attached  to  the  symbolism.  But  I  confess  that  the  actual
communications  of  scholars  on  these  subjects  are  so  like  the
scattered  references  in  the  scripts, — both  of  those  which  have
now  appeared  in  Vol.  XXIV.  and  of  those  which  I  obtained
through  Mrs.  Willett  at  a  date  before  that  part  of  the  Proceedings
had  been  published, — that  it  requires  some  effort  to  discriminate
between  them ;  which  tends  to  confirm  my  impression  that  we
are  tapping  a  mind  full  of  literary  feeling  and  classical  scholar-
ship. And  the  advantage  of  the  fact  that  these  communications
have  come  to  me  is  obvious,  since  my  mind  is  only  potentially,
but  not  actually,  either  the  one  or  the  other.


Chap.  VII. Evidence  for  Scholarship.

One  of  the  points  which  Mrs.  Verrall  specially  notices  in
scripts  which  purport  to  come  from  Myers  is '  their  occasional
scholarly  character — beyond  any  ordinary  amateurish  acquaint-
ance with  classical  literature.  This  I  think  comes  out  clearly
in  the  material  received  through  Mrs.  Piper  by  Mr.  Dorr  (as
published  in  Part  LX.  of  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.),  but  it
comes  out  with  equal  strength  in  the  material  received  through
Mrs.  Willett,  who  is  quite  ignorant  of  Classics,  though  she
has  a  fair  amount  of  ordinary  literary  knowledge, — much  more
than  Mrs.  Piper  has.

A  simple  and  not  specially  striking  instance  of  accuracy  in
classical  allusion  shown  by  Willett  script  may  be  cited  as  an
illustration.  When  the  word  "  Hemlock  "  appeared  in  a  script
of  March  7,  1910,  the  continuation  was:

Hemlock  and  the  cold  slowly  rising,  met  in  serene  confidence
the  draught  of  deliverance.  See  also  the  Phsedo.  The  attitude  was
the  result  of  long  years  of  pondering,  and  of  intuitive  knowledge
the  same  as  we  are  now  arriving  at  by  the  slower  but  necessary
method  of  experiment.

These  few  words,  says  Mrs.  Verrall,  are  exceedingly  well
chosen  and  represent  both  the  account  by  Xenophon  (Memora-
bilia, iv.  8)  which  emphasises  the  "  deliverance,"  and  by  Plato
(Pltccdo)  which shows the  "  cold  slowly  rising "  the  "  serene


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Neiv  Script.  165


confidence  "  and  the  "  draught."  The  next  sentence  too — "  his
attitude  was  the  result  of  long  years  of  pondering  and  of
intuitive  knowledge," — is  a  good  and  scholarly  description.

It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  the  two  chief  authorities
for  the  life  of  Socrates  are  mentioned  in  Human  Personality,
Vol.  II.,  p.  95,  and  that  some  years  ago  Mrs.  Willett  read  a
translation  of  the  concluding  chapters  of  the  Phaedo.

I  myself  note  one  among  many  illustrations  of  classical
accuracy,  in  the  fact  that  between  the  rivers  mentioned  in  the
JEneid,  Book  VI.,  namely,  the  Styx,  Cocytus,  and  other  rivers
of  Hades  on  the  one  hand,  and  Lethe — a  river  washing  the
shores  of  the  Elysian  fields — on  the  other,  no  kind  of  confusion
has  ever  been  exhibited  by  a  Myers  control.  Such  confusion
is  not  always  avoided  by  scholars,  for  on  my  relating  to  an
exceptionally  learned  classical  Professor  some  part  of  the  Virgilian
reminiscence  stimulated  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-communicator
by  the  word  "  Lethe,"  he  at  once  cproted  the  famous  line
about  the  dead  stretching  out  their  hands  in  longing  toward
the  further  shore :  Tendehantque  manus  ripaz  ulterioris  amove.

But  the  souls  which  congregate  on  Lethe  banks, — and  which,
in  a  Virgilian  passage  alluded  to  in  the  script,  are  likened  to
the  swarmino-  of  bees, — are  not  thinking  of  the  farther  shore  at
all ;  they  do  not  want  to  get  across  Lethe,  they  want  to  drink
it.  It  is  the  dead  who  lie  unburied  on  the  earth  or  sea
who  stand  on  the  bank,  not  of  Lethe  but  of  Cocytus —
it  is  these  who  stretch  out  their  hands  in  longing  toward  the
i'arther  shore ;  for  they  are  not  allowed  to  cross  in  Charon's
boat  until  their  bodies  are  buried.

Indeed,  in  a  Myers  H.  V.  script  of  Sept.  1908  (see  Proe.
Yo\.  XXIV.,  p.  191)  this  river  of  Hades  is  definitely  referred
to  as  "  the  river  of  wailing,"  and  is  mentioned  in  the  same
sentence  with  Lethe  in  order  apparently  to  emphasise  the
distinction  between  them  :

No  no  go  not  to  Lethe,  and  the  river  of  wailing  too,
Upon  the  shore  they  stood  and  stretched  their  arms.

An  incident  showing  at  least  an  elementary  knowledge  of
Greek  on  the  part  of  one  of  the  inspirers  of  Willett  script, —
Gurneyw  probably — to  the  extent  at  any  rate  of  Greek  declen-
sions and  the  meaning  of  a  couple  of  words,  one  not  a  common


166


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


one,  (p)')iu.>i  and  xp/ovxo'c, — may  perhaps  be  noted  later  in  its
proper  place ;  but  another  incident  indicative  of  classical  know-
ledge may  be  conveniently  reported  here.

Prayer  of  Ajax.

When  speaking  of  the  difficulty  which  people  have  in  follow-
ing up  anything  which  negatives  the  trend  of  their  own  life
work,  and  of  the  absence  in  most  cases  of  any  strenuous  long-
ing for  illumination  whatever  might  be  the  result,  Myersw,
communicating  with  me  orally  in  May  1910, — in  a  manner
which  will  be  described  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter
— said  :

Light  more  light  though  it  should  blind  me.
A  prayer,  that  is,  a  prayer  long  ago.

To  which  I  replied  :

"  Yes  I  know,  the  prayer  of  dying  Goethe."

On  which  I  got  the  response :

Yes  but  there  is  a  classical  analogy.
Prayer  of  Ajax.

This  I  then  dimly  remembered,  and  with  assistance  found
it,  in  the  Iliad,  XVII.,  647,  ev  oe  (paei  kou  oXe&crov}

This  may  be  regarded  as  common  knowledge,  and  its  occur-
rence is  therefore  not  remarkable.  The  line  is  quoted  and
accurately  translated  in  the  biographical  Memoir  of  Henry
Bidgwick,  which  Mrs.  Willett  had  read ;  but  she  does  not
know  the  Greek  letters.  The  same  English  phrase  "  though  it
blind  me,"  without  the  Greek,  had  occurred  in  the  script  of
Miss  Helen  Verrall,  who  had  made  a  note  associating  it  with
both  Goethe  and  Ajax  ;  and  this,  too,  had  been  seen  by  Mrs.
Willett.  Mrs.  Willett  herself  associates  it  with  Goethe,  so
she  tells  me  in  reply  to  an  enquiry,  but  with  nothing  else.

1  The  prayer  is  made  by  Telamonian  Ajax  in  the  midst  of  the  strange  darkness
which  the  gods  had  sent  to  protect  the  body  of  Patroclus  and  to  assist  the
Trojans.  The  appeal  is  for  light,  even  though  it  be  fatal,  and  may  be  para-
phrased thus — If  thou  wilt  destroy  us,  yet  destroy  us  in  the  light  ;  or,  let  us
have  light  whatever  be  the  consequence  ;  or,  let  us  perish  in  the  face  of  day.
Goethe  of  course  used  the  word  "Light,"'  as  it  was  used  in  the  above  script,
for  mental  illumination.


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  167

Now  comes  the  notable  incident  of  which  the  above  is  a
necessary  though  detached  and  independent  prelude.

About  a  week  later  I  had  another  opportunity  of  receiving
communications  personally  ;  and  after  a  great  number  of  other
subjects  the  question  came  orally :

Now  Lodge  do  you  want  to  say  anything  to  me  ?

I  then  said,  "  May  T  ask  a  question  ? "  and  on  permission
being  given  I  asked,  a  propos  of  nothing,  what  a  certain
sentence  meant,  namely,

ev  06  (pdei icai  oXecrcroi'.

The  oral  conversation  through  Mrs.  Willett  which  followed
I  had  better  give  in  full ;  it  will  be  perceived  that  Mrs.
Willett  speaks  of  the  communicator  in  the  third  person,  as
"  he,"  though  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  a  few  words  are
reported  in  the  first  person :

O.  J.  L.  Do  the  words  [just  cited, — -spoken  thus,  without  translation
or  explanation]  mean  anything  to  you  ?

Mrs.  W.  Greek.  How  shall  I  make  this  clear.
Where  comrades  wander.
Then  he  says  a  word  with  a  g  and  s's.
Glossolally,  that's  the  word.
He  says  that  that's  a  separate  faculty.

0.  J.  L.  Very  well,  perhaps  I  had  better  not  bother  him  through  this
machine,  but  ask  it  through  a  trance  medium.

Wait  a  minute,  give  him  a  chance.

0.  J.  L.  Shall  I  repeat  the  sentence  1

No  he  has  got  it  pretty  clear.

[Mrs.  Willett  murmured  it  over  nearly  correctly,  except  that
the  last  word  was  pronounced  by  her  more  like  the
English  word  "  lesson  "  or  "  lessen  "  ;  which  she  immedi-
ately corrected,  saying,  "  He  says  it  is  oless-on."]

He  says  it  makes  him  think  of  comrades,  but  it  is  difficult
to  explain  why  ;  and  of  change,  complete  change.

It  makes  him  think  of  his  own  death,  something  of  his  own
life.

That  sort  of  question  has  a  better  chance  when  asked
through  an  entranced  subject.


168


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Will  you  try  it  with  Mrs.  Piper?

What  you  have  got  down  he  knows  will  appear  to  you
fearful  rubbish,  but  it's  not  altogether  rubbish.

Think  of  trying  to  dictate  to  a  First  Standard  child,  that  is
the  condition.

Then  he  says,  Ajax.

Then  he  says,  Cassandra;  and  surely  any  fool  can  see  the
connexion  between  Cassandra  and  a  god  with  wings,  no
that's  not  it,  Mercury. And  then  he  says

Though  it  should  blind  me.  Though  it  should  blind  me
(repeated).

And  he  says  he  fell,  struck  by  a  fork,

And  then  he  says,  he  will.  .  .  .

Mother  and  Lover  of  Men  the  sea,1

The  Pagan  singer  of  sweet  things.

Now  Lodge  she  has  groped  far  enough,

Stop  writing.

Upon  this  I  have  to  note  that  the  first  idea — that  about
comrades — evidently  emanates  from  Mrs.  Willett  herself,  since
"  comrades "  occurs  in  a  Greek  line  well  known  and  often
repeated  in  connexion  with  Myers,  about  which  I  had  spoken
to  her  some  months  previously.

But  the  detection  of  the  identity  of  these  last  Greek  words
with  what  had  been  said  previously,  and  their  close  connexion
with  the  phrase  "  Though  it  should  blind  me,"  cannot  be  due
to  chance,  and  is  surely  beyond  Mrs.  Willett's  normal  know-
ledge. There  was  nothing  to  indicate  any  connexion  with
what  had  been  a  mere  episode  on  a  previous  occasion  among
a  mass  of  other  material.  I  was  present,  but  I  gave  no  sort
of  indication,  when  the  word  Ajax  was  said,  that  it  was
specially  acceptable.

The  Ajax  who  insulted  Cassandra  and  who  fell  struck  by  a
fork — whether  of  lightning  or  Neptune's  trident  does  not  matter
— and  was  drowned  in  the  sea,  is  not  the  greater  Ajax  who
made  the  prayer,  but  is  Ajax  Oileus.

The  immediate  reference  to  Swinburne  when  the  sea  has
been  thought  of  is  very  natural.

1  Swinburne,  Triumph  of  Time  :

"I  will  go  back  to  the  great  sweet  mother,
Mother  and  lover  of  men,  the  sea."


lxiil] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  169

The  phrase  "  Then  he  says  '  he  will ' "  may  possibly  be
intended  to  refer  to  the  bragging  of  this  latter  Ajax,  which
resulted  in  his  sudden  doom.

I  consider  the  mention  of  Ajax  in  connexion  with  the  Greek
sentence,  and  the  virtual  though  not  literal  translation  of  it,  to
be  quite  good  ;  but  the  apparent  confusion  between  the
greater  and  lesser  Ajax  must  be  counted  as  an  exceptional
unscholarly  defect.


Chap.  VIII. Non-Evidential  Statements.

In  addition  to  script  which  reached  me  by  post  I  had  in
May,  1910,  some  short  personal  interviews  with  Mrs.  Willett,
for  the  purpose  of  receiving  automatic  communications ;  and
at  these  sometimes  the  pencil  was  laid  down,  and  she  began
to  talk  instead  of  writing :  thus  making  it  more  like  a  "  voice-
sitting "  with  Mrs.  Piper  instead  of  a  "  writing-sitting,"  except
that  Mrs.  Willett  did  not  go  into  any  kind  of  trance  but  merely
sat  and  spoke.  It  appears  to  be  a  sort  of  inspirational  speak-
ing, but  not  of  a  vague  or  general  kind,  it  is  definitely  associated
with  a  particular  personality  e.g.  Myersw  or  Gurneyw,  and  has
been  found  to  be  evidentially  worth  attention.

The  utterance  is  often  fluent  and  rapid,  and  note-taking  is
difficult ;  indeed  it  hardly  seems  to  be  desired.  I  noted  all
I  could,  being  able  to  write  very  rapidly,  though  I  regret  to
say  very  illegibly  also.  Consequently  the  report,  of  which
only  samples  are  now  given,  is  not  always  perfectly  verbatim.
Most  of  it  is  correct,  however,  and  from  it  I  will  select
almost  at  random  a  few  statements  from  the  Myersw  com-
munications, which  may  be  of  interest  although  they  are  of
a  non-evidential  character. One  is  to  the  effect  that

Telepathy  is  not  a  matter  of  the  organism,  nor  of  any  shadow
of  it.  It  does  not  pertain  to  matter,  nor  is  it  the  result
of  any  physical  peculiarity.  No,  it  is  the  law  of  the  Mete-
therial,  it  is  the  mark  of  evolution  in  human  faculty,  the
extension  of  man's  powers  not  evolved  by  the  friction  of
material  self-preservation  :  not  protoj)lasmic  but  cosmic.

Some  of  this  is  certainly  rather  characteristic.


170


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


So  also  is  the  following  rebuke  addressed  to  me  in  connexion
with  my  preliminary  non-recognition  of  the  appropriateness  of  his
answer  to  my  Lethe  question,  namely,  the  answer  "  the  will
again  to  live,"  and  his  references  to  reincarnation :

Why  did  you  say  that  the  reference  to  reincarnation  was  in-
appropriate when  it  emerged  as  an  answer  what  had  Lethe
reminded  him  of?  You  saw  in  it  a  repetition  of  something
that  the  machine  had  been  reading.  It  was  more  than  that.
[See  App.  B.  above,  p.  146.]

Why  did  you  send  her  your  paper*?  [An  unpublished  paper  on
Incarnation.]  You  sent  it  to  her  supraliminal.  [I  had  done
so,  in  January  1910,  and  it  was  unwise.]

I  wanted  to  select  from  that  subject  but  then  the  supra  rose  up
and  beat  me  back.  It  fitted  in  with  what  I  had  been  successful
in  adumbrating  with  regard  to  the  Ode.  You  thought  it  was
based  on  something  you  had  been  writing,  but  you  are  not
the  only  man  who  has  written  on  that  subject  !

It  might  be  illuminating  to  Miss  Johnson  to  realise  that  we  suffer
from  them  just  as  much  as  they  do  from  us.  How  much
more  ready  I  am  to  hear  than  you  to  pray.  Think  of  what
somebody  said  that  these  things  come  not  forth  save  by
prayer  and  fasting.  That  was  a  sort  of  saying  that  was  on
the  level  of  development  which  had  then  been  reached  by  the
hearers,  but  you  are  able  to  translate  that  into  terms  suitable
for  the  present  state,  and  (notes  illegible)  of  "prayer"  replace
it  by  withdrawal  from  immediate  multiple  impressions,  leaving
as  it  were  a  surface  to  collect,  which  is  capable  of  receiving
impressions  and  is  virgin  of  any.  (On  such  a  surface)  impres-
sions can  be  registered  (but  not  on  one)  crowded  up  and
down  and  through  with  the  ordinary  business  of  life.

And  translate  "  fasting  "  into  the  newer  word  abstention.

You  will  see  Lodge  in  time  this  will  be  realised,  and  people  will
think  it  worth  while  to  provide  the  proper  conditions,  just
as  they  think  it  worth  while  now  to  give  to  wheat  scientific
treatment ;  and  they  won't  (attempt  communication)  after
neglecting  almost  every  necessary  condition.

Don't  mind  going  slowly.

They  won't  then  say — now  then  you  show  us  what  you  can  do.
What  I  want  to  drive  in  is  the  necessity  for  co-operation.
Investigation  at  arm's  length  has  had  its  day,  and  there's  so  little
that  is  independent  of  conditions.


lxiil] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  171


No  one  is  so  overpowered  by  my  ignorance  as  I  am  :  I,  Myers.

Every  machine  is  different,  and  experience  is  the  sole  instructor.

But  while  I  am  experimenting  I  may  be — -it  is  necessary  to
experiment,  I  myself  now  experiment — and  yet  I  may  be
losing  ground.  And  if  I  don't  experiment,  and  don't  advance
with  fearful  risk,  how  are  you  going  to  get  the  only  minds
worth  having  to  take  this  seriously.

This  also  :

Lodge  the  most  difficult  things  are  the  most  worth  doing.

Dare  to  fail  is  becoming  my  motto — dare  to  risk  failure.

There  is  no  doubt  there  is  a  risk  in  attempting  things  at  this

stage  of  the  enquiry.
Much  is  lost — some  in the passage  from  us  to  you,  some  in

your  own  incapability  of  interpreting  things  already  through.
Chiefly  in  the  lack  shown  in  some  quarters  of  adopting  as  a

working  hypothesis  the  theory  that  we  are  what  we  claim

to  be.

And  a^ain  this  :

It  is  no  doubt  legitimate  to  say  that  ideal  conditions  cannot  be
realised ;  but  whether  they  can  be  realised  or  not  does  not
affect  the  fact.

There  is  an  extraordinary  obstinacy  of  the  investigators.  They
have  to  do  with  delicate  machines  and  they  won't  take  the
trouble  to  study  them.

A  great  deal  of  the  atmosphere  is  too — I  shall  call  it  superior —
too  superior  in  its  attitude.

You  know  the  text,  he  that  is  not  like  a  little  child.

It  is  much  better  for  them  to  learn  than  to  dogmatise.  There  is  an
awful  danger  in  your  thinking — a  heap  of  you — that  the  learn-
ing stage  is  so  much  over  now  that  you  can  think  you  have
precedents,  can  lay  down  rules,  and  that  sensitives  can  be
standardised.  Whereas,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  many
varieties,  and  you  can't  lay  down  canons,  you  can't  bring
them  up  to  a  standard.  You  have  still  much  to  learn  ;  so
have  we. Do  you  admit  this  1

And  another  sentence  is  of  interest :

He  is  trying  to  make  himself  real  to  people  who  are  not  only
conscious  of  their  own  reality,  but  who  are  among  people


172  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

who  admit  their  reality.  How  much  of  your  sense  of  reality
is  due  to  that?  Think  that  over.  There  is  a  paralysing
sense  of  isolation  in  the  experience  of  coming  back.


Chap.  IX. Discussion  of  the  Possibility  of  a  Normal
Explanation  of  the  Facts.

Most  of  the  script  of  major  importance  received  by  me,
and  dealt  with  above,  seems  to  have  been  started  into  activity
by  my  question  about  Lethe.  At  first  the  answers  were  con-
fined to  reminiscences  of  Lethe  itself,  but  the  idea  was  speedily
caught  that  I  wanted  to  detect  in  Myersw  knowledge  of
matters that  had  been  referred  to  by  other  Myers  controls,

I  know  what  Lodge  wants,  he  wants  me  to  prove  that  I
have  access  to  knowledge  shown  elsewhere.

This  was,  indeed,  exactly  the  object  of  my  question, — and
Myersw  entered  into  the  game  con  amove,  flooding  me  with
literary and classical  allusions.

But,  of  all  the  scripts  thus  received,  I  think  none  excelled
in  interest  the  one  obtained  on  the  first  occasion — immediately
after  the  envelope  containing  my  question  had  been  opened  by
Mrs.  Willett — namely,  on  February  4,  1910.  The  extraordinary
appropriateness  of  the  answers  then  given,  to  the  idea  of
"  Lethe "  as  treated  in  classical  and  modern  literature,  seems
to  me  a  truly  remarkable  fact.

It  will  be  contended  that  Mrs.  Willett  is  simply  reproducing
things  already  within  her  normal  knowledge  (both  supra-  and
sub-liminal).  A  good  many  of  the  allusions  made  in  the
script  have  reference  to  things  that  we  know  she  has  seen
and  partially  read, — for  instance,  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Essay  on
Virgil,  Human  Personality,  Church's  Stories,  and  those  numbers
of  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.  which  are  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Verrall
on  p.  215,  besides  ordinary  literary  sources  known  to  educated
people.  Moreover  not  a  few  of  the  phrases  employed  in  her
script  had  already  appeared  in  scripts  of  other  automatists,  some
of  which  she  had  seen.  The  history  of  what  she  had  seen
must  be  narrated  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  but  I  understand  that  in
her  judgment  the  evidence  is  not  thereby  weakened. The  way


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  New  Script.  173


in  which  these  allusions  are  combined  or  put  together,  and
their  connexion  with  each  other  indicated,  is  the  striking
thing, — it  seems  to  me  as  much  beyond  the  capacity  of
Mrs.  Willett  as  it  would  be  beyond  my  own  capacity.  I
believe  that  if  the  matter  is  seriously  studied,  and  if  Mrs.
Willett's  assertions  concerning  her  conscious  knowledge  and
supraliminal  procedure  are  believed,  this  will  be  the  opinion  of
critics  also ;  they  will  realise,  as  I  do,  that  we  are  tapping  the
reminiscences  not  of  an  ordinarily  educated  person  but  of  a
scholar, — no  matter  how  fragmentary  and  confused  some  of  the
reproductions  are.  I  quite  recognise  that  safety  and  credit  lie
in  the  direction  of  forcing,  even  into  absurdity,  every  explanation
that  can  by  any  means  be  considered  normal ;  but,  in  spite  of
that,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  no  normal  explanation  that  has
as  yet  been  suggested  wears  the  garb  of  truth.

The  problem  that  has  to  be  solved  is  how  it  comes  about
that  all  those  appropriate  literary  and  classical  reminiscences
flow  from  Mrs.  Willett's  hand  in  response  to  a  given
stimulus ;  and  I  confess  that  I  cannot  conceive  any  normal
explanation  for  it,  except  the  supposition  of  fraud  on  the
part  of  Mrs.  Willett.  Fraud,  I  mean  in  this  sense, — that
instead  of  really  opening  the  envelope  and  reading  the  ques-
tion  for  the  first  time  on  February  4th,  1910,  as  recorded
on  p.  121  above, — just  when  she  was  ready  for  her  automatic
writing,  with  no  source  of  information  open  to  her  except  her
own  knowledge, — she  had  in  reality,  and  contrary  to  her
statement  which  I  fully  believe,  opened  the  envelope  some
weeks  previously,  had  industriously  studied  the  subject  with
the  aid  of  classical  friends,  and  was  now  retailing  information
thus  normally  obtained.

Such  a  supposition — grotesque  to  any  one  who  knows  Mrs.
Willett — is  one  that  by  a  stranger  may  be  preferred  to  any
other,  in  this  particular  instance,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  it
conspicuously  fails  to  account  for  knowledge  of  what  had  come
through  in  certain  scripts  of  other  automatists — scripts  which
were  certainly  unknown  to  Mrs.  Willett.  And — if  I  may
paraphrase  a  sentence  of  Henry  Sidgwick's  in  an  early  address
to  the  Society,  Proc.  Vol.  I.,  p.  12 — it  will  be  an  indication  of
the  value  and  success  of  the  effort  made  by  the  communicators,
and  of  the  test  which  they  have  supplied  us  with,  if  such  a


174


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


supposition  is  seriously  urged  as  competent  to  furnish  a
normal  explanation.

It  may  be  said — for  such  things  are  often  said — that
it  is  the  most  scientific  course  to  press  a  normal  explana-
tion at  all  hazards,  and  in  face  of  every  obstacle,  before
admitting  anything  else.  With  this  contention,  plausible
as  it  sounds,  and  true  though  it  is  in  many  cases,  I
do  not  agree.  The  scientific  attitude  is  to  find  if  possible
the  true  solution,  not  the  most  plausible  or  superficial
one,  of  any  problem.  And  it  is  by  no  means  scientific  to
ignore  a  number  of  the  facts  and  conditions,  when  devising
even  a  provisional  explanation.  Some  view  which  occurs  to
a  casual  reader  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  supersede  and
overpower  the  deliberate  judgment  of  a  careful  student  of  the
facts.  I  assert  that  no  careful  student  of  the  phenomena — ■
that  is  no  one  who  painstakingly  scrutinises  the  whole  of  the
evidence — can  be  permanently  satisfied,  in  this  case,  with  a
normal  explanation ;  and  I  have  not  scrupled  to  indicate
throughout  my  own  view.

For  instance,  at  the  outset,  the  kind  of  references  and  classical
allusions  which  would  be  given  by  a  fraudulent  writer  would
surely  be  of  an  inferior  and  less  scholarly  description  than  those
which  have  actually  been  obtained.  Moreover,  although  the
hypothesis  of  fraud  may  manage  to  survive  in  connexion
with  the  occurrences  on  one  particular  date,  when  Mrs.  Willett
was  alone,  it  will  not  explain  what  happened  on  other  days,,
when  I  was  present  myself  and  put  questions  and  received
answers  without  giving  any  sort  of  opportunity  for  "  hunting
things  up."

People  will  no  doubt  say, — oh  that  was  telepathy !  Yes,,
but  that  is  not  a  normal  explanation  ;  and  it  is  entirely
different  from  the  hypothesis  of  fraud.  The  same  explanation
will  not  tit  the  two  sets  of  circumstances  ;  telepathy  will
not  explain  the  one,  fraud  will  not  explain  the  other.

The  only  alternative  which  will  explain  both,  is  the
supposition  that  Mrs.  Willett  is  a  classical  scholar  in  disguise.

But  then  that  will  not  explain  the  obtaining  of  the  word
"  Dorr,"  nor  for  the  knowledge  shown  of  the  writings  of  other
automatists.  Some  other  hypothesis  has  to  be  invented  for  all
that:  and  no  doubt  one  will  be  forthcoming. But  it  is  almost


lxiii.] Classical  Scholarship,  etc.,  in  some  Nexv  Script.  175

proverbial  in  science  that  whenever  a  fresh  hypothesis  has  to
be  invented  to  account  for  every  fresh  case,  it  is  an  indication
that  the  explorer  is  off  the  track  of  truth.  He  feels  secure
and  happy  in  his  advance  only  when  one  and  the  same
hypothesis  will  account  for  everything — both  old  and  new —
which  he  encounters.

The  one  hypothesis  which  seems  to  me  most  nearly  to
satisfy  that  condition,  in  this  case,  is  that  we  are  in  indirect
touch  with  some  part  of  the  surviving  personality  of  a  scholar
— and  that  scholar  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

That  has  gradually  come  to  be,  I  confess,  my  own  working
hypothesis,  which  I  am  ready  to  abandon  freely  on  good
grounds — but  on  good  grounds  only, — not  in  deference  to
sentimental  prejudice.  I  admit  that  it  is  a  momentous  con-
clusion— when  it  comes  to  be  a  "  conclusion," — I  doubt  if  we
any  of  us  realise,  to  the  full,  how  momentous.  But  in
science  we  are  not  unused  to  discoveries  of  considerable
magnitude  ;  and  if,  after  due  scrutiny  facts  become  compulsory,
men  of  science  must  be  ready  to  enlarge  their  scheme  of  the
universe  so  as  to  admit  them.


176


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


II.

NOTES  ON  MES.  WILLETT'S  SCRIPTS  OF  FEBRUARY,

1910.

By  MRS.  A.  W.  VERRALL.

In  this  paper  I  propose  to  supplement  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  general
account  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script :

(1)  by  a  brief  historical  statement  covering  the  period  between
March,  1908,  when  answers  to  a  question  about  Lethe  were
obtained  from  MyersP,  and  February,  1910,  when  the  repeated
question  was  answered  by  Myersw ;

(2)  by  a  detailed  examination  of  the  probable  sources  of  the
quotations  and  allusive  phrases  of  which  Mrs.  Willett's  script
largely  consists.

The  investigation  of  these  two  subjects  has  increased  my  sense
of  the  value  of  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  of  February,  1910,  by
adding  further  evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge  on  her  part,
and  by  emphasising  the  closeness  of  interconnexion  between  the
intelligences  which  we  call  Myers w,  MyersP,  MyersH,  etc.,  and  so
reinforcing  the  claim  that  each  of  these  intelligences  makes  to
represent  the  same  underlying  personality.  For,  while  Mrs.
Willett  was  completely  ignorant  of  what  had  passed  at  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908,  and  of  the  very  fact
that  he  had  had  sittings  in  1909,  the  statements  of  Myersw  were
appropriate  to  an  intelligence  aware  of  the  conversations  between
Mr.  Dorr  and  MyersF  in  those  two  years.  Again,  the  apparent
incoherence  of  the  phrases  used  by  Myersw  is  reduced  to  order,
and  their  sequence  becomes  intelligible,  when  we  are  acquainted
with  the  contents  of  other  automatic  scripts,  contents  not  known,
when  the  scripts  were  obtained,  to  Mrs.  Willett,  nor  known  as  a


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


177


whole  to  any  one  living  person.  Various  persons  were  familiar
with  parts  of  the  scripts  in  question,  but  no  one  of  us  possessed
as  a  whole  the  knowledge  which,  now  that  it  has  been  collected
together,  converts  a  jumble  of  disconnected  phrases  into  an  intel-
ligible sequence  of  associated  ideas.  This  fact  is  an  important
element  not  to  be  overlooked  in  any  attempt  to  frame  a  hypothesis
which  will  account  for  the  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script.

The  supplementary  evidence  here  brought  forward  was  for  the
most  part  inaccessible  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  it  seems  con-
venient to  present  it  to  the  reader  in  a  separate  paper.

I.  From  March,  1908,  to  March,  1910.

Considerable  time  elapsed  between  the  date  when  Mr.  Dorr
asked  MyersP  what  the  word  Lethe  suggested  to  him  and  the
answer  to  that  question  by  Myersw,  after  its  repetition  by  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  to  Mrs.  Willett.  It  may  be  useful  to  state  here
what  associations  with  the  word  Lethe  had,  during  that  interval,
received  particular  attention  from  the  small  group  of  persons
aware  of  the  earlier  incident  and  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Willett's
phenomena.  In  this  statement  1  have  included  notes  of  the  dates
at  which,  by  reading  books  or  by  seeing  copies  of  certain  selected
scripts,  Mrs.  Willett  obtained  normal  knowledge  likely  to  have
affected  the  contents  of  her  script.  It  should,  however,  be
remembered  that  there  was  no  reason  why  her  attention  should
have  been  directed  to  allusions,  in  what  she  read,  to  Lethe.

The  summary  is  arranged  as  far  as  possible  in  chronological
order  and  is  followed  by  detailed  explanations  of  points  that
require  fuller  treatment.

Chronological  Sum  mary.

On  March  23,  1908,  in  the  course  of  sittings  held  with  Mrs.
Piper  between  March  9  and  May  26,  1908,  and  largely  occupied
with  attempts  to  revive  the  literary  memories  of  Frederic  Myers,1
Mr.  Dorr  asked  of  MyersP  the  question  :  "  What  does  the  word
Lethe  suggest  to  you  ?  "  The  answers  given  consisted  chiefly  of
allusions  to  Ovid's  account  of  the  source  of  the  water  of  Lethe  as
told  in  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  (Met.  XL),  but  incidentally

JSee  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  Part  LX.,  published  in  April,  1910.

M


178


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


showed  a  knowledge  of  certain  Virgilian  associations  with  Lethe,
as  an  Elysian  river  (Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  134-5)  visited  by
Aeneas  in  company  with  the  Sibyl  (Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.
144-50). None  of  these  allusions  were  recognised  by  Mr.  Dorr.

In  October,  1908,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  made  a  preliminary  examina-
tion of  the  record  of  these  sittings,  and  in  November,  1908,  I
made  a  detailed  study  of  the  classical  allusions  in  them,  but  in  my
ignorance  of  Ovid's  Metamorphose*  I  failed  to  trace  any  coherence
in  the  answers  of  MyersP  to  Mr.  Dorr's  question  about  Lethe.

On  December  13,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.
Piper,  at  which,  in  continuance  of  his  earlier  experiment,  he  read
aloud  several  times  in  Latin  the  speech  1  of  Anchises  (jEn.,  VI,,
724-751)  and  also  a  passage  from  Swinburne's  Hymn  of  Man —
in  the  Songs  before  Sunrise— quoted  in  Frederic  Myers's  Science
anel  a.  Future  Life  (p.  177).  The  control  showed  no  signs  of
recognising  either  passage,  but  at  the  close  of  the  sitting  MyersP
stated  that  he  would  refer  to  the  Latin  within  a  few  hours  "  at
Mrs.  Verrall's."  I  knew  nothing  of  what  had  taken  place  at
these  sittings,  and  indeed  was  not  aware  till  April,  1909,  that
Mr.  Dorr  had  had  any  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  except  those
between  March  and  May,  1908.

On  December  21,  1908,  I  read  through  the  Sixth  JEneid  for
the  purpose  of  a  paper,2  which  was  completed  on  January  11,
1909 ;  between  these  two  dates  there  were  references  to  Virgil  by
Myersv.  Thus  in  my  script  of  December  29,  1908,  it  was  said
that  in  every  script  containing  a  single  word  of  Virgil  something
would  be  found  derived  from  an  external  source,  as  distinguished
from  the  subliminal  self  of  the  automatist ;  on  January  6,
1909,  the  script  contained  words  noted  at  the  time  as  a  transla-
tion of  Virgil's  lines  (JEii.,VI.,  129-31)  describing  those  admitted
to  the  underworld  ;  and  on  January  11,  1909,  Myersv  wrote  that
"the  Virgil"  had  helped,  and  that  he  thought  he  could  get  a
reflexion  of  the  thought  elsewhere.3

Meanwhile,  on  January  4,  1909,  and  again  on  January  5,

1  For  an  account  of  this  speech,  see  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  paper  above,  pp.  184,  135,
144.

2  Subsequently  published  in  the  March,  1009,  number  of  the  Magazine  of  the
National  Home  Reading  Union.

3 The  text  of  the  scripts  is  given  below,  p.  183.  The  script  of  Jan.  6,  1909,  was
subsequently  found  to  contain  a  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Willett  on  a
literaiy  but  non-classical  subject,  which  it  is  hoped  shortly  to  publish.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


179


1909,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  Myers  P  translations  by  Cranch  and
by  Frederic  Myers,  of  JEneid,  VI.  724-751  (Anchises'  speech),
and  also  in  Latin  JEneid,  VI.  883-886  (Lilies  for  Marcellus).
Translations  were  also  read  of  passages  from  Lucretius,  Book  III.,
and  Virgil,  Georgia  II.,  and  Eclogue  IV.  The  greater  part  of
both  sittings  was  occupied  with  reading  to  the  control,  and
nothing  was  said  in  the  trance  indicating  any  recognition  by
Myers  P  of  the  Virgilian  passages.

In  February,  1909,  Mr.  Piddington  was  at  work  on  the
paper  subsequently  published  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  under  the
title  "  A  Prelude  and  a  Sequel  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question,"
and  about  February  28  lie  found  the  passage  in  Ovid's  Meta-
morphoses which  for  the  first  time  explained  to  us  the  allusions
to  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  by  Myers  P  in  March -May,
1908.  Between  March  and  July,  1909,  he  was  engaged  in
writing  the  papers  on  "  Three  Incidents  "  from  those  sittings,
which  were  published  later  in  Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.  In  the  course
of  the  summer  the  contents  of  these  papers  were  communicated
to  the  small  group  of  persons — of  whom  Mrs.  Willett  was,
of  course,  not  one — engaged  in  investigating  the  records  of  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings  before  they  were  published.

On  March  1,  1909,  Mr.  Dorr,  before  having  heard  anything  of
Mr.  Piddington's  discoveries,  read  to  MyersP,  in  the  original,
three  passages  from  JEneid,  VI.,  namely,  124-129  (descent
to  Avernus),  143-8  (description  of  Golden  Bough),  883-
886  (Lilies  for  Marcellus).  and  translations  of  the  last  two,,
and  also  of  724-751  (Anchises'  speech).  At  the  suggestion
of  Mr.  Piddington,  but  without  knowing  why  the  suggestion
was  made,  he  also  during  the  sitting  read  aloud  in  Latin  the
first  six  lines  of  Horace,  Odes,  I.  28  (Archytas),  mentioned
the  phrase  Adscriptas  glebae,  and  read  aloud  in  Greek  the
words  of  Achilles  (Od.  XL  489),  which  Mr.  Piddington  believes
to  have  been  associated  in  Frederic  Myers's  mind  with  that
Ode  of  Horace  (Proc,  XXIV,  150-169).  Confident,  though
erroneous,  statements  were  made  by  the  Piper-controls  in  their
attempts  to  identify  the  authorship  of  the  various  passages
read.  Successful  attempts  at  cross-correspondence  were  made
in  this  sitting,1  but  no  knowledge  whatever  was  shown  of  the
passages  read  by  Mr.  Dorr.

1  Only  one  is  noticed  in  this  paper,  below,  p.  184.


180


Mrs,  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


On  April  26,  1909,  I  heard  that  on  December  13,  1908,
and  March  1,  1909,  MyersP  had  expressed  to  Mr.  Dorr  the
intention  of  conveying  in  my  script  allusions  to  JEneid,  VI.
724-751  (Anchises'  speech),  and  124-129  (descent  to  Avernns).

On  April  29,  1909,  Miss  Verrall's  script,  written  in  my
presence,  combined  with  "jam  satis"  (a  quotation  from  Horace,
Odes,  I.  2)  the  phrase  "  Tu  Marcellus  eris  "  (JSneid,  VI.  883).
This  phrase  was  repeated  in  H.V.  script,  again  in  connexion
with  the  same  Ode  of  Horace,  on  May  6,  1909.  Allusions
to  the  Golden  Bough  (JEneid,  VI.  201-9)  appeared  in  H.V.
script  of  May  11  and  13,  1909.

On  May  19,  1909,  I  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett,  who  had  not
seen  the  above-described  H.V.  scripts,  the  following  questions
to  be  addressed  to  Myersw :  (1)  'Please  make  clear  the  con-
nexion between  "  tu  Marcellus  eris"  and  "jam  satis"';  (2)
'  please  explain  why  the  Golden  Bough  is  mentioned,'  telling
her  that  the  questions  referred  to  recent  H.V.  script.  No
answer  was  obtained  from  Mrs.  Willett,  as  she  had  no  oppor-
tunity, while  trying  for  script,  of  putting  the  questions  to  the
communicator.

On  June  26,  1909,  Mrs.  Willett  read  parts  of  F.  W.  H.
Myers's  Essays,  Classical  and  Modern,  including  the  Essay  on
Virgil.

On  July  26,  1909,  copies  of  Miss  Verrall's  above-described
script  (April  29,  May  6,  May  11  and  May  13),  were  shown  to
Mrs.  Willett.

In  August,  1909,  Mrs.  Willett  read  Euskin's  Sesame  and
Lilies,  which  incidentally  mentions  Dante's  "  Matilda  by  the
edge  of  happy  Lethe."

On  September  28,  1909,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  sent  to  Mrs.
Willett  the  covering  letter  and  the  closed  envelope,  containing
the  question  about  Lethe  to  be  addressed,  when  an  opportunity
occurred,  to  Myersw  as  described  in  his  paper.  Mr.  Piddington
was  informed  of  this  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

On  October  1,  1909,  I  heard  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  that  he
had  thus  sent  an  exact  repetition  of  the  question  asked  by
Mr.  Dorr  :  "  What  does  the  word  Lethe  suggest  to  you  ? "
The  expectation — so  far  as  there  was  any  expectation — both
of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  of  me,  was  that  this  question  might
elicit  from  Myersw  allusions  similar  to  those  produced  in  Mr.


lxiil]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willetfs  Scripts.


181


Dorr's  sittings  of  1908  by  Myers P,  i.e.  to  the  Metamorphoses
of  Ovid.  Mrs.  Willett  was  in  complete  ignorance  of  what
had  taken  place  at  those  sittings.

On  October  28,  1909,  an  abbreviated  arrangement  of  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  on  Lethe  (Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  86-144)
was  read  by  Miss  Verrall  in  London  at  a  meeting  of  the
S.P.K.,  for  Members  and  Associates  only.  No  report  of  that
paper  or  of  its  subject  appeared  in  the  Journal  or  elsewhere.
Mrs.  Willett  was  not  present  nor  did  she  hear  anything
about  the  meeting  from  anyone.  The  two  papers  entitled
"  The  Sibyl "  and  "  A  Prelude  and  a  Sequel  to  the  Horace  Ode
question,"  subsequently  published  in  the  Proceedings  (Vol.
XXIV.,  pp.  144-169),  were  not  read  at  the  meeting.

In  January,  1910,  I  learnt  from  Mrs.  Willett  that  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  closed  envelope  had  not  yet  been  opened  by
her.

On  February  4,  1910,  Mrs.  Willett  opened  this  envelope,
and  answers  from  Myersw  were  obtained,  as  described  in  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  paper,  on  February  4,  5  and  10.

In  March,  1910,  in  the  Classical  Review  was  published  a
paper,  long  planned  by  me,  and  written  about  November,  1909,
which  dealt  with  two  points  in  the  Sixth  JEnevl,  11.  27-30
(sculpture  on  the  temple  near  the  Sibyl's  cave),  and  707-9
(lilies  by  Lethe's  stream).

This  concludes  the  chronological  summary.  Some  points
require  further  comment.

Attempt  at  Cross-correspondences  on  the  Sixth  JEneid

While  the  answers  of  MyersP  in  1908  to  Mr.  Dorr's
question  about  Lethe  had  referred  in  the  first  instance,  and
mainly,  to  Ovid's  Lethe,  it  was  the  Virgilian  Lethe  which
emerged  instantly  and  unmistakably  in  the  answers  of  Myersw
in  1910.  For  this  various  explanations  may  be  offered,  among
which  must  be  reckoned  the  normal  knowledge  of  the  auto-
matist — whatever  be  the  intelligence  that  utilised  that  knowledge
and  selected  appropriate  items.  But  it  has  been  suggested  to
me  by  Miss  Johnson  that  there  is  another  factor  which  must
not  be  left  out  of  consideration.  In  Mr.  Dorr's  four  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper  in  December,  1908,  and  January  and  March,


182


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


1909,  Mr.  Dorr,  carrying  further  the  scheme  inaugurated  by
him  in  1908,  selected  several  passages  from  Latin  authors  to
read  aloud  as  likely  to  be  familiar  to  the  supposed  com-
municator. Four  of  these  selections  were  from  the  Sixth
JEneid.  Of  these  four,  two  passages,  both  closely  associated
with  Lethe  (Anchises'  speech,  724-751,  and  the  descent  to
Avernus,  124-129)  were  chosen  by  MyersP  for  transmission
to  me.  This  choice  suggests  that  some  special  interest  was
attached  to  these  particular  passages  by  Myers  P,  though  here
again  the  selection  may  have  been  determined  telepathically
by  my  own  preoccupations  at  the  time.
The  facts  are  as  follows :

(1)  Anchises Speech  (724-751).

On  December  13,  1908,  two  passages  in  all  were  read  by
Mr.  Dorr  to  MyersP, — the  whole  speech  made  by  Anchises
beside  the  "  Lethean  stream,"  and  eight  lines  from  Swinburne's
Hymn  of  Man.  The  greater  part  of  the  sitting  was  occupied
with  reading  and  spelling  over  to  the  control  the  twenty-eight
Latin  lines.  At  the  close  MyersP  said,  "  I  shall  refer  to  the
Latin  within  a  few  hours  earthly  time  at  Mrs.  Verrall's.
Myers. And  translate  it  here  when  we  meet  again.1  M."

No  script  was  produced  by  me  after  December  11,  1908,
till  December  28,  by  which  date  my  thoughts  were  normally
much  occupied  with  the  Sixth  JUncicl,  which  I  read  through  on
December  21,  as  above  described.  No  reference  to  the  speech
of  Anchises  was  made  in  my  script,  which,  however,  about
that  period  contained  four  statements  by  Myersv  which  may
be  connected  with  the  expressed  intention  of  MyersP.

(a)  December  28,  1908.

.  .  .  But  listen.  I  have  got  a  clear  message  written  by  Mrs.
Piper  just  lately,  which  you  will  understand  when  you  see  it.  .  .  .
F.  W.  H.  M.

This  was  the  first  reference  in my script  to  Mrs.  Piper

1  No  opportunity  occurred  for  translation  by  Myersp,  as  Mr.  Dorr's  next
sitting,  on  Jan.  4,  1909,  was  largely  occupied  by  unavoidable  discussion  of
Mrs.  Piper's  future  plans,  after  which  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  the  controls  certain
passages,  among  thein  being  a  translation  of  the  speech  of  Anchises.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


183


since  Nov.  5,  1907,  when  a  reference  was  made  to  the  English
experiments  of  1906  and  1907.

(b)  December  29,  1908.

.  .  .  lovers  of  Virgil  remember  that  phrase — it  will  serve  as  a
link  more  than  once.  Wherever  in  any  writing  you  find  the  words
or  even  a  single  word  of  Virgil,  there  you  will  find  something  that
has  filtered  through  from  an  external  source,  not  yours,  nor  Helen's,
nor  compound  of  both.  .  .  .  Wherever  you  have  the  Virgilian  words
look  for  a  meaning  in  the  passage,  a  direct  message  from  me.  Do
you  want  the  signature  1

Yours. F.  W.  H.  M.

(c)  January  6,  1909.

.  .  .  Yet  some  there  are  by  valour  or  God's  grace
Heroes  and  prophets,  leaders  of  the  race,
Who  thro'  the  barriers  ordained  have  past
And  seen  the  Form  within  the  Shadowy  Vast.

F.  W.  H.  M.

These  lines,  occurring  in  verses  descriptive  of  a  vision,  were
noted  by  me  at  the  time  as  reminiscences  of  JEneid,  VI.  129-
131:  "  Pauci,  quos  aequos  amavit  Iuppiter  aut  ardens  evexit
ad  aethera  virtus  .  .  .  potuere."

(d)  January  11,  1909.

.  .  .  The  Virgil  has  helped.  I  think  I  can  get  a  reflection  of
the  thought  elsewhere.  But  I  wish  you  would  sit  with  Mrs.  Piper.
...  I  have  a  new  type  of  expt.  to  try,  but  I  must  have  Mrs.
Piper  quite  clear  for  that.  .  .  .

F.  W.  H.  M.

"  The  Virgil,"  as  I  noted  at  the  time,  might  refer  either  to
the  paraphrase  in  my  script  of  January  6,  or  to  the  paper
on  the  Sixth  ^EJneid,  which  I  completed  just  before  obtaining
script  on  January  11.

But  although  there  was  no  reference  in  my  script  to  the
speech  of  Anehises,  three  words  from  that  speech  did  appear
in  my  daughters  script  of  January  22,  1909,  which  opened
with  the  words,  "  Spiritus  intus  alit."  These  are  the  first  three
words  of  the  third  line  of  Anehises'  speech  (JEneid,  VI.  726),
and  summarise  the  philosophic  view  there  set  forth. No  other


184  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

quotation  from  Virgil  is  found  in  H.V.  script  between
September  10,  1908\  and  March  23,  190!),  on  each  of  which
days  occurred  a  phrase  (not  the  same  phrase)  from  the  First
JEneid.  Her  next  quotation  from  the  Sixth  JEneid,  "  Tu
Marcellus  eris,"  is  on  April  29,  1909,  as  described  above.

The  speech  of  Anehises  then,  which  MyersP  undertook  to
repeat  to  me  on  December  13,  1908,  was  not  mentioned  in
my  script,  but  its  leading  words  are  found  on  January  22,  1909,
in  my  daughter's  script.2

(2)  Descent  to  Avernus  (124-129).

On  March  1,  1909,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  MyersP  the  opening
lines  of  the  Sibyl's  answer  to  Aeneas'  request  to  visit
his  father,  beginning  with  1.  124,  and  ending  in  the  middle
of  1.  129.  To  his  question  whether  he  had  made  the  lines
clear,  MyersP  replied  :  "  Very  good.  1  want  you  to  continue  a
little  or  take  another,  to  get  several  through  and  to  show  you
my  answer  clearly.  I  will  not  only  give  it  here,  but  1  will
refer  to  it  at  Mrs.  Verrall's  also."

Neither  my  script  nor  my  daughter's  reproduced  the  actual
lines  read,  though  the  lines  immediately  following  (129-181,
"  pauci  quos  .  .  .  potuere")  were,  as  I  have  said,  paraphrased
in  my  script  of  January  0,  1909.

So  far  we  have  considered  the  connexion  between  MyersP
and  Myeisv  or  MyersH  v.  But  the  connexion  of  Myersw  with
MyerSp  seems  closer.  MyersP  had  no  further  opportunity  of
showing  his  knowledge  of  the  passages  read  to  Mrs.  Piper  by
Mr.  Dorr  on  March  1,  1909,  as  Mr.  Dorr  had  no  more  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  passages  from  Virgil  read  on  that  day
by  Mr.  Dorr  were  four  :

(1)  Descent  to  Avernus,  in  Latin.

(2)  Golden  Bough,  in  Latin  and  English.

(3)  Speech  of  Anehises,  in  English.

(4)  Lilies  for  Marcellus,  in  Latin  and  English.

The  last  three  of  these  were  immediately  and  clearly
referred to by Myersw on February J, 1910, when  Mrs.

1  See  Miss  Johnson's  paper  below,  p.  237.

'-See  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  258,  for  another  case  where  a  "message  for  trans-
mission" intended  for  me  appeared  in  H.V.  script.


Lxur.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


185


Willett  opened  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  envelope :  namely  Golden
Bough,  Marcellus,  and  Anchises'  speech, — this  last  by  the  words
"  blending  of  the  essence  with  the  instrument." 1  The  first  on
the  list,  the  Descent  to  Avernus,  was  not  alluded  to  on
February  4,  but  hinted  at  on  February  10  in  the  remark
about  the  place  where  the  Sibyl  lived.  Later  we  shall  see2
■  that  other  classical  topics  brought  to  the  notice  of  MyersP  in
the  course  of  Mr.  Dorr's  readings  on  March  1,  1909  emerged
in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  February  10,  1910.  So  that  it
would  seem  as  if  the  threads  left  loose  by  MyersP  at  the  last
sitting  of  Mr.  Dorr  were  at  once  picked  up  by  Myersw  on
the  communication  to  Mrs.  Willett  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's
question.  Of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  neither  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  nor
Mrs.  Willett  had  any  knowledge  whatever ;  any  connexion,
therefore,  between  those  sittings  and  Mrs.  Willett's  script,  if  not
accidental,  must  be  wholly  supernormal,  and,  moreover,  cannot
have  been  derived  by  direct  telepathy  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.
But  though  Mrs.  Willett  had  no  normal  knowledge  of  Mr.
Dorr's  experiments,  she  had  seen  certain  selected  scripts  of
my  daughter's,  and  I  now  pass  on  to  consider  what  use  was
made  of  that  knowledge  in  her  own  script.

Mrs. Willett's  utilisation  of  H.  V.  Scrijrf.

On  May  19,  1909,  as  has  been  narrated  above,  Mrs.
Willett's  attention  was  directed  by  my  questions  to  the  phrase
"  Tu  Marcellus  eris "  in  connexion  with  an  Ode  of  Horace,
and  at  the  same  time  to  the  Golden  Bough.

In  June  Mrs.  Willett  read,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,
Frederic  Myers's  Essay  on  Virgil.  This  Essay  refers  in  foot-
notes to  dZn.,  VI.,  on  the  pages  where  mention  is  made  of
Lethe  (p.  172)  and  of  the  golden  bough  (p.  112),  and  to  it
is  prefixed,  as part of  its  motto,  Tennyson's  line 3

"  Golden  branch  amid  the  shadows."

1  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  are  quoted  on  pp.  123,  124,  126,  148-50  ;  for  her
normal  knowledge  on  these  points,  see  JSir  O.  Lodge's  paper  passim,  and
also  below,  p.  193.

2  Below,  p.  188.

aNo  mention  is  made  of  the  authorship  of  the  line  either  there,  or  later  (p.  148)
where  the  line  is  quoted.


186


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


On  July  26,  no  answer  having  been  obtained  to  my  questions,
Mrs.  Willett  was  shown  copies  of  the  H.V.  scripts  which  had
suggested  them  to  me.  Two  of  these  scripts  (April  29,  May  6)
combined  allusions  to  "  Tu  Marcellus  eris "  with  an  Ode  of
Horace,  and  the  other  three  (May  11,  May  13,  May  20)
mentioned  the  Golden  Bough. I  quote  the  relevant  parts :

April  29,  1909.  [The  script  was  produced  in  my  presence  and
the  remarks  and  questions  within  round  brackets  (...)  were  said
aloud  by  me  at  the  time].

Fulmina  Jovis  satis  jam  grandine  how  does  it  go  the  Horace  I
mean. Do  you  understand  1

(I  understand  the  Latin  you  did  not  finish)  [i.e.  I  recognised  the
allusion  to  Horace,  OA.  I.  2].

It  is  a  message  to  you.

(The  Latin?)

Yes

(Say  more,  make  it  plain)

Virgil  too you  should  combine  the  two

(What  Virgil  ?)

Tu  Marcellus  eris this  and  the  Horace. There  are  many  differ-
ences but  one  common  thought  it  is  that  I  want  to  bring  out — read
(Aloud  1)
No.

(The  poems  1)

By  the yes by  the  waters  of  Babylon
(Go  on)

Exile  the  will  of  heaven  I  don't  think  I  can  get  it  clear.  She
does  not  understand.

(Who  does  not  understand  ?)
Helen

(Think  it  over  and  finish  next  week)
Yes  enough.

May  6,  1909. (M.  de  G.  V.  present.)

Tu  Marcellus  eris  that  was  said  .  .  .  Many  sacrifices  to  the
purposes  of  Fate  that  was  the  thought  it  is  in  Horace  too.  Do  you
U.D.

(Yes. Is  the  word  or  idea  in  Horace1?)
Idea. Jam  satis.

and  elsewhere  in  Horace  but  it  was  to  that  ode  that  special
reference  was  to  be  made  ask  ask.


LX1II.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


187


(Who  ?)
You

(Whom  ?)
Piddington  ask
(About  the  Horace  ?)
Yes  and  Virgil.

May  11,  1909.

Within  the  silvery  radiance  of  the  wood  a  tempered  shade — dark
green  within  the  depths,
the  doves  of  Venus
Son  (?)

May  IS,  1909. (M.  de  G.  V.  present.)

Cypria  dea — do  you  UD?

(No)

Cypria  dea

(I  read  those  words)

The  doves  were  the  sign  that  led  him  doves  bay  tree  golden
branch  amid  the  shadows.

May  20,  1909.  [Before  writing  this  script  my  daughter  read  the
same  two  questions  which  had  been  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett  on  May  19.
See  above,  p.  180.]

Tree  the  entrance  to  the  world  of  the  Dead  that  was  the  thought
golden  branch  amid  the  shadows.  .  .  .

star  that  guildest  (sic)  yet  this  phantom  shore.  .  .  .  The  unknown
depths  down  down— the  golden  bough  must  be  plucked.

Taking  into  account  Mrs.  Willett's  reading  of  these  scripts,
we  may  attribute  to  her  normal  knowledge  and  inference,  or
to  her  subliminal  memory,  the  association  of  two  ideas  derived
from  the  Sixth  xEneid,  the  Golden  Bough  and  the  phrase
Tu  Marcdlus  eris.  But  if  normal  association  only  is  at
work,  what  induced  her  to  omit  all  reference  to  the  Ode  of
Horace  definitely  associated  in  her  mind  with  the  phrase
Tu  Marcellus  eris,  both  by  my  question  on  May  19,  1909,
and  by  the  statements  of  the  above  H.V.  scripts  which  she
saw  on  July  26  ?

Such  a  reference  would  of  course  be  inappropriate  among
associations  with  Lethe.  But  how  did  Mrs.  Willett  know  that  ?
She  could  have  learnt  it  neither  from  her  knowledge  of  Virgil,


188


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


which  is  small,  nor  from  her  knowledge  of  Horace,  which  is
less.  Suppose,  however,  that  we  attribute  to  a  happy  accident
the  omission  from  a  Lethe-context  of  all  reference  to  a  topic
(Ode  of  Horace)  normally  associated  by  Mrs.  Willett  with
another  topic  (Tu  Marcellus  eris)  which  is  introduced  into
her  script.  To  what  happier  accident  are  we  to  attribute  the
combination  of  Horace  with  Homer  on  February  10,  1910,  in
a  phrase  directly  reminiscent  of  the  H.V.  script  of  April  29,
1909,  where  it  is  applied  to  Horace  and  Virgil?  MyersHV,
on  April  29,  1909,  wrote  of  the  "common  thought"  of  Horace
and  Virgil  which  he  could  not  "  get  clear."  Myersw  writes
on  February  10,  1910,  "Homer  and  Horace  the  thought  allied
but  I  cannot  get  it  clear."  Words  clearly  recalling  the  H.V.
script  are  utilized  to  convey  something  new,  something  not
normally  known  to  Mrs.  Willett,  an  alliance  of  thought  between
Homer  and  Horace.

The  only  commentary,  1  make  bold  to  say,  that  has  suggested
an  alliance  of  thought  between  those  two  poets  is  the  commentary
by  Mr.  Piddington  on  the  obscure  early  writings  of  Myersv
(iVoc,  Vol.  XXIV,  pp.  150-169).  In  February,  1909,  Mr.
Piddington  was  considering  what  bearing  certain  statements
about  Horace,  made  by  MyersP  in  March,  1908,  had  on  the
juxtaposition  by  Myersv  in  March,  1901,  of  a  quotation  from
Horace,  Od.  I.  28,  and  a  Latin  version  (adscriptus  glcbae)
of  a  word — eirapovpos — which  occurs  only  in  HOMEK,  Odyssey,
XL  489.  Mr.  Piddington,  without  giving  his  reasons,  asked
Mr.  Dorr  to  read  certain  passages  to  MyersP.  Accordingly
on  March  1,  1909,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  MyersP:  (a)  the
first  six  lines  of  that  Ode  of  Horace  (in  Latin),  and,  after  an
interval  occupied  with  other  matters,  (b)  the  phrase  adscriptus
glebae,  followed  by  (c),  the  words  fiovXoifxyv  k  eirapovpo<;  ewv
O^TfJo/xei'  a\\w  [rather  would  I  be  a  slave  and  the  hireling  of
another  .  .  .  (than  rule  among  the  dead)],  in  the  original  Greek
(Odys.,  XI.  489).  Considerable  time  was  spent  in  communi-
cating these  words,  and  in  their  repetition  to  the  control.
When  this  was  over,  and  Mr.  Dorr  asked  if  the  subject  should
now  be  left,  Myers P  replied:  "Yes  you  may  be  sure  of  our
answer."

That  answer  may  be  found  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  February
10,  1910,  which  contains  a  translation  of  this  line  from  the


I.  XIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


189


Odyssey,  prefaced  by  words  probably  reminiscent  of  the  diver-
gent sentiment  uttered  by  Milton's  fallen  archangel  in  the
famous  line  (Par.  Lost,  I.  263) —

"  Better  to  rule  in  Hell  than  serve  in  Heaven."

Mrs.  Willett's  script  runs:  ''Better  to  Rule  among  no  to
slave  among  the  living  than  King  it  mid  the  Dead."

The  Homeric  line  is  translated  in  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,
written  between  April  and  July,  1909,  and  published  in  April,
1910  (Proc,  Vol.  XXIV,  Part  LX.),  after  the  production  of
Mrs.  Willett's  script.  This  paper  is  a  further  contribution —
"  a  prelude  and  a  sequel  " — to  the  Horace  Ode  question,  which
was  published  in  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  XXII.)  of  October,  1908.
That  volume  was  read  soon  after  publication  by  Mrs.  Willett.
In  this  earlier  paper  the  attention  of  the  reader  is  directed
entirely  to  the  question  of  connexion  between  Horace's  Ode  to
Archytas  and  a  poem  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  There  is  no  mention
of  Homer,  and  it  would  need  classical  knowledge  and  very
careful  reading  to  infer  from  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  any  sug-
gestion of  connexion  between  Homer  and  Horace.  On  p.  400
(Vol.  XXII.)  the  words  of  Achilles  to  Odysseus  appear  in  the
middle  of  a  suggested  interpretation  of  the  Ode  to  Archytas.
They  occur  between  the  name  Pythagoras,  who  (pp.  404-5)  is
definitely  stated  to  be  referred  to  in  the  Ode,  and  a  verbal
quotation  in  Latin  from  the  Ode.  There  is  no  mention  of
their  source  nor  any  indication  that  they  do  not  form  part  of
the  Ode  of  Horace  which  Mr.  Piddington  is  paraphrasing,  and,
in  the  absence  of  knowledge  to  the  contrary,  they  would  be
taken  by  the  reader  to  be  part  of  that  Ode.  The  only  reference
to  the  Odyssey  in  this  paper  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  404)  would  cer-
tainly not  encourage  the  idea  that  there  was  any  legitimate
connexion  between  the  Odyssey  and  the  Ode  of  Horace ;  for
Rector's  half  acceptance  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  suggestion  that  by
"  Odessus,"  etc.,  he  was  aiming  at  "  Odyssey,"  is  mentioned  by
Mr.  Piddington  as  "a  good  instance  of"  Rector's  readiness  "to
accept  a  misleading  suggestion."  The  second  paper,  not  pub-
lished till  after  the  production  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script,  deals
with  the  connexion  between  Homer  and  Horace  simcrested  to
Mr.  Piddington  by  an  examination  of  the  statements  of  MycrsP
in  1908  and  of  Myersv  in  1901,  neither  of  which  were  known


190


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


to  Mrs.  Willett.  In  this  second  paper  frequent  allusion  is
made  to  Achilles  and  this  line  in  the  Odyssey.

Mr.  Piddington  wrote  (Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  159),  con-
cerning Mr.  Dorr's  reading  of  the  Horatian  lines  to  MyersP  on
March  1,  1909,  and  their  failure  to  elicit  a  response:  "here  for
the  present,  and  probably  for  good,  the  matter  stands."  But
I  think  we  may  claim  that  Mrs.  Willett's  script  carries  the
matter  further,  and  that  in  the  words,  "  Myers  Homer  and
Horace  the  thought  allied,"  we  have  from  Myersw  a  response  to
a  suggestion  made  nearly  a  year  before  to  MyersP  and  not  known
to  Mrs.  Willett.


II.  Sources  and  Correspondences  of  Phrases  in
Mrs.  Willett's  Script.

As  the  greater  part  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script  consists  of
quotations  and  allusive  phrases,  some  derived  from  literary
sources,  some  paralleled  in  the  scripts  of  other  automatists,  I
have  set  out,  so  far  as  I  could,  in  the  following  table  these
"  sources  "  and  "  correspondences,"  showing  in  each  case  whether
the  corresponding  passage  was  within  Mrs.  Willett's  normal
knowledge  and  whether  its  context  supplied  a  reason  for
associating  it  with  Lethe.  For  this  purpose,  in  order  to  be
on  the  safe  side,  I  have  counted  the  Sixth  jEneid  as  associated
with  Lethe,  and  I  have  assumed  Mrs.  Willett  to  be  acquainted
with  Church's  stories  based  on  that  book,  with  all  the  English
authors  named  in  my  table,  and  with  all  Mr.  Myers's  published
work.  Where  Mrs.  Willett  had  no  normal  knowledge  of  the
parallel  phrases  in  other  automatic  writings,  the  connexion  of
course  constitutes  what  we  have  called  a  cross-correspondence.
Throughout  I  have  given  references  to  the  numbers  of  pages
in  this  volume  where  detailed  comment  may  be  found,  but  I
have  given  the  names  only  of  the  authors,  as  exact  references  to
chapter  and  verse  will  in  most  cases  be  found  in  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  paper.  But  in  many  cases  the  mere  statement  and
classification  is  inadequate,  and  there  I  have  added  notes,  as
indicated  by  the  *.


Lxur.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


191


List  of  Probable  Sources  of  Phrases  and  Correspondences
in  Mrs.  Willett's  Script  of  Feb.  4  and  Feb.  10,  1910

Italics  are  used  where  the  context  of  the  passage  supplies  a  reason
for  associating  it  with  Lethe  ;  underlining  is  used  where  the  phrase
in  question  occurs  in  an  author  or  script  normally  unknown  to  Mrs.


Willett. Mr.  Piddington's  two

articles  on

"  the  Horace  Ode  "  are

referred  to  respectively  as  J.  G.  P.  22  ;  and  J.  G.  P.  24.

Phrases.

Authors.

Script.

Page.

Feb.  4,  1010.

(1)  The  will  again  to  live

Myers

131

(2)*River  of  forgetfulness

Church

H.V.

193

(3)  Soul  descend  the  way

Myers

133

(4)  Blending  of  essence  with

Virgil

134

instrument

(5)*Tu  Marcellus  eris

Virgil

H.V.

136,  144,  193

(6)*In  valle  reducta

Virgil

Mac.

137,  193

(7)  Doves  and  golden  bough

Church

H.V.

138,  145

(8)  Golden  bough  amid  the
shadows

("Myers
(Tennyson

11 .  V  .

1 39  1 87

(9)  Go  not  to  Lethe

Keats

H.V.

130

(10)*Door  to  which  I  found

Omar  Khay-

Mac

Holland  ^  193

no  key

yam

Forbes

H.V. 1  ff-

(11)  riaggi  ±>at>ba

(Tiuskin
(Arabian  Nig

hts

1  V  V  11 .

(12)  Souls shining by  the

Virgil

134

river  brim

(13)  Pain  forgotten

Myers

134

(14)*Rose  leaves  . . .  enchanter

Shelley

Mac

H.V. 212  ff.

fleeing

(15)  Love  spilt  . . .  ground

Tennyson

140

(16)  Far  off

Tennyson

141

(17)  Peak  in  Darien  j

"Myers
[Keats

141

Feb.  10,  1910.

(18)  Ode  Horatian

J.  G.  P.  22

Piper

151,  189

(19)  Lydia

152

(20)  Seneca

152

192  Mrs

A W  Verrall

[PAKT

Phrases.

Authors.

Script.

Page.

(21)  Filial  piety  led  son  to

(Myers

152

father

\Church

(22)*Ulysses,  there  is  a

Myers

152,  204

parallel

(23)*Nightingale

f  Keats
\Shelley

r  Pi  per 158,  206  ff.
(Holland

(24)  Once  more  ye  laurels

Milton

H.V.

159

(25)*Strew  on  her  roses

Arnold

M.V.

160,  204

(26)  Ganymede ...  Mrs.  Ver-

Virgil

Piper

160

rall

(27)  Homeless  in  the  heart

JMyers

161

of  Paradise

[J.  G.  P.  22

(28)  Where  was  the  Sybil

f  77"  *7

|  Virgil
r  a  p  04

Piper

161

(29)  Flavicomata

Virgil

M.V.

161

(30)*Draught  of  forgetfulness

Plato  ?

205

(31)*Anaxagoras

Plato

/'32>)*Arifhisps

(Myers
\  Church

131

(33)*I  remember  . .  .  you  for-

Swinburne

TT 11  J

Holland

_'!  H  l  It.

get

(34)*Dead  things  .  .  .  forgot-

Swinburne

rloiiano.

Jul)  n.

ten  days

(35)*Waters of  Babylon  .  .  .

1  '-alius

I  T  V
11.  V  .

OAQ  ft'

Zion

(36)  Get  thee  to  a  nunnery

Shakespeare

(37)  Shepherds pipe  Muses

193

dance

(38)  Better  to  rule

Milton

153,  189

(39)*To  slave  . .  .  dead

(Homer
[J.  G.  P.  22

H.V.

153,  188

(40)*Sleep, the dream  that

Ovid]

I'ipt  r

156,  210

flits  by  night

Tennyson

(41)*Sleep  and  his  twin
brother

JMyers
(Tennyson

H.V.

157,  210

(42)*Writ  in  water

Keats

H.V.;  H.V.

156,  213

(43)  Homer  and  Horace

J.  G.  P.  24

Piper

154,  188

(44)  Watts

J.  G.  P.  24

H.V.

155

LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


193


(2)  River  of  Forgetfulness,

This  phrase  occurred  in  an  H.Y.  script  of  Feb.  5,  1908,
seen  by  Mrs.  Willett. The  script  ran  :

No  no  go  not  to  Lethe  .  Reeds  the  reeds  by  the  river's  edge
the  river  of  forgetfulness  and  from  those  reeds  the  pipes  were  made
whereon  the  shepherd  softly  played.

A  recollection  of  this  phrase  perhaps  accounts  for  the  "  shep-
herds pipe"  on  Feb.  10  (No.  37).

(5)  (6)  Tu  Marcellus,  etc. In  valle,  etc.

Mrs.  Willett  knows  no  Latin  and  has  not  read  these  phrases
in  Virgil's  Sixth  sEncid,  whence  they  come.  But  in  the  copies
seen  by  her  of  the  two  scripts  (Mac  and  H.Y.)  where  the  Latin
phrases  occurred,  references  were  given  to  JEn,,  VI.,  so  that  the
source  of  the  two  phrases  is  here  counted  as  within  Mrs.
Willett's  normal  knowledge.  In  neither  case  was  there  any
association  in  the  script  with  Lethe.

(10)  Cross-correspondence  on  Door.

This  phrase,  directly  derived  from  the  Rubaiyat  of  Omar
Khayyam,  as  recognised  by  Mrs.  Willett,  constitutes  a  remarkable
cross-correspondence  with  the  scripts  of  four  other  automatists/
namely,  (1)  Miss  Mac  and  her  brother,  (2)  Miss  Verrall,  (3)
Mrs.  Holland,  and  (4)  Mrs.  Forbes.  I  relate  the  episode  in
detail,  quoting  and  commenting  on  the  scripts  in  their  chrono-
logical sequence.

(1)  Mac  Script,  September  12,  1908.

'Tis  not  for  every  chance  seeker  after  knowledge  to  obtain  the  key
that  unlocks  the  DOOE.

[Drawing  of  two  hearts  pierced  by  an  arrow]  .  .

This  sentence  was  contained  in  the  script  received  by  me
from  Miss  Mac  on  September  26,  1908,  as  described  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV,  p.  26d.  The  particular  sentence  in
question  was  overlooked  by  me  at  the  time,  probably  because
it  was  not  among  the  H.S.  communications,  but  formed  part
of  a  series  of  attempts  from  a  combination  of  controls  to  relate

N


194


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


a  story  in  Italian  verse.  This  part  of  the  Mac  script  was
seen  by  no  one  but  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  myself,  till  in  October,
1910,  I  showed  it  to  Miss  Johnson.  She  was  at  once  struck
by  the  resemblance  between  the  sentence  in  question  and  the
pun  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  Feb.  4,  1910,  on  the  name
which  emerged  in  her  next  day's  script,  in  large  letters,  DORK,
and  shortly  afterwards  found  the  references  to  the  same  topic  in
the  scripts  of  Miss  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland,  and  Mrs.  Forbes
described  below.

It  is  clear,  I  think,  that  this  allusion  in  the  Mac  script
should  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  series  of  allusions  to
Sesame  and  Lilies,  which  made  up  the  larger  part  of  the  cross-
correspondences  between  Mac  and,  Verrall  scripts  in  1908.  It
differs,  however,  from  the  rest  of  that  series  in  two  respects :

{a)  All  the  other  allusions  in  the  Mac  script  occurred  between
July  19  and  July  27,  before  the  beginning  of  any  allusions  in
the  Verrall  scripts  (Aug.  ]  1-2  2) ;

(&)  The  other  allusions  all  came  from  SidgwickM,  whereas
this  sentence  is  contributed  by  one  of  several  unnamed  com-
municators combining  to  tell  a  romantic  story  in  Italian  with
occasional  episodes  in  English.  After  the  drawing  of  the  arrow
on  September  12,  1908,  follows  an  account  of  the  heroine  of  the
story  immuring  "  herself  within  the  heartless  walls  of  a  nunnery."
Her  profile  is  then  drawn  and  this  is  followed  by  a  message
from  the  Sidgwick  control,  thus :

Professor  Sidgwick.  Progress  is  pitifully  slow  but  sure(r)  the
easier  it  is.

The  whole  preceding  communication  about  the  door,  the  arrow,
and  the  Italian  ston'  is  in  a  new  handwriting  which  reappeared
on  one  or  two  occasions  but  was  never  assigned  to  a  named
control.

Regarded  as  part  of  the  Srsame  and  Lilies  series,  the  sentence
in  question  has  two  points  of  special  interest.  (1)  It  is  the
only  allusion  in  the  Mac  script  to  one  of  the  obvious  normal
associations  with  the  word  Sesame,  namely  the  open  door,
and  (2)  it  thereby  makes  another  correspondence  with  the
HV  script,  for  on  September  23.  1908, — after  my  daughter
and  I  had  compared  our  scripts  and  detected  in  them  incomplete
allusions  to  Sesame  and  Lilies,  but  before  we  had  received  any


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


195


communication  whatever  from  Miss  Mac, — the  H.V.  script  in-
cluded in  its  reminiscences  of  Sesame  and  Lilies,  a  topic — the
open  door — which  had  not  occurred  in  either  M.V.  or  H.V.
script.1

But  in  view  of  the  sequel — the  reappearance  of  the  Door  in
other  scripts  and  the  emergence  in  later  Mac  scripts  of  topics
selected  at  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  for  transmission  to  other  auto-
matists 2 — it  is  possible  to  see  in  this  sentence  a  punning
reference  to  those  sittings.  Neither  to  the  Macs,  when  this
script  was  produced,  nor  to  me  when  it  was  received,  was  it
known  that  messages  had  come  from  MyersP  since  Mrs.  Piper's
return  to  America,  or  that  any  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  had
been  held  by  Mr.  Dorr.

(2)  H.V.  scripts.

(a)  September  23,  1908.

.  .  .  note  the  literary  allusions  something  should  be  made  of  them,
putting  one  with  another  the  clue  is  there,  but  several  things  have
been  missed  but  try  again.

An  implement  of  peace,  the  fork  of  the  husbandman  the  sowing
of  the  grain  a  star  flower  something  like  a  daisy,  what  does  that
mean1?  The  message  was  confused  the  star  flower  and  lilies  too  look
back  the  open  door.

(b)  October  24,  1908.

.  .  .  circles  wheels  within  wheels  the  closing  of  the  door  the
open  door.  .  .  .

[Drawing  of  an  anchor]  an  anchor  that  is  a  clue  the  pinions  of
Hope.  .  .  .

three  red  roses  and  a  book  remember  .  .  .
[Drawing  of  an  arrow]  that  too  and  4.
a  rainbow  in  the  sky.  ... 3

The  first  of  these  is  the  script  just  referred  to  and  marks
the  reminiscence  in  H.V.  script  of  our  impression  about  the

1The  script  is  quoted  below. See  also  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  281.

2  See  Miss  Johnson's  paper,  pp.  269  ff.

3  The  portion  of  the  script  here  omitted,  as  disconnected  with  the  subject
of  the  present  paper,  refers  to  a  topic  subsequently  found  to  occur  in  Mrs.
Willett's  automatic  writing.


196


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


incomplete  correspondence  on  Sesame  and  Lilies.  The  second
script  repeats  the  "  open  door,"  an  idea  easily  associated  with
Sesame,  but  combines  with  it  "  the  closing  of  the  door,"  and
introduces  the  drawing  of  an  anchor 1 — the  usual  Sidgwick  symbol
in  H.V.  script — and  of  an  arrow,2  often  used  in  the  Verrall
scripts  to  indicate  a  cross-correspondence.  Both  arrow  and
anchor  connect  the  H.V.  script  closely  with  the  Mac  script.
The  anchor  occurred  throughout  their  script  and  had  been
interpreted  as  a  Sidgwick  symbol.  This  Miss  Verrall  knew,
but  as  she  had  not  seen  the  Mac  script  of  September  12,  1908,
she  did  not  know  that  there  the  allusion  to  the  not  unlocked
Door  was  followed  by  a  drawing  of  an  arrow.  It  looks  as  if
the  particular  form  taken  by  the  reminiscence  of  Sesame  and
Lilies  in  H.V.  script  both  on  Sept.  23  and  on  Oct.  24  was
determined  by  the  desire  of  the  scribe  to  repeat  the  Door
which  ought  to  have  been,  but  was  not,  recognised  as  a  cross-
correspondence  between  the  Mac  and  H.V.  scripts  of  September
12  and  23,  1908.

It  is  tempting  to  see  in  the  words  "  and  4  "  an  indication  of
the  number  of  automatists  subsequently  found,  as  will  be  seen,
to  have  references  to  the  "  opening  of  doors."  But  I  think  it
more  likely  that  the  "  and  4  "  is  to  be  combined  with  the  three
of  "  three  red  roses  "  to  make  seven,  and  thus  to  serve,  with  the
unmistakable  allusions — "  circles  wheels  within  wheels  "  and  the
"rainbow"— to  recall 3  the  earlier  H.V.  script  of  May  11,  1908,
which  makes  part  of  the  elaborate  cross-correspondence  on
Sevens'1  described  by  Miss  Johnson  (Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  222-
258).  If  that  is  so,  a  link  is  made  with  the  next  script  which
we  have  to  consider,  that  of  Mrs.  Holland.

lSee  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  295.  2  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  77-86.

3  It  is  characteristic  of  the  H.V.  script  to  indicate  inter-connexions  between
different  pieces  of  script,  often  separated  by  considerable  intervals,  by  means
of  the  repetition  of  certain  clue  words  or  phrases  (which  thus  serve  as  what
Prof.  Bury,  in  his  introduction  to  Pindar's  Nemean  Odes,  calls  "  responsions  ").

4  Miss  Verrall  knew  nothing  of  this  cross-correspondence  when  her  script
of  Oct.  24,  1908,  was  obtained.  She  was  told  on  Nov.  18,  1908,  that  her
script  of  May  11,  1908,  made  a  cross-correspondence  on  'Seven'  with  Mrs.
Piper,  and  she  was  told  on  Nov.  20,  1908,  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  also  came
into  the  series.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


197


(3)  Mrs.  Holland's  Script,  Nov.  25,  1908.

....  The  other  George — not  G.  P. — he  goes  to  the  other  one
Five  in  this— the  fingers  of  the  hand — G.  B.  D.  F.  A.
— alone  and  warming  his  five  wits  the  white  owl  in  the
belfry  sits — ■
S.  M. E.G. H.S. F.M. R.  H.
Another  set  of  fives  for  you —

Not  for  Cambridge  this  time — America  and  Cheltenham  and  London
are  in  it — not  Berks.

=@ no  reason  for  believing  it  for  a  minute —


This  extract  follows  immediately  upon  a  long  piece  of  script
introducing  several  topics  which  had  been  chosen  as  messages
for  transmission  by  MyersP  earlier  in  the  year,  and  some  of
which  also  appear  in  H.V.,  M.Y.,  or  Mac  script.1  It  is
immediately  followed  by  a  couple  of  sentences  alluding  to  a
topic  (unknown  to  Mrs.  Holland)  that  has  occurred  in  Mrs.
Willett's  script,  and  was  said  in  a  Willett  script  of  January
28,  1909,  to  have  been  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Holland,  thus
constituting  something  like  a  cross-correspondence  between  the
scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Willett.  The  extract  above
quoted  may  be  interpreted  as  follows :

G.  P.  represents  George  Pelham,  a  frequent  control,  as  Mrs.
Holland  knew,  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  Is  "  the  other  George  "
a  reference  to  Mr.  George  B.  Dorr,  in  whose  sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper — not  known  to  Mrs.  Holland — had  appeared  the  messages
for  transmission  reproduced  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  script  ?
The  script  then  announces  that  there  are  "  Five  in  this."  If  it
stood  alone,  this  phrase  might  mean  that  either  five  controls

1  For  a  full  account  of  this  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  and  the  circumstances
of  its  production,  see  Miss  Johnson's  paper,  pp.  218,  "225.


198


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


or  five  automatists  are  concerned  with  some  topic  contained  in
this  script.  But  in  view  of  the  later  statement  that  the  initials
of  five  controls  are  "  another  set  of  fives,"  the  first  "  five  "  must
be  taken  definitely  to  apply  not  to  controls  but  to  automatists.

The  notion  of  five  is  reiterated  throughout  the  rest  of  the
script ;  five  divisions  in  the  first  drawing,  five  fingers,  five  notes
of  the  bass  clef — this  last  selection  perhaps  determined  by  the
fact  that  the  first  three  letters  of  these  notes  make  the  initials
(unknown  to  Mrs.  Holland)  of  Mr.  Dorr,  G.B.D. — five  wits,
five  names  of  places ; 1  and  the  script  ends  with  four  sets
of  fives,  among  them  being  five  concentric  circles,  which  recall
the  "  circles  wheels  within  wheels  "  of  H.V.  script  of  October  24,
1908.

The  only  point  not  thus  accounted  for  is  the  drawing  of  a  key,
and  it  is  a  fair  inference  that  this  key  represents  the  topic  with
which  the  live  automatists  are  concerned.  In  the  H.V.  script,
with  which  by  its  "  concentric  circles "  this  script  is  closely
connected,  there  is  mention  of  a  door,  a  door  which  there  is  good
reason  to  think  represents  an  attempt  to  emphasize  the  unnoticed
Door  of  the  Mac  script.  Is  it  fanciful  to  see  in  the  key  of
Mrs.  Holland's  script  a  reproduction  of  the  "  key  "  of  the  Mac
script  ?  The  reader  will  better  judge  when  the  sequel  has  been
related.

The  scripts  of  these  three  automatists  are  separated  by  a
considerable  interval,  more  than  a  year,  from  the  scripts  of  the
other  two,  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Mrs.  Willett.  Darin"'  that  interval
two  things  occurred  which  may  have  a  bearing  on  the  problem
before  us:  (1)  a  paper  on  Sesame  and  Lilies,  afterwards  published
as  part  of  a  larger  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  was  read
by  me  at  a  private  meeting  of  the  S.P.E.  on  May  IS,  1909,
and  (2)  at  the  end  of  September,  1909,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  devised
the  experiment  of  repeating  to  Myersw  the  cpiestion  that  had
been  asked  of  MyersP  by  Mr.  Dorr.  The  proposed  experiment
was  communicated  to  me  and  to  Mr.  Piddington,  but  was  not
known  to  any  one  else  till  Mrs.  Willett  opened  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  envelope  on  Feb.  4,  1910.  It  was,  therefore,  not
known to Mrs. Forbes when the following  script was  pro-

1  If  these  names  are  intended,  as  seems  probable,  to  suggest  the  localities
of  the  automatists,  they  are  incorrect.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


199


dueed  and  sent  to  me,  for  whom  Mrs.  Forbes  understood  the
message  to  be  intended :

(4)  Mrs.  Forbes' s  script,  December  12,  1909.

[Attempts  at  capital  letters]  Lodge  is  the  best  friend  [confused
statement  about  a  test]  written — openings  of  doors — with  less  over-
shadowed scenes — we  see  freely  you  through  a  glass  darkly.  E.G.
sends  this  letter,  Talbot  is  the  writer.

Mrs.  Forbes,  though  not  present  at  the  S.P.E.  meeting  on
May  18,  1909,  had  heard  from  me  in  August  a  brief  outline  of
the  Sesame  and  Lilies  incident,  and  her  interest  in  it  may  be
reflected  in  the  reference  in  her  script  to  "  openings  of  doors."
Here,  again,  however,  as  in  the  case  of  my  daughter's  script,
the  choice  of  the  particular  phrase  may  have  been  determined  by
the  communicator's  desire  to  emphasize  the  word  Door,  of  which
we  had  failed  to  recognize  the  importance  in  the  Mac  script.  But
Mrs.  Forbes's  knowledge  or  interest  does  not  account  for  the
introduction  into  her  script  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  name,  whicli
Mrs.  Forbes  had  no  reason  to  connect  with  Sesame  or  with
Dorr  or  Doors,  open  or  closed.  When  I  received  this  script
I  saw  a  point  in  the  openings  of  doors,  but  none  in  the  intro-
duction of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  name  either  on  this  occasion  or
when  it  occurred  again  in  Mrs.  Forbes's  script  of  February  6,
1910.

Between  these  two  scripts  of  Mrs.  Forbes  came  Mrs.  Willett's
scripts  of  February  4  and  5,  1910:

(5)  Mrs.  IVilletis  script.

February  If,  1910.
...  Go not  to  Lethe. Myers.  Myers. There  was  the  door  to
which  I  found  no  key  and  Haggi  Babba  too. This  is  disconnected
but  not  meaningless.

February  5,  1910.
.  .  .  Tell  Lodge  this  word  Myers. Myers  get  the  word  I  will
spell  it  Myers yes  the  word  is  D  0  R  R.

We  are  only  concerned  here  with  the  form  in  which  Myersw
indicated  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  that  one  of  the  associations  which
the  word  Lethe  had  for  him  was  the  name  Dorr.  The  allusion
to  that  name  on  February  4,  1910,  is  made  in  two  sentences


200


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


joined  by  the  word  "  and."  Have  these  two  sentences  any  special
point  ? Do  they  contribute  anything  to  the  problem  before  us  ?

The  first  sentence  introduces  in  a  quotation  from  Omar
Khayyam  the  two  words  '  Door '  and  '  Key.'  Each  of  these
singly  had  occurred  in  interconnected  scripts — Door  in  Miss
Verrall's  script  (seen  by  Mrs.  Willett),  and  Key  in  Mrs.  Holland's
(not  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett).  Both  words  had  been  used  together
in  the  earlier  Mac  script  of  September  12,  1  908,  with  which
none  of  the  three  automatists  was  acquainted.

The  second  sentence,  "  Haggi  Babba  too  "  doubtless  alludes  to
"  open  Sesame,"  the  magic  formula  of  Ali  Baba  in  one  of  the
tales  of  the  Arabian  Nights  Entertainments.  This  story  was
known  to  Mrs.  Willett  in  childhood,  and  was  probably  recalled
by  her  reading  of  Buskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies1  in  the  summer
of  1909,  as  well  as  by  the  H.V.  script  of  September  23,  1908,
which  she  had  seen  in  the  spring  of  1909.  By  the  word  "too,"
Myersw  in  this  second  sentence  definitely  links  (a)  the  group
of  allusions  to  Sesame  (Haggi  Babba)  with  (b)  the  idea  of  a
door  without  a  key.  This  is  precisely  what  I  had  failed  to
do  when  I  read  the  sentence  in  the  Mac  script  about  a  "  key
that  unlocks  the  DOOB.,"  though  I  now  have  no  doubt  that
those  words  did  form  part  of  the  group  of  allusions  to  Sesame
in  the  Mac  script.

The  first  sentence,  then,  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  gives  evidence
of  supernormal  knowledge  of  the  Mac  script,  and  does  this  by
means  of  a  quotation  appropriate  in  a  series  of  associations
with  Lethe,  if  among  those  associations  are  present  the  Vir-
giliaii  and  Blatonic  passages  of  the  Sixth  JEneicl  and  the  Tenth
Book  of  the  Republic.

For  those  who  are  not  familiar  with  Omar  Khayyam,  I
recall  the  context  of  Mrs.  Willett's  quotation.  The  poet  sums
up  the  results  of  the  learned  studies  of  his  youth  as  telling
him  no  more  than  that

"I  came  like  Water  and  like  Wind  I  go.

Into  this  Universe  and  why  not  knowing
Nor  whence  like  Water  willy  nilly  flowing:
And  out  of  it,  as  Wind  along  the  Waste,
I  know  not  whither  willy  nilly  blowing."

1  See  Sesame,  §  50.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


201


Even  when,  like  Mahomet1  before  him,  he  passed  "Up  from
Earth's  Centre  through  the  Seventh  Gate "  of  the  Planets  to
the  Empyrean,  he  could  not  unravel  "  the  Knot  of  Human  Death
and  Eate."

"There  was  a  door  to  which  I  found  no  key."

This  passage  of  the  Bvbaiyat  is  based  upon  Neo-Platonism  L>
and  so  goes  ultimately  back  to  Plato's  story  of  the  Vision  of  Er
{Republic,  X.),  who  in  his  trance  passed  by  the  seven  whorls  of
the  Planets  in  his  journey  to  the  Plain  of  Lethe  and  the
Kiver  of  Forgetfulness.  And  it  is  the  problem  of  Human
Death  and  Fate  which  Virgil  treats  in  the  speech  of  Anchises  to
iEneas  and  the  Sibyl  by  the  "  Lethean  stream."

Thus,  on  February  4  and  5,  1910,  Myersw  completed  the
cross-correspondence  begun  in  the  Mac  script  of  September  12,
1908,  and  the  next  day,  February  6,  that  completion  was
announced  in  a  script  of  Mrs.  Forbes.  The  first  part  of  this
script,  in  looking-glass  writing,  was  apparently  addressed  to  me ;
it  was  followed  by  a  message  in  ordinary  writing  to  Mrs.  Forbes
herself  telling  her  to  send  the  first  message  to  me.

(6)  Mrs.  Forbes's  script,  Feb.  6,  1910.

{Looking-glass  writing. )

Oliver  Lodge  will  be  glad  to  know  the  key  we  send  it  to  o — 3

be  sure  it  will  be  opened  by  the  seeker. Be  of  good  courage,  it  is

left  to  you  to  be  the  finder. Best  be  still,  summer  shall  be  soon,

my  best  of  open  doors  is  to  be  with  brightest  sunshine — life  shall

be  Triumphant.  „ . .  _

Hidmund  tmrney  lalbot.

{In  ordinary  writing.)
We  want  the  letter  sent  to  Mrs.  V.— from  me  to  Cambridge
friends — she  has  the  sense  to  see  it  is.  .  .  .  Seeing  will  be  needed
if  she  is  to  decipher  it.  .  .  .  We  are  writing  it  for  the  sake  of  the
word  wanted,  it  will  help  if  you  say  this.  We  see  you  have
been  trying,  it  will  soon  seem  clearer,  send  it  on  quickly.

1  For  an  account  of  the  Vision  of  Mahomet  and  the  connexion  of  that  and
other  "Astronomical  Apocalypses"  with  the  myths  of  the  Phaedrus  and
Republic,  and  with  the  Paradiso  of  Dante,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Prof.
J.  A.  Stewart's  book  on  the  Myths  of  Plato,  pp.  350  ff.

2  See  inter  alia  Heron  Allen's  edition  of  FitzGerald's  translation,  Intro-
duction, pp.  xxii.  ff.

3  (?)  open.


202


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


There  is  no  mistaking  the  intention  here.  This  script
connects  directly  with  Mrs.  Forbes's  earlier  script  of  December
12,  1909,  about  "Lodge"  and  the  "openings  of  doors";  here,
however,  it  is  not  the  "  door "  but  the  "  key "  which  "  Oliver
Lodge  will  be  glad  to  know."  On  this  very  day,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  did  in  fact  receive  a  message  from  Myersw  with  the
words  "  This  is  the  door  to  which  I  found  no  key," — this
being  the  first  time  that  the  word  "  key  "  was  brought  within
his  knowledge.1  Moreover,  a  definite  and  unmistakable  con-
nexion with  the  Mac  script  is  made  by  the  introduction  into
Mrs.  Forbes's  script  of  the  word  "  seeker,"  used  in  no  inter-
vening script.  "  Tis  not  for  every  chance  seeker  after  know-
ledge to  obtain  the  key  that  unlocks  the  DOOR,"  said  the
unnamed  scribe  on  September  12,  1908,  when  this  set  of
allusions  began.  After  it  ended  with  the  answer  of  Myersw
to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  question,  GurneyF  and  Talbot  Forbes
wrote  "  Oliver  Lodge  will  be  glad  to  know  the  key  ...  be
sure  it will be opened  by  the  seeker."

"  It "  was  not,  however,  "  opened "  for  some  time  after  this.
The  connexion  between  the  quotation  from  Omar  Khayyam  in
Mrs.  Willett's  script  on  February  4  and  the  name  Dorr  in  her
script  of  February  5  was  not  perceived  till  after  two  further
allusions  to  the  subject 2  by  Myersw.  Fven  after  the  detection
of  the  pun  of  Myersw,  the  cross-correspondence  with  other  auto-
matists  on  the  word  "  Door  "  remained  undetected  for  some  little
while,  as  no  one  person  possessed  the  whole  information  required
for  its  apprehension.  Some  points  had  been  observed  and  noted  ;
the  connexion,  for  instance,  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  script  with  the  cross-
correspondence  on  "  Sesame  and  Lilies,"  and  in  particular  with
Miss  Verrall's  scripts  of  September  23  and  October  24,  1908,
was  perceived  by  me  when  I  received  Mrs.  Forbes's  script.  But
I  had  at  that  time  no  knowledge  either  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script
or  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  and  Miss  Johnson,  who  knew  Mrs.  Holland's
script,  did  not  see  the  Mac  script  of  September  12,  1908,  with
its  emphasised  "  DOOR,"  till  October,  1910.  If  the  intelligence
that  directs  these  complicated  experiments  knows  what  is  going
on  and  is  capable  of  feeling,  a  considerable  strain  must  occasion-
ally be  made  upon  its  patience!

'Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had  not  seen  either  the  Mac  script  of  September  12,  1908,
or  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  November  25,  1908.
2  See  Sir  O.  Lodge's  paper,  p.  128.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willctt's  Scripts.


203


204


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[PAET


The  foregoing  tabular  statement  will  serve  as  a  summary
of  the  above  described  cross-correspondence.  The  names  of  the
automatists  are  given  in  chronological  sequence,  with  dates,  on
the  left.  I  have  divided  the  contents  of  the  scripts  into  two
parts,  called  respectively  Phrase  and  Context.  Under  "  Phrase  "
I  have  given  such  other  recurrent  words  as  were  actually
included  in  the  sentences  containing  the  words  door  [D]  and
key  [K].  Under  "  Context  "  I  have  included  references  in  the
context  of  those  sentences  to  Sesame  [S],  and  other  points
indicative  of  interconnexion  with  other  scripts.  In  the  last
column  I  have  put  the  letters  "  c.c,"  standing  for  cross-corre-
spondence, wherever  in  my  opinion  there  is  internal  evidence
in  the  script  itself  that  it  claims  to  be  part  of  a  whole  com-
pleted through  other  automatists.1

I  pass  on  to  the  next  point  requiring  a  note.

(14)  Ode  to  the West  Wind,
See  below  on  (42).

(22)  Ulysses.

The  name  Ulysses  is  not  mentioned  in  the  passage  from
F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Essay  on  Virgil,  which  is  here  counted  as
a  "  source  "  within  Mrs.  Willett's  normal  knowledge.

(23)  Nightingale
See  below  on  (33)-(35).

(25) "Strew  on  her  roses."

This  line  of  Matthew  Arnold's  was  known  to  Mrs.  Willett,
and  she  had  seen  it  quoted,  as  she  herself  noted,  in  an  M.V.

1  This  claim  is  plainly  made  in  both  the  H.V.  scripts,  as  well  as  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script.  It  is  also  made,  I  think,  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  Feb.  10,
which  is  a  continuation  of  the  scripts  of  Feb.  4  and  5,  by  the  words  "Lodge
wants  .  .  .  me  to  prove  access  ...  to  knowledge  shown  elsewhere," — such
a  desire  not  having  been  expressed  or  hinted  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  letters.
The  same  intention  is  probably  indicated  by  the  drawing  in  the  Mac  script
of  two  hearts  pierced  by  an  arrow,  and  by  the  statement  in  Mrs.  Forbes's
second  script  that  Mrs.  V.  is  "to  decipher  it"  and  that  a  "word"  is  wanted.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


205


script  of  August  14,  1907.  But  she  did  not  know  that  its
appearance  there  re-echoed  an  earlier  emergence  in  the  course
of  some  experiments  in  table-tilting  between  my  daughter  and
her  cousin,  Mrs.  Eiviere,  and  that  it  had  thus  been  recognised
as  the  subject  of  cross-correspondence  between  other  automatists.1

(30)  (31) Plato's  "Phaeclo."

Here  follow  a  group  of  six  sentences,  including  two  proper
names,  and  four  phrases  easily  associated  with  Lethe  as  the
Water  of  Forgetfulness.  Can  any  explanation  be  offered  for
the  particular  selection  of  associations  here  made  ?

The  first  phrase  (30),  the  Draught  of  Forgetfulness,  stand-
ing alone,  could  not  be  claimed  as  specifically  applicable  to
anything  in  particular.  The  words  are  little  more  than  a
paraphrase  for  the  Waters  of  Lethe.  But  followed  as  they  are
by  the  name  Anaxagoras,  to  a  classical  scholar  they  can  recall
only  one  draught  of  forgetfulness — the  cup  of  hemlock  drunk
by  Socrates.  Students  of  Plato  will  remember  the  effect  on
the  development  of  Socrates'  philosophy  produced  by  the  writings
of  Anaxagoras,  as  described  in  two  chapters  (46,  47)  of  the
Phaeclo, — two  chapters,  be  it  noted,  which  do  not  form  part
of  the  "  concluding  chapters "  of  the  Phaeclo  of  which  Mrs.
Willett  had  once  read  a  translation.2

In  a  mind  feeling  after  associations  with  the  word  Lethe,
which  has  already  produced  an  allusion  to  Keats's  Nightingale,
the  "  drowsy  numbness  ...  as  though  of  hemlock  I  had  drunk,"
may  easily  have  led  on  to  the  thought  of  the  hemlock  drunk  by
Socrates,  the  draught,  as  Myers  w  later  called  it,  of  deliverance.
But  I  fail  to  account  by  any  normal  associations  of  Mrs.  Willett's
for  the  introduction  into  the  script  of  the  name  of  the  great
predecessor  of  Socrates,  Anaxagoras,  accused  like  Socrates  himself
of  impiety  against  the  gods.3

1A  paper  on  this  subject  was  read  by  me  at  the  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.
on  Dec.  8,  1910,  and  will  be  published  later  in  Proceedings.
2  See  above,  p.  165.

3 In  conjunction  with  this,  the  reader  is  reminded  that  later  references  to
Socrates  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  also  appear  to  show  more  accurate  knowledge
than  would  be  expected  from  Mrs.  Willett  herself. See  above,  p.  164.


206


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


(33)-(35) Three  Poems  of  Swinburne's.

Next  follow  (33,  34)  two  reminiscences  of  Swinburne,  both
associated  with  one  aspect  of  Lethe,  namely,  forgetfulness.
Neither  is  an  exact  quotation,  as  is  recognised  in  the  script,
but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  tracing  what  is  intended.  The
first  words,  "  which  only  I  remember  which  only  you  forget,"
recall  Swinburne's  poem  of  Itylns,  where  the  memory  of  the
nightingale  and  the  forgetfulness  of  the  "  sister  swallow,"  whom
she  addresses,  are  emphasized  in  almost  every  verse  ;  e.g.  "  Hast
thou  forgotten  ere  I  forget  " — "  Could  I  forget  or  thou  remember  "
— "  Can  I  remember  if  thou  forget — But  the  world  shall
end  when  I  forget." 1

The  second  sentence,  "  and  all  dead  things  go  thither,  and  all
forgotten  days — something  like  that,"  recalls  Swinburne's  Garden
of  Proserpine.

"  There  go  the  loves  that  wither,  .  .  .
And  all  dead  years  draw  thither,
And  all  disastrous  things ;
Dead  dreams  of  days  forsaken  .  .  ."

Thus  the  "  I,"  that  alone  remembers,  is  the  Nightingale,
Mother  of  Itylus,  and  it  is  to  the  Garden  of  Proserpine  that
go  "  all  dead  years "  and  "  dreams  of  days  forsaken."

Now  the  two  words  "  Nightingale "  and  "  Proserpine  "  are
the  subject  of  cross-correspondence  between  other  automatists,
the  one — Proserpine — originating  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on
March  2 4,  1908,  and  the  other — Nightingale — in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  Nov.  25,  1908.  But  this  script,  which  originates
the  cross-correspondence  on  Nightingale  by  means  of  a  quotation
from  Oscar  Wilde's  The  Burden  of  Itys,  reproduces  the  Proser-
pine of  MyerSp  by  means  of  a  quotation  from  Swinburne's
Geirden  of  Proserpine,  and,  as  if  to  show  that  the  conjunction
is  not  fortuitous,  four  months  later  (nothing  having  meanwhile
occurred  to  draw  Mrs.  Holland's  attention  to  the  subject)
both  topics  are  implicitly  introduced  on  March  24,  1909,
by  quotations  from  two  poems  of  Swinburne's,  the  Garden  of
Proserpine,  and the Chorus from Atalanta  in  Calydon  about

1  The  rhythm  of  the  quotation  recalls  another  poem  of  Swinburne's,  Rococo,  but
in  that  poem  there  is  no  contrast  between  the  remembrance  of  one  person  and  the
forgetfulness  of  another.


LXIIL]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


207


the  Nightingale  and  Itylus.  A  detailed  account  of  these
cross-correspondences,  in  which  rny  daughter  and  I  are  con-
cerned, as  well  as  Mrs.  Holland,  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac,  and
Mrs.  Piper,  is  given  in  Miss  Johnson's  paper,1  but  for  the
sake  of  completeness  a  brief  summary  is  here  made  :

Proserpine.

(a)  March  2 4,  1908.  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  "Proserpine  the
seasons.  .  .  .  Proserpine  Spring  upward  and  the  Seasons.  .  .  .
I  am  thinking  of  Proserpine."

(b)  July  <26,  1908.  Mac  script.  "Hoc  fecit  Persephone.
Eheu  fugaces  postume  postume."

(c)  August  26,  1908.  M.V.  script.  "Guardian  on  the
threshold  .  .  .  the  goddess  [i.e.  Proserpine]  holds  in  her  hand
a  pomegranate — flower  and  fruit  red."

(d)  September  10,  1908.  H.V.  script.  "The  goddess
[i.e.  Proserpine]  holds  in  her  hand  a  white  flower,  but  they  are
red  too.  Better  to  be  a  slave  than  rule  among  the  dead  "
(Oct.  XI.  489).

(e)  September  19,  1908.  H.V.  script.  "Flaming  torch  .  .  .
four  pomegranate  seeds."

(/)  November  25,  1908.  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  "Pale  be-
yond porch  and  portal  crowned  with  faint  leaves  she  stands
[i.e.  Proserpine]."

(g)  March  24,  1909.  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  "We  are  not
sure  of  sorrow  And  joy  was  never  sure  [Swinburne's  Garden
of  Proserpine"].

(h)  August  19,  1909.  H.  V.  script.  "The  flowery  mead
asphodel  Persephone  the  Chariot  of  Dis  .  .  .  go  not  to  Lethe,
sleep  too  brings  forgetfulness."

(i)  November  10,  1909.  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  "Per-
sephone. ...  Oh  singer  of  Persephone  .  .  .  the  hidden  piping-
thrills.  .  .  . The  voice  of  the  bird."

(k)  February  10,  1910.  Mrs.  Willett's  script.  "All  dead
things  go  thither  and  all  forgotten  days  something  like  that
[Swinburne  {Gen-den  of  Proserpine)].  .  .  .  The  dream  that  flits  by
night"  [Tennyson's  Demeter  and  Persephone,  see  below  (40)].


1See  pp.


233-50.


208


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


(I)  March  2,  1910.  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  "Pars  thyma,
etc.  [Ovid's  Fasti]  .  .  .  Oh  Proserpine  for  the  flowers  now  that
thou  lets  frighted  fall.  Pale  beyond  porch  and  portal,  etc.
[Swinburne's  Garden  of  Proserpine].  Pomegranate  seeds  .  .  .
Dusky  Dis  .  .  .  fiery-footed  steeds."

Nightingale.

(a)  November  £5,  1908.  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  Quotation
from  Burden  of  Itys  (Nightingale) — with  Echo  substituted  for
Sorrow  in  Mrs.  Holland's  recollection — and  quotation  from
Comus  introducing  the  word  Echo.1

({3)  December  9,  1908.  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  "The  nightin-
gale has  a  lyre  of  gold  "  (quotation  from  Henley's  Echoes)  given
as  a  subject  for  cross-correspondence  and  followed  shortly  by
the  mention  of  "  Mrs.  Holland."

(7)  March  $4,  1909.  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  "  The  Thracian
ships  and  the  foreign  faces  [Swinburne's  Atalanta]."

(§)  February  10,  1910.  Mrs.  Willetl's  script.  "  Nightin-
gale "  explicitly  twice,  implicitly  once  (by  means  of  an  allusion
to  Swinburne's  Itylus).  Echo  perhaps  implicitly,  in  an  allusion
to  "  Shelley's  Nightingale."

With  regard  to  these  cross-correspondences  it  is  noticeable
that  in  the  case  of  "  Proserpine,"  of  the  eleven  references  the
first  and  last  (a  and  I)  alone  give  the  Latin  name.  Three  of
the  intervening  allusions  (b,  h,  i)  give  the  Greek  name,  Per-
sephone ;  three  (c,  d,  f)  describe,  but  do  not  name,  the  goddess;
in  the  remaining  three  (e,  g,  7c),  the  allusions  are  implicit  only.

In  the  case  of  "  Nightingale,"  in  Mrs.  Holland's  first  script
(a)  the  word  is  implicit  and  associated  with  the  word
Echo.  This  arrangement  is  exactly  reversed  in  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  (/3),  where  the  word  Nightingale  occurs  in  a  quotation
from  one  poem  of  a  series  whose  title — not  mentioned — is  Echoes.
To  the  Nightingale  and  to  the  name  Itylus,  Mrs.  Holland's
second  script  (7)  makes  implicit  reference.  Mrs.  Willett's
script  (0)  contains  the  word  Nightingale  explicitly  more  than

1  The  word  Echo  appears  to  have  been  used  by  Myersp  in  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings
of  March  to  May,  1908,  to  indicate  a  cross-correspondence;  see  Proc,  Vol.
XXIV.,  pp.  81,  116.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


209


once,  and  recalls  Mrs.  Holland's  implicit  allusion  to  Itys  and
Itylus  by  a  quotation  from  a  poem  of  Swinburne's  called  Itylus.
If,  as  I  think,1  the  intention  of  the  words  "  once  more  ye
laurels  "  is  to  indicate  that  Shelley's  Nightingale  means  Shelley's
reference  in  Adonais  to  the  Nightingale  of  Keats,2  we  have  an
implicit  allusion  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  to  Echo,  which  is
named  in  the  preceding  stanza  of  Adonais  as  another  of  the
things  made  beautiful  by  Keats.

The  last  (No.  35)  of  this  group  is  associated  by  the  words
"  Waters  "  and  "  remembered " 3  with  Lethe,  and  closely  con-
nected with  the  two  preceding  quotations  from  Swinburne.
Sivper  Flumina  Babylonis  is  the  title  of  a  poem  by  Swinburne
in  Songs  before  Sunrise,  which  begins  with  the  opening  words
of  Ps.  cxxxvii.  Mrs.  Willett  was  not  acquainted  with  the  poem,
but  some  lines  of  it  are  quoted  in  the  Memoir  of  Henry
Sidgwick  (p.  588),  which  she  had  read,  and  the  words  Super
Flumina  Babylonis  appear  in  an  M.V.  script  of  April  12,
1909,  written  a  few  days  after  Swinburne's  death,  and  seen
by  Mrs.  Willett  in  July,  1909.  She  had  also  seen  the  quota-
tion from  the  Psalm,  "  By  the  waters  of  Babylon,"  in  H.V.
script  of  April  29,  1909,4  but  she  did  not  know  that  those
opening  words  of  the  Psalm  had  been  employed"  in  an  earlier
H.V.  script  as  part  of  the  cross-correspondence  between  Miss
Verrall's  script  and  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on  "  Exile  and  Moore "
(Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV,  p.  187).  So  that  here  too,  as  in  the  two
preceding  sentences,  Mrs.  Willett's  script  selects  among  phrases
associated with Lethe ("  forgetfulness," "  water ") one  which

1  See  p.  159.  The  main  part  of  my  note  on  the  interpretation  of  Shelley's
Nightingale  as  the  Nightingale  of  Adonais  was  marie  and  communicated  to  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  some  months  before  I  saw  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  November
25,  1908,  or  the  record  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on  December  9,  1908,  and
before  I  had  recognised  the  allusion  to  Swinburne's  I(>/lw<  in  Mrs.  Willett's
script.

-That  some  value  was  attached  by  Myersw  to  the  word  Nightingale  is  clear
from  the  statement  on  March  7,  1910  (see  p.  129),  which  suggests  that  the
full  point  of  the  Nightingale  had  not  yet  been  perceived.

3 The  words  "forget"  and  "remember"  each  occur  twice  in  the  nine  verses
of  the  Psalm,  vv.  5,  6,  7.

4  See  above,  p.  186,  where  the  script  is  quoted.

5  That  fact  was  known  to  my  daughter  when  her  script  of  April  29,  1909,
was  produced,  and  is  unmistakably  therein  alluded  to,  as  is  shown  by  the  next
following  word  on  April  29,  "Exile."

O


210


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


implicitly  refers  to  a  word,  Exile,  which  had  heen,  without
Mrs.  Willett's  knowledge,  the  subject  of  a  cross-correspondence
between  other  automatists.

Under  these  circumstances  I  cannot  believe  it  an  accident
that  the  three  allusions  to  Swinburne  contained  in  these  con-
secutive remarks  of  Myers  w  should  all  recall  words — Nightingale,
Proserpine,  Exile — which,  unknown  to  Mrs.  Willett,  were  already
the  subjects  of  cross-correspondence  between  the  trance-utter-
ances of  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  scripts  of  other  automatists.  More-
over, it  must  be  remembered  that  these  statements  follow  upon
a  group  of  references  to  other  topics — Ganymede,  Sibyl,  etc.1 —
discussed  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  with  Mr.  Dorr,  and  introduced
by  Myersw  with  the  words  :  "  Dorr's  scheme  excellent — Myers —
that  I  have  to  use  different  scribes,  means  that  I  must  show
different  aspects  of  thoughts,  underlying  which  unity  is  to  be
found."

(39)  To  slave,  etc.

See  above,  p.  189,  for  Mrs.  Willett's  normal  associations  with
this  phrase  and  its  application  in  her  script.

(40)  (41)  Sleep.

Between  a  plain  allusion  to  Homer  and  a  plain  allusion
to  Keats  comes  a  group  of  sentences  to  which  no  literary
prototype  can  with  certainty  be  assigned.  That  Death  and
Sleep  are  brothers  is  a  commonplace  of  poetry  from  Homer2
onwards,  and  no  specific  allusion  can  therefore  be  recognised  in
this  passage  to  Virgil,3  Shelley,4  Tennyson,0  or  Frederic  Myers.6
None  of  the  poets  named  give  Sleep  more  than  one  Brother,
though  Tennyson,  it  is  true,  in  one  section  of  In  Memoriam,
makes  Sleep  "kinsman"  to  death  and  trance  and  madness.'

'See  above,  p.  162.  -//.,  XIV.,  231.

3 Mneid,  VI.,  278,  "  consanguineus  Leti  Sopor."

4  Queen  Mab,  1.  2,  "Death,  and  his  brother  Sleep."

5  In  Mem.,  Ixviii.,  "Sleep,  Death's  twin  brother."  Tennyson's  own  note  here
gives  the  reference  to  the  Sixth  JEneld,  278.

6 Fragments,  p.  124,  "Oh  sleep!  thy  true  twin  brother."

7  The  poem  in  Fragment*  is  clearly  reminiscent  of  In  Memoriam,  and  the  choice
of  the  epithet  "true"  suggests  that  the  brotherhood  of  sec.  Ixviii.  is  preferred
to  the  kinship  of  sec.  Ixxi.,  that  Sleep  is  in  the  author's  view  more  nearly  akin  to


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willelt's  Scripts.


211


I  have  found  no  certain  literary  source  for  the  sentence,
"  Sleep,  the  dream  that  flits  by  night."  To  me  the  phrase
recalled  the  noiseless  flight  of  the  dream-god  Morpheus  sent
by  Sleep  to  Alcyone  (Ovid,  Met.,  XL  646):  "  Ille  volat  nullos
strepitus  facientibus  alis  per  tenebras "  (he  flies  on  noiseless
wing  through  the  darkness).  But  since  the  above  was  written,
it  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  the  phrase  in  the  script
recalls  the  lines  from  Tennyson's  Demeter  and  Persephone
(quoted  on  p.  204  of  F.  W.  TL  Myers's  volume  of  Essays  called
Science  and  a  Future  Life) :

"  Last,  as  the  likeness  of  a  dying  man,
Without  his  knowledge,  from  him  flits  to  warn
A  far-off  friendship  that  he  comes  no  more."

This  therefore  may  be  the  source  from  which  it  is  derived.
But  that  is  perhaps  only  another  way  of  saying  that  it  goes
ultimately  back  to  the  passage  in  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  which
it  recalled  to  me.  That  Tennyson  was  familiar  with  the  story
of  Proserpine  as  told  in  Metamorphoses,  V.,  is  clear.  He  follows
Ovid  closely  in  the  details  of  the  disappearance  of  Proserpine
and  the  search  by  Demeter.  But  he  differs  completely  from
Ovid  in  his  account  of  how  the  news  came  to  the  mother
that  her  child  was  in  Hades.  In  Tennyson's  poem,  Demeter
learns  this  from  a  veridical  dream,  related  by  Demeter  in  words
that  recall  another  passage  in  the  Metamorphoses,  the  veridical
dream  by  which  Alcyone  was  informed  of  the  death  of  Ceyx
(Ovid,  Met.,  XL  646,  660).  After  the  above  quoted  allusion
to  a  '  phantasm  of  the  living,'  Tennyson's  Demeter  goes  on  :

"  So  he,  the  God  of  dreams,  who  heard  my  cry,
Drew  from  thyself  the  likeness  of  thyself
Without  thy  knowledge,  and  thy  shadow  past
Before  me,  crying.  ..."

So  in  the  Metamorphoses,  Sleep  chooses  Morpheus,  the  Dream
God,  who  thereupon  flits  noiselessly  through  the  darkness,  and,
assuming  the  likeness  of  Ceyx,  announces  himself  to  Alcyone
as  the  shadow  of  her  husband —

"  nosces

inveniesque  tuo  pro  coniuge  coniugis  umbram."

Death  than  to  Trance  or  Madness.  For  a  complete  exposition  of  Frederic
Myers's  theory  of  Sleep,  see  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  150,  151.


212


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[PART


(42) Writ  in  Water.

This  phrase  was  repeated  in  a  script  of  my  daughter's  written
on  Feb.  16,  1910.  To  complete  these  comments  I  therefore
here  add  notes  on  certain  scripts  of  hers  and  mine,  produced
in  February,  1910,  which  appear  to  form  part  of  this  series,
or  at  least  to  show  points  of  contact  with  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts
of  approximately  the  same  date.  There  are  three  in  all,  two
of  my  daughter's  and  one  of  mine,  written  in  ignorance  of
Mrs.  Willett's  and  of  each  other's  scripts.

H.V.  Script. February  5,  J 9 10.

When  the  sound  of  the  harp  is  mute — alone  in  the  darkness — stray-
ing leaves  autumn's  harvest — as  I  walk  in  autumn's  even  when  the
dead  leaves  pass — the  flight  of  the  birds  too — minstrelsy  song  there  is
something  about  that  I  want  to  say — a  quotation — wait.

songs  of  the  old  world  and  of  the  new  a  new  world  worth

your  old

note  that

and  the  waters  of  Babylon  enough.

"  If  I  walk  in  autumn's  even
When  the  dead  leaves  pass "

is  a  quotation  from  a  poem  of  Shelley's.1  The  script  then
seems  to  pass,  with  the  thought  of  autumn,  to  reminiscences
of  Keats's  To  Autumn,  with  his  "  Gathering  swallows  twitter
in  the  skies  "  and  his  "  songs  of  spring "  and  autumn's  "  music
too."  It  then  quotes,  with  a  difference,  Browning's  Alt  Vogler 2
and  ends  with  "  the  waters  of  Babylon."  This  last  phrase  is
fairly  frequent  in  H.V.  script,  this  being  its  fourth  occurrence
since  its  first  appearance  on  May  16,  1908,  as  part  of  the
cross-correspondence  on  Exile  and  Moore.3
My  daughter's  next  script  was  as  follows :

H.V.  Script. February  16,  1910.

.  .  .  You  should  write  more  often  and  regularly — then  it  would
be  easier  to  give  the  message.

1  The  poem  is  not  included  in  all  editions,  but  was  published  in  Mr.  W.  M.
Rossetti's  edition  of  1870,  and  is  included  in  a  selection  from  Shelley  familiar
to  Miss  Verrall.

2  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  380,  where  a  similar  point  is  made.

3  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  186  ff.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.


213


beyond  the  barriers  of  the  sun — that  is  one  idea — where  the
slant  rays  kiss  the  water  a  level  beam.

a  golden  line  from  shore  to  shore
the  pathways  of  the  deep
who  shall  talk  of  paths  writ  in  water
the  unharvested  deep.  .  .  .

In  these  two  scripts  there  are  three  points  of  contact  with
Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  of  February  4  and  February  10,  1910,
of  which  neither  my  daughter  nor  I  knew  anything :

(1)  On  February  4,  1910,  Myersw  quotes  the  greater  part
of  the  third  line  of  Shelley's  Ode  to  the  West  Wind.  The  first
three  lines  of  that  poem  run  :

"  Oh  wild  West  Wind,  thou  breath  of  Autumn's  being,
Thou  from  whose  unseen  presence  the  leaves  dead
Are  driven,  like  ghosts  from  an  enchanter  fleeing."

The  first  two  lines  of  the  Ode  offer  resemblances  with  the
lines  of  Shelley's  other  poem  quoted  in  the  H.V.  script.  It
is  possible  that  these  two  lines  represent  the  "  quotation "
which  the  scribe  of  Feb.  5  wanted  "  to  say,"  and  for  which
the  automatist  was  to  "  wait."

(2)  On  February  10,  1910,  Myersw  quotes  the  first  verse
of  Psalm  exxxvii.,  four  words  of  which,  "  the  waters  of
Babylon,"  occurred  in  H.V.  script  of  February  5.

(3)  On  February  10,  1910,  Myersw  quotes  the  words  from
the  epitaph  on  Keats  "  his  name  was  writ  in  water,"  while
on  February  16  the  H.V.  script  applies  the  three  distinctive
words  "  writ  in  water  "  in  a  different  connexion.1

As  has  been  said,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  question  about  Lethe
would  account  for  the  introduction  into  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of
phrases  containing  the  word  "  water."  But  there  was  no  such
reason  for  their  introduction  into  H.V.  script.  My  daughter
was  altogether  unaware  that  any  attempt  had  been  made  to
connect  Myersw  and  MyersP,  that  any  question  had  been  asked
of  Myersw,  or  that  any  particular  interest  attached  to  associa-
tions with  Lethe  other  than  those  explained  in  Mr.  Piddington's
paper  which  she  had  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  in  October,
1909,  when,  as  far  as  she  was  concerned,  the  Lethe  episode  was
concluded.

1  The  words  were  noted  by  my  daughter  at  the  time  as  referring  to  Keats's
epitaph.


214


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


In  the  case  of  ray  script  the  resemblance  with  Mrs.  Willett's
script  is  not  in  the  phraseology  but  in  the  topic,  namely  Lethe.
I  quote  the  whole.

M.V.  Script. February  15,  1910.

Oh  for  a  draught  of  some  deep  stream — but  deep  is  not  the  word —
clear  is  better  though  not  yet  right.

haustus  longos deep  draughts  that  quench  the  thirst.
Deep  wells  of  cool  no
Deep  wells  and  crystal  founts

TTlJ-yUL KpV(TTaWlVOL  tUippVTOC

No  not  yet

the  ever  flowing  crystal  fount

the  source  of  Life  and  Joy

forth  flowing  from  the  Sacred  Mount

no  don't  say  obvious  nonsense — the  rhyme  hinders — but  you  now
have  the  general  sense.  I  can't  think  why  you  will  not  just  put
down  the  words  without  making  up  bad  verses  to  disguise  from
yourself  what  you  are  doing.  Now  write  FOUNT  no  more  than
that — and  off  you  go  to  Fountains  Abbey — no  more.

F.  W.  H.  M.

The  allusion  here  is  plainly  to  Dante's  Lethe  as  described  in
Purgatorio,  XXVIII.  to  XXXI.  Dante's  Lethe  is  translucent  (die
nulla  nasconde)  and  cool  (die  si  in  ova  bruna  bruna  sotto  Vombra
perpetua),  fed  not  from  rain  but  issuing  from  a  fount  that  never
fails  (csce  di  fontana  salda  e  certa)  ;  it  flows  through  the  earthly
Paradise  situated  on  the  Mount  of  Purgatory :  its  draught
destroys  sad  memories  (mr.morir  triste)  and  is  a  necessary  prelude
to  the  entry  into  eternal  life  and  to  the  quenching  of  Dante's  ten
years'  thirst  (la.  decennc  sete).1

These  allusions  to  Lethe  were  produced  in  the  first  piece  of
script  obtained  by  me  after  Mrs.  Willett's  final  allusions  to  Lethe
on  February  10,  1910.  As  I  have  said,  I  did  not  know  that
Mrs.  Willett  had  opened  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  envelope,  or  that  she
was  producing  script ;  of  this  I  was  not  informed  till  some  weeks

1  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  "237  for  earlier  reference  to  Lethe  in  a  script  of  mine
recalled  by  this  script.  The  word  aeipvros  only  occurs  once  in  Greek  poetry,  viz.
in  Soph.,  0.  C.  4(59,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  sacred  fountain  at  Kolonos  whence
CEdipus  takes  the  water  for  the  offering  to  the  Eumenides  which  precedes  his
purgation  and  death.


LXIIL]


Notes  on  Mrs.  WAlletfs  Scripts.


215


later  in  a  letter  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  My  latest  information— =
at  the  end  of  January — was  that  the  envelope  had  not  been
opened  and  that  Mrs.  Willett  was  not  writing  automatically.
Three  pieces  of  script  were  produced  by  me  in  February  (Feb.  1,
Feb.  8,  Feb.  9),  before  the  above  described  allusion  to  Dante's
Lethe.  So  that  even  if  we  attribute  that  allusion  to  my  normal
knowledge  that  Mrs.  Willett  had  received  a  cpiestion  about
Lethe  and  would  be  likely  soon  to  be  sitting  for  script,  yet  some
supernormal  connexion  between  her  script  and  mine  is  indicated
by  the  chronology,  as  well  as  by  the  supplementary  character  of
the  allusion  in  my  script,  there  being,  as  we  have  seen,  no
reference  whatever  to  Dante's  Lethe  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script.
This  omission  in  her  script  is  the  more  remarkable  in  that  Mrs.
Willett  had  read  with  some  care  Mr.  Piddington's  Eeport  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  where  much  attention  is  given  to  Dante's
Purgatorio  in  connexion  with  the  cross-correspondence  on  Light
in  West,  and  where  the  words  River  of  Lethe  are  emphasised
(p.  268)  by  appearing  in  leaded  type.

That  the  omission  from  Mrs.  Wiliett's  Lethe-scripts  of  all
mention  of  Dante  was  intentional  is  made  the  more  likely  by  the
following  incident,  recorded  by  Mrs.  Willett  on  March  23,  1910,
and  received  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  was  abroad,  on  April  7,
before  the  issue  of  Proceedings,  Part  LX.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  containing
Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  the  Lethe  incident.1

Mrs.  Willett  relates  how  she  felt  an  impulse  on  March  22,
1910,  to  look  through  certain  volumes  of  the  Proceedings.2  The
result  was  twofold.  The  first  result  showed  supernormal
knowledge,  but  does  not  concern  us  here ;  the  second  is  thus
reported  in  Mrs.  Willett's  note  :

Then  I  felt  there  was  more.  .  .  .  After  a  little  time  I  fetched
Mr.  Piddington's  "Report"  (Oct.  IOCS;  i.e.  Vol.  XXIL).  It  is  a
good  long  time  (months)  since  I  had  looked  at  it.  I  keep  it  in  a
drawer  where  I  also  keep  Miss  Johnson's  Report  (June,  1908;  i.e.
Vol.  XXL). I  took  both  books  out  and  went  and  sat  down.

1  Part  LX.  of  Proceedings,  though  dated  March,  1910,  was  not  posted  from
the  printers  till  April  9,  1910,  and  was  not  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett  till  April
19,  1910.

2  Mrs.  Willett  is  not  a  member  of  the  S.P.R..  and  does  not  receive  its
publications.  Some  numbers  of  the  Proceedings  have  been  sent  to  her  for
definite  purposes.


216


Mrs.  A.  W.  VerralL


[part


Something  in  me  rejected  Miss  Johnson's — so  I  took  up  Mr.
Piddington's.  ...  I  thought  I  had  better  turn  the  pages  carelessly
and  see  if  I  "  felt,"  as  I  did  [in  the  first  case],  that  1  had  got
"  it."  It  was  some  minutes  before  I  lit  on  what  I  knew  (though
how  I  can't  explain)  was  wanted — page  268  in  big  print — "  the  river
of  Lethe." The  words  preceding  are

"  Dante  enters  the  Terrestrial  Paradise  and  reaches  the  river  of
Lethe."

To  sum  up  : — my — I  don't  know  what  to  call  it — impression  or
round-about  given  words  (for  I  seemed  led  to  the  words)  was

Lethe — with  Dante.

Of  course  I  see  Lethe  has  to  do  with  Sir  0.  L's.  messages.  .  .  .
I  know  nothing  of  Dante's  writings — I  have  a  small  Italian  Divina
Commedia  .  .  .  but  have  never  read  it.

I  never  connected  Lethe  and  Dante,  nor  did  I  know  (at  least
consciously)  that  Dante  had  written  about  Lethe.  .  .  .

I  do  not  know  whether  anything  capable  of  being  interpreted  as
a  reference  to  Dante's  account  of  Lethe  has  come  in  my  (to  me)
confused  script  written  in  answer  to  the  Lethe  question.

This  incident  is  instructive.  It  will  no  doubt  be  variously
interpreted.  It  is  certain  that  within  the  last  year  Mrs.
Willett  had  had  two  opportunities  of  learning  that  Dante
had  written  about  Lethe,  once  when  she  read — and  read
with  special  interest — Ruskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies,  with  its
eloquent  concluding  passage  comparing  Tennyson's  Maud  with
Dante's  "  great  Matilda "  by  the  "  edge  of  happy  Lethe,"  and
also  when  she  read  Mr.  Piddington's  Report  (Proa,  Vol.
XXII.);  so  that,  had  her  script  included  a  reference  to  Dante's
Lethe,  we  should  certainly  have  counted  that  allusion  as  due
to  subliminal  memory.  It  is,  however,  clear  that  not  all
Mrs.  Willett's  normal  associations  with  Lethe  emerged  in  the
apparent  tangle  of  her  Lethe  scripts,  and  I  myself  think  that
there  is  evidence  that  this  particular  omission  was  not  accidental.
For  not  only  was  there  no  mention  of  Dante's  Lethe  by
Myersw,  but  that  omission  was  immediately  followed,  at
the first opportunity,1 by the mention of just that  very

1  After  February  10,  1910,  no  further  script  was  obtained  from  Myersw  till
March  7,  1910.  The  first  script  from  MyersT  in  that  interval  was  on  Feb.  15,
and  the  first  H.V.  script  was  on  Feb.  16,  1910.


LXIII.]


Notes  on  Mrs.  Wiilett's  Scripts.


217


subject  by  Myersv,  although  the  association  of  Lethe  with
Dante  is  far  less  familiar  to  me  than  its  associations  with
Plato  or  with  Virgil.  Taking  all  circumstances  into  account,
I  regard  the  incident  of  March  22,  1910,  as  marking  the
recovery  of  a  memory  deliberately  withheld.  It  is,  to  my
mind,  another  of  several  signs  of  intelligent  direction  shown
throughout  the  series  of  incidents  which  culminated  with  Mrs.
Wiilett's  script  of  February,  1910.  We  must  put  the  omission
of  Dante,  on  February  4  and  10,  and  the  reminder  of  that
omission  on  March  22,  in  the  same  class  as  the  re-arrange-
ment of  topics  drawn  from  H.V.  script,  and  the  significant
choice  of  quotations  from  Swinburne.

The  problem  to  be  solved  is  clearly  stated  by  Myersw.
Just  as  the  words,  "  Ask  Piddington,"  are  constantly  used  by
Myersv  and  MyersH  v  to  draw  attention  to  a  point  of  special
value  in  the  accompanying  script,  so  Myersw  on  June  5,
1910,  also  emphasises  the  importance  of  the  evidence  for
Selection  in  Mrs.  Wiilett's  script  in  words  which  may  fitly
conclude  these  notes :

Write  the  word  Selection.
Who  selects,  my  friend  Piddington  1
I  address  this  question  to  Piddington.
Who  Selects  ?


218


Alice  Johnson.


[part


III.

THIRD  REPORT  ON  MRS.  HOLLAND'S  SCRIPT.

By  ALICE  JOHNSON.

Introduction.

This  paper  is  concerned  primarily  with  certain  cross-corre-
spondences between  Mrs.  Holland's  script  and  that  of  Mrs.
Piper  produced  some  months  earlier,  namely,  during  her  21
sittings  with  Mr.  Dorr  from  March  9  to  May  26,  1908,  which
were  reported  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  Part  LX.,  published
in  April,  1910.

It  happened  that  Mrs.  Holland  produced  only  two  pieces  of
script  (on  March  4  and  10,  1908,)  during  the  period  of  Mrs.
Piper's  sittings,  and  neither  of  these  contains  anything  connected
with  the  sittings.  Her  next  script,  dated  July  23,  1908,  is
concerned  with  the  important  cross-correspondence  of  Sevens
dealt  with  in  my  Second  Report  on  her  automatic  writing
(Proceedmtjs,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  238).  After  that  she  wrote
nothing  more  until  Nov.  25,  1908,1  when  she  began  again
to  write  regularly,  that  is  as  a  rule  once  a  week.

The  prelude  to  this  period  was  my  interview  with  Mrs.
Holland  on  Nov.  24,  1908  (see  my  Second  Report,  op.  cit.  p.  241),
when  1  ^ave  her  a  short  account  of  the  main  points  in  the
cross-correspondence  of  Sevens,  mentioning  that  Mrs.  Piper  had
been  having  sittings  with  an  acquaintance  of  ours  in  America,
and  had  given  the  phrase  "  We  are  seven."  Mrs.  Holland
was  much  interested  in  hearing  of  this  case,  and  it  seems
probable  that  her  talk  with  me  about  it  stimulated  her
automatic faculty into fresh activity. The contents of  her

1  Except  a  piece  of  script  produced  in  my  presence  on  Nov.  24,  1908,  and
not  dealt  with  here.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


219


writing,  however,  cannot  be  thus  accounted  for,  since  I  had
not  mentioned  Mr.  Dorr's  name,  nor  said  anything  about  any
of  the  other  topics  of  the  Piper  sittings,  of  which  I  then
knew  very  little.  Yet  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  the  following
day  (discussed  in  detail  below)  referred  to  "  the  other  George —
not  G.  P.,"  and  soon  after  gave  the  letters  "  G.B.D.F.A.," 1  the
first  three  of  which  are  the  initials  of  Mr.  Dorr's  name.

I  saw  her  again  on  Nov.  28,  1908,  and  went  over  this
script  with  her.  She  told  me  the  sources  of  some  of  the
quotations  in  it,  and  pointed  out  that  the  letters  were  the  five
lines  of  the  bass  clef.  I  told  her  that  the  first  three  of  them
were  also  the  initials  of  a  person  known  to  me  (without
mentioning  his  connexion  with  Mrs.  Piper),  but  that  I  thought
her  interpretation  was  probably  the  correct  one.  I  said  nothing
of  the  cross-correspondences  contained  in  the  script,  since  I
did  not  discover  them  till  some  months  later.

Meanwhile  I  had  on  Oct.  20,  1908,  sent  her  Vol.  XXII.
of  the  Proceedings,  containing  Mr.  Piddington's  report  of  the
Piper  sittings  in  England,  1900-1907;  and  she  had  already
seen  the  first  report  on  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic  writing
{Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.),  as  well  as  my  first  report  on  her
own  script  in  Arol.  XXI.  Her  knowledge  of  all  these  matters
must  be  borne  in  mind  in  considering  the  script  of  this  later
period.

Possible  Telepathy  from  the  Investigators.

It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  these  cross-correspondences  did
not  occur  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  until  after  Mrs.  Verrall
knew  of  the  occurrence  of  the  topics  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.
Mrs.  Verrall  knew  nothing  about  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  at  the
time  they  were  taking  place ;  but  after  they  were  completed
the  records  were  sent  to  England  and  were  put  into  her
hands  for  study  in  October,  1908.  Similarly  Mrs.  Holland's
"  Sevens "  script,  and  her  "  Sesame  and  Lilies " 2  scripts  were
produced  after  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  of  the  occurrence  of  those
topics  in  the  scripts  of  other  automatists.

Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Mr.  G.  W.  Balfour,  and  Mr.  Piddington,  as
well  as  Mr.  Dorr,  must  also  be  regarded  as  possible  telepathic

1  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  p.  197.
-See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  319.


220


Alice  Johnson.


[part


agents  in  this  case,  for  they  too  were  engaged  in  studying
the  Piper  records  during  part  of  the  period  that  Mrs.
Holland  was  producing  these  scripts,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  having
read  the  records  both  before  and  after  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mr.  Balfour
next,  and  Mr.  Piddington  beginning  his  work  on  them  about
Feb.  10,  1  909.  Some  slight  evidence  for  telepathy  from
Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  Piddington  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance
is,  I  think,  to  be  found  in  his  report  on  the  English  sittings
of  190G-7,  the  strongest  case  being  that  of  the  "Steeple"
incident  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  38-46),  when  the  word
"  Steeple  "  was  given  in  the  Piper  script  a  few  days  after  Mr.
Piddington  dreamt  or  imagined  that  I  had  told  him  it  formed
the  subject  of  a  cross-correspondence  in  some  other  scripts.
It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that  he  had  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of
this  before  the  word  came  out  in  the  Piper  script.

Similarly  there  are  a  few  cases  (see  especially  "  Comus  "  and
"Shelley's  Skylark"  below,  pp.  253  and  272)  where  a  subject
suggested  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  is  reproduced
in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  and  where,  therefore,  it  is  conceivable
that  Mr.  Dorr  may  have  exercised  some  telepathic  influence
on  Mrs.  Holland.  There  is,  however,  no  evidence  for  telepathy
from  Mr.  Dorr  apart  from  Mrs.  Piper ;  no  reference  to  him
being  made  in  the  Holland  script  except  in  connexion  with
the  Piper  sittings.

The  general  question  of  what  influence  may  be  exercised  on
the  automatists  by  telepathy  from  one  another  is  deferred  to
the  theoretical  discussion  at  the  end  of  this  paper.  I  merely
note  here  what  persons  may,  through  their  normal  know-
ledge of  the  Piper  records,  be  regarded  as  possible  telepathic
agents  in  relation  to  Mrs.  Holland.

From  Nov.  25,  1908,  to  May  19,  1909,  Mrs.  Holland
produced  twenty-two  pieces  of  script.  Three  of  these  con-
tained contributions  to  the  Sesame  and  Lilies  cross-correspond-
ence, and  were  quoted  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  319-326;
ten  are  quoted  in  connection  with  other  cross-correspondences
below.  Two  later  ones,  carrying  on  the  cross-correspondence
Proserpine,  are  added.

It  will  be  seen  that  other  automatists  besides  Mrs.  Piper,
in  particular  Miss  Arerrall,  are  also  concerned  in  these  cross-


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


221


correspondences,  while  connexions  are  further  shown  with
some  later  American  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  Dec,  1908,—
March,  1909,  four  of  which  were  held  by  Mr.  Dorr  and  six
by  Miss  Theodate  Pope,  a  friend  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  and  a
member  of  the  Society,  who  has  had  a  long  experience
of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  phenomena,  and  who  kindly  under-
took to  continue  Mr.  Dorr's  experiments.

Finally,  some  of  the  cross-correspondences  reappear  in  Mrs.
Willett's  scripts  of  Feb.,  1910,  reported  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's
paper  above,  which  were  linked  up  with  the  Piper  sittings
by  his  question,  put  to  Myersw,  "  What  does  the  word  Lethe
suggest  to  you  ? "

For  the  convenience  of  the  reader  I  insert  overleaf  a  tabular
list  of  the  cross-correspondences,  arranged  in  the  order  of  their
emergence  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  with  the  dates  on  which
the  same  topics  occurred  in  the  scripts  of  other  automatists.

The  Question  of  Chance  Coincidence.

The  first  thing  to  strike  the  eye  in  this  table  is  the  long
periods  of  time  over  which  several  of  the  topics  are  distributed
among  the  automatists,  and  this  at  once  raises  the  question
whether  some  of  the  cross-correspondences  may  not  be  due  to
chance.

The  mere  probability  that  the  same  word  or  phrase  may
occur  through  chance  alone  in  two  given  scripts  by  two
different  writers  is  the  same,  whether  the  two  scripts  were
produced  on  the  same  day,  or  with  an  interval  of  a  hundred
years  between  them.  But  that  they  should  be  contemporaneous
adds  another  and  a  very  important  factor  to  the  coincidence.

And  when  we  try  to  determine  whether  the  coincidence  is
due  to  telepathy  (either  from  incarnate  or  from  discarnate
minds),  a  fresh  element  is  introduced  into  the  argument.;  for,
since  we  must  suppose  the  contact  between  two  minds  which
constitutes  telepathy  to  take  place  at  a  certain  time,  it  would
be  much  more  reasonable  to  attribute  a  coincidence  between
two  scripts  to  telepathy  if  they  were  produced  on  the  same
day  than  if  there  was  a  long  interval  between  them.

On  the  other  hand,  the  scripts  merely  record  the  emergence
of  some  of  the  subliminal  impressions  of  the  automatists,  and


ett.

1910

1910
1910

1910
1910

o

OS "  -

Will

o"

i— i

i— i

Mrs.

Feb.

^  J

Feb.
Mar.

Feb.
Feb.'
Mar.

CO

CO

o

o

m

o

OS

OS

of

1 — 1

c?

d

co~

cf

2  °°

1-1  o

CI

he

EH

P«

s

0)

1-3

CO

00

OS


CM

bC
3


OS  O

CO

O  i— i

o

OS  OS

OS

i — (  i — (

rH

cf  co~

oT

i — i

i— (

d  42

&b

<ao  a3

3

00

o  ,

OS  -

1908
1909

CO

o"os~c£T

i— i  rH  CI

OX

[Sept.
[oept.
Jan.

CO

O -  -
as -  -

1 —

1908

1908

o"  i— T  to

CO  CO

os~

— '

CM

3


00

o  ..

OS  -


co  rti

CI  CT


Oh  *=>

co  O


CO

r


ci  ci

H  H  IM

&b  fee  feb

B  3  3

<!<<<]


Sh  *h  ^

ci  oi  o,


CD
-


O


CO  CO

o  o

OS  OS


CI


CO  OS  O
O  O  rH

os  os  os


CI  CI


>
o


o

rH


O  ci

v.P.


CP


o


os  os  o

CO

0C

CO

O O  rH

c

o ~  „

as  os  os

OS

3S

os "  "

■ — ■

1 —

rH

o"  cm"

1-'

Os'

os"~co"o~

CT  rH

C  1

CI  CO

IH* >  !_'

>

ci

odd

03 o  ci

o

CO

(D CO  CO

X

P

o


co


>
o


o
cs

!Z5


ci
O

o


3

c

'43
—

bD


B


-


co


c
c

-


-.

CD


s

EH


r^

CO


C

ci

CD
oi

03
CD


o
I— I

03


—


CT5  OS

o  o

<33  03


x

33


X

-

3!


CC


X


—


00

00

X

00  O

00

00

o

o

;

O  „I-H

o

o

as

OS

03

03  -OS

CTJ

i — 1

o"

OS*

o"

t-"  co"  icT

lO

i— i

•AO

•AO

o,^  %

—

Sept.

<1  ^3

00

00

X

O  .

O

O

C3

33

03

00

cM~co~

eo"

CO

~

Cvl

<M

33

- — i

>:

i- !

eS

s

00

o


X

r

(33


00

-  —J


i— i

„

02 03 o3  n\


—

CO

^ — j

Z-

eS

<  00

X

2-M

CO  O

■ — i

o

l- H  03

ri

.  « — 1

—

E-

-

<

(35

CT5

: .

o  o

=3

as  cs

r.

33

3:

X


00

o

OS


CO  00

o  o
ai  as


o  o

eo  co


o  o


00

33

33

c

r

o

c

C3

C3

1 —

r— <

~

o~

CO

■ —

o

s

o

-_

CO

Eh

*  Cm

<  <


S

o
O

SET


-

-

E
t-

tc
c
c

C


Skylc

(A

iley's

Mei

Exil

She!

— '

>-„

X

—
p

eS
C

c
~


e3

w


a
-r

O


c
-


O


224


Alice  Johnson.


[part


these  impressions  may  not  be  recorded  until  some  time  after
they  arise ;  while,  again,  the  transmission  (from  whatever
source)  to  the  second  automatist  may  not  take  place  until  some
time  after  the  first  record  has  been  made.  Thus  there  may
be  a  real  telepathic  connexion  between  two  scripts,  in  spite  of
their  production  at  different  dates.1  But  since  the  only  ascer-
tainable dates  are  those  of  their  production,  it  is  obvious  that
the  strength  of  the  evidence  for  a  telepathic  connexion  depends
■ — partly  at  least — on  the  shortness  of  the  interval  between  the
dates.

It  depends  also,  of  course,  on  the  number  and  degree  of
the  coincidences  in  proportion  to  the  total  amount  of  script.
In  cases  of  this  type,  however,  no  exact  calculation  of  prob-
abilities can  be  made,  since  the  data  are  not  only  indeterminate
in  number, — it  may  sometimes  be  a  matter  of  opinion  whether
a  coincidence  should  count  as  such  or  not, — but  they  are  also
incommensurable  in  value.  We  can  only  judge  roughly  by  a
common  sense  estimate  whether  the  total  amount  of  coincidence
is  decidedly  more  than  we  should  expect  to  occur  by  chance.
The  argument  is  of  the  same  kind  as  those  used  in  discussing
many  literary  questions.  For  instance,  it  is  believed  that  Shake-
speare drew  his  materials  for  Julius  Caesar  from  North's  translation
of  Plutarch's  Lives  on  account  of  the  numerous  resemblances  in
the  plot,  characters,  etc. ;  and  evidence  in  such  a  case,  while
it  can  never  be  made  mathematically  demonstrable,  may  be
more  than  enough  to  satisfy  the  reasonable  requirements  of
scholars.  For  this  conclusion,  the  study  of  Julius  Caesar  alone
may  suffice ;  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  analyse  all  the
works  of  Shakespeare  in  order  to  estimate  what  proportion
the  coincidences  with  North's  Plutarch  bore  to  Shakespeare's
whole  output.  Similarly  it  is  possible,  I  think,  for  readers  of
the  Proceedings  to  judge  whether  the  cross-correspondences  there
recorded  are  beyond  what  can  reasonably  be  attributed  to
chance,  without  reference  to  the  unpublished  portions  of  the
scripts.

I  have  explained  above  that  Mrs.  Holland  was  practically

1  It  is  noteworthy  that  when  a  statement  is  made  in  one  script  as  to  the
occurrence  of  a  topic  in  the  script  of  another  automatist,  if  any  time  is
mentioned,  it  is  generally  stated  incorrectly.  Several  instances  of  this  are
given  below.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


225


producing  no  script  during  the  first  and  main  batch  of  the
Piper  sittings  in  question,  so  that  contemporary  correspondences
could  not  have  occurred.  But  in  my  view  the  total  bulk
of  coincidence  between  her  scripts  of  Nov.  25,  1908,  to
May  19,  1909,  and  the  Piper  scripts  of  the  period  March
9  to  May  26,  1908,  as  shown  in  the  detailed  record  below,
is  too  great  to  be  reasonably  ascribed  to  chance.

The  same  principles  of  reasoning  apply  to  cases  where  a  topic
recurs  several  times  in  different  scripts  by  the  same  automatist.
These  too  are  coincidences  which  may  or  may  not  be  due  to
chance ;  that  is,  the  topic  may  have  been  mentioned  inde-
pendently on  different  occasions,  or  the  later  mentions  may
be  connected  with  the  first.  If  the  topic  is  associated  with
the  same  phrase  or  the  same  idea  more  than  once,  or  if  the
second  mention  follows  closely  on  the  first,  it  is  probable
that  the  two  are  causally  connected.  Thus,  in  the  complicated
cross-correspondence  of  Proserpine  (No.  -1  below)  Proserpine  is
referred  to  four  times  in  Miss  Verrall's  script ;  the  first  two
references  coming  so  close  together  that  they  seem  to  form
parts  of  one  allusion.  On  the  other  hand  the  third  and
fourth  references  are  less  obviously  connected  with  the  first
two.

Proserpine  is  also  referred  to  four  times  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script.  On  the  last  occasion  (Mar.  2,  1910),  the  same  quota-
tion is  repeated  as  on  the  first  occasion  (Nov.  25,  1908),
which  seems  a  link  between  the  two.  But  the  last  occasion
is  near  in  point  of  time  to  Mrs.  Willett's  allusion  to  Pro-
serpine (on  Feb.  10,  1910),  which  is  linked  with  Mrs.
Holland's  first  script  by  the  fact  that  in  the  writing  of  both
automatists  the  Nightingale  is  referred  to,  as  well  as  Proserpine.
This  to  my  mind  points  to  the  conclusion  that  none  of  these
coincidences  is  due  to  chance  alone,  but  that  Mrs.  Holland's
scripts  are  linked  to  one  another  by  memory,  and  to  Mrs.
Willett's  by  telepathy  (whether  through  the  agency  of  an
incarnate  or  of  a  discarnate  mind).

In  considering  the  question  of  chance  coincidence,  it  has
also  to  be  noted  that  when  a  number  of  cross-correspondences
occur  in  one  piece  of  script,  the  probability  that  they  are  due
to  something  beyond  chance  is  greatly  increased.  Thus  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Nov.  25,  1908,  contains  five. The  first  of

p


■2-2(1


Alice  Johnson.


[part


these,  "  Convolvulus  and  shell,"  is  weak,  taken  alone,  but  the
presence  of  four  others  in  the  same  script  strengthens  it.
Again,  "Confirmation"  (No.  10,  on  Dec.  30,  1908)  is  a  weak
one,  taken  alone,  and  in  any  case  may,  I  think,  be  attributed
to  chance,  and  I  only  quote  it  to  complete  the  record  of  the
script  in  which  it  occurs.

Again,  when  several  cross-correspondences  in  a  single  script
appear  in  another  single  script  by  a  different  automatist,  written
at  a  different  time,  the  improbability  that  these  coincidences
are  due  to  chance  is  very  great.  Thus  Mrs.  Willett's  script
of  Feb.  10,  1910  (see  table)  refers  to  three  cross-correspond-
ences— "  Echo."  "  Nightingale,"  and  "  Proserpine  " — that  appear
in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Nov.  25,  1908,  while  the  latter
script  contains  also  the  cross-correspondence  "  Door  ( =  Dorr)
Key,"  which  reaches  its  climax  in  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  of
Feb.  4  and  5,  1910  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  pp.  193—
204).  The  combination  of  all  these  seems  to  me  far  beyond
what  can  reasonably  be  attributed  to  chance.

A  few  more  specific  facts  may  be  given,  bearing  on  this
question.


Classical  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.

The  reports  of  Mr.  J  lorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in
Proceedings,  Part  LX.,  show  that — in  consequence  of  his
deliberate  plans  of  experiment  with  her — her  trance  utterances
during  those  sittings  were  full  of  classical  allusions.  Now
several  of  the  cross-correspondences  here  dealt  with  are  con-
cerned with  classical  topics.  These  had  hitherto  been  com-
paratively rare  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  though  references  to
literary  subjects  in  general  are  very  frequent.  Since  April,
190G,  Mrs.  Holland  has  been  aware  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
contains  a  good  deal  of  Latin  and  Greek,  and  it  might  be
supposed  that  this  knowledge  would  have  influenced  her
subliminally  to  refer  to  classical  subjects.  But  the  whole  of
her  script  from  the  beginning  of  1905  to  the  end  of  July,
1908,  which  consists  of  160  pieces  of  writing,  contains  only
twenty-two  references  to  such  subjects,  i.e.  on  an  average,  one
reference  in  seven  scripts. On  the  other  hand,  in  the  period


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  227

now  under  consideration  (Nov.  25,  1908,  to  May  19,  1909)
she  produced  twenty-two  pieces  of  script,  in  which  seventeen
classical  references  are  to  be  found,  that  is,  on  an  average,
more  than  two  references  in  every  three  scripts.  The  refer-
ences are  thus  more  than  five  times  as  numerous  during  this
period  as  they  were  before.  The  following  is  a  complete  list
of  them  :

(1)  Nov.  25,  1908. Quotation  from  The  Burden  of  Itys.

(2)  „  "  Sweet  Echo,  fairest  nymph."

(3)  „  Quotation  from  The  Garden  of  Proserpine.

(4)  Dec.  30,  190 S. Quotation  from  Prometheus  Unbound.

(5)  „  The  Pleiades.

(6)  „  The  Muses  on  Helicon.

(7)  Jan.  13,  1909.  Caryatides.

(8)  Feb.  10,  1909. Caduceus — The  dog  tooth  Mercury.

(9)  March 1909. Quotation  from  The  Garden  of  Proser-

pine.

(10)  „  Quotation  from  Atalanta  in  Ccdydon.

(11)  Apr.  1,  1909. The  Charonic  Staircase.

(12)  Apr.  10,  1909. Diotima— the  5th  line  of  the  3rd  Speech.

(13)  Apr.  11,  1909. The  Stygian  River.

(14)  „  Cassiopeia  swings  low  in  the  midnight

sky.

(15)  Apr.  14,  1909. The  Cyclops.

(16)  „  "In  valour  is  not  Love  a  Hercules."

(17)  May  19,  1909. Perseus,  Medusa,  and  Andromeda.

Out  of  these  17  classical  allusions,  15  form  the  subject  of
cross-correspondences,1  and  in  the  case  of  two  only,  viz.  Nos.  7
and  12,  has  no  correspondence  been  found  with  the  scripts  of
other  automatists.


1  Thirteen  of  these  are  quoted  in  the  present  paper;  two,  "The  Pleiades"
and  the  "Muses  on  Helicon,"  belong  to  the  "Sesame  and  Lilies"  cross-
correspondence  (Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  324).


228


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Cross-correspondences  claimed  by  the  Piper  controls  to  have
appeared  in  Holland,  script.


Date  of  mention
in  Mrs.  P.'s  trance.

Subject  of  Cross-correspondence.

Date  of  appearance
in  Mrs.  H.'s  Script.

Mar.

23

1908.


City  in  flames ; Dido ;

Burned  ;  Juno.

Mar.

24

Fairy  roses.

Styx.

Apr.  11,

1909.

Mar.

30

>  >

Lime-leaf.

Mar

men .

31

%J  Jl  ,

Floating statue in  the

air.

5)

Echo  and  Narcissus.

Nov.  25,

1908.

Apr.

J.

13,

Drawing  of  dot  and  circle.

Apr.

21,

7)

Rock  of  Ages.

Syringa.

Apr.

27,

)  '

Pegasus. Soaring  wings.

May

4,

J'

Turkeys  and  Birds.

Dec.  9,  1908.

May

12,

5)

Some  verses  by  Byron.

55

Daughter  of  the  Sun.

55

Cyclops.

Apr.  14,

1909.

j;

Medusa's  Head.

May  19,

1909.

5)

Clouds.

Thus,  out  of  16  cross-correspondences  claimed  by  the  Piper
controls  to  have  occurred  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  5  appeared
later.


The  question  how  far  the  knowledge  of  classical  topics  shown
in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  is  to  be  regarded  as  supernormally
acquired  was  fully  discussed  in  the  papers  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and
Mr.  Piddington  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  and  does  not  concern
us  here.  The  details  of  these  subjects  mentioned  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  were  no  doubt  all  familiar  to  her,  except  in
the  cases  of  the  "  Charonic  staircase  "  and  of  the  quotation  from
Ovid  (see  below,  pp.  246-50).  But  the  present  paper  deals
mainly  with  the  evidence  for  supernormal  connexion  between
Mrs.  Holland's  scripts  and  the  scripts  or  trance-utterances  of
other  automatists, — evidence  which  is  not  affected,  one  way  or
the  other,  by  the  question  of  whether  the  knowledge  shown  in


LXTIL] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  229

any  individual  trance  utterance  or  script  has  or  has  not  been
normally  acquired.

I  now  give  the  cross-correspondences  in  detail,  in  the  chrono-
logical order  of  their  appearance  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.

Ckoss-Correspondences.

(1)  Convolvulus  and  Shed.

(2)  Echo  and  Narcissus.

(3)  The  Nightingale.

(4)  Proserpine.

These  topics  are  contained  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
November  25th,  1908,  as  follows: —

"  Then  an  octave  struck  the  answer." 1
Make  no  mistake.

(1)-  Curling  wreaths  of  smoke  that  take  fantastic  forms —
Convolutions.  Convolvulus  the  clinging  creeping  flower
— The  Morning  glory — fragile  bells  of  morning — blue  and
purple  as  it  were  sunrise  skies —

(2  and  3)  I  might  perhaps  get  the  verses  I  remembered  to
you — if  not  my  own — yet  mine  by  right  of  memory

"Oh  Memory  cast  down  thy  wreathed  shell."3
Not  the  shape  here  but  the  sound — the  echoing  repeat-
ing  sound — "  Sweet Echo— fairest nymph that  dwells
unseen." 4

(i) "  Pale  beyond  porch  and  portal

Crowned  with  faint  leaves  she  stands."5

The  other  George — not  G.  P. — he  goes  to  the  other  one —

[Here  follows  the  passage  quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,
p.  197.]

1  R.  Browning,  A  Toccata  of  Galuppi.

'-The  numbers  in  brackets  are  not  part  of  the  scripts,  but  are  inserted  for
convenience  of  reference.

:i  Oscar  Wilde,  The  Burden  of  Itys.  4  Milton,  Comus.

5  Swinburne,  The  Garden  of  Proserpine  ;  "faint"  should  be  "calm."


230


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(1)  Convolvulus  and  Shell.

The  first  part  of  the  above  script  seems  to  reflect  some
topics  occurring  in  two  consecutive  scripts  of  Miss  Verrall's,
produced  three  or  four  weeks  earlier,  viz.:

(October  30th,  1908.)

The  blue  flowers  were  periwinkles.
A  mossy  bank  beside  the  stream
and  convolvulus  too.

F.  W.  H.  Myers.

(November  4th,  1908).

No  you  grow  confused  wait.  A  round  shell  hold  it  to  your
ear  the  sound  of  the  sea  a  network  of  lines  over  the
surface.

The  bluebells  that  was  the  other  clue. Put  them  together.

I  interpret  this  as  meaning  that  the  convolvulus  suggests
something  rather  similar  to  itself  (since  both  are  of  spiral
habit),  namely,  a  shell  in  which  one  may  hear  the  murmuring
sound  that  is  supposed  to  be  an  echo  of  the  sea-waves.
"  Periwinkle,"  in  the  first  script,  is  also  a  shell,  as  well  as  a
flower.

The  same  association  of  ideas  appears  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script :  convolutions — convolvulus  or  morning  glory — fragile
bells,  blue  and  purple,  the  form  of  which  suggests  the
"  wreathed  shell,"  which  in  turn  leads  on  to  the  "  echoing
repeating  sound "  to  be  heard  in  it.1

1  The  association  between  the  flower  and  the  shell  is  perhaps  derived  from
Wordsworth's  lines  :

"  I  have  seen
A  curious  child,  who  dwelt  upon  a  tract
Of  inland  ground,  applying  to  his  ear
The  convolutions  of  a  smooth-lipped  shell,
To  which,  in  silence  hushed,  his  very  soul
Listened  intently."

( The  Excursion,  Book  IV. )


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


231


(2)  Echo  and  Narcissus; and  (3)  The  Nightingale.

Mrs.  Holland's  quotation  from  The  Burden  of  Itys  is  the
first  line  of  one  verse,  the  whole  of  which  is  as  follows :

"  O  Memory  cast  down  thy  wreathed  shell !

Break  thy  hoarse  lute  O  sad  Melpomene  !
0  Sorrow,  Sorrow  keep  thy  cloistered  cell

Nor  dim  with  tears  this  limpid  Castaly  !
Cease,  Philomel,  thou  dost  the  forest  wrong
To  vex  its  sylvan  quiet  with  such  wild  impassioned  song ! "

Itys  (or  Itylus)  was  the  son  of  Zethos  and  Aedon;  the
latter  laid  a  plot  to  kill  her  sister-in-law  Niobe's  son,  and
killed  her  own  son  by  mistake.  Being  pursued  by  her  husband,
she  was  turned  into  a  nightingale  {Greek,  ayScov).  According
to  another  version  of  the  legend,  Itys  was  the  son  of  Tereus
and  Procne.  Tereus,  having  fallen  in  love  with  Procne's  sister
Philomela,  deserted  Procne,  who  avenged  herself  by  killing
Itys  and  serving  him  up  at  his  father's  table.  Tereus  pursued
Procne  and  Philomela,  who  were  changed  into  a  nightingale
and  a  swallow,  or  a  swallow  and  a  nightingale,  respectively.
In  Oscar  Wilde's  poem  (as  in  Swinburne's  Atcdanta  in  Cedydon
and  Itylus)  it  is  the  nightingale  who  is  the  mother  of  Itys.

The  chief  idea  then  that  is  implicit  in  this  quotation  made
by  the  script  is  the  Nightingale ;  cf.  Miss  Pope's  sitting  below.

Mrs.  Holland  told  me  the  source  of  the  quotation,  and
afterwards  wrote  out  for  me  the  whole  verse  from  memory.
But  I  found  that  her  version  was  not  quite  correct ;  instead  of
"  0  Sorrow,  Sorrow,"  she  wrote  "  0  Echo,  Echo."  Thus  the
words  Shell  and  Echo  are  prominent  in  her  version,  and  it  was
perhaps  this  combination  that  suggested  to  her  the  next
quotation  from  Comus,  which  contains  the  same  two  wordy.
It  is  the  first  line  of  the  song  sung  by  the  Lady,  when
lost  in  the  forest,  to  attract  her  two  wandering  brothers  :

"Sweet  Echo,  sweetest  nymph,  that  liv'st  unseen

Within  thy  airy  shell
By  slow  Meander's  margent  green,
And  in  the  violet-embroidered  vale

Where  the  love-lorn  nightingale
Nightly  to  thee  her  sad  song  mourneth  well :
Canst  thou  not  tell  me  of  a  gentle  pair

That  likest  thy  Narcissus  are  1 "


232


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  script  through  this  quotation  again  gives  Shell  implicitly,
and  in  the  same  way  the  Nightingale  and  also  Narcissus,  who
is  naturally  associated  with  Echo,  Echo  being  the  nymph  who
was  in  love  with  Narcissus.

Echo  and  Narcissus  had  been  given  by  Mrs.  Piper,  with
special  reference  to  the  "  poetical  memories  associated  with "
them,  as  shown  in  the  following  extracts  from  the  records
of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings :

(2) Echo  and  Narcissus.

(March  SO,  190S.)  (Waking-stage.)

I  love  the  beautiful  Eclio !  Walking  through  the  forest
Echo  greets  me  everywhere !  Narcissus  smiles  at  my
feet  and  I  am  surrounded  by  love.

Tell  Mr.  Dorr,  "  I  say  my  utterances  echo,  echo  everywhere,
if  that  is  he.  I  think  he  will  understand  what  I  mean
by  echo,  if  that  is  he !  "

I  get  a  laughing  echo — music.

(March  31,  1908.)  G.  B.  D.  I  have  just  recalled  from  yesterday's
waking-stage  that  you  spoke  of  Echo  repeatedly ;  was
that  a  message  1

Yes.  From  Mrs.  [Holland]  and  as  [my]  own  utterances  to
the  spirit  of  the  Light  reminded  me  of  what  I  had
written  there  a  few  days  ago  I  brought  it  here  to  you.
"Echo,  Echo  everywhere  !  "  And  I  wrote,  "  As  I  wandered
through  woodland  paths  Echo  greeted  me  and  Narcissus
sprang  up  about  my  feet."  You  will  receive  this  ere
long.

(April  6,  1908.)  G.  B.  D.  "Laughing  winds — I  love  the  beautiful
echo,  I  walk  through  the  forest,  etc."  Was  that  a
symbol  1  »

Yes,  and  poetical  memories  associated  with  my  readings  of
mythological  characters  and  subjects.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


233


(3)  The  Nightingale,  etc.
The  Nightingale  was  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  later,  as  follows  :

Extract  from  record  of  Miss  Popes  sitting  of  Bee.  9th,  1908.

[The  controls  on  being  asked  to  give  "a  message  for
England,"  i.e.,  for  some  of  the  other  automatists  to
reproduce,  replied  :]

Tis  not  that  I  love  Caesar  less  but  Rome  more E.  H.  G.  P.

Yes,  don't  you  know  it  1

Miss  Pope.  Yes.

Repeat — Softly [Miss  Pope  repeats  the  line.]
G.  P.  has  one  which  I  think  good.
The  nightingale  has  a  lyre  of  gold.

Myers and Hodgson with the help and  encouragement

of  G.  P.
The  lark  is  on  the  wing.

No  more,  too  many  may  lead  to  confusion,  besides  the  light

is  getting  faint.  .  .  .
Listen  before  I  go  I  want  to  tell  you  that  I  am  not  creeping

like  some  ghostly  cricket  where  a  house  has  burned.
Message  (two  lines  were  made,  like  the  number  11).

Miss  Pope.  What  do  those  two  lines  mean  ?

Emphasis.

We  shall  get  on  famously  after  a  while.
I  saw  and  helped  Mrs.  Holland.

Pour  "  messages "  are  included  in  this  passage :

(a)  "'Tis  not  that  I  love  Ctesar  less,  but  Rome  more."
Nothing  corresponding  to  this  has  been  found  in  the
other  scripts.

(b)  "  The  nightingale has a lyre of  gold." This is  the

first  line  of  a  poem  by  W.  E.  Henley,  belonging  to  a
series  of  short  poems  called  Echoes.  Thus  "  Echo "  is
implicit  in  this  quotation,  while  "  Nightingale,"  as
already  seen,  is  implicit  in  Mrs.  Holland's  quotations
about  "Echo."


234


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(c)  "  The  lark  is  on  the  wing." This  is  probably  a  remi-

niscence of  the  cross-correspondence  Shelley's  Skylark
already  given  in  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  see  below,  p.  272.

(d)  "  I  am  not  creeping  like  some  ghostly  cricket  where  a

house  has  burned,"  which  seems  from  the  context  to
have  been  specially  intended  for  Mrs.  Holland.  It  is
a  quotation  (incorrectly  given ;  the  actual  line  being  :
"  Yes,  you,  like  a  ghostly  cricket,  creaking  where  a
house  was  burned ")  from  Browning's  A  Toccata  of
Gcduppis,  while  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Nov.  25th,
1908,  begins  with  another  quotation  from  the  same
poem,  "  Then  an  octave  struck  the  answer  "  (see  above).

The  latter  quotation  is  repeated  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  Jan.  20th,  1909,  with  the  addendum:

"  Take  this  from  that  if  that  be  otherwise," 1  as  if
to  emphasise  its  importance.

For  further  allusions  to  the  Nightingale,  implicit  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script,  and  explicit  in  Mrs.  Willett's,  see  below,  under

Proserpine.

(4)  Proserpine.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Xov.  25,  1908,  quoted  above,  has:

"  Pale  beyond  porch  and  'ported
Crowned  with  faint  leaven  she  stands."
The  other  George — not  G.  P. — he  goes  to  the  other  one —

I  take  "  the  other  George "  to  be  Mr.  George  Dorr,  which
seems  to  indicate  that  a  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Piper
is  being  attempted.

In  the  latter's  trance,  the  following  allusions  to  Proserpine
occurred  :

{March  1908.)  (G.  B.  D.  reads  a  few  lines  in  Latin  describing
Juno's  visit  to  the  cave  of  Aeolus  and  asks:)  Does  this
suggest  anything  to  you  1

Yes,  it  suggests — I  quoted  part  of  that  myself — I  thought
of  Proserpine  and  the  seasons.

G.  B.  D.  No,  this  has  reference  to  the  time  when  Juno  tries  to
prevent  Aeneas  from  reaching  Italy.

1  Hamlet,  Act  ii.  Scene  2.


LXIII.J


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


235


Yes,  yes. Winds — Storm — waves — Neptune.

(After  writing  "  Neptune,"  the  hand  expresses  dissatisfaction
with  it  and  tries  to  cross  it  out)  Proserpine  Spring
upward — and  the  Seasons

(Some  question  asked  which  was  not  noted.)
Yes,  Light — no,  I  am  thinking  of  Proserpine.  Aphrodite
Juno's  child. Goddess  (this  word  is  crossed  out)  Niobe

—  W ater  drowned
(Waking-stage.)

Child — Eros — love — Venus — paramour — Where  her  feet  trod
— flowers —

Mr.  Piddington  observes  that  there  are  two  natural  links,
apparently  unknown  to  or  unnoticed  by  Mr.  Dorr,  between
Aeolus  and  Proserpine,  the scene of  whose rape  was  Sicily.

(1)  It  is  when  Aeneas  and  his  Ueet  are  "scarcely  out  of
sight  of  the  land  of  Sicily "  (Am.  i.  34)  that  Juno  resolves
to  go  to  Aeolus'  cave  and  bid him  help  her  against  Aeneas.

(2)  The  cave  of  Aeolus  was  in  Aeolia  (Am.  i.  52),  i.e.  the
Lipari  Islands,  just  north  of  Sicily.  That  MyersP  should  say
that  the  cave  of  Aeolus  suggested  Proserpine  to  him  seems,
therefore, — especially  when  combined  with  various  incidents  given
by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  her  paper  on  these  sittings  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV., — to  indicate  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  Aencicl
on  his  part.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  trance-personality  returned  to  the
subject  of  Proserpine  twice  more  during  the  sitting,  in  spite  of
Mr.  Dorr's  attempts  to  lead  it  off  on  to  other  lines.  The  story
of  Proserpine  is  clearly,  though  somewhat  indirectly,  indicated  :
"  Juno's  child — Goddess — Niobe."  Here  the  train  of  thought
seems  to  be :  "  Proserpine — Juno's  child — No,  the  child  of
another  goddess — a  goddess  who  was  a  bereaved  mother,"  which
leads  on  to  the  other  classical  example  of  a  bereaved  mother, —
Niobe.  The  words  "  Spring  upward — Child — where  her  feet
trod — flowers "  seem  to  relate  to  the  return  of  Proserpine  in
the  spring  and  suggest  reminiscences  of  the  following  passage
in  Tennyson's  Demeter  and  Persephone 1  (another  reminiscence

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  Demeter  and  Persephone  are  the  Greek  names  of
Ceres  and  Proserpine.


236


Alice  Johnson.


[part


appropriate  to  MyersP,  for  the  poem  is  more  than  once  quoted
in  the  published  works  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers) :

"  So  in  this  pleasant  vale  we  stand  again,
The  field  of  Enna,  now  once  more  ablaze
With  flowers  that  brighten  as  thy  footstep  falls,
All  flowers — but  for  one  black  blur  of  earth
Left  by  that  closing  chasm,  thro'  which  the  car
Of  dark  Aidoneus  rising  rapt  thee  hence.
And  here,  my  child,  tho'  folded  in  thine  arms,
I  feel  the  deathless  heart  of  motherhood
Within  me  shudder,  lest  the  naked  glebe
Should  yawn  once  more  into  the  gulf,  and  thence
The  shrilly  whinnyings  of  the  team  of  Hell,
Ascending,  pierce  the  glad  and  songfnl  air,
And  all  at  once  their  arch'd  necks,  midnight-maned,
Jet  upward  thro'  the  mid-day  blossom.  No!
For,  see,  thy  foot  has  touch'd  it ; all  the  space
Of  blank  earth-baldness  clothes  itself  afresh,
And  breaks  into  the  crocus-purple  hour
That  saw  thee  vanish."

The  subject  of  Proserpine  also  appeared  in  the  Mac  script
of  July  26,  1908,  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  on  Aug.  26,  1908,
and  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  on  Sep.  10  and  19,  1908,  the
autoinatist  in  each  case  being  ignorant  of  the  occurrence  of  the
subject  in  the  script  of  any  other  writer.

The  reference  in  the  Mac  script  was  as  follows :

{July  26,  1908.)

Erebus  and  terror — Hoc  fecit  Persephone —
Eheu  fugaces  postume  postume.1

While  the  Piper  script  refers  to  the  return  of  Proserpine
(Persephone)  in  the  spring,  as  well  as  to  her  being  carried
off,  this  alludes  only  to  her  sojourn  in  the  infernal  regions
(Erebus).  The  ode  of  Horace  which  it  quotes  ("  Eheu  fugaces,
Postume,  Postume,"'  Odes,  II.  14)  does  not  refer  to  Proserpine,
but  is  quite  appropriately  associated  with  her,  for  it  laments

1  For  the  context  of  this,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  309.
2"Postumus"  is  the  name  of  the  friend  to  whom  the  Ode  is  addressed.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


237


over  the  brief  and  fleeting  nature  of  all  earthly  joys,  as  com-
pared with  the  eternal  gloom  of  Hades.

This  script  was  not  seen  by  Mrs.  or  Miss  Verrall  until
Sep.  26,  1908,1  and  it  was  not  until  October,  1908,  that  Mrs.
Verrall  saw  any  of  Mr.  Dorr's  records  of  his  sittings  with
Mrs.  Piper.

Meanwhile  Mrs.  Verrall  produced  on  Aug.  26,  1908,  the
following  script : 2

[In  Latin :  A  guardian  on  the  threshold,  but  beneath  the
threshold  who?]3  And  yet  the  words  are  guarded  with
the  fence  of  the  teeth.  In  books  is  wisdom  who  seeks
shall  find.  Ask  for  the  pomegranate  flower — the  goddess
holds  it  in  her  hand. Flower  and  fruit  red.

Here  the  Latin  words,  followed  by  the  Homeric  phrase
"  fence  of  the  teeth,"  suggest  the  guardianship  of  Hades.  In
that  case,  the  "  guardian  on  the  threshold "  would  be  the
three-headed  dog,  Cerberus,  to  whom  the  words  "  fence  of  the
teeth,"  are  especially  appropriate,  for  his  snarl  and  bark  are
always  emphasised.  "  In  books  is  wisdom,  who  seeks  shall
find "  seems  to  mean  that  the  reference  is  to  some  literary
topic.

"  Beneath  the  threshold  who  ?  "  4  may  refer  to  Proserpine,  the
goddess  of  the  infernal  regions.  There  is  at  any  rate  no  doubt
that  Proserpine  is  the  goddess  with  the  pomegranate  flower  or
fruit.  The  allusion  to  Proserpine,  then,  is  the  clearest  point
in  this  script.

The  following  allusions  to  Proserpine  occur  in  Miss  Verrall's
script,  produced  in  ignorance  of  her  mother's,  just  quoted  :

(Sep.  10,  190S).

A  cup a  white  cup a  flower I  think  she  holds  it  in  her
hand  [In  Latin :  a  true  goddess]. 5 [Drawing  of  flower]

1See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  264  and  311.

2  It  may  be  worth  noting  that  this  is  the  only  allusion  to  Proserpine  in
•282  scripts  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  covering  a  period  of  nearly  four  years.

3  Custos  in  limine — sed  sub  limine  quis  ?

4 It  is  possible  that  the  words  "sed  sub  limine  quis?"  are  also  intended  to
convey  a  pun  on  the  word  subliminal,  meaning  "Who  do  you  suppose  directs
your  subliminal  activity  ?  "

5Dea  vera,  i.e.  Venus  (Virgil,  JZn.  I.  405).


238


Alice  Johnson.


[part


thus  the  lotus  flower  but  they  are  red  too  better  to  be
a  slave  than  rule  among  the  dead  who  said  it?  [In
Greek :  amongst  the  dead.] 1

(Sep.  19,  1908.)

A  cap  of  liberty  and  a  flaming  torch  the  sparks  shall  burn
the  chaff  which  the  wind  scattereth.  .  .  .

four  pomegranate  seeds  that  was  part  of  the  charm  the
seeds  are  cut seed  pearls.

Of  these  two  scripts,  the  first,  referring  to  a  goddess  hold-
ing a  flower  in  her  hand,  and  to  Hades,  seems  clearly  con-
nected with  Mrs.  Verrall's  of  Aug.  26:  but  the  "true  goddess"
is  Venus,  not  Proserpine,  though  it  is  Proserpine  who  rules
among  the  dead.

In  the  second  script,  the  "  pomegranate  seeds "  that  were
"  part  of  the  charm "  is  an  unmistakeable  allusion  to  Proser-
pine,2 who  was  to  be  liberated  from  Hades  on  condition  that
she  had  eaten  nothing  while  there.  She  had,  however,  taken
a  pomegranate 3  and  eaten  seven  of  its  seeds ;  but  in  spite  of
this  was  permitted  to  return  to  the  earth  every  spring,  though
she  had  to  go  back  to  Hades  for  part  of  every  year.

The  "  cap  of  liberty  "  and  "  flaming  torch  "  of  the  first  part
of  the  script  almost  certainly  refer  to  Proserpine  too  ;  the  "  cap
of  liberty "  is  the  pileum,  the  characteristic  head-covering  of
Mercury,  or  Hermes.  In  the  representations  of  Proserpine's
"Eetum,"  she  is  usually  led  by  Hermes,  wearing  this  cap.  The
"  torch  "  is  associated  with  underworld  goddesses  in  general,  and
in  this  particular  case  may  refer  to  the  torches  lit  at  Mount
Etna  by  Ceres,  who  carried  one  in  each  hand  when  she  set
out  to  search  for  her  daughter  Proserpine.

Eeturning  now  to  the  allusion  to  Proserpine  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Nov.  25,  190S  (see  above,  p.  229),  we
see that her quotation with its context  follows  closely  the

1  ev  (pdi/itvois  (Homer,  Od.  XI.  489,  491).

"Mrs.  Verrall  noted  "Proserpine"  as  a  cross-correspondence  between  her
own  and  her  daughter's  script  on  Sep.  26,  190S.

3  This  pomegranate  is  called  by  Ovid  (Met.  V.  536)  pun.ice.vm  pomum,  puniceum
being  an  unusual  word  for  red.  Both  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  speak
of  the  flower  or  fruit  being  "red."


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


239


sentiment  of  the  Mac  script  and  the  Horace  Ode  therein
quoted  :

"Pale  beyond  porch  and  portal,

Crowned  with  calm  leaves,  she  stands,
Who  gathers  all  things  mortal
With  cold  immortal  hands ;

There  go  the  loves  that  wither,
The  old  loves  with  wearier  wings ;

And  all  dead  years  draw  thither,
And  all  disastrous  things."

(Swinburne,  The  Garden  of  Proserpine.)

Mrs.  Holland's  script,  however,  quotes  only  the  first  two
lines  of  the  poem,  underlining  the  words  "  portal  "  and  "  leaves."
The  words  "  Beyond  porch  and  portal  "  have  some  resemblance
to  Mrs.  Verrall's  phrase  "  Beneath  the  threshold " ;  while  the
emphasis  laid  in  both  scripts  on  the  idea  of  an  entrance  (Mrs.
Holland,  "  beyond  porch  and  portal " ;  cf.  Mrs.  Verrall,  "  A
guardian  on  the  threshold,  but  beneath  the  threshold  who  ?
And  yet  the  words  are  guarded  with  the  fence  of  the  teeth  ")
seems  to  link  on  this  cross-correspondence  with  the  elaborate
one  formed  by  a  pun  on  the  name  of  Mr.  Dorr  ("  Door-Key,"
see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  p.  193)  Mrs.  Holland's  con-
tribution to  which  occurs  in  this  same  script.

PROSERPINE  :  CONTINUED.

The  next  script  to  be  quoted  refers  only  to  Dis  (Pluto),  and
not  to  Proserpine ;  but  I  include  it  under  this  topic  because  I
believe  that  the  reference — like  some  of  Mrs.  Piper's  references
to  Proserpine — is  derived  from  Tennyson's  Derneter  and  Per-
sephone. The  passage  occurs  in  a  script  of  Miss  Verrall's,
dated  Jan.  26,  1909  :

.  .  .  the  shapes  that  haunt  the  dusk1  the  twilight  the
kingdom  of  dreams  you  do  not  get  the  thought  clearly
wait  flitting  forms  on  the  threshold  between  the  Seen
and  the  Unseen.  [In  Latin  :  flitting  round  the  gates  of
Dis,  flitting  round.]  -  .  .  .

1  Tennyson,  In  AJemoriam,  xcv.

"  Ostia  Ditis  circumvolitantia  circumvolitantia.


240


Alice  Johnson.


[part


This  recalls  to  me  the  following  lines  from  Demeter :

"Last  as  the  likeness  of  a  dying  man,
Without  his  knowledge,  from  him  flits  to  warn
A  far-off  friendship  that  he  comes  no  more,
So  he,  the  God  of  dreams,  who  heard  my  cry,
Drew  from  thyself  the  likeness  of  thyself
Without  thy  knowledge,  and  thy  shadow  past
Before  me."

The  same  passage  is,  I  think,  the  source  of  the  phrase  in
Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  Feb.  10,  1910,  quoted  below,  p.  245:
"  Sleep,  the  dream  that  Hits  by  night,"  which  is  immediately
followed  by  the  words,  "  Sleep  and  his  twin  Brother,"  probably
derived  from  In  Mnnoriam,  lxviii.  :  "  Sleep,  Death's  twin
brother."

Thus  both  scripts  seem  to  associate  these  two  poems
together,  and  the  sections  of  In  Memoriam  chosen  are  appro-
priate, for  they  refer  to  a  dream  about  Hallam  in  which  he
does  not  seem  to  be  dead,  and  to  the  trance  in  which
Tennyson  conceived  himself  to  have  communicated  with  Hallam.

The  topic  of  Proseririnc  recurs  several  times  more  in  Mrs.
Holland's  scripts,  and  it  is  important  to  note  the  frequent
association  of  it  with  the  Nightingale,  which  was  shown  to  be
implicit  in  her  script  of  Nov.  25,  1908.

Her  next  allusion  occurs  on  March  24,  1909,  as  follows:

"  We  are  not  sure  of  sorrow
And  joy  was  never  sure "
The  Thracian  ships  and  the  foreign  faces.

The  first  of  these  quotations  is  from  Swinburne's  Garden  of
Proscrjmie,  the  context  being :

"  We  are  not  sure  of  sorrow,
And  joy  was  never  sure ;
To-day  will  die  to-morrow ;

Time  stoops  to  no  man's  lure."

The  second  is  from  the  Chorus  of  Atalanta  in  Calydon :

"  And  the  brown  bright  nightingale  amorous
Is  half  assuaged  for  Itylus,
For  the  Thracian  ships  and  the  foreign  faces
The  tongueless  vigil  and  all  the  pain."


LXlii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script  241

The  next  allusion  to  Proserpine  in  any  of  the  scripts  is  in
Miss  Verrall's  of  August  19,  1 909,  as  follows :

The  flowery mead — asphodel — Persephone — the chariot  of

Dis  foam-flecked  steeds  Asphodelos
"  No,  no,  go  not  to  Lethe  "  1
sleep  too  brings  forgetfulness
In  the  intenser  light  that  heralds  in  the  dawn
When  the  grey  clouds  roll  back  from  Day's  portal  to  let
the  dawn  ride  forth — the  horses  of  dawn  and  of  death
dawn  and  death

■

The  first  part  of  this  script  seems  to  be  founded  on  a
reminiscence  of  the  passage  from  Demeter  and  Persephone  given
above,  p.  236,  but  with  the  flowery  "field  of  Enna  "  the  script
combines  the  Asphodel  Meadow  of  Elysium,  which  is  referred
to  in  the  last  four  lines  of  the  poem  :

"  [Thou  shalt]  see  no  more
The  Stone,  the  Wheel,  the  dimly-glimmering  lawns
Of  that  Elysium,  all  the  hateful  fires
Of  torment,  and  the  shadowy  warrior  glide
Along  the  silent  field  of  Asphodel."

The  quotation  from  Keats  is  perhaps  introduced  next  partly
on  account  of  the  casual  allusion  to  Proserpine  in  its  context.

Next  comes  a  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  dated  November
10,  1909  :

P — persiflage — persist — In  penitence — Persephone — Penste-
mon —

Oh  singer  of  Persephone  from  the  far  meadows  desolate —

Hast  thou  forgotten  Sicily  1
Through  the  stilled  groves  the  hidden  piping  thrills —
What  forms  are  these  coming— All  white  through  the  gloom —
The  voice  of  the  bird —

The  torture  of  the  whirling  wheel  wherein  the  power  of  the
philter  lay  .  .  .

1 "  No,  no,  go  not  to  Lethe,  neither  twist

Wolf's-bane,  tight-rooted,  for  its  poisonous  wine  ;
Nor  suffer  thy  pale  forehead  to  be  kiss'd
By  night-shade,  ruby  grape  of  Proserpine  ;  "

(Keats,  Ode  on  Melancholy.)

Q


2i2


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Here,  I  think,  are  further  allusions  to  the  poem  Demeter
and  Persephone ;  "  the  far  meadows  desolate "  being  probably
the  fields  that  remained  barren  in  consequence  of  the  grief
of  Demeter.  "Hast  thou  forgotten  Sicily?"  suggests  the
"clouded  memories";  and  "the  hidden  piping,"  and  "the  voice
of  the  bird,"  suggest  the  "  sudden  nightingale "  in  the  passage
from  Demeter  given  below,  p.  240.

"  The  hidden  piping "  has  perhaps  also  a  secondary  reference
to  Mrs.  Piper,  whose  name  is  not  infrequently  the  subject  of
puns  in  the  script.

"  The  torture  of  the  whirling  wheel "  I  take  to  be  an  allusion
to  the  last  four  lines  of  the  poem,  quoted  on  p.  241  in  con-
nexion with  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Aug.  19,  1909.

"  What  forms  are  these  coming
So  white  through  the  gloom  1

•  •  •  •  *

'Tis  Apollo  comes  leading
His  choir,  the  Nine."

is  a  quotation  from  the  song  of  Callicles  in  Matthew  Arnold's
Empedocles  on  Etna.  This  seems  to  be  brought  in  through  a
normal  association  of  ideas,  Empedocles  and  Persephone  both
belonging  to  Sicily.  But,  as  observed  above,  the  association
between  Proserpine  and  Sicily  seems  implicit  also  in  the  Piper
trance-utterances.

Mrs.  Holland's  next  allusion  to  Proserpine  occurs  in  her
script  of  March  2,  1910,  the  whole  of  which  I  quote:

"  Oh  lark  be  day's  apostle
To  mavis,  merle  and  throstle —
Bid  them  their  betters  jostle —
From  day  and  day's  delight — 1

Pars  thy  ma — pars  casiam — melifontos

Plurima  lecta  rosa  est  et  sunt  sine  nomine  flores — crocus  liliaque
alba —

"  Oh  Prospero  "  Oh  Proserpine  for  the  flowers  now  that  thou  lets
righted  fall"

1 R.  Browning,  Pippa  Passes.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


243


Pale  beyond  porch  and  portal
Crowned  with  faint  leaves  she  stands
Who  gathers  all  things  mortal
In  calm  immortal  hands
Pomegranate  seeds — Cleft  rosy  at  the  heart.
Dusky  Dis —
Gallop  apace  you  fiery  footed  steeds

Toss  [?]  jam-jam The  other  ignoramus  is  less  tiresome —
Foreshadowings — Overshadowings —

Take  pains  not  to  let  them  misunderstand  the  Latin  attempt —
but  you  are  always  behindhand — dealing  with  arrears  of  months
ago—

Both  hands  send  this —
F.  W.  H.  M.  R.  H.

In  the  letter  accompanying  this,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote :

Last  night's  script  begins  with  a  Browning  [quotation] — Pippa
Passes — tries,  to  get  a  few  Latin  words,  misquotes  Winter's  Tale,
"Oh  Proserpine,  etc.,"  then  Swinburne,  finally  B.  and  Juliet.

From  "Take  pains"  my  left  hand  insisted  on  holding  the  pen
too, — a  new  and  cumbrous  plan.

For  comments  on  the  Latin  in  this  script,  see  separate
section  below,  p.  246.

The  quotations  following  the  Latin  are :

(a)  "  0  Proserpina,
For  the  flowers  now,  that  frighted  thou  let'st  fall
From  Dis's  waggon  !  Daffodils

That  come  before  the  swallow  dares,  and  take
The  winds  of  March  with  beauty."

(The  Winter's  Tale,  Act  iv.  Scene  4.)

(b)  "  Pale  beyond  porch  and  portal,"  etc.,  previously  quoted  by
Mrs.  Holland  on  Nov.  25,  1908  (see  above,  p.  229),  from  The
Garden  of  Proserpine.

(c)  "Dusky  Dis"  from—

"  Ceres. Since  they  [Venus  and  Cupid]  did  plot

The  means  that  dusky  Dis  my  daughter  got,
Her  and  her  blind  boy's  sandal'd  company
I  have  forsworn."

(The  Tempest,  Act  iv.  Scene  1.)


244


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  fact  of  this  quotation  coming  from  The  Tempest  no
doubt  accounts  for  the  mention  of  Prospero  in  connexion  with
Proserpine  in  the  script.

(d)  "  Juliet. Gallop  apace,  you  fiery-footed  steeds,

Towards  Phoebus'  lodging :  such  a  waggoner
As  Phaethon  would  whip  you  to  the  west,
And  bring  in  cloudy  night  immediately."

(Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  iii.  Scene  2.)

This  script  has  many  points  of  resemblance  to  Miss  Verrall's
of  August  19,  1909,  quoted  above.  In  both  the  chariot  and
horses  of  Dis  are  connected — by  a  not  unnatural  association
of  ideas — with  the  horses  of  the  Sun ;  but  while  Miss  Verrall's
script  speaks  of  "  the  horses  of  dawn,"  Mrs.  Holland's  are  those
of  the  setting  sun.

This  carrying  on,  or  recrudescence,  of  the  topic  of  Proserpine,
must  be  considered  in  connexion  with  its  emergence  in  Mrs.
Willett's  script  of  February  10,  1910,  in  which  script,  as
already  remarked,  we  find  that  a  number  of  the  cross-corre-
spondences involved  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Nov.  25,  1908,
are — so  to  speak — gathered  together  and  focussed, — namely,
Echo  (implicitly,  see  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  paper  above,  p.  159,
and  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  pp.  208-9),  the  Nightingale  and  Pro-
serpine. The  whole  script  is  given  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (see
above,  pp.  148-50);  I  quote  here  the  passages  relating  to  the
two  latter  cross-correspondences :

(The  Nigldingale).

The  Nightingale  hut  but  I  no  no  no
begin  again

The  nightin  Nightingale  but  Shelley
too  as  well

Once  more  ye  Laurels

Which  only  1  remember
which  only  you  forget

(Proserpine).

There  is  a  line  of  Swinburne's  I  want
that  Pagan  singer  of  fair  things
and  all  dead  things  go  thither


lxiil] Third  Re-port  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  245


and  all  forgotten  days
something  like  that  Swinburne

Sleep  the  dream  that  flits  by  night
Sleep  and  his  twin  Brothers
not  Brothers  single  Brother

The  above  references  to  the  Nightingale  and  Shelley  were
interpreted  by  Mrs.  Verrall  (see  above,  p.  159)  as  alluding  to
Shelley's  poem  Aclonais,  Stanza  xvii.,  an  interpretation  which
seems  to  me  sound  ;  and  Mrs.  Verrall  remarks  that  the
two  preceding  stanzas  refer  to  Echo  and  Narcissus,  which  are
thus  linked  with  the  Nightingale  in  this  poem,  as  in  the  two
poems  quoted  by  Mrs.  Holland  on  Nov.  25,  1908,  and  in
the  one  quoted  by  Mrs.  Piper  on  Dec.  9,  1908  (see  above,
pp.  229  and  233).

The  next  phrase  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script,
"  Which  only  I  remember
Which  only  you  forget "
is  a  reminiscence  of  the  refrain  in  Swinburne's  Itylus,  whereas
Itylus  is  also  referred  to  in  the  passage  from  Atalanta  in
Calydon,  quoted  by  Mrs.  Holland  on  March  24,  1909. It  is
interesting  to  note  that  the  phrase  seems  re-echoed  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Feb.  16,  1910,  which  begins:
I  shall  remember  while  the  light  lives  yet
And  in  the  darkness  I  shall  not  forget.

Mrs.  Willett's  phrase,

"  And  all  dead  things  go  thither
And  all  forgotten  days "
is  misquoted  from  The  Garden  of  Proserpine  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper,  p.  206);  while  "the  dream  that  flits  by  night"  seems
(see  above,  p.  240  and  also  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  211)  to  be
a  reminiscence  of  Tennyson's  Demeter  and  Persephone.

These  topics  are  reiterated  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of
March  7,  1910  :l

Write  again  the  Nightingale
I  want  that  seen  to

Pluto  not  not  Plato  this  time,  but  PLUTO
Bees  Bees  the  hum  of  Bees

1  For  the  context  of  this,  see  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  paper  above,  p.  129.


246


Alice  Johnson.


[PART


Pluto  (Dis)  here  is  perhaps  primarily  associated  with  Lethe,
the  main  topic  of  these  Willett  scripts,  but  is  also  of  course
closely  connected  with  Proserpine,1  with  whom  the  Holland
script  of  March  2,  1910,  associates  bee-plants  (see  below)  and  Dis.

The  association  of  the  Nightingale  with  Proserpine  both  in
the  Holland  and  Willett  scripts  indicates  an  additional  tele-
pathic link  between  them,  for  the  two  topics  are  by  no
means  necessarily  associated  together, — in  the  same  way  that
e.g.  Ceres  and  Proserpine  would  be, — and  I  do  not  think
they  are  often  found  together  in  literature.  They  are,  however,
associated  in  the  following  passage  from  Tennyson's  Demeter  and
Persephone,  which  seems  to  have  been  the  source  of  certain  phrases
in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Nov.  10,  1909  (see  p.  241):

"  Thou  earnest,  0  my  child,
Led  upward  by  the  God  of  ghosts  and  dreams,
Who  laid  thee  at  Eleusis,  dazed  and  dumb,
With  passing  thro'  at  once  from  state  to  state,
Until  I  brought  thee  hither,  that  the  day,
When  here  thy  hands  let  fall  the  gather'd  flower,
Might  break  thro'  clouded  memories  once  again
On  thy  lost  self. A  sudden  nightingale
Saw  thee,  and  flash'd  into  a  frolic  of  song
And  welcome  ;  and  a  gleam  as  of  the  moon,
When  first  she  peers  along  the  tremulous  deep,
Fled  wavering  o'er  thy  face,  and  chased  away
That  shadow  of  a  likeness  to  the  king
Of  shadows,  thy  dark  mate."

Latin  Quotation  in  Mes.  Holland's  Script  of
March  2,  1910.

Pars  thyma — pars  casiam — melifontos

Plurima  lecta  rosa  est  et  sunt  sine  nomine  flores — crocus  liliaque
alba —

On  this  Mrs.  Verrall  sends  me  the  following  notes :

January  27,  1911.
In  Ovid,  Met.  V.  392,  Proserpine  is  described  as  picking  "  violets
or  white  lilies,"  (ant  violas  aut  Candida  lilia  carpit)  and  it  is  in

1  Cf.  Persephone,  Dis  and  Lethe  mentioned  together  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of
Aug.  19,  1909,  p.  241,  above. This  script  had  not  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  247


this  passage  that  she  is  said  to  have  dropped  her  flowers  in  her
fright.1

There  is,  however,  another  famous  account  of  the  story  in  Ovid,
Fasti  IV.  393-620.  Here  Ovid  describes  the  flowers  which  Proser-
pine and  her  companions  pick,  and  Mrs.  Holland's  words  come
straight  out  of  this  (Paley's  text,  11.  440-442)  :

"Pars  thyma,  pars  rorem,  pars  meliloton  amant.
Plurima  lecta  rosa  est,  sunt  et  sine  nomine  flores.
Ipsa  crocos  tenues,  liliaque  alba  legit."

(Some  prefer  thyme,  some  rosemaiy,  some  melilote :  many  a  rose
is  plucked,  and  there  are,  too,  flowers  unnamed.  She  herself
[i.e.  Proserpine]  picks  slender  crocuses  and  white  lilies.)

She  has  substituted  for  rorem  the  word  casiam — which  is  closely
associated  with  it  in  Virgil  (Georg.  II.  213),  both  being  food  for
bees — and  she  has  written  "  melifontos  "  for  "  meliloton  "  (it  is  a  kind
of  clover).  She  has  omitted  the  flowers  named  in  the  preceding
11.  437-439,  viz.  :  buttercups,  violets,  poppies,  hyacinths,  amaranth.

I  can't  help  feeling  a  possible  connexion  with  my  article  pub-
lished in  the  Classical  Review  on  March  1,  1910.  But  the  connexion
is  subtle.  I  am  speaking  of  passages  in  Virgil  where  white  lilies
are  mentioned,  and  I  name  "  cassia,  vervain,  thyme "  among  low-
growing  plants,  the  favourites  of  bees.  I  give  the  reference  (above
noted)  to  Virgil,  Georg.  II.  213,  which  combines  "casiam"  and
"rorem,"  but  I  do  not  quote  it.  I  am  not  dealing  with  Ovid,  but
the  Fasti  passage  is  very  familiar  to  me  (I  have  read  it  often  with
children  in  class),  and  it  seems  odd  that  on  the  day  after  the
appearance  of  my  talk  about  white  lilies  and  bee-plants,  Mrs.
Holland  should  write  about  an  Ovidian  passage  which  deals  with
white  lilies  and  bee-plants.  Ovid,  it  is  true,  does  not  mention  bees ;
but  to  the  classical  student  thyme,  cassia,  and  melilote  are  typical
bee-plants.

If  this  is  so,  the  question  arises,  is  this  knowledge  wholly  super-
normal, or  did  Mrs.  Holland  see  the  Classical  Pieview  which  usually
comes  out  punctually  on  the  first  of  the  month  1  Even  so,  I  don't
see  how  she  could  have  got  any  sense  of  connexion  between  Ovid's
Proserpine  (Fasti)  and  my  article  except  supernormally.

The  point  of  interest  in  this  is  that  my  article  deals  with  Lethe,
bees,  and  lilies.

1  It  is  from  the  Metamorj>hoxes  (probably  known  to  him  in  Golding's  transla-
tion) that  Shakespeare  takes  his  allusions,  quoted  by  Mrs.  Holland,  to  Proser-
pine in  The  Winter  s  Tale  and  The  Tempest.


24N


Alice  Johnson.


[part


This  is  the  article  referred  to  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  paper
above,  p.  163,  in  connexion  with  the  passage  about  Pluto  and
Bees  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  March  7,  1910,  quoted  on  p.  245.

It  may,  I  think,  be  taken  as  certain  that  neither  Mrs.
Willett  nor  Mrs.  Holland  had  seen  this  paper  at  the  time  of
producing  the  scripts  referred  to : 1  but  I  have  read  it  care-
fully with  a  view  to  judging  what  could  be  inferred  from  it
by  non-classical  readers.  Mrs.  Verrall  mentions  bees  in  con-
nexion with  Lethe,  but  not  with  Pluto,  and  it  appears  to  me
very  unlikely  that  Mrs.  Willett  should  have  derived  this  latter
connexion  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  even  if  she  had  seen  it.
As  to  Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Verrall  has  stated  fully  in  her
note  above  the  facts  bearing  on  the  question  of  possible  con-
nexions between  Mrs.  Holland's  script  and  her  paper,  and  I
can  find  no  other  points  in  the  paper  from  which,  as  it  appears
to  me,  Mrs.  Holland  could  have  deduced  anything  that  emerged
in  this  script.

If,  then,  any  connexion  exists  between  the  scripts  and  Mrs.
Verrall's  paper,  it  would  seem  that  it  must  be  telepathic  in
origin,  for  the  scripts  reflect,  not  what  is  stated  in  the  paper,
but  some  of  the  topics  that  would  be  associated  with  it  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  mind.

In  regard  to  Mrs.  Holland's  substitution  of  casiam  for  rorem
in  the  Latin  quotation,  Mrs.  Verrall  has  quite  recently  found
that  there  is  a  difference  of  reading  among  the  editors  of  Ovid
in  respect  to  line  440  of  Fasti,  Book  IV.  The  older  editions  in
common  use  in  the  early  part  of  last  century  read  casiam,  and
it  is  pretty  certain  that  this  would  have  been  the  reading  known
to  Mr.  Myers  as  a  boy.  Casiam  is  also  the  reading  of  the  latest
edition  of  the  Corpus  (1894).  Merkel,  however,  (1841)  reads
rorem,  which  was  the  reading  familiar  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

The  context  of  the  Ovid  quotation  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script
has  also  to  be  considered.

"  Proserpina "  is  mentioned  twice  only  in  Shakespeare :
Winters  Tale,  Act  iv.  Scene  4  (quoted  by  Mrs.  Holland),  and
Troilus  and  Cressida,  Act  ii.  Scene  1,  "as  Cerberus  is  at
Proserpina's  beauty."

1 1  have  made  special  enquiries  on  this  point  in  regard  to  Mrs.  Holland  and
Mrs.  Verrall  has  done  the  same  in  regard  to  Mrs.  Willett.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


■IV.)


Dis  is  mentioned  twice  only,  in  the  Winter's  Tale  and
Tempest,  both  quoted  by  Mrs.  Holland.  The  Troilus  and
Cressida  passage  does  not  refer  to  the  story  of  Proserpine,
so  Mrs.  Holland  has  included  in  her  script  of  March  2  ;  1910,
the  only  two  references  by  Shakespeare  to  the  story,  both  of
which  are  derived  from  Ovid's  Metamorphoses.

She  follows  them  up  with  a  quotation  from  Borneo  and  Juliet :
"  Gallop  apace,  you  fiery-footed  steeds."

"Fiery-footed  steeds"  is  a  translation  of  Ovid,  Met.  II.  392,
where  in  his  account  of  the  story  of  Phaethon  he  speaks  of:
"  ignipedum  vires  .  .  .  equorum "  (the  strength  of  the  fiery-
footed  horses). 1

This,  then,  is  another  unmistakeable  allusion  by  Mrs.  Holland
to  Ovid,  as  represented  in  Shakespeare.

Thus  her  script  of  March  2,  1910,  represents — not  only  a
combination  of  the  two  Ovid  versions  of  the  story  of  Proser-
pine with  Shakespeare's  two  allusions  to  one  of  those  versions
(a  combination  which  may  possibly  be  found  in  some  passage  of
literary  criticism,  though  we  have  not  been  able  to  trace  any
such),  but  in  addition  an  allusion  to  another  Ovid  story,  viz.
that  of  Phaethon.

The  script  shows  at  least  more  knowledge  of  Ovid  than  can
be  derived  from  Shakespeare,  who  was  apparently  unacquainted
with  the  Fasti.

As  to  the  actual  quotation  from  the  Fasti,  it  is  of  course
impossible  to  prove  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  not  casually  seen
this  somewhere,  and  reproduced  it  from  her  subconscious  memory.
That  she  was  not  aware  of  having  recently  seen  any  Latin
phrases  is  shown  by  her  letter  to  me,  quoted  above,  where  she
remarks  that  the  script  "  tries  to  get  a  few  Latin  words  "  ;  for
it  is  her  custom  to  tell  me  whenever  she  can  trace  the  origin
of  such  in  her  script.2  Enquiries  made  later  have  failed  to
throw  any  light  on  this.

1The  word  ignipes  (Mrs.  Verrall  tells  me)  is  used  only  twice  in  Latin
poetry:  (1)  by  Ovid,  as  above;  (2)  by  Statius,  Thtb.  I.  27,  in  a  passage
deliberately  recalling  the  passage  in  Ovid.

2  Latin  phrases,  generally  very  familiar  ones,  occur  occasionally,  but  by  no
means  often,  in  her  script.  Greek  words  are  still  more  rare.  In  several  cases
she  has  traced  these  latter  to  words  casually  seen  in  the  midst  of  her  ordinary
English  reading,  and  reproduced  in  an  apparently  mechanical  and  unintelligent
way.


250


Alice  Johnson.


[part


It  may  be  worth  adding  that  Tennyson  in  his  Dcmeter  and
Persephone,  which  has  already  been  mentioned  as  the  source  of
several  of  the  factors  in  this  cross-correspondence,  follows  closely
Ovid's  version  of  the  story,  and  that  the  same  version  seems  to
lie  behind  Mrs.  Piper's  references  to  Proserpine  on  March  24,
1908,  and  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's  references  in  Aug.  and
Sep.  1908.

It  was,  as  shown  above,  MyersP  who  originated  the  "  Proser-
pine "  cross-correspondence,  and  who  in  other  cases  had  shown
evidence  of  knowledge  of  Ovid.  Mrs.  Holland's  0 vidian
references  (made,  it  is  to  be  noted,  before  any  reports  on  these
Piper  sittings  had  been  published)  were  to  passages  known  to
Mrs.  Verrall ;  whereas  the  Piper  Ovidian  references  to  "  Lethe  "
were  not  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  But  in  both  cases  it  is
"  Myers "  who  claims  to  be  the  communicator  of  the  Ovidian
references,  and  with  Ovid,  as  we  know  from  the  autobiographical
passages  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  (p.  17),  Frederic
Myers  was  intimately  acquainted.

(5)  Door  Key.

For  the  details  of  this  cross-correspondence,  see  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper  above,  pp.  193-204.

(6) Birds  and  Turkeys.

Mrs.  Holland  at  the  end  of  a  long  script  produced  on
Dec.  9th,  1908,  and  immediately  after  a  passage  quoted  in
connexion  with  the  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  incident  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.  p.  32  0),  writes  as  follows:


and  a  path  between — ■


LXIII.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  251


I  attached  no  meaning  to  this.

On  May  11th,  1909,  I  saw  Mrs.  Holland  and  read  over
with  her  a  quantity  of  her  recent  script,  so  that  she  might
as  far  as  possible  identify  the  quotations  which  I  had  not
traced.  On  coming  to  the  "  Mallard "  and  drawing  of  birds,
she  said  that  it  reminded  her  of  a  College  song,  "  Let  All
Souls'  men  have  their  mallard."

Later  when  it  occurred  to  me  that  this  might  have  a  possible
connexion  with  a  phrase  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script,  I  asked
Mrs.  Holland  to  look  up  this  song,  which  she  found  in
The  Minstrelsy  of  Isis :  Poems  relating  to  Oxford,  edited  by
J.  B.  Firth. The  first  verse  is  as  follows :

"  Griffin,  Turkey,  Bustard,  Capon,
Let  other  hungry  mortalls  gape  on,
And  on  their  bones  with  stomachs  fall  hard
But  let  All  Souls  men  have  the  mallard."

The  mallard  feast  is,  it  appears,  held  at  All  Souls'  College
within  a  night  or  two  of  All  Souls'  Day  (i.e.  November  2nd),
and  this  was  an  old  drinking  song  associated  with  the
ceremony.

The  corresponding  parts  of  Mrs.  Piper's  script  are :

{April  6,  190S.)  G.  B.  D.  Now  shall  I  give  you  a  new  message?
(Hand  assents.)

G.  B.  D.  It  refers  to  the  landing  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  here  and
the  first  settlement  of  this  country.

"  The  breaking  waves  dashed  high
On  a  stern  and  rock-bound  coast."
Do  you  understand  what  "  Pilgrim  Fathers  "  means  1
Something  about  birds  or  turkeys

(G.  B.  D.  explains.  The  hand  suddenly  rushes  down  to  the  paper
and  writes  :)  Pilgrim's  Progress  ! Yes,  Pilgrim  Fathers.

G.  B.  D.  Now  you  understand  about  the  "breaking  waves"  and  the
"  rock-bound  coast "  1  I  think  you  can  make  a  mental
picture  of  it  which  may  help  you  in  giving  it  to  the
other  Lights.

Good,  I  understand  well. Breaking  waves  ?

G.  B.  D.  Yes,  breaking  on  a  stern  and  rocky  coast.


252


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(April  22,  1908.)  G.  B.  D.  I  have  just  discovered  the  association
in  R.  H.'s  mind  between  turkeys  and  pilgrims  that  made
the  Light  write  the  one  when  I  spoke  of  the  other, —
Pilgrim  Fathers,  Fast  Day,  Thanksgiving  and  Turkey.

(Hand  expresses  great  satisfaction)  I  could  not  think  of  the

word

(It  was  evident  in  the  action  of  the  hand  that  Thanks-
giving is  the  word  meant,  and  E,.  H.  the  speaker.)

G.  B.  D.  You  might  add  it  and  turkeys  to  the  message.
(Hand  expresses  that  it  will.)

(May  4,  1908.)  [On  "Thanksgiving"  being  mentioned:]  I  said
Turkeys  and  Birds  to  Mrs.  Holland,  and  Mrs.  V.  also.

For  the  sake  of  English  readers  it  may  be  well  to  explain
that  Thanksgiving  Day  is  an  American  national  holiday
appointed — in  Massachusetts,  at  least, — by  proclamation  by  the
Governor  of  the  State.  The  last  Thursday  in  November  is
always  the  day  appointed.  It  is  a  feast  day  which  com-
memorates the  celebration  by  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  their  first
harvest  in  America.  On  that  occasion  they  found  wild  turkeys
in  the  woods  and  brought  them  home  to  add  to  their  feast.
Hence  turkeys  have  always  been  the  staple  of  Thanksgiving
dinners.

Fast  Day  commemorates  another  incident  in  the  history  of
the  early  settlers  in  Massachusetts.  After  they  had  been  there
about  two  years  their  supplies  gave  out,  and  as  the  expected
ship  from  England  did  not  arrive,  great  suffering  resulted,
and  the  Governor  ordered  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  to  be
observed.  This  being  done  the  ship  arrived  while  the  people
were  praying  in  church.  Within  the  last  few  years,  Fast  Day,
which  was  gradually  transformed  into  a  festival,  has  been
re-christened  Patriots'  Day.

The  pictorial  form  used  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  this
occasion  may  possibly  have  been  derived  from  Mr.  Dorr's
suggestion  to  Mrs.  Piper,  "  I  think  you  can  make  a  mental
picture  of  it,"  whereas  the  ideas  that  were  apparently  most
prominent  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  consciousness, — "  birds  or
turkeys  "  and  "  breaking  waves," — are  roughly  represented  in
Mrs.  Holland's  drawing.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


253


The  fact  that  the  little  known  English  festival  alluded  to  by
Mrs.  Holland  and  the  well-known  American  one  alluded  to
by  Mrs.  Piper  both  occur  in  November  adds  somewhat  to  the
correspondence.

(7) Sesame  and  Lilies.

For  the  details  of  this  cross-correspondence,  see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  264-326.

(8)  Comus.

Mrs.  Holland  writes  on  December  16th,  190S  :
The  glassy  cool  translucent  wave —

I  want  her  to  draw  a  recumbent  figure  not  this  one  the
drawing  one — Helen  could  help.  .  .  .

"  The  glassy  cool  translucent  wave "  is  quoted  from  the
first  part  of  the  Attendant  Spirit's  invocation  to  Sabrina
in  Covins.  The  first  few  lines  of  this  (with  a  few  other
passages  from  Comus)  had  been  read  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  the
Piper  controls  on  May  4th,  1908,  and  on  May  8th  he  had
suggested  that  they  should  "  make  one  of  the  other  Lights
give  the  name  of  Comus,  or  of  Circe,  or  make  some  refer-
ence to  the  poem, — quote  some  lines  from  it,  perhaps.1'  Again
on  May  12th  he  repeated

I  read  you  "Sabrina  fair,  listen  where  thou  are  sitting,
Under  the  glassy  cool  translucent  wave."  Perhaps  this,
as  a  quotation,  may  help  you  to  give  it  to  the  other
Lights.

Thus,  besides  the  lines  to  "  Sweet  Echo"  quoted  above,  p.  231,
part  of  the  very  passage  that  Mr.  Dorr  suggested  on  this
occasion  was  reproduced  by  Mrs.  Holland.

A  number  of  allusions  to  Comus  were  made  in  the  Piper
sittings,  for  a  full  report  of  which  see  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  196-9.

The  "  recumbent  figure "  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script
as  to  be  drawn  by  "  Helen "  is  perhaps  the  nymph  Sabrina,
for  river  deities  are normally  recumbent in  Greek  art.  The


254


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Piper  controls  had  also  said  on  May  12th,  190S,  that  they
would  give  to  Miss  Verrall  "  Caves,  nymphs,  water-nymphs
and  Maid  of  the  Sea,  Maidens  fair  twining  their  golden  locks."
Again  in  Miss  Pope's  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  December
21st,  1908,  MyersP,  indicating  a  date  with  more  accuracy  than
usual,  wrote  :

[Mrs.  Verrall]  also  wrote,  or  Helen  did,  Water  nymphs,  sprite.
Recently  within  three  Sabbaths.

Miss  Verrall  produced  the  following  script  on  November
20th,  1908  :

A  hand  long  and  narrow  the  fingers  close  together  [drawing
of  hand]  white  as  alabaster  the  blue  depths  of  ocean
Of  his  bones  are  coral  made 1 — in  the  caves  of  ocean
where  the  sea  nymphs  dwell — mermaids  the  lure  of  the
sea — lorelei  [drawing  of  bow  and  arrow]

and  nought  shall  save  the  fisherman

whom  once  that  net  hath  trapped

The  arrow,  which  appears  in  this  script,  is  often  introduced
into  the  Verrall  scripts,  apparently  as  a  symbol  of  a  cross-
correspondence.  (An  instance  is  to  be  found  in  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  Oct.  24,  1908,  also  in  the  Mac  script  of  Sept.  12,
1908,  both  quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  pp.  193-6.)

Miss  Verrall's  script  here  closely  reproduces  the  subjects
named  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and  is  also  a  sort  of  paraphrase
of  the  latter  part  of  the  Attendant  Spirit's  invocation  to
Sabrina,  namely  :

"  By  Leucothea's  lovely  hands,
And  her  son  that  rules  the  strands ;
By  Thetis'  tinsel-slippered  feet,
And  the  songs  of  Sirens  sweet ;
By  dead  Parthenope's  dear  tomb,
And  fair  Ligea's  golden  comb,
Wherewith  she  sits  on  diamond  rocks
Sleeking  her  soft  alluring  locks  ;
By  all  the  nymphs  that  lightly  dance
Upon  the  streams  with  wily  glance  ;

1  The  Tempest,  Act  I.  Scene  2.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


255


Rise,  rise,  and  heave  thy  rosy  head
From  thy  coral-paven  bed,
And  bridle  in  thy  headlong  wave,
Till  thou  our  summons  answered  have.
Listen  and  save  !  "

"  Leucothea "  means  the  white  goddess,  so  that  "  white  as
alabaster "  would  be  a  suitable  phrase  to  apply  to  her ;  and
the  "  mermaids  the  lure  of  the  sea  "  and  the  "  Lorelei "  of  the
script  are  equivalent  to  the  "  Sirens  "  and  "  Ligea."  In
Heme's  ballad  of  the  "  Lorelei "  who  lures  the  fisher  boats
on  to  the  rocks :

"  Die  schonste  Jungfrau  sitzet
Dort  oben  wunderbar,
Ihr  goldnes  Geschmeide  blitzet
Sie  kammt  ihr  goldnes  Haar ;

"  Sie  kammt  es  mit  goldenem  Kara  me
Und  singt  ein  Lied  dabei  ;
Das  hat  eine  wundersame
Gewaltige  Melodei."

If  it  be  admitted  that  the  resemblances  between  Miss  Verrall's
script  and  the  passage  from  Comus  are  too  great  to  be  put
down  to  chance,  and  that  the  script  really  refers  to  that
passage,  whereas  Mrs.  Holland's  script  actually  quotes  from
another  part  of  the  same  passage,  the  case  may  be  compared
with  the  one  given  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,
pp.  297-8,  where  the  first  stanza  of  a  French  poem  ("La  vie
est  vaine ")  is  closely  paraphrased  in  the  Mac  script,  while  the
second  stanza  of  the  same  poem  is  quoted  in  a  script  of  Miss
Verrall's.

(9)  Time  and  Eternity;  Prometheus.
(10)  Confirmcdion.

These  cross-correspondences  are  contained  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  December  30th,  1908,  the  whole  of  which  I  quote:

Fer — Fervent — fervency — Forth  on  the  vigil — each  take  part
Knights  of  the  yet  undaunted  heart.1

1  Misquoted  from  R.  L.  Stevenson's  Our  Lady  of  the  Snows:
"Pour  forth  and  bravely  do  your  part,
O  knights  of  the  unshielded  heart  !  "


256


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(9)  The  solemn  beat  of  Time  swinging  through  the  spheres
to  Eternity —

Here  Oh  here — we  bear  the  bier  of  the  Spectres  of  many
a  vanished  year — Spectres  we  of  the  dead  time  be —
We  bear  Time  to  his  tomb  in  Eternity — "  Sun-treader
life  and  light  be  thine  for  ever" — "Lest  [sic]  oft  is  peace
in  Shelley's  mind  than  calm  on  waters  seen  " —

(7)  Con — Context  is  lacking — Not  constant  remembrance —
Con — "Art  thou  poor  yet  hast  thou  golden  slumbers — oh
sweet  content — to  add  to  golden  numbers  golden  numbers.

The  Pleiades — Stars  in  her  hair  were  7 — No  the  Muses
on  Helicon — Coniston —

(10)  Coney  Island — Confirmation  strong  as  proofs  of  Holy  Writ
— Conlan  —  Conrad — Connacht — Connecticut — Concord
Confirmed — confirmed  oh  that  is  stronger  made  which  was
before  bound  up  with  ribs  of  iron  " —

F.  W.  H.  M.

[the  signature  is  followed  by  drawings  of  a  bird  and  other
objects  which  seem  to  have  no  significance.]

The  passage  marked  (7)  in  the  above  belongs  to  the  cross-
correspondence  "  Sesame  and  Lilies,"  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,
p.  324.

(9) Time  and.  Eternity;  Prometheus.

It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  the  first  phrase  in  the
part  of  the  above  script  marked  (9)  is  a  reminiscence  of
Henry  Vaughan's  poem  :

"  I  saw  Eternity  the  other  night,
Like  a  great  Ring  of  pure  and  endless  light,
All  calm,  as  it  was  bright ;

And  round  beneath  it  Time,  in  hours,  days,  years,
Driven  by  the  spheres,

Like  a  vast  shadow  moved,  in  which  the  world
And  all  her  train  were  hurled.


Yet  some,  who  all  this  while  did  weep  and  sing,
And  sing  and  weep,  soared  up  into  the  Ring;
But  most  would  use  no  wing.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


257


O  fools,  said  I,  thus  to  prefer  dark  night
Before  true  light !

To  live  in  grots  and  caves,  and  hate  the  day
Because  it  shows  the  way,

The  way,  which  from  this  dead  and  dark  abode
Leads  up  to  God,

A  way  where  you  might  tread  the  Sun  and  be

More  bright  than  he !

But,  as  I  did  their  madness  so  discuss,

One  whispered  thus,

'  This  Ring  the  Bridegroom  did  for  none  provide,
But  for  his  Bride.'"

There  is  a  certain  resemblance  between  these  passages  of  the
poem  and  the  Platonic  phrase  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of
Nov.  19,  1908,  quoted  below,  p.  259.

It  seems  to  me  probable  that  it  was  from  this  poem  that
Browning  derived  the  word  "  Sun-treader "  in  the  line  quoted
shortly  afterwards  by  Mrs.  Holland.  This,  combined  with  the
idea  of  "  Time  and  Eternity,"  would  make  a  natural  association
of  ideas  between  the  three  quotations  that  follow  in  her  script,
viz.:

(a)  "  Here,  oh  here  :

We  bear  the  bier
Of  the  Father  of  many  a  cancelled  year !

Spectres  we

Of  the  dead  Hours  be,
We  bear  Time  to  his  tomb  in  eternity."

This  is  from  Shelley's  Prometheus  Unbound,  Act  IV.,  and  is
sung,  after  the  release  of  Prometheus,  by  the  "  Train  of  dark
Forms  and  Shadows,"  which  represent  "  the  past  Hours."

(b)  "  Sun-treader,  life  and  light  be  thine  for  ever  !

Thou  art  gone  from  us."

From  Browning's  Pauline ;  the  "  Sun-treader "  being  Shelley.

(c)  "  Less  oft  is  peace  in  Shelley's  mind

Than  calm  in  waters  seen."

From  Shelley's  To  Jane : The  Recollection.

R


258


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Prometheus.

The  subject  of  Prometheus  occurred  a  good  many  times  in
Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.

On  March  24th,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  the  control  some
lines  from  the  beginning  of  Mrs.  Browning's  translation  of  the
Prometheus  of  Aeschylus,  explaining,  without  mentioning  its
title,  that  it  was  "  the  beginning  of  a  play  of  Aeschylus,  and
Shelley  wrote  about  it  also."  To  which  the  control  replied,
"  Yres,  I  understand,  let  me  recall — who  was  it  that  was
bound  to  the  rock?"  At  the  next  sitting,  on  March  30th,
the  control  wrote  :

Posthemus — Unbound.  I  tried  and  tried  to  get  it  through.
[On  Mr.  Dorr  remarking  that  the  name  aimed  at  was
associated  in  Latin  with  the  word  vinctus,  the  control
added]  Bound. I  spelt  it  right  that  time.

Mr.  Dorr  then  read  several  more  verses  from  the  translation
of  Prometheus,  and  further  talk  ensued  on  the  subject.  In
the  waking-stage  of  this  day  the  name  "  Prometheus,"  which
had  not  been  mentioned  by  Mr.  Dorr,  was  given  for  the  first
time  by  the  control,  with  a  few  remarks  about  him.  On
March  31st  Mr.  Dorr  suggested  that  "Prometheus"  would  be
a  good  message  to  take  to  the  other  automatists,  and  mentioned
various  ideas  associated  with  the  name  which  might  help  in
conveying  it,  such  as  the  vulture  that  gnawed  his  breast,  the
rock  to  which  he  was  bound,  and  his  gifts  to  man.  On
April  7th,  in  the  waking-stage,  came  the  words :

Fire — From  careless  man — he  taught  them  all  his  wiles  and
wisdom.  Shelley  !  He  taught  them  all  he  knew.  And
they  were  envious  of  him — Poor  Prometheus !  What
would  we  have  known  but  for  him  !

Prometheus  was  referred  to  again  as  a  message  to  be  taken
with  "Fire"  and  "Art,"  on  April  1.3th,  14th,  22nd  and
27th,  and  May  4th,  8th,  12th  and  13th.

The  following  script  about  Prometheus  was  produced  by  Mrs.
Verrall  on  Sept.  23,  1908  :

[In  Greek. He  wrapped  up  beforehand  the  fillets  and  so  also  the


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


259


veils ;  he  brings  in  also  the  nard.  For  in  a  narthex  was  hidden
the  fire  by  which  Prometheus  made  men  like  unto  gods]1

In  a  narthex  stem  conveyed2

By  the  god  who  disobeyed

Broke  the  fate,  mankind  to  save

So  gave  freedom  to  the  slave.

And  Ocean's  nymphs  his  loneliness  deplore

Floating  melodious  to  the  distant  shore

Where  the  dim  form  of  man's  immortal  friend

Waited  the  issue  and  foreknew  the  end.

There  is  something  else  wanted  to  make  this  complete — more  than
Foreknowledge  goes  to  make  a  god,  and  more  than  sympathy  with
suffering. Can't  you  fill  the  void  in  the  story  1

Not  perhaps  yet,  try  later.

This  is  the  only  mention  of  Prometheus  in  282  scripts  by
Mrs.  Verrall,  covering  a  period  of  nearly  four  years.

On  the  Greek  in  this  script,  Mrs.  Verrall  sends  me  the
following  note :

The  word  TvpovKaXvxpev  means  "wrapped  up  or  hid  beforehand,"
and  there  is  a  grammar  mistake  over  the  word  \i'npa..  The  word
for  fillet  is  mitra,  fern.,  so  that  its  accusative  plural  should  be  mitras  :
tas  mitras  would  be  "  the  fillets  "  (as  I  knew).  The  word  in  the  script
ought  to  come  from  a  singular  mitron.  But  there  is  no  such  word.
There  is,  however,  a  word  miton,  meaning  thread ;  the  accusative
plural  of  which  would  be  ta  mita.  If  this  were  what  is  intended
the  sentence  would  very  well  represent  an  attempt  to  indicate  cross-
correspondences  :  "  he  concealed  beforehand  the  threads."  Anyhow
concealment  is  clearly  an  important  element  in  this  M.  V.  script.

Time  and  Eternity.

A  reference  to  "  Time  and  Eternity "  occurred  in  a  passage
in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  November  19th,  1908,  as  follows:

Time's  hour  glass  whose  sands  never  run  out — Time  and
eternity.  [In  Greek :  Time  is  as  it  were  an  image  of
eternity  given  (?)  to  men.]3

1  irpovKoXvpev  to.  fiirpa  u>o-avTus  Kai  to.  Ka\vfi/j.ara  eicrcpepei  Kai  tou  uapoov.  eu
yap  vdp6r]KL  Ka\v/Jtp.euou  to  trvp  u>  Tlpofj.rjdevi  tovs  dudpurrovs  dioiffiu  eoi/f6ras  twoirjo-e.

2  iHschylus,  Prometheus  Vinctus,  passim.

3XP°"0s  wairep  eiKuv  tis  ecrrt  tov  aiwviov  rots  avOpwirois  5e5w/ulue<'os.


260


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  asked  Mrs.  Verrall  in  March,  1911,  whether  she  could
trace  the  origin  of  the  Greek  in  this  script,  and  after  a
little  investigation  she  replied  :

I  find  the  phrase  "Time  an  Image  of  Eternity"  in  Plato's  Timaeus,
which  Helen  has  read  and  known  well.

(Ch.  X.)  Troiei  fikvoi'Tos  alwvos  ev  evl  Kar  apiOpov  toucrai'  altnviov  eiKova,
tovtov  ov  81]  ypovov  Mvopo.Kapev.

Translation  (by  R.  D.  Archer-Hind)  "  [while  God  was  ordering  the
universe],  he  made  of  eternity  that  abides  in  unity  an  eternal  image
moving  according  to  number,  even  that  which  we  have  called  time."

There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  H.  V.  script  reproduces  this :
it  has  the  words  eiKwv  (image)  and  almv  (eternity),  atwvtos  (the
eternal),  and  xP'n'0<s  (time).

The  passage  is  difficult,  and  R.  D.  A.-H.  has  a  long  note  on  the  chief
difficulty, — that  time  is  described  as  an  eternal  image  of  eternity.  The
H.  V.  script  gets  out  of  the  difficulty  by  leaving  out  the  adjective
(eternal)  and  inserting  the  qualifying  wv-rrep,  "  as  it  were,"  "  Time  is,  as
it  were,  an  image  of  the  Eternal  given  to  men."  The  word  for
given  is  ungrammatical,  though  it  is  plain  enough  what  is  meant ;
and  the  gender  of  "image,"  ei/c&v,  is  incorrect.

This  interpretation  by  Mrs.  Verrall  of  Miss  Verrall's  script
as  reminiscent  of  the  Timaeus  was  made  in  ignorance  of  the
suggestion  made  to  me  by  another  friend  about  a  month  earlier,
that  Mrs.  Holland's  phrase  about  "  Time  and  Eternity "  was
reminiscent  of  Vaughau's  poem ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is
a  close  resemblance  between  the  Timaeus  passage  and  the  poem,
which  happened  to  be  unknown  both  to  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall.

Miss  Verrall's  script  deviates  from  its  original  source  in
describing  Time  as  given  to  men,  and  this  seems  the  only  link —
if  link  it  can  be  called — between  her  scripts  and  the  "  Prome-
theus "  scripts  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  both  of  which
refer  to  Prometheus'  gifts  to  men.

Another  unmistakable  link,  however,  is  provided  by  Mrs.
Holland's  script,  which  was  the  latest  of  the  four,  and  which
combines  the  topics  "  Time  and  Eternity  "  and  "  Prometheus  "
in  a  single  quotation  from  Shelley's  Prometheus  Unbound.

I  wish  to  lay  special  stress  on  this  case,  because  it  seems  to
me  to  fulfil  the  condition  suggested  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  his
well-known  experiment  of  the  "  Latin  Message,"  which  he  gave


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  261


to  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personalities  at  the  end  of  1906.  The
suggestion  he  made  to  them,  translated  into  English,  runs  as
follows : 1

"  Try  to  give  to  A.  and  B.  two  different  messages,  between
which  no  connexion  is  discernible.  Then  as  soon  as  possible
give  to  C.  a  third  message,  which  will  reveal  the  hidden
connexion."

Now  here  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Sep.  23,  1908,  states
explicitly  "  There  is  something  else  wanted  to  make  this  com-
plete " ;  possibly  meaning  that  a  cross-correspondence  is  being
attempted.  The  Greek  part  of  the  same  script  also  refers  to
something  wrapped  up,  or  concealed,  beforehand,  i.e.  to  some  hidden
design  in  the  references.  Between  this  and  Miss  Verrall's  script
of  Nov.  19,  1908,  I  think  it  may  fairly  be  said  that  "no  con-
nexion is  discernible."  But  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Dec.
30,  1908,  a  "hidden  connexion"  between  the  two  earlier  ones
is  revealed.

Mrs.  Verrall,  it  is  true,  refers  to  the  Prometheus  of  Aeschylus,
while  Mrs.  Holland  refers  to  the  Prometheus  of  Shelley ;  but
this  connects  the  Holland  script  with  the  Piper  sittings,  in  which
Shelley  was  mentioned  as  well  as  Aeschylus,  while  the  Piper
trance  utterances  are  clearly  connected  with  Mrs.  Verrall's
script.

(10)  Confirmation .

The  passage  marked  (^10)  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
Dec.  30,  1908,  contains  two  quotations  from  Shakespeare:

(a)  "Trifles  light  as  air
Are  to  the  jealous  confirmations  strong
As  proofs  of  holy  writ :  "

(Othello,  Act  III.  Scene  3.)

(b)  "  Confirm'd,  confirm'd  ! O,  that  is  stronger  made

Which  was  before  barr'd  up  with  ribs  of  iron  ! "

(Much  Ado  about  Nothing,  Act  iv.  Sc.  1.)

Note  also  that  the  syllable  "  con- "  occurs  thirteen  times  in
the  script  besides  in  these  cpuotations :

Con — Context — Constant — Con — Content — Helicon — Coniston
— Coney — Conlan — Conrad — Connacht — Connecticut — Concord.

JSee  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  313.


262


Alice  Johnson.


[part


A  connexion  is  perhaps  intended  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  April  30,  1908,  which,  like  Mrs.  Holland's,  claims  to  come
from  Frederic  Myers,  and  contains  the  word  "  confirmation  "  with
two  other  words  beginning  with  "  con-  "  and  clearly  indicates  that
a  cross-correspondence  is  intended. The  passage  is  as  follows :

Not  the  only  test  word  has  been  given  between  you  and
Helen  there  are  other  words  to  be  similarly  used  when
the  time  comes.  And  confirmation  could  I  think  be
obtained  by  others  help.  Anyhow  why  not  try  for  con-
temporary corroboration.  Thus  :  Conversation  about  a
dulcimer,  ask  to  whom  that  recalls  something.

A  slight  contribution  to  the  same  cross-correspondence  is  to
be  found  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  as  follows :

(May  12,  1908.)

(Waking-stage.)
[after  reference  to  a  number  of  messages  :]
They  told  me  to  take  Winged  Victory,  and  Spire,
Conformation

Altar — Altar — and  Chancel

I  have  travelled  many  miles  to  get  those  to  you,  George
(May  13,  1908.) G.  B.  D.  Then  she  spoke  of  Conformation.
Confirmation  it  should  be.

(11)  Mercury.

(12)  Exile.  "

(13)  Shelley's  Skylark.

These  topics  occur  explicitly  or  implicitly  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  February  10th,  1909,  as  follows:

(11)  And  e'en  with  Paradise  devised  the  Snake.
Man's  forgiveness  give  and  take.1

Beat  beat  beat  in  a  regular  muffled  cadence — Caduceus —

The  dog  tooth  Mercury  has  not  yet  begun  to  bud —
Propert — Property — Prospice  finem —

1Oh,  Thou,  who  man  of  baser  Earth  didst  make,
And  e'en  with  Paradise  devise  the  Snake :

For  all  the  Sin  wherewith  the  Face  of  Man
Is  blacken'd — Man's  forgiveness  give — and  take  !

E.  FitzGerald,  Omar  Khayyam.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  263

(12)  St.  Bridget's  Day — St.  Bride — Our  lady  of  the  mantle  green —
The  Phoenix —

"  By  feathers  green  across  Casbeen

Are  with  the  splendid  anguish  gilt."  1
The  black  lyn —

Oh  Bay  of  Dublin  my  heart  you're  troubling  " 2

Not  Lord  F.  Cavendish  he  died  long  ago — his  wife —

The  man  in  a  grey  coat  who  drove  the  car —

"As  at the best it is but this  most foul  strange  and

unnatural — 3
"Leave  your  home  behind  lad  and  give

your  friends  your  hand  " —  4
In  terra  pax — donum  [sic]  donum  dulce  donum.

(13)  Hail  to  thee  blythe  [sic]  Spirit
Bird  thou  never  wert  5 —

Not  even  a  goose.
(11)  Mercury.

In  this  apparently  disjointed  script,  the  way  in  which  one
topic  leads  on  by  association  of  ideas  to  another  can  be
traced,  not  perhaps  completely,  but  to  a  rather  striking  extent.
The  Snake  of  the  first  quotation,  combined  with  the  word
"  cadence,"  seems  to  suggest  "  Caduceus."  The  Caduceus,  or
herald's  staff,  was  originally  an  olive  stick,  round  which  were
twined  festoons  of  wool. Later  the  festoons  became  serpents,

1  A.  C.  Benson,  The  Phoenix.  The  marks  of  omission  between  the  two  lines
quoted  are  in  the  original  script.

2 Oh,  Bay  of  Dublin!  how  my  heart  you're  troublin',
Your  beauty  haunts  me  like  a  fever  dream.

Lady  Dufferin,  The  Bay  of  Dublin.

3  Murder  most  foul,  as  in  the  best  it  is,
But  this  most  foul,  strange  and  unnatural.

Hamlet,  Act  r.  Sc.  5.

4  Leave  your  home  behind,  lad,
And  reach  your  friends  your  hand.

A.  E.  Housman,  A  Shropshire  Lad  (in,  The  Recruit).
5  Shelley,  To  a  Skylark.


264


Alice  Johnson.


[part


as  is  frequently  found  in  representations  of  the  Caduceus  in
Greek  art.

The  Dog  Mercury  (Mercurialis  perennis)  is  a  very  common
plant  having  small  green  flowers,  which  blooms  in  April  and
May.  Its  foliage  is  some  of  the  earliest  spring  green.  The
mention  of  the  Caduceus  shows  that  the  script  is  alluding  not
only  to  the  flower,  but  also  to  the  god  Mercury.

Compare  with  this  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  April  20th,  1908,
as  follows  :

Minos  and  Rhadamanthus  and  a  third

[In  Greek :  Hermes,  leader  of  souls] 1  the  symbol  of  his  office
[here  follow  two  drawings  of  the  Caduceus,  or  herald's
staff,  the  symbol  of  Hermes  or  Mercury]  and  the  souls
follow

A  holly  leave  or  something  like  that  green  and  prickly  a

holly  wreath
Troy  Laodamia  saw  a  vision  too

This  script  of  Miss  Verrall's  is  connected  with  some  utterances
in  the  waking  stage  of  a  Piper  sitting  of  March  23rd,  1908
(see  the  cross-correspondence  "  Troy  and  Joy,"  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  182-185),  when  Mercury
was  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Piper  as  one  of  the  items  of  the  cross-
correspondence.

(12)  Exile,

The  next  topic  seems  to  be  another  re-emergence  of  a  cross-
correspondence  between  Mrs.  Piper  and  Miss  Verrall,  the  one
entitled  "  Exile  and  Moore "  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  (op.  cit.
pp.  186-189);  and  here  again  the  original  cross-correspondence
is  reproduced  only  partially.  It  began  with  Mrs.  Piper,  who,
on  March  23rd,  1908,  wrote  "Exile,"  which  "came  out  with
Moore,"  or  "  connected  with  the  word  Moore."

Miss  Verrall's  scripts  on  this  topic  are,  it  will  be  remembered,
as  follows  :

(April  27th,  1908.)

The  shamrock  for  Ireland  and  an  English  rose
An  open  book — Dominus  illuminatio  mea  2

1  Ep/XTJJ  \pVXOTTOfXTTO%.

2  The  motto  of  Oxford  University.  An  open  book  is  part  of  the  Oxford
arms.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  265


A  golden  harp  the  harp  that  once  through  Tara's  halls 1
The  lute  with  a  single  string Watts'  picture

(May  16th,  1908.)

By  the  waters  of  Babylon- the  song  of  exile  in  a  strange
land

singing  in  a  tongue  unknown  but  the  music  is  sweet  and

music  is  a  universal  language
Garay  mekon no  it  is  useless the  harp  upon  the  willows

write  that  too the  harp  that  once  through  Tara's  halls

A seven-stringed  lute  the  lute  of  Orpheus  Eurydice

clam  at  3

Here  Miss  Verrall  quotes  twice  a  line  from  a  poem  of
Moore's,  referring  to  an  Irish  harp,  and  also  refers  to  exile
and  the  harp  of  the  exiled  Jews  in  Babylon.  Watts'
picture  mentioned  in  her  first  script  is  probably  the  picture
of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  painted  in  1869  and  now  hanging
in  the  Watts  gallery  at  Compton,  in  which  Orpheus  holds
a  lute  with  all  the  strings  broken  but  one  ;  for  it  seems  clear
that  the  two  scripts  are  connected  together,  and  Orpheus
and  Eurydice  are  explicitly  mentioned  in  the  second  one.  In
the  waking  stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on  March  30,  and
again  on  March  31,  1908,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  had  been
mentioned  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  105-6)  and  Mr.
Piddington  in  his  discussion  of  these  sittings  shows  that  Orpheus
and  Eurydice  belong  to  a  group  of  Ovidian  references  connected
with  the  answers  given  by  MyersP  to  Mr.  Dorr's  question  about
Lethe  (op.  cit.,  pp.  115-120)  and  gives  reasons  for  thinking  that
MyerSp  also  had  in  mind  Watts'  picture  of  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  (op.  cit.,  pp.  130-132),  which  is  thus  described  in
F.  W.  H.  Myers's  "Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts'  Collected  Works":4

For  here  the  Thracian,  vainly  wise,
Close  on  the  light  his  love  has  led  ; —

Oh  hearken  !  her  melodious  cries
Fade  in  the  mutter  of  the  dead  : —

1  T.  Moore, "The  harp  that  once  through  Tara's  halls

The  soul  of  music  shed,

Now  hangs  as  mute  on  Tara's  walls

As  if  that  soul  were  fled."
'Psalms  137,  verses  1-4.

3  Trans.  Eurydice  cries  out. Cf.  Virgil,  Georg.  iv.  494.

4  Fragments  of  Prose,  and  Poetry,  p.  191.


266  • Alice  Johnson.  [part

"  Farewell' !  from  thy  embrace  I  pass,

Drawn  to  the  formless  dark  alone  :
I  stretch  my  hands, — too  weak,  alas  !

And  I  no  more,  no  more  thine  own."

The  poem  deliberately  recalls  the  famous  passage  in  the
Fourth  Georgic,  to  which  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  May  16,
1908,  also  alludes,  the  last  four  lines  of  this  verse  being  a
translation  of  Georg.  iv.  497-8.

The  same  topics  are  referred  to  later  in  the  Mac  scripts  and
in  Mrs.  Willett's  script,  given  below,  but  the  next  script  in
chronological  order  dealing  with  the  general  subject  of  "  Exile  "
is  Mrs.  Holland's  of  Feb.  10,  1909,  quoted  above.  This
contains  nothing  about  a  harp  or  lute,  but  consists  of  a
number  of  variations  on  the  theme  of  Exile,  chiefly  associated
with  Ireland  in  general  (and  so  perhaps  by  implication  with
the  harp,  as  the  emblem  of  Ireland),  though  not  with  Moore
in  particular,  viz.  :

(a)  "  St.  Bridget's  Day — St.  Bride — Our  Lady  of  the  Mantle
Green."

The  green  which  is  so  marked  a  characteristic  of  the  Dog
Mercury  mentioned  earlier  in  the  same  script  seems  to  lead
on  to  St.  Bridget.  Her  Day  is  February  1st.  She
founded  the  important  religious  house  at  Kildare,  of  which
she  became  Abbess,  and  which  attracted  scholars  from  all
parts  of  Ireland,  as  she  was  a  great  patroness  of  educa-
tion and  the  fine  arts.  She  died  in  523,  and  is  regarded
as  the  chief  woman  saint  of  Ireland,  being  often  spoken  of  in
association  with  the  Virgin.  She  is  called  St.  Bride  of  the
Mantle  and  the  Foster  Mother  of  Christ,1  from  the  legend  that
she  was  miraculously  transported  to  Bethlehem  on  the  night
that  Christ  was  born  ;  she  then  took  the  child  in  her  arms  and
covered  it  with  her  mantle  and  nursed  it  all  through  the  night.
In  the  Hebrides  she  is  regarded  as  "  the  aid-woman  of  mothers."

There  is  a  story  of  Fiona  Macleod's,2  which  begins  with  an

1  The  legends  and  folk-lore  connected  with  St.  Bride  and  referred  to  in  the
text  are  chiefly  taken  from  Carmina  Gadelica  :  Hymns  and  Incantations,  with
illustrative  notes  on  words,  rites  and  customs,  dying  and  obsolete  ;  orally  collected
in  the  Highlands  and  islands  of  Scotland,  and  translated  into  English.  By
Alexander  Carmichael  (Edinburgh,  1900).

2  "  St.  Bride  of  the  Isles  "  in  the  volume  Spiritual  Tales.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


267


account  of  the  banishment  of  St.  Bride's  father  from  Ireland
immediately  after  her  birth,  when  he  went  to  Iona,  taking  her
with  him,  so  that  she  was  an  exile  from  Ireland.  There  may
possibly  be  some  allusion  to  this  banishment  in  the  script,
though  Mrs.  Holland  tells  me  that  she  never  read  the  story,
and  I  have  failed  to  find  any  foundation,  either  historical  or
legendary,  for  its  opening.1  The  subjects  associated  with  St.
Bridget  in  the  script  seem  at  least  to  refer  to  Scotch  as  well  as
to  Irish  legends  of  her.  Thus  "  the  Snake  " ; — the  Serpent  was
supposed  in  Scotland 2  to  emerge  from  its  hollow  among  the
hills  on  St.  Bride's  Day,  and  a  propitiatory  hymn  was  sung  to  it :

"  To-day  is  the  Day  of  Bride,
The  serpent  will  come  from  its  hole ;
I  will  not  molest  the  serpent,
Nor  will  the  serpent  molest  me."

One  of  the  customs  of  St.  Bride's  Day  was  the  pounding  of  the
serpent  in  eftigy.

Innumerable  charms  to  guard  against  various  evils,  or  to  assist
all  sorts  of  domestic  arts  and  operations,  are  associated  with  the
name  of  "  the  golden-haired  Bride,"  and  it  was  perhaps  the  invoca-
tions of  St.  Bride  and  the  Virgin  in  connexion  with  the  important
functions  of  the  kindling  and  "  smooring  "  of  the  fire  that  led  on
the  automatist  to  write  next  of  the  Phoenix.  But  St.  Bridget  is
especially  associated  with  the  spring,  for  "  it  is  on  her  day  .  .  .
[that]  the  death  of  the  year  is  done  with  and  the  birthday  of  the
year  is  come," 3  and  this  makes  another  connexion  with  the
Phoenix,  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  Eesurrection.

The  name  Bridget  is  derived  from  Brighid  or  Brio-it,  the
Celtic  goddess  or  Muse  of  Song,  daughter  of  the  Dagda,  who,
like  Orpheus,  had  a  wonder-working  harp.4

1The  story  as  a  whole  is  founded  on  "The  Genealogy  of  Bride7'  in  Alexander
Carmichael's  Carmina  Gadelica  (Vol.  I.  p.  165).  I  fancy  that  "Fiona  Macleod  "
(the  literary  secondary  personality  of  William  Sharp)  invented  the  opening  part
in  consequence  of  his  great  affection  for  Iona  and  interest  in  St.  Bride,  so
that  he  liked  to  imagine  that  she,  as  well  as  St.  Columba,  had  actually  lived
there.

'-It  is  well  known  that  there  are  no  snakes  in  Ireland,  since  they  were  banished
thence  by  St.  Patrick,  who  was  born  about  half  a  century  earlier  than  St.  Bride.

3  Lady  Gregory,  A  Book  of  Saints  and  Wonders,  p.  12.

4  Cours  de  Literature  Celtique,  Vol.  I.  p.  56.


268


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(b)  "  The  Phoenix."  The  script  quotes  two  detached  lines
from  Mr.  A.  C.  Benson's  poem  of  this  title,  as  if  to  imply
that  the  whole  of  it  was  in  the  mind  of  the  scribe.  It  is  as
follows : 1

"  By  feathers  green,  across  Casbeen,

The  pilgrims  track  the  Phoenix  flown,
By  gems  he  strewed  in  waste  and  wood
And  jewelled  plumes  at  random  thrown.

"  Till  wandering  far,  by  moon  and  star,
They  stand  beside  the  fruitful  pyre,
Whence  breaking  bright  with  sanguine  light,
The  impulsive  bird  forgets  his  sire.

"  Those  ashes  shine  like  ruby  wine,
Like  bag  of  Tyrian  murex  spilt ;
The  claw,  the  jowl  of  the  flying  fowl
Are  with  the  glorious  anguish  gilt.

"  So  rare  the  light,  so  rich  the  sight,
Those  pilgrim  men,  on  profit  bent,
Drop  hands  and  eyes  and  merchandise,
And  are  with  gazing  most  content."

This  poem  seems  a  sort  of  conglomerate  of  the  older  oriental
myth  of  the  Phoenix  with  its  later  forms,  as  adopted  into  early
Christian  symbolism.  Ambrose,  e.g.,  used  the  Phoenix  as  a
symbol  of  the  Resurrection  and  there  is  a  famous  Anglo-Saxon
poem  on  the  subject,  probably  written  in  the  latter  half  of
the  eighth  century and  attributed  to Cynewulf.2 The  poem

1  In  answer  to  enquiries  about  this  poem,  Mr.  Benson  writes  to  me:  "I
dreamed  the  whole  poem  in  a  dream,  in  1894,  I  think,  and  wrote  it  down  in  the
middle  of  the  night  on  a  scrap  of  paper  by  my  bedside.  I  have  never  had  a
similar  experience,  and,  what  is  more  curious,  it  is  a  lyric  of  a  style  which  I
have  never  attempted  before  or  since.  ...  I  really  can  offer  no  explanation
either  of  the  idea  of  the  poem  or  its  interpretation.  It  came  to  me  so
(apparently)  without  any  definite  volition  of  my  own  that  I  don't  profess  to
understand  or  to  be  able  to  interpret  the  symbolism."

It  is  quoted  here  in  full,  by  the  kind  permission  of  the  author  and  of  the
publisher,  from  The  Poems  of  A.  G.  Benson  (London:  John  Lane,  The  Bodley
Head,  1909),  p.  263.

2  See  Stopford  Brooke's  History  of  Early  English  Literature,  in  which  a  trans-
lation of  a  great  part  of  the  poem  is  given.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  269

describes  the  Paradise  in  which  the  Phoenix  lives  alone, — a
Happy  Isle,  like  the  Elysian  Fields  of  Homer  or  the  Earthly
Paradise  of  Dante.  Once  in  every  thousand  years,  attended
by  troops  of  birds,  he  flies  far  to  the  Syrian  land,  where  in  a
desert  place  on  a  high  tree  he  makes  his  nest  for  death.
There  "  in  a  season  of  calm  weather,"  when  the  wind  is  still
and  the  clouds  are  cleared  away  and  every  storm  under  heaven  is
hushed,  he  builds  his  nest  and  sets  it  on  fire.  The  young
Phoenix,  who  rises  out  of  the  ashes,  gathers  together  the  relics
of  the  parent  body  and,  covering  them  with  herbs,  takes  them
in  his  claws  and  flies  back  with  them  to  his  native  land.
"  All  men  and  all  the  birds  flock  to  see  his  flight,  but  he
outstrips  their  sight  and  comes  alone  to  his  happy  isle,  where
once  more  he  dwells  in  the  grove,  delighting  in  the  welling
streams."

The  lifediistory  of  the  Phoenix,  then,  might  possibly  be
regarded  as  another  illustration  of  the  idea  of  Exile.

(c)  "  The  black  lyn,  etc."  Here  the  script  returns  definitely
to  Irish  associations :  the  name  "  Dublin "  or  "  Duibh-linn "
means  the  black  pool.  Next  comes  a  quotation  from  a  song
by  an  Irishwoman,  Lady  Dufferin,  whose  best  known  poem  is
'  The  Irish  Emigrant,"  and  afterwards  a  reference  to  the
Phoenix  Park  murders,  probably  suggested  by  the  previous
mention  of  the  Phoenix.  Then  come  two  further  quotations
referring  to  the  general  topic  of  exile  from  home.  "  Dulce
donum "  (sweet  gift)  is  of  course  a  misquotation  of  "  dulce
domum "  (sweet  home),  but  there  seems  a  double  meaning  in
it,  for  it  immediately  follows  the  words  "  in  terra  pax,"  and
the  peace  brought  down  to  earth  might  be  called  a  "  sweet
gift."

Exile —  Continued.

The  following  references  in  the  Mac  scripts  seem  specially
connected with Miss Verrall's scripts of April 27th  and
May  16th, 1908, quoted above,  which had not  been  seen
by  the  Mac  family  at  the  time  the  following  scripts were  }
obtained.


27o


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(June  27,  1909)

And  Tara's  harp  is  hung.

{August  24,  1909)

You  see  it  is  just  as  well  to  send  it  by  driblets.1  Easier
for  you  to  see  contact  with  Helenns  (sic). The  mind  is
mased  (sic)  by  the  mass  of  material.  .  .  .
He  only  grasped  a  shadow
Eurydice  I  mean — you  forget — poor  wretch.

Both  these  scripts  purported  to  come  from  the  Sidgwick
control,  who  is  the  one  associated  with  evidential  matter  in  the
Mac  scripts  of  1908  dealt  with  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  in.
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  264-318.

The  words  "  he  only  grasped  a  shadow "  are  a  translation
of  Virgil,  Georg.  iv.  501,  "  Presantem  nequiquam  umbras,"  so
that  in  this  Mac  script,  as  well  as  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of
May  16,  1908,  the  allusion  is  not  only  to  the  story  of
Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  but  also  to  Virgil's  version  of  that
story,  which  is  the  one  used  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in  his  poem
quoted  above.

Miss  Verrall's  script  returns  to  the  subject  on  Feb.  5,  1910,
in  the  following  phrases  :  2

When  the  sound  of  the  harp  is  mute

and  the  waters  of  Babylon

This  must  be  regarded  as  a  normal  reminiscence  of  the
cross-correspondence  on  "  Exile,"  which  was  known  to  Miss
Verrall  at  the  time ;  but  it  seems  to  be  supernormally  con-
nected with  the  emergence  of  the  same  topic  in  Mrs.  Willett's
script  five  days  later.

Mrs.  Willett,  on  Feb.  10,  1910,3  immediately  following  on  the

1  This  sentence  no  doubt  refers  to  Miss  Mac's  custom  of  sending  the  scripts
at  intervals  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  "  Helenn "  being  of  course  Miss  Verrall.

2  For  the  whole  of  this  script  and  a  discussion  of  it,  see  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper  above,  p.  212.

:;  For  the  whole  of  this  script,  see  ISir  Oliver  Lodge's  paper  above,  pp.  148-
150.


lxiti.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


271


passage  quoted  above  (p.  244-5)  under  the  Cross-correspondence
"  Proserpine  "  wrote  :

Swinburne. By  the  waters  of  Babylon  we  sat  down  and

wept  when  we  remembered  thee  oh  Zion  .  .  .
Homer  and  Horace  the  thought  allied  but  I  cannot  get  it
clear

Watts  Watts

you  are  getting  dim  Enough

As  explained  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above  (p.  209)  there
is  probably  a  double  reference  here, — to  the  title  of  Swin-
burne's poem,  Super  Flumina  Bdbylonis,  as  well  as  to  the
opening  words  of  Psalm  137.  Mrs.  Willett  had  seen  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  April  29,  1909  (quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper  above,  p.  186),  in  which  the  phrase  "By  the  waters  of
Babylon "  occurs,  but  she  did  not  know  that  it  had  at  any
time  formed  part  of  a  cross-correspondence,  or  that  there  had
been  a  cross-correspondence  on  the  topic  Exile.  Considering
how  much  evidential  matter  is  contained  in  this  whole  script
of  Mrs.  Willett's,  there  seems  strong  ground  for  supposing,  as
suggested  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (see  above,  p.  155),  that
"  Watts — Watts  "  belongs  to  the  same  general  topic  and  refers
to  the  picture  by  Watts,  which  was  presumably  alluded  to
by  Miss  Verrall  on  April  27,  1908  (see  above,  p.  265).

It  is  noteworthy  that  while  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
Nov.  25,  1908,  certain  cross-correspondences  that  had  emerged
separately  in  the  scripts  of  other  automatists, — viz.  "  Echo,"
"  Nightingale,"  and  "  Proserpine,"  were  all  associated  together ;
so  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  Feb.  10,  1910,  another  single
cross-correspondence,  hitherto  disconnected, — viz.  "  Exile,'" — is
added  to  this  group,  a  link  being  found  in  the  notion,
common  to  all,  of  the  contrast  between  memory  and  forget-
fulness.  This  idea  is  clenched  in  the  passage  from  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Feb.  16,  1910,  already  quoted:

I  shall  remember  while  the  light  lives  yet
And  in  the  darkness  I  shall  not  forget.


272


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(13)  Shelley  s  Oclc  "  To  a  Skylark."

At  the  end  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Feb.  10,  1909,  and
apparently  quite  disconnected  from  what  precedes  them,  occur
the  first  two  lines  of  this  poem  (see  above,  p.  263).  This  is
another  case  (cf.  the  cross-correspondence  "  Comus,"  No.  8  above,
p.  253)  where  a  quotation  suggested  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  be  given
through  "  one  of  the  other  Lights "  appeared  in  her  script.

It  was  referred  to  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  as  follows  :

(May  4th,  1908.)

G.  B.  D.  You  spoke  of  Shelley's  poem  the  Skylark  the  other  day  ; 1
perhaps  you  could  get  one  of  them  to  quote  for  you
some  lines  from  it.

We  will  impress  her  to  write  it.

(Waking-stage.)

Which  would  you  rather  be,  G.I  A  mermaid  at  the  bottom
of  the  sea  [i.e.  Sabrina,  see  cross-correspondence  "  Comus  "]
or  a  spirit  blithe  and  gay  and  free  [i.e.  Shelley's  Sky-
lark] 1  Answer  that  when  you  are  free.  No  hurry
about  it.

(May  8th,  1908.)

G.  B.  D.  We  agreed  the  other  day  upon  Shelley's  poem  the  Skylark
as  a  message.

(The  hand  makes  successive  upward-darting  movements  like
a  lark  ascending).

G.  B.  D.  And  you  were  going  to  try  and  make  one  of  the  other  Lights
write  some  lines  from  that.  And  if  you  can  do  that,  I
think  you  may  be  able  to  make  them  write  some  lines
from  Comus  too.  They  both  must  be  familiar  to  some
among  the  other  Lights.

( JVaking-stage. )

We  said  Ode,  and  we  said  Skylark,  and  we  wrote  them.
And  she  drew  a  bird.

Again  in  the  sitting  with  Miss  Pope  on  Dec.  9th,  1908,
quoted  above,  p.  233,  comes  the  phrase  "  The  lark  is  on  the  wing,"
which  seems  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  the  same  message.

1  I.e.  on  April  22nd,  1908;  see  cross-correspondence  "Cyclops  and  Hercules"
below,  p.  281.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


273


(14)  Charon  and  Styx.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  1st,  1909,  begins  as  follows:

Charonic. The  staircase  for  the  unheard  unseen  feet  of  the
returning.

The  word  "  returning "  is  clearly  used  here  in  the  sense  of
revenants  (ghosts).

In  her  script  of  April  11th,  1909,  occurs  the  following
passage :

The  present  occupant  of  my  old  rooms — News  of  him — No
— I  was  not  concerned  with  that  last  message — it  was
Myers — Not  here  the  other  side  of  the  herring  pond —
"Piper  sit  thee  down  and  write
In  a  book  that  all  may  read."1
The  Stygian  River —

In  the  letter  accompanying  this,  Mrs.  Holland  told  me  that
she  regarded  "The  Stygian  River"  as  a  quotation  from  E.  A.  Poe.
It  occurs  in  the  first  lines  of  his  poem  Lenore :

"  Ah,  broken  is  the  golden  bowl !
the  spirit  flown  forever  !
Let  the  bell  toll  !  a  saintly  soul
floats  on  the  Stygian  River."

Mr.  Piddington,  seeing  these  scripts  shortly  afterwards,  wrote
to  me  of  the  first :

This  is  an  undoubted  reference  to  the  i<Xljxa^  ^apuveios,  i.e.
Charon's  (or  Charonean)  staircase,  "a  staircase  in  the  [Greek]
theatre,  leading  up  to  the  stage  as  if  from  the  world  below,  by
which  adiosts  entered."2

Charon's  staircase  is  referred  to,  I  am  told,  in  Donaldson's
Theatre  of  the  Greeks  and  Haigh's  Attic  Theatre.

I  wrote  on  April  24th,  1909,  to  ask  Mrs.  Holland  what,
if  anything,  was  suggested  to  her  mind  by  the  passage  quoted
above  from  her  script  of  April  1st,  and  she  replied  on  April
27th,  1909:  "I  cannot  see  that  Charon,  the  ferryman  of  the

1  W.  Blake,  Introduction  to  "Songs  of  Innocence."
-  Liddell  and  Scott's  Greek  Dictionary.

S


274


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Styx,  has  any  earthly — or  unearthly — connection  with  a  stair-
case." Later  enquiries  elicited  that  she  had  not  either  read
or  seen  Donaldson's  Theatre  of  the  Greeks  or  Haigh's  Attic
Theatre,  and  she  adds :  "  I  have  no  knowledge  of  the  Greek
Theatre."

It  is  to  be  noted  that  these  enquiries  were  not  made  until
after  the  second  script — that  of  April  11th — had  been  written.
The  latter  obviously  purports  to  be  inspired  by  Dr.  Hodgson
(though  his  name  is  not  mentioned),  and  refers  to  some
message  alleged  to  have  been  given  in  America  at  a  sitting
with  Mrs.  Piper,  who  is  not  infrequently  alluded  to  in  this
punning  manner  in  the  Holland  script.  "  The  present  occu-
pant of  my  old  rooms "  may  perhaps  be  taken  to  mean  Mr.
Dorr,  who,  though  not  occupying  Dr.  Hodgson's  rooms  in  a
literal  sense,  was  taking  the  place  he  had  so  long  held  in
regard  to  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings.

The  message  is  stated  to  be  "  The  Stygian  River,"  whereas
"  Styx  "  had  been  claimed  (see  below)  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
as  a  message  that  had  been  given  to  Mrs.  Holland.

The  following  are  the  passages  in  which  "  Charon "  and
"  Styx "  were  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Piper :

(March  16,  1908.) G.  B.  D.  Who  was  Charon  ?

I  remember  Charon  perfectly  well
G.  B.  D.  What  did  he  do  ?

I  remember  father,  if  I  understand  the  name
G.  B.  D.  No,  you  have  not  got  it  yet

Oh,  I  am  thinking  of  Aeneas's  father  1

G.  B.  D.  I  would  like  to  have  you  take  off  with  you  the  word
Charon  to  work  over.  Charon  was  associated  with  a
river ;  try  and  recall  it  ...  .

Yes,  I  will  think  it  all  out  for  you ;  give  me  time

1  For  the  context  of  this  extract,  see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.  p.  72.  On  March  10th  Mr.  Dorr  had  asked  Myersp  what  was  the
name  of  Aeneas's  father.  Mrs.  Verrall  explains  that  it  was  appropriate  that
the  mention  of  Charon  should  recall  the  father  of  Aeneas,  for  it  was  on  his
visit  to  his  father  in  Hades  that  Aeneas  used  the  services  of  Charon.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  275

(March  17,  1908.)  What  was  that  word  you  asked  me  about,
beginning  with  C  1

G.  B.  D.  It  is  Charon

Spell  it

G.  B.  D.  Shall  I  spell  it  in  Greek  ?  (Hand  nods  assent.  G.  B.  D.  spells
it  accordingly  in  Greek  letters.  Hand  dashes  down  before
the  word  has  been  quite  spelt  through  and  draws  vehe-
mently a  series  of  parallel  lines)

G.  B.  D.  What  does  that  mean  ?

Sticks  .  .  .

STICKS

G.  B.  D.  [after  an  attempt  to  get  the  English  letters  of  Charon  written
as  he  gives  the  Greek  ones :]  What  has  Charon  to  do
with  Styx  ?

(Rough  drawing  of  boat  is  here  made)  Boat

G.  B.  D.  Splendid.

More

G.  B.  D.  Tell  me  more  about  Charon  and  what  he  had  to  do  with
the  Styx.

Ferry.  FERRY

(March  23,  190S.)  (The  hand  draws  a  series  of  short  straight  parallel
lines)

G.  B.  D.  Did  you  try  to  give  1  anything  besides  these  ?
Ferry.

G.  B.  D.  Did  you  write  Ferry  1

I  did  certainly. Time  may  come,  time  may  go,  but  I  go
on  for  ever.  Ferry

1  This  question  refers  to  the  messages  attempted  to  be  transmitted  to  other
automatists.  Mr.  Dorr  means  :  Did  you  try  to  make  one  of  the  other  auto-
matists  do  anything  besides  drawing  a  series  of  lines  ?


276


Alice  Johnson.


[part


G.  B.  D.  Then  you  wrote  "ferry"  at  the  end  of  these  verses'?

Then  I  signed Ferry. Myers  and  I  drew  several  lines
(Two  more  straight  parallel  lines  are  here  drawn)

{March  24,  1908.) G.  B.  D.  You  drew  a  picture  of  the  Styx  by  short
straight  lines. Whom  did  you  give  this  to  1

Helen. Also  Mrs.  H.  [i.e.  Mrs.  Holland]

(March  30,  190S.) G.  B.  D.  [referring  to  what  messages  have  got
through  :] Styx  1

Yes,  three  (hand  draws  three  parallel  lines)

G.  B.  D.  Angels,  written  with  the  word  procession  1

Yes —  She  did  not  understand  Sticks.

On  April  14th  it  is  stated  that  Styx  has  now  been  given
to  "the  other  Lights"  and  is  done  with.  On  April  21st,  on
Mr.  Dorr  reading  out  this  statement,  the  word  <:  Styx  "  is  spelt
correctly  for  the  first  time,  it  having  been  previously  spelt
"  Sticks."

It  will  be  seen  that  a  claim  is  made  that  "  Styx "  has  been
transmitted  to  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland.  Charon  and
Styx  occurred  a  year  later,  as  shown  above,  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script,  and  an  echo  of  the  same  subject  is  perhaps  to  be  found
in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Sep.  5,  1908,  quoted  below,  p.  282,
which  contains  the  words :

Go  not  to  Lethe  and  the  river  of  wailing  too Upon  the
shore  they  stood  and  stretched  their  arms.

The  "  river  of  wailing "  is  Cocytus,  a  river  in  Hades  very
near  the  Styx,  and  it  is  the  unburied  dead  who  stand  there,
stretching  out  their  arms  in  longing  for  Charon  to  come  and
carry  them  across.  This  same  script  contains,  it  will  be  seen,
another  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Piper
on  "  Hercules."

(15) Medusa's  Head.

In  the  middle  of  a  long  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's  on  April  11,
1909,  part  of  which  is  quoted  above,  comes  the  phrase:

Cassiopea  swings  low  in  the  midnight  sky — -A  shallow  Spring
sky — not  the  velvety  tropic  depths  of  dark  that  we  have
seen —


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script,


277


It  is  true  that  the  constellation  of  Cassiopeia  is  at  its
lowest  "  in  the  midnight  sky "  from  the  middle  of  February
to  the  middle  of  April.  Cassiopeia,  as  the  mother  of  Andromeda,
is  intimately  connected  with  her  rescuer  Perseus.  Their  story  is
described  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  May  19,  1909,  as  follows:

Pershore — pericarp — Persia — Perseus — The  Fateful  Head — -
Medusa — The  mirrored  shield  and  the  winged  sandals  of
swiftness —

Take  this  for  sign — One  eye  only  among  the  three — passed
from  one  to  another  that  each  might  see  by  turns —

She  is  still  within  sound  of  the  sea  but  not  by  such  rocks
as  Andromeda  knew  while  she  waited  for  the  coils  of  the
sea  monster  to  lift  curling  among  the  slow  ripples  at  the
margin  of  the  sand —

Mrs.  Piper's  references  to  Medusa's  Head  were  as  follows :
March  31st,  190S.

(Waking-stage.)

(A  word  is  whispered  indistinctly  which  G.  B.  D.  first  wrote
down  as  Fefeus  and  then  as  Theseus,  the  first  part  of
the  word  still  remaining  thick  and  indistinct)

Took  the  head  through  the  air  and  then  the  blood  dropped
down  and  Pallas  made  it —

I  said  P theus  ! I  don't  know  what  he's  talking  about!

During  the  next  sitting,  on  April  6th,  Mr.  Dorr  enquired
•£  whose  head  was  it  and  who  took  it  ?  But  don't  try  to  answer
this  now,  leave  it  to  tell  me  in  the  subliminal."  In  the  waking
stage  of  the  same  day  Mrs.  Piper  said :

War,  Minerva

Took  the  head  and  out  of  the  head  the  blood  dropped
down  to  the  earth  and  out  of  the  blood  sprang  the
winged  horse.

{April  7  th,  1908.)

[On  the  above  sentence  being  read  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  the  trance
personality,  the  hand  wrote  :]

Horse. Peg —  —


278  Alice  Johnson.  [part

G.  B.  D.  Are  you  not  confused  here  over  two  memories  1

Perhaps  I  am,  read  and  clear  me.

G.  B.  D.  I  won't  read  now,  but  you  understand  what  Pegasus  stood
for,  don't  you?

I  understand  pretty  well.

G.  B.  D.  You  remember  his  flight  into  the  sky  1  You  have  just  spoken
of  it  [Pegasus  and  his  flight  into  the  sky  had  been
mentioned  earlier  in  the  sitting]

Oh  yes,  I  said  it  to  her  but  perhaps  she  did  not  understand.
Medusa's  head —

G.  B.  D.  Now  you  will  remember  this  tale  and  that  it  is  a  different
one  from  that  of  Pegasus —

Minerva  comes  in  here,  I  faintly  recall  it 1

The  details  already  mentioned  were  repeated  in  the  waking
stage  of  this  day,  and  at  the  next  sitting,  on  April  13th,  when
Mr.  Dorr  mentioned  "  Medusa,"  the  hand  wrote  :

P cut  off  the  head

Later  in  the  sitting  Mr.  Dorr  suggested  that  "  Medusa's
head "  would  be  a  good  message  to  take  to  the  other  Lights,
adding :  "  Describe  it  if  you  can  as  you  have  to  me,  carried
through  the  air  and  dropping  blood."  In  the  waking  stage  of
this  day  the  name  Perseus  was  given  clearly  for  the  first
time.

Medusa's  head  was  mentioned  again  on  April  14th,  21st
and  22nd,  and  on  April  27th  Mr.  Dorr  remarked:  "It  may
help  you  to  give  it  if  you  recollect  the  effect  the  head  had
on  those  who  beheld  it."  At  which  the  hand  made  a  gesture
expressive  of  great  horror  and  wrote,  "  Bad,  'wicked."

On  May  4th  "Snakes"  was  associated  by  the  trance-personality
with  "  Medusa's  head,"  and  on  May  8th  Mr.  Dorr  talked  further
about  it  as  a  message.

1  When  Perseus  cut  off  Medusa's  head,  the  blood  sinking  into  the  earth  pro-
duced the  winged  horse  Pegasus.  Minerva  caught  and  tamed  him  and  presented
him  to  the  Muses.


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


279


On  May  12th  the  trance-personality  wrote  that  it  had  been
received  by  Mrs.  Holland,  who  had  written  "  Blood — Horse —
Head,  etc.,"  and  on  May  13th,  1908,  in  connexion  with  Medusa's
head,  it  wrote  :

Doesn't  Pallas  come  in  here  1 Her  gift —  head.

It  has  been  seen  that  Mrs.  Holland,  like  Mrs.  Piper,  refers  to
the  head  of  Medusa,  Perseus,  and  the  gifts  of  Pallas  (namely,
"  the  mirrored  shield  and  the  winged  sandals  of  swiftness,"  by
which  Perseus  was  helped  to  find  Medusa  and  to  cut  off  her
head).  But  she  makes  no  reference  to  Pegasus,  and  she  brings
in  other  details  of  the  Perseus  myth, — such  as  the  three  Grey
Sisters  and  the  rescue  of  Andromeda  from  the  sea  monster,- —
which  are  not  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Piper.

(16) Cyclops  and  Hercules.

Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  14th,  1909,  contains  the
following  :

The  Cyclops

"  In  valour  is  not  Love  an  Hercules
Still  climbing  trees  in  the  Hesperides "  1
Kennst  du  das  Land  1 2

The  Isle  of  the  Hesperides,  as  a  sort  of  earthly  Paradise,
seems  here  to  lead  on  to  the  country  described  in  Mignon's
song :

"  Kennst  du  das  Land,  wo  die  Citronen  bluhn,
Im  dunkeln  Laub  die  Gold-Orangen  gluhn,
Ein  sanfter  Wind  vom  blauen  Himmel  weht,
Die  Myrte  still  und  hoch  der  Lorbeer  steht,

"Kennst  du  den  Berg  und  seinen  Wolkensteg  1
Das  Maulthier  sucht  im  Nebel  seinen  Weg,
In  Hohlen  wohnt  der  Drachen  alte  Brut ;
Es  stiirzt  der  Fels  und  iiber  ihn  die  Fluth."

1  Love's  Labour  Lost,  Act  iv.  Sc.  3.

3  Goethe,  "Mignon's  Song  "  in  Wilhelm  Meister's  Lehrjahre.


280


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Here,  as  in  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides,  we  have  citrons
and  oranges  (the  golden  apples  of  the  Hesperides  being  sup-
posed to  be  the  oranges  of  Spain) ;  and  also  a  dragon.

On  May  12th,  1908,  MyersP  had  claimed  that  "Cyclops"
had  been  given  to  Mrs.  Holland,  and  the  topics  Cyclops  and
Hercules, — or,  at  least,  subjects  associated  with  Hercules, — had
been  put  together  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  as  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  extracts  : 1

(April  '22,  190S.)  [Hand  makes  drawing  and  writes  "Centaur,"  then]
(Hand  reaches  out  and  touches  G-.  B.  D.  on  both  eyes  and
then  upon  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  where  it  presess
heavily)

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  mean  to  describe  a  creature  with  a  single  eye  in  the
centre  of  his  forehead  1  [i.e.  a  Cyclops]

Yes.  Sophocles

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  mean  that  Sophocles  wrote  of  such  a  one  1

(Hand  assents.)

[Mr.  Dorr  now  goes  over  a  number  of  the  topics  that  had
been  chosen  for  transmission  to  the  other  automatists.
the  last  mentioned  being  "Atlas." The  hand  then  writes:]

Mrs.  Verrall  has  written  a  few  verses  from  Browning  which
I,  Myers,  gave  her  recently  from  Euripides.2  Where  she
has  selected  the  verses,  the  words  appeal  to  me  and
describe  one  of  our  messages  here.

[Mr.  Dorr  notes  that  he  did  not  know  that  Browning  had
translated  any  of  Euripides'  plays,  but  found  that  the

1  Part  of  the  record  of  this  sitting  has  already  been  quoted  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.  (pp.  27  and  191-2)  in  connexion  with  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides
— the  subject  of  a  cross-correspondence  between  Mrs.  Piper's  and  Miss  Verrall's
scripts.  I  give  part  of  it  again  here  to  show  how  this  topic  became  associated
with  the  Cyclops  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.

2  In  commenting  on  this  passage  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  25-28,  Mr.
Piddington  points  out  that  it  seems  to  refer  to  a  cross-correspondence  between
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  of  which  neither  Mrs.  Piper  nor  Mr.  Dorr
could  at  that  time  have  had  any  normal  knowledge.  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  on
March  4th  and  25th,  1907,  had  contained  references  to  the  Herades  Furens  of
Euripides,  and  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  16th,  1907,  had  referred  to
Browning's  translation  of  the  same  play.  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  212-
220,  not  published  till  some  time  after  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


281


book  he  had  brought  with  him  to  the  sitting — A.  W.
Pollard's  Odes  from  the  Greek  Dramatists — contained  extracts
both  from  Browning's  translation  of  the  Hercules  Furens
and  from  Shelley's  translation  of  the  Cycloids.  He  pro-
ceeded to  read  aloud  some  passages  from  the  former,
one  of  which  was  :

"  And  next  to  the  melodious  maids  he  came,
Inside  the  Hesperian  court-yard  :  hand  must  aim
At  plucking  gold  fruit  from  the  appled  leaves,
Now  he  had  killed  the  dragon,  backed  like  flame,
Who  guards  the  unapproachable ;  he  weaves
Himself  all  round,  one  spire  about  the  same."

On  hearing  these  lines,  the  trance-personality  wrote :]

I  am  listening  carefully — Apple — correct.  She  quoted  it  in
answer  to  apple.

[From  the  context,  "  she  "  appears  to  mean  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mr.
Dorr  then  read  some  verses  from  Shelley's  Cyclops,  explain-
ing that  it  was  a  translation  from  the  Greek,  and  the
trance-personality,  on  being  asked  whose  verses  they  were,
answered  :]

Did  he  write  Ode'to  the  Sky  Lark?

[Mr.  Dorr  assented,  and  said  that  he  wished  to  give  "Cyclops  'r
as  a  message  to  be  taken  to  the  other  automatists.  In
the  waking-stage  of  this  day  came  the  words  :]

Cyclops — head,  snakes.
Atlas,  globe  on  his  head  and  shoulders
Cyclops  had  one  eye  in  his  forehead  ....
Cyclops  was — Centaur,  no,  that's  mixed  ! Half  head,  half
bodjr,  tell  him  that. Say,  snakes  from  the  head.

Here  it  is  evident  that  the  idea  of  the  Cyclops  is  confused
with  Centaurs  and  other  topics, — such  as  the  garden  of  the
Hesperides  and  Atlas, — associated  with  Hercules,  and  it  certainly
seems  remarkable  that  this  combination  of  unconnected  ideas
should  occur  both  in  Mrs.  Holland's  and  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script.
On  April  27th  and  May  8th,  1908,  the  Cyclops  is  again  referred
to  as  a  message  to  be  taken,  and  on  May  12th  MyersP  claimed,,
as  stated  above,  that  it  had  been  given  to  Mrs.  Holland.


282


Alice  Johnson.


[PART


Meanwhile,  on  April  22,  1908  (see  above),  he  had  maintained
that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  quoted  Browning's  lines  about  the
Hesperides.  This  is  perhaps  one  of  the  instances  in  which,  as
Mrs.  Verrall  has  observed,  the  trance  personalities  seem  not  to
distinguish  between  her  and  her  daughter's  scripts.  Miss  Verrall,
on  September  5th,  1908,  produced  the  following  script,  part  of
which  refers  to  the  same  subjects  as  Browning's  lines :

The  garden  of  the  sun  the  golden  apples  that  the  dragon
guarded  Who  stole  the  apples  froward  mortal  Hesperides
three  nymphs  no  no  go  not  to  Lethe 1  and  the  river  of
wailing  too  Upon  the  shore  they  stood  and  stretched
their  arms.

The  Principle  of  Selection  in  the  Production
of  Scripts.

"  To  choose  is  to  create." — 0.  W.  Holmes.

In  discussing  the  cross-correspondence  of  Sevens  in  my  second
report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script,'2  I  gave  a  detailed  analysis  of
the  various  elements  in  the  case,  showing  the  use  made  in
it  both  of  fragments  of  the  automatists'  normal  knowledge  and
— apparently — of  telepathy  between  the  different  living  persons
concerned ;  and  pointing  out  certain  features  which,  in  my
view,  indicated  that  the  whole  scheme  might  be  attributed  to
"  some  other  intelligence,  which,  surveying  and  selecting  from
these  diverse  elements, — namely,  the  ideas  normally  arising  in
the  minds  of  the  automatists  and  of  Mr.  Piddington,  and  the
play  of  telepathy  between  them, — diverted  them  all  to  its  own
purposes  and  so  shaped  the  event,"  The  present  section  is  an
attempt  to  develop  further  the  theory  there  suggested  of  the
part  which  T  conceive  to  be  played  in  the  construction  of
cross-correspondences  by  this  principle  of  Selection.

In  the  great  majority  of  the  scripts  of  all  the  automatists
here  dealt  with,  including  those  between  which  cross-correspon-

1  Keats,  Ode  on  Melancholy.  Lethe,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  been
suggested  as  a  subject  for  cross-correspondence  in  this  same  sitting  of  April
22,  1908,  with  Mrs.  Piper. (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  191.)

-  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  254-263.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script,


283


dences  are  to  be  found,  the  actual  contents  of  each  script
relate  to  facts,  topics,  or  ideas  known  and  more  or  less  familiar
to  the  writer  who  produces  it.  In  this  the  scripts  resemble
ordinary  cases  of  experimental  thought-transference,  where  the
idea  that  the  agent  wishes  to  transfer  relates  to  something
familiar  to  the  percipient,  and  telepathy  is  manifested  by  the
percipient's  selection,  out  of  a  number  of  more  or  less  familiar
ideas,  of  the  particular  one  that  had  been  thought  of  by
the  agent.  Similarly,  when  a  cross-correspondence  occurs
between  scripts,  there  seems  to  be  a  selection,  out  of  one
automatist's  ideas,  of  something  corresponding  to  what  another
has  written.

For  the  automatic  writing  does  not,  of  course,  reproduce  all
the  ideas  in  the  mind  of  the  automatist.  It  resembles  rather
those  dreams  which  represent  one  or  two  trivial  ideas  chosen
apparently  at  random  out  of  the  dreamer's  stock  of  thoughts.
We  can  often  trace  the  source  of  a  dream  to  something  recently
seen  or  heard,  but  we  can  seldom  or  never  give  a  satisfactory
explanation  of  why  that  particular  thing,  rather  than  a  number
of  other  possible  things,  should  have  recurred  in  the  dream.
It  can  sometimes  be  attributed  to  a  train  of  thought,  leading
on  from  one  idea  to  another ;  or  sometimes  to  a  slight  external
stimulus  mingling  in  the  train  and  shaping  or  distorting  it.
But  why  the  train  of  thought  should  go  in  one  direction
rather  than  another,  why  one  external  stimulus  should  affect
it  perceptibly  and  another  not,  remains  mysterious.

The  same  normal,  though  obscure,  psychological  processes
with  which  we  are  all  familiar  in  dream  and  reverie  are  also
at  work  in  automatic  writing.  Here,  too,  we  can  often  trace
the  ideas  and  the  phrases  to  something  that  has  recently  passed
through  the  automatist's  mind  or  to  a  discoverable  train  of
thought.  And  it  is  probable  that,  the  more  we  knew  of  the
circumstances,  the  more  of  these  links  of  normal  causation
would  be  discovered,  though  even  then  the  cpiestion  of  what
determined  the  emergence  of  one  idea  rather  than  another
would  be  difficult  to  solve.

But  while  many  of  the  individual  scripts  considered  by
themselves  seem  explicable  by  normal  causes,  some  other
factor  has  to  be  assumed  for  the  coincidences  between  them,
granting,  as  I  think  it  must  be  granted,  that  these  are  too


284


Alice  Johnson.


[part


numerous  to  be  put  clown  to  chance.  As  another  person  may
enter  a  room  and  break  in  on  the  reverie  of  a  solitary  thinker,
and  by  speech  or  action  may  turn  or  influence  the  course  of  his
thoughts ;  so  this  other  factor  of  telepathy  (whether  from  the
incarnate  or  the  discarnate),  which  seems  to  act  frequently,
though  intermittently,  and  with  varying  degrees  of  force,  tends
to  influence  the  scripts  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  them  into
harmony  with  one  another.

The  telepathic  influence  in  these  cases  produces,  as  is  well
known,  harmony,  and  not  uniformity.  One  script  does  not
give  the  exact  words  of  another,  but  expresses  the  same  idea,
or  sometimes  another  aspect  of  the  same  idea,  in  different
words.  The  absence  of  any  exact  resemblance  between  the
two  may  be  clue  to  one  of  two  causes :  either  (a)  telepathy
has  partially  failed,  so  that  the  result  is  only  partially  success-
ful, or  (5)  there  is  a  deliberate  intention  on  the  part  of  the
telepathic  influence  which  acts  on  the  scripts  to  make  them
express  the  same  idea  differently.  Of  course  we  cannot
assume  that  there  is  any  such  deliberate  intention  unless  we
have  some  fairly  definite  evidence  of  it.  If  two  scripts  express
ideas  which  are  clearly  parts  of  one  whole, — for  instance,  if  one
gives  "  Julius "  and  the  other  "  Caesar," — the  whole  idea  is
better — i.e.  more  precisely — expressed  than  if  both  gave
"  Julius,"  for  Julius  would  apply  to  many  more  people  than
Julius  Caesar.

On  the  other  hand,  if  one  script  gave  "  Brutus "  and  the
other  "  Caesar,"  we  should  infer  that  there  might  have  been
some  telepathy  between  the  two  scripts,  but  that,  if  so,  it  was
only  partially  successful ;  the  second  script,  we  should  suppose,
ought  to  have  given  "  Brutus,"  but  only  got  somewhere  near  it
by  giving  "  Caesar."

In  ordinary  experiments  in  thought-transference  between
two  living  persons,  cases  like  this  often  occur,  when  the  per-
cipient does  not  reproduce  exactly  the  thought  of  the  agent,
but  gives  something  more  or  less  approximating  to  it,  as  if
the  attempt  had  fallen  short.  But  it  seldom,  if  ever,  happens
that  the  percipient  gives  something  which  definitely  supple-
ments or  adds  to  the  agent's  thought  in  such  a  way  that  the
two  between  them  give  a  more  complete  representation  of  one
idea  than  is  to  be  found  in  either  alone,  whereas  this  supple-


lxiil] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


285


mentary  character  is  often  found  in  the  scripts  relating  to  the
more  complicated  cross-correspondences.

To  illustrate  the  difference,  compare  two  cases  given  above,
"Birds  and  turkeys"  (p.  250),  and  "  Comus "  (p.  253).  In
the  first,  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs  Piper  do  not
supplement  one  another ;  they  express  two  separate  and
distinct,  though  similar,  things, — not  two  parts  of  one  idea.  It
seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  difference  between  them
was  not  deliberately  caused,  but  that  it  happened  uninten-
tionally. The  case  thus  resembles  a  partially  successful  experi-
ment in  thought-transference.

In  the  second  case,  "  Comus,"  Mrs.  Holland  quotes  a  phrase
from  the  address  to  Sabrina,  while  Miss  Verrall  gives  a  para-
phrase of  another  part  of  it,  and  these  two  scripts,  with  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  utterances,  supplement  one  another,  giving  a
more  complete  representation  of  this  part  of  the  poem  than
any  one  of  them  alone.  Here,  then,  the  differences  between
the  scripts  afford  some  evidence  of  design  ;  the  supplementary
element  in  them  seems  to  be  what  Mr.  Balfour  calls  "  pur-
posive." 1

A  more  definitely  complementary  relation  between  two  scripts
is  seen  in  the  case  of  "  Echo "  and  i:  Nightingale,"  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Nov.  25,  1908,  and  Mrs.  Piper's  of
Dec.  9,  1908  (see  pp.  229  and  233),  where  Mrs.  Holland  gives
"  Echo  "  explicitly  and  "  Nightingale  "  implicitly,  and  Mrs.  Piper
reverses  the  process.

A  somewhat  similar  kind  of  complementariness  is  seen  in
the  distribution  of  separate  parts  of  a  cross-correspondence
between  different  automatists.  Thus  in  the  "  Door — Key  "  case
(see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  pp.  193-204),  Miss  Verrall's
script  mentions  "  Door  "  and  Mrs.  Holland's  gives  a  drawing  of
a  key,  whereas  both  words  had  occurred  in  the  Mac  script.
Again,  in  the  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  case  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.
pp.  264-318),  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  mentions  "Lilies,"  and  Miss
Verrall's  alludes  indirectly  to  "  Sesame,"  shortly  after  the  com-
plete phrase  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  had  appeared  in  the  Mac
script.

A  farther  step,  and  one  affording  stronger  evidence  for
design on the part of  an intelligence external to  all  the

1  See  Proceedings,  Part  LXII.  p.  45.


286


Alice  Johnson.


[part


autornatists,  is  found  in  cases  of  the  converse  type,  where  one
automatist's  script  ingeniously  links  together  two  entirely  dis-
similar topics  that  have  previously  appeared  separately  in  the
scripts  of  two  other  autornatists, — a  plan  that  had  been  suggested
in  Mr.  Piddington's  Latin  Message,  and  that  seems  to  have
been  successfully  carried  out  in  the  case  of  "  Prometheus  "  and
"Time  and  Eternity"  (see  p.  256),  where  these  topics,  which
had  occurred  respectively  in  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  and  Miss
Verrall,  were  combined  by  Mrs.  Holland  in  a  single  quotation.

An  amplification  of  this  process  is  seen  where  cross-corre-
spondences that  had  seemed  already  complete  reappear,  in  the
form  of  factors  in  a  larger  scheme,  in  a  later  script  by  another
automatist.  Thus,  "  Proserpine,"  which  had  already  formed  the
subject  of  a  cross-correspondence  between  Mrs.  Piper,  the
Macs,  and  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  recurs  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  Nov.  25,  1908,  woven  in  with  some  other  cross-
correspondences — e.g.  "  Echo  "  and  "  Nightingale  "  ;  while  Mrs.
Willett's  script  of  Feb.  10,  1910,  repeats  these  topics,  com-
bining with  them  the  hitherto  separate  cross-correspondence  of
"  Exile,"  and  finding  a  fresh  link  of  association  between  them
all  in  the  notion  of  the  contrast  between  memory  and  forget-
fulness  (see  p.  271).

A  similar  blending  of  several  simple  cross-correspondences
into  one  complicated  whole  was  shown  by  Mr.  Piddington  to
occur  in  the  "  Light  in  West "  case  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  241-280).

It  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  that  cross-correspondences
of  so  elaborate  a  character  as  these  differ  in  a  marked  way
from  ordinary  cases  of  experimental  thought-transference,
which  seem  to  involve  nothing  more  than  a  momentary  effect
produced  by  one  mind  on  another,  the  effects  produced  at
different  moments  having  no  coherence  or  connexion  with  one
another.

The  cross-correspondences  point  rather  to  an  intelligence
which  is  continually  thinking,  continually  making  plans,  con-
tinually developing  them  and  adapting  them  to  circumstances.
We  have  to  consider  how  far  this  intelligence  can  be  identified
with  the  subliminal  selves  of  the  autornatists.

The  script  of  each  automatist  taken  by  itself  seems,  indeed,
to  indicate  great  activity  and  intelligence  on  the  part  of  her


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


287


subliminal  self.  The  latter  can,  to  begin  with,  draw  on  a  wider
range  of  subjects  than  is  accessible  to  the  supraliminal,  for
the  subliminal  memory  is  more  extensive  than  the  supraliminal.
Not  only  is  there  a  great  variety  in  the  topics  introduced ,
but  great  ingenuity  is  shown  in  expressing  them  in  different
ways :  e.g.  by  a  number  of  different  quotations  appropriate  to
the  same  subject ;  by  altering  the  quotation  to  make  it  suit  ;
by  various  devices  for  emphasising  different  words  in  it  which
are  not  emphasised  in  the  original ;  by  the  choice  of  quotations
which  refer  to  a  topic  indirectly  through  their  context,  and
so  on.

So  far  as  all  this  goes,  there  is  nothing  provably  beyond
normal  subliminal  powers,  and  it  would  be  a  natural  result
of  the  long  continuance  of  any  automatic  activity  that  the
subliminal  self  should  become  more  and  more  developed.  It
must  also  be  largely  influenced  by  the  knowledge  which  the
automatists  have  in  course  of  time  acquired  normally,  both
of  their  own  and  of  other  scripts.  For  they  cannot  be  kept
permanently  in  ignorance  of  each  other's  scripts,  or  of  the
discussions  on  them,  since,  sooner  or  later,  they  see  the  articles
published  about  them.  jSTor  can  they  help  speculating  on  the
subject  themselves,  and  being  influenced  by  the  speculations  of
others.

In  any  case,  the  scripts  of  each  automatist  undoubtedly  suggest
an  active  intelligence,  with  idiosyncracies  of  its  own,  and  work-
ing on  its  own  account, — something  as  different  as  possible
from  a  mere  channel  for  the  utterances  of  another  mind,  as
different  as  possible  from  the  ordinary  conception  of  "  spirit
control,"  which  implies  that  the  mind  of  the  automatist  is  in
abeyance,  while  he  mechanically  reproduces  phrases,  as  it  were
dictated  to  him  from  outside.

It  has  generally  been  assumed  that  the  best  evidence  for
communication  from  the  spirits  of  survivors  could  be  obtained
under  such  conditions,  where  everything  came  as  directly  as
possible  from  the  spirit,  while  the  mind  of  the  automatist  was
as  much  as  possible  put  out  of  action.  The  idea  is,  of  course,
a  very  plausible  one  on  the  face  of  it.

It  has  further  been  assumed  that  this  condition  is  most
likely  to  coincide  with  a  state  of  deep  trance,  and  that  the
deeper  the  trance,  the  more  complete  is  the  "  possession "  by


-288


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  spirit,  and  consequently  the  better  are  the  results  obtained.
For  this  idea,  there  is,  it  seems  to  me,  little  or  no  evidence.
We  do  not  find  in  practice  that  what  comes  through  an  auto-
matist  in  trance  is  constantly  better  than  what  comes  through
an  automatic  writer,  whose  mental  condition  shows  little
or  no  signs  of  dissociation.

Further,  a  study  and  comparison  of  a  great  number  of  scripts
seem  to  show  that  activity  on  the  part  of  the  subliminal  self
is  by  no  means  necessarily  an  obstacle  to  the  influence  of  an
outside  mind.  For  the  great  development  of  subliminal  action
which  is,  I  think,  to  be  found  in  the  recent  scripts  has  coin-
cided with  a  great  development  in  the  supernormal  connexions
between  them,  which  have  become  both  more  numerous  and
more  complex.  This  fact  points  either  to  a  freer  play  of
telepathy  between  the  automatists,  or  to  a  stronger  telepathic
influence  from  outside,  acting  on  all  of  them,  and  tending  to
produce  connexions  between  them.  Or  it  may  be,  as  I  am
inclined  to  think,  that  there  is  both  more  telepathy  between
them,  and  more  telepathy  from  a  source  external  to  all  of
them.

This  hypothesis  is,  in  effect,  one  that  occurred  long  ago  to
Mr.  Myers,  who  had,  I  think,  a  quite  extraordinary  faculty  for
foreseeing  the  trend  of  events  in  psychical  research.  In  refer-
ence to  a  case  where  the  vision  of  a  death  was  seen, — not  at  the
time  it  occurred,  but  at  the  time  when  the  news  of  it  reached
a  third  person, — he  observed  :

I  conjecture  that  a  current  of  influence  may  be  started  by  a
deceased  person,  which,  however,  only  becomes  strong  enough  to  be
perceptible  to  its  object  when  reinforced  by  some  vivid  current  of
emotion  arising  in  living  minds.  I  do  not  say  that  this  is  yet
provable  ;  yet  the  hint  may  be  of  value  when  the  far-reaching  inter-
dependencies  of  telepathy  between  the  two  worlds  come  to  be  better
understood.1

What  is  here  foreshadowed  is  a  simple  kind  of  co-operation
between  two  minds — the  discarnate  and  the  incarnate — as  if
two  men  were  pulling  at  one  rope  in  the  same  direction,  so
that  the  total  pull  would  depend  simply  on  the  sum  of  their
efforts. But  if  co-operation  between  the  two  minds be  once

1  Human  Personality,  vol.  ii.  p.  55.


LXlil.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  289

started,  it  might  develop  into  a  much  more  complicated  rela-
tionship, and  it  seems  clear  that  when  Mr.  Myers  was  speaking
of  "the  far-reaching  interdependencies  of  telepathy  between  the
two  worlds,"  he  was  thinking  of  the  possibilities  of  its  develop-
ment. For  his  whole  thought  was  coloured  by  his  strong  belief
in  the  possibility  of  quite  new  things  happening— things  that
had  never  happened  in  the  world  before,  but  that  were  the
normal  growth  and  outcome  of  previous  happenings.

Now  the  normal  result  of  physical  evolution,  as  we  know
it,  is  that  as  we  rise  in  the  scale  from  the  inanimate  to  the
animate,  from  the  plant  to  the  animal,  from  the  animal  to
man,  we  find  at  each  step  a  more  definite  and  complete  indi-
viduality,— a  tree  is  more  of  an  individual  than  a  rock,  and  a
dog  more  than  a  tree, — and  at  the  same  time,  with  each  up-
ward step,  we  find  more  and  more  points  of  contact — more
and  more  complicated  relationships — between  the  individual  and
the  world  outside  him.  As  he  becomes  more  active  and  vital
and  distinct  from  the  world,  the  more  closely  is  he  also  bound
up  with  it.

These  conceptions  are  familiar  enough,  so  far  as  concerns
the  physical  universe.  But  if  we  conceive  the  same  process
carried  on  into  the  relationship  between  the  incarnate  and  the
discarnate,  it  might  produce  a  result  something  like  what  we
see  in  the  scripts.  Suppose  that  the  discarnate  mind  has  a
definite  plan  and  purpose  of  getting  some  rather  complicated
idea  expressed,  and  that  it  is  able  by  telepathy  to  influence
the  incarnate  minds  of  the  automatists.  Their  minds  mean-
while are  actively  working  and  producing ;  but  what  actually
emerges  in  the  script  is  to  a  great  extent  determined  by  the
discarnate  influence,  which  we  may  suppose  is  constantly  select-
ing from  their  thoughts  and  turning  their  ideas  into  channels
that  fit  its  own  purposes.  Where  one  phrase  that  has  just  been
written  in  the  script  may  suggest  to  the  automatist's  mind  a
good  many  others  naturally  associated  with  it,  the  discarnate
influence  selects  out  of  these  something  appropriate  to  the
whole  cross-correspondence  and  gets  that  one  expressed  in
preference  to  the  others.  The  mental  activity  of  the  automatist
thus  gives  a  wider  choice  to  the  discarnate  influence,  and  enables
it  to  express  itself  in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  affording  scope
for  subtle  and  complicated  connexions  between  the  scripts.

T


2!J0


Alice  Johnson.


[part


There  would  here  be  a  collaboration  between  the  two  minds
somewhat  similar  to  that  between  the  minds  of  a  skilled  hypnotist
and  his  subject.  The  hypnotist  does  not  exercise  compulsion  on
his  subject  or  directly  produce  any  mechanical  effect  on  him  ;  but
their  two  minds  are  working  together  towards  the  same  end, — both
desiring  a  certain  result,  e.g.  of  healing,  to  be  produced.  It  is
impossible,  with  our  present  knowledge,  to  distinguish  the  parts
they  play,  but  often  the  co-operation  of  the  two  minds  and  wills
brings  about  a  result  which,  apparently,  neither  could  produce
alone.

There  have  been  some  remarkable  cases  where  the  scripts
afford  evidence  of  knowledge  beyond  the  automatist's  normal
scope  (apart  from  supernormal  connexions  with  other  scripts),  as,
apparently,  in  Mrs.  Holland's  quotation  from  Ovid's  Fasti
given  above,  (p.  246),  and  in  the  references  to  "Lethe"  by
Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.  Willett.  The  importance  and  interest  of
these  cases  is  not  to  be  undervalued.  But  I  think  it  possible
that  those  in  which  the  automatist  collaborates,  in  the  way
suggested,  with  the  spirit  belong  actually  to  a  more  advanced
type,  and  that  what  we  are  witnessing  here  is  a  new  step  in
evolution,  capable  of  great  developments  in  the  future.

There  is,  at  least,  one  point  on  which  all  serious  students
of  the  subject  seem  to  be  agreed,  viz.  that  these  scripts  do
represent  a  new  development ;  if  there  is  nothing  in  them  be-
yond telepathy  between  the  automatists,  it  is  at  all  events
telepathy  of  a  more  advanced  and  potent  kind  than  has  ever
been  met  with  before, — something  that  both  stimulates  and
restrains,  that  both  gives  and  withholds ;  something  that  can
keep  a  definite  and  intelligent  plan  in  mind  over  a  long
period  of  time  and  bring  it  to  fruition  at  last, — a  fruition
that  none  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  matter, — neither  the
automatists  nor  those  to  whom  their  scripts  are  entrusted, — are
able  to  foresee.

All  this,  however,  might  be  attributed  to  the  subliminal
self  of  one  of  the  automatists',  and  when  I  first  brought  for-
ward the  theory  of  cross-correspondences,1  I  remarked  that  if
they  were  not  the  work  of  a  spirit,  which  was  very  far  from
being  proved,  the  most  likely  hypothesis  was  that  they  were

1  See  Proceeding,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  369-391.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


291


concocted  by  the  subliminal  self  of  Mrs.  Verrall.  This
hypothesis  has  been  adopted  since  by  our  leading  critics, — by
Mr.  Podmore  ;  implicitly,  as  I  understand,  by  Professor  Pigou ;
and  later  by  Mr,  Bayfield  in  the  discussion  included  in  his
review  of  Mr.  Podmore's  last  book  in  Proceedings,  Part  LXII.

The  reason  why  the  plan  of  cross-correspondences  might
with  some  show  of  plausibility  be  attributed  to  Mrs.  Verrall
was  that  hints  of  it  appeared  in  her  script  (though  they  passed
undetected  by  herself)  some  time  before  there  were  any  dis-
coverable allusions  to  the  subject  in  the  scripts  of  other  auto-
matists.  This  did  not,  of  course,  prove  that  the  plan  originated
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  mind,  because  it  might  have  been  transmitted
to  her  telepathically  by  its  originator ;  but  it  did  tend  to  show
that  if  any  one  of  the  automatists  had  originated  it,  she  was
probably  the  one.  Further,  many  of  the  cross-correspondences
started  in  her  script,  so  that  it  might  be  supposed  in  these
cases  that  she  was  the  telepathic  agent  from  whom  the  others
derived  them.  There  are,  however,  other  important  cases  in
which  the  topic  appeared  first  in  the  scripts  of  other  auto-
matists, and  there  are  even  some  in  which  Mrs.  Arerrall's
script  is  not  concerned  at  all  ;  so  that  we  have  now  reached
a  point  where,  on  the  supposition  that  the  whole  of  the
cross-correspondences  are  worked  exclusively  by  the  automatists,
we  should  have  to  assume  that  several  of  them,  besides  Mrs.
Verrall,  are  capable  of  the  task.  Or  else  we  should  have  to
assume  a  sort  of  telepathic  committee  meeting .  of  the  sub-
liminal selves  of  the  automatists,  at  which  they  scheme  together
and  settle  on  their  different  parts.

We  know  that  the  subliminal  self  has  considerable  powers
of  romancing,  of  dramatic  personation,  of  expressing  ideas  in  a
form  altogether  foreign  to  the  supraliminal  self;  we  often  find
an  apparently  deliberate  obscurity  of  utterance,  a  veiling  of
meaning,  as  if  the  subliminal  wished  to  protect  itself  from
supraliminal  interference  by  concealing  its  real  aim.  There
seems,  in  fact,  no  limit  to  the  degree  of  invention  or  of
ingenuity  that  it  can  display,  in  so  far  as  the  -performances  of
the  cmtomatist  owning  it  are  concerned.  There  is  therefore
nothing  surprising  in  finding  a  romance,  or  an  epic,  or  a
realistic  personation,  running  through  a  long  series  of  the  scripts
of  a  single  automatist.


292


Alice  Johnson.


[part


It  has  never  been  maintained,  then,  that  the  whole  scheme
of  cross-correspondences,  and  many  individual  cases  among  them,
were  beyond  the  inventive  capacity  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal
self.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  execution,  of  the  plan ;  in  the
appropriate  distribution  of  the  parts  among  diiferent  auto-
matists,  who  ex  hypothesi  are  not  in  communication  with  each
other  except  telepathically  ;  for  to  carry  out  such  a  plan  would
seem,  as  already  said,  to  involve  much  greater  powers  of
telepathy  than  the  experimental  evidence  so  far  obtained
would  warrant  us  in  assuming.

Nevertheless  the  question  whether  any  mind  beyond  those
of  the  automatists  is  concerned  remains  open ;  spirit  agency  is
not  yet  proved  conclusively.  And  before  this  is  conclusively
proved  it  may  seem  premature  to  discuss  by  what  particular
processes  it  might  work,  so  that  some  justification  is  required
for  the  attempt  to  formulate  so  dubious  a  speculation  as  the
one  here  brought  forward.  In  the  end,  of  course,  our  case
must  rest  on  concrete  evidence.  We  have  appealed  to  science
and  to  science  we  must  go  to  have  our  claims  settled.  But
my  present  argument  is  addressed  in  part  to  some  of  the
a  priori  objections  to  the  hypothesis  of  spirit  agency.  People
start  with  certain  theories  of  its  nature  and  find  that  the  facts
do  not  correspond.  They  are  apt  to  think  that  the  scripts
are  either  produced  by  the  influence,  say,  of  Mr.  Myers,  or
they  are  not.  They  find  in  them  passages  which  are  rather
silly,  rather  incorrect,  rather  illiterate,  and  in  every  way  unlike
Mr.  Myers.  They  then  say  that  Mr.  Myers,  as  we  knew  him,
cannot  have  produced  those  passages,  and  that  therefore  the
scripts  cannot  be  inspired  by  him.  Even  if  they  admit  that  some
part  may  be  inspired  and  some  not,  they  generally  conceive
of  the  failure  as  being  due  to  some  mechanical  difficulty  of
control,  the  automatist  being  on  this  view  a  more  or  less
complicated  and  delicate  instrument,  on  which  the  spirit  is  a
more  or  less  efficient  and  skilled  performer.

This  conception  does  not,  to  my  mind,  fit  the  facts.  The
scripts  appear  to  me  rather  to  represent  the  combined  mental
activity  of  two  or  possibly  more  personalities.  These  com-
binations we  call  for  convenience  MyersP,  Myersv,  MyersH,  etc.
If  we  attempt  roughly  to  allot  functions  to  the  members  of


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


293


the  combination,  we  may  say  that  the  automatist  provides,  as
it  were,  ready-made  material  out  of  which  the  spirit  weaves
his  design,  as  the  finished  products  of  one  trade  may  provide
the  raw  material  for  another.  But  we  must  never  allow  our-
selves to  suppose  that  any  material  metaphor  can  afford  us
more  than  a  hint  of  certain  aspects  only  of  the  phenomenon.
In  particular,  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  we  are  dealing
not  with  physical  but  with  mental  facts,  to  which  the  laws  of
arithmetic  do  not  apply.  For  instance,  if  a  given  passage
in  a  script  is  the  product  of  two  minds,  it  does  not  follow
that  the  more  of  one  mind  is  in  it,  the  less  there  is  of  the
other.

Finally,  I  would  suggest,  as  a  working  hypothesis,  that  the
best  evidence  is  to  be  looked  for  not  from  a  suppression  of  the
automatist's  personality,  but  rather  from  its  free  development
in  collaboration  with  a  personality  less  limited  than  itself,
because  already  freed  from  space  and  matter.


Appendix  A.

The  "  Diamond  Island  "  Incident.

In  my  first  report  on  the  automatic  writing  of  Mrs.  Holland
I  quoted  a  piece  of  script  produced  by  her  in  India  on
January  17th,  1904,1  the  concluding  part  of  which  was  as
follows  :

"We  few,  we  happy  few,  we  band  of  brothers" — 2
Dear  old  chap  you  have  done  so  much  in  the  past  three
years — I  am  cognisant  of  a  great  deal  of  it  but  with
strange  gaps  in  my  knowledge — If  I  could  only  talk  with
you — If  I  could  only  help  you  with  some  advice — I  tried
more  than  once  did  it  ever  come — There's  so  much  to  be
learnt  from  the  Diamond  Island  experiment —
well  meaning  but  very  ignorant — bound  to  be  tinged  by
the  channels  through  which  they  are  conveyed — Help  me
— give  me  the  help  if  not  yet  of  your  belief  of  your
sympathy — Take  the  message  to  you  all  I  cannot  yet  fully
and  [ending  in  illegible  scribble].

1See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.  p.  235.  -Henry  V.,  Act  iv.  Scene  iii.


294


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  stated  in  a  foot-note  to  this  script  that  I  was  unable  to
conjecture  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  "  Diamond  Island  experi-
ment ; "  and  Mrs.  Holland,  who  was  accustomed  to  tell  me  of
any  facts  within  her  knowledge  that  could  throw  light  on  the
script,  had  made  no  comment  on  it.  Nor  did  it  convey
anything,  as  far  as  I  could  learn,  to  those  who  read  the
Proceedings.

On  Nov.  24th,  1908,  Mrs.  Holland,  being  in  England,  came
to  see  me  and  told  me  among  other  things  that  she  thought
this  phrase  must  be  an  allusion  to  wireless  telegraphy,  since
Diamond  Island  (which  she  believed  to  be  near  Diamond
Harbour  at  the  mouth  of  the  Hoogli  river)  had  a  wireless
station  on  it.  Some  time  later  Mrs.  Verrall,  hearing  of  this
interpretation,  pointed  out  to  me  that  it  followed  that  the
whole  of  this  part  of  the  script  was  intended  to  be  addressed
to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  I  then  perceived  that  most  of  the
message  evidently  was  intended  for  him.  But  on  communi-
cating with  him  on  the  subject,  though  he  recognised  the
appropriateness  of  the  general  tone  and  substance  of  the  message,
the  phrase  "  Diamond  Island "  awoke  no  chord  in  his  memory.
He  told  me,  however,  that  the  Lodge-Muirhead  system  was  at
work  between  Burma  and  the  Andaman  Islands,  and  he  wrote
to  his  friend  and  partner  in  this  matter,  Dr.  Alexander  Muir-
head,  F.B.S.,  on  Feb.  24,  1910,  to  ask:

Do  you  remember  whether  any  wireless  experiments  were  conducted
across  the  mouth  of  the  Hoogli  or  anywhere  in  that  neighbourhood  ?
If  so,  can  you  name  the  place  1  ...  I  should  rather  like  to  know
whether  they  tested  the  Andaman  installation  first  at  the  Hoogli —
or  wherever  it  was.  They  must  have  tried  it  somewhere  ...  Is
there  a  wireless  station  on  the  Hoogli,  do  you  know?

Dr.  Muirhead  replied  on  Feb.  26,  1910:

I  believe  Mr.  Simpson,  the  man  who  put  up  the  Andaman  Wire-
less, has  been  conducting  some  experiments  between  a  pilot  boat
.  .  .  and  Calcutta.  .  .  .  The  Andamans  circuit  is  between  Diamond
Island,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Irrawaddy  in  Burma,  and  Port  Blair  .  .  .

Thus  it  appears  that  Mrs.  Holland's  conjecture  of  a  con-
nexion between  Diamond Island  and  wireless  telegraphy  was


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


295


correct,  but  that  she  had  located  it  wrongly,  viz.,  at  the  mouth
of  the  Hoogli,  whereas  it  is  really  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the
Irrawaddy,  in  Burma.  From  enquiries  made  with  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  help,  I  find  that  towards  the  end  of  August,  1904,
operations  were  begun  for  linking  up  the  Settlement  of  Port
Blair  in  the  Andaman  Islands  with  the  general  telegraph  system
of  India  by  establishing  wireless  telegraph  stations  at  Port  Blair
and  at  Diamond  Island,  which  was  already  connected  by  cable
to  the  mainland.  The  distance  to  be  spanned  was  305*2  miles.
The  system  chosen  was  the  Lodge-Muirhead,  with  which  pre-
liminary experiments  had  already  been  carried  on  for  three
months  in  the  early  part  of  1904;  the  150  feet  masts  were
made  in  the  Calcutta  workshops,  the  scientific  apparatus  being
supplied  by  the  Lodge-Muirhead  Co.  in  England.  The  work,
which  was  executed  by  the  Indian  Government  Telegraph
Department,  went  on  for  several  months,  the  circuit  being  in
complete  working  order  first  on  Feb.  10th,  1905.

This  installation  was  an  event  of  some  importance  in  the
history  of  wireless  telegraphy,  for  it  was  one  of  the  first
installations  in  the  British  Empire  connecting  different  land
stations ;  the  main  developments  of  wireless  telegraphy  having
previously  been  for  the  purpose  of  connecting  shore  stations
with  ships.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  of  course  knew  of  the  Burma-Andamans
installation,  but  had  entirely  forgotten  that  the  Burma  end  of
the  installation  is  on  Diamond  Island 1  (which  is  a  very  small
island,  not  marked  on  most  atlases).

When  I  questioned  Mrs.  Holland  about  her  knowledge  of
these  matters,  she  told  me  that  she  had  known  at  or  about
that  time  that  the  Lodge-Muirhead  system  of  wireless  telegraphy
was  being  experimented  with  in  India,  but  she  could  not  say
whether  it  was  before  or  after  the  date  of  the  script,  which
had  conveyed  no  meaning  to  her  when  it  was  written.

In  reply  to  a  question  what  normal  means  of  acquiring
information  about  experiments  on  Diamond  Island  existed  in
India  in  January,  1904,  Mr.  M.  G.  Simpson,  of  the  Govern-
ment Telegraph  Department,  who  had  superintended  the  setting

1  From  a  letter  on  the  subject  which  he  has  recently  found,  it  appears  that
the  geographical  fact  did  actually  come  under  his  eye,  but  awakened  no  conscious
attention,  in  "March,  1903.


296


Alice  Johnson.


[part


up  of  the  installation,  wrote  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  from  Calcutta
on  April  18th,  1910  :

...  In  1902  I  was  at  home,  hut  some  of  my  officers  did  some
wireless  experiments  in  July  at  Diamond  Harbour.  They  were  not
very  successful,  but  a  paragraph  or  two  appeared  in  the  local  press
about  them.  I  came  out  here  in  December  1902,  and  in  1903,
January,  I  put  up  a  little  temporary  station  at  Sangor  Island  at  the
mouth  of  the  river  and  another  on  a  small  Government  steamer,  the
"Guide,"  and  we  worked  out  to  the  Sandheads  where  the  pilot
vessel  is  stationed  40  miles  from  Sangor.  This  was  reported  in  due
course  and  found  its  Avay  into  the  papers.  During  the  whole  of
1903  there  was  a  weekly  financial  paper,  Capital,  in  Calcutta  con-
stantly jibing  at  Government  for  their  dilatoriness  with  regard  to
wireless  and  urging  them  to  come  to  terms  with  the  Marconi  Co.
In  Jan.,  '04,  apparatus  began  to  arrive  from  Elmers  End  [Messrs.
Muirhead  &  Co.'s  works  in  Kent]  and  in  February  we  started  out
from  Calcutta  to  try  and  link  up  Diamond  Island  with  the  Andamans.
I  can't  be  quite  certain  now,  but  I  think  it  is  more  than  probable
information  of  this  intention  appeared  in  the  local  press.  At  first
we  established  communication  over  a  short  distance,  Elephant  Point
to  Amherst,  and  it  was  not  till  April,  1904,  any  actual  experimenting
was  done  on  Diamond  Island.

The  script  referring  to  the  Diamond  Island  experiment  was
written,  as  stated  above,  in  January,  1904  ;  but  from
Mr.  Simpson's  letter  it  appears  not  impossible  that  Mrs.  Holland
may  already  have  seen  references  to  the  subject  in  one  of  the
Indian  papers.  She  herself  knows  nothing  in  detail  of  wireless
telegraphy,  and  she  could  not  remember  that  any  of  the  friends
she  was  accustomed  to  see  at  that  time  had  spoken  to  her  of  the
subject  or  took  any  interest  in  it.  It  happened,  however,  that
she  had  heard  a  lecture  by  Marconi  in  1901  or  1902,  and  had
rather  regretted  that  an  Italian  was  (as  she  erroneously  sup-
posed) ahead  of  Englishmen  in  the  subject.  Consequently  she
was  pleased  when  she  heard  of  the  Lodge-Muirhead  system  being
used. She  wrote  to  me  on  March  19  th,  1910:

I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  be  certain,  after  the  lapse  of  so  many
years,  if  I  heard  or  read  any  mention  of  the  Lodge-Muirhead  system
before  writing  the  script  of  Jan.  17th,  1904.

My  impression  is  that  I  must  have  seen  some  newspaper  reference


lxjii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


207


to  it,  since  I  ani  as  sure  as  I  can  be,  when  dealing  with  anything
so  far  away,  that  I  did  not  hear  any  conversation  about  it.

I  left  India  in  April,  1904,  and  returned  there  more  than  two
years  later.

My  ignorance  of  the  matter  is  shown  by  my  belief — until  just
lately — that  Diamond  Island  was  near  Diamond  Harbour  in  Bengal,
instead  of  in  Lower  Burma,  where  it  is  really  situated.

It  is  clear  then  that  Mrs.  Holland's  reference  to  the  "  Diamond
Island  experiment "  cannot  be  regarded  as  strictly  evidential,
since  she  may  have  had  normal  knowledge  of  it.

The  script  nevertheless  is  remarkably  appropriate  in  several
respects  as  a  message  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  It  was  written  on
Jan.  1 7th,  1904,  the  third  anniversary  of  Mr.  Myers's  death,
which  was  also  the  end  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  three  years'
Presidency  of  the  S.P.B.  I  take  the  phrase — "  you  have  done
so  much  in  the  past  three  years  "  to  refer  to  this.  The  tone
of  affectionate  intimacy  running  through  the  whole  script  is
also  especially  appropriate.

Mrs.  Holland  knew  the  date  of  Mr.  Myers's  death  and  that
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had  been  President  of  the  S.P.E.  in  1903  ;
but  when  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  in  January,  1904,  that
he  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Myers's  and  that  he  had  been
President  for  three  years,  she  replied :

Feb.  20th,  1910.

...  I  did  not  realise  then  that  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was  an  intimate
friend  of  Mr.  Myers's.  There  were  references  to  him,  of  course,  in
[Human  Personality],  especially  in  reference  to  early  experiments  with
Mrs.  Piper ;  but  I  did  not  know  there  was  a  friendship  of  long
standing,  and  I  certainly  did  not  know  in  Jan.,  1904,  that  he  became
President  of  the  S.P.E.  after  Mr.  Myers's  death.  I  am  surprised  to
hear  that  he  held  it  for  three  years, — I  thought  it  had  been  for
two  ...  It  never  struck  me  before  that  this  message  was  to  Sir
Oliver  Lodge.  .  .  .

It  is  further  significant  that,  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  tells  me,
Mr.  Myers  had  been  keenly  interested  in  his  work  in  wireless
telegraphy  and  it  was  while  with  Mr.  Myers  and  stimulated
by  him  that  he  devised  the  fundamental  plan  for  "  tuning  "  which
in  some  form  or  another  is  necessarily  used  in  all  systems  of
wireless  telegraphy  and  was  first  patented  by  him  in  1897.


298


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  term  "  syntouy  "  was  invented  for  him  by  Mr.  Myers  and  Dr.
A.  T.  Myers.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had,  as  is  well  known,  been  ex-
perimenting for  years  on  the  theoretical  side  of  the  subject,
and  it  was  partly,  or  even  largely,  his  discoveries  between  1888
and  1894  which,  in  the  energetic  hands  of  Mr.  Marconi,  in
1896  and  onwards,  led  to  the  development  of  wireless  telegraphy
for  practical  purposes.  Mr.  Myers  had  been  much  interested  in
this  development  and  anxious  that  the  results  of  his  friend's  work
should  not  be  unduly  exploited  by  others.

While  the  script  is  thus  thoroughly  characteristic  of  the
relation  between  Mr.  Myers  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  the  fact
that  it  is  connected  in  point  of  time  with  the  first  important
cross-correspondence  between  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall —
the  "  Selwyn  Text  Incident "  1 — seems  to  lend  weight  to  the
supposition  that  what  we  may  call  the  "  Diamond  Island  script "
may  have  been  at  least  partially  inspired  by  the  surviving
personality  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

I  may  add  that  the  patent  referred  to  above  for  "Improve-
ments in  Syntonised  Telegraphy  without  Line  Wires "  is  the
important  one  which,  by  Mr.  J  ustice  Parker's  judgment  delivered
in  the  Chancery  Division  of  the  High  Court  on  April  28th,
1911,  has  just  been  renewed  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  for  another
term  of  seven  years.

Appendix  B.

A  further  detail  in  the  "  Sevens "  Cross-correspondence.2

In  the  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research
for  March,  1911,  Professor  Hyslop  comments  at  length  on  a
number  of  points  in  this  case,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  discussion
gives  an  interesting  interpretation  of  certain  words  spoken  in
the  waking  stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on  May  8th,  1908.
After  an  apparent  attempt  to  translate  the  Latin- verses  of  the
Tavern  Club  motto,  in  which  the  only  word  audible  to  Mr.  Dorr
was  "  Habit,"  she  said

"  We  are  Seven
I  said  Clock  ! Tick,  tick,  tick  ! Stairs."  3


JSee  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.  pp.  219-239.
-See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  222-263.


sOp.  cit.  p.  223.


LXIII.]


Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


299


This  was  supposed  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  be  an  allusion  to  Long-
fellow's poem,  The  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs.  Prof.  Hyslop  has
now  ascertained  that  there  is  a  clock  on  the  staircase  of
the  Tavern  Club  leading  up  to  the  dining-room,  and  that  at
banquets,  when  there  are  no  guests  present,  it  is  the  habit  of
the  members  to  assemble  downstairs,  and  there  at  a  fixed
hour  to  sing  the  Latin  verses,  and  then  go  upstairs  to  the
dining-room.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  the  words,  "  Clock  !  tick,
tick,  tick !  Stairs."  might  appropriately  have  been  uttered
by  Hodgsonp  among  the  reminiscences  evoked  by  the  verses.
Whether  or  not  Mrs.  Piper  had  any  normal  knowledge  of  this
clock  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  say.


Appendix  C.

Some  further  Cross-correspondences  between  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance
and  the  Scripts  of  other  Automatists.

As  stated  above,  four  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  were  held  by
Mr.  Dorr  and  six  by  Miss  Pope,  during  the  period  Dec.  7,  1908,
to  March  1,  1909.  At  only  four  of  Miss  Pope's  sittings  were
attempts  made  to  send  "  messages  "  to  the  other  automatists,  and
some  of  these  were  merely  repetitions  of  "  messages  "  attempted
in  Mr.  Dorr's  previous  series.  Part  of  Miss  Pope's  record  of
Dec.  9,  1908,  and  an  extract  from  that  of  Dec.  21,  1908,  are
given  above,  pp.  233  and  254,  and  part  of  her  record  of
Jan.  13,  1909,  is  as  follows:

(MyerSp  communicating.)

LUX  UBE
Lux  UBE

[These  three  letters,  especially  the  E,  look  like  an  attempt  to
write  Greek  letters,  which  had  been  attempted  earlier  in
the  sitting]

Lux

[Soon  afterwards  came  another  attempt  to  write  Greek  words,

with  the  explanation:]
The  first  Greek  words  were  strength,  star,  to  give  light,  to

help  free  souls


300


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Helen  wrote  gathering  clouds,  clouds  are  gathering  in  the

west  and  she  also  wrote  Lux.
She  also  wrote  winding  stream  or  winding  sheet  and  I  am

not  sure  which. It  sounds  like  stream  and  I  go  on  for

ever

Then  another  thing  was  written.  Arrow,  light  and  swift  as
an  arrow.  The  bird  is  on  the  wing.1  Then  Mrs.  Verrall
wrote  as  did  Mrs.  Holland  also'  clouds  before  dawn.

Meadow  violets  blooming  and  Larkspur  Garden  Steep
banks  or  Bank.

Lux  Ube  is  perhaps  an  attempt  at  the  motto  TTbi  crux  ibi
lux  and  the  above  seems  to  reflect  in  a  fragmentary  way  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  Nov.  5th,  1908,  which  was  as  follows:

Mist  on  the  high  peaks  of  the  mountains  at  sunrise  when

the  clouds  in  the  valley  grow  rosy  in  the  growing  light.
Lucifero  radio  Phoebus  iam  diffugat  umbras  et  sub  luce  nova

nova  lucent  omnia.2
Green  fields  and  pastures  new3  that  was  the  idea a  new

day  and  a  new  undertaking  the  old  order  changeth4  but

still  the  harmony  remains  throughout,
a  butterfly  in  the  sunshine  and  pink  hollihocks  against  an

old  brick  wall

a  cottage  garden  old-fashioned  flowers  mingled  together  and
grass  green  paths  between  the  beds hie  et  ubique.5

On  Nov.  10,  1908,  Miss  Verrall's  script  contained  the  follow-
ing:

The  two  horns  of  the  moon  &  between  them  a  cord — thus
Diana's  shafts  speed  swiftly — the  arrow  by  day.

Mr.  Dorr's  four  sittings  were  mostly  occupied  with  attempts
to  carry  on  his  experiments  in  trying  to  revive  the  literary
memories  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  As  in  his  earlier  series,  the
results  obtained  appeared  at  the  time  to  be  incoherent,  rambling,
and  worthless,  but  have  turned  out  on  further  investigation  to

1Cf.  "The  lark  is  on  the  wing,"  written  at  Miss  Pope's  sitting  of  Dec.  9,  1908.
2  Trans. Now  Phoebus  with  light-bearing  ray  puts  to  flight  the  shadows  and
beneath  the  new  light  all  things  shine  anew.

:i Milton,  Lycklas. "Fields"  should  be  "woods."

4  Tennyson,  The  Passing  of  Arthur.  5  Here  and  everywhere.


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


301


be  of  considerable  interest.  The  most  important  parts  of  them
consist  of  connexions  with  later  scripts  of  Mrs.  Willett,
and  with  the  more  or  less  contemporary  scripts  of  Mrs.  and
Miss  Verrall,  as  described  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above
(pp.  176-90).  Mrs.  Verrall  deals  only  with  the  classical
allusions  ;  I  supplement  her  account  with  a  few  further  corre-
spondences, which  add  to  the  cumulative  evidence  for  connexion
between  these  Piper  sittings  and  Miss  Verrall's  scripts.

In  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  by  Mr.  Dorr  on  March  1,
1909,  certain  messages  were  said  to  have  been  oiven  to  Miss
Verrall,  as  follows  :

Tell  Piddington  chirades.  H.

G.  B.  D.  What  is  that  word  1

Charades.1

Helen Trailing Trail  Trellis.
G.  B.  D.  Is  that  word  "trailing;"?
Yes. Very  good.

Sea Season Polling. Roll  Waves.
I  got  these  through  Helen  V.

(G.  B.  D.  reads  from  F.  W.  H,  Myers's  paper  "In  Memory
of  Henry  Sidgwick"  the  verse  from  Tennyson's  "The
Voyage  "  beginning

"For  one  fair  Vision  ever  fled,"

when  the  hand  wrote  :)

Wait  for  this.  I  have  already  referred  to  this  particular  verse
with  Helen.

G.  B.  D.  Helen  who  ?
V.

'Mrs.  Verrall  informs  me  that  parts  of  a  charade  were,  as  she  believes,
distributed  between  her  and  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  between  Nov.  12  and  Dec.  21,
1907.  There  is  therefore  some  point  in  connecting  "charades"  with  H.  V.
script.


302


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(a)  Trailing.

The  following  are  extracts  from  Miss  Verrall's  scripts :

(Nov.  24,  1908.)

grapes purple a  vineyard  on  the  sunny  South a  sloping
hillside  with  trailing  vines.

(Feb.  10,  1909.)

night  in  her  sable  cloak.

I  saw  the  sable  gardents  (sic)  of  the  night  sweep  through  her
marble  halls.

This  is  a  misquotation  from  Longfellow's  "  Hymn  to  the
Night  " :

"I  heard  the  trailing  garments  of  the  Night
Sweep  through  her  marble  halls  !
I  saw  her  sable  skirts  all  fringed  with  light
From  the  celestial  walls  !  "

(March  IS,  1909.)

The  tangled  boughs  a  matted  screen
branches branches  held

When  Birnani  wood  shall  come  to  Dunsinane.1
a  moving  forest  ....

a  twisted  spiral a  pole  black  &  yellow  &  green  upon  it
twined  around  green  trailing  up  the  rod  ....

(b)  Sea,  Rolling  waves  and  "  The  Voyage."

The  following  extracts  from  Miss  Verrall's  script  refer  to
these  topics :

(Dec.  12,  190S.)

From  the  deep  the  wailing  of  the  waters  the  salt  spray  dashes

over  the  rocks thalassa  thalassa2
the  deeps  of  deliverance the  seaddng's  child the  white-

maned  steeds

Far back through creeks &  inlets making comes  silent
flooding  in  the  main.3

1  Macbeth,  Act  v.  8c.  3.  2  The  sea,  the  sea.

3 A.  H.  Clough,  "Say  not  the  struggle  nought  availeth."


lxiii.] Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.

(Dec.  15,  190S.)

Birds  on  the  sea  shore  the  sea  gull's  cry
[In  Greek :  Of  the  sounding  sea.]  1

[Jan.  22,  1909.)

On  the  face  of  the  waters — when  the  deeps  are  stirred.

{Feb.  1,  1909.)

a  ship a  ship  comes  sailing
but  never  a  ship  for  me  2

the  sound  of  great  waters  when  the  bed  of  ocean  rocks
we  know  the  merry  world  is  round
and  we  may  sail  for  evermore.3

(Feb.  3,  1909.)

Beneath  the  ,white  cliffs  by  the  tossing  sea.

1  iro\v<p\oaj3oio  BaKaaa-qs  (Homer).

2  Cf. "  Oh  what  comes  over  the  sea,

Shoals  and  quicksands  past  ;
And  what  conies  home  to  me,
Sailing  slow,  sailing  fast  ?

A  wind  comes  over  the  sea

With  a  moan  in  its  blast ;
But  nothing  comes  home  to  me

Sailing  slow,  sailing  fast."— C.  G.  Rossetti.

3  Tennyson,  The  Voyage,  last  two  lines.


304


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


IV.

NOTE  ON  THE  CBOSS-COBBESPONDENCE  "  CUP."

Being  a  suggestion  as  to  the  meaning  and  source  of  the  word
"Cup  "  employed  successfully  as  a  message  for  cross-correspondence
by  Mrs.  Pipers  trance-personalities  in  the  sittings  of  1907.

By  MRS.  A.  W.  VERRALL.

In  the  majority  of  the  "  Concordant  Automatisms "  resulting
from  the  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  during  her  visit  to
England  in  1906-7,  described  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXII.,  the  leading  word  was  framed  by  one  or  more  of
the  automatists  concerned  in  a  literary  setting,  so  that  it
emerged  as  part  of  a  poetical  quotation,  or  as  the  subject  of
a  more  or  less  elaborate  literary  allusion.  Thus  in  the  Con-
cordant Automatisms  grouped  round  the  idea  of  "  Light  in
West "  (Section  xix.)  and  culminating  in  references  to  East  and
West  by  three  automatists  on  April  8,  1907,  Dante,  Browning,
and  Tennyson  were  laid  under  contribution.  Were  this  habit
confined  to  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland,  my  daughter  and
myself,  it  would  hardly  require  comment.  Those  scripts  are
full  of  literary  reminiscences,  easily  accounted  for  by  the  previous
education  and  the  general  tastes  and  interests  of  the  automatists.
The  employment  of  a  quotation  to  introduce  a  transmitted  word
may  be  due  to  some  necessity  to  conceal  the  intention  from
the  normal  consciousness,  always  ready  to  interfere  and  inhibit
phenomena  where  the  script  is  produced  without  trance.

But  with  Mrs.  Piper  the  case  is  otherwise.  Neither  her
previous  history  nor  her  general  tastes  and  interests  lead  us
to  expect  literary  allusions  in  her  trance  utterances.  Nor  are
such  literary  allusions  found  in  the  records  of  her  earlier
sittings. Their  introduction  is  a  new  and  noteworthy  occur-


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "  Cup."  305


rence,  and  only  conies  into  prominence  in  the  English
sittings.

For  this,  various  explanations  may  be  suggested.  The  ex-
pectation of  the  sitters  is  a  factor  not  to  be  omitted.  The
type  of  mind,  again,  of  the  other  automatic  writers  deliberately
brought  into  close  connexion  with  the  trance-consciousness  of
Mrs.  Piper  may  be  supposed  to  have  produced  some  effect  upon
that  consciousness.  Moreover,  Mrs.  Piper  had  opportunity  of
reading  the  report  of  my  script  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.)  and
so  of  acquainting  herself  with  the  sort  of  phraseology  which
was  presumably  to  be  expected  from  Myersv.  And  my  ques-
tion addressed  to  MyersP,  as  to  his  associations  with  the  words
auTos  ovpai'og  ciku/uoop,  directed  the  attention  of  the  trance-
controls  towards  literary  subjects.  Whatever  explanation  is
adopted,  the  fact  remains  that  in  these  English  sittings  Mrs.
Piper's  trance-personalities  showed  an  acquaintance  with  English
poetry  never  shown  by  them  before,  and  often  associated  that
poetry  with  words  selected  for  transmission,  using  it  as  a  sort
of  framework  for  the  transmitted  phrase,  much  in  the  same
fashion  as  did  the  other  automatists  concerned.  Not  only
were  there  allusions  in  the  Piper  trance  to  Browning  and
Tennyson  in  the  course  of  references  to  the  "  answer  to  the
Latin  message "  which  emerged  amid  similar  allusions  in  the
Holland  and  Verrall  scripts,  but  in  one  case  (Section  xviii.)
two  lines  of  Wordsworth  suggested  a  group  of  "  cross-cor-
respondences," some  of  which  were  successfully  reproduced  by
another  automatist,  but  without  any  trace  of  the  quotation
which  accompanied  them  in  the  Piper  script :

"  I  wandered  lonely  as  a  Cloud
That  floats  on  high  o'er  Vales  and  Hills." 1

An  examination  of  the  series  of  Concordant  Automatisms
described  by  Mr.  Piddington  shows  that  among  the  contem-
porary successes 2  only  three  emerged  without  a  literary  setting

1  My  point  here  is  not  whether  or  not  Mrs.  Piper  was  normally  acquainted
with  Wordsworth's  poem.  That  may  very  well  have  been  the  case.  The
noteworthy  point  is  the  selection  in  her  trance  for  cross-correspondence  of  a
group  of  words  combined  by  literary  associations.

2 1  exclude  "Celestial  Halcyon  Days"  (Section  x.),  where  Myersp  referred
to  an  expression  in  an  earlier  script  of  mine,  not  to  a  contemporary  ex-
periment.

U


306


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


furnished  by  one  or  other  of  the  automatists  concerned,  namely,
those  described  in  Sections  v.,  xiii.,  and  xxii.  In  the  case  of
Section  v.,  "  Library,  my  own  name,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick's,"
these  three  ideas  were  woven  together,  both  in  Mrs.  Piper's
script  and  my  own,  into  a  story,  untrue  indeed  and  improbable,
but  with  a  certain  superficial  plausibility  which,  serving  as  a
framework,  may  perhaps  have  enabled  the  triple  combination
to  appear  in  both  scripts.  Only  two  cases  remain  in  which
the  Concordant  Automatisms  emerged,  so  to  say,  bare,  with
very  little  setting  or  decoration.  I  have  nothing  further  to
add  on  the  subject  of  Section  xxii.,  "  Laus  Deo,"  but  some-
thing may,  I  think,  be  learnt  from  a  further  consideration  of
the  cross-correspondence  on  "  Cup,"  described  in  Section  xiii.
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  179-192).

The  word  "  Cup "  was  announced  as  a  cross-correspondence
by  Hodgsonp  on  March  18,  1907  (p.  179);  the  word  "Cup"
appeared  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (p.  191)  on  the  morning  of
March  19; 1  and  on  the  evening  of  March  19,  a  Cup  was  drawn
and  the  word  written  in  my  script  (p.  181).  On  no  other
occasion  during  the  period  covered  by  these  sittings  with
Mrs.  Piper  did  the  word  "  Cup  "  occur  in  either  Mrs.  Holland's
script  or  mine.  In  neither  of  those  scripts  is  the  word  "  Cup  "
the  subject  of  a  literary  quotation.  In  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  it
is  applied  to  a  stone  cavity,  eventually  intended  to  hold  water.
In  my  script  the  Cup  is  said  to  be  of  silver  ;  it  is  drawn  with
a  stem,  foot  and  bowl,  and  no  handle.  Nor  is  there  any
indication  of  literary  allusion  in  the  announcement  of  a  cross-
correspondence  by  Hodgsoiip.  But  two  English  poems  are
referred  to  several  times  during  the  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,
either  of  which  is  easily  associated  with  the  word  "  Cup,"  a
cup  being  prominent  in  both.  FitzGerald's  poem,  The  Rubaiyat
of  Omar  Khayyam,  centres  round  the  "  Cup "  which  is  to  be
filled  with  "  Ruby  Vintage,"  and  the  word  occurs  eight  times
in  the  seventy-five  stanzas  of  the  first  edition.  In  Browning's
Rabbi  ben  Ezra  the  speaker's  meditations  culminate  in  the
comparison of man with a  "  Cup " ; this image  is  carried

1  The  water  drops  have  not  as  yet  begun  to  wear  the  stone — After  the  cup
has  been  worn  in  the  stone  the  falling  drops  can  be  collected — but  not
before —  At  present  there  is  only  a  damp  spot — inadequate  for  thirst
quenching.


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Gross-Correspondence  "  Cup."  307


through  the  concluding  eight  of  the  thirty-two  stanzas,  and  the
word  "  cup  "  occurs  three  times.

Allusions  in  the  Piper  script  to  Omar  Khayyam  are  made
on  Feb.  12,  13,  March  12,  19  and  20,  1907.  On  Feb-
ruary 12,  in  a  would-be  evidential  communication  from  a
supposed  dead  friend  of  the  sitter,  a  spontaneous  reference  was
made  to  the  poem.  The  allusion  was  not  at  first  understood
but  was  later  recognised,  after  it  had  been  described  as  a
quotation  from  the  Book  of  a  Dreamer  in  a  Persian  Garden.
On  Feb.  13,  Mr.  Piddington  being  the  sole  sitter,  further
remarks  were  made  about  a  "  Persian  Garden,"  which  was
now  said  to  be  a  cross-correspondence  for  Mrs.  Verrall  devised
by  HodgsonP  with  the  concurrence  of  MyersP.  The  word
"  Paradise,"  pointing  to  a  passage  in  F.  W.  H.  Myers's
Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  (p.  5),  had  occurred  in  the
trance  on  January  30,  when  I  was  the  sitter,  and  may  have
led  on,  by  an  easy  association  of  ideas,  to  the  selection
of  "  Persian  Garden,"  as  a  cross-correspondence  for  transmission
to  me.  The  word  "  Paradise "  recurred  on  March  6  as  a
subject  of  cross-correspondence,  and  was  shortly  followed  by
the  word  "  Bird,"  a  connexion  more  popular  than  literary.
Both  words  occur  in  Omar  Khayyam  :  "  Bird  "  twice  in  stanza
vii.,  and  "  Paradise "  in  stanzas  xi.  and  xii.  But  no  allusion
to  the  poem  was  suggested  by  the  controls  on  Feb.  13  or
March  6.  On  March  12,  however,  Omar  Khayyam  unmistak-
ably again  makes  an  appearance,  again  not  as  a  subject  for
cross-correspondence,  but  as  an  attempt  at  a  verifiable  remi-
niscence from  HodgsonP,  addressed  to  the  sitter,  Mr.  John
Russell.  The  poem  reappears  in  Mrs.  Busseil's  sittings  on
March  19  and  20.1  I  quote  all  extracts  bearing  on  these
definite  allusions  to  the  poem.

Extract  from  Record  of  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  February  12,
1907.

(Present :  Mr.  Piddington  in  charge  and  Mr.  X.  as  sitter ;
Z  communicating :)

[At  a  previous  sitting  on  February  11,  the  sitter  Mr.  X.  had  asked
the  communicator,  Z,  if  he  remembered  a  certain  friend  whose  foreign

1  Neither  Mr.  Russell  nor  Mrs.  Russell  was  introduced  by  name.  For
further  account  of  these  sittings  the  reader  is  referred  to  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXII.  Section  xiii.


308


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


tri-syllabic  name  began  with  P.  In  connexion  with  that  enquiry  the
following  statements  were  made. Note  by  M.  de  G.  V.]

Do  you  remember  one  evening  when  we  were  talking  about
the  possibilities  of  this  life.  I  said  wait  until  I  get  over
and  I  will  show  you.

And  the  Book  of  the  man  who  said  he  sat  and  dreamed
about  this  life

until  he  had  drunk  the  wine.  .  .  .

But  he  referred  to  a  quotation  of  a  Hindoo  who  said  he
drank  his  wine.

J.  G.  P. Rector,  we  must  get  this  clear.

Change  the  machine  kindly  [i.e.  the  pencil]  and  it  may  help
me  in  making  it  clearer.

I  said  P reminded  me  of  the  Persian  Garden.

(Sitter  fails  to  understand.) 1

You  are  stupid  but  you  never  used  to  be.

Sitter  : You  had  not  found  me  out  then,  Z.

Oh,  I  know  you  fully  old  chap  but  don't  you  understand
what  I  am  driving  at.

Sitter: I  think  I  do,  but  I  don't  understand  the  reference  to  the
Persian.

It  was  a  saying  that  the  Persian  in  his  garden  dreamed  all  day
about  God  and  the  Universe  and  Life  in  general  but
never  got  any  further  then — beyond  his  dream.  This
was  P  .

[repeated  in  answer  to  difficulties  of  reading  :]
I  say  never  got  beyond  his  dream

[Here  followed  attempts  to  remind  Mr.  X.  of  evenings  spent

with  Y.  at  his  house. Later  the  communicator  returned  to

the  subject  as  follows  :]
Got,  understood  yet  my  reference  to  the  Hindoo  dreamer  ?
I  said  well  it's  no  use  if  there  is  no  life  beyond. I  said,  when

I  was  in  the  body,  if  there  was  no  life  beyond  there  is  no

justice  in  this  life.

1  The  name,  a  foreign  one,  mentioned  by  the  Sitter  bears  some  resemblance  in
sound  to  the  name  Pehlevi  in  Omar  Khayyam,  stanza  vi.  where  it  follows  on  the
stanza  which  introduces  two  Persian  names,  Iram  and  Jamshyd,  as  well  as  the
word  "  Garden."


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "  Cup."  309

Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  March  12,
1907.

(Present :  Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  charge,  and  Mr.  John  Russell  as
sitter.)

[The  word  Dawn  had  been  mentioned  by  HodgsonP  in  the  course
of  attempts  to  remind  the  sitter  of  incidents  that  would  be  familiar
to  him. Note  by  M.  de  G.  V.}

Sitter  : What  is  Dawn  1

What.

Don't  you  remember  %
Sitter  : I  am  not  sure  whether  I  do.

What  is  Dawn  do  you  ask  1
Sitter  :  Yes.

Don't  you  remember  my  description  of  a  poem  in  which  I
gave  you.

and  you  thought  it  a  good  thing  or  point,
by  Fitzgerald.

Sitter  : Again,  please.

By  Fitzgerald.

Sitter  : I  have  forgotten,  but  I  will  see  when  I  get  home.

[Later  in  the  same  sitting,  Hodgson  communicating  says  :]

Do  you  remember  Fitzgerald  and  a  joke  they  made  on  me,
made  about  my  being  Irish.

Sitter: Irish  what?

Don't  you  remember  the  joke  I  made  about  being  Irish  1

Sitter  :  No.

Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  March  19,
1907.

(Present :  Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  charge,  and  Mrs.  John  Russell  as
sitter;  Hodgson  communicating:)

Don't  you  remember  a  poem  I  used  to  recite  to  you  of

Fitzgerald's,  about  drinking  up  the  wine  of  life.
Don't  you  remember  it,  and  how  fond  I  used  to  be  of  it  1


310


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Sitter  :


I  can't  remember  your  reciting  it.


Yes  I  tried  to  make  J.  understand,  but  it  was  useless.  I
tried  so  hard.  I  used  to  recite  it  for  you,  it  was  about
a  Hindoo  or  a  Persian  I  can't  remember  which.


Sitter: Yes,  I  remember  the  poem,  but  I  don't  remember  your


Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  March  20,


(Present :  Mrs.  Sidgwick  alone,  Myers  communicating  :)

Hodgson  told  her  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  to  say  a  line  or  two

from  the  poem  I  .  .  .
No  man  ever  came  back  to  tell  us  what  is  before  us.

E.  M.  S.  (reading  over)  Is  that  the  poem  ?


(Rector  communicating)

Yes  I  do  not  get  in  all  the  words  clearly  but  I  do  my  best.
He  [i.e.  Myers]  repeats.

No  man  ever  came  back  from  whence  he  has  gone  to  tell

us  of  the  shore.
It  is  Persian,


Yes,  he  says :  Rector,  if  you  can  tell  Mrs.  Sidgwick  what
I  say  at  all  clearly,  she  will  certainly  understand  my
meaning.


E.  M.  S.  I  understand. You  have  given  Mrs.  Verrall  a  line  from  a
Persian  poem'?

Yes  he  made  her  write  Omar  and  left  it  as  she  seemed


There  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  references  to  Omar  Khayyam
on  these  four  clays.  The  combination  of  Dawn  and  Fitz-
Gerald  on  March  12  would  alone  determine  the  allusion.  The
poem  begins  with  a  description  of  the  coming  of  Dawn,  "  Awake,
for  Morning  in  the  Bowl  of  Night  ..."  and  the  word  Dawn
comes  in  the  first  line  of  the  second  stanza.1 Again,  on  Feb.  13


reciting  it.


1907.


E.  M.  S.


Persian  1


tired.


I  quote  throughout  from  the  First  Edition.


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "Cup."  311


and  March  19,  the  allusion  is  explicit,  in  spite  of  the  extraordinary
confusion  between  Hindoo  and  Persian,  which  is  made  by  both
trance-communicators  and  is,  as  Mrs.  Eussell  notes,  absurd  as
comincr  from  Dr.  Hodgson.  The  words,  "  dreamed  about  this
life— until  he  had  drunk  the  wine"  (on  Feb.  12),  and  again
"drinking  up  the  wine  of  life"  (on  March  19),  point  to  the
second  stanza,  and  especially  to  its  concluding  line  :

"  Dreaming  when  Dawn's  Left  Hand  was  in  the  Sky
I  heard  a  Voice  within  the  Tavern  cry,
'  Awake  my  Little  ones,  and  fill  the  Cup
Before  Life's  Liquor  in  its  Cup  be  dry.' "

On  March  20,  MyersP  definitely  claims  that  HodgsonP  has
succeeded  in  conveying  to  me  a  line  from  a  Persian  poem.
The  name  Omar  fixes  the  allusion,  and  the  words,  obviously
intended  to  represent  a  line  from  the  poem,  may  with  certainty
be  referred  to  the  conclusion  of  the  third  stanza  :

"  You  know  how  little  while  we  have  to  stay,
And,  once  departed,  may  return  no  more." 1

It  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  certain  that  allusions  to
FitzGerald's  poem,  probably  to  particular  stanzas,  were  made  by
the  trance-personalities  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  on  Feb.  12,
March  12,  March  19,  and  March  20,  1907.

The  allusions  to  Browning's  Rabbi  ben  Ezra  were  on  April  24
and  29,  and  May  6  and  8,  1907.  On  April  24,  a  group  of
words  contained  in  the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth  stanzas
of  the  poem  and  also  the  name  Ezra  were  brought  out  during
the  course  of  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  trance-personalities  to
indicate  what  line  of  Browning  had  been  aimed  at  in  the  triple
cross-correspondence  described  as  "  Browning,  Hope,  Star."  2  On
April  29,  one  of  these  words,  "Vaunt,"  was  mentioned  by
Myersp  in  my  presence  as  the  subject  of  a  cross-corre-
spondence, but  it  had  no  context  and  I  did  not  connect  it
with  anything.  On  May  6  and  May  8,  the  word  "  Vaunt "
was  again  spoken  of  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  as  the  subject  of  a

1In  the  words  "before"  and  "shore"  of  Myersp  I  am  disposed  to  see
reminiscences  of  the  three  rhymed  words  of  stanza  iii.,  namely,  "before,"
"door,"  and  "more."

2  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  413;  and  also  Section  vi.


312  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

cross-correspondence  which  Myers P  hoped  to  complete.  I  quote
the  extracts  in  question  :

Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  April  24,
1907.

(Present :  Mrs.  Sidgwick  alone  ;  Hodgson  communicating).

Do  j'ou  remember  my  words  Mars  the  planet.
Jove.

Mars  Egla

(Rector  communicating).

He  [i.e.  Hodgson]  is  giving  me  the  words  as  he  thinks  they
appeared  [i.e.  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  writing.]

[After  recapitulating  some  cross-correspondence,  Myers  com-
municating, says  :]

Ezra

What  vaunts  life
Vaunt

transcends Did  you  understand
E.  M.  S.  Not  quite. What  is  it  that  transcends  life  ?

The  star  spark  flame

Do  you  understand  it  now  1

E.  M.  S.  Poetical  expressions  ?

Yes.  I  believe  whereas  it  is  difficult  to  get  through  the
words  one  after  the  other  I  believe  I  can  make  you
understand  that  I  know  what  I  gave  her  [i.e.  Mrs.
Verrall.]

I  now  recall  the  transcends

and  Vaunt

did  they  not  appear?
[Later  in  the  same  sitting]

One  word  more.  I  gave  Mrs.  Verrall  Vaunt  and  trans-
cendentalism.1


1  See  Mr.  Piddington's  Report,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  374,  for  an
explanation  of  the  substitution  of  "transcendentalism"  for  "transcends."


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "  Cup."  313

Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  April  29,
1907.

(Present:  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  Johnson;  Myers  communicating).

[After  reference  to  the  word  "azure,"  which  was  only  read
with  difficulty  :]

I  also  referred  to  the  word  Vaunt  and  I  want  you  to
look  it  up.

M.  de  G.  V. You  want  me  to  look  up  the  word  Vaunt  1
Yes  in  your  writing.

o

Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  May  6,  1907.
(Present Mrs. Sidgwick and Miss Johnson ; Rector  communi-
cating).

We  will  go  on  with  it  [i.e.  "  Cloud  "  as  a  cross-correspondence]
or  other  words.

E.  M.  S.  Particularly  with  the  word  Vaunt  and  what  you  meant  to
bring  out  with  that.

Yes  certainly  we  gave  her  the  word  [i.e.  mentioned  it  when
Mrs.  Verrall  was  present]  but  there  is  so  much  more  we
could  say  about  it  or  concerned  with  it.

Extract  from  Record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  May  8,  1907.
(Present  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson ;  Myers  communicating).

I  am  still  interested  in  Vaunt  and  shall  complete  it.

It  is  therefore  certain  that  these  two  poems,  FitzGerakl's
and  Browning's,  both  of  them  easily  associated  with  the  word
"  Cup,"  were  referred  to  by  the  trance-personalities  in  the  course
of  the  sittings.  Before  deciding  whether  the  "  Cup  "  of  March  18,
1907,  was  associated  with  either  or  both,  we  must  examine
carefully  the  statement  in  the  trance  of  that  day.

As  is  described  by  Mr.  Piddington,1  the  words  claimed  to
come  from  HodgsonP,  and  were  thus  written :

"  Cup  used
C  C"


1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  179,  Section  xiii.


314


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


The  word  "  used "  is  marked  as  not  certain  in  Mr.  Pid-
dington's  account  of  the  sitting,  but  I  have  myself  little
doubt  that  it  is  correct.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  points  out  that  the
word  is  almost  exactly  like  the  word  "  used "  in  other
places,  and  says  that  she  would  be  satisfied  with  the  reading
"  Cup  used  C.C."  if  it  made  any  sense  in  the  context.  I
feel,  with  Mr.  Piddington,  the  difficulty,  arising  from  an
acquaintance  with  the  usual  phraseology  of  the  Piper  script,
of  attributing  to  the  controls  the  elliptical  or  condensed  con-
struction required  if  the  meaning  of  "  Cup  used  C  C "  is  to
be  "  Cup  has  been  (or,  'is  to  be  ')  used  as  a  cross-correspond-
ence." This  objection  would  disappear  if  the  word  "  used "
could  be  regarded  as  forming  part,  not  of  the  control's  remark,
but  of  the  phrase  to  be  transmitted.  I  should  punctuate  thus,
"  Cup  used  "  ;  then — after  a  pause — "  C  C," — the  explanation
"  cross-correspondence "  being  appended  to  the  phrase  "  Cup
used,"  to  show  that  the  two  words  just  written  were  a  message
for  transmission  to  other  automatists.  There  would  be  no
difficulty  in  the  selection  by  the  controls  of  that  particular
combination,  if  any  meaning  attached  to  it.1  The  question
thus  arises, — is  there  any  point  in  the  addition

(1)  of  a  word  following  upon  Cup;

(2)  of  the  particular  word  "  used."

To  both  these  questions  I  think  that  an  affirmative  answer
can  be  given.

(1)  A  reference  to  the  sitting  of  January  30th,  1907,  shows
a  reason  for  avoiding  the  single  word  "  Cup "  as  a  subject  for
transmission  to  me.  I  was  the  sitter  on  January  30th,  and
among  other  words,  said  to  have  occurred  in  my  earlier  script,
"  Chalice "  was  mentioned.  This  reminded  me,  as  I  noted  at
the  time,  of  an  allusion  in  my  earlier  script  to  the  Latin  Cyathus,
Cup,  the  connexion  of  which  with  Christian  ritual  I  had  quite
recently  been  investigating.  Of  this  I  said  nothing  at  the
sitting,  but  shortly  afterwards  "  Cup "  was  mentioned  with-
out context  by  MyersP.  As  therefore  my  attention  had  on
January  30th  been  called  to  the  word  "Cup,"  that  word  alone
was  not  a  good  choice  for  a  cross-correspondence  with  me.  A

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  287,  where  a  particular  kind  of  sea  and  sky,
"Sea  and  Sky  Blue,"  is  indicated  as  the  subject  of  a  cross-correspondence.


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "  Cup."


315


similar  difficulty  had  arisen  in  another  case.1  The  word
"  Wreath,"  intended  for  a  cross-correspondence,  had  been
mentioned  in  my  presence  on  January  21,  1907;  on  Jan-
uary 23  Rector  apologised  to  Mr.  Piddington  for  the  blunder,
and  on  March  4  MyersP,  after  hearing  that  "  Laurel  wreath  "
had  appeared  in  my  script,  explained  that  "  laurel "  had  been
added  to  "  wreath  "  to  make  the  cross-correspondence  evidential.
It  is  thus  consistent  with  the  previous  conduct  of  the  controls,
since  the  word  "  Cup "  had  been  mentioned  in  my  presence,  to
add  another  word  when  employing  "  Cup  "  as  a  subject  for  cross-
correspondence.

(2)  Without  going  so  far  as  to  say  that  "Cup  used"  recalls
Rabbi  ben  Ezra  to  a  student  of  Browning,  I  yet  assert  that  if
it  is  desired  to  distinguish  by  a  single  epithet  the  cup  of  ben
Ezra  from  the  cup  of  Omar,  used  is  well  chosen.  The  distinction
between  the  two  conceptions  of  a  cup  lies  just  in  the  use  of  the
vessel,  and  the  word  use  is  introduced  into  one  poem  and  not
into  the  other.  Omar's  cup  is  to  be  filled  with  "  Life's  Liquor  "
(ii.),  with  "Wine  Eed  Wine"  (vi.),  with  what  "clears  To-Day  of
past  regrets  "  (xx.)  ;  it  is  to  drown  the  memory  that  "  without
asking  "  we  are  "  hurried  hither  "  and  "  hurried  hence  "  (xxx). ;
the  "  Ruby  A^intage  "  is  to  be  drunk  "  with  old  Khayyam,"  and,
"  when  the  Angel  with  his  darker  Draught  draws  up,"  we  are
to  "  take  that "  without  shrinking  (xlviii.).  Rabbi  ben  Ezra
on  the  contrary  bids  us  look  not  "  clown  but  up  !  to  uses  of  a
cup"  (30);  and  asks  Cod  "who  mouldest  men  ...  to  take  and
use  Thy  work"  (32).  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  single
word  better  suited  than  "  used  "  to  distinguish  between  the  two
cups  and  at  the  same  time  to  recall  the  culminating  stanzas  of
Browning's  poem.

A  further  point  for  consideration  is  whether  by  an  examina-
tion of  the  script  of  the  other  two  automatists  concerned  in  the
cross-correspondence  any  reason  is  found  for  associating  the  Cup
of  March  18,  1907,  with  either  Omar  Khayyam  or  Rabbi  ben
Ezra.  Neither  the  slowly-forming  stone  cup  of  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  19,  1907,  nor  the  silver  cup  of  my  script  of
the  same  day,  represents  the  earthenware  cup  of  Omar  and  ben

JSee  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  Section  ix.,  especially  pp.  101,  102;  and  note
the  above  quoted  statement  by  Rector  on  May  6th,  1907,  about  the  additions
that  could  be  made  to  a  word  inadvertently  mentioned  in  my  presence.


316


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Ezra,  though  the  ultimate  purpose — "  thirst  quenching  " — of  the
uncompleted  cup  described  in  her  script1  recalls  the  purpose  of
Browning's  cup, — to  slake  the  thirst  of  the  Master  when  the
cup  has  been  made  perfect  as  planned.  In  my  script  I  find  two
points  where  it  is  possible  to  see  a  connexion  with  Browning's
poem,  but  neither  is  certain.  My  scripts  of  March  19  and  20,
1907,  are  plainly  intended  to  be  continuous,2  and  the  second
script aims,  as Mr.  Piddington has pointed out, "  at  giving

expression  to  one  thing  St  John's  College,  Cambridge."

It  reaches  this  goal  "  by  devious  bye-paths,"  in  the  course  of
which  it  passes  from  the  Feast  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  to  the
Feast  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  kept  at  St.  John's  College,
Cambridge,  thus  perhaps  recalling  the  "  festal  board  "  of  Rabbi
ben  Ezra  (30).  The  second  point  of  possible  connexion  is
contained  in  a  later  script  of  March  26,  1907,  of  which  I
here  quote  the  whole :

Write  again  later — out  of  doors — but  now  say  this  :
what  turns  the  wheel,  the  four-spoked  wheel  of  time  1
[drawing  of  a  four-spoked  wheel]  from  left  to  right  revolving.

With  this  script  may  be  compared  the  phrases  in  stanzas
26  and  27  of  Rabbi  ben  Ezra,  "feel  why  time  spins  fast,"  and
"  time's  wheel  runs  back  or  stops."  There  is  no  reason,  how-
ever, as  far  as  I  know,  why  the  wheel  of  time  should  be  four-
spoked.

No  one  of  these  scripts  is  sufficiently  distinctive  to  be  applied
to  Rabbi  ben  Ezra,  if  taken  alone.  But  I  should  not  expect  to
find  accidentally  within  nine  days,  in  the  scripts  of  three  differ-
ent automatists,  four  references  presenting  such  parallelism  to
the  ideas  and  language  of  Rabbi  ben  Ezra,  as  is  presented  by  the
four  in  question,  which  are  summarized  in  the  following  tabular
form :

Date.  Automatisms  'phrase.  Browning.
Mar.  18 P.  "  Cup  used  "  Uses  of  cup  (30) 3

Use  Thy  work  (32)
Mar.  19 H.  "Thirst quenching" To  slake  Thy  thirst  (31)

"  inadequate "  Amend  .  .  .  perfect  the  cup

(32)

1  See  above,  p.  306,  foot-note. 2  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  183.
3  The  numbers  in  brackets  refer  to  the  stanzas  of  Rabbi  ben  Ezra.


LXIII.]


Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "Clip."  317


Date. Automatist's  phrase.
Mar.  19 V.  "  Feast  .  .  .  Feast "
Mar.  26 V.  "What  turns  the
wheel "
"  Wheel  of  Time."


Browning.
festal  board  (30)
Gocl,  whose  wheel  (25)  time

spins  (26)
Time's  wheel  (27)  times  .  .  .

in  Thy  hand  (32)


The  persistency  of  allusions  1  to  Rabbi  hen  Ezra  in  the  Piper
trance  is  shown  in  a  sitting  of  Mr.  Dorr's  with  Mrs.  Piper  in
1908,  when  on  May  8  the  first  line  of  the  poem,  "Grow  old
along  with  me,"  was  selected  as  a  subject  for  cross-correspond-
ence with  me.  It  was  not  reproduced  in  my  script,  nor  were
any  of  the  cross-correspondences  from  Rahbi  ten  Ezra,  mentioned
on  April  24,  1907,  successfully  transmitted  by  the  trance-
personalities.  "  Cup,"  however,  which  is  a  word  in  the  poem,
was  transmitted,  as  above  described,  but  when  it  was  mentioned
in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on  March  18,  1907,  it  was  not  connected
with  Browning  or  assigned  to  any  specified  automatist.

Some  confirmation  of  the  view  set  out  in  this  paper  is
supplied  by  other  evidence  from  the  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper
in  February  and  March,  1907.  From  these  sittings  I  infer
that  the  "Cup  used,"  of  March  18,  whatever  it  may  have
meant,  was  not  the  cup  of  Omar  Khayyam.  The  sitting  of
Feb.  1 2  as  well  as  the  immediately  preceding  sitting  of  March  1 2
and  the  two  succeeding  sittings  of  March  19  and  20  contain
allusions  to  Omar  KJiayyam — allusions,  it  may  be  said  in
passing,  that  show  an  acquaintance  with  the  poem  at  once  more
intimate  and  less  directly  expressed  than  would  be  expected
were  the  source  in  Mrs.  Piper's  own  mind.  Words  associated
with  the  poem  are  selected  for  transmission.  The  connexion
of  the  word  "  cup  "  with  FitzGerald's  poem  could  not  fail  to  be
known  to  one  who  associated  with  that  poem  "  Dawn,"  "  Wine
of  Life,"  and  "  no  man  ever  returns,"  etc.,  but  no  such  association

1  There  have  also  been  quotations  from  the  poem  in  other  scripts  :  on  January
7,  1904,  MyersH  cpaotecl  from  stanza  25  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.  p.  215) :
"All  I  could  never  be —
All  men  refused  in  me

This  I  was  worth  to  God  whose  wheel  the  pitcher  shaped,"
and  on  Oct.  20,  1906,  H.  V.  script  has  (stanza  3)  "  folly  wide  the  mark. "  Neither
of  these  scripts  was  known  to  Mrs.  Piper,  or  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  when  allusions
to  the  poem  were  made  by  MyersP  in  April,  1907.


318


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


is  suggested  for  the  "  Cup  used  C  C."  Even  had  the  suggested
cross-correspondence  consisted  of  the  single  word  "  Cup,"  I  should
be  indisposed,  under  the  circumstances,  to  connect  it  with
Omar  Khayyam.  When  we  remember  that  between  "  Cup "
and  "  C  C  "  was  inserted  a  word  wholly  inappropriate  to  Omar
Khayyam's  cup,  I  think  it  is  clear  that  on  March  18  there
was  no  intention  on  the  part  of  HodgsonP  to  suggest  any
association  between  "  Cup  used  C  C  "  and  the  cup  of  Omar
Khayyam.1

This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  in  detail  whether  there
is  a  historical  link  between  the  two  poems,  or  whether  a
student  of  literature  would  naturally  pass  from  the  thought  of
EitzGerald's  Omar  Khayyam  to  the  thought  of  Browning's
Rabbi  ben  Ezra.  The  first  edition  of  Omar  Khayyam  was
published  in  1859,  and,  though  not  generally  known  till  some
time  later,  it  was  enthusiastically  praised  and  eagerly  read  by
a  small  group,  among  whom  were  Swinburne  and  Dante
Eossetti.  In  the  autumn  of  1861  Eobert  Browning  came  to
live  in  London,  and  often  saw  Eossetti,  who  had  been  a  friend
of  his  for  some  years.  It  is  probable  that  a  poem  which  had
so  strongly  impressed  Eossetti  was  not  unknown  to  Browning.
In  1864  Rabbi  ben  Ezra  was  published  in  the  volume  called
Dramatis  Personcc.  If  any  one  reads  and  compares  the  two
poems,  noticing  especially  the  treatment  in  both  of  the  image
of  the  Fotter,  he  will  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the  work
of  the  earlier  poet  was  unknown  to  the  later  poet.  The
comparison  of  man  to  the  Eotter's  Clay  is  not  new  ;  as  Eitz-
Gerald  reminds  us,  it  is  found  "  in  the  Literature  of  the
World  from  the  Hebrew  Brophets  to  the  present  time " ;  it
is  as  appropriately  employed  by  the  Hebrew  as  by  the  Fersian
thinker.  But  the  form  of  stanzas  2  6  and  27  of  Rabbi
ben  Ezra  suggests  that  the  view  there  represented  is  not  only
an  expression  of  personal  belief,  but  a  refutation  of  some
existing  theory,  and  a  comparison  with  stanzas  xxxvi.  and
xxxvii.  of Omar  Khayyam  suggests  whose  that theory  was.

1  The  view  that  "Cup  used"  is,  in  fact,  a  reminiscence  of  Rabbi  ben  Ezra
need  not  imply  a  deliberate  reticence  on  the  part  of  the  controls.  The  phrase
may  have  been  a  first  emergence,  provoked  by  the  interest  of  the  experimenters
in  Browning,  of  allusions  to  Rabbi  ben  Ezra,  definitely  formulated  on
April  24,  1907.


lxiii.] Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence  "Cwp"  319


Omar  Khayyam  says  that  he  "  watch'd  the  Potter  thumping
his  wet  Clay,"  and  thereupon  he  urges  his  auditor —

"  Ah,  fill  the  Cup ; — what  boots  it  to  repeat
How  Time  is  slipping  underneath  our  Feet :
Unborn  To-morrow  and  dead  Yesterday,
Why  fret  about  them  if  To-day  be  sweet ! "

Kabbi  ben  Ezra  bids  his  auditor —

"  note  that  Potter's  wheel,
That  metaphor!"

and  goes  on :

"  Thou,  to  whom  fools  propound,
When  the  wine  makes  its  round,
Since  life  fleets,  all  is  change ; the  Past  gone,  seize  To-day !

Fool! all  that  is,  at  all,
Lasts  ever,  past  recall ;
Earth  changes,  but  thy  soul  and  Clod  stand  sure."

If  accident,  and  not  acquaintance  with  FitzGerald's  poem,
produced  so  apt  a  criticism  of  Omar's  theory  of  life  and  ex-
pressed it  by  a  different  interpretation  of  Omar's  metaphor,
the  coincidence  is  remarkable.  But  that  there  are  remark-
able undesigned  coincidences  in  the  history  of  literature,  as
elsewhere,  it  is  not  for  a  student  of  Psychical  Eesearch  to
deny.


320


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


V.

MISS  VERK ALL'S SCRIPT  OF MARCH 16,  1908:
A  CORRECTION  AND  AN  ADDITION.

By  MRS.  A.  W.  VERRALL.

The  script  in  question  is  quoted  and  commented  on  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  297,  298. It  runs  as  follows:

La  vie  est  breve
Un  peu  d'espoir
Un  peu  de  reve
Et  puis  bonsoir.

The  end  of  the  story.

Like  a  crimson  petalled  rose  the  rose  of  Sharon.

When  the  proof  was  sought  he  told  them  that  the  only  means  of
obtaining  it  was  to  persevere  in  the  attempt  to  prove  the  connexion.

Gautier  and  Hugo  those  together  types  to  be  compared.

Unless  there  is  a  possibility  of  setting  the  two  side  by  side  there
would  be  no  opportunity.

is  is  the — ■

now  at  his  ease

[drawing  of  flower]  note  this  flower.

When  I  wrote  the  paper  on  "  A  New  Group  of  Experi-
menters "  in  Proceedings,  I  thought  that  the  two-stanza  poem,
of  which  the  second  verse  appears  in  the  above  H.  V.  script,
was  by  Victor  Hugo.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case.  On
the  first  occasion — many  years  ago — when  I  made  the  acquaint-
ance of  the  poem,  it  was  attributed  to  Victor  Hugo,  and
having  never  had  reason  to  question  the  authorship,  I  accepted
that  statement  without  further  consideration.  But  on  being
informed  of  my  mistake,  soon  after  the  publication  of  Proceedings,
Part  LX.,  I  took  some  pains  to  ascertain  the  authorship  of
the  poem. This,  with  some  difficulty,  I  have  done.


LXIIL] Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  321


The  poem  is  quoted  in  Du  Maimer's  Trilby  (published
1894),  which  also  contains  an  English  poem  based  upon  it.
But  the  author  is  not  there  named.  In  one  well-known  book
of  reference  the  poem  is  quoted  incorrectly — the  first  and
third  lines  of  the  two  stanzas  being  transposed,  so  that
"  amour "  and  "  haine "  appear  in  different  stanzas,  and  the
poem  begins  "  La  vie  est  breve " — and  in  the  same  book  it
is  incorrectly  attributed  to  Alfred  de  Musset.  In  1902  the
two  stanzas  were  set  to  music  by  Madame  Teresa  del  Eiego
and  published,  together  with  an  English  version  by  the  composer.
Madame  Teresa  del  Eiego  has  set  and  translated  the  trans-
posed arrangement  of  the  two  stanzas,  though  her  song  is
named,  "  La  vie  est  vaine,"  from  what,  in  her  arrangement,
is  the  first  line  of  the  second  stanza.  But  she  has  printed
on  the  fly-leaf,  besides  her  own  version,  the  original  lines  by
Leon  de  Montenaeken  and  the  "  author's  own  English  version."
Here  the  two  stanzas  are  not  transposed,  but  run  as  in  my
paper  in  Proceedings  with  "  amour "  and  "  haine "  in  the  first
stanza,  which  begins  "  La  vie  est  vaine."  A  third  stanza  is
added  which  runs  as  follows :

"  La  vie  est  telle
Que  Dieu  la  fit ;
Et  telle  quelle  .  .  .
Elle  suffit."

This  third  stanza  was,  to  the  best  of  our  belief,  unknown
to  the  automatists  concerned  in  the  cross-correspondence,  as
well  as  to  me,  until,  in  the  course  of  enquiries  as  to  the
authorship  of  the  lines,  Miss  Mac  came  across  the  words  set
to  music  and  wrote  to  me  on  April  30,  1911.  The  further
information  thus  obtained,  though  it  shows  that  what  I  called
a  "  two-stanza  poem  by  Hugo "  is  in  fact  by  Montenaeken
and  contains  a  third  stanza,  does  not  affect  the  correspondence
between  the  H.  V.  and  Mac  scripts,  nor  the  complementary
nature  of  that  correspondence.  For  on  March  16,  1908,  an
H.  V.  script,  containing  internal  evidence  that  it  was  incom-
plete and  required  supplementing,  quoted  the  second  stanza
of  a  French  poem,  of  which  the  first  stanza  appeared
independently,  three  months  later,  in  the  script  of  some
new automatic writers whose script, by order of  their

x


322


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


"  communicators,"  was  sent  to  me  as  containing  messages
intended  for  me.  To  all  the  automatists  concerned  the  two
stanzas  of  the  poem,  and  two  only,  were  known,  as  they  were
to  me ;  by  one  automatist,  my  daughter,  as  by  me,  the  author-
was  thought  to  be  Victor  Hugo.

But  it  will  be  observed  that  the  H.  V.  script  does  not
attribute  the  lines  to  Hugo.  Taking  that  script  as  it  stands,
without  preconceptions  of  any  kind,  there  is  no  more  reason
to  attribute  the  verses  to  Hugo  than  to  Gautier.  Both  those
names  appear  later  in  the  same  script,  and  neither  is  claimed
as  the  author  of  the  opening  lines.  But,  believing  as  I  did,
that  the  opening  lines  were  a  quotation  from  Hugo,  I  naturally
supposed  the  lines  thus  quoted  to  represent  the  poem  of  Hugo
later  alluded  to  in  the  script,  as  representing  a  type  to  be
compared  with  a  poem  of  Gautier.  Of  Gautier's  work  I  was
completely  ignorant,  as  was  my  daughter.  I  looked  through  a
collection  of  his  poems — which  I  do  not  possess — to  see  if  I
could  find  a  poem  comparable  with  "  La  vie  est  breve,"  but  I
could  find  none.

So  much  for  my  mistaken  statement ;  I  pass  to  the  con-
sideration of  the  H.  V.  script.  It  is  clear  that  the  inclusion
of  these  lines  in  a  script  which  also  suggests  a  comparison  of
the  types  of  Hugo  and  Gautier  would  be  completely  justified
if,  for  instance,  there  existed  poems  by  Hugo  and  Gautier
characteristic  of  their  respective  authors  and  referring  to  the
topic  which  is  the  subject  of  the  poem  whose  second  stanza  is
quoted  in  the  script, — the  emptiness  and  brevity  of  life.  That
being  so,  and  it  being  certain  that  the  lines  are  neither  by
Hugo  nor  by  Gautier,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  any
poems  by  Hugo  and  Gautier  can  be  found  which  fulfil  these
conditions,  and  whether  any  clue  to  those  poems  is  contained
in  the  H.  V.  script.  I  believe  that  there  are  such  poems,
and  I  have  been  led  to  their  discovery  by  means  of  what
was  written  in  my  own  script  and  in  the  script  of  other
automatists.  I  relate  the  circumstances  in  detail,  prefacing
my  account  with  a  statement  about  my  own  knowledge  of  the
two  poets  at  the  time  (October  1910)  when  my  own  scripts
were  produced.

(1)  I  had  no  acquaintance  with  Gautier,  except  what  was
derived  from  looking  at  the  index  and  turning  over  the  pages


lxiil] Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  323


of  his  collected  poems,  as  just  above  described,  some  time  in
the  winter  of  1908-9,  to  see  if  I  could  find  a  parallel  with
"  La  vie  est  breve."

(2)  Much  of  Victor  Hugo's  poetry  is  exceedingly  familiar
to  me.  But  certain  volumes — among  them  Toutc  la  Lyre —
I  had  never  seen  until,  in  April  or  May  1910,  after  his
authorship  of  "  La  vie  est  breve "  had  been  challenged,  I  went
to  the  University  Library  and  looked  cursorily  through  the
volumes  which  I  do  not  possess,  turning  over  their  pages  and
glancing  at  all  poems  with  short  lines  such  as  there  are  in
"  La  vie  est  breve,"  for  which  I  was  looking.

The  clue  to  what  I  now  believe  to  have  been  the  intention
of  the  H.  V.  script  of  March  16,  1908,  was  obtained  as
follows :

My  script  of  October  3,  October  4  and  October  10,  1910,
emphasized  the  word  "Meditation."  On  September  22,  1910,
I  had  seen  this  word  in  the  record  of  a  sitting  of  Mrs.  Piper's
of  July  16,  19 10.1  There  the  word  was  introduced  into  a
verse  apparently  indicated  as  a  subject  for  cross-correspondence.
It  appeared  to  me,  however,  when  I  read  the  record,  that  the
intention  was  to  emphasize,  not  the  lines  uttered,  but  the
actual  word  "  Meditation."

Whether  or  not  my  impression  was  correct,  it  was,  beyond
all  doubt,  reproduced  in  my  script  of  Oct.  3,  1910,  and  probably
again  in  my  scripts  of  Oct.  4  and  10,  1910.  They  run  as
follows  :

Oct.  3,  1910. 10.20  p.m.

Meditation  and  /icAe-raco2  are  much  the  same— and  you  will  find
recorded  that  Mrs.  Piper  has  a  hand  in  the  combination.

Your  first  impression  about  Meditation  was  right.

Write  to-morrow  earlier  in  the  day,  and  again  for  a  good  message
on  Wednesday.3

1See  below,  p.  331,  for  extracts  from  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  with  comment.

2  The  use  in  Latin  Bucolic  poetry  of  the  word  meditor  (to  practise)  is  similar  to
the  use  of  jueXerdu  in  Greek.  Milton  follows  the  classical  use  of  meditor  in  the
phrase  "  to  meditate  the  Muse."

3  See  below,  pp.  325,  33o,  for  Wednesday's  script.


324


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


Oct.  4,  1910. 4.10  p.m.

Samaritan — write  down  a  word  that  is  in  your  mind — it  is  the
only  way  to  clear  the  lumber  out.
Satisfied  he  is  not  but  well  content.1

|V|"p-^ no  not  quite  that.

It  is  not  easy  when  you  keep  rejecting  the  words  which  come
first  to  your  mind.

Meditation  is  a  good  long  word  in  M  —  will  that  fill  your  gap?
and  ask  about  the  Golden  Numbers.1

It  seems  impossible  to  get  you  to  distinguish  sometimes  between
your  thoughts  and  ours, — and  you  constantly  overlook  idiosyncracies
wh.2  ought  to  tell  you  who  the  writer  is  —

Oct,  10,  1910. 11.30  a.m.

No  ordinary  effort  will  be  spared
Meditation,  Fancy's  Child — no
Sweet  Meditation  heavenly  maid
and  apt  alliteration's  artful  aid.

Then  there  are  Augustine's  Meditations3 — but  they  are  not  what
I  want.

It  is  a  purely  poetic  association  with  the  word.
Pacing  in  the  cloister  slow
no  cloister's  shade

*In  a  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's  (Dec.  30,  1908)  quoted  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.
p.  324,  and  known  to  me,  occur  the  words  "content"  and  "golden  numbers."
I  can  offer  no  explanation  of  the  reminiscence  here  of  that  script.

The  word  "golden"  has  perhaps  some  special  association,  unknown  to  me,
with  Theophile  Gautier. See  Swinburne's  Memorial  Verses  (to  Th.  G.)
"In  types  of  clean  chryselephantine  verse.
Who  gave  thee  words  more  golden  than  fine  gold."

"The  sunrise  of  whose  golden-mouthed  glad  head,"
and  his  Sonnet  with  a  copy  of  Mile  de  Maupin

"This  is  the  golden  book  of  spirit  and  sense,"
and  again  his  Theophile  Gautier,

"  Sa  parole  de  marbre  et  d'or."

2Such  as  the  abbreviated  "  wh."  for  "which,"  a  characteristic  in  the  letters  of
F.  W.  H.  M.

3  Augustine's  Confessions  is,  I  suppose,  meant.


LXIII.]


Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.


325


But  you  do  not  seem  able  to  complete


cJ\fh


Meditation  heavenly  maid.
That  will  do  for  to-day.

There  is  no  cross-correspondence  between  my  script  and
Mrs.  Piper's,  as  I  had  seen  the  record  of  her  sitting.  But
the  repetition  of  the  word  in  three  scripts  of  mine  within  a
week  emphasizes  the  word  "  meditation,"  and  on  some  other
occasions  I  have  found  meaning  in  cases  where  my  script  has
repeated  emphatically  a  word  originally  introduced  by  a  normal
association.  At  the  time  I  was  unable  to  see  any  point  in
the  reiteration  of  the  word  "  meditation."

In  the  early  part  of  January  1911,  I  came  across  an  allusion
in  a  book,1  which  I  was  reading,  to  "  Gautier's  axiom."  The
same  sentence  contrasted  "  the  rose "  and  "  the  laurel."  This
struck  me,  as  in  recent  scripts  there  had  been  some  association
of  rose  and  laurel,  and  on  January  7,  1911,  I  noted  "  Gautier's
axiom "  as  a  point  to  be  looked  up,  but  I  did  nothing  further
in  the  matter  at  that  time.

On  Jan.  21,  1911,  I  saw  my  daughter's  script  for  the  period
Sept.  7,  to  Nov.  22,  1910,  which  I  had  not  seen  before,  and
found  an  unmistakable  cross-correspondence  between  M.  V.
script2  of  October  5  and  H.  V.  script  of  October  6,  1910.
Stringed  instruments  appeared  in  both  scripts  ;  my  script
certainly,  and  my  daughter's  probably,  quoted  from  Scott's
Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel ;  my  script  had,  in  emphasized
writing,  "  toute  la  lyre  " — the  title  of  a  volume  of  Victor  Hugo's
poems ;  and,  further,  my  script  represented  that  it  was  dealing
with  the  second  of  two  groups  wanted :  "I  do  not  think  you
have  got  the  first  word  at  all. What  you  have  is  the  second


The  cross-correspondence  between  our  scripts  on  a  "  stringed
instrument"  was  noted 3  by  me  on  January  21,  1911,  but

1  Men  and  Ghosts,  by  Edith  Wharton.

-  The  cross-correspondence  is  here  summarized.  See  below,  pp.  335  ff. ,  for  the
scripts  and  full  comments.

3  The  reader  may  not  assent  to  my  view  as  to  the  correspondence  between
the  scripts ;  but,  in  any  case,  it  is  certain  that  I  noted  my  own  impression
on  seeing  my  daughter's  script,  as  "c.c.  on  stringed  instrument."


word.


33


326


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


I  made  no  attempt  to  connect  it  with  anything  else.  It  is,
however,  to  be  remembered  that  my  part  of  this  cross-
correspondence  was  produced  on  the  "  Wednesday "  on  which
I  was  told,  in  the  script  of  October  3,  1910,  to  write  "for
a  good  message."

On  Jan.  27,  1911,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  looking  for
"  Gautier's  axiom,"  in  which  I  expected  to  find  a  comparison
or  contrast  between  the  rose  and  the  laurel.  Mrs.  Wharton's
sentence  runs  as  follows:  "He  had  but  one  idea  in  his  beautiful
obstinate  head.  He  wanted  the  laurel  and  not  the  rose,  and
he  kept  on  repeating  Gautier's  axiom  and  battering  ...  at  his
limp  prose."  The  allusion  is  unmistakably  to  the  following
lines,  contained  in  the  first  poem  of  Gautier's  first  volume :

"  Ce  qui  charme  s'en  va,  ce  qui  fait  peine  reste,
La  rose  vit  une  heure,  et  le  cypres  cent  ans."

In  his  preface  to  the  volume,  Gautier  expounds  the  views
condensed  into  the  couplet  above  quoted, — his  admiration  for
the  beautiful  and  his  conviction  of  its  evanescence.  The  motto
at  the  head  of  this  poem  is  a  quotation  from  Malherbe's  famous
lines  on  the  death  of  his  friend's  child,  thus  :  "  Ce  monde  ou
les  meilleures  choses  out  le  pire  destin."  The  name  of  the
poem  is  "  MSditation."

Here,  therefore,  we  have  a  poem  of  Gautier —

(1)  characteristic  of  the  author,

(2)  closely  associated  with  the  topic  of  "La  vie  est  breve,"

(3)  bearing  a  title — Meditation — a  word  emphasized  by  the
repetition  in  my  script  (Oct.  3,  4,  10,  1910)  of  the  word,
which  had  been  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  (July  8,  16,
1910)  as  a  subject  for  cross-correspondence.

These  facts  naturally  struck  me,  and  having  thus  found  a
connexion  between  the  M.  V.  "Meditation"  (Oct.  3,  4,  and  10)
and  Gautier,  I  looked  back  at  the  intervening  script  (Oct.  5)
to  see  if  it  also  were  connected  with  the  subject.  I  then
noted  that  this  script,  already  emphasized  by  forming  part  of
a  cross-correspondence,  contained  the  words  "  toute  la  lyre,"
which  are  the  title  of  a  volume  of  Victor  Hugo. 1

1I  had  not  noticed  this  before.  My  note  runs:  "Jan.  27,  1911.  Toute  la
lyre  is  the  name  of  a  vol.  of  V.  Hugo,  I  think,"


lxiilJ Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  327


On  Jan.  28,  1911,  I  went  to  the  University  Library  to  see
whether  anything  in  Victor  Hugo's  Toutc  la  Lyre  threw  light
on  the  script.  The  volume  was  not  one  of  those  known  to
me,  but  I  had  looked  through  it,  as  above  described,  in  search
of  the  lines  "La  vie  est  breve,"  in  April  or  May  1910.  I
now  found  in  it  two  poems  of  interest  in  the  present  con-
nexion, thus:  (1)  The  last  poem  of  Book  IV.,  dated  "  Le
Jour  des  Morts,  1872  " — the  year  of  Gautier's  death — -is
addressed  "  a,  Theophile  Gautier."  It  describes  the  early  friend-
ship of  the  two  poets,  dwells  on  the  old  age  of  the  present
writer  1 —

"  Moi,  blanchi  par  les  jours  sur  ma  tete  neigeant,
Je  me  souviens  des  temps  ecoules, .  .  ."

and  recalls  Gautier's  preface  and  his  poem  "  Meditation "  by
allusions  to  his  search  for  the  beautiful.

"  Va  chercher  le  vrai,  toi  qui  sus  trouver  le  beau."

(2)  In  the  sixteenth  poem  of  Book  III.,  called  "  Epitaphes
d'Enfants,"  the  ending  of  a  child's  short  life  is  regarded  as  a
subject  not  of  regret  but  of  rejoicing,  thus  exactly  reversing
the  sentiment  of  Gautier.  Gautier  laments  the  evanescence  of
the  beautiful,  which  perishes  like  a  rose,  or  the  child  of
Malherbe's  lines :

"  Ce  qui  charme  s'en  va,  ce  qui  fait  peine  reste,
La  rose  vit  une  heure,  et  le  cypres  cent  ans."

Hugo,  on  the  contrary,  envies  the  brevity  of  the  child's  life :

"  Enfant,  que  je  te  porte  envie !
Ta  barque  neuve  echoue  au  port ;
Qu'as  tu  done  fait  pour  que  ta  vie
Ait  sitot  merite  la  mort  ? "

Thus,  following  the  hints  of  "  meditation  "  (in  M.  V.  script  of
Oct.  3,  4,  and  10)  and  of  "  toute  la  lyre  "  (M.  V.  script  of  Oct.  o),
we  have  arrived  at  poems  by  Hugo  and  Gautier,  characteristic
of  their  respective  authors  and  dealing  with  the  emptiness  and
brevity  of  life.  Hereby  a  meaning  is  given  to  the  remarks  of
H.  V.  script  of  March  16,  190S,  which,  after  quoting  the  stanza

1Cf.  M.  V.  script :  "  The  minstrel  was  infirm  and  old."  Toutt  la  Lyre,  Hugo's
final  volume,  might  be  described,  not  indeed  as  the  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,
but  as  the  Minstrel's  Last  Lay.


328


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


beginning  "  La  vie  est  breve,"  says  that  "  Gautier  and  Hugo "
are  "  types  to  be  compared."

Moreover,  an  explanation  is  now  forthcoming  for  the  choice
of  the  word  "  rose "  to  serve  as  a  second  link  in  the  cross-
correspondence  on  the  two-stanza  poem,  "  La  vie  est  breve,"
between  the  H.  V.  and  Mac  scripts.  The  introduction  of  a
second  topic,  not  associated  with  either  stanza  of  the  French
poem,  is  strong  evidence,  as  I  noted  in  my  paper  on  the
subject  (Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  299),  that  the  correspondence
on  the  French  poem  is  not  accidental.  Still  stronger  evidence
of  design  is  now  furnished  by  the  identification  of  the  poem
of  Gautier,  which,  according  to  the  H.  V.  script  of  March  16,
1908,  presented  a  type  for  comparison  with  Hugo.  For
Gautier's  poem,  based  on  Malherbe's  lines,  chooses  as  a  type  of
the  evanescence  of  beauty  the  short-lived  "  rose,"  and  this  gives
point  to  the  introduction  of  a  "rose"  in  the  H.  V.  script.
The  choice  of  a  rose  to  combine  with  each  stanza  of  the
French  poem  as  topics  for  transmission  is,  as  I  recognised
Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  297),  not  inappropriate,  and  might,  for
instance,  be  accounted  for  by  a  familiarity  with  Malherbe's
poem  on  the  death  of  his  friend's  little  daughter :

"  Et  rose,  elle  a  vecu  ce  qui  vivent  les  roses,
L'espace  d'un  matin."

I  did,  indeed,  detect  and  note  at  the  time  references  to
Malherbe's  lines  in  the  Mac  scripts;  thus,1  on  July  21,  1908,
"  why  did  the  rose  fall  so  young  and  fresh — "  and  on  July  26,
1908,  "alas  for  the  faded  faded  petals — helas  elle  est  morte  dans
sa  jeunesse  quand  tout  est  frais  et  nouveau."

But  it  requires  a  knowledge  not  of  Malherbe  but  of
Gautier  to  see  the  appropriateness  of  introducing  Gautier's
name  into  the  H.  V.  script  of  March  16,  1908,  with  its
"brevity  of  life"  and  its  "rose";  and  it  takes  a  knowledge
both  of  Gautier  and  of  Hugo  to  suggest  in  the  same  connexion
that  those  types  should  be  compared.  That  knowledge  neither
my  daughter  nor  I  possessed  at  the  time  when  her  script  was
written.2 I  have acquired it  since by  following up  hints

1  The  scripts  are  quoted  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  308,  309.

2  That  is  perhaps  recognised  in  the  remark  about  the  lack  of  opportunity,
unless  there  were  a  possibility  of  putting  the  two  side  by  side  ;  it  was  long
before  such  an  opportunity  occurred.


lxiii.] Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March,  16,  1908.


329


given  in  script.  It  is,  of  course,  possible — though  I  do  not
myself  accept  as  sufficient  such  an  explanation, — that  the
hints  suggested  by  the  words  in  my  own  script,  "  Meditation  "
and  "  toute  la  lyre,"  were  due  to  subliminal  memory  of  what
I  had  seen  in  turning  over  the  pages  of  Gautier  and  Hugo,
after  I  was  acquainted  with  the  H.  V.  script  of  March  1G,
1908.  But  my  subliminal  memory  does  not  account  for  the
choice,  as  a  subject  for  transmission  to  other  automatists,  of
the  word  "Meditation"  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  of  July  1910
—  before  the  appearance  of  the  word  in  my  script — nor  for
the  cross-correspondence  between  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  script,  which
drew  my  attention  to  the  words  "  toute  la  lyre."  And  I  am
as  certain  as  I  can  be  of  anything,  that  in  March  1908,
neither  my  daughter  nor  I  had  any  knowledge  whatever :

(a)  of  Gautier's  Meditation;

(5)  of  Hugo's  Epitaplies  cVEnfants  or  of  any  poem  in  Touts
la  Lyre ;

(c)  of  any  reason  why  a  comparison  of  the  types  of  Hugo
and  Gautier  should  throw  light  on  the  conjunction  of  a  rose
with  the  last  stanza  of  a  poem  commemorating  the  emptiness
and  brevity  of  life.

To  make  the  dates  and  sequence  of  incidents  clear  to  the
reader,  I  append  a  chronological  table,  showing  the  chief
incidents.

(1)  March  16,  1908. H.  V. La  vie  est breve;  rose;


Gautier  and  H  112:0  to
be  compared.


(2)  July  27,  1908.

(3)  Sept.  26,  1908.


Mac.


Mrs.  Verrall  receives  Mac
script  and  notes  cross-
correspondence on  "  La


Vain  is  life ;  rose.


vie,  etc."


(4)  Dec.  1908.


Mrs.  Verrall,  accepting
Hugo's  authorship  of
"  La  vie,  etc.,"  fails  to
find  comparable  poem
by  Gautier.


330


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


(5)  April,  1910.  Proceedings,  Part  LX.  (Vol.

XXIV.),  issued  from
printers,  with  account  of
cross-correspondence  on
"  La  vie,  etc."

(6)  May,  1910.  Mrs.  Verrall,  hearing  that

"  La  vie,  etc.,"  is  not  by
Hugo,  looks  through  all
Hugo's  poems.

(7)  July  8,  1910.  Piper.  Meditation.

(8)  July  16,  1910.  Piper.  Meditation.

(9)  Sept.  2  2,  1910.  Mrs.  Verrall  sees  records

of  Piper  sittings  in
July  1910.

(10)  Oct.  3,  1910.  M.  V.  Meditation.

(11)  Oct.  4,  1910.  M.  V.  Meditation

(12)  Oct.  5,  1910.  M.  V. Toute  la  lyre.

(13)  Oct.  6,  1910.  H.  V.  Dulcimer.

(14)  Oct.  10,  1910.  M.  V.  Meditation.

(15)  Jan.  7,  1911.  Mrs.  Verrall notes  refer-

ence by  Mrs.  Wharton
to  Gautier's  axiom  con-
nected with  "  rose  "  and
"  laurel."

(16)  Jan.  21,  1911.  Mrs. Verrall sees  H.  V.

script  of  Oct.  6,  1910,
and  notes  cross-corre-
spondence on  "  stringed
instrument."

(17)  Jan.  27,  1911.  Mrs.  Verrall  finds  Gautier's

Meditation.

(18)  Jan.  28,  1911.  Mrs. Verrall finds  Epi-

taphes  d'Enfants  and  a
poem  to  Gautier  in
Hugo's  Toutc  la  Lyre.


lxiil] Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  331


Appendix  A.

"  Meditation  "  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Sittings.

The  following  extracts  from  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  of  July  8
and  July  16,  1910,  show  how  the  word  "Meditation"  was
there  introduced  :

Extract  from  Sitting  of  July  8,  1910.  Sitters,  Lady  Lodge  and  Sir
Oliver  Lodge,  the  latter  taking  notes :  contemporary  notes  are  in  rcrand
brackets,  letter  additions  in  square  brackets.

( Waking-stage.)

Myers.  Meditation.

(Very  faint.  Then  she  began  to  whisper  a  poem  fast  and  low —
too  low  to  hear  properly. All  I  could  record  was  this.)

 ,  meditation  .  .  .

 sleeping  dead

Laurels  round

 ever  grow.

Meditation  links  it.  (These  words  were  said  at  end  of  stanza
as  a  sort  of  explanation.  The  stanza  sounded  quite  like  poetry,
but  it  was  whispered  very  fast.  I  said  "  Could  Myers  repeat  it
again,"  on  which  it  seemed  to  be  repeated,  and  this  time  all  I  got
down  was  this.)

Churchyard  tree

 walked  with  gorgeous  feet

 about  the  sleeping  dead.

Meditation  links  it
Life  open  peace

completes  the  semblance.
Let's  stick  to  the  old  never  mind  the  new.

Extract  from  Sitting  of  July  16,  1910. Sitters,  Miss  Johnson  and  Sir
Oliver  Lodge,  the  latter  taking  notes.

(B.  H.  communicating.)

Meditation.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  want  to  understand  about  that.
Connects  it.


332  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

0.  J.  L.  Links  it  1
Yes.

0.  J.  L.  I  cannot  find  a  poem  called  Meditation.

Meditation comes  out  in  Mrs.  Holland's  also  will  appear
at  Mrs.  W.'s. Wait  for  it.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  all  right,  but  let  me  ask  you :  In  the  waking  stage
last  time  Myers  recited  a  verse  of  a  poem,  but  I  could
not  get  it  down  quite. Could  you  write  the  poem  %

Elegy

I'll  get  Myers  to  repeat  it  for  me.

As  through  the  graveyard's  lone  retreat

my  Meditation  led

Slow  I  walked  with  cautious  feet

above  the  sleeping  dead

(0.  J.  L.  in  reading  mis-read  the  word  before  "  feet.")
Cautious  he  said
Got  it  1
Cautious.

0.  J.  L.  Yes  I  see,  cautious  feet.

Meditation  clinches  it.
0.  J.  L.  Can  you  tell  me  if  it  is  an  original  poem  1

No  he  quoted  it.
0.  J.  L.  Does  he  wish  to  say  where  he  quoted  it  from  1

Elegy.

0.  J.  L.  Do  you  mean  Gray's  Elegy?
Yes.

[This  must  be  an  instance  of  an  accepted  but  erroneous
suggestion. — 0.  J.  L.]

But  Meditation  will  play  a  most  interesting  pari
0.  J.  L.  Yes  I  understand,  a  c.c.


LXIII.]


Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  333


And  the  last  two  lines  through  loth  lights.
Wait  for  them.

Times  around  Helen  coming  slowly

[This  is  certainly  incorrectly  deciphered. — 0.  J.  L.]
(0.  J.  L.  tried  to  repeat  this,  emphasizing  Helen.)

Yes  V
Got  it?

0.  J.  L.  No,  I  haven't.

Helen  V

Wait  for  it wait  for  it
0.  J.  L.  Yes,  yes.

What  precisely  was  the  intention  of  the  above,  I  feel  un-
able to  determine,  but  note  the  following  points  :

(a)  Meditation,  on  July  8,  emerges  as  from  MyersP  and  is,
on  July  16,  referred  to  as  from  him  by  HodgsonP.

(h)  Meditation  is  repeatedly  said  (twice  on  July  8,  and  again
on  July  16)  to  "link"  something;  it  will  play  a  part.

(c)  Meditation  was  at  first  supposed  by  Sir  0.  Lodge  to  be  the
title  of  a  poem;  his  note  of  July  13,  1910,  gives  a  list  of
poets  in  whose  works  he  had  failed  to  find  a  poem  called
Meditation.  After  HodgsonP  has  learnt  that  no  poem  called
Meditation  has  been  found,  he  says  that  the  word  will  play
a  part  and  accepts  the  suggestion  that  he  means  a  cross-corre-
spondence. This  suggestion  is  not  spontaneous.

(d)  The  fragmentary  lines  of  July  8,  completed  on  July  16,
have  not  been  identified,  nor  have  they  been  found  in  any
other  automatic  script.

(e)  "  Elegy "  is  given  twice  as  a  clue  to  the  identification
of  the  poem ;  the  sitter's  suggestion  that  Gray's  Elegy  is  in-
tended is  accepted,  but  erroneously.

(/)  The  poem  in  question  is  said  not  to  be  one  by  Frederic
Myers.

(g)  The  last  two  lines  of  the  poem  are  emphasized  as  a
subject  for  transmission.

Possible  points  of  contact  with  the  Meditation,  of  Gautier
are  to  be  found  in  (&),  (c),  (e),  (g). Gautier's  poem  called


334


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Meditation,  and  described  by  him  as  an  Elegy,1  does  "  link "
or  "connect"  parts,  otherwise  unconnected,  in  the  H.  V.  script
of  March  16,  1908,  and  the  important  lines  of  Gautier's  poem
are  the  last  two,  which  allude  to  Malherbe's  poem,  and  intro-
duce the  rose  and  the  characteristic  "  axiom."

"  Ce  qui  charme  s'en  va,  ce  qui  fait  peine  reste,
La  rose  vit  une  heure,  et  le  cypres  cent  ans."

It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  the  "  Churchyard  tree "  of
Mrs.  Piper's  waking  stage  (July  8,  1910)  may  be  an  attempt
to  represent  Gautier's  cypress,  a  tree  evidently  selected  by  him
for  its  associations  with  places  of  burial.  This  suggestion
perhaps  receives  some  support  from  the  parallelism  which  is
thus  presented  between

(a)  the  substitution  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  "  Churchyard
tree  "  for  "  Laurels,"  and

(h)  the  expectation  in  my  mind  that  the  axiom  would  con-
cern a  rose  and  a  laurel,  whereas  in  fact  it  concerns  a  rose
and  a  cypress.

This  expectation  was  derived,  in  my  ignorance  of  the  poem,
from  my  reading  of  Mrs.  Wharton's  book,  and  is  due  solely
to  the  form  of  her  sentence,  not  to  any  statement  of  hers.
The  "  laurel "  of  immortality  is  preferred  by  the  personage  in
her  story  to  the  fleeting  beauty  of  the  "  rose."  I  read  this
story  for  the  first  time  in  January  1911,  soon  after  the
publication  of  the  book.  If  therefore  the  parallelism  with  Mrs.
Piper  is  other  than  accidental,  its  explanation  must  be  found
elsewhere  than  in  my  mental  activity,  whether  consciously  or
unconsciously  exercised.  The  association  in  my  mind  between
"  cypress "  and  "  laurel,"  in  connexion  with  "  Meditation,"
demonstrably  came  into  existence  only  in  January  1911,  and
not  earlier,  and  cannot  therefore  be  held  accountable  for  the
combination  by  MyersP,  six  months  before,  of  "  Meditation "
with  "  Laurels  "  and  "  Churchyard  tree."

^autier  divides  his  early  poems  into  "Elegies,"  and  "Paysages,"  and
Meditation  is  numbered  as  Elegie  xii.


lxiii.] Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  335


Appendix  B.


Cross-correspondence  between  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  Script
on  "  Stringed  Instrument."

The  scripts,  produced  independently  and  within  twelve  hours
of  one  another,  run  as  follows  :

M.  V.  Script. Oct.  5,  1910. 10.15  p.m.  Cambridge.


how  often  has  the  tune  been  played  before  ? then  say
minstrel the  minstrel  was  infirm  and  old1


IT


ap  hoel


toute  la
lyre 2


no  you  do  not
get  the  shape


I  do  not  think  you  have  got  the  first  word  at  all. What  you  have
is  the  second  group.

Hoehs  lays 3

That  is  better.


1  Scott's  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  introduction,  1.  2.

2  Name  of  a  volume  of  Victor  Hugo's  poems,  the  last  published.

3  Confused  recollection  of  Gray's  Bard,  I.  2  (last  line):  "High  born  Hoel's
harp  or  soft  Llewellyn's  lay."


336


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  ail.


[part


//.  V. Script. October  6,  1910. 10  a.m.  London.

Aslant  lines  aslant. I  cannot  get  it  clear
a  peak  of  Darien 1  a  damsel  with  a  dulcimer 2
The  lonely  road

[Drawing  of  snake  with  tail  in  mouth]  thus
Ye  have  heard  with  your  ears
More  later

My  daughter  and  I  compared  notes  on  January  21,  1911,
as  to  scripts  produced  since  our  last  comparison  on  September
7,  1910.  Her  script  of  October  6  was  the  first  obtained  by
her  since  we  parted.  Between  the  two  scripts  above  quoted
there  seems  a  distinct  correspondence.

Both  allude  to  a  stringed  instrument,  named  in  one
case,  but  not  in  the  other.  The  "  lines  aslant "  of  H.  V.
script  perhaps  have  some  relation  to  the  two  drawings  in
M.  V.  script,  both  of  which  show  "  lines,"  though  not  "  aslant,"
and  evidently  represent  some  stringed  instrument,  said  not
to  be  satisfactorily  executed,  and  not  to  give  "  the  shape "
wanted.  Clearly  neither  represents  a  lyre.  A  dulcimer  is,
it  appears,3  an  irregularly  shaped  four-sided  wooden  instrument
over  which  are  stretched  metal  strings.  The  first  drawing
might  represent  strings  stretched  over  solid  wood ;  the  second
clearly  shows  a  frame  on  the  left-hand  side  and  so  approxi-
mates to  a  harp.  Taking  together  the  two  drawings  and  the
explanatory  phrase  written  beside  them,  "  toute  la  lyre,"  I  am
disposed  to  think  that  the  intention  was  to  represent  not  a
particular  musical  instrument,  but  the  general  idea  of  stringed
instruments.

Not  only  is  there,  as  I  think,  a  correspondence  between
these  scripts  on  a  "  stringed  instrument,"  but  also  on  Scott's
poem,  The  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.  M.  V.  script  has  the
word  "  Minstrel,"  quotes  the  second  line  of  the  poem,  and
ends  with  the  word  "  lays."  Here,  then,  the  reference  to
Scott's  poem  is  explicit.  H.  V.  script,  with  its  "  the  lonely
road," suggests a reference to two passages in  the  poem,

1  Keats,  Sonnet  on  first  looking  into  Chapman's  Ho?)ier.

2  Coleridge,  Kubla  Khan.

3  Neither  my  daughter  nor  I  had  any  precise  idea  of  a  dulcimer,  other  than
that  it  was  a  stringed  instrument.


Lira.] Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  March  16,  1908.  337


namely,  the  first  line,  "  The  way  was  long,"  and,  more
definitely,  the  second  and  third  lines  of  the  final  verses :

"  And  did  he  wander  forth  alone  ?
Alone  in  indigence  and  age."

I  have  no  explanation  to  offer  of  the  words  "  a  peak  of
Darien "  in  H.  V.  script.  The  phrase  was  known  by  my
daughter  as  a  quotation  from  Keats's  Sonnet.  She  had  no
other  associations  with  it,  and  did  not  know  of  its  application
to  S.P.B.  cases1  until  I  told  her  of  it,  on  January  21,  1911.

The  snake  in  H.  V.  script,  taken  together  with  the  follow-
ing words,  suggested  to  us  "  the  deaf  adder "  that  stoppeth
her  ears,  and  may  probably  be  taken  to  mean  that  the
intention  of  the  script,  though  stated,  has  not  been  understood.

There  is  no  indication  in  either  script  of  cross-correspondence
with  any  other  automatist.  But  the  paragraph  in  M.  V.  script
about  the  "  second  group "  suggests  that  the  important  point
of  the  script,  whatever  that  point  may  be,  was  to  be  the
second  of  two  phrases.  In  this  connexion  it  should  be
noted  that  the  M.  V.  script  was  produced  on  a  day  (Oct.  5,
1910)  appointed  two  days  beforehand  in  M.  V.  script  (Oct.  3,
1910)  thus:  "Write  to-morrow  and  again  for  a  good  message
on  Wednesday."  If  I  am  right  in  considering  that  the
common  topic  of  M.  V.  script  of  October  5  and  of  H.  V.
script  of  October  6  indicates  the  second  of  two  associated
phrases,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  look  to  M.  V.  script  of
October  3,  1910,  for  the  first  phrase.

lSee  Sir  0.  Lodge's  paper  on  Mrs.  Willett's  script  above,  p.  141.  My
daughter  had  not  read  proofs  of  his  paper.


V


338


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.J).


[part


VI.

THE  HYPNOIDAL  STATE  OF  SIDIS.

By  T.  W.  MITCHELL,  M.D.

Our  knowledge  of  the  efficacy  of  suggestion  in  the  treatment
of  morbid  conditions  is  apt  to  bias  our  judgment  in  regard  to
the  value  of  other  psychotherapeutic  measures  and  in  regard  to
the  interpretation  of  the  results  obtained  by  the  employment
of  such  measures.  We  know  how  powerful  and  how  far
reaching  is  its  action,  we  know  how  subtle  and  indirect  may
be  its  use,  we  know  so  well  the  difficulty  of  eliminating  its
possible  influence  in  every  form  of  treatment  whatsoever,  that
we  may  be  inclined  to  ascribe  to  its  virtues  results  that  are
in  part  at  least  dependent  upon  other  factors.  And  although
it  is  probable  that  the  importance  of  suggestion  in  the  domain
of  psychotherapy  can  never  be  gainsaid,  and  that  the  increased
suggestibility  brought  about  by  the  induction  of  hypnosis
cannot  be  denied,  yet  we  are  bound  to  examine  any  mode  of
psychic  treatment  that  is  put  forward  by  responsible  men,  and
to  appraise  without  prejudice  the  theoretical  considerations
advanced  by  them  in  explanation  of  their  results.

We  know  the  efficacy  of  suggestion,  and  we  know  it  is
a  good  rule  of  method  not  unnecessarily  to  multiply  our
causes ;  but  we  also  know  that  no  scientific  dictum  has  been
more  productive  of  advance  in  knowledge  than  that  which  tells
us  to  examine  our  residues.  The  history  of  Science  affords  us
many  instances  in  which  the  neglect  of  residual  phenomena  in
experimental  research  has  led  to  the  overlooking  of  important
facts,  and  prevented  investigators  from  making  discoveries
which,  had  they  paid  due  attention  to  their  residues,  they
could  hardly  have  missed.  The  great  chemist  Cavendish
probably  missed  the  discovery  of  Argon  because  in  his  estimate


lxiil]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis.


339


of  the  nitrogen  of  the  air  he  neglected  a  residue  which  his
experiments  showed  him  could  not  be  more  than  1-1 20th
part  of  the  whole.  More  than  a  hundred  years  afterwards
this  residue  was  accounted  for  by  the  discovery  of  Argon.

Now  in  the  history  of  psychotherapy,  from  its  earliest
beginnings  down  to  our  own  time,  we  find  many  cases  where
the  circumstances  under  which  curative  results  have  been
obtained  render  it  difficult  for  us  to  range  these  results  under
the  category  of  the  therapeutics  of  suggestion.  The  mesmeric
operator,  by  a  prolonged  series  of  passes,  induced  a  trance
condition  which  in  itself  appears  to  have  had  a  curative
influence.  In  other  instances  benefit  was  obtained  when  no
evidence  of  the  mesmeric  state  was  to  be  found.  We  try  to
hypnotize  a  patient  and  fail,  but  while  he  lies  quiescent  we
give  him  curative  suggestions  which  seem  to  be  effective.  We
ask  a  patient  to  lie  quietly  with  closed  eyes  while  we  murmur
therapeutic  suggestions  in  a  monotonous  voice,  and  sooner  or
later  he  derives  great  benefit  from  this  process.

Such  cases  as  these  may  be  regarded  as  the  residual  pheno-
mena of  the  therapeutics  of  suggestion,  and  just  as  Cavendish
and  his  successors  too  readily  assumed  that  all  the  so-called
nitrogen  of  the  air  was  the  same  as  the  nitrogen  of  nitre,  so  we
may  be  missing  some  important  truth  if  we  too  readily  assume
that  all  these  therapeutic  results  are  due  solely  to  suggestion.
The  value  of  suggestion  during  hypnosis  is  well  attested,  and  the
possibility  of  effecting  physiological  and  psychological  change
by  its  means  is  supported  by  a  large  amount  of  experimental
evidence.  But  evidence  of  this  kind  is  greatly  lacking  in
regard  to  suggestion  without  hypnosis,  and  until  it  is  forth-
coming we  are  justified  in  receiving  with  some  suspicion
accounts  of  the  therapeutic  efficacy  of  suggestion  in  the  waking
state.  We  seem  bound  to  consider  whether  some  state  of
consciousness  intermediate  between  waking  and  hypnosis  may
not  be  artificially  induced  and  utilized  for  the  purpose  of
giving  therapeutic  suggestions.  We  should  also  keep  open
minds  in  regard  to  the  possible  influence  of  agencies  other
than  suggestion  in  every  form  of  psychotherapeutic  practice.

The  scientific  investigation  of  states  of  consciousness  inter-
mediate between  waking  and  hypnosis  is  a  contribution  to
psychology  and  psychotherapy  which  we  owe  practically  to  one


340


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.J).


[part


man — Dr.  Boris  Siclis  of  Brookline.  A  research  into  the
nature  of  suggestibility  carried  out  by  him  some  thirteen  or
fourteen  years  ago  led  him  to  formulate  certain  laws  and
conditions  of  normal  and  abnormal  suggestibility.  In  order  to
get  suggestibility  in  the  waking  state  he  found  that  certain
conditions  have  to  be  complied  with.  Attention  must  be  fixed,
but  it  must  be  distracted  from  the  suggestion.  There  must  be
monotony  of  impressions,  limitation  of  voluntary  movements,
and  consequently  a  limitation  of  the  field  of  consciousness.
He  regards  hypnosis  (abnormal  suggestibility)  as  "  a  disaggrega-
tion of  consciousness,  a  slit,  a  scar  produced  in  the  mind  that
may  extend  wider  and  deeper,  ending  at  last  in  a  total  dis-
junction of  the  waking,  guiding,  controlling  consciousness  from
the  reflex  consciousness."  Normal  suggestibility  he  believes  to
be  of  a  like  nature — "  it  is  a  cleft  in  the  mind,  only  here  the
cleft  is  not  so  deep,  not  so  lasting,  as  it  is  in  hypnosis  or  in
the  state  of  abnormal  suggestibility ;  the  split  is  here  but
momentary,  evanescent,  fleeting,  disappearing  at  the  very
moment  of  its  appearance."  1

According  to  Sidis  there  is  no  suggestibility  without  dis-
aggregation of  consciousness.  Suggestion  in  the  waking  state
is  effective  only  when  limitation  of  the  field  of  consciousness
is  produced  by  the  conditions  under  which  the  suggestion  is
given.  Suggestibility  is  an  attribute  of  the  subconscious,  and
only  when  there  is  a  disaggregation  of  consciousness  as  a  whole
is  it  possible  to  appeal  directly  to  the  subconscious.  Now  in
the  treatment  of  psychopathic  disorders  we  often  find  it  desir-
able to  get  into  communication  with  the  subconsciousness  of
our  patients,  not  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  giving  sugges-
tions, but  in  order  that  we  may  discover  mental  material
which  has  become  dissociated  from  the  waking  consciousness.
So  far  as  I  can  discover  from  the  writings  of  Dr.  Sidis,  it
was  in  order  to  determine  whether  certain  cases  of  amnesia
were  merely  disaggregative,  and  therefore  curable,  or  absolute
and  incurable,  that  he  first  made  use  of  the  conditions  of
normal  suggestibility  as  a  means  of  gaining  access  to  the  sub-
conscious for  diagnostic  or  therapeutic  purposes.  The  same
end  may  be  obtained  by  the  induction  of  hypnosis,  but  hypnosis
cannot  always  be  easily  induced,  and  sometimes  it  is  objected

1  The  Psychology  of  Suggestion  (New  York,  1906),  p.  88.


LXIII.]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis.


341


to.  But  "  where  hypnosis  is  not  practicable,  and  the  sub-
conscious has  to  be  reached,  we  can  effect  a  disaggregation  of
consciousness,  and  thus  produce  an  allied  subconscious  state  by
putting  the  patient  under  the  conditions  of  normal  suggesti-
bility."1 Sidis  maintains  that  by  keeping  the  patient  for  a
short  time  under  the  conditions  of  normal  suggestibility  we
induce  a  peculiar  mental  state  which  he  has  named  the
hypnoidal  state.  The  process  by  which  it  is  induced  he  calls
hypnoidization.

Many  different  methods  of  hypnoidization  may  be  employed,
but  they  all  fulfil  the  main  requisites  for  the  production  of
normal  suggestibility,  namely,  monotony  and  limitation  of
voluntary  movement.  In  his  work,  The  Psychology  of  Sug-
gestion, Sidis  gives  the  following  account  of  his  original
method :  "  The  patient  is  asked  to  close  his  eyes  and  keep
as  quiet  as  possible,  without,  however,  making  any  special
effort  to  put  himself  in  such  a  state.  He  is  then  asked  to
attend  to  some  stimulus,  such  as  reading  or  singing.  When
the  reading  is  over,  the  patient,  with  his  eyes  still  shut,  is
asked  to  repeat  it,  and  tell  what  came  into  his  mind  during
the  reading,  during  the  repetition,  or  after  it.  Sometimes,  as
when  the  song-stimulus  is  used,  the  patient  is  simply  asked  to
tell  the  nature  of  ideas  and  images  that  entered  into  his  mind
at  that  time  or  soon  after." 2

In  his  Studies  in  Psychopathology  (1907)  he  writes:  "As
modifications  of  the  same  method,  the  patient  is  asked  to
fixate  his  attention  on  some  object,  while  at  the  same  time
listening  to  the  beats  of  a  metronome ;  the  patient's  eyes  are
then  closed  ;  he  is  to  keep  very  quiet,  while  the  metronome  or
some  other  monotonous  stimulus  is  kept  on  going.  After
some  time,  when  his  respirations  and  pulse  are  found  some-
what lowered,  and  he  declares  that  he  thinks  of  nothing  in
particular,  he  is  asked  to  concentrate  his  attention  on  a  subject
closely  relating  to  the  symptoms  of  the  malady  or  to  the  sub-
merged subconscious  state."3

Writing  in  1909  on  The  Therapeutic  Value  of  the  Hypnoidal
State, he says  : "  The procedure of hypnoidization is  quite

1  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  March  14,  1907,  p.  325.

2  The  Psychology  of  Suggestion  (New  York,  1906),  p.  224.

3  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  J 'our -nal,  Mar.  14,  1907,  p.  325.


342


T.  W.  Mitchell,  31. D.


[part


simple  and  may  be  described  as  follows.  The  patient  is  told
to  close  his  eyes  and  keep  very  quiet.  He  is  then  asked  to
attend  to  some  monotonous  stimulus  such  as  the  beats  of  a
metronome,  or  listen  to  a  continuous  note  produced  by  a
tuning-fork,  or  to  smell  some  pleasant  odour,  or  simply  to
submit  himself  to  a  gentle  massage  in  which  touch  and
pressure  are  of  uniform  intensity.  This  should  be  carried  out
in  a  room  where  it  is  dark  and  quiet.  Fatigue,  physical  and
mental,  especially  emotional,  is  a  favourable  condition.  A
prolonged  warm  bath  with  relaxation  is  favourable.  A  pre-
disposition to  sleep  is  helpful.  It  is  therefore  best  to  make
the  first  attempt  at  hypnoidization  late  at  night,  when  the
patient  is  both  tired  and  sleepy.  In  most  cases  darkness,
quietness,  repose,  fixation  on  a  bright  point  and  listening  to
the  monotonous  buzzing  of  an  inductorium  are  conditions
favourable  to  the  induction  of  the  hypnoidal  state,  even  at
the  very  first  attempt."1

It  may  be  observed  that  the  first  description  is  specially
applicable  to  the  investigation  of  cases  of  amnesia.  The
second  method  described  would  apply  more  particularly  to  the
use  of  hypnoidization  as  a  means  of  discovering  dissociated
complexes  of  a  pathogenic  nature.  In  the  last  description
stress  is  laid  on  the  induction  of  the  hypnoidal  state  as  an
end  in  itself.

By  the  use  of  these  or  similar  methods  a  state  of  con-
sciousness is  induced  which  differs  from  full  waking  but  is  not
hypnosis  or  ordinary  sleep.  The  patient  is  apparently  awake
and  in  possession  of  all  his  faculties,  but  scraps  of  dissociated
memories,  which  he  cannot  ordinarily  recall,  keep  rising  into
consciousness.  The  whole  feeling-tone  becomes  one  of  acquies-
cence and  indifference.  Pulse  and  respiration  become  diminished,
but  are  liable  to  occasional  disturbances.  Fluctuations  of
sensory  acuteness,  sudden  apparently  unaccountable  starts,  and
a  slight  tendency  to  resist  any  change  of  posture  of  limbs  or
body,  without  actual  catalepsy,  may  be  observed.  But  the
condition  is  essentially  an  unstable  one  and  constantly  varies
in  depth.  At  one  moment  the  patient  may  be  practically  in
the  ordinary  waking  state,  at  another  he  may  be  on  the  very
brink  of  hypnosis  or  of  sleep. Yet  on  the  whole  it  is  a  state

1  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  Aug.  19,  1909,  p.  247.


LXIIl.]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Siclis.


343


of  rest  and  calm.  Mental  and  physical  activity  are  relaxed,
emotional  excitement  becomes  stilled,  and  suggestions  meet  with
little  resistance.

The  hypnoidal  state  is  an  intermediate  territory,  on  the
border-land  of  waking,  sleep,  and  hypnosis.  In  the  course  of
a  valuable  experimental  study  of  sleep 1  in  man  and  the  lower
animals,  Sidis  discovered  that  the  hypnoidal  state  is  a  phase
of  consciousness  which  is  passed  through  in  every  transition
from  one  of  these  states  to  another.  In  passing  from  the
waking  state  to  ordinary  sleep  or  hypnosis,  there  is  always  a
longer  or  shorter  hypnoidal  stage.  In  the  practice  of  hyp-
noidization  the  patient  sometimes  drops  into  hypnosis,  or  he
may  fall  asleep  without  touching  on  hypnosis.  And  so  also,
in  awakening  from  sleep  or  from  hypnosis,  the  hypnoidal  state
has  to  be  passed  through.  Sidis  found  that  the  farther  we
descend  in  the  scale  of  animal  life,  the  more  important  does
the  hypnoidal  state  become  in  relation  to  bodily  rest  and
recuperation,  and  he  concludes  that  it  is  the  primitive  rest-
state  out  of  which  both  sleep  and  hypnosis  have  been  evolved.


The  relation  to  each  other  of  waking,  sleep,  hypnosis,  and
the  hypnoidal  state  may  be  represented  in  a  diagram  in  which

1. Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  Apr.-Sept.,  1908.


344


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


the  primitive  hypnoidal  state  is  regarded  as  a  nucleus  from
which  the  segments  of  the  larger  circle,  waking,  sleep,  hyp-
nosis, have  arisen.  The  transition  from  one  of  these  segments
to  another  can  take  place  only  through  the  central  territory
with  which  they  each  have  direct  relations.

The  spontaneous  occurrence  of  the  hypnoidal  state  in  man
is  as  a  rule  merely  a  transitory  stage  in  the  alternation  of
waking  and  sleep.  From  the  point  of  view  of  evolution  it  is
a  vestige  derived  from  a  long  race  of  ancestors,  a  rudimentary
function  which  has  been  superseded  by  the  more  highly
specialized  rest-state,  sleep.  But  it  can  be  artificially  induced
and  maintained  by  the  methods  which  have  been  described,
and  it  can  be  utilized  with  effect  in  the  treatment  of  psycho-
pathic disorders.

The  therapeutic  use  of  the  hypnoidal  state  is  a  somewhat
complex  subject,  for  hypnoidization  may  be  employed  merely
as  an  adjunct  to  other  methods  or  as  a  curative  measure  in
itself.  To  understand  the  claims  which  Sidis  puts  forward  for
it  at  the  present  time,  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  examine
the  types  of  cases  in  which  it  has  been  used  by  Sidis  himself
at  various  stages  in  the  development  of  his  practice  of  it.  The
first  record  of  his  use  of  hypnoidization  I  have  been  able  to
find  is  in  the  account  of  the  well-known  Hanna  case,  given  in
full  in  Multiple  Personality  by  Sidis  and  Goodhart.  This  was
a  case  of  total  amnesia,  following  a  severe  injury.  The
patient,  a  cultured  clergyman,  was  reduced  to  the  mental
condition  of  a  new-born  child.  All  his  former  acquisitions  and
memories  seemed  to  have  entirely  disappeared,  and  he  had  to
start  learning  everything  again  from  the  beginning.  When  he
was  put  into  the  hypnoidal  state  various  fragmentary  experi-
ences of  his  past  life  emerged  into  consciousness,  demonstrating
to  his  observers  that  his  lost  memories  were  merely  dissociated
and  not  destroyed.  The  same  method  was  made  use  of  in
other  cases  of  amnesia,  and  it  was  found  to  be  of  great
assistance  in  effecting  the  resurrection  of  dissociated  mental
material  and  its  reintegration  in  consciousness.

With  the  progress  of  his  studies  in  psychopathology,  the
reintegration  of  consciousness  became,  for  Sidis,  the  aim  of  all
therapeutic  endeavour  in  connection  with  maladies  that  are
associated with, or produced by, mental dissociation.  The


LXIII.]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis.


345


recurrent  psycho-motor  states  of  functional  psychosis,  insistent
ideas,  imperative  concepts,  persistent  or  periodically  appearing
emotional  states,  so-called  psychic  epilepsy  and  other  states  of
dissociation,  all  lent  themselves  to  treatment  by  hypnoidization.
By  its  means  the  dissociated  complexes  could  be  recovered,
the  psychogenesis  of  the  malady  could  be  traced,  a  synthesis
of  consciousness  affected,  and  the  patient  thereby  cured.  As
his  confidence  in  his  method  increased,  Sidis  gradually  ex-
tended its  employment,  until  at  the  present  time  he  seems  to
use  it  in  every  kind  of  disorder  in  which  psychotherapy  is
indicated.  Writing  in  1909,  he  says:  "All  cases  of  a
psychopathic  character  admit  of  treatment  by  hypnoidization.
This,  however,  is  too  broad  a  statement,  as  the  hypnotic
state  is  far  more  powerful  and  attains  its  end  in  a  shorter
time  than  the  hypnoidal  state.  In  those  cases  therefore  where
hypnosis  can  be  used,  it  should  by  all  means  be  employed.
There  is,  however,  a  far  larger  number  of  cases  where  hypnosis
is  not  quite  easy  to  induce,  either  on  account  of  the  patient
himself  or  on  account  of  unfavourable  external  circumstances.
In  such  cases,  and  they  form  the  vast  majority  of  psycho-
pathic cases,  the  hypnoidal  state  is  of  the  utmost  importance
from  a  diagnostic,  psychopathological  and  therapeutic  stand-
point." 1  It  is  thus  as  a  substitute  for  hypnosis,  when  the
induction  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  for  any  reason  impossible,
that  Sidis  recommends  treatment  by  hypnoidization.

Now,  it  might  be  inferred  that  in  using  the  hypnoidal
state  as  a  substitute  for  hypnosis,  we  should  have  to  rely
mainly  upon  the  suggestibility  of  the  state  in  the  one  case  as
in  the  other.  We  might  suppose  that  suggestion  during  the
hypnoidal  state  is  the  essential  part  of  the  treatment.  But
surprisingly  little  stress  is  laid  by  Sidis  on  this  part  of  the
technique.  The  most  that  he  says  of  it  is  that  "  the  suggesti-
bility of  the  state,  if  skilfully  handled,  is  apt  to  increase  the
therapeutic  efficacy." 2  Nor  is  it  in  its  usefulness  as  a  means
of  enabling  us  to  get  into  touch  with  dissociated  mental
complexes,  and  thereby  to  assist  in  their  reintegration  in
consciousness,  that  the  sole  or  chief  therapeutic  value  of  the
hypnoidal  state  exists. He  says,  "  once  the  hypnoidal  state  is

1  Boston  Medical  and  Surr/ical  Journal,  Aug.  26,  190P,  p.  291.
-Ibid.  p.  246.


346


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


induced  by  any  of  the  various  methods  of  hypnoidization,  we
can  either  attempt  to  follow  up  the  history  and  the  develop-
ment of  the  malady,  or  we  may  chiefly  work  for  the  thera-
peutic effect  and  treat  the  present  symptoms.  It  is,  however,
advisable  from  a  purely  practical  therapeutic  purpose  to
combine  the  two  procedures,  as  the  cure  is  then  far  more
effective  and  far  more  stable.  In  cases  where  the  history  of
the  origin  and  development  of  the  disease  could  not  be  traced
on  account  of  the  age  or  unintelligence  of  the  patient,  the
therapeutic  effects  alone  of  the  hypnoidal  state  have  been
utilized.  The  results  are  not  so  satisfactory  so  far  as  scientific
information  is  concerned,  but  they  are  nevertheless  of  great
benefit  to  the  patient." 1

It  would  appear,  then,  that  Sidis  ascribes  some  special
therapeutic  virtue  to  the  hypnoidal  state,  cmite  apart  from  the
suggestibility  which  characterises  it,  and  apart  also  from  the
assistance  which  it  gives  us  in  tracing  the  pathogenesis  of
psychopathic  disorders.  On  what,  then,  does  this  special  thera-
peutic virtue  depend  ?  According  to  Sidis,  it  depends  on  the
fact  that  through  the  hypnoidal  state  access  is  gained  "  to  the
stores  of  potential  subconscious  reserve  energy,  which  by  a
liberation  of  energy  bring  about  a  reassociation  and  synthesis
of  the  dissociated  mental  systems  underlying  the  symptoms  of
the  disease.  The  therapeutic  value  of  the  hypnoidal  state
consists  in  the  liberation  of  reserve  energy  requisite  for  the
synthesis  of  the  dissociated  systems." 2

Before  going  on  to  consider  this  contention,  it  will  be  well
to  examine  the  practice  of  hypnoidization  in  regard  to  its
value  as  a  method  of  employing  suggestion,  and  as  a  means  of
facilitating  the  recovery  of  lost  or  dissociated  memories.

If  Sidis  is  right  in  supposing  the  hypnoidal  state  to  have
curative  value  in  itself,  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  determine
how  much  importance  we  should  ascribe  to  suggestion  during
the  state,  even  when  it  is  persistently  used  and  relied  upon
by  the  physician  as  the  essential  therapeutic  measure.  Sidis
gives  practically  no  detailed  record  of  his  use  of  therapeutic
suggestion  in  the  hypnoidal  state,  and  other  observers  who
have  reported  their  experience  of  hypnoidization  have  done  so

1  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  Ibid.  p.  247.

2  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology ,  June-July,  1909,  p.  155.


LXIII.]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis.


347


almost  exclusively  with  reference  to  the  recovery  of  dissociated
memories.

Perhaps  the  best  example  of  the  use  of  suggestion  as  an
exclusive  therapeutic  measure  in  the  hypnoidal  state  is  to  be
found  in  the  practice  of  Dr.  Bramwell's  method  of  treatment
by  suggestion.  I  think  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  by  his
method  of  oivino-  suggestions  Dr.  Bramwell  induces  in  his
patients  a  state  of  consciousness  which  is  identical  with  the
hypnoidal  state  of  Sidis.  But  in  this  mode  of  treatment  there
is,  besides  the  suggestions,  a  prolongation  of  the  hypnoidal
state ;  and  if  the  hypnoidal  state  in  itself  has  therapeutic
virtue,  it  is  manifestly  difficult  to  be  sure  how  much  of  Dr.
Bramwell's  good  results  is  due  to  suggestion  and  how  much
to  the  postulated  virtue  of  the  hypnoidal  state.  If,  however,
we  disregard  the  supposed  virtues  of  hypnoidization  by  itself,
there  is  good  evidence  to  show  that  in  some  cases  valuable
results  may  be  obtained  by  the  use  of  suggestion  in  the
hypnoidal  state.

The  value  of  hypnoidization  in  the  resurrection  of  dis-
sociated memories  is  that  which  is  perhaps  most  firmly
established.  And  this  applies  not  only  to  the  restoration  of
the  forgotten  experiences  of  ordinary  amnesia,  but  to  the
recovery  of  dissociated  memories  that  are  of  pathogenic
significance.  The  most  striking  work  that  has  been  clone  in
this  connection  is  to  be  found  in  the  publications  of  Freud
and  his  school  on  psycho-analysis  ;  but  the  general  principle  of
the  reintegration  of  dissociated  mental  complexes  as  a  curative
measure  in  the  treatment  of  the  psycho-neuroses  has  been
arrived  at  independently  by  several  workers.  Sidis  himself  lias
insistently  taught  that  reassociation  of  dissociated  complexes
effects  a  cure  of  psychopathic  disease.

But  although  Sidis  uses  the  hypnoidal  state  for  psycho-
analytic purposes,  in  so  far  as  by  its  means  he  brings  back
to  consciousness  pathogenic  experiences  that  cannot  be  recalled
by  ordinary  association,  he  does  not  believe,  as  the  Freudians
do,  that  this  process  is  in  itself  curative.  He  thinks  that  "  the
information  of  the  psychogenesis  given  to  the  patient  is  valuable
only  in  so  far  as  by  a  systematic  course  of  direct  and  in-
direct suggestion,  by  mediate  associative  and  immediate  asso-
ciative suggestion,  by  substitution,  disintegration,  and  synthesis,


348


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAET


both  in  the  waking  and  hypnoidal  states,  we  help  to  transform
the  associative  course  and  emotional  tone  of  the  patient's
mental  life."  1

We  must  remember  that  Sidis  admits  that  all  the  lost
memories  that  can  be  recovered  by  hypnoidization  can  be  more
easily  recovered  if  hypnosis  can  lie  induced.  The  realm  of
the  subconscious  laid  bare  in  patches  in  the  hypnoidal  state
is  the  same  as  that  which  is  laid  bare  in  its  entirety
during  hypnosis.  But  those  who  are  familiar  with  Freud's
views  will  remember  that  he  deprecates  the  use  of  the
hypnotic  state  for  purposes  of  psycho-analysis,  on  the  grounds
that  whilst  in  hypnosis  the  resistances  to  the  emergence  of
pathogenic  memories  are  lessened  in  some  directions,  they  are
made  more  intense  in  others.  The  region  of  consciousness
laid  bare  by  the  induction  of  hypnosis  does  not  always  contain
all  the  pathogenic  material  whose  recovery  is  necessary,  and
the  psychic  force  which  prevents  the  emergence  of  this
material  into  the  waking  consciousness  is  at  least  equally
effective  in  preventing  its  emergence  into  the  hypnotic  con-
sciousness. In  my  own  experience  I  have  found  this  resistance
to  be  very  great  in  the  hypnotic  states  of  patients  suffering
from  the  graver  forms  of  hysteria.

If  then,  in  such  cases,  hypnoidization  be  no  more  efficacious
than  hypnotization,  it  would  seem  that  Freud's  method
is  the  best  for  the  purpose  of  psycho-analysis ;  but  I  think
it  is  possible  that  in  some  cases  the  hypnoidal  state  may
have  a  superiority  over  hypnosis  in  this  respect  which  Sidis
does  not  explicitly  claim  for  it.  Indeed,  it  seems  probable
that  the  hypnoidal  state  may  be  the  best  condition  of  con-
sciousness in  which  to  make  use  of  Freud's  technique.  Sidis
has  expressed  the  opinion  that  some  of  Freud's  success  may
be  due  to  the  unconscious  use  of  the  hypnoidal  state,  and
the  conditions  under  winch  Freud  conducts  his  analysis
render  this  supposition  not  improbable.

But  in  expressing  this  view  Sidis  is  not  referring  to  Freud's
success  in  conducting  the  psycho-analysis.  He  does  not  mean
that  by  the  unconscious  use  of  the  hypnoidal  state  Freud
renders  easier  the  discovery  of  pathogenic  complexes.  What
he  means  is  that  Freud  by  his  method  of  conducting  the
1  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  June- July,  1909,  p.  154.


LXill.]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis.


349


analysis  unconsciously  induces  the  hypnoidal  state,  and  that
his  therapeutic  success  may  be  due  in  part  to  the  virtues
inherent  in  the  hypnoidal  state  rather  than  to  the  psycho-
analysis. This  inherent  virtue  of  the  hypnoidal  state  is  the
most  interesting  claim  made  by  Sidis  in  regard  to  the
practice  of  hypnoidization.  In  his  later  writings  he  insistently
maintains  that  the  use  of  hypnoidization  alone,  without  sugges-
tion or  psycho-analysis,  is  sufficient  to  cure  certain  morbid
conditions.  He  bases  this  claim  on  the  fact  that  he  has  found
the  hypnoidal  state  effective  towards  this  end,  and  he  inter-
prets his  results  as  being  due  to  a  release  of  reserve  energy
which  has  been  locked  up  in  the  inhibited  and  dissociated
systems  or  complexes.

The  principle  of  reserve  energy  is  based  upon  a  wide
generalization  of  facts,  namely,  that  far  less  energy  is  utilized
by  the  individual  than  is  actually  at  his  disposal.  In  the
struggle  for  existence,  those  forms  of  life  which  have  accumu-
lated a  store  of  reserve  energy  that  can  be  drawn  upon  in
emergencies,  have  the  best  chance  of  survival.  The  more
complex  an  organism  becomes,  the  greater  is  its  need  to  avoid
reaction  to  every  passing  stimulus.  Such  unrestrained  reactions
must  be  inhibited  or  there  will  be  a  wasteful  expenditure
of  energy,  which  will  leave  the  organism  unprepared  for
occasions  of  stress  in  its  struggle  for  life.  The  inhibitions
increase  with  the  growth  in  complexity  of  the  nervous  system,
and  they  are  brought  about  by  the  multiplicity  of  associa-
tions that  are  formed  in  the  course  of  phylogenetic  and  onto-
genetic experience.  Nothing  so  clearly  marks  off  the  higher
from  the  lower  races  of  mankind  as  the  amount  of  inhibition
they  show  in  regard  to  instinctive  or  immediate  response  to
external  stimuli.  The  inhibitions  exercised  by  civilized  man
are  a  consequence  of  the  multiplicity  of  associations  which  all
his  mental  complexes  have  acquired,  and  it  is  the  increase
of  inhibitions  that  has  led  to  that  accumulation  of  reserve
energy,  ever  ready  to  be  called  upon  in  emergencies,  which
has  made  him  master  of  the  world.

When  we  weigh  the  considerations  for  and  against  a
certain  line  of  conduct,  the  delay  in  our  response  to  the
stimulus  is  due  to  the  inhibitions  exercised  by  the  manifold
of  associated  complexes  that  have been  aroused to  function.


350


T.  W.  Mitchell,  31.  D.


[part


These  complexes  exercise  an  inhibitory  influence  on  the
complex  which  has  been  stimulated.  We  are  familiar  in
experimental  psychology  with  the  notion  of  a  stimulus-thres-
hold, and  the  effect  of  an  increase  of  associations  is  to  raise
the  stimulus-threshold  of  a  complex.  A  complex  that  has
many  associations  will  not  be  so  readily  aroused  to  function
as  one  that  has  few.

Now  if  a  complex  from  any  cause  becomes  dissociated,
it  drops  out  of  the  personal  life  and  cannot  be  set  in  action
through  its  ordinary  sensory  or  associative  channels.  It  will
then  appear  as  if  its  stimulus-threshold  were  very  high.  But
in  fact,  if  we  can  by  any  means  tap  the  dissociated  complex,
its  threshold  will  be  found  to  be  very  low.  And  this  is
what  we  should  expect.  Cut  off  from  association  with  other
complexes  which  were  wont  to  exercise  upon  it  an  inhibitory
influence,  it  now  reacts  to  minimal  stimuli  and  manifests
itself  with  great  intensity.  Freed  from  the  restraining  influence
of  its  normal  associations,  its  locked-up  energy  is  expended
in  wasteful  and  inappropriate  activity.  This  is  well  illustrated
in  attacks  of  so-called  psychic  epilepsy  and  in  the  psycho-
motor reactions  of  other  dissociated  states.

In  a  dissociated  complex  energy  is  held  in  reserve  which
cannot  be  drawn  upon  for  the  requirements  of  the  individual,
and  if  by  any  means  this  energy  comes  to  be  released,  it  is
expended  in  ways  that  are  worse  than  useless  as  regards  the
adjustment  of  the  organism  to  its  environment.  And  even
when  no  dissociation  has  occurred,  the  inhibitions  exercised  by
associated  complexes  may,  under  certain  circumstances,  be  so
great  that  a  complex  may  be  practically  cut  off  from  the
functional  life  of  the  individual,  and  its  reserve  energy
rendered  unavailable.  Here  the  result  is  due,  not  to  the
dissociation  of  the  complex,  but  to  the  raising  of  its  thres-
hold so  high  that  normal  stimuli  are  inadequate  to  arouse  it
to  function.  In  the  one  case  we  have  a  complex  with  a
very  low  threshold,  functioning  only  sporadically  and  exces-
sively because  it  is  dissociated.  In  the  other  we  have  a
complex,  still  functionally  related  to  its  associated  complexes,
but  with  a  stimulus-threshold  so  high  that  it  cannot  be
overstepped  by  the  ordinary  stimuli  of  life.  In  one  case
energy  is  stored  and  then  wastefully  expended ;  in  the  other


LXIII.]


The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis.


351


case  energy  is  stored,  but  it  is  unavailable.  In  both  cases,
so  long  as  the  dissociation  or  the  inhibitions  continue,
nervous  energy  is  lost  to  the  individual  and  his  mental  and
physical  life  is  impoverished.

Now  these  are  the  conditions  met  with  in  functional
psychosis  and  in  the  psychoneuroses,  and  if  we  can  restore  the
dissociated  functions,  or  break  down  the  inhibitions,  we  shall
liberate  the  reserve  energy  of  the  dissociated  and  inhibited
complexes,  re-establish  normal  associations,  and  restore  the
patient  to  health.  Sidis  maintains  that  this  end  can  frequently
be  obtained  by  means  of  the  hypnoidal  state.  In  this  state
there  is  a  lowering  and  redistribution  of  thresholds.  Access
is  gained  to  the  reserve  energy  of  dissociated  complexes,
and  the  energy  so  available  assists  in  repairing  the  breaches
of  associative  continuity.  The  high  thresholds  of  inhibited
complexes  are  lowered  and  reserve  energy  is  liberated.  "  The
overacting  dissociated  systems  with  their  automatic  reflex
reactions  may  form  associations  with  other  systems  and  thus
become  inhibited  as  well  as  controlled  in  their  function  by
the  voluntary  activity  of  personal  consciousness,  while  the
inhibited  systems  with  their  raised  thresholds  and  accumulated
reserve  energy  are  set  to  function."  1  The  reintegration  of  the
dissociated  and  inhibited  complexes  is  accompanied  by  a  new
feeling-tone,  a  fresh  emotional  energy,  which  sometimes  amounts
to  a  complete  transformation  of  personality.

These  are  the  principal  points  which  seem  to  claim  atten-
tion in  regard  to  the  hypnoidal  state.  It  is  maintained  by
Sidis  that  a  definite  state  of  consciousness,  different  from  waking,
sleep,  and  hypnosis,  is  brought  about  by  subjecting  the  patient
to  the  conditions  of  normal  suggestibility,  namely,  monotony  and
limitation  of  voluntary  movement.  It  is  a  state  in  which  there  is
a  variable  and  fluctuating  disaggregation  of  consciousness,  whereby
a  partial  and  intermittent  access  to  the  subconscious  may  be
obtained.  The  intercourse  with  the  subconscious  so  established
may  be  utilized  for  the  purpose  of  giving  therapeutic  suggestions,
or  for  the  recovery  of  the  submerged  memories  of  simple  amnesia
and  for  the  discovery  of  dissociated  complexes  of  pathogenic
significance.  Finally,  the  hypnoidal  state  may  be  employed  as
1  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  Sept.  9,  1909,  p.  360.


352


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


a  therapeutic  agency  in  itself,  by  virtue  of  its  power  of  lowering
and  redistributing  the  thresholds  of  inhibiting  and  inhibited
complexes,  and  so  releasing  reserve  energy  which  assists  in  the
restoration  of  normal  associations.  This,  according  to  Sidis,  is
its  chief  therapeutic  value,  and  it  is  a  claim  which,  if  substan-
tiated by  the  experience  of  other  observers,  will  entitle  the
method  of  hypnoidization  to  be  considered  a  discovery  of  the  first
rank,  and  a  most  noteworthy  contribution  to  psychotherapeutics.

I  do  not  desire  on  this  occasion  to  enter  into  any  critical
examination  of  the  views  put  forward  by  Sidis  in  explanation
of  Ins  therapeutic  results.  For  practical  physicians  the  most
important  matter  at  the  present  time  is  the  fact  that  such  results
have  been  obtained  by  the  use  of  the  methods  which  Sidis  has
described  in  his  writings  on  the  hypnoidal  state.  The  whole
subject  is  relatively  new,  and  I  do  not  think  we  have  had
sufficient  experience  of  the  method  to  be  justified  in  having
very  decided  views  one  way  or  another  in  regard  to  its  use-
fulness. My  own  experience,  so  far  as  it  goes,  tends  to
corroborate  in  every  respect  the  claims  put  forward  by  Sidis.
I  have  observed  the  good  effects  of  the  hypnoidal  state  apart
from  any  other  measure,  and  whether  or  not  his  doctrine  of
the  lowering  and  redistribution  of  thresholds  and  the  release
of  reserve  energy  affords  an  adecpaate  explanation,  I  have  little
doubt  that  continued  treatment  by  hypnoidization  is  sometimes
of  marked  benefit  in  psychopathic  disorders.


LXIII.]


Review.


353


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEWS.

An  Adventure  (Macmillan  &  Co.,  St.  Martin's  Street,
London,  1911).

This  is  the  title  of  a  book  by  Miss  Morison  and  Miss  Lamont
(assumed  names)  which  has  been  widely  read  and  has  made  a
considerable  sensation.  It  describes  a  visit  to  the  Petit  Trianon  on
August  10th,  1901,  when  various  people  and  things  were  seen  which
the  two  ladies  afterwards  concluded  were  hallucinatory,  and
"wondered  whether  [they]  had  entered  within  an  act  of  the  Queens
[Marie  Antoinette's]  memory  when  alive,  and  whether  this  explained
[their]  curious  sensation  of  being  completely  shut  in  and  oppressed"
(p.  23).  What  exactly  entering  into  an  act  of  memory  is  we  do
not  know,  but  it  does  not  appear  to  be  a  dream  state,  since  the
authors  continue:  "What  more  likely,  we  thought,  than  that  during
those  hours  in  the  Hall  of  Assembly  [on  August  10th,  1792]...  she
had  gone  back  in  such  vivid  memory  to  other  Augusts  spent  at
Trianon,  that  some  impress  of  it  was  imparted  to  the  place "
(pp.  23-4).  Besides,  the  story  ends  up  with  a  tour  of  the  interior  of
the  Petit  Trianon  in  the  company  of  a  solidly  real  modern  French
wedding  party  (pp.  10,  25).  If,  however,  the  authors  do  not  mean
a  dream  state  by  "entering  into  an  act  of  memory,"  their  theory
appears  to  involve  their  own  bodily  transportation  through  what  is
now  a  solid  wall  (see  V.,  pp.  87-89).  A  good  deal  of  evidence
would  be  required  before  a  phenomenon  of  this  kind  could  be
accepted  as  a  fact.

However,  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  the  "act  of
memory "  theory,  as  it  does  not  seem  to  us  that,  on  the  evidence
before  us,  there  is  sufficient  ground  for  supposing  anything  super-
normal  to  have occurred at all. The persons and things  seen

z


354


"An  Adventure.''


[PAET


were,  we  should  judge,  the  real  persons  and  things  the  seers
supposed  them  to  be  at  the  time,  probably  decked  out  by  tricks
of  memory  (and  after  the  idea  of  haunting  had  occurred  to  them,
pp.  11,  20)  with  some  additional  details  of  costume  suitable  to  the
times  of  Marie  Antoinette  (p.  24).  No  detailed  account  of  the
experiences  was  apparently  written  till  three  months  later,  Nov.,
1901,1  and  it  is  unusual  to  be  able  to  rely  on  one's  memory  for
details  of  things  seen  after  even  a  much  shorter  interval  of  time.
Vagueness  of  memory  is  the  more  likely  to  have  occurred  in  this
case,  as  the  ladies,  who  at  best  do  not  seem  to  be  very  good  at
topography,  were  not  apparently  attending  closely  to  their  surround-
ings ;  they  are  careful  to  explain  that  they  were  talking  about
England  and  mutual  acquaintances  as  they  walked  (pp.  3,  4),  and
continued  their  "  conversation  about  other  things  after  every  inter-
ruption" (p.  102).  It  may  easily  be  due  to  this  comparative  absence
of  mind  at  the  time  that  they  failed  later  to  recognise  the  places
where  they  had  been.  "  Not  only  was  there  no  trace  of  [the  old
paths],"  says  Miss  Morison  of  a  visit  made  three  years  later,  "  but
the  distances  were  contracted,  and  all  was  on  a  smaller  scale  than
I  recollected"  (p.  36).  This  erroneous  impression  of  size  about  a
place  new  to  one,  and  where  one  does  not  know  one's  way,  is  a
common  experience.

It  may  be  worth  while  to  examine  the  narrative  more  syste-
matically. We  have  in  the  hook  separate  accounts  by  the  two  ladies,
but  these  are  not  strictly  independent,  as  they  wrote  them  after  talk-
ing their  experiences  over.  Still,  the  accounts  differ  in  some  respects,
and,  as  often  happens  when  two  people  walk  together,  they  did  not
always  notice  the  same  things.  Our  friend,  M.  Sage,  who  lives  at
Paris,  anil  has  on  previous  occasions  made  some  investigations  for  us,
kindly  walked  over  the  ground  with  their  accounts  before  him,  and
sent  us,  with  his  comments,  plans  and  picture  post-cards,  some  of
which  we  reproduce  here.  The  plan  we  give  below  is  a  sketch  by
M.  Sage  giving  an  enlarged  representation  of  a  portion  of  a  map  of  the
palaces  and  gardens  of  Versailles  by  M.  Marcel  Lambert,  Architecte
des  Domaines  de  A^ersailles  et  des  Trianons.  The  line  and  letters
on  the  plan  explain  M.  Sage's  view  of  the  route  taken  by  Miss
Morison  and  Miss  Lamont.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  plans
in  their  book  do  not  profess  to  be  more  than  diagrammatic.

'The  papers  written  then  are,  we  are  told,  "still  in  existence''  (p.  103).
Does  this  mean  that  the  two  narratives  at  the  beginning  of  the  book  do  not
exactly  reproduce  these  papers?


LXIII.]


Review.


The  two  ladies  having  reached — by  a  route  which  their  description
leaves  doubtful,  but  which  is  unimportant — the  intersection  of  the
Allee  de  la  Reine  with  the  Allee  des  deux  Trianons,  should  have
followed  the  latter  in  the  direction  away  from  the  Grand  Trianon,
and  would  shortly  have  arrived  at  the  main  entrance  of  the  Petit
Trianon.  Instead  they  took  the  "Chemin  Creux,"  passing  on  their
right  the  Musee  des  Ventures  (A,  on  map),  out  of  a  window  of
which  (the  dwelling-house  of  the  gardien  forms  part  of  it)  a  woman
was  shaking  a  cloth,  and  on  their  left  the  Grand  Trianon.  They
followed  the  Chemin  Creux  to  C,  then  turned  to  the  right,  passing
behind  farm-like  buildings  and  cottages,  and  noticing  farm  and  garden
implements  (p.  16),  probably  at  I),  reached  the  crest  of  the  rising
ground  at  E,  and  turned  into  the  garden  of  the  Petit  Trianon.

It  was  here  that  they  began  to  feel  as  if  they  had  lost  their
way,  and  as  if  something  were  wrong  (p.  17).  "An  extraordinary
depression  had  come  over "  Miss  Morison  (p.  4).  It  was  the  latter
part  of  the  afternoon  of  a  hot  day  spent  in  sight-seeing,  and  when
they  began  to  realise  that  they  had  lost  their  way  a  feeling  of
oppression  was  perhaps  not  unnatural.  Miss  Morison  attributed  it
to  fatigue  (p.  102),  but  afterwards  thought  that  the  fatigue  'he
result,  not  the  cause,  of  the  uncomfortable  sensations  (p.  102),  and
remembers  herself  as  not  at  all  tired  (p.  4).  Miss  Lamont  describes
the  feeling  as  eerie,  and  culminating  in  an  impression  of  something
uncanny  (p.  IS),  but  is  careful  to  explain  (p.  103)  that  she  "did
not  mean  that  she  had  the  least  idea  at  the  time  that  any  of  the
people  encountered  were  unreal  or  ghostly,"  and  that  "  this  was
still  more  true  of  the  scenery."  Nevertheless,  remembering  this
feeling  of  "dreamy  unnatural  oppression"  (p.  11),  a  week  later,  they
agreed  that  the  place  was  haunted  (pp.  11,  20).

On  entering  the  garden  they  saw  two  men  (probably  at  F,  a
spot  close  to  the  entrance  to  a  gardener's  yard,  and  where  M.  Sage
also  found  garden  labourers  at  work)  whom  they  describe  as  dressed
in  "greyish  green  coats  with  small  three-cornered  hats"  (Miss
Morison,  p.  4),  "in  official  dress  greenish  in  colour"  (Miss  Lamont,
p.  17).1  This  description  does  not  seem  to  correspond  to  the  dress
of  either  officials  or  gardeners  at  Trianon  now.  The  former,  M.
Sage  informs  us,  wear  cocked  hats,  and  the  latter  have  by  way
of  uniform  a  Mpi  (the  kind  of  cap  French  soldiers  wear)  with  a
broad  red  band.  This  last  may  possibly  have  given  an  impression
to  Miss  Lamont  which  crystallised  into  official  dress. But  whatever

1" Greenish"  becomes  "green"  in  later  references.
Z2


356


"An  Adventure."


[part


the  dress  was,  it  seems  clear  that  at  the  time  they  took  the  men
for  gardeners.  "  We  spoke  of  them  as  gardeners,"  Miss  Morison
says,  "because  we  remembered  a  wheelbarrow  of  some  kind  and
the  look  of  a  pointed  spade"  (p.  4),  and  again  she  speaks  of  "con-
necting the  sound  [of  the  running  man]  with  the  gardeners"
(|).  5).  In  later  years  they  decided  that  these  men  probably  repre-
sented in  the  "act  of  memory"  two  brothers  Bersy,  attendants  on
Marie  Antoinette,  who,  research  shows,  were  likely  to  have  been  on
guard  somewhere  about  that  spot  in  1789.

They  asked  these  men  their  way  and  were  told  to  go  straight
on.  If  that  meant  by  the  path  marked  on  our  plan  with  an  arrow
it  would  have  been  the  shortest  way  to  the  entrance  of  the  house
from  the  point  F.  They,  however,  appear  to  have  taken  it  to
mean  the  path  towards  G — the  Rocher  bridge.  Just  before  reaching
G  they  would  be,  as  their  description  requires,  at  a  point  where
their  path  ended,  being  crossed  by  another.  They  would  then
have  a  kiosk,  (the  Belvedere,  H,1)  in  front  to  their  left  and  a  rustic
bridge  (the  Rocher  Bridge,  G)  to  their  right  (see  view  of  these,
below,  taken  from  another  point).

The  ladies  do  not  admit,  however,  that  either  the  bridge  or  the
kiosk  have  any  resemblance  to  those  they  saw,  and  further  conclude
from  researches  made  in  1908  and  1907  (pp.  48  and  67)  that  besides
these  and  not  far  from  them  there  were  in  1789  another  kiosk  and
another  rustic  bridge,  now  no  longer  existing,  which  may  have
resembled  what  they  remember.  Much  stress  is  laid  on  these  two
items  as  evidence  of  supernormal  vision.  It  is  unfortunate  for  their
theory  that  neither  lady  saw  more  than  one  kiosk  or  one  bridge  in
that  region  on  their  first  visit,  nor  does  Miss  Lamont  appear  to
have  done  so  on  the  subsequent  one  when  she  regarded  her
experience  as  supernormal  (p.  30).  (For  the  diagrams  on  pp.  53
and  62  do  not  represent  what  they  saw  at  any  one  time,  but  are
only  their  hypothetical  reconstructions  of  the  results  of  their
reseat  ches.)  That  no  more  kiosks  or  bridges  were  seen  than  now
exist  goes  to  confirm  our  conjecture  that  it  was  the  existing  ones
which  they  saw.

It  is  true,  however,  that  the  descriptions  of  the  kiosk  in  the  book,
"  A  light  garden  kiosk,  circular  and  like  a  small  bandstand  "  (in  Miss
Morison's  account,  p.  4);  or  "A  building  consisting  of  some  columns
roofed  in"  (in  Miss  Lamont's  account,  p.  18) — do  not  correspond  well

1This  building,  judging  from  post-cards  and  map,  seems  to  be  called  indif-
ferently by  the  names  "Belvedere,"  "Pavilion  de  Musique,"  and  "Kiosque."


LXIII.]


Review.


357


to  the  Belvedere,  and  are  more  like  the  Temple  de  l'Amour  (see  illus-
tration). On  the  other  hand,  Miss  Lamont  in  January,  1902,  went  to
see  the  Temple  de  l'Amour,  and  decided  that  it  was  not  the  building
they  had  seen  in  1901  (p.  26),  and  on  the  same  occasion  took  for
granted  that  the  Belvedere  was  that  building,  "for  coming  upon  it
from  behind,  all  the  water  was  hidden  from"  her  (p.  30).  Is  it
possible  that  they  saw  both  buildings  in  1901  and  retained  a  kind
of  composite  mental  picture  of  them'?  We  understand  from  M.
Sage  that  the  Temple  de  l'Amour  (/  on  the  map)  is  visible  from
the  points — among  others — marked  K  and  L  on  the  map,  and  if  the
ladies  made  a  ditour  through  either  of  these  points  in  approaching
the  house,  which  there  is  some  reason  to  think  they  did,  they
would  have  had  a  view  of  it  in  front  and  to  the  left,  which  mitrht
have  merged  itself  in  memory  with  that  of  the  Belvedere.  It  must
be  remembered  that  the  grounds  are  not  large  (the  distance  as  the
crow  flies  from  the  Belvedere  to  the  Temple  de  l'Amour  is  only  about
300  yards),  but  they  are  carefully  laid  out,  and — except  in  the
formal  French  garden — planted  with  trees  and  shrubs  so  as  to  give
an  idea  of  size  and  distance  and  prevent  the  plan  of  the  grounds
from  being  obvious  from  any  one  point.  That,  in  fact,  is  the
meaning  of  Jardin  Anglais  (English  garden,  p.  8).

Near  the  kiosk  sat  a  man  in  slouched  hat  and  cloak  whose
appearance  the  ladies  disliked,  and  who  they  afterwards  thought
might  be  the  Comte  de  Vaudreuil,  well  known  at  the  Court  of
Marie  Antoinette.

At  the  junction  of  the  paths  a  man  ran  up  to  them  from  behind
and  directed  them  to  the  right  as  the  way  to  the  house.  They
heard  but  did  not  see  his  approach.  This  running  man  may,  as
Miss  Morison  at  first  supposed,  have  been  one  of  the  gardeners  they
had  spoken  to,  who,  observing  that  they  still  did  not  realise  the
way,  pursued  them  to  put  them  right.  This  would  accord  well
with  his  curious  smile  (pp.  7,  19),  for  most  of  us  are  slightly
amused  when  others  lose  their  way  in  a  place  familiar  to  our-
selves. Why,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  "act  of  memory"  a  mes-
senger bringing  to  Marie  Antoinette  news  of  the  approach  of  the
mob,  as  they  afterwards  supposed  the  man  to  be,  should  smile  is  not
explained.  The  sudden  appearance  and  disappearance  of  this  man
is  easily  accounted  for,  M.  Sage  thinks,  as  the  paths  are  narrow
and  tortuous  and  the  shrubs  thickly  planted.  Miss  Morison  speaks
of  a  "rock  (or  whatever  it  was)  that  shut  out  the  view  at  the
junction  of  the  paths"  and  over  or  through  which  she  supposes  the


358


"An  Adventure.'


[part


man  to  have  come  (pp.  5-6).  Neither  any  mysteriousness  in  the
man's  appearance  and  disappearance,  nor  any  strangeness  in  his
costume  seems  to  have  struck  the  ladies  at  the  moment.  It  was
only  a  week  later,  on  talking  it  over,  that  they  "realised  for  the
first  time,  the  theatrical  appearance  of  the  man  who  spoke  to
[them],  the  inappropriateness  of  the  wrapped  cloak  on  a  warm
summer  afternoon,  the  unaccountahleness  of  his  coming  and  going"
(p.  12).  His  accent  puzzled  them  somewhat.  It  is  suggested,  as
fitting  with  the  "act  of  memory,"  that  it  may  have  been  Austrian
pronunciation  of  French  (p.  22)  or  Breton  (p.  65),  but  M.  Sage
remarks  "  il-y-a  de  bizarres  accents  en  Seine-et-Oise,"  and  much
cannot  be  based  on  that.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  "  the  rock  or  whatever  it  was  that
shut  out  the  view  at  the  junction  of  the  paths"  (pp.  5-6)  becomes
definitely  an  "isolated  rock  standing  up  as  we  saw  it  behind  the
running  man  "  on  p.  71,  to  correspond  with  what  the  authors  regard
as  the  aspect  of  the  garden  in  1789.  On  p.  54,  "  he  stood  in  front  of  a
rock,  and  seemed  to  come  either  over,  round,  or  through  it."  On  p.  113,
"  he  came  over  and  stood  witli  his  back  against  rocks  of  considerable
size  piled  on  one  another."  It  seems  rather  odd,  by  the  way,  that
a  messenger  in  a  hurry  should  come  over  a  rock,  and  very  mysterious
that  he  should  come  through  it,  unless,  indeed,  the  implication  is
that  the  rock  was  identical  with  the  grotto  in  which,  according  to
tradition,  the  Queen  sat  when  the  messenger  came  to  her  (p.  58).
About  this  grotto  we  are  told  (p.  61)  that  "though  a  '  ruisseau '
passed  through  it,  persons  could  go  freely  out  at  both  ends";  but
then  how  could  it  be  at  the  same  time  an  isolated  rock  (p.  71)  and
where  was  the  "ruisseau'"?

After  the  rustic  bridge,  the  way  by  which  the  ladies  approached
the  house  is  too  vaguely  indicated  to  be  securely  traced.  M.  Sage
thinks  it  most  likely  that  they  followed  the  dotted  line  (see  map).
Miss  Morison  says  the  "pathway  led  under  trees;  it  skirted  a  narrow
meadow  of  long  grass,  bounded  on  the  further  side  by  trees,  and
very  much  overshadowed  by  trees  growing  in  it.  This  .  .  .  shut  out
the  view  of  the  house  until  we  were  close  to  it "  (pp.  7-8).  Miss
Lamont  says:  "We  then  followed  a  narrow  path  till  almost  im-
mediately we  came  upon  the  English  garden  front  of  the  Petit
Trianon  "  (pp.  19-20).  Near  the  house  Miss  Morison  saw  a  lady,
unnoticed  by  Miss  Lamont,  wearing  a  pale  green  fichu  and  sitting
on  a  seat  on  the  grass.  She  took  her  at  the  time  for  a  tourist
(pp.  8,  9),  but  now  supposes  it  may  have  been  a  vision  of  Marie


LXIII.]


Review.


359


Antoinette,  who  they  find  possessed  in  1789  green  bodices  and  white
fichus  (p.  75.)  A  green  bodice  with  a  white  muslin  fichu  over  it
would  look  greenish.  The  idea  seems  to  have  been  suggested  by  a
report  heard  by  Miss  Lamont  in  November,  1901,  "that  on  a  certain
day  in  August  Marie  Antoinette  is  regularly  seen  sitting  outside
the  garden  front  at  the  Petit  Trianon,  with  a  light  flapping  hat
and  a  pink  dress "  (p.  22).  This  legend,  however,  they  tell  us,  "  is
of  course  incapable  of  proof"  (p  74).

The  Petit  Trianon  has  terraces  on  its  north  and  west  sides— the
west  one  fitting  in  architecturally  with  the  French  garden.  From
this  terrace  the  ladies  looked  over  into  the  Cour  d'honneur  on
the  south  (the  only  way  into  the  house  for  visitors),  inaccessible
from  where  they  were,  and  then  moved  towards  one  of  the  long
windows,  which  was  unshuttered  (p.  9).  These  movements  seem
sufficient  to  suggest  to  any  one  watching  them  that  they  wished  to
get  into  the  house  and  did  not  know  how  to  proceed,  and  probably
account  for  a  young  man  politely  coming  to  them  and  showing  them
the  way  round.  He  "looked  inquisitively  amused"  as  he  did  so
(pp.  10,  20),  like  the  running  man.

There  are,  however,  two  mysteries  connected  with  this  man.  In
the  first  place  the  ladies  thought  he  came  out  of  a  door  which  he
banged  behind  him,  and  four  years  later  (p.  80)  identified  the  building
from  which  he  came  as  the  disused  chapel  (M  on  the  map)  from
which  no  openable  door  on  to  the  terrace  has  existed  for  many
years.  A  door  now  inaccessible  from  inside  once  opened  on  to  what
is  now  a  small  separate  terrace  or  balcony,  and  they  make  out  to
their  satisfaction  that  there  was  once  a  connection  on  a  level  between
this  terrace  and  the  one  on  which  they  stood.  We  do  not  profess
to  be  able  to  follow  their  reconstruction  of  the  altered  terrace  with
complete  conviction,  but  assuming  them  to  be  right  about  this,  their
suggestion  is  that  the}'  were  approached  by  a  ghostly  man  walking
along  a  ghostly  terrace.  The  chapel  door  in  question  is  only  partially
visible  now  from  the  terrace  on  which  they  remember  standing,  and
another  door  observed  by  M.  Sage  about  10  ft.  further  west  and
suggested  by  him  as  a  more  plausible  alternative  is  not  visible
from  the  terrace  at  all.  On  the  whole  our  own  suggestion  would
be  that  a  noise  as  of  a  banging  door  occurred  simultaneously  with
the  approach  of  the  man,  and  suggested  to  them  in  recollection
that  he  came  through  a  door.

The  other  mystery  we  have  already  referred  to.  It  is  that,  as
the  ladies  neither  remember  walking  so  far  round  as  is  necessary


360


An  Adventure''


[part


in  order  to  get  from  the  west  side  of  the  house  to  the  Court  of
Honour,  nor  entering  the  Avenue  des  deux  Trianons  by  so  narrow
a  path  as  the  present  one,  they  think  they  may,  in  order  to  reach
their  destination,  have  been  transported  by  a  roadway  that  existed
through  the  buildings  in  Marie  Antoinette's  time  where  there  is  now
solid  building  with  no  gates  (pp.  88,  89) !  We  may  remark  that  in  the
incident  of  "  the  chapel  man "  the  ladies  themselves  played  in  the
supposed  act  of  memory  the  part  of  intruders  observed  by  the  Queen
while  sitting  in  front  of  the  house,  while  in  the  incident  of  the
running  man  their  part  was  that  of  the  Queen  herself.  This,  how-
ever, may  be  what  happens  in  "  acts  of  memory."

These  are  the  principal  incidents  of  the  "  Adventure."  In  others
there  seems  even  less  solid  foundation  for  a  supernormal  explanation.
We  ought  perhaps  to  refer  to  supposed  hallucinatory  music  heard
by  Miss  Lamont  on  a  subsequent  visit  in  1902,  and  believed  by  her
to  have  been  of  the  date  of  Marie  Antoinette — "faint  music  as  of
a  band,  not  far  off"  (p.  29).  She  ascertained  that  no  band  was
playing  in  the  grounds  for  the  public  benefit  on  that  day.  She
wrote  down  from  memory  about  12  bars,  but  these  are  not  repro-
duced in  the  book,  and  have  not  been  found  consecutively  in  any
music  examined.  They  may  of  course  be  so  characteristic  as  to
be  convincing,  but  even  in  that  case  may  have  been  an  appro-
priate hallucinatory  reproduction  of  Miss  Lamont's  general  recollec-
tions of  eighteenth  century  music.  On  the  other  hand,  a  more
realistic  explanation  may  be  afforded  by  the  fact  that  a  good  deal
of  exercising  of  soldiers  goes  on  constantly  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Versailles  and  the  Trianons,  and  that  snatches  of  military  band  music
might  well  be  heard,  M.  Sage  tells  us.  It  is  true  that  in  a  later  part
of  the  book  the  sounds  are  said  to  be  "  of  a  band  of  violins  "  (p.  94),
but  as  they  were  faint  and  intermittent  it  seems  not  impossible  that
there  was  some  uncertainty  about  the  instruments.

In  conclusion,  while  gladly  admitting  that  Miss  Morison  and  Miss
Lamont  have  produced  a  very  readable  book  and  have  taken  praise-
worthy trouble  in  looking  up  historical  facts  and  traditions,  we
cannot  honestly  say  that  they  appear  to  us  to  have  added  anything
of  interest  on  the  positive  side  of  Psychical  Research.  The  founda-
tions on  which  the  supernormal  claims  of  the  "Adventure"  are
built  are  too  slight,  and  too  little  allowance  is  made  for  the
weaknesses  of  human  memory  both  in  adding  to  and  subtracting
from  facts — weaknesses  from  which  there  is  no  reason  to  think  the
writers  of  this  book  suffer  less  than  the  rest  of  the  world.


LXIII.]


Review.


361


The  Tenth  Declamation  of  (Pseudo-)  Quintilian.  A  Lecture  delivered
in  the  Hall  of  Corpus  Christi  Coilege  on  May  11,  1911,  by  ROBINSON
Ellis,  Corpus  Professor  of  Latin  Literature.  (London  and  Oxford,
Henry  Frowde. Is.  net. Pp.  24.)

This  last  work  of  the  doyen  of  Oxford  Latinists  may  be  read  with
interest  and  profit  by  all  psychical  researchers,  for,  as  the  Professor
himself  points  out  in  his  preface,  the  declamation  he  has  selected  for
translation  "is  interesting  spiritualisticatty,  I  do  not  suppose  that
any  ghost  story  has  ever  been  recorded  so  circumstantially,  and  this
is  my  chief  reason  for  selecting  it."  The  declamation  is  a  plea
supposed  to  be  made  on  behalf  of  a  mother  whose  only  son  had
died,  but  reappeared  to  her  looking  well  and  happy  on  the  night
after  his  cremation,  and  regularly  afterwards,  growing  more  confident
and  substantial  and  ultimately  materializing  completely,  embracing
her  and  conversing  with  her  all  night.  The  lady  at  last  got  the
ghost  to  promise  to  appear  also  to  his  father,  and  then  told  her
experience  to  her  husband.  The  result,  however,  was  different  from
what  she  expected.  The  father  "  was  afraid  to  see  his  son "
(ch.  6  s.f),  whose  return  from  his  tomb  he  apparently  considered
quite  improper.  So  he  employed  a  magician  to  pronounce  incanta-
tions in  order  to  confine  the  ghost  within  the  sepulchre,  and,  to
make  assurance  doubly  sure,  also  closed  up  the  sepulchre  with  iron
clamps.  The  effect  was  immediate.  The  ghost  ceased  to  pay  his
nightly  visit  of  consolation,  and  after  his  third  failure,  the  mother
made  inquiries,  and  discovered  what  had  been  done.  Her  indigna-
tion was  so  intense  that  she  brought  an  action  for  cruelty  (malae
tractationis)  against  her  husband. Hence  the  declamation.

Of  course  it  cannot  be  inferred  that  the  declamation  was  suggested
by  any  actual  case.  But  its  author  shows  fine  logical  acumen  and
knowledge  of  human  nature.  He  shows  the  true  spirit  of  psychical
research,  and  had  evidently  reflected  more  than  most  on  the  problem
of  the  relation  of  the  living  to  the  departed,  while  his  work  is  at
any  rate  good  evidence  of  the  state  of  opinion  and  sentiment  at  the
time.  It  is  astonishing  how  very  modern  it  all  sounds.  The  whole
story  might  have  happened  yesterday,  except  that  a  modern  British
father,  troubled  with  a  ghost-seeing  wife,  would  either  have  had  the
ghost  laid  by  a  priestly  exorcist,  or  have  appealed  to  a  doctor  to
certify  his  wife  for  admission  to  an  asylum.  But  no  change  of
times  and  religious  profession  has  altered  the  ordinary  practical
attitude  and  sentiment  towards  the  revenant  that  won't  stay  dead.


3G2


Dr.  F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part  lxiii.]


The  judges  doubtless  decided  against  the  mother,  and  would  do  so
still,  and  so  long  as  such  is  the  normal  attitude,  it  is  no  wonder
that  the  seeds  of  scientific  knowledge  which  a  rare  chance  scatters
are  slow  to  take  root  in  the  unpropitious  soil  of  social  prejudice.

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  author  of  the  Declamation  had  a  very
good  notion  of  psychical  evidence.  He  is  careful  to  note  that  the
phantom  could  not  be  ascribed  to  expectant  attention,  because  "alarm,
not  grief,  was  uppermost  when  the  ghost  first  stepped  suddenly  before
me"  (ch.  13),  and  that  the  mothei-  only  gradually  became  convinced
of  its  genuine  objectivity  (ch.  f4).  He  argues  strenuously  against
the  supposition  that  it  was  a  dream  or  subjective  illusion,  and  traces
a  growth  in  confidence  and  materiality  in  the  apparition  itself  (ch.  6).
He  scores  good  points  by  emphasizing  that  the  lady  had  no  reason
not  to  expect  her  son's  appearance  after  the  incantation,  and  that
her  sentiment  was  logically  far  more  natural  and  rational  than  her
husband's,  whose  psychology,  in  palliating  his  dread  of  the  abnormal
under  the  guise  of  solicitude  for  his  wife's  health,  he  depicts  very
subtly.  He  clearly  ranks  himself  among  the  precursors  of  pragma-
tism by  enunciating  the  mother's  "right  of  believing"  in  the  more
consoling  interpretation  of  her  experiences  (ch.  13).  And,  lastly,  he
very  definitely  raises  two  of  the  chief  cruxes  about  such  psychical
evidence  generally — viz.  how  is  it  that  in  advanced  cases,  whether
spontaneous  or  experimental  (spiritistic),  these  phantoms  seem  to
'materialize'?  and  how  is  it  that  apparently  fatuous  exorcisms  seem
to  be  efficacious  in  laying  '  ghosts '  1  The  second  of  these  questions
is  probably  the  more  urgent  of  the  two  for  psychical  researchers  to
answer;  for  they  might  hope  to  discover  why  phantoms  materialize
if  they  could  only  catch  them.  If,  however,  'ghosts'  have  been
rendered  thoroughly  distrustful  by  men's  instinctive  unfriendliness,
and  shrink  from  the  unsolicited  insults  of  exorcists,  it  may  take  the
psychical  researcher  a  long  time  to  convince  them  that  he  is  not
merely  a  modern  disguise  of  the  old  exorcist,  but  genuinely  appre-
ciative of  a  genuine  apparition.  And  then  we  may  possibly  cease
to  encounter  uniform  failure  in  our  attempts  to  interview  'ghosts'!

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXIV.
August,  1911.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  137th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  Morley
Hall,  George  Street,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Tuesday,
January  31st,  1911,  at  5  p.m.,  Mr.  H.  Arthur  Smith  in  the
Chair.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  read  part  of  the  paper  on
"  Poltergeists,  Old  and  New,"  which  is  printed  below.


The  138th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on

Tuesday,  May  16  th,  1911,  at  5  p.m.,  the  President,  Mr.
Andrew  Lang,  in  the  Chair.

Mr.  Lang  delivered  the  Address  which  is  printed  below.


364


Andrew  Lang.


[part


I.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Delivered  on  May  16th,  1911.
By  ANDREW  LANG.

Since  the  noble  peer  who,  to  the  carnal  eye,  seemed  "  but  a
landscape  painter "  informed  the  village  maiden  that  he  was
"  Lord  of  Burleigh ;  Burleigh  House  by  Stamford  town " ;  no
mortal — not  even  the  village  maiden — has  been  so  much  sur-
prised  as  I  was,  when  invited  to  be  President  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research.  This  is,  indeed,  "  the  burden  of  an
honour  unto  which  I  was  not  born."  My  illustrious  prede-
cessors have  been  eminent  in  the  most  severe  sciences —
involving  an  extensive  knowledge  of  the  mathematics,  in  the
first  place;  and,  in  the  second,  a  personal  and  intimate
acquaintance  with  the  natural  history  of  the  fugitive  molecule,
and  the  shy  and  retiring  ion.  Among  such  distinguished
predecessors  I  may  be  permitted  to  mention  Professor  Barrett,
of  the  Old  Guard.  We  argue  glibly,  now,  for  or  against
"  telepathy."  The  idea  of  such  intercommunication  of  distant
minds,  or  brains,  or  both,  not  through  the  normal  channels  of
sense,  is  as  familiar  to  modern  savages,  "  vacant  of  our  glorious
gains,"  as  it  was  to  Hegel ;  and,  again,  as  it  is  to  the
untutored  Gaelic-speaking  Celts  of  North-Western  Scotland.
The  term  "  telepathy "  we  owe  to  Mr.  Myers.  But  Professor
Barrett,  as  early  as  1870,  introduced  what  we  now  call
"  telepathy "  to  the  notice  of  the  British  Association  itself  at
Glasgow,  of  all  places,  and  presently  he  made  the  earliest
experiments  of  note  in  "  thought-transference "  between  persons
in  normal  conditions. Our  obligations  to  Professor  Barrett  do


LXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


365


not  end  with  his  introduction  of  thought-transference  to  the
British  Association  at  Glasgow,  which,  I  fear,  like  the  Turkish
passengers  in  Thackeray's  poem  "  The  White  Squall "  "  thought
but  little  of  it."

I  can  think  of  no  work  published  under  the  auspices  of
the  Society  which  contains  more  stable  evidence  of  the  exist-
ence of  strange  neglected  faculties  in  human  nature,  than
Professor  Barrett's  two  papers  on  "  The  So-called  Divining
Bod." 1  In  the  five  hundred  pages  of  this  book,  which  is
not  in  the  least  degree  sensational,  or  rhetorical,  a  book  which
demanded  serious  disinterested  labour,  we  really  have  proof,
I  think,  of  some  process  by  which  the  human  intelligence
obtains  information — marketable,  practical  information — in  ways
which  are  still  obscure  to  psychological  science.  A  faculty
which  had  been  dismissed  to  the  limbo  of  popular  superstitions
turns  out  to  be  a  fact,  and  a  serviceable  fact.  I  cannot  but
regret  and  condemn  the  flippancy  of  my  Lord  Byron,  the  poet.
His  mother-in-law,  Lady  Milbanke,  was  a  dowser  or  water-
finder,  with  the  divining  rod.  On  her  regretted  demise,  Lord
Byron  said  that  she  would  find  the  faculty  useful  in  the  place
where,  according  to  his  teleology,  she  had  gone !

Some  of  my  predecessors  in  this  Chair  have  been  distinguished
moral  philosophers ;  others  have  been  statesmen ;  others  meta-
physicians ;  others  have  been  psychologists,  learned  in  the
mechanism  of  the  brain  and  the  nerves.

One  was  a  poet  with  a  note  of  his  own,  unique  and
unmistakable,  the  differentia  of  a  poet ;  he  was  a  keen  and
gracious  literary  critic  too ;  a  scholar,  whom  I  first  knew  in
the  merits  of  his  Latin  verse ;  in  fact  was  universally  gifted.
He,  over  and  above  all  this,  was  a  humourist.  Yet  he  turned
away,  in  seeking  an  aim  for  his  energy,  from  all  these
things,  and  devoted  himself  to  Psychical  Research.  He  studied
the  arcana  of  body  and  mind ;  he  made  himself  an  authority
about  hypnotism — recognised  as  such  by  the  authoritative ;  he
was  the  Pounder,  it  may  be  said,  and  the  inspirer  of  modern
Psychical  Research,  and,  happy  in  his  friends,  he  was  accom-
panied by  others  who  could  temper,  by  a  sagacious  and
humorous  scepticism,  the  enthusiasm  of  his  nature.  That  poetic
enthusiasm,  however,  was  indeed  bridled  in  him,  as  I  have

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  2-282;  Vol.  XV.,  pp.  130-383.


366


Andrew  Lang.


[part


already  suggested,  by  a  gift  extremely  rare  among  the  earnest,
of  a  keen  sense  of  humour,  an  exquisite  irony.

No  Society  with  aims  like  ours,  not,  indeed,  novel,  but
new  in  our  age,  could  be  more  fortunate  than  ours  was  in
the  leadership  of  that  group ;  of  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Mr.
Edmund  Gurney,  Professor  Barrett,  Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  and
latest  lost,  Mr.  Podmore,  whose  mission  was  to  throw  cold
water  on  too  sanguine  brethren.  In  our  other  Presidents  we
have  been  happy  enough  to  possess  men  of  the  highest  intel-
ligence in  the  most  varied  fields  of  life  and  action ;  while,  in
the  only  lady  who  has  presided  over  us,  we  recognise  the
patience  and  open  mind  of  Science,  truly  so  called,  with  the
resolute  fairness  and  absence  of  bias,  and,  if  I  may  use  a  term
not  really  frivolous,  with  the  sportsmanlike  quality — which
is  far  from  being  universally  present  even  in  scientific  his-
torians ;  and  even  in  leaders  of  physical  science.

On  this  matter  of  fairness  much  is  to  be  said :  for  the
peculiarity  of  many  of  our  honourable  adversaries  is  that  they
believe  us  to  have  a  bias,  and  themselves  to  have  none.  Now
every  thinking  and  rational  being  is,  naturally,  of  bias  and
prejudice  all  compact.  The  essential  mark  of  the  scientific
temperament  is  to  know  that  bias  we  all  have,  and  to  guard
against  it.  Monsieur  Charles  Eichet  states  the  case  well  in
our  Proceedings  (Vol.  V.,  p.  22).  "There  is  such  a  thing  as
good  faith,  perfect,  stainless,  absolute ;  but  we  almost  never
meet  it,  and  should  not  even  expect  it  in  ourselves.  Strive  as
we  may,  we  are  always  led  on,  more  or  less,  to  give  a  coup  de
ponce,  that  is,  to  press  our  conclusions  in  the  direction  which
we  prefer.  We  may  resist  the  temptation ;  but  that  is  un-
availing, for,  if  we  do,  we  press  too  hard  in  the  opposite
direction,  which  is  just  as  bad  and  dangerous."

Exactly ;  but  not  as  dangerous  to  ourselves.  In  such  deli-
cate equilibrium  let  us  tip  the  balance  against  our  desires.
We  may  be  wrong,  either  way,  but  if  we  give  that  little
touch,  that  coup  de  pouce,  against  our  inclinations,  at  least  our
consciences  are  clear.  Besides  not  much  can  be  lost  to  the
cause  of  knowledge  by  the  tiny  tip  of  the  balance  against  our
inclinations.  If  we  have  no  evidence  so  firm  that  it  cannot
keep  its  equilibrium  against  a  mere  coup  de  pouce,  then  our
evidence  is  almost  nAgligcablc.


LXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


367


Indeed  it  is  true  that  the  subjects  which  we  study  are
extremely  evasive;  like  tricksy  follets  which  play  at  hide  and
seek  with  us.  But  this  is  not  a  peculiarity  of  our  topics  alone.
How  often  does  it  happen  that,  in  history,  we  almost  lay  our
hands  on  the  truth,  but  are  disappointed  by  a  mutilated  docu-
ment !  In  the  study  of  Homer  and  his  age,  we  are  baulked
by  the  spoliation  of  ancient  burial  cairns,  and  by  a  blank  in  an
important  passage  of  Diogenes  Laertius.  The  fairies  have  spirited
away  the  essential  words ;  "  the  Irruntarinia  have  taken  them,"
as  the  natives  of  Central  Australia  say — but  we  pursue  our
studies,  historical  and  archaeological ;  and  in  psychical  research,
in  spite  of  all  the  evasions  of  the  truth  for  which  we  seek,
we  should  not  be  more  easily  daunted  than  in  history  and
archaeology.

It  is  in  no  conventional  humility  that  I  recognise  my  too
patent  inferiority  to  each  and  every  one  of  the  former
Presidents  of  our  Society,  and  to  many  of  its  actual  members,
whom  I  would  gladly  see  in  my  place.  Not  only  am
I  ignorant  of  physiology  and  experimental  psychology,  but  I
have  only  once,  by  accident,  seen  a  person  under  hypnotic
influence,  and  I  never  but  once  was  in  the  same  room  with
a  professional  medium, — a  famous  medium  she  was, — but  a
complete  failure  on  that  occasion !  I  have  lately  been  taxed
by  the  author  of  a  book  on  our  subject  (a  book  which  I
happened  to  review)  with  my  "  aristocratic "  aversion  (he  called
it  "  aristocratic  ")  to  paid  mediums.  But  surely  the  reasons  for
my  sentiment  are  conspicuous  enough.  If  there  be  such
faculties  as  telepathy,  premonition,  clairvoyance,  and  the  powers
of  holding  intercourse  with  the  dead,  and  summoning  them  up
in  material  form,  we  have  good  reason  to  think  that  such
faculties  cannot  be  turned  on  at  will,  punctually,  for  money
down. As  The  Scholar-Gipsy  says  :

"  It  needs  heaven-sent  moments  for  this  skill."

Consequently  the  punctual  paid  medium,  being  human,  and
earning  a  livelihood  by  his  or  her  alleged  faculty  for  making
tables  float  in  air,  or  jump  about  the  room,  is  tempted  to  cheat,
and  gets  caught  by  the  ankle,  like  Eusapia,  where  her  ankle
should  not  be.  Our  records  abound  in  examples  of  the
detection and  exposure  of  paid  mediums,  to  whom  the  most


368


Andrevo  Lang.


[part


honourable  amateur  medium  must  speak  in  the  words  of  the
poet :

"  Said  Fanny,  though  tears  it  may  cost,
I  think  we  must  part,  my  dear  Sue,
For  your  character's  totally  lost,

And  /  have  not  sufficient  for  two."

The  most  honourable  people  who  have  had  what  they  think
supernormal  experience  are  subject  to  illusions  of  memory,  and
the  temptation  to  give  that  tiny  coup  de  pouce.  We  must  be
most  carefully  watchful  of  ourselves  and  of  each  other :  while
of  the  paid  medium  I  wish  that  we  could  steer  clear  altogether.
We  would  never  be  trysted  with  a  paid  medium  if  I  had  my  way.
I  have  therefore  never  resorted,  for  scientific  or  other  purposes,
"  to  them  that  mutter  and  peep,"  professionally.  My  qualities,
in  this  field  of  study,  are  first,  I  venture  to  think,  a  fixed
desire  to  be  sportsmanlike — "  at  least  as  far  as  I  am  able " —
and,  in  the  second  place,  familiarity  with  the  historical,  the
folk-lorish,  and  the  anthropological  aspects  of  the  topics  which
we  study.

These  aspects  do  not  greatly  interest  the  Society,  for  what
the  Society  desires  is  "  modern  instances,"  fresh  evidence  from
just  persons  ready  to  submit  to  cross-examination.  But  in
my  own  mind  the  enormous  volume  of  historical  and  an-
thropological reports  of  supernormal  phenomena,  and  their
striking  uniformity  with  alleged  modern  experiences,  produces
the  conviction  that  so  much  smoke  can  only  be  ex-
plained by  the  existence  of  some  fire.  I  must  not  speak  of
the  psychical  experiences  of  savages ;  these,  for  want  of
contemporary  records  duly  attested,  are  illustrative,  not  evi-
dential. Nor  must  I,  for  the  same  reason,  dilate  on  the
strange  stories  of  the  psychical  experiences  of  men  of  genius.
This  is  a  most  curious  theme.  Among  such  cases,  in  various
degrees,  I  have  observed  those  of  the  wraith  of  Byron,  seen  by
Sir  Robert  Peel ;  of  incidents  in  the  lives  of  George  Sand,
Goethe,  Dickens,  Thackeray,  Lord  Nelson,  Dr.  Donne,  Shelley ;
the  last  words  of  de  Quincey — a  most  pathetic  story ; — the
experiences  of  Sir  Walter  Scott ;  and — not  in  the  supernormal
exactly,  but  in  the  "  subliminal "  way — a  record,  from  his  own
pen,  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington. But  this  is  "  the  blue  smoke  "


LXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


369


of  literature ;  and  of  history,  you  will  say.  Still,  with  this  blue
smoke  there  is  some  fire,  as  the  cause  thereof.  The  Duke  of
Wellington,  in  a  private  letter  of  his,  published  in  Sir  Herbert
Maxwell's  Life  of  that  great  man,  could  not  guess  that  he
was  playing  into  the  hands  of  Mr.  Myers's  theory  of  the
Subliminal  Self,  and  Mr.  Myers  obviously  never  read  the  letter.

To  be  fair  is  the  first  thing  of  all,  and  I  dare  to  say  that
the  Society  has  been  fair.  It  is  not  in  human  nature  not  to
make  mistakes,  and  never  to  be  inclined  to  accept  evidence
which  examination  proves  to  be  erroneous  ;  never  to  indulge  in
hypotheses  which  criticism  demonstrates  to  be  worthless.  But
when  the  Society  has  been  deceived,  it  has  not  concealed  the
fact,  and,  as  to  hypotheses,  as  a  Society  we  have  none.  The
Society,  as  such,  has  no  views,  no  beliefs,  no  hypotheses,  except
perhaps  the  opinion  that  there  is  an  open  field  of  inquiry ;
that  not  all  the  faculties  and  potentialities  of  man  have  been
studied  and  explained,  up  to  date,  in  terms  of  nerve  and  brain.
jSTow  this  opinion  is  also,  I  presume,  entertained  by  the  most
stalwart  and  emancipated  "  rationalists."  Their  belief,  however,
I  suppose,  is  that  everything  in  human  nature  can  be,  and
probably  will  be,  explained  on  terms,  chemical  and  biological,
satisfactory  to  themselves.  The  members  of  the  Society,  as  a
rule,  perhaps,  though  not  necessarily,  are  not  absolutely  sure  of
that :  perhaps  there  are  other  things  to  be  discovered,  though
what  these  other  things  may  be,  at  present  we  know  not.  This
mere  conception  of  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  faculties
not  readily  to  be  explained  in  terms  of  what,  in  the  airy
currency  of  speech,  we  call  "  matter,"  is,  I  think,  that  in  the
Society  which  irritates  so  many  people.  If  other  members
of  the  Society  agree  with  me  in  the  hope  (in  my  own  case  the
belief)  that  many  orthodox  theories  of  all  kinds  are  apt  to  be
upset  in  the  course  of  time,  that  new  fields  of  knowledge  are
perhaps  to  be  annexed,  our  attitude  may,  doubtless,  be  called
Eomantic.  Yet  in  other  fields  I  have  seen  my  early  romantic
aspirations  made  actual ;  I  have  seen  a  vast  region  of  the  historic
past,  in  which  from  boyhood  I  fervently  believed,  thrown  open
by  the  spade  of  the  excavator.  I  have  seen  Homer's  "  golden
Mycenae "  and  "  Crete  of  the  Hundred  Cities "  won  from  the
realm  of  dreams  by  Dr.  Schliemann,  and  by  Mr.  Arthur  Evans,
and  their  followers.


370


Andrew  Lang.


[part


Therefore  I  may  not  live  to  see,  but  I  hope  that  later
generations  will  see,  certain  world-old  world-wide  beliefs  find
scientific  recognition.  Hegel  believed  in  almost  all  the  "  super-
normal "  phenomena  which  we,  not  necessarily  believing  in
them,  have  the  audacity  to  study :  and  the  brain  of  Hegel  was
not,  as  Mr.  Carlyle  said  of  Mr.  Keble's,  "  the  brain  of  a
rabbit.''

I  spoke  of  my  desire  to  be  fair,  and  in  my  desire  to  be
fair  I  have  deliberately  exhibited  my  bias,  my  romantic  pre-
possessions. I  would,  as  a  matter  of  taste,  prefer  certain  facts
to  be  established,  rather  than  not.  I  would  even  welcome
with  pleasure  an  indisputable  Poltergeist ;  not  that  I  think  him
a  desirable  inmate  of  the  universe — far  from  it.  When  I  say
Poltergeist,  I  mean  an  authenticated  instance  of  the  queer
disturbances  and  movements  of  objects,  of  which  history  is  so
full.  Thus  in  a  very  early  Life  of  St.  Dunstan  we  find  that,
as  a  boy,  he  was  a  Somnambule,  in  mature  life  was  a  centre
of  Hying  and  falling  stones,  and,  before  death,  was  bodily
levitated,  bed  and  all,  before  the  eyes  of  the  bewildered  monks.
These  are  not  saintly  miracles.  Men  would  rather  conceal
than  invent  them  about  a  holy  man,  and  they  are  parallel  in
character  to  those  modern  instances  on  which  Mr.  Barrett
lately  read  a  paper,  and  to  Claire  Claremont's  case,  as  given
in  the  journals  of  herself  and  Shelley.  In  short  I  am  not
certain  that  this  kind  of  thing  never  occurs.  But  to  suggest
to  little  poltergeistish  boys,  by  a  gentle  correction,  that  they
should  not  be  mediums,  appears  a  sagacious  measure.  I  have
lived  to  see  many  so-called  scientific  certainties  proved  to  be
fleeting  phantasms  of  hypothesis,  and  more  of  them,  I  think,
will  go  by  the  primrose  path  to  the  gulf  and  grave  of
Lachmann — and  other  learned  persons !  But  these  expressions
of  bias  are  only  made  in  a  spirit  of  fairness,  and  I  must  not,
dare  not,  say  that  the  scientifically  orthodox  would  rather
prefer  that  there  were  no  Poltergeist ;  even  nothing  correspond-
ing to  what  we  call  "  Telepathy."  The  orthodox  believe  them-
selves, I  am  aware,  to  be  wholly  destitute  of  bias  and
prejudice, — and  surely  they  ought  to  know !  But  were  I  to
think  myself  destitute  of  bias,  I  would  be  mournfully  bereft  of
humour ;  and,  were  I  to  conceal  the  circumstance,  I  would  be
equally  devoid  of  honour.


LXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


371


None  the  less,  I  do  not,  at  present,  believe  in  a  Poltergeist :
in  fact,  for  the  moment,  you  have  a  sceptical  President,  who
gives  the  cowp  de  police  against  his  inclinations.  Other  pre-
judices possess  me  which  I  shall  later  divulge.  As  they  are
on  the  sceptical  side,  perhaps  they  ought  not  to  be  called
"  prejudices,"  but  "  the  intuitive  monitions  of  stalwart  common-
sense,  and  genuine  inductive  science."  (I  have  always  heard
that  Inductive  science  is  "  true  and  tender,"  and  Deductive
science  "  an  old  offender.")

Meanwhile,  though  entirely  destitute  of  hostile  bias,  our
critics  are,  certainly,  a  little  careless  and  inaccurate.  Perhaps
this  error  springs  from  a  strong  consciousness  of  intellectual
superiority.  They  should  remember  that  their  native  genius
can  scarcely  be  superior  to  that  of  the  great  Napoleon,  who
fell,  to  the  regret  of  the  Whig  party,  and  of  Lord  Byron,  and
Mr.  Hazlitt,  by  plunging  into  wintry  Eussia  without  waiting
for  the  arrival  of  his  supplies,  and  without  even  providing
instruments  calculated  to  prevent  his  cavalry  from  slipping
about  on  the  frozen  roads.  With  the  same  Napoleonic  con-
fidence in  their  own  intellectual  superiority,  our  adversaries
criticise  us  without  taking  the  trouble  to  read  what  we  have
written ;  or  even  to  re-read  what  they  have  written  themselves.
This  negligence  can  only  arise  from  their  sense  of  intellectual
greatness.  Thus  a  friend  of  my  own,  whom  I  do  not  name,
was  criticising  the  Society's  Census  of  Hallucinations.  "  Thou-
sands of  persons,"  he  wrote,  "  were  asked  whether  they  had
ever  seen  apparitions,  and  out  of  these  people  some  hundreds,
mostly  intelligent  foreigners,  replied  in  the  affirmative."  There
was  no  truth  in  these  assertions !  Of  the  persons  who
answered  the  questions  (which,  of  course,  did  not  ask  "  whether
they  had  seen  apparitions")  in  the  affirmative,  1499  were  of
British  birth,  185  were  not,  and,  of  course,  were  therefore
"  unintelligent."  "  For  all  that  I  can  see,  foreigners  is  fools."
I  had  vainly  warned  my  scientific  friend  that  his  statistics,  as
to  the  proportions  of  British  subjects  and  undesirable  aliens,
were  incorrect.  Confident  in  his  intellectual  superiority,  he
rushed,  like  Napoleon,  on  his  doom,  and  published  his  fantastic
statistics.  I  might  also  mention  a  foreign  critic,  foreign  but
not  unintelligent,  Herr  Dr,  Parish,  author  of  a  popular  work,
Hallucinations  and.  Illusions. He,  too,  criticised  the  Society's


372


Andrew  Lang.


[part


Census  of  Hallucinations:  He  got  rid  of  the  phenomena  by
misstating  the  facts  in  the  report  under  his  eyes,  and  by  then
explaining  away  stories  which,  as  he  gave  them,  were  of  his
own  unconscious  manufacture.  He  also  accused  the  reporters
of  not  taking  the  very  precautions  which  they  did  take  and
especially  emphasised  !

Again,  Dr.  Pierre  Janet  (foreign,  I  admit,  but  intelligent),
in  his  work,  Les  Nivroses  et  les  Idles  Fixes  (1898),  made  much
use  of  Miss  Goodrich  Freer's  valuable  paper  on  "  Crystal  Gazing  "
in  the  Society's  Proceedings.  But  he  attributed  this  lady's  ex-
periences not  to  herself,  but,  now  to  "  a  young  girl,"  now  to
"  a  poor  seeress,"  now  to  "  a  rather  mystic  person."  He  then
triumphantly  explained  the  experiences — by  the  theory  which
Miss  Goodrich  Freer  had  herself  advanced  in  the  vast  majority
of  cases,  namely,  by  the  revival  of  memories — but  he  did  this
without  saying  that  the  lady  had  anticipated  him.1

This  kind  of  criticism  "  is  not  cricket,"  perhaps ;  but  nobody
is  ever  consciously  unfair.  We  are  all  only  subject  to  the
hallucinations  of  our  bias,  to  Bacon's  "  spectres  of  the  cave "
(idola  speens),  and  men  of  science,  like  Sir  David  Brewster,
have  before  now  given,  not  the  coup  de  pouce,  but  the  coup  de
bottc,  to  their  own  signed  and  written  statements  of  their  own
strange  experiences.  Almost  equally  painful  examples  of  this
error,  the  error  of  superior  persons  in  thinking  themselves
infallible,  may  be  gleaned  from  a  work  no  older  than  yesteryear,
Studies  in  Spiritism,  by  Miss  Amy  E.  Tanner,  Ph.D.2  Miss
Tanner  is  a  Doctor  of  Philosophy,  of  what  University  I  know
not.  On  some  points  I  think,  against  my  bias,  that  she  is
right  in  her  criticisms,  but  am  open  to  conviction  if  she  can
be  proved  to  be  wrong.  On  her  first  page  she  states  that
"  the  Psychical  Eesearchers "  (under  correction  I  suppose  her
to  mean  the  Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch)  "  have  printed
voluminously,  persistently  calling  their  work  '  scientific,'  and
maintaining  that  they  have  '  proved '  certain  facts  bearing  in
the  most  fundamental  way  upon  personal  survival  after  death."
"  Whereby  we  have "  drawn  to  ourselves  "  a  large  following,"
aud  so  forth,  and  so  forth.  Dr.  Tanner  must  have  overlooked,
"  In  the  mad  pride  of  intellectuality,"  as  her  country's  chief

1  See  my  Making  of  Religion,  Appendices  A  and  C.
2Appleton  &  Co.,  London  and  New  York,  1910.


LXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


373


poet  says,  the  perpetual  protests  of  the  Society  that,  as  a
Society,  it  never  expresses  any  collective  opinion.  No  Society
does.  The  Folk-Lore  Society  may  publish  my  theories  of
Totemism.  But  they  also  publish  those  of  several  benighted
members  who  are  so  misguided  as  to  reject  my  views.  The
British  Academy  publishes,  but  is  not  committed  to,  the
opinions  of  Mr.  Bidgeway  as  to  who  the  Bomans  really  were, —
and  so  on,  in  every  case.  If  Mr.  Feilding  and  other  observers
thought  that  Eusapia  did  some  inexplicable  things  in  their
presence,  and  said  so  in  our  Proceedings,  other  members  of  our
Society  arose  and  said,  in  the  same  work,  that  the  performances
might  be  very  easily  explained  by  the  old  familiar  tricks.  But
so  superior  are  our  critics  that  this  simple  fact — every  member
may  air  his  own  opinions,  and  the  Society  has  contracted  itself
out  of  all  responsibility  for  every  opinion — is  unknown  to  our
censors.  By  sheer  force  of  native  genius,  they  may  say  what
they  please,  quite  independent  of  the  simple  truth.  Not  only
does  the  Society  abstain  from  offering  any  opinion  as  to  the
Society's  having  "  proved "  certain  facts  bearing  in  the  most
fundamental  way  upon  personal  survival  after  death,  or  any
other  facts,  but  the  Society  continually  publishes  the  essays  of
members  who  maintain,  in  certain  cases,  that  no  such  proofs
have  been  produced.  A  member  is  very  welcome  to  disprove,
if  he  thinks  he  can,  all  evidence  even  for  Telepathy.  The
members  who  argue  on  the  negative  side,  as  regards  commu-
nication with  the  dead,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  are,
I  think,  more  numerous  than  the  members — if  any  such
members  exist — who  argue  in  the  affirmative :  who  say  that
such  communications  are  proved.  Of  course  if  our  critics  say
"  you  should  not  publish  the  observations  of  members  with
whom  we  do  not  agree,"  of  members  who  take  the  affirmative
side,  I  understand  them,  and  partly  sympathise  with  them.
But,  unluckily,  the  constitution  of  the  Society  obliges  us  to
hear  all  parties,  and  to  side  with  none.

My  own  bias,  to  proceed  in  the  path  of  confession,  curls
away  from  Mrs.  Biper  and  from  all  professional  mediums.  A
case  of  abnormal  psychology  so  curious  as  hers  is  worthy,  indeed,
of  the  study  of  orthodox  psychologists,  and  I  would  be  the  last
to  complain  if  our  Society  left  her  for  three  or  four  years  in
the  hands  of  savants  who  think,  like  Dr.  Hall,  that  they  might


374


Andrew  Lang.


[part


succeed  in  exorcising  all  her  "  sub-personalities,"  all  her  "  com-
municators," and  making  her  a  perfectly  normal  human  being ;
which  she  is,  apparently,  when  she  does  not  voluntarily  pass
into  a  very  curious  and  enigmatic  mental  condition.  As  to
the  real  nature  of  that  condition — as  to  whether,  when  appar-
ently entranced,  she  is  acutely  conscious — the  reports  of  Dr.
Hall  and  Dr.  Tanner  are  too  self-contradictory  and  too  casual
to  enable  me  to  form  any  opinion.  One  cannot  even  be
certain  that  on  all  occasions  the  condition  is  absolutely  the
same.

My  own  opinions  are  almost  identical  with  the  hesitations
of  the  late  Professor  William  James  as  described  by  him  in
the  Proceedings.  Much  more  evidence  than  has  been  published
is  needed  before  I  can  enter  into  the  way  of  belief  in  the
identity  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "  communicators "  with  the  dead  men
that  they  profess  to  be.  As  at  present  instructed,  I  believe
in  nothing  of  the  sort.  In  the  matter  of  experiments  I  prefer
to  deal  with  highly-educated  British  subjects,  such  as  the  ladies
to  whom  we  are  obliged  for  so  many  automatic  writings.  I
have  read  with  much  interest  and  some  agreement  Dr.  Tanner's
criticisms  of  what  are  called  "  Cross-Correspondences."  But
criticism  of  her  criticisms  in  detail  I  must  leave  to  writers
better  accpuainted  than  myself  with  those  perplexing  documents.
At  the  lowest  they  illustrate  the  singular  workings  of  the  sub-
conscious mind,  especially  in  the  matter  of  impersonation.  I
have  read,  for  example,  passages  in  the  documents  which  bring
to  my  ears  the  very  accents  of  the  voice  of  one  of  the  "  com-
municators," and  imitations  of  his  style  which,  I  think,  the
conscious  self  of  the  most  consummate  parodist  could  not
compose.  In  short,  there  are  cases  in  which  communicators
are  at  once  so  perfectly  impersonated  and  so  thoroughly  false,
that  our  rude  forefathers  would  have  regarded  the  subconscious
self  as  a  synonym  for  the  Devil.  If  this  view  were  correct
it  would  give  a  great  shock  to  the  Eationalist.

After  prolonged  study  of  the  documents,  I  find  myself  in
complete  bewilderment  over  the  Cross-Correspondences,  with  a
tendency  to  think  that,  in  matters  so  vast,  so  various,  and  so
incoherent,  it  must  needs  be  that  patient  ingenuity  will  dis-
cover correspondences  which  some  minds  will  accept  as  the
result  of  design,  and  others  as  the  result  of  fortuitous  coincidence.


LXIV.]


Presiclentia  I  A  ddress.


375


Between  chance  coincidences,  and  subconscious  memories;  by
supposing,  for  example,  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  read  the  Neo-
platonists  though  she  believed  she  had  not,  Dr.  Tanner  can
explain  away  most  things.  Yet  if  she  has  herself  read  Plotinus,
Porphyry  and  Iamblichus  in  the  original  Greek,  I  am  sure
she  will  admit  that  she  could  not  entirely  forget  the  circum-
stance ;  these  writers  demand  more  serious  application  than  an
ordinary  novel.

When  it  comes  to  three  cases  of  predictions  automatically
written,  Dr.  Tanner  is  puzzled.  Subconscious  memory  will  not
explain,  but  why  not  try  chance  coincidence  ?  Apparently
Dr.  Tanner  does  perceive,  though  many  other  critics  do  not,
that  the  theory  of  chance  coincidence  may  be  overworked.

On  one  "  supernormal "  point  I  have  to  confess  myself
resolutely  credulous,  namely  telepathy.  The  word  "  telepathy,"
of  course,  is  a  merely  technical  term  to  cover  a  variety  of
incidents,  some  of  which,  but  not  all,  might  be  explained  on
the  hypothesis  that  minds  may  intercommunicate  by  other
means  than  the  channels  of  the  senses.  On  this  point  I  am
convinced  by  personal  experience,  by  experiments,  made  in  my
presence,  and  by  others,  carefully  and  contemporaneously  re-
corded by  friends  whom  I  can  entirely  trust,  and  by  spon-
taneous experiments  of  the  same  and  other  friends.  Of  course
the  evidence  which,  in  the  circumstances,  is  sufficient  for  me,
need  not  be  convincing  to,  or,  perhaps,  need  not  even  be
thought  worthy  of  a  moment's  consideration  by  other  people.

Still,  I  am  wholly  convinced.  When  Dr.  Tanner's  ally,  Dr.
Stanley  Hall,  writes,  "  only  when  conditions  can  be  so  con-
trolled that,  e.g.,  a  teacher  can  announce  beforehand  that,  on
such  a  day,  hour,  and  place  he  will  demonstrate  these  things,
can  or  will  they  be  accepted  by  any  sound  scientific  mind,"
one  is  merely  amazed  by  the  learned  Doctor's  attitude.  For
my  part  I  should  at  once  regard  the  "  teacher "  as  a  humbug.
If  either  Keats  or  Wordsworth  had  announced  that,  in  a
teacher's  lecture-room,  on  January  29,  1820,  at  three  forty-
five  p.m.,  he  would  write  an  ode  of  immortal  merit,  and  if  he
did  write  it, — we  all  see  that  he  must  have  composed  his
poem  before  he  made  his  promise,  and  committed  it  to
memory.  "  The  wind  "  of  poetic  inspiration  "  bloweth  where  it
listeth,"  and  so  does  the  telepathic  breeze,  which  requires  a


376


Andrew  Lang.


[part


harmony  of  an  unguessed-at  kind  between  two  or  more  minds.
Thus  experimenters  may  now  hit  on  the  "  heaven-sent  moment,"
and  now  miss  it.  If  "  sound  scientific  minds  "  will  not  believe
in  telepathy  till  its  conditions  can  be  punctually  produced  to
order,  they  can  never  believe  in  it  at  all.  I  see  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  existence  of  telepathy  can  ever  be  de-
monstrated to  the  satisfaction  of  this  order  of  scientific
intellect.  But,  believing  in  telepathy  myself,  I  take  pleasure
in  the  opinion  that  we  do  not  yet  know  all  about  everything ;
that,  if  we  persevere,  we  may  discover  numbers  of  curious  and
interesting  things.


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


377


II.

«

POLTERGEISTS, OLD AND  NEW.
By  Professor  W.  F. BARRETT,  F.R.S.

Perhaps  I  may  be  permitted  to  express  my  own  gratifi-
cation, and  I  venture  to  say  that  of  the  whole  Society,  in
the  announcement  we  have  just  heard,  that  Mr.  Andrew  Lang
has  accepted  the  office  of  President  for  the  ensuing  year.  It
is  an  appropriate  coincidence  that  this  announcement  should
synchronize  with  the  reading  of  a  paper  on  a  subject  to
which  Mr.  Lang  has  devoted  so  much  historical  research  and
literary  skill.

The  term  "  Poltergeist "  is  translated  Hobgoblin  in  our
German  dictionaries,  but  that  is  not  the  equivalent,  nor  have
we  any  English  equivalent  to  the  German  word.  It  is
derived  from  polter,  a  rumbling  noise,  or  poltern,  to  make  a
row,  to  rattle ;  a  polterer  is  a  boisterous  fellow,  a  poltergeist
therefore  a  boisterous  ghost.  It  is  a  convenient  term  to
describe  those  apparently  meaningless  noises,  disturbances  and
movements  of  objects,  for  which  we  can  discover  no  assignable
cause.

The  phenomena  are  especially  sporadic,  breaking  out  sud-
denly and  unexpectedly,  and  disappearing  as  suddenly  after  a
few  days,  or  weeks,  or  months  of  annoyance  to  those  con-
cerned. They  differ  from  hauntings,  inasmuch  as  they  appear
to  be  attached  to  an  individual,  usually  a  young  person,  more
than  to  a  place,  or  rather  to  a  person  in  a  particular  place.
Moreover,  ghostly  forms  (except,  if  we  may  trust  one  or  two
witnesses,  a  hand  and  arm)  are  not  seen.  They  appear  to
have  some  intelligence  behind  them,  for  they  frequently
respond  to  requests  made  for  a  given  number  of  raps ;  the
intelligence  is  therefore  in  some  way  related  to  our  intelli-
gence, and  moreover  is  occasionally  in  telepathic  rapport  with


378


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


our  minds.  For  in  one  case,  which  I  submitted  to  a  long
and  searching  enquiry,  I  found  that  when  I  mentally  asked
for  a  given  number  of  raps,  no  word  being  spoken,  the  re-
sponse was  given  promptly  and  correctly,  and  this  four  times
in  succession,  a  different  number  being  silently  asked  for  in
each  case.  There  are  other  characteristics  which  bring  the
subject  of  poltergeists  into  close  connection  with  the  physical
phenomena  of  spiritualism.  The  movement  of  objects  is
usually  quite  unlike  that  due  to  gravitational  or  other  attrac-
tion. They  slide  about,  rise  in  the  air,  move  in  eccentric
paths,  sometimes  in  a  leisurely  manner,  often  turn  round  in
their  career,  and  usually  descend  quietly  without  hurting  the
observers.  At  other  times  an  immense  weight  is  lifted,  often
in  daylight,  no  one  being  near,  crockery  is  thrown  about  and
broken,  bedclothes  are  dragged  off,  the  occupants  sometimes
lifted  gently  to  the  ground,  and  the  bedstead  tilted  up  or
dragged  about  the  room.  The  phenomena  occur  both  in
broad  daylight  and  at  night.  Sometimes  bells  are  con-
tinuously rung,  even  if  all  the  bell  wires  are  removed.  Stones
are  frequently  thrown,  but  no  one  is  hurt  ;  I  myself  have
seen  a  large  pebble  drop  apparently  from  space  in  a  room
where  the  only  culprit  could  have  been  myself,  and  certainly
I  did  not  throw  it.  Loud  scratchings  on  the  bedclothes,
walls  and  furniture  are  a  frequent  characteristic ;  sometimes
a  sound  like  whispering  or  panting  is  heard,  and  footsteps  are
often  heard  without  any  visible  cause.  More  frequently  than
otherwise  the  disturbances  are  associated  with  the  presence
of  children  or  young  people,  and  cease  when  they  are  taken
from  the  place  where  the  disturbance  originated,  only  to  be
renewed  on  their  return,  and  then  abruptly  the  annoyance
ends.

If  upon  the  cessation  of  the  disturbances,  investigators
appear  on  the  scene  and  ask  for  something  to  occur  in  their
presence,  and  are  sufficiently  persistent  and  incredulous,  they
may  possibly  see  a  clumsy  attempt  to  reproduce  some  of  the
phenomena,  and  will  thereupon  catch  the  culprit  child  in
the  act.  Then  we  hear  the  customary  "  I  told  you  so,"
and  forthwith  the  clever  investigator  will  not  fail  to  let  the
world  know  of  his  acumen,  and  how  credulous  and  stupid
everybody  is  but  himself. I will  return later on to  the


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


379


psychological  cause  of  this  not  infrequent  simulation  of  mys-
terious phenomena,  especially  by  children.

The  point  to  which  I  am  anxious  to  draw  attention  is  the
essentially  temporary  and  fugitive  nature  of  the  phenomena,
and  that  if  we  are  fortunate  enough  to  hear  of  them  at  once,
and  are  able  to  visit  the  place  whilst  the  disturbances  are
going  on,  the  presence  of  the  most  skilful  and  incredulous
observer  will  not  affect  the  result — and  under  such  circum-
stances I  challenge  the  scornful  to  produce  a  single  adverse
witness.  In  fact,  to  any  one  who  has  made  a  serious  and
prolonged  study  of  the  subject  of  poltergeists,  it  is  simple
waste  of  time  to  reply  to  the  arguments  of  those  who  assert
that  fraud  and  hallucination  are  adequate  explanations  of  the
whole  phenomena.

In  the  Journal  of  our  Society  for  1884,  the  late  Mr.
Podmore  published  the  report  of  his  investigation  of  a  famous
case  of  poltergeist  occurring  in  a  house  at  Worksop.1  The
enquiry  was  made  five  weeks  after  the  disturbances  had  ceased,
and  unfortunately  he  did  not  quote,  as  Mr.  A.  Lang  points
out,  the  contemporaneous  and  more  striking  account  of  the
phenomena  attested  by  an  excellent  witness,  which  Mr.  Lang
gives  in  full.2  Nevertheless  Mr.  Podmore  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  evidence  of  the  eye-witnesses  he  examined  was
unimpeachable,  and  that  the  phenomena  were  supernormal ;  and
he  acids  at  the  conclusion  of  his  report :  "  To  suppose  that
these  various  objects  were  all  moved  by  mechanical  contri-
vances argues  incredible  stupidity,  amounting  almost  to  im-
becility, on  the  part  of  all  the  persons  present  who  were  not
in  the  plot."

Twelve  years  later,  in  1896,  without  further  personal  in-
vestigation of  this  particular  case,  Mr.  Podmore  changed  his
views.  Por  in  a  lengthy  report  on  poltergeists,  printed  in
Vol.  XII.  of  our  Proceedings,  he  suggests  that  fraud  arising
from  love  of  notoriety  among  young  people,  and  hallucination
on  the  part  of  the  observers,  are  the  true  explanation  of  the
majority  of  poltergeist  phenomena,  including  the  above  case.
This,  of  course,  is  the  popular  view.

1  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  199,  and  also  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XII.,
p.  46.

2  The  Making  of  Religion,  Appendix  B,  p.  356.

2B


380


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


In  a  review  of  oue  of  Mr.  Podmore's  books  dealing
with  poltergeists,  published  in  Vol.  XIII.  of  our  Proceedings —
and  also  in  his  great  work  on  the  "  Making  of  Religion  " —
our  new  President  has  taken  the  other  side,  and  so  cogently
shown  the  unscientific  character  of  the  popular  view,  that  I
need  not  discuss  the  matter  further.  But  more  than  two
centuries  ago,  one  of  the  earliest  Fellows  of  the  Royal  Society,
whom  Mr.  Lecky  describes  as  a  man  of  "  incomparable  ability,"
Joseph  Glanvil,  the  author  of  Saducismus  Triumphatus,  dealt
with  every  objection  raised  by  modern  critics,  and  demon-
strated that  neither  fraud  nor  hallucination  was  adequate  to
explain  the  poltergeist  phenomena  which  were  abundant  in
his  day.1  Like  all  other  inexplicable  supernormal  phenomena,
it  is,  as  Glanvil  says,  simply  a  question  of  adequate  and
trustworthy  evidence.  With  all  deference,  I  venture  to  com-
mend sceptics  who  dogmatize  on  this  question  to  Glanvil's  work
on  the  Vanity  of  Dogmatizing,  a  book  of  which  Mr.  Lecky
remarks :  "  Certainly  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  work  dis-
playing less  of  credulity  and  superstition  than  this  treatise."

I  will  now  pass  on  to  give  some  of  the  evidence  that  exists
on  behalf  of  the  genuineness  of  poltergeist  phenomena,  beginning
with  recent  cases  that  have  come  under  my  own  notice,  and
then  briefly  reviewing  some  of  the  other  abundant  evidence
that  exists  in  different  places,  and  which  stretches  back  to
remote  periods  of  time.2

The  Enniscorthy  Case.
The  first  case  I  will  relate  has  recently  occurred  at  Ennis-
corthy, a  town  in  Co.  Wexford.  My  attention  was  drawn  to
the  matter  through  a  letter  from  the  representative  of  a  local
newspaper,  Mr.  Murphy.  After  some  correspondence,  and  in
answer  to  my  request,  Mr.  Murphy  kindly  drew  up  the
accompanying  admirable  report :

Statement  by  Mr.  N.  J.  Murphy,
The  strange  manifestations  which  took  place  at  Enniscorthy  last
•Tub',  1910,  may  perhaps  interest  some  students  of  Psychology,  and

1My  copy  of  Glanvil's  Saducismus  Triumphatus  is  the  3rd  Edition,  published
in  1700. Glanvil  was  one  of  His  Majesty's  chaplains.

2  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  has  given  some  remarkable  and  well  attested  cases  of
poltergeists  in  two  of  his  papers  published  in  the  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  Neiv.


381


more  particularly  the  members  of  the  Dublin  Section  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research.

At  the  outset  let  me  say  that  I  am  a  journalist  by  profession
and  in  pursuit  of  "copy"  for  the  paper  I  represent,  "The  Ennis-
corthy  Guardian,"  I  was  brought  into  touch  with  those  concerned
in  the  manifestations,  and  introduced  to  the  room  where  these
manifestations  occurred.

The  "  haunted  "  house  was  one  in  which  a  labouring  man  named
Nicholas  Redmond  and  his  wife  resided  in  Court  Street,  Ennis-
corthy.  Redmond's  earnings  were  supplemented  by  his  wife  keeping
boarders.  On  the  ground  floor  of  the  house  are  two  rooms — a
shop  and  a  kitchen.  Both  are  lofty  and  spacious,  and  the  latter  is
situated  under  the  room  in  which  the  manifestations  occurred.
The  upstairs  portion  of  the  premises  consists  of  three  bedrooms.
The  floors  of  these  bedrooms  are  of  wood,  and  are  all  intact,  the
house  being  a  comparatively  new  one.  Two  of  the  bedrooms  look
out  on  the  street,  and  the  third,  in  which  the  occurrences  took
place,  is  situate  at  the  back  of  these.  All  three  are  entered  from
the  same  landing  and  are  on  the  same  level.  Redmond  and  his
wife  slept  in  the  front  room  immediately  adjoining  the  room  in
which  the  occurrences  described  below  took  place.  The  rear  bed-
room was  occupied  by  two  young  men  who  were  boarders.  They
had  separate  beds.  Their  names  are  John  Randall,  a  native  of
Killurin,  in  this  County,  and  George  Sinnott,  of  Ballyhogue,  in  this
County.  Both  these  men  are  carpenters  by  trade.  I  can  bear
personal  testimony  to  the  occurrences  which  I  am  about  to  describe.
I  accepted  nothing  on  hearsay  evidence,  and  I  place  my  experiences
before  your  Society  exactly  as  the  circumstances  occurred  to  me.
Many  of  the  details  have  already  been  published  in  the  daily  papers,
and  are  quite  true,  much  of  what  appeared  having  been  written  by
myself.

Hearing  strange  rumours  about  the  house,  I  proceeded  to  make
enquiries.  The  owner  of  the  house  replied  to  my  questions  that
the  rumours  I  had  heard  of  the  house  were  quite  true,  and  in
response  to  my  application  for  permission  to  remain  all  night  in
the  "haunted"  room,  he  replied:  "I  will  make  you  as  comfortable
as  I  can,  and  you  can  remain  as  long  as  you  want  to,  and  bring  a
friend  with  you,  too,  because  you  will  feel  more  comfortable."  My
next  move  was  to  procure  a  volunteer  to  accompany  me,  who  was
found  in  the  person  of  Mr.  Owen  Devereux,  of  the  "Devereux"
Cycle  Works,  Enniscorthy. Together  we  went  to  the  house  on  the


382


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


night  of  the  29th  July,  1910,  and  immediately  proceeded  to  make  a
tour  of  inspection.  Sinnott,  Randall  and  the  owner  of  the  house
having  gone  out  of  the  room  for  a  few  moments,  we  made  a  close

BACK  OF  HOUSE.


FRONT  OF  HOUSE.

The  above  is  a  plan  of  the  room  where  the  young  men  slept.


inspection  of  the  apartment.  The  beds  were  pulled  out  from  the
walls  and  examined,  the  clothing  being  searched  ;  the  flooring  was
minutely  inspected,  and  the  walls  and  fireplace  examined.  Every-
thing was  found  quite  normal.  Sinnott's  bed  was  placed  with  the
head  at  the  window.  The  window  faced  the  door  as  one  entered
the  room.  Randall's  bed  was  placed  at  the  opposite  end  of  the
room  at  right  angles  to  Sinnott's,  and  with  the  foot  to  the  door.


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  Nevj.


383


The  two  boys  prepared  to  retire,  Mrs.  Redmond  having  placed  two
chairs  in  their  bedroom  for  the  use  of  the  narrator  and  his  com-
panion. The  occupants  of  the  room  having  been  comfortably  dis-
posed of — each  in  his  own  bed  and  chair  respectively— the  light
was  extinguished. This  was  about  11.20  p.m.

The  night  was  a  clear,  starlight  night.  No  blind  obstructed  the
view  from  outside,  and  one  could  see  the  outlines  of  the  beds  and
their  occupants  clearly.  At  about  11.30  a  tapping  was  heard  close
at  the  foot  of  Randall's  bed.  My  companion  remarked  that  it
appeared  to  be  like  the  noise  of  a  rat  eating  at  timber.  Sinnott  replied,
"  You'll  soon  see  the  rat  it  is."  The  tapping  went  on  slowly  at
first,  say  at  about  the  rate  of  fifty  taps  to  the  minute.  Then  the
speed  gradually  increased  to  about  100  or  120  per  minute,  the  noise
growing  louder.  This  continued  for  about  five  minutes,  when  it
stopped  suddenly.  Randall  then  spoke.  He  said :  "  The  clothes
are  slipping  off  my  bed  :  look  at  them  sliding  off.  Good  God  !  they
are  going  off  me."  Mr.  Devereux  immediately  struck  a  match
which  he  had  ready  in  his  hand.  The  bedclothes  had  partly  left
the  boy's  bed,  having  gone  diagonally  towards  the  foot,  going  out  at
the  left  corner,  and  not  alone  did  they  seem  to  be  drawn  off  the
bed,  but  they  appeared  to  be  actually  going  back  under  the  bed
much  in  the  same  position  one  would  expect  bedclothes  to  be  if  a
strong  breeze  were  blowing  through  the  room  at  the  time.  But
then  everything  was  perfectly  calm.

Mr.  Devereux  lighted  the  candle  and  a  thorough  search  was  made
under  the  bed  for  strings  or  wires,  but  nothing  could  be  found.
Randall,  who  stated  that  this  sort  of  thing  had  occurred  to  him  on
previous  nights,  appeared  very  much  frightened.  I  adjusted  the
clothing  again  properly  on  the  bed  and  Randall  la)'  down.  The
candle  was  again  extinguished.  After  about  ten  minutes  the  rapping
recommenced.  First  slowly,  as  before.  It  again  increased  in  speed
and  volume,  and  after  about  the  same  interval  of  time  it  again
stopped.  When  the  clothes  were  going  in  under  the  bed  on  the
first  occasion,  Sinnott  sat  up  in  bed  and  said  :  "  Oh,  God  !  look  at  the
clothes  going  in  under  the  bed."  He  also  appeared  very  nervous.
The  rapping  having  stopped  on  the  second  occasion,  Randall's  voice
again  broke  the  silence.  "  They  are  going  again,"  he  cried ;  "  the
clothes  are  leaving  me  again."  I  said,  "Hold  them  and  do  not  let
them  go:  you  only  imagine  they  are  going."  He  said:  "I  cannot
hold  them ;  they  are  going,  and  I  am  going  with  them ;  there  is
something  pushing  me  from  inside :  I  am  going,  I  am  going,  I'm


384


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


gone."  My  companion  struck  a  light  just  in  time  to  see  Randall
slide  from  the  bed,  the  sheet  under  him,  and  the  sheets,  blanket
and  coverlet  over  him.  He  lay  on  his  back  on  the  floor.  The
movement  of  his  coming  out  of  bed  was  gentle  and  regular.  There
did  not  appear  to  be  any  jerking  motion.  Whilst  he  lay  on  the
floor,  Randall's  face  was  bathed  in  perspiration,  which  rolled  off  him
in  great  drops.  He  was  much  agitated  and  trembled  in  every  limb.
His  terribly  frightened  condition,  especially  the  beads  of  perspiration
on  his  face,  precludes  any  supposition  that  he  was  privy  to  any
human  agency  being  employed  to  effect  the  manifestations.  Sinnott
again  sat  up  in  bed,  and  appeared  terrified  also.  Mr.  Redmond,
hearing  the  commotion,  came  into  the  room  at  this  time.  Randall
said:  "Oh,  isn't  this  dreadful?  I  can't  stand  it;  I  can't  stay  any
longer  here."  We  took  him  from  the  floor  and  persuaded  him  to  re-
enter the  bed  again. He  did  so,  and  we  adjusted  the  bedclothes.

It  was  now  about  midnight.  The  owner  of  the  house  returned
to  his  own  room,  and  we  remained  watching  until  about  1.45,  and
during  that  time  nothing  further  occurred.  Redmond  returned  then
to  see  how  we  were  getting  on,  and  took  a  seat  by  my  side  in
Randall's  bedroom.  The  three  of  us  having  sat  there  for  about  five
minutes,  the  rapping  again  commenced,  this  time  in  a  different  part
of  the  room.  Instead  of  being  near  the  foot  of  Randall's  bed  as
heretofore,  I  located  it  about  the  middle  of  the  room  at  a  place
about  equally  distant  from  each  bed.  It  went  on  for  about  fifteen
minutes,  and  then  ceased.  It  was  at  this  time  fairly  bright,  the
dawn  having  appeared  in  the  eastern  sky.  Randall  was  not  inter-
fered with  any  further  that  night,  and  we  remained  watching  till
close  on  three  o'clock,  and  nothing  further  having  occurred  we
left  the  house.

On  the  following  night  I  remained  in  that  room  from  eleven  o'clock
till  long  past  midnight.  Neither  Randall  nor  Sinnott  were  there,
having  gone  home  to  the  country  for  the  usual  week-end.  I  heard
or  saw  nothing  unusual.

Randall  could  not  reach  that  part  of  the  floor  from  which  the
rapping  came  on  any  occasion  without  attracting  my  attention  and
that  of  my  comrade.  I  give  up  the  attempt  to  explain  away  the
strange  manifestations.  I  hope  some  member  of  the  Society  may  be
able  to  do  so.

Nicholas  J.  Murphy.

1  George  Street,  Enniscorthy,
August  Uh,  1910.


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


385


I  have  read  the  foregoing,  and  I  corroborate  the  statements
therein.

Owen  Deveretjx.

August  tth,  1910.

In  reply  to  my  enquiry  whether  any  further  disturbances
had  since  occurred,  and  that  in  any  case  I  should  wish  to
make  a  personal  investigation  of  the  matter,  I  received  the
following  letter  from  Mr.  Murphy  :

Enniscorthy,  November  11,  1910.

Dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  yours,  I  beg  to  say  that  the  house  in
which  the  phenomena  occurred  is  now  vacant.  The  tenant,  Mr.
Redmond,  and  his  wife,  left  Enniscorthy  about  the  middle  of  August.
Randall  left  the  house  on  the  Monday  evening  after  the  occurrence
described  took  place.  Nothing  unusual  was  ever  seen  or  heard  in
the  house  until  Randall  went  to  lodge  there.  However,  I  should  be
very  glad  to  see  you  in  Enniscorthy.  Randall  and  Sinnott  are  in
the  town,  and  you  can  question  them.  Mr.  Devereux  and  myself
are  always  at  your  service,  and  we  have  no  objection  to  our  names
and  addresses  being  published.

Yours  faithfully,

N.  J.  Murphy.

I  was  not  able  to  visit  Enniscorthy  until  a  few  weeks  later,
when  I  spent  a  day  examining  the  witnesses  and  the  house
where  the  disturbances  occurred.  The  following  notes  written
at  the  time  give  the  result  of  my  enquiry :

On  Tuesday,  December  6th,  1910,  I  visited  Enniscorthy,  and
saw  and  closely  questioned  the  eye-witnesses  mentioned  in  Mr.
Murphy's  paper,  with  the  exception  of  Sinnott  and  Redmond,
who  were  away.  I  also  saw  the  servant  who  slept  in  a  small
room  adjoining  the  one  in  which  the  disturbances  occurred.
She  scouted  the  idea  of  the  boys  playing  tricks,  and  added  an
important  fact,  viz.  that  the  large  iron  bed  in  which  Sinnott
slept  along  with  another  lodger  had  lost  one  of  its  castors ;
nevertheless,  it  was  dragged  across  the  room  with  the  two
young  men  in  it,  leaving  a  mark  along  the  floor  where  the
iron  leg  had  scraped  along.  The  bed,  she  told  me,  was  so
heavy  that,  even  with  no  one  in  it,  she  had  to  get  assistance
when  moving  it. She  was  terribly  scared  by  the  disturbances,


386


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


and  left  the  place  as  soon  as  she  could.  I  begged  her  to  write
down  what  she  had  observed,  and  Mr.  Murphy  sent  me  her
statement  which  follows.

I  then  visited  the  house  where  the  disturbances  took  place.
It  was  empty  and  unfurnished,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  painters.
The  descriptions  given  by  Mr.  Murphy  and  by  Randall  are
quite  correct.

I  had  a  long  interview  with  Randall,  and  he  impressed  me
very  favourably ;  an  intelligent,  straightforward  youth  about
eighteen  years  old.  He  undertook  to  write  down  a  detailed
account  of  what  had  occurred  during  the  time  he  lodged  with
Redmond.  This  he  did,  and  his  statement  is  annexed.  Randall
is  a  Protestant,  and  I  saw  the  rector  of  his  parish,  who  knew
the  young  man  well  and  testified  to  his  good  character  and
trustworthiness. His  letter  to  me  is  given  later  on.

I  saw  Mr.  Devereux,  the  companion  whom  Mr.  Murphy  took
with  him.  He  owns  a  cycle  shop  in  Enniscorthy,  and  is  a
skilled  mechanic,  an  excellent  witness.  He  corroborated  Mr.
Murphy's  statement,  and  said  he  went  to  the  house  feeling  sure
he  would  be  able  to  discover  that  one  or  other  of  the  lads  was
playing  a  practical  joke.  But  he  was  unable  to  unravel  the
mystery.  He  said  that  what  occurred  in  his  presence  could
not  possibly  have  been  done  by  Randall  or  his  companion.  I
also  had  an  interview  with  the  previous  occupant  of  the  house.
Nothing  had  occurred  in  his  time.

Statement  of  Bridget  Thorpe.
I  was  a  servant  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Redmond,  8  Court
Street,  Enniscorthy.  I  remember  John  Randall  coming  to  lodge
there.  It  was  on  a  Monday  night  he  first  came.  On  the  following
Friday  morning  I  heard  John  Randall  and  George  Sinnott,  another
lodger,  talking  about  the  clothes  being  pulled  off  the  bed.  On
Friday  night  I  heard  the  bed  running  about  the  floor  in  Randall's
room.  I  was  then  in  my  own  room.  On  the  next  morning  I  heard
John  Randall  say  that  he  would  not  sleep  in  the  house  any  more.
I  remember  going  into  Randall's  room  one  night  with  Mr.  Redmond
as  we  heard  noises ;  and  when  we  went  in  Richard  Roche,  another
lodger,  who  was  there  that  night,  was  in  one  bed  and  John  Randall
in  another.  The  bedclothes  were  all  pulled  through  the  bars  at  the
foot  of  Roche's  bed. Roche  was  very  much  frightened. I  frequently


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


387


heard  rapping  in  Randall's  room.  I  always  thought  it  came  from
the  corner  of  Randall's  room  nearest  to  Mr.  Redmond's  room.  On
the  night  that  Mr.  Murphy  and  Mr.  Devereux  were  there  I  heard
footsteps  walking  about  the  lobby  outside  the  door  where  they  were.
I  often  heard  these  footsteps.  The  night  I  heard  the  bed  running
about  the  floor,  the  floor  shook  as  if  a  very  strong  man  was  pulling
the  bed  around.

(Signed) B.  Thorpe.
Witnessed  by  N.  J.  Murphy.

It  will  be  noticed  that  Randall  mentions  two  companions  in
the  bedroom  with  him.  This  was  for  a  short  time  the  case,
but  one  of  them  had  left  when  Mr.  Murphy  visited  the  house.

Statement  written  by  J.  W.  Randall.

On  Saturday,  the  2nd  of  July,  1910,  I  came  to  work  in  Ennis-
corthy  as  an  improver  in  the  carpentry  trade.  Monday,  I  went  to
lodge  in  a  house  in  Court  Street.  There  were  two  other  men
stopping  in  the  same  house  as  lodgers.  They  slept  in  the  same
room  also,  but  shared  a  different  bed  at  the  other  side  of  the  room.
My  bed  was  in  a  recess  in  the  wall  at  the  opposite  side.  There  was
one  large  window  in  the  room,  which  opened  both  top  and  bottom.
The  room  was  about  14  feet  scpaare  and  10  feet  high.  There  was
one  door  opening  into  it.  The  window  already  described  was  in
the  back  Avail  of  the  house  nearly  opposite  the  door  opening  into  the
room  from  the  top  landing.  There  were  two  other  doors  on  the
same  landing  opening  into  different  rooms.  There  was  also  a  fire-
place in  the  room.

On  Monday  night,  July  4th,  we  went  to  bed,  and  my  first  night
in  the  strange  house  I  think  I  slept  pretty  soundly.  We  got  up  at
six  o'clock  the  next  morning  and  went  to  work.  We  left  off  work
at  six  in  the  evening,  and  went  to  bed  the  same  time  as  the  night
before,  between  10  and  10.30  o'clock,  slept  soundly,  and  all  went  well,
also  on  Wednesday.

Went  to  bed  on  Thursday  night  at  10.45,  the  three  of  us  going
as  before.  We  blew  out  the  light,  but  the  room  was  then  fairly
lightsome.  We  had  been  only  about  ten  minutes  in  bed  when  I  felt
the  clothes  being  gently  drawn  from  my  bed.  I  first  thought  it  was
the  others  that  were  playing  a  joke,  so  I  called  out,  "  Stop,  George,
it's  too  old."  (George  being  one  of  their  names  and  the  other
Richard.) Then  I  heard  them  say,  "It's  Nick"  (that  is  the  name


388


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


of  the  man  of  the  house).  It  wasn't  any  of  them  that  had  pulled
the  clothes  off  me,  so  they  thought  it  was  Nick  that  was  in  the
room,  and  did  not  mind.  At  this  time  the  clothes  had  gone  off  my
bed  completely,  and  I  shouted  to  them  to  strike  a  match.  When
they  struck  a  match  I  found  my  bedclothes  were  at  the  window.
The  most  curious  part  was  that  the  same  time  when  the  clothes
were  leaving  my  bed,  their  bed  was  moving.  I  brought  back  the
clothes  and  got  into  bed  again.  The  light  was  then  put  out,  and  it
wasn't  long  until  we  heard  some  hammering  in  the  room — tap-tap-tap-
like. This  lasted  for  a  few  minutes,  getting  quicker  and  quicker.
When  it  got  very  quick  their  bed  started  to  move  out  across  the
floor,  and  that  made  us  very  frightened,  and  what  made  us  more
frightened  was  the  door  being  shut,  and  nobody  could  open  it  without
making  a  great  noise.  They  then  struck  a  match  and  got  the  lamp.
We  searched  the  room  thoroughly,  and  could  find  nobody.  Nobody
had  come  in  the  door.  We  called  the  man  of  the  house  (Redmond);
he  came  into  the  room,  saw  the  bed,  and  told  us  to  push  it  back
and  get  into  bed  (he  thought  all  the  time  one  of  us  was  playing
the  trick  on  the  other).  I  said  I  wouldn't  stay  in  the  other  bed  by
myself,  so  I  got  in  with  the  others ;  we  put  out  the  light  again,
and  it  had  been  ordy  a  couple  of  minutes  out  when  the  bed  ran  out
on  the  floor  with  the  three  of  us.  Richard  struck  a  match  again,
and  this  time  we  all  got  up  and  put  on  our  clothes  ;  we  had  got  a
terrible  fright  and  couldn't  stick  it  any  longer.  We  told  the  man
of  the  house  we  would  sit  up  in  the  room  until  daylight.  During
the  time  we  were  sitting  in  the  room  we  could  hear  footsteps  leaving
the  kitchen  and  coming  up  the  stairs ;  it  would  stop  on  the  landing
outside  the  door  and  wouldn't  come  into  the  room.  The  footsteps
and  noises  continued  through  the  house  until  daybreak.  We  got  up
at  nine  o'clock  and  went  to  work  for  a  three-quarter  day.

That  night  (Friday)  when  we  went  to  bed  about  eleven  o'clock
we  felt  a  bit  nervous  in  going.  We  put  out  the  light,  and  in  a  few
minutes  the  footsteps  started  again,  and  noises.  There  were  also
noises  like  chips  getting  chopped  in  the  kitchen.  This  night  passed
over  not  near  so  bad  as  the  night  before,  but  yet  we  were  afraid  to
go  to  sleep.

Saturday  we  all  went  home  for  the  Sunday,  but  returned  Sunday
evening.  We  went  to  bed  Sunday  night  as  before,  and  it  passed
over  with  very  slight  noises.  On  Monday  night  the  noises
started  again  after  going  to  bed,  and  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour
their  bed  ran  again. They  then  struck  a  light,  and  I  got  into  the


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  .  and  New.


389


bed  with  them.  There  were  terrible  noises  everywhere ;  on  the
walls,  out  on  the  landing,  and  downstairs.  We  left  the  light  lighted
for  some  time,  and  whilst  it  was  lighted,  what  added  more  to  our
fright  was  a  chair  dancing  out  to  the  middle  of  the  floor  without  a
thing  near  it.  We  put  out  the  light  again  after  moving  back  the
bed.  Immediately  the  light  was  put  out  the  bed  ran  again  out
on  the  floor.  Richard  had  the  matches  always  ready  to  strike.
Every  time  we  would  hear  the  noise  and  feel  the  bed  moving,  we
would  shout :  "  Strike,  Richard,  strike ;  we're  going  again  !  "  We
were  trembling  from  head  to  feet  with  fear.  We  left  the  light
lighted  till  morning  after  that.

Tuesday  night  passed  over  about  the  same,  and  on  Wednesday
night  there  wasn't  a  stir.  After  hearing  nothing  on  Wednesday
night  we  thought  it  had  stopped,  but  still  we  felt  nervous.  On
Thursday  night  it  started  as  bad  as  the  first  night,  and  several
people  remarked  it  being  so  bad  on  the  night  exactly  a  week  after
it  had  started.  The  bed  ran  out  several  times,  and  what  never
happened  to  any  one  of  us  before,  George  was  lifted  out  of  bed  without
a  hand  near  him.  He  went  home  next  day,  and  stopped  at  home
for  two  clays.  So  while  he  was  away,  Richard  and  I  stopped  in
the  room.  The  same  noise  still  continued,  and  the  bed  ran  also.
We  went  home  on  Saturday  as  on  the  week  before.

George  came  back  again  on  Sunday  night,  and  slept  in  the  same
bed  with  us  again,  and  it  wasn't  extra  bad  that  night.  It  went  on
about  the  same  way  every  night  until  the  following  Friday  night,
when  it  was  very  bad.  The  bed  turned  up  on  one  side,  and  threw
us  out  on  the  floor,  and  before  we  were  thrown  out,  the  pillow  was
taken  from  under  my  head  three  times.  When  the  bed  rose  up,  it
fell  back  without  making  any  noise.  This  bed  was  so  heavy,  it  took
both  the  woman  and  girl  to  pull  it  out  from  the  wall  without
anybody  in  it,  and  there  was  only  three  castors  on  it.  After  being
thrown  out  of  the  big  bed,  the  three  of  us  got  into  my  bed.  We
were  not  long  in  it  when  it  started  to  rise,  but  could  not  get  out
of  the  recess  it  was  in  unless  it  was  taken  to  pieces.  It  ceased
about  daybreak,  and  that  finished  that  night's  performance.

It  kept  very  bad  then  for  a  few  nights.  So  Mr.  Murphy,  from
the  "Guardian"  Office,  and  another  man  named  Devereux,  came
and  stopped  in  the  room  one  night.  They  sat  on  two  chairs  in  the
room,  while  we  lay  each  in  our  own  beds.  We  were  not  long  in
bed  when  I  felt  a  terrible  feeling  over  me  like  a  big  weight.  I
then  felt  myself  being  taken  from  the  bed,  but  could  feel  no  hands,


390


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


nor  could  I  resist  going.  All  I  could  say  was :  "  I'm  going,  I'm
going ;  they're  at  me."  I  lay  on  the  floor  in  a  terrible  state,  and
hardly  able  to  speak.  The  perspiration  was  pouring  through  me.
They  put  me  back  in  bed  again,  and  nothing  more  than  strange
knockings  and  noises  happened  between  that  and  morning.  We
slept  again  in  the  room  the  next  night,  but  nothing  serious  happened.
We  then  got  another  lodging,  and  the  people  left  it  also.  For  the
three  weeks  I  was  in  the  house  I  lost  nearly  three-quarters  of  a
stone  weight.  I  never  believed  in  ghosts  until  that,  and  I  think  it
would  convince  the  bravest  man  in  Ireland.

John  William  Eandall.

18  Main  St.,  Enniscorthy.

I  heard  from  Eandall  a  few  days  ago  (January  25th).
Nothing  has  occurred  in  his  new  lodgings.  The  curious
association  of  a  particular  person  in  a  particular  place  at  a  par-
ticular time  is  very  characteristic  of  all  poltergeist  phenomena.

From  the  Rev.  Canon  Rennison.

Kilpatrick  Eectory,  Wexford,
Jan.  27,  1911.

Dear  Sir, — I  have  known  John  Eandall  for  the  past  five  years,  and  I
believe  him  to  be  a  thoroughly  truthful  and  trustworthy  boy.  I
think  you  may  rely  on  any  particulars  he  has  given  you  about  the
"haunted  house"  at  Enniscorthy.  He  has  always  been  a  steady,
well-conducted  boy,  so  far  as  I  know.  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  you
are  reading  a  paper  on  the  whole  affair.

Yours  very  truly,

John  Eennison.

My  best  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  N.  J.  Murphy,  who  kindly
spared  neither  time  nor  trouble  in  assisting  me  in  these
enquiries.

The  Derrygonnelly  Case.

I  now  pass  on  to  another  Irish  case  of  which  I  heard  soon
after  the  disturbances  broke  out,  and  was  able  to  visit  the
spot  while  the  poltergeist  was  still  active,  so  that  I  was  an
eye-witness  of  many  of  the  occurrences.  I  wrote  a  detailed
account  of  what  took  place  at  the  time,  and  it  was  published
in  the  Dublin  University  Magazine  for  December,  1877,  under


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


391


the  title  of  "  The  Demons  of  Derrygonnelly."  ISTo  report  of
this  case  has  yet  appeared  in  our  Proceedings,  and  I  can  only
briefly  summarize  it  here.

In  1877  Mr.  Thomas  Plunkett,  of  Enniskillen,  a  gentleman
who  has  devoted  much  time  to  the  geological  and  archaeological
investigation  of  the  County  Fermanagh,  wrote  to  tell  me  of
some  mysterious  disturbances  occurring  in  a  farmer's  cottage
near  some  prehistoric  limestone  caves  he  was  exploring,  and
asking  me  to  visit  the  place,  which  I  did.

The  place  was  a  hamlet  called  Derrygonnelly,  about  nine
miles  from  Enniskillen,  and  the  cottage  was  some  two  miles
further  on.  A  more  lonely  spot  could  hardly  be  found  in
this  country.  Across  the  bog  that  lay  before  us  rose  the  huge
limestone  cliff's  of  Knockmore,  crowned  by  an  escarpment  of
overhanging  rock.  The  cottage  itself  was  hidden  in  the  hollow
of  a  field,  and  no  other  house  could  be  seen  anywhere.

The  household  consisted  of  a  grey-headed  farmer  who  had
recently  lost  his  wife,  and  a  family  of  four  girls  and  one  boy,
the  youngest  about  ten  years  of  age,  and  the  eldest,  Maggie,
round  whom  the  disturbances  arose,  about  twenty  years  old.
The  cottage  had  the  usual  large  kitchen  and  dwelling-room,
with  earthen  floors  in  the  centre,  and  a  smaller  room  opening
from  each  side.  In  one  of  them  Maggie  and  the  girls  slept
on  a  large,  old-fashioned  four-post  bed.  The  noises,  rappings
and  scratches  generally  began  after  they  had  retired,  and  often
continued  the  whole  night  through.  Eats,  of  course,  were  first
suspected  ;  but  when  objects  began  to  move  without  any  visible
cause,  stones  to  fall,  candles  and  boots  repeatedly  thrown  out  of
the  house,  the  rat  theory  was  abandoned  and  a  general  terror
took  possession  of  the  family.  Several  neighbours  urged  them
to  send  for  the  priest,  but  they  were  Methodists,  and  their  class
leader  advised  them  to  lay  an  open  Bible  on  the  bed.  This
they  did  in  the  name  of  God,  putting  a  big  stone  on  the  top
of  the  volume ;  but  the  stone  was  lifted  off  by  an  unseen  hand,
and  the  Bible  placed  on  top  of  it.  After  that  "  it,"  as  the
farmer  called  the  unseen  cause,  moved  the  Bible  out  of  the
room  and  tore  seventeen  pages  right  across.  Then  they  could
not  keep  a  light  in  the  house,  candles  and  lamps  were  mysteri-
ously stolen,  or  thrown  out.  They  asked  their  neighbours'  help,
and  here  I  cp;iote  the  old  farmer's  words :  "  Jack  Flanigan  came


392


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


and  lent  us  his  lamp,  saying  he  would  engage  the  devil  himself
could  not  steal  it,  as  he  had  got  the  priest  to  sprinkle  it  with
holy  water."  "  But  that,"  the  old  man  said,  "  did  us  no
good  either,  for  the  next  day  it  took  away  that  lamp  also."
They  were  forcer]  to  keep  their  candles  in  a  neighbour's  house
some  way  off,  and  fetch  them  at  night,  and  keep  them
lighted.

During  the  evenings  I  spent  in  the  cottage,  the  farmer  and
each  of  his  children  were  independently  examined.  He  gave
me  a  concordant  account  of  the  singular  freaks  of  this  polter-
geist, and  their  vain  efforts  to  put  a  stop  to  it.  Those  who
are  interested  can  read  the  story,  told  by  the  old  man,  which
I  took  down  in  writing,  as  it  is  published  in  full  in  my  article
already  referred  to.

My  own  observations  were  as  follows :  After  the  children,
except  the  boy,  had  gone  to  bed,  Maggie  lay  down  on  the  bed
without  undressing,  so  that  her  hands  and  feet  could  be  ob-
served. The  rest  of  us  sat  round  the  kitchen  fire,  when  faint
raps,  rapidly  increasing  in  loudness,  were  heard,  coming  appar-
ently from  the  walls,  the  ceiling  and  various  parts  of  the
inner  room,  the  door  of  which  was  open.  On  entering  the  bed-
room with  a  light  the  noises  at  first  ceased,  but  recommenced
when  I  put  the  light  on  the  window-sill  in  the  kitchen.  I  had
the  boy  and  his  father  by  my  side,  and  asked  Mr.  Plunkett
to  look  round  the  house  outside.  Standing  in  the  doorway
leading  to  the  bedroom  the  noises  recommenced,  the  light  was
gradually  brought  nearer,  and  after  much  patience  I  was  able
to  bring  the  light  into  the  bedroom  whilst  the  disturbances
were  still  loudly  going  on.  At  last  I  was  able  to  go  up  to
the  side  of  the  bed,  with  the  lighted  candle  in  my  hand,  and
closely  observed  each  of  the  occupants  lying  on  the  bed.  The
younger  children  were  apparently  asleep,  and  Maggie  was
motionless ;  nevertheless,  knocks  were  going  on  everywhere
around ;  on  the  chairs,  the  bedstead,  the  walls  and  ceiling.
The  closest  scrutiny  failed  to  detect  any  movement  on  the  part
of  those  present  that  could  account  for  the  noises,  which  were
accompanied  by  a  scratching  or  tearing  sound.  Suddenly  a
large  pebble  fell  in  my  presence  on  to  the  bed ;  no  one  had
moved  to  dislodge  it  even  if  it  had  been  placed  for  the  purpose.
When  I  replaced  the  candle  on  the  window-sill  in  the  kitchen,


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


393


the  knocks  became  still  louder,  like  those  made  by  a  heavy
carpenter's  hammer  driving  nails  into  flooring.

At  midnight  we  drove  back  to  Enniskillen,  and  next  day  I
telegraphed  to  Dublin  to  an  acute  and  careful  observer,  presi-
dent of  one  of  our  learned  societies,  to  come  down  to  help  me
in  the  investigation.  He  kindly  did  so.  It  was  the  Eev.
Maxwell  Close,  M.A.,  a  man  honoured  in  Dublin  for  his  great
learning,  remarkable  critical  insight  and  singular  sobriety  of
judgment.1  With  him  a  clay  or  two  later,  we  again  drove  over
in  the  evening  the  eleven  lonely  miles  to  the  farmer's  cottage.
In  spite  of  the  vigilance  of  my  friends,  Mr.  Close,  Mr.  Plunkett
and  myself,  we  failed  to  detect  the  slightest  attempt  at  im-
posture by  any  of  the  family,  and  we  were  each  equally
certain  that  we  were  not  the  victims  of  hallucination.  The
noises  were  heard  as  before ;  we  searched  within  and  without
the  cottage,  but  no  cause  could  be  found.

The  following  night  we  made  another  visit  with  the  same
result.  When  we  were  about  to  leave  some  two  hours  later,
the  farmer  was  distressed  that  we  had  not  "  laid  the  ghost,"  and
I  asked  him  what  he  thought  it  was. He  replied  :

"  I  would  have  thought,  sir,  it  do  be  fairies,  but  them  late
readers  and  knowledgeable  men  will  not  allow  such  a  thing,
so  I  cannot  tell  what  it  is.  I  only  wish,  sir,  you  would  take
it  away."

"  Have  you  asked  it  to  answer  a  question  by  raps  V  I
asked.

"I  have,  sir,"  he  said,  "as  some  one  told  us  to  do,  but
it  tells  lies  as  often  as  truth,  and  oftener,  I  think.  We  tried
it,  and  it  only  knocked  at  L.M.N,  when  we  said  the  alphabet
over."  I  asked  him  if  it  would  respond  to  a  given  number  of
raps,  and  he  said  it  would.  This  it  did  in  my  presence.  Then
I  mentally  asked  it,  no  word  being  spoken,  to  knock  a  certain
number  of  times  and  it  did  so.  To  avoid  any  error  or  delusion
on  my  part,  I  put  my  hands  in  the  side  pockets  of  my  over-
coat and  asked  it  to  knock  the  number  of  fingers  I  had  open.
It  correctly  did  so.  Then,  with  a  different  number  of  fingers
open  each  time,  the  experiment  was  repeated  four  times  in

1  The  Rev.  Maxwell  Close  died  a  few  years  ago  ;  he  was  one  of  the  earliest
members  of  the  S.P.R. ,  an  obituary  notice  of  him  by  the  present  writer
appeared  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  November,  1903.


394  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  [part


succession,  and  four  times  I  obtained  absolutely  the  correct
number  of  raps.  The  doctrine  of  chances  shows  that  casual
coincidence  is  here  practically  out  of  the  question,  and  the
interesting  fact  remains  that  some  telepathic  rapport  between
the  unseen  agent  and  ourselves  appears  to  exist,  on  this  occa-
sion at  any  rate.

Before  leaving,  it  was  uow  past  midnight,  the  farmer
implored  us  not  to  go  without  ridding  him  of  this  pertinacious
poltergeist.  So  I  asked  my  clerical  friend  to  read  a  few
words  of  scripture  and  offer  up  a  prayer.  He  did  so,
choosing  appropriate  passages  from  our  Lord's  ministry  to  the
possessed,  and  a  suitable  prayer.  It  was  a  weird  scene,  the
children  were  in  bed,  but  not  asleep,  in  the  inner  room,
the  farmer  and  Mr.  Plunkett  seated  by  the  kitchen  fire,
Mr.  Close  seated  on  a  stool  at  the  open  bedroom  door,  I
holding  a  lighted  candle  for  him,  and  seated  just  within  the
bedroom.  The  noises  were  at  first  so  great  we  could  hardly
hear  what  was  read,  then  as  the  solemn  words  of  prayer
were  uttered  they  subsided,  and  when  the  Lord's  Prayer
was  joined  in  by  all,  a  profound  stillness  fell  on  the  whole
cottage.  The  farmer  rose  from  his  knees  with  tears  streaming
from  his  eyes,  gratefully  grasped  our  hands,  and  we  left  for
our  long  midnight  drive  back  to  Enniskillen.

I  am  afraid  this  does  not  sound  a  very  scientific  account,
but  it  is  a  veracious  one.

Subsequent  correspondence,  and  reports  from  Mr.  Plunkett,
showed  that  the  poltergeist  had  fled  from  that  night  onwards,
until  some  curious  visitors,  after  reading  my  published  descrip-
tion, had  gone  to  the  farmer's  cottage,  and  tried  to  bring
it  back  again.  It  came,  they  said,  feebly  and  furtively,  but
whether  genuine  or  Maggie's  Irish  desire  to  please  the  visitors,
I  have  no  means  of  knowing.  The  farmer  is  now  dead,
and  Maggie,  I  believe,  in  service,  but  I  have  lost  sight  of
them  all.


In  both  the  preceding  cases  the  disturbances  took  place
at  night,  in  the  next  two  cases  they  occurred  in  the  day
chiefly.  The  reason  appears  to  be  that  only  when  the  living
radiant  point,  or  psychic,  is  in  a  particular  place,  and  more


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


395


or  less  at  rest,  do  the  disturbances  break  out.  The  boy
Eandall  was  away  from  his  lodgings  all  day  at  work ;  the  girl,
Maggie,  was  largely  engaged  in  farm  work  outside,  as  well  as
housework  within,  and  some  phenomena  took  place  in  the  day
time  when  she  was  in  the  house,  but  were  less  marked  until
she  went  to  bed.  In  the  next  case  the  psychic  was  evidently
more  powerful,  a  somnambulist  and  clairvoyant,  and  the  dis-
turbances arose  when  she  was  in  the  house,  both  in  the  day-
time and  at  night.  As  in  the  case  of  dowsing,  hypnosis,
clairvoyance,  telepathy  and  probably  all  psychical  phenomena,
the  effect  of  education,  the  cultivation  of  the  reasoning  powers,
alert  consciousness,  in  fine,  cerebral  activity  generally,  usually
diminish  and  ultimately  inhibit  the  production  of  supernormal
phenomena.

The  Atlantic  Monthly  Case.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  and  carefully  investigated  cases
of  poltergeists  is  recorded  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly}  a  leading
American  review,  for  August,  1868.  This  case  is  so  little
known  and  so  admirable  that  I  will  briefly  summarize  it.

An  Irish  girl,  18  years  old,  named  Mary  Carrick,  went  to
live  as  servant  with  a  family  in  Massachusetts  soon  after  her
arrival  in  America.  Six  weeks  after  she  came  to  the  family,
the  house  bells  began  violently  ringing  without  any  assignable
cause.  This  would  occur  at  intervals  of  half  an  hour  through-
out the  day  and  evening.  The  wires  were  detached  from  all
the  bells,  but  the  ringing  still  continued.  The  bells  were
hung  near  the  ceiling  of  the  room,  11  feet  high.  They  only
rang  when  the  girl  was  in  the  room  or  in  the  adjoining  one,
and  were  seen  to  ring  by  the  family  without  any  visible  cause.
The  ringing  was  not  a  mere  stroke  of  one  bell,  but  a  violent
agitation  of  all  the  bells*  A  careful  examination  made  by  the
writer  of  the  article,  Mr.  Willis,  showed  that  no  mechanism
of  any  kind  was  attached  to  the  bells.  So  far  the  case  is  like
the well-known  "  Bealings Bells "  in Suffolk,  described  with

i  Like  other  articles  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly,  the  name  of  the  author,  Mr.
H.  A.  Willis,  is  not  given  in  the  text,  but  only  in  the  Table  of  Contents.  As
the  article  was  published  43  years  ago,  it  is,  I  fear,  hopeless  to  obtain  any
confirmatory  evidence  at  the  present  day  ;  but  I  have  written  to  the  Editor  of
the  Atlantic  Monthly  with  this  object  in  view.  As  yet  no  further  information
has  been  obtained.

2C


396


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.RS.


[part


great  care  by  Major  Moor,  F.K.S.,  in  1834,  a  full  account  of
which  will  be  found  in  Dale  Owen's  "Debateable  Land,"  p.  239

et  seq.

But  more  remarkable  phenomena  followed  in  the  American
case.  Loud  and  startling  raps  occurred  on  the  walls,  door  and
windows  of  any  room  where  the  girl  was  at  work,  and  followed
the  "irl  from  room  to  room,  and  could  be  heard  in  her  bedroom
at  night  when  she  was  apparently  fast  asleep.  A  little  later,
chairs  were  upset,  crockery  thrown  down,  tables  lifted  and
moved,  and  various  kitchen  utensils  hurled  about  the  room.
This  was  during  July.  In  August  a  careful  daily  record  was
kept.  The  writer  of  the  article  states  that  he  saw  the  table
at  which  the  girl  had  been  ironing  suddenly  lifted  when  no
one  was  near  enough  to  touch  it.  This  also  happened  when
a  child  was  sitting  on  the  table,  and  when  the  writer  and
other  persons  tried  to  hold  the  table  down.

On  the  6  th  of  August,  as  Mary  was  placing  the  tea  tray
on  a  heavy  stone  slab,  lh  inches  thick,  and  weighing  48  lbs.,
the  stone  slab  suddenly  flew  up,  struck  the  tray  and  upset  the
dishes  upon  it.  The  writer  states  that  this  happened  again
in  his  own  presence  when  he  was  carefully  watching  the  girl,
who  was  at  the  moment  in  the  act  of  wringing  out  some
clothes.  The  slab  rose  and  fell  back  with  such  force  that  it
broke  in  two,  no  one  touching  it.  Soon  after  one-half  of  the
slab  was  pitched  on  the  ground  and  the  fragments  thrown
about.  Another  clay  a  large  basket  filled  with  clothes  was
thrown  to  the  floor,  a  stool  having  on  it  a  pail  filled  with
water  ran  along  the  floor;  a  wash  tub  filled  with  clothes  was  taken
off  its  stand  and  flung  to  the  ground,  and  the  contents  thrown
about.

The  girl  would  often  start  in  her  sleep  and  scream  in  terror,
the  family  watching  the  girl  and  hearing  the  violent  noises.

The  result  of  all  this  disturbance  greatly  alarmed  and  excited
the  girl,  who  was  ignorant  and  superstitious ;  it  brought  on  a
serious  attack  of  hysteria,  and  she  had  to  be  taken  to  an
asylum.  All  the  noises  ceased  in  her  absence.  At  the  end
of  three  weeks  she  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  return  to  her
work.  None  of  the  movements  subsequently  took  place,  but  a
month  later  she  suffered  from  somnambulism.  Many  times  when
fast  asleep  she  rose  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  dressed  herself,


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  Nevj.


397


and  went  about  her  work  downstairs  in  the  pitch  darkness,
even  studying  some  lessons  she  was  doing,  and  returned  to
bed  in  an  hour  or  two.

She  was  also  clairvoyant,  and  one  remarkable  instance  of
this  is  given  by  the  writer  of  the  article.

The  report  concludes  by  saying  it  may  be  justly  asked  why
no  scientific  men  were  asked  to  investigate  the  phenomena
during  the  ten  weeks  they  lasted.  To  this  the  writer  replies
that  whilst  the  phenomena  were  in  full  force,  a  statement
of  the  facts  was  sent  to  a  leading  scientific  man  in  America,
with  an  earnest  request  that  he  would  investigate  and  report.
The  request  was  treated  with  absolute  contempt ;  they  were
told  that  such  things  could  not  happen,  and  that  it  was  all
trickery.

The  writer  of  the  article  then  tried  some  experiments  him-
self. He  conceived  that  the  sounds  might  possibly  be  electri-
cally produced,  and  made  some  experiments  to  test  this  idea.
When  the  bedstead  on  which  the  girl  slept  was  insulated  on
glass  nothing  occurred,  but  when  the  insulators  were  removed
the  noises  returned  as  violently  as  ever.  A  daily  journal  of
the  weather  and  of  the  disturbances  was  kept,  expecting  that  the
phenomena  would  be  more  frequent  on  dry  clear  days,  but
some  of  the  most  remarkable  disturbances  occurred  on  very
rainy  ones.  With  candour  the  writer  therefore  concludes  that
there  is  some  difficulty  in  applying  the  electrical  hypothesis.

Electricity  has  to  bear  a  good  many  sins  on  its  head,  but
we  may  safely  exonerate  it  from  creating  the  poltergeist  pheno-
mena. The  insulation  experiments,  tried  not  only  on  the  bed,
but  also  on  tables  and  chairs,  certainly  inhibited  the  disturb-
ances, but  this  inhibition  was  more  probably  due  to  the  effect
of  suggestion  either  on  the  girl  or  on  her  unseen  tormentors.
Psychic  subjects  are  exceedingly  suggestible,  and  this  often  lays
them  open  to  perpetrate  fraudulent  imitations,  especially  when
the  enquirer  feels  confident  trickery  is  an  adequate  explanation
of  everything.

The  Portland,  Oregon,  Case.

In  the  autumn  of  1909  one  of  the  leading  newspapers
on  the  Pacific  coast  published  details  of  extraordinary  dis-
turbances and  movement  of  objects  which  occurred  in  a  house


398


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


in  Portland,  Oregon.  Subsequently  an  article  on  the  subject
appeared  in  the  Pacific  monthly,  and  the  publicity  thus
given  to  the  case  led  to  its  careful  investigation  by  Dr.
Gilbert  and  Mr.  Thacher,  two  most  competent  investigators,
who  were  requested  by  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Eesearch  to  make  a  critical  and  full  enquiry.  The  results  of
this  enquiry  are  given  in  detail  in  the  Journal  of  the
American  S.P.B.  for  September  and  November,  1910.

The  phenomena  were  associated  with  the  presence  of  a  boy
named  Elwin  March,  who,  at  the  time  of  these  occurrences,
was  eleven  years  old,  and  lived  with  his  grandparents,  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Sawyer,  at  546  Marshall  Street,  Portland,  Oregon.
The  first  disturbance  took  place  on  Oct.  28th,  1909.  A
reporter  at  once  got  hold  of  the  story,  witnessed  some  of  the
phenomena,  and  next  day  published  a  full  report  in  the
principal  local  newspaper.  The  consequent  notoriety  was  so
annoying  to  the  Sawyers  that  they  were  glad  to  hand  the
boy,  Elwin,  over  to  Dr.  Gilbert,  who  took  him  into  his  own
house  in  Portland,  and  kept  his  whereabouts  secret  for  a
week  until  the  reporters  again  ferreted  him  out.  Meanwhile  Dr.
Gilbert  had  obtained  a  detailed  statement  of  the  first  dis-
turbances from  eye-witnesses,  but  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Gilbert  failed
to  obtain  any  satisfactory  evidence  of  supernormal  phenomena,
and,  in  fact,  were  convinced  that  the  boy  Elwin  was  the
author  of  the  later,  if  not  of  the  whole  of  the  occurrences.
I  will  return  to  this  presently.

On  the  other  hand  the  other  investigator,  Mr.  Thacher,
whose  report,  published  in  the  Journal  of  the  American
S.P.B.  for  Nov.  1910,  is  one  of  painstaking  care,  after  a  most
searching  investigation,  says :  Practically  all  the  eye-witnesses
were  convinced  that  the  movements  were  produced  by  super-
normal agencies,  and  the  witnesses  were  numerous  enough  and
intelligent  enough  to  create  a  presumption  in  favour  of  genuine
poltergeist  phenomena.  Mr.  Thacher  remarks :  "  I  began  to
collect  testimony  on  Oct.  29  (the  day  after  the  first  outbreak)
and  have  watched  closely  all  developments  for  a  period  of  several
months.  I  wrote  out  the  story  immediately  after  the  events
narrated,  it  is  in  substance  a  diary,  and  reflects  the  mental
attitude  of  the  witnesses  at  the  time,  which  gives  it  a  certain
value  in  the  final  analysis  and  conclusion."


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


399


Let  us  now  look  at  the  evidence.  A  medical  man,  Dr.
Ainley,  testified  on  Oct.  29th,  and  made  a  signed  statement
next  day  that  he  was  in  Mr.  Sawyer's  house  on  Oct.  28th,
and  standing  near  the  door,  saw  the  telephone  fall  from  its
stand,  no  one  being  near  it  but  the  boy,  Elwin,  who  had  come
past  it  and  was  then  standing  near  him.  Shortly  afterwards
a  chair  near  the  telephone  rose  up  and  then  fell  on  the  floor.
It  was  picked  up,  and  again  it  was  raised  and  fell  on
the  floor.  No  one  was  touching  it,  and  no  one  was  nearer
than  four  feet  (subsequently  corrected  to  six  feet)  from  the
chair,  and  the  movements  occurred  plainly  in  his,  Dr.  Ainley's
sight.  Another  medical  man,  J.  C.  Ross,  M.D.,  of  Portland,
also  signed  a  declaration  that  he  went  to  the  house  immedi-
ately after  the  disturbances,  found  the  occupants  frightened
and  bewildered,  chairs,  tables  and  pictures  overturned  ;  dishes
lying  broken  on  the  floor,  having  by  some  unseen  force  been
pulled  off  a  sideboard.  He,  however,  did  not  see  any  move-
ments after  he  arrived.

Another  witness  who  had  been  in  the  U.S.  artillery
deposed  that  he  saw  two  chairs  rise  up  and  tip  over  in  the
dining-room,  whilst  the  boy,  Elwin,  was  in  the  kitchen  and
no  one  within  ten  or  twelve  feet  of  the  chairs  when  they  rose
and  fell  over.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sawyer  made  very  detailed
depositions  of  the  movement  of  various  articles  of  furniture
when  no  one  was  near  them.  A  large  glazed  picture  which
hung  on  the  wall,  slid  slowly  down  the  wall  to  the  floor
and  rested  there  without  breaking  the  glass  or  doing  any
damage.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sawyer  both  saw  this,  and  Mr.  Sawyer
added  that  the  picture  was  lifted  off  the  suspending  hook,
came  slowly  down,  struck  the  ground  at  one  corner,  and  then
righted  itself  and  stood  leaning  against  the  wall.

Another  witness,  Mr.  Casson,  said  that,  hearing  of  these  dis-
turbances, he  went  to  the  house  and  saw  several  knives  and
forks  rise  up  an  inch  or  two  from  the  drain-board  of  the  sink
and  fall  over  on  to  the  floor.  A  small  basket  on  the  sink  also
rose  up  and  fell  over  on  the  floor.  He  and  Mrs.  Sawyer,  the  only
persons  present  in  the  room,  were  six  or  seven  feet  away  from
the  sink,  and  the  boy,  Elwin,  was  in  an  adjoining  room.  Mr.
Sawyer  deposed  to  the  plaster  coming  off  the  wall  and  pieces
thrown  into  the  room. One  piece  of  plaster  flew  from  the


400


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.E.S.


[part


kitchen  wall,  hit  a  tailor's  goose-iron  which  was  on  the  table,
which  in  its  turn,  though  weighing  over  a  stone,  flew  off  the
table  on  to  the  floor.  Another  day  he  saw  a  basket  with  some
onions  in  it  come  off  the  table,  and  two  cans  of  condensed
milk  followed  it,  and  all  fell  on  the  floor.  Then  the  bread  can,
with  a  pail  containing  some  meat  which  stood  in  the  pantry,
fell  on  the  floor,  and  a  number  of  plates  came  off  the  shelf,
and  fell  on  the  floor.  Elwin,  though  in  the  room,  was  not
near  the  things  at  the  time  this  occurred.  The  basket  that
fell  was  replaced,  and  again  thrown  down ;  this  was  done
several  times  running.  Many  other  disturbances  are  reported,
and  numerous  witnesses  affirmed  no  visible  agency  could  have
caused  them.

Now  let  us  hear  the  other  side.  Dr.  Gilbert,  who  had  taken
the  boy  to  his  house,  found  him  cheating  at  a  game,  and  also
saw  him  deliberately  move  some  objects,  when  he  thought  he
was  not  observed.  This  was  some  time  after  the  original  dis-
turbances, and  when  nothing  had  lately  occurred.  There  can
be  no  doubt  the  boy  did  practise  several  tricks  in  December,
when  removed  from  the  Sawyers'  house  where  the  disturbances
broke  out,  and  Dr.  Gilbert  obtained  a  confession  from  him  that
he  did  so.  Moreover,  though  at  first  he  denied  having  had
anything  to  do  with  the  manifestations,  when  they  first  broke
out  at  the  Sawyers'  house,  yet  Dr.  Gilbert  says  he  was  so  con-
vinced of  the  boy's  having  tricked  them  all  along  that  after
severe  cross-examination  he  obtained  a  qualified  admission  from
the  boy  that  he  did  do  some  of  the  earlier  things.  Hence
the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Dr.  Gilbert  was  that  the  whole
phenomena  were  fraudulent,  and  no  supernormal  agency  need
be  assumed.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Thacher,  who  made  a
more  prolonged  and  searching  investigation,  says  with  consider-
able justice  :  "  Could  the  fact  that  the  boy  had  been  the  centre
of  attention  for  several  weeks,  and  that  the  interest  was  waning,
together  with  the  strong  and  constantly  repeated  wishes  of  the
small  group  of  persons  about  him  that  the  movements  without
contact  should  be  repeated,  be  sufficient  to  induce  him  to  '  fake '
the  phenomena,  and  then  lie  about  it  [the  earlier  ones]  ?  Or
were  all  the  witnesses  utterly  unreliable,  and  was  the  immediate
family  all  bound  together  in  the  deception  ? "

Now  it  turns  out  that  there  were  two  persons  who  influenced


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


401


Dr.  Gilbert's  opinion,  by  attributing  fraud  to  the  boy  at  the
outset;  one  stated  that  he  found  38  threads  fastened  outside
the  window  of  the  dining-room,  by  which  the  lad  probably  moved
the  objects.  This  evidence  also  led  Dr.  Hyslop,  of  the  American
S.P.H.,  at  first  to  conclude  that  the  whole  thing  was  fraud.
However,  Mr.  Thacher  discovered  that  these  adverse  witnesses
were  absolutely  untrustworthy.  No  one  saw  the  witness  find
the  threads,  and  none  were  to  be  found ;  even  if  the  threads
had  been  there,  the  witness  could  not  explain  how  they  could
move  various  objects  within  the  room.  Finally,  this  witness
was  found  to  be  a  rogue,  so  that  Dr.  Hyslop  eventually  stated
his  evidence  was  valueless.  The  other  witness  who  had  stated
that  the  boy  himself  pulled  the  plaster  off  and  threw  it,  turns  out
to  be  the  owner  of  the  house  and  anxious  to  discredit  the  whole
story,  as  it  was  likely  to  depreciate  his  property;  his  statements
were  merely  inferences  of  his  own,  he  had  seen  nothing  to
support  them,  and  Mr.  Thacher  shows  they  are  entirely  dis-
proved, inasmuch  as  the  plaster  came  from  parts  of  the  wall
and  ceiling  which  the  boy,  even  if  present,  could  not  possibly
reach.

On  the  one  side  we  have  two  discredited  witnesses,  and  on  the
other  over  twenty  credible  and  disinterested  witnesses  who  testify
to  these  occurrences  as  being  due  to  some  unseen  inexplicable
agency.  Take,  for  instance,  Mr.  Jerome  Holmes'  statement ;  he
affirms  iii  writing  that  when  in  the  dining-room  on  October  28th
in  the  afternoon  he  saw  a  chair,  which  was  standing  near  the
door,  go  right  up  in  the  air  as  much  as  three  feet,  and  then,  whilst
it  was  poised  in  the  air,  it  turned  half  over  to  a  horizontal
position,  and  then  fell  on  the  floor.  No  one  was  near  the  chair
when  it  went  up  in  the  air.  El  win  March  had  just  gone  out
of  the  room  and  was  outside  the  door  when  the  chair  rose  up
and  fell.  "  The  chair  was  plainly  in  my  sight,  and  I  am  sure
that  no  person  in  the  room  touched  it  during  its  movements,"
Mr.  Holmes  remarks,  adding  that  when  he  stated  what  he  him-
self clearly  saw  in  broad  daylight,  people  said  to  him,  "  Well,
you  must  be  crazy."  Here  as  elsewhere,  as  regards  the  wit-
nesses, it  was  against  their  interest  to  make  up  these  stories.

That  the  disturbances,  like  other  poltergeist  phenomena,  are
more  or  less  attached  to  a  place,  is  seen  from  the  fact  that
after  Elwin  and  his  grandparents  had  left  Marshall  Street,  the


402


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


phenomena  did  not  follow  them ;  but  it  is  asserted  move-
ments of  objects  without  contact  occurred  for  a  short  time  in
the  neighbouring  house.  Two  witnesses  told  Mr.  Thacher  the
facts,  but  declined  to  let  their  names  be  published,  as  they  did
not  wish  "  to  be  mixed  up  in  any  spooky  business."  This
evidence  is,  therefore,  of  little  value.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  an  important  case,  not  only,
nor  perhaps  chiefly,  from  a  psychical  point  of  view,  but  from  a
psychological  standpoint.

We  find  what  appear  to  be  undoubtedly  genuine  phenomena
passing  into  fraudulent  imitations  by  the  lad  around  whom
interest  chiefly  centred.  As  a  recent  American  writer  on  the
"  Psychology  of  child  development "  says  :  "  A  child  sees  an
elder  writing  with  a  pencil.  When  he  has  a  chance  he  tries
it.  To  an  observer  it  is  a  case  of  imitation,  but  to  the  child
it  is  an  attempt  to  get  a  new  experience  with  a  pencil  through
the  image  furnished  by  the  adult."

Other  cases  of  trickery,  and  even  confession  to  a  part  of
the  phenomena  observed,  are  recorded  in  our  Proceedings.  In
a  poltergeist  case  occurring  in  1895  at  Ham,  near  Hungerford,
Berks.,  Mr.  Westlake  saw  the  twelve-year-old  child,  who  was  the
centre  of  the  disturbances,  deliberately  move  objects.  In  the
case  of  Emma  Davies  at  Wem,  in  Shropshire,  Mr.  Hughes,  who
investigated  the  case  on  behalf  of  our  Society,  obtained  a  partial
confession  from  Emma  Davies.1  This  led  to  a  critical  review
of  the  case  by  my  friend,  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  who  published  a
pamphlet  which  showed  how  inconclusive  such  subsequent  con-
fessions are,  for  objects  jumped  off  tables  and  out  of  cupboards
when  the  girl  was  outside  the  room,  and  under  circumstances
quite  inconsistent  with  trickery.  Mr.  Massey  remarks  that  it
is  probable  the  vanity  of  the  girl  was  more  gratified  by  the
reputation  of  having  duped  the  investigators  than  by  that  of
being  the  medium  of  an  unknown  force.

The  question  then  arises,  are  we  to  reject  as  worthless  evi-
dence of  what  appear  to  be  supernormal  phenomena  because
sometimes  there  are  cases  of  subsequent  imitation  and  trickery,
and even occasionally confession of fraud  ? In cases  of

1  For  these  and  several  other  recent  cases  of  poltergeist  phenomena,  see  the
full  reports  published  in  Vol.  XII.  of  our  Proceedings.


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


403


poltergeist,  children  are  usually  the  centre  of  disturbances,  and
the  superficial  or  prejudiced  observer,  knowing  the  love  of
mischief  among  children,  and  that  in  his  and  nearly  every  one's
experience  objects  don't  jump  about  without  an  assignable  cause,
naturally  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  any  supernormal  ex-
planation is  needless  and  absurd.  But  this  a  priori  argument,
which  satisfies  the  man  in  the  street,  completely  breaks  down
when  a  critical  and  historical  study  of  the  whole  subject  is
made.

In  the  numerous  trials  for  witchcraft  recorded  in  different
countries  the  so-called  witches  freely  confessed  that  they  did
quite  impossible  things.  One  of  the  most  tragic  and  heart-
breaking series  of  confessions  occurred  in  the  village  of  Mobra,
in  Sweden,  where  in  1670,  it  is  stated  in  the  public  register  of
the  Lords  Commissioners  who  tried  the  case,  that  71  children
freely  confessed  that  they  were  engaged  in  witchery,  that  they
were  carried  away  by  the  devil ;  and  being  "  separately  and  in-
dependently examined  to  see  if  their  confessions  did  agree,"  the
Commissioners  state  they  "  found  that  all  of  them  except  some
very  little  ones,  who  could  not  tell  all  the  circumstances,  did
practically  agree  in  the  confession  of  particulars."  And  the
particulars  consisted  in  describing  the  traditional  devil,  how  they
were  carried  through  the  air  and  down  chimneys,  that  burning
candles  were  stuck  in  their  hair,  but  they  were  not  burnt,  that
they  were  beaten  with  thorns,  etc.,  etc.  And  all  this  upon
oath,  and  in  peril  of  their  lives.  In  fact,  15  children,  who  so
confessed,  were  thereupon  burnt  ;  36  children,  between  9  and
16  years  old,  considered  less  guilty,  were  publicly  beaten  once
a  week  for  a  year,  and  forced  "to  run  the  gauntlet";  20  more,
mere  babies,  were  lashed  with  rods  for  three  Sundays  at  the
Church  door.  The  number  of  children  more  or  less  found
guilty,  we  are  told,  was  300.  In  addition  70  women,  all  from
this  same  village,  were  tried;  23  freely  confessed  their  witch-
craft and  were  burnt,  the  rest  were  imprisoned  and  afterwards
executed.1

Obviously,  therefore,  we  must  not  place  too  much  reliance
upon  the  confessions  of  children,  nor  of  uneducated  persons,
who  believe  the  superstitions  of  their  clay  to  be  actual  facts,
and  tacitly  accept the  opinion  of  their  '  betters,'  when  told

1  See  Glanvil,  Saducimus  Trhunphatus,  the  last  tract.


404  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  [part

that  they  have  taken  part  in  the  witchery  of  which  they  are

accused.

The  Dale  Tower,  Georgia,  U.S.A.,  Case.

One  of  the  most  recent  poltergeists  has  occurred  in  Georgia,
U.S.A.,  and  is  described  in  the  Occult  Review  for  May,  1911.
The  narrator  is  a  medical  man,  T.  Hart  Raines,  M.D.,  who  as
soon  as  he  heard  of  the  occurrences  began  an  investigation,  and
whilst  he  did  not  witness  the  phenomena  himself,  he  inter-
viewed the  three  young  men  who  collectively  saw  what
occurred,  and  he  personally  visited  the  scene  of  the  disturb-
ance. Dr.  Raines  states  that  the  young  men  are  intelligent
telegraph  operators,  and  their  veracity  above  suspicion :  they
are  positive  that  they  were  not  deceived  nor  hallucinated,  and
they  have  all  signed  a  statement  certifying  to  the  truth  of  the
facts.

The  disturbances  took  place  in  a  little  railway  telegraph
tower  at  Dale,  Georgia,  on  the  main  line  of  the  Atlantic  coast
railroad.  The  tower  adjoins  the  railway  track,  and  is  the
only  house  of  any  description  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile.
During  nine  months  in  the  year  the  tower  is  closed,  and  is
opened  for  the  tourist  season  from  January  to  April.  The
three  young  men — Bright,  Davies,  and  Clark — opened  the
tower  on  January  4,  1911,  and  were  the  sole  occupants  living
in  its  two  rooms,  one  room  above  the  other,  a  trap-door  closing
the  stair  leading  to  the  upper  room.  The  first  thing  that
occurred  was  the  sudden,  inexplicable  flinging  open  of  the
trap-door,  and  the  difficulty  of  keeping  it  closed.  In  spite  of
fastening  it  with  stout  nails  and  an  iron  bar,  it  would  still  fly
open  ;  mysterious  footsteps  were  also  heard  on  the  stair,  but  a
careful  search  revealed  no  cause  for  the  disturbances.  Then
followed  the  raising  and  lowering  of  the  window  sashes  in  the
upper  chamber,  in  full  view  of  the  three  occupants,  no  one
being  near  the  window.  "  To  assure  themselves  against
tricksters,  the  trap-door  leading  down  to  the  floor  below  was
closed  and  securely  fastened,  and  raised  only  when  necessary
to  descend  to  the  ground.  This  precaution  had  no  effect  what-
soever on  the  phenomena,  and  soon  various  articles  began  to
be  levitated  about  the  room  in  broad  open  daylight  in  full  view


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  Neiv.


405


of  all  three  occupants  of  the  tower,  when  there  was  no  possible
chance  for  trickery  or  fraud.  A  can  of  condensed  milk  was
seen  to  lift  itself  into  the  air  and  pass  from  one  end  of  the
desk  to  the  other  without  the  contact  of  a  visible  hand.  A
large  dish-pan  lying  near  the  stove  slowly  lifted  itself  and
rolled  down  the  stairs  and  out  of  the  tower  and  under  it,
from  whence  it  had  to  be  fished  out  with  the  aid  of  a  long-
pole.  A  lantern  was  levitated  on  to  the  desk  without  having
been  touched,  and  in  full  view  of  all.  On  another  occasion
this  lantern  made  a  wild  rush  across  the  room  and  dashed
itself  into  fragments  against  the  wall.  An  ordinary  can-opener
flew  wildly  about  the  room  and  fastened  itself  in  the  centre  of
the  ceiling.  I  [Dr.  Raines]  saw  this  can-opener,  and  can
assure  any  one  interested  that  the  most  expert  could  not
perform  a  similar  feat  once  in  a  hundred  efforts.  Frequently
bolts  and  taps,  such  as  are  used  in  railroad  construction
work,  would  be  hurled  into  the  room,  breaking  a  hole  in
the  glass  of  the  window  scarcely  large  enough  to  enter
through.

"  On  one  occasion,  when  objects  were  being  hurled  about  the
room  so  persistently  that  the  tower  was  hastily  abandoned  by  all
three  occupants,  a  chair  was  dashed  out  of  the  upper  window,
and  fell  with  such  force  that  one  of  the  rings  was  broken.  This
in  broad  daylight,  with  no  one  in  the  tower,  and  the  only  avenue
of  entrance  or  of  escape  guarded  by  the  three  occupants  of
the  tower.  I  [Dr.  Raines]  saw  the  chair,  and  only  a  terrific
blow  could  have  so  injured  it."

The  young  men  were  now  in  a  state  of  panic,  and  one  of
them  walked  seven  miles  to  the  nearest  town,  to  resign  his
position,  and  he  assured  Dr.  Raines  nothing  would  induce  him
again  to  go  through  the  eerie  experience  he  had  suffered.  The
last  of  the  strange  occurrences  took  place  a  few  days  before  Dr.
Raines  visited  the  tower  and  made  a  searching  investigation  of
the  possibility  of  some  outside  person  tricking  the  young  men.
This,  he  says,  was  impossible,  nor  could  the  vibration  of  passing
trains  have  caused  the  phenomena,  and  any  attempt  to  climb
the  stair  would  have  been  instantly  detected  by  the  operators,
one  of  whom  was  always  on  duty.  Dr.  Raines  is  convinced  that
there  was  no  chance  of  deception,  that  the  operators  were
perfectly  truthful  and  were  not  the victims  of  hallucination.


406


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


In  fact,  the  whole  record  exactly  resembles  other  poltergeist
phenomena  in  their  sudden  development  and  sudden  cessation.

A  recent  case  of  poltergeist  in  Surrey  was  reported  in  the
newspapers,  and  on  inquiry  I  learnt  the  phenomena  occurred
as  narrated ;  but  I  have  been  unable  to  visit  the  place  and
obtain  the  evidence  at  first  hand.

The  Vienna  Poltergeist.

In  the  Journal  of  the  Society  for  May,  1907,  there  is  a
report  of  a  typical  poltergeist  occurring  in  a  Vienna  suburb.
The  report  is  sent  by  an  eye-witness  of  some  of  the  disturbances,
Mr.  Warndorfer,  a  member  of  the  S.P.E.,  living  at  Baden,  near
Vienna,  Eegarding  this  case  Miss  A.  Johnson  (Eesearch  Officer
of  the  S.P.E.)  writes  to  me  as  follows  :  "  Mr.  Warndorfer,  whom
I  know  personally,  is  an  unusually  cool-headed  and  competent
observer,  and  a  very  intelligent  and  open-minded  man.  He  is
genuinely  interested  in  psychical  research,  and  would,  I  feel  sure,
be  prepared  to  give  an  impartial  account  of  anything  he  wit-
nessed." Miss  Johnson  adds  that  she  believes  Mr.  Warndorfer
"  is  not  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  this  case,  or  of  any
telekinetic  phenomena ;  what  it  amounts  to  is  that  he  investi-
gated this  case  carefully,  and  did  not  discover  any  fraud  in  it."

The  principal  points  in  the  narrative  are  as  follow :  A  smith
named  Zimmerl  has  a  shop  near  Vienna  (address  given),  where
he  employs  two  apprentices.  The  shop  is  at  the  end  of  a
long  court,  in  the  souterrain  of  a  large  house  inhabited  by
tradespeople,  so  that  it  is  entered  by  going  down  a  short,  open
stair.  Zimmerl  had  had  the  shop  some  four  years,  but  nothing
unusual  occurred  until  July,  1906,  when  a  report  appeared  in
a  Vienna  paper  of  the  mysterious  disturbances  that  had  broken
out  in  this  smith's  shop.

On  July  16th,  1906,  Mr.  Warndorfer  visited  the  shop  and
heard  from  Zimmerl  how  tools,  bits  of  iron,  etc.,  had  been  flung
about  the  place,  and  both  the  master  and  one  of  his  apprentices
had  been  hurt  by  one  of  these  missiles.  He  had  watched  the
boys,  but  could  not  detect  any  tricks  on  their  part ;  in  fact,
when  they  were  outside  the  shop  the  missiles  still  flew  about,
and  from  an  opposite  direction  to  where  they  stood,  and  where


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


407


a  solid  wall  intervened.  The  police  had  investigated  the  matter
and  could  find  nothing  to  account  for  the  disturbances.  The
tools,  etc.,  had  to  be  put  into  boxes  and  moved  outside,  as  they
were  afraid  to  work  otherwise.  The  man  was  much  scared,
and  lost  customers  through  this  mysterious  annoyance.  Once
a  pipe  Hew  from  one  side  of  the  shop  to  the  other,  and  then
came  back  and  settled  on  the  anvil  in  the  middle  of  the  room  ;
another  time  the  pipe  was  taken  from  Zimmerl's  mouth  and
fluttered  on  to  the  lathe.

Mr.  Warndorfer  made  several  subsequent  visits,  and  heard
still  more  remarkable  accounts,  and  was  able  to  witness  many
of  the  occurrences.  On  one  occasion  he  saw  more  than  a
dozen  objects  thrown  about,  and  was  "  perfectly  certain  none
of  the  persons  present  could  have  thrown  them " ;  one  was
thrown  when  he  happened  to  be  alone  in  the  shop.  He  never
saw  the  objects  actually  fly,  but  heard  them  fall ;  some  dropped
close  to  him,  and  three  struck  him  on  the  head.  In  reply  to
enquiries  from  the  S.P.R.,  Mr.  Warndorfer  relates  five  cases  of
inexplicable  movements  of  objects,  which  he  witnessed  in  day-
light, and  of  which  he  believes  "  the  chances  of  mal-observation
were  very  small  indeed."  One  of  these  cases  was  as  follows :
A  small  glazed  picture  which  he  had  seen  hanging  on  the  wall
a  few  minutes  before  came  fluttering  through  the  air  to  the
middle  of  the  shop,  where  it  fell  on  the  floor,  but  did  not
break  ;  in  fact,  it  moved  like  a  sheet  of  paper.  At  the  time
he  was  standing  about  a  yard  and  a  half  in  front  of  the
picture,  nobody  being  near  it,  nor  in  that  part  of  the  shop
through  which  it  moved.  He  did  not  see  it  leave  its  place,
but  saw  it  when  it  was  about  a  couple  of  yards  from  where  it
alighted.  Mr.  Warndorfer  adds  that  he  thinks  "  it  would  be
very  difficult,  though  not  impossible,  to  throw  or  drop  such  a
picture  without  its  breaking."  Another  incident  witnessed  by
Mr.  Warndorfer  occurred  when  the  smith  was  out  of  the  shop
and  the  two  apprentices  were  drilling  a  hole  in  a  piece  of
iron.  He  was  watching  their  slow  work  and  noticed  that  their
four  hands  were  all  engaged  at  their  work ;  of  this  he  was  "  per-
fectly certain,"  when  suddenly  one  of  the  boys  screamed  with
pain ;  a  pair  of  big  iron  compasses,  which  had  been  lying  on
the  work-bench  a  yard  behind  the  boy,  had  flown  across  and  hit
the  boy  sharply  on  the  temple,  causing  a  swelling  and  a  little


408


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


blood.  Mr.  Wiirndorfer  saw  the  iron  compasses  ricochetting
as  it  were  off  the  boy's  head  and  falling  to  the  ground.  He
himself  was  five  times  hit — three  times  on  the  head,  as  already
mentioned,  and  twice  elsewhere,  once  rather  severely,  with
pieces  of  iron  and  steel  that  unaccountably  flew  across  the
room  and  struck  him.

The  disturbances  continued  for  two  months,  and  then  ceased.
One  of  the  lads,  round  whom  the  disturbances  seemed  to
cluster,  was  taken  to  the  police  court  and  fined,  though  he
denied  all  guilt,  and  there  was  no  direct  evidence  of  his  having
thrown  anything.  The  boys  were,  nevertheless,  dismissed,  and
the  disturbances  ceased.  Mr.  W;irndorfer,  however,  does  not
consider  that  this  proves  anything,  and  he  is  right,  for  if  his
observations  were  correct  the  boys  could  not  have  been  the
culprits.

The  foregoing  poltergeist  closely  resembles  that  which  occurred
at  Swanland,  near  Hull,  in  1849,  and  a  narrative  of  which
was  written  by  an  eye-witness,  Mr.  Bristow,  and  published  by
the  S.P.E..  Prof.  Sidgwick,  in  1891,  interviewed  a  surviving
witness  of  the  phenomena,  who  confirmed  Mr.  Bristow's  ac-
count. Here  three  workmen  in  a  carpenter's  shop  were  pelted
with  bits  of  wood,  etc.,  which  seemed  to  sail  through  the  air
"  as  if  borne  on  gently  heaving  waves,"  and  no  visible  cause
could  be  discovered  for  the  disturbances,  which  lasted  about
six  weeks.  The  narrative  given,  if  accurate,  shows  that  any
normal  explanation  of  the  phenomena  is  untenable.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  evidence  on  behalf  of
the  phenomena  we  have  been  considering  rests  upon  observation
and  not  upon  experiment.  We  cannot  repeat  the  phenomena
at  will,  but  must  rest  content  with  the  statements  of  credible
witnesses.  Under  such  circumstances  no  single  case,  however
well  attested,  can  produce  conviction  of  the  supernormal
character  of  the  phenomena ;  inasmuch  as  our  reason  renders
us  instinctively  hostile  to  the  reception  of  any  evidence  which
cannot  be  readily  fitted  in  to  the  structure  of  our  existing
knowledge.  We  have,  therefore,  to  rely  upon  the  accumulation
of  testimony  from  many  independent  observers,  in  cases  widely
separated  both  in  space  and  time.  It  is  with  the  object  of
adding  to  the  strength  of  the  faggot  of  evidence,  which  exists


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New


409


on  behalf  of  poltergeists,  that  this  paper  has  been  added  to
others  on  this  subject  already  published  in  our  Proceedings.

Every  one  will  admit  the  truth  of  Glanvil's  remark:  "That
which  is  sufficiently  and  undeniably  proved  ought  not  to  be
denied  because  we  know  not  how  it  can  be,  that  is,  because
there  are  difficulties  in  the  conceiving  of  it  "  ;  and  if  the  array
of  testimony  from  credible  and  competent  witnesses  in  different
countries  and  different  ages  concerning  poltergeist  phenomena
be  set  aside,  all  testimony  to  strange  and  sporadic  occurrences,
such  as  meteorites,  fireballs,  red-rain,  mock-suns,  etc.,  must  also
be  discredited.  Few  of  us  have  witnessed  the  fall  of  meteoric
stones  to  the  earth,  yet  we  believe  in  their  existence  in  spite
of  the  impossibility  of  their  reproduction  at  our  pleasure.  The
reason  why  we  believe  is  of  course  the  testimony  of  many
trustworthy  witnesses  to  whom  we  hare  given  attention.  In
fact  there  are  some  phenomena  in  physical  science  which  are
as  rare,  elusive  and  inexplicable  as  those  in  psychical  research.
That  strange  phenomenon,  to  which  the  name  of  fire-ball  or
globe  lightning  has  been  given,  is  an  example.  "  As  we  have
hitherto  been  unable  to  reproduce  a  fire-ball  by  our  most
powerful  electrical  machines,  some  philosophers  have  denied  that
any  such  thing  can  exist !  But  as  Arago  says  :  1  Where  should
we  be  if  we  set  ourselves  to  deny  everything  we  do  not  know
how  to  explain  ? '  The  amount  of  trustworthy  and  independent
evidence  which  we  possess  as  to  the  occurrence  of  this  pheno-
menon is  such  as  must  convince  every  reasonable  man  who  chooses
to  pay  due  attention  to  the  subject.  No  doubt  there  is  a  great
deal  of  exaggeration,  as  well  as  much  imperfect  and  erroneous
observation,  in  almost  all  these  records.  But  the  existence  of  the
main  feature  (the  fire-ball)  seems  to  be  proved  beyond  all  doubt."
These  are  the  words  of  that  eminent  and  genuine  scientific
man,  the  late  Professor  P.  G.  Tait,  and  the  words  I  have
italicized  are,  in  my  opinion,  equally  true  of  the  phenomena
of  poltergeists.  There  has  been,  no  doubt,  much  "  exaggeration
and  erroneous  observation "  in  connection  with  this  subject,
but  this  can  also  be  said  of  the  early  stages  of  other  new  and
striking  additions  to  our  knowledge.

Moreover,  the  evidence  for  poltergeist  phenomena  is
strengthened  when  we  remember  the  injury  to  themselves
which the  witnesses  often  suffered. As  Grlanvil  says  of  Mr.


410  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  [part


Mompesson,  "  He  suffered  in  his  name,  his  estate,  and  in  all
his  affairs,  and  in  the  general  peace  of  his  family.  Unbelievers
took  him  for  an  impostor,  others  thought  it  was  a  judgment  of
God  upon  him  for  impiety.  He  suffered  also  in  loss  of  servants
and  the  health  and  constant  affrights  of  his  whole  household."

Conclusions.

The  conclusions  to  which  a  study  of  the  subject  has  led  me
may  be  stated  as  follows :

(1)  That  fraud  and  hallucination  are  inadequate  to  explain
all  the  phenomena.

(2)  That  the  widespread  belief  in  fairies,  pixies,  gnomes,
brownies,  etc.,  probably  rests  on  the  varied  manifestations  of
poltergeists.

(3)  That  in  these  phenomena  occurring  in  all  countries  and
going  back  to  remote  periods  of  time  we  have,  as  Mr.  Lang
suggests,  one  probable  origin  of  Fetishism  among  savages,  the
belief  that  an  inanimate  object  may  be  tenanted  by  what  is
thought  to  be  a  spirit.

(4)  That  the  noises,  sudden  movements  of  objects,  and  other
physical  phenomena  appear  to  be  associated  with  some  unseen
intelligence  which  can  respond,  though  fitfully  and  imperfectly,
to  an  uttered  and,  there  is  some  evidence  to  show,  to  an
unlettered  request ;  hence  they  must  be  in  some  degree  related
to  our  intelligence.

(5)  That  the  disturbances  are  usually,  though  not  invariably,
associated  with  the  presence  of  a  child  or  young  person  of
either  sex,  and  appear  to  be  attached  to  a  particular  place  as
well  as  to  a  particular  person  ;  some  animate  as  well  as  inani-
mate point  d'a/ppui  seems  to  be  essential.

(G)  The  phenomena  are  sporadic  and  temporary,  their  dura-
tion varying  from  a  few  days  to  several  months,  disappearing
as  suddenly  as  they  came.

(7)  They  produce  annoyance  to  those  concerned,  and  some-
times, though  rarely,  injury.

(8)  They  can  be  inhibited  by  suggestion,  acting  either  upon
the  human  radiant  point  or  upon  the  unseen  agency,  or  possibly
upon  both.

(9)  The  close  connection  of  poltergeist  disturbances  with  the


LXIV.]


Poltergeists,  Old  and  New.


411


physical  phenomena  of  spiritualism,  suggests  that  the  latter
would  be  more  effectually  studied  immediately  after  they  were
first  noticed,  and  in  the  place  where  they  first  occurred  in  the
presence  of  the  child,  or  other  "  medium,"  round  whom  they
centred.  Further,  we  may  expect  simulation,  and  even  con-
fession of  subsequent  trickery,  in  the  case  of  children,  after
the  phenomena  have  ceased.

As  the  universe  is  founded  on  order  and  follows  definite
intelligible  laws,  we  might  expect  to  discover  some  analogy
between  the  operation  of  seen  and  unseen  causes.  I  fear,
however,  it  will  be  a  long  time  before  we  shall  bring
out  of  "  the  disorderly  mystery  of  ignorance  into  the  orderly
mystery  of  science "  these  puzzling  and  freakish  phenomena.
We  find,  however,  in  meteorological  disturbances,  in  the
unseen  physical  phenomena  of  wind  and  weather,  similar
puzzling  and  apparently  freakish  occurrences.  Albeit  we  have
no  doubt  that  long-continued  patient  observation  and  classifica-
tion will  ultimately  reveal  the  complex  and  orderly  physical
causes  at  work  in  our  fitful  weather.  But  the  scientific  use  of
the  imagination  is  necessary  alike  in  meteorological  and  bizarre
psychical  phenomena,  such  as  poltergeists.

The  obvious  question  arises,  why  in  the  latter  is  a  human
radiant  centre  necessary  ?  In  inorganic  nature  we  find  in  the
behaviour  of  saturated  solutions  of  salts  a  state  of  unstable
equilibrium  such  that  a  particle  of  solid  matter  dropped  into
the  quiescent  liquid  will  suddenly  create  a  molecular  disturbance
which  spreads  throughout  the  solution,  causing  solid  crystals  to
appear  and  aggregate ;  a  general  commotion  results  for  a  short
time,  until  the  whole  becomes  a  solid  mass  of  crystals.  Here
we  see  the  effect  of  a  nucleus  upon  a  previously  quiescent  state
of  things.  Microscopists  are  familiar  with  similar  phenomena.
Especially  in  cell  growth  the  presence  of  a  nucleus  is  essential.

We  may  term  the  child,  or  other  living  person  in  poltergeist
phenomena,  the  nucleus,  which  is  the  determining  factor.  We
ourselves  and  the  whole  world  may  be  but  nucleated  cells  in  a
vaster  living  organism,  of  which  we  can  form  no  conception.
Some  incomprehensible  intelligence  is  certainly  at  work  in  the
congeries  of  cells  and  in  the  galaxy  of  suns  and  stars.
But  evolution  in  animate  and  inanimate  nature  is  unlikely  to

2d


412


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


be  confined  to  the  visible  universe.  Living  creatures  of
different  types  and  varied  intelligence  may  exist  in  the  unseen
as  in  the  seen.  Possibly  these  poltergeist  phenomena  may  be
due  to  some  of  these,  perhaps  mischievous  or  rudimentary,  in-
telligences in  the  unseen :  I  do  not  know  why  we  should
imagine  there  are  no  fools  or  naughty  children  in  the  spiritual
world ;  possibly  they  are  as  numerous  there  as  here.  But  why
the  conjunction  of  a  particular  locality  and  a  particular  human
organism  enables  them  to  play  pranks  in  the  material  world,
we  are  as  ignorant  as  the  savage  is  as  to  why  a  dry  day  and
particular  material  are  necessary  for  the  working  of  an  electrical
machine  in  the  production  of  electricity.

At  present  our  obvious  duty  is  to  collect,  scrutinize,  and
classify  these  phenomena,  leaving  their  explanation  aside  until
our  knowledge  is  larger.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  413


III.

LES PHENOMENES PHYSIQUES DU SPIRITISME :
QUELQUES  DIFFICULTES.1

Pak  le  COAITE  PEROVSKY-PETROVO-SOLOVOVO.

Les  "  phenomenes  physiques "  du  spiritisme  semblent  etre  plus
que  jamais  a  l'ordre  du  jour  dans  le  monde  des  "  psychistes."
Les  seances  de  Carancini  ;  les  experiences  avec  Eusapia  Pal-
ladino  a  Naples  (en  1908  et  1910)  et  aux  Etats  Unis  ;  celles  de
M.  de  Rochas  avec  Bailey  a  Grenoble  ;  les  performances
etourdissantes  d'Ofelia  Corrales  a  San  Jose  (Costa-Rica),  etc.,
ont  donne  a  cette  sempiternelle  question  un  regain  d'actualite.
II  peut  paraitre  opportun  au  moment  ou  elle  se  pose  une  fois
de  plus  avec  une  acuite  particuliere  ;  ou,  de  l'incident  du  pied
d'Eusapia  saisi  dans  l'ombre  du  "  cabinet "  a  New  York 2  aux
photographies  de  la  soi-disant  "  Mary  Brown,"  tout  vient  attiser
la  discussion — de  jeter  un  coup  d'oeil  sur  l'etat  actuel  du
probleme.  Et  pour  s'en  rendre  un  compte  exact  il  sera  utile
de  passer  en  revue  les  difficultes  qui  semblent  militer  contre
l'authenticite  des  phenomenes ;  les  objections  qu'on  peut  y  faire.
La  situation  y  gagnera  certainement  en  nettete.

La  plupart  de  ces  difficultes  sont  du  reste  bien  connues,3
quoique  quelques-unes  de  celles  que  nous  allons  citer  aient
comparativement  peu,  je  crois,  retenu  l'attention ;  elles  ne  sont
pas  toutes  d'importance  egale,  mais  certaines  nous  paraissent
tres  serieuses.  Et  leur  force  cumulative  est  en  tous  cas  con-
siderable. J'indiquerai  a  la  fin  de  mon  article  la  conclusion —
provisoire — a,  laquelle  elles  m'acculent. Pour  le  moment  qu'il

1  This  paper  is  printed  in  French,  having  been  originally  written  for  a  French
journal. — Ed.

2  Journal  of  the  Society  for  Pxychical  Research,  avril  1910,  pp.  265-275;
Psychische  Studien,  fevrier  1911.

3  On  en  verra  quelques-unes  enumerees  par  exemple  chez  Podmore,  Studies  in
Psychical  Research,  pp.  110-115.


414


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


me  suffise  de  preciser  que,  si  depuis  les  vingt  et  quelques  annees
que  j'ai  consacrees  a  l'etude  du  sujet  sous  ses  differents  aspects
j'ai  fait  graduellement  beaucoup  de  chemin  dans  le  sens  du
scepticisine  et  de  la  negation — je  suis  quand  meme  et  par-
dessus  tout  sincerement  desireux  de  traiter  le  probleme  avec
une  complete  impartiality.  Aux  esprits  et  aux  mediums  de  me
prouver  que  je  fais  fausse  route  en  penchant  vers  la  negative
pour  certains  faits  ou  soi-disant  tels.  Si  cette  preuve  nous
est  jamais  donnee,  je  m'inclinerai  bien  volontiers  devant  elle,  car
je  crois  fermement  que  rien  ne  peut  prevaloir  contre  ce  qui  est.

( 1 )  Les  phe'nomines  physiques  du  spiritisme  sont  tre~s
improbables  a  priori.

A  la  verite  il  taut  ici  distinguer.  Us  ne  le  sont  pas  tous
egalement.  Quelques-uns  le  sont  meme  assez  peu,  et  je  crois
que,  si  jamais  le  jour  vient  ou  l'authenticite,  par  exemple,  des
"  raps  "  et  de  la  telekinesie  sera  reconnue,  nous  les  ferons  rentrer
dans  le  cadre  de  nos  connaissances  physiques  sans  difficult^.
Mais  que  dire,  par  exemple,  de  faits  tels  que  les  materialisations,
les  "  apports "  et  le  "  passage  de  la  matiere  a  travers  la
matiere  " — surtout  des  deux  derniers  ?  Ne  renversent-ils  pas  de
fond  en  comble — ou  a  peu  pres — nos  notions  actuelles  ?  Ne
contredisent-ils  pas  les  lois  les  plus  certaines,  sans  parler  de
l'experience  non-interrompue  de  milliards  d'hommes  durant  je
ne  sais  combien  de  milliers  d'annees  ?

On  me  repondra  que  l'improbabilite  apriorique  ne  suffit  pas
pour  rejeter  des  faits  bien  etablis ;  on  pourra  me  rappeler
les  aerolithes,  la  circulation  du  sang,  les  chemins  de  fer,  le
phonographe — que  sais-je  encore  ?  D'accord  :  je  suis  le  premier
de  cet  avis.  Et  tous  ces  exemples  de  negations  aprioriques
auxquelles  la  realite  vient  donner  un  dementi  eclatant  sont
fort  instructifs.  Mais — il  s'agit  de  s'entendre  sur  le  sens  des
mots  "  bien  etablis."  Et  il  serait,  je  crois,  mal  aise  de  disconvenir
que  plus  un  fait  est  en  soi  improbable,  plus  nous  sommes  autorise's
a  nous  montrer  elifficiles  en  faits  de  preuves.  II  ne  peut  y  avoir
la-dessus  deux  opinions.

Or  dans  le  domaine  du  spiritisme  que  voyons-nous  ?  Presque
exactement  l'oppose.  Plus  tin  ph&aomdnc  est  invraisemblable,  moins
les  preuves  eju'on  avance  en  faveur  de  sorn  authenticity  sont  satis-


LXIV.]


Les  Phe'nomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


415


faisantes  !  En  effet.  S'agit-il  de  "  coups  frappes,"  de  levitations
de  tables  et  de  certains  mouvements  sans  contact  —  les
temoignages  sont  quelquefois  excellents.  lis  le  sont  meme  si
bien  que  je  doute  qu'un  chercheur  ve'ritablement  impartial  et  bien
au  courant  de  la  question  puisse  les  rejeter.  Si  nous  passons
aux  "  materialisations,"  beaucoup  plus  extraordinaires — nous
voyons  que  nos  "  preuves  "  ont  extremement  baisse  comme  qualite.
Sauf  quelques  observations  jusqu'a  un  certain  point  curieuses  et
deconcertantes  sur  des  apparitions  de  "  mains "  avec  D.  D.
Home  et  peut-etre  avec  Eusapia,1  c'est  surtout  sur  Katie  King
et  Sir  W.  Crookes  que  nous  devons  nous  rabattre.  C'est
maigre  apres  un  tiers  de  siecle.  Ajoutons  que  certaines  des
observations  de  Sir  W.  Crookes  relatives  a  "  Katie  King "  ont
pu  paraitre  avec  raison  preter  a,  la  critique.2  Et  en  dehors
d'elles  je  ne  vois  presque  rien  !

Tout  de  meme  c'est  encore  quelque  chose  evidemment  !  Mais
si  nous  faisons  un  pas  de  plus  dans  le  domaine — je  ne  dirai
meme  pas  de  l'improbable,  mais  humainement  parlant  de  l'im-
possible ;  si  nous  passons  aux  "  apports "  et  autres  faits  de  ce
genre — que  trouvons-nous  ?  Pour  le  "  passage  de  la  matiere  a
travers  la  matiere " — peu  de  temoignages  serieux  et  pas  un
seul  fait  veritablement  concluant.  Pour  les  "  apports "  c'est
moins  encore.  On  sait  que  les  preuves  de  leur  realite  se
rattachent  pour  la  plupart  au  nom  de  Stainton  Moses :  en
dehors  de  lui  je  ne  connais  presque  pas  de  cas  tant  soit  peu
dignes  de  retenir  l'attention.3 Or  pour  S.  Moses  il  n'y  a  pas  de

1  Voir  cepetidant  ce  que  je  dis  a  ce  sujet  dans  mon  post  scriptum.

2  Voir  par  exemple  les  observations  de  M.  Podmore  dans  Modern  Spiritualism,
Vol.  II.,  pp.  155-157.

3  On  pourra  s'en  rendre  compte  en  lisant  le  chapitre  consacre  aux  apports
chez  Aksakow,  Auimisme  et  Spiritisme  (pp.  484-495  de  l'original  russe).  Sur
les  six  cas  qu'il  cite  un  a  le  Colonel  Olcott  pour  temoin,  ce  qui  suffit  pour  le
disqualifier  entitlement  ;  un  second  est  atteste  par  M.  Robert  Cooper — un
spirite  tres  honorable  celui-la,  mais  comme  temoin  par  trop  "commode";  un
troisieme  peut  s'expliquer  tres  facilement  en  supposant  une  entente  prealable
entre  "une  jeune  dame  douee  de  faeultes  mediumniques  "  qui  n'est  pas  nominee
et  Monck — un  professionnel  amplement  deinasque.  Les  trois  autres  cas  sont
a  la  verite  meilleurs  ;  mais  la  encore  dans  deux  les  temoignages  sont  loin
d'etre  suffisants,  et  certains  details  essentiels  nous  viennent  de  seconde  main.
Reste  finalement  un  seul  cas  relate  par  Crookes  et  se  rapportant  a  une  seance
avec  Miss  Kate  Fox  (Jencken).  Mais  cette  fois  il  ne  s'agit  plus  d'un  veritable
"apport,"  mais  plutot  d'un  transport  d'objet  (une  sonnette)  d'une  chambre


416


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


doute  que  la  grande  majorite  de  ses  pheriomenes  (les  apports
y  compris)  puisse  s'expliquer  par  de  la  fraude  de  sa  part —
necessairement  consciente  pour  certains  cas,  peut-etre  incon-
sciente  pour  d'autres.  II  est  certainement  invraisemblable
qu'un  homme  dans  sa  situation  se  soit  amuse  durant  des  annees
a  mystifier  ses  amis  les  plus  proches ;  mais  il  est  infiniment
plus  improbable  encore  de  supposer  qu'il  ait  eu  le  don  de  faire
venir  on  ne  sait  d'ou,  ni  comment,  a  travers  l'espace,  divers
objets  et  de  leur  faire  traverser  portes  et  murs  en  leur  con-
servant  leur  forme  premiere.  Et  je  pense  que  dans  ce  cas  nous
avons  a  choisir  non — comme  on  l'a  dit — entre  "  a  physical  and  a
moral  miracle " — mais  plutot  entre  "  a  physical  impossibility
and  a  moral  improbability."  II  est  difficile  d'hesiter  entre  les
deux.

(2)  Les  incidents  qui  out  donne  naissancc  a  ce  gru'on  appellc  le
"  spiritucdisme  modernc "  sont  indnbitctblcment  jusqu'a  un
certain  'point  suspects.

Je  veux  parler  des  fameux  "  raps "  qui  se  firent  entendre
en  1848  k  Hydesville,  puis  a  Eochester,  en  presence  des  soeurs
Fox,  et  sans  lesquels  il  n'y  aurait  peut-etre  pas  de  spiritisme
a  l'heure  qu'il  est.  II  est  hors  de  doute  que  des  sons  pareils
peuvent  etre  facilement  produits  soit  a  l'aide  des  doigts  du
pied,  soit  avec  les  muscles  du  genou ;  il  parait  egalement
certain  que  les  personnes  qui  experimenterent  avec  les  Fox
au  tout  commencement  ignoraient  que  de  pareils  trues  fussent
possibles.  Nous  avons  aussi  d'autres  circonstances  suspectes :
la  non-reussite  des  experiences  entreprises  en  1851  avec  deux
des  sceurs  Fox  par  trois  professeurs  de  Buffalo  (Flint,  Lee  et

dans  une  autre.  II  est  vrai  que  Sir  W.  Crookes  nous  dit  avoir  lui-meme
ferme  a  cle  la  porte  de  celle  oil  avait  lieu  la  seance.  Le  cas,  je  l'avoue,  me
parait  digne  d'attention  ;  mais  comme  il  est  a  ce  point  de  vue  a  peu  pres  le
seul  de  son  espece ;  comme  d'autre  part  le  recit  qu'en  fait  Sir  W.  Crookes
est  evidemment  distinct  des  notes  qu'il  a  du  prendre  immediatement  apres  la
seance  et  qu'il  a  pu  y  omettre  telle  on  telle  circonstance  importante — on  ne
pent  vraiment  attacher  a  ce  r^cit  de  valeur  decisive.  En  y  supposant  une
inexactitude  des  plus  legeres  on  pourrait  voir  dans  le  transport  de  la  sonnette
un  fait  de  "  telekinesie  "  tout  au  plus.  Neanmoins  je  reconnais  que  l'incident
decrit  par  l'illustre  savant  anglais  est  curieux  ;  quelle  pitie  que  les  "esprits"  se
refusent  comme  regie  generale  a  nous  en  donner  de  pareils  !  (On  en  trouvera
la  description  aussi  dans  les  Bexearches  de  Crookes,  p.  97.)


lxiv.] Les  Phenornenes  Physiques  clu  Spiritisme.  417


Coventry) ; 1  le  fiasco  de  Margaret  Fox-Kane  devant  la  "  Com-
mission Seybert " ; 2  celui  de  Kate  Fox-Jencken  avec  Mme
Sidgwick;3  la  declaration  qu'aurait  faite  en  justice  en  1871
une  parente  des  Fox,  Mme  Norman  Culver ; 4  enfin  la  fameuse
"confession"  des  scours  Fox  elles-memes  en  1888; 5  confession
retiree  ensuite,  il  est  vrai,  et  a  laquelle  diverses  circonstances
enlevent  indubitablement  du  poids.  Quoiqu'il  en  soit,  tous
ces  incidents  ne  laissent  pas  que  de  jeter  un  jour  quelque
peu  suspect  sur  les  fameux  "  Rochester  knockings,"  tout  en  ne
nous  permettant  pas  de  conclure  positivement  dans  le  sens  de
la  fraude.

(3)  Suspectes  aussi — et  combien  ! — les  conditions  clans  lesqicelles  ont

lien,  la  plupart  clu  temps  les  phenornenes.

C'est  l'obscurite  et  le  demi-jour  si  propices  a  la  fraude  et
aux  erreurs  des  sens ;  c'est  l'injonction  aux  assistants  de  se
tenir  les  mains,  precaution  qui  peut  avoir  son  bon  cote  mais
qui  gene  singulierement  toute  investigation ;  de  chanter  ou  de
parler  (aux  seances  d'Eusapia) ;  de  ne  pas  concentrer  l'attention
sur  les  phenornenes ;  c'est  la  defense  constante  de  faire  ceci  ou
cela,  de  s'approcher  ou  de  regarder  de  trop  pres ;  c'est  le  me'dium
assis  seul  et  en  liberte  dans  le  "  cabinet "  a  la  plupart  des
seances  de  materialisation ;  enfin  c'est  en  general  l'impossibilite
de  controler  comme  on  le  voudrait.  Je  ne  crois  pas  qu'aucun
spirite  raisonnable  puisse  nier  le  bien-fonde  de  l'affirmation  qui
a  du.  etre  faite  bien  des  fois  et  que  de  toute  facon  je  reprends
pour  mon  compte  :  les  conditions  qui  favorisent  les  phenornenes
favorisenl  dgalement  la  fraude.

(4)  II  y  a  plus :  ce  ne  sont  pas  seulement  les  conditions  dans

lesquelles  les  plUnomenes  se  produisent,  ce  sont  les  "  his "
mime  qui  soi-disant  les  rigissent  qui  favorisent  aussi  la
super  cherie.

En  effet  :  si  les  spirites  etaient  toujours  consequents  avec
eux-memes,  ils se mettraieut  dans l'impossibilite  de  jamais

JR.  B.  Davenport,  The  Death-blow  to  Spiritualism,  pp.  132-144.
2  Davenport,  The  Death-blow  to  Spiritualism,  pp.  164-200.
zProc.  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  47,  48.
4Maskelyne,  Modern  Spiritualism,  pp.  24-27.
5  Davenport,  op.  cit.,  passim.


418


Comte  Perovsky-Petvovo-Solovovo.  [part


prouver  que  de  la  part  du  medium  il  y  a  eu  tricherie !
Trouve-t-ou  ce  dernier  a  la  place  de  l'apparition  qu'un  des
assistants  a  saisie  un  peu  brutalement  a  une  seance  de  materia-
lisation— on  nous  affirme  qu'il  y  a  eu  reunion  des  deux,  mais
dans  des  conditions  anormales ;  et  que  l'apparition  ne  pouvant
pas  revenir  vers  le  medium  puisqu'on  la  reteiiait — c'est  le
medium  qui  a  ete  attire"  vers  la  forme  materialisee.1  Trouve-t-on
dans  le  "  cabinet  "  des  masques,  voiles  et  autres  objets  servant
au  deguisement — on  nous  dit  que  ce  sont  les  esprits  qui  les  y
ont  apportes ; 2  ou  que  la  seance  ayant  ete  brusquement
interrompue  ils  n'ont  pas  eu  le  temps  de  d^materialiser  les
voiles.3  La  main  materialisee  est-elle  subrepticement  enduite
d'une  matiere  colorante  quelconque,  dont  les  traces  sont  ensuite
relevees  sur  la  main  du  medium  ?  C'est  que  la  main  materia-
lised s'etant  formee  aux  depens  de  cette  derniere  et  y  rentrant
une  fois  la  seance  terminee,  a  du  necessairement  y  transporter
les  particules  de  la  matiere  colorante.4  La  main  materialisee
s'est-elle  maladroitement  montree  revetue  d'une  manche  iden-
tique  a  celles  du  vetement  du  medium — on  nous  assure  que
ce  ne  sont  pas  seulement  les  membres  et  le  corps  du  medium
qui  se  dedoublent  mais  aussi  ses  habits.  Nous  donne-t-on  des
preuves  de  toutes  ces  enormites  ?  Oui — mais  elles  sont  presque
toutes  telles  qu'on  pourrait  a  la  rigueur  sen  passer  et  croire
sur  parole. 5

1  Harrison,  clans  le  Spiritualist,  29  decembre,  1876  (cite  par  Podmore,  Modern
Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  p.  10S)  ;  lettre  du  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace  au  Light,
no  vein  b  re,  1882.

2Aksakow,  Materiaux  your  l'appr4ciation  de  Vicriture  automatique  ( experiences
personneV.es)  ainsi  que  de  la  materialisation,  pp.  279,  280,  note  (en  russe).

3  Voir  le  chapitre  correspondant  dans  Brackett,  Materialised  Apparitions,
je  n'ai  lu  cet  ouvrage  qu'en  traduction  russe.

4  Aksakovv,  Animisme  et  Spiritisme,  p.  139  (original  russe).

5  C'est  du  reste  ce  qu'il  faut  bien  faire  pour  ['affirmation  de  M.  Aksakow
quant  au  role  des  apports  dans  les  seances  de  materialisation  ;  de  preuves
il  n'en  donne  que  je  sache  aucune.  Pour  ce  qui  est  du  dedoublement  des
vStements  ( !)  le  seul  incident  de  ce  genre  digne  d'attention  que  je  connaisse
se  rapporte  a  la  fameuse  experience  eleetrique  de  Crookes  et  de  Varley  avec
Mine  Fay:  on  y  vit,  parait-il,  qui  "l'apparition"  que  parut  dans  l'ouverture
du  rideau  et  remit  un  livre  a  Cox  portait  la  meme  robe  que  le  medium  et
mhne  ses  bracelets  (The  Spiritualist,  1875,  I.,  p.  151).  J'ignore  si  la  critique
que  M.  Podmore  a  faite  des  experiences  en  question  est  tout  a  fait  justitiee
(Modern  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  158,  159),  mais  je  ne  puis  ne  pas  attacher


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  419

Ce  n'est  pas  tout :  ces  theories  abracadabrantes  sont  gene-
ralement  fabriquees  ad  hoc,  pour  expliquer  tel  ou  tel  cas
particulier,  alors  qu'auparavant  il  n'en  etait  pas  question.  Eu
voici  un  exemple.  J'ignore  le  noiu  du  spirite  qui  a  le  premier
lance  l'hypothese  d'une  "  main  materialised "  pour  expliquer  les
transports  d'objets  "  sans  contact."  II  paraitra  a  un  sceptique
assez  probable  que  ce  qui  a  pu  donner  l'impulsion  premiere  a
cette  hypothese-la  c'est  quelque  aventure  desagreable  arrivee  a
un  medium  aussi  maladroit  qu'ingenieux.  Quoiqu'il  en  soit  il  est
trop  tard  maintenant  pour  recriminer,  et  force  nous  est
actuellement  de  traiter  cette  theorie  avec  egards.  Mais  que
dire  par  exemple  de  l'hypothese  du  "  til  etherique,"  du  "  hi
materialise"  emise  par  M.  le  Docteur  Ochorowicz  dans  ses  si
interessants  articles  sur  ses  experiences  avec  Stanislawa  Tomczyk?
Des  centaines  de  milliers  de  spirites  sont  nes  et  morts  depuis
la  date  fatidique  des  "Eochester  knockings"  sans  jamais  avoir
envisage  une  telle  possibility.  Et  jusqu'a  M.  Ochorowicz,  le
medium  le  plus  audacieux,  le  plus  "  sans  gene,"  ne  se  serait
jamais  permis  de  recourir  a  une  explication  pareille.  Aujourd'hui
c'est  autre  chose :  de  vastes  et  de  nouveaux  horizons  s'ouvrent
devant  nous — et  aussi  de  nouvelles  facilites  de  tricherie  et
de  nouvelles  excuses  a  invoquer  pour  les  mediums  fraudeurs.
Toujours  cette  meme  deplorable  coincidence  entre  une  "  loi " —
ou  soi-disant  telle — et  les  conditions  qui  facilitent  la  super-
cherie.1

A  noter  encore  que  toutes  ces  theories  si  commodes  pour  eux
ne  sembleut  pas  avoir  ete  mises  en  avant  en  premier  lieu  par
les  "  esprits "  eux-memes — qu'on  pourrait  cependant  croire  le
mieux  informes.  Esprits  et  mediums  preferent  en  laisser
l'initiative  a  de  simples  spirites  (ou  "  psychistes  ") — quittes,  sans

d'importance  au  fait  que  lorsque  Mme  Fay  est  venue  en  Russie  en  1888-89
elle  s'est  obstinement  refusee  a  les  renouveler  sous  des  pretextes  eminemment
mensongers  (Rebus,  1889,  p.  117);  elle  y  a  ete  en  outre  d^masquee,  et  en
general  sa  "  mediumnite  "  est  des  plus  suspectes  qui  se  soient  jamais  produites.

1  En  ecrivant  ce  qui  precede  je  n'exprime  pas  d'opinion  sur  les  experiences  de
M.  Ochorowicz  en  elles-memes.  S'il  en  a — je  Tavoue— d'irresistiblement  sus-
pectes, il  y  en  a  aussi  de  deconcertantes  et  difficilement  explicables  {Annates  des
Sciences  Psychiques,  1910,  No.  3-4,  pp.  33-39).  Je  ne  juge  pas  :  je  constate  qu'il
y  a  coincidence  facheuse  pour  la  cent  et  unieme  fois.  Et  je  ne  puis  refuser  a
M.  le  Docteur  Ochorowicz  1'expression  de  mon  admiration  pour  sa  science  et  ses
infatigables  travaux.


420


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


doute,  a  intervenir  et  a  donner  leur  sanction  une  fois  le  terrain
suffisamment  prepare.

(5)  Lei  varUU  extraordinaire  des  conditions  soi-disant  exige'es
par  les  phenomenes  est  aussi  de  nature  a  donner  raison
anx  sceptiqties.

On  nous  dit  par  exemple  que  l'obscurite  est  une  condition
necessaire — et  a  ce  propos  on  invoque  la  photographie  et  je  ne
sais  quoi  encore.  Et  cependant  Home,  nous  raconte-t-on,
operait  presque  toujours  dans  une  lunriere  suftisante  pour  bien
observer.  Et  cependant  les  "slate-writing  mediums"  americains
donnent  leurs  seances  en  plein  jour.  Et  meme  on  vient  nous
dire  aujourd'hui  (MM.  Feilding,  Baggally  et  Carrington  a  propos
d'Eusapia  Palladino)  que  "  plus  les  precautions  etaient  com-
pletes, plus  la  lumiere  etait  forte,  plus  les  phenomenes  etaient
nombreux." 1  (Voila  certes  une  affirmation  bien  nouvelle  et
bien  inattendue.)  Tantot  la  "  chaine  des  mains"  est  considered
comme  etant  de  toute  necessite,  a  ce  point  que  rien  ne  se
produit  plus  une  fois  qu'elle  est  rompue;  tantot  on  sen  passe
tout-a-fait — du  moins  en  ce  qui  regarde  le  medium  lui-meme.
Certains  mediums  n' "  operent "  qu'isoles  des  assistants  et  bras
et  jambes  litis  (comme  les  Davenport) ;  d'autres  ne  consentent
qu'avec  les  plus  grandes  difficultes  et  exceptionnellement  a  se
laisser  attacher  les  mains  a  celles  des  controleurs  (Eusapia).
Et  pour  la  seule  facon  de  controler  les  mains  il  y  a  des
nuances !  Sambor  par  exemple  se  laissait  presque  toujours
tenir  dans  le  sens  strict  du  mot.  Au  contraire  Eusapia  ne
l'admet  pas ;  M.  le  Docteur  Ochorowicz  nous  a  tres  ingenieuse-
ment  explique  pourquoi.2  Et  puisque  je  viens  de  citer  son  nom
je  me  permettrai  d'ajouter  qu'a  mon  avis  les  conditions  dans
lesquelles  se  produisent  a  l'heure  actuelle  en  presence  de  son
medium  Mile  Tomczyk  les  levitations  de  petits  objets  vont
certainement  k  l'encontre  de  ce  que  les  spirites  ont  tache  de
nous  inculquer  durant  soixante  ans.  Pour  les  "  apports  "  :  non
seulement  beaucoup  de  mediums  a  effets  physiques  n'en  pro-
duisent pas  du  tout,  ma-is  les  esprits  de  Home  affirmaient  (e'est
Crookes  qui  nous  raconte  le  fait)  que  la  matiere  ne  peut  passer

1  Proceedings  of  the  8.P.B.,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  323.
-Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiqucs,  1896,  No.  2,  pp.  105-107.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


421


a  travers  la  matiere;  et  cependant .  .  .  Enfin  pour  les  materia-
lisations: ime  condition  soi-disant  essentielle — c'est  la  "transe"
du  medium  qui  doit  etre  en  plus  isole  des  assistants.  M.
Aksakow  a  meme  elabore  a  ce  propos  une  ingenieuse  theorie
d'apres  laquelle  a  chaque  "  materialisation "  partielle  ou  totale
correspondrait  une  "  dematerialisation  "  aussi  partielle  ou  presque
totale  du  corps  du  medium  lequel  pourrait  par  consequent
devenir  "  invisible."  (Voila  encore  une  hypothese  bien  commode
a  certain  point  de  vue.1)  Et  cependant  non  seulement  les  cas
ou  medium  et  apparition  auraient  ete  vus  simultanement  ne
sont  pas  apres  tout  si  peu  nombreux ;  mais  aux  seances  des
mediums  de  profession  americains  on  voit  souvent  apparaitre
une,  deux,  trois  apparitions  en  meme  temps  que  le  medium —
et  meme  en  pleine  lumiere  '  La  "  transe "  non  plus  n'est  pas
une  condition  sine  qua  non ;  le  polonais  Jan  Guzik — pour  ne
citer  que  lui — n'est  ni  "  entranse,"  ni  meme  isole  du  cercle
lorsque  se  produisent  ses  "  materialisations " — aussi  tres  sui
generis,  puisqu'avant  lui  nous  n'avons  jamais  entendu  parler,
je  crois,  de  materialisations  a  caractere  mi-animal  (!).  (Des
bandes  de  toile  enduites  d'une  substance  lumineuse  et  apposees
sur  les  jambes  de  Guzik — je  parle  d'apres  mon  experience  per-
sonnelle — presentent  un  obstacle  insurmontable  a  ces  materialisa-
tions-la.)

Et  une  fois  materialisees — comnie  elles  se  comportent  differem-
ment  les  apparitions!  Aujourd'hui  tel  "esprit"  parle  qui
soutenait  auparavant  qu'un  esprit  materialise  ne  pent  parler.2
Ou  bien,  alors  que  certains  ne  tarissent  pas  en  babillages  "  de
omni  re  scibili  et  quibusdam  aliis,"  un  autre  affirme  qu'une
fois  revetu  temporairement  d'une  enveloppe  corporelle  un
habitant  de  l'autre  monde  n'en  sait  pas  plus  que  les  assis-
tants,3 etc.,  etc.

Et  voyez  les  apports.  Alors  que  pour  produire  le  plus
simple  mouvement  d'objet  sans  contact  le  medium  doit  l'avoir

i  C'est,  comme  on  sait,  la  soi-disant  disparition  des  jambes  de  Mine  d'Espe-
rance  a  une  seance  a  Helsingfors  qui  apousse'  M.  Aksakow  a  formuler  sa  theorie
(v.  Un  cas  de  demat&rialisation  partielle  du  corps  d'un  medium).  M.  Carrington  a
fait  bonne  justice  de  cet  incident  dans  un  interessant  article  des  Proceedings  of
the  American  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.  pp.  131-168.

-  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.B.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  61.

3  Pareille  affirmation  a  ete  faite  en  ma  presence  a  une  seance  de  Mme
Corner  (Florence  Cook).


422


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


tout  pres  de  soi  et  que  l'experience  rate  infailliblement  s'il
en  est  autrement — voila  que  d'autres  objets  voyagent  sans
encombres,  a  travers  les  airs  sur  des  distances  souvent  tre.s
considerables  (comme  de  Portsmouth  a  Londres).1  Les  "  lois "
les  plus  essentielles  des  phenomenes  sont  ainsi  renversees  de
fond  en  comble,  mais  les  spirites  ne  sen  montrent  pas  autre-
ment preoccupes.  lis  repondront  sans  doute  que  les  "apports"
appartiennent  a  un  tout  autre  ordre  de  faits  que  les  uiouve-
ments  sans  contact  (comme  si  c'etait  la  une  explication !) —
et  voila  tout.

L'impression  qui  se  degage  de  tout  cela  c'est  que  ces  soi-
disant  lois  ne  sont  que  le  fruit  de  la  fantaisie  des  mediums —
quand  ce  n'est  pas  de  leur  ingeniosite.  Une  seule — ou  a  pen
pres — ne  varie  presque  jamais  :  les  conditions  de  I' investigation  ne
sont  'pas  telles  que  I'dbservateur  les  cUsire,  mais  telles  que  le
medium  les  vent.

(6)  A  supposer  les  pltinomenes  authentiqu.es  ce  n'est  phis  d'tme
seide  force  physique  inconnue  les  produisant  qu'il  s'agirait
mais  de  plusieurs.

En  eftet,  comme  le  dit  M,  Podniore,"  quelque  sage  que  soit
l'adage  "  entia  non  sunt  multiplicanda  praeter  necessitatem "  il
serait  vraiment  par  crop  parcimonieux  le  critique  qui  s'obsti-
nerait  a  mettre  sur  le  compte  d'une  seule  et  unique  force
physique  des  faits  aussi  differents  que :  les  levitations  d'objets,
(tables)  avec  contact ;  les  transports  d'objets  sans  contact ;
les  levitations  et  "elongations"  du  corps  humain  (Home);
le  passage  de  la  matiere  a  travers  la  matiere  (noeuds  de
Zollner,  etc.);  les  apports;  les  coups  frappes ;  les  sons  musicaux
et  parfums  (Stainton  Moses);  l'incombustibilite  (Home);  les
materialisations.

II  est  clair  que  si  tous  ces  faits  sont  authentiques,  ce  n'est
pas  par  une  "  force  "  unique,  mais  bien  par  plusieurs,  qu'ils
doivent  etre  produits.  Eien  d'inqDrobable  dans  la  supposition
que  non  seulement  une,  mais  de  multiples  forces  inconnues
peuvent  operer  dans  la  nature  :  qui  oserait  le  nier  apres
toutes  les  decouvertes  de  ces  dernieres  annees  ? Mais  c'est  la

1  Aksakow,  Animisme  et  Spirilisme,  p.  489  (original  russe).
-  Modem  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  p.  183.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


4-23


concentration  de  plusieurs  de  ces  forces  inconnues  en  un  meme
individu  ou  une  meme  categorie  d'individus  ;  c'est  leur  gravita-
tion a  toutes,  pour  ainsi  dire,  autour  d'un  meme  centre  qui  est
invraisemblable.  Comme  le  dit  toujours  M.  Podmore,  l'impro-
babilite  apriorique  de  l'hypothetique  force  psychique  est  enor-
mement  accrue  rien  que  par  l'enumeration  des  multiples  fonctions
auxquelles  ladite  force  aurait  a.  pourvoir.1

(7)  L'origine  purement  terrestre  de  toutes  les  traces  permanentes

quoit  jamais  laissSes  une  stance  spiritiquc  est  certaine.

La  meche  que  Crookes  a  coupee  sur  la  tete  de  "  Katie
King"  etait  formee  de  veritables  cheveux,  de  l'origine  la  plus
indubitablement  bumaine.  Son  vetement — a  en  juger  par  les
morceaux  quelle  y  d^coupa  pour  les  donner  a  ses  admirateurs —
ne  semble,  non  plus,  avoir  presente  rien  de  particulierement
enigmatique  au  point  de  vue  de  l'etofte.  Les  multiples  apports
de  Stainton  Moses  et  d'autres  mediums  n'offraient  et  n'offrent
non  plus  rien  d'extra-terrestre.  Dans  certains  cas — comme
pour  Anna  Eothe  et  Bailey — on  a  meme  pu  decouvrir  la  bou-
tique de  fleurs  ou  d'oiseaux  ou  ces  braves  mediums  s'etaient
approvisionnes  en  vue  de  la  seance !

Et  ainsi  de  suite.  Si  exception  apparente  il  y  a,  c'est  que
l'objet,  la  substance  en  question  n'ont  pas  ete  soumis  a  un
examen  digne  de  ce  nom.

(8)  Plus les conditions d'une experience midiumnicpuc  sont

rigonrcuses,  plus  les  chances  de  r&ussite  de  eetfe  experience
diminuent.

A  mesure  que  1'observateur  elimine  les  causes  d'erreur  et
met  de  plus  en  plus  les  "  esprits  "  au  pied  du  mur — les  phe-
nomenes decroissent  en  intensite  pour  disparaitre  souvent  tout-
a-fait.  Ou  bien  le  medium  s'arrange  de  fa^on  a  eluder
l'experience  embarrassante  qu'on  veut  lui  imposer  et  offre  a
1'observateur  autre  chose.  Pres  de  40  ans  se  sont  ecoules
depuis  que Crookes  dans  un  article fameux 2  exposait  ce  que

1  Modem  Sph-itualism,  Vol.  II.,  p.  183.  A  noter  cependant  qu'ime  ingenieuse
theorie  developpee  par  Myers  dans  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  530-543,
permettrait  d'expliquer  par  1'operation  d'une  meme  cause  efficiente  la  plupart
des  phenomenes.

2  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  v.  Researches  in  Spiritualism,  p.  6.


424


Gomte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


les  phenomenes  sont  et  ce  qu'on  est  en  droit  d'exiger  qu'ils
soient — mais  helas!  si  depuis  lors  progres  il  y  a,  c'est  plutot
du  progres  a  rebours.  L'echec  presque  constant  des  expe-
riences veritablement  decisives  finit  par  devenir  un  argument
negatif  terriblement  serieux.1

Les  exemples  abondent.  lis  sont  particulierement  frappants
peut-etre  dans  le  domaine  de  l'ecriture  directe  sur  ardoises.
Le  nombre  d'observations  apparemment  tres  concluantes  s'y
rapportant  est  fort  imposant ;  mais  l'investigateur  veut-il
s'entourer  de  precautions  speciales  et  excluant  nettement  la
fraude — le  crayon  ne  bouge  plus.  Plusieurs  des  experiences  de
Zollner  avec  Slade  sont  un  autre  exemple  de  cette  meme
particularite ;  l'astucieux  americain  s'arrange  plus  d'une  fois  de
facon  a  tourner  les  "  tests  "  vraiment  decisifs  et  a  presenter
au  savant  allemand  quelque  chose  d'autre  ne  leur  ressemblant
que  superficiellement.  Pour  passer  a  un  cas  qui  m'est  per-
sonnel :  avec  Sanibor  des  chaises  s'enfilent  sur  ses  bras  alors
que  ses  mains  ne  sont  que  tenues  (quoique,  ma  foi,  tres  bien
tenues  !).  C'est  la  un  "  phenomene  "  qui  se  renouvelle  un  nombre
incalculable  de  fois  et  quelquefois  presque  sur  commande.
Voila  qui  est  fort  bien — mais  . .  .  un  simple  ruban  de  toile
passe  a  travers  les  manches  de  la  redingote  du  medium  et
celles  de  ses  voisins  fait  invariablement  "  rater "  ce  "  pheno-
mene." II  en  est  ainsi,  je  crois,  de  tous  les  mediums.  II
leur  arrive  quelquefois  de  presenter  des  faits  apparemment
incomprehensibles,  mais  sitot  que  nous  exigeons  des  garanties
speciales  et  en  demandons  alors  la  repetition — il  ne  se  produit
plus  rien  ou  presque  rien.

II  est  vrai,  il  n'est  que  juste  d'ajouter,  premierement,  que
dans  l'ignorance  ou  nous  sommes  des  phenomenes  presumes
quelques-unes  de  ces  "  garanties  speciales "  ont  pu  quelquefois
f'aire  violence  a  telle  ou  autre  de  leurs  lois  les  plus  essentielles
et  en rendre  des  lors  la  production  impossible ; 2  ensuite  que

'Jedis  "  presque  "  pai'ce  que  je  considere  que  certaines  experiences  tres  pro-
bantes  se  rapportant  aux  mouvements  d'objets  d'un  caractere  plus  ou  moins
elementaire  ont  toutefois  reussi.

2  Je  serais  enclin  a  mettre  dans  le  nombre  la  pleine  liuniere  (quelque  desirable
qu'elle  soit  en  principe)  pour  tous  les  phenomenes  autres  que  les  "raps"  et  les
mouvements  sans  contact  et  levitations  de  tables  ;  l'interposition  d'obstacles
materiels  compacts  entre  le  medium  et  les  objets  a  mouvoir  (tels  qu'une  cloison
metallique)  ;  peut-etre  aussi  la  pretention  (bien  des  fois  emise)  de  pouvoir  faire  la


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


425


plus  d'une  fois  il  est  arrive  aux  observateurs  eux-memes  de
negliger  im  detail  important  et  par  la  de  vicier  l'experience.
Neanmoins  et  malgre  ces  reserves  necessaires,  la  difficulte  sub-
siste.  La  on  le  prestidigitateur  ne  pent  rien  le  midium  99
fois  sur  100  (ne  serait-ce  pas  plutdt  999  fcis  sur  1000  ?)  ne
re'ussit  pas  mieux.

(9)  Aussi  voyons-nous  que  la  presque  totaliU  des  "  plUnomenes
physiques"  a-t-elle  ite  reproduite  par  les  prestidigitateurs.

S'ils  n'ont  pas  demoli  tout  l'edifice  si  laborieusement  eleve  au
cours  de  quelques  dizaines  d'annees  par  les  mediums  a  effets
physiques,  ils  n'en  out  certainement  laisse  debout  que  quelques
pans  de  murs  !  Ils  ont  fait  table  rase  des  multiples  temoignages
accumules  en  faveur  de  l'ecriture  directe  sur  ardoises  ;  ils  ont
reproduit  ou  explique  les  photographies  spirites,  les  trues  des
seances  de  materialisation  (par  exemple  la  materialisation  gra-
duelle  de  "  l'esprit  "  devant  les  assistants) ;  les  "  raps  "  (du  moins
certains  "raps");  les  phenomenes  lumineux  (du  moins  certains
phenomenes  lumineux) ;  les  procedes  a  l'aide  desquels  les
mediums  parvenaient  a  se  debarrasser  des  liens  dont  on  les
chargeait ;  a  sortir  des  sacs  dans  lesquels  on  les  enfermait — ou
a  produire  leurs  phenomenes  malgre  ces  liens  et  ces  sacs,
etc.,  etc.

Je  ne  connais  rien  de  plus  instructif  sous  ce  rapport  que
la  lecture  des  ouvrages  speciaux  consacres  a  nous  narrer  les
trues  en  usage  chez  les  mediums  (americains  surtout).1  L'in-
geniosite  des  i^rocedes  qui  y  sont  decrits  tient  quelquefois  du
prodige  ! Et  on  se  dit  en  parcourant  cette  suite  interminable

lumiere  a  n'importe  quel  moment  d'une  seance.  Pour  ce  qui  est  de  la  pleine
lumiere  il  est  admissible  a  priori  (quoique  bien  i'acheux  !)  qu'elle  puisse  veritable-
ment  nuire  aux  phenomenes;  quant  aux  "obstacles  materiels,"  comme  nous  ne
repoussons  pas  a  priori  l'hypothese  d'une  "  materialisation  "  de  membres  humains,
il  est  comprehensible  que  ces  membres  ne  puisseut  pas  agir  a  travers  une  cloison
metallique,  ou  le  couvercle  et  les  parois  d'une  boite  hermetiquement  fermee.  Un
eclairage  subit  de  la  chambre  ou  la  seance  a  lieu  pourrait  a  mon  avis  etre  preju-
diciable  au  medium.  On  le  voit,  je  fais  encore  la  part  assez  belle  aux  "esptits,"
quelque  sceptique  que  je  sois  a  leur  egard.  En  revanche  je  comprendrais
l'attitude  d'un  investigateur  refusant  d'experimenter  avec  un  medium  dont  les
mains  seraient  aussi  mal  tenues  que  celles  d'Eusapia.

1  Je  recommande  en  particulier  l'ouvrage  de  Carrington,  The  Physical  Pheno-
mena of  Spiritualism,  fraudulent  and  genuine.


-


420


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


["part


de  recits  ou  l'investigateur,  quelqu'alerte  et  intelligent  qu'il
soit,  donne  invariablement  dans  le  panneau  malgre  les  precau-
tions les  plus  minutieuses.  Oui,  certes,  ces  sortes  de  recherches
doivent  etre  l'apanage  de  quelques-uns  seulement  !  Oui,  le
temoignage  de  celui  qui  n'a  pas  fait  du  sujet  une  etude
speciale  (qui  n'a  pas  en  particulier  etudie  la  prestidigitation)
ne  pent  forcement  valoir  grand'ehose !  Nous  ne  demandons  pas
a  tin  assyriologue  de  trancher  un  probleme  ardu  d'algebre,  ou  a
un  chiniiste  de  se  prononcer  sur  la  lecture  d'un  texte  cunel-
forme ;  nous  ne  regardons  pas  un  chirurgien  comme  speciale-
ment  competent  en  architecture  et  ne  rechercherons  pas  l'avis
d'un  architecte  relativement  a  un  probleme  de  chimie.  A  plus
forte  raison  comment  peut-on  invoquer  le  temoignage  du  premier
venu  1  dans  une  question  aussi  compliquee  que  celle  de  savoir
si  tel  ou  tel  phenomene  apparemment  incomprehensible  peut
ou  ne  peut  pas  etre  du  a  un  "  true  "  ?  II  est  clair  que  par-
eille  question  releve  des  specialistes.

Du  reste  j'aurai  encore  l'occasion  de  toucher  a  ce  sujet.
Eevenons  a  ce  qu'ont  reussi  a  faire  nos  prestidigitateurs  et
constatons  que  sur  certains  chapitres  ils  ont  non  seulement
egale  mais  surpasse  les  mediums.  Les  vases  remplis  d'eau  et
de  poissons  rouges ;  les  lapins  et  oiseaux  vivants  que  nous
voyons  surgir  grace  a  leur  baguette  magique,  venant  on  ne  sait
d'ou,  devant  nos  yeux  emerveilles  dans  des  dalles  brillamment
eclairees — valent  bien  les  apports  de  Bailey,  d'Anna  liothe  ou
menie  de  Stainton  Moses.  II  faut  bien  croire  d'ailleurs,  que  les
adeptes  de  la  magie  blanche  ont,  somme  toute,  assez  bien
reussi  dans  leur  imitation  des  phenomenes  mediumniques,
puisqu'il  s'est  trouve  des  spirites — et  non  des  moindres — pour
affirmer  que  certains  d'entr'eux  n'etaient  que  des  mediums
honteux.  (O'est  ce  qu Alfred  Eussel  Wallace  notamment  a  fait
pour  plusieurs  et  en  particulier  pour  Davey.1)

1  lit  meme  si  ce  temoin  n'est  pas  le  premier  venu,  mais  s'est  illustre  dans  un  tout
autre  domaine,  la  question  ne  me  semble  pas  se  poser  tres  differemment.  Je  rap-
pellerai  a  ce  propos  que  certains  savants  dont  le  temoignage  en  faveur  des
phenomenes  mediumniques  a  et(5  souvent  cite  comme  ayant  beaucoup  de  poids  ont
reconnu  ne  rien  comprendre  a  la  prestidigitation  (ainsi  MM.  Scheibner  et  Weber  ;
Seyhert  Commission's  Report,  pp.  108-110).

Journal  of  the  S.P.B.,  mars  1891.  On  me  fera  observer  peut-etre  que  meme
s'ils  ont  reproduit  beaucoup  de  phenomenes  les  prestidigitateurs  n'ont  pas  reussi  a
les  reproduire  tous  ;  ensuite  que  certains  prestidigitateurs,  Davey  par  exemple,


LXIV,] Les  Phenornenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  427


Nous  somraes  loin  de  meconnaitre  l'importance  du  fait  que
certains  prestidigitateurs  appeles  a  donner  leur  avis  sur  l'au-
tbenticite  de  quelques  phenornenes  se  sont  prononces  nettement
pour  l'affirruative  (par  exemple  Bellachini  et  Kybka  a  propos
de  Slade  et  d'Eusapia ;  MM.  Carrington  et  Baggally  qui
out  experiments  avec  cette  derniere  a  Naples  en  meme  temps
que  M.  Eeilding  sont  egalement  des  experts  en  la  matiere) ;
mais  leurs  verdicts  sont  contre-balances  par  ceux  d'autres
specialistes  d'un  caractere  tout  oppose.  II  est  fort  naturel
du  reste  qu'un  Bellachini  puisse  tout  comme  un  autre  etre
pris  au  depourvu  par  un  true  qu'il  ne  connait  pas ;  aurait-il
persevere  dans  son  attitude  premiere  s'il  avait  continue  ses
recherches  ? That  is  the  question.

Puisque  nous  parlons  en  ce  moment  de  prestidigitation,  rappelons
que  les  spirites  insistent  souvent  sur  le  grand  desavantage
dans  lequel  le  medium  serait  place  vis-a-vis  du  faiseur  de
tours  de  passe-passe,  celui-ci  operant  sur  une  estrade,  avec  ses
propres  instruments  et  appareils,  souvent  entoure  d'acolytes ;
celui-la  venant  au  contraire  seul  dans  une  maison  etrangere,
sans  rien  apporter  avec  soi ;  en  proie  a  la  suspicion ;  bref,
a  en  croire  certains  "  croyants,"  toutes  les  facilites  seraient
l'apanage  du  prestidigitateur  et  la  situation  du  medium  serait
des  moins  commodes.

Voyons  s'il  en  est  vraiment  ainsi. Tout  d'abord :

(a)  Beaucoup  de  prestidigitateurs — ou  presque  tous — viennent
donner  des  seances  en  ville.  lis  ne  se  font  quelquefois
accompagner  de  personne ;  ils  empruntent  tres  souvent  aux
assistants  certains  objets  dont  ils  ont  besoin,  comme  des
montres,  des  mouchoirs  de  poche,  des  pieces  de  monnaie,  etc.

(h)  Beaucoup  de  mediums — surtout  en  Amerique  et  en
Angleterre — donnent  des  seances  chez  eux  et  se  servent  de
leurs  propres  appareils  (ardoises,  etc.).  Rien  ne  leur  manque
alors :  tables  et  portes  truquees,  comperes  caches  au  bon
endroit  et ainsi de suite  ad  infinitum.

Ensuite  il  faut  se  rappeler  que  le  medium  n'est  nullement

etaient  doues  de  facultes  d'adresse  et  d'ingeniosite  exceptionnelles,  et  qu'on  ne  peat
avec  vraisemblance  attribuer  au  premier  venu  ;  enfin  qu'il  est  theoriquement
possible  que  deux  phenornenes  apparemment  identiques  puissent  etre  dus  a  deux
causes  absolument  differentes.  Je  suis  pret  k  conceder  ces  quelques  points,  mais
sauf  pour  le  premier  je  ne  leur  vois  pas  une  tres  grande  importance.

2E


42S


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


tenu  de  produire  les  pbenomenes  quand  meme ;  qu'il  a  a  sa
disposition  mille  et  une  bonnes  raisons  pour  n'en  rien  faire
quand — pour  une  cause  ou  pour  une  autre — cela  ne  l'arrange
pas  (il  pent  meme  a  la  rigueur,  s'il  est  a  court  d'excuses,
ne  rien  dire  apres  n'avoir  rien  produit  et  s'en  aller  comme
il  etait  venu  sans  que  sa  reputation  en  patisse) ;  1  que
souvent  une  seance  nulle  lui  donne  pour  ainsi  dire  un
regain  de  mystere ;  enfin  que  generalement  on  exige  beaucoup
plus  du  prestidigitateur  (qui  n'a  pas  droit,  lui,  aux  seances
nulles !)  cpie  du  medium  comme  phenomenes  et  que  la
majorite  de  ceux  qui  fr^quentent  les  seances  spirites  savent
(il  faut  leur  rendre  cette  justice)  se  contenter  de  peu.
II  n'irait  pas  loin  le  prestidigitateur  qui  se  mettrait  en
tete  d'imiter  les  mediums  (ou  du  moins  la  plupart  des
mediums)  au  point  de  vue  de  la  modicite  des  resultats !
Enfin  faut-il  expliquer  que  bien  souvent  l'ambiance  aussi
est  beaucoup  moins  favorable  a  l'emule  de  Kobert  Houdin
qu'au  medium  ?  Et  tout  en  admettant  volontiers  que  dans
nombre  de  cas  ce  dernier  peut  se  trouver  dans  une  situation
des  plus  desagreables,  je  crois  somme  toute  que  les  pretendus
avantages  qu'a  sur  lui  le  prestidigitateur  sont  exageres.
Les  risques  h  courir  seraient  evidemment  iucomparablement
plus  serieux  pour  le  medium  si,  une  fois  demasque,  il  etait
definitivement  "  coule " ;  mais  on  sait  bien  que  cela  n'arrive
jamais.  La  plus  eclatante  des  "exposures"  a-t-elle  jamais  mis
fin  a  la  carriere  d'un  medium  ?  Priere  de  me  citer  quelques  cas  !

(10) Presque  tous  les  mediums  a  effets  physiques  connus  out  6U
convaincus  de  fraude — et  plutot  dix  fois  quune.

Dans  la  carriere  de  D.  D.  Home  lui-meme — pourtant  unique
a  certains  points  de  vue — il  y  a  des  incidents  suspects.2  Pour
les  autres  c'est  une  suite  interminable  de  scandales  et  de  trues
demasques,  trues  souvent  grossiers,  d'autres  fois  d'une  surprenante

1  Pour  des  mediums  plutot  bavards  et,  ma  foi,  tres  amusauts  quelquefois
comme  feu  Sambor,  j'en  connais  d'autres  qui  preferent  garder  un  silence
obstine\  Ce  silence  a  ses  avantages.  Pour  le  medium  il  n'y  a  ni  explica-
tions a  donner,  ni  questions  gunantes  a  redouter  :  il  se  tire  d'embarras  avec
quelques  monosyllabes  du  sens  le  plus  vague — et  ses  affaires  n'en  vont  pas
plus  mal  :  au  contraire  !

-Journal  S.P.B.,  mai  1903.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomhies  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


429


ingeniosite  (mais  plus  rarement).  Les  mediums  americains
viennent  naturellement  en  premiere  ligne.  Et  la  serie  est  loin
d'etre  close !

Ce  cote  de  la  question  est  trop  connu  du  reste  pour  que
j'y  insiste ;  mais  puisque  les  spirites  mettent  souvent  en  avant
l'argument  qu'on  peut  tres  bien  etre  medium  et  frauder  par
ci — par  la  quand  ineme,  soit  dans  un  etat  d'inconscience,  soit
pour  suppleer  a  un  epuisement  temporaire  de  la  "  force "
inediumnique,  je  ferai  observer  que  bien  souvent — le  plus  souvent
— quand  on  demasque  un  medium  on  constate  la  premeditation ;
que  d'autres  fois  on  se  trouve  en  presence  d'une  veritable  or-
ganisation sysUmatiqne  ayant  pour  but  la  fraude  sur  une  vaste
echelle.  Ce  serait,  assure-t-on,  le  cas  pour  la  grande  majorite,
tout  au  moins,  des  mediums  de  profession  americains — sans  en  ex-
cepter  les  "  trance-mediums  " — lesquels  constitueraient  ni  plus  ni
moins  qu'une  vaste  association  embrassant  presque  tout  le  pays ;
association  dont  les  membres  se  communiqueraient  mutuellement
tous  les  renseignements  pouvant  mieux  faire  marcher  le  com-
merce et  se  soutiendraient  les  uns  les  autres  dans  le  louable
but  de  mieux  berner  leurs  clients.  Pour  ceux-la  pas  de  doute
que  les  excuses  ordinaires  des  spirites  ne  tiennent  pas  debout.

Un  autre  de  leurs  arguments  consiste  a  dire  que  de  ce  que
tel  phenomene  ait  ete  simule  il  ne  s'en  suit  pas  qu'il  n'y  en  ait
pas  d'authentiques ;  et  pour  un  pen  on  irait  jusqu'a  jouer  sur
les  mots  et  a  pretendre  qu'on  ne  peut  imiter  que  ce  qui  existe ;
si  done  on  imite  un  phenomene  quelconque  e'est  que  celui-ci
doit  forcemeut  exister  par  lui-meme !  (Je  crois  avoir  vu
quelque  part  ce  raisonnement ')  A  ceci  je  repliquerai :  si  en
etudiant  une  categorie  de  "  faits "  ou  soi-disant  tels,  nous
constatons  (a)  que  pas  un  de  ces  "  faits  "  ne  peut  etre — n'a  ete
— rigoureusement  prouve  ;  (b)  que  parmi  ces  "  faits  "  beaucoup
sont  indubitablement  d'origine  frauduleuse  ;  et  (c)  qu'ils  peuvent
etre  reproduits  artificiellement ;  si,  dis-je,  nous  constatons  tout
cela,  que  serons-nous  en  droit  de  conclure  ?  Simplement  ceci :  que
la  categorie  de  "faits"  en  question  n'existe  probablement  pas  I1

1Je  posai  un  jour  a  un  spirite  tres  honorablement  connu,  aujourd'hui  decide,
la  question  :  quelle  peut  bien  gtre  a  l'egard  des  phenomenes  frauduleux  l'attitude
des  "  esprits "  eux-memes?  II  me  fut  repondu  :  "Une  longue  experience  m'a
appris  que  ces  esprits  sont  de  simples  canailles."  Un  "  psychiste  "  des  plus
illustres  auquel  je  faisais  part  il  y  a  peu  de  temps  de  cette  opinion  s'empressa
de  s'y  rallier  entieremeut.


430


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


(11)  Les  mediums  pay6s  sont  loin  d'etre  les  seuls  a  frauder.

Lorsque,  en  1882,  fut  organisee  la  Societe  anglaise  des  Re-
cherches  Psychiques  ses  fondateurs  attachaient  grande  importance
a  la  possibility  d'observer  des  phenomenes  physiques  en  presence
non  de  mediums  payes  mais  de  simples  particuliers.  Leur
attente  fut  en  tres  grande  partie  deciie.  Mais  la  ou  elle  ne  Fa
pas  ete  je  crois  que  les  savants  anglais  ont  pu  se  convaincre
que  leur  point  de  depart  etait  faux  et  que,  en  excluant — ou
a  peu  pres 1 — les  mediums  payes,  ils  ne  faisaient  nullement
disparaitre  le  seul  stimulant  qui  pousse  a  la  fraude.  On  ne
trompe  pas  que  par  interet  pecuniaire ;  nous  n'en  sommes
pas  encore  la,  Dieu  merci  !  Le  role  de  porte-parole  de
l'Au-dela ;  d'intermediaire  entre  deux  mondes  qu'un  gouffre
sans  fond  separe ;  de  canal  par  ou,  venant  de  la  plus  enig-
matique  des  sources,  s'ecoule  la  mysterieuse  force  psychique —
est  assez  tentant  pour  pouvoir  pousser  bien  sou  vent  tout  seul
k  donner  le  coup  de  pouce.  A  part  cela,  n'oublions  pas  que
la  table  autour  laquelle  ont  vient  faire  la  "  chaine "  est  un
puissant  element  niveleur.  Tel  personnage  eminent  qui  dans
la  vie  de  tons  les  jours  laisserait  a  peine  franchir  au  medium
le  seuil  de  son  antichambre  est  tout  heureux  de  l'avoir  assis
a  ses  cotes  k  une  seance  de  spiritisme  et  pour  un  peu  serait
pret  a  faire  toutes  ses  fantaisies.  De  son  cote  le  medium,  s'il
est  suffisamment  intelligent  pour  ne  pas  se  contenter  de  simples
satisfactions  d'amour  propre — satisfactions  de  contre-bande  plus
ou  moins — saura  faire  fructifier  ailleurs  ces  bonnes  dispositions
et  en  recueillir  les  resultats  sous  une  forme  plus  tangible.  Bref
il  y  a  pour  un  medium  bien  d'autres  manieres  a  tirer  profit
du  spiritisme  qu'en  passant  a  la  caisse  au  bout  de  chaque
seance. Rappelons  nous  Home  qui  ne  se  faisait  jamais  payer  lui.

Ensuite  il  existe  plus  de  gens  qu'on  ne  croit  communement
qui  trouvent  tres  amusant  de  mystifier  leurs  semblables  sans
raison  apparente.  Voila  encore  l'origine  possible  de  plus  d'une
mediumnite  surprenante  (voir  plus  loin).  A  noter  que  quand
notre  farceur  en  aura  assez  (on  se  lasse  de  tout !)  rien  ne
l'empeche  (telle  Katie  King  annongant  qu'elle  va  quitter  Florence
Cook)  de  declarer  qu'il  a  perdu  sa  mediumnite — et  voila !

1  Tout  en  mettant  en  avant  ce  principe,  ils  ne  s'y  sont  pas  toujours  conformes
(tt^moins  Eglinton,  Eusapia,  Mine  Piper).


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  431


Pour  ce  qui  est  des  conditions  de  controle  l'observateur  est
certainement  moins  bien  partage  (sauf  des  cas  rarissimes)  avec
un  medium  prive  qu'avec  un  professionnel.  Quand  on  a  affaire
a  ce  dernier  on  tient  generalement  (sentiment  bien  naturel !)  a
en  avoir  pour  son  argent.  Au  contraire  le  premier  vous  fait
une  faveur  en  vous  admettant ;  et  cette  faveur — comment  la
reconnaitre  sinon  en  ne  se  montrant  pas  trop  exigeant,  ni
comme  controle,  ni  comme  phenomenes  ?

La  confiance  ne  se  commande  pas.  Tel  individu  en  inspire
une  sans  bornes  a  A,  qui  ne  dit  rien  qui  vaille  a  B.  De  ce  que
tel  cercle  spirite  ait  une  confiance  entiere  en  la  personne  du
medium,  un  des  leurs,  otfrant  toutes  sortes  de  garanties  comme
situation,  comme  relations  personnelles,  comme  desinteresse-
ment — il  ne  s'en  suit  nullement  qui  cet  individu  soit  reellement
au-dessus  du  soupcon.  Du  reste,  a,  mon  humble  avis,  tout
homme,  quelqu'il  soit,  affichant  des  pretentions  extraordinaires
et  en  elles-memes  invraisemblables  doit  etre  presume'  capable  de
tromper  jusqu'a  ce  qu'il  ait  apporU  une  preiwe  pe'remptoire  de
la  v6riU  de  ses  allegations.

Enhn  je  crois  qu'aucun  de  ceux  ayant  etudie  les  faits  d'altera-
tion  de  la  personnalite,  de  double  conscience,  etc.,  ne  niera  la
possibility  de  la  fraude  inconsciente.  De  ce  que  mediums
tricheurs  et  spirites  fanatiques  aient  use  et  abuse  de  cette
excuse  pour  couvrir  la  fourberie  la  plus  manifeste,  il  ne  faut
pas  conclure  qu'il  ne  puisse  y  avoir  la  une  part  de  verite.
Mais  s'il  en  est  vraiment  ainsi — le  degre  de  confiance  qu'on
peut  avoir  dans  tel  ou  tel  personnage  a  Vitat  de  veille  n'a  plus
rien  a  voir  a  la  question.

Pour  finir  je  me  permettrai  de  demander :  sont-ils  apres  tout
si  nombreux  les  cas  ou  des  phenomenes  tels  que  les  apports  ou
la  materialisation  aient  ete  constates  en  presence  de  personnes
honorablement  connues  et  jouissant  de  l'estime  et  de  la  con-
sideration generales  ?

(12)  Si  des  phenomenes  et  de  ceux  qui  les  produisent  nous
passons  a  ceux  qui  les  observent — nous  serons  tout
d'abord  amenes  a,  constater  qu'un  tres  grand  nombre  de
Umoignages  s  y  rapportant  est  dinui  de  toute  valeur.

Pourquoi  ?  Parce  que  ces  temoignages  emanent  tres  souvent
d'individus  dont  la  credulite  sans  bornes,  la  cecite  a  tout  indice


432


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


de  fraude,  le  manque  de  sens  critique,  le  fanatisme,  ont  fait  un
tort  irreparable  au  spiritisme  et  meme  aux  recherches  psyehiques
en  general,  Dieu  sait  pourquoi  censees  en  etre  solidares  !  Kare-
ment,  je  crois,  le  proverbe,  "  Mon  Dieu,  preservez  moi  de  mes
amis,"  a  trouve  meilleure  application.  La  crdduliU  des  spirites!
Que  d'exemples  ridicules,  burlesques,  quelquefois  presque  re-
pugnants,  ces  quatre  mots  suffisent  a  evoquer  dans  notre  memoire
a  tons,  nous  autres  "  psychistes  "  !

Oui,  il  faut  se  le  dire :  dans  ce  domaine  etrange  il  est
certains  temoins — honnetes  ou  du  moins  se  croyant  tels — dont
les  declarations  les  plus  categoriques  n'ont  absolument  aucune
valeur.  Quoiqu'ils  affirment,  le  critique  doit  passer  outre  a
toutes  leurs  assertions.

Je  viens  d'ecrire  les  mots  "  honnetes  ou  se  croyant  tels."
Cela  ne  les  empeche  pas  de  travestir  la  v^rite  a  chaque  pas —
consciemment  ou  semi-consciemment.  Un  desir  intense  que
ceci  ou  cela  soit  ne  nous  pousse-t-il  pas  a  fermer  les  yeux  avec
obstination — avec  violence,  pourrais-je  dire — sur  tout  ce  qui  est
contraire  a  notre  "  marotte  " — pour  parler  vulgairement  ?  Des
lors,  au  'point  de  vuc  pratique  la  question  de  savoir  si  certains
de  ces  temoins  sont  de  bonne  foi  perd  son  interet.

Us  sont  convaincus  fermement  que  les  phenomenes  existent ;
c'est  entendu.  Aussi  ne  veulent-ils  plus  rien  connaitre  de  tout
ce  qui  ne  parle  pas  en  faveur  de  cette  authenticity.  Us
passeront  outre  a  tous  les  indices  de  supercherie  de  la  part
du  medium.  II  n'en  sera  pas  question  dans  les  comptes-rendus
qu'ils  feront  de  ses  phenomenes ;  au  contraire,  tout  ce  qui  lui
semblera  favorable  sera  exagdre"  et  souligne.  Un  scandale
eclatera-t-il  ?  le  medium  sera-t-il  pris  la  main  dans  le  sac  ?
lis  commenceront  par  reserver  leur  indignation  pour  celui  qui
l'aura  demasque  ; 1  ils  accepteront  ensuite  de  sa  part  les  excuses
les  plus  boiteuses :  enfin  il  y  a  beacoup  a  parier  qu'ils  feront  tout
pour  etouffer  l'affaire,  pour  ne  pas  l'ebruiter.

Allons  plus  loin.  Supposons  que  des  spirites  dans  cet  ordre
(ou  plutot  ce  desordre !)  d'idees  ont  livre  a  la  publicite  la
description  de  phenomenes  etonnants  qu'ils  auraient  observes.

1  Je  me  rappelle  avoir  lu  il  y  a  bien  des  amines  dans  la  Revue  Spirite  comme
quoi  quelques  sceptiques  qui  avaient  saisi  "  I'apparition "  a  line  stance  de
materialisation  americaine  avaient  ete  roues  de  coups  "non  seulement  par
les  amis  visibles  et  presents,"  mais  aussi  soi-disant  par  les  invisibles.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  433


Supposons  qu'il  leur  aura  ete  demontre  par  A  +  B  qu*ils  ont  ete
grossierement  mis  dedans.  Supposons  que,  par  extraordinaire,
ils  se  seront  laisses  convaincre.  Mais  comme  (1)  on  n'aime  pas
generalement  a  reconnaitre  son  erreur ;  (2)  comme  il  est  entendu
que  les  phenomenes  existent  tout  de  meme  en  ge'ne'ral  (de  ce
que  telle  maison  vende  des  vins  frelates  il  ne  faut  pas  conclure,
n'est-ce  pas,  qu'il  n'y  ait  que  cela  dans  le  commerce,  etc.) — il
est  assez  vraisemblable,  je  crois,  que  les  spirites  en  question  ne
rectifieront  pas  et  prefereront  garder  de  Conrart  le  silence
prudent.

Je  crois  qu'on  pourrait  aller  plus  loin  encore.  Supposons
un  de  ces  spirites  "  ultra "  k  une  seance  ou  le  medium  est
entoure  de  sceptiques  plus  ou  moins  mal  disposes.  Les  esprits
refusent  obstinement  de  se  manifester.  Le  medium  est  enerve ;
l'assistanee  gouailleuse.  Notre  spirite  sait  pertinemment  que  les
pihe'nomdnes  existent :  ne  les  a-t-il  pas  observes  cent  fois  ?  Alors
pouvons-nous  etre  absolument  surs  que  cette  fois-la — la  cent
et  unieme — s'il  en  a  l'occasion,  il  ne  fraudera  pas  lui-meme  ad
major  em  spirit  uum  gloriam  ?

La  tentation  pour  lui  doit  etre  en  tous  cas  terriblement
forte.1

En  dehors  de  ces  fanatiques  extremes  il  existe  encore
d  autres  categories  de  spirites  au  sujet  desquels  un  doute  l£ger
peut  (sans  calembour)  se  presenter  a  l'esprit.  II  en  est  soit
qui  se  sont  fait  du  spiritisme  une  situation  ou  un  gagne-pain ;

1  Tout  r^cemment  encore  on  m'affirmait  chose  pareille  d'un  spirite  de  St
Petersbourg  occupant  une  haute  situation.  Apres  tout  je  ne  dis  pas  que  pareil
fait  s'est  necessairement  produit ;  je  dis  que  theoriquemeut  il  peut  tres  bien  se
produire.  Je  ne  parle  ici  et  plus  haut  que  des  spirites  fanatiques.  Mais  j'ai
ete"  frappe  des  privautes  que  prennent  quelquefois  avec  la  verite  d'autres
spirites — ponderes,  prudents,  non  exempts  de  quelque  scepticisme.  Toutd'abord,
que  de  scandales  6touffes  !  Humainement  cela  est  tres  comprehensible ;  mais
le  tableau  general  est  des  lors  forcement  incomplet.  Le  silence  garde  sur  des
experiences  negatives  (et  au  cours  desquelles  le  medium  a  convaincu  de
fraude)  venant  a  la  suite  d'autres,  positives  celles-la  et  proclamees  "  urbi  et
orbi,"  me  semble  aussi  devoir  etre  evite.  Enfin  que  dire  d'une  description
d'une  serie  d'experiences  faite  sur  un  ton  ou  on  ne  voit  guere  percer  de  doute —
alors  que  l'experimentateur  est  au  moment  mime  persuade  qu!un  des  resultats
obtenus  est  du  a  la  fraude  ?  La  publication — dans  une  revue  ou  un  ouvrage
special — de  recits  emanant  de  personnages  dont  le  temoignage  vaut  tres  peu  aux
yeux  de  celui  qui  les  publie  me  parait  egalement  peu  desirable.  On  pourrait
sans  doute  multiplier  ces  exemples ;  je  ne  cite  que  ceux  que  j'ai  presents  a  la
memoire  et  qui  me  sont  personnellement  connus.


434  Gomte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


soit  qui  s'en  servent  pour  faire  leur  chemin  dans  tous  les
rnondes ;  soit  qui — pour  des  raisons  que  je  n'ai  pas  a  approfon-
dir — se  sont  particulieremeiit  infeodes  a  tel  ou  tel  medium.
Dans  un  compte-rendu  de  seances  recemment  publie  j'ai  pu
lire  quelques  lignes  consacrees  a  decrire  les  precautions  prises
non  plus  contre  le  medium  mais  contre  un  des  assistants
appartenant  apparemment  a  unede  ces  categories  ;  d'oii  je  conclus
que  je  ne  suis  pas  le  seul  a  m'en  mefier  quelque  peu  !

Enfin,  disons  le  franchement :  les  seances  spirites  sont  loin
d'etre  toujours  recreatives ;  et  les  longues  heures  d'attente
frequemment  infructueuse  passees  dans  l'obscurite  ou  dans  un
soi-disant  "demi-jour"  vous  donnent  quelquefois  Ten  vie
irresistible  de  varier  un  peu  la  monotonie  d'un  passe-temps  qui
pour  etre  hautement  instructif  et  plein  des  plus  transcendantes
esperances  n'en  est  pas  moins  souvent  fort  ennuyeux.
Heureux  celui  qui  n'a  jamais  eprouve  cette  tentation-la !
D'illustres  personnages  n'y  ont-ils  pas  succombe  ? 1  Et,  comme
ici  comme  ailleurs,  "  il  n'y  a  que  le  premier  pas  qui  coute,"  ce
qui  n'etait  a  l'origine  qu'une  facetie  sans  lendemain,  finit  par
devenir  une  habitude  inveteree.  On  se  met  a  mystifier  syste-
matiquement  sans  en  tirer  aucun  profit.

Je  crois  en  avoir  fait,  helas,  la  triste  experience.  Des  1904
j'avais  concu  des  doutes  serieux  au  sujet  du  role  joue  dans
les  seances  du  cercle  dont  je  faisais  partie  par  X — avec  qui
jetais  du  reste  depuis  plusieurs  annees  deja  dans  les  meilleurs
termes.2  Le  succes  brillant  de  la  plupart  des  seances  aux-
quelles  X  assistait  et  controlait,  et  la  non-reussite  de  celles
auxquelles  il  n'etait  pas  present  nous  donnerent  tout  d'abord
l'eveil — a  moi  et  k  quelques  autres  membres  de  notre  cercle.
A  un  certain  moment  nos  soupcons  devinrent  meme  si  irre-
sistibles — que  je  cms  devoir  m'en  ouvrir  a  X  lui-meme.  Les
assurances  qu'il  me  donna  furent  si  categoriques  et  apparemment
si  sinceres  C{ue  mes  doutes  s'evanouirent — ou  je  les  forq.ai  a
s'evanouir. Ainsi  nous  avions veritablement  ^te  temoins  de

1  Notamment  feu  le  professeur  Mend^leew  aux  seances  de  la  commission
nominee  en  1875  par  la  Soci^te  Physique  pres  TUniversite  de  St  Petersbourg
(Aksakow,  Divulgations,  p.  109  [en  russe]);  tricheries  assez  anodines  du  reste;
et  le  professeur  Bianchi  a  la  seconde  seance  de  Lombroso  avec  Eusapia
[Annates  des  Sc.  Psych.,  1891,  6,  p.  331).

2  Voir  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  LV.,  pp.  403,  404.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


phenomenes  surprenants — et  avec  quatre  mediums  differents !
Les  esprits  avaient  decidement  fait  des  prodiges  en  notre
faveur ;  et  avec  les  "  apports  "  seuls  dont  ils  nous  avaient
gratifies :  (une  grosse  pomme  de  pin ;  des  photographies  de
personnes  inconnues ;  une  collection  de  monnaies  russes  du  dix-
huitieme  siecle ;  une  ancienne  monnaie  grecque ;  deux  cles ;
une  brochure ;  une  bande  de  toile ;  une  boite  de  cold-cream
vide  cachee  dans  un  fauteuil  et  decouverte  le  lendemain
matin  ;  un  petit  thermometre  trouve  egalement  le  lendemain  de
la  seance  sur  le  rebord  d'une  armoire — tous  objets  d'origine
inconnue,1)  avec  ces  seuls  "  apports,"  dis-je,  on  pouvait  former
tout  un  petit  musee.
Et  cependant  .  .  .

Bref — un  peu  moins  de  six  ans  apres  que  nos  premiers
soupcons  eussent  pris  naissance  (en  fevrier  1910) — levenement
les  confirmait  d'une  facon  irrefutable.  II  fut  constate  in-
dubitablement  que  X  laissait  le  medium — ou  soi-disant  tel — agir
a  sa  guise.  Une  petite  lampe  electrique  soudainemeut  allumee
au  beau  milieu  de  la  seance,  d'un  cote,  les  confidences  du  soi-
disant  medium  de  l'autre,  nous  revelerent  que  X  lachait  la
main  du  medium  quand  ce  dernier  lui  en  manifestait  dis-
cretement  l'euvie.  II  la  lachait  meme  si  bien  que  leurs  deux
mains  avaient  quelque  peine  a  se  retrouver  ensuite !  A  part
cela  il  n'y  a  pas  de  doute  pour  moi  que  X  a  triche  aussi
pour  ainsi  dire  directement.2

II  est  certain  que  la  preuve  positive  qu'il  ait  egalement
fraude  ou  laisse  frauder  aux  seances  anterieures  (deux  avec
Sambor  en  mai  1902  ;  seances  avec  la  sceur  de  Sambor,
Mme  W. ;  avec  le  Dr.  Sch.,  un  medium  prive ;  avec  Luba
Morozow  de  Vladikavkaz ;  enfin  avec  Jan  Guzik 3  immediate-
ment  avant  la  seance  decisive)  fait  defaut ;  et  il  est  douteux
que  nous  l'obtenions  jamais.  En  tous  cas  la  forme  sous
laquelle  X  refuta  mes  soupcons  en 1904  lui  rendrait,  a  mon

1  A  une  seance  de  .Sambor  (13  mai,  1902)  il  y  en  eut  aussi  "  d'apportes  "  de
la  chambre  d'a  cote — oil  nous  nous  rendions  durant  les  entr'actes.

2  En  particulier,  lors  de  "  l'apport  "  de  la  monnaie  grecque— pendant  une  sus-
pension de  seance — le  medium  (Luba  Morozow)  ne  se  trouvait  meme  pas  dans
la  chambre.  En  revanche  X  y  etait  lui.  II  y  a  aussi  d'autres  observations  da
meme  genre  se  rapportant  a  X — notaminent  a  la  seance  oil  on  le  demasqua.

3 II  y  fut  pourtant  constate  que  Guzik  avait  a  un  certain  moment  une
main  libre,  X  etant  un  de  ceux  qui  le  contrulaient.


436


Gomte  Perovsky  -Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


avis,  assez  difficile  im  aveu.  Eh  bien,  soit :  j'admets  qu'il  y
a  doute  (quant  a,  la  fraude)  pour  ces  seances.  Mais  comme
(Us  notre  premiere  tentative  s&rieuse  de  tirer  la  question  au  clair,
nos  soupcons  quant  au  rdle  jou6  par  X  rccevaient  une  confir-
mation 6clatante — comment  attacher  une  valeur  quelconque  a
toutes  les  experiences  anterieures  ou  il  lui  etait  possible  de
tricher  ?

Et  notez  que  ce  personnage  extraordinaire  est  loin  d'etre  le
premier  venu.  C'est  un  homme  cultive,  intelligent,  d'un  com-
merce tres  agreable,  dessinateur  et  ecrivain  a  ses  heures ;
occupant  une  situation  officielle  elevee  (avec  cela  rien  du
"  bureaucrate "  dans  le  mauvais  sens  du  mot).  II  jouit  meme
a  certain  point  de  vue  d'une  tres  honorable  notoriete  en  Iiussie
et  ailleurs ;  et  j'ajouterai  qu'il  a  toujours  fait  profession  de
s'interesser  serieusement  et  sans  fanatisme  au  spiritisme.

Notez  aussi  qu'il  ne  s'est  jamais  fait  passer  pour  medium.  II
se  sera  fait  pmt-etre  ce  raisonnement  qu'il  finirait  par  etre
soupronne  s'il  n'operait  qua  des  seances  sans  medium  reconnu  ;
tandis  qu'il  n'avait  aucunement  a  se  gener  avec  Sambor  ou
Jan  Guzik,  tout  ce  qui  se  passerait  pouvant  etre  mis  sur  le
compte  de  leur  mediumnite.  &  eux.  Ce  raisonnement — a  supposer
qu'il  ait  vraiment  ete  fait — e'tait  tres  juste  en  principe  ;  il  est
facheux  pour  X  qu'il  ne  l'ait  tout  de  meme  pas  empeche  de
se  faire  pincer.

Quelles  raisons  pouvait-il  bien  avoir  ?  Apparemment  rien
que  le  desir  anormal — presque  morbide — de  duper  les  autres,
de  rire  sous  cape  a  leurs  depens ;  peut-etre — quelquefois —
d'epater  un  novice.  II  ne  pouvait  certes  rien  y  gagner  ni  au
point  de  vue  pecuniaire,  ni  a  celui  de  la  notoriete,  puisque  le
benefice  de  tous  les  phenomenes  revenait  au  medium  !

Cet  exemple  me  parait  hautement  instructif!

J'ajouterai  que  les  personnes  qui  prenaient  part  a  nos  seances
etaient  invitees  en  partie  par  moi,  en  partie  par  un  ami  k
moi,  qui  est  un  des  chercheurs  les  plus  consciencieux  et  les  plus
patients  que  je  connaisse.  Notre  "  cercle  "  semblait  done  offrir
— et  offrait  en  effet — de  serieuses  garanties.  Et  pourtant !  .  .  .
Nous  avons,  il  est  vrai,  fini  par  voir  clair  la-dedans,  mais
d'autres  auraient  pu  etre  moins  perspicaces ;  et  je  crois  que
nous-memes  aurions  bien  pu  ne  nous  apercevoir  de  rien,  si  X,
au  lieu  de  nous  accabler  d' "  apports,"  setait  contente  d'un  peu


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  437


de  telekinesie  par  ci,  d'une  petite  materialisation  par  la,  et  avait
pris  la  precaution  de  faire  "  rater "  plus  souvent  les  seances
auxquelles  il  assistait  le  medium  !

Que  ses  emules  futurs  en  prennent  bonne  note  !

On  le  voit :  que  de  sources  d'erreurs !  Et  comment  les
demeler  sans  une  etude  approfondie  ?  Certains  fanatiques  se
designent,  il  est  vrai,  eux-niemes ;  mais  il  y  en  a  d'autres,  plus
dangereux,  parce  que  plus  intelligents.  Les  reconnaitre  n'est  pas
toujours  chose  facile.  Et  pour  les  autres  categories  la  tache  n'est
pas  plus  aisee.  A  parler  strictement  pour  appre'cier  a  sa  juste
valeur  ion  compte-rendu  de  phe'nomines  me'dnomniques  il  faudrait
avant  tout  personnellement  connaitre  tous  les  temoins :  alors  seule-
ment  on  peut  avoir  la  quasi-certitude  qu'il  ne  peut  s'agir  la
ni  de  trues  a  la  X,  ni  d'elucubrations  de  fanatiques ;  et  que  le
compte-rendu  en  question  ne  contient  pas  a  cote  d'inexactitudes
involontaires  des  reticences  voulues  ou  des  exagerations  inspirees
par  le  desir  de  servir  la  bonne  cause.

(13)  En  dehors  des  cas  sortant  plus  ou  moins  du  commun
que  je  viens  de  citer  (car  quelque  nombreux  que  scient  les  spirites
ultra-credules,  ils  ne  le  sont  pas  tous ;  quelque  plaisir  que
certains  farceurs  puissent  trouver  a  mystifier  leurs  semblables,
leur  nombre  doit  etre  force'ment  limite)  il  existe  d'autres  et  de
tres  serieuses  raisons  pour  recuser  dans  le  domaine  du  spiritisme
et  des  recherches  psychiques  bien  des  temoignages.  Et  tout
d'abord  :

(13)  Pour  bien  observer  dans  ce  domaine  il  faut  des  aptitudes
sptcialcs  et,  rigoureusement  parlant,  un  entrainement  specicd.

Car  l'etude  de  ce  que  Ton  est  convenu  d'appeler  les  phenomenes
psychiques  (ou  metapsychiques)  est  une  science,  quelque  soit  le
point  de  vue  auquel  on  se  place.  Elle  a  sa  litterature,  ses  pro-
cedes  et  methodes  d'investigation,  sa  philosophie,  quelquefois
ses  appareils.  Elle  demande — tout  au  moins  elle  devrait
demander — des  notions  en  d'autres  sciences  encore  :  en  psycho-
logie,  en  physiologie,  en  physique,  en  chimie.  Enfin  elle  comporte
certainement — et  peut-etre  avant  tout  le  reste — des  connaissances
dans  un  autre  domaine  qui,  par  une  ironie  du  sort,  a  de  mul-
tiples points  de  contact  avec  la  "  Psychical  Eesearch  "  :  la  presti-
digitation. (J'ai  deja  touche  plus  haut  a  ce  cote  de  la
question.)


438


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


Inutile  d'ajouter  qu'un  petit  nombre  seulement  des  investi-
gateurs  des  phenornenes  mediumniques  peut  satisfaire  a  de
telles  exigences.  Et  pourtant  je  n'ai  pas  encore  nomme  la
condition  qui  est  d'apres  moi  de  beaucoup  la  plus  importante ;
si  importante  au  fait  quelle  suffit  a  elle  seule,  k  mon  avis,  a
remplacer  bien  d'autres.

Notre  dbservateur  doit  avant  tout  bien  observer  !  Or  c'est  la
une  faculte  innee,  encore  qu'elle  puisse  etre  developpee.

II  doit  non  seulement  bien  observer,  mais  bien  decrire  ce
qu'il  aura  constate ;  bien  retenir  dans  sa  memoire  les  details
non  seulement  essentiels  mais  ceux-la  meme  qui  lui  semblent
superficiels ;  il  ne  doit  pas  trop  se  laisser  impressionner  par
1'apparemment  merveilleux  ou  inexplicable ;  il  ne  doit  jamais
ecrire  une  ligne  qu'il  n'ait  inurement  pesee  ;  entin  il  doit  etre
doue  d'une  impartiality  a  toute  epreuve  et  faire  le  meme  accueil
au  "  pour  "  et  au  "  contre."

Bara  avis. Oui,  certes  !

Et  ces  qualites  si  importantes  ne  se  trouvent  necessairement
reunies  ni  chez  l'homme  de  science,  fut-il  le  plus  illustre  parmi
les  illustres ; 1  ni  chez  l'homme  de  lettres  ou  l'artiste — fut-il
une  celebrite  mondiale ;  ni  chez  l'homme  simplement  cultive  et
intelligent ;  ni  meme  chez  l'homme  d'affaires,  pratique  et  de
bon  sens  par  excellence.  Eien  ne  nous  garantit  qu'une  fois
assis  a  la  table  spiritique  ils  ne  se  laissent  berner  comme
tant  d'autres. (J'en  connais  ')

Pour  ce  qui  est  en  particulier  des  homines  de  science,  il
est  permis  peut-etre  de  douter  que  les  etudes  faites  dans  le
calme  serein  des  laboratoires,  dans  une  ambiance  qui  n'a  rien
de  commun  avec  celle  des  seances  spirites,  aux  antipodes  de

1  La  science  la  plus  indubitable  est  loin  d'exclure  toujours  la  credulite —
quelquefois  une  credulite'  a  faire  palir  d'envie  le  spirite  le  plus  "ultra."  Dans
le  domaine  du  spiritisme  je  citerai  feu  le  Professeur  Wagner  de  St  Petersbourg
qui,  lors  de  ses  "experiences"  avec  le  medium  Nikolaeff  mettait  de  la  mous-
seline  duns  le  ''cabinet"  afjn  de  faciliter  aux  esprits  la  materialisation  des
voiles  dont  devait  se  revetir  la  "forme"  materialisee  ;  sur  l'ordre  que  lui  en
donnait  "l'esprit"  il  tournait  aussi  le  dos  au  cabinet  (ainsi  que  les  autres
assistants)  au  moment  d'allumer  le  magnesium  pour  photographier  la
"forme."  (V.  mon  "Supplement"  a  ma  traduction  russe  du  Modern
Spiritualism  de  M.  Podmore,  pp.  190-191.).  Et  en  dehors  des  recherches
psychiques,  que  dire  de  Chasles,  l'illustre  geometre,  rassemblant  durant  des
annees  les  autographes  de  Marie  Madeleine,  de  Ponce  Pilate,  d'autres
encore  ?


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  439


tout  ce  qui  rappelle  la  fraude  et  la  simulation — soient  toujours
la  meilleure  preparation  a  des  recherches  sur  un  terrain  aussi
seme  de  pieges  et  de  traquenards  que  Test  celui  ou  ont  pris
la  facheuse  habitude  de  fleurir  les  phenomenes  mediumniques.

Je  crois  que  dans  nombre  de  cas  un  "  bon  observateur "
sans  etiquette  sera  aussi  apte  pour  ces  sortes  de  recherches
qu'un  savant  officiel.

Si  je  ne  craignais  d'etre  accuse  de  courir  apres  le  paradoxe
je  dirais  meme  qu'il  y  sera  peut-etre  quelquefois  plus  apte.
Pourquoi  ?  Dame !  ne  fut-ce  que,  parce  qu'en  vertu  de  l'adage
"  Quod  licet  Jovi  non  licet  bovi "  il  est  a  presumer  qu'il  ne
se  permettra  pas  de  petites  libertes  dont  ne  se  sont  pas  fait
faute  d'user  certains  savants  parmi  les  plus  eminents  ;  il  ne  se
contentera  pas  d'une  simple  enumeration  des  "  phenomenes,"
mais  nous  decrira  les  conditions  dans  lesquelles  il  les  aura
constates ;  et  au  lieu  d'affinner  sans  autres  details  que  toutes
les  precautions  etaient  prises  contre  la  supercherie,  il  con-
descendra  a  nous  les  decrire  exactement.

Et  si  jamais  des  critiques  serieux  attaquent  ses  experiences
et  ses  conclusions,  notre  observateur  croira  sans  cloute  de  son
devoir  de  leur  repondre  d'une  facon  circonstanciee,  au  lieu  de
se  draper  dans  un  dedaigneux  silence  ou  de  ne  laisser  tomber
de  sa  plume  que  trois  ou  quatre  phrases  qui  ne  refutent  rien.

Mais — je  ne  veux  pas  qu'on  m'accuse  de  rechercher  le
paradoxe ;  et  puis — je  respecte  trop  les  savants.  Mettons  que
je  n'ai  rien  dit !

Ainsi  aucun  titre,  aucune  etiquette  attaches  aux  noms  des
experimentateurs  ne  peuvent  nous  garantir  d'une  fac^on  certaine
la  valeur  veritable  de  leurs  investigations,  ni  nous  premunir
contre  des  erreurs — peut-etre  meme  grossieres — de  leur  part.
Meme  la  qualite  de  prestidigitateur  n'est  pas  une  garantie
infaillible ;  la  preuve  c'est  que  certains  d'entr'eux  ont  change
d'avis  sur  les  phenomenes  dont  ils  avaient  ete  les  t^moins.
Harry  Kellar,  par  exemple,  qui  a  Calcutta,  en  1882,  avait
declare  ne  pouvoir  expliquer  l'ecriture  sur  ardoises  d'Eglinton,
revint  ensuite  sur  ses  affirmations  et  emerveillait  quelques
annees  plus  tard  les  membres  de  la  commission  Seybert  de
rilniversite  de  Pennsylvanie  en  leur  montrant  du  "  slate-
writing  "  bien  superieur  k  celui  de  Slade.1

1  Annaks  des  Sc.  Pxych.,  1895,  No.  6,  p.  378.


440


Comte  Pcrovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


En  somnie  :

(a)  La  comp6tence  veritable  des  investigateurs  des  pliinomhies
me'diumnicques  ne  depend  el'aucun  signe  extirieur  caracUrisS ;  en
memc  temps  elle  presuppose  un  ensemble  de  faculte's  plus  ou  moins
inne'cs — sans  parler  des  eonnaissances  acquises — qui  doit  nieessaire-
ment  se  rencontrer  assez  rarement.  D'ou  il  suit  rqu'une  quantiU
trds  restreinte  seulement  ele  elcscriptions  se  rapportant  aux  dits
ph&nomhws  doit  entrer  en  ligne  de  cornpte.

(b)  Le  meme  recit  (mot  pour  mot  /)  pent  avoir  une  valeur
quasi-ddcisive  si  c'est  A  qui  le  fait  et  pent  n'en  avoir  aueune  s  il
Smanc  de  B.

(14)  Mais  de  nouvelles  reserves,  entrainant  d'autres  elimina-
tions, sont  encore  necessaires.  C'est  qu'on  a  voulu  demontrer
que  la  on  ces  sortes  d'experiences  dependent  de  ce  que  les
inembres  de  la  Societe  des  recherches  psychiques  appellent
"  observation  continue ; "  d'un  effort  de  l'attention  devant
embrasser  une  periode  de  temps  tant  soit  peu  prolongee — elles
sont  entachees,  pour  ainsi  dire,  d'un  vice  primordial.  II  a  ete
prouve — on  du  moins  on  a  essaye  de  prouver — que  l'attention  ne
pouvait  suffire  a  la  tache  qu'elle  s'imposait  par  exemple  a  une
seance  d' "  ecriture  directe  sur  ardoises."  II  devait  necessaire-
ment  s'y  passer  une  serie  d'incidents  qui  lui  c'chapperaient ;
ou  qu'elle  percevrait  inexactement ;  ou  dont  elle  intervertirait
retrospectivement  l'ordre ;  et  c'est  dans  ces  omissions,  dans  ces
interversions,  dans  ces  interpolations  que  se  trouverait  l'expli-
cation  naturelle  de  faits  a  premiere  vue  incomprehensibles.
Les  experiences  classiques  de  S.  J.  Davey  ont  confirrae  sous
ce  rapport  les  conclusions  aprioriques  de  Hodgson  basees  sur
une  etude  approfondie  et  une  analyse  serine  des  comptes-rendus
des  seances  d'Eglinton.1

Tout  en  me  ralliant  en  somme  h  ces  conclusions  je  crois
qu'il  ne  faut  pas  les  pousser  trop  loin ;  du  reste  je  ne  ferai
sous  ce  rapport  qu'imiter  ces  memes  membres  de  la  "  Society
for  Psychical  Research  "  qui  ont  tres  sagement  consenti  a
experimenter  avec  Eusapia  alors  que  l'authenticite  des  pheno-
menes  de  cette  derniere  depend  uniquement  du  degn/  d'atten-
tion  qu'on  apporte  a  controler  ses mains  et  ses  pieds.  En

1  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  387-495.  Hodgson  a  revele  plus
tarcl  (Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  253-310)  les  methodes  de
Davey.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  441


outre,  quelque  faillible  que  soit  le  temoignage  humain— comme
c'est,  en  derniere  analyse,  de  lui  que  tout  depend  ici  bas- — force
nous  est  bien  de  ne  pas  trop  le  disqualifier  dans  le  domaine
que  se  sont  adjuge  les  mediums.  Ensuite  je  ne  vois  pas
trop  ce  que  Ton  pourra  toujours  mettre  a  sa  place.  L'ingeniosite
humaine — surtout  agencee  dans  un  but  pen  louable ! — etant
veritablement  sans  bornes,  qui  me  dit  qu'un  experimentum
cruris  qui  nous  semble  absolument  exclure  la  m'cessite  de  la
"  continuous  observation "  aujourd'hui,  ne  sera  pas,  s'il  reussit,
proclame  nul  et  non  avenu  demain  ?  Les  conditions  inclividuelles
d'une  experience  mediumnique  joueront  toujours  un  role  capital  ;
en  revanche,  comme  je  i'ai  deja  dit,  il  importe  avant  tout
d'etre  fixe  sur  la  personnalite  des  experimentateurs ;  c'est  par
la  qu'il  faudrait  commencer.

N'exagerons  done  pas  outre  mesure  l'importance — reellement
grande — de  1'oeuvre  de  Hodgson  et  de  Davey  ;  surtout  ne  nous
en  servons  pas  trop  sou  vent  comme  d'une  fin  de  non-recevoir ;
mais  admettons  cependant  qu'ils  out  demontre  la  faillibilite
frequente  de  l'observation  humaine  en  general  pour  certaines
categories  de  faits  mediumniques.

VoiJa  done  encore  une  circonstance  h  envisager  tres  serieuse-
ment.

Une  conclusion  s'impose.  Voici  celle  a  laquelle  provisoire-
ment  je  m'arrete  :

Je  crois  que  l'ensemble  des  objections  que  j'ai  indiquees,
toutes  convergeant  au  meme  point,  pese  d'un  poids  assez  lourd
pour  inspirer  des  doutes  legitimes  quant  a  la  securite  de  la
barque  qui  transporte  vers  des  destinees  inconnues  le  medium  a
effets  physiques  et  sa  fortune.  II  nous  faut  jeter  du  lest !  II
nous  faut  en  d'autres  termes  conceder  aux  sceptiques  que  /"
r6alit4  de  certains  phinomen.es  physiques,  loin,  d'etre  prouvte,  ne
repose  sur  aucun  fondement  serieux.  C'est  d'apres  moi  le  cas
des  "  apports,"  du  passage  de  la  matiere  a  travers  la  matiere ;
tres  probablement  aussi  de  la  materialisation  de  formes  humaines,
de  la  photographie  spirite ;  sans  doute  aussi  de  l'ecriture  directe.

En  revanche  je  considere  toujours  comme  importantes  et
probantes  certaines  observations  sur  les  mouvements  de  tables
sans  contact  (experiences  du  Comte  de  Gasparin  ;  du  professeur
Thury ;  d'un  des  sous-comites  de  la  Societe  Dialectique  de
Londres) ;  celles  de  M.  le  Docteur  Dariex  sur  le  renversement


442


Gomte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


spontane  des  chaises  de  son  cabinet  de  travail ; 1  peut-etre
aussi  certaines  experiences  sur  les  Invitations  de  tables  avec
Eusapia.'2

Je  range  entre  les  deux  categories  quelques  phenomenes  de
D.  D.  Home  (d'autres- — en  tres  petit  nombre — rentreront  plutot
dans  la  seconde).  II  y  en  a  qui  paraissent  decidement  bien
enigmatiques  (surtout  certains  cas  d'  "  incombustibility  "  partagee
parfois  par  d'autres  personnes  que  lui-meme ;  aussi  quelques
cas  de  Invitation  et — a  un  degre  moindre — de  transports
d'objets  et  meme  peut-Stre  d'apparitions  de  "  mains  ").  Par  rap-
port k  ceux-la  je  prefere  rester  pour  le  moment  sur  l'expectative.

Je  tiens  tout  de  meme  a  faire  remarquer  que  certains  cotes
negatifs  des  temoignages  se  rapportant  aux  phenomenes  medium-
niques  sont  particulierement  intensifies  clans  le  cas  de  Home.
Exception  faite  pour  Crookes,  peut-etre  pour  Lord  Adare  et  un
petit  nombre  d'autres  noms,  nous  n'avons  que  tres  peu  de  r£cits
emanant  de  temoins  pouvant  faire  autorite.  La  clientele  de
Home  etait,  il  est  vrai,  des  plus  "  choisies "  mondainement
parlant ;  mais  quelque  peu  democrate  que  je  sois  dans  l'ame,  je
suis  loin  de  considerer  un  nom  sonore  et  un  titre  aristocratique
comme  offrant  dans  le  cas  present  quelque  garantie.  N'en
deplaise  k  la  brillante  compagnie  dans  laquelle  ne  cessait
d'evoluer  le  mysterieux  ecossais,  je  pencherais  presque  pour
la  supposition  contraire.  Les  relations  de  Home  avec  sa
tres  distinguee  clientele  etaient  k  n'en  pas  douter  telles  que  tres
souvent — le  plus  souvent  peut-etre — non  seulement  il  n'avait  a
apprehender  aucune  surprise  desagreable,  mais  pouvait  imposer
telles  conditions  qu'il  voulait — meme  se  mouvoir  en  liberte  dans
la  chambre.  Et  de  ce  qu'il  lui  est  arrive  de  dire  k  Sir  W.
Crookes  "  au  commencement  de  leur  connaissance " :  "William,
aujourd'hui  je  veux  que  vous  vous  comportiez  envers  moi
comme  si  j'etais  un  prestidigitateur  reconnu"3 — il  est  permis  de
conclure  justement  que  la  plupart  du  temps  on  ne  le  con-
siderait  pas  comme  tel — c'est-a-dire,  qu'on  le  laissait  agir  plus
cm  moins  a  sa  guise. II  etait,  parait-il,  d'un  grand  charme

1  Annates  den  Sciences  Psychiques,  1S92,  No.  4.

2  C'est  avec  plaisir  que  je  constate  que  je  suis  sur  ce  dernier  point  du  meme
avis  qu'un  sceptique  comme  M.  Dorr  {Journal  of  the  S.P.B.,  avril  1910,
p.  -270).

Journal  of  the  S.P.B.,  1894,  pp.  344,  345.


lxiv.] Les  Phenomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.  443


personnel.  La  confiance  qu'il  inspirait  a  un  grand  nombre  de
ses  amis  etait  entiere,  et  il  en  comptait  de  fort  zeles.  Oeux-
la  pouvaient-ils  etre  de  bons  temoins  ?  La  reponse  est  pour
le  moins  douteuse  !

Leur  attitude  etait,  somme  toute,  assez  naturelle,  et  si  nous
sommes  tentes  de  n'accepter  leurs  recits  que  sous  benefice
d'inventaire,  il  n'en  doit  rien  rejaillir,  pour  la  plupart  d'entr'eux,
ni  sur  leur  honorabilite,  ni — tres  probablement — sur  leur
intelligence.  Moins  excusable  certes  est  l'attitude  du  monde
savant  de  ce  temps-la,  qui  sauf  un  nombre  d'exceptions  infime,
a  prefere  tout  bonnement  ignorer  Home.  A-t-il  toutefois
perdu  par  la  une  occasion  unique  et  qui  ne  se  presentera  peut-
etre  jamais  ?  C'est  somme  toute  improbable.  Si  les  pMnomhies
physiques  clu  spiritisme  existent,  un  autre  Home  finira  par  svrgir;
et  s'il  n'en  surgit  pas,  il  faudra  bien  conclure  que  lui  aussi
n'etait  qu'un  simple  prestidigitateur.1

Suspendons  done — -quant  a  lui — notre  jugement.

Ah  certes,  un  nouveau  Home,  s'il  se  presentait  a  l'heure
actuelle,  n'aurait  pas  a  se  plaindre  d'etre  neglige  par  la  science
onicielle.  Ce  serait  plutot  le  contraire.  On  se  l'arracherait !
Mais  voila :  malheureusement,  plus  la  science  y  met  de  la
bonne  volonte,  plus  les  "  bons "  mediums  se  font  rares.

J'acheve  ces  pages  sous  l'impression  d'experiences  d'aviation
auxquelles  j'ai  eu  la  chance  d'assister.  Voila  encore  une  fois
l'apparemment  miraculeux  realise — et,  ma  foi,  pas  trop  mal.
Decidement  le  merveilleux  scientifique  n'a  rien  a  envier  au
merveilleux  spiritique — et  aussi  religieux.  Les  envolees  des
Vedrines,  des  Conneau,  des  Grabam  White  et  des  Efimow  valent
bien  les  "  levitations  "  de  Home — et  ineme  celles  de  St.  Joseph
de  Copertino  ;  comme  du  reste  les  rayons  Eontgen  traversent
les  corps  opaques  bien  plus  surement  que  la  clairvoyance  de  la
somnambule  la  plus  extra-lucide  ;  comme  la  telegraphie  sans  fil
vaut  bien  comme  precision  et  siirete  d'information  la  tele-
pathie — revetue  de  l'estampille  ecclesiastique  ou  simplement
laique.  II  y  a  loin  du  grand  jour  de  la  science  triomphante
a  la  penombre  des  sanctuaires,  et  a  l'obscurite  ou  se  complaisent
esprits  et  mediums. La  science  peut  errer  longtemps ;  faire

1  Je  rappellerai  a  ce  propos  que  Home  ne  produisait  en  fait  de  "phenomenes"
ni  apports,  ni  "  le  passage  de  la  matiere  a  travers  la  inatiere."


444


Comte  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


bien  des  fois  fausse  route  ;  bruler  aujourd'hui  ce  qu'elle  adorait
hier  et  adorera  peut-etre  demain :  mais  une  fois  qu'elle  a
atteint  le  but  qu'elle  s'etait  propose — quelle  richesse  de  resultats  !
quelle  surabondance  de  preuves !  quels  riots  de  lumiere !  C'est
bien  autre  chose,  ce  me  semble,  que  les  agissements  d'esprits
plus  ou  moins  materialises  mais  toujours  timores  derriere  le
rideau  du  "  cabinet "  mediumnique  ;  ou  que  les  manifestations
hesitantes  et  insaisissables  des  entites  ineffablement  augustes
qui  president  au  merveilleux  religieux.

Tout  conipte  fait  je  commence  a  croire  que  c'est  plutot  le
merveilleux  scientifique  qui  merite  notre  admiration  et  nos
sympathies.

Post  Script  cjm.

On  le  voit,  je  n'ai  pas  range  parmi  les  causes  d'erreur
enumerees  plus  haut  une  dont  il  a  ete  pourtant  souvent  fait
etat  :  1'hallucination  collective.  Je  persiste  a  croire  qu'alors
qu'elle  a  contre  elle  un  faisceau  de  preuves  peremptoires,  elle
ne  repose  que  sur  des  presomptions — ou  pire ;  et  tout  en
trouvant  assez  frappants  certains  recits  de  performances
fakiriennes  publics  au  cours  de  ces  dernieres  annees,  je  main-
tiens  que  c'est  aux  adeptes  de  cette  theorie  qu'incombe  Yonus  pro-
handi,  et  que  jusqu'a  present  rien  n'a  ete  fait  sous  ce  rapport.1

Je  me  refuse  done  jusqu'a  nouvel  ordre  a  la  prendre  en  con-
sideration.

Mais  je  n'irai  pas  jusqu'a  nier  que  ce  ne  soit  dans  une
forme  inusitee  de  la  suggestion,  sexcrgant  sur  une  seule
personne  ct  sur  un  seul  sens  a  la  fois,  qu'il  faille  chercher
l'explication  de  certains  incidents  particulierement  frappants
ayant  eu  lieu  a  certaines  seances.  Je  me  suis  assez  souvent
etendu  a  ce  propos  sur  les  "  experiences  de  chaises "  faites
avec  le  defunt  Sambor  pour  ne  pas  revenir  la-dessus.  Mais

1  J'appelle  "faisceau  de  preuves  peremptoires"  tout  l'ensemble  des  experiences
mediumniques  ayant  laisse  des  traces  permanentes :  ardoises  couvertes  d'ecri-
ture,  photographies  de  formes  d'  "  esprits  "  visibles  ou  invisibles,  mouvements
sans  contacts  ou  levitations  de  tables  enregistres  graphiquement,  "apports,"  et
ainsi  de  suite.  Par  les  mots:  "  ou  pire,"  je  fais  allusion  au  cas  bien  connu
(Journal  S.P.E.,  Vol.  V.  pp.  84-86)  oil  une  histoire  de  fakirs  photographies  au
cours  de  la  representation  (sans  que  la  plaque  sensible  ait  rien  enregistre^  s'est
trouvde  etre  invented  de  toutes  pieces.  Pour  les  recits  de  performances  faki-
riennes auxquels  je  fais  allusion,  voir  Journal  S.P.R.,  novembre  1904  et  fevrier
1905.


lxiv.] Les  Phe'nomenes  Physiques  du  Spiritisme.


445


actuellement  je  ne  suis  pas  eloigne  d'admettre  que  quelques
observations  faites  avec  Eusapia  Ealladino  peuvent  avoir  la
meme  origine.  II  s'agit  d'apparitions  de  mains  et  "  d'attouche-
ments "  ne  pouvant  s'expliquer  par  une  simple  substitution
des  mains  du  medium.

II  me  semble  a  l'heure  actuelle  extrOmement  douteux  que
la  main  soi-disant  materialised  ait  ete  jamais  vue  en  meme
temps  que  les  cleux  means  d'Eusapia.  Cela  est  certain  en  tous
cas  pour  les  experiences  dont  nous  possedons  des  comptes-
rendus  stenographiques :  celles  de  1908  a  Naples  et  celles
entreprises  sous  les  auspices  de  l'lnstitut  Psychologique  de
Paris.  Pour  les  experiences  anterieures  pareille  chose  a
pu  Gtre  accidentellement  affirmed.1  Mais — ainsi  que  j'ai  eu
l'occasion  de  le  montrer  ailleurs2 — les  conditions  des  seances
d'Eusapia  sont  eminemment  propres  a  engendrer  dans  l'esprit
des  assistants  des  erreurs  de  memoire  quant  aux  circonstances
exactes  de  tel  ou  tel  incident.  On  ne  peut  done  attacher
grande  importance  a  des  affirmations  isolees  de  ce  genre  (a
supposer  qu'il  s'en  rencontre  beaucoup,  ce  dont  je  doute  fort).
Mon  impression  actuelle — e'est  que  lorsque  les  assistants  voient
la  main  "  materialised "  une  des  mains  d'Eusapia  au  moins  est
toujours  recouverte  par  le  rideau  (sur  la  table).  Aux  experi-
mentateurs  de  l'avenir  a,  me  prouver  que  j'ai  tort.

Pour  les  "  attouchements "  (a  travers  le  rideau)  la  chose
parait,  je  l'avoue,  moins  evidente  a  premiere  vue,  mais  je  crois
que  si  nous  serrons  de  pres  les  comptes-rendus  stenographiques
(pour  les  autres  il  faut,  je  le  repete,  faire  une  part  tres  large
aux  erreurs  d'observation  et  surtout  de  memoire)  nous  con-
staterons  k  peu  pres  la  meme  chose.  La  aussi  bien  souvent,
sinon  toujours,  une  des  mains  du  me'dium  au  moins  est
recouverte  par  le  rideau  et  invisible.  Et  quand  il  y  a — bien  rare-
ment — derogation  apparente  a  cette  regie,  e'est  que  les  pieds  du
medium  n'etaient  pas  bien  controles  (comme  cela  me  semble
avoir  ete  presque  indubitablement  le  cas  pour  l'experience  de
M.  Baggally  a  la  onzieme  des  seances  de  1908  a  Naples).3

Somme  toute  l'hypothese  que  ces  apparitions  de  mains
"  materialisees "  et  ces  contacts  etaient  produits  par  la  main

1  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1897,  No.  1.,  p.  4.

2  Proceedings  S.P.B.  Part  LXIL,  pp.  61-63.

3  Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Part  LIX.,  pp.  552,  553.


44< ;


G omte  Perovsky-Petrovo-SoLovovo.


[part


d'Eusapia  elle-meme  (celle  que  le  rideau  recouvrait)  liberee
(alors  qu'une  substitution  etait  hors  de  question)  a  la  suite
d'une  hallucination  tactile  provoqu^e  par  le  medium  chez  le
controleur 1  me  semble  a  l'heure  actuelle  devoir  etre  envisagee
serieusement.

Et  tant  que  des  phenomenes  de  ce  genre  n'auront  pas  ete
observes  alors  que  les  deux  mains  d'JEusapict  seront  au  moment
meme  nettcment  visibles  sur  la  table  (et  scs  pieds  contrdles  d'une
fagon  ne  prStant  a  aucun  doute)  nous  ne  sommes  pas  tenus  de
recourir  a  l'hypothese  d'une  "  materialisation."

1  Ou  plutot :  le  midium  provoque  chez  le  contrdleur — mentalement  et  peut-etre
inconsciemment — un  itat  d'esprit  dans  leqael  pareille  liberation  pourra  passer
inapernie. Je  prefere  cette  formule.


lxiv.] A  priori  Argument  against  Physical  Phenomena.  447


IV.

ON THE A PRIORI  ARGUMENT  AGAINST
PHYSICAL  PHENOMENA.

By  SIR  OLIVER  LODGE.

Theee  seems  to  be  a  tendency  in  some  quarters  to  emphasise
the  improbability  of  all  abnormal  physical  phenomena — an
improbability  which  certainly  looms  large  before  every
physicist — and  to  oppose  the  extreme  unlikelihood  of  the
occurrence  of  such  things  against  every  testimony  and  all
evidence  of  a  positive  kind  in  their  favour.

Up  to  a  point  this  attitude  is  legitimate  and  necessary,  but
there  comes  a  time  when  wisdom  lies  rather  in  considering
whether  our  ordinary  experience  of  nature,  and  our  customary
human  powers,  are  a  sufficiently  comprehensive  guide,  and
whether  we  can  imagine  any  enlarged  powers,  of  not  too
outrageous  a  nature,  such  as  could  be  supposed  capable  of
achieving  some  of  the  results.

The  first  hypothesis  which  every  one  who  is  driven  in  this
direction  naturally  makes  is  to  suppose  that  the  faculties
belonging  to  an  individual  are  not  all  known,  and  that  it  is
conceivable  that  force  may  be  exerted  and  sensations
experienced  beyond  the  known  periphery  of  the  bodily
organism.  The  truth  of  such  extension  of  faculty  must  be
examined,  for,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  nothing  to  negative  it,
but  it  has  certainly  not  been  definitely  proved.  Moreover,
among  the  asserted  occurrences  of  a  supernormal  nature  there
are  some  which  cannot  reasonably  be  explained  by  any  such
hypothesis,  however  it  be  stretched — not  at  least  if  the  supposed
extended  faculty  is  to  be  of  the  same  general  nature  as  those
with  which  we  are  familiar  within  the  limits  of  the  body
itself.


448


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[paet


The  movements  and  other  phenomena  that  have  to  be
explained  frecpuently  exhibit  intelligence — an  intelligence  some-
times beyond,  or,  at  any  rate,  differing  from,  that  of  any  person
present — even  though  it  is  not  of  a  high,  and  may  occasionally
be  of  a  mischievous,  kind.

Now,  in  the  domain  of  intelligent  phenomena,  pure  and
simple,  automatic  writing  may  be  considered  pre-eminent ;  and
the  evidence  which  is  accumulating  under  this  head  is  undoubtedly
tending  in  the  direction  of  substantiating  the  claim — a  claim
made  by  the  writings  themselves — that  they  are  partly  clue  to
selection  and  control  exercised  by  the  surviving  portion  of
individuals  who  not  loner  ago  lived  on  the  earth.

Let  us  take  this  as  a  working  hypothesis,  for  a  moment,
and  trace  its  results.  There  is  not  the  slightest  necessity,  and
as  far  as  I  know  there  is  no  extensive  claim,  for  attributing
merely  physical  phenomena  to  the  direct  agency  of  departed
human  beings.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  their
powers  of  acting  on  matter  have  been  enlarged  or  revolu-
tionised :  rather  it  would  appear  probable  that  such  mechanical
powers  as  were  possessed  in  the  body  have  now  ceased.  The
idea  that  physical  phenomena  are  directly  due  to  deceased
persons  has  led,  and  will  probably  always  lead,  to  cheap  and
easy  retort  and  ridicule.

That,  however,  is  no  argument.  In  certain  cases  there  does
appear  to  be  a  connexion,  though  it  may  be  indirect.  Some
of  the  simpler  physical  phenomena,  such  as  raps,  seem  designed
to  call  attention  and  add  emphasis  to  what  is  being  otherwise
communicated ;  though  the  source  of  the  messages  is  still  an
open  question.  If  it  should  turn  out  that  great  psychic
activity  or  emotion  on  the  other  side  occasionally  results  in
physical  as  well  as  in  mental  phenomena,  as  a  kind  of  overflow
of  energy  —  perhaps  unconscious  and  unintended,  like  stam-
mering —  I  should  not  be  altogether  surprised.  And  if  once
the  possibility  of  any  such  physical  action,  however  trivial,  is
admitted,  a  door  is  opened  which  will  not  readily  be  closed.

But  that  is  not  the  lesson  which  I  wish  now  to  draw  from
the  hypothetical  existence  and  activity  of  departed  human
beings. The  moral  that  I  would  draw  is  more  like  this :

If  intelligences  akin  to  humanity  are  in  any  way  at  work,
in an  order  of  being  beyond  our  present  senses  and  outside


lxiv.] A  priori  Argument  against  Physical  Phenomena.  449

our  present  scope,  is  it  likely  that  they  are  the  only  beings
that  thus  exist  ?

It  is  certainly  far  from  the  case  here  and  now.

A  reader  of  terrestrial  history,  living  on  another  planet,
might  readily  conceive  the  idea  that  the  earth  was  inhabited
solely  by  human  beings,  though  he  would  observe  that
reference  was  occasionally  made  to  creatures  such  as  horses
and  cattle  as  useful  for  labour  or  for  food ;  but  how  little
could  he  appreciate  of  the  facts  known  to  a  Zoologist —
how  far  he  would  be  from  imagining  the  extraordinary  wealth
of  terrestrial  life,  some  of  it  of  the  most  curious  and  fantastic
kind,  among  which  we  live.  He  could  imagine  less  even  than
the  ordinary  uninstructed  person  knows  of  the  myriads  of
creation.  Our  experience  here  certainly  leads  us  to  assume
that,  where  there  is  life  at  all,  there  is  likely  to  be  an  immense
variety  and  complexity  of  life ;  so  if  the  evidence  ever  con-
strains us  to  extend  human  existence,  or  an  existence  akin  to
human,  into  what  is  popularly  spoken  of  as  "  another  world,"
then  we  ought  to  make  the  generalisation,  based  on  our
experience  here,  that  not  humanity  alone  but  many  other
orders  of  being,  some  higher,  some  lower,  may  exist  and
interact  in  those  unknown  surroundings.

Is  such  a  hypothesis  legitimate  ?  It  is  premature  as  yet
to  make  it,  but  I  foresee  a  time  when  we  shall  be  driven  to
something  like  it ;  and,  if  there  is  any  truth  in  it,  a  multitude
of  phenomena  which  now  appear  weird  and  strange,  or  frankly
impossible,  will  receive  what  then  may  seem  their  simple  and
natural  explanation.  The  lawless  and  the  capricious  can  only
be  so  to  our  present  understanding,  and  only  appear  so
because  we  have  abstracted  and  mentally  partitioned  off  a
certain  small  region  of  the  Universe  and  decided  to  treat  it
for  scientific  purposes  as  if  it  were  the  whole.

That  is  exactly  what  we  do  in  a  laboratory :  we  exclude
disturbing  influences  as  much  as  possible ;  and  those  which
we  cannot  exclude  we  first  reduce  to  a  minimum,  and  then
either  take  into  account  by  calculation  or  else  ignore  as  being
demonstrably  insignificant  in  amount.  That  is  our  customary
process ;  and,  of  course,  we  sometimes  make  mistakes.  The
history  of  science  is  full  of  instances  where  the  ignored  is
found  ultimately  to  be  of  importance. "Whereupon  unexplained


450


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


discrepancies,  or  what  had  been  called  discordances  between
theory  and  fact,  become  in  the  light  of  fuller  knowledge
resolved  and  explained.

A  trace  of  radioactivity,  before  radioactivity  was  allowed  for ;
the  impact  of  stray  electric  waves,  before  such  things  were
expected ;  the  pressure  of  light  in  interplanetary  space  or  a
vacuum  bulb,  before  the  time  of  Clerk  Maxwell  or  Crookes  ;
the  complication  of  a  spider's  web  in  a  balance  case  which  had
been  supposed  closed  to  alien  influence ; — all  these,  no  less  than
the  proverbial  bull  in  a  china  shop,  have  before  now  produced
strange  happenings  which  seemed  inexplicable  until  the  per-
turbing cause  itself  became  known.

And  it  would  not  be  unnatural,  though  it  could  hardly  be
said  to  be  wise,  for  the  head  of  the  laboratory,  to  whom  such
events  were  reported,  to  profess  disbelief  in  them;  on  the
ground  that  it  was  more  likely  for  observers  to  be  careless  or
for  testimony  to  err  than  for  such  outrageous  eccentricities
in  the  order  of  nature  to  be  real.

But  it  may  be  said  that  if  ever  for  a  moment  we  allow
ourselves  to  contemplate  the  possible  existence  and  activity  of
another  order  of  being,  we  are  making  a  wild  speculation  and
opening  the  door  to  a  region  so  unknown  as  to  be  useless  and
confusing.  Yes,  and  that  is  one  good  reason  why  we  do  not
open  the  door ;  or,  at  least,  are  not  willing  to  open  it  very
wide.

Progress  in  science  is  made  by  proceeding  slowly  and  gradually
from  the  known  to  the  unknown — not  by  postulating  any
mysterious  agency  that  can  be  imagined  and  letting  it  work
its  hypothetical  will.  That  was  done  in  old  times  truly,  when,
for  instance,  an  angel  was  supposed  to  control  the  movement
of  each  planet  and  guide  it  on  its  course ;  it  is  also  done
sometimes  by  illiterate  persons  who  attribute  particular  actions
to  the  Deity — not  indirectly  and  ultimately,  in  the  way  that
all  religious  people  assume,  but  directly  and  immediately  as
if  He  were  a  clumsy  artificer  poking  a  finger  into  the  works.
But  those  were  not  the  ages  of  science,  nor  is  satisfaction
with  vague  unknown  possibilities  the  atmosphere  of  science.
In  science  all  the  entrances  to  unknown  causes  must  be
jealously  guarded,  and  new  agencies  must  be  only  let  in  one
at  a  time  as  they  are  really  needed.


lxiv.] A  priori  Argument  against  Physical  Phenomena.  451


In  recent  times  several  new  agencies  have  been  admitted —
new  elements,  new  vibrations,  new  forces, — all  outside  our
unaided  senses,  and,  therefore,  all  unknown  fifty  years  ago.
But  in  what  sense  were  they  new  ?  Manifestly  only  in  a
subjective  sense.  Throughout  the  world's  history  they  have
existed  and  done  their  work.  Argon  and  helium  and  radium,
electrons  and  X-rays  and  electric  waves,  have  really  been
active  all  the  time ;  and  phagocytes  have  been  attacking  the
microbes  of  disease,  and  bacilli  have  been  contributing  to  the
fertility  of  the  soil,  and  bacteria  have  been  slaying  their
thousands,  all  through  human  history  ;  just  as  certainly  as
that  the  heart  was  pumping  and  the  blood  circulating  in  the
heroes  of  antiquity,  however  little  the  owners  of  the  blood-
vessels were  aware  of  the  fact.

But  all  these  things,  it  will  be  said,  are  in  the  line  of
human  knowledge,  they  fit  in  with  what  was  previously
known,  they  were  surmised  and  then  verified  by  human  intel-
ligence,— their  recognition  is  not  like  opening  the  door  to  the
unlicensed  activity  of  a  group  of  creatures  of  whose  nature
and  properties  we  know  absolutely  nothing.

Well,  let  us  look  at  that  contention  for  a  little  while.
Socrates  spoke  of  his  Daemon,  Joan  of  Arc  of  her  Voices,
Saints  have  told  of  their  direct  inspiration,  Poets  have
assured  us  that  their  best  work  comes  from  outside  them-
selves ; — so  we  must  admit,  without  trenching  on  the  ground
of  religion,  that  activities  of  a  kind  higher  than  human  have
been  testified  to  on  a  basis  of  direct  experience.

But  this  is  very  different  from  the  physical  phenomena
which  at  present  are  under  discussion.  Most  true,  and  the
testimony  for  these  things  is  of  a  less  high  and  notable  order,
— but  it  exists  nevertheless,  and  I  desire  to  urge  that  the
kind  of  things  asserted  are  not  beyond  the  capacity  of  a
group  of  imaginary  beings  which  science  for  its  own  sake  has
imagined  the  possibility  of,  and  whose  powers  it  has  delimited
and  defined.

The  power  of  human  beings  as  we  know  them,  so  far  as
it  relates  to  the  world  of  matter,  is  limited  to  moving  masses
of  matter  of  visible  and  tangible  size.  No  other  thing  can
man  do  in  the  material  region.  He  acts  on  it  by  his
muscles,  and  by  his  muscles  alone. All  else  is  done  by  the


452


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


properties  of  matter  itself.  Man  can  put  a  seed  into  the
ground  and  cover  it  with  soil  and  water, — the  resulting  plant
is  not  his  achievement.  Man  can  build  a  machine  of  glass  and
brass,  and  by  turning  a  handle  can  evoke  an  electric  spark, —
but  the  spark  is  not  man's  production.  Whatever  can  result
from  the  movement  and  arrangement  of  matter  is  indirectly
the  result  of  man's  activity,  and  beyond  that  he  can  achieve
nothing.

But  if  he  had  the  power  of  dealing  with  individual  mole-
cules, instead  of  with  masses  of  matter, — if  he  could  see  and
trace  and  handle  and  control  the  motions  of  the  atoms  them-
selves,— or  if  a  being  existed  with  senses  and  powers  analogous
to  our  own,  and  like  ours  perfectly  finite  and  limited, — only
different  in  the  sense  of  being  so  acute  and  rapid  that  things
moving  with  the  speed  of  bullets  and  things  invisible  in  the
highest-power  microscope  became  tangible  and  tractable, — then
other  things  could  be  done  which  to  us  with  our  present  senses
and  muscles  would  seem  impossible,  and  which  certainly  would
in  the  strict  sense  be  super-,  or  it  might  be  infra-,  human.  It  is
well  known  that  Clerk  Maxwell  imagined  such  an  order  of
beings  for  the  purpose  of  showing  how  the  second  law  of
thermodynamics  might  be  evaded  ;  and  Lord  Kelvin — to  whom
few  things  could  be  more  distasteful  than  being  quoted  in
support  of  my  present  contention,  and  to  his  shade  I  apologise
■ — went  a  step  further  and  enunciated  a  whole  category  of
things  which  "  Maxwell's  demons  "  could  achieve,  subject  to  all
the  perfectly  defined  physical  laws  and  processes  with  which
we  are  already  acquainted.

Myers  enters  into  some  detail  concerning  the  relation  of
this  conception  to  many  asserted  physical  phenomena.  Nothing
more  is  necessary  than  a  power  of  dealing  with  molecules  as
we  deal  with  masses  of  matter  ;  no  law  of  motion — as  we  call
it — need  be  upset,  the  conservation  of  energy  would  hold  un-
disputed sway,  gravitation  and  all  the  other  forces  would  be  as
potent  as  ever;  and  yet  what  would  seem  miraculous  to  un-
initiated human  beings  would  be  capable  of  achievement.

The  idea  is  worked  out,  with  just  the  right  attitude  of
humour  and  semi-sarcasm  appropriate  to  the  novelty  of  the
idea  and  to  the  apparent  fancifulness  of  its  basis,  in  F.  W.  H.
Myers'  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.  pp.  530-534.


LXiv.j A  priori  Argument  against  Physical  Phenomena.  453


I  remember  when  he  was  writing  that  part  of  his  book,
and  the  talks  we  had  on  it.  I  remember  his  asking  me  what
sort  of  reality  could  by  any  conceivability  be  attributed  to
Maxwell's  demons,  and  what  sort  of  acts  they  could  accomplish
if  they  in  any  kind  of  sense  existed.  I  referred  him  to  Lord
Kelvin's  brilliant  lecture  on  the  subject,  of  which  an  abstract
appears  in  Proc.  Hoy.  hist.  Vol.  IX.,  Feb.  1879, — under  the
title  "  The  Sorting  Demon  of  Maxwell," — and  likewise  in  his
"Popular  Addresses,"  Vol.  I.;  and  I  was  interested  in  the
singular  felicity  of  the  use  which  Myers  made  of  the  idea.

Do  I,  then,  seriously  contend  that  we  must  postulate  such
creatures  in  order  to  account  for  asserted  physical  and  chemical
phenomena  of  a  novel  kind  ?  I  do  not.  But  I  do  maintain
that  the  existence  of  such  power  has  been  imagined  by  physicists
themselves,  for  the  purposes  of  ordinary  physics, — especially
perhaps,  for  the  region  where  physics  interlocks  with  biology, —
not  at  all  with  the  object  of  aiding  our  special  investigations ;
with  entire  ignorance  perhaps — indeed  with  active  dislike  in
one  case — of  the  subjects  which  are  dealt  with  by  our  Society.

Hence  I  hold  that  if  testimony  as  to  facts  of  this  order
ever  becomes  strong  enough  to  demand  ideas  of  this  kind  for
their  elucidation,  there  will  be  nothing  outrageous  or  hyper-
fanciful  in  the  conception,  nor  anything  illegitimate  in  such  a
hypothesis,  when  it  is  forced  upon  us.  We  shall  not  make  it
unless  driven  to  it  by  facts,  and  facts  have  not  yet  driven  us
to  it ;  but  if  and  when  they  do,  I  for  one  shall  take  the  line
not  of  denying  the  facts  as  grotesquely  impossible  and  mani-
festly absurd — however  much  one  is  sometimes  tempted  to  say
this  now — but  I  shall  hope  to  examine  them  to  see  whether,
by  some  such  extension  of  human  or  other  power  as  Maxwell
and  Kelvin  have  conceived,  we  may  not  be  led  a  step  on  into
our  understanding  of  a  larger  Nature.  We  may  perhaps  thus
find  that  the  physical  phenomena  and  the  intellectual  phenomena
are  more  closely  allied  than  we  had  imagined  ;  that  they  are
allied  there,  indeed,  somewhat  as  they  are  allied  here ;  and  that
one  class  is  a  reasonable,  or  at  any  rate  a  real,  supplement  to
the  other.

One  set  of  facts  may  be  of  the  heroic  order,  and  another
set  of  the  trivial,  the  domestic,  the  casual  order, — and  no
man  is  a  hero  to  his  valet ;  but  whether  we  attend  to  the


454


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


commonplace  actions  of  a  great  man  or  not,  such  actions  are
undoubtedly  performed.  To  suppose  that  great  poetry,  for
instance,  ever  came  into  the  world  without  any  concomitant  of
ordinary  and  what  we  call  "  low "  humanity,  is  to  suppose  a
monstrosity.  And  those  who  are  even  now  opening  the  door
to  a  demonstration  of  intelligence  from  beyond  the  veil  may
find — will  find  as  I  believe — that  they  are  admitting,  along
with  the  intelligence,  a  mass  of  supplementary  concomitant
activity,  which  will  have  to  be  reckoned  with,  classified,  and
understood.  And  I  venture  to  risk  the  prediction  that  the
testimony  to  this  physical  material  activity,  low  though  it
may  be,  and  however  much  it  be  kept  in  its  proper  subordi-
nate place,  and  however  critical  the  attitude  which  may
rightly  have  to  be  taken  with  respect  to  it,  can  with  wisdom
be  neither  ignored  nor  denied.

I  write  this  article  not  as  a  protest  but  as  a  counter-
balancing presentation, — erring,  perhaps,  on  the  positive  or
speculative  side  as  much  as  some  may  think  Count  Solovovo's
article  lags  on  the  negative  or  sceptical  side.  I  gather  that
his  desire,  and  that  of  the  more  stringently  critical  of  the
investigators  and  recorders  of  the  Society — indeed  the  desire
of  us  all — is  to  improve  the  evidence  and  gradually  make  it
irrefragable.  And  I  further  gather  that  they  consider  it
possible  to  achieve  this ;  in  the  first  place,  by  stimulating
experimenters  to  greater  care  and  exactitude  of  observation ;
and  in  the  second  place,  by  actually  bringing  pressure  to  bear
on  whatever  intelligence  may  be  supposed  responsible  for  these
obscure  phenomena,  so  that  the  conditions  under  which  they
occur  may  by  practice  and  effort  be  gradually  improved.


LXIV.]


Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.


455


V.

A  CASE  OF  EMERGENCE  OF  A  LATENT  MEMORY
UNDER  HYPNOSIS.

By  G.  LOWES  DICKINSON.

This  paper  deals  with  a  series  of  sittings  for  hypnotic
experiments  held  during  April,  May,  and  June,  1906.1

The  person  hypnotised  was  a  young  lady  whom  I  shall
call  Miss  C.  She  is  not  a  professional  medium,  but  the
daughter  of  a  clergyman,  with  a  good  general  education  ;
not  a  student,  but  interested  in  psychical  and  theosophical
questions,  and  conversant  with  literature  bearing  on  such
subjects.  The  doctor  who  hypnotised  her,  and  whom  I
shall  call  Dr.  G.,  considers  her  perfectly  normal,  free
from  any  symptoms  of  hysteria  or  other  nervous  disease.
To  an  ordinary  observer,  like  myself,  she  appears  a  simple,
straightforward  character,  with  a  strong  sense  of  humour.  It
seems  worth  while  to  insist  upon  these  points  because  the
case  would  lose  all  interest  for  psychical  research  if  the
hypothesis  of  fraud  were  entertained.  It  is,  of  course,  im-
possible to  disprove  fraud.  I  can  only  say  that  those  who
were  present  at  the  sittings  regard  that  hypothesis  as  the  least
probable  that  can  be  put  forward.  Besides  the  lady  herself
and  Dr.  G.,  there  were  present  at  the  sittings  her  brother,  Mr.
C,  and  Mr.  Woolley,  a  Fellow  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  who
took  notes.  I  was  present  myself  at  several,  but  not  at  all  the
sittings.  This  paper  is  based  on  the  notes  taken  at  the  time.
These  notes,  however,  not  being  taken  in  shorthand,  though

1  Mr.  Dickinson's  account  of  this  case  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society
held  in  July,  1906,  and  would  have  been  published  sooner  but  that  the  MS.
was  accidentally  mislaid  by  one  of  the  experimenters,  and  has  only  recently
been  found  again. — Ed.


456


G.  Loives  Dickinson.


[part


they  are  accurate,  are  necessarily  brief,  and  do  not  give  an
adequate  impression  of  the  vivid  and  dramatic  character  of
the  proceedings.  These  assumed  a  dialogue  form,  Dr.  G.  con-
versing with  the  hypnotised  subject  and  drawing  her  out,  but
taking  care  not  to  suggest  trains  of  ideas  himself.  A  con-
siderable number  of  sittings  were  held,  and  the  general  pro-
cedure was  as  follows  : —

The  lady,  whom  I  shall  call  for  convenience  the  subject,
as  soon  as  she  was  hypnotised  described  herself  as  passing  out
of  her  body.  She  would  sometimes,  according  to  her  account,
pause  just  outside  it  both  in  starting  and  in  returning,  and
would  then  say  that  she  saw  her  body,  was  standing  upon  it,
etc.  But  this  only  for  a  moment,  so  that  we  never  got  her
satisfactorily  to  describe  the  room  or  things  in  it  while  she
purported  to  be  in  this  posture.  She  almost  immediately
"  went  up,"  as  she  described  it.  And  "  up "  meant  a  very
remarkable  and  complicated  world,  her  account  of  which  was
quite  coherent  and  consistent  throughout  the  sittings.  It  con-
sisted of  a  number  of  different  "  planes,"  one,  as  she  said,
above  another,  in  which  are  stored  up  not  only  everything
that  ever  has  happened  or  will  happen,  but  all  thoughts,
dreams,  and  imaginations.  To  begin  with,  she  usually  went
straight  to  what  she  called  the  "  blue."  It  was,  she  said,
from  and  in  this  plane  that  she  derived  the  "  force "  to  move
and  observe  in  these  upper  regions.  Her  account  was  that
she  "  got  blue "  from  Dr.  G-.  originally,  and  his  "  blue "  was
apparently  necessary  for  her  support  throughout.  But  also  she
derived  force  from  this  blue  plane,  and  when  she  was  tired
could  always  refresh  and  restore  herself  by  returning  to  it  and
sinking  into  it.  She  did  not  commonly  "  see  things "  in  the
blue ;  she  had  to  go  for  that  into  other  planes.  But  the
"blue"  had  the  peculiar  property  that  she  could  tell,  when
she  was  in  it,  whether  what  she  had  seen  elsewhere  was  real
or  no.  She  also  got  from  this  plane  her  metaphysical  ideas.
Above  the  blue  was  the  "  white,"  a  dazzling  plane  into  which
she  could  not  penetrate.  Other  planes  to  which  she  referred
were  the  "  thought  plane, "  "  mind  plane,"  "  dream  plane,"
"  plane  of  feelings."  There  was  also  the  plane  where  there
were  real  people,  with  which  we  shall  here  be  mainly  con-
cerned ;  and  a  plane  in  which  she  found  her  past  lives.


lxtv.] Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.


457


While,  however,  this  complicated  world  was  always  described
in  terms  of  planes  and  of  colours,  the  subject  insisted  that
these  were  only  metaphors.  There  was  really,  she  said,  no
time  and  no  space  where  she  went.  All  the  planes  were
really  somehow  one.  And  she  had  great  difficulty  in  convey-
ing through  language  the  experiences  she  received.  "  There
are  no  words  up  here,"  she  said,  "  and  so  when  you  try  to
bring  it  back  you  give  it  any  words  that  come  into  your  head
on  waking."  And  again,  "  everywhere  is  really  the  same  plane,
and  when  I'm  up  here  I'm  in  my  body  too."  Again,  "  on
different  planes  you  get  different  answers  to  the  same  question.
They're  all  parts  of  the  truth."  Again,  "  everything  is  all
thought  really.  Things  aren't  really  coloured.  They  only  make
one  feel  like  it."  "  Other  people  may  see  the  same  things  and
describe  them  differently ;  the  things  added  to  what  you  are
yourself  make  what  you  see."  Again,  "  I  can't  tell  where
things  are.  Just  the  same  if  they  are  close  or  far  away.
Can't  get  used  to  it."

In  this  curious  world  there  were  many  obstacles  to  the
discovery  of  objective  truth.  Thus,  if  the  subject  thought  of
anything,  she  immediately  saw  it.  "  If  I  want  to  see  anything,
it  is  there  at  once,  just  as  real  as  if  I  hadn't  made  it,  so  I
mustn't  want  to  see  things."  Again,  she  will  sometimes  get
into  some  one  else's  dream.  Thus  on  one  occasion  she  gave
us  a  picture  of  a  landscape,  and  told  us  afterwards,  after
returning  to  the  "  blue,"  that  some  one  was  dreaming  it,
"  some  one  up  there  called  Monica."  Monica,  she  said,  was
"  wrapped  up  in  her  own  plane,  and  doesn't  want  to  meet  any
one,"  so  we  were  unable  to  pursue  that  branch  of  the  subject.
On  another  occasion  she  saw  "  grey-blue  mist,  moving  snakes
in  it,  not  really  snakes.  Look  like  snakes.  Arms  coming
through  the  mist. Oh  nothing  really. I  got  into  a  dream."

We  were  naturally  more  interested  in  what  purported  to  be
real  things  and  real  persons.  In  the  earlier  sittings  the
subject  was  much  disturbed  by  a  lady  she  met  up  there  who,
she  said,  oughtn't  to  be  there  at  all,  didn't  know  her  way
about,  and  was  always  worrying  her  for  advice,  which  she
didn't  take.  This  lady  she  called  at  first  Malka,  but  finally
informed  us  that  her  real  name  was  Eose  Weston,  that  she
lived  near  Merthyr  Tydvil,  and that  she  was  in a  trance.


458


G.  Lowes  Dickinson.


[part


Going  up  to  the  "  blue "  one  day  she  remarked,  with  real
delight :  "  The  dark  woman  has  gone.  She  woke  up  !  "  But
later  on  Malka  turned  up  again  in  the  same  vague  condition.
"  She  wants  me  to  show  her  round.  She  doesn't  know  about
anything."  Later  she  met  another  lady  also  in  a  trance,
whose  name  she  gave  us,  but  unfortunately  not  her  address.
This  lady,  she  said,  would  go  mad  as  the  result  of  her  trances.
She  got  her  to  promise  to  write  to  Dr.  G.,  but  the  promise
has  not  been  fulfilled.  The  most  interesting  person,  however,
whom  the  subject  met,  and  the  immediate  occasion  of  this
paper,  was  a  lady  who  lived  in  the  reign  of  Kichard  the
Second.  As  this  whole  episode  is  very  curious,  I  propose  to
describe  it  at  some  length.

At  the  beginning  of  one  of  the  sittings,  the  subject  began
as  follows :  "  Standing  beside  myself.  Can't  stop  here  now.
Got  to  a  different  place.  Lots  of  people.  Eeal  people.  They
have  been  alive.  I  don't  know  where  it  is.  Never  been
there  before.  Perhaps  100  years  ago."  She  then  went  to
the  "  blue "  to  observe  this  place  from  there,  and  having
satisfied  herself  that  it  was  real,  went  back  to  it.  She  then
met  and  fell  into  conversation  with  a  lady  whom  she  con-
tinued to  visit  during  the  several  following  sittings.  This
lady  gave  her  name  as  Blanche  Poynings.  As  presented  to
us  she  was  a  lady  of  very  distinct  character,  a  great  gossip,
taken  up  exclusively  with  herself  and  her  circle  of  friends
and  acquaintances,  which  was  a  very  distinguished  one.  She
was  a  great  friend  of  Maud,  Countess  of  Salisbury,  and  much
of  her  talk  was  about  that  lady  and  her  husband,  the  Earl.
The  Countess,  she  said,  had  been  married  three  times,  and
she  gave  the  names  of  her  former  husbands, — Aubrey,  and
Sir  Alan  de  Buxhall.  She  gave  the  names  of  her  children
by  the  Earl,  and  of  her  stepson,  Alan  de  Buxhall,  her  own
maiden  name,  Frances,  and  the  names  of  the  Earl  of  Salisbury's
brothers.  The  Earl,  Blanche  said,  was  a  cultivated  man,  a
poet.  Not  that  her  standard  of  cultivation  was  high,  for  she
thought  it  a  wonderful  thing  that  the  Countess  could  write
her  own  name.  As  to  the  Earl's  poems,  she  could  not  quote
us  any,  as  "  she  never  remembered  that  sort  of  thing."  She
remembered,  however,  and  described  with  much  vigour,  how
the  Earl,  who was  a Lollard,  threw the  images out of  his


t


lxiv.] Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.  459

chapel,  and  especially  an  image  of  Saint  Catherine.  This  image,
when  they  were  removing  it,  fell  on  one  of  the  men  and
made  his  nose  bleed.  They  were  very  frightened,  said  Blanche,
because  they  thought  Saint  Catherine  was  after  them.  "  We
didn't  really  believe  it,"  she  said,  "  but  still  we  felt  rather
uncomfortable."  The  image  was  thrown  into  a  ditch  ;  but
picked  up  by  a  man  who  repainted  it  and  put  it  up  in  his
bakehouse.

A  number  of  other  facts  were  given  about  the  Earl
of  Salisbury,  such  as  his  family  name,  Montacute,  his  title
as  Lord  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  the  name  of  one  of  his
manors,  Bisham,  to  which  they  used  to  ride  from  London.
Blanche's  own  maiden  name,  de  Mowbray,  was  given,  and
the  name  of  the  man  she  married  after  Poynings's  death,  Sir
John  Worth.  Also  the  fact  that  she  was  expelled  from
court,  together  with  Dame  de  Molyneux,  by  Arnold,  one  of
the  Lords  Appellant.  We  were  also  introduced  to  Joan,  mother
of  Richard  the  Second,  formerly  known  as  the  "  Fair  Maid
of  Kent,"  whose  fatness  and  good  nature  appeared  to  have
much  impressed  and  delighted  Blanche.  Her  son  by  her  first
marriage,  John  Holland,  was  also  referred  to,  and  the  story
told  how  his  squire  was  killed  by  "  some  one  else's "  squire,
whereupon  John  Holland,  meeting  this  "  some  one  else,"  killed
him,  remarking  "  Your  squire  killed  my  squire  whom  I  loved."
Other  historical  personages  introduced  were  the  kings  Richard  II.,
Henry  IV.,  Richard's  two  queens,  Ann  of  Orleans  and
Isabelle  of  France,  and  Aumerle,  for  whom  Blanche  expressed
great  dislike.  The  subject  accounted  for  this  by  the  state-
ment that  Blanche  had  been  engaged  to  marry  him,  but  that
he  had  afterwards  married  some  one  else.  "  She  says  he  was
the  worst  of  the  lot,  but  she  can't  find  much  against  him."
In  addition  to  these  distinguished  people,  Blanche  gave  informa-
tion about  one  Ralph  Turval,  and  his  wife  Ellen  Newland,
a  waiting  woman  of  the  Countess  of  Salisbury.

She  was  also  full  of  information  about  the  costume  of  the
period.  "  She  used  to  wear  brocaded  velvet,  trimmed  with
ermine,  and  a  high-peaked  cap  of  minever.  She  wore  blue  velvet,
embroidered  with  gold.  Men  wore  shoes  with  long  points
which  were  chained  to  their  knees.  They  had  long  hair  cut
straight  across  the  forehead." She  described  the  three  kinds

2g


460


G.  Lowes  Dickinson.


[part


of  bread,  simmel.  wastel  and  cotchet,  eaten  by  different  classes,
and  gave  some  account  of  her  way  of  life.  Her  favourite
dish  was  lampreys  stewed  in  oil.  They  always  had  a  doctor
in  every  house.  He  used  to  bleed  them  for  everything.  Often
the  chaplain  was  the  doctor.  "  She  used  to  have  ague,  and
they  bled  for  that.  When  she  had  smallpox,  they  bled  her
every  third  day,  and  put  on  cold  water  compresses,  and  nearly
starved  her.  They  gave  her  bitter  medicine.  She  thinks  it
was  dandelion."  Her  time  seems  to  have  been  spent  mainly
in  conversation  and  needlework,  but  she  refers  to  occasional
journeys,  as  to  Bisham  and  to  "  Stepany "  to  see  the  may-
hedges  in  spring.

We  were  naturally  anxious  to  know  what  Blanche  looked
like,  and  how  she  communicated  with  Miss  C.  To  the  former
question  the  answer  was  rather  curious.  When  asked  what
Blanche  wore,  we  were  told  at  first  "  she  wears  only  her  blue
mist."  "  What  does  she  look  like  ?  "  "  She  has  white  hair,  is
tall,  with  dark  eyes.  But  she  looks  like  that  because  she  was
like  that  when  she  died.  She  can  look  any  age."  We  asked  to
know  how  she  looked  at  the  age  of  eight.  She  was  then
described  as  having  "  long  brown  hair  ;  long  dress  and  sleeves,
with  grey  fur  round  the  edge."  Also  as  carrying  "  what  she
thinks  is  a  doll.  But  really  it's  only  a  block  of  wood.  They
hadn't  got  any  proper  toys  then.  They  made  their  own."  To
the  question  what  language  Blanche  talked,  we  were  told  she
didn't  talk,  but  only  communicated  thoughts,  so  we  got  no
specimen  of  the  English  of  that  time.  Blanche,  we  were
informed,  was  very  much  surprised  to  find  she  had  been  dead
so  long.  Speaking  of  death,  she  said  "  she  was  very  surprised
when  she  was  first  dead,  but  she  soon  got  over  it.  She  just
went  to  sleep  and  woke  up  dead."  We  asked  what  she  had
been  doing  up  there  all  these  years,  and  were  told  she  had
been  doing  nothing  much.  "  She  has  a  lot  to  find  out  before
she  gets  anywhere  else.  She  keeps  on  learning  things  without
knowing  it.  She  thought  she  knew  everything  there  was  to
be  known,  but  she  has  just  found  out  she  does  not."  Blanche,
apparently,  had  had  a  lonely  time.  Anyhow  she  was  particularly
pleased  to  find  some  one  to  talk  to,  and  was  always  described
as  being  "  on  the  look  out "  when  Miss  C.  went  to  visit  her.

Such,  in  brief  summary,  is  the  principal  information  obtained


lxiv.] Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.  461

from  Blanche.  Now  as  to  its  objective  truth.  We  none  of
us  knew  anything  about  the  reign  of  Richard  II.,  nor  whether
there  was  an  Earl  of  Salisbury  at  that  time,  and  we  were  quite
unable,  at  the  first  appearance  of  Blanche,  to  check  any  of  her
information.  I  took,  however,  an  early  opportunity  of  testing
the  statements  made.  I  found  that  the  main  facts  about  the
Earl  and  Countess  of  Salisbury  were  true.  Encouraged  by  this,
I  followed  up,  so  far  as  I  could,  all  the  statements  of  names,
relationships  and  events.  I  looked  up  the  chronicles  and  rum-
maged in  peerages  and  charters,  and  was  able  in  almost
every  case  to  verify  the  truth  of  Blanche's  assertions.  This
interested  and  puzzled  me.  Miss  C.  assured  me,  and  I  believed
her,  that  she  had  never  studied  the  period.  And  in  any  case
some  of  the  facts  given  were  not  such  as  even  a  student  of
the  period  would  naturally  come  across.  Blanche  Poynings
herself,  for  example,  was  a  quite  unimportant  person,  only
referred  to  by  name,  by  one  or  two  chroniclers,  as  one  of  the
ladies  in  attendance  on  the  Queen.  The  most  likely  explana-
tion was  that  the  facts  narrated  were  contained  in  a  historical
novel.  But  the  only  novel  dealing  with  the  period  which
Miss  C.  could  remember  reading  was  one  entitled  John  Standish,
and  a  reference  to  this  showed  that  it  was  not  the  source  of
the  information  she  gave  us.  I  clung,  however,  to  the  hypothesis
that  a  novel  must  be  the  explanation,  though  I  am  bound  to
confess  that  as  more  and  more  facts  came  out,  as  these  almost
invariably  proved  to  be  correct,  as  far  as  I  could  test  them,
and  as  they  were  in  some  cases  obscure  genealogical  data  such
as  it  seemed  unlikely  would  be  embodied  in  a  work  of  fiction,
I  came  at  last  to  think  it  possible  that  Miss  C.  was  really  com-
municating with  the  departed  Blanche  Poynings.  The  mystery,
however,  was  finally  explained  in  a  rather  curious  way.

I  went  to  tea  with  Miss  C.  Her  aunt  was  present  and
her  brother.  We  began  talking  about  planchette.  Miss  C.
said  that  she  could  draw,  with  planchette,  faces  which  were
faces  whichever  way  one  looked  at  them,  a  feat  which  she
could  not  perform  by  conscious  effort.  I  expressed  a  curiosity
to  see  these  faces,  and  planchette  was  produced.  The  faces
were  not  particularly  interesting.  But  we  went  on  to  converse
with  planchette  in  the  ordinary  way,  eliciting  at  first  the  usual
irrelevant  nonsense. Presently,  however,  it  was  suggested  that


462


G.  Lowes  Dickinson.


[part


we  should  see  whether  Blanche  would  communicate.  Blanche
was  immediately  on  the  spot,  and  began  by  reproaching  Miss  C.
for  not  having  been  to  see  her  lately.  I  quote  now  from  the
notes  made  afterwards  by  Mr.  Woolley  from  the  original  answers
written  by  planchette,  the  sentences  in  round  brackets  being
the  questions  and  remarks  we  addressed  to  it  at  the  time.

Miller.  (Who  are  you?)  Mr.  Miller.  (Are  you  Mr.  Miller  next
door  ?)  No.  (When  were  you  alive  ?)  Richard  II.  (Did  you  know
Blanche  Poynings?)  Yes.  (What  was  she  like?)  A  middle-aged
lady.  (What  was  the  name  of  her  fourth  husband  ?)  John  Wilshere.
[Blanche  begins.]  Why  did  you  not  come  back  ?  Come  to-night.  I
want  to  talk.  He  [J.  W.]  is  bothering.  I  haven't  seen  him  for  500
years.  [Contest  between  Blanche  and  John  Wilshere]  (Let  him
come  and  talk.)  (Why  did  he  do  that1?)  He  can't  write.  (You
must  write  for  him).  ([To  J.  W.]  What  is  she  really  like  ?)  She  is
listening.  (Can  Poynings  write  ?)  He  was  born.  He  is  alive  again.
(What  is  his  name  ?)  John  Andrews.  (Where  does  he  live  ?)  Cam-
bridge. (What  does  he  do  ?)  He  mends  roads.  (Can  you  tell  us
any  more  about  John  Wilshere?)  He  is  damned.  (Give  us  the
names  of  all  your  husbands.)

1.

2.  Poynings.

3.  Worth.

4.  Wilshere.

(How  can  we  confirm  what  you  are  telling  us?)  Read  his  will.
(Whose  will?)  Wilshere's.  He  died  first.  (Where  is  it  ?)  Museum.
(What  part?)  On  a  parchment.  (How  can  we  get  at  it?)  Ask  the
man.  (Any  particular  man?)  No.  Ask  E.  Holt.  (Who  is  E.  Holt?)
An  antiquarian.  (AVhere  is  he  ?)  Dead.  There  is  a  book.  (Where
is  it?)  I  don't  know  where  it  is.  Mrs.  Holt.  (What  has  she  to  do
with  it  ?)  Ask  her.  (Do  you  know  where  she  lives  ?)  No.  Wrote
a  book.  (What  about?)  About  all  of  them.  All  the  people  are  in
it.  (What  else?)  I  am  there.  (What  else  is  it  about?)  Maud.
(Is  what  it  says  about  you  good?)  Not  interesting  enough.  Countess
Maud  by  Emily  Holt.  (Why  didn't  you  tell  me  that  before  ?)  I
would  have  told  you,  but  you  went  away.

On  the  name  of  this  novel  being  mentioned,  Miss  C.  said
at  once  that  she  believed  there  was  a  novel  with  that
title,  and  that  she  had  read  it.  This  was  confirmed  by  her
aunt. But  neither  of  them  could  remember  anything  about


Lxrv.] Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.  463

the  book,  not  even  the  period  with  which  it  dealt,  nor  whether
it  contained  any  mention  of  Blanche  Poynings.  I  took  an
early  opportunity  of  investigating  the  point,  discovered  the
book  in  question,  and  discovered  in  it  every  person  and  every
fact  (with  one  or  two  trifling  exceptions)  which  had  been
referred  to  in  the  supposed  interviews  with  Blanche  Poynings.
The  whole  thing  had  been  an  elaborate  rearrangement  by  Miss
C.'s  subconsciousness  of  data  given  in  a  book  she  had  com-
pletely forgotten.  At  a  later  sitting  (June  10th,  1906),  Miss
C,  in  her  hypnotic  state,  was  asked  about  the  novel,  and
made  an  attempt  of  a  kind  which  I  fancy  to  be  characteristic
of  subconscious  states  to  get  out  of  the  difficulty.  I  quote
from  the  record  of  this  sitting :

(Can  you  see  yourself  young  1)
Yes.

(Can  you  see  your  aunt  reading  a  book,  Countess  Maud  1)
Yes ;  blue  book,  with  gold  line  across  name  of  it.
[My  copy  is  red.]
(What  is  it  about?)

Ellen  Turval,  and  the  Earl  and  Countess  of  Salisbury.

(How  old  were  you  1)

Twelve.

(Did  you  read  it  yourself?)

I  looked  at  it,  and  painted  a  picture  in  the  beginning.

(Did  you  read  the  Appendix1?)

No.

(Did  your  aunt  1)
No.

(What  was  it  about1?)

The  people  in  the  book.  I  used  to  turn  over  the  pages.  I
didn't  read  it,  because  it  was  dull.  Blanche  Poynings  was  in  the
book  •  not  much  about  her.

(How  much  did  you  get  from  Blanche  Poynings  —  how  much
from  the  book  1)

Nearly  all  the  events  from  the  book,  but  not  her  character.  .  .  .
There  was  a  real  person  called  Blanche  Poynings  that  I  met,  and
I  think  her  name  started  the  memory,  and  I  got  the  two  mixed  up.

On  this  it  may  be  remarked  that  Miss  C.  must  have  read
the  Appendix,  as  some  of  the  genealogical  facts  come  from  it.
As  to  the  character  of  Blanche,  what  she  says  is  quite  true,


464


G.  Lowes  Dickinson.


[part


for  this  lady,  who  in  the  novel  is  nothing  if  not  pious  and
discreet,  became  in  the  hands  of  Miss  C.'s  subconscious  self  a
garrulous  and  flippant  gossip.  And  this  brings  me  to  a  point
which  seems  worth  noting  in  the  whole  episode.  Though  Miss
C.  got  her  facts  from  the  novel,  she  made  up  (presumably  on
the  basis  of  miscellaneous  theosophic  reading)  a  quite  new
setting.  She  selected  as  her  interviewer  in  this  imaginary
world  a  subordinate  character,  not  the  heroine  of  the  book
(who  is  the  Countess  Maud).  And  she  introduced  the  data,  not
in  the  order  or  connection  in  which  they  occur  in  the  book,
but,  most  naturally  and  skilfully,  as  they  might  actually  come
out  haphazard  in  a  conversation.  Her  subconscious  self  showed
in  fact  remarkable  invention  and  dramatic  power  (as  is  often
the  case  with  dream-selves) ;  so  that  if  we  had  not
happened  to  light  upon  the  source  of  the  information  given
through  Blanche  Poynings,  it  might  have  seemed  a  plausible
view  (failing  any  invincible  a  priori  scepticism)  that  Miss  C.
really  did  visit  a  real  world  and  hold  conversations  with  real
people.  As  it  is,  the  discovery  of  the  source  of  the  Blanche
Poynings  episode  throws  discredit  on  everything  else,  and
especially  on  the  elaborate  details  about  her  past  lives  with
which  Miss  C.'s  subconscious  self  also  favoured  us.

Appendix.

I  give  below  a  few  extracts  from  the  detailed  record  of  the
sittings  to  illustrate  the  line  of  thought  of  the  hypnotic  per-
sonality :

April  29,  1906.

I  got  straight  into  blue  to-night.  You  told  me  to  last  time,  so  I
was  obliged  to.

I  can't  tell  if  what  I  see  are  really  what  I  see  now  or  what  I  saw
a  long  time  ago. Everything  looks  as  if  I  was  just  seeing  it.

Can't  tell  where  things  are.  Just  the  same  if  they  are  close  or
far  away. Can't  get  used  to  it.

Don't  know  where  I  am,  too  dark.

Got  back  into  blue  now.  I  went  out  because  I  wanted  to  see
things.  If  I  want  to  see  anything  it  is  there  at  once,  just  as  real
as  if  I  hadn't  made  it,  so  I  mustn't  want  to  see  things,  because  it's
no  good  going  to  see  things  that  aren't  really  there.  (Try  and  go
to  your  own,  the  real,  plane  again.)


lxiv.] Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.  465

I  can't  try  to  go  to  the  real  one.  I  must  just  drift  down  by
accident.  Why  is  it  when  I'm  right  up  here  I  can  talk  with  my
body? I'm  not  anywhere  near  it. (Go  into  blue  and  tell  me.)

It's  because  everywhere  is  really  the  same  place  and  when  I'm
up  here  I'm  in  my  body  too.  I  can't  get  my  body  up  here,  but  I
can  get  all  the  rest  of  me  down  to  my  body.  When  I  get  right
into  blue  I  forget  all  about  my  body  and  I  can't  quite  see  why.
Everything  like  that  finds  its  own  answer  if  you  think  about  it  once.
It's  no  good  going  on  thinking,  because  you  can't  think  harder  than
you  can  think.  On  different  planes  you  get  different  answers  to
the  same  question. All  parts  of  the  truth.

That  silly  woman  wants  me  to  shew  her  about  again.  Why
doesn't  she  find  herself?  I  want  to  go  and  help  her.  She  doesn't
know  where  she  is.  She  says  she's  been  here  a  long  time  and  can't
find  anybody.  She  doesn't  do  what  I  tell  her,  perhaps  she  can't.  Her
name  is  Malka.  She's  been  trying  to  see  things  without  knowing
the  proper  way.  She  wants  to  get  back.  She  doesn't  know  much.
Stupid  of  her  to  come  when  she  doesn't  know  anything.  She  came
by  herself.  She  doesn't  know  her  own  name  and  she  can't  find  her
other  half.  It's  rather  ridiculous,  isn't  it?  I  must  go  down  and  see
things. I  can't  go  up  into  the  white,  because  I  couldn't  get  back.

(How  do  you  hear  me?)  You're  up  here  too.  I  don't  hear  your
voice,  only  understand  your  thought.  I  don't  really  see  things,  only
understand.  I  don't  think  or  feel  either.  When  I  go  from  one
plane  to  another  I  don't  really  go.  It's  like  dissolving  into  another.
I  can't  tell  you  things  exactly,  because  there  are  lots  of  things  there
are  no  words  for.  Sometimes  when  I'm  coming  out  to  tell  you
things  I  forget  them  on  the  way.  I  can't  forget  them  really,  you
know.  They're  all  in  the  back  of  my  head.  (What  sort  of  things?)
All  blank.  When  I  try  to  think  of  them  it  makes  me  feel  as  if
I  was  sinking  deeper.  It's  stupid  to  use  words.  It's  much  better
here,  because  you  can't  make  a  mistake  in  what  you're  saying.

Pink  spirit  again.  Been  waiting  for  me.  Spirits  that  have  never
been  incarnate  are  pink. It  hasn't  got  a  proper  plane  of  its  own.

Everything  is  all  thought  really.  The  pink  spirit  is  my  own
thought. When  you  once  do  a  thing  you  can't  undo  it.

Things  aren't  really  coloured.  They  only  make  one  feel  like  it.
Other  people  may  see  the  same  things  and  describe  them  differently.
The  things,  added  to  what  you  are  yourself,  make  what  you  see.

When  I  haven't  got  enough  blue  I  keep  getting  down  on  to  my
own  thought  plane  and  I  can't  tell  whether  things  are  real  or  not.


466


G.  Lowes  Dickinson.


[part


It's  no  good  trying  to  see  things  on  the  earth,  because  you  can't
tell  whether  they're  real  or  not.

If  I  stop  in  the  blue  I  never  find  anything.  When  I  go  outside
I  may  see  false  things,  but  when  I  find  out  I  know  them  next  time.
It  makes  me  tired  to  be  in  the  blue  for  long.

Name  of  Malka  is  Rose  Weston.  She  is  up  there  in  a  trance.
Her  body  is  in  Wales.  South  Wales,  small  house  in  hills.  Her
husband  is  English.  Her  maiden  name  was  Davis.  She  is  47.  She
goes  into  trances  and  can't  help  it.  She  has  no  business  up  there.
Every  one  has  different  names  up  there.  The  nearest  town  is
LLAN  .

Not  very  south  Wales.  Inland.  She  used  to  live  at  Llandudno.
That's  where  the  Llan  came  from.  Not  there  now.  Begins  with
MEKTHYR  T  . I  don't  believe  she  can  spell  it  herself.  She

seems  to  think  she  is  doing  a  lot  of  good  by  being  up  here.  Quite
a  mistake.  Tired  of  her,  not  even  interesting.  She  won't  go.  She
doesn't  really  want  to. She  likes  poking  about.

3rd  May.

Standing  beside  myself,  can't  stop  here  now.  Got  to  a  different  place.
Lot  of  people.  Real  people.  They  have  been  alive.  I  don't  know
where  it  is.  Never  been  there  before.  Perhaps  100  years  ago.  I  went  to
blue  and  looked  at  it  from  there.  Going  to  see  it  again.  Woman  there.
Been  dead  a  long  time,  since  1399. Name  Blanche  Poynings.

The  dark  woman  has  gone.  She's  woke  up.  I  want  to  find  out
where  things  that  you  imagine  come  from,  because  nothing  comes
from  nothing.

I  get  on  to  a  plane  where  those  questions  come  up  without  answers.

Up  here  your  thoughts  are  just  as  real  as  the  things  you've  done
(i.e.  in  Blue  plane).

You  can't  get  any  higher  without  being  dead.

These  are  only  reflections.  Both  blue  and  white  are  difficult  to
describe,  because  they  take  an  impression  from  you.  Nothing  is
anything  in  itself,  but  it  impresses  you  as  if  you  were  seeing  it.

I  want  to  see  real  things.

You  can't  come  here  when  you  are  awake,  because  you  would  be
in  two  places  at  once.  When  you  are  awake  you  are  conscious  of
space  and  time.  When  you  lose  yourself  and  these  limitations  which
only  exist  because  you  know  about  them,  you  get  here.  You  could
train  yourself  to  get  here  when  you  are  asleep  by  making  up  your
mind. Some  people  can  put  themselves  into  a  trance  and  come


lxiv.] Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under  Hypnosis.  467


here.  They  bring  back  memories.  Everything  is  recorded  here
somewhere,  but  it  isn't  always  easy  to  find.  If  you  go  by  yourself
and  aren't  very  strong,  you  get  caught  in  the  first  will  current  that
there  is  and  are  helpless.  You  must  practise  and  train  by  minimizing
the  body  and  strengthening  the  will.  Live  by  yourself  and  think  of
nothing  but  going  there ;  but  you  may  get  stuck  there.  The  only
thing  that's  good  for  everybody  is  to  strengthen  their  will.  Thinking
is  good  because  it  makes  a  kind  of  atmosphere  round  you.  You
must  think  about  something  and  you  might  as  well  think  about  this.
Many  people  don't  know  how  to  think,  and  stop  a  long  time  in  the
first  stage  where  you  go  directly  you  die.  First  you  have  to  learn
how  to  think  and  how  little  you  know :  then  how  to  distinguish
between  true  and  false. You  can  learn  both  in  the  body.

You  may  meet  the  same  people  in  successive  incarnations  if  you
are  very  fond  of  them  and  on  the  same  level.  You  can  always  find
any  one  up  there.  Hunt  up  their  impressions  where  they've  been.
The  impressions  are  as  real  as  the  people.  I  couldn't  find  any  one
I  didn't  know,  because  I  shouldn't  recognize  their  impressions.
They  might  send  a  message  by  me.  They  sometimes  hunt
about  for  some  one  to  take  a  message  down.  Live  people  are  so
dense,  it  is  very  difficult  for  the  dead  people  to  get  a  message
understood.  Some  of  them  are  mischievous  and  play  tricks.  Death
makes  no  difference.  It's  only  leaving  your  body  behind.  The
body  is  something  to  live  in  and  it  conveys  impressions  to  your
mind  and  teaches  you.  And  unless  you've  had  limitations  for  some
time,  you  don't  realise  what  it  is  to  be  without  them.

June  3,  1906.

(Remember  about  Poynings  ?  Has  she  anything  fresh  1)  I'll  go
and  ask  her.  She's  really  there.  (Go  and  see  her  and  then  to
blue.)  She's  a  real  person  but  I  put  her  there.  I  saw  about  her
somewhere.  She  keeps  talking,  saying  the  same  silly  things.  I  came
across  her  because  I  had  seen  about  her  before.  She  must  be  a  real
person  or  I  shouldn't  see  her  here.  What  I  heard  about  her  wasn't
so  important  as  what  she  tells  me  about  herself.  Going  to  see  her
again.  She's  really  there.  She  seems  sort  of  two  people  when  in
blue,  one  that  I  have  heard  about  and  one  part  that's  real.  I
meant  to  ask  her  something.  She  says  she  can't  see  people  on
earth  at  all  and  can't  communicate  unless  they  come  up  here.  She
says  it's  all  true  what  she  told  me.  She  wants  to  know  why  I
have  been  away  so  long.


4<;s


M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


EEVIEW.

Esprits  et  Mediums,  Melanges  de  Mttapsychigue  et  de  Psychologie,  by
Th.  FLOURNOY,  Professeur  a  la  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  1' Uni-
versity de  Geneve.  Geneve,  Librairie  Kiindig  :  Paris,  Librairie
Fischbacher  (royal  8vo,  pp.  561,  7  fr.  50).

This  latest  work  from  Professor  Flournoy's  hand  is  not  less  interest-
ing than  those  which  have  preceded  it,  and  is  at  the  same  time
extremely  valuable  by  reason  of  the  large  mass  of  material  which
it  contains.  It  will,  indeed,  be  found  to  form  an  admirable  book
of  reference,  of  great  service  to  any  one  who  is  interested  in  the
various  departments  of  psychical  research.  The  author's  pen  has
lost  nothing  of  its  characteristic  eloquence,  and  he  shows  us  once
more  how  incomparable  a  medium  for  psychical  analysis  is  the
French  language  in  the  hands  of  one  who  is  at  once  a  literary
expert  and  a  master  of  the  subject.

The  book  is,  in  sum,  a  detailed  exposition,  supported  by  voluminous
evidence,  of  M.  Flournoy's  conclusions  concerning  such  physical  and
psychical  phenomena  as  had  come  to  his  knowledge  up  to  the
time  of  writing,  and  in  particular  concerning  the  great  question  of
experimental  communication  with  discarnate  or  unincarnate  spirits.
As  to  the  possible  achievement  of  this  last  he  professes  himself  to
be  quite  open  to  conviction  (for  he  is  definitely  a  "  Spiritualist,"  1))
but  at  present  unconvinced.

The  following  quotation  from  the  Preface  will  give  a  sufficiently
clear  indication  of  the  author's  position  :

"Les  faits  que  j'ai  pu  etudier  d'un  peu  pres  m'ont  tous  laisse

1  M.  Flournoy  distinguishes  between  "  Spiritualists  "  (Spiritualistes),  i.e.  those
who  believe  that  the  soul  of  man  survives  the  death  of  the  body,  and
"Spiritists"  (Spirites),  those  who  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  alleged  experi-
mental communications  with  spirits. This  distinction  is  observed  in  this  review.


LXIV.]


Review.


469


l'impression  qu'en  depit  de  certaines  apparences  superficielles,  .  .  .
c'est  se  tromper  lourdement  que  d'attribuer  aux  Esprits  des
morts,  aux  desincarnes,  comme  on  les  appelle,  les  curieux  pheno-
menes  que  presentent  les  mediums.

"  La  plupart  de  ces  phenomenes  s'expliquent  facilement  et
sans  r6sidu  par  des  processus  inherents  aux  mediums  eux-
memes  et  a  leur  entourage.  L'etat  de  passivite  ou  de  laisser-
aller,  l'abdication  de  la  personnalite  normale,  le  relachement
du  controle  volontaire  sur  les  mouvements  musculaires  et  les
associations  d'idees, — toute  cette  disposition  psycho-physiologique
speciale  oil  le  sujet  se  place  dans  l'attente  et  le  desir  de  com-
muniquer  avec  les  trepasses,  favorise  chez-lui  la  dissociation
mentale  et  une  sorte  de  regression  infantile,  de  rechute  a  une
phase  inferieure  d'evolution  psychique,  oil  son  imagination
puerile  se  met  tout  naturellement  a  jouer  au  desincarne,  dont
l'idee  la  hante,  en  utilisant  pour  ses  roles  les  ressources  de  la
subconscience  (complexus  emotifs,  souvenirs  latents,  tendances
instinctives  ordinairement  comprimees,  etc.)."

The  volume  is  divided  into  two  Parts,  of  which  the  first  has  a
curious  history.  In  1898,  M.  Flournoy,  having  become  interested
in  matters  psychical,  addressed  to  the  members  of  the  Soctitt  des
Etudes  Psychiques  (a  spiritist  society,  of  which  he  was  not  himself  a
member),  and  to  some  others,  a  lengthy  and  elaborate  questionnaire
concerning  their  psychical  experiences,  their  conclusions  as  to  these,
and  other  relevant  matters.  His  hope  was  that  he  might  discover
among  the  answers  some  good  evidence  of  spirit  intervention.  The
replies  received  were  72  in  number,  and  many  of  them  of  considerable
length ;  but  none  contained  such  convincing  proofs  as  he  desired.
He  then  published  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  (fevrier,  1899)  an
article  embodying  the  conclusions  to  which  he  had  been  led  by  his
investigations — conclusions  which  were  altogether  unfavourable  to
the  claims  of  the  spiritists.  He  naturally  did  not  publish  the  whole
dossier  of  replies,  and  the  failure  to  do  so  then  or  subsequently
brought  down  on  his  head  a  storm  of  reproaches  from  spiritist
circles  ;  he  was  accused  of  wilfully  suppressing  much  valuable  evi-
dence that  told  against  his  own  views.  In  the  end,  M.  Flournoy
decided  that  honour  required  him  to  print  without  selection  the
whole  mass  of  these  replies.  He  has  accordingly  given  them  to  us
in  the  present  volume  (of  which  they  fill  the  first  202  pages  in
small  print),  together  with  some  valuable  observations  upon  them
and  a  restatement  of  his  conclusions.


470


M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


The  replies  themselves  will  be  found  to  possess  considerable  interest
— until  they  weary  by  their  bulk  and,  to  some  extent,  by  their
sameness.  They  contain  accounts  of  a  good  number  of  remarkable
phenomena,  veridical  dreams,  etc.,  apparently  well  attested  and
deserving  of  permanent  record  ;  but  what  strikes  one  most  forcibly
in  the  perusal  is  that  the  writers,  almost  without  exception,  seem
to  have  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the  telepathic  powers  of  the
human  personality.  True  statements  received  through  trance  mediums
or  automatic  writing  are  credited  without  hesitation  to  the  spirits
of  deceased  persons,  while  false  ones  are  assigned,  with  equal
ndiveU,  to  malicious  spirits.  The  following  is  an  abridged  account  of
one  instructive  case  which  M.  Flournoy  discusses  at  length  on
pp.  276  ff.

A  certain  M.  Til  (teacher  of  book-keeping,  aged  48),  a  man
in  excellent  health  and  of  a  genial  and  kindly  nature,  attempted
automatic  writing,  and  at  once  succeeded.  A  continuance  of
the  writing  on  the  following  days  greatly  excited  him ;  he  was
obsessed  by  grapho-motor  impulses,  even  at  night,  and  would
write  in  the  air  with  his  finger  if  he  had  no  pencil.  On  the
fourth  day,  in  answer  to  questions  about  the  careers  of  his
children,  the  script  made  vague  and  disquieting  insinuations
against  his  son  Edouard  (who  was  employed  in  a  business  office),
and  ended  with  the  formal  accusation  that  Edouard  had  stolen
his  employer's  cigarettes,  and  received  a  letter  of  dismissal.
Further  script,  obtained  the  same  afternoon,  urged  M.  Til  to
go  at  once  to  see  his  son's  employer.  He  went,  but  the  employer
was  out.  The  chief  clerk,  however,  gave  an  excellent  report
of  the  young  man.  While  the  clerk  was  speaking,  M.  Til's
finger  wrote  in  the  air,  "  Je  suis  navre  de  la  duplicite  de  cet
homme."  The  employer  then  arrives,  and  completely  reassures
the  distressed  father  as  to  his  son's  conduct,  but  had  hardly
done  so  when  M.  Til's  finger  wrote,  "Je  t'ai  trompe,  Michel,
pardonne-moi ! "

This  case  donne  a  penser.  Not  a  few  of  us  have  hitherto  been
the  more  disposed  to  accept  as  genuine  various  spirit  impersonations
and  messages  which  have  come  under  our  notice  because  we  found
it  hard  to  believe  the  subliminal  self  capable  of  such  positively
cruel  deceptions  as  must,  in  the  alternative,  be  laid  to  its  charge  in
certain  cases.  But  in  this  instance  we  find  M.  Til's  subliminal  self —
for  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  we  are  concerned  with  any
external  influence  whatever— pouring  forth,  with  all  the  devilry  of


LXIV.]


Revietv.


471


a  "Sally  Beauchamp,"  a  series  of  circumstantial  lies  specially  calcu-
lated to  wound  the  father  in  perhaps  his  tenderest  point ; — "  any-
thing to  give  pain,"  as  Michael  Finsbury  said.  And  when  at  last
the  game  is  up,  it  makes  an  airy  admission  of  guilt,  with  no  hint
either  of  shame  or  regret.  My  own  experience  furnishes  a  parallel
of  similar  effrontery.  In  the  course  of  some  table-tilting  experiments
made  by  Miss  Verrall  and  myself,  the  table,  which  had  professed  to
be  inspired  by  "  the  sub.  of  both,''  told  us  a  short  story,  with
names,  addresses,  etc.,  which  was  easily  discovered  to  be  false.  When
pressed  to  justify  this  at  a  subsequent  sitting,  it  coolly  replied,
"When  I  do  not  know,  I  draw  upon  my  imagination."  One  may
attempt  to  minimise  the  importance  of  M.  Til's  case  by  saying
that  it  finds  its  analogy  in  the  absurdities  and  villainies  of  dreams,
in  which  the  moral  sense  and  the  normal  control  of  the  will  are
in  abeyance,  but  by  what  criterion  can  we  exclude  from  the  same
category  any  of  our  automatic  scripts,  or  any  of  the  impersonations
and  communications  of  the  entranced  personalities  of  Mrs.  Piper  and
Mrs.  Thompson  ?  No  less  than  in  our  own  cases  M.  Til's  script
exhibits  purpose  and  design,  and  the  purpose  is  inexcusably  naughty.
The  conclusion  seems  to  be  that  we  can  no  longer  set  a  limit  to  the
possible  vagaries  of  the  subliminal  self  ;  it  is  largely  irresponsible
and  is  apparently  capable  de  tout  !

The  Second  Part  of  the  volume  is  occupied  with  "  Observations
diverses."  There  is  an  introductory  chapter  on  "Science  et  Me'ta-
jisychique,"  in  which  the  author  discusses  incidentally  Professor
Richet's  experiences  at  the  Villa  Carmen  in  Algiers,  and  the  storm
raised  in  the  scientific  world  by  his  temerity  in  publishing  them.  A
highly  appreciative  chapter  is  devoted  to  "F.  W.  H.  Myers  et  la  Psychohgie
subliminale."  While  he  has  nothing  but  admiration  for  Myers's  great
and  illuminating  synthesis,  M.  Flournoy  is  at  present  unable  to
follow  him  in  his  conviction  that  he  had  held  communication  with
the  spirit  world.

"II  faut  bien  distinguer,  clans  l'ceuvre  de  Myers,  la  creation
de  la  psychologie  subliminale,  et  le  systeme  philosophico-religieux
qu'il  pretendait  en  tirer. .  .  .

"  Si  les  decouvertes  futures  viennent  a  confirmer  sa  these  de
l'intervention  empiriquement  verifiable  des  desincarnes  dans  la
trame  physique  ou  psychologique  de  notre  monde  phenomenal,
alors  son  nom  s'inscrira  au  livre  d'or  des  grands  initiateurs,  et,
joint  a  ceux  de  Copernic  et  de  Darwin,  il  y  compl^tera  la  triade


472


M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


des  genies  ayant  le  plus  profondement  revolutionne  la  pensee
scientifique  dans  l'ordre  cosmologique,  biologique,  psychologique."

If  the  contrary  should  happen,  continues  M.  Flournoy, — if
one  should  have  taken  for  "des  revelations  d'outre-tombe
ce  qui  n'etait  en  realite  que  jeux  enfantins,  ou  plaisanteries
macabres,  de  consciences  subliminales  tres  incarnees  et  plus
ou  moins  perverties ;  si,  en  un  mot,  il  fallait  definitivement
renoncer,  non  point  a  la  survivance  (qui  est  une  toute  autre
affaire),  mais  a  la  demonstration  scientifique  de  la  survivance,
alors  ce  serait  l'effondrement  du  but  vers  lequel  Myers  avait
fait  converger  tous  ses  efforts,  et  l'idee  dominante  de  sa  carriere
n'aurait  ete  qu'une  utopie.

"  Mais  n'oublions  pas  que,  dans  ce  cas  encore,  son  ceuvre  pro-
prement  scientifique,  bien  loin  de  se  trouver  ruinee,  subsisterait
intacte,  et  meme  d'une  solidite  d'autant  plus  evidente  que  c'est
precisement  en  s'appuyant  sur  elle  qu'on  aurait  fini  par  tirer
les  choses  au  clair."

Valuable  and  interesting  chapters  follow,  on  "  Des  Esprits  trompeurs,"
"Des  Esprits  bienfaisants,"  "  Cryptomndsie,"  and  "  Le  Reve  pro-
phdtique  de  Mine.  Buscarlet."  This  dream  is  of  an  extraordinary
nature,  and  as  it  is  probably  new  to  readers  of  our  Proceedings,  I
append  an  abridged  account  of  it  here,  omitting  much,  but  giving
the  essential  and  verified  points.

Mme.  Buscarlet  returned  to  Geneva  in  August,  1883,  after
being  for  three  years  governess  to  the  two  little  daughters  of
Mme.  Moratief  at  Kasan  in  Russia.  At  Kasan  she  had  made  the
acquaintance  of  two  friends  (amongst  others)  of  Mme.  Moratief ;
these  were  Mile.  Olga  Popoi  and  Mme.  Nitchinof.  Mme.
Nitchinof  was  headmistress  of  the  Insiitut  Imperial  at  Kasan, — 1
a  school  which  Mme.  Moratief's  daughters  began  to  attend
after  Mme.  Buscarlet's  departure, — and  was  very  intimate  with
Mme.  Moratief.  On  Dec.  22,  1883  (Dec.  10,  O.S.)  Mme.  Buscarlet
wrote  a  letter  to  Mme.  Moratief,  but  apparently  did  not  post
it  for  two  days,  for  M.  Flournoy, — who  has  seen  both  the
letter  and  its  envelope — states  that  the  latter  bears  the  Geneva
post-mark  of  Dec.  24,  and  (together  with  other  Russian  post-
marks) that  of  "  Kasan  20.  xii.  83."  Thus,  according  to  the
Russian  calendar  (O.S.),  it  left  Geneva  on  Dec.  12,  and  reached
Kasan  on  Dec.  20,  taking  eight  days  for  the  journey.  The  letter,
which  is  written  in  French,  opens  with  about  a  page  of  Christ-


LXIV.]


Review.


473


mas  greetings,  and  then  goes  on  as  follows  : — "  Cette  nuit,  j'ai
fait  un  drole  de  reve,  que  je  veux  vous  raconter,  non  que  j'y
attache  une  importance  quelconque,  mais  seulement  parce  que
c'est  drole.  Vous  et  moi  etions  sur  un  chemin,  dans  la  cam-
pagne,  lorsque  passa  devant  nous  une  voiture  d'ou  sortit  une
voix  qui  vous  appela.  Arrivees  pres  de  la  voiture,  nous  vimes
Mile.  Olga  Popoi 1  couchee  en  travers,  vetue  de  blanc  avec
un  bonnet  garni  de  rubans  jaunes.2  Elle  vous  dit :  Je  vous  ai
appelie  pour  vous  dire  que  Mme.  Nitchinof  quitte  Vlnstitut  le  17.
Puis  la  voiture  continua  de  rouler.  Que  les  reves  sont  parfois
burlesques  ! "  The  remaining  two  pages  of  the  letter  deal  with
other  subjects.

Now  for  what  happened  at  Kasan.  In  a  letter  dated  Kasan,
Dec.  20  [O.S.] — the  day  on  which  the  Geneva  letter  arrived —
M.  Moratief  wrote  to  Mme.  Buscarlet  that  he  and  his  wife  had
dined  at  Mme.  Nitchinof's  house  on  the  13th  [i.e.  the  day
after  the  posting  of  Mme.  B.'s  letter].  After  dinner  Mme.  N.
felt  unwell,  but  a  doctor,  who  arrived  immediately,  diagnosed
nothing  more  than  "une  simple  et  legere  angine."  On  the
14th  and  15th  the  doctors  (three  in  number)  found  nothing
alarming,  and  only  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  did  scarlet  fever
declare  itself.  [There  appears  to  have  been  also  diphtheria.]
At  5.0  p.m.  of  that  day  the  patient  could  hardly  speak,  and  she
died  at  11.45  p.m.  the  same  night.  For  fear  of  infection,  the
body  was  removed  from  the  school  to  a  neighbouring  chapel
at  2.0  a.m.  on  the  17th.

There  are  also  letters  from  two  other  people  living  at  Kasan
which  confirm  these  facts.

Thus  the  dream  is  exactly  fulfilled,  and  the  use  of  the  peculiar
word  quitte  is  seen  to  be  precisely  adapted  to  the  circumstances.
There  was  no  question  of  Mme.  N.'s  dismissal  or  of  her  resigna-
tion of  her  post.  She  had  been  established  at  Kasan  for  many
years,  with  all  her  children,  and  never  left  it — nor  was  likely
to  leave  it — during  the  Christmas  holidays. M.  Flournoy  has

1  In  1901 — when  M.  Flournoy  interviewed  her — Mme.  Buscarlet  was  alto-
gether unable  to  explain  the  intrusion  of  Mile.  Popoi  dans  cette  galere  ;  she
could  not  recall  that  this  lady  (who  appears  to  have  been  alive  at  the  time
of  the  dream)  was  in  any  way  concerned  with  the  actual  occurrences.

2  Mme.  B.  had  seen  in  Russia  the  corpse  of  a  lady  similarly  dressed.  The
cap  was  white,  as  it  was  also  in  the  dream,  according  to  Mme.  B.'s  verbal
statement  to  M.  Flournoy.


474


M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


investigated  the  case  thoroughly,  and  is  convinced  that  there
is  in  it  neither  collusion  nor  fraud.  He  would  explain  the
dream  as  a  telepathic  communication  [through  Mile.  Popo'i?]
from  Mme.  Nitchinof  herself:  her  subliminal  consciousness  was
fully  aware,  as  early  as  Dec.  9  (O.S.)  of  all  that  was  to  happen  in
this  strange  tragedy,  even  to  the  extraordinary  detail  of  the
body's  immediate  removal  in  the  early  hours  of  the  17th,  some
two  hours  after  death.  This  may  be  so, — or  it  may  not ;  but
one  certainty,  at  any  rate,  emerges  from  this  remarkable  case,
and  that  is,  that  a  mortal  (be  it  Mme.  Buscarlet  or  both  she
and  Mme.  Nitchinof)  may  have  prophetic  knowledge — a  thing
which,  in  more  important  connexions,  some  have  found  reason
to  doubt.

M.  Flournoy  next  turns  to  physical  phenomena.  A  chapter  is
given  to  Eusapia  Palladino,  and  another  to  other  mediums.  Of  the
genuineness  of  some  physical  phenomena — and  he  has  himself  wit-
nessed many — he  has  no  doubt,  and  he  offers  theories  of  the  possible
methods  of  their  production.

Of  Eusapia  he  writes  : —

"  En  ce  qui  me  concerne,  je  dois  dire  que  les  ph6nomenes  palla-
diniens — si  etranges  qu'ils  paraissent  an  premier  abord  et  si
inadmissibles  qu'ils  soient  forcement  pour  qui  n'en  a  pas  vu
lui-meme  ou  n'est  pas  an  courant  de  la  litterature  du  sujet —
sont  aujourd'hui  hors  de  doute  a  mes  yeux  (autant  qu'une
question  de  fait  peut  l'etre),  tant  est  considerable  le  poids  des
preuves  qu'ils  ont  en  leur  faveur."

Among  the  matters  treated  in  the  remainder  of  the  book,  reference
is  made  to  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Piper — which  M.  Flournoy
recognises  to  be  of  a  truly  remarkable  character — and  to  the
cross-correspondences,  but  both  subjects  are  treated  with  disappoint-
ing brevity.  In  each  case  spirit-intervention  is  rejected  as  "  not
proven."  Those,  however,  who  lean  to  the  spiritistic  view  of  Mrs.
Piper's  impersonations  and  utterances  (and  the  cross-correspondences
are  closely  bound  up  with  these)  will  feel  satisfaction  in  finding
that  when  M.  Flournoy  attempts  to  formulate  a  telepathic  theory,
he  falters  and  speaks  in  a  tone  of  uncertainty  not  to  be  found  else-
where in  the  book.  Certainly  one  who,  like  myself,  is  torn  both
ways  in  a  state  of  absolute  indecision  is  not  much  helped  by  the
following  suggestion  :


LXIV.]


Review.


475


[How  are  we  to  explain  the  impersonations  and  the  knowledge
shown  of  the  deceased  person,  if  it  is  not  by  his  actual  inter-
vention ?]  "  A  moins  cependant  (il  faut  penser  a  tout)  que
le  sosie  partiel  du  defunt,  que  l'un  des  assistants  aurait  transmis
telepathiquement  a  Mme.  Piper,  ne  se  fut  ensuite  complete
graduellement  chez  celle-ci,  en  attirant  a  lui,  par  quelque
obscure  affinite  psychologique,  les  autres  sosies  fragmentaires
epars  chez  d'autres  personnes."

We  miss  here  the  sure  touch  that  we  find  elsewhere  in  the  volume ;
and  we  miss  it,  as  I  think,  because  M.  Flournoy  is  fully  alive  to  the
crucial  difficulty  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis, — viz.  that  it  seems  to
demand  the  assumption  of  an  incredible  selective  power  as  part  of
the  telepathic  faculty.  Apparently  the  medium's  mind  must  be
able  to  range  the  world,  and  pick  out  of  the  million  memories  of
one  selected  individual  just  the  memory  or  memories  required.

"  Mais  il  y  a  des  faits  plus  complexes,  oil  il  faudrait  admettre
une  telepathie  active  et  selective,  par  laquelle  l'imagination  hyp-
noide  de  Mme.  Piper  s'en  irait  choisir,  chez  beaucoup  de  vivants
presents  ou  absents,  les  souvenirs,  concernant  precisement  tel
desincarne,  et  les  reunirait  de  facon  a  reconstituer  une  image
totale  plus  complete  qu'aucune  des  images  partielles  qu'il  a
laissees  chez  les  diverses  personnes  de  sa  connaissance."

With  regard  to  the  cross-correspondences  in  particular,  the  author's
last  words — coloured,  I  fear,  with  a  faint  tinge  of  irony — are  these  : —

"  Souhaitons  que  Myers  ou  d'autres  Esprits,  s'ils  sont  vraiment
en  jeu  en  tout  cela,  nous  revelent  bientot  le  moyen  d'eliminer
de  leurs  apparentes  manifestations  Taction  combinee  de  l'imagina-
tion subliminale,  dont  on  n'a  que  trop  souvent  deja  constate  la
malice,  et  de  la  telepathie  des  vivants,  dont  on  ne  connait  pas
du  tout  les  limites.  Et  en  attendant,  laissons  la  porte  ouverte
a  toutes  les  possibilites  de  l'avenir  ! "

The  last  published  Part  of  our  Proceedings  (LXIII.)  had  not  been
issued  when  M.  Flournoy's  book  appeared,  and  he  was  therefore
unacquainted  with  its  contents.  It  would  be  interesting  to  learn
whether  they  have  in  any  degree  modified  his  judgement.  Some  of
these  newly  published  incidents  are  certainly  of  a  very  remarkable
character,  and  have — it  must  be  confessed — so  seriously  increased
the  difficulties  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis  that,  if  I  may  speak  for
myself,  the  point  at  issue  has  now  come  to  be  this  : — is  it  more


476


M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part  lxiv.]


reasonable  to  attribute  the  production  of  certain  phenomena  solely
to  the  subliminal  self,  making  an  assumption  as  to  its  powers  which
really  goes  beyond  the  evidence, — or  to  assign  some  share  in  the
phenomena  to  the  intervention  of  discarnate  spirits,  to  which
much  of  the  evidence  seems  most  naturally  to  point  1  When  the
matter  is  stated  thus,  the  position  of  one  who  remains  provisionally
a  "  telepathist "  seems  somewhat  paradoxical,  but  future  research
might  prove  it  to  have  been  justified.  Agreement  between  the
holders  of  the  two  opposed  views  may,  however,  never  be  reached ;
for  conviction,  one  way  or  the  other,  will  probably  not  be  attained
by  the  reasoning  powers  alone,  and  the  belief  which  supplies  a
felt  need  is  commonly  the  one  which  we  embrace.  This,  indeed,
M.  Flournoy  has  found  to  be  frequently  the  case  with  convinced
spiritists.  Though  the  evidence  for  spirit  communication  is  still,
as  he  resolutely  maintains,  inadequate,  and  though  they  have  not
examined  the  evidence  critically  for  themselves,  many  spiritists
believe  that  proof  of  such  communication  exists  somewhere,  and  they
adopt  spiritism  as  a  faith  because  it  gives  them  a  desired  assurance
of  that  future  life  to  which  they  instinctively  look  forward.

On  the  other  hand,  even  though  "  Science "  should  to-morrow
stamp  the  spiritist  view  with  its  official  approval,  what  would  this
approval  be  worth  ?  It  would  only  show  that  on  the  authority  of  a
sufficient  number  of  responsible  thinking  men  this  theory  might  be
generally  adopted  as  being  for  the  moment  and  according  to  present
knowledge  the  one  which  best  accounted  for  the  observed  facts.
Absolute  certainty  would  be  as  far  off  as  ever,  for  time  might  reverse
the  verdict.  It  would  all  still  be  a  matter  of  faith ;  and  a  bare  belief
in  the  soul's  survival  of  the  body's  dissolution  would  rest  on  evidence
in  no  way  superior  (to  say  the  least)  to  the  credentials  of  the  Christian
Faith,  which — if  I  may  say  it  here  without  indiscretion — modern
psychical  research  has,  in  my  own  humble  judgement,  only
strengthened.

M.  A.  Bayfield.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL

RESEARCH.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  1882-1884.


Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  -----

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  ------

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  -

Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.,

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  ------

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  -------

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  -

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  -----

Professor  Charles  Richet,- - -  -

The  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour,  -

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick, - -  - -  -

H.  Arthur  Smith, -  -

OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOE  1911.


1885-1887.
1888-1892.
1893.

1894-1895.
1896-1899.
1900.

1901-1903.

1904.

1905.

1906-1907.
1908-1909.
1910.


Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
The  Rev.  Canon  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.

COUNCIL

W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Ernest  N.  Bennett.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  M.Sc,  M.B.


PRESIDENT.
Andrew  Lang,  D.Litt.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

George  B.  Dorr.
John  R.  Hollond.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.


Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.
J.  G.  Piddington.
St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.:
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
A.  F.  Shand.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.
Y.  J.  Woolley.


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.
HON.  SECRETARIES.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  1  Grange  Terrace,  Cambridge.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
RESEARCH  OFFICER  AND  EDITOR.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
SECR ETA RY  A ND  S UB- EDITOR,
Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
ASSISTANT  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.
Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  5  Panteleimonovskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

AGENT  FOR  AMERICA.
The  W.  B.  Clarke  Co.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

2H


478


Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

December,  1911.
President — Andrew  Lang,  D.Litt.

Vice-Presidents  .

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

The  Rev.  Canon  W.  Boyd-Carpenter,  D.D.,  The  Cloisters,  West-
minster, London,  S.W.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

John  R.  Hollond,  41  Princes  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.

Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D. Sc.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.

Honorary  Members.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,.
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.

Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratoire  de
Physique  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.

Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.,  Holm  Leigh,  West  Road,  Cam-
bridge .

Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Broadstone,  Wimborne,  Dorset.


Members  and  Associates.


479


Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-
times),  France.

Professor  H.  Bergson,  Villa  Montmorency,  18  Avenue  des  Tilleuls,
Paris.

Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  31  Goltz  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Dr.  Freud,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna,  Austria.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mrs.  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VIIe,  Paris.

Dr. Wm. Romaine  Newbold, Ph.D., Univ. of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris.
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  Wood  River  Junction,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Eeden,  Frederik  van,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Institute  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  St.  James'  Vicarage,  Walthamstow,  London,  N.E.
Grubb,  Edward,  3  George  Street,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  Wista,  Silesia.

Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  2  Gledhow  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,  W.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  2  Westlea  Terrace,  Buxted,  Sussex.
Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIVe  Arrt.,  Paris.


480


Members  and  Associates.


Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  Members.

Abbott,  E.  J.  W.,  Moabund  Tea  Co.,  Moabund,  Gatonga,  Assam,
India.

Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.
Acland-Hood,  Rev.  R.,  Rodsall,  Sliackleford,  nr.  Godalming,  Surrey.
Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  163  Walnut  Street,  Brookline,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  H.,  P.O.  Box  241,  Ckristchurch,  New  Zealand.
Adderley,  Hon.  and  Rev.  James,  Saltley,  Birmingham.
Addison,  Miss  Ina,  c/o  Mrs.  H.  J.  Wilson,  12  Cheyne  Court,

London,  S.W.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  485,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croydon,

Surrey.

Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Allen,  George  B.,  Free  Chase,  Warninglid,  Sussex.
Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  The  Presidency  College,  Madras,  India.
Allen,  William,  M.B.,  4  Newton  Terrace,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow.
Alston,  Mrs.  Rowland,  Turvey  Abbey,  Turvey,  Beds.
Ames,  Miss  Evelyn,  355  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.
Anderson,  Major  A.  T.,  R.F.A.,  55a  Dilkusha,  U,P.,  India.
Anderson,  F.,  Medical  Director,  U.S.  Naval  Examining  Board,

Navy  Yard,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Anderson,  Miss  Ruth,  14  Coleherne  Court,  Earl's  Court,  London,

S.W.

*Antrobus,  Miss  Lily,  69  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Archer,  Basil,  Highfield,  The  Chase,  Coulsden,  Surrey.
Armitstead,  G.  H.

Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.
Arnold,  Major  Ernest  C,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,  S.W.
Askew,  Claude,  Botches,  Wivelsfield  Green,  Sussex.
Askew,  Mrs.  Claude,  Botches,  Wivelsfield  Green,  Sussex.
Aspinwall,  Rev.  C.  F.,  Tregenna,  Decoy  Road,  Newton  Abbot,  Devon.
*Assheton-Smith,  Lady,  Vaynol,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.


Members  and  Associates.


481


*Astley,  H.  D.,  Benham-Valence,  Newbury,  Berks.

Astley,  Miss,  Cowrie  Haven,  Poundstock,  nr.  Bude,  N.  Cornwall.
*Astor,  William  Waldorf,  Cliveden,  near  Maidenhead.

Atkinson,  Mrs.,  224  Hereford  Street,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  13  Bronghton  Drive,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.
*  Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Highground,  Waterford  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
""Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baikie,  W.  S.,  Southend,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.
*Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  161  Westbourne  Grove,  London,  W.

Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  St.  John's  Schools,  Eton,  Windsor.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

Balfour,  F.  C.  C,  32  Addison  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.

Ballard,  Rev.  Frank,  D.D.,  Langbar,  Harrogate.
*Bancroft,  Miss  M.,  Haddonfield  Training  School,  Haddonfield,
N.J.,  U.S.A.

Barclay,  Rev.  Charles  W.,  The  Vicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
^Barclay,  Edwyn,  10  Vicarage  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3942  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Nash  Court,  Marnhull,  Dorset.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  D.Litt.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barlow,  Rev.  J.  W.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barnes,  C.  T.,  P.O.  Box  1199,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.

Barnes, Rev. Walter  W., 92 Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Barnett,  Burgess,  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  London,  E.C.
Barritt,  E.  H.,  J. P.,  Warrior  House,  26  Beaconsfield  Avenue,
Colchester.

Barrows,  Miss,  Hampton  School,  Malvern  P.O.,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  1121  Nelson  Ave.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Baruch,  Edgar,  Rooms  805-6  Wright  &  Callender  Building,  Los
Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.


482


Members  and  Associates.


*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  Bilaspur,  Central  Provinces,  India.

Bath,  Hubert,  7d  Grove  End  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,  N.W.
"*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1524  Chesnut  Street,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt,

Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  The  School  House,  Brentwood,  Essex.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
^'Bedford,  Adeline  Duchess  of,  Chenies,  Rickmansworth.

Beeching,  Miss  Nelly,  The  Priory,  Tonbridge.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward.

Belaribi,  Mrs.,  Bartlands,  Holt  Heath,  Worcestershire.
*Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.

Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  11  St.  Luke's  Road,  Westbourne  Park,  London,  W.

Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.

Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay,  India.
*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.

Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge.

Bentham,  Mrs.,  30  Lexham  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  14  Princes  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Berens,  Mrs.  Richard,  Marlings  Hall,  Chislehurst.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.
*Bergheim,  John  S.,  Belsize  Court,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.W.

Berry,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Meadowside,  Grantchester  Meadows,  Cam-
bridge.

*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Best,  Mrs.,  Merifield,  Exmouth,  Devon.

Best,  Robert,  146  Hamstead  Road,  Handsworth,  Birmingham.

Bethell,  Mrs.,  23  Shooters  Hill  Road,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Rev.  W.  O.,  Richmond  Hill,  Galle,  Ceylon.
*Beveridge,  Erskine,  LL.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Beverley,  Mrs.,  Nascot  Lodge,  Watford,  Herts.

Bickersteth,  Miss  E.  F.,  West  Lodge,  Ripon.

Bicknell,  Clarence,  Villa  Rosa,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.


Members  and  Associates.


483


*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Birley,  Miss  Florence  H.,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,  S.E.
Bishop,  Edward  Thomas,  Edmonton,  Alberta,  Canada.
Blackburn,  E.  M.,  Little  Thakeham,  Pulborough,  Sussex.
Blackburne,  F.  E.  I.,  Hazel  Hall,  Gomshall,  Surrey.
Blacklock,  Miss  C,  52  Lower  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.
Blackmail,  J.  F.,  R.N.,  47  Grafton  Road,  Acton,  London,  W.
Blackwood,  Miss.

Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,  Winkfield  Cottage,  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
*Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Blodgett,  Mrs.  C,  272  Walnut  Street,  Holyoke,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Bloxsome,  C.  H.,  The  Croft  House,  Fairford,  Gloucestershire.
Bodley,  Mrs.,  41  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  J.  M.  Robertson  &  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.
*Bond,  Frederick  Bligh,  16  Brook  Street,  Bath.
Boothroyd,  A.  E.,  12  Temple  Fortune  Lane,  Hampstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.
Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  150  Lefferts  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,

U.S.A.

Bouwens,  B.  G.,  East-Moor  House,  Harpenden,  Herts.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  rue  Maze,  St.  Martin's,  Guernsey.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
-*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.

Bowley,  Miss  S.  M.,  29  Croftdown  Road,  Highgate  Road,  London,  N.W.

Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  Woodlands,  Magrath  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Boys,  Major  R.  H.  H.,  D.S.O.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing
Cross,  London,  S.W.

Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emanuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.

Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B., 178  Bedford  Hill,  Balham,
London,  S.W.
^Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Bradley,  Arthur  C,  Newport,  New  Hampshire,  U.S.A.

Bradley, Professor A. C, 9 Edwardes Square,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Bradley,  F.  H.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.

Bramly,  Mrs.  Jennings,  Castel  di  Poggio,  Fiesole,  Italy.


484


Members  and  Associates.


Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Kingshot,  St.  Cross,  Winchester.
*Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Haddon  House,  Weybridge.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.G.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brazier-Creagh,  Mrs.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Brewster,  Bertram,  39  Woodville  Gardens,  Ealing,  London,  W.
Briantchaninoff,  Alexandre  N.,  11  Grand  Monetnaia,  St.  Peters-
burg, Russia.

Bristowe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Pretoria,  South
Africa.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.

Brooke,  Miss  Emma  F.,  30  Carlingford  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke,  Lady,  Colebrooke,  Brookeborough,Co.  Fei*managh,  Ireland.
*Brookes-Smith,  Mrs.,  The  Lodge,  Hurst  Green,  Sussex.

Brooks,  George  L.,  903  West  Copper  Ave.,  Albuquerque,  N.M.,
U.S.A.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.
Brown,  Dr.  Gustavus  R.,  900  14th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Brown,  Miss  May,  62  Carlisle  Mansions,  Westminster,  London, S.W.
Brown,  Mrs.  Robert,  Tankerville,  Boscombe,  Hants.
Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

Browne, J. Stark, The Red House, Mount  Avenue,  Ealing,

London,  W.
Browning,  Oscar,  31  Dorset  Road,  Bexhill.
Brownrigg,  Lady,  55  Zaimsku  Cho,  Azabu,  Tokio,  Japan.
Bruce,  James,  Craik,  Sask.,  Canada.

Brunwin,  A.  D.,  M.D.,  Haverings,  Rayne,  Braintree,  Essex.
Brush,  W.  Franklin,  500  5th  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Bryan,  C.  A.  Douglas,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Spa  House,  Humber-

stone  Road,  Leicester.
Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.
Bryden,  F.  W.  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  The  Priory,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Bryson,  Archibald,  Nenthoxme,  Ayr.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J. P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.
Buchanan,  A.  G.,  F.R.C.S.,  75  Warwick  Square,  London,  S.W.


Members  and  Associates.


485


Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winni-
peg, Canada.
*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.

Bullock,  A.  H.,  24  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.
*Bullough,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bullough,  Mrs.  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Burnham,  Mrs.,  Staindrop  Lodge,  Chapeltown,  Sheffield.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Butcher,  W.  Deane,  M.R.C.S.,  Holyrood,  Cleveland  Road,  Ealing,
London,  W.
*Butler,  Mrs.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Syon  House,  East  Budleigh,  Devon.
*Butt,  Lady,  9  Albert  Hall  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  London,
S.W.

Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  The  Bungalow,  West  Kirby,  Cheshire.
Cade,  F.  J.,  Mosborough,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.
Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.
Cadenas,  Delgado  F.,  Caracas,  Venezuela,  S.  America.
Calderon,  George  Leslie,  Heathland  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,
London,  N.W.

^Campbell,  Lady  Archibald,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire.

Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.

Campbell,  Captain  N.  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Trimulgherry,
Deccan,  India.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  King's  Weigh  House  Parsonage,  Thomas

Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  180  Hope

Street,  Glasgow.
Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road,  London,  E.
Capper,  Thomas,  Hasheton,  Mill  Hill,  London,  N.W.
Capron,  Mrs.  Cynthia  J.,  340  S.  Galena  Avenue,  Freeport,  111.,

U.S.A.


486


Members  and  Associates.


Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  50  Fayerweather  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Carlisle,  Mrs.  A.  M.,  12  Hyde  Park  Place,  London,  W.
Carnahan,  Charles  Tingley,  951  Logan  Avenue,  Denver,  Colo.,
U.S.A.

"^Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.
Carnsew,  Miss  Rosamund,  Burton  Common,  Petworth,  Sussex.
Carpenter,  Mrs.,  Withleigh,  Shoot-up-Hill,  Brondesbury,  London,
N.W.

Carpenter,  Miss  A.  C,  40  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  130  West  34th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

"-Carter,  Mrs.,  The  Anchorage,  Northchurch,  nr.  Berkhampsted.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  26  Denning  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Casey,  Hon.  J.  J.,  C.M.G.,  K.C.,  Ibrickane,  Acland  Street,  St.
Kilda,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.

Gather,  Miss  A.  S.,  York  House,  3  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,
London,  W.C.

Cautley,  Mrs.  R.  K.
*Cave,  Charles,  J. P.,  Ditcham  Park,  Petersfield,  Hants.
*Cave,  Lady,  Stoneleigh  House,  Clifton  Park,  Bristol.

Cayley,  H.  S.,  Box  128,  Vancouver,  B.C.,  Canada.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.
":'Chambers, John, Mokopeka, Hastings, Hawkes Bay,  New
Zealand.

Chance,  Clinton  F.,  Lawnside,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.
Chase,  G.  N.,  Beaumont,  Calif.,  U.S.A.

Chatterjee,  A.  K.,  Deputy  Magistrate  and  Collector,  P.O.  Comilla,

District  Tippura,  India.
Chattock,  Professor  Arthur  P.,  24  Royal  York  Crescent,  Clifton,

Bristol.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  126  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Cheyne,  C.  A.,  c/o  Arthur  Lomax,  Esq.,  Heilbron,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Childe-Pemberton, Miss  A. H., 12  Portman  Street,  Portman
Square,  London,  W.


Members  and  Associates.


487


Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Childers,  Miss  S.  R.,  12  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  Sloane  Street,
London,  S.W.

Chitty,  Hubert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  etc.,  Royal  Infirmary,  Bristol.
Chubb, Mrs. C. A., Oldfield, Parkside  Avenue,  Wimbledon

Common,  London,  S.W.
Clapham,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  267  South  8th  Street,  San  Jose,  Calif.,

U.S.A.

Clapham,  J.  H.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Clapp,  Mrs.  Emma  A.,  5310  Lexington  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,
U.S.A.

Clapp,  James,  Cromwell  Lodge,  Feltham,  Middlesex.

Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  Trobridge  House,  Crediton,  Devon.
*Clavering,  Miss,  New  County  Club,  21  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
*Clawson,  G.  W.

Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.

Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  1359  Columbia  Road,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Coates,  C.  J.,  The  Thornton  Woollen  Mill  Co.,  St.  Petersburg.

Cochrane,  Miss  Jessie,  34a  Via  Porta  Pinciana,  Rome,  Italy.

Cockle,  Rev.  Francis  T.,  The  Rectory,  Swinford,  Co.  Mayo,  Ireland.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  96  Chestnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Coghill,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Castle  Townshend,  nr.  Skibbereen,
Co.  Cork,  Ireland.
*Coit,  Stanton,  Ph.D.,  30  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Cole,  Arthur,  36  Baldry  Gardens,  Streatkam,  London,  S.W.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Collison,  Harry,  1  Temple  Gardens,  London,  E.C.

Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  High  Street,  Duneclin,  New  Zealand.

Colthurst,  George  O.,  The  Castle,  Blarney,  Co.  Cork,  Ireland.

Compton,  Lady  Alwyne,  7  Balfour  Place,  London,  W.

Connor,  Rev.  David,  The  Knowe  Manse,  Bewcastle,  East  Cumber-
land.

^Constable,  F.  C,  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.
Conway,  Lady,  Allington  Castle,  Maidstone,  Kent.
Cook,  Mrs.  Frank  H.,  Barnett  Hill,  Wonersh,  Guildford,  Surrey.
Cooke,  Miss  Mabel,  Dana  Hall  School,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.
Cooper,  Rear- Admiral  P.  H.,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.


488  Members  and  Associates.

*Cooper,  Sir  W.  E.,  CLE.,  Hume  Towers,  Bournemouth.
Copland,  Howard,  Villa  Copland,  Interlaken,  Switzerland.
Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  Rosenheim,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith

Street,  London,  S.W.
Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.

Coupland,  W.  C,  D.Sc,  33  Pembroke  Crescent,  Hove,  Brighton.
Courtairld,  George,  Junr.,  The  Waver,  Wethersfield,  Braintree,
Essex.

Courtauld,  R.  M.,  M.B.,  Halesowen,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Cowan,  W.  H.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Cowell,  Miss  Marion  A.,  2  Westbourne  Square,  London,  W.
Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay

&  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,  London,  S.W.
Coxeter,  Harold,  34  Holland  Park  Rd.,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Coxon,  Mrs.  George  S.,  Craigleith,  Cheltenham.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craige,  Wm.  C,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Crane,  Rev.  W.  M.,  Ph.D.,  Richmond,  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2  Cavendish
Square,  London,  W.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1  Lockharton  Gardens,  Colinton  Road,  Edinburgh.
Critchley,  W.  A.  Paget,  15  Parkside,  Albert  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Crook,  A.  H.,  Queen's  College,  Hong  Kong.
*Crookes,  Lady,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
*Crooks,  Miss  Marianne,  Achintorlie,  Norwood,  South  Australia.
Crouch,  H.  N.,  AdditionalJudicial  Commissioner  of  Sind,  Karachi,
Sincl,  India.

Cunard,  Cyril  G.,  The  Manor  House,  Notgrove,  Gloucestershire.
Cunningham,  Colonel  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  Tormount,  Torquay,  Devon.
Currie,  Mrs.,  Warders,  10  Crescent  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.

Curtis,  Atherton,  17  rue  Notre  Dame  des  Champs,  Paris,  France.
*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  10  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Curwen,  Mrs.,  Horncop,  Heversham,  Milnthorpe,  Westmoreland.


Members  and  Associates.


489


Dakin,  W.  R.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  8  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.
Dale,  Alan,  110  St.  Nicholas  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  31  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dallas, Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  North  End  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.

*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.
Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Lammas,  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight.
Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.

Danzas,  Mile.  Julia,  26  Moika,  St.  Petersburg.
Darbyshire,  Rev.  H.  S.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Methley,  Leeds.
D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.
Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.
*Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  M.B.,  CM.,  76  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Davies,  Benjamin,  Wilford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middle-
sex.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  c/o  Miss  E.  M.  Reynolds,  44  Egerton  Crescent,

London,  S.W.
Davies,  Mrs.,  The  Goodwyns,  East  Cosham,  Hants.
*Davis,  Charles,  29  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Davis,  Mrs.,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Trelinda,  St.  Merryn,  Padstow.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  Albemarle  Club,  37  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Dawes,  Miss  E.  A.  S.,  Heathlands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington,  Biirnsall,  Skipton.
Dawson,  Miles  M.

Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  Gershom,  Reigate,  Surrey.
*Dayton,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  Box  258,  South  Kaukauna,  Wisconsin,
U.S.A.

Dearmer,  Rev.  Percy,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Primrose  Hill,  London,
N.W.

Delanne,  Gabriel,  40  Boulevard  Exelmans,  Paris.
Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Rosslare  Harbour,  Kilrane,  Wexford.
De  Lissa,  Mrs.  F.,  Bittacy  House,  Mill  Hill,  London,  N:W.
Demming,  Benj.  W.,  1518  State  Street,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Denovan,  Wm.,  Ventura  Avenue,  Ventura,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Densham,  William,  c/o  M.  W.  T.  Co.,  Ltd.,  9  Hall  Street,  Chelms-
ford, Essex.

Derby,  Dr.  Hasket,  352  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Despard,  Mrs.,  2  Currie  Street,  Nine  Elms,  London.  S.W.
Deverell,  Francis,  8e  Portman  Mansions,  Baker  Street,  London,  W.


490


Members  and  Associates.


Devitt,  Mrs.  J.  A.,  Oskaloosa,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.
Dhru,  B.  L.,  LL.B.,  Camp  Baroda,  Bombay,  India.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Vice-Consulate,  Kertch,  Crimea,  Russia.
Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.
Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.,  and

Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  Greville  House,  3  Greville  Place,  St.

John's  Wood,  London,  N.W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.,  The  Hard,  Hythe,  Southampton.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.
Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park

Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow,  W.
Doan,  Professor  F.  C,  911  Grove  Street,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dobbie,  A.  W.,  Gawler  Place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
*Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Warwick  House,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Dodge,  Miss  Theodora,  Chipping  Campden,  Gloucestershire.
Doherty,  J.  J.,  LL.D.,  29  Grosvenor  Place,  Rathmines,  Co.  Dublin.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,

S.W.

Dorr,  George  B.,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  East  Undercliff,  Exmouth.

Douglas,  Mrs.,  4  Campden  House  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  Tuxedo  Park,  Orange  County,  New
York,  U.S.A.

*Douglas-Pennant,  Hon.  Violet,  9  Cromwell  Place,  London,  S.W.

Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Doyle,  Theodore,  M.D.,  1001  East  15th  Street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,
U.S.A.

Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  24  Bennington  Street,  Newton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Drew,  Professor  Eric,  Brightnell,  Cathedral,  Madras,  India.
Drew,  Ringrose  C,  8  Grove  Park,  Rathmines,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Drewry,  Mrs. George, c/o  S.  Hicks, J. P.,  Rostherne,  Upper

Colwyn  Bay,  N.  Wales.
Duane,  Russell,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.


Members  and  Associates.  491


Duff,  Miss  H.  A.,  27  Chester  Street,  London,  S.W.

Duggin,  Mrs.  Chas.,  25  East  38th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  Fairlawn,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.

Dyce,  Capt.  Cecil,  69  Linden  Gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Dyson,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Edgerton,  1a  Weld  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  Heathercliffe,  Frodsharn,  Cheshire.
*Edge,  Selwyn  Francis,  14  New  Burlington  Street,  Regent  Street,
London,  W.

Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.

*Elder,  Frederick,  21  Cleveland  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Eldred,  Fleet-Paymaster  E.  H.,  R.N.,  St.  Ann's,  Grove  Road

South,  Southsea,  Hants.
Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson

Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.
Elliot,  Gilbert  C,  Hull  Place,  Deal,  Kent.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  Kasr  el  Nuzha,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Elliott,  E.  T.,  Hawarden,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Elliott,  Captain  W.  R.,  Sherbrooke,  Quebec.
Ellis,  Herbert,  120  Regent  Road,  Leicester.

Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.,  Calle  Victoria  714,  Chihuahua,  Chih.,
Mexico .

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.

Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.

Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
*Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhavnagar,  India.

Evans,  Frank  Gwynne,  The  Tower  House,  Woodchester,  Stroud.

Evans,  W.  A.,  The  Brackley,  Stoneygate  Avenue,  Leicester.
*Fabbri,  Alessandro,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Fabbri,  Ernesto  G.,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Farrington,  Ernest  A.,  M.D.,  Haddonfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Felton,  Rev.  W.,  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Walsall,  Staffs.

Ferenczi, Dr. Sandor, Erzsebet-Korut 54, Budapest,  VII.,
Hungary.


492


Members  and  Associates.


Field,  Allan  B.,  P.O.  Box  274,  East  Liberty  Station,  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Fillmer,  Horatio  R.,  52  Ship  Street,  Brighton.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  The  Manor  House,  Stokesley,  R.S.O.,  Yorks.

Flake,  Mrs.  Albert,  611  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Fleetwood-Hesketh, C. H., Stocken  Hall, Stretton,  Oakham,
Rutlandshire.

Fliigel,  J.  C,  Cravenhurst,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Foote,  Geo.  W.,  34  Bull  Street,  Newport,  R.I.,  U.S.A.

Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  44  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Forman,  Colonel  R.H.,A.M.S.,c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  White-
hall Place,  London,  S.W.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Tullibody  House,  Cambus,  by  Stirling,  N.B.

Fortescue,  Miss  Frances,  c/o  M. Fortescue  Esq.,  The  Grange,
Ipplepen,  Newton  Abbot,  S.  Devon.
*Foster,  Rev.  J.  Edgar,  Lindsey  Vicarage,  Ipswich.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  24  Teville  Road,  Worthing.

Fournier  d'Albe,  E.  E.
*Fox,  Mrs.,  Fawe  Park,  Keswick.

Francis,  Arthur,  P.  O.  Kelowna,  British  Columbia.
*Francis,  Mrs.  Francis,  Palace  House,  Beaulieu,  Hants.

Frankland,  F.  W.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,  Lon-
don, W.C.

Frankland,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,
London,  W.C.

Franklin,  Hon.  Mrs.  E.  L.,  50  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.
Freas,  W.  R.,  1632  N.  12th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Freeman, Miss Adelaide C, Belgrave Mansions,  Grosvenor
Gardens,  London,  S.W.
'■Frith,  Mrs.,  Swynnerton  Rectory,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Corn-
wall.

Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
-Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Funk,  Dr.  I.  K.,  195  Washington  Park,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Gaff,  T.  T.,  1520  20th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Norton-in-Hales,  Market  Drayton.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Gardner,  Harold  E.,  9  Cook  Street,  Liverpool.
*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.


Members  and  Associates.


493


*Gayer,  Gustav  A.,  Ph.D.,  131  West  63rd  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Gearn,  Dr.  George  C,  2545  Front  Street,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Gehring,  J.  G.,  M.D.,  Bethel,  Maine,  U.S.A.
*Geikie,  Sir  Archibald,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Shepherd's  Down,  Hasle-
mere,  Surrey.

*George,  Mrs.,  Cottage-on-the-Links,  Hindhead,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
George,  Walter  C.,  Wayside,  St.  James  Avenue,  Beckenham,
Kent.

Ghose, Babu  Moti  Lai, Ananda  Chatterjee's  Lane,  Calcutta,
India.

Gibson,  Miss  Winifred,  108  Alexandra  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.

Giddings,  Miss  H.  M.,  810-11  New  England  Building,  Cleveland,

Ohio,  U.S.A.
Gidney,  A.  R.,  Aylsham,  Norfolk.
Gillard,  Mrs.,  Heinerweg  3,  Wiesbaden,  Germany.
Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Rtissia.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  16  Wilton  Street,  Grosvenor  Place,

London,  S.W.

Goldstein,  Dr.  phil.  J.,  Rossdorferstrasse  81,  Darmstadt,  Germany.
Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.
Goodall,  Charles  Henry,  Lucknow  Avenue,  Nottingham.
Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford,  Essex.
Goore,  Albert,  Rose  Mount,  Meadvale,  Redhill,  Surrey.
Gordon,  Mrs.  J.  L.  R.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  &  Co.,  Bombay,
India.

Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Gower,  John  H.,  Mus.  Doc.  (Oxon.),  23  Steele  Block,  Denver,

Colo.,  U.S.A.
Graham,  Mrs.  Perceval  Gore,  Ghezireh,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
*Grant-Suttie,  H.  F.,  Royal  Horse  Artillery,  Rawal  Pindi,  India.
Graveson,  Miss  C,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,  S.E.
Gray,  Rev.  Arthur  Romeyn,  Church  Missions  House,  281  Fourth

Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Hogarth  House,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.
Greene,  Mrs.  Bertram,  382  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

*Greene,  J.  G.,  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

2i


4!  >4


Members  and  Associates.


Green-Thompson,  Mrs.,  Bridekirk,  Cockermoutk,  Cumberland.
Greet,  Mrs.,  Caens  Wood,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Greeves,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Cudworth  Vicarage,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.
Greg,  Miss  Mary  S.,  19  Kensington  Gate,  London,  W.
Grenfell,  Mrs.,  2  Morton  Crescent,  Exmouth,  S.  Devon.
Grew,  Mrs.  Joseph  Clark,  Matthaiskirchstrasse  6,  Berlin,  Germany.
*Grey,  R.  C,  Oaklands,  West  Wellow,  Romsey,  Hants.
Gribble,  Miss  F.  M.,  32  Chester  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.

Griffith,  Rev.  R.  G.,  Riversley,  Bakewell,  Derbyshire.
*Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  24  Melrose  Avenue,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.
*Grimshaw,  Mrs.,  109  Cromwell  Road,  London,  S.W.

Gripper,  Mrs.  Harold,  11  Eliot  Vale,  Blackheath,  Kent.

Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  C,  Morrisburne  House,  Woking,  Surrey.

Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Schenk  Straat  150,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Suffolk.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Hackett,  James  T.,  95  King  William  Street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Haemmerle,  Madame,  3  Square  du  Croisie,  Paris  XV,  France.
*Haig,  Mrs.  G.  Ogilvy,  65  Brook  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  Lon-
don, W.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.
*Hall,  Mrs.  Basil,  31  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Hall,  J.  P.,  Gorse  Bank,  Werneth,  Oldham.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.

Hallett,  Henry  Hiram,  Bridge  House,  Taunton.

Halls,  Robert,  34  Royal  Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Hamar-Nemespann,  La  Baronne  de,  Hohe  Warte  50,  Vienna  XIX,
Austria.

*Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  70  Princes  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Hamilton,  Col.  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  Co.  Down,  Ireland.
Hamilton,  James,  Heversham  School,  Milnthorpe,  Westmoreland.
Hamilton,  J.  J.,  80  Woodland  Rise,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hamilton-Hoare,  Miss  Sybil  H.,  96  Ebury  Street,  Chester  Square,
London,  S.W.

Hammond,  Miss  Winifred  B.,  386  East  51st  Street,  Portland,

Oregon,  U.S.A.
Handcock,  Dr.  Charles  L.,  J. P.,  Ashburton,  New  Zealand.
Hankow,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Hankow,  China.


Members  and  Associates.


495


Hansard,  Mrs.,  24  Chelsea  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Hanson,  H.  P.,  Box  39,  R.F.D.  Route  No.  5,  Harlan,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hanson,  Mrs.,  7  Canning  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Westfield,  Sefton  Park,  Liverpool.
Hardie,  Miss  Mabel,  M.B.,  Candello,  577  Finchley  Road,  London,  N.W.
Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  c/o  Nevett  &  Co.,  21  Park  Road,  Crouch

End,  London,  N.
Hare,  Cyril  Lockhart,  Abbotsholme,  Dunstable,  Bedfordshire.
Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,

London,  N.W.

Harris,  Alan  Campbell,  Staufenberg  Str.  28,  Annaberg,  Baden-
Baden,  Germany.
Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  90  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
*Harris,  Mrs.  H.  Percy,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.
*Harris,  Hon.  J.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James's
Square,  London,  S.W.
Harrison,  Rev.  Arthur  S.,  28  Eastgate,  Stafford.
Harrison,  H.  Leeds,  M.B.,  104  Marine  Parade,  Worthing.
Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
*Hart, Colonel  H.  H.,  R.E.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

Hart,  Lieut. -General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,
United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Milton  P.O.,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  35  South  Willow  Street,  Montclair,  N.J.,
U.S.A.

Haslam,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Sainte  Barbe,  Christchurch,  Canterbury,
New  Zealand.

Haslehurst,  E.  W.,  72  Burnt  Ash  Hill,  Lee,  London,  S.E.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
Hauxhurst,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall

Mall,  London,  S.W.
Hawarden,  The  Viscountess,  18  Chelsea  Court,  London,  S.W.
Hawkins,  E.  F.,  Villa  des  Troenes,  Livry  (S.  et  O.),  France.
Hawkins,  H.  P.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  56  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  26  Leinster  Square,  London,  W.
*Heard,  G.  H.,  Cheniston,  Highfield  Lane,  Southampton


496


Members  and  Associates.


Heath,  George  H.,  277  Brockley  Road,  London,  S.E.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  West  Cliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
*Helmsley,  Viscount,  Nawton  Tower,  Nawton,  Yorks.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  Mill  Cottage,  Bonhard,  Perth.
Henderson, Miss  Lilian, The  Sesame  Club, 29  Dover  Street,
London,  W.

Henly,  Mrs.  Albert  W.,  Gwydyr  House,  Bromley,  Kent.
Henrici,  Jacob,  6126  Penn.  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert-Smith,  Miss  Evelyn  E.,  Raymead,  Park  Road,  Watford,
Herts.

Herschel,  Colonel  John,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
Hessel,  Miss  K. A.,  14  Waterlow  Court, Hamjjstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.
Heymans,  Prof.  G.,  Ubbo-Emmiussingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
Heysinger,  Dr.  Isaac  W.,  1521  Poplar  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,

U.S.A.

Hielle,  Robert,  xix/1  Karl-Ludwig  Str.  62,  Vienna.
Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hildyard,  F.  W.,  77a  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Wensley  Bank,  Thornton,  Bradford.
Hill,  Mrs.  John  Howard,  272  State  Street,  Portland,  Maine,
U.S.A.

*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R.,  Westover  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Himes,  Prof.  Charles  F.,  170  W.  Louther  Street,  Carlisle,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Hinkle,  Beatrice  M.,  M.D.,  110  Madison  Ave.,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Hinton,  Mrs.  Howard,  East  Dene,  26  Tyson  Road,  Forest  Hill,

London,  S.E.
Hoare,  F.  H.,  67  Fitzjohn's  Avenue,  London,  N.W.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Springdale,  Uppingham.
Hodding,  Miss,  2  The  Avenue,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.
Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  8  Northmoor  Road,  Oxford.
*Hogg,  Sir  Frederick  Russell,  Oriental  Club, Hanover  Square,

London,  W.

*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  2  Vicarage  Gate,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  L.R.C.P.,  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Hollins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.


M embers  and  Associates.


497


Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  3  Maid's  Causeway,  Cambridge.
*Hollond,  John  R.,  41  Princes  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.
Holms,  Mrs.  Douglas,  16  South  Street,  Thurloe  Square,  London,
S.W.

*Holt,  Henry,  34  West  33rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Holt-White,  Mrs.,  Pavington,  Yelverton,  Devon.

Homan,  C.  H.,  24  Oscarsgade,  Christiania,  Norway.
*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Porfcsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Hoppin,  J.  C,  1527  18th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Horn,  W.  J.,  Woldingham,  Surrey.

Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.

Horton,  W.  Claude,  81  Church  Road,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Hammam  Chambers,  76  Jermyn
Street,  London,  S.W.

Hotchkin,  Mrs.,  The  Dower  House,  Woodhall  Spa,  Lincolnshire.
*Hough,  Joseph  Fairhurst,  Lowood  Cottage,  Moor  Park,  Great
Crosby,  Liverpool.

Houston,  James,  1  Hereford  Mansions,  Hereford  Road,  Bayswater,
London,  W.

Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.

Howson,  Richard,  M.I.C.E.,  5  Southfield  Terrace,  Middlesbrough,
Yorkshire .

Hubbell,  Geo.  Allen,  Ph.D.,  Cumberland  Gap,  Tennessee,  Lincoln

Memorial  University,  U.S.A.
Hubbell,  G.  G.,  1101  State  Street,  Erie,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  Ph.D.,  Anker  Heegaards  Gade  1,  Copenhagen

B.,  Denmark.

*Hudleston,  R.  W.,  68  Parliament  Hill,  London,  N.W.
Hudson,  Morris,  Aldersey  Croft,  Guildford.

Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  Swiss  Cottage,  Birchington-on-Sea,  Thanet,
Kent.

*Hull,  Mrs.  Carrie  G.,  112  Academy  Street,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  TL,  The  Pines,  Tivoli,  Cheltenham.
Humphrey,  Miss  Ola.

Hunt,  Guy  W.,  Southport,  Queensland,  Australia.
*Hunt,  Mrs.  Warwick,  12  Lansdowne  Road,  Holland  Park,  London  W.
Huntingford,  Miss,  Exeter  Lodge,  Bournemouth.
Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
Hutton,  E.  Charles  F.,  5  Chuxxh  Street,  Cape  Town,  South  Africa.


498


Members  and  Associates.


*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Imamura,  Prof.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Uni-
versity, Kioto,  Japan.

Ingalls,  Mrs.  Joseph  A.,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Merchant  Taylors'  School,  London,  E.C.

Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  Raemoir,  Banchory,  Scotland.

Ireland,  Gordon,  32  Nassau  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Izod,  C.  H.,  7  Malwood  Road,  Balham  Hill,  London,  S.W.

Jacks,  L.  P.,  28  Holywell,  Oxford.

Jackson,  Mrs.,  44  Park  Street,  Calcutta,  India.

James,  Mrs.,  The  Elms,  Selly  Oak,  Birmingham.
"-"Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

-Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Jaye,  William  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,
London,  N.E.

*Jeakes,  Rev.  Prebendary,  4  Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Jenkinson,  W.  E.,  Highthorn,  King  Cross  Road,  Halifax.

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Johnston,  R.  F.,  Weihaiwei,  China.
*  Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.
*Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cardfields,  Hatfield  Peverel,  Essex.

Jones,  Lady,  Cardfields,  Hatfield  Peverel,  Essex.

Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Josling,  Lieut. -Colonel  C.  L.,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,
S.W.

*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  164  Summer  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Kaleta,  Georg,  Sigmund-Haffnergasse  18/ III,  Salzburg,  Austria.
Keene,  The  Most  Rev.  J.  B.,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Meath,  Navan,
Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.
"""Kellogg,  Spencer,  Junr.,  221  Linwood  Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.
Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.
Ker,  Miss,  1  Windsor  Terrace,  Glasgow,  W.


Members  and  Associates.


499


*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.

Ketkar,  N.  G.,  Amraoti,  Berar,  India.
*Kevill-Davies,  George,  East  Cavalry  Barracks,  Aldershot,  Hants.

Kielgast,  Svend,  c/o  Messrs.  Erslev  &  Hasselbalch,  26  Kobmager-
gade,  Copenhagen  K.,  Denmark.

Kilroe,  E.  G.,  Jubbulpore,  Central  Provinces,  India.

Kirkwood,  J.  H.  M.,  M.P.,  62  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Kittel,  T.  B.,  Vane  House,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
*Klinckowstroem,  Count  Carl,  Elisabethstrasse  40,  Munich,  Bavaria.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.

Knoller,  Richard,  1  Riemerstrasse  8,  Vienna.

Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27  Mikealsgaten,  Helsingfors,  Finland.

Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Swarthmore,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Kress,  Miss  Anne,  Lock  Haven,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Kwang,  Sim  Boon,  73  Scott's  Road,  Singapore,  S.S.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford,  Essex.
~*Lacon,  Mrs.  Sidney,  Ormesby  Hall,  Great  Yarmouth,  Norfolk.
*Laain,  Mrs.  Louis  E.,  Ellslloyd,  Lake  Forest,  111.,  U.S.A.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.

Lambert,  Miss  Ada  R.,  c/o  Miss  Lambert,  Ivy  Cottage,  Newick,
Sussex.

Lane,  Miss  E .  Abbott,  131  East  21st  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Lane-Poole, Professor Stanley, Litt.D., Donganstown  Castle,

Wicklow,  Ireland.
"*Lang,  Andrew,  1  Marloes  Road,  London,  W.,  and  Alleyne  House,

St.  Andrews,  Scotland.
Larken,  E.  P.,  Authors'  Club,  2  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.W.
Latham,  Miss  Edith,  3  Avenue  Bugeaud,  Paris.
Latshaw,  Allen,  3414  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Layman,  Alfred,  M.D.,  1630  North  18th  Street,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  21  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.
Leaf,  Miss  Ellen,  6  Airlie  Gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough,  Wilts.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London, N.W.


500


Members  and  Associates.


Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Rev.  A.  H.  E.,  156  Albany  Street,  London,  N.W.
Lee,  Blewett,  1  Park  Row,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Mrs.  Henry  Thomas,  414  West  Adams  Street,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  L.  G.  H.,  Kingswood,  Raunds,  near  Wellingborough.
*Lees,  Robert  James,  Craigmore,  Ilfracombe.
*Legg,  W.  A.,  18  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury,  London,  N.W.

Leggatt,  Edward  O.  Every,  I.C.S.,  Saharanpur,  U.P.,  India.
*Leigh,  Mrs.  Gerard.

*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  Warwickshire.
Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartiield,  Roehampton,  London,  S.W.
Lenon,  J.  W.,  Kiamara  Estate,  Nairobi,  British  East  Africa.
Leon, Mrs. Philip, 4m  Montagu  Mansions, Portman  Square,
London,  W.

Leonard, Thomas, 223  W. School  Lane, Germantown,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Leslie-Melville,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  51  Hans  Road,  London,  S.W.

Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  North  Rockhampton,
Queensland,  Australia.

Lewis,  David  J.,  House  of  Representatives  U.S.,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Lewis,  Francis  B.,  Box  5,  Maraisburg,  Transvaal,  South  Africa.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,
Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc.,  Church  Street,  Brighton.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washing-
ton, D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland
Avenue,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,
Md.,  U.S.A.


Members  and  Associates.


501


Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.G.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian, Public  Library  of New  South  Wales, c/o  Messrs.

Truslove  &  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Somerville  Public  Library,  Somerville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  106  New  Bond  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian,  Bibliotheque  Victor  Cousin,  L'Universite  de  Paris.
Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.
Librarian,  Vancouver  Medical  Association  Library,  633  Hastings

Street  West,  Vancouver,  B.C.,  Canada.
Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dr.  Williams's  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Free  Public  Library,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Livingstone,  Rev.  W.  O.,  355  Greenwood  Avenue,  Kankakee,  111.,

U.S.A.

*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.
Lloyd,  Brig. -General  Francis.
Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.


.-)0-2


Members  and  Associates.


Lloyd,  Rev.  John,  509  Hartwell  Avenue,  Waukesha,  Wisconsin,
U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Miss  Julia,  Farm,  Sparkbrook,  Birmingham.
*Lockhart,  Lady,  187  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Loewenstein,  Amtsrichter  Dr.,  Klosterstern  5,  Hamburg,  Germany.

Lomax,  Arthur,  Heilbron,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.

Lombardi,  C,  2331  Leconte  Avenue,  Berkeley,  Cal.,  U.S.A.,  and
c/o  The  Dallas  News,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lonsada,  Duchesse  de,  4  Lancaster  Street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Greenhill,  Sutton- Veny,  Wiltshire.

Luke,  James,  Box  No.  183,  G.P.O.,  Calcutta.

Lumsden,  Miss  K.  M.,  17  Richmondhill  Place,  Aberdeen.

Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Lyall,  Edward,  Barton,  R.S.O.,  Darlington.

Lyell,  D.,  407  Lake  of  the  Woods  Building,  St.  John  Street,
Montreal,  Canada.

Lyon,  Miss  C.  C,  Ashcroft,  Prestwood,  Great  Missenden,  Bucks.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.

Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Lieut. -Colonel  F.,  Resident  in  Nepal,  India.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  Dun  Erin,  Chalfont  St.  Peter,  Bucks.
Macfarlane,  Mrs.,  74  Finnart  Street,  Greenock,  N.B.
MacGregor,  Arthur  C,  8  Longford  Terrace,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin.
Mackintosh,  R.  D.,  M.B.,  The  Bungalow,  Mortlake,  Surrey.
Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.
Macnaughtan,  Miss,  61  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
MacVeagh, Lincoln, 52 Plympton Street, Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Madocks,  Major  H.  J.,  1a  Ovington  Square,  London,  S.W.
Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  11  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.
Mallet,  Miss  A.  V.,  Anlaby  House,  25  Highbury  New  Park,
London,  N.

Mallet,  Louis,  182  Ebury  Street,  London,  S.  W.
Mander,  Charles  A.,  The  Mount,  Wolverhampton,  Staffs.


Members  and  Associates.


503


*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.

Mangin,  Marcel,  102  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Temple  Ewell  Vicarage,  Dover.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Mount  Vernon,  Melton  Mowbray,  Tasmania.
*Mansfield,  Mrs.  Richard,  The  Grange,  New  London,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Mantell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  Chesters,  Sydney  Road,  Guildford.

Marks,  Mrs.  Claude,  15  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Marsh,  Edward  H.,  3  Gray's  Inn  Place,  London,  W.C.

Marshall,  Mrs.  F.,  36  Drayton  Court,  London,  S.W.

Marshall,  William  Cecil,  Tweenways,  Hindhead,  Haslemere.

Marston,  Charles,  J. P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,
Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Martin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury.

Martin,  Thomas  Beecham,  Wanstead  College,  South  Woodford,

London,  N.E.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward.

Maskell,  Miss  E.  M.,  21  Thornsett  Road,  Anerley,  London,  S.E.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  5  Vincent  Square  Mansions,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.

Massey,  Hon.  Mary,  80  Royal  Hospital  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,  13  Grosvenor  Road,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
*Mathews,  Mrs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  London,  W.

Mattiesen,  Emil,  Ph.D.,  Witzleben  Str.  3,  Charlottenburg,  Berlin,
Germany.

Mavrogordato,  John  N.,  52  Queen's  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Maxim,  Sir  Hiram  S.,  Ryecotes,  Dulwich  Common,  London,  S.E.
Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  6  Rue  Villaret-de-Joyeuse,  Paris.
*Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  48  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.
M'Adam,  D.  J.,  Jr.,  Ph.D.,  Leonard  Hall,  S.  Bethlehem,  Penna.,
U.S.A.

M'Alpine,  Robert,  Balclutha,  Greenock,  N.B.

M'Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York  City,  U.S.  A.
M'Clure, Henry, M.D., 30 Portland Court, Portland  Place,
London,  W.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.
M'Cormick,  Alfred,  Rooksley,  Simla,  Punjab,  India.


504


Members  and  Associates.


M'Dougall,  Dugald  W.,  c/o  R.  J.  Turnbull  &  Co.,  4  Lloyds
Avenue,  London,  E.C.
*M'Dougall,  Isaac  S.,  The  Ox-chard,  off  Arthog  Road,  Hale,  Cheshire.
M'Dougall,  William,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Woodsend,  Foxcombe  Hill,  nr.

Oxford.

M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
M'Kellar,  Miss  J.  L.,  c/o  National  Bank  of  Australasia,  123

Bishopsgate  Street  Within,  London,  E.C.
M'Lean,  Mrs.,  186  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham  Gate,  London,

S.W.

Meek,  Maximilian  de,  Russian  Consulate,  Leipzig,  Germany.
Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.
Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.
Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater

Road,  Bombay,  India.
Mellone,  Rev.  Sydney  Herbert,  D.Sc,  10  Hartington  Gardens,

Edinburgh.

Merwin,  Miss  Mary  F.,  668  Hancock  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Metcalfe,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  The  Aberdeen,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
Meyer,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Regent's  Park  Chapel,  Park  Square  East,
London,  N.W.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Bishop's  College,  Calcutta,  India.
*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Millard,  Mrs.  Almira  B.,  2505  Farnam  Str.,  Omaha,  Neb.,  U.S.A.

Millard,  Charles  Killick,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  Gilroes,  Leicester.
*Miller,  Prof.  Dickinson  S.,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  U.S.A.
^Miller,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  80  Craiglea  Drive,  Edinburgh.

Milne,  A.  M.  Lees,  Ribbesford  House,  Bewdley,  Worcestershire.
*Mirlees,  W.  J.,  11  Cranmer  Road,  Cambridge.
Mistri,  Jeejeebhoy  P.,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,

Hornby  Road,  Bombay,  India.
Mitchell,  Sidney  J.,  c/o  D.  Mitchell  &  Co.,  Box  77,  G.P.O.,  Newcastle,
N.S.W.,  Australia.
♦Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
Moggridge,  Miss  Edith,  Stanfield  House,  High  Street,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.
*Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett.
Monteagle, The  Lord, K.P., Mount  Trenchard, Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.


Members  and  Associates.


505


Montgomery,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Byways,  Exmouth,  Devon.

Moor,  Lady,  89  Linden  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.,  and

Ladbroke,  Chine  Crescent,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth.
Moore,  Prof.  Franklin,  M.D.,  Syrian  Protestant  College,  Beirut,

Syria.

Moore,  Major  H.  G.  A.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  London,  S.W.
*Moore,  Admiral  W.  Usborne,  8  Western  Parade,  Southsea.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  4  Randolph  Cliff,  Edinburgh,  and  Morison

House,  Hetland,  Ruthwell,  N.B.
Morley,  Edwin  W.,  Andover,  Ashtobula  County,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Morries,  J.  M.,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Morton,  Mrs.  F.  N.,  73  West  La  Crosse  Avenue,  Lansdowne,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  2  Rampart  Row,
Bombay.

*Moss-Cockle,  Mrs.,  26  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C,  11  Burstock  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.
Mower,  Mrs.  George,  Winona,  Lovelace  Road,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  1  York  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Miiller,  Fraulein  A.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Munro,  Hugh  F.,  1740  Germantown  Avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Murray,  Donald,  Mildmay  Park  Works,  Mildmay  Avenue,  London,  N.
*Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  c/o  C.  Holmes,  Court  Street,  Faversham,
Kent.

Myers,  Professor  Charles  S.,  M.D.,  Galewood  Tower,  Great  Shel-
ford,  Cambs.

*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
*Myers,  L.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.B.M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda
Anchorage,  China.

Nash,  Joseph,  The  White  House,  Somerleyton,  Lowestoft.

Neate,  P.  J.

Neeld, A.  D., 10  Bradford  Avenue, Crafton, Pittsburg,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Neild,  Miss  Maria,  83  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  3501  Jackson  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of,  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.
Newill,  George  E.,  Guadalupe  Mine,  Inde,  Durango,  Mexico.


Members  and  Associates.


*Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84  Newman  Street,  London,  W.
Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  D.D.,  Garden  City,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

•Nicoll,  Mrs.  De  Lancey,  23  East  39th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Nicolson,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Arthur,  Bart.,  G.C.B.,  etc.,  Foreign
Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.

*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13  Beverley  Terrace,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.

*Niven,  Mrs.  Graham,  The  Golden  Farm,  Cirencester,  Gloucester-
shire.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  40  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Noel-Cox.,  H.  L.,  M.D.,  Elcove,  Elms  Avenue,  Eastbourne.
*Norris, Professor  Richard, M.D.,  F.R.S.E., The  Laboratory,
Yardley  Fields,  Yardley,  Birmingham.
Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  17  Rue  Simoneau,  Boulogne-sur-Mer,  France.
Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  Beechcroft,  The  Avenue,  Cambridge.
Oates,  R.  Crosbie,  Moyallen,  Ness  Holt,  nr.  Neston,  Cheshire.
*Odell,  L.  E.,  Casa  Central  Florida  864,  Buenos  Aires,  Argentine
Republic.

Odell,  S.  W.,  202  Boston  Building,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  11  Hill  Street,  Edinburgh.
Ogle,  Captain  N.,  67th  Punjabis,  Multan,  Punjab,  India.
Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Rostrevor,  Langton  Green,

Tunbridge  Wells.
O'Leary,  Miss  Katherine  W.,  44  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,

W.

Oliver,  Mrs.,  26  Brunswick  Terrace,  Brighton.
*01ivier,  Sir  Sydney,  K.C.M.G.,  King's  House,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.

Oman,  Professor  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.

Onslow,  Lady,  Chevin  Bank,  Duffield,  Derbyshire.
*Onslow,  Hon.  TL,  Clandon  Park,  Guildford.

Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hamp-
stead,  London,  N.W.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.

Pack Beresford, Denis R., Fenagh House, Bagenalstown,  Co.
Carlow.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Sir  Arthur,  9  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Paine,  Mrs.  W.,  37  Westminster  Palace  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Paley,  Mrs.,  Ampton  Hall,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.
Parke,  Roderick  J.,  179  Cottingham  Street,  Toronto,  Canada.


Members  and  Associates.


507


Parker,  Sir  Gilbert,  D.C.L.,  M.P.,  20  Carlton  House  Terrace,
London,  S.W.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.

Parkin,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Sheffield.
*Parsons,  J.  Denham,  58  St. Oswald's  Road,  West  Brompton,
London,  S.W.
Parsons,  1ST.  M.,  22  Barkston  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Pask,  A.  F.,  50  Bensham  Manor  Road,  Thornton  Heath,  Surrey.
*Passingkam,  Mrs.,  Berrow  House,  nr.  Ledbury,  Hereford.
Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  3  Devonshire  Terrace,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Payne,  Ernest,  10  Wellington  Court,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Hesslewood,  Hessle,  Yorks.
Peckham,  Miss  Ella,  246  Gano  Street,  Providence,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Pedley,  Charles  Herbert,  Dee  Lodge,  Chester.
Penha,  Alfred  de  la,  Long  Wall  House,  Oxford.
Penha,  Paul  de  la.

Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  Silverthorne,  King's  Ride,  Camberley,
Surrey.

Penny,  W.  R.,  Office  of  the  Chief  Railway  Storekeeper,  Cape

Town,  South  Africa.
Percival,  Mrs.,  1  Chesham  Street,  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Perdicaris,  Ion,  Shandon,  Tunbridge  Wells.
*Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Isles.

Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  8  Mansfield  Street,  London,  W.
*Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  The  Count,  5  Panteleimonovskaia,  St.
Petersburg.

Perowne,  Miss  Edith,  11  Harvey  Road,  Cambridge.

Perry, Sir E. Cooper, M.D., Superintendent's House,  Guy's
Hospital,  London,  S.E.

Perry,  Thos.  S.,  c/o  Perier  &  Cie,  59  rue  de  Province,  Paris.

Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  362  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Philipse,  Miss  Margaret  Gouverneur,  142  West  71st  Street,  New
York  City,  U.S.A.
*Phillimore,  Mrs.,  Battler's  Green,  Letchmore  Heath,  Hex'ts.
*Pickering,  J.  F.,  Camden  Ridge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.

Pickering,  J.  W.,  D.Sc,  Sundridge,  Russell  Hill,  Purley,  Surrey.
*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Holy  Well,  Hook  Heath,  Woking,  Surrey.


r,o,s


Members  and  Associates.


*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  March wiel  Hall,  Wrexham,  and  Villa  Piercy,
Sardinia.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treryn,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Pinchot,  Mrs.  Amos,  1021  Park  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Pinchot,  Gifford,  1615  R.I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Piper, John  E., LL.B., 10  Herondale Avenue,  Wandsworth

Common,  London,  S.W.
Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras

Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  48  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Plowden,  Mrs.,  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.
Plumer-Willson,  Mrs.  W.,  20  Laurence  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
Pogson  Smith,  Mrs.  E.,  Bourkes,  Blackball  Rd.,  Oxford.
Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,  S.W.
Pontifex,  Dudley,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Pope,  George  H.,  60  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.
*Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Popoff,  General  James,  Sosnitza,  Gov.  Chernigow,  Russia.
Porter,  Miss  Agatha,  M.D.,  18  Kensington  Park  Road,  Notting

Hill,  London,  W.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,

Hants.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm.,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.,  and  Buckhannon,  W.  Va.,  U.S.A.
*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J. P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex.
*Pring,  C.  H.,  278  Old  Kent  Road,  London,  S.E.

Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hall,  Stocksfield-on-Tyne.

Putnam,  Miss  Irene,  Bennington,  Vt.,  U.S.A.

Pym,  Mrs.  Guy,  35  Cranley  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Pym,  Leslie  Ruthven,  Alnwick,  Northumberland.
Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  331  West  28th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82  Charles  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Rae,  James,  Villa  Laurel,  San  Jacopo,  Livorno,  Italy.

Raggett,  Mrs.,  70  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Drayton  Old  Lodge,  Norwich.


Members  and  Associates.


509


Raikes,  Mrs.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Raj,  Des,  Pasrur,  Dist.  Sialkot,  Punjab,  India.

Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.

Ransom,  Francis,  Ckilterns,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137  Main  Street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Ransom,  H.  B.,  28  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Raper,  R.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
*Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  New  College,  Oxford.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okekampton.

Reade, Herbert  V., 32  Palace  Gardens  Terrace,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Reckett,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

*Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2  Wellington  Terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.;
U.S.A.

Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  Singapore,  S.S.
*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.
Ridley,  The  Viscountess, 10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,
S.W.

Ritchie,  Thomas,  J. P.,  Overstrand  Lodge,  Cromer,  Norfolk.
Ritchie,  Mrs.,  33  Cadogan  Place,  London,  S.W.
Ritter,  Miss,  7  Park  Place,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.

*Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  Room  138,  State  House,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Robbins,  G.  M'L.,  Titusville,  Fla.,  U.S.A.

Robeck,  Miss  Geraldine  de,  St.  David's  House,  Naas,  Ireland.

Roberts,  Mrs.  Hugh,  53  F.O.  Quarters,  Europa,  Gibraltar.
♦Roberts,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.
♦Roberts,  R.  Nevill,  29  Finchley  Road,  London,  N.W.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbor,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.

Robinson,  George  R.,  31  James  Street,  Liverpool.

Robinson,  Nelson  L.,  381  Central  Park  West,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Rodakiewicz,  Dr.  Erla,  Bernbrunngasse  17,  Hietzing,  Vienna,  Austria.


510


Members  and  Associates.


Roe,  Miss  Jessie  T.,  33  Nightingale  Place,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.
Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,

Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.
Rogers, T. Percival, Henleaze Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,

Gloucestershire.
Rolleston,  Mrs.,  Glasshouse,  Shinrone,  King's  Co.,  Ireland.
Rolleston,  T. W., Ardeevin, Christchurch  Road,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.
Rose,  Mrs.  Guy,  Giverny,  par  Vernon,  Eure,  France.
Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5  Hamilton  Place,  London,  W.

Roy,  Gunga  N.,  Deputy  Magistrate,  Barisal,  East  Bengal,  India.
*Riicker,  Sir  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19  Gledhow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Rundle,  Miss  M.  G.,  Varese,  Burghley  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,

S.W.

Russell,  George  M.,  Caixa  304,  Manaos,  Brazil.
Ryan,  Mrs.,  The New  York  Sun, 1 Arundel  Street,  Strand,
London,  W.C.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Clovelly,  Banstead  Road,  Ewell,  Surrey.
Sadgrove,  W.  Arthur,  Clonarel,  Foxley  Lane,  Purley,  Surrey.
St.  Davids,  The  Lady,  3  Richmond  Terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.
St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.
*Salm  unci  Dyck,  H.S.H.  Christine,  Princess  of,  9  Queen's  Gate,

London, S.W., and Schloss  Neu-Cilly, nr. Cilli,  Styria,

Austria.

Samaldas,  Hon.  Lalubai,  99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.

Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.

Sanderson,  W.  R.,  Via  Nomentana,  58,  Rome,  Italy.
*Sandford,  Miss  Alice,  33  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Saunders,  Miss  E.  R.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Saunders,  W.  E.,  Riovista,  Torresdale,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  D.D.,  1867  Crawford  Road,  Cleveland,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  66  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Sayer,  Miss  Ettie,  M.B.,  35  Upper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.
*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  Ringmore  House,  Quarry  Road,  Hastings.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Schmidt,  Julius,  582  Woolwich  Road,  Charlton,  London,  S.E.

Schoeller,  W.  R.,  Ph.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  C.  Simeons  &  Co.,  17  Wilson
Street,  Finsbury,  London,  E.G.


Members  and  Associates.


Sckofield,  S.  Robert,  M.B.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Schofield,  Mrs.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Schreiner,  Miss  Julia,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenkam  House,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.
*Scott,  Capt.  G.  B.,  27th  Punjabis,  Alipore,  Calcutta,  India.
*Scott,  Sydney  C.,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  Tke  Lymes,  Ellesmere,  Salop.
*Scott-Gatty,  Sir  Alfred  S.,  K.C.V.O.,  F.S.A.,  Garter  King  of

Arms,  Wendover  Lodge,  Welwyn,  Herts.
Scott-Moncrieff,  W.  G.,  J. P.,  Edgemoor,  Lanark,  Scotland.
Scripps,  Thomas  Cecil,  13  Woronzow  Road,  London,  N.W.
Searle,  Rev.  George  M.,  St.  Paul's  Church,  415  West  59th  Street,

New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  120  E.  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Senathi  Raja,  E.  S.  W.,  LL.B.,  The  Grange,  Trivandrum,  India.
Seymour,  Admiral  of  the  Fleet  Sir  E.  H.,"o.M.,  G.C.B.,  G.C.V.O.,

Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  St.  James's  Park,  London,  S.W.
Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Tallahassee,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shaddick,  W.  Harris,  Lyndhurst,  99  Montague  Road,  Leytonstone,

London,  N.E.

Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  21  Nottingham  Place,  London,  W.
Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  J.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Rectory,  Adisham,
Kent.

Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  N.,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Sheets,  J.  C.  (c/o  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill),  Station

K.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Sheldon,  A.  F.,  Rockefeller,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shirley,  Ralph,  164  Aldersgate  Street,  London,  E.C.
*Shove, Miss  E.,  M.B., 30  York Street Chambers,  Bryanston
Square,  London,  W.
Shuttleworth,  Miss  C.  J.,  10  Cottesmore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  LL.D.,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.W.
*Siclgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  1  Grange  Terrace,  Cambridge.

Sidgwick,  Miss  Rose,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.


512


Members  and  Associates.


Siegel,  Louis.

Siegel,  Mrs.  Henry,  51  Avenue  Malakoff,  Paris,  France.
Silver,  Mrs.,  24  Victoria  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Simpson,  Commander  H.  V.,  R.N.,  Kylintra,  Portrude  Park,
Weybridge,  Surrey.
Singh,  Amar,  Hoskiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Sivudu,  R.  Venkata,  The  College,  Gunt.ur,  Madras  Presidency,
India.

Skeffington,  J.  B.,  LL.D.,  21  Crumlin  Road,  Belfast.

Skipwith,  Mrs.,  1  Culford  Gardens,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.

Skipwith,  Mrs.,  13  Montagu  Square,  London,  W.

Sloggett, Surgeon-General  A. T., C.M.G., C.B.,  P.M.O.  6th

Division,  Poona,  India.
Small,  Mrs.  William,  9l  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  Rev.  Ernest  F.,  153  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.
Smith,  Ernest  S.,  Les  Algues,  Saint-Jean-de-Luz,  France.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  Laboratory  Lodge,  Roman  Crescent,  Southwick,

Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Lowestoft.
*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.
Smith,  Sir  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  121  St.  James's  Court,  Bucking-
ham Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Smith,  Rev.  Richard,  The  Manse,  Melrose  Gardens,  West  Ken-
sington Park,  London,  W.
Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.
*Smith,  Mrs.  W.  Easton,  26  N.  Main  Street,  Waterbury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Smith,  Wm.  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  William  P.,  Crestline,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Snape,  Mrs.,  St.  Bees,  Beachy  Head  Road,  Eastbourne.
*Snow,  Chester  A.,  710  8th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Snyder,  Irving  T.,  Willow  Grange,  Littleton,  Colorado,  U.S.A.

Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrewsbury.
*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Major  C.  G.,  R.A.M.C.,  Dudley  Cottage,  Fulford,  York.

Spens,  William,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Spicer,  Mrs.  W.  T.  Holmes,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  Bros.  &  Co.,  8
Bishopsgate  Street,  London,  E.C.


Members  and  Associates.


513


Spielmann,  Miss  E.  M.,  38  Gloucester  Square,  London,  W.
*Sproston,  S.,  Junr.,  Elm  House,  Nantwich,  Cheshire.
Sproston, W. Manning, Ardingly  College, Hayward's  Heath,
Sussex.

Stansfeld, Rex, 17 Spencer Road, North Side,  Wandsworth

Common,  London,  S.W.
Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  Clifton  Springs,  N.Y.,

U.S.A.

Stapleton,  Mrs.,  Rembrandt  Hotel,  S.  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Stapley,  Sir  Richard,  33  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.
Statkowski,  Miss  Tamara.

Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  44  Westbourne  Park  Villas,  London,  W.
*Steel,  Mrs.,  Talgarth  Hall,  Machynlleth,  Montgomeryshire.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stephenson,  Guy,  41  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stephenson,  H.  H.,  16  Brinkley  Road,  Worcester  Park,  Surrey.
Stevenson,  Mrs.,  Wingrove,  Moorend  Park  Road,  Cheltenham.
Stewart, Miss  M. A.,  Artillery  Mansions, 75  Victoria  Street,

London,  S.W.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Herbert  L.,  Ill  University  Street,  Belfast.
Stewart,  J.,  P.O.  Dept.,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Stocker, Miss M. I., The Croft, Woodridings, Hatch  End,
Middlesex.

Stoehr,  Miss,  Downend,  Hindhead,  Surrey.

Stokes,  Dr.  Henry  N.,  1443  Q.  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

*Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118  East  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
Strachey, Charles, Colonial Office, Downing Street,  London,
S.W.

Strachey,  J.  B.,  67  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,

Strand,  London,  W.C.
Strain,  Miss  E.  H.,  Cassillis  House,  Maybole,  Ayrshire.
Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Strauss,  E.  A.,  M.P.,  49  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Street,  Mrs.  W.  P.  R.,  10  Mackenzie  Avenue,  Rosedale,  Toronto,

Canada.


514


Members  and  Associates.


Strong,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  67  Avoca  Street,  S.Y.,  Melbourne,
Australia.

*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Stuart,  A.  I.,  24. Marlborough  Rd.,  Southport.

Stuart,  Mrs.,  Gloucester  House,  Lansdown,  Cheltenham.

Stuart-Prince,  Major  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay,  Groom  &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

*Sturdy,  Edward  T.,  6  St.  John's  Wood  Park,  London,  N.W.
Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

*Suffern,  Ernest  S.,  165  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Sulman,  H.  L.,  31  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,  N.W.
Sutton,  Lady,  49  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  W.
Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.

Swainson,  Miss  M.,  7e  Oxford  &  Cambridge  Mansions,  London,  W.
*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  153  Mill  Creek  Rd.,  Ardmore,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Sweetlancl,  Mrs.  Gifford,  San  Francisco,  San  Lorenzo,  Alameda
County,  Calif.,  U.S.A.

Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  B.  M.  J.  de,  Consulate  for  Austria-
Hungary,  Roustschuk,  Bulgaria.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Lismullen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,
Surrey.

Tanner,  Ernest,  Hotel  Curzon,  Brighton.

Taplin,  A.  Betts,  L.R.C.P.,  Norwood,  Ivanhoe  Road,  Sefton  Park,
Liverpool.

Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  7e  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,
London,  W.

*Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  Mount  Villas,  York.
Tebb,  Mrs. ,  Rede  Hall,  nr.  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Temple,  Reginald  W.

Theophilus,  Mrs.,  165  Westbourne  Grove,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Thomas,  Rev.  CD.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.
Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.
Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Thomas,  Dr.  George  P.,  2113  North  7th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Thomas,  J.  W.,  Overdale,  Shortlands,  Kent.

*Thomas,  Seymour  P.,  211  Cliveden  Avenue,  Germantown,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Thompson,  Edwin,  25  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.


Members  and  Associates.


515


Thompson,  Matthew  William,  Salters  Hall,  Sudbury,  Suffolk.
Thompson,  Mrs.  Rosalie,  90  Newman  Street,  London,  W.
*Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow.
Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  LL.D.,  The  Bungalow,  St.  Helen's  Down,
Hastings.

Thornhill,  Miss  H.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Thornley,  Rev.  Alfred,  Hughenden,  Coppice  Road,  Nottingham.
Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.
Thornton,  W.  M.,  D.Sc,  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-
on-Tyne.

Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,
Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.

Townesend,  Mrs.,  Trevine,  Boley  Hill,  Rochester,  Kent.

Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid  de,  Queensberry  House,  Richmond.
*Trotter,  Mrs.,  Standerwick  Court,  Frome,  Somersetshire.

Truell,  Robert  Holt  Stuart,  West  Mount,  Dover  College,  Dover.

Tschistiakoff,  P.  A.,  Arbate  (maison  Tolstoy),  Moscow,  Russia.

Tucker,  James  W.,  Cooperstown,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.,
*Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88  Park  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,
London,  W.

Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Turner,  Herbert  B.,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.

Turner,  Sidney,  20  Minster  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.

Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  The  Oaks,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.

Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  The  Lodge,  Alderminster,  Stratford-on-Avon.

Unwin,  Mrs.,  Homestead,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.

Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Van  Meter,  Solomon  L.,  Hutchison,  Kentucky,  U.S.A.
*Van  Norden,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  East  Auburn,  Placer
Co.,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam,
Holland.

*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.
*Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.

Villamarina,  Her  Excellency  the  Marchesa  di,  Palazzo  Regina
Margherita,  Rome.

Vincent,  W.  James,  M.B.,  Wadsley  Asylum,  Sheffield.


516


Members  and  Associates.


Von  der  Heydt,  Baron,  48  Green  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.
Wakefield,  Mrs.,  70  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Wakeley,  Mrs.  Charles,  6218  Ingleside  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,
U.S.A.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Mrs.,  28  St.  Andrew's  Mansions,  Dorset  Street,  London,  W.
*Walker,  P.  L.  E.,  7th  Hussars,  Hounslow,  Middlesex.
*Walker-Munro,  L.,  R.N.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Walton,  J.  P.,  Hill  House,  Halesworth,  Suffolk.

Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  Brazil.
*Ward,  The  Count,  G.C.V.V.,  54  and  55  London  Wall,  London,
B.C.

Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Aughnacloy,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.

Warndorfer,  A.,  Elisabetstrasse  23,  Baden,  nr.  Vienna.

Warner,  Miss  E.,  42  Albany  Villas,  Hove,  Sussex.

Warren,  Mrs.  Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Warren,  R.  N.,  45  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.
*Warwick,  Countess  of,  Warwick  Castle,  Warwick.

Wastell,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Waterlow,  Sydney,  Hillyfields,  Rye,  Sussex.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  39  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.

Weaver,  Miss  Sarah,  15  Blagden  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Webber,  Mrs.  Felix,  The  Croft,  Shillingstone,  Dorset.
*  Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Welch,  Thomas  G.,  The  Oaks,  Blakebrook,  Kidderminster.
*Wells,  E.  P.,  The  Limes,  94 Larkhall Rise,  Clapham,  London,
S.W.

West,  Arthur  B.,  100  Franklin  Street,  Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Westcott,  W.  Wynn,  M.B.,  J. P.,  396  Camden  Road,  London,  N.
Western,  F.  J.,  c/o  The  Librarian,  Forman  Christian  College,
Lahore,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
Westropp,  A.  S.  A.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.

James's  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  7  St.  Stephen's  Crescent,  Bayswater,
London,  W.


Members  and  Associates.


517


Wheeler,  Mrs.  Mary  K.,  1133  Grand  View  Avenue,  Boulder,  Colo.,
U.S.A.

*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Upwater  Lodge,  Cambridge.
Whinyates,  Miss  Amy  O.,  15  Sloane  Gardens,  Sloane  Square,
London,  S.W.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  10  East  66th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Whishaw,  R.  W.,  North  West  House,  Duntrune  Terrace,  Broughty
Ferry,  N.B.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malntano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
*White,  F.  R.  M.,  R.N.,  Copyhold,  Fernhurst,  Sussex.

White,  Dr.  Gordon,  610*  Church  St.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.
*Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.

Whitehead,  Rev.  John,  57  Dana  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Whiting, J. Markby, Ashford House, Wimbledon  Common,
London,  S.W.

Whitmore,  Mrs.,  28  Milner  St.,  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  287  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Whittemore,  Mrs.  Julia  S.,  Naugatuck,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Wiener,  Captain  Clarence,  Ewell  Castle,  Surrey.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.
*Wigg,  E.  Neale,  The  Moss,  Clendon  Road,  Toorak,  Melbourne,
Australia.

Wight,  Edward,  M.R.C.S.,  9  Regency  Square,  Brighton.
Wilkins,  Mrs.,  8  Rostrevor  Terrace,  Rathgar,  nr.  Dublin.
*Wilkins,  C.  F.,  Lower  Division,  Eastern  Jumna  Canal,  Delhi,
India.

Willett,  Mrs.,  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  Seaford,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  52  King  William  Street,  London,  E.C.
*Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  Hill,  London,  W.
Williams,  J.  E.,  Plumb  Opera  House,  Streator,  111.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lome  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Croft,  Didsbury,  Manchester.
Willis,  Mrs.,  c/o  Mrs.  Barbar,  New  Street,  Killarney,  Co.  Kerry,
Ireland.

Willis,  Grant  B.,  434  North  M'Kinley  Avenue,  Canton,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Willock,  Mrs.  C.  J.,  16  Warwick  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Rev.  Alexander,  The  Manse,  Ythanwells,  Insch,  Aberdeen-
shire.

Wilson,  Mrs.  Arthur,  150  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Charles  J.,  17  Pembroke  Park,  Dublin,  Ireland.


518


Members  and  Associates


Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  c/o  Major  C.  S.  Wilson,  R.E.,  Kasr  el
Nil,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Wilson,  Miss  E.  M.,  Hotel  Beau  Sejour,  Chateau  D'Oex,  Switzer-
land.

Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  Cornholme,  Garston,  Liverpool.

Wilson,  Miss  M.  A.,  Hotel  Beau  Sejour,  Chateau  D'Oex,  Switzer-
land.

Wingate,  D.  C.
*Wingfield,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  44  Welbeck  Street,  London,  W.

Winslow,  L.  Forbes,  M.B.,  LL.D.,  57  Devonshire  Street,  Portland
Place,  London,  W.

Winslow,  Mrs.  Forbes,  57  Devonshire  Street,  Portland  Place,
London,  W.

Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
*Wolf,  Francisco  Eugene  de,  c/o  Banque  de  Montreux,  Montreux,
Switzerland.

*Wood,  R.  H.,  c/o  Messx-s.  Smith,  Wood  &  Co.,  3  and  4  Lime  Street

Square,  London,  E.C.
Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near

Tewkesbury,  Gloucestershire.
*Woods,  Miss  Alice,  3  North  Mansions,  Burton  Road,  Kilburn,

London,  N.W.

Woods,  Mrs.,  The  Master's  House,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
*Wooldridge,  IT.  B.,  168  Marylebone  Road,  London,  N.W.
Woollett,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Charles,  4  The  Ridges,  Farnboro',
Hants.

Woolley, V. J., 48  Lissenden Mansions, Lissenden  Gardens,
London,  N.W.
*Worsfolcl,  Mrs.  Basil,  Romden  Place,  Smarden,  Kent.
Wrangell,  Baron  Cyrille,  9  Schpalernaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Wrchovszky,  Wilhelm,  Kronprinz  Rudolf  Str.  12,  Vienna.
Wriford,  Mrs.,  21  Bullingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Wyke,  Mrs.  Wilberforce,  Arundel  House,  Beaumont,  Jersey,  C.I.
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Wyndham-Quin,  The  Lady  Emily,  12  William  Street,  Lowndes

Square,  London,  S.W.
Yandell,  Miss  Maud,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,

London,  S.W.
Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.


Members  and  Associates.


519


Young,  G.  P.,  Burnside  Cottage,  Colston,  Bisbopbriggs,  Glasgow.
*Young,  Sir  William  L.,  Bart.,  35  Lower  Seymour  Street,  Portman
Square,  London,  W.
Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Yssel  de  Scbepper,  Mr.  Justice,  Eendracbtstraat  27b,  Rotterdam.
Zagury,  Leon,  12  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXV.

(PARTS  LXIL— LXIV.  AND  APPENDIX).
191  I  .


A.

A.,  Miss,  Case  of,  reference  to  73
Abt  Yogler. See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.

Aeneid  (Book  I.)  Incidents  -  -  160,  234,  235

„ (Book  VI.)  Cross-Correspondence

121-23,  131-146,  151-58,  161-163,  165,  178-190,  191-193,  200
See  also  Lethe  and  Lethe-Dorr  Incident.
Aeschylus,  Prometheus  Vinctus,  Script  references  to - -  258,  259

Ajax  and  Goethe  Incident  - -  -  166-169

„ Prayer  of  -  -  166

All  Souls  College  Song,  Script  reference  to  -  -  251


Alternations  of  Personality,  Long-continued  Cases. (See  "  Beauchamp,

the  Misses,"  X.,  Felida,  and  Sanders,  the  Rev.  C.  B.
American  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino,  reference  to


57,  59,  61,  69,  413

Anaxagoras  (Lethe  Incident) -  ...  149,192,205

Anchises  (Sibyl  Incident)  -  -  121,  131-146,  152-158,  178,  180-184,  192
Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiqties,  references  to

419,  420,  434,  439,  442,  445  (foot-notes)
Apports,  Alleged  Phenomena  of  -  415,  416,  420-423,  426

Arabian  Nights. See  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Key,  and  Lethe-Dorr  Episode.
Arithmetical  Prodigies,  references  to  -  -  -  74

Arnold,  Matthew,  Script  references  to  Empedocles  on  Etna - -  242
„  „  „  Requiescat 149,  160,  192,  204,  205


parts  lxil-lxiv.] Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


521


Arrow,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  - 81  (foot-note)

„ as  a  symbol  of  Cross-Correspondence  - 193-6,  254,  300

Aksakow,  Alex.  N.,  Animisme  et  Spiritisme,  by,  references  to

415  (foot-note),  418  (foot-note),  421,  422  (foot-note)
„  „ Divulgations,  by  - -  - 434  (foot-note)

Atlantic  Monthly  Case  (Massachusetts  Disturbances)  -  -  395

Automatic  Writing  (Miscellaneous) -  -  73,  461-462,  470,  471

See  also  the  Scripts  of  "Mrs.  Forbes,"  "Mrs.  Holland,"  The
Mac  Script,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  Mrs.  Willett,  and  the
Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.
duTos  ovpavus  aKUfUov  Incident,  reference  to  -  305

Ave  Roma  Immortalis,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  54


B.

Baggally,  W.  W.,  Note  on  the  Report  of  Further  Sittings  with

Eusapia  Palladino,  by  the  Hon.  E.  Feilding  and  W.  Marriott  -  69
Bailey,  C,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  refereDces  to  413,  423,  426

Balfour,  The  Et.  Hon.  G.  W.,  On  Professor  Pigou's  Criticism  of  Cross-
Correspondences  -  -  - 38,  219,  220
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.E.S.,  on  Poltergeists,  Old  and  New  - -  377
n ,. „ Close  connection  with  Telekinetic

Phenomena  with  Mediums  410-411
,,  „  General  Conclusions -  410-412

„  „  Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Dowsing,

by,  reference  to  - - - - -  365

Bayfield,  The  Rev.  M.  A.—

On  Cross-Correspondences -  -  77-89,  291,  475-76

„ „  Imaginary  Cross-Correspondence,  as  bearing  on -  84-88
„  Subliminal  Self  and -  -  83,  84,  291,  475-76

„ Reviews  :  Esprits  et  Mediums,  by  Professor  Th.  Flournoy -  468
The  Newer  Spiritualism,  by  Frank  Podmore -  70
"  Bealings  Bells "  Case,  reference  to - -  - 395,  396

"  Beauchamp,  The  Misses,"  Case  of,  reference  to -  - 72,  471

"Bees  and  Lilies"  Incident -  - 128,  129,  137,  163,  165,  247,  248

Benson,  A.  O,  Script  references  to  The  Phoenix  - -  - 263,  268

„  „  „  „ Note  on,  by - 268  (foot-note)

Bergson,  Professor  H.,  Psychology  of,  references  to -  - 14,  31,  34

Birds  and  Turkeys,  Cross-Correspondence -  222,  228,  250,  285

Blake,  W.,  Script  references  to  So?igs  of  Innocence -  - -  273

Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  references  to  341,  342,  345,  346,  351
Brackett,  Materialised  Apparitions,  by,  reference  to  -  -  418  (foot-note)
Bramwell,  Dr.  Milne,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of,  reference  to  -  73,  347
Bristow,  John,  Report  on  the  Swanland  Disturbances,  reference  to -  408


522


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Brooke,  Stopford,  History  of  Early  English  Literature,  reference  to

268  (foot-note)

Browning  R. See  Hope  and  Star  Cross-Correspondence.

„  Aristophanes' Apology and Euripides  Cross-Corre-

spondence, reference  to  -  - 280,  281

,,  Script  references  to  Pauline  -  257

Pippa  Passes  -  - - 242,  243

Rabbi  ben  Ezra -  306-319
,,  ,, possible connection between and  Omar

Khayyam -  - -  318-319

„  „ Source of the "Cup"  Correspondence,

Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  on  - - -  304-319
„  Tocca  ta  of  Galuppi -  - 229,  234

Buscarlet,  Mme.,  Case  of -  -  472

C.

C.  Miss,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  -  -  -  455

Carancini,  F.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  reference  to -  -  413

Carmichael,  Alexander,  Carmina  Gadelica,  reference  to

266  (foot-note),  267  (foot-note)

Carrick,  Mary. See  the  Pealing  Bells  Case.

Carrington,  Hereward,  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  by,

reference  to  -  - - - 425  (foot-note)

Celestial  Halcyon  Days,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  305  (foot-note)
Ceyx,  Story  of  (Lethe  Incident),  references  to  80,  81  (foot-note),  121, 177, 179
Charades,  possible  Cross-Correspondence -  -  301

Charon  and  Styx;  Cross-Correspondence -  223,  227,  228,  273,  274

Charonic  Staircase. See  Charon  and  Styx  Cross-Correspondence.
Church,  Professor  Alfred,  Stories  from  Virgil,  by,  reference  to

135,  136,  143,  172,  190,  191-192
dough,  A.  H.,  Script  reference  to  Poem  of  - -  302

Cobbe,  Frances  Power,  The  Peak  of  Darien  by,  references  to

141  (foot-note),  146,  147

Coleridge,  S.  T.,  Script  reference  to  KvHa  Khan - -  -  336

Comics,  Cross-Correspondence -  -  220,  223,  253,  272,  285

Confirmation,  Cross-Correspondence - - -  223,  226,  261

Conjurors  and  the  Physical  Phenomena  of  Mediums,  Count  Perovsky-

Petrovo-Solovovo  on -  -  -  425-28

Controls,  Hypnotic. See  "  Poynings,  Blanche."

Convolvulus  and  Shell,  Cross -Correspondence  222,  226,  229,  230

Cook,  Miss  Florence,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  reference  to

415,  421  (foot-note),  423,  430
Corrales,  Ofelia,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  -  413
Cours  de  Litterature  Celtique,  reference  to -  - 267  (foot-note)

Crookes,  Sir  William,  Researches  of - 415,  418  (footnote),  420,  423,  442


lxii.-LXIV.]  Index  to  Vol,  XXV  523

Cross-Correspondence,  Experiments  in

Balfour,  Hon.  G.  W.,  on  -  38
Bayfield,  Eev.  M.  A.,  on  - - 77-89,  291,  475,  476
,,  Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  on -  -  79,  82,  218

,,  Lang,  A.,  on -  -  373-376

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  38,  113,  293

Pigon,  Prof.  A.  C,  on  - 38,  291

Podmore,  F.,  on -  - 77-89,  291

„  Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  on  -  176,  304,  320

See  also  Dorr,  G.  B.,  and  Piddington,  J.  G.  (Series  of  1908).
Cross-Correspondence,  Chance  Coincidence  and  -  221,  374,  375

,,  Chronological  Tables  of

191,  192,  203,  222-3,  228,  329,  330
„  Imaginary,  by  the  Eev.  M.  A.  Bayfield - -  84-88

,,  Indications  of  the  Presence  of  a  Third  Intelli-

gence, question  of 50-54,  77-82,  126-128,  131  (foot-
note), 135,  141,  151-164,  166-169,  193-217,  250,  283,
293-98,  313-319,  320-337,  448
„  Identity  of  the  Intelligence,  question  of 77-89,  132

(foot-note),  150,  151,  175,  197-198,214-217,219,  235-
236,  250,  294,  297,  298,  305,  324  (foot-note),  374,  448
,,  Knowledge  of  the  Subject-matter  on  the  part

of  Automatists  or  Sitters,  question  of 52-54,  79,
81,  132,  135,  142-43,  146,  164-169,  172-175,  176-193,
195, 196  (foot-note),  198,  200,  202  (foot-note),  204,  205,
209-217,  228,  267,  273-274,  280-81,  290,  305,  320-37
„  Phrases  and  Symbols  indicating  217,  254,  262,  298,  300

Subliminal  Self  and 83,  88,  172,  173,  291-92,  475-76
,,  Telepathy,  Incidents  suggestive  of 77-89,  163,  164,

219,  247,  248,  252,  283,  290-91,  293,  305
See  also  the  Scripts  of  "Mrs.  Forbes,"  "  Mrs.  Holland,"  Mrs.  and  Miss
Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Willett,  the  Mac  Script,  and  the  Trance  Pheno-
mena of  Mrs.  Piper.
Cup,  Cross-Correspondence  - -  105,  304

„ Note  on,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall -  -  304

„  Rabbi  ben  Ezra  considered  as  the  source  of  313-319
Cyclops,  Centaurs,  etc.,  allusions  to  277,  280,  281

Cyclops  and  Hercules,  Cross-Correspondence

223,  227,  228,  272  (foot-note),  279

I).

Daffodils,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -  -  305

Dale  Tower  (Georgia)  Disturbances  - -  -  404

Dante's  Lethe,  references  to ------ -  214-216

Dariex,  M.,  Experiments  in  Physical  Phenomena,  reference  to - 441,  442


524


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[PARTS


Davenport,  R.  B.,  Death-blow  to  Spiritualism,  reference  to  -  417  (foot-note)
Davey,  S.  J.,  Experiments  in  Slate-Writing,  references  to  106,  426,  440,  441
Davies,  Emma. See  The  Wem  Disturbances.

Davis,  W.  S.,  Report  on  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino,  reference  to

57,  59,  61


Dawn. See  "The  One-Horse  Dawn"  Experiment.

Derrygonnelly  Disturbances,  the  ...  -  390

Devereux,  Owen,  Evidence  as  to  the  Enniscorthy  Disturbances  - -  385
Diamond  Island  Incident ------  -  293

Diana,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  -  105

Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  A  Case  of  Emergence  of  a  Latent  Memory  under

Hypnosis,  by---  ......  455

Didier,  Alexis,  Case  of,  reference  to -  -  76

Divining  Rod. See  Dowsing  Experiments.

Documentary  Evidence,  Contemporary,  Extant  -  115,  116,  472,  473

Donaldson,  Theatre  of  the  Greeks,  reference  to -  - 273,  274

Door  ( =  Dorr)  and  Key  and  Lethe-Dorr  Cross-Correspondence

121-30,  191,  193-204,  219,  222,  226,  229,  234,  239,  250,  285
„ Summary  of  203


Dorr,  G.  B.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  :  series  of  1908  ;  chief  refer-
ences to 80,  84,  95,  104-105,' 116,  120,  121,  150-156,  158-166,  176-217,
218-229,  231-237,  245,  251-53,  258,  260-62,  264,  269,  272,  273,  276,  279,

299-301,  317

See  also  Door  ( =  Dorr)  and  Key  and  Lethe-Dorr,  Cross-Corre-


spondence, and  the  Willett  Script.
Doves. See  Golden  Bough  (Doves  and).

Dowsing,  Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F.,  on,  reference  to -  - -  365

Dreams,  Mental  Activity  during,  Poem  composed  in  - - 268  (foot-note)

See  also  Premonitions  and  Telepathy.
Dublin  University  Magazine,  The  Demons  of  Derrygonnelly,  Prof.  W.  F.

Barrett  on,  in, -----  -  -  390


Dufferin,  Lady,  Script  reference  to  song  by,  The  Bay  of  Dublin 263  (foot-note)


E.

Echo  and  Narcissus,  Cross-Correspondence

160,  222,  226,  228,  231,  232,  244,  245,  253,  271,  285,  286
Eheu  fugaces,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -  -  236

Eglinton,  W.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of -  - 439,  440

Ellis,  Professor  Robinson,  The  Tenth  Declamation  of  (Pseudo)  Quin-

tilian,  by,  Review  of,  by  F.  C.  S.  Schiller - - -  -  361

Elongation  and  Contraction  of  Mediums  alleged  (D.  D.  Home)  -  75,  422
Enniseortliy  Disturbances,  the - -  -  380

Euripides,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to - -  52,  280,  281

Eurydice. See  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.


LXII.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


525


Exile  and  Moore,  Cross-Correspondence

149,  155,  156,  186,  209,  210,  212,  223,  262,  264,  265,  269-271,  286


F.

Fat,  Mrs.  Eva,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  reference  to  -  418  (foot-note)
Fechner,  Panpsychic  View  of  the  Universe,  reference  to  -  -  -  27
Feilding,  the  Hon.  Everard,  and  W.  Marriott,  Report  on  a  Further

Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palla-

dino  at  Naples  57

Baggally,  W.  W.,  Note  on - - -  69
„  ,,  Control,  the  Question  of

57,  58,  60-63,  64-67,  69
„  „  Detailed  Account  of  the  Table-Lifting

Incident -  63,  64,  65-67

„  „  Fraud,  Question  of  58,  59,  61

,,  „  Negative  Conclusions,  -  58,  59

„  ,,  Petrovo-Solovovo, Count  Perovsky,

Statement  and  Note  by  59,  64

„  ,,  Countess  Solovovo,  Note  by - -  65

„  „  „ Comment  on,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  67

„  „  Previous  Series  of  Sittings,  reference  to

373,  420,  427,  445,  446

Fire  Test,  Alleged  Phenomena  of  ...  75;  422,  442

Firth,  J.  P>.,  The  Minstrelsy  of  Isis,  edited  by,  reference  to  -  -  251

FitzGerald,  E.,  Translation  of  Omar  Khayyam,  Script  reference  to -  262
„  Cup,  Cross-Correspondence  and -  - 306,  313-319

See  also  Door  {  =  Dorr)  and  Key,  Cross-Correspondence.
Flavicomata  Incident  -  .... 149,  160-163,  192

Flournoy,  Professor  Th.,  Esprits  et  Mediums  by,  Review  by  the  Rev.

M.  A.  Bayfield -  - -  - - -  468

Forbes  (Talbot)  Control ....  ... 199,  201

"  Forbes,  Mrs.,"  Door  and  Key,  Cross-Correspondence

191,  193,  199-204,  222,  250
Fox-Jencken,  Mrs.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  415  (foot-note),  416,  417,  419
Fox-Kane,  Mrs.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of - -  - 416, 417,  419

Freer. See  Goodrich-Freer,  Miss  A.

Freud,  Professor  S.,  Methods  of  Psycho-Analysis,  reference  to -  347-349

G.

G.,  Dr.,  Hypnotise  experiments  of - -  ...  455

Ganymede  Incident -------- 149,  160,  192

Gasparin,  Comte  de,  Researches  of,  reference  to  - ...  441
Gautier, Theophile, The Hugo-  Gautier-Mo  ate  aaeken  Cross-Corre-
spondence, Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  011 320-337

2l


526


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Gilbert,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Portland  (Oregon)  Dis-
turbances 398,  400,  401

Glanvil,  Joseph,  Saducismus  Triumphatus,  reference  to

380,  403  (foot-note),  409,  410
Goethe,  Script  references  to  Mignon's  Song  ------  279

Goethe  and  Ajax  Incident  - -  166-169

Golden  Bough,  Doves  and,  Incident

123,  133,  136-140,  145,  146,  162,  179,  180,  184-187,  191
Goodrich-Freer,  Miss  A.,  Crystal  Gazing  by,  reference  to  -  -  -  372
Gray's  Bard,  Script  references  to  335  (foot-note)

Gregory,  Lady,  A  Book  of  Saints  and  Wonders,  reference  to  267  (foot-note)
Gurney-Control,  the,  through  "  Mrs.  Forbes " - -  - 199,  201

Mrs.  Verrall -  -  109

Mrs.  Willett - - 116,  128,  129,  165
Guzik,  Jan,  Alleged  Medhuiiship  of - -  421,  435,  436


H.

Haggi  Babba. See  Door  {  =  Dorr)  and  Lethe-Dorr  Cross-Correspondence.
Haigh,  Attic  Theatre,  reference  to - -  ... 273,  274

Hall,  Dr.  Stanley,  Studies  in  Spiritism,  by  Dr.  A.  Tanner,  with  an
Introduction  by —

„ Beview  of,  by  A.  Lang  90

„  „  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick ------  102

Hallucination,  Collective

,,  An  Adventure  (Petit  Trianon)  considered  from  the

point  of  view  of 353-360

,,  and  Suggestion  as  an  explanation  of  the  Telekinetic

Phenomena  of  Eusapia  Palladino

58,  60,  61,  63,  67-69,  74-75,  444-446
,,  „ Miss  Alice  Johnson  on - - - -  67

Hallucinations,  Census  of,  references  to - -  - - 371,  372

Hanna,  Bev.  T.  C,  A  Case  of  Secondary  Personality,  reference  to -  344
Hegel,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to -------  35

Heine,  Lorelei,  Script  reference  to  ...  255

Henley,  W.  E.,  Echoes,  Script  references  to  - - - - - -  233

Hercules  Furens,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -  -  280-281

Hercules  (and  Cyclops),  Cross-Correspondence  -  -  223,  227,  279-282
Hibbert  Journal,  Articles  on  Psychical  Besearch  in,  references  to  51,  52

Hodgson,  Control,  Mrs.  Piper's 77,  89,  91-101,  103,  243,  298-299,  309,  310r

312,  318,  331

„  Dramatic  Character  of - -  - - 77,  299

"  Holland,  Mrs.,"  The  Automatic  Script  of—

„  Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Third  Beport  on  218-303

,,  „ '  Appendices  - -  ...  293-303


LXII.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


527


"Holland,  Mrs.,"  Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  On  chance-coincidence,  question  of  221
„ Classical  Allusions  in  her  Script 228,  248,  267
,,  ,, Diamond  Island  Incident  -  293

„  Cross-Correspondences,  L\...f  references,  Chrono-

logical Lists  of  - -  191,192,222,223,228
„ (with  "  Mrs.  Forbes :') - -  191,193,197-204
,,  ,, ( ,, the  Mac  Script)

191,  193,  197-204,  207,  234-239,  250
„ ( „ Mrs.  Piper) 52-54,  206,  207,  222,  223,  228,  231-
236,  250-252,  253-282,  285,  286,  304,  307-318
„ ( „ Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall)  -  52-54,191,193,197-
204,  206-209,  218-221,  222,  223,  229,  234,  239,
250,  253,  256,  259,  261,  263,  264,  269,  273,  279,

285,  286,  304-307

„ ( „ Mrs.  Willett) 191-193,  197-204,  206-209,  222

223,  231-234,  250,  264-269
„  Cup,  Cross-Correspondence,  Note  on,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.

Verrall  - - - - - - - -  304

,,  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Key,  Cross-Correspondence

191,  193,  197-204

Holmes,  Jerome,  Evidence  as  to  the  Portland  (Oregon)  Disturbances  -  401
Home,  D.  D.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  references  to

5,  74,  75,  415,  420,  422,  428,  430,  442

Homer,  Script  references  to

148-149,  153-158,  166,  188-190,  192,  210,  238  (foot-note)


Hope,  Star,  and  Browning,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -  77,  78,  311
Horace  Ode  Question,  references  to

136  (foot-note),  148-162,  179,  181,  185-190,  191
„  „  „ in  Willett  Script  148-162,185-190,191

Housrnan,  A.  E.,  A  Shropshire  Lad,  Script  reference  to  263
Hughes,  F.  S.,  Report  on  the  Weni  Disturbances,  reference  to - -  402
Hugo,  Victor,  Poem  of,  Cross-Correspondence  of  255,  320

„ A  correction  and  an  addition  to,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall -  320
„ Gautier  and  Montenaeken,  connection  with  - - - 321,  337
„ Chronological  Table --------  329

Huxley,  Professor  T.  H,  Case  recorded  by  -  73
Hyacinthus  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to  - - - - - -  160

Hypnotism,  Phenomena  of

,, Consciousness  during -  - -  456-457

„ Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis,  the  -  ...  338-352

,.  „ Amnesia  -  - - 340-342,  344

„  „ Memory,  Revivals  of  344,  348

„  „ Reserve  Energy,  Theory  of -  349-352

„  „ Suggestion  and ----- S39,  345

„  „ Therapeutic  Aspects  of - - - -  338-352


528


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


•>

>!


Hypnotism,  Memory,  Revivals  of 348,  455-467

„ Personality  in  the  Light  of,  Hypnotic  Controls

72,  73,  458,  463,  464

„  „  „ Dramatic  Character  of  463-464

Therapeutic  Aspects  of  348

See  also  Hypnoidal  State  above.
,, Time-Reactions  in  Hypnosis ------  73

I.

Identity. See  Cross-Correspondence, and the Gurney,  Hodgson,

Myers,  and  Sidgwick  Controls.
Imaginary  Cross-Correspondences,  Construction  of  84-88
In  Valle  Reducta,  Script  references  to - - 123,  136,  137,  191,  193
Iris  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to - - - - - 81  (foot-note)

,J.

Jambs,  Professor  William  (and  Frank  Podmore) — Commemorative

Address  on,  by  H.  Arthur  Smith -  - -  1

„ In  Memory  of,  by  W.  M'Dougall  11

,, As  Philosopher,  by  Professor  J.  H.  Muirhead  30
,, Piper,  Mrs.,  Investigation  into  the  Phenomena  of,  by  - -  16,  20
„ Work  in  Psychical  Research  - -  - - - 12,  15-29

Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  Les  Nivroses  et  les  Ide'es  Fixes,  reference  to - -  372
Johnson,  Miss  Alice —

Comments  on  the  Countess  Solovovo's  Note  on  a  Seance  with

Eusapia  Palladino -------  67

,, Hallucination  and  Illusion  as  an  explanation  of  supposed

Telekinetic  Phenomena -------  67-69

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to  313

„ Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script

Appendices -------  293-303

Introduction - - - -  - - -  218

„ Chance  Coincidence,  Question  of  - - - - -  221

„ Classical  Allusions  in  the  Script  -----  226

„ Cross-Correspondences  -  229-282

List  of -  222,  223,  228

„ Principle  of  Selection  in  the  282

„ Telepathy,  possible,  from  Investigators 219,  221,  224,  225
„ Third  Intelligence  and - ...  283-293
„ Verrall,  Mrs.,  Subliminal  Self  of,  and  Cross-Corre-
spondence 291,  292

„  The  Willett  Script,  on  115,  221,  240,  244-246,  248,  266,270,286,290,301
Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  references  to

343  (foot-note),  346  (foot-note),  348  (foot-note)
Journal  of  the  American  S.  P. R.,  Investigation  of  the  Portland  (Oregon)

Disturbances 398-402


LXII.-LXIV  ]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


529


K.

Keats,  Script  references  to

Epitaph  of,  Writ  in  Water - - -  -150,156,192,212,213

Ode  on  Melancholy 130,  241,  282

„ Ode  to  a  Nightingale 129  (foot-note),  148,  156,  158,  160,  163,  192,

204-209

,, Sonnet  on  first  looking  into  Chap-man's  Homer

124,  141,  142,  143,  146,  147,  191,  336,  337

Kellar,  H.,  Sitting  with  Eglinton  439

Kelvin,  Lord,  Scientific  Researches  of,  references  to  -  -  -  452,  453
Key  (and  Door),  Cross-Correspondence. See  Door.


L.

Lamont,  Miss,  and  Miss  Morison,  An  Adventure  by,  Review  of  - -  353
Lang,  Andrew,  on  Cross-Correspondences  -----  373-76
„ Open  Letter  to  Dr.  Stanley  Hall,  by -----  90

„  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  on  102

„ on  Mrs.  Piper 90-101,  102

„ on  Poltergeist  Phenomena ----- 370,  371,  380

„ Presidential  Address,  1911  364

„  Psychical  Experiences  of  Men  of  Genius  368-369

„  The  "Work  of  the  Society  and  its

Critics 364-373

Latin  Message,  Mr.  Piddington's,  references  to  - 77,  78,  82,  260,  261,  286
Laurel  Wreath,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  315
Laus  Deo,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -  -  306

Lethe-Dorr  Episode,  in  the  Willett  Script  -  116,  120-130

„  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Key  Cross-Correspondence

191,  193-204,  219,  222,  226,  229,  250,  285
Lethe  Incident,  the  (Mrs.  Piper),  references  to  80,  81,  116,  120,  121,

122-175,  176-217,  221,  222,  223,  241,  290
„  Cross-Correspondences  in  the  Willett  Script  122-175,

176-217,  221-223,  246,  290
„  See  also  Allusions  in  the  Scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland

and  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall.
„  Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  -  113-175

„  Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  on - -  -  176-217

Lethean  Poppies,  reference  to  - -  163

Levitations,  Alleged,  of  Saints ------- 370,  443

See  also  Telekinesis.
Library,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -----  306

Light  in  the  West,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  -  52,  286,  304

Lilies. See  Bees  and  Lilies,  and  Sesame  and  Lilies.


530


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Literary  and  Classical  Allusions  in  Automatic  Scripts —

,, Evidence  of  Classical  Scholarship  and  Cross-Correspondence

(Willett  Script),  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on - - - -  113

„  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  on  - - - -  176

See  also  the  Scripts  of  "  Mrs.  Holland,"  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,
the  Mac  Script,  and  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver, On the  a  priori  Argument  against  Physical

Phenomena  -------  447

„  „  Diamond  Island  Incident,  on  the - -  294-298

„  „  Evidence  of  Classical  Scholarship  and  Cross-Cor-

respondence in  some  New  Automatic
Writings  113,  244,  245  (foot-note),

270  (foot-note),  337  (foot-note)
„  „  ,, Appendices  -  ... 142,  146

„  „  ,, Introduction- -  113

,,  ,,  „ Concerning  the  Scripts  of  Feb.  4  and

Feb.  10,  1910 - - -  120,  147

„  ,,  „ Lethe-Dorr  Episode - - -  120-130

„  „  „ Lethe  and  Knowledge  of  other  Scrhpts  -  158

„  „  „ Lethe  and  the  Will  to  Live  - -  131-140

,,  ,,  ,, Non-Evidential  Statements  - - -  169

„  „  „ Normal  Explanation,  discussion  of -  172

,,  „  ,, Scholarship,  Evidence  for ...  164

„  ,,  Reply  to  Professor  A.  C.  Pigou's  Criticism  of

Cross-Correspondences -----  38,  44

„  „  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  references  to 106,  107,  331

Longfellow,  Script  references  to

Hymn  to  Night - - - 302

The  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs  (further  details)  - -  298,  299

Luminous  Appearances  in  the  presence  of  Mediums  -  -  -  -  425
Lux  Ube,  Cross-Correspondence  ------- 299,  300

M.

Mac  Script,  The—

„ Cross-Correspondence  (with  Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.

and  Miss  Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Willett) 137,  142,  191,  193-204,
207,  212,  222,  223,  234,  236,  239,  250,  254,  264,  269,  270,  320

„ Door  and  Key,  Cross-Correspondence  - - 191,  193-204,  250

„  The  Hugo-Gautier  and  Montenaelcen  Cross-Correspondence  320-330
Malherbe,  Script  references  to  poem  by  328,  334

Manuscript  Play  Incident,  reference  to  - -  109

Marcellus,  Script  references  to - - - - 136-139,  144,  145,  191,  193
March,  Elwin. See  The  Portland  (Oregon)  Disturbances.
Marriott,  W.,  and  Feilding,  the  Hon.  Everard — Report  on  a  Further

Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  at  Naples  57
Maskelyne,  J.  N.,  Modern  Spiritualism,  reference  to  -  -  417  (foot-note)
Massey,  C.  O,  Report  on  the  Wem  Disturbances,  reference  to - -  402


LXII.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


531


Materialisations,  Alleged  Phenomena  of - -  414,  415,  418-422,  425,  432

(foot-note),  442,  445

Maxwell,  Clerk,  reference  to  the  Writings  of  - - 452,  453

M'Dougall,  W.,  In  Memory  of  William  James,  by - - - -  11

■"Meditation"  Incident  (The  Hugo-Oautier  and  Montenaeken  Cross-
Correspondence)  -------- 323,  324,  331

Medusa's  Head,  Cross-Correspondence  -  ... 223,  228,  276

Meetings  of  the  Society,  General  -  363

Members  and  Associates,  List  of -------  478

Mercury,  Cross-Correspondence - - -  223,  227, 238,  262,  263

Miles,  Miss  Clarissa  (and  Miss  H.  Eamsden)

Thought-Transference  Experiments,  bearing  of,  on  '^Cross-
Correspondence 39-42,  44,  45,  54

Milton,  Script  references  to  Comus - - 220,  223,  229  (foot-note),  253

„  „  Lycidas 300  (foot  note)

Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  The  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis  -  -  338

Mompesson,  Mr. See  The  Drummer  of  Tedworth  Disturbances.
Monck,  "Dr.,"  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  references  to  - - 415  (foot-note)
Montenaeken, Leon  de,  Poem  by,  and  The Victor  Hugo  Cross-
Correspondence,  a  Correction  and  Addition  to,  by  Mrs.

A.  W.  Verrall - - -  320

„  ,,  Gautier,  Connection  with - -  320-334

Moore,  T. See  Exile  and  Moore,  Cross-Correspondence.

Moratief,  M.,  Case  confirmed  by  -------  473

Morison,  Miss,  and  Miss  Lamont,  An  Adventure  by,  Review  of  - -  353
Morozow,  Luba,  Alleged  Mediumship  of ----- ■*  435

Morpheus. See  Lethe  and  the  Lethe-Willett  Incident.

Moses,  Rev.  W.  Stainton,  reference  to  the  Experiences  of 6,  76,  415,  416,

422,  426

Muirhead,  Dr.  Alexander,  Note  on  the  Diamond  Island  Experiments

in  Wireless  Telegraph  -------- 294,  295

Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  William  James  as  Philosopher  30
Murphy,  N.  J.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Enniscorthy  Distm-bances  380,  385,  387
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Script  References  to  and  Reminiscences  of  the  Writings  of

„ Classical  Essays  131,134-36,139,140,153,154,155,

157,  172,  192,  210

,,  ,, Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  155,  210  (foot-note),

250,  265,  270,  307

„  „ Renewal  of  Youth  132,  140

„ .Si!.  Paul  - - - - .  - - - -  140
„  „ Science  and  a  Future  Life  -  178,211

„  ,, Special  Poems,  Immortality -  - 154,  161

,,  ,,  ,,  To  Tennyson  -  133

„  „  „  Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts'  Collected

Works  155,  192,  265,  270,  271


532


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Myers,  F.W.H.,  Theory  of  the  Subliminal  Consciousness,  references  to

25,  70-72,  288,  369,  471,  472
Myers-Control,  the,  Communications  through  "  Mrs.  Holland  "

218-303,  304-307

„  „ Mrs.  Piper  77-83,  88,  89,  116,

117,  120,  121,  127,  130,  132,
152,  154-156,  159-164,  176-
217,  304-319,  323,  331-334
„  „  „ Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  77-89,

136  (foot-note),  155,165,166,
180,  182-217,  219,  222,  223,
229,  234,  239,  250,  253,  255,
256,  258,  259,  261,  263,  264,
269,  272,  273,  279,  304-319,
320-337

Mrs.  Willett  113-175,  176-217,
231,  233,  234,  239,  250,  264,
269

„  Comparison  of,  through  different  Automatists  78-80,  118, 119

„  Dramatic  Character  of  the  Impersonation

174-175,  290-293,  374

N.

Nicolaeff,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  - 438  (foot-uote)

Nightingale,  Cross-Correspondence 124,  129,  156-160,  191,  192,  204-206,  208-

209,  222,  229,  231-233,  244,  245,  271,  285,  286


O.

Ochorowicz,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  Miss  S.  Tomczyk,  reference  to  -  419-420
„  „ „ Eusapia  Palladino,  reference  to  - -  420

Officers  and  Council  for  1911  477

Omar  Khayyam. See  Cup,  Cross-Correspondence,  and  Door  (  =  Dorr)
and  Key,  Cross-Correspondence.

"  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment,  Further  Discussion  of

„ Balfour,  Et.  Hon.  G.  W.,  on  42-56

„ Pigou,  Prof.  A.  C,  on  42-56

„ Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  an  Additional  Note  on  - - - -  109

Orpheus  and  Eurydice. See  Exile,  Cross-Correspondence.

Ovid,  Script  references  to

„ Fasti  -  - - 247,  248,  290

„ Metamorphoses 121,  149,  156,  160,  177-181,  192,  210,  211,  228,  238,

246-250

P.


Pacific  Monthly,  The  Portland  (Oregon)  Disturbances


398


LXII.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


533


Palladino,  Eusapia,  Physical  Phenomena  of 57,  75,  367,  373,  413,  415-417,

420,  427,  434  (foot-note),  445,  446,  474
n  „ Eeport  on  a  further  Series  of  Sittings  at  Naples

with,  by the Hon. E. Feilding and  W.
Marriott -------  57

Notes  on,  by  W.  W.  Baggally - -  -69
„  „  „ Miss  Alice  Johnson -----  67

„  „  „ Count and Countess  Eerovsky-Fetrovo-

Solovovo ------  59;  64

„  „ Podmore,  F.,  on -  -----  75

Passage  of  Matter  through  Matter  (Apports,  Eing-Test,  etc.),  alleged

414,  415,  416,  420,  423,  424,  426,  443  (foot-note),  444
Peak  in  Darien,  Script  references  to  124,  141-3,  146,  147,  191,  336,  337

Peel,  Sir  E,,  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to -  ...  353

Personality,  Problems  of -  -  - 23-29,  70-74,  76,  344,  374

„ Prof essor  W.  James  on -------  23-29

„ Multiple  - - - -  - -  -  72,  76,  344

Petrovo-Solovovo,  Count  Perovsky,  on  the  Phenomena  of  Eusapia

Palladino  59,  64-67,  413,  415-417,  420,  427,  434  (foot-note),  445,  446
,, Les  Phe'nomknes  Physiques  de  Spiritisme  :  Quelques  Dijfi-

culte's,  by - - - - -  -413

„  ,, Hallucination  and  Illusion -  444

„  a  priori  Improbability,  Question  of  - - -  414

„  „ Sitters,  the  Education  of  431

„ Eeport  on  Further  Sittings  with  Eusapia  FalladiDO  at  Naples.

Statement  and  Notes  by  59,  64

„  „ Countess  Solovovo,  Notes  on  the  Seance  of  Nov.

28,  1910,  by -  65
„  „  ,, Comment  on  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson -  67

Phoenix,  The. See  Exile,  Cross-Correspondence.

Fhrases  and  Symbols  indicating  Cross-Correspondence  217,  254,262,298,300
Physical  Phenomena. See  Poltergeists  and  Telekinesis.

See  also  Apports,  Fire-test,  Materialisations,

Passage  of  Matter  through  Matter,  and

Slate  Writing.

,,  Feilding,  the  Hon.  E.,  on - - - -  57

„  Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  447

„  Eetrovo-Solovovo,  Count  Perovsky,  on 59,  64,  413

Piddington,  J.  C,  Concordant  Automatisms,  reference  to, - 51,  77-79,  104,

105,  212  (foot-note),  304,  306,  307-318
„  „ the  Series  with  G.  B.  Dorr,  1908,  chief  references  to

80-84,  91  (foot-note),  95,  104-105,  116,  120,  121,  150-
156,  158-166,  176-217,  218-229,  231-237,245,  251-253,
258,  260-262,  264,  269,  272-273,  276,  279,  299-301,  317
See  also  Cross-Correspondences  in  the  Willett  Script.


534


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Pigou,  Professor  A.  C,  Eeferences  to  his  Criticism  of  Cross-Correspond-
ences, 38,  88,  291

„  „  Balfour,  Et.  Hon.  G.  W.,  on - - - -  38

Pilgrim  Fathers. See  Birds  and  Turkeys,  Cross-Correspondence.
Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of 52-54,  76-82,  90-101,  102-107, 113-175,

176-217,  222-301,  304,  307-318,  373-376,  474-476
„ „ Hall,  Dr.  Stanley,  on  - -  90-101

„ „ Lang,  Andrew,  on -  ...  90-101

,, „ Tanner,  Dr.  Amy,  on ----- -  102-107

,, ,, Cross-Correspondences —

„ (with  "  Mrs.  Holland  ") 52-54,  206,  207,  222,  223,  228,
231-236,  250-252,  253-282,  285,  286,  304,  307-318
„ „ „ (with  the  Mac  Script)  222,223,234,236,239,264,269
„ „ „ (with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall) 52-54,  77-89,  104-105,

222,  223,  229,  234,  239,  253,  255,  256,  258,  259,  261,
263,  264,  269,  273,  279,  299-303,  304,  305-317,  323,

331-334

„ (with  Mrs.  Willett)  113-175,176-217,222,223,231,

233,  234,  239,  264,  269
See  also  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Key  and  Lethe-Dorr  Cross-Correspondence.
Plato,  Script  references  o

„ Phaedo  205

„ Republic -  - -  .... 200,  201

„ Timaeus  260

Plunkett,  Thomas,  Evidence  as  to  the  Derrygon  nelly  Disturbances 391,  394
Pluto. See  Lethe-Willett  Incidents  and  Proserpine,  Cross-Correspondence.
Podmore,  Frank  (and  William  James) —

„  ,, Commemorative  Address  on,  by  H.  Arthur  Smith -  1

„  '  ,,  on  Cross-Correspondences  -  -  -  77-81,  89,  291
„  „ and  Psychical  Research,  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick -  5

„  ,, Modern  Spiritualism  by,  references  to

41 5,  422-423,  438  (foot-note)
„  „ The  Newer  Spiritualism,  Review  by  the  Rev.  M.  A.

Bayfield  70

,,  ,, on  Poltergeist  Phenomena -  379

,,  ,, Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  references  to - -  413

Poe,  E.  A.,  Script  references  to  Poem  of - -  -  -  273

Pollard,  A.  W.,  Odes  from  the  Greek  Dramatists,  reference  to - -  281
Poltergeists,  Old  and  New,  by  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  - 370,  377
„  „  General  Disturbances - - 370,  380-412

Bells ..... 378,  395-397
„  „  Sounds - - 378,  383,  384,  387,~388,  390-404

„  „  Stone  throwing,  etc. -  378,  391,  392,  406-408

„  „  Witchcraft  Trials -  -  403

Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to

221,  231,  233,  272,  299


LX1I.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


535


Portland,  Oregon,  Disturbances,  the - -  397

Poynings,  Blanche,"  A  Hypnotic  "  Control " -  -  458-467

Premonitions,  Dreams - -------  372-374

Presidential  Address  (1911),  by  Andrew  Lang -----  364

Probabilities,  Calculus  of,  in  Psychical  Research-  - 107,  108


Prometheus,  Cross-Correspondence  -  -  -  223,  227,  255,  261,  286
Proserpine,  Cross-Correspondence 206,  207,  220,  222,  225,  226,  227,  234,

239,  271,  286

Psalm  cxxxvii.,  Script  refereuces  to —

Waters  of  Babylon -  -  -  149,  192,  209,  265,  271

Psychical  Research,  Frank  Podmore  and,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  -  5

Psychology,  Work  of  Professor  William  James  in —

„ M'Dougall,  W.,  on ...  -  11

„ Muirhead,  Prof.  J.  H.,  on -  -  30

Psychotherapy,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on  the  Hypnoidal  State  of  Sidis  -  338

R,

R.,  Miss,  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to  105

Raines,  T.  Hart,  M.D.,  Report  on  the  Dale  Tower  Disturbances  -  404
Ramsden,  Miss  Hermione,  and  Miss  C.  Miles,  Thought-Transference

Experiments,  bearing  of,  on  Cross-Correspondences  -  39-42,  44,  45,  54
Randall,  J.  W.,  Statement  as  to  the  Enniscorthy  Disturbances  -  -  387
"  Rector,"  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  308,  310,  312,  315

Rennison,  Rev.  Canon,  Evidence  as  to  the  Enniscorthy  Disturbances  -  390

Reviews - -  - 70,  90,  102,  353,  361,  468

Richet,  Professor  Charles,  Experiments  of,  reference  to - - 366,  471
River  of  Forgetfulness. See  Lethe  and  the  Willett  Script.
Rothe,  Miss  Anna,  Alleged  Mediumship  of ... - 423,  426
Rossetti,  C.  G.,  Script  reference  to  Poem  of -----  303
Russell,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to 307,  309,  310

S.

Sage,  M.,  Notes  on  a  supposed  Psychical  experience,  An  Adventure

354,  357-360

Sambor,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  references  to  60,  424,  428  (foot-note),


436,  444

Sanders,  Rev.  C.  B.,  A  Case  of  Secondary  Personality,  reference  to -  76
Sawyer,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Portland  (Oregon)  Dis-
turbances 398,  399

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.—


Review  of  "  The  Tenth  Declamation  of  (Pseudo)  Quintilian,"  361
Scott,  Sir  W.,  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  Script  references  to

325,  327  (foot-note),  335,  336
Sea,  Rolling  Waves  and  The  Voyage,  Cross-Correspondence- -  301-303


536


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Selection  as  a  Factor  in  the  Production  of  Scripts - 128,  129,  217,  282
Selwyn  Text  Incident,  reference  to ------ -  298

Sesame  and  Lilies,  Cross-Correspondence,  references  to 54,  83,  84, 194-196,
199,  200,  202,  216,  219,  220,  222,  227  (foot-note),  250,  253,  256,  285
Sevens,  Cross-Correspondence,  references  to - 81,  82,  196,  218,  219,  298
„  „  A  Further  Detail  in - - - -  298

Seybert  Commission  on  Spiritualism,  reference  to  417,  426  (foot-note),  439
Shakespeare,  Script  references  to

„ Hamlet 234,  263  (foot-notes)

„ Henry  V. 293  (foot-note)

„ Love's  Labour's  Lost 279  (foot-note)

„ Macbeth - - 302  (foot-note)

„ Much  Ado  about  Nothing -------  261

„ Othello  - - -  261

„ Romeo  and  Juliet  - 243,  244,  249

„ The  Tempest  -  243,  247  (foot-note),  248,  249,  254

„ Troilus  and  Cressida - 248,  249

„ Winter's  Tale ... - 243,  247  (foot-note),  248,  249
Sharp,  William  (Fiona  Macleod),  reference  to  Writings  of  - 267  (foot-note)
Shelley,  The  Skylark,  Cross-Correspondence -  220,  223,  234,  262,  263,  272
„ Script  references  to  Adonais  (Nightingale  Cross-Correspon-
dence) 124,  156-160,  191,  192,  204,  206,  208,  209,  244,  245,

271,  285,  286

Ode  to  West  Wind  - 204,  213

Queen  Mob - 150,  156,  157

„ Prometheus  Unbound - -  - - 227,  255,  259,  261

Skylark,  Shelley's,  Cross-Correspondence  -  -  220,  223,  234,  262,  263,  272
Sibyl  Incident,  references  to -  -  .  121,  131-146,  149,  161,  185, 192

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

„ Frank  Podmore  and  Psychical  Research,  by  - - - -  5

Value  of  his  Work  as  a  Critic  8-10

„ Review  of  Studies  in  Spiritism  by  A.  E.  Tanner,  Ph.D.,  by -  102
„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to  - -  309,310,312,313
Sidgwick-Control,  The —

„ Through  the  Mac  Script  194

„  „ Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall - - -  109,196,270

Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  The  Hypnoidal  State  of,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on -  338
„ „  Psychology  of  Suggestion  by,  reference  to  340  (foot-note),  341

„ „  Studies  in  Psychopathology  by,  reference  to - -  341

„ „  Therapeutic Value of  the Hypnoidal State  by,

reference  to- - -- -- --  341

Simpson,  M.  G.,  Note  on  the  Diamond  Island  Experiments  in  Wire-
less Telegraphy - 295,  296

Slade,  "  Dr."  Henry,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  references  to  -  6,  424,  439
Slate-writing  Phenomena,  alleged 6,  425,  439-441


LXII.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


Slave,  better  to  slave,  Script  references  to  -  -  -  149,  188,  189,  192,  210
Sleep  and  Death,  Script  references  to  -  -  -  149,  150,  192,  210,  240,  245
Smith,  H.  Arthur,  Commemorative  Address  on  Frank  Podmore  and

William  James - -- -- -- -- -  |

Spiritual  Tales :  St.  Bride  of  the  Isles,  reference  to  -  -  266  (foot-note)
Spiritualism,  Physical  Phenomena. See  Telekinesis.

See  also  under  Classes  of  Phenomena  and  Names  of  Mediums.
St.  Augustine,  Script  references  to  Coyifessions  of - - 324  (foot-note)
St.  Bride's  Day,  Script  references  to - -  263,  266,  267

St.  Dunstan,  Alleged  Levitation  of  -  370

St.  Joseph  of  Copertino,  Alleged  Levitation  of - -  - -  443

Star. See  Hope,  Star,  and  Browning.

Steeple,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  - - - - - -  220

Stevenson,  P.  L.,  Script  references  to  Our  Lady  of  the  Snows  255  (foot-note)
Sti-inged  Instruments,  Cross-Correspondence -  325,  335

Styx. See  Charon.

Subliminal  Consciousness. See  Myers,  F.  W.  H.
Subliminal  Self —

„ As  the  Agent  in  Cross-Correspondence  - 83-88,  172-173,  291,  475

„ Dramatic  Powers  of 291,  461-464

„ Moral  Aspects  of  -  - - 461-464,  470,  471

Suggestion  without  Hypnosis - 339,  347

Swanland  Disturbances,  reference  to  - - - - - - -  408

Swinburne,  Algernon,  Script  references  to

„ Atalanta  in  Calydon - - - -  206,227,240,245

„ Garden  of  Proserpine  149,  192,  206,  227,  229  (foot-note),  239,  240,  245

„ Hymn  of  Man -  182

„ Itylus - 192,  206,  245

„ Memorial  Verses  to  The'ophile  Oautier - - - 324  (foot-note)
„ Super  Flumina  Babylonis -  149,  192,  209,  271

Triumph  of  Time  - - - - - - -  149,  168

T.

Tanner,  Miss  A.  E.,  Ph.D.,  Studies  in  Spiritism,  with  an  Introduction

by  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Eeview  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  -  -  -  102
„  „  „  Lang,  A.,  on  - -  90,  372-375

Tavern  Club  Motto  (Piper-Hodgson),  a  further  detail  - 298,  299

Telekinesis,  Alleged —

Levitations,  Complete,  of  Table  in  the  presence  of  Eusapia

Palladino 58,  64-67,  68

„ Minor  objects -  57-69, 415,  420-422,  424,  442

„ of  Mediums ----- 75,  422,  442
See  also  Levitation  of  Saints,  alleged  instances.
Telepathy —

Professor  A.  C.  Pigou  on  a  Telepathic  explanation  of  Cross-
Correspondences -----  - -  38-56


538


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


[parts


Telepathy —

Dr.  Amy  Tanner  on  ... 107,  108

See  also  Cross-Correspondences.
Telepathy,  Experimenta at  a  distance

The Eanisden-Miles Experiments  as bearing on  Cross-
Correspondences  39-42,  44,  45,  54
Telepathy,  Spontaneous

Dreams  472-474
,, Hallucinations -------  105

Tennyson,  Scr  pt  references  to

Demeter  and  Persephone - - 211,  235,  236,  239-242,  246,  250
„ In  Memoriam  - 140,  156,  157,  191,  211,  239  (footnote),  240-

„ Passing  of  Arthur  - ------ 300  (footnote)'

„ To  Virgil -----  135,  139,  185,  191,  210

Thanatos,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to - - - -  52,  53,  136

Thatcher,  Mr.,  Investigation  of  the  Portland  (Oregon)  Disturbances  398-402
Thompson,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of,  reference  to  - - - -  76

Thorpe,  Bridget,  Statement  as  to  the  Enniscorthy  Disturbances  - -  386

Thury,  Professor,  Experiments  of  441

Til,  M.,  Case  recorded  by --------  470

Time  and  Eternity :  Prometheus,  Cross-Correspondence

223,  255,  256,  258,  259,  286
Time-Reactions  in  Hypnosis --------  73

Tomczyk,  Miss  Stanislawa,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  reference  to 419,  420
Trailing,  Cross-Correspondence  -  .....  301-303

Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper

„  Automatist's  Knowledge  of  Subject-matter  -  228,  280  (foot-note)
„ Conditions  of  Consciousness  and  Hearing  during  -  91-101,  102,  103

„ Mistakes  and  Confusions  - 332,  333

Troy  and  Joy,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  264

U.

Ulysses,  Script  references  to -  - 148,  152,  192,  204

V.

Vaughan,  Henry,  Script  reference  to  Poem  by  256

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.

„ Telepathic  Experiments  of  (The  One-Horse  Dawn)

Balfour,  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  on -  -  42-52

Prof.  A.  C.  Pigou  on  -  ...  42-52

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  on  -  -  109'

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.—

Automatic  writing,  an  experiment  iu - - -  -  471

,,  Cross-Correspondences

(with  "Mrs.  Forbes") - - -  -193-204,222,250
( „ "Mrs.  Holland")  193-204,  222-223,  229,  234,  239,
250,  253,  255,  256,  263,  264,  269,  273,  279-


LXII.-LXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXV.


539


Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  Cross-Correspondences

„ (with  Mac  Script)  114,  193-204,  222,  234,  239,  253,  264,

269,  320-330

( „ Mrs.  Piper)  222,  223,  234,  239,  253,  255,  257,  263,

264,  269,  273,  279,  299-303,  331
( „ Mrs.  Verrall)  114,  193-204,  222,  223,  234,  253,  255,

259,  261,  320-330,  335-337
( „ Mrs.  Willett)  114,  130,  136-139,  142,  144,  153,  155,
157,  159,  183-188,  191,  192,  209,  210,  212,
213,  234,  239.  250,  264,  269,  336,  337

,* Script  of  March  16,  1908

("  Victor  Hugo  "  Cross-correspondence),  a  correction  and  an
addition  to,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall - - -  320
Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.—

Cross-Correspondences

(with  "  Mrs.  Forbes  ") -  -  193-204,  222,  250

( „ "Mrs.  Holland")  193-204,  222-223,  234,  250,  253,

255,  256,  261,  298

( „ the  Mac  Script)  193-204,  234,  250,  253,  323-329,

335-337

( „ Mrs.  Piper)  52-54,  77-89,  104-105,  193-204,  222,  223,
234,  239,  250,  255,  256,  261,  304-319,  323,  331-334
( „ Miss  Verrall)  114,  193-204,  222,  223,  234,  253,  255,

259,  261,  320-330,  335-337
„  ( „ Mrs.  Willett)  114,  138  (foot-notes),  159-162,  191,  192,

193-204,  222,  234,  250,  264,  269
„ Classical  Review  Article,  connexion  with  the  Holland  Script

163,  245,  247,  248
„ Miss  VerralFs  Script  of  March  16,  1908,  a  correction  and  an

addition,  by 320

„ Note  on  the  Cross-Correspondence,  Cup,  by  - - - -  304

„ Notes  on  Mrs.  Willett's  Script  of  February,  1910

132  (foot-note)  136,  142,  153,  154,  176-217
History  of  the  Period,  March,  1908,  to  March,  1910  177
Sources  and  Correspondences  of  Phrases  in  the  Script  190
Table  of ------  191,192

„ "  The  One  Horse  Dawn,"  Additional  Note  on  the  Experiment  109
,, Subliminal  Self  of,  and  Cross-Correspondence - 83-88,  291,  292
See  also  Door  {  =  Dorr)  and  Key,  Cross-Correspondence.

Vienna  Disturbances,  the -  - - -  406

Virgil,  Aeneid,  Incidents  (Book  I.),  Script  references  to - 160,  234,  235
(Book  VI.)

121-123,  131-146,  151-158,  161-163,  165,  178-190,  193,  200
„ Georgics,  Script  reference  to - - - 265  (foot-note),  266,  270
See  also  Lethe  and  Lethe-Dorr,  Cross-Correspondence.


540


Index  to  Vol.  XXV. [parts  lxii.-lxiv.]


w.

Wagner,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Nicolaeff,  references  to 438  (foot-note)
Warndorfer,  A.,  Eeport  of  the  Vienna  Disturbances  -  406
Waters  of  Babylon. See  Exile,  Cross-Correspondence.
Watts,  G.  F.,  Stanzas  on  the  Collected  Works  of,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,

Script  references  to  - - - - 155,  170,  192,  265

„ Pictures  by,  Script  references  to - - 155,  192,  265,  271
Wellington,  Duke  of,  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to - - - 368,  369
Wem  Disturbances,  the,  reference  to  - - - - - - -  402

Wharton,  Edith,  Men  and  Ghosts,  reference  to 325  (foot-note),  326,  330,  334
Wilde,  Oscar,  Burden  ofltys,  Script  references  to  206,  227,  229  (foot-note),  231
Will  to  Live,  Lethe  and - - - -131-140,  154  (foot-note),  170-191

Willis,  H.  A.,  Case  recorded  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly  (Massachusetts

Disturbances) - - --------  395

Willett,  Mrs.—

The  Automatic  Scripts  of
„  Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  on

115,  221,  240,  244-246,  248,  266,  270,  286,  290,  301
,,  Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  113-175

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  on  -  ...  176-217

,,  Knowledge  of  Literary  and  Classical  Allusion  in  her

Script,  Question  of

124,  132,  135,  142-169,  172-175,  176-217,  248
„  Scholarship  and  Supernormal  Knowledge,  Evidence

for ------- -  147-169

,,  Sources  and  Correspondences  of  Phrases  in  190,191-217

Cross-Correspondences —

(with  Mrs.  Holland) 191,  193,  197-204,  206-209,  222,  223,

231-334,  250,  264-269
(with  Mrs.  Piper)  113-175,  176-217,  221,  222,  223,  231,  233,

234,  239,  264,  269

(with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall)  114  (footnote),  130,  132,
136-139,  142,  144,  153,  155,  162,  165,  166,  183-188,  191,
192,  193-204,  209,  210,  212,  213,  222,  223,  234,  250,

264,  269,  336,  337
See  also  Lethe  Incident,  and  Lethe-Dorr  and  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and
Key,  Cross-Correspondence.
Wordsworth,  The  Exclusion,  Script  reference  to - - 230  (foot-note)
,, /  wandered  lonely  as  a  Cloud  ------  305

Worksop  Disturbances,  reference  to - - - - - - -  379

X.

X,  Felida,  Case  of,  reference  to  -  72

Z.

Zimmerl,  John,  Poltergeist  Disturbances  at  the  Workshop  of  -  406-408
Zollner,  Professor,  Experiments  of,  reference  to  - - - - 422,  424
