All of Grace (C.H. Spurgeon, 1886)
==========================================================
Spurgeon's 1886 All of Grace — the Prince of Preachers' beloved evangelistic book on salvation by grace alone. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

A, os te. : oe sreshaw 


7 Satay 


iS ont Ge the aon os Gt a ve 


a 4 ; | RE is s a # 2 7 ' " 
i 


th) 


4 


Ung 

ay 
Rats 
by 7 


ot aie 


rs 


‘ 


~~ 


Gwe Lo huewly 
SMe. IS QE 


Ion eon Myer) 


FART 


ALL OF GRACE. 


OR, JESUS CAME-TO SAVE SINNERS 


AN EARNEST WORD 
WITH THOSE WHO ARE SEEKING SALVATION 
BY THE LORD JESUS CHRIST. 


BY 


Ue SPURGEON, - 


“Ahere sin abounded, grace Did much more abound,” 


Romans v, 20, 


LONDON : 
PASSMORE AND ALABASTER, 
PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C, 

1886. 


—_—_— 


All rights reserved. 


LONDON : 
PRINTED BY ALABASTER, PASSMORE, AND SONS, 
FANN STREET, ALDERSGATE STREET, E.C, 


TWh, . 7 a ee : “a. 
: ie + “iN y ek i 


- eos RK: 
: | Fae 
OCS 


\ 
Ay 
yA 
( iy 


7 00% 


HE object of this book is the salvation of 
the reader. He who spoke and wrote 
it will be greatly disappointed if it 
does not lead many to the Lord Jesus. 

It is sent forth in childlike dependence upon 
the power of God the Holy Ghost, to use it 
in the conversion of millions, if so he pleases, 
No doubt, many poor men and women will take 
up this little volume, and the Lord will visit 
them with grace, To answer this end, the very 
plainest language has been chosen, and many 
homely expressions have been used. But if those 
of wealth and rank should glance at this book, 
the Holy Ghost can impress tem also; since that 
which can be understood by the unlettered is none 
the less attractive to the instructed. Oh that some 
might read it who will become great winners of 
souls ! 

Who knows how many will find their way to 
peace by what they read here? A more important 
question to you, dear reader, is this—W7l/ you be 
one of them? 7 

A certain man placed a fountain by the wayside 
and he hung up a cup near to it by a little chain. 
He was told some time after that a great art-critic 


4 All of Grace. 


2 ee eee 
had found much fault with its design. “ But,” said 
he, “do many thirsty persons drink at it?” Then 
they told him that thousands of poor people, men, 
women, and children, slaked their thirst at this 
fountain; and he smiled and said, that he was little 
troubled by the critic’s observation, only he hoped 
that on some sultry summer’s day the critic him- 
self might fill the cup, and be refreshed, and praise 
the name of the Lord. 

Here is my fountain, and here is my cup: find 
fault if you please ; but do drink of the water of life. 
I only care for this. I had rather bless the soul of 
the poorest crossing-sweeper, Or rag-gatherer, than 
please a prince of the blood, and fail to convert 
him to God. 

Reader, do you mean business in reading these 
pages? If so, we are agreed at the outset; but 
nothing short of your finding Christ and heaven is 
the business aimed at here. Oh that we may seek 
this together! Ido so by dedicating this little book 
with prayer. Will not you join me by looking up 
to God, and asking him to bless you while you 
read? Providence has put these pages in your 
way, you have a little spare time in which to read 
them, and you feel willing to give your attention to 
them. These are good signs. Who knows but the 
set time of blessing is come for you? At any rate, 
“The Holy Ghost saith, To-day if ye will hear his 
voice, harden not your hearts.” 


WHAT ARE Whe AT? 


HEARD a story ; I think it came from 
ee the North Country :—A minister called 
(Sy (ke) upon a poor woman, intending to give 
SEAS G, her help ; for he knew that she was very 
poor. With his half-crown in his hand, he knocked 
at the door; but she did not answer. He concluded 
she was not at home, and went his way. A little 
after he met her at the church, and told her that he 
had remembered her need: “I called at your house, 
and knocked several times, and I suppose you were 
not at home, for I had no answer.” “At what 
hour did you call, sir?” “It was about noon.” 
“ Oh, dear,” she said, “I heard you, sir, and I am 
so sorry I did not answer ; but J thought it was the 
man calling for the rent.” Many a poor woman 
knows what this meant. Now, it is my desire to 
be heard, and therefore I want to say that I am not 
calling for the rent ; indeed, it is not the object of 
this book to ask anything of you, but to tell you 
that salvation is ALL OF GRACE, which means, free, 
gratis, for nothing. 

Oftentimes, when we are anxious to win atten- 
tion, our hearer thinks, “Ah! now I am going to 
be told my duty. It is the man calling for that 
which is due to God, and I am sure I have nothing 


6 All of Grace. 


wherewith to pay. I will not beat home.” No, this 
book does not come to make a demand upon you, 
but to bring you something. We are not going to 
talk about law, and duty, and punishment, but 
about love, and goodness, and forgiveness, and 
mercy, and eternal life. Do not, therefore, act as 
if you were not at home: do not turn a deaf ear, 
or a careless heart. I am asking nothing of you in 
the name of God or man. It is not my intent to 
make any requirement at your hands; but I come, 
in God’s name, to bring you a free gift, which it 
shall be to your present and eternal joy to receive. 
Open the door, and let my pleadings enter. “Come 
now, and let us reason together.” The Lord himself 
invites you to a conference concerning your imme- 
diate and endless happiness, and he would not have 
done this if he did not mean well towards you. Do 
not refuse the Lord Jesus who knocks at your door ; 
for he knocks with a hand which was nailed to the 
tree for such as you are. Since his only and sole 
object is your good, incline your ear and come to 
him. Hearken diligently, and let the good word 
sink into your soul. It may be that the hour is 
come in which you shall enter upon that new life 
which is the beginning of heaven. Faith cometh 
by hearing, and reading is a sort of hearing: faith 
may come to you while you are reading this book, 
Why not? O blessed Spirit of all grace, make 
it so! 


ISTEN to a little sermon. You will 
find the text in the Epistle to the 
Romans, in the fourth chapter and the 
fifth verse :— 


“To him that worketh not, but believeth on him 
that justifieth the ungodly, his faith 1s counted for 
righteousness.” 


I call your attention to those words, “ Hem that 
justifieth the ungodly.” They seem to me to be 
very wonderful words. 

Are you not surprised that there should be such 
an expression as that in the Bible, “ That justifieth 
the ungodly”? I have heard men that hate the 
doctrines of the cross bring it as a charge against 
God, that he saves wicked men and receives to him- 
self the vilest of the vile. See how this Scripture 
accepts the charge, and plainly states it! By the | 
mouth of his servant Paul, by the inspiration of the 
Holy Ghost, he takes to himself the title of “ Him 
that justifieth the ungodly.” He makes those just 
who are unjust, forgives those who deserve to be 
punished, and favours those who deserve no favour. 
You thought, did you not, that salvation was for 
the good? that God’s grace was for the pure and 


8 All of Grace. 
ae eee 
holy, who are free from sin? It has fallen into 
your mind that, if you were excellent, then God 
would reward you; and you have thought that, 
because you are not worthy, therefore there could be 
no way of your enjoying his favour. You must be 
somewhat surprised to read a text like this: “Him 
that justifieth the ungodly.” I do not wonder that 
you are surprised ; for with all my familiarity with 
the great grace of God, I never cease to wonder 
at it. It does sound surprising, does it not, 
that it should be possible for a holy God to justify 
an unholy man? We, according to the natural 
legality of our hearts, are always talking about our 
own goodness and our own worthiness, and we stub- 
bornly stand to it that there must be somewhat in 
us in order to win the notice of God. Now, God, 
who sees through all deceptions, knows that there 
is no goodness whatever in us. He says that “there 
is none righteous, no not one.” He knows that “all 
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags”; and, there- 
fore, the Lord Jesus did not come into the world to 
look after goodness and righteousness among men, 
but to bring goodness and righteousness with him, 
and to bestow them upon persons who have none of 
them. He comes, not because we are just, but to 
make us so: he justifieth the ungodly. 

When a counsellor comes into court, if he is an 
honest man, he desires to plead the case of an inno- 
cent person and justify him before the court from ~ 
the things which are falsely laid to his charge. It 
should be the barrister’s object to justify the inno- 
cent person, and he should not attempt to screen 


Justification for the Ungodly. 9 


es 


man’s power truly to justify the guilty. This isa 
miracle reserved for the Lord alone. God, the in- 
finitely just Sovereign, knows that there is not a 
just man upon earth that doeth good and sinneth 
not, and therefore, in the infinite sovereignty of 
his divine nature and in the splendour of his in- 
effable love, he undertakes the task, not so much 
of justifying the just as of justifying the ungodly. 
God has devised ways and means of making the 
ungodly man to stand justly accepted before him: 
he has set up a system by which with perfect justice 
he can treat the guilty as if he had been all his 
life free from offence, yea, can treat him as if he 
were wholly free from sin. He justificth the 
ungodly. 

Jesus Christ came into the world to save szzvers. 
It is a very surprising thing—a thing to be mar- 
velled at most of all by those who enjoy it. I 
know that it is to me even to this day the greatest 
wonder that I ever heard of, that God should ever 
justify se. I feel myself to be a lump of unworthi- 
ness, a mass of corruption, and a heap of sin, apart 
from his almighty love. I know by a full assurance 
that I am justified by faith which is in Christ Jesus, 
and treated as if I had been perfectly just, and 
made an heir of God and a joint-heir with Christ ; 
and yet by nature I must take my place among 
the most sinful. I, who am altogether undeserving, 
am treated as if I had been deserving. I am loved 
with as much love as if I had always been godly, 
whereas aforetime I was ungodly. Who can help 


10 All of Grace. 


being astonished at this? Gratitude for such favour 
stands dressed in the robes of wonder. 

Now, while this is very surprising, I want you to 
notice how available it makes the gospel to you and 
to me. If God justifieth the wzgodly, then, dear 
friend, he can justify you. Is not that the very kind 
of person that you are? If you are unconverted 
at this moment, it is a very proper description of 
you: you have lived without God, you have been 
the reverse of godly; in one word, you have been 
and are uzgodly. Perhaps you have not even at- 
tended a place of worship on the Sabbath, but 
have lived in disregard of God’s day, and house, 
and Word—this proves you to have been ungodly. 
Sadder still, it may be you have even tried to 
doubt God’s existence, and have gone the length 
of saying that you did so. You have lived on this 
fair earth, which is full of the tokens of God’s 
presence, and all the while you have shut your eyes 
to the clear evidences of his power and Godhead. 
You have lived as if there were no God. Indeed, 
you would have been very pleased if you could have 
demonstrated to yourself to a certainty that there 
was no God whatever. Possibly you have lived a 
great many years in this way, so that you are now 
pretty well settled in your ways, and yet God is 
not in any of them. If you were labelled 

UNGODLY 
it would as well describe you as if the sea were to 
be labelled salt water. Would it not? 

Possibly you are a person of another sort; you 
have regularly attended to all the outward forms of 


Justification for the Ungodly. 11 


os 


religion, and yet you have had no heart in them at 
all, but have been really ungodly. Though meeting 
with the people of God, you have never met with 
God for yourself; you have been in the choir, and 
yet have not praised the Lord with your heart. 
You have lived without any love to God in your 
heart, or regard to his commands in your life. Well, 
you are just the kind of man to whom this gospel 
is sent—this gospel which says that God justifieth 
the ungodly. It is very wonderful, but it is happily 
available for you. It just suits you. Does it not? 
How I wish that you would accept it! If youarea 
sensible man, you will see the remarkable grace of 
God in providing for such as you are, and you 
will say to yourself, “Justify the ungodly! Why, 
then, should not I be justified, and justified at 
once ?” 

Now, observe further, that zt mast be so—that the 
salvation of God is for those who do not deserve 
it, and have no preparation for it. It is reasonable 
that the statement should be put in the Bible ; for, 
dear friend, no others need justifying but those 
who have no justification of their own. If any of 
my readers are perfectly righteous, they want no 
justifying. You feel that you are doing your duty 
well, and almost putting heaven under an obliga- 
tion to you. What do you want with a Saviour, or 
with mercy? What do you want with justification ? 
You will be tired of my book by this time, for it 
will have no interest to you. 

If any of you are giving yourselves such proud 
airs, listen to me for a little while. You will be 


12 All of Grace. 


lost, as sure as you are alive. You righteous men, 
whose righteousness is all of your own working, 
are either deceivers or deceived; for the Scrip- 
ture cannot lie, and it saith plainly, “ There is 
none righteous, no, not one.” In any case I have no 
gospel to preach to the self-righteous,—no, not a 
word of it. Jesus Christ himself came not to call 
the righteous, and I am not going to do what he 
did not do. If I called you, you would not come, 
and, therefore, I will not call you under that 
character. No, I bid you rather look at that 
righteousness of yours till you see what a delusion 
it is. It is not half so substantial as a cobweb. 
Have done with it! Flee away from it! O sirs, 
the only persons that can need justification are 
those who are not in themselves just. They need 
that something should be done for them to make 
them just before the judgment-seat of God. De- 
pend upon it, the Lord only does that which is 
needful. Infinite wisdom never attempts that which 
is unnecessary. Jesus never undertakes that which 
is superfluous. To make him just who zs just is 
no work for God—that were a labour for a fool; 
but to make him just who is unjust—that is work 
for infinite loveand mercy. To justify the ungodly 
—this is a miracle worthy of a God. And for 
certain it is so. 

Now, look. If there be anywhere in the world 
a physician who has discovered sure and precious 
remedies, to whom is that physician sent? To 
those who are perfectly healthy? Itrow not. Put 
him down in a district where there are no sick 


Justification for the Ungodly. 13 


persons, and he feels that he is not in his place. 
There is nothing for him to do. “The whole have 
no need of a physician, but they that are sick.” Is 
it not equally clear that the great remedies of grace. 
and redemption are for the sick in soul? They 
cannot be for the whole, for they cannot be of use 
to such. If you, dear friend, feel that you are 
spiritually sick, the Physician has come into the 
world for you. If you are altogether undone by 
reason of your sin, you are the very person aimed 
at in the plan of salvation. I say that the Lord of 
love had just such as you are in his eye when he 
arranged the system of grace. Suppose a man of 
generous spirit were to resolve to forgive all those 
who were indebted to him ; it is clear that this can 
only apply to those really in his debt. One person 
owes him a thousand pounds ; another owes him 
fifty pounds; each one has but to have his bill 
receipted, and the liability is wiped out. But the 
most generous person cannot forgive the debts of 
those who do not owe himanything. Itis out of the 
power of omnipotence to forgive where there is no 
sin. Pardon, therefore, cannot be for you who 
have no sin. Pardon must be for the guilty. 
Forgiveness must be for the sinful. It were ab- 
surd to talk of forgiving those who do not need 
forgiveness—pardoning those who have never 
offended. 

Do you think that you must be lost because you 
areasinner? This is the reason why you can be 
saved. Because you own yourself to be a sinner 
I would encourage you to believe that grace is 


ere All of Grace. 


ordained for such as you are. One of our hymn- 
writers even dared to say— 
“A sinner is a sacred thing ; 
The Holy Ghost hath made him so.” 

It is truly so, that Jesus seeks and saves that which 
is lost. He died and made a real atonement for 
real sinners. When men are not playing with 
words, or calling themselves “miserable sinners” 
out of mere compliment, I feel overjoyed to meet 
with them. I would be glad to talk all night to 
bona fide sinners, The inn of mercy never closes its 
doors upon such, neither week-days nor Sundays, 
Our Lord Jesus did not die for imaginary sins, but 
his heart’s blood was spilt to wash out deep crimson 
stains, which nothing else can remove. 

He that is a black sinner—he is the kind of man 
that Jesus Christ came to make white. A gospel 
preacher on one occasion preached a sermon from, 
“ Now also the axe is laid to the root of the trees”; 
and he delivered such a sermon that one of his 
hearers said to him, “One would have thought 
that you had been preaching to criminals. Your 
sermon ought to have been delivered in the county 
jail.” “Oh, no,” said the good man, “if I were 
preaching in the county jail, I should not preach 
from that text. There I should preach, ‘ This is a 
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that 
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.’ ” 
Justso. The law is for the self-righteous, to humble 
their pride: the gospel is for the lost, to remove 
their despair. 

_ If you are not lost, what do you want with a 


Justification for the Ungodly. 15. 
Saviour? Should the shepherd go after those who 
never went astray? Why should the woman sweep 
her house for the bits of money that were never out 
of her purse? No, the medicine is for the diseased ; 
the quickening is for the dead; the pardon is for 
the guilty ; liberation is for those who are bound ; 
the opening of eyes is for those who are blind. 
How can the Saviour, and his death upon the 
cross, and the gospel of pardon, be accounted for, 
unless it be upon the supposition that men are 
guilty and worthy of condemnation? ‘The sinner 
is the gospel’s reason for existence. You, my 
friend, to whom this word now comes, if you are 
undeserving, ill-deserving, hell-deserving, you are 
the sort of man for whom the gospel is ordained, 
and arranged, and proclaimed. God justifieth the 
ungodly. 

I would like to make this very plain. I hope 
that I have done so already ; but still, plain as it Is, 
it is only the Lord that can make a man see it, It 
does at first seem most amazing to an awakened 
man that salvation should really be for him as a lost 
and guilty one. He thinks that it must be for him 
as a penitent man, forgetting that his penitence 
is a part of his salvation. “Oh,” says he, “but I 
must be this and that ”—all which is true, for he 
shall be this and that as the result of salvation ; 
but salvation comes to him before he has any of 
the results of salvation. It comes to him, in fact, 
while he deserves only this bare, beggarly, base, 
abominable description, “ wzgodly.” That is all he 
is when God’s gospel comes to justify him. 


16 All of Grace. 


_— 


May I, therefore, urge upon any who have no 
good thing about them—who fear that they have not 
even a good feeling, or anything whatever that can 
recommend them to God—that they will firmly be- 
lieve that our gracious God is able and willing to 
take them without anything to recommend them, 
and to forgive them spontaneously, not because ¢hey 
are good, but because 4e is good. Does he not make 
his sun to shine on the evil as well as on the 
good? Does he not give fruitful seasons, and send 
the rain and the sunshine in their time upon the 
most ungodly nations? Ay, even Sodom had its 
sun, and Gomorrah had its dew. O friend, the 
great grace of God surpasses my conception and 
your conception, and I would have you think 
worthily of it. As high as the heavens are above 
the earth; so high are God’s thoughts above our 
thoughts. He can abundantly pardon. Jesus 
Christ came into the world to save sinners: 
forgiveness is for the guilty. 

Do not attempt to touch yourself up and 
make yourself something other than you really 
are ; but come as you are to him who justifies the 
ungodly. A great artist some short time ago had 
painted a part of the corporation of the city in 
which he lived, and he wanted, for historic purposes, 
to include in his picture certain characters well 
known in the town, A crossing-sweeper, unkempt, 
ragged, filthy, was known to everybody, and there 
was a suitable place for him in the picture. The 
artist said to this ragged and rugged individual, 
“T will pay you well if you will come down to my 


Justification for. the Ungodly. 17 


es oo, 


studio and let me take your likeness.” He came 
round in the morning, but he was soon sent about 
his business ; for he had washed his face, and combed 
his hair, and donned a respectable suit of clothes. 
He was needed as a beggar, and was not invited in 
any other capacity. Even so, the gospel will re- 
ceive you into its halls if you come as a sinner, but 
not else, Wait not for reformation, but come at 
once for salvation. God justifieth ¢he ungodly, and 
that takes you up where you noware: it meets you 
in your worst estate. 

Come in your déshabille. I mean, come to your 
heavenly Father in all your sin and sinfulness. 
Come to Jesus just as you are, leprous, filthy, naked, 
neither fit to live nor fit to die. Come, you that 
are the very sweepings of creation ; come, though 
you hardly dare to hope for anything but death. 
Come, though despair is brooding over you, pressing 
upon your bosom like a horrible nightmare. Come 
and ask the Lord to justify another ungodly one. 
Why should he not? Come along with you ; for 
this great mercy of God is meant for such as you 
are. I put it in the language of the text, and I 
cannot put it more strongly : the Lord God himself 
takes to himself this gracious title,“ Him that justi- 
fieth the ungodly.” He makes just, and causes to 
be treated as just, those who by nature are ungodly. 
Is not that a wonderful word for you? Reader, do 
not rise from your seat till you have well considered 
this matter. 


“YT AS GOD YHAYT JOSTIFYEE." 


Romans viii. 33. 


WONDERFUL thing is this being 
justified, or made just. If we had 
never broken the laws of God we 
should not have needed it; for we 
should have been just in ourselves. He who has 
all his life done the things which he ought to have 
done, and has never done anything which he ought 
not to have done, is justified by the law. But 
you, dear reader, are not of that sort, I am quite 
sure. You have too much honesty to pretend to 
be without sin, and therefore you need to be 
justified. 3 

Now, if you justify yourself, you will simply be a 
self-deceiver. Therefore do not attempt it. It is 
never worth while. | 

If you ask your fellow-mortals to justify you, 
what can they do? You can make some of them 
speak well of you for sixpence; and others will 
backbite you for less than that. Their judgment is 
not worth much. 

Our text says, “It is God that justifieth,’ and 
this is a deal more to the point. It is an astonish- 
ing fact, and one that we ought to consider with 
care. Come and see, 


It is God that Justifieth. 19 


In the first place, nobody else but God would 
ever have thought of justifying those who are 
guilty, They have lived in open rebellion; they 
have done evil with both hands; they have gone 
from bad to worse; they have turned back to sin 
even after they have smarted for it and have there- 
fore for a while been forced to leave it. They have 
broken the law, and trampled on the gospel. They 
have refused proclamations of mercy, and have 
persisted in ungodliness. How can they be for- 
given and justified? Their fellow-men, despairing 
of them, say, “ They are hopeless cases.” Even 
‘Christians look upon them with sorrow rather than 
with hope. But not so theirGod. He,in the splendour 
of his electing grace having chosen some of them 
before the foundation of the world, will not rest till 
he has justified them, and made them to be ac- 
cepted in the Beloved. Is it not written, “Whom 
he did predestinate, them he also called : and whom 
he called, them he also justified : and whom he justi- 
fied, them he also glorified”? Thus you see there 
are some whom the Lord resolves to justify: why 
should not you and I be of the number ? 

None but a God would ever have thought of 
justifying me. Iam a wonder to myself. I doubt 
not that grace is equally seen in others. Look at 
Saul of Tarsus, who foamed at the mouth against 
God’s servants. Like a hungry wolf, he worried the 
lambs and the sheep right and left ; and yet God 
struck him down on the road to Damascus, and 
changed his heart, and so fully justified him that, 
ere long, this man became the greatest preacher of 


20 All of Grace. 

justification by faith that ever lived. He must often 
have marvelled that ever Ze was justified by faith 
in Christ Jesus; for he was once a determined 
stickler for salvation by the works of the law. None 
but God would have ever thought of justifying such 
aman as Saul the persecutor; but the Lord God 
is glorious in grace. 

But, even if anybody had thought of justifying 
the ungodly, zone but God could have done it. It 
is quite impossible for any person to forgive 
offences which have not been committed against 
himself. A person has greatly injured you; you 
can forgive him, and I hope you will; but no third 
person can forgive him apart from you. If the 
wrong is done to you, the pardon must come from 
you. If we have sinned against God, it is in God’s 
power to forgive; for the sin is against himself. 
That is why David says, in the fifty-first Psalm, 
“ Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done 
this evil in thy sight” ; for then God, against whom 
the offence is committed, can put the offence away. 
That which we owe to God, our great Creditor can 
remit, if so it pleases him ; and if he remits it, it is 
remitted. None but the great God, against whom 
we have committed the sin, can blot out that sin; 
let us, therefore, see that we go to him and seek 
mercy at his hands. Do not let us be led aside by 
priests, who would have us confess to them: they 
have no warrant in the Word of God for their pre- 
tensions. But even if they were ordained to pro- 
nounce absolution in God’s name, it must still be 
better to go ourselves to the great Lord through 


Lt is God that Justifieth. 21 
Jesus Christ, the Mediator, and seek and find par- 
don at his hand ; since we are sure that this is the 
right way. Proxy religion involves too great a 
risk: you had better see to your soul’s matters 
yourself, and leave them in no man’s hands. 

Only God can justify the ungodly; but Ze can 
do wt to perfection. Ue casts our sins behind his 
back, he blots them out; he says that though they 
be sought for, they shall not be found. With no 
other reason for it but his own infinite goodness, 
he has prepared a glorious way by which he can 
make scarlet sins as white as snow, and remove our 
transgressions from us as far as the east is from the 
west. He says, “I will not remember your sins.” 
He goes the length of making an end of sin. One 
of old called Gut in amazement, “ Who is a God 
like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth 
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage ? 
he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he 
delighteth in mercy.” 

We are not now speaking of justice, nor of 
God’s dealing with men according to their deserts. 
If you profess to deal with the righteous Lord on 
law terms, everlasting wrath threatens you, for that 
is what you deserve. Blessed be his name, he has 
not dealt with us after our sins ; but now he treats 
with us on terms of free grace and infinite compas- 
sion, and he says, “I will receive you graciously, 
and love you freely.” Believe it, for it is certainly 
true that the great God is able to treat the guilty 
with abundant mercy; yea, he is able to treat the 
ungodly as if they had been always godly. Read 


22 All of Grace. 

carefully the parable of the prodigal son, and see 
how the forgiving father received the returning 
wanderer with as much love as if he had never 
gone away, and had never defiled himself with 
harlots. So far did he carry this that the elder 
brother began to grumble at it; but the father 
never withdrew his love. O my brother, however 
guilty you may be, if you will only come back to 
your God and Father, he will treat you as if you 
had never done wrong. He will regard you as 
just, and deal with you accordingly. What say you 
to this? 

Do you not see—for I want to bring this out 
clearly, what a splendid thing it is—that as none 
~ but God would think of justifying the ungodly, and 
none but God could do it, yet the Lord can do it? 
See how the apostle puts the challenge, “ Who 
shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? It 
is God that justifieth.” If God has justified a man 
it is well done, it is rightly done, it is justly done, 
it is everlastingly done. I read the other day in a 
print which is full of venom against the Gospel and 
those who preach it, that we hold some kind of 
theory by which we imagine that sin can be re- 
moved from men. We hold no theory, we publish 
a fact. The grandest fact under heaven is this— 
that Christ by his precious blood does actually put 
away sin, and that God, for Christ’s sake, dealing 
with men on terms of divine mercy, forgives the 
cuilty and justifies them, not according to anything 
that he sees in them or foresees will be in them, but 
according to the riches of his mercy which lie in 


It is God that Justifieth. 23 


ee 


his own heart. This we have preached, do preach, 
and will preach as long as welive. “It is God that 
justifieth ”"—that justifieth the ungodly; he is not 
ashamed of doing it, nor are we of preaching it. 

The justification which comes from God himself 
must be beyond question. If the Judge acquits me, 
who can condemn me? If the highest court in the 
universe has pronounced me just, who shall lay 
anything to my charge? Justification from God is 
a sufficient answer to an awakened conscience. 
The Holy Spirit by its means breathes peace over 
our entire nature, and we are no longer afraid. 
With this justification we can answer all the roarings 
and railings of Satan and ungodly men. With this 
we shall be able to die; with this we shall boldly 
rise again, and face the last great assize. 


“ Bold shall I stand in that great day, 
For who aught to my charge shall lay? 
While by my Lord absolved I am 
From sin’s tremendous curse and blame.” 


Friend, the Lord can blot out all your sins. 1 
make no shot in the dark when I say this. “ All 
manner of sin and of blasphemy shall be forgiven 
unto men.” Though you are steeped up to your 
throat in crime, he can with a word remove the 
defilement, and say, “I will, be thou clean.” The 
Lord is a great forgiver. 

“JT BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.” 
Do you? 

He can even at this hour pronounce the sentence, 
“ Thy sins be forgiven thee; go in peace”; and if 


24 All of Grace. 


_ he do this, no power in heaven, or earth, or under 
the earth, can put you under suspicion, much less 
under wrath. Do not doubt the power of Almighty 
love. You could not forgive your fellow-man had 
he offended you as you have offended God ; but 
you must not measure God’s corn with your bushel ; 
his thoughts and ways are as much above yours as 
the heavens are high above the earth, 

“Well,” say you, “it would be a great miracle if 
the Lord were to pardon me.” Just'so. It would 
be a supreme miracle, and therefore he is likely to 
do it; for he does “great things and unsearchable” 
which we looked not for. 

I was myself stricken down with a horrible 
sense of guilt, which made my life a misery to 
me ; but when I heard the command, “Look unto 
me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth, for 
I am God, and there is none else ”—I looked, 
and in a moment the Lord justified me. Jesus 
Christ, made sin for me, was what I saw, and that 
sight gave me rest. When those who were bitten 
by the fiery serpents in the wilderness looked to 
the serpent of brass they were healed at once ; and 
so was I when I looked to the crucified Saviour, 
The Holy Spirit, who enabled me to believe, gave 
me peace through believing. I felt as sure that 
I was forgiven as before I felt sure of condemnation. 
I had been certain of my condemnation because the 
word of God declared it, and my conscience bore 
witness to it; but when the Lord justified me I 
was made equally certain by the same witnesses, 
The word of the Lord in the Scripture saith, “ He 


It is God that Justifieth. 25 


that believeth on him is not condemned,” and my 
conscience bears witness that I believed, and that 
God in pardoning me is just. Thus I have the 
_ witness of the Holy Spirit and my own conscience, 
and these two agree in one. Oh, how I wish that 
my reader would receive the testimony of God 
upon this matter, and then full soon he would also 
have the witness in himself! 

I venture to say that a sinner justified by God 
stands on even a surer footing than a righteous 
man justified by his works, if such there be. We 
could never be sure that we had done enough works: 
conscience would always be uneasy lest, after all, 
we should come short, and we could only have the 
trembling verdict of a fallible judgment to rely 
upon: but when God himself justifies, and the Holy 
Spirit bears witness thereto by giving us peace with 
God, why then we feel that the matter is sure and 
settled, and we enter into rest. No tongue can 
tell the depth of that calm which comes over the 
soul which has received the peace of God which 
passeth all understanding. viend, do seck it AT 
ONCE, 


JOST AND TRE JOSTIFIER., 


SUL E have seen the ungodly justified, and 

ss have considered the great truth, that 

only God can justify any man: we 

now come a step further and make 

the enquiry—How can a just God justify guilty 

men ? Here we are met with a full answer in the 

words of Paul, in Romans iii. 21 to 26. We will 

read six verses from the chapter so as to get the 
run of the passage :— 


“ But now the righteousness of God without the law 
1s manifested, being witnessed by the law and the 
prophets ; even the righteousness of God which ts by 
faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that 
believe : for there ts no difference ; for all have sinned, 
and come short of the glory of God, being justified 
Sreely by his grace through the redemption that ts in 
Christ Jesus: whom God hath set forth to be a pro- 
pitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his 
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, 
through the forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at 
this time his righteousness; that he might be just, 
and the gustifier of him which believeth in Jesus.” 


Here suffer me to give you a bit of personal 
experience. When I was under the hand of the 
Holy Spirit under conviction of sin, I had a clear 


Just and the Justifier. oy] 


and sharp sense of the justice of God. Sin, what- 
ever it might be to other people, became to me an 
intolerable burden. It was not so much that I 
feared hell, but that I feared sin. I knew myself 
to be so horribly guilty that I remember feeling 
that if God did not punish me for sin he ought to 
do so. I felt that the Judge of all the earth ought 
to condemn such sin as mine. I sat on the judg- 
ment-seat, and I condemned myself to perish ; for I 
confessed that had I been God I could have done 
no other than send such a guilty creature as I was 
down to the lowest hell. All the while, I had upon 
my mind a deep concern for the honour of God’s 
name, and the integrity of his moral government. 
I felt that it would not satisfy my conscience if I 
could be forgiven unjustly. The sin I had com- 
mitted must be punished. But then there was the 
question how God could be just, and yet justify 
me whohad been so guilty. I asked my heart : “ How 
can he be just and yet the justifier?” I was worried 
and wearied with this question ; neither could I see 
any answer to it. Certainly, I could never have 
invented an answer which would have satisfied my 
conscience. 

The doctrine of the atonement is to my mind 
one of the surest proofs of the divine inspiration of 
Holy Scripture. Who would or could have thought 
of the just Ruler dying for the unjust rebel? This 
is no teaching of human mythology, or dream of 
poetical imagination. This method of expiation is 
only known among men because it isa fact: fiction 
could not have devised it. God himself ordained 


28 All of Grace. 

ae ee neh i ae ae AE se eee 
it: it is not a matter which could have been 
imagined, 

I had heard the plan of salvation by the sacrifice 
of Jesus from my youth up; but I did not know 
any more about it in my innermost soul than if I 
had been born and bred a Hottentot. The light 
was there, but I was blind : it was of necessity that 
the Lord himself should make the matter plain 
tome. It came to me as a new revelation, as fresh 
as if I had never read in Scripture that Jesus was 
declared to be the propitiation for sins that God 
might be just. I believe it will have to come asa 
revelation to every new-born child of God when- 
ever he sees it: I mean that glorious doctrine of the 
substitution of the Lord Jesus. I came to understand 
that salvation was possible through vicarious 
sacrifice ; and that provision had been made in the 
first constitution and arrangement of things for 
such a substitution. I was made to see that he 
who is the Son of God, co-equal, and co-eternal 
with the Father, had of old been made the 
covenant head of a chosen people, that he might 
in that capacity suffer for them and _ save 
them. Inasmuch as our fall was not at the first a 
personal one, for we fell in our federal representative, 
the first Adam, it became possible for us to be 
recovered by a second representative, even by him 
who has undertaken to be the covenant head of his 
people, so as to be their second Adam. I saw that 
ere I actually sinned I had fallen by my first father’s 
sin; and I rejoiced that therefore it became pos- 
sible in point of law for me to rise by a second 


Just and the Justifier. 29 


head and representative. The fall by Adam left a 
loophole of escape; another Adam can undo the 
ruin made by the first. When I was anxious about 
the possibility of a just God pardoning me, I under- 
stood and saw by faith that he who is the Son of 
God became man, and in his own blessed person 
bore my sin in his own body on the tree. I saw 
that the chastisement of my peace was laid on him, 
and that with his stripes I was healed. Dear friend, 
have you ever seen that? Have you ever under- 
stood how God can be just to the full, not remitting 
penalty nor blunting the edge of the sword, and 
yet can be infinitely merciful, and can justify the 
ungodly who turn to him? It was because the Son 
of God, supremely glorious in his matchless person, 
undertook to vindicate the law by bearing the sen- 
tence due to me, that therefore God is able to pass 
by my sin. The law of God was more vindicated 
by the death of Christ than it would have been had 
all transgressors been sent to hell. For the Son 
of God to suffer for sin was a more glorious establish- 
ment of the government of God, than for the whole 
race to suffer. | 

Jesus has borne the death penalty on our behalf. 
Behold the wonder! There he hangs upon the 
cross! This is the greatest sight you will ever see. 
Son of God and Son of Man, there he hangs, bear- 
ing pains unutterable, the just for the unjust, to 
bring us to God. Oh, the glory of that sight! The 
innocent punished! The Holy One condemned! 
The Ever-blessed made a curse! The infinitely 
glorious put to a shameful death! The more I 


30 All of Grace. 


look at the sufferings of the Son of God, the more 
sure I am that they must meet my case. Why did 
he suffer, if not to turn aside the penalty from 
us? If, then, he turned it aside by his death, 
it is turned aside, and those who believe in him 
need not fear it. It must be so, that since ex- 
piation is made, God is able to forgive without 
shaking the basis of his throne, or in the least 
degree blotting the statute-book. Conscience 
gets a full answer to her tremendous question. 
The wrath of God against iniquity, whatever that 
may be, must be beyond all conception terrible. 
‘Well did Moses say, “Who knoweth the power of 
thine anger?” Yet when we hear the Lord of 
glory cry, “ Why hast thou forsaken me?” and see 
him yielding up the ghost, we feel that the justice 
of God has received abundant vindication by obe- 
dience so perfect and death so terrible, rendered by 
so divine a person. If God himself bows before his 
own law, what more can be done? There is more 
in the atonement by way of merit, than there is 
in all human sin by way of demerit. The great 
culf of Jesus’ loving self-sacrifice can swallow up 
the mountains of our sins, all of them. For the 
sake of the infinite good of this one representative 
man, the Lord may well look with favour upon 
other men, however unworthy they may be in and 
of themselves. It was a miracle of miracles that 
the Lord Jesus Christ should stand in our stead, 
and : 


“ Bear that we might never bear 
His Father’s righteous ire.” 


Just and the Justifier. 31 


But he has done so. “It is finished.” God will 
spare the sinner because he did not spare his Son. 
God can pass by your transgressions because he 
laid those transgressions upon his Only Begotten 
Son eighteen hundred years ago, If you believe in 
Jesus (that is the point), then your sins were carried 
away by him who was the scape-goat for his people. 

What ts to believe in him? It is not merely to 
say, “ He is God and the Saviour,” but to trust him 
wholly and entirely, and take him for all your salva- 
tion from this time forth and for ever—your Lord, 
your Master, your all. If you will have Jesus, he has 
you already. If you believe on him, I tell you 
you cannot go to hell; for that were to make the 
sacrifice of Christ of none effect. It cannot be that 
a sacrifice should be accepted, and yet the soul 
should die for whom that sacrifice has been received, 
If the believing soul could be condemned, then why 
a sacrifice? If Jesus died in my stead, why should 
I die also? Every believer can claim that the sacri- 
fice was actually made for him: by faith he has laid 
his hands on it, and made it his own, and therefore 
he may rest assured that he can never perish. The 
Lord would not receive this offering on our behalf, 
and then condemn us to die. The Lord cannot read 
our pardon written in the blood of his own 
Son, and then smite us. That were impossible. 
Oh that you may have grace given you at once to 
look away to Jesus, and to begin at the beginning, 
even at Jesus, who is the fountain-head of mercy to 
cuilty man! ce 

“He justifieth the ungodly.” “It is God that 


32 All of Grace. 


justifieth”” therefore, and for that reason only it can 
be done, and he does it through the atoning sacri- 
fice of his divine Son. Therefore it can be justly 
done—so justly done that none will ever question 
it-—so thoroughly done that in the last tremendous 
day, when heaven and earth shall pass away, there 
shall be none that shall deny the validity of the 
justification. “Whois he that condemneth? It 
is Christ that died. Who shall lay anything to the 
charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth.” 

Now, poor soul! will you come into this lifeboat, 
just as you are? Here is safety from the wreck! 
Accept the sure deliverance. “I have nothing with 
me, say you. You are not asked to bring any- 
thing with you. Men who escape for their lives 
will leave even their clothes behind. Leap for it, 
just as you are. 

I will tell you this thing about myself to encour- 
age you. My sole hope for heaven lies in the full 
atonement made upon Calvary’s cross for the un- 
godly. On that I firmly rely. I have not the 
shadow of a hope anywhere else. ‘You are in the 
same condition as I am; for we neither of us have 
anything of our own worth thinking of as a ground 
of trust, Let us join hands and stand together 
at the foot of the cross, and trust our souls once 
for all to him who shed his blood for the guilty. 
We will be saved by one and the same Saviour. 
If you perish trusting him, I must perish too. What 
can Ido more to prove my own confidence in the 
gospel which I set before you? 


ff ” oe 
om pas ie ae 
Ek EASE AEH 


CONCERNING DELIVERANCE ¥ROM 
SIN NING 


or two to those se understand the 
method of justification by faith which 
is in Christ Jesus, but whose trouble is 
that they cannot cease from sin. We can never be 
happy, restful, or spiritually healthy till we become 
holy. We must be rid of sin; but how is the 
riddance to be wrought? This is the life-or-death 
question of many. The old nature is very strong, 
and they have tried to curb and tame it; but it will 
not be subdued, and they find themselves, though 
anxious to be better, if anything growing worse than 
before. The heart is so hard, the will is so ob- 
stinate, the passions are so furious, the thoughts 
are so volatile, the imagination is so ungovernable, 
the desires are so wild, that the man feels that he 
has a den of wild beasts within him, which will eat 
him up sooner than be ruled by him. We may say 
of our fallen nature what the Lord said to Job 
concerning Leviathan: “ Wilt thou play with him 
as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy 
maidens?” A man might as well hope to hold the 
north wind in the hollow of his hand as expect to 
control by his own strength those boisterous powers 
3 


34 All of Grace. 


which dwell within his fallen nature. This is a 
greater feat than any of the fabled labours of Her- 
cules : God is wanted here. 

“L could believe that Jesus would forgive sin,’ 
says one, “ dut then my trouble is that I sin again, 
and that I feel such awful tendencies to evil within 
me. \s surely as a stone, if it be flung up into the 
air, soon comes down again to the ground, so do J, 
though I am sent up to heaven by earnest preach- 
ing, return again to my insensible state. Alas! Iam 
easily fascinated with the basilisk eyes of sin, and 
am thus held as under a spell, so that I cannot 
escape from my own folly,” 

Dear friend, salvation would be a sadly incom- 
plete affair if it did not deal with this part of our 
ruined estate. We want to be purified as well 
as pardoned. Justification without sanctification 
would not be salvation at all. It would call the 
leper clean, and leave him to die of his disease; it 
would forgive the rebellion and allow the rebel to 
remain an enemy to his king. It would remove the 
consequences but overlook the cause, and this would 
leave an endless and hopeless task before us. It 
would stop the stream for a time, but leave an open 
fountain of defilement, which would sooner or later 
break forth with increased power. Remember that 
the Lord Jesus came to take away sin in three ways ;_ 
he came to remove ¢he penalty of sin, the power of sin, 
and, at last, the presence of sin. At once you may 
reach to the second part—the power of sin may 
immediately be broken ; and so you will be on the 
road to the third, namely, the removal of the 


Deliverance from Sinning. 35 
Se oe ee 522 
presence of sin. “We know that he was manifested 
to take away our sins.” 

The angel said of our Lord, “Thou shalt call his 
name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their 
sins.” Our Lord Jesus came to destroy in us the 
works of the devil. That which was said at our 
Lord’s birth was also declared in his death ; for when 
the soldier pierced his side forthwith came there out 
blood and water, to set forth the double cure by 
which we are delivered from the guilt and the 
defilement of sin. 

If, however, you are troubled about the power 
of sin, and about the tendencies of your nature, as 
you well may be, here is a promise for you. Have 
faith in it, for it stands in that covenant of grace 
which is ordered in all things and sure. God, who 
cannot lie, has said in Ezekiel xxxvi. 26 -— 


“A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit 
will I put within you: and I will take away the 
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an 
heart of flesh.” 


You see, it is all “I will,” and “I will.” “T will 
give,” and “I will take away.” This is the royal 
style of the King of kings, who is able to accom- 
plish all his will. No word of his shall ever fall to 
the ground. 

The Lord knows right well that you cannot 
change your own heart, and cannot cleanse your 
own nature; but he also knows that he can do 
both. He can cause the Ethiopian to change his 
skin, and the leopard his spots. Hear this, and be 


26 All of Grace. 


nl 


astonished: he can create you a second time; he 
can cause you to be born again. This is a miracle 
of grace, but the Holy Ghost will perform it. “at 
would be a very wonderful thing if one could stand 
at the foot of the Niagara Falls, and could speak a 
word which should make the river St. Lawrence 
begin to run up stream, and leap up that great preci- 
pice over which it now rolls in stupendous force. 
Nothing but the power of God could achieve that 
marvel; but that would be no more than a fit parallel 
to what would take place if the course of your nature 
were altogether reversed. All things are possible 
with God. He can reverse the direction of your 
desires and the current of your life, and instead 
of going downward from God, he can make your 
whole being tend upwards toward God. That is, 
_in fact, what the Lord has promised to do for all 
who are in the covenant ; and we know from Scrip- 
ture that all believers are in the covenant. Let me 
read the words again :— | 


“4 new heart also will I give you,and anew spirit 
will I put within you: and I will take away the 
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an 
heart of flesh.” 


What a wonderful promise! Andi it is yea and 
amen in Christ Jesus to the glory of God by us. 
Let us lay hold of it; accept it as true, and appro- 
priate it to ourselves. Then shall it be fulfilled in 
us, and we shall have, in after days and years, to 
sing of that wondrous change which the sovereign 
grace of God has wrought in us. 


Deliverance from Sinning. 37 


=e 


eed 


It is well worthy of consideration that when the 
Lord takes away the stony heart, that deed is done; 
and when that is once done, no known power can 
ever take away that new heart which he gives, and 
that right spirit which he puts within us. “The 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance” ; 
that is, without repentance on his part; he does 
not take away what he has once given. Let him 
renew you, and you will be renewed. Man’s refor- 
mations and cleanings up soon come to an end, for 
the dog returns to his vomit ; but when God puts 
a new heart into us, the new heart is there for ever, 
and never will it harden into stone again. He who 
made it flesh will keep it so. Herein we may re- 
joice and be glad for ever in that which God creates 
in the kingdom of his grace. 

To put the matter very simply—did you ever 
hear Mr. Rowland Hill’s illustration of the cat and 
the sow? I will give it in my own fashion, to illus- 
trate our Saviour’s expressive words—“ Ye must be 
born again.” Do you see that cat? What a cleanly 
creature she is! How cleverly she washes herself 
with her tongue and her paws! It is quite a pretty 
sight! Did you ever see a sow do that? No, you 
never did. It is contrary to its nature. It prefers 
to wallow in the mire. Go and teach a sow to 
wash itself, and see how little success you would 
gain. It would be a great sanitary improvement if 
swine would be clean. Teach them to wash and 
clean themselves as the cat has been doing. Useless 
task. You may by force wash that sow, but it 
hastens to the mire, and is soon as foul as ever. 


38 All of Grace. 


The only way in which you can get a sow to 
wash itself is to transform it into a cat; then it 
will wash and be clean, but not till then! Suppose 
that transformation to be accomplished, and then 
what was difficult or impossible is easy enough, 
the swine will henceforth be fit for your parlour and 
your hearthrug. So it is with an ungodly man, 
you cannot force him to do what a renewed man 
does most willingly ; you may teach him, and set 
him a good example, but he cannot learn the art 
of holiness, for he has no mind to it; his nature 
leads him another way. When the Lord makes a 
new man of him, then all things wear a different 
aspect. So greatis this change, that I once heard a 
convert say, “Either all the world is changed, or 
else lam.” The new nature follows after right as 
naturally as the old nature wandered’after wrong. 
What a blessing to receive such a nature! Only 
the Holy Ghost can give it. 

Did it ever strike you what a wonderful thing it 
is for the Lord to give a new heart and a right 
spirit to aman? You have seen a lobster, per- 
haps, which has fought with another lobster, and 
lost one of its claws, and a new claw has srown. 
That is a remarkable thing ; but it is a much more 
astounding fact that a man should have a new 
heart given to him. This, indeed, is a miracle 
beyond the powers of nature. There isa tree. If 
you cut off one of its limbs, another one may grow 
in its place; but can you change its nature; can 
you sweeten sour sap ; can you make the thorn bear 

figs? You can graft something better into it, and 


Deliverance from Sinning. 39 


that is the analogy which nature gives us of the 
work of grace; but absolutely to change the vital 
sap of the tree would be a miracle indeed. Such 
a prodigy and mystery of power God works in all 
who believe in Jesus. 

If you yield yourself up to his divine working, 
the Lord will alter your nature ; he will subdue the 
old nature, and breathe new life into you. Put your 
trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, and he. will take 
the stony heart out of your flesh, and he will give 
you a heart of flesh. Where everything was hard, 
everything shall be tender; where everything was 
vicious, everything shall be virtuous ; where every- 
thing tended downward, everything shall rise up- 
ward with impetuous force. The lion of anger shall 
give place to the lamb of meekness; the raven 
of uncleanness shall fly before the dove of purity ; 
the vile serpent of deceit shall be trodden under 
the heel of truth. 

I have seen with my own eyes such marvellous 
changes of moral and spiritual character that I 
despair of none. I could, if it were fitting, point 
out those who were once unchaste women who are 
now pure as the driven snow, and blaspheming men 
who now delight all around them by their intense 
devotion. Thieves are made honest, drunkards 
sober, liars truthful, and scoffers zealous. Wherever 
the grace of God has appeared to a man it has 
trained him to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, 
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this 
present evil world; and, dear reader, 27 w/t do the 
same for you. 


AO All of Grace. 


“I cannot make this change,’ says one. Who 
said you could? The Scripture which we have 
quoted speaks not of what maz will do, but of what 
God will do. It is God’s promise, and it is for him 
to fulfil his own engagements. Trust you in him to 
fulfil his word to you, and it will be done. 

“But how is it to be done?” What business is 
that of yours? Must the Lord explain his methods 
before you will believe him? The Lord’s working 
in this matter isa great mystery: the Holy Ghost 
performs it. He who made the promise has the 
responsibility of keeping the promise, and he is 
equal to the occasion. God, who promises this 
marvellous change, will assuredly carry it out in all 
who receive Jesus, for to all such he gives power 
to become the Sons of God. Oh that you would 
believe it! Oh that you would do-the gracious 
Lord the justice to believe that he can and will 
do this for you, great miracle though it will be! 
Oh that you would believe that God cannot lie! 
Oh that you would trust him for a new heart, and 
a right spirit, for he can give them to you! May 
the Lord give you faith in his promise, faith in 
his Son, faith in the Holy Spirit, and faith in him- 
self, and to him shall be praise and honour and 
glory for ever and ever! Amen, 


BY GRACH THROUGH FAITH. 


‘* By grace are ye saved through faith.” —Ephesians ii, 8. 


side that I may ask my reader to ob- 
serve adoringly the fountain head of our 
salvation, which is the grace of God. 
“ By grace are ye saved.” Because God is gracious, 
therefore sinful men are forgiven, converted, purified, 
and saved. It is not because of anything in them, 
or that ever can be in them, that they are saved ; 
but because of the boundless love, goodness, pity, 
compassion, mercy, and grace of God. Tarry a 
moment, then, at the well-head. Behold the pure 
river of water of life as it proceeds out of the throne 
of God and of the Lamb! 

What an abyss is the grace of God! Who can 
measure its breadth? Who can fathom its depth? 
Like all the rest of the divine attributes, it is infinite. 
God is full of love, for “God is love.” God is full 
of goodness: the very name “GOD” is short for 
“good.” Unbounded goodness and love enter into 
the very essence of the Godhead. It is because 
“his mercy endureth for ever” that men are not 
destroyed ; because “his compassions fail not” that 
sinners are brought to himself and forgiven, 


42 All of Grace, 
ee 

Right well remember this ; or you may fall into 
error by fixing your minds so much upon the faith 
which is the channel of salvation as to forget the 
grace which is the fountain and source even of faith 
itself. Faith is the work of God’s grace in us, No 
man can say that Jesus is the Christ but by the 
Holy Ghost. “No man cometh unto me,” saith Jesus, 
“except the Father which hath sent me draw him.” 
So that faith, which is coming to Christ, is the result | 
of divine drawing. Grace is the first and last 
moving cause of salvation ; and faith, essential as it 
is, is only an important part of the machinery which 
grace employs. We are saved “ through faith,” but 
salvation is “by grace.” Sound forth those words 
as with the archangel’s trumpet: “ By grace are ye 
saved.” What glad tidings for the undeserving ! 

Faith occupies the position of a channel or condutt- 
pipe. Grace is the fountain and the stream; faith 
is the aqueduct along which the flood of mercy 
flows down to refresh the thirsty sons of men. It 
is a great pity when the aqueduct is broken. It is 
asad sight to see around Rome the many noble 
aqueducts which no longer convey water into the 
city, because the arches are broken and the mar- 
vellous structures are in ruins. The aqueduct must 
be kept entire to convey the current ; and, even so, 
faith must be true and sound, leading right up to 
God and coming right down to ourselves, that it 
may become a serviceable channel of mercy to our 
souls. 

Still, I again remind you that faith is only the 
channel or aqueduct, and not the foyntain head, 


By Grace are ye Saved. 43 


and we must not look so much to it as to exalt it 
above the divine source of all blessing which lies in 
the grace of God. Mever make a Christ out of 
your faith, nor think of it as if it were the inde- 
pendent source of your salvation. Our life is found 
in “looking unto Jesus,” not in looking to our own 
faith. By faith all things become possible to us ; 
yet the power is not in the faith, but in the God upon 
whom faith relies. Grace is the locomotive engine, 
and faith is the chain by which the carriage of the 
soul is attached to the great motive power. The 
righteousness of faith is not the moral excellence of 
faith, but the righteousness of Jesus Christ which 
faith grasps and appropriates. The peace within 
the soul is not derived from the contemplation of 
our own faith; but it comes to us from him who is 
our peace, the hem of whose garment faith touches, 
and virtue comes out of him into the soul. 

See then, dear friend, that the weakness of your 
faith will not destroy you. A trembling hand may 
receive a golden gift. The Lord’s salvation can 
come to us though we have only faith as a grain of 
mustard seed. The power lies in the grace of God, 
and not in our faith. Great messages can be sent 
along slender wires, and the peace-giving witness 
of the Holy Spirit can reach the heart by means of 
a thread-like faith which seems almost unable to 
sustain its own weight. Think more of HIM to 
whom you look than of the look itself. You must 
look away even from your own looking, and see 
nothing but Jesus, and the grace of God revealed in 
him, 


FAITH, WHAT XS x1? 


V9Z HAT is this faith concerning which it is 
said, “By grace are ye saved through 
Jaith” ? There are many descriptions 

= of faith ; but almost all the definitions 
I have met with have made me understand it less 
than I did before I saw them. The negro said, 
when he read the chapter, that he would confound 
it; and it is very likely that he did so, though he 
meant to erpound it. We may explain faith till 
nobody understands it. I hope I shall not be guilty 
of that fault. Faith is the simplest of all things, 
and perhaps because of its simplicity it is the more 
difficult to explain. 

What is faith? J¢ 2s made up of three things— 
knowledge, belief, and trust. Knowledge comes first. 
“ How shall they believe in him of whom they have 
‘not heard?” I want to be informed of a fact 
before I can possibly believe it. ‘ Faith cometh 
by hearing”: we must first hear, in order that we 
may know what is to be believed. “They that 
know thy name will put their trust in thee.” A 
measure of knowledge is essential to faith: hence 
the importance of getting knowledge. “Incline 
your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul 
shall liye:” such was the word of the ancient 


What is Faith ? AS 
prophet, and it is the word of the gospel still. 
Search the Scriptures and learn what the Holy 
Spirit teacheth concerning Christ and his salva- 
tion. Seek to know God: “For he that cometh 
to God must believe that he is, and that he is a 
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.” May 
the Holy Spirit give you the spirit of knowledge 
and of the fear of the Lord! Know the gospel : 
know what the good news is, how it talks of free 
forgiveness, and of change of heart, of adoption 
into the family of God, and of countless other 
blessings. Know especially Christ Jesus the Son 
of God, the Saviour of men, united to us by 
his human nature, and yet one with God; and 
thus able to act as mediator between God and 
man, able to lay his hand upon both, and to be the 
connecting link between the sinner and the Judge 
of all the earth. Endeavour to know more and 
more of Christ Jesus. Endeavour especially to 
know the doctrine of the sacrifice of Christ ; 
for the point upon which saving faith mainly 
fixes itself is this—“‘God was in Christ, re- 
conciling the world unto himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them.” Know that Jesus was 
“made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is 
everyone that hangeth on a tree.” Drink deep 
into the doctrine of the substitutionary work of 
Christ ; for therein lies the sweetest possible comfort 
to the guilty sons of men, since the Lord “ made 
him to be sin for us, that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in him.” Faith begins with 
knowledge. 


—_ 


46 All of Grace. 


The mind goes on to believe that these things are 
true. The soul believes that God is, and that he 
hears the cries of sincere hearts ; that the gospel is 
from God ; that justification by faith is the grand 
truth which God hath revealed in these last days 
by his Spirit more clearly than before. Then the 
heart believes that Jesus is verily and in truth our 
God and Saviour, the Redeemer of men, the Pro- 
phet, Priest, and King of his people. All this is 
accepted as sure truth, not to be called in question. 
I pray that you may at once come to this. Get 
firmly to believe that “the blood of Jesus Christ, 
God’s dear son, cleanseth us from all sin” ; that his 
sacrifice is complete and fully accepted of God on 
man’s behalf, so that he that believeth on Jesus 
is not condemned. Believe these truths as you 
believe any other statements; for the difference 
between common faith and saving faith lies mainly 
in the subjects upon which it is exercised. Believe 
the witness of God just as you believe the tes- 
timony of your own father or friend. “If we 
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is 
greater.” | 

So far you have made an advance towards faith ; 
only one more ingredient is needed to complete it, 
which is zvust. Commit yourself to the merciful 
God ; rest your hope on the gracious gospel ; trust 
your soul on the dying and living Saviour; wash 
away your sins in the atoning blood; accept his 
perfect righteousness, and all is well. Trust is the 
life-blood of faith: there is no saving faith without 
it. The Puritans were accustomed to explain faith 


What ts Faith ? A? 
by the word “recumbency.” It means leaning upon 
a thing. Lean with all your weight upon Christ. 
It would be a better illustration still if I said, fall 
at full length, and lie on the Rock of Ages. Cast 
yourself upon Jesus; rest in him; commit your- 
self tohim. That done, you have exercised saving 
faith. Faith is not a blind thing ; for faith begins 
with knowledge. It is not a speculative thing; for 
faith believes facts of which it is sure. It is not 
an unpractical, dreamy thing ; for faith trusts, and 
stakes its destiny upon the truth of revelation. That 
is one way of describing what faith is: I wonder 
whether I have.“ confounded ” it already. 


Let me try again. Fazth is believing that Christ ts 
what he is said to be, and that he will do what he has 
promised to do, and then to expect this of him. The 
Scriptures speak of Jesus Christ as being God, God 
in human flesh ; as being perfect in his character ; 
as being made a sin-offering on our behalf ; as bear- 
ing our sins in his own body on the tree. The Scrip- 
ture speaks of him as having finished transgression, 
made an end of sin, and brought in everlasting 
righteousness. The sacred records further tell us 
that he “rose again from the dead,” that he “ ever 
liveth to make intercession for us,” that he has 
gone up into the glory, and has taken possession 
of heaven on the behalf of his people, and that he 
will shortly come again “to judge the world in 
righteousness, and his people with equity.” We are 
most firmly to believe that it is even so; for this 
is the testimony of God the Father when he said, 


48 All of Grace. 


“This is my beloved Son; hear ye him.” This 
also is testified by God the Holy Spirit; for the 
Spirit has borne witness to Christ, both in the 
inspired word and by divers miracles, and by his 
working in the hearts of men. Weare to believe 
this testimony to be true. 

Faith also believes that Christ will do what he 
has promised ; that since he has promised to cast out 
none that come to him, it is certain that he will not 
cast ws out if we come to him. Faith believes that 
since Jesus said, “The water that I shall give him 
shall be in him a well of water springing up into 
everlasting life,” it must be true; and if we get 
this living water from Christ it will abide in ws, 
and will well up within ws in streams of holy 
life. Whatever Christ has promised to do he will 
do, and we must believe this, so as to look for par- 
don, justification, preservation, and eternal glory 
from his hands, according as he has promised 
them to believers in him. 

Then comes the next necessary step. Jesus is 
what he is said to be, Jesus will do what he says he 
will do; therefore we must each one trust him, 
saying, “ He will be to me what he says he is, and 
he will do to me what he has promised to do; I 
leave myself in the hands of him who is appointed 
to save, that he may save me. I rest upon his pro- 
mise that he will do even as he has said.” This is 
a saving faith, and he that hath it hath everlasting 
life. Whatever his dangers and difficulties, what- 
ever his darkness and depression, whatever his 
infirmities and sins, he that believeth thus on Christ 


What ts Faith ? 7K) 


Pilar een 


Jesus is not condemned, and shall never come into 
condemnation. 

May that explanation be of some service! I 
trust it may be used by the Spirit of God to direct 
my reader into immediate peace. “Be not afraid : 
only believe.” Trust, and be at rest. 


My fear is lest the reader should rest content 
with understanding what is to be done, and yet 
never do it. Better the poorest real faith ac- 
tually at work, than the best ideal of it left in 
the region of speculation. The great matter is to 
believe on the Lord Jesus a¢ once. Never mind 
distinctions and definitions. A hungry man eats 
_ though he does not understand the composition of 
his food, the anatomy of his mouth, or the process 
of digestion: he lives because he eats. Another 
far more clever person understands thoroughly the 
science of nutrition ; but if he does not eat he will 
die, with all his knowledge. There are, no doubt, 
many at this hour in hell who understood the 
doctrine of faith, but did not believe. On the 
other hand, not one who has trusted in the Lord 
Jesus has ever been cast out, though he may never 
have been able intelligently to define his faith. O 
dear reader, receive the Lord Jesus into your soul, 
and you shall liveforever. “HE THAT BELIEVETH 
IN HIM HATH EVERLASTING LIFE.” 


SV APrUGESF SA 
PACS: SS EEC 2) '/_~S 


HNO make the matter of faith clearer still, 
, I will give you a few illustrations. 
Though the Holy Spirit alone can 
make my reader see, it is my duty and 
my joy to furnish all the light I can, and to pray 
the divine Lord to open blind eyes. Oh that my 
reader would pray the same prayer for himself! 

The faith which saves has its analogies in the 
human frame. 

It is the eye which looks. By the eye we bring 
into the mind that which is far away ; we can bring 
the sun and the far-off stars into the mind by a 
elance of the eye. So by trust we bring the Lord 
Jesus near to us; and though he be far away in 
heaven, he enters into our heart. Only look to 
Jesus; for the hymn 1s strictly true— 


“There is life in a look at the Crucified One, 
There is life at this moment for thee.” 


\ 


Faith is the hand which grasps. When our hand 
takes hold of anything for itself, it does precisely 
what faith docs when it appropriates Christ and the 
blessings of his redemption. Faith says, “Jesus is 
mine.” Faith hears of the pardoning blood, and 
cries, “I accept it to pardon we.” Faith calls the 
legacies of the dying Jesus her own; and they are 


Faith I. llustvated. i 


her own, for faith is Christ’s heir; he has given 
himself and all that he has to faith. Take, O friend, 
that which grace has provided for thee. You will 
not be a thief, for you have a divine permit : 
“Whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely.” He who may have a treasure simply by 
his grasping it will be foolish indeed if he remains 
poor. 

Faith is the mouth which feeds upon Christ. 
Before food can nourish us, it must be received into 
us. This is a simple matter—this eating and drink- 
ing. We willingly receive into the mouth that 
which is our food, and then we consent that it 
should pass down into our inward parts, wherein 
it is taken up and absorbed into our bodily frame. 
Paul says, in his Epistle to the Romans, in the 
tenth chapter, “ The word is nigh thee, even in thy 
mouth.” Now then, all that is to be done is to 
swallow it, to suffer it to go down into the soul. 
Oh that men had an appetite! for he who is hungry 
and sees meat before him does not need to be 
taught how to eat. “Give me,” said one, “a knife 
and a fork and a chance.” He was fully prepared 
to do the rest. Truly, a heart which hungers and 
thirsts after Christ has but to know that he is freely 
given, and at once it will receive him. If my 
reader is in such a case, let him not hesitate to re- 
ceive Jesus; for he may be sure that he will never 
be blamed for doing so ; for “unto as many as re- 
ceived him, to them gave he power to become 
the sons of God.” He never repulses one, but he 
authorizes all who come to remain sons for ever, 


62 : All of Grace. 


The pursuits of life illustrate faith in many ways. 
The farmer buries good seed in the earth, and ex- 
pects it not only to live but to be mutiplied. He 
has faith in the covenant arrangement, that seed- 
time and harvest shall not cease, and he is rewarded 
for his faith. 

The merchant places his money in the care of a 
banker, and trusts altogether to the honesty and 
soundness of the bank. He entrusts his capital to 
another’s hands, and feels far more at ease than if 
he had the solid gold locked up in an iron safe. 

The sailor trusts himself to the sea. When he 
swims he takes his foot off from the bottom and 
rests upon the buoyant ocean. He could not swim 
if he did not wholly cast himself upon the water. 

The goldsmith puts precious metal into the fire 
which seems eager to consume it, but he receives it 
back again from the furnace purified by the heat. 

You cannot turn anywhere in life without seeing 
faith in operation between man and man, or be- 
tween man and natural law. Now, just as we trust 
in daily life, even so are we to trust in God as he 
reveals himself in Christ Jesus. 

Faith exists in different persons in various de- 
grees, according to the amount of their knowledge 
or growth in grace. Sometimes faith is little more 
than a simple clinging to Christ; a sense of de- 
pendence and a willingness so to depend. When 
you are down at the seaside you will see limpets 
sticking to the rock. You walk with a soft tread 
up to the rock; you strike the limpet a rapid blow 
with your walking-stick and off he comes. Try 


Faith IMustrated, 53 


_ 


the next limpet in that way. You have given hirn 
warning ; he heard the blow with which you struck 
his neighbour, and he.clings with all his might. 
You will never get him off; not you! Strike, and 
strike again, but you may as soon break the rock. 
Our little friend, the limpet, does not know much, 
but he clings. He is not acquainted with the geo- 
logical formation of the rock, but heclings, Hecan 
cling, and he has found something to cling to: this 
is all his stock of knowledge, and he uses it for his 
security and salvation. It isthe limpet’s life to cling 
to the rock, and it is the sinner’s life to cling to 
Jesus. Thousands of God’s people have no more 
faith than this ; they know enough to cling to Jesus 
with all their heart and soul, and this suffices for 
present peace and eternal safety. Jesus Christ is to 
them a Saviour strong and mighty, a rock im- 
movable and immutable; they cleave to him for 
dear life, and this dlingtine saves them. Reader, 
cannot you cling? Do so at once. 

Faith is seen when one man relies upon another 
from a knowledge of the superiority of that other. 
This is a higher faith ; the faith which knows the 
reason for its dependence, and acts upon it. I do 
not think the limpet knows much about the rock ; 
but as faith grows it becomes more and more intel- 
ligent. A blind man trusts himself with his guide 
because he knows that his friend can see, and, 
trusting, he walks where his guide conducts him. 
If the poor man is born blind he does not know 
what sight is; but he knows that there is such a 
thing as sight, and that it is possessed by his friend, 


54 All of Grace. 


and therefore he freely puts his hand into the hand 
of the seeing one, and follows his leadership. “We 
walk by faith, not by sight.” “Blessed are they 
which have not seen, and yet have believed.” This 
is as good an image of faith as well can be;3, we 
know that Jesus has about him merit, and power, 
and blessing, which we do not possess, and there- 
fore we gladly trust ourselves to him to be to us 
what we cannot be to ourselves. We trust him as 
the blind man trusts his guide. He never betrays 
our confidence ; but he “is made of God unto us 
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and 
redemption.” 

Every boy that goes to school has to exert faith 
while learning. His schoolmaster teaches him 
geography, and instructs him as to the form of the 
earth, and the existence of certain great cities and 
empires. The boy does not himself know that 
these things are true, except that he believes his 
teacher, and the books put into his hands. That 
is what you will have to do with Christ, if you are 
to be saved ; you must simply know because he tells 
you, believe because he assures you it is even so, 
and trust yourself with him because he promises 
you that salvation will be the result. Almost all 
that you and I know has come to us by faith. A 
scientific discovery has been made, and we are sure 
of it. On what ground do we believe it? On the 
authority of certain well-known men of learning, 
whose reputations are established. We have never 
made or seen their experiments, but we believe 
their witness. You must do the like with regard tg 


Faith Itlustrated. 55 


— 


Jesus: because he teaches you certain truths you 
are to be his disciple, and believe his words ; because 
_ he has performed certain acts you are to be his client, 
and trust yourself with him. He is infinitely superior 
to you, and presents himself to your confidence as 
your Master and Lord. If you will receive him 
and his words you shall be saved. 

Another and a higher form of faith is that faith 
which grows out of love. Why does a boy trust 
his father? The reason why the child trusts his 
father is because he loves him. Blessed and happy 
are they who have a sweet faith in Jesus, inter- 
twined with deep affection for him, for this is a 
restful confidence. These lovers of Jesus are 
charmed with his character, and delighted with his 
mission, they are carried away by the lovingkind- 
ness that he has manifested, and therefore they 
cannot help trusting him, because they so much 
admire, revere, and love him. 

The way of loving trust in the Saviour may thus 
be illustrated. A lady is the wife of the most emi- 
nent physician of the day. She is seized with a 
dangerous illness, and is smitten down by its power ; 
yet she is wonderfully calm and quiet, for her hus- 
band has made this disease his special study, and has 
healed thousands who were similarly afflicted. She 
is not in the least troubled, for she feels perfectly 
safe in the hands of one so dear to her, and in 
whom skill and love are blended in their highest 
forms. Her faith is reasonable and natural; her 
husband, from every point of view, deserves it of 


her. This is the kind of faith which the happiest 


56 All of Grace. 


of believers exercise towards Christ. There is no 
physician like him, none can save as he can; we 
love him, and he loves us, and therefore we put 
ourselves into his hands, accept whatever he pre- 
scribes, and do whatever he bids. We feel that 
nothing can be wrongly ordered while he is the 
director of our affairs; for he loves us too well to 
let us perish, or suffer a single needless pang. 

Faith is the root of obedience, and this may be 
clearly seen in the affairs of life. When a captain 
trusts a pilot to steer his vessel into port he manages 
the vessel according to his direction. When a 
traveller trusts a guide to conduct him over a diffi- 
cult pass, he follows the track which his guide points 
out, When a patient believes in a physician, he 
carefully follows his prescriptions and directions, 
Faith which refuses to obey the commands of the 
Saviour is a mere pretence, and will never save the 
soul. We trust Jesus tosave us: he gives us direc- 
tions as to the way of salvation: we follow those 
directions and are saved. Let not my reader forget 
_ this. Trust Jesus, and prove your trust by doing 
whatever he bids you. 

A notable form of faith arises out of assured know- 
ledge ; this comes of growth in grace, and is the 
faith which believes Christ because it knows him, and 
trusts him because it has proved him to be infallibly 
faithful. An old Christian was in the habit of 
writing T and P in the margin of her Bible when- 
ever she had tried and proved a promise. How 
easy it is to trusta tried and proved Saviour! You 
cannot do this as yet, but you will do so. Everything 


Faith Illustrated. b7 


must have a beginning. You will rise to strong 
faith in due time. This matured faith asks not for 
signs and tokens, but bravely believes. Look at the 
faith of the master mariner—I have often wondered 
at it. He looses his cable, he steams away from the 
land. For days, weeks, or even months, he never 
sees sail or shore; yet on he goes day and night with- 
out fear, till one morning he finds himself exactly 
opposite to the desired haven towards which he has 
been steering. Howhas he found his way over the 
tracklessdeep? He has trusted in his compass, his 
nautical almanack, his glass, and the heavenly 
bodies; and obeying their guidance, without sight- 
ing land, he has steered so accurately that he has not 
to change a point to enter into port. It is a won- 
derful thing—that sailing or steaming without sight. 
Spiritually it is a blessed thing to leave altogether 
the shores of sight and feeling, and to say, “ Good- 
bye” to inward feelings, cheering. providences, signs, 
tokens, and so forth. It is glorious to be far out on 
the ocean of divine love, believing in God, and 
steering for heaven straight away by the direction 
ofthe Word of God. “Blessed are they that have 
not seen, and yet have believed” : to them shall be 
administered an abundant entrance at the last, and 
a safe voyage on the way. Will not my reader put 
his trust in God in Christ Jesus? There I rest with 
joyous confidence. Brother, come with me, and 

believe our Father and our Saviour. Come at once. 


HY is Faith selected as the channel of 
Salvation? No doubt this enquiry is 
often made. “By grace are ye saved 
through faith,’ is assuredly the doctrine 

of Holy Scripture, and the ordinance of God; but 

why is it so? Why is faith selected rather thas 
hope, or love, or patience ? 
It becomes us to be modest in answering such 

a question, for God’s ways are not always to be 

understood; nor are we allowed presumptuously 

to question them. Humbly we would reply that, 
as far as we can tell, faith has been selected as 
the channel of grace because ¢here is a natural 
adaptation in faith to be used as the receiver. Sup- 
pose that I am about to give a poor man an alms: 

I put it into hishand—why? Well, it would hardly 

be fitting to put it into his ear, or to lay it upon his 

foot ; the hand seems made on purpose to receive, 

So, in our mental frame, faith is created on purpose 

to be a receiver: it is the hand of the man, and 

there is a fitness in receiving grace by its means. 
Do let me put this very plainly. Faith which re- 
ceives Christ is as simple an act as when your child 
receives an apple from you, because you hold it out 
and promise to give him the apple if he comes for it, 


Saved by Faith. 59 


The belief and the receiving relate only to an apple ; 
but they make up precisely the same act as the 
faith which deals with eternal salvation. What 
the child’s hand isto the apple, that your faith is 
to the perfect salvation of Christ. The child’s hand 
does not make the apple, nor improve the apple, 
nor deserve the apple; it only takes it ; and faith 
is chosen by God to be the receiver of salvation, 
because it does not pretend to create salvation, nor 
to help in it, but it is content humbly to receive it. 
“Faith is the tongue that begs pardon, the hand 
which receives it, and the eye which sees it; but it 
is not the price which buys it.” Faith never makes 
herself her own plea, she rests all her argument 
upon the blood of Christ. She becomes a good 
servant to bring the riches of the Lord Jesus to the 
soul, because she acknowledges whence she drew 
them, and owns that grace alone entrusted her 
with them. : 

Faith, again, is doubtless selected because z¢ gives 
all the glory to God. It is of faith that it might be 
by grace, and it is of grace that there might be no 
boasting; for God cannot endure pride. “The 
proud he knoweth afar off,” and he has no wish to 
come nearer to them. He will not give salvation 
in a way which would suggest or foster pride. 
Paul saith, “Not of works, lest any man should 
boast.” Now, faith excludes all boasting. The 
hand which receives charity does not say, “I am 
to be thanked for accepting the gift” : that would 
be absurd. When the hand conveys bread to 
the mouth it does not say to the body, “ Thank 


60 All of Grace. 

me; for I feed you.” It is a very simple thing 
that the hand does, though a very necessary thing ; 
and it never arrogates glory to itself for what it 
does. So God has selected faith to receive the 


unspeakable gift of his grace because it cannot 


take to itself any credit, but must adore the gra- 
cious God who is the giver of all good. Faith sets 
the crown upon the right head, and therefore the 


Lord Jesus was wont to put the crown upon the ~ 


head of faith, saying, “Thy faith hath saved thee ; 
go in peace.” | 

Next, God selects faith as the channel of salva- 
tion because z¢ zs a sure method, linking man with 
God. When man confides in God, there is a point 
of union between them, and that union guarantees 
blessing. Faith saves us because it makes us cling 
to God, and so brings us into connection with him. 
I have often used the following illustration, but I 
must repeat it, because I cannot think of a better. 
I am told that years ago a boat was upset above 
the falls of Niagara, and two men were being car- 
ried down the current, when persons on the shore 
managed to float a rope out to them, which rope 
was seized by them both. One of them held fast 
to it and was safely drawn to the bank; but the 
other, seeing a great log come floating by, unwisely 
let go the rope and clung to the log, for it was the 
bigger thing of the two, and apparently better to 
cling to. Alas! the log with the man on it went 
right over the vast abyss, because there was no 
union between the log and the shore. The size 
of the log was no benefit to him who grasped it ; 


€ 


Saved by Faith. 61 


it needed a connection with the shore to produce 
safety. So when a man trusts to his works, or to 
sacraments, or to anything of that sort, he will 
not be saved, because there is no junction be- 
tween him and Christ; but faith, though it may 
seem to be like a slender cord, is in the hand of 
the great God on the shore side ; infinite power 
pulls in the connecting line, and thus draws the 
man from destruction. Oh the blessedness of faith, 
because it unites us to God! 

Faith is chosen again, because zt douches the 
springs of action. Even in common things faith 
of a certain sort lies at the root of all. I wonder 
whether I shall be wrong if I say that we never 
do anything except through faith of some sort. If 
I walk across my study it is because I believe my 
legs will carry me. A man eats because he believes 
in the necessity of food ; he goes to business because 
he believes in the value of money; he accepts a 
cheque because he believes that the Bank will 
honour it. Columbus discovered America because 
he believed that there was another continent beyond 
the ocean; and the Pilgrim Fathers colonized it 
because they believed that God would be with 
them on those rocky shores. Most grand deeds 
have been born of faith; for good or for evil, faith 
works wonders by the man in whom it dwells. 
Faith in its natural form is an all-prevailing force, 
which enters into all manner of human actions. 
Possibly he who derides faith in God is the man 
who in an evil form has the most of faith ; indeed, 
he usually falls into a credulity which would be 


62 All of Grace. 


ridiculous, if it were not disgraceful. God gives’ 
salvation to faith, because by creating faith in us he 
thus touches the real main-spring of our emotions 
and actions. He has, so to speak, taken possession 
of the battery, and now he can send the sacred 
current to every part of our nature. When we 
believe in Christ, and the heart has come into the 
possession of God, then are we saved from sin, and 
are moved towards repentance, holiness, zeal, prayer, 
consecration, and every other gracious thing. 
“ What oil is to the wheels, what weights are to a 
clock, what wings are to a bird, what sails are toa 
ship, that faith is to all holy duties and services.” 
Fave faith, and all other graces will follow and con- 
tinue to hold their course. 

Faith, again, has the power of working by love ; it 
influences the affections towards God, and draws 
the heart after the best things. He that believes 
in God will beyond all question love God. Faith 
is an act of the understanding ; but it also proceeds 
from the heart. “With the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness” ; and hence God gives sal- 
vation to faith because it resides next door to the 
affections, and is near akin to love ; and love is the 
parent and the nurse of every holy feeling and act. 
Love to God is obedience, love to God is holiness. 
To love God and to love man is to be conformed 
to the image of Christ ; and this is salvation. 

Moreover, faith creates peace and joy; he that 
hath it rests, and is tranquil, is glad and joyous ; 
and this is a preparation for heaven. God gives all 
heavenly gifts to faith, for this reason among others, 


Saved by Faith, 63 


that faith worketh in us the life and spirit which 
are to be eternally manifested in the upper and 
better world. Faith furnishes us with armour for 
this life, and education for the life to come. It en- 
ables‘a man both to live and to die without fear ; 
it prepares both for action and for suffering ; and 
hence the Lord selects it as a most convenient 
medium for conveying grace to us, and thereby 
securing us for glory. | 

Certainly faith does for us what nothing else can 
do: it gives us joy and peace, and causes us to 
enter into rest. Why do men attempt to gain sal- 
vation by other means? An old divine says, “A 
silly servant who is bidden to open a door, sets his 
shoulder to it and pushes with all his might ; but. 
the door stirs not, and he cannot enter, use what 
strength he may. Another comes with a key, and 
easily unlocks the door, and enters right readily. 
Those who would be saved by works are pushing 
at heaven’s gate. without result ; but faith is the key 
which opens the gate at once.” Reader, will you 
not use that key? The Lord commands you to 
believe in his dear Son, therefore you may do so; 
and doing so, you shall live. Is not this the promise 
of the gospel, “He that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved”? Mark xvi.16. What can be your 
objection to a way of salvation which commends 
itself to the mercy and the wisdom of our gracious 
God? . 


2FTER the anxious heart has accepted 
the doctrine of atonement, and learned 
the great truth that salvation is by 
faith in the Lord Jesus, it is often sore 
troubled with a sense of inability towards that 
which is good. Many are groaning, “I can do 
nothing.” They are not making this into an ex- 
cuse, but they feel it asa daily burden. They would 
if they could. They can each one honestly say, 
“To will is present with me, but how to perform 
that which I would I find not.” 

This feeling seems to make all the gospel null 
and void ; for what is the use of food toa hungry 
man if he cannot get at it? Of what avail is the 
river of the water of life if one cannot drink? Weall 
remember the story of the doctor and the poor 
woman's child. The sage practitioner told the 
mother that her little one would soon be better 
under proper treatment! but it was absolutely need- 
ful that her boy should regularly drink the best 
port wine, and that he should spend a season at 
one of the German spas. This to a widow who 
could hardly get bread to eat! Now, it some- 
times seems to the troubled heart that the simple 
gospel of “Believe and live,” is not, after all, so 


Without Strength. | 65 


very simple ; for it asks the poor sinner to do what 
he cannot do. To the really awakened, but half 
instructed, there appears to be a missing link: 
yonder is the salvation of Jesus, but how is it to 
be reached? The soul is without strength, and 
knows not what to do. It lies within sight of the 
city of refuge, and cannot enter its gate. 

Is this want of strength provided for in the plan 
of salvation? It is. The work of the Lord is 
perfect. It begins where we are, and asks nothing 
of us in order to its completion. When the good 
Samaritan saw the traveller lying wounded and 
half dead, he did not bid him rise and come to him, 
and mount the ass and ride off tothe inn. No,“he 
came where he was,’ and ministered to him, and 
lifted him upon the beast and bore him to the inn. 
Thus doth the Lord Jesus deal with us in our low 
and wretched estate. 

We have seen that God justifieth, that he 
justificth the ungodly, and that he justifies them 
through faith in the precious blood of Jesus: we 
have now to see the condition these ungodly 
ones are in when Jesus works out their salvation. 
Many awakened persons are not only troubled 
about their sin, but about their moral weakness. 
They have no strength with which to escape from 
the mire into which they have fallen, nor to keep 
out of it in after days. They not only lament over 
what they have done, but over what they cannot do. 
They feel themselves to be powerless, helpless, and 
spiritually lifeless. It may sound odd to say that 
they feel dead, and yet it is even so. They are, 

5 


66 All of Grace. 


in their own esteem, to all good incapable. They 
cannot travel the road to heaven, for their bones 
are broken. “None of the men of strength have 
found their hands”; in fact, they are “without 
strength.” Happily, it is written, as the commen- 
dation of God’s great love to us: 


“ When we were yet without strength, in due time 
Christ died for the ungodly.’—Rom. v. 6. 


Here we see conscious helplessness succoured— 
succoured by the interposition of the Lord Jesus. 
Our helplessness is extreme. It is not written, 
“When we were comparatively weak Christ died 
for us”; or, “ When we had only a little strength” ; 
but the description is absolute and unrestricted: 
“When we were yet without strength.” Wehad no 
strength whatever which could aid in our salvation : 
our Lord’s words were emphatically true, “ Without 
me ye can do nothing.” I may go further than 
the text, and remind you of the great love where- 
with the Lord loved us, “even when we were dead 
in trespasses and sins.” To be dead is even more 
than to be without strength. 

The one thing that the poor strengthless sinner 
has to fix his mind upon and firmly retain as his 
one ground of hope is the divine assurance that “ in 
due time Christ died for the ungodly.” Believe 
this and all inability will disappear. As it is fabled 
of Midas that he turned everything into gold by his . 
touch, so it is true of faith that it turns everything it 
touches into good. Our very needs and weaknesses 
become blessings when faith deals with them. 


Without Strength. 67 


Let us dwell upon certain forms of this want of 
strength. To begin with. One man will say, “ Szr, 
L do not seem to have strength to collect my thoughts, 
and keep them fixed upon those solemn topics which 
concern my salvation: a short prayer ts almost too 
much for me. It ts so partly, perhaps, through natural 
weakness, partly because I have injured myself 
through dissipation, and partly also because I worry 
myself with worldly cares, so that I am not capable 
of those high thoughts which are necessary ere a soul 
can be saved.’ This is a very common form of 
sinful weakness. Listen to me! You are without 
strength on this point ; and there are many like you. 
They could not carry out a train of consecutive 
thought to save their lives. Many poor men and 
women are illiterate and untrained, and these would 
find deep thought to be very heavy work. Others 
are so light and trifling by nature, that they could 
no more follow out a long process of argument and 
reasoning, than they could fly. They could never 
attain to the knowledge of any profound mystery 
if they expended their whole life in the effort. You 
need not, therefore, despair : that which is necessary 
to salvation is not continuous thought, but a simple 
reliance upon Jesus. Hold you on to this one 
fact—“In due time Christ died for the ungodly.” 
This truth will not require from you any deep 
research or profound reasoning, or convincing argu- 
ment. There it stands: “In due time Christ died 
for the ungodly.” Fix your mind on that, and rest 
there. 

Let this one great, gracious, glorious fact lie 


68 | All of Grace. 


in your spirit till it perfumes all your thoughts, 
and makes you rejoice even though you are with- 
out strength, seeing the Lord Jesus has become 
your strength and your song, yea, he has become 
your salvation. According to the Scriptures it is 
a revealed fact, that in due time Christ died for 
the ungodly when they were yet without strength. 
You have heard these words hundreds of times, may 
be, and yet you have never before perceived their 
meaning. There is a cheering savour about them, 
is there not? Jesus did not die for our righteous- 
ness, but he died for our sins. He did not come to 
save us because we were worth the saving, but 
because we were utterly worthless, ruined, and un- 
done. He came not to earth out of any reason 
that was in us, but solely and only out of reasons 
which he fetched from the depths of his own divine 
love. In due time he died for those whom he 
describes, not as godly, but as wxgodly, applying 
to them as hopeless an adjective as he could well 
have selected. If you have but little mind, yet fasten 
it to this truth, which is fitted to the smallest 
capacity, and is able to cheer the heaviest heart. 
Let this text lie under your tongue like a sweet 
morsel, till it dissolves into your heart and flavours 
all your thoughts; and then it will little matter 
though those thoughts should be as scattered as 
autumn leaves. Persons who have never shone in 
science, nor displayed the least originality of mind, 
have nevertheless been fully able to accept the 
doctrine of the cross, and have been saved thereby. 
Why should not you? 


Without Strength. 69 


I hear another man cry, “ Ok, sir, my want of 
strength lies mainly in this, that I cannot repent sufft- 
ciently.’ A curious idea men have of what repent- 
ance is! Many fancy that so many tears are to be 
shed, and so many groans are to be heaved, and so 
much despair is to be endured. _Whence comes this 
unreasonable notion? Unbelief and despair are 
sins, and therefore I do not see how they can be 
constituent elements of acceptable repentance ; yet 
there are many who regard them as necessary parts 
of true Christian experience. They are in great 
error, Still, I know what they mean, for in the 
days of my darkness I used to feel in the same way. 
I desired to repent, but I thought that I could not 
do it, and yet all the while I was repenting. Odd 
as it may sound, I felt that I could not feel. I 
used to get into a corner, and weep because I could 
not weep ; and I fell into bitter sorrow because I 
could not sorrow for sin. What a jumble it all is 
when in our unbelieving state we begin to judge our 
~ own condition! It is like a blind man looking at his 
own eyes. My heart was meited within me for fear, 
because I thought that my heart was as hard as an 
adamant stone. My heart was broken to think 
that it would not break. Wow I can see that I 
was exhibiting the very thing which I thought I 
did not possess ; but ze I knew not where I was. 

Oh that I could help others into the light which I 
now enjoy! Fain would I say a word which might 
shorten the time of their bewilderment. I would say 
a few plain words, and pray “the Comforter” to 
apply them to the heart. 


40 All of Gracé. 
SSSR ee aS oe SiS aes Ne eS re ee 

Remember that the man who truly repents is 
never satisfied with his own repentance. We can 
no more repent perfectly than we can live perfectly. 
However pure our tears, there will always be some 
dirt in them : there will be something to be repented 
of even in our best repentance. But listen! To 
repent is to change your mind about sin, and Christ, 
and all the great things of God. There is sorrow 
implied in this; but the main point is the turning 
of the heart from sin to Christ. If there be this 
turning, you have the essence of true repentance, 
even though no alarm and no despair should ever 
have cast their shadow upon your mind. 

If you cannot repent as you would, it will greatly 
aid you to do so if you will firmly believe that “in 
due time Christ died for the ungodly.” Think of 
this again and again. How can you continue to 
be hard hearted when you know that out of supreme 
love “Christ died for the ungodly”? Let me per- 
suade you to reason with yourself thus -—Ungodly 
as I am, though this heart of steel will not relent, 
though I smite in vain upon my breast, yet he died 
for such as I am, since he died for the ungodly. 
Oh that I may believe this and feel the power of it 
upon my flinty heart! 

Blot out every other reflection from your soul, 
and sit down by the hour together, and meditate 
deeply on this one resplendent display of un- 
merited, unexpected, unexampled love, “Christ 
died for the ungodly.” Read over carefully the 
narrative of the Lord’s death, as you find it in 
the four evangelists, If anything can melt your 


Without Strength. wI 


stubborn heart, it will be a sight of the sufferings of 
Jesus, and the consideration that he suffered all this 
for his enemies. 


““O Jesus ! sweet the tears I shed, . 
While at thy feet I kneel, 
Gaze on thy wounded, fainting head, 
And all thy sorrows feel. 


“ My heart dissolves to see thee bleed, 
This heart so hard before ; 
I hear thee for the guilty plead, 
And grief o’erflows the more. 


“Twas for the sinful thou didst die, 
And I a sinner stand : 
Convine’d by thine expiring eye, 
Slain by thy pierced hand.” 


Surely the cross is that wonder-working rod 
which can bring water out of arock. If you under- 
stand the full meaning of the divine sacrifice of 
Jesus, you must repent of ever having been opposed 
to one who is so full of love. It is written, “ They 
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and 
they shall mourn for 427, as one mourneth for his 
only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one 
that is in bitterness for his firstborn.” Repentance 
will not make you see Christ; but to see Christ 
will give you repentance. You may not make a 
Christ out of your repentance, but you must look 
for repentance to Christ. The Holy Ghost by 
turning us to Christ turns us from sin. Look away, 
then, from the effect to the cause, from your own 
repenting to the Lord Jesus, who is exalted on 
high to give repentance. 


72 All of Grace. 


I have heard another say, “JZ am tormented with 
horrible thoughts. Wherever I go, blasphemies steal 
an upon me, Frequently at my work a dreadful sug- 
gestion forces itself upon me, and even on my bed 
Lam startled from my sleep by whispers of the evil 
one. L cannot getaway from this horrible temptation.” 
Friend, I know what you mean, for I have myself 
been hunted by this wolf. A man might as well 
hope to fight a swarm of flies with a sword as to 
master his own thoughts when they are set on by 
the devil. A poor tempted soul assailed by Satanic 
suggestions is like a traveller I have read of, about 
whose head and ears and whole body there came a 
swarm of angry bees. He could not keep them off 
nor escape from them. They stung him everywhere 
and threatened to be the death of him. I do not 
wonder you feel that you are without strength to 
stop these hideous and abominable thoughts which 
Satan pours into your soul; but yet I would remind 
you of the Scripture before us—‘ When we were 
yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the 
ungodly.” Jesus knew where we were and where 
we should be; he saw that we could not overcome 
the prince of the power of the air; he knew that we - 
should be greatly worried by him ; but even then, 
when he saw us in that condition, Christ died for the 
ungodly. Cast the anchor of your faith upon this. 
The devil himself cannot tell you that you are not 
ungodly : believe, then, that Jesus died even for such 
as you are. NKemember Martin Luther’s way of cut- 
ting the devil’s head off with his own sword. “Oh,” 
said the devil to Martin Luther, “you are a sinner.” 


Without Strength. 73 


“Yes,” said he, “ Christ died to save sinners.” Thus 
he smote him with his own sword. Hide you in 
this refuge, and keep there: “In due time Christ 
died for the ungodly.” If you stand to that truth, 
your blasphemous thoughts which you have not 
the strength to drive away will go away of them- 
selves ; for Satan will see that he is answering no 
purpose by plaguing you with them. : 

These thoughts, if you hate them, are none of 
yours, but are injections of the devil, for which he 
is responsible, and not you. If you strive against 
them, they are no more yours than are the cursings 
and falsehoods of rioters in the street. It is by 
- means of these thoughts that the devil would drive 
you to despair, or. at least keep you from trusting 
Jesus. The poor diseased woman could not come 
at Jesus for the press, and you are in much the 
same condition, because of the rush and throng of 
these dreadful thoughts. Still, she put forth her 
finger, and touched the fringe of the Lord’s gar- 
ment, and she was healed. Do you the same. | 

Jesus died for those who are guilty of “all manner 
of sin and of blasphemy”; and therefore I am sure 
he will not refuse those who are unwillingly the 
captives of evil thoughts. Cast yourself upon him, 
thoughts and all, and see if he be not mighty to 
save. He can still those horrible whisperings of the 
fiend, or he can enable you to see them in their true 
light, so that you may not be worried by them. In 
his own way he can and will save you, and at length 
give you perfect peace. Only trust him for this 
and everything else. 


GA ‘All of Grace. 


Sadly perplexing is that form of inability which 
lies in a supposed want of power to believe. We 
are not strangers to the cry— 


“Oh that I could believe, 
Then all would easy be; 
L would, but cannot; Lord, relieve, 
My help must come from thee.” 


~ 


Many remain in the dark for years because they 
have no power, as they say, to do that which is the 
giving up of all power and reposing in the power 
of another, even the Lord Jesus. Indeed, it is a 
very curious thing, this whole matter of believing ; 
for people do not get much help by trying to be- 
lieve. Believing does not come by trying. If a 
person were to make a statement of something 
that happened this day, I should not tell him 
that I would try to believe him. If I believed in 
the truthfulness of the man who told the incident 
to me and said that he saw it, I should accept the 
statement at once. If I did not think him a true 
man, I should, of course, disbelieve him ; but there 
would be no ¢vying in the matter. Now, when God 
declares that there is salvation in Christ Jesus, I 
must either believe him at once, or make him a 
liar. Surely you will not hesitate as to which is the 
right path in this case. The witness of God must 
be true, and we are bound at once to believe in 
Jesus. 

But possibly you have been trying to believe too 
much. Now, do not aim at great things. Be satis- 
fied to have a faith that can hold in its hand this 
one truth, “ While we were yet without strength, 


vw. 


Without Strength. } 7 


in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” He laid 
down his life for men while as yet they were not 
believing in him, nor were able to believe in him. 
He died for men, not as believers, but as sinners. 
He came to make these sinners into believers and 
saints; but when he died for them he viewed them 
as utterly without strength. If you hold to the 
truth that Christ died for the ungodly, and believe 
it, your faith will save you, and you may go in 
peace. If you will trust your soul with Jesus, who 
died for the ungodly, even though you cannot 
believe all things, nor move mountains, nor do any 
other wonderful works, yet you are saved. It is not 
creat faith, but true faith, that saves ; and the salva- 
tion lies not in the faith, but in the Christ in whom 
faith trusts. Faith as a grain of mustard seed will 
bring salvation. It is not the measure of faith, but 
the sincerity of faith, which is the point to be con- 
sidered. Surely a man can believe what he knows 
to be true; and as you know Jesus to be true, you, 
my friend, can believe in him. 

The cross which is the object of faith is also, by 
the power of the Holy Spirit, the cause of it. Sit 
down and watch the dying Saviour till faith springs 
up spontaneously in your heart, There is no place 
like Calvary for creating confidence. The air of 
that sacred hill brings health to trembling faith, 
Many a watcher there has said :— 


“ While I view thee, wounded, grieving, 
Breathless on the cursed tree, : 
Lord, I feel my heart believing 
That thou suffer’dst thus for me.” 


96 All is Grace. 

“Alas !” cries another, “ my want of strength lies 
in thts atrection, that I cannot quit my sin, and I 
know that I cannot go to heaven and carry my sin 
with me.’ Iam glad that you know ¢haé, for it is 
quite true. You must be divorced from your sin, 
or you cannot be married to Christ. Recollect the 
question which flashed into the mind of young 
Bunyan when at his sports on the green on Sunday: 
“Wilt thou have thy sins and go to hell, or wilt 
thou quit thy sins and go to heaven?” That 
brought him to a dead stand. That is a question 
Which every man will have to answer ; for there is 
no going on in sin and going to heaven. That 
cannot be. You must quit sin or quit hope. Do 
you reply, “Yes, Iam willing enough. To will is 
present with me, but how to perform that which I 
would I find not. Sin masters me, and I have no 
strength.” Come, then, if you have no strength, 
this text is still true, “When we were yet without 
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” 
Can you still believe that? However other things 
may seem to contradict it, will you believe it? 
God has said it, and it is a fact ; therefore, hold on 
to it like grim death, for your suis hope lies there. 
Believe this and trust Jesus, and you shall soon find 
power with which to slay your sin; but apart from 
him, the strong man armed will hold you for ever 
his bond-slave. Personally, I could never have 
overcome my own sinfulness. I tried and failed. 
My evil propensities were too many for me, till, in 
the belief that Christ died for me, I cast my guilty 
soul on him, and then I received a conquering 


Without Strength. py 


principle by which I overcame my sinful self. The 
doctrine of the cross can be used to slay sin, even 
as the old warriors used their huge two-handed 
swords, and mowed down their foes at every stroke. 
There is nothing like faith in the Sinner’s Friend: 
it overcomes all evil. If Christ has died for me, 
ungodly as I am, without strength as I am, then I 
cannot live in sin any longer, but must arousc 
myself to love and serve him who hath redeemcd 
me. I cannot trifle with the evil which slew my 
best friend. I must be holy for his sake. How can 
I live in sin when he has died to save me from it ? 

See what a splendid help this is to you that are 
without strength, to know and believe that in duc 
time Christ died for such ungodly ones as you are. 
Have you caught the idea yet? It is, somehow, so 
difficult for our darkened, prejudiced, and unbelieving 
minds to see the essence of the gospel. At times 
I have thought, when I have done preaching, that I 
have laid down the gospel so clearly, that the nose 
on one’s face could not be more plain; and yet I 
perceive that even intelligent hearers have failed to 
understand what was meant by “Look unto me and 
be ye saved.” Converts usually say that they did 
not know the gospel till such and such a day; and 
yet they had heard it for years. The gospel is un- 
known, not from want of explanation, but from 
absence of personal revelation. This the Holy 
Ghost is ready to give, and will give to those who 
ask him. Yet when given, the sum total of the 
truth revealed all lies within these words: “ Christ 
died for the ungodly.” 


78 All of Grace. 
ae etnies wictiens onc api ee 
I hear another bewailing himself thus: “OA, sir, 
my weakness lies in this, that I do not seem to keep 
long in one mind. Thear the word ona S unday, and 
L am impressed ; but in the week I meet with an evil 
companion, and my good feelings are all gone. My 
fellow-workmen do not believe in anything, and they 
say such terrible things, and I do not know how to 
answer them, and so I find myself knocked over.” I 
know this Plastic Pliable very well, and I tremble 
for him ; but at the same time, if he is really sincere, 
his weakness can be met by divine grace. The Holy 
Spirit can cast out the evil spirit of the fear of 
man. Hecan make the coward brave. Remember, 
my poor vacillating friend, you must not remain in 
this state. It will never do to be mean and beg- 
garly to yourself. Stand upright, and look at your- 
self, and see if you were ever meant to be like a 
toad under a harrow, afraid for your life either to 
move or to stand still. Do have a mind of your 
own. This is not a spiritual matter only, but one 
which concerns ordinary manliness. I would do 
many things to please my friends ; but to go to hell 
to please them is more than I would venture. It 
may be very well to do this and that for good fel- 
lowship; but it will never do to lose the friendship of 
God in order to keep on good terms with men. “I 
know that,” says the man, “but still, though I know 
it, I cannot pluck up courage. I cannot show my 
colours. I cannot stand fast.” Well, to you also I 
have the same text to bring: “When we were yet 
without strength, in due time Christ died for the 
ungodly.” If Peter were here, he would say, “The 


Without Strength. 79 


Lord Jesus died for me even when I was such a poor 
weak creature that the maid who kept the fire 
drove me to lie, and to swear that I knew not the 
Lord.” Yes, Jesus died for those who forsook him 
and fled. Take a firm grip of this truth—“ Christ 
died for the ungodly while they were yet without 
strength.” This is your way out of your cowardice. 
Get this wrought into your soul, “Christ died for 
me,’ and you will soon be ready to die for him. 
Believe it, that he suffered in your room and place 
and stead, and offered for you a full, true, and satis- 
factory expiation. Ifyou believe that fact, you will 
be forced to feel, “I cannot be ashamed of him who 
died for me.” A full conviction that this is true will 
nerve you with a dauntless courage. Look at the 
saints in the martyr age. In the early days of 
Christianity, when this great thought of Christ’s 
exceeding love was sparkling in all its freshness in 
the church, men not only were ready to die, but they 
grew ambitious to suffer, and even presented them- 
selves by hundreds at the judgment-seats of the 
rulers, confessing the Christ. I do not say that 
they were wise to court a cruel death ; but it proves 
my point, that a sense of the love of Jesus lifts the 
mind above all fear of what man can do to us. 
Why should it not produce the same effect in you? 
Oh that it might now inspire you with a brave re- 
solve to come out upon the Lord’s side, and be his 
follower to the end! 

May the Holy Spirit help us to come thus far by 
faith in the Lord Jesus, and it will be well! 


OW CAN WE OBTAIN AND INCREASE 
OUR FAITH? A very earnest question 
this to many. They say they want to 
believe, but cannot. A great deal of 

nonsense is talked upon this subject. Let us be 

strictly practical in our dealing with it. Common- 
sense is as much needed in religion as anywhere 
else. “What am I to do in order to believe?” 

One who was asked the best way to do a certain 

simple act replied, that the best way to do it was 

to do it at once. We waste time in discussing 
methods when the action is simple. The shortest 
way to believe is to believe. If the Holy Spirit 
has made you candid, you will believe as soon as 
truth is set before you. You will believe it because 
it is true. The gospel command is clear: “ Believe | 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” 

It is idle to evade this by questions and quibbles. 

The order is plain ; let it be obeyed. 

But still, 2f you have a difficulty, take tt before God 
wn prayer. Tell the great Father exactly what it is 
that puzzles you, and beg him by his Holy Spirit 
to solve the question. If I cannot believe a state- 
ment in a book, I am glad to enquire of the author 
what he means by it; and if he is a true man his 


The Increase of Faith. SI 


explanation will satisfy me: much more will the 
divine explanation of the hard points of Scripture 
satisfy the heart of the true seeker. The Lord is 
willing to make himself known ; go to him and see 
if it be not so, Repair at once to your closet, and 
cry, “O Holy Spirit, lead me into the truth. What 
I know not teach thou me.” 

Furthermore, if faith seems difficult, it is possible 
that God the Holy Spirit will enable you to believe 
if you hear very frequently and earnestly that which 
you are commanded to believe. We believe many 
things because we have heard them so often. Do 
you not find it so in common life, that if you hear 
a thing fifty times a day, at last you come to be- 
lieve it? Some men have come to believe very 
unlikely statements by this process: and therefore I 
do not wonder that the good Spirit often blesses 
the method of often hearing the truth, and uses 
it to work faith concerning that which is to be 
believed. It is written, “ Faith cometh by hearing,” 
therefore hear often. If I earnestly and attentively 
hear the gospel, one of these days I shall find my- 
self believing that which I hear, through the blessed 
operation of the Spirit of God upon my mind. Only 
mind you hear ¢he gospel, and do not distract your 
mind with either hearing or reading that which is 
designed to stagger you. 

If that, however, should seem poor advice, I _ 
would add next, consider the testimony of others. 
The Samaritans believed because of what the 
woman told them concerning Jesus, Many of our 
beliefs arise out of the testimony of ge I 


82 All of Grace. 


believe that there is such.a country as Japan: I 
never saw it, and yet I believe that there is sucha 
place because others have been there. I believe 
that I shall die: I have never died, but a ‘great 
many have done so whom I once knew, and there- 
fore I have a conviction that I shall die also; the 
testimony of many convinces me of that fact. 
Listen, then, to those who tell you how they were 
saved, how they were pardoned, how they were 
changed in character. If you will look into the 
matter you will find that somebody just like your- 
self has been saved. If you have been a thief, you 
will find that a thief rejoiced to wash away his sin 
in the fountain of Christ’s blood. If unhappily you 
have been unchaste, you will find that men and 
women who have fallen in that way have been 
cleansed and changed. If you are in despair, you 
have only to get among God’s people, and enquire 
a little, and you will discover that some of the 
saints have been equally in despair with your- 
self, and they will be pleased to tell you how the 
Lord delivered them. As you listen to one after 
another of those who have tried the word of God, 
and proved it, the divine Spirit will lead you 
to believe. Have you not heard of the African 
who was told by the missionary that water some- 
times became so hard that a man could walk 
on it? He declared that he believed a great 
many things the missionary had told him ; but he 
never would believe that. When he came to Eng- 
land it came to pass that one frosty day he saw the 
river frozen, but he would not venture on it. He 


The Increase of Faith. 83 


knew that it was a deep river, and he felt certain 
that he would be drowned if he ventured upon it. 
He could not be induced to walk the frozen water 
till his friend and many others went upon it: then 
he was persuaded, and trusted himself where others 
had safely ventured. So, mayhap, while you see 
others believe in the Lamb of God, and notice 
their joy and peace, you will yourself be gently led 
to believe. The experience of others is one of 
God’s ways of helping us to faith. Be it how it 
may, you have either to believe in Jesus or die; 
there is no hope for you but in him. 

A better plan still is this—vote the authority upon 
which you are commanded to believe, and this will 
greatly help you to faith. The authority is not 
mine, or you might well reject it. It is 
not even the Pope’s, or you might question it. 
But you are commanded to believe upon the 
authority of God himself. e bids you believe in 
Jesus Christ, and you must not refuse to obey your 
Maker. The foreman of a certain. works in the 
North had often heard the Gospel, but he was 
troubled with the fear that he might not come to 
Christ. His good master one day sent a card 
round to the works—“ Come to my house imme- 
diately after work.” The foreman appeared at his 
master’s door, and the master came out, and said 
somewhat roughly, “What do you want, John, 
‘troubling me at this time ? Work is done, what right 
have you here?” “ Sir,” said he, “I had a card from 
you saying that | was to come after work.” “Do you 
mean to say that merely because you had a card 


84 All of Grace. 


ee 


from me you are to come up to my house and 
call me out after business hours?” “Well, sir,” 
replied the foreman, “I do not understand you, but 
it seems to me that, as you sent for me, I hada 
right to come.” “Come in, John,” said his master, 
“T have another message that I want to read to 
you,’ and he sat down and read these words,— 
“Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest.” “ Do you think 
after such a message from Christ that you can be 
wrong in coming to him?” The poor man saw it 
all at once, and believed in the Lord Jesus unto 
eternal life, because he perceived that he had 
good warrant and authority for believing. So 
have you, poor soul! you have good authority for 
coming to Christ, for the Lord himself bids you 
trust him. 
~  Ifthat does not breed faithin you, think over what 
wt is that you have to believe,—that the Lord Jesus 
Christ suffered in the room and place and stead of 
sinners, and is able to save all whotrust him. Why, 
this is the most blessed fact that ever men were told 
to believe ; the most suitable, the most comforting, 
the most divine truth that ever was set before mortal 
minds. I advise you.to think much upon it, and 
search out the grace and love which it contains, 
Study the four Evangelists, study Paul’s epistles, 
and then see if the message is not such a credible 
one that you are forced to believe it. 
If that does not do, then ¢hink upon the person of 
Jesus Christ—think of who he is and qwhat he did, 
aad where he is, and what he is. How can you 


The Increase of Faith. 85 
See eS 
doubt zm ? It is cruelty to distrust the ever truthful 
Jesus. He has done nothing to deserve distrust ; 
on the contrary, it should be easy to rely upon him. 
Why crucify him anew by unbelief? Is not this 
crowning him with thorns again, and spitting upon 
him again? What! is he not to be trusted? What 
worse insult did the soldiers pour upon him than 
this? They made him a martyr; but you make him 
a liar—this is worse by far. Do not ask how can 
f believe? But answer another question—How can 
you disbelieve ? | 

If none of these things avail, then there is some- 
thing wrong about you altogether, and my last 
word is, submit yourself to God! Prejudice or pride 
is at the bottom of this unbelief. May the Spirit of 
God take away your enmity and make you yield. 
You area rebel, a proud rebel, and that is why you 
do not believe your God. Give up your rebellion ; 
throw down your weapons; yield at discretion ; 
surrender to your King. I believe that never did a 
soul throw up its hands in self-despair, and cry, 
“Lord, I yield,” but what faith became easy to it 
before long. It is because you still have a quarrel 
with God, and resolve to have your own will and 
your own way, that therefore you cannot believe. 
“How can ye believe,” said Christ, “that have 
honour one of another?” Proud self creates un- 
belief. Submit, Oman. Yield to your God, and 
then shall you sweetly believe in your Saviour. May 
the Holy Ghost now work secretly but effectually 
with you, and biwéng you at this very moment to 
believe in the Lord Jesus! Amen. - 


‘sa 


ng Aaa 
Ors a IEG, fag eee es 
ELLA RA TE PAS 


REGENERATION AND THE HOLY 
SPIBIT, 


it % 
E must be born again.” This word of 


our Lord Jesus has appeared to 

flame in the way of many, like the 

drawn sword of the cherub at the 
gate of Paradise. They have despaired, because 
this change is beyond their utmost effort. The new 
birth is from above, and therefore it is not in 
the creature’s power. Now, it is far from my mind to 
deny, or even to conceal, a truth in order to create 
a false comfort. I freely admit that the new birth 
is supernatural, and that it cannot be wrought by 
the sinner’s own self. It would bea poor help to 
my reader if I were wicked enough to try to cheer 
him by persuading him to reject or forget what 
is unquestionably true. 

But is it not remarkable that the very chapter in 
which our Lord makes this sweeping declaration 
also contains the most explicit statement as to 
salvation by faith? Read the third chapter of 
John’s gospel quite through, and do not dwell alone 
upon its earlier sentences. It is true that the third 
verse runs thus :— 


“ Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, 
I say unto thee, Except a man be Pru again, he can- 
ol . 
jot see the kingdom of God,” 


“ Ve must be Born Again.” 87 

LP EEA RE eo eee ee 

But, then, the fourteenth and fifteenth verses 
speak to us upon this wise :— 


“And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilder- 
ness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have 
eternal life.” 


The eighteenth verse repeats the same delight- 
ful doctrine in the broadest terms :— 


“ He that believeth on him is not condemned: but 
he that believeth not is condemned already, because he. 
hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son 
of God.” 


It is clear to every reader that these two state- 
ments must agree, since they came from the same 
lips, and are recorded on the same inspired page. 
Why should we make a difficulty where there can be 
none? If one statement assures us of the necessity 
to salvation of a something which only God can 
give, and if another assures us that the Lord will 
save us upon our believing in Jesus, then we may 
safely conclude that the Lord will give to those who 
believe all that is declared to be necessary to salva- 
tion. The Lord does, in fact, produce the new 
birth in all who believe in Jesus; and their believ- 
ing is the surest evidence that they are born again. 

We trust in Jesus for what we cannot do our- 
selves: if it were in our own power, what need of 
looking to him? It is ours to believe, it is the Lord’s 
to create us anew. He will not believe for us, 
neither are wg to do regenerating work for him. 
It is enough for us to obey the gracious command ; 


88 All of Grace. 

enn EeC eer <> aan Stee ne Se ae ee 
it is for the Lord to work the new birth in us. He 
who could go so far as to die on the cross for us, can 
and will give us all things that are needful for our 
eternal safety, 

“But a saving change of heart is the work of the 
floly Spirit.” This also is most true, and let it be far 
from us to question it, or to forget it. But the work 
of the Holy Ghost is secret and mysterious, and it 
can only be perceived by its results. There are 
mysteries about our natural birth into which it 
would be an unhallowed curiosity to pry: still more 
is this the case with the sacred operations of the 
Spirit of God. “The wind bloweth where it listeth, 
and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not 
tell whence it cometh, or whither it goeth ; so is 
every one that is born of the Spirit.” This much, 
however, we do know,—the mysterious work of the 
Holy Ghost cannot be a reason for refusing to 
believe in Jesus to whom that same Spirit beareth 
witness. 

If a man were bidden to sow a field, he could not 
excuse his neglect by saying that it would be useless 
to sow unless God caused the seed to grow. He 
would not be justified in neglecting tillage because 
the secret energy of God alone can create a harvest. 
No one is hindered in the ordinary pursuits of life 
by the fact that unless the Lord build the house 
they labour in vain that build it. It is certain that 
no man who believes in Jesus will ever find that 
the Holy Spirit refuses to work in him: in fact, his 
believing is the proof that the Spirit is already at 
work in his heart. - 3 


“ Ve must be Born Again.” 89 


ee ee 


God works in providence, but men do not there- 
fore sit still. They could not move without the 
divine power giving them life and strength, and yet 
they proceed upon their way without question ; the 
power being bestowed from day to day by him in 
whose hand their breath is, and whose are all their 
ways. Soisitin grace. We repent and believe, 
though we could do neither if the Lord did not 
enable us, We forsake sin and trust in Jesus, and 
then we perceive that the Lord has wrought in us 
to will and to do of his own good pleasure. It is 
idle to pretend that there is any real difficulty in 
the matter. 

Some truths which it is hard to explain in words 
are simple enough in actual experience. There is 
no discrepancy between the truth that the sinner 
believes, and that his faith is wrought in him by the 
Holy Spirit. Only folly can lead men to puzzle 
themselves about plain matters while their souls are 
in danger. No man would refuse to enter a_life- 
boat because he did not know the specific gravity 
of bodies ; neither would a starving man decline to 
eat till he understood the whole process of nutri- 
tion. If you, my reader, will not believe till you 
can understand all mysteries, you will never be 
saved at all; and if you allow self-invented difficul- 
_ ties to keep you from accepting pardon through 
your Lord and Saviour, you will perish in a con- 
demnation which will be richly deserved. Do not 
commit spiritual suicide through a passion for dis- 
cussing metaphysical subtleties, 


ONTINUALLY have I spoken to the 
reader concerning Christ crucified, who 
is the great hope of the guilty; but it 
is our wisdom to remember that our 

Lord has risen from the dead and lives eternally. 
You are not asked to trust in a dead Jesus, but in 

one who, though he died for our sins, has risen 

again for our justification. You may go to Jesus 
at once as toa living and present friend. He is not 

a mere memory, but a continually existent person 

who will hear your prayers and answer them. He 

lives on purpose to carry on the work for which he 
once laid down his life. He is interceding for 
sinners at the right hand of the Father, and for 
this reason he is able to save them to the utter- 
most who come unto God by him. Come and try 
this living Saviour, if you have never done so before. 

This living Jesus is also raised to an eminence of 

slory and power. He does not now sorrow as “a 

humble man before his foes,’ nor labour as “ the 

carpenter’s son”; but he is exalted far above prin- 
cipalities and powers and every name that is~* 
named. The Father has given him all power in 
heaven and in earth, and he exercises this high 
endowment in carrying out his work of grace. 


“My Redeemer Liveth.” Ol 


Hear what Peter and the other apostles testified 
concerning him before the high priest and the 
council :— 


“The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye 
slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted 
with his right hand to bea Prince and a Saviour, 
for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of 
sins.’ —Acts v. 30, 31. 


The glory which surrounds the ascended Lord 
should breathe hope into every believer’s breast. 
Jesus is no mean person—he is “a Saviour and a 
great one.” He is the crowned and enthroned ke- 
deemer of men. The sovereign prerogative of life 
and death is vested in him: the Father has put 
all men under the mediatorial government of the 
Son, so that he can quicken whom he will. He 
openeth, and no man shutteth. At his word the 
soul which is bound by the cords of sin and con- 
demnation can be unloosed in a moment. He 
stretches out the silver sceptre, and whosoever 
touches it lives. 

It is well for us that as sin lives, and the flesh 
lives, and the devil lives, so Jesus lives ; and it is 
also well that whatever might these may have to 
ruin us, Jesus has still greater power to save us. 

All his exaltation and ability are on our account. 
“He is exalted zo be,” and exalted “to give.” He 
is exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, that he may 
give all that is needed to accomplish the salvation 
of all who come under his rule. Jesus /as nothing 
which he will not use for a sinner’s salvation, and 


92 All of Grace. 


he zs nothing which he will not display in the 
aboundings of his grace. He links his princedom 
with his Saviourship, as if he would not have the 
one without the other ; and he sets forth his exalta- 
tion as designed to bring blessings to men, as if this 
were the flower and crown of his glory. Could any- 
thing be more calculated to raise the hopes of 
seeking sinners who are looking Christ-ward ? 

Jesus endured great humiliation, and therefore 
there was room for him to be exalted. By that 
humiliation he accomplished and endured all the 
Father’s will, and therefore he was rewarded by 
being raised to glory. He uses that exaltation 
on behalf of his people. Let my reader raise his 
eyes to these hills of glory, whence his help must 
come. Let him contemplate the high glories of 
the Prince and Saviour. Is it not most hopeful for 
men that a man is now on the throne of the universe? 
Is it not glorious that the Lord of all is the Saviour 
of sinners? Wehavea friend at court; yea, a friend 
on the throne. He will use all his influence for 
those who entrust their affairs in his hands. Well 
does one of our poets sing— 

“ He ever lives to intercede 
Before his Father’s face ; 
Give him, my soul, thy cause to plead, 
Nor doubt the Father’s grace.” 

Come, friend, and commit your cause and your 
case to those once pierced hands, which are now 
glorified with the signet-rings of royal power and 
honour. No suit ever failed which was left with 
this great Advocate. 


REPENTANCE MUST GO WITH 
FORGIVENESS. 


T is clear from the text which we have 

, lately quoted that repentance is bound 
up with the forgiveness of sins. In 
Acts v. 31 we read that Jesus is-“ er- 
alted to give repentance and forgiveness of sins.” 
These two blessings come from that sacred hand 
which once was nailed to the tree, but is now 
raised to glory. Repentance and forgiveness are 
riveted together by the eternal purpose of God, 
What God hath joined together let no man put 
asunder. 

Repentance must go with remission, and you 
will see that it is so if you think a little upon 
the matter. J¢ canzot be that pardon of sin should 
be given to an impenitent sinner; this were to con- 
firm him in his evil ways, and to teach him to 
think little of evil. Ifthe Lord were to say, “ You 
love sin, and live in it, and you are going on 
from bad to worse, but, all the same, I forgive 
you,” this were to proclaim a horrible license for 
iniquity. The foundations of social order would 
be removed, and moral anarchy would follow. I 
cannot tell what innumerable mischiefs would 
certainly occur if you could divide repentance and 


94 All of Grace. 


forgiveness, and pass by the sin while the sinner 
remained as fond of it as ever. In the very nature 
of things, if we believe in che holiness of God, it 
must be so, that if we continue in our sin, and will 
not repent of it, we cannot be forgiven, but must 
reap the consequences of our obstinacy. Accord- 
ing to the infinite goodness of God, we are pro- 
mised that if we will forsake our sins, confessing 
them, and will, by faith, accept the grace which is 
provided in Christ Jesus, God is faithful and just 
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all un- 
righteousness. But, so long as God lives, there can 
be no promise of mercy to those who continue in their 
evil ways, and refuse to acknowledge their wrong- 
doing. Surely no rebel can expect the King to 
pardon his treason while he remains in open re- 
volt. No one can be so foolish as to imagine 
that the Judge of all the earth will put away our 
sins if we refuse to put them away ourselves. 
Moreover, it must be so for the completeness of 
divine mercy. That mercy which could forgive the 
sin and yet let the sinner live in it would be scant 
and superficial mercy. It would be unequal and 
deformed mercy, lame upon one of its feet, and 
withered as to one of its hands. Which, think you, 
is the greater privilege, cleansing from the guilt ot 
sin, or deliverance from the power of sin? I will 
not attempt to weigh in the scales two mercies so 
surpassing. Neither of them could have come to 
us apart from the precious blood of Jesus. But it 
seems to me that to be delivered from the dominion 
of sin, to be made holy, to be made like to God, 


Repentance and Renission. 95 

must be reckoned the greater of the two, if a 
comparison has to be drawn. To be forgiven is an 
immeasurable favour. We make this one of the first 
notes of our psalm of praise,—“ Who forgiveth 
all thine iniquities.” But if we could be forgiven, 
and then could be permitted to love sin, to 
riot in iniquity, and to wallow in lust, what 
would be the use of such a forgiveness? Might 
it not turn out to be a poisonous sweet, 
which would most effectually destroy us? To 
be washed, and yet to lie in the mire; to be 
pronounced clean, and yet to have the lcareey 
white on one’s brow, would be the veriest mockery of 
mercy. What is it to bring the man out of his 
sepulchre if you leave him dead? Why lead him 
into the light if he is still blind? We thank 
God, that he who forgives our iniquities also heals 
our diseases. He who washes us from the stains of 
the past also uplifts us from the foul ways of the 
present, and keeps us from falling in the future. 
We must joyfully accept both repentance and 
remission ; they cannot be separated. The cove- 
nant heritage is one and indivisible, and must not 
be parcelled out. To divide the work of grace 
would be to cut the living child in halves, and 
those who would permit this have no interest in it. 
I will ask you who are seeking the Lord, 
whether you would be satisfied with one of these 
mercies alone? Would it content you, my reader, 
if God would forgive you your sin and then allow 
you to be as worldly and wicked as before? Oh, 
no: the quickened spirit is more afraid of sin itself 


96 All of Grace. 


than of the penal results of it. The cry of your 
heart is not, “ Who shall deliver me from punish- 
ment?” but, “O wretched man that I am! who 
shall deliver me from the body of this death? 
Who shall enable me to live above temptation, and 
to become holy even as God is holy?” Since the 
unity of repentance with remission agrees with 
gracious desire, and since it is necessary for the 
completeness of salvation, and for holiness’ sake, 
rest you sure that it abides. 

Repentance and forgiveness are joined together 
in the experience of all believers. ‘There never was 
a person yet who did unfeignedly repent of sin 
with believing repentance who was not forgiven ; 
and on the other hand, there never was a person 


forgiven who had not repented of his sin. I do 
not hesitate to say that beneath the copes of 


heaven there never was, there is not, and there 
never will be, any case of sin being washed away, 
unless at the same time the heart was led to 
repentance and faith in Christ. Hatred of sin and 
a sense of pardon come together into the soul, 
and abide together while we live. 

These two things act and react upon each other: 
the man who is forgiven, therefore repents ; and 
the man who repents is also most assuredly for- 
given. Remember first, that forgiveness leads to 
repentance. As we sing in Hart’s words: 


“Law and terrors do but harden, 
All the while they work alone ; 
But a sense of blood-bought pardon 
Soon dissolves a heart of stone.” 


Repentance and Remission. 07 


When we are sure that we are forgiven, then we 
abhor iniquity; and I suppose that when faith 
grows into full assurance, so that we are certain 
beyond a doubt that the blood of Jesus has washed 
us whiter than snow, it is then that repentance 
reaches to its greatest height. - Repentance grows 
as faith grows. Do not make any mistake about 
it: repentance is not a thing of days and weeks, a 
temporary penance to be got over as fast as possible! 
No; it is the grace of a life-time, like faith itself. 
God’s little children repent, and so do the young 
men and the fathers. Repentance is the inseparable 
companion of faith. All the while that we walk 
by faith and not by sight, the tear of repentance 
clitters in the eye of faith. That is not true 
repentance which does not come of faith in Jesus, 
and that is not true faith in Jesus which is not 
tinctured with repentance. Faith and repentance, 
like the Siamese twins, are vitally joined together. 
In proportion as we believe in the forgiving love 
of Christ, in that proportion we repent; and in 
proportion as we repent of sin and hate evil, we 
rejoice in the fulness of the absolution which 
Jesus is exalted to bestow. You will never value 
pardon unless you feel repentance; and you will 
never taste the deepest draught of repentance until 
you know that you are pardoned. Jt may seem a 
strange thing, but so it is—the bitterness of repent- 
ance and the sweetness of pardon blend in the 
flavour of every gracious life, and make up an 
incomparable happiness. 

These two covenant gifts are the mutual assur- 


7 


98 All of Grace. 


ance of each other. If I know that I repent, I 
know that I am forgiven. How am I to know 
that I am forgiven except I know also that I am 
turned from my former sinful course? To be a 
believer is to be a penitent. Faith and repentance 
are but two spokes of the same wheel, two handles 
of the same plough. Repentance has been well 
described as a heart broken for sin, and from 
sin; and it may equally well be spoken of as 
turning and returning. It is a change of mind of 
the most thorough and radical sort, and it is at- 
tended with sorrow for the past, and a resolve of 
amendment in the future. 


** Repentance is to leave 
The sins we loved before ; 

And show that we in earnest grieve, 
By doing so no more.” 


Now, when that is the case, we may be certain 
that we are forgiven; for the Lord never made a 
heart to be broken for sin and broken from sin, 
without pardoning it. If, on the other hand, we 
are enjoying pardon, through the blood of Jesus, 
and are justified by faith, and have peace with 
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, we know 
that our repentance and faith are of the right sort. 

Do not regard your repentance as the cause of 
your remission, but as the companion of it. Do 
not expect to be able to repent until you see the 
grace of our Lord Jesus, and his readiness to blot 
out your sin. Keep these blessed things in their 
places, and view them in their relation to each 
other. They are the Jachin and Boaz of a saving 


Repentance and Remission. 99 


experience ; I mean, that they are comparable to 
Solomon’s two great pillars which stood in the 
forefront of the house of the Lord, and formed a 
majestic entrance to the holy place. No man 
comes to God aright except he passes between the 
pillars of repentance and remission. Upon your 
heart the rainbow of covenant grace has been 
displayed in all its beauty when the tear-drops of 
repentance have been shone upon by the light of 
full forgiveness. Repentance of sin and faith in 
divine pardon are the warp and woof of the fabric 
of real conversion. By these tokens shall you 
know an Israelite indeed. 

To come back to the Scripture upon which we 
are meditating: both forgiveness and repentance 
flow from the same source, and are given by the 
same Saviour. The Lord Jesus in his glory bestows 
both upon the same persons. You are neither to 
find the remission nor the repentance elsewhere. 
Jesus has both ready, and he is prepared to bestow 
them now, and to bestow them most freely on all 
who will accept them at hishands. Let it never be 
forgotten that Jesus gives all that is needful for our 
salvation. It is highly important that all seekers 
after mercy should remember this. Faith is as much 
the gift of God as is the Saviour upon whom that 
faith relies. Repentance of sin is as truly the work of 
grace as the making of an atonement by which sin is 
blotted out, Salvation, from first to last, is of grace 
alone. You will not misunderstand me. It is not 
the Holy Spirit who repents. He has never done 
anything for which he should repent. If he could 


100 All of Grace. 

repent, it would not meet the case; we must 
ourselves repent of our own sin, or we are not saved 
from its power. It is not the Lord Jesus Christ 
who repents. What should he repent of ? We our- 
selves repent with the full consent of every faculty 
of our mind. The will, the affections, the emo- 
tions, all work together most heartily in the blessed 
act of repentance for sin; and yet at the back of 
all that is our personal act there is a secret holy 
influence which melts the heart, gives contrition, 
and produces a complete change. The Spirit of 
God enlightens us to see what sin is, and thus 
makes it loathsome in our eyes. The Spirit of 
God also turns us towards holiness, makes us 
heartily to appreciate, love, and desire it, and 
thus gives us the impetus by which we are led 
onward from stage to stage of sanctification. The 
Spirit of God works in us to will and to do 
according to God’s good pleasure. To that good 
Spirit let us submit ourselves at once, that he may 
lead us to Jesus, who will freely give us the double 
benediction of repentance and remission, according 
to the riches of his grace. 


“BY GRACE ARE YE SAVED.” 


GeO return to the grand text: “ Him hath 
\ x God exalted with his right hand to be a 
~ Prince and a Saviour, for to give re- 
pentance to Israel, and forgiveness of 
sins.” Our Lord Jesus Christ has gone up that grace 
may come down. His glory is employed to give 
ereater currency to his grace. The Lord has not 
taken a step upward except with the design of 

earing believing sinners upward with him. He is 
exalted to give repentance; and this we shall see if 
we remember a few great truths. 

The work which our Lord Jesus has done has 
made repentance possible, available, and acceptable. 
The law makes no mention of repentance, but 
says plainly, “ The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” | 
If the Lord Jesus had not died and risen again 
and gone unto the Father, what would your repent- 
ing or mine be worth? We might feel remorse 
with its horrors, but never repentance with its hopes. 
Repentance, as a natural feeling, is a common duty 
deserving no great praise: indeed, it is so gene- 
rally mingled with a selfish fear of punishment, 
that the kindliest estimate makes but little of it. 
Had not Jesus interposed and wrought out a 
wealth of merit, our tears of repentance would have 


OTE: 


S 


102 All of Grace. 


been so much water spilt upon the ground. Jesus 
is exalted on high, that through the virtue of his 
intercession repentance may have a place before 
God. In this respect he gives us repentance, because 
he puts repentance into a position of acceptance, 
which otherwise it could never have occupied. 

When Jesus was exalted on high, the Spirit of 
God was poured out to work in us all necdful graces. 
The Holy Ghost creates repentance in us by 
supernaturally renewing our nature, and taking 
away the heart of stone out of our flesh. Oh, sit 
not down straining those eye-balls of yours to fetch 
out impossible tears ; repentance comes not from 
unwilling nature, but from free and sovereign grace. 
Get not to your chamber to smite your breast in 
order to fetch from a heart of stone feelings which 
are not there. But go to Calvary and see how Jesus 
died. Look upward to the hills whence comes your 
help. The Holy Ghost has come on purpose that he | 
may overshadow men’s spirits and breed repent- 
ance within them, even as once he brooded over 
chaos and brought forth order. Breathe your 
prayer to him, “Blessed Spirit, dwell with me. 
Make me tender and lowly of heart, that I may 
hate sin and unfeignedly repent of it.” He will 
hear your cry and answer you. 

Remember, too, that when our Lord Jesus was 
exalted, he not only gave us repentance by sending 
forth the Holy Spirit, but by consecrating all the 
works of nature and of providence to the great ends 
of our salvation, so that any one of them may call us 
to repentance, whether it crow like Peter’s cock, or 


Repentance Given, 103 


shake the prison like the jailer’s earthquake. From 
the right hand of God our Lord Jesus rules all 
things here below, and makes them work together 
for the salvation of his redeemed. He uses both 
bitters and sweets, trials and joys, that he may pro- 
duce in sinners a better mind towards their God. 
Be thankful for the providence which has made 
you poor, or sick, or sad ; for by all this Jesus works 
the life of your spirit and turns you to himself. 
The Lord’s mercy often rides to the door of our 
hearts on the black horse of affliction. Jesus uses 
the whole range of our experience to wean us from 
earth and woo us to heaven. Christ is exalted to 
the throne of heaven and earth in order that, by 
all the processes of his providence, he may sub- 
due hard hearts unto the gracious softening of 
repentance. 

Besides, he is at work at this hour by all his 
whispers in the conscience, by his inspired Book, 
by those of us who speak out of that Book, and by 
praying friends and earnest hearts. He can send 
a word to you which shall strike your rocky heart 
as with the rod of Moses, and cause streams of 
repentance to flow forth. He can bring to your 
mind some heart-breaking text out of Holy Scrip- 
ture which shall conquer you right speedily. He 
can mysteriously soften you, and cause a holy 
frame of mind to steal over you when you least 
look for it. Be sure of this, that he who is gone 
into his glory, raised into all the splendour and 
‘majesty of God, has abundant ways of working 
repentance in those to whom he grants forgiveness, 


104 All of Grace. 


fle 1s even now waiting to give repentance to you. 
Ask him for it at once. 

Observe with much comfort that the Lord Jesus 
Christ gives this repentance to the most unlikely 
people in the world. He is exalted to give re- 
pentance fo [srael. To Israel! In the days when 
the apostles thus spoke, Israel was the nation which 
had most grossly sinned against light and love, 
and had crowned its guilt by crucifying the Lord, 
and daring to say, “His blood be on us and on 
our children.” Why, these were the murderers of 
Jesus ; and yet he is exalted to give them repent- 
ance! What a marvel of grace! Listen,then. If 
you have been brought up in the brightest of 
Christian light, and yet have rejected it, there is 
still hope. If you have sinned against conscience, 
and against the Holy Spirit, and against the love 
of Jesus, there is yet space for repentance, Though 
you may be as hard as unbelieving Israel of old, 
softening may yet come to you, since Jesus is 
exalted, and clothed with boundless power. For 
those who went the furthest in iniquity, and sinned 
with special aggravation, the Lord Jesus is ex- 
alted to give to them repentance and forgiveness 
of sins. Happy am I to have so full a gospel to 
proclaim! Happy are you to be allowed to hear 
it! 

The hearts of the children of Israel had grown 
hard as an adamant stone. Luther used to think 
it impossible to convert a Jew. We are far from 
agreeing with him, and yet we must admit that the 
seed of Israel have been exceedingly obstinate in 


Repentance Given. 105 
their rejection of the Saviour during these many cen- 
turies. Truly did the Lord say, “ Israel would none 
of me.” “He came to his own and his own received 
him not.” Yet on behalf of Israel our Lord Jesus 
is exalted for the giving of repentance and remis- 
sion. Probably my reader is a Gentile ; but yet he 
may have a very stubborn heart, which has stood 
out against the Lord Jesus for many years ; and yet 
in him our Lord can work repentance. It may be 
that you will yet feel compelled to write as William 
Hone did when he yielded to divine love. He was 
the author of those most entertaining volumes 
called the “Every-Day Book,’ but he was once 
a stout-hearted infidel. When subdued by sove- 
reign grace, he wrote as follows,— 


“ The proudest heart that ever beat 
Hath been subdued in me ; 
The wildest will that ever rose 
To scorn thy cause and aid thy focs . 
Is quell’d, my Lord, by thee. 


“ Thy will, and not my will, be done, 
My heart be ever thine ; 
Confessing thee the mighty Word, 
My Saviour Christ, my God, my Lord, 
Thy cross shall be my sign.” 


The Lord can give repentance to the most un- 
likely, turning lions into lambs, and ravens into 
doves. Let us seek to him that this great change 
may be wrought in us. Assuredly the contem- 
plation of the death of Christ is one of the surest 
and speediest methods of gaining repentance. Do 
not sit down and try to pump up repentance from 


106 All of Grace. 


the dry well of corrupt nature. It is contrary 
to the laws of mind to suppose that you can force 
your soul into that gracious state. Take your 
heart in prayer to him who understands it, and 
say, “ Lord, cleanse it. Lord, renew it. Lord, work 
repentance in it.’ The more you try to produce 
penitent emotions in yourself, the more you will 
be disappointed ; but if you believingly think of 
Jesus dying for you, repentance will burst forth. 
Meditate on the Lord’s shedding his heart's blood 
out of love to you. Set before your mind’s eye 
the agony and bloody sweat, the cross and passion ; 
and, as you do this, he who was the bearer of all 
this grief will look at you, and with that look he 
will do for you what he did for Peter, so that you 
also will go out and weep bitterly. He who died 
for you can, by his gracious Spirit, make you die 
to sin; and he who has gone into the glory on 
your behalf can draw your soul after him, away 
from evil, and towards holiness. 

I shall be content if I leave this one thought with 
you: look not beneath the ice to find fire, neither 
hope in your own natural heart to find repentance. 
Look to the Living One for life. Look to Jesus 
for all you need between Hell Gate and Heaven 
Gate. Never seek elsewhere for any part of that 
which Jesus loves to bestow ; but remember, 


CHRIST IS ALL. 


DARK fear haunts the minds of many 
who are coming to Christ: they are 
afraid that they shall not persevere 
to the end. I have heard the seeker 

say: “If I were to cast my soul upon Jesus, yet, 
peradventure I should after all draw back into per- 
dition. Ihave had good feelings before now, and 
they have died away. My goodness has been as 
the morning cloud, and as the early dew. It has 
come on a sudden, lasted for a season, promised 
much, and then vanished away.” 

My reader, I believe that this fear is often the 
father of the fact; and that some who have been 
afraid to trust Christ for all time, and for all 
eternity, have failed because they had a temporary 
faith, which never went far enough to save them. 
They set out trusting to Jesus in a measure, but 
looking to themselves for continuance and per- 
severance in the heavenward way; and so they 
set out faultily, and, as a natural consequence, 
turned back before long. If we trust to ourselves 
for our holding on we shall zot hold on. Even 
though we rest in Jesus for a part of our salvation, 
we shall fail if we trust to self for anything. No 
chain is stronger than its weakest link: if Jesus 


108 All of Grace. 


be our hope for everything, except one thing, we 
shall utterly fail, because in that one point we 
shall come to nought. I have no doubt whatever 
that a mistake about the perseverance of the saints _ 
has prevented the perseverance of many who did 
run well. What did hinder them that they should 
not continue to run? They trusted to themselves 
for that running, and so they stopped short. Beware 
of mixing even a little of self with the mortar with 
which you build, or you will make it untempered 
mortar, and the stones will not hold together. If 
you look to Christ for your beginnings, beware of 
looking to yourself for your endings. He is Alpha. 
See to it that you make him Omega also. If you 
begin in the Spirit you must not hope to be made 
perfect by the flesh. Begin as you mean to go on, 
and go on as you began, and let the Lord be all in 
all to you. Oh, that God, the Holy Spirit, may 
give us a very clear idea of where the strength 
must come from by which we shall be preserved 
until the day of our Lord’s appearing! 

Here is what Paul once said upon this subject 
when he was writing to the Corinthians: 


“Our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall also confirm 
you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. God ts fatthful, by whom 
ye were called see the fellowship of his Son Jesus 
Christ our Lord.”—t1 Cor. i. 8, 9. 


This language silently admits a great need, by 
telling us how it is provided for. Wherever the 
Lord makes a provision, we are quite sure that there 


“ Kept by the Power of God.” 109 
i ee 
was a need for it, since no superfluities encumber 
the covenant of grace. Golden shields hung in 
Solomon’s courts which were never used, but there 
are none such in the armoury of God. What God 
has provided we shall surely need. Between this 
hour and the consummation of all things every 
promise of God and every provision of the covenant 
of grace will be brought into requisition. The 
urgent need of the believing soul is confirmation, 
continuance, final perseverance, preservation to the 
end. This ts the great necessity of the most aa- 
vanced believers, for Paul was writing to saints at 
Corinth, who were men of a high order, of whom he 
could say, “I thank my God always on your behalf, 
for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus 
Christ.” Such men are the very persons who most 
assuredly feel that they have daily need cf new 
grace if they are to hold on, and hold out, and 
come off conquerors at the last. If you were not 
saints you would have no grace, and you would 
feel no need of more grace ; but because you are 
men of God, therefore you feel the daily demands 
of the spiritual life. The marble statue requires no 
food ; but the living man hungers and thirsts, and 
he rejoices that his bread and his water are made 
sure to him, for else he would certainly faint by the 
way. The believer’s personal wants make it in- 
evitable that he should daily draw from the great 
source of all supplies ; for what could he do if he 
could not resort to his God? 

This ts true of the most gifted of the saints—of 
_ those men at Corinth who were enriched with all 


110 All of Grace. 

ee Re a SE eee Ota a a 
utterance and with all knowledge. They needed 
to be confirmed to the end, or else their gifts and 
attainments would prove their ruin. If we had the 
tongues of men and of angels, if we did not receive 
fresh grace, where should we be? If we had all 
experience till we were fathers in the church—if we 
had been taught of God so as to understand all 
mysteries—yet we could not live a single day with- 
out the divine life flowing into us from our Covenant 
Head. How could we hope to hold on for a single 
hour, to say nothing of a lifetime, unless the Lord 
should hold us on? He who began the good work 
in us must perform it unto the day of Christ, or it 
will prove a painful failure. 

This great necessity arises very much from our 
own selves. In some there is a painful fear that 
they shall not persevere in grace because they know 
their own fickleness. Certain persons are constitu- 
tionally unstable. Some men are by nature con- 
servative, not to say obstinate; but others are 
as naturally variable and volatile. Like butterflies 
they flit from flower to flower, till they visit all the 
beauties of the garden, and settle upon none of 
them. They are never long enough in one stay 
to do any good; not even in their business nor in 
their intellectual pursuits. Such persons may well 
be afraid that ten, twenty, thirty, forty, perhaps 
fifty years of continuous religious watchfulness will 
be a great deal too much for them. We see men 
joining first one church and then another, till they 
box the compass. They are everything by turns 
and nothing long. Such have double need to pray 


“ Kept by the Power of God.” tri 


that they may be divinely confirmed, and may be 
made not only steadfast but unmoveable, or other- 
wise they will not be found “always abounding in 
the work of the Lord.” 

All of us, even if we have no constitutional temp- 
tation to fickleness, must feel our own weakness if 
we are really quickened of God. Dear reader, do you 
not find enough in any one single day to make you 
stumble? You that desire to walk in perfect holi- 
ness, as I trust you do; you that have set before 
you a high standard of what a Christian should be 
—do you not find that before the breakfast things 
are cleared away from the table, you have dis- 
played enough folly to make you ashamed of your- 
selves? If we were to shut ourselves up in the 
lone cell of a hermit, temptation would follow us ; 
for as long as we cannot escape from ourselves 
we cannot escape from incitements to sin. There 
is that within our heart which should make us 
watchful and humble before God. If he does not 
confirm us, we are so weak that we shall stumble 
and fall; not overturned by an enemy, but by our 
own carelessness. Lord, be thou ourstrength. We 
are weakness itself. 

Besides that, there zs the weariness which comes 
of a long life. When we begin our Christian 
profession we mount up with wings as eagles, 
further on we run without weariness; but in 
our best and truest days we walk without 
fainting. Our pace seems slower, but it is more 
serviceable and better sustained. I pray God 
that the energy of our youth may continue with us 


112 All of Grace. 


- a 


so far as it is the energy of the Spirit and not the 
mere fermentation of proud flesh. He that has 
long been on the road to heaven finds that there 
was good reason why it was promised that his shoes 
should be iron and brass, for the road is rough. 
He has discovered that there are Hills of Difficulty 
and Valleys of Humiliation ; that there is a Vale of 
Deathshade, and, worse still, a Vanity Fair—and 
all these are to be traversed. If there be Delectable 
Mountains (and, thank God, there are), there are 
also Castles of Despair, the inside of which pilgrims 
have too often seen. Considering all things, those 
who hold out to the end in the way of holiness 
will be “men wondered at.” | 

“QO world of wonders, I can say .no less.” The 
days of a Christian’s life are like so many Koh-i- 
noors of mercy threaded upon the golden string of 
divine faithfulness, In heaven we shall tell to angels, 
and principalities, and powers the unsearchable 
riches of Christ which were spent upon us, and 
enjoyed by us while we were here below. We have 
been kept alive on the brink of death. Our spiritual 
life has been a flame burning on in the midst of the 
sea, a stone that has remained suspended in the air. 
It will amaze the universe to see us enter the pearly 
gate, blameless inthe day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
We ought to be full of grateful wonder if kept for 
an hour ; and I trust we are. 

If this were all, there would be enough cause 
for anxiety ; but there is far more. We have toa 
think of what a place we live in. ‘The world 
is a howling wilderness to many of God’s people. 


" Kept by the Power of God 113 


Some of us are greatly indulged in the providence 
of God, but others have a stern fight of it. We 
begin our day with prayer, and we hear the voice 
of holy song full often in our houses: but many 
good people have scarcely risen from their knees 
in the morning before they are saluted with blas- 
phemy. They go out to work, and all day long 
they are vexed with filthy conversation like righteous 
Lot in Sodom. Can you even walk the open streets 
nowadays without your ears being afflicted with foul 
language? The world is no friend to grace. The 
best we can do with this world is to get through it 
as quickly as we can, for we dwell in an enemy’s 
country. A robber lurks in every bush. Everywhere 
we need to travel with a drawn sword in our hand, 
or at least with that weapon which is called ad/- 
prayer ever at our side; for we have to contend for 
every inch of our way. Make no mistake about 
this, or you will be rudely shaken out of your fond 
delusion. O God, help us, and confirm us to the 
end, or where shall we be? 

True religion is supernatural at -its beginning, 
supernatural in its continuance, and supernatural 
in its close. It is the work of God from first to 
last. There is great need that the hand of the Lord 
should be stretched out still: that need my reader 
is feeling now, and i am glad that he should feel 
it ; for now he will look for his own preservation to 
the Lord who alone is able to keep us from falling, 
and glorify us with his Son. 


CONFYBMATYON: 


WANT you to notice THE SECURITY 
WHICH PAUL CONFIDENTLY EXPECTED 
for allthe saints. He says—* Who shal 
confirm you unto the end, that ye may 

be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 

This is the kind of confirmation which is above 

all things to be desired. You see it supposes that 

the persons are right, and it proposes to confirm 
them in the right. It would be an awful thing to 
confirm a man in ways of sin and error. Think of 

a confirmed drunkard, or a confirmed thief, or a 

confirmed liar. It would be a deplorable thing for 

a man to be confirmed in unbelief and ungodliness, 

Divine confirmation can only be enjoyed by those 

to whom the grace of God has been already mani- 

fested. It is the work of the Holy Ghost. He who 
gives faith strengthens and establishes it ; he who 
kindles love in us preserves it and increases its 
flame. What he makes us to know by his first 
teaching, the good Spirit causes us to know with 
greater clearness and certainty by still further in- 
struction. Holy acts are confirmed till they become 
habits, and holy feelings are confirmed till they 
become abiding conditions. Experience and prac- 
tice confirm our beliefs and our resolutions. Both 


Confirmation from God. 115 


our joys and our sorrows, our successes and our 
failures, are sanctified to the self-same end; even 
as the tree is helped to root itself both by the soft 
showers and the rough winds. The mind is in- 
structed, and in its growing knowledge it gathers 
reasons for persevering in the good way: the 
heart is comforted, and so it is made to cling more 
closely to the consoling truth. The grip grows 
tighter, and the tread grows firmer, and the man 
himself becomes more solid and substantial. 

This is not a merely natural growth, but is as 
distinct a work of the Spirit as conversion. The 
Lord will surely give it to those who are relying 
upon him for eternal life. By his inward working 
he will deliver us from being “unstable as water,” 
and cause us to be rooted and grounded. It is a 
part of the nethod by which he saves us—this 
building us up into Christ Jesus and causing us to 
abide in him. Dear reader, you may daily look for 
this ; and you shall not be disappointed. He whom 
you trust will make you to be as a tree planted by 
the rivers of waters, so preserved that even your 
leaf shall not wither. 

What a strength to a church is a confirmed 
Christian! He is a comfort to the sorrowful, and a 
help to the weak. Would you not like to be such ? 
Confirmed believers are pillars in the house of our 
God? These are not carried away by every wind 
of doctrine, nor overthrown by sudden temptation. 
They are a great stay to others, and act as anchors 
in the time of church trouble. You who are 
beginning the holy life hardly dare to hope that 


116 All of Grace. 


A a acon heen 


you will become like them. But you need not fear, 
the good Lord will work in you as well as in them. 
One of these days, you who are now a babe in Christ 
shall be a father in the church. Hope for this: 
great thing ; but hope for it as a gift of grace, and 
not as the wages of work, or as the product of your 
own energy. 

The inspired apostle Paul speaks of these people 
as to be confirmed wnto the end. He expected the 
erace of God to preserve them personally to the 
end of their lives, or till the Lord Jesus should 
come. Indeed, he expected that the whole church 
of God in every place and in all time would be kept 
to the end of the dispensation, till the Lord Jesus 
as the Bridegroom should come to celebrate the 
wedding-feast with his perfected Bride. All who 
are in Christ will be confirmed in him till. that 
illustrious day. Has he not said, “ Because I live, 
ye shall live also”? He also said, “I give unto my 
sheep eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither 
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.” He 
that hath begun a good work in you will confirm it 
unto the day of Christ. The work of grace in the 
soul is not a superficial reformation; the life 
implanted at the new birth comes of a living and 
incorruptible seed, which liveth and abideth for ever ; 
and the promises of God made to believers are 
not of a transient character, but involve for their 
fulfilment the believer’s holding on his way till he 
comes to endless glory. We are kept by the 
power of God, through faith unto salvation. “ The 
righteous shall hold on his way.” Not as the result 


Confirmation from God. 117 
EE ens er sg 2 aoe Se eee ee ee 
of our own merit or strength, but as a cift of free 
and undeserved favour those who believe are “ pre- 
served in Christ Jesus.” Of the sheep of his fold 
Jesus will lose none; no member of his body shall 
die ; no gem of his treasure shall be missing in the 
day when he makes up his jewels. Dear reader, the 
salvation which is received by faith is not a thing 
of months and years; for our Lord Jesus hath 
“obtained eternal salvation for us,” and that which 
is eternal cannot come to an end, 

Paul also declares his expectation that the Corin- 
thian saints would be“ confirmed to the end dlame- 
less.” This blamelessness is a precious part of our 
keeping. To be kept holy is better than merely to | 
be kept safe. It is a dreadful thing when you see 
religious people blundering out of one dishonour 
into another : they have not believed in the power 
of our Lord to make them blameless. The lives of 
some professing Christians are a series of stumbles : 
they are never quite down, and yet they are seldom 
well on their feet. This is not a fit thing for a be- 
liever: he is invited to walk with God, and by faith 
he can aitain to steady perseverance in holiness» and 
he ought to do so. The Lord is able, not only to 
save us from hell, but to keep us from falling. We 
need not yield to temptation. Is it not written, “ Sin 
shall not have dominion over you”? The Lord is 
able to keep the feet of his saints; and he will do 
it if we will trust him to do so. We need not defile 
our garments, we may by his grace keep them un- 
spotted from the world: we are bound to do this, 
“for without holiness no man shall see the Lord,” 


118 All of Grace. 

The apostle prophesied for these believers, that 
which he would have us seek after—that we may 
be preserved “ blameless unto the day of our Lora 
Jesus Christ.’ Qur Revised Version has “zazreprove- 
able” instead of “blameless.” Possibly a hetter 
rendering would be “unimpeachable.” God grant 
that in that last great day we may stand free from 
all charge, that none in the whole universe may 
dare to challenge our claim to be the redeemed of 
the Lord. We have sins and -infirmities to mourn 
over, but these are not the kind of faults which 
would prove us to be out of Christ; we shall be 
clear of hypocrisy, deceit, hatred, and delight in 
sin; for these things would be fatal charges. Despite 
our failings, the Holy Spirit can work in us a 
character spotless before men ; so that, like Daniel, 
we shall furnish no occasion for accusing tongues, 
except in the matter of our religion. Multitudes of 
godly men and women have exhibited lives so 
transparent, so consistent throughout, that none 
could gainsay them. The Lord will be able to say 
of many a believer, as he did of Job, when Satan 
stood before him, “ Hast thou considered my ser- 
vant, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth 
God and escheweth evil?” This is what my reader 
must aim at, and look for at the Lord’s hands. 
This is the triumph of the saints—to continue to 
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, maintain- 
ing our integrity as before the living God. May we 
never turn aside into crooked ways, and give cause 
to the adversary to blaspheme. Of the true be- 
liever, it is written, “He keepeth himself, and that 


Confirmation from God. 119 


wicked one toucheth him not.” May it be so written 
concerning us! | 

Friend just beginning in the divine life, the Lord 
can give you an irreproachable character. Even 
though in your past life you may have gone far into 
sin, the Lord can altogether deliver you from the 
power of former habit, and make you an example 
of virtue. He can not only make you moral, but he 
can make you abhor every false way and follow after 
all that is saintly. Do not doubt it. The chief 
of sinners need not be a whit behind the purest of 
the saints. Believe for this, and according to your 
faith shall it be unto you. 

Oh, what a joy it will be to be found blameless 
in the day of judgment! We sing not amiss, ie 
we join in that charming hymn— | 


“ Bold shall I stand in that great day, 
For who aught to my charge shall lay ; 
While through thy blood absolved I am, 
From sin’s tremendous curse and shame ?”’ 


What bliss it will be to enjoy that dauntless 
courage, when heaven and earth shall flee away 
from the face of the Judge of all! This bliss shall 
be the portion of every one who looks alone to the 
grace of God in Christ Jesus, and in that sacred 
might wages continual war with all sin. 


WAY SAINTS PERSEVERE, 


HE hope which filled the heart of Paul 
concerning the Corinthian brethren we 
have already seen to be full of com- 
fort to those who trembled as to their 

future. But why was it that he believed that the 
brethren would be confirmed unto the end ? 


I want you to notice that he gives his reasons. 
Here they are— 


“God ts faithful, by whem ye were called unto the 
Sellowship of his Son Jesus Christ.’—1 Cor. i 9. 


The apostle does not say, “You are faithful.” 
Alas! the faithfulness of man is a very unreliable 
affair: it is mere vanity. He does not say, “ You 
have faithful ministers to lead and guide you, and 
therefore I trust you will be safe.” Oh, no! if we 
are kept by men we shall be but ill kept. He puts 
it, “God is faithful” If we are found faithful it 
will be because God is faithful. _ On the faithfulness 
of our covenant God the whole burden of our sal- 
vation must rest. On this glorious attribute of 
God the matter hinges. We are variable as the 
wind, frail as a spider’s web, weak as water. No 
dependence can be placed upon our natural quali- 
ties, or our spiritual attainments ; but God abideth 


Why Saints Persevere. I2I 


faithful. He is faithful in his love: he knows no 
variableness, neither shadow of a turning. He 
is faithful to his purpose: he doth not begin a 
work and then leave it undone. He is faithful to 
his relationships: as a Father he will not renounce 
his children, as a friend he will not deny his people, 
as a Creator he will not forsake the work of his 
own hands. He is faithful to his promises, and will 
never allow one of them to fail to a single believer. 
He is faithful to his covenant, which he has made 
with us in Christ Jesus, and ratified with the blood 
of his sacrifice. He is faithful to his Son, and will 
not allow his precious blood tobe spilt in vain. He 
is faithful to his people to whom he has promised 
eternal life, and from whom he will not turn away. 

This faithfulness of God is the foundation and 
corner-stone of our hope of final perseverance. 
The saints shall persevere in holiness, because God 
perseveres in grace. He perseveres to bless, and 
therefore believers persevere in being blessed. He 
continues to keep his people, and therefore they 
continue to keephis commandments. This is good 
solid ground to rest upon, and it is delightfully 
consistent with the motto of this little book, “ ALL 
OF GRACE.” Thus it is free favour and infinite 
mercy which ring in the dawn of salvation, and the 
same sweet bells sound melodiously through the 
whole day of grace. 

You see that the only reasons for hoping that we 
shall be confirmed to the end, and be found blame- 
less*at the last, are found in our God; but in him 
these reasons are exceedingly abundant, 


122 All of Grace. 


They lie first, 22 what God has done. He has 
gone so far in blessing us that it is not possible for 
him to run back. Paul reminds us that he has 
“called us into the fellowship of his Son Jesus 
Christ.” Has he called us? Then the call cannot 
be reversed ; for, “the gifts and calling of God are - 
without repentance.’ From the effectual call of 
his grace the Lord never turns. “Whom he called 
them he also justified, and whom he justified them 
he also glorified”: this is the invariable rule of the 
divine procedure. There is a common call, of 
which it is said, “Many are called, but few are 
chosen”; but this of which we are now thinking is 
another kind of call, which betokens special love, 
and necessitates the possession of that to which we 
are called. In such a case it is with the called 
one even as with Abraham’s seed, of whom the 
Lord said, “I have called thee from the ends of | 
the earth, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant ; 
I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.” 

In what the Lord has done, we see strong 
reasons for our preservation and future glory, be- 
cause the Lord has called us znto the fellowship of 
his Son Jesus Christ. It means into partnership 
with Jesus Christ, and I would have you carefully 
consider what this means. If you are indeed called 
by divine grace, you have come into fellowship with 
the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to be joint-owner with 
him in all things. Henceforth you are one with 
him in the sight of the Most High. The Lord 
Jesus bare your sins in his own body on the tree, 
being made a curse for you; and at the same time 


Why Saints Persevere. 133. 


he has become your righteousness, so that you are 
justified in him. You are Christ’s, and Christ is 
yours. As Adam stood for his descendants, so does 
Jesus stand for all who are in him. As husband 
and wife are one, so is Jesus one with all those 
who are united to him by faith; one by a con- 
jugal union which can never be broken. More 
than this, believers are members of the body 
of Christ, and so are one with him by a loving, 
living, lasting union. God has called us into this 
union, this fellowship, this partnership, and by this 
very fact he has given us the token and pledge 
of our being confirmed to the end. If we were con- 
sidered apart from Christ we should be poor perish- 
able units, soon dissolved and borne away to 
destruction ; but as one with Jesus we are made 
partakers of his nature, and are endowed with his 
immortal life. Our destiny is linked with that of 
our Lord, and until Ze can be destroyed it is not 
possible that we should perish. 

Dwell much upon this partnership with the Son 
of God unto which you have been called: for all 
your hope lies there. You can never be poor while 
Jesus is rich, since you are in one firm with him. 
Want can never assail you since you are joint- 
proprietor with him who is Possessor of heaven and 
earth. You can never fail; for though one of the 
partners in the firm is as poor as a church mouse, 
and in himself an utter bankrupt, who could not pay 
a half a farthing in the pound of his heavy debts, 
yet the other partner is inconceivably, inexhaustibly 
rich. Insuch partnership you are raised above the 


124 All of Grace. 


depression of the times, the changes of the future, 
and the shock of the end of all things. The Lord 
has called you into the fellowship of his Son Jesus 
Christ, and by that act and deed he has put you 
into the place of infallible safeguard. 

If you are indeed a believer you are one with 
Jesus, and therefore you are secure. Do you not 
see that it must be so? You must be confirmed to 
the end until the day ot his appearing, if you have 
indeed been made one with Jesus by the irrevocable 
act of God. Christ and the believing sinner are in 
the same boat: unless Jesus sinks, the believer will 
never drown. Jesus has taken his redeemed into 
such connection with himself, that he must first be 
smitten, overcome, and dishonoured, ere the least of 
his purchased ones can be injured. His name is at 
the head of the firm, and until it can be dishonoured 
we are secure against all dread of failure. 

So, then, with the utmost confidence let us (exe) 
forward into the unknown future, linked eternally 
with Jesus. If the men of the world should cry, 
“Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, 
leaning upon her Beloved ?” we will joyfully con- 
fess that we do lean on Jesus, and that we mean to 
lean on him more and more. Our taithful God is 
an everflowing well of delight, and our fellowship 
with the Son of God isa full river of joy. Knowing 
these glorious things we cannot be discouraged : 
nay, rather we cry with the apostle, “ Who shall 
separate us fron the love of God which ts in Christ 
Jesus our Lord 2” 


CLOSE: 


I’ my reader has not followed me step by 
| step as he has read my pages, I am 
truly sorry. Book-reading is of small 
value unless the truths which pass be- 
fore the mind are grasped, appropriated, and 
carried out to their practical issues. It is as if one 
saw plenty of food in a shop and yet remained 
hungry, for want of personally eating thereof. It 
is all in vain, dear reader, that you and I have 
met, unless you have actually laid hold upon Christ 
Jesus, my Lord. On my part there was a distinct 
desire to benefit you, and I have done my best to 
that end. It pains me that I have not been able 
todo you good, for I have longed to win that 
privilege. I was thinking of you when I wrote this 
page, and I laid down my pen and solemnly bowed 
my knee in prayer for every one who should read 
it. It is my firm conviction that great numbers of 
readers will get a blessing even though you refuse 
to be of the number. But why should yoz refuse? 

If you do not desire the choice blessing which I 
would have brought to you, at least do me the justice 
to admit that the blame of your final doom will 
not lie at my door. When we two meet before the 
great white throne you will not be able to charge me 


125 All of Grace. 


with having idly used the attention which you were 
pleased to give me while you were reading my little 
book. God knoweth I wrote each line for your 
eternal good. I now in spirit take you by the 
_ hand. I give you a firm grip. Do you feel my 
brotherly grasp? The tears are in my eyes as I 
look at you and say— Why will you die? Will you 
not give your soul a thought? Will you perish 
through sheer carelessness? Oh, do not so; but 
weigh these solemn matters, and make sure work 
for eternity. Do not refuse Jesus, his love, his 
blood, his salvation. Why should you do so? Can 
you do it? 
I BESEECH YOU, 


Do NOT TURN AWAY FROM YOUR REDEEMER! 


If, on the other hand, my prayers are heard, and 
you, my reader, have been led to trust the Lord 
Jesus and receive from him salvation by grace, 
then keep you ever to this doctrine, and this way 
of living. Let Jesus be your all in all, and let free 
erace be the one line in which you live and move. 
There is no life like that of one who lives in the 
favour of God. To receive all as a free gift pre- 
serves the mind from self-righteous pride, and from 
self-accusing despair. It makes the heart grow 
warm with grateful love, and thus it creates a 
feeling in the soul which is infinitely more accept- 
able to God than anything which can possibly 
come of slavish fear. Those who hope to be saved 
by trying to do their best know nothing of that 
elowing fervour, that hallowed warmth, that devout 


Closing Appeal. 127 


joy in God, which come with salvation freely given 
according to the grace of God. The slavish spirit 
of self-salvation is no match for the joyous spirit of 
adoption. There is more real virtue in the least 
emotion of faith than in all the tuggings of legal 
bond-slaves, or all the weary machinery of devotees 
who would climb to heaven by rounds of cere- 
monies. Faith is spiritual, and God who is a spirit 
delights in it for that reason. Years of prayer- 
saying, and church-going, or chapel-going, and 
ceremonies, and performances, may only be an 
abomination in the sight of the spiritual Jehovah ; 
but a glance from the eye of true faith is spiritual, 
and it is therefore dear to him. “The Father 
seeketh such to worship him.’ Look you first to , 
the inner man, and to the spiritual part of religion, 
and the rest will then follow in due course. 

[f you ave saved yourself, be on the watch for the 
souls of others. Your own heart will not prosper 
unless it is filled with intense concern to bless your 
fellow men. The life of your soul lies in faith ; its 
health lies in love. He who does not pine to lead 
others to Jesus has never been under the spell of 
love himself. Get to the work of the Lord—the 
work of love. Begin at home. Visit next your 
neighbours. Enlighten the village, or the street in 
which you live. Scatter the word of the Lord 
wherever your hand can reach. | 

If those who are converted become winners of 
others, who knows what may spring out of my little 
book? Already I begin praising God for the con- 
versions which he will work by it, and by those 


i28 All of Grace. 

whom it leads to Jesus. Probably the larger part 
of the results will happen when my right hand 
which is now leaving its impress on the page will 
be paralyzed in death. 

‘READER, MEET ME IN HEAVEN! Do not go 
down to hell, There is no coming back again from 
that abode of misery. Why do you wish to enter 
. the way of death when heaven’s gate is open before 
you? Do not refuse the free pardon, the full sal- 
vation which Jesus grants to all who trust him. 
Do not hesitate and delay. You have had enough 
of resolving, come to action. Believe in Jesus now, 
with full and immediate decision. Take with you 
words and come unto your Lord this day, even this 
day. Remember, O soul, it may be 


NOW OR NEVER 


with you. Let it be NOW: it would be horrible 
that it should be zever. 
Farewell. Again I charge you, 


MEET ME IN HEAVEN, 


+thi END. 


Alabaster Passmore, and Sons, Printers, Faan Street, E.C. 


WORKS BY C. H. SPURGEON, 


AND OTHER AUTHORS, 


PUBLISHED BY PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 


PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C. 


Lxposttory. 
TREASURY OF DAVID: Containing an Original 


Exposition of the Book of Psalms; a collection of illustrative 
Extracts from the whole range of Literature; a series of 
Homiletical Hints upon almost every verse ; and list of Writers 
upon each Psalm. By ©. H. SpurcEoN. Complete in 7 vols., 
Cloth, 8s. each. May also be had in half-calf and calf bindings. 
Vol. I., containing Psalms xiv I.to XXVI.—Twenty-fourth Thousand. 


se . ie oy Es vy LII.—Twentieth Thousand. 
5) ales 9 3 LIII. ,, LXXVIII.—Nineteenth Thousand. 
pecs? Gy »  UxXXIxX.,, OCIII.—Seventeenth Thousand, 
5 “3 ‘5 CIV. ,, OXVIII.—Thirteenth Thousand, 
Wes % ‘5 CXIX.,, OXXIV.—Ninth Thousand. 

Tah ae - CXXV. ,, CL.—Fifth Thousand. 


‘‘Tf the eloquent Baptist preacher of the Metropolitan Tabernacle had 
produced nothing but these volumes he would certainly be entitled to the 
thanks of all Bible readers.” —The Rock, 


THE INTERPRETER; or, Scripture for Family Wor- 


ship : being selected passages of the Word of God for every morning and 
evening throughout the year, accompanied by a running comment and 
suitable Hymns. By 0. H. Spureron. Cloth 25s., Persian Morocco 32s. 
Turkey Morccco 42s. Hymn Book, 1s. 

‘The impress of Mr. Spurgeon’s genius is observable in the very felicitous 
arrangement of the passages of Scripture as well as in the characteristic running 
comments, in which latter, by the way, Mr. Spurgeon’s theological views come 
prominently to the front.’—The Christian Family. 


aomiletical. 
THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT, 


Containing the Sermons of ©. H. Spureron, preached during the 
past thirty-one years, Vols. I. and II., 6s. 6d. each. Vols. IIT. 10:V.E.5:78 
each, Vol. VII., 8s.6d. Vols. VIII. to XXXI., 7s. each. Whole calf, 
17s. 6d. and 21s., and half-calf, 12s. per vol, The Sermons are pub- 
lished every Thursday at ld.; and will be sent weekly by the Pub- 
lishers, post free, to any address in the United Kingdom :—Three months, 
1s. 11d.; Six months, 3s. 9d.; Twelve months, 7s. 6d. 


TWELVE SERMONS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS. 


By ©. H. Spureron, With a Portrait, Views of Cottage where Mr. 
Spurgeon first preached, and of the Metropolitan Tabernacle. Limp 
Cloth, 1s, Post free 14 stamps. 


TWELVE SELECTED SOUL-WINNING SERMONS. 


Bound in Limp Cloth, is. Post free 14 stamps. 


a SRE a 
2 


TWELVE STRIKING SERMONS. Bound in Limp 


Cloth, 1s, Post free 14 stamps. 


TYPES AND EMBLEMS: A Collection of Sermons 


preached on Sunday and Thursday Evenings at the Metropolitan 
Tabernacle. By C. H. Spuraron. 33s. 
*** Types and Emblems’ are attractive themes, and in Mr. Spurgeon’s hands 
they neither lack suggestiveness nor power. All his well-known qualities as 
a preacher are in great force throughout this volume.’’—Gen. Baptist Mag. 


TRUMPET CALLS TO CHRISTIAN ENERGY, A 
Second Series of Mr. SrurcxEon’s Sunday and Thursday Evening 
Sermons. Price 3s. 6d. 

“‘The aim in each of these addresses is the simple one of rousing Christian 
men and women to renewed activity for God. Believing them to be eminently 
calculated to do good, we wish them a wide circulation.” —Rock. : 


THE PRESENT TRUTH: A Third Series of Mr. Spur- 
geon’s Sunday and Thursday Evening Sermons, 3s. 6d. 

“Thank God for such mighty discourses! . . . No better gift-book 

could be suggested for an unconverted or backsliding friend.”—The Christian. 


STORM SIGNALS: A Fourth Series of Sermons 


preached on Sunday and Thursday Evenings at the Metropolitan Taber- 
nacle. By C. H. Spurcron. Price 3s, 6d. 


FARM SERMONS. Nineteen Discourses on Farming. 
By C. H. Spureron. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. cloth gilt. Illustrated. 


‘* These sermons are fresh and as fragrant as the newly-ploughed soil, or 
the new-mown hay, and ought to be perused with pleasure and profit by many 
who know little or nothing of agricultural pursuits.”— The Christian, 


Elustratibe, 
FEATHERS FOR ARROWS; or, Illustrations for 


Preachers and Teachers, from my Note Book. By ©. H. Spurexron. 
Price 2s. 6d. 

** The collection is very varied, but all bearing on the highest themes, and fitted 
to help the highest purpose of the Christian ministry. There is an admirable 
index of subjects, and another of texts, which greatly add to the practical 
usefulness of the book : we cordially recommend it.”— Evangelical Magazine, 


ILLUSTRATIONS AND MEDITATIONS ; or, Flowers 


ly a Puritan’s Garden. Distilled and Dispensed by C. H. Spurceon. 
rice 2s. 6d, 

“It is a Garden full of beautiful and useful things, which will yield its 
delights to many classes of readers,””—Christian World, 


Zxtracts, 
FLASHES OF THOUGHT; being one Thousand Choice 


Extracts from the Works of C. H. SpurgEon. Alphabetically arranged, 

and with a copious Index. Price 5s. 
_, .A thousand extracts, bright with the light of heaven, sparkling with wit, 
rich in imagery, beautiful in their setting, forcible in style, and devoutly 


stimulating in tone, make up a volume of unique merit.”—General Baptist 
Magazine, 


eee SSS SS eee tenisiinds eae le 


3 
SPURGEON’S GEMS: being Brilliant Passages Selected 


from the Discourses of C. H. Spureron. Large Type, 4s. 


GLEANINGS AMONG THE SHEAVES, By C. H. 


Spurcron. Cloth Antique, Price 1s. 
“These extracts are quite Spurgeonic—racy, rich, and rare, both as to 
style and matter—full of exquisite consolation—faithful advice—clear analogies 
—poetic touches—and glorious old gospel.” — Weekly Review. 


SPURGEON’S BIRTHDAY BOOK. Cloth, 2s. 6d,; 


Calf or Morocco, 5s.; Russia, with Photograph, 10s. 6d. 
*‘A metaphor, simile, allegory, or illustration for every day in the year, 
compiled from the works of 0. H.Spurcron. For thirty pence our readers may 
possess a book which is as useful as it is handsomely got up.”—Christian Age. 


Debotional. 
MORNING BY MORNING; or, Daily Readings for the 


Family or the Closet. By C. H. Spuraron. 3s. 6d. Morocco, 7s. 6d. 
“Those who have learned the value of morning devotion, will highly prize 
these helps. All who love a full-orbed gospel, vigorous, varied thought, and 
a racy style, will appreciate this volume.”—Rev, J. Angus, D.D. 


EVENING BY EVENING; or, Readings at Eventide for 


the Family or the Closet. By O.H.Spurcron. 38s. 6d. Morocco, 7s. 6d. 

**On learning that ‘ Evening by Evening’ was published, how gladly I bade 

it welcome! And I can humbly commend it in no higher terms than by simply 

saying that it will be found a fit companion, every way, for its forerunner of 
the morning.””— Charles J, Brown, D.D., Edinburgh. 


For Students, 
LECTURES TO MY STUDENTS; A Selection from 


Addresses delivered to the Students of the Pastors’ College, Metropolitan 
Tabernacle, By OC. H. Spuraxzon, President. First and Second Series. 
Price 2s. 6d. each. 

* We have read this work with a feeling very nearly approaching to delight. 
Nothing that Mr. Spurgeon has printed has so thoroughly pleased us, and few 
of his works are calculated to be of greater practical service. It abounds in 
words of wisdom; it is rich in humour, but richer in human and spiritual 
experience.”’—Wonconformist. 


COMMENTING AND COMMENTARIES: Two Lec- 


tures addressed to the Students of the Pastors’ College, together with 
a Catalogue of Bible Commentaries and Expositions, Price 2s. 6d, 

“ Every candid reader will admit that, in impartiality, in terse and telling 
brevity, in wisdom sharpened into wit, in unaffected zeal for Christ's cause, 
and, above all, in robust common sense, this volume has few equals, if any.”’ 
Literary World. 


MY SERMON-NOTES. A Selection from Outlines of 


Discourses delivered at the Metropolitan Tabernacle. By 0. H.SpurcEon. 
Part I. Genesis to Proverbs—I. to LXIV. Part II, Ecclesiastes to 
Malachi—LXV. to CXXIX. Part III. Matthew to Acts—OXXXxX. to 
CXLV. Cloth, 2s. 6d. each. Parts I. and II. bound together in one 
volume. Cloth 5s. 

““*My Sermon Notes’ qill be as heartily welcomed by the clergy of the 
Establishment as by Nonconformist pastors. In point of freshness, the work 
is such a contrast to many books of the same order, that preachers of every 
grade will find something suggestive under every head.”— The Christian World. 


4 
SPEECHES by C. H. SPURGEON AT HOME and 


Abroad. 2s. 6d. ee 
The pieces are in the main given as they originally appeared ; in the majority 
of instances the author is made to speak in the first person; but this is not the 
case throughout. The reader will also find that the principal subjects are 
admirably reported. 


Periodical, 
THE SWORD AND THE TROWEL: A Monthly 


Magazine, Price 3d. Yearly vols., 5s. Cases for binding, 1s. 4d. 

It is an accurate record of the religious movements which emanate from 
the Metropolitan Tabernacle, but its advocacy is far from being confined 
within that area. No pains will be spared to render the Magazine growingly 
worthy of the widest circulation.—Editor, C. H. SPURGEON. 


Historical, 
THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE: its History 


and Work. With 33 Illustrations. By 0. H. Spureron. Price, in 
paper covers, ls. Bound in cloth, 2s. 
‘‘Profusely illustrated with portraits, fac-similes of forgotten caricatures, 
and other engravings, quaint and otherwise, is likely to rival ‘John Plough- 
man’ in popularity.”—Christian World. 


MEMORIAL VOLUME. Containing Sermons and 


Addresses delivered on the completion of the Twenty-fifth year of the 
Pastorate of C. H. Spurcron. Price ls., cloth. 


THE SPURGEON PHOTOGRAPH ALBUM, in Hand- 


some Binding, Royal 4to, gilt edges. Containing a brief sketch of Mr. 
SpurGcEoN’s Life and his numerous Institutions, with Photographic 
Views, and Portraits of Mr. and Mrs. Spurcron. 10s. 6d. 

‘This is a very worthy memorial of the Jubilee. A work of art for the 
drawing-room table, and at the same time a historical document of an event 
which has been a joy tomany. The price is moderate for such a production.” — 
C, H. SPURGEON. 


JBopular. 
JOHN PLOUGHMAN’S TALK; or, Plain Advice for 


Plain People. Illustrated. By C. H. Spurcxon. In stiff covers, ls. 
Cloth, gilt edges, 2s, 340th Thousand. 

‘Racy and pungent; very plain, and to the purpose. No fear_as to 
whether it will be read or not by those into whose hands it may fall. If Mr. 
Spurgeon goes on at this rate in his multiform publications, he will leave 
nothing racy unsaid.’ — Watchman. 


JOHN PLOUGHMAN’S PICTURES; or, More of his 


Plain Talk for Plain People. In stiff covers, 1s.; cloth, gilt edges, 2s. 
110th Thousand. 


SPURGEON’S SHILLING SERIES. Bound in Cloth. 


No. 1.—Christ’s Glorious Achievements. | No. 4.—The Mourner’s Comforter. 
», 2—Seven Wonders of Grace. », 0.—The Bible and the Newspaper. 
9) 93—Lhe Spare Half-Hour. », 6.—Eccentric Preachers. 
No. 7.—Good Cheer. 


5 ‘ 
ALL OF GRACE. An earnest word with those who 


are seeking salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ. By C. H. SpurGEON. 


Cloth, 1s. 


_“ Every word is weighted with precious truth, and truth so simply and con- 
vincingly put that none can fail to understand God’s way of salvation.’”?—The 


Christian. 


THE CLUE OF THE MAZE. ByC.H.Spurgeon. Cloth 


Gilt, ls. 


“A seasonable as well as characteristic little book for doubters.’’— The 


Christian Leader. 


ONE PENNY EACH. 


By C. H. SPURGEON. 


Specially adapted for gratuitous distribution. 


A DOUBLE KNOCK AT THE DOOR 
OF THE YOUNG. 

A GOOD SOLDIER OF JESUS CHRIST. 

A VERY EARLY BIBLE SOCIETY. 

AN ANXIOUS ENQUIRY FOR A BE- 
LOVED SON. 

APOSTOLIC EXHORTATION. 

A SILLY DOVE. 

A SPUR FOR A FREE HORSE. 

A WORD FOR THE PERSECUTED. 

BAPTISMAL REGENERATION. 

BELLS FOR THE HORSES. 

CALL TO THE UNCONVERTED. 

CHASTISEMENT. 

CONFESSION OF SIN. 

wea 5 iH HALL SERMON TO YOUNG 


MEN. 

FAITH: WHAT IS IT? HOW CAN IT 
BE OBTAINED. 

FEAR NOT. 

FEED MY LAMBS. 

GOD’S JEWELS. 

HELPS TO FULL ASSURANCE. 

HIGH DOCTRINE AND BROAD DOC- 
TRINE. 

HOW TO OBTAIN FAITH. 

HOW TO RAISE THE DEAD. 

INFANT SALVATION. 

IS CONVERSION NECESSARY? 

IS IT NOTHING TO YOU? 

JESUS AND THE LAMBS. 

LANDLORD AND TENANT. 

LET US PRAY. 

LOVING ADVICE FOR ANXIOUS 
SEEKERS. 

MAY I? 


NONE BUT JESUS. 

NUMBER 1,500; or, LIFTING UP THE 
BRAZEN SERPENT, 

ONLY TRUST HIM! 

RECEIVING THE KINGDOM OF GOD 
AS A LITTLE CHILD. 

SERMON FOR EVERYBODY. 

“SUPPOSING HIM TO BE THE 
GARDENER.” 

THE ANXIOUS ENQUIRER. 

THE BEST BURDEN FOR YOUNG 
SHOULDERS. 

CHILDREN AND THEIR HO- 


SANNAS. 

THE DROPPING WELL OF KNARES- 
BOROUGH. 

THE ESSENCE OF SIMPLICITY. 

THE LUTHER SERMON AT EXETER 
HALL. 

THE HOLD FAST. 

THE LITTLE DOGS. 

THE PEARL OF PATIENCE. 

THE PERPETUITY OF THE LAW OF 


GOD, 

THE PRIEST DISPENSED WITH. 

THERE GO THE SHIPS. 

THE SEA! THE SEA! THE WIDE 
AND OPEN SEA. 

THE SILVER TRUMPET. 

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL AND THE 
SCRIPTURES. 

THE TURNING POINT. 

THE UPPER HAND. 

THE WAY OF SALVATION. 

THE WAR HORSE. 

TOKEN FOR THE BEREAVED. 


Second Edition, handsomely bound, 3s. 6d. 


TEN YEARS OF MY LIFE in the Service of the 


Book Fund: Being a Grateful Record of my Experience of the Lord’s 
Ways, and Work, and Wages. By Mrs, C. H. SpuRGEON. 

‘¢ A deeply interesting narrative of a beneficent and courageously sustained 

effort. Mrs. Spurgeon has much of the style of her husband’s writing, and 

this autobiographic sketch might in many respects have proceeded from his 


pen.”—Daily Telegraph. 


THE GOSPEL OF THE GRACE OF GOD: being 


Sermons delivered at the Metropolitan Tabernacle, by THoMAs SpuRGEON, 
during his father’s illness. With Preface by ©. H.Spurcxon. Cloth, ls. 6d. 


6 


WORKS BY OTHER AUTHORS. 
A BODY OF DIVINITY, contained in Sermons upon the 


Assembly’s Catechism. By the Rev. Tuomas Watson, Rector of St. 
Stephen’s, Walbrook. A new and complete edition, revised and adapted to 
modern readers by the Rey. Grorck Rogers, Camberwell. With a 
Preface and Appendix by Pastor C. H. Spurgeon. Price 6s. 

Every divine of Calvinistic views should read it, and every private Christian 
also. We can heartily recommend it to all lovers of sound doctrine, among 
whom we hope for a large sale.—C. H. SpurcEon. 


ELISHA COLES ON DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY. With 
Preface by C. H. Spureron. 2s. 6d. 

Romaine says of this book: ‘The doctrines of grace, of which this book 
treats, are the truths of God: our author has defended them in a masterly 
manner. He has not only proved them to be plainly revealed in the Scriptures, 
but has also shown that they are of such constant use to the children of God, 
that without the steadfast belief of them, they cannot go on their Way rejoicing. 
In the practical view of these points Elisha Coles is singularly excellent.” 


HENRY’S OUTLINES OF CHURCH HISTORY: A 
Brief Sketch of the Christian Church from the First Century. By 
JOSEPH FERNANDEZ, LL.D. 2s. 6d. 

“The Church Histories hitherto in vogue are too cumbersome, too verbose, 
too involved to be used in schools and colleges, and we entertain the hope that 
the present work will remedy that evil, and supply a work which all our friends 
who are tutors can use with pleasure and safety. Every young Christian should 
be acquainted with ecclesiastical history ; it should be taught in every school of 
a high grade, to young ladies as well as to their brothers.’—(C, H. Spurgeon. 


GLIMPSES OF JESUS; or, Christ Exalted in the Affec- 
cere of his People. By W. P.Batrern. Eighth Thousand. Fep. 8vo. 
oth 3s, 

**T hailed with pleasure the advent of this precious volume. I sat down to 
read it, and soon discovered its beauty; it was a feast of fat things, a season 
long to be remembered. I have read it again and again, and would desire to 
adore the Holy Spirit for that gracious unction which rested on me in its 
perusal.””—C. H, Spurgeon. 


LESSONS FROM JESUS: or, the Teachings of Divine 
Love. By W.P. Batrern. Second Edition, 3s. 

“This is a worthy sequel to ‘Glimpses of Jesus,’ by the same author. 
Every book is valuable that fixes our attention upon Jesus, and revives our 
perception of his beauty; and especially when it discovers new beauties, and 
brings his whole character more vividly before us. Such will be the effect of 
these ‘ Lessons from the life of Jesus.’ ’—C. H, Spurgeon. 


THE BEAUTY OF THE GREAT KING, and other 
Poems for the Heart and Home. By W. P. Baurern, Author of 
‘* Glimpses of Jesus.’”? Second Edition. 2s. 6d, 

‘* We strongly recommend this book to the attention of our readers. No 
child of God can read it without pleasure and profit. It has been written in the 
furnace, and will comfort such as are init. The Author has seen some of ‘ The 
Beauty of the Great King,’ and has well uttered the joy of that great sight. 
We hope that many will have equal delight with ourselves as they read this 
book.’’—C, H. Spurgeon. 


Pastor C. H. SPURGEON: his Life and Work to his 
Fiftieth Birthday; with an Account of his Ancestors for 200 Years, By 
GrorGE J. Stevenson, M.A. Paper covers, ls., cloth, 2s. 


7 
BOOTH OF THE BLUE RIBBON MOVEMENT; or, 


The Factory Boy who became a Temperance Evangelist. By ERNEST 
BLACKWELL. With Preface by CANoN WILBERFORCE. Crown 8vo, 328 

pages, handsomely bound in cloth, with illustrations. Price 3s. 6d. 
“Very well written. <A singular life, revealing the greatness of divine grace. 
R. T. Booth is one of the truest and most devoted of Temperance Evangelists. 
It has been our lot to see him near at hand, and to have fellowship with him, 
and the result is genuine Christian love to him, and esteem for him. The book 
is so prettily got up, that it ought to run to a hundred thousand at the least. 

It must be popular, or else we are greatly out of our reckoning.’’ 

C. H. SpurRGEON. 


THE PATHOS OF LIFE; or, Touching Incidents Illus- 


trative of ~ Truth of the Gospel, By W. Poote BALFern. Second Edi- 
tion. 2s. 6d. 

‘* Sensitive, refined, and tender, suited to contact with the highest class of 
mind, he yet seeks to reach the finer feelings of those who externally too often 
exhibit a rough, hard, and unimpressible aspect. The young, we venture to 
say, will be charmed by the fatherly tenderness characteristic of many of these 
poems,”’—Literary World, : 


BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKBUYERS in Byeways and 


Highways. By C. H. Spureron, SAamvet Mannina, LL.D., and G, 
HoLpEn Pike. With a Preface by the Right Hon. the Eart or 
SHAFTESBURY, K.G. Cloth, gilt edges, 1s. 6d. 

‘* Externally this is an attractive book. Itis brought out with the view of 
creating and increasing public interest in Colportage. It remains a mystery 
with us that we cannot obtain support for Colportage in ag liberal a measure as 
so good a work demands. It does not say much for the wisdom and prudence 
of Christian people. If they gave most where the best return might legiti- 
mately be expected, we may say of our religious societies—these are last which 
would be first. If these addresses, papers, and reports should bring us ina 
revenue of sympathy, it will soon be followed by substantial help. To reach the 
villages and hamlets by means of sound literature taken to the cottagers’ doors, 
is a most worthy work.’—C, H. SpurRGEON. 


CONFERENCE ADDRESSES, being a Selection from 


Addresses delivered at the Annual Conferences of the Pastors’ College, by 
the Rev. GEorcE Rogers. With a recommendation by C. H. Spurcron, 
Cloth 2s. 6d. 

‘Our honoured friend, the Rev. George Rogers, has given an address at 
each gathering of our College conference, and on each occasion he has been 
singularly happy in his theme and in his mode of handling it. It would have 
been a pity and a sin to allow these racy addresses to be forgotten: and, accor- 
dingly, we are glad to see them preserved in print. Twelve such addresses it 
would be very hard to find anywhere else. We firmly believe that every student 
and minister who heard them will be anxious at once to possess a copy, and we 
shall be greatly surprised if the volume does not command a host of readers. 
Mother-wit is blended with fatherly wisdom, and the whole is sanctified by zeal 
for the cause of God. We cannot too heartily commend the volume to our 
subscribers, ’’—C. H. Spurcxon. 


A COLLECTION OF RARE JEWELS. From the 


Mines of Witiiam GuRNALL. (1680.) Dug up and deposited in a 
Casket, by ARTHUR Aveustus ReExs (1853). Second Edition. Price 2s, 
“Of all the Puritans, Gurnall is the best adapted for quoting. He is 
sententious, and withal pictorial, and both in a high degree. Mr. Rees has 
made his selections with a discerning eye; they are not mere clippings at 
random, but extracts chosen with judgment.”’—C. H. Spurgeon. 


8 
STRAY LEAVES FROM MY LIFE STORY. By 


J. MAnton Smiru. Illustrated. Price 2s. 6d. 


FRONDED PALMS. A Oollection of Pointed Papers 


on a wide range of subjects. By W. Y. Futierton. With over one 
hundred Illustrations. Cloth gilt, bevelled boards, 2s. 6d. 


WAYMARKS FOR WANDERERS. Being Five 


Addresses on the Prodigal Son. By W. Y. FuLLERTon, Evangelist. 
Price 1s. 


THE PULPIT BY THE HEARTH. Being Plain 


Chapters for Sabbath Reading. By ArrHuR MursELu. Price 2s. 6d. 


FOUR LETTERS TO THE CHRISTIANS CALLED 


‘‘ BRETHREN”? on the subject of Ministry. By Arruur Aveustus 
Rers. Price Sixpence, 


BUNYAN’S WATER OF LIFE. Preface by C. H. 


SPURGEON. Ils. 


UPTON CHAPEL SERMONS. By W. Williams. 


With Three Potographs, and Preface by C,H. Spurcron. Price 6s. 


SOME OF THE GREAT PREACHERS OF WALES. 


By Owen Jonzs, M.A. Price 6s. 6d. 


BAPTIST CONFESSION OF FAITH. Thirty-two 
Articles on Christian Faith and Practice, with Scripture Proofs, adopted by 
the Ministers and Messengers of the General Assembly, which met in 
London in 1689. Preface by C. H. Spurgxon. Paper covers, 4d. Post 
free, 5 stamps, 


BAPTISM DISCOVERED PLAINLY AND FAITH- 


fully according to the Word of God. By Joun Norcorr. A New 
Edition, corrected and somewhat altered by C. H, SpurGEoN. Price, 
paper covers, 6d.; cloth, ls. 


LECTURES ON BAPTISM. By the Rev. W. Shirreff. 7 


With Preface by C. H. Spureron. Price 2s. 6d. 


FOR EVER AND EVER. A College Lecture upon the 


Duration of Future Punishment. By Rey. Gzorex RocrErs. Price 2d. 


FUTURE PUNISHMENT. A Lecture Delivered to 


the Students of the Metropolitan Tabernacle College, in reply to a series 
of letters in ‘“‘ The Christian World,” from the Rev. Edward White. By 
the Rey. GrorcE Rogers, Price 1d. 


MURSELL’S LECTURES TO WORKING MEN. De- 
livered at the Lambeth Baths, Westminster Bridge Road, Price One 
Penny each; or 10d. the series in wrapper. Post free. 


WHAT’S YOUR NAME? COLOURS OF THE RAINBOW. 
TEMPLE BAR. RIPPLES ON THE RIVER. 
THE CRYSTAL PALACE. FACES IN THE FIRE. 
SUGAR-COATED PILLS. CRIES FROM THE CRADLE. 


WASHED AWAY. 


PASSMORE & ALABASTER, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS. 


ee  ————————————————— 


I 


ee As ew ty 
¥ ah 
Sie a’ 4 


£0 ‘ z. ey. . 
pot 4 ash beer as 

r & 

. Ny
