The Physiognomical System of Drs. Gall and Spurzheim
Johann Gaspar Spurzheim, 1815
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Spurzheim's 1815 exposition of Gall's system — the book that launched phrenology in Britain and America: the founding English text of the skull-reading craze. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b33090154_0001). This 1815 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

ara
hs rR
Bee wari


Serre ¢


See
NG teotne at


ac
See Lee wee
et tabclpiaderdtiied


k9394/6/


Pate mn
7


is fio i) ei
; ola Marke Bear ee ba ky ae Ou
ran PANG iba CR dle sO YP Ris
. Pa, uy i Se mi, Ann B ; va my hig ne
ie Fei 2y) Vey A ty ae > t a


DO ee


evans enn tf
Fe Wrenn cen yg Vi
Mea Cie ippeL 2
ox a * EMAL


ew a ©


4 i it
Pg ee


YD


THE


PHYSIOGNOMICAL SYSTEM


DRS. GALL AND SPURZHEIM ;


FOUNDED ON


AN ANATOMICAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION


OF THE
NERVOUS SYSTEM IN GENERAL,


AND OF THE
(® BRAIN IN PARTICULAR;
y 5, '


ae


AND INDICATING THE
we


DISPOSITIONS AND MANIFESTATIONS OF THE MIND. >
By J. G. SPURZHEIM, M. D.


— Being at the same Time a Book of Reference for Dr. Spurzhem’s »
Demonstrative Lectures.


j :
ILLUSTRATED WITH NINETEEN COPPER-PLATES,


_’ LONDON:
PRINTED FOR BALDWIN, CRADOCK, AND JOY,
47, Paternoster Row ;
AND WILLIAM BLACKWOOD, EDINBURGH.


1815. |


TO


HIS EXCELLENCY
MAXIMILIAN COUNT MERVELDT,


GRAND CROSS OF THE ORDERS OF
LEOPOLD, ALEXANDER NEWSKI, AND ST. MAURICE,
KNIGHT OF THE MILITARY ORDER OF MARIA THERESA,
ACTUAL CHAMBERLAIN AND PRIVY COUNSELLOR OF
MIS IMPERIAL AND ROYAL APOSTOLIC MAJESTY,
GENERAL OF CAVALRY,
AND COLONEL PROPRIETOR OF A REGIMENT OF UHLANS,


COMMANDANT GENERAL IN MORAVIA AND SILESIAs5


AND
AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY


TROM HIS IMPERIAL AND ROYAL APOSTOLIC,


TO HIS BRITANNIC, MAJESTY,


In Testimony of the Author’s Respect for the
Faculties and the Knowledge which so eminently
distinguish him, and in grateful Acknowledgement
of the generous Attention and Kindness which the
Author has experienced,


THIS WORK


IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.


iis ve


aBaicito Aer mg “te Mt B83 ie


Serpe a. BS OER UAE 28: ois
Be FeO ln 8! Pe ;
eee ;


oa ess Y hea eaE ye ae a0 HIRD varia te, Sire WD tore es
isin See OF Digmmulyice" week as NE
ie ay Lo ok ;


A ae :


: : ‘ oa pe oS sas aera ares % Be ae Se rae : LAS E x


Hiatt otro anton ek mma
aoe ry | nee FN: Ps ie Tit Ags ‘i wy, aioe The ‘tank “ Se fxs
ae ee ae ae ee hae


\ + - cc ie , -_ j ve ee er:


wae ee ihdiaiaine 20
or


*
Satie


ss ay . oe
or fen ‘i ee gist >
eas a ate: . tee, : ena s


a a |


LALA ‘ € vee A sg


ih a me i ae


re oe ' :
BLL vhs Le Sag Viet. .
mae ae oF ¥, # ; ‘ . ; ;


4 4
¥ iQ. x ae oath 1


PREFACE


VERY few readers condescend to peruse a
preface, especially if it be long. The present
therefore shall be very short. I need allude |
only to two things, the odject of our inquiries,
and the reason why I call them ours. Our in-
quiries may be divided into three kinds; ana-
tomical, physiological, and physiognomical. - At
first, Dr. Gall’s chief intention was to point out
the functions of the brain. Now, an exact
knowledge of the functions of any organic part
requires an- examination of its structure; for
physiology without anatomy is unfounded,
while anatomy without physiology is useless.
We therefore never separate anatomy and
physiology from each other. Moreover, ana-
tomical and physiological inquiries as to the
brain have led us to those of the five external
senses, and of the nervous system in general.
—The third kind of investigation is the result of
the other two. It indicates the possibility of
distinguishing, by external signs, the different
degrees of perfection in the neryous parts ne-
1


Vi PREFACE.


cessary to the manifestations of the special fa-
culties of the mind, and to the activity of these
faculties: these investigations are termed phy-
siognomical. Hence, all the functions of man
which take place with consciousness, the ex-
ternal signs of these functions, and the structure
of their respective organs—undoubtedly the
most important part of anthropology—are the
object of our investigations. .

It is acknowledged that Dr. Gall has the
merit of having first begun these inquiries. He
had pointed out many relations which exist be-
tween various ACTIONS of man and animals, and
certain cerebral parts, before I was so happy as
to become acquainted with him. As, however,
I have been associated in these examinations
during many years, and have been. especially
charged with the prosecution of the anatomical
part; as I have not a little contributed, and still
continue to extend, to perfect, and to establish
the new doctrine, Dr. Gall himself thinks it
just to speak of our inquiries, and for several
years past he has held this language. Hence the
Memoir to the national Institute of France, and
the Large Work on the Anatomy &c. of the
Brain, haye been published under our joint
names. ‘This book itself will show how much
I have improved our doctrine in the last few
years, during which nothing else has been pub-

6


PREFACK. Wii


lished on the subject. 1 am now led to think,
that the objects which are still to be added to
eur larger work must assume a more scientific
arrangement, and be considered in a more phi-
losophical manner, than Dr. Gall has been ac-
customed te do in his lectures. |

I now confine myself to the publication of
outlines of our investigations, in order to give
the English reader a correct view of our doc-
trine, and to enable him to judge of its solidity
and importance. ‘The large work, entitled,
Anatomie et Physiologie du Systéme Nerveux en
général, et du Cerveau en particulier, par Gall
et Spurzheim, Paris, of which the first volume
and half of the second haye been published,
contains many more anatomical details elu-
cidated by a greater number of plates than I
had the intention of introducing here.

Being aware that neither English philologists
nor the English public like to admit new words, —
I must apologise for my daring to introduce
new names. I foresee that the reyiewers may
blame them. I therefore beg leave to observe,
that while I do not wish to dispute respecting
words, I shall be obliged for every observation
which may improve our knowledge of human
nature, or rectify the nomenclature of our phi-
losophical ideas; but that I shall pay no at-
tention to any obseryation which indicates any


Vill PREFACE.


other intention than scientific examinations re-
quire, or which may originate in individual
motives. Let us never forget: Nehil aliud
natura, nihil aliud sapientia dicet.

Having however formed new names it is my
duty to state my reasons for so doing. ‘The
English language presents very few single words
which express my conceptions of the peculiar
faculties of the mind. Hence “I was obliged
either to speak by circumlocution or to make
new names. Now I think with Locke, that,
in this respect, we have the samé right as our
predecessors, and | therefore propose new single
names, which I have formed, as much as _possi-
ble, conformably to the spirit of the language.
Having established different propensities as pecu-
lar faculties of the mind, in order to designate
propensity I have taken the termination IvE as
indicating the quality of producing, and Ness as
indicating the abstract state; I have therefore
joined tveness to different roots, among which
I have given the preference to English words
generally admitted. When [ could not find any
such, I chose Latin participles, which, in English,
are so common even in expressions which denote
a meaning similar to that which I look for, as
destructiveness, productiveness &c. 3

{ have further to make a few particular ob-
servations. In the nomenclature of the pPro-


PREFACE. ix


pensities, I dislike the name physical love, be-
cause this propensity is neither more nor less
physical than attachment, or any other inclina-
tion common to man and animals; and I could
not admit some other expressions in order to
denote this propensity, because [ want names
which indicate the faculty, and not at all any
determinate action, whether in its use or its
abuse. I have therefore adopted amativeness,
like destructiveness.—It was difficult to make a
name for the second organ, because there is no
single word which indicates the love of offspring.
Hence I took two Greek roots. I am aware
that the name is long, but I could not say philo-
genitiveness, because the name ought to indicate
love of producing offspring. As however pro-
geny means offspring, and philoprogeny love of
offspring, and philoprogenitiveness the faculty of
producing love of offspring, I have adopted that -
term.—Inhabitiveness is composed of the English
word inhabit, and the termination iveness.—It
is true that adhesiveness is generally used merely
in a physical sense, but was not this originally
the case with many other words which bear now
a mental signification? Attachment indicates
only the.effect of this faculty, and [ require a
name to express the faculty of producing such
effect. It was naturally my desire to give the


x PREFACE.


same termination to all the names which denote
any propensity; and it seems to me that the
sound attachiveness would be infinitely more dis-
agreeable than adhesiveness, the signification of
which only remains to be determined.—Combat-
iveness is the propensity to combat.—Destruct-
iveness is admitted in the language.—Construet-
iveness is, in our doctrine, the producing of
construction—1 know that covetiveness. is a
pléonasm, but this fault is observed in many
other words. Covet itself indicates propensity or
wishing for; and I have added weness solely for
the sake of uniformity: otherwise I should have
said covetingness.—Secretiyeness is the propen-
sity to secrete or conceal.

‘The termination ous indicates a SENTIMENT, ag
anxious, cautious, pious, conscientious &c., and I
should have been very glad of finding similar
adjectives for every primitive sentiment of the
mind, When that has been the case, I haye
added ness in order to express the abstract
state, as cautiousness, righteousness, or conscien-
tiousness.

The names of the INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES
are easily understood, and. do not require any
particular explanation.

_ If, under any head of this nomenclature, there
beany better name, or one which indicates more


PREFACE. Xl


exactly any determinate faculty, but no determi-
nate action or effect of the faculty, I shall be
anxious to make use of it; for I am always dis-
posed to acknowledge truth and every real im-
provement.

As to style, my work of course presented, in
the first instance, many Germanisms and Galli-
cisms; and it probably still presents some of
them. I am however indebted to my friend
Alexander Walker, Esq. late Lecturer at Edin-
burgh, for bestowing upon its revisal such time
as he could spare from other avocations.


J.G. SPURZHEIM, M.D.


11, Rathbone Place, London,
Dec. 1814.


~ _ : *


wap: sta ed


CONTENTS.


Preface. bie SRE NS: OTe 6 bene) ers) .ar eT ere 6 oe 6 @ ol eel eel are
Introduction @eoeget@oeeeeeeosess ee oe Ooeee ere


eoeee 8 @% @ @


Vv
eeeeeoee evs 1


ANATOMICAL PART.


Getieral. cofsiderations; uw» cawiecteads buaewoxaun eides ob
TRG NPCS. ats do aioe nent Gib Re ecnew «xhh-tnes S1B 2S
Cerebetamtasticnen cfs a chistes Bs fe weiwilewan sos awk) OME
eieiit. ss. +s paialaeet dewinalled<i.


Commissures eoovo@e@qeoee@eeeeseaeveseeeeeeneeeeas oe@et @e@ 82 8 @ 6 39
Convolutions O'S 66'S € 2 es © 8 8.2 © 9 ££ SS. 2 OL agers oaeescee ee oboe @ @ ad 3
Communications e coeoesae ea pee eneaeseaeses @ *®e*eeoeeseeeeee e 2 4. oe}


PHYSIOLOGICAL PART.


CHAPTER IL


INNATENESS OF THE FACULTIES,


General view of the origin of the faculties ............ 53
External influences considered as the cause of the faculties 61
General faculties considered as the cause of the special
MEME | eat «nas ¢ mea Ao ee Re Ose v8 2 rates hurlie S's ow vel Oe
Positive proofs of the innateness of the Scril ton. PT LO,
The doctrine of the innateness of the faculties very ancient 91
PNG ss ie han daddns vais is bees dadeds scenes SORT EOS


CHAPTER II.


THE MANIFESTATIONS OF ALL FACULTIES OF THE MIND_
DEPEND ON ORGANIC CONDITIONS,


Gomera! View oi f2sos:


cov ee? ee e@eeeve eR eo ee ee on eae 103


Particular proofs . CV SP SLC GI SPV LS Bee eS SH CRN Ape Ke 104
Materialism . ee@eeaetetReovaeeeeoeeoeeveov ae oe eeeneve oe ee oe 119


XIV CONTENTS.


CHAPTER IIL


EXAMINATION OF THE MATERIAL CONDITIONS NECESSARY TO
THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE MIND.


Clenerpl Siew iia tae ree sie Fear AS oles WA oe acu LAB
The manifestations of the mind do not depend on the

whole body .. y keeQyan wuld « Qidpieewrad eel & ou 2iiead be
The viscera of 1 siden and oun are not the organs

of the manifestations of the moral feelings ........ io: 188
The spinal marrow and the nerves of the external senses

are not the organs of the manifestations of the mind.. 143
The brain is exclusively the organ of the manifestations

of the moral feelings and intellectual faculties.....:.. 159
Injuries of the brain and their influence upon the mani-

festations of the mind .. cs sssces sess sr ssisccasseee 164


" Dropsy of the brain ...6.¢0-06405- eT ea: as P74
@Ceriicamons Of tne DEAT 3 4 oasis no's wigs sits ba 0s ee
Absolute size of the bmain 3 fin daied aera g Ne. oS 08
Proportionate size of the brain to the Sees v iste ace AOE


Vaeralanglei cs iiss <4 ede St CARES «are ids lee aa sisy OE
Proportionate size of the cerebral parts one to aisle » 201
Our manner of judging of the size of the cerebral parts 204


CHAPTER IV.


PLURALITY OF THE CEREBRAL ORGANS,


Gtenetal View, 1s ie hwnd acl Jeeps tacts ads 1a chook avid BOS
ProOns ao 0495 astinisbedh to ka wueeage o61 a oabsta0i 212:
Sg ee iy tac ive ds ca dncceusniapeseeie 219


CHAPTER V.


MEANS OF POINTING OUT THE ORGANS OF THE MANIFESTA~
TIONS OF THE MIND.


Anatomy . TE SHTSTHCEFCECEC TEE CCE REZ CELE CEC RED ee OO Zon
PO OLEGORS cis civese see ry reread ds) eee ee 239
Our manner of proceeding. ci sscecveseeccoveecesees Fl


CONTENTS, | KY


CHAPTER VI.


POSSIBILITY OF DISTINGUISHING THE DEVELOPEMENT OF THE
BRAIN IN GENERA Ts AND ITS PARTS IN PARTICULAR.


‘The brain is the principal cause of the form and size of
the dead): 1.65 PFs 0) a wih a, 6 whe 49-0 8e Bem Arius. acaa ca
Possibility of distinguishing ne size of the brain ...... 259
Difficulties of distinguishing the size of the cerebral parts 262
Impossibility of distinguishing the size of the cerebral
POTTS, cceccescerwececeerecececoveraisguvbessee. 200


CHAPTER VII.


OUR METHOD OF POINTING OUT THE ORGANS OF THE MANIFES-
TATIONS OF THE MIND. ; 271


CHAPTER VIII.


PARTICULAR ORGANS OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE MIND.


oe aan ee ee ee or sla 0's: + cemalanies dees ia a
Generalities of the five external senses. ...c0.eeee0:2+ 294
Particularities of the five external senses .....+..%..... 311
PSN. os eek sb iies de BAD nibh Pie g can IS
re “Ghee eee’ Che eles bane eee 35 oes
PA oon o. 5 005.00, cub REEVE CON y es sn watenG os 9s Bee
Hearing..... al ellga SUR Sch alt akan teinhtsWaw se Coe
Seeme.... Mere re eee ony Nao be eGeeetees sive oon


INTERNAL ORGANS. 342


Organ of amativeness ..g..-scececesecrecseseeteees Shh


philoprogenitiveness wens oe sceseisvceseces . 359
HEV ass ce steg cw wd os ase 0 8’ See ers
“Rea gece one! eoesece See tele «hee be eC ee we STU OCTET 371


‘AestPulCtiVenfesS 6c ce ck ee ec ct eee este et eee OSE?
constructiveness . Ce ee we AS a


XVI CONTENTS.


Organ of Covetiveness......seeeeeeereeeeererscsees 39S
SECTEtIVENESS cseeeecees eal sso 08 ean oe ae
self-love ..... sila Pasa E36 5 Vege Se: acetate RRC 4.04:
ADPYODSHOMN 044/o oss cs ns en ee eo ss se eos verw BOD


————= cautiousness eeoeoveeeeveoeeoeoeoeeveevreveseeeree 407
beteVoOlence Sl. CHEE A 4 PN BET POD


WETLOT AUION: *. 7. [00% k's "0"s ay "o's nae ate wie Bee be
DOPE s.r t Vea ee cabs are eae toes eeeeoe ® . 416


ideality ..... DSR RE seebissoted, dol pieced,


thant COLSCICHLIOUSTIONS s a gins e's Cece eens Hh ew awb een ALS


AIT TTITICSS *0’0's'2 sie 'e"s'e'e e°e%e°b'n's'e'a'e'e eve e'e"e'ereie 2 09 6 aad
APACAVACMANINY: ovine sig c's s'ca ons Seis ce bon ee sins ed
COUUR Ss rds ce re Se ae Cen eis OR
Nia le ales cat Aeine' RELY oe “ee Senin ate


——_——- weight eeocee eecececeoeeereereeree eereer eee see 6% 6 & 433
—————— colour Bae Peale «RCS Oe ie:


aera SPACE +6 eo ee @ eevee ecoeoev eae eeene7eex7 28 08 F606 435
order eoeeecereooaeoereoveeeeoeoreC eeeoree eee ot oe 4AO


THEO ae Se Oe Te Ls oe eae oa ce a Ce
TUTOR 70075 o oho “o'e ee e's! ahs eidlelatetstels rs 6 ew Teed
————-—— TUNE oe eee receesce Seo eR Er FE tae & eA
| Aangnage Oy ecco ee vee ease eee Te ee RED


COMPATISON "0'.'4°. ei s'o dg e'eielele weste eects ese wee HOT
causality. eeeeovoevw eevee OG eoeeer eve 8G 80888 & e 458
ene WIL ecoeecr ao oe ee ooeheovescedseoereoe ee eee ee ser 460


calito ITIPALIONS SE tate PORT Sa Oe PORT d es MONS 461


%


CHAPTER Ix.


DIFFERENT MODES OF ACTION OF THE SPECIAL FACULTIES OF
THE MIND.


ene CSS bin ko Sie cs, ono o sche SRM Ae eee BOD
BRecions ,. «ss vasines ab sine the shew aaa shea RG Ra a0 0d s SOF
Modes of the intellectual faculties.........ccceeseeeee 468
“General view of philosophy .....e0secss0eeedncegseu: 415


CONTENTS. XVil


CHAPTER X.


MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND IN
RESPECT TO THE MORALITY OF OUR ACTIONS,


RCP AD WIR oie Bhs ols Se en Kone eline «o's 9 « MOS
ME ee ecg pais wah atace are «Onto eee aes onto OT
Per 3s at sect ths yet sees Cet ese waninaee ao?
PIO) WGCTUY a gcse skeen cg scene ns 8s on sense hes ale
Wee eS cig sk ono © SR ae © Fo lG wags sata lz. e pieanpe.e, ai, Oe


CHAPTER XI.


MODIFICATIONS OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE MIND. 507


PESSOPIALION: OF TUCAS occce-so1 ss 0 val ecoeete «% vo oibe Ole ee So UROL?
RE ERG NIOR So 5:'ccd ce ep ea Mela) tanks Coil un.) gt deg @ ghana ee tS


CHAPTER XII.


MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES AS THE CAUSE OF
DIFFERENT CHARACTERS AND TALENTS, 520


CHAPTER XIII.


DIFFICULTY OF JUDGING THE ACTIONS OF OTHER PERSONS. 522


Pavention of -arts and Sciences oo... av oe bis bs oc ace eos, ORS


Indulgence e*aeeoeoeeeovrreeseeeeveeseeve*eeHseeaeseeeeevreee®eooe 527


CHAPTER XIV.


SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY. 529


CHAPTER XV.


PATHOGNOMY OR NATURAL LANGUAGE, 533
General principles of pathognomy . 2... ee a cies oe 6 5, OY
sles trae eo Ow
Pathognomy of the modes of action of the faculties of
HME TIGL sts oie ss « how scasaidla MAA GL LAER fie wl le Gautier co
Pathognomy of different characters .........+.2206+ 542
: b


Particularities of several faculties.........,.


KVL CONTENTS.


\
pe’


CHAPTER XVI.


EDUCATION AND REFORM. 548


CHAPTER XVII.


DERANGEMENTS OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE MIND. 552


jeecapititlation Bnd conclusion “Wii 46 eee fe ae oe Oe


EXPLANATION OF THE NUMBERS REFERRING TO THE VA-
RIOUS ORGANS MARKED IN THE FRONTISPIECE, &c.... 569


THE
PHYSIOGNOMICAL SYSTEM


i


OF


DRS. GALL AND SPURZHEIM.


INTRODUCTION.


Tus system is commonly considered as one ac-
cording to which it is possible to discover the in-
dividual actions of every one; it is treated as an art
of prognostication. Such, however, was never the
aim of our inquiries: we never treat of determinate
actions; we consider only the faculties man is en-
dowed with, the organic parts by means of which
these faculties are manifested, and the general in-
dications which they present. ‘Lhe object of this
new psychological system, therefore, is to examine
the structure and the functions of the nervous
system in general, and of the brain in particular.
Thus does this science particularly combroutg, to the
knowledge of human nature.

It is sometimes asked, if such inguiries be useful.
Every one will agree, that the knowledge of man is
of the greatest interest; that the brain and nerves

B


g INTRODUCTION.


are the most important of the animal organs; and
that the greatest ignorance exists concerning these
parts. Hence, inquiries of this kind cannot be un-
important. We examine all the beings around us:
we divide and subdivide the different objects which
nature presents to us: we study mineralogy, botany,
zoology: why should we not study man, who mani-
fests the greatest number of faculties, and who is
lord of the terrestrial creation? Man, if considered
merely as the most important being of creation, ought
chiefly to interest every thinking person. As more-
over we ourselves belong to this kind of being, it
must be of the utmost importance to know his na-
ture. Among the Greeks the divine precept written
upon the temple of Delphos was Tvas csavrév—Know
thyself. Our interest in being acquainted with human
nature increases in proportion as we live with men;
as it is necessary that we should influence them; as
we wish to direct them. All institutions must be
calculated upon a knowledge of human nature; other-
wise they cannot be permanent. ‘Than this, indeed,
it seems impossible to point out an object more in-
teresting to natural philosophers, anatomists, physio-
logists, physicians, teachers, moralists, and legislators.

I do not pretend that the study of man has been
neglected. On the contrary, reflecting people of all
ages have thought it especially worthy of their at-
tention. They have taken notice of the actions of
the most remarkable individuals, as well as of mankind
: in general; they have inquired into the number and
the nature of the faculties of man; and they have
invented many systems in respect to the causes of


INTRODUCTION; 3


his actions. But though men of almost all pro-
fessions have thus endeavoured to elucidate human
nature, it must be allowed that our knowledge of
mankind is still extremely defective ; and when we
consider, that so many great men have investigated
this subject, it is astonishing that so little progress
has been made in it.

It would, indeed, be difficult to imagine this slow |
and limited improvement, if the manifold obstacles
to scientific inquiries in general, and to anatomy —
and physiology in particular were unknown. Among
these general obstacles, we may reckon the religious
respect which men have for ancient opinions, and
their aversion to new ones ;—the obligation and the —
ease of maintaining adopted opinions ;—our inapt-
ness to think for ourselves ;—the want of clearness
and precision in our ideas and expressions ;—the
mania of ferming systems upon a few solitary facts
and hasty conceptions ;—the jealousy, the envy, the
falsehoods of opponents ;—and their malice in draw-
ing dangerous consequences from the most innocent
statements.
~ The particular causes of ignorance in psychology
may be divided into natural and artificial. Among
the natural, the most important is the difficulty
which the examination of mankind presents. It
may be.observed in general, that our,knowledge is
less advanced the more difficult the object to be ex-
amined. It is easy to describe minerals, their
volume, figure, weight, density, colour, and other
physical qualities. ‘This may also be done at leisure.
Hence mineralogy is eminently advanced.  In-

B2


4: INTRODUCTION.


quiries belonging to botany and zoology are more
‘difficult; and these sciences are consequently less
improved. On the same account we are, even as
to plants and animals, more acquainted with their
physical qualities, than with their vital functions.
Anatomy, being easier than physiology, is also more
advanced. We may at our leisure describe and
make drawings of animals; we may anatomize and
preserve them with safety and ease; but it is not
so easy to observe the facts concerning the life of
animals, to inquire into their instinctive labours,
their propensities, and their faculties. Of the many
books which treat on human nature, anatomical de-
scriptions form the greatest portion. In anatomy
the parts, in physiology the functions, the most
easy to be examined, are also the best known. It
is infinitely easier to examine the muscles and bones,
than the nervous system: the anatomical and physi-
ological knowledge of the nervous system and of
the brain has, therefore, made the slowest progress.
Till our days only the external forms of the brain
were known, and the internal structure of its parts
‘was quite overlooked. ‘The brain was pretty gene-
rally considered as the source of the medulla oblon-
gata, of the spinal marrow, and of all the nerves.
Indeed the physiology of the nervous system, and of
the brain, shows only a succession of error, ever
conformable to the prevailing philosophical system.
To anatomy there is a natural obstacle in the
repugnance which men have, at all times, had against
the dissection of the dead. ‘The ancient Egyptians
‘embalmed them; and the Greeks, Romans, Jews,


INTRODUCTION, 5


Arabs, and Chinese, were prohibited by religious opi-
nions from dissecting and examining dead bodies.
Hence Hippocrates often betrayed his ignorance
of anatomy. Aristotle and the Roman anatomists
were confined to the dissection of animals. Galen
considered himself as having been very fortunate,
in seeing two human skeletons at Alexandria; and
he recommended all those who intended to study
osteology on the skeleton, to go there. In ancient
times, the dissection of human bodies was permitted
or encouraged, only by the Ptolemies. Protected by
these governors, Herophilus, Erasistratus, and Kude-
mus, made several important discoveries, which were
however neglected or overlooked by their successors.
The empirics entirely neglected anatomy. For that
reason it was, in the year 1315, very remarkable,
that Mondini de Luzzi, a professor at Bologna, pub-
licly dissected two dead bodies. Montagna, a pro-
fessor at Padua, acquired even in the 15th century
great reputation by having dissected 14 bodies ; an
evident proof that the improvement of anatomy was
very slow, even after the restoration of letters, in the
century which preceded. Even at the present day
few permit the opening of a deceased relation; and
physicians too much neglect such means of instruc-
tion. Thus if we consider the want of the oppor-
tunity of dissecting, and especially the difficulty of
dissecting the nervous system, we may conceive
“why the anatomy of that system has made so slow a
sr0g ess. Moreover, in dissecting the brain, ana-
tomists employ a method which is very bad. They
cut the brain horizortally, vertically, or obliquely,


6 INTRODUCTION.


from above or from below, and remove it by slices. In
this manner they only destroy the organic parts, and
their various and interesting connexions. Unac-
quainted with the origin of the nerves, and that of
the brain; destitute of every physiological princt-
ple capable of guiding them; and neglecting the
comparative anatomy of these parts, they have hi-
therto proceeded without any system. -It was even
impossible thus to acquire any idea of the natural
order of the parts.

Physiology presents a still greater number of ob-
stacles.. Besides the natural difficulty of inquiring
into the causes of the functions, there are many
artificial obstacles.—The metaphysical notions of the
schools have greatly impeded the improvement of
psychology. By substituting on all oceasions such
metaphysical opinions for data furnished by the
observation of nature, physiologists and even ana-
tomists, have regarded these opinions as sacred.
The schoolmen, for example, say, the soul is
simple, and therefore its material residence must be
simple also, and all the nerves must end in one point ;
in other words, the nerves can have only one origin,
because each individual has but one soul. Bonnet,
Haller, and others, having extended its seat to the
whole substance of the brain, were contradicted by
the metaphysicians, who did not reflect, that a little
more or less of room could not enable them to ex-
plain the nature of the soul any better; nor that,
according to the remark of Van Swieten, Tiede-
mann, and others, a material point, in which all ideas
and sensations should centre, is inconceivable, in


INTRODUCTION. "


consequence of the confusion and disorder which
would result from such an arrangement. It appears
indeed ridiculous, that the naturalist, to whom all
nature is open, should direct his researches and in-.
ductions by the guidance of such frivolous specu-
lation. If, on the contrary, metaphysicians would
observe the facts, and ascertain the conditions on
which they depend, their notions would no longer
be at variance with the inferences of anatomy and
physiology ; and one science would not arrogate the
right of setting bounds to the progress of another.
The doctrine of a single origin, and of a central
point for all the nerves, is neither true nor possible ;
and this can be verified by examination. If, after
this, the metaphysician cannot comprehend the
unity of his individual consciousness, we ask him,
if he understand, in automatic life, how such dif-
ferent apparatus concur by their varied functions
in forming one whole ?—if he can reconcile, in ani-
mal life, the circumstance of double organs with
unity of function, and simplicity of consciousness ?
—if he can comprehend any single power in the
material: world ?

The principal artificial impediment to the im-
provement of psychology was the blameable method
which had been employed for the study of human
nature. All phenomena were explained by the ima-
gination alone or by hypotheses. ‘There exist, even
at thig.day, philosophers, who maintain that man is
not as subjected to the laws of nature, that
he can begin a series of actions independently of all
causes and motives, and that his functions do not


8 INTRODUCTION:


admit of any explanation. According to this hypo:
thesis, man is separated from all other beings; he is
considered asa being entirely regulated by laws pe-
culiar to himself.. ‘These schoolmen attribute all the
operations of man to his soul: several of them even
give to it an unbounded power over the body. ‘This
neglect to compare man with other beings was a
great obstacle to the progress of psychology.—More-
over, the various branches of anthropology, instead
of being united, are cultivated separately. The use-
ful example of the Greek philosophers is neglected.
Anatomy, physiology, medicine, philosophy; educa-
tion, religion, and legislation, instead of uniting their
mutual influence, constitute so many particular dec-
trines or sciences.

Man must be considered as a being of creation ;
and the study of his nature requires the same method
as the examination of every other natural being.
Every class of living beings presents two parts for
investigation :. the bodily structure, which is the ob-
ject of anatomy, and the functions, which are the
objects of physiology. Thus it is necessary to study
in man—Ist, The structure of the whole body, and
that of each part in particular. 2d, The functions
in general, and those of every part in particular.
3d, The mutual influence of the different parts, and
their functions; and 4th, The relations between
man and all the beings around him, whether inani-
mate or animate, even the relation to his Creator.

The knowledge of mankind may farther be di-
vided into two parts: into the knowledge of the
healthy, and into that of the diseased state. We


INTRODUCTION. var 9


may now ask, To what profession does the examina-
tion of human nature. especially belong? Several
persons cannot conceive why a physician should
speak continually of the knowledge of human na-
ture; but no profession is more interested m nor
more fit for such examination. It is indeed the par-
ticular duty of the physician to consider the dis-
eased state of man; but itis evident that a know-
ledge of the healthy state must be the foundation of
a knowledge of the diseased state: that is, patho- -
logy must be founded upon physiology. It is im-
possible to understand any derangement of the func-
tions if we are not acquainted with their regular
state. Hence all physiological inquiries are most
intimately connected with medicine.

It cannot be doubted that, considered even in
itself, the most important part of man is the nervous
system ; and with relation to other parts, our in+
quiries in respect to that system in general, and to
the brain in particular, must also be the more im-
portant, the greater influence these parts exert
upon all the operations of the animal economy.
Now in man, and the more perfect animals, the ma-
nifestations of all the faculties are more or less subor-
dinate to the influence of the nervous system. ‘The
functions of digestion, nutrition, circulation, respi-
ration, secretion, and excretion, are deranged or
annihilated, when the nerves, which co-operate in
the performance of these functions, are compressed,
wounded, or destroyed. ‘The chemical changes in
the alimentary canal during digestion are the more
sensible the less the nervous power is active. The


10 INTRODUCTION.


nerves distributed to the organs of sense, and to
the muscles, are indispensable to the performance
of their functions. ‘The impressions made on parts
below the division of a merve are no more per-
ceived, and the principle of motion can no more
be directed towards the muscles with which it is
naturally connected. We shall also see that, besides
the functions of the five external senses, all the in-
stinets, propensities, sentiments, and intellectual
faculties, all affections and passions, all the charac-
teristics of humanity, are manifested only by means
of the nervous system. Hence we are obliged to
acknowledge, that without the physiology of the
nervous system, there would be neither psychology
nor any species of philosophy; and that it 1s impos-
sible to find any object of greater importance than
this, or of more durable interest for philosophers,
physicians, moralists, teachers, judges, and legis-
lators. | :

Hence it is obvious, that physicians, who study
the influence of the nervous system, are especially
interested to contribute to the knowledge of man;
nor does the practice of any profession make us feel
so intimately the necessity of knowing both his phy-
sical and his moral state, in consequence of the in-
fluence of affections upon the functions. Who, for in-
stance, has not observed that grief, jealousy, envy,
hopeless love, and similar painful affections, con-
sume the principle of life? Moreover, the examina-
tion of the nervous system, and of its influence, in- —
terests physicians, chiefly because all the alienations
of the mind have their primitive cause in the me-


INTRODUCTION. ¥i


diate or immediate derangement of the nerves, and
of the brain; and in pointing out the conditions
necessary to the manifestations of the moral senti-
ments and intellectual faculties in the healthy state,
we contribute also to the elucidation of mental dis-
eases. ‘Thus no one is more interested than the
physician in discovering the nature of man.
Fortunately no profession is more prepared than
that of the physician to investigate these subjects
by accessary knowledge, and by the study of nature
in general; nor is any one so frequently, and so
seriously, admonished by nature to revise opinions,
and to forsake hypothetical reasoning, in order to
follow the simple methods of experience. No phi-
losopher is more intimately convinced, that all our
knowledge ought to be reduced to a rational mode
of judging from experiment and observation. ‘The
physician, moreover, is placed in circumstances the
‘most conducive to a profound and certain know-
ledge of man. No one has such facility of ob-
serving men at all times, and in all situations, when
liberated from, when incapable of, habitual restraint
and ceremony. ‘The physician alone has an oppor-
tunity of being, during the night or the day, wit-
ness of the most intimate relations, and the most
secret events in families. Good and bad men, when
sick, with difficulty conceal from him their true
sentiments. Who does not wish for the friendship |
of the man whom he trusts with his own life, with
that of his wife, or of his children? To such a man,
supposed to know all that belongs to our nature,
we unfold the most secret thoughts, we acknow-


12 INTRODUCTION,


ledge our frailties and our errors, in order to guide
his judgment concerning our situations. There
is consequently no profession more entitled to 2 sUsy
mankind, than that of medicine.


PART I.


‘ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


THE first part of our inquiry relates to the ana-
tomy of the nervous system in general, and that of
the brain in particular—I have already mentioned
the slow progress of the anatomical knowledge of
these parts, though, from the earliest antiquity, ana-
tomists, convinced of their importance, have in-
quired into their structure. I have also pointed out
the reasons of this. I now continue the elucidation
of the subject.

In examining the structure of the nervous system,
our whole procedure differs from that of other ana-
tomists. ‘The method of demonstrating the brain,
commonly employed in anatomical schools, is de-
fective in every sense. No idea could be formed of
the structure of any organic part, if its dissection
were performed by slicing, as is done with the brain.
Who could understand the structure of the muscles
by a demonstration of their transverse sections?
Guided always by physiological and pathological
views, we begin the examination of every cerebral
part at its origin, and by scraping aside the ner-
vous substance, we follow the course and direction
of the fibres. In this way, we easily perceive their
successive increase, the addition of new parts, and


14 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


their various connexions. We also discover the
form, consistency, and colour of the nervous parts
with more facility than by cutting and slicing them.
This method, therefore, is preferable even for those
anatomists whose aim is only the mechanical form of
the organization. It is of indispensable necessity
to our considerations, which are not confined to me-
chanical form, but connected with physiological and
pathological views.

In our anatomical inquiries, the origin of the ner-
vous system is the first consideration. Is there one
common origin of all nerves, or are there various
origins ?——Anatomists and physiologists generally
speak of a common origin of the nervous system :
they consider the brain as the origin of the spinal
marrow and of the nerves, and all these parts as
one homogeneous mass. We are of opinion, that
the nervous system must be divided and subdivided,
and that each part of these divisions and subdivi-
sions has its particular origin.—Anatomists speak
commonly of four parts of the nervous system: of
the great sympathic or intercostal nerve, of the
spinal marrow, of the cerebral nerves, and of the
brain itself. Several anatomists, as Winslow, Soem-
merring, and Cuvier, have remarked the impro-
priety of deriving the great sympathic nerve from
the brain and the spinal marrow; they have consi-
dered this nervous apparatus as existing by itself.
Bichat even maintained, that the intercostal nerve is
not one, but that it must be considered as composed
of various parts which take their separate origins
from the different ganglia dispersed through the ab-

/


ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 15


domen and thorax: he mentions the differences
which may be observed between the great sympathe-
tic, and the other nerves of the body. ‘The fibres
of the former are greyer, thinner, softer, and more
numerous, while the fibres of the other nerves are
whiter, thicker, more solid, and less numerous.
Comparative anatomy indeed clearly proves, that
the nerves of the abdomen and thorax are not the
continuation of the spinal marrow and the brain.
For, while no nerves have been detected in zoo-
phytes, nerves exist in animals which have distinct
vessels, and an intestinal canal, and there take their
origin from various ganglia; and, as these animals
are destitute of a spinal marrow and brain, the
nerves cannot arise from them. Now as the ner-
vous systems of the viscera of the lower classes of
animals are analogous to similar systems in higher
classes, which perform similar functions ; that is, as
the nerves of these animals correspond to the ner-
vous plexus of the abdomen and thorax, and to the
series, more or less interrupted, of the ganglia of
the sympathic nerve in the higher animals, it is de-
monstrated that this apparatus exists independently
and of itself. Thus we consider the intercostal
nerve as composed of different parts which have
their separate origins, and are in communication
with each other, with the spinal marrow, and with
the brain.

Even the spinal marrow, and the pretended cere-
bral nerves, are not continuations of the brain, nor
is one part of them the continuation of another ;
but the spinal marrow, every pair of its nerves, and

it


16 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


every pair of the pretended cerebral nerves, have
their peculiar origin. For the brain 1s in proportion
neither to the spinal marrow nor to the pretended
cerebral nerves, which ought to be the case if they
“were continuations one of another. The brain of a
horse, ox, or stag, is smaller than that of man,
while their spinal marrow and nerves are far larger
than the same parts of man. Hence the brain is
the origin neither of the spinal marrow nor of the
nerves. Certain monsters of the human species,
and of the perfect animals, are born without head,
and are yet provided with nerves, and a spinal mar-
row. Sometimes the head, the upper parts of the
body, and the thorax, are wanting, and yet the in-
ferior parts have nerves. Even a leg, if it be born
alone, is provided with them. Hence the brain can-
not be their origin.

Certain authors support their opinion relative to
the origin of the nerves from the brain, by saying
with Morgagni, Haller, and Sandifort, that a dropsy
of the brain, after having destroyed that mass with
its membranes and bony ‘coverings, is the cause of
the dissolution and absorption of all the parts which
are wanting. But no acephalous fectus, either incom-
plete or complete, that is, either where the basis of
the skull, the inferior parts of the brain, and the
nerves exist, or where the whole head is wanting,
shows, at birth, any traces of such destruction. In-
stead of observing any erosion, the edges of the
bones are smooth, and thicker than in the perfect
foetus. Besides, if the water, whether that of the
‘amnios or that which is accumulated in the brain,

2 ?


ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. iy:


can dissolve membranes and bones, why do the soft
nerves of smelling, seeing, and hearing, resist this
destructive power? Moreover, when it is admitted
that other parts of the body, as legs, hands, arms,
&c. are wanting by a primitive defect of organiza-
tion, why should it be necessary to make an ex-
ception in respect to acephali, and to have re-
course to dropsy in order to explain the deficiency
of the brain and the skull?

Other persons, who maintain that the brain is the
origin of the nerves, explain the existence of ace-
phali by a stronger pressure, whereby the com-
pressed parts are absorbed. It may indeed happen,
that a strong pressure hinders the nutrition of any
part, and the deposition of new matter, while the
absorption continues; consequently in this manner
a compressed part may diminish, and even disap-
pear; but who shall determine the duration neces-
sary to produce this effect? Moreover, I do not
understand how the uterus can produce a pressure
upon the head without a counter pressure upon the
opposite parts, and yet these parts are not absorbed
at the same time. In the same way it is incon-
ceivable, how the pressure could act only upon the
arms, legs, or upon any other part alone. How
shall we find in pressure, an explanation of the want
of interior parts, while the whole surface of the
body is entire? Vinally, while the fcetus swims in the
water of the amnios, it is quite impossible that any
pressure should take place. Hence, accephali must
be considered as the result of an organization origi-
nally defective.

C ‘


i8 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. |


The direction of the fibres of the spinal marrow,
and of the pretended cerebral nerves, clearly proves
that they are not prolongations of the brain; and
that one pair of nerves is not a prolongation of
another. The direction of the pretended cerebral
nerves is evidently from below upward. (Pl. I. jig. 1.
10, 12. 13, 15, 20, 23.) Every pair of the spinal
nerves is composed of different bundles, several of .
which, in animals, have their direction from below,
upward and outward; others from above, down-
ward and outward. Hence, the nervous bundles
come neither from the superior nor inferior extre-
mities of the spinal marrow; but every pair of
nerves takes its origin at the place, whence the
nervous bundles go off. ‘This is also evident by the
size of the different parts of the spinal marrow,
which are not in proportion one to another. ‘The
spinal marrow is large or small, in proportion to the
size of the nerves which arise at different parts of
it; for instance, it is larger at the places where
the nerves of the arms and legs take their origin ;
and is smaller at the places where the nerves of the
back go off. Therefore, the number of pairs of the
spinal marrow varies extremely, not only considered
collectively, but also the particular number of the
vertical, dorsal, and lumbar pairs. |

This consideration relative to the origin of the
nervous substance must also be applied to the
various parts of the brain. ‘Thus the different parts
of the brain, of the spinal marrow, the pretended
cerebral nerves, and the nerves of the abdomen
and thorax, have no common origin; but every part


ANATOMY. OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 19.


has its separate origin. ‘The various parts are
brought only into communication with each other.
It is natural that the form of the whole nervous
system should be different in different animals, and
conformable to the form of their different bodies.
If an animal have a round form, the arrangement
of its nervous system must be different from that of
an animal which is long. |
The nervous system in general, and the brain in
particular, consist of two kinds of substance ; namely,
of a cineritious, and of a white substance. ‘The
cineritious or grey substance is pulpy, gelatinous,
sometimes softer, sometimes harder, more or less
whitish, yellowish, reddish, or blackish, and without
‘apparent organization. It contains a very great
number of blood vessels, so that certain anatomists
have considered it as a. tissue of very small blood
vessels; but Albinus, and after him, Soemmerring,
proved by injections, that there is yet another sub-
stance, which is probably secreted by the blood
vessels. Other anatomists supposed that it is des-
tined to secrete a nervous fluid. We consider the
grey substance as the matrix of the nervous fibres.
It is objected, that all organic parts are produced
and nourished from the blood. ‘This is true; but it
does not always happen immediately, but also me-
diately. We may therefore state, that various
organic parts immediately take origin from a soft
greyish substance, and only mediately from the cir-
culating fluids. Plants spring from a soft substance:
In trees, wherever a branch originates, it first hap-
pens that a certain quantity of greyish substance
C2


ae = 2


20 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


is deposited from the sap, and then from this sub-
stance fibres arise. These fibres next are on one
side brought in communication with the trunk, and
by means of this with the roots; and on the other
side they form the branch. ‘The new branch, there-
fore, is not the continuation of the inferior ligneous
fibres, or of the roots; it is only brought into com-
munication with them. This is also evident from
the consideration, that all the branches together
make up a larger quantity than the trunk or the
roots do. The mutual influence of the roots and
branches is sufficiently explained by the communi-
cation of these parts; and therefore it is, that the
injuries of the roots do harm to the branches, and —
wice versd.

The bones have their origin in a similar way.
The cartilaginous mass precedes the bony substance,
and this latter is deposited in the former. In the
nervous system also, the grey matter acts sooner
than the white fibrous substanee. At first, in the
foetus, the whole brain consists of a cineritious mass,
and by degrees only it is that the fibres appear; and
then at certain places sooner than at others, the
nervous fibres always going off from the grey sub-
stance. There is even a uniform proportion be-
tween the grey substance and the nervous fibres
which are derived from it. In worms, insects, and
crustaceous animals, the ganglia, wherein nervous
fibres arise, contain a proportionate quantity of
greyish substance. This substance is sometimes ac-
cumulated at particular places, and sometimes it
accompanies the nervous fibres in their course. It


ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 21


is the same in the cerebellum and in the brain.
Every nervous part has its origin in a proportionate
quantity of cineritious matter. From these consi-
derations we infer, that the nervous filaments are
originally produced in the cineritious substance.

The opinions of anatomists, concerning the struc-
‘ture of the white substance, are also very various.
Some have taught that it is solid; others maintain
that itis hollow: some, that it is absolutely destitute
of vessels ; others, that it is entirely composed of
them: a great number think it resembles marrow ;
very few anatomists know that it is ee and this
is in fact its structure.

The objection, which is opposed to the fibrous
structure of the brain, is, that we do not see the
fibres when we cut the mass. Sometimes, accord-
ing to their expression, it seems fibrous ; but this is,
say they, the effect of drawing and pulling this
coriaceius mass; and though filaments were also
observe by other processes, this happened, con-
tinue they, in consequence of a chemical preparation,
or of an alteration after death. This assertion is quite
unfounded. In the first place, it is quite impossible
to discover the true and fibrous structure of an ex-
ceeding fine and soft mass by cutting it. Proceed-
ing in this way, we fail to discover this structure
even in those cerebral parts which are manifestly
fibrous; for instance in the pyramidal bundles and
in the great commissure. ‘The fibrous structure may
however be proved by other means. In dropsy of
the brain, the fibres are very distinct. If we direct
a stream of water by means of a syringe, on a con-


22 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


volution, and separate its two layers one from ano-
ther, we may see their fibres throughout their
whole expansion. ‘The same result follows if the
convolutions of the brain be boiled in oil, or mace-
rated in nitric or muriatic acid diluted with alcohol.
Moreover, when we scrape the white substance in
the direction of the fibres, we can follow them
with the naked eye into the grey substance of the
convolutions; but when we scrape cross-ways or
side-ways, the fibres are brought out of their na-
tural direction, and visibly break off. If then the
fibres were the product of coagulation after death,
how should it happen that agents so opposite as
the water of the dropsy, alcohol, vinegar, mineral
acids, boiling oil, and even intense cold, act in a
uniform manner upon it. Why, in the convolutions,
is the white substance coagulated in fibres which run
perpendicularly from the basis upward? Why in
other parts is it in horizontal, circular, cro:sed, in-
terlaced, or diverging fibres? Why do ‘he fibres
always take the same form in the same parts? The
only rational answer is, that the white substance is
fibrous, and that these are its natural directions.

For this reason the name medullary substance is
false. ‘This expression excludes the idea of fibres ;
and the functions of the nervous fibres have no ana-
logy with those of the medulla. Therefore, we al-
Ways say, nervous mass or nerves, and name them
according to the parts they belong to: for example,
instead of spinal marrow, we say the nerves of the
spine, as we say, nerves of the stomach, of the
lungs, &c.


ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 23


I shall now describe the most remarkable parts of
the nervous system.—The nerves in general may
be divided in the same way as their functions. I
shall afterwards demonstrate that certain functions
must be considered as the result of the organization
alone; and that others take place with conscious-
ness, and are the effect of the mind. ‘The former
class of functions constitute organic or automatic
life; the latter animal life.

The nerves of automatic life consist in the nerves
of the abdomen and thorax, into the particular de-
scription of which I shall not enter. I have proved
that they exist by themselves. I only add that
they are brought into communication with all the
nerves of animal life. -The nerves of animal life
may be subdivided into four orders ; into the nerves
of voluntary motion, those of the five senses, those
of the propensities and sentiments, and those of
the intellectual faculties. ‘Till the present time,
the difference between the nerves necessary to vo-
luntary motion and to the sense of feeling has not
been demonstrated; but, by several anatomical,
physiological, and pathological proofs, I am con-
vinced of its existence. This difference has been
sought for from ancient times. Herophilus was the
first who spoke of it. Reil thought that the me-
dulla of the nerves produces sensation, and their
investment motion; but entire nerves—nerves con-
sisting of both these parts—are distributed to the
muscles or to the skin.

I admit a difference in the nerves of motion, and
those of feeling; because the same nervous fibres


DA ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. |


do not go to the muscles and to the skin, and each
of these parts perform peculiar functions. The
nerves necessary to motion cannot propagate the im-
pressions of the sentient nerves, nor these the 1m-
pressions of the nerves of motion. These latter pro-
duce only the feeling of pain, as the nerves of au-
tomatic life do. Muscles do not feel temperature nor
moisture, but muscles feel fatigue. There is no pro-
portion between being fatigued and feeling: it is
possible to be fatigued and to have an acute feeling.
Muscles receive their impressions from within, and
nerves of feeling from without. Moreover, there
is no proportion between the size of muscles, and
the sense of feeling. ‘The nerves of feeling are
only assisted by the nerves of motion, in the same
way as the nerves of all other senses. That is, if
internal faculties act upon internal impressions by
means of the five senses, they make use of the
organs of motion. Is not the tongue, for this rea-
son, provided with three kinds of nerves, vz. with
nerves of motion, of feeling, and of taste? The
diseased state proves also the difference between
the nerves of motion and those of feeling. Volun-
tary motion sometimes is impossible, while feeling is
preserved or even increased ; and sometimes feeling
is lost, while voluntary motion continues. From
these observations I infer that the nerves of motion
and feeling are different. |

It may be replied, that the nerves of motion and
feeling arise from the same pair, consequently that
they are not different. This conclusion is erroneous ;
and the contrary is evident by the fifth pair, the


ON THE SPINAL NERVES. 25


various fibres of which perform different functions,
wig. motion and taste. ‘The other spinal nerves are
also composed of different original bundles, the
functions of which may be different. According to
this view, the spinal marrow consists of nerves of
motion and of feeling; and the greater number of
the pretended cerebral nerves belongs to the nerves
of motion or of feeling. |

In respect to the nerves of motion, and of the
five external senses, I have already proved that
these nervous fibres exist by themselves, and can-
not be considered as the continuation of the white
substance of the brain and cerebellum. I shall only
add some considerations relative to their particular
structure.


ON THE SPINAL NERVES.


The term spinal marrow has been used in a vague
manner by different authors. The natural limit of
- this nervous mass appears to be the edge of the
foramen magnum, at the lower extremity of the py-
ramidal bundles. (Pl. I. fig. i.7.) It must be con-
sidered as a series of enlargements, in which arise
the different pairs of nerves. There is in this re-
spect an analogy throughout all classes of animals,
whose nervous system presents in general a longi-
tudinal arrangement. In the worms and caterpil-
lars there are as many origins of nerves or ganglions,
as there are superficial rings or segments. These
ganglions or knots are joined to each other by
nervous branches, and form a cord with small tu-


26. ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM,


mours of various forms and sizes. ‘The number and
size of the nervous threads arising from these swell-
ings are always proportionate to the size of the
swellings themselves. In fishes, amphibia, and birds,
there is no essential difference ; only the ganglions
are in general closer to each other, forming, with
their uniting bands, a cord nearly equal in size; but
swelling in distinct knots wherever large nerves go
off. The same law is preserved in mammalia and
in man, although in man the swellings are not so
immediately evident. But even in him, these al-
ternate swellings, corresponding to the origin of
the nerves, may be seen by removing the spinal
marrow, detaching the arachnoid coat, and observ-
ing the profile when held against the light. The
largest swellings are where the nerves of the ex-
tremities go off; but they are sufficiently visible
throughout, the line being every where more or
less undulatory.

The interior structure of the spinal marrow is
not well understood. There are evidently two
fissures, one in the midst of the anterior, and
another in the midst of the posterior side, but there
are no lateral fissures. ‘The anterior fissure is wider
and more visible; the posterior penetrates more
deeply. ‘The anterior fissure has also the peculiarity
of being interrupted by the decussation of the py-
ramidal bodies. The two halves of the spinal mar-
row are united at the bottom of each fissure by a
nervous layer, the fibres in the anterior being trans-
verse, and in the posterior, longitudinal. The
nerves of the spinal marrow originate in the cine-


ON THE PRETENDED NERVES OF THE BRAIN. a7


ritious substance, found in the interior of each side
of the cord, forming two arcs which pass towards
the anterior and posterior surface. The nervous
fibres follow the course of these arcs from within,
to the surface throughout the whole length of
the spinal marrow; so that we have on each side
two rows of nerves, an anterior and a posterior.
The posterior ones are more considerable, and
therefore it is that the posterior fissure penetrates
more deeply.


ON THE PRETENDED NERVES OF THE BRAIN.


There can be no dispute about the origins of the
accessory (PJ. I. fig. i. 2—3), hypoglossal (Pl. I.
Jig. 1. 4), vocal (6), and glossopharyngeal (7) nerves.
They bear a close resemblance to the nerves of the
spine. The others have this particularity, that
their filaments unite into one band before they quit
the mass, which band evidently runs directly up-
ward, sometimes more, sometimes less visibly, ac-
cording as it is more or less covered by neighbour-
ing bundles. However we must not in these nerves
confound the point of origin, with the point of de-
parture from the mass.

The abductor nerve (Pi. I. fig. i. 10) is seen
clearly, in herbivorous animals, arising, at some dis-
tance behind the pons Varolii (Pi. I. fig. i. b 6), from
a small band which ascends between the corpora py-
ramidalia (—c) and olivaria (a). It is only on ac-
count of the greater breadth of the pons in man,
that this nerve approaches to its posterior edge.


28 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


The facial nerve (Pl. I. fig. i. 11) goes off at the
angle formed between the pons Varolii, and the
corpus retiforme (e—e). In herbivorous animals,
the roots of this nerve may, according to Mr.
Walker’s observations, be deeply traced as two
strong and glistening cords passing through the
whole thickness of the medulla oblongata.

The auditory nerve (Pl. I. fig. i. 9) comes from
the medullary streaks on the surface of the fourth
ventricle, increases into a small grey and slightly
prominent band placed transversally upon the cor-
pus retiforme. ‘This band is proportionate to the
size of the auditory nerve, and the acuteness of
hearing in different animals.

The roots of the par trigeminum (Pi. [. fig. 1. 12)
may be traced to above the corpora olivaria (a). This
fact has been observed by Santorini, but overlooked
by modern anatomists. ‘The breadth and thickness
of the pons in man were the obstacles to its being
discovered sooner. But as this part is much smaller
in animals, the roots of the fifth pair are easily
traced. In fishes, amphibia, and birds, it is quite
detached from the cerebral parts.

The optic nerves (Pl. I. fig. i. 20) have a very
different origin from that which is commonly as-
signed to them. ‘The greater number of anatomists
derive them from the thalami, although Santorini,
and, among the moderns, Hildebrand, Soemmerring,
and Boyer, stated that they arise, in a great mea-
sure, from the nates. It is very evident in brutes,
particularly in the horse, the calf, and sheep, that
the anterior pair of the tubercula quadrigemina gives


ON THE PRETENDED NERVES OF THE BRAIN. 29


origin to a broad band of nervous fibres, which
bends round the outside of the thalami, and appears
to receive a small addition from the corpus genicu-
latum externum, where it ceases to adhere, except
at its external edge. It proceeds toward the fore-
head, and is closely attached to a layer of grey mat-
ter, called by some tuber cinereum, receiving from
it several new filaments. Here it meets the nerve
of the opposite side, and decussates that nerve, ac-
cording to the opinion of the most enlightened ana-
tomists, although this decussation is denied by
others, who allege reasons which are of less force.
We have seen in different animals, that, after blind-
ness which lasted for many years, the nerve of the
affected side diminished in size as far as the union,
that the change has continued from this point along
the nerve of the opposite side, and that the nates of
this same side has also been considerably diminished.
It is evident that the thalami are not the origin of
the optic nerves. There is no proportion between
the size of the optic nerves and of the thalami.
The latter are much smaller in the horse, cow, and
stag, than in man, though the optic nerves of these
animals are much larger; but the proportion between
the optic nerves and the nates is always preserved.
It may be clearly shown from the brain of birds,
that the thalami do not belong to the optic nerves.
Anatomists have strangely confounded, in fishes and
birds, two round tubercles with the thalami in mam-
malia, though the hemispheres in fishes and birds
contain the same parts as in mammalia. In these
only one band of superficial fibres, on their outside,


30 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
*


contributes to the formation of the optic nerves.
- All the rest belongs to the brain, particularly to the
organs of propensities and sentiments. Anatomical
inquiries clearly prove this organization. At Paris
I have examined a brain in which the thalami were
destroyed by suppuration, but the optic nerve pre-
served its natural size proportionate to its fellow of
the other side. |

The origin of the olfactory nerve (P/. I. fig. i. 23)
is not yet demonstrated. There are three roots
(18, 19, 21) in different directions, but I have not—
been able to observe its primary origin. It is cer-
tain that neither the testes nor the corpora striata
are its origin, because the brains of the cetacea,
destitute of this nerve, have testes and corpora
striata. It is also an error to suppose that the rela-
tive magnitude of the nates is larger in herbivorous,
and that of the testes more considerable in carni-
vorous animals.


CEREBRAL MASS.


Natural order now leads us to the examination
of the cerebellum and the brain. The ideas which
have prevailed, on what may properly be called the
brain, have been, till the present time, very inde-
terminate. Certain anatomists confine the idea of
brain to the convolutions and hemispheres. Others
extend it to the whole nervous mass contained in
the skull. Others still suppose that even the me-
dulla oblongata and spinal marrow are prolonga-
tions of the brain and cerebellum, and give to all


CEREBRAL MASS. Sm


these parts the common name encephalic mass (from
the Greek 8, in, and xeozat, head). In order to
fix the meaning of our terms, and to avoid all con-
fusion, we call cerebral all the nervous mass which
is joined to the nervous systems, performing volun-
tary motion, and the functions of the five senses.

The cerebral mass is commonly divided into two
principal parts; namely, the superior, composed of
the two hemispheres, and called the brain; and the
inferior, which, being in general much smaller than
the superior, is called cerebellum or little brain.
The cerebral mass may also be divided, according to
its functions, into two parts: into the organs of
propensities and sentiments, and into those of the
intellectual faculties. | |

Anatomists have observed in the medulla oblon-
gata three eminences: the corpora pyramidalia
(Pl. I. fig. 1. i—c), olivaria (a), and retiformia
-(e—e); or the pyramidal eminences, olivary tu- ©
bercles, and retiform bodies, naming them according
to their mechanical form. But the medulla oblon-
gata contains different bundles which are composed
of fibres. These bundles are augmented by new
fibres, which arise from a grey substance, and are
joined to the inferior nerves; that is, the original
fasciculi of the cerebellum and of the brain are
put in communication and reciprocal action with
the nervous system below them.

The mode of this communication is not the same
in all these original parts of the cerebral mass. Ex-
cept the anterior pyramidal eminences, all the other
fasciculi of the brain, as well as of the cerebellum,


82 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


arise on the same side, of which they become cere-
bral parts, and they communicate with the nervous
systems of the same side of the body; but it is
quite different with the anterior pyramidal emi-
nences. ‘The fibres of these eminences cross or de-
cussate each other, each going to the side opposite
to that from which it originates. Just ‘at the spot
where the medulla oblongata, or the great occipital
enlargement, begins to swell at its lower part, at
one inch and a few lines below the pons Varoli
(Pl. I. fig.i. 7), let the arachnoid and vascular
coats be divided by a superficial incision, not ex-
tending into the subjacent parts, and then be care-
fully removed. If then the edges of the groove,
which runs in the middle, be gently separated, there
are seen three, four, or five threads crossing each
other, coming obliquely from below upward, and
oceupying a space of about three or four lines in
length. ‘The nervous threads, arising in the cor-
tical substance on each side, pass respectively to the
opposite side, so as to produce a decussation of the
pyramids. ‘These primitive threads of the pyramids
vary in number and size: there are five, four, or
three ; and sometimes the primitive fibres, instead
of forming an intertexture of this kind, present
bands which pass obliquely to the side opposite to
that from which each comes. The decussation is
constant, but the form and size of the crossing
fibres vary.

This structure of the pyramids was known to
some of the ancient anatomists, as to Mistichelli,
Pourfour du Petit, and Santorini; but it has been

1


CEREBELLUM. 33


overlooked or denied by modern anatomists. It
explains why injuries of the head influence the op-
posite side of the body; and as only a part of the
brain, namely the continuation of the anterior
pyramids, is in communication by decussation with
the nervous mass of the body, it’is evident and
easily understood, why palsy of the body, or convul-
sions, produced by injuries of the head, are observed
sometimes on the opposite, and sometimes on the
same side. .


CEREBELLUM. —


The lowest part of the cerebral mass is the cere-
bellum (Pl. I. fig. 2.1). It follows immediately after
the spinal nerves. In animals of the lower orders,
and also in birds, the cerebellum is single, but al-
ways composed of two distinct halves. In fishes
and reptiles no division of it is perceived ; ‘and if,
in them, it be cut perpendicularly, it does not pre-
sent the arbor vite. In birds, the external surface
of the cerebellum presents semicircular rings and
ridges, and if in them the cerebellum be cut per-
pendicularly, the arbor vite is visible. In vivipar-
ous animals, the cerebellum is no longer single;
lateral parts are added, and the first part becomes
the middle portion, as Reil calls it. This denomi-
nation however seems less adapted to it than that
of fundamental portion, because this portion exists
in all animals, even in fishes and reptiles, where
there are no lateral parts.

Nature observes always the same model in the


D


34 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


formation of the cerebellum. ‘The cerebellum of
man, therefore, although complicated and perfect,
presents the common elementary form. The first
visible roots of the cerebellum spring out of the
grey substance, placed in the interior of the large
occipital swelling (medulla oblongata). ‘These roots
form on each side of this swelling a fibrous cord
more or less considerable. ‘This string thickens
continually as it ascends (Pl. Il. fig. 1 & 2. ee).
Near the cerebellum it is covered by the auditory
nerve and by its ganglion, called by certain ana-
tomists the grey band. After having taken away
with precaution, by scraping or by the handle of
the scalpel, the auditory nerve and ganglion, we
see on each side, in following the direction of the
fibres, the whole cord enter into the interior of each
hemisphere of the cerebellum. It has scarcely ade
vanced a few lines, when it meets an accumulation
of grey substance, and forms with it a somewhat
dense tissue, so that it is impossible to pursue in it
the direction of the nervous filaments (Pi. III.
fig. 1 & 2. §). This tissue, offering an indented and
irregular figure, is named by anatomists, corpus
dentatum, ciliare, rhomboideum, or zig-zag. Other
anatomists, considering this part as the re-union of
all the white substance of the cerebellum, gave it
the name nucleus. ‘The cineritious substance, con-
tained in this body, is a preparatory apparatus,
destined to increase the nervous filaments that enter
into it by new fibres: consequently it is a large
point of increase for the cerebellum. Accordingly
several new nervous bundles arise in it, continue


CEREBELLUM. 35


their course, ramify into branches, layers, and mul-
tiplied subdivisions. In every point from which a
principal branch goes off, there is an increased.
quantity of grey substance. Thus results a number
of friges, or denticulations, of this substance equal
to the number of the principal branches. ‘The ori-
ginal bundle, the ganglion, the divisions, and sub-
divisions are, as to their dimensions, in direct pro-
portion to one another. ‘The greater number of
Viviparous animals, having the cerebellum smaller
than man, have also a smaller, and scarcely visible,
ganglion (corpus. ciliare.) Therefore anatomists
thought that animals were destitute of it.

In man, one principal branch goes toward the
middle line, and contributes with its fellow of the
opposite side to make the fundamental portion of
the cerebellum; namely, the vermiform process,
which is ordinarily subdivided into seven principal
branches (Pi. Il. fig. 2. 62). The other branches,
which go off from the corpus ciliare, are directed
upward, downward, and outward, and are expanded
in slender layers horizontally disposed (Pl. I. fig.
2. I). Those of the middle line are the longest ;
the others are the shorter as they are nearer to the
place where the original cord enters into the corpus
ciliare. ‘The nervous fibres of all the divisions and
subdivisions are covered with grey substance at
their peripheral extremity (Pl. Il. fig. 2; Pd. LI.
fig. 1 & 2. 47; 48.)

If the cerebellum be cut soutionlly through the
middle of this ganglion, we commonly find eleven
principal branches, but the number of the divisions

D2


36 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


varies, according as the cut is directed farther from
or nearer to the middle of the cerebellum. The
fibrous layers expanded into large branches and
leaves, when vertically cut, present a figure which,
on account of its resemblance to the leaf of a
thuya, or tree of life, bears the name, arbor vite.
But horizontal or transverse cuts of these branches
and leaves present only a white substance. There-
fore anatomists are wrong in maintaining that the
quantity of the cineritious mass is more considerable
in the cerebellum than in the brain. The contrary
will appear if the brain and the cerebellum be cut
vertically.


BRAIN.


I shall now examine the organization of the brain.
Immediately before their entrance into the pons
Varolii, the pyramids are a little contracted (Pl. I.
Jig. 1; & Pl Il. jig. 2. ¢); but as soon as they »
enter this mass, they are divided into many bundles,
which spring out of the large mass of grey sub-
stance, contained in the pons Varoli (P/. II. fie.
2. f). ‘These longitudinal bundles are covered by
a thick layer of transverse cords (Pl. III. fig. i. 5),
coming from the cerebellum, which I shall describe
hereafter. Some longitudinal bundles are disposed in
layers; others are interwoven with transverse cords.
They ascend and are successively enlarged, so as to
form, at their exit forward and outward, at least
two thirds of the crura cerebri. Thus the anterior
and external bundles of the crura cerebri (Pl. HT.


BRAIN. ah 37


jig. 1. g) are the continuation and successive com-
pletion of the primitive pyramidal bundles: they
contain internally, through their whole course, a
great quantity of grey substance, by which they are
continually increased, and always multiplied by new
fibres which are joined to former ones. At their
upper extremity, where the optic nerve bends round
their outside, or at the exterior part of the corpora
striata (P/. Ill. fig.i. 34—38), they receive the
greatest additions. There is there a large mass of
grey substance, wherein an infinite quantity of fibres
are produced. At last, at the external margin or
edge of the optic nerve, the nervous bundles of the
crura cerebri assume a diverging direction, and form
expansions folded in various ways, called convolu-
tions of the brain. In this way the pyramidal emi-
nences, being successively increased and completely
developed, form the inferior, anterior, and exterior
convolutions of the anterior and middle lobes
(Ai Tal go. 1).

It remains to show how the posterior lobe and
the convolutions at the superior margin of every
hemisphere, or toward the middle line, are formed.
The bundle which comes from the olivary tubercle
(Pl. Il. fig. 2. aa), and some other posterior
bundles (Pi. III. fig. 2. 70), ascend like the
pyramids through the transverse cords of the com-
missure of the cerebellum or pons Varolii. In this
way they receive some additions, but less considera-
ble than that of the pyramidal eminences, and they
form the posterior and interior part of the crura
cerebri. Here they receive the greatest additions


38 © ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


from the thick mass of grey substance contained in
the crura, which gives origin to many fibres, and
forms a hard ganglion flat in the middle, and unequal
superiorly and posteriorly (PJ. II. fig 2. p). This
ganglion was hitherto known under the name, optic
thalamus ; but I have already proved that the broad
band of nervous fibres, which forms the optic nerve,
is only attached to the posterior external surface of
this ganglion; that there is no proportion between
the size of the thalami and the optic nerves, but
that the thalami are proportionate to the convolu-
tions which arise from them ; finally that, by exa-
mining the interior of this ganglion, a great number
of fine fibres is detected, which ascend in a diverg-
ing direction, and which at their exit, namely at
the superior margin of this ganglion, form large
bundles. ‘The anterior bundles of the thalamus
penetrate a large mass of grey substance, viz. that
part of the corpora striata which is situated in the
great cavities, and receive from it a considerable
addition. All the bundles of this ganglion form
the posterior lobes and the superior convolutions
toward the mesial line of the head (Pl. III. fig. 2).

Thus we consider the thalami and corpora striata
as apparatus of increase, in which many new fibres
arise and join the others. In this way the different
cerebral parts are added to the other nervous sys-
tems, just as many branches might be engrafted
upon the stock of a tree. So far I have described
the diverging fibres of the cerebellum and brain. I
have followed these fibres from their origin to the
bottom of the convolutions into which they enter ;


ON COMMISSURES. 39


but before I speak of the particular structure of the
convolutions, I:shall consider another order of fibres
which come out of the convolutions, pass in the in-
tervals of the fibres first described, and cross them,
always converging toward the middle line, becom-
ing thicker and forming commissures or unions.


ON COMMISSURES.


All the nerves necessary to the manifestations of
animal life are double, but they all unite in the mid-
dle line with their fellows of the opposite side. For
a long time past anatomists have given the name of
commissures to different parts of the brain. They
have mentioned the anterior, middle, posterior, and
great commissure. But they never thought of the
relation between these commissures and _ their
respective parts; they never examined whence
the commissures are derived, nor whether every
cerebral part is united in the same manner,. nor
why the unions are so different in different kinds of
animals. ‘They had no knowledge of the law of this
arrangement. We have established, in this respect,
the strictest and exactest elucidation. We do not
employ the expressions of anterior, middle, poste-
rior, and great commissures ; we endeavour to set-
tle to what parts the unions belong, and name every
commissure according to the parts it serves to unite.

I have spoken of a transverse nervous layer at the
bottom of the anterior fissure of the spinal marrow.
By means of this apparatus the two halves of it
communicate with and act upon each other; and


40 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


any part of one side participates in the state of the
corresponding part of the other side.


COMMISSURES OF THE CEREBELLUM.


The double parts of the cerebellum are also united.
In the cerebellum there exists a kind of nervous
fibres, which are not immediately in connexion
either with the original band, or with the apparatus
of increase. These fibres come out of the grey
substance at the surface, pursue various directions
through the diverging fibres, always converging to-
ward the anterior external margin of the cerebel-
Jum, where they form a large and thick fibrous
layer. The anterior ones converging lie in front:
the middle and posterior ones pass transversally
through the longitudinal bands, which go to diverge
in the hemispheres of the brain. They all unite in
the middle line with their fellows of the opposite
side, thereby joining the two hemispheres of the
cerebellum. This part, now known under the name
pons Varolii, or tuberculum annulare, is then really
the great commissure of the cerebellum. It is al-
ways in a direct proportion to the lateral parts of
the cerebellum. Therefore the mammalia, having
smaller cerebella, have also this commissure smaller.
In man, in whom the cerebellum is so large, the
commissure is particularly broad, covering the ori-
gins of many of the nerves which are exposed in
other animals. ‘This commissure does not exist in
fishes, reptiles, and birds, because these animals
have no lateral parts to their cerebellum. But all


COMMISSURES OF THE BASIS OF THE BRAIN. 41


animals have a commissure of the part which I have
called fundamental portion, independent of the
commissure of the lateral parts. ‘This commissure
is formed by the soft and fine fibrous layers from the
superior and inferior parts of the fundamental portion,
commonly called the superior and inferior valves.


COMMISSURES OF THE BASIS OF THE BRAIN.


The uniting fibres of the inferior convolutions of
the posterior lobe, and those of the posterior con-
volutions of the middle lobe, bend behind the crura
of the brain, and behind the pretended optic tha-
lami, go from every side toward the middle line in
an oblique direction, and are joined together. ‘The
internal convolutions of the posterior lobe give off
the uniting fibres, which are named the posterior
fold of the corpus callosum, the other uniting fibres
of these convolutions form the fornix with its lyra
or psalterium, which, according to anatomists, is
composed of both the lateral parts of its lower sur-
face. ‘The uniting fibres of the anterior convolu-
tions of the middle lobe form the nervous cord
which passes through the corpora striata without
being adherent, and both sides present, in man, the
figure of a bow, the convex part of which is directed
forward. ‘The direction of this bow is quite oppo-
site in animals ; in them the convex part is directed
backward. Anatomists called this cord commissura
anterior (Pi. II. fig. 2. 61). The inferior convolu-
tions of the anterior lobes have their: commissures


42 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM...


in what is called the anterior fold of the corpus cal-
losum. The anterior and posterior folds of the cor-
pus callosum are adapted to the cavities which ex-
tend between the inferior and superior convolutions
of the posterior and anterior lobes.


?


COMMISSURES OF THE SUPERIOR CONVOLUTIONS OF THE
BRAIN.


All the superior convolutions of both hemispheres
of the brain have their uniting fibres in the great
commissure or in the corpus callosum (Pl. If. fig. 2.
apa) ‘This commissure, as well as all the rest,
must be proportionate to the size of the parts from
which it is produced. ‘Therefore it is much smaller
in sheep, dogs, oxen, &c. than in man. As both
hemispheres of the brain are separated both behind
and before, the uniting fibres of the convolutions, be-
tween these separations, cannot join in a transverse
direction, but the uniting fibres of the posterior
convolutions run forward and inward, and those of
the anterior eonvolutions run backward and inward.
On this account also, the uniting fibres are more
numerous at both extremities of the corpus cal-
losum; and, as the posterior separation of the
hemispheres is more considerable than the anterior,
the posterior extremity of the corpus callosum is
also thicker. In the middle region, however, of the
corpus callosum, the direction of the uniting fibres
is transverse.


Anatomists are wrong in maintaining that birds


®


r%


CONVOLUTIONS. AS


(v2


are destitute of the corpus callosum and of certain
commissures. The cause of their error is the small-
ness of the commissures in birds. ‘The commissures
however are proportionate to their respective parts,
and the same principle exists in all animals. All
double nervous parts are united, and only the form,


size, and direction of the uniting fibres offer various
modifications. |


CONVOLUTIONS.


We have seen that the bundles of the corpora
striata and thalami pursue every variety of direc-
tion, that is to say, toward the fore and lateral, the
back and upper parts. At the bottom of the con-
volutions, the radiating or diverging and converging
filaments cross one another and form a tissue, from
which they are afterward disengaged. Beyond this
tissue, each duplication may be easily separated into
two layers (P/. Il. fg. 1. Il. 1—2. 2, 1—3), and
as this may be done in all the convolutions, it fol-
lows, that if the tissue be destroyed by a rude kind
of manipulation, or extended by a gentle action of
a constant force, as in hydrocephalus, all the du-
plicatures will be transformed into a kind of mem-
branous expansion, covered externally by grey sub-
stance. A person affected with hydrocephalus, of
54 years of age, first excited us to examine the


structure of the brain in general, and of the con-


volutions in particular. It is a common opinion,
that in hydrocephalic persons, the brain is disor-


ganized or evenannihilated. But this hydrocephalic


C)


Aide ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


patient manifested her faculties in a pretty high
degree ; and several similar examples are recorded.
The conclusion, that the brain is by no means de-
stroyed in those hydrocephalic persons, who mani-
fest their moral sentiments and intellectual faculties,
is unavoidable.

Now in a large hydrocephalus, the upper con-
volutions do not appear: a membrane only is dis-
covered, the fibres of which are horizontal, while
the fibres of the convolutions in the natural state
keep a vertical position from the basis to the top.
It unavoidably follows, that in hydrocephalus the
convolutions are separated into two parts. ‘This ts
more probable, because the membrane of the ce-
rebral mass is very thin, and covered on the exter-
nal surface with grey substance. Nay, it is pos-
sible to imitate the extension or unfolding of the
convolutions, by taking away the arachnoid and
vascular coats, by introducing the fingers into the
great cavities, and by pressing against the convolu-
tions. At first a little resistance is felt on account
of the tissue above mentioned; but beyond this
tissue the two layers of the convolutions are easily
separated from each other. This unfolding of the
convolutions has been .very strongly contested.
The French Institute stated, that their reporters
found that the convolutions would separate into two
lateral portions, as easily on one side of the middle
line of each convolution, as in the middle line
itself. ,

This is incorrect, and the contrary is easy of
proof. Vertical slices of the convolutions, macerated


INTERMEDIAL LAYERS OF THE COMMISSURES. 45


in nitric acid diluted with rectified alcohol, or in
pure alcohol, become hard, and are more easily
divided at the middle line. The separation into
two layers is exhibited, when the convolutions are
boiled for 12 or 15 minutes in oil. When we blow
on such a slice, or direct a small stream of water
on it with a syringe, the separation may be made
very easily in the middle; but not at all at the sides,
without obviously destroying the structure of the
fibres: In the two latter cases especially, the two
surfaces which are separated remain smooth, there
is no division of vessels, nor any traces of fibres
passing from one side to the other. Consequently
the existence of the two layers of the convolutions
must be admitted. However, it may be that between
them there exists an adhesion of contiguity, main-
tained perhaps by a fine cellular substance, but by
no means a connexion of continuity, produced by
an intermixture and confusion of substance. ‘The
junction of the two layers may be denominated
agglutination, but not concretion.


INTERMEDIAL LAYERS OF THE COMMISSURES,.


There are different objects which belong to the
structure of the brain, but the uses of which are
unknown. We have seen that all the nerves of
both sides are united, but it is not certain that
the similar parts of both cerebral hemispheres are
in immediate contiguity ; for there is, in the middle
line of all commissures, a layer of transverse fibres,


46 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


which are accompanied in the same direction by
blood-vessels. Bonhomme, ‘Tarin, Vicq d’Azyr,
and Soemmerring, have demonstrated this structure
in the corpus callosum. I find that the direction
of these intermedial fibres 1s always opposite to that
of the fibres which seem to be separated. It is
transverse between the ascending bundles (Pi. I.
fig. 2. 86, 87, 88, 90) in the midst of the corpus
-callosum ; between its horizontal fibres it is ver-
tical (Pl. II. fig. 2. ); and, in the anterior and
posterior parts of the corpus callosum, it is diver-
gent in radii. (Aa) These intermedial fibres pro-


duce what is called the raphe of the corpus cal-
losum.


SEPTUM LUCIDUM.


The septum lucidum may be considered as the
continuation and expansion of a fibrous bundle,
like a band between the anterior and middle lobes
(Pl. I. fig. 1. 63). It isin communication with the
intermedial fibres of the corpus callosum (Pi. II.
Vit a. Bis GO; Oo).


TRANSVERSE BANDS.


In plants there exist transverse layers of fibres,
at different. places where they are increased. ‘This
arrangement is very evident in straw. ‘There are
rings and transverse fibres, which however do not
interrupt the communication of the superior and


CORPORA CANDICANTIA. - AT


inferior parts. A similar arrangement is aiso ob-
served in the structure of the brain. At every point
of considerable increase there is a transverse band,
for instance, at the lower end of the corpora oli-
varia;—in the midst of the crura cerebri (Pi. IIL.
jig. 1. 34) ;—at the external margin of the optic
nerve (35) ;—between the thalami and corpora striata
(37) ;—-and at the external margin of the corpora
striata (38).


CORPORA CANDICANTIA.


The corpora mammillaria, or candicantia, are se-
parated one from another in man (Pl 1. fig. 1. Pi.
II. fig. 2.10); in animals they adhere one to an-
other, and seem to form only a single tubercle.
Every corpus mammillare contains three cords, two
internal and one external. ‘This latter is joined to
the transverse band under the optic nerve; the in-
ternal anterior cord is im connexion with the an-
terior crus-of the fornix; the internal posterior


sinks into the interior of the thalamus, and is united
to another transverse band.


PINEAL GLAND.


The pineal gland (Pl. Il. fig. 2. 2.) bears a
name which is acknowledgedly inaccurate. It is
not a gland, but composed of grey and white sub-
stance. Jour nervous threads are produced in it.
Its name pineal results from its mechanical form,
which somewhat resembles a cone of a pine or fir.


4S ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


CAVITIES OF THE BRAIN.


The cerebral parts are separated one from an-
other at different places. These intervals are called
cavities or ventricles. Anatomists speak of five
ventricles; but the fifth has no analogy to the
others. It consists of the interval between the two
layers of the septum lucidum. Every anfractuosity,
the interval between the two hemispheres, and that
between the anterior and middle lobe, would, as well
as it, deserve the name of ventricles. The four
other cavities are in communication one with an-
other; therefore they cannot be considered as se-
parate cavities. We neglect their numerical order
as first, second, third, and fourth, and call them
according to their situation. ‘The fourth ventricle
of anatomists is the interval between the funda-
mental portion of the cerebellum and the medulla
oblongata (Pi. Il. fg. 2.mm). By means of the
canal before the fourfold tubercles, called the aque-
duct of Sylvius (Pl. IT. fig. 2. 9), it communicates
with the third ventricle, that is, the interval be-
tween the thalami(M M). The lateral or great ca-
vities are in the interior of the hemispheres for-
ward, backward, and in the middle lobe, conse-
quently in the interior of the lobes. |


COMMUNICATIONS.


Besides the separate and independent origin of
every nervous part, and the commissures or unions _


COMMUNICATIONS. 49


ef every nervous part which is double, there is to
be considered another nervous apparatus, which I
call communicating branches, or nervous apparatus
of communication. By this means particular ner-
vous parts are brought in communication, and there-
fore placed under mutual influence. In the lower
classes of animals, the different ganglia are joined
to each other by particular nervous cords. In the
higher classes of animals, it is the same with the
different ganglia and plexus of the nerves of the
abdomen and thorax. ‘These nervous systems com-
municate with every pair of spinal nerves, with
the five senses, and with the cerebral parts. ‘The
various pairs of spinal nerves adhere one to another ;
and they are all concatenated by a longitudinal
cord, visible at the bottom of the posterior fissure,
throughout the whole length of the spinal marrow.
The nerves necessary to motion are brought in
communication with the nerves of the five senses,
and both these kinds with the cerebral parts. ‘This
communication of the different nervous parts is al-
ways adapted to their mutual influence. ‘The five
senses and all the cerebral parts are in communica. |
tion with the nerves necessary to motion. The
five senses communicate also with certain cerebral
parts more than with others; for instance, the nerve
of taste is in nearest communication with the nerves
of mastication, deglutition, and respiration. The
auditory nerve is in more intimate connexion with
the nerves of hunger and thirst, of the voice, of
taste, and with the organs of propensities and sen-
timents, than with the organs of the intellectual
E


50 ANATOMY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


faculties. The optic nerve, on the contrary, has the
greatest communication with the organs of the in-
tellectual faculties. Finally, all the cerebral parts
adhere one to another; but certain parts are con-
nected more intimately than others. These con-
siderations will be better understood, if the differ-
ent faculties of the mind and their respective organs
be demonstrated. Then they are of the greatest
necessity for the elucidation of the mutual influence
of the different faculties.*


RECAPITULATION.


In this chapter I have developed our method of
examining the structure of the nervous system; I
have demonstrated the necessity of admitting as.
many origins as there are various nervous masses ;
I have pointed out the proportion of the grey and
white substance in the nervous system, and their re-
lation. Moreover, I have considered the different
structure of the nervous parts of the abdomen and
thorax, of the spine, of the five senses, of the ce-
rebellum and brain; I have shown the general prin-
ciple of commissures or unions of all nervous parts
which are double; and I have proved the commu-
nication of the different nervous parts one with
another, and especially of those which exert the


* Those who make a study of anatomy, and want more details,
will find them in the first volume of our large work, entitled, «¢ Ana-
tomie et Physiologie du Systéme nerveux en général et du Cerveau
en particulier.” There they will find also every particularity ex.
hibited, by plates, in their natural size.


RECAPITULATION. 51


greatest influence upon each other. It follows that
all nervous parts are formed and perfected in the
same manner; that our considerations are general
and simple; and that this conformity of all the es-
tablished principles bears the character of truth.


eT: vs


ake es Me ; - ye - . oe : ay
: e jee, isin pitta.
; ‘s,8 are ime y a ie, 3


, ne
ee he


acca - a


- Gites. . ae


rae E


ee: < eee


PART IL.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


CHAPTER I.


INNATENESS OF FACULTIES.


THE first question perhaps in Anthropology is,
Whence has man his faculties? Is man born in-
different; or does he come into the world en-
dowed with determinate faculties? Before I an-
swer this a on ee I shall make some general ob-
servations.

From the remotest antiquity, philosophical in-
quirers have divided beings into creative and
created. These last were subdivided into spirit or
soul, and matter. ‘The word spirit was given to
every being that did not fall immediately under the
senses ; namely, which was not palpable, tangible,
measurable, or visible. Every thing, on the con-
trary, which possessed these qualities was called
matter. Thus this division into spirit and matter
was founded on the density of beings. Several
beings therefore, which formerly passed for spirits,
must actually be considered as matter.

According to the definition of spirit, it is evi-


Pa


54: PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


dent that we never can have the least notion or
conception of its nature; and we are therefore
obliged to content ourselves with the knowledge of |
material beings. We are acquainted with the ex-
istence of spirits, only in as far as their phenomena
or manifestations fall under our senses.

Material beings offer to our consideration matter
itself and phenomena. Now it is not easier to ac-
quire any knowledge of the nature of matter itself
than of spirit. Thus we can only inquire into
phenomena. In ancient times, all phenomena were
considered as effects of the operation of spirits or
souls. All motions and actions of stars, plants,
and animals, were thought to be produced by them :
hence, their multitude according to Thales, Pytha-
goras, and others. Matter, according to this system,
was considered as inert.

The philosophers who treat of spirits may be
ranged into two classes: into those who consider
fhem as material, for instance, Zeno and the Stcics ;
and into those who admit an immaterial principle.
These latter admit in man either several principles,
or one single soul; yet it is to be observed, that
in, man never more than one principle was con-
sidered as immaterial. Pythagoras, Alcmeon, Plato,
and others, speak of one rational soul, and of one
irrational soul, in man. Aristotle, Galen, and their
disciples as far down as the 17th century, attributed
to the soul all the operations of life. ‘Thomas
Aquinas attributed to it an unbounded power over
the body. Borelli, Robinson, Cheyne, Mead, Porter-
field, and others, considered the soul as the efficient


INNATENESS OF FACULTIES. 5S


cause of the organization. Swammerdam, Perrault,
and Stahl, honoured the soul as the guardian of
health, or the cause of disease.

On the other hand, it is also an ancient doctrine,
that every atom is endowed with a primitive pro-
perty. Philo the Jew taught this doctrine. Several
other philosophers considered all phenomena as
produced by the form and mixture of the bodily
organization. ‘This opinion was openly maintained
by Democritus, Heraclides, Epicurus, Asclepiades,
Hippocrates, Erasistratus, and others. The ex-
pressions of Thales, Pythagoras, Empedocles, and
Heraclitus, are not distinct and determinate enougu
to enable us to decide whether they believed in an
immaterial soul or not.

The doctrine, that every thing is provided with
its own properties, was from time to time checked
by metaphysicians and scholastic divines; but by
degrees it gained ground, and the maxim that
matter is inert, was entirely refuted. Natural phi-
losophers discovered corporeal properties, the laws
of attraction and repulsion, of chemical affinity, of
fermentation, and even of organization. ‘They con-
sidered the phenomena of vegetables as the pro-
duction of material qualities—as properties of mat-
ter. Glisson attributed to matter a particular ac-
tivity, and to the animal fibre a specific irritability.
De Gorter acknowledged in vegetable life some-
thing more than pure mechanism. Winter and
Zups proved that the phenomena of vegetable life
ought to be ascribed only to irritability. Of this,
several phenomena of flowers and leaves indicate a |


56 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


great degree. The hop and French bean“twine
round rods which are planted near them. ‘The
tendrils of vines curl round poles or the branches
of neighbouring trees. The ivy climbs the oak,
and adheres to its sides, &c.

Now it would be absurd to pretend that the or-
ganization of animals is entirely destitute of pro-
perties: therefore Friederick Hoffmann took it
for the basis of his system, that the human body,
like all other bodies, is endowed with material pro-
perties. Whytt, Sauvage, Hartley, Unzer, Charles
Bonnet, and others, maintained that all automatic
functions are produced without consciousness, and
that in this sense the seat or residence of the soul
is extended over the whole body. ‘The writings of
Isenflamm, Cullen, Musgrave, De la Roche, Thaer,
Schaeffer, and many others, present similar consider-
ations.

It follows that the functions of man must be di-
vided into two classes: into those which are pro-
duced by means of the organizatfen alone without
consciousness—automatic life; and into functions
which take place with consciousness, and which are
the effect, of the soul—animal life.

Now may we answer the question, whether man
is born indifferent, or whether his nature is deter-
minate. J irst, the faculties of automatic life, being
considered as the effects of the organization, must
be innate and determinate, because the organization
itself is innate. ‘These faculties being common to
man and animals must be innate in man as well as

in animals. In general, man, participating in the


INNATENESS OF FACULTIES. 57


nature of all other beings, of minerals, plants, and
animals, and being therefore a microcosm, must
possess all the properties common to him and to
other beings. The body of man consists of matter :
hence it is subjected to all the laws of matter. It
is attracted towards the centre of the earth, and if
it be not supported, it falls as every inanimate body
does. It is impenetrable, and is crushed by violent
pressure like matter in general. It has figure and
extension; it possesses all the other physical and
chemical qualities; and in order to explain a great
number of the functions of man, it 1s necessary to
know the laws of physics, mechanics, and chemistry.
Moreover, the organic life of man, and that of
plants, is supported by the same circumstances,
namely, by the influence of caloric, air, light, food,
&c. Plants are produced from germs, which for-
merly made part of a similar being; they take food,
convert it into their proper substance, increase, de-
crease, and die. ‘This comparison of man with
plants takes place not only in respect to the healthy
state, but even to the state of disease. It is cer-
tain that various diseases in man are explicable by
certain laws of nutrition, which are observed in
plants. If too much food be given to a peach-tree,
its bark bursts, grows rough, and secretes gum.
In the same manner, a person who is too well
nourished has a red countenance, pimples, boils,
and various eruptions on the skin. Wounds heal
in man as in plants. Strip off the bark of a branch;
it falls down, as a bone deprived of its periosteum,
A smooth circular cut ina plant heals sooner and


58 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


better than a lacerated wound. ‘The healing of
wounds begins from the margin both in man and in
plants, &c. In the same way all the organic laws of
animals are preserved in man; and the constituent
parts of animals are much more analogous, than the
parts of plants, to those of man. ‘Their bones,
muscles, viscera, arteries, veins, and nerves, per-
form the same functions. Hence, all the faculties
of man, which contribute to the production and re-
production of the organization, namely, all the
faculties of automatic or organic life, are innate.

In former times there were philosophers who
thought that the soul forms its own body; but, if
this be the case, an ill formed body never could
be endowed with a good soul. All the natural in-
fluence of generation, nutrition, climate, education,
&e. would therefore ‘be inexplicable. Hence, it is
much more reasonable to: think that the soul, in
this life, is only confined in the body, and makes
use of its respective instruments, which entirely
depend on the laws of the organization. In blind-
ness, the soul is not mutilated, but it cannot per-
ceive light without eyes, &c. _

Let us now examine whether the faculties of ani-
mal life, viz. those which act consciously, are also
innate? These faculties may be subdivided into four
orders : into voluntary motion; into the five exter-
nal senses; into propensities and sentiments; and
into the faculties of the understanding. According
to the principle above mentioned, that when ani-
mal life presents any point of contact between man
and animals these common faculties are innate, it


INNATENESS OF FACULTIES. | 59


is evident that voluntary motion must be considered
as innate or given by nature. The five external
senses are also inherent in the nature of man and
animals; and these senses exert essentially the same
functions in man and animals. No one will endea-
vour to prove that the five senses are the produc-
tion of our will: their laws are determined by
nature. Therefore as soon as an animal meets with
the food destined for it, its smell and taste declare
in favour of it. Thus it is not astonishing that a
kid, taken from the uterus of its mother, preferred
broom-tops to other vegetables which were pre-
_sented to it. And Richerand is wrong in saying,
“If such a fact have any reality, we should be forced
to admit that an animal may possess a foreknow-
ledge of what is proper for it; and that, indepen-
dently of any impressions which may be afterwards
received by the senses, it 1s capable, from the mo-
ment of birth, of choosing, that is, of comparing
and judging of what is presented to it.’ The hog
likewise eats the acorn the first time he finds it.
Animals however have, on that account, no need of
any previous exercise, of any innate idea, of any
comparison or reflexion. The relations between
the external world and the five senses are deter-
mined by creation. We cannot see as red that
which is yellow, nor as great that which is little, &c. »
How should animals have any idea of what they
have not felt?

It results from these considerations, that the com-
parison of man with other beings (not merely with


60 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


animals, but also with plants and minerals) must be
admitted, and cannot be repugnant to our feelings,
because he participates of their properties. He,
who thinks that such comparisons degrade mankind,
should be aware that the greatest natural philoso-
phers, moralists, and divines, have maintained the
same opinion; as St. Gregorius Nyssenus, St. Au-
gustin, Bonnet, Pascal, Condillac, and others. Her-
der was right in saying “ that it is incontestable that
all living beings are created conformably to certain
laws of analogy.’’* It is only to be considered that
the inferior properties are preserved in the beings
of a higher order, modified only by superior facul-
ties. In this manner man unites all physical, che-
mical, vegetable, and animal laws; and it is only by
particular faculties that he acquires the character of
humanity.

I have still to examine the origin of the propen-
sities, sentiments, and intellectual faculties. There
are three modes of explaining this matter: Man and
animals acquire their propensities, sentiments, and
intellectual faculties, either by external impressions,
or by internal causes. In this latter respect, either
one or several general faculties produce all particu-
lar faculties; or each special faculty is determinate,
and given by creation. I shall first demonstrate that
external influences are not the cause of the internal
faculties of the mind.


* Tdeen zur Geschichte der Philosophie der Menschheit. T, IL.
p. 126. |


EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES, 61


On external Influences considered as the cause of the
Faculties of the Mind.


EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES.


There are a great number of authors who main-
tain that the faculties of the mind, instead of being
innate, result from external circumstances and acci-
dental events. “ Demosthenes,” says Helvetius, “ be-
came eloquent because he heard Callistratus speak,
whose eloquence made so deep an impression upon
his mind that he aspired only to this talent.’? Ac-
cording to the same author, ‘* Vaucanson became fa-
mous in mechanics, because, when yet a child and
being obliged to stay alone in the waiting-room of
his mother’s confessor, he found there a clock, exa-
mined its wheels, and by means of a bad knife en-
deavoured to make a similar machine of wood. He
succeeded, and therefore he constructed such surpris-
ing machines as his automatons. Milton would not
have composed his poem of Paradise Lost, had he
not lost his place of secretary to Cromwell. Shak-
speare composed his tragedies because he was an
actor; and he became an actor because he was
forced to leave his native county on account of
some juvenile errors. Corneille fell in love and
made verses for the object of his passion, and there-
fore he became famous in poetry. Newton saw an
apple falling, and this fall revealed to him the law
of gravitation. It is daily observed that revolutions
produce great men, &c.”

In this manner of reasoning the origin of the fa-


62 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


culties is confounded either with the opportunity
necessary for their activity, or with some external
excitement. It is certain that external circum-
stances must be presented, otherwise internal facul-
ties cannot act; but opportunities do not produce
faculties. Without food I cannot eat; but I am not
hungry because there is‘food. A dog cannot hunt
if it be shut up, but its desire of hunting is not pro-
duced by leading it into the fields. ‘The same cir.
cumstances are often presented to many millions,
and perhaps one single individual alone makes use
of them. Revolutions make great men known, not
because they produce the faculties, but because
they offer opportunities and subjects necessary to
the faculties. Circumstances are often very favour-
able to the attainment of distinction and the acqui-
sition of celebrity, but we do not see that every in-
dividual attains an honourable place. It is certainly
not sufficient to be an actor in order to compose
tragedies like Shakspeare. How many children are
exposed to the same influences without manifesting
the same energy of faculties. Several individuals,
on the contrary, not only make use of the present
circumstances, but they prepare and produce events
which admit a still greater activity of their faculties.

On the other hand, it is true that our faculties
are often excited by external events, and that with-
out this external excitement our faculties would re-
main inactive. However useful therefore may be
the consideration of great models, I am still con-
vinced that in every science, in every art, in every
occupation, the principles of each are easily con-


SOCIETY. ~ 63


ceived by those who possess the corresponding fa-
culties in a high degree. This is the case even with
moral principles and with religion. ‘These superior
sentiments are easily excited if the innate disposi-
tions be conformable.


SOCIETY.


A great number of works treat of the natural
state of man in opposition to his state of society,
and of many qualities which are considered as the
result of social life. According to this hypothesis,
man is made for solitude, and the social state is in
opposition to his nature. It is added, that many
virtues and vices of man would never have existed,
had he not abandoned his natural state of isolation.
Excepting certain idiots however, where, and at
what time, has man lived a solitary being? Accord-
ing to history, man lived always in society, at least
in families; and the families, though scattered in
woods, formed communities. Thus, as we find man-
kind every where united in society, is it not natural
to conclude that man is a social being? It is neces-
sary to know that, in this respect, there are two |
kinds of animals: several species are destined to live
in society, as sheep, monkies, dogs, hogs, geese,


crows, &c.; others to live solitary, as the fox, hare,


magpie, &c. Man belongs to the social class. Now

it is certainly conceivable that the social animals are

endowed with faculties destined for society, and that

these faculties can never act without society ; for

every individual is upon the whole calculated for so-
2


64 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM:


ciety, and all the faculties must be appropriated to
this end. Bustards and cranes place sentinels; a
flock of wild geese form a triangle in flying; a flock
of chamois is led by a female; the honey-bees act in
concert, &c.: and all these properties are given to ani-
mals at the same time with the social instinct. Con-
sequently society itself is a natural institution esta-
blished by creation, and the faculties, which are
observed in social animals, are not at all the result
of society. ‘This assertion is also proved by the ob-
servation that social animals have quite different fa-
culties; but if society produced any number of the
faculties of man and animals, every kind of social
animal ought to possess them.


WANTS.


Wants, that is, disagreeable impressions, misery,
poverty, painful situations, are often considered as
the source of the instincts, propensities, sentiments,
and intellectual faculties of man and animals. It is
certain that external wants, in this signification, ex-
cite the internal faculties, but it is not true that
these external wants produce them. For, according
to this supposition, the same external wants ought
to produce the same faculties in animals and in man.
But we observe that not merely every kind of ani-
mal, but even every individual, acts and conducts
itself differently against external impressions, and
always according to its internal faculties. The par-
tridge dies from hunger and cold during sharp win-
ters, and benumbed sparrows fall from the top


Ay


i


{


CLIMATE AND MODE.OF LIVING. 65


of the house, while the nightingale and quail have
gone into temperate climates before the season of
hunger and thirst has arrived. The cuckow wants
a nest to lay its eggs in as well as the wagtail or the
redbreast, yet it builds none. ‘The idiot makes no
effort in order to prevent the injuries of the air and
to preserve himself, while the reasonable man covers
himself with cloathing. Moreover, the faculties are
active in animals and man without any external ne-
cessity. The beaver, although shut up and defended
against the injuries of the weather, builds its cot-
tage. ‘The weaver bird, though in a cage, makes
its tissue. It consequently follows that external
wants only excite the activity. of the internal facul-
ties, but do not produce them; and in this respect
their influence is important. The faculties of poor
persons, for instance, are more active than the fa-
culties of those who live in plenty; but if the fa-
culties have not been given by. nature, external
wants cannot excite them.

The expression want has still another sense, that
of propensity or inclination. Want, in this signifi-
cation, is evidently the efiect and not the cause of
the internal faculties; and, in this sense, there are
as many wants as there are different faculties them-
selves. These wants are also proportionate to the
activity of the faculties.


CLIMATE AND MODE OF LIVING.


Several philosophers have advanced that climate,
manner of living, and even the nurse’s milk, might be
; K


e


66 PHYStOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


the cause of our faculties. According to this man-
ner of thinking, the modifications of our faculties are
confounded with their primitive origin. ‘These ex-
ternal influences can neither produce nor annihilate
determinate faculties: the special faculties are given
by creation. This opinion must however be consi-
dered. It proves only that the manifestations of
our faculties depend on our organization; for cli-
mate, eating, drinking, &c. have a powerful in-
fluence over the organization. Instead therefore of
denying the influence of climate, food, air, light &c.
we consider it as very important, but only in respect
to the activity of the faculties. The milk of nurses
contributes certainly to the increase and organic
constitution of children, and consequently to the
manifestations of the moral and intellectual faculties,
in as far as the body is necessary to these manifesta-
tions, but all these external influences cannot pro-
duce any faculty. If parents were right in attri-
buting the inferior propensities of their children to
nourishment, why might not grown-up persons, who
live upon beef, veal, mutton, pork &c. accuse the
ox, the calf, the sheep, or the pig, for their own
want of intelligence, and for their peculiar character ?
Dietetics must be stillimproved. They ought to de-
termine the influence of external impressions upon the
organization, according to the different constitutions
or temperaments, which it affects; and they ought
to point out what external influences—what food,
climate, &c. act more upon the nervous than upon
other systems. The activity of our faculties varies
according to the modifications of the organization,
‘ |


CLIMATE AND MODE OF LIVING. 67


in the same way that the milk and butter of cows
vary according to the food they live on; or as the
flesh and fat of fowls, and other animals, are modi-
fied according to the food by means of which they
are fattened. ‘The activity of men fed on game dif
fers much from that of those who live upon potatoes
and vegetables. It seems moreover possible to show
the greater influence of different aliments upon cer-
tain systems in the healthy state, just as we may
show that some medicaments act more upon one
system than upon another. By the same reason we
may also conceive why certain rules of fasting are
useful in order to subdue the sensual appetites. Cer
tain degrees of excitement suppress the activity
of certain faculties while they increase that of
others. |

Climate has certainly a great influence upon the
organization, and it seems natural that certain cli-
mates contribute more than others to the develope-
ment of certain faculties. Its influence however
does not seem so powerful in mankind as in animals.
Man by his intellectual faculties opposes its in-
fluence. Of this the Jews are an evident proof.
This people is dispersed over the whole world, and
yet their primitive and characteristic organization
is preserved in all countries. The effect of innate-
ness and propagation from parents to children is
much stronger than that of external influence. In
determining therefore, that, according to climate and
nourishment, the faculties are more or less active,
the primitive origin of the faculties, and their greater
or less activity, must not be confounded.

F2


65 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


EDUCATION IN GENERAL.


Finally, education has been particularly considered
as a cause of the faculties of the mind. According
to this opinion, not only man but also animals are
born without determinate faculties—indifferent—as
tabule rase or blank paper. All the instincts and
aptitudes of animals, from the insect to the dog and
elephant, are the effects of instruction. Foxes hunt
because they learn it from their parents; birds learn
to sing; and man ‘becomes man by education. It
nrust be answered that neither in animals nor in ‘man
does education produce any faculty whatever.


CONSTANCY OF ANIMALS AND MEN.


If animals be susceptible of all impressions around
them, so that these impressions determine their cha-
racter and nature, why does every kind of animal
always preserve the same nature? Why does not the ’
hen learn to coo when she is brought up with
pigeons? Why does not the female nightingale
learn to sing like the male? Why do birds hatched
by those of different species imitate the habits and
instincts of their parents? Why does the young
duck, hatched ‘by a hen, run towards the water?
Why does not the cuckoo ‘sing like the bird that
hatched and nourished it? When young squirrels
_and rabbits are pursued, why do squirrels climb
upon trees and rabbits hide themselves in burrows?
Why are dogs attached to their masters notwith-

1


GENIUSES AMONG ANIMALS AND MEN. 69


standing the blows they receive, and which ought to
produce the contrary effect? &c. It is true that the
actions of animals are not confined solely to what
their preservation requires. They are susceptible of
several modifications: they modify their manners
according to the position wherein they live; they
are susceptible of an education beyond their wants.
Hence horses, monkies, dogs, cats, rats, harts &c.
can be instructed to play various tricks. Still how-
ever this power of modifying their manners is not un-
bounded, but conformable to their nature. Pigeons
and roes never can be made to hunt like falcons and
dogs.

It is the same with man. If human faculties be
the result of external influences and education, why
does not man imitate the nature of different. ani-
mals? Why does he preserve, at all times and in all
climates, his characteristic nature, and his primitive
qualities? Young children pass the most of their
time with their mothers and nurses, and conse-
quently with women ; yet boys and girls show, from,
the earliest infancy, their distinctive character. And),
this difference between the sexes continues for life.


GENIUSES AMONG ANIMALS AND MEN.


If animals and men learn all functions from other
individuals, why do several individuals excel others
which have absolutely the same manner of living,
and the same instruction? Why does one nightingale
sing better and. more constantly than another in the
same wood? Why, amongst a drove of cows, oxen,


70 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


or horses, is one individual good-natured and meek,
and another ill-natured and furious? M. Dupont de
Nemours had a cow which alone understood to open
the enclosure of a field: none of its companions
learned to imitate its manner of proceeding; but
being near the entrance waited with impatience for
the arrival of their leader. <A hunting dog, when
he was hindered from taking a good place near the
fire, from his companions occupying every sur-
rounding place, went out into the yard and barked:
immediately all the other dogs did the same; and
then he ran in and took the best place near the fire.
Though he often deceived his companions, none of
them was capable of imitating his stratagem. A
little dog, when he was eating with several large
dogs, behaved himself in the same manner, in order
to secure his portion, or to catch some good bits.
Such genius is not the result of instruction.
Children sometimes show. particular dispositions
and faculties before they have received any kind
of instruction. Almost every great man shows in
his infancy the character of future greatness.
Achilles, hidden in Pyrrha’s clothes, took the sword
from among the presents of Ulysses. ‘Themistocles,
when still a child, said that he could increase a
state and render it powerful. Alexander would
not dispute any prize at the Olympic games, unless
his rivals were kings. At fourteen years of age,
Cato of Utica manifested the greatest aversion from
tyranny. Nero was cruel from the cradle. Pascal,
when twelve years old, published his treatise on conic
sections. Voltaire made verses when only seven years


INDIVIDUALITY. rai


of age. The number of such examples is very
great: it is not necessary to multiply them, as they
must be within the scope of every one’s knowledge.


INDIVIDUALITY.


All individual animals of the same kind show
something particular. Every young bird of the
same brood does not learn to sing with the same
facility. One horse is more fit for the race than
another. Sportsmen know very well that there is
a great difference among dogs, &c. It is the same
with mankind. Children of the same parents are
entirely different, though their education is uniform.
How could the same education produce all the par-
ticularities of different children. I shall afterwards
prove that education has a great influence upon the
majority of persons whose faculties are middling,
who have no determinate vocation, and who re-
peat what they hear, and do what they see done by
others. Yet notwithstanding the same education,
every individual preserves some peculiarity in his
character, in his manner of feeling and thinking:
so many men, so many minds. Moreover, if edu-
cation could produce faculties, why have instructors
not yet found the means of conferring understand-
ing, judgment, and good qualities in general? Why
are we not all men of genius? Why are we obliged
to lament so many errors and crimes? Why cannot
moral and satirical discourses prevent the abuses of
our faculties.


V2 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


Objection.


In order to prove that man acquires all his moral
and intellectual faculties by education, it is asserted
that savages who are found in woods, destitute of
all human faculties, are like beasts, only because
they have not received any education. This ob-
jection is refuted, as soon as the condition and
state of these pretended savages are known. ‘These
unfortunate creatures may be referred to two classes.
Ordinarily they are wretched persons of a defective
organization, with heads too large, being increased
in size by dropsy of the brain; or they have heads
too small and deformed. These individuals have
almost always scrofula, hanging lips, a_ thick
tongue, a swollen neck, a bad constitution in ge-
neral, a wavering and unsteady gait; they are more
or less completely idiots. They generally consist of
persons who have been exposed and given up to
the care of Providence, because they were burden-
some to their parents. In certain countries, the
lower classes of people consider such unhappy
creatures as bewitched, and take no care of them.
Often these idiots have a determinate propensity to
live alone in woods, and they consequently escape.
At Haina near Marbourg, where there is a great
hospital, we were told that several idiots had
escaped, and on sending people in order to seek
and catch them, other idiots who had escaped from
other places were found. In a castle near Augs-


INDIVIDUALITY. 715


burgh, we saw a mad woman who had been found.
in a wood. At Brunswick we saw a woman, who
was found lying on her side in a forest, but was
incapable of pronouncing a single word. ‘The pre-
tended savage of Aveyron, who is kept in the In-
stitution of Deaf and Dumb at Paris, is an idiot in
a high degree. His forehead is very small and
much compressed in the superior region: the eyes
are little, and lay deep in the orbits. We could not
convince ourselves that he hears; for it was im-
possible to make him attentive to our calling him,
or to the sound of a glass struck behind him! His
attitude and manner of sitting are decent, but his
head and body are incessantly in motion from side.
to side. He knows several written signs and words,
and points out the objects noted by them. The
most remarkable instinct in him is, the love of order.
As soon as any object is displaced, he puts it in
order.

Such unfortunate creatures therefore are idiots,
not because they have not received any education,
but because they cannot be educated on account of |
their imbecility. It is difficult to conceive that
in our populous countries, a well organised person
should long wander about like a savage, without
being discovered. However, if a well organised
individual, who has escaped in his infancy, be dis-
covered in a forest, though he cannot be acquainted
with our manners and determinate education, yet
he will manifest the essential and characteristic
faculties of mankind ; and such an individual, living
in society, will soon imitate the manners and re-


74: PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


ceive the instruction of others. The girl of Cham-
paigne proves this assertion.

Thus education produces no faculty either in man
or in animals: but let us not draw the conclusion,
that education is superfluous. After having con-
sidered all the innate faculties of the mind, I shall
examine what education does; and I shall prove
its importance. It is certain that education cannot
produce any faculty. It only excites, exercises, —
guides and determines the uses, and prevents the
abuses of the different faculties. In this respect,
education is of the highest importance. It is evi-
dent in countrymen and peasants, who are confined
to their occupations. ‘They are ignorant; yet many of |
them might surpass many citizens in every kind of apt-
ness and science, had they received a good education.

It results from all these considerations relative to
external influence, that the internal faculties are
not produced by them, but that the doctrine of
external impressions as causing the faculties of
the mind, may be reduced to two propositions.
Either the external impressions present some oppor-
tunity for the activity of the faculties, or they excite
and guide the faculties ; but in no way do they pro-
duce them.

The second way of explaining the origin of the
faculties of man and animals is to admit an inter-
nal cause. ‘The meaning however of these authors
must be subdivided, because several authors admit
one or more primitive faculties, which they say pro-
duce all the special faculties. Others maintain that
every special faculty is innate. Let us-first con-


ATTENTION. 76


sider the doctrine, that one or several general facul-.
ties produce all other special faculties.


ATTENTION.


_ Attention is commonly considered as the cause
of all internal faculties. Helvetius. even said, that
each well organised person might exercise his facul-
ties by means of his attention, with so great a suc-
cess, as to arrive to the first rank. By the expres-
sion, well organised person, can only be understood
those who are not born idiots; consequently ac-
cording to this opinion, the first and most im-
portant faculty, viz. attention, on which all other
faculties depend, depends itself on the organization.
The word attention has two acceptations. It
denotes consciousness in general, and in this sense
attention accompanies the activity of every faculty.
Thus may it be explained why one animal or man
pays great attention to one object, and very little
or none to another. Sheep will never pay attention
to philosophy nor theology. ‘The squirrel and
pigeon perceive a hare pass with indifference,
while the fox and eagle watch for it. Different in-
dividuals are attentive to different objects, even ac-
cording to their sex and age. Among children, girls
prefer dolls, ribands &c.; boys take horses, whips
and drums. Among adults, one.is pleased - with
philosophical discourses, another with witty replies ;
one with events which touch the heart, another
with sanguinary battles. -Attention in this sense is
also proportionate to the activity of the respective


76 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


faculty. If therefore the five senses be not ex-
ercised, much greater impressions are necessary to
excite their attention. ‘The attention of every fa-
culty may be cultivated and improved by the ex-
ercise of the particular faculty ; but by one par-
ticular faculty general attention cannot be ex-
ercised.

Attention denotes also a distinct consciousness,
a reflection on our sensations and actions. The
aptitudes and instincts of animals, however, are
certainly not the effect of this kind of attention.
Nobody will maintain, that the rabbit, badger, mole,
marmot, or hamster, make burrows because they
have examined with attention the advantages of
them; or that the beaver builds a cottage because
it has studied the laws of mechanics. Among men,
geniuses burst forth before they are conscious
of their talent. This kind of attention may ex-
eite the particular faculties, but it never produces
them.


PAIN AND PLEASURE.


‘There is an ancient doctrine which teaches that
pain and pleasure, desire and aversion, are not only
the source of all actions, but also of all faculties.
Let us briefly examine it. Pain and pleasure, de-
sire and aversion, are general expressions, and be-
long to all faculties. Every faculty, being active,
desires; and man and animals desire the objects
relative to their faculties. The dog has the desire
of hunting, the beaver that of building. Hence


PASSIONS. 17


the desires are as different as the faculties, and the
energy and number of desires are proportionate
to the activity and number of the faculties. It is
the same with pain and pleasure. Every faculty
being satisfied perceives pleasure ; and every faculty
being disagreeably affected feels pain : conse-
quently the kinds of pain and pleasure are as nu-
merous as the faculties. One individual delights
in generously pardoning offences, another in taking
revenge. One is happy in the possession of riches,
another glories in disdaining the vanity of man-
kind. It follows that pain and pleasure are the
result, and not the cause, of the particular faculties.


PASSIONS.


Helvetius and several others consider the passions,
principally the love of glory or ambition, as the source
of faculties. Let us examine their doctrine. The ex-
pression, passion, has different significations : some-
times passion is confounded with the affections in
general; or it signifies the highest degree of ac-
tivity, or it denotes any special faculty. Passions
in the sense of affections, as anger, envy, shame,
affliction, joy &c. are only modifications of the
sensations, and cannot produce the faculties whose
modified actions they are. Passions, as the highest
degree of activity of any faculty, produce evidently
great phenomena. Every faculty which is extremely
active, whether by its own power and internal
energy, or by external excitement, will perform
actions which are impossible in the ordinary state


78 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


of activity; but it follows also, that the faculties
are not the effect, but the cause of the passions.
Finally, passions as particular faculties, for example,
love, glory, pride &c. may excite the other facul-
ties, but they never can produce them. Many in-
dividuals have emulation, but they do not therefore
excel in any particular talent. ‘This point will be
better understood when I. speak of the mutual in-
fluence of the faculties. Here I shall make two
secondary observations in respect to the passions.
The factitious passions spoken of in different books
do not exist. All faculties are nate; their highest
degree of activity ought to be called passion ; and
- every passion presupposes a primitive faculty: there-
fore the passions are as different as the faculties.
Locke and many modern writers maintain that
children are destitute of passions. It is true there
is one passion in adults which is not observed in
children, the passion of love. There have been,
however, some individuals who at three or four
years of age have felt passionately this propensity ;
but in general the greater number of inclinations
manifest themselves with energetic activity in chil-
dren. The opponents of our doctrine, for the most
part, confound the objects upon which the particu-
lar faculties act at different ages, with the incli-
nations themselves. Children it is true, have no
inclination to defraud the orphan of his inheritance,
or to conquer kingdoms; but they will deceive one
another for a bird’s-nest; they will fight for play-
things, and they are proud to occupy the first place
at school: young boys are even more grieved by the


ANALOGY. 79


loss of a bird, than when grown up they are sorry
for that of a horse. Some qualities are even more
active in children than in adults, while other facul-
ties are more energetic in adults than in children.
Hence passion, in the signification of the highest
degree of activity, in general takes place in chil-
dren, and but very few faculties are quite inactive
in them. ‘This is also the case with other faculties
in adults. Thus it is necessary to speak more pre-
cisely, and to indicate the faculties which do not
act passionately at different ages; but it is false
to say generally, that children have no passions.
Children have also passions in the sense of affec-
tions.. Who has not observed in them anger, jea-
lousy, envy, shame, affliction, joy &c. Hence, |
children have passions as well as adults.

It results from these considerations, that one or
several general faculties are not sufficient to produce
all particular faculties. Thus we may conclude,
from all preceding negative proofs, that every
special faculty of the mind or understanding is in-
nate, and given by creation. There are also many
positive and direct proofs of the innateness of every
faculty.


ANALOGY.


The first of them may be drawn from analogy.
By examining nature we perceive that every kind
of earth, every salt, every metal, has its deters
minate qualities, which distinguish one species from
another; for instance, the figure of crystalliza-


80 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


tion, the weight, aftinity, and other physical and
chemical properties, are determinate and perma-
nent. It is the same with plants. Their general
laws are fixed, and every plant has its own cha-
racter. A pear-tree never bears apples, nor an
apple-tree pears. We never gather figs upon a vine,
nor grapes upon athorn-bush. The plastic power
of vegetables, by which they have their increase,
fructification, and all relations to external beings,
1s determinate. Every species of animal presents a
specific character. The structure of their bodies,
and all their manifestations, afford characteristics to
distinguish one from another. We can never change
a cat into a dog, nor a tiger into a lamb, &c.
Hence we must say with Moses, ‘* God created
all beings, earths, plants, fishes, birds, and all ani-
mals, each according to its kind.’’* Why then should
man be excepted ?

The faculties of man may be divided into
those which are common to man and animals, and
those which are proper to man. As long as we
consider faculties which are common to animals and
man, it is evident that these faculties are innate.
Now it is beyond doubt, that all the instinctive
aptitudes and inclinations of animals are innate.
Is it not evident that the faculties by which the
spider makes its web, the honey-bee its cell, the
beaver its hut, the bird its nest, &c. are inherent in
the nature of these animals. When the young duck,
or tortoise, runs towards the water as soon as hatched,


* Gen. i, 22, %4.


ANALOGY. 81


when the bird brushes the worm with his bill; when
the monkey, before he eats the may-bug, bites off its
head, &c. all these and similar dispositions are condu-
cive to the preservation of animals, but they are not
at all acquired. According to the same law, the
hamster gathers corn and grains, the dog hides its
superfluous food, the falcon kills the hare by driving
his beak into its neck, &c.

In the same way, all instinctive manifestations of
man must be innate. ‘The new-born child sucks
the fingers and seeks the breast, as the puppy and
calf seek the dug. J have mentioned above, that
voluntary motion and the five external senses, com-
mon to man and animals, are innate. Moreover,
if man and animals feel certain propensities and
sentiments, with clear and distinct consciousness,
we must consider these faculties as innate. ‘Thus,
if in animals we find examples of mutual inclination
between the sexes, of maternal care for the young,
_of attachment, of mutual assistance, of sociableness,
of union for life, of peaceableness, of desire to |
fight, of propensity to destroy, of circumspection,
of slyness, of love of flattery, of obstinacy, &c.
all these faculties must be considered as innate.
Let all these faculties be ennobled in man: let ani-
mal instinct of propagation be changed into moral
love; the inclination of animals for their young
into the virtue of maternal care for children; ani-
mal attachment into friendship; animal susceptibility
of flattery into love of glory and ambition; the
nightingale’s melody into harmony; the bird’s nest,


G


82 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


and the beaver’s hut into palaces and temples, &c. :
these faculties are still of the same nature, and
all these phenomena are produced by faculties com-
mon to man and animals. ‘They are only modified
and ennobled in man by the influence of superior
qualities, which give another direction to the inferior
ones.

Many modifications of sentiments, known by the
name affections, as pain, pleasure, fear, anxiety,
anger, envy, jealousy, hatred &c. are common to
man and animals, and are not voluntarily produced
either by man or by animals. Both are struck with
affections before they thought of them. These af-
fections arise against will and reflection, and they
are inherent in the nature of man and animals.
Therefore when the sentiments and affections are
somewhat energetic, they are accompanied with
bodily motions, gestures, and sounds, which are as
involuntary as the affections themselves, but which .
tend to the preservation of man and animals. The
infant, who has no knowledge of motherly care,
weeps and cries when he is hungry and in pain.
The puppy, though destitute of the sense of hear-
ing during the first fortnight, and unaware of its
complaining being heard, whines and invites the as-
sistance of its mother. Threatened by any danger,
we draw back the limbs before we have time to
think of it, and of the means to escape. ‘The will
has no part in these actions, but man and animals


do what nature commands them to do by. innate
laws.


INNATENESS OF THE HUMAN FACULTIES. 83


INNATENESS OF THE HUMAN FACULTIES.


Finally, man is endowed with faculties which are
peculiar to him. Now it is to be investigated whe-
ther the faculties which distinguish man from ani-
mals, and which constitute his human character, are
innate. It must be answered, that all the faculties
of man are given by creation, and that human
nature is as determinate as that of every other
being. Thus though we see that man compares
his sensations and ideas, inquires into the causes of
phenomena, draws consequences, and discovers laws
and general principles ; that he measures distances
and times, and crosses the sea from one end to
another; that he acknowledges culpability and
worthiness; that he bears a monitor in his own
breast, and raises his mind to the idea and adoration
of God :—yet all these faculties result neither from
accidental influence from without, nor from his own
will. How indeed could the Creator abandon man
in the greatest and most important occupations, and
give him up to chance? No. Herein, as every
where, he has prescribed to man his sphere of acti-
vity, and guarded all his steps. It is only by these
means that the same essential faculties always con-
tinue in the human kind, faculties the existence of


which we could never have conceived unless nature
had given them to us.


84 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


CONSTANCY OF THE HUMAN CHARACTER.


In order to prove that man does not acquire his
faculties by education, I have already mentioned
the constancy of the human character. ‘This con-
stancy really proves the innateness of all the facul-
ties with which man is endowed. . Mankind are al-
ways the same, as far as we know their history, not
only in respect to organic, but also in respect to
animal life. Ancient mummies present the same
parts of the skeleton which we find in man at pre-
sent, and the history of all times shows virtues and
vices essentially the same. Thus mankind has not
acquired any faculty, and can never lose any. ‘The
special faculties are always the same; the only
difference observed, at different times, is that the
manifestations of the special faculties are more or
less active, and variously modified, in different per-
sons. Here one unjustly seizes a piece of ground,
there a place-of honour; here the beloved person
is celebrated on an oaten-reed, there on a harp.
Leaders are decorated, some with feathers, others
with purple, &c. but all these modifications are
grounded upon primitive faculties essentially the


same.


UNIFORMITY OF MANKIND.


The uniformity of mankind in respect to the es-
sential faculties, notwithstanding all the exterior in-
fluence of society, climate, modes of living, laws,


GENIUSES. 85


religion, education and accidental events, affords a
great proof that nothing can change the laws of
nature. We every where find the same species;
whether man stain his skin or powder his hair; whe-
ther he dance to the sound ofa drum or to the
music of a concert; whether he adore the stars, the
sun, the moon, or the.God of Christians. The
special faculties are every where the same.


GENIUSES.


I have also spoken of genius, in order to prove
that education does not produce our faculties. In-
deed children, endowed with particular dispositions,
show their peculiar faculties before they have re-
ceived any kind of instruction. Shakspeare, when
he was a boy, exercised the trade of his father, who
was a butcher; but when he killed a calf he would
do it in a high style and make a speech. External
circumstances are sometimes very adverse to the
exercise of genius; but individuals, endowed with
energy of disposition, only wait for opportunities ;
they often leave their parents and their profession,
and follow their natural inclination. Moses, David,
Tamerlane, and Pope Sixtus the Fifth, were shep-
herds; Socrates, Pythagoras, Theophrastus, Demos-
thenes, Moliére, and Rousseau, were the sons of ar-
tificers. Such individuals are sometimes obliged to
surmount great obstacles, but they vanquish all im-
pediments; their character prevails, and their talents —
assume their natural place. Sometimes such indivi-
duals, hindered by circumstances from following


S6 PITYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


their inclinations, find their favourite occupation,
and their most agreeable recreations, in the exercise
of their most powerful dispositions. ‘Therefore
peasants, shepherds, and artisans, become astrono-
mers, poets, philosophers &c.: on the other hand,
ministers, kings, and emperors, have been known
to employ themselves in the mechanical arts. All
this proves that the primitive faculties are innate.


Objection.


It is objected that men of genius form a particu-
lar class, and that they cannot be compared with
persons whose faculties are middling. This is the
same as to say, that hunger and the circulation of
the blood do not depend on the organization, be-
cause all men have not an immoderate hunger,
famine, or the fever; or that the mole does not see
by means of its eyes, because the stag sees better on
account of its larger optic nerves; or that man has
no smell, since the smell of the dog is so superior on
account of its larger olfactory nerves. We ought to
conclude in a quite opposite manner; for, if the
organization be the cause of the highest degree of
activity of the different faculties, it is evident that
on it the lower degrce of their activity also depends,


PARTICULARITY OF EVERY GENIUS.


The man of greatest genius in one respect is often
very weak in others. William Crotch, at six years
of age, astonished all his auditors by his musical

‘ |


INDIVIDUALITY OF EVERY PERSON. © $7


talent, but in every other respect he was a child.
Cesar never could have become an Horace or a
Virgil, nor Alexander a Homer. Sir Isaac Newton
could not be changed into so great a poet as he was
an astronomer; nor Milton into so great an astro-
nomer as he was a poet. Nay, Michael Angelo
could not have composed the paintings of Raphael,
nor Albano those of Titian, &c.


PARTICULARITY OF EVERY SEX.


Both sexes manifest essentially the same moral
and intellectual faculties, but there is a great dif-
ference between their modifications. Several facul-
ties are more energetic in women; others more in
men. In general the feelings are stronger in women,
and the intellectual faculties more energetic in men.
These modifications then are inherent by nature, and
it is impossible to change one sex into another.


INDIVIDUALITY OF EVERY PERSON.


In all nations, notwithstanding the uniformity of
opinions, customs, professions and arts, sciences,
laws, religion, and whatever relates to positive in-
stitutions, every individual differs, from another by
his peculiar character. Every one has more capa-
city and more propensity for one than for another
object. Every child manifests his own manner of
thinking and feeling. It isa fact generally known,
that every one excuses his frailties by saying, It is
my nature; it is stronger than Iam; I cannot help


88 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


it, &c. Brothers and sisters often differ extremely
from each other, though their education is uniform.
‘The cause must be internal.


RELATION BETWEEN THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE FA-
CULTIES AND THEIR RESPECTIVE ORGANIZATION.


It is also necessary to admit the innateness of the
faculties, because there is a direct relation between
the manifestations of the moral sentiments, and the
faculties of the understanding, and their respective
organizations. I here take this for granted: its
particular elucidation must be demonstrated after-
wards. I mention this proof only for the sake of
connexion.


MAN HAS BEEN CREATED.


Finally, man has been created as well as every
other being; consequently it is rational to think that
his faculties are determinate, and ordered by crea-
tion.. We consequently maintain that every faculty
of man is innate. 7

In respect to innateness it is important to consi-
der an observation of Locke. In order to. demon-
strate that the ideas are not innate, Locke stated
that children do not manifest certain qualities, and
that different nations have quite different, nay, op-
posite principles of morality. This assertion o
Locke, in respect to the innateness of ideas and
moral principles, must not be confounded with the
innateness of the faculties. No sensation, no idea,


MAN HAS BEEN CREATED. 89


no principle, is innate. Our sensations and ideas of
external objects result from external impressions.
These impressions are accidental, consequently the
ideas of them are not innate; but the faculties
which perceive the impressions, and conceive the
ideas, are innate; for instance, the ideas of a stone,
plant, animal, are not innate; but these objects
make impressions on our senses, and these impres-
sions produce sensations or ideas in our minds. The
five senses however, and the faculties of our mind,
are innate. In the same manner the sensations and
ideas of external and accidental events are nowise
innate. In general no determinate action of any
faculty, but the faculty itself, is innate. ‘The pro-
pensity to love, not the subject of love; the faculty
of speaking, not the peculiar language; the faculty
of comparing and judging, not the determinate
judgment ; the faculty of poetry, not the particular
poem, &c. are innate. ‘Thus there is a great dif-
ference between innate faculties and innate ideas
and sensations. :

It is true that children do not manifest all facul-
tics, but we cannot from this draw the conclusion
that the faculties are not innate. For birds do not
make their nests, the hamster and marmot do not
collect provisions, the swallow does not migrate into
foreign countries, immediately after their birth. Ani-
mals do not propagate, females and women do not
give suck, immediately on coming into the world.
All these qualities however are innate. ‘This diffi-
culty is easily explained. Every faculty is confined
to its own organ, and its manifestations are propor-


90 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


tionate to the developement of the organ. Several
organs are very little developed in children, but
very much in adults; while others are proportion-
ately larger in children than in grown-up persons :
other organs are greatly developed in children as
well as in adults. The manifestations of the facul-
ties then being always proportionate to the deve-
lopement of the organs, it is evident why certain
faculties do not manifest themselves in infancy.

It is also obvious why the moral principles are
different in different nations. We agree with Locke
that these principles are not innate, but we main-
tain that the faculties which form these principles
are innate. I shall afterwards show that only some
faculties make laws, and that the moral principles
vary in different nations because the principles do
not result from one organ but from the different
combinations of various organs; consequently that
the justice of a libertine without benevolenee and
veneration must be quite different from that of a
charitable and modest person without the love of
venery. We every where see the same fundamental
faculties, but the manifestations are greatly modi-
fied. Men every where adore a Supreme Being;
they every where have marks of honour and of in-
famy; there are every where masters and servants ;
all nations make war, whether with spears and arrows,
or with muskets and artillery. Every where dead
friends are lamented, whether their remembrance be
honoured by embalming their bodies, or by putting
their ashes into an urn, or by depositing them in
sepulchres. Hence though the functions in general


MAN HAS BEEN CREATED, 91


of all faculties are modified in different nations, and
consequently also the functions of those faculties
which determine all laws and principles, yet the
same primitive faculties are observed in the cus-
toms, manners, and laws of all nations.

The innateness of the faculties is too evident to
escape the penetration of profound thinkers. Many
ancient and modern philosophers, both profane and
religious, were convinced of this. Plato (in his Re-
public VI.) considers philosophical and mathemati-
cal talents, memory, the sentiments of pride, ambi-
tion, courage, sensuality &c. as innate. Hiuppo-
crates, in treating of the qualities necessary for a
- physician, speaks of natural and innate dispositions.
Quintilian said, If precepts could produce elo-
quence, who would not be eloquent? Cicero, Se-
neca &c. were of opinion that religion is innate ;
so thought also Lavater. Herder * considered the
sociability of man, his benevolence, his inclination
to venerate a superior being, his love of religion, &c.
as innate. Condillact says, Man does not know
what he can do, till experience has shown what he is
capable of doing by the force of nature alone;
therefore he never does any thing purposely till he
has once done it instinctively. I think this obser-
vation will be found to be permanent and general.
I think also that, if it had been considered, philo-
sophers would have reasoned better than they have
done. Man makes analyses only after having ob-
served that he has analyzed. He makes a language


*. The t 8.252. + Giuv. Compl. 8vo, T. UT. p. 115.


92 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


after having observed that he had been understood.
In this manner poets and orators began before they
thought of their peculiar talents. In one word, all
that man does he did at first from nature alone.
Nature commences, and always commences well.
This is a truth that cannot be repeated too fre-
quently. ;

-“ When the laws,”’ says he in another passage,*
‘are conventions, they are arbitrary.” This may
be the case; and indeed there are too many arbi-
trary laws; but those which determine the mora-
lity of our actions cannot be arbitrary. ‘They are
our work as far as they are our conventions; but
we did not make them alone; nature dictated them
to us, and it was not in our power to make them
otherwise than they are. The wants and faculties
of man bemg given, laws are given also; and,
though we make them, God, who created us with
such wants and such faculties, is in fact our sole
legislator. In following these laws conformably to
nature we obey God; and this is the completion of
the morality of our actions. |

Innateness was so evident to ancient philosophers
that they thought that even sensations and ideas
were innate. I have mentioned above that this-as-
sertion is incorrect, and that only the faculties of
acquiring these sensations and ideas are innate. The
religion of Christ also admits the innateness of the
faculties. According to it all is given from above.
“* A man can receive nothing, except it be given to


* Loc. cit. p> 55.


RECAPITULATION. , 93


him from heaven.’ *—‘* No man can come unto me, —
except it were given to him of my Father.” t—
<< Who has ears to hear, let him ear.’? t—‘* The dis- |
ciples said, Why speakest thou in parables? Christ
answered, Because it is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it
is not given.” §—* All men cannot receive this say-
ing, save they to whom it is given.’’||—*¢ St. Paul
says: “ When the Gentiles which have not the law
do by nature the things contained in the law, these,
having not the law, are a law unto themselves:
which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else ex-
cusing one another.’ J


RECAPITULATION.


I have considered as the basis of anthropology
this truth, that the nature of man is determinate,
and that all his faculties are innate. For this pur-
pose I have first refuted all opinions, according to
which the faculties of man and animals originate ~
from external impressions, or from certain particular
faculties which are said to produce all special facul-
ties. Then I have mentioned direct proofs, as the
analogy throughout all nature: minerals, plants,
and animals, have their peculiar and determinate
nature, and why should not man? In conformity


* John iii. 27. + John vi. 65. { Matt. xiii. 9.
§ Matt. xiii. 10, 11. {| Matt. xix. 11. q Rom. ii. 14, 15.


94, PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


with this consideration, J have demonstrated that
the faculties which are common to man with mine-
rals, plants, and animals in general, must be innate
in man as well as in other beings. Moreover, I
have proved the innateness of the merely human fa-
culties by the constancy of the human character ;
by the uniformity of the nature of man at all times
and in all countries; by the tendency of natural
genius; by the peculiarity of every genius; by the
determinate character of each of the sexes; by the
peculiarities of every individual; by the relation
between the organization and the manifestations of
the respective faculties; finally, by the circum-
stance that man isa created being. As long there-
fore as all these proofs are not refuted, our first prin-
ciple of anthropology stands unshaken.


FATALISMs 95


Objection against the Innateness of the Faculties.


FATALISM.


It is proved by incontestable facts, that the moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties are innate; but
ignorance often, and hypocrisy and envy sometimes,
take part in the discussion. ‘The basis of the doc-
trine is no longer attacked: it seems more conve-
nient to blame its consequences, and, without know-
‘ing why or explaining how, to cry out that it 1s
dangerous. This, in all ages, has been the fate of
every discovery and invention. ‘The disciples of the
different philosophical schools of Greece inveighed
against each other, and made reciprocal accusations
of impiety and perjury. The people, in their turn,
detested the philosophers, and accused those who
investigated the causes of things of presumptuously
invading the rights of the Divinity. Pythagoras was
driven from Athens on account of his novel opi-
nions. Hor the same reason Anaxagoras was con-
fined in prison: Democrites was treated as a fool by
the Abderites for endeavouring to find out the cause
of madness by dissections; and Socrates, for having
demonstrated the unity of God, was forced to drink
the juice of hemlock. Several of those who ex-
celled in physics in the fourteenth century were
punished with death as sorcerers or magicians. Ga-
lilei, when seventy years of age, was shut up in
prison for having proved the motion of the earth.
Vesalius, Varolius, and Harvey, were persecuted on


96 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


account of their discoveries. ‘Those who maintained,
at first, the influence of climate upon the intellec-
tual faculties of man were suspected of materialism.
The pious philosopher Bonnet, Linneeus, Buffon,
the virtuous Lavater, and many others, have been
treated as materialists and fatalists.

The example of Aristotle and Descartes may be
quoted to show the good and bad fortune of new
doctrines. The ancient antagonists of Aristotle
caused his books to be burned; and in the time of
Francis I. the writings of Ramus against Aristo-
tle were similarly destroyed, his adversaries were
declared heretics, and under pain of being sent
to the galleys philosophers were prohibited from
combating his opinions. At the present time, the
philosophy of Aristotle is no longer spoken of.
Descartes was persecuted for teaching the doctrine
of innate ideas; he was accused of atheism though
he had written on the existence of God; and his
books were burnt by order of the university of
Paris. A short time after, the same university
adopted the doctrine of innate ideas, and when
Locke and Condillac attacked it, there was a gene-
ral cry of materialism and fatalism. Thus the same
opinions were considered at one time as dangerous
because they were new, and at another as useful
because they were ancient. What is to be inferred
from this but that man deserves pity ; that the opi-
nions of contemporaries, in respect to the truth or
falsehood, and the good or bad consequences im-
puted toa new doctrine, are quite suspicious ; and
that the only object of an author ought to be that

A. .


FATALISM. 97
of pointing out the truth. Ancillon is therefore
tight in saying with Bonnet, Reason does not know
any useless or dangerous truth. That which is, is.
This is the only answer to be given to those who,
valuing things only by the advantage they may pro-
duce, incessantly ask, Cui bono—what is this good
for? and at the same time to those who anxiously
ask, To what does it lead? Jesus the son of Sirach
long ago said, “ We ought not to demand what
is this good for; the usefulness of every thing will
be known in its due time.”

We are far from thinking that ignorance and
knavery will not attack our doctrine with abuse,
but what does not man abuse? ‘Tell him that he
ought to expiate his crimes, in his superstition
he will immolate his children. Have not Lucretius
and’ his disciples employed all their genius and
talents to demonstrate, that the belief in the im-
mortality of the soul maintains the fear of death,
and poisons all the enjoyments of life; whereas
Christians consider this belief as the basis of order
and happiness, of morality and of the most effica-
cious comfort during the calamities of life? To
establish hospitals for innoculation or for vaccination,
and to fix upon edifices a conductor for lightning,
is, in the opinion of some persons, of the greatest
service to humanity; but, in the eyes of others,
itis an offence to Divine Providence. In one word,
man finds in all things some cause of complaint;
but we may say with St. Bernard, “we ought to
judge in a different manner the complaints of the
ignorant and those of the hypocritical.”” The former

H


¢


98 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


complain from ignorance, the latter from cable
the first because they do not know the truth, the
second because they hate it.

Malebranche has very well painted the enemies
of new truths. “ Persons of solid and true piety,”
says he, “ do not condemn what they do not un-
derstand; but the ignorant, the superstitious, and
hypocritical, do.”” The superstitious by a slavish fear —
become fierce, when they see an ingenious and
penetrating man. If he assign the natural causes
of thunder and its effects, they deem him an atheist.
Hypocrites on the contrary, though led by particu-
lar motives, make use of truths generally vene-
rated; and they combat new truths under the
mask of some other truth: sometimes they deride
secretly what every one respects, and produce in
the minds of others a reputation which is the more
to be feared, in proportion as the things which they
abuse are more sacred.

As we maintain that all faculties are innate, it
is also said that this doctrine leads to fatalism. But
what is the meaning of this objection? The ex-
pression, fatalism, has different significations. Cer-
tain writers understand by fatalism, that allin the
world, and the world itself, exist by necessity ;
but that all events are the result of chance, and
not at all the effect of any supreme intelligence.
This fatalism resembles atheism; but such fatalism
is quite difierent from the doctrine, that man has
received all his faculties by creation; and that his
nature is determmed by it. . Another kind of fa-
talism teaches that all physical and moral laws are

1 4


FATALISM. | O93


etéated and fixed; that there is no liberty in our
actions; that man does good or evil according to»
his faculties; that he cannot change his character ;
that his actions are irresistible; consequently that
he cannot be rewarded or punished for them.

Here we must make a distinction. It is certain
that not only the faculties of mankind and the
laws to which they are subjected, but that the laws
of nature in general are fixed by creation. All
faculties are given, and their laws are determinate.
in automatic and in animal life. Who for example
has called himself to life? Does it depend on the
will of any one to be born in such or such a
country? from such or such parents? under this.
or that government, or religion? Who has des
termined his sex? Who can say: I am the eldest
or youngest because it has been my choice? Who
can determine the accidents which affect him, the
capacities of his teachers, and of all those around
him from the earliest infancy? Who can prepare
and produce all external circumstances acccording —
to his will? The organs of automatic hfe perform
their functions without our will, the liver never
can perform digestion ; the kidneys never can secrete.
bile ; and what is poison can never be changed
into food, &c. |

It is the same with animal life. The existence
and the laws of the five external senses are an effect _
of creation. It does not depend on our will to’ |
have the power of seeing, hearing, feeling, smelling
and tasting ; we can never hear or see by the fingers,
nor smell by the lips &c. It is impossible to see as
H Z


100 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


red that which is blue, or to see.as great that which
is little. The determination of these faculties. is
doubtless fatalism. We, inthe same manner, main-
tain, that all propensities, all sentiments and, intel-
lectual faculties, are innate and. determined by crea-
tion. But there is a great difference between, the
innateness of the faculties and the irresistibility of
theic actions. The faculties are given, and with-
out innate faculties no action is possible; but is
there no liberty in our actions?. This. question
cannot be perfectly understood before I have treated.
of the particular faculties, and of their mutual in-
fluence and subordination. I shall. then elucidate.
in a clearer manner what, moral liberty consists in.
Meanwhile I appeal to experience. Are the actions
of the faculties in man and animals irresistible ?
Neither in animals nor in man are all the facul-
ties active at the same moment, and with irresistible.
force. It. often happens in animals, that whilst.one.
faculty is active the others are quiescent. Animals.
perform rather one ‘action than another. If- this.
were not the case in animals, it would be cruel to.
punish them in order to prevent certain actions.
If a dog who is hungry be punished for. having,
eate, do we not often observe that. he will. leave.
the food presented to him? And is it not the.same.
with man?, Man has a great number of faculties,
but are they always active and irresistible? We.
can walk, dance, sing, but are we forced-to do so?»
Who does not feel within himself, that he some-
times wishes for something, or inclines to perform,
some action, while he combats this inclination by.
4


FATALISM,. ; 101


other motives? Hence it is indubitable that the
actions neither in animals nor in man are irrésisti-
ble. The muscular system and the moving powers
are given and innate, but we are not forced to
move our limbs incessantly. And in the same way
we shail see, that the greatest number of our facul-
ties are subordinate to the will.

It is true that the faculties of the will, and the
motives which determine the will, are given and
innate. This kind of fatalism must be admitted not
only in man, but even in God; for perfection and all
good powers are inherent in the nature of God. He
cannot wish for evil. So also the superior faculties
of man, called the divine part of his nature, must
desire the real good of man: Hence a certain
fatalism has its foundation in nature; and therefore
the philosophers of China, Hindostan, Greece, the
eastern and western Christians, and the followers
of Mahomet, have blended a certain fatalism with
their religious opinions. Indeed, it cannot be
dangerotts to teach such a fatalism in as far as it
exists ; for Christ, his apostles, and the fathers of
the church have done so. A proverb of Solomon
was, “ The Lord gives wisdom ;”—Christ said, “ The
tree is known by its fruit ;” *—‘* O generation of
vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things?
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh.” +—St. Paul says, “ And we know that all
things work together for good to them that love God,
to them who are the called according to his purpose.


* Matt. xii. 33. + Matt, xii. 34.


102 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate
to be conformed to the image of his Son; that he
might be the first-born among many brethren.
Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also
called : and whom he called, them he also justified :
and whom he justified, them he also glorified.” *—
The same: ‘ Who maketh thee to differ from
another? and what hast thou that thou didst not
receive?’ + St. Augustine taught openly and dis-
tinctly our dependance on God, and he commanded
to preach this truth. ** As no one,” says he, “ can
give to himself his life, so nobody can give to
himself understanding.’t He calls gifts of God,
all good qualities, as the fear of God, charity, faith,
obedience, justice, veracity—He says,§ that God
has not distributed in an equal manner noble sen-
timents any more than temporal good, as health,
strength, riches, honours, the gifts of arts and
sciences. It is then positive that the faculties are
innate; but we must also say with St. Augustine, ||
God in giving the power does not inflict the ne-
gessity. I now continue to investigate the know-
ledge of mankind; nor need I fear that the innate-
ness -of the faculties can produce irresistibility in
our actions, or: in general that any physical truth
is dangerous. We admit one sole Creator, who cer-
tainly has rendered consistent all physical and moral
truth. 3


* Rom. viii, 28—30. + 1 Cor. iv. 7.


t Lib. de Fide, ¢: 1: § Lib. de Coreptione et Gratia.
|| Lib. de Litera et Spiritu. c. 31. |


CHAPTER If.


THE MANIFESTATIONS OF ALL FACULTIES OF THE MIND
| DEPEND ON ORGANIC CONDITIONS. .


'THERE is no doubt that the functions of auto-
matic life depend on organization, because they
absolutely are results of it. It is also allowed in
respect to a great number of the functions of ani-
mal life, that they cannot take place without or-
ganization, voluntary motion for instance, and the
five external senses, We maintain, that the mani-
festations of every moral sentiment and every in-
tellectual faculty depend on the organization. But
in saying, that the manifestations of the moral sen-
timents and intellectual faculties depend on. the
organization, we do not assert that the faculties
are the result of the organization. We never
venture beyond experience. We only consider the
faculties of the mind or understanding, in as far as
they become apparent to us by the organization.
We neither deny nor affirm any thing which cannot
be verified by experiment. We neither make re-
searches upon the dead body nor upon the soul
alone, but upon man as he appears in life. We
never question what the moral and intellectual fa-
culties may be in themselves. We do not attempt


104 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


to explain how the body and soul are joined to-
gether and exercise a mutual influence. We do not
examine what the soul can do without the body.
Souls may be united to bodies at the moment of
conception or afterwards ; they may be different in
all individuals, or of the same kind in every one;
they may be emanations from God, or something
else. Whatever metaphysicians and _ theologians
may decide in respect to all these points, our asser-
tion, that the manifestations of all the faculties of
the mind depend, in this life, on the organization,
cannot be shaken. Let us now consider the proofs
of this second principle of psychology.


DIFFERENCE OF THE SEXES.


The manifestations of the faculties of the mind
are modified in both sexes. Some faculties are
more energetic in men, othersin women. Do the
souls of women therefore differ from those of men,
or is it more probable, that the manifestations of
the faculties are modified because the organs or
instruments vary? Malebranche* deduces the dif-
ferent manner of thinking and feeling in men and
women from the delicacy of the cerebral. fibres.
According to our doctrine of the brain, certain
parts of the brain are more developed in men,
others more in women; and in that way is the
difference of the manitestations of their faculties


*.T. I, Sme, Edit, p. 155


INDIVIDUALITY OF EVERY PERSON. 105


perfectly explicable. There are doubtless a great
number of exceptions, so that the intellectual fa-
culties of some women are like those of men, and
wice versd. ‘This idea will be perfectly understood
after I have demonstrated that the manifestations
of every faculty depend on some particular organi-
zation, and that they are more energetic in pro-
portion to the size of the respective organs. It
follows. that the difference of the manifestations in
men and women depends on the organization, either
of the whole body or of its particular parts. »

In respect to the heads of women, it must be
observed that the head of the Venus de Medici is
too small, and that such a head is only compatible
wath imbecility. The head of a gladiator would as
little suit this figure as the head of an idiot. In-
tellectual gifts certainly heighten and adorn the
charms of a beautiful figure, consequently the fairest
woman ought to have a head, which admits at
least the manifestations of the intellectual faculties.


INDIVIDUALITY OF EVERY PERSON.


The manifestations of the faculties of the mind
and understanding are modified in every individual.
Now is it not probable. that the soul of each indi-
vidual differs:—On, the contrary, it is said that all
mankind has descended from the same. original
parents; and all the modifications of our faculties
are easily explained by the difference: of their re-
spective organs. All animals of the same species;
and all men, have essentially the same corporeal


106 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


parts. There is only some difference of proportion
and developement in the different parts of the or-
ganization. These differences of the organs then
produce differences in the manifestations of the re-
spective faculties.


AGES.


The manifestations of the faculties are modified
in different ages. The soul cannot change, but the
organization—the instruments of the soul change.
This law exists in respect to automatic and animal
life. Certain faculties manifest themselves earlier,
others later, according to the developement of their
respective organs. ‘The nervous systems of the ab-
dominal and thoracic viscera are almost perfect,
while the brain seems to be only a pulpy mass.
The nerves of taste and smell are earlier developed
than those of hearing and seeing. Therefore their
respective functions manifest themselves earlier.
This is obvious principally in those animals which
are born blind and deaf.

It 1s the same with the moral sentiments and
intellectual faculties. Their manifestations are not
simultaneous. Several faculties manifest themselves
from infancy, others appear later: in the same
manner several faculties disappear earlier, and
others last till the end of life. Now as we see that
the manifestations are always according to the state
of the organic conditions, it is impossible to deny
that the manifestations of these faculties depend
on the organization.


RELATION OF THE FACULTIES. 107


RELATION BETWEEN THE ORGANIZATION AND THE
MANIFESTATION OF THE FACULTIES.


Moreover it can be demonstrated, that the mani- —
festations of the faculties exactly correspond to the
developement of the organs. The faculties of the
mind manifest themselves, increase and diminish,
in the same proportion as their respective organs
are developed, increase and decrease. In new-
born children, the brain shows scarcely any appear-
ance of fibres. ‘The fibres are sooner visible in the
posterior and middle lobes, than in the anterior.
The cerebellum increases very late in life. The
brain increases by degrees, and it attains its per-
fection between 80 and 40 years. At this time, it
seems to undergo very little change for several
years ; but in proportion as the individual advances
in age, the cerebral fibres become firm ; the whole
brain diminishes; the convolutions, which in their
maturity of age are plump, become flabby. Thus
_the brain undergoes the same organic changes as
every other corporeal part. :

According to this successive growth, stationary
state, and decrease of the brain, the relative func-
tions manifest themselves. In new-born children,
animal life is confined to spontaneous motions, to
the perception of hunger and thirst, to some ob-
scure sensation of pain and pleasure, and to the
external senses. Even these functions are very im-
perfect. By degrees inclinations and propensities
become more numerous and more energetic ; child-


108 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


ren acgiire some determinate ideas of external
objects ; they become acquainted with them. The
child advances to boyhood, adolescence and man-
hood. Then all these faculties manifest the greatest.
energy. By degrees they begin to decrease; and
in the decrepitude of old age, the sensations aré
blunted, the seutiments weak, and the intellectual
‘faculties almost or entirely suppressed. Now the
organization of the brain is innate; hence, as the
manifestations of the faculties of the mind and une
derstanding are proportionate to the organization,
it is evident that taey depend on it.

If the organs of the faculties do not follow the
natural order of inerease, if their developemeiit
be too rapid or too tardy; then the respective
functions undergo the same change in their mani- —
festations. In rickets, the intellectual faculties act
often with greater energy than the age of such
ehildren requires: ‘Then their brain 1s also extraor-
dinarily developed or irritable. It sometimes hap-
pens even without. this disease, that some part of
the brain is too soon unfolded; and then its fune-
tions. are equally premature. We have seen several
children from three to four years of age, whose ce-
rebellum had. acquired an extraordinary growth:
These individuals manifested also a particular de:
sire for sexual intercourse. There are similar in:
stances in respect to every particular faculty and
every respective organ.

On the other hand, several parts of the brain;
or the whole’ brain, sometimes: arrive very late at
the state of maturity. Such children retain their


RELATION OF THE FACULTIES. 109.


childishness, and are sometimes half stupid tilt
about 10 or 12 years of age, so that their parents
despair of their rationality. At this age the organs
sometimes: acquire. a particular developement, and
the. manifestations. of their faculties. are simultane-
ous. One of the. most distinguished physicians at
Berlin, when 10 years of age, could not yet make use
of: his organs. of speech. Gessner at the same age:
had improved so: little that: his preceptor declared
him. half an idiot; yet it is known how famous he
afterwards. became. |

If the. growth of the organs: be incomplete, the:
manifestations. of the faculties.are equally defective.
It. is. impossible. to. determine with exactness: the:
degree, of cerebral: developement, necessary to the:
regular. manjfestation of the. intellectual faculties ;.-
for, these manifestations depend not only on the:
size, of the organs, but also on their internal'con-
stitution. A.brain too. small, however, is-always ac-
companied with imbecility. Willis. described: the;
brain. of one who. was. an idiot from birth. It was:
not. more. than. half the. size of an ordinary brain.
Professor Bonn of Amsterdam. possesses. two such.
seulls, and the. brain of one who-was an idiot from:
birth, and who lived: till the age of 24 (Pl IV-
fig. 1). This individual was born at Amsterdam,
where. he was. shown for. money.as an African
savage. We.have. seen. several such heads-in difs
ferent collections. Pinel has one; Gall has-twe.

It. is to be observed that, in general, the heads-of:
idiots are either too. small or. too-large, increased?
In. size. by hydrocephalus, or water collected in-the-


110. PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


cavities of the brain. But in proportion as the
organization of the brain becomes more perfect,
the faculties of the mind manifest themselves more
distinctly. ‘The inclinations of such individuals are
subordinate ; their ideas become clearer ; and their
manners more significant. In respect to idiots it.:
must be observed, that imbecility sometimes is not
general, but only partial. Parents often, and even
physicians, cannot conceive how a child should be
declared an idiot, though he answers reasonably
and executes correctly several things relative to
household affairs. We saw at Hamburgh a young
man 16 years of age, the inferior parts of whose
brain were favourably developed, but whose fore-
head was scarcely an inch in height, and conse-
quently the improvement of the superior parts of
the brain was impeded. He had indeed enly the
functions of the inferior parts : he recollected names,
numbers, chronology and historical facts; he re-
peated them in a mechanical manner. But the
functions of the superior parts of the brain, as
comparison, reflection, judgment, sagacity, pene-
tration &c. were utterly wanting. Even reason-
able and very intelligent persons are sometimes
extremely ill provided with this or that particular
faculty. | | |
If the organs have acquired a particular develope-
ment, the faculties manifest themselves with par-
ticular energy. The history of all times, and the.
languages of all nations, denote great genius by an
expansion of the head (Pl. IV. fig. 2). Several
ancient artists have perfectly well imitated this


RELATION OF THE FACULTIES. 111


difference of heads. They gave to priests and phi-
losophers, for instance, a head quite different from
that of gladiators. But all modern artists are en-
tirely wrong in fancying that the head bears a cer-
tain proportion to the rest of the body, and that the
Apollo Belvidere ought to be considered the mo-
del of wisdom and of human perfection. ‘This beau-
tiful form would not agree with an idiot, but it 1s
quite insufficient for the faculties of a Socrates.
Had the ancient artists perfectly understood the
laws of the organization, they would not have
thought it necessary to hide the head of Pericles
with a helmet because it was disproportionate in
size with his body.

Children possess sometimes the same organic con-
stitution of the brain as their parents; and such
children manifest the moral and intellectual facul-
ties in the same degree. It is observed, that the
characteristic form of heads is often transmitted
from generation to generation ; and then the facul-
ties of the mind and understanding are propagated
in such families during as many centuries. It is an
acknowledged fact that children, who are like one
another or like their parents, manifest similar facul-
ties, as far as the difference of age and sex admits.
I have seen two twin-boys so like each other that it
was almost impossible to distinguish them. ‘Their
inclinations dnd talents presented also a striking and
astonishing similitude. ‘Two others, twin-sisters, are
very different: in one the muscular system is the
most developed, in the other the nervous. The.
former is of little understanding, whereas the second


B12 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


is endowed with strong intellectual faculties. It is
the same with animal as with automatic life. Dis-
positions to certain diseases: are propagated from
generation to generation ; as the disposition to gout,
consumption, deafness, dropsy &c. In the same
manner, certain propensities, sentiments, and intel-
lectual faculties, even certain inferior inclinations,
imbecility, and the disposition to mental diseases,
are transmitted from parents to children. It is
known, that musical talent is sometimes hereditary in
certain families, &c. _Gaubius relates, that a girl,
whose father had killed men in order to eat them,
and: who was separated from her father in her in-
fancy and carefully educated, committed’ the same
crime. Gaubius drew from: this fact the conse-
quence, that the faculties are propagated with the
organization. It would be of the highest importance
to know the laws according to which the different
dispositions and faculties are propagated from parents
to children; and why: the same parents occasionally
beget quite different children. But our knowledge,
in this respect, 1s very defective; and it’ is impossi-
ble to say any thing determinate without muitiply-
ing infinitely observations of this kind.

From all these considerations it results, that there
is a,relation: between the manifestations of the: fa-
culties and the organization; and hence the mani-
festations of the faculties must depend on the orga-
nization.

The state of watching, sleeping and dreaming,
proves .also, that the manifestations of the faculties
of the mind depend on the organization. Corporeal


EXERCISE. 113


organs alone can be fatigued and exhausted. Now
it is known that the operations of the soul, or of
the faculties of the mind, cannot continue inces-
santly with equal energy. Rest is necessary and un-
avoidable. This inactive state of the faculties of
the mind is sleep. During it, new forces are col-
lected; and. after awaking, its functions proceed
with new energy.

If single organs be excited by any stimulus what-
ever, and enter into action while other organs are
inactive, partial sensations and ideas, or dreams,
arise. The nature of these dreams is almost always
the result of certain material causes, and they are
conformable to the age and organic constitution of
the body. Men and women, endowed with a very
irritable nervous system, find, in their dreams, im-
pediments without end; they feel always pain and
anxiety. This relation between our dreams and or-
ganization, verified by an infinity of examples, evi-
dently proves that the manifestations of the facul-
ties of the mind and cndominnding: depend on the
organization.


EXERCISE.


Lhe possibility of evercising and training the facul-
ties of the mind, or education, proves also the de-
pendence of their manifestations on the organiza-
tion. For it is inconceivable how an immaterial
being can be exercised.


114 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


INFLUENCE OF THE PHYSICAL CONDITIONS.


All that disturbs, weakens, or excites the organi-
zation, chiefly that of the nervous system, changes |
also the manifestations of our faculties. It is a ge-
neral observation, that the organs are weakened if
their increase be too rapid; and therefore their
functions are less energetic. This is principally to
be observed at the climacterical years, or at the
periods of increase, which are very important to be
known in practical medicine. ‘The body does not
grow always in the same proportion. This happens,
in the same manner, in plants, animals, and man.
It is known that vegetables increase sensibly at two
periods; first in the spring, and secondly in the middle
of summer. ‘The growth of man is also stronger at
certain periods than at others. Now each sudden
increase weakens the organs, and consequently their
respective functions. This is the case in respect to
automatic and animal life. Girls who increase too
suddenly grow pale, and undergo chlorosis; young
men become consumptive &c. Such individuals,
during their periods of growth, are not fit to be
employed, or much to exercise their intellectual fa-
culties. Rest is necessary till the organs have ac-
quired a state of maturity. Then the faculties of
the mind again operate with great energy. Some-
times the organs are too soon developed or too
much exercised, and thence often results an in-
curable exhaustion: such early genius becomes quite
ordinary in men. I have already mentioned also


INFLUENCE OF THE PHYSICAL CONDITIONS. 115


that sometimes weak intellectual faculties, princi-
pally in children in whose heads water is collected,
become stronger, so that they afterwards show pe-
culiar energy. |

In grown-up men and animals, the organs are still
subjected to different degrees of excitement accord-
ing to the seasons, temperature, food, and princi-
pally according to particular laws of the organiza-
tion. Therefore we sce appear and disappear in
animals, at different periods, their instinctive la-
bours, their inclination or disposition to sing, to
build, to gather provisions, to live solitarily or in
society, to migrate &c. Itis the same in man: the
functions of his faculties do not always act with the
same energy. Who can mistake the influence of
periodical evacuations; for instance, of the catame-
nia, of hemorrhoides &c.; the influence of preg-
nancy, of digestion, of fasting, and of all that ex-
hausts the corporeal powers? Who can deny the in-
fluence of diseases upon the manifestations of our
faculties; that of external and internal excitement,
of agreeable sensations, of fine weather, of music,
of dancing, and similar circumstances? Now all
these influences act only upon the organization,
consequently the manifestations of the faculties de-
pend on the organization.

Sometimes very inert and defective. manifestations
grow very active when excited by external or inter-
nal causes. Haller relates, that an idiot, who was
wounded on the head, manifested great understand-
ing while the wound lasted; but as soon as the
wound was cured fell into his former stupidity. He

12


116 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


speaks of another patient whose eye was inflamed,
and who saw perfectly well at night during the time
of his sickness. Father Mabillon, in his infancy,
showed very limited faculties. He got a blow on
his head, and from that moment he manifested ta-
lents. We have been told, that a boy at fourteen years
of age seemed incapable of improvement: he fell down
a staircase and got several wounds in his head; and af-
ter that period he excelled in his studies. We have seen
a girl nine years of age, who had received a blow on
the right side of her head, and who afterwards com-
plained of pain on the opposite side: by degrees
her right arm grew weak and almost paralytic; her
inferior jawbone trembled incessantly ; she was often
seized with convulsions; but her intellectual facul-
ties had acquired a high degree of energy and perfec-
tion, and her manner of behaviour was very imposing.
There are many facts of this kind. I shall men-
tion only one other case, inserted in the Edinburgh
Review,* and extracted from a description of the Re-
treat, an institution near York for insane persons of
the society of friends, by Samuel Tuke: “ A young
woman, who was employed as a domestic servant by
the father of the relater when he was a boy, became —
insane, and at length sunk into 4a state of perfect
idiocy. In this condition she remained for many
years, when she was attacked by a typhus fever ;
and my friend, having then practised some time, at-
tended her. He was surprised to observe as the
fever advanced a developement of the mental powers.


* N° XLV, April, 1814, p. 197.


INFLUENCE OF THE PHYSICAL CONDITIONS. 117


During that period of the fever when others are
delirious, this patient was entirely rational. She re-
cognized, in the face of her medical attendant, the
son of her old master, whom she had known so
many years before, and she related many circum.
stances respecting his family and others, which had
happened to herself in her earlier days. But, alas!
it was only the gleam of reason: as the fever abated,
clouds again enveloped the mind; she sunk into her
former deplorable state, and remained in it until
her death, which happened a few years afterwards.”
These facts are positive, and there cannot be any
doubt that similar causes change surprisingly the
exercise of the faculties of the mind; yet they act
immediately upon the organization alone. Hence
we are obliged to conclude, that when these physi-
cal and organic causes produce the manifestations of
the most impudent lasciviousness, the most arrogant —
pride, a complete despair which rejects all consola-
tion &c. the cause of these manifestations depends
on the organization.

Finally, if it be possible to demonstrate the re-
spective organs of the propensities, sentiments, and
intellectual faculties, it will be impossible to deny
that their manifestations depend on the organiza-
tion.

The essential part of this second principle has been
known from the remotest antiquity. A great num-
ber of ancient and modern, profane and religious,
writers taught it. Plato considered the body as a
prison for the soul. Seneca, (Epist. 66,) ‘* Corpus
hoc animi poena ac pondus est.” Hippocrates and


118 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


Galen, and all physicians and physiologists, however
different their opinions, make all manifestations of
the soul depend on the organization—the intellec-
tual faculties on the brain; and the affections, pas-
sions, and moral sentiments on the temperaments.
Boerhaave and Van Swieten attribute to the brain
not only all ideas with their combinations, and all
reasoning, but also the moral character and the es-
sence of man. The Cartesians, by their doctrine of
the tracks which they admit in the brain, acknow-
ledge the influence of the brain on the intellectual
faculties. Malebranche explains the difference of
the faculties of both sexes, the various kinds and par-
ticular tastes of different nations and individuals, by
the firmness and softness, dryness and moisture, of
the cerebral fibres, and he remarks that our time
cannot be better employed than in investigating the
material causes of human phenomena. Charles
Bonnet said, that mankind can only be known and
penetrated by their physical nature. St. Thomas *
said: “ Though the spirit is no corporeal faculty, the
spiritual functions, as memory, imagination, cannot
take place without the bodily organization. There-
fore if the organs cannot exercise their activity, the
spiritual functions are disturbed. For the same rea-
son a happy organization of the human body is always
accompanied with excellent intellectual faculties.”
St. Gregorius Nyssenust compared the body of
man to a musical instrument. ‘“ It sometimes hap-
_ pens,” says he, “ that excellent musicians cannot


* Contra Gentiles, c. 84. 12, 9.. + De Hominis Officio, e. 12.


“


MATERIALISM. 119


show their talent because their instrument is in a
bad state. It is the same with the functions of the
soul. ‘They are disturbed or suspended according
to the changes which take place in the organs; for
it is the nature of the spirit that it cannot exercise
conveniently its functions but by sound organs.”
St. Paul: “ O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?” * and
*¢ When I was a child, I spake as a child, I under-
stood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I
became a man, I put away childish things.” tT St. Au-
gustine,t St. Cyprian,§ St. Ambrose, || St. Chry-
sostom, 4 usebius, and others, consider the body
as the instrument of the soul, and teach distinctly
that the soul is regulated according to the state of
the body. Consequently all natural philosophers
and physicians, all the fathers of the church, and
even the apostles, agree with us in respect to the
second principle, that all the manifestations of the
mind depend on the organization.


MATERIALISM.


After these considerations it is easy to answer the
following objection made against the physiology of
the brain. It is said that, if the manifestations of
the faculties of the mind depend on the organiza-
tion, materialism will thereby be established. It


* Romans vii. 24. 7 1 Cor. xu. if. t De Lib. Arb.
§ De Operibus Christi. || De Off.
q Hom. II. II. super Epist, ad Heb,


120 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


must however be remembered that the expression
materialism has two different significations. One
class of materialists maintain, that there is no Crea-
tor; that matter has always existed; and that all
phenomena in the world are the effects of matter.
The ancient Roman church attached this significa-
tion to the expression materialism. It is still often
the case at the present day, that materialism is em-
ployed as synonymous with atheism. But our asser-
tion, that the manifestations of the mind depend on
the organization, is far from this sort of materialism.
A natural philosopher, who inquires into the laws of
phenomena, cannot be an atheist. He cannot con-
sider the admirable and wise concatenation of all
nature, the mutual relation between all things, as
without a primitive cause. He is obliged, accord-
ing to the laws of thinking, to admit such a cause,
a supreme understanding, an all-wise Creator.
Another kind of materialism is taught by those
who admit a Creator, but who maintain that man
does not consist of two different substances—of the
body and soul; and that all the phenomena, ordina-
rily, attributed to the soul, result only from the
forms and mixture of matter. The soul, in their
opinion, is a fluid of extreme tenuity, distributed
over all things, and enlivening the whole organiza-
tion. Our doctrine of the physiology of the brain
and nervous system has nothing in common with
this opinion. We never endeavour to explain final
causes. We have always declared, and we every
where declare, that we do not make any inquiry
into the nature of the soul, nor into that of the


MATERIALISM. 12]


body. Weare led only by experiment. Now we
see that every faculty manifests itself by means of
the organization. But when our antagonists main-
tain that we are materialists, they ought to prove
that we teach that there is nothing but matter. The
falsehood of this accusation is very obvious by the
following considerations. ‘The expression organ de-
signs an instrument by means of which some faculty
manifests itself; the muscles, for example, are the
organs of voluntary motion, but the muscles are
not the moving power. ‘The eyes are the organ of
sight, but the eyes are not the faculty of seeing.
We separate the faculties of the soul or of the mind
from the organs, and we consider the cerebral parts
as the organs of these faculties, viz. as the instru-
ments by means of which these faculties manifest
themselves. Even the adversaries of our doctrine
must so far admit the dependence of the soul on the
body. Professor Walter, of Berlin, imputed mate-
rialism to our doctrine; but in the same passage he
says, In children the brain is pulpy, in decrepid old
age it is hard. It must have a certain degree of
firmness and elasticity, that the soul may manifest
itself with great splendour. But this consideration
does not lead to materialism, it shows only the mu-
tual union of the body and soul.

It results from what I have just said of our man-
ner of teaching, that we are no more materialists
than our predecessors, whether anatomists, physio-
logists, physicians, or than a great number of phi-
losophers and moralists, viz. all those who admit
the dependance of the soul on the body. For it


1292 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


is essentially the same, whether the faculties of
the mind depend on the whole body, or on the
whole brain, or whether every special faculty de-
pends on a particular part of the brain: the mani-
festations of the faculties depend always on the or-
ganization. |

It is also objected, that the faculties of the mind
cannot depend on the organization, because man
in his healthy state does not feel their dependance.
Man does not feel the performance of digestion,
circulation, nutrition in general, and of the differ-
ent secretions; but do not these functions depend
on the organization? We think with Herder, that
the vulgar understanding is to be pardoned, when
it considers reason, or the rationality of man, as
an absolute faculty which is independent of the
senses and of all organization. But the natural
philosopher, who knows human nature by experi-
ments, and who observes the scale of perfectibility
from the lowest animal to man, is incessantly warned
and informed of the influence of the organization.
Every thing shows him that man is not the creator
of his intellectual faculties, any more than of his
organic life. Thus, though we do not feel the
functions of the faculties of the mind, their de-
pendance on the organization is not less certain.

There are persons who maintain that, in the
highest degree of magnetic influence, the mani-
festations of the soul are independent of the or-
ganization. If this be the case they ought to de-
monstrate that, in this state, the body has no in-
fluence upon the soul, and that the soul is utterly


MATERIALISM. 123


separated from the body. In this supposition, why
do not these persons produce the same phenomena
when they act upon children, fools, and idiots, as
when they magnetise very weak, delicate, and ir-
ritable individuals? Why do magnetised persons
know only what is known? Why do they not make
any discovery in anatomy, physiology, medicine, or
in any art or science? While there are in these sub-
jects so many points to be elucidated, why cannot
these persons make them out? Hence, as long as
all the phenomena produced by magnetism denote
only a greater irritation and a greater energy of the
faculties, and not at all a different state, we must
conclude that the soul manifests itself only by the
organization. We do not deny the existence of some
animal fluid, called magnetic fluid; on the contrary
we admit it. This fluid may have the greatest
affinity to the nervous system: its accumulation
may increase the activity of the nerves, so that
magnetised persons may have more acute feelings
and judge better, than they can do in the ordinary
state of irritation. But I wish to know if it be
possible to communicate this fluid by the will, and
what phenomena this fluid can produce? I fancy
that this fluid only excites the different organs, and
produces phenomena relative to every organ: con-
sequently magnetism is only a state of particular
excitement.


124 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


RECAPITULATION.


According to our second principle, all mani-
festations of the faculties of the mind depend on
the organization. In order to support this assertion,
we demonstrate that the manifestations are different
according to the sexes;—that they are modified in
every individual ;—and that they do neither appear
nor disappear simultaneously :—besides, we show
that sometimes one faculty manifests itself weakly,
whilst the other faculties are very energetic, and
that sometimes one faculty is very energetic, whilst
the others are very defective. Moreover, we state
that children inherit the moral character and intel-
lectual faculties of their parents, when similar or-
ganization is propagated from parents to children.
We prove also our assertion by the state of watch-
ing, sleeping, and dreaming; by the possibility of
education ; and by the observation that every thing
that changes, weakens, or excites the organization,
especially of the nervous system, changes the ma-
nifestations of animal life. Vinally, the proportion
between the manifestations and the respective
organs does not permit us to doubt of the depen-
dance of the moral sentiments and intellectual fa-_
culties on the organization.


125


CHAPTER III.


ON WHAT ORGANIZATION DO THE MANIFESTATIONS OF
ANIMAL LIFE DEPEND.


AFTER having demonstrated that the manifes-
tations of the moral sentiments and intellectual fa-
culties depend on the organization, it 1s important
to determine on what organization animal life, in
general, and its particular functions depend. Before
we enter into this consideration, let us examine the
difference between the expressions, seat and organ
of the soul. IF ormerly the seat of the soul, and the
mutual influence of the soul upon the body, and
of the body upon the soul, were much spoken of;
but these two problems seem to us to be beyond
the reach of natural philosophy. It is absurd to
assign a material seat to an immaterial being; and
the action of an immaterial being upon the body,
and that of the body upon an immaterial being, are
also quite inconceivable. I shall mention only a
few of the opinions which have been entertained
on this matter. Physiologists and philosophers ac-
cording to their opinions respecting the soul, assign
to it a different seat, and a different manner of acting
upon the body. From ancient times down to the
present day, the moral sentiments have been at-


tributed to the different viscera. ‘The sentient soul,
| 4


126 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


or intellectual faculties, on the contrary, was placed
in the brain according to Pythagoras, Plato, Galen,
Haller, and the greater number of physiologists.
Aristotle placed the sentient soul in the heart. Des
Cartes and his followers confined it to the pineal
gland (Pl. Il. fig. 2. <). Erasistratus placed it in the
cerebral membranes; Herophilus in the cavities of
the brain; Serveto in the aqueduct of Sylvius
(Pl. Il. fig. 2. 9); Van Helmont in the stomach ;
Wharton and Schellhammer in the commencement
of the spinal marrow; Drelincourt and others in
the cerebellum (Pl. I. fig. 2.1.); Bontekoe, La-
neisi, and ‘Lapeyronie in the great commissure of
the brain ; Willis in the corpora striata; Vieussens in
the centrum ovale of the medullary substance 3;
Soemmering in the vapour of the cerebral cavi-
ties &c. But it is said that each of these parts has
been found wounded, diseased, and entirely dis-
organised without any alteration of the intellectual
faculties. Hence it results, say they, that these parts
are not the seat.of the soul.

In order to explain the mutual influence of the
soul and body on each other, the most extravagant
opinions have been formed. Some authors, with
Malebranche, consider God as the immediate agent ©
between the soul and the body:—others on the
contrary deny the existence of two different sub-
stances, and consider all faculties as properties of
the body which are propagated with the semen, and
produced by the developement of the organization. ©
A third class of writers endeavours to find out
means to reconcile all the- differences of opinion,


MANIFESTATIONS OF ANIMAL LIFE. oT


by the intervention of some medium or middle sub-
stance. Hence the great number of vapours, fluids,
pneumata, and vital spirits: hence the introduction
of caloric, and the electric, galvanic, and magnetic,
fluids. We shall always adhere to our first declara-
tion—that we make no inquiries into the nature of
the soul; we observe only its manifestations, and
the organic conditions by means of which its ma-
nifestations take place; and in speaking of organs,
‘we speak only of the organic parts by means of
which the faculties of the soul become apparent.

. We have now to examine if animal life depend
on the whole body, or on one particular system: on
the nervous system for example; or only on one
part of this system, for instance, on the brain.
Animal life begins with consciousness or the power
of perceiving any impression, and its action I call
sensation. We never confound the functions of
irritability with those of sensibility. As long as
the functions take place without consciousness, we
consider them as the effect of the organization or
of irritability, as digestion, circulation, and nu-
trition. No motion is spontaneous or the result of
sensibility, but that which is accompanied with
consciousness. The same organ may be moved
either by irritability or by sensibility. It seems
hewever to me that a particular arrangement of
this organ renders possible the manifestations of
consciousness, and another organic peculiarity pro-
duces the phenomena of irritability. ‘This idea
will afterwards be more fully explained. Thus it

2


128 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


is to be examined wheiler the whole body, or the
brain alone, is the organ of consciousness.

Many physiologists and philosophers speak a great
deal of unity, both in inorganic and organic na-
ture; they maintain that the whole contributes to
the performance of every, function, and that no
part in an isolated state can perform its function.
This manner of speaking is not sufficiently distinct.
It is true that no part can perform its function if
its organization be not in a healthy and perfect
state: thus the organization of the eyes must be
perfect, otherwise the eyes cannot see, &c. Con-
sequently all parts which contribute to the repro-
duction and nutrition of the organs contribute
mediately to the function of every part; in this
manner, the stomach and alimentary canal contri-
bute to the functions of the brain, but peculiar
functions are performed by peculiar organizations.
Now it is evident that all those parts which are in-
sensible cannot be considered as organs of sen-
sibility. It is even generally admitted that the
functions of animal life are confined to the nervous
system. It is only undecided, whether the whole
nervous system, or only one part of it, is the organ
of animal life.

I have said that animal life begins with conscious-
ness. I now con.equently ask, Is consciousness -
manifested by the whole nervous system, or is it
confined to certain parts of that system? The
opinions of physiologists are different in this re-
spect. The greatest number consider the brain


MANIFESTATIONS OF ANIMAL LIFE. 129


without the spinal marrow and the nerves of the
five external senses, as the organ of all conscious-
ness. ‘They quote the following proofs: a nerve
that is divided can no more produce either sensa-
tion or voluntary motion, however the nerve may
be irritated. Hence, the sentient principle does
not reside in the nerves, or at the place where the
impression is made, but only in the brain. If the
origin or continuation of any nerve be compressed
or tied, its function is suspended, but after the pres-
sure is removed, sensation returns. Hence, the
consciousness of all impressions must reside in the
brain. When the brain is compressed by any fluid,
by a long excrescence, by turgid blood-vessels, or
bya violent concussion, all sensation is inte rru pted
and it is restored in proportion as the compression
is removed. Sometimes in convulsive fits, pains
are felt as if they were ascending along the nerves
to the brain; and such pains are often cured by divid-
ing or by tying the nerves. After the amputation
of a limb, some individuals, though perfectly cured,
fancy that they feel pains in the amputated limb.
Thus this pain cannot have its seat but in the
brain. Finally, all volition comes from the brain:
consequently the first cause of all voluntary motion
resides in it. The opinion that all consciousness
resides in the brain was formerly supported by the
assertion that all nerves are continuations of the
brain, and that they have a central point init. But
this proof can no longer be admitted, because we
have demonstrated that neither the nerves of the
external senses, nor the spinal marrow, are prolonga-
K


130 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS. -SYSTEM~.


tions of the ccrebral mass, nor are the nervous
fibres concentrated in one spot; but that every
nervous system has its own origin, and that the
different nervous systems are only brought into
communication by nervous branches, and exert
thereby a mutual influence.


RECOLLECTION.


On the other hand, arguments of different de-
grees of validity may be employed, in order to
prove that the brain is not exclusively the organ
of sensation and voluntary motion. Dumas thinks
that those who have lost a limb, and imagine that
they feel pain in it, do so by their power of re-
collection. If that be the case, Dumas ought to
prove that the power of recollection is different
from that of consciousness, before he can conclude
that that power may exist in the brain, and con-
sciousness everywhere. Besides, why is it absolutely
impossible to produce an equal degree of other agree-
able or disagreeable sensations by means of the
power of recollection? Moreover, after amputa-
tions, why are, pains particularly excited by wet,
stormy, and changeable weather? Hence, the
assertion of Dumas is far from refuting the positive
proofs, that all consciousness belongs to the brain.


THE BRAIN IS INSENSIBLE.


The same physiologist thinks that the brain can
neither be the seat nor the organ of sensation, be-


THE BRAIN IS INSENSIBLE. 131


cause it is insensible. It is true that the convolu-
tions of the brain, when wounded or mutilated, do
not produce the same pains as the sensitive nerves
do when they are injured. Yet in certain diseases
the brain becomes very painful, as is the case with
different other parts which do not manifest any sen-
sibility in the healthy state. Besides, nobody says
that the pains which we feel in our limbs exist in
the brain.. This organ has only the consciousness
of them. ‘The pains exist in the part where the im-
pressions are made. Morcover, we must consider
that the sensations of different parts are quite dif-
ferent, and that although one part does not produce
the sensations of another it cannot on that account
be called insensible. ‘The nerves of hunger and
thirst cannot perceive the sensations of pride or
compassion; the olfactory nerve cannot perceive
the impressions of light &c. Every particular sen-
sation is manifested by means of a particular organi-
zation. Now thinking and willing certainly are sen-
sations, and nobody can or will deny that these
two functions are confined to the brain: conse-
quently it can only be said, that the brain does not
manifest all sorts of sensation. The assertion how-
ever, that all consciousness resides in the brain, is
not yet refuted. It may still be maintained that
the nerves produce the impressions, but that the
brain perceives them and alone has consciousness.


K 2


132 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


MONSTERS.


It is also objected that sometimes acephali, who
are entirely destitute of cerebral substance, live,
suck, and make various motions ; consequently that
the brain is not the only organ of sensation. In
this objection, automatic motions are evidently con-
founded with consciousness. ‘This is also the case,
when they say, with Gautier, that a beheaded cock
struggles in order to fight and to defend itself. All
similar phenomena, which may be observed in in-
sects, fishes, reptiles, birds, quadrupeds, and even
in man, are the result of irritability without con-
sciousness. Such motions seem to be accompanied
with sensation and will, only because, according to
the organic structure and mechanical arrangement
of the parts, the motions take place in the same
way as they ought to do if they were determined
by the will and with consciousness. There are many
phenomena which happen according to determinate
laws without consciousness, reflection, or will. In
the same way, the motions of the muscles are de-
termined, whether they are the effect of the will or
of any other irritation. All automatic motions take
place without brain, and neither the energy nor the
length of automatic life is in proportion to the quan-
tity of brain. During sleep and before birth, auto-
matic motions existed in sufficient perfection, while
the animal functions were inactive.

It is even to be determined whether crying and
sucking are always accompanied with consciousness,


MUTILATIONS. 133


or whether these phenomena may belong to automa-
tic life. It seems to me that they are sometimes
automatic and at other times animal, just as motions
in general are. Consequently it must be considered
that certain parts of the body can produce only au-
tomatic motions; and that other parts are subjected
to the will, but that they are capable of producing
motions which are not the result of the will, but
which are nevertheless conformable to the structure
of the muscles. |


MUTILATIONS.


Duverney is said to have taken out all the brain
from some pigeons, which, however, continued to
perform all their animal functions. Similar experi-
ments made upon turtles are mentioned by several
authors, but their knowledge of these facts is de-
rived merely from hearsay. It is evident to us that
the whole brain cannot be taken off without de-
stroying at the same time the nerves of the external
senses and the animals themselves. Besides it is
generally known that sportsmen kill wounded birds
by driving a feather into their neck. In order to be
absolutely certain, I have made several experiments.
I cut off the greatest portion of the hemispheres of
the brain of some hens and pigeons, even the great
commissure, and down to the lateral or rather the
great ventricles ;'and these animals manifested dis-
tinctly their sense of seeing and hearing. ‘They did
not take the food presented to them, but they swal-
lowed bread and seed introduced into their bills.


134 PHYSIOLOGY.OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


Rabbits, mutilated in the same manner, walked,
saw and heard; they even took food spontaneously.
Consequently it is certain that the destruction of all
the superior parts of the brain does not destroy the
functions of the five senses and tbe muscular mo-
tion. But it is impossible to take out all the cere-
bral mass without killing the animals. As soon as
the corpora striata and optic thalami were wounded,
convulsions and death succeeded. Consequently
we declare the experiments made by Duverney en-
tirely false. All that can be concluded from these
experiments is, that the whole brain is not neces-
sary to the functions of the five senses; but it can-
not be concluded that no cerebral part is absolutely _
necessary to the functions of the five senses, because
it is impossible to separate the brain from the nerves
of the five senses without killing the animals.

There are other arguments which give room to
suppose that the external senses have perception
and a kind of judgment. There are animals to
which it is impossible to refuse feeling and taste,
although they present nothing which may be com-
pared to any portion of the brain. Every nerve
destined to a particular function has its own origin,
its gradual enlargement, its proper expansion, its
particular form, and it makes a whole in respect to
its structure: why relatively to its function should
it not make a whole? The functions of the nervous
systems of the five senses are in proportion to the
perfection of their particular organization, and by
no means to the quantity of the brain. Several in-
sects, notwithstanding the extreme smallness of their

2


MUTILATIONS. 135


brain, are endowed with an extraordinary fine feel-
ing, taste, and smell. Eagles, with their little brain,
see much better than dogs whose brain is much
larger; and the smell of dogs is more acute than
that of man, whose brain is very considerable. It has
been observed that when not only the external appa-
ratus, but also the internal organization of a sense
is destroyed, all ideas which belong to this sense are
lost or annihilated. All these arguments however
are not sufficient to explain why, in perfect animals,
every nerve which is pressed, tied, or divided, loses
sensation. Perhaps, in perfect animals, the inferior
parts of the brain are as necessary to consciousness
as the heart is necessary to the circulation of the
blood; while in lower animals a kind of obscure
consciousness exists independent of the brain, as in
them, and even in plants, circulation takes place
without the heart.

After every consideration it remains undecided,
at least in perfect animals, in what respect the brain
is necessary to the passive consciousness of the ex-
ternal senses. But it is certain that the will, and
consequently the voluntary motions and reflection,
depend on the brain; for no phenomena of this
kind take place without the brain. Thus it is ne-
cessary to distinguish the regular motions into those
which are regular but only automatic, and into t
which are both regular and voluntary; the latter
depend on the actions of the brain, the former take
place without it. In the same manner it is neces-


1. ob
NOs?


sary to distinguish the functions of the five exiernal
senses. It is undecided whether their passive con.


136 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


sciousness takes place by means of their respective
nerves alone, or by the assistance also of the brain ;
but it is certain that their active consciousness, ac-
companied with attention, reflection, and will, is
possible only by the operation of the brain. After
having considered the organization on which con-
sciousness in general may depend, and that on
which the voluntary motions depend, we shall in-
vestigate the organization on which depend the ma-
nifestations of the various feelings and the intellec-
tual faculties. This proposition is doubtless of the
highest importance to anthropology. |


SECTION I.


Do the Manifestations of the various Feelings, and
Intellectual Faculties, depend on the whole Body ?


THE WHOLE BODY.


Neither the size nor the internal constitution of
the whole body determines the manifestations of the —
various feelings and intellectual faculties. I have
already mentioned that the functions of every part
depend on the healthy state of its organization, and
that, in as far as the organization of every part de-
pends on others, these mediately contribute to the
possibility of the functions of every part. ‘The
function of seeing depends mediately on the
stomach, heart, lungs &c. because the organization
of the eyes depends on digestion, circulation and .


SHAPE AND SIZE.—TEMPERAMENTS. 137


respiration ; but every well-organised part performs
its proper function by itself. In this sense we main-
tain that the different feelings, and intellectual fa-
culties, do not depend on the whole body.


SHAPE AND SIZE.


Neither do they depend on the size and shape of
the whole body in respect to different species of
animals, nor in respect to different individuals of
the same species. Otherwise whales, elephants,
rhinoceroses, horses &c. ought to have more under-
standing than man, and an ox or horse more than
an oran-outang &c. It is certainly not possible to
measure the faculties of the mind and understand-
ing in men according to their size and shape. In
general little persons have more understanding than
tall men. In one word, daily observation is against
the opinion that the manifestations of the feelings
and intellectual faculties depend on the shape and
size of the whole body.


TEMPERAMENTS.


Among ancient and modern authors, the opinion
is more common that the faculties of the mind de-
pend on the organic constitution of the whole body,
that is, on the temperaments. It is very easy to re-
fute this error. What are these temperaments of ani-
mals from which their faculties may be derived?
Why are all animals neglected in this doctrine of


temperaments? How can all their faculties be ex-


138 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


plained by the small number of temperaments and
their combinations? Idiots have certainly some tem-
perament, why do they not exert proportionate facul-
ties? It is conceivable how a different organic con-
stitution may produce a different degree of activity
of the faculties in general; but it is inconceivable
how the same temperament can give great energy
and strong passions for some things, while the mani-
festations of other faculties are very weak. It is
obvious that there is no proportion between the
vital functions and the faculties of the mind. A
man may be well nourished and active, and yet at
the same time either stupid or intelligent. ‘There is
no fixed and constant proportion between tempera-
ments and the determinate faculties of the mind and
understanding. ‘There are many persons who have
a melancholy look, but who are not at all melan-
choly. We find sanguine and bilious individuals,
who are intellectual or stupid, meek or impetuous 3
we may observe phlegmatics of a bold, quarrelsome,
and imperious character. In short, the doctrine of
the temperaments, as applied to the indication of
determinate faculties, is not more sure, nor better
founded, than divination by the hands, feet, skin,
hair, ears, and similar physiognomieal signs. I shall
afterwards speak of these considerations. In many
diseases, the humours and organic constitution of
the body are much altered, but the faculties of the
mind and understanding do nat suffer a propor-
tionate alteration.

We do not however deny the influence of sie or-
ganic constitution upon the manifestations of the


VISCERA. 139


moral feelings and intellectual faculties; but the
deriving of determinate faculties and positive pro-
pensities from the temperaments is quite different
from saying, that the manifestations of the faculties
of the mind are modified by the organic constitu-
tion of the body in general, and of the respective
organs in particular. There are beyond doubt some
individuals more irritable, more energetic, and more
fit to be exercised than others. But the organic
constitution of the whole body does not constitute
the condition by which the manifestations of the
moral sentiments and intellectual faculties are
possible.


SECTION II.


Do the Moral Feelings depend on the Viscera of the
Abdomen and Thorax ?


VISCERA.


The greater number of physiologists, physicians,
and philosophers, derive the intellectual faculties
from the brain, and the moral sentiments from dif:
ferent viscera, or from the nervous plexuses and
-ganglions of the great sympathetic nerve ; that is,
from the nerves of the abdomen and thorax: but
comparative anatomy and physiology entirely con-
tradict this opinion. There are animals, which are
endowed with faculties attributed to certain bowels
or viscera, without having these viscera. Insects,
for instance, become angry, and have neither liver


140 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


nor bile. Oxen, horses, hogs &@. have a great
number of viscera in structure analogous to -those
of man, but these animals want many faculties
which are attributed to these viscera, and with
which man is endowed. There is no proportion
either in animals or in man between the size of the
viscera, or even of the ganglions, and the determi-
nate moral sentiments. Several viscera, nervous
plexuses, and ganglions, are greater in animals than
in man, and yet the qualities attributed to them
are beyond doubt more energetic in man. There is
no proportion between the number of viscera and
moral sentiments in different animals. The four-
footed animals have viscera and nervous ganglions
very similar to one another, as the dog, wild boar,
ox, horse, sheep, beaver, hare, roe, wolf, tiger,
lion &c., but their inclinations are entirely different
and even opposite. The heart of the tiger ought to
be the organ of cruelty, and the heart of a lamb
that of meekness. There is no proportion between
the period of the developement of the viscera and
the manifestations of the moral sentiments. In
young animals and in children several viscera are
sooner developed than their pretended inclinations
manifest themselves, at least they are not manifested
in the same proportion. It is astonishing that Bichat
should derive all passions from organic life, while he
believed that organic life was perfect in new-born
children, but that children have no passions. Those
who, with Reil, maintain that the nervous plexuses
and ganglions are the organs of the affections and
passions, and who say that the ganglions are des-


VISCERA. 141


tined to weaken or interrupt the propagation of
internal impressions to the brain, fall into a similar
contradiction; for affections and passions make
great impressions, and their energy is felt both in
animals and in man. Moreover, it is a principle
that every organic part manifests only one particu-
Jar function. Now each viscus has its particular
function which is known and conformable to its
structure. Hence viscera cannot manifest the moral
sentiments. |

In respect to man it may be added, that ace-
phali and complete idiots have viscera and gan-
glions; that their assimilating power is sometimes
very energetic; and that yet they manifest no
moral sentiment. In man also there is no constant
proportion between the energy of the moral sen-
timents, and the activity of the viscera. Finally,
the moral sentiments are not subjected to derange-
ments proportionate to the diseases of the viscera.
The frequency of the pulse does not produce pride,
attachment, compassion &c. We infer, from all these


proofs, that the viscera do not produce the moral
sentiments.


Objection.


It is objected that man, when he is influenced
by any great affection or passion, as by anger,
jealousy, fear &c., feels evidently some motion in the
various viscera. It seems therefore natural to sup-
pose that these affections reside in these parts.
It may in general be answered, that it is impos-
sible to infer from the sensations or other pheno-


{42 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


mena, which take place in different parts of the
body, that the primitive cause of these phenomena:
resides in the parts which suffer these changes. Alb
parts are in communication with, and exercise a
mutual influence upon, each other. On this account,
the great sympathetic nerve or the nerves of the abdo-
men and thorax, are connected with the spinal mar-
row, with the nerves of the external senses, and
with the brain. Without this communication, ani-
mal life would be confined to the brain, and this
organ could not put in action the instruments ne-
cessary to motion. Now the activity of one part
produces different phenomena in other parts; and
as the existence of pain and pleasure does not de-
monstrate that their consciousness resides at the
place where we feel the irritation, so the mutual in-
fluence of the parts does not demonstrate that the
affections have their seat in the thorax or abdomen,
where we feel the influence of their action. Sor-
row makes the tears to flow, and anger makes the
knees to tremble, and the lips to quiver. But who
would therefore assert that sorrow resides in the
lachrymal gland, and anger in the knees and lips!
When wounds of the brain produce contractions of
the gall bladder, overflowing of the bile, and vo-
miting, the primitive cause resides in the brain;
but nobody will place there the overflowing of the
gall and the consequent vomiting. Indigestible
aliments introduced into the stomach produce head-
‘ach; intestinal worms, narcotics and similar ex-
traneous bodies sometimes produce madness, blind-
ness &c.; but who will therefore maintain that mad-


SPINAL MARROW. 148


ness, blindness &c. have their seat in the alimentary
canal? ‘The remembrance of any injury acts upon
the heart and augments the pulsations; but is the
brain the organ of the circulation? It follows
therefore, from these and similar considerations,
that it is impossible to infer from the sensations
which are produced in different parts by affections
and passions, that these parts are their respective
organs.

All that has been said in respect to the abdomi-
nal and thoracic viscera, in order to prove that
they are not the organs of the moral sentiments,
may be applied also to the nervous plexuses and gan-
glions of the abdomen and thorax. ‘These nervous
systems are essentially necessary to the performance
of the functions of automatic or organic life.


SECTION III.


Do the Manifestations of the Moral Sentiments and
Intellectual Faculties depend on the Spinal Mar-
row 2


SPINAL MARROW.


The answer is negative; and all proofs alleged
against the viscera as organs of the faculties of the
mind serve also to show, that the nerves of the
vertebral column do not manifest the moral sen-
timents, nor the intellectual faculties. Neither
the number of these nerves, nor the period of
their developement, nor their greater or less degree


144 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


of perfection has any relation to these faculties.
The nerves of the spine produce muscular motion
and the sense of feeling.


SECTION IV.


Do the Manifestations of the Moral Sentiments and
Intellectual Faculties depend on the Five External
Senses ?


FIVE SENSES.


The external senses bring men and animals into
communication with the beings around them; and
by the medium of the five senses, men and ani-
mals acquire a determinate consciousness of sur-
rounding beings. Without these senses, men and
animals would have only an znternal existence ;
but not as Richerand says, a vegetative existence.
What can interest man more than his five senses,
to which he owes so many sensations, so many en-
joyments? Hence the assiduous igvestigations of
this object by philosophers, physiologists, and ana-
tomists. However, not only the structure of the
five senses, but also their functions, are far from
being perfectly and precisely determined. <A great
number of odd, extravagant, and contradictory
opinions relative to the senses may be mentioned.

I do not remember, that the moral sentiments
have ever been derived from the external senses ;
consequently it is superfluous to prove that such an
assertion would be erroneous. But it is quite dif-

1


FIVE SENSES. 145


ferent in respect to the intellectual faculties. Ac-
cording to many ancient philosophers all ideas are
innate, but excited by the external senses. The
greater number of philosophical systems, since the
time of Bacon and Locke, rest upon the axiom of
Aristotle: that all ideas come into the mind by
means of the external senses. According to both
these assertions, the perfection of the manifesta-
tions of the intellectual faculties depends on the
perfection of the external senses. But if the ideas
and sensations of man and animals are either pro-
duced or excited only or particularly by the five
senses, man and animals ought to manifest them-
selves according to the external objects and acci-
dental impressions. Their faculties ought to be
proportionate. to the perfection of the five senses,
and to the education bestowed on them; and it
ought to be possible to change and modify each
individual at pleasure. But we have seen, in the
chapter on the innateness of the faculties, that
daily experience contradicts this hypothesis.
Another class of philosophers maintain that the .
mind acts independently of all organization, and
that the senses are rather an impediment to than
organs of action. They complain much of the
illusions of the five senses; they despise all tes-
timony, and all conclusions grounded upon the
external sensations. According to them that only
is truth, which may be conceived by the under.
standing alone. If the influence of all external ob-
jects, of all the social institutions, of education in
general be denied, this opinion is evidently in con-


L


146 - PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


tradiction with the history of all times and with
‘that of every individual. If all truth resulted from
reflection alone, it would be easy to establish gene-
ral Jaws, and it would not be necessary painfully to
collect a great number of facts and experiments in
order to deduce from them general principles. But
history proves the insufficiency of our reflection
alone, that is, if it be not guided by experiments.

- Finally, still other philosophers admit two sources
of the manifestations of the intellectual faculties,
an external and an internal; and they consider the
manifestations of the intellectual faculties as de-
pendent on one or on the other of these two sources.
Here I do not intend to determine the functions of
the five external senses; this consideration belongs
to another chapter: I shall only prove that im-
pressions on the senses are not sufficient to explain
the manifestations of the moral sentiments and in-
tellectual faculties. I shall consider each sense in
succession, and examine what manifestations cannot
result from them.


FEELING.


The sense of feeling and muscular motion are
ordinarily considered as one sense; and this sense
of touch, as it is called, produces, according to a
great number of philosophers and physiologists,
many instinctive labours of animals, and the me-
chanical arts of man: for instance, the proboscis
of the elephant gives to this animal his intelligence ;
the beaver builds its hut because it has teeth fit to
cut, and a tail which serves instead of a trowel;


ORGANS WITHOUT FACULTIES. 147


the swan lives in water because its feet are natural
oars &c. Some philosophers and physiologists, who
believe in chance, maintain that man and animals
make use of their external instruments, because these
instruments exist, without considering the external
instruments as the source of the faculties. I do not
agree with any of these opinions. The order and
regularity of all nature, of all phenomena in man
and animals, seem to me contradictory to mere
chance. According to my understanding, I am
forced to admit a final cause, though I am also
convinced that this final cause cannot be. under-
stood by man.


INSTINCTS BEFORE THE DEVELOPEMENT OF THE IN=
STRUMENTS.


The other hypothesis, that the external instru.
ments produce the determinate faculties, may be
easily refuted. A great number of insects exert
different instincts, before their antenne or their
external instruments are developed.


ORGANS WITHOUT FACULTIES:


Many animals have the instruments to which
certain faculties are attributed, but they do not
produce the corresponding functions. Would it
not be more natural to suppose that apes and
monkies possess the building power on account of
their hands, than to think that the beaver builds
on account of its tail? Monkies have hands, they
L2


148 PHYSIOLOGY OF TIIE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


can put wood ona fire, but have they understand-
ing enough to keep up the fire? According to this
opinion insects, crawfish, lobsters, and especially
cuttle fish, ought to have exact ideas of extension,
size, and mathematics, on account of their nume-
rous and perfect organs of touch.


SIMILAR ORGANS AND DIFFERENT FUNCTIONS.


The extérnal instruments are often similar, and
the functions performed by them quite different.
There is a great variety of cobwebs, which different
species of spiders make in order to catch flies.
What diversity of structure in the nests of birds
whose bills are similar? Animals of the same genus
vary much in their food and their manner of living.
The large titmouse builds its nest in hollow trees ;
the long-tailed titmouse in clefts of branches;
the bearded titmouse among reeds; the titmouse
of Poland suspends its delicate and curious nest
on a slender branch; whilst the cuckoo, though it
is endowed with a bill and feet fit to build, does not
build at all. The hare and rabbit have similar feet,
yet the hare lies in the midst of the fields, while
the rabbit makes burrows.


SIMILAR FUNCTIONS AND DIFFERENT ORGANS,


On the contrary, similar functions are observed
in animals which have quite different instruments.
The proboscis is to the elephant what the hand is
‘to man and to the monkey. The swallow attaches


FACULTIES WITHOUT RELATION TO MEANS. 149


her nest to the wall; and the thrush cements the
interior of her’s by the assistance of the bill; while
the beaver covers his hut with mud by means of his
tail. The hands of monkies, the feet of parrots,
and squirrels, are certainly different ; yet by means
of these instruments they hold up their food when
they eat. The hog ploughs the earth with his snout,
and the dog scratches it with his feet in order to
dig up truffles. In our manner of thinking we
say, Similar internal faculties produce similar effects
by means of quite different instruments.


MANY FACULTIES WITHOUT ANY RELATION TO EXTER-:
NAL INSTRUMENTS.


There are in man and animals many faculties
which cannot be considered as the effect of exter-
nal instruments. Who for example, can show, by an
external organ, why crows live in society, and
magpies in pairs? Why the cuckoo and chamois
are wild by nature, and the pigeon and goat tame-
able? Why bustards and cranes place sentinels;
and why ants gather provisions &c.?

Finally, even in mankind there is no proportion
between the manifestations of the faculties and the
perfection of the external instruments. If man
owe his arts to his hands, why do not idiots invent?
Why do painters drop the pencil, sculptors the
chisel, and architects the compass, as soon as
their understanding is deranged, while other indi-
viduals bring forth stupendous things by the assist-
ance of their crippled hands or their stumps. Who


150 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


can measure the talents and capacities for the art
of building, according to the conformation of the
hands? From these considerations we consequently
see that the external instruments do not produce
the faculties: I do not however deny the im-
portance of these external instruments. It must
even be admitted that there is some relation be-
tween the internal faculties and the external im-
struments. Without external instruments, the in-
ternal faculties cannot manifest themselves ; with-
out muscles, the will cannot aetuate any limb;
without hands, or something equivalent, we cannot
seize any thing. Carnivorous animals could not
destroy without claws and teeth ; without these in-
struments therefore they could not subsist &c.
Moreover, when the instruments are more perfect,
the manifestations of the internal faculties are also
more easy and more perfect. Nevertheless it is
unquestionable that the inclinations, propensities,
and intellectual faculties, which make use of the
external instruments, must be derived from within,


FEELING.


It remains still to be considered, whether the
acuteness of feeling produces the instinctive labours
of animals and the mechanical arts of man? Ex-
perience shows the contrary. For there is no pro-
portion between the fineness of the skin, the acute-
ness of feeling, and the manifestations of the fa-
culties of the mind. Some individuals have rough
hands and an obtuse feeling, and they produce


TASTE—SMELL. 151


however surprising things. Till the present time
no artist has judged of the capacity of his disciples
according to the acuteness of their feeling.

It results from these observations that the sense
of feeling, even when muscular motion is con-
sidered along with it, is not. sufficient to explain
the mechanical arts of man and the instinctive
labours of animals.


TA STE.


x


Neither any moral sentiment nor any intellectual
faculty has been supposed to be derived from the
sense of taste; therefore it would be superfluous to
speak here of this sense.


SMELL.


The greatest number of physiologists attribute
to the sense of smell the surprising faculty of many
animals, by means of which they find again their
dwellings at a very great distance; but many phe-
nomena of this kind cannot be explained by the
smell alone. For example, a dog at the end of
several months, and at a distance of more thana
hundred leagues, finds his former dwelling and
master ; when he has been carried away in a coach ;
when it has rained during this interval of time ;
when the dog has gone by water and comes back
by land; when he is obliged to make circuits instead
of taking the nearest way; when the wind has
changed in all directions. Moreover, pigeons trans-
ported to a distance of twenty or fifty leagues,


152 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


and shut up for several weeks, return to their former
residence ; the falcon of Iceland, confined for se-
veral months, flies away at the first moment of its
freedom &c.: these and similar phenomena it is im-
possible to explain by the sense of smell. It is
necessary to admit still another superior faculty,
sometimes called the sixth sense.


f


HIEARING.


It is a quite common opinion that music and the
faculty of speaking are the result of the sense of
hearing. But neither one nor the other faculty is
produced by the sense of hearing. First I shall
show that hearing cannot produce music. Le Cat,
Ackermann, and others think, that the cochlea is
the most important part of the ear, and the prin-
cipal instrument of the musical faculty. Acker-
mann maintained that man alone has the cochlea,
but different quadrupeds not only possess this part,
but have it also more perfect than man. Sheep,
cats, dogs, and hogs, have the cochlea, and they
are certainly not fond of music. Hence, the
opinion of Ackermann falls, and that of Le Cat is
erroncous, because the cochlea is in many animals,
which are not sensible to music, more perfect than
in man. Besides, birds, whose ear is destitute of
this part, yet sing. Le Cat, knowing this contra-
diction, answered that the whole skull of birds is
‘more sonorous than that of quadrupeds, because °
the skulls of birds are less covered with muscles.
He thinks that if nature had joined a cochlea to the


HEARING. | 158


sonorous skull of birds, they would be still moré
sensible to harmonious modulations, and as passion-
ate for harmony as almost all animals are passionate
for food. But, continues he, because birds are
destitute of the cochlea, their musical talent de-
pends more on their ‘throat. In this Le Cat is
mistaken. There is a great number of singing
birds, the skulls of which are covered proportion-
ately with more muscles than those of many qua-
drupeds which do not chew hard food; for in-
stance, the ant-eater &c. ‘The heads of the gold-
finch, bullfinch, chaffinch, linnet &c. are covered
with great muscles, while the head of the green
wood-pecker, which is certainly not a melodious
bird, is almost destitute of muscles. The heads
of the March thrush with its hoarse voice, of the
monotonous cuckoo, of the miserable babbler of
Bohemia &c. are not covered with more muscles
than the skulls of the charming mocking bird, of
the melodious blackbird, and of the vineyard thrush
with its delightful song. If we arbitrarily suppose
that the whole skull of birds is sonorous, the only
consequence to be drawn from it might be, that
a weak sound is extremely strengthened in them ;
but it would be inexplicable why certain birds are
so fond of singing, and why some nightingales con-
tinue sometimes their song till they die from ex-
haustion.

Hearing in general cannot produce music, be-
cause there is no proportion between hearing and
the faculty of music, either in animals or in man.
Many animals hear very acutely, and they are in-


154 FHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


sensible to music. In birds the female hears as well
as the male: why does not the former sing if hearing
produces music? In mankind there are individuals
whose hearing is very obtuse, and whose talent for
music is very considerable. Finally, hearing can-
not produce music, because hearing perceives only
the tones which are produced. ‘The first musician
began to produce music from an internal impulse,
and music which he had never heard. Singing
birds, which have been hatched by strange females,
without any instruction sing the song of their
species as soon as their internal organization is
active. Hence the males of every species preserve
their natural song, though they have been brought
up in the society of individuals of different kinds. |
Hence also musicians, who have lost their hearing,
continue to compose. Hence likewise deaf and
dumb persons have an innate sentiment of measure
and cadence.

Le Cat confounds the crying of dogs at the sound
of a hunter’s horn, and the stamping and neighing
of horses at the sound of a trumpet, with the senti-
ment of music. If this were the case, we must
allow that fishes, reptiles, even spiders, which are
allured by sound, are sensible to music. Buffon,
Dumas, Bichat &c. think that the talent of music
depends on the circumstance that the power of
hearing is equal on both ears. But if the inequality
of both ears were sufiicient to prevent the perfection
of music, a good musician would be extremely rare ; |
for far the greatest number of men hear better with
one ear than with the other. It follows from all this


LARYNX AND VOICE. 155


that hearing does not produce music. However it
is to be considered that hearing is necessary to: per-
ceive and to execute music; but this consideration
belongs to the chapter on the sphere of activity of
each faculty. Here I intend only to prove that
hearing cannot produce music.


'LARYNX AND VOICE.


Some authors derive music, and the singing facul-
ties of birds, from the larynx or throat, and voice.
But if the larynx produce the instinct of singing,
why do not all animals endowed with this part ma-
nifest the faculty of singing? Cuvier has examined
the larynx of many birds, and found its structure
similar in birds which sing, and in others which do
not sing. What difference is there between the
throats of the females and males of the same
species? Is there in man any proportion between
the agreeableness of the voice and the musical ta-
lent? Have not many individuals great musical ta-
lent and no voice; and do not others sing very
agreeably without excelling in their musical talent:
Consequently music is neither the result of hearing
nor of the voice. Now I shall show that neither
hearing nor voice can produce the faculty of
speaking.

It is also a very common opinion that hearing
alone, or hearing and voice, produce together the
faculty of speaking. ‘The best way to refute this
error is by inquiring, in what any language consists,
and how every language is produced? Language in


156 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


general is the medium by which sensations and ideas
are mutually communicated. ‘This may happen by
sounds, gestures, or by other signs. Language may
be divided into two classes: into natural and arbi-
trary, artificial or conventional.

It is a natural law that the internal faculties of
man and animals, as soon as they are active, mani-
fest their activity by the intermedia between them
and the external world, by the five external senses,
and by muscular motion. ‘These external’ manifes-
tations happen involuntarily according to determi-
nate laws. They are modified in every kind of ani-
mals, but are always conformable to some kind of
sensations or ideas. ‘The horse neighs, the lamb
bleats, the cow bellows, the child cries &c. accord-
ing to their wants. This natural language is quite
general, because all animals need to communicate
their sensations, were it only for sexual purposes.
We generally observe that animals which live in so-
ciety communicate their wants, the approach of
danger, or of an enemy. ‘To what purpose their
calling, their placing sentinels, their sounding
alarms, when they do not understand one another?
Without this supposition how were it possible that
hunters could deceive animals in imitating their
voice and calling? Consequently we must allow with
George Le Roi, Condillac, Dupont de Nemours,
Tracy, and many others, that animals have their
language, and that this sanperee” 1S diag Sopaadesace to
their faculties.

It may be objected that the language of srinrtie
has no words. Animals have only natural language,


LARYNX AND VOICE. 157


and it consists partly of sounds and partly of ges-
tures, as well as the natural language of man, which
has also no words. But man has, besides his natural
language, a particular faculty of producing arbitrary
signs, whether sounds or gestures, or other signs.
Animals, on the contrary, are destitute of this fa-
culty of producing arbitrary signs; they have only
the faculty of learning the different arbitrary signs
of man; for instance, cats, dogs, horses, oxen &c.
jearn the language of every nation as far as they
have the respective sensations. A dog may learn
to understand the signification of eating, manger, or
essen; but animals cannot understand any sign,
either natural or arbitrary, if they be destitute of
the respective sensations or ideas. Under the phy-
siology of the brain, we shall consider the faculty
which produces the arbitrary signs, and another
which acquires them. Here I intend only to de-
monstrate that neither hearing nor voice produces
the faculty of speaking. Both are in respect to
language what they are in respect to music, that is,
only means of manifestation, or certain intermedia.
There are animals which can pronounce words, imi-
tate different sounds, and hear very well; neverthe-
less they have no arbitrary language. Some imper-
fect idiots hear very well, and pronounce with faci-
lity the words they know, but they cannot keep up
a conversation. ‘Their manner of communicating,
‘or their language, becomes consistent in proportion
to their internal faculties. Moreover, if the mind
and understanding are deranged, orators and poets
become dumb, or their eloquence is changed into in-


158 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.


coherent babbling. It is therefore evident that the
faculty of speaking does not result primitively from
the voice and hearing.


SIGHT.


We have still to examine whether sight produces
any moral sentiment or intellectual faculty. Itisa
common opinion that the art of painting is the re-
sult of sight; and it is true that eyes are necessary
to perceive colours, as the ears are to perceive sounds
and tones; but the art of painting does not consist
in the perception of colours, any more than musi¢


in the perception of sounds. Sight therefore and |


the faculty of painting are not at all in proportion.
The sight of many animals is more perfect than that
of man, but they do not know what painting is; and
in mankind the talent of painting cannot be mea-
sured according to the acuteness of sight. Great
painters never attribute their talent to their eyes.
They say, it is not the eye, but the understanding,
which perceives the harmony of colours.

It follows from all these considerations, that many
intellectual faculties which have been attributed to
the five external senses do not belong to them.
Moreover, it is easily conceived that there are many
other faculties which cannot be, and which never
have been considered as the effeet of the five exter-
nal senses; for instance, the moral sentiments of
justice and charity, the faculty of inquiring into the
relations between cause and effect &c. ‘The brain
alone remains to be investigated. Let us then exa-
mine whether the manifestations of the feelings and


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 159


intellectual faculties have any relation to the organi-
zation of the brain?


SECTION V.


The Brain is exclusively the Organ of the Feelings
and Intellectual Faculties.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


I have demonstrated that the manifestations of
the feelings and intellectual faculties do not depend
on the whole body—neither on its configuration,
form, and size, nor on its organic constitution; that
they do not depend on the viscera, or on the ner-
vous plexus and ganglia of the abdomen and thorax,
nor on the spinal marrow, nor on the five external
senses. I shall now prove that they depend only on
the brain. Jor many centuries it has been said that
the brain is the organ of the soul; and hence it
might be objected that it is superfluous to give any
detailed demonstration of this truth. But there
exist still many doubts to be resolved, many diffi-
culties to be removed, many notions to be fixed
with more precision; and the repetition of transi-
tory and contradictory opinions is quite a different
thing from the accurate knowledge of an object in
all its details.

If, according to the ancient philosophers, the in-
tellectual faculties be placed in the brain, and the
moral sentiments in the viscera of the abdomen and


160 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS BRAINe


thorax for the purpose of preventing the under-
standing from being disturbed by the passions ;—if it
be said that the nervous plexus or ganglia are the
seats of the affections;—if, according to Dumas,
Richerand, Sprengel, and other physiologists, the
difference of the feelings and intellectual faculties.
result from the difference of the temperaments ;—if
Pinel and others do not dare to seek in the brain for
the proximate causes of the mental alienations ;—if
Bichat consider the hemispheres of the brain as
mere coverings of the internal parts ;—if, according
to Sabatier and Boyer, the brain be a secreting
organ, and, according to all anatomists before us,
the origin and source of the nerves ;—if all the sen-
sations and ideas be derived from the five external
_ senses ;—if the instinctive labours of animals, and
the arts of man, be ascribable to their hands, eyes,
ears, and other external instruments ;—if it be main-
tained that one nerve can perform the function of
another nerve, so that the nerves are homogene-
ous ;—if it be taught by some magnetisers, that, in
the perfect state of animal magnetism, the spirit
‘acts without the assistance of the organization ;—if
the soul of the world be spoken of and admitted ;—
if the greatest number of metaphysicians maintain
that the highest faculties of the understanding—
reason and will at least act independently of all
the organization ;—if hydrocephalic persons be
quoted, who without brain have manifested moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties ;—if the same
be related of animals whose brain was ossified ;—if
any of these assertions be admitted, and if it be at
2


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN: 161


the same time maintained that the brain is. exclu-
sively the organ of the soul, the contradiction is
evident. Now there is no author who has not ad-
vanced one or other of these suppositions ; and con-
sequently it is not superfluous to detail our ideas
relative to the organ of the soul, and to inculcate’
our principle that the brain is exclusively the organ
of the feelings and the intellectual faculties.

All the parts of the body may be wounded or
destroyed—even the nervous mass of the spine may
be compressed or injured at a certain distance from
the brain, without destroying immediately the feel+
ings and intellectual faculties. In tetanus, produced.
by a cause remote from the brain, the other ner-
vous systems are attacked in the most violent man-
ner, while the functions of the mind remain some-
times till death. On the contrary, if the brain be
compressed or destroyed, its functions are deranged,
and the manifestations of the feelings and intellec«
tual faculties are suspended or annihilated. More-
over, automatic life requires neither the brain nor
the cerebellum. The superior parts of both hemi-
spheres, the great commissure, even tore than half
the cerebellum, may be wounded, destroyed by sup-
puration, diminished in size, or taken away, without
destroying the functions of the five external senses
and automatic life. Several acephali, or monsters
destitute of the brain, are born strong and fat, some
of them even live some time after birth. Conse.
quently if the brain be not destined to superior
functions, its existence would be useless. But it is
probable that the most perfect of all the nervous

M


162 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


systems has also an object corresponding to its
organization.

However defective our knowledge of the scale of
the brain from the lowest animals to man may be, it is
nevertheless certain that the number of faculties in-
creases in proportion as the cerebral parts multiply.
This multiplication of the feelings and intellectual
faculties of man, and of the instinctive labours of
animals, is neither in proportion to the five external
senses, nor to any other part of the body, but only
to the cerebral parts. This could not happen if the
brain were not exclusively the organ of the feelings
and intellectual faculties. In treating of the innate-
ness of the faculties, and their dependance on the
organization, I have stated that, if the developement
of the brain be defective, the manifestations of the
feelings and intellectual faculties are also defective. —
In fact, an infinite number of observations prove
that the brains of idiots from birth are defective ;
and that the manifestations of the feelings and intel-
lectual faculties improve and become perfect in the
same proportion as the organization: of the brain
improves. 48

I have proved at the same time that, if the deve-
lopement of the brain be very considerable, the
manifestations of the feelings and intellectual facul-
ties are very energetic. Consider the heads of
those who have excelled by great talents and capa-
cities. Bear in mind however the difference be-
tween a large brain and a large face: the brain
may be small and the face large, or the brain large
and the face small. J have also demonstrated. that

q 4


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 163


_the manifestations of the faculties follow the ordi-
nary or extraordinary growth of the organs: that in
children the brain is yet pulpy, and that therefore
the functions of animal life cannot be manifested 5
that in proportion as the brain increases by degrees
the faculties manifest themselves; that in the state
of maturity the brain has acquired the highest de-
gree of developement, and the manifestations the
greatest energy; and that in proportion as the or-
ganization of the brain decreases, the energy of the
moral sentiments and intellectual faculties decreases
also.

We have mentioned that, if the developement of
the brain do not follow the common order, if it take
place too early or too late, the manifestations of the
moral sentiments and intellectual faculties are sub-
jected to the same changes ; and that certain faculties
are more active in men, and others in women, ac-
cording to the difference of their cerebral organiza- _
tion. I have also shown that the feelings and intel-
lectual faculties are hereditary in the same propor-
tion as the organization of the brain is propagated
from parents to their children. Hence as there is a
proportion between the developement, increase and
decrease of the brain, and the manifestations of the .
moral sentiments and intellectual faculties, the con-
clusion is evident that the brain is the organ of these
faculties.

To the preceding proofs I may add, that the moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties are weakened
or deranged either by age or diseases, in the same
proportion as the brain is altered. Finally, every

M Z


164 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


one feels that he thinks by means of his brain. Thus
all concurs to prove that the brain must be consi-
dered as the organ of the moral sentiments and in-
tellectual faculties.


Objections.


There are, however, various objections against the
assertion that the brain is exclusively the organ of
the moral sentiments and intellectual faculties. I
shall answer the most important of them which are
still repeated in different writings.


On the Influence of the Diseases and Wounds of the
Brain upon the Manifestations of the Moral and
Intellectual Faculties.


In order to prove that the brain is exclusively the
organ of the mind, I have said that its functions are
more or less disturbed by the diseases and wounds of
the brain. Hildanus relates that the skull of a boy,
ten years of age, was depressed near the lambdoid
suture by an accident; and because no harm im-
mediately resulted from it, the bone was not lifted
up. The boy, however, who was endowed with
strong mental dispositions, lost by degrees his me-
-mory and judgment; he became incapable of learn-
ing any thing, and finished with becoming an idiot,
living till forty years of age. Repeated observa-
tions induced Boerhaave to say, that if the bones of
the skull be depressed, and compress the brain,
numbness of the senses, fainting, giddiness, want of
consciousness and delirium, result from it. In the


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 165


writings of Morgagni, Haller and others, a great
number of slight injuries of the brain are quoted,
by which the faculties of the mind were disturbed.
It seems superfluous to me to quote a greater num-
ber of similar examples. Several authors have even
maintained that every injury of the brain produces
necessarily some derangement of the functions of
the mind.

On the other hand, there is a great number of ob-
servations according to which the most considerable
injuries of the brain have not done any harm to the
manifestations of the soul. A person was wounded
in the head by a shot, and the ball remained in the
brain. After the death of this person the ball was
found near the pineal gland. However this man
lived for several years after the accident without
manifesting the least derangement of the intellectual
faculties.* The skull of a child of eight years of
age was broken by the kick of.a horse: bits of the
cineritious substance, larger than a hen’s egg, (as it
is expressed,) came out and were lost; however this
child was perfectly cured, and his intellectual facul-
ties did not suffer.t A young person, fifteen years
of age, received a blow on his head with a stone;
his brain became black, and issued out of the wound.
This young man, in a fit of delirium, took away with
violence the apparatus which covered the wound,
and at the same time a considerable portion of the
injured brain. The cerebral substance was injured
down to the corpus callosum; and the patient was pa-


* Memoires de l’ Acad. de Chir, T. i. p. 134 + Ibid. p. 126.


166 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ralysed, but his intelligence was not impaired.* A
child of seven years of age had a severe wound on
his head by a fall from a horse: the brain issued
continually by new excrescences without doing any
harm to the intellectual faculties, though the ulcera-
tion penetrated to the cerebral substance. Another
child lost a great deal of his brain by fungus, which
grew during four months. ‘The cineritious substance
was entirely destroyed at the place of the wound,
and changed into purulent matter. However the
child preserved his consciousness, and spoke with
understanding till his death.t A stag drove its
horn into the head of a hunter through the orbit, so
- that the end of the horn came out at the top of the
hunter’s head. Notwithstanding this accident the
hunter walked home two leagues on foot. <A great
number of similar examples have been noted, partly
as extraordinary observations, partly in order to
prove that the brain is not the organ of the mind,
and that the functions of the intellectual faculties
are independent of the organization.

There are still many more examples of derange-
ment in the intellectual faculties, while not the least
defect could be discovered in the brain. And in
. many cases of mental alienation, instead of finding
out any cause in the brain, an evidently diseased
state has been observed in quite different parts, as
in the liver, bowels &c. Hence Pinel affirms that:
the most exact dissections have not taught any thing


* Memoires de Acad. de Chir. T. i. p. 150.
+ Van Swieten, T.1, p. 440,


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 167


in respect to the seat of mental alienation, and that
we have no sufficient data to conclude from the dis-
eases of the brain that the brain is exclusively the
organ of the intellectual faculties.

- In order to rectify these facts, opposite in appear-
ance, we must consider two questions: Was it pos-
sible before now to judge exactly of diseases and
wounds of the brain in respect to their nature?
And was it possible before now to judge perfectly
of the effects produced in the manifestations of the
intellectual faculties by such diseases and wounds?
It is evident that it was impossible to make exact
- anatomical observations upon an organization which
was not. only unknown, but in respect to which
there were notions quite erroneous, nay entirely oppo-
site to its real structure; and it is beyond doubt that
hitherto this was the case with the internal structure
of the brain. On the other hand, the authority of
writers induces too often the admission of facts
which never existed. Morgagni, for instance, main-
tains that the brains of those who are proud and
stubborn, are hard and coriaceous; and that the
brains of those who have manifested a meek, un-
steady and undecided character, are soft. Theo-
philus Bonnet relates that the brains of those who
died of anger and fury, were hard, dry and friable.
According to the opinion of Portal, in fools the con-
- volutions of the brains are less deep; according to
Dumas, in reasonable men the form of the brain is
round: this author advances also that the character
of any person is mild or hasty; that his ideas are
lively and rational, or heavy and confused ; that he


168 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


is an idiot or a fool, according as his brain is more
or less of a dark colour, more or less firm &c. Now
though such exaggerated notions are ill-founded,
is it right to conclude that in madness and idiotism
the organ of the mind has not at all undergone any
derangement? Hence it is necessary to inquire what
changes can take place in the cerebral mass in gene-
ral, or in any of its particular parts. And it is also
necessary to consider whether a derangement may
happen which cannot be observed by the five exter-
nal senses? If anybody die by being struck by a
thunderbolt, or in consequence of the gout in the
stomach, or of hydrophobia, or of tetanus, no de-
rangement is discovered in the nervous system; are
we therefore authorised to say that the nervous sys-
tem has not suffered any change?

In the same way, certain alterations of the brain
are not visible if they be transitory, but they be-
come manifest after a lapse of time. The blood-
vessels are sometimes ossified; sometimes a great
quantity of bony substance is deposited on the in-
ternal surface of the skull, and the cerebral mass it-
self is diminished in size.

We are of opinion that all the derangements of
the manifestations of the mind result immediately
irom any change in the brain. We admit that the
remote causes of mental diseases often reside in the
viscera of the abdomen; but does it follow that the
immediate cause is not in the brain? Intestinal
worms produce by their irritations of the bowels a
bad breath, a cough, grinding of teeth, a tickling
in the nose, blindness, madness &c. but the bowels


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 169


are no more the seat of the madness than they are
the seat of the gnashing of teeth, of the tickling of
the nose, or of the blindness. There. exists an
influence of the viscera upon the brain, and
wice versd. Therefore the functions of the brain
may be deranged by the influence of any remote
part. It is, however, conceivable that a derangement
of the brain, which is only sympathetic at the be-
ginning, may continue after the first cause no more
exists, that is, if the first cause have produced an
alteration in the cerebral mass itself. On account
of the reciprocal influence of the brain and the
viscera of the abdomen, many derangements of the
functions of the viscera result from different affec-
tions of the brain; for instance, fear relaxes the
bowels, grief troubles digestion, anger deranges the
secretion of bile &c. And as aderangement of the vis-
cera may produce a derangement of the functions of
the brain, which may still augment the disease of the
viscera; so a derangement of the functions of a viscus
may result from any moral sentiment, and it may re-
ciprocally augment the disease of the brain.

It is also true that very considerable injuries of
the brain produce sometimes very slight perturba-
tions in the manifestations of the mind; and that
very slight injuries of the brain are accompanied
often with the most violent accidents. But this
-also happens in other parts of the body. Sometimes
very considerable abscesses are found in the lungs
without a considerable preceding derangement in
the respiration. Are not the lungs therefore the
organ of respiration? Sometimes ossifications have


170 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


been observed in the heart, without any remarkable
disturbance of the circulation ; is not therefore the
heart the organ of circulation? Hence, it is wrong
to attribute to the wound, or to its seat, what must
be attributed to the particular irritability of the
sick person. Thus we may explain why often no
accident results from a very considerable wound of
the brain, namely, in patients whose irritability is
very weak; while in very irritable persons very
slight wounds produce the most serious conse-
quences.

It remains to mention certain observations, where
half the brain was completely destroyed by suppura-
tion, while the manifestations of the intellectual
faculties remained. It seems at least that in such
a case the half of the manifestations ought to be
annihilated. Though these observations seem to
be incorrect, let us admit them as they are related.
Let us even join to them an observation made by
Gall at Vienna. He attended a clergyman in the
Theresian Institution, who for a long time had a
pustular erisypelas, which disappeared and re-ap-
peared from time to time; his left side became
weaker by degrees, so that at last he could not
walk without a stick; finally, he was struck with
apoplexy and died in a few hours. ‘Three days
before, he had preached and given a lecture at the
school. On the dissection of his head the middle
_ part of the right hemisphere, as large as one’s hand,
was found changed into a yellowish and grumous
substance. Gall regrets his not knowing the struc-
ture of the brain, and being prevented from making


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 171


an exact observation of it. It is however certain,
that notwithstanding this considerable alteration of
the hemisphere, the intellectual faculties manifested
themselves in this individual with a surprising re-
gularity. Consequently, it is to be examined how
similar observations are to be explained, if the brain
be the organ of the mind.

In this objection, and generally in injuries of
the brain, the duplicity of the nervous systems has
been forgotten. One half of the brain may be de-
stroyed, and the other half continue to exert the
manifestations of the mind. One of the optic,
auditory, olfactory, or other nerves may be de-
stroyed, while the other manifests the respective
function. In the same manner, one side of the
brain, one hemisphere may be desfroyed, while
the other hemisphere continues to manifest the fa-
culties of the mind. It is evident that both he-
mispheres of the brain may be in a quite different
or even opposite state. Tiedeman relates the ex-
ample of one Moser, who was insane on one side,
and who observed his madness with the other side.
Gall attended a minister who had a similar disease
for three years. He heard constantly on his left
side reproaches and injuries; he turned his head on
this side, and looked at the persons. With his right
side he commonly judged the madness of his left
side; but sometimes in a fit of fever he could not
rectify his peculiar state. Long after being cured,
if he happened to be angry, or if he had. drunk
more than he was accustomed to do, he observed
in his left side a tendency to his former alienation.


172 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


These observations seem to be extraordinary ;
but the opposite state of both hemispheres is not
rare. It exists evidently in the hemiplegia, when
one hemisphere is paralysed and deprived of ac-
tivity, while the other hemisphere continues to
exert its functions, so that the patients do not seem
to have lost any faculty of the mind. One half of
the tongue is paralysed, one eye is blind, one ear
deaf; while the taste remains, the other eye sees,
and the other ear hears. Sometimes one hemisphere
of the brain is inflamed, the other not. In the
megrim, the blood-vessels are more full on the dis-
eased side. A child died by a violent blow applied
to the right side of his head: on dissection the
right side was found quite pale and bloodless, and
the left on the contrary, injected and filled up with
blood—an evident proof that the hemispheres may
be in an opposite state. If this child had continued
to live, he would have been paralysed on one side,
and he would have suffered violent convulsions on
the other. I dissected the brain of a mad girl, and .
found that on the left side a great deal of the in-
ferior large apparatus of increase (thalamus) was de-
stroyed by ulceration; the nervous bundles were
diminished in size, and the convolutions were pro-
portionate; while on the right side all the parts
were larger. ‘Thus as it is proved that all cerebral
parts are double, and that one half may be in a
different state from the other; it may easily be con-
ceived that any special faculty may manifest itself,
as long as the respective organ is not utterly de-


stroyed on both sides.
2


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 173


Let us examine whether it was hitherto possible
to judge exactly of the derangement of the mani-
festations of the mind. No one feels better the
insufficiency of the actual state of our knowledge
of human nature, than those who observe the de-
rangements of the manifestations of the mind.
Pinel despairs of our ever being able to know the
cause of the derangement of the mind, on account
of our ignorance concerning its healthy state. I
shall here confine my considerations to the exposure
of the defectiveness of the proceedings of our pre-
decessors.

All the reports relative to the wounds of the
head, to the injuries of the brain, and preservation
of the manifestation of the mind, are confined to the
following expressions:—The patient continued to
walk, to eat and drink; he had his consciousness
entire, viz. he knew all around him ; he manifested
some memory and judgment; consequently he pos-
sessed all the faculties of the mind, and nothing
was disturbed. But if a person of a meek and
peaceable character, after being wounded on the
brain by a stone, become quarrelsome and morose ;
if another, whose actions were irreproachable, after.
being wounded on the head feel an irresistible in-
clination to steal; it is evident that these persons
have preserved consciousness, memory, judgment ‘
and imagination; but can we infer that the injuries
of the brain have not produced any derangement
of the manifestations of the mind? Moreover, ani-
mals have consciousness, memory and judgment ;
are they therefore men? If a man by any disease be


174 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


brought down to the faculties of a dog, and pre- —
serve the functions of the five external senses,
memory and judgment, would he therefore have lost
no characteristic faculty of human nature? If partial.
idiots have perception, memory and judgment,
do all their faculties manifest themselves? If in
partial madness the patients preserve consciousness,
memory and judgment; if their imagination be
even exalted; are therefore all their faculties unim-
paired. Finally, if persons by a commotion of the
brain, or by a fit of apoplexy, lose the memory of
proper names, or of a language, and if they pre-
serve the functions of the five senses, memory and
judgment, have they lost nothing at all? Thus it is
evident that now the manifestations of this, and
then of that faculty of the mind may be deranged or
destroyed, though the patient preserves the faculties ©
which are said to constitute the whole intellectual
being. It follows also that it has hitherto been
impossible to judge exactly of the effects of diseases
and injuries of the brain, because all physiologists
considered only the general attributes of the under-
standing, and were quite ignorant in respect to the
special faculties. Hence, inquiries into the injuries
of the brain, in respect to mental alienation, must
be made with more exactness than it has hitherto
been possible to make them.


Objection.


An objection has been founded on pretended ob-
servations, according to which, although the brain


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. | 175


was destroyed, dissolved, or disorganised by water,
yet the manifestations of the mind continued un-
impaired.

Zacutus Lusitanus maintains that he saw a child
who lived for three years without brain. ‘This author
believes that he found in this child a double dura
mater. Duverney says that he found in a skull
only water and no brain. Haller and Soemmer-
ring speak of these observations without denying
them. Lauffer* speaks of a new-born child in
whose head he found no brain, but only water: he
maintains that the brain existed before, and that
it was dissolved by the water. This opinion was
very general, and this phenomenon is spoken of
under the name liquefaction, or dissolution of the
Brain. -

Anatomists were accustomed to see the. brain
presenting a thick and solid mass in its natural
state; if they did not find this solid mass, they
considered the brain as dissolved or annihilated.
However Morgagni reproached Duverney with his
inadvertency, and he assured us that, in perfectly
similar cases, he has always found the brain only
distended into a thin membrane, and he relates. that
the same has been observed before him by Tulpius,
Vesalius, and several other anatomists. In order
to answer exactly this objection, we must consider
three points. ,First it is to be examined where the
water is found ; then what change the cerebral mass


* Diss. de Infante sine Cerebro nato. Halae, 1743.


176 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


has undergone; and what change takes place in
the manifestations of the faculties of the mind.
Physicians are not agreed where the water is
contained in hydrocephalic persons. I speak here
only of those hydrocephalic patients, whose skull is
distended beyond the natural size. ‘There are two
other kinds of this disease, which are very im-
portant in the practice of medicine, but which do
not belong to this subject. In the hydrocephalic
persons, whose skulls are larger than natural, the
water is said to be accumulated either in the ca-
vities of the brain, or between the membranes, or
between the dura mater and the skull. ‘The greatest
number of practitioners consider the two latter
cases as the most common, but all physicians admit
these three kinds. Professor Walter, at Berlin,
maintained publicly, that in sixteen hydrocephalic
persons he always found the water without the
brain. Pinel* says that in hydrocephalic persons
the water is contained between the skull and the
dura mater, or between the membranes, and some-
times in the cavities of the brain. Odier fancies
that the hydrocephalus is always produced in the
windings of the pia mater. He distinguishes this
hydrocephalus from the acute, which latter, -accord-
ing to his opinion, is only formed by an accumula-
tion in the ventricles. He gives a detailed descrip-
tion of the acute hydrocephalus, and calls it inter-
nal, in opposition to the hydrocephalus of which I


* Nosographie Phil. Edit, 3me. T. iii. p. 423.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN: 177


speak here, and which is called external by Odier.
Petit, on the contrary, maintains that in all dis-
tended hydrocephalic heads he found the water in
the ventricles, and never between the membranes;
nor between the dura mater and the skull. Our
Observations agree perfectly with those of Petits
We maintain that in all hydrocephalic persons,
whose skulls are extraordinarily distended, and con-
sequently contain a great accumulation of water,
the liquid occupies the cavities of the brain.

We have proved that Walter has only advanced
his assertion in order to support his erroneous
opinion relative to hydrocephalus, and that he has
not opened any one of the sixteen mentioned
skulls. In his defence, he allows that nine of these
heads were not in a state to be examined: the
tenth was opened by professor Buttner at Konigs-
berg. In his work, called Museum, he makes no
mention of these skulls; and in his considerable col-
lection we found not any dissected skull of hydro-
cephalus, while there were several unopened ones.
It is easily explained how anatomists and physicians
have been led into this mistake. In those hydro-
cephalic skulls which contain a large quantity of
water, the hemispheres of the brain are so much
unfolded, that the brain is distended like a bladder,
not more than a line in thickness. In sawing the
skull without precaution, this thin membrane of
cerebral matter is commonly wounded; the water
which distended the brain issues, and the brain
sinks down. The water flows out; and if the su-
perior part of the skull be taken away, the water

N


1738 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


appears on the surface of the brain. Some phy-
sicians also of little experience did not consider
this membrane of cerebral matter as brain, but
they fancied that the brain had been dissolved by
the water. There were even some who said that
the brain had been compressed into a small mass,
that is, they considered the inferior parts as the
whole brain.

If the hydrocephalus of the cavities be con-
founded with an accumulation of water without the
brain ; and if, according to the advice of Darwin, *
an aperture be made in the skull in order to make
an outlet for the water, the patient is sometimes
killed suddenly, and sometimes dies in a few days.
Some fluctuation, however, felt at the fontanel might
easily deceive bad observers; for sometimes the
skull of such children remains very thin; at dif-
ferent places the ossification takes place very late
in life; and a cartilaginous transparent mass alone
covers the brain. It 1s necessary to be perfectly
acquainted with these observations in order not to
be deceived. Not long ago, Dr. Martin junior t
endeavoured to cure this disease by puncture ; but
after seven days the patient died. He erred in
thinking that the water was accumulated between
the brain and membranes.

Let us now examine what change the brain un-
dergoes in the dropsy of the cerebral cavities? It
was by many anatomists admitted that, in the hy-


* Loology, vol. il. p. 162, 236.


+ Bulletin de la Societé d’ Emulation de ete 1810, Mai, Tw
p. 294.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 179


drocephalus of the cavities, the brain was distended
like a bladder; but it was unknown in what this
distension consisted; and it seemed inconceivable
how a medullary substance could be distended to
such thinness without breaking. Walter, at Berlin,
Ackermann, at Heidelberg, and many others, admit
the existence of the cerebral mass in hydrocephalic
persons; but they maintain that this mass is de-
stroyed or disorganised. We maintain that the
cerebral substance is not disorganized. We prove
our assertion by anatomy and physiology.

It may be proved by anatomy, that the fibres —
of the brain are directed. vertically or perpen-
dicularly above the cerebral cavities, and_ that
every convolution consists of two layers applied
one against another, and which may be separated
one from another. ‘Thus if a great quantity of
water be accumulated in the cerebral cavities, and
act against the convolutions placed round about
the cavities, it separates gradually the two layers
whose natural position is vertical, till at last their
situation is horizontal. In this manner, in large
hydrocephalic skulls, the convolutions are entirely
unfolded, and present a smooth surface and a mem-
branous expansion.

This expansion was considered by Zacutus Lu-
sitanus as a second dura mater. If such a hydro-
cephalic head have not been. shaken, and if the .
opening have been made with precaution, the water
is limpid. But if such heads be carried from one
place to another, and thereby shaken, it is not
astonishing that the water is troubled, and the brain

N 2


180 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


dissolved or eroded in appearance, and swimming in
flakes among the water.

We also prove our assertions by physiology. If
the brain be the organ of the soul, and if at the
same time the cerebral substance be destroyed in
hydrocephalic persons, it would be impossible that
these patients could manifest any intellectual fa-
culties. Indeed one of the two following assertions
must be maintained: either that the brain is the ©
organ of the soul, and in this case it cannot be
destroyed in those hydrocephalics who manifest in-
tellectual faculties; or that the brain is not the
organ of the soul, because the hydrocephalic per-
sons, whose brain is disorganised, nevertheless
manifest feelings and intellectual faculties.

Walter, at Berlin, fancied that the brain of hy-
drocephalic patients was disorganised; and he —
therefore maintained that in them all the intel-
lectual faculties were annihilated. But there are —
many examples of hydrocephalic persons, in which,
although the disease is very considerable, there is
a manifestation of intellectual faculties. Tulpius
had observed such a hydrocephalus endowed with
understanding. He inferred from this observation
that the structure of the brain ought to be quite
different from what is supposed. Camper, and
many other anatomists, speak with amazement of —
similar observations.

In order to procure yet stronger proofs against
those who deny that the brain is exclusively the —
organ of the soul, and to refute at the same time
those who deny that hydrocephalic persons continue —


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 181


to manifest intellectual faculties, I shall quote se-
veral examples of this kind. We observed for some
years a woman with a considerable dropsy of the
brain, who manifested a moderate understanding
like other women of her class. She died at fifty-four
years of age of an intestinal inflammation ; and the
cavities of her brain contained almost four pounds
of limpid water. We have seen a learned man,
whose head is extraordinarily high on the anterior
superior part of the forehead, and which, according
to its size, must contain from three to four pounds of
water, yet this man has extensive knowledge. The
only inconvenience which results from his peculiar
state is, that he often falls suddenly asleep in the
midst of the most interesting conversation, at table,
at the theatre, and elsewhere. At Copenhagen, we
saw a girl thirteen years of age, whose head was
twenty-five inches in circumference, nineteen inches
from one ear to the other, and the same measure
from the root of the nose to the neck. The head
must have contained from ten to thirteen pounds of
water. ‘The legs of this girl were almost paralytic,
so that she had to be carried from one place to
another. Yet she was genteel in her manners, and
learned very well what other girls learned at school.
At Augsbourg, we met with a girl thirteen years of
age, whose head presented the same shape and size
with that of the woman of fifty-four years mentioned
above. ‘This girl was little, but she walked well,
and spoke with understanding. A similar girl, eleven
years of age, was shown to us at Marbourg. At
Bruchsal, a hydrocephalic girl of fourteen years of
4


182 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN;


age, who was obliged to lie constantly in bed, and
was certainly too childish for her age, yet talked
with understanding enough of every thing she was
interested in. At Leipzic, Dr. Tobias showed us a
hydrocephalic head of an extraordinary size. This
person had lived thirty-six years, and had common
understanding, which he lost only one year before
his death by a violent fit of anger. Messrs. Lau-
meyer and Nueffer, at Fribourg in Brisgau, pre-
serve the skeleton of a gitl of seven years of age,
whose skull contained seventy ounces of water, and
who was nevertheless able to remind other persons
of news she had heard read in the papers some time
before. Dr. Maler, of Carlsruhe, told us the history
of a person affected with hydrocephalus, who died
at twenty years of age, and whose skull contained
above ten pounds of water. This patient manifested
an ordinary state of understanding. I have seen at
London, four considerable hydrocephalic heads. One
was thirty-three inches in circumference, twenty-
four and a half inches from one ear to another, and.
twenty-three and a half inches from the root of the
nose to the neck. Yet the person, then nineteén
years of age, manifested all the moral sentiments
and intellectual faculties. He read and wrote tole-
rably well.—(P/. V. fig. 2). Thus these examples
prove that hydrocephalic patients are not’ entirely
destitute of the manifestations of feelings and intel-
lectual faculties.

The explanation of these phenomena is easy to
those who know the structure of the convolutions,
It follows from it, that in large hydrocephalic per-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 183


sous the brain is not disorganised, but that the cere-
bral fibres have only changed their vertical direction
into a horizontal one. Now the functions of the
intellectual faculties do not depend essentially on
the vertical, horizontal, or inclined position of the
- cerebral fibres, and the manifestations of the intel-
lectual faculties may continue without great de-
rangement, if the pressure of the water upon the brain
be not too strong, and only act upon it by degrees,
It is also possible that the cerebral fibres may grow
longer without the internal organization being de-
stroyed. Sometimes the optic nerves grow longer, if
"an excrescence pushes the eyeball out of the orbit
without losing the faculty of seeing. Thus all the
arguments which have been founded on hydroce-
phalus, in order to prove that the brain is not ex-
clusively the organ of the soul, fall to the ground.


Objection.—Of the pretended petrified or ossified
Brains, which, we are told, have not prevented
the Manifestations of the Intellectual Faculties.


Among the phenomena which seemed calculated to
refute the principle that the brain is exclusively the or-
gan of the soul, it is asserted that petrified or ossified
brains have not hindered the mind from manifest-
ing its faculties. Instead of examining the truth of
these narrations, they are admitted by our adversa-
ries, because they seem decisive in the refutation of
our principle. We have seen similar ossifications at
Vienna, Leipzic, Amsterdam, Cologne, and at Paris;


/


184 ‘ PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


and these pretended ossified brains were shown to.
us always with the intention to refute our assertion
that the brain is exclusively the organ of the moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties. ‘Thomas Bar-
tholin, in 1660, first mentioned this phenomenon.
in 1670 an ox was slaughtered in the Benedictine
monastery of St. Justine, near Padua, and, accord-
ing to the narration of a monk who was cook, its
brain was hard like marble. Duverney showed such a
pretended ossified brain to the Academy of Sciences
in 1703. Moreschi, Professor of Anatomy at Bo-
logna, and Dr. Giro,* maintain that they examined,
at Rovigo, a similarly ossified brain. ‘They cut it
horizontally almost on the level with the corpus cal-
josum, in order to examine the interior parts. They
found the colour of the circumference different from
that of the interior parts, but they did not distin-
guish the cavities, the thalami, or the corpora striata,
any vestige of the third and fourth ventricles, no cor-
pora quadrigemina, no pineal gland. ‘The cerebel-
jum presented only parallel transverse ridges. On
the basis of this pretended brain they found only
unevennesses without any origin of the nerves.
However they maintain that the ox, to which this
brain belonged, manifested the same inclinations as
every other ox with a sound brain. The ox was
eight years old when it was killed. Dumas has maip-
tained that these facts refute completely our doc- —
trine of the cerebral organs, because, according to
the narration of Duverney, the ox preserved its un-


t Gazette de Santé. Paris, Nov. 11, 1809. N° XXXII.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 185


derstanding. Indeed this erroneous opinion relative
to ossified brains is very far from being destroyed,
though Vallisneri has completely refuted it.

From the number of such ossifications which we
have seen, and of those Vallisneri speaks of, it seems
that they are not rare. But let us first consider
what Vallisnerit thinks of them. He shows* that
there is no such thing as a petrification of the brain, |
and that this opinion took its rise from the ignorance
of a Benedictine friar. He states that he has seen
this pretended petrifaction, and he assures us that
it is only an ossification. Vallisneri proves morever
that these bony masses are not at all ossified brains,
but only bony excrescences of the skull. He has
made drawings of the convolutions of a natural
brain of an ox from above, from below, and in the
middle line, in order to show that there is no ana-
logy between the protuberances of these bony ex-
crescences, and the convolutions of the brain. He
shows that one of the excrescences which was in his
possession had a much stronger resemblance to the
_ natural brain of an ox than the excrescence’ which
Duverney had caused to be drawn, and he mentions
that he knew of five such excrescences. He conse-
quently reproached Duverney with his ignorance
in thinking that Bartholin and himself only had
observed this phenomenon; and shows the greatest
amazement that the Academy of Sciences had been
deceived by that which Duverney presented as an


* Opere Physico-Mediche. Venezia, 1733. T. i. Art. Cervelle
Impetrito. —


186 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ossified brain. He moreover reproaches Duverney |
for not opening, and for not having examined, the
interior parts, in order to see that there was no ves-
tige of cavities, of corpora striata, of thalami; and
blames his credulity in supporting his assertion only
by the relations of a butcher.

It may be joined to the observations of Vallisneri,
that Duverney calls some part on the surface pineal
gland; but, in the first place, this part is much
larger than the pineal gland of an ox; next, its form
is quite different; and finally, the pineal gland is
not situated on the surface but imteriorly. In the
same manner, the part which he considers as a cere-
bellum, with its vermiform process, does not at all
resemble the natural cerebellum. Moreover, Val-
lisneri justly remarks that Duverney would have
found the brain as well as the bony excrescence, had
he himself opened the head. He relates that a
butcher of Modena, proceeding more exactly and
more carefully, found both the brain and a bony
excrescence of the skull.

Messrs. Giro and Moreschi maintain that they
found the centrum ovale of Vieussens in the bony
excrescence which they possess. This error is easily
explained. If the brain be cut horizontally, it pre-
sents a large white surface, called by Vieussens,
centrum ovale. Now if the bony excrescences are
sawed in any direction whatever, they also present
a white surface like ivory, and this white surface has
been considered as the centrum ovale. But why
have these gentlemen not found the ventricles, the
thalami, the corpora striata, the tubercula quadri-

3


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 187


gemina &c.? What is most inconceivable is, that
they found no vestige of nerves, although the ox
had preserved not only its intellectual faculties, but
also its five external senses! Moreover, the cerebel-
Jum of the ossified brain, mentioned by Moreschi
and Giro, presents transverse and parallel rings and
ridges, but the natural figure of the cerebellum of
an ox is altogether different.

Dr. Simson* gives an account of the ossified
brain of a cow killed at Fettercairn, a village in the
county of Angus, in Scotland. Simson allows that
this brain was much larger; that the cerebellum, in
particular, was indeed six times at least bigger than
the natural; that the natural shape was not at all pre-
served; that the cerebellum was raised much above its
ordinary height, and out of all form; that only one
small end, which was quite rough, might be sus-
pected of having been joined to the skull, and
broken off from the parts next to it. However, Dr.
Simson thought that it was the ossified brain, be-
cause the butcher found it in the skull, and de-
pended upon its being the brain; and he to whom
the cow belonged received it as such, and all those
who possessed it looked upon it as such.

Hallert+ mentions that the ossified brain, which Bar-
tholin speaks of, was only a bony excrescence. So-
emmerring advances the same opinion which we pro-
fess, viz. that all the pretended. ossified brains are


* In an inquiry how far the vital and animal actions are indepene
dent on the brain. Edinburgh, 1752.


+ Phy. T. iv. p. 356.


188 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


only bony excrescences, which take origin at the in-
ternal surface of the skull, compress the brain, and
push it by degrees from its place without destroying
it. These bony excrescences are formed ordinarily
on the internal surface of the skull; but sometimes
also on its external surface, and sometimes on both
sides externally and internally. We saw a specimen
of the latter kind at Goettingen, of which Peter
Frank had made a present to the university. In the
anatomical collection of the medical school at Paris,
there is also a skull which presents a bony excres-
cence both without and within. ‘These bony ex-
crescences are sometimes spongy, soft, and smooth:
usually however they are solid, hard, and uneven,
or gibbous, like stalactites or cauliflowers. These
gibbosities have been considered by superficial ob-
servers as the convolutions of the brain; but nei-
ther the superior nor inferior surface of these ex-
crescences presents any part analogous to the shape
of a natural brain. In every one of them, may be
distinguished the place of adhesion to the surface of
the skull. This root is sometimes large, sometimes
small. Sometimes the size of such excrescences is
more considerable than that of a natural brain. Pro-
fessor Bonn of Amsterdam, for instance, showed us
half an ossified brain of an ox, and this half was
larger than a whole natural brain.

In respect to the influence of these bony excres-
cences upon healthy functions, it is certain that,
notwithstanding such affections, man and animals
can live for many years, and manifest various fa-
culties. But it is not probable that the faculties suf-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 189


fer from them no derangement. In all examples,
except that of Duverney, which he himself had not
observed, the same symptoms have been remarked
which take place when the brain is compressed by
some other cause. The cow of which Dr. Simson
speaks ate and drank, saw and heard, as well as
any cow, but she had a difficulty of breathing which
made her snort in her sleep, and sleep ill; she was
fed to be slaughtered, yet did not get flesh, but on
the contrary fell away. This pressure does the less
harm, because the excrescence grows only by de-
grees and very slowly. We have not yet had an
opportunity of observing a similar case; but it is
very probable that the brain is not compressed in
proportion as the bony excrescence increases, but
that the cavities of the skull become larger by de-
grees in the same way as happens in dropsy of the
brain. Consequently all that has been said in re-
spect to ossified brains must be attributed to igno-
rance concerning anatomy and physiology, and prin-
cipally to inexact observations and an excessive love
of the marvellous. I repeat what we have always:
said, that if ever any brain be ossified, and the ani-
mal preserve the manifestations of its intellectual
faculties, we shall be the first to declare that our


whole doctrine of the functions of the brain is 3
mere chimerical invention.


190 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN;


SECTION VI.


On the absolute Size of the Brain.


‘The greater number of natural philosophers, being
convinced that the brain is the organ of the soul,
have concluded that its functions must be propor-
tionate to its size. ‘The brain of man was found
larger than of the greater number of tame animals,
as of the horse, ox &c. Therefore without exa-
mining living beings more strictly, the superiority
of man was attributed to the absolute size of his
brain. Thus, according to Erasistratus, Aristotle,
Pliny, Galen, Portal* and others, man has the
largest brain.

Modern discoveries however have shown that the
brains of whales and elephants are larger than that
of man. ‘Those therefore who measure the faculties
of animal life according to the absolute size of the
brain must err; for whatever the understanding of
the elephant may be, and though the whale be de-
clared king of the inhabitants of the sea, no one
will attribute either to the one or to the other the
superior faculties which constitute the distinctive
character of man. Besides, if we consider more
strictly the study of nature, we find that the brains
of the monkey and the dog are smaller than those of
the ox, ass, and hog, yet the former come nearer


* Anatomie Medicale, T..iv. p. 30.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN, 191


to man in respect to their intellectual faculties.
‘Moreover, different animals, as the wolf, tiger,
sheep, and roe, may be ranged in the same class in
respect to the size of their brain, but their qualities
are quite different and even opposite. It 1s the same
with the sparrow-hawk, cock, and pigeon. Finally,
we see that nature produces the most surprising ef-
fects by means of very small brains. ‘Observe the
honey-bee and the ant; think of their interior eco-
nomy, of their local memory, of the care they take
of their progeny, of their anger and revenge, of
their natural language. Is there any thing more
curious than the conic hole of the pyrmicoleon, or
the web of the spider? Do we not observe in the
cock the jealousy of the stag; in the red-breast the
propensity to fight of the wild boar &c.? Thus if.
the absolute size of the cerebral mass were sufficient
to measure the moral sentiments and intellectual fa-
culties, all the animals which have the same quan-
tity of brain ought to manifest absolutely the same
faculties, and the faculties could only differ in
energy. It would then be inexplicable why one
animal lives in society, another in solitude; why
one takes care of its progeny, and another does not;
why one constructs, another sings &c. It is not
even possible in the individuals of the same kind to
measure their faculties according to the absolute
size of their brain. Hence it is necessary to look
for other means of determining the measure of the
faculties of the mind.


192 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


SECTION VII.


On the Proportionate Size of the Brain to that of
the Body, and to that of the Nerves.


The brain of the elephant and whale is larger
than that of man; but their bodies are also much
heavier than that of man. This peculiarity seemed
sufficient to prove the superiority of the human
brain; and anatomists no longer said that man had
absolutely the largest brain, but that he had the
largest brain in proportion to his body. According
to the principle admitted in respect to the origin
of the nerves, it was easy to explain how the moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties are imdicated
by the size of the brain, compared with that of the
body. For*all nerves were said to be prolongations
of the cerebral mass, and to be proportionate to the
body. Consequently, in a large body the greatest
part of the nervous system is employed for the
purpose of bodily functions, and there remains a
small portion of the brain for the superior faculties.

Some authors, it is true, considered the brain and
spinal marrow as a homogeneous mass, and they
derived the nerves from the spinal marrow itself;
but then they supported this assertion by other
observations. The brains of reptiles and fishes are
very small in proportion to their bodies. A croco-
dile twelve teet long, a serpent eighteen feet long;
a turtle that weighs from three to five hundred


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 193


pounds, have brains that scarcely weigh one drachm.
There are insects in which the nerve of one single
sense .exceeds the size of their brain. ‘The great
vulture of the Alps (lammergeyer) has the brain
almost as small as that of the raven: the turkey-
cock has no more brain than the parrot. It was con-
cluded from these facts, that the faculties are in the
proportion of the brain to the body.

This conclusion was drawa too hastily, and it
was not grounded upon a sufficient number of ob-
servations. Wrisberg, Soemmerring, Blumenbach,
Cuvier, and other anatomists wished to verify this
principle. But they found that the sparrow, ca-
nary-bird, linnet, red-breast, bulfinch, and several
species of monkies have, in proportion to their body,
more brain than man: therefore the intellectual
faculties of these animals ought to surpass those of
man, or at least to approach to them. Rats and mice
ought to have more understanding than the horse,
stag, dog and elephant, because the former animals
have, proportionately to their bodies, a more con-
siderable quantity of brain. According to this
principle, it should be impossible to find out any
difference in respect to the faculties of different
species of animals, whose brain bears the same
relative proportion to the body. Moreover, it would
be very difficult to determine the just proportion of
the brain to the body and to the nerves. The pro-
portions noticed by Cuvier are evidently incorrect.
In adult men, he admits the proportion of one to
thirty-five. We believe that the proportion of one to
forty, or fifty, or even sixty, is more general. For


194 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


if we suppose that a grown-up man weighs only a
hundred and twenty pounds, and his brain from
two to three pounds, the proportion fixed by Cuvier
is inexact. Finally, this anatomist does not say
how he had separated the brain from the other
parts; whether he left smaller or larger portions of
the nerves and membranes; whether the blood-
vessels were empty or filled; and at what age the
comparisons were made. — :

Haller remarked that children have a larger brain
in proportion to their body, consequently that they
ought to excel grown-up persons in understanding,
if their faculties were measurable by the propor-
tionate size of the brain. It may however be an-
swered, that the brain of children is not yet per-
fectly developed, hence unfit for the manifestations
of the intellectual faculties. Haller remarked also,
and Soemmering and Cuvier after him repeated,
that it is very difficult to determine the proportion
of the brain to the body, because the body grows
lean or fat, augments or diminishes half its weight,
while the brain does not undergo any change. This
assertion is refuted by experience. It is true that
the brain cannot grow fat, that is, no adipose sub-
stance can be deposited in the cerebral mass any
more than in the substance of the lungs, but the
brain participates in the nutrition of the body as
well as every other organic part. In young and
well nourished men and animals, in the flower of
youth, the convolutions of the brain are more plump
and nearer one to another; the whole brain is
more heavy than in old Jean and emaciated persons,


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 195


who have died of hunger and consumption. We
directed our attention to this subject, and examined
with this view rabbits, cats, monkies and men.
Hence the remarks made by Haller would not be
sufficient to refute the opinion that the faculties
of the mind may be measured according to the pro-
portionate size of the brain.

Wrisberg and Soemmerring thought they might
proceed in a surer way if they determined the
faculties according to the proportion of the brain
to the nerves. ‘They observed that the nerves are
much more considerable in many animals than in
man. ‘This proportion however, though more plau-
sible than that of the brain to the body, is not yet
general. The seal has, proportionally to its nerves,
a larger brain than the house-dog ; and the porpoise :
more than the orang-outang: yet we do not ob-
serve the same proportion in the faculties of these
animals.

It seems that Soemmerring, in some women,
found smaller nerves than he was accustomed to see
in men. He concluded from these observations,
that as the brain of women is smaller than that of
men, the proportionate size of their nerves is pre-
‘Served, viz., that although their brain is ordinarily
smaller than that of men, yet they possess the same
degree of understanding, because their nerves are
also smaller than those of men. We were attentive
to this subject. There is neither any proportion:
between the nerves of the five external senses one
to another, nor between the nerves and the brain ;
neither is there a general rule in respect to the

O2


196 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


sexes. Sometimes one, sometimes another pair of
nerves is large or small in men or in women, and
without any proportion to their brain. Therefore
it is also observed that the functions of these dif-
ferent parts are in no proportion one to another.
There are individuals whose senses are very weak,
and who yet manifest great energy of moral sen-
timents and intellectual faculties, and vice versd. ©
Moreover, if the proportionate size of the brain to
the nerves were a means of measuring the faculties
of the mind, these means would yet be confined
to theory, and could never be applied to living
persons, because there is no possibility of dis-
tinguishing the size of the nerves before the open-
ing of the body.

The comparison of the brain with the spinal
marrow, admitted by Soemmerring, Ebel, and Cu-
vier,* is not more exact than the other proportions
J have mentioned. Cuvier himself quotes excep-
tions; for instance, in the porpoise. Blainville is en-
tirely wrong in saying that the occipital hole in-
dicates the proportion of the spinal marrow to the
brain. The occipital hole is proportionate to the
medulla oblongata, and not at all to the spinal
marrow. Besides, there is no proportion of the
spinal marrow, nor even of the occipital hole, to the
brain. The brain may be large, and the occipital
hole or the spinal marrow small, or vice versd.
This is not only the case in different species of ani-—
mals, but even in different individuals of the same


* Lecons d’ Anatomie comparée. T, ii, p. 150.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 197


species. Moreover, this proportion could not be
known in living persons: consequently, even if it
were exact it would be useless in anthropology.


SECTION VIII.


On the Facial Angle of Camper; on the Occipital
Angle of Daubenton ; and on the Proportionate
Size of the Brain to the Face and Neck.


In order to measure the extent of the brain and
the energy of the intellectual faculties, Camper
drew a vertical line from the upper lip to the
uppermost point of the forehead, and a horizontal
line from the upper incisores to the external opening
of the ear. Camper thought that man and ani-
mals have the more understanding, the more the
angle formed by the two lines is obtuse ; and on the
contrary, that man and animals are the more stupid,
the more this facial angle is acute. Lavater, Cuvier,
Richerand, and a great number of anatomists and
physiologists, are partisans of the facial angle.
According to this opinion, Lavater composed ‘the
progressive scale of heads from the frog to Apollo
Belvidere. Cuvier composed different tables, which
indicate the facial angles of men and different ani-
mals. He fixed for the facial angle of Europeans,
in a child ninety degrees, in an adult person eighty-
five, and in an old decrepid man fifty degrees.
This manner of measuring the intellectual faculties
is not more exact than all I have hitherto men-


198 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


tioned. ‘The facial angle considers only the an-
terior parts of the brain situated in the’ forehead,
and it overlooks all the lateral and posterior parts:
hence the facial angle could only indicate the
faculties whose organs constitute the forehead.
Besides, it is entirely impossible to fix in general
the proportion of the forehead to the face. In
new-born children the forehead is flat; in children
from three months to eight or ten years of age, the
forehead is ordinarily prominent, and forms a more
obtuse angle than in new-born children, or in adult
persons. Hence Cuvier is wrong in admitting that
the facial angle decreases in proportion as the child
advances in age. And even if this were the case,
it would be only possible to say that the facial
angle will be of so many degrees in grown-up and
in old persons, when it was such or such in infancy.
But it is utterly impossible to draw a conclusion
from one individual; for among a hundred in-
dividuals not two will present the same facial angle.
And according to the supposition of Cuvier, all
children, all grown-up, and all old Europeans,
ought to have the same proportion of the cerebral
mass to the face. Moreover, this facial angle is
useless in respect to animals. For, as Blumenbach
has observed, three fourths of the animals known to
us have almost the same facial angle: they are
however endowed with quite different propensities.
Finally, Cuvier himself has remarked that the
brain is not situated immediately under the fore-
head in all animals, but that in a great number of
them the two plates of the skull are very distant


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 199


one from another. ‘This happens indeed not only
in different species of animals, but also in old per-
sons, whose skulls often present a considerable dis-
tance between the two plates. In hogs, the brain
lies one inch, and in the elephant thirteen inches
deeper than the external table of the skull indicates.
Cuvier, in order to avoid this inconvenience, draws
the tangent or vertical line upon the internal plate.
In many animals, as in several species of cats, in ro-
dentia, the brain inclines downward behind the
frontal sinus, and it is quite impossible to draw a
facial angle according to the most prominent point
of the forehead.

The facial angle is also a very imperfect measure
of the faculties of man. We know negroes whose
jaw-bones are extremely prominent, but who mani-
fest great intellectual faculties, because their fore-
heads are much developed. According to their
facial angle, they ought to come after many stupid
Europeans who have a little forehead, but whose
jaw-bones are inclined backward. It follows then
from all- these considerations, that the facial angle
cannot serve as a means of measuring the moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties. |

The occipital angle of Daubenton is formed by
a horizontal line drawn from the inferior edge of
the orbit to the posterior edge of the occipital fo-
ramen, and by a vertical line that cuts the first,
and passes between both condyles over the surface
of the occiput. Now this occipital angle, accord-
ing to the observation of Blumenbach, is in all
animals from eighty to: ninety degrees; conse-


200 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


quently, its difference is not proportionate to the
divers faculties of animals. Moreover, the occi-
pital angle indicates only the developement of the
occiput, but it does not show that of the lateral
and superior parts of the brain; and thisis sufficient
to show its inutility.

Some physiologists, as Soemmerring and Cuvier,
have compared the proportionate size of the brain
to the face, and, according to them, animals are
more stupid as the face is larger in proportion to
the brain. Cuvier calls the senses of smell and |
taste, which occupy principally the face, the most
animal functions. In order to facilitate the ex-
amination of this proportion, Cuvier saws the skulls
vertically and longitudinally: in this way then it
is easy to compare the proportionate size of the
cavity of the brain to the bones of the face. The
ancient artists observed a certain proportion be-
tween the forehead and the face. The statues of
their high-priests, sacrificators, demi-gods, gods,
and principally that of Jupiter, present high, large,
and vaulied foreheads. But the superiority of the
intellectual faculties does not result from the pro-
portion of the forehead to the face, but from the
developement of the forehead itself. There have
been great men whose faces were very large, and
whose jaw-bones were very prominent. Leo, Mon-
taigne, Leibnitz, Haller, Mirabeau &c., had large
faces and very considerable brains. On the contrary,
Bossuet, Voltaire, Kant, had small faces and large
brains. Soemmerring errs in saying that the skulls of
women are larger in proportion to their face than


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 201


those of men. Moreover, in many animals this pro-
portion is evidently inexact. The face of the sloth
and seal is, proportionally to their brain, smaller than
that of the stag, horse, and ox; but no one will main-
tain that the former animals exceed the latter in
their intellectual faculties. Finally, this proportion
is not at all applicable to birds, as Cuvier himself
has observed.

Plato in ancient times, and Bichat and Riche-
rand in our days, maintained that there is a pro-
portion between the intellectual faculties and the
length of the neck. According to this assertion
the intellectual faculties are the smaller the longer
the neck is, because the brain is more removed from
the heart, and consequently is less excited by the
blood. This assertion is too evidently against all
natural history and physiology to endeavour to de-
monstrate its falsehood.


SECTION IX.


On the Proportionate Size of the Cerebral Parts
one to another.


The cerebral parts have been compared one with
another, in order to point out their functions.
Cuvier says * that it is possible to determine the
exact proportion of the brain to the cerebellum ;
because no change of health produces any influence


* Loc. cit. p. 152.


202 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


upon the cerebral mass; and he composed several
tables relative to this object. He admits the pro-
portion of the cerebellum to the brain, in man as
one to nine, in ‘the Saimiri as one to fourteen,
in the ox as one’to nine &c. These few examples
prove that the intellectual faculties cannot be mea-
sured according to the proportion of the cerebellum
to the brain; for in this hypothesis man and the
ox ought to belong to the same order. If, ac-
cording to the opinion of Malacarne, the cerebellum
were the organ of understanding, the Saimiri ought
to have the most understanding; if according to our
doctrine the brain be the organ of the feelings and
intellectual faculties, the Saimiri ought to have less
understanding than the ox; and if the hypothesis
of Cuvier were true, the ox should have as much
understanding as man has. |

It is not necessary that every part of the brain
always participates in the healthy and diseased state
of the rest of the body; for, why should not that -
happen with the cerebral parts, which happens in
other organs ; for example, any sense, or any viscus,
may fall into disease, while the rest of the body is in
good health. In the same way, each cerebral part
alone may be diseased. And even in the sup-
position that all cerebral parts are influenced
equally at the same time, by the healthy or diseased
state of the whole body, it may still be asked,
whether there is a determinate proportion between
the brain and the cerebellum, and between the
particular parts of the brain one to another. The
answer must be aflirmative in one respect, and ne-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 203


gative in another. The constituent parts of one
organ are in proportion one to another; for instance,
the cineritious and white substances, the different
apparatuses of increase, the ganglia, and the num-
ber of fibres which spring out of them &c. But
the different cerebral systems which constitute the
particular organs, and manifest the determinate
faculties, are in no constant proportion one to
another. ‘There are large brains joined to small
cerebella, and vice versd. The cerebellum of young
persons is smaller in proportion to the brain than
in grown-up persons. Sometimes one, sometimes
another part of the brain, sometimes the forehead,
sometimes the posterior part is more developed.
The proportions of the cerebral parts one to another
are the more numerous the greater the number of
the particular parts is. Hence the almost infinite
number of size and forms of heads in the human
species. Soemmerring, therefore, errs in saying
that in sound brains not only the position and
mutual connexion of all cerebral parts does not
vary, but also that in the brain of man no con-
siderable deviation relative to form and size is
observed.

According to these considerations, and to the
principle that every particular system manifests
some particular faculty, it is evident that the fa-
culties in general cannot be determined either ac-
cording to the whole form and size of the head,
or according to any comparison of one part with
another. It is therefore also evident, that it is im-
possible to point out the different species of in-

4


204 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


sanity by measuring and comparing the different
dimensions of the skull.


SECTION X.


Our Manner of judging the Cerebral Parts in re-
spect to their Functions.


After so many useless attempts, it was natural to
despair of being able to point out the organs of the
moral sentiments and intellectual faculties. Indeed
physiologists could not succeed, as long as they en-
deavoured to measure the moral sentiments and
intellectual faculties, according to the whole mass
of the brain, or according to any proportion what-
ever. Our predecessors moreover had not the
least notion of the special faculties; they were ac- |
quainted only with common or general faculties ;
and they sought organs for these common faculties ;
but it was impossible to discover any organ, because
the common faculties have no particular organs.
The idea that the special faculties are manifested
by particular organs was the only way to find the
organs of the moral sentiments and intellectual —
faculties. According to the new psychological sys-
tem, then, it must be asked what are the functions
ef an animal and of man, and what proportion
exists between every determinate kind of function
and its respective organ? According to this idea,
Gall first thought that there is a proportion between
the energy of the functions and the respective


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 205.


organs. Therefore he no longer compared different
systems one with another, but he considered every
system and its functions by themselves. In the in-
vestigation of the internal senses he followed the
same means as we pursue in all inquiries concerning
the external senses. ‘The sense of sight is not de-
termined by comparing it with any other sense, but
vision and the optic organ are compared &c.

It is however necessary to remark that all obser-
vations of this kind can only be made upon beings
of the same species, and it is useless to compare the
same faculty with the respective organ in different
species of animals. The faculty of seeing is not
generally in proportion to the size of the optic
nerve, for there are species of animals whose optic
nerve is smaller, and whose sight is stronger, while
other species have a larger optic nerve though their
sight is weaker. It is the same with the internal
organs of the brain. There is no proportion be-
tween the size of different cerebella and the mani-
festations of the faculty which we attribute to this
organization. The irritability is very different in
different kinds of animals. Hence in order to point
out the particular organs, we are obliged to com-
pare individuals of the same species; and if we do
not endeavour to determine every insignificant de-
gree of difference, it is possible, in comparing dif-
ferent individuals of the same species, to find the.re-
lation of determinate functions to particular parts of
the brain. However, the manner of proceeding and
the determinations cf the organs are yet sure, if we
examine every individual by himself, and determine


900 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the organs according to his functions, or the func.


tions according to the organs. This last is the only |
method of which we make use. Hence in future it |


can no more be asked, whether there is a propor-
tion between the faculties of animals and man, and
the absolute size of their brains, or between the fa-
culties and any proportionate size of the brain to
the body, to the nerves, or to the spinal marrow, or


of one cerebral part to another. Every faculty must |
be compared with its respective organ, not in indi- —


viduals of different kinds, not even in different in-
dividuals of the same species, but in the same indi-
vidual. ‘That organ then is larger whose function is
stronger, and vice versd. I speak here of this sub-
ject summarily: I shall treat of it in detail when I


examine the means necessary to point out the or-


gans of the animal functions.


RECAPITULATION.


In this chapter I have first examined whether the
brain is exclusively the organ of all consciousness,
or whether any consciousness is manifested by means
of the nerves? I have then demonstrated the use-
lessness of the proceedings of our predecessors 5


and with this view I have proved that the manifes-


tations of the mind do not depend either on the
size and form of the whole body, or on its organic
constitution. I have moreover shown that the moral
feelings do not depend either on the viscera or on
the nervous plexus and ganglia of the abdomen and
thorax ; and finally, that there is no proportion be-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 307


tween the manifestations of the mind and the size of
the spinal marrow, or of the five senses, but exclu-
sively of the brain. I have also answered the most
important objections against this principle. These
considerations led me to examine the different me-
thods of measuring the intellectual faculties; and I
have demonstrated that the faculties of the mind
can neither be determined according to the absolute
size of the brain, nor according to any. proportion
between the brain and the body, the nerves, the
face, or the neck, nor according to any proportion
of one cerebral part to another. We have seen that
it is necessary to compare each special faculty only


with its relative organ. Let us consider this subject
in a new chapter.


208


CHAPTER IV.


ON THE PLURALITY OF THE CEREBRAL ORGANS.


As it is demonstrated that the brain is exclusively
the organ of the manifestations of the mind, it is to
be investigated whether the whole brain must be
considered as one single organ, or whether it is__
composed of as many particular and independent
organs as there. are particular and independent ma-
nifestations of the mind. On this subject there are
the most ridiculous, absurd, and contradictory opi-
nions in philosophical writings. ‘Those who admitted
the simplicity of the soul, inferred from it that
its organ must be single; others, who examined the
particular faculties of the soul, maintained that the
manifestations of every special faculty must be at- ©
tributed to a particular organ.

As soon as philosophers began to think of the
beings of nature, it was necessary to make divisions.
Moses speaks of a division into brutes which live
and feel, and into those which reason. The Greek
philosophers called, with Thales, sou/ the cause of
every phenomenon; they then spoke of a soul of
plants, a soul of animals, and a soul of man. Con-
sequently soul, or anima, was all that which gave life
and sensation. The soul (anima) was not only di-
vided into anima of plants, anima of animals, and


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 209


into anima of man; ‘but one soul was considered as
vegetative, and another.as sensitive. All the incii-
nations were regarded as the result of the animus.
Finally, the intellectual part which reasons, was
called mens. Pythagoras, St. Paul, Galen, Gilbert,
Gassendi, Bacon, Van Helmont, Wepfer, Leibnitz,
Frederick Hoffmann, Haller, Blumenbach, Soem-
merring, Reil, Barthez &c. admit different causes
of the different phenomena of animais and man.
Plato and several ancient writers speak of an unrea-
sonable and of a reasonable portion of the soul. All
those who admit only one soul in man, as Anaxago-
ras, Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Stahl &c.
are obliged to acknowledge at least several faculties
of the single soul. St. Augustin determined with
great exactness the faculties common to man and
animals, and those which are proper to man. Male-
branche and many other philosophers speak of prin-
cipal and secondary faculties; the former are under,
standing and will. .‘The subdivisions of understand-
ing into perception, memory, judgment, and imagi-
Nation; and the subdivisions of will into inclination,
desire, affections, and passions, are generally known.
Some authors have even subdivided these special fa-
culties ; for instance, Vieussens speaks of two kinds
of imagination; others admit several kinds of me-
mory, as a local, a verbal memory, a memory of
facts, and another of time. Thus various princi-
ples, at least various faculties of the same principle,
have been admitted at all times. |
As the principles, or the faculties, were divided and
subdivided, so different seats were assigned to them.
ie


A, PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


The reasonable soul was commonly placed in the
head, the unreasonable in the viscera of the abdo-
men. ‘The ventricles of the brain have been consi-
dered at all times as of principal importance. ‘The
Arabs placed common sense in the anterior cavity of
the brain, imagination in the second, judgment in
the third, and memory in the fourth ventricle. For
several centuries the brain was considered as the
organ of perception, the cerebellum as the organ of
memory, and the degree of memory was measured
according to the protuberance of the occiput. St.
Gregorius Nyssenus, in order to explain why the
functions of the mind are not troubled, although the
different senses propagate different impressions, com-
pares the brain with a town which has several en-
trances and a great number of streets, by means of
which it is possible to arrive at the same point.
Nemesius, the first bishop of Emesa, under the reign
of Theodosius, taught that the sensations have their
‘seat in the anterior ventricles, memory in the middle,
and understanding in the posterior ventricles. |
Albertus Magnus,’ archbishop of Ratisbon, in the
thirteenth century, delineated a head, and indicated
upon it the seats of the different faculties of the
mind. He placed common sense in the forehead,
or in the first ventricle of the brain, cogitation and
judgment in the second, memory and moving power
in the third. Peter de Montagnana, in 1491, pub-
lished a delineation of a head, on which were indi-
cated the seat of sensus communis, the cellula ima-
ginativa, cellula wstimativa seu cogitativa, cellula
memorativa, and cellula rationalis. Lodovico Dolei


PIYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 214


published a similar delineation. He placed common
sense in the foreheads; behind it imagination; un-
derstanding in the cerebellum; and memory the
most downward-in the neck. According to Serveto,
the anterior ventricles receive the images of the ex-
ternal impressions ; the third ventricle is the seat of
thought, the aqueduct of Sylvius the seat of the
soul, and the fourth ventricle the seat of memory.
Willis considered the corpora striata as the seat of
sensation and attention, the medullary mass as the
seat of memory: he placed reflection in the corpus
callosum, and deriyed the moving spirits from the
cerebellum. |

Charles Bonnet considered each fibre of the brain
as a particular organ of the soul. Boerhaave said
that imagination and judgment ought to be attached
to different seats, because the former is active in
sleeping and dreaming, the latter in watching. Hal-
ler and Van Swieten* fancied that the internal
senses occupy different places of the brain; but
they considered the organization of the brain as too
complicated, too intricate, and too difficult to per-
mit us to hope to point out the seat of memory, of
judgment, or that of imagination. Mayer, Profes-
sor at Frankfort on the Oder, thought it probable
that the soul exercises its different faculties at dif
ferent places of the brain. He was disposed to
think that the cineritious substance is the organ


* Van Swieten, T. ii. p. 454. “ Quis memorie et rationis
- sedem in hoc mirabili et intricatissimo organo determinare po
terit? ” |


ae


212 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


of memory, and the cerebellum that of abstract
ideas. Prochaska thinks it more than probable that
every internal sense is attached to a particular or-
gan. Platner speaks of two organs of the soul; of
a superior, and of an inferior. Mallacarne cannot
imagine that the medullary substance of the brain 1s
fit to receive the same impressions at every point.
He denies the central point of the nerves, he con-
siders the cerebellum as the seat of the intellectual
faculties, and measures them according to the num-
ber of lamellae of which the cerebellum is composed.
Tiedemann, Wrisberg, Soemmerring, and an infinite
number of physiologists and philosophers, admit the
plurality of the organs. They maintain that the dif-
ferent parts of the brain are destined to different
functions. Soemmerring speaks, like Haller, of dif-
ferent provinces of the brain. :

Thus it follows from all these quotations, which
might be extremely multiplied, that the idea of the
plurality of the seats or organs is very ancient, and
that those who maintain that Gall first invented it
are mistaken.’ It is only to be determined which
are the faculties, and which are the respective or-
gans! I afterwards shall inquire into these two ques-
tions in more detail. First let us examine in gene-
ral the proofs which induce us to think that the
brain must be considered as composed of different
organs.

It is a general observation that nature, in order
to produce various effects, has varied the material
conditions. ‘This is observed throughout all nature:
every salt, every metal, has its own crystallization ;


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 213


every plant and every fruit-tree has its particular
organization; even the parts of the same tree, as
wood, bark, leaves, flowers, and fruit, possess some-
what varying qualities. Itis the same with animals:
the organization of every kind of animal is modified,
and in the same animal there is a particular organ
for every function: the liver is destined to the secre-
tion of bile, the heart and blood-vessels to circula-
tion, and the lungs to respiration. The five exter-
nal senses are separated, and independent one of
another. ‘Thus nature is not so attached to simpli-
city and unity, as certain speculative philosophers
are pleased to maintain. ‘This plurality and inde-
pendence of the organs of automatic life, and of the
five senses, makes it probable that the different in-
ternal sensations and functions of the mind are also
manifested by different and independent organs.
However, besides analogy, there are still other
proofs furnished by the psychology of animals and
man in the healthy and diseased state.

It is necessary that the brains of different animals
should be different, because the faculties of these
animals vary. ‘The beaver which builds its hut, the
dog which hunts, the black-bird which sings, the
swallow which migrates, cannot have similar brains.
Thus it is not indifferent to have such or such a
brain: the organization of the brains of these ani-
mals must be as different as their muscles. Even
individuals of the same species do not possess all fa-
culties in the same degree: certain individuals excel,
others are middling in all; some individuals are en-
dowed with genius, others are idiots: hence the or-

4:


214 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ganization of their brains cannot be equally perfect.
Moreover, if the brains of different animals were
not composed of different organs, why should their
understanding increase in the same proportion as
their brains are complicated? It is also necessary
that the cerebral organization of both sexes should
be at least modified; for certain faculties are more
active in women and females, and others in men
and males. These modified manifestations are easily
understood if we admit that certain organs are more
developed in men and males, and others more in
women and females.

_ In the same individual certain propensities, senti-
ments, and intellectual faculties, manifest them-
selves with great energy, while others are scarcely
perceptible; one excels in verbal memory, while he
cannot combine two philosophical ideas; another is
a great painter, and a bad musician, or a miserable
poet; and a third is a great poet, and a bad gene-
ral; one may be pious and stupid, or pious and in-
telligent; and every one has his peculiar gifts.
Hence the same mass of the brain cannot. preside
over the same functions. If there were only one
external sense for all impressions, all functions
ought to take place as soon as one sense were ac-
tive; but as the functions of the external senses are
attached to different organs, one may be weak and
another strong. It is the same with the internal
senses: if the same organ manifested every faculty,
how should the mind, by means of the same instru-
ment, manifest one faculty in its perfection, and
another in a very limited manner?


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 915


-'Ehe propensities and intellectual faculties do not
manifest themselves simultaneously ; several appear
earlier, and others diminish and disappear more
lately. Certain faculties are very energetic in chil-
dren, others appear only in adult persons: some fa-
culties disappear at the age of fifty or sixty, others
last till ninety or a hundred. Now if the manifes-
- tations of all faculties were dependent en the same
organ, they ought to appear and disappear simul-
taneously. But all difficulty is removed, if we admit
different organs which are developed and dimi-
nished, at different periods, in the same way as the
five external senses. The smell and taste appear
earher than the senses of seeing and hearmg, be-
cause their relative organs are earlier developed.
‘Fhe faculties of animal life cannot continue inces-
santly to act, but they need rest. It is known that
study too long protracted produces fatigue, but we
can continue to study by changing the object. Now
if the brain were a single organ performing all the
functions of the mind, why should not the organ be
more fatigued by this new form of study? Our eyes
may be fatigued by looking at pictures, but we can
still listen to music, because there is one organ for
hearing and another for seeing. This consideration
is very important in medicine ; for by these circum~
stances it. is often possible to prevent partial insani- _
ties, that is, if a person have one organ very active,
whether on account of its considerable develope-
ment, or on account of its great irritability, so that
its activity is almost involuntary, or that the person
has not the power of putting it in action, or of recall.


916 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ing it to rest, then it is necessary to avoid every
thing that has any relation to this faculty, and to
put in action quite different faculties. “Thus this al-
ternate state of action and rest would be impossible,
if there were only one single organ.

As in the state of watching the same organ can-
not be always active, but it must rest; so in the
state of sleeping all organs do not remain inactive,
but sometimes a particular organ enters into action,
and this is the state of dreaming. Watching is
called the state wherein the will can put in action
the organs of the intellectual faculties, of the five
senses, and of voluntary motion; but it is impossi-
ble to define watching as the state wherein all these
organs are active; for it cannot happen that all: fa-
culties should be active at the same time. All or-
gans being fatigued take rest, and this state of rest
is sleep. But any particular organ, or even several
organs, may be active while the other organs rest ;
then the peculiar sensations or ideas, which result
from this particular activity, constitute that which
is called dreams, which are more or less complicated
according to the number of the active organs. Here
it may be asked, whether the soul or mind can ever
be without any idea? Formerly it was a general
opinion that activity is the essence of the soul; and,
in order to preserve this opinion, it was said, that
in the deepest and most complete sleep, the soul
continues nevertheless to act and to think, but that
no one had consciousness of it. It may be asked,
how are we sure of this action? And it may be
reckoned merely supposititious. At all events it is


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. Phe


evident that the state of dreaming proves the plura-
lity of the organs of animal life; and it would be
impossible to have a conception of particular dreams,
or ideas and sensations, if the brain were one single
organ, and if every faculty were not attached to a
| particular and independent organ.

The state of somnambulism equally proves the
plurality of the organs. This is a state of incom-
plete sleep, wherein several organs are watching. It
is known that the brain acts upon the external world
by means of voluntary motion, of the voice, and of
the five external senses. Now if in sleeping some
organs be active, dreams take place; if the actien of
the brain be propagated to the muscles, there follow
| motions ; if the action of the brain be propagated
to the vocal organs, the sleeping person speaks. In-
deed it is known that sleeping persons dream and
speak; others dream, speak, hear, and answer;
others still dream, rise, do various things, and walk.
This latter state is called somnambulism, that is,
the state of walking during sleep. Now as the ear
can hear, so the eyes may see, while the other organs
sleep; and there are facts quite positive which prove
that several persons in the state of somnambulism
have seen, but always with open eyes. There are
also convulsive fits in which the patients see without
hearing, and vice versd.

Some somnambulists do things of which they are
not capable in a state of watching; and dreaming
persons reason sometimes better than they do when
awake. ‘This phenomenon is not astonishing. If
we wish to reflect upon any object, we avoid the


$18 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


noise of the world and all external impressions ;
we caver the eyes with our hands, and we put to
rest a great number of organs in order to concen-
trate all vital power in one or in several. In the
state of dreaming and in somnambulism, this na-
turally happens; consequently, the manifestations
of the active ergans are then often more perfect
and more energetic; the sensations are more lively,
and the reflections deeper, than in the state of wateh-
ing. Without knowing their danger, sucl: persons
do things which are possible to be done, but which
they would not do, being acquainted with the
danger they run. Therefore, somnambulists ought
not to be awakened when they are exposed to
danger.

Inspirations, visions, and similar phenomena, find ©
their explanation only in the plurality of the organs ;_
and consequently these phenomena contribute to
demonstrate it. In order to understand visions, it
is necessary to recollect the state of dreaming. ©
In dreaming, the whole external world is repre-
sented inwardly to the mind. We see objects, our
friends, or enemies ; we speak with them, we walk, —
we eat, drink, sing, hear music &c., and all these
things happen i the brain of him who dreams.
Visions are only internal sensations or ideas, which —
are so strong and so energetic, that, though in the
state of watching, the person refers them outwards —
and considers them as real; for instance, he sees —
inwardly some person, and he admits his outward
existence. Visions are transitory or permanent.
In the latter case, it is a true alienation of the mind.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 219


This explains why visionaries fancy that they see
| beings, or that they are accompanied by demons ;
and why sorcerers have imagined they conversed
| with the devil. It is even known that sorcerers
| produced such illusions by external applications or
| frictions, with narcotic ointments composed of
| dulcamara, bella donna, stramonium, hyosciamus,
| opium &c.

The state of disease proves also the plurality of
the cerebral organs. For how is it possible to com-
bine partial insanities with the unity of the brain!
| One faculty may be deranged, while the manitfes-
tations of all the other faculties of the mind may
be regular. To this belong all fixed ideas or mo-
- nomanie. On the other hand, there are madmen
who are reasonable only in one kind of manifes-
tations of the mind. A chemist was a madman in
every thing except chemistry. An embroiderer in
her fits, and in the midst of the greatest absurdities,
calculated perfectly how much stuff was necessary
to such or such piece of work. It follows from all
these considerations, that there are as many organs
as there are special and independent faculties: con-
sequently the brain cannot be considered as one
single organ, but as composed of several. Before
[ determine the special faculties and their respective
organs, I shall answer the most important objections
against this principle.


Objection 1.—Unity of Consciousness.


Philosophers repeat incessantly that the organ of


9220 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the soul cannot be complicated, because conscious-
ness is single. This objection is very ancient. It
was made to Boerhaave, Haller, and Van Swieten,
who have commented on the duplicity, and con-
sequently on the plurality of the organs. The du-
plicity of the brain was known even to Hippocrates,
who said, the brain of man is double as well as that
of animals. Van Swieten relates that, as we have
two ears, and two eyes, and as the consciousness
of the impressions of two similar organs is single,
so the consciousness of the mind is single, though
the brain is double. I suppose indeed that the
explanation of this phenomenon may remain un-
known for ever, but it is not therefore less true
that the brain is double, and that each half is com-
posed of different parts. Are there not many things
which cannot be explained? Automatic life is one ;
but is it not composed of different functions, which
are produced by different organs? It is always
single, though it is more or less complicated in
different kinds of animals. It is the same with ©
animal life. It is more or less complicated in dif-
ferent kinds of animals; the different faculties are
manifested by means of different organs; these
organs exert a mutual influence, and as long as this
mutual influence exists, the unity of animal life
also exists ; but if the mutual influence be deranged,
the unity of animal life is deranged also. Hence
it is not true that consciousness is always single,
either in respect to the external senses, or in re-
spect to the internal organs. ‘There are patients
who see objects double, and all monomanie have a


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 221


complicated consciousness. ‘Tiedemann speaks of
one Moser, who was alienated on one side of his
\brain, and observed his madness with the other
side. One of Gall’s friends, a physician, often
‘complained that he could not think with the left
side of his head. ‘The right side of his head is one
inch higher than the left. Gall attended a gentle- |
jman who for three years, on his left side, heard pea-
isants insulting him. Commonly he discerned his
derangement and rectified his error; but if he had
idrunk a little too much, or had a fit of fever, he
fancied that he really heard the voices of peasants.
A great number of madmen hear angels sing, or
‘the devil roar &c. only on one side. Thus, as both
hemispheres may undergo a quite different state,
so the organs of each side may be differently af-
fected. In treating of the functions of the five
senses, I shall examine the different explanations
of this single consciousness ; but whether the unity
of consciousness may be explained or not, it is in-
dubitable that all the organs of animal life are
double.


Objection 2.


It is also objected that the unity of the organiza-
tion is destroyed by the separation of the organs,
and that all organic parts are dependent one on the
other. It is impossible to deny the mutual influence
and dependance of the different organs. Nobody can
insist upon this truth more than we. But there is
a great difference between saying that the different


B22 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


organic parts exert a mutual influence upon each
other, and saying that each part does not exert its
_ particular function. It is the same with both automa-
tic and animal life. Digestion is necessary to the cir.
culation of blood, and to the secretion of bile, but |
does the stomach‘produce the circulation of blood,
or the secretion of bile? Nutrition depends on di-—
gestion, chylification, sanguification, respiration, cir-_
culation, and other auxiliary functions; but is not—
every function attached to some particular or.
ganization? We observe the same in animal lifes
Without the sense of hearing we cannot hear any _
language, but does hearing invent the vocal signs?
We shall afterwards see that certain ideas cannot
take place without the external senses, but that the
external senses do not produce the conceptions of —
these ideas. All that which is necessary to the nue
trition of the brain contributes to the productio v
‘of this organization, as it does to that of the eyes,
‘or ears &c.; and no organic part, when detached
from the body, can preserve the perfect state of its
organization, consequently it cannot perform its”
function; but can we therefore say that the eye”
does not see, or that the ear does not hear?


. Objection 3. q

| \ | a

It is often objected that the particular organs

of the brain are not as distinctly separated, as
the nerves of the five external senses. It is”
‘true the limits or lines of separation cannot be_
exactly determined between the. different organs,


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. - 993


| but this also is mot possible in respect to the five
| external senses. ‘The nerves of motion and feeling
have not yet been separated, though the nerves
| must be different. ‘he structure of the skin must
| be different at different places, as is evident by the
| different exhalation arising from it, and the hair
which grows on some parts of it; but the difference
of the parts of the skin has not yet been demon-
strated. Neither the limits of the olfactory nerve,
nor those of the nerve of taste, are better known
or more distinct than are the different bundles of
the internal organs, separated one from another. |
| Nay it is possible to demonstrate the relation be-
| tween the developement of these bundles, and the
respective manifestations of the moral sentiments
and intellectual faculties. Anatomy shows that the
bundles which form the convolutions situated in the
forehead are smaller, but more numerous, while the
posterior bundles are less numerous, but larger.
‘In the same manner we shall see that the faculties
of the forehead are numerous, but less energetic,
while the faculties whose organs are situated in the
posterior and superior part of the head, are less
numerous, but very energetic.


Objection 4.


The comparison of the internal organs with the
‘five external senses is rejected as a proof of the
plurality of the organs, because the five external
‘senses may be reduced to one single sense, namely,
‘to sensation, in the same way as all the internal


2


QI4 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


faculties may be reduced to the faculty of thinking.


It is true that the five external senses only feel,
or exert some sensation ; but feeling or sensation in~


this sense is a general expression, and all general
expressions must be specified, in order to indicate
some particular thing. It is the same throughout
all nature. Gravity, density, volume &c. are ge-
neral expressions of physics; but is it not necessary
to specify the physical qualities in order to indicate
any determinate body, as. gold, silver, copper,
iron &c.? Life is a general expression, and its com-
mon phenomena, as birth, nourishment, increase,
decrease, and death, are observed in all living
beings; in plants and animals. Is it not how-
ever necessary to discriminate vegetation from ani-
malisation, since nutrition is modified in plants and
animals? Nay, every common faculty of plants and


animals must be specified in order to indicate every


determinate plant, every determinate animal. Ses
cretion is a general expression ; but in such a case the


particular secretions must be indicated, and they ac-_


tually are performed by particular organs. The
secretion of bile is performed by the liver, that of


urine by the kidneys &c.


It is the same in animal as in organic life: sen-—


sation is a general expression, but every kind of
sensation must be specified. It is quite different to
have a sensation of light or of sound, of taste of
of smell. These particular sensations then are per-


formed by particular organs. The thinking power
is a common faculty; but thinking of space, of


form, colour, tone, number &c., are particular


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 225


manners of thinking; and these particular manners
of thinking are manifested by particular organs.
Hence this objection, instead of refuting the plu-
tality of the organs, proves its necessity.


Objection 5.


Another objection is this: the nerves of the five
external senses are homogeneous; their functions
are only different on account of their external ap-
paratus. The auditory nerve in the eye would see,
the olfactory nerve in the ear would hear ; but the
internal organs are destitute of such external ap-
paratus, consequently they are all the same, and
they perform the same functions. This opinion is
still pretty general. As a polypus may be divided
into several pieces, and every piece become a
whole. Cuvier applies this phenomenon to the
nervous system. He compares the nervous system
with a net, or with a broken loadstone, which
originally are composed of homogeneous parts: he
thinks that the different functions of the nerves
must be attributed to the external apparatus, to
their blood-vessels, their ramifications and combi-
nations; in one word, to an infinity of secondary
circumstances, rather than to the internal structure
of the nerves. But it may be proved anatomically
and physiologically, that not only the external ap-
paratus, but also the internal structure of the
nerves is different. I admit five kinds of nerves,
and subdivide each kind: the first kind of nerves
presides over automatic life; the second over vo-


Q


926 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN:


luntary motion; the third over the functions of the
five senses ; the fourth over the moral feeling; and
the fifth over the intellectual faculties. The nerves of
the first kind are soft, gray, or whitish red; the
nerves of the second are white and firm. ‘The
nerves of the five external senses differ one from
another in their consistence, colour, form, and
texture. The fibres of the brain and cerebellum
are white and delicate. Moreover, every nerves
even the different parts of any nerve, take origin in
a particular quantity of cineritious substance. All
these anatomical circumstances are always the same,
consequently they must be essential to the structure
and function of the nerves... Cuvier, therefore, is
in contradiction with himself in saying* that,
“‘ whatever may be the position of the parts, and
whatever circuitous ways the nerves must take in
order to arrive at the parts to which they belong,
the analogous parts constantly receive their nerves
from the same pair. Similar nerves have always
similar distribution. The smallest pairs which might
be easily supplied by some neighbouring pair, as
the fourth and sixth pairs, preserve their existence
and their destination.” From these anatomical
proofs it seems natural to conclude that the nerves
are not entirely similar, and do not conduct one
identical fluid ‘as the arteries do.

The difference of the nerves themselves is equally
proved by physiology. The divers functions of
automatic life, as the secretions of bile, saliva,


* Logi. p.:192.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 29}:


tears &c., suppose organs essentially different : is
it not the same with the nerves of the five senses?
Their external apparatus are said to be different,
because they receive different impressions ; but how
is it possible that different impressions should be
transmitted to the brain by the same nerves? How
can the impressions of light be propagated by the
auditory nerve. If the manner of propagating
the external impressions, and their communication
to the brain, were essentially the same, and only
weaker or stronger, the perceptions of these similar
impressions ought also to be essentially the same,
and only weaker or stronger. Hence, the difference
of the propagated impressions requires a difference
of the internal structure of the nerves which pro-
pagate them. Moreover, the internal structure of
the nerves must be different, because the nerves
perform their special functions by internal irrita-
tions alone. The sensations which we feel in
dreaming are the same which are produced by the
external impressions. A person who has lost his
eyes dreams that he sees; another thinks he feels


pain in an amputated limb. ‘The increased flow of


blood toward the eyes makes us see shining objects
or flame; in the ears, it excites tingling and hum-


ming; towards the skin, it produces the dream that
we are in a lukewarm bath. Finally, the illusions
of the five external senses in different diseases are


produced only by internal causes. We must infer
from all these phenomena, that the Na ich ae of
every nerve is particular.
It is replied that the difference of every organ
Q2


228 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


cannot be demonstrated: I answer that the con-
trary also cannot be demonstrated. Hence the
homogeneous structure of the organs is neither
proved ner refuted by the five senses. However,
there are many things which are similar in appear-
ance, and which are really quite different in their
nature. Many fluids look like water without being
aqueous. Who can distinguish all the varieties of
apple-trees by the difference of their ligneous fibres,
which must be different since their flowers and
fruits are so? Hence physiological proofs must
supply what is deficient in anatomical proofs.

The identity of the nerves is principally sup-
ported by the phenomena of animal magnetism. —
An animal fluid is said to be diffused throughout all
nature; it is called ether, and considered as the
cause of all phenomena; it is communicated to —
other persons by the will of the magnetiser; and
then it does not only excite the organs, but, ac-
cording to certain magnetisers, it communicates —
also to the soul the different external impressions by —
means of each nerve; or, according to other mag-
netisers, this animal fluid is the leader of the ex-
ternal impressions. The will and its modifications
are communicated by it; therefore the will of the
magnetiser and of the magnetised person govern
one another. I admit an animal fluid which is com-
municated to the nerves. However, I propose
various questions to magnetisers, the answer of
which should be interesting for me. I wish to
know in what state it is communicated, whether it
varies only in quantity, or whether being commu-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 929


nicated from one person to another its quality is also
modified ; then whether this fluid acts immediately
upon the soul of the magnetised person, or whether
it acts only upon the organs, and by means of these
upon the soul? Is it not proved that this fluid
which is communicated varies in quality, because
according to all magnetisers it is necessary to place
every one in relation? It seems certain that this
fluid acts only upon the organs; for children and
idiots are not fit for such experiments, while the
experiments are said to succeed principally with
very delicate and irritable persons. I wish also to
know with what the magnetised individuals can be
acquainted ? Why are they said to know more than
the magnetisers themselves? According to com-
mon observations they are acquainted only with
that which is known in the country where they live.
I allow that this fluid may excite the activity of the
organs, but I think it is impossible that it can
render every nerve fit to perform all manifestations
of the mind. ‘This fluid may also contribute to the
state of health, but it cannot produce all the phe-
nomena of living beings and cure all diseases. It
results from these considerations that the structure
of the nerves is different, and that therefore their
functions also are different.


Objection 6.


Plattner made the following objection: a musician
plays with his fingers on all instruments, why should
not the soul manifest all its operations by means of


230 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


one and the same organ? This observation is rather
for than against the plurality of the organs. First
there are ten fingers which play; moreover, the
instruments present different chords or holes. We
admit only one organ for music; and all kinds of
music are produced by this organ. Hence, this


assertion of Plattner does not invalidate our prin-
ciple,


Objection le


All voluntary motion is produced by muscles:
consequently it is possible that all ideas and sen-
sations are the result of the different motions of the
cerebral fibres. ‘Those who make this objection
forget that the different motions are performed by
different muscles. ‘There are flexor, extensor, pro-
nator, and other muscles; and every muscle is
composed of many fibres which have different di-
rections. Now in every position and in every
motion of the body other muscles are active. In
the same way it is conceivable that every kind of
sensation or idea is attached to a particular organ.


RECAPITULATION.


In this article I have proved that it is necessary
to make divisions and subdivisions of the beings
and their functions, and that they have at all times
been made. I have then considered in particular
the divisions and subdivisions, into which philoso-
phers and physiologists have divided the faculties
of man. I have spoken of the different seats which


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 231


have been assigned to the different faculties. I
have mentioned the proofs, according to which it
is evident that every faculty is manifested by a
particular organ. I have supported this assertion
by analogy; by the different qualities of different
kinds of animals; and by the different number of
their faculties ; by the modifications of the faculties
in both sexes and in the same individual ; by the
want of simultaneous manifestations of the faculties;
by the alternate action and rest of the faculties ;
by the state of dreaming; by that of somnambu-
lism, and of visions; by natural alienations; and
finally by the refutation of all objections. Con-
sequently, it is now to be examined which are the
special faculties and their respective organs?


CHAPTER V.


ON THE MEANS OF DETERMINING THE FUNCTIONS OF
THE CEREBRAL PARTS.


After having proved that the faculties are innate,
that the manifestations of the mind depend on the
brain, and that the manifestations of every particu-
lar faculty depend on some particular organ, it 1s
natural to examine how the organ of every faculty
may be determined. In the chapter on the princi-
ple that the brain is exclusively the organ of the
manifestations of our feelings and intellectual facul-
ties, I have refuted the different manners of mea-
suring the faculties of the mind. I have proved
that it is necessary to confine our comparisons to
every faculty and its peculiar organ. In the pre-
ceding article we have seen that the idea of the plu-
rality of the organs is very ancient, consequently it
is conceivable that different organs have been looked
for. Therefore let us first consider what means-
have been employed for this purpose, and examine
why no one has succeeded.


ANATOMY.


Many natural philosophers have hoped to point out.
the organs of the intellectual faculties by anatomy


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 2933


in general, or at least by comparative anatomy. It is
also pretty generally believed that the new physio-
logy of the brain is the result of its anatomy: I shall
make some reflexions in respect to anatomy in ge-
neral, and to comparative anatomy in particular.
There are very few cases where the structure of any
part indicates its function; and such opinions are
never more than conjectural. Before the motions
of muscles were observed, it was impossible to infer
from their structure that they were contractile.
Who, in seeing the structure of the stomach, could
conjecture its digestive power? Who can distinguish
by the structure of the viscera, that the liver secretes
bile, the kidney urine? The structure of the heart
was known a long time before its function was disco-
_vered. Who among anatomists can determine, by

the structure and form of the nerves, what kind of
impressions they propagate? ‘The deepest perspi-
| cuity would not have attributed the smell to the
| pituitary membrane of the nose, the taste to the ner-
vous papillz of the tongue, the sensation of light to
| the optic nerve &c.

It is the same with the brain. Let the direction
of its fibres be known; let anatomists distinguish
their greater or less consistence, their more or less
white colour, their different size, length &c. what
conclusion can they draw from these circumstances
in respect to the functions? None. Moreover, it is
known that even in plants the functions are ex-
tremely different, although it would be impossible
to perceive any difference of the organization, which
however must be different because the effects pro-


234 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


duced by it are so. Thus it is certain that the ana-
tomical knowledge of any part does not indicate its
function. It is therefore necessary to have re-
course to other means in order to discover it. On
this account, the physiology of any; part precedes
often its anatomy. It was generally known that we
see by means of the eyes, before anatomists were
acquainted with their structure. If it were possible
to determine the functions of the organization ac-
cording to its structure, we should no longer have
occasion to refute many errors; for instance, that
the moral sentiments do neither result from the
viscera or nervous plexus and ganglia of the abdo-
men, nor from the temperaments &c. Indeed many
organs of the brain were discovered before its struc-
ture was demonstrated, and these discoveries might
have subsisted for many centuries without the struc-
ture of the brain being known.

When I say, however, that the function of any part —
is not discovered by the knowledge of its anatomical
structure, I am far from maintaining that the struc-
ture of any part has no relation to its function. The
structure of the heart has not. shown its function,
yet its structure is in relation to its function. It is
the same with all the parts of automatic and animal
life. A physiological system of the brain would
be necessarily false, were it in contradiction with its
anatomical structure. If an anatomist can prove
that all nerves are only prolongations of the brain ;
that they terminate at one central point; that there
is no difference between the brains of different ani-
mals though their faculties are different; that all


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 235


parts of the brain increase and decrease simultane-
ously ; that there is no difference between the brain
of an idiot from birth, and that of a person endowed
with great talent. In one word, if an anatomist
demonstrate that the structure of the brain is in
contradiction with physiological principles, or vice
wersad, he will undermine and annihilate our whole
doctrine with all its consequences. ‘Thus there is
some relation between the structure and function of
organic parts, but the structure of any part seldom
indicates its function.

Let us now examine whether comparative ana-
tomy has determined the functions of the brain. <At
the first view, it seems that comparative anatomy
ought to afford important results ; but there are, in
this respect, obstacles which it is impossible to over-
come. First, I have just said that it is impossible
to determine the functions according to the struc-
ture of any part. Moreover, there is a great num-
ber of animals whose automatic life presents several
organs of which man is entirely destitute. We may
conjecture that it is the same with animal life; but
how can we conceive any function if we are not en-
dowed with a similar faculty? Although it is of the
highest importance to know the gradation observed
by nature in perfecting the brains of animals in
order to multiply and ennoble their functions, we
must allow that, notwithstanding the most assiduous
labours relative to this end, comparative anatomy
has only shown the mechanical form of different
brains, but that these anatomical notions do not at
_all determine the functions of the cerebral parts.


236 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


There was not any principle to enable us to de-
termine whether the same parts exist in different
animals or not. Dzufferent parts were denied or ad-
mitted according to their similar or dissimilar form.
The nerves of insects, crustaceous animals, and mol-
lusca, are derived partly from ganglia, partly from
the brain ; but, according to our anatomical princi-
ples, no nerve can either be derived from another
nerve nor from the brain. Every nerve has its own
origin, and we call brain the nervous mass, which is
joined to the nerves of motion and the five external
senses, and which manifests the moral sentiments
and intellectual faculties.

In the lower animals, it is extremely difficult, if
not impossible, to determine whether there be a
particular cerebral mass, which is intimately united
to the organs of the nerves so that they seem to
form one whole, the parts of which cannot be de-
monstrated; or whether this mass belongs only to
the nerves of the five external senses, so that the ex-
ternal impressions are perceived without a brain. In
fishes and reptiles, the nervous mass, situated in the
skull, is divided into several ganglia. The anterior
pair of these ganglia engenders the olfactory nerve ;
behind this pair are the hemispheres of the brain
which are small, and composed of fibres whose func-
tions are unknown. In birds the hemispheres of the
brain are more considerable than in the animals of
lower orders, but they do not yet present convolu-
tions. We have rectified the error of all anatomists,
according to which the brains of birds are said to be
destitute of the commissures, thalami, and corpora


:
:


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 237


striata. Their cerebellum is single, and consists of


semicircular rings. In viviparous animals, the cere-
bellum ceases to be single, it has lateral parts. ‘Lhe


brains of small quadrupeds, as of mice, rats, squire
rels &c. present a smooth surface without convolu-
tions. Cuvier however is wrong in saying that the
brains of the rodentia in general have no convolu-
tions, for in the beaver the convolutions of its brain
are very distinct. In the greater number of quad-
rupeds, the brains present distinct convolutions ; but
neither in birds nor in quadrupeds has the function
of any cerebral part been pointed out.

According to Cuvier the posterior lobes of the
brain are wanting in mammalia, except in monkies.
He supports this opinion by the observation that
their cerebellum is not covered with the brain. ‘This
conclusion is very incorrect. It is true the cere-
bellum is not covered ; but this particularity results
from the horizontal position of quadrupeds. ‘The
posterior lobes cannot be denied, because their size
and form are different in different animals; other-
wise the cerebellum and the anterior and middle
lobes ought to be denied also. Nay it seems to me
that in animals the anterior lobes and lateral convo-
lutions of their brains are proportionally much
smaller than the posterior lobes. ‘The posterior
convolutions spring out of the pretended optic tha-
lami; these are proportionally much larger in ani-
mals than the external half of their corpora striata.
Consequently the anterior and middle lobes of the
brains of animals do not present a greater analogy
to those of man than the posterior lobes. It is to


238 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


be considered that in general the position and form
of the cerebral parts do not constitute the essential
proof of their existence. In man, the ganglion of
the olfactory nerve is covered by the anterior lobe
of the brain ; in animals this ganglion lies before the
convolutions: the olfactory nerve of man is sepa-
rated from his brain, and in the greatest number of
animals it is united to the anterior convolutions &c.
but are therefore the anterior lobes wanting in ani-
mals? Moreover, there are even men whose cere-
bellum is not entirely covered by the posterior lobes;
these lobes however exist,. and are only smaller.
Thus the posterior lobes may be smaller in different
animals, but the whole arrangement of their brain,
the cavities of the hemispheres, the diverging and
uniting fibres &c. prove the existence of the poste-
rior lobes as well as that of any cerebral part.
Finally, animals manifest the same functions which
are performed by the posterior lobes of the brain of
man, consequently it is also permitted to conclude
physiologically that the respective organs exist.
Cuvier says also, in contradiction with himself,
that the brains of quadrupeds have the same parts
as the brain of man. By this saying he can only
mean the large portions, as the cerebellum, the pons
Varoli, the thalami, corpora striata, corpus callo-
sum, anterior and middle lobes. Therefore this as-
sertion must yet be rectified in another respect.
The general type of the brains and cerebella of man
and animals is the same; but they present many
modifications, and many parts of the brain of man
are wanting in the brains of animals. ‘This may be


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 939


conceived by some analogy. All plants and all trees
have some common parts, as roots, stalk, trunk,
boughs, branches, leaves; but can we say that all
vegetables have the same parts? The general type is
the same in all, but their modifications are infinite.
The laws of vegetation are the same in all plants,
but the elements, submitted to these laws, are dif-


ferent. Inthe same way, the laws of the nervous


system are the same in respect to origin, increase in
size and perfection. ‘There exists the same type
from the brains of insects to that of man, but the
brains present as many modifications as nature in-
tended to produce different functions. ‘To this end
the common parts are more or less complicated.
Cuvier thought that there is some proportion be-
tween the size of the tubercula quadrigemina and
the food of animals. According to him the anterior
pair of these tubercles is larger in herbivorous ani-
mals, the posterior in carnivorous. ‘The wolf and
sheep have the nates larger than the testes: hence
the assertion of Cuvier falls to the ground. I pass


different other errors believed and propagated by


)


comparative anatomists. They belong rather to
anatomy than to physiology. I think it results evi-
dently from these considerations that comparative
anatomy has not, more than anatomy in general, ad-
yanced the physiology of the brain.


MUTILATIONS.


Several natural philosophers hoped to determin:
the functions of the brain by its mutilations. The:


940 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


cut away different parts in order to see what faculty
should be lost. But, first, these means could not be
‘exactly employed, and therefore they must be entirely
useless. ‘They could not be exactly employed, and
all experiments made to this purpose were very im-
perfect, because the duplicity of the organs was
overlooked: besides the structure of the brain was
not known. Therefore the mutilations have been
made horizontally, while the direction of the fibres
is vertical—( Pi. III. fig. 1&2). Moreover, the
special faculties of the mind were unknown, and the
mutilated animals were said to manifest all facul-
ties, if they manifested the common and general
faculties. |
These means were not only entirely useless, but
they never could serve to determine the functions of
the brain, for the organs are not confined to the
surface, consequently every organ ought to be cut
away, on both sides, from the surface to the medulla
oblongata. But such a wound would kill any per-
fect animal. Let us even suppose that the animal
could survive such mutilations, how should it mani-
fest a sensation of which it has been deprived? And
how should it indicate the want of this sensation?
Moreover, such operations are too violent, and the ant-
mals might retain several faculties without manifest-
ing them. <A bird whose brain is violently injured
will not sing, or build a nest &c. Finally, some-
times the derangements of parts, which are affected
by sympathy, are more sensible than those of parts
which suffer primitively or idiopathically. A head-
ach is often the only result of some indigestible


3


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. QA


thing in the stomach, and this takes place without
any feeling of pain in the stomach itself. Hence it —
is impossible to determine the functions of the cere-
bral parts by their mutilation.


OUR MANNER OF PROCEEDING.


As the structure of any part does not indicate its
function, and as the manifestations of the mind ne-
vertheless depend on the organization, it must be
examined on what other material conditions of any
part its function depends. In every function, we may
distinguish the energy or quantity, and the modifi-
cation or quality. It is very difficult to examine
the modifications, it is more easy to consider the
different energy of the functions. It is then to be
examined on what conditions the energy of the
faculties depends. There is a general law that the
energy of the functions of any part depends on its
size, and on its organic constitution; that is, on its
extensity and intensity. It is also certain that, in
order to judge the degree of activity of the facul-
ties, it is necessary to consider, besides the exten-
sity and intensity of the organ, the exercise of every
faculty, and the mutual influence of the faculties
upon each other. Now among these conditions the
most easy to be observed is the size of the organs.
Consequently as the energy of the function depends
on the size of the organs, and as the size of the
organs is the most easily distinguished, it results
that these means are the most proper for the dis-


covery of the organs.
R


949 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


There is indeed a general law throughout alli
nature, that the properties of bodies act with an
energy proportionate to their size. A large load-
stone attracts a greater mass of iron than a small
loadstone. ‘The fermentation of the same fluid is
more energetic if its quantity be more considerable.
A great muscle of the same kind is stronger than a
small one. If the nerves of the five external senses
are larger on one side of the body the functions are
also stronger on the same side. Why should it not
be the same in respect to the brain? Those however
who object that we neglect the internal organization
are entirely wrong.

In order to judge exactly of our inquiries it must
be considered that we do not endeavour to deter-
mine every degree of activity of any cerebral part,
but only the nature of its functions, and to this end
its size is sufficient. Gall, though he mentioned
this difference in his lectures, was not careful enough
to insist upon it. ‘The internal constitution, though
very important, is not easily distinguished. On ac-
count of its influence, however, we never compare
the individuals of different kinds, not even the in-
dividuals of the same species, but, in order to con-
ceive the first idea of any organ, we confine our
observations to each individual in particular. . I ad-
mit even the possibility that, in the same individual,
the internal constitution of the different parts of the
brain varies in the same way as the optic nerve may
be more irritable than the auditory or olfactory
nerve. It may, however, be observed that a great
difference in the size of the cerebral parts produces


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 2A


a difference in the manifestations of the mind. In-
deed the divers parts of the brain are differently
developed: one is larger, another smaller; and ac-
cording to a general law we are convinced that the
functions of the parts, which are much developed,
manifest themselves with more energy, while the
small organs are less active. It results that, in per-
sons endowed with partial genius, the organs are
the most easily discovered. In fact, each organ has
been discovered in persons who manifested one kind
ef function in the highest degree. |


Re


244


CHAPTER VI.


ON THE POSSIBILITY OF DETERMINING THE DEVELOPE-
MENT OF THE BRAIN IN GENERAL, AND ITS PARTS IN
PARTICULAR.


If the functions of the moral feelings and intel-
lectual faculties are more or less energetic accord-
ing to the size of the organs, it is to be examined
whether it is possible to distinguish the develope-
ment of the cerebral parts in man and animals during
life? This question, Is it possible to know the size
of the cerebral parts by the form and size of the
head? must be distinguished from another question,
What is the cause of the form and size of the head?
This latter question is important in respect to physio-
logy in general, but it is indifferent in respect to
the practical part of the ‘organology of the brain.
This requires only the possibility of knowing the
size of the organs without examining the causes of
their developement. With respect to the first ques-
tion we must answer, that there is a great difference
between the different kinds of animals; that it is im-
possible to compare animals with animals, or ani-
mals with man; that it is even necessary to consider,
in animals and in man, the different periods of life;
that in mankind in particular it is sometimes pos-
sible to determine the organs of the brain with


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 9435


exactness and facility; that several other circum-
stances render it difficult; and, finally, that in cer-
tain cases it is impossible. Let us begin with the
examination of the cause which produces the form
of the head.


THE BRAIN IS THE PRINCIPAL CAUSE OF THE FORM AND
SIZE OF THE HEAD.


It is asked, whether it is the skull or the brain
which determines the form of the head? It is to be
remarked that I here speak only of mankind in par-
ticular, but that these researches, in respect of both
these questions, may be extended to every kind of
animals. It may seem that the skull, which is hard,
must determine the form of the brain, which is soft,
rather than the brain that of the skull. I shall con-
sider, on this account, man in his healthy and dis-
eased state. After conception, the brain exists be-
fore it is confined to the skull. It is covered with
a fourfold membraneous coat: the pia mater, which
closely adheres to the substance of the brain; the
tunica arachnoides or arachnoid coat, which bears
this name on account of the extreme tenuity of its
texture; the dura mater, which consists of two
separable membranes; and lastly, a cartilaginous
membrane in which the ossification is formed. ‘This
fourfold membraneous coat, enveloping the brain,
represents exactly its form.

The ossification begins at different points, called
points of ossification; from these points then the
ossification extends in a radiant direction according


246 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN,


to the size and form of the cerebral parts. The
elongations of the bony radiations are sooner or
later aggregated, and form the bones, the regular
assemblage of which forms the skull. In new-born
children, there are commonly eight bones, which
contain the brain and represent its size: these
bones are—two frontal, which latter commonly unite
and form one bone, yet there are grown-up per-
sons whose frontal bone is divided into two; two
parietal, two temporal, one sphenoidal, one oc-
cipital, and one ethmoidal bone. ‘These different
bones have connexions called sutures or articula-
tions; and these bones together form the skull, In
new-born children, in general, the corners between
the two frontal and the two parietal bones are not
yet ossified. . This membranous part is ‘called
fontanel. The bones are, till this age, very thin, and
accommodated to the form and size of the cerebral
parts. It may here be asked, whether any difference
of skull and brain is already perceptible in foetus?
Soemmerring has elucidated this object; we have
repeated the same observations ; and it is indubitable
that the heads of foetus are as different as those of
grown-up persons.

‘Then birth happens, and it must be ascertained
whether the form of the heads of new-born children
is changed by birth; it may also be asked, whether
it is possible that a midwife, or an accoucheur, can
give to the head an arbitrary form, by compressing
the head or impressing certain parts? Before I
answer this question, I shall consider natural de-
livery. Sometimes the head of the foetus is retained


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 247


during difficult birth. In these cases the head
is compressed. Nature however has taken par-
ticular care of the preservation of the brain
enclosed in the cavity of the cranium: the dura
mater, which envelopes the brain, is attached to the
skull more firmly than in adults, and prevents the
bones from riding over each other. The prolongations
of the dura mater, known under the names falciform
process, and tentorium, contribute equally to secure
the parts of the brain. The bones themselves are
flexible, elastic, and articulated in their connexions.
Moreover, the skull forms an arch, and this form
offers the greatest resistance. The brain is also a
living part, and its natural elasticity is supported by
its continual elevation and falling, produced by the
circulation. The tumours which are commonly ob-
served in the top of the heads of new-born children
result from the accumulation of blood, the circulation
of which is interrupted; but after a few hours or
days the humours are absorbed, and the tumour dis-
appears. Consequently, a transient pressure, which
does not act very violently, does not change the
primitive form of the brain. A violent compres-
sion will. derange the organization; a less violent
but permanent compression, which changes the na-
tural form of the brain, and hinders its develope-
ment, will always do harm to the manifestations of
the mind. If such individuals do not become idiots,
the manifestations of their faculties are at least
injured.

It happens sometimes that the bones of the skull
do not at birth touch one another. In this case the


948 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


head is compressed, and children die during birth.
This circumstance should be considered, when an
unfortunate woman is accused of having murdered
her child. It is also obvious, that though in the or-
dinary state great violence must be employed to
compress the skull and the brain, yet in delivering
the foetus by means of the forceps, it may easily
happen that the brain is compressed and the organs
injured. But in this case the manifestations of the
mind will be injured also. Thus it follows from
these observations, that in new-born children the
form and size of the head depend on the brain.

It is objected that, in America, several tribes of
savages give an arbitrary form to the heads of their
children. I do not pretend that such reports are
false. JI admit that engines of this kind, which are
preserved as curiosities in cabinets, have been em-
ployed with the intention of flattening the head,
but I am not convinced of the effect which is at-
tributed to these machines. I have seen five skulls
of Caraibes; they were low and laterally extended,
particularly at the temporal bones. Every one how-
ever presented some modification as distinctly as
four skulls of any European nation could do. I have
even seen skulls of Europeans which were lower
and wider. ‘This form of skull therefore is not
merely the effect of artificial pressure. Moreover,
the upper surface of each of the five Caraibean
skulls was differently vaulted, and not at all mo-
delled according to the pressure of an equal board.
It even seems to me that this manner of flattening
the head is refuted by itself: according to the


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 249


preceding observations, great violence must be
employed to compress the skull and brain ; now this
cannot take place from above, without an equal
counterpressure from below, or from another part;
and if the pressure produce an. effect, it must be
the same with the counterpressure. Hence I think
that Americans, as well as Europeans, who endea-
vour to give an arbitrary form to the brain, make
an incorrect calculation. It may be replied that
the effect of pressure is evident by the feet of
Chinese women. I certainly do not deny the effect
of pressure; but the feet of the Chinese are com-
pressed from all sides; there is pressure and coun-
terpressure, and their effect is every where visible.
This might also be the case with the head, but I
argue only against the inexactnéss of observations,
according to which the head is depressed on one
side alone.

I continue now the elucidation of the natural
developement of the skull. By degrees it grows
hard. It may therefore be asked, whether the hard
skull must yield to the soft brain? If we compare
the skull of a child with the skull of an adult per-
son, it is obvious that the skull of the adult is
larger than that of the child, consequently, the
skull increases in proportion to the brain. More-
over, all the cerebral parts do not increase simul-
taneously; and this partial developement is equally
observed in the skull. ‘The forehead, for instance,
which at birth is narrow and flat, grows wider and
prominent from the age of three months, to that of
eight or ten years. After this period, the middle


250 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


part of the forehead is less developed in proportion
to the other parts.. The neck of children is very
small, for the cerebellum, whose developement takes
place very late, is situated in the inferior occipital
fossee; but in proportion as it increases, the skull
stows prominent from without. It is the same
with all other cerebral parts which mcrease succes-
sively. |

Some explain the growth of the skull in a mecha- —
nical way by the action of ‘the brain. This ex-
planation is quite incorrect; for if the brain were
exposed to the least compression, its functions
would be deranged. The phenomenon of growth
results from the continual change which our body,
as wellas every organic being, undergoes. The parts
of our body are continually decomposed and com-
posed again; the matter which constitutes our body
to-day is evacuated by excretions, and it is re-
placed by another matter, furnished by alimentation.
The brain and skull are submitted to this decom-
position and composition like all other parts of our
body, and, according to the natural law established
between the skull and brain, the brain commands at
all ages the directions in which the bony mass is
deposited in order to form the skull. If the whole
brain, or some parts, increase or decrease, the ossi-
fication of the skull follows always the size and ~
form of the brain.

It is not only the case in respect to the head, |
that a hard part is formed according to the form of
a soft, but it is general that the hard parts which
inclose soft ones are formed according to the form


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 251


of the soft parts. If in consumption, one side of the
lungs alone be affected, the corresponding side of
the thorax is diminished. If we push out the eve of
an animal, the orbit becomes smaller; on the con-
trary, if an eye grow carcinomatous, the orbit is
extended in proportion as the eye-ball grows. In
the same manner, the skull follows the different size
and form of the brain.

Let us now consider what happens with the brain
and skull in old age. Then the cerebral parts diminish
by degrees ; the convolutions, which are plump and
well nourished in young persons, sink down and
diminish in size; and they are no more near one
another. In the same proportion as the brain or
its parts decrease, the internal table of the skull is
changed according to the law of nutrition I have
just spoken of, Ordinarily the external table of the
skull preserves in old age the same form and size
which it had at the age of maturity. Then the
skull, if the brain diminish in size, becomes
thicker; and the two tables are sometimes very
distant one from the other. ‘The superior portion
of the orbit is ordinarily very thin and transparent,
but it happens sometimes in old persons, whose
brain has diminished in size, that the two tables
are separated and very distant one from another.
The external preserves its position, but the internal -
follows the size of the brain, and diminishes much
the cavity of the skull. Thus it results from this
exposition of ages, in respect to the changes pro-
duced in the brain and skull, that the form of the
skull is always the result of that of the brain; that


252 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the internal table of the skull is moulded accord-
ing to the brain from the beginning of ossification
till death; but that in old and decrepid age the
two tables are often separated, and the skull is
thicker than it was at the age of maturity.

The diseased state of the brain also proves our
assertion relative to the form of the skull. There
is no skull without brain. If monsters are born
without brain, their skull is also wanting. Hf in
idiots from birth the brain be hindered from in-
creasing, the skull remains small (P/. IV. fig 1);
on the contrary, if the brain be distended by water
accumulated in its cavities, the skull participates
of this extension, whether in general, or in particu-
Jar places.—(Pl. V. fig. 1 & 2.) The resistance of
the brain is also demonstrated by wounds of the
skull, wherein bits of bones are impressed by any
external violence, and put again in the right position
by the action of the brain. Moreover, this resist-
ance of the brain is proved by the fungus of the
dura mater; these fungous tumours act upon the
skull, destroy and pierce it. Consequently all con-
curs to prove that the form and size of the brain
regulate the form and size of the skull. However,
I do not deny that in some diseases of the skull,
the ossification may be altered primitively, and the
developement of the brain injured by the influence
of the skull upon the brain; but in this case the
functions of the brain are unavoidably deranged.

It is incorrect to think that the impressions which
are correspondent to the convolutions, and those
which the blood-vessels of the dura mater make on


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 255


the internal surface of the skull, are the result of a
mechanical pressure. The grooves of the internal
surface of the skull are the effect of the absorbent
vessels, and the impressions called digital take place
when and where the dura mater is very thin ; this
happens commonly in the greatest number of ani-
mals, as in the roe, sheep, cat, dog &c., and in
man at the basis of the skull, and sometimes all
over it in individuals who die of consumption, and
whose dura mater had become thin.

There are several other opinions relative to the
size and form of the head, which are quoted as
objections against our assertion, according to which
the brain determines the form of the head. A great
number of anatomists and physiologists maintain
that the form of the head is modified by the muscles,
and that several elevations attributed to the brain
are the effect of the action of the muscles which
are attached to the outside of the skull. There are
indeed bony tumours on the outside of the skull,
which are neither the effect of the brain nor of
muscular action: these elevations are either bony
excrescences or bony elevations of different forms,
destined by nature for the insertion of the muscles.
But I speak here only of the form of the skull, or
of its protuberances, which we consider as the result
of the brain. Those who defend the influence of
the muscles upon the form of the head do not
agree about their effect. Some maintain that
muscles depress the organs, others think that they
produce elevations. But it is easy to prove that


254 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the muscles have not the least influence upon the
form of the skull.

If the muscles determined the form of the skull,
they ought to act in the direction of their inser-
tion; the protuberances of the occiput, and of both
sides of the head, ought to be directed downward,
and not backward and sideward. In this suppo-
sition there ought to be a proportion between the
size of the protuberances and the strength of the
muscles which are inserted into them; but often
large protuberances are corresponding to weak
muscles, and vice versd. Negroes have larger and
stronger masticating muscles than Europeans, and
the heads of the former are narrower at the tem-
poral region than those of the latter. ‘There are
anatomists who therefore think that the muscles
compress the skull. But, in opposition to this, we
see that in children the lower region of the head,
eovered with muscles, is narrower than the upper
region, while it is quite the contrary in adult per-
sons. We have observed Europeans who had very
weak masticating muscles, and whose heads were
large or narrow, and others who had strong muscles
and narrow or large heads. It is the same with
animals. The heads of lions, tigers, hyenas, dogs,
are much narrower at the the temples than those
of oxen, horses, stags &c., however the former
animals have stronger masticating muscles. . The
seal has a large head and weak muscles, while the
badger has strong muscles and a narrow head.
Other animals have strong muscles and a large head.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 255


Moreover, the muscles ought to act upon the
external table of the skull, and both tables ought
io recede one from the other, while they are nearest
at the places where the muscles are inserted, so
that there the skull is transparent. On the con-
trary, both tables of the skull are the most distant
one from another at the places where no muscles
are inserted. Sometimes it happens that the skull
grows thick even in young persons: this thickening
then takes always place at the internal surface, as
is evident. by the spina cruciata of the occiput. If
in old persons, or in chronic diseases of the brain, —
the skull grow thick, and if both tables be distant
one from the other, the internal plate always di-
minishes the cavity of the skull, while the external
plate preserves its usual direction.

The protuberances or depressions of the skull
ought to be not only in proportion to the strength
‘of the muscles, but also to the time during which
the muscles have acted, which however is not ob-
served. Moreover, the protuberances or depres-
sions produced by the muscles ought to be con-
formabie to their points of insertion; but what
muscie can produce the form of the determinate
organs, for instance, that of construction, of co-
vetousness &c.? ‘The form of the protuberances 1s
always corresponding to the form of the organs.

There are many protuberances where no muscles
are inserted, as the protuberances which indicate
firmness, veneration, benevolence, self-love and
eircumspection. What muscle can draw the skull
upwards? In many animals, as in the hog, ox, ele-

3


256 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


phant &c., both tables of the skull are separated
one from the other, but the cells are irregular and
never corresponding to the insertion of the muscles.
If in animals the muscles be placed in the interior
of the skull, for instance in the tortoise, the head
ought to be small and contracted. The orbit ought
to grow smaller by degrees, on account of the
muscles, which are inserted on its internal surface.

Finally, in foetuses, muscles do not act with
strength. enough to determine the form of their
heads, which however are as different as those of
adult persons. Consequently, it is evident from all
these proofs, that the muscles do not at all deter-
mine the form of the skull.

Professor Ackermann, at Heidelberg, thought
that the frontal sinuses of man, and the cells be-
tween both plates of the skull of animals, were pro-
duced by the inspiration of the air, which accord-
ing to him distends the cells by degrees. He main-
tained that, from that cause, individuals who are
very active, and much exercised in walking and
running, have larger sinuses, and that animals which
live in the open air and which inspire a great deal
of it, present the greatest number of cells. Se-
veral considerations prove the error of this asser-.
tion, which is not grounded upon experiments, but
only hypothetically advanced.

The possibility of drawing in the air supposes
already a space between the two tables of the skull ;
but how has the space first been produced? Let
us admit that the air is drawn into the sinuses,
what may be its action? Ackermann fancies that

I


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. O57


the air is warmed, and distends the cells by its ex-
pansibility ? But is it not more probable that the air,
in its state of expansion, goes out through the same
aperture through which it entered, instead of acting
with violence against the walls of the cells? Even in
the supposition that the air acts against the walls
of the cells, ought not the cells to be distended like
bladders: why then are they angular? Moreover,
all the cells of the skulls of animals do not com-
municate one with another. There are also cells in
the interior of other bones; for instance, in the
bones of the extremities, in both maxilla, even in the
foetus: then, why should cells not be formed origi-
nally between both the tables of the skull?

Finally, the opinion of Professor Ackermann is.
a mere supposition. We know individuals who lead
a sedentary life, and have great sinuses, and others
who live always in open air, and have no sinuses. It
is the same with animals. ‘The ox and hog have
larger cells than the stag, roe, andreindeer. ‘he
lazy owl has greater cells than the active cagle.
The skulls of the stork, wild duck, wild goose and
swallow, have no cells, notwithstanding the steady
and rapid motions of these birds. Consequently,
the opinion of Ackermann, that the inspiration of
the air produces the frontal sinuses and the cells
between the two plates of the skulls of animals, is
erroneous and falls to the ground.

Hufeland, of Berlin, made the observation that
perhaps in countries where the inhabitants bear bur-
dens upon the heads, the form of their heads is
changed and modified. First, very young children

5


958 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


do not bear any burden upon the heads; conse-
quently when they begin to carry burdens their
skulls are closed and offer resistance. This resist-
ance is greater on account of the vaulted form of
the bones; and the brain itself contributes to resist.
Then those who bear burdens upon their heads
make use of cushions or rolls, so that the burden
cannot press upon the top of their heads, but upon
the lateral parts; consequently the head cannot
be flattened by these means. Moreover, they do
not bear their burdens continually. Their heads are
free from burdens for the greatest part of their lives,
and in these intervals they might increase. Tinally,
this opinion is not only refuted in theory, but also by
experience. We have examined many individuals
who have borne burdens upon the head for their
whole life, and whose heads were much higher than
the heads of other persons who never bore any
burden.

Walter, of Berlin, Rudolphe, and several others,
have maintained that the forming power determines
the ossification and the shape of the skull. I have
already said that the ossification of the skull is not
the result of the brain; the bony mass is secreted
by particular vessels, and according to the state of
these blood-vessels the internal constitution of the
skull is modified: however it is also certain that the
bony mass is deposited according to the form and
size of the brain. |

Thus it follows from all that I have said in re-
spect to the skull, that its form is the result of the
form of the brain. Let us now examine the circum-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 959


stances wherein it is certain and easy to distinguish
the size of the cerebral parts; afterwards I shall
mention divers difficulties which must be removed ;
finally, I shall consider the cases wherein it is im-
possible to determine exactly the size of the brain
and its parts.


' POSSIBILITY OF DISTINGUISHING THE SIZE OF THE BRAIN.


Ihave already mentioned that for the practical
part of the physiology of the brain, it is indifferent
to know the cause of the form and size of the head;
that, in this respect, it is only necessary to distin-
guish the size of the brain, and its particular parts
by the exterior of the head. This knowledge re-
quires a just idea of the difference between the size
of the head and that of the skull. All dimensions
of the skull are much smaller, but the whole shape
of the head is preserved in its details. It is only
with this restriction that we can make use of antique
busts and heads. For it is certain that the antiques
do not present the natural size of the head. ‘They
are colossal, but it is remarkable that their form and
size are very different ; for instance, what difference
between the heads of women and men; between the
form and size of the heads of gladiators, sacrifica-
tors, of philosophers, of great poets, or generals?

_ Inrespect to the size and form of the head, it
is also necessary to know the common size of
heads, whether in general or at their different re-
_ gions, in order to distinguish at the first view whe-
ther any head is too large (Pl. V. jig. 1 & 2), or too
§ 2


260 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN,


small.—(P?. IV. fig. 1). It is also necessary not to
confound bony excrescences and irregular elevations
with the protuberances which present the develope-
ment of the organs. Moreover, it is necessary to
known the bony protuberances which belong to the
natural state of the skull, and which have some par-
ticular destination, as the mastoid process behind
the ears, the spina cruciata of the occiput, and the
zygomatic process.

it is certain from experience that the skin, muscles,
and coverings of the head in general, do not prevent
us from distinguishing the form of the skull; and
that the dimensions of the skull are only smaller;
but it is still: to be examined whether the form and
size of the skull indicate those of the brain? To
this end I repeat, that the skull is composed of two
tables, one external and the other internal; and
that between these two tables a cellular spongy
mass, called diploe, is deposited.—(P/. IIL. fig. 1
& 2). ‘These two tables are scarcely perceptible in
children, they are distinct in adults, but their
distance one from the other is not very considerable.
In general, from birth to the period when the brain
begins to diminish in size, it is possible and easy to.
distinguish the size of the brain by considering the
size of the skull. For there never is an empty space
between the skull and the brain, and both tables are
not distant enough to invalidate our assertion.

It is objected that both tables are not parallel,
and that for this reason it is impossible to measure
the size of the brain and its parts according to the
size and form of the skull. This objection falls to


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN, 261°


the ground as soon as our method is known. It
is not necessary to appreciate the minute difference
of size, in order to distinguish the developement of
the organs. ‘These occupy a large surface, and they
present a very different size from the lowest to the
highest degree of developement.

It is also to be considered that we only intend to
distinguish the size of organs, and that it is essential
not to confound this idea with that of protuberances.
If one organ be much developed, and the neigh-
bouring organs very little, the developed organ pre-
sents an elevation or protuberance; but if the neigh-
bouring organs are developed in proportion, no pro-
tuberance can be perceived, the surface is smooth.
Now this may happen if the organs are much or
little developed. Every individual has all organs ;
and it is only to be determined whether the whole
brain, or one or several parts, are more or less de-
veloped. It is also to be remarked that, in order to
distinguish the developement of the organs, it is not
always necessary to touch the head; in many cases
the eye is sufficient. It 1s even more easy to dis-
tinguish the size of the organs, situated in the fore-
head, by sight than by touch. It is only necessary
to touch the organs which are covered with hair.

Iinally, it is to be considered that the develope-_
ment of the organs is different in respect to their
Jength, and in respect to their breadth; for the
fibres which compose the organs are sometimes
‘thick and short, sometimes slender and long, or
slender and short, or long and thick. This dif.
ference of developement must. produce some. dif-

1


962 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ference of the manifestations of the faculties. My
observations are not yet matured enough to deter-
mine this point. It seems that long fibres produce
more activity, and large fibres more intensity? It
follows that the size of the brain in general, and of
its parts in particular, may be determined from in-
fancy to the commencement of decrease, conse-
quently at the ages in which the faculties are the
most active. Let us now consider the difficulties


which must be removed in the physiology of the
brain.


DIFFICULTIES OF DISTINGUISHING THE SIZE OF CERTAIN
PARTS OF THE BRAIN.


Plattner, of Leipzig, said, that it is impossible to
determine the organs situated in the middle line of
the head, on account of the longitudinal sinus. But
this receptacle of blood, or this canal, is not large
enough to hinder us from distinguishing the size
and developement of the neighbouring organs, the
elevations of the organs being much larger. Some-
times the hemispheres of the brain are a little sepa-
rated in the middle line along the longitudinal:
sinus; this happens most commonly between the
organs of philoprogeny, of selflove, and of perse-
verance. ‘Then there is a groove on the outside of
the head; but he who knows organology cannot be
mistaken.

Those who begin to practise our doctrine find
another difficulty in the frontal sinus. Many adver-
saries even maintain that it is impossible to distin-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN, 263


guish the developement of the cerebral parts situated
behind it. ‘They say that on account of the frontal
sinuses, the organ of space cannot be distinguished.
The developement of this organ, however, and the
frontal sinuses, present quite different forms: the
frontal sinuses only form a bony crest, and the isolated
protuberance, which indicates the particular deve-
lopement of the organ of space, is round and large.
Sometimes the organ of space is very considerable,
and at the same time there are frontal sinuses; then
the bony crest is perceived, and at the same time
this part of the forehead is prominent.

The cerebral parts, situated behind the orbits, re-
quire some exercise on the part of the organoscope,
in order to be exactly determined. ‘Their develope-
ment is perceived by the configuration and position
of the eyes, and by the circumference of the orbits.
It is therefore necessary to examine whether the
eyeball is prominent or hiddea in the orbit, whether
it is depressed or pushed sideward, inward, or out-
ward. According to this position of the eyeball,
we may judge that such or such part of the brain,
which is situated against such or such part of the
orbit, is more or less developed.

It may be questioned whether all organs reach the
surface, so that the organs of all faculties of the
mind may be determined by the size and shape of
the head? There are many convolutions in the
middle line of the brain between the two hemi-
spheres; there are still some others at the basis of
the brain, and between the anterior and middle


264: PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


lobes, which do not reach the surface of the skull;


but it seems to me that at least a great part of every
organ lies at the surface, and that, if one part of
any organ be well developed, the whole participates
of this developement. The whole cerebellum does
not touch the skull, but it is possible to determine
the size of the cerebellum according to the part
which reaches the surface. The cerebral parts,
situated in the middle line between the two hemi-
spheres, seem to be proportionate to the superin-
cumbent organs; at least I have always observed a
proportion between these cerebral parts in the ver-
tical direction. Now as there is a proportion be-
tween the constituent parts of any organ, and as
the other organs have been determined although
all their parts do not reach the surface, it seems to
me that it is possible to determine all organs, though
all their fibres do not terminate at the surface.

‘The greatest difficulty for beginners is, when any
organ is extremely developed, and pushes the neigh-
bouring organs out of the places which they com-
monly occupy. There are two cases of this kind.


Hither one single organ is extremely developed, or


several are very voluminous, but in such a propor- .


tion that the surface is almost smooth. In the first
case the difficulty is not very great, for every organ
has its own form and its particular direction. There-
fore it is only necessary to look at the most promi-
nent point which is corresponding to the midst of
every organ. It requires more exercise if several
neighbouring organs are almost equally developed.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 2°65


However the most prominent point, and the direc-
tion of the protuberance, facilitate our examination
and decision. | .

-It is still objected against organology, that though
it be possible to measure the form and size of the
brain according to the form and size of the head,
it is impossible to determine the size of the organs
according to the size of the head or skull, because
the organs are not confined to the surface, or to the
convolutions of the brain. It is true the organs are
not confined to the surface of the brain; they ex-
tend from the surface to the great swelling of the
occipital hole, (medulla oblongata,) and probably to
the commissures ; for the whole mass of the brain
constitutes the organs: but as the peripheric ex-
pansions of the five senses indicate the develope-
ment of the respective nerves, so the convolutions
of the brain denote a larger or smaller developement
of the whole cerebral mass. ‘This will be understood
by analogy. Animals which have a large external
apparatus of smell, large nostrils, large turbinated
bones, a large expansion of the pituitary mem-
brane, consequently a very considerable nervous
expansion, have the whole olfactory nerve very
much developed; and it is possible to measure the
developement of the nerve in general according to
its peripheric expansion. In the same manner the
retina, or the expansion of the optic nerve, is in
proportion to the nerve itself; and it is the same
with the organs of the moral sentiments and intel-
lectual faculties. ‘The convolutions are the peri-
pheric expansions of the internal nervous bundles,


266 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


and they are in proportion to them, so that it is
possible to determine the whole mass of the organs
according to the convolutions. ‘Therefore though
the organs are not confined to the surface of the
brain, and though only their peripheric expansions
are perceived at the surface, it is however possible
to determine the size of the whole organs.


IMPOSSIBILITY OF DETERMINING THE SIZE OF THE BRAIN.


It remains still to speak of the cases wherein it is
impossible to determine the size of the brain in
general, and of its parts in particular, according to
the form and size of the head. If the brain begin
to diminish it is impossible to determine its size.
According to a general law of organic parts the
brain decreases by degrees, the convolutions which,
at the age of maturity, were plump and prominent,
sink down, and are separated one from the other ;
in one word, the composition is no longer equal to
the decomposition, the latter prevails, and the size
of the brain diminishes. Then ofteir the external
form and size of the head remain the same, but the
internal table of the skull follows the surface of the
brain, and both tables are more or less distant one
‘from another, and separated by the diploe. In this
manner the skull of old decrepid persons of both
sexes is commonly thicker, more spongy, and less


dense. ‘The diploe is not only more considerable,


but the tables are also less solid. Sometimes there
are, in the skulls of old persons, parts which are
very thin, while the rest remains thick; sometimes


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 267


the whole skull grows thin. Consequently the de-
composition, or absorption, is not always equally
strong at all places of the brain. This absorption 1s
most commonly observed in the middle of the
parietal bones. It is then to be remarked that the
least blow may depress such thin skulls of old per-
sons, while a much stronger blow would not have
done to it the least harm at the age of maturity.
Thus old and decrepid persons do not serve to con-
firm the doctrine of the organclogy, because it is im-
possible to judge exactly of the size of the brain
from the size of the head. Moreover, the organs
do not continue to be very active at thisage. Itis
therefore evident that, in order to establish the
physiology of the brain, we confine our observations
to young and grown-up persons in the flower of
their age.

Another circumstance which prevents from deter-
mining the size of the brain, according to the form
and size of the head, is certain cases of chronic in-
sanity. For in this state the brain diminishes in
size like the other nerves if they are diseased for a
long time; the internal table always follows the size
of the brain, while the external table preserves its
usual position; on this account the skulls of fools
and madmen are often very thick ; but their texture
is not very spongy, but hard and dense like ivory.
Indeed it is remarkable that a great number of mad-
men have the skull hard and dense like ivory, and
very heavy. The skulls of many madmen are also
thicker than usual, and if they are not thicker they
are at least dense and heavy. ‘his phenomenon is


268 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


probably an effect of some alteration of the brain,
and it furnishes a new proof of the influence of the
brain upon the skull.

It would be very interesting to denote the mad-


men whose skulls are dense, and those whose skulls:


are not so, or whose skulls are dense and thick. It
seems that the inflammatory state of the blood-vessels
of the dura mater contributes to the density of the


skull. Does the greater afflux of blood towards the


skull augment the ossification? In idiots from birth,
who live long, the skull is often thicker, but less
dense than in furious madmen. A child of nine
years of age felt a permanent head-ache; he became
mdifierent to his lesson, then stupid, and, after a
few years, he was affected with convulsions; he
died at thirteen years of age, and his brain was
covered with a false membraneous mass, which in-
dicated a chronic inflammation of the arachnoid
coat; the skull was very dense, and the frontal
bone thick at the same time. It is a known fact,
that in fractured bones being cured, the ossification
at these places is more solid than that of other parts.
We have seen several skulls which, being injured,
had sufiered from inflammation; and they were
thicker or at least denser and heavier than natural.
Gall preserves in his collection the skull of a sol-
dier who, at the battle of Ozakow, received severe
blows with the but end of a gun; he became mad,
and lived for thirty years in that state; his skull is
like ivory. A stone fell upon the head of a person,
and deranged his mind; the person died along time
after, and his skull is dense and heavy.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 269


This observation, relative to the density and thick-
ness of the skulls of madmen, is disputed. Some
anatomists deny the facts. We support our asser-
tion by experience. I find similar skulls in different
cabinets, but it is seldom that the proprietors are
acquainted with the history of those to whom these
skulls belonged. However there were anatomists,
and natural philosophers before us, who have made
the same observations. Greding, at Waldheim in
Saxony, has opened several hundreds of skulls of
madmen, and he found that the greatest number of
their skulls was thick and dense. We have opened
a great number, and among them many who died at
the Salpetri¢re and in the Bicétre: we found their
skulls dense and often thick. Dr. Goergen, at Vienna,
has in his collection many skulls of this kind. Thus
it is indubitable that the skulls of many mad persons
are dense and thick. .

We have also observed that the skulls of indivi-
duals, who for a long time had a propensity to
suicide, are commonly dense and sometimes thick.
But it is then necessary to distinguish those who
kill themselves in a fit of momentaneous despair, or
‘by a short melancholy, or by this disease. It is im-
possible that the state of the ossification should be
changed in a few days. These researches relative
to the skulls of alienated persons, though important
for physiology and pathology in general, and im-
mediately connected with organology, are not es-
sential to it as far as we intend to determine the func-
tions of the brain. We admit even that in these in-
dividuals, who were diseased for a long time, it is


270 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


impossible to measure exactly the size of the brain
according to the shape and size of the head.


RECAPITULATION.


It results from that which I have said, in respect
to the possibility of distinguishing the size of the
brain in general, and of its parts in particular, ac-
cording to the size of the head, that it is indifferent
what cause determines the form and size of the head,
but that it is sufficient to distinguish the size of the
brain. I have considered various opinions about the
cause which produces the form of the head. More-
over, I have indicated the ages wherein it is pos-
sible, in living persons, to determine the size of the
brain. I have examined the difficulties we meet
with, and I have developed how they may be re-
moved. Finally, I have spoken of the cases wherein


it is impossible to determine the size of the brain,


wherein our judgment is at least very uncertain.
Thus if these researches are made according to
these considerations, it is obvious that they require
inquiry ; but those who endeavour to repeat them
will be convinced that some difficulty does not ex-
clude the possibility of success.


CHAPTER VII.


ON OUR METHOD OF POINTING OUT THE FUNCTIONS OF
THE BRAIN.


After having considered the principles of the
physiology of the brain, that is, after having de-
monstrated that all faculties of the mind are innate ;
that their manifestations depend on the brain; and
that the manifestations of every faculty depend on
some particular part of the brain : finally, after having
examined the means which have been employed in
order to determine the functions of the different
cerebral parts, and after having proved that the
functions must be determined according to the de-
velopement of the respective organs, I shall now de-
velope our peculiar mode of examining the functions
of the brain. In treating of the plurality of the
organs, we have seen that a great number of phi-
losophers, physicians, and ancient and modern phy-
siologists, have divided the functions of animal life ;
and that they have attributed different faculties to
different parts of the body ; but before Gall, no
special organ of the faculties of the mind has been
discovered. I think the reasons are the following :—
lirst, the seats of the moral sentiments have been
looked for in the viscera of the abdomen and


thorax, or in the temperaments ; consequently in
Z


yA PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


parts where they do not reside ; or in conditions on
which their existence does not depend. The in-
tellectual faculties have been placed in the brain,
but it was impossible to point out any organ, be-
cause organs have been sought for faculties which
have no organ, namely, for common and general
faculties. In order to understand this assertion, it
is necessary to consider the difference between the
faculties. I admit three kinds of faculties: gene-
ral, common, and special faculties. This division of
faculties is quite general throughout all nature.

In inorganic bodies, there are general qualities
which must be specified in determinate bodies; for
instance, size, figure, weight and consistence are
general qualities of all bodies, and in order to in-
dicate any determinate body, as gold, silver, iron,
copper &c., the general qualities must. be spe-
cified. Moreover, several qualities are common to
metals, or to salts, or to earths, and these common
qualities must also be specified in order to distin-
guish every sort of metal, salt or earth. It is the
same in vegetables. ‘There are general properties
of vegetation; for instance, to be produced by its
like, to be nourished by intussusception, to assi-
milate the food, to increase, decrease, and die; all
~ these phenomena must be specified in designing any
particular plant, as an apple-tree, a rose-bush.
‘There are also qualities common to various orders
of plants. It is still the same in animals both in
their automatic and animal life. Their phenomena
generally analogous bear also a general name ; and
their phenomena common to a certain order of


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. O73.


functions are designated by a common name. But
it is to be considered that general or common phe-
nomena never have any particular organ. Secretion,
for instance, is a common name, and secretion in
general has-no particular organ ; but the particular
secretions, as of saliva, bile, tears &c., are at-
tached to particular organs. Sensation is an ex-
pression which indicates the common function of
the five external senses; therefore this common fa-
culty has no particular organ; but every determinate
sensation, as of sight, hearing, smelling, taste or
feeling, is attached to some particular organ.

Before Gall, all philosophers and physiologists
have only spoken of general or common faculties of.
the mind. For instance, it is generally said that
animals act by instinct, and man by understanding.
Instinct however is a general expression, and de-
notes every inclination, every internal impulsion :
now instinct or internal impulsion in general has no
organ, but the determinate impulsions or instincts,
as the instinct to migrate, to gather provisions, to
build or to sing, are attached to particular organs.
Moreover, it is said that man acts by understanding
in opposition to the instinct of animals. We must
here observe two things: first, it is to be known
whether animals act only and always by instinct ;
and whether understanding has a particular organ.

As instinct denotes any internal impulsion, many
actions of animals, as the industrious labours of
insects, are certainly the result of some internal
impulsion or instinct; but many animals modify
their actions; they choose even among different

as


274 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


motives. These actions then are not the effect only
of an internal instinct. A dog is hungry, but he
does not eat because he fears the blows of his
master; certainly this dog does not act only by in-
stinct, but shows a certain degree of understand-
ing. For understanding is the knowledge of our
faculties and the power of modifying their actions.
Thus all actions of animals are not the result of
mere instinct. On the other hand, if new-born
ehildren cry, and suck the finger, they do not act
by understanding. If men of great genius manifest
their talents without knowing that such manifes-
tations exist ; if they calculate, sing, or draw, with-
‘out having seen or heard of such things having been
done, does it not happen by some internal impulse or
instinct, in man, as well as in animals which sing,
build, migrate, gather provisions, by a mere inter-
nal impulse or instinct? Hence understanding is
hot a prerogative of man in opposition to instinct
in animals,. Let us now examine whether under.
standing has an organ.

Understanding being an expression which desig-
nates a-general faculty has no particular organ, but
every determinate species of understanding is at-
tached to a particular organ. Finally, it is the same
with all common faculties of the understanding ;
of which philosophers and physiologists speak,
namely, with perception, memory or recollection,
judgment, and imagination. ‘These expressions are
common, and the respective faculties have no
organs, but every peculiar perception, memory,
judgment and imagination, as of space, form, co-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. pis:


Jour, tune and number, have their particular
organs. If the common faculties of understanding
were attached to particular organs, the person who
possesses the organ of any common faculty ought
to be endowed with all particular kinds of faculties.
If there were, for instance, an organ for instinct
in general, an animal which ‘should have one in-
Stinct ought to have all instincts. If there were
an organ of perception, of memory, of judgment
or of imagination, any one who has the organ of
perception, of memory, of judgment or of imagi-
nation, ought to possess all kinds of perception, of
memory, of judgment or of imagination. Now
this is against all experience. One has a great me-
mory of one kind, and a very little memory of
other things. A poet possesses one kind of imagi-
nation in a high degree, but has he therefore every
kind of imagination, as that of inventing machines,
of composing music &c.? Therefore, natural phi-
losophers were wrong in looking for organs of com-
mon faculties. A speculative philosopher may be
satisfied with vague and common expressions, which
do not denote the particular and determinate pro-
perties of the different beings; but these general
or common considerations are not sufficient fora
naturalist, who endeavours to know: the functions
and the faculties of every organic part in particular.
Throughout all natural history the expressions are
the less significant the more general or common
they are; and a distinct knowledge of any being
requires a study of its particularities. |

Moreover, organs have been sought for the af-

T2


276 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


fections and passions, but I shall explain hereafter, —


that affections are only the different modes of action
of the particular faculties, and that passions are the
highest degrees of activity of the organs; conse-
quently, neither affections nor passions can have
particular organs. Another obstacle was in the di-
vision of the faculties of the mind into natural and
factitious. For it is evident that no organ was
sought for any faculty which seemed to be fac-
titious. Tinaily, many philosophers thought that
the soul is utterly independent of the organization,
though the ideas were derived from the five exter-
nal senses; they considered however reflection and
judgment as manifestations of the soul, independent
of any organization. Instead of examining the re-
lation of the brain and its parts to the manifesta-
tions of the soul, philosophers lost themselves in
mere metaphysical abstractions concerning the na-
ture of the soul. I think that these considerations,


and the means employed by other physiologists,
prove evidently that it was impossible to point out:


the function of any cerebral part.


Gall himself for a long time participated in these’
errors of the schools; he followed this false way, and.
did not leave it till he perceived that all his re-
searches were useless. At the beginning he com-


pared the form and size of the whole head only


with the general faculties of the understanding,
without thinking that the moral sentiments reside’
also in the brain. He looked for particular organs’
of memory, judgment, and imagination. Not suc-,


ceeding in this way, he left all the notions of phi-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. o"t


losophy, and compared the form and size of the
whole head with the favourite occupations of every
person. It is commonly known that certain persons
are endowed by nature with particular faculties.
Some are from birth fit for mechanics, or for music,
for painting &c. Gall compared individuals who
excelled in any one kind of functions, and examined
the whole form of their heads; he believed for
some time that great mechanicians may be distin-
guished by a face enclosed between two parallel
lines, that’ is equally wide at the forehead and at
the jaw-bones; and that the forehead of great mu-
sicians is triangular. However, he met with ex-
ceptions: consequently he was aware that he had
not yet found the truth; for nature makes no
exceptions in her laws. If the eye be the organ of
sight, vision can never exist without the eye. it 1s
the same with the internal organs. If any faculty
be attached to some organ, this organ can never
be wanting if the faculty manifest itself. ‘This
assertion is as evident as that no effect can take
place without a cause. Therefore Gall was obliged
to give up his former method of proceeding, con-
cerning the general configuration of the head, to
which he had devoted several years. He maintains
however that this kind of observation was not en-
tirely useless for him, because he acquired a great
habit of distinguishing the slightest differences of
the divers forms.

Considering his first observations, where he dis-
tinguished a good memory by the developement of
some particular part of the brain, viz. by prominent


278 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


eyes, he then looked only for particular organs, in
comparing them with the natural vocations of dif.
ferent persons: that is, when he was acquainted
with any individual who manifested any function in
a high degree; if, for instance; he observed any
mechanician, musician, sculptor, draughtsman, ma-
thematician, endowed with such or such faculty
from birth, he examined their heads to try whether
he might point out a particular developement of
some cerebral part. In this way, he found in a short
time, in musicians and mechanics, the developement
of particular cerebral parts. He indeed observed
that the respective organ is always much developed,
if. the same great talents are innate, while the rest
of the head presents quite different shapes in the
same individuals. At the beginning, he confined
his observations to men of partial genius ; such indi-
viduals were indeed most proper, not only because
their organs are easily pointed out, but also because
these persons alone resist the influence of external
circumstances and of education. These individuals
are also the most proper for contirming the organs
and convincing: beginners: the organ is the most
easily distinguished, and the relation between the
developement of the cerebral parts and the par-.
ticular manifestations of the mind is the most evi-
dent. It is also important to observe the characters
' of uncultivated people, who are least capable of dis-
simulation. Peing physician to the Establishment
for the Deaf. and Dumb at Vienna, Gall was well cir-.
cumstanced for this purpose; he could observe the na-
tural state of their manifestations, and their different


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. ONS


degrees of susceptibility of education. ‘To this end
he also called together in his house common people,
as coachmen and poor boys, and’ excited them to
make him acquainted with their characters.

Gall investigated particular organs according to
the principal actions of men, and he named the
organs according to these actions. He observed,
for instance, individuals who are born mathema-
ticians, mechanicians, musicians, philologists, meta-
physicians, poets &c., and if he found that some
part of their brain was always more developed than
the rest, he called these cerebral parts, organ of
mathematics, of music, of philology, of metaphy-
sics, of poetry &c. In the same way he observed
individuals who from birth were stubborn, proud,
courageous, thieves, murderers, religious &c., and
if he found that the size of some cerebral part was
corresponding to these actions, he called these parts
of the brain, organ of pride, of firmness, of courage,
of theft, of murder, of religion. Not being ac-
quainted with the special faculties, Gall could not
proceed in any other way; he ought only to have
suspended the denomination of the organs: he was
obliged to observe man only in action, but as the
actions of man and animals are seldom the result of
one single faculty, and as many actions are the
effect of the abuse of the faculties, it is conceivable
that the nomenclature established by Gall is very
defective. It is true that in individuals who have
stolen from infancy, notwithstanding the most care-
ful education, and the severest punishment, one


280 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


part of the brain is particularly developed ; but all
persons in whom this organ is much developed are
not thieves. It is the same with the organ of mur-
der: those who from infancy were charmed with
murdering, present some part of the brain much
developed, but all persons who have this organ
much developed have not murdered.

It is evident that no organ should be named ac-
cording to the abuse of its faculty. Greediness and
drunkenness depend on some organization, but it
is not said that there are organs of drunkenness and
greediness: the abuses of physical love depend on
a certain organization, but nobody speaks of an
organ of the abuses of this faculty. I shall show
below, that it is the same with the organs of theft


and murder. These functions are abuses which —
result from the highest degree of activity of cer-—


tain organs, which are not directed by other facul-
ties. “Therefore Gall, who distinguished only the
organs if they were extremely developed, while


the other organs were very small, ebserved a certain —


organization in inveterate thieves. ‘This will indeed
_ be always the case, and Gall, as I mentioned above,
was wrong only in naming this organ according to


its abuse. Moreover Gall, in his proceeding, has —
only observed the particular actions which accom-


pany the different organs, but he has not deter-
mined their special faculties. Hence his com-
plaint in respect to every organ, that he does not
Know its sphere of activity. His manner of. ob-


serving was necessary, and has prepared the way for


4A


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 281


several philosophical considerations, which elucidate
this doctrine and render it conformable to all other
‘physical and moral truths.

Before I treat of these considerations, let me
relate the means fit for determining the organs of
the manifestations of the mind. Gall compared all
energetic actions with the greatest developement
of any part of the brain; and if he found that a
greater developement of any cerebral part cor-
responded with any given energetic action, he sup-
posed that this part of the brain might be the re-
spective organ. The probability then increased in
the same proportion as the number of observations
was multiplied. Moreover, if any individual pre-
sented on his head any protuberance, which evi-
dently was the result of the developement of some
cerebral part, Gall endeavoured to be acquainted
with the talents or the dominant character of this
person. If it were an organ which he had deter-
mined according to the actions, and if the actions
er inclinations of this person were concordant, the
probability increased. If it was a new organ, he
compared in other individuals similar actions or
inclinations with the developement of the respective
part of the brain. In these two ways he determined
all the organs he discovered: for instance, he
pointed out the organs as they were called by him,
of propagation, of murder, of theft, of mechani-
cal arts, of music, of mathematics, and of meta-
physics, by determining the organs according to
energetic actions; and he discovered the organs of


282 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


philoprogeny, circumspection, and religion, by de«
termining the actions according to the protuber.
ances.

On the other hand, if energetic actions are at-
tached to large organs, and if large organs produce
energetic actions, it unavoidably follows that weak
actions are indicated by small organs, and _ that
small organs produce weak actions. On this account,
Gall compared the weak functions of individuals
who were almost destitute of a particular faculty
with the determinate organ, and a determinate
organ with the respective actions; and if weak
actions were corresponding to small organs, or
small organs to weak actions, these proofs in a ne-
gative way confirmed the first conclusion. <A great
number of circumstances have contributed to mul-
tiply these positive and negative observations. To
this end it is necessary to live in large towns, and
to irequent all classes of society. Gall was pro-
fessionally acquainted with many families; he was
physician to the director of the schools, and could
examine every child who excelled. He had him-
self no children, and was not obliged to spare ex-
pense for their sake. He was also bold enough to
speak to every person in whose head he observed
any distinct protuberance. In our travels, we have
been able to obtain much information ; to observe
a great number of distinguished persons, and to
compare their organization ; in one word, to collect
innumerable facts in our visits to establishments for
education, in hospitals for idiots and madmen; in


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 2383


the houses of correction, in prisons, and in our in-
tercourse with different nations and with all classes
of society.

It is known that, in general, physical truths im-
prove in proportion as observations are repeated.
We continue therefore to multiply our observations,
and in respect to several organs the number of these
observations is immense, and we consider the re-
spective organs as determinate. We shall insist on
our opinion as long as we are not. convinced, by
experience, of the contrary. Several organs how-
ever are still conjectural, and require a greater
number of observations in order to be determined
with the same degree of certitude as the others
which are supported by the most satisfactory proofs.
It is objected that the organs cannot be verified, be-
cause our conclusions are drawn only from indivi
dual facts. But is this not the case with all physical
truths? No physician has observed all facts; no
anatomist has seen the viscera of all persons. Yet
according to the stability of natural laws, physical
truths are admitted, and the structure and po-
sition of the viscera are supposed to be the same in
individuals who have not been opened. It has also
been objected that our observations might be true
only at one place; and that it is necessary to repeat
them elsewhere. Our travels have refuted this ob-
jection, because we have every where had oppor-
tunities enough of multiplying and confirming the
same observations.

Gall felt soon the necessity of making a collec-
tion of the busts of individuals remarkable for any


984 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


quality, whether talent or moral sentiment. He
modelled them in plaster without hair, and imitated
as exactly as possible the whole configuration of
their heads. By these means it was possible to mul-
tiply and rectify the observations; he could com-
pare at the same time different individuals en-
dowed with the same faculties; he could examine
them at leisure, which was a very important. cir-
cumstance ; for our mind does not act always with
the same energy and acuteness. Gall allows that
he often placed together the busts of individuals
who excelled in the same functions without  dis-
tinguishing any difference in the shape of their
heads; sometimes he looked in vain at them for se- —
veral weeks; and sometimes he pointed out an
organ, so to say, without thinking of it. Those
who have not experienced similar things may have
difficulty in conceiving this assertion; but those
who have made similar observations know how
long it is necessary to exercise the eyes in order to
perceive every difference of form and size. The
collection of busts procured still another advantage.
Many of these individuals were remarkable in se-
veral points of view, whether in an affirmative or
negative manner. They therefore presented dif-
ferent points of comparison. At the same time
Gall made a collection of skulls, especially of those
persons who were remarkable for any quality, and’
if possible of those whose busts he had modelled in
plaster. In this manner he learned to compare the —
heads with the skulls. ‘Moreover, he could verify
the forms of the organs.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 985


As the arrangement and position of all parts
which are common to man and animals are the
same, it is very useful to compare animals which
are endowed with the same faculties one with an-
other, and with animals which are destitute of these
faculties. In this way the points of comparison
are extremely numerous, and the observations, in
respect to faculties common to man and animals,
may be repeated to infinity. However, no organ
has been discovered in animals, but all were pointed
out in man. ‘The reason is, because, in order to be
sure, the observations must be confined to the in- .
dividuals of the same kind, and chiefly to indi-
viduals of ereat genius. Some physiological dis-
coveries relative to the physiology of the brain, and
made upon animals by countrymen, agriculturists,
hunters, and jockeys, have been found in different
individuals of the same kind. Peasants, for in-
stance, know that horses with a large forehead are
more docile than those with small foreheads. There-
fore they put them at the head of the team. Some
jockeys distinguish biting and stubborn horses by
the configuration of the forehead. They made
these observations in distinguishing the different
forms of the head without knowing the ground of
them, which really depends on the greater or smaller
developement of the cerebral parts. Thus, the com-
parative anatomy and physiology of the brain may
contribute a great deal to determine the organs.
Many animals are mutilated by nature, and it is not
necessary to make them undergo violent mutilations.
In fact, comparative anatomy shows that in lower


286 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


animals the brain is more simple, and in perfect
animals more complicated. In the same way it is
observed that the faculties multiply in proportion as
the parts of the brain are more numerous.

The anatomy of the brain in particular confirms
us in the determination of the organs. First, the
bundles which constitute the organs are distinct,
and no central point is perceived. The plurality of
the organs then are as evident as the plurality of
the faculties. Moreover, some faculties have a
great sphere of activity, while the actions of others
are very weak; and it is observed that the size of
the respective organs is in direct proportion. It is
known, for instance, that the moral sentiments act
with greater energy than the intellectual faculties ;
and anatomy shows the same difference in respect
to the natural size of the respective organs. Ana-
tomy shows also that the different cerebral parts
are not developed simultaneously, in the same way
as the manifestations of the mmd do not take place
at the same time. In short anatomy is always cor-
responding to physiology and vice versa.

The diseased state of the brain and its accidental
injuries may be taken advantage of, in order to de-
termine the particular organs; but. I have already
considered that these kinds of observations are
very uncertain, ‘They are only secondary, and not
at all decisive; they are however interesting, if
combined with other direct and evident proofs. In
treating of the particular organs I shail mention
similar observations, without maintaining that it is
possible to point out the organs only by them.

1


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 287


Mental alienations, chiefly partial insanities, mo-
nomania, and the state of idiotism, are much more
conducive to this object than the accidental injuries
of the brain. In idiots from birth, the whole brain
is small or distended by water. In madmen with
partial insanities, the respective organs are com-
monly more developed than the rest, and their ex-
ternal signs are easily perceived. It is conceivable
that persons who manifest a certain sentiment or in-
tellectual faculty with peculiar energy, show, in a
state of greater irritation, this faculty in the highest —
degree. I never saw a fool by pride without a great
developement of the organ of self-love; however it
seems to me that very great developement is not
indispensably necessary to every partial insanity, for -
every part of our body in general, and of our brain
in particular, may grow more irritable than the TES,
and therefore the energy of every cerebral organ
may also increase and produce partial insanity.

It is of great importance to consider the heads of
different nations. Several anatomists and physiolo-
gists have endeavoured to point out the particular
Shape of the heads of different nations. Though all
observations of this kind are very defective, they
are yet rather for than against the physiclogy of the
brain. The foreheads of negroes, for instance, are
very narrow, their talents of music and mathema-
tics are also in general very limited. The Chinese,
who are fond of colours, have the arch of the eye-
brows much vaulted, and we shall see that this is
the sign of a greater developement of the organ of
colour. According to Blumenbach the heads of the


288 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


Kalmucks are depressed from above, and very large
sideward about the organ which gives the disposi-
tion to covet. It is also admitted that this nation 1s
inclined to steal &c. In the same way, the manner
of thinking and feeling of different nations may be
compared with their most developed organs. It 1s
obvious that I speak only of the greater number of
individuals in every nation ; and only of any general
type of their heads; for the modifications are in-
finite in all countries, but, generally speaking, there
are nations whose heads are longer or shorter,
higher or lower, narrower or broader &e.

There is still another means of pointing out or of
confirming the organs: mimickry. Every internal
sentiment is manifested outwardly by certain mo-
tions of the head, body, and hands. ‘These exter-
nal manifestations are constant, and commanded by.
the internal faculties. They are essentially the same
in all nations and at all times.. I do not intend at
present to detail the principles of the doctrine
which explains the external manifestations: this
consideration belongs to the practical part of an-
thropology ; therefore I shall treat of it afterwards.
Here I mention only one principle relative to the |
seat of the organs; namely, the motions are con-
formable to the seat of the organs. If, for instance, —
a faculty, the organ of which is situated in the
posterior part of the brain, be active, the motions
are backward ; and if its organ be in the forehead |
all motions are in this direction.

By all these means, which we employ continually —
in order to multiply our observations, every organ


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 289


may be determined, and those which are pointed
out may be confirmed. ‘The number of facts we
have collected is immense, but it is impossible to
quote them all. I can speak only of their results or
general deductions. Moreover, no one will have
personal or individual conviction before he has
made the same observations. Gall admonishes his
auditors not to practise this doctrine because it is so
difficult: I, on the contrary, invite every inquirer
to repeat the observations in order to obtain self-con-
viction. Therefore also every inquirer ought to con-
sider it as his duty to be well acquainted with this
doctrine, before he endeavours to make any applica-
tion of it. It is true that it requires examination,
and I can show only what is to be observed and
how it is to be done; but.I shall never advance any
thing that cannot be observed by every other per-

son. Ido not then listen to any objection grounded
upon mere reasoning, and destitute of every kind
of observation ; one fact well observed is more posi-
tive and decisive for me than a thousand mere meta-
physical opinions. We flatter ourselves that every
one who will take the trouble of examining and re-

~ peating our observations, without any prejudice, will
be convinced of the solidity of these principles of
the physiology of the brain.


290


CHAPTER VIII.


ON THE PARTICULAR ORGANS.


I wave mentioned that Gall, unacquainted with
the special faculties of the mind, sought organs for
the actions of man; that the actions do not al-
ways indicate the special faculty ; and that there
are very few actions which are the result of one
<pecial faculty. However, the proceeding of Gall 1s
conducive to determine the special faculties, and
their sphere of activity. I shall not treat of the
organs in the order in which they have been dis-
covered, but according to their situation in the
brain, beginning from the most inferior.

Before I examine the special organs, I shall con-
sider whether the faculties which manifest them-
selves by the cerebral parts may be divided or not.
Before Gall, all physiologists and philosophers sought |
only the organs of the understanding in the brain,
‘and the moral sentiments elsewhere: Gall was the
first who showed that the organs of the moral senti-
ments are also situated in the brain. Moreover,
opinions in respect to the faculties of the mind have
hitherto been extremely vague. Even at the pre-
sent day, the most common division of the faculties
of the human mind is into will and understanding; |
will is subdivided into different modifications, as


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 29]


into inclination, propensity, desire, and passion ;
understanding into perception, memory, judgment,
and imagination. All the functions of animals were
considered as the effect of instinct. I have already
explained * that all these expressions are general or
common, and that these general and common facul-
ties have no particular organs. I have also demon-
strated that it is wrong to call the faculties of ani-
mals instinct in opposition to the understanding of
man; and that many actions of animals are accom-
panied with understanding, while many actions of
man are the result of mere instinct. It remains to
be proved that the division of human faculties into
will and understanding is very inexact. I shall after-
wards elucidate that it is a great mistake to consider
will as a generic expression of every propensity, in-
clination, and desire. Here I maintain that will, as
a generic name, indicating every propensity, cannot
be considered as a particular class of functions dif-
ferent from the intellectual faculties. For every fa-
culty, whether moral sentiment or intellectual fa-
culty, desires, or has some propensity, as soon as it
is active. The faculty of space, that of colour,
tune, of comparison &c. being active, desire. I:ven
every faculty desires more or less, from the weakest
propensity to the highest degree, called passion.
Thus the division of the human faculties ito under-
standing and will, in the ordinary sense, is incor-
rect. Gall therefore rejects all divisions of the fa-
culties manifested by the brain. He admits in every


* Pages 272, et seq.
U2


299 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


organ all modes of action. However it seems to
me that different divisions of the cerebral faculties
may be admitted. It is true all faculties desire,
but all faculties of man do not present the modifica-
tions of action of which the intellectual faculties
are capable. The moral sentiments have no me-
mory, no judgment, they produce only feelings,
while the intellectual faculties have not only pro-
pensity, but also peculiar modifications of action of
which the other faculties are destitute. Moreover,
it seems to me that there is some difference between
the different moral sentiments. Several of them
produce a mere propensity, while others produce
some sentiment which is not only propensity, but a
particular mode of feeling which must be felt in
order to be known; for instance, self-love, justice,
compassion &c. All faculties which I call propen-
sities are common to man and animals; but the
faculties which produce propensity, together with a
peculiar feeling, and which I call sentiments, may

be subdivided into those which are common to man
and animals, and those which are proper to man.
Certain other faculties are destined to know the ex-
ternal world, and the qualities of external bodies: I
name them knowing faculties. Still other faculties
compare the relations between different external
bodies, the relations between external bodies and the
internal faculties, and those between the internal fa-
culties themselves: I term these reflecting faculties.

Thus I divide and subdivide the class of the men-
tal faculties, according to the common principle of
natural philosophy, into orders, genera, species, and


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN: 295 ©


varieties. The expression Mind designates the
class of faculties. I divide it into two orders: into
feelings (gemueth, in German) and intellect. ‘The
feelings are subdivided into two genera: into pro-
pensities and sentiments. The propensities begin
with that of eating and drinking. Many instincts
of animals’ belong to this genus, while other in-
stincts of animals, as those of singing and migrating,
belong to the knowing faculties, ‘The second genus
of feelings consists in sentiments, some of which
are common to man and animals, and others proper
to man. ‘The second order of mental faculties and
intellect is subdivided also into two genera, into
knowing and into reflecting faculties. Moreover,
there are different species of propensities, of senti-
ments, of knowing, and of reflecting faculties.
There are varieties in the different species; and we
observe even monstrosities in the manifestations of
the peculiar faculties.

Before I consider the internal faculties and their
respective organs, it is necessary to examine the in-
termedia, by means of which the external world
acts upon the internal faculties, and these upon the
external objects. The former takes place by means
of the five external senses; the latter by means of
the five external senses and voluntary motion. ‘Those
who compare this chapter with that which we have
_ published on the five senses, in the first volume of
our large work, will find not only another arrange-
ment of these considerations, but also several cor-
rections and many additional elucidations.

I have already demonstrated that many faculties


294 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


attributed to the external senses cannot be consi-
dered as their effect. I have also answered the ob-
jection that the five external senses may be reduced
to one—sensation ; and I have proved that it is ne-
cessary to treat of every sense in particular. I shail
now show the special functions of the external
senses, but before I consider every sense in particu-
lar, I shall enter into some general considerations re-
lative to every sense.


On the Generalities of the Five External Senses.


DUPLICITY OF THE ORGANS.


The organs of every sense are double, as the or-
gans of animal life in general. ‘There are two eyes,
two ears, two nerves of smell, of taste, of feeling.
Some authors have denied the duplicity of the
cerebral organs, but they confounded the double-
ness with symmetry. It is true both organs are
seldom symmetrical, but is it not the same with
both eyes, ears, and other double parts? Thus the
want of symmetry does not annihilate the double-
ness. Indeed the nerves are commonly larger on
one side than on the other; and it may be asked on
what side they are commonly larger? In the greatest
number of persons the right side of the whole body
is stronger than the left. This is known in respect
to the hands and feet, and it is commonly main-
tained, that it is the case on aceount of the conti-
nual exercise of the right hand. But it may be re-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN: 295


plied, Why is the greatest number of new-born
children right-handed? For of ten children perhaps
seven are right-handed from birth, and they take or
hold with the right hand without being taught; and
the three others, whose right hand is exercised from
infancy, feel more strength on the left side, not-
withstanding all exercise of the right side. More-
over, if the strength of the right hand be only the
result of exercise, why is the rest of the whole right
side stronger than the left: Why is the right eye
larger than the left? Why are the right breast, the
right hemisphere of the brain, larger than those of
the left side? ‘he greatest number of diseases at-
tack the left side much more frequently than the
right. The greatest number of hamp-backed per-
sons have this deformity on the right side, because
the muscles of the right side are stronger, and draw
the spinal vertebrae on this side. Thus the organs
of animal life are double, while the organs of auto-
matic life are mostly single; and the organs of the
right side are commonly stronger than those of the


left.


THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF EVERY SENSE IS SINGLE.


Another common consideration of the five senses
is, that every one has two sentient apparatus; that
therefore the impressions are double; the con SC10US-
ness however of both impressions is single. Dit
ferent explanations have been given of this pheao-
menon, and the sense of sight, has generally been
considered by those who endeavoured to explain it.

1


296 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


TOUCH.


Many writers explain the single consciousness by
the sense of touch. They say, at the beginning,
vision is double, but touch rectifiés this error. Buf-
fon was of this opinion. He supported his assertion
by the following experiment: If we look with both
eyes at two objects, which are in the same direction
with us, and if we fix the eyes upon the nearest
object, we see it single, but at the same time we
see the farthest object double; on the contrary, if
we fix our eyes upon the farthest object we see it
single, and the nearest object double. This experi-
ment is, according to Buffon, an evident proof that
we see the objects double, but judge them single,
being rectified by the touch. But as in this experi-
ment the same object now appears double, then
single, how is it possible to infer from it that the
sense of touching has corrected sight? Why is this
correction only relative now to the nearest, then to
the farthest object. It seems to me that quite another
conclusion may be drawn from this experiment ;
namely, that sight has no relation to touch; sight,
its modifications and illusions, are only the result of
the organization and position of the eyes, and of the
laws of the refraction of light.

Moreover, nobody recollects to have seen objects
double in his infancy. No person born blind, who
has recovered the sight by the operation for the
cataract, has seen objects double. We also have
never observed, nor heard, that animals take single


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 297


objects for double ones. The butterfly does not
confound the flower with its image, and the lamb
distinguishes very well its mother from its mother’s
shadow. Animals which live a short time, and
which never can rectify their vision by touch, are
not deceived by the number of objects. Sometimes
in morbid affections of the eyes, or in squinting,
man sees double, notwithstanding all preceding exe
perience. Consequently it is evident that the cause


of single vision does not reside in the sense of
touch.


CORRESPONDING POINTS.


Others explain single vision in another manner.
They say, if the images of any object fall upon
corresponding points of the retina, that is, upon
points which are always affected at the same time,
the object appears single, but if the images fall
upon different parts of the retina, which are not af.
fected ordinarily at the same time, the object ap-
pears double. ‘This explanation is very common.
Cuvier and Richerand admit it. But it is rare that
corresponding parts of the eyes are affected at the
same time. If we look at any object sideward, op-
posite parts of the retina of both eyes are affected,

yet the object appears single.


INEQUALITY OF THE EYES.


Several authors maintain that the inequality of the
‘yes is the cause of the single consciousness of sight.


998 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


According to them the strongest impression alone is
perceived... It is true that very few persons have both
eyes equally strong, consequently the impressions
do-not produce the same effect in both eyes in re-
spect to energy. But if only one impression be


perceived, why do we see better with both eyes,


and hear better with both ears?


DECUSSATION OF THE OPTIC NERVES.


Ackermann explains the single vision by the de-
cussation of the optic nerves. But such an arrange-
ment cannot be demonstrated in respect to the audi-
tory nerves. And it is beyond doubt that the single
consciousness: of sight, hearing; smell, and taste,
must be explained in the same manner.


ACTIVE STATE.


Gall ventured to give another explanation. He
distinguished two states of the five senses ; he called
one active and the other passive. The functions
are passive if they take place independent of the
will ; for instance, we must perceive the impressions
of light which fall upon the retina, or the impres-
- gions of sounds which shake the auditory nerve.
Gall says, we perceive passively with both organs,
we see with both eyes, hear with both ears, but the
active state of the functions of the five external
senses takes place only in one organ, and commonly
in the strongest. We see with both eyes at the same
time, but we look with one eye alone; we hear with


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 299


both ears, but we listen with only one ear; we feel
with both hands, and touch only with one &c.

There is no doubt that we look with one eye
alone. If we place a small stick, a pencil, a goose-
quill, or another thin body between our eyes and a
light, if we keep both eyes open, and point out the
right line between our eyes, the stick, and light,
then if we looked with both eyes the stick should
occupy the diagonal, and its shadow should fall
upon the nose. But the shadow falls always upon
one eye, upon that of which the person, who re-
peats the experiment, ordinarily makes use in look-
ing with attention. If the person keep the stick in
the same position, and shut the eye with which he
did not look, the direction remains the same for
him, but if he shut the eye with which he looked,
the stick appears removed far from its direction.
Let any one look at a point at a little distance from
his eyes; both eyes seem to be in the same direc-
tion toward the object. ‘Then let him shut his eyes
alternately. If he shut the eye with which he did
not look, the other stands without the least motion;
but if he shut the eye with which he looked, the
other eye makes immediately a little motion inward
in order to fix the point. Moreover, in many ani-
mals the eyes are placed entirely sideward, and they
cannot be directed at the same time toward the
same object. Finally, even the gestures of man
and animals prove that they look with one eye, and
listen with one ear; they direct one eye or one ear
toward the object to be seen or heard.

Walther and Ackermann have objected an experi-


300 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ment which has been invented, believed, and repeated
according to an erroneous supposition. It is known
that green colour is composed of yellow and blue.


They inferred from it that if we look through spec- |


tacles one glass of which is blue, and the other
yellow, we perceive the mixed colour, green. We
have often repeated this experiment, but we never
saw green. If you behold green coloured objects,
as meadows, you see them green; for the coloured
glasses do not destroy this colour. If you behold
other objects, and both glasses of the spectacles are
equally thick, you will perceive the colour of that


glass, which is before the eye, with which you look. |


If the glasses are of different thickness you perceive
the colour of the thinnest glass.


It may be asked, with which eye men ordinarily


look? Le Cat thought that the eyes change every
day. Borelli maintained that the left eye is the
strongest, but Le Cat mentioned that sometimes the
right, sometimes the left eye shows the greatest
energy. We have observed that as in general the
whole right side, and the right eye in particular, are
stronger, that the greatest number of persons look
with the right eye. However it is to be observed
that every one does not look with his strongest eye.

It nevertheless seems to me that also this explana-
tion is not satisfactory. Indeed it is very remark-
able that passively we perceive, at the same time,


the impressions of both organs of any sense, not


only if one object make impressions upon both eyes
or both ears &c. but also if different objects make
impressions upon both organs of any sense. Even


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 301


different impressions of different objects may be per-
ceived by both organs of different senses. You may
see, for instance, with both eyes different objects,
and, at the same time, hear different sounds with
both ears; but as soon as you are attentive, as you
look or listen, you perceive only one impression at
the same time. It is impossible to attend to two
different discourses at the same time. A musician,
who directs the orchestra, hears passively, and he
cannot be attentive to different instruments at the
same time. The rapidity with which the mind acts
deceives several persons, and makes them think that
it is possible to pay attention to different objects at
the same moment. It follows that there is a dif-
ference between the active and passive state of the
five external senses, But it is another question,
whether this difference explains the single conscious-
ness of every sense? I think not.

First, this explanation would only be applicable
to the active state of functions, and not at all to
their passive state. But the cause of single con-
sciousness must be the same for both states of func-
tions. Moreover, it must be considered that the
active state is not at all produced by the external
senses themselves, any more than voluntary motion
is the effect of the muscles themselves. Some in-
ternal activity provokes the active state of the five
senses; the five external senses are always passive ;
they only propagate the external impressions, and
they only appear active if some internal cause em.
ploy them to receive the impressions and to carry
them to the brain. Therefore, it is probable that


302 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the same internal cause which puts only one organ
of the five senses in action is also the cause of
the single consciousness of different impressions.
Thus, the explanation given by Gall of single con-
sciousness, according to the active and passive state
of the five senses, is not only grounded upon a de-
fective notion, but iv is also far from being satis-
factory, even if the supposition were true.


COMMISSURES.


Still another explanation may be ventured by the
commissures or uniting fibres of both organs. For
though the constituent parts of every organ are
double, all similar parts of both sides are united in
the middle line by an uniting apparatus. It is pos-
sible that the impressions of both organs are com-
bined by this arrangement. ‘This arrangement
would explain the single consciousness of both
organs of any given sense, but it does not explain
the single consciousness of the impressions received
by different senses.


CENTRAL POINT.


Many philosophers and physiologists speak of a
central point at which all nerves terminate. But
the anatomy of the brain proves evidently that such
a central point is quite impossible. Moreover, if
all impressions arrived at the same point at the same
time, they would produce the greatest confusion,
as Van Swieten and Tiedmann have already ob-


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 305


served. Thus it follows from that which I have
said of the explanations of single consciousness,
that we are not yet acquainted with its true cause.


EVERY SENSE HAS ITS OWN NATURE.


A third common consideration of the five senses
is, that every one performs its functions by its own
power. A great deal has been said of the mutual
rectification of the five senses and of their habit.
But it is a general principle that the power of every
sense is innate and inherent in the sense itself.
The relations of every sense to the external im-
pressions are determinate, and subjected to positive
laws. As soon as any odour makes an impression
upon the olfactory nerve, this impression is either
conformable and agreeable to the smell or not, and
according to this relation between the external im-
pressions and the five senses, the manner of acting
of man and animals is different. No preceding ex-
ercise or habit is necessary in order to acquire the
special power of every sense; but the functions of
every sense depend only on its organization. If
this be perfect, the functions are perfect also, and
if the organization be diseased, the functions are
deranged notwithstanding all preceding exercise.
If the optic apparatus be perfect in new hatched
birds, their sight is perfect ; for instance, in chickens,
young ducks, partridges and quails: on the con-
trary, if in new-born animals the organization of
their eyes and ears are imperfect, their seeing and
hearing powers manifest themselves imperfectly. If


304 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


in adult persons the eyes are diseased, the vision is
deranged. In old persons the functions of the
five senses lose their energy, because the vital power
of the organs decreases.

Indeed it would be ridiculous if nature had pro-
duced any sense, which could not perform its func-
tions without being supported by another different
sense; for example, if we could not see without
feeling, or if we could not hear without seeing.
However we must make this consideration. It is
certain that no sense acquires its faculty by any


other sense; but it is also evident that every sense |


cannot produce the same sensations; that different
senses may distinguish the other beings, and that
one sense is more fit than another to make us ac-
quainted with different bodies and their qualities.
The laws of sight are determinate, and a straight
stick plunged in water appears crooked, because
we must see according to the laws of the refraction


of light. ‘Touch however will prove that the stick is -


straight. ‘This is a kind of rectification ; but this
kind of rectification must not be confounded with
the idea according to which one sense acquires its
faculty by the rectification of another sense: touch
may show that a stick which is plunged in water,
and which looks crooked, is straight ; the eyes how-
ever will always see it crooked. ‘This rectification
of the senses is mutual, but not the prerogative of
one sense. In this respect, the eyes may rectify the
sense of touch. If, without knowing it, a thin
paper be placed between two of our fingers, for
instance, between the thumb and fore-finger, we


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 805


shall not feel it, but we may see it. Even smell and
taste may rectify the sense of seeing and that of
touching. Many fluids look like water; it would
be impossible to distinguish them by the sense of
touch, but it is easy by smell and taste. Thus
every sense has its faculty by itself; its manifes.
tations are subjected to constant laws, and depend
on-the respective organization; but every sense
perceives impressions of which another is not sus-
ceptible, and in this respect the external senses
rectify one another.


EVERY SENSE MAY BE EXERCISED.


It is also a general observation that no sense ac-
quires its faculty by exercise, but that the functions
of every sense are strengthened by exercise. The
sense of feeling, if it be exercised, may acquire a
very high degree of perfection. Blind persons feel
the proximity of external objects by the impression
of the air upon their faces. Le Cat speaks of a
blind-born person of Poiscaux, who distinguished
the distance of the fire by the degree of warmth or
heat. Saunderson, though he was blind, in hand-
ling a series of medals, discerned the false from the
true more exactly than many connoisseurs. Le Cat
mentions a sculptor, Ganibasius of Vottera, who,
being blind, groped the faces and modelled them
in potter’s clay. The deaf and dumb, in -the In-
stitution of Mr. Eschke, at Berlin, read with fa-
cility what was written on their back covered with
clothes. Boyle and others relate-that the touch of

xX


306 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


blind persons was so acute, that they distinguished
the different colours and their shades. ‘The same
thing is told of the blind Weissenbourg, of Man-
heim. This man had about thirty pieces of cloth,
and he indicated with precision the colour of
every piece. But. he was often mistaken in de-
termining the colour of the clothes of strangers.
The cards with which he played were pricked with
needles, consequently marked. ‘Those who were
not acquainted with it, thought that he distinguished
the colours of the cards by touch. Many other
blind persons have assured us that it is impossible for
them to discern colours. A few discern white from
black, because the surface of the white colour is
more smooth. In general, if blind persons distin-
guish the colours, they feel only a more or less
smooth surface ; but they do not acquire any idea
of colour itself.

The sense of taste is fortified by exercise as
well as every other sense. At the first, several
dishes appear tasteless or unpleasant, for instance,
oysters, or truffles; but after having eaten of them
several times, we distinguish their particular savour.
It is a common opinion that the sensibility of taste
is blunted early in life by the spicy dishes and by all
the refinements of luxury that are daily invented.
But is it possible to maintain that our cooks and
dainty mouthed persons have a more obtuse taste
than savages, who distinguish the flavour of some
roots which are insipid to us? Do not the frequent
poisonings by vegetables, as by hemlock, bella
donna, or poisonous mushrooms, prove that the


3


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN, 307


_ taste of the sober country-man is not surer than the
taste of the voluptuous citizen? We must admit in
respect to the sense of taste what happens in respect
to every other sense. If the impressions are too
strong its sensibility is blunted, but the functions
grow more energetic by a conformable exercise.

The sense of smell is also susceptible of being
exercised. Several physicians, at the entrance into
a room, distinguish the kind and state of certain
diseases. It is related that some negroes follow
other persons by their track as dogs do, and discern
the traces of a negro from that of a European. In
the same way, the smell is blunted by the use of
too strong and penetrating odors, but a con-
formable exercise strengthens its functions.

The sense of hearing is like the other senses,
cultivated by exercise. The blind Weissenbourg,
of Manheim, judged exactly of the distance and
size of persons who in an erect posture spoke to
him. The blind Schoenberger, of Weide, in the
Upper Palatinate, had the sense of hearing so acute,
that it was sufficient to indicate, by striking, the
place where the nine pins were put up, or the mark
to be shot at, and he often hit the aim. Blind
persons find often a pin or piece of money which
make some noise in falling.

Finally, the eyes acquire by exercise a very high
degree of activity. Le Cat mentions a deaf woman
of Amiens, who distinguished what other persons
said by the motion of their lips. In order to tell
her something it was sufficient for others to move the
lips as if they were speaking. She observed imme-

X 2


808 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


diately if foreigners spoke a strange language. We
saw the same phenomenon at Berlin, and elsewhere,
in several deaf and dumb. They distinguished by
the motions of our lips what we told them. Several
understood us even when we kept the hand before
the mouth. The motions of the face in general
were sufficient. They read with facility what was
traced in the air with the fingers. It follows, that
though exercise does not produce the faculties of
the five external senses, the functions of every sense
yet grow more energetic by exercise.

A. fifth common consideration of the external
senses is, that their functions are not only modified
in different kinds of animals, but even in different
individuals of the same kind. The taste and smell
of carnivorous and herbivorous animals are in-
dubitably modified.. The ox and horse find hay
savoury, while the dog and wolf find flesh. well
tasted. ‘Ihe senses change also at different ages,
and according to our habits; they even participate
of the different states of health. In this manner
are to be explained the different longings of preg-
nant women, of hypochondriacal and hysteric per-
sons. ‘This explains also why we are sometimes
disgusted at what we formerly liked. Moreover,
several substances, inodorous to man, make a
great impression upon the smell of certain animals.
Some animals are much excited by certain odours,
to which others are quite indifferent. One odour
is agreeable to one individual and repugnant to
another. In the same way, the eyes and ears must
be modified in animals which live under water, or in’

A


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 3809


the air: the eyes are different in animals which
see in the night or during the day. One individual
likes one colour or sound with which another is
displeased. Therefore, it is certain that the func.
tions of the external senses are modified, not only
in different kinds of animals, but also in different
individuals of the same kind.


THE EXTERNAL SENSES DO NOT PRODUCE THEIR EN-
JOYMENTS.


The five external senses can only perceive the
impressions which are given; they are agreeably or
disagreeably affected by them; but they cannot pro-
duce their enjoyments: consequently, animals are
confined to the use of impressions which are pre-
sented to them. ‘They prefer the taste of one thing
to another,:one odour, one colour, one sound to
others, but they cannot produce the agreeable im-
pressions. Man alone is capable of this. Man alone,
in order to enjoy his smell, cultivates fields and
constructs manufactories of perfume ; he alone plants
flowers in order to gratify both smell and vision. Man
however has not conceived these ideas by his smell ;
for this sense is much stronger and finer in the
ox, horse, and dog, which do not cultivate any
flower-gardens, and which have no rose-water. In the
same way animals have no cookery; and they cannot
charm their eyes or ears. We shall afterwards see
that man possesses these advantages on account of
some superior faculties which produce these en-


310 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


joyments, while the external senses only perceive
them.


IMMEDIATE AND MEDIATE FUNCTIONS,


Still another common consideration of the ex-
ternal senses is relative to the nature of their func-
tions. These are immediate or mediate, that is,
every external sense perceives one particular kind
of impressions, and excites, by means of its organt-
zation alone, one kind of sensation. ‘This sensa-
tion is then the immediate function of every sense.
The external senses are also intermedia for the in-
ternal faculties; and all functions of the external
senses, which are necessary to the accomplishment
of the functions of the internal faculties, are mediate.
The immediate perceptions depend on the external
senses; but in the mediate functions the five senses
are only auxiliary, and they merely contribute to the
acquisition of the determinate ideas, which are con-
ceived by internal faculties. 2


EVERY SENSE HAS ONLY ONE KIND OF PERCEPTION.


Finally, it 1s certain that every sense produces
only one kind of function. I cannot enough repeat
this axiom, that no organ can manifest two kinds
of function, or that two kinds of perception never
take place in one organ. Therefore, as soon as I
observe that the same conception may be manifested
by several senses, I am certain that the conception
belongs to some internal faculty, which makes use


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. $1i


of different external intermedia in order to act upon
the external world. The conception of form, for
instance, is performed by an internal faculty, but
this internal faculty may examine the determinate
forms by means of touch or sight. After having
considered the generalities of the five senses, let
us consider their particularities.


ON THE PARTICULARITIES OF THE FIVE EXTERNAL
SENSES.


The external senses are destined to bring man
and animals into communication with the external
world. By means of two senses we are acquainted
with external bodies, if they touch immediately the
sentient organs. ‘This is the case with touch and
taste. The other senses perceive remote bodies.
I do not say, that perception or sensation can take
place in any sense which is not affected by some
immediate impression. This is an indispensable
condition. It is certainly different when I say, we
are acquainted with remote bodies and their qua-
lities, Or we perceive, without impression. ‘This
latter phrase would be contradictory and absurd.
We perceive remote bodies either by some par-
ticles which are detached from them, and carried
to our sentient organ as to the olfactory nerve,
or by some intermedia as by light and air. In
both cases, it is certain that man and animals
are acquainted with remote bodies and their quali-
ties.

In general only five external senses are spoken of.


3812 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.
|


But it is necessary to speak with more precision.
Therefore I separate the expression, sensation in
general, from the determinate sensation of hunger
and thirst; from voluntary motion to which voice
belongs ; and from the sense of feeling; as well as
from touch. I consider the word sensation as quite a
general expression. _ Every consciousness or per-
ception of any impression, whether external or in-
ternal, is sensation. Hunger and thirst constitute a
particular class of sensations, attached to particular
nerves ; moreover, voluntary motion: ought not to
be confounded with the sense of touch as is ge-
nerally done. It seems to me that the nerves of
motion and feeling are quite different. In the
descriptive anatomical part, I have already men-
tioned the reasons which induce me to think so.

Iinally, touch must be distinguished from feeling.
Touch is the effect of some internal faculty, which
makes use of the nerves of motion and feeling, in
order to be acquainted with some quality of an
external body. Feeling is properly the external
sense, of which I here speak.


EXTERNAL SENSES. 313


On Feeling in particular.


OF THE PREROGATIVES ATTRIBUTED TO THE SENSE OF
FEELING.


It is often observed that without touch man would
not have any consciousness of the external world.
It is said that man moves and finds limits and resist-
ance to his motion, and that therefore he is adver-
tised of some external existence. But our eyes are
limited, as well as our desire to move; consequently
it would be possible to perceive the external world
by sight, as well as by touch. Moreover, the sen-
tient power does not reside in the external bodies,
but in the mind. Now I cannot conceive why the
sentient being should not be acquainted with the
impressions which happen upon it indistinctly, as
well as with those impressions which are made upon
it only at the moment when it endeavours to act,
and is prevented from it. In both cases there are
only external impressions. And for what reason
does the sentient being, which has no consciousness
of the external world, make any motion? Why do
insects and many animals act as soon as they are
born? ‘The young tortoise and young duck, scarcely
hatched, run toward the water without ever having
touched it. How do they distinguish water from
solid bodies? How can young birds be acquainted
by touch with the branches upon which they sit
down, at the first time they leave their nest ?

All observations, and nature itself, are against


814 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


this philosophical opinion. ‘Two things are here to
be observed. First, man and animals are from nature
much more disposed to transfer their internal sensa-


tions, relative to the external objects, into the out- —


ward world, than to concentrate external nature
within themselves. We see and hear from without,


at least it seems so tous. ‘The young child, with-
out any instruction, turns his head towards the place


whence come the sound and light, which make im-
pressions upon his ears and eyes. The afflux of
blood toward the optic nerves makes us see flames
from without, and toward the auditory nerves it
makes us hear the sound of bells. In dreaming we
see landscapes, persons, coaches, we hear music, we
walk in the parks, we see and fear enemies, and
=) thousand similar things. Madmen hear heavenly


choirs, and see angels; visionaries consider their in-


ternal sensations as realities, they distinguish the


figures of their genii &c. All these and similar —


phenomena take place inwardly, but they are trans-
ferred by the mind into the external world.

It is also to be observed, that the faculty of sepa-
rating the external impressions, consequently the
external world, from the internal sentient power,


cannot be attributed to any external sense ; this fa-


culty is much superior, and is internal as well as the —


faculty which says, I feel, hence Iam. It is quite
another thing to perceive any impression and to
know this faculty, and to reflect about it. This in-
ternal faculty of knowing the existence of external


objects acts by means of all the external senses ; and


the sense of touch has, in this respect, no prefer-


EXTERNAL SENSES. 315


‘ence. ‘Tracy* has very well demonstrated that the
sense of touch has not the prerogative of producing
the idea of the external world. He says, the nerves
are only agitated by different impressions. “This is
the case in respect to the auditory, optic, and olfac-
tory nerves, as well as in respect to the feeling
nerves. Consequently for what reason should touch
alone excite the idea of some external cause?

The second prerogative, attributed by Buffon,
Condillac, Cuvier, Dumas, and others to the sense
of touch is, that it alone produces the ideas of
space, dimensions, extent, distance, figure, number,
motion, and rest. But it is only necessary to exa-
mine the functions of animals in order to prove that
this assertion is incorrect. Animals which acquire
no, or at most a very defective, instruction by their
touch, judge however of distance, figure, and plura-
lity. If the swallow and bat catch flying insects
with incredible swiftness, do they not measure the
distance? When young birds leave their nest for the
first time, do they run with their heads against
houses and trees, instead of sitting down upon some
branch? Do we observe that young animals, which
have not yet left their native place, run away indif-
ferently in perceiving an enemy far off, or near
them? Animals which are born with imperfect eyes,
or blind, can neither see external objects, nor mea-
sure distance; but those which are born with per-
fect eyes see immediately, and measure exactly,
distance, figure, motion, and plurality ; for instance,


¢ Ideologie, Tom. i. p. 114.


316 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN,


the young partridge, quail, and duck, avoid from
birth every object which lies in their way. There-
fore it is evident that the sense of touch has not
the prerogative of producing the ideas of extent,
distance, form, and motion. Locke has already
demonstrated this truth; and it is certain that not
_ only touch and vision, but also hearing and smell
may excite the ideas of distance, direction, motion,


and plurality. Animals turn toward the wind, and


judge of the direction whence impressions come.
The observation that the ideas of extent, form,
distance, motion, and plurality, are excited by dif-
ferent senses, is an evident proof to me that none
of these ideas can be attributed immediately to any
external sense. For I have already mentioned, that I
consider it as an axiom that no special faculty shows
its manifestations by means of two or several organs,
but that the manifestations of every special faculty
are attached to some particular organ. My reason-
ing is also confirmed by facts and direct proofs.
The faculties of knowing and measuring space in
general, of distinguishing distance, forms, number,
motion, and rest, are not in proportion to the five
external senses to which they are attributed, either
in animals or in man. Moreover, these facul-
ties, which are internal, act and produce respective
sensations without being excited by the sense of
seeing or touch; for instance, in birds which mi-
grate; in dogs and pigeons which find again the
ancient places to which they are attached, without
being acquainted with the interjacent objects; in
birds which build their nests conformable to those


EXTERNAL SENSES, 817


of their parents without having been instructed :
and these faculties act from within without any ex-
ternal excitation of touch or sight. Finally, the
physiology of the brain shows particular organs for
these faculties, and proves that the manifestations
of these faculties are in proportion to their respect-
ive internal organs; consequently these faculties
must be separated from the functions of the exter-
nal senses, and attributed to particular internal
organs.

The third prerogative, attributed to the sense of
touch is, that it is the surest sense, and that it rec-
tifies and corrects the other senses. In treating of
the external senses in general, I have demonstrated
that no sense acquires its faculty by another sense,
but that every sense has its faculty from nature by
itself; that every sense is subjected to its particular
laws; and that its functions are perfect or imperfect
according to its proper organization. ‘Thus it fol-
lows from this consideration that touch does not
rectify the errors of the other senses in the organi-
zation, that it produces not the faculties of the other
senses. Indeed it is easy to prove by the healthy
and diseased state, that the sense of touch is not
surer than any other sense, and does not rectify the
other senses any more than these rectify the sense
of touch. : 7

If we cross two fingers, and touch a round body,
for instance, a pebble, a pea, we seem to feel two
bodies. If we place a thin flexible paper.between
the forefinger and thumb of any person, he will not
feel it. In different diseases, the patients think that


$18 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


they receive impressions from without, they feel
warm, hot, cold, various pains, some itching &c.,
in the same way as they hear voices which are pro-
duced by some internal cause. Those who reflect
on these considerations, combined with those I have
made above in respect to the rectification of the dif


ferent senses, will be convinced that the sense of |


touch is not surer than any other sense, and does
not rectify the other senses any more than these rec-
tify the sense of touch.


Many physiologists and philosophers have main-


tained that the sense of touch produces a great


|
i


}
|
j


|
i


number of instinctive labours in animals, and has —


invented the mechanical arts in mankind. But in~


treating of the origin of the moral sentiments and
intellectual faculties, I have proved that they are
not at all the result of the external senses or of
muscular motion; and that the muscles and exter-
nal senses are only instruments given by nature in
order to perform different functions which are dic-


tated by internal faculties. I have shown that the —


instruments are confounded with the internal facul-
ties. Indeed if we examine the instinctive labours
of animals, and the mechanical arts of man, we
shall observe that they are not in proportion either
to the acuteness of touch, or to the perfection of
the external instruments. Those who recollect all


the proofs, which I have mentioned above, will be —


convinced with me that the ancient doctrine of
Anaxagoras, that the hand of man is the cause of
his understanding, falls to the ground. It will be
evident that the wisdom of Solomon, Solon, Plato,


|
|
|
|


EXTERNAL SENSES. 319


all the master-pieces of Homer, Euclid, Raphael,
and others, are not at all the result of their hands;
and that the surprising instincts of animals are not
the effect of their antennz, of their feet, teeth, pro-
bosces, or tails.

It must however be allowed that the external in-
struments cannot be in contradiction with the inter.
nal faculties, though they are not in proportion to
them; and that the internal faculties perform their
functions with more facility and more perfection, if
the external instruments are more perfect. There-
fore the hand of man, which is divided into several
moveable parts, capable of changing its form at
every moment, and of surrounding closely the sur-
face of external bodies, is more fit for appreciating
their tactile qualities, than the feet of birds invested
with scales, or the feet of quadrupeds covered with
a horny substance. But it is always certain that the
external instruments are not the cause of the inter-
nal faculties.

From these considerations it follows, that the
sense of touch has no prerogative superior to the
other senses. It manifests its particular functions,
and assists different internal faculties as well as the
other senses. It is also necessary to consider the
question, whether the feeling of man is more acute
than that of animals? This opinion is generally be-
lieved, because the skin of man is destitute of hair,
and only covered with a thin epidermis, while the
hair of quadrupeds, and the feathers of birds, dimi-
nish their feeling. But there are animals destitute
of hair, as the elephant, the Turkish dog, snails &c.


320 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


and their feeling is very acute. Other animals,
though covered with hair, as the horse, dog &c.
feel immediately the insects which sit down upon
their hair. Finally, it is even impossible to con-
clude that, because the skin is covered with hair,
the feeling is less acute. Sometimes in diseases, the
hairy scalp of man grows extremely sensible, and
the least touch of the hair produces great pain: the
epidermis at the anterior part of our fingers is the
thickest, however the feeling of these parts is con-
sidered as the most acute. Consequently the feel-_
ing nerves of animals, though covered with hair,
might be more sensible than other nerves which are
destitute of hair; and it is not obvious that the feel-
ing of man is more acute than that of animals.

It is still to be asked, whether feeling produces
the ideas of consistency, of hardness, softness, of
solidity, and fluidity, of weight, and resistance? I
think it does not. For in order to examine these
qualities of external bodies, the mind employs the
muscular system rather than the sense of feeling
properly so called. There is also no proportion —
between the faculty of measuring these qualities
of external bodies, and the sense of feeling or
the muscular system. Moreover, the sense of feel-_
ing may be lost, but if the muscular power remain,
we may perceive the weight and consistency of ex-
ternal bodies. Hence muscles are necessary in
order to measure the qualities of external bodies
just mentioned, but feeling does not contribute to |
it. Now the muscular functions are excited by in-
ternal causes, therefore the ideas of weight, resist-


EXTERNAL SENSES. 321


ance, and consistency of external bodies, are the
result of some internal faculty. I make once for all
the general observation that, as soon as any func-
tion is the result of the active state of any external
sense, we may be sure that the faculty, which con.
ceive the ideas, is internal. For the same reason
we have seen above, that the faculties which con-
ceive the extent and size, the form and number, of
external bodies, are internal. In this manner it is
also conceivable how the internal faculties make use
of different external senses if it be possible, and
how sometimes they can only make use of such or
such external intermedium. The mind, for instance,
wishes to move the body from one place to another,
this can only be done by means of the muscular
system; the mind wishes to perceive music, this
also can only be done by means of the auditory
nerve; but the mind wishes to perceive the size or
form of a body, this may then be done by the sense
of sight or feeling. Notwithstanding these modifi-
cations, it remains always certain that every re-
action of the mind upon external bodies is. grounded
‘upon some internal faculty, while the sensations,
which result from the passive state of the five ex-
ternal senses, constitute their immediate sphere of
activity ?-

Now which are the immediate functions of the
sense of fecling? The sense of feeling is the most
extensive, and is continued even over the intestinal
canal. It produces the most general perceptions of
pain and pleasure, and the sensations of tempera-
ture, and those of dryness and moisture. All other.

Yy


322 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


functions are only mediate. Even the ideas of
roughness and smoothness belong to some internal
faculty; namely, to that of form. In respect to
the mediate functions, the sense of feeling may be
called touch, and its sphere of activity is very con-
siderable and important; it is principally combined
with voluntary motion, and these two kinds of
nerves then may assist all internal functions, both the
moral sentiments and intellectual faculties. There-
fore it is evident why the connexion of the nerves
of motion and feeling, with the organs of the moral
sentiments and intellectual faculties, is the most in-
timate. For it is a principle conceivable by itself,
and proved by experience, that the five external
senses are in connexion with the cerebral organs
which they assist; and as the nerves of motion and
feeling may assist all internal faculties, they also are
connected with all the internal organs, in the same


way as the nerves of motion are connected with the
nerves of feeling.


ON THE SENSE OF TASTE.


Taste is the second sense by means of which man
and animals are acquainted with external bodies, if
they touch immediately the sentient organ. After
feeling, this sense seems to be the most general and
the most indispensable in living beings which take


their food with consciousness. It seems also that


this sense is active very early in life. The fifth pair


of nerves, several branches of which are distributed
to the papille of the membrane, which covers the |


|


EXTERNAL. SENSES. 823


palate, the velum pendulum, the pharynx, and chiefly
the tongue, is much developed in new-born chil-
dren, in the same way as are the nerves of motion
and feeling.

Itpis a common opinion that the acuteness of the
taste depends not only on the nervous papillze of the
tongue, but also on its flexibility, softness, and
moisture. Ackermann, who derives the perfection
of the human mind from the acuteness of the five
senses, asserts that the nerves of taste are propor-
tionately more considerable in man than in animals ;
that the tongue of man is the most flexible and soft,
and that his nervous papillae are covered with the
finest skin. However in many animals, as in dogs,
monkies &c. the skin of the tongue is as thin and
fine, and the structure as flexible, as in that of man.
As to the mobility of the tongue it has less relation
to the taste than to the function of speech. ‘The
principal requisite of an acute taste Is certainly the
largeness of the gustatory nerves, and of the surface
which they supply ; but, in this respect, many ani-
mals surpass man. In many animals, the lingual nerve,
as well as the whole of the fifth pair, is much larger
than in man; the nervous papillz of the tongue are
more numerous, and their apices more extensive.
Though the tongue of several animals is covered
with a rougher skin, these animals distinguish and
select certain plants which are conformable to their
taste, and reject other vegetables which are contrary
to it. Moreover, if it be considered that eating
procures to animals the most exquisite and perma-
nent pleasure; that a great number of animals,

Y¥ 2


894. PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


while awake, pass almost all their time either in
eating or in ruminating, it will be difficult to deny
that the taste of many animals is more perfect than
that of man. Hence if any one expect more con-
siderable intellectual faculties from a more perfect
organization of the organ of taste, he ought at least
to show that such animals as the dog, horse, ox &c.
have employed those intellectual faculties to perfect
the methods of gratifying that sense.

We cannot adopt the opinion of those naturalists
who maintain that the taste of birds is very obtuse.
It seems at least that this is not generally the case.
Blumenbach has shown that the organ of taste is
large, and the sense very exquisite in ducks. For
this reason a great number of birds do not swallow
their food suddenly. The titmouse, for example,
laps it. The greater number of birds which live
upon insects, grains, and berries, crush and bruise
them. If you present to the canary-bird, to the
bulfinch, nightingale &c. different sorts of food,
each of them will choose that sort of food which is
the most agreeable to it. If we present ant’s eggs
to young nightingales, many of them will rather die


of hunger than use them, because they are unac-


quainted with that sort of food; if we put these
eggs into their bill they commonly throw them
away, but if we break the eggs they swallow them
with the greatest avidity. Hence it is evident that
their taste is very fine. Even the birds which swal-
low their food suddenly, as the cock, hen, pigeon &c.
distinguish different berries and. seeds by touching
them with the extremity of their bill. If we mix
3


EXTERNAL SENSES. 325


the seed of vetches with that of robinia caragana,
pigeons and hens will take them indiscriminately in
their bills, but they will throw away the latter.
These kinds of birds prefer therefore, like others,
one sort of food. If we tame storks and accustom
them to catch with their bills rats and mice thrown
to them, they throw them several times in the air,
and catch them every time; then crush and swal-
low them greedily. But if we fling at them a toad
they catch it, and they throw it away immediately.
They eagerly eat bees and great flies; but if they
catch any insect with which they are displeased,
they throw it also away. It is the same with swal-
lows, and all birds which live upon insects.

These observations render it improbable that
every insoluble body is insipid, or that every body,
in order to affect the organ of. taste, must be soluble
in the mucus which covers the tongue. In many
physiological writings, the axiom of chemistry, cor-
pora non agunt nisi soluta, is applied to the organ
of taste. “ The tongue,’ says Richerand, “ is
covered by a mucous, whitish, yellow, or bilious
slime. This covering, more or less thick, prevents
the immediate contact of sapid particles, and we
have only a false idea of tastes. All aliments seem
bitter if a bilious disposition exist, or insipid if
there be a superabundance of mucus.” But it seems
that the tongue may perceive many spirituous, olea-
ginous, or other impressions produced by seeds and
insects, without being dissolved and mixed with the
mucus which covers the tongue.

Dumeril, Professor of Physiology at Paris, maiu-


326 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


tains (in an essay on the smeil of fishes) that fishes

are destitute of the sense of taste, which, accord-

ing to him, is replaced by the sense of smelt

Fishes, says he, have not the hypoglossal: nerve, -
and the continual pressure of the lingual nerve by
the water must blunt the sensibility of the tongue.
In the supposition that fishes ‘are destitute of the
hypoglossal nerve, it does not follow that they have
no taste. For the hypoglossal serves only for the
motion of the tongue, while a branch of the fifth
pair, which exists also in fishes, is the organ of
taste. ‘The tongues of many fishes are covered with
numerous nervous papille, and the anterior part of
their tongue is even moveable, flexible and soft.
Hence there is no anatomical reason to deny taste
to fishes. It is in consequence of their possessing
this sense that fishes are taken with bait. On the
other hand, if the pressure of water blunt the taste,
why should not the same pressure blunt also their
smell? But pressure produces no such effect; for
some persons walk during the greatest part of their
lives, yet the soles of their feet do not lose their
sensibility. In short, it seems that this opinion of
Dumeril.is more remarkable for singularity than
for any foundation in anatomicai and physiological

observation.

The lower animals also must have the nerves of
daste. Insects, for example, prefer different food;
but their gustatory nerves have not yet been dis-
covered. Neither in man nor in animals can taste
be considered as an iniallible guide to the whole-
‘someness of the thing which is tasted. Repugnant


EXTERNAL SENSES. 327


aliments may be wholesome, while others which are
eaten with pleasure act sometimes like poison upon
the stomach, or upon the intestines. The taste of
patients is often an indication conformable to the
nature of their disease ; but no reasonable physician
will have an unbounded confidence in it. The sense
of taste, however, has necessarily the most intimate
relation to the whole system of digestion and nutri-
tion. I have already mentioned that the sense of
taste is modified in different kinds of animals, and
in different individuals of the same kind, even in
different ages, and in the healthy or diseased state.
As the organ of taste is the first developed, so it
seems to be the last which loses its activity. Old
persons commonly esteem good food which is also
necessary for them. When their sight is extremely
weak, when they are almost deaf, when their skin
‘3 wrinkled, stiff, and almost insensible, they drink
and eat as heartily and with as much pleasure as.
their grand-children.

The sphere of activity of this sense is confined
to the sensations of taste ; that is, it perceives only
impressions of savout. Mediately, it gives assist-
ance to nutrition. The nerves of taste have the
most intimate connexion with the nerves necessary
to the motion of the jaws, with the nerve of the
organ of voice, and with the glossopharyngeal
nerve. It is also known that the organs on which
these nerves are expanded exert the greatest in-
fluence upon one another.


528 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ON THE SENSE OF SMELL.


By means of smell the external world begins
to act upon man and animals from a distance.
Odorous particles are here detached from bodies,
and inform man and animals of the existence of
the bodies to which they belong. Several phy-
siologists consider smell as a completion of taste,
that is, as a finer and higher degree of taste. But the
olfactory nerve constitutes a particular system. It is
the explorer and the guide of the sense of taste. This
sense must exist in lower animals as in insects, be-
cause they are attracted by odorous objects, yet
their olfactory nerve has not yet been discovered.

Dumeril, according to whom fishes have no taste,
thinks that their smell is its substitute ; and in order
to support his opinion, he maintains that odoriferous
particles cannot be transmitted by water. We have
already seen that the organ of taste exists in fishes,
and it is not probable that nature has produced any
organic apparatus without an object. It is besides
strange to maintain that odoriferous particles cannot
be transmitted by water, as fish and craw-fish are
taken by bait.

It is remarkable that this sense does not exist in
cetaceous animals which occupy so high a place in
the scale of being. Dumeril thinks also that their
taste takes the place of the sense of smell. It is
generally admitted that many animals excel man
in respect to the acuteness of smell. Their whole
olfactory apparatus is larger. It is the same in the


EXTERNAL SENSES. 829


most stupid as in the most skilful animals—in the
ox and hog, as in the horse and dog. It is known
that the subtile smell of hogs and dogs serves to
detect certain roots, truffles, for instance, which
are buried in the earth. These animals are led to
the place where the truffles are suspected to be, and
they burrow into the earth in which the truffles are
concealed,

Cuvier maintains that the olfactory nerve is larger
in carnivorous than in herbivorous’ animals. But
there is no relation between the acuteness of smell,
and the instinct of eating flesh or vegetables. Man
who is omnivorous, and the sea-calf which lives
only upon fish, have both very small olfactory
nerves. The fish, turtle, mole, sheep, ox, horse &c.,
however different their food is, have proportionally
a larger olfactory nerve than the wolf, dog, tiger &c.
Comparative anatomy therefore opposes Cuvier’s
opinion. Comparative physiology proves also the
contrary. Herbivorous animals take many hundreds
of plants for food, while carnivorous animals live
commonly upon a smaller number of animals. In
order therefore to distinguish their food, the organ
of smell in, herbivorous animals must be larger than
that of carnivorous. Moreover, if nature endowed
carnivorous animals with a very acute smell in order
to trace and find out emanations from animals des-
tined to be their prey, it is improbable that nature
should have refused to the weak victim the ad-
vantage of an acute smell, in order to detect its
enemies and to escape them.

Odoriferous impressions act powerfully upon the


330 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


brain. This circumstance induces us to apply to these
nerves stimuli, which are proper to revive-sensibility
when life is suspended, as in cases of weakness and
suffocation or asphyxia. I have already shown that
this sense does not produce the surprising faculty
possessed by different animals, of finding their dwell-
ings at avery great distance. It remains to be de-
termined what is the sphere of activity of this sense.
The immediate functions of smell consist in per-
ceiving the odoriferous particles of external bodies,
and in informing man and animals of the existence of


their aliments. All its other functions are mediate.


It assists the faculty which conceives the existence
of external bodies; it indicates to animals the
proximity of friends and enemies ; and it leads those
which live solitary to their companions, when they
are commanded to propagate their species.

It seems that the olfactory nerve. has a greater
connexion with the anterior lobes and with the con-
volutions of the brain, which are situated side-
ward and outward. ‘This sense assists chiefly the
knowing faculty of individuals. ‘The nose is also
near the mouth, certainly on account of their ne-
cessary relation one to another.


ON THE SENSE OF HEARING.


Hearing is the second sense which makes man
and animals acquainted with remote objects, and it
is the first sense which perceives external objects
by an intermedium, namely the air. ‘The auditory


nerve is found from man down to the cuttle-fish, —


EXTERNAL SENSES. 331


below which the organ of hearing has not been dis-
tinguished, though several animals, lower in the
seale of gradation, are not destitute of this sense.
The auditory apparatus becomes more complex in
proportion as animals are more perfect. ‘This is the
case with the external and internal ear. Except
Ackermann, all physiologists know that many ani-
mals surpass man in the faculty of hearing. Acker-
mann, who derives the superiority of human un,
derstanding only from the external senses, asserts
that the hearing of man is the most perfect on ac-
count of the cochlea of his ear, which, according to
Ackermann, is the most essential part, and wanting
in animals.: But the assertion of Ackermann may
be refuted anatomically and physiologically. First,
it is certain that the hearing apparatus is more per-
fect in many animals than in men. ‘The external
ear is larger and moveable in many animals, so that
it can be moved in all directions and opposed to
the soniferous undulations. ‘The muscles destined
to this function are large and strong in animals.
Moreover, the hearing apparatus of many animals pre-
sents large cavities, which increase the sonorous
vibrations, and which cannot be confounded with
the mastoid process of man; they are sometimes
empty; in other animals they are divided into a
greater or less number of compartments; in the
ox they are composed of many concentric par-
titions. ‘The auditory nerve is also much larger in
many animals, as in the ox, horse, stag, sheep &c.
than in man; also the cochleadoes not only exist
in many animals, but it is even more perfect in


332 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


many animals than in man. Hence, it is anatomi-
cally proved, that the hearing apparatus is larger
and more perfect in many animals than in man.
The same may be demonstrated physiologically. In
observing the functions of animals, we may convince
ourselves that many animals perceive sounds which
are imperceptible to man. It therefore must be
admitted that many animals surpass man in the
sense of hearing.

In new-born children, this sense is not yet active,
but it improves by degrees and in proportion as its
respective organ is developed. In the same way
the auditory power decreases in proportion as the
vigour of the hearing apparatus decreases. Se-
veral atithors maintain that the deafness of old per-
sons depends on the blunted sensibility of the au-
ditory nerve ; they think that the repeated impres-
sions exhaust sensibility. It is true, sensibility is
blunted and exhausted by too great activity; but
in the ordinary state of health, I think that hard-
ness of hearing in old persons depends on the de-
crease of the auditory apparatus. In young and
sound persons the auditory nerve is expanded in a
humour that occupies the cavities of the internal
ear, in old persons this humour diminishes at the
same time that the nerve itself decreases. There-
fore Pmel, who during the severe winter of 1798,
at the hospital Salpetriere, caused the skulls of se-
veral women to be opened, who died at an advanced
age and had lost their hearing for several years,
found the cavities of the internal ear perfectly
empty, while they were filled with a cake of ice in


EXTERNAL SENSES. $353


younger persons who had possessed the faculty of
hearing.

With regard to the immediate functions of the
sense of hearing, it is confined to the perception
of sounds; but it assists a great number of internal
faculties, which are commonly attributed to it. It
is, for instance, a quite common opinion that this
sense produces music and the faculty of speaking,
but I have already refuted this error. I have
shown that hearing produces neither the one nor
the other of these faculties, but that hearing is
only a means of executing or putting in action these
two faculties. It is conceivable that in different
beings the. sense of hearing must be modified, and
in relation to the internal faculties which act by it ;
in the same way as also the external objects are
calculated for the internal faculties, or the internal
faculties for the external objects; in the same way
as, for instance, the laws of vibrations, though they
exist without, in the external vibrating objects,
must be conformable to the laws of the internal
faculty of tone; or in the same way as the relations
of size, of number, of succession, which exist in
the outward world, are calculated for their respective
internal faculties. Hence, hearing is only a means
of communication for the internal faculties of speak-
ing and music.

There are yet other internal faculties which act
upon the outward world by means of hearing. All
these internal faculties therefore were commonly
attributed to the sense of hearing. In this respect
I must consider an error which formerly was very


334 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


common, and in which even Kant and Herder
participated, namely that it is impossible to com-
municate any abstract notion to the deaf and dumb.
Le Cat says, that deaf persons are more unfortunate
than the blind, because many truths are heard, and
very few are seen. Herder, thought that a deaf_
and dumb person imitates all he sees done, whether
good or evil. All the erroneous opinions relative to
deaf and dumb persons result partly from the com-
mon error that our notions and sensations are pro-
duced by the external senses, and that nothing |
exists in the mind but what comes by the five senses,
and partly from the error that the arbitrary vocal
language produces sensations and ideas. But it is |
certain that all internal faculties may exist without
hearing, consequently, that deaf persons in whom
the sense of hearing alone is wanting, may mani-
fest all-other faculties. ‘They are only destitute of
this means of communication, and they are obliged
to make use of some other means. ‘Therefore they
speak, that is, communicate their sensations and
ideas by gestures. | 1

The sense of hearing principally assists the moral
sentiments, as well as the faculties of space, of indt
viduality, of tune, of speaking, and thereby all im:
tellectual faculties and sentiments. The auditory
nerve has a nearer connexion with the organs of the
moral sentiments than with those of the intellectual
faculties; it embraces the nervous bundle of the
cerebellum, and is connected with the vocal nerves.
Therefore the voice, as natural language, is more
energetic in sentiments than in intellectual faculties.


Z


~


EXTERNAL SENSES. 335


ON THE SENSE OF SIGHT.


This is the second sense which informs man and
animals of remote objects by means of an interme-
dium—light. Those who attribute the perfection
of the intellectual faculties of man to the perfection
of his senses maintain also that man has a more
perfect vision than animals. They consider this
perfection of sight as resulting from the more dis-
tinct manner in which man sees objects, and
they ascribe this peculiarity first to the exact
coincidence of the refraction and reflection of the
rays of light; then to the transparency of the
diaphanous parts of the eyes of man, to the irri-
tability of the iris, and to the position of the crys-
talline lens. Richerand even believes that the pig-
mentum nigrum must impede and disturb the dis-
tinctness of vision; and that perhaps on this ac-


count animals have false and exagerated ideas of


the power of man. Experience answers these


errors. The iris of many animals is very moveable,
and they see both in the day and at night. In ge-
neral if similar reasoning were true, the falcon
would not perceive the heron at a distance at
which the heron is imperceptible to the eye of man;
the eagle hovering in the air would not perceive a
mouse on the earth; the turkey-cock would not
recognize a falcon or other birds of prey, and warn
the individuals around it, when it is impossible for
man to distinguish the enemy ; and tigers and other


fierce animals would not attack man. It must


$36 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


therefore be allowed that many animals have the
sense of sight more acute than man.

No sense has more occupied physiologists and.
philosophers, than the senses of sight and touch ;
but the greatest number of errors are also relative
to these two senses. Many erroneous opinions have
been, and are still, maintained in respect to vision. It
has been said that this sense acquires its faculty either
by touch or by habit. But I have already proved
in speaking of the generalities of the five external
senses, that no sense acquires its faculty, neither
from another sense, nor from habit. Vision de-
pends on the organization of the eye; it is weak,
energetic, perfect or imperfect, according to its
organization. Some animals come into the world
with perfect eyes, and these animals see perfectly
from the beginning. ‘The butterfly and honey-bee fly
at the first attempt through fields and flowery mea-
dows ; the young partridge and chicken run through
stubbles and corn, as soon as they have left the,
shell ; while other animals, which are born blind,
distinguish size, shape, and distance of bodies by
slow degrees. This latter is also the case with
new-born children. I cannot insist enough that
every sense has its own laws, and that its functions
depend on the healthy and perfect sfate of the re-
spective organization. We see in the looking glass
ourselves and other objects enlarged, diminished,
lengthened, shortened, multiplied, near, distant &c.,
according to the laws of the refraction of the rays
_ of light.

It is also maintained, that without the sense of


EXTERNAL SENSES. 337


touch, the eyes would see all objects in a reversed
situation, and double; and that all objects would
seem to be in the eyes, because the objects are
painted on the retina. The reversed impressions
of the objects in the eyes really exist, but, as Berk-
ley and Condillac have elucidated, the objects are
not painted on the retina; the retina is only agitated
by the impressions of light. However, the difficulty
why we see the objects upright is not resolved.
I formerly spoke of the internal faculty which
makes us acquainted with the external world. I
then showed that man is more disposed to trans-
fer all internal sensations and ideas, which are re-
lative to external bodies, into the outward world,
than to concentrate external impressions inwardly.
According to a law of nature, the impressions of the
five senses are not only transferred into the external
world, but even to the place and distance whence
they come. If animals take wind they do not look
for the received impressions in an opposite di-
rection. We think that the sonorous body is in the
direction from whence come the vibrations of the
air. In the same manner, the impressions of
light are referred to the place from whence they
come. Consequently, the impressions of light which
come from above are referred upwards, and those
which come from below are referred downwards,
and the object is seen in its right position.

_ Nobody recollects to have seen in his infancy any
object reversed, and natural history does not show
any example of this sort in animals. According to
these philosophical absurdities, young birds ought


$38 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


to take the root of a tree for its top. It is to
be observed in general, that natural philosophers
and physiologists, in examining the five external
senses, have entirely forgot animals in restraining
their reasoning only to man. I have already spoken
of single vision, although the impressions are double,
in treating of the generalities of the external senses.
I have also spoken of the possibility of distinguish-
ing distance by means of the eyes, and I have
shown that animals are unable to measure exactly
the distance between themselves and external
bodies, only when their eyes are imperfect. Thus
the apparatus of seeing possesses its proper faculty 3
the manifestations of this faculty depend on the
state of the respective organization ; and vision is
subjected to its invariable laws, in the same way as
every other sense has its own laws. A straight


stick plunged in water must appear crooked. Ifa —


vessel is filled with water, we see a stone or other
body at the bottom, which we cannot see in the
same situation if the vessel be empty. The deepest
philosopher and the most learned man, notwithstand-
ing all contrary conviction, see their pictures be-
hind the looking-glass, like parrots, monkies and
children. We see our persons reversed in the
bottom of a spoon which we keep upright, and
our right hand appears on the left side, and the
left hand on the right side; but in a conic looking-
glass which is convex in the circumference and
concave from the basis to the top, we see our per-
sons also reversed, but the right side opposite to
our right side, and the left side opposite to the left,


EXTERNAL SENSES. 839


as in an ordinary plain looking-glass. We know
that in two rows of trees the last trees are as far
distant one from another as the nearest, however
the distance of the two rows appears narrower at
the farther end. A square tower at a great distance
appears round ; and very large trees which are distant
do not appear larger than small bushes which are
near. All these and similar judgments are un-
avoidable and accord with the laws of optics.

Those who reproach the sense of sight with the
errors we have refuted support their assertions by
the experiments observed by Cheselden upon per-
sons blind born. First, in the description of the
experiment made by Cheselden, there is no mention
of a double or reversed vision during the first mo-
ments after the operation. Le Cat said, therefore,
that these persons were acquainted by touch with
the situation of the bodies, consequently their mind
could not so easily be misled by sight. But we
ask why was not their soul acquainted with the size
_ and shape of the bodies? On the other hand, their
soul was informed by touch, that the bodies were not
applied to the surface of our body, however it ap-
peared so to their eyes. ‘This was the case even
with the blind-born individual who underwent the
second operation twelve months after the first ;
consequently he was acquainted by the other eye
with external bodies, with their size and shape;
yet neither his touch nor his sound eye were
sufficient to persuade his other eye that pictures were
not elevated bodies.

Diderot has very well answered this reproach made

Z&


$40 PUYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


against sight. Pictures, says he, produced the same
effect upon savages when they perceived them for
the first time. ‘They took paintings for living per-
sons, spoke to them, and were much astonished that
they did not give any answer. We ought to
consider, continues Diderot, that vision cannot be
perfect before the organization is perfect. ‘The
humours of the eye must be cleared, the iris must
be conveniently dilatable, the retina neither too
little nor too much sensible ; the whole eye-ball must
be fit for exerting all the particularities necessary
to vision. He also said very well: sight is not ne-
cessary in order to be sure by touch that any figure
exists ; why should touch be necessary to sight in
order to be sure by sight that the same thing
exists ?

The sphere of activity of the immediate functions
of sight is confined to the perception of light. All
its other functions are mediate. I have already de-
monstrated that the eyes do not produce the art of
painting; this faculty is internal and only assisted
by the eyes. ‘These also may assist all the other
external senses, all the moral sentiments, and all the
intellectual faculties, and principally the latter of
these. ‘Lhe connexion of the optic nerve with the .
other parts of the brain also shows that sight assists
chiefly the posterior, lateral, and anterior organs of
the brain.

It results from all I have said of the five external
senses, that their spheres of immediate activity are
very limited; that feeling perceives only dryness,
moisture and temperature; that taste perceives


EXTERNAL SENSES. 34)


savours; smell odours; the ears sound; and the
eyes light: hence, that all the other functions are
only mediate, that is, the internal faculties by means
of the external senses perceive the different im-
pressions, and conceive the peculiar ideas; they
are acquainted with the existence of the external
bodies and their qualities, and they act again upon
the external world, by means of the external senses
and voluntary motion.

A fact mentioned by Darwin * proves that the five
senses are only intermedia, and that their actions must
be propagated to internal operations. An old man
who suffered a stroke of palsy preserved hearing
and vision perfect, but he’ could call up a train of
ideas only from the latter. When he was told it was
nine o’clock and time for him to eat his breakfast,
he repeated the words distinctly but without under-
standing them. But if his servant put a watch into
his hand, he said Why, William, have I not my
. breakfast? On almost every occasion, his servants
conversed with him by visible objects although his
hearing was perfect.


* Zoonomia, 3d Edit, vol. iv. p. 295.
, P


B42


ON THE INTERNAL ORGANS OF THE MIND.


Before I examine the special faculties of the-
mind and their particular organs, I shall answer a
question which may be put with respect to every
organ, viz., Why do you admit a particular organ for
this, and not for another function ? In speaking of
actions alone, it is difficult to conceive the necessity


of such or such organ. The answer however is de-


cisive if we can say, Experience demonstrates it.

But, as I look for special faculties and their organs,
the necessity of every organ may be demonstrated
even by reasoning, that is, by the proofs which
demonstrate the plurality of the organs. Consider
these proofs in respect to every organ, and it is im-
possible to be mistaken. Consequently, it is ne-
cessary to point out a particular organ for every
faculty, |


1. Which exists in one kind of animals and not
in another:


2. Which varies in both sexes of the same species :


3. Which is not proportionate to the other facul-.


ties of the same individual -


4. Which does not manifest itself simultaneously
with the other faculties, that is, which appears or
disappears earlier or later than the other faculties:

5. Which may act or rest alone:


6. Which alone is propagated in a distinct man-
ner from parents to children: and


INTERNAL ORGANS OF THE MIND. 843


7. Which alone may preserve its proper state of
health or disease.

Gall did not determine any organ in conformity
with this reasoning. He followed only the empirical
method, that is, he looked for organs according to
the active functions of man,


bay


344


ORDER I.—FErz.ines.
Genus I.—Propensities.
1, ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS,* (. ‘physical lowe.)


Dr. Gall did not originally think that there was an
organ of this propensity in the brain. He dis-
covered its existence by chance. Being physician


to a widow who was subject to very strong hysterical


fits, during which she drew her head backward
violence, Gall sometimes supported her
his hand, and observed that her neck was
very large and hot. He was acquainted with her
character, and knew that she was extremely fond of
sensual pleasure. Gall considered this magnitude
neck, the consequent developement of her


with great
head with


of ber


cerebellum,
love; and he was naturally led to inquire, whether


there might not be some relation between the mag-
nitude of the cerebellum and this particular pro-
pensity. Indeed it is impossible to unite a greater


e induced the author to make new
for his nomenclature
which the


% The reasons which hav
d to choose the termination zveness,


names, an
are mentioned in the Preface, to


of the propensities,
reader IS referred.


and her excessive passion for physical


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. $45"


number of proofs to demonstrate any natural truth,
than may be presented to determine the function of
this organ.

First, none of the causes which are commonly
admitted is sufficient to explain the existence of
physical love. The sexual parts, or the testes and
uterus in particular cannot produce it; for many
children manifest this propensity before their testes
secrete. Besides, many eunuchs, although deprived
of their testes, preserve this propensity. In the
same manner, there are women entirely destitute
of the uterus, who yet manifest this inclination.
Therefore, certain adversaries of our doctrine main-
tain that the semen is contained in the blood, and
that it may produce the desire of sexual intercourse.
In this case, the semen should also be contained in
the food we take. Such objections are against all
physiological knowledge, and scarcely deserve to be
noticed. It is also said that the prostatic fluid
produces this propensity. But sometimes in old
persons the secretion of the prostate gland is very
copious, and we do not in them observe that this
mean produces the inclination in question. Let
us now consider the relation between this propen-
sity and the cerebellum.

Organised beings which are propagated without
copulation, as by buds, by slips, or by cuts, have
neither brain nor cerebellum. But those animals
which present a nervous mass corresponding to the
cerebellum generate by copulation. This obser-
vation alone, if it could be verified in all! natura]
beings, would be sufficient to prove the existence
of this organ. Yet this is impossible: some ani-


S46 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


mals are too small to admit of any demonstration of
this kind from dissection.

In new-born children, the cerebellum is to the
brain as one to nine, to ten, to thirteen, twenty
and more; and in adults as one to five, six, or
seven. Professor Ackermann maintains that the —
cerebellum is perfectly developed at the end of two
years. But we have compared the heads and skulls
of children of two, three, four, six, eight, ten,
till sixteen years of age, and we have always seen
that the cerebellum is not yet perfectly developed
at these ages. In proportion as the cerebellum is
developed this propensity appears. It has been
said that the cerebellum is developed in proportion
as this propensity is active, but other proofs show
evidently that the developement of the cerebellum
always precedes the manifestation of this faculty.
In adult persons, the cerebellum 1s perfectly de-
veloped, and then this propensity exists in its
greatest energy. ‘The activity is even proportionate
to the particular developement of the cerebellum.
It is known that men vary in respect to this pro-
pensity. In some individuals, this propensity is al-
most wanting; in others it is moderate; in others
again it is very violent. In the first the cerebellum
is very small (PJ. VI. fig. 2. I.)5 in the second it is
of a middling size; and in the third class it 1s very
prominent.—(P/. VI. fig. 1. I.) We have met with
different persons confined in prisons for the crime
of bestiality, rapes, and unnatural crimes, and we
have found that their neck was large and prominent.

Farmers and breeders of cattle have for a long
time past made the observation, that stallions, rams


,


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. SAE


and bulls, which have a Jarge neck, have a more
energetic power of propagation. It is also known
that vigorous pigeons are distinguished by the size
of their necks. |

It is indubitable that men and male animals (PJ.
VIII. jig. 1. & 3. I.),in general, have a larger ceres
bellum than women (PI. VII. fig. 1. I.) and fe-
males.—(P/. VIII. fig. 2. I.). Now it is known that
men and males, in general, have a greater desire of
venery than women and female animals.* In many
kinds of animals, one male has many females, but
females never live in polyandry. A great number
of male animals are disposed to love at every mo-


- ment, while their females are restricted to certain


periods. Even among animals which live in family,
males are generally more amorous than females. It
is not, however, a law that the cerebella of males are
uniformly larger than those of females. ‘There are
exceptions; and more of these in mankind than in
animals. If women have a stronger propensity, their
cerebella are also larger.

{t has been objected that the brain, in general, is
larger in men than in women, and that consequently
it is not astonishing that the cerebella of men are
also larger than those of women. But many indivi-
duals have large brains and small cerebella, and vice
wersd. Consequently there is no proportion be-
tween the brain and the cerebellum; and fhe pro-
pensity to physical love is never in proportion to

a

* In venere exercenda longe minorem quam vie moudnaeam mulier

percipit, vir yero etiam diuturniorem. Hrpr. De Geniturd,


348 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the size of the brain, but always to that of the
cerebellum.

In order to distinguish externally the develope-
ment of the cerebellum by the shape and size of the
neck, it is necessary to be acquainted with the dif-
ferent structure of the cerebellum in mammiferous
animals and in birds. ‘The cerebella of birds are
single, and are similar to the vermiform process of
the cerebella of quadrupeds, which present lateral
parts in addition to the vermiform process. It even
seems that the configuration of the cerebellum is,
in every kind of animals, relative to their instinct
of propagation. For both sexes of the same kind
are more attached one to another than to the sexes
of other kinds of animals. ‘The manifestations of
this propensity in man and animals are disordered
only. when this faculty is too energetic.

In erotic madness, the cerebellum has often ac-
quired a large developement, but it cannot be main-
tained that all madmen, with an erotic delirium, have
a large cerebellum; for the cerebellum may be-
come diseased as well as every other organic part.
The mutual influence of the cerebellum upon the
genital parts, and of these upon the cerebellum,
proves also the destination of the cerebellum. Castra-
tion produces some influence upon the develope-
ment of the cerebellum. In castrated animals and
men, the cerebellum ceases to increase. ‘Therefore
animals which have been castrated when young, and
eunuchs who have suffered the operation before the
cerebellum was developed, have a narrow neck, a
small cerebellum, and no propensity to sexual inter-


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. 349°


course. Oxen and horses, for instance, which are
castrated when young, have a small neck in compa-
rison to bulls and stallions. On the other hand, if
animals and men are castrated when the cerebellum
is developed, they feel this propensity still after the
_ operation, and this is an evident proof that physical
love does not result from the testes.

At the age of maturity, the mutual influence of
the genital parts and the neck is most considerable.
The beard grows, the voice suffers great changes,
because the larynx is much developed; and the de-
velopement of these, of the genital parts, and of
the cerebellum, is‘always simultaneous.* Animals,
at rutting time, have the neck swollen and warmer
than at other times, and the voice hoarse. ‘This in-
timate and direct influence of these parts upon each
other was known, but till the present time inexpli-
cable. or the same reason it seems that castration
produces also certain changes in the skulls of ani-
mals, and in the excrescences of their skulls, as in
their horns. Oxen. have greater horns than bulls.
If the testes of stags be. injured, their horns are of
a defective growth; they are crooked, spongy, and
present various excrescences. Moreover, if the
horns of stags be sawed off some time before the
rutting season, they less certainly propagate their
species. However there are examples where, al-
though their horns were sawed off, yet their genera.
tive functions being stimulated by good food, deers
have engendered.


* Non ilam nutrix orienti hue revisens
Hesterno collum potuit circumdare filo. Cartut,


350 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


If the cerebellum or neck be wounded, the geni-
tal parts are affected by sympathy. Grall attended
two officers, at Vienna, who were wounded in the
neck, and became impotent. One of them de-
parted, and was no more heard of; the other, after
two years, recovered the procreative power and had
children. Formey, at Berlin, informed us, that a
man being wounded in the neck an inflammation of
the genital parts and a priapism followed, and the
person remained impotent for six months. Baron
Larrey, at Paris, showed us several individuals who
had been wounded in the neck, and whose genital
parts had diminished in size. A soldier, for example,
was wounded in the neck at the age of seventeen
years. His testes and penis withered and diminished
in size. This person remained without a beard, and
preserved the voice of a girl. In ancient times it
was a common opinion that the seminal fluid is
secreted in the cerebellum, and that it descends
along the spinal marrow. ‘Therefore it is said in
the apocryphal work of Hippocrates, ‘* De Geni-
tura,’’ iii. sub fine: Quibuscunque jurta aures vene
secté sunt, hi coéunt quidem et gentturam emittunt,
werum modicam et debilem ac infecundam. Nam
plurima. geniture pars a capite juxta aures in spinas
lem medullam procedit. In another book, Hippo-
crates says: ™Aique nuhi sane videntur ea medicatione
seipsos perdere. Vene enim retro aures sunt, quas
siguis secet, sterilitatem inferat his quibus secantur ;
quare id etiam ipsis ex earum incisione accilere
certum est. Quando igitur postea uvores adeunt,
impotentesque se factos vident, cum tllis coire

an


aa


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. 851


primum quidem nihil molestius cogitantes quiescunt
(Scythe).*

Schoell cites a passage of Apollonius Rhodius, in.
which, speaking of the love of Medea, he says:
‘The flame which consumes her pervades all her
nerves, and is felt even behind the head in that
place where pain is the strongest when extreme love
takes possession of all the senses.’”’ | Professor Rein-
hold, at Leipzig, put a seton in the neck of a boy
who suffered by an ophthalmia. A continual priapism
was the result of it, and Reinhold was obliged to
take away the seton. In mumps the patients are
often subjected to different affections of their genital
parts. Strangulated persons commonly suffer erec-
tions and emissions. ‘There are several examples in
which menstruation has been re-established by a
blister on the neck. Spirituous frictions on the
neck in hysterical fits are very useful. In erotic de-
lirium, the genital parts are often inflamed, but this
inflammation is only secondary and sympathetic.
The inflammation of the cerebellum and brain is
primitive, and requires the necessary remedies. ‘The
lascivious fury of man and stallions has been cured
by castration, but it is better to cure this disease by
some treatment applied to the inflammation of the
cerebellum. In such cases, topical remedies applied
to the genital parts are almost entirely useless; but
the inflammation of the genital parts and priapism
disappear if the inflammation of the cerebellum be
removed by bleeding behind the ears. All these


* Lib. de acribus Aquis et Locis, Sect. 1.
+ Histoire Abregée de la Litterature Grecque, vol. i. p. 99.


853 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


observations relative to the mutual influence be-
tween the neck and the genital parts demonstrate
the function of the cerebellum.

In lunatic hospitals, there are often idiots who
have lost all their intellectual faculties, or whose in-
tellectual functions are very weak, while they mani-
fest an irresistible erotic desire. ‘Their state of
idiotism is commonly attributed to self-pollution. It
cannot be denied that the abuse of venery, and a
too frequent loss of semen, weakens extremely the
intellectual faculties; but the greater number of
these individuals are given up to their vice by weak-
ness, or want of the superior faculties: they are
more or less idiots from birth. Their masturbation
is the consequence of their imbecility and not the
cause. These unfortunate creatures have the neck
and the posterior part of the head large and much
developed, while the fore and superior part of their
heads is narrow and small. ‘Therefore these persons
are not susceptible of superior motives. ‘They are
given up to their dominant propensities like other
animals. It is the same with certain Cretins who
are given up to Onanism. In these individuals, the
developement of the brain is very defective, while
that of the cerebellum is often very considerable.
But it is an error to maintain that all Cretins have
large genital parts, and a great propensity to physi-
cal love. In many of them, the cerebellum and the |
genital parts present a great developement, and
they are very lascivious. But we have also seen
many others who, though grown-up, do not feel the
least. excitement of the genital parts, and do not


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. 358


manifest any propensity of this kind. These indi-
viduals do not present the large developement of
the neck and cerebellum, which, even from in-
fancy, is observed in the former. Many idiots and
hydrocephalic persons are lascivious without pre-
senting an extraordinary developement of the cere-
bellum and genital parts. This may easily be ex-
plained. The cerebellum constitutes a particular
system, consequently the functions of the brain
may be deranged or suppressed, while the cerebel-
lum, which is secured by the tentorium, performs
its function. Such individuals follow their inclina-
tion, because all opposite motives, as honour, shame,
and other principles of a higher order which direct
reasoning persons, are wanting. In these unhappy
beings, the ordinary developement of the cerebellum
acts unresisted and irresistibly.

Even the position of the cerebellum proves its
destination. After hunger and thirst, no propen-
sity is more necessary than that of propagating the
species. This function is the most common in ani-
mals after nutrition, and the cerebellum is in the in-
ferior part of the head. Hence it is probable that
it is destined to the propensity of propagating.

Finally, the mimickry of this propensity proves
that its organ is situated downward and backward in
the head. I shall in future treat of this matter with
more detail. Then I shall demonstrate that the
gestures and manifestations, which accompany the
different internal propensities and sentiments, are
modified according to the position of the organs,
by means of which the faculties manifest themselves.


a as -


354: PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


Even now, however, I may remark that when this
propensity is active, the head and body are drawn
backward. In many birds and quadrupeds, the
males tickle the necks of their females in order to
excite this instinct. Many persons carry their arms
and hands involuntarily behind the neck during the
erotic state. Many artists, in their paintings and
statues of man and animals, have thus presented
different modifications of the mimickry of this pro-
pensity. ‘Thus if we consider together all the facts
which I have quoted to prove that the cerebellum is
the organ of physical love, it is impossible to doubt
of the determination of this organ. It is objected
that it is impossible to admit in animals an organ
of the instinct of propagation, because their erotic
instinct is restrained to determinate periods. ‘This
difficulty will be the same whatever may be the
cause of this instinct, for instance, the genital parts
or the blood. Besides, it is certain that organs may
exist without being active and producing their func-
tions; for example, the mammz of women do not
always secrete milk, yet they exist continually. The
cerebellum may be excited at different periods in
the same way as other organs are more or less active
at difierent times. We have no observations to de-
cide whether the size of the cerebellum increases
like that of the testes at the rutting period, or whe-
ther it is only more excited. We know positively
that the necks of bitches are warmer at this period
than at other times. ;

It is also objected that it is not necessary to admit
an organ of propagation in the brain, because there


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. 855


are other distinct organs of propagation ; and it is
added that plants also are propagated without any
brain. ‘The first part of this objection is refuted by
the observation already mentioned, that this instinct
may exist without the genital parts, and that there
is no’ proportion between the propensity and the
power of satisfying it. In the comparison of ani-
mals with plants, the reproduction of the species, or
propagation itself, is confounded with the propen-
sity todo so. In plants this action is only an or-
ganic or vegetative function, a simple fructification;
while in animals there is, besides the organic func-
tion, a certain propensity, and it is for this propen-
sity that there exists a particular organ in the brain.
In order to elucidate this matter very clearly, I
shall compare the reproduction of individuals, and
the preservation of the species, in plants and ani-
mals. For these two kinds of functions are com-
mon to both.

Nutrition exists in plants and animals. In plants
it is automatic... Plants take food, their roots are
directed toward it, but they do not feel the want of
taking food as animals which are hungry and thirsty.
Consequently animals must possess some organic
apparatus which apprises them of the necessity of
taking aliments. Besides animals distinguish their
food, and prefer one kind to another with conscious-
ness. Hence in animals there are three kinds of
organs which contribute to their nutrition: the
digestive and assimilating organs, the organs which
produce the feeling of hunger and thirst, and the
organ which distinguishes and chooses the aliments.

ZA2Z


$56 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


It is the same with the reproduction of the species.
Plants are propagated by germs in an automatic
way. In animals there are also organic apparatus
relative to the automatic functions of propagation,
for instance, the testes and the uterus. But there
is still some organic apparatus which is necessary to
the manifestation of the propensity. Finally, coition
takes place with consciousness, and an organic ap-
paratus produces the perception of pleasure in the
exercise of this function.

It is to be observed that the different organs
destined to the whole of any function have a mutual
influence ; for example, hunger excites taste, taste
excites hunger, and both excite the digestive power,
and this again excites hunger and taste. In the
same way, the propensity to propagation excites the
secretion of semen; this function excites the pro-
pensity to physical love; both have an influence
upon the organ which perceives the act of coition;
and the irritation of this latter organ excites the
secretory organ and that which produces desire.
Notwithstanding this mutual influence there is no
direct and constant proportion between the particu-
lar parts necessary to the whole of one and the
same kind of function. For example, the digestive
power is not always in a direct proportion with ap-
petite and the taste, and vice versd. In the same
way, the propensity to coition is not always propor-
tionate to the secretion of semen, or to the state of
the genital parts. I have already stated the samé
principle in respect to the external senses, the muscles
and the internal faculties. One part has an influence

4


ORGAN OF AMATIVENESS. 357


upon others, but there is no proportion between
the external intermedia and the internal faculties.

According to these considerations, it may easily
be conceived how the abuses of physical love are
possible. ‘They are explained in the same manner
as those of hunger and thirst. Food is taken in
order to replace the lost parts; but the desire of
eating and taste are sometimes more active than is
necessary for the preservation of the individual :
they sometimes excite men and animals to take
what is even unwholesome. Hence gluttony and
drunkenness. These abuses are, beyond doubt,
the result of the organs of hunger and taste, but
shall we say that the organs which contribute to
the preservation of the individual are organs of
gluttony and drunkenness? Certainly not. It is the
same with the erotic propensity. This propensity is
destined to the preservation of the species. This pre-
servation, as I said before, resultsfrom several functions
together. Now if the organ which produces the pro-
pensity to propagation, and the organ which is sen-
sitive during coition, are more active than is neces-
sary for the preservation of the species, or more
than circumstances permit, or greatly exceeds the
productive power, there result abuses.

Thus, according to all I have said, it seems to me
that this organ and its special faculty are fairly esta-
blished. I think the object of this propensity is to
contribute to the preservation of the species. Its
abuses are masturbation, pederasty, tribady, besti-
ality, adultery, and incest. ‘The want of this pro-
pensity produces passive chastity, continency, and


358 PUYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


celibacy. It remains to be examined what name
must be given to this propensity. Gall, as I ob-
served, not knowing any special faculty of the
mind, considered the actions of man, and, in gene-
ral, named the organs according to those actions,
which he observed proportionate to the organs. He
called this the organ of sexual love or of propaga-
tion. Certainly it is impossible to choose a name
according to any abuse of an organ; and as there is
no organ of gluttony and drunkenness, there can
be none of libertinism or adultery. Moreover, I
hink that the name cannot be chosen according to
the object of the faculty, nor according to any func-
tion. For it frequently happens that several organs
contribute to one action, as I have ascertained in
respect to nutrition and propagation. It seems to
me that every organ must be called according to its
special faculty. As we do not say, nerves of nutri-
tion, but nerves of hunger and thirst, so we cannot
say organ of propagation, because the name must
only express the propensity. I propose the name
AMATIVENESS.

In order accurately to observe and to substan-
tiate the organs in general, it is necessary to know
their places. This particular organ is situated in
the neck. Discover the mastoid process behind the
ear, and the protuberance of the occipital spine
above the middle of the neck, the space between


these two elevations indicates the extent of this.


organ. Consider then its size in all dimensions, and
compare its ee ent and the ee to
erotic actions,


ie)
es
©


II, ORGAN OF PHILOPROGENITIVENESS, (love of progeny.)


I shall endeavour to prove by reasoning, accord-
ing to the method mentioned above, that it is neces-
sary to admit a particular organ of philoprogenitive-
ness: I shall afterwards state the circumstances
which led to its discovery. In some kinds of ani-
mals neither male nor female take care of their pro-
geny; the eggs are resigned to chance, and to
some external influence: this is the case with
insects, reptiles and fishes. Even among birds, the
cuckoo gives a striking example of it. This bird
has a great propensity to physical love, but it nei-
ther builds a nest, nor hatches its eggs: it deposites
its eggs in the nests of other little birds which live
on insects, placing only one egg in any individual
nest; and the other birds hatch and nourish the
young cuckoo with particular attachment. In some
other kinds of animals, the females alone take care
of their progeny. Bulls, stallions, dogs, cocks &c.
are indifferent about their young; while the cow,
mare, bitch, hen &c. are extremely attached to
them. In other animals again, the males and females
form an attachment for life, and both sexes take
care of their progeny; this instinct however is more
energetic in the females. The fox, which so much
resembles the dog, differs from him in this respect.
The fox is attached to its female for life, and par-
takes of the same cares with her; and if the female
be killed he seeks for food for his young ones. Phi-
loprogenitiveness, however, is stronger in the female


360 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


than in the male; for, if they be pursued, the male
leaves the young ones sooner than the female. Many
birds are paired, and both males and females take
care of the young. ‘These differences are constant :
does not each of them, even on the slightest con-
sideration, seem to require peculiar organization ?

In the human race, this propensity is, in general,
stronger in women than in men. ‘This difference is
not only perceptible between fathers and mothers,
but also between the sexes in general. A male ser-
vant seldom takes care of children as well as a
woman. Besides this difference is not only sensible
in grown-up. people, but even in children. Present
to children playthings indiscriminately, boys will
choose horses, whips, drums &c.; girls, on the con-
trary, will prefer dolls, cradles, ribbons &c.

In every species of animals, which take care of
their progeny, there are some females which do not
feel this propensity, while certain males of these
kinds excel in this inclination. Even certain women
consider children as a heavy burden, others as their
greatest treasure and happiness. This is not only
the case among wretched persons, but indiscrimi-
nately among rich and poor, among persons of good
and bad breeding. In general all the proofs which
have been adduced of the plurality of the organs
may be applied to the organ of philoprogenitiveness
in particular. ‘Therefore its existence is necessary.

Dr. Gall observed a distinct protuberance on the
posterior part of the skulis of women (Pl. VII. jg-
1. If.) ; and in comparing the skulls of his collection,
he found a similar elevation on the skulls of chil-


ORGAN OF PHILOPROGENITIVENESS. 361


dren and on those of monkies. Consequently it was
necessary to point out a faculty common to all of
them. During five years he was occasionally occu-
pied with this consideration. He thought for some
time, that it might indicate the greater irritability
of women and children; but this supposition he did
not long entertain, because irritability is a common
quality of every organ. He was in the habit of
suggesting his difficulty, relative to this protuber-
ance, to his auditors; and a clergyman, who at-
tended him, observed that monkies have much at-
tachment to their progeny. Gall examined this
idea. In fine, he found that this protuberance,
which is situated immediately above that of physical
love or amativeness, and corresponds with the ge-
neral protuberance of the occiput, is the organ of
philoprogenitiveness. The developement of this
cerebral part always coincides with the energy of
this propensity. Species, sexes, individuals, which
are endowed with a great deal of maternal love,
have this organ much developed. In women and
females, this organ is, in general, larger. Gall pos-
sesses the skull of a woman who, being sick, had
the confirmed notion of being pregnant with five
children. “The corresponding organ in her is ex-
tremely developed. There are nations which excel
in this propensity, and the developement of the re- .
spective organ is proportionate. Negroes manifest
this propensity in an eminent degree, and this organ
is much developed in them. ‘These are facts which
every one may verify.

It is objected that love of children is the result of


62 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


moral sentiments, of self-love, or of the desire of
suckling, and not at all of a particular propensity.
These causes, so commonly admitted, cannot pro-
duce love of offspring ; for in many animals which
love their progeny these causes do not exist.
No animal, below man, has any idea of duty or
religious sentiment: birds do not give suck, yet
they love their young. This is also the case with
men and males in general. Many mothers do not
give suck, and yet they love their children much.
Moreover, in mothers there is no proportion be-
tween moral or religious sentiments, and philopro-
genitiveness. Consequently we must admit a parti-
cular organ for this propensity.

I have already mentioned that in mankind, and
in those species of animals where females take care
of the progeny, certain individuals are quite indif-
ferent to their progeny.—(P/ VII. fg. 2. II). In
mankind this phenomenon must be considered as an
indirect cause conducive to infanticide. We have
examined the shape of the head in twenty-nine
- women who were infanticides. “Twenty-five of them
had the organ of philoprogenitiveness very small.
The want of this organ does not excite a mother to
destroy her child, but a mother destitute of this
propensity is less able to resist those external cir-
cumstances which provoke her to commit this crime.
Such a mother will not resist as much as she would
have done if her mind had been influenced by the
powerful energy of philoprogenitiveness.

The aim of this faculty is obvious—care of the
progeny ; its activity may be too energetic, and do

1


ORGAN OF PHILOPROGENITIVENESS. 363°


harm to children in spoiling them; and if it be very
small there must follow indifference about progeny.
The protuberance which indicates the developement
of this organ, placed in the posterior lobes of the
brain, is commonly single, although the organ is
double, that is, one on each side. It is single when
the posterior lobes of the brain are very near to
each other, and double when the posterior lobes are
somewhat separate. ‘This difference of form is com-
mon to all organs situated in the mesial plane of the
head.

By this and the preceding organ, it is very easy
to distinguish the skulls of males and females of the
same kind, and consequently those of men and
women. It is peculiarly worthy of notice that
throughout all animals a striking similarity is pre-
served in the skulls of both sexes. The skulls of
men and males are generally shorter and larger,
those of women and females longer and narrower.


364 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


TIX. ORGAN OF INHABITIVENESS.


Dr. Gall observed im animals which have a great
propensity to elevated stations, as in the chamois
and wild goat, a protuberance which he identifies
with the organ that in mankind produces pride and
haughtiness.—( Pl. TX. fig. 1. X).. I think that the
instinct to assume physical height, and the senti-
ment of self-love, cannot be ascribed to the same
organ. First, it 1s certain and must be conceded,
that animals which dwell upon mountains, or which
are fond of high regions, have one part of their
brain more developed than the varieties of the same
kinds which live in low countries or in plains. This
difference is sensible, for instance, in roes, hares,
rats &e. One variety of rat lives im canals, cellars,
_and the lower parts of houses; another dwells in
corn-lofts, and in the higher parts of the houses.
The difference of their organization is very sensible.
But it seems to me that this does not authorize the
supposition that this faculty, which leads animals to
elevated stations, is essentially the same with that
which makes man proud and haughty.

_ Dr. Gall thinks that the place where both organs
are situated, viz. the organ of self-love in man, and
the instinct to physical height in animals, is in the
same place in the head. Moreover, he says that this
faculty is not the only one which, although physical
in animals, is somewhat moral in man. He quotes
the physical love of animals which grows moral and
Platonic in mankind. He supports also his opinion


ORGAN OF INHABITIVENESS. 363


by the natural expressions by which the sentiment
of pride is manifested, that is, the mimickry of this
faculty is allied with physical elevation. From the
earliest infancy proud children are pleased with
mounting upon chairs in order to be on a level with
adult persons. Adults of little stature often do the
same in order to gratify their self-love. Proud per-
sons keep their body upright, their gait is haughty.
In general all expressions of pride and superiority
are combined with some physical elevation. Kings
and emperors sit upon elevated thrones &c. Is it
then surprising that the same organ presides over
physical and moral elevations, if there be so many
relations between them? Such is the reasoning of
Gall. | :

It seems to me that these proofs are insufficient to
demonstrate the identity of these two faculties, vzz.
of that which leads animals to physical elevation,
and that which gives to man the sentiment of self-
love and pride. I draw my proofs from anatomy
and physiology. Anatomically I maintain that the
place of an organ does not prove any thing as soon
as animals of different kinds are spoken of. For if
different animals are endowed with different faculties,
their organs, although different, may occupy cor-
responding places of the head. Let us suppose
three kinds of animals whose faculties are quite dif-
ferent: their organs fill up the skull ; yet it is impos-
sible to maintain that their faculties are the same
because the same number of places on the head are
conspicuous. It is true, if animals possess the same
faculty with man, the respective organ is situated in


$66 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. -


man and animals in the same part of the head. Now
to me it does not even seem that the place of the
protuberance, which indicates that animals like phy-
cal height, corresponds with that of man, which pro-
duces self-love and pride. | In animals this protuber-
ance immediately follows the organ of philopro-
genitiveness,, but the corresponding cerebral part
in man is unknown.—(Pl. IX. jig. 1 & 2. III.) Con-
sequently, the comparison of the places of both
faculties is rather against than for the assertion of


Gall.


The physiological proofs stated above do not —


seem more to be relied on. Gall says that different
faculties which are merely physical in animals be-
come moral in man. He supports his assertion by
the example of physical love. I think that no fa-
culty, in so far as it is physical in animals, changes its
nature in man by itself, but that all physical facul-
ties common to man and animals preserve their
nature in man: consequently, the faculty of phy-
sical love, according to my opinion, is always in
itself the same. But it is obvious that this pro-


pensity may be accompanied by other sentiments.


Indeed it is so accompanied not only in man, but
also in animals. We may observe that many males
prefer one female to another, and many females
show a similar preference. ‘This is evident in birds
and quadrupeds. Sometimes the bull is particularly
attached to. one individual amongst a herd of cows.
I saw canary-birds which could not live with certain
individuals, and though separated they remained
attached to their former mates. Moreover, if the


ORGAN OF INHABITIVENESS. 367


organ of physical love alone be active in man, it
acts always without morality, for instance, in hy-
drocephalic persons and idiots from birth. The
physical love of these individuals entirely resembles
that of animals in general: consequently, all that
which is moral in physical love depends on other
faculties which may accompany this propensity.
And indeed it is observed that man and animals
modify the manifestation of this propensity, in pro-
portion as they are endowed with other faculties.
If a man or an animal be prone to attachment and
physical love together, both faculties will act to-
_ gether, and physical love will be modified by at-
tachment, and attachment by physical love.

It is replied, that Platonic love finishes ordinarily
by physical love. I agree with this; but is it pos-
sible to conclude that Platonic love is the same as
physical love? I am not hungry because I have a
taste or smell. But if smell be stimulated by any
odour, and if thereby the sense of taste and the
feeling of hunger be excited, and independently of
my first intention I eat, will it be maintained that
smell and the desire to eat are the same? If you
examine Platonic or moral love, you will find that
all the sentiments which you feel at the same time
with the propensity to physical love, may be at-
tributed to the other special faculties and their re-
spective organs. In the same manner it seems to me,
that it is impossible’ to confound the instinct of
physical height, with the moral sentiment of self-
love and pride: I believe it possible to have a great
opinion of one’s own person in all regions and
countries.


868 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


Finally, the expressions or external manifestations
of haughty persons, for instance, their mounting
upon chairs in order to be higher and greater ; this
behaviour of children in order to be on a level with
adult persons; the haughty gait of proud persons &c.
do not at all prove the identity of both mentioned
organs. Examine what kind of proud children
mount upon chairs and tables in order to show
their height. I am sure that they are children to
whom certain things have been interdicted because
they are still little, or, in general, children who have
observed the advantages of grown-up persons, of
in whose presence adult age has been praised. Say
to such individuals that those who are placed at the
head of the company, or at its lower part, occupy
those places by way of distinction, and they will
endeavour to occupy the place which is praised.
All other external manifestations of proud persons
are explained according to the general principle of
mimickry, which shows that our gait and all the


motiens of the body in general, and of the head in |
particular, are conformable to the seat of the organ —
which is active. The organ of pride is situated up-—


wards and backwards; hence all motions of pride
take place in this direction.


Thus, I separate the instinct which carries ani-


mals to physical elevation from the sentiment which
produces self-love and pride, and I seek for two
different organs. It is denied that animals which
like elevated situations, are led there by an inter-
nal instinct which is attached to some particular
organ. It is said that these animals go to these
places in order to look for their food. But these


ORGAN OF INHABITIVENESS. 869


animals sometimes like situations where there is no—
food: for instance, the chamois and wild goat dwell
upon the tops of rocks which are entirely barren.
They are obliged to descend into the middle regions
in order to find their food. There are still other
animals which like the higher regions of the air,
and which seek their food upon the earth. Eagles
and hawks hover high in the air, and catch mice
upon the ground. Does the lark need to ascend
into the air in order to sing? In treating of the in-
nateness of all the faculties, I have shown that it
is very unphilosophical to attribute the origin of
any faculty of man or animals to external wants,
though it is necessary to allow that external wants
excite internal innate faculties. Consequently, we
must admit some particular propensity which leads
animals into higher regions.

In examining the habits and manners of living of
different animals, it is obvious, that different kinds
of animals are attached to some particular region
and country. Nature which intended that all regions
and countries should be inhabited, assigned to all
animals their dwelling, and gave to every kind of
animal its respective propensity to some particular
region. If we place any animal in another region,
it leaves it and returns to its natural dwelling. Some
animals seek the water frem the first moment
of their existence, for example, turtles and ducks.
As soon as they are hatched they run towards the
water; other young animals stay upon dry land. Some
of these like high regions, some the low countries
and plains, and others the marshes. Among the

2B


370 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


inhabitants of the air, some species live in the bigher


and others in the lower regions. The power of —


flying does not produce the instinct of hovering in
the high regions of the air, for many kinds of
animals, although their power of flying is great, are
destitute of this instinct. Some birds build their
nests on the top of trees, some in the middle parts,
and others in holes of trees, on the earth, or on the
banks of rivers &c.

According to all these considerations, it seems to
me that there is a particular faculty, and a special
organ, which determines the dwelling of animals.
But it is difficult to point out the seat of this organ.
First, it is impossible to compare in this respect
land and water animals, because both orders must
have some organ of their particular instinct. It is
with this organ, as with the senses of smell and taste
in carnivorous and herbivorous animals. Both
orders possess these two senses, but they are mo-
dified. So it is with the propensity of inhabitive-
ness. It must exist in land and water animals.
Consequently, it is necessary to compare only
different varieties of animals which inhabit the
same element or region, and chiefly individuals
which excel in this respect. This organ must be
verified in the same way as every other organ. ‘This
propensity is common to the greatest number of
animals, hence its organ must be deep-seated in
the brain, and must be looked for in the region of
the other propensities; while self-love is a senti-
ment, and its organ occupies a higher place in the
head, :


371


IV. ORGAN OF ADHESIVENESS.


Friendship has long been considered as the re-
sult of reflection, as the consequence of some
analogy between the faculties, or as an effect of
mutual interest. But it is necessary to admit some
particular instinct, which produces different mani-
festations of attachment in animals in whom no
moral argument, nor any interest, can take place.
‘This seems to be evident from certain examples
among dogs. All dogs are not susceptible of the
same degree of attachment, though their external
treatment ought to exite it: some dogs, on the con-
trary, are attached in opposition to their interest.
Sometimes they are ill-treated, and yet they remain
attached to their master. Moreover, there is some-
thing involuntary in this sentiment. Its manifestations
are too early and too sudden to result from any reflec-
tion. Even criminals have sometimes a great degree
of attachment to their accomplices. Some among
them have been known to destroy themselves rather
than denounce their companions. A highway-man
confined in the prison of Lichtenstein, near Vienna,
hanged himself in the prison that he might not be
forced to betray his accomplices.

These considerations prove the necessity of some
organ of attachment. It is. difficult however to
point out its seatin man. The actions in men are
not sufficiently free, but are sometimes only em-
bellished by the appearance of this sentiment. Gall
seldom speaks of it. He examined the head of a

2B2


372 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. :


woman at Vienna, who was known as a model of
friendship. She suffered different changes of for-
tune; she became alternately rich and poor; but
was always attached to her former friends. Gall
found the part of her head situated upward and
outward from the organ of philoprogenitiveness,
very prominent, and called it the organ of friend-
‘ship. Our observations are not multiplied enough
to enable us to decide positively on this organ ;
yet its seat seems to me more than probable. It
must be inferiorly, because this faculty exists in
the lower animals and is a propensity. For this
reason it belongs to their region of the head; and
according to its mimical signs and the motions of
the head when it is active, it lies laterally and
backward.—( Pl. IX. fig. 1 & 2. IV.)

Now what is the special faculty of this organ?
In considering the actions of man and animals, it
may be observed that there is a great difference
between different species, and even between dif-
ferent individuals of the same kind, in respect to
attachment. Suppose animals have a propensity to
physical love, they like their progeny, and have a >
determinate dwelling. Then we see that in several
kinds of animals, males and females are attached
one to another, and live domestically. ‘This, for
example, is the case with the fox and with many
birds. The fox, which resembles the dog in so
many circumstances, lives with its female, while
the dog lives in polygamy, like the cock, bull and
stallion. Without some particular attachment, males
and females would leave one another as soon as

]


ORGAN OF ADHESIVENESS. 373


the instinct of physical love was satisfied, but nature
by another instinct prevented this separation. ‘There
is still another modification of attachment, that 1s,
society, in which individuals of one kind are attached
one to another and live together, while other ani-
mals live isolated. Here it is to be observed that
the instinct of being attached for life, and that of
living in society, are not mere degrees of energy,
so that a’ lower degree produces attachment for
life, and a higher degree of society. For there
are animals which live in society without being
attached for life, as the bull, dog, cock &c.; others
live in society and in family, as starlings, raven,
crows &c.; others again are attached for life without
living in society, as the fox, magpie &c. Conse-
quently, the instinct of living in society, and that
of living in family, are modifications of their proper
nature, in the same way as smell and taste are
modified in carnivorous and herbivorous animals.
Man belongs to the animals which are social and
attached for life. It results that society and mar-
riage are not at all the effect of human reflection,
but of original nature.

It seems to me that this special faculty extends
its sphere of activity still farther, and that it gives
us attachment to all around us, to inanimate beings,
plants, animais and man, in short to all that we
possess, whether animate or inanimate. It produces
also the sentiment of habitude. T’riendship con-
sequently is only a part of this faculty. If attach-
ment for life belong to some portion of this organ, it
must be the nearest to the organ of philoprogenitive-


37 4 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ness. According to all preceding considerations,
it seems to me that the-name adhesiveness or at-
tachment denotes this special faculty, which presents
several modifications, and its objects are friendship,
marriage, society, and attachment in general. Abuse
results from its too great energy in nostalgia, or in re-
gretting too much the loss of a friend &c. Without
attachment men become anchorites and hermits.


V. ORGAN OF COMBATIVENESS.


Ihave mentioned above, that Dr. Gall, having
called together boys from the streets, made them fight
each other: there were some who liked it much,
and others who, on the contrary, were peaceable
and timid. In the former, that part of the head
which corresponds to the posterior inferior angle of
the parietal bone, behind the mastoid process was
prominent (Pl. IX. fig. 1. V.), and in the latter
the same place was flat or depressed.—(P/. IX.
jig. 2. V.) ‘The prominence was also found in the
heads of brave and valiant officers, of quarrelsome
students, of duellists, and of those whose greatest
pleasure consisted in fighting and making themselves
feared. Gall therefore at first called this organ that
of courage. Considering afterwards that it is pos-
sible for a man to have courage to do any thing of
which he thinks himself capable, for instance, to
dance, play on an instrument, or sing, when he
may possess no propensity to fight, he called this


ORGAN OF COMBATIVENESS. 375


the organ of quarrelsomeness. At present he calls
it the organ of self-defence.

This propensity is active in different degrees,
not only in mankind but also in different species of
animals. There are animals which never fight ;
others are fond of it. Rabbits, for instance, are
more courageous than hares. Even individuals of
the same kind differ entirely with respect to this
faculty. One dog incessantly looks for an opportu-
nity of fighting, another always flies away. The
courageous animals have the head between and be-
hind the ears very large.—(Pl. X. jig. 1 & 3. V.)
This is an unfailing sign to distinguish or recognize,
if a horse be shy and timid (Pi. X. jig. 4. V.), or
bold and sure.—(Pi. X. fig. 3. V.) The same dit
ference is observed in game cocks and game hens,
in comparison with the domestic cock. Horse-
jockies, and those who are fond of fighting cocks,
long ago made the same observation.

It is objected that this propensity is the result of
bodily strength. But there are several species which,
though weak, like much to fight, while others,
‘though large and strong, avoid all fighting. You
may find striking examples in dogs: the fighting
cock is less than the dunghill-cock: hares are
stronger than rabbits, but less courageous. Among
men, and even among delicate women, you find in-
dividuals who are very weak, but intrepid and
courageous, while tall and robust individuals are
sometimes destitute of this propensity.

The desire of fighting is necessary to animals as
soon as they are attached to females, to progeny,


376 PUYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


to dwellings, or to friends; for, according to the
arrangement of nature, it is necessary to fight in
order to defend. Consequently, this propensity
must exist for the purpose of defence; but it seems
to me that this faculty is, like all others, general and
not limited to self-defence. Therefore I call it the
organ of the propensity to fight, or of combative-
hess. Sometimes this propensity acts with greater
energy than it ought; it is charmed with combats:
then it produces dispute, quarrelsomeness, attack,
vis. abuses.

It is to be ascertained whether the want of this
organ produces fear. Gall thinks so, but it appears
to me, that the absence of any organ cannot pro-
duce a positive sentiment like fear. It is conceive-
able that the absence of any organ may produce
modifications in the manner of thinking and feeling
in man; for instance, the absence of this propen-
sity renders a character peaceable, but I imagine
that in order to fear, a positive action ought to take
place. Hence I think that Gall in general is
wrong in speaking of negative qualities. If fear
be the result of the absence of courage, I cannot
conceive how it is possible to be at the same time
courageous and fearful; yet this happens both in
animals and mankind. We shall see afterwards that
I attribute the sensations of fear and anxiety to the
organ of cautiousness. |


—


377


VI. ORGAN OF THE PROPENSITY TO DESTROY, OR OF
DESTRUCTIVENESS.


A difference in the skulls of carnivorous and
herbivorous animals gave the first idea of the ex-
istence of this organ. If we place a skull of any
carnivorous animal ‘horizontally, and trace a vertical
line through the external meatus auditorius, a great
portion of cerebral mass is situated behind that line.
The more an animal is carnivorous, the more con-
siderable is the portion of the cerebral mass situated
there. |

It is objected that it is useless to admit in the
brain a particular organ of destruction, in order to
determine the kind of food man and animals live
upon; because nature has given to carnivorous ani-
mals the feeling of hunger, the taste, teeth, and
instruments necessary for seizing and masticating
their prey. These external instruments, however,
prove only the harmony between the internal fa-
culties and the external instruments. Man has hands
m order to take his aliments, but some interior
sensation advertises man and animals of the ne-
cessity of taking food. The tiger, lion, cat &c.
have teeth and claws, but an internal power excites
‘them to use them. <A sheep could not employ such
instruments any more than an idiot could employ
his hands to perform things for which they might
be fit, but which his reason could not direct. Thus
an internal propensity must make use of ‘the ex-


378 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ternal instruments, and this propensity is attached
to a particular organ. |

‘The propensity to kill exists beyond doubt in
certain animals. © It is’ more or less energetic in
animals of different species, and even in the in-
dividuals of the same kind. There are some species
which do: not kill more than they need for their
nourishment. Other species, as the wolf, tiger, pole-
cat &c. kill all living beings around them, and that
seemingly for the pleasure of killing alone. One dog
scarcely has this prosensity, another possesses it in
a high degree. Gall had a little dog which had |
this propensity in so high a degree, that he would —
sometimes watch several hours for a mouse. As
soon as it was killed he left it. Notwithstanding
repeated punishment he had an irresistible propen-
- sity to kill birds. In short, there is no doubt that
different animals have the propensity to kill. Is man —
also endowed with this faculty ? |

If carnivorous animals have the propensity to
kill, man ought to have it also; for he 1s omni-
vorous. There is no carnivorous animal which eats
so many kinds of animals as man does. Animals
are confined to a certain number of species for the
choice of their food, but man lives upon all, and
anthropophagi even upon their fellow creatures.
Man kills from the insect to the elephant and the
whale, in order to apply them to his purposes. lt
is said that man eats flesh only from depravity of
habit; but in examining the teeth of man, it is
evident that they partake of the structure both of
those of carnivorous and of herbivorous animals.


ORGAN OF DESTRUCTIVENESS. 379


\


It is the same with the stomach of man. It differs
much from the stomach of herbivorous animals, and
resembles that of the carnivorous.

In man this propensity presents different degrees
of activity, from a mere indifference to the pain of
animals to the pleasure of seeing them killed, or
even the most imperious desire to kill. This doc-
trine shocks sensibility, but it is not less true. Who-
ever endeavours to study nature and judge its
phenomena ought to admit the existence of things
as they are. It may be observed that in children as
well as in adults, among the uncultivated as well
as among the polite and well bred classes of society, ©
certain individuals are sensible, and others indif-
ferent, to the suffering of others. Some persons feel
a pleasure in tormenting animals and in seeing them
tortured or killed, even when it is impossible to ascribe
this disposition to bad habit or bad education. . There
are some individuals who choose their profession
according to this propensity, if it be very energetic.
A student often shocked his school-fellows by his
extraordinary pleasure in tormenting insects, birds
and other animals. In order, as he pretended, to
satisfy this inclination he became surgeon. A jout-
neyman apothecary, at Vienna, felt so great a pro-
pensity to kill, that he became an executioner. The
son of a rich merchant, of the same city, gave up
commerce and became a butcher. A rich Dutch-
man_ paid the butchers who furnished the navy with
beef, for permission to kill the oxen.

- We may also determine the existence of this
propensity, and its diversities, by the impressions


380 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


which different spectators receive from public exe-
cutions. The view of them is insupportable to some
individuals and delightful to others. George Selwm
sought for such spectacles, and he endeavoured al-
ways to stand near the executioner. - It is also re-
ported of La Condamine that he was fond of such
spectacles, and that on his, at one time, endeavour-
ing to pass through the crowd, as the soldiers
pushed him backward, the executioner said to them,
Let this gentleman pass, he is an amateur. Mr.
Bruggmans, Professor at Leyden, told us of a Dutch


priest who had so violent a desire to kill and to see’


animals killed, that he became chaplain of a regi-
ment solely in order to have an opportunity of see-
ing men destroyed. The same clergyman kept in
his house a great number of different domestic ani-
mals, as cats, in order to satisfy his natural propen-


sity by killing their young ones. He also killed all —


the animals for the use of his kitchen. He was ac-
quainted with the hangmen of the country, and he
received notice of each execution which he travelled
‘on foot for several days in order to witness. ‘The
executioners placed him always near them. In the
field of battle we find a great difference in the
energy of this propensity. One soldier is overjoyed
at the sight of the blood which he sheds, while an-


other, moved by compassion, gives uncertain blows, _


or at least spares the vanquished, and stops of his
own accord after the victory.

There are highway-men who are not content with
robbing, but who manifest the most sanguinary in-
clination to torment and kill without necessity.


ORGAN OF DESTRUCTIVENESS. 381


John Rosbeck was not content with maltreating his
victims in order to make them betray the places of
their concealed treasures, he invented and employed
the most outrageous cruelties merely to witness the
sufferings of children, of women and of old per-
sons. Neither fear nor torture could correct him.
On his first being caught he was shut up for eighteen
months, confined in a small subterraneous dungeon,
his feet were loaded with chains, he stood in muddy
water up to his ancles, and when dragged out of this _
place he was tortured in the most cruel way. Never-
theless he did not confess any thing. He was en-
larged, and the first thing he did, when free, was to
steal in full daylight. He soon committed new
murders, and he was executed.* At the beginning of
the last century several murders were committed in
Holland, on the frontiers of the provinces of Cleves.
For a long time the murderer remained unknown;
but at last an old fiddler, who was accustomed to
play on the violin at country weddings, was suspected
in consequence of some expressions of his children.
Led before the justice, he confessed thirty-four mur-
ders, and he asserted that he had committed them
without any cause of enmity, and without any in-
tention of robbing, but only because he was ex-
tremely delighted by this action. At Strasbourg
two keepers of the cathedral were assassinated : for
along time the murderer remained undiscovered,
but at last a postillion was killed by the shot of a
pistol by a clergyman, called Frick. This monster,


’ * History of Schinderhaunes, t. ii. p. 8.


382 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


in order to satisfy his horrible propensity to murder,
had hired a post-chaise for the express purpose of kill-
ing the postillion. He was arrested, and he confessed
that he was the murderer of both keepers of the
cathedral. Without changing countenance he ac-
knowledged. that when yet a student he had often
engaged children to follow him into the woods, that
there he had hanged them on trees, had kindled a
fre under them, and destroyed them in that man-
ner. This criminal was rich, and had never stolen.
For his. crimes he was burnt alive at Strasbourg.
“ Lewis XV.” says M. de Lacretelle,* ** felt a rooted
aversion against a brother of the Duke of Bourbon-
Condé, Count of Charolois, who would have re-
newed all the crimes of Nero had he occupied any


throne. While yet a child he betrayed an instinct


of cruelty which excited horror. He was delighted
with tormenting animals, and with treating his ser-
vants violently. It is related that he liked to shed


the blood of those he had debauched, and that he —


exercised different kinds of barbarities on the cour-
tesans who were brought to him. Popular tradition,
which corresponds with several historical relations,
accuses him of different homicides. It is said that
he committed murders without interest, without
anger, and without vengeance. He shot at tilers in


order to have the barbarous pleasure of seeing them


falling from the top of the houses.”
These latter facts, which fortunately are very rare,


prove that this terrible propensity is sometimes quite ~


* Histoire de la France, t. ii, p. 59. ’


ORGAN OF DESTRUCTIVENESS. 383


independent of education, of examples, of seduc-
tion, or of habit, and that it depends only on the
organization. Indeed there are crimes of so higha
degree, and accompanied with such repugnant and
horrible circumstances, that it would be impossible
to explain them in any other way. Prochaska re-
lates* that a woman of Milan flattered little chil-
dren, led them home, killed them, salted their flesh,
and eat of it every day. He quotes also the example
of a person who, excited by his heinous propensity,
killed a traveller and a young girl, in order to eat
them. Gaubiust speaks of a girl whose father was
incited by a violent propensity to eat the flesh of
man, and who committed several murders for this
purpose. ‘This girl; though separated from her
father for a long time, and though educated care-
fully among respectable persons, who had no rela-
tion to her family, was overcome by the incon-
ceivable desire of eating the flesh of man.

Some idiots manifest this propensity to kill or to
destroy. An idiot, after having killed two children
of his brother, came smiling and announced the
action to him. Another idiot, excited by anger,
-murdered his brother, and intended to burn him
openly and ceremoniously before the house. <A
third, according to Herder, after having seen a hog.
killed, thought he had a right to murder his fellow-
creatures, and actually cut the throat of a man. We
have seen in prison a young man whom nobody con-


/
* Opera Minora, t. ii. p. 98.
+ Oratio Prima de Regimine Mentis quod Medicorum est.


$84 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


sidered as silly, and whe ,without any motive killed
a child. Different questions were put to him, he
was threatened with various punishments in order to
obtain a knowledge of his motive. He only answered
and repeated incessantly, that he saw nothing but
black. ‘“* Whoever,” said he with a lamentable voice,
‘was not present cannot believe me. God will pardon
me.” At Fribourg, in Brisgau, we saw a young man
of fifteen years of age confined in prison because
he had put fire to nine houses successively ; he
helped to quench the fire, and, on one occasion, he
saved a child who was nearly destroyed by the


flames. When the fire was extinguished, he thought —


no more of it. This proves that his conduct was
excited only by some. bestial instinct. Indeed he
was half an idiot.

Certain madmen are alienated only in respect to
the propensity to murder. At Berlin, Mr. Mayer,
surgeon of a regiment, showed us a soldier whose
body was very irritable and much weakened by the
loss of his wife; he suffered every month a fit of
violent convulsions; he felt their apprgach, and at
the same time had an immoderate propensity to kill;
then he begged instantly to be loaded with chains ;


at the end of several days the fit and the fatal pro- |


peusity diminished, and he himself fixed the period
when he might be delivered from his chains without
any danger. At Haina we met with another person


who, at certain periods, felt an irresistible desire to


maltreat other persons: he knew his unfortunate
propensity, and he also begged to be loaded with
chains till his fit was over. A melancholy person


ORGAN OF DESTRUCTIVENESS. 385


saw the execution of a criminal. This spectacle
produced in him such a violent emotion that he sud-
denly was seized with a propensity to kill. At the
same time he preserved the strongest aversion
against such acrime; he described his deplorable
situation weeping bitterly, and with an extreme
confusion; he struck his head, wrung his hands,
exhorted himself, and cried to his friends to take
care and to fly; and he thanked them if they re-
sisted and menaced him.

Pinel has also observed in various mad _ persons,
the fierce impulsion to destroy. He speaks of one
who did not show any mark of alienation in respect
to memory, imagination, and judgment, and who
confessed that, in his narrow seclusion, his propen-
sity to murder was quite involuntary and utterly
irresistible ; that his wife, notwithstanding his ten-
derness for her, was near being immolated, and that
he had only time to warn her to fly. In his lucid
intervals he made the same melancholy reflections,
he expressed the same remorse, and he was dis-
eusted with life to such a degree that he several
times attempted to put an end to his existence.
“¢ What reason,” said he, ‘‘ have I to cut the throat
of the overseer of the hospital who treats us with the
greatest humanity? Yet in the moments of my fury
I feel a desire to attack him in the same way as
other persons, and to thrust a dagger into his breast.”
Another madman for six months in the year suffered
periodical fits of fury. The patient felt the decrease
of the symptoms, pointed out the periods when the
danger was over, and begged those about him not

2C


$86 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


to let him free if he felt an incapacity of governing
his blind impulsion to destroy. He confessed, in his
calm intervals, that during his fits of fury it would
be impossible for him to restrain it; that if he met
with anybody it appeared to him that he saw the
blood circulate in the vessels of those persons, and
that he felt an irresistible desire of sucking ‘it, and
of tearing their limbs with his teeth in order to suck
the blood more commodiously. Pinel relates also
the history of a young alienated person who every
morning felt a fit of mania, during which she tore
all that fell under her hands, and committed every
sort of violence against all who came near her.
They were obliged to restrain her by a strait jacket.
In the afternoon she repented of her actions, and
despaired of being pardoned. Pinel quotes another
example of a monk whose understanding was alien-
ated by devotion. He thought that he had one
night seen the Virgin Mary surrounded with a choir
of angels and happy spirits, and had received ex-
pressly an order to kill a certain person whom he
considered as unfaithful. He would have executed
his project had he not betrayed himself by different
observations, on account of which he was shut up.
The same author speaks also of a certain credulous
vine-dresser, whose imagination was violently shaken


by the sermon of a missionary. He thought himself.


and his family lost and damned to everlasting pains.
He considered the baptism of blood, or martyrdom,
as the only means of saving them. He first en-
deavoured to murder his wife, who with difficulty
escaped; then he exercised his fury in killing


é


ORGAN OF DESTRUCTIVENESS. 887


quietly two of his children in order to procure to
them eternal life. Confined to prison in order
to be judgéd, he cut the throat of a criminal who
was with him in the same room, always with the in-
tention of doing some expiatory action. His aliene
ation being proved, he was condemned to be shut up
in the Bicétre for life. Long solitary detention ex-
alted his imagination; and because he had not been
executed, he fancied himself the Almighty or, ac-
cording to his own expressions, the fourth person of
the Trinity, and that he was sent to save the world
by the baptism of blood. He was confined for ten
years, and as he was continually calm and quiet, he
received permission to converse with the other con-
valescents in the court of the hospital. He passed
four years tranquilly in this way, and his healthy
state seemed to be restored, when he suddenly ma-
nifested his former superstitious and sanguinary
ideas. The day before Christmas, he conceived the
project of doing some expiatory sacrifice in killing
all those who might fall under his hands. He con-
sequently got a shoemaker’s knife, and at the mo-
ment when the keeper went the rounds, he gave
him a thrust from behind which fortunately slipped
over the ribs; he cut the throats of two other mad-
men,-and he would ‘have continued his homicide had
he not been arrested by force.

All these and many similar examples, observed in
the healthy and diseased state of man, in idiots and
madmen, prove evidently that the propensity to kill
and destroy is innate, not only in animals but in
man. Moreover, does not the whole history of

Z2C2


888 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


mankind confirm this assertion? In all ages the
earth has been drenched with blood. It is now to
be examined with what view nature has created this
propensity. We cannot imagine that this propensity
is innate in order to murder man. Carnivorous
animals are endowed with this propensity, but they

do not kill other individuals of their own kind.
- They kill other animals in order that they them-
selves may live. In what then does the food of


man consist? He lives on other animals, and there- .


fore he must kill them. ‘Thus it may be questioned
whether this propensity determines the sort of food,
that is, flesh? Gall thinks so; I do not. It is cer-
tain that the propensities are in relation to the whole
nature of animals, and that the propensity to kill is
in relation to the food of every species of animals;
but the power which desires to kill is not the same
as that which chooses flesh. One special faculty
produces the propensity to kill, and another faculty
makes choice of flesh. On this account, there is no
proportion between the propensity to kill and the
want of food. Some animals kill more than is ne-
cessary for their nourishment. Some persons like
meat, but they cannot kill any animal; other per-
sons have no reluctance to kill, and yet prefer vege-
tables for nourishment. Children, in general, have
this propensity more energetic than adult persons,
but they prefer fruits to meat. Hencg..it must be
allowed that this propensity is necessary to carni-
vorous animals, but not that they are carnivorous
because they have the propensity to kill.

It remains still to be examined what is the essen-


ORGAN OF DESTRUCTIVENESS. $89


tial nature of this faculty? I think that the sphere
of activity of this faculty is more extended than the
instinct to kill. It seems to me that this faculty
produces the propensity to destroy, in general, with-
out denoting any object. Destruction may be ap-
plied to inanimate things, to animals, or to man. In
this signification, it is conceivable that this faculty is
necessary and destined from creation. It must cer-
tainly be granted that throughout all nature one
being lives upon another, that violent death is an
institution of nature, and that there are animals of
prey among all orders of animals, Now if nature
had created animals which ought to live upon meat
without giving to them, at the same time, the in-
stinct of killing animals, it would be contradictory
and absurd. Moreover, nature has even taught car-
nivorous animals to kill others in the most certain
and sudden way, that is, in wounding ‘their neck at
the place of decussation. Sometimes it is necessary
to destroy what is useless in order to replace it by
what is useful; and there are many things which
are relatively hurtful, which we are provoked to
destroy. In this sense it is permitted to destroy
others in order to save one’s self; in this sense
destruction is not only permitted and exercised by
| justice, but it is even rewarded and considered as a
virtue. On the contrary, whenever this faculty
destroys what ought not to be destroyed some abuse
takes place; for example, in murdering and assassin-
ating man, or in setting fire to houses &c.

This faculty then produces the propensity to
destroy, in general, without determining the object

1


390 PHIYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


to be destroyed, or the manner of destroying it.
This faculty gives the propensity to pinch, scratch,
‘bite, cut, break, pierce, devastate, demolish, ravage,
burn, massacre, strangle, butcher, suffocate, drown,
kill, poison, murder, and assassinate. Gall formerly
called the organ of this faculty the organ of murder,
because he found it much developed in two mur-
derers; but it is evident that a name cannot be
given to any faculty according to its abuse. It is
true that the organs can be discovered only when
they are extremely developed; and in the highest
state of developement, many faculties produce
abuses. Such was the origin of this too limited
term, erroneously derived from the abuse of a fa-
culty of which the well regulated employment is,
like that of all other faculties, essential to life. I
think that the name organ of the propensity to
destroy, or of destructiveness, is the most general
and the most conformable to the sphere of activity of
this faculty. We are convinced, by a great number
of observations, that the seat of this organ is on
the side of the head immediately above the ears.
(Pl. IX. fg. 1 & 2. VI, and Pl. XIL fig. 2. VI.)


Vil, ORGAN OF THE PROPENSITY TQ BUILD, OR OF
7 CONSTRUCTIVENESS. +


Gall observed that those who had a particular dis-
position to mechanical arts presented a face of some-
what parallel form, that 1s, a face as large at the


ORGAN OF CONSTRUCTIVENESS. 391


temples as at the cheeks; consequently that a
greater disposition to mechanical arts is indicated
by the developement of the brain at the temples.—
(Pl. XII. fig. 2. VII.) He found this sign in great
mechanicians, architects, sculptors, and designers.
The skulls of animals which build, and those of
others which do not build, present a remarkable
difference at the place where this organ is situated ;
for instance, the skulls of rabbits and of hares. It is
known that rabbits build burrows, while hares, which
in general resemble rabbits, lie in the field. In the
beaver, marmot, field-mouse &c. this organ is dis-
tinctly expressed.

A certain skull is preserved at Rome which is
said to be the skull of Raphael. There exists some
doubt of its reality. Professor Schell, of Copen-
hagen, brought a cast of it in plaster to Gall, and.
asked him his opinion relative to this skull. Gall
answered that three organs were very considerable :
that the organ of mechanical arts was more deve-
loped than he had ever seen it before, and that the
organ of imitation, and that of physical love, were
very large. Gall possesses the skull of a milliner of
Vienna, who had a good taste, and understood per-
fectly to change the forms of her merchandises. In
this skull the organ in question is prominent.

Adversaries of our doctrine may ridicule a com-
parison between Raphael, a milliner, and a field-
mouse. ‘They may laugh at a doctrine which, as
they conclude, attributes to a similar organ the
sublime conceptions of Raphael, the pretty produc-

2


8993 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


tions of a milliner, and the inartificial habitation of
a field-mouse. But does not the sloth creep by
means of organs similar to those by means of which
the horse can gallop or the roe run? Does not the
ass cry by the organs by means of which a Catalani
sings? It is indeed true that this faculty alone does
not produce the sublime conceptions of Raphael,
but it was essential to the execution of their objects.

It seems to me that this faculty produces every
thing that may be called construction. By means
of it birds build nests for their young, rabbits and
other animals make burrows, and the beaver its hut.
I think that in mankind all propensity to construct,
from the huts of savages to the palaces of kings,
and the temples of God, is the result of this faculty.
It produces, according to my opinion, fortifications,
ships, the engines of war, of manufactures and com-
merce, instruments of all kinds, furniture, clothes,
jashionable merchandises and toys. This faculty is
essential not only to every mechanical profession,
but to all that, in any way, require construction,
as the arts of drawing, engraving, writing, carving,
and sculpture. Lock-makers, watch-makers, joiners,
cabinet-makers, turners &c. are directed by this fa- _
culty. ‘Thus it seems to me that the propensity to con-
struct, or constructiveness, is the special faculty of '
this organ, which does not however determine its
object. I know a lady at Paris, who, every time
when she was with child, felt the greatest propensity
to build. ‘Too large a developement of this organ
might produce too great a propensity to build or an


ORGAN OF COVETIVENESS. 393


abuse. A man, for instance, might ruin his family
by building, or employ this faculty for coining false
money.


VIII. ORGAN OF THE PROPENSITY TO COVET, OR OF
, COVETIVENESS.


Certain persons have a particular propensity to
steal or rob. It is known that Victor Amadeus IL.
King of Sardinia, took every where objects of little |
importance. Saurin, Pastor at Geneva, though ac-
quainted with the best principles of reason and re-
ligion, was overcome continually by the propensity
to steal. Another individual of good breeding was
given up to, this inclination from his infancy: he
betook himself to the military service in hopes of
being restrained by the severity of its discipline ;
but, as he continued to steal, he was in danger of
being hanged. Struggling against this propensity,
he studied theology and became a Capucin: his
propensity followed him into the convent, but he
took only little things, as candlesticks, snuffers,
scissars, drinking-cups and glasses. He did not
however conceal the stolen objects, but acknow-
ledged that he had taken them home that the pro-
prietors might have the trouble of carrying them to
their houses again. A person employed by the
government of Austria, and established at Pres-
bourg, had filled two chambers with stolen furni-
ture, but he never dared to make use of it. The
wife of Gaubius, the famous physician at Leyden,


394 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


had in so high a degree the propensity to steal, that,
when making purchases at shops, she always endea-
voured to take something away. Her husband
ordered a servant to follow her, and to prevent or
to compensate for her theft. [he Countess M***,


at Wesel, and J***, at Frankfort, manifested the


same propensity. Madame de N*** had been edu-


cated with great care, her understanding and talents _


assured to her a distinguished place in society, but
neither her breeding nor education secured her
against the powerful propensity to steal. Lavater


speaks of a physician who did not leave the rooms —


of his patients without putting something into his
pocket, as keys, scissars, knives, spoons, thimbles,
buckles and boxes, but he sent them back again to
their owners. Moritz, in his treatise on the human
mind, relates, with much detail, the history of a
certain thief, whose propensity to steal was so ener-
_getic, that even when dying he stretched out his


hand in order to steal the snuff-box of his confessor.
Dr. Benard, physician to his Majesty the King of —


Bavaria, told us the history of an Alsacian who was
rich, and not at all avaricious, but who had a great
propensity to steal. He had been educated with
great care, and sometimes severely punished on ac-
count of his stealing: his father caused him to be-
come a soldier, and as he continued to rob he was
hanged. We know the history of the son of a very
learned man: he excelled his comrades at the schools;
but from his earliest infancy, he stole from. his
parents, sisters, brothers, servants, comrades, school-
fellows and professors: all sorts of correction were


ORGAN OF COVETIVENESS. 395


useless to him; as a punishment he was given up to
military service, and several times suffered severe
inflictions, but all without changing his character.
In all other respects, his behaviour was regular, but
in this fault he was entirely indifferent to the most
energetic exhortations: he looked as if he did not
hear any thing, and they were obliged to confine
him in prison. ‘The chaplain of a regiment in
Prussia, a man of great intelligence and ability,
could not avoid stealing handkerchiefs from the
officers at the parade. The commanding officer
esteemed him much; but as soon as the chaplain
made his appearance all cabinets, presses, and cup-
boards were shut up; for he had carried off hand-
kerchiefs, towels, shirts, and even women’s stock-
ings. He, with pleasure, gave back the stolen
things. We saw, at Copenhagen, a prisoner who
was an incorrigible thief, but who sometimes distri-
buted the things he had stolen among the poor.
Another thief was shut up for the seventh time, who
confessed that it seemed to be impossible to change
his behaviour. He begged earnestly to be kept in
prison, and that he might have the means of earn-
ing a livelihood. A young Calmuck, brought to
Vienna by Count Stahrenberg, Ambassador of
Austria at the Court of Petersburg, became me-
_lancholic, and fell into a nostalgia because his con-
fessor, who instructed him in religion and morality,
had forbidden him to steal. ‘he confessor, a man
of understanding, discovered the cause of his dis-
ease, and gave him permission to steal on condition
that he would give back what he had stolen. The


396 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


young Calmuck profited by this permission, and
stole the watch of even his confessor during the
consecration of the mass, and, leaping with joy, gave
it back after the mass was over.


It would be easy to multiply examples of this


‘kind to an almost infinite number; and they prove
that the instinct of stealing is not always the effect
of bad education, of poverty, idleness, or of the
want of religion and moral sentiments. This truth
is so evident that every one winks at a little theft
committed by rich persons who have a good be-
haviour in other respects. These thefts are then
said to be the consequences of mental abstraction.
Moreover, the propensity to steal is proved by a
state of disease. We knew several cases in which
pregnant women felt this propensity in a high de-
gree only during pregnancy. Certain individuals
manifest the propensity to steal only if their mind
be alienated. Hence it is obvious that the faculty
of this propensity must be innate. We have exa-
mined the heads of a very great number of thieves ;
and there is no doubt that those who manifest a
great propensity to steal, present one part of the
brain much developed, while in other persons, who
are destitute of this inclination, that part is small in
proportion to the other cerebral parts.

The idea however of considering stealing as a
natural propensity is so contradictory to common
opinion, that it is impossible to avoid all objections
to it. It may be objected that stealing presupposes


the existence of property ; but that property is the


result of society and social convention; and conse-


ORGAN OF COVETIVENESS. 397


quently that stealing is not supported by any natural
propensity ; and that it is absurd to admit an organ
of theft. In this objection there are two things to
be considered ; first, it must be examined whether
property is not grounded upon some natural and
particular instinct? In treating of the innateness
of the faculties, we have seen that many actions
which are considered as the effect of society, or as
factitious, result from particular innate faculties.
Besides, we have seen that society itself is the re-
sult of a particular instinct, and that all other fa-
culties are combined with this propensity. It is
easy to demonstrate that the sentiment of property
is natural and not at all factitious: even animals
possess it. Birds have their own nests; many
quadrupeds their burrows and dwelling-places; and
all animals defend their habitation against foreign
aggression. ‘l'ame animals also know their own
places in the stables: if they go out and return
home, every one takes its place. Nightingales,
red-breasts &c. have their districts, and drive away
all other individuals of their kind, even their young
ones if they have grown up. The constancy of
storks and swallows is known in respect to those ~
places of nestling of which they have taken pos-
session. Bees and all insects fight even till death
to defend their hives against intruders. Every one
knows that a dog defends his bone with more
courage in the house of his master, than in the
house of a stranger. Sportsmen and hunters know,
that in a certain district there is only a certain
number of animals of the same kind, which do not


398 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN;


permit other individuals of the same species to
take possession of the same part of the country.
This is the case even with certain social animals,
Every herd of chamois, for instance, occupies oné
district, and drives away all other herds. ‘The sameé
takes place with man. Let us suppose two persons
living in a wood: one gathers fruits which the
other endeavours to eat; will not the former feel
that the fruits are his? Such examples might be
multiplied innumerably ; they clearly prove that
the sentiment of property is natural in animals and
man, and that it is anterior to legislation. In anis
mals this sentiment submits only to strength of
force. Man, who is susceptible of morality and
justice, determines the laws according to which a
thing is property or not. Consequently, the senti-
ment of property has produced legislation of this —
kind, and not legislation the sentiment of property.

It must also be inquired whether stealing is na-
tural, and consequently whether there is a special
propensity of this kind? Our opponents maintain
that such a doctrine is both ridiculous and danger- —
ous: ridiculous, because nature could not produce
any faculty absolutely hurtful to man; dangerous, —
because it would permit what is punished as crime
by the laws. Gall was accustomed to answer?
nobody can deny the facts which prove that theft
exists; and as it exists, it was not against the will
of the Creator: this propensity is also more or less
energetic in different thieves, and there are very
few persons who have never stolen any thmg. The
organ is moreover very considerable m inveterate.


ORGAN OF COVETIVENESS. 399


thieves. I allow that God cannot have created any
faculty which is only hurtful to mankind, and this
would be the case if there were an organ of theft,
that is, destined only to theft and robbery. On
the other hand it is also certain, that there is no
action without faculty and without the assistance of
organization. Consequently, theft is grounded upon
a certain faculty, and this faculty manifests itself
by means of an organ; but theft being an evil
action, is only an abuse of a certain faculty. This
point is cleared up by analogy. Gluttony and
drunkenness are the effect of a certain power, but
there is no faculty solely destined to these actions :
they are abuses of the special propensity, hunger,
and thirst. It is the same with adultery and incest,
which are abuses of the propensity to physical love.
Attack and quarrelsomeness are abuses of the
propensity to fight. Hence, we must examine
what is the special faculty which produces theft?
May it not be the faculty of property and _pos-
session? Some thieves take without any inten-
tion of keeping what they have stolen; and some-
times men and animals take away things which are
entirely useless to them: magpies and ravens, for
instance, carry away money and spoons, and
gather stones and similar things of which they
cannot make use. Certain thieves give back, or
they are content if the proprietor carries home, what
they have taken away. Consequently, the faculty
which steals is not essentially the faculty of keeping
possession. ‘The faculty in question precedes the
possession, it is rather the propensity to take pos-


400 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


session. The name possession therefore does not
characterise this special faculty, which does not care
about keeping and preservation.

Gall says that theft is sometimes an exuberance
of cunning, and a very great propensity to exercise
one’s cunning. Certain dogs prefer bad bits which
they steal, to good dishes which are given to them.
The proverb says, “ Stolen morsels are sweet.” I
am not of the opinion of Gall; for there are
thieves who are not at all cunning. For the same
reason, Gall was obliged to admit two organs; one of
theft and another of cunning. It is also evident that
this organ cannot be that of theft, because various
persons who have this organ very much developed
never steal. Are they therefore destitute of the
manifestations of this faculty? ‘To this Gall replies,
that he cannot determine whether any person with
whom he meets in society, and who has this organ
much developed, has really stolen; and that he dis-
tinguishes only the disposition. But in this manner
of speaking, the kind or nature of this faculty re-
mains always the same, viz. the disposition to steal.

According to all that I have observed, in com-
paring animals and man with respect to the
functions of this faculty, it seems to me, that the
special faculty of this organ is the propensity to
gather and acquire—to covet—without determining
the object to be acquired or the manner: of ac-
quiring it. This faculty gives a desire for all that
pleases: money, property, animals, servants, land,
cattle, or any thing upon the earth. This faculty
produces egotism and selfishness. Persons endowed


ORGAN OF COVETIVENESS. 4O1


with this faculty in a very high degree will never
forget themselves. But the objects they desire, and
their manner of acquiring, whether by gaming,
commerce, industry, or stealing, depend on the in-
fluence of all the other faculties. It is in consequence
of this faculty also, that we ask what is this or that
object good for?

This faculty is essentially necessary to man and
animals, because their subsistence depends on it.
By means of this faculty also, according to my
opinion, man and animals make provision and col-
lection. ‘The activity of this propensity may be
more energetic than necessary. We have seen that
some species and some individuals of carnivorous
animals kill more than is necessary to nourish them-
selves, and that they like to kill animals which they
do not eat. In the same way, animals and man do
not only gather what is useful and permitted, but
sometimes they take away what belongs to others,
and that of which they cannot make any use. ‘These
latter actions then constitute abuses. They have
different names, as usury, plagiarism, fraud, or theft.
Thus, after having determined the special faculty
of this organ, and after having explained the pos-
sibility of its abuses, it can no longer be said that
it is dangerous to admit an organ of this faculty.
In this chapter I examine only the special faculties.
Their mutual influence forms another consideration,
wherein I shall determine how far every faculty may
be active, and where its abuses begin. This organ
is situated at the temples on the anterior inferior
angle of the parietal bone.—( Pl. XII. fig. 2. VILL)

2D


1X. ORGAN OF THE PROPENSITY TO CONCEAL, OR
SECRETIVENESS.


Gall calls this organ that of cunning, and he
allows that he does not know the sphere of its
activity. He ascribes to it cunning, prudence, the
savoir faire, the capacity of finding means necessary
to succeed, hypocrisy, lies, intrigues, dissimulation,
duplicity,falsehood ; in poets the talent of finding out
interesting plots for romances and dramatic pieces ;
and finally slyness of animals. In all individuals
remarkable for such actions, a larger developement
of this organ is observed. It is situated in the
midst of the side of the head above the organ of
the propensity to destroy —(Pl. XI. jig. 2. and
Pi. XUI. fig. 1. TX.) Gall first observed this organ
in a person who had many debts, but who had the
address to conceal his real situation, so that the
creditors could have no knowledge of each other.
Hence it is evident that Gall observed only the
different functions of this faculty, but that he did
not determine the special faculty itself. Hence
also he complains in respect to this, as to every
organ, that he does not know its sphere of activity.
According to his manner of proceeding, it is scarcely
possible to determine the sphere of activity of any
organ, because the functions of the faculties are
infinite. Ihave mentioned that it is necessary to de-
termine the special faculties without considering the
objects upon which, and the manner in which, they
act. What is then the special faculty of this organ ?


ORGAN OF SECRETIVENESS. 408


If I consider the faculty of the person in whom
this organ was first observed; if J examine the
manners of sly animals, and consider what in them
is sly; more especially if I consider the mimickry
of man and animals, when they exercise functions
of this kind, it seems to me, that the special fa-
culty is the propensity to be clandestine in general;
to secrete thoughts, words, things, or projects.
The fox takes care not to be perceived ; a cat, waits
ing for a mouse, does not move a single limb ; sly
animals in general, if pursued, hide themselves dex-
terously ; and cunning persons conceal their opinions
and intentions, and sometimes manifest an opinion
opposite to their own. Hence, the special faculty
seems to be the propensity to conceal without de-
termining the object or the manner of concealing.
The uses and abuses of this faculty have these
various names; but the propensity to conceal is
common to all its manifestations.


Z2DzZ


404


Genus Il.—Sentiments.


After mere propensities follows another kind of
faculties which I call sentiments. Several of them
are common to man and animals, others are proper
toman. I first shall consider the former.


_X. ORGAN OF SELF-LOVE.


This is one of the faculties which are generally
attributed to external circumstances; and no one
thought of an organ on which its manifestations

might depend. Sometimes however pride, or a great
opinion of their own persons, is observed in indi-
viduals who have no influence upon others, neither
by birth, fortune, nor personal talents. Gall first
found this organ in a beggar. In examining the
head of this person, he observed in the midst of
the upper posterior part of the head, an elevation
which he had not observed before in so high a de-
gree. He asked him the cause of his mendicity.
The beggar accused his pride as the cause of his
present state, he having considered himself too im-

portant to acquire any business. He therefore
only spent money, and did not think of earning a
livelihood. We have a great number of proofs of
this organ, and can establish its existence. Proud
persons and those who are alienated by pride, who
imagine themselves to be emperors, kings, ministers,
generals &c. possess it in a high degree.—( Pl. IX.
Jig. 1. and: Pl. XI. fig. 2. X.)


ORGAN OF APPROBATION. 4.05


It appears that certain animals are endowed with
this organ, as the turkey-cock, peacock, horse &c.
Gall thinks also that this organ is the same as that
of the faculty which makes certain animals dwell
upon mountains, or in general in high regions. ‘There-
fore he calls this organ that of haughtiness, in order
to designate at once physical and moral height.
In speaking of the organ of inhabitiveness, I have
examined the proofs which Gall admits, and have
made opposite observations. I separate these two
organs one from another, and according to my
Opinion, one faculty produces the propensity to a
determinate inhabitation, and another that sentt-
ment of which I now treat.

This faculty gives us a great opinion of our own
person, self-love or self-esteem. Its too great ac-
tivity is the cause of various abuses as pride, haugh-
_tiness, even of disdain, contempt, presumption,
arrogance and insolence. ‘The want of it disposes
to humility. There are a greater number of mad
men than of mad women, who are alienated by pride.
Their mimickry is conformable. They speak little,
they command, and show their importance with
gravity.


XI. ORGAN OF APPROBATION.


Persons who are very fond of being caressed, ho-
noured and applauded, in short, who are ambitious,
have the upper posterior and lateral part of the
head much developed.—(P/. IX. fig. 2. XI.) Gall


4.06 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


calls this the organ of ambition or vanity, according
to the object. It is called ambition if the object to
which we aspire be of importance, and vanity if we
endeavour to distinguish ourselves by little things.
I consider the activity of this faculty in general.
Certain animals are sensible to caresses and flattery ;
others are destitute of this sentiment. It is the
same with man. Some persons are fond of flattery
or of applause, they wish to be distinguished and
to be honoured. ‘To this end they make use of
various means, of dresses, of decorations &c. ‘This
faculty makes us attentive to the opinion which
others have of us, and it loves their approbation in
general without determining the object or the man-
ner of acquiring their approbation. It may act
upon things of the highest importance, upon al-
together indifferent, or upon useful, or even hurtful,
objects. A coachman endowed with this faculty is
pleased if his manner of conducting horses be ap-
proved, and a general is elated if he be applauded
by his nation for leading an army to victory.

We do not doubt of the existence of this organ.
I call it, according to its special faculty, the organ
of approbation. This faculty contributes much, and
is necessary, to society. It excites the other faculties,
and produces emulation and the point of honour.
Its. activity, when too strong or irregular, causes
many abuses. The want of this faculty makes us
indifferent to the opinions of others. This faculty
is more active in women than in men, and even in
certain nations more than in others. There is also
a greater number of women than of men alienated


ORGAN OF CAUTIOUSNESS. 407


in this respect. We have met with only one mad
man alienated from vanity. Mad women manifest
themselves in a manner which indicates evidently
that they wish to please. They are affable, civil
and courteous.


XII. ORGAN OF CAUTIOUSNESS.


Two persons at Vienna were known to be re-
markable for their extreme irresolution. One day
in a public place, Gall stood behind them and ob-
served their heads. He found them extremely
large on the upper posterior part of both sides of
the head.—(Pl. IX. fig. 2. XII.) This observation
gave the first idea of this organ. The heads of cir-
cumspect persons, and of those who want this fa-
culty, are very different. Circumspect animals also,
as the stag, roe, pole-cat, otter and mole, and
those which place sentinels to warn them of ap-
proaching danger, as the chamois, cranes, starlings
and bustards, have this cerebral part much de-
veloped. Indeed, geese, cranes &c., have not un-
derstanding enough to induce us to think, that
their habit of placing sentinels is the result of any
intellectual combination, but it is possible that this
faculty is commanded by nature, by means of some
organic arrangement. Moreover, animals which see
during day-light, but which do not dare to seek
their food except at night, have the upper lateral
and posterior part of their heads more developed
than those which go out during the day. Theskulls


408 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


of eagles are different in this respect from those of
the horned owls, which see both in the day-time
and at night, because they can contract and dilate
the pupil at pleasure. Lats also have the head large
posteriorly.

Lhe special faculty of this organ produces pre-
caution, demurs, doubts, places sentinels, and in
general exclaims continually, Take care. It con-
siders consequences and produces all the hesitations
expressed by dut. This faculty when too active
causes abuses, as uncertainty, irresolution, un-
quietness, anxiety, fear, melancholy and_hypo-
chondriasis. In treating of thé organ of the pro-
pensity to fight, I have mentioned that anxiety and
fear cannot be the result of the want of courage 5
but that they must be attributed to some positive
sentiment. They result from a too great activity of
circumspection. Nevertheless, a person destitute of
courage is overcome by cautiousness sooner than a
person who feels a great propensity to fight. The
want of cautiousness modifies the actions of the
other faculties as far as these act according to their
own nature without being restrained by circum-
spection. . The result is what. is called levity or in
consideration.

Thus this faculty is necessary to our preserva-
‘tion, and only its too great activity, like that of
every other faculty, causes abuses. A great degree
of cautiousness predisposes also to the disease of
suicide. I say, it predisposes to suicide, but it is
not the only cause of that crime. In speaking
afterwards of the diseased state of the moral sen-


om,


ORGAN OF BENEVOLENCE. 409


timents and intellectual faculties, I shall treat of
the unfortunate disposition to suicide. This and
the preceding organ are commonly more developed
in females than in males, probably because they are
obliged to take greater care of their progeny, or in
order to supply in them what is wanting as to force.


XIII. ORGAN OF BENEVOLENCE IN MAN, OR OF MEEKNESS
IN ANIMALS.


For a long time Gall did not think of placing
_ goodness of heart in the brain. A family at Vienna
often praised the goodness of one of their servants.
This family several times told Gall, that he ought
to mould this servant in plaster. At last he actually
did so, and observed a considerable protuberance
on the superior middle part of his forehead. ‘This
organ was afterward confirmed by numerous ob-
servations; for it is very easy to examine and
verify this organ in children and in adult persons.—
(PLNMIL fig. li; PLXI. fig. 1. XI.) ‘This organ
may also be proved by reference to animals, either
in comparing different species or different indivi-
duals of the same species. Several kinds of ani-
mals are naturally meek, as the roe, goat, sheep,
while others are wild, savage and mischievous.
Some dogs, horses, cows &c. are meek and familiar,
while other individuals of the same kind bite,
kick &c. The mild and good-natured animals have
the place of their forehead corresponding to the
sear i


410 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


organ of goodness in man elevated and prominent |


(Pl. X. jig. 1. & 3. VIII), while the ill-natured
present a hollow at this place.—(P/. X. fig. 2. &
4, XIII.)

Tt is sometimes maintained that goodness is ‘the
result of the want of courage. But it is in my
opinion a law, that the want of any faculty cannot
produce any positive sentiment. On the other
hand, many persons are very quarrelsome, and at
the same time very good-hearted. In the same way
active cruelty cannot be the result of the want of
goodness; for cruelty is a positive sentiment. It is
true, goodness or compassion cannot exist in cruel
beings which are fond of tormenting others, but
cruelty belongs to the organ of the propensity to
destroy, without being restrained by any other sen-
timent.’

This faculty, although it exists in animals, is
greatly magnified and ennobled in mankind. In the
greatest number of animals it is restrained to a
passive goodness, but in man its sphere of activity
is very considerable. It produces in man goodness
of heart, kindness, peacefulness, mildness, benig-
nity, benevolence, complaisance, clemency, mer-
citulness, compassion, humanity, hospitality, libe-
rality, equity, cordiality, urbanity, in one word,
Christian charity.


411


ON THE SENTIMENTS WHICH ARE PROPER TO
MANKIND.


Hitherto we have considered man so far as he is
animal. All the organs and special faculties I
have spoken of are common to man, quadrupeds,
birds &c. In this respect man is even the most
perfect of them all; he possesses all those faculties
which are distributed among different kinds of ani-
mals. Besides this prerogative, every faculty is
susceptible of many more modifications, and its
energy is greater in man than in animals. More-
over, man is endowed with sentiments which con-
stitute the human character, of which animals are
entirely destitute. ‘Till the present time, no system
of philosophy has clearly indicated the line of de-
marcation between man and animals. It was be-
lieved for a long time that man differs from animals
in being endowed with memory, judgment, and
imagination; but a great number of facts prove that
animals possess all these faculties. Others again con-
sider reasoning and religion, as particular attributes
of human nature. I shall here treat only of the
sentiments proper to man; and in speaking of the
intellectual faculties, I shall also point out which of
them are common to animals and man, and which
are proper to mankind.


rm ts,


XIV. ORGAN OF VENERATION.


Dr. Gall, in examining the actions of man, visited
churches in order to see the configuration of the
heads of those who excel in devotion. - He first
observed, that the heads of those who prayed with
the greatest fervour were bald. Now it is incon-
ceivable that the bald state of the head can produce
devotion. For every bald man is not pious, and
though women do not grow bald, yet a great num-
ber of them are pious and devout. Gall observed
also, that the heads of these pious men were very
elevated.—( Pi. XII. fig. 1. XIV.) Lavater had
made the same observation. .

Priests who have chosen this state from natural
propensity or vocation, and those who have become


priests by external circumstances or from various |


other views, religious and irreligious persons, pre-
sent a different degree of developement in the
middle of the upper part of their heads. The
pictures of the saints show the very configuration
of those pious men whom Gall had first observed.


It is also in this respect remarkable, that the head —


of Christ is always represented as very elevated.
Have we the real picture of Christ? Have artists
given to the head of Christ a configuration which
they have observed in religious persons; or have
they composed this figure from some internal in-
spiration? Has the same sentiment among modern
artists given to Christ an elevation of head, as
among the ancient it conferred a prominence of the


ORGAN OF VENERATION. ATS


forehead upon Jupiter? At all events the shape of the
head of Christ contributes to prove this organization.
If the head be very high in the middle line, the
hair falls down on both sides, just as this arrange-
ment of the hair is presented in the pictures of
Christ. |

An objection made on account of this organ is,
that if there be an organ of religion, there is no
occasion for revelation. But it is easy to prove
that this objection is false. First, there were
systems of religion before any revelation. Cicero
Says expressly, that there is no nation, no people,
who do not adore a Deity. Plutarch observes,
that there is neither town nor village in the world
without a God. Aristotle, Plato, and all the ancient
philosophers make the same remark. Even the
fathers of the church have commented on this truth,
in order to prove that the belief in a God is innate.
We only add that it manifests itself by a certain
organization. Thus the sentiment of religion has
existed long before any revelation. Besides, all
nations are not yet acquainted with revelation, and
yet these nations manifest religious sentiments.
Moreover, if revelation was to be given to mankind
was it not necessary to prepare man, or to make him
eapable of receiving revelation? Who would endea-
vour to make any animal inferior to man acquainted
with revelation? It is a general law, that neither
man nor animals can be instructed or educated, if
the respective faculty be not innate. Dogs do not
learn religion any more than mathematics. Hence,
man must be prepared to receive the former as well


Ac] 4: PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


as the latter; and on this account he has received
a particular organ of veneration. Finally, if re-
velation ought to regulate religious sentiments and
ideas, was it not necessary that they should exist
previously ?

Thus these considerations prove that the senti:
ment of religion is inherent in the nature of man,
that it is an arrangement of creation, and that
mankind never will exist without religion. Gall
even maintains that this organ is not only necessary,
but that it is also the most evident proof of the
existence of God. If nature, says he, has produced


any faculty, there is an object of this faculty 5”


for example, the propensities to love, to destroy &c.
exist as well as their objects. The faculty of music
exists, and the laws of vibration in external objects
are conformable. In general every other faculty
of man and animals has an object which it may ac-
complish. Can it then be probable that God does not
exist while there is an organ of religion? Hence,
God exists. Gall speaks of this organ under the name
of religion, of theosophy, or even of morality.

These expressions are very vague, and far from
indicating any special faculty. They designate @
greater sphere of activity than that of this particu-


lar organ. First, I disapprove the name theosophy 5


for we cannot flatter ourselves that we know the
nature of God. We can only say what God is ac
cording to us, that is, all the superior faculties of


man, elevated to the highest degree, are attributed ,


to God; but God may possess many other faculties
of which we have not the slightest notion. We can
6


ORGAN OF VENERATION. AAS


only speak of a Supreme Being without determining
his nature. I dislike also the name religion, because
this expression has different significations. It some-
times denotes particular acts and ceremonies by
which God is venerated: sometimes it also desig-
nates the morality of our actions; but we have
established as a principle that the organs cannot
be named according to any action. Finally, the
name organ of morality is still less applicable; for
the religion of God is only one part of moralhty.
It is also known that one man may be religious
without being just, and another may be just without
being religious. Therefore it remains to be ex-
amined, what is the special faculty of this organ.
This faculty constitutes a sentiment, and not an
idea. Gall observed this organ first in persons who
were in the act of adoring God; and according to
all my observations it seems that its special faculty
is the sentiment of veneration, without determining
its objects or its manner. It is by this faculty that
man adores God, or venerates saints, persons and
things. It respects all sacred objects. Now what
can be more natural than to venerate the Being who
is considered as the cause of all things? Moreover,
experience proves my assertion, that this faculty
does not determine the object to be venerated, nor
the manner of venerating. The ancient nations
admitted a greater or less number of gods; and at
the present time, different nations and different
persons have different ideas of God, according to
their national creeds, and their intellectual faculties,
and they venerate him accordingly. We consider


4.16 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


this organ as determined. It is situated in the midst
of the upper part of the head.


XV. ORGAN OF HOPE AND FAITH.


It seems to me that there is a particular sentiment.
of hope. Gall considers hope as belonging to every
organ. I think there is a difference between desire:
or want, and hope. Every faculty, being active,
produces desire; therefore animals desire; and
while the respective organ is active, they wish the
satisfaction of their desires; but I do not believe
that they have the sentiment of hope. I consider
this sentiment as proper to man. No other faculty
can produce hope, therefore I admit a particular
organ for the manifestations of this kind. ‘This
sentiment is necessary in almost every situation; it
gives hope in the present and of a future life. In
religion it is called faith. Persons endowed with it
in a higher degree are credulous. The organ of
hope seems to be situated on the side of that of
veneration. |


XVI. ORGAN OF IDEALITY.


‘It is a proverb that a poet must be born. -tt 1s
also certain ‘that the heads of great poets, but not
of all versificators, are enlarged above the temples
in an arched direction.—(P/. XVIIL. jig. 2. XVI.)


“«


ORGAN OF IDEALITY. 477


Now it is impossible that poetry, in general, should
be confined to one single organ. I therefore think
that the name organ of poetry, given by Gall to
this organ, does not indicate the essential faculty of
this organ, but that it is necessary to point out
what is essential to all kinds of poetry. This com-
mon faculty of poets then must be the special fa-
culty of this organ, and the combination of this
with the other faculties must determine the kind of
poetry of each poet. It can neither be the faculty
of versification, nor that of rhyming. For some
authors write in prose, and their expressions are
really poetical ; and others make verses which how-
ever contain no poetical thought. Rhyme is still


less essential to poetry, for among the ancients it


was entirely unknown, and among the moderns »
poetry is not always rhythmic. It seems to me that
in every kind of poetry the sentiments are exalted,
the expressions warm, and that there must be rap-
ture, inspiration—what is commonly called imagi-
nation or fancy. I observe moreover, that in all
persons this faculty gives a peculiar tinge to all


other faculties; it makes them in every thing aspire


to ideality. It is a sentiment, and, if I may so
speak, the opposite of circumspection; it renders
us enthusiasts, while circumspection stops our career
by saying, ‘Take care. I call this organ that of


‘Ideality.


I have here to mention certain curious observa-
tions without being capable of determining their
characteristic nature. We have observed that if the
part of the head, above the organ of ideality and a

2 i


4)8 PHYSIOLOGY OY THE BRAIN.


little backward from it, be very much developed,
the persons are disposed to have visions, to see
ghosts, demons, phantoms, to believe in astrology,
magic, and sorcery. I cannot say whether this is a
particular organ, or a greater developement of the
organ of hope, or of that of ideality, or of both
together.


XVII. ORGAN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.


I think also that there is a particular sentiment
of just and unjust, right and wrong, and that a par-
ticular organ of righteousness must be admitted.
No animal has this faculty. Its activity is very dif-
ferent in man. Some individuals are almost destt-
tute of it, others possess it in a high degree. It
produces only the sentiment of justice without de-
termining what is just. Particular determinations,
as to justice, depend on the other faculties with
which this sentiment is combined. A person who
combines righteousness with some propensity of the
lower order calls just, what another person, who
possesses righteousness combined with goodness or
veneration, calls unjust.* I shall afterwards give a
better elucidation of the mutual influence of the fa-
culties. This faculty produces the sentiment of


* « All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the
Lord weigheth the spirits.” Prov. xvi. 2. *& Every way of a man


is right in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the hearts.” Prov.
SEL. 2,


ORGAN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 419
duty, and constitutes what is called conscience and
remorse. |

Gall thinks that there is no organ of conscience.
He considers conscience as the result of the opposi-
tion of the dominant character of a person to his
' particular actions, and; according to him, there are
as many consciences as faculties. He even speaks
of a good and of a bad constience: the good con-
science is the opposition of the good qualities to a
particular action, and the bad conscience is the op-
position of the bad faculties to a particular action.
In this respect he admits bad faculties. If a good-
natured man commit a fault or offend another, he
repents, and his conscience torments him, because
he has acted in opposition to his natural character.
On the other hand, a usurer and a libertine are
sorry for having neglected a good opportunity, the
first of deceiving, the second of seducing some in-
hocent person. Gall gives to this opposition of the
dominant character to any action the name Natural
Conscience, and asserts that we cannot trust to the
natural conscience, but that it is necessary to esta-
blish some positive conscience, that is, to determine
what is to be done and what is to be let alone, with-
out considering what persons may desire. There-
fore it is said, Thou shalt adore one God ; thou shalt
not kill; thou-shalt not steal &c.

In opposition to this assertion, Gall, in speaking
of criminals, proves that certain inveterate criminals
do not feel any repentance, or, what is called by
him, good conscience. He does not deny that cri-
minals, who possess good nature, and have com-

ZEQZ


4.20) PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


mitted some fault, repent sincerely. If, for instance,
a mother who has been dishonoured, and consigned
to the most unfortunate situation, in a moment of
despair and confusion, deprives her new-born child
of life; if the fatal concourse of circumstances be
past, and the innate sentiments of mildness and
compassion begin again to act, she feels the contra-
diction between her natural character and her ac-
tion, and this contradiction constitutes, according
to Gall, her repentance or natural conscience. At
Spandau, we saw a man who ‘had assassinated his
wife in a paroxysm of anger. ‘This man was un-
happy during his whole life. Indeed he was good-
natured, and generally considered as an honest man.
On the other hand, it is beyond doubt that he who
is dragged to criminal actions by very strong inter-
nal propensities, rarely feels any natural repentance.
In such a man, the inclinations which lead to evil
are energetic. ‘They constitute, if 1 may so say,
his principal character. Hence all actions which
result from them are in harmony with his inclina-


tions. This fatal truth may displease those who.


dream of nothing but of the dignity of human. na-
ture, but it is proved by observation, and it is even
conformable to Christianity. ‘¢ The soul of the
wicked desires evil, his neighbour finds no favour in
his eyes.” *—** A good tree cannot bring forth evil


fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good


fruit.” t—** O generation of vipers, how can ye,
being evil, speak good things? ’’ t—* They that are


* Prov. xxi. 10. + Matt. vii. 18. { Matt. xu. 34,


ORGAN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 421


after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, but
they that are after the spirit, the things of the
spirit.” *—‘ The natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto: him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned.” t—* Some children are
called hellish, not because they are born in hell,
but because they are destined to hell.’ t

Cardinal Polignac also speaks of men who are
born wicked, and to whom crime is delightful.
Why should a criminal, says he, who does not con-
sider himself as wicked, repent? § Indeed great cri-
minals do not think that they are guilty, and they
cannot feel any repentance. Examine them by their
juridical processes ; follow them to the scaffold and
execution! Some of them deny, with an incredible
stubbornness, the most evident actions, and some-
times they insult the witnesses with surprising auda-
city; others, with an impudent sincerity, relate a
series of horrible trespasses and crimes ; some even
make the gayest joke of the most outrageous actions,
and often when we shudder with horror at their guilt
they break out into laughter. A soldier had stolen
successively from twenty churches. Being con-
ducted to the gallows he hoped to receive pardon.
But instead of showing any repentance, he said to
the auditor Wiedemann of Vienna, “I see well
there is nothing more to be done here; I shall en-
deavour to go elsewhere.’—Mr. Bruggmanns, at


* Rom. viii. 5. +1 Cor. ii. 14.
+ St. Augustin on Faith, Hope, and Charity, chap. xii.
§ Antilucrece, t. 1. p. 164.


4.22 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


Leyden, showed us the skull of the chief of a band.
of robbers. This man had precipitated different
persons into the canals only in order to have the
pleasure of seeing them struggling with death. He
said, when on his trial, What will you do with me,
am J not an honest man ?—We have seen a girl who
had assisted her mother in killing her father. She
did not manifest the least repentance. If her crime
was spoken of she only shrugged up her shoulders.
In short, all juridical proceedings, which have con-
demned inveterate criminals, justify our observation,
that certain guilty persons never are guided by con-
science. Such perverted men are even. proud of the
faculties by means of which they deceive, and they;
recount with pleasure the most remarkable tricks of
their criminal life. Hence, as it is certain that the
greatest criminals are not prevented from doing evih
by conscience or by repentance, it is necessary to
produce some positive conscience, and to regulate
actions by rewards and punishments. |

I shall now examine whether there is an organ of
eonscience, or whether conscience is only the oppo-
sition of the principal character to any action. First,
~Ithmk that if the assertion of Gall be true, every
organ ought to produce repentance whenever any
action is opposite to the natural dominant character
of the acting person; but it does not seem to me


that a criminal feels repentance for having done any


action which is good in itself, and not hurtful in
respect to the criminal. Ifa criminal give to the
poor a part of his booty, will he repent it? I think
not, unless he is betrayed by it. Gall asserting that


ORGAN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. ; 423


inveterate criminals do not feel any repentance is in
contradiction with himself. Besides, if Gall say
that libertines or usurers repent of having neglected
a good opportunity of seducing or deceiving, I
think that he confounds repentance or remorse with
being sorry for or being displeased. It seems to me
that he commits a fault similar to that of those who
confound inclination or propensity with will. Every
cerebral organ manifests a desire, a propensity, but
every organ does not produce will. In the. same
way every organ, not being satisfied, or being dis-
agreeably affected, produces pain, the being sorry ;
but every organ does not produce repentance or re-
morse. I shall afterward detail the difference be-
tween inclination and will. Here I mention it only
on account of the analogy. ‘Thus I maintain that
no sentiment common to animals and man produces
repentance.

It may be asked, whether repentance be the same
as will? The answer must be negative; for will is
the effect of the understanding, while repentance or
remorse is the effect of the mind in the adopted
signification. The latter is a sentiment independent
of understanding, and there is no proportion be-
_ tween conscience and understanding. I think that
repentance, remorse, or conscience, must be attri-
buted only to the faculty of justice and duty. Ac-
cording to the preceding considerations, L-also dis-
approve of the divisions of the conscience made by
Gall into natural—good or bad; and into artificial
or positive. I divide it, 1st, Into natural or abso-
lute conscience, which is the effect of justice com-

6


4.24 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


bined with all the other faculties proper to mankind,
while all the faculties common to man and animals
are held in subordination. 2d, Into individual, parti-
cular, or relative conscience, which results from the
justice of every one combined with his other facul-
ties. 8d, Into positive conscience, which is fixed
by legislation, whether divine or civil, as by the
commands, Thou shalt not eat meat on Fridays or
Saturdays; thou shalt go to church every Sunday &c.
Thus I admit a particular organ of justice, and seek
for its organ on the side of the following organ.


XVII. ORGAN OF DETERMINATENESS.


Dr. Gall observed that persons of a firm and con-
stant character have the top of the brain much de-
veloped.—(P/. IX. fig. 2. XVIII.) Lavater had
distinguished the same configuration in persons of
an immoveable character. The special faculty is
dificult to be determined. Its effects are often
called will; but this will is not the moral will which
is necessary to liberty. It is true, persons endowed
with a greater developement of this organ say com-
monly, “ I will,” that is, I want, I desire, I insist, I
command, but without sufficient reason or reflection.
This faculty contributes to maintain the activity of
the other faculties. It gives constancy and perseve-
rance. Its too great activity produces infatuation,
stubbornness, obstinacy, and disobedience. Its want
renders men unsure, inconstant, and changeable, ac-


ORGAN OF DETERMINATENESS. 425


cording to the other impressions. We are con-
vinced of the existence of this organ by a multitude
of observations ; and it seems to be situated in the
midst of the feelings, in order to strengthen their
activity. |


ORDER Il.—Unperstanpine or INTELLECT.
Genus L.—Knowing Faculties.


I have finished the first order of faculties—the
propensities and sentiments: I shall now consider
the second order. The first genus contains those
faculties by means of which we know the existence
of external bodies and their qualities. Strictly
speaking, the five external senses belong, in some
measure, to this kind of faculties. I have already
treated of the knowledge which man and animals
acquire by their assistance. I shall now examine
the organs necessary to acquire certain kinds of
knowledge which the five external senses cannot pro-
duce. ‘Lhe first’ conception which our understand-
ing must have of external beings is that of their
existence. In order to acquire this conception, the
external senses are not sufficient, although this con-
ception cannot be determinate without an impres-
sion on these senses. Thus the organ which pro-
cures knowledge of external beings must be consi-
dered as the first in respect to the order in which
the faculties are necessary. |


42°77


XIX. ORGAN OF INDIVIDUALITY.


Dr, Gall observed, in society, different persons
who were learned, who had a superficial knowledge
of all arts and sciences, and who were not always
profound, but who knew enough to be capable of
speaking with facility—such as are called brilliant in
society. He found that in them, the midst of the
lower part of the forehead was very prominent, con-
sequently that the anterior inferior part of the brain
was much developed.—(P/. XIII. fig. 1. XIX.) At
first, Gall called this organ, organ of the memory of
things, because the persons endowed with a great
developement of this organ had much information,
or knew many things. Afterwards, as he observed
that memory is only a degree of the activity of
every faculty, he named it the organ of the sense of
things. In comparing animals with man, and one
kind of animal with another, it is obvious that tame
animals have the. forehead more developed than wild
ones, and that they are more or less tameable in
proportion as the forehead is developed. Gall now
therefore calls this organ that of educability.

The cause of the tameableness of animals has
long been sought. It has been asked, whether ani-
mals are tamed by nature, or whether they are sub-
dued and subjected to our services by means of our
understanding? It was believed for a long time, and
a great number of physiologists and philosophers
still think, that tameableness in animals is solely
the work of mankind. But this opinion is errone-


428 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ous: otherwise why is it at present impossible for
man to tame the other wild species? Yet we are
now better acquainted with the manners of animals
than two thousand years ago, and consequently we
can better suit to them external circumstances. It
is possible to tame single wild animals, for instance,
one chamois, one tiger &c. but never the whole
race. The young ones are always wild and fly into
solitude. On the other hand, certain animals are
tame without our wishing it. Mice every where
follow the abodes of man. Dogs, in Egypt, are
considered as impure animals, and have no particu-
lar master, yet they remain in the villages and


towns, never go far from the dwellings of man, and -


consequently are originally tame.

Dr. Gall, in his lectures, in order to demonstrate
this organ, shows a scale of animals, and proves that
they are more tameable in proportion to the height


of their forehead. It does not seem to me that this |


organ fills up the whole forehead. Meekness cer-


tainly contributes much to the tamegableness of ani- |


mals. Gall himself, in speaking of the organ of
meekness, says, that animals endowed with that
organ, are more docile and more serviceable than
others. Besides, the reflecting faculties of animals
are. connected with the organ of facts. I think
therefore that the faculties of the whole forehead
contribute to the tameableness or educability of ani-
mals; that Gall’s observations, relative to this special
organ, are not sufficiently precise; and that his man-
ner of comparing this organ in man and animals is
very inexact. Iam confirmed in my opinion not
4:


ORGAN OF INDIVIDUALITY. 429


only because Gall, in comparing this organ, com-
pares the whole foreheads of man and animals, but
also because he compares the same foreheads in yet
other respects.

In looking for the special faculties, and their re-
spective organs, I cannot make use of these com-
parisons, which are indeed striking as a whole, and
show that the developement of the forehead coincides
with the degree of the understanding. In animals
of lower kinds, the brain, instead of ascending and
forming a forehead, is inclined downward. By de-
grees it becomes horizontal, is elevated, and forms
a forehead less or more developed: finally, in man
it presents the most developed forehead ; still how-
ever, in different degrees, being sometimes vertical,
sometimes even prominent. Notwithstanding these
remarks, I admit that animals are endowed with this
organ. ‘They recollect what has happened to them.
An old fox which has escaped several snares, and
which knows that it is watched, takes more precau-
tion, and proceeds with greater slyness, when it
comes near houses, in order to catch poultry. Any
bird whose nest has been destroyed, at a place fre-
quented by people, conceives the necessity of
in future placing it in solitude; the construction of
the second nest is also more perfect. A dog resists
its instinct to run after a hare, because it recollects
the beating which it formerly received on the same
account. Similar facts might be multiplied in-
finitely; and it is consequently evident that the
actions of animals are not subjected to an absolute
necessity, but that animals are, in a certain degree,


4.30 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAINé


susceptible of education, partly by the organ in
question, and principally by the faculties situated in
the whole of the forehead. | | |

It already results from what I have said, that the
name educability is bad. Besides, every faculty may
be educated, that is, exercised or directed. What
is then the special faculty of this organ, and its
sphere of activity? Persons endowed with this fa.
culty in a high degree are attentive to all that hap-
pens around them, to every object, to every pheno-
menon, to every fact ; hence also to motions. ‘This
faculty neither learns the qualities of objects, nor
the details of facts; it knows only their existence.
The qualities of the objects, and the particularities
of the phenomena, are known by the assistance of
other organs. Besides, this faculty has knowledge
of all internal faculties, and acts upon them. It
wishes to know all by experience, consequently it
puts every other organ in action ; it wishes to hear;
see, smell, taste and touch, to know all arts and
sciences; it is fond of instruction, colleets facts;
and leads to practical knowledge. |

I call this faculty that of Individuality, because it


knows not only the external world in general, but


also each object in its individual capacity. This
organ is early developed in children, because they
are obliged to acquire knowledge of the external
world. By this faculty, children are attentive to
every object and fact, and in a short time they make
an immense number of observations. We consider
this organ as proved by facts. Its place ss already
indicated. |


431


XX. ORGAN OF FORM.


Dr. Gall sometimes speaks of an organ of the
sense of persons. He was desired to examine the
head of a young girl who had an extreme facility of
distinguishing and recollecting persons. He only
found in her the eyes pushed laterally outward, and
a squinting look. My manner of considering this
faculty is the following. The preceding faculty has
knowledge of the existence of external bodies. The
first quality, which our intellect considers in them,
is their form. Persons are particularly known by
their form. I therefore speak of this faculty in
general. Persons, endowed with it in a high de-
gree, are fond of seeing pictures, and if they make
collections, they collect portraits. Crystallography
is the result of this faculty. It seems to me that
the conception also of the smoothness and roughness
of bodies belongs to it. It is certain that vision and
touch are not sufficient to make us acquainted with
these qualities of bodies; they furnish only the im-
pressions, and an internal faculty forms these con-
ceptions. ‘There is no proportion between this fa-
culty and the perfection of both external senses.

Animals of the lower orders, as insects, know well
individuals of their kind and of their family; they
possess therefore the faculty in question. Honey-
bees distinguish the individuals of their’ own hive
from those of any other. Ina flock of sheep, the
young ones know their mother. Elephants and dogs
give very striking examples of this kind; they know


432 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


persons after having seen them a long time before.
The organ of form seems to be placed in the internal
angle of the orbit. If this part of the brain be
much developed, it pushes the eyeball toward the
external angle, that is, a little outward and down-
ward.—( Pl. XIII. fig. 2. XX.) According to the
external configuration of the heads of Chinese whom
Ihave seen in London, it seems to me, that this
part of the brain is much developed in them. This
organ, in order to be verified, requires still a great
number of observations.


XXII. ORGAN OF SIZE.


After the existence and figure of any body, the
mind considers its dimensions or size. ‘There is no
proportion either of the senses of feeling or seeing,
or of the other internal faculties, to this kind of con-
ceptions. The faculty of distinguishing form, for in-
stance, is not the same as the faculty of size, be-
cause there is an essential difference between the
idea of size and that of form. The form may be
the same and the size quite different, or the size the
same and the form very different. Moreover, one
kind of knowledge may exist without the other, and
there is no proportion between them. Nevertheless
these two organs seem to be near to each other
without being the same.


435


XXII. ORGAN OF WEIGHT.


In treating of the sense of feeling and of its
sphere of activity, I have ascertained that the ideas
of weight and existence, and of consistency, den-
sity, softness, and hardness, cannot be attributed to
this external sense. I admit a particular faculty for
conceptions of this kind. Its organ must be situated
in the neighbourhood of the organ of form and size.


XXIII. ORGAN OF COLOUR.


It is certain that the qualities of external bodies,
of which I have spoken, are the most essential to
them. The knowledge of these qualities is also
more important to man and animals than the faculty
which makes us acquainted with colour. In speak-
ing of vision, I have shown that vision is insufficient
to bestow excellency in colouring among painters.
It is true the eyes perceive the beams of light, and
they are affected agreeably or disagreeably by dif-
ferent modifications of light or by colours, but they
do not conceive the relations of different colours,
their harmony or discord, and they have no memory
ef them. In order to prove this assertion we need
only compare, in animals and man, the faculty of
perceiving light or vision with the faculty of con-
ceiving colours. I am not certain that animals are
destitute of the faculty of distinguishing colour,

2F


43 A PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


because they have no art of painting. For there is.


a great difference between producing a thing, and
being capable of perceiving it. Animals have the
senses of smell and taste, but they cannot produce
the enjoyments of these senses. In the same way it
is possible that they perceive different colours, and
their harmony or discord, without being capable of
painting.

Certain persons are almost destitute of the power
of perceiving colours. We know a family in which
ail the individuals distinguish only black and white.
Dr. Unzer, of Altona, could not perceive green
and blue. A boy, of Vienna, wished to become a
tailor, but he was obliged to leave this trade be-
cause he could not distinguish different colours.
There are many similar examples. These persons,
who do not perceive colours, have sometimes the
vision very acute, and they perceive the other qua-
lities of external bodies, as their size and form.
Thus, as in man the faculty of colouring is not in
proportion to the sense of sight, nor to the under-


standing in general, it seems evident that there. is @
some particular faculty which perceives the different


colours, recollects them, and judges of their rela-
tions. ‘This faculty is necessary to painters, dyers,
enamellers, and to all those who are occupied with
colours and their shades. It is by means of this


faculty that certain persons are so much charmed —


with flower gardens, and with enamelled meadows.
Its organ is placed in the midst of the arch of the
eyebrows. ‘The external sign of a greater develope-
ment of the organ of this faculty is a vaulted and


ORGAN OF SPACE. 435


round arch of the eyebrows.—(Pl. XIV. jig. 1.
XXIII.) This configuration gives to the face a
look of joviality and voluptuousness. In the Chinese, |
the orbitary arch is elevated in the midst, the eyes
are depressed, and it is known that they are very
fond of colours. This faculty is generally more
active in women than in men. Women are more
fond of colours than men, and they show this taste
even in their dresses. Some women acquire a certain
perfection in colouring, while in all other parts of
the arts they are surpassed by men. Their eye-
brows, accordingly, are more rounded than those of
men,


XXIV. ORGAN OF SPACE.


Dr. Gall had always good eyes, but he could not
again find places where he had been before, and
which he wished to discover. One of his fellow-
students had a surprising facility of recollecting
localities and particular places. ‘This young man,
called Scheidler, never lost any place where he had
discovered a bird’s nest, but always found it again
without having made any artificial marks. Gall, on
the contrary, could not find the places again, al-
though he was very attentive and had recourse to
artificial indications. As Gall formed various busts
in plaster, he moulded also his _ fellow-student
Scheidler, known to him by his excellent local
memory ; and he distinguished at the eyebrows, to-
ward the middle line of the forehead, a protuber-

2F2


4:36 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ance on each side which reached to the middle of
the forebead. He afterwards observed every person
endowed with a greater degree of this faculty. One
day Gall met, at Vienna, a woman who had this
organ extremely developed, so that her face was de-
formed by it. He spoke to her, and learned that
she had the greatest propensity to travel, that she
had left her parents, at Munich, solely in order to
see foreign countries, that she never lived long in
the same house, because she liked change of place,
and that her greatest pleasure consisted in travelling.

The pictures and busts of great astronomers,
navigators, and geographers, as of Newton, Cooke,
Columbus &c., present a great developement of this
organ.—( Pi. XIV. fig. 2. XXIV.) In the biogra-
phy of Cooke it is expressly said, that his frontal
sinuses were extremely prominent. This faculty
caused Columbus to seek for a new continent, and it
excites every zealous traveller. Bloede, of Dresden,
speaks of one who. had formerly been a miner,
known under the name of Augustus of Schneeberg,
because he was born in that town. This man, with
a kind of ridiculous eagerness which prevents him
from staying longer than one or two days at the
same place, runs every year over the greatest part
of Saxony, Lusatia, and Silesia. He has every day,
like migrating birds, a fixed station, and brings to
every landlord, who gives him relief, compliments
and salutations from all his friends; he begins to tell
all the details of his last journey, and speaks with the
greatest volubility, keeping his body immoveable
and his eyes shut. Bloede states, that this odd


ORGAN OF SPACE. 437


person has really two large and prominent protuber-
ances corresponding to those of this organ. At
Torgau, in Saxony, we saw a blind man in whom
this organ was much developed. This man told us
that he was fond of hearing geography and travels
spoken of, and that he often dreamed of foreign
countries. In one word, this organ has been proved.
in man by many thousand facts, and we have no
doubt of its existence.

Animals must be endowed with shia faculty.
Without it they would find neither their progeny
nor their dwellings, when obliged to leave them in
order to seek for food. This faculty is very active
in certain animals, while other are almost destitute
of it. This difference is not only perceptible in
different kinds of animals, but also in different indt-
viduals of the same kind. One dog, having scarcely
gone down stairs, loses the door of its dwelling,
while another finds its usual abode and master at an
enormous distance. A dog was transported in a
carriage from Vienna to Petersburg, and after six
months it returned to Vienna. Another dog was
transported from Vienna to London, and still he
found means to come back. He attached himselt
to a traveller in the packet-boat, and went with him
to Mentz, where he left him and returned to Vienna.
Another was carried from Lyons to Marseilles, em-
barked and conducted to Naples, but he came back
to Lyons by land. Another found again his former
master in Suabia, after having left his new master
in Hungary &c. Similar facts prove that those
persons are wrong who derive this faculty from the


438 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


sense of smell. None of the dogs, just mentioned
could discover any trace by smell. Besides dogs do
not always return the nearest way, but sometimes
make extraordinary turnings. Certainly the sense
of smell does not lead back pigeons which are
transported to the distance of twenty leagues and
more, confined in a sack and prevented from seeing
the country. It is the same with the falcon of Ice-
land: though it has been carefully confined, often
the first time it is sent against a heron, it ascends
vertically into the air, distinguishes its regions, and


takes the direction of the north. It is equally im-.


possible to maintain that this faculty is an attribute
of the eyes, because tiere is no proportion between
the energy of this faculty and that of vision. Hence
it must be attributed to some internal organization.
This faculty being innate, and being active by in-
ternal excitement, explains a phenomenon observed
in many animals. Certain animals, chiefly birds, as
swallows, storks, starlings, quails, nightingales &c.,
emigrate at certain periods of the year. These ani-
mals also come back, not only into the same climate
and into the same country, but to the same place, to
the same window, bush, chimney, or tree. ‘These
emigrations do not result from want of food alone.
It is true faculties are excited by, external wants,
and certain birds leave one country in order to seek
food elsewhere; but the faculties must exist before


they can be excited. Besides, every faculty may be.


active without being excited by an external want.
This is evident, because certain birds emigrate be-
fore food is wanting, and they come back before


ORGAN OF SPACE. 439


food is to be found. Moreover, if such birds be
confined to a cage, and fed abundantly, they be-
come unquiet at the periods of migration. It
may lastly be asked, why do not all birds leave their
ordinary dwelling when food is wanting! Hence it
is necessary to admit an internal and innate faculty
which produces all these phenomena.

It remains to be determined what: is the special
faculty of this organ, and the sphere of its activity ¢
This faculty makes the traveller, geographer, land-
scape-painter ; it recollects localities, judges of sym-
metry ; it measures space and distance, and gives no-
tions of perspective. Hence it seems to me that it is
the faculty of space in general. As soon as we have
the conception of the existence of any body and its
qualities, it is necessary that it should occupy a
place. This faculty conceives the places occupied
by the external bodies. It makes space not only
known, it is also fond of this kind of knowledge,
and explains all the phenomena of which If have
spoken. The place of its organ has already been
designated. |

It does not seem to me that space is a mere form
of our understanding, as Kant has maintained. It is
true the conception of space cannot be attributed
to the five external senses, but space certainly exists
in the external world. The conception of causality
also cannot be attributed to the five external senses,
but the relations and succession of phenomena,
called cause and effect, exist in nature. The same
idea prevails in respect to all categories established
‘by Kant, and relative to external subjects: internal


440 | PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


faculties constitute them, and they are adapted to
external bodies, or, in other terms, all conceptions
of external objects are the result of internal facul-
ties which are adapted, by creation, to the external
world. |


XXV. ORGAN OF ORDER.


It seems to me that there is a particular faculty
which makes us conceive order. We may have
some idea of different objects without order. The
mind being acquainted with external objects, their
qualities, and the places they occupy, considers also
the order in which they are ranged one by the side
of another. Order then may be applied to different
faculties, to form, size, weight, colour. Its organ
is probably situated outward, but not far from the
organs of size and space. Is cleanliness dependent
on the same faculty as order?


a


XXVI. GRGAN OF TIME.


The faculty of time also seems to me a quite dis-
tinct faculty: it may exist without order and num-
ber. Yesterday, to-day, to-morrow, the day after
to-morrow &c., constitute a succession without any
regard to the number of days. There is more con-
nexion between order and number than between
time and number, and there is more connexion be-
tween time and order than between time and num-


ORGAN OF NUMBER. 441


ber. Order is more in relation to objects, and time
to events or facts. The conception of time seems
to be higher in the scale, and its organ occupies a
higher place in the brain; the organ of order, the
middle, and that of number, the lowest and the
most outward. ‘The mimickry of time and number
proves indeed that the organs of these faculties
occupy different places, and that the seat of the
organ of time is higher than that of the organ of
number. We raise up the eyes in thinking of time,
and we look downward and outward in ciphering.
I shall afterwards speak of a faculty which examines
the relations between cause and effect. This faculty
supposes a succession of phenomena, and cannot,
in place, be far from the organ of succession or of
time. It seems indeed that the organ of time is
situated between the organs of individuality, space,
order, tune, and cause.


XXVII. ORGAN OF NUMBER.


Some individuals remarkable for their great talent
of calculating excited the attention of Dr. Gall.
There are children who excel in this faculty. A
child of seven years of age, called Devaux, was
extremely delighted with running about the fairs,
and making calculations for the merchants. A boy
of thirteen years of age, born at St. Poelten, not
far from Vienna, excelled his school-fellows in a
surprising manner. He learnt easily an immense

I


44.2 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


quantity of numbers, made the most complicated —
arithmetical operations from memory, and very soon
found their result. Mr. Mantelli, a counsellor of
the Court of Appeals at Vienna, took a particular
pleasure in the solution of arithmetical problems ;
and his son of five years of age did nothing but cal-
culate during the whole of the day. In such in-
dividuals the arch of the eye-brows is much de-
pressed or elevated at the external angle of the
orbit.—(Pl. XV. fig. 2. XXV.) This sign is the
result of a greater developement of the part of the
brain situated behind this place. The portraits and _
busts of great calculators present the external sign
of this faculty, as Newton, Kuler, Kaestner, Je-
didiah Buxton, Pitt, &c.—(P/. XV.) We have an
infinity of observations upon this organ, and we
consider it as demonstrated. |

Certain races of negroes make five the basis of
their enumeration, that is, they count only as far as
five by simple terms, whereas we Europeans proceed
as far as ten. All their numbers after five are com-
pound, whereas ours are not compoud till we have
passed the number ten; in short, while our terms,
six, seven &c. are simple, they terminate their sim-
ple numbers at five, and say five-one, five-two,
five-three &c.—Negroes in general do not excel in
this faculty. Accordingly the heads of negroes are
very. narrow at the place of this organization.
However in certain individuals among them, the
faculty of reckoning is considerable and more encr-
getic than in a great number of Enropeans.

i am not certain whether this faculty exists im


ORGAN OF NUMBER. 44.3


animals. It is said that a bitch perceives if one of
its puppies be taken away; but it is not evident that
she counts her young ones. She may perceive by’
the faculties of individuality and form, that this in-
dividual is wanting. George le Roi has observed,
that magpies count three; for if we construct a hut
in the neighbourhood of a tree, upon which a
magpie has placed its nest, and if three persons
enter into this hut the magpie is not deceived ; it
does not come to its nest before the three persons
have left the hut; but if more than three persons
enter, it can no more reckon their number, and can-
not compare the number of those who are gone in,
with that of those who are gone out. Dupont de
Nemours, however, thinks that magpies can count
nine.

What is the special faculty of this organ, and
its sphere of activity? All that which concerns
unity and plurality—number—seems to belong to
this faculty. Hence, its object is calculation in
general. Gall often calls this organ that of mathe-
matics, but I think that this faculty only calculates :
therefore, arithmetic, algebra, and logarithms be-
long to it, but the other branches of mathematics, as
geometry, are the result not merely of this faculty
which however may be applied to different faculties
as to form, size, colour &c. c


44


XXVIII. ORGAN OF TUNE.


It is with the organ of tune in respect to the
ears, as with the organ of colour in respect to the
eyes. ‘he ear hears sounds, and it is affected by
them agreeably or disagreeably ; but the ear has no
recollection of tones, nor does it judge of their re-
lations. In treating of the sense of hearing, I have de-
monstrated, that on the ears the origin of music does
not depend. Besides the above-mentioned proofs that
the ear is not the organ of musical perception, there
exists a direct proof that an internal organ is necessary
to the manifestations of this faculty. Sometimes in —
epileptic fits, in delirium, and syncope, certain in-
dividuals sing continually and with great precision.
This faculty then is alone active, while in such cases —
the functions of all the other faculties are deranged.
A greater developement of this organ enlarges the
lateral parts of the forehead—(P/. XV. fig. 2. 7
XXVIII.) Its form varies according to the di-
rection and form of its convolutions. In Gluck,
Hadyn, and others, this organ had a pyramidal
form; in Mozart, Viotti, Zumstey, Dussek, Cre-
scentini, and others, the external corners of the
forehead are enlarged but rounded.

The heads and skulls of birds which sing, and of
those which do not sing, and the heads of the dil-
ferent individuals of the same kind which have a
greater or less disposition to sing, present a great —
difference at the place where this organ is situated.
The heads of males, for instance, and those of fe-


/


ORGAN OF LANGUAGE. 44.5


males of the same kind of singing-birds, are easily
distinguished by the different developement of this
organ. In short, we consider this organ as estab-
lished by the immense number of observations which
demonstrate its existence.

There is a striking analogy between colours and
tones, and their respective organs. Colours are
perceived by the eyes; sounds by the ears. There
are primitive colours and shadows; and such also
is the case with tones. ‘There is an agreeable suc-
cession of colours as of tones, that is, there are
colours and tones which agree with one another,
and others which do not. Colours must harmonize,
and tones must be concordant. Lastly, the con-
cordance of colours and tones may be considered »
by the faculties of order and number. In this man-
ner, colours and tones are calculated, and thus are
the principles of painting and music established.


XXIX. ORGAN OF LANGUAGE.


Dr. Gall, at thirteen years of age, was vexed
that while several of his school-fellows learned by
heart even things which they did not understand with
great facility, he had the utmost difficulty in en-
graving in his memory a less number of words. On
thé other hand, however, he excelled them in the
powers of reflexion and reasoning. He afterwards
observed, that in those individuals who had so great
a facility of learning by heart, the eyes were very


446 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


prominent. This observation was the commence-
ment of all his future inquiries into psychology.
Studying medicine he learned that the functions of
the brain are not known, and at the same time ob-
serving that great eyes indicate a good verbal me-
mory, he thought, that perhaps different other fa-
culties might be distinguished by the external form
of the head. He established an organ of words,
the greater degree of developement of which: is
denoted by the prominence of the eyes. Some-
times the eyes are not only prominent (P/. XVI.
feel: XXIX.), but also depressed downward, so
that the under eye-lid presents a sort of roll, or ap-
pears swollen.—(Pl. XVI. jig. 2. XXIX.) Such
persons are fond of philology, that is, they like to —
study the spirit of different languages. Gall speaks —
of these two configurations as of two different —
organs under the name, organ of words, and organ
of languages.

It is true that some persons learn easily the spirit of
different languages without having a great memory
of words, and that other persons easily acquire
words without knowing the spirit of any language. —
It seems however to me, that the memory of words
‘and philology in general, are grounded upon the
same special faculty. I shall afterwards show that
the judgment and memory of any faculty are not
different degrees of activity, but that judgment 1s
only a mode of activity, and that it may exist
‘without great memory of the respective faculty. It
seems also to me, that the organ of words must
have its laws as well. as the organ of colour, tune,


ORGAN OF LANGUAGE. 447


and other faculties; and these laws of words con-
stitute the spirit of language. I am satisfied of the
truth of this opinion, because the spirit of all lan-
guages is essentially the same, just as the spirit of
all kinds of music; that is, the laws or principles
of music, painting, and language, are constant and
every where the same. Music, painting, lan-
guages &c., are only modified in different nations —
according to the modifications in the structure of
the organs, and the combinations of these faculties
with others. I therefore admit only one organ of
language.

Before it is possible to understand the special
faculty of this organ, it is necessary to examine the
question so often treated by different authors, viz.
what is the influence of signs upon ideas? Accord-
ing to many philosophers and to the most common
Opinion, signs may produce ideas. I think with
St. Martin, that it is more reasonable to put the
opposite question: what is the influence of ideas
upon signs? The Institute of France has given the
prize to him who developed the influence of signs
upon ideas. In speaking of the influence of signs
upon ideas or vice versd, the question ought to be
more distinctly stated. It should be determined
whether artificial signs produce ideas? I do not
think so; on the contrary, I am convinced that no
arbitrary sign produces any idea, but that ideas pre-
cede, and that arbitrary signs follow; that without
ideas there would not be any arbitrary sign; and
that without having had the idea before, the ar-
bitrary sign has no signification. We have an evi-


MAS PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


dent proof of this in persons blind from birth. The
word red, green, and the names of other colours, do
not produce any conception of colour.

First, I must explain what may be called an idea.
Some philosophers call idea, according to the etymo-
logy of the word, every sensation which presents an
image. But in this sense there are very few ideas;
even the sensations of the five external senses would
not all deserve this name ; for savours, odours, tones,
and colours, do not present any image. Other phi-
losophers call idea every sensation produced by
means of the five external senses. Others again un-
derstand by this expression every sensation produced
both by external and internal impressions. More-
over, they speak of ideas as consisting of two kinds,
simple and compound. ‘The first kind of ideas are
acquired by the external senses; the second are
the result of reflexion, as abstract and general ideas.
I propose to call ideas the conceptions only of the
knowing faculties, and to call reflection every function
of those faculties which compare, and of which
I shall afterwards speak. Now the internal faculties
may be active by means of the organic apparatus ;
and a being may have an inclination, a sentiment,


an idea, or reflection, without manifesting them


by any sign whatever. But man and animals are
destined for society; consequently it is necessary


they should communicate and understand their sen-


sations, ideas and reflections; and this communica-
tion can take place only by signs.


These signs are natural, and arbitrary or arti-.


ficial. The natural signs are conformable to every


ORGAN OF LANGUAGE. AAG


faculty. AH beings endowed with the same faculty
manifest its activity essentially in the same manner,
and all beings endowed with the same faculty under-
stand its natural manifestations. But several beings,
all endowed with different faculties, could not com-
municate their sensations. ‘This law is common to
man and animals. Animals, which have a certain fa-
eulty in common with man, understand his natural
manifestations. ‘The dog, tor instance, perfectly un-
derstands the signs of anger in his master, because
the dog possesses the faculty which produces anger ;
but the dog will never understand the natural signs
of the adoration of God. Hence, it is also obvious
that individuals of the same kind understand these
natural signs better, if the respective faculties are
ef equal strength. |

This natural language is also known under the
name of mimickry. I shall afterwards treat of it
with more detail. Here I mention only in general,
that every faculty, being active, involuntarily pro-
duces particular signs, that is, the natural language
common to man and animals as far as their faculties
are common. It is true these natural signs produce
the respective feelings. On this account their in-
fluence is of great importance in teaching the deaf
and dumb; for by means of this natural language
they are acquainted with the expressions of the va-
rious internal affections. Itis, notwithstanding, to be
observed, that the natural signs communicate princi-
pally the propensities and sentiments, and in_a less
degree the different conceptions and reflections of the
understanding. Natural signs indicate the activity of


2G


450 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the different intellectual faculties, but not their de-
terminate actions. ‘These are indicated by the
second sort of signs, which are not understood be-
fore man and animals have had the relative deter-
minate ideas. |

The second sort of signs are arbitrary or arti-
ficial. I have mentioned that natural language is
common to animals and man; artificial language is
a prerogative of mankind. This language is the
result of the superior intellectual faculties, which
contrive and procure the enjoyments of all the
other faculties, and of which I shall afterwards treat.
In order to communicate his sensations and ideas to
others, man makes more use of the artificial language
than of the natural, though natural language always
and involuntarily accompanies the artificial. As
the natural language is expressed principally by
voice and muscular motion, so these parts present
the most natural and most convenient means of
employing artificial signs. The voice is the most


commodious; but if these means cannot be con-


veniently used, as in addressing the deaf, or per-
sons absent, or at a distance, we must have re-
course to other means, as to gestures for the deaf,


and to those in sight, but not within hearing, and


to written signs for absent persons. How little the
artificial vocal signs are understood, is evident from
different languages. If we wish to communicate
certain sensations or ideas to any other person, and
to him alone, we are obliged to choose arbitrary
and secret signs—signs which he alone understands.
Hence artificial signs do not at all produce -by


ORGAN OF LANGUAGE. ASTI


themselves any idea, but only in consequence of an
arbitrary agreement.

The superior intellectual faculties form the concep-
tion of producing artificial signs: therefore the sensa-
tions, ideas, and reflections must exist, before arbi-
trary signs can be invented in order to indicate them.
It follows, moreover, that signs are multiplied and
modified according to the sensations and concep-
tions of the mind. Hence there are as many sorts
of signs as there are different faculties. There are
words’ or signs to indicate individual objects, that is;
nouns and verbs. Other words denote the qualities
of the substantives; and in certain languages the
adjectives expressed are concordant to the substan-
tives. The signs 6f the qualities are susceptible
of different degrees. As there is a difference be-
tween the sexes in living beings, the signs indicate
this difference, and admit genders. ‘The number of
objects is also considered, sometimes the number
alone, sometimes number combined with order,
and sometimes with order and time, as one, two,
three &c.; or first, second, third &c.; or first
time, second time, third time &c. ‘There are yet
other words which may be substituted for sub-
stantives, whether persons or other objects, namely,
pronouns, which are either personal, possessive, de--
monstrative or relative. Other signs denote any
state of the subject spoken of. The subject may
be a person or a thing, and its state may be active,
passive, or neuter. This state may be affirmed or
denied by certain terms in a positive (indicative) ;
¢onditional (conjunctive or subjunctive); or impe-

262


45% PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


rative manner. This state may be, moreover, con-
sidered in respect to time—whether it exist at pre-
sent, or whether it be past, or whether it will take
place at a future period. ‘The words denoting the
state of the subject are called verbs. There are
yet other signs which explain the verbs :—a great
number of them are analogous to those which in-
dicate the qualities of the substantives. They denote
places, times, numbers, quantities &c. There are
also particles which indicate the different operations
of the mind. Some particles denote any cause;
some, any connexion or conjunction; others, any
condition; and others again, any time, any order,
any sudden emotion of the mind, (interjections).
Thus there are artificial signs for all the operations
of the mind. And if all signs may be reduced, in
respect to their etymology, to nouns and verbs,
their significations must be different, and on this
account the terminations have been changed.
_. Now there is some particular faculty which learns
all these particular signs produced by the superior
intellectual faculties, according to the activity of
all faculties. ‘This faculty which learns the arbitrary
signs is quite different from those which produce
them, and from those which produce the sensations.
There is no proportion between these different
faculties. Animals do not at all produce, yet they
Jearn, the significations of arbitrary signs, as far as
they are endowed with the respective sensations:
tame animals learn in every country the arbitrary
language of their masters; they ‘learn even the sig-
nifications of different sounds of different languages.


ORGAN OF LANGUAGE. 45%


Some persons excel in one kind and not in another
of these faculties. It is possible to have many ideas
without possessing the faculty of learning the ar-
bitrary signs which express them, and to know
many words without having many ideas.

Finally, in order to speak, besides the inclina-
tions, sentiments, ideas, or reflections, and the
words or vocal signs which express them, we must
possess the organs of voice, and the sense of
hearing. I have already stated that arbitrary
language is more necessary to the manifestations of
the intellectual faculties than to those of the pro-
pensities and sentiments. The organ of language
accordingly seems to be placed in the midst of the
knowing faculties, and it occupies a transverse
situation.—( Pl. I. fig 1. XXIX.)

It appears that this organ is composed of dif-
ferent parts, as is the case with other organs.
Some persons forget easily proper names, while
they recollect the words which denote the qualities
of external bodies. Other persons lose, by disease,
the memory of proper names while they preserve
the memory of words which indicate the qualities
of the objects. One Lereard, of Marseilles, after
having received a blow from a foil on the orbit,
lost entirely the memory of names; sometimes he
did not recollect the names of his intimate friends,
and of his father, as he asserted in a letter written
to Gall, to ask his advice. Cuvier, in the historical
eulogium on Broussonet, pronounced at the In-
stitute of France, the 4th of January, 1808, men-
tions, that this famous botanist, after having re-


ASA PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


covered from an apoplectic fit, never could recollect
proper names nor substantives, though he had re-
covered his prodigious memory with respect to
other objects. He knew plants, their figure, leaves
and colours, he recollected the adjectives, but he
could not recover their names.

Galil thinks that animals, as monkies, orang”
outangs &c. want the power of speech, in conse-
quence of their being destitute of this faculty. It
seems to me, that animals have this faculty in some
degree; they learn to repeat arbitrary signs, and
understand them as far as they have the respective
sensations; but I think that animals want speech
for the same reason that they do not make fire,
have no clothes, or cannot produce food. It is cer-
tain that the organs of voice are not the cause why
animals have no artificial language. For some ani-
mals pronounce words and even whole phrases, nay
they understand them, and yet they do not produce
any artificial sign. | | |

Certain children who are half idiots do not
speak, though they do many things like reasonable
persons, and manifest sometimes a great deal of
cunning. ‘Their parents, relations, and even phy-
sicians, cannot believe in their partial imbecility.
Though such children be not deaf, though they
can pronounce various words, yet, they do not
speak. Physicians often look for the cause of this
in the organs of voice, as in the tongue, amygdaloid
glands, palate &c.; but these parts are never the
cause of the want of language. It is true that the
organs of voice produce sounds, but they are not


ORGAN OF LANGUAGE. 455


the origin or the cause of vocal language. Certain
persons deprived of the tongue have yet continued
to speak.* It is evident that their pronunciation
could not be so distinct as that of other persons,
they could not pronounce certain letters ; but they
felt the necessity of speaking, or of communicating
their sensations and ideas, and they actually spoke.
On the contrary, these half idiots pronounce single
words very well, but they cannot maintain any dis-
course; they cannot keep up their attention, nor
combine their expressions. These children are
destitute of the faculty of learning arbitrary signs,
as well as of the intellectual faculty of inventing
them.

The occasional cause of this partial imbecility is
two-fold. It may be a slight hydrocephalus which
distends the brain and pushes the globes of the
eyes forward, in the same way as a very consider-
able developement of the cerebral parts situated
behind the orbits. Hence, these children present
the same external mark, which in the healthy state
of the brain denotes a great strength of this fa-
culty. It must however be observed, that this cir-
cumstance does not prove the impossibility of dis-
covering and knowing this organ, as certain ad-
versaries of our doctrine have maintained: it pre-
sents only a difficulty which must be removed. The


* Bartholin speaks of this in a boy who lost his tongue by suppu-
ration, produced from the small pox :—Huxham saw the same in a
girl :—Scheak, Tulpius, Richter &c., speak of similar facts. There
is also a dissertation by Aurran, De Femine Elinguis Loquela. Ar-
gentor. 1766.


456 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


state of the whole organization must direct our
judgment. The cause of the second sort of this
partial imbecility is some real defect of organiza-
tion: the cerebral part affected with this faculty is
either wanting or very little developed. Such in-
dividuals never speak. The eyes, instead of being
pushed forward, lie deeply in the orbits: the roof
of the orbits, instead of being flat, is very convex
toward the interior of the skull. Gall has in his
collection two skulls of children who had this im-
becility. The roofs of the orbits present also this
convexity. He possesses also the skull of a woman
of forty years of age who never was capable of
learning any language.* Thus I admit only one
organ of language. Its respective faculty produces
similar phenomena in respect to languages or ar-
bitrary signs, as every other intellectual faculty does
in respect to external impressions. It makes us _
acquainted with arbitrary signs, has memory of _
them, judges of their relations, and produces a pro-
pensity to these functions. |


* What is to be done with such children? Those of the first
kind ought in every respect to be strengthened by physical educa-
tion, by not employing too incessantly their feelings and intel-
lectual faculties. Sometimes with age the fibres of the brain be-
come stronger; they resist the pressure of the water accumulated
in the cavities of the brain. Too early instruction is in all cases
hurtful, but it is most so to this kind of children. The disease of
the second kind of these children is incurable.


457


Genus I].—Reflecting Faculties.
XXX. ORGAN OF COMPARISON.


Dr. Gall observed various persons, who, in every
conversation, had recourse to examples, similitudes,
and analogies, in order to convince others; and sel-
dom to reasoning and philosophical arguments. In
them he found, in the midst of the superior part of
the forehead, an elevation which presented the form
of a reversed pyramid, and he named this organ
according to its functions, organ of analogy.—
(Pl. XVII. fig. 1. XXX.) This organ is developed
in all popular preachers beloved by the crowd,
who speak of examples and parables, and who
choose their similitudes from facts which are gene-
rally known. Gall possesses the skulls of two
Jesuits who had this faculty in a high degree. In-
deed, in order to persuade and to affect, the speaker
or orator must speak by analogy: he must bring
spiritual things near to terrestrial objects, and com-
pare them with each other; he must imitate the
manner of the preaching of Christ.

The activity of this faculty is very important. It
‘compares the sensations and ideas of all the other
faculties; points out their difference, analogy, si-
militude or identity. It compares, for instance, the
functions of the five external senses with the func-
tions of the internal faculties, and therefore it often


458 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


happens, that the same vocal signs or expressions
are applied to both kinds of functions, so that the
same expressions are sometimes positive, and some-
times figurative. For this reason the language of
every nation proves whether this organ is much or
little developed in the greatest number of its indi-
viduals. If they have this faculty in a high degree,
they are fond of figurative language.

This faculty attaches us to comparison without
determining its kinds: every one chooses his ana-
logies from his knowledge, or from the sphere of
activity of his other faculties. He who has the fa-
culty of space in a high degree, derives thence his
examples ; another from figure, or from any other
faculty in which he excels. The name and place of
this organ are already indicated.


XXXI. ORGAN OF CAUSALITY.


Dr. Gall remarked, that persons who like meta-
physical study have the superior part of the fore-
head much developed and prominent in a hemi-
spherical form, as Mendelsohn, Kant, (Pi. XVII.
jig. 2,) Fichte, and others. It is also remarkable
that the ancient artists have given to Jupiter Capi-
tolinus a forehead more prominent than to any
other antique head. It seems therefore that they
had observed that the developement of the forehead
has a relation to great understanding. Gall ascribes
to this hemispherical configuration the love of me-


ORGAN OF CAUSALITY. 459


taphysics. He allows that he does not know its
sphere of activity.

I must object, first, that in this configuration are
involved both the middle and lateral parts, and the
special faculty of the lateral cannot be the same
as that of the middle parts. It happens indeed that
sometimes the middle, sometimes the lateral parts
are much developed. Moreover, the name meta-
physics does not designate a special faculty. Hence
I ask, what is the special faculty of the lateral parts
‘To this end we must examine what is the most
active faculty in metaphysicians ? ‘Their object is to
dive into the nature of every thing, even into the
nature of God, and into the immortality of the
soul. Though I think with Kant and others, that
it is impossible to penetrate by reasoning to the
bottom of these inquiries, it may however be ex-
amined what special faculty endeavours to do this ?
Metaphysicians endeavour to explain phenomena,
but in order to do so, it is necessary to examine
the relations between cause and effect. Lven phi-
losophers who explain natural phenomena by rea-
soning admit some cause, and explain the rest by
mental induction according to the supposed cause.
Hence it seems to me that this special faculty
examines: the causes, considers the relations be-
tween cause and efiect, and always prompts men
to ask, Why.

Thus the faculty of individuality makes us ac-
quainted with objects and facts ; the faculty of com-
parison points out their identity, analogy, or dif-
ference ; and this faculty desires to know the causes


460 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


of all events. Consequently, these three faculties
together form systems, draw conclusions, inductions,
or corollaries, point out principles and laws, and
constitute the true philosophical understanding.
The faculty of individuality must furnish a sufficient
number of facts in order to permit the two other
faculties to draw consequences and establish ge-
neral principles. The too great activity of this


faculty, or the mania of explaining, produces abuses, —


and has done great harm to natural knowledge, |


principally to physics and to medicine. It is evident


that it is impossible to know final causes which —
must exist: the only thing we can know is the suc- —
cession of phenomena, and if one uniformly suc- —


ceed another, the preceding is considered as the


cause, and the following as the effect. This latter :
kind of mental operation is manifested by the de-—
velopement of those convolutions which occupy the _


upper, middle and lateral parts of the forehead.


XXXII. ORGAN OF WIT.


Persons who are called witty, who write like
Sterne, Voltaire, Piron, John Paul &c., have the
superior external parts of the forehead elevated.
(Pie RVI jig. + 1. XXXII.) Jest, raillery,


mockery, ridicule, irony &c., belong to this faculty.


It is asserted that wit consists in comparing the
resemblance and dissemblance of objects; but the
two preceding faculties compare also ; and com-


6


ORGAN OF IMITATION. 461


paring in a philosophical way is quite different from
comparing in the witty manner. ‘Thus the essence
of this faculty consists in its peculiar manner of
comparing, which always excites gaiety and laughter.


XXXIII. ORGAN OF IMITATION.


There is in the brain an organ of a faculty for
which Gall never would have thought of seeking.
It seems to be a faculty suz generis. One of Gall’s
acquaintance, Mr. Hannibal, governor to the young
counts Festerditsh at Vienna, possessed the faculty
of imitating in a surprising degree; he was a per-
fect actor. He desired Gall to examine his head,
because he had a transverse furrow in the midst of
it. Gall found the hollow place; but he at the
same time observed before it, at the superior part of
the forehead, a considerable elevation of a semi-
globular form. Sometime after, Gall observed in
the institute for deaf and dumb persons, an indi-
vidual, who, the first time he put on a mask at the
carnival, imitated perfectly well all the persons who
frequented the institution. Gall found the con-
ficuration of the upper fore-part of his head the
same as that of Mr. Hannibal. In comparing many
persons endowed with this faculty at Vienna, and
during our travels, we have ‘always found that the
developement of this organ coincides with the
energy of the faculty of imitating. We therefore
admit this organ as demonstrated. ‘Thus persons


462 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


endowed with a higher degree of developement of
this cerebral part, imitate with great precision the
gestures, voice, manners, and in general all the na-
tural manifestations of man and animals. ‘They like
also to be actors. —(P/. XVIII. fig. 2. XXXIIT.)

It seems to me that this faculty has a great sphere
of activity. This organ is in general more de-
veloped in children than in adult persons.. It is also
known that children learn a great number of things
by imitation. They do what they see done by
others; they repeat what they hear told. Is it not
the same in a great number of adults? Those who
possess this organ much developed do not only
mention a fact or an action, but they also imitate
as far as possible the gestures and voice of the per«
sons and animals they describe.

It is difficult to determine whether, and in what
degree, animals possess this faculty. Some birds
imitate the song of others. Monkies and apes do
various things like man; but do they act by imita-
tion, or because they have certain faculties in com-
mon with man? I think that the latter is often the
case. In the same way the imitation of singing
birds may be explained by the faculty of tone, which
perceives, recollects, and repeats the song of other
birds.


RECAPITULATION.


In this chapter I have mentioned the particular
organs which are ciseovered, and those which are
still to be verified or pointed out. I have shown
the importance of determining every special faculty


RECAPITULATION. 463


and its sphere of activity, a point which Gall
hitherto has too much neglected. I think that t
have specified various faculties, and proved the ne-
cessity of admitting others. I have divided these
special faculties into two orders—and each order
into two genera. The first genus of feelings con-
tains the propensities—amativeness, philoprogeni-
tiveness, inhabitiveness, adhesiveness, combative-
ness, destructiveness, constructiveness, covetiveness,
and secretiveness. To the second genus belong
self-love, approbation, cautiousness, benevolence,
veneration, hope, ideality, righteousness, and de-
terminateness. The first genus of the intellectual
consists in the faculties of individuality, form, size,
weight, colour, space, order, time, number, tune,
and language. In the second genus of intellectual
faculties I spoke of comparison, ‘causality, and
wit. The last faculty I treated of,—imitation,—be-
longs to none of the four genera, and acts upon
them all. I have considered in every special fa-
culty the necessity of its existence, its use and
abuse, and the result of its inactivity. Finally, I
have indicated the situation of every organ. <A
double objection against this kind of considerations
is made. Some adversaries object that there are
too many organs; others say, that there are not
enough. ‘Those who find the organs too multiplied
must know that every organ is admitted by the
same proofs, namely, by those which establish the
plurality of the organs, and that it is verified by
experience. ‘The independence of one organ is
neither more nor less certain than that of any other


464: PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


organ, and if any proofs be admitted in respect to
one organ, they must be agreed to in respect to all
other organs. ‘Those who think that we do not admit
organs enough, must consider that every faculty
may be. applied to an infinite number of things; for
instance, seeing is always seeing, but what an in-
finite number of objects may be seen? Hearing is
always hearing, and so on as to every external
sense. It is the same with the internal faculties.
Constructing is always constructing, but what an in-
finite number of objects may be constructed &c.?
Moreover, it is to be observed that a great number
of actions (not a great number of faculties) result
from the combination of different faculties; and
therefore it is not surprising to observe so many
effects produced by so small a number of them.
Are not twenty-four letters of the alphabet suf
ficient to compose all imaginable words? ‘The
muscles of the face are not very numerous, yet
the face of almost every individual presents. dif
ferent. physiognomical traces. There are a few
primitive sounds or colours; there are only ten
signs of numbers; and what an infinite number
of combinations do not each of these present?
There are probably thirty-three special faculties.
Now if we consider all possible combinations of
thirty-three faculties and their modifications, it —
would be indeed surprising if we did not observe a
such a number of modified functions. Consequently,
we do not multiply the organs any more than is
necessary, but we follow determinate principles im
establishing each of them.


465


CHAPTER IX.


ON THE DIFFERENT MODES OF ACTION OF THE SPECIAL
FACULTIES OF THE MIND.


Arter having determined the special faculties of
the mind and their respective organs, I shall ex-
amine the different modes of action of every fa-
culty, a kind of consideration which Dr. Gall has
quite overlooked. The modes of action of the fa-
culties of the mind are either general, that is, they
may take place in every faculty; or they are com-
mon to several faculties ; or they are proper to some
one special faculty. |

The general modes of action which may be ap-
plied to all faculties of the mind ; to propensities,
sentiments, knowing and reflecting faculties, are
the following. Every faculty of the mind may be
in a state of less or greater inactivity. There are
then different expressions in order to designate these
degrees; as heaviness, indifference, laziness, neg-
ligence, apathy. The complete want of activity 18
called imbecility, if the faculty never existed ; fa-
tuity, if the faculty have been suppressed by
any disease. Faculties, being active, may manifest

more or less energy; and there are various ex-
pressions for denoting this state. To like, for in-
stance, is a general expression; for every faculty,
being active, likes, or produces some inclination,


2H


466 PHYSIOLOGY ‘OF THE BRAIN.


some propensity, or desire. ‘Tranquillity and pa-
tience designate a less active state of the faculties:
impatience, on the contrary, denotes a very active.
state. One may. be quiet and tranquil in respect
to one object, and impatient in respect to another,
Temperance indicates the best degree of activity of
every faculty ;. intemperance is a too high degree of
activity. Other expressions which designate the
different degrees of activity of every faculty are in-
clination, desire, longing, want, ardour, passion,
and, in the diseased state, irresistibility. Here it is
to be observed that, according to our opinion,
passion denotes only the highest degree of ‘activity
of every faculty; this expression then must not be —
confounded with that of affection, which I shall —
speak of immediately. ‘Thus the first kind of gene |
ral modes of action of every faculty consists in the
different degrees of activity, from imbecility to
passion and irresistibility. |

The second kind of general modes of action is, —
that every faculty may be put in action in an har-—
monious or unharmonious manner, that is, every fa- —
culty may be agreeably or disagreeably affected.
Affections then are only modes of action of the @
special faculties, and not at all special faculties
themselves. ‘They are divided into two classes,
agreeable and disagreeable, and every class admits
of different degrees. The different degrees of the
agreeable affections are called pleasure, joy, and
ecstasy. ‘Those of the disagreeable affections are
termed pain, grief, and misery. According to these
considerations it is easy to rectify the confusion of


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 467


ideas and expressions observed in different writings
in respect to the affections and passions. I have al-
ready mentioned that passion ought to indicate only
the highest degree of activity of every faculty. The
word affection, which sometimes is employed as
synonymous with passion, which sometimes desig-
nates certain special faculties, as pride, ambition,
friendship, hope &c., and very often the different
modes of action of the different sentiments, as
shame, anger, fear, fright, terror &c., indicates, ac«
cording to us and according to its etymology, only
the modes of being affected. Hence affections are
only modes of feeling, and belong particularly to
certain propensities wid sentiments.

The affections of certain propensities and senti-
ments may also be divided into simple and com-
pound. Simple affections, for instance, are—anger,
of the propensity to fight ;—fury and rage, of the
propensities to fight and destroy ;—sorrow,. anxiety,
anguish, fear, terror, and melancholy, of cautious-
ness ;—pretension, pride, contempt, and disdain, of
self-love ;—compassion, of benevolence ;—contri-
tion, repentance, and remorse, of justice. ‘Che com-
pound affections are jealousy, of which egotism
forms the basis, and which is modified according to
the other organs which desire; envy, which is jea-
Jousy without benevolence; shame, the result of
love of approbation combined with justice; and
consternation and perplexity the result of much
cautiousness, much love of approbation, and a
propensity to fight &c. |

In respect to the intellectual faculties there are

2H 2


468 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


also some expressions, as to learn, know, think, and
to be attentive, which belong to every one of them.
Some other common expressions designate the dif-
ferent degrees of their activity, as perception, me-
mory, and imagination. Gall speaks of four degrees
of activity in every organ of the brain: of percep-
tion; memory, recollection or remembrance ; judg-
ment; and imagination. Gall admits perception
in every organ. I make use of the name perception
only in respect to the intellectual faculties, and of
the name sensation in respect to every faculty of
animal life. very faculty which has consciousness
has sensation, and every faculty which perceives
impressions made upon it has perception; for in-
stance, any being which feels hunger or physical
love has the sensation of hunger or physical love;
and any being endowed with the faculty of tone, or
which is capable of perceiving tones, has perception


of them as soon as its faculty acts upon them. Thus


perception is a common expression of the intellec-
tual faculties.

It is the same with memory or recollection. Me-
mory is the reproduction of perceptions. Propen-
sities and sentiments cannot be reproduced volun-
tarily, consequently it is impossible that we have
any memory of them. It is only possible to re-
member that they have existed, for instance, that
we have been hungry, that we have felt the propen-
sity to physical love &c. But it is possible to renew
the perceptions of the intellectual faculties, for in-
stance, the impressions of form, size, colour, tone &c.
This internal reproduction of the perceptions of ex-


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 46%


ternal impressions ought alone to be termed memory.
It follows that there are as many memories as per-
ceptions, and that memory is not a special faculty.
This is also evident from the following reason. If
memory were a special faculty, he who has one kind
of memory ought to have all kinds of memory. But
this opinion is refuted by daily experience. ‘Thus
as the perception of every faculty has its seat in the
respective organ, so also the memory of every fa-
culty resides in the organ of the faculty, the me-
mory of tones in the organ of tone, the memory of
colour in the organ of colour &c.

Gall thinks that memory and remembrance are
only two modifications of every faculty. Remem-
brance is the faculty of recollecting that we have
perceived the impressions, and memory is the fa-
culty of renewing the impressions which we have
perceived. Gall then considers memory as a higher
degree of activity. I must first observe that I do
not think that memory is an attribute of every fa-
culty of the mind; for what memory can be attri-
buted to propensities and sentiments? Every faculty
of animal life produces some sensation, and the
sensations of the intellectual faculties are called per-
ceptions; but as we cannot reproduce propensities
and sentiments voluntarily, so they are destitute of
memory, and memory belongs only to the intellec-
tual faculties. Moreover, I distinguish memory
from remembrance. It is possible to have some re-
| membrance of all propensities and sentiments with-
out memory, that is, without reproducing them.
In respect to the intellectual faculties, we have some-


4A7O PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


times the remembrance of an impression without
being able to reproduce the perception; for in-
stance, we may know that we were acquainted with
a certain name, we may know that we have heard
some music, that we have seen some person &c., but
we cannot recollect the name, the music, nor the
person, A certain person lost, during a nervous
fever, all remembrance; but he spoke French, and
was astonished to find that he had learned it; and he
played upon a musical instrument without recollect-
ing that he had had a music-master. Sometimes we
repeat a song without recollecting where we have
heard it. Thus memory and remembrance may
exist separately; therefore it seems to me that they
do not belong to every intellectual faculty. I con-
sider memory as an attribute of every knowing fa-
culty, and as the second degree of its activity ;
while remembrance is the same degree of activity


of the organ of individuality. This faculty knows - —


what happens in the other organs; and if it repro-
duce its perceptions, it produces remembrance in
the same way as the other knowing faculties pro-
duce memory, if they reproduce their perceptions.
Gall considers judgment as the third degree of
activity of every organ; and he admits as many
kinds of judgments as there are special faculties.
Now, in the first place, it does not seem to me that
judgment is an attribute of every faculty of the
mind; for what judgment have pride, circumspec-
tion, aie in general, all the propensities and senti-


ments? In my opinion, judgment belongs only to —


the intellectual faculties. Moreover, I cannot ima-


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. A he.


gine that judgment is the third degree of activity.
For some individuals judge very well as soon as_
they perceive impressions, without possessing the re-
spective memory; other persons have a great me-
mory of one kind of impressions, and a bad judg-
ment of the same faculty. It even happens that in
certain individuals certain faculties are active in the
highest degree, while the same persons judge badly
in respect to these very energetic faculties. Hence
it follows that judgment is not the third degree of
activity. Before I explain what I consider judg-
ment to be, I shall treat of imagination as of the
highest degree of activity of every faculty. Imagi-
nation is the internal activity of the faculties when
they are not excited by external circumstances.
There are as many kinds of imagination as there are
special faculties. It is the same with propensities,
sentiments, knowing and reflecting faculties. We
are hungry without the presence of food, and we
feel physical love when in solitude. Certain per-
sons are cautious, pious, or like to play on musical
instruments, to sing, to draw, to travel, to calcu-
late, to build &c., without being excited by exter-
nal impressions, and they do not repeat the im-
pressions which they have perceived. ‘This degree
of activity then is designated by the word imagina-
tion in respect to the intelleetual faculties. It is
essentially the same thing in respect to all faculties
in man and animals. In the latter it is called i-
stinct.- Imagination and instinct then are common
expressions, and applied to different kinds of facul-
ties, but they indicate essentially the same thing,


A72 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


that is, some activity excited from within; for if
animals sing, build, choose a dwelling &c., without
rational determination and only by instinct, they
act by their internal faculties. In the same way
men endowed with genius in music, mathematics,
mechanics &c. act by the energy of. their respective
internal faculties. 3

Thus I think that, in respect to the intellectua
faculties, there are only three degrees of activity :


perception, memory, and imagination. I shall now


examine what, according to my opinion, judgment
is. I consider judgment as a mode of action of the
intellectual faculties. Propensities and sentiments
have only the judgment called agreeable and dis-
agreeable. Intellectual faculties are equally af-
fected in an agreeable or disagreeable manner; but
there is also some relation between the faculties and
their respective external impressions; and every
one who considers the relation which exists between
his faculties and the. external impressions, judges.
In this sense, judgment belongs to all degrees of ac-
tivity of every intellectual faculty. A good or a
bad judgment must alone be spoken of. Therefore
any intellectual faculty may be very active without
having a good judgment. The functions of the re-
flecting faculties bear particularly the name judg-
ment, but their jucyment essentially is only some
mode of action of them, as that of the intellectual
faculties in general. The faculty of tone, of co-
lour &c., perceive and know the relations of tones,
of colours &c., and. approve such or such a relation
in the same way as the reflecting faculties distin-


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 473


guish analogies or dissimilitudes, and point out the
causes of phenomena.

It is obvious that the laws between the exter-
nal impressions and internal faculties are determi-
nate, and essentially the same in individuals of the |
same kind; for instance, in man; but that the ac-
tions of every faculty must be modified, conse-
quently also the judgments.. ‘This idea however will
be farther elucidated in the following chapter. ‘Thus
it results that judgment is only a mode of affection
of the intellectual faculties, and not a degree of
their activity ; or, in other terms, that it is a mode
of quality and not of quantity.

It may be of some interest to the philosophical
reader to see the difference between my. manner of
philosophising and that of others. I shall therefore
consider, in a general way, various philosophical
systems. ‘The mind, considered as the power of
knowing, was the object of all the ancient, and is
still the object of the modern philosophical systems.
The Greek philosophers paid great attention to this
subject. The Romans made no improvement in it ;
they only learned from the Greeks. The first philo-
sophers made no difierence between the considera-
tions or thoughts, and the objects which were con-
sidered or thought of; they particularly studied
cosmogony, God and the soul. Later philosophers
began to distinguish the considerations of the mind
from the objects which were considered. There
were then two classes of philosophers. Some of
them admitted the senses as particular means of ac-
quiring knowledge; others considered their testi-


AT 4s PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


mony as illusive, and had confidence only in the un-
derstanding. Democritus admitted both kinds of
knowledge, considering however that obtained by
the senses as changeable and not to be depended
on, and gave therefore the preference to knowledge
obtained by the understanding. In respect to the
objects of their philosophical examination, it is to


be observed that they considered external objects —


much more than their own nature.
Socrates gave a particular direction to philosophi


™.


cal investigation. He thought it much more rea- —


sonable to examine the things in relation to man,


and the principles of his moral behaviour, than to—


speak of things which lie out of the sphere and


reach of the human mind, and have consequently —


no relation to it. Socrates was in general practical.


Plato also distinguished the knowledge obtained by —


the senses from that obtained by the mind; and ob.


served that the former is individual and simple,


while the latter is general... He admitted, moreover, —
certain considerations of the mind, though destitute -


of all experience, as necessary and positive.


After the restoration of the sciences, Bacon,


Descartes and Leibnitz, excelled, though in a dif-
ferent way, in philosophy. Bacon established, as
the basis of his philosophy, observation and induc-


tion. The essential point of Descartes’s philosophy


is thinking and the knowledge obtained by thinking.
Like Plato, Leibnitz never gave to his philosophy
a methodical arrangement, of which Aristotle was so
fond. ‘The philosophy of Leibnitz admits two kinds
of perceptions, one without and the other with con-


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 4°75


sciousness: it considers the knowledge by the senses
as individual, accidental, and changeable; but that
by thinking and reasoning, as general, necessary, and
positive. According to it our reasoning power is
endowed with principles, and all phenomena are
intellectual. |

_ Locke maintained that all knowledge begins with
experience, that all conceptions are founded on
sensations, but that our mind never can acquire any
knowledge of the objects themselves. Condillac,
and the French philosophers, agree with Locke
about the origin of our knowledge ; they never try
to examine the things in themselves, but only judge
of their relations to each other. Hume not only
confines all knowledge to mere experience, but
even denies the necessity of causality. T'inally,
Berkeley was so far from examining the things in
themselves, that he even denied the possibility of
proving the existence of external objects.

The principal schools of modern philosophy, in
Germany, are the critical philosophy, the transcen-
dental idealism, and the philosophy of nature.
Kant, the founder of the critical philosophy, distin-
guished two kinds of knowledge, an experimental
(Kritik der reinen Vernunft), and another founded
on belief (Kritik der practishen Vernunft). In re-
spect to the first kind he maintained that it is only
relative, subjective, or phenomenal, or that we know
only the relation of the subject to the object: we
do not know either the subject or the object in
themselves, but both only in their mutual relation,


A76 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


and this relation then constitutes their reality to us.
The subject is endowed with particular categories
which are applied to the object. Whatever is gene-
ral and necessary in knowledge belongs to the sub-


ject; the particular and variable is the attribute of


the object. Hence all experimental knowledge is
founded upon dualism, upon the union of subject
and object. Even the categories, though inherent
in the subject, and conceived by the mind from
within, acquire objective reality only by their appli-
cation to the object. Kant, though he considered
both subject and object, had however more in mind
the subject than the object. He reduced all cate-
gories, or forms according to which the mind ac-
quires experimental knowledge, to four kinds—to
quantity, quality, relation and modality. ‘The two
former concern objects in general, the two latter


the relations of the objects to each other and to our |


understanding. ‘Thus Kant admits notions, inde-
pendent of experience, as the conceptions of space,
time, cause, and others; and considers these con-
ceptions not as the result of external impressions,
but of the faculties of the subject: they exist d
priori, and, according to them, we are acquainted
with the objects. Our notions of morality, God,
and immortality, are not experimental but belong
to the practical understanding and originate @ priori.
Liberty is a postulatum.

Fichte went farther, and established the transcen-
dental idealism. All certainty and reality is con-
fined to the subject, which has knowledge only of


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 477


his own modifications. By means of abstraction
and reflection, he arrived at the intellectual intuition
of the subject.

The philosophy of nature rejects subject and ob-
ject, makes no abstraction or reflection, begins with
intellectual intuition, and knows immediately the
objects in themselves. It does not consider the ob-
jects as existing, but as originating, and it con-
structs them d@ priort by mere speculation. Abso-
tute existence without qualities and liberty are the
basis of this philosophical system.

My mind can never rise to similar conceptions:
it is confined to analysis. According to the princi-
ple of Bacon, it collects as many facts as possible,
compares them, and draws conclusions, or forms in-
ductions. As the system of Locke is the basis of
the greatest number of philosophical opinions in
England and France, I shall compare its principles
with our philosophy. I shall mention how far we —
agree with him, and wherein our opinions are dif-
ferent. Like him we think that truth is to be
placed above all other considerations, that we can-
not examine the nature of the mind but only ob-
serve its faculties.— We then examine the organs by
means of which the different faculties of the mind
are manifested.—Like him, we admit innate capaci-
ties, but no innate idea or innate principle. He
denies the innateness of ideas and principles, be-
cause children or certain adults, and even nations,
‘are destitute of them, or possess them variously
modified. ‘hese assertions however are no proofs,
because the inactivity of the faculties is explained


<a


A783 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


| by the want of developement of the respective or-
gans; and the different modifications of ideas and
principles are the result of the combinations of the
different faculties of which I shall afterwards treat
in a particular chapter. hao
Locke admits only one primitive source of the
activity of the mind, that is, external impressions
on the senses. If we speak of the mind in general,
we admit still a second primitive source of its acti-
vity which 1s internal.—According to Locke, the —
mind begins with external sensations, and by means ;
of its perception, contemplation, retention, compas
-rison, and its faculties of composing and abstract-
ing, it performs all the particular operations or ma- 4
nifestations of thinking and volition: the feelings —
also primitively result from external impressions,
and mediately from the understanding. I, on the”
contrary, entirely separate the mere propensities —
and sentiments of the mind ‘from its understanding;
they exist independently of it, and are in no pro-
portion to it; they are internal faculties which may
be excited by external impressions, but they often
are active by their internal power alone. They are
‘innate as particular faculties inseparable from the
nature of man, though their determinate actions are
not innate.— According to Locke, the moral princi-
ples must be proved; I think they must be felt;
and reasoning does not produce them any more
than it produces the perception of colours without
any impression of light upon the optic nerves.
In respect to the understanding, Locke thinks
that, by means of the five senses alone and their im- ;
1 |
;


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 479


pressions, it conceives the existence of external
bodies, their inseparable or original qualities, as ex-
tent, figure, and mobility, and their separable or
sensible qualities. I am of opinion that the mind
conceives very few ideas by the five senses alone,
but that the internal parts of the brain are still
necessary. On this account, in treating of the five
senses, I spoke of their immediate and mediate
functions. To the latter class belong. our concep-
tions of the existence of bodies, their form, size,
weight, colour, space, order, and number. The un-
derstanding as a reflecting power acts,.in my opi-
nion, not only upon the sensations and conceptions
of external objects, but also upon the propensities
and sentiments; 1t knows them as well as the exter.
nal sensations and perceptions, compares them, con-
siders them in different ways, and determines their
various relations. Moreover, I do not only admit
an internal activity of the mind independent of ex-
ternal experience in respect to the propensities and
sentiments, but also with Kant in respect to the
understanding, and in respect to experimental
knowledge as well as to the reflecting powers. The
conception of size, for instance, that the whole is
greater than the half, is not the result of experience,
but of-an internal faculty. In the same way the
conception, that there is nothing without cause, is ,
internal. ‘These general conceptions are the attri-
butes of the internal faculties of the understanding,
in the same way as the particular feelings result
from the propensities and sentiments. The internal
. general conceptions of experimental knowledge and


480 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the particular feelings are calculated for the exter-
nal world; and the general conceptions of the re-
flecting powers of the mind are calculated for expe-
rimental and sentimental knowledge. ‘This second
knowledge then is as positive as the former ; for we
know our feelings as well as our sensations and per-
ceptions by the five senses. Every determinate ac-
tion of any faculty whatever depends on two condi-
tions, on the faculty and its object. The activity
of every faculty, or the general conceptions of the
knowing faculties, and particularly the feelings, are
only applied to the external world ; and the general
conceptions of the reflecting faculties are applied to
experimental knowledge and to the feelings. Ina —
perfect state all conditions must agree with each
other. If, for instance, external impressions do not
agree with the general state of man, and the re-
spective internal faculties, they are illusive ; and if
internal faculties suppose in the external objects
something which experience does not confirm, they
are also erroneous: each condition corresponds with
another. All conditions must be conformable to
the conceptions of reflection, and these must be ap-
plicable to the actions of the particular faculties.
Thus, in a perfect system of our knowledge of
man, all particular faculties must be pointed out
and considered in their concordance. I admit in-
ternal powers and intermediate faculties by means
of which the internal powers and the external world
are brought into communication and mutual in-
fluence. The internal faculties are essentially dif-
ferent, and they may act by their internal power, or


ACTION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND, 431


be excited, by respective impressions. Some of
them make man act; others modify, assist and
direct our actions: some procure for us a relative
knowledge of external beings; and others are
destined to bring all the faculties into harmony, in
order to constitute unity. If such a system be prac-
tical, it requires first a knowledge of particularities,
and if these be capable of a useful application they
must be reduced to generalities and even to unity.


RECAPITULATION.


All that I have said, in respect to the modes of
action of the special faculties, may be reduced to
two general considerations. very faculty may be
more or less active, and the activity of every fa-
culty may result from its internal energy, or it may
be excited by respective impressions. In this re-
spect I have spoken of different names given to dif:
ferent degrees of activity. Moreover, every faculty
may be affected differently, and these different af:-
fections or different modes of action bear equally
different names. Finally, I have given a general
view of different philosophical systems, and coms
pared them with my own.


Ne)
—


482


CHAPTER X.


ON THE MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES OF THE
MIND AS THEY CONCERN THE MORALITY OF OUR
ACTIONS.


Havine considered the special faculties, their


sphere of activity, and their modes of action, Ig


shall now point out their mutual influence. The
first thing which is to be examined in this respect
is an arrangement relative to the morality of our
actions. Whatever philosophers may say against
the plurality of the faculties and their respective
organs, it is indispensable for a philosopher of na-
ture to admit them in animal life as well as in auto-
matic life. Indeed both lives are more or less com-


plicated in different orders of animals. Organic


life, for instance, is very simple in the lower ani-
mals. In them nutrition is limited to intussuscep-
tion, absorption, and assimilation, while it becomes
compound by degrees. It is known that in perfect
quadrupeds nutrition is the consequence of mastica-
tion, deglutition, digestion, chylification, sanguifi-
cation, respiration, circulation, assimilation, and of
a great number of secondary and auxiliary func-
tions, as of the secretion of bile, that of the pan-
creatic juice, the secretion and excretion of urine &c.
It is also known that even the particular kinds of
function which contribute to the reproduction of ©
1


7


LE pee,


ina ee


-


aw


ssi


INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 4893


the organization, as intussusception, digestion, re-
spiration, circulation &c., are composed of a greater
or less number of apparatus, though the common
purpose is always the same, that is, the preservation
of the individual. |

It is the same with animal life: it is very simple
in lower animals, and begins with the sense of feel-
ing. It is multiplied by taste, smell, hearing, see-
ing, by various instinctive labours, by propensities,
sentiments, and intellectual faculties; and finally, in
man it is most complicated. For man unites all the
faculties which are dispersed in different animals,
and he is endowed with various faculties peculiar to
himself. Thus it is an incontestable fact, and proved
by daily experience, that the faculties of man are
multiplied. Let us now consider in what order the
faculties of the mind and their respective organs
are arranged.

Except the organs of voluntary motion and of
feeling, all other organs of animal life are placed in
the head. The organs of the faculties which are
very common, and bestowed upon all animals, are
placed downward in the inferior part of the head,
while the faculties proper to man are situated in its.
highest region of the head. The more noble the
faculties are, the higher are the organs situated ; and
the more important the faculties, the nearer the
organs toward the middle line of the head. The
organs of the propensities, those of the sentiments,
those of the knowing and reflecting faculties, ‘are
always placed together. ‘The organs of the propen-
sities and sentiments are larger than those of the in-

212


4S 4c PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN,


tellectual faculties; and the organs of the reflecting
faculties are larger than those of the knowing facul-
ties. ‘The whole mass of the organs common to
animals is ordinarily larger than the mass of the
organs proper to man. ‘The organs of the faculties
which assist one another are near each other; con-
sequently the organs may be divided into rubrics:
for instance, the organs of physical love, philopro-
genitiveness, adhesiveness, and the propensity to
fight ; the organs of the propensities to fight and to
destroy ; the organs of the propensities to destroy, to
possess, and to conceal; attachment, and love of ap-
probation; selflove, and determinateness; justice,
and determinateness; benevolence, hope, and venera-
tion; the organs of space, and form ; of number, and
constructiveness; of number, colour, andtone; the
organs of individuality, comparison, and causality ;
the organs of wit, ideality, and imitation.

As the faculties are different, it is to be considered
whether they are equally important. ‘Ihis is neither
the case in organic nor in animal life. All the func-
tions which contribute to the preservation of the
body are not equally important: mastication, for
instance, and the mixture of the food with saliva,
are less important than digestion, circulation, and
assimilation. ‘The secretion of certain glands is less
necessary than respiration &c. It is the same with
animal life. In respect to the external senses, every
one would lose the sense of smell rather than that
of sight. Who would not lose some talent, as the
faculty of drawing, of music, of painting, rather
than that of reflection and reasoning; and one sen-


INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 485


timent rather than another. Every one is offended
if we call him stupid; but not so if we say that he
has not such or sucha talent. Moreover, if we exa-
mine the influence of different faculties of animal
life upon the happiness and preservation of man-
kind, it is easily observed that several faculties are
much more important than others. ‘The love of ap-
probation is less important than benevolence. The
Christian religion places charity above faith and all
other moral faculties. Thus I think it must be
granted that the faculties of animal life have dit-
ferent degrees of importance. In this respect they
may be divided into two classes, into those which
are common to animals and man, and into those
which are proper to man. This double nature of
man is evident, and has been designated by dif-)
ferent expressions; the flesh and spirit, or the ani-
mal and man, or the carnal and spiritual part of
man.

It is now to be known whether the faculties com-
mon to animals and man, or those which are proper
to man, are the most important. The answer is
obvious, and not subject to any doubt. ‘There is
even a general law throughout all nature, that infe-
rior faculties are subordinate to superior ones. Phy-
sical laws are submitted to chemical laws; gravity,
for instance, is a physical law, and modified by
chemical affinity. ‘The particles of any salt are at-
tracted one to another in opposition to their physical
gravity, and form a crystal, Physical and chemical
laws, though preserved in organic beings, are modi-
fied by organic laws. Plants do not increase by


486 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


juxtaposition ; they assimilate heterogeneous sub-
stances. ‘The physical laws of motion and hydrau-
lics are preserved in the muscles and in the circula-
tion, but they are- subjected to the laws of life.
Chemical laws are preserved .in digestion, but they
are modified by organic laws. Physical, chemical, «
and organic laws exist in animals, but they are modi-
fied by animal laws. Animals take food, plants do
the same; but animals choose it, guided by the sense
of taste. Plants propagate their species automati-
cally, but animals feel a propensity to do so. Thus
in animals the propensities, sentiments, and intellec-
tual faculties, modify extremely the properties of the
organization. \

The same principle ought to be applied to the
laws of human nature; that is, all inferior laws, as
physical, chemical, organic, and animal, are pre-
served in man, but they must be subordinate to the
laws of the human faculties. Thus all faculties are
not equally important, and certain-faculties ought
to be subordinate to others. ‘Therefore, in respect
to actions, I divide the faculties into three orders.
Certain faculties excite man and animals to deter-
minate actions; for example, hunger, physical love,
the propensity to fight, to build, to gather provi-
sion &c. I call them faculties of action. Other
faculties are auviliary ; they assist and modify the
faculties of the first kind. Still other faculties ought
to direct: these are directing faculties.

The natural law of the subordination of the fa-
culties one to another leads us immediately to the
consideration of moral evil and moral good, or to


INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 487


the consideration of the morality of our actions ; and,
under this head, the first thing to be considered 1s,
whether any evil exists? [ shall then examine its
origin.

‘There exist indeed two kinds of evil; one physi-
cal, and the other moral. The first kind belongs be-
yond doubt to the plan of Eternal Providence. For
there is a continual opposition throughout all nature.
Earth, water and air, present a perpetual scene of
destruction and reproduction, of pain and pleasure.
It is even obvious that in the same way as temporal
good is distributed unequally and without personal
merit, physical evil happens often without any cor-
responding fault. This is the case in animals and
man. ‘What have animals done, which are ill-fed
and ill-treated in every respect for the services ren-
dered to man? Who is the cause of contagious dis-
eases? If children are begotten in the excess of de-
bauchery, for what reason must they expiate the
faults of their parents? When the hail ravages the
harvest of the indolent and idle rich man, does it
spare the garden of the laborious poor? This melan-
choly observation has been made at all times. The
preacher says, “ There is a just man that perisheth
in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that
prolongeth his life in his wickedness.”’* “ All things,”
says he, “ come alike to all: there is one event to
the righteous, and to the wicked ; to the good and
to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacri-
ficeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the


* Eccles. vu. 15.


ASS PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he
that feareth an oath. This is an evil among all
things that are done under the sun, that there is
one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons
of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart
while they live, and after that they go to the dead.” *
in another passage he continues: “ I returned, and
saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to
the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding,
nor yet favour to men of skill: but time and chance
happeneth to them all.’ + Physical evil indeed does
not only exist, it comes also to all according to
established laws of creation. It is also unquestion-
able that moral evil exists. Although man thinks
himself abased by his wickedness and imperfection,
he must acknowledge the existence of moral evil.
Moses said, ** God saw that the wickedness of man
was great in the earth, and that every: imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil conti-
nually.’~ David thought, that “ there is none
that doeth good, no not one.”’§ Christ. taught,
that “ out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, falsé wit-
ness, blasphemies.” || St. Paul speaks of. men,
** being filled with all unrighteousness, fornica-
tion, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full
of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whis-
perers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud,


* Eceles. ix. 2, 3, + Eccles. ix. 11, 12, + Gen. vi. 5,
Sel scxiy.'S, |; Matt. xv. 19.


INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND. 489


boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to
parents, without understanding, covenant breakers,
without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful :
who knowing the judgment of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, not
only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them.” * Thus moral evil has existed at all times,
as well as physical evil; and it seems that the time
when it will be rooted out is yet far off.

Let us now consider the origin and cause of
moral eyil. I pass over in silence the opinion ac-
cording to which two creative principles—a good
and a bad, were admitted. Neither do I speak of
original sin in the first man. Moreover, 1 do not
find any explanation of the origin of evil in ad-
mitting free will. It is true, without liberty man
never can be guilty, but free-will does not give
any idea of the origin of the evil. For as soon as
free-will is spoken of, good and evil are supposed :
to what purpose should there be free-will, if there
were not two different things, good and evil, be-
tween which the free man may choose? It is said,
that man abuses his liberty; but by what motive
does he abuse it, if there be nothing from within
which provokes him to act badly? Therefore liberty
is not sufficient to explain the origin of moral evil.

Are there any bad faculties? Gall is disposed to
admit wicked propensities. He says, that man
must submit to the laws of creation, in respect to
moral evil as well as in respect to physical evil; that


* Rom. 1, 29—32,


AQ


4,90 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


no man can say, he is without any temptation; and
that all our thoughts and inclinations are not in-
nocent and virtuous. He even thinks that moral
evil belongs to the plan of the Creator. I am in-
timately convinced that no faculty in itself can be »
bad, and that all innate faculties of man have some
aim; that every faculty is necessary; that none
leads necessarily to evil; but that every faculty may
produce abuses. The faculties are no more bad
than every substance. I think with Philo the Jew,
Eusebius,* and St. Augustin, that any substance,
as fire, water, iron &c., is not bad in itself, and 1s
not the cause of evil; and I think with Augustin, T
that evil is not a substance, and that only the abuse
is evil. Hence, I consider every faculty neither as
good nor bad. The evil consists only in such or
such action. Every faculty is necessary, and none
of them can be destroyed. . The germ contains —
the faculty of producing all dispositions. There. a
fore, parents who have lost any limb of their body,
as a leg, an arm &c., get children provided. with
all the parts of the body. But what then is the
origin of moral evil?

I have spoken of the law of subordination of one
faculty to another. All the faculties, common to
man and animals, act in animals in the-same way
as in man; but it is never said that animals sin or
commit a crime. This is a new proof that liberty
does not produce moral evil, for animals modity
their actions, and suppress different instincts by other _


* Preepar. Evang. Lib. vii. n, 22.


+ Lib. de Vera Religione, c. 20,


LIBERTY. 49]


motives; but no action of any animal can be con-
sidered in respect to morality. However, without
liberty no man can be guilty. Therefore in order
perfectly to understand moral good, and moral evil,
we must consider two things, zberty and morality.


LIBERTY.


Being free is the opposite to being forced; li-
berty is opposite to irresistibility. Because we
maintain that all faculties are innate, our adversaries
object that all actions are unavoidable, necessary
and irresistible. On the contrary, we think with
St. Augustin,* that God, in giving the power (fa-
culty), does not impose necessity. ‘Thus, it is to be
known in what liberty consists, and what faculties
produce it? Some philosophers attribute to man an
unlimited or unbounded liberty. According to
them man creates, so to say, his own nature. He
is independent of every natural law, and his will is
the only cause of his actions. But such liberty in
a created being is contradictory. Hence all that
can be said in favour of this liberty is mere decla-
mation, destitute of signification and truth.

Others maintain that the liberty of man is ab-
solute, and that he acts without any motive. This
is the same as saying, there is an effect without a
cause, but such an assertion is against the law of
understanding. Moreover, liberty without motives

would be contradictory in itself; for a person would


* Lib. de Litt. et Spir. c. 31.


4.92 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


act reasonably or unreasonably, justly or unjustly,
well or ill, but always without any motive. Finally,
in this supposition all institutions which respect the
happiness of mankind would be useless. Educa-
tion, morality, religion, punishment and reward,
would be without efiect, because man is not deter-
mined by any motive. According to this notion of
liberty, we might expect from every one hatred and
perfidy as well as friendship and fidelity, virtue as well
as vice. Thus, such a liberty is merely speculative.
We can only admit a liberty which corresponds
with the general laws of nature, and with the nature
of man. Hence, if we admit that man acts by
motives, then he is placed like all the rest of nature,
under the law of cause and effect. This kind of
liberty alone has been professed by ancient  philo-
sophers and legislators, and only this kind of liberty
is supposed by morality and religion, because these
furnish the most powerful and most noble motives
to direct the actions of man. Liberty consists in the
possibility of doing or of not doing any thing, and
in the faculty of knowing the motives and of deter-
~ mining one’s-self according to them. ‘Two things
ee then must be considered in liberty: will and
MOLES.

A great number of authors deny the existence of
free-will, but they confound the propensities, in-
clinations, lusts and concupiscences, with will. The
internal satisfaction alone, and will, are two quite
different things. Neither man nor animals aet
freely if they feel only an internal satisfaction.
This accompanies the fulfilling of every desire.


LIBERTY. 493


The sheep and tiger do not act freely because they
are pleased, the former with grazing, and the latter
with tearing its prey in pieces. Every faculty of
animal life, being active, gives a desire or an in-
clination. Even man and animal feel these incli-
nations involuntarily. ‘They cannot change the
nature of their faculties and organization. ‘They
are forced to feel hunger, if the respective nerves
act in a certain manner; they must see, if the light
strikes the retina of their eyes &c. Thus man
neither has any power upon accidental external im-
pressions, nor upon the existence of internal organs.
He is obliged to feel an inclination if the respective
ergan be excited. Man is not master of this, and
he cannot be answerable for it. But these incli-
nations, propensities, or desires of different organs,
are not yet will, because man and animals have
often inclinations, yet will not. A dog, for example,
which is hungry, but which has been beaten for
having eaten such or such a thing, will not eat the
meat you lay down before it. It may be hungry,
it wants, but it will not eat.—It is the same with
man. How often are we obliged to act against our
inclinations. Hence, we see by this experience,
not only that the faculties do not act irresistibly
either in man or in animals, or that there exists
liberty or freedom, but also that inclinations are
not yet wall. However, freedom presupposes will.
Therefore it is to be examined how will is per-
formed.

In order to have will, to decide for or against, I
must know what happens or has happened; I must


ADA PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


compare: hence will begins with the knowing and
reflecting faculties, or with the understanding;
therefore the will of every animal is proportionate
to its understanding. Man has the greatest free-
dom, because his will has the greatest extent; and


this is the case because he has the most understand- .


ing. He knows more than any animal; he com-
pares better the present with the past; he foresees


the future; he discovers the relation between cause |


and effect; and he has traditions. It is even to be


observed that not only wié/, but also the participation :


of the individual, and our accountableness, begin
with the knowing faculties. Idiots have sometimes


inclinations, but they are neither free, nor answer- — |


able. And a man of great understanding and
good education is more blameable for a fault, than
an uncultivated and stupid person.


The willing faculties however are not given up to 4 .


chance, but submitted to certain laws; for the
laws of the understanding are as determinate by :
ereation as the laws of nutrition. Man cannot will
any thing which does not seem good to him. ‘There-
fore St. Paul said,—‘* Being made free from sin, ye
became the servants of righteousness.” * Thus the
first condition of freedom is will, which is the effect’
of knowledge and reflection. The second part of
freedom concerns what is to be known and com-
pared, that is, the motives. Will is the decision of
the understanding, but this decision takes place
according to motives. | 7


* Rom. vi. 18.


LIBERTY. 4.9 5


I shall now consider the source of the motives.
They result principally from the propensities and
sentiments, and sometimes from the knowing fa-
culties. ‘Thus the motives are as numerous as the
faculties; even their energy depends on the energy
of the faculties. Hence, an animal which has many
and energetic faculties, has many and vigorous
motives, and its freedom is proportionate to the
strength of will, and to the number and energy of
its faculties or motives. Therefore will, or the fa-
culty of choosing or deciding, is not sufficient, but
the plurality of motives is also necessary to freedom.
An animal endowed only with one faculty would
not be susceptible of any other feeling or motive,
and its knowing and reflecting faculties could not
act upon this single faculty, so as to make a com-
parison or choice between motives, because there
is Only one motive ; the animal would act according
to its propensity which is active, and the action or
inaction of this animal would be only the effect of
the action or inaction of this single faculty. On
the contrary, if animals are endowed with several!
faculties, they are susceptible of different feelings.
It is true, that in this case the action of one faculty
and its respective organ does not destroy either
the existence or the action of any other faculty and
its organ. But here it must be considered at the
same time whether the animal acts without or with
freedom. ‘The plurality of the faculties and organs
alone is not sufficient. ‘his idea is of essential im.
portance ; but was not sufficiently considered in our
book on the innate dispositions. If man or ani-


496 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


mals act by motives without will, they do not act
freely. It is only necessary that one faculty be
stronger than another in order to act. Give food
to a hungry dog, and at the moment when he eats,
make a hare run before him; the dog will eat or
follow the hare according to its strongest propen-
sity. Here is no freedom, the strongest propensity
prevails. On the contrary, if another animal be
endowed with the faculty of knowing and com-
paring; if, for instance, another dog which is fond
of hunting, but which has been punished for having
followed hares, feel a great propensity to follow a
hare which passes before him; if it tremble and
have palpitations without pursuing the hare, there
is liberty; the dog chooses between different mo-
tives. It may, but it will not. Thus liberty re-
quires will and motives. It begins with the under-
standing, which knows and compares the different
motives, and decides the action according to its
choice. The plurality of the faculties produces
only the plurality of motives; but will decides.
This is the true idea of liberty, but this liberty is
not yet moral liberty ; consequently, it remains to
be examined wae the morality of our actions
begins.


MORAL LIBERTY.


I have shown that all faculties are not equally ime
portant, and that, according to a general law of
nature, inferior faculties are subordinate to superior
faculties. Hence it is also evident, that all motives


MORAL LIBERTY. | 497


are not equally important. In this respect I establish
the following principle: all motives which result
from faculties common to man and animals do not
present any morality, do not suppose any idea of
conscience or duty, nor any idea of sin; for no
animal is susceptible of these feelings. Moreover,
as liberty begins with the understanding, so morality
begins with the faculty of duty and justice. Thus
moral liberty is will, applied to absolute conscience.
Absolute good or moral actions therefore result, if
will act according to absolute conscience, or to the
motives proper to mankind; and whatever is not
conformable to will applied to the motive of abso-
Jute conscience, is absolute evil. Man then has
not only the greatest liberty, for he has the greatest
will and the greatest number of motives, but he
alone possesses a moral liberty. As long as he de-
termines himself to any action by motives common
to animals, his actions are not primitively moral,
though they may be conformable to moral actions.
The inferior motives, however, must be employed 5
they must support, and sometimes supply the place
of, the superior motives.

It results from all that I have said in respect
to moral liberty, that no accountableness takes
place without liberty; that liberty begins with
the understanding or with the faculties of know-
ing and choosing the motives, and of deciding
according to them; that man has the greatest li-
berty ; and that the faculties proper to man, pro-
duce motives which contribute to the morality of our
actions. |


et


OK


4.98 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


According to these considerations, we may easily
conceive how moral evil has come into the world,
or what is its origin. It consists in actions which
are not conformable to the whole of the faculties
proper to man. As soon then as any faculty acts
without being directed by all the faculties proper to
man, these declare that the actions are abuses,
or are morally evil. ‘Thus moral good is any action
conformable to the faculties proper to man or to


the directing faculties ; and moral evil is any action


which is not conformable to them. Now it is also
clear why moral evil has always existed, and pro-
bably will always exist. For the inferior faculties
exist, and are inherent in human nature: their use
is necessary to the preservation of man; but. their
energy goes easily farther than the faculties proper
to man permit, and then it produces abuses. Hunger
and thirst will always exist; therefore at all times
man may eat and drink more than the preservation
of his body requires, and gluttony and drunkenness
may easily take place. In the same way, all other
faculties may act with greater energy than the fa-
culties proper to man approve of: consequently they
may commit errors, faults, sins. Now also it is
conceivable, why sins or actions against the moral
laws of nature unavoidably produce physical evil.
For the laws of nature are determinate in the phy-
sical and moral world; they are put in relation ;
the natural order cannot be changed; and every one
who endeavours to change this order, or does not act
conformably to it, produces moral and physical evil
at the same timé. It would be easy for me to ex-


MORAL LIBERTY. ‘4 GG


amine all faculties and their actions according to
this principle. Its consideration is of the highest
importance to all those who form moral institu-
tions. No faculty of human nature ought to be
neglected, and the sphere of activity of every one
ought to be determined. Every intelligent reader
who knows history will be convinced of the solidity
of this principle.

Moreover, it is evident why man is inclined to
moral evil.* We have seen that the organs com-
mon to man and animals are very considerable:
therefore the manifestations of the respective fa-
culties are very energetic; and for the same reason
they submit themselves, sometimes with difficulty, to
the superior faculties proper to man, and very sel-
dom to the will alone. The two natures of man
which combat one another t are easily understood :
that is, man as animal; and man as man, or man
endowed with faculties common to man and animals,
and with others proper to himself. We easily con-
ceive how certain faculties give laws to other fa-
culties; that is, how laws began; how the law
makes sin; how we know sin by the law; how
until the law, sin was in the world, but how sin 1s


* « If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves. ””
1 John, i. 8.

+ “For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye
cannot’do the things that ye would.’ Galat. v. 17.—** But I see
another law in my members warring against the law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my
members.” Rom, vil, 23.


—


Kg


500 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


not imputed when there is no law.* For the su-
perior faculties command obedience to the inferior :
without the existence of the superior faculties, no
sentiment of law, and none of sin, could take place :
the inferior faculties may produce the same actions,
as is the case in animals; but the superior faculties
alone disapprove of them.

It is also explicable how men who have not the
Jaw, do by nature the things contained in the law;
who, having not the law, are a law unto themselves :
and who show the work of the law written in their
hearts, the conscience witnessing with them, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing or else ex-
cusing one another ;+ and also how there are elect
persons. A person endowed with the faculties pro-
per.to man in the highest degree, and with very
small animal faculties, will act by nature con-
formably to the faculties which give the law when
the animal faculties act with energy. He has no
occasion for any law either for putting in action the
superior faculties, or for preventing the abuses of
his animal faculties, and is really elect. We also
understand how a person may dislike and hate evil,
and yet do it;+ how virtue is possible, and how
merit and demerit take place. The inferior facul
ties ought to be subordinate, and the victory that
the superior faculties gain over the inferior is
virtue. If the combat be difficult, the merit of
vanquishing is great, while he who does good


* Rom, vii. 7.; v. 13. f Rom. ii, 14, 15.
{ Rom. vii. 15—25.


MORAL LIBERTY. 501


because he likes it, and has no opponent, has less
claim to merit. Finally, it is now easily explained
what is the difference between the kingdom of law
and the kingdom of love, and why the law cannot
be abolished, but must be fulfilled. If in all men
the superior faculties were eminently active, and
the inferior less and only proportionate, every one
should be a law unto himself, or rather every one
should do good by love; but the law or its king-
dom is necessary, as long as it is necessary to excite
the superior faculties, and restrain the activity of
the inferior, that is, as their activity is not pro-
portionate, and the inferior not subordinate by love,
to the superior. |

Here it may be asked, what individual must de-
termine moral good and moral evil, or who can
serve as a model to others? I think that it is the
same with moral principles as with all other facul-
ties. A great genius for music establishes musical
principles which other persons learn; the great
painter gives the rules of his art &c. In the same
way, he who possesses the faculties proper to man in
the highest degree, and who is capable of submit-
ting all his animal faculties to the superior—he who
can say, Who can accuse me of any injustice? must
establish moral principles.

Those who aré acquainted with the preceding
considerations, or the spirit of our doctrine, cannot
ask, whether it can be reconciled with moral liberty.
I am convinced that no philosophy has so distinctly
demonstrated the moral liberty, as the physiology
ef the brain does. Nay it is evident, that our in-


502. PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


quiries into the nature of man, instead of being:
dangerous to the Christian religion, support it greatly,
and explain many expressions which have grown
out of use, and have almost entirely lost their
meaning. It is indeed quite natural, that physical
and moral truths support one another, since there
is only one Creator. Those who think that in-
quiries of this kind do not belong to our doctrine
ought to consider that all the functions of man,
which take place with consciousness, are the fg
of our investigations.

Before I finish this chapter, there are to be ex-
amined several opinions relative to the questions:
What is the aim of all our faculties? and which is,
or ought to be, the moral motive of all our actions?
The modern physiologists in France maintain that
all faculties are destined to the preservation of the
individual, and to the preservation of the species.
But there are many faculties which do not con-
tribute any thing to this purpose, as the song of
birds, the pride of man &c. In respect to the
motives of our actions, certain philosophers main-
tain that man acts only by interest or egotism.
This may be said in a very general and indetermi-
nate sense; that is, the greatest number of persons
act according to their propensities and sentiments ;
but many individuals do things which are opposite
to their particular interest. Moreover, this maxim
of egotism, excluding every idea of right and wrong,
can never be established as a moral principle.
Other philosophers and moralists wish to reduce all
actions to the moral principle of charity as the only


MORAL LIBERTY?» 503


motive; but a great number of necessary actions
cannot be the result of charity: thus killing animals
in order to live upon them, singing, adoration of
God &c., do not take place by charity. Others again
maintain that faith alone is the true moral motive
of our actions. This however is saying that there
is no absolute good, and that no action was morally
good before the introduction of faith. Ido not deny
that faith is a very important motive, and indeed one
of the most efficacious ones; but I do not think that
good actions become good, because they are con-
-formable to faith. I think that they are good in
themselves, and that they have been taught because
they are good.

I think that all the actions of man cannot be re-
duced to one single motive. It Seems to me that
every moralist or philosopher judges more according
to his own sentiments, than to the absolute nature
of the human race. Man is endowed with several
superior faculties, and these all produce moral
motives, and are really all considered in the Chris-
tian religion. The aim of the actions of man seems
to be of three kinds: every individual considers
either himself, or other individuals—men or ani-
mals, or his Creator. If we examine what faculties
produce every kind of these actions, it may be ob-
served that actions relative to the individual himself
result from certain propensities, sentiments and in-
tellectual faculties, but that all actions concerning
other individuals, and even God, are the effect of
propensities and sentiments. This explains the


504 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


assertion of certain observers, that. man acts only
by sentiments, and not by understanding. These
philosophers. considered then the actions of man
only in respect to other persons or to society.


_ RECAPITULATION.


In this chapter, I have considered the mutual in-
fluence of the faculties of the mind, with respect
to the morality of our actions. With this view I
have ascertained, that the faculties are not equally
important ; that, according to a general law through-
out all nature, inferior laws are subordinate to su-
perior ones; that, therefore, the faculties proper
to man ought to govern the other facultics com-
mon to man and animals; that for this reason man
must be free; that liberty begins with understand-
ing, and requires will and motives; that motives
are of two kinds; that the faculties proper to man
procure moral motives; that, therefore, man
alone has moral liberty. By these considerations,
1 have explained the origin of moral evil; I have
shown why moral evil has always existed; why
man is inclined to it; why it is unavoidably pu-
nished ; why it is said’ that man consists of two
natures, which combat one another ; why one can
do what he would not do. I have elucidated how
the law has begun; how persons without the law
can do the things contained in the law; how
virtue is possible and meritorious ;_ moreover,
what is the difference between the kingdom of law


MORAL LIBERTY. 505


and that of love. Finally, I have stated the aim
of our actions, and observed that there is not
one simple moral motive of our actions, but that
all faculties proper to man furnish moral motives,


and that they altogether constitute a perfect mo-
rality.


CHAPTER XI.


ON THE MODIFICATIONS OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF
EVERY FACULTY.


Arter having considered the mutual influence of
the faculties of the mind, with respect to liberty
and morality, I shall examine the mutual influence
of the faculties as the cause of their modified ma-
nifestations. Hitherto this subject has been too
much neglected. I consider it however as one of
the most important in anthropology, and very ne-
cessary to the elucidation of our doctrine. In phi-
losophy it is commonly admitted, that the world
is different to every species of animals, and even
to every individual of the same species. ‘This is
easily understood, when we consider that all the
beings of. nature are in relation one to another,
and that the beings endowed with consciousness
are acquainted with this relation, or, in other terms,
perceive various impressions of the other beings.
Now it is evident that every sentient being per-
ceives impressions in proportion to the number and
energy of its sentient faculties. Hence it results
that the world is different to different species of
animals ; that it.is essentially the same, but modified
to the individuals of the same species; and that
man, who unites all the faculties distributed among
different animals, and possesses certain faculties

1


‘MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 507


peculiar to himself, has the most extended world ;
that nevertheless the world of every person is modi-
fied, as well as that of every animal of the same
species. |

I shall now investigate with more detail the modi-
fications of the faculties. . First then the manifesta-
tions of every faculty itself are greatly modified in
different kinds of beings. This is evident from
the functions of the faculties common to man and
animals, both in respect to automatic and animal
life. The liver secretes bile, the kidneys secrete
urine, the salivary glands, saliva &c.; these secre-
tions however, and those of other organs, vary in
different kinds of animals, and they are modified
even in different individuals of the same species.
The power of motion is modified in the muscles of
different kinds of animals; and in the same way the
consistence, texture, and taste of these different
muscles vary. ‘The five external senses present vari-
ous modifications in different species of animals, and
in different individuals of the same species. It is yet
to be known whether the faculties attached to the
brain are also modified in different animals.

If we examine the functions of these faculties,
there remains no doubt that it is the same in respect
to the brain. ‘The cerebellum, for instance, must
be modified in different species, because the indivi-
duals of every species prefer others of their own
species. Sometimes the manifestations of this pro-
pensity, if very active, are quite inordinate, as hap-
pens with the sense of taste and with hunger and
thirst. It is the same with philoprogenitiveness.


508 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


Animals love the young of their own kind more
than those of other kinds. The organ of inhabitive-
ness must be modified in animals which live in the
water or upon dry land, in the air, in higher or in
Jower regions. Adhesiveness presents many modifi-
cations in solitary or social animals. Destructive-
ness and constructiveness are much modified, for
animals do not kill in the same way, and the nests
of different birds are not built in the same manner.
The same observations may be made in respect to
all propensities, sentiments, and intellectual facul-
ties. ‘The song of different birds, and their instinct
to migrate, are much modified. Thus it is certain
that all the faculties of the mind are modified in
different species, and in different individuals of the
same species. Nay, it seems to me that there are
idiosyncrasies in respect to propensities, sentiments
and intellectual faculties, as well as in respect to
digestion and the five senses. It is known that cer-
tain stomachs do not digest some things; that cer-
tain individuals cannot bear some odours, savours,
colours, and sounds. In the same way, some per-
sons cannot bear certain modes of feeling or think-
ing, and certain series of tones or of ideas. The
same thing is approved or disapproved of according
to the manner in which it is proposed.

- Another reason of the modified manifestations of
the faculties is their mutual influence. I here con-
sider only mankind. It is indubitable that if two or
more persons do the same thing, it will be done with
certain modifications by every one. As far as the
faculties are essentially the same, we find the same


MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 509


actions in all mankind: nay, as far as the indivi-
duals of different nations have similar faculties, we
observe a certain analogy in their actions and man-
ners, because the actions are the effects of the
special faculties and their combinations, and it is
only their modifications and different combinations
that produce modifications in the actions. Every
faculty then may be considered as combined with
one, two, or more faculties. Hence it is evident
that the number of binary, ternary, and more mul-
tiplied combinations is immense, especially if we re-
flect that every faculty may be modified in itself,
and may be more or less energetic. As this object
however is of the highest importance in anthropo-
logy, and indispensable to the elucidation of our
doctrine, I shail treat of it with some detail, and
shall choose examples which are easily understood,
and may interest every person.

Physical love alone, or combined with adhesive.
ness, philoprogenitiveness, benevolence, and vene-
Tation, or with the propensities to fight and de-.
stroy &c., acts quite differently. ‘Two mothers who
both love their progeny, but of whom one has
philoprogenitiveness combined with much self-love,
much firmness, a great propensity to fight, and with
little benevolence, while the other has philoprogeni-
tiveness combined with adhesiveness, benevolence,
veneration, and with very little self-love and pro-
pensity to fight, will love their children in a quite
different way. Determinate or individual justice is
greatly modified in every person. Every where jus-
tice gives laws, but these are modified according to


510 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the simple and combined faculties of the legislators.
What a difference in the characters of Lycurgus
and Solon; but what a difference also in their pre-
cepts? Socrates and his disciples looked for happi-
ness as the aim of all our actions. Socrates placed
it in moral and virtuous actions; his disciple Aris-
tippus in agreeable impressions on the senses; An-
niceris in agreeable sensations and moral feelings;
Antisthenes in self-satisfaction; Hegesias, a disci-
ple of Aristippus, in voluptuousness; ‘Theodorus,


another disciple of Aristippus, considered every ac-


tion which procured pleasure as good in itself and
as virtuous, because, according to him, man was —
born in order to be happy. Diogenes, disciple of ©
Antisthenes, raised his mind to an absolute inde- 3
pendence: he became almost a savage, and had no
respect for any thing. .
Every where man believes in one or several Gods ;
but what a difference between the Gods of different
nations! It seems to me that every where the Gods
are endowed with faculties conformable to those of —
the nations or of their religious legislators. The
God of the Jews, particularly that of Joshua, and
that of true Christians, are represented as extremely
modified. If we ask different individuals of the
same religion their opinions about God, we hear
also of great modifications. St. Peter and St. John, -—
speak of the same God of Christians, the former
with fear, the latter with meekness and love. Exa-
mine the different opinions of reformers, as of
Luther, of Calvin, Zwingli, and of many others.
Do we not in them always observe the faculties of


MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 511


the individuals? Who, for instance, does not find in
the principles of Melancthon the mildness and mo-
deration of his character? A person endowed with
veneration, combined with charity, attachment, and
understanding, and without pride, destructiveness
and physical love, will establish a system of religious
veneration quite different from that of a person
endowed with veneration combined with covetive-
ness, pride, physical love and destructiveness, and
without charity and understanding.

Music is different in every nation. We easily
distinguish the music of the Italians, Germans,
French, Scots &c. Even the music of every com-
poser offers some thing particular, so that con-
noisseurs distinguish the music of Gluck, of Mozart,
Haydn &c. It is the same with painting. All pain.
ters are colourists, but there is a difference in their
choice of colours and their shades? Does not every
painter prefer certain colours as well as certain ob-
jects? Hence the difference of the pictures of
Titian, Rembrandt, Paul Veronese &c. Those of
Paul Veronese show that he was fond of architec-
ture. Albano betrays in his paintings the propen-
sity to physical love, and the faculty of space &c.

The languages of different nations present a beau-
tiful example of the mutual influence of the facul-
ties. I even admit as a principle, that according to
the spirit of any language we may judge of the fa-
culties of the nation. I spoke of a faculty which —
learns and knows the signs denoting the feelings
and ideas, and is invented by the superior intellec-
tual faculties. Hence it is evident that a nation


512 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


must have many signs if it have many feelings or
ideas, and that the number of one kind of signs in-
dicates the energy of the respective faculty. The
Greek and French languages, for instance, have a
greater number of tenses than the German and
English languages. ‘The French language, on the
contrary, is poor in respect to philosophical expres-
sions, and to those of the sentiments: moreover, it
does not like figurative expressions; while the
German language is rich in these respects. ‘The
German language has also many more signs of dis-
junction. Frenchmen have the organ of indivi-
duality very much developed, and therefore they
are fond of facts; but their faculties of comparison
and causality are commonly smaller. In conse-
quence of this, the French Institute does not admit
analogies as proofs; these consist according to it
only in facts; while the Germans are fond of analo-
gies, and perhaps too much so, for they compare
and wish to explain every thing. The French ex-
pressions are individual without any comparison;
therefore many sounds, though the same, denote
different objects, and are distinguished only in writ-
ing. We see by this that the distinguishing facul-
ties were not very active in Frenchmen. ‘The same
defect is apparent from the quite different names
which they give to very similar objects, while the
German and English languages are more systematic.
Even the common German language is conformable
to the system of Linnzus. ‘The I'rench say, bozv-
reuil, chardonneret, pincon &c., while the German
and English preserve the generic name jink, or


ra


oad


THE MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 513


finch, and join a distinctive character. In the
same way the French say, rasoir, couteau, canif,
serpette, &c., while in German and English the
generic name messer or knife is retained, and the
particular destination is affixed, as pen-knife, cutting-
knife, pruning-knife &c. For this reason also the
number of the roots of the French language is so
considerable, though there is a smaller number of
words than in the German which has fewer roots.
Another proof that the French language is very un-
systematic is, that there is very often an additional
adjective, and an additional substantive, in order to
designate the same idea. ‘These examples evidently
show the influence of other faculties in establishing
languages. Thus the number of signs is relative to
the special. faculties, and the choice of words. de-
pends on the faculties which invent the arbitrary
sions. The faculty of individuality being the first
active in children, we may understand why nouns
and verbs are first invented, and constitute almost
the whole artificial language of children; and why
all words may be reduced to their etymology. By
degrees, as other faculties are active, other significa-
tions of signs must be pointed out, even if the signs
remain the same.

The construction of every language proves also
the influence of other faculties. It denotes the
manner of thinking of different nations. The French
like facts, and direct their attention to them with-
out first considering the cause. It is natural to
begin, in general, with the subject; and after that
the French immediately join the action of the sub-

21L |


514 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


ject; after this the other circumstances are ex-
pressed. If cause and effect are indicated, the
French style begins with the effect, and the cause is
related afterwards. ‘The German language is quite
different ; it requires much more attention than the
French language. It begins also ordinarily with
the subject ; then follow the expressions of the rela-
tions between the subject and object, which are
both mentioned ; and lastly, the action of the sub-
ject upon the object is expressed. Moreover, if a
fact and its cause are spoken of, the cause is ordi- —
narily denoted first and the fact after it. It is known
that certaif languages admit a great number of inver-
sions, others very few. It appears to me that the
former are more logical; for it seems natural that
attention should be directed first to the most impor-
tant object. The French language begins almost
‘always with the fact: hence French understandings
consider the fact as the most important. From these
observations relative to languages, we may easily
conceive that the spirit of any one language can-
not become general. I am of opinion that the spirit
of the French language never will please Germans ;
and that Frenchmen, on the other hand, will al-
ways dislike the spirit of the German, because the
manner of thinking, and the concatenation of ideas,
are quite different in the two nations.

Iam convinced that even different philosophical
systems are the result of the different combinations
of faculties. He who has more of the faculty of in-
dividuality will never neglect facts. He who pos-
sesses this faculty in a low degree, and those of


THE MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 513


comparison and causality in the highest, will begin
to philosophize with cause, and construct the world
instead of observing its existence. He in whom,
on the contrary, the faculty of causality is less ac-
tive, willreject this kind of consideration, and think
that it is unphilosophical to admit a primitive cause.
If, in a philosopher, the superior sentiments be very
energetic, his mind is directed principally toward
moral principles. Hence philosophers think in a
different way as well as every other person does,
and every philosopher also considers his manner of
thinking and feeling as the best. It seems to him
to be right, because his consciousness tells him so,
but I think he is wrong in considering himself as
the measure of the absolute nature of man. I am
of opinion that, in examining the nature of man,
we ought to make abstraction of our manner of
feeling and thinking. We never ought to admit in
man a feeling as the strongest, or a manner of think-
ing as the best, because they are conformable to
ours; and we also ought never to deny in others
what we do not possess; but we ought only to ob-
serve the operations of the human mind in the con-
viction that all essential kinds of manifestations of
the mind, that is, all particular faculties, are inhe-
rent in its nature by creation, and to observe how
every faculty acts and can act, and under what
circumstances it does act. In this manner I think it
possible to determine the absolute nature of man,
and the infinite modifications of individuals. .

It would be easy to quote examples of every fa-
culty, and to multiply them infinitely in order to

| 2L2


td


516 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


prove the mutual influence of the faculties upon
their actions. But I shall not dwell farther on this
principle, except with regard to the abuses of the
faculties. I mention this in order to show how it is
possible to explain peculiarities which seem incon-
ceivable to those who have no idea of our doctrine,
and who therefore deny the possibility of determin-
ing the modifications of the functions. Suppose,
for instance, that we find two thieves confined to a
prison, and we are told that one has robbed a church,
the other not: in this case we may distinguish him ~
who robbed the church from the other. If one


have the organ of charity much developed, and that


of veneration very little, while the other has less
charity, and much veneration, we may be assured
that the former is the robber of the church. Sup-
pose we see two women in a prison, and are told
that one has stolen, and that the other has concealed
the stolen things; the former will have the organ
of covetiveness larger, and that of the propensity
to conceal less, while the second will have the organ
of secretiveness much developed. Ifa certain num-
ber of highwaymen be shown.to us, and if we wish
to point out their chief, we look at the organs of
self-love and determinateness. We distinguish a
vagabond thief from a coiner of false money: the


former has, besides the organ of covetiveness, the


organ of space large, and the organ of cautiousness
small; the latter has that of constructiveness deve-
loped. We may also distinguish dangerous criminals
from those who are more easily corrected. Any one
who has the organs of the sentiments proper to man


THE MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 517


very small, and very little of will, but the organ of
covetiveness, those of the propensities to fight, to
destroy, to conceal, very much developed, will be
corrected with much more difficulty than another
criminal who has the organ of covetiveness very
much developed, but at the same time the organs
of the human faculties very large, and who is sus-
ceptible of moral will.

The mutual influence of the faculties explains
also that which is called the association of ideas.
This name, according to my opinion, designates
only a phenomenon which is quite general, and not
confined only to the intellectual faculties. It is true
that one intellectual faculty, being active, excites
one or several others; but this is also the case with
propensities and sentiments. Certain philosophers
consider the association of ideas as the effect of
habit, and not:as a law of our nature; but it must be
admitted as an innate principle. Many admit a pri-
mitive associating power which Ideny. ‘The facul-
ties exist and are associated. Moreover, as the
energy of the different faculties varies in different
individuals, it may easily be conceived why the fa-
cility, with which ideas are associated, is very dit-
ferent in different individuals. Faculties, the organs
of which are neighbouring, or which are active at
the same time, will easily excite one another.
Moreover, the faculties which contribute to the
same function will easily excite one another, in the
game way in animal life as is the case in organic life.
The principles of association are essentially the same
as those of sympathy or consensus.


418 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN,


These considerations explain also the principle of
mnemonics, and show their importance. It follows
however that the same mnemonical rules cannot be
equally perfect for every person. One person, for
instance, will more easily recollect ideas by the
assistance of space, another by that of form, or of
colour, or number &c. ‘This consideration, in its
whole extent, ought to be employed in education,
Never ought one intellectual faculty alone, but all
those which are necessary to a perfect knowledge of
an object, to be exercised together. I shall farther
elucidate this matter by mentioning the opinion
pretty generally believed, that every one thinks in
his mother tongue. ‘The meaning of this phrase is
not distinct, and it should be determined. We do
not think in any language in the sense, that the
language primitively produces our thinking; for the
feelings and ideas exist before the signs, and we may
have feelings and thoughts without any sign or
language. The signs are only associated to the
feelings and thoughts. This association then is ex-
tremely quick, and takes place instantaneously ; it
corresponds to our manner of thinking, and there-
fore it is said that we think in our native language.
This fact however proves the importance of associa-


tion or mnemonics, or of the mutual influence of


the faculties in general. The vocal signs excite
again the feelings and thoughts, and in the same
way the ideas of form, size, colour, space &c., may
reproduce the vocal signs; or size may excite the


idea of colour, er colour the idea of order, and
40 On.


SE SA RLS LU SD AE ST RR


i


THE MANIFESTATIONS OF EVERY FACULTY. 519


It results from what I have said in this chapter,
that in different species of animals, and in different
individuals of the same species, the actions of every
faculty are modified partly by the modified faculties
themselves, and partly by the mutual influence of
the faculties. This mutual influence and excite-
ment of the faculties is quite general, and explains,


in particular, the association of ideas, and the prin-
ciple of mnemonics.


tyr
bs
Co


CHAPTER XII.


ON THE MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF THE FACULTIES AS
CAUSE OF DIFFERENT CHARACTERS AND TALENTS.


AA rew only of the manifestations of man are the
result of any single faculty : his actions are mostly
the effect of the various combinations of his facul-
ties. It is therefore very important to consider
those different combinations of the faculties which
produce his various actions. Propensities may be
combined with propensities, or with propensities
and sentiments, or with propensities, sentiments
and intellectual faculties. In the same way every
faculty may be combined with faculties of the same
or of other kinds. The combinations of the pro-
pensities and sentiments with propensities and sen-
timents produce the different characters of men,
and the combinations of the intellectual faculties,
one with another, determine the different talents. It
is obvious that very few characters and talents are
simple, but that the greatest number of them is
compound. ‘The agreeable, polite, and amiable
characters result from the combinations of amiable,
benevolent, and superior sentiments. Determinate-
ness, righteousness, and cautiousness, if predomi-
nant, render one serious in general. Characters
become good and noble in proportion as the pro-
pensities and sentiments, which are common to man


CAUSE OF DIFFERENT CHARACTERS AND TALENTS. 521


and animals, are subordinate to the sentiments
proper to man. On the contrary, characters be-
come impolite, disagreeable, immodest, partial, vin-
dictive, corrupt, or untractable, if the superior sen-
timents be less active, while self-love, covetiveness,
and the propensities to conceal, to fight, and to
destroy, act with great energy.

The various talents in art and science result from
the combinations of feelings with intellectual facul-
ties. The faculty of constructiveness, for instance,
combined with number and size, makes mathemati-
cal and geometrical instruments; space and number
are essential to astronomy; construction, space, and
colour, principally constitute the landscape-painter.
Religious sentiments and space produce a zealous
‘missionary. Moreover, all artists, as painters, sculp-
tors, musicians and poets, choose their objects, and
execute them according to their manner of feeling
and thinking. Hence it is evident that all the func-
tions of man are the result of the action and reac-
tion of all his faculties together. These considera-
tions, elucidated by different forms of the heads
corresponding to the particular characters and ta-
lents, may form the object of an interesting separate
book. At all events they lie out of the limits to
which this work is confined.


522


CHAPTER XIII.


ON THE DIFFICULTY OF JUDGING THE ACTIONS OF
OTHER PERSONS.


Havine considered the modified manifestations of
the faculties of the mind, natural order leads me to
the consideration of the difficulty of judging the
‘actions of others, and determining the motives of
their actions. From the preceding considerations it
first results, that the judgment itself of every one
must be modified, as well as his other functions in
general. Indeed if we attend to the judgments of
different individuals in respect to the same object,
observe their reflections, and consider what every
one praises or blames, we are convinced by expe-
rience of the truth of this assertion. It may be ad-
mitted as a principle that every one judges accord-
ing to the natural modifications of his faculties, and
according to their mutual influence ; and that every
one judges others according to his own nature, OF
that he takes himself as the measure of good and
evil. Therefore God is always, and at all times,
anthropomorphosed, every one thinking him modi-
fied and conformable to his own manner of judging.
Therefore also if great philosophers, moralists, and
others, who are good-natured, consider, in criminals
and malefactors in general, the absolute conscience
as their most severe judge, they suppose in thenr


OF JUDGING THE ACTIONS OF OTHER PERSONS. 523


the sentiment which they themselves feel; they
judge themselves in the actions of the others. In
the same way whatever is conformable to our man-
ner of feeling and thinking is approved, while
the contrary is disapproved. Hence, in order to
judge well, we must first distinguish the nature of
man in general, from the modifications of every indi-
vidual; and then we must know our own nature and
our modifications, in order not to censure others ac-
cording to our favourite sentiments or ideas. Thus
we must judge others and ourselves according to the
same measure—according to absolute good and evil.

It is also difficult to judge the actions of other
persons, and to determine their real motives, be-
cause the motives of the same action or omission
may be quite different. It is proverbially said that
appearances are deceitful. I shall quote only a
few examples; but if we consider all kinds of ac-
tions in man, we may observe different motives to
the same action in different individuals. One gives
to the poor from ostentation, another from duty, a
third from the hope of gaining heaven, and others
again from real charity. One wishes to be acquainted
with the situation of unfortunate persons before he
does good; another gives as soon as he sees misery,


and every one is his neighbour ; his left hand wil]
not know what his right hand does. One goes to
church in order to see or to be seen, another in
order to get the friendship of the pious, and a third
from sincere veneration. One is only clean when
he goes into society, another is clean at al] times,
even in solitude. One cultivates an art or science


2


524 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


from vanity, another because he is charmed with it,
and a third because he finds in it the greatest ad-
vantage &c. :

It is the same with the omissions of abuses. One,
for instance, does not steal from charity ; another
steals every where except in the house of those
with whom he lives; a third robs churches, but
not the poor. One does not steal for fear of being
punished, or for fear of doing harm to his repu-
tation, or from a sense of duty and justice &c.
In short, every one knows that the same action he
has done, or not done, was not always the effect of


the same motive. ‘Thus, if an action or -omission |


must be judged, it is necessary to consider whether


it is the result of the natural energy, and of the


want of the respective faculty, or whether other
faculties have influenced this action or its omission.


In judging others, we must consider that every fa-


culty may be active by its own energy or by the
excitement of other faculties; and that in the
same way every faculty may be inactive by the want
of its energy, or by the influence of other faculties.
Hence it follows, that every function does not sup-
pose a large developement of the respective organ ;
and, on the other hand, that the organs may be
greatly developed without producing abuses. The
organ of covetiveness may be very large without
stealing; the organ of physical love much de-


veloped without committing any abuse &c. The —


functions of very large organs may be suppressed,
though with difficulty. The activity of every organ
produces only a corresponding inclination, but the


OF JUDGING THE ACTIONS OF OTHER PERSONS. 525


mutual influence of the faculties must regulate their
subordination. Thus we cannot judge other per-
sons according to our sentiments and faculties, nor
according to one or several of their faculties ; but
‘we must consider, besides individual faculties, all
their faculties together, and censure then the moral
value of -their actions, according to the absolute
nature of man.

- The consideration that every faculty may be active
by its internal energy, answers the question so often
mentioned in different books : what is the origin of
all the arts and sciences? Commonly, in examining
this cause, they begin with the highest antiquity,
and endeavour to show bow external circumstances
have produced and improved them. Without deny-
ing the importance of external circumstances as
exciting powers, we think however that the most
important and primitive cause is overlooked, and
exists in the innate organization. It is the same as
that of the instinctive labours of animals. Man in-
vents and cultivates arts and sciences in the same
-way as the beaver builds its hut, and as the night-
ingale sings. Every sentiment and every intellectual
faculty may act without external excitement, by
its internal activity, and this is the primitive source
of the arts and the sciences. Scarcely could Handel
speak, before he articulated musical sounds. His
father, grieved at the child’s propensity to music,
banished from his house all musical instruments.
But this musical genius was not to be extinguished
by the caprice of a mistaken parent. The child
contrived to get a little clavichord into a garret, to

4:


526 PUYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


which applying himself after the family retired to
rest, he soon found means to produce both melody
and harmony. Nature invented arts and sciences,
and revealed them to man by means of the organiza-
tion. Even the gradual perfecting of arts and
sciences takes place, only in proportion as the in-
dividuals who cultivate them are possessed of more
or less energetic organs.

The consideration of the two kinds of activity of
the faculties leads me to the following question,
What actions deserve the greatest confidence in re-
spect to morality, those which result from good
nature, or those which are the effect of virtue?
Though I think that good is always good in itself,
and must be approved of, I allow however that the
merit of virtue is greater than that of good-nature.
I agree with the definition of virtue which all great
ancient and modern philosophers have given, as
Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Kant, and others.
I admit, that those who have vanquished temp-
tations deserve particularly to be rewarded, and
that by the possibility of being virtuous or vicious


our actions have the greatest merit or demerit.”


* Non virtus est, non posse peccare ; cum renunciatur impro-


bitati, statim adsciscetur virtus. St. Amdrostus.—Nulla sine ©


labore virtus est. Non est gloriosa victoria nisi ubi fuerint gloriosa
certamina. Idem in Ps. 118, et De Off:—Posse peccare datum
est primo homini, non ut proinde peccaret, sed ut gloriosior ap-
pareat, si non peccaret, dum peccare posset. St. Bernardus de
Lib. Aré.—Vita nostra in hac peregrinatione non potest esse sine
peccato, sine tentatione, quia profectus noster per tentationem
nostram fit; nec sibi quisquam innotescit, nisi tentatus; nec potest
coronari, nisi vicerit ;- nec potest vincere, nisi certaverit; nec potest


OF JUDGING THE ACTIONS OF OTHER PERSONS. 527


Nevertheless I confess that with respect to my own
behaviour in society, I trust more to good-nature
than to virtue. I love good-nature and esteem
virtue. Guided by daily experience, which shows
that the greatest number of persons act much more
according to their propensities and sentiments, than
according to their understanding and will, I never
choose for my intimate friends persons in whom
the inferior organs are very large, and the superior
very small. In the same way I think, that the effect
of the intellectual faculties, if they act by internal
energy, is much greater than if they are excited
by other sentiments.

From the modifications of our faculties results
still a very important practical rule—indulgence.
It is impossible that other persons should feel and
think in every point in the same manner as we do.
In the same way as it is generally admitted, that
the functions of the five external senses cannot be
altogether the same, and without any modification—


certare, nisi inimicum et tentationes habuerit. St. Augustinus super
Ps. 60.—Quidam in juventute luxuriosé viventes, in senectute
continentes fieri delectantur, et tunc eligunt servire castitati, quando
libido eos servos habere contempsit. Nequaquam in senectute
continentes vocandi sunt quiin juventute luxuriosé vixerunt; tales
non haberint premium, quia laboris certamen nor habuerunt; eos
enim spectat gloria, in quibus fuerunt gloriosa certamina. Jsidor.
de Summo Bono, Lib. i. c. 31.—For there are some eunuchs which
were so born from their mother’s womb; and there are some eunuchs
which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs which
have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake.
Matt. xix. 12.—Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons which need
no repentance. Luke, xv. 7,


528 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


as it is proverbially said, De gustibus non est dis-
putandum, the internal faculties are also modified,
and no one has a right to desire other persons to
feel and think in the same manner.as he does. A
certain indulgence is necessary in society. I do not
maintain that every manner of feeling and thinking,
and every action, can be tolerated. There is a com-
mon touchstone for every individual. The feelings,
thoughts, and actions, must be conformable to the
absolute conscience of man; all other modifications
ought to be tolerated. This principle may be ap-
plied to both sexes, to all conditions and ages;
and no friendship can be permanent without indul-
gence as to many modifications in the manner of


feeling and thinking. It is the same in religious.
and other opinions. St. Paul said to the Romans, |


<¢ One believeth that he may eat all things, another,
who is weak, eateth herbs; let not him that eateth


despise him that eateth not, and let not him that »


eateth not judge him that eateth. One man esteemeth
one day above another, another esteemeth every day
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind. We then that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace.”


CHAPTER XIV.


ON SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY.


Tue idea that ail the manifestations of the fa-
culties are modified in different individuals leads
me also to the consideration of sympathy and anti«
pathy. Hitherto I have considered merely human
nature, and every individual only in himself; but
throughout all nature beings have some relation
one to another. And as we have seen that there
are different relations between the different faculties
of the same individual, so there exist different re-
lations between the different faculties of different
individuals. Indeed it is generally observed, that
certain beings cannot exist in the society of others,
while others are attached one to another. The
attractive and repulsive power of physics, the
affinities of chemistry, are well known; but even
among vegetables, certain species perish in the
neighbourhood of certain others, while other species
increase and prosper very well together. Among
animals, this law does not only exist in respect to
different species, but also in respect to different
individuals of the same kind. Certain individuals
of the same species manifest a particular attach.
ment one to another, while others cannot bear each
other. In a herd of cows, the bull is commonly

2M


530 } PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


more attached to one individual than to the rest.
Birds are paired by choice &c.

It is the same with mankind. It is however to
be remembered, that Ido not speak in the same
sense of sympathy and antipathy, as many authors
do, in speaking of the sympathy and antipathy of the
stomach and the five senses. ‘They then describe
what is called idiosyncrasy. It is, for instance,
known that certain persons cannot digest, a parti-
cular kind of food. One cannot bear the smell of
certain odours, or he is disgusted in tasting a par-
ticular savour ; he cannot look at certain figures, or
touch certain bodies. I mentioned above that I
admit idiosyncrasies in the internal faculties, but
here I speak of the natural relations between the
faculties of different individuals. Certain individuals
are as it were born one for each other, while others


mutually feel an invincible aversion. This may be ©


explained in the following manner. First, certain
faculties of man are eminently social, as attachment
and charity ; and others are quite the contrary, for
instance, selfishness and pride. Moreover, accord-
ing to a general rule, every faculty desires to be
satisfied. Hence every person is pleased with that
which is conformable to his manner of feeling and
thinking: every one wishes to enjoy; therefore
every one likes those who procure or permit.to him
enjoyments. Hence ‘it is easily conceived, that
there is. no permanent and invariable combination :
on the contrary, the relations vary in the same de-
gree as the modifications of the faculties of different


ON SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY. 531


individuals. Before we can decide whether two
individuals sympathize or not, we must consider all
their faculties. In this respect then, it is obvious
that understanding likes understanding, and every
kind of intellectual faculty likes a similar faculty.
The musician is pleased with music; a mathema-
_ tician with mathematics; a philosopher with phi-
losophical ideas; a philologist with languages &c.
In the same way, the sentiments proper to man look
for similar sentiments. A charitable person likes
mild and good-natured people; religious persons
prefer similar individuals. Thus, all the faculties
of the understanding and all the sentiments proper
to man, are favourable to society.

It is not quite the same with the faculties com.
mon to man and animals. Certain of these facul-
ties are also social, as attachment, adhesiveness,
and, in a certain degree, amativeness and philopro-
genitiveness; but the greatest number of these fa-
eulties are antisocial. Interested persons, for in. —
stance, do not like other interested individuals,

except as far as their own covetiveness is satisfed.
Proud persons do not like other persons endowed
with the same faculty. Proud and interested per-
sons not only dislike one another, but they are
also disliked by persons endowed with the superior
sentiments. This is also the case with the propen-
sities to fight and to destroy. Thus every one will
sympathise with those in whose society his faculties
are satisfied ; and antipathy will be proportionate to
the hinderance of enjoyments.

There is a guestion relative to the consideration

2M 2


632 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


of the happiness of man, which may here be spoken
of. It is asked whether it is better to have many or
few wants in order to be happy? Wants in this sense
are synonymous with instincts, inclinations, desires 5
and they are the result of the activity of the fa-
culties. Hence this question might also be pro-
posed in the following manner: is it better to have
more or fewer faculties, and to have them more or
less active, in order to be happy? I think that the
number and energy of the faculties may be the
cause either of a fortunate or unfortunate condition.
Every faculty, being active, wishes to enjoy, and
he who is possessed by many and energetic faculties,
if his faculties be satisfied, will enjoy more than
another person who has very inactive faculties ; but
the former will also be much more unfortunate, if
his faculties be not satisfied. Happy is he, who has
many faculties which he himself can satisfy, but
unhappy are ordinarily those who have many and
energetic faculties which can be satisfied only by
the assistance of others. Unhappy also is he, whose
inferior faculties are the most energetic; principally
if they do harm to the health, and if their satis-
faction be expensive. Yet it is to be observed that
these kinds of wants are rather inordinate actions
of the faculties than their natural destination, and
it is necessary to distinguish wants, as simple ac-
tivities of the faculties, from their abuses; here in
examining this question, I speak only of wants in the
sense of activity of the faculties.


533


CHAPTER XV.
ON PATHOGNOMY.


Arter having considered the faculties in particu-
lar, their modifications, their mutual influence, and
the consequences of this mutual influence, I shall
treat of another very important consideration.—It
is to be investigated whether it be possible to point
out certain and determinate rules, according to
which the faculties, and their different modes of
action, manifest themselves by certain and positive
signs. It seems to me, that a doctrine which
teaches the special external expressions of every
faculty is possible. I shall speak of it under the
name of natural language or pathognomy.

What can be more interesting than the know-
ledge of man, and the doctrine of the possibility of
distinguishing the feelings and thoughts of others?
Hence, from the highest antiquity this study has
been cultivated, and several opinions in it have been
established. Solomon said, ‘“ A naughty person, a
wicked man walketh with a froward mouth. He
winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he
teacheth with his fingers.”’* Ecclesiasticus ob-
served, “ that the heart of a man changes his coun-
tenance, whether it be for good or for evil; and a


* Proy, yi. 12513


5S4 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


merry heart makes a cheerful countenance.” * “ The
envious man has a wicked eye, he turns away his
face and despises men.” t ‘“ A man may be known
by his look, and one that has understanding by
his countenance, when thou meetest him &c.’’t
Aristotle, Cicero, Leibnitz, and a great number of
ancient and modern writers have treated of this
matter. Lavater obtained great reputation by obser-
vations of this kind. ‘This study however is still far
from being reduced to fixed principles. I ‘can-
not enter into all the details which an exaet elucida-
tion of this subject requires; but shall confine my-
self to general observations, an order to show with
what view this study ought to be cultivated. Iam
obliged to do the same in respect to the subjects of
the following chapters. If however circumstances
permit, I shall publish farther on these subjects,
which ‘are so intimately ‘connected with anthro-
pology, and seem to me of ithe highest importance.
The first thing ‘to be considered is the differ-
ence between physiognomy and pathognomy. The
former is the doctrine which judges of ‘the faculties
of the «mind, according to the form of the solid
parts of our body; the latter considers the
motions ‘of the ‘mobile parts. ‘Lavater thinks, that
it is easy to know ‘the dispositions and the funda-
mental faculties, by means ‘of the shape of the solid
parts and of the permanent features ; he considers
pathognomy as necessary, ‘but deceitful on account
of the dissimulation of ‘man; he prefers physiog-


* Ecclus. x iil. + Eeclus. xiv. 8. t Ecclus, xiv, 29.


2


ON PATHOGNOMY. 535


nomy, because it is impossible to change and con-
ceal the form of the bodily parts. He insists
particularly on the harmony of the different parts.
According to him the form of every part, separated
from the rest, indicates the form of all other
parts and of the whole body. ‘ All that  be-
longs to man arises from the same source. All is
homogeneous: size, shape, stature, colour, hair,
skin, veins, bones, nerves, voice, manners, passions,
love and hatred. He is always one.’’*

Our observations do not agree with this pro-
position. In treating of the brain as the organ of
the faculties of the mind, I have shown that there
is no harmony or proportion of the different bodily
parts to each other, but that it is necessary to com-
pare the relation of every faculty to its respective
organ. For this reason, all the physiognomical
signs mentioned by Lavater, which do not belong
to the skull are quite incorrect, and even those
relative to the head are only useful hints, because
he always considers the shape of the whole head.
It follows, that the physiognomical system of La-
vater cannot be confounded with our doctrine. We
deny all means of measuring the faculties of the
mind, which do not consider the developement of
the cerebral parts in particular. ‘These are the only
physiognomical signs which are drawn from thew
configuration.

The second kind of signs are pathognomical or
mimical. They consist in the motions of the soft


S Tom, li. fx. 14,


536 PHYSIGLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


and mobile parts, and indieate the activity of the’
internal faculties. Their existence is not only evi-
dent, but their study is also very important and
indispensable to artists, painters, sculptors, actors,
and: anthropologists. Tull the present time, all mi-
mical knowledge has consisted only in detached
observations: it has not been reduced to principles.


This however ought to be, and seems to me to be.


possible. I think that the manifestations of every
faculty are as determinate as the special faculty
itself. I shall endeavour to point out this relation
of the faculties to their external expressions. Gall,
in speaking of mimickry, considers the motions,
gestures and attitude, only in order to prove the
seats of the organs. He is right in saying that the
motions are modified according to the seats of the


organs, but this consideration alone is too limited


to explain all the variety of expression. This may
be the cause why the greatest number of his au-
ditors are not satisfied with his explanations of
mimickry.

Mimickry is divided by different authors accord-
ing to their knowledge of .our faculties. Engel
divides mimickry into that of pleasure and pain. I


divide mimickry or pathognomy, according to my’


division of the faculties of man, into that of au-
tomatic and into that. of animal life. I subdivide
the mimickry of animal life into that of the five
senses and of the internal faculties. I then con-
sider the expressions of every particular faculty.
and after this, the pathognomy of the different
modes of action of the faculties. Finally, pathog-


ON PATHOGNOMY. 537


nomy is simple—that of every single faculty ; or it
is compound—the effect of the activity of several
faculties together. In treating of the faculties of
the mind, I have shown that there are several ge-
neral ideas which concern all the faculties, and it
is the same with mimickry. Therefore I shall speak
first of these general considerations, and then of the
particular signs of every faculty.


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF PATHOGNOMY.


1. As soon as any faculty of the mind is active,
all the bodily parts which contribute to the per-


formance of the respective function enter into
action. | 7 «

2. All motions and all activity of the auxiliary
parts are adapted to the performance of the func-
tion. op |

3. Though the activity of only one part be ne-
cessary to any function, yet all other similar parts
enter into action.

4, If any internal faculty be active, and some-
what energetic, though no function is produced, yet
the external expressions take place conformably.

5. All external expressions are concordant over
the whole body.

6. The external expressions are stronger or
weaker according to the activity of the faculties ;
they are modified in different nations, individuals,
temperaments and ages; but the essential is every
where the same.


533 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


7, The motions and attitude of the body are mo-
dified according to the seats of the organs.

8. External i are either transitory or
permanent. 4

9, Pathognomy may be studied in respect to truth,
or in respect to gracefulness.

10. Finally, pathognomy is to be distinguished
from pantomime.

It answers my present purpose only to mention
these general principles, but they might be ascer-
tained by a great number of particular observations.
The reader however may be desirous to know some
particularities as to the special faculties, and I shail
therefore shortly examine the simple pathognomy of
different faculties. It is unnecessary to particularise
certain motions which indicate the propensity to
love; such as the head and body drawn backward
and downward &c.—In adhesiveness, all the motions
express this propensity: there are shaking hands,
kissing and embracing; and the motions in general
are soft, engaging and insinuating, the voice mild
and gentle.—In combativeness, we defend or attack ;
and all motions then are conformable. No blow,
for instance, can be given without contraction of
the muscles; and to this end the muscles which
must act are always extended in contracting the
opposite ones when we endeavour to give any blow.
The contraction of the muscular fibres is also ob-
served in the vocal organs. ‘Thus contraction is the
characteristic sign of this faculty.—In destructive-
ness, the instruments which catch and seize enter


ON PATHOGNOMY. 539


first into action; man opens the fingers, and car-
nivorous animals the claws. In a high degree of
activity, we gnash the teeth, pinch, scratch, stamp
with the feet, and make motions relative to des
struction. |

In secretiveness all the expressions correspond.
The head is drawn downward between the shoul-
ders; the look is from below upward, and turned
in all directions; the whole body is contracted.
The cunning man feigns not to observe the object he
looks at; he goes on tip-toe, and his voice is soft
and low. Every sign indicates concealment.—Self.
love draws the head and the whole body upward
and backward, and keeps them stiff. The eyes are
open and staring; all motions are measured; the
voice is slow and brief.. The inactivity of this’ fa.
culty, or humility, is indicated by quite opposite
signs. ‘The head and body are then bowed forward ;
and its highest degree is marked by prostration of
the body.—In approbation, all the expressions of
the face, voice, and motions, are pleasant: the face
is smiling; the lips are softly closed; sometimes
the mouth is a little pointed; the voice is engaging ;
the motions light, agile and caressing. This fa-
culty wishes to be looked at by others, and hence
all its decorative signs.—Cautiousness lifts the head:
up and a little backward, puts every sense into
activity, and commands attention. We listen and
look around us. |
In benevolence, all the expressions are lively,
quiet, soft, free, peaceful, and without any con-
straint.—Adoration directs the head upward and


540 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


forward; the eyes and arms take the same di-
rection; and the fingers are opened as if to receive
a certain influence from above. If we need the
assistance of God, we call on him, stretch out our
hands, close them together as if we would keep
him, and say, Do not leave us, we hang on thee.
It is objected, that in adoration and saying of
prayers, our motions are upward, because we think
that God is above. But why do we think that God
is above, while we are taught from infancy that
God is every where. Moreover, it is a known fact
that we turn with the earth; yet at every moment
we think that God is above, though after twelve
hours the former above is become the below.—In
righteousness, and determinateness the whole body
is upright and immoveable. The manner of speak-
ing is short, slow, and expressive, and all the motions
are slow. “

The faculty of individuality desires to know, it
therefore excites the activity of the external senses.
On this account, even in touching, we listen at the
same time.—If we hear music, or play on any mu-
sical instrument, we listen and make different
motions forward and sideward according to the
cadence; the eyes are turned outward upward ; and
certain persons open the mouth in order to hear
better :—if we reckon internally we look downward
and sideward:—if we think of time we raise our
eyes upward :—if we cannot recollect any name or
word, we make different motions with the eye-balls
and eye-lids, and we shut the eyes or rub them with
the hands.—In deep reflection, we put all the ex-

6 £


ON PATHOGNOMY. 541


ternal senses in inactivity, and we keep the hands
before the forehead. In general all motions show
that reflection takes place in the forehead. There-
fore if we reproach any one on account of his want
of reflection, we bring the hand to his forehead or
to ours, indicating its want. It seems that Sterne
placed his finger upon his organ of wit, as his portrait
represents him.

The second section of pathognomy concerns the
modes of action of the faculties. We have seen
that there are general modes of action, and particu-
lar ones. It is the same with the mimical expres-
sions. If the faculties be inactive, there is no ex-
ternal expression. In perfect idiots, for instance,
the muscles act according to the preponderance of
their natural strength; and therefore the flexor
muscles, being stronger than the extensors, produce
a conformable attitude of the body. In a lazy and
stupid fellow, the head hangs forward, the legs are
turned inward, and the body never keeps an active
position. Moreover, all faculties are either agree-
ably or disagreeably affected; and there are also
expressions common to each of these states. In
every disagreeable affection, we endeavour to re-
move the impressions; but in every agreeable
affection, we try to receive and to retainthem. In
the same way as we stop the nose and propel the
air, if the smell be affécted by any disagreeable
odour, and as we shut the eyes and ears in order to
avoid disagreeable impressions on these organs, so
we shut all the organs of the senses, contract our
limbs, and shorten our body in order to present a


542 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


smaller surface, when our mind is disagreeably
affected. It is quite the contrary in agreeable af-
fections. This consideration may explain the na-
tural signs of yes and no. ‘The former inclines the
head forward; the latter shakes it. It seems to
me, that in assenting we show our inclination by
approaching the object we think of, and by the
sign of denying we indicate that we would not be
touched or retain the idea.

The different expressions of the particular af-
fections are explained by the particularities of every
faculty, combined with the common expressions of
agreeableness or disagreeableness.—Anger is diss
agreeable and is an affection of combativeness.—
Anxiety and fear are disagreeable affections of cau-
tiousness. The expressions of disdain are com-
posed of disagreeableness, self-love, and the de-
sire to see any one down and below us.

The third section of pathognomy contains the
expressions of different characters. J have men-
tioned that the greatest number of characters are
compound. ‘Therefore the compound pathognomy
is as numerous as the characters themselves—almost
infinite in modification and combination. ‘The ge-

“neral rule is, that in the compound pathognomy
the signs of every faculty are distinct, in the same
proportion, as the faculties which constitute the
characters are active. I conclude this chapter with
the remark, that pathognomy constitutes natural
language; that its perfect study is difficult, but very
important ; and that its acquirement amply rewards
for the pains which its prosecution requires, |


543


CHAPTER XVI.


@N MAN AS AN OBJECT OF EDUCATION AND CORRECTION
OR REFORM.


Arter having considered the special faculties of
the mind, their modes of action, their mutual in-
fluence with all its consequences, and the expressions
which indicate the activity of the faculties; after
having pointed out the nature of man, we may
speak of his education and correction or reform. I
commence with the principle that all faculties are
innate, and that their manifestations depend on par-
ticular organs. Hence education can only take
place where the faculties, and the conditions of
their manifestations, exist; for education is nothing
but exercise, cultivation, and direction.

‘Those who have the care of education will agree,
that the acting powers are not equal in all indivi-
duals; and therefore the first object to be examined
is the cause of this difference, and the second whe-
ther we have any influence, and what, upon this
eause. It follows from our doctrine that the mate-
rial organs produce the difference of the manifesta-
tions of the mind. Moreover, as it is impossible to
exercise any power upon the: faculties themselves,
we are obliged to confine our examination to the
conditions of the material organs. In this respect,
man is submitted to the general law of living nature,


5 4A PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


and like other organised beings he participates in
the properties of his parents as far as their organiza-
tion is propagated. Hence the first principle of all
education, or of all endeavours to perfect man-
kind, is to observe the same method which is kept
in view in perfecting all other living beings, that is,
to take care that the germ be good.

Since it is known by constant observation that the
disposition to certain diseases, as to the gout, dropsy,
consumption, scrofula, deafness, epilepsy, apoplexy,
idiotism &c., are hereditary, several authors insist
in their writings upon a better choice of marriages
for the sake of the progeny. Now as it is indubita-
ble that the manifestations of the mind depend on
the organization, and as the organization is propa-
gated, it results evidently that the first means of per-
fecting mankind depends on innateness ; and that, as
Moses said, ‘* the sons of God ought not to come to
the daughters of man.” All ancient legislators con-
sidered marriage as a very important point of their in-
stitutions. It certainly is a pity that, in this respect,
we take more care of the races of our sheep, pigs,
dogs, and horses, than of our own offspring.

After birth we have no more immediate power
than before birth; upon the faculties themselves;
we have some influence only upon the organization.
At this period however, strictly speaking, education
begins. It is commonly divided into physical and
moral; the former concerns the body, the latter the
faculties of the mind. But as the manifestations of
the mind depend on the body, this division seems to
me incorrect. I therefore divide education dit-


ON MAN AS AN OBJECT OF EDUCATION. G48


ferently, though also into two parts. Iconsider, im
the first part, whatever contributes to the activity
of the faculties, and, in the second, whatever con¢
cerns the mutual influence of the faculties, and con-
tributes to the morality of our actions. ‘Lhe first
condition of a greater energy of the manifestations
of the mind is the developement of the respective
organs; the second is the imternal constitution of
the organs: these two conditions then constitute
particularly the object of physical education. ‘The
third condition is the exercise, and the fourth the
mutual influence of the faculties.

Though we have great power over physical educa-
tion, yet innateness is, in this respect, of the highest
importance ; for there are individuals who resist all
hurtful influence and prosper, while others are over-
come by little impediments. After innateness, the
influence of climate, air, light, and food; in one
word, of all the hygiena, is the most important.
Hygiena then must be studied according to tem-
peraments, ages, professions, and climate; and all
its rules must be established according to a long
series of observations. The law of nutrition is
general throughout all organised beings, why should
it not be applicable to man? and as the whole body
is modified by nutrition, we are obliged to admit
that it is also the case with the nervous system,
which is nourished in the same way as all the other
systems.

In respect to exercise, as the third condition which
contributes to a greater energy of the mamnitesta-
tions, I. mention that its influence is observed

2N


546 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


throughout all living beings, and in the automatic
and animal life of man. No exercise however can
take place if the organ be not given; and exercise
will produce a different effect according to the deve-
lopement, and the internal constitution of the organs.
Here it may be asked whether the organs increase
by exercise? ‘This may happen in the brain as well
as in the muscles; nay, it seems more than proba-
ble, because the blood is carried in greater abun-
dance to the parts which are excited, and nutrition
is performed by the blood. But in order to be able
to answer this question positively, we ought to ob-
serve the same persons exercised and not exercised ;
or at least observe many persons who are, and many
others who are not exercised during all periods of
life. Strictly speaking I consider in exercise only
the facility of action produced by it. The fingers
of an individual, who exercises himself in playing
upon the piano-forte, do not always increase, but
their motions become more facile and less _ easily
fatigued, than in a person who seldom makes use of
his hands. The part of education which concerns
exercise is still extremely defective. I shall men-
tion only its chief principles. First, to exercise is
synonymous with putting in action: hence in ex-
ercising one faculty, we do not exercise another,
and every faculty must be exercised in itself. Now
what shall we say of that education which endea-
vours to cultivate feelings by exercising intellectual
faculties or mere verbal memory? Is it conceivable
that the feelings are not learned? I think that. feel-


ings must be educated and exercised in the same
1


pow


ON MAN AS°AN OBJECT OF EDUCATION. 547


way as the intellectual faculties, that is, by putting
them in action. Speak to a child of music, but
prevent him from hearing music, and never permit
him to play on any musical instrument, can you
imagine that his faculties of tune will be exercised?
Speak to a child of compassion, but let him never
see any unfortunate being, will his benevolence be
exercised? This consideration explains the ancient
adage, Verba movent, exempla trahunt.

Moreover, no faculty can be exercised before the
respective organ is developed. But certain organs
are early developed, others increase later; some
act early and last during life, and others begin to
act early or late, and do not last till the end of life.
This is necessary to be obseryed in an exact plan of
education. The fourth means of activity consists
in the mutual influence of the faculties. As I have
treated this consideration in another chapter, it is
not here necessary to enter into any detail. I shall
therefore state several notions, in respect of the
second part of education, which concerns the direc-
tion of the manifestations.

In order to understand this consideration, it is ne-
cessary to recollect what I have said of the sphere of
activity of every faculty, of their mutual influence, of
their natural arrangement with respect to morality,
and of the modifications of every individual. All
these notions are necessary to education if it intend
to direct action. The basis then of .all education is,
that the faculties common to man and animals ought
to be directed by those which are proper to man.
Moreover, it is to be considered that every one is

2N 2


548 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


fond of what gives him pleasure. ‘This principle,
combined with that of morality, will greatly support
the direction of the faculties. If, for mstance, love
of approbation exist in a child, it cannot be annihi-


lated but must be directed, and ought to be ap- .


proved of as far as it is combined with superior
sentiments; praise is to be given to him for his
benevolence, justice, perseverance, and other noble
manifestations.

A third principle is, that no action takes place
without motive. The motives are of two kinds;
superior or inferior. The former are the best; but
if the manifestations of the superior faculties be
very weak, we must supply their place by the infe-
rior. Man is ‘susceptible of shame, fear, interest,
of the enjoyments of the five senses, of hunger and
thirst, of bodily pain and pleasure; he likes his per-
sonal freedom &c.; hence all these sensations be-
come motives for him to act in different ways. It is
also to be considered that, besides the two kinds of
motives, the will contributes much to the direction
of the actions, because the faculties of will render
_ man attentive to the motives. Hence he who has
more will, or whose reflecting faculties are more

active, who compares better the present with the
past, and foresees the future, who distinguishes
easily the relation between ‘cause and effect &c.,
will consider more exactly the different motives,
and will form a different decision from him who
pays very little attention to motives.

Another essential point to be considered in educa-
tion is, that not every one is fit for every condition.

6


» ae hs we Rn * .
aera er


ON MAN AS AN OBJECT OF CORRECTION. 549


It is a general complaint that very few persons oc-
cupy the places to. which they are destimed by na-
ture. This great error in society will exist as long
as the unity of faculties is believed, or as long as
the general faculties of the mind are considered as
special. This fault will be corrected when the true
special faculties are known, and when it is admitted
that the manifestations of every special faculty de-
pend on a particular organ. Before I finish this
chapter, I may mention another great error of edu-
cation. Many things are learned in order to be un-
learned, and auxiliary faculties often are not at all
exercised. To obviate this it is necessary to know
not only that every faculty itself must be exercised,
but also that certain faculties are required for dif-
ferent professions, arts or sciences. All faculties
proper to man ought to be exercised in every one ;
but among the others a choice ought to be made,
and those only which are indispensable or auxiliary
ought to be exercised. I conclude this subject with
the remark, that those who endeavour to educate
mankind ought to begin by studying the nature of
the human race.


ON MAN CONSIDERED AS AN OBJECT OF CORRECTION OR
REFORM.


I shall here mention only a few general ideas.
First, I repeat the remark, that the nature of the
human race is by no means known. It is therefore
not astonishing that the means which have been and
are still employed for correcting malefactors have


550 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


not succeeded, and neither do nor can succeed. I[
consider the principles according to which institu-
tions for correction and punishment ought to be
established, as the continuation of education, that
is, of the education of bad children. Neither all
adult persons nor all children can be left to them-
selves, and to the motives which they find in their
minds; for these very often would not be sufficient
to produce moral actions, and hence governments’
are obliged to direct the actions of society. Now
it seems to me that the aim of all institutions ought
to be essentially the same, that is, to render subor-
cinate the actions of the faculties common to man
and animals to those which are proper to man; or,
in other terms, to combine the common happiness,
as far as possible, with that of every individual.

{ have shown that the superior faculties produce
laws, and that without them no law could exist. It
is now to be observed that every perfect institution
ought to be founded upon all the superior faculties
together. It is defective as soon as one faculty is
neglected. Hence it must be, only according to the
absolute conscience, charitable, wise, and immuta-
ble. Though the. branches of legislation are very
numerous, they ought all to have the same aim; and
moral and religious precepts, and civil laws, ought
to agree with each other. I also think that all in-
stitutions, called houses of correction and _ prisons,
ought to have the same aim, and be established
upon the same principles. Punishment ought to be
only a means of correction, and not the aim of any
_fegislation. The faults and crimes of adults must


ON MAN AS AN OBJECT OF CORRECTION. 5d


be prevented in the same way as those of children ;
I mean, by education in allits extent. Adult per-
sons, who commit faults, ought to be corrected ;
and, if any one be incorrigible, society must be
secured against him. It is not my intention to
enter into details; I wish only to call the attention
of moralists and legislators to the knowledge of
human nature, and to show that our doctrine is in-
timately connected with all professions in society,
and with all the actions of man.


552


CHAPTER XVI.


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN, AND ON THE
DERANGEMENTS OF TITE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE
MIND.


ConsipErATions of this kind, in particular, belong
to medical men. I shall therefore develope only
certain ideas which may have some interest with
every intelligent reader. ‘The first distinction to be
made concerns the difference between the diseases
of the brain with respect to its automatic life, and-
the derangements of the manifestations of the mind.
Indeed the diseases of the brain and the derange-
ments of the mind may be considered'separately by
philosophers; and they are too often so considered
by physicians, though these latter never ought to do
so. It would evidently be very odd if we should
examine the diseases of the lungs, liver, stomach &c.,
without considering the derangements of their func-
tions, or to speak of the derangements of respira-
tion, secretion, digestion &c., without thinking of
the diseased state of the relative organs. Physi-
cians however, who speak of the derangements of
the manifestations of the mind without considering
the cerebral organization, proceed in a similar man-
ner. Such an error is immaterial as long as it is not
applied to practice; but it is hurtful and unpar-
donable when it is necessary to act and to cure; or


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 553


when institutions for such unfortunate creatures are
established according to such conceptions.

The importance of these considerations will ex-
cuse my digressing from the object of the work.
Indeed I should be very happy could I call to them
the attention of those who contribute to the foun-
dation and direction of similar institutions, which,
according to their common arrangement, I shouldbe
inclined to consider as indeed mad-houses, not houses
for madmen. ‘They are at least an evident proof of
our ignorance as to these diseases. I also think that
this ignorance does greater harm to humanity than
any kind of insanity. I cannot help confessing my
indignation at such institutions, and my pity for
these unfortunate creatures who are given up to
chance only from our ignorance. What would a
physician think of hospitals wherein all patients
were received indiscriminately, curable and incura-
ble, cripples, blind, deaf and dumb, with acute,
chronic, infectious, and other affections, without
any medical arrangement as to the cure of them—
where the patients were only separated according to
their payment—where the rooms or wards were in-
deed kept clean, and every hurtful accident pre-
vented, but where all care was confined to a good
physical and, as it is called, moral treatment—
where the permanent direction of the institution
was entrusted to a man who had no idea of any
disease, and who considered this object only as a pe-
euniary affair—and where the plan of distribution of
such institutions was committed to architects? Is it
not then shocking to be obliged to say, that all these


554 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


faults may be observed in many institutions for the
insane? A great deal is spoken of moral treatment ;
it is considered as more important than the medi-
cal; but I cannot call it rational, because it is not
adapted to the nature of man.. Even the most
obvious idea, the indispensable necessity of sepa-
rating the patients, is neglected. ‘The most furious
and the most gloomy and melancholy, the most im-
perious and the most fearful and anxious, the idiot
and the most vociferous, the most religious and
most villanous, are put together. If this be
moral treatment, then that expression seems to me
synonymous with ignorant and stupid. I shall not
detail other defects which may be observed in such
institutions. These cannot be perfectly regulated
before the nature of the mind and of its manifesta-
tions is pointed out. In general it was impossible,
till the present time, to conceive the derangements
of the manifestations of the mind, because the con-
ditions necessary in the healthy state were not
known. But as it is certain that all the manifesta-
tions of the mind take place by means of the orga-
nization, and as the organization may be deranged,
(not the mind itself which 1s immaterial,) the de- .
rangements of the manifestations of the mind are
easily understood. It follows then that the physio-
logy and pathology of the brain are submitted to
the same principles as those of the other parts of
the body, and all that may be taught of these is
also applicable to the brain. I shall elucidate this
assertion by certain examples. } |

The manifestations of all the faculties of the


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 558


mind, or of any one of them, may be deranged in the
same way as the whole of automatic life, or certain
functions in particular. ‘The diseased state of the
brain is sometimes perceptible and sometimes im-
perceptible on dissection. It is perceptible in the
brain in the same cases as in other parts. <A defect-
ive developement of the whole or of its parts, a
too rapid developement, inflammation and its conse-
quences, as serous secretion, suppuration, dropsy &c.,
_ are perceptible in the brain as well as in other parts.
Many other diseased affections of the brain, as
gout, hydrophobia, violent concussion followed by
death &c., leave no perceptible traces in the brain
any more than blindness by worms is perceptible in .
the optic nerve, or convulsions in the muscles, or an
idiosyncrasy of digestion in the stomach. Hence it
is impossible to deny the diseased state of the brain,
because it cannot always be seen or touched.
Among the perceptible diseases of the brain, I
mentioned its defective or too rapid developement.
This latter ought to be adverted to by all parents
whose children increase rapidly, principally if this
be the case with their head. On account of such
rapid increase the organs are not sufficiently strength-
ened, and such children are exposed to different
accidents, particularly to inflammation, and acute
dropsy of the bram. I am convinced of this truth
by numerous dissections. During the period of
dentition they require particular attention. At this
age the inflammation of the brain is very dangerous,
and easily overlooked, because it is not accompanied
with violent delirium, fury and similar signs. Phy-


556 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


sicians are generally wrong in thinking that vio-
lent delirium and fury are the only signs of inflam-
mation of the brain. The bodily strength of children
indeed seems to be weakened and even exhausted,
and the apparent weakness is often accompanied
with numbness, convulsions, coldness, and paleness,
It is evident that those who then administer stimu-
lating things do great harm. Did I not think that
it would be tedious to the reader, I should describe
this diseased state in all its details. But as it is
merely medical, I shall not venture beyond the
limits of this work. I need only mention, that the
mind of delicate children who have a large head,
or even of those whose head increases rapidly,
though they are in good health, ought not to be
occupied too early and too seriously ; and whatever
carries the blood toward the head ought to be
avoided. The faculties of the mind im those chil-
dren act commonly with too great energy. Certain
physicians are wrong in maintaiming that round
heads are more subject to this disease than those of
other forms. Very different and very beautiful con-
figurations of the head are no security against this
evil. It takes place most frequently from two. to
nine years. In general it happens with the brain as
with all other parts: the frequency of disease
coincides with developement, and the greatest
enetgy of faculty.

Moreover, the brain suffers idiopathically, that
is, is diseased by itself, or sympathically, that is, is
deranged by the imfluence of other parts. The


+e YI
ace *
3
+ tad
4
“
¢)
oA
i
mo


abdominal viscera and the brain are in intimate


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 557


connexion. If the functions of the viscera are
disturbed, the actions of the mind are not perfect ;
and, on the other hand, the affections of the mind
disturb the functions of the viscera. If, for in-
stance, we feel grief, the digestion is less perfect.
The law of sympathy then ‘between the brain and
viscera 1s the same as between other parts. In the
same way as one gets a cold, another a tooth-ache, a
third an ophthalmia, a fourth a diarrhea, and all from
the inflwence of cold and wet feet, so in different
persons who feel grief, the functions of different
viscera are disturbed, and wice versd.

Finally, the curative method must here be mo-
dified according to the individual, in the same way
as the treatment of every other disease. Hence it
is obvious that the brain is subjected to the same
laws of nutrition, mcrease and disease, as every
other part of the body; and if other parts may be
‘cured, the brain must be curable too. It is also
obvious that the propensities, sentiments and im-
‘tellectual ideas, are to the brain what food 4s to the
stomach, and air to the lungs; and that therefore
the moral treatment of insanities belongs also to
their curative method. Those therefore are cer-
tainly wrong who permit to madmen a kind of
mental occupation, about which their mind is de-
ranged. It is on the other hand a great mistake
to think that moral treatment alone is sufficient.

It may now be conceived why we cannot accede
to the common division of mental diseases. This
is founded upon a division of the faculties of the
mind. But Ihave shown that, till the present time,


558 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the particular faculties of the mind were not known;
and hence it was impossible to make a true division
of their derangements. If my division of the fa-
culties be true, the derangements of the mind will
be divided in the same manner. There will be de-
rangements of propensities, of sentiments, and of in-
tellectual faculties. All derangements will be con-
sidered as the result of the disturbed organs im-
mediately or mediately. Every reasonable mode of
treatment then must be determined according to
the cause; and if this cannot be pointed out, the
whole curative proceeding will be vague and merely
experimental.

The following consideration relative to the de-
rangements of the mind may show how little the
spirit of our doctrine is known, even by those who
oppose it. Pinel supposed, that we pretend to know
in general the disposition to mental alienation by
the external form of the head. To illustrate this
matter, he caused two skulls to be drawn which
have almost the same form. One of these skulls
belonged to a madman, the other to a person of
sound faculties. Pinel intends, by this, to prove
that it is impossible to distinguish madness by the
configuration of the head. Yet he measured the
skulls in all their dimensions, compared both halves
one with another, and all their dimensions accord-
ing to the proportions of the Apollo de Belvidere,
in order to point out the reason of madness. At
the end however he says, “‘ I must be on my guard
against hasty conclusions. I confine myself to his-
torical details, without pronouncing that there is a


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 559


connexion between idiotism and faults of confor-
mation.”

I have explained that the size and form of the
whole head do not at all indicate the particular fa-
culties of the mind; and on this account also the
form of the skull cannot indicate the derangement
of the faculties. We except however idiotism from
birth; for we are not of the opinion of Pinel, who
perhaps did not see a sufficient number of such
heads. If we find any observation confirmed and
proved at all times and every where, we consider it
established, being convinced that the laws of na-
ture are constant. If we do not admit this con-
clusion, there will be no physical truth. We think
that in a too small and defective brain, the mind
cannot manifest itself. Moreover, I ask Pinel,
whether a tongue which gives an appetite for coal,
chalk, dirt &c., has a peculiar form? whether eyes
which see during night differ in shape from eyes
which see only in day-light? Every one before he
falls into any disease has the same shape of the
bodily parts. In the same way, brains of all forms
may fall into disease; and the heads of madmen
therefore must be different as well as those of per-
sons endowed with sound faculties. It is, however,
a positive fact, that certain configurations of the
head are observed in certain derangements of the
mental faculties. In idiots from birth, the head
is too small, or too large, that is, extended by
water. Epileptic persons have in general small
heads, and the vertex very high in comparison to
the rest. of the head. Moreover, if any organ be


560 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


extremely developed, and the person become weak
and irritable, it is natural that this developed organ
should manifest a greater activity than the other
organs. However, it cannot be maintained that
other organs, which are less developed, cannot be-
come extremely irritable and produce fixed feelings
or ideas. |

I shall farther speak only of one circumstance,
which is of the highest importance, and deserves
the attention of all observers, but which is too
much neglected. Many diseased affections appear
particularly at certain periods. ‘Lhe cause of any
disease may be permanent, but it produces greater
derangements at certain times than at others. These
periods of irritability have also the greatest in-
fluence upon madmen. Certain authors consider the
moon as the cause of this periodical excitement ;
but it coincides with all the phases of the moon,
and therefore its real reason seems to be unknown.
It. is indubitable that these periods of irritability
exist. They affect all persons, men and women, at
least once within twenty-eight days. Weak and ir-
ritable persons feel their influence twice within the
same time. Almost every one is from time to time,
during a few days, more irritable ; his mind is not dis-
posed to any application, it is easily fatigued ; his
thoughts are not consecutive ; he wishes to remove
all impressions of the senses, and is sometimes
offended by things which at other times seem in-
different; he is morose without reason, and more
disposed to quarrel or to dispute; his appetite is
Jess, and all his excretions more copious &c.


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 561 >


At this period of irritability a greater number of
quarrels, disputes, duels, and of certain crimes, as
murders from revenge, take place. Therefore, such
periods never are the moments the most favourable
for conciliating two disunited persons. Moreover,
at these periods there is an exacerbation of symp-
toms in all chronical diseases. ‘Those who suffer by
piles are more tormented. Hemoptesis, abortions,
and natural births, are more frequent. It is an
ancient observation, that in certain weeks there are
few births, in others they are numerous. This is
now explained, since the delivery coincides with the
period of the tenth menstruation, and the menses
coincide with these periods of irritability. ‘This
explains also, why, at certain periods, many women
have their menses, and at other times very few.
At these periods, women deserve also more indul-
gence on account of their-irritability.

These periods are shorter or longer, weaker or
stronger, according to the season, weather, tempe-
rature, and the individual irritability of men and
women. But a‘great number of individuals of both
sexes, and always the same individuals, are subjected
to the same periods; and every one according to his
own sensations may determine, whether the effect.
of the periods are weaker or stronger, shorter or
longer, in other persons who belong to his class.
Lhe cause seems to be quite general. Its influence
however is not the same upon all individuals, be-
cause strong persons feel a similar influence only
once, and weak persons twice during the same time.

These periods of irritability explain why certain

ts ee


562 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


persons are subjected to different sorts of periodical
fits ; why others see spectres only once or twice in
a lunar month; and why there are more suicides
at one time than at another; why sometimes their.
melancholy seems to be cured, but returns; why
such individuals being saved or prevented from de-
stroying themselves, after a few days are glad of
being alive; why yet a short time after, they make
new, attempts to finish their existence; and why
they repeat them three, four, five, and more times,
till at last they succeed. Suicide may be the result
of despair, of offended pride, of shame &c., but
it undoubtedly is very often produced by disease ;
for the propensity to suicide is endemical in certain
countries. At Geneva, about Jena, Halle, Ham-
burg &c. it is very frequent; at Vienna it 1s very
rare. Sometimes suicide is epidemical. It is more
frequent at certain times than at others: hence its
cause lies in the bodily constitution, excited by ex-
ternal influences. Finally, like many other aliena-
tions of the mind, suicide is even hereditary. Dit-
ferent symptoms which are observed im such. un-
fortunate creatures prove evidently a diseased state.
At the beginning there is great disorder in the
functions of the viscera of the abdomen: eructa-
tions, flatulencies, an inordinate appetite,, irregular
evacuations ; in women, derangement of the menses.
The complexion becomes sallow or yellowish, and
of an earthy colour, principally about the nose and
mouth; the face loses all its vital lustre; the eyes
are dim and weak; the white of the eyes is of
leaden hue. In other individuals, the face is high-


=


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 563


coloured, lively and much animated, and the eyes
are inflamed. Certain patients of this kind grow
lean, others preserve their plumpness and strength.
Sometimes the whole surface of the skin is insen-
sible, and the patients complain that their hands
and feet are stiff and benumbed. More frequently
the sensibility of the skin is increased; they feel
either in the whole body, or only in certain parts,
principally in the thighs and feet, a burning heat.
Sometimes this heat disappears suddenly at one
place, and appears again at another: it is often felt
in the intestines. The greatest number of these
patients are weak and_ pusillanimous, so that very
strong men tremble before children. Certain pa:
tients torment other persons around them in dif-
ferent ways, and about inconsiderable things ; they
are displeased with all; they see nothing but wicked-
ness and misfortune; even when their situation
mich t be the happiest, and all external circumstancés
indicate prosperity, they despair, and fancy that
they and their family may die of hunger and misery.
Certain individuals imagine that they are despised
or persecuted by every body. The greatest number
of these patients feel a permanent pain above the
root of the nose, and in the midst of the inferior


part of the forehead, and sometimes at the top of


the head. Others complain of an insupportable
tension in the forehead, and of a painful constriction


in the region of the diaphragm. Sometimes they


suffer convulsions, suffocating anxieties, an involun-

tary inclination, or secret impulse, to kill themselves.

Certain persons cannot take the resolution of com-
ZO 2


564 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


municating their feelings to other persons. Some-
times all these symptoms disappear suddenly, but a
short time after they come back. Certain patients
have particular ideas, inspirations, and visions. At
the beginning they judge of their state exactly ;
they consider these feelings and ideas as illusions,
and they combat them with moral and religious prin-
ciples; but when the disease increases, they are
persuaded of their reality, and they sometimes fancy
that they see angels, or hear voices which excite
them to put an end to their life.

Certain individuals are still more unfortunate.
They wish not only to kill themselves, but begin to
destroy other beloved persons, as children, wife,
or husband. They struggle sometimes for several
years against such dreadful ideas; they sometimes
carry about them destructive weapons for several
years, unresolved concerning the manner, place,
and time, when they shall kill themselves and their
relations. Certain persons keep a note book which
shows evidently the derangement of their mind:
they sometimes write down,—I am mad, I am dis-
tracted, and (thinking of self-destruction) I shall
yet do it.

Such patients are commonly considered as tur-
bulent, exalted, whimsical and fractious men.
They are ill-treated, reproached or derided ; they
are even accused as impious, instead of being
treated with mildness, felt for, and trusted to the
attendance of a philosophical physician. Those who
consider this disease as incurable are mistaken,
though it is true that, given up to itself, it most


‘ERE +


ON THE DISEASED STATE OF THE BRAIN. 565


commonly terminates in involuntary destruction. |
When the catastrophe happens, different external -
and accidental circumstances are considered as its
cause. If a husband kill his wife, or a wife her
husband, or parents their children, a great number
of persons consider these actions as the most hor-
rible crimes, because they destroy the life of other
individuals on being tired with their own; but the
judgment of a philosophical physician is quite dif-
ferent. He perceives in these deplorable actions
only the signs of a terrible disease, most deserving
of pity. ‘The opposition of the actions of such une
fortunate persons to nature, ought to have ex-
cited the attention and reflection of every one who
studies mankind. It is impossible to conceive that
a wife who leves her husband, and vice wersé, and
parents that love their children, will assassinate
them as long as their mind is not at all deranged.
Add to this, that murderers of this kind have
neither terrestrial advantage nor revenge in view; >
that after those actions they kill themselves, or
accuse themselves before a magistrate and ask for
death. How is it possible not te observe here a
derangement of the mind, especially if a true pic-
ture of the preceding symptoms be taken inte con-
sideration?

The skulls of such unfortunate creatures also
prove the disease of their brain, for the bone is in
general dense like ivory. Frem this diseased state
it is easily conceived, why certaim observers have
found the corpus callosum altered in suicides; be-
cause, if the whole brain be in a diseased state,


566 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN.


the corpus callosum, as the commissure of both
hemispheres, must be altered too. ‘Thus it is cer-
tain, that suicide is very often the result of disease,
and is influenced by the periods of irritability. |

Many other considerations relative to the de-
rangements of the manifestations of the mind be-
long only to the study of medical men, and I pass
them over in silence,


RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.


It results from all that I have ascertained in re-
spect to the knowledge of man, that his nature is as
determinate as that of every other created being ;
that the manifestations of the mind depend on the
organization; that even the manifestations of every
particular faculty of the mind depend on a par-
ticular part of the brain, termed its organ or in-
strument; that this truth however does not lead to
materialism; that it is possible to point out the
particular functions of every cerebral part by its
size, though the functions do not depend only on
its size, but also on its organic constitution, on its
exercise, and on the mutual influence of the fa-
culties; and that the size of the cerebral parts is dis-
tinguished by the exterior of the head. I have de-
termined also the special faculties of the mind, and
indicated their respective organs; I have treated of
the modes of action of the special faculties, and of
the effects of their mutual influence ; of moral li-
berty; of the morality of our actions in general ;
of the modifications of the manifestations of the

6


RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION. 567


mind in every individual; of different characters
and talents; of the difficulty of judging exactly the
actions of other persons; of the law of sympathy
and antipathy between different individuals ; and of
the external expressions or mimical signs, which in-
dicate the activity of every faculty. Finally, I have
entered into certain general considerations on edu-
cation, on the correction of malefactors, and on
the derangements of the manifestations of the mind.


]


Nee


“


/
: -
.
1
‘ }
x .
¢ i
Z
Py
.
-
‘
>
' s
: !
~* :
4 ‘


“xplanation of the Numbers referring to the va-
rious Organs marked in the Frontispiece and other
Plates.


; Organ of amativeness, (physical love.)


(I. ———— philoprogenitiveness, (Jove of offspring.)
ill, —— inhabitiveness.
OG oe adhesiveness,
Vv. — combativeness,
VI. ———— destructiveness.
Vit. constructiveness,
Vill ——— covetiveness,
[X. ——-—— secretiveness,
X. ——--——- self-love.
XT, —— approbation.
XII, ———-——. cautiousness.
PO) ) eo benevolence.
XIV. ———— veneration.
XV, —— hope.
<Q y one ideality.
AVIL. conscientiousness.
XVII. ———— firmness or determinateness.
XIX individuality.
XX, ———_——. form.
XXI, size.
x XII, —— weight.
XXIII colour.
XXIV. —— space.
XXV, —— order 2
XXVI, ————~ time 2
Me WEL, © stains number.


4


570 LIST OF PLATES.


XXVIII. Organ of tune.
XXIX, ——-——- language.


XXX. — comparison. :
XXX *—— causality.
XXXIT. ~ wit.


XXNY 4 imitation


Eaplanation of the Numbers and Signs marked in
the Anatomical Plates.


1. Decussation of the pyramidal bundles.

2, 3. Accessory nerve.

4, Hypoglossal nerve.

6. Vocal nerve.

7. Glossopharyngeal nerve.

9. Auditory nerve.

10. Abductor nerve.

11. Facial nerve.

12. Fifth pair of nerves.

16. Corpus mammillare.

20. Optic nerve.

18, 19, 21. Roots of the olfactory nerve.

93. Bulb of the olfactory herve.

34, 35, 37, 38. Transverse bands.
47, 48. Place of the organ of amativeness.
48, 49. —— philoprogenitiveness,
35) eer inhabitiveness.


eo!


50, 51. — self-love.

51, 52. ——— firmness.

52, 53. ——_—_—___—_-_——.. veneration.
53, 54. ———— benevolence.
64, 55. par ele
5b 00. rere ae individuality.


LIST OF PLATES. 571


57, 58, 59. Septum lucidum.

61. Commissura anterior. ;

62. Centre of the fundamental part of the cerebellum.

63. Fibres which are connected with the septum lucidum.

70. Nervous bundles of the organs of the feelings.

86, 87, 88, 90. Layer of fibres in the middle line of. the
nervous apparatus.

Kk. Pineal gland.

M. M. Third ventricle.

S. Ganglion or corpus dentatum of the cerebellum.

a. Corpus olivare.

t. Great commissure of the cerebellum (pons Varolii.)

c. Entrance of the anterior pyramids into the pons.

e—e. Corpus restiforme.

f. Interior of the pons.

g. Crura cerebri.

m.m. Fourth ventricle.

a «A. Corpus callosum. |

¢. Canal of communication between the third and fourth ven-
tricle or aqueduct of Sylvius.


THE END.


_ C. Baldwin, Printer,
New Bridge Street, London,


+


Page 24,
—— 55,
—— 126,
ema (28
—— 205,
= 958,
—— 349,


ps Sol,


as. Bil,


po 444,


Sad
wes Ee


9
55,
e— Sti,


ERRATA.


line 11, for internal read external,
—— 30, — Zups read Lups.

—— 12, — Laneisi read Lancisi,
—— 14, — long read bony.

eo 31, — sure read surer.

—— 20, — Rudolphe read Rudol phi.
in the uote, for huc read luce. .
» — deacribus Aquis read de Aeribus, Aquis et Locis.


line 11, for exite read excite.

—— 20, — Hadyn read Haydn.

—— 21, — Zumstey read Zumsteg. ©

—— 30, — Scheak read Schenk.

—— 31, — and is invented read and invented.


3-3) f
ees:
t
ste
v 4
re Sa ee
4 ee
#0,
y z
FaD he
i
-
.
¢
,


Engraved by TMitehell Thaw by Pere ‘ye to Pscaie


Lonion. Ubbished by Robert Baldwin Later Noster kowNev" 1814


eis Plate I


€
'
te ‘Ss
- rae
£ my
;
%
-
‘
th
Tie
+
: x
2 i. Pai -
‘
;
Ah”
> r%
oe


Drawn te Loetre . Breperd PT Yorn


care TEAM NO IRR
* pees ss


z


Drann tn Lretre Lrgravd by A det hell


Loniton Fublivhed: by Robert Latadwin Loder Noster Row Dec 15 [std


ie eal
eee


¥


ie ae i
hy
deal


%


Cle


Drawn & Engraved yy E


TBI,


&Lngraved ly EC Lewes.


ast
woe)
Bes


n=


*
<


can
he =


pan)


War set Ds,
* “FE


-


SS


4


J‘
inva


Mi tey' >>|
i


oy
as

ey ROVE a
: eve i 4
A ven

CAA) Wie ee Oe,
mo > &


ve
me
a


Fo


..


Se eat :


es Sai
" ni here AY


ay
i


Shrane
e oa


aaa


<>


: ae
em Men et eran eet
lene wt Ha A my —eatrncenp rn = ts Os
nara


ee
A is
a


