Lectures to My Students (C.H. Spurgeon, 1875)
==========================================================
Spurgeon's 1875 Lectures to My Students — the Pastors' College talks on preaching; the wittiest homiletics ever written. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

-CM


University  of  Toronto


SECOND    SERIES


OF


BEING


ADDRESSES    DELIVERED    TO    THE    STUDENTS


^jt  §a.^{ars'  ^allrge,


METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE.


BY


C.     H.     SPURGEON.

^rcsitient.


Sondon:

PASSMORE  AND  ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS.


1877.


INTKODUCTION.


The  former  series  of  my  lectures  met  with  a  welcome  which  was
by  no  means  anticipated  by  their  author.  Everyone  has  received
the  book  kindly,  and  some  have  grown  enthusiastic  over  it.  To
the  gentlemen  of  the  press  I  am  deeply  indebted  for  their  cordial
reviews,  to  the  general  public  for  largely  purchasing,  but  specially
to  the  many  individuals  who  in  private  letters  have  s|M»ken  of  the
work  in  approving  words,  which  I  am  not  ungrateful  enough  to
forget,  nor  vain  enough  to  repeat*  A  man  may  be  allowed  to  feel
glad  when  he  is  thanked  for  having  been  of  service  to  his  fellow
men,  and  those  men  the  ministers  of  the  Lord.  It  is  comforting
to  know  that  you  have  aimed  at  usefulness,  pleasant  to  l>elieve
that  you  have  succeeiled,  and  most  of  all  encoui*aging  to  have  been
assured  of  it  by  the  pei*sons  benefited.  With  no  little  fear  and
trembling  the  former  lectures  were  submitted  to  the  public  eye,
but  the  result  is  now  looked  back  U|)on  with  uiuisual  content.
As  in  duty  bound  and  by  gratitude  prompted,  thanksgivings  to
God  are  hereby  very  earnestly  recorded,  and  indebtedness  is  also
expressed  to  kindly  hearta  who  have  given  my  adilresses  so  hearty
a  reception.

One  result  of  the  unanimous  generosity  of  my  critics  has  been
this  second  series  of  lectures  :  whetlier  this  will  prove  to  be  a  fresh
trial  for  j>atience,  or  a  further  source  of  satisfaction  to  my  readers,
time  alone  will  show.     I  hoj)e  the  lectures  are  not  woi"se  than  their

{wedecessors.  In  some  respects  they  ought  to  be  better,  for  I
lave  had  three  years'  more  experience ;  but  thei*e  is  one  valid
reason  why  the  latter  should  hardly  be  expected  to  be  equal  to
the  former,  and  it  is  this — the  subjects  ai*e  not  numerous,  and  the
first  choice  naturally  takes  off  the  cream,  so  that  the  next  gather-
ing must  consist  of  minor  topics.  I  hope,  however,  that  the
quality  has  not  very  seriously  fallen  off,  and  that  the  charity  of
my  readers  will  not  fail.  At  any  rate,  I  do  not  offer  that  which
has  cost  me  nothing,  for  I  have  done  my  best  and  taken  abundant
pains.  Therefore  with  clear  conscience  I  place  my  work  at  the
service  of  my  brethren,  especially  hoping  to  have  a  careful  reading
from  young  preachers,  whose  profiting  has  been  my  principal  ami.
I  have  made  my  addresses  entirely  for  students  and  beginners  in
preaching,  and  I  beg  that  they  may  always  be  regarded  from  that
point  of  view,  for  many  remarks  which  are  proper  enough  to  be
made  to  raw  recruits  it  would  be  gross  impertinence  to  place
before  mastei-s  in  Israel.  The  intent  and  object  will  be  borne  in
mijid  by  every  candid  reader.


IV  INTRODUCTION.

I  seize  the  present  opportunity  to  call  attention  to  the  second  of
my  three  books  for  students,  for  this  is  properly  the  third.  I  allude
to  the  volume  entitled,  "  Commenting  and  Commentanesr  It  em-
bodies the  experience  and  information  of  a  lifetime,  but  being
very  much  occupied  with  a  Catalogue  of  Commentaries  it  cannot
commend  itself  to  popular  tastes,  and  must  be  confined  in  its
circulation  to  those  who  wish  for  information  upon  expository
works.  To  my  own  surprise  it  is  in  the  tenth  thousand,  but
numbers  of  readers  to  whom  it  might  be  valuable  have  not  yet
seen  it.  As  almost  all  the  reviewers  speak  of  it  with  much  praise,
I  think  it  will  be  worth  any  young  man's  while  to  buy  it  before  he
gets  far  on  in  the  formation  of  a  library.  It  is  on  my  heart,  if  life
is  spared,  to  issue  six  half-crown  books  for  preachers :  the  fourth,
which  is  much  of  it  prepared,  will  be  occupied  with  "  The  Art  of
Illustration"  and  I  am  anxious  in  no  one  instance  to  waste  time
and  labour  upon  books  which  will  not  be  read.  Hence  my  reason
for  mentioning  the  Commenting  book  in  this  place.  Life  is  short,
and  time  is  precious  to  a  busy  man.  Whatever  we  do  we  wish  to
make  the  most  of.

One  more  apology  and  note.  The  lectures  upon  "  Posture,
Gesture,  Action,  etc., '  will  probably  be  judged  to  make  too  much
of  a  secondary  matter.  I  wish  I  could  think  so  myself.  My  own
observation  led  me  to  think  them  needful,  for  it  has  scores  of
times  occurred  to  me  to  lament  that  speakers  should  neglect  those
minor  points  until  thev  spoil  themselves  thereby.  It  matters
little  how  a  man  moves  his  body  and  hands  so  long  as  he  does  not
call  attention  to  himself  by  becoming  ungainly  and  grotesque.
That  many  do  this  is  a  fact  which  few  will  deny,  and  my  motive
is  not  to  make  mirth  at  good  men's  expense,  but  to  prevent  its
being  done  by  their  beard's.  It  is  sad  to  see  the  Lord's  message
jnarred  by  being  ill  told,  or  to  have  attention  taken  off  from  it  by
the  oddities  of  the  messenger's  manner.  Could  those  who  con-
sider me  to  be  trifling  only  see  the  results  of  bad  action,  as  they
are  seen  by  those  who  wish  that  they  did  not  see  them,  they
would  discover  that  a  very  serious  pui*pose  lies  beneath  the  some-
what sarcastic  humour  which  I  have  employed  ;  and  if  they  also
])elieved,  as  I  do,  that  sucli  evils  cannot  be  cured  except  by  ex-
j)osing  them  to  ridicule,  they  would  acquit  me  of  trifling,  even
if  they  did  not  aj)prove  of  my  mode  of  clealing  with  the  evil.

Hoi)ing  that  some  benefit  may  accrue  to  the  rising  mce  of
preacliers,  and  through  them  to  the  church  of  God.  this  book  is
offered  to  the  Lord's  service,  in  the  hope  that  he  will  use  it  for  his
own  glory.


©I^e  IP'astDrs'  ®0lkgc.


The  lectures  of  which  this  volume  is  composed  were  delivered  «t
the  Pastors'  College,  in  the  rear  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,
and,  therefore,  we  take  the  liberty  to  notice  that  Institution  in
these  pages.  To  make  the  Colletre  known,  and  to  win  for  it  will-
ing friends,  is  confessedly  one  object  of  our  publications  upon  the
ministry,  which  may,  indeed,  be  viewed  as  mei-ely  the  giving  forth
to  a  wider  area  the  instruction  carried  on  within  the  College  walls.
The  lnstitutioi\  is  intendeil  to  aid  useful  preachers  in  obtaining
a  better  education.  It  takes  no  man  to  make  him  a  minister,  but
requires  that  its  pupils  should,  as  a  rule,  have  exercised  their  gifts
for  at  least  two  veal's,  and  have  won  souls  to  .lesus.  These  we  receive,
however  pooj*  or  backward  they  may  be,  and  our  endeavours  are
all  directed  to  the  one  aim  that  they  should  be  instnicted  in
the  things  of  God,  furnished  for  their  work,  and  practised  in  the
gift  of  utterance.  Much  prayer  is  made  by  the  Church  in  the
Tabernacle  that  this  end  may  be  accomplished,  nor  has  the  praver
been  in  vain,  for  some  365  men  who  wei"e  trained  in  this  manner
are  now  declaring  the  gospel  of  Jesus.  Besides  the  students  for
the  regular  ministry,  several  hundreds  of  street  preachers,  city  mis-
sionaries, teachei's,  and  workei-s  of  all  kinds  have  passed  through
our  Evening  Classes,  and  more  than  200  men  are  now  with  us,
pursuing  their  callings  by  day  and  studying  in  the  evening.     We


VI  THE   PASTORS    COLLEGE.

ask  for  much  prayer  from  all  our  brethren,  that  the  supply  of
the  Spirit  may  sanctify  the  teaching,  and  anoint  every  worker  for
the  service  of  the  Lord.

As  it  would  be  quite  unwarrantable  for  us  to  interfere  with  the
an'angements  of  other  bodies  of  Christians,  who  have  their  own
methods  of  training  their  ministers,  and  as  it  is  obvious  that  we
could  not  find  spheres  for  men  in  denominations  with  which  we
have  no  ecclesiastical  connection,  we  confine  our  College  to
Baptists ;  and,  in  order  not  to  be  harassed  with  endless  contro-
versies, we  invite  those  only  who  hold  those  views  of  divine  truth
which  are  popularly  known  as  Caldinistic, — not  that  we  care  for
names  and  phrases  ;  but,  as  we  wish  to  be  understood,  we  use  a  term
which  conveys  our  meaning  as  nearly  as  any  descriptive  word  can
do.  Believing  the  grand  doctrines  of  grace  to  be  the  natural
accompaniments  of  the  fundamental  evangelical  truth  of  redemp-
tion by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  we  hold  and  teach  them,  not  only  in
our  ministry  to  the  masses,  but  in  the  more  select  instruction  of
the  class  room.  Latitudinarianism  with  its  infidelity,  and  unsec-
tarianism  with  its  intolerance,  are  neither  of  them  friends  of  ours :
we  delight  in  the  man  who  believes,  and  therefore  speaks.  Out*
Lord  has  given  us  no  permission  to  be  liberal  with  what  is  none
of  ours.  We  are  to  give  an  account  of  every  truth  with  which  we
are  put  in  trust.

Our  means  for  conducting  this  work  are  with  the  Most  High
God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  We  have  no  list  of  sub-
scribers or  roll  of  endowments.  Our  trust  is  in  him  whom  we
desire  to  serve.  He  has  supported  the  work  for  many  years,  by
moving  his  stewards  to  send  us  helpj  and  we  are  sure  that  he  will
continue  to  do  so  as  long  as  he  desires  us  to  pursue  this  labour  of
love.  We  need  at  least  £120  every  week  of  the  year,  for  we  have
113  men  to  board,  lodge,  and  educate,  preaching  stations  to  hire,
and  new  churches  to  help.  Since  our  service  is  gratuitous  in
every  sense,  we  the  more  freely  appeal  to  those  who  agree  with  um
in  believnig  that  to  aid  an  earnest  young  minister  to  equip  himself
for  his  life-work  is  a  worthy  effort.  No  money  yields  so  large  a
return,  no  work  is  so  important,  just  now  none  is  so  absolutely
needful.


NlOHTINOALE   LaNE,

Clapuam,  Sukrev.


CONTENTS.


LECTURE   I.  ,«E

The  Holy  Spirit  in  connection  with  our  Ministry  -  1

LECTURE    II.

The  necessity  of  Ministerial  Progress  -        -  -        2S

LECTURE   III.

The  need  of  Decision  for  the  Truth    -        •        -  -        39

LECTURE   IV.

Open  Air  Preaoljing— a  Sketch  of  its  History      •  -        54

LECTURE   V.

Open  Air  Preaching — Remarks  thereon      •        -  -        7  (J

LECTURE   VI.

Posture,  Action,  Gesture,  etc. 9G

LECTURE   VII.

Posture,  Action,  Gesture,  etc.  (Second  I^ecture)    -  -       11 C

Illustrations  of  Action       - 137

LECTURE   VIII.

Earnestness  :  its  Marring  and  Maintenance  -  -       145

LECTURE   IX.

The  Blind  Eye  and  the  Deaf  Ear        -         -         -  -       163

J.KCTLKK    X.

On  Conversion  as  our  Aim 17y


LECTURE  I.

®I/f  Ufl'S  ^jirit  in  comnim  M^  our  piiiistrg.


I  HAVE  selected  a  topic  upon  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  say
anj^thing  which  has  not  been  often  said  before  ;  but  as  the  theme
is  of  the  highest  importance  it  is  good  to  dwell  upon  it  fre-
quently, and  even  if  we  bring  forth  only  old  things  and  nothing
more,   it   may   be   wise   to   put  you   in   remembrance  of   them.

Our  subject  is   "  TlIE   IIOLY    SriRIT    IN   CONNECTION   WITH   OUR

MINISTRY,"  or— the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  relation  to  our-
selves as  ministers  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.

"3  faclfcfae  in  tf)e  ?l?olg  GtjOBt."  Having  pronounced  that  sen-
tence as  a  matter  of  creed,  I  hojK*  we  can  also  repeat  it  as  a
devout  soliloquy  forced  to  our  lips  by  personal  experience.  To  us
the  presence  and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  the  ground  of  our
confidence  as  to  the  wisdom  and  hopefulness  of  our  life  work.  If
we  had  not  believed  in  the  Holy  Ghost  we  should  have  laid  down
our  ministry  long  ere  this,  for  "  who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?"
Our  hope  of  success,  and  our  strength  for  continuing  the  senice,
lie  in  our  belief  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  resteth  upon  us.

I  will  for  the  time  being  take  it  for  granted  that  we  are  all  of
us  conscious  of  the  existence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  have  said
we  believe  in  him ;  but  in  very  deed  we  have  advanced  beyond
faith  in  this  matter,  and  have  come  into  the  region  of  conscious-
ness. Time  was  when  most  of  us  believed  in  the  existence  of  our
present  friends,  for  we  had  heard  of  them  by  the  hearing  of  the
ear,  but  we  have  now  seen  each  other,  and  returned  the  fraternal
grip,  and  felt  the  influence  of  happy  companionship,  and  therefore
we  do  not  now  so  much  believe  as  know.  Even  so  we  have  felt
the  Spirit  of  God  operating  upon  our  hearts,  we  have  kno^^Ti  and
perceived  the  power  which  he  wields  over  human  spirits,  and  we
know  him  by  frequent,  conscious,  personal  contact.  By  the  sen-
sitiveness of  our  spirit  we  are  as  much  made  conscious  of  the
presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  we  are  made  cognizant  of  the

2


2        THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IX  CONNECTION   WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.

existence  of  the  souls  of  our  fellow-men  by  their  action  upon  our
souls,  or  as  we  are  certified  of  the  existence  of  matter  by  its  action
upon  our  senses.  We  have  been  raised  from  the  dull  sphere  of  mere
mind  and  matter  into  the  heavenly  radiance  of  the  spirit-world ;
and  now,  as  spiritual  men,  we  discern  spiritual  things,  we  feel  the
forces  which  are  paramount  in  the  spirit-realm,  and  we  know  that
there  is  a  Holy  Ghost,  for  we  feel  him  operating  upon  our  spirits.
If  it  were  not  so,  we  should  certainly  have  no  right  to  be  in  the
ministry  of  Christ's  church.  Should  we  even  dare  to  remain  in
her  membership  ?  But,  my  brethren,  we  have  been  spiritually
quickened.  We  are  distinctly  conscious  of  a  new  life,  with  all
that  comes  out  of  it :  we  are  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus,  and
dwell  in  a  new  world.  We  have  been  illuminated,  and  made  to
behold  the  things  which  eye  liath  not  seen ;  we  have  been  guided
into  truth  such  as  flesh  and  blood  could  never  have  revealed.  We
have  been  comforted  of  the  Spirit :  full  often  have  we  been  lifted
up  from  the  deeps  of  sorrow  to  the  heights  of  joy  by  the  sacred
Paraclete.  We  have  also,  in  a  measure,  been  sanctified  by  him  ;
and  we  are  conscious  that  the  operation  of  sanctification  is  going
on  in  us  in  different  forms  and  ways.  Therefore,  because  of  all
these  personal  experiences,  we  know  that  there  is  a  Holy  Ghost,
as  sui'ely  as  we  know  that  we  ourselves  exist.

I  am  tempted  to  linger  here,  for  the  point  is  worthy  of  longer
notice.  Unbelievers  ask  for  phenomena.  The  old  business  doc-
trine of  Gradgrind  has  entered  into  religion,  and  the  sceptic  cries,
"  What  I  want  is  facts."  These  are  our  facts :  let  us  not  forget  to
use  them.  A  sceptic  challenges  me  with  the  remark,  "  I  cannot
l)in  my  faith  to  a  book  or  a  history ;  I  want  to  see  present  facts."
My  reply  is,  "  You  cannot  see  them,  because  your  eyes  are  blinded  ;
but  the  facts  are  there  none  the  less.  Those  of  us  who  have  eyes
see  marvellous  things,  though  you  do  not."  If  he  ridicules  my
assertion,  I  am  not  at  all  astonished.  I  expected  him  to  do  so,  and
should  have  been  very  much  surprised  if  he  had  not  done  so  ;  but
I  demand  respect  to  my  own  position  as  a  witness  to  facts,  and  I
turn  u|>on  the  objector  \\\i\\  the  enquiry — "  What  right  have  you
to  deny  my  evidence?  If  I  were  a  blind  man,  and  were  told  by
you  that  you  possessed  a  faculty  called  sight,  I  should  be  un-
rea.sonabie  if  I  railed  at  you  as  a  conceited  enthusiast.  All  you
Imve  a  right  to  say  is — that  you  know  nothing  about  it,  but  you
are  not  authorized  to  call  us  all  liars  or  dupes.  You  may  join
with  revilurs  of  old  and  declare  that  the  s[)iritual  man  is  mad,  but
that  docs  not  disprove   his  statements."      Brethren,  to  me  the


THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION   WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.       3

phenomena  which  are  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God  demonstrate
tlie  tmth  of  the  Christian  religion  as  clearly  as  ever  the  destruction
of  Piiaraoh  at  the  Red  Sea,  or  the  fall  of  manna  in  the  wilderness,
or  the  water  leaping  from  the  smitten  rock,  could  have  proved  to
Israel  the  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  her  tribes.

We  will  now  come  to  the  core  of  our  subject.  To  us,  as
ministers,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  absolutely  essential.  Without  him
our  office  is  a  mere  name.  We  claim  no  priesthood  over  and  above
that  which  belongs  to  every  child  of  God ;  but  we  are  the  suc-
cessors of  those  who,  in  olden  times,  were  moved  of  God  to
declare  his  word,  to  testify  against  transgression,  and  to  plead  his
cause.  Unless  we  have  the  spirit  of  the  prophets  resting  upon  us,
the  mantle  which  we  wear  is  nothing  but  a  rough  garment  to
deceive.  We  ou^ht  to  be  driven  forth  with  abhorrence  from  the
society  of  honest  men  for  daring  to  speak  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
if  the  Spirit  of  God  rests  not  u|X)n  us.  We  believe  ourselves  to  be
spokesmen  for  Jesus  Christ,  appointed  to  continue  his  witness
upon  earth ;  but  upon  him  and  his  testimony  the  Spirit  of  God
always  rested,  and  if  it  does  not  rest  upon  us,  we  are  evidently  not
■sent  forth  into  the  world  as  he  was.  At  Pentecost  the  commence-
ment of  the  great  work  of  converting  the  world  was  with  flaming
tongues  and  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  symbols  of  the  presence  of  the
Spirit ;  if,  therefore,  we  think  to  succeed  without  the  Spirit,  we
are  not  after  the  Pentecostal  order.  If  we  have  not  the  Spirit
which  Jesus  promised,  we  cannot  perform  the  commission  which
Jesus  gave.

I  need  scarcely  warn  any  brother  here  against  falling  into  the
delusion  that  we  may  have  the  Spirit  so  as  to  become  inspired.
Yet  the  members  of  a  certain  litimous  modern  sect  need  to  be
warned  against  this  folly.  They  hold  that  their  meetings  are
under  "the  presidency  of  the  Holy  Spirit:"  concerning  which
notion  I  can  only  say  that  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  in
holy  Scripture  either  the  term  or  the  idea.  I  do  find  in  the
New  Testament  a  body  of  Corinthians  eminently  gifted,  fond  of
speaking,  and  given  to  party  strifes — time  representatives  of
tliose  to  whom  I  allude,  but  as  Paul  said  of  them,  ''  I  thank
God  I  baptized  none  of  you"  so  also  do  I  thank  the  Lord  that  few
of  that  school  have  ever  been  found  in  our  midst.  It  would  seem
that  their  assemblies  possess  a  i)eculiar  gift  of  inspiration,  not
quite  })erhaps  amounting  to  infallibility,  but  nearly  approximating
thereto.  If  you  have  mingled  in  their  gatherings,  I  m-eatly
question  whether  you  have  been  more  edilieil  by  the  prelections


4       THE   HOLY  SPIRIT   IN   COXNECTION   WITH    OUR   MINISTRY.

produced  under  celestial  presidency,  than  you  have  been  by  those
of  ordinary  preachers  of  the  Word,  who  only  consider  themselves
to  be  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  one  spirit  is  under
the  influence  of  another  spirit,  or  one  mind  under  the  influence  of
another  mind.  We  are  not  the  passive  communicators  of  infalli-
bility, but  the  honest  teachers  of  such  things  as  we  have  learned,
so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  grasp  them.  As  our  minds  are
active,  and  have  a  personal  existence  while  the  mind  of  the  Spirit
is  acting  upon  them,  our  infirmities  are  apparent  as  well  as  his
wisdom ;  and  while  we  reveal  what  he  has  made  us  to  know,  we
are  greatly  abased  by  the  fear  that  our  own  ignorance  and  error
are  in  a  measure  manifested  at  the  same  time,  because  we  have
not  been  more  perfectly  subject  to  the  divine  power.  I  do  not
suspect  that  you  will  go  astray  in  the  direction  I  have  hinted  at :
certainly  the  results  of  previous  experiments  are  not  likely  to
tempt  wise  men  to  that  folly.

This  is  our  first  question.  Wherein  may  we  look  for  the  aid  of
the  Holy  Spirit  ?  When  we  have  spoken  on  this  point,  we  will,
very  solemnly,  consider  a  second — How  may  we  lose  that  assistance  ?
Let  us  pray  that,  by  God's  blessing,  this  consideration  may  help
us  to  retain  it.

Wherein  may  we  look  for  the  aid  of  the  Ploly  Spirit  ?  I  should
reply, — in  seven  or  eight  ways.

1.  First,  he  is  the  Spirit  of  knowledge, — '*  He  shall  guide  you  into
all  truth."     In  this  character  we  need  his  teaching.

We  have  urgent  need  to  study,  for  the  teacher  of  others  must
liimself  be  instructed.  Habitually  to  come  into  the  pulpit  unpre-
pared is  unpardonable  presumption  :  nothing  can  more  effectually
lower  ourselves  and  our  office.  After  a  visitation  discourse  by  the
Bishop  of  Lichfield  upon  the  necessity  of  earnestly  studying  the
Word,  a  certain  vicar  told  his  lordship  that  he  could  not  believe  his
doctrine,  "  for,"  said  he,  "  often  when  I  am  in  the  vestry  I  do  not
know  what  I  am  going  to  talk  about ;  but  I  go  into  the  pulpit  and
preach,  and  think  nothing  of  it."  His  lordship  replied,  "  And  you
are  quite  right  in  thinking  nothing  of  it,  for  your  churchwardens
have  told  me  that  they  share  your  opinion."  If  wo  are  not
instructed,  how  can  wo  instruct  ?  If  we  have  not  thought,  how
shall  we  lead  others  to  think?  It  is  in  our  study-work,  in  that
blessed  labour  when  we  are  alone  with  the  Book  before  us,  that  we
need  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  holds  the  key  of  the
heavenly  trea-sury,  and  can  enrich  us  beyond  conception ;  he  has
the  clue  of  the  most  lubyriuthiue  doctrine,  and  can  lead  us  in  the


THE   HOLY  SPIRIT   IN  CONXECTION  WITH  OUR  MINISTRY.      5

way  of  truth.  He  can  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut
in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron,  and  give  to  us  the  treasures  of  darkness,
and  hidden  riches  of  secret  places.  If  you  study  the  original,
consult  the  commentaries,  and  meditate  deeply,  yet  if  you  neglect
to  cry  mightily  unto  the  Spirit  of  God  your  study  will  not  profit
you ;  but  even  if  you  are  debarred  the  use  of  helps  (which  I  trust
you  will  not  be),  if  you  wait  u|X)n  the  Holy  Ghost  in  simple  de-
pendence upon  his  teaching,  you  will  lay  hold  of  very  much  of  tlie
divine  meaninfj.

The  Spirit  of  God  is  peculiarly  precious  to  us,  because  he
especially  instructs  us  as  to  the  person  and  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ ;  and  that  is  the  main  point  of  our  preaching.  He  takes  of
the  things  of  Christ,  and  shows  them  unto  us.  If  he  had  taken  of
the  things  of  doctrine  or  precept,  we  should  have  been  glad  of
such  gracious  assistance ;  but  since  he  especially  delights  in  the
things  of  Christ,  and  focusses  his  sacred  light  upon  the  cross,  we
rejoice  to  see  the  centre  of  our  testimony  so  divinely  illuminated,
and  we  are  sure  that  the  Hght  will  be  diffused  over  all  the  rest  of
our  ministry.  Let  us  wait  upon  the  Spirit  of  God  with  this  cry —
"  O  Holy  Spirit,  reveal  to  us  the  Son  of  God,  and  thus  show  us
the  Father."

As  the  Spirit  of  knowledge,  he  not  only  instructs  us  as  to  the
gospel,  but  he  leads  us  to  see  the  Lord  in  all  other  matters.  We
are  not  to  shut  our  eyes  to  Gotl  in  nature,  or  to  God  in  general
history,  or  to  God  in  the  daily  occurrences  of  providence,  or  to
God  in  our  own  experience ;  and  the  blessed  Spirit  is  the  inter-
preter to  us  of  the  mind  of  God  in  all  these.  If  we  cry,  "  Teach
me  what  thou  wouldst  have  me  to  do  ;  or,  show  me  wherefore  thou
contendest  with  me  ;  or,  tell  me  what  is  thy  mind  in  this  precious
providence  of  mercy,  or  in  that  other  dispensation  of  mingled
judgment  and  grace," — we  shall  in  each  case  be  well  instructed  ;
for  the  Spirit  is  the  seven-branched  candlestick  of  the  sanctuary,
and  by  his  light  all  things  are  rightly  seen.  As  Goodwin  well  ob-
serves, "  There  must  be  light  to  accompany  the  truth  if  we  are  to
know  it.  The  experience  of  all  gracious  men  proves  this.  What
is  the  reason  that  you  shall  see  some  things  in  a  chapter  at  one
time,  and  not  at  another ;  some  grace  in  your  hearts  at  one  time,
and  not  at  another ;  have  a  sight  of  spiritual  things  at  one  time,
and  not  at  another?  The  eye  is  the  same,  but  it  is  the  Holy
Ghost  that  openeth  and  shutteth  this  dark  lantern,  as  I  may  so
call  it ;  as  he  openeth  it  wider,  or  contracts  it,  or  shutteth  it
narrower,  so  do  we  see  more  or  less :  and  sometimes  he  shutteth  it


6       THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN  CONNECTIOX   WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.

wholly,  and  then  the  soul  is  in  dai'kness,  though  it  have  never  so
good  an  eye."

Beloved  brethren,  wait  upon  him  for  this  light,  or  you  will  abide
in  darkness  and  become  blind  leaders  of  "the  blind.

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  Spirit  is  called  the  Spirit  of  wisdom,
and  Ave  greatly  need  him  in  that  capacity  ;  for  knowledge  may  be
dangerous  if  unaccompanied  with  wisdom,  which  is  the  art  of
rightly  using  what  we  know.  Rightly  to  divide  the  Word  of  God
is  as  important  as  fully  to  understand  it,  for  some  who  have  evi-
dently understood  a  part  of  the  gospel  have  given  undue  prominence
to  that  one  portion  of  it,  and  have  therefore  exhibited  a  distorted
Christianity,  to  the  injury  of  those  who  have  received  it,  since
they  in  their  turn  have  exhibited  a  distorted  character  in
consequence  thereof.  A  man's  nose  is  a  prominent  feature  in  his
face,  but  it  is  possible  to  make  it  so  large  that  eyes  and  mouth,  and
everything  else  are  thrown  into  insignificance,  and  the  drawing
is  a  caricature  and  not  a  portrait :  so  certain  important  doctrines
of  the  gospel  can  be  so  proclaimed  in  excess  as  to  throw  the  rest  of
truth  into  the  shade,  and  the  preaching  is  no  longer  the  gospel  in
its  natural  beauty,  but  a  caricature  of  the  truth,  of  which  carica-
ture, however,  let  me^  say,  some  people  seem  to  be  mightily  fond.
The  Spirit  of  God  will  teach  you  the  use  of  the  sacrificial  knife  to
divide  the  offerings ;  and  he  will  show  you  how  to  use  the  balances
of  the  sanctuary  so  as  to  weigh  out  and  mix  the  precious  spices  in
their  proper  quantities.  Every  experienced  preacher  feels  this  to
be  of  the  uti^ost  moment,  and  it  is  well  if  he  is  able  to  x'esist  all
temptation  to  neglect  it.  Alas,  some  of  our  hearers  do  not  desire
to  hoar  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  They  have  their  favourite
doctrines,  and  would  have  us  silent  on  all  besides.  Many  are  like
the  Scotchwoman,  wjio,  after  hearing  a  sermon,  said,  "  It  was  very
well  if  it  hathia  been  for  the  trash  of  duties  at  the  hinner  end."
Tiiere  are  brethren  of  that  kind  ;  they  enjoy  the  comforting  part —
the  promises  and  the  doctrines,  but  practical  holiness  must  scarcely
he  touched  upon.  Faithfulness  requires  us  to  give  them  a  four-
square gospel,  from  which  nothing  is  omitted,  and  in  which  nothing
in  exaggemted,  and  for  this  much  wisdom  is  requisite.  I  gravely
({uestion  whether  any  of  us  have  so  nuich  of  this  wisdom  as  wo
need.  We  are  probably  ufHicted  by  some  inexcusable  partialities
and  unjustifiable  leanings ;  let  us  search  them  out  and  have  done
with  them.  We  may  be  conscious  of  liuving  passed  by  certain  texts,
not  because  we  do  not  understand  them  (which  might  be  justifiable),
but  becttuso  we  do  understand  lluuii,  and  hardly  like  to  say  what


THE   HOLY  SPIRIT   IN  CONNECTION   WITH  OUR  MINISTRY.      7

they  have  taught  us,  or  because  there  may  be  some  imperfection
in  ourselves,  or  some  prejudice  among  our  hearers  which  those
texts  would  reveal  too  clearly  for  our  comfort.  Such  sinful  silence
must  be  ended  forthwith.  To  be  wise  stewards  and  bring  forth
the  right  portions  of  meat  for  our  Master's  household  we  need  thy
teaching,  O  Spirit  of  the  Lord  1

Nor  is  this  all,  for  even  if  we  know  how  rightly  to  divide  the
Word  of  God,  we  want  wisdom  in  the  selection  of  the  particular
part  of  truth  which  is  most  ap[)licable  to  the  season  and  to  the
people  assembled ;  and  equal  discretion  in  the  tone  and  manner  in
which  the  doctrine  shall  be  presented.  I  believe  that  many
brethren  who  preach  human  responsibility  deliver  themselves  in  so
legal  a  manner  as  to  disgust  all  those  who  love  the  doctrines  of
grace.  On  the  other  hand,  I  fear  tliat  many  have  preached  the
sovereignty  of  God  in  such  a  way  as  to  drive  all  persons  who
believe  in  man's  free  agency  entirely  away  from  the  Calvinistic
side.  We  should  not  hide  truth  for  a  moment,  but  we  should  havo
wisdom  so  to  preach  it  that  there  shall  be  no  needless  jarring  or
offending,  but  a  gradual  enlightenment  of  those  who  cannot  see  it
at  all,  and  a  leading  of  weaker  brethren  into  the  full  circle  of
gospel  doctrine.

Brethren,  we  also  need  wisdom  in  the  way  of  putting  things  to
different  people.  You  can  cast  a  man  down  with  the  very  truth
which  was  intended  to  build  him  up.  You  can  sicken  a  man
with  the  honey  with  which  you  meant  to  sweeten  his  mouth.  The
great  mercy  of  God  has  been  preached  unguardedly,  and  has  led
hundreds  into  licentiousness ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  terrors
of  the  Lord  havo  been  occasionally  fulminated  with  such  violence
that  they  havo  driven  men  into  despair,  and  so  into  a  settled  de-
fiance of  the  Most  High.  Wisdom  is  profitable  to  direct,  and  ho
who  hath  it  brings  forth  each  truth  in  its  season,  dressed  in  its
most  appropriate  garments.  Who  can  give  us  this  wisdom  but  the
blessed  Spirit  ?  O,  my  brethren,  see  to  it,  that  in  lowliest  reve-
rence you  wait  for  his  direction.

3.  Thirdly,  we  need  the  Spirit  in  another  manner,  namely,  as
the  live  coal  from  off  the  altar,  touching  our  lips,  so  that  when  we
have  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  select  the  fitting  portion  of  truth,
re  may  enjoy  freedom  of  utterance  when  we  come  to  deliver  it.
"  Lo,  this  hath  touched  thy  lips."  Oh,  how  gloriously  a  man
speaks  when  his  lips  are  blistered  with  the  live  coal  from  the  altar
— feeling  the  burning  power  of  the  truth,  not  only  in  his  inmost
soul,  but  on  the  very  lip  with  which  he  is  speaking  1     Mark  at


8        THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION  WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.

such  times  how  his  very  utterance  quivers.  Did  you  not  notice  in
the  prayer-meeting  just  now,  in  two  of  the  suppliant  brethren,
how  their  tones  were  tremulous,  and  their  bodily  frames  were
quivering,  because  not  only  were  their  hearts  touched,  as  I
hope  all  our  hearts  were,  but  their  lips  were  touched,  and  their
speech  was  thereby  affected.  Brethren,  we  need  the  Spirit  of
God  to  open  our  mouths  that  we  may  show  forth  the  praises  of
the  Lord,  or  else  we  shall  not  speak  with  power.

We  need  the  divine  influence  to  keep  us  back  from  saying
many  things  which,  if  they  actually  left  our  tongue,  would
mar  our  messajje.  Those  of  us  who  are  endowed  with  the  dan-
gerous  gift  of  humour  have  need,  sometimes,  to  stop  and  take  the
word  out  of  our  mouth  and  look  at  it,  and  see  whether  it  is  quite
to  edification ;  and  those  whose  previous  lives  have  borne  them
among  the  coarse  and  the  rough  had  need  watch  with  lynx  eyes
against  indelicacy.  Brethren,  far  be  it  from  us  to  utter  a  syl-
lable which  would  suggest  an  impure  thought,  or  raise  a  question-
able memory.  We  need  the  Spirit  of  God  to  put  bit  and  bridle
upon  us  to  keep  us  from  saying  that  which  would  take  the  minds
of  our  hearers  away  from  Christ  and  eternal  realities,  and  set
Ihem  thinking  upon  the  grovelling  things  of  earth.

Brethren,  we  require  the  Holy  Spirit  also  to  incite  us  in  our
utterance.  I  doubt  not  you  are  all  conscious  of  different  states
of  mind  in  preaching.  Some  of  those  states  arise  from  your
body  being  in  different  conditions.  A  bad  cold  will  not  only  spoil
the  clearness  of  the  voice,  but  freeze  the  flow  of  the  thoughts.
For  my  own  part  if  I  cannot  speak  clearly  I  am  unable  to  think
clearly,  and  the  matter  becomes  hoarse  as  well  as  the  voice.
The  stomach,  also,  and  all  the  other  organs  of  the  body,  affect  the
mind ;  but  it  is  not  to  these  things  that  I  allude.  Are  you  not
conscious  of  changes  altogether  independent  of  the  body?  When
you  are  in  robust  health  do  you  not  find  yourselves  one  day  as
heavy  as  Pluiraoh's  chariots  with  the  wheels  taken  off,  and  at
another  time  as  much  at  liberty  as  '*  a  hind  let  loose  "?  To-day
your  branch  glittere  with  the  dew,  yesterday  it  was  parched  with
drought.  Who  knoweth  not  that  the  Spuit  of  God  is  in  all  this?
The  divine  Spirit  will  sometimes  work  upon  us  so  as  to  bear  us
completely  out  of  ourselves.  From  the  bi'giiining  of  the  sermon
to  the  end  we  might  at  such  times  say,  "  Whether  in  the  body
or  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  tell :  God  knoweth."  Everything
lias  been  forgotten  but  the  one  all-engrossing  subject  in  hand.  If
1  were  forbidden  to  enter  heaven,  but  were  permitted  to  select  my


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  IN  CONNECTION   WITH  OUR  MINISTRY.       9

state  for  all  eternity,  I  should  choose  to  be  as  I  sometimes  feel  in
preaching  the  gospel.  Heaven  is  foreshadowed  in  such  a  state :
the  mind  shut  out  from  all  disturbing  influences,  adoring  the
majestic  and  consciously  present  God,  every  faculty  aroused  and
joyously  excited  to  its  utmost  capability,  all  the  thoughts  and
powers  of  the  soul  joyously  occupied  in  contemplating  the  glory
of  the  Lord,  and  extolling  to  listening  crowds  the  Beloved  of  our
soul ;  and  all  the  while  the  purest  conceivable  benevolence  towards
one's  fellow  creatures  urging  the  heart  to  plead  with  them  on
God's  behalf — what  state  of  mind  can  rival  this  t  Alas,  we  have
reached  this  ideal,  but  we  cannot  always  maintain  it,  for  we  know
also  what  it  is  to  preach  in  chains,  or  beat  the  air.  We  may  not
attribute  holy  and  happy  changes  in  our  ministry  to  anything
less  than  the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  our  souls.  I  am
sure  the  Spirit  does  so  work.  Often  and  often,  when  I  have  had
doubts  suggested  by  the  infidel,  I  have  been  able  to  fling  them  to
the  winds  with  utter  scorn,  because  I  am  distinctly  conscious  of
a  power  working  upon  me  when  I  am  speaking  in  the  name  of
the  Lord,  infinitely  transcending  any  personal  power  of  fluency,
and  far  surpassing  any  energy  derived  from  excitement  such  as  I
have  felt  when  delivering  a  secular  lecture  or  making  a  speech —
so  utterly  distinct  from  such  power  that  I  am  quite  certain  it
is  not  of  the  same  order  or  class  as  the  enthusiasm  of  the  poli-
tician or  the  glow  of  the  orator.  May  we  full  often  feel  the
divine  energy,  and  speak  with  power.

4.  But  then,  fourthly,  the  Spirit  of  God  acts  also  as  an  anoint-
ing  oil,  and  this  relates  to  the  entire  delivery — not  to  the  utterance
merely  from  the  mouth,  but  to  the  whole  delivery  of  the  discourse.
He  can  make  you  feel  your  subject  till  it  thrills  you,  and  you
become  depressed  by  it  so  as  to  be  crushed  into  the  earth,  or
elevated  by  it  so  as  to  be  borne  upon  its  eagle  wings ;  making
you  feel,  besides  your  subject,  your  object,  till  you  yearn  for  the
conversion  of  men,  and  for  the  uplifting  of  Christians  to  some-
thing nobler  than  they  have  known  as  yet.  At  the  same  time,
another  feeling  is  with  you,  namely,  an  intense  desire  that  God
may  be  glorified  through  the  truth  which  you  are  delivering.  You
are  conscious  of  a  deep  sympathy  with  the  people  to  whom  you  are
speaking,  making  you  mourn  over  some  of  them  because  they
know  so  little,  and  over  others  because  they  have  known  much,
but  have  rejected  it*  You  look  into  some  faces,  and  your  heart
silently  says.  '*  The  dew  is  dropping  there ;"  and,  turning  to
others,  you  sorrowfully  perceive  that  they  are  as  Gilboa's  dewless


10        THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION   WITH   OUR  MINISTRY,

mountain.  All  this  will  be  going  on  during  the  discourse.  We  can-
not tell  how  many  thoughts  can  traverse  the  mind  at  once.  I  once
counted  eight  sets  of  thoughts  which  were  going  on  in  my  brain
simultaneously,  or  at  least  within  the  space  of  the  same  second.
I  was  preaching  the  gospel  with  all  my  might,  but  could  not  help
feeling  for  a  lady  who  was  evidently  about  to  faint,  and  also
looking  out  for  our  brother  who  opens  the  >vindows  that  he  might
give  us  moi'e  air.  I  was  thinking  of  that  illustration  which  I  had
omitted  under  the  first  head,  casting  the  form  of  the  second  di-
vision, wondering  if  A  felt  my  rebuke,  and  praying  that  B  might
get  comfort  from  the  consoling  observation,  and  at  the  same  time
praising  God  for  my  own  personal  enjoyment  of  the  truth  I  was
proclaiming.  Some  interpreters  consider  the  cherubim  with  their
four  faces  to  be  emblems  of  ministers,  and  assuredly  I  see  no  diffi-
culty in  the  quadruple  form,  for  the  sacred  Spirit  can  multiply  our
mental  states,  and  make  us  many  times  the  men  we  are  by  nature.
How  much  he  can  make  of  us,  and  how  grandly  he  can  elevate  us,
I  will  not  dare  to  surmise :  certainly,  he  can  do  exceeding  abund-
antly above  what  we  ask  or  even  think.

Especially  is  it  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  to  maintain  in  us  a  devo-
tional frame  of  mind  whilst  we  are  discoursing.  This  is  a  condition
to  be  greatly  coveted — to  continue  praying  while  you  are  occupied
with  preaching ;  to  do  the  Lord's  commandments,  hearkening  unto
the  voice  of  his  word  ;  to  keep  the  eye  on  the  throne,  and  the  wing
in  perpetual  motion.  I  hope  we  know  what  this  means  ;  I  am  sure
we  know,  or  may  soon  experience,  its  ojiposite,  namely,  the  evil  of
preaching  in  an  undevotional  spirit.  What  can  be  worse  than  to
sjieak  under  the  influence  of  a  proud  or  angry  spirit?  What  more
weakening  than  to  preach  in  an  unbelieving  spirit  ?  But,  oh,  to  burn
in  our  secret  heart  while  we  blaze  before  the  eyes  of  others  1  This
is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Work  it  in  us,  O  adorable
Comforter !

In  our  pulpits  we  need  the  spirit  of  dependence  to  bo  mixed  with
that  of  devotion,  so  that  all  along,  from  the  first  word  to  the  last
syllable,  wo  may  be  looking  up  to  the  strong  for  strength.  It  is
well  to  feel  that  though  you  have  continued  up  to  the  present  point,
yet  if  the  Holy  Spirit  were  U)  leave  you,  you  wouhl  play  the  fool
ere  the  »ennon  closed,  I^ookiug  to  tlie  hills  wlionco  conieth  your
help  all  the  scnnou  through,  with  absolute  depeudenco  upon  God,
you  will  j»rearh  in  a  brave,  confident  8j)irit  all  the  while.  Per-
haps  I  was  wrong  to  say  **  brave,"  ft)r  it  is  not  a  brave  thing  to
trust  God :  to  tniQ  believers  it  is  a  simple  matter  of  sweet  necessity —


THE    HOLY   SPIRIT    IN    CONNECTION    WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.       11

how  can  they  help  trusting  him  ?  Wherefore  should  they  doubt
their  ever  faithful  Friend  I  I  told  my  people  the  other  morning,
when  preaching  from  the  text,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,"
that  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  experienced  what  Abraham
felt  when  he  fell  upon  his  face  and  laughed.  I  was  riding
home,  very  weary  with  a  long  week's  work,  when  there  came
to  my  mind  this  text — "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee :"  but
it  came  with  the  emphasis  laid  upon  two  words:  "J/y  grace
is  sufficient  for  thee"  My  soul  said,  "  Doubtless  it  is.  Surely
the  grace  of  the  infinite  God  is  more  than  sufficient  for  such  a
mere  insect  as  I  am,"  and  I  laughed,  and  laughed  again,  to  think
how  far  the  supply  exceeded  all  my  needs.  It  seemed  to  me  as
though  I  were  a  little  fish  in  the  sea,  and  in  my  thirst  I  said,
"  Alas,  I  shall  drink  up  the  ocean."  Then  the  Father  of  the
waters  lifted  up  his  head  sublime,  and  smilingly  replied,  "  Little
fish,  the  boundless  main  is  sufficient  for  thee."  The  thought  made
unbelief  appear  supremely  ridiculous,  as  indeed  it  is.  Oh,  brethren,
we  ought  to  preach  feeling  that  God  means  to  bless  the  word,
for  we  have  his  promise  for  it ;  and  when  we  have  done  preaching
we  should  look  out  for  the  people  who  have  received  a  blessing.  Do
you  ever  say,  "  I  am  overwhelmed  with  astonishment  to  find  that
the  liord  has  converted  souls  through  my  poor  ministry"?  Mock
humility  !  Your  ministry  is  poor  enough.  Everybody  knows  that,
and  you  ought  to  know  it  most  of  all :  but,  at  the  same  time,  is  it
any  wonder  that  God,  who  said  ''  My  word  shall  not  return  unto
me  void,"  has  kept  his  promise  ?  Is  the  meat  to  lose  its  nourish-
ment because  the  dish  is  a  poor  platter  t  Is  divine  grace  to  be
overcome  by  our  infirmity  t  No,  but  we  have  this  treasure  ia
earthen  vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  jiower  may  be  of  God
and  not  of  us.

We  need  the  Spirit  of  God,  then,  all  through  the  sermon  to  keep
our  hearts  and  minds  in  a  proper  condition,  for  if  we  have  not  the
right  spirit  we  shall  lose  the  tone  which  jx'rsuades  and  prevails,
and  our  people  will  discover  that  Samson's  strength  has  departed
from  him.  Some  speak  scoldingly,  and  so  betray  their  bad  temper;
others  preach  themselves,  and  so  reveal  their  pride.  Some  dis-
course as  though  it  were  a  condescension  on  their  part  to  occupy
the  pulpit,  while  others  preach  as  though  they  aix)logised  for  their
existence.  To  avoid  en'ors  of  mannei*s  and  tone,  we  must  be  led
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  alone  teacheth  us  to  profit.

5.  Fifthly,  we  depend  entirely  upon  the  Spirit  of  God  to  pi'oduce
actual  effect  from  the  gospel^  and  at  this  effect  we  must  always  aim.


12       THE  HOLY  SPIRIT    IN   CONNECTION  WITH  OUR  MINISTRY.

We  do  not  stand  up  in  our  pulpits  to  display  our  skill  in  spiritual
sword  play,  but  we  come  to  actual  fighting :  our  object  is  to  drive  the
sword  of  the  Spirit  through  men's  hearts.  If  preaching  can  ever  in
any  sense  be  viewed  as  a  public  exhibition,  it  should  be  like  the  exhi-
bition of  a  ploughing  match,  which  consists  in  actual  ploughing.  The
competition  does  not  lie  in  the  appearance  of  the  ploughs,  but  in
the  work  done  ;  so  let  ministers  be  judged  by  the  way  in  which
they  drive  the  gospel  plough,  and  cut  the  furrow  from  end  to  end
of  the  field.  Always  aim  at  effect.  *'  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  thought
you  would  have  said,  'Never  do  that.'"  I  do  also  say,  never  aim
at  effect,  in  the  unhappy  sense  of  that  expression.  Never  aim  at
effect  after  the  manner  of  the  climax  makers,  poetry  quoters,
handkerchief  manipulators,  and  bombast  blowers.  Far  better  for
a  man  that  he  had  never  been  born  than  that  he  should  degrade  a
pulpit  into  a  show  box  to  exhibit  himself  in.  Aim  at  the  right
sort  of  effect ;  the  inspiring  of  saints  to  nobler  things,  the  leading
cf  Christians  closer  to  their  Master,  the  comforting  of  doubters
till  they  rise  out  of  their  terrors,  the  repentance  of  sinners,  and
their  exercise  of  immediate  faith  in  Christ.  Without  these  signs
following,  what  is  the  use  of  our  sermons  ?  It  would  be  a  miser-
able thing  to  have  to  say  with  a  certain  archbishop,  "  I  have  passed
through  many  places  of  honour  and  trust,  both  in  Church  and
State,  more  than  any  of  my  order  in  England,  for  seventy  years
befoi-e ;  but  were  I  assured  that  by  my  preaching  I  had  but  con-
verted one  soul  to  God,  I  should  herein  take  more  comfort  that  in
all  the  honoured  offices  that  have  been  bestowed  upon  me."
Miracles  of  grace  must  be  the  seals  of  our  ministry ;  Avho  can
bestow  them  but  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  Convert  a  soul  without  the
Spirit  of  God  1  Why,  you  cannot  even  make  a  fly,  much  less
create  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit.  Lead  the  children  of  God
to  a  higher  life  without  the  Holy  Ghost  1  You  are  inexpressibly
more  likely  to  conduct  them  into  carnal  security,  if  you  attempt
their  elevation  by  any  method  of  your  own.  Our  ends  can  never
be  gained  if  we  miss  the  co-operation  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.
Therefore,  with  strong  crying  and  tears,  wait  upon  him  from  day
to  day.

The  lack  of  distinctly  recognizing  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost
lies  at  the  root  of  many  useless  ministries.  The  forcible  words  of
Kobert  Hall  are  as  true  now  ns  when  he  poui*ed  them  forth  like
moltvn  lava  upoTj  a  Kemi-socinian  generaticm.  **  On  the  one  hand
it  deserves  attenticm,  tliat  the  most  eminent  and  successful
preachers  of  the  gospel  in  different  communities,  a  Braincrd,  a


THE   HOLY  SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION  WITH  OUR  MINISTRY.       13

Baxter,  and  a  Schwartz,  have  been  the  most  conspicuous  for  simple
dependence  on  spiritual  aid ;  and  on  the  other  that  no  success
whatever  has  attended  the  ministrations  of  those  by  whom  this
doctrine  has  been  either  neglected  or  denied.  They  have  met
with  such  a  rebuke  of  their  presumption,  in  the  total  failure  of
their  efforts,  that  none  will  contend  for  the  reality  of  Divine
interposition,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned  ;  for  when  has  the  arm
of  the  Lord  been  revealed  to  those  pretended  teachers  of  Christi-
anity, who  believe  there  is  no  such  ann  t  We  must  leave  them  to
labour  in  a  field  respecting  which  God  has  commanded  the  clouds
not  to  rain  upon  it.  As  if  conscious  of  this,  of  late  they  have
turned  their  efforts  into  a  new  channel,  and  despairing  of  the  con-
version of  sinners,  have  confined  themselves  to  the  seduction  of  the
faithful ;  in  which,  it  must  be  confessed,  they  have  acted  in  a
manner  perfectly  consistent  with  their  principles ;  the  propaga-
tion of  heresy  requiring,  at  least,  no  divine  assistance."

6.  Next  we  need  the  Spirit  of  God  as  the  Spirit  of  supplications^
who  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  according  to  the  will  of
God.  A  very  important  part  of  our  lives  consists  in  praying  in
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  minister  who  does  not  think  so  liad
better  escape  from  his  ministry.  Abundant  prayer  must  go  with
earnest  preaching.  We  cannot  be  always  on  the  knees  of  the
body,  but  the  soul  should  never  leave  the  posture  of  devotion.
The  habit  of  prayer  is  good,  but  the  spirit  of  prayer  is  better.
Regular  retirement  is  to  be  maintained,  but  continued  communion
with  God  is  to  be  our  aim.  As  a  rule,  we  ministers  ought  never
to  be  many  minutes  without  actually  lifting  up  our  hearts  in
prayer.  Some  of  us  could  honestly  say  that  we  ai-e  seldom  a
quarter  of  an  hour  without  speaking  to  God,  and  that  not  as  a  duty
but  as  an  instinct,  a  habit  of  the  new  nature  for  which  we  claim
no  more  credit  than  a  babe  does  for  crying  after  its  mother.  How
could  we  do  otherwise  ?  Now,  if  we  are  to  be  much  in  the  spirit
of  prayer,  we  need  secret  oil  to  be  poured  upon  the  sacred  fire  of
our  heart's  devotion ;  we  want  to  be  again  and  again  visited  by
the  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications.

As  to  our  prayers  in  public,  let  it  never  be  truthfully  said  that
they  are  official,  formal,  and  cold ;  yet  they  will  be  so  if  the  supply
of  the  Spirit  be  scant.  Those  who  use  a  liturgy  I  judge  not ;  but
to  those  who  are  accustomed  to  free  prayer  I  say, — ^you  cannot
pray  acceptably  in  public  year  after  year  without  the  Spirit  of
God  ;  dead  praying  will  become  offensive  to  the  people  long  before
that  time.     What  then?     Whence  shall  our  help  come ?     Certain


14       THE   HOLY    SriKIT   IX   CONNECTION  WITH   OUK  MINISTKT.

weaklings  have  said,  "  Let  iis  have  a  liturgy !"  Eather  than  seek
divine  aid  they  "will  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help.  Eatlicr  than  be
dependent  upon  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  will  pray  by  a  book !  For
my  part,  if  I  cannot  pray,  I  would  rather  know  it,  and  groan  over
my  soul's  barrenness  till  the  Lord  shall  again  visit  me  with  fruit-
fulness  of  devotion.  If  you  are  filled  with  the  Spirit,  you  will  be
glad  to  throw  off  all  formal  fetters,  that  you  may  commit  yourself
to  the  sacred  current,  to  be  borne  along  till  you  find  waters  to
swim  in.  Sometimes  you  Avill  enjoy  closer  felloAvship  with  God  in
prayer  in  the  pulpit  than  you  have  known  anywhere  else.  To  me
my  gi'eatest  secrecy  in  prayer  has  often  been  in  public ;  my  truest
lonehness  with  God  has  occurred  to  me  while  pleading  in  the
midst  of  thousands.  I  have  opened  my  eyes  at  the  close  of  a
prayer  and  come  back  to  the  assembly  with  a  sort  of  a  shock  at
finding  myself  upon  earth  and  among  men.  Such  seasons  are  not
at  our  command,  neither  can  we  raise  ourselves  into  such  conditions
by  any  preparations  or  efforts.  How  blessed  they  are  both  to  the
minister  and  his  people  no  tongue  can  tell !  How  full  of  power
and  blessing  habitual  prayerfulness  must  also  be  I  cannot  here
pause  to  declare,  but  for  it  all  we  must  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  blessed  be  God  we  shall  not  look  in  vain,  for  it  is  especially
said  of  him  that  he  helpeth  our  infirmities  in  prayer.

7.  Furthermore,  it  is  important  that  we  be  under  the  influence
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  he  is  the  Spirit  of  holiness ;  for  a  very  con-
siderable and  essential  part  of  Christian  ministry  lies  in  example.
Our  people  take  much  note  of  what  we  say  out  of  the  pulpit,  and
what  we  do  in  the  social  circle  and  elsewhere.  Do  you  find  it
easy,  my  brethren,  to  be  saints? — such  saints  that  others  may
regard  you  as  examples?  We  ought  to  be  such  husbands  that
every  husband  in  the  parish  may  safely  be  such  as  we  are.  Is  it
RO?  We  ought  to  be  the  best  of  fathers.  Alas  1  some  ministers,
to  my  knowledge,  are  far  from  this,  for  as  to  their  families,  they
have  kept  the  vineyards  of  others,  but  their  own  vineyards  they
have  not  kept.  Their  children  are  neglected,  and  do  not  grow  up
as  a  godly  seed.  Is  it  so  with  yours  ?  In  our  converse  with  our
fellow  men  are  we  blameless  and  hannless,  the  sons  of  God  without
rebuke?  Such  we  (Might  to  be.  I  admire  Mr.  Whitfield's  reasons
for  always  having  his  linen  scruj)ulously  dean.  "  No,  no,"  ho
would  say,  •*  these  are  not  trifles ;  a  minister  must  be  without
sjmt,  even  in  his  garments,  if  he  can."  Purity  cannot  bo  carried
Ux)  far  in  a  minister.  You  have  known  an  unhappy  brother  be-
Bpnttcr  himself,  and  you  iuive  affectionately  aided  in  removing  the


THE    HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION    WITH    OUR   MINISTRY.        15"

spots,  but  you  have  felt  that  it  would  have  been  better  had  the
garments  been  always  white.  O  to  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from
the  world !  How  can  this  be  in  such  a  scene  of  temj)tation,  and
Avitli  such  besetting  sins  unless  we  are  preserved  by  superior
power?  If  you  are  to  walk  in  all  holiness  and  purity,  as  be-
cometh  ministers  of  the  gospel,  you  must  be  daily  baptized  into
the  Spirit  of  God.

8.  Once  again,  we  need  the  Spirit  as  a  Spirit  of  discernment,
for  he  knows  the  minds  of  men  as  he  knows  the  mind  of  Got!,
and  we  need  this  very  much  in  dealing  with  difficult  characters.
There  are  in  this  world  some  persons  who  might  jx)ssibly  be
allowed  to  preach,  but  they  should  never  be  suffered  to  become
pastors.  They  have  a  mental  or  spiritual  disqualitication.  In  the
church  of  San  Zeno,  at  Verona,  I  saw  the  statue  of  that  saint  in
a  sitting  posture,  and  the  artist  has  given  him  knees  so  short  that
he  has  no  lap  whatever,  so  that  he  could  not  have  been  a  nursing
father.  I  fear  there  are  many  others  who  labour  under  a  similar
disability  :  they  cannot  bring  their  minds  to  enter  heartily  into
the  pastoral  care.  They  can  dogmatize  ujwn  a  doctrine,  and  con-
trovert upon  an  ordinance,  but  as  to  sympathizing  with  an  exjie-
rience,  it  is  far  from  them.  Cold  comfort  can  such  render  to
afflicted  consciences  ;  their  advice  will  be  equally  valuable  with
that  of  the  highlander  who  is  rejwrted  to  have  seen  an  English-
man sinking  in  a  bog  on  Ben  Nevis.  "I  am  sinking  I"  cried  the
traveller.  '*  Can  you  tell  me  how  to  get  out  ?  "  The  highlander
calmly  replied,  "  I  think  it  is  likely  you  never  will,"  and  walked
away.  We  have  known  ministers  of  that  kind,  puzzled,  and
almost  annoyed  with  sinners  struggling  in  the  slough  of  desjwnd.
If  you  and  I,  untrained  in  the  shepherd's  art,  were  placed  among
the  ewes  and  young  lambs  in  the  early  spring,  what  should  we  do
with  them  ?  In  some  such  perplexity  are  those  found  who  have
never  been  taught  of  the  Holy  Spirit  how  to  care  for  the  souls  of
men.  May  his  instructions  save  us  from  such  wretched  incom-
petence.

^loreover,  brethren,  whatever  our  tenderness  of  heart,  or  loving
anxiety,  we  shall  not  know  how  to  deal  with  the  vast  variety  of
cases  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  direct  us,  for  no  two  indi-
viduals are  alike ;  and  even  the  same  case  will  require  different
treatment  at  different  times.  At  one  period  it  may  be  best  to
console,  at  another  to  rebuke ;  and  the  person  with  whom  you
sym])athized  even  to  tears  to-day  may  need  that  you  confront  him
with  a  frown  to-morrow,  for  trifling  with  the  consolation  wliich


16      THE  HOLY  SPIRIT   IN  CONNECTION  WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.

'  you  presented.     Those  who  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  and  set
free  the  captives,  must  have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  upon  them.

In  the  oversight  and  guidance  of  a  church  the  Spirit's  aid  is
needed.     At  bottom  the  chief  reason  for  secession  from  our  de-
nomination  has    been   the    difficulty   arising   out   of   our  church
government.     It  is  said  to  "  tend  to  the  unrest  of  the  ministry."
Doubtless,  it  is  very  trying  to  those  who  crave  for  the  dignity  of
officialism,  and  must  need  be  Sir  Oracles,  before  whom  not  a  dog
must  bark.     Those  who  are  no  more  capable  of  ruling  than  mere
babes  are  the  very  persons  who  have  the  greatest  thirst  for  autho-
rity, and,  finding  little  of  it  awarded  to  them  in  these  parts,  they
seek  other  regions.     If  you  cannot  rule  yourself,  if  you  are  not
manly  and  independent,  if  you  are  not  superior  in  moral  weight,
if  you  have  not  more  gift  and  more  grace  than  your  ordinary
hearers,  you  may  put  on  a  gown  and  claim  to  be  the  ruling  person
in  the  church  ;  but  it  will  not  be  in  a  church  of  the  Baptist  or  New
Testament  order.     For  my  part  I  should  loathe  to  be  the  pastor
of  a  people  who  have  nothing  to  say,  or  who,  if  they  do  say  anything,
might  as  well  be  quiet,  for  the  pastor  is  Lord  Paramount,  and
they  are  mere  laymen  and  nobodies.    I  would  sooner  be  the  leader
of  six  free  men,  whose  enthusiastic  love  is  my  only  power  over
them,  than  play  the  dictator  to  a  score  of  enslaved  nations.    What
position  is  nobler  than  that  of  a  spiritual  father  who  claims  no
authority  and  yet  is  universally  esteemed,  whose  word  is  given
only  as  tender  advice,  but  is  allowed  to  operate  with  the  force  of
law?     Consulting  the  wishes  of  others  he  finds  that  they  first
desire  to  know  what  he  would  recommend,  and  deferring  always  to
the  desires  of  others,  he  finds  that  they  are  glad  to  defer  to  him.
Lovingly  firm  and  graciously  gentle,  he  is  the  chief  of  all  because
he  is  the  servant  of  all.     Does  not  this  need  wisdom  from  above  I
What  can  require  it  more  ?    David  when  established  on  the  throne
said,  "  It  is  lie  that  subdueth  my  people  under  me,"  and  so  may
every  happy  pastor  say  when  he  sees  so  many  brethren  of  differing
temperaments  all  haj)j)ily  willing  to   be  under  discipline,  and  to
accept  his  leadership  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.     If  the  Lord  were
not  among  us  how  soon  there  would   be  confusion.     Ministei*s,
deacons,  and  elders  may  all  bo  wise,  but  if  the  sacred  Dove  de-
parts, and  the  spirit  of  strife  enters,  it  is  all  over  with  us.   Brethren,
our  system  will  not  work  without  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  I  am
glad  it  will  not,  for  ifji  stoppages  and  breakages  call  our  attention
to  the  fact  of  his  absence.     Our  system  was  never  intended  to
promote  the  glory  of  priests  and  pastors,  but  it  is  calculated  to


THE   HOLY   SPIRIT    IN    CONNECTION    WITH   OUR   MINISTRY.       17

educate  manly  Christians,  who  will  not  take  their  faith  at  second-
hand. What  am  I,  and  what  are  you,  that  we  should  be  lords
over  God's  heritage  ?  Dare  any  of  us  say  with  the  French  king,
"  L'^tat,  e'est  moi " — "  the  state  is  myself," — I  am  the  most  im-
portant person  in  the  church  ?  If  so,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  likely
to  use  such  unsuitable  instruments ;  but  if  we  know  our  places
and  desire  to  keep  them  with  all  humility,  he  will  help  us,  and  the
churches  will  flourish  beneath  our  care.

I  have  given  you  a  lengthened  catalogue  of  matters  wherein  the
Holy  Spirit  is  absolutely  necessary  to  us,  and  yet  the  list  is  very
far  from  complete.  I  have  intentionally  left  it  imperfect,  because
if  I  attempted  its  completion  all  our  time  would  have  expired
before  we  were  able  to  answer  the  question,  How  may  we  losb
THIS  NEEDFUL  ASSISTANCE?  Let  none  of  US  ever  try  the  ex|)eri-
ment,  but  it  is  certain  that  ministers  may  lose  the  aid  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  Each  man  here  may  lose  it.  You  shall  not  perish  as  be-
lievers, for  everlasting  life  is  in  you;  but  you  may  perish  as  minis-
ters, and  be  no  more  heard  of  as  witnesses  for  the  Lord.  Should
this  happen  it  will  not  be  without  a  cause.  The  Spirit  claims
a  sovereignty  like  that  of  the  wind  which  bloweth  where  it
listeth;  but  let  us  never  dream  that  sovereignty  and  capriciousness
are  the  same  thing.  The  blessed  Spirit  acts  as  he  wills,  but  he
always  acts  justly,  wisely,  and  with  motive  and  reason.  At  times
he  gives  or  withholils  his  blessing,  for  reasons  connected  with  our-
selves. Mark  the  course  of  a  river  like  the  Thames;  how  it  winds
and  twists  according  to  its  own  sweet  will :  yet  there  is  a  reason  for
every  bend  and  curve :  the  geologist  studying  the  soil  and  marking
the  conformation  of  the  rock,  sees  a  reason  why  the  river's  bed  di-
verges to  the  right  or  to  the  left :  and  so,  though  the  Spirit  of  God
blesses  one  preacher  more  than  another,  and  the  reason  cannot  be
such  that  any  man  could  congi*atulate  himself  upon  his  own  good-
ness, yet  there  are  certain  things  about  Christian  ministers  which
God  blesses,  and  certain  other  things  which  hinder  success.  The
Spirit  of  God  falls  like  the  dew,  in  mystery  and  power,  but  it  is  in
the  spiritual  world  as  in  the  natural :  certain  substances  are  wet
with  the  celestial  moisture  while  others  are  always  dry.  Is  there
not  a  cause?  The  wind  blows  where  it  lists;  but  if  we  desire  to
feel  a  stiff  breeze  we  must  go  out  to  sea,  or  cUmb  the  liills.  The
Spirit  of  God  has  his  favoured  places  for  displaying  his  might.
lie  is  typified  by  a  dove,  and  the  dove  has  its  chosen  haunts:  to  the
rivers  of  waters,  to  the  peaceful  and  quiet  places,  the  dove  resorts;

3


18       THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION   WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.

we  meet  it  not  upon  the  battle-field,  neither  does  it  alight  on
carrion.  There  are  things  congruous  to  the  Spirit,  and  things
contrary  to  his  mind.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  compared  to  light,  and
light  can  shine  where  it  wills,  but  some  bodies  are  opaque,  while
others  are  transparent;  and  so  there  are  men  through  whom  God
the  Holy  Ghost  can  shine,  and  there  are  others  through  whom  his
brightness  never  appears.  Thus,  then,  it  can  be  shown  that  tlie
Holy  Ghost,  though  he  be  the  "free  Spirit"  of  God,  is  by  no  means
capricious  in  his  operations.

But,  dear  brethren,  the  Spirit  of  God  may  be  grieved  and  vexed,
and  even  resisted :  to  deny  this  is  to  oppose  the  constant  testimony
of  Scripture.  Worst  of  all,  we  may  do  despite  to  him,  and  so  in-
sult him  that  he  will  speak  no  more  by  us,  but  leave  us  as  he  left
king  Saul  of  old.  Alas,  that  there  should  be  men  in  the  Christian
ministry  to  whom  this  has  happened;  but  I  am  afraid  there  are.

Brethren,  what  are  those  evils  which  will  grieve  the  Spirit?  I
answer,  anything  that  would  have  disqualified  you  as  an  ordinary
Christian  for  communion  with  God  also  disqualifies  you  for  feeling
the  extraordinary  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  minister:  but,
apart  from  that,  there  are  special  hindrances.

Among  the  first  we  must  mention  a  want  of  sensitiveness,  or  that
unfeeling  condition  which  arises  from  disobeying  the  Spirit's  in-
fluences. We  should  be  delicately  sensitive  to  his  faintest  move-
ment, and  then  we  may  expect  his  abiding  presence,  but  if  we  are
as  the  horse  and  as  the  mule,  which  have  no  understanding,  we
shall  feel  the  whip,  but  we  shall  not  enjoy  the  tender  influences  of
the  Comforter.

Another  grieving  fault  is  a  want  of  truthfulness.  When  a  great
musician  takes  a  guitar,  or  touches  a  harp,  and  finds  that  the  notes
are  false,  he  stays  his  hand.  Some  men's  souls  are  not  honest ;
they  are  sophistical  and  double-minded.  Christ's  Spirit  will  not
be  an  accomplice  with  men  in  the  wretched  business  of  shufiling  and
deceiving.  Does  it  really  come  to  this — that  you  preach  certain
doctrines,  not  because  you  believe  them,  but  because  your  congre-
gation ex[>ect8  you  to  do  sot  Are  you  biding  your  time  till  you
can,  without  risk,  renounce  your  present  creed  and  tell  out  what
your  dastardly  mind  really  liolds  to  be  true?  Then  are  you  fallen
indeed,  and  are  baser  than  the  meanest  slaves.  God  doliver  us
from  treacherous  men,  and  if  they  enter  our  ranks,  may  tiiey
speedily  be  drummed  out  to  the  tune  of  the  Rogue's  Marc^h.  If
we  feel  an  uhhorrence  of  them,  how  much  more  must  the  Spirit
of  truth  detest  them  I


THE   HOLT   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION   WITH    OUR   MINISTRY.       19

You  can  greatly  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  by  a  general  scantiness
of  grace.  The  phrase  is  awkward,  but  it  describes  certain  persons
better  than  any  other  which  occurs  to  me.  The  Scanty-grace
family  usually  have  one  of  the  brothers  in  the  ministry.  I  know
the  man.  lie  is  not  dishonest,  nor  immoral,  he  is  not  bad  tempered,
nor  self-indulgent,  but  there  is  a  something  wanting:  it  would  not
be  easy  to  prove  its  absence  by  any  overt  offence,  but  it  is  wanting
in  the  whole  man,  and  its  absence  spoils  everything.  He  wants
the  one  thing  needful.  He  is  not  spiritual,  he  has  no  savour  of
Christ,  his  heart  never  burns  within  him,  his  soul  is  not  alive,  he
wants  grace.  We  cannot  exjxict  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bless  a
ministry  which  never  ought  to  have  been  exercised,  and  certainly  a
graceless  ministry  is  of  that  character.

Another  evil  which  drives  away  the  divine  Spirit  is  pride.  The
way  to  be  very  great  is  to  be  very  little.  To  be  very  not*,'worthy
in  your  own  esteem  is  to  be  unnoticed  of  God.  If  you  must  needs
dwell  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  you  shall  find  the  mountain
summits  cold  and  barren:  the  Lord  dwells  with  the  lowly,  but  he
knows  the  proud  afar  off.

The  Holy  Ghost  is  also  vexed  by  laziness.  I  cannot  imagine
the  Spirit  waiting  at  the  door  of  a  sluggard,  and  supplying  the
deficiencies  created  by  indolence.  Sloth  in  the  cause  of  the  Re-
deemer is  a  vice  for  Avhich  no  excuse  can  be  invented.  We  our-
selves feel  our  flesh  creep  when  we  see  the  dilatory  movements  of
sluggards,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  the  active  Spirit  is  equally
vexed  with  those  who  trifle  ir.  the  work  of  the  Lord.

Neglect  of  private  prayer  and  many  other  evils  will  produce  the
same  unhappy  result,  but  there  is  no  need  to  enlarge,  for  your  own
consciences  will  tell  you,  brethren,  what  it  is  that  grieves  the  Holy
One  of  Israel.

And  now,  let  me  entreat  you,  listen  to  this  word  : — Do  you  know
what  may  happen  if  the  Spirit  of  God  be  greatly  gineved  and  depart
from  us  ?  There  are  two  suppositions.  The  first  is  that  we  never
were  God's  true  servants  at  all,  but  were  only  temporarily  used  by
him,  as  Balaam  was,  and  even  the  ass  on  which  he  rode.  Suppose,
brethren,  that  you  and  I  go  on  comfortably  preaching  a  while,  and
are  neither  suspected  by  oui-selves  nor  others  to  be  destitute  of  the
Spirit  of  God :  our  ministry  may  all  come  to  an  end  on  a  sudden,
and  we  may  come  to  an  end  with  it ;  we  may  be  smitten  down  in
our  prime,  as  were  Nadab  and  Abidu,  no  more  to  be  seen  ministering
before  the  Lord,  or  removed  in  riper  years,  like  Hophni  and
Phineas,  no  longer  to  serve  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congi-egation.


20       THE   HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION   WITH   OUR  MINISTRY.

We  have  no  inspired  annalist  to  record  for  us  the  sudden  cutting
off  of  })romising  men,  but  if  we  had,  it  may  be  we  should  read
with  terror — of  zeal  sustained  by  strong  drink,  of  public  Phari-
seeism  associated  with  secret  defilement,  of  avowed  orthodoxy
concealing  absolute  infidelity,  or  of  some  other  form  of  strange
fire  presented  upon  the  altar  till  the  Lord  would  endure  it  no
more,  and  cut  off  the  offenders  with  a  sudden  stroke.  Shall  this
terrible  doom  happen  to  any  one  of  us  1

A  las,  I  have  seen  some  deserted  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  Saul  was.
It  is  written  that  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul,  but  he  was
faithless  to  the  divine  influence,  and  it  departed,  and  an  evil  spirit
occupied  its  place.  See  how  the  deserted  preacher  moodily  plays
the  cynic,  criticises  all  others,  and  hurls  the  javelin  of  detraction
at  a  better  man  than  himself.  Saul  was  once  among  the  prophets,
but  he  was  more  at  home  among  the  persecutors.  The  disap-
pointed preacher  worries  the  true  evangelist,  resorts  to  the  witch-
craft of  philosophy,  and  seeks  help  from  dead  heresies ;  but  his
power  is  gone,  and  the  Philistines  will  soon  find  him  among  the
slain.  "Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of
Askelon  !  ye  daughters  of  Israel  weep  over  Saul  I  How  are  the
mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  ! "

Some,  too,  deserted  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  have  become  like  the
sons  of  one  Sceva,  a  Jew.  These  pretenders  tried  to  cast  out
devils  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  whom  Paul  preached,  but  the  devils
leaped  upon  them  and  overcame  them ;  thus  while  certain  preachers
have  declaimed  against  sin,  the  very  vices  which  they  denounced
have  overthrown  them.  The  sons  of  Sceva  have  been  among  us  in
England :  the  devils  of  drunkenness  have  prevailed  over  the  very
man  who  denounced  the  bewitching  cup,  and  the  demon  of  un-
chastity  has  leaped  upon  the  preacher  who  ajiplauded  purity.  If
the  Holy  Ghost  be  absent,  ours  is  of  all  positions  the  mosfperilous ;
therefore  let  us  beware.

Alas,  some  ministers  become  like  Balaam.  He  was  a  prophet,
was  he  not  ?  Did  he  not  speak  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  if  Is  he
not  called  "  the  man  whoso  eyes  are  opened,  which  saw  the  vision
of  the  Almighty  V*  Yet  Balaam  fought  against  Israel,  and  cun-
ningly devised  a  scheme  by  which  the  chosen  people  might  be
overthrown.  Ministers  of  the  gospel  have  become  Papists,  infidels,
and  freethinkers,  and  plotted  the  destruction  of  what  they  once
professed  to  pri/,e.  We  may  be  aj)ostlos,  and  yet,  like  Judas,  turn
out  to  be  sons  of  pertlition.     Woe  unto  us  if  this  be  the  easel

Bretiirun,  I  will  assume  that  we  really  are  the  children  of  God,


THE    HOLY   SPIRIT   IN  CONNECTION   WITH    OUR  MINISTRY.       21

and  wliat  then  ?  Why,  even  tlien,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  depart
from  us,  we  may  be  taken  away  on  a  sudden  as  the  deceived  pro-
j)het  was  who  failed  to  obey  the  command  of  the  Lord  in  the  days
of  Jeroboam.  He  was  no  doubt  a  man  of  God,  and  the  death  of
liis  body  was  no  evidence  of  the  loss  of  his  soul,  but  he  broke
away  from  what  he  knew  to  be  the  command  of  God  o^ven  specially
to  himself,  and  his  ministry  ended  there  and  then,  for  a  lion  met
him  by  the  way  and  slew  him.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  preserve  us
from  deceivers,  and  keep  us  true  to  the  voice  of  God.

Worse  still,  we  may  reproduce  the  life  of  Samson,  upon  whom
the  Spirit  of  God  came  in  the  camps  of  Dan ;  but  in  Delilah's  lap
he  lost  his  strength,  and  in  the  dungeon  he  lost  his  eyes.  He
bravely  finished  his  life-work,  blind  as  he  was,  but  who  among  us
wishes  to  tempt  such  a  fatet

Or — and  this  last  has  saddened  me  beyond  all  expression,
because  it  is  much  more  likely  than  any  of  the  rest — we  may  be
left  by  the  Spirit  of  Gwl,  in  a  painful  degree,  to  mar  the  close  of
our  life-work  as  Moses  did.  Not  to  lose  our  souls,  nay,  not  even  to
lose  our  crowns  in  heaven,  or  even  our  reputations  on  earth  ;  but,
still,  to  be  under  a  cloud  in  our  last  days  through  once  speaking
unadvisedly  with  our  lips.  I  have  lately  studied  the  later  days
of  the  great  prophet  of  Horeb,  and  I  have  not  yet  recovered
from  the  deep  gloom  of  spirit  which  it  cast  over  me.  What  was
the  sin  of  Moses  t  You  need  not  enquire.  It  was  not  gross  like
the  transgression  of  David,  nor  startling  like  the  failure  of  Peter,
nor  weak  and  foolish  like  the  grave  fault  of  his  brother  Aaron ;
indeed,  it  seems  an  infinitesimal  offence  as  weighed  in  the  balances
of  ordinary  judgment.  But  then,  you  see,  it  was  the  sin  of  Moses,
of  a  man  favoui*ed  of  God  beyond  all  others,  of  a  leader  of  the
people,  of  a  representative  of  the  divine  King.  The  Lord  could
have  overlooked  it  in  anyone  else,  but  not  in  Moses :  Moses  must
be  chastened  by  being  forbidden  to  lead  the  people  into  the  pro-
mised land.  Truly,  he  had  a  glorious  view  from  the  top  of  Pisgah,
and  everything  else  which  could  mitigate  the  rigour  of  the  sen-
tence, but  it  was  a  great  disappointment  never  to  enter  the  land  of
Isi-ael's  inheritance,  and  that  for  once  speaking  unadvisedly.  I
would  not  shun  my  Master's  service,  but  I  tremble  in  his  presence.
Who  can  be  faultless  when  even  Moses  erred  I  It  is  a  dreadful
thing  to  be  beloved  of  God.  "  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with
devouring  fire?  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting
burnings "?  He  that  walketh  righteously  and  speaketh  uprightly  "  —
he  alone  can  face  that   sin-consuming  flame  of  love.     Bx'ethren,


22       THE  HOLY   SPIRIT   IN   CONNECTION   WITH    OUR  MINISTRY.

I  beseech  you,  crave  Moses's  place,  but  tremble  as  you  take  it.
Fear  and  tremble  for  all  the  good  that  God  shall  make  to  pass
before  you.  When  you  are  fullest  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  bow-
lowest  before  the  throne,  and  serve  the  Lord  with  fear.  "  The
Lord  our  God  is  a  jealous  God."  Remember  that  God  has  come
unto  us,  not  to  exalt  us,  but  to  exalt  himself,  and  we  must  see  to
it  that  his  glory  is  the  one  sole  object  of  all  that  we  do.  "  He  must
increase,  and  I  must  decrease."  Oh,  may  God  bring  us  to  this,
and  make  us  walk  very  carefully  and  humbly  before  him.  God
will  search  us  and  try  us,  for  judgment  begins  at  his  own  house,
and  in  that  house  it  begins  with  his  ministers.  Will  any  of  us  be
found  wanting?  Shall  the  pit  of  hell  draw  a  portion  of  its
wretched  inhabitants  from  among  our  band  of  pastors  ?  Ter-
rible will  be  the  doom  of  a  fallen  preacher:  his  condemnation
will  astonish  common  transgressors.  '*  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved
for  thee  to  meet  thee  at  thy  coming."  All  they  shall  speak  and
say  unto  thee,  "Art  thou  also  become  weak  as  we?  Art  thou
become  like  unto  us  ?"  O  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  make  and
keep  us  alive  unto  God,  faithful  to  our  office,  and  useful  to  our
generation,  and  clear  of  the  blood  of  men's  souls.    Amen.


LECTURE  II.


Dear  Fellow  Soldiers  I  We  are  few,  and  we  have  a  desperate
fight  before  us,  therefore  it  is  needful  that  every  man  should  be
made  the  most  of,  and  nerved  to  his  highest  point  of  strenf^th.  It
is  desirable  that  the  Lord's  ministers  should  be  the  picked  men  of
the  church,  yea,  of  the  entire  universe,  for  such  the  age  demands;
therefore,  in  reference  to  yourselves  and  your  personal  qualifica-
tions, I  give  you  the  motto,  ♦*  Go  forward."  Go  forward  in  per-
sonal attainments,  forward  in  gifts  and  in  grace,  forward  in  fitness
for  the  work,  and  forward  in  conformity  to  the  image  of  Jesus.
The  points  I  shall  s|)eak  upon  begin  at  the  base,  and  ascend.

1.  FirGt,  dear  brethren,  I  think  it  necessary  to  say  to  myself
and  to  you  that  we  must  go  foi'ward  in  our  mental  acquirements.
It  will  never  do  for  us  continually  to  present  ourselves  to  God  at
our  worst.  We  are  not  worth  his  having  at  our  best;  but  at  any
rate  let  not  the  offering  be  maimed  and  blemished  by  our  idleness.
"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart"  is,  per-
haps, more  easy  to  comply  with,  than  to  love  him  with  all  our
mind ;  yet  we  must  give  him  our  mind  as  well  as  our  affections,
and  that  mind  should  be  well  furnished,  that  we  may  not  offer
him  an  empty  *casket.  Our  ministry  demands  mind.  I  shall  not
insist  upon  "  the  enlightenment  of  the  age,"  still  it  is  quite  certain
that  there  is  a  great  educational  advance  among  all  classes,  and
that  there  will  yet  be  much  more  of  it.  The  time  is  passed  when
ungrammatical  speech  will  suffice  for  a  preacher.  Even  in  a
country  village,  where,  according  to  tradition,  *'  nobody  knows
nothing,"  the  schoolmaster  is  now  abroad,  and  want  of  education
will  hinder  usefulness  more  than  it  once  did ;  for,  when  the  speaker
wishes  his  audience  to  remember  the  gospel,  they  on  the  other

•  This  lecture  was  delivered  to  ministers  who  had  been  educated  at  the  Pastors'
College  as  well  as  to  students,  hence  certain  diH'erences  of  expression.


24  FORWARD !

hand  will  remember  his  ungrammatical  expressions,  and  will  re-
peat them  as  themes  for  jest,  when  we  could  have  wished  they
had  I'ehearsed  the  divine  doctrines  to  one  another  in  solemn
earnest.  Dear  brethren,  we  must  cultivate  ourselves  to  the  highest
possible  point,  and  we  should  do  this,  firt  t,  by  gathering  in  know-
ledge that  we  may  fill  the  barn,  then  by  acquiring  discrimination
that  we  may  winnow  the  heap,  and  lastly  by  a  firm  retentiveness
of  mind,  by  which  we  may  lay  up  the  winnowed  grain  in  tlie
storehouse.  These  three  points  may  not  be  equally  important,  but
they  are  all  necessary  to  a  complete  man.

We  must,  1  say,  make  great  efforts  to  acquire  information,
especially  of  a  Biblical  kind.  We  must  not  confine  ourselves  to
one  topic  of  study,  or  we  shall  not  exercise  our  whole  mental  man-
hood. God  made  the  world  for  man,  and  he  made  man  with  a  mind
intended  to  occupy  and  use  all  the  world  ;  he  is  the  tenant,  and
nature  is  for  a  while  his  house  ;  why  should  he  shut  himself  out  of
any  of  its  rooms  ?  Why  refuse  to  taste  any  of  the  cleansed  meats
the  great  Father  has  put  upon  the  table '?  Still,  our  main  busi-
ness is  to  study  the  Scriptures.  The  smith's  main  business  is  to
shoe  horses  ;  let  him  see  that  he  knows  how  to  do  it,  for  should  he
be  able  to  belt  an  angel  with  a  girdle  of  gold  he  will  fail  as  a
smith  if  he  cannot  make  and  fix  a  horse-shoe.  It  is  a  small  matter
that  you  should  be  able  to  write  the  most  brilliant  poetry,  as  pos-
sibly you  could,  unless  you  can  preach  a  good  and  telling  sermon,
which  will  have  the  effect  of  comforting  saints  and  convincing
sinners.  Study  the  Bible,  dear  brethren,  through  and  through,
with  all  helps  that  you  can  possibly  obtain :  remember  that  the
appliances  now  within  the  reach  of  ordinary  Christians  are  much
more  extensive  than  they  were  in  our  fathers'  days,  and  therefore
you  must  be  greater  Biblical  scholars  if  you  would  keep  in  front
of  your  hearers.  Intermeddle  with  all  knowledge,  but  above  all
tilings  meditate  d«ay  and  night  in  the  law  of  the  Lord.

Be  well  instructed  in  theology,  and  do  not  regard  the  sneers  of
those  who  rail  at  it  because  they  are  ignorant  of  it.  Many
preachers  are  not  theologians,  and  hence  the  mistakes  which  they
make.  It  cannot  do  any  hurt  to  the  most  lively  evangelist  to  be
also  a  sound  theologian,  and  it  may  often  bo  the  means  of  saving
him  from  gross  blunders,  Now-a-days  we  hear  men  tear  a  single
sentence  of  Scripture  from  its  connection,  and  cry  "  Kuroka  I
Eureka  I "  as  if  they  had  found  a  new  truth  ;  and  yet  tlioy  have
not  discovered  a  diamond,  but  a  piece  of  broken  glass.  Had  they
been    able   to  cuniparu  spiritual   things   with  spiritual,  had    they


FORWARD  I  25

understood  the  analopfy  of  tlie  faith,  and  had  they  been  acquainted
Avith  the  liolj  learning  of  tlie  great  Bible  students  of  ages  past,
they  would  not  have  been  quite  so  fast  in  vaunting  their  marvel-
lous knowledge.  Let  us  be  thoroughly  well  acquainted  with  the
great  doctrines  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  let  us  be  mighty  in  ex-
pounding Scripture.  I  am  sure  tiiat  no  preaching  will  last  so
long,  or  build  up  a  church  so  well,  as  the  expository.  To  renounce
altogether  tlie  hortatory  discourse  for  the  expository  would  be  run-
ning to  a  preposterous  extreme;  but  I  cannot  too  earnestly  assure
you  that  if  your  ministries  are  to  be  lastingly  useful  you  must  be
expositors.  For  this  you  must  understand  the  Word  yourselves,
and  be  able  so  to  comment  upon  it  that  the  people  may  be  built
up  by  the  Word.  Be  mastera  of  your  Bibles,  brethren  :  whatever
other  works  you  liave  not  searched,  be  at  home  with  the  writings
of  the  prophets  and  apostles.  '*  Let  the  word  of  God  dwell  in  vou
richly."

Having  given  precedence  to  the  inspired  writings,  neglect  no
field  of  knowledge.  The  presence  of  Jesus  on  the  earth  has  sanc-
tified the  realms  of  nature,  and  what  he  has  cleansed  call  not  you
common.  All  that  your  Father  has  made  is  yours,  and  you  should
learn  from  it.  You  may  read  a  naturalist's  journal,  or  a  traveller's
voyage,  and  find  profit  in  it.  Yes,  and  even  an  old  herbal,  or  a
manual  of  alchemy  may,  like  Samson's  dead  lion,  yield  you  honey.
There  are  pearls  in  oyster  shells,  and  fruits  on  thorny  boughs.  The
paths  of  true  science,  especially  natural  history  and  botany,  drop
fatness.  Geology,  so  far  as  it  is  fact,  and  not  fiction,  is  full  of
treasures.  History — wonderful  are  the  visions  which  it  makes  to
pass  before  you — is  eminently  instructive ;  indeed,  every  portion
of  God's  dominion  in  nature  teems  with  precious  teachings.  Follow
the  trails  of  knowletlge,  according  as  you  have  the  time,  the  op-
portunity, and  the  peculiar  faculty ;  and  do  not  hesitate  to  do  so
because  of  any  apprehension  that  yon  will  educate  yourselves  up
to  too  high  a  point.  When  grace  abounds,  learning  will  not  puif
you  up,  or  injure  your  simplicity  in  the  gospel.  Serve  God  with
such  education  as  vou  have,  and  thank  him  for  blowing  throuirii
you  if  you  are  a  ram's  horn,  but  if  there  be  a  possibility  of  your
becoming  a  silver  trumpet,  choose  it  rather.

I  have  said  that  Ave  must  also  leaiu  to  discriminate,  and  at
this  particular  time  that  point  needs  insisting  on.  Alany  run
after  novelties,  charmed  with  every  invention :  learn  to  judge
between  truth  and  its  counterfeits,  and  you  will  not  be  led  astray.
Others  adhere  like  limpets  to  old  teachings,  and  yet  these  may


26  FOllWARD  I

only  be  ancient  errors  :  prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which
is  good.  The  use  of  the  sieve,  and  the  winnowing  fan,  is  much
to  be  commended.  Dear  brethren,  a  man  who  has  asked  of  the
Liord  to  give  him  clear  eyes  by  which  he  shall  see  the  truth  and
discern  its  bearings,  and  who,  by  reason  of  the  constant  exercise
of  his  faculties,  has  obtained  an  accurate  judgment,  is  one  fit  to
be  a  leader  of  the  Lord's  host ;  but  all  are  not  such.  It  is  painful
to  observe  how  many  embrace  anything  if  it  be  but  earnestly
brought  before  them.  They  swallow  the  medicine  of  every
spiritual  quack  wdio  has  enough  of  brazen  assurance  to  appear  to
be  sincere.  Be  ye  not  such  children  in  understanding,  but  test
carefully  before  you  accept.  Ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  give  you  the
faculty  of  discerning,  so  shall  you  conduct  your  flocks  far  from
poisonous  meadows,  and  lead  them  into  safe  pasturage.

When  in  due  time  you  have  gained  the  power  of  acquiring
knowledge,  and  the  faculty  of  discrimination,  seek  next  for  ability
to  retain  and  hold  firmly  what  you  have  learned.  In  these  times
certain  men  glory  in  being  weathercocks ;  they  hold  fast  nothing,
they  have,  in  fact,  nothing  worth  the  holding.  They  believed
yesterday,  but  not  that  which  they  believe  to-day,  nor  that  which
they  will  believe  to-morrow ;  and  he  would  be  a  greater  prophet
than  Isaiah  who  should  be  able  to  tell  what  they  will  believe  when
next  the  moon  doth  fill  her  horns,  for  they  are  constantly  altering,
and  seem  to  be  born  under  that  said  moon,  and  to  partake  of  her
changing  moods.  These  men  may  be  as  honest  as  they  claim  to  be,
but  of  what  use  are  they  ?  Like  good  trees  oftentimes  transplanted,
they  may  be  of  a  noble  nature,  but  they  bring  forth  nothing ;
their  strength  goes  out  in  rooting  and  re-rooting,  they  have  no
sap  to  spare  for  fruit.  Be  sure  you  have  the  truth,  and  then
be  sure  you  hold  it.  Be  ready  for  fresh  truth,  if  it  be  truth,
but  be  very  chary  how  you  subscribe  to  the  belief  that  a  better
light  has  been  found  than  that  of  the  sun.  Those  who  hawk
new  truth  about  the  street,  as  the  boys  do  a  second  edition  of  the
evening  paper,  are  usually  no  better  than  they  should  be.  The
fair  maid  of  truth  does  not  paint  her  cheeks  and  tire  her  head
like  Jezebel,  following  every  new  ])hilosopliic  fashion  ;  she  is  con-
tent with  her  own  native  beauty,  and  her  aspect  is  in  the  main  the
8ame  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  When  men  change  often
they  generally  need  to  bo  changed  in  the  most  emphatic  sense.
(^ur  "  modern  thought  "  gentry  are  doing  incahnilabU';  niischief  to
the  souls  of  men,  and  resemble  Nero  fiddling  u])()n  the  top  of  a
tuH'er  with  Uouie  burning  at  his  feet.     »Sou1h  are  being  damned,


FORWARD  I  27

and  yet  these  men  are  spinning  theories.  Hell  gapes  wide,  and
with  her  open  mouth  swallows  up  myriads,  and  those  who  should
spread  the  tidings  of  salvation  are  ''pursuing  fresh  lines  of
thought."  Highly  cultured  soul-murderers  will  find  their  boasted
*'  culture  "  to  be  no  excuse  in  the  day  of  judgment.  For  God's
sake,  let  us  know  how  men  are  to  be  saved,  and  get  to  the  work :
to  be  for  ever  deliberating  as  to  the  proper  mode  of  making
bread  while  a  nation  dies  of  famine  is  detestable  ti-iflinj;.  It  is
time  we  knew  what  to  teach,  or  else  renounced  our  office.  "  For
ever  learning  and  never  coming  to  the  truth  "  is  the  motto  of  the
worst  rather  than  the  best  of  men.  I  saw  in  Rome  a  statue  of
a  boy  extracting  a  thorn  from  his  foot ;  I  went  my  way,  and  re-
turned in  a  year's  time,  and  there  sat  the  selfsame  boy,  extracting
the  intruder  still.  Is  this  to  be  our  model  f  "I  shape  my  creed
every  week,"  was  the  confession  of  one  of  these  divines  to  me.
Whereunto  shall  I  liken  such  unsettled  onest  Are"  they  not
like  those  birds  which  frequent  the  Golden  Horn,  and  are  to  be
seen  from  Constantinoi)le,  of  which  it  is  said  that  they  are  always
on  the  wing,  and  never  rest  ?  No  one  ever  saw  them  alight  on
the  water  or  on  the  land,  they  are  for  ever  jioised  in  mid-air.
The  natives  call  them  "  lost  souls,"  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.
Assuredly,  men  who  have  no  pei-sonal  rest  in  the  truth,  if  they
are  not  unsaved  themselves,  are,  at  least,  ven'  unlikely  to  save
others.  Ho  who  has  no  assured  truth  to  tell  must  not  wonder
if  his  hearers  set  small  store  by  him.  We  must  know  the  truth,
understand  it,  and  liold  it  with  firm  grip,  or  we  cannot  hope  to
lead  others  to  believe  it.  Brethren,  I  charge  you,  seek  to  know
and  to  discriminate ;  and  then,  having  discriminated,  labour  to  be
rooted  and  grounded  in  the  truth.  Keep  in  full  operation  the
processes  of  filling  the  barn,  winnowing  the  grain,  and  storing
it  in  granaries,  so  shall  you  mentally  "  Go  forward."

2.  We  need  to  go  forward  in  oratarical  qualijications.  I  am
beginning  at  the  bottom,  but  even  this  is  important,  for  it  is  a
pity  tliat  even  the  feet  of  this  image  should  be  of  clay.  Nothing
is  trifling  which  can  be  of  any  service  to  our  grand  design.  Only
for  want  of  a  nail  the  horse  lost  his  shoe,  and  so  became  unfit  for
the  battle ;  that  shoe  was  only  a  trifling  rim  of  iron  which  smote
the  ground,  and  yet  the  neck  clothed  with  thunder  was  of  no  avail
when  the  shoe  was  gone.  A  man  may  be  irretrievably  ruined  for
spiritual  usefulness,  not  because  he  fails  either  in  character  or
spirit,  but  because  he  breaks  down  mentally  or  oratorically,  and,
therefore,  I  have  begun  with  these  points,  and  again  remark  tliat


28  FORWARD  !

we  must  improve  in  utterance.  It  is  not  every  one  of  us  wlio  can
speak  as  some  can  do,  and  even  these  men  cannot  speak  up  to
their  own  ideal.  If  there  be  any  brother  here  who  thinks  he  can
preach  as  well  as  he  should,  I  would  advise  him  to  leave  off  alto-
gether. If  he  did  so  he  would  be  acting  as  wisely  as  the  great
j)ainter  who  broke  his  palette,  and,  turning  to  his  wife,  said,  "  My
painting  days  are  over,  for  I  have  satisfied  myself,  and  therefore  I
am  sure  my  power  is  gone."  Whatever  other  perfection  may  be
reachable,  I  am  certain  that  he  who  thinks  he  has  gained  perfec-
tion in  oratory  mistakes  volubility  for  eloquence,  and  verbiage  for
argument.  Whatever  you  may  know,  you  cannot  be  truly  efficient
ministers  if  you  are  not  "  apt  to  teach."  You  know  ministers
who  have  mistaken  their  calling,  and  evidently  have  no  gifts  for  it:
make  sure  that  none  think  the  same  of  you.  There  are  brethren
in  the  ministry  whose  speech  is  intolerable ;  either  they  rouse  you  to
wrath,  or  else  they  send  you  to  sleep.  No  chloral  can  ever  equal
some  discourses  in  sleep-giving  properties  ;  no  human  being,  unless
gifted  with  infinite  patience,  could  long  endure  to  listen  to  them,
and  nature  does  well  to  give  the  victim  delivei'ance  through  sleep.
I  heard  one  say  the  other  day  that  a  certain  preacher  had  no  more
gifts  for  the  ministry  than  an  oyster,  and  in  my  own  judgment
this  was  a  slander  on  the  oyster,  for  that  worthy  bivalve  shows
great  discretion  in  his  openings,  and  knows  when  to  close.  If
some  men  were  sentenced  to  hear  their  own  sermons  it  would  be
a  righteous  judgment  upon  them,  and  they  would  soon  cry  out
with  Cain,  "  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear."  Let  us
not  fall  under  the  same  condemnation.

Brethren,  we  should  cultivate  a  clear  style.  When  a  man  does
not  make  me  understand  what  he  means,  it  is  because  he  does  not
liimself  know  what  he  means.  An  average  hearer,  who  is  unable
to  follow  the  course  of  thought  of  the  preacher,  ought  not  to  worry
himself,  but  to  blame  the  pivacher,  whose  business  it  is  to  make
the  matter  plain.  If  you  look  down  into  a  well,  if  it  be  empty  it
will  appear  to  be  very  deej),  but  if  there  be  water  in  it  you  will  see
its  brightness.  I  believe  that  many  "deep"  preachers  are  snn[)ly
80  because  tiiey  are  like  dry  wells  with  nothing  whatever  in  tiiem,
except  decaying  leaves,  a  few  stones,  and  perliaps  a  dead  cat  or
two.  If  there  bo  living  water  in  your  ])reachiiig  it  may  bo  very
deep,  but  the  ligiit  of  truth  will  give  clearness  to  it.  It  is  not
enough  to  be  so  plai!i  that  you  can  be  understood,  you  must  speak
80  that  you  cannot  hi*  misunderstood.

Wo  must  cultivate  n  cofjent  as  well  as  a  clear  stylo;  our  speech


FORWARD  !  20

must  be  forceful.  Some  imagine  that  this  consists  in  speaking
loudly,  but  I  can  assure  them  tiiey  are  in  error.  Nonsense  tloes
not  improve  by  being  bellowed.  God  does  not  require  us  to  shout
as  if  we  were  speaking  to  ten  thousand  when  we  are  only  ad-
dressing three  hundred.  Let  us  be  forcible  by  reason  of  the  ex-
cellence of  our  matter,  and  the  energy  of  spirit  which  we  throw
into  the  delivery  of  it.  In  a  word,  let  our  s|>eaking  be  natural
and  living.  I  hope  we  have  foresworn  the  tricks  of  professional
oratoi's,  the  strain  for  effect,  the  studied  climax,  the  pre-arrangeil
pause,  the  theatric  strut,  the  mouthing  of  words,  and  I  know  not
what  besides,  which  you  may  see  in  certain  pompous  divines  who
still  survive  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  May  such  become  extinct
animals  ere  long,  and  may  a  living,  natural,  simple  way  of  talking
out  the  gospel  be  learned  by  us  all ;  for  I  am  persuaded  that  such
a  style  is  one  which  God  is  likely  to  bless.

Among  many  other  things,  we  must  cultivate  persuasireiies».
Some  of  our  brethren  have  gi*eat  influence  over  men,  and  yet
others  with  greater  gifts  are  devoid  of  it ;  these  last  do  not  appear
to  get  near  to  the  people,  they  cannot  grip  them  and  make  them
feel.  There  are  preachers  who  in  their  sermons  seem  to  take  their
hearere  one  by  one  by  the  button-hole,  and  drive  the  truth  right
into  their  souls,  while  others  generalise  so  much,  and  are  so  coKl
withal,  that  one  would  think  they  were  speaking  of  dwellers  in
some  remote  planet,  whose  affairs  did  not  much  concern  them.
Learn  the  art  of  pleading  with  men.  You  will  do  this  well  if  you
often  see  the  Lord.  If  I  remember  rightl}-,  the  old  classic  story
tells  us  that,  when  a  soldier  was  about  to  kill  Darius,  his  son,  who
had  been  dumb  from  his  childhood,  suddenly  cried  out  in  surprise,
"Know  you  not  that  he  is  the  kingt"  His  silent  tongue  was
unloosed  by  love  to  his  father,  and  well  may  ours  find  earnest
speech  when  the  Lord  is  seen  by  us  crucified  for  sin.  If  there  be
any  speech  in  us,  this  will  rouse  it.  The  knowledge  of  the  terrors
of  the  Lord  should  also  bestir  us  to  persuade  men.  We  cannot  do
other  than  plead  with  them  to  be  i^econciled  to  God.  Brethren,
mark  those  who  woo  sinners  to  Jesus,  find  out  their  secret,  and
never  rest  till  you  obtain  the  same  power.  If  you  find  them  very
simple  and  homely,  yet  if  you  see  them  really  useful,  say  to  your-
self, "  That  is  my  fashion  ; "  but  if  on  the  other  hand  you  listen
to  a  preacher  who  is  much  admired,  and  on  inquiry  find  that  no
souls  are  savingly  converted,  say  to  yourself,  "  This  is  not  the
thing  for  me,  fur  I  am  not  seeking  to  be  great,  but  to  be  really
useful"


30  FORWARD  I

Let  your  oratory,  therefore,  constantly  improve  in  clearness,
cogency,  naturalness,  and  persuasiveness.  Try,  dear  brethren,  to
get  such  a  style  of  speaking  that  you  suit  yourselves  to  your
audiences.  Much  lies  in  that.  The  preacher  who  should  address
an  educated  congregation  in  the  lanijuafTe  which  he  would  use  in
speaking  to  a  company  of  costermongers  would  prove  himself  a
fool :  and  on  the  other  hand,  he  who  goes  down  amongst  miners  and
colliers  with  technical  theological  terms  and  drawing-room  phrases
acts  like  an  idiot.  The  conf  ucion  of  tongues  at  Babel  was  more  thorougii
than  we  imagine.  It  did  not  merely  give  different  languages  to
,great  nations,  but  it  made  the  speech  of  each  class  to  vary  from
that  of  others.  A  fellow  of  Billinjisijate  cannot  understand  a
fellow  of  Brazenose.  Now  as  the  costermonger  cannot  learn  the
lanorua<Te  of  the  college,  let  the  college  learn  the  language  of  the
costermonjjer.  "  We  use  the  lansuajje  of  the  mai'ket,"  said  Whit-
field,  and  this  was  much  to  his  honour ;  yet  when  he  stood  in  the
drawing-room  of  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon,  and  his  speech
entranced  the  infidel  noblemen  whom  she  brought  to  hear  him,  he
adopted  another  style.  His  language  was  equally  plain  in  each
case,  because  it  was  equally  familiar  to  the  audience :  he  did
not  use  the  ipsissima  verba,  or  his  language  would  have  lost  its
plainness  in  the  one  case  or  the  other,  and  would  either  have  been
slang  to  the  nobilitv,  or  Greek  to  the  crowd.  In  our  modes  of
speech  we  should  aim  at  being  "  all  things  to  all  men."  He  is
the  greatest  master  of  oratory  who  is  able  to  address  any  class  of
people  in  a  manner  suitable  to  their  condition,  and  likely  to  touch
their  hearts.

Brethren,  let  none  excel  us  in  power  of  speech  :  let  none  surpass
us  in  the  mastery  of  our  mother  tongue.  Beloved  fellow-soldiers,
our  tongues  are  the  swords  which  God  has  given  us  to  iise  for  him,
even  as  it  is  said  of  our  Lord,  "  Out  of  his  mouth  went  a  two-
edged  sword."  Let  these  swords  be  sharp.  Cultivate  your
powers  of  speech,  and  be  amongst  the  foremost  in  the  land  for
utterance.  I  do  not  exhort  you  to  this  because  you  are  remarkably
deficient ;  far  from  it,  for  everybody  says  to  me,  "  We  know  the
college  men  by  their  j)lain,  bold  speech."  This  leads  me  to  believe
that  you  have  the  gift  largely  in  you,  and  1  beseech  you  to  take
j)ains  to  jK-rfect  it.

3.  Brethren,  wo  must  be  even  more  earnest  to  go  forward  in
moral  (/ualities.  Let  the  points  I  shall  mention  hero  come  home
to  thoHc  who  shall  re<juire  them,  but  I  assure  you  1  have  no  special
])er8on8  among  you  in  my  mind's  eye.     We  desire  to  rise  to  the


FOliWAKD


highest  style  of  ministry,  and  if  so,  even  if  we  obtain  tlie  mental
and  oratorical  qualifications,  we  shall  fail,  unless  we  also  possess
high  moral  qualities.

There  are  evils  which  we  must  shake  off,  as  Paul  shook  the
viper  from  his  hand,  and  there  are  virtues  which  we  must  gain  at
any  cost.

Self-induh'ence  has  slain  its  thousands  ;  let  us  tremble  lest  we
jHirish  by  the  hands  of  that  Delilah.  Let  us  have  every  passion
and  habit  under  due  restraint :  if  we  are  not  masters  of  ourselves
we  are  not  fit  to  be  leaders  in  the  church.

We  must  put  away  all  notion  of  self-importance.  God  will  not
bless  the  man  who  thinks  himself  great.  To  glory  even  in  the
work  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  in  yourself  is  to  tread  dangerously
near  to  self-adulation.  "  Let  another  praise  thee,  and  not  thine
own  lips,"  and  be  very  glad  when  that  other  has  sense  enough  t4>
hold  his  tongue.

We  must  also  have  our  tempers  well  under  restraint.  A  vigor-
ous temper  is  not  altogether  an  evil.  Men  who  are  as  easy  as  an
old  shoe  are  generally  of  as  little  worth.  I  would  not  say  to  you,
"  Dear  brethren,  have  a  temper,"  but  I  do  say,  "  If  you  have  it,
control  it  carefully."  I  thank  God  when  I  see  a  minister  have
temper  enough  to  be  indignant  at  wrong,  and  to  be  firm  for  the
right ;  still,  temper  is  an  edged  tool,  and  often  cuts  the  man  who
handles  it.  "  Gentle,  easy  to  be  entreated,"  ju-eferring  to  bear
evil  rather  than  infllict  it,  this  is  to  be  our  si)irit.  If  any  brother
here  naturally  boils  over  too  soon,  let  him  mind  that  when  he  does
do  so  he  scalds  nobody  but  the  devil,  and  then  let  him  boil  away.

We  must  conquer — some  of  us  especially — our  tendency  to
levity.  A  great  distinction  exists  between  holy  cheerfulness,
which  is  a  virtue,  and  that  general  levity,  which  is  a  vice.  There
is  a  levity  which  has  not  enough  heart  to  laugh,  but  trifles  with
everything ;  it  is  flippant,  hollow,  unreal.  A  hearty  laugh  is  no
more  levity  than  a  hearty  cry.  I  speak  of  that  religious  veneering
which  is  pretentious,  but  thm,  suix'rficial,  and  insincere  about  the
weightiest  matters.  Godliness  is  no  jest,  nor  is  it  a  mere  form.
Beware  of  being  actors.  Never  give  earnest  men  the  impression
that  you  do  not  mean  what  you  say,  and  are  mere  professionals.
To  be  burning  at  the  lip  and  fi-eezing  at  the  soul  is  a  mark  of
reprobation.  God  deliver  us  from  being  superfine  and  superficial :
may  we  never  be  the  butterflies  of  the  garden  of  God.

At  the  same  time,  we  should  avoid  everj'thing  like  the  ferocity
of  bigotry.     I  know  a  class  of  religious  people  who,  I  have  no


OZ  FORWARD  I

doubt,  were  born  of  a  woman,  but  they  appear  to  have  been  suckled
bv  a  wolf.  I  have  done  them  no  dishonour  :  were  not  Romulus
and  Kemus,  the  founders  of  Rome,  so  reared?  Some  warlike
men  of  this  order  have  had  sufficient  mental  power  to  found
dvniasties  of  thought ;  but  human  kindness  and  brotherly  love
consort  better  with  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  AVe  are  not  to  go
about  the  world  searching  out  heresies,  like  terrier  dogs  sniffing
for  rats  ;  nor  are  we  to  be  so  confident  of  our  own  infallibility  as
to  erect  ecclesiastical  stakes  at  which  to  roast  all  who  differ  from
us,  not,  'tis  true,  with  fagots  of  wood,  but  with  those  coals  of
juniper,  which  consist  of  strong  prejudice  and  cruel  suspicion.

In  addition  to  all  this,  there  are  mannerisms,  and  moods,  and
ways  which  I  cannot  now  describe,  against  which  we  must  struggle,
for  little  faults  may  often  be  the  source  of  failure,  and  to  get  rid
of  them  may  be  the  secret  of  success.  Count  nothing  little  which
even  in  a  small  degree  hinders  your  usefulness  ;  cast  out  from  the
temple  of  your  soul  the  seats  of  them  that  sell  doves  as  well  as  the
traffickers  in  sheep  and  oxen.

And,  dear  brethren,  we  must  acquire  certain  moral  faculties
and  habits,  as  well  as  put  aside  their  opposites.  lie  will  never  do
much  for  God  who  has  not  integrity  of  spirit.  If  we  be  guided
by  policy,  if  there  be  any  mode  of  action  for  us  but  that  which  is
straightforward,  we  shall  make  shipwreck  before  long.  Resolve,
dear  brethren,  that  you  can  be  poor,  that  you  can  be  despised,
that  you  can  lose  life  itself,  but  that  you  cannot  do  a  crooked
thing.     For  you,  let  the  only  policy  be  honesty.

May  you  also  possess  the  grand  moral  characteristic  of  coiirage.
By  this  we  do  not  mean  impertinence,  impudence,  or  self-conceit ;
but  real  courage  to  do  and  say  calmly  the  right  thing,  and  to  go
straight  on  at  all  hazards,  though  there  should  be  none  to  give
you  a  good  word.  I  am  astonished  at  the  number  of  Christians
who  are  afraid  to  speak  the  truth  to  their  brethren.  I  thank  God
I  can  say  this,  there  is  no  mend)er  of  my  church,  no  officer  of  the
church,  and  no  man  in  the  world  to  whom  I  am  afraid  to  say
before  his  face  what  I  would  say  behind  his  back.  Under  God  I
owe  my  position  in  my  own  church  to  the  ai)sence  of  all  policy,
and  the  habit  of  saying  what  I  mean.  Tiie  plan  of  making
things  pleasant  all  round  is  a  perilous  as  well  as  a  wicked  one.  If
you  say  one  thing  to  one  man,  and  another  to  another,  they  will
one  day  compare  notes  and  find  you  out,  and  then  you  will  be
(luHpised.  The  man  of  two  faces  will  sooner  or  later  be  the  object
of  contempt,  and  justly  so.     Above  all   things  avoid  cowai'dice,


TORAVAIID  !  33

for  it  makes  men  liars.  If  you  liave  anything  that  yon  feel  you
oufrht  to  say  about  a  man,  let  the  measure  of  what  you  say  be
this — "How  mucii  dare  I  say  to  his  face?"  You  must  not  allow
yourselves  a  word  more  in  censure  of  any  man  living.  If  that  be
your  rule,  your  courage  will  save  you  from  a  thousand  difficulties,
and  win  you  lasting  respect.

Having  the  integrity  and  the  courage,  dear  brethren,  may  you
be  gifted  with  an  indomitable  zeal.  Zeal — what  is  it?  How
shall  I  describe  it?  Possess  it,  and  you  will  know  what  it  is.  Be
consumed  with  love  for  Christ,  and  let  the  flame  burn  continuously,
not  flaming  up  at  public  meetings  and  dying  out  in  the  routine
work  of  every  day.  We  need  indomitable  perseverance,  dogged
resolution,  and  a  combination  of  sacred  obstinacy,  self-denial,  holy
gentleness,  and  invincible  courage.

Excel  also  in  one  power,  which  is  both  mental  and  moral,  namely,
the  power  of  concentrating  all  your  forces  upon  the  work  to  which
you  are  called.  Collect  your  thoughts,  rally  all  your  faculties,
mass  your  energies,  focus  your  capacities.  Turn  all  the  springs  of
your  soul  into  one  channel,  causing  it  to  flow  onward  in  an  undi-
vided stream.  Some  men  lack  this  quality.  They  scatter  them-
selves and  fail.  Mass  your  battalions,  and  hurl  them  upon  the
enemy.  Do  not  try  to  be  great  at  this  and  great  at  that — to  be
"everything  by  turns,  and  nothing  long;"  but  suffer  your  entire
nature  to  be  led  in  captivity  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  lay  everything
at  his  dear  feet  who  bled  and  died  for  you.

4.  Above  all  these,  we  need  spiritual  qttaliJicationSf  graces  which
must  be  wrought  in  us  by  the  Lord  himself.  This  is  the  main
matter,  I  am  sure.  Other  things  are  precious,  but  this  is  price-
less ;  we  must  be  rich  towards  God.

We  need  to  know  ourselves.  The  preacher  should  be  great  in
the  science  of  the  heart,  the  philosophy  of  inward  experience.
There  are  two  schools  of  experience,  and  neither  is  content  to
learn  from  the  other ;  let  us  be  content,  however,  to  learn  from
both.  The  one  school  speaks  of  the  child  of  God  as  one  who
knows  the  deep  depravity  of  his  heart,  who  undei'stands  the
loathsomeness  of  his  nature,  and  daily  feels  that  in  his  flesh  there
dwelleth  no  good  thing.  "  That  man  has  not  the  life  of  God  in
his  soul,"  say  they,  "  who  does  not  know  and  feel  this,  and  feel  it
by  bitter  and  painful  experience  from  day  to  day."  It  is  in  vain
to  talk  to  them  about  liberty,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  they
will  not  have  it.  Let  us  learn  from  these  one-sided  brethren.
Tliey  know  much  that  should  be  known,  and  woe  to  that  minister


*  /


34  FORWARD  I

who  ignores  tlieir  set  of  truths.     Marthi  Luther  used  to  say  tliat
temptation  is  the  best  teacher  for  a  minister.     There  is  truth  on
that   side   of  the   question.     Another   school   of  believers   dwell
much  upon  the  glorious  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  rightly
and  blessedly  so.    They  believe  in  the  Spirit  of  God  as  a  cleansing
power,   sweeping  the  Augean  stable  of  the  soul,  and  making  it
into  a  temple  for  God.     But  frequently  they  talk  as  if  they  had
ceased  to  sin,  or  to  be  annoyed  by  temptation ;  they  glory  as  if
the  battle  were  already  fought,  and  the  victory  won.    Let  us  learn
from  these  brethren.    All  the  truth  they  can  teach  us  let  us  know.
Let  us  become  familiar  with  the  hill-tops,  and  the  glory  that
shines  thereon,  the  Hermons  and  the  Tabors,  where  we  may  be
transfigured  with  our  Lord.     Do  not  be  afraid  of  becoming  too
holy.     Do  not  be  afraid  of  being  too  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     I
would  have  you  wise  on  all  sides,  and  able  to  deal  with  man  both
in  his  conflicts  and  in  his  joys,  as  one  familiar  with  both.     Know
where  Adam  left  you ;  know  where  the  Spirit  of  God  has  placed
you.     Do  not  know  either  of  these  so  exclusively  as  to  forget  the
other.     I  believe  that  if  any  men  are  likely  to  cry,  "  O  wretched
man  that  I  am !     Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this
death?"  it  Avill  always  be  the  ministers,  because  we  need  to  be,
tempted  in  all  points,  so  that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  others.
In  a  railway  carriage  last  week  I  saw  a  poor  man  with  his  leg
placed  upon  the  seat.     An  official  happening  to  see  him  in  th's
posture,  remarked,  "  Those  cushions  were  not  made  for  you  to  put
your  dirty  boots  on."     As  soon  as  the  guard  was  gone  the  man
put  up  his  leg  again,  and  said  to  me,  "  He  has  never  broken  his  leg
in  two  places,  I  am  sure,  or  he  would  not  be  so  sharp  with  me."
When  I  have  heard  brethren  who  have  lived  at  ease,  enjoying
good  incomes,   condemning  others  who  are  much  tried,  because
they  could  not  rejoice  in  their  fashion,  I  have  felt  that  they  knew
nothing  of  the  broken  bones  which  others  have  to  carry  through-
out the  whole  of  their  pilgrimage.

lirethren,  know  man  in  Christ,  and  out  of  Christ.  Study  him
at  his  best,  and  study  him  at  his  worst ;  know  his  anatomy,  his
secrets,  and  his  passions.  You  cannot  do  this  by  books ;  you  must
have  personal  spiritual  experience ;  God  alone  can  give  you  that.
Among  spiritual  acquirements,  it  is  beyond  all  other  things
needful  to  know  liim  who  is  the  sure  remedy  for  all  human  diseases.
Know  Jesus.  Sit  at  his  feet.  Consider  his  nature,  his  work,  liis
KufferingH,  his  glory.  Rejoice  in  his  presence:  commune  with  him
from  day  to  <lay.     To  know   Christ  is  to  understand  the  most


FORWARD !  35

excellent  of  sciences.  You  cannot  fail  to  be  wise  if  you  commune
with  wisdom ;  you  cannot  miss  of  strength  if  you  have  fellowship
with  the  mighty  Son  of  God.  I  saw  the  other  day  in  an  Italian
grotto  a  little  fern,  which  grew  where  its  leaves  continually  glis-
tened and  danced  in  the  spray  of  a  fountain.  It  was  always  green,
and  neither  summer's  drought  nor  winter's  cold  affected  it.  So  let
us  for  ever  abide  under  the  sweet  influence  of  Jesus'  love.  Dwell
in  God,  brethren ;  do  not  occasionally  visit  him,  but  abide  in  him.
They  say  in  Italy  that  where  the  sun  does  not  enter  the  physician
must.  Where  Jesus  does  not  shine  the  soul  is  sick.  Bask  in  his
beams  and  you  shall  be  vigorous  in  the  service  of  the  Lord.  Last
Sunday  night  I  had  a  text  which  mastered  me : — "  No  man  knoweth
the  Son  but  the  Father."  I  told  the  people  that  poor  sinners  who
had  gone  to  Jesus  and  trusted  him,  thought  they  knew  him,  but  that
they  knew  only  a  little  of  him.  Saints  of  sixty  years'  experience,
who  have  walked  with  him  every  day,  think  they  know  him;  but  they
are  only  beginners  yet.  The  perfect  spirits  before  the  throne,  who
have  been  for  five  thousand  years  perpetually  adoring  him,  perhaps
think  they  know  him,  but  they  do  not  to  the  full.  "  No  man
knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father."  He  is  so  glorious,  that  only
the  infinite  God  has  full  knowledge  of  him,  therefore  there  will  be
no  limit  to  our  study,  or  narrowness  in  our  line  of  thought,  if  wo
make  our  Lord  the  great  object  of  all  our  meditations.

Brethren,  as  the  outcome  of  this,  if  we  are  to  be  strong  men,  we
must  be  conformed  to  our  Lord.  Oh,  to  be  like  him !  Blessed  be
that  cross  on  which  we  shall  suffer,  if  we  suffer  for  being  made
like  unto  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  we  obtain  conformity  to  Christ,  we
shall  have  a  wondrous  unction  upon  our  ministry,  and  without  that,
what  is  a  ministry  worth  ?

In  a  word,  we  must  labour  for  holiness  of  character.  ^Vliat  is
holiness  ?  Is  it  not  wholeness  of  character  ?  a  balanced  condition
in  which  there  is  neither  lack  nor  redundance  ?  It  is  not  morality,
that  is  a  cold  lifeless  statue ;  holiness  is  life.  You  must  have
holiness  ;  and,  dear  brethren,  if  you  should  fail  in  mental  qualifi-
cations (as  I  hope  you  will  not),  and  if  you  should  have  a  slender
measure  of  the  oratorical  faculty  (as  I  trust  you  will  not),  yet,
depend  upon  it,  a  holy  life  is,  in  itself,  a  wonderful  power,  and
will  make  up  for  many  deficiencies ;  it  is,  in  fact,  the  best  sermon
the  best  man  can  deliver.  Let  us  resolve  that  all  the  purity  which
can  be  had  we  will  have,  that  all  the  sanctity  which  can  be  reached
we  will  obtain,  and  that  all  the  likeness  to  Christ  that  is  possible
in  this  world  of  sin  shall  certainly  be  in  us  through  the  work  of  the


36  FORWARD !

Spirit  of  God.     The  Lord  lift  us  all  as  a  college  right  up  to  a
higher  platform,  and  he  shall  have  the  glory !

5.  Still  I  have  not  done,  dear  brethren.  I  have  to  say  to  you,
^0  forward  in  actual  icork,  for,  after  all,  we  shall  be  known  by
what  we  have  done.  We  ought  to  be  mighty  in  deed  as  well  as
word.  There  are  good  brethren  in  the  world  who  ai'e  impractical.
The  grand  doctrine  of  the  second  advent  makes  them  stand  with
open  mouths,  peering  into  the  skies,  so  that  I  am  ready  to  say,
*'  Ye  men  of  Plymouth,  why  stand  ye  here  gazing  up  into  heaven  ?"
The  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  is  to  co.ne  is  not  a  reason  for  star-gazing,
but  for  working  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Be  not  so  taken
^p  with  speculations  as  to  prefer  a  Bible  reading  over  a  dark  passage
in  the  Revelation  to  teaching  in  a  ragged-school  or  discoursing  to  the
poor  concerning  Jesus.  We  must  have  done  with  day-dreams,  and  get
to  work.  I  believe  in  eggs,  but  we  must  get  chickens  out  of  them.
I  do  not  mind  how  big  your  egg  is ;  it  may  be  an  ostrich's  egg  if
you  like,  but  if  there  is  nothing  in  it,  pray  clear  away  the  shells.
If  something  comes  of  it,  God  bless  your  speculations,  and  even  if
you  should  go  a  little  further  than  I  think  it  wise  to  venture,  still,
if  you  are  more  useful,  God  be  praised  for  it.  We  want  facts —
deeds  done,  souls  saved.  It  is  all  very  well  to  write  essays,  but
what  souls  have  you  saved  from  going  down  to  hell?  Your
excellent  management  of  your  school  interests  me,  but  how  many
children  have  been  brought  into  the  church  by  it  ?  We  are  glad
to  hear  of  those  special  meetings,  but  how  many  have  really  been
born  to  God  in  them?  Are  saints  edified?  Are  sinners  converted ?
To  swing  to  and  fro  on  a  five-barred  gate  is  not  progress,  yet  some
seem  to  think  so.  I  see  them  in  perpetual  Elysium,  humming  over
to  themselves  and  their  friends,  "  We  are  very  comfortable."  Goil
gave  us  from  living  in  comfort  while  sinners  are  sinking  into  hell.
In  travelling  along  the  mountain  roads  in  Switzerland  you  will
oontinually  see  iparks  of  the  boring-rod ;  and  in  every  minister's
life  there  should  be  traces  of  stern  labour.  Brethren,  do  some-
thing; do  something;  do  something.  While  committees  waste
their  time  over  resolutions,  do  something.  While  Societies  and
Unions  axe  making  <;onstitutions,  let  us  win  souls.  Too  often  wo
discuss,  and  discuss,  and  discuss,  and  Satan  laughs  in  his  sleeve.
It  is  time  we  bad  done  planning  and  souglit  something  to  plan.  I
pray  you,  be  men  of  action  all  of  you.  Get  to  work  and  quit
y<jui*8elvc8  like  men.  Old  Suwarrow's  idea  of  war  is  mine :
**  Forward  and  strike !  No  theory  1  Attack !  Form  column  !
Charge  bayonets  I     IMunge  into  tiic  centre  of  the  enemy."     Our


FORWARD !  37

one  aim  is  to  save  sinners,  and  this  we  are  not  to  talk  about,  but  to
do  in  the  power  of  God.

6.  Lastly,  and  here  I  am  going  to  deliver  a  message  which  weighs
upon  me, — Go  forward  in  the  matter  of  the  choice  of  your  sphere  of
action.  I  plead  this  day  for  those  who  cannot  plead  for  themselves,
namely,  the  great  outlying  masses  of  the  heathen  world.  Our
existing  pulpits  are  tolerably  well  supplied,  but  we  need  men  who
will  build  on  new  foundations.  Who  will  do  thist  Are  we,  as  a
company  of  faithful  men, clear  in  our  consciences  about  the  heathen?
Millions  have  never  heard  the  name  of  Jesus.  Hundreds  of
millions  have  seen  a  missionary  only  once  in  their  lives,  and  know
nothing  of  our  King.  Shall  we  let  them  perish  ?  Can  wo  go  to
our  beds  and  sleep  while  China,  India,  Japan,  and  other  nations
are  being  damned  t  Are  we  clear  of  their  blood  I  Have  they  no
claim  upon  us  I  We  ought  to  put  it  on  this  footing — not  "  Can
I  prove  that  I  ought  to  go  ]  "  but  '*  Can  I  prove  that  I  ou^ht  not
to  go?"  When  a  man  can  prove  honestly  that  he  ought  not  to  go
then  he  is  clear,  but  not  else.  What  answer  do  you  give,  my
brethren?  I  put  it  to  you  man  by  man.  I  am  not  raising  a
question  among  you  which  I  have  not  honestly  pilt  to  myself.  1
have  felt  that  if  some  of  our  leading  ministers  would  go  forth  it
would  have  a  grand  effect  in  stimulating  the  churches,  and  I  have
honestly  asked  myself  whether  I  ought  to  go.  After  balancing
the  whole  thing  I  feel  bound  to  keep  my  place,  and  I  think  the
judgment  of  most  Christians  would  be  the  same ;  but  I  ho[)e  I
would  cheerfully  go  if  it  were  my  duty  to  do  so.  Brethren,
put  yourselves  through  the  same  process.  W^e  must  have  the
heathen  converted;  God  has  myriads  of  his  elect  among  them,
we  must  go  and  search  for  them  till  we  find  them.  Many
difficulties  are  now  removed,  all  lands  are  open  to  us,  and  distance
is  annihilated.  True  we  have  not  the  Pentecostal  gift  of  tongues,
but  languages  are  now  readily  acquired,  while  the  art  of  printing
is  a  full  equivalent  for  the  lost  gift.  The  dangei*s  incident  to  mis-
sions ought  not  to  keep  any  true  man  back,  even  if  they  were  very
great,  but  they  are  now  reduced  to  a  minimum.  There  are  huu-
dreils  of  places  where  the  cross  of  Christ  is  unknown,  to  which
we  can  go  without  risk.  Who  will  go  ?  The  men  who  ought  to
go  are  young  brethren  of  good  abilities  who  have  not  yet  taken
upon  themselves  family  cares.

Each  student  entering  the  college  should  consider  this  matter,
and  surrender  himself  to  the  work  unless  there  are  conclusive
reasons  for   his   not  doing    so.     It   is  a  fact  that  even  for  the


38  FORWAKD 1

colonies  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  men,  for  I  have  had  openings
in  Australia  which  I  have  been  obliged  to  decline.  It  ought  not
to  be  so.  Surely  there  is  some  self-sacrifice  among  us  yet,  and
some  among  us  are  willing  to  be  exiled  for  Jesus.  The  Mission
languishes  for  want  of  men.  If  the  men  were  forthcoming  the
liberality  of  the  church  would  supply  their  needs,  and,  in  fact,  the
liberality  of  the  church  has  made  the  supply,  and  yet  there  are  not
the  men  to  go.  I  shall  never  feel,  brethren,  that  we,  as  a  band  of
men,  have  done  our  duty  until  we  see  our  comrades  fighting  for
Jesus  !n  every  land  in  the  van  of  conflict.  I  believe  that  if  God
moves  you  to  go,  you  will  be  among  the  best  of  missionai'ies,  be-
cause you  will  make  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  the  great  feature
of  your  work,  and  that  is  God's  sure  way  of  power.  I  wish  that
our  churches  would  imitate  that  of  Pastor  Harms,  in  Germany,
where  every  member  was  consecrated  to  God  indeed  and  of  a
truth.  The  farmers  gave  the  produce  of  their  lands,  the  working-
men  their  labour  ;  one  gave  a  large  house  to  be  used  as  a  mission-
ary college,  and  Pastor  Harms  obtained  money  for  a  ship  which  he
fitted  out,  to  make  voyages  to  Africa,  and  then  he  sent  missionaries,
and  little  companies  of  his  people  with  them,  to  form  Christian
communities  among  the  Bushmen.  When  will  our  churches  be
equally  self-denying  and  energetic  f  Look  at  the  Moravians !
how  every  man  and  woman  becomes  a  missionary,  and  how  much
they  do  iu  consequence.  Let  us  catch  their  spirit.  Is  it  a  right
spirit  ?  Then  it  is  right  for  us  to  have  it.  It  is  not  enough  for  us
to  say,  "■  Those  Moravians  are  very  wonderful  people  !  "  We  ought
to  be  wonderful  people  too.  Christ  did  not  purchase  the  Mora-
^ians  any  more  than  he  purchased  us ;  they  are  under  no  more
obligation  to  make  sacrifices  than  we  are.  Why  then  this  back-
wardness? When  we  read  of  heroic  men  who  gave  up  all  for
Jesus,  we  are  not  merely  to  admire,  but  to  imitate  them.  Who
will  imitate  them  now  ?  Come  to  the  point.  Are  there  not
some  among  you  willing  to  consecrate  yourselves  to  the  Lord?
•*  Forward"  is  the  watchword  to-day  1  Ai*e  there  no  bold  spirits
to  lead  the  van?  Pray  all  of  you  that  during  this  Pentecost  the
Spirit  may  say,  **  Separate  me  JJarnahas  and  Saul  for  the  work."
ForicardI     In  God's  name,  FouwaudII


LECTURE  III.

t  ^ttb  d  ^tcmoii  far  i^t  ^xwili.


Some  things  are  true  and  some  tilings  are  false : — I  regard  that  as
an  axiom  ;  but  there  are  many  persons  who  evidently  do  not
believe  it.  The  current  principle  of  the  present  age  seems  to  be.
'•  Some  things  are  either  true  or  false,  according  to  the  }X)int  of
view  from  which  you  look  at  them.  Black  is  white,  and  white  is
black  according  to  circumstances ;  and  it  does  not  particularly
matter  which  you  call  it.  Truth  of  course  is  true,  but  it  would
be  rude  to  say  that  the  opposite  is  a  lie ;  we  must  not  be  bigoted,
but  remember  the  motto,  '  So  many  men,  so  many  minds,' "  Our
forefathers  were  particular  about  maintaining  landmarks;  they
had  strong  notions  about  fixed  points  of  revealed  doctrine,  and
were  very  tenacious  of  what  they  believed  to  be  scriptural ;  their
fields  were  protected  by  hedges  and  ditches,  but  their  sons  have
grubbed  up  the  kedges,  filled  up  the  ditches,  laid  all  level,  and
j)layed  at  leai)-frog  with  the  boundary  stones.  The  school  of
modern  thought  laughs  at  the  ridiculous  positiveness  of  Reformers
and  Puritans  ;  it  is  advancing  in  glorious  liberality,  and  before
long  will  publish  a  grand  alliance  between  heaven  and  hell,  or,
rather,  an  amalgamation  of  the  two  establishments  upon  terms  of
mutual  concession,  allowing  falsehood  and  truth  to  lie  side  by  side,
like  the  lion  with  the  lamb.  Still,  for  all  that,  my  firm  old-
fashioned  belief  is  that  some  doctrines  are  true,  and  that  state-
ments which  are  diametrically  opposite  to  them  are  not  true, — that
when  "No"  is  the  fact,  "Yes"  is  out  of  court,  and  that  when
*'  Yes "  can  be  justified,  "  No  "  must  be  abandoned.  I  believe
that  the  gentleman  who  has  for  so  long  a  time  perplexed  our
courts  is  either  Sir  Roger  Tichborne  or  somebody  else  ;  I  am  not
yet  able  to  conceive  of  his  being  the  true  heir  and  an  impostor  at
the  same  time.  Yet  in  religious  matters  the  fashionable  standf)oint
is  somewhere  in  that  latitude.


40  THE  KEED    OF   DECISION   FOR   THE   TRUTH.

We  have  a  fixed  faith  to  preach,  my  brethren,  and  we  are  sent
forth  with  a  definite  message  from  God.  We  are  not  left  to  fabri-
cate the  message  as  we  go  along.  We  are  not  sent  forth  by  our
Master  with  a  general  commission  arranged  on  this  fashion — "  As
you  shall  think  in  your  heart  and  invent  in  your  head,  so  preach.
Keep  abreast  of  the  times.  Whatever  the  people  want  to  hear,  tell
them  that,  and  they  shall  be  saved."  Verily,  we  read  not  so.
There  is  something  definite  in  the  Bible.  It  is  not  quite  a  lump
of  wax  to  be  shaped  at  our  will,  or  a  roll  of  cloth  to  be  cut
according  to  the  prevailing  fashion.  Your  great  thinkers  evidently
look  upon  the  Scriptures  as  a  box  of  letters  for  them  to  play  with,
and  make  what  they  like  of,  or  a  wizard's  bottle,  out  of  which
they  may  pour  anything  they  choose,  from  atheism  up  to  spiritualism.
I  am  too  old-fashioned  to  fall  down  and  worship  this  theory.
There  is  something  told  me  in  the  Bible — told  me  for  certain — not
put  before  me  with  a  "  but "  and  a  "  perhaps,"  and  an  "  if,"  and  a
"  may  be,"  and  fifty  thousand  suspicions  behind  it,  so  that  really
the  long  and  the  short  of  it  is,  that  it  may  not  be  so  at  all ;  but
revealed  to  me  as  infallible  fact,  which  must  be  believed,  the
opposite  of  which  is  deadly  error,  and  comes  from  the  father
of  lies.

Believing,  therefore,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  truth,  and
such  a  thing  as  falsehood,  that  there  are  truths  in  the  Bible,  and
that  the  gospel  consists  in  something  definite  which  is  to  be
believed  by  men,  it  becomes  us  to  be  decided  as  to  Avhat  we  teach,
and  to  teach  it  in  a  decided  manner.  We  have  to  deal  with  men
who  will  be  cither  lost  or  saved,  and  they  certainly  will  not  be
saved  by  erroneous  doctrine.  We  have  to  deal  with  God,  whose
servants  we  are,  and  he  will  not  be  honoured  by  our  delivering
falsehoods ;  neither  will  he  give  us  a  reward,  and  say,  *'  Well  done,
good  and  faithful  servant,  thou  hast  mangled  the  gospel  as
judiciously  as  any  man  that  ever  lived  before  thee."  We  stand
in  a  very  solemn  position,  and  ours  should  be  the  spirit  of  old
Micaiah,  who  said,  "  As  the  Lord  my  God  livcth,  before  whom  I
statu!,  whatsoever  the  Lord  saith  unto  me  that  will  I  speak."
Neither  less  nor  more  than  God's  word  are  we  called  to  state,  but
that  word  we  are  bound  to  declare  in  a  sj)irit  which  convinces  the
sons  of  men  that,  whatever  they  may  think  of  it,  we  believe  God,
and  are  not  to  be  shaken  in  our  confidence  in  him.

Brethren^  in  what  ought  we  to  he  positive?  Well,  there  are
gentlemen  alive  who  imagine  that  there  are  no  fixed  principles  to
go  upon.     "  Perhaps  a  few  doctrines,"  said  one  to  me,  "  perhaps  a


\


THE   NEED    OF   DECISION   FOR   THE   TRUTH.  41

few  doctrines  may  be  considered  as  established.  It  is,  perhaps,
ascertained  that  there  is  a  God ;  but  one  ought  not  to  dogmatise
upon  his  personality :  a  great  deal  may  be  said  for  pantheism."
Such  men  creep  into  the  ministiy,  but  they  are  generally  cunning
enough  to  conceal  the  breadth  of  their  minds  beneath  Christian
phraseology,  thus  acting  in  consistency  with  their  principles,  for
their  fundamental  rule  is  that  truth  is  of  no  consequence.

As  for  us — as  for  me,  at  any  rate — I  am  certain  that  there  is  a
God,  and  I  mean  to  })reach  it  as  a  man  does  who  is  absolutely
sure.  He  is  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Master  of
providence,  and  the  Lord  of  grace :  let  his  name  be  blessed
for  ever  and  ever  I  We  will  have  no  questions  and  debates  as
to  him.

We  are  equally  certain  that  the  book  wliich  is  called  "  the
Bible  "  is  his  word,  and  is  inspired  :  not  inspired  in  the  sense  in
which  Shakespeare,  and  Milton,  and  Dryden  may  be  inspired,  but
in  an  infinitely  higher  sense ;  so  that,  provided  we  have  the  exact
text,  we  regard  the  words  themselves  as  infallible.  We  believe
that  everything  stated  in  the  book  that  comes  to  us  from  God  is
to  be  accepted  by  us  as  his  sure  testimony,  and  nothing  less  than
that.  God  forbid  we  should  be  ensnared  by  those  various  inter-
pretations of  the  modus  of  inspiration,  which  amount  to  little
more  than  frittering  it  away.  The  book  is  a  divine  pro<luction ;
it  is  perfect,  and  is  the  last  court  of  apjjeal — "  the  judge  which
ends  the  strife."  I  would  a:,  soon  dream  of  blaspheming  my  ^laker
as  of  questioning  the  infallibility  of  his  word.

We  are  also  sure  concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  blessed  Trinity.
We  cannot  explain  how  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  can  be  each
one  distinct  and  perfect  in  himself,  and  yet  that  these  three  are
one,  so  that  there  is  but  one  God ;  yet  we  do  verily  believe  it,
and  mean  to  preach  it,  notwithstanding  Unitarian,  Socinian,
Sabellian,  or  any  other  error.  We  shall  hold  fast  evermore  the
doctrine  of  the  Trinity  in  Unity.

And,  brethren,  there  will  be  no  uncertain  sound  from  us  as  to
the  atonement  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  cannot  leave  the
blood  out  of  our  ministry,  or  the  life  of  it  will  be  gone ;  for  we
may  say  of  the  gospel,  "  The  blood  is  the  life  thereof."  The
proper  substitution  of  Christ,  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ,  on
the  behalf  of  his  people,  that  they  might  live  through  him, — this
we  must  publish  till  we  die.

Neither  can  we  waver  in  our  mind  for  a  moment  concerning
the  great  and  glorious  Spirit  of  God — the  fact  of  his  existence,


42         THE  NEED  OF  DECISION  FOR  THE  TKUTH.

his  personality,  the  power  of  his  working,  the  necessity  of  his
influences,  the  certainty  that  no  man  is  regenerated  except  by
him ;  that  we  are  born  again  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that  the
Spirit  dwells  in  believers,  and  is  the  author  of  all  good  in  them,
their  sanctifier  and  preserver,  without  whom  they  can  do  no  good
thing  whatsoever : — we  shall  not  at  all  hesitate  as  to  preaching
these  truths.

The  absolute  necessity  of  the  new  birth  is  also  a  certainty.  We
come  down  with  demonstration  when  we  touch  that  point.  We
shall  never  poison  our  people  with  the  notion  that  a  moral
reformation  will  suffice,  but  we  will  over  and  over  again  say  to
them,  "  Ye  must  be  bom  again."  We  have  not  got  into  the  con-
dition of  the  Scotch  minister  who,  when  old  John  Macdonald
preached  to  his  congregation  a  sermon  to  sinners,  remarked,
"  Well,  Mr.  Macdonald,  that  was  a  very  good  sermon  which  you
have  preached,  but  it  is  very  much  out  of  place,  for  I  do  not
know  one  single  unregenerate  person  iii  my  congregation."  Poor
soul,  he  was  in  all  probability  unregenerated  himself.  No,  we  dare
not  flatter  our  hearers,  but  we  must  continue  to  tell  them  that
they  are  born  sinners,  and  must  be  born  saints,  or  they  will
never  see  the  face  of  God  with  acceptance.

The  tremendous  evil  of  sin — we  shall  not  hesitate  about  that.
We  shall  speak  on  that  matter  both  sorrowfully  and  positively;
and,  though  some  very  wise  men  raise  difficult  questions  about
hell,  we  shall  not  fail  to  declare  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  the
fact  that  the  Lord  has  said,  "  These  shall  go  away  into  everlast-
ing punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."

Neither  will  we  ever  give  an  uncertain  sound  as  to  the  glorious
truth  that  salvation  is  all  of  grace.  If  ever  we  ourselves  are
saved,  we  know  that  sovereign  grace  alone  has  done  it,  and  we
feel  it  must  be  the  same  with  others.  We  will  publish,  "  Grace  I
grace  I  grace  I "  with  all  our  might,  living  and  dying.

We  shall  be  very  decided,  also,  as  to  justification  by  faith ;  for
salvation  is  "  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast."  "  Life  in
a  look  at  the  Crucified  One"  will  bo  our  message.  Trust  in  the
Redeemer  will  be  that  saving  grace  which  we  will  pray  the  Lord
to  im|)lant  in  all  our  hearers'  hearts.

And  everything  else  which  we  believe  to  bo  true  in  the  Scrip-
tures we  shall  preach  with  decision.  If  there  be  questions  which
may  be  regarded  as  moot,  or  comparatively  unimportant,  we  shall
Kpeak  with  such  a  measure  of  decision  about  tluin  as  may  be
comely.     But  points  which  cannot  be  moot,  whiih  are  e.^sjntial


THE    NEED    OF   DECISION   FOE   THE   TRUTH.  43

and  fundamental,  will  be  declared  by  us  without  any  stammeriug,
without  any  enquiring  of  the  people,  "  What  would  you  wish  us
to  say?"  Yes,  and  without  the  apology,  "Those  are  my  views,
but  other  people's  views  may  be  correct."  We  ought  to  preach
the  gospel,  not  as  our  views  at  all,  but  as  the  mind  of  God — the
testimony  of  Jehovah  concerning  his  own  Son,  and  in  reference
to  salvation  for  lost  men.  If  we  had  been  entrusted  with  the
making  of  the  gospel,  we  might  have  altered  it  to  suit  the  taste
of  this  modest  century,  but  never  having  been  employed  to  origi-
nate the  good  news,  but  merely  to  repeat  it,  we  dare  not  stir
beyond  the  record.  What  we  have  been  taught  of  God  we  teach.
If  we  do  not  do  this,  we  are  not  fit  for  our  position.  If  I  have
a  servant  in  my  house,  and  I  send  a  message  by  her  to  the  door,
and  she  amends  it  on  her  own  authority,  she  may  take  away  the
very  soul  of  the  message  by  so  doing,  and  she  will  be  responsible
for  what  she  has  done.  She  will  not  remain  long  in  my  employ,
for  I  need  a  servant  who  will  rejx^at  what  I  say,  as  nearly  as  pos-
sible, word  for  word ;  and  if  she  does  so,  I  am  responsible  for  the
message,  she  is  not.  If  any  one  should  be  angry  with  her  on  ac-
count of  what  she  said,  they  would  be  very  unjust ;  their  quarrel
lies  with  me,  and  not  with  the  person  whom  I  employ  to  act  as
mouth  for  me.  He  that  hath  God's  Word,  let  him  speak  it  faith-
fully, and  he  will  have  no  need  to  answer  gainsayers,  except  with
a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  This,  then,  is  the  matter  concerning
which  we  are  decided.

How  are  ice  to  show  this  decision  f  We  need  not  be  careful  to
answer  this  question,  our  decision  will  show  itself  in  its  own  way.
If  we  really  believe  a  truth,  we  shall  be  decided  about  it.  Cer-
tainly we  are  not  to  show  our  decision  by  that  obstinate,  furious,
wolfish  bigotry  which  cuts  off  every  other  body  from  the  chance
and  hope  of  salvation  and  the  possibility  of  being  regenerate  or
even  decently  honest  if  they  happen  to  differ  from  us  about  the
colour  of  a  scale  of  the  great  leviathan.  Some  individuals  appear
to  be  naturally  cut  on  the  cross ;  they  are  maimfactured  to  be
rasps,  and  rasp  they  will.  Sooner  than  not  quarrel  with  you  they
would  raise  a  question  upon  the  colour  of  invisibility,  or  the
weight  of  a  non-existent  substance.  They  are  up  in  arms  with
you,  not  because  of  the  importance  of  the  question  under  discussion,
but  because  of  the  far  greater  importance  of  their  being  always
the  Pope  of  the  party.  Don't  go  about  the  world  with  your  fist
doubled  up  for  fighting,  carrying  a  theological  revolver  in  the  leg
of  vour  trousers.     There  is   no  sense  in  being  a  sort  of  doctrinal


44  THE   NEED  OF   DECISION   FOR   THE   TRUTH.

game-cock,  to  be  carried  about  to  show  your  spirit,  or  a  terrier  of
orthodoxy,  ready  to  tackle  heterodox  rats  by  the  score.  Practise
the  suaviter  in  modo  as  well  as  the  fortiter  in  re.  Be  prepared  to
figlit,  and  always  have  your  sword  buckled  on  your  thigh,  but  wear
a  scabbard ;  there  can  be  no  sense  in  waving  your  weapon  about
before  everybody's  eyes  to  provoke  conflict,  after  the  manner  of
our  beloved  friends  of  the  Emerald  Isle,  who  are  said  to  take  their
coats  off  at  Donnybrook  Fair,  and  drag  them  along  the  ground,
crj-ing  out,  while  they  flourish  their  shillelahs,  "AVill  any  gentle-
man be  so  good  as  to  tread  on  the  tail  of  my  coat  ? "  These  are
theologians  of  such  warm,  generous  blood,  that  they  are  never  at
peace  till  they  are  fully  engaged  in  war.

If  you  really  believe  the  gospel,  you  will  be  decided  for  it  in
more  sensible  ways.  Your  very  tone  will  betray  your  sincerity ;
you*^vill  speak  like  a  man  who  has  something  to  say,  which  he
knows  to  be  true.  Have  you  ever  watched  a  rogue  when  he  is
about  to  tell  a  falsehood  ?  Have  you  noticed  the  way  in  wdiich  he
has  to  mouth  it  %  It  takes  a  long  time  to  be  able  to  tell  a  lie  well,
for  the  facial  organs  were  not  originally  constituted  and  adapted
for  the  complacent  delivery  of  falsehood.  When  a  man  knows  he
is  telling  you  the  truth,  everything  about  him  corroborates  his
sincerity.  Any  accomplished  cross-examining  lawyer  knows  within
a  little  whether  a  witness  is  genuine  or  a  deceiver.  Truth  has  her
own  air  and  manner,  her  own  tone  and  emphasis.  Yonder  is  a
blundering,  ignorant  country  fellow  in  the  witness-box ;  the  counsel
tries  to  bamboozle  and  confuse  him,  if  possible,  but  all  the  while  he
feels  that  he  is  an  honest  witness,  and  he  says  to  himself,  *'  I  should
like  to  shake  this  fellow's  evidence,  for  it  will  greatly  damage  my
side  of  the  question."  There  ought  to  be  always  that  same  air
of  truth  about  the  Christian  minister ;  otdy  as  he  is  not  only
bearing  witness  to  the  truth,  but  wants  other  people  to  feel  that
truth  and  own  the  power  of  it,  he  ought  to  have  more  decision  in
his  tone  than  a  mere  witness  who  is  stating  facts  which  may  be
believed  or  not  without  any  serious  consequences  following  oitlier
way.  Luther  was  the  man  for  decision.  Nobody  doubted  that  he
believed  what  he  spoke.  lie  spoke  with  thunder,  for  there  was
lightning  in  his  faith.  The  man  j)reachcd  all  over,  for  his  entire
nature  believed.  You  felt,  *'  Well,  he  may  be  mad,  or  he  may  be
altogether  mistaken,  but  he  assuredly  believes  what  he  says.  He
18  the  incarnation  of  faith ;  his  heart  is  running  over  at  his  lips."

If  wc  would  show  decision  for  the  truth,  we  must  not  only  do  so
by  our  tone  and  manner,  but  by  our  daily  actions.    A  man's  life  \s


\


THE  NEED  OF  DECISION  FOK  THE  TRUTH.        45

always  more  forcible  than  his  speech ;  when  men  take  stock  of  him
they  reckon  his  deeds  as  pounds  and  his  words  as  pence.  If  his
life  and  his  doctrines  disagree,  the  mass  of  lookers-on  accept  his
practice  and  reject  his  preaching.  A  man  may  know  a  gi*eat  deal
about  truth,  and  yet  be  a  very  damaging  witness  on  its  behalf,
because  he  is  no  credit  to  it.  The  quack  who  in  the  classic  story
cried  up  an  infallible  cure  for  cc^ds,  coughing  and  sneezing  between
every  sentence  of  liis  panegyric,  may  serve  as  the  image  and  symbol
of  an  unholy  minister.  The  Satyr  in  iEsop's  fable  was  indignant
with  the  man  who  blew  hot  and  cold  with  the  same  mouth,  and
well  he  might  be.  I  can  conceive  no  surer  method  of  prejudicing
men  against  the  truth  than  by  sounding  her  praises  through  the
lips  of  men  of  suspicious  character.  When  the  devil  turned
preacher  in  our  Lord's  day,  the  Master  bade  him  hold  his  peace ;
he  did  not  care  for  Satanic  praises.  It  is  very  ridiculous  to  hear
good  truth  from  a  bad  man ;  it  is  like  flour  in  a  coal-sack.  AV^hen
I  was  last  in  one  of  our  Scottish  towns  I  heard  of  an  idiot  at  the
asylum,  who  thought  himself  a  great  historic  character.  With
much  solemnity  the  poor  fellow  put  himself  into  an  impressive
attitude  and  exclaimed,  ''I'm  Sir  William  AVallace !  Gie  me  a  bit  of
bacca."  The  descent  fi-om  Sir  William  AVallace  to  a  piece  of
tobacco  was  too  absurd  for  gravity ;  yet  it  was  neither  so  absurd
nor  so  sad  as  to  see  a  professed  ambassador  of  the  cross  covetous,
worldly,  passionate,  or  sluggish.  How  strange  it  would  be  to  hear
a  man  say,  '*  I  am  a  servant  of  the  Most  High  God,  and  I  will  go
wherever  I  can  get  the  most  salary,  I  am  called  to  labour  for  the
glory  of  Jesus  only,  and  I  will  go  nowhere  unless  the  church  is  of
most  respectable  standing.  For  me  to  live  is  Christ,  but  I  cannot
do  it  under  five  hundred  pounds  per  annum,"

Brother,  if  the  truth  be  in  thee  it  will  flow  out  of  thine  entire
being  as  the  perfume  streams  from  every  bough  of  the  sandal-wood
tree ;  it  will  drive  thee  onward  as  the  trade-wind  speeds  the  ships,
filling  all  their  sails ;  it  will  consume  thy  whole  nature  with  its
energy  as  the  forest  fire  bui*ns  up  all  the  trees  of  the  wood.  Truth
has  not  fully  given  thee  her  friendship  till  all  thy  doings  are
marked  with  her  seal.

We  must  show  our  decision  for  the  truth  by  the  sacrifices  we
are  ready  to  make.  This  is,  indeed,  the  most  efficient  as  well  as
the  most  trying  method.  We  must  be  ready  to  give  up  anything
and  everything  for  the  sake  of  the  principles  which  we  have
espoused,  and  must  be  ready  to  offend  our  best  supporters,  to
alienate  our  warmest  friends,  sooner  than  belie  our  consciences.


46  THE   NEED    OF   DECISION   FOR   THE    TRUTH.

We  must  be  ready  to  be  beggars  in  purse,  and  offscourings  in
reputation,  rather  than  act  treacherously.  We  can  die,  but  we
cannot  deny  the  truth.  The  cost  is  already  counted,  and  we  are
determined  to  buy  the  truth  at  any  price,  and  sell  it  at  no  price.
Too  little  of  this  spirit  is  abroad  now-a-days.  Men  have  a  saving
faith,  and  save  their  own  persons  from  trouble ;  they  have  great
discernment,  and  know  on  which  side  their  bread  is  buttered ;  they
are  large-hearted,  and  are  all  things  to  all  men,  if  by  any  means
they  may  save  a  sum.  There  are  plenty  of  curs  about,  who  would
follow  at  the  heel  of  any  man  who  would  keep  them  in  meat.
They  are  among  the  first  to  bark  at  decision,  and  call  it  obstinate
dogmatism,  and  ignorant  bigotry.  Their  condemnatory  verdict
causes  us  no  distress ;  it  is  what  we  expected.

Above  all  we  must  show  our  zeal  for  the  truth  by  continually,
in  season  and  out  of  season,  endeavouring  to  maintain  it  in  the
tenderest  and  most  loving  manner,  but  still  very  earnestly  and
firmly.  We  must  not  talk  to  our  congregations  as  if  we  were  half
asleep.  Our  preaching  must  not  be  articulate  snoring.  There
must  be  power,  life,  energy,  vigour.  We  must  throw  our  whole
•selves  into  it,  and  show  that  the  zeal  of  God's  house  has  eaten  us

How  are  we  to  manifest  our  decision  ?  Certainly  not  by  harp-
ing on  one  string  and  repeating  over  and  over  again  the  same
truths  with  the  declaration  that  we  believe  them.  Such  a  course
of  action  could  only  suggest  itself  to  the  incompetent.  The  barrel-
organ  grinder  is  not  a  pattern  of  decision,  he  may  have  persistency,
but  that  is  not  the  same  thing  as  consistency.  I  could  indicate
certain  brethren  who  have  learned  four  or  five  doctrines,  and  they
grind  them  over  and  over  again  with  everlasting  monotony.  I  am
always  glad  when  they  gi'ind  their  tunes  in  some  street  far  re-
moved from  my  abode.  To  weary  with  perpetual  repetition  is  not
the  way  to  manifest  our  firmness  in  the  faith.

My  brethren,  you  will  strengthen  your  decision  by  the  recollection
of  the  importance  of  these  truths  to  your  own  souls.  Are  your  sins
forgiven!  Have  you  a  hope  of  heaven?  How  do  the  solemnities
of  eternity  affect  you  ?  Certainly  you  are  not  saved  apart  from
these  things,  and  therefore  you  must  hold  them,  for  you  feel  you
are  a  lost  man  if  they  be  not  true.  You  have  to  die,  and,  being
conscious  that  these  things  alone  can  sustain  you  in  the  last  article,
you  hold  them  with  all  your  might.  You  cannot  give  them  up.
How  can  a  man  resign  a  tnrth  which  he  feels  to  be  vitally  im-
portant to  his  own  soul?     He  daily  feels — "I  have  to  live  on  it,  I


\


THE   XEED    OF    DECISION   FOR   THE    TllUTH.  47

have  to  die  on  it,  I  am  wretched  now,  and  lost  for  ever  apart  from
it,  and  therefore  by  the  help  of  God  I  cannot  relinquish  it."

Y'our  own  experience  from  day  to  day  will  sustain  you,  beloved
brethren.  I  hope  you  have  realised  already  and  will  experience
much  more  the  power  of  the  truth  which  you  preach.  I  believe
the  doctrine  of  election,  because  I  am  quite  sure  that  if  God  had
not  chosen  me  I  should  never  have  chosen  him  ;  and  I  am  sure  he
chose  me  before  I  was  born,  or  else  he  never  would  have  chosen  me
afterwards  ;  and  he  must  have  elected  me  for  reasons  unknown  to
me,  for  I  never  could  find  any  reason  in  myself  why  he  should
have  looked  upon  me  with  special  love.  So  I  am  forced  to  accept
that  doctrine.  I  am  bound  to  the  doctrine  of  the  depravity  of  the
human  heart,  because  I  find  myself  depraved  in  heart,  and  have
daily  proofs  that  there  dwelleth  in  my  flesh  no  ^ood  thing.  I
cannot  help  holding  that  there  must  be  an  atonement  before  there
can  be  pardon,  because  my  conscience  demands  it,  and  my  peace
depends  upon  it.  The  little  court  within  my  own  heart  is  not
satisfiel  unless  some  retribution  be  exacted  for  dishonour  done  to
God.  They  tell  us  sometimes  that  such  and  such  statements  are
not  true  ;  but  when  we  are  able  to  reply  that  we  have  tried  them
and  proved  them,  what  answer  is  there  to  such  i*easoningt  A
man  propounds  the  wonderful  discovery  that  honey  is  not  sweet.
"  But  I  had  some  for  breakfast,  and  I  found  it  very  sweet,*  say
you,  and  your  reply  is  conclusive.  He  tells  you  that  salt  is
poisonous,  but  you  point  to  your  own  health,  and  declare  that  you
have  eaten  salt  these  twenty  years.  He  says  that  to  eat  bread  is  a
mistake — a  vulgar  error,  an  antiquated  absurdity;  but  at  each
meal  you  make  his  protest  the  subject  for  a  merry  laugh.  If  you
are  daily  and  habitually  experienced  in  the  truth  of  God's  Word,  I
am  not  afraid  of  your  being  shaken  in  mind  in  reference  to  it.
Those  young  fellows  who  never  felt  conviction  of  sin,  but  obtained
their  religion  as  they  get  their  bath  in  the  morning,  by  jumping
into  it — these  will  as  readily  leap  out  of  it  as  they  leaped  in.
Those  who  feel  neither  the  joys  nor  yet  the  depressions  of  spirit
which  indicate  spiritual  life,  are  torpid,  and  their  palsied  hand  has
no  firm  grip  of  truth.  Mere  skimmei"s  of  the  Word,  who,  like
swallows,  touch  the  water  with  their  wings,  are  the  first  to  fly  from
one  land  to  another  as  personal  considerations  guide  them.  They
believe  this,  and  then  believe  that,  for,  in  truth,  they  believe
nothing  intensely.  If  you  have  ever  been  dragged  through  the
mire  and  clay  of  soul-despair,  if  you  have  been  turned  upside  down,
and  wiped  out  like  a  dish  as  to  all  your  own  strength  and  pride,


48  THE   NEED   OF   DECISION   FOR   THE   TRUTH.

and  Lave  then  been  filled  with  the  joy  and  peace  of  God,  throufrli
Jesus  Christ,  I  will  trust  you  among  fifty  thousand  infidels.
Whenever  I  hear  the  sceptic's  stale  attacks  upon  the  Word  of
God,  I  smile  within  myself,  and  think,  "  Why,  you  simpleton  I
how  can  you  urge  such  trifling  objections  1  I  have  felt,  in  the
contentions  of  my  own  unbelief,  ten  times  greater  difficulties."
We  who  have  contended  with  horses  are  not  to  be  wearied  by
footmen.  Gordon  Gumming  and  other  lion-killers  are  not  to  be
scared  by  wild  cats,  nor  will  those  who  have  stood  foot  to  foot  with
Satan  resign  the  field  to  pretentious  sceptics,  or  any  other  of  the
evil  one's  inferior  servants.

If,  my  brethren,  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
we  cannot  be  made  to  doubt  the  fundamentals  of  the  gospel ;
neither  can  we  be  undecided.  A  glimpse  at  the  thorn-crowned
head  and  pierced  hands  and  feet  is  the  sure  cure  for  "  modern
doubt "  and  all  its  vagaries.  Get  into  the  "  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft
for  you,"  and  you  will  abhor  the  quicksand.  That  eminent
American  preacher,  the  seraphic  Summerfield,  when  he  lay  a-dying,
turned  round  to  a  friend  in  the  room  and  said,  "  I  have  taken  a
look  into  eternity.  Oh,  if  I  could  come  back  and  preach  again,
how  differently  would  I  preach  from  what  I  have  done  before  I  "
Take  a  look  into  eternity,  brethren,  if  you  want  to  be  decided.
Remember  how  Atheist  met  Christian  and  Hopeful  on  the  road  to
the  New  Jerusalem,  and  said,  "  There  is  no  celestial  country.  I
have  gone  a  long  way,  and  could  not  find  it."  Then  Christian  said
to  Hopeful,  "  Did  we  not  see  it  from  the  top  of  Mount  Clear,
when  we  were  with  the  shepherds  ?  "  There  was  an  answer  I  So
when  men  have  said,  "  There  is  no  Christ — there  is  no  truth  in
religion,"  we  have  replied  to  them,  "  Have  we  not  sat  under  his
shadow  with  great  delight  ?  Was  not  his  fruit  sweet  to  our  taste?
Go  with  your  scepticisms  to  those  who  do  not  know  whom  they
have  believed.  We  have  tasted  and  handled  the  cood  word  of  life.
What  we  have  seen  and  heard,  that  we  do  testify ;  and  whether
men  receive  our  testimony  or  not,  we  cannot  but  speak  it,  for  we
speak  what  wc  do  know,  and  testify  what  we  have  seen."  That,
my  bretliren,  is  the  sure  way  to  be  decided.

And  now,  lastly,  whi/  should  ice  at  this  particular  age  he  decided
and  boldf  We  shouUl  be  so  because  this  atje  is  a  doubtin<i  a<ie.
It  swarms  with  doubters  as  Egypt  of  old  with  frogs.  You  rub
against  them  everywiiero.  Everybody  is  doubting  everything,  not
merely  in  religion,  but  in  politics  and  social  economics,  in  everything
indeed.     It  is  the  era  of  progress,  and  I  suppose  it  must  be  the


THE  NEED  OP  DECISION  FOE  THE  TSUTH.  49

age,  therefore,  of  unloosening,  in  order  that  the  whole  bodj'  politic
may  move  on  a  little  further.  Well,  brethren,  as  the  age  ia
doubting,  it  is  wise  for  us  to  put  our  foot  down  and  stand  still
where  we  are  sure  we  have  truth  beneath  us.  Perhaps,  if  it  were
an  age  of  bigotry,  and  men  would  not  learn,  we  might  be  more
inclined  to  listen  to  new  teachers  ;  but  now  the  Conservative  side
must  be  ours,  or  rather  the  Radical  side,  which  is  the  truly  Con-
servative side.  We  must  go  back  to  the  radix,  or  root  of  truth,
and  stand  sternly  by  that  which  God  has  revealed,  and  so  meet  the
wavering  of  the  age.  Our  eloquent  neighbour,  Mr.  Arthur
Mursell,  has  well  hit  off  the  present  age  : —

"Have  we  gone  too  far  in  saying  that  modern  thought  has
grown  impatient  with  the  Bible,  the  gosjKd,  and  the  cross  ?  Let
us  see.  What  part  of  the  Bible  has  it  not  assailed  i  The  Penta-
teuch it  has  long  ago  swept  from  the  canon  as  unauthentic.  What
Ave  read  about  the  creation  and  the  flood  is  branded  as  fable.  And
the  laws  about  the  landmarks,  from  which  Solomon  was  not
ashamed  to  quote,  are  buried  or  laid  upon  the  shelf.

"  Different  men  assail  different  portions  of  the  book,  and  various
systems  level  their  batteries  of  prejudice  at  various  ix)ints ;  until
by  some  the  Scripture  is  torn  all  to  pieces,  and  cast  to  the  four
winds  of  heaven,  and  by  even  the  most  forbearing  of  the  cultured
Vandals  of  what  is  called  modern  thought,  it  is  condensed  into  a
thin  pamphlet  of  morality,  instead  of  the  tome  of  teaching  through
which  we  have  eternal  life.  There  is  hardly  a  prophet  but  has
been  reviewed  by  the  wiseacres  of  the  day  in  precisely  the  same
spirit  as  they  would  review  a  work  from  Mudie's  library.  The
Temanite  and  the  Shuhite  never  misconstrued  the  baited  Job
with  half  the  prejudice  of  the  acknowledged  intellects  of  our  time.
Isaiah,  instead  of  being  sawn  asunder,  is  quartered  and  hacked  in
pieces.  The  weeping  prophet  is  drowned  in  his  own  tears.  Ezekiel
is  ground  to  atoms  amidst  his  wheels.  Daniel  is  devoured  bodily
by  the  learned  lions.  And  Jonah  is  swallowed  by  the  deep
monsters  with  a  more  inexorable  voracity  than  the  fish,  for  they
never  cast  him  up  again.  The  histories  and  events  of  the  gi*eat
chronicle  ai*e  rudely  contradicted  and  gainsaid,  because  some
schoolmaster  with  a  slate  and  pencil  cannot  bring  his  sums  right.
And  every  miracle  which  the  might  of  the  Lord  wrought  for  the
favour  of  his  people,  or  the  frustration  of  their  foes,  is  pooh-poohed
as  an  absurdity,  because  the  professors  cannot  do  the  like  \>ith
their  enchantments.  A  few  of  what  are  called  miracles  may  be
credible,  because  our  leaders  think  they  can  do  them  theniselves.


50         THE  NEED  OF  DECISION  FOR  THE  TRUTH.

A  few  natural  phenomena,  which  some  doctor  can  show  to  a  com-
pany of  martinets  in  a  dark  room,  or  with  a  table-full  of  apparatus,
will  account  for  the  miracle  of  the  Red  Sea.  An  aeronaut  ^oes  up
in  a  balloon,  and  then  comes  down  again,  and  quite  explains  away
the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  cloud,  and  trifles  of  that  kind.  And  so
our  great  men  are  satisfied  when  they  think  that  their  toy  wand
has  swallowed  up  the  wand  of  Aaron :  but  when  Aaron's  wand
threatens  to  swallow  up  theirs,  they  say  that  part  is  not  authentic,
and  that  miracle  never  occurred.

**  Nor  does  the  New  Testament  fare  any  better  than  the  Old  at
the  hands  of  these  invaders.  There  is  no  toll  of  deference  levied
on  their  homage  as  they  pass  across  the  line.  They  recognise  no
voice  of  warning  with  the  cry,  *  Take  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,
because  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground.'  The
mind  which  halts  in  its  career  of  spiritual  rapine  on  any  reverential
pretext,  is  denounced  as  ignorant  or  slavish.  To  hesitate  to  stamp
the  hoof  upon  a  lily  or  a  spring  flower  is  the  sentimental  folly  of  a
child,  and  the  vanguard  of  the  thought  of  the  age  has  only  pity'
and  a  sneer  for  such  a  feeling,  as  it  stalks  upon  its  boasted  march
of  progress.  We  are  told  that  the  legends  of  our  nurseries  are
obsolete,  and  that  broader  views  are  gaining  ground  with  thought-
ful minds.  We  are  unwilling  to  believe  it.  The  truth  is,  that  a
few,  a  very  few,  thoughtful  men,  whose  thinking  consists  in
negation  from  first  to  last,  and  whose  minds  are  tortured  with  a
chronic  twist  or  curve,  which  turns  them  into  intellectual  notes  of
interrogation,  have  laid  the  basis  of  this  system ;  these  few  honest
doubters  have  been  joined  by  a  larger  band  who  are  simply  restless ;
and  these  again  by  men  who  are  inimical  to  the  spirit  and  the
truths  of  Scripture,  and  together  they  have  formed  a  coterie,  and
called  themselves  the  leaders  of  the  tiiought  of  the  age.  They  have
a  following,  it  is  true  ;  but  of  whom  does  it  consist  ?  Of  the  mere
satellites  of  fashion.  Of  the  wealth,  the  pedantry,  and  the
stupidity  of  our  large  populations.  A  string  of  carriages  is  seen
*  setting  down*  and  'taking  up' at  the  door  where  an  advanced
professor  is  to  lecture,  and  because  the  milliner  is  advertised  from
floor  to  celling  in  tho  lecture  room,  these  views  are  said  to  be
gaining  ground.  But  in  an  age  of  fashion  like  this,  who  ever
«U8|)ects  these  minions  of  the  mode  of  having  any  views  at  all'^  It
becomes  respectable  to  follow  a  certain  name  for  a  time,  and  so  the
vainiings  go  to  fctljow  the  name  and  to  display  the  dress,  lint  as
Ut  views,  one  would  no  more  suspect  such  people  of  having  any
views  than  they  would  dream  of  cliurging  more  than  a  tenth  part


THE  NEED  OF  DECISION  FOR  THE  TRUTH.         ol

of  the  crowds  who  go  to  the  Royal  Academy's  exhibition  with
understanding  the  laws  of  perspective.  It  is  the  thing  to  do :  and
80  every  one  who  has  a  dress  to  show  and  a  lounge  to  air,  goes  to
show  it,  and  all  who  would  be  in  the  fashion  (and  who  would  not?)
are  bound  to  advance  with  the  times.  And  hence  we  find  the
times  advancing  over  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  New  Testament,
as  though  it  were  the  floor  of  St.  Alban's  or  of  a  professor's
lecture  room ;  and  ladies  drag  their  trains,  and  dandies  set  their
dress-boots  on  the  authenticity  of  this,  or  the  authority  of  that,  or
the  inspiration  of  the  other.  People  who  never  heard  of  Strauss,
of  Bauer,  or  of  Tubingen,  are  quite  prepared  to  say  that  our
Saviour  was  but  a  well-meaning  man,  who  had  a  great  many  faults,
and  made  a  great  many  mistakes ;  that  his  miracles,  as  recorded  in
the  New  Testament,  were  in  part  imaginary,  and  in  part  account-
able by  natural  theories;  that  the  raising  of  Lazarus  never
occurred,  since  the  Gospel  of  John  is  a  forgery  from  first  to  last ;
that  the  atonement  is  a  doctrine  to  be  scouted  as  bloody  and
unrighteous ;  that  Paul  was  a  fanatic  who  wrote  unthinkingly,  and
that  much  of  what  bears  his  name  was  never  written  by  him  at  all.
Thus  is  the  Bible  rubbed  through  the  tribulum  of  criticism  from
Genesis  to  Revehition,  until,  in  the  faith  of  the  age  in  which  we
live,  as  represented  by  its  so-called  leaders,  there  are  but  a  few
inspired  fragments  here  and  there  remaining."

Moreover,  after  all,  this  is  not  an  earnestly  doubting  age ;  we
live  among  a  careless,  frivolous  race.     If  the  doubters  were  honest
there  would  be  more  infidel  places  of  concourse  than  there  are  ;  but
infidelity  as  an  organised  community  does  not  prosper.    Infidelity  in
London,  open  and  avowed,  has  come  down  to  one  old  corrugated
iron  shed  opposite  St.  Luke's.     I  believe  that  is  the  present  posi-
tion of  it.     "  The  Hall  of  Science  "  is  it  not  called  I     Its  litera-
ture was  carried  on  for  a  long  time  in  half  a  shop  in  Fleet  Street,
that  was  all  it  could  manage  to  support,  and  I  don't  know  whether
even  that  half  shop  is  used  now.     It  is  a  poor,  doting,  drivelling
thing.     In  Tom  Paine's  time  it  bullied  like  a  vigorous  blasphemer,
but  it  was  outspoken,  and,  in  its  own  way,  downright  and  earnest
in  its  outspokenness.     It  commanded  in  former  days  some  names
which  one  might  mention  with  a  measure  of  respect ;  Hume,  to
wit,  and  Bolingbroke,  and  Voltaire  were  great  in  talent,  if  not  in
character.     But  where  now  will  you  find  a  Hobbes  or  a  Gibbon  ?
The  doubters  now  are  usually  doubters  because  they  do  not  care
about  truth   at  all.     They  are   indifferent    altogether.     Modem
scej^ticism  is   playing   and   toying  with  truth ;    and  it   takes   to


52  THE  NEED   OF  DECISION  FOR  THE  TRUTH.

"  modern  thought "  as  an  amusement,  as  ladies  take  to  croquet  or
archery.  This  is  nothing  less  than  an  age  of  millinery  and  dolls
and  comedy.  Even  good  people  do  not  believe  out  and  out  as
their  fathers  used  to  do.  Some  even  among  Nonconformists  are
shamefully  lax  in  their  convictions ;  they  have  few  masterly  con-
victions such  as  would  lead  them  to  the  stake,  or  even  to  imprison-
ment. Molluscs  have  taken  the  place  of  men,  and  men  are
turned  to  jelly-fishes.  Yax  from  us  be  the  desire  to  imitate
them.

Moreover  it  is  an  age  which  is  very  impressible,  and  therefore  I
should  like  to  see  you  very  decided,  that  you  may  impress  it.  The
wonderful  progress  made  in  England  by  the  High  Church  move-
ment shows  that  earnestness  is  power.  The  Kitualists  believe
something,  and  that  fact  has  given  them  influence.  To  me  their
distinctive  creed  is  intolerable  nonsense,  and  their  proceedings  are
childish  foolery ;  but  they  have  dared  to  go  against  the  mob,  and
have  turned  the  mob  round  to  their  side.  Bravely  did  they  battle,
let  us  say  it  to  their  honour ;  when  tkeir  clnu'ches  became  the  scenes
of  riot  and  disorder,  and  there  was  raised  the  teri'ible  howl  of  "  No
Popery  "  by  the  lower  orders,  they  boldly  confronted  the  foe  and
never  winced.  They  went  against  the  whole  current  of  what  was
thought  to  be  the  deep-seated  feeling  of  England  in  favour  of
Protestantism,  and  with  scarcely  a  bishop  to  patronise  them,  and
but  few  loaves  and  fishes  of  patronage,  they  have  increased  from  a
liandful  to  become  the  dominant  and  most  vital  party  in  the
Church,  of  England,  and  to  our  intense  surprise  and  horror  they
liave  brought  people  to  receive  again  the  Popery  which  we  thought
dead  and  buried.  If  anybody  had  told  me  twenty  years  ago  tliat
the  witch  of  Endor  would  become  Queen  of  England,  I  should  aa
80on  have  believed  it  .as  that  we  should  now  have  such  a  High
Church  development ;  but  the  fact  is,  the  men  were  earnest  and
decided,  and  held  what  they  believed  most  firmly,  and  did  not
hesitate  to  push  their  cause.  The  age,  therefore,  can  be  im-
pressed ;  it  will  receive  what  is  taught  by  zealous  men,  whether  it
it  be  truth  or  falsehood.  It  may  be  objected  that  falsehood  will  be
received  the  more  readily ;  that  is  just  possible,  but  anything  will
be  acrHjpted  by  men  if  you  will  but  preach  it  with  tremendous
energy  and  living  earnestness.  If  they  will  not  receive  it  into
their  liearts  in  a  Hpiritual  sense,  yet  at  any  rate  there  will  be  a
mental  assent  and  consent,  very  much  in  jjroportion  to  the  energy
with  which  you  proclaim  it;  ay,  and  God  will  bless  our  decision
too,  80  that  when  tliu  mind  is  gained  by  our  earnestness,  and  the


THE   NEED   OF   DECISION  FOR  THE   TRUTH.  53

attention  is  won  by  our  zeal,  the  heart  itself  will  be  opened  by
the  Spirit  of  God.

We  must  be  decided.  What  have  Dissenters  been  doing  to  a
great  extent  lately  but  trying  to  be  fine  t  How  many  of  our
ministers  are  labouring  to  be  grand  orators  or  intellectual  thinkerst
That  is  not  the  thing.  Our  young  ministers  have  been  dazzled
by  that,  and  have  gone  off  to  bray  like  wild  asses  under  the  notion
that  they  would  then  be  reputed  to  have  come  from  Jerusalem,  or
to  have  been  reared  in  Germany.  The  world  has  found  them  out.
There  is  nothing  now  I  believe  that  genuine  Christians  despise
more  than  the  foolish  affectation  of  intellectualism.  You  will  hear
a  good  old  deacon  say,  "  Mr.  So-and-so,  whom  we  had  here,  was  a
very  clever  man,  and  preached  wonderful  sermons,  but  the  cause  has
gone  down  through  it.  We  can  hardly  supjwrt  the  minister,
and  we  mean  next  time  to  have  one  of  the  old-fashioned  ministers
back  again  who  believe  in  something  and  preach  it.  There  will  be
no  addition  to  our  church  else."  Will  you  go  out  and  tell  tlie
people  that  you  believe  you  can  say  sometliing,  but  you  hardly
know  what;  you  are  not  quite  sure  that  what  you  preach  is  cor-
rect, but  the  trust-deed  requires  you  to  say  it,  and  therefore  you
say  it  ?  Why,  you  may  cause  fools  and  idiots  to  be  pleased  with
you,  and  yo»i  will  be  sure  to  propagate  infidelity,  but  you  cannot
do  more.  When  a  prophet  comes  forward  he  must  speak  as  from
the  Lord,  and  if  he  cannot  do  that,  let  him  go  back  to  his  bed.
It  is  quite  certain,  dear  friends,  that  now  or  never  we  must  be
decided,  because  the  age  is  manifestly  drifting.  You  cannot  watch
for  twelve  months  without  seeing  how  it  is  going  down  the  tide ;
the  anchors  are  pulled  up,  and  the  vessel  is  floating  to  destruction.
It  is  drifting  now,  as  near  as  I  can  tell  you,  south-east,  and
is  nearing  Cape  Vatican,  and  if  it  drives  much  further  in  that
direction  it  will  be  on  the  rocks  of  the  Roman  reef.  We  must
get  aboard  her,  and  connect  her  with  the  glorious  steam  tug  of
gospel  truth,  and  drag  her  back.  I  should  be  glad  if  I  could  take
her  round  by  Cape  Calvin,  right  up  into  the  Bay  of  Calvary',  and
anchor  her  in  the  fair  haven  which  is  close  over  by  Vera  Cruz,  or
the  cross.  God  grant  us  grace  to  do  it.  We  must  have  a  strong
hand,  and  have  our  steam  well  up,  and  defy  the  current ;  and  so
by  God's  grace  we  shall  both  save  this  age  and  the  generations
yet  to  come.


LECTURE  IV.


There  are  some  customs  for  which  nothing  can  be  pleaded,  except
that  they  are  very  old.  In  such  cases  antiquity  is  of  no  more
A'alue  than  the  rust  upon  a  counterfeit  coin.  It  is,  however,  a
happy  circumstance  when  the  usage  of  ages  can  be  pleaded  for  a
really  good  and  scriptural  practice,  for  it  invests  it  with  a  halo  of
reverence.  Now,  it  can  be  argued,  with  small  fear  of  refutation,
that  open  air  preaching  is  as  old  as  preaching  itself.  We  are  at
full  liberty  to  believe  that  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  when
he  prophesied,  asked  for  no  better  pulpit  than  the  hill-side,  and
that  Noah,  as  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  was  willing  to  reason
with  his  cotemporaries  in  the  sliip-yard  wherein  his  marvellous
ark  was  builded.  Certainly,  Moses  and  Joshua  found  their  most
convenient  place  for  addressing  vast  assemblies  beneath  the  un-
pillared  arch  of  heaven.  Samuel  closed  a  sermon  in  the  field  at
Gilgal  amid  thunder  and  rain,  by  which  the  Lord  rebuked  the
people  and  drove  them  to  their  knees.  Elijah  stood  on  Carmel,
and  challenged  the  vacillating  nation,  with  "  How  long  halt  ye
between  two  opinions?"  Jonah,  whose  spirit  was  somewhat
similar,  lifted  up  his  cry  of  warning  in  the  streets  of  Nineveh,  and
ill  all  her  places  of  concourse  gave  forth  the  warning  utterance,
*'  Yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown  1"  To  hear
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  "  all  the  people  gathered  themselves  together
as  one  man  into  the  street  tliat  was  before  the  water  gate."
Indeed,  we  fijid  examples  of  open  air  preaching  everywhere  ai'ound
us  in  the  records  of  the  Old  Testament.

It  may  suffice  us,  however,  to  go  back  as  far  as  the  origin  of
our  own  holy  faith,  and  there  wo  hear  the  forerunner  of  the
iSaviour  crying  in  the  wilderness  and  lifting  up  his  voice  from  the
river's  bank.  Our  Lord  himself,  wlio  is  yet  more  our  pattern,
delivered  the  larger  proporlioti  of  his  sermons  on  the  mountain's
side,  or  by  the  sea  shore,  or  in  the  streets.     Our  Lord  was  to  all


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.  55

intents  and  purposes  an  open  air  preacher.  He  did  not  remain
silent  in  the  synagogue,  but  he  was  equally  at  home  in  the  field.
We  liave  no  discourse  of  liis  on  record  delivered  in  the  chapel
royal,  but  we  have  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  the  sermon  in
the  plain  ;  so  that  the  very  earliest  and  most  divine  kind  of
preacliiug  was  practised  out  of  dooi's  by  him  who  spake  as  never
man  spake.

There  were  gatherings  of  his  disciples  after  his  decease,  within
walJG,  especially  that  in  the  upper  room ;  but  the  preaching  was
even  then  most  frequently  in  the  court  of  the  temple,  or  in
such  other  open  spaces  as  were  available.  The  notion  of  holy
places  and  consecrated  meeting-houses  had  not  occurred  to  them
as  Cliristians ;  they  preached  in  the  temple  because  it  was  the
chief  place  of  concourse,  but  with  equal  earnestness  "in  every
house  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ"

The  apostles  and  their  immediate  successors  delivered  their
message  of  mercy  not  only  in  their  own  hired  houses,  and  in  the
synagogues,  but  also  anywhere  and  everywhere  as  occasion  served
them.  This  may  be  gathered  incidentally  from  the  following
statement  of  Eusebius.  "  The  divine  and  admirable  disciples  of
the  apostles  built  up  the  superstructure  of  the  churches,  the
foundations  whereof  the  apostles  had  laid,  in  all  places  where  they
came ;  they  everywhere  prosecuted  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,
sowing  the  seeds  of  heavenly  doctrine  throughout  the  wliole  world.
Many  of  the  disciples  then  alive  distributed  their  estates  to  the
poor ;  and,  leaving  their  own  country,  did  the  work  of  evangelists
to  those  who  had  never  yet  heard  the  Christian  faith,  preaching
Christ,  and  delivering  the  evancjelical  writincrs  to  them.  No
sooner  had  they  planted  the  faith  in  any  foreign  countries,  and
ordained  guides  and  pastors,  to  whom  they  committed  the  care  of
these  new  plantations,  but  they  went  to  other  nations,  assisted  by
the  grace  and  powerful  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  st>on  as
they  began  to  preach  the  gospel  the  people  flocked  universally  to
them,  and  cheerfully  worshipj)ed  the  true  God,  the  Creator  of  the
world,  piously  and  heartily  believing  in  his  name."

As  the  dark  ages  lowered,  the  best  preachers  of  the  gradually
declining  church  were  also  preachers  in  the  open  air ;  as  were  also
those  itinerant  friars  and  great  founders  of  religious  orders  who
kept  alive  such  piety  as  remained.  We  hear  of  Berthold,  of
Ratisbon,  with  audiences  of  sixty  or  a  hundred  thousand,  in  a
field  near  Glatz  in  Bohemia.  There  were  also  Bernards,  and  Ber-
nardines,  and  Anthonys,  and  Thomases  of  Ajreat  fame  as  travelling


56  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — A  SKETCH   OF  ITS   HISTORY.

preacliers,  of  whom  we  cannot  find  time  to  speak  particularly.
Dr.  Lavington,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  being  short  of  other  argu-
ments, stated,  as  a  proof  that  the  Methodists  were  identical  with
the  Papists,  that  the  early  Friar  Preachers  were  great  at  holding
forth  in  the  open  fields.  Quoting  from  Eibadeneira,  he  mentions
Peter  of  Verona,  who  had  "  a  divine  talent  in  preaching ;  neither
churches,  nor  streets,  nor  market-places  could  contain  the  great
concourse  that  resorted  to  hear  his  sermons."  The  learned  bishop
might  have  easily  multiplied  his  examples,  as  we  also  could  do,  but
they  would  prove  nothing  more  than  that,  for  good  or  evil,  field
preaching  is  a  great  power.

When  Antichrist  had  commenced  its  more  universal  sway,
the  Refonners  before  the  Reformation  were  full  often  open  air
preachers,  as,  for  instance,  Arnold  of  Brescia,  who  denounced  Papal
usurpations  at  the  veiy  gates  of  the  Vatican.

It  would  be  very  easy  to  prove  that  revivals  of  religion  have
usually  been  accompanied,  if  not  caused,  by  a  considerable  amount
of  preaching  out  of  doors,  or  in  unusual  places.  The  first  avowed
preaching  of  Protestant  doctrine  was  almost  necessarily  in  the  open
air,  or  in  buildings  which  were  not  dedicated  to  worship,  for  these
were  in  the  hands  of  the  Papacy.  True,Wycliffe  for  a  while  preached
the  gospel  in  the  church  at  Lutterworth ;  Huss,  and  Jerome,  and
Savonarola  for  a  time  delivered  semi-gospel  addresses  in  connec-
tion with  the  ecclesiastical  an*angements  around  them ;  but  when
they  began  more  fully  to  know  and  proclaim  the  gospel,  they  were
driven  to  find  other  platforms.  The  Reformation  when  yet  a  babe
was  like  the  new-born  Christ,  and  had  not  where  to  lay  its  head,
but  a  company  of  men  comparable  to  the  heavenly  host  proclaimed
it  under  the  open  heavens,  where  shepherds  and  common  people
heard  tliem  gladly.  Thoughout  England  we  have  several  trees
remaining  called  "  gospel  oaks."  There  is  one  spot  on  the  other
side  of  the  Thames  known  by  the  name  of  "  Gospel  Oak,"  and
I  have  myself  preached  at  Addlestone,  in  Surrey,  under  the  far-
spreading  boughs  of  an  ancient  oak,  beneath  which  John  Knox  is
said  to  have  jjroclaimed  the  gospel  during  his  sojourn  in  England.
Full  many  a  wild  moor,  and  lone  hill  side,  and  secret  spot  in  the
forest  have  been  consecrated  in  the  same  fashion,  and  traditions
still  linger  over  caves,  and  delis,  and  hill  toj)s,  where  of  old  time
the  bands  of  the  faithful  met  to  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.
Nor  was  it  ah)no  in  solitaiy  places  that  in  days  of  yore  the  voice
of  the  preacher  was  heard,  for.  scarcely  is  there  a  market  cross
which  haa  nut  served  as  a  pulpit  fur  itinerant  guspellers.     Dming


OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — A  SKETCH   OF  ITS  HISTORY.  57

the  lifetime  of  Wycliffe  his  missionaries  traversed  the  country,
everywhere  preaching  the  word.  An  Act  of  Parliament  of  Richard
II.  (1382)  sets  it  forth  as  a  grievance  of  the  clergy  that  a  number
of  persons  in  frieze  gowns  went  from  town  to  town,  without  the
license  of  the  ordinaries,  and  preached  not  only  in  churches,  but  in
churchyards,  and  market-places,  and  also  at  fairs.  To  hear  these
heralds  of  the  cross  the  country  people  flocked  in  great  numbers,
and  the  soldiers  mingled  with  the  crowd,  ready  to  defend  the
preachers  with  their  swords  if  any  offered  to  molest  them.  After
Wycliffe's  decease  his  followers  scrupled  not  to  use  the  same
methods.  It  is  specially  recorded  of  William  Swinderby  that,
"  being  excommunicated,  and  forbidden  to  preach  in  any  church
or  churchyard,  lie  made  a  pulpit  of  two  mill-stones  in  the  High-
street  of  Leicester,  and  there  preached  *  in  contempt  of  the
bishop.'  'There,'  says  Knighton,  'you  might  see  throngs  of
people  from  every  part,  as  well  from  the  town  as  the  country,
double  the  number  there  used  to  be  when  they  might  hear  him
lawfully.' "

In  Germany  and  other  continental  countries  the  Reformation
was  greatly  aided  by  the  sennons  delivered  to  the  masses  out  of
doors.  We  read  of  Lutheran  preachers  perambulating  the  country
proclaiming  the  new  doctrine  to  crowds  in  the  market-places,
and  burial-grounds,  and  also  on  mountains  and  in  meadows.  At
Goslar  a  Wittemberg  student  pi*eached  in  a  meadow  planted  with
lime-trees,  which  procured  for  his  hearers  the  designation  of  **  the
Lime-tree  Brethren."  D'Aubign^  tells  us  that  at  Appenzel,  as
the  crowds  could  not  be  contained  in  the  churches,  the  preaching
was  held  in  the  fields  and  public  squares,  and,  notwithstanding
keen  opposition,  the  hills,  meadows,  and  mountains  echoed  with
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation.  In  the  life  of  Farel  we  meet  with
incidents  connected  with  out-of-doors  ministry ;  for  instance,  when
at  Metz  he  preached  his  first  sermon  in  the  churchyard  of  the
Dominicans,  his  enemies  caused  all  the  bells  to  be  tolled,  but  his
voice  of  thunder  overpowered  the  sound.  In  Neuchatel  we  are
told  that  "  the  whole  town  became  his  church.  He  preached  in
the  market-place,  in  the  streets,  at  the  gates,  before  the  houses,
and  in  the  squares,  and  with  such  persuasion  and  effect  that  he
won  over  many  to  the  gospel.  The  people  crowded  to  hear  his
sermons,  and  could  not  be  kept  back  either  by  threats  or  per-
suasions."

From  Dr.  Wvlie's  "  Histor\'  of  Protestantism "  I  borrow  the
following: — "It  is  said  that  the  first  field-preaching  in  the  Nether-


58  OPEN   AIR   PREACHING— A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.

lands  took  place  on  the  14tli  of  June,  1566,  and  was  held  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Ghent.  The  preacher  was  Herman  Modet,  who
had  formerly  been  a  monk,  but  was  now  the  reformed  pastor  at
Oudenard.  *  This  man,'  says  a  Popish  chronicler,  '  was  the  first
who  ventured  to  preach  in  public,  and  there  were  7,000  persons
at  his  first  sermon.'  ....  The  second  great  field-preaching  took
place  on  the  23rd  of  July  following,  the  people  assembling  in  a
large  meadow  in  the  vicinity  of  Ghent.  The  '  Word '  was  precious
in  those  days,  and  the  people,  eagerly  thirsting  to  hear  it,  pre-
pared to  remain  two  days  consecutively  on  the  ground.  Their
arrangements  more  resembled  an  army  pitching  their  camp  than
a  peaceful  multitude  assembled  for  worship.  Around  the  wor-
shippers was  a  wall  of  barricades  in  the  shape  of  carts  and
waggons.  Sentinels  were  placed  at  all  the  entrances.  A  rude
pulpit  of  planks  was  hastily  run  up  and  placed  aloft  on  a  cart.
Modet  was  preacher,  and  around  him  were  many  thousands  of
persons,  who  listened  with  their  pikes,  hatchets,  and  guns  lying  by
their  sides  ready  to  be  grasped  on  a  sign  from  the  sentinels  who
kept  watch  all  around  the  assembly.  In  front  of  the  entrances
were  erected  stalls,  whereat  pedlars  offered  prohibited  books  to  all
who  wished  to  buy.  Along  the  roads  running  into  the  country
were  stationed  certain  persons,  whose  office  it  was   to   bid   the

casual  passenger  turn  in  and  hear  the  Gospel When  the

services  were  finished,  the  multitude  would  repair  to  other  dis-
tricts, where  they  encamped  after  the  same  fashion,  and  remained
for  the  same  space  of  time,  and  so  passed  through  the  whole  of
West  Flanders.  At  these  conventicles  the  Psalms  of  David,
which  had  been  translated  into  Low  Dutch  from  the  version  of
Clement  Marot,  and  Theodore  Beza,  were  always  sung.  Tiie
odes  of  the  Hebrew  king,  pealed  forth  by  from  five  to  ten
thousand  voices,  and  borne  by  the  breeze  over  the  woods  and
meadows,  might  be  heard  at  great  distances,  arresting  the  plough-
man as  he  turned  the  furrow,  or  the  traveller  as  he  pursued  his
way,  and  making  him  stop  and  wonder  whence  the  minstrelsy
proceeded."  It  is  most  interesting  to  observe  that  congregational
singing  is  sure  to  revive  at  the  same  moment  as  gospel-preaching.
In  all  ages  a  Moody  has  been  attended  by  a  Sankey.  History
repeats  itaulf  because  like  causes  are  pretty  sure  to  i)roduce  like
effects.

It  would  bo  an  interesting  task  to  prepan^  a  voliinKr  of  notable
facts  connected  with  open  air  preaciiing,  or,  better  still,  a  consecu-
tive history  of  it.     I  have  no  time  for  oven  a  complete  outline,


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.  59

but  would  simply  ask  you,  where  would  the  Reformation  have  been
if  its  great  preachers  had  confined  themselves  to  churches  and
cathedrals?  How  would  the  common  people  have  become  in-
doctrinated with  the  gospel  had  it  not  been  for  those  far  wander-
ing evangelists,  the  colporteurs,  and  those  daring  innovators  who
found  a  pulpit  on  every  heap  of  stones,  and  an  audience  chamber
in  every  open  space  near  the  abodes  of  men  ?

Among  examples  within  our  own  highly  favoured  island  I  cannot
forbear  mentioning  the  notable  case  of  holy  Wishart.  This  I
(juote  from  Gillie's  "  Historical  Collections"  : —

"  George  Wishart  was  one  of  the  early  preachers  of  the  doctrines
of  the  Reformers,  and  suffered  martyrdom  in  the  days  of  Knox.
His  public  exposition  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  especially
excited  the  fears  and  hatred  of  the  Romish  ecclesiastics,  who
caused  him  to  be  silenced  at  Dundee.  He  went  to  A}T,  and  began
to  preach  the  gospel  with  great  freedom  and  faithfulness.  But
Dunbar,  the  then  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  being  informed  of  the
great  concourse  of  people  who  crowded  to  his  sermons,  at  the
instigation  of  Cardinal  Beaton,  went  to  Ayr,  with  the  resolution
to  apprehend  him ;  bnt  first  took  possession  of  the  church,  to  pre-
vent him  from  preaching  in  it.  The  news  of  this  brought  Alex-
ander, Earl  of  Glencairn,  and  some  gentlemen  of  the  neighbourhood
iunnediately  to  town.  They  wished  and  offered  to  put  Wishart
into  the  church,  but  he  would  not  consent,  saying,  *  that  the
Bishop's  sermon  would  not  do  much  hurt,  and  that,  if  they  pleased,
he  would  go  to  the  market  cross,'  which  he  accordingly  did,  and
preached  with  such  success,  that  several  of  his  hearers,  formerly
enemies  to  the  truth,  were  converted  on  the  occasion.

'*  Wishart  continued  with  the  gentlemen  of  Kyle,  after  the
archbishop's  departure ;  and  being  desired  to  preach  next  Lord's-
day  at  the  church  of  Mauchline,  he  went  thither  with  that  design,
but  the  sheriff  of  Ayr  had,  in  the  night  time,  put  a  garrison  of
soldiers  into  the  church  to  keep  him  out.  Hugh  Campbell,  of
Kinzeancleugh,  with  others  in  the  parish,  were  exceedingly
offended  at  this  impiety,  and  would  have  entered  the  church  by
force ;  but  Wishart  would  not  suffer  it,  saying,  *  Brethren,  it  is
the  word  of  peace  which  I  preach  unto  you ;  the  blood  of  no  man
shall  be  shed  for  it  this  day  :  Jesus  Christ  is  as  mighty  in  the
fields  as  in  the  church,  and  he  himself,  while  he  lived  in  the  flesh,
preached  oftener  in  the  desert  and  upon  the  sea  side  than  in  the
temple  of  Jerusalem.'  Upon  this  the  people  were  appeased,  and
went  with  him  to  the  edce  of  the  moor,  on  the  south-west   of


60  OPEN   AIR  PREACHING—A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.

Mauchline,  where  having  placed  himself  upon  a  ditch-dike,  he
preached  to  a  great  multitude.  He  continued  speaking  for  more
than  three  hours,  God  working  wondrously  by  him ;  insomuch  that
Laurence  Ranken,  the  Laird  of  Shield,  a  very  profane  person,  was
converted  by  his  means.  About  a  month  after  the  above  circum-
stance, he  was  informed  that  the  plague  had  broken  out  at  Dundee,
the  fourth  day  after  he  had  left  it ;  and  that  it  still  continued  to
rage  in  such  a  manner  that  great  numbers  were  swept  off  daily.
This  affected  him  so  much,  that  he  resolved  to  return  to  them,  and
accordingly  took  leave  of  his  friends  in  the  west,  who  were  filled
with  sorrow  at  his  departure.  The  next  day,  after  his  arrival  at
Dundee,  he  caused  intimation  to  be  made  that  he  would  preach ;
and  for  that  pui'pose  chose  his  station  at  the  head  of  the  east  gate,
the  infected  persons  standing  without,  and  those  that  were  whole,
within.  His  text  on  this  occasion  was  Psalm  cvii.  20 :  '  He  sent
his  word  and  healed  them,  and  delivered  them  from  their  destruc-
tions.' By  this  discourse  he  so  comforted  the  people,  that  they
thought  themselves  happy  in  having  such  a  preacher,  and  en-
treated him  to  remain  with  them  while  the  plague  continued."
What  a  scene  must  this  have  been  t  Seldom  has  preacher  had
Fuch  an  audience,  and,  I  may  add,  seldom  has  audience  had  such  a
preacher.  Then,  to  use  the  words  of  an  old  author,  "  Old  time
stood  at  the  preacher's  side  with  his  scythe,  saying  with  hoarse
voice,  *  Work  while  it  is  called  to-day,  for  at  night  I  will  mow  thee
down.'  There,  too,  stood  grim  death  hard  by  the  pulpit,  with  his
sharp  arrows,  saying,  '  Do  thou  shoot  God's  arrows  and  I  will  shoot
mine.' "  This  is,  indeed,  a  notable  instance  of  preaching  out  of
doors.

I  wish  it  were  in  my  power  to  give  more  particulars  of  that
famous  discourse  by  John  Livingstone  in  the  yard  of  the  Kirk  of
Shotts,  when  not  less  than  five  liundred  of  his  hearers  found
Christ,  though  it  rained  in  torrents  during  a  considerable  part  of
the  time.  It  remains  as  one  of  the  great  out-door  sermons  of
history,  unsurpassed  by  any  within  walls.  Here  is  the  gist  of
what  we  know  about  it : —

"  It  was  not  usual,  it  seems,  in  those  times,  to  have  any  sermon
on  the  Monday  after  dispensing  the  Lord's  Suj^pcr.  But  God
had  given  so  much  of  his  gracious  presence,  and  afforded  his  people
80  much  communion  with  liimself,  on  the  foregoing  days  of  that
solemnity,  that  they  knew  not  how  to  part  witiiout  thanksgiving  and
praise.  Tlien;  had  been  a  vast  confluence  of  choice  Christians,  with
several  eminent  miuibtcrs,  from  uhnoi>t  uU  the  corners  of  the  land.


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING A   SKETCH   OF  ITS   HISTORY.  61

There  had  been  many  of  them  there  together  for  several  days  be-
fore the  sacrament,  hearing  sermons,  and  joining  together  in  larger
or  lesser  companies,  in  prayer,  praise,  and  spiritual  conferences.
Wliile  their  hearts  were  warm  with  the  love  of  God,  some  ex-
pressing their  desire  of  a  sermon  on  the  Monday,  were  joined  by
others,  and  in  a  little  the  desire  became  very  general.  Mr.  John
Livingstone,  chaplain  to  the  Countess  of  Wigtoun  (at  that  time
only  a  preacher,  not  an  ordained  minister,  and  about  twenty-seven
years  of  age),  was  with  very  much  ado  prevailed  on  to  think  of
giving  the  sermon.  He  had  spent  the  night  before  in  prayer  and
conference ;  but  when  he  was  alone  in  the  fields,  about  eight  or
nine  in  the  morning,  there  came  such  a  misgiving 'of  heart  upon
him  under  a  sense  of  unworthiness  and  unfitness  to  speak  before
so  many  aged  and  worthy  ministers,  and  so  many  eminent  and
experienced  Christians  ;  that  he  was  thinking  to  have  stolen  quite
away,  and  was  actually  gone  away  to  some  distance ;  but  when
just  about  to  lose  sight  of  the  Kirk  of  Shotts  these  words,  '  Have
1  been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel?  a  land  of  darkness!'  were  brought
into  his  heart  with  such  an  overcoming  power,  as  constrained  him
to  think  it  his  duty  to  return  and  comply  with  the  call  to  preach ;
which  he  accordingly  did  with  good  assistance  for  about  an  hour
and  a  half  on  the  points  he  had  meditated  from  that  text,  Ezek.
xxxvi.  25,  2G;  'Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  uyton  you,  and
ye  slmll  be  clean :  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols,
will  I  cleanse  you.  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new
spirit  will  I  put  within  you:  and  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart
out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh.'  As  he
was  about  to  close,  a  heavy  shower  coming  suddenly  on,  which
made  the  people  hastily  take  to  their  cloaks  and  mantles,  he  began
to  speak  to  the  following  purpose :  '  If  a  few  drops  of  rain  from
the  clouds  so  discomposed  them,  how  discomposed  would  they  be,
how  full  of  horror  and  despair,  if  God  should  deal  with  them  as
they  deserved :  and  thus  he  will  deal  with  all  the  finally  impeni-
tent. That  God  might  justly  rain  fire  and  brimstone  upon  them,
as  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  other  cities  of  the  plain.
That  the  Son  of  God,  by  tabernacling  in  our  nature,  and  obe^nng
and  suffering  in  it,  is  the  only  refuge  and  covert  from  the  storm
of  divine  wrath  due  to  us  for  sin.  That  his  merits  and  mediation
are  the  alone  screen  from  that  storm,  and  none  but  penitent  be-
lievers shall  have  the  benefit  of  that  shelter.'  In  these  or  some
expressions  to  this  purpose,  and  many  others,  he  was  led  on  for  about
an  hour's  time  (after  he  had  done  with  what  he  had  premeditated)


62  OrEX  AIR  PEEACHIXG — A  SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.

in  a  stimin  of  exhortation  and  warning,  with  great  enlargement
and  melting  of  heart."

We  must  not  forget  the  regular  out-of-doors  ministry  at  Paul's
Cross,  under  the  eaves  of  the  old  cathedral.  This  was  a  famous
institution,  and  enabled  the  notable  preachers  of  the  times
to  be  heard  by  the  citizens  in  great  numbers.  Kings  and  princes
did  not  disdain  to  sit  in  the  gallery  built  upon  the  cathedral  wall,
and  listen  to  the  preacher  for  the  day.  Latimer  tells  us  that  the
gi'aveyard  was  in  such  an  unhealthy  condition  that  many  died
through  attending  the  sermons  ;  and  yet  there  was  never  a  lack  of
hearers.  Now  that  the  abomination  of  intra-mural  burial  is  done
away  with,  the  like  evil  w^ould  not  arise,  and  Paul's  Cross  might  be
set  up  again ;  perhaps  a  change  to  the  open  space  might  blow  away
some  of  the  Popery  which  is  gradually  attaching  itself  to  the
services  of  the  cathedral.  The  restoration  of  the  system  of
public  preaching  of  which  Paul's  Cross  was  the  central  station
is  greatly  to  be  desired.  I  eai-nestly  wish  that  some  person  pos-
sessed of  sufficient  wealth  would  purchase  a  central  space  in  our
great  metropolis,  erect  a  pulpit,  and  a  certain  number  of  benches,
and  then  set  it  apart  for  the  use  of  approved  ministers  of  the
gospel,  who  should  there  freely  declare  the  gospel  to  all  comers
without  favour  or  distinction.  It  would  be  of  more  real  service
to  our  ever-growing  city  than  all  its  cathedrals,  abbeys,  and
grand  Gothic  edifices.  Before  all  open  spaces  are  utterly  swept
away  by  the  ever-swelling  tide  of  mortar  and  brick,  it  w  ould  be  a
wise  policy  to  secure  Gospel  Fields,  or  God's-acrcs-for-the-living,
or  whatever  else  you  may  please  to  call  open  spaces  for  free  gospel
preaching.

All  through  the  Puritan  times  there  were  gatherings  in  all  sorts
of  out-of-the-way  places,  for  fear  of  persecutors.  "  We  took,"
says  Archbishop  Laud,  in  a  letter  dated  Fulham,  June,  1G32,
"  another  conventicle  of  separatists  in  Newington  Woods,  in  the
very  brake  where  the  king's  stag  was  to  be  lodged,  for  his  hunting
next  morning."  A  hollow  or  gravel-pit  on  Hounslow  Heath
sometimes  served  as  a  conventicle,  and  there  is  a  doll  near
Ilitchin  wlierc  John  liunyan  was  wont  to  preach  in  perilous
times.  All  over  Scotland  the  straths,  and  dells,  and  vales,  and
hill-sides  are  full  of  covenanting  memories  to  this  day.  You
will  not  fail  to  meet  with  rock  pulpits  whence  the  stern  fathers
of  the  Presbyterian  church  thundered  forth  their  denuncia-
tions of  Erastianism,  and  pleaded  the  claims  of  the  King  of
kings.     Cargill  and  Cameron  and  their  fellows  found  congenial


OPEN   AIR   PEEACHING — A   SKETCn   OF  ITS   HISTOEY.  G3

scenes  for  their  brave  ministries  mid  the  lone  mountains'  rents  and
ravines.

"  Long  ere  the  dawn,  by  devious  ways.
O'er  hills,  through  woods,  o'er  dreary  wastes,  they  sought
The  upland  moors,  where  rivers,  there  but  brooks,
Dispart  to  different  seas:   fast  by  such  brooks,
A  little  glen  is  sometimes  scoop'd,  a  plat
"With  greensward  gay,  and  flowers  that  strangers  seem
Amid  the  heathery  wild,  that  all  around

Fatigues  the  eye  :  in  solitudes  like  these  »

Thy  persecuted  children,  Scotia,  loil'd
A  tyrant's  and  a  bigot's  bloody  law.
There,  leaning  on  his  ppear  ....
The  lyart  veteran  heard  the  word  of  God
By  Cameron  thunder'd,  or  by  Renwick  poor'd
In  gentle  stream  :  then  rose  the  song,  the  loud
Acclaim  of  praise ;  the  wheelmg  plover  ceased
Her  plaint ;  the  solitary  place  was  glad,
And  on  the  distant  cairns,  the  watcher's  ear
Caught  doubtfully  at  times  the  breeze-borne  note.
But  years  more  gloomy  follow'd;  and  no  more
The  assembled  people  dared,  in  face  of  day,
To  worship  God,  or  even  at  the  dead
Of  night,  save  when  the  wintry  storm  raved  fierce.
And  thunder-peals  compell'd  the  men  of  blued
To  couch  within  their  dens  ;  then  dauntlessly
The  scatter'd  few  would  meet,  in  some  deep  dell
By  rocks  o'er-canopied,  to  hear  the  voice.
Their  faithful  pastor's  voice  :  he  by  the  gleam
Of  sheeted  lightning  oped  the  sacred  book,
And  words  of  comfort  spake  :  over  their  souls
His  accents  soothing  came,  as  to  her  young
The  heathfowl's  plumes,  when  at  the  close  of  eve
She  gathers  in,  mournful,  her  brood  dispersed
By  murderous  sport,  and  o'er  the  remnant  spreads
Fondly  her  wings  ;  close  nestling  'neath  her  breast
They  cherish'd  cower  amid  the  purple  blooms."

At  the  risk  of  being  prolix  I  feel  I  must  add  the  following
touching  description  of  one  of  these  scenes.  The  prose  picture
even  excels  the  poet's  painting.

"  We  entered  on  the  administration  of  the  holy  ordinance,  com-
mitting it  and  ourselves  to  the  invisible  protection  of  the  Lord  of
hosts,  in  whose  name  we  were  met  together.  Our  trust  was  in  the
arm  of  Jehovah,  which  was  better  than  weapons  of  war,  or  the
strength  of  the  hills.  The  place  where  we  convened  was  every  way
commodious,  and  seemed  to  have  been  formed  on  purpose.     It  was


G4         OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — A  SKETCH  OP  ITS  HISTORY.

a  green  and  pleasant  haugh,  fast  by  the  water  side  (the  Whittader).
On  either  hand  there  was  a  spacious  brae,  in  the  form  of  a  half
round,  covered  with  delightful  pasture,  and  rising  with  a  gentle
slope  to  a  goodly  height.  Above  us  was  the  clear  blue  sky,  for  it
was  a  sweet  and  calm  Sabbath  morning,  promising  indeed  to  be
'one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man.'  There  was  a  solemnity  in  the
place  befitting  the  occasion,  and  elevating  the  whole  soul  to  a  pure
and  holy  frame.  The  communion  tables  were  spread  on  the  green
by  the  water,  and  around  them  the  peojile  had  arranged  them-
selves in  decent  order.  But  the  far  greater  multitude  sat  on  the
brae  face,  which  was  crowded  from  top  to  bottom — full  as  pleasant
a  sight  as  ever  was  seen  of  that  sort.  Each  day  at  the  congrega-
tion's dismissing  the  ministers  with  their  guards,  and  as  many  of
of  the  people  as  could,  retired  to  their  quarters  in  three  several
country  towns,  where  they  might  be  provided  with  necessaries.
The  horsemen  drew  up  in  a  body  till  the  people  left  the  place,  and
then  marched  in  goodly  array  behind  at  a  little  distance,  until  all
were  safely  lodged  in  their  quarters.  In  the  morning,  when  the
people  returned  to  the  meeting,  the  horsemen  accompanied  them :
all  the  three  parties  met  a  mile  from  the  spot,  and  marched  in
a  full  body  to  the  consecrated  ground.  The  congregation  being  all
fairly  settled  in  their  places,  the  guardsmen  took  their  several
stations,  as  formerly.  These  accidental  volunteers  seemed  to  have
been  the  gift  of  Providence,  and  they  secured  the  peace  and  quiet
of  the  audience;  for,  from  Saturday  morning,  when  the  work
began,  until  Monday  afternoon,  we  suffered  not  the  least  affront  or
molestation  from  enemies,  which  appeared  wonderful.  At  first
there  was  some  apprehension,  but  the  people  sat  undisturbed,  and
the  whole  was  closed  in  as  orderly  a  way  as  it  had  been  in  the  time
of  Scotland's  brightest  noon.  And  truly  the  spectacle  of  so  many
grave,  composed,  and  devout  faces  must  have  struck  the  adversaries
with  awe,  and  been  more  formidable  than  any  outward  ability  of
fierce  looks  and  warlike  array.  We  desired  not  the  countenance  of
earthly  kings  :  there  was  a  spiritual  and  divine  Majesty  shining
on  the  work,  and  sensible  evidence  that  the  great  Master  of
assemblies  was  present  in  the  midst.  It  was  indeed  the  doing  of
the  Lord,  who  covered  us  a  table  in  the  wilderness,  in  jn'esence  of
our  foes  ;  and  reared  a  pillar  of  glory  between  us  and  the  enemy,
like  the  fieiy  cloud  of  old  that  separated  between  the  camp  of
Israel  and  the  Egyptians — encouraging  to  the  one,  but  dark  and
terriljlo  to  the  other.  Though  our  vows  were  not  offered  within
the  courts  of  God's  house,  they  wanted  not  sincerity  of  heart,


OPEN   AIR    PREACHING — A    SKETCH    OF   ITS   HISTORY.  65

which  is  better  than  the  reverence  of  sanctuaries.  Amidst  the
lonely  mountains  we  remembered  the  words  of  our  Lord,  that  true
worship  was  not  peculiar  to  Jerusalem  or  Samaria — that  the
beauty  of  holiness  consisted  not  in  consecrated  buildings  or  material
temples.  We  remembered  the  ark  of  the  Israelites  which  had
sojourned  for  yeai's  in  the  desert,  with  no  dwelling  place  but  the
tabernacle  of  the  plain.  We  thought  of  Abraham  and  the  ancient
patriarchs,  who  laid  their  victims  on  the  rocks  for  an  altar,  and
burnt  sweet  incense  under  the  shade  of  the  green  tree.

*'  The  ordinance  of  the  Last  Supper,  that  memorial  of  his  dying
love  till  his  second  coming,  was  signally  countenanced  and  backed
with  power  and  refreshing  influence  from  above.  Blessed  be  God,
for  he  hath  visited  and  confirmed  his  heritage  when  it  was  weary.
In  that  day  Zion  put  on  the  beauty  of  Sharon  and  Carmel ;  the
mountains  broke  forth  into  singing,  and  the  desert  place  was  made
to  bud  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  Few  such  days  were  seen  in  the
desolate  Church  of  Scotland ;  and  few  will  ever  witness  the  like.
There  was  a  rich  effusion  of  the  Spirit  shed  abroad  in  many  hearts ;
their  souls,  filled  with  heavenly  transports,  seemed  to  breathe  a
diviner  element,  and  to  burn  upwards  as  with  the  fire  of  a  pure  and
holy  devotion.  The  ministers  were  visibly  assisted  to  speak  home
to  the  conscience  of  the  hearers.  It  seemed  as  if  God  had  touched
their  lips  with  a  live  coal  from  off  his  altar :  for  they  who  witnessed
declared  they  carried  themselves  more  like  ambassadors  from  the
court  of  heaven  than  men  cast  in  earthly  mould.

*'  The  tables  were  served  by  some  gentlemen  and  persons  of  the
gravest  deportment.  None  were  admitted  without  tokens  as  usual,
which  were  distributed  on  the  Saturday,  but  only  to  such  as  were  known
to  some  of  the  ministers  or  persons  of  trust  to  be  free  of  public  scan-
dals. All  the  regular  forms  were  gone  through.  The  communicants
entered  at  one  end  and  retired  at  the  other,  a  way  being  kept  clear
to  take  their  seats  again  on  the  hill-side.  Mr.  Welsh  preached
the  action  sermon  and  served  the  two  first  tables,  as  he  was  ordin-
arily put  to  do  so  on  such  occasions.  The  other  four  ministers,
Mr.  Blackader,  Mr.  Dickson,  Mr.  Kiddell,  and  Mr.  Kae,  exhorted
the  rest  in  their  turn  ;  the  table  service  was  closed  by  Mr.  Welsh
with  solemn  thanksgiving,  and  solemn  it  was,  and  sweet  and
edifying  to  see  the  gravity  and  composure  of  all  present,  as  well
as  of  all  parts  of  the  sersdce.  The  communion  was  peaceably
concluded,  all  the  people  heartily  offering  up  their  gratitude,  and
singing  with  a  jo^-ful  voice  to  the  Rock  of  their  salvation.
It  was  pleasant  as  the  night  fell  to  hear  their  melody  swelling  in

6


66         OPEN  AIR  PEE  ACHING — A   SKETCH   OF  ITS  HISTORY.

full  unison  along  the  hill,  the  whole  congregation  joining  with  one
accord,  and  praising  God  with  the  voice  of  psalms.

"  There  were  two  long  tables  and  one  short  across  the  head,
with  seats  on  each  side.  About  a  hundred  sat  at  every  table.
There  were  sixteen  tables  in  all,  so  that  about  three  thousand  two
hundred  communicated  that  day."

Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  place  ever  chosen  for  a  discourse
was  the  centre  of  the  river  Tweed,  where  Mr.  John  Welsh  often
preached  during  hard  frosts,  in  order  that  he  might  escape  from
the  authorities  of  either  Scotland  or  England,  whichever  might  in-
terfere. Prize-fighters  have  often  selected  the  borders  of  two
counties  for  their  performances,  but  their  prudence  would  seem
to  have  been  anticipated  by  the  children  of  light.

It  is  amusing  also  to  read  of  Archbishop  Sharp's  commanding
the  militia  to  be  sent  to  disperse  the  crowd  who  had  gathered  on
the  hill  side  to  hear  Mr.  Blackader,  and  of  his  being  informed
that  they  had  all  gone  an  hour  before  to  attend  the  sermon.

What  the  world  would  have  been  if  there  had  not  been  preach-
ing outside  of  walls,  and  beneath  a  more  glorious  roof  than
these  rafters  of  fir,  I  am  sure  I  cannot  guess.  It  was  a  brave  day
for  England  when  Whitefield  began  field  preaching.  When
Wesley  stood  and  preached  a  sermon  on  his  father's  grave,  at
Epworth,  because  the  parish  priest  would  not  allow  him  admission
within  the  (so-called)  sacred  edifice,  Mr.  Wesley  writes :  "I  am
well  assured  that  I  did  far  more  good  to  my  Lincolnshire  parish-
ioners by  preaching  three  days  on  my  father's  tomb  than  I  did  by
preaching  three  years  in  his  pulpit."  The  same  might  be  said  of
all  the  open  air  preaching  which  followed,  as  compared  with  the
regular  discourses  within  doors.  "  The  thought  of  preaching  in
the  open  air  was  suggested  to  Whitefield  by  a  crowd  of  a  thousand
people  unable  to  gain  admission  to  Bermondsey  church,  where  he
preached  one  Sunday  afternoon.  He  met  with  no  encouragement
when  he  mentioned  it  to  some  of  his  friends ;  they  thought  it  was
a  '  mad  notion.'  However,  it  would  have  been  carried  out  the
next  Sunday  at  Ironmongers'  Almshouses  had  not  the  preacher
been  disapptjinted  in  his  congregation,  which  was  small  enough  to
hear  him  from  the  pulpit.  He  took  two  sermons  with  him,  one  for
within  and  the  other  for  witliout."  The  idea  which  had  thus
ri|x'iu'd  into  a  resolve  had  not  long  to  wait  before  it  was  cai*-
ried  into  execution.  Tlie  Chancellor  of  the  Diocese  having  put
in)|)edinient8  in  the  way  of  Wliitefield's  preaching  in  the  Churches


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — A   SKETCH   OP  ITS   HISTORY.  67

of  Bristol  on  behalf  of  his  Orphan-house,  he  went  to  preach  to  the
colliers  at  Kingswood  "  for  the  first  time  on  a  Saturday  afternoon,
taking  his  stand  on  Hannan  Mount.  He  spoke  on  Matt.  v.  1,  2,  3,
to  as  many  as  came  to  hear ;  upwards  of  two  hundred  attended.
His  only  remark  in  his  journal  is.  Blessed  be  God  that  the  ice  is
now  broke,  and  I  have  now  taken  the  field !  Some  may  censure  me.
But  is  there  not  a  cause t  Pulpits  are  denied;  and  the  poor
colliers  ready  to  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge."  Now  he  was  the
owner  of  a  pulpit  tliat  no  man  could  take  from  him,  and  liis
heart  rejoiced  in  this  great  gift.  On  the  following  day  the
journal  relates,  "  All  the  church  doors  being  now  shut,  and  if
open  not  able  to  contain  half  that  came  to  hear,  at  three  in  the
afternoon  I  went  to  Kingswood  among  the  colliers.  God  highly
favoured  us  in  sending  us  a  fine  day,  and  near  two  thousand
people  were  assembled  on  that  occasion.  I  preached  and  enlarged
on  John  iii.  3  for  near  an  hour,  and,  I  hope,  to  the  comfort  and
edification  of  those  that  heard  me."  Two  days  afterwards  he
stood  upon  the  same  spot,  and  preached  to  a  congregation  of  four
or  five  thousand  with  great  freedom.  The  bright  sun  overhead,
and  the  immense  throng  standing  around  him  in  awful  silence,
formed  a  picture  which  filled  him  with  '  holy  admiration.*  On  a
subsequent  Sunday,  Bassleton,  a  village  two  miles  from  Bristol,
opened  its  church  to  him,  and  a  numerous  congregation  coming
together,  he  first  read  pi*ayers  in  the  church,  and  then  preached  in
the  churchyard.  At  four  he  hastened  to  Kingswood.  Though
the  month  was  February  the  weather  was  unusually  open  and
mild ;  the  setting  sun  shone  with  its  fullest  power ;  the  trees
and  hedges  were  crowded  with  hearers  who  wanted  to  see  the
preacher  as  well  as  to  hear  him.  For  an  hour  he  spoke  with  a
voice  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  every  one,  and  his  heart  was
not  without  joy  in  his  own  message.  He  writes  in  his  journal :
'  Blessed  be  God,  The  fire  is  kindled  ;  may  the  gates  of  hell  never
be  able  to  prevail  against  it  I*  It  is  important  to  know  what  were
his  feelings  when  he  met  those  immense  field  conjiTegations,  whose
numbers  had  grown  from  two  hundred  to  twenty  thousand,  and  what
were  the  effects  of  his  preaching  upon  his  audience.  His  own  words
are,  'Having  no  righteousness  of  their  own  to  renounce,  the
colliers  were  glad  to  heai*  of  Jesus  who  was  a  friend  to  publicans,
and  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners,  to  repentance.
The  first  discovery  of  their  being  aflfected  was,  to  see  the  white
gutters  made  by  their  tears,  which  plentifully  fell  down  their
black  cheeks,  as  they  came  out  of  their  coal  pits.     Hundreds  and


68  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING A  SKETCH   OF  ITS   HISTORY.

liundreds  of  them  were  soon  brought  under  deep  convictions,
which  (as  the  event  proved)  happily  ended  in  a  sound  and  thorough
conversion.  The  change  was  visible  to  all,  though  numbers  chose
to  impute  it  to  anything  rather  than  the  finger  of  God.  As  the
scene  was  quite  new,  and  I  had  just  began  to  be  an  extempore
preacher,  it  often  occasioned  many  inward  conflicts.  Sometimes,
when  twenty  thousand  people  were  before  me,  I  had  not,  in  my
own  apprehension,  a  word  to  say,  either  to  God  or  them.  But  I
was  never  totally  deserted,  and  frequently  knew  by  happy  expe-
rience what  our  Lord  meant  when  he  said,  *  Out  of  his  belly
shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.'  The  open  firmament  above  me,
the  prospect  of  the  adjacent  fields,  with  the  sight  of  thousands  and
thousands,  some  in  coaches,  some  on  horseback,  and  some  on  the
trees,  and,  at  times,  all  affected  and  drenched  in  tears  together,
to  which  sometimes  was  added  the  solemnity  of  the  approaching
evening,  was  almost  too  much  for,  and  quite  overcame,  me."

Wesley  writes  in  his  journal,  "  Saturday,  31  [March,  1731].
In  the  evening  I  reached  Bristol,  and  met  Mr.  Whitefield  there.
I  could  scarce  reconcile  myself  at  first  to  this  strange  way  of
preaching  in  the  fields,  of  which  he  set  me  an  example  on  Sun-
day ;  having  been  all  my  life  (till  very  lately)  so  tenacious  of
every  point  relating  to  decency  and  order,  that  I  should  have
thought  the  savinjj  of  souls  almost  a  sin,  if  had  it  not  been  done
in  a  church."  Such  were  the  feelings  of  a  man  who  in  after
life  became  one  of  the  greatest  open  air  preachers  that  ever
lived  1

I  shall  not  tarry  to  describe  Mr.  Whitefield  on  our  own  Ken-
nington  Common  among  the  tens  of  thousands,  or  at  Moorfields
early  in  the  morning,  when  the  lanterns  twinkled  like  so  many
glowworms  on  a  grassy  bank  on  a  summer's  night,  neither  will  I
mention  the  multitudes  of  glorious  scenes  with  Wesley  and  his
more  renowned  preachers ;  but  a  picture  more  like  that  which
some  of  you  can  easily  copy  has  taken  a  strong  hold  upon  my
memory ;  and  I  set  it  before  you  that  you  may  never  in  times  to
come  despise  the  day  of  small  things : —

"  Wesley  reached  Newcastle  on  Friday,  the  28th  of  May.  On
walking  out,  after  tea,  he  was  surprised  and  shocked  at  the
abounding  wickedness.  Drunkenness  and  swearing  seemed
general,  and  even  the  mouths  of  little  children  were  full  of
curses.  How  lie  spent  the  Saturday  we  are  not  informed ;  but,
on  Sunday  mornin(^  at  seven,  ho  and  John  Taylor  took  their
ttand   near   the    pump,  in   Sandgate,    '  the    poorest   and   most


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING A   SKETCH    OF   ITS   HISTORY.  C9

contemptible  part  of  the  town,'  and  began  to  sing  the  Old
Hundredth  Psalm  and  tune.  Three  or  four  people  came  about
them,  to  see  what  was  the  matter;  these  soon  increased  in  number,
and,  before  Wesley  finished  preaching,  his  congregation  consisted
«f  from  twelve  to  fifteen  hundred  j)ersons.  When  the  service
was  ended,  the  people  still  stood  gaping,  with  the  most  pro-
found astonishment,  upon  which  Wesley  said,  *If  you  desire  to
know  who  I  am,  my  name  is  John  Wesley.  At  five  in  the  even-
ing, with  God's  help,  I  design  to  preach  here  again."*

Glorious  were  those  great  gatherings  in  fields  and  commons
which  lasted  throughout  the  long  period  in  which  Wesley  and
Whitefield  blessed  our  nation.  Field-preaching  was  the  wild  note
©f  the  birds  singing  in  the  trees,  in  testimony  that  the  true  spring-
time of  religion  had  come.  Birds  in  cages  may  sing  moi-e  sweetly,
perhaps,  but  their  music  is  not  so  natural,  nor  so  sure  a  pledge  of
the  coming  summer.  It  was  a  blessed  day  when  Methodists  and
others  began  to  proclaim  Jesus  in  the  open  air;  then  were  the
gates  of  hell  shaken,  and  the  captives  of  the  devil  set  free  by
hundreds  and  by  thousands.

Once  recommenced,  the  fruitful  agency  of  field-preaching  was
not  allowed  to  cease.  Amid  jeering  crowds  and  showers  of  z"otten
eggs  and  filth,  the  immediate  followers  of  the  two  great  Methodists
continued  to  storm  village  after  village  and  town  after  town.
Very  varied  were  their  adventures,  but  their  success  was  generally
great.  One  smiles  often  when  reading  incidents  in  their  labours.
A  string  of  packhorses  is  so  di-iven  as  to  break  up  a  congregation,
and  a  fire-engine  is  brought  out  and  played  over  the  throng  to
achieve  the  same  purpose.  Hand-bells,  old  kettles,  marrow-bones  and
cleavers,  trumpets,  drums,  and  entire  bands  of  music  were  engaged
to  drown  the  preachers'  voices.  In  one  case  the  parish  bull  was  let
loose,  and  in  others  dogs  were  set  to  fight.  The  preachers  needed
to  have  faces  set  like  flints,  and  so  indeed  they  had.  John  Furz
says:  "As  soon  as  I  began  to  preach,  a  man  came  straight
forward,  and  presented  a  gun  at  my  face;  swearing  that  he
would  blow  my  brains  out,  if  I  spake  another  word.  However,
I  continued  speaking,  and  he  continued  swearing,  sometimes
putting  the  muzzle  of  the  gun  to  my  mouth,  sometimes  against
my  ear.  While  we  were  singing  the  last  hymn,  he  got  behind  me,
fired  the  gun,  and  burned  off  part  of  my  hair."  After  this,
my  brethren,  we  ought  never  to  speak  of  petty  interruptions
or  annoyances.  The  proximity  of  a  blunderbuss  in  the  hands
of  a  son  of  Belial   is   not   very  conducive   to   collected  thought


70  OPEN  AIR  PREACHrNTG — A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.

and  clear  utterance,  but  the  experience  of  Furz  was  probably  no
worse  than  that  of  John  Nelson,  who  coolly  says,  "  But  when  I
was  in  the  middle  of  my  discourse,  one  at  the  outside  of  the
congregation  threw  a  stone,  which  cut  me  on  the  head :  however,
that  made  the  people  give  greater  attention,  especially  when  they
saw  the  blood  run  down  my  face ;  so  that  all  was  quiet  till  I  had
done,  and  was  singing  a  hvmn."

The  life  of  Gideon  Ouseley,  by  Dr.  Arthur,  is  one  of  the  most
powerful  testimonies  to  the  value  of  outdoor  preaching.  In  the
early  part  of  the  present  century,  from  1800  to  1830,  he  was  in
full  vigour,  riding  throughout  the  whole  of  Ireland,  preaching  the
gospel  of  Jesus  in  every  town.  His  pulpit  was  generally  the  back
of  his  horse,  and  he  himself  and  his  coadjutoi's  were  known  as  the
men  with  the  black  caps,  from  their  habit  of  wearing  skull  caps.
This  cavalry  ministry  was  in  its  time  the  cause  of  a  great  revival
in  Ireland,  and  gave  promise  of  really  touching  Erin's  deep-seated
curse — the  power  of  the  priesthood,  and  the  superstition  of  the
people.  Ouseley  showed  at  all  times  much  shrewdness,  and  a  touch
of  common-sense  humour ;  hence  he  generally  preached  in  front  of
the  apothecary's  window  because  the  mob  would  be  the  less  liberal
with  their  stones,  or  next  best  he  chose  to  have  the  residence  of  a
respectable  Catholic  in  his  rear,  for  the  same  reason.  His  sermon
from  the  stone  stairs  of  the  market  house  of  Enniscorthy  was  a  fair
specimen  of  his  dexterous  method  of  meeting  an  excited  mob  of
Irishmen.  I  will  give  it  you  at  length,  that  you  may  know  how  to
act  if  ever  you  are  placed  in  similar  circumstances: — "He  took  his
stand,  put  off  his  hat,  assumed  his  black  velvet  cap,  and,  after  a
few  moments  spent  in  silent  prayer,  commenced  to  sing.  People
began  to  gather  round  him,  and,  during  the  singing  of  a  few  verses,
were  quiet,  and  apparently  attentive,  but  soon  began  to  be  restless
and  noisy.  Ho  then  commenced  to  pray,  and  quietness  for  a  short
time  followed;  but  presently,  as  the  crowd  increased,  it  became
uneasy,  and  even  turbulent.  He  closed  his  prayer,  and  began  to
preach;  but  evidently  his  audience  were  not  disposed  to  hoar  him.
Before  many  sentences  had  been  uttered,  missiles  began  to  lly — at
first  not  of  a  very  destructive  character,  being  refuse — vegetables,
potatoes,  turni[)s,  &c.;  but  before  long  harder  materials  were
thrown — brickbats  and  stones,  some  of  which  reached  him  and  in-
flicted slight  wounds.  He  stopped,  and,  after  a  ])au8e,  cried  out,
*Boy8  dear,  what's  the  matter  with  you  to-day  t  Won't  you  let  an
old  man  talk  to  you  a  littleT  'We  don't  want  to  hear  a  word  out
of  your  old  head,'  was  the  prompt  reply  from  one  in  the  crowd.


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.  71

*But  I  want  to  tell  you  what,  I  think,  you  would  like  to  hear.'
'No,  we'll  like  nothing  you  can  tell  us.'  'How  do  you  know?  I
want  to  tell  you  a  story  about  one  you  all  say  you  respect  and  love.*
*  Who's  that?'  'The  blessed  Virgin.'  *  Och,  and  what  do  t/ou  know
about  the  blessed  Virgin?'  'More  than  you  think;  and  I'm  sui-e
you'll  be  pleased  with  what  I  have  to  tell  you,  if  you'll  only  listen
to  me.'  'Come  then,'  said  another  voice,  Met  us  hear  what  he  has
to  say  about  the  Holy  Mother.'  And  there  was  a  lull,  and  the
missionary  began:  'There  was  once  a  young  couple  to  be  married,
belonging  to  a  little  town  called  Cana,  It's  away  in  that  country
where  our  blessed  Saviour  spent  a  great  part  of  his  life  among  us;
and  the  decent  people  whose  children  were  to  be  married  thought
it  right  to  invite  the  blessed  Virgin  to  the  wedding  feast,  and  her
blessed  Son  too,  and  some  of  his  disciples;  and  they  all  thought  it
right  to  come.  As  they  sat  at  table,  the  Virgin  Mother  thought
she  saw  that  the  wine  provided  for  the  entertainment  began  to  run
short,  and  she  was  troubled  lest  the  decent  young  people  should  be
shamed  before  their  neighbours;  and  so  she  whispered  to  her  blessed
Son,  "They  have  no  wine."  "Don't  let  that  trouble  you,  ma'am,"
said  he.  And  in  a  minute  or  two  after,  she,  knowing  well  what
was  in  his  good  heart,  said  to  one  of  the  servants  that  was  passing
behind  them,  "  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it."  Accordingly,
by-and-by,  our  blessed  Lord  said  to  another  of  them — I  suppose  they
had  passed  the  word  among  themselves — "Fill  those  large  water-
pots  with  water."  (There  were  six  of  them  standing  in  a  corner
of  the  room,  and  they  held  nearly  three  gallons  apiece,  for  the
people  of  those  countries  use  a  gi"eat  deal  of  water  every  day.)
And,  remembering  the  words  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  they  did  his
bidding,  and  came  back,  and  said,  "  Sir,  they  are  full  to  the  brim."
*'Take  some,  then,  to  the  master,  at  the  head  of  the  table,"  he
said.  And  they  did  so,  and  the  master  tasted  it,  and  lo  and  behold
you  1  it  was  wine,  and  the  best  of  wine  too.  And  there  was  plenty
of  it  for  the  feast,  ay,  and,  it  may  be,  some  left  to  help  the  young
couple  setting  up  house-keeping.  And  all  that,  you  see,  came  of
the  servants  taking  the  advice  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  and  doing
what  she  bid  them.  Now,  if  she  was  here  among  us  this  day,  she
would  give  just  the  same  advice  to  every  one  of  us,  "Whatsoever  fie
saith  to  you,  do  it,"  and  with  good  reason  too,  for  well  she  knows
there  is  nothing  but  love  in  his  heart  to  us,  and  nothing  but  wisdom
comes  from  his  lips.  And  now  I'll  tell  you  some  of  the  things  he
says  to  us.  He  says,  "Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate;  for
many,  1  say  unto  you,  will  strive  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able."  *


72  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — A  SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.

And  straightway  the  preacher  briefly,  but  clearly  and  forcibly,  ex-
pounded the  natm'e  of  the  gate  of  life,  its  straitness,  and  the  dread
necessity  for  pressing  into  it,  winding  up  with  the  Virgin's  counsel,
'  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it.'  In  like  manner  he  explained,
and  pressed  upon  his  hearers,  some  other  of  the  weighty  words  of
our  divine  Lord, — 'Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,
he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God';  and,  'If  any  man  will
come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  daily
and  follow  me,' — enforcing  his  exhortation  in  each  instance  by  the
Virgin's  counsel  to  the  servants  at  Cana.  '  But  no,'  at  last  he  broke
forth  'no;  with  all  the  love  and  reverence  you  pretend  for  the
blessed  Virgin,  you  won't  take  her  advice,  but  will  listen  willingly
to  any  drunken  schoolmaster  that  will  wheedle  you  into  a  public-
house,  and  put  mischief  and  wickedness  into  your  heads.'  Here  he
was  interrupted  by  a  voice,  which  seemed  to  be  that  of  an  old  man,
exclaiming,  '  True  for  you,  true  for  ye.  If  you  were  tellin'  lies  all
the  days  of  your  life,  it's  the  truth  you're  tellin'  now.'  And  so  the
preacher  got  leave  to  finish  his  discourse  with  not  a  little  of  good
effect."

The  history  of  Primitive  Methodism  might  here  be  incorporated
bodily  as  part  of  our  sketch  of  Field-preaching,  for  that  wonderful
mission  movement  owed  its  rise  and  progress  to  this  agency.  It
is,  however,  a  singular  reproduction  of  the  events  which  attended
the  earlier  Methodism  of  eighty  or  ninety  years  before.  The
Wesleyans  had  become  respectable,  and  it  was  time  that  the  old
fire  should  burn  up  among  another  class  of  men.  Had  Wesley
been  alive  he  would  have  gloried  in  the  poor  but  brave  preachers
who  risked  their  lives  to  proclaim  the  message  of  eternal  love
among  the  depraved,  and  he  would  have  headed  them  in  their
crusade.  As  it  was,  other  leaders  came  forward,  and  it  was  not
long  before  their  zeal  called  forth  a  host  of  fervent  witnesses  who
could  not  be  daunted  by  mobs,  or  squires,  or  clergymen ;  nor  even
chilled  by  the  genteel  brethren  whose  proprieties  they  so  dread-
fully shocked.  Then  came  forth  the  old  weapons  in  abumlance.
Agricultural  produce  in  all  stages  of  decomposition  rewarded  the
zealous  apostles — turnips  and  potatoes  were  a  first  course,  and
rotten  eggs  followed  in  special  abundance,  these  last  we  note  were
frequently  goose  eggs,  selected  we  suppose  for  their  size.  A  tub
of  coal-tar  was  often  in  readiness,  filth  from  the  horse-{)onds  was
added,  and  all  this  to  the  nm.si('  of  tin  whistles,  horns,  and  watoh-
niens*  rattles.  Cartels  of  ale  were  ])rovided  by  the  advocates  of
**  Church  and  king"  to  refresh  tire  orthodox  assailants,  while  both


OPEN   AIR  PREACHING — A  SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.  73

preachers  and  disciples  were  treated  with  brutality  such  as  to
excite  compassion  even  in  the  hearts  of  adversaries.  All  this  was,
happily,  a  violation  of  law,  but  the  ^reat  unpaid  winked  at  the
transgressors,  and  endeavoured  to  bully  the  preacher  into  silence.
For  Christ's  sake  tliey  were  content  to  be  treated  as  vagrants  and
vagabonds,  and  the  Lord  put  great  honour  upon  them.  Disciples
were  made  and  the  Ranters  multiplied.  Even  till  a  late  periotl
these  devoted  brethren  have  been  opposed  with  violence,  but  their
joyful  experience  has  led  them  to  persevere  in  their  singing  through
the  streets,  camj)-meetings,  and  other  irregularities :  blessed  irre-
gularities by  wliich  hundreds  of  wanderers  have  been  met  with  and
led  to  the  fold  of  Jesus.

I  have  no  time  further  to  illustrate  my  subject  by  descriptions
of  the  work  of  Christmas  Evans  and  others  in  Wales,  or  of  the
Haldanes  in  Scotland,  or  even  of  Rowland  Hill  and  his  bivthren
in  England.  If  you  wish  to  pursue  the  subject  these  names  may
serve  as  hints  for  discovering  abundant  materials ;  and  I  may  adtl
to  the  list  "The  Life  of  Dr.  Guthrie,"  in  which  he  records  notable
open-air  assemblies  at  the  time  of  the  Disruption,  when  as  yet  the
Free  Church  had  no  places  of  worship  built  with  human  hands.

I  must  linger  a  moment  over  Robert  Flockhart  of  Edinburgh,
who,  though  a  lesser  light,  was  a  constant  one,  and  a  tit  example  to
the  bulk  of  Christ's  street  witnesses.  Every  evening,  in  all
weathers  and  amid  many  i)ersecutions,  did  this  brave  man  continue
to  speak  in  the  street  for  forty-three  yt>ars.  Think  of  that,  and
never  be  discouraged.  When  he  was  tottering  to  the  gi-ave  the
old  soldier  was  still  at  his  post.  "  Compassion  to  the  souls  of  men
drove  me,"  said  he,  "  to  the  streets  and  lanes  of  my  native  city,  to
pleatl  with  sinners  and  persuade  them  to  come  to  Jesus.  The  love
of  Christ  constrained  me."  Neither  the  hostility  of  the  police,  nor
the  insults  of  Papists,  Unitarians,  and  the  like  could  move  him,  he
rebuked  error  in  the  plainest  terms,  and  preached  salvation  by
grace  with  all  his  might.  So  lately  has  he  passed  away  that  Edin-
burMi  remembers  him  still.  Thei*e  is  room  for  such  in  all  our
cities  and  towns,  and  need  for  hundreds  of  his  noble  order  in  this
huge  nation  of  London — can  I  call  it  less!

In  America  men  like  Peter  Cartwright,  Lorenzo  Dow,  Jacob
Gruber,  and  othei-s  of  a  past  generation,  carried  on  a  glorious
warfare  under  the  open  heavens  in  their  own  original  fashion ;  and
in  later  times  Father  Taylor  has  given  us  another  proof  of  the
immeasurable  power  of  this  mode  of  crusade  in  his  "  Seven  Years
of  Street  Preaching  in  San  Francisco,  California."     Though  sorely


74  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — A  SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.

tempted,  I  shall  forbear  at  this  time  from  making  extracts  from
that  very  remarkable  work.

The  camp-meeting  is  a  sort  of  associated  field-preaching,  and
has  become  an  institution  in  the  United  States,  where  everything
must  needs  be  done  upon  a  great  scale.  This  would  lead  me  into
another  subject,  and  therefore  I  shall  merely  give  you  a  glimpse  at
that  means  of  usefulness,  and  then  forbear.

The  following  description  of  the  earlier  camp  meetings  in
America  is  from  the  pen  of  the  author  of  a  "  Narrative  of  a
Mission  to  Nova  Scotia ": — "  The  tents  are  generally  pitched  in
the  form  of  a  crescent,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  an  elevated  stand
for  the  preachers,  round  which,  in  all  directions,  are  placed  rows
of  planks  for  the  people  to  sit  upon  while  they  hear  the  word.
Among  the  trees,  which  spread  their  tops  over  this  forest  church,
are  hung  the  lamps,  which  burn  all  night,  and  give  light  to  the
vai'ious  exercises  of  religion,  which  occupy  the  solemn  midnight
hours.  It  was  nearly  eleven  o'clock  at  night  when  I  first  arrived
on  the  border  of  the  camp.  I  left  my  boat  at  the  edge  of  the
wood,  one  mile  from  the  scene ;  and  when  I  opened  upon  the  camp
ground,  my  curiosity  was  converted  into  astonishment,  to  behold
the  pendant  lamps  among  the  trees ;  the  tents  half -encircling  a
large  space ;  four  thousand  people  in  the  centre  of  this,  listening
with  profound  attention  to  the  preacher,  whose  stentorian  voice
and  animated  manner  carried  the  vibration  of  each  word  to  a
gi'eat  distance  through  the  deeply  umbrageous  wood,  where,  save
the  twinkling  lamps  of  the  camp,  brooding  darkness  spread  a  tenfold
gloom.  All  excited  my  astonishment,  and  forcibly  brought  before
my  view  the  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness.  The  meetings  generally
begin  on  Monday  morning,  and  on  Friday  morning  following  break
up.  The  daily  exercises  are  carried  forward  in  the  following
manner:  in  the  morning  at  five  o'clock  the  horn  sounds  through
the  camp,  either  for  preaching  or  for  prayer ;  this,  with  similar
exercises,  or  a  little  intermission,  brings  on  the  bi*eakfast  horn*,
eight  o'clock;  at  ten,  the  horn  sounds  for  public  preaching,  after
wliicli,  until  noon,  the  interval  is  iilled  up  witii  little  groups  of
praying  j)c'rsons,  who  scatter  themselves  up  and  down  the  camp,
both  in  the  tents  and  under  the  trees.  After  dinner  the  horn
Bounds  at  two  o'clock ;  this  is  for  preaching.  I  should  have  ob-
served that  a  female  or  two  is  generally  left  in  each  tent,  to
prepare  materials  for  dinner.  A  finj  is  kej)t  burning  in  different
I)art8  of  the  camp,  where  water  is  boiled  for  tea,  the  use  of  ardent
Spirits  being  forbidden.      After  the  afternoon  preaching  things


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — A   SKETCH   OF   ITS   HISTORY.  75

take  nearly  the  same  course  as  in  the  morning,  only  the  praying
groups  are  upon  a  larger  scale,  and  more  scope  is  given  to
animated  exhortations  and  loud  prayers.  Some  who  exercise  on
these  occasions  soon  lose  their  voices,  and,  at  the  end  of  a  camp
meeting,  many  of  both  preachers  and  j)eople  can  only  speak  in  a
whisper.  At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  horn  summons  to
preaching,  after  which,  though  in  no  regulated  form,  all  the
above  means  continue  until  evening;  yea,  and  during  whatever
part  of  the  night  you  awake,  the  wilderness  is  vocal  with  praise."

Whether  or  not  under  discreet  management  some  such  gather-
ings  could  be  held  in  our  country  I  cannot  decide,  but  it  does
strike  me  as  worthy  of  consideration  whether  in  some  spacious
grounds  services  might  not  be  held  in  summer  weather,  say  for  a
week  at  a  time,  by  ministers  who  would  follow  each  other  in  pro-
claiming the  gospel  beneath  the  trees.  Sennons  and  prayer-
meetings,  addresses  and  hymns,  might  follow  each  other  in  wise
succession,  and  perhaps  thousands  might  be  induced  to  gather  to
worship  God,  among  whom  would  be  scores  and  hundreds  who
never  enter  our  regular  sanctuaries.  Not  only  must  something
be  done  to  evangelize  the  millions,  but  everytliiruj  must  be  done,
and  perhaps  amid  variety  of  effort  the  best  thing  would  be  dis-
covered. "  If  by  any  means  I  may  save  some  "  must  be  our  motto,
and  this  must  urge  us  onward  to  go  forth  into  the  highways  and
hedges  and  compel  them  to  come  in.  BrethiHiu,  I  speak  as  unto
wise  men,  consider  what  I  say.


LECTURE  V.


I  FEAR  that  in  some  of  our  less  enlightened  country  churches
there  are  conservative  individuals  who  almost  believe  that  to  preach
anywhere  except  in  the  chapel  would  be  a  shocking  innovation,
a  sure  token  of  heretical  tendencies,  and  a  mark  of  zeal  without
knowledge.  Any  young  brother  who  studies  his  comfort  among
them  must  not  suggest  anything  so  irregular  as  a  sermon  outside
the  walls  of  their  Zion.  In  the  olden  times  we  are  told  "  Wis-
dom crieth  without,  she  uttereth  her  voice  in  the  streets,  she
crieth  in  the  chief  places  of  concourse,  in  the  openings  of  the
gates";  but  the  wise  men  of  orthodoxy  would  have  wisdom  gagged
except  beneath  the  roof  of  a  licensed  building.  These  people
believe  in  a  New  Testament  which  says,  "  Go  out  into  the  high-
ways and  hedges  and  compel  them  to  come  in,"  and  yet  they  dislike
a  literal  obedience  to  the  command.  Do  they  imagine  that  a
special  blessing  results  from  sitting  upon  a  particular  deal  board
with  a  piece  of  straight-up  panelling  at  their  back — an  invention
of  discomfort  which  ought  long  ago  to  have  made  people  prefer
to  worship  outside  on  the  green  grass?  Do  they  suppose  that
grace  rebounds  from  sounding-boards,  or  can  be  beaten  out  of
pulpit  cushions  in  the  same  fashion  as  the  dust?  Are  they  en-
amoured of  the  bad  air,  and  the  stifling  stufhness  which  in  some
of  our  meeting-houses  make  them  almost  as  loathsome  to  the
nose  and  to  the  lungs  as  the  mass-houses  of  Paj)ists  with  tlieir
cheaj)  and  nasty  incense  I  To  reply  to  these  objectors  is  a  task
for  which  we  have  no  heart:  we  prefer  foemen  worthy  of  the
steel  we  use  upon  tliem,  but  these  are  scarcely  worth  a  passing
remark.  Oii<^  siniK-s  at  tlu'ir  ])reju(lice,  but  we  may  yet  have  to
weep  over  it,  if  it  be  allowed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  usefulness.

No  sort  of  defence  is  needed  for  preaching  out  of  doors ;  but
it  would  need  very  potent  arguments  to  ])r()ve  that  a  man  had
done  liis  duty  who  has   never  preached  beyond  the  walls  of  his


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING REMARKS   THEREON.  77

meeting-house.  A  defence  is  required  rather  for  services  within
buildings  than  for  worship  outside  of  them.  Apologies  are  cer-
tainly wanted  for  architects  who  pile  up  brick  and  stone  into  the
skies  when  there  is  so  much  need  for  preaching  rooms  among  poor
sinners  down  below.  Defence  is  greatly  needed  for  forests  of  stone
pillars,  which  prevent  the  preacher's  being  seen  and  his  voice  from
being  heard ;  for  high-pitched  Gothic  roofs  in  which  all  sound  is
lost,  and  men  are  killed  by  being  compelled  to  shout  till  they  burst
their  bloodvessels ;  and  also  for  the  wilful  creation  of  echoes  by
exposing  hard,  sound-refracting  surfaces  to  satisfy  the  demands  of
art,  to  the  total  overlooking  of  the  comfort  of  both  audience  and
speaker.  Surely  also  some  decent  excuse  is  badly  wanted  for
those  childish  people  who  must  needs  waste  money  in  placing
hobgoblins  and  monsters  on  the  outside  of  their  preaching  houses,
and  must  have  other  ridiculous  pieces  of  Popery  stuck  up  both
inside  and  outside,  to  deface  rather  than  to  adorn  their  churches
and  chapels :  but  no  defence  whatever  is  wanted  for  using  the
heavenly  Father's  vast  audience  chamber,  which  is  in  everj'  way
so  well  fitted  for  the  proclamation  of  a  gospel  so  free,  so  full,  so
expansive,  so  sublime.  The  usual  holding  of  religious  assemblies
under  cover  may  be  excused  in  England,  because  our  climate  is
so  execrably  bad ;  but  it  were  well  to  cease  from  such  use  when
the  weather  is  fine  and  fixed,  and  space  and  quiet  can  be  obtained.
We  are  not  like  the  peo})le  of  Palestine,  who  can  foresee  their
weather,  and  are  not  every  hour  in  danger  of  a  shower ;  but  if
we  meet  sub  Jove,  as  the  Latins  say,  we  must  expect  the  Jove  of
the  hour  to  be  Jupiter  pluvius.  We  can  always  have  a  deluge  if
we  do  not  wish  for  it,  but  if  we  fix  a  service  out  of  doors  for  next
Sunday  morning,  we  have  no  guamntee  that  we  shall  not  all  be
drenched  to  the  skin.  It  is  true  that  some  notable  sermons  have
been  preached  in  the  rain,  but  as  a  general  rule  the  ardour  of  our
auditors  is  hardly  so  great  as  to  endure  much  damping.  Besides,
the  cold  of  our  winters  is  too  intense  for  services  out  of  doors  all
the  year  round,  though  in  Scotland  I  have  heard  of  sermons  amid
the  sleet,  and  John  Nelson  writes  of  speaking  to  "  a  crowd  too
large  to  get  into  the  house,  though  it  was  dark  and  snowed."  Such
things  may  be  done  now  and  then,  but  exceptions  only  prove  the
rule.  It  is  fair  also  to  admit  that  when  people  will  come  within
walls,  if  the  house  be  so  commodious  that  a  man  could  not  readily
make  more  persons  hear,  and  if  it  be  always  full,  there  can  be  no
need  to  go  out  of  doors  to  preach  to  fewer  than  there  would  be  in-
doors ;  for,  all  things  considered,  a  comfortable  seat  screened  from


78        OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — REMARKS  THEREON.

the  weather,  and  shut  in  from  noise  and  intrusion,  is  helpful  to  a
man's  hearing  the  gospel  with  solemnity  and  quiet  thought.  A
well  ventilated,  well  managed  buildini;  is  an  advantage  if  the
crowds  can  be  accommodated  and  can  be  induced  to  come ;  but
these  conditions  are  very  rarely  met,  and  therefore  my  voice  is
for  the  fields.

The  great  benefit  of  open-air  preaching  is  that  we  get  so  many  new
comers  to  hear  the  gospel  xoho  otherwise  would  never  hear  it.  The
gospel  command  is,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the
gospel  to  every  creature,"  but  it  is  so  little  obeyed  that  one  would
imagine  that  it  ran  thus,  "  Go  into  your  own  place  of  worship
and  preach  the  gospel  to  the  few  creatures  who  will  come  inside."
"  Go  ye  into  the  highways  and  hedges  and  compel  them  to  come
in," — albeit  it  constitutes  part  of  a  parable,  is  worthy  to  be  taken
veiy  literally,  and  in  so  doing  its  meaning  will  be  best  carried  out.
We  ought  actually  to  go  into  the  streets  and  lanes  and  highways,
for  there  are  lurkers  in  the  hedges,  tramps  on  the  highway,  street-
walkers, and  lane-haunters,  whom  we  shall  never  reach  unless  we
pursue  them  into  their  own  domains.  Sportsmen  must  not  stop
at  home  and  wait  for  the  birds  to  come  and  be  shot  at,  neither
must  fishermen  throw  their  nets  inside  their  boats  and  hope  to
take  many  fish.  Traders  go  to  the  markets,  they  follow  their
customers  and  go  out  after  business  if  it  will  not  come  to  them ;
and  so  must  we.  Some  of  our  brethren  are  prosing  on  and  on,
to  empty  pews  and  musty  hassocks,  while  they  might  be  conferring
lasting  benefit  upon  hundreds  by  quitting  the  old  walls  for  awhile,
and  seeking  living  stones  for  Jesus.  Let  them  come  out  of  Reho-
both  and  find  room  at  the  street  comer,  let  them  leave  Salem  and
seek  the  peace  of  neglected  souls,  let  them  dream  no  longer  at
Bethel,  but  make  an  open  space  to  be  none  other  than  the  house
of  God,  let  them  come  down  from  Mount  Zion,  and  up  from
iEnon,  and  even  away  from  Trinity,  and  St.  Agnes,  and  St.
Michael-and- All-Angels,  and  St.  Margaret-Pattens,  and  St.  Ve-
dast,  and  St.  Ethelburga,  and  all  the  rest  of  them,  and  try  to  find
new  saints  among  the  sinners  who  are  perishing  for  lack  of
knowledge.

I  have  known  street  preaching  in  London  remarkably  blest  to
persons  whose  character  and  condition  would  quite  preclude  their
liaving  been  found  in  a  places  of  worship.  I  know,  for  instance,  a
Jewish  friend  who,  on  coming  from  Poland,  understood  nothing
whatc^ver  of  the  English  language.  In  going  about  the  street.s
on    ihu   Sunday    lie   noticed   the   numerous   grou])s   listening   to


OPEN   AIR   PRFACHING —REMARKS   THEREON.  79

earnest  speakers.  He  had  never  seen  such  a  thing  in  his  own
country,  where  the  Russian  police  would  be  alamied  if  groups
were  seen  in  conversation,  and  he  was  therefore  all  the  more
interested.  As  he  acquired  a  little  English  he  became  more  and
more  constant  in  his  attendance  upon  street  speakers,  indeed,  it
was  very  much  with  the  view  of  learning  the  language  that  he
listened  at  the  first.  I  am  afraid  that  the  English  which  he
acquired  was  not  of  the  very  best,  which  judgment  I  form  as
much  from  what  I  have  heard  of  o|)en  air  oratory  as  from  having
listened  to  our  Jewish  friend  himself,  whose  theology  is  better
than  his  English.  However,  that  "  Israohte  indeed"  has  always
reason  to  commend  the  street  preachers.  How  many  other
strangers  and  foreigners  may,  by  the  same  instrumentality,  have
become  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of
God  we  cannot  tell.  Romanists  also  are  met  with  in  this  manner
more  frequently  than  some  would  sup}X)se.  It  is  seldom  prudent
to  publish  cases  of  conversion  among  Papists,  but  my  own  obser-
vation leads  me  to  believe  that  they  are  far  more  common  than
they  were  ten  years  ago,  and  the  gracious  work  is  frequently  com-
menced by  what  is  heard  of  the  gospel  at  our  street  corners.
Infidels,  also,  are  constantly  yielding  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  thus
brought  home  to  them.  The  street  evangelist,  moreover,  wins
attention  from  those  eccentric  people  whose  religion  can  neither
be  described  nor  imagined.  Such  people  hate  the  very  sight  of
our  churches  and  meeting  houses,  but  will  stand  in  a  crowd  to
hear  what  is  said,  and  ai^e  often  most  impressed  when  they  affect
the  greatest  contempt.

Besides,  there  are  numbers  of  persons  in  great  cities  who  have
not  fit  clothes  to  worship  in,  according  to  the  current  idea  of  what
clothes  ought  to  be ;  and  not  a  few  whose  persons  as  well  as  their
garments  are  so  filthy,  so  odorous,  so  unapproachable,  that  the
greatest  philanthropist  and  the  most  levelling  democrat  might
desire  to  have  a  little  space  between  himself  and  their  lively  indi-
vidualities. There  are  others  who,  whatever  raiment  they  wear,
would  not  go  into  a  chapel  upon  any  consideration,  for  they
consider  it  to  be  a  sort  of  punishment  to  attend  divine  service.
Possibly  they  remember  the  dull  Sundays  of  their  childhood  and
the  dreary  sermons  they  have  heard  when  for  a  few  times  they
have  entered  a  church,  but  it  is  certain  that  they  look  upon  persons
who  attend  places  of  worship  as  getting  off  the  punishment  they
ought  to  endure  in  the  next  world  by  suffering  it  in  this  world
instead.    The  Sunday  newspaper,  the  pipe,  and  the  pot,  have  more


80  OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — REMARKS    THEREON.

charms  for  them  than  all  the  preachments  of  hishops  and  parsons,
whether  of  church  or  dissent.  The  open-air  evangelist  frequently
picks  up  these  members  of  the  "No  church"  party,  and  in  so
doing  he  often  finds  some  of  the  richest  gems  that  will  at  last
adorn  the  Redeemer's  crown :  jewels,  which,  by  reason  of  their
roughness,  are  apt  to  be  unnoticed  by  a  more  fastidious  class  of
soul-winners.  Jonah  in  the  streets  of  Nineveh  was  heard  by
multitudes  who  would  never  have  known  of  his  existence  if  he  had
liired  a  hall ;  John  the  Baptist  by  the  Jordan  awakened  an  in-
terest which  woidd  never  have  been  aroused  had  he  kept  to  the
synagogue;  and  those  who  went  from  city  to  city  proclaiming
everywhere  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus  would  never  have  turned
the  world  upside  down  if  they  had  felt  it  needful  to  confine  them-
selves to  iron  rooms  adorned  with  the  orthodox  announcement,
"  The  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  will  (D.V.)  be  preached  here
next  Lord's  day  evening."

I  am  quite  sure,  too,  that  if  we  could  persuade  our  friends  in
the  country  to  come  out  a  good  many  times  in  the  year  and  hold  a
service  in  a  meadow,  or  in  a  shady  grove,  or  on  the  hill  side,  or
in  a  garden,  or  on  a  common,  it  would  be  all  the  better  for  the  usual
hearers.  The  mere  novelty  of  the  place  would  freshen  their
interest,  and  wake  them  up.  The  slight  change  of  scene  would
have  a  wonderful  effect  upon  the  more  somnolent.  See  how
mechanically  they  move  into  their  usual  place  of  worship,  and  how
mechanically  they  go  out  again.  They  fall  into  their  seats  as  if
at  last  they  had  found  a  resting  place;  they  rise  to  sing  with  an
amazing  effort,  and  they  drop  down  before  you  have  time  for  a
doxology  at  the  close  of  the  hjinn  because  they  did  not  notice  it
was  coming.  What  logs  some  regular  hearers  are  I  Many  of
them  are  asleep  with  their  eyes  open.  After  sitting  a  certain
number  of  years  in  the  same  old  spot,  where  the  pews,  pulpit,
galleries,  and  all  things  else  are  always  the  same,  except  that  they
get  a  little  dirtier  and  dingier  every  week,  where  everybody
occupies  the  same  position  for  ever  and  for  evermore,  and  the
minister's  face,  voice,  tone  are  much  the  same  from  January  to
December, — you  get  to  feel  the  holy  quiet  of  the  scene  and
listen  to  what  is  going  on  as  though  it  were  addressed  to  "the
dull  cold  ear  of  death."  As  a  miller  hears  his  wheels  as  though
lie  did  not  hear  them,  or  a  stoker  scarcely  notices  the  clatter  of
his  engine  after  enduring  it  for  a  little  time ;  or  as  a  dweller  in
Tvondon  never  notices  the  ceaseless  grind  of  the  traffic ;  so  do
many  ineniburs  of  uur  congregations  become  insensible  to  the  most


OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — REMARKS  THEREON.        81

earnest  addresses,  and  accept  them  as  a  matter  of  course.  The
preaching  and  the  rest  of  it  get  to  be  so  usual  that  thej  might  as
well  not  be  at  all.  Hence  a  change  of  place  might  be  useful,  it
might  prevent  monotony,  shake  up  indifference,  suggest  thought,
and  in  a  thousand  ways  promote  attention,  and  give  new  hope  of
doing  good.  A  great  fire  which  should  burn  some  of  our  chapels
to  the  ground  might  not  be  the  greatest  calamity  which  has
ever  occurred,  if  it  only  aroused  some  of  those  rivals  of  the
seven  sleepers  of  Ephesus  who  will  never  be  moved  so  long  as  the
old  house  and  the  old  i)ews  hold  together.  Besides,  the  fresh  air
and  i)lenty  of  it  is  a  grand  thing  for  every  mortal  man,  woman,
and  child.  I  preached  in  Scotland  twice  on  a  Sabbath  day  at
Blairmore,  on  a  little  height  by  the  side  of  the  sea,  and  after
discoursing  with  all  my  might  to  large  congregations,  to  be  counted
by  thousands,  I  did  not  feel  one-half  so  much  exhausted  as  I
often  am  when  addressing  a  few  hundreds  in  some  horrible  black
hole  of  Calcutta,  called  a  chapel.  I  trace  my  freshness  and
freedom  from  lassitude  at  Blairmore  to  the  fact  that  the  windows
could  not  be  shut  down  by  persons  afraid  of  draughts,  and  that
the  roof  was  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  eai'th.  My  con-
viction is  that  a  man  could  preach  three  or  four  times  on  a  Sabbath
out  of  doors  with  less  fatigue  than  would  be  occasioned  by  one  dis-
course delivered  in  an  impure  atmosphere,  heated  and  poisoned
by  human  breath,  and  carefully  preserved  from  every  refreshing
infusion  of  natural  air.

Tents  are  bad — unutterably  bad:  far  worse  than  the  worst
buildings.  I  think  a  tent  is  the  most  objectionable  covering  for  a
preaching  place  that  was  ever  invented.  I  am  glad  to  see  tents
used  in  London,  for  the  very  worst  place  is  better  than  none,  and
because  they  can  easily  be  moved  from  place  to  place,  and  are  not
very  expensive;  but  still,  if  I  had  my  choice  between  having  nothing
at  all  and  having  a  tent,  I  should  prefer  the  open  air  by  far.  Under
canvas  the  voice  is  deadened  and  the  labour  of  speaking  greatly  in-
creased. The  material  acts  as  a  wet  blanket  to  the  voice,  kills  its
resonance,  and  prevents  its  travelling.  With  fearful  exertion,  in
the  sweltering  air  generated  in  a  tent,  you  will  be  more  likely  to  be
killed  than  to  be  heard.  You  must  have  noticed  even  at  our  own
College  gatherings,  when  we  number  only  some  two  hundred,  how
difficult  it  is  to  hear  at  the  end  of  a  tent,  even  when  the  sides  are
open,  and  the  air  is  pure.  Perhaps  you  may  on  that  occasion
attribute  this  fact  in  some  degree  to  a  want  of  attentiveness  and
quietness  on  the  part  of  that  somewhat  jubilant  congregation,  but


82  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — REMARKS   THEREON.

still  even  when  prayer  is  offered,  and  all  is  hushed,  I  have  observed
a  great  want  of  travelling  power  in  the  best  voice  beneath  a
marquee.

If  you  are  going  to  preach  in  the  open  air  in  the  country,  you
will  perhaps  have  your  choice  of  a  spot  wherein  to  preach ;  if  not,
of  course  you  must  have  what  you  can  get,  and  you  must  in  faith
accept  it  as  the  very  best.  Hobson's  choice  of  that  or  none  makes
the  matter  simple,  and  saves  a  deal  of  debate.  Do  not  be  very
squeamish.  If  there  should  happen  to  be  an  available  meadow
hard  by  your  chapel,  select  it  because  it  will  be  veiy  convenient
to  turn  into  the  meeting-house  should  the  weather  prove  unsuit-
able, or  if  you  wish  to  hold  a  prayer-meeting  or  an  after-meeting
at  the  close  of  your  address.  It  is  well  to  preach  before  your
regular  services  on  a  spot  near  your  place  of  worship,  so  as  to  march
the  crowd  right  into  the  building  before  they  know  what  they  are
about.  Half-an-hour's  out-of-door  speaking  and  singing  before  your
ordinary  hour  of  assembly  will  often  fill  an  empty  house.  At  the
same  time,  do  not  always  adhere  to  near  and  handy  spots,  but
choose  a  locality  for  the  veiy  opposite  reason,  because  it  is  far
away  from  any  place  of  worship  and  altogether  neglected.  Hang
up  the  lamps  wherever  there  is  a  dark  corner ;  the  darker  the  more
need  of  light.  Paradise  Row  and  Pleasant  Place  are  generally
the  least  paradisaical  and  the  most  unpleasant :  thither  let  your  steps
be  turned.  Let  the  dwellers  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  deatli
perceive  that  light  has  sprung  up  for  them.

I  have  somewhere  met  with  the  recommendation  always  to
preach  with  a  wall  behind  you,  but  against  that  I  respectfully
enter  my  caveat.  Have  a  care  of  what  may  be  on  the  other  side
of  the  wall  I  One  evangelist  received  a  can  of  scalding  water
from  over  a  wall  with  the  kindly  remark,  "  There's  soup  for
Protestants ! "  and  another  was  favoured  with  most  unsavoury
bespatter! ngs  from  a  vessel  emptied  from  above.  Gideon  Ouseley
began  to  preach  in  lloscommon  with  his  back  against  the  gable  of
a  tobacco  factory  in  which  there  was  a  window  with  a  wootlcu
door,  through  which  goods  were  hoisted  into  the  loft.  Would
you  be  surprised  to  learn  that  the  window  suddenly  opened,  and
that  from  it  descended  a  i)ailful  of  tol)acc()  water,  an  acrid  fluid
most  painful  to  the  eyes  t  Tiie  preacher  in  after  years  knew  better
than  to  put  himself  in  such  a  tempting  position.  Let  his  expe-
rience instruct  you.

If  I  luid  my  choice  of  a  pitch  for  preaching,  I  should  prefer  to
fruiit  a  rising  ground,   or  an  open  spot  bounded  at  some  little


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING— REMARKS   THEREON.  83

distance  by  a  wall.  Of  course  there  must  be  sufficient  space  to
allow  of  the  congre^tion  assembling  between  the  pulpit  and
the  bounding  object  in  front,  but  I  like  to  see  an  end,  and  not
to  shout  into  boundless  space.  I  do  not  know  a  prettier  site  for
a  sermon  than  that  which  I  occupied  in  my  friend  Mr.  Duncan's
grounds  at  Benmore.  It  was  a  level  sweep  of  lawn,  backed  by
rising  terraces  covered  with  fir-trees.  The  people  could  either
occupy  the  seats  below,  or  drop  down  upon  the  grassy  banks,  as
best  com|X)rted  with  their  comfort,  and  thus  I  had  part  of  my
congregation  in  rising  galleries  above  me,  and  the  rest  in  the  area
around  me.  My  voice  readily  ascended,  and  I  conceive  that  if
the  people  had  been  seated  up  the  hill  for  half-a-niile  they  would
have  been  able  to  hear  me  with  ease.  I  should  suppose  that
Wesley's  favourite  spot  at  Gwennap  Pit  must  be  somewhat  after
the  same  order.  Amphitheatres  and  hillsides  are  always  favourite
spots  with  preachers  in  the  tields,  and  their  advantages  will  be  at
once  evident  to  you.

My  friend  Mr.  Abraham  once  produced  for  me  a  grand  cathe-
dral in  Oxfordshire.  The  remains  of  it  are  still  called  "  Spur-
geon's  Tabernacle,"  and  may  be  seen  near  Minster  Lovell,  in  the
form  of  a  quadrilateral  of  oaks.  Originally  it  was  the  beau  ideal
of  a  preaching  place,  for  it  was  a  cleared  spot  in  the  thick  forest
of  Witchwood,  and  was  reached  by  roads  cut  through  the  dense
underwood.  I  shall  never  forget  those  "  alleys  green,"  and  the
verdant  walls  which  shut  them  in.  When  you  reached  the  inner
temple  it  consisted  of  a  large  square,  out  of  which  the  underwood
and  smaller  trees  had  been  cut  away,  while  a  sufficient  number  of
young  oaks  had  been  left  to  rise  to  a  considerable  height,  and
then  overshadow  us  with  their  branches.  Here  was  a  truly  mag-
nificent cathedral,  with  pillars  and  arches:  a  temple  not  made
with  hands,  of  which  we  might  truly  say,

"  Father,  thy  hand
Ilath  reared  these  venerable  columns,  thou
Didst  weave  this  verdant  roof."

I  have  never,  either  at  home  or  on  the  Continent,  seen  archi-
tecture which  could  rival  my  cathedral.  "  Lo,  we  heard  of  it
at  Ephratah :  we  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood."  The  blue
sky  was  visible  through  our  clerestory,  and  from  the  great  window
at  the  further  end  the  sun  smiled  upon  us  toward  evening.  Oh,
sirs,  it  was  grand  indeed,  to  worship  thus  beneath  the  vaulted  firma-
ment, beyond  the  sound  of  city  hum,  where  all  around  ministered


84        OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — REMARKS  THEREON.

to  quiet  fellowship  with  God.  That  spot  is  now  cleared,  and
the  place  of  our  assembly  has  been  selected  at  a  little  distance
from  it.  It  is  of  much  the  same  character,  only  that  my  boundary
walls  of  forest  growth  have  disappeared  to  give  place  to  an  open
expanse  of  ploughed  fields.  Only  the  pillars  and  the  roof  of  my
temple  remain,  but  I  am  still  glad,  like  the  Druids,  to  worship  among
the  oak  trees.  This  year  a  dove  had  built  her  nest  just  above  my
head,  and  she  continued  flying  to  and  fro  to  feed  her  young,  while
the  sermon  proceeded.  Why  not  ?  Where  should  she  be  more
at  home  than  whei'e  the  Lord  of  love  and  Prince  of  Peace  was
adored  ?  It  is  true  my  arched  cathedral  is  not  waterproof,  and
other  showers  besides  those  of  grace  will  descend  upon  the
congi'egation,  but  this  has  its  advantages,  for  it  makes  us  the
more  grateful  when  the  day  is  propitious,  and  the  veiy  precari-
ousness  of  the  weather  excites  a  large  amount  of  earnest  prayer.

I  once  preached  a  sermon  in  the  open  air  in  haying  time  during
a  violent  storm  of  rain.  The  text  was,  "  He  shall  come  down  like
rain  upon  the  mown  grass,  as  showers  that  water  the  earth,"  and
surely  we  had  the  blessing  as  well  as  the  inconvenience.  I  was
sufficiently  wet,  and  my  congregation  must  have  been  drenched,
but  they  stood  it  out,  and  I  never  heard  that  anybody  was  the  worse
in  health,  though,  I  thank  God,  I  have  heard  of  souls  brought  to
Jesus  under  that  discourse.  Once  in  a  while,  and  under  strong
excitement,  such  things  do  no  one  any  harm,  but  we  are  not  to
expect  miracles,  nor  wantonly  venture  upon  a  course  of  proce-
dure which  might  kill  the  sickly  and  lay  the  foundations  of  disease
in  the  strong.

I  remember  well  preaching  between  Cheddar  Cliffs.  What  a
noble  position  I  What  beauty  and  sublimity  I  But  there  was  great
danger  from  falling  pieces  of  stone,  moved  by  the  people  who  sut
upon  the  higher  portions  of  the  cliff,  and  hence  I  would  not  choose
the  spot  again.  We  must  studiously  avoid  positions  where  serious
accident  might  be  possible.  An  injured  head  qualifies  no  one  for
enjoying  the  beauties  of  nature,  or  the  consolations  of  grace.
Concluding  a  discourse  in  that  place,  I  called  upon  those  mighty
rocks  to  bear  witness  that  I  had  preached  the  gospel  to  the  people,
and  to  be  a  testimony  against  them  at  the  last  great  day,  if  they
rejected  the  message.  Only  the  other  day  I  iioard  of  a  person  to
whom  that  appeal  was  made  useful  by  the  Holy  spirit.

Look  well  to  the  ground  you  select,  that  it  is  not  swampy.  I
never  like  to  see  a  man  slip  up  to  his  knees  in  mire  while  I  am
preaching.     Kushy  places  are  often  so  smooth  and  green  that  wo


OPEN   AIR  PREACHING REMARKS   THEREON.  85

select  them  without  noting  that  they  are  apt  to  be  muddy,  and  to
give  our  hearers  wet  feet.  Always  inconvenience  yourself  rather
tlian  your  audience :  your  Master  would  have  done  so.  Even  in  the
streets  of  London  a  concern  for  the  convenience  of  your  hearers  is
one  of  the  things  which  conciliates  a  crowd  more  than  anything.

Avoid  as  your  worst  enemy  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Normandy
poplar.  These  trees  cause  a  perpetual  hissing  and  rustling  sound,
almost  like  the  noise  of  the  sea.  Every  leaf  of  certain  kinds  of
poplar  is  in  perpetual  motion,  like  the  tongue  of  Talkative.  The
noise  may  not  seem  very  loud,  but  it  will  drown  the  best  of  voices.
"The  sound  of  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees "  is  all
very  well,  but  keep  clear  of  the  noise  of  poplars  and  some  other
trees,  or  you  will  suffer  for  it.  I  have  had  painful  experience  of
this  misery.  The  old  serpent  himself  seemed  to  hiss  at  me  out  of
those  unquiet  boughs.

Practised  preachers  do  not  care  to  have  the  stin  directly  in  their
faces  if  they  can  help  it,  neither  do  they  wish  their  hearers  to  be
distressed  in  like  manner,  and  therefore  they  take  this  item  into
consideration  when  arranging  for  a  service.  In  London  we  do
not  see  that  luminary  often  enough  to  be  much  concerned  upon
this  point.

Do  not  try  to  preach  against  the  wind,  for  it  is  an  idle  attempt.
You  may  hurl  your  voice  a  short  distance  by  an  amazing  effort,
but  you  cannot  be  well  heard  even  by  the  few.  I  do  not  often
advise  you  to  consider  which  way  the  wind  blows,  but  on  this  occa-
sion I  urge  you  to  do  it,  or  you  will  labour  in  vain.  Preach  so
that  the  wind  carries  your  voice  towards  the  people,  and  does  not
blow  it  down  your  throat,  or  you  will  have  to  eat  your  own
words.  There  is  no  telling  how  far  a  man  may  be  heard  with  the
wind.  In  certain  atmospheres  and  climates,  as  for  instance  in
that  of  Palestine,  persons  might  be  heard  for  several  miles ;  and
single  sentences  of  well-known  speech  may  in  England  be  recog-
nised a  long  way  off,  but  I  should  giavely  doubt  a  man  if  he
asserted  that  he  understood  a  new  sentence  beyond  the  distance  of
a  mile.  Whitfield  is  reported  to  have  been  heard  a  mile,  and  I  have
been  myself  assured  that  I  was  heard  for  that  distance,  but  I  am
somewhat  sceptical.*  Half-a-mile  is  surely  enough,  even  with  the
wind,  but  you  must  make  sure  of  that  to  be  heard  at  all.

*  From  "  Chambers*  Book  of  Dajs "  we  borrow  the  following  note : —
"Mrs.  Oliphant,  in  her  'Life  of  the  liev.  Edward  Irving,'  states  that  he  had
been  ou  some  occasions   clearlj  heard  at  the  distance  of  half-a-mile.     It  has


86  OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — REMARKS    THEREON.

In  the  country  it  ought  to  be  easy  to  find  a  fit  place  for  preach-
ing. One  of  the  earliest  thinjrs  that  a  minister  should  do  when  he
leaves  College  and  settles  in  a  country  town  or  village  is  to  begin
open  air  speaking.  He  will  generally  have  no  difficulty  as  to  the
position ;  the  land  is  before  him  and  he  may  choose  according  to
his  own  sweet  will.  The  market-cross  will  be  a  good  beginning,
then  the  head  of  a  court  crowded  with  the  poor,  and  next  the
favourite  corner  of  the  idlers  of  the  parish.  Cheap-Jack's  stand
will  make  a  capital  pulpit  on  Sunday  night  during  the  village  fair,
and  a  wagon  will  serve  well  on  the  green,  or  in  a  field  at  a  little
distance,  during  the  week-day  evenings  of  the  rustic  festival.  A
capital  place  for  an  ai  fresco  discourse  is  the  green  where  the  old
elm  trees,  felled  long  ago,  are  still  lying  in  reserve  as  if  they
were  meant  to  be  seats  for  your  congregation ;  so  also  is  the  burial
ground  of  the  meeting-house  where  "  the  rude  forefathers  of  the
hamlet  sleep."  Consecrate  it  to  the  living  and  let  the  people
enjoy  "  Meditations  among  the  Tombs."  Make  no  excuses,  then,
but  get  to  work  at  once.

In  London,  or  any  other  large  town,  it  is  a  great  thing  to  find
a  vacant  spot  where  you  can  obtain  a  right  to  hold  services  at  your
pleasure.  If  you  can  discover  a  piece  of  ground  which  is  not  yet
built  over,  and  if  you  can  obtain  the  use  of  it  from  the  owner
till  he  covers  it,  it  will  be  a  great  acquisition,  and  worth  a  slight
expense  in  fencing ;  for  you  are  then  king  of  the  castle  and  dis-
turbers will  be  trespassers.  I  suppose  that  such  a  spot  is  not  often
obtainable,  especially  by  persons  who  have  no  money ;  but  it  is
worth  thinking  about.  It  is  a  great  gain  when  your  place  of
worship  has  even  a  small  outside  space,  like  that  at  Surrey  Cliapel,
or  upon  the  Tabernacle  steps ;  for  here  you  are  beyond  the  inter-
ference of  the  police  or  drunken  men.  If  we  have  none  of  these,
we  must  find  street  corners,  triangles,  quiet  nooks,  and  wide  s})aces
wherein  to  proclaim  the  gospel.  Years  ago  I  preached  to  enor-
mous assemblies  in  King  Edward's  Road,  Hackney,  which  was

been  alleged,  however,  that  Black  John  Russell,  of  Kilmarnock,  celebrated  by
Kurns  in  no  gracious  terms,  was  heard,  though  not  perhaps  intelli<;ibly,  at  the
distance  of  a  full  mile.  It  would  appear  that  even  this  is  not  the  utmost
stretch  of  the  phenomenon.  A  correspondent  of  the  Jai/iesou^a  Journal,  in
1828,  states  that,  being  at  the  west  end  o(  DuiiifLTliiie,  ho  overheard  part  of  a
sermon  then  delivering  at  a  tent  at  Cairneyhill  by  Dr.  Black  :  he  did  not  miss
a  word,  '  tliou;{h  the  distance  must  be  sotuetliini];  about  two  nules:'  the
preacher  has,  perhaps,  seldom  been  siirpasMed  for  distinct  speak  in;;  and  a  clear
voice:  'and  the  wind,  which  was  steady  and  moderate,  came  in  the  direction
uf  the  sound.' "


OPEN   AIR  PREACHING — REMARKS   THEREON.  87

tlien  open  fields,  but  now  not  a  spare  yard  remains.  On  those
occasions  the  rush  was  perilous  to  life  and  limb,  and  there  seemed
no  limit  to  the  throngs.  Half  the  number  would  have  been  safer.
That  open  space  has  vanished,  and  it  is  the  same  with  fields  at
Brixton,  where  in  years  gone  by  it  was  delightful  to  see  the
assembled  crowds  listening  to  the  word.  Burdened  with  the  rare
trouble  of  drawing  too  many  together,  I  have  been  compelled  to
abstain  from  these  exercises  in  London,  but  not  from  any  lessened
sense  of  their  importance.  With  the  Tabernacle  always  full  1
have  as  large  a  congregation  as  I  desire  at  home,  and  therefore  do
not  preach  outside  except  in  the  country ;  but  for  those  ministers
whose  area  under  cover  is  but  small,  •  and  whose  congregations
are  thin,  the  open  air  is  the  remedy  whether  in  London  or  in
the  provinces.

In  raising  a  new  interest,  and  in  mission  operations,  out  of  door
services  are  a  main  agency.  Get  the  people  to  listen  outside  that
they  may  by-and-by  worship  inside.  You  want  no  pulpit,  a  chair
will  do,  or  the  kerb  of  the  road.  The  less  formality  the  better,
and  if  you  begin  by  merely  talking  to  the  two  or  three  around  you
and  make  no  pretence  of  sermonizing  you  will  do  well.  More  good
may  bo  done  by  personal  talk  to  one  than  by  a  rhetorical  address
to  fifty.  ]3o  not  purposely  interfere  with  the  thoroughfare,  but  if
the  crowd  should  accumulate  do  not  hasten  away  in  sheer  fright :
the  policeman  will  let  you  know  soon  enough.  You  are  most
wanted,  however,  where  you  will  be  in  no  danger  of  impeding
passers-by,  but  far  more  likely  to  be  in  danger  yourself — I  refer  to
those  central  courts  and  blind  alleys  in  our  great  cities  which  lie
out  of  the  route  of  decency,  and  are  known  to  nobody  but  the
)>olice,  and  to  them  principally  through  bruises  and  wounds.  Talk
of  discovering  the  interior  of  Africa,  we  need  explorers  for  Frying-
pan  Alley  and  Emerald-Island  Court :  the  Arctic  regions  are  well
nigh  as  accessible  as  Dobinson's  Rents  and  Jack  Ketch's  Warren.
Heroes  of  the  cross — here  is  a  field  for  you  more  glorious  than  the
Cid  ever  beheld  when  with  his  brave  right  arm  he  smote  the  Pav-
nim  hosts.  *'  Who  will  brinj;  me  into  the  strong  cityt  Who  will
lead  me  into  Edom  V  Who  will  enable  us  to  win  these  slums  and
dens  for  Jesus  t  Who  can  do  it  but  the  Lord!  Soldiers  of  Christ
who  ventui'e  into  these  regions  must  expect  a  revival  of  the  practices
of  the  good  old  times,  so  far  as  brickbats  are  concerned,  and  I  have
known  a  flower-pot  fall  accidentally  from  an  upper  window  in  a  re-
markably slanting  direction.  Still,  if  we  are  born  to  be  drowned  we
shall  not  be  killed  by  flower-pots.  Under  such  treatment  it  may  be


88  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING REMARKS   THEREON.

refreshing  to  read  what  Christopher  Hopper  wrote  nnder  similar
conditions  more  than  a  hundred  years  ago.  "  I  did  not  much  re-
gard a  Httle  dirt,  a  few  rotten  eggs,  the  sound  of  a  cow's  horn,
the  noise  of  bells,  or  a  few  snowballs  in  their  season ;  but  some-
times I  was  saluted  with  blows,  stones,  brickbats,  and  bludgeons.
These  I  did  not  well  like :  they  were  not  pleasing  to  flesh  and
blood.  I  sometimes  lost  a  little  skin,  and  once  a  little  blood,
which  was  drawn  from  my  forehead  with  a  sharp  stone.  I  wore  a
patch  for  a  few  days,  and  was  not  ashamed ;  I  gloried  in  the  cross.
And  when  my  small  sufferings  abounded  for  the  sake  of  Christ,
my  comfort  abounded  much  more.  I  never  was  more  happy  in
my  own  soul,  or  blessed  in  my  labours."

I  am  somewhat  pleased  when  I  occasionally  hear  of  a  brother's
being  locked  up  by  the  police,  for  it  does  him  good,  and  it
does  the  people  good  also.  It  is  a  fine  sight  to  see  the  minister
of  the  gospel  marched  off  by  the  servant  of  the  law  1  It  excites
sympathy  for  him,  and  the  next  step  is  sympathy  for  his  message.
Many  who  felt  no  interest  in  him  before  are  eager  to  hear  him
when  he  is  ordered  to  leave  off,  and  still  more  so  when  he  is  taken
to  the  station.  The  vilest  of  mankind  respect  a  man  who  gets
into  trouble  in  order  to  do  them  good,  and  if  they  see  unfair  oppo-
sition excited  they  grow  quite  zealous  in  the  man's  defence.

I  am  persuaded  that  the  more  of  open  air  preaching  there  is  in
London  the  better.  If  it  should  become  a  nuisance  to  some  it  will
be  a  blessing  to  others,  if  properly  conducted.  If  it  be  the  gospel
which  is  spoken,  and  if  the  spirit  of  the  preacher  be  one  of  love  and
ti'uth,  the  results  cannot  be  doubted :  the  bread  cast  upon  the  waters
must  be  found  again  after  many  days.  The  gospel  must,  how-
ever, be  preached  in  a  manner  worth  the  hearing,  for  mere  noise-
making  is  an  evil  rather  than  a  benefit.  I  know  a  family  almost
driven  out  of  their  senses  by  the  hideous  shouting  of  monotonous
exhortations,  and  the  howling  of  "  Safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus  "
near  their  tloor  every  Sabbath  afternoon  by  the  year  together.
They  are  zealous  Christians,  and  would  willingly  help  their  tor-
mentors if  they  saw  the  slightest  probability  of  usefulness  from
tiio  violent  bawling  :  but  as  they  seldom  see  a  hearer,  and  do  not
think  that  what  is  spoken  would  do  any  good  if  it  were  heard,  they
complain  that  they  are  compelled  to  lose  their  few  hours  of  (piiet
becutise  two  good  men  tliink  it  their  duty  to  perform  a  noisy  but
I)erfe(!tly  uselusH  service.  I  onco  saw  a  num  ])reaching  with  no
hearer  but  a  dog,  which  sat  upon  its  tail  and  looked  up  very
reverently  while   its  master  orated.     There   were   no   people  at


OPEN  AIR  PREACHING— REMARKS  THEREON.        89

the  Avindows  nor  passing  by,  but  the  brother  and  his  dog  were
at  their  post  whether  the  people  would  hear  or  whether  they
would  forbear.  Once  also  I  passed  an  earnest  declaimer,  whose
hat  was  on  the  ground  before  him,  filled  with  papers,  and  there
was  not  even  a  dog  for  an  audience,  nor  any  one  within  hearing,
yet  did  he  "  waste  his  sweetness  on  the  desert  air."  I  hoj>e  it
relieved  his  own  mind.  Really  it  must  be  viewed  as  an  essential
part  of  a  sermon  that  somebody  should  hear  it :  it  cannot  be  a  great
benefit  to  the  world  to  have  sermons  preached  in  vacuo.

As  to  sft^Ie  in  preaching  out  of  doors,  it  should  certainly  be
very  different  from  much  of  that  which  prevails  within,  and  per-
haps if  a  speaker  were  to  acquire  a  style  fully  adapted  to  a  street
audience,  he  would  be  wise  to  bring  it  indoors  with  him.  A  great
deal  of  sermonizing  may  be  defined  as  saying  nothing  at  extreme
length  ;  but  out  of  doors  verbosity  is  not  admired,  you  must  say
something  and  have  done  with  it  and  go  on  to  say  something  more,
or  your  hearers  will  let  you  know.  '*  Now  then,"  cries  a  street
critic,  *'  let  us  have  it,  old  fellow."  Or  else  the  observation  is
made,  "  Now  then,  pitch  it  out  I  You'd  better  go  home  and  learn
your  lesson."  *'  Cut  it  short,  old  boy,"  is  a  very  common  admo-
nition, and  I  wish  the  presenters  of  this  ad\'ice  gratis  could  let
it  be  heard  inside  Ebenezer  and  Zoar  and  some  other  places  sacred
to  long-winded  orations.  Where  these  outspoken  criticisms  are
not  employed,  the  hearers  rebuke  prosiness  by  quietly  walking
away.  Very  unpleasant  this,  to  find  your  congregation  disj>ersing,
but  a  very  plain  intimation  that  your  ideas  are  also  much  dispei"sed.

In  the  street,  a  man  must  keep  himself  alive,  and  use  many
illustrations  and  anecdotes,  and  sprinkle  a  quaint  remark  here  and
there.  To  dwell  long  on  a  point  Avill  never  do.  lleasoning  must  be
brief,  clear,  and  soon  done  with.  The  discourse  most  not  be
laboured  or  involved,  neither  must  the  second  head  depend  upon
the  first,  for  the  audience  is  a  changing  one,  and  each  point  must
be  complete  in  itself.  The  chain  of  thought  must  be  taken  to
pieces,  and  each  link  melted  down  and  turned  into  bullets :  you
will  need  not  so  much  Saladin's  sabre  to  cut  through  a  muslin
handkerchief  as  Cceur  de  Lion's  battle-axe  to  break  a  bar  of  iron.
Come  to  the  point  at  once,  and  come  there  with  all  your  might.

Short  sentences  of  words  and  short  passages  of  thought  are
needed  for  out  of  doors.  Long  paragraphs  and  long  arguments
had  better  be  reserved  for  other  occasions.  In  quiet  country
crowds  there  is  much  force  in  an  eloquent  silence,  now  and  then


90  OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — REMARKS    THEREON.

interjected;  it  gives  people  time  to  breathe,  and  also  to  reflect.
Do  not,  however,  attempt  this  in  a  London  street ;  you  must  go
ahead,  or  someone  else  may  run  off  with  your  congregation.  In
a  regular  field  sermon  pauses  are  very  effective,  and  are  useful  in
several  ways,  both  to  speaker  and  listeners,  but  to  a  passing  com-
pany who  are  not  inclined  for  anything  like  worship,  quick,  short,
sharp  address  is  most  adapted.

In  the  streets  a  man  must  from  beginning  to  end  be  intense,  and
for  that  very  reason  he  must  be  condensed  and  concentrated  in
his  thought  and  utterance.  It  would  never  do  to  begin  by  saying,
"  !My  text,  dear  friends,  is  a  passage  from  the  inspired  word,  con-
taining doctrnies  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  bringing  before
us  in  the  clearest  manner  the  most  valuable  practical  instruction.
I  invite  your  careful  attention  and  the  exercise  of  your  most  candid
judgment  while  we  consider  it  under  various  aspects  and  place  it
in  different  lights,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  perceive  its
position  in  the  analogy  of  the  faith.  In  its  exegesis  we  shall  find
an  arena  for  the  cultured  intellect,  aud  the  refined  sensibilities.
As  the  purling  brook  meanders  among  the  meads  and  fertilizes  the
pastures,  so  a  stream  of  sacred  truth  flows  through  the  remarkable
words  which  now  lie  before  us.  It  will  be  well  for  us  to  divert
the  crystal  current  to  the  reservoir  of  our  meditation,  that  we
may  quaff  the  cup  of  wisdom  with  the  lips  of  satisfaction."
There,  gentleman,  is  not  that  rather  above  the  average  of  word-
spinning,  and  is  not  the  art  very  generally  in  vogue  in  these  days  t
If  you  go  out  to  the  obelisk  in  Blackfriars  Road,  and  talk  in  that
fashion,  you  will  be  saluted  with  "  Go  on,  old  buffer,"  or  "  Aint
he  fine  f  My  eyeI"  Avery  vulgar  youth  will  cry,  "What  a
mouth  for  ataterl"  and  another  will  shout  in  a  tone  of  mock
solemnity,  "  Amen  !"  If  you  give  them  chaff  thoy  will  cheerfully
return  it  into  your  own  bosom.  Good  measure,  pressed  down  and
running  over  will  they  mete  out  to  yon.  Shams  and  shows  will
have  no  mercy  from  a  street  gathering.  But  have  something  to  say,
look  them  in  the  face,  say  what  you  mean,  put  it  plainly,  boldly,
earnestly,  courteously,  and  they  will  hear  you.  Never  speak  against
time  or  for  the  sake  of  hearing  your  own  voice,  or  you  will  obtain
some  information  about  your  personal  appearance  or  manner  of
oratory  which  will  ))r<)l)ably  be  more  true  than  ])leusing.  *'  Crikey,"
says  one,  "wouldn't  ho  do  for  an  undertaker!  He'd  make  'em
weep."  This  was  a  compliment  paid  to  a  melancholy  brother
whose  tone  is  peculiarly  funereal.  "There,  old  fellow,"  said  a
critic  ou  auuther  occasion,  "  you  go  and  wet  your  whistle.     Yuu


Ol'EN   AIR   PREACHING— REMARKS    THEREON  91

must  feel  awfully  dry  after  jawing  away  at  that  i*ate  about
nothing  at  all."  This  also  was  specially  appropriate  to  a  very
lieavy  brother  of  whom  we  had  aforetime  remarked  that  he  would
make  a  good  martyr,  for  there  was  do  doubt  of  his  burning  well,  he
was  so  dry.  It  is  sad,  very  sad,  that  such  rude  remarks  should  be
made,  but  there  is  a  wicked  vein  in  some  of  us,  which  makes  us
take  note  that  the  vulgar  observations  are  often  very  true,  and
*'  hold  as  'twere  the  mirror  up  to  nature."  As  caricature  often
gives  you  a  more  vivid  idea  of  a  man  than  a  photograph  would
afford  you,  so  do  these  rough  mob  critics  hit  off  an  orator  to  the
life  by  their  exaggerated  censures.  The  very  best  speaker  must  be
prepared  to  take  his  share  of  street  wit,  and  to  return  it  if  need
be;  but  primness,  demureness,  formality,  sanctimonious  long-
windedness,  and  the  affection  of  superiority,  actually  invite  offen-
sive pleasantries,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  deserve  them.
Chadband  or  Stiggins  in  rusty  black,  with  plastered  hair  and  huge
choker,  is  as  natural  an  object  of  derision  as  Mr.  Guido  Fawkes
himself.  A  very  great  man  in  his  own  esteem  will  provoke  im-
mediate opposition,  and  the  affectation  of  8U|)ernaturul  saiutliness
will  have  the  same  effect.  The  less  you  are  like  a  parson  the
more  likely  you  are  to  be  heard ;  and,  if  you  are  known  to  be  a
minister,  the  more  you  show  yourself  to  be  a  man  the  better.
"  What  do  you  get  for  that,  governor  t"  is  sure  to  be  asked,  if
you  appear  to  be  a  cleric,  and  it  will  be  well  to  tell  them  at  once
that  this  is  extra,  that  you  are  doing  overtime,  and  that  there  is
to  be  no  collection.  *'  You'd  do  more  good  if  you  gave  us  some
bread  or  a  drop  of  beer,  instead  of  them  tracts,"  is  constantly
remarked,  but  a  manly  manner,  and  the  outspoken  declaration
that  you  seek  no  wages  but  their  good,  will  silence  that  stale
objection.

The  action  of  the  street  preacher  should  be  of  the  very  best.  It
should  be  purely  natural  and  unconstrained.  No  speaker  should
stand  up  in  the  street  in  a  gi-otesque  manner,  or  he  will  weaken
himself  and  invite  attack.  The  street  preacher  should  not  imitate
his  own  minister,  or  the  crowd  will  spy  out  the  imitation  very
speedily,  if  the  brother  is  anywhere  near  home.  Neither  should
he  strike  an  attitude  as  little  boys  do  who  say,  "  My  name  is
Norval."  The  stiff  straight  posture  with  the  regular  up  and
down  motion  of  arm  and  hand  is  too  commonly  adopted  :  and  I
would  even  more  condemn  the  wild-raving-maniac  action  which
some  are  so  fond  of,  which  seems  to  be  a  cross  between  Whitefield


92  OPEN  AIR  PREACHING REMARKS   THEREON.

with  both  his  arms  in  the  air,  and  Saint  George  with  both  his  feet
violently  engaged  in  trampling  on  the  dragon.  Some  good  men
are  grotesque  by  nature,  and  others  take  great  pains  to  make
themselves  so.  The  wicked  Londoners  say,  "  What  a  cure  !"  I
only  wish  I  knew  of  a  cure  for  the  evil.

All  mannerisms  should  be  avoided.  Just  now  I  observe  that
notiiing  can  be  done  without  a  very  large  Bagster's  Bible  with  a
limp  cover.  There  seems  to  be  some  special  charm  about  the  large
size,  though  it  almost  needs  a  little  perambulator  in  which  to  push
it  about.  With  such  a  Bible  full  of  ribbons,  select  a  standing  in
Seven  Dials,  after  the  pattern  of  a  divine  so  graphically  described
by  Mr.  McCree.  Take  off  your  hat,  put  your  Bible  in  it,  and
place  it  on  the  ground.  Let  the  kind  friend  who  approaches  you
on  the  right  hold  your  umbrella.  See  how  eager  the  dear  man  is
to  do  so!  Is  it  not  pleasing?  He  assures  you  he  is  never  so
happy  as  when  he  is  helping  good  men  to  do  good.  Now  close
your  eyes  in  prayer.  When  your  devotions  are  over,  somehody
will  have  profited  by  the  occasion.  Where  is  your  affectionate
friend  who  held  your  umbrella  and  your  hymn-book  ?  Where  is
that  well*brushed  hat,  and  that  orthodox  Bagster  ?  W^here  1  oh,
where  ?     Echo  answers,  "  Where  I "

The  catastrophe  which  I  have  thus  described  suggests  that  a
brother  had  better  accompany  you  in  your  earlier  ministries,  that
one  may  watch  while  the  other  prays.  If  a  number  of  friends  will
go  with  you  and  make  a  ring  around  you  it  will  be  a  great  acqui-
sition, and  if  these  can  sing  it  will  be  still  further  helpful.  The
friendly  company  will  attract  others,  will  help  to  secure  order,  and
will  do  good  service  by  sounding  forth  sermons  in  song.

It  will  be  very  desirable  to  speak  so  as  to  be  heard,  but  there  is
no  use  in  incessant  bawling.  The  best  street  preaching  is  not  that
wliich  is  done  at  the  top  of  your  voice,  for  it  must  be  impossible
to  lay  the  proper  emphasis  upon  telling  passages  wlien  all  along
you  are  shouting  with  all  your  might.  When  there  are  no
hearers  near  you,  and  yet  people  stand  upon  the  other  side  of  the
road  and  listen,  would  it  not  be  as  well  to  cross  over  and  so  save
a  little  of  the  strength  which  is  now  wasted?  A  quiet,  pene-
trating, conversational  style  wouKl  seem  to  be  the  most  telling.
Men  do  not  bawl  and  halloa  when  they  are  pleading  in  deepest
earnestness ;  they  have  generally  at  such  times  less  wind  and  a
little  more  ruin :  less  rant  and  a  few  more  tears.  On,  on,  on
with  one  monotonous  shout  and  you  will  weary  everybody  and
wear  out  yourself.    Bo   wise  now,  therefore,  O  ye  who  would


OPEN  AIR  PREACHING — REMARKS  THEREON.       93

succeed  in  declaring  your  Master's  message  among  the  multitude,
and  use  your  voices  as  common  sense  would  dictate.

In  a  tract  published  by  that  excellent  society  "  The  Open  Air
Mission,"  I  notice  the  following

QUALIFICATIONS   FOR   OPEN-AIR    PREACHERS.

1.  A  good  voice.

2.  Naturalness  of  manner.

3.  Self-possession.

4.  A  good  knowledge  of  Scripture  and  of  common  things.

5.  Ability  to  adapt  himself  to  any  congregation.

6.  Good  illusti-ative  powers.

7.  Zeal,  prudence,  and  common  sense.

8.  A  large,  loving  heart.

9.  Sincere  belief  in  all  he  says.

10.  Entire  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit  for  success.

11.  A  close  walk  with  God  by  prayer.

12.  A  consistent  walk  before  men  by  a  holy  life.

If  any  man  has  all  these  qualifications,  the  Queen  had  better
make  a  bishop  of  him  at  once,  yet  there  is  no  cue  of  these  qualities
which  could  well  be  dispensed  with.

Interrup'tions  are  pretty  sure  to  occur  in  the  streets  of  London.
At  certain  places  all  will  go  well  for  months,  but  in  other  positions
the  fight  begins  as  soon  as  the  speaker  opens  his  mouth.  There
are  seasons  of  opposition  :  different  schools  of  adversaries  rise  and
fall,  and  accordingly  there  is  disorder  or  quiet.  The  best  tact  will
not  always  avail  to  prevent  disturbance  ;  when  men  are  drunk  there
is  no  reasoning  with  them,  and  of  furious  Irish  Papists  we  may  say
much  the  same.  Little  is  to  be  done  with  such  unless  the  crowd
around  will  co-operate,  as  oftentimes  they  will,  in  removing  the
obstructor.  Certain  characters,  if  they  find  that  preaching  is
going  on,  will  interrupt  by  hook  or  by  crook.  They  go  on  purpose,
and  if  answered  once  and  again  they  still  pei-severe.  One  con-
stant rule  is  to  be  always  courteous  and  good  tempered,  for  if  you
become  cross  or  angry  it  is  all  over  with  you.  Another  rule  is
to  keep  to  your  subject,  and  never  be  drawn  into  side  issues.
Preach  Christ  or  nothing :  don't  dispute  or  discuss  except  with
your  eye  on  the  cross.  If  driven  off  for  a  moment  always  be
on  the  watch  to  get  back  to  your  sole  topic.  Tell  them  the  old,
old  story,  and  if  they  will  not  hear  that,  move  on.  Yet  be  adroit,
and  take  them  with  guile.     Seek  the  one  object  by  many  roads.


94  OPEN  AIR  PEEACHING — REMARKS   THEREON.

A  little  mother-wit  is  often  the  best  resource  and  will  work
Avonders  with  a  crowd.  Bonhominie  is  the  next  best  thing  to  grace
on  such  occasions.  A  brother  of  my  acquaintance  silenced  a
violent  Romanist  by  offering  him  his  stand  and  requesting  him
to  preach.  The  man's  comrades  for  the  very  fun  of  the  thing
urged  him  on,  but,  as  he  declined,  the  dog  in  the  manger  fable
was  narrated  and  the  disturber  disappeared.  If  it  be  a  real
.  sceptic  who  is  assailing  you  it  is  prudence  to  shun  debate  as  much
as  possible,  or  ask  him  questions  in  return,  for  your  business  is  not
to  argue  but  to  proclaim  the  gospel.  Mr.  John  McGregor  says
*'  Sceptics  are  of  many  kinds.  Some  of  them  ask  questions  to  get
answers,  and  others  put  difficulties  to  puzzle  the  people.  An
honest  sceptic  said  to  me  in  a  crowd  in  Hyde-park,  '  I  have  been
trying  to  believe  for  these  ten  years,  but  there  is  a  contradiction
1  cannot  get  over,  and  it  is  this  :  we  are  told  that  printing  was
invented  not  five  hundred  years  ago,  and  yet  that  the  Bible  is  five
thousand  years  old,  and  I  cannot  for  the  life  of  me  see  how  this
can  be.'  Nay  I  the  crowd  did  not  laugh  at  this  man.  Vei^  few
people  in  a  crowd  know  much  more  than  he  did  about  the  Bible.  But
how  deeply  they  drank  in  a  half-hour's  account  of  the  Scripture
manuscripts,  tlieir  preservation,  their  translations  and  versions,
their  dispersion  and  collection,  their  collation  and  transmission,
and  the  overwhelming  evidence  of  tiieir  genuine  truth  !  "

I  remember  an  infidel  on  Kennington  Common  being  most
effectually  stopped.  He  continued  to  cry  up  the  beauties  of
nature  and  the  works  of  nature  until  the  preacher  asked  him  if  h«
would  kindly  tell  them  what  nature  was.  He  replied  that  "  every-
body knew  what  nature  was."  The  preacher  retorted,  "  Well,
then,  it  will  be  all  the  easier  for  you  to  tell  us."  "  Why,  nature —
nature,"  he  said,  "  nature,  —nature  is  nature."  Of  course,  the
crowd  lau<;hed  and  the  wise  man  subsided.

Ignorance  when  it  is  allied  with  a  coarse  voluble  tongue  is  to
be  met  by  letting  it  liave  rope  enough.  One  fellow  wanted  to
know  '*  how  Jacob  knew  that  Esau  hated  him."  He  had  hold  of
tlie  wrong  end  of  the  stick  that  time,  and  the  preacher  did  not
enlighten  him,  or  he  would  have  set  him  up  with  ammunition  for
future  encounters.

Our  business  is  not  to  supply  men  with  arguments  by  inform-
ing them  of  difficulties.  In  the  process  of  answering  them  minis-
ters have  published  the  sentiments  of  infidels  more  widely  than
the  inliilels  themselves  could  have  done.  Unbelievers  only  *' glean
their  blunted  shafts,  and  shoot  them  at  the  shield  of  truth  again.'


OPEN   AIR   PREACHING — REMARKS   THEREON.  95

Our  object  is  not  to  conquer  them  in  logical  encounters,  but  to  save
their  souls.  Real  difficulties  we  should  endeavour  to  meet,  and  hence
a  competent  knowledge  of  the  evidences  is  most  desirable  ;  but
honest  objectors  are  best  conversed  with  alone,  when  they  are  not
ashamed  to  own  themselves  in  the  wrong,  and  this  we  could  not
expect  of  them  in  the  crowd.  Christ  is  to  be  preached  whether
men  will  believe  in  him  or  no.  Our  own  experience  of  His  power
to  save  will  be  our  best  reasoning,  and  earnestness  our  best  rhetoric.
The  occasion  will  frequently  suggest  the  fittest  thing  to  say,  and  we
may  also  fall  back  on  the  Holy  Spirit  who  will  teach  us  in  the  self-
same hour  what  we  shall  speak.

The  open-air  speaker's  calling  is  as  honourable  as  it  is  arduous,
as  useful  as  it  is  laborious.  God  alone  can  sustain  you  in  it,  but
with  Him  at  your  side  you  will  have  nothing  to  fear.  If  ten
thousand  rebels  were  before  you  and  a  legion  of  devils  in  every
one  of  them  you  need  not  tremble.  More  is  he  that  is  for  you
than  all  they  that  be  against  you,

*'  By  all  hell's  host  ■withstood,
We  all  hell's  host  o'erthrow  ;
And  conquering  theui  through  Jesus'  blor^l.
We  still  to  conquer  go."


LECTURE    VI.
^0ste,  %cim,  (^t^imt,  tk.


The  subjects  of  this  lecture  are  to  be  "  Fosture,  Gesture,  and
Action  in  the  Delivejy  of  a  Seiinon."  I  shall  not  attempt  to  draw
any  hard  and  fast  line  of  division  between  the  one  and  the  other ;
for  it  would  need  a  very  highly  discriminating  mind  to  keep  them
separate ;  indeed,  it  could  not  be  done  at  all,  for  they  naturally
merge  into  each  other.  As  I  have,  after  a  fair  trial,  found  it
impossible  to  keep  even  "  posture  "  and  "  gesture"  in  an  absolutely
unmingled  state  in  my  own  mind,  I  have  allowed  them  to  run
together ;  but  I  hope  that  no  confusion  will  appear  in  the  result.

The  sermon  itself  is  the  main  thing:  its  matter,  its  aim,  and
the  spirit  in  which  it  is  brought  before  the  people,  the  sacred
anointing  upon  the  preacher,  and  the  divine  power  applying  the
truth  to  the  hearer: — these  are  infinitely  more  important  than  any
details  of  manner.  Posture  and  action  are  comparatively  small
and  inconsiderable  matters ;  but  still  even  the  sandal  in  the  statue
of  Minerva  should  be  correctly  carved,  and  in  the  service  of  God
even  the  smallest  things  should  be  regarded  with  holy  care.  Life
is  made  up  of  little  incidents,  and  success  in  it  often  depends  upon
attention  to  minor  details.  Small  flies  make  the  apothecary's
ointment  to  stink,  and  little  foxes  spoil  the  vines,  and  therefore
small  flies  and  little  foxes  should  be  kept  out  of  our  ministry.
Doubtless,  faults  in  even  so  secondary  a  matter  as  posture  have
I)rejudiced  men's  minds,  and  so  injured  the  success  of  what  would
otherwise  liave  been  most  acceptable  ministries.  A  man  of  more
than  average  abilities  may,  by  ridiculous  action,  be  thrown  into  the
rear  rank  and  kept  there.  This  is  a  great  ])ity,  even  if  there
were  only  one  such  case,  but  it  is  to  be  feared  that  niany  are
injured  by  the  same  cause.  Little  oddities  and  absurdities  of
mode  and  gesture  which  wise  men  would  endeavour  not  to  notice
are  not  overlooked  by  the  general  public  ;  in  fact,  the  majority
of  hearers  fix  their  eyes  mainly  upon  those  very  things,  while  those


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  97

who  come  to  scoff  observe  nothing  else.  Persons  are  either  dis-
gusted or  diverted  by  the  oddities  of  certain  preachers,  or  else
they  want  an  excuse  for  inattention,  and  jump  at  this  convenient
one :  there  can  be  no  reason  why  we  should  help  men  to  resist  our
own  endeavours  for  their  good.  No  minister  would  willingly
cultivate  a  habit  which  would  blunt  his  arrows,  or  drift  them
aside  from  the  mark;  and,  therefore,  since  these  minor  matters  of
movement,  posture,  and  gesture  may  have  that  effect,  you  will
give  them  your  immediate  attention.

We  very  readily  admit  that  action  in  preaching  is  an  affair  of
minor  consequence ;  for  some  who  have  succeeded  in  the  highest
sense  have  been  exceedingly  faulty  from  the  rhetorician's  point  of
view.  At  the  present  moment  there  is  in  Boston,  U.  S.  A.,  a
})reacher  of  the  very  highest  order  of  power,  of  whom  a  friendly
critic  writes :  "  In  the  opening  sentences  one  or  the  other  of  his
arms  shakes  at  his  side  in  a  helpless  fashion,  as  if  it  were  made  of
caudal  vertebrai  loosely  jointed.  He  soon  exhibits  a  most  engaging
awkwardness,  waddling  about  in  a  way  to  suggest  that  each  leg  is
shorter  than  the  other,  and  shaking  his  head  and  shoulders  in  un-
gainly emphasis.  He  raises  one  eyebrow  in  a  quite  impossible
fashion.  No  one  else  can  squint  so."  This  is  an  instance  of  mintl
overcoming  matter,  and  the  excellence  of  tlie  teaching  condoning
defects  in  utterance ;  but  it  would  be  better  if  no  such  drawbacks
existed.  Are  not  apples  of  gold  all  the  more  attractive  for  being
placed  in  baskets  of  silver!  Why  should  powerful  teaching  be
associated  with  waddling  and  squinting  I  Still  it  is  evident  that
proper  action  is,  to  say  the  least,  not  essential  to  success.  Homer
would  apj^ear  to  have  considered  the  entire  absence  of  gesture  to
be  no  detriment  to  eminent  power  in  speech,  for  he  pictures  one
of  his  greatest  heroes  as  entii-ely  abjuring  it,  though  not  without
some  sense  of  censure  from  his  audience.

"  But  when  Ulysses  rose,  in  thought  profound.
His  modest  eyes  he  fixed  upon  the  ground  ;
As  one  unskilled  or  dumb,  he  seemed  to  stand.
Nor  rais'd  his  head,  nor  stretched  his  sceptred  band.
But  when  he  speaks,  what  elocution  flows !
Soft  as  the  fleeces  of  descending  snows,
The  copious  accents  fall,  with  easy  art  ;
Melting  they  fall,  and  sink  into  the  heart !
Wondering  we  hear,  and,  fixed  in  deep  surprise.
Our  eai-s  refut«  the  censures  of  our  eyes."

Nor  need  we  go  back  to  the  ancients  for  proof  that  an  exceedinglv

8


98  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,   ETC.

quiet  action  maybe  connected  with  the  highest  power  of  eloquence,
for  several  instances  occur  to  us  among  the  moderns.  One  may
suffice :  our  own  supremely  gifted  Robert  Hall  had  no  oratorical
action,  and  scarcely  any  motion  in  the  pulpit,  except  an  occasional
lifting  or  waving  of  the  right  hand,  and  in  his  most  impassioned
moments  an  alternate  retreat  and  advance.

It  is  not  so  much  incumbent  upon  you  to  acquire  right  pulpit
action  as  it  is  to  get  rid  of  that  which  is  wrong.  If  you  could  be
reduced  to  motionless  dummies,  it  would  be  better  than  being
active  and  even  vigorous  incarnations  of  the  grotesque,  as  some  of
our  brethren  have  been.  Some  men  by  degrees  fall  into  a  suicidal
style  of  preaching,  and  it  is  a  very  rare  thing  indeed  to  see  a  man
escape  when  once  he  has  entangled  himself  in  the  meshes  of  an
evil  mannerism.  No  one  likes  to  tell  them  of  their  queer  antics,
and  so  they  are  unaware  of  them ;  but  it  is  surprising  that  their
wives  do  not  mimic  them  in  private  and  laugh  them  out  of  their
awkwardness.  I  have  heard  of  a  brother  who  in  his  earlier  days
was  most  acceptable,  but  who  afterwards  dropped  far  behind  in  the
I'ace  because  he  by  degrees  fell  into  bad  habits :  he  spoke  with  a
discordant  whine,  assumed  most  singular  attitudes,  and  used  such
extraordinary  mouthings  that  people  could  not  hear  him  with
pleasure.  He  developed  into  a  man  to  be  esteemed  and  honoured,
but  not  to  be  listened  to.  Excellent  Christian  men  have  said  that
they  did  not  know  whether  to  laugh  or  to  cry  when  they  were
hearing  him  preach:  they  felt  as  if  they  must  laugh  at  the
bidding  of  nature,  and  then  they  felt  that  they  ought  to  cry  from
the  impulse  of  grace  when  they  saw  so  good  a  preacher  utterly
ruined  by  absurd  affectations.  If  you  do  not  care  to  cultivate
j)roper  action,  at  least  be  wise  enough  to  steer  clear  of  that  which
is  grotesque  or  affected.  There  is  a  wide  range  between  the  fop,
curling  and  perfuming  his  locks,  and  permitting  one's  h.air  to  hang
in  matted  masses  like  the  mane  of  a  wild  beast.  We  should  never
advise  you  to  practise  postures  before  a  glass,  nor  to  imitate
great  divines,  nor  to  ape  the  fine  gentleman ;  but  there  is  no
need,  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  vulgar  or  absurd.  Postures  and
attitudes  are  merely  a  small  part  of  the  dress  of  a  discourse,  and  it
is  not  in  dress  that  the  substance  of  the  matter  lies  :  a  man  in
fustian  is  **aman  for  a'  that,"  and  so  a  sermon  which  is  oddly
delivered  may  be  a  good  sermon  for  all  that ;  but  still,  as  none  of
you  would  care  to  wear  a  pauper's  suit  if  you  could  procure  better
raiment,  so  you  should  not  bo  so  slovenly  as  to  clothe  truth  like
a  mondicant  when  you  might  array  her  as  a  prince's  daughter.


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTUKE,    ETC.  99

Some  men  are  naturally  very  awkward  in  their  persons  and
movements.  I  suppose  we  must  blame  what  the  countryman  called
their  "  broughtens  up."  The  rustic's  gait  is  hea\y,  and  his  walk  is
slouching.  You  can  see  that  his  natural  Jiabitat  is  a  ploughed  field.
On  the  pavement  or  the  carpet  he  is  suspicious  of  his  footing,  but
down  a  muddy  lane,  with  a  mule's  burden  of  earth  on  each  boot,  he
progresses  with  ease,  if  not  with  elegance.  There  is  a  lurapishness
and  lubberliness  innate  in  the  elements  of  some  men's  constitu-
tions. You  could  not  make  them  elegant  if  you  brayed  them  in  a
mortar  among  wheat  with  a  jxistle.  The  drill-sergeant  is  of  the
utmost  use  in  our  schools,  and  those  parents  who  think  that  drill
exercise  is  a  waste  of  time  are  very  much  mistaken.  There  is  a
shape  and  handiness,  a  general  propriety  of  fonn,  which  the
human  body  acquires  under  proper  drill  which  seldom  comes  in  any
other  manner.  Drill  brings  a  man's  shoulders  down,  keeps  his
arms  from  excessive  swinging,  expands  the  chest,  shows  him  what
to  do  with  his  hands,  and,  in  a  word,  teaches  a  man  how  to  walk
uprightly,  and  to  bring  himself  into  something  like  shijvshape,
without  any  conscious  effort  to  do  so,  which  effort  would  be  a  sure
Ijetrayal  of  his  awkwardness.  Very  spiritual  people  will  think  me
trifling,  but  indeed  I  am  not.  I  \\o\)g  the  day  will  come  when  it
will  be  looked  upon  as  an  essential  part  of  education  to  teach  a
young  man  how  to  carry  himself,  and  move  without  clumsiness.

It  may  happen  that  awkward  gestures  arise  from  feeble  utterance,and
a  nervous  consciousness  of  lack  of  power  in  that  direction.  Certain
splendid  men  of  our  acquaintance  are  so  modest  as  to  be  diffident,
and  hence  they  become  hesitating  in  speech,  and  disarranged  in
manner.  Perhaps  no  morc  notable  instance  of  this  can  be  men-
tioned than  the  late  beloved  Dr.  James  Hamilton.  He  was  the
most  beautiful  and  chaste  of  speakers,  with  an  action  painful  to
the  last  degree.  His  biographer  says : — '*  In  mental  resources  and
acquirements  he  was  possessed  of  great  wealth  ;  but  in  the  capacity
to  utter  his  thoughts,  with  all  the  variation  of  tone  and  key  which
their  nature  required,  yet  so  as  to  be  thoroughly  heard  in  a  great
edifice,  he  was  far  less  gifted.  In  this  department,  accordingly,
he  was  always  pained  by  a  conscious  shortcoming  from  liis  own
ideal.  It  is  certain  that  lack  of  vocal  force,  and  ready  control  over
his  intonations,  largely  detracted  from  the  power  and  popularity  of
his  pr'eaching.  In  delicacy  of  conception,  in  the  happy  choice  of
idioms,  in  the  command  of  striking  and  original  imagery,  and  in
the  glow  of  evangelical  fervour  that  pervaded  all,  he  had  few
equals.     These  rare  qualities,  however,  were  shorn  of  half  their


100  POSTURE,   ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

stfength,  in  as  far  as  his  public  preaching  was  concerned,  hy  the
necessity  under  which  he  constantly  lay  of  straining  to  make  him-
self audible,  by  standing  on  his  tip-toes,  and  throwing  out  his  words
in  handfuls,  if  so  be  they  might  reach  the  far-distant  aisles.  If  the
muscles  of  his  chest  had  been  such  as  to  enable  him  to  stand  solidly
at  ease,  while  his  lips  performed  the  task  of  articulation  without
the  aid  of  auxiliary  blasts  from  over-inflated  lungs,  James
Hamilton  would  certainly  have  been  followed  by  greater  crowds,
and  obtained  access  for  his  messacje  to  a  wider  and  more  varied
circle.  But  we  do  not  know  what  counterbalancing  evil  might
have  come  in  along  with  such  external  success.  Although  with  all
his  prayers  and  pains  this  thorn  was  still  left  in  the  flesh,  the  grand
compensation  remained :  '  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ;  my
strength  is  perfect  in  thy  weakness.'  "What  talents  the  Lord  saw
meet  to  bestow,  he  laid  out  with  marvellous  skill  and  diligence  in
the  giver's  service,  and  if  some  of  the  talents  were  withheld,  the
Withholder  knows  why.  He  hath  done  all  things  well."  In  this
sentiment  we  heartily  concur,  but  we  should  be  sorry  for  any  young
man  to  submit  at  discretion  to  a  similar  defect,  and  ascribe  it  to  the
hand  of  the  Lord.  Dr.  Hamilton  did  not  so.  He  earnestly  en-
deavoured to  overcome  his  natural  disadvantage,  and  to  our  know-
ledge took  lessons  of  more  than  one  professor  of  elocution.  He  did
not  take  refuge  in  the  sluggard's  plea,  but  laboured  hard  to  master
the  difficulty,  and  only  failed  because  it  was  a  physical  defect  be-
yond all  remedy.  Let  us  wherever  we  see  awkwardness,  which  is
evidently  unavoidable,  take  little  or  no  notice  of  it,  and  take  care  to
commend  the  brother  that  he  does  so  well  under  the  circumstances;
counting  it  no  small  achievement  for  a  divine  to  cover  by  richness  of
thought  and  fitness  of  language  the  ungainliness  of  his  outer  man,
thus  making  the  soul  triumph  over  the  body.  Yet  should  we
ourselves  be  afflicted  with  any  fault  of  manner,  let  us  resolve  to
overcome  it,  for  it  is  not  an  impossible  task.  Edward  Irving  was
a  striking  instance  of  a  man's  power  to  improve  himself  in  this
respect.  At  first  his  manner  was  awkward,  constrained,  and  un-
natural; but  by  diligent  culture  his  attitude  and  action  were  made
U)  be  striking  aids  to  his  eloquence.

Pulpits  have  much  to  answer  for  in  having  made  men  awkward.
What  horriMe  inventions  they  are  1  If  we  could  once  abolish
them  we  might  say  concerning  them  as  Joshua  did  concerning
Jericho — "Cursed  be  he  that  buildeth  this  Jericho,"  for  the  old-
fashioned  pulpit  has  been  a  greater  curse  to  the  churches  than
is  at  first  sight  evident.     No   barrister  would   ever  enter  a  pulpil


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


101


to  plead  a  case  at  the  bar.  How  could  he  hope  to  succeed  while
buried  alive  almost  up  to  his  shoulders?  The  client  would  be
ruined  if  the  advocate  were  thus  imprisoned.  How  manly,  how
commanding  is  the  attitude  in  which  Chiysostom  is  usually
[represented !  Forgetting  his  robes  for  the  moment  one  cannot
•  but  feel  that  such  a  natural  posture  is  far  more  worthy  of
sublime  truth  than  that  of  a  person  crouching  over  a  sheet  of
paper,  looking  up  very  occasionally,  and  then  revealing  no
more  than  his  head
and  shoulders.  Aus-
tin in  his  Chiro-
.»


very    pro-
"  Free-


nomta
perly  says,
dom  is  also  necessary
to  gracefulness  of
action.  No  gestures
can  be  graceful
which  are  either
confined  by  exter-
nal circumstances,
or  restrained  by  the
mind.  If  a  man
were  obliged  to  ad-
dress an  assembly
from  a  narrow  win-
tlow,  through  which
he  could  not  extend
his  arms  and  his
head,  it  would  be
in  vain  for  him
to  attempt  graceful
jjesture.  Confine-
ment  in  every  lesser
degree  must  be  pro-
])ortionally  injurious  to  grace ;  thus  the  crowded  bar  is  injurious
to  the  action  of  the  advocate,  and  the  enclosed  and  bolstered
pulpit,  which  often  cuts  off  more  than  half  of  his  figure,  is  equally
injurious  to  the  graceful  action  of  the  preacher."

*  Chironomia ;  or,  a  Treatise  on  Rhetorical  Delivery  :  comprehending  many
precepts,  both  ancient  and  modem,  for  the  proper  regulation  of  the  Voice,  the
Countenance,  and  Gesture,  and  a  new  method  for  the  notation  thereof;  illustrated
by  many  figures.   By  the  Eeverend  Gilbert  Austin,  A  M.    London.  1806.  [Quarto.j


102


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


The  late  Thomas  Binney  was  unable  to  endure  a  platform,  and
was  known  to  fetch  gowns  and  other  materials  to  hang  over  the
rails  of  an  open  rostrum,  if  he  found  himself  placed  in  one :  this
must  have  arisen  solely  from  the  force  of  habit,  for  there  can  be
no  real  advantage  in  being  enclosed  in  a  wooden  pen.  This  feeling
Avill  no  doubt  I'etain  the  close  pulpit  in  its  place  for  awhile  longer,
but  in  ages  to  come  men  will  find  an  argument  for  the  divinity  of
our  holy  faith  in  the  fact  that  it  survived  pulpits.

Ministers  cannot  be  blamed  for  ungainly  postures  and  attitudes
when  only  a  very  small  part  of  their  bodies  can  be  seen  during  a

discourse.  If  it  was  the  custom
to  preach  as  Paul  did  at  Athens
public  speakers  would  become
models  of  propriety,  but  when
the  usual  method  is  modelled
upon   our  woodcut    of    "Tlie
Reverend  Dr.  Paul  preaching
in  London  "  we  cannot  marvel
if  the  ungainly  and  tlie  gro-
tesque  abound.     By  the  way,
it  is  interesting  to  note  that
Raphael   in  his  representation
of   Paul  at  Athens  evidently
had  in  his  mind  the  apostle's
God  dwelleth  not
made  with    hands,
worshipped    with
hence    he  de-
liftinix    his


as


utterance,
in  temples
neither    is
man's    hands
lineates    him

hands.  I  am  indebted  for  this
hint  to  G.  W.  Hervey,  M.A.,
who  has  written  a  very  abU':
and  comprchensive  "  System
of  Rhetoric."*

Remarkable  are  the  forms  which  pulpits  have  assumed  according
to  th(!  freaks  of  human  fancy  and  folly.  Twenty  years  ago  they  had
probably  reached  their  very  woi-st.  What  could  liave  been  their
-design  and  intent  it  would  be  hard  to  conjecture.  A  det^p  wooden
pulpit  of  the  old  sort  might  well  remind  a  minister  of  his  mortality,
for  it  is  nothing  but  a  coffin  set  on  end :  but  on  what  rational

*  A  Sjttom  of  ChriHtian  Rhetoric  for  the  Um  of  ProacborH  and  other  Speakers.
By  George  Winfrod  ilorvoy,  M.A.    Uouistoa  and  Sodb,  laiii.


PAUL  PKRACITTNO  AT  ATHENS,
AKTICK    KAiniABL.


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


103


ground  do  we  bury  our  pastors  alive  ?  Many  of  these  erections
resemble  barrels,  others  are  of  the  fashion  of  etjg  cups  and  wine
glasses ;  a  third  class  were  evidently  modelled  after  corn  bins  upon
four  legs ;  and  yet  a  fourth  variety  can  only  be  likened  to  swallows'
nests  stuck  upon  the  wall.  Some  of  them  are  so  high  as  to  turn
the  heads  of  the  occupants  when  they  dare  to  peer  into  the  awful
ilepths  below  them,  and  they  give  those  who  look  up  to  the  elevated
preacher  for  any  length  of  time  a  crick  in  the  neck.  I  have  felt
like  a  man  at  the  mast-head  while  perched  aloft  in  these  "  towers
of  the  flock."  These  abominations  are  in  themselves  evils,  and
create  evils.

While  I  am  upon  pulpits  I
will  make  a  digression,  and  ro-
mark  for  the  benefit  of  deacons
and  churchwardens  that  I  fre-
quently notice  in  pulpits  a  most
abominable  savour  of  gas,  which
evidently  arises  from  leakage  in
the  gas-pipes,  and  is  very  apt  to
make  a  preacher  feel  lialf  intoxi-
cated, or  to  sicken  him.  We
ought  to  be  spared  this  infliction.
Frequently,  also,  a  large  lamp  is
placed  close  to  each  side  of  the
minister's  head,  thus  cramping
all  his  movements  and  placing
liim  between  two  fires.  If  any
complaints  are  made  of  the  hot-
headedness  of  our  ministers,  it  is
readily  to  be  accounted  for,  since
the  apparatus  for  the  purpose  is
arranged  with  great  care.  Only
the  other  night  I  had  the  privilege,  when  I  sat  down  in  the  pulpit,
to  feel  as  if  some  one  had  smitten  me  on  the  top  of  my  head,  and
as  I  looked  up  there  was  an  enormous  argand  burner  with  a
reflector  placed  immediately  above  me,  in  order  to  throw  a  light  on
my  Bible :  a  very  considerate  contrivance  no  doubt,  only  the  in-
ventor had  forgotten  that  his  burners  were  pouring  down  a
terrible  heat  upon  a  sensitive  brain.  One  has  no  desire  to
experience  an  artificial  coup  de  soleil  while  preaching  ;  if  we  must
suffer  from  such  a  calamity  let  it  come  upon  us  during  our  holi-
days, and  let  it  befall  us  from  the  sun  himself.    No  one  in  erecting


THE  VERY    KETERBND   DR.    PAUL
rUKACUlNa   IN    lX>Ml>OM.


104  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

a  pulpit  seems  to  think  of  the  preacher  as  a  man  of  like  feelings
and  senses  with  other  people  ;  the  seat  upon  which  you  are  to  rest
at  intervals  is  often  a  mere  ledge,  and  the  door  handle  runs  into
the  small  of  your  back,  wdiile  when  you  stand  up  and  would  come
to  the  front  there  is  often  a  curious  gutta-percha  bag  interposed
between  you  and  your  pulpit.  This  gummy  depository  is  charitably
intended  for  the  assistance  of  certain  deaf  people,  who  are  I  hope
benefited ;  they  ought  to  be,  for  every  evil  should  have  a  compen-
sating influence.  You  cannot  bend  forward  without  forcing  this
contrivance  to  close  up,  and  I  for  my  own  part  usually  deposit  my
pocket-handkerchief  in  it,  which  causes  the  deaf  people  to  take
the  ends  of  the  tubes  out  of  their  ears  and  to  discover  that  they
hear  me  well  enough  without  them.

No  one  knows  the  discomfort  of  pulpits  except  the  man  who
has  been  in  very  many,  and  found  each  one  worse  than  the  last.
They  are  generally  so  deep  that  a  short  person  like  myself  can
scarcely  see  over  the  top  of  them,  and  when  I  ask  for  something
to  stand  upon  they  bring  me  a  hassock.  Think  of  a  minister
of  the  gospel  poising  himself  upon  a  hassock  while  he  is  preaching :
a  Boanerges  and  a  Blondin  in  one  person.  It  is  too  much  to
expect  us  to  keep  the  balance  of  our  minds  and  the  equilibrium  of
our  bodies  at  the  same  time.  The  tippings  up,  and  overturnings
of  stools  and  hassocks  which  I  have  had  to  suffer  while  preaching
rush  on  my  memory  now,  and  revive  the  most  painful  sensations.
Surely  we  ought  to  be  saved  such  petty  annoyances,  for  their
evil  is  by  no  means  limited  by  our  discomfort ;  if  it  were  so,  it
would  be  of  no  consequence;  but,  alas  I  these  little  things  often,
throw  the  mind  out  of  gear,  disconnect  our  thoughts,  and  trouble
our  spirit.  We  ought  to  rise  superior  to  such  trifles,  but  though
the  spirit  truly  is  willing  the  flesh  is  weak.  It  is  marvellous  how
the  mind  is  affected  by  the  most  trifling  matters:  there  can  be  no
need  to  perpetuate  needless  causes  of  discomfort.  Sydney  Smith's
story  shows  that  we  have  not  been  alone  in  our  tribulation.  "  I
can't  bear,"  said  he,  "  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  true  orthodox  way  in
my  pulpit,  with  my  head  just  peeping  above  the  desk.  I  like  to
look  down  upon  my  congregation — to  fire  into  them.  The  common
people  say  I  am  a  hould  preacher^  for  I  like  to  have  my  arms
free,  and  to  thump  the  pulpit.  A  singular  contretemps  happened
to  mo  once,  when,  to  effect  this,  I  liad  ordered  the  clerk  to  pile
up  some  liassocks  for  me  to  stand  on.  My  text  was,  '  We  are
perpKixed,  but  not  in  despair ;  persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ;  cast
down,  but  not   debtroycd,'     I  had  scarcely  uttered  these  words,


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  105

tiwd  was  preparing  to  illustrate  them,  when  I  did  so  practically,
and  in  a  way  I  had  not  at  all  anticipated.  My  fabric  of  hassocks
suddenly  gave  way;  down  I  fell,  and  with  difficulty  prevented
myself  from  being  precipitated  into  the  arms  of  my  congregation,
wiio,  I  must  say,  behaved  very  well,  and  recovered  their  gravity
sooner  than  I  could  have  expected."

But  I  nnxst  return  to  my  subject,  and  I  do  so  by  repeating  the
belief  that  boxed-up  pulpits  are  largely  accountable  for  the  un-
gainly postures  which  some  of  our  preachers  assume  when  they  are
out  of  their  cages  and  are  l(K)se  upon  a  platform.  They  do  not
know  what  to  do  with  their  legs  and  aims,  and  feel  awkward  and
exposed,  and  hence  drop  into  ridictilous  attitudes.  When  a  man
has  been  accustomed  to  regard  himself  as  an  "  animated  bust "  he
feels  as  if  he  had  become  too  long  when  he  is  made  to  apjH'ar
at  full  length.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  many  men  are  made  awhxcard  through
fear.  It  is  not  the  man's  nature,  nor  his  pulpit,  but  his  nervousness
which  makes  a  guy  of  him.  To  some  it  is  a  display  of  great
courage  even  to  stand  before  an  audience,  and  to  sjK'uk  is  an  ordeal
indeed :  no  wonder  that  their  attitude  is  constrained,  for  they  ai*e
twitching  and  trembling  all  over.  Every  nerve  is  in  a  static  of
excitement,  and  their  whole  body  is  tremulous  with  fear.  Es-
pecially are  they  perplexed  what  to  do  with  their  hands,  and  they
move  them  about  in  a  restless,  irregular,  meaningless  manner ;  if
they  could  have  them  strapped  down  to  their  sides  they  might  re-
joice in  the  deliverance.  One  of  the  clergy  of  the  Church  of
England,  in  pleading  for  the  use  of  the  manuscript,  makes  use  of
the  remarkable  argument  that  a  nervous  man  by  having  to  turn
over  the  leaves  of  his  discourse  thus  keeps  his  hands  occupied ;
whereas,  if  he  had  no  paper  before  him,  he  would  not  know  what
to  do  with  them.  It  is  an  ill  wind  that  blows  no  one  any  good,
and  it  must  be  a  very  bad  practice  indeed  which  has  not  some
ivmote  and  occasional  advantages.  For  nervousness,  however,
there  must  be  a  moi*e  effectual  treatment ;  the  preacher  should
try  to  conquer  the  evil  rather  than  look  for  a  mode  of  concealing
its  outward  manifestations.  Practice  is  a  great  remedy,  and  faith
in  God  is  a  still  more  potent  cure.  When  the  minister  becomes
accustomed  to  the  people  he  stands  at  ease  because  he  is  at  ease,
he  feels  at  home,  and  as  to  his  hands  or  legs,  or  any  other  part
of  his  person,  he  has  no  thought :  he  goes  to  work  with  all  his
heart,  and  drops  into  the  positions  most  natural  to  an  earnest  man,
and  these  are  the  most  appropriate.     Unstudied  gestures,  to  which


106  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

you  never  turned  your  thoughts  for  a  moment,  are  the  vei'v  best,
and  the  higliest  result  of  art  is  to  banish  art,  and  leave  the  man  as
free  to  be  graceful  as  the  gazelle  among  the  mountains.

Occasional  oddities  of  posture  and  gesture  may  arise  from  the
dijiculti/  of  finding  the  next  word.  An  American  observer  some
years  ago  said,  "  It  is  interesting,  sometimes,  to  see  the  different
ways  in  which  different  individuals  get  out  of  the  same  dilemma.
Mr.  Calhoun  is  not  often  at  a  loss  for  a  word,  but  occasionally  one
sticks  in  his  throat,  in  the  pronunciation,  like  Macbeth's  ^  Amen.\
In  such  a  case  he  gives  a  petulant  twitch  or  two  at  his  shirt  collar,
and  runs  his  bony  fingers  through  his  long  grey  hair,  till  it  fairly
bristles  again.  Webster,  when  bothered  for  a  word,  or  snarled  up
in  a  sentence,  almost  invariably  scratches  the  inner  corner  of  his
left  eye  carefully  with  the  third  finger  of  his  right  hand.  Failing
in  this,  he  rubs  his  nose  quite  fiercely  with  the  bent  knuckle  of
his  thumb.  As  a  dernier  ressort,  he  springs  his  knees  apart  until
his  legs  resemble  an  ellipsis,  then  plunging  his  hands  deep  into
his  pockets,  he  throws  the  upper  section  of  his  body  smartly  for-
ward, and  the  word  is  '  bound  to  come.' "  A  man  ought  to  be
forgiven  for  what  he  does  when  he  is  in  an  agony,  but  it  would  be  a
great  gain  if  he  never  suffered  from  such  embarrassments,  and
so  escaped  from  the  consequent  contortions.

Habit  also  frequently  leads  speakers  into  very  singular  move-
ments, and  to  these  they  become  so  wedded  that  they  cannot  speak
without  them.  Tugging  at  a  button  at  the  back  of  the  coat,  or
twiddling  the  fingers,  will  be  often  seen,  not  as  a  part  of  the
preacher's  oratory,  but  as  a  sort  of  free  accompaniment  to  it.
Addison,  in  the  Spectator,  relates  an  amusing  incident  of  this  kind.
*'  I  remember,  when  I  was  a  young  man,  and  used  to  frequent
Westminster  Hall,  there  was  a  counsellor  who  never  pleaded  with-
out a  piece  of  packthread  in  his  hand,  which  he  used  to  twist  about
a  thumb  or  a  finger  all  the  while  he  was  speaking :  the  wags  of
those  days  used  to  call  it  the  thread  of  his  discourse,  for  he  was
not  able  to  utter  a  word  without  it.  One  of  his  clients,  who  was
more  merry  than  wise,  stole  it  from  him  one  day  in  the  midst  of
liis  pleading,  but  ho  liad  better  have  let  it  alone,  for  he  lost  his
cause  by  his  jest."  Oentlcmen  who  are  as  yet  free  from  sucii
little  peculiarities  should  bo  upon  their  guard  lest  they  should
gradually  yield  to  them ;  but,  so  long  as  they  are  mere  trifles,
ol)H(!rved  only  by  the  few,  and  not  injnrious  to  the  preacher's
efforts,  no  great  Ht^^H8  needs  to  be  laid  upon  them.

The  posture  of  the  minister  should  be  natural,  but  his  nature


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  107

must  not  be  of  a  coarse  type ;  it  should  be  graceful,  educated
nature.  He  should  avoid  es[>ecially  those  positions  which  are  un-
natural to  a  speaker,  because  they  hamper  the  organs  of  utterance,
or  cramp  his  lungs.  He  should  use  his  common  sense,  and  not  make
it  difficult  for  him  to  speak  by  leaning  forward  over  the  Bible  or
book-board.  Bending  over  as  if  you  were  speaking  confidentially
to  the  persons  immediately  below  may  be  tolerated  occasionally,
but  as  a  customary  position  it  is  as  injurious  as  it  is  ungraceful.
Who  thinks  of  stooping  when  he  speaks  in  the  parlour':?  What
killing  work  it  would  be  to  conduct  a  long  conversation  while
pressing  the  breathing  apjiaratus  against  the  edge  of  a  table !
Stand  upright,  get  a  firm  position,  and  then  speak  like  a  man.
A  few  orators  even  err  in  the  other  direction,  and  throw  their
heads  far  back  as  though  they  were  addressing  the  angels,  or  saw
a  handwriting  upon  the  ceiling.  This  also  cometh  of  evil,  and
unless  the  occasional  sublime  apostrophe  requires  it,  is  by  no
means  to  be  practised.  John  Wesley  well  says,  "  The  head  ought
not  to  be  held  up  too  high,  nor  clownish ly  thrust  too  forward,
neither  to  be  cast  down  and  hang,  as  it  were,  on  the  breast ;  nor
to  lean  always  on  one  or  the  other  side ;  but  to  be  kept  modestly
and  decently  upright,  in  its  natural  state  and  position.  Further,
it  ought  neither  to  be  kept  immovable,  as  a  statue,  nor  to  be  con-
tinually moving  and  throwing  itself  about.  To  avoid  both  ex-
tremes, it  should  be  turned  gently,  as  occasion  is,  sometimes  one
way,  sometimes  the  other;  and  at  other  times  remain,  looking
straight  forward,  to  the  middle  of  the  auditory."

Too  many  men  assume  a  slouching  attitude,  lolling  and  sprawling
as  if  they  were  lounging  on  the  parapet  of  a  bridge  and  chatting  with
somebody  down  in  a  boat  on  the  river.  We  do  not  go  into  the
pulpit  to  slouch  about,  and  to  look  free  and  easy,  but  we  go  there
upon  very  solemn  business,  and  our  posture  should  be  such  as  be-
comes our  mission.  A  reverent  and  earnest  spirit  will  not  be  in-
dicated by  a  sluggish  lounge  or  a  careless  slouch.  It  is  said  that
among  the  Greeks  even  the  ploughmen  and  herdsmen  take  up
graceful  attitudes  without  any  idea  that  they  are  doing  so.  I  think
it  is  also  true  of  the  Italians,  for  wherever  I  have  seen  a  Koman
man  or  woman — no  matter  whether  they  ai*e  sleeping  upon
the  Spagna  steps,  or  sitting  upon  a  fragment  of  the  baths  of
Caracalla,  or  carrying  a  bundle  on  their  heads,  or  riding  a  mule,
they  always  look  like  studies  for  an  artist ;  yet  this  is  the  last
thing  which  ever  crosses  their  minds.  Those  picturesque  peasants
have  never  taken  lessons  in  calisthenics,  nor  do  they  trouble  their


108  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

heads  as  to  how  they  appear  to  the  foreigner;  pure  nature,  delivered
from  mannerism,  primness,  and  affectation,  moulds  their  habits
into  gracefulness.  We  should  be  foolish  to  imitate  Greeks  or
Italians,  except  in  their  freedom  from  all  imitation,  but  it  were
well  if  we  could  copy  their  unconstrained  and  natural  action.
There  is  no  reason  why  a  Christian  should  be  a  clown,  and  there
are  a  great  many  reasons  why  a  minister  should  not  be  a  boor.  As
Rowland  Hill  said  that  he  could  not  see  why  Satan  should  have
the  best  tunes,  so  neither  can  I  see  why  he  should  have  the  most
gi'acef  ul  speakers !

Now,  leaving  posture,  let  us  more  distinctly  notice  action  in
preaching ;  this  also  is  a  secondary  and  yet  an  important  item.
Our  first  observation  shall  be,  it  should  never  be  excessive.  In
this  matter  bodily  exercise  profiteth  little.  We  cannot  readily
judge  when  action  is  excessive,  for  what  would  be  excessive  in  one
man  may  be  most  fitting  and  proper  in  another.  Different  races
employ  different  action  in  speaking.  Two  Englishmen  will  talk
very  quietly  and  soberly  to  one  another  compared  with  a  couple  of
Frenchmen.  Notice  our  Gallic  neighbours :  they  talk  all  over,  and
shrug  their  shoulders,  and  move  their  fingers,  and  gesticulate  most
vehemently.  Very  well,  then,  we  may  allow  a  French  preacher  to
be  more  demonstrative  in  preaching  than  an  Englishman,  because
he  is  so  in  ordinary  speech.  I  am  not  sure  that  a  French  divine  is
so  as  a  matter  of  fact,  but  if  he  were  so  it  could  be  accounted  for
by  the  national  habit.  If  you  and  I  were  to  converse  in  the
Parisian  fashion  we  should  excite  ridicule,  and,  in  the  same  way,
if  we  were  to  become  violent  and  vehement  in  the  pulpit  wo
might  run  the  same  risk ;  for  if  Addison  be  an  authority,  English
orators  use  less  gestures  than  those  of  other  countries.  As  it  is
with  races  so  is  it  with  men :  some  naturally  gesticulate  more
than  others,  and  if  it  be  really  natural,  we  have  little  fault  to  find.
For  instance,  we  cannot  censure  John  Gough's  marvellous  gesticu-
lation and  perambulation,  for  he  would  not  have  been  (Jougli
without  them.  1  wonder  how  many  miles  he  walks  in  the  course
of  one  of  his  lectures  1  Did  we  not  see  him  climb  the  sides  of  a
v(»lcano  in  j)ursuit  of  a  bubble?  How  we  pitied  him  as  we  saw
him  ankle  deep  in  the  hot  ashes !  Then  he  was  away,  away  at  the
r>ther  end  of  the  platform  at  Exeter  Hall,  apostrophising  a  glass  of
water;  but  he  only  8toj)ped  there  a  inonu-nt,  and  anon  made
another  rush  over  tho  corns  of  the  temperance  brethren  in  the
front  row.  Now,  this  was  right  enough  for  tlohn  (Jongh;  but  if
yon,  John  Smith  or  John  IJrown,  connnenco  these  perambulations


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  109

you  will  soon  be  likened  to  the  wandering  Jew,  or  to  the  polar
bear,  at  the  Zoological  Gardens,  which  for  ever  goes  backwards
and  forwards  in  its  den.  Martin  Luther  was  wont  to  smite  with
his  fist  at  such  a  rate  that  they  show,  at  Eisenach,  a  board — I  think
a  three-inch  board — which  he  broke  while  hammering  at  a  text.
The  truth  of  the  legend  has  been  doubted,  for  it  has  been  asserted
that  those  delicate  hands,  which  could  play  so  charmingly  upon
the  guitar,  could  hardly  have  been  treated  so  roughly;  but  if  the
hand  be  an  index  of  its  owner  s  character,  we  can  well  believe  it,
for  strength  and  tenderness  were  marvellously  combined  in  Luther.
There  was  much  delicacy  and  sensitiveness  about  Luther's  mind,
yet  these  never  diminished,  but  rather  increased,  its  tremendous
energy.  It  is  by  no  means  difficult  to  believe  that  he  could  smash
up  a  plank,  from  the  style  in  which  he  struck  out  at  the  Pope ;
and  yet  we  can  well  imagine  that  he  would  touch  the  strings  of
his  guitar  with  a  maiden's  hand;  even  as  David  could  play
skilfully  upon  the  harp,  and  yet  a  bow  of  steel  was  broken  by  his
arms.  John  Knox  is  said  at  one  time  to  have  been  so  feeble  that,
before  he  entered  the  pulpit,  you  would  expect  to  see  him  drop
down  in  a  fainting  fit ;  but  once  before  the  audience  he  seemed
as  though  he  would  "  ding  the  pulpit  in  blads,"  which,  being
interpreted,  means  in  English  that  he  would  knock  it  into  shivers.
That  was  evidently  the  style  of  the  period  when  Protestants  were
fighting  for  their  very  existence,  and  the  Pope  and  his  priests
and  the  devil  and  his  angels  were  aroused  to  special  fury:  yet
I  do  not  suppose  that  Melancthon  thought  it  needful  to  be  quite
so  tremendous,  nor  did  Calvin  hammer  and  slash  in  a  like  manner.
At  any  rate,  you  need  not  try  to  break  three-inch  boards,  for
there  might  be  a  nail  in  one  of  them ;  neither  need  you  ding  a
j)ulpit  into  "  blads,"  for  you  might  find  yourself  without  a  pulpit  if
you  did.  Come  upon  consciences  with  a  crash,  and  aim  at  break-
ing hard  hearts  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  but  these  require
sj)iritual  power ;  physical  energy  is  not  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation.

It  is  very  easy  to  overdo  the  thing  so  much  as  to  make  your-
self appear  ridiculous.  Perhaps  it  was  a  keen  perception  of  this
danger  which  led  Dr.  Johnson  to  forbid  action  altogether,  and  to
commend  Dr.  Watts  very  highly  because  "  he  did  not  endeavour
to  assist  his  eloquence  by  any  gesticulations  ;  for  as  no  corporeal
actions  have  any  correspondence  with  theological  truth,  he  did  not
see  how  they  could  enforce  it."  The  great  lexicographer's  remark
is  nonsense,  but  if  it  should  be  thought  weighty  enough  to  reduce


110  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

a  preacher  to  absolute  inaction,  it  will  be  better  than  overwrought
posturing.  When  Nathan  addressed  David,  I  suppose  that  he
delivered  his  parable  very  quietly,  and  that  when  the  time  came  to
say,  "Thou  art  the  man,"  he  gave  the  king  a  deeply  earnest  look;
but  younger  ministers  imagine  that  the  prophet  strode  into  the
middle  of  the  room  and,  setting  his  right  foot  forward,  pointed
his  finger  like  a  pistol  between  the  royal  eyes,  and  giving  a  loud
stamp  of  the  foot,  shouted,  "  thou  art  the  man."  Had  it
been  so  done  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  royal  culprit  would  have
had  his  thoughts  turned  from  himself  to  the  insane  prophet,  and
would  have  called  for  his  guard  to  clear  the  hall.  Nathan  was
too  solemnly  in  earnest  to  be  indecently  violent;  and  as  a
general  rule  we  may  here  note  that  it  is  the  tendency  of  deep
feeling  rather  to  subdue  the  manner  than  to  render  it  too  ener-
getic. Pie  who  beats  the  air,  and  bawls,  and  raves,  and  stamps,
means  nothing ;  and  the  more  a  man  really  means  wliat  he  says
the  less  of  vulgar  vehemence  will  there  be.  John  Wesley  in  his
"Directions  concerning  Pronunciation  and  Gesture"  cramps  the
preacher  too  much  when  he  says,  "  He  must  never  clap  his  hands,
nor  thump  the  pulpit.  The  hands  should  seldom  be  raised  higher
than  the  eyes ":  but  he  probably  had  his  eye  upon  some  glaring
case  of  extravagance.  He  is  right,  however,  when  he  warns  his
preachers  that  "  the  hands  should  not  be  in  peqietual  motion,  for
this  the  ancients  called  the  babbling  of  the  hands."

Russell  very  wisely  says  :  "  True  vehemence  never  degenerates
into  violence  and  vociferation.  It  is  the  force  of  inspiration, — not
of  frenzy.  It  is  not  manifested  in  the  screaming  and  foaming,
the  stamping  and  the  contortions,  of  vulgar  excess.  It  is  ever
manly  and  noble,  in  its  intensest  excitement:  it  elevates, — it  does
not  degrade.  It  never  descends  to  the  bawling  voice,  the  guttural
coarseness,  the  slu'ieking  emphasis,  the  hysteric  ccstacy  of  tone,
the  bullying  attitude,  and  the  clinched  fist  of  extravagant  passion."*

When  your  sermon  seems  to  demand  of  you  a  little  imitative
action,  be  peculiarly  watchful  lest  you  go  too  far,  for  this  you
may  do  before  you  are  aware  of  it.  I  have  heai'd  of  a  young
divine  who  in  expostulation  with  the  unconverted,  exclaimed,
*'  Alas,  you  shut  your  eyes  to  the  light   (here  he  closed  both

•  Pulpit  Elocution:  comprising  UrmarlcH  on  tho  EfTt^ct  of  Mannor  in  Public
Discoumo  ;  tho  Elemonta  of  Elocution,  uppliiul  to  tho  loailinK  of  Siripturo,  Hymns,
ftndSsnnont;  with  ohRorvutiona  on  tho  I'rinoiplos  of  (JcHturo;  and  a  Snloction  of
KserdMa  in  Ubading  and  Hpoaking.  By  William  liussoll,  with  un  Introduction;
by  I'klwsrdu  A.  P»rk,  D.D.,  and  lt«v.  Edward  N.  Kirk.     Andover  [U.  S.  A.].  18fi3.


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


Ill


eyes) ;  you  stop  your  ears  to  the  truth  (here  he  put  a  finger
into  each  ear);  and  you  turn  your  backs  upon  salvation"
(here  he  turned  his  back  on  tlie  people).  Do  you  wonder  that
when  the  people  saw  a  man  standing  with  his  back  to  them  and
his  fingers  in  his  ears  they  all  fell  to  laughing?  The  action  might
be  appropriate,  but  it  was  overdone,  and  had  better  have  been  left
undone.  Violent  gesture,  even  when  commended  by  some,  will
be  sure  to  strike  others  from  its  comic  side.  When  Burke  in  the
House  of  Commons  flung  down
the  dagger  to  show  that  En-
glishmen were  making  weapoas
to  be  used  against  their  own
countrymen,  his  action  seems
to  me  to  have  been  striking
and  much  to  the  purpose,  and
yet  Sheridan  said,  "The  gen-
tleman has  brought  us  the
knife,  where  is  the  fork  t  "  and
Gilray  wickeclly  caricatured
him.  The  risks  of  too  little
action  are  by  no  means  gi'eat,
but  you  can  plainly  see  that
there  are  great  perils  in  the
other  direction.  Therefore,  do
not  carry  action  too  far,  and
if  you  feel  that  you  are  naturally
very  energetic  in  your  delivery,
repress  your  energies  a  little.
Wave  your  hands  a  little  less,
smite  the  Bible  somewhat  more
mercifully,  and  in  general  take
matters  rather  more  calmly.  *""

Perhaps  a  man  is  nearest  to  the  golden  mean  in  action  when  his
manner  excites  no  remark  either  of  praise  or  censure,  because  it  is
so  completely  of  a  piece  with  the  discourse  that  it  is  not  regarded
as  a  separate  item  at  all.  That  action  which  gains  conspicuous
notice  is  probably  out  of  proportion,  and  excessive.  Mr.  Hall  once
spent  an  evening  with  Mrs.  Hannah  More,  and  his  judgment  upon
her  manners  might  well  serve  as  a  criticism  upon  the  mannerisms
of  ministers.  "Nothing  striking,  madam,  certainly  not.  Her
manners  are  too  perfectly  proper  to  be  striking.  Striking  manners
are  bad  manners,  you  know,  madam.     She  is  a  perfect  lady,  and


112  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

studiously  avoids   those    eccentricities    which  constitute    strikinj^
manners."

In  the  second  place,  action  should  he  expressive  and  appropriate.
We  cannot  express  so  much  by  action  as  by  langviage,  but  one
may  express  a  few  things  with  even  greater  force.  Indignantly  to
open  a  door  and  point  to  it  is  quite  as  emphatic  as  the  words,
*'  Leave  the  room  I "  To  refuse  the  hand  when  another  offers  his
own  is  a  very  marked  declaration  of  ill-will,  and  will  probably
create  a  more  enduring  bitterness  than  the  severest  words.  A
request  to  remain  silent  upon  a  certain  subject  could  be  well
conveyed  by  laying  the  finger  across  the  lips.  A  shake  of  the  head
indicates  disapprobation  in  a  very  marked  manner.  The  lifted  eye-
brows express  surprise  in  a  forcible  style ;  and  every  part  of  the
face  has  its  own  eloquence  of  pleasure  and  of  grief.  What  volumes
can  be  condensed  into  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  and  what  mournful
mischief  that  same  shrug  has  wrouglit  I  Since,  then,  gesture  and
posture  can  speak  powerfully,  we  must  take  care  to  let  them  speak
correctly.  It  will  never  do  to  imitate  the  famous  Grecian  who
cried,  "  O  heaven  I "  with  his  finger  pointing  to  the  earth ;  nor
to  describe  dying  weakness  by  thumping  upon  the  book-board.
Nervous  speakers  appear  to  fire  at  random  with  their  gestures,
and  you  may  see  them  wringing  their  hands  while  they  are
dilating  upon  the  joys  of  faith,  or  grasping  the  side  of  the
pulpit  convulsively  when  they  are  bidding  the  believer  liold  all
earthly  things  with  a  loose  hand.  Even  when  no  longer  timorous,
brethren  do  not  always  manage  their  gestures  so  as  to  make  them
run  parallel  with  their  words.  Men  may  be  seen  denouncing  with
descending  fist  the  very  persons  whom  they  are  endeavouring  to
comfort.  No  brother  among  you  would>  I  hope,  be  so  stupid  as  to
clasp  his  hands  while  saying — "  the  gospel  is  not  meant  to  be
confined  to  a  few.  Its  spirit  is  generous  and  expansive.  It
opens  its  arms  to  men  of  all  ranks  and  nations."  It  would  be  an
equal  solecism  if  you  were  to  spread  forth  your  arms  and  cry,
"Brethren,  concentrate  your  energies  1  Gather  them  up,  as  a
commander  gathers  his  troops  to  the  royal  standard  in  the  day  of
battle."  Now,  put  the  gestures  into  their  proper  places  and  see
how  diffusion  may  be  expressed  by  tlie  opened  arms,  and  con-
centrution  by  the  united  hands.

Action  and  tone  together  may  absolutely  contradict  the  mean-
ing of  the  words.  The  Abb6  Mullois  tells  us  of  a  malicious  wag
who  on  hearing  a  preacher  pronounce  those  terrible  words,  "Depart,
ye  cursed,"  in  tju*  bljuidcst   niauner,  turned  to  his  companion  and


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


113


said,  "  Come  here,  my  lad,  and  let  me  embrace  you ;  that  is  what
the  parson  has  just  expressed."  This  is  a  sad  business,  but  bv  no
means  an  uncommon  one.  What  force  may  tlie  language  of  Scri]>-
ture  lose  through  the  preacher's  ill-delivery !  Those  words  which
the  French  preacher  pronounced  in  so  ill  a  manner  are  very
terrible,  and  I  felt  them  to  be  so  when  a  short  while  ago  I  heard
them  hissed  forth  in  awful  earnest,  by  an  insane  person  who
thought  liimself  a  prophet  sent  to  cui'se  myself  and  my  congrega-
tion. "  Depart,  ye  cursed"  came  forth  from  his  lips  like  the  mut-
terings  of  thunder,  and  the  last  word  seemed  to  bite  into  the  very
soul,  as  with  flaming  eye  and  outstretched  hand  the  fanatic
flashed  it  upon  the  assembly.

Too  many  speakers  appear  to  have  taken  lessons  from  Bendigo,
or  some  other  professor  of  the  noble  art  of  self -defence,  for  they
hold  their  fists  as  if  they  were
ready  for  a  round.  It  is  not
pleasant  to  watch  brethren
preaching  the  gospel  of  peace
in  that  pugnacious  style  ;  yet
it  is  by  no  means  rare  to  hear
of  an  evangelist  preaching  a
free  Christ  with  a  clinched
fist.  It  is  amusincr  to  see  them
putting  themselves  into  an
attitude  and  saying,  *'  Come
unto  me,"  and  then,  with  a  re-
volution of  both  fists,  "  and  I
will  give  you — rest."  Better
not  suggest  such  ridiculous
ideas,  but  they  have  been  sug-
gested more  than  once  by  men
who  earnestly  desired  above  all
things  to  make  their  hearers
think  of  better  things.  Gentle-
men, I  am  not  at  all  surprised

at  your  laughing,  but  it  is  infinitely  better  that  you  should  have
a  hearty  laugh  at  these  absurdities  here  than  tJiat  your  people
should  laugh  at  you  in  the  future.  I  am  giving  you  no  imaginaiy
sketch,  but  one  which  I  have  seen  myself  and  fear  I  may  yet
see  again.  Those  awkward  hands,  if  once  brought  into  subjection,
become  our  best  allies.  We  can  talk  with  them  almost  as  well  as
with  our  tongues,  and  make  a  sort  of  silent  music  with  them  which

9


114  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

Avill  atkl  to  the  charm  of  our  words.  If  you  have  never  read  Sir
Charles  Bell  on  *'  The  Hand,"  be  sure  to  do  so,  and  note  well  the
following  passage  : — "  We  must  not  omit  to  speak  of  the  hand  as
an  instrument  of  expression.  Formal  dissertations  have  been
written  on  this.  But  were  we  constrained  to  seek  authorities,
we  might  take  the  great  painters  in  evidence,  since  by  the
position  of  the  hands,  in  conformity  wuth  the  figure,  they  have
expressed  every  sentiment.  Who,  for  example,  can  deny  the
eloquence  of  the  hands  in  the  Magdalens  of  Guido ;  their  ex-
pression in  the  cartoons  of  Raphael,  or  in  the  last  Supper,
by  Leonardo  da  Vinci  ?  We  see  there  expressed  ail  that  Quinc-
tilian  says  the  hand  is  capable  of  expressing.  '  For  other  parts  of
the  body,'  says  he,  '  assist  the  speaker,  but  these,  I  may  say,  speak
themselves.  By  them  we  ask,  we  promise,  we  invoke,  we  dismiss,
we  threaten,  we  intreat,  we  deprecate,  we  express  fear,  joy,  grief,
our  doubts,  our  assent,  our  penitence :  we  show  moderation,  or
profusion  ;  we  mark  number  and  time.'  "

The  face,  and  especially  the  eyes,  will  play  a  very  important
part  in  all  appropriate  action.  It  is  very  unfortunate  when  minis-
ters cannot  look  at  their  people.  It  is  singular  to  hear  them
pleading  with  persons  whom  they  do  not  see.  They  are  entreat-
ing them  to  look  to  Jesus  upon  the  cross !  You  wonder  where
the  sinners  are.  The  preacher's  eyes  are  turned  upon  his
book,  or  up  to  the  ceiling,  or  into  empty  space.  It  seems  to  me
that  you  must  fix  your  eyes  upon  the  people  when  you  come  to
exhortation.  There  are  parts  of  a  sermon  in  which  the  sublimity
of  the  doctrine  may  call  for  the  uplifted  gaze,  and  there  are
other  portions  which  may  allow  the  eyes  to  wander  as  you  will ;
but  when  pleading  time  has  come,  it  will  be  inappropriate  to  look
anywhere  but  to  the  persons  addressed.  Brethren  who  never  do
this  at  all  lose  a  great  power.  When  Dr.  Wayland  was  ill,  he
wrote,  '*  Whether  I  am  to  recover  my  former  health  I  know  not.
If,  however,  I  should  be  permitted  to  preach  again,  I  will  certainly
do  what  is  in  my  power  to  learn  to  preach  directly  to  men,  looking
t/iem  in  their  faces,  and  not  looking  at  the  paper  on  the  desk."

The  man  who  would  be  perfect  in  posture  and  gesture  must
regulate  his  whole  frame,  for  in  one  case  a  man's  most  suitable
action  will  be  that  of  his  head,  and  in  another  tliat  of  his  hands,
and  in  a  third  that  of  his  trunk  alone.  Quinclilian  says — "The
«ide»  Hhould  bear  their  part  in  the  gesture.  The  motion,  also,  of
the  whole  body  contributes  much  to  the  effect  in  delivery :  so  much
so  that  Cicero  i»  of  opinion  that  more  can  be  done  by  its  gesture


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  115

than  even  by  the  hands  themselves.  Thus  he  says  in  his  Avork  De
Oratore  : — '  There  will  be  no  affected  motions  of  the  fingers,  no
fall  of  the  fingers  to  suit  the  measured  cadence  of  the  language ;
but  he  will  produce  gestures  by  the  movements  of  his  whole  body
and  by  the  manly  inflexion  of  his  side.' "

I  might  multiply  illustrations  of  what  I  mean  by  appropriate
action,  but  these  must  suffice.  Let  the  gesture  tally  with  the
words,  and  be  a  sort  of  running  commentary  and  practical  exegesis
upon  what  you  are  saying.  Here  I  must  make  a  pause,  hoping
to  continue  the  subject  in  my  next  lecture.  But  so  conscious  am
I  that  many  may  think  my  subject  so  secondary  as  to  be  of  no
importance  whatever,  that  I  close  by  giving  an  instance  of  the
careful  manner  in  which  gix'at  painters  take  heed  to  minute
details,  only  drawing  this  inference,  that  if  they  are  thus  atten-
tive to  little  things,  much  more  ought  we  to  be.  Vigneul  Mar-
ville  says  : — "  When  I  was  at  Rome  I  frequently  saw  Claude,  who
was  then  patronised  by  the  most  eminent  jiersons  in  that  city ;  I
frequently  met  him  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber,  or  wandering  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Konie,  amidst  the  venerable  remains  of
antiquity.  He  was  then  an  old  man,  yet  I  have  seen  him  return-
ing from  his  walk  with  his  handkerchief  filled  with  mosses,  flowers,
stones,  etc.,  that  he  might  consider  them  at  home  with  that  inde-
fatigable attention  which  rendered  him  so  exact  a  copier  of  nature.
I  asked  him  one  day  by  what  means  he  arrived  at  such  an  excel-
lency of  character  among  painters,  even  in  Italy.  '  I  spare  no
pains  whatever,  even  in  the  minutest  trifles,'  was  the  modest  reply
of  this  venerable  genius."


LECTURE  VII.

Mmt,  ^dioxif  (^t^tmt,  tic.

[second  lecture.]


This  lecture  begins  at  thirdly.  If  you  remember,  we  have  said
that  gesture  should  not  be  excessive,  and  secondly  that  it  should
be  appropriate :  now  comes  the  third  canon,  action  and  gesture
should  never  be  grotesque.  This  is  plain  enough,  and  I  shall  not
enforce  it  except  by  giving  specimens  of  the  grotesque,  that  you
may  not  only  avoid  the  identical  instances,  but  all  of  a  similar
character.  In  all  ages  absurd  gestures  would  appear  to  have  been
very  numerous,  for  in  an  old  author  I  find  a  long  list  of  oddities,
some  of  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  have  taken  their  leave  of  this
world,  while  others  are  described  in  language  so  forcible  that  it
probably  caricatures  the  actual  facts.  This  writer  says :  "  Some
hold  their  heads  immovable,  and  turned  to  one  side,  as  if  they
were  made  of  horn ;  others  stare  with  their  eyes  as  horribly  as  if
they  intended  to  frighten  every  one ;  some  are  continually  twisting
their  mouths  and  working  their  chins  while  they  are  speaking,  as  if,
all  the  time,  they  were  cracking  nuts;  some  like  the  apostate  Julian,
breathe  insult,  and  express  contempt  and  impudence  in  their  coun-
tenances. Others,  as  if  they  personated  the  fictitious  heroes  in
tragedy,  gape  enormously,  and  extend  their  jaws  as  widely  as  if
they  were  going  to  swallow  up  everybody :  above  all,  when  they
bellow  with  fury,  they  scatter  their  foam  about,  and  threaten  with
contracted  brow,  and  eyes  like  Saturn.  7'/ic'«<',  as  if  they  were
playing  some  game,  are  continually  making  motions  with  their
lingers,  and,  by  the  extraordinary  working  of  their  hands,  en-
deavour to  form  in  the  air,  I  may  almost  say,  all  the  figures  of
the  mathematicians :  those^  on  the  contrary,  have  hands  so  pon-
derous, and  so  fastened  down  by  terror,  that  they  could  more
ettsily  move  beams  of  timber.     Many  labour  so  with  their  elbows,


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  117

tliat  it  is  evident,  either  that  they  had  been  formerly  shoemakers
tliemselves,  or  had  lived  in  no  other  society  than  that  of  cobblers.
Some  are  so  unsteady  in  the  motions  of  their  bodies,  that  they
seem  to  be  speaking  out  of  a  •  cock-boat ;  others  again  are  so  un-
wieldy and  uncouth  in  their  motions,  that  you  would  think  them
to  be  sacks  of  tow  painted  to  look  like  men.  I  have  seen  some  who
jumped  on  the  platform  and  capered  nearly  in  measure ;  men  that
exhibited  the  fuller's  dance,  and,  as  the  old  poet  says,  expressed
their  wit  with  their  feet.  But  who  in  a  short  comj>ass  is  able  to
enumerate  all  the  faults  of  gesture,  and  all  the  absurdities  of  bad
delivery  I"  This  catalogue  might  surely  content  the  most  vo-
racious collector  for  the  chamber  of  horrors,  but  it  does  not  include
the  half  of  what  may  be  seen  in  our  own  times  by  anyone  who  is
able  to  ramble  from  one  assembly  to  another.  As  children  seem
never  to  have  exhausted  their  mischievous  tricks,  so  sj^eakers  ap-
pear never  to  be  at  the  end  of  their  singular  gestures.  Even  the
best  fall  into  them  occasionally.

The  first  species  of  grotesque  action  may  be  named  the  stiff ;  and
this  is  very  common.  Men  who  exhibit  this  horror  appear  to  have
no  bend  in  their  bodies  and  to  be  rigid  about  the  joints.  The
arms  and  legs  are  moved  as  if  they  were  upon  iron  hinges,  and
were  made  of  exceedingly  hard  metal,  A  wooden  anatomical  doll,
such  as  artists  use,  might  well  represent  their  limbs  so  sti'aight  and
stiff,  but  it  would  fail  to  show  the  jerks  with  which  those  limbs
are  thrown  up  and  down.  There  is  nothing  round  in  the  action  of
these  brethren;  everything  is  angular,  sharp,  mechanical.  If  I
were  to  set  forth  what  I  mean  by  putting  myself  into  their  rect-
angular attitudes  I  might  be  supposed  to  caricature  more  than
one  exceedingly  able  northern  divine,  and  having  the  fear  of  this
before  my  eyes,  and,  moreover,  holding  these  brethren  in  supreme
respect,  I  dare  not  go  into  very  minute  particulars.  Yet  it  is  sup-
jwsable  that  these  good  men  are  themselves  aware  that  their  legs
should  not  be  set  down  as  if  they  belonged  to  a  linen-horse,  or
a  huge  pair  of  tongs,  and  that  their  arms  should  not  be  absolutely
rigid  like  pokers.  Oil  for  the  joints  has  been  suggested,  but  there
appears  to  be  a  want  of  oil  in  the  limbs  themselves,  which  move
up  and  down  as  if  they  belonged  to  a  machine  rather  than  to  a
living  organism.  Surely  any  sort  of  physical  exercise  might  help
to  cure  this  mischief,  which  in  some  living  preachers  almost
amounts  to  a  deformity.  On  the  platform  of  Exeter  Hall,  gentle-
men afflicted  with  unnatural  stiffness  not  only  furnish  matter  for
the  skilful  caricatui-ist,  but  unfortunately  call  off  the  attention  of


118


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


their  auditors  from  their  admirable  speeches  by  their  execrable
action.  On  a  certain  occasion  we  heard  five  or  six  remarks  upon
tlie  awkwardness  of  the  doctor's  posturing,  and  only  one  or  two
encomiums  upon  his  excellent  speech.  "  People  should  not  notice
such  trifles,*'  remarks  our  friend  Philo ;  but  people  do  notice  such
trifles  whether  they  ought  to  do  so  or  not,  and  therefore  it  is  well
not  to  display  them.  It  is  probable  that  the  whole  of  this  lecture
will  be  regarded  by  some  very  excellent  people  as  beneath  their
notice,  and  savouring  of  questionable  humour,  but  that  I  cannot
help ;  for  although  I  do  not  set  so  much  value  upon  action  as
Demosthenes  did  when  he  made  it  the  first,  the  second,  and  the
third  point  in  oratory,  yet  it  is  certain  that  much  good  speech  is
bereft  of  power  through  the  awkward  deportment  of  the  speaker ;
and  therefore  if  I  may  in  any  measure  redress  the  evil  I  will
cheerfully  bear  the  criticism  of  my  more  sombre  brethren.  I  am
deeply  in  earnest,  however  playful  my  remarks  may  seem  to  be.
These  follies  may  be  best  shot  at  by  the  light  arrows  of  ridicule,
and  therefore  I  employ  them,  not  being  of  the  same  mind  as  those

"  Who  tliink  all  virtue  lies  in  gravity,
And  sjniles  are  symptoms  of  depravity."

The  second  form  of  the  grotesque  is  not  unlike  the  first,  and
may  be  best  distinguished  as  the  regular  and  mechanical.  Men  in
this  case  move  as  if  they  were  not  living  beings  possessed  of  will
and  intellect,  but  as  if  they  were  automatons  formed  to  go  through
prescribed  movements  at  precise  intervals.  At  the  back  of  the
Tabernacle  a  cottager  has  placed  over  his  house
a  kind  of  vane,  in  the  form  of  a  little  soldier,
which  lifts  first  one  arm  and  then  the  other
with  rather  an  important  air.  It  has  made  me
smile  many  a  time   by   irresistibly  reminding

me  of ,  who  alternately  jerks  each  arm,  or

if  he  allows  one  arm  to  lie  still,  chops  the  other
op  and  down  as  jwrsistently  as  if  he  were
moved  by  wind  or  by  clock-work.  Up  and
down,  up  and  down  the  hand  goes,  turning
neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left,  everj-  otlu
movement  being  utterly  abjured,  except  this
one  monotonous  ascent  and  descxMit.  It  mat-
ters little  how  unobjectionable  a  movement  may
be  ill  itself,  it  will  become  intolenible  if  it  bo
oiitinued  without  variation.     Ludovicus  Cresollius,  of  liriltuny.


rOSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  119

(1620)  in  his  treatise  upon  the  action  and  pronunciation  of  an
orator,  speaks  somewhat  strongly  of  a  learned  and  polished
Parisian  preacher,  who  had  aroused  his  ire  by  the  wearisome  mo-
notony of  his  action.  "  When  he  turned  himself  to  the  left  he
spoke  a  few  words  accompanied  by  a  moderate  gesture  of  the
hand,  then  bending  to  the  right  he  acted  the  same  part  over  again  ;
then  back  again  to  the  left,  and  presently  to  the  right  again :
almost  at  an  equal  and  measured  interval  of  time  he  worked
himself  up  to  his  usual  gesture,  and  went  through  his  one  kind  of
movement.  You  could  compare  him  only  to  the  blindfolded
Babylonian  oxen  going  forward  and  turning  back  by  the  same
path.  I  was  so  disgusted  that  I  shut  my  eyes,  but  even  so  I
could  not  get  over  the  disagreeable  impression  of  the  speaker  8
maimer."

The  prevailing  House  of  Commons'  style,  so  far  as  I  have  seen
it  in  public  meetings,  consists  of  an  up  and  down  movement  of
the  back  and  the  hand  ;  one  seems  to  see  the  M.P.  bowing  to  Mr.
Speaker  and  the  honourable  house  much  as  a  waiter  will  do  at
an  eating-house  when  he  is  receiving  an  order  for  an  elaborate
dinner.  *'  Yes  sir,"  "  Yes  sir,"  •'  Yes  sir,"  with  a  jerk  between
each  exclamation.  The  amusing  rhyme  with  its  short  lines  brings
many  a  parliamentary  speaker  before  my  mind's  eye  :—

"  Mr.  TatUt
Yuu  utubt  not  pat
Your  ur<|;uineni8  Hat
On  t<i  the  crown  of  another  man'd  hat."

This  is  near  akin  to  what  has  been  accurately  described  as  the
pumiJ-handle  style.  This  is  to  be  witnessed  very  frequently,  and
consists  of  a  long  series  of  jerkings  of  the  arm,  meant,  perhaps,
to  increase  emphasis,  but  really  doing  nothing  whatever.  Speakers
of  this  sort  remind  us  of  Moore's  conundrum,  "  Why  is  a  pump
like  Lord  Castlereaiih  ?  "

"  Because  it  is  a  slender  thing  of  wood.

That  up  and  down  its  awkward  ann  doth  sway.
And  coolly  spout,  and  spout,  and  s|>out  away
In  one  weak,  washy,  everlasting  tloud.  *

Occasionally  one  meets  with  a  saw-like  action,  in  which  the  ann
seems  lengthened  and  contracted  alternately.  This  motion  is  carried
out  to  perfection  when  the  orator  leans  over  the  rail,  or  over  the
front  of  the  pulpit,  and  cuts  downward  at  the  people,  like  the
top  sawyer  operating  upon  a  piece  of  timber.     One  wonders  how


120


POSIURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


many  planks  a  man  would  cut  in  the  time  if  he  were  really
working  upon  wood  instead  of  sawing  the  air.  We  are  all  grateful
for  converted  sawyers,  but  we  trust  they  will  feel  at  liberty  to
leave  their  saws  behind  them.

Much  the  same  may  be  said  for  the  numerous  hammer-men  who
are  at  work  among  us,  who  pound  and  smite  at  a  great  rate,  to  the
ruining  of  Bibles  and  the  dusting  of  pulpit  cushions.  The  pre-
decessors of  these  gentlemen  were  celebrated  by  Hudibras  in  the
oft-quoted  lines, —

"  And  pulpit  drum  ecclesiastic.

Was  beat  with  fist  instead  of  a  stick."

Their  one  and  only  action  is  to  hammer,  hammer,  hammer,  without
sense  or  reason,  whether  the  theme  be  pleasing  or  pathetic.     They

preach  with  demonstration  and
power,  but  evermore  the  manifes-
tation is  the  same.  We  dare  not
say  that  they  smite  with  the  fist
of  wickedness,  but  certainly  they
do  smite,  and  that  most  vigor-
ously. They  set  forth  the  sweet
influences  of  the  Pleiades  and
the  gentle  wooings  of  love  with
blows  of  the  fist ;  and  they  en-
deavour to  make  you  feel  the
beauty  and  the  tenderness  of
their  theme  by  strokes  from  their
never-ceasing  hammer.

Some  of  them  are  dull  enough
in  all  conscience,  and  do  not  even
hammer  with  a  hearty  good  will,
and  then  the  business  becomes
intolerable.  One  likes  to  liear  a  good  noise,  and  see  a  man  go  in
for  hammering  vehemently,  if  the  thing  must  be  done  at  all ;  but
the  gentleman  we  have  in  our  mind  seldom  or  never  warms  to  his
work,  and  merely  smites  because  it  is  the  way  of  hnn.

"'  You  can  hear  him  swinj;  his  heavy  sledge,
With  nieaHured  beat  aud  slow."

If  a  man  must  strike,  let  him  do  it  in  earnest;  but  there  is  no
need  for  perpetual  pounding.  Tliere  are  better  ways  of  becoming
striking  prcaclierH  tlum  by  imitating  the  divine  of  whom  his  pre-
centor said  that  he  had  dashed  tlu;  inwards  out  of  one  Bible  and


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  121

was  far  gone  with  another.  In  certain  old  Latin  MSS.  sermons,
with  notes  in  the  margin,  the  preacher  is  recommended  to  shake
the  crucifix,  and  to  hammer  u|)on  the  pulpit  like  Satan  himself!  By
this  means  he  was  to  collect  his  thoughts ;  but  one  would  not  give
much  for  thoughts  thus  collected.  Have  any  of  our  friends  seen
these  manuscripts  and  fallen  in  love  with  the  directions  I  It
would  seem  so.

Now,  the  jerking,  sawing,  pumping,  and  pounding  might  all  1)C
endurable  and  even  appropriate  if  they  were  blended ;  but  the  per-
petual iteration  of  any  one  becomes  wearisome  and  unmeaning.
The  figures  of  Mandarins  in  a  tea-shop,  continually  nodding  their
heads,  and  the  ladies  in  wax  which  revolve  with  uniform  motions
in  the  hair-dresser's  window,  are  not  fit  models  for  men  who  have
before  them  the  earnest  work  of  winning  men  to  grace  and  virtue.
You  ought  to  be  so  true,  so  real,  so  deeply  in  earnest,  that  mere
mechanical  movements  will  be  impissible  to  you,  and  everything
about  you  will  betoken  life,  energy,  concentrated  faculty,  and
intense  zeal.

Another  method  of  the  grotesque  may  be  correctly  called  the
lahonom.  Certain  brethren  will  never  fail  in  their  ministry  from
want  of  physical  exertion  :  when  they  mount  the  rostrum  they
mean  hard  work,  and  before  long  they  puff  and  blow  at  it  as  if
they  were  labourers  working  by  the  piece.  They  enter  ujwn  a  sermon
with  the  resolve  to  storm  their  way  through  it,  and  carr>'  all  before
them:  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence  with  them  in
another  sense  besides  that  which  is  intended  in  Scripture.  "  How  is
your  new  minister  getting  out"  said  an  en<|uiring  friend  to  a  rustic
hearer.  *'  Oh,"  said  the  man,  "  he's  sure  to  get  on,  for  he  drives  at
sin  5is  if  he  were  knocking  down  an  ox."  An  excellent  thing  to
do  in  spirit,  but  not  to  be  performed  literally.  When  I  have  occa-
sionally heard  of  a  wild  brother  taking  off  his  collar  and  craA'at,
upt)n  a  very  hot  day,  and  even  of  his  going  so  far  as  to  divest  himself
of  his  coat,  I  have  thought  that  he  was  only  putting  himself  into  a
condition  which  the  physical-force  orator  might  desire,  for  he
evidently  regards  a  sermon  as  a  battle  or  a  wrestling  match.  An
Irish  thunderer  of  my  acquaintance  broke  a  chair  during  a  decla-
mation against  Popery,  and  I  trembled  for  the  table  also.  A
distinguished  actor,  who  became  a  convert  and  a  preacher
late  in  life,  would  repeatedly  strike  the  table  or  floor  with  his  staff
when  he  grew  warm  in  a  speech.  He  has  made  me  wish  to  close
my  ears  when  the  smart  raps  of  his  cane  have  succeeded  each
other  with  great  rapidity  and   growing   force.     What   was  the


122  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

])eculiar  use  of  the  noise  I  could  not  tell,  for  we  were  all  awake,
and  his  voice  was  sufficiently  powerful.  One  did  not  mind  it,  how-
ever, from  the  grand  old  man,  for  it  suited  the  "  fine  frenzy  "  of
his  whole-hearted  enthusiasm,  but  the  noise  was  not  so  desirable
as  to  be  largely  called  for  from  any  of  us.

Laborious  action  is  frequently  a  relic  of  the  preacher's  trade  in
former  days  :  as  an  old  hunter  cannot  quite  forget  the  hounds,  so
the  good  man  cannot  shake  off  the  habits  of  the  shop.  One  brother
who  has  been  a  wheelwright  always  preaches  as  if  he  were  making
wheels.  If  you  undei'stand  the  art  of  wheelwrighting,  you  can
see  most  of  the  processes  illustrated  during  one  of  his  liveliest  dis-
courses. You  can  detect  the  engineer  in  another  friend,  the  cooper
in  a  third,  and  the  grocer  with  his  scales  in  a  fourth.  A  brother
who  has  been  a  butcher  is  pretty  sure  to  show  us  how  to  knock
down  a  bullock  when  he  gets  at  all  argumentative.  As  I  have
watched  the  discourse  proceed  from  strength  to  strength,  and  the
preacher  has  warmed  to  his  work,  I  have  thought  to  myself,  "  Here
comes  the  pole-axe,  there  goes  the  fat  ox,  down  falls  the  prize  bul-
lock." Now,  these  reminiscences  of  former  occupations  are  never
ver\'  blameworthy,  and  are  at  all  times  less  obnoxious  than  the
altogether  inexcusable  awkwardnesses  of  gentlemen  who  from  their
youth  up  have  dwelt  in  the  halls  of  learning.  These  will  sometimes
labour  quite  as  much,  but  with  far  less  likeness  to  useful  occupa-
tions ;  they  beat  the  air  and  work  hard  at  doing  nothing.  Gentle-
men from  the  universities  are  frequently  more  hideous  in  their
action  than  commonplace  people ;  perhaps  their  education  may
have  deprived  them  of  confidence,  and  made  them  all  the  more
fidgety  and  awkward.

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  some  speakers  fancy  that  they  are
beating  carpets,  or  chopping  sticks,  or  mincing  sausage-meat,  or
})atting  butter,  or  poking  their  fingers  into  people's  eyes.  Oli,
could  they  see  themselves  as  others  see  them,  they  might  cease
thus  to  perform  before  the  public,  and  save  their  bodily  exercise
for  other  occasions.  After  all,  I  prefer  the  vigorous,  laborious  dis-
plays to  the  more  easy  and  even  stately  airs  of  certain  self-possessed
talkera.  One  rubs  his  hands  together  with  abounding  self-
satisfaction,

"  Wnsliinjj  liis  hnnds  with  invisible  sonp
III  iin{)urci'{)tible  wutur,"

and  meanwhile  utters  the  veriest  platitudes  with  the  air  of  a  man
who  is  outdoing  llobcrt  Hall  or  (^halnu-rs.  An(>th(*r,-.ansi>s  and  looks
round  wilji  a  dignilii-d  air,  as  if  In-  had  {•ominuiiicattMJ   iiu-stiniablo


POSTUHE,    ACTION,    GESTUICE,    ETC.  12o

iiiformation  to  a  highly  favoured  body  of  individuals  who  might
reasonably  be  expected  to  rise  in  a  state  of  intense  excitement
and  exj)ress  their  overwhelming  sense  of  obligation.  Nothing
lias  been  said  beyond  the  merest  schoolboy  talk  ;  but  the  air
of  dignity,  the  attitude  of  authority,  the  very  tone  of  the  man,
all  show  how  thoroughly  satisfied  he  is.  This  is  not  laborious
preaching,  but  it  occurs  to  me  to  mention  it  because  it  is  the  very
reverse,  and  is  so  much  more  to  be  condemned.  A  few  simpletons
are,  no  doubt,  imposed  u[K)n,  and  fancy  that  a  man  must  be  saying
something  great  when  he  delivers  himself  in  a  pompous  manner ;
but  sensible  persons  are  at  first  amused  and  afterwards  disgusted
with  the  big  manner,  "  a  la  grand  seigneur^  One  of  the  great
advantages  of  our  College  training  is  the  certainty  that  an  inflated
mannerism  is  sure  to  be  abated  by  the  amiable  eagerness  with
which  all  our  students  deliiiht  in  rescuing  a  brother  from  this
peril.  Many  wind-bags  have  collapsed  in  this  room  beneath  your
tender  handling,  never,  I  hojie,  to  be  puffed  out  to  their  fonuer
dimensions.  There  are  some  in  the  ministry  of  all  the  churches
who  would  be  marvellously  benefited  by  a  little  of  the  very  candid
if  not  savage  criticisms  which  have  been  endured  by  budding
orators  at  your  hands.  I  would  that  every  minister  who  has
missed  such  an  instructive  martyrdom  could  find  a  friend  suflS-
ciently  honest  to  point  out  to  him  any  oddities  of  manner  into
which  he  may  insensibly  have  fallen.

But  here  we  must  not  overlook  another  laborious  orator  wlio  is
in  our  mind's  eye.  We  will  name  him  the  perpetual  motion
preacher,  who  is  all  action,  and  lifts  his  finger,  or  waves  his  hand,
or  strikes  his  palm  at  every  word.  He  is  never  at  rest  for  a
moment.  So  eager  is  he  to  be  emphatic  that  he  effectually  defeats
his  object,  for  where  every  word  is  emphasized  by  a  gesture  nothing
whatever  is  emphatic.  This  brother  takes  off  men's  minds  from
his  words  to  his  movements:  the  eye  actually  carries  the  thoughts
away  from  the  ear,  and  so  a  second  time  the  preacher's  end  is
missed.  This  continual  motion  greatly  agitates  some  hearers,  and
gives  them  the  fidgets,  and  no  wonder,  for  who  can  endure  to  see
such  incessant  patting,  and  jwinting,  and  waving?  In  action,  as
well  as  everything  else,  "  let  your  mcMleration  be  known  unto  all
men."

Thus  I  have  mentioned  three  species  of  the  grotesque — the
stiff,  the  mechanical,  and  the  laborious — and  I  have  also  glanced
at  the  lazily  dignified.  I  will  close  the  list  by  mentioning  two
othei-s.    There  is  the  martial^  which  also  surtk-icntly  borders  on  the


124


POSTURE,    ACTION,   GESTURE,    ETC.


grotesque  to  be  placed  in  this  category.  Some  preachers  appear  to
be  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith  every  time  they  stand  before  a
congregation.  They  put  themselves  into  a  fencing  attitude,  and
either  stand  on  guard  against  an  imaginary  foe,  or  else  assault  the
unseen  adversary  with  stern  determination.  They  could  not  look
more  fierce  if  they  were  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  nor
seem  more  satisfied  at  the  end  of  each  division  of  discourse  if  they
had  fought  a  series  of  Waterloos.  They  turn  their  heads  on  one
side  with  a  triumphant  air,  as  if  about  to  say — "  I  have  routed
that  enemy,  and  we  shall  hear  no  more  of  /iim."

The  last  singularity  of  action  which  I  shall  place  under  this
head  is  the  ill-timed.  In  this  case  the  hands  do  not  keep  time  with
the  lips.  The  good  brother  is  a  little  behindhand  with  his  action,
and  therefore  the  whole  operation  is  out  of  order.  You  cannot  at
first  make  the  man  out  at  all :  he  appears  to  chop  and  thump  with-
'out  rhjTiie  or  reason,  but  at  last  you  perceive  that  his  present
action  is  quite  appropriate  to  what  he  said  a  few  seconds  before.
The  effect  is  strange  to  the  last  degree.  It  puzzles  those  who  do
not  possess  the  key  to  it,  and  when  fully  understood  it  loses  none
of  its  oddness.

Besides  these  oddities,  there  is  a  class  of  action  which  must,  to

use  the  mildest  term,  be
described  as  altogether  ugly.
For  these  a  platform  is
"  generally  necessary,"  for  a
man  cannot  make  himself  so
thoroughly  ridiculous  Avhen
concealed  in  a  pulpit.  To
grasp  a  rail,  and  to  drop
down  lower  and  lower  till
you  almost  touch  the  ground
is  supremely  absurd.  It  may
be  a  proper  position  as  a
])relude  to  an  agile  gym-
nastic feat,  but  as  an  accom-
paniment to  eloquence  it  is
monstrous;  yet  have  I  seen  it  more  than  once.  I  have  found  it
diflficrult  to  convey  to  my  artist  the  extraordinary  position,  but  the
woodl)lock  may  help  to  show  what  is  meant,  and  also  to  render
the  attitude  obsolete.  One  or  two  bretliren  have  disported  thom-
selvea  upon  my  platform  in  this  queer  manner,  and  they  are  quite
welcome  to  do  tlie  same  again,  if  upon  seeing  themselves  thus


POSTURE,    ACTIOX,    GESTURE,    ETC.


125


roughly  sketched  they  consider  the  posture  to  be  commanding  and
imj)ressive.  It  would  be  far  better  for  such  remarkable  j)erformers
if  it  were  reported  of  them  as  of  that  great  Wesleyan,  Richard
Watson :  "  He  stood  perfectly  erect,  and  nearly  all  the  action  that
he  used  was  a  slight  motion  of  the  right  hand,  with  occasionally
a  significant  shake  of  the  head."

The  habit  of  shrugging  the  shoulders  has  been  allowed  to
tyrannise  over  some  preachers.  A  number  of  men  are  round-
shouldered  by  nature,  and  many  more  seem  determined  to  apj)car
so,  for  when  they  have  anything  weighty  to  deliver  they  back
themselves  up  by  elevating  their  backs.  An  excellent  pi"eacher
at  Bristol,  lately  deceased,  would  hunch  first  one  shoulder  and
then  another  as  his  great  thoughts  struggled  forth,  and  when  they
obtained  utterance  he  looked  like  a  hunchback  till  the  effort  was

over.  What  a  pity  that  such
a  habit  had  become  inveterate!
How  desirable  to  avoid  its  fonna-
tion!  QuinctiHan  says:  "Some
people  raise  up  their  shoulders  in
speaking,  but  this  is  a  fault  in
gesture.  Demosthenes,  in  order
to  cure  himself  of  it,  used  to
stand  in  a  narrow  pulpit,  and
practise  speaking  with  a  spear
hanginji  over  his  shoulder,  in  such
a  manner  that  if  in  the  heat
of  delivery  he  failed  to  avoid  this
fault,  he  would  be  corrected  by
hurting  himself  against  the  point."
This  is  a  sharp  remedy,  but  the
gain  would  be  worth  an  occasional
wound  if  men  who  distort  the
human  forai  could  thus  be  cured
of  the  fault.

At  a  public  meeting  upon  one  occasion  a  gentleman  who  ap-
peared to  be  very  much  at  home  and  to  speak  with  a  great  deal
of  familiar  superiority,  placed  his  hands  behind  him  under  his
coat  tails,  and  thus  produced  a  very  singular  figure,  especially
to  those  who  took  a  side  view  from  the  platform.  As  the
speaker  became  more  animated,  he  moved  his  tails  with  greater
frequency,  reminding  the  observer  of  a  water-wagtail.  It
must   be   seen    to   be   appreciateil,    but   one    exhibition    will    be


126


rOSTUKE.    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


enough  to  convince  any  sensible  man  that  however  graceful  a
dress  coat  may  be,  it  by  no  means  ministers  to  the  solem-
nity of  the  occasion  to  see  the  tails  of  that  garment  projecting
from  the  orator's  rear.  You  may  also  have  seen  at  meetings  the
gentleman  who  places  his  hands  on  his  hips,  and  either  looks  as  if
he  defied  all  the  world,  or  as  if  he  endured  considerable  pain.
This  position  savours  of  Billingsgate  and  its  fish-women  far  more

than  of  sacred  eloquence.  The
arms  "  a  hvmho"  I  think  they  call
it,  and  the  very  sound  of  the
word  suggests  the  ridiculous  ra-
ther than  the  sublime.  We  may
drop  into  it  for  the  moment  rightly
enough,  but  to  deliver  a  speech
in  that  posture  is  preposterous.
It  is  even  worse  to  stand  with
your  hands  in  your  trousers  like
the  people  one  sees  at  French
railway  stations,  who  probably
thrust  their  hands  into  their
pockets  because  there  is  nothing
else  there,  and  nature  abhors  a
vacuum.  For  a  finger  in  the
waistcoat  pocket  for  a  moment
!  ni         no   one  will  be   blamed,   but  to

thrust  the  hands  into  the  trou-
sers is  outrageous.  An  utter  contempt  for  audience  and  subject
must  have  been  felt  before  a  man  could  come  to  this.  Gentlemen,
because  you  are  gentlemen,  you  will  never  need  to  be  warned  of
this  practice,  for  yon  will  not  descend  to  it.  Once  in  a  while  before
a  suporfinely  genteel  and  affected  audience  a  man  may  be  tempted
to  shock  their  foolish  gentility  by  a  freedom  and  easiness  which  is
meant  to  be  the  protest  of  a  brusque  manliness ;  but  to  see  a  man
preach  the  gospel  with  his  hands  in  In's  pockets  does  not  remind
you  of  either  a  prophet  or  an  apostle.  There  are  brethren  who  do
this  ever  and  anon  who  can  afford  to  do  it  from  their  general
force  of  character :  these  are  the  very  men  who  should  do  nothing
of  the  kind,  because  their  example  is  powerful,  and  tluv  are  some-
what responsible  for  tlie  weaklings  who  copy  them.

Another  unseemly  style  is  nearly  allied  to  the  last,  though  it  is
not  quite  ho  objectionable.  It  may  be  .seen  at  ])ublic  ilinners  of  the
common  order,  where  white  waistcoats  need  a  little  extra  display,


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


127


and  at  gathciings  of  artizans  where  an  employer  has  given  his  men

a  treat,  and  is  responding  to  the  toast  of  "  the  firm."     Occasionally

it  is  exhibited  at  religious  meetings,  where  the  speaker  is  a  man  of

local    importance,

and  feels  that  he

is  monarch  of  all

he  sui*veys.  In  this

case    the    thumbs

are  inserted  in  the

arm-holes  of    the

waistcoat,  and  the

speaker       throws

back  his  coat  and

reveals   tiie  lower

part  of    the  vest.

I  have  called  this

the  penguin  style,

and   1  am  unable

to    find    a    better

comparison.     For  a  footman  or  a  coachman  at  a  soiree,  or  for  ft

member  of  the  United  Order  of  Queer  Fellows,  this  attitude  may

be  suitable  and  dignified,  and  a  venerable  sire  at  a  family  gathering

may  talk  to  his  boys  and  girls  in  that  position ;  but  for  a  public

speaker,  and  much  more  for  a  minister,  as  a  general  habit,  it  is

as  much  out  of  character  as  a  posture  can  be.

First  cousin  to  this  fashion  is  that  of  holding  on  to  the  coat  near
the  collar,  as  if  the  speaker  considered  it  necessary  to  hold  liimself
well  in  hand.  Some  grasp  finnly.  and  then  run  the  hands  up  and
down  as  if  they  meant  to  double  the  coat  in  a  new  place,  or  to
lengthen  the  collar.  They  appear  to  hang  upon  their  coat-fronts
like  a  man  clutching  at  two  ropes :  one  wonders  the  garment  does
not  split  at  the  back  of  the  neck.  This  practice  adds  nothing  to
the  force  or  perspicuity  of  a  speaker's  style,  and  its  probable  sig-
nification is,  "  1  am  quite  at  ease,  and  greatly  enjoy  hearing  my
own  voice."

As  it  would  be  well  to  stamp  out  as  many  uglinesses  as  possible,
I  shall  mention  even  those  which  are  somewhat  rare.  1  remem-
ber an  able  minister  who  was  accustomed  to  look  into  the  palm  of
his  left  hand  while  with  his  right  he  appeared  to  pick  out  his  ideas
therefrom.  Divisions,  illustrations,  and  telling  points  all  seemed
to  be  growing  in  his  palm  like  so  many  flowers;  and  these  he  seemed
carefully  to  take  up  by  tlie  roots  one  by  one  and  exhibit  to  the


128


POSTURE,    ACTIOX,    GESTURE,    ETC.


people.     It  mattered  little,  for  his  thought  was  of  a  high  order  of
excellence,  but  yet  the  actiou  was  by  no  means  graceful.

A  preacher  of  no  mean  order  was  wont  to  lift  his  fist  to  his  brow
and  to  tap  his  forehead  gently,  as  if  he  must  needs  knock  at  the
mind's  door  to  wake  up  his  thoughts :  this  also  was  more  peculiar
than  forcible.

To  point  into  the  left  hand  with  the  first  finger  of  the  right  as
if  boring  small  holes  into  it,  or  to  use  the  aforesaid  pointed  finger
as  if  you  were  stabbing  the  air,  is  another  freak  of  action  which
has  its  amusing  side.

Passing  the  hand  over  the  brow  when  the  thought  is  deep,  and
the  exact  word  is  not  easy  to  find,  is  a  very  natural  motion,  but
scratching  the  head  is  by  no  means  equally  advisable,  though  per-
haps quite  as  natural.  I  have  seen  this  last  piece  of  action  carried
to  considerable  lengths,  but  I  was  never  enamoured  of  it.

I  cannot  avoid  mentioning  an  accidental  grotesqueness  which  is  ex-
ceedingly common.  Some  brethren
always  lay  down  the  law  with  an
outspread  hand,  which  they  con-
tinue to  move  up  and  down  with
the  rhythm  of  every  sentence.
Now  this  action  is  excellent  in  its
way  if  not  carried  on  too  mo-
notonously, but  unfortunately  it  is
liable  to  accidents.  If  the  earn-
est orator  continues  to  lift  his
liand  upward  and  downward  he
is  in  great  danger  of  frequently
presenting  the  aspect  which  my
artist  has  depicted.  The  action
verges  upon  the  symbolic,  but
uniiappily  the  symbol  has  been
somewhat  vulgarized,  and  has
been  described  as  "  putting  the
thumb  of  scorn  to  the  nose  of  con-
t<.'mpt."  Some  men  unwittingly  perpetrate  this  a  score  times
during  a  discourse.

You  have  laughed  at  these  portraits  which  I  have  drawn  for
your  edification — take  care  that  no  one  has  to  laugh  at  you
because  you  fall  into  these  or  similar  absurdities  of  action.

I  muMt  confess,  iiowever,  that  I  do  not  ihiiiU  so  badly  of  any
of  these,   or  all   of    tluin    put  together,  as   1  ilu  of  tin'  guperjine


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  129

style,  which  is  utterly  despicable  and  abominable.  It  is  worse
than  the  commonly  vulgar,  for  it  is  the  very  essence  of  \'ulgarity,
flavoured  with  affectations  and  airs  of  gentility.  Rowland  Hill
sketched  the  thing  which  I  condemn  in  his  portrait  of  Mr.
Taplash ;  of  course  it  was  a  more  correct  representation  as  to  detail
fifty  years  ago  than  it  is  now,  but  in  the  main  features  it  is  still
sufficiently  accurate :  "  The  orator,  when  he  first  made  his  appear-
ance, would  be  primmed  and  dressed  up  in  the  most  finished  style ;
not  a  hair  would  be  found  out  of  place  on  his  empty  pate,  on  which
the  barber  had  been  exercising  his  occupation  all  the  Sunday
morning,  and  powdered  till  as  white  as  the  driven  snow.  Thus
elegantly  decorated,  and  smelling  like  a  civet-cat,  through  an
abundance  of  perfumery,  he  would  scent  the  air  as  he  passed.
Then,  with  a  most  conceited  skip,  he  would  step  into  the  pulpit,
as  though  stepping  out  of  a  band-box ;  and  here  he  had  not  only
to  display  his  elegant  production,  but  his  elegant  self  also :  his
deUcate  white  hand,  exhibiting  his  diamond  ring,  while  his  richly-
scented  white  handkerchief  was  unfurled,  and  managed  with
remarkable  dexterity  and  art.  His  smelling-bottle  was  next
occasionally  presented  to  his  nose,  giving  different  opportunities
to  display  his  sparkling  ring.  Thus  having  adjusted  the  im-
portant business  of  the  handkerchief  and  the  smelhng-bottL",  he
had  next  to  take  out  his  glass,  that  he  might  reconnoitre  the  fair
part  of  his  auditory,  with  whom  he  might  have  been  gallanting
and  entertaining  them  with  his  cheap  talk  the  day  before :  and
these,  as  soon  as  he  could  catch  their  eye,  he  would  favour  with  a
simpering  look,  and  a  graceful  nod."

This  is  a  pungent  prose  version  of  Cowper's  review  of  certain
"  messengers  of  grace"  who  ''relapsed  into  themselves"  when  the
sermon  was  ended :  very  Httle  selves  they  must  have  been.

"Forth  comes  the  i>ocket  mirror.     First  we  stroke
An  eyebrow  ;  next  compose  a  straggling  lock  ;
Then  with  an  air,  most  gracefully  performed,
Fall  back  into  our  seat,  extend  an  arm
And  lay  it  at  itjs  ease  with  gentle  care,
With  handkerchief  in  hand  depending  low.
The  better  hand  more  busy  gives  the  nose
Its  bergamot,  or  aids  the  indebted  eye,
With  opera  glass,  to  watch  the  moving  acene,
Aud  recognize  the  slow  retiring  fair. —
Now  this  is  fulsome,  and  offends  me  more
Than  in  a  churchman  slovenly  neglect
And  rustic  coai'sencis  would."

10


130  POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

"  Rustic  coarseness "  is  quite  refreshing  after  one  has  been
wearied  with  inane  primness.  Well  did  Cicero  exhort  orators  to
adopt  their  gestures  rather  from  the  camp  or  the  wrestling  ring
than  from  the  dancers  with  their  effeminate  niceties.  Manliness
must  never  be  sacrificed  to  elegance.  Our  working  classes  will
never  be  brought  even  to  consider  the  truth  of  Christianity  by
teachers  who  are  starched  and  fine.  The  British  artizan  admires
manliness,  and  prefers  to  lend  his  ear  to  one  who  speaks  in  a
hearty  and  natural  style  :  indeed,  working  men  of  all  nations  are
more  likely  to  be  struck  by  a  brave  negligence  than  by  a  foppish
attention  to  personal  appearances.  The  story  told  by  the  Abbe
Mullois  is,  we  suspect,  only  one  of  a  numerous  class.*  "  A  con-
verted Parisian  operative,  a  man  of  a  wilful  but  frank  disposition,
full  of  energy  and  spirit,  who  had  often  spoken  with  great  success
at  the  clubs  composed  of  men  of  his  own  class,  was  asked  by
the  preacher  who  had  led  him  to  God,  to  inform  him  by  what
instrumentality  he,  who  had  once  been  so  far  estranged  from  reli-
gion, had  eventually  been  restored  to  the  faith.  "Your  doing
so,"  said  his  interrogator,  "  tnay  be  useful  to  me  in  my  efforts  to
reclaim  others."

"  I  would  rather  not,"  replied  he,  "  for  I  must  candidly  tell
you  that  you  do  not  figure  very  conspicuously  in  the  case."

"■  No  matter,"  said  the  other,  "  it  will  not  be  the  first  time  that
I  have  heard  the  same  remark."

"  Well,  if  you  must  hear  it,  I  can  tell  you  in  a  few  words  how
it  took  place.  A  good  woman  had  pestered  me  to  read  your
little  book — pardon  the  expression,  I  used  to  speak  in  that  style
in  those  days.  On  reading  a  few  pages,  I  was  so  impressed  that
I  felt  a  strong  desire  to  see  you.

"  I  was  told  that  you  preached  in  a  certain  church,  and  I  went
to  hear  you.  Your  sermon  had  some  further  effect  upon  me  ;  but,
to  speak  frankly,  very  little ;  comparatively,  indeed,  none  at  all.
What  did  much  more  for  me  was  your  open,  and  simple,  and  good-
natured  manner,  and,  above  all,  your  ill-combed  hair ;  for  I  have
always  detested  those  priests  whose  heads  remind  one  of  a  hairdresser's
assistant ;  and  I  said  to  myself,  '  That  man  forgets  himself  on
our  bclialf,  wo  ought,  therefore,  to  do  something  for  his  sake.*
Tiiereupon  I  determined  to  pay  you  a  visit,  and  you  bagged  me.
Su(rli  was  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  affair."

There  are  silly  young  ladies  who  are  in  raptures  with  a  dear

*  M.  L'AbM  laidore  MuUoia,  in  hta  work,  "  The  Olergjr  and  the  Pulpit  in  their
BaUtkHM  tn  th«  People."


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.  131

young  man  whose  main  thought  is  his  precious  person ;  these,  it
is  to  be  hoped,  are  becoming  fewer  every  day :  but  as  for  sensible
men,  and  especially  the  sturdy  workmen  of  our  great  cities,  they
utterly  abhor  foppery  in  a  minister.  Wherever  you  see  affectation
you  find  at  once  a  barrier  between  that  man  and  the  common-
sense  multitude.  Few  ears  are  delighted  with  the  voices  of
peacocks.

It  is  a  pity  that  we  cannot  persuade  all  ministers  to  be  men^  for
^t  is  hard  to  see  how  otherwise  they  will  be  truly  men  of  God.
It  is  equally  to  be  deplored  that  we  cannot  induce  preachers  to
speak  and  gesticulate  like  other  sensible  pers^ms,  for  it  is  impossible
that  they  should  grasp  the  masses  till  they  do.  All  foreign
matters  of  attitude,  tone,  or  dress  are  barricades  between  u«  and
the  people :  we  must  talk  like  men  if  we  would  win  men.  The
late  revival  of  millinery  in  the  Anglican  Church  is  for  this  reason,
as  well  as  for  far  gi*aver  ones,  a  st4ip  in  the  wrong  direction.  A
hundred  years  ago  the  dressiness  of  the  clergy  was  about  as  con-
spicuous as  it  is  now,  but  it  had  no  doctrinal  meaning,  and  was
mere  foppery,  if  Lloyd  is  to  be  believed  in  his  *'  Metrical  Plea  for
Curates."

He  abuses  rectors  very  heartily,  and  among  the  rest  describes
a  canonical  beau : —

"  Behold  Nugoso !  wriggling,  shufHIng  on,
A  mere  church-puppet,  an  automaton
In  orders :  note  its  tripping,  mincing  pace,
Religion  creams  and  mantles  in  its  face !
It's  all  religion  from  the  top  to  toe !
But  milliners  and  barbers  made  it  so.
It  wears  religion  in  the  modish  way,
It  brushes,  starches,  combs  it  every  day  :
Its  orthodoxy  lies  in  outward  things,
In  beavers,  cassocks,  gowns,  bands,  gloves,  and  rings :
It  shows  its  learning  by  its  doctor's  hood.
And  proves  its  goodness, — 'cause  its  clothes  are  good."

This  fondness  for  comely  array  led  to  a  stiff  propriety  in  the  pulpit :
they  called  it  "  dignity,"  and  prided  themselves  upon  it.  Propriety
and  decorum  were  their  chief  concern,  and  these  were  mingled
with  pomposity  or  foolish  simpering  according  to  the  creature's
peculiarities,  until  honest  men  grew  weary  of  their  hollow  per-
formances and  turned  away  from  such  stilted  ministrations.  The
preachers  were  too  much  concerned  to  be  proper  to  have  any  con-
cern to  be  useful.  The  gestures  which  would  have  made  their
words  a  little  more  intelligible  they  would  not  condescend  to  use.


132  POSTURE,   ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

for  what  cared  they  for  the  vulgar?  If  persons  of  taste  were
satisfied,  they  had  all  the  reward  they  desired,  and  meanwhile  the
multitudes  were  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge.  God  save  us
from  fine  deportment  and  genteel  propriety  if  these  are  to  keep
the  masses  in  alienation  from  the  public  worship  of  God.

In  our  own  day  this  sickening  affectation  is,  we  hope,  far
more  rare,  but  it  still  survives.  We  had  the  honour  of  knowing
a  minister  who  could  not  preach  without  his  black  kid  gloves,  and
when  he  upon  one  occasion  found  himself  in  a  certain  pulpit  with-
out them,  he  came  down  into  the  vestry  for  them.  Unfortunately
one  of  the  deacons  had  carried  into  his  pew,  not  his  own  hat,  as  he
intended,  but  the  preacher's,  and  while  this  discovery  was  being
made,  the  divine  was  in  terrible  trepidation,  exclaiming,  "  I  never
do  preach  without  gloves.  I  cannot  do  it.  I  cannot  go  into  the
pulpit  till  you  find  them."  I  wish  he  never  had  found  them,  for
he  was  more  fitted  to  stand  behind  a  draper's  counter  than  to
occupy  the  sacred  desk.  Slovenliness  of  any  sort  is  to  be  avoided
in  a  minister,  but  manliness  more  often  falls  into  this  fault  than
into  the  other  effeminate  vice ;  therefore  shun  most  heartily  this
worst  error.     Cowper  says,

"  In  my  soul  I  loathe  all  afTectation,"

and  so  does  every  sensible  man.  All  tricks  and  stage  effects  are  un-
bearable when  the  message  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  delivered.  Better
a  ragged  dress  and  rugged  speech,  with  artless,  honest  manner,  than
clerical  foppery.  Better  far  to  violate  every  canon  of  gracefulness
than  to  be  a  mere  performer,  a  consummate  actor,  a  player  upon
a  religious  stage.  The  caricaturist  of  twenty  years  ago  favoured
me  with  the  name  of  Brimstone,  and  placed  side  by  side  with  me  a
simpering  elocutionist  whom  he  named  Treacle,  I  was  thoroughly
satisfied  with  my  lot,  but  I  could  not  have  said  as  much  if  I  had
been  represented  by  the  companion  portrait.  Molasses  and  other
sugary  matters  are  sickening  to  me.  Jack-a-dandy  in  the  pulpit
makes  me  feel  as  Jehu  did  when  he  saw  Jezebel's  decorat^nl
head  and  painted  face,  and  cried  in  indignation,  "Fling  her
down."

It  would  gi'catly  trouble  me  if  any  of  my  remarks  upon  grotesque
action  should  lead  even  one  of  you  to  commence  posturing  and
performing;  this  would  be  to  fly  from  bad  to  worse.  Wo  men-
tioned that  Dr.  Ilainilton  took  lessons  from  a  master,  in  order  to
escape  from  his  infirmity,  but  the  result  was  manifestly  not  very
encouraging,  and  1  gravely  fear  that  more  faults  are  created  than


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.


133


cured  by  professional  teachers  :  perhaps  the  same  result  may  follow
from  my  own  amateur  attempt,  but  I  would  at  least  prevent  that
misfortune  as  far  as  possible  by  earnest  warnings.  Do  not  think
of  how  you  will  gesticulate  when  you  preach,  but  learn  the  art  of
doing  the  right  thing  without  giving  it  any  thought  at  all.

Our  last  rule  is  one  which  sums  up  all  the  others ;  be  natural  in
your  action.  Shun  the  very  appearance  of  studied  gesture.  A  rt
is  cold,  only  nature  is  warm ;  let  grace  keep  you  clear  of  all
seeming,  and  in  every  action,  and  in  every  place,  be  truthful,
even  if  you  should  be  considered  rough  and  uncultivated.  Your
mannerism  must  always  be  your  own,  it  must  never  be  a  polished
lie,  and  what  is  the  aping  of  gentility,  the  simulation  of  passion,


BKIM8T0NE


the  feigning  of  emotion,  or  the  mimicry  of  another  man's  mode  of
delivery  but  a  practical  lie.

"  Therefore,  araunt  all  attitude  and  stare,
And  start  theatric,  practised  at  the  glass  !"

Our  object  is  to  remove  the  excrescences  of  uncouth  nature,  not  to
produce  artificiality  and  affectation ;  we  would  prune  the  tree  and
by  no  means  clip  it  into  a  set  form.  We  would  have  our  students
think  of  action  while  they  are  with  us  at  college,  that  they  may
never  have  need  to  think  of  it  in  after  days.  The  matter  is  too
inconsiderable  to  be  made  a  part  of  your  weekly  study  when  you
get  into  the  actual  battle  of  ministerial  life ;  you  must  attend  to


134  POSTURE,   ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

the  subject  now,  and  have  done  with  it.  You  are  not  sent  of  God
to  court  smiles  but  to  win  souls ;  your  teacher  is  not  the  dancing-
master,  but  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  your  pulpit  manner  is  only  worth
a  moment's  thought  because  it  may  hinder  your  success  by  causing
people  to  make  remarks  about  the  preacher  when  you  want  all
their  thoughts  for  the  subject.  If  the  best  action  had  this  effect
I  would  urge  you  to  forswear  it,  and  if  the  worst  gestures  would
prevent  such  a  result  I  would  advise  you  to  practise  them.  All
that  I  aim  at  is  to  advocate  quiet,  graceful,  natural  movements,
because  they  are  the  least  likely  to  be  observed.  The  whole
business  of  delivery  should  be  one ;  everything  should  harmonize ;
the  thought,  the  spirit,  the  language,  the  tone,  and  the  action
should  be  all  of  a  piece,  and  the  whole  should  be,  not  for  the
winning  of  honour  to  ourselves,  but  for  the  glory  of  God  and
the  good  of  men ;  if  it  be  so  there  is  no  fear  of  your  violating  the
rule  as  to  being  natural,  for  it  will  not  occur  to  you  to  be  other-
wise. Yet  have  I  one  fear,  and  it  is  this:  you  may  fall  into  a
foolish  imitation  of  some  admired  miuister,  and  this  will  to  some
extent  put  you  off  from  the  right  track.  Each  man's  action  should
suit  himself  and  grow  out  of  his  own  personality.  The  style  of
Dr.  Goliath,  who  is  six  feet  high,  will  not  fit  the  stature  and
person  of  our  f I'iend  Short  who  is  a  Zaccheus  among  preachei's ;
neither  will  the  respectable  mannerism  of  an  aged  and  honoured
divine  at  all  befit  the  youthful  Apollos  who  is  barely  out  of  his
teens.  I  have  heard  that  for  a  season  quite  a  number  of  young
Congregational  ministers  imitated  the  pastor  of  the  Weigh  House,
and  so  there  were  little  Binneys  everywhere  copying  the  great
Thomas  in  everything  except  his  thoughtful  preaching.  A  ru-
mour is  current  that  there  are  one  or  two  young  Spurgeons  about,
but  if  so  I  hope  that  the  reference  is  to  my  own  sons,  who  have  a
right  to  the  name  by  birth.  If  any  of  you  become  mere  copyists
of  me  I  shall  regard  you  as  tliorns  in  the  flesh,  and  rank  you
among  those  whom  Paul  says  "  we  suffer  gladly."  Yet  it  has  been
wisely  said  that  every  beginner  must  of  necessity  be  for  a  time  a
copyist ;  the  artist  follows  his  master  while  as  yet  he  has  barely
acquired  the  elements  of  the  art,  and  perhaps  for  life  he  remains
a  painter  of  the  school  to  which  he  at  first  attached  himself ;  but
as  he  becomes  j)r()ficient  he  develops  his  own  imlividualiiy,  grows
into  a  painter  with  a  style  of  his  own,  and  is  all  the  better  and
pono  the  worse  for  having  been  in  his  cai'liest  days  content  to
sit  at  a  master's  feet.  It  is  of  necessity  the  same  in  oratory,  and
thercffirc  it  may  be  too  much  to  say  never  copy  anyone,  but  it


POSTURE,    ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC


135


may  be  better  to  exhort  you  to  imitate  the  best  action  you  can
find,  in  order  that  your  own  style  during  its  formation  may  be
rightly  moulded.  Correct  the  influence  of  any  one  man  by  what
you  see  of  excellence  in  others  ;  but  still  create  a  manner  of  your
own.  Slavish  imitation  is  the  practice  of  an  ape,  but  to  follow
another  where  he  lea<ls  aright,  and  there  only,  is  the  wisdom  of  a
prudent  man.  Still  never  let  a  natural  originality  be  missed  by
your  imitating  the  best  models  of  antiquity,  or  the  most  esteemed
among  the  moderns.

In  conclusion,  do  not  allow  my  criticisms  upon  various  gix>-
tesque  postures  and  movements  to  haunt  you  in  the  pulpit ;  better
perpetrate  them  all  than  be  in  fear,  for  this  would  make  you
cramped  and  awkward.  Dash  ^t  i\  whether  you  blumler  or  no.
A  few  mistakes  in  this  matter  will  not  he  half  so  bad  ^  being
nervous.  It  may  be  th^t  what  would  be  eccentric  in  another
may  \)e  most  proper  in  t,'oa ;  therefore  t^ke  uo  mHu's  dictum  a^
applicable  to  every  c^se,  or  tq
your  own.  See  how  John
Knox  is  pictured  iu  the  well-
known  engraving.  Is  his
posture  graceful?  Perhaps
not.  Yet  is  it  not  exactly
what  it  sliould  be  t  Can  you
find  any  fault  with  it  t  Is  it
jiot  Kuox-liko,  and  full  of
power  ■?  It  would  not  suit  one
man  in  fifty ;  in  most  preachers
it  would  seem  stra,ined,  but  iu
the  great  Reformer  it  is  cha-
racteristic, and  accords  with
liis  life-work.  You  must  re-
member the  person,  the  times
and  his  surroundings,  and
then  the  mannerism  is  seen
to  be  well  becoming  a  hero-
preacher  sent  to  do  an  Elijah's  work,  and  to  utter  his  rebukes  in
the  presence  of  a  Popish  court  whicli  hated  the  reforms  which  he
demanded.  Be  yourself  as  he  was  himself  ;  even  if  you  should  be
ungainly  and  awkward,  be  yourself.  Your  own  clothes,  though
they  be  homespun,  will  fit  you  better  than  another  man's,  though
made  of  the  best  broadcloth  ;  you  may  follow  your  tutor's  style  of
dress  if  you  like,  but  do  not  borrow  his  coat,  be  content  to  wear


136  rOSTURE,   ACTION,    GESTURE,    ETC.

one  of  your  own.  Above  all,  be  so  full  of  matter,  so  fervent,  and
so  gracious  that  the  people  will  little  care  how  you  hand  out  the
word ;  for  if  they  perceive  that  it  is  fresh  from  heaven,  and  find
it  sweet  and  abundant,  they  will  pay  little  regard  to  the  basket  in
wliich  you  bring  it  to  them.  Let  them,  if  they  please,  say  that
your  bodily  presence  is  weak,  but  pray  that  they  may  confess  that
your  testimony  is  weighty  and  powerful.  Commend  yourself  to
every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  then  the  mere
mint  and  anise  of  posture  will  seldom  be  taken  into  account.


While  preparing  this  lecture  it  occurred  to  me  to  copy  a  plate
which  I  found  in  Austin's  Chironomia,  in  the  hope  that  it  may
afford  some  direction  to  young  speakers.  As  my  lecture  mainly
shows  how  not  to  do  it,  this  may  be  a  little  help  in  the  positive
direction.  Of  course  I  do  not  recommend  that  so  much  action
should  be  used  in  reciting  this  one  piece,  or  any  other ;  but  I
would  suggest  that  each  posture  should  be  considered  apart.  Most
of  the  attitudes  are  natural,  striking,  and  instructive.  I  do  not
admire  them  all,  for  they  are  here  and  there  a  little  forced,  but  as
a  whole  I  know  of  no  better  lesson  in  so  short  a  compass,  and
being  in  verse  the  words  will  be  the  more  easily  remembered.

Considerable  expense  has  been  incurred  in  producing  these
plates  and  the  wood-engravings  of  the  previous  lectures,  and
tlierefore  the  present  volume  of  lectures  is  a  few  pages  shorter
than  its  predecessor ;  but  anxiety  to  do  the  thing  thoroughly  for  the
good  of  my  younger  brethren  has  led  me  to  insert  what  I  earnestly
hope  will  be  of  some  slight  service  to  them.  Often  a  mere  hint  is
sufficient.  Wise  men  from  one  example  learn  all,  and  I  trust
that  the  following  illustrations  may  suffice  to  give  to  many  be-
ginners the  clue  to  proper  and  expressive  attitude  and  gesture.


137


139


2    "^


^


141


2   "^


143


—    «


LECTURE    VIII.

€anurJitt5s:  its  ^IJarriii^  unir  gj^nintnnna.


If  I  were  asked — What  in  a  Christian  minister  is  the  most
essential  quality  for  securinrj  success  in  winniuf;  souls  for  Christ?  I
should  reply,  "earnestness":  and  if  I  were  asked  a  second  or  a
third  time,  I  should  not  vary  the  answer,  for  |)ersonal  obser\'ation
drives  me  to  the  conclusion  that,  as  a  rule,  real  success  is  propor-
tionate to  the  preacher's  earnestness.  Both  great  men  and  little
men  succeed  if  they  are  thoroughly  alive  unto  God,  and  fail  if  they
are  not  so.  We  know  men  of  eminence  who  have  gained  a  high
reputation,  who  attract  large  audiences,  and  obtain  much  admira-
tion, who  nevertheless  are  very  low  in  the  scale  as  soul-winners :  for
all  they  do  in  that  direction  they  might  as  well  have  been  lecturers
on  anatomy,  or  political  oratoi*s.  At  the  same  time  we  have  seen
their  compeers  in  ability  so  useful  in  the  business  of  conversion  that
evidently  their  acquirements  and  gifts  have  been  no  hindrance  to
them,  but  the  reverse ;  for  by  the  intense  and  devout  use  of  their
powers,  and  by  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  have  turned
many  to  righteousness.  We  have  seen  brethren  of  very  scanty
abilities  who  have  been  terrible  drags  upon  a  church,  and  have
proved  as  inefficient  in  their  spheres  as  blind  men  in  an  observa-
tory; but,  on  the  other  hand,  men  of  equally  small  attainments  are
well  known  to  us  as  mighty  huntei's  before  the  Lord,  by  whose  holy
energy  many  hearts  have  been  captured  for  the  Saviour.  I  de-
light in  M'Cheyne's  remark,  "  It  is  not  so  much  great  talents  that
God  blesses,  as  great  likeness  to  Christ."  In  many  instances  minis-
terial success  is  traceable  almost  entirely  to  an  intense  zeal,  a  con-
suming passion  for  aouls,  and  an  eager  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of
God,  and  we  believe  that  in  eveiy  case,  other  things  being  equal,
men  prosper  in  the  divine  sen'ice  in  proportion  as  their  hearts  are
bhizing  with  holy  love.  "  The  God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let
him  be  God  ";  and  the  man  who  has  the  tongue  of  fire,  let  him  be
God's  minister.

11


146  EARNESTNESS:   ITS  MARRING  AND   MAINTENANCE.

JBretliren,  you  and  I  must,  as  preachers,  be  always  earliest  in
reference  to  our  pulpit  work.  Here  we  must  labour  to  attain  the
very  highest  degree  of  excellence.  Often  have  I  said  to  my  brethren
that  the  pulpit  is  the  Thermopylas  of  Christendom  :  there  the  fight
will  be  lost  or  won.  To  us  ministers  the  maintenance  of  our  power
in  the  pulpit  should  be  our  great  concern,  we  must  occupy  that
spiritual  watch-tower  with  our  hearts  and  minds  awake  and  in
full  vigour.  It  will  not  avail  us  to  be  laborious  pastors  if  we
are  not  earnest  preachers.  We  shall  be  forgiven  a  great  many
sins  in  the  matter  of  pastoral  visitation  if  the  people's  souls
are  really  fed  on  the  Sabbath-day ;  but  fed  they  must  be,  and
nothing  else  will  make  up  for  it.  The  failures  of  most  ministers
who  di'ift  down  the  stream  may  be  traced  to  inefficiency  in  the
pulpit.  The  chief  business  of  a  captain  is  to  know  how  to  handle
his  vessel,  nothing  can  compensate  for  deficiency  there,  and  so  our
pulpits  must  be  our  main  care,  or  all  will  go  awry.  Dogs  often
fight  because  the  supply  of  bones  is  scanty,  and  congregations
frequently  quaiTel  because  they  do  not  get  sufficient  spiritual
meat  to  keep  them  happy  and  peaceful.  The  ostensible  ground  of
dissatisfaction  may  be  something  else,  but  nine  times  out  of  ten
deficiency  in  their  rations  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  mutinies  which
occur  in  our  churches.  Men,  like  all  other  animals,  know  when
they  are  fed,  and  they  usually  feel  good  tempered  after  a  meal ;
and  so  when  our  hearers  come  to  the  house  of  God,  and  obtain
"  food  convenient  for  them,"  they  forget  a  great  many  grievances
in  the  joy  of  the  festival,  but  if  we  send  them  away  hungry
they  will  be  in  as  irritable  a  mood  as  a  bear  robbed  of  her
whelps.

Now,  in  order  that  we  may  be  acceptable,  ice  must  he  earliest
tohen  actually  engaged  in  preaching.  Cecil  has  well  said  that  the
spirit  and  manner  of  a  preacher  often  effect  more  than  his  matter.
To  go  into  the  pulpit  with  the  listless  air  of  those  gentlcnion  who
loll  about,  and  lean  upon  the  cushion  as  if  they  had  at  last  reached
a  quiet  resting  place,  is,  I  think,  most  censurable.  To  rise  before
tlie  people  to  deal  out  rommoiiplaccs  which  have  cost  you  nothing,
as  if  anything  would  do  for  a  sermon,  is  not  merely  derogatory
to  the  dignity  of  our  office,  but  is  offensive  in  the  sight  of  God.
We  must  be  earnest  in  the  pulpit  for  our  own  sakes,  for  we  shall
not  long  be  able  to  maintain  our  jwsition  as  leaders  in  tho
church  of  God  if  we  are  dull.  Moreover,  for  tho  sake  of  our
church  members,  and  converted  people,  we  must  be  eniM-getic,
for  if  we  are  not  zealous,  neither  will  they  be.     It  is  not  in  tho


EARNESTNESS:    ITS    MA.RRING   AND   MAINTENANOE.  147

order  of  nature  that  rivers  should  run  upliill,  and  it  does  not  often
happen  that  zeal  rises  from  the  pew  to  the  pulpit.  It  is  natural
that  it  should  flow  down  from  us  to  our  hearers ;  the  pulpit  must
therefore  stand  at  a  high  level  of  ardour,  if  we  are,  under  God,  to
make  and  to  keep  our  people  fervent.  Those  who  attend  our
ministry  have  a  great  deal  to  do  during  the  week.  Many  of  them
have  family  trials,  and  heavy  personal  burdens  to  carry,  and  they
frequently  come  into  the  assembly  cold  and  listless,  with  thoughts
wandering  hither  and  thither ;  it  is  ours  to  take  those  thoughts
and  thrust  them  into  the  furnace  of  our  own  earnestness,  melt  them
by  holy  contemplation  and  by  intense  appeal,  and  pt)ur  them  out  into
the  mould  of  the  truth.  A  blacksmith  can  do  nothing  when  his
fire  is  out,  and  in  this  respect  he  is  the  type  of  a  minister.  If  all
the  lights  in  the  outside  world  are  quenche<l,  the  lamp  which  burns
in  the  sanctuary  ought  still  to  remain  undimmed ;  for  that  fire  no
curfew  must  ever  be  rung.  We  must  regard  the  people  as  the
wood  and  the  sacrifice,  well  wetted  a  second  and  a  third  time  by  the
cares  of  the  week,  upon  which,  like  the  prophet,  we  must  pray
down  the  fire  from  heaven.  A  dull  minister  creates  a  dull
audience.  You  cannot  expect  the  office-bearers  and  the  members
of  the  church  to  travel  by  steam  if  their  own  chosen  pastor  still
drives  the  old  broadwheeled  wajjgon.  We  ought  each  one  to  be  like
that  reformer  who  is  described  as  "  Vicidus  vultus^  vtvidi  occuli^
vividw  manuK,  deniqne  omnia  riru/u,"  which  I  would  rather  freely
render — "  a  countenance  beaming  with  life,  eyes  and  hands  full  of
life,  in  fine,  a  vivid  preacher,  altogether  alive."

"  Thy  soul  must  overflow,  if  thou

Another's  soul  would  reach,
It  needs  the  overllow  of  heart

To  give  the  lips  full  speech."

The  world  also  will  suffer  as  well  as  the  church  if  we  are  not
fervent.  We  cannot  e.xpect  a  gospel  devoid  of  earnestness  to
have  any  mighty  effect  upon  the  unconverted  around  us.  One
of  the  excuses  most  soporific  to  the  conscience  of  an  ungodly
generation  is  that  of  halt-heartedness  in  the  preacher.  If  the
sinner  finds  the  preacher  nodding  while  he  talks  of  judgment  to
come,  he  concludes  that  the  judgment  is  a  thing  which  the
preacher  is  dreaming  about,  and  he  i"esoh'es  to  regard  it  all  as
mere  fiction.  The  w  hole  outside  world  receives  serious  danger
from  the  cold-hearted  preacher,  for  it  draws  the  same  conclusion  as
the  individual  sinner :  it  perseveres  in  its  own  listlessness,  it  gives
its  strength  to  its  own  transient  objects,  and  thinks  itself  wise  for


148  EARNESTXESS:   ITS   MARRING  AND   MAINTEXANCB.

SO  doing.  How  can  it  be  otherwise  ?  If  the  prophet  leaves  his  heart
behind  him  wlien  he  professes  to  speak  in  the  name  of  God,  what
can  he  expect  but  that  the  ungodly  around  him  will  persuade
themselves  that  there  is  nothing  in  his  message,  and  that  his
commission  is  a  farce.

Hear  how  Whitefield  preache<],  and  never  dare  to  be  lethargic
again.  Winter  says  of  him  that  "  sometimes  he  exceedingly  wept,
and  was  frequently  so  overcome,  tliat  for  a  few  seconds  you  would
suspect  he  never  would  recover ;  and  when  he  did,  nature  required
some  little  time  to  compose  herself.  I  hardly  ever  knew  him  go
through  a  sermon  without  weeping  more  or  less.  His  voice  was
often  interrupted  by  his  affections ;  and  I  have  heard  him  say  in
the  pulpit,  *  You  blame  me  for  weeping ;  but  how  can  I  help  it,
when  you  will  not  weep  for  yourselves,  although  your  own  im-
mortal souls  are  on  the  verge  of  destruction,  and,  for  aught  I  know,
you  are  hearing  your  last  sermon,  and  may  never  more  have  an
■opportimity  to  have  Christ  offered  to  you  V  "

Eaimestness  in  the  pulpit  must  be  real.  It  is  not  to  be  mimicked.
We  have  seen  it  counterfeited,  but  every  person  with  a  grain  of
sense  could  detect  the  imposition.  To  stamp  the  foot,  to  smite
.the  desk,  to  perspire,  to  shout,  to  bawl,  to  quote  the  pathetic  por-
tions of  other  people's  sermons,  or  to  pour  out  voluntary  tears
from  a  watery  eye  will  never  make  up  for  true  agony  of  soul
and  real  tenderness  of  spirit.  The  best  piece  of  acting  is  but
.acting ;  those  who  only  look  at  appearances  may  be  pleased
by  it,  but  lover*  of  reality  will  be  disgusted.  What  presumption  1 —
what  hypocrisy  it  is  by  skilful  management  of  the  voice  to  mimic
the  passion  which  is  the  genuine  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Let
jnere  actors  beware,  lest  they  be  found  sinning  against  the  Holy
Spirit  by  their  theatrical  pei-formances.  We  must  be  earnest
in  the  pulpit  because  we  are  earnest  everywhere ;  we  must  blaze
in  our  discourses  because  we  are  continually  on  fire.  Zeal
which  is  stored  up  to  be  let  off  only  on  grand  occasions  is  a  gas
which  will  one  day  destroy  its  proj)rictor.  Nothing  but  truth  may
apiK'ar  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  all  affectation  is  strange  fire,
and  excites  the  indignation  of  the  God  of  truth.  Bo  earnest,  and
you  will  aeem  to  be  earnest.  A  burning  heart  will  schmi  find  for
itself  a  flaming  tongue.  To  sham  earnostiu'ss  is  one  of  the  most
contemptTiblo  of  dodges  for  courting  popularity ;  let  us  abhor  the
very  tliought.  Go  and  be  listless  in  the  puli)it  if  you  are  so  in  your
heart,  lie  slow  in  «j)eech,  drawling  in  tone,  and  monotonous  in
voice,  if  80  you  can  best  express  your  soul ;  oven  that  would  bo


earnestness:  its  marring  and  maintenance.        149

infinitely  better  than  to  make  your  ministry  a  masquerade  anil
yourself  an  actor.

But  our  zeal  while  in  tite  act  of  preaching  must  be  foUoiced  up  hy
intense  solicitude  as  to  the  after  results  ;  for  if  it  be  not  so  we  shall
have  cause  to  question  our  sincerity.  God  will  not  send  a  harvest
of  souls  to  those  who  never  watch  or  water  the  fields  which  they
have  sown.  When  the  sermon  is  over  we  have  only  let  down  the
net  which  afterwards  we  are  to  draw  to  shore  by  prayer  and  watch-
fulness. Here,  I  think,  I  cannot  do  better  than  allow  a  far  abler
advocate  to  plead  with  you,  and  quote  the  words  of  Dr.  Watts : —
"  Be  very  solicitous  about  the  success  of  your  labours  in  the  pulpit.
Water  the  seed  sown,  not  only  with  public,  but  secret  prayer.
Plead  with  God  imjwrtunately  that  he  would  not  suffer  you  to
labour  in  vain.  Be  not  like  that  foolish  bird  the  ostrich,  which  lays
her  eggs  in  the  dust,  and  leaves  them  there  regardless  whether  they
come  to  life  or  not,  (Job  xxxix.  14-17).  God  hath  not  given  her
understanding,  but  let  not  this  folly  be  your  character  or  prac-
tice ;  labour,  and  watch,  and  pray,  that  your  sermons  and  the  fruit
of  your  studies  may  become  words  of  Divine  life  to  souls.

It  is  an  observation  of  pious  Mr.  Baxter  (which  I  have  read  some-
where in  his  works),  that  he  has  never  known  any  considerable
success  from  the  brightest  and  noblest  talents,  nor  from  the  most
excellent  kind  of  preaching,  nor  even  when  the  preachers  themselves
have  been  truly  religious,  if  they  have  not  had  a  solicitous  concern
for  the  success  of  their  ministrations.  Let  the  awful  and  important
thought  of  souls  being  saved  by  our  preaching,  or  left  to  perish  and
to  be  condemned  to  hell  throuirh  our  neiilijience,— -I  sav,  let  this
uwful  and  tremendous  thought  dwell  ever  u^wn  our  spirits.  We
are  made  watchmen  to  the  house  of  Israel,  as  Ezekiel  was ;  and»
if  we  give  no  Avarning  of  approaching  danger,  the  souls  of  multi-
tudes may  perish  through  our  neglect ;  but  the  blood  of  souls  will
be  terribly  required  at  our  hands  (Ezekiel  iii.  17,  <S;c.)."

Such  considerations  should  make  us  instant  in  season  and  out  of
season,  and  cause  us  at  all  times  to  be  clad  with  zeal  as  with  a
cloak.  We  ought  to  be  all  alive,  and  always  alive.  A  pillar  of
light  and  fire  should  be  the  preacher  s  fit  emblem.  Our  ministry
must  be  emphatic,  or  it  will  never  affect  these  thoughtless  times ;
and  to  this  end  our  hearts  must  be  habitually  fervent,  and  our
whole  nature  must  be  fired  with  an  all-consuming  passion  for  the
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men.

Kov.',  my  brethren,  it  is  sadly  true  that  holy  earnestness  when


150        earnestness:  its  marring  and  maintenance.

we  once  obtain  it  may  be  easily  damped  ;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact
it  is  more  frequently  chilled  in  the  loneliness  of  a  vilhige  pas-
torate than  amid  the  society  of  warm-hearted  Christian  brethren.
Adam,  the  author  of  "  Private  Thoughts,"  once  observed  that  "  a
poor  country  parson,  fighting  against  the  devil  in  his  parish,  has
nobler  ideas  than  Alexander  the  Great  ever  had ; "  and  I  -svill  add,
that  he  needs  more  than  Alexander's  ardour  to  enable  him  to  con-
tinue victorious  in  his  holy  warfare.  Sleepy  Hollow  and  Dormer's
Land  will  be  too  much  for  us  unless  we  pray  for  daily  quickening.

Yet  town  life  has  its  dangers  too,  and  zeal  is  apt  to  burn  low
throuch  numerous  eno-aijements,  like  a  fire  which  is  scattered
abroad  instead  of  being  raked  together  into  a  heap.  Those  inces-
sant knocks  at  our  door,  and  perpetual  visits  from  idle  persons,  are
so  many  buckets  of  cold  water  thrown  upon  our  devout  zeal.  We
must  by  some  means  secure  uninterrupted  meditation,  or  we  shall
lose  power.     London  is  a  peculiarly  trying  sphere  on  this  account.

Zeal  also  is  more  quickly  checked  after  long  years  of  con-
tinuance in  the  same  service  than  when  novelty  gives  a  charm
to  our  work.  Mr.  Wesley  says,  in  his  fifteenth  volume  of
'*  Journals  and  Lettei"^,"  "  I  know  that,  were  I  myself  to  preach
one  whole  year  in  one  place,  I  should  preach  both  myself  and  most
of  my  congregation  asleep."  What  then  must  it  be  to  abide  in  the
same  pulpit  for  many  years  !  In  such  a  case  it  is  not  the  pace  that
kills,  but  the  length  of  the  race.  Our  God  is  evermore  the  same,
cndurinir  for  ever,  and  he  alone  can  enable  us  to  endure  even  to
the  end.  He,  who  at  the  end  of  twenty  years'  ministry  among  the
same  people  is  more  alive  than  ever,  is  a  great  debtor  to  the
quickening  Spirit.

Earnestness  may  be,  and  too  often  is,  diminished  by  neglect  of
study.  If  we  liave  not  exercised  ourselves  in  the  word  of  God,
we  shall  not  preach  with  the  fervour  and  grace  of  the  man  who  has
fed  upon  the  truth  he  delivers,  and  is  therefore  strong  and  ai'dent.
An  Englishman's  earnestness  in  battle  depends,  according  to  some
authorities,  upon  his  being  well  fed  :  he  has  no  stomach  for  the
fight  if  he  is  starved.  If  we  are  well  nourished  by  sound  gospel
food  we  shall  be  vigorous  and  fervent.  An  old  blunt  commander
at  ( 'adiz  is  described  by  Selden  as  thuR  aiMressing  liis  soldiers : —
"  What  a  shame  will  it  be,  you  Englishmen,  who  feed  ujxju  good
Iwef  and  beer,  to  let  these  rascally  Si)aniar(ls  beat  you  that  eat
notlilng  but  oranges  and  lemons  I  "  His  philosophy  and  mine
agree  :  he  ex|M'cted  courage  and  valour  from  tiiosi;  who  were  well
nourished.  Brethren,  never  neglect  your  spiritual  meals,  or  you  will


earnestness:  its  marring  and  maintenance.       151

lack  stamina  and  your  spirits  will  sink.  Live  on  the  substantial
doctrines  of  grace,  and  you  will  outlive  and  out-work  those  who
delight  in  the  pastry  and  syllabubs  of  "  modern  thought."

Zeal  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  damped  by  our  studies.  There
is,  no  doubt,  such  a  thing  as  feeding  the  brain  at  the  expense  of
the  heart,  and  many  a  man  in  his  aspirations  to  be  literary  has
rather  qualified  himself  to  write  reviews  than  to  preach  sermons.
A  quaint  evangelist  was  wont  to  say  that  Christ  hung  crucified
beneath  Greek,  Latin,  and  Hebrew.  It  ought  not  to  be  so,  but  it
has  often  hap|)ened  that  the  student  in  college  has  gathered  fuel,
but  lost  the  fire  which  is  to  kindle  it.  It  will  be  to  our  ever-
lasting disgrace  if  we  bury  our  fiame  beneath  the  faggots  which
are  intended  to  sustain  it.  If  we  degenerate  into  bookworms  it
will  be  to  the  old  serpent's  delight,  and  to  our  own  misery.

True  .earnestness  may  be  greatly  lessened  by  levity  in  conver-
sation, and  especially  by  jesting  with  brother  ministers,  in  whose
company  we  often  take  greater  liberties  than  we  would  like  to
do  in  the  society  of  other  Christians.  There  are  excellent
reasons  for  our  feeling  at  home  with  our  brethren,  but  if  this
freedom  be  carried  too  far  we  shall  soon  feel  that  we  have  suffered
damage  through  vanity  of  speech.  Cheerfulness  is  one  thing,  and
frivolity  is  another;  he  is  a  wise  man  who  by  a  serious  happiness
of  conversation  steers  between  the  dark  rocks  of  nioroseness,  and
the  quicksands  of  levity.

We  shall  often  find  ourselves  in  danger  of  being  deteriorated  in
zeal  by  the  cold  Christian  people  with  whom  we  come  in  contact.
What  terrible  wet  blankets  some  professors  are  I  Their  remarks
after  a  sermon  are  enough  to  stagger  you.  You  think  that  surely
you  have  moved  the  very  stones  to  feeling,  but  you  painfully  learn
that  these  people  are  utterly  unaffected.  You  have  been  burning
and  they  are  freezing ;  you  have  been  pleading  as  for  life  or  death
and  they  have  been  calculating  how  many  seconds  the  sermon
occupied,  and  grudging  you  the  odd  five  minutes  beyond  the  usual
hour,  which  your  earnestness  compelled  you  to  occupy  in  pleading
with  men's  souls.  If  these  frost-bitten  men  should  happen  to  be
the  officers  of  the  church,  from  whom  you  naturally  expect  the
warmest  sympathy,  the  result  is  chilling  to  the  last  degree,  and  all
the  more  so  if  you  ai"e  young  and  inexperieiiced  :  it  is  as  though
an  angel  were  confined  in  an  iceberg.  "  Thou  shalt  not  yoke  the
ox  and  the  ass  together"  was  a  merciful  precept:  but  when  a
laborious,  ox-like  minister  comes  to  be  yoked  to  a  deacon  who
is  not  another  ox,  it  becomes  hard  work  to  plough.     Some  crabbed


152  EAE^TESTNESS  :    ITS   MARRING  AND   MAINTENANCE.

professors  have  a  great  deal  to  answer  for  in  this  matter.  One  of
them  not  so  very  long  ago  went  up  to  an  earnest  young  evange-
list who  had  been  doing  his  best,  and  said,  "  Young  man,  do  you
call  that  preaching  ?  "  He  thought  himself  faithful,  but  he  was
cruel  and  uncourteous,  and  though  the  good  bi'other  survived  the
blow  it  was  none  the  less  brutal.  Such  offences  against  the  Lord's
little  ones  are,  I  hope,  very  rare,  but  they  are  very  grievous,  and
tend  to  turn  aside  our  hopeful  youth.

Frequently  the  audience  itself,  as  a  whole,  will  damp  your  zeal.
You  can  see  by  their  very  look  and  manner  that  the  people  are
not  appreciating  your  warm-hearted  endeavours,  and  you  feel  dis-
couraged. Those  empty  benches  also  are  a  serious  trial,  and  if
the  place  be  large,  and  the  congregation  small,  ihe  inflaence  is
seriously  depressing :  it  is  not  every  man  who  can  bear  to  be
"  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness."  Disorder  in  the  congrega-
tion also  sadly  afflicts  sensitive  speakers.  The  walking  up  the
aisle  of  a  woman  with  a  pair  of  pattens,  the  squeak  of  a  pair
of  new  boots,  the  frequent  fall  of  umbrellas  and  walking-stick?,
the  crying  of  infants,  and  especially  the  consistent  lateness
of  half  the  assembly ; — all  these  tend  to  irritate  the  mind,  take  it
off  from  its  object,  and  diminish  its  ardour.  We  hardly  like
to  confess  that  our  hearts  are  so  readily  affected  by  such  trifles,
but  it  is  so,  and  not  at  all  to  be  wondered  at.  As  pots  of  the
most  precious  ointment  are  more  often  spoilt  by  dead  flies  than  by
dead  camels,  so  insignificant  matters  will  destroy  earnestness  more
readily  than  greater  annoyances.  Under  a  great  discouragement  a
man  pulls  himself  together,  and  then  throws  himself  upon  his  God,
and  receives  divine  strength  :  but  under  lesser  depressions  he  may
possibly  worry,  and  the  trifle  will  irritate  and  foster  till  serious
consequences  follow.

Pardon  my  saying  that  the  condition  of  your  body  must  be
attended  to,  especially  in  the  matter  of  eating,  for  any  measure  of
excess  may  injure  your  digestion  and  make  you  stupid  when  you
should  be  fervent.  From  the  memoir  of  Duncan  Matheson  I  cull
an  anecdote  which  is  much  to  the  ])<)int:  "In  a  certain  place
where  evangelistic  meetings  were  being  held,  the  lay  preachers,
among  whom  was  Mr.  Matheson,  were  sumptuously  entertained  at
the  house  of  a  Christian  gentleman.  After  dinner  thoy  went  to
the  meeting,  not  witliout  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  best
method  of  conducting  the  services  of  the  evening.  '  The  Spirit  is
grieved;  ho  is  not  here  at  all,  I  feel  it,'  said  one  of  the  younger,
with    a  whine   which    somewhat  contrasted    with    his    previous


earnestness:  its  marring  and  maintenance.        loo

unbounded  enjoyment  of  the  luxuries  of  the  table.  *  Nonsense/
replied  Matheson,  who  liated  all  whining  and  morbid  spirituality ;
'Nothing  of  the  sort.  You  have  just  eaten  too  much  dinner,  and
you  feel  heavy.' "  Duncan  Matheson  was  right,  and  a  little  more
of  his  common  sense  would  be  a  great  gain  to  some  who  are  ultra
spiritual,  and  attribute  all  their  moods  of  feeling  to  some  super-
natural cause  when  the  real  reason  lies  far  nearer  to  hand.  Has
it  not  often  happened  that  dysjx'psia  has  been  mistaken  for  back-
sliding, and  a  bad  digestion  has  been  set  down  as  a  hard  heart  i  I
say  no  more :  a  word  to  the  wise  is  enough.

Many  physical  and  mental  causes  may  operate  to  create  apparent
lethargy  where  there  is  at  heart  intense  earnestness.  Upon  some
of  us  a  disturbed  night,  a  change  in  the  weather,  or  an  unkind
remark,  will  j)ro<luce  the  most  lamentable  effect.  But  those  who
complain  of  want  of  zeal  are  often  the  most  zealous  i)ersons  in
the  world,  and  a  confession  of  want  of  life  is  itself  an  argu-
ment that  life  exists,  and  is  not  without  vigour.  Do  not  spare
yourselves  and  become  self-satisfied ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
do  not  slander  yourselves  and  sink  into  desjK)ndency.  Your  own
opinion  of  your  state  is  not  worth  much :  ask  the  Lord  to  search
you.

Long  continued  labour  without  visible  success  is  another  frequent
damp  upon  zeal,  though  if  rightly  viewed  it  ought  to  be  an  incentive
to  sevenfold  diligence.  Quaint  Thomas  Fuller  observes  that
"  herein  God  hath  humbled  many  painstaking  pastors,  in  making
them  to  be  clouds  to  min,  not  over  Arabia  the  happy,  but  over
Arabia  the  desert  and  stony."  If  non-success  humbles  us  it  is
well,  but  if  it  discourages  us,  and  especially  if  it  leads  us  to  think
bitterly  of  more  prosperous  brethren,  we  ought  to  look  about  us
with  grave  concern.  It  is  ^wssible  that  we  have  been  faithful  and
have  adopted  wise  methods,  and  are  in  our  right  place,  and  yet
wo  have  not  struck  the  mark ;  we  shall  probably  be  heavily  bowed
down  and  feel  scarcely  able  to  continue  the  work  ;  but  if  we  pluck
up  courage  and  increase  our  earnestness  we  shall  one  day  reap  a
rich  hanest,  which  will  more  than  repay  us  for  all  our  waiting.
*'The  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  pix'cious  fruits  of  the  earth";
and  with  a  holy  patience  begotten  of  zeal  we  must  wait  on,  and
never  doubt  that  the  time  to  favour  Zion  will  yet  come.

Nor  must  it  ever  be  forgotten  that  the  flesh  is  weak  and
naturally  inclined  to  slumber.  We  need  a  constant  renewal  of
the  divine  impulse  which  first  started  us  in  the  way  of  service.
We  are  not  as  arrows,  which  find  their  way  to  the  target  by  the


154  EAKNESTXESS:   ITS  MARRING  AND   MAINTENANCE.

sole  agency  of  the  force  with  which  they  started  from  the  bow ;
nor  as  birds,  which  bear  within  themselves  their  own  motive
power :  we  must  be  borne  onward,  like  ships  at  sea,  by  the  con-
stant power  of  the  heavenly  wind,  or  we  shall  make  no  headway.
Preachers  sent  from  God  are  not  musical  boxes  which,  being  once
wound  up,  will  play  through  their  set  tunes,  but  they  are  trumpets
which  are  utterly  mute  until  the  living  breath  causes  them  to
give  forth  a  certain  sound.  We  read  of  some  who  are  dumb
dogs,  given  to  slumber,  and  such  would  be  the  character  of  us  all
if  the  grace  of  God  did  not  prevent.  We  have  need  to  watch
against  a  careless,  indifferent  spirit,  and  if  we  do  not  so  we  shall
soon  be  as  lukewarm  as  Laodicea  itself.

Remembering  then,  dear  brethren,  that  we  must  be  in  earnest,
and  that  we  cannot  counterfeit  earnestness,  or  find  a  substitute  for
it,  and  that  it  is  very  easy  for  us  to  lose  it,  let  us  consider  for
a  while  the  ways  and  means  for  retaining  all  our  fervour  and
gaining  more.  If  it  is  to  continue,  our  earnestness  must  he
kindled  at  an  immortal  flame,  and  I  know  of  but  one — the  flame
of  the  love  of  Christ,  which  many  waters  cannot  quench.  A
spark  from  that  celestial  sun  will  be  as  undying  as  the  source
from  whence  it  came.  If  w-e  can  get  it,  yea,  if  we  have  it,  we  shall
still  be  full  of  enthusiasm,  however  long  we  may  live,  however
greatly  we  may  be  tried,  and  however  much  for  many  reasons  we
may  be  discouraged.  To  continue  fervent  for  life  we  must  possess
the  fervour  of  heavenly  life  to  begin  with.  Have  we  this  fire  I  We
must  have  the  truth  burnt  into  our  souls,  or  it  will  not  burn  upon
our  lips.  Do  we  understand  this?  The  doctrines  of  grace  must
be  part  and  parcel  of  ourselves,  interwoven  with  the  warp  and  woof
of  our  being,  and  this  can  only  be  effected  by  the  same  hand  which
originally  made  the  fabric.  We  shall  never  lose  our  love  to  Christ
and  our  love  to  souls  if  the  Lord  has  given  them  to  us.  The  Holy
{Spirit  makes  zeal  for  God  to  be  a  permanent  principle  of  life  rather
than  a  passion, — does  the  Holy  Spirit  rest  upon  us,  or  is  our
present  fervour  a  mere  lumian  feeling'?  We  ought  uj)on  this  point
to  be  seriously  inquisitorial  with  our  hearts,  pressing  home  the
question,  Have  we  the  holy  fire  which  springs  from  a  true  call  to
the  ministry /  If  not,  why  are  we  here?  If  a  man  can  live  with-
out preaching,  let  him  live  without  preaching.  If  a  man  can  be
content  without  being  a  soul-winner — I  had  almost  said  he  had
better  not  atteni])t  the  work,  but  I  had  riitlier  say — let  hinx  seek
to  hHV(!  the  «tone  taken  out  of  his  heart,  that  lie  may  feel  for
^KfriHJung  men.     Till   then,   as   u  minister,    he   may   do   positive


earnestness:  its  marring  and  maintenance.        155

mischief  by  occupying  the  place  of  one  who  might  have  succeeded
in  tlie  blessed  work  in  which  he  must  be  a  failure.

The  jire  of  our  earnestness  ynust  hum  upon  the  hearth  of  faith  in
the  truths  which  we  preach,  and  faith  in  their  power  to  bless  man-
kind when  the  Spirit  applies  them  to  the  heart.  He  who  declares
what  may  or  what  may  not  be  true,  and  what  he  considers  u|X)n  the
whole  to  be  as  good  as  any  other  form  of  teaching,  will  of  necessity
make  a  very  feeble  preacher.  How  can  he  be  zealous  about  that
which  he  is  not  sure  of?  If  he  knows  nothing  of  the  inward
power  of  the  truth  within  his  own  heart,  if  he  has  never  tasted
and  handled  of  the  good  word  of  life,  how  can  he  be  enthusiastic  t
But  if  the  Holy  Ghost  has  taught  us  in  secret  places,  and  made  our
soul  to  understand  within  itself  the  doctrine  which  we  are  to  proclaim,
then  shall  we  speak  evennore  with  the  tongue  of  fire.  Brother,
do  not  begin  to  teach  others  till  the  Lord  has  taught  you.  It  must
be  dreary  work  to  parrot  forth  dogmas  which  have  no  interest  for
your  heart,  and  carry  no  conviction  to  your  understanding.  I
would  prefer  to  pick  oakum  or  turn  a  crank  for  my  breakfast,  like
the  paupers  in  the  casual  ward,  rather  than  be  the  slave  of  a  con-
gregation and  bring  them  spiritual  meat  of  which  I  never  taste
myself.  And  then  how  dreadful  the  end  of  such  a  coui-se  must  be!
How  fearful  the  account  to  be  rendered  at  the  last  by  one  who
publicly  taught  what  he  did  not  heartily  believe,  and  jntrpetrated
this  detestable  hypocrisy  in  the  name  of  God  I

Brethren,  if  the  fire  is  brought  from  the  right  place  to  the
right  place,  we  have  a  goo<l  beginning ;  and  the  main  elements  of
a  glorious  ending.  Kindled  by  a  live  coal,  borne  to  our  lips  from
off  the  altar  by  the  winged  cherub,  the  fire  has  begun  to  feed  upon
our  inmost  spirit,  and  there  it  will  burn  though  Satan  himself
should  labour  to  stamp  it  out.

Yet  the  best  flame  in  the  world  needs  renewing.  I  know  not
whether  immortal  spirits,  like  the  angels,  drink  on  the  wing,  and
feed  on  some  superior  manna  prepared  in  heaven  for  them ;  but
the  probability  is  that  no  created  being,  though  immortal,  is
quite  fi*ee  from  the  necessity  to  receive  from  without  sustenance
for  its  strength.  Certainly  the  flame  of  zeal  in  the  renewed  heart,
however  divine,  must  be  continually  fed  with  fresh  fuel.  Even  the
lamps  of  the  sanctuary  needed  oil.  Feed  the  Jlame,  my  brother,  feed
it  frequently ;  feed  it  with  holy  thought  and  contemplation,  espe-
cially with  thought  about  your  work,  your  motives  in  pursuing  it,
the  design  of  it,  the  helps  that  are  waiting  for  you,  and  the  grand
results  of  it  if  the  Lord  be  with  you.     Dwell  much  upon  the  love


156        earnestness:  its  marrixg  and  maintenance.

of  God  to  sinners,  and  the  death  of  Christ  on  their  behalf,  and  the
■work  of  the  Spirit  upon  men's  hearts.  Tiiink  of  wliat  must  bo
wroutrht  in  men's  hearts  ere  they  can  be  saved.  Remember,  you
are  not  sent  to  whiten  tombs,  but  to  open  them,  and  this  is  a  work
which  no  man  can  perform  unless,  like  the  Lord  Jesus  at  the
grave  of  Lazarus,  he  groans  in  spirit ;  and  even  then  he  is  powerless
apart  from  the  Holy  Ghost.  Meditate  with  deep  solemnity  upon
the  fate  of  the  lost  sinner,  and,  like  Abraham,  when  you  get  up
early  to  go  to  the  place  where  you  commune  with  God,  cast  an
eye  towards  Sodom  and  see  the  smoke  thereof  going  up  like  the
smoke  of  a  furnace.  Shun  all  views  of  future  punishment  which
would  make  it  appear  less  terrible,  and  so  take  off  the  edge  of  your
anxiety  to  save  immortals  from  the  quenchless  flame.  If  men  are
indeed  only  a  nobler  kind  of  ape,  and  expire  as  the  beasts,  you  may
well  enough  let  them  die  unpitied;  but  if  their  creation  in  the  image
of  God  involves  immortality,  and  there  is  any  fear  that  through
their  unbelief  they  will  bring  upon  themselves  endless  woe,  arouse
yourselves  to  the  agonies  of  the  occasion,  and  be  ashamed  at  the
bare  suspicion  of  unconcern.  Think  much  also  of  the  bliss  of  the
sinner  saved,  and  like  holy  Baxter  derive  rich  arguments  for  earnest-
ness from  "  the  saints'  everlasting  rest."  Go  to  the  heavenly  hills
and  gather  fuel  there ;  pile  on  the  glorious  logs  of  the  wood  of
Lebanon,  and  the  fire  will  burn  freely  and  yield  a  sweet  perfume
as  each  piece  of  choice  cedar  glows  in  the  flame.  There  will  be
no  fear  of  your  being  lethargic  if  you  are  continually  familiar  with
eternal  realities.

Above  all,  feed  the  flame  with  intimate  fellowship  with  Christ.
No  man  was  ever  cold  in  heart  who  lived  with  Jesus  on  such  terms
as  John  and  Maiy  did  of  old,  for  he  makes  men's  hearts  burn
within  them.  I  never  met  with  a  half-hearted  preacher  who  was
much  in  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  zeal  of  God's
house  ate  up  our  Lord,  and  when  we  come  into  contact  with  him  it
begins  to  consume  us  also,  and  we  feel  that  we  cannot  but  speak  the
things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  in  his  company,  nor  can  we
help  speaking  of  them  with  the  fervour  which  comes  out  of  actual
acquaintance  with  them.  Those  of  us  who  have  been  preaching
for  these  fivc-and-twenty  years  sometimes  feel  that  the  same  work,
the  same  subject,  the  same  people,  and  the  same  pulpit,  are  together
ftpt  to  beget  a  feeling  of  monotony,  an<l  monotony  may  soon  lead
on  to  weariness.  IJut  then  we  call  to  mind  another  sameness,  which
becomes  our  comj)lfte  deliverance;  there  is  the  same  Saviour,
aud  wc  may  go  to  him  in  the  same  way  us  we  did  ut  the  first,  since


EARNESTNESS  t    ITS   MARRING   AND   MAINTENANCE.  157

lie  is  *'  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."
In  liis  presence  we  drink  in  the  new  wine  and  renew  our  youth.
He  is  the  fountain,  for  ever  flowing  with  the  cool,  refreshing
water  of  hfe,  and  in  fellowship  with  him  we  find  our  souls  quickened
into  perpetual  energy.  Beneath  his  smile  our  long-accustomed
work  is  always  delightful,  and  wears  a  brighter  charm  than
novelty  could  have  conferred.  We  gatlier  new  manna  for  our
])eople  every  morning,  and  as  we  go  to  distribute  it  we  feel  an
anointing  of  fresh  oil  distilling  upon  us.  "  They  that  wait  upon
the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength ;  they  shall  mount  up  with
wings  as  eagles ;  they  shall  run  and  not  be  weary ;  and  they  shall
walk,  and  not  faint."  Newly  come  from  the  presence  of  him  that
walketh  among  the  golden  candlesticks  we  are  ready  to  write  or
speak  unto  the  churches  in  the  power  which  he  alone  can  give.
Soldiers  of  Christ,  you  can  only  be  worthy  of  your  Captain  by
abiding  in  fellowship  witli  him,  and  listening  to  his  voice  as  Joshua
did  when  he  stood  by  Jordan,  and  eutpiired — "  What  saith  my
Lord  unto  his  servant?'*

Fan  thejlame  as  well  as  feed  it.  Fan  it  with  much  supplication.
We  cannot  be  too  urgent  with  one  another  uj)on  this  point :
no  language  can  be  too  vehement  with  which  to  implore  ministers
to  pray.  There  is  for  our  brethren  and  ourselves  an  absolute
necessity  for  prayer.  Necessity! — I  hardly  like  to  talk  of  that,  let
me  rather  speak  of  the  deliciousness  of  prayer — the  wondrous
sweetness  and  divine  felicity  which  come  to  the  soul  that  lives
in  the  atmosphere  of  prayer.  John  Fox  said,  "  The  time  we  spend
with  God  in  secret  is  the  sweetest  time,  and  the  best  improved.
Therefore,  if  thou  lovest  thy  life,  be  in  love  with  prayer."  The
devout  Mr.  Hervey  resolved  on  the  bed  of  sickness — "If  God  shall
spare  my  life,  I  will  read  less  and  pray  more."  John  Cooke,  t)f
Maidenhead,  wrote — "  The  business,  the  pleasure,  the  honour,
and  advantage  of  prayer  press  on  my  spirit  with  increasing  forcu
every  day."  A  deceased  pastor  when  drawing  near  his  end,  ex-
claimed, "  I  wish  I  had  prayed  more ; "  that  wish  many  of  us
might  utter.  There  should  be  special  seasons  for  devotion,  and  it
is  well  to  maintain  them  with  regularity ;  but  the  spirit  of  prayer
is  even  better  than  the  habit  of  prayer :  to  pray  without  ceasing  is
better  than  praying  at  intervals.  It  will  be  a  happy  circum-
stance if  we  can  frequently  bow  the  knee  with  devout  brethren,
and  I  think  it  ought  to  be  a  rule  with  us  ministers  never  to
separate  without  a  word  of  prayer.  Much  more  intercession  would
rise  to  heaven  if  we  made  a  point  of  this,  especially  those  of  us


158  EARXESTXESS:    ITS   MARRING   AND   MAINTENANCE.

wlio  have  been  fellow-students.  If  it  be  possible,  let  prayer  and
praise  sanctify  each  meeting  of  friend  with  friend.  It  is  a  re-
freshing practice  to  have  a  minute  or  two  of  supplication  in  the
vestrj  before  preaching  if  you  can  call  in  three  or  four  warm-
hearted deacons  or  other  bretlu'en.  It  always  nerves  me  for  the
fight.  But,  for  all  that,  to  fan  your  earnestness  to  a  vehement
flame  you  should  seek  the  spirit  of  continual  prayer,  so  as  to
pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  ever^'vvhere  and  always  ;  in  the  study,
in  the  vestry,  and  in  the  pulpit.  It  is  well  to  be  pleading  ever-
more with  God,  when  sitting  down  in  the  pulpit,  when  rising
to  give  out  the  hymn,  when  reading  the  chapter,  and  while
delivering  the  sermon ;  holding  up  one  hand  to  God  empty,
in  order  to  receive,  and  with  the  other  hand  dispensing  to  the
people  what  the  Lord  bestows.  Be  in  preaching  like  a  conduit
pipe  between  the  everlasting  and  infinite  supplies  of  heaven  and
the  all  but  boundless  needs  of  men,  and  to  do  this  you  must  reach
heaven,  and  keep  up  the  communication  without  a  break.  Pray
for  the  people  while  you  preach  to  them  ;  speak  wath  God  for  them
while  you  are  speaking  with  them  for  God.  Only  so  can  you
expect  to  be  continually  in  earnest.  A  man  does  not  often  rise
from  his  knees  unearnest ;  or,  if  he  does,  he  had  better  return  to
prayer  till  the  sacred  flame  descends  upon  his  soul.  Adam  Clarke
once  said,  "  Study  yourself  to  death,  and  then  pray  yourself
alive  ajjain  " :  it  was  a  wise  sentence.  Do  not  attempt  the  first
without  the  second  ;  neither  dream  that  the  second  can  be  honestly
accomplished  without  the  first.  Work  and  pray,  as  well  as  watch
and  pray;  but  pray  always.

Stir  the  fire  also  by  frequent  attempts  at  fresh  service.  Shake
yourself  out  of  routine  by  breaking  away  from  the  familiar  fields
of  service  and  reclaiming  virgin  soil.  I  suggest  to  you,  as  a
subordinate  but  very  useful  means  of  keeping  the  heart  fresh,
the  frequent  addition  of  new  work  to  your  usual  engagements.
I  would  say  to  brethren  who  are  soon  going  away  from  the
College,  to  settle  in  spheres  where  they  will  come  into  contact
witli  but  few  superior  minds,  and  perhaps  will  be  almost  alone  in
the  higher  walks  of  spirituality, — look  well  to  yourselves  that  you
do  not  become  flat,  stale,  and  improfitable,  and  keej>  yourselves
sweet  by  maintaining  an  enterprising  spirit.  You  will  have  a
g<M>d  share  of  work  to  do,  and  few  to  help  you  in  it,  and  the
years  will  grind  along  heavily ;  watch  against  this,  and  use  all
means  to  ])revent  your  ln'coming  dull  and  sleepy,  and  among  them
uae  that  which  experience  leads  me  to  press  upon  you.     1  find  it


EARNESTNESS  :    ITS   MARRING   AND    MAINTENANCE.  159

Ejood  for  myself  to  have  some  new  work  always  on  hand.  The  old
and  usual  enterprises  must  be  kept  up,  but  somewhat  must  be  added
to  them.  It  should  be  with  us  as  with  the  squatters  upon  our
commons,  the  fence  of  our  garden  must  roll  outward  a  foot  or  two,
and  enclose  a  little  more  of  the  common  every  year.  Never  say  "  it
is  enough,"  nor  accept  the  policy  of  "  rest  and  be  thankful."  Do
all  you  possibly  can,  and  then  do  a  little  more.  I  do  not  know  by
what  process  the  gentleman  who  advertises  that  he  can  make
short  people  taller  attempts  the  task,  but  I  should  imagine  that
if  any  result  could  be  pi'oduced  in  the  direction  of  adding  a
cubit  to  one's  stature  it  would  be  by  every  morning  reaching  up
as  high  as  you  possibly  can  on  tiptoe,  and,  having  done  that,  trying
day  by  day  to  reach  a  little  higher.  This  is  certainly  the  way  to
grow  mentally  and  spiritually, — "  reaching  forth  to  that  which  is
before."  If  the  old  should  become  just  a  little  stale,  add  fresh
endeavours  to  it,  and  the  whole  mass  will  be  leavened  anew.  Try
it  and  you  will  soon  discover  the  virtue  of  breaking  uj)  fresh  ground,
invading  new  provinces  of  the  enemy,  and  scaling  fresh  heights  to
set  the  banner  of  the  Lord  thereon.  This  is,  of  course,  a  second-
ary expedient  to  those  of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  but  still
it  is  a  very  useful  one,  and  may  greatly  benefit  you.  In  a  country
town,  say  of  two  thousand  inhabitants,  you  will,  after  a  time,  feel,
"  Well,  now,  I  have  done  about  all  I  can  in  this  place."  What
then  I  There  is  a  hamlet  some  four  miles  off,  set  about  opening
a  room  thei*e.  If  one  hamlet  is  occupied,  make  an  excursion  to
another,  and  spy  out  the  land,  and  set  the  relief  of  its  spiritual
destitution  before  you  as  an  ambition.  When  the  first  place  is
supplied,  think  of  a  second.  It  is  your  duty,  it  will  also  be  your
safeguard.  Everybody  knows  what  interest  there  is  in  fresh  work.
A  gardener  will  become  weary  of  his  toil  unless  he  is  allowed  to
introduce  new  flowers  into  the  hothouse,  or  to  cut  the  beds  upon
the  lawn  in  a  novel  shaj>e ;  all  monotonous  work  is  unnatural  and
wearying  to  the  mind,  thei-efore  it  is  wisdom  to  give  variety  to  your
labour.

Far  more  weighty  is  the  advice,  keep  close  to  God,  and  keep  close
to  yow  fellow  men  whom  you  are  seeking  to  bless.  Abide  under  the
shadow  of  the  Almighty,  dwell  where  Jesus  manifests  himself,
and  live  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Your  very  life  lies  in
this.  Whitefield  mentions  a  lad  who  was  so  vividly  conscious  of
the  presence  of  God  that  he  would  generally  walk  the  roads  with
his  hat  off.  How  I  wish  we  were  always  in  such  a  mood.  It
would  be  no  trouble  to  maintain  earnestness  then.


IGO        earnestness:  its  marking  and  maintenance.

Take  care,  also,  to  be  on  most  familiar  terms  with  those  whose
souls  are  committed  to  your  care.  Stand  in  the  stream  and  fish.
Many  preachers  are  utterly  ignorant  as  to  how  the  bulk  of  the
people  are  living ;  they  are  at  home  among  books,  but  quite  at  sea
among  men.  What  would  you  think  of  a  botanist  who  seldom  saw
real  flowers,  or  an  astronomer  who  never  spent  a  night  wath  the
stars  ?  Would  they  be  worthy  of  the  name  of  men  of  science  ?
Neither  can  a  minister  of  the  gospel  be  anything  but  a  mere
empiric  unless  he  mingles  with  men,  and  studies  character  for  him-
self. "  Studies  from  the  life," — gentlemen,  we  must  have  plenty
of  these  if  we  are  to  paint  to  the  life  in  our  semions.  Read  men  as
well  as  books,  and  love  inen  rather  than  opinions,  or  you  will  be
inanimate  preachers.

Get  into  close  quarters  with  those  who  are  in  an  anxious  state.
Watch  their  difficulties,  their  throes  and  pangs  of  conscience.
It  will  help  to  make  you  earnest  when  you  see  their  eagerness
to  find  peace.  On  the  other  hand,  when  you  see  how  little  earnest
the  bulk  of  men  remain,  it  may  help  to  make  you  more  zealous
for  their  arousing.  Rejoice  with  those  who  are  finding  the  Sa-
viour :  this  is  a  grand  means  of  revival  for  your  ovm  soul.  When
you  are  enabled  to  bring  a  mourner  to  Jesus  you  will  feel  quite
young  again.  It  will  be  as  oil  to  your  bones  to  hear  a  weeping
penitent  exclaim,  *'  I  see  it  all  now  I  I  believe,  and  my  burden  is
gone  :  I  am  saved."  Sometimes  the  rapture  of  newborn  souls  will
electrify  you  into  apostolic  intensity.  Who  could  not  preach  after
having  seen  souls  converted?  Be  on  the  spot  when  grace  at  last
captures  the  lost  sheep,  that  by  sharing  in  the  Great  Shepherd's
rejoicings  you  may  renew  your  youth.  Be  in  at  the  death  with
sinners,  and  you  will  be  repaid  for  the  weary  chase  after  them
which  it  may  be  you  have  followed  for  months  and  years.  Grasp
them  with  firm  hold  of  love,  and  say,  "  Yes,  by  the  grace  of  God,
I  have  really  won  these  souls ;"  and  your  enthusiasm  will  flame
forth.

If  you  have  to  labour  in  a  large  town  I  should  recc^nmcnd
you  to  familiarize  yourself,  wherever  your  place  of  worship  may
be,  with  the  poverty,  ignorance,  and  drunkenness  of  the  place.
Go  if  you  can  with  a  City  missionary  into  the  poorest  quarter,  and
you  will  sec  that  which  will  astonish  you,  and  the  actual  sight  of
the  disease  will  make  you  eager  to  reveal  the  remedy.  There  is
enough  of  evil  to  be  H(^en  even  in  the  best  streets  of  our  great  cities,
but  there  i«  an  unutterable  depth  of  horror  in  the  condition  of  the
kIiuiis.     As  a  doctor  walks  the  hosj)itals,  so  ought  you  to  traverse  the


earnestness:  its  marring  and  maintenance.         161

lanes  and  courts  to  behold  the  mischief  whioli  sin  has  wrought.  It
is  enough  to  make  a  man  weep  tears  of  blood  to  gaze  ujwn  the  deso-
lation which  sin  lias  made  in  the  earth.  One  day  with  a  devoted
missionary  would  be  a  fine  termination  to  your  College  course,  and
a  fit  preparation  for  work  in  your  own  sphere.  See  the  masses
living  in  their  sins,  defiled  with  drinking  and  Sabbath-breaking,
rioting  and  blaspheming;  and  see  them  dying  sodden  and  har-
dened, or  terrified  and  despairing  :  surely  this  will  rekindle  ex-
piring zeal  if  anything  can  do  it.  The  world  is  full  of  grinding
})overty,  and  crushing  sorrow ;  shame  and  death  are  the  portion  of
thousands,  and  it  needs  a  great  gospel  to  meet  the  dire  necessities
of  men's  souls.  Verily  it  is  so.  Do  you  doubt  it  f  Go  and  see
for  yourselves.  Thus  will  you  learn  to  preach  a  great  salvation,
and  magnify  the  great  Saviour,  not  with  your  mouth  only,  but
with  your  heart ;  and  thus  will  you  be  married  to  your  work
beyond  all  possibility  of  deserting  it.

Death-beds  are  grand  schools  for  us.  They  are  intended  to
act  as  tonics  to  brace  us  to  our  work.  I  have  come  down  from
the  bed-chambers  of  the  dving,  and  thought  that  everybody  was
mad,  and  myself  most  of  all.  I  have  grudged  the  earnestness
which  men  devoted  to  earthly  things,  and  half  said  to  myself, — Why
was  that  man  driving  along  so  hastily  1  Why  was  that  woman
walking  out  in  such  finery?  Since  they  were  all  to  die  so  soon,
I  thought  nothing  worth  their  douig  but  preparing  to  meet  their
God.  To  be  often  where  men  die  will  help  us  to  teach  them
both  to  die  and  to  live.  M'Cheyne  was  wont  to  visit  his  sick  or
dying  hearers  on  the  Saturday  afternoon,  for,  as  he  told  Dr.  James
Hamilton,  "  Before  preaching  he  liked  to  look  over  the  verge."

I  pray  you,  moreover,  measure  your  work  in  the  light  of  God.
Are  you  God's  servant  or  not  1  If  you  are,  how  can  your  heart
be  cold  t  Are  you  sent  by  a  dying  Saviour  to  proclaim  his  love
and  win  the  reward  of  his  wounds,  or  are  you  not  ?  If  vou  are,
how  can  you  fiug  ?  Is  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  you?  Has  the
Lord  anointed  you  to  preach  glad  tidings  to  the  poor  {  If  he  has
not,  do  not  pretend  to  it.  If  he  has,  go  in  this  thy  might,  and  the
Lord  shall  be  thy  strength.  Yours  is  not  a  trade,  or  a  profession.
Assuredly  if  you  measure  it  by  the  tradesman's  measure  it  is  the
poorest  business  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Consider  it  as  a  pro-
fession :  who  would  not  prefer  any  other,  so  far  as  golden  gains  or
worldly  honours  are  concerned?  But  if  it  be  a  divine  calling,
and  you  a  miracle-worker,  dwelling  in  the  supeniatural,  and
working  not  for  time  but  for  eternity,  then  you  belong  to  a  nobler

12


1  62  EARNESTNESS  :    ITS   MARRING  AND   MAINTENANCE.

guild,  and  to  a  higher  fraternity  than  any  that  spring  of  earth
and  deal  ^\  ith  time.  Look  at  it  aright,  and  you  will  own  that  it
is  a  grand  thing  to  be  as  poor  as  your  Lord,  if,  like  him,  you
may  make  many  rich ;  you  will  feel  that  it  is  a  glorious  thing
to  be  as  unknown  and  despised  as  were  your  Lord's  first  follower?,
because  you  are  making  him  known,  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal.
You  will  be  satisfied  to  be  anything  or  to  be  nothing,  and  the
thought  of  self  will  not  enter  your  mind,  or  only  cross  it  to  be
scouted  as  a  meanness  not  to  be  tolerated  by  a  consecrated  man.
There  is  the  point.  Measure  your  work  as  it  should  be  measured,
and  I  am  not  afraid  that  your  earnestness  will  be  diminished.
Gaze  upon  it  by  the  light  of  the  judgment  day,  and  in  view  of  the
eternal  rewards  of  faithfulness.  Oh,  brethren,  the  present  joy  of
having  saved  a  soul  is  overAvhelmingly  delightful ;  you  have  felt
it,  I  trust,  and  know  it  now.  To  save  a  soul  from  going  down  to
perdition  brings  to  us  a  little  heaven  below,  but  what  must  it  be
at  the  day  of  judgment  to  meet  spirits  redeemed  by  Christ,  who
learned  the  news  of  their  redemption  from  our  lips  !  We  look
forward  to  a  blissful  heaven  in  communion  with  our  Master,  but
we  shall  also  know  the  added  joy  of  meeting  those  loved  ones  Avhom
we  led  to  Jesus  by  our  ministry.  Let  us  endure  every  cross,  and
despise  all  shame,  for  the  joy  which  Jesus  sets  before  us  of  winning
men  for  him.

One  more  thought  may  help  to  keep  up  our  earnestness.  Con-
sider the  great  evil  which  will  certainly  come  upon  us  and  upon
our  hearers  if  we  be  negligent  in  our  work.  "  They  shall  perish  "
— is  not  that  a  dreadful  sentence  ?  It  is  to  me  quite  as  awful  as
that  which  follows  it, — *'  but  their  blood  will  I  require  at  the
watchman's  hand."  How  shall  we  describe  the  doom  of  an  un-
faithful minister'.^  And  evexy  unearnest  minister  is  unfaithful.  I
would  infinitely  prefer  to  be  consigned  to  Tophet  as  a  murderer  of
men's  bodies  than  as  a  destroyer  of  men's  souls  ;  neither  do  J
know  of  any  condition  in  which  a  man  can  perish  so  fatally,  so
infinitely,  as  in  that  of  the  man  who  preaches  a  gospel  which  ho
does  not  believe,  and  assumes  the  office  of  pastor  over  a  people
whoso  good  lie  does  not  intensely  desire.  Let  us  i)ray  to  be  found
faithful  always,  and  ever.  God  gi'ant  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may
make  and  keep  us  so.


LECTURE  IX.


Having  often  said  in  this  room  that  a  minister  ought  to  have
one  blind  eye  and  one  deaf  ear,  I  have  excited  the  curiosity  of
several  brethren,  who  have  requested  an  explanation  ;  for  it
appears  to  them,  as  it  does  also  to  me,  that  the  keener  eyes  and
ears  we  have  the  better.  Well,  gentlemen,  since  the  text  is  some-
what mysterious,  you  shall  have  the  exegesis  of  it.

A  part  of  my  meaning  is  expressed  in  plain  language  by
Solomon,  in  the  book  of  Eeclesiastes  (vii.  21):  "Also  take  no  heed
unto  all  words  that  are  spoken  ;  lest  thou  hear  thy  servant  curse
thee."  The  margin  says,  "  Give  not  thy  heart  to  all  words  that
are  spoken  ;" — do  not  take  them  to  heart  or  let  them  weigh  with
you,  do  not  notice  them,  or  act  as  if  you  heard  them.  You
cannot  stop  people's  tongues,  and  therefore  the  best  thing  is
to  stop  your  own  ears  and  never  mind  what  is  spoken.  There  is
a  world  of  idle  chit-chat  abroad,  and  he  who  takes  note  of  it  mil
have  enough  to  do.  He  will  find  that  even  those  who  live  with
him  are  not  always  singing  his  praises,  and  that  when  he  has
displeased  his  most  faithful  servants  they  have,  in  the  heat  of  the
moment,  spoken  fierce  words  which  it  would  be  better  for  him
not  to  have  heard.  Who  has  not,  under  temporary  irritation,
said  that  of  another  which  he  has  afterwards  regretted  ?  It  is
the  part  of  the  generous  to  treat  passionate  words  as  if  they  had
never  been  uttered.  When  a  man  is  in  an  angry  mood  it  is
wise  to  walk  away  from  him,  and  leave  off  strife  before  it  be
meddled  with ;  and  if  we  are  compelled  to  hear  hasty  language,  we
must  endeavour  to  obliterate  it  from  the  memory,  and  say  with
David,  "But*  I,  as  a  deaf  man,  heard  not.  I  was  as  a  man  that
heareth  not,  and  in  whose  mouth  are  no  reproofs."  Tacitus  des-
cribes a  wise  man  as  saying  to  one  that  railed  at  him,  "  You
are  lord  of  your  tongue,  but  I  am  also  master  of  my  ears " — you
may  say  what  you  please,  but  I  will  only  hear  what  I  choose.


164  THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

We  cannot  shut  our  ears  as  we  do  our  eyes,  for  we  have  no  ear
lids,  and  yet,  as  we  read  of  him  that  "  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hear-
ing of  blood,"  it  is,  no  doubt,  possible  to  seal  the  portal  of  the  ear
so  that  nothing  contraband  shall  enter.  We  would  say  of  the
general  gossip  of  the  village,  and  of  the  unadvised  words  of  angry
friends — do  not  hear  them,  or  if  you  must  hear  them,  do  not  lay
them  to  heart,  for  you  also  have  talked  idly  and  angrily  in  your
day,  and  would  even  now  be  in  an  awkward  position  if  you  were
called  to  account  for  every  word  that  you  have  spoken,  even  about
your  dearest  friend.  Thus  Solomon  argued  as  he  closed  the  passage
which  we  have  quoted, — "For  oftentimes  also  thine  own  heart
knoweth  that  thou  thyself  likewise  hast  cursed  others."

In  enlarging  upon  my  text,  let  me  say  first, — when  you  com-
mence youi*  ministry  make  up  your  mind  to  begin  with  a  clean  sheet ;
be  deaf  and  blind  to  the  longstanding  differences  icliich  may  survive  in
the  church.  As  soon  as  you  enter  upon  your  pastorate  you  may  be
waited  upon  by  persons  who  are  anxious  to  secure  your  adhesion
to  their  side  in  a  family  quarrel  or  church  dispute ;  be  deaf  and
blind  to  these  people,  and  assure  them  that  bygones  must  be  by-
gones with  you,  and  that  as  you  have  not  inherited  your  predecessor's
cupboard  you  do  not  mean  to  eat  his  cold  meat.  If  any  flagrant
injustice  has  been  done,  be  diligent  to  set  it  right,  but  if  it  be  a
mere  feud,  bid  the  quarrelsome  party  cease  from  it,  and  tell  him
once  for  all  that  you  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  The
answer  of  Gallio  will  almost  suit  you:  '*If  it  were  a  matter
of  wrong  or  wicked  lewdness,  O  ye  Jews,  reason  would  that  I
should  boar  with  you  :  but  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  names,
and  vain  janglings,  look  ye  to  it;  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of  such
matters."  When  I  came  to  New  Park-street  Chapel  as  a  young
man  from  the  country,  and  was  chosen  pastor,  I  was  speedily  in-
terviewed by  a  good  man  who  had  left  tiie  church,  having,  as  he
said,  been  "  treated  shamefully."  He  menti(med  the  names  of  half-
a-dozen  persons,  all  prominent  members  of  the  church,  who  had
behaved  in  a  very  unchristian  manner  to  him,  he,  poor  innocent
sufferer,  having  been  a  model  of  patience  and  holiness.  I  learned
his  charact<^r  at  once  from  what  he  said  about  others  (a  mode  of
ju<lgiiig  which  has  never  misled  me),  and  I  made  up  my  mind  how
to  act.  1  told  him  that  the  church  had  been  in  a  sadly  unsettled
state,  and  that  the  only  way  out  of  the  snarl  was  for  every  one  to
forget  the  past  and  begin  again.  lie  said  that  the  lapse  of  years
dicl  not  alti'r  facts,  and  I  replied  that  it  would  altx.'r  a  man's  view
of  them  if  in  that  time  he  hud  become  a  wiser  and  a  better  man.


THE   BLIND   EYE   AXD   THE   DEAF   EAR.  165

However,  I  added,  that  all  the  past  had  gone  away  with  my
predecessors,  that  he  must  follow  them  to  their  new  spheres,  and
settle  matters  with  theniy  for  I  would  not  touch  the  affair  with
a  pair  of  tonp^s.  lie  waxed  somewhat  warm,  but  I  allowed  him
to  radiate  until  he  was  cool  again,  and  we  shook  hands  and  parted.
lie  was  a  good  man,  but  constructed  upon  an  uncomfortable  prin-
ciple, so  that  he  came  across  the  path  of  others  in  a  very  awkward
manner  at  times,  and  if  I  had  gone  into  his  JiaiTative  and  examined
his  case,  there  would  have  been  no  end  to  the  strife.  I  am
quite  certain  that,  for  my  own  success,  and  for  the  prosperity  of
the  church,  I  took  the  wisest  course  by  applying  my  blind  eye
to  all  disputes  which  dated  previously  to  my  advent.  It  is  the
extreme  of  unwisdom  for  a  young  man  fresh  from  college,  or  from
another  charge,  to  suffer  himself  to  be  earwigged  by  a  clique,  and
to  be  bribed  by  kindness  and  flattery  to  become  a  partisan,  and  so
to  ruin  himself  with  one-half  of  his  people.  Know  nothing  of
parties  and  cliques,  but  be  the  pastor  of  all  the  flock,  and  care  for
all  alike.  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  and  one  sure  way  of  j>eace-
making  is  to  let  the  fire  of  contention  alone.  Neither  fan  it,  nor
stir  it,  nor  add  fuel  to  it,  but  let  it  go  out  of  itself.  Begin  your
ministry  with  one  blind  eye  and  one  deaf  ear.

/  should  recommend  the  use  of  the  same  faculty^  or  want  of
faculhj,  with  regard  to  finance  in  the  matter  of  your  own  salary.
There  are  some  occjvsions,  especially  in  raising  a  new  church,  when
you  may  have  no  deacon  who  is  qualified  to  manage  that  depart-
ment, and,  therefore,  you  may  feel  called  upon  to  undertake  it
yourselves.  In  such  a  case  you  are  not  to  be  censured,  you  ought
even  to  be  commended.  Many  a  time  also  the  work  would  come
to  an  end  altogether  if  the  preacher  did  not  act  as  his  own  deacon*
and  find  supplies  both  temporal  and  spiritual  by  liis  own  exertions.
To  these  exceptional  cases  I  have  nothing  to  say  but  that  I  admire
the  struggling  worker  and  deeply  sympathize  with  him,  for  he  is
overweighted,  and  is  apt  to  be  a  less  successful  soldier  for  his  Lord
because  he  is  entangled  with  the  affairs  of  this  life.  In  churches
which  are  well  established,  and  afford  a  decent  maintenance,  the
minister  will  do  well  to  supervise  all  things,  but  interfere  with
nothing.  If  deacons  cannot  be  trusted  they  ought  not  to  be
deacons  at  all,  but  if  they  are  worthy  of  their  office  they  are  worthy
of  our  confidence.  I  know  that  instances  occur  in  which  they  are
sadly  incompetent  and  yet  must  be  borne  with,  and  in  such  a
state  of  things  the  pastor  must  open  the  eye  which  otherwise
would  have  remained  blind.     Rather  than  the   management  of


16G         THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

church  funds  should  become  a  scandal  we  must  resolutely  inter-
fere, but  if  there  is  no  urgent  call  for  us  to  do  so  we  had*  better
believe  in  the  division  of  labour,  and  let  deacons  do  their  own  work.
We  have  the  same  rio;ht  as  other  officers  to  deal  with  financial
matters  if  we  please,  but  it  will  be  our  wisdom  as  much  as  possible
to  let  them  alone,  if  others  will  manage  them  for  us.  When  the
purse  is  bare,  the  wife  sickly,  and  the  children  numerous,  the
preacher  must  speak  if  the  church  does  not  properly  provide  for
him ;  but  to  be  constantly  bringing  before  the  people  requests  for
an  increase  of  income  is  not  wise.  When  a  minister  is  poorly  remu-
nerated, and  he  feels  that  he  is  worth  more,  and  that  the  church
could  give  him  more,  he  ought  kindly,  boldly,  and  firmly  to  com-
municate with  the  deacons  first,  and  if  they  do  not  take  it  up  he
should  then  mention  it  to  the  brethren  in  a  sensible,  business-like
way,  not  as  craving  a  charity,  but  as  putting  it  to  their  sense  of
honour,  that  "the  labom'er  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  Let  him  say
outright  what  he  thinks,  for  there  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of,  but
there  would  be  much  more  cause  for  shame  if  he  dishonoured  him-
self and  the  cause  of  God  by  plunging  into  debt :  let  him  there-
fore speak  to  the  point  in  a  proper  spirit  to  the  proper  persons,
and  there  end  the  matter,  and  not  resort  to  secret  complaining.
Faith  in  God  should  tone  down  our  concern  about  temporalities,
and  enable  us  to  practise  Avhat  we  preach,  namely — "  Take  no
thought,  saying.  What  shall  we  eat  ?  or,  What  shall  we  drink  ;  or,
Wlierewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  ?  for  your  heavenly  Father
knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things."  Some  who  have
pretended  to  live  by  faith  have  had  a  very  shrewd  way  of  drawing
out  donations  by  turns  of  the  indirect  corkscrew,  but  you  will
either  ask  plainly,  like  men,  or  you  will  leave  it  to  the  Christian
feeling  of  your  people,  and  turn  to  the  items  and  modes  of  church
finance  a  blind  eye  and  a  deaf  ear.

Tlie  blind  eye  and  the  deaf  ear  will  come  in  exceedingly  loell  in
connection  icith  the  gossips  of  the  place.  Every  church,  and,  for  the
matter  of  that,  every  village  and  family,  is  plagued  with  certain
Mrs.  Grundys,  who  drink  tea  and  talk  vitriol.  They  are  never  quiet,
bat  buzz  around  to  the  great  antioyance  of  those  who  are  devout
and  jiractical.  No  one  needs  to  look  far  for  perpetual  motion,  he
has  only  to  watch  their  tongues.  At  tea-meetings,  Dorcas
meetings,  and  other  gatherings,  thoy  practise  vivisection  upon  the
charatrters  of  their  neighbours,  and  of  course  they  are  eager  to  try
their  knives  upon  tlie  minister,  the  minister's  wife,  the  minister's
children,  the  minister's  wife's  bonnet,  the  dress  of  the  minister's


THE    BLIND    EYE    AND    THE    DEAF   EAR.  1G7

daughter,  and  how  many  new  ribbons  she  has  worn  for  the  last  six
months,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  There  are  also  certain  persons
who  are  never  so  happy  as  when  they  are  *'  grieved  to  the  heart"  to
have  to  tell  the  minister  that  Mr.  A.  is  a  snake  in  the  grass,
that  he  is  quite  mistaken  in  thinking  so  well  of  Messrs.  B  and  C,
and  that  they  have  lieard  quite  "  promiscously  "  that  Mr.  D.  and
his  wife  are  badly  matched.  Then  follows  a  long  string  about
Mrs.  E,,  who  says  that  she  and  Mrs.  F.  overheard  Mrs.  G.  say  to
Mrs.  n.  that  Mrs.  J.  should  say  that  Mr.  K.  and  Miss  L.  were
going  to  move  from  the  chapel  and  hear  Mr.  M.,  and  all  because
of  wiiat  old  N.  said  to  young  O.  about  that  Miss  P.  Never  listen
to  such  ])eople.  Do  as  Nelson  did  when  he  put  his  blind  eye  to  the
telescope  and  declared  that  he  did  not  see  the  signal,  and  thei*efore
would  go  on  with  the  battle.  Let  the  creatures  buzz,  and  do  not
even  hear  them,  unless  indeed  they  buzz  so  much  concerning  one
person  that  the  matter  threatens  to  be  serious  ;  then  it  will  be  well
to  bring  them  to  book  and  talk  in  sober  earnestness  to  them.
Assure  them  that  you  are  obliged  to  have  facts  definitely  before
you,  that  your  memory  is  not  very  tenacious,  that  you  have  many
things  to  think  of,  that  you  are  always  afraid  of  making  any
mistake  in  such  matters,  and  that  if  they  would  be  good  enough
to  write  down  what  they  have  to  say  the  case  would  be  more  fully
before  you,  and  you  could  give  more  time  to  its  consideration.
Mrs.  Grundy  will  not  do  that;  she  has  a  great  object  ion  to  making
clear  and  definite  statements ;  she  prefers  talking  at  random.

I  heartily  wish  that  by  any  process  we  could  put  down  gossip,
but  I  su})])ose  that  it  will  never  be  done  so  long  as  the  human  race
continues  what  it  is,  for  James  tells  us  that  '*  every  kind  of  beasts,
and  of  birds,  and  of  serpents,  and  of  things  in  the  sea,  is  tamed,
and  hath  been  tamed  of  mankind:  but  the  tongue  can  no  man
tame ;  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison."  What  can't
be  cured  must  be  endured,  and  the  best  way  of  enduring  it  is  not
to  listen  to  it.  Over  one  of  our  old  castles  a  former  owner  has
inscribed  these  lines —

TlIEY   SAY.

What  do  they  say?
Let  them  say.

Thin-skinned  persons  should  learn  this  motto  by  heart.  The  talk
of  the  village  is  never  worthy  of  notice,  and  you  should  never
take  any  interest  in  it  except  to  mourn  over  tha  maUce  and  heart-
lessness  of  which  it  is  too  often  the  indicator.

^Mayow  in  his  '*  Plain  Preaching "  very  forcibly  says,  "  If  you


168         THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

were  to  see  a  woman  killing  a  farmer  s  ducks  and  geese,  for  the
sake  of  having  one  of  the  feathers,  you  would  see  a  person  acting
as  we  do  when  we  speak  evil  of  anyone,  for  the  sake  of  the
pleasure  we  feel  in  evil  speaking.  For  the  pleasure  we  feel  is
not  worth  a  single  feather,  and  the  pain  we  give  is  often  greater
than  a  man  feels  at  the  loss  of  his  property."  Insert  a  remark  of
this  kind  now  and  then  in  a  sermon,  when  there  is  no  special
gossip  abroad,  and  it  may  be  of  some  benefit  to  the  more  sensible :
I  quite  despair  of  the  rest.

Above  all,  never  join  in  tale-bearing  yourself,  and  beg  your  wife
to  abstain  from  it  also.  Some  men  are  too  talkative  by  half,  and
remind  me  of  the  young  man  who  was  sent  to  Socrates  to  learn
oratory.  On  being  introduced  to  the  philosopher  he  talked  so
incessantly  that  Socrates  asked  for  double  fees.  "  Why  charge  me
double?  "  said  the  young  fellow.  "  Because,"  said  the  orator,  *'  I
must  teach  you  two  sciences ;  the  one  how  to  hold  your  tongue  and
the  other  how  to  speak."  The  first  science  is  the  more  difficult,
but  aim  at  proficiency  in  it,  or  you  will  suffer  greatly,  and  create
trouble  without  end.

Avoid  with  your  whole  soul  that  spirit  of  suspicion  which  sours
some  men's  lives,  and  to  all  things  from  which  yon  might  harshly
draw  an  unkind  inference  turn  a  blind  eye  and  a  deaf  ear.  Suspicion
makes  a  man  a  torment  to  himself  and  a  spy  towards  others.
Once  begin  to  suspect,  and  causes  for  distrust  Avill  multiply
around  you,  and  your  very  suspiciousness  will  create  the  major
l)art  of  them.  Many  a  friend  has  been  transformed  into  an  enemy
by  being  suspected.  Do  not,  therefore,  look  about  you  with  the
eyes  of  mistrust,  nor  listen  as  an  eaves-dropper  with  the  quick  ear
of  fear.  To  go  about  the  congregation  ferreting  out  disaffection,
like  a  gamekeeper  after  rabbits,  is  a  mean  employment,  and  is
generally  rewarded  most  sorrowfully.  Lord  Bacon  wisely  advises
"  the  pi'ovident  stay  of  enquiry  of  that  which  wo  would  be  loth  to
find."  When  nothing  is  to  be  discovered  which  will  lu'lj)  us  to
love  others  we  had  better  cease  from  the  enquiry,  for  we  nuiy  drag
to  liglit  that  which  may  be  the  commencement  of  years  of  con-
tention. 1  am  not,  of  course,  referring  to  cases  ri'ipiiring  disci-
])linc  which  must  be  thoroughly  investigated  and  boldly  dealt  with,
but  I  have  upon  my  mind  mere  personal  matters  where  the  main
Bufferer  is  yourself  ;  here  it  is  always  best  not  to  know,  nor  to  wish
to  know,  what  is  being  saiil  about  you,  either  by  friends  or  foes.
Those  who  praise  us  are  i^robably  as  much  mistaken  as  thos(!  who
abuiic  us,  and  the  one  may  be  regarded  as  a  set  off  to  the  other,  if


THE    BLIND   EYE   AND    THE   DEAF   EAR.  169

indeed  it  be  worth  while  taking  any  account  at  all  of  man's  judg-
ment. If  we  have  the  approbation  of  our  God,  certified  by  a
placid  conscience,  we  can  afford  to  be  indifferent  to  the  opinions  of
our  fellow  men,  whether  they  commend  or  condemn.  If  we
cannot  reach  this  point  we  are  babes  and  not  men.

Some  are  childishly  anxious  to  know  their  friend's  opinion  of  them,
and  if  it  contain  the  smallest  element  of  dissent  or  censure,  they
retrard  him  as  an  enemy  forthwith.  Surely  we  are  not  pojws,  and
do  not  wish  our  hearers  to  regard  us  as  infallible !  We  have
known  men  become  quite  enraged  at  a  perfectly  fair  and  reason-
able remark,  and  regard  an  honest  friend  as  an  opptuient  who
delighted  to  find  fault;  this  misrepresentation  on  the  one  side  has
»oou  produced  heat  on  the  other,  and  strife  has  ensued.  IIow  much
better  is  gentle  forbearance  I  You  must  be  able  to  bear  criticism,
or  you  are  not  fit  to  be  at  the  head  of  a  congregation ;  and  you
must  let  the  critic  go  without  reckoning  him  among  your  deadly
foes,  or  you  will  prove  yourself  a  mere  weakling.  It  is  wisest
always  to  show  double  kindness  where  you  have  been  severely
handled  by  one  who  thought  it  his  duty  to  do  so,  for  he  is
probably  an  honest  man  ami  worth  winning.  He  who  in  your
early  days  hardly  thinks  you  fit  for  the  pastorate  may  yet  become
your  firmest  defender  if  he  sees  that  you  gi-ow  in  grace,  and  ad-
vance in  qualification  for  the  work ;  do  not,  therefore,  regard  him
as  a  foe  for  truthfully  expressing  his  doubts  ;  does  not  your  own
lieart  confess  that  his  fears  were  not  altogether  groundless  ?  Turn
your  doaf  ear  to  what  you  judge  to  be  his  harsh  criticism,  and
endeavour  to  preach  better.

Persons  from  love  of  change,  from  pique,  from  advance
in  their  tastes,  and  other  causes,  may  become  uneasy  under
our.  ministry,  and  it  is  well  for  us  to  know  nothing  about  it.
Perceiving  the  danger,  we  must  not  betray  our  discovery,  but
bestir  ourselves  to  improve  our  sermons,  hoping  that  the  good
people  will  be  better  fed  and  forget  their  dissatisfaction.  If  they
are  truly  gracious  persons,  the  incipient  evil  will  pass  away,  and  no
real  discontent  will  arise,  or  if  it  does  you  must  not  provoke  it  by
suspecting  it.

Where  I  have  known  that  there  existed  a  measure  of  disaffection
to  myself,  I  have  not  recognised  it,  unless  it  has  been  forced  upon
me,  but  have,  on  the  contrary,  acted  towards  the  opposing  person
with  all  the  more  courtesy  and  friendliness,  and  I  have  never
heard  any  more  of  the  matter.  If  I  had  treated  the  good  man  as
an  opponent,  he  would  have  done  his  best  to  take  the  part  assigned


170  THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

him,  and  carry  it  out  to  liis  own  credit;  but  I  felt  that  he  was  a
Christian  man,  and  had  a  right  to  dislike  me  if  he  thought  fit,  and
that  if  he  did  so  I  ought  not  to  think  unkindly  of  him ;  and
therefore  I  treated  him  as  one  who  was  a  friend  to  my  Lord,  if
not  to  me,  gave  him  some  work  to  do  which  implied  confidence  in
him,  made  him  feel  at  home,  and  by  degrees  won  him  to  be  an
attached  friend  as  well  as  a  fellow-worker.  The  best  of  people
are  sometimes  out  at  elbows  and  say  unkind  things  ;  we  should
be  glad  if  our  friends  could  quite  forget  what  we  said  when  we
were  peevish  and  irritable,  and  it  will  be  Christlike  to  act  towards
others  in  this  matter  as  we  would  wish  them  to  do  towards  us.
Never  make  a  brother  remember  that  he  once  uttered  a  hard  speech
in  reference  to  yourself.  If  you  see  him  in  a  happier  mood,  do
not  mention  the  former  painful  occasion :  if  he  be  a  man  of  right
spirit  he  will  in  future  be  unwilling  to  vex  a  pastor  who  has
treated  him  so  generously,  and  if  he  be  a  mere  boor  it  is  a  pity
to  hold  any  argiunent  with  him,  and  therefore  the  past  had  better
go  by  default.

It  would  be  better  to  be  deceived  a  hundred  times  than  to  live
a  life  of  suspicion.  It  is  intolerable.  The  miser  who  traverses
his  chamber  at  midnight  and  hears  a  burglar  in  every  falling  leaf
is  not  more  wretched  than  the  minister  who  believes  that  plots  are
hatching  against  him,  and  that  reports  to  his  disadvantage  are
being  spread.  I  remember  a  brother  who  believed  that  he  was
being  poisoned,  and  was  persuaded  that  even  the  seat  he  sat  upon
and  the  clothes  he  wore  had  by  some  subtle  chemistry  become
saturated  with  death ;  his  life  was  a  perpetual  scare,  and  such  is
the  existence  of  a  minister  when  he  mistrusts  all  around  him.
Nor  is  suspicion  merely  a  source  of  disquietiide,  it  is  a  moral  evil,
and  injures  the  character  of  the  man  who  harbours  it.  Suspicion
in  kings  creates  tyranny,  in  husbands  jealousy,  and  in  ministers
bitterness ;  such  bitterness  as  in  spirit  dissolves  all  the  ties  of  the
pastoral  relation,  eating  like  a  corrosive  acid  into  the  very  soul
of  the  office  and  making  it  a  curse  rather  than  a  blessing.  WheiR
once  this  terrible  evil  has  curdled  all  the  milk  of  human  kindnesjt
in  a  man's  bosom,  he  becomes  more  fit  for  the  detective  [lolice  force
than  for  the  ministry ;  like  a  spider,  he  begins  to  cast  out  his  lines,
and  fashions  a  web  of  tremulous  threads,  all  of  which  lead  up  to
himself  and  warn  him  of  the  least  touch  of  even  the  tiniest  midge.
There  he  sits  in  the  centre,  a  mass  of  sensation,  all  nerves  and  raw
wounds,  excitable  and  excited,  a  self-immolated  martyr  drawing
the    blazing   faggots  about   him,    and  ap|)arently  anxious    to  be


THE    BLIND    EYE   AND    THE    DEAF   EAR.  171

burned.  The  most  faithful  friend  is  unsafe  under  such  con-
ditions. The  most  careful  avoidance  of  offence  will  not  secure
immunity  from  mistrust,  but  will  probably  be  construed  into
cunninir  and  cowardice.  Society  is  almost  as  much  in  dauf^er  from
a  suspecting  man  as  from  a  mad  dog,  for  he  snaps  on  all  sides
without  reason,  and  scatters  right  and  left  the  foam  of  his  mad-
ness. It  is  vain  to  reason  with  the  victim  of  this  folly,  for  with
perverse  ingenuity  he  turns  every  argument  the  wrong  way,  and
makes  your  })lea  for  confidence  another  reason  for  mistrust.  It
is  sad  that  he  cannot  see  the  ini(iuity  of  his  groundless  censure
of  others,  esjiecially  of  those  who  have  been  his  best  friends  and
the  firmest  upholders  of  the  cause  of  Christ.

"  I  would  not  wrong
Virtue  so  tried  by  the  least  shade  of  doubt :
Undue  suspicion  is  more  abject  ba^euesd
Even  than  the  guilt  suspected."

No  one  ought  to  be  made  an  offender  for  a  word  ;  but,  when  suspi-
cion rules,  even  silence  becomes  a  crime.  Brethren,  shun  this  vice
by  renouncing  the  love  of  self.  Judge  it  to  be  a  small  matter  what
men  think  or  say  of  you,  and  care  only  for  their  tivatment  of  your
Lord.  If  you  are  naturally  sensitive  do  not  indulge  the  weak-
ness, nor  allow  others  to  play  upon  it.  Would  it  not  be  a  great
degratlution  of  your  office  if  you  were  to  keep  an  army  of  spies
in  your  pay  to  collect  infonnation  as  to  all  that  your  people
said  of  you  1  And  yet  it  amounts  to  this  if  you  allow  certain
busybodies  to  bring  you  all  the  gossip  of  the  place.  Drive  the
creatures  away.  Abhor  those  mischief-making,  tattling  hand-
maidens  of  strife.  Those  who  will  fetch  will  cany,  and  no  doubt
the  gossips  go  from  your  house  and  report  every  observation  which
falls  from  your  lips,  with  plenty  of  garnishing  of  their  own.  Re-
member that,  as  the  receiver  is  as  bad  as  the  thief,  so  the  hearer  of
scandal  is  a  sharer  in  the  guilt  of  it.  If  there  were  no  listeninjr  ears
there  would  be  no  talebearing  tongues.  While  you  are  a  buyer  of
ill  wares  the  demand  will  create  the  supply,  and  the  factories  of
falsehood  will  be  working  full  time.  No  one  wishes  to  become  a
creator  of  lies,  and  yet  he  who  hears  slanders  with  pleasure  and
believes  them  with  readiness  will  hatch  many  a  brood  into  active  life.
Solomon  says  ''  a  whisjierer  separateth  chief  friends."  (Prov.
xvi.  28.)  Insinuations  are  thrown  out,  and  jealousies  aroused,
till  "mutual  coolness  ensues,  and  neither  can  understand  why;
each  wonders  what  can  possibly  be  the  cause.  Thus  the  firmest,
the  longest,  the  waimest,  and  most   confiding   attachments,  the


172  THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

sources  of  life's  sweetest  joys,  are  broken  up  perhaps  for  ever."*
This  is  work  worthy  of  the  arch-fiend  himself,  but  it  could  never
be  done  if  men  lived  out  of  the  atmosphere  of  suspicion.  As  it  is,
the  world  is  full  of  sorrow  through  this  cause,  a  sorrow  as  sharp  as
it  is  superfluous.  This  is  grievous  indeed !  Campbell  eloquently
remarks,  "  The  ruins  of  old  friendships  are  a  more  melancholy
spectacle  to  me  than  those  of  desolated  palaces.  They  exhibit
the  heart  which  was  once  lighted  up  with  joy  all  damp  and
deserted,  and  haunted  by  those  birds  of  ill  omen  that  nestle  in
ruins."     O  suspicion,  what  desolations  thou  hast  made  in  the  earth !

Learn  to  disbelieve  those  who  have  no  faith  in  their  brethren.
Suspect  those  who  would  lead  you  to  suspect  others.  A  resolute
unbelief  in  all  the  scandalmongers  will  do  much  to  repress  their
mischievous  energies.  Matthew  Pool  in  his  Cripplegate  Lecture
says,  "  Common  fame  hath  lost  its  reputation  long  since,  and  I  do
not  know  anything  which  it  hath  done  in  our  day  to  regain  it ;
therefore  it  ought  not  to  be  credited.  How  few  reports  there  are
of  any  kind  which,  when  they  come  to  be  examined,  we  do  not  find
to  be  false  I  For  my  part,  I  reckon,  if  I  believe  one  report  in
twenty,  I  make  a  very  liberal  allowance.  Especially  distrust  re-
proaches and  evil  reports,  because  these  spread  fastest,  as  being
grateful  to  most  persons,  who  suppose  their  own  reputation  to  be
never  so  well  grounded  as  when  it  is  built  ujHin  the  ruins  of
other  men's."  Because  the  persons  who  would  render  you  mis-
trustful of  your  friends  are  a  sorry  set,  and  because  suspicion  is
in  itself  a  wretched  and  tormenting  vice,  resolve  to  turn  towards
the  whole  business  your  blind  eye  and  your  deaf  ear.

Need  I  say  a  word  or  two  about  the  wisdom  of  never  hearing
wJiat  was  not  meant  for  you.  The  eaves-dropper  is  a  mean  ])erson,
very  little  if  anything  better  than  the  common  informer  ;  and  he
who  says  he  overheard  may  be  considered  to  have  lieai'd  over  and
above  what  he  should  have  done.

Jeremy  Taylor  wisely  and  justly  observes,  "  Never  listen  at
the  door  or  window,  for  besides  that  it  contains  in  it  a  danger
and  a  snare,  it  is  also  invading  my  neighbour's  privacy,  and  a  lay-
ing that  open,  which  ho  therefore  encloses  that  it  might  not  bo
open."  It  is  a  well  worn  proverb  that  listeners  seldom  hear  any
good  of  themselves.  Listening  is  a  sort  of  larceny,  but  the  goods
btoU'n  are  never  a  pleasure  to  the  thief.  Information  obtained  by
clandestine  means  must,  in  all  but  extreme  cases,  be  more  injury

*  Dr.  Wardkw  on  ProTerbs.


THE    BLIND    EYE    AND    THE    DEAF   EAK.  173

than  benefit  to  a  cause.  The  magistrate  may  judge  it  expedient
to  obtain  evidence  by  such  means,  but  I  cannot  imagine  a  case  in
wliich  a  minister  should  do  so.  Ours  is  a  mission  of  grace  and
peace ;  we  are  not  prosecutors  who  search  out  condemnatory  evi-
dence, but  friends  whose  love  would  cover  a  multitude  of  offences.
The  peeping  eyes  of  Canaan,  the  son  of  Ham,  shall  never  be  in
our  employ;  we  prefer  the  pious  delicacy  of  Shem  and  Japhet,
who  went  backward  and  covered  the  shame  which  the  child  of  evil
had  published  with  glee.

To  opinions  and  remarks  about  yourself  turn  also  as  a  general
rule  the  blind  eye  and  the  deaf  ear.  Public  men  must  expect  public
criticism,  and  as  the  public  cannot  bo  regarded  as  infallible,  public
men  may  expect  to  be  criticized  in  a  way  which  is  neither  fair  nor
pleasant.  To  all  honest  and  just  ivmarka  we  are  bound  to  give
due  measure  of  heed,  but  to  the  bitter  verdict  of  prejudice,  the
frivolous  faultfinding  of  men  of  fashion,  the  stupid  utterances  of
the  ignorant,  and  the  fierce  denunciations  of  opponents,  we  may
very  safely  turn  a  deaf  ear.  We  cannot  expect  those  to  approve
of  us  whom  we  condemn  by  our  testimony  against  their  favourite
sins  their  commemlation  would  show  that  we  had  missed  our
mark.  We  naturally  look  to  be  approved  by  our  own  people,  the
members  of  our  churches,  and  the  adherents  of  our  congregations,
and  when  they  make  observations  which  show  that  they  are  not  very
great  admirers,  we  may  be  tempted  to  discouragement  if  net  to
anger :  herein  lies  a  snare.  When  I  was  about  to  leave  my  village
charge  for  London,  one  of  the  old  men  prayed  that  I  might  be
"  delivered  from  the  bleating  of  the  sheep."  For  the  life  of  me  I
could  not  imagine  what  he  meant,  but  the  riddle  is  plain  now,  and
I  have  learned  to  offer  the  prayer  myself.  Too  much  considera-
tion of  what  is  said  by  our  people,  whether  it  be  in  praise  or  in
depreciation,  is  not  good  for  us.  If  we  dwell  on  high  with  "  that
great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  "  we  shall  care  little  for  all  the  con-
fused bleatings  around  us,  but  if  we  become  "  carnal,  and  w  alk  as
men,"  we  shall  have  little  rest  if  we  listen  to  this,  that,  and  the
other  which  every  poor  sheep  may  bleat  about  us.  Perhaps  it  is.
quite  true  that  you  were  uncommonly  dull  last  Sabbath  morning,
but  there  was  no  need  that  Mrs.  Clack  should  come  and  tell  you
that  Deacon  Jones  thought  so.  It  is  more  than  probable  that
having  been  out  in  the  country  all  the  previous  week,  your  preach-
ing was  very  like  milk  and  water,  but  there  can  be  no  necessity  for
your  going  round  among  the  people  to  discover  whether  they
noticed  it  or  not.     Is  it  not  enough  that  your  conscience  is  uneasy


i74         THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

upon  the  point  ?  Endeavour  to  improve  for  the  future,  but  do
not  want  to  hear  all  that  every  Jack,  Tom,  and  Mary  may  have  to
say  about  it.  On  the  other  hand,  you  were  on  the  high  horse  in
your  last  sermon,  and  finished  with  quite  a  flourish  of  trumpets,
and  you  feel  considerable  anxiety  to  know  what  impression  you
produced.  Repress  your  curiosity:  it  will  do  you  no  good  to
enquire.  If  the  people  should  happen  to  agree  with  your  verdict,
it  will  only  feed  your  pitiful  vanity,  and  if  they  think  otherwise
your  fishing  for  their  praise  will  injure  you  in  their  esteem.  In
any  case  it  is  all  about  yourself,  and  this  is  a  poor  theme  to  be
anxious  about;  play  the  man,  and  do  not  demean  yourself  by
seeking  compliments  like  little  children  when  dressed  in  new
clothes,  who  say,  "  See  my  pretty  frock."  Have  you  not  by  this
time  discovered  that  flattery  is  as  injurious  as  it  is  pleasant?  It
softens  the  mind  and  makes  you  more  sensitive  to  slander.  In
proportion  as  praise  pleases  you  censure  will  pain  you.  Besides,  it
is  a  crime  to  be  taken  off  from  your  great  object  of  glorifying  the
Lord  Jesus  by  petty  considerations  as  to  your  little  self,  and,  if
there  were  no  other  reason,  this  ought  to  weigh  much  with  you.
Pride  is  a  deadly  sin,  and  will  grow  without  your  borrowing  the
parish  water-cart  to  quicken  it.  Forget  expressions  which  feed
your  vanity,  and  if  you  find  yourself  relishing  the  unwhole-
some morsels  confess  the  sin  with  deep  humiliation.  Payson
showed  that  he  was  strong  in  the  Lord  when  he  wrote  to  his
mother,  "  You  must  not,  certainly,  my  dear  mother,  say  one  word
which  even  looks  like  an  intimation  that  you  think  me  advancing  in
grace.  I  cannot  bear  it.  All  the  people  here,  whether  friends  or
enemies,  conspire  to  ruin  me.  Satan  and  my  own  heart,  of  course,
will  lend  a  hand ;  and  if  you  join  too,  I  fear  all  the  cold  water  which
Christ  can  throw  upon  my  pride  will  not  prevent  its  breaking  out
into  a  destructive  flame.  As  certainly  as  anybody  flutters  and
caresses  me  my  heavenly  Father  has  to  whip  me :  and  an  un-
speakable mercy  it  is  that  ho  condescends  to  do  it.  I  can,  it  is
true,  easily  muster  a  hundred  reasons  why  I  should  not  be  proud,
•but  pride  will  not  mind  reason,  nor  anything  else  but  a  good
drubbing.  Even  at  this  moment  I  feel  it  tingling  in  my  fingers'
ends,  and  seeking  to  guide  my  pen."  Knowing  something  myself
of  those  secret  whippings  which  our  good  Father  adniinisters  to
his  servants  when  he  sees  them  unduly  exalted,  I  heartily  add  my
own  solemn  warnings  against  your  pampering  the  flesh  by  listening
to  the  praises  of  the  kindest  friends  you  have.  They  are  in-
judicious, and  you  must  beware  uf  them.


THE   BLIND   EYE   AND    THE   DEAF    EAR.  175

A  sensible  friend  who  will  unsparingly  criticize  you  from  week
to  week  will  be  a  far  greater  blessing  to  you  than  a  thousand  un-
discriminatini;  admirers  if  you  have  sense  enout;h  to  bear  his
treatment,  and  grace  enough  to  be  thankful  for  it.  When  I  was
preaching  at  the  Surrey  Gardens,  an  unknown  censor  of  great
ability  used  to  send  me  a  weekly  list  of  my  mispronunciations  and
other  slips  of  speech.  He  never  signed  his  name,  and  that  was  my
only  cause  of  complaint  against  him,  for  he  left  me  in  a  debt
which  I  could  not  acknowledge.  I  take  this  opportunity  of  con-
fessing my  obligations  to  him,  for  with  genial  temper,  and  an
evident  desire  to  benefit  me,  he  marked  down  most  relentlessly
everything  which  he  supposed  me  to  have  said  incon-ectly.  Con-
cerning some  of  these  corrections  he  was  in  error  himself,  but  for
the  most  part  he  was  right,  and  his  remarks  enabled  me  to
perceive  and  avoid  many  mistakes.  I  looked  for  his  weekly
memoranda  with  much  interest,  and  I  trust  I  am  all  the  better  for
them.  If  I  had  repeated  a  sentence  two  or  three  Sundays  before,
he  would  say,  ^'  See  same  expression  in  such  a  sermon,"  mentioning
number  and  page.  He  remarked  ou  one  occasion  that  I  too  often
quoted  the  Une

"  Nothing  in  roj  bands  I  bring,"

and,  he  added,  "  we  are  sufficiently  infonned  of  the  vacuity  of  your
hands."  He  demanded  my  authority  for  calling  a  man  covechus ;
and  so  on.  Possibly  some  young  men  might  have  been  dis-
couraged, if  not  irritated,  by  such  severe  criticisms,  but  they
would  have  been  very  foolish,  for  in  resenting  such  coiTcction  they
would  have  been  throwing  away  a  valuable  aid  to  progress  No
money  can  purchase  outspoken  honest  judgment,  and  when  we
can  get  it  for  nothing  let  us  utilize  it  to  the  fullest  extent.  The
worst  of  it  is  that  of  those  who  offer  their  judgments  few  are
qualified  to  form  them,  and  we  shall  be  pestered  with  foolish,  im-
pertinent remarks,  unless  we  turn  to  them  all  the  blind  eye  and
the  deaf  ear.

In  the  case  of  false  reports  against  yourself,  for  the  most  part  use  the
deaf  ear.  Unfortunately  liars  are  not  yet  extinct,  and,  like  Richard
Baxter  and  John  Bunyan,  you  may  be  accused  of  crimes  which  your
soul  abhors.  Be  not  staggered  thereby,  for  this  trial  has  befallen
the  very  best  of  men,  and  even  your  Lord  did  not  escape  the  en-
venomed tongue  of  falsehood.  In  almost  all  cases  it  is  the  wisest
course  to  let  such  things  die  a  natural  death.  A  great  lie,  if
unnoticed,  is  like  a  big  fish  out  of  water,  it  dashes  and  plunges  and
beats  itself  to  death  in  a  short  time.     To  answer  it  is  to  supply  it


176  THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

with  its  element,  and  help  it  to  a  longer  life.  Falsehoods  usually
carry  their  own  refutation  somewhere  about  them,  and  sting
themselves  to  death.  Some  lies  especially  have  a  peculiar  smell,
which  betrays  their  rottenness  to  every  honest  nose.  If  you  are
disturbed  by  them  the  object  of  their  invention  is  partly  answered,
but  your  silent  endurance  disappoints  malice  and  gives  you  a
partial  victory,  which  God  in  his  care  of  you  will  soon  turn  into
a  complete  deliverance.  Your  blameless  life  wnll  be  your  best
defence,  and  those  who  have  seen  it  will  not  allow  you  to  be  con-
demned so  readily  as  your  slanderers  expect.  Only  abstain  from
fighting  your  own  battles,  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  your
accusers  w;ill  gain  nothing  by  their  malevolence  but  chagrin  for
themselves  and  contempt  from  others.  To  prosecute  the  slanderer
is  very  seldom  wise.  I  remember  a  beloved  servant  of  Christ
who  in  his  youth  was  very  sensitive,  and,  being  falsely  accused,  pro-
ceeded against  the  person  at  law.  An  apology  was  offered,  it
withdrew  every  iota  of  the  charge,  and  was  most  ample,  but  the  good
man  insisted  upon  its  being  printed  in  the  newspapers,  and  the
result  convinced  him  of  his  own  unwisdom.  Multitudes,  who
would  otherwise  have  never  heard  of  the  libel,  asked  what  it
meant,  and  made  comments  thereon,  generally  concluding  with
the  sage  remark  that  he  must  have  done  something  imprudent
to  provoke  such  an  accusation.  He  was  heard  to  say  that  so  long
as  he  lived  he  would  never  resort  to  such  a  method  again,  for  he
felt  that  the  public  apology  had  done  him  more  harm  that  the
slander  itself.  Standing  as  we  do  in  a  position  which  makes  us
choice  targets  for  the  devil  and  his  allies,  our  best  course  is  to
defend  our  innocence  by  our  silence  and  leave  our  reputation
with  God.  Yet  there  are  exceptions  to  this  general  rule.  When
distinct,  definite,  pubjic  charges  are  made  against  a  man  he  is
bound  to  answer  them,  and  answer  them  in  the  clearest  and
most  open  manner.  To  decline  all  investigation  is  in  such  a  case
practically  to  plead  guilty,  and  whatever  may  be  the  mode  of
putting  it,  the  general  public  ordinarily  regard  a  refusal  to
reply  as  a  proof  of  guilt.  Under  mere  worry  and  annoyance  it
is  by  fur  the  best  to  be  altogether  passive,  but  when  the  mattes
aKsumes  more  serious  proportions,  and  our  accuser  defies  us  to  a
defence,  we  are  bound  to  meet  his  charges  with  honest  statements
of  fact.  In  every  instance  counsel  should  be  sought  of  the  Lord
as  to  how  to  deal  with  slandiTons  tonguc^s,  and  in  the  issue  inno-
cence will  be  vindicated  and  falsehood  convicted.

boine  ministers  liave  been  broken  in  spirit,  driven    from  their


THE   BLIND   EYE   AND    THE   DEAF   EAR.  177

position,  and  even  injured  in  character  by  taking  notice  of  village
scandal.  I  know  a  fine  young  man,  for  whom  I  predicted  a  career
of  usefulness,  who  fell  into  great  trouble  because  he  at  first
allowed  it  to  be  a  trouble  and  then  worked  hard  to  make  it  so.
He  came  to  me  and  complained  that  he  had  a  great  grievance ;
and  so  it  was  a  grievance,  but  from  beginning  to  end  it  was  all
about  w^hat  some  half-dozen  women  had  said  about  his  ])rocedure
after  the  death  of  his  wife.  It  was  originally  too  small  a  thing
to  deal  with, — a  Mrs.  Q.  had  said  that  she  should  not  wonder  if
the  minister  married  the  servant  then  living  in  his  house;  another
represented  her  as  saying  that  he  ought  to  marry  her,  and  then  a
third,  with  a  malicious  ingenuity,  found  a  deeper  meaning  in  the
words,  and  construed  them  into  a  charge.  Worst  of  all,  the  dear
sensitive  preacher  must  needs  trace  the  matter  out  and  accuse  a
score  or  two  of  people  of  spreading  libels  against  him,  and  even
threaten  some  of  them  with  legal  proceedings.  If  he  could  have
prayed  over  it  in  secret,  or  even  have  whistled  over  it,  no  harm
would  have  come  of  the  tittle-tattle  ;  but  this  dear  brother  could
not  treat  the  slander  wisely,  for  he  had  not  what  I  earnestly
recommend  to  you,  namely,  a  blind  eye  and  a  deaf  ear.

Once  more,  my  brethren,  the  blind  eye  and  the  deaf  ear  will  be
useful  to  you  in  relation  to  other  churches  and  their  pastors.  I  am
always  delighted  when  a  brother  in  meddling  with  other  people's
business  burns  his  fingei-s.  Why  did  he  not  attend  to  his  own
concerns  and  not  episcopize  in  another's  diocese  t  I  am  frequently
requested  by  members  of  churches  to  meddle  in  their  home  dis-
j)utes ;  but  unless  they  come  to  me  with  authority,  officially
appointing  me  to  be  umpixv,  I  decline.  Alexander  Cruden  gave
himself  the  name  of  "the  Corrector,"  and  I  have  never  envied  him
the  title.  It  would  need  a  peculiar  inspiration  to  enable  a  man  to
settle  all  the  controversies  of  our  churches,  and  as  a  rule  those
who  are  least  qualified  are  the  most  eager  to  attempt  it.  For  the
most  part  interference,  however  well  intentioned,  is  a  failure.
Internal  dissensions  in  our  churches  are  very  like  quarrels  between
man  aud  wife :  when  the  case  comes  to  such  a  pass  that  they
must  fight  it  out,  the  interposing  party  will  be  the  Wctim  of  their
conmion  fury.  No  one  but  Mr.  Verdant  Green  will  interfere  in
a  domestic  battle,  for  the  man  of  course  resents  it,  and  the  lady,
though  suffering  from  many  a  blow,  will  say,  "  You  leave  my
husband  alone ;  he  has  a  right  to  beat  me  if  he  likes."  However
great  the  mutual  animosity  of  conjugal  combatants,  it  seems  to
be  forgotten  in  resentment  against  intruders;  and  so,  amongst  the

13


178  THE  BLIND  EYE  AND  THE  DEAF  EAR.

very  independent  denomination  of  Baptists,  the  person  outsido
the  church  who  interferes  in  any  manner  is  sure  to  get  the
worst  of  it.  Do  not  consider  yourself  to  be  the  bishop  of  all
the  neighbouring  churches,  but  be  satisfied  with  looking  after
Lystra,  or  Derbe,  or  Thessalonica,  or  whichever  church  may  have
been  allotted  to  your  care,  and  leave  Philippi  and  Ephesus  in
the  hands  of  their  own  pastors.  Do  not  encourage  disaffected
persons  in  finding  fault  with  their  minister,  or  in  bringing  you
news  of  evils  in  other  congregations.  When  you  meet  your
brother  ministers  do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  advise  them  ;  they  know
their  duty  quite  as  well  as  you  know  yours,  and  your  judgment
iipon  their  course  of  action  is  probably  founded  upon  partial  infor-
mation supplied  from  prejudiced  sources.  Do  not  grieve  your
neighbours  by  your  meddlesomeness.  We  have  all  enough  to  do
at  home,  and  it  is  prudent  to  keep  out  of  all  disputes  which  do  not
belong  to  us.  We  are  recommended  by  one  of  the  world's  proverbs
to  wash  our  dirty  linen  at  home,  and  I  will  add  another  line  to  it,  anil
advise  that  we  do  not  call  on  our  neighbours  while  their  linen  is  in
the  suds.  This  is  due  to  our  friends,  and  will  best  promote  peace.
"  He  that  passeth  by  and  meddleth  with  strife  belonging  not  to

him,  is  like  one  that  taketh  a  dog  by  the  ears  "; he  is  very  apt

to  be  bitten,  and  few  will  pity  him.  Bridges  wisely  observes  that
"Our  blessed  Master  has  read  us  a  lesson  of  godly  wisdom.
He  healed  the  contentions  in  his  own  family,  but  when  called  to
meddle  with  strife  belonging  not  to  him,  he  gave  answer —
'Who  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider  over  you?'"  Self-
constituted  judges  win  but  little  respect ;  if  they  were  more  fit
to  censure  they  would  be  less  inclined  to  do  so.  Many  a  trifling
difference  within  a  church  has  been  fanned  into  a  great  flame  by
ministers  outside  who  had  no  idea  of  the  mischief  they  were
causing:  they  gave  verdicts  upon  ex  parte  statements,  and  so
egged  on  opposing  persons  who  felt  safe  when  they  could  say
that  the  neighbouring  ministers  quite  agreed  with  them.  My
counsel  is  that  we  join  the  "  Knownothings,"  and  never  say  a
word  upon  a  matter  till  we  have  heard  both  sides;  and,  more-
over, that  we  do  our  best  to  avoid  hearing  either  one  side  or
the  other  if  the  matter  does  not  concern  us.

Is  not  this  a  suflicient  explanation  of  my  declaration  that  I  have
one  blind  eye  and  one  deaf  ear,  and  that  they  are  the  best  eye  and
ear  1  have/


LECTURE  X.


The  grand  object  of  tlie  Christian  ministrv  is  the  glor}'  of  Gotl.
Whether  souls  are  converted  or  not,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  faithfully
preached,  the  minister  has  not  laboured  in  vain,  for  he  is  a  sweet
savour  unto  God  as  well  in  them  that  perish  as  in  them  that  are
saved.  Yet,  as  a  rule,  God  has  sent  us  to  preach  in  order  that
through  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  sons  of  men  may  be
reconciled  to  him.  Here  and  there  a  i)reacher  of  righteousness,
like  Noah,  may  labour  on  and  bring  none  beyond  his  own  family
circle  into  the  ark  of  salvation ;  and  another,  like  Jeremiah,  may
weep  in  vain  over  an  impenitent  nation  ;  but,  for  the  most  part,
the  work  of  preaching  is  intended  to  save  the  hearers.  It  is
ours  to  sow  even  in  stony  places,  where  no  fruit  rewards  our
toil ;  but  still  we  are  bound  to  look  for  a  harvest,  and  mourn  if
it  does  not  appear  in  due  time.

The  gloiy  of  God  being  our  chief  object,  we  aim  at  it  by  seeking
the  edification  of  saints  and  the  salvation  of  sinners.  It  is  a  noble
work  to  instruct  the  people  of  God,  and  to  build  them  up  in  their
most  holy  faith  :  we  may  by  no  means  neglect  this  duty.  To  this
end  we  must  give  clear  statements  of  gospel  doctrine,  of  vital
experience,  and  of  Christian  duty,  and  never  shrink  from  declaring
the  whole  counsel  of  God.  In  too  many  cases  sublime  truths
are  held  in  abeyance  under  the  pretence  that  they  are  not
jn-actical ;  whereas  the  veiy  fact  that  they  are  revealed  proves
that  the  Lord  thinks  them  to  be  of  value,  and  woe  unto  us  if  we
])retend  to  be  wiser  than  he.  We  may  say  of  any  and  every  doctrine
of  Scripture —

'*  To  give  it  then  a  tongue  is  wise  in  man."

If  any  one  note  is  dropped  from  the  divine  harmony  of  truth
the  music  may  be  sadly  marred.     Your  people  may  fall  into  grave


180  ox  cox"vt:rsion  as  our  aim.

spiritual  diseases  through  the  lack  of  a  certain  form  of  spiritual
nutriment,  which  can  only  be  supplied  by  the  doctrines  which  you
■withhold.  In  the  food  which  we  eat  there  are  ino;redients  which
do  not  at  first  appear  to  be  necessary  to  life;  but  experience
shows  that  they  are  requisite  to  health  and  strength.  Phosphorus
will  not  make  flesh,  but  it  is  wanted  for  bone ;  many  earths  and
salts  come  under  the  same  description — they  are  necessary  in  due
proportion  to  the  human  economy.  Even  thus  certain  truths
which  appear  to  be  little  adapted  for  spiritual  nutriment  are,  never-
theless, very  beneficial  in  furnishing  believers  with  backbone  and
muscle,  and  in  repairing  the  varied  organs  of  Christian  manhood.
We  must  preach  "  the  whole  truth,"  that  the  man  of  God  may  be
thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works.

Our  gi-eat  object  of  glorifying  God  is,  however,  to  be  mainly
achieved  by  the  winning  of  souls.  We  must  see  souls  born  unto
God.  If  we  do  not,  our  cry  should  be  that  of  Eachel  "  Give
me  children,  or  I  die."  If  we  do  not  win  souls,  we  should  mourn
as  the  husbandman  who  sees  no  harvest,  as  the  fisherman  who  re-
turns to  his  cottage  with  an  empty  net,  or  as  the  huntsman  who
has  in  vain  roamed  over  hill  and  dale.  Ours  should  be  Isaiah's
language  uttered  with  many  a  sigh  and  groan — "  Who  hath  be-
lieved our  report?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed?"
The  ambassadors  of  peace  should  not  cease  to  weep  bitterly  until
sinners  weep  for  their  sins.

If  we  intensely  desire  to  see  our  hearers  believe  on  the  Lord
Jesus,  how  shall  we  act  in  order  to  be  used  of  God  for  producing
such  a  result  ?     This  is  tlie  theme  of  the  present  lecture.

Since  conversion  is  a  divine  work,  we  must  take  care  that  we
depend  entirely  upon  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  look  to  him  for  jwwer
over  men's  minds.  Often  as  this  remark  is  repeated,  I  fear  wo
too  little  feel  its  force ;  for  if  we  were  more  truly  sensible  of  our
need  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  should  we  not  study  more  in  depen-
dence upon  his  teaching  ?  ShouUl  we  not  pray  more  importu-
nately to  be  anointed  with  his  sacred  unction  ?  Should  we  not  in
preaching  give  more  scope  for  his  operation  ?  Do  we  not  fail  in
many  of  our  efforts,  because  we  practically,  though  not  doctrinally,
ignore  the  Holy  Ghost?  His  place  as  God  is  on  the  throne,  and
in  all  our  enteri)rises  he  must  be  first,  midst,  and  end :  we  are
iiiHtnnnents  in  liis  hand,  and  nothing  more.

This  being  fully  admitted,  what  else  should  be  done  if  we  hope
to  see  conversions?  Ansurcdli/  we  should  be  careful  to  preacJi
vioat  prominent li/  those  truths  which  are  likely  to  lead  to  this  end.


ox   CONVERSION  AS   OUR   AIM.  181

What  truths  are  those  I  I  answer,  we  should  first  and  foremost
preach  Christ,  and  him  crucified.  Where  Jesus  is  exalted  souls
are  attracted ; — "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."
The  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that  are  saved  the  wisdom
of  God  and  the  iwwer  of  God.  The  Christian  minister  should
preach  all  the  truths  which  cluster  around  the  person  and  work
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  hence  he  must  declare  very  earnestly  and
pointedly  the  evil  of  sin,  which  created  the  need  of  a  Sa^iour.
Let  him  show  that  sin  is  a  breach  of  the  law,  that  it  necessitates
punishment,  and  that  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  against  it.
Let  him  never  treat  sin  as  though  it  were  a  trifle,  or  a  mis-
fortune, but  let  him  set  it  forth  as  exceeding  sinful.  Let  him
go  into  particulars,  not  superficially  glancing  at  evil  in  the
gross,  but  mentioning  various  sins  in  detail,  especially  those  most
current  at  the  time :  such  as  that  all-devouring  hydra  of  drunken-
ness, which  devastates  our  land;  lying,  which  in  the  fonn  of
slander  abounds  on  all  sides ;  and  licentiousness,  which  must  be
mentioned  with  holy  delicacy,  and  yet  needs  to  be  denounced
unsparingly.  We  must  especially  reprove  those  evils  into  which
our  hearers  have  fallen,  or  are  likely  to  fall.  Explain  the  ten
commandments  and  obey  the  divine  injunction :  **  show  my
people  their  transgressions,  and  the  house  of  Jacob  their  sins."
Open  up  the  spirituality  of  the  law  as  our  Lord  did,  and  show
how  it  is  broken  by  evil  thoughts,  intents,  and  imaginations.
By  this  means  many  sinners  will  be  pricked  in  their  hearts.  Old
llobbie  Flockhart  used  to  say,  "  It  is  of  no  use  trying  to  sew  with
the  silken  thread  of  the  gospel  unless  we  pierce  a  way  for  it  with
the  sharp  needle  of  the  law."  The  law  goes  first,  like  the  needle,
and  draws  the  gospel  thread  after  it :  therefore  preach  con-
cerning sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment  to  come.  Let  such
language  as  that  of  the  fifty-first  Psalm  be  often  explained  :  show
that  God  requireth  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  that  purging
with  sacrificial  blood  is  absolutely  needful.  Aim  at  the  heart.
Probe  the  wound  and  touch  the  very  quick  of  the  soul.  Spare
not  the  sterner  themes,  for  men  must  be  wounded  before  they  can
be  healed,  and  slain  before  they  can  be  made  alive.  No  man  will
ever  put  on  the  robe  of  Christ's  righteousness  till  he  is  stripi)ed  of
his  fig  leaves,  nor  will  he  wash  in  the  fount  of  mercy  till  he  ix?r-
ceives  his  filthiness.  Therefore,  my  brethren,  we  must  not  cease  to
declare  the  law,  its  demands,  its  threatenings,  and  the  sinner's
multiplied  breaches  of  it.

Teach  the  depravity  of  human  nature.     Show  men  that  sin  is  not  an


182  ON   CONVERSION   AS    OUR   AIM.

accident,  but  the  genuine  outcome  of  their  corrupt  hearts.  Preach
the  doctrine  of  the  natural  depravity  of  man.  It  is  an  vmfashion-
able  truth ;  for  nowadays  ministers  are  to  be  found  who  are  very
fine  upon  "  the  dignity  of  human  nature."  The  "  lapsed  state  of
man  " — that  is  the  phrase — is  sometimes  alluded  to,  but  the  cor-
ruption of  our  nature,  and  kindred  themes  are  cai'efully  avoided :
Ethiopians  are  informed  that  they  may  whiten  their  skins,  and
it  is  hoped  that  leopards  will  remove  their  spots-  Brethren,  you
will  not  fall  into  this  delusion,  or,  if  you  do,  you  may  expect  few
conversions.  To  prophecy  smooth  things,  and  to  extenuate  the
evil  of  our  lost  estate,  is  not  the  way  to  lead  men  to  Jesus.

Brethren,  the  necessity  for  the  Holy  Ghost's  divine  operations  will
follow  as  a  matter  of  course  upon  the  former  teaching,  for  dire
necessity  demands  divine  interposition.  Men  must  be  told  that
they  are  dead,  and  that  only  the  Holy  Spirit  can  quicken  them ;
that  the  Spirit  works  according  to  his  own  good  pleasure,  and  that
no  man  can  claim  his  visitations  or  deserve  his  aid.  This  is  thought
to  be  very  discouraging  teaching,  and  so  it  is,  but  men  need  to  be
discouraged  when  they  are  seeking  salvation  in  a  wrong  manner.
To  put  them  out  of  conceit  of  their  own  abilities  is  a  great  help
toward  bringing  them  to  look  out  of  self  to  another,  even  the
Lord  Jesus.  The  doctrine  of  election  and  other  great  truths
which  declare  salvation  to  be  all  of  grace,  and  to  be,  not  the  right
of  the  creature,  but  the  gift  of  the  Sovereign  Lord,  are  uU  calcu-
lated to  hide  pride  from  man,  and  so  to  prepare  him  to  receive  the
mercy  of  God.

We  must  also  set  before  our  hearers  the  justice  of  God  and
the  certainty    that   every    transgression   icill   he  punished.      Often

nnist  wo

"  Before  them  p!ace  in  drond  array,
The  pomp  of  that  tremendous  day
When  Christ  with  clouds  shall  come."

Sound  in  their  ears  the  doctrine  of  the  second  advent,  not  as  a
curiosity  of  prophecy,  but  as  a  solemn  ])ractical  fact.  It  is  idle  to
set  forth  our  Lord  iu  all  the  tinkling  bravery  of  an  earthly
kingdom,  after  the  manner  of  brethren  who  believe  in  a  revived
Judaism ;  we  need  to  preach  the  Lord  as  coming  to  judge  the
world  in  righteousness,  to  summon  the  nations  to  his  bar,  and  to
geparatc  them  as  a  shepherd  divideth  the  sheep  from  the  goats.
Paul  pH'ached  of  righteousness,  temjiorancc,  and  judgment  to  come,
ttn<l  niiult!  Felix  tremble  :  these  ihenies  iire  equally  powerful  now.
We  rob  the  gospel  of  its  power  if  wo  leave  out  its  threaten ings  of


ON    COXVEKSION    AS    OUU    AI5I.  183

punishment.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  novel  opinions  upon
annihilation  and  restoration  which  have  afflicted  the  Church  in
tliese  last  days  have  caused  many  ministers  to  be  slow  to  speak
concernincr  the  last  judgment  and  its  issues,  and  consequently  the
terrors  of  the  Lord  have  had  small  influence  upon  either  preachers
or  hearers.  If  this  be  so  it  cannot  be  too  much  i-egretted,  for  one
great  means  of  conversion  is  thus  left  unused.

Beloved  brethren,  we  must  be  most  of  all  clear  upon  the  great
soul-saving  doctrine  of  the  atonement;  we  must  preach  a  real  bona  tiile
substitutionary  sacrifice,  and  proclaim  pardou  as  its  result.  Cloudy
views  as  to  atoning  blood  are  mischievous  to  the  last  degree  ;  souls
are  held  in  unnecessary  bondage,  and  saints  are  robbed  of  the  calm
confidence  of  faith,  because  they  are  not  definitely  told  that  "  Go<l
hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might
be  made  tiie  righteousness  of  God  in  Ilim."  We  must  preach  sub-
stitution straightforwardly  and  unmistakeably,  for  if  any  doctrine
be  plainly  taught  in  Scripture  it  is  this, — '*  The  chastisement  of
our  peace  was  upon  Ilim,  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed,"  "  He,
His  own  self,  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  This
truth  gives  rest  to  the  conscience  by  showing  how  God  can  be  just,
and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth.  This  is  the  great  net  of
gospel  fishermen :  the  fish  are  drawn  or  driven  in  the  right  direc-
tion by  other  truths,  but  this  is  the  net  itself.

If  men  are  to  be  saved,  we  must  in  plainest  terms  preach  justi-
Jication  by  faith^  as  the  method  by  which  the  atonement  becomes
effectual  in  the  soul's  experience.  If  we  are  saved  by  the  substi-
tutionary work  of  Christ,  no  merit  of  ours  is  wanted,  and  all  men
liave  to  do  is  by  a  simple  faith  to  accept  what  Christ  has  already
done.  It  is  delightful  to  dwell  on  the  gi-and  truth  tliat "  This  man,
after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the
right  hand  of  God."  O  glorious  sight — the  Christ  sitting  down
in  the  place  of  honour  because  his  work  is  done.  Well  may  the
soul  rest  in  a  work  so  evidently  complete.

Justification  by  faith  must  never  be  obscured,  and  yet  all  are
not  clear  upon  it.  I  once  heard  a  sermon  upon  "  They  that  sow
in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy,"  of  which  the  English  was,  "  Be  good,
very  good,  and  though  you  will  have  to  suffer  in  consequence,
God  will  ivward  you  in  the  end."  The  preacher,  no  doubt,
believed  in  justification  by  faith,  but  he  very  distinctly  preached
the  opposite  doctrine.  Many  do  this  when  addressing  children,
and  I  notice  that  they  generally  speak  to  the  little  ones  about
loving  Jesus,  and  not  upon  believing  in  him.     This  must  leave  a


18-4  ON   CONVERSION   AS   OUR   AIM.

miscliievous  impression  upon  yonthful  minds  and  take  tliem  off
from  the  true  way  of  peace.

Preach  earnestly  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  magnify
the  abounding  mercy  of  the  Lord ;  but  always  ])reach  it  in  con-
nection with  his  justice.  Do  not  extol  the  single  attribute  of  love
in  the  method  too  generally  followed,  but  regai'd  love  in  the  high
theological  sense,  in  which,  like  a  golden  circle,  it  holds  within
itself  all  the  divine  attributes :  for  God  were  not  love  if  he
were  not  just,  and  did  not  hate  every  unholy  thing.  Never  exalt
one  attribute  at  the  expense  of  another.  Let  boundless  mercy  be
seen  in  calm  consistency  with  stern  justice  and  unlimited  sove-
reignty. The  true  character  of  God  is  fitted  to  awe,  impress,  and
humble  the  sinner :  be  careful  not  to  misrepresent  your  Lord.

All  these  truths  and  others  which  complete  the  evangelical
system  are  calculated  to  lead  men  to  faith;  therefore  make  them
the  staple  of  your  teaching.

Secondly,  if  we  are  intensely  anxious  to  have  souls  saved  Ave
must  not  only  preach  the  truths  which  are  likely  to  lead  up  to  this
end,  but  we  must  use  modes  of  handling  those  truths  tvhich  are
likehj  to  conduce  thereto.  Do  you  enquire,  what  are  they '?  First,
you  must  do  a  great  deal  by  way  of  histriiction.  Sinners  are  not
saved  in  darkness  but  from  it ;  "  that  the  soul  be  without  know-
ledge, it  is  not  good."  Men  must  be  taught  concerning  themselves,
their  sin,  and  their  fall ;  their  Sa^/iour,  redemption,  regeneration,
and  so  on.  Many  awakened  souls  would  gladly  accept  God's  way
of  salvation  if  they  did  but  know  it ;  they  are  akin  to  those  of  whom
the  apostle  said,  "And  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance
ye  did  it."  If  you  will  instruct  them  God  will  save  them :  is  it
not  written,  "the  entrance  of  thy  word  giveth  light"?  If  the  Holy
Spirit  blesses  your  teaching,  they  will  see  how  wrong  they  have
been,  and  they  will  be  led  to  repentance  and  faith.  I  do  not
believe  in  that  preaching  which  lies  mainly  in  shouting,  "  Believe  1
believe  1  believ6l"  In  common  justice  you  are  bound  to  tell  the
poor  people  what  they  are  to  believe.  There  must  be  instruction,
otherwise  the  exhortation  to  believe  is  manifestly  ridiculous,  and
must  in  practice  be  abortive.  I  fear  that  some  of  our  orthodox
brethren  have  been  prejudiced  against  the  five  invitations  of  the
gospel  by  hearing  the  raw,  inidigested  harangues  of  revivalist
speakers  whoso  heads  are  loosely  put  together.  The  best  way  to
preacli  sinners  to  Christ  is  to  preach  Christ  to  sinners.  Exhorta-
tions, entreaties,  and  beseechings,  if  not  accompanied  with  sound
inutruction,  are  liko  firing  off   powder  without  shot.     You  may


ON   CONVERSION    AS   OUR   AIM.  18j

shout,  and  weep,  and  plead,  but  you  cannot  lead  men  to  believe
what  they  have  not  lieard,  nor  to  receive  a  truth  which  has  never
been  set  before  them.  "  Because  the  preacher  was  wise,  he  still
taut^ht  the  people  knowledge."

While  giving  instruction  it  is  wise  to  appeal  to  the  understandiug.
True  religion  is  as  logical  as  if  it  were  not  emotional.  I  am  not  an
admirer  of  the  peculiar  views  of  Mr.  Finney,  but  I  have  no  doubt
that  he  was  useful  to  many ;  and  his  power  lay  in  his  use  of  clear
arguments.  Many  who  knew  his  fame  were  greatly  disap[X)inted
at  first  hearing  him,  because  he  used  few  beauties  of  speech  and
was  as  calm  and  dry  as  a  book  of  Euclid ;  but  he  was  exactly
adapted  to  a  certain  order  of  minds,  and  they  were  convinced  and
convicted  by  his  forcible  reasoning.  Should  not  persons  of  an
argumentative  cast  of  nund  be  provided  for?  We  are  to  be  all
things  to  all  men,  and  to  these  men  we  must  become  argumen-
tative and  push  them  into  a  corner  with  plain  deductions  ami
necessary  inferences.  Of  carnal  reasoning  we  would  have  none,
but  of  fair,  honest  pondering,  considering,  judging,  and  arguing
the  more  the  better.

The  class  re(|uiring  logical  argument  is  small  comj)ared  with  the
number  of  those  who  need  to  be  pleadeil  with,  by  way  of  emotional
persuasion.  They  require  not  so  much  reasoning  as  heart-argument
— which  is  logic  set  on  fire.  You  must  arjiue  with  them  as  a
mother  pleads  with  her  boy  that  he  will  not  grieve  her,  or  as  a  fond
sister  entreats  a  brother  to  return  to  their  father's  home  and  seek
reconciliation  :  argument  must  be  quickened  into  persuasion  by  the
living  warmth  of  love.  Cold  logic  has  its  force,  but  when  made  red
hot  with  affection  the  power  of  tender  argument  is  inconceivable.
The  power  which  one  mind  can  gain  over  otlters  is  enormous,
but  it  is  often  best  developed  when  the  leading  mind  has  ceased
to  have  power  over  itself.  When  passionate  zeal  has  carried  the
man  himself  away  his  speech  becomes  an  irresistible  torrent,  sweej>-
ing  all  before  it.  A  man  known  to  be  godly  and  devout,  and  felt
to  be  large-hearted  and  self-sacrificing,  has  a  power  in  his  very
person,  and  his  advice  and  recommendation  carry  weight  because
of  his  character;  but  when  he  comes  to  plead  and  to  persuade,
even  to  tears,  his  influence  is  wonderful,  and  God  tlie  Holy  Spirit
yokes  it  into  his  service.  Brethren,  we  must  plead.  Entreaties  and
beseechings  must  blend  with  our  instructions.  Any  and  every  appeal
which  will  reach  the  conscience  and  move  men  to  fly  to  Jesus  we
must  perpetually  employ,  if  by  any  means  we  may  save  some.  I
have  sometimes  heard  ministers  blamed  for  speaking  of  themselves


186  ox   CONVERSION   AS  OUR  AIM.

when  they  are  pleading,  but  the  censure  need  not  be  much
regarded  while  we  have  such  a  precedent  as  the  example  of
Paul.  To  a  congregation  who  love  you  it  is  quite  allowable
to  mention  your  grief  that  many  of  them  are  unsaved,  and
your  vehement  desire,  and  incessant  prayer  for  their  conversion.
You  are  doing  right  when  you  mention  your  own  experience  of  the
goodness  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  plead  with  men  to  come
and  taste  the  same.  AYe  must  not  be  abstractions  or  mere  officials
to  our  people,  but  we  must  plead  with  them  as  real  flesh  and
blood,  if  we  would  see  them  converted.  When  you  can  quote
yourself  as  a  living  instance  of  what  grace  has  done,  the  plea  is
too  powerful  to  be  withheld  through  fear  of  being  charged  with
egotism.

Sometimes,  too,  we  must  change  our  tone.  Instead  of  instruct-
ing, reasoning,  and  persuading,  we  must  come  to  threatening,
and  declare  the  wrath  of  God  upon  impenitent  souls.  We  must
lift  the  curtain  and  let  them  see  the  future.  Show  them  their
danger,  and  warn  them  to  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come.  This
done,  we  must  return  to  invitation,  and  set  before  the  awakened
mind  the  rich  provisions  of  infinite  grace  which  are  freely  pre-
sented to  the  sons  of  men.  In  our  Master's  name  we  must  ffive
the  invitation,  crying,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of
life  freely."  Do  not  be  deterred  from  this,  my  brethren,  by  those
ultra-Calvinistic  theologians  who  say,  "  You  may  instruct  and  warn
tiie  ungodly,  but  you  must  not  invite  or  entreat  them."  And  why
not  ?  "  Because  they  are  dead  siimers,  and  it  is  therefore  absurd  to
invite  them,  since  they  cannot  come."  Wherefore  then  may  we
warn  or  instruct  them  ?  The  argument  is  so  strong,  if  it  be  strong
Jit  all,  that  it  sweeps  away  all  modes  of  appeal  to  sinners,  and  they
alone  are  logical  who,  after  they  have  preached  to  the  saints,  sit
down  and  say,  "  The  election  hath  obtained  it,  and  the  rest  were
blinded."  On  what  ground  are  we  to  address  the  ungodly  at  all  ?
If  we  are  only  to  bid  them  do  such  things  as  they  are  capable
of  doing  without  the  Spirit  of  God,  we  are  reduced  to  mere
moraliiits.  If  it  be  absurd  to  bid  the  dead  sinner  believe  and  live,
it  is  equally  vain  to  bid  him  consider  his  state,  and  reflect  upon
his  future  doom.  Indeed,  it  would  bo  idle  altogether  were  it  not
that  true  preat-hing  is  on  act  of  faith,  and  is  owned  by  the  Holy
Spirit  a8  the  means  of  working  spiritual  miracles.  If  we  were  by
ourHelveH,  and  di<l  not  expi'ct  divine  interpositions,  we  should  bo
wise  to  keep  within  the  bounds  of  reason,  and  persuade  men  to  do
only  what  we  »ce  in  them  the  ability  to  do.     W^e  should  then  bid


ox   COXVEKSIOX   AS   OUR   AIM.  187

the  living  live,  urge  the  seeing  to  see,  and  persuade  the  willing  to
will.  The  task  would  be  so  easy  that  it  might  even  seem  to  be
superfluous ;  certainly  no  special  call  of  the  Holy  Ghost  would  be
needed  for  so  very  simple  an  undertaking.  But,  brethren,  where
is  the  mighty  power  and  the  victory  of  faith  if  our  ministry
is  this  and  nothinij  more?  Who  among  the  sons  of  men  would
think  it  a  great  vocation  to  be  sent  into  a  synagogue  to  say  to  a
j)erfectly  vigorous  man,  "  liise  up  and  walk,"  or  to  the  possessor
of  sound  limbs,  "  Stretch  out  thine  hand."  He  is  a  j)Oor  Ezekiel
whose  greatest  achievement  is  to  cry,  '*  Ye  living  souls,  live."

Let  the  two  methods  be  set  side  by  side  as  to  practical  result,
and  it  will  be  seen  that  those  who  never  exhort  sinners  are  seldom
winners  of  souls  to  any  great  extent,  but  they  maintain  their
churches  by  converts  from  other  systems.  I  have  even  heard  them
say,  "  Oh,  yes,  the  Methodists  and  Kevivalists  are  beating  the
hedges,  but  we  shall  catch  many  of  the  birds."  If  I  harboured
such  a  mean  thought  I  should  be  ashamed  to  express  it.  A  system
which  cannot  touch  the  outside  world,  but  must  leave  arousing  and
converting  work  to  others,  whom  it  judges  to  be  unsound,  writes
its  own  condemnation.

Again,  brethren,  if  we  wish  to  see  souls  saved,  we  must  be  wise

as  to  tlie  times  when  we  addi"ess  the  unconverted.  Very  little
common  sense  is  spent  over  this  matter.  Under  certain  ministries
there  is  a  set  time  for  speaking  to  sinners,  and  this  comes  as
regularly  as  the  hour  of  noon.  A  few  crumbs  of  the  feast
are  thrown  to  the  dogs  under  the  table  at  the  close  of  the  dis-
course, and  they  treat  your  crumbs  as  you  treat  them,  namely,
with  courteous  indifference.  Why  should  the  warning  word  be
always  at  the  hinder  end  of  the  discourse  when  hearers  are  most
likely  to  be  weary?  Why  give  men  notice  to  buckle  on  their
harness  so  as  to  be  prepared  to  repel  our  attack  I  When  their
interest  is  excited,  and  they  are  least  u})on  the  defensive,  then  let
fly  a  shaft  at  the  careless,  and  it  will  frequently  be  more  effectual
than  a  whole  flight  of  arrows  shot  against  them  at  a  time  when
they  are  thoroughly  encased  in  armour  of  proof.  Surprise  is  a
great  element  in  gaining  attention  and  fixing  a  remark  upon  the
memory,  and  times  for  addressing  the  careless  should  be  chosen
with  an  eye  to  that  fact.  It  may  be  very  well  as  a  rule  to  seek
the  edification  of  the  saints  in  the  mornintr  discovu-se,  but  it  would
be  wise  to  vary  it,  and  let  tli*»  unconverted  sometimes  have  the  chief
labour  of  your  preparutiou  and  the  best  service  of  the  day.


188  ON   CONVERSION   AS   OUR  AIM.

Do  not  close  a  single  sermon  without  addressing  the  ungodly,  but
at  the  same  time  set  yourself  seasons  for  a  determined  and  con-
tinuous assault  upon  them,  and  proceed  with  all  your  soul  to
the  conflict.  On  such  occasions  aim  distinctly  at  immediate  con-
versions ;  labour  to  remove  prejudices,  to  resolve  doubts,  to  con-
quer objections,  and  to  drive  the  sinner  out  of  his  hiding-
places  at  once.  Summon  the  church-members  to  special  prayer,
beseech  them  to  speak  personally  both  with  the  concerned  and  the
unconcerned,  and  be  yourself  doubly  upon  the  watch  to  address
individuals.  We  have  found  that  our  February  meetings  at  the
Tabernacle  have  yielded  remarkable  results :  the  w'hole  month
being  dedicated  to  special  effort.  Winter  is  usually  the  preacher's
harvest,  because  the  people  can  come  together  better  in  the  long
evenings,  and  are  debarred  from  out-of-door  exercises  and  amuse-
ments. Be  well  prepared  for  the  appropriate  season  when  "  kings
go  forth  to  battle."

Among  the  important  elements  in  the  promotion  of  conversion
are  your  own  tone,  temper,  and  spirit  in  preaching.  If  you  preach
the  truth  in  a  dull,  monotonous  style,  God  may  bless  it,  but  in  all
probability  he  will  not ;  at  any  rate  the  tendency  of  such  a  style
is  not  to  promote  attention,  but  to  hinder  it.  It  is  not  often  that
sinners  are  awakened  by  ministers  who  are  themselves  asleep.
A  hard,  unfeeling  mode  of  speech  is  also  to  be  avoided ;  want
of  tenderness  is  a  sad  lack,  and  repels  rather  than  attracts.
The  spirit  of  Elijah  may  startle,  and  where  it  is  exceedingly
intense  it  may  go  far  to  pre])are  for  the  reception  of  the  gospel ;
but  for  actual  conversion  more  of  John  is  needed, — love  is  the
winning  force.  We  must  love  men  to  Jesus.  Great  hearts
are  the  main  qualifications  for  great  preachers,  and  we  must
cultivate  our  affections  to  that  end.  -  At  the  same  time  our
manner  must  not  degenerate  into  the  soft  and  saccharine  cant
which  some  men  affect  who  are  for  ever  dearing  everybody,  and
fawning  upon  people  as  if  they  hoped  to  soft-sawder  them  into
godliness.  Manly  persons  are  disgusted,  and  suspect  hypocrisy
when  they  hear  a  preacher  talking  molasses.  Let  us  be  bold  and
outspoken,  and  never  address  our  hcaivrs  as  if  we  were  asking  a
favour  of  them,  or  as  if  they  would  oblige  the  Redeemer  by
allowing  him  to  &avv  them.  We  are  bound  to  be  lowly,  but  our
ofKcc  as  ambassadors  should  prevent  our  being  servile.

Happy  shall  we  bo  if  we  preach  bclievingly,  always  expecting
the  I^ord  to  bless  his  own  word.  This  will  give  us  a  (piiet  confi-
dence which  will  forbid  petulance,  rashness,  and  weariness.    If  we


ON   CONVERSION   AS   OUR   AIM.  189

ourselves  doubt  tlie  power  of  the  gospel,  how  can  we  preach  it  with
authority  ?  Feel  that  you  are  a  favoured  man  in  being  allowed
to  proclaim  the  good  news,  and  rejoice  that  your  mission  is  fraught
with  eternal  benefit  to  those  before  you.  Let  the  }>eople  see  how
glad  and  confident  the  gospel  has  made  you,  and  it  will  go  far
to  make  them  long  to  partake  in  its  blessed  influences.

Preach  very  solemnly,  for  it  is  a  weighty  business,  but  let  your
matter  be  lively  and  pleasing,  for  this  will  prevent  solemnity
from  souring  into  dreariness.  Be  so  thoroughly  solemn  that  all
your  faculties  are  aroused  and  consecrated,  and  then  a  dusJi  of
humour  will  only  add  intenser  gravity  to  the  discourse,  even  as  a
flash  of  lightning  makes  midnight  darkness  all  the  more  impressive.
Preach  to  one  point,  concentrating  all  your  energies  ujK)n  the
object  aimed  at.  There  must  be  no  riding  of  hobbies,  no
introduction  of  elegancies  of  speech,  no  suspicion  of  personal  dis-
play, or  you  will  fail.  Sinnere  are  quick-witted  jK*ople,  and  soon
detect  even  the  smallest  effort  to  glorify  self.  Forego  everything
for  the  sake  of  those  you  long  to  save.  Be  a  fool  for  Christ's  sake
if  this  will  win  them,  or  be  a  scholar,  if  that  will  be  more
likely  to  impress  them.  Spare  neither  labour  in  the  study,  prayer
in  the  closet,  nor  zeal  in  the  pulpit.  If  men  do  not  judge  their
souls  to  be  worth  a  thought,  compel  them  to  see  that  their  minister
is  of  a  veiy  different  opinion.

Mean  conversions,  expect  them,  and  prepare  for  them.  Resolve
that  your  hearers  shall  either  yield  to  your  Lord  or  be  without
excuse,  and  that  this  shall  be  the  immediate  result  of  the  sermon
now  in  hand.  Do  not  let  the  Christians  around  you  wonder
when  souls  are  saved,  but  urge  them  to  believe  in  the  un-
diminished power  of  the  glad  tidings,  and  teach  them  to  marvel
if  no  saving  result  follows  the  delivery  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus.
Do  not  peiTnit  sinners  to  hear  sermons  as  a  matter  of  coui-se,  or
allow  them  to  play  with  the  edged  tools  of  Scripture  as  if  they
were  mere  toys;  but  again  and  again  remind  them  that  every  true
gospel  sermon  leaves  them  worse  if  it  does  not  make  them  better.
Their  unbelief  is  a  daily,  hourly  sin ;  never  let  them  infer  from
your  teaching  that  they  are  to  be  pitied  for  continuing  to  make
God  a  liar  by  rejecting  his  Son.

Impi-essed  with  a  sense  of  their  danger,  give  the  ungodly  no  rest
in  their  sins ;  knock  again  and  again  at  the  door  of  their  hearts,
and  knock  as  for  life  and  death.  Your  solicitude,  your  earnestness,
your  anxiety,  your  travailing  in  birth  for  them  God  will  bless  to
their  arousing.      God   works  mightily   by   this   instrumentality.


190  ON   CONVERSION    AS   OUR    AIM.

But  our  agony  for  souls  must  be  real  and  not  feigned,  and
therefore  our  hearts  must  be  wrought  into  true  sympathy  with
God.  Low  piety  means  little  spiritual  power.  Extremely
pointed  addresses  may  be  delivered  by  men  whose  hearts  are  out
of  order  Avith  the  Lord,  but  their  result  must  be  small.  There
is  a  something  in  the  very  tone  of  the  man  who  has  been  with
Jesus  which  has  more  power  to  touch  the  heart  than  the  most
perfect  oratory:  remember  this  and  maintain  an  unbroken  walk
with  God.  You  will  need  much  night-work  in  secret  if  you  are  to
gather  many  of  your  Lord's  lost  sheep.  Only  by  prayer  and
fasting  can  you  gain  power  to  cast  out  the  worst  of  devils.  Let
men  say  what  they  will  about  sovereignty,  God  connects  special
success  with  special  states  of  heart,  and  if  these  are  lacking  he
will  not  do  many  mighty  works.

In  addition  to  earnest  preaching  it  xcill  he  xcise  to  tise  other  means.
If  you  wish  to  see  results  from  your  sermons  you  must  be  accessible
to  enquirers.  A  meeting  after  every  service  may  not  be  desirable,
but  frequent  opportunities  for  coming  into  direct  contact  with
your  people  should  be  sought  after,  and  by  some  means  created.
It  is  shocking  to  think  that  there  are  ministers  who  have  no
method  whatever  for  meeting  the  anxious,  and  if  they  do  see
here  and  there  one,  it  is  because  of  the  courage  of  the  seeker,  and
not  because  of  the  earnestness  of  the  pastor.  From  the  very  first
you  should  appoint  frequent  and  regular  seasons  for  seeing  all
who  are  seeking  after  Christ,  and  you  should  continually  invite
such  to  come  and  speak  with  you.  In  addition  to  this,  hold
numerous  enquirers'  meetings,  at  which  the  addresses  shall  be  all
intended  to  assist  the  troubled  and  guide  the  perplexed,  and
with  these  intermingle  fervent  prayers  for  the  individuals  present,
and  short  testimonies  from  recent  converts  and  others.  As  an
open  confession  of  Christ  is  continually  mentioned  in  connec-
tion with  saving  faith,  it  is  your  wisdom  to  make  it  easy  for
believers  wlio  are  as  yet  following  Jesus  by  night  to  come  forward
and  avow  their  aUegiance  to  him.  There  must  be  no  persuading
to  make  a  jtrofession,  but  there  should  be  every  opportunity  for  so
doing,  and  no  stumbling-block  placed  in  the  way  of  hopeful  minds.
As  for  those  who  are  not  so  far  advanced  as  to  warrant  any
thought  of  baptism,  you  may  be  of  the  xitmost  benefit  to  them  by
personal  intercourse,  and  therefore  you  shoidd  seek  it.  Doubts
may  bo  cleared  away,  errors  rectified,  and  terrors  dispelled  by  a
few  moments'  conversation  ;  I  have  known  instances  in  which  a
lif(-l(»ng  misery  has   been  ended  by  a  simple  explanation  which


ON    COXVEllSION    AS    OUR    AIM.  191

might  liave  been  given  years  before.  ISeek  out  the  wandering
sheep  one  by  one,  and  wlien  you  find  all  your  thoughts  needed  for
a  single  individual,  do  not  grudge  your  labour,  for  your  Lord  in
his  parable  represents  the  good  shepherd  as  bringing  home  his  lost
sheep,  not  in  a  flock,  but  one  at  a  time  upon  his  shoulders,  and
rejoicing  so  to  do.

With  all  that  you  can  do  your  desires  will  not  be  fulfilled,  for
soul-winning  is  a  pursuit  which  grows  upon  a  man;  the  more  he  is
rewarded  with  conversions  the  more  eager  he  iK'Comes  to  see
greater  numbers  born  unto  Go<l.  Hence  you  will  soon  discover
that  you  need  help  if  many  are  to  be  brought  in.  The  net  soon
becomes  too  heavy  for  one  pair  of  hands  to  drag  to  shore  when  it
is  filled  with  fishes ;  and  your  fellow-helj)ers  must  be  beckoned
to  your  assistance.  Great  things  are  done  by  the  Holy  Spirit
when  a  whole  church  is  aroused  to  sacred  energy  :  then  there
are  hundreds  of  testimonies  instead  of  one,  and  these  strengthen
each  other;  then  advocates  for  Christ  succeed  each  other  and
work  into  each  other's  hands,  while  supplication  ascends  to  heaven
with  the  force  of  united  importunity  ;  thus  sinners  are  encom-
passed with  a  cordon  of  earnest  entreaties,  and  heaven  itself
is  called  into  the  field.  It  would  seem  hard  in  some  congrega-
tions for  a  sinner  to  be  saved,  for  whatever  good  he  may  receive
from  the  pulpit  is  frozen  out  of  him  by  the  arctic  atmosphere
with  which  he  is  surrounded:  and  on  the  other  hand  some  churches
make  it  hard  for  men  to  remain  unconverted,  for  with  holy  zeal
they  pereecute  the  careless  into  anxiety.  It  should  be  our  ambi-
tion, in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  work  the  entire  church
into  a  fine  missionary  condition,  to  make  it  like  a  Leyden  jar
charged  to  the  full  with  divine  electricity,  so  that  whatever
comes  into  contact  with  it  shall  feel  its  power.  What  can  one
man  do  alone  ?  What  can  he  not  do  with  an  anuy  of  enthusiasts
around  him  i  Contemplate  at  the  outset  the  possibility  of  having
a  church  of  soul-w  inners.  Do  not  succumb  to  the  usual  idea  that
we  can  only  gather  a  few  useful  workers,  and  that  the  rest  of  the
community  must  inevitably  be  a  dead  weight :  it  may  possibly  so
hapj)en,  but  do  not  set  out  with  that  notion  or  it  will  be  verified.
The  usual  need  not  be  the  universal ;  better  things  are  possible
than  anything  yet  attained ;  set  your  aim  high  and  spare  no  effort
to  reach  it.  Labour  to  gather  a  church  alive  for  Jesus,  every
member  energetic  to  the  full,  and  the  whole  in  incessant  activity
for  the  salvation  of  men.  To  this  end  there  must  be  the  best  of
preaching  to  feed   the   host  into    strength,   continual   prayer  to


192  ON   CONVERSION   AS   OUR   AIM.

bring  down  the  power  from  on  high,  and  the  most  heroic  example
on  your  own  part  to  fire  their  zeal :  then  under  the  divine  blessing
a  common-sense  management  of  the  entire  force  cannot  fail  to
produce  the  most  desirable  issues.  Who  among  you  can  grasp
this  idea  and  embody  it  in  actual  fact '?

To  call  in  another  brother  every  now  and  then  to  take  the  lead
in  evangelistic  services  will  be  found  very  wise  and  useful ;  for
there  are  some  fish  that  never  will  be  taken  in  your  net,  but  will
surely  fall  to  the  lot  of  another  fisherman.  Fresh  voices  pene-
trate where  the  accustomed  sound  has  lost  effect,  and  they  tend
also  to  beget  a  deeper  interest  in  those  already  attentive.  Sound
and  prudent  evangelists  may  lend  help  even  to  the  most  efficient
pastor,  and  gather  in  fruit  which  he  has  failed  to  reach ;  at  any
rate  it  makes  a  break  in  the  continuity  of  ordinaiy  services,  and
renders  them  less  likely  to  become  monotonous.  Never  suffer
jealousy  to  hinder  you  in  this.  Suppose  another  lamp  should
outshine  yours,  what  will  it  matter  so  long  as  it  brings  light  to
those  whose  welfare  you  are  seeking  f  Say  with  Moses,  "  Would
God  all  the  Lord's  servants  were  prophets."  He  who  is  free  from
selfish  jealousy  will  find  that  no  occasion  will  suggest  it ;  his
people  may  be  well  aware  that  their  pastor  is  excelled  by  others
in  talent,  but  they  will  be  ready  to  assert  that  he  is  surpassed
by  none  in  love  to  their  souls.  It  is  not  needful  for  a  loving  son
to  believe  that  his  father  is  the  most  learned  man  in  the  parish  ;
he  loves  him  for  his  own  sake,  and  not  because  he  is  superior  to
others.  Call  in  everv  now  and  then  a  warm-hearted  neiirlibour.
utilize  the  talent  in  the  church  itself,  and  procure  the  services
of  some  eminent  soul-winner,  and  this  may,  in  God's  hands,  break
up  the  hard  soil  for  you,  and  bring  you  brighter  days.

In  fine,  beloved  brethren,  by  any  means,  by  all  means,  labour  to
glorifv  God  by  conversions,  and  rest  not  till  your  heart's  desire  is
fulfilled.


PMMDoro  and  Alubastor,  Steaiu  PrintefH,  hi,  Little  Biiiuiu,  E.O.


WORKS    BY   C.   H.   SPURGEON,

AND  OTHER  AUTHORS,

PUBLISHED    BY    PASSMORE    AND    ALABASTER,

4,   PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS,    LONDON,    E.C.

TREASUEY  OF  DAVID :  Containing  an  Original  Exposition  of  the

Book  of  Psalms;    a  Collection  of  lUustrativo  Extracts  from  the  whole  range  of
Literature;  a  series  of  Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost  every  verse;  and  list  of
Writers  upon  each  Psalm.     By  C.  H.  Splkgeon.     VoL  L,  containing  Psalms  L
to  XXVI.     Price  88.     Thirteenth  Thousand.
In  his  preface  to  Lance's  Ne-*  Commentary  on  the  PmIius,  Dr.  Schall^  tbe  Wew  Tork  editor,

thus  refers  to  Mr.  Spurgeon'§  r< •'■■  ■ '^Mi^ed  work:   "The  most  important  homiletical  and

practical  work  of  the  age  on  th.  .e 'TreMury  of  David,' by  Charles  H.  Spurgeon.    Full

of  the  force  and  gi-niub  of  thi»  '  dcher,  and  rich  in  »elections  from  the  tntire  range  of

literature,  especially  from  the  1  umaii  inmeii."

"  No  man,  whatever  hJ8  theological  predileetknu  mar  be,  who  haa  a  spark  of  juntioe  in  him,
will  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  work  of  great  merit,  rereamiK  an  intellect  of  reoiarkable  vivacity  and
Tigour,  and  a  soul  aflame  with  ruligiouc  earnestness."' — Homilitt.

Vol.  II.,  Psalms  XXVII.  to  LII.    Price  8s.     Tenth  Thouwuid.

"  We  know  of  no  work  on  the  Psalms  at  all  comparable  to  this.  The  very  marrow  of  moat  other
ezpoHitions  and  commentaries  estant  is  brought  together  h^re,  in  addition  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own
characteristic  comment.s,  and  all  who  are  acquainted  with  his  pulpit  servieea  will  know  how  rich  and
forceful  these  comments  are.  The  extent  of  li''^  .-..^.•.r.  h^s  may  be  estimated  from  the  tact  that  be-
tween live  and  six  hundred  authors  are  quotr.:  me  (the  seeord)  and  that  the  list  includes
the  names  of  the  oldest  Knglish  expositor  anl  who  represent  the  learning  and  laborious

investigation  of  our  own  times.     The  work  it.  ■i.j.  >  . ,.     »iva8ury.' We  have  no  doubt

that  it  will  secure  for  itself  'immortality,'  and  that  *  bpurgeon  on  the  Psalms,'  will  be  a  standard
work  to  be  found  in  every  Biblical  library  for  generations  hence."— I/«/«rafy  World.

Vol.  III.,  Psalms  LIII.  to  LXXVIII.    Price  Ss.    Ninth  Thooaand.

"  If  the  eloquent  Baptist  preacher  of  the  MetropoUtan  Tabernacle  had  produced  nothing  but

these  volumes  he  would  certainly  be  entitled  to  the  thanks  of  all  Bible  readers

Mr.  Sixn'K'con  evidently  >  onsiders  that  there  is  toiiiething  more  important  to  he  doiU)  m  the  pulpit
than  >liscus-.iiig  creeds,  and  as  the  expositions  of  the  Psalms  givrn  by  him  to  hw  oonsrention  on
Sunday  uiurniugs  fonn  the  basis  of  the  present  work  there  is  much  more  of  expaciineiltal  than  of
doctrinal  teaching,  and  where  he  does  touch  upon  doctrinal  points  his  remarks  are,  in  the  main,  of  a
character  that  might  be  uttered  by  any  Evangelical  clergyman  in  the  land.*' — The  Sock.

Vol.  IV.,  Psalms  LXXIX.  to  GUI.      Price  8s.       Seventh  Thousaod.
"  This  fourth  volume  treats  of  Psalms  seldom  cuiumented  upon,  and  yet  among  the  richest  in

instruction  and  pathos.     It  is  strange  !v  "■  •■ ■■•'  the  Psalms  have  bee-  '^■y^r\.^x^i  or  left  without

full  exvositiun,  and  this  fact  makes  Mi  work  the  more  vu!  akes  it  also  the

more  dilHcult  to  write.    Mr  Spurgeoi.  ■  lie  same  wealth  oi  '  xtracta,  of  racy

English,  and  of  Evangelical  tiuth  as  ii^  ^.,-  ,  ,,  ...  v..-  volumes.  The  hon-..^...^...  .^...i-  are  taken  from
almost  every  verse,  and  will  be  helpful,  not  only  to  '  village'  preachers,  but  to  preachers  of  town
and  city — to  whom  a  '  hint '  is  often  more  precious  than  a  sermon  itself.  We  trust  the  author  will
be  favoured  to  finish  his  work  very  soon.  M  hen  complete,  it  will  be  a  ma<;fium  opus,  to  which
multitudes  will  lesurt,  fur  bi-uuty  and  strength."— /"/veOToa.

THE  INTERPRETER;   or.  Scripture  for  Family  Worship:     being

selected  passages  of  the  word  of  Ood  for  every  morning  and  evening  throughout  the  year,

accompanied  by  a  running  comment  and  suiuble  Hymns.    By  C.  H.  Si-uaoaos.      Cloth  2is.,

Persian  Morocco  32s.,  Tarkey  Morocco  428.    Uymn  Book,  Is.

"  Calculated  to  be  of  great  value  to  the  many  who  require  guidance  in  conducting  &unily
worship." — The  Churchman's  Monthly  Penny  Magazine.

"  The  impress  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  genius  is  observable  in  the  very  felicitous  arranpement  of  the
passages  of  Scripture  as  well  as  in  the  characteristic  running  comments." — The  Christian  Family.

THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT,    Containing    the

Sermons  of  C.  II.  Spvuukon,  preached  during  the  past  twentv-two  years.     Vols.  1.  and  II.

68.  6d.  each.    Vols.  III.  to  VI.,  7s    each.   Vols.  VII.,  8s.  6d.     Vols.  VIII.  to  XXII.,  Ts.

each.    The  Sermons  are  published  every  Thursday  at  Id. ;  Monthly  Parts  at  6d.  each.

•»•  The  publishers  call  attention  to  the  remarkable  fact  that  they  have  now  issued  Mr.  Spurgeon's

Sermons  weekly  for  twenty-two  years,  and  that  all  this  time  the  circulation  has  not  onlv  been  very

large,  but  has  steadily  increased.     This  imparalleled  fact,  unprecedented  in  the  pulpit  ot  any  age  or

church,  s].eaks  for  itself,  and  is  a  higher  eulogium  than  the  most  fiien.ilv  reviewer  could  pronounce.

TWELVE    SERMONS    ON    VARIOUS     SUBJECTS.        By    C.    H.

SiH-ROKON.     With  a  Portrait.    Price  Is.

MORNING  BY  MORNING ;  or,  DaUy  Readings  for  the  Family  or

the  Closet.    By  C.  H.  Splhovon.    Price  3s.  6d.    70th  Thousand.
"  Those  who  have  learnt  the  value  of  morning  devotion,  will  highly  prixe  these  helps.    All  who
love  a  full-orbed  gosjvel,  vigorous,  varied  thought,  and  a  racy  style,  will  appreciate  this  volume." —
Kev.  J.  Angus,  D.D.,  Begenfs  Park  College.


EVENING  BY  EVENING  ;  or,  Readings  at  Eventide  for  the  Family

or  the  Closet.  By  C.  H.  Spurgkon.  3s.  6d.  45th  Thousand.
"Ever  since  I  became  actiuainted  with  Mr.  Spurgeon's'  Morning  by  Morning,'  I  have  reckoned
it  altogether  pi  icele.ss,  not  only  myself  using  it  every  day  with  joy  and  profit,  but  sending  it  abroad
to  members  of  my  family  in  distant  lands,  giving  it  as  a  present  to  friend  after  friend,  and  in  other
ways  endeavouring  to  extend  the  knowledge  and  use  of  it  on  every  side.  On  learning  that  '  Evening
by  Evening'  was  published,  how  gladly  I  badi-  it  welcome  !  And  I  can  humbly  commend  it  in  no
higher  terms  than  by  simply  saying  that  it  will  be  found  a  fit  compa)iion,  every  way,  for  its  fore-
runner of  the  morning." —  Charles  J.  Brown.  D.D.,  Edinburgh,

FLASHES   OF    THOUGHT;    being  One   Thousand   Choice  Extracts

from  the  Works  of  C.  H   Spirgf.ox.    Alphabetically  arranged,  and  with  a  copious  Index.  Price  5s.
"  A  thousand  extracts,  bright  with  the  light  of  heaven,  sparkling  with  wit,  rich  in  imagery,
beautiful  in  their  setting,  fo  cible  in  style,  and  devoutly  stimulating  in  tone  make  up  a  volume  of
unique  merit." — General  Baptist  Magazine.

TYPES  AND  EMBLEMS:   Being  a  Collection  of  Sermons  preached

on  Sunday  and  Thursday  Evenings  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  By  C.  II.  Spi-uoeon.  3s.
"It  will   be  sure  to   be  a  favourite.       'Types  and  r'^mbleins'  are  attractive  themes,  and  in
Mr.  Spurgeon's  bands  they  neither  lack  suggestivene.ss  nor  power.    All  his  well-known  qualities  as
a  preacher  are  in  great  force  throughout  this  volume.'' — General  Biiptist  Magazine.

TRUMPET  CALLS  TO  CHRISTIAN  ENERGY;  being  a  Second  Series

of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Sunday  and  Thursday  Evening  Sermons.     Price  3s.  6d.
,     .     .     "  1  he  aim  in  each  of  these  addresses  is  the  simple  one  of  rousing  Caristian  men  and
women  to  renewed  acti^'ity  for  God     .  •  .     .     .     Believing  them  to  be  eminently  calculated  to  do
good,  we  wish  them  a  wide  circulation." — So'k.

LECTURES    TO  MY   STUDENTS:     A   Selection    from    Addresses

delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  Colli  ge.  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.     By  G.  H.

SpuROEOM.  President.     First  Scries — 25th  Thousand.     Price  2s.  6q.

"Brimful  of  wholesome,   instructive,    and    racy   truths;   just  the  book   to   be   put  into  the

hands  of  theological  students  or  young  pastors.     The  general  reader,  also,  will  find  in  it  much

entertaining    sentiment,    giving    the    aut.^or's    expressions    in  some  of   his  happiest  moods."^-

Chrisiian  Age.

COMMENTING  AND  COMMENTARIES:   Two  Lectures  addressed

to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  together  with  a  Catalogue
of  Biblical  Commentaries  and  Expositions.     10th  Thous;ind.     Price  2s.  6d.
"  Every  c^indid  reader  will  admit  that,  in  impartiality,  in  terse  and  tolling  brevity,  in  wisdom
sharpened  into  wit,  in  unaffected  zeal  for  Christ's  c;iuse,  and,  above  all,  in  robust  common  sense,
this  volume  has  few  equals,  if  anv." — Literary  World.

GLEANINGS   AMONG   THE   SHEAVES.     By  C.    H.    SPURGEON.

Ciotli  Antique,  Price  Is.  Gd.     fifth  Edition.
"These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgcouic — racy,  rich,  and  rare,  both  as  to  style  and  matter — full  of
exquisite  consolation — faitliful  advice— clear  analogies— poetic  touches— and  glorious   old  gospel.
We  do  not  wonder  th'.ugh  eight  thousand  copies  were  disposed  of  on  the  day  of  publication,  and  we
trust  eighty  times  cii;hty  thousand  will  hud  their  way  to  the  religious  public." —  Weikly  Heriew.

OUR  OWN  HYMN  BOOK.      By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.      Royal  32mo.

Cloth,  2s.  (id. ;  Ornamental  Hoards,  gilt  edges,  8s. ;    Morocco,  gilt,  5s.     Large  type  for  the

pulpit;  cloth,  68. ;  roan,  7s. ;  morocco,  10s.  Cd.     Double  columns  for  the  pew  ;  roan,  .1s.  (id.;

morocco,  6s.    Congregations  can  secure  advantageous  tonus  bj'  application  to  the  Publishers

direct.     A  cheap  edition  is  published  at  Is.  4d.
It  is  believed  to  he,  all  things  considered,  the  largest,  cheapest,  and  most  accurate  Hymn -book
In  the  Knglish  language.     The  ministers  who  use  it  uniformly  speak  of  it  in  the  warmest  terms  of
approval.     Specimen  Paqe.i  of  the  varimt-i  editions  can  be  had  on  appliattion.

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK;  or,    Plain  Advice  for  Plain  People.

Hy  C.   II.  SpiRuEo.N.     Price  I.S.,  cloth  Is.  6(i.     2(!0th  Thousand.
"  Riwy  and  pungent ;  very  plain,  and  to  the  purpose.     No  fear  as  to  whether  it  will  be  read  or
not  by  those  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall.     If  Mr.  Sjiurgeon  goes  on  at  this  rate  in  his  multiform
publiaitions,  he  will  leiivo  nothing  racv  unsaid." — U'airhman.

THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE:    its   History   and  Work.

With  .12  Illustrations,     lly  ('.  11.  .Si'iRciKo.v.     20th  Tliousand.     J'lice  in  paper  covers,  Is.

Bound  in  cloth,  2s.

"A   shillmg  hriirhure  on  this  fruitful  theme  from  the  ov.T-busy  nen    of   the  great  Baptist

prciuhi  r.  oiii'  til  it  is  profusely  illuHtrated  with  portraits,  /<«r-si»i//('ji  of  forgotten  caricatures,  and

■uaint  and  oiherwim',  is  likely  to  rival  'John  Ploughman'  in  popularity.     Con-

•  •  and  two  hundred  octavo  panes,  tli<!  matter  nii,fht  oiisily  have  bi'en  spread  out

1  inliing  volume  ;  but,  as  Mr.  Spurgc-on  desires  to  write  for  the  people,  ho  publishes

hin  woikn  rtl  |ii  ict  toHiiit  tlio  pockcts  uvcu  of  tlio  pooi'." — Chri»liti)\   Wortii.

SPURGEON'S  GEMS :    being   Brilliant  Passages   Selected  from  the

l)iH<oiir»cs  of  C.  \\.  SiMHiiEos.     i.argu  Type,  ^H.

FEATHERS    FOR    ARROW  S ,    or,   Illustrations  for  Preachers  and

'liiiclirrs,  from  my  Note  Hook,    lly  C.  H.  HriiRiiKos.     I'ricc  2s   (VI.     2flth  Thousand.
"Tlir  work  Kiveri  a  wide  range  of  »iilije<;tM  ;  the  inelaiihoi-s  are  always  striking  and  fioiiuontly
brilliant,  whilo   the  trulhn  whiuh  thejr  illustrnte  are   such  as  have   always  formed   the  staple  of
Mr.  Hpurgroii't  di»M:ourw«.     A  choicer  collertlon  of  illustrations  we  do  not  know."— y''rC('m(JM,

THE  ROYAL  WEDDING.     The  Banquet  and  the  Guests.    By  C.  H.

BfVKUROM.      P«pcr  CoVcTH,  lid.

"  Ail  eteipint  little  book  of  ho  juiges,  illuNtniting  the  parable  of  the  Wedding  Oanncnt,  nnd
woithj  <^tb«  worUl-wiUe  fume  of  the  author."— /ia;><M(  Meatenger.


SPTJRGEON'S  SHILLING  SERIES.    Bound  in  Cloth.

\o.  1.— CHRIST'S    GLORIOUS    ACHIEVEMENTS.
No.  2.— SEVEN'    WONDERS    OF    GRACE.

THE     SWORD     AND     THE     TROWEL:     A    Monthly  Magazine.

Price  3d.     Yearly  vols.,  58.     Cases  for  binJintf,  Is.  -id.  ^  a

It  commands  a  large  circulation  among  almost  all  classes  of  Christians,  and  as  a  religious
periodical,  it  now  occupies  a  position  second  to  none.  It  re  ords  the  works  of  faith  ami  labours  of
love  which  are  the  honour  of  the  various  sections  of  the  church,  and  it  contends  most  unsparingly
against  the  errors  of  the  times.  It  is  an  accurate  record  of  the  relig:ious  movements  whii  h  emanat«
from  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  but  its  advcxacy  is  f.ir  from  being  confined  within  that  area.
As  an  earnest  defender  of  the  voluntary  principle,  it  strives  to  draw  out  the  sympathies  of  the
people,  and  to  educate  them  to  give  freely  to  Christian  enterprises  ;  so  that  as  the  "system  of  endow-
ments and  State-grants  gradually  passes  away,  the  living  power  of  spontaneous  generosity  may  mora
than  supply  its  place.  No  pains  will  be  spared  to  render  the  Magazine  growingly  worthy  of  th«
widest  circulation.-  KJitor,  C.  H.  SPUKGEO.V.

One  Penny  Each.    In  neat  wrapper.     By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.

A  SPUU  Foil  A  FKEK  UOK.SE.  I.OVIXG  ADVICK   KOK  ANXluCS

BELL.S  yoii  THE  UOHSES.  8EEKEKS.

THE  WAR  HORSE.  THE  UPPER  HAVD.

OOU'S  JEWELS.  A    (UKm    SOLDIER   OF    JEBVS

ItAPTIsMAL  HEGENERATION.  ■  "">^>'

CONFESSION  OF  SIN.  I  \N'I)  TENANT.

APOSlOi.IC  EXHORTATION.  I'HE  BEREAVED.

THE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  1

INFANT  S.\LVATION.  i        i.  KUTEU.

HOW  TO  RAISE  THE  DEAD.  |        ^  <l)\

NONE  lilT  JESUS.  1  1

THE  ESSENCE  OF  SIMPLICITY.  I  >ARY  .•

THE  SILVER  TRUMPET.  1

JESUS  AND  THE  LAMBS  ,        A  .>.-  ....r.  ».>..,  r.  .a.   illEDOOR.

A  WOUDFOR  THE  PERSECUTED.  |  OF  THE  YOUNU.

THE  PUIEST  DISPENSED  WITH.  THERE   (iO  THE   SHU'S.

THE  liEST  15URDEN  FOR  VaUNG  t       THE   LITILE   DOGS.
SHOULDERS  A    SILLY    DOVE.


NEW  PARK  STREET  LIBRARY.    EDITED  BY  C.  H    SPURGEON .

No.  1  contains  ''  Imputed  Righteousness,"  in  two  Discourses,  by  the  Rev.  Q  Wbitfiklii.
No.  2  contains  •' Christ— the  Rock,'  by  C.  H.  Si-i  K<iKo.<«  ;  and  "A  Choice  Drop  of  Uoui-y
from   the  Rock  Christ,"  by  the   Kev.    Iuom.is  Wu.iot  k«.    tid.  each.     Post  frw;.

A  BODY  OF  DIVINITY,  contained  in  Sermons  upon  the  Aasembly's

Catechism.     By  the  Kev.  Thom  as  W  "■     tor  of  St.  Stephen's,  Walbrook.      A  new  and

coiuiilcte  edition,  revi.se<l  and  ml.  rn  rt'a<lers,  by   the  Rev.   GeoRoe  RooKaa,

(iuubtrwell.     With  a  Preface  an.  v  Pastor  C.  H.' SpiKutoN.     Price  6s.

Every  divine  of  Calvinistic  views  shouiu  ici.i  u.  and  every  private  Christian  also.  We  tan
heartily  recommend  it  to  itU  lovers  of  sound  doctrine,  luiiong  whom  «e  hope  for  a  large
sale. — C.  H.  Spi'soeon.

BAPTIST  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH.   Thirty-two  Articles  on  Christian

F'uith  iiikl  Practice,  with  Scripture  l*roofs,  adupte<l  by  the  ,\lilll^ters  and  M.^sengers  of  the
(Jcneiiil  As.seiiibly,  which  met  in  Loudon  in  l(i«9.  Preface  by  C.  H.  Si  t  koko.n.  Paper
covers,  id.     Post  five,  6  stamps.

BTINYAN'S  WATER  OF  LIFE.     Preface  by  C.  H  SPURGEON.     Is.

This  is  a  tiisteful  little  book,  very  suitable  fora  present,  ana  likely  to  Ik?  made  useful  wherever
it  mav  be  circulated.  It  is  written'in  Bimyan's  best  style;  it  is  simple,  forcible,  pleasing,  and
full  or  illustration.

ELISHA    COLES   ON   DIVINE   SOVEREIGNTY.     With  Preface  by

C.  H.  Spvroeo.n.    2s.  Gd.

Romaine  sitys  of  this  book  :  "  The  doctrines  of  grace,  of  which  v  ■  >■  the  truths

of  God:  our  author  has  defended  them  in  a  masterly  mamier.     He  !  .  them  to  be

plainly  revealed  m  the  Scriptures,  but  has  also  shown  that  they  .<i  '.  use  to  the

children  of  God,  that  without  the  steadfast  belief  of  them,  they  "cannot  ^o  on  ihcir  way  reioicing.
In  the  practical  view  of  these  points,  EUsha  Coles  is  singularly  excellent."

WORKS    BY    OTHER    AUTHORS.
HANDBOOK  OF  REVIVALS :  for  the  use  of  Winners  of  Souls.    By

Dr.  IIknuy  Fisji,  Newark,  New  Jersey.     5s.
"  This  is  the  authorized  edition  of  a  work  which  at  this  present  time  shtmld  hare  a  very  large

sale.   It  is  a  judicious  compilation  from  almost  every  work  ujiot'.  ''      ..i ...  , ...  ..  , ,.    i,      .,,j  j^  written
in  a  spirit  calculated  to  promote  them.    We  cannot  imagine  a  i  tu  be  heavy

reading;  the  subject  itself  is  inspiriting,  and  the  mode  of  hm:  .tile  ability.

We  have  enjoyed  the  reading  of  the  work,  and  though  it  is  dcci  .i^..  .^.i..  .  i.m,  .i  .:.  nunc  the  lets
interesting  and  valuable. ''—C  M.  Spwgeon.

HENRY'S  OUTLINES  OF  CHURCH  HISTORY :  A  Brief  Sketch  of

the  Christian  Church  from  the  First  Century.  By  Jo»k:pu  Fta.NASntJt,  LL.D.  2s.  6d.
"The  Church  Histories  hitherto  in  vogue  are  too  cumbersome,  too  verbose,  too  involved  to  be
used  in  schools  and  colleges,  and  we  entertain  the  hope  that  the  present  work  -kxW  remedy  that  •vil,
and  supply  a  work  which  all  our  friends  who  are  tutors  can  use  with  pleasure  and  safety.  Every
young  Christian  should  be  acquainted  with  ecclesiastical  history  ;  it  should  be  taught  in  erery  school
of  a  high  grade,  to  young  ladies  as  well  as  to  their  bi others. "'—C.  H.  Spurgton.


txo    •


^


CO


University  of  Toronto
Library


i


(Qi
0)
rH

05

•i

§!


col


0):

I


w

(U
•H

0)

g

o


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Librarj'  Card  Pocket

I'nder  Fat.  "Ref.  Index  File"

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
