The Congo and the Founding of Its Free State, Vol. I (Henry Morton Stanley, 1885)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1885 first edition (https://archive.org/details/congofoundingofi01stan). Stanley's founding of the Congo Free State (1879–84) — the Emin Pasha relief expedition's prelude and the scramble for the Congo.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

** .. 


mL^ 


t  /. 


LIBR.\RY 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

SANTA  BARBARA 

Fro"-  the  col  1  ect  ion  of 
ELSPETH  HUXLEY 


rnr^-^ 


*  s^. 


i-^i/-:' 


!«^V^■'^ 


f  •  ■■*-i  A 


i^r'i 


V    /;■ 


•^1.7'  ■■lAW^"', 


r 


lit/'*  ' 


(0 


ULiB   LIBRARY 

X'  3-7(30 


Frontispiece  to  Vol.  I. 
HIS   MAJESTY   LEOPOLD   II..   KIXG   OF    THE   EELGI.iXS. 


THE    CONGO 


FOUNDING   OF   ITS   FREE  STATE 


A  STORY  OF  WORK  AND  EXPLORATIOX. 


BV 


HENRY    M.    STANLEY. 


IN    TWO    VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 


WITH     OVER    ONE    HUNDRED    FULLPAGE     AND     SMALLER     ILLUSTRATIONS. 
TWO     LARGE    MAPS   AND     SEVERAL    SMALLER     ONES. 


CHEAPER  EDITION. 


LONDON: 
SAMPSON   LOW,   AIAESTON,    SEARLE,   k    RIVINGTON 

^  188,  FLEET  STUKET. 

1886. 

t^All  rights  reserved.) 


THIS  NAEEATITE 

OF 

LABOUE,  EXPLOEATIOX  AND  DISCOVEEY, 

AIiD 

HISTORY 

OF   A   GREAT   AST)   SUCCESSFUL 

POLITICAL    AXD    DIPLOMATIC   ACHIEVEMENT, 

IS,  BY  SPEQAL  PERMISSION, 

^lost  rcs^iedftiUg  ^ciiiaitci)  to 

HIS    :\IAJESTY  LEOPOLD    IL, 

THE  KING  OF  THE  BELGIANS, 

THE   GENEROUS   3I0XARCH   WHO   SO   XOBLY   COXCEIVED,    ABLY   COSDUCTED,    AXD 

MUSIFICENTLT   SUSTAINED   THE   ENTERPRISE   WHICH    HAS   OBTAINED    THE   RECOGNITION 

OF   ALL   THE   GREAT   POWERS   OF   THE   WORLD,   AND   HAS   ENDED   IN 

THE    ESTABLISHMENT    OF 

THE     CONGO    STATE: 

AND    ALSO    TO    ALL    THOSE     GENTLEMEN    WHO    ASSISTED    HIM     BY    THEIR   ZEALOUS 

SERVICE,     TALENTS,    MEAXS,    AND     SYMPATHY,    TO     REALISE    THE 

UNIQUE   PJBOJECT   OF   FORMING   A   FREE    COMMERCIAL 

STATE    IN   EQUATORIAL   AFRICA, 

BY   THEIR   HUMBLE   AND   OBEDIENT   SERVANT, 

THE   AUTHOE. 

London,  April  1835. 


PKEFACE. 


A  WISE  Englisliman  has  said  that  pure  impulses  and 
noble  purposes  have  been  oftener  thwarted  by  the  devil 
under  the  name  of  Quixotism  than  by  any  other  in- 
sinuating phrase  of  obstruction.  In  1878  that  word 
was  flung  in  my  teeth  several  times,  especially  by  Man- 
chester men.  If  I  delivered  a  speech  or  a  lecture,  or 
wrote  a  letter,  about  the  probabilities  of  success  attend- 
ing a  judiciously  conducted  enterprise  in  Africa,  a 
Manchester  editor,  or  a  Manchester  merchant,  almost 
invariably  taunted  me  with  being  a  "  dreamer,"  a 
"Quixotic  journalist,"  or  a  mere  "penny-a-liner."  I 
do  not  quarrel  with  the  phrases,  but  I  certainl}^ 
deprecate  the  uses  to  which  they  were  applied.  The 
charge  of  Quixotism,  being  directed  against  my 
mission,  deterred  many  noble  men  in  Manchester  from 
studying  the  question  of  new  markets,  and  deepened 
unjustly  their  prejudices  against  Africa  and  African 
projects. 

In  the  Daily   Telegrciph  of  November  12_,  1877,  tlie 


vi  PREFACE. 

following  words  of  mine  were  published.  Thej  will, 
at  least,  prove  my  own  consistency  of  belief. 

"  I  feel  convinced  that  the  question  of  this  mighty 
water-way  will  become  a  political  one  in  time.  As  yet, 
however,  no  European  Power  seems  to  have  put  forth 
the  right  of  control.  Portugal  claims  it  because  she 
discovered  its  mouth  ;  but  the  great  Powers — England, 
Am.erica,  and  France — refuse  to  recognise  her  right. 
If  it  were  not  that  I  fear  to  damp  any  interest  you  may 
have  in  Africa,  or  in  this  magnilicent  stream,  by  the 
length  of  my  letters,  I  could  show  you  very  strong 
reasons  why  it  would  be  a  politic  deed  to  settle  this 
momentous  question  immediately.  I  could  prove  to 
you  that  the  Power  possessing  the  Congo,  despite  the 
cataracts,  would  absorb  to  itself  the  trade  of  the  whole 
of  the  enormous  basin  behind.  This  river  is  and  will 
be  the  grand  highway  of  commerce  to  "West  Central 
Africa." 

Gambetta,  the  great  French  statesman,  in  July, 
18*78,  also  uttered  a  prediction  which  has  been  since 
verified. 

"  You  have  thrown  the  light  of  knowledge  on  what 
you  have  well  described  as  the  Dark  Continent.  Not 
only,  sir,  have  you  ojDened  up  a  new  Continent  to  our 
view,  but  you  have  given  an  impulse  to  scientific  and 
philanthrojDic  enterprise  which  M-ill  have  a  material 
effect  on  the  progress  of  the  world.  It  is  not  only  in 
the  action  of  private  individuals  that  that  is  seen. 
What  you  have  done  has  influenced  Grovernments — 
proverbially  so  difficult  to  be  moved — and  the  impulse 


PREFACE.  vii 

you  have  imparted  to  them  will,  I  am  convinced,  go 
on  growing  year  after  year." 

Besides  the  work  of  the  International  Association,  of 
which  these  volumes  are  the  record,  the  English  Baptists 
have  carried  the  banner  of  peace  up  the  Congo  beyond 
the  Equator ;  and  the  American  Baptists,  taking  up 
the  work  begun  by  the  Livingstone  Congo  Mission,  are 
urging  on  the  civilising  work  side  by  side  with  their 
English  brethren.  London  and  Church  Missionary 
Societies  have  planted  their  Christian  flags  on  Lakes 
Victoria  and  Tanganika.  The  African  Lakes  Company 
and  the  Free  Kirk  of  Scotland  are  earnestly  at  work 
on  Lake  Nyassa,  and  are  advancing  to  Lake  Tanganika. 
Serpa  Pinto  and  Weissman  have  crossed  Africa ; 
Ivens  and  Cape^lo  have  performed  remarkable  journeys 
to  the  east  of  Angola.  Monsieur  de  Brazza  has  given 
France  a  West  African  Empire  \  Germany  has  entered 
the  field  of  colonial  enterprise,  and  has  annexed  all 
the  territory  in  south-west  Africa,  between  Cape  Frio 
and  British  colonies  in  South  Africa,  the  Cameroons 
territory,  and  a  fertile  province  in  east  Africa ;  Italy 
has  annexed  territory  on  the  Red  Sea ;  Great  Britain 
has  annexed  the  Niger  Delta  ;  and  Portugal  now 
possesses  700,000  square  miles  of  African  territor3^ 
Thus  the  expressed  conviction  of  the  statesman  Gam- 
betta  has  been  realised. 

Nor  has  the  end  yet  been  reached.  The  time  will 
shortly  come  when  other  grand  faits  accomplis  will  be 
published.  The  impulse  is  still  throbbing  and  per- 
meating throughout  Europe.     These  volumes  will  tend 


viii  PREFACE. 

to  quicken  rather  than  to  allay  the  fever.  They  will 
be  printed  in  eight  different  languages,  and  the  words 
of  enterprise  and  of  action,  it  is  hoped,  will  move 
many  a  man  out  of  the  325,000,000  of  Europe  to  be 
ujD  and  doing. 

The  world  has  heard  enough  of  the  old  wives'  tales 
of  "  horrible  climate,"  of  "  Quixotism,"  and  all  such 
fancies  of  timorous  and  feeble  minds.  Hundreds  of 
raw  European  youths  have  been  launched  into  the 
heart  of  the  "murderous  continent,"  and  the  further 
inland  we  sent  them  the  more  they  improved  in 
physique.  It  matters  not  now  what  may  be  said  by 
-interested  traders,  selfish  publicists,  narrow  -  minded 
grasping  merchants,  or  discharged  agents  about  the 
dangers  of  this  climate.  We  have  tested  it  most 
thoroughly  for  six  years.  There  is  less  sickness  by 
half  in  the  Congo  basin,  even  in  its  present  unpre- 
pared condition,  than  there  is  in  the  "  bottom  lands  " 
of  Arkansas,  a  state  which  has  doubled  its  population 
during  the  last  twenty-five  years. 

At  the  same  time,  with  all  my  desire  to  serve  Africa, 
I  will  not  serve  it  at  the  expense  of  truth.  I  hear  of 
companies  being  launched  to  exploit  "West  and  East 
Africa.  In  regard  to  West  Africa,  I  am  bound  to  say 
that  almost  every  available  point  which  promised  to 
remunerate  enterprise  has  already  been  occupied.  The 
coast  is,  after  all,  but  a  thin  line.  The  lower  courses 
of  the  Kwanza_,  Congo,  Chiloango,  Kwilu,  Ogowai, 
Muni,  Cameroons,  the  Oil  rivers,  Niger,  Roquelle, 
Gambia,  and  Senegal   rivers   have   been   dotted  with 


FEE  FACE.  ix 

factories,  while  along  tlie  intervening  coast-lines  com- 
mercial establishments  are  pretty  thickly  sown.  Not 
a  single  firm  that  I  know  of  requires  assistance  in  the 
purchase  of  the  native  productions.  On  the  Congo 
we  have  the  great  Dutch  Company,  Hatton  and  Cook- 
son,  and  Daumas,  Beraud  &  Co.,  who  have  pushed 
their  way  up  to  the  foot  of  the  cataracts  ;  on  the  Niger 
the  National  African  Company  is  firmly  established. 
New  companies  seeking  to  outbid  these  establishments 
in  the  purchase  of  the  native  produce  are  preparing 
for  themselves  periods  of  trial,  and  most  probably 
pecuniary  loss. 

On  the  East  Coast  there  is  but  little  room  for 
the  European,  as  he  can  scarcely  compete  with  the 
frugal  Arab,  Hindi  and  Banyan,  let  him  be  ever  so 
economical  and  enterprising. 

There  only  remain  the  great  river  basins  to  be 
exploited  commercially ;  the  principal  of  which  are  the 
Congo,  Nile,  Niger,  and  Shari.  But  these  require 
railways  to  connect  their  upper  basins  with  the  sea. 
Until  railways  are  constructed  it  is  useless  to  suppose 
that  any  remunerative  trade  can  be  made.  The  value 
of  the  traffic  upon  the  river  banks  which  would  be 
thrown  open  by  these  railways  may  be  best  seen  in 
the  following  table  : — 

Railway,  Rivor  bauks. 

Congo,  between  Vivi  and  Stanley  Pool  147  miles  long  10,800  miles. 

Nile,  Suakim  to  Berber      ....  280         „  5,600     „ 

Niger,  above  Rabba  to  Komba      .      .  250         „  4,400      „ 

Shari  and  Lake  CI  uad,Kibago  to  Mogolo  150         „  1,800      „ 

Totals    .     .     .     .827  22,000 


X  PREFACE. 

The  capital  required  at  £4000  *  per  mile,  which 
would,  of  course,  include  labour,  rails  and  rolling 
material  for  each  railway,  would  amount  to : — 

£ 

Congo  railway  and  flotilla  ....  000,000 

Nile           „             „  ....  1,160,000 

Niger         „             „  ....  1,010,000 

Shari          „             „  ....  620,000 


£3,420,000 


The  area  of  country  and  the  masses  of  population 
which  these  railways  would  make  immediately  acces- 
sible, according  to  the  most  careful  calculations,  are 
as  follows : — 

Area  in  square  statute  miles.         Population. 

Congo      ....  1,090,000  43,000,000 

Nile 660,000  23,760,000 

Niger       ....  440,000  8,800,000 

Shari 180,000  5,400,000 


2,370,000  80,960,000 


The  entire  continent  of  Africa  is  15,500  English 
miles  in  length.  The  four  river  banks  if  stretched  in 
line  would  be  equal  in  length  to  22,600  statute  miles. 
The  aggregate  areas  immediately  accessible  to  com- 
mercial enterprise  may  be  said  to  equal  a  belt  155 
miles  deep  drawn  around  the  entire  continent.  Such 
a  belt  would  require  thirty-four  souls  to  the  square 
mile  to  produce  a  population  equal  to  the  80,960,000 
inhabitants  of  the  four  river  basins. 

Again,  almost   the   least   exploited   portion   of   the 

*  These  figures  are  but  assumed  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument,  of 
course.    The  cost  of  railway  mileage  may  be  more  or  less. 


PREFACE.  xi 

African  coast-line,  2,900  miles  long,  is  that  from  the 
Gambia  to  St.  Paul  de  Loan  da,  which  gives  an  annual 
trade  of  £32,000,000.  The  banks  of  these  four  rivers, 
if  equally  developed,  ought  to  furnish  a  trade  seven 
and  a  half  times  greater,  or  £240,000,000.  The  gross 
sum  required  to  create  this  enormous  trade  is  only 
£3,420,000 ! 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  continent  abounding  with 
tropic  produce,  populated  by  81,000,000  of  workable 
people,  and  showing  a  coast-line  of  22,600  miles  in 
length,  suddenly  rose  from  the  bosom  of  the  Atlantic, 
Imagine  the  scramble  for  the  possession  of  it  b}^  the 
Powers !  Yet  here  are  four  river  basins  offered  to 
civilization  at  the  rate  of  l|c?.  per  acre,  with  an  annual 
trade  of  over  35.  per  acre  almost  guaranteed,  which  is 
certainly  very  much  cheaper  than  what  is  offered  by  a 
land  company  at  the  present  time  in  East  Africa. 

Of  course,  I  little  expect  that  any  of  these  grand  and 
advanced  ideas  will  ever  be  put  to  the  test.  But  when 
I  hear  of  perpetual  lamentations  about  depression  of 
trade,  of  the  silent  spindle,  and  the  cold  foundry,  I 
am  tempted  to  ask  what  has  become  of  all  that  tradi- 
tional energy  which  made  Britain  so  famous  in  the 
commercial  world. 

Let  us  reflect  upon  the  wisdom  of  the  proceedings  in 
connection  with  Egypt  to-day.  The  total  exports  and 
imports  of  Lower  Egypt  and  the  Soudan  in  1882 
amounted  to  £16,805,001,  and  yet  before  the  British 
Government  can  issue  out  of  the  present  contest  satis- 
factorily they  will  have    expended  quite  £16,000,000, 


xii  PEEFACE. 

over  four-and-a-half  times  more  money  than  the  sum 
which  is  required  to  give  in  a  few  years  an  augmented 
trade  to  the  world  of  £240,000,000,  of  which  no  doubt 
three-fourths  would  be  absorbed  by  the  mercantile 
body  of  Great  Britain.  Let  us  hope  that  the  Nile 
basin  may  be  rescued,  however,  from  the  fate  which 
hovers  over  it.  If  lost  to  Britain,  let  us  at  least 
hope  that  some  other  nation  will  do  its  utmost  to 
preserve  this  basin  open  to  civilisation.  If  France 
only  prosecutes  her  present  great  enterprise  intended 
to  connect  the  Upper  Xiger  with  the  Senegal,  one  of 
the  three  other  gTeat  river  basins  will  be  saved  from 
waste  ;  and  if  she  is  wise  and  liberal  in  her  tariffs,  she 
will  find  ample  recompense  in  the  commercial  inter- 
course she  will  have  estabhshed  with  the  8,800,000 
inhabitants  of  the  Xiger  banks. 

These  volumes  now  issued  contain  minute  details  of 
what  is  produced  in  the  greatest  and  most  populous 
river  basin  in  Africa.  The  information  so  painfully 
and  so  patiently  acquired  is  for  the  benefit  of  those 
natives  of  Europe  who  can  read  and  are  interested  not 
only  in  Africa,  but  in  the  commercial  prosperity  of  the 
world.  Any  two  rich  men  in  Great  Britain,  Belgium, 
France,  Germany,  Italy,  Holland,  Spain,  Portugal,  or 
Sweden  and  Norway,  may  combine  together  and  build 
the  Congo  railway.  I  shall  be  surprised  if  before  the 
end  of  the  year  some  such  railway  has  not  been 
started.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  perfectly  immaterial 
to  me  personally  whether  an  attempt  be  made  to 
realise  the  project  or  not. 


PREFACE.  xiu 

At  tlie  same  time,  I  have  a  strong  hope  that  Man- 
chester, which  in  1878  was  so  apathetic,  and  in  1884  so 
bravely  strenuous  in  defending  the  commercial  liberty 
of  the  Congo  basin,  will  unite  with  Berlin,  Paris,  and 
Brussels  in  the  subscription  of  £600,000  to  build  this 
railway.  At  any  rate,  the  Manchester  Chamber  of 
Commerce,  and  its  excellent  President,  J.  F.  Hutton, 
Esq.,  and  the  Manchester  editors  deserve  the  thanks 
of  every  reader  of  these  books  for  the  persistent  de- 
fence of  the  principles  which  the  author  advocates, 
and  which  he  maintains  can  alone  rescue  Africa  from 
the  slough  of  despond  and  inutility  in  which  it  has 
remained  so  long. 

The  Author  craves  the  permission  of  the  reader  to 
introduce  to  his  or  her  notice  the  President  of  the 
International  Association,  Colonel  Strauch,  to  whose 
genius  for  administration,  thoughtful  care,  and  wise 
provision,  the  success  of  the  Expedition  was  so  largely 
due ;  and  also  to  Captain  Thys,  of  the  corps  Etat- 
MajoVy  qfficier  d'ordonnance  du  Hoi,  whose  patience 
was  sorely  tried,  especially  when  the  Commander  of 
the  Expedition  was  sending  his  peremptory  orders  for 
supplies. 

Finally,  the  British  reader  must  be  persuaded  by  the 
Author  to  believe  that  the  expedition  has  been  largely 
indebted  to  the  munificence  of  William  Mackinnon,  Esq., 
of  Balinakill,  Clachan,  Argylleshire,  from  whom  at 
various  times  we  obtained  substantial  help,  and  in- 
variably the  most  generous  sympathy  with  the  kindliest 
advice. 


xiv  PREFACE. 

There  is  a  law  of  Nature  which  has  decreed  that 
a  man  must  work.  The  Divine  law  declares  that  only 
by  the  sweat  of  his  brow  shall  a  man  eat  bread.  There 
is  a  law  pretty  generally  recognised  among  the  ad- 
vanced nations,  that  every  honest  labourer  is  worthy 
of  his  hire,  but  only  the  conspicuously  meritorious 
deserve  special  commendation.  The  stern  practice  of 
the  world  is  that  a  man  shall  not  obtain  his  food  for 
nothiug.  Unless  he  labours  in  his  vocation,  neither 
shall  he  receive  wages.  It  is  also  generally  conceded 
that  any  man  who  distinguishes  himself  by  goodwill  and 
endeavour,  however  incompetent  he  may  be,  deserves 
consideration,  but  any  man  who  exhibits  capacity  with 
intelligence,  effective  labour  with  honest  goodwill^  shall 
receive  reward  commensurate  with  his  services.  For 
thriftlessness  the  world  has  naught  but  contempt ;  for 
natural  debility  only  pity  ;  for  vice,  condemnation ;  for 
failures,  oblivion.  Obeying  these  general  laws  and 
practices,  those  whom  I  think  have  proved  themselves 
most  deserving  of  recognition  for  their  gallantry,  moral 
courage,  and  fortitude  under  privations,  for  the  greatest 
intelligence  and  capacity  in  the  performance  of  their 
duties,  have  received  honourable  mention  at  my  hands 
in  the  chapter  on  Europeans. 

It  has  been  customary  with  me  to  compliment  my 
publishers  upon  the  energy  and  care  with  which  they 
produce  their  books.  These  volumes  are  no  exception 
to  their  usual  happy  art  of  pleasing  both  public  and 
author.  I  am  also  indebted  to  Mr.  J.  D.  Cooper  for  the 
pains  he  has  taken  to  faithfully  reproduce  the  many 


PBEFACE.  X7 

photographs  of  landscape  and  persons  in  the  engrav- 
ings now  published;  and  also  to  Mr.  John  Bolton 
for  the  manner  in  which  he  has  produced  my  maps. 
The  large  map  is  the  result  of  nearly  four  hundred 
observations  for  latitude  and  longitude  made  during 
our  successive  voyages  up  and  down  the  Congo.  The 
principal  stations  between  Yivi  and  Stanley  Falls  have 
been  finally  fixed  after  several  observations  taken  at 
each  place  during  my  six  years'  mission. 

I  now  commit  my  work  to  the  public,  in  the  hope 
that  it  will  efi'ect  a  happy  change  for  Africa,  and  give 
a  greater  impetus  to  the  true  civilising  influences 
which  are  seen  in  the  advancement  of  commerce  and 
in  the  vitality  of  Christian  missions. 

The  Author. 

London,  Ap-il  1885. 


CONTENTS. 

{l-olJ.) 
CHAPTER  L 

PREVIOUS   HISTORY   OF   THE   CONGO. 

PAGE 

Early  discoveries — Erroneous  nomenclature — Inaccurate  descriptions 
— Difficiilties  in  following  the  old  chroniclers^Tlie  British 
Expedition  of  1816 — Its  misfortunes,  but  finally  successful 
scientific  result — Livingstone's  last  Expedition  —  The  Baili/ 
Telecjmph  and  New  York  Herald  Expedition,  1876 — Discovery  of 
the  continuity  of  the  Congo      I 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE   POLITICAL   HISTORY   OF   CONGO-LAND. 

Piqafetta's  'Kingdom  of  the  Congo' — Chronicle  of  the  Capuchin 
Expedition—  The  stone  jjillars  of  the  Portuguese  :  their  purpose 
—  The  capital  of  Congo-land  —  Conversion  of  the  King  to 
Christianity — Missions  and  ancient  religious  edifices— Hostile 
incursion  of  the  Jaggas — Territorial  claims  of  the  Portuguese- 
Expulsion  of  the  Portuguese  from  Congo-land — The  slave  trade 
— The  missions  of  Rome  and  France — Boundaries  and  general 
description  of  Congo-land — The  position  and  power  of  its  chiefs 
— Treaties  of  tlie  International  Association 9 

CHAPTER  III. 

THK  SEQUEL  TO  THE  BOOK,  'THROUGH  THE  DARK  CONTINENT.' 

My  return  from  the  "Dark  Continent"  in  1878— Met  by  King 
Leopold's  Commissioners  at  Marseilles — The  King's  proposition 
■ — Fatigue  and  an  unavailing  search  for  repose — Three  weeks  in 
Switzerland — Negotiations  for  the  new  enterprise — "  What  was 
to  bo  its  character  ?  " — King  Leopold's  invitation  to  Brussels — 
The  meeting  there  in  December  1878 — The  "  Comite  d'Etudes  du 
Haut  Congo"  formed — Final  preparations  for  the  journey- 
Again  e«  rc/wie  to  Africa      ..      ..     'JO 

VOL.  I.  b 


xvi-i  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEE  IV. 

THE    AFRICAN'   IXTEEXATIONAL   ASSOCIATION. 

PAGE 

Foiuidation  of  the  Association — Witbdrawal  of  the  English  members 
— General  Sanford's  description  of  the  Association — My  first 
relations  with  the  International — My  instructions  to  M.  Cambier 
— Karema,  a  prosperous  station— My  instructions  to  Captain 
Popelin  —  Draft  of  propositions  for  the  organisation  of  an 
Expedition — Farewell  to  Zanzibar — The  SS.  Albion  starts  on  her 
long  voyage 33 

CHAPTEE  Y. 

EX   ROVTE   TO   THE   COXGO. 

Bankruptcy  of  Dutch  merchants  at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo  :  its 
effect — Letter  to  Colonel  Straiich — The  Expedition  charged  with 
being  mysterious — Groundlessness  of  the  charge — My  personal 
conduct  in  the  matter — Accident  to  the  Albion — Compelled  to 
call  at  Sierra  Leone — An  amusing  misunderstanding — An  old 
friend — Kind  attentions — Arrival  at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo    . .     50 

CHAPTEE    YI. 

BANAXA   POINT. 

Approaching  land — Appearance  of  the  coast — The  majestic  Congo — 
The  factories — Our  manly  pilot — Banana  Point — A  good  anchor- 
age— Effects  of  tropic  life — Advice  as  to  clothing,  food,  and 
general  behaviour — The  "•  petite  verre  de  Cognac^''  —  Senseless 
abuse  of  Africa — Description  of  our  boats — The  eccentricities  of 
the  En  .4i'an<— Clamours  among  the  staff— Expenses,  pay,  and 
precedence — Description  of  the  factories — A  factory  dinner — 
Youth  of  the  managers — The  coloured  helps — A  busy  scene — 
A  varied  collection  of  stores — Immense  i^owder  supply  and  its 
pui'pose — A  melancholy  spot — Banana  Creek — Seething  mud — 
Local  origin  of  the  name  "  Banana '" — Prediction  regarding  the 
fate  of  the  i^eninsula Gl 

CHAPTEE  YII. 

UP   THE   "  MIGHTY  "   CONGO. 

The  flotilla  proceeds  up  the  river — Braving  the  giant  stream — Silence 
on  the  wooded  shores  —  Kissanga  —  Ponta  da  Lenha — Dutch 
factories — Guarding  against  floods — The  dangers  of  hospitality — 
Depth  of  the  river :  its  volume — The  dry  and  rainy  seasons- 
Tidal  action- -Fetish  rock— "  The  d— 1  had  done  it '— Ma-taddi 
Iszazzi,  "  Lightning  Stone  "— Boma,  the  principal  emporium  of 
trade — Means  of  communication — Loneliness  and  cheerlessness — 


CONTEXTS.  xix 

/•AIJE 

A  refreshing  change— African  sunshine  —  The  blood-curdling 
history  of  Boma — Horrors  of  the  slave-trade — A  terrible  punish- 
ment— The  trade  of  Boma-  The  "  wicked  white  man  "—Progress 
of  Boma^Historical  treatment  of  the  rirer — Hungry  whites — 
BafBed  by  the  stream — "  Hippopofcimus  ?  that's  a  rock,  mun  !  " — 
A  dead  shot — Departure  of  the  SS.  Alhion  for  Europe 79 

CHAPTEE  YIII. 

L'P   THE   CONGO  :   FROil   BOMA   TO   YITI. 

Buka  Island  —  Chinsalla  Creek— Prince's  Island— Burial-place  of 
officers  of  the  Tuckey  Expedition — Viuda-le-Xzaddi  village — 
Mussuko — Number  of  trading  establishments — Navigation  of  the 
Congo— Ultimate  point  of  navigation — Eeconnaissance  for  a  site 
for  our  chief  station—  Amount  of  steam-power  required  to  breast 
the  current — Dedede,  the  merry  chief,  tells  us  of  a  site — Castle 
Hill — "  Sure,  it  is  beautiful,  this ! " — A  fiery  clearance — Amiable 
natives — Features  of  the  district — Access  and  routes  to  the 
station  —  Arrangements  for  a  "  palaver  " — Advantages  of  the 
Yivi  country :  its  exploration — The  five  chiefs  of  Yivi  and  their 
men-at-arms— A  splendid  market  for  old  clothes — The  "  palaver  " 
— A  tight  bargain- —Congoese  shrewdness  in  trade — Lingenji,  the 
boy  trader  of  Bolobo  — "  Are  not  Yivi  and  Nsanda  one?"— The 
bargain  closed      109 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE   FOrXDlN'G   OF   VIVI :   A   STORY   OF   WORK. 

An  unpromising  field  for  work—"  He  makes  his  mark,  and  many 
marks  make  a  road  " — The  signal  given — Work  olfered  to  the 
natives :  their  astonishment — Eoad-making — Transport  of  stores 
— Mapping  the  sites  of  houses — I  gain  the  name  of  Bula  Matari, 
"  Breaker  of  Eocks" — Garden-making — Duration  of  our  working 
day — Native  fondness  of  grog — Completing  the  head-quarters — 
Extracts  from  descriptive  letters  to  the  President — Oflicers  and 
men  at  Yivi HO 

CHAPTEE  X. 

vivi  TO  isangila:  a  reconnaissance. 

Looking  out  for  a  wagon  route — The  gardens  of  Banza  Somlio— Tho 
valley  of  the  Loa — Banza  Uvana — Fine  view  from  Kaishaudi — 
^Vc  visit  our  friend  Dedede  -  Eeception  of  thirty  chiefs  and 
their  retainers — A  conference — Mysterious  councils  and  final 
decisions— Distribution  of  gifts— A  dear  bargain  — A  deserted 
plateau— The  Bundi  valley— A  fine  retreat  for  a  recluse -Ad- 


XX  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

ventures  -nith  buffaloes  and  elephants — Harassing  search  for  a 
herd-track — "  ]\Iabriiki,  are  you  hurt  or  dead  ?  " — A  lucky  fall — 
The  course  of  the  future  road  revealed — Eest  at  Ndambi  Mbongo 
— Difficulty  of  our  task— A  tropical  nest — "  Tuckey's  Furthest " 
— Faithful "  Mirambo  "—The  penitent  chiefs  of  Isangila— Future 
operations  —  Proposed  raihvay — Infusing  confidence — Extracts 
from  letters  to  Colonel  Strauch ICO 

CHAPTEE  XI. 

VIVI   TO   ISANGILA  :    ROAD-MAKING — A   CURIOUS   CHAPTER. 

My  working  force — The  whites — Camp  in  the  Loa  valley — Tracing  a 
way  through  the  tall  grass — Our  first  day's  road-making — "  When 
in  Eome  you  must  do  as  the  Eomans  do,"  a  mistake — What  food 
to  take  in  the  tropics — Tillage  idols — A  bigoted  medicine-man — 
Yahie  of  buffalo  and  hippoiiotami  tracks — Gin-drinking  chiefs — 
A  determined  old  toper — Difficulty  about  the  names  of  the 
Congo — Yellala  Falls  —  Market-days— Snakes  —  Abundance  of 
game — The  sun  at  noon — Birds — Completion  of  the  first  section 
of  our  road — Overland  conveyance  of  the  steam-launch  Boyal — 
Troubles  with  the  Europeans — Arrival  of  Belgian  "  commercials  " 
— The  coldest  part  of  the  country — Death  of  a  promising  mem- 
ber of  the  Expedition — My  first  sickness — A  day's  thermometer 
readings — Swinburne  ill — Settlement  of  a  trade  dispute — Eesult 
of  IGO  days' hard  work — Eeports  to  the  President       195 

CHAPTEE  XII. 

VIVI  TO  ISANGILA — continued. 

Liitete,  a  truculent  chief — "  Seize  him,  boys ! " — Fiote  law — Trial  and 
fine  of  Lutete — The  axe  and  the  forest — In  search  of  game — 
^Nostalgia — No  more  Europeans  wanted — Our  first  rain-storm- 
Hauling  the  En  Acant  overland— A  Day  of  Eest — Arrival  of  Le 
Comte  Savorgnan  de  Brazza— His  travels  and  adventures — 
Ngoma  Point — A  diflicult  engineering  feat — Successful  forma- 
tion of  a  road  round  the  Point — Isangila — Captain  Anderson's 
services — A  year's  progress — Our  toil,  trials,  and  losses      ,.      ..   218 

CHAPTEE  XIII. 

BETWEEN   THE    CATARACT   REGIONS  :    TO   MANYANGA, 

Number  of  men  and  quantity  of  stores  bound  for  Manyanga — Isan- 
gila scenery — Ntombi's  dark  ravine — Crocodiles  chasing  us — 
The  Long  Eeach — Curious  rock-formations — Eomjjing  on  the 
sands— Advantages  of  geniality  and  liveliness  in  dealing  with 


CONTEXTS.  XX  i 

I-AGK 

aborigines — Kilolo  Point— Getting  up  steam  pressure  for  a  stiff 
current — Kuvoko — We  encounter  two  missionaries — Their  rc- 
l^ulse  by  tlie  natives  at  Kinshassa  and  Mfwa — Soudi  of  Ituru  is 
killed  by  a  buflfalo — Natives  still  friendly — "  A'kumbi,  kumbi !  " 
— Nzambi  Eapids — The  Kwilu— Procuring  food — A  whirlpool — 
Kimbauza  Island — A  memory  of  1877 — Hamadi's  slavery  and 
wonderful  escape — Repairing  our  steamers — Minnow  iishiug  — 
Ndunga  Eapids — A  place  for  suicides — Ndunga  dancing — An 
exciting  and  extraordinary  jDerformance  —  Manyanga  —  "To- 
morrow we  shall  not  work ;  we  shall  see  the  strangers " — 
Doubtful  reception  from  the  natives        'Ii'2 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

FEVER   AT   MANYAXGA. 

I  am  prostrated  by  fever— Preparing  for  death— Awakening  to  life — 
A  voracious  appetite — Joyful  news — Reinforcements  from  Zanzi- 
bar— Lindner's  arrival — Agreement  with  the  chiefs  of  Manyanga 
— Erecting  the  station        271 

CHAPTER  XV. 

A   EECONJfAISSAXCE   TO   STANLEY   POOL. 

All  outrage  iipon  custom,  and  its  result — Turbulent  marketing — 
Death  of  M.  Neve — Letter  respecting  the  support  of  Manyanga 
— On  the  march  to  Stanley  Pool — Reception  by  natives — A  boy 
drowned — Bwabwa  Njali,  a  dissembling  chief — Native  pomp — 
I\Ialameen  api:>ears,  bearing  the  French  tricolour — A  treaty  re- 
garding territory — The  Gordon-Bennett — Mfwa — Malima — Ga- 
mankono,  an  old  acquaintance — Instance  of  retentive  memory — 
"  We  are  all  kings  " — Arrival  of  IMalameen,  whose  fables  alarm 
the  villagers— Friendship  supplanted  by  hate — Forced  retirement 
from  Malima — Evil  news  2'i'ecedes  us — Stojiped  by  an  armed 
crowd — "  Tanlcy,  Tanlcy  !  " — A  timely  arrival      281 

CHAPTER  XVL 

NGALYEMA   OF   NTAMO. 

Apin-oacliing  starvation—Relief  delayed — Threat  of  Bwabwa  Njali  — 
Arrival  of  Ngalyema  of  Ntamo— A  blood  brother — Prosperity  c)f 
a  native  chief — A  grasping  fraternity — Ngalyema  demands  my 
servant  Dualla — We  meet  a  Roman  Catholic  Mission — Its  repulse 
l)y  the  natives — More  demands  upon  our  stores — The  cost  of  our 
negotiations — Richer  goods  required — Arrival  in  the  Ziiiga  dis- 
trict         8(»2 


xxii  COXTEXTS. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

SETTLEMEKT  AT  STANLEY  TOOL. 

The  onli/  study  of  mankind  is  man — "  Killing  the  road  " — A  hroken 
axle-tree  —  Braconnier's  accident — "We  encounter  Susi — "The 
news  from  Ngalyema  is  good  and  bad  "—Ivory  traders'  intrigiaes 
— Ngalyema  in  reality  a  powerless  chief — Our  "appetite  for 
Itlack  babies" — lyumbi  mountain — Makoko^A  six-foot  beard 
— Overtures  to  Makoko — His  reply — "  But,  my  friend,  rememlier 
we  own  the  country" — Mild  but  valorous — "  Influential  men"^ — 
Hakoko  gives  me  his  sword — Ngalyema  comes  to  tight — Our 
preparations  for  war — A  ruse — Ngalyema  comes  to  the  camp — 
A  dissembling  welcome — Masked  hostility — "  What  nice  things 
has  my  brother  brought  ?  " — "  Make  up  your  mind  that  I  go  to 
or  near  Kintamo  " — A  war  fetish — The  signal  of  the  gong — 
"  Strike — strike  it,  I  tell  you  !  " — My  force  spring  up  like  armed 
madmen — A  general  stampede — Success  of  the  ruse — "  Ah,  I  was 
not  afraid,  was  I?" — Peace,  brotherhood,  and  conviviality        ..   313 

CHAPTER  XYIII. 

THE   FOUNDIXG   OE   LEOPOLDVILLE. 

Susi  reconnoitres  the  country — Prospects  of  road-maldng — Payment 
of  native  workers — Ngamberengi's  account  of  Ngalyema's  life — 
— Fightingstrengthof  tribes— Our  advance  on  Kintamo — Native 
callages— Selecting  camping  ground — Leopold  Hill — An  offer 
from  Ngalyema — New  camp  formed        3^5 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE   FOUNDIXG   OF  hilOFO'LTtVILl.E— continued. 

Ngalyema  and  "  Bula  Matari  "—Wily  tactics  of  Ngalyema— A  one- 
sided balance  sheet — Strained  relations—"  Everybody's  iinger  is 
on  the  trigger  "—Armed  visits — Gorgeous  apparel — "  Speak, 
Ngalyema ;  is  it  peace  or  war  ?  " — "  Ay,  kill  me,  Bula  Matari ! " 
The  brotherhood  is  not  broken — Kintamo  a  populous  place — 
Proposed  palaver — Outbreak  imminent- — Mysterious  disappear- 
ance of  two  of  my  men — Arrival  of  Konko — The  palaver  takes 
place — The  trouble  is  ended — Noisy  rejoicing— Trading  opera- 
tions— Kinshassa — Nchuvila— Our  block-house — News  from  Vivi 
■ — New  recruits — Bwabwa  Njali's  convenient  forgetfulness — 
Strength  of  the  expedition — Malingering — Anxiety  about  the 
exploring  party — Selling  to  the  natives — Witchcraft — Profit  on 
ivory — Thriving  gardens — A  lost  party — Engeli's  enmity — Ivory 
transactions — The  people  anxious  to  trade— Brotherhood  with 
Ngalyema .,  857 


COXTEXTS. 
CHAPTER  XX. 

rP  THE  COXGO  TO  LAKE  LEOPOLD  If. 


r.vo  K 


Naming  the  new  station  "  Leopoldville  " — "  The  middleman,"  "  ling- 
ster,"  or  "  ivory  trader,"  and  his  inflnence — Docility  of  Xgalyema 
— Description  of  Leoi^oldville — Fine  yiew  from  Leopold  Hill — 
Companionable  neighbours — The  pomp  of  death — A  rich  bnt 
neglected  land :  what  might  be  made  of  it — Departure  of  the  first 
Upper  Congo  expedition — Bamu  Island — "Wild  animals — Stanley 
Pool — Slow  progress— The  fierceness  of  crocodiles — Impressions 
of  scenery — Comparison  with  Scotch  scenery — "Width  and  sound- 
ings of  the  Congo — Yohame  of  the  river  with  its  tributaries — 
Jottings  for  future  pilots — Mswata — New  acquaintances^ — Gan- 
delay's  favourable  decision — Giral,  a  French  quartermaster — 
Eeturn  to  Kintamo ;  a  cordial  greeting — Susii  Mpembe,  the 
"White  Chicken "— The  KwaPdver        3SG 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

DISCOVERY   OF   LAKE   LKOPOLD   11. 

Start  on  the  exploration  of  the  Kwa — The  Mbihe  and  the  Mfini — The 
scenery  of  the  Kwa — Fertile  soil — Towing  canoes  unsuccessful — 
Curious  natives — "  Don't  frighten  Gankabi  too  much  " — Kemeh 
Island— Sepulchre  of  chiefs — Difi"erent  colours  of  the  river — ■ 
Musye — Eela,  the  faithless — Mosquitoes  in  myriads — Natives 
extracting  salt  from  grass — Gankabi,  Queen  of  Musye — A  com- 
mantling  woman — "  Follow  me  this  instant  to  Ngete !  "■ — Scarcity 
of  food — Musye  Munono — Difficulty  in  getting  information — 
Hostile  natives  on  the  river's  banks — An  unexiDCcted  lake — Film 
of  dust  upon  the  water- — Bays  and  wood-clad  shore — Our  lessen- 
ing food — Encounter  with  native  canoes — Fright  and  skurry — 
Pursuit  and  a  dive  for  a  capture — "  There  are  many  better  than 
I  in  our  village" — Repelled  by  natives— Circumnavigation  of 
Lake  Leopold  IL — Hunger,  illness,  and  return  to  Leopoldville — 
Rest  at  Isangila 410 

CHAPTER  XXIL 

RETURN     TO     EUROPE. 

Iletum  to  Vivl — No  progress — Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche— Zanzibaris  sent 
home—Good-bye  to  Yivi — St.  Paul  de  Loanda — Appearance  of 
the  city— Absence  of  sanitary  measures — The  hospital  and  prison 
—  A  Howard  wanteil  —  Tiie  Governor-General  in  the  past — 
Neglected  water  and  railway  works — Eu  routv  to  Lisbon — Ports 
of  call — Discomforts  of  the  voyage — Madeira,  the  Pearl  of  Ww 
Atlantic        It" 


TACE 


XX  iv  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

CONDITION  OF  AFFAIRS  ON  THE  CONGO. 

Tlie  position  explained  to  the  Comite— A  railroad  imperative— Im- 
portance of  retaining  the  guardianship  of  the  territory — The 
prospects  of  trade — Arrangements  for  the  Upper  Congo  expedi- 
tion— Difficulty  in  getting  an  efficient  Assistant  Chief        . ,      . .  462 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

TO     STANLEY     POOL. 

Lisbon  to  Banana  Creek — Dismal  news— Yivi  demoralised — Elliott's 
exijedition  to  Kwilu-Niadi — Massala  shot  by  a  French  trader — 
An  enormous  fine — I  act  as  peacemaker — Lieutenant  Van  de 
Yelde's  mission  to  Kwilu-Niadi — Appearance  of  the  Saggitaire — 
Piclief  of  Elliott's  expedition — Bad  news  from  Leopoldville — A 
starving  station — Ferry  traffic  on  the  Congo — Kindly  attentions 
from  the  natives — Leopoldville  neglected  and  grass-gi'own ! — A 
sad  state  of  matters — An  unfortunate  young  officer  —  Canoe 
accidents — A  false  alarm  of  murder  ! — A  siiicide— Ee-establish- 
ing  friendly  relations  with  the  chiefs— An  important  conference, 
and  its  results — Noble  work  of  English  missionaries   ,.      ..      ..   408 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

TO   BOLOBO. 

Improving  Leopoldville — Departure  of  the  Upper  Congo  Expedition 
— Its  equipment — Kimpoko,  "  Good  View  Station  " — Gambiele, 
chief  of  Kimpoko — Stanley  Pool  again — Papa  Gobila — Makoko 
of  Mbe— Fumu  Ntaba— "  Bula  Matari,  don't  you  go  to  Mbe  "— 
Growth  of  Mswata  town — The  beer  of  ]\Iantu — The  Lawson- 
Lufini  river — The  real  heart  of  equatorial  Africa — A  splendid 
region — My  former  repulse  by  the  wild  men — Two-Palm  Point— 
3Iurder  of  two  of  our  men — Bolobo  district — A  pojjulous  neigh- 
bourhood— Difficulty  in  finding  Europeans  adapted  for  inter- 
course with  natives — Ibaka,  the  senior  chief  of  Bolobo — Incidents 
in  his  life — A  bellicose  garrison — A  jealous  chief,  and  conjugal 
infidelity — "  Blood  must  be  shed  for  blood,  or  money  must  i>ay 
for  it " — A  tardy  payment — Dangers  of  beginning  war — Bolobo 
cession  of  territory      498 


LIST   OF  ILLUSTEATIONS. 

(Vol  L) 


FULL-PAGE    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

so.  PAGE 

1.  His  Majesty  Leopold  II.,  King  of  the  Belgians  ..        Frontiqyicce. 

2.  The  Flotilla  of  the  International  Expedition  at  Banana  Point, 

near  the  Dutch  Factory  . .  . .  , .  . .  . .  ..To  face    68 

3.  View  down  river  from  behind  the  English  Factory  at  Boma. 

(From  a  photograph)       ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  „  98 

4.  A  portion  of  Boma,  opposite  the  Isle  of  Buka  ]\Iboma.     (From 

a  photograph)        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..         .,        100 

5.  "  Albert,  in  a  frenzy  of  delight,  must  first  bcstriile  the  carcase, 

that  he  might  write  to  his  papa  at  Copenhagen  "     ..  ..         ,,        107 

(].  Headquarters,  Vivi  Station,  and  Castle  Hill.     (From  a  photo- 
graph)       ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..         .,         120 

7.  The  Interior  of  Vivi  Station.     (From  a  photograph)     ..  ..         „        l.io 

8.  View  of  Yellala  Falls  from  left  bank.    (From  a  photograph  hy 

Dr.  Allabd)        ..         ..         ..  ..  ..  ..         ..        202 

9.  Tlie  ascent  of  a  slope  in  the  Mpagassa  (jorge      ..  ..  ..         .,        209 

10.  Ascending  Nyongena  Hill  . .  ..  ..  ..  ..  .,        228 

11.  Ngoma  Point  after  the  great  wagon-road  had  been  completed. 

(From  a  photograph)        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..         .,  23G 

12.  The  fate  of  poor  Soudi  of  Ituru      ..  ..  ..  ..  ..         ,,  252 

13.  A  Farewell ,  27."> 

14.  On  the  Plateau  of  Manyanga  Station.   View  down  river.    (From 

a  photograph)        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..         ,,        283 

15.  Camp  in  the  wilderness  between  the  Mpalanga  and  I-ulu  rivers. 

(From,  a  photograph)        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..         ■,        322 

16.  "  Every  native  present,  would-be  friend  and  would-be  foe,  lost 

his  senses  completely "    ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ••  341 

17.  View  of  Leopoldville  and  Kintamo  ..  ..  ..  ..         •-  388 

18.  Leopoldvillc,  April  1884 394 

19.  Up  the  Mfiui  to  Lake  Leopold  II.  4:^3 

20   "  Another  glance,  and  it  seems  to  be  overwhelming  him,  when, 

'  Ach  Gott !'  he  springs  overboard "     ..  ..  ..  ..         ..        M') 

VOL.  I.  C 


LIST   OF  ILLUSTBATIOXS. 


21.  The  Head  of  Lake  Leopold  II 

ti'I.  The  West  Coast  Native  Employe's  in  the  Plaza  of  Vivi 
2o.  Crossing  the  3Ipalanga.     (^From  a  photograph)   .. 
24.   Women  in  the  Market-place  ;  for  Le'opoldville,  before  it  can  be 
called  a  town,  must  possess  a  market.     {From  a  photograph) 


PACK 

To  face  US 
470 
480 

r)01 


SMALLER    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

25.  '•  The  Kingdome  of  Congo  " 
2tj.  Colonel  Straiich 

27.  The  Forested  Banks  of  the  Lower  Congo 

28.  Group  of  Natives — Men,  Women,  and  Youths 

29.  Island  on  the  Lower  Congo 
','•0.  Down  the  river  from  Tivi    . . 
ol.  Native  House  with  a  Family  Group 
'.'•2.  Sketcli  Map  of  Yivi 
o3.  Native  Chicken  Seller 
i'i.  Congo  from  Landing-place,  Vivi     .. 
V>5.  Specimens  of  our  Employe's 
i'.G.  View  of  Yivi  Headquarters  from  the  North 
o7.  Yiew  of  Y'ivi  Station  from  the  North 
88.  Ba.sundi  Native 
i'-D.  General  View  of  Yivi.     (From  a  sketch  by  Mr.  Naets).. 

40.  Diagram  of  Truck  for  Machinery   . . 

41.  Fetish  Idols 

42.  Elevation  of  Steel  Ligliter  .. 

43.  L'pland  Road  through  Forest  Encampment 

44.  Mons.  de  Brazza 
4.").  Elevation  of  Sailing  Boat 
40.  Plan  of  Sailing  Boat  

47.  Plan  of  Lighter 

48.  Diagram  of  New  Steamer  Le  Stanley,  since  added  to  the  Flotilla 

the  Association 

49.  Plan  of  Steamer 

50.  Caravan  Grouj) 
5L  Ivory  Carriers 

52.  Ngalyema,  Chief  of  Kintamo  . .  . .    ' 

53.  The  Narrows  near  Msampala 

54.  The  Cascades  of  the  Mpalanga 

55.  Looking  towards  Stanley  Pool  from  high  ridge  inland  . . 

56.  A  Yiew  from  a  Camp  ..  .. 

57.  One  of  the  Bateke'     . . 

58.  Bateke  Native 

59.  Types  of  our  Coloured  EmpLoye's    . . 


of 


10 
5.") 
89 
99 
110 
119 
122 
125 
131 
134 
140 
150 
158 
174 
188 
198 
200 
211 
229 
232 
252 
252 
261 

2G:! 
263 
289 
294 
300 
318 
322 
324 
320 
330 
338 
347 


LIST   OF   TLLUSTBATIONS. 


60.  Types  of  our  Employes 

61.  Bird's  Eye  View  of  Shiulcy  Fix il 

62.  Village  of  Ndua         

6:!.  Lieutenant  Van  de  Veldc    . . 
61.  Our  West  Coast  Employ I'V  .. 

65.  Lieutenant  Orbau 

66.  Sketch  of  a  Banana  Garden 

67.  View  from  tlie  Terrace  below  Kinipoko     .. 

68.  View  from  Kimpoko 
60.  The  Upper  Congo  issuing  into  Stanley  Pool.     (From  a 

70.  Papa  Gobila  of  iMswata 

71.  Types  of  our  Coloured  Emploje's   .. 

72.  By-Yanzi 

73.  Native  Method  of  Holding  a  tJun.     (Fi-om  a  sletdi  hy 


PACK 

.       371 

.       389 

430 

.       47.J 

.       484 

488 

.       499 

504 

^itJ't 

I  pliofofircq 

h)  ■ 

506 

508 

522 

.       526 

Mr.  Gi.AV 

-)    . 

523 

MAPS. 

1.  A  Map  of  the  Congo  Basiu  (first  half) 

2.  The  River  Congo  from  Banana  to  "S'ivi 

3.  Sketch  Map  of  Vivi  Station  .. 

4.  A  Sketch  of  Stanley  Pool      .. 


Til  Pocket. 
To  face    79 
140 
..       313 


THE   CONGO 


THE   FOUNDING  OF  ITS  FREE   STATE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

PREVIOUS    HISTORY    OF    THE    CONGO. 

Early  discoveries — Erroneous  nomenclature— Inaccurate  descriptions — 
Difficulties  in  following  the  old  chroniclers — The  British  Expedition 
of  1816 — Its  misfortunes,  but  finally  successful  scientific  result — 
Livingstone's  last  Expedition — The  Dally  Tehgraph  and  Xeio  York 
Herald  Expedition,  1876 — Discovery  of  the  continuity  of  the  Congo. 

The  discovery  of  the  mouth  of  the  Congo  is  due  to    i4S4_r, 
Diego  Cao_,  or  Cam,  a  Portuguese  naval  officer,   and  w^^go  t'ac/, 
Gentleman  of  the  Household  to  Dom  Joao  II.,  King 
of  Portugal.     This  event  occurred  in  the  year  1484-5, 
while,  according  to  Duarte  Lopez,  a  naval  expedition 
was  sailing  along  the  coast  of  Africa  for  the  purpose 
of  discovering  the  East  Indies.     To  commemorate  the 
discovery  the  commander  of  the  fleet  erected  a  pillar 
on  the  southern  point  of  the  debouchure,  by  which  the 
river  became  known  for  a  time  as  the  Rio  de  Padrao,  or 
Pillar  River,  flowing  through  the  kingdom  of  Congo. 

Martin  de  Behaim,  or  ^fartin  of  Bohemia,  wlio  was 
present  at  the  discovery,  called  it  the  Rio  Poderoso,  or 

VOL    I.  B 


2  THE   CONGO. 

1578.    Mighty  River,  from  the  immense  volume  of  water  tiiat 

'^^^''    is  discharged  by  it  into  the  ocean. 

Lopez,  who  visited  Angola  in  1578,  describes  it  as 

the   "  greatest  river   in    Congo,  called   Zaire    in   that 

tongue,  which  signifies  '  I  know.'  " 

De  Barras  and  Merolla,  who  followed  Lopez  over  a 

century  later,  also  called  it  the  Zaire,  a  name  to  which 

the  modern  Portuguese  are  devotedly  attached,  most 

probably  because  their  classic  poet  Camoens  describes 

it  as 

"  That  lucid  river — the  long  winding  Zaire." 

The  term  ''  Zaire,"  however,  with  all  due  deference 
to  the  old  travellers  and  geographers,  is  only  a  cor- 
ruption of  Nzari,  Nzali,  Njali,  Xzaddi,  Nyadi,  Xiadi, 
and  other  different  spellings  of  words  which  simply 
mean  river  in  the  many  dialects  spoken  within  the 
limits  of  what  was  popularly  supposed  three  centuries 
ago  to  be  the  kingdom  of  Congo. 

About  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century  we  find 
that  the  river  began  to  be  designated  on  the  maps  as 
Rio  de  Congo,  while  the  upper  portion  retained  the 
name  of  Zaire. 

The  English  map-makers  ever  since  have  almost 
invariably  named  it  the  River  of  Congo,  while  the 
Portuguese  still  continue  to  call  it  by  its  ancient  name. 

Any  one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  glance  at  the 
early  globes  or  maps  of  Africa  will  perceive  that 
almost  all  the  geographical  information  relating  to  its 
equatorial  regions  illustrated  by  these  must  have  been 
founded  by  hearsay  from  natives,  probably  ivory  or 


ERRONEOUS  NOMENCLATURE.  3 

slave  traders  from  the  interior.  As  one  proof  of  this  i578. 
I  need  only  cite  the  pertinacity  with  which  map-makers  ^°'^*^^* 
and  geographers  cling  to  the  famous  "  kingdom  of 
Anzichi,  and  the  people  of  Anzichana  living  on  both 
sides  of  the  river  Zaire."  The  "  Anzichana,"  however, 
literally  signify  people  of  the  interior,  and  "  Anzichi," 
or  rather  Nseke,  means  "  inland." 

In  my  book  '  Through  the  Dark  Continent,'  I  also 
speak  of  a  town  or  large  market  called  Ngornbe', 
whereas  after  obtaining  a  smattering  of  the  language 
I  now  know  "  Ngombe  "  to  mean  simply  inland.  And 
during  my  early  voyages  np  and  down  the  Congo  I 
heard  of  a  place  called  Mpama,  and  had  located  it 
pretty  exactly  as  I  thought  in  the  Uyanzi  country, 
Avhen  suddenly  I  learned  that  Mpama  in  the  language 
of  Uyanzi  stood  also  for  "  inland." 

Another  instance  of  the  singular  ignorance  of  early 
writers  respecting  the  lands  and  rivers  they  attempted 
to  describe  is  the  extraordinary  description  of  the 
Lower  Congo  given  by  Duarte  Lopez  in  1578. 

"  The  river  is  navigable  for  twenty-five  miles  with  large  boats  till  it 
reaches  a  strait  between  rocks,  where  the  waters  pour  down  with  such 
tremendous  noise  as  to  be  heard  nearly  eight  miles  off.  This  place  is 
called  by  the  Portuguese  Cachivera — that  is  a  fall  or  cataract,  as  it 
resembles  that  of  the  Nile." 

In  the  following  three  quotations  will  be  found 
furtlier  proof  that  the  writers  of  the  IGth  and  17th 
centuries  either  were  unable  to  confine  themselves  to 
exact  description  of  what  they  saw,  or,  as  was  most 
probable,  they  had  no  better  authorities  for  their  state- 
ments than  slave  traders  and  coast  gossip. 

15    2 


4  THE   CONGO. 

1645.         A   Capuchin   father,   belonging   to    the   missionary 

Cai^chins.  expedition  sent  by  Pope  Paul  V.  in  1G4.'),  ^Y^ites  of  the 

Congo  thus  : — 

*'  Of  the  many  rivers,  great  and  small,  wliicli  traverse  Congoland,  ore 
larger  than  the  others  is  the  Zaire,  which  according  to  the  received 
opinion  even  in  onr  times  springs  from  some  perennial  waterfalls  which 
form  the  Xile.  Both  rivers  separate  themselves  from  the  same  source, 
the  Xile  flowing  through  all  Africa  northwards  until  it  falls  into  the 
3Iediterranean  Sea,  and  the  Zaire  in  the  contrary  direction  flowing  down 
formidable  precipices  towards  the  west,  winding  among  rocks  and  banks 
sometimes  with  so  much  noise  that  at  two  or  three  leagues  distance  it 
deafens  and  frightens  the  inhabitants.  The  volume  of  such  a  river, 
increasing  in  quantity  as  it  flows  foi-ms  whirlijools,  and  in  some  places 
expands  so  widely  that  one  can  hardly  distinguish  the  opposite  banks, 
and  finally  debouches  by  seven  gi'eat  mouths  into  the  Atlantic,  Its 
rapidity  frightens  even  the  lx)ldest  pilots,  who  maintain  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  cross  the  open  channel,  and  therefore  they  seek  fords  where  the 
islands  break  the  force  of  the  current,  and,  weakening  it,  make  the  pas- 
sage easier.  These  islands  are  very  populous  and  very  well  cultivated. 
Throughout  the  kingdom  of  Congo  are  many  other  rivers,  remarkable  not 
so  much  for  their  rapidity  as  for  their  numbers  of  crocodiles,  sea-horses, 
enormous  serpents,  and  other  monsters  for  which  we  have  no  names." 

Father  Merolla,  despatched  to  Congo  in  1G82, 
writes  : — 

"  In  consequence  of  the  waters  of  the  Zaire  being  yellow,  the  river  hs 
known  for  a  hundred  miles  as  it  flows  into  the  sea,  and  by  means  of  it 
many  large  kingdoms  were  discovered  hitherto  unknown." 

In  another  place  the   same  writer  mentions  tliat  the 
Zaire  is  twenty-eight  miles  wide  at  the  mouth ! 

The  Engrlishman  Purchas  was  an  industrious  com- 
piler  of  voyages  and  travels.  It  is  very  evident  that 
he  must  have  read  '  The  Chronicles  of  the  Jesuits.' 
He  writes  of  the  Congo  after  the  following  manner  : — 

*•'  The  river  is  of  such  force  that  no  ship  can  get  in  against  the  current, 
bat  near  to  the  .shore.  Yea,  it  prevails  against  the  ocean's  saltness  three- 
score, and,  as  some  say,  fourscore  miles  within  the  sea,  before  his  proud 
waves  yield  their  full  homage,  and  receive  that  salt  temper  in  token  of 


TEE   OLD    CEIiOXICLEIiS.  5 

subjection.  Sucli  is  the  hauglity  spirit  of  tliat  stream,  oTernmning  the  isiG. 
low  countries  as  it  passeth,  and  swollen  with  conceit  of  daily  conquests  Tuckey. 
and  daily  supplies  which  in  armies  of  showers  are  by  the  clouds  sent  to 
his  succoui',  runs  now  in  a  furious  rage,  thinking  even  to  swallow  the 
ocean  which  before  he  never  saw.  With  his  mouth  gaping  eight  and 
twenty  miles  as  Lojiez  aflfirmeth  in  the  opening,  but  meeting  with  a  more 
giant-like  enemy  which  lies  lurldng  under  the  cliffs  to  receive  his  assault, 
is  iDresently  swallowed  in  that  wider  womb.  Yet  so  as  always  being 
conquered  he  never  gives  over,  but  in  an  eternal  quarrel,  with  deep  and 
indented  frowns  in  his  angry  face,  foaming  with  disdain  and  iilling  the 
air  with  noise,  with  fresh  help  supplies  those  forces  which  the  salt  sea 
hath  consumed." 

■  From  these  extracts  it  is  clear  that  it  is  a  waste  of 
time  trying  to  follow  the  old  chroniclers.  Frequently 
I  have  endeavoured  to  trace  them  where  they  gravely 
give  names  of  localities  and  attempt  to  describe  the 
districts  of  which  they  write,  but  I  have  always  been 
compelled  to  abandon  my  work  with  an  aching  head, 
and  grieving  at  the  loss  of  valuable  time  incurred  in 
the  useless  effort.  Through  the  sheer  impossibility  of 
describing  to  others  what  I  cannot  consistently,  with 
the  local  knowledge  I  possess,  explain  to  myself,  I  am 
constrained  to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  an  expe- 
dition despatched  by  the  British  Government,  in  the 
year  181 G,  under  Captain  James  Kingston  Tuckey, 
which  was  the  means  of  giving  us  a  reliable,  accurate, 
and  definite  information  of  the  Lower  Congo,  although 
only  to  the  extent  of  172  statute  miles  inland. 

In  the  instructions  furnislied  by  the   Admiralty  to 
Captain  Tuckey  may  be  found  corroborative  evidence 

of  what  is  stated  above.     I  quote  the  following  : — 

\ 

"Although  the  expedition  about  to  be  undertaken  for  exploring  tlit^ 
course  of  the  Zaire,  which  flows  through  the  kingdom  of  Congo,  in 
Southern  Africa,  was  originally  grounded  on  a  suggestion  of  its  being 


6  777^   COS  GO. 

181C.     itlentical  with  the  Niger,  it  is  not  to  be  understood  that  the  attempt  to 
Tuckev,    ascertain    this    point  is    by  any  means   the   exclusive  object  of   the 
expedition."' 

"  That  a  river  of  such  a  magnitude  as  the  Zaire,  and  offering  so  many 
peculiarities,  should  not  be  known  with  any  degree  of  certainty  Ix-yond, 
if  so  far  as,  200  miles  from  its  mouth  is  incompatible  with  the  advanced 
state  of  geographical  science,  and  little  creditable  to  those  Europeans 
who  for  nearly  three  centuries  have  occupied  various  parts  of  the  coast 
near  to  which  it  empties  itself  into  the  sea,  and  have  held  communication 
with  the  interior  of  the  country  through  which  it  descends  by  means  of 
missionaries  and  slave  agents.  So  confined  indeed  is  our  knowledge  of 
the  course  of  this  remarkable  river  that  the  only  chart  of  it  which  can 
have  any  pretension  to  accuracy  does  not  extend  above  130  miles,  and 
the  correctness  of  this  survey,  as  it  is  called,  is  more  than  questionable." 
"  There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that  a  river  which  runs  more 
rapidly,  and  discharges  more  water  than  either  the  Ganges  or  the  Nile, 
and  which  has  this  peculiar  quality  of  being  almost  at  all  seasons  of  the 
year  in  a  flooded  state,  must  not  only  traverse  a  vast  extent  of  country, 
but  must  also  be  supplied  by  large  branches  flowing  from  diff"erent  and 
l^robably  opposite  directions,  so  that  some  one  or  more  of  them  must  at 
all  times  of  the  year  pass  through  a  tract  of  coimtry  where  the  rains 
l)revail.  To  ascertain  the  soiu'ces  of  these  great  l>ranches,  then,  will  be 
one  of  the  principal  objects  of  the  present  expedition." 

Captain  Tuckej's  expedition  numbered  fifty-six 
Europeans,  and,  to  quote  the  words  of  the  Secretary 
to  the  Admiralty,  "  there  never  was  in  this,  or  in  any 
other  country,  an  exj^edition  of  discovery  sent  out  with 
better  prospects  or  more  flattering  hopes  of  success 
than  the  one  in  question."  Yet,  by  a  fatality  that  is 
almost  inexplicable,  never  were  the  results  of  an  ex- 
pedition more  melancholy  and  disastrous.  Captain 
Tuckey,  Lieutenant  Hawkey,  Mr.  Eyre,  and  ten  of 
the  Congo's  crew,  Professor  Smith,  Mr.  Crancli,  Mr. 
Tudor,  and  Mr.  Gal  way — in  all  eighteen  persons — died 
within  the  short  period  of  less  than  three  months 
during  which  they  remained  in  the  river,  or  a  few 
da3^s  after  leaving  it.    Fourteen  of  the  above-mentioned 


CAPTAIN   TUCKET'S  EXPEDITIOX. 


Tvere  of  the  party  of  thirty  who  set  out  on  tlie  laud      isee. 


Livins- 


journej   beyond   the   cataracts ;    the    other   four   were     stone 
attacked  on  board  the   Congo.     Two  died  during  the 
passage  out. 

"When  treatino:  of  the  cHmate*  I  shall  have  occasion 
to  explain  the  causes  which  led  to  this  excessive  mor- 
tality among  the  members  of  this  unfortunate  expedi- 
tion, which,  however  disastrous  it  m.ay  have  been  to 
life,  furnished  to  geographical  science  a  very  valuable 
contribution.  For  the  first  time  the  Lower  Congo 
was  shorn  of  all  myth  and  fi\ble,  and  was  described 
with  an  accuracy  that  cannot  be  much  excelled  even 
in  the  present  day. 

Captain  Tuckey  learned  from  the  natives  that  the 
river  was  known  to  them  as  Moenzi  Xzaddi,  which 
literally  means  Receiver  of  all  Rivers. 

Cruisers  of  many  nations  have  visited  the  great 
river  at  various  times  since;  and  naval  officers  have 
added  much  to  our  knowledge  of  the  river's  depth,  and 
of  its  currents,  besides  giving  the  names  of  factories 
and  trading  depots  situated  along  the  banks.  But  the 
melancholy  loss  of  life  incurred  by  Captain  Tuckey's 
expedition  served  to  warn  off  all  scientific  missions  for 
a  period  of  over  half  a  century. 

In  18G6  Dr.  Livingstone,  inspired  by  Sir  Roderick 
^lurchison,  set  out  on  his  final  journey,  with  the  object 
of  exploring  the  watershed  between  Lakes  Nyassa  and 
Tanganika.  Li  1807  he  discovered  a  large  river  flow- 
ing westward,  which  he  subsequently  learned  had  its 
*  Sec  Vol.  11. :  Climate,  Piirt  11. 


TEE   CONGO. 


1871.  sources  in  the  folds  of  tlie  Ciiibale  Hills,  in  the  country 
stone!  of  Mambwe'.  Believing,  with  many  other  geographers 
of  that  day,  that  he  had  at  last  discovered  the  extremest 
head  of  the  Xile,  he  traced  the  course  of  this  large 
river,  which  was  named  Chambezi,  until  it  reached 
Lake  Bemba  or  Baugweolo,  in  S.  lat.  11°  and  E.  long. 
29°.  During  the  years  1868-1871,  he  found  that  the 
river  emerged  from  Lake  Bangweolo  under  the  native 

« 

name  of  Luapula,  and  flowed  northerly,  to  enter 
another  lake  called  Mweru,  whence  it  issued  under  the 
name  of  Lualaba.  He  last  saw  the  river,  which  was 
now  of  vast  volume,  at  ISTyangwc,  in  Manyema,  at  a 
distance  of  about  1500  English  statute  miles  from  its 
sources. 

In  October  1876  the  expedition  despatched  by  the 
London  Daily  Telegraph  and  ^ew  York  Herald,  for  the 
completion  of  Livingstone's  explorations,  arrived  at  the 
Arab  town  of  Nyangwe',  and  shortly  after  set  out  on 
its  mission  of  following  the  river  to  the  sea  ;  and  281 
days  later  this  expedition  sighted  the  Atlantic  Ocean, 
having  proved  by  the  navigation  of  the  river  for  about 
1660  miles,  and  a  land  journey  of  140  miles,  that  the 
Chambezi,  Luapula,  or  Lualalja  was  no  other  than 
the  Congo,  whose  embouchure  was  discovered  by  the 
Portuguese  just  four  centuries  ago. 

It  is  the  subsequent  history  of  this  noble  stream, 
and  the  extraordinary  enterprise  which  this  discovery 
caused  to  be  undertaken,  that,  after  a  short  politico- 
historical  sketch,  I  propose  to  set  forth  in  the  following 
pages. 


THE   CAPUCHIN  EXPEDITION. 


CHAPTER   II. 

THE    POLITICAL    HISTORY    OF    CONGO-LAND. 

Piqafetta's  '  Kingdom  of  the  Congo  '—Chronicle  of  the  Capuchin  Expe- 
dition— The  stone  pillars  of  the  Portuguese:  their  purpose — The 
capital  of  Congo-land — Conversion  of  the  King  to  Christianity  — 
Missions  and  ancient  religious  edifices — Hostile  incursion  of  the 
Jaggas — Territorial  claims  of  the  Portuguese — Expulsion  of  the  Por- 
tuguese from  Congo-land— The  slave  trade — The  missions  of  Eome 
and  France— Boundaries  and  general  description  of  Congo-land — 
The  position  and  power  of  its  chiefs — Treaties  of  the  International 
Association. 

AYiTH  the  discovery  of  the  mouth  of  the  River  Congo 
by  Diego  Cam  begins  the  poHtical  history  of  Congo 
Land.  Mrs.  Margarite  Hutchinson  has  lately  given  a 
translation  of  an  old  book  called  '  The  Kingdom  of 
Congo,'  by  Filippo  Piqafetta,  Rome,  1591,  wherein  we 
are  told  that  the  "  kingdom  "  had  a  coast-line  of  G30 
miles  long,  and  that  it  penetrated  inland  a  distance  of 
GOO  miles  ;  but  the  author  of  the  voluminous  chronicle 
of  the  Capuchin  expedition,  published  in  1G70,  very 
cpiaintly  says  that  some  "  who  claim  to  be  well 
informed,  and  who  perhaps  do  come  near  the  truth, 
reckon  up  a  mixed  collection  of  peoples,  potentates, 
and  princes,  who  held  joint  possession  of  all  that  tract 
of  country  which  is  called  the  Kiugdom  of  Congo. 
And  if,  in  addition  to  all  that  is  certainly  known,  we 


1501. 
Piqafette. 


10 


THE   CONGO. 


1670. 

The 
Capuchins. 


add  that  wliicli  Is  guessed,  we  may  with  some  assurance 
persuade  ourselves  tliat,  just  as  Africa  is  a  great  ^^or- 
tion  of  the  terrestial  globe,  divided  and  subdivided 
into  divers  kingdoms,  so  in  the  same  way  Congo  was 
divided  into  various  dominions." 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  a  memorial  in  the 
shape  of  a  stone  pillar  was  erected  by  the  Portuguese 


discoverer  on  the  southern  point  of  the  mouth  of  the 
river,  known  to-day  as  Point  Padron,  to  commemorate 
the  discovery.  It  was  a  custom  with  the  old  Portu- 
guese navigators,  when  starting  on  a  voyage  of  mari- 
time exploration,  to  take  with  them  several  of  these 
stone  pillars,  to  set  up  on  prominent  points  of  new 
land,  not  only  as  memorials  of  discover}-,  but  also  to 
indicate  an  intention  to  annex  such  new  lands  to  the 
Crown  of  Portugal.    However,    this   raising  of  pillars 


MISSION  L ABO  UBS.  11 

only  signified  at  the  utmost  an  intention  to  occupy,  or     1570. 
to  show  possession  of  such  privileges   as  are  derived    jaggL 
from  pre-emption.     If  they  did  not  immediately  occupy 
the  ground  or  settle  upon  it  within  a  reasonable  length 
of  time,  those  privileges  to  which  they  were  entitled 
after  discovery,  or  the  act  of  pre-emption,  lapsed. 

Congo  Proper  extended  in  an  easterly  direction 
to  about  200  miles.  The  river  that  derives  its  name 
from  the  ancient  kingdom  was  generally  known  as  its 
northern  boundary,  though  there  were  several  inde- 
pendent districts  then,  as  now,  lying  between  it  and 
the  river.  To  the  south  it  extended  as  far  as  the 
Kwanza.  The  capital  was  called  Ambassi,  or  Ambeze, 
but  on  the  conversion  of  the  king  to  Christianity,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  IGth  century,  it  became  known 
to  Europeans  as  San  Salvador.  Its  distance  from  the 
nearest  landing-place  on  the  Congo  is  about  eighty- 
five  statute  miles. 

The  King  of  Congo  must  have  proved  a  fitting 
subject  for  a  p^roselyte,  since  the  Portuguese  were 
so  successful  in  their  missionary  efforts  that  in  a  short 
time  almost  all  persons  who  were  in  authority  came 
to  the  mission  established  at  San  Salvador  to  be  con- 
verted and  baptised.  A  cathedral  and  several  churches 
were  erected,  and  in  1534  we  read  of  a  bishop  having 
been  appointed. 

Thirty-six  years  later  occurred  tlie  incursion  of 
tlie  savage  Ajakkas,  variously  called  Jaggas,  Giagas, 
\'akkas,  who  overran  the  entire  country,  burning  and 
slaughtering  wherever  they  went — and  the  Christian 


12  TEE   COXGO. 

1570.  city  of  San  Salvador,  with  its  cathedral  and  churches, 
Portu|nese  "^'^s  destrojcd.  Bcfore  the  invaders,  the  king,  his 
court,  and  the  missionaries,  fled  to  the  Congo  and  took 
refuo-e  in  the  Isle  of  Horses — one  of  those  laro-e  islands 
near  Boma  probably,  since  above  that  neighbourhood 
there  are  no  islands  capable  of  affording  shelter  to 
a  large  number  of  people. 

An  appeal  for  help  was  despatched  to  the  King  of 
Portugal,  who  promptly  responded  to  it  by  sending 
600  soldiers,  with  the  aid  of  whose  firearms  the 
Jaggas  were  ignominiously  expelled  from  the  country, 
and  the  King  of  Congo  was  enabled  to  rebuild  his  city, 
and  the  missionaries  to  restore  their  churches. 

It  is  stated  that  in  the  archives  of  St.  Paul  de 
Loanda  there  is  a  document,  dated  1570,  by  which 
the  Kino-  of  Cono;o  ceded  to  tlie  Portuo-uese  all  of  the 
coast  from  the  Pillar  Point,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo, 
to  the  Kwanza  Piver,  as  a  reward  for  the  aid  given 
to  the  distressed  king  during  the  savage  invasion  ;  but 
Dapper,  the  Dutch  geographer,  relates  that  the  Congo 
king  only  offered  to  pay  an  annual  tribute  of  slaves, 
and  to  accept  the  Portuguese  king  as  his  suzerain, 
which  His  Faithful  Majesty  magnanimously  refused, 
saying  that  he  considered  the  King  of  Congo  as  his 
brother  in  arms,  and  that  he  was  fully  repaid  by  the 
knowledge  of  the  latter's  constancy  in  the  Catholic  faith. 

About  sixty  years  later  we  are  informed  that  the 
King  of  Congo  broke  off  all  allegiance  to  the  Portu- 
guese, in  consequence  of  which  Sonho,  one  of  the 
districts  of  Congo,  rebelled  ;    the  mission  established 


EXFULSIOX   OF   THE  FOFTUGUESE.  13 

at  San  Salvador  was   broken   up,   and    the   bishopric     isrs. 
established   in    1534   at   that   city  was  transferred   to    cn-audj- 
St.  Paul  de  Loanda  in  Angola. 

In  1781,  about  150  years  after  the  expulsion  of  the 
Portuguese,  an  attempt  was  made  to  reopen  the  mission 
work  at  San  Salvador.  Unfortunately  the  rightful 
king  was  at  that  time  a  banished  man,  and  the 
missionaries,  having  met  him  outside  his  city,  and 
learning  from  him  the  distracted  state  of  the  country, 
withdrew,  and  returned  to  Loanda. 

Then  follows  a  silence  and  a  blank  in  the  history 
of  Congo-land,  and  ruin  claims  the  once  promising 
cathedral  town  for  its  own.  We  hear  no  more  of  it 
until  Dr.  Bastian,  the  eminent  German  traveller,  after 
exploring  in  that  locality  in  1857,  writes  that  it  is 
only  "  an  ordinary  native  town,  with  a  few  scattered 
monuments  of  other  days.'' 

In  1873,  Lieutenant  Grandy,  of  the  West  African 
Livingstone  Search  Expedition,  passed  through  San 
Salvador.  According  to  his  account  he  found  nothing 
but  ruins,  and  a  pagan  ignorance  of  everything  bear- 
ing the  least  semblance  of  civihsation.  Some  of  the 
native  leaders  of  coast  caravans  understood  and  spoke 
a  lingua-Portugueza,  but  the  explorer  eu countered  no 
welcome. 

The  year  subsequent  to  my  descent  of  the  Congo 
witnessed  the  arrival  at  San  Salvador  of  the  mission- 
aries of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  who  succeeded 
in  establishing  a  Protestant  Mission  therein. 

To  the  north  of  the  Congo  River  about  thirty  miles, 


14  THE   CONGO. 

1816.  and  situate  on  the  coast,  is  Kabinda — the  only  place 
Tuckey.  ^Qj,^|-^y  q£  being  distinguished  in  the  political  history 
of  this  region  (by  an  attempt  of  the  Portuguese  to 
establish  the  authority  of  the  King  of  Portugal  near 
the  Congo)  since  the  raising  of  the  memorial  stone  by 
Diego  Cam.  In  1784,  the  Portuguese  commenced  to 
construct  at  Kabinda  a  fortlet,  which  drew  protests 
from  other  European  nations,  until  they  were  finally 
compelled,  by  a  French  squadron  under  the  Marquis 
de  Marigny,  to  demolish  the  fort  and  withdraw  from 
Kabinda. 

During  the  days  when  the  slave  trade  was  in  full 
operation  the  Portuguese  possessed  a  few  offices  on  the 
Congo  for  the  shipment  of  slaves  to  the  Brazils;  but 
when  it  was  ascertained  that  Angola  could  furnish 
as  many  slaves  as  were  necessary  to  meet  the  demands 
of  the  Brazilian  planters,  these  also  were  withdrawn 
and  transferred  to  St.  Paul  de  Loanda. 

In  1816,  according  to  Captain  Tucke}^,  there  were 
2000  slaves  shipped  annually  to  the  xVmericas.  That 
Captain  Tuckey  was  a  truthful  and  honourable  gentle- 
man can  be  testified  by  all  who  liave  been  on  the  Congo 
and  compared  what  he  describes  with  tliat  which  they 
themselves  have  seen ;  he  observed  with  a  keen  eye  all 
manner  of  things  in  the  little-known  region  he  was 
about  to  explore.  In  no  part  of  his  notes,  nor  in  any 
of  those  of  his  companions,  can  be  discovered  the 
slightest  evidence  of  Portuguese  occupation  or  exer- 
cised authority  on  either  bank  of  the  Congo. 

All  the  Portuguese  whom  Captain  Tuckey  met  were 


SUPPRESSION   OF   THE   SLAVE   TRADE.  15 

slave   traders,  owners   of  slave    barracoons ;    and  the     i^^"- 

Sliive 

natives  of  Boma  informed  him  that,  if  the  English  de-  Trade, 
sired  the  like  privileges  as  the  Portuguese,  they  would 
cede  to  them  all  the  land  which  they  would  require. 
Down  to  a  late  period  slave  trading  was  the  only 
profitable  employment  followed  by  the  Europeans — ■ 
Portuguese,  French,  S]3aniards — on  the  Congo. 

In  1810  the  European  Powers  resolved  to  suppress 
the  slave  trade.  Portugal,  which  had  been  the  first 
to  start  the  traffic,  was  the  last  power  in  Europe  to 
abandon  it.  Tuckey  mentions  this  fact  incidentally  in 
his  book,  when  he  writes  that  he  was  compelled  to 
tell  the  natives  that  no  other  nation  but  the  Portuguese 
was  permitted  to  trade  in  slaves.  This  arrangement 
will  be  found  in  the  Treaty  of  Alliance  entered  into 
between  England  and  Portugal,  19th  February,  1810. 

In  the  treaty  of  the  22  nd  January,  1815,  Portugal 
renounced  the  right  to  carry  on  the  slave  trade  north 
of  the  equator,  Ijut  with  regard  to  the  south  the  privi- 
lege was  again  granted  to  her  both  in  the  actual  terri- 
tories of  the  Portuguese  Crown,  and  in  those  to  which 
it  reserved  its  rights  under  the  preceding  treaty  of 
1810. 

In  1817  the  British  Government  declared  the  slave 
trade  to  be  piracy,  and  it  was  accordingly  the  object  of 
vigorous  suppression  outside  of  Portuguese  waters,  that 
is  to  say,  in  all  waters  not  actually  fronting  Portuguese 
possessions. 

In  the  support  of  this  policy  a  British  cruiser  iu  184G 
captured  a  slave-ship  a  little  to  the  north  of  Amhriz. 


16  THE   COS  GO. 

1846.  The  capture  gave  rise  to  diplomatic  correspondence  be- 
Trade.  twecn  the  Governments  of  Grreat  Britain  and  Portugal, 
concerning  the  rights  of  the  latter  country,  wherein 
the  Portuguese  were  informed  that,  though  their  rights 
between  the  8th  and  18th  degrees  of  S.  Lat.  were  fully 
recognised,  the  British  Government  maintained  the 
liberty  of  unrestricted  commercial  intercourse  between 
S.  Lat.  5°  12'  and  8^ 

Missionaries  had  been  employed  by  the  Portuguese 
Government  at  San  Salvador  and  other  places  inland, 
but  with  tbie  decay  of  its  power  these  were  withdrawn, 
and  those  who  survived  the  climate,  which  was  very 
ill-understood,  were  transferred  to  Angola.  Rome, 
under  Pope  Paul  T.  (1621)  and  Innocent  X.  (1G52), 
despatched  no  less  than  six  separate  missionary  ex- 
peditions, consisting  altogther  of  ninety-five  Capu- 
chin monks,  who  were  appointed  to  the  missions  of 
Congo,  Angola,  Loanga,  Bamba,  Batta,  Masangano 
Pemba,  Sonho,  and  Sundi.  A  French  mission  also 
was  organised  at  an  early  period  in  the  18th  century 
under  the  Abbe  Belgarde,  who  was  styled,  according 
to  the  fashion  then  prevailing  in  Angola,  "  Prefet  de 
la  Mission  de  Loango,  Kakongo,  and  other  kingdoms 
beyond  the  Zaire." 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  extent  of  Congo  and 
the  various  countries  adjoining  it  in  the  15th,  IGtb, 
17th,  and  18th  centuries,  or  the  character  of  the  poli- 
tical power  invested  in  the  persons  grandiloquently 
styled  "kings,"  '^potentates,"  "princes,"  "dukes,"  and 
"  counts,"  by  the  old  chroniclers,  there  is  no  evidence  to 


TEE  BOUNDABIES   OF   COXGO-LAND.  17 


he  gained  at  tlie  present  time,  dating  from  the  memory     i878. 
of  the  oldest  chief  I  have  met,  that  the  condition  of   comber. 
things  differed  greatly  from  what  exists  to-day. 

Congo-land  I  find  to  be  an  inland  country,  bounded 
on  the  south  by  the  upper  part  of  the  Ambrizette  River; 
its  western  boundar}'  runs  northerly  to  a  point  about 
thirty  miles  from  Nokki,  and  thence  runs  easterly  sixty 
geographical  miles,  thence  in  a  curving  line  south- 
easterly, south,  and  south-westerly,  along  the  western 
base  of  the  Montes  Quemados,  or  Burnt  Rocks,  to  the 
Ambrizette  River,  making  altogether  an  area  of  about 
4000  square  miles  (geo.).  The  cliief's  town  is  called  by 
the  natives  Ambassi,  but  the  Portuguese  still  call  it  by 
the  name  of  San  Salvador.  ^Ir.  Comber,  who  visited 
the  town  in  1878,  describes  the  king,  named  Totela, 
as  an  unimportant  person,  although  his  assumed  title 
was  H.M.  Dom  Pedro,  King  of  Congo.  The  national 
flag  was  dark  blue,  with  a  golden  star  in  the  centre. 

All  the  rest  of  the  country  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
river,  and  along  the  sea-coast,  is  absorbed  by  minute 
subdivisions  of  power,  under  as  many  chiefs;  or,  as 
it  generally  happens,  under  as  many  groups  of  elders, 
varying,  according  to  the  size  of  the  district,  from  three 
to  ten  persons.  The  native  title  of  a  chief  or  of  an 
elder  possessing  two  or  three  slaves  is  Nfumu,  origi- 
nally meaning,  without  doubt,  king.  Now,  however, 
slave  owners  having  become  so  numerous,  the  title  has 
descended  from  the  fortunate  victor  over  thousands,  who 
became  owner  of  the  captives — of  their  bodies  as  well 
as  their  liberties,  in  the  olden  times — to  the  arrogant 

VOL.    I.  c 


18  THE   CONGO. 

1878.  and  ambitious  slave,  "who  by  dint  of  roguery,  slirewd- 
pohSi  ness,  or  frugality,  has  succeeded  in  amassing  property 
sufficient  to  purchase  two  slaves.  Here  and  there, 
along  the  left  bank_,  as  in  the  case  of  Makoko  of 
Usansi,  who  is  the  son  of  another  Makoko,  who  died 
a  wealthy  and  powerful  lord  over  a  large  acquired 
territorv,  a  native  suzerain  may  be  found,  whose 
nominal  power  extends  over  an  area  approaching  to  a 
thousand  square  miles,  to  whom  a  certain  amount  of 
respect  and  obedience  is  shown  by  a  large  number  of 
village  chiefs.  Buguku  of  Uburna  is  another  instance 
of  a  like  suzerainty.  Even  this  forra  of  power,  how- 
ever, is  only  a  tacit  acknowledgment  of  seniority  in 
rank,  like  that  which  is  shown  by  a  wealthy  merchant 
in  Eno-land  according  due  precedence  to  the  scion  of 
a  noble  house.  On  the  right  bank  of  the  Congo  may 
be  found  two  or  three  superior  chiefs.  Manipambu  of 
Loango,  and  Mpumu-Ntaba  of  Mbe' — the  successor  of 
the  Makoko  so  prominent  in  jJulJic  notice  lately — and 
Samuna,  the  chief  of  Nsanda,  near  Yivi. 

The  agents  of  the  Inteniational  Association  having 
made  over  400  treaties  with  the  native  chiefs  on  both 
banks  of  the  Congo,  whose  sig-natures  number  over 
2000,  perforce  became  acquainted  witli  these  facts, 
and  had  to  conduct  themselves  accordingly  in  the 
distribution  of  the  payments  made  by  them.  Over 
these  cmious  groups  of  chiefs  there  is  always  an  ac- 
knowledged senior,  who,'  although  his  rank  may  be 
undisputed,  has  only  the  privilege  of  demanding  a 
superior  consideration  for  his  favour,  sometimes  of  a 


condition. 


SUBDIVISIONS   OF  KINGDOMS.  19 

very  trifling  amount ;  but  the  smallest  chief  has  fre-     ists. 
quently  the  power  of  stopping  a  bargain  if  his  claims  jSScai 
to  consideration  have  been  disregarded  or  neglected. 

In  the  following  chapters  will  be  found,  a  detailed 
account  of  the  proceedings  with  the  various  chiefs  with 
whom  I  had  a  personal  intercourse,  by  which  the  reader 
may  perceive  into  what  infinitesimal  subdivisions  of 
power  are  distributed  those  powerful  kingdoms  whose 
splendours  Lopez,  Merolla  and.  others  loved  to  describe 
two  and  three  centuries  ago. 


c  2 


20  TEE   CONGO. 


CHAPTER   III. 

THE  SEQUEL  TO  THE  BOOK,  '  THROUGH  THE  DARK 
CONTINENT.' 

My  return  from  the  "  Dark  Continent "  in  1878 — Met  by  King  Leopold's 
Commissioners  at  Marseilles — The  King's  proposition — Fatigue  and 
an  unavailing  search  for  repose — Three  weeks  in  Switzerland — Nego- 
tiations for  the  new  enteri^rise — "  ^^^lat  was  to  be  its  character  ?  " 
— King  Leopold's  invitation  to  Brussels  —  The  meeting  there  in 
December  1878 — The  "  Comitu  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo  "  formed — 
Final  prei^arations  for  the  journey — Again  ea  route  to  Africa. 

"  How  often  have  we  seen  some  such  adventurer,  and  much  censured 
wanderer,  light  on  some  outlying  and  neglected  i)rovince,  the  hidden 
treasures  of  which  he  first  discovered,  and  kept  proclaiming  till  the 
general  eyes  and  effort  were  directed  thither,  and  the  conquest  was 
completed,  thereby  in  these  his  seemingly  aimless  rambles  planting  new 
standards  and  founding  new  habitable  colonies." — Thomas  Carhjle. 

1878.     The  "  Dark  Continent "  bad  been  traversed  from  east 

January.  .  ,  .  .,       , 

Europe,  to  west,  its  great  lakes,  the  \  ictoria  JMyanza  and  the 
Tanganika,  bad  been  circumnavigated,  and  tbe  Congo 
Kiver  bad  been  traced  from  Nyangwe  to  tbe  Atlantic 
Ocean  !  Tbe  members  of  tbe  late  exploring  expedition 
had  been  taken  to  tbeir  bomes,  tbe  living  bad  been 
vv^ortbily  rewarded,  and  tbe  widows  and  orphans  bad 
not  been  neglected. 

Wben  I  finally  reached  Europe  in  January  1878, 
slowly  recovering  from  tbe  effects  of  famine  and  fatigue 
endured  on  tbat  long  journey,  little  did  I  imagine  tbat 


KING  LEOPOLD'S  PROPOSITION.  21 

before  the  close  of  the  year  I  should  be  preparing  i878. 
another  expedition  for  the  banks  of  that  river  on  £m.one. 
which  we  had  suffered  so  greatly.  But  at  Marseilles 
railway  station,  as  I  descended  from  the  express  just 
arrived  from  Italy,  two  Commissioners  from  His  Majesty 
the  King  of  the  Belgians,  Le'opold  II.,  met  me,  and 
before  I  was  two  hours  older  I  was  made  aware  that 
King  Le'opold  intended  to  undertake  to  do  something 
substantial  for  Africa,  and  that  I  was  expected  to 
assist  him. 

It  would  be  needless  to  describe  ray  feelings.  Any 
person  acquainted  with  what  I  had  so  recently  under- 
gone can  well  imagine  the  reluctance  with  which  I 
listened  to  the  suo'O'estion  that  I  should  return  to  the 
scene  of  so  much  disaster  and  suffering,  though  I 
heartily  as^reed  with  the  Commissioners  that  it  was  a 
great  and  a  good  work  that  the  King  was  inclined  to 
perform,  and  that  it  would  be  a  great  pity  if  anything 
occurred  to  thwart  his  good  intentions.  I  was  quite 
willing  to  give  my  best  advice,  and  to  furnish  those 
details  necessary  for  the  complete  equipment  of  an 
expedition,  and  its  proper  organisation,  which  would 
lead  under  right  management  to  a  successful  issue ; 
but,  "as  for  myself,"  I  said,  "I  am  so  sick  and  weary 
that  I  cannot  think  with  patience  of  any  suggestion 
that  I  should  personally  conduct  it.  Six  months  hence, 
perhaps,  I  should  view  things  differently ;  but  at 
})resent  I  cannot  think  of  anything  more  tlian  a  long 
rest  and  sleep." 

Even  a  personal  visit  to  His  Majesty  I  was  unable  to 


22  TEE   COy'GO. 

1878.  pay,  being  utterly  unfit,  and  my  entire  system  so 
Europe.  Utterly  out  of  order ;  and,  had  I  sought  medical  advice, 
no  doubt  that  needful  rest  and  quiet  which  I  so 
ardently  desired  would  have  been  prescribed. 

But  good  food,  comfortable  shelter,  and  relief  from  all 
anxiety  and  strain  of  the  mind,  were  doing  wonders  for 
my  emaciated  frame  and  half-ruined  constitution.  Gra- 
dually I  was  persuaded  by  my  publisher  to  begin  work. 
The  result  was  that  by  the  end  of  May  the  book,  called 
'  Through  the  Dark  Continent,'  was  in  the  printer's 
hands,  and  for  the  first  time  in  many  years  I  felt  free 
— free  to  move,  to  act  as  I  pleased,  unrestrained  by 
pledges  or  promises,  and  without  that  terrible,  com- 
pelling and  oppressive  law — duty — with  its  constant 
and  persistent  call  to  action,  hanging  over  my  head. 
Lightened  of  all  cause  to  labour,  I  hastened  to  the 
neighbouring  continent  to  indulge  in  that  luxury 
which  in  my  travels  through  Em'ope,  years  before,  I 
had  seen  so  many  thousands  doing — viz.,  lounging. 

But  first  my  long-deferred  visit  to  Eang  Le'opold  II. 
was  paid,  and  I  there  learned  that,  though  lie  had  not 
commenced  to  realise  his  intentions.  His  Majesty  still 
purposed,  at  a  fit  time,  and  when  he  was  fully  infoimed 
of  all  that  was  necessary  to  know,  to  attempt  to  realise 
them.  Happily  for  me  it  was  not  imraediate,  and  my 
loved  liberty  was  still  my  own. 

A  wise  man  is  he  who  knows  how  to  use  his  liberty 
to  best  advantage.  Unfortunately,  though  I  had  in- 
dulged in  luxurious  reveries  while  imprisoned  within 
the  rocky  caiion  of  the  Congo,  and    banqueted  bHss- 


THREE    WEEKS  IN  SWITZEELAXD.  23 

fully  on  thoughts  of  how  I  should  enjoy  myself  when     ists. 

June. 

once  free  from  work,  a  hermit,  issuing  from  some  Europe. 
wilderness,  could  scarcely  be  more  innocent  than  I  of 
the  art  of  enjoying  one's  libert}-.  Like  hundreds  of 
others  from  America  and  England,  I  thought  the  art 
lay  in  dressing  a  la  mode,  sipping  coffee  with  indolent 
attitudes  on  the  flagstones  of  the  Parisian  boulevards,  or 
testing  the  merits  of  Pilsen  and  Strasburg  beer  ;  but  my 
declining  health  and  increasing  moody  spirits  informed 
me  that  these  were  vanities,  productive  of  nothing  but 
loss  of  time,  health,  and  usefulness. 

Some  friends  suggested  Trouville,  Deauville,  or 
Dieppe ;  but  my  wretchedness  increased.  I  explored 
those  famed  seaside  resorts,  and  discovered  that  I  was 
getting  more  and  more  unfit  for  what  my  neighbours 
called  civilised  society. 

A  friend  finallj'  suggested  Switzerland — and  I  obeyed 
the  hint.  Three  weeks  in  this  hapi3y  land  restored  me 
to  health ;  and  I  then  understood  that  all  this  time  I  did 
not  need  rest,  quiet,  but  that  three  weeks  of  pedestrian 
exercise,  even  in  England,  would  have  shaken  off  those 
morbid  feelings,  shattered  constitution,  and  wrecked 
svstem,  and  would  liave  enabled  me  almost  to  forjret 
that  I  had  ever  been  in  Africa.  ^Yitli  restored  healtli, 
"  liberty  "  became  insipid  and  joyless,  that  luxury  of 
lounging  which  had  appeared  desirable  to  an  ill-regu- 
lated and  unhealthy  fancy  became  unbearable.  With 
such  views,  a  letter  from  one  of  the  Commissioners,  re- 
questing an  interview,  and  appointing  a  meeting  in 
Paris,  was  very  acceptable. 


24  THE  CONGO. 

1878.         It  is  from  this  meeting,  which  took  place  in  August, 

August.  .'"'.. 

Europe,  "t^^^-t  I  clatc  the  formation  of  the  project  of  the  first 
enterprise  np  the  Congo.  For  as  yet  it  was  only 
generally  understood  that,  as  the  Congo  was  explored, 
and  the  core  of  the  Dark  Continent  accessible  by  it, 
somethhvj  ought  to  be  done  to  render  it  serviceable  to 
the  humanities  that  were  encompassed  around  by 
roadless  regions  fatal  to  all  good-doing.  All  readily 
concurred  in  the  proposition  that  my  descent  of  the 
Congo  had  opened  a  highway  into  Africa,  were  it 
possible  to  utilise  it.  But  how  to  utilise  this  high- 
way ?  AVljat  enterprise  shall  be  undertaken  ?  In 
what  character  shall  a  new  expedition  be  despatched 
to  the  Congo  ?  Shall  it  be  purely  geographical,  phi- 
lanthropic, commercial  ?  Or  shall  we  adventure  at 
once  on  a  railway  to  join  the  lower  to  the  upper 
Congo  ?     Each  question  was  discussed  in  its  order. 

To  a  purely  geographical  or  exploring  exjoedition 
one  great  objection  was  its  great  expense  with  meagre 
results.  The  addition  of  a  few  dozens  of  names  of 
native  villages,  the  outlining  of  a  few  small  streams, 
the  defining  of  a  few  ranges  of  hills,  and  the  limits  of 
insignificant  districts,  with  a  chapter  or  two  upon  local 
customs  of  races  of  people  who  are  more  or  less  related 
to  one  another,  from  the  sea  to  the  Kwa,  did  not  appear 
to  be  sufficient  results  to  warrant  the  expenditure  of 
£20,000.  If  it  were  to  be  a  purely  philanthropic  enter- 
prise, its  magnitude  would  depend  entirely  upon  the 
means  that  a  society  would  consider  to  lie  at  its  disposal. 
A  commercial  enterprise  should  also  be  on  a  grand  scale 


THE   CEARACTER    OF   THE   EXPEDITION.  25 

to  ensure  success  ;  otherwise  it  were  useless  to  attempt     i87s. 

August. 

to  rival  the  traders  long  established  on  the  lower  river,  Em-ope. 
while  the  services  of  a  peculiar  body  of  Europeans 
initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  ledgers  and  double  entry 
would  have  to  be  secured,  and  it  was  very  doubtful  if  a 
sufficient  number  could  be  obtained  who  were  acquainted 
with  the  Congo  languages  and  manners  and  customs, 
and  possessed  sufficient  stamina  to  resist  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  the  climate. 

To  create  a  railway  for  over  200  miles  through  a 
little-known  country  would  require  a  preliminary  sur- 
vey of  the  land  through  which  it  was  proposed  the 
line  should  run.  An  exact  knowledge  would  have  to 
be  gained  of  the  laws  which  governed  the  natives ;  of 
proprietary  rights  along  its  proposed  course ;  and  of 
the  protection,  if  any,  which  could  be  guaranteed  by 
the  native  chiefs  to  such  a  road.  All  these  questions 
were  subjected  to  a  very  searching  analysis,  and  esti- 
mates laboriously  made  of  the  expense  that  would  be 
likely  to  attend  any  effort,  and  the  Commissioner,  with 
his  voluminous  papers,  returned  to  Brussels  to  lay  them 
before  His  Majesty. 

Meantime  September,  October  and  November  were 
passed  by  me,  sometimes  lecturing  on  Africa,  in  respond- 
ing to  numerous  requests  for  ideas  upon  the  African 
continent  relating  to  other  projects  in  embryo  from 
Manchester  and  London,  and  in  maintaining  a  constant 
correspondence  upon  topics  upon  which  the  Commis- 
sioner at  Brussels  wislied  to  have  a  little  more  light. 

Early  in  November  1878  I  received  an  invitation 


26  THE   CONGO. 

1878.     to   be  at  the  Royal  Palace   in  Brussels   at  a   certain 

November.  t  i 

Euroi>e.  ^^^c  and  hour.  Punctual  to  the  time,  I  there  discovered 
various  persons  of  more  or  less  note  in  the  commercial 
and  monetary  world,  from  England,  Germany,  France, 
Belgium,  and  Holland,  and  presently  we  were  all  ushered 
into  the  council-room.  After  a  few  minutes  it  trans- 
pired that  the  object  of  the  meeting  was  to  consider  the 
best  way  of  promoting  the  very  modest  enterprise  of 
studying  what  might  be  made  of  the  Congo  River  and 
its  basin.  This  body  of  gentlemen  desired  to  know 
how  much  of  the  Congo  River  was  actually  navigable 
by  light-draught  vessels  ?  Wliat  protection  could 
friendly  native  chiefs  give  to  commercial  enterprises  ? 
Were  the  tribes  along  the  Congo  sufficiently  intel- 
ligent to  understand  that  it  would  be  better  for 
their  interests  to  maintain  a  friendly  intercourse  with 
the  whites  than  to  restrict  it  ?  What  tributes,  taxes, 
or  imports,  if  any,  would  be  levied  by  the  native 
chiefs  for  right  of  way  through  their  country  ?  What 
was  the  character  of  the  produce  which  the  natives 
would  be  able  to  exchange  for  European  fabrics? 
Provided  that  in  future  a  railway  would  be  created  to 
Stanley  Pool  from  some  point  on  the  lower  Congo,  to 
what  amount  could  this  j^roduce  be  furnished  ?  Some 
of  the  above  questions  were  answerable  even  then, 
others  were  not.  It  was  therefore  resolved  that  a 
fund  should  be  subscribed  to  equip  an  expedition  to 
obtain  accurate  information ;  the  subscribers  to  the  fund 
assuming  the  name  and  title  of  "Comite  d'Etudes  du 
Haut  Congo."     A  portion  of  the  capital  amounting  to 


THE    WOBK   OF   THE  EXPEDITION.  27 

£20,000  was  there  and  then  subscribed  for  immediate     ists. 

November, 
rise.  Europe. 

A  series  of  resolutions  was  drawn  up  by  whicli  every 
subscriber  bound  himself  to  answer  each  call  when 
further  funds  were  necessary.  A  president,  secretary, 
and  treasurer  were  appointed.  The  expedition  was  to 
be  immediately  organised  and  equipped,  and  I  was 
lionoured  with  the  charge  of  its  personnel  and  materieU 
and  to  effect  the  object  for  which  the  committee  was 
constituted.  I  was  to  erect  stations  according  to  the 
means  furnished  along  the  overland  route — after  due 
consideration  of  their  eligibility  and  future  utility — for 
the  convenience  of  the  transport,  and  the  European  staff 
in  charge,  to  establish  steam-communication  w^herever 
available  and  safe.  The  stations  w^ere  to  be  commo- 
dious and  sufficient  for  all  demands  that  were  likely 
to  be  made  on  them.  By  lease  or  purchase,  ground 
enough  was  to  be  secured  adjoining  the  stations  so  as 
to  enable  tliem  in  time  to  become  self-supporting  if  the 
dispositions  of  the  natives  should  favour  such  a  project. 
If  it  were  expedient  also,  land  on  each  side  of  the  route 
adopted  for  the  traffic  was  to  be  purchased  or  leased,  to 
prevent  persons  ill-disposed  towards  us  from  frustrating 
tbe  intentions  of  the  Committee  through  sheer  love  of 
mischief  or  jealousy.  Such  acquired  land,  however, 
might  be  sublet  to  any  European,  at  a  nominal  rent, 
who  would  agree  to  abstain  from  intrigue,  from  inciting 
the  natives  to  hostility,  and  from  disturbing  the  peace 
of  the  country. 

In  brief,  during  this  and  subsequent  meetings  every 


28  THE   CONGO. 

1878.  2:»lan  that  could  teud  to  promote  harmony  and  good- 
Europe,  Will,  and  nisure  a  peaceable  and  thorough  trial  for 
the  experimental  efforts  about  to  be  made  in  a  little- 
known  country  was  discussed  and  formed.  The  chari- 
table and  philanthropic  character  of  the  resolutions 
clearly  showed  whose  hand  and  mind  had  formed  them, 
even  if  I  had  not  had  the  honour  of  learning  the  senti- 
ments of  the  Royal  Founder  of  the  enterprise  from  his 
own  lips  at  private  audiences. 

The  first  meeting  assembled  on  the  25tli  November, 
1878,  at  the  Ko^'al  Palace  of  Brussels,  at  which  Colonel 
Strauch,  of  the  Belgian  Army,  was  elected  President  of 
the  society  called  Comite  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo ;  and 
my  first  instructions  to  begin  organising  the  Expedi- 
tion du  Haut  Congo  were  written  out.  At  the  second 
meeting,  held  on  December  9,  I  was  requested  to  have 
all  the  plans  and  estimates  for  expenses  for  the  first 
six  months  ready  to  be  laid  before  a  general  council  to 
be  held  on  the  2nd  of  January,  as  many  of  the  members 
had  been  unable  to  appear  at  the  December  meeting. 
The  third  meeting,  held  on  the  2nd  of  January,  1879, 
at  which  there  were  present  representatives  of  Belgium, 
Holland,  England,  France,  and  America,  was  the  final 
one,  when  the  plans  were  adopted  and  the  necessary 
sums  voted.  By  the  23rd  of  January,  all  that  I  could 
personally  effect  in  EurojDe  was  accomj)lished ;  and 
while  the  steamer  Albion,  of  Leith — chartered  for  the 
expedition — was  steaming  to  the  Mediterranean,  I  was 
hurrying  through  France  and  Italy  to  meet  her,  to 
proceed    to    Zanzibar    to    enlist   as   many   of   my    old 


FINAL   ABRANGEMENTS.  29 

comrades   as   might    be  willing  to    try  their  luck  on     i879. 

.  .  Jamiavv. 

the  great  river  agani.  Daring  my  absence  on  the  Eurofc. 
East  Coast  of  Africa  advantage  could  be  taken  by 
the  builders  of  the  steamers,  lighters,  and  steel  whale- 
boats,  by  the  makers  of  portable  wooden  houses, 
corrugated  iron  stores,  wagon-makers,  and  provision- 
packers,  to  complete  the  orders  they  had  received ; 
and  by  the  time  I  should  accomplish  my  mission  at 
Zanzibar,  the  larger  steamer  Barga,  also  chartered, 
would  no  doubt  have  arrived  at  the  Congo,  and  have 
discharged  her  passengers  and  her  cargo  of  expedi- 
tionary material. 

The  following  letter,  dated  London,  January  7th, 
1870,  to  Mr.  Albert  Jung,  a  director  in  the  present 
Afrikaansche  Handels-Yenootschap — successor  of  the 
Afrikaansche  Handels-Vereeniging — then  chief  agent 
of  the  great  Dutch  Company  at  Banana  Point,  Congo 
Iviver,  will  perhaps  better  serve  to  explain  the  measures 
and  objects  briefly  described  above  : — 

"Dear  Sir, 

"  I  am  infonnccl  that  you  arc  already  partly  aware  of  what  is  about 
to  be  attempted  by  a  number  of  gentlemen  in  Holland,  Belgium,  France, 
England,  and  America,  who  have  formed  tljemselves  into  a  commission 
called  the  '  Comite  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo.'  You  have  also  doubt- 
less heard  that  I  am  selected  as  chief  of  the  expedition  which  is  about 
to  set  out  for  the  Congo  under  the  auspices  of  the  Committee. 

"  Before  proceeding  with  the  request  which  I  have  to  make  to  you,  with 
your  kind  permission  I  will  endeavour  to  explain  luore  clearly  what  tlie 
Committee  have  in  view. 

"  \Vithin  the  vast  basin  known  in  geographical  i)arlance  as  the  basin  of 
the  Congo  there  is  a  vast  field  lying  untouched  by  the  European  merchant, 
and  about  three-fourths  unexplored  by  the  geographical  explorer.  For 
tlie  most  i)art  it  is  i)eoj)led  by  ferocious  savages,  devoted  to  abominable 
cannibalism  and  wanton  murder  of  inoffensive  peoi)lc;  but  along  the 


30'  THE   CONGO. 

1879.  great  river  towards  the  Livingstone  Falls  there  dwell  numerous  amiable 
January,  tribes  who  'wonld  gladly  embrace  the  arrival  of  the  European  merchant, 
Europe,  ^nd  hasten  to  him  with  their  rich  produce  to  exchange  for  Manchester 
cloths,  Venetian  beads,  brass  wire,  hardware  and  cutlery,  and  such  other 
articles  as  generally  find  favour  with  the  Africans  in  your  vicinity.  Their 
manners  are  gentle,  and  their  instincts  are  entirely  for  trade.  Hitherto, 
however,  they  have  been  unable  to  benefit  themselves  by  commercial 
relationship  with  the  white  man,  such  articles  of  European  manufacture 
having  arrived  only  after  a  tedious  process  and  the  lapse  of  many  months, 
perhajDS  years,  among  them,  because  between  them  and  the  coast  extends 
a  broad  belt  of  country  inhabited  by  warlike  tribes  and  turbulent  natives, 
who  are  not  only  accustomed  to  tax  heavily  all  articles  boiand  for  the 
interior,  but  to  often  lay  violent  hands  on  the  almost  defenceless  wayfarer. 
Having  on  a  successful  journey,  which  terminated  last  year,  studied  the 
problem  of  uniting  the  amiable  tribes  above  in  close  trading  relationship 
with  European  merchants,  and  obtained  the  clue  to  the  mode  of  putting 
into  practice  this  idea  for  the  benefit  of  the  many  kind  African  friends 
whom  I  met  above,  and  such  merchants  as  we  may  be  able  to  interest  in 
the  business,  I  am  on  the  eve  of  having  my  anticipations  realised.  You 
must  know  that  not  many  hours'  joui'ney  from  Boma  to  the  confines  of 
the  Babwende  territory  the  road  is  rendered  unsafe  for  the  more  amiable 
jieople  above  by  the  turbulent  and  rapacious  petty  chiefs  who  dwell  along 
the  route,  and  whose  number  is  legion.  These  would  be  a  great  obstacle 
to  me  also  if  I  did  not  avail  myself  of  varioiis  roads  which  penetrate 
through  the  unpeopled  wilderness,  my  explorations  through  the  country 
having  given  me  such  a  general  knowledge  of  the  interior  that  I  shall  be 
able  to  pass  by  these  chiefs  unmolested ;  and  I  have  perfect  confidence 
that  if  I  live  a  road  will  be  found  both  practicable,  easy,  and  safe  for  the 
natives  of  the  upi^er  regions  to  visit  the  lower  station  with  their  produce. 
This,  as  you  must  know,  would  materially  assist  us  in  j^lanting  the  benefits 
of  legitimate  commerce  among  them,  and  opening  the  great  heart  of  Africa, 
with  its  various  productions,  to  the  enterprise  of  Europe.  It  cannot  be 
done,  however,  without  great  tact,  patience,  long-suffering,  and  winning 
manners,  even  with  the  friendly  peoj^les  of  the  upper  regions.  The  many 
times  that  I  have  made  blood-brotherhood  with  the  chiefs  above  will  stand 
me  in  good  stead  now ;  and  whatever  virtue  is  required  to  realise  my 
anticipations  and  to  effect  the  objects  the  Committee  have  in  view,  shall 
be  thoroughly  practised. 

"  You  will  observe  from  the  above  remarks  that  our  purpose  is  threefold : 
that  they  are  philanthropic,  scientific,  and  commercial.  They  are  philan- 
thropic, inasmuch  as  our  principal  aim  is  to  open  the  interior  by  weaning 
the  tribes  below  and  above  from  that  savage  and  susjDicious  state  which 
they  are  now  in,  and  to  rouse  them  up  to  give  material  aid  voluntarily. 
"When  we  shall  have  shown  them  that  the  white  men  near  the  sea  wait  to 
extend  a  courteous  welcome  to  the  dark  strangers  from  the  interior,  that 


LETTER    TO   MR.   ALBERT  JUNG.  31 

the  road  between  the  sea  and  their  country  is  not  beset  by  diflBculties  and      ^gyg 
trouble,  Texation  and  harm,  the  j)roblem  is  solved,  and  it  may  then  be  left   January, 
to  the  white  men  to  expedite  matters  by  creating  a  more  rapid  means  of    Europe. 
communication,  or  to  time  to  ripen  the  good  seed  that  we  shall  have  sown. 
At  any  rate  I  doubt  that  the  road  thus  created  by  mutual  goodwill  and 
mutual  confidence  will  ever  again  be  closed. 

"  Our  i^urpose  is  also  scientific,  because  we  intend  to  make  a  systematic 
survey  of  that  country  lying  between  the  Stanley  Pool  and  Boma,  either 
on  the  north  or  the  south  side  of  the  Congo,  and  to  determine  with  exacti- 
tude the  positions  of  all  important  towns  and  villages,  and  all  i^rominent 
points  which  shall  be  of  interest  to  the  geographer  and  the  merchant. 

"  Our  aims  are  commercial  also,  because  we  intend  to  experiment  how 
far  people  may  venture  into  commercial  relationship  with  the  tribes  above, 
by  inviting  them  to  exchange  such  products  as  they  may  possess  for  the 
manufactured  goods  of  civilised  states.  We  may  thus  obtain  valuable 
statistics,  which  shall  be  a  guide  to  future  merchants,  of  the  nature  and 
cxuantity  of  African  produce  in  the  interior,  and  shall  be  able  to  note  well 
the  general  disposition  of  those  with  whom  we  come  in  contact. 

"  Yet  on  the  threshold  of  the  enterprise  we  are  encountered  with  the 
serious  necessity  of  providing  ourselves  with  suitable  men  in  whom  we 
may  repose  a  confidence  that  the  mere  sight  of  a  drunken  chief  will  not 
dissipate  at  once  our  hopes,  and  destroy  those  dreams  we  have  cherished 
and  have  hoped  to  realise. 

"  After  a  conversation  with  ^Messrs.  Kcrdyck  &  Pincofis,  who  are  greatly 
interested  in  these  plans  of  ours,  as  you  must  be  aware,  I  have  been 
requested  and  advised  to  apply  to  you,  and  this  I  do  witli  the  greater 
confidence  that  I  already  have  had  the  honour  and  pleasiire  of  an  inter- 
view with  you  in  London. 

"  While  I  set  out  for  Egypt  and  the  East  African  Coast  to  collect  a 
few  trusty  men,  you  could  materially  assist  me  by  collecting  a  number 
of  Kruboys  or  Krumaners,  from  75  to  130  men,  by  hiring  them  from  the 
chiefs  for  a  given  time,  with  the  promise  of  either  renewing  the  contract, 
or  returning  them  to  the  chiefs  according  to  such  agreement  as  you  may 
make  with  the  chiefs  or  with  the  people  themselves,  and  engaging  for  me 
from  twenty  to  thirty  or  forty  Kabindas  at  such  wages  as  you  deem  just, 
and  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  West  Coast. 

"  Messrs.  Kcrdyck  and  Pincoffs  have  also  spoken  to  mc  about  a  young- 
gentleman  who  is  at  present  engaged  in  your  establishment  at  P>anana 
Point,  and  I  believe  and  hope  that  they  will  write  to  you  about  him.  If 
it  is  quite  decided  that  he  accepts  office  under  me,  will  you  kindly  instruct 
him  what  to  do.  He  could  assist  you  materially  in  looking  after  those 
men  whi^m  you  engage  for  me — if  no  Kabindas  sufficient  could  1)0  collected 
at  Banana  itself,  he  might  go  personally  to  Kabinda,  I'^irc,  and  do  valuable 
service  liy  collecting  all  that  he  could  induce  to  accept  such  wages  as  you 
may  offer.    And  whatever  contracts  you  may  make  in  my  name  it  would 


32  THE   CONGO. 

1879.      ^^6  as  well  to  have  them  as  clear  and  simple  as  possible,  to  prevent  mis- 
January.    iTnderstanding  in  future.     If  you  can  collect  150  men  of  all  classes- 
Europe.     Kabindas  and  others — for  me  by  the  time  I  have  arrived,  you  -will  have 
done  me  and  the  Committee  also  a  most  important  service,  "wliich  they 
•would  be  bound  to  acknowledge. 

"I  may  very  probably  arrive  at  the  Congo  about  the  beginning  of 
August,  i)erhaps  before,  if  all  goes  well,  where  I  shall  hope  to  find  you 
and  thank  you  in  person  for  the  favour  that  I  hope  you  shall  have  done 
for  me. 

"  I  have  not  by  any  means,  I  am  well  aware,  exhausted  this  subject  or 
others  that  I  might  have  enlarged  upon,  but  I  know  that  I  am  addressing 
a  gentleman  of  large  experience  with  Afi-ican  customs  and  manners,  and 
one  who  will  be  able  to  fill  up  the  lack  of  sufiicieut  detail  with  his  o"«^l 
ample  stock  of  good  common  sense  and  profound  and  wide  knowledge  of 
what  ought  to  be  done. 

"  ^Meantime  until  my  arrival  various  things  will  be  shipped  to  your  care, 
which  I  beg  you  to  store  for  me  in  your  store-rooms,  and  such  gentlemen 
who  come  in  my  name  pray  receive  as  hospitably  as  your  circumstances 
will  warrant,  and  your  knowledge  of  their  condition  in  a  sti'ange  land  will 
suggest.  I  need  not  have  touched  upon  that,  for  the  Congo  merchants,  as 
I  know  from  experience,  are  always  ready  to  extend  hospitality.  Any 
exxtense  in  any  duty  that  you  may  incur  for  me,  or  in  my  behalf,  I  shall 
gladly  repay,  but  your  goodness  and  your  compliance  with  the  above 
favoui's  that  I  have  asked  of  you  would  be  above  recompense,  yet  by  far 
of  greater  value,  which  I  shall  leave  to  good  fortune  to  enable  me  to  show 
you  my  never-dying  gratitude. 

"  Please  commimicate  the  details  of  this  letter  to  Mr.  deBloeme;  and  it 
would  be  as  well  to  suggest  that  until  my  arrival  such  persons  as  have  no 
interest  in  knowing  of  our  business  it  would  be  as  well  not  to  communicate 
our  affairs  to  them. 

"  Present  my  best  respects  to  Mr.  de  Bloeme,  and  believe  me,  dear 
Sir, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

(Signed)    '-'Hexby  M.  Stakley." 


FOUNDATION   OF   THE  ASSOCIATION.  33 


July. 
Brussels. 


CHAPTER  lY. 

THE   AFRICAN-   INTERNATIONAL   ASSOCIATION. 

Foundation  of  the  Association — "Withdrawal  of  the  English  members — 
General  Sanford's  description  of  the  Association — My  first  relations 
with  the  International — My  instructions  to  M.  Cambier — Karema,  a 
prosjierous  station^My  instructions  to  Captain  Popelin— Draft  of 
propositions  for  the  organisation  of  an  Expedition  —  Farewell  to 
Zanzibar— The  SS.  Albion  starts  on  her  long  voyage. 

The  foundation  of  the  African  International  Association  1877 
took  place  while  I  was  still  in  the  heart  of  equatorial 
Africa.  I  am  therefore  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the 
printed  accounts  of  its  formation,  and  from  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society's  ^Proceedings'  of  July  1877  I 
quote  the  following  : — 

"  The  fresh  impulse  to  African  exploration  originated  in  the  Conference 
at  Brussels,  on  the  12th,  13tli,  and  llth  of  September  last,  to  which  His 
^Majesty  the  King  of  the  Belgians  invited  a  number  of  the  leading  geo- 
graphers of  tlie  chief  nations  of  Europe.  Eeju'esentativcs  from  Germany, 
Austro-Hungary,  Belgium,  France,  Great  Britain,  Italy  and  Russia  were 
present  at  the  Conference,  and,  as  a  result  of  their  deliberations,  it  was 
agreed  that  an  International  Commission,  having  its  seat  at  Brussels, 
should  be  founded  for  the  exploration  and  civilisation  of  Central  Africa, 
and  that  each  nation  willing  to  co-operate  should  form  National  Com- 
mittees to  collect  subscriptions  for  the  common  object,  and  send  delegates 
to  the  Commission ;  thus  centralising  as  much  as  possible  tlio  efforts 
made,  and  facilitating  by  co-operation  the  execution  of  the  resolutions  of 
the  Commission. 

"  Belgium  was  the  first  to  establish  a  National  Committee,  the  mem- 
bers of  which  assembled  under  the  presidency  of  the  King  on  the  Gth  of 
November,  187C.  At  tliis  meeting  the  statutes  were  formulated  and 
VOL.  I.  D 


July 

l>nissels 


34  THE   CONGO. 

1S77.  agreed  to,  the  preamble  of  whicli  set  fortli  that  the  Committee  was  con- 
stituted for  the  purpose  of  carrying  into  effect,  within  tlie  limits  of  Belgium, 
the  programme  of  the  International  Conference,  which  was  stated  to  be 
the  '  repression  of  the  slave-trade  and  the  exploration  of  Africa.'  The 
Committee  made  an  appeal  to  the  Belgian  public  for  subscriptions,  with 
considerable  success. 

"  In  England,  when  the  organisation  of  a  similar  Committee  came  to  be 
discussed,  difficulties  of  an  obvious  nature  were  foreseen,  which  rendered 
it  desirable  that  such  a  Committee,  whilst  maintaining  friendly  relations 
of  corresi^ondence  with  the  Belgian  and  other  Committees,  should  not 
trammel  itself  with  engagements  of  an  International  nature,  or  with 
objects  other  than  those  connected  with  geography.  In  consequence  of 
this  decision;  delegates  have  not  been  appointed  to  the  International 
Commission  at  Brussels. 

"  Germany. — In  resi^onse  to  the  views  of  the  Brussels  International 
Conference,  a  National  Committee  was  formed  at  Berlin  who  decreed,  on 
the  18th  of  December,  1876,  the  establishment  of  the  German  African 
Society,  the  functions  of  which  will  be  to  carry  out  the  same  objects  as 
the  International  Commission,  viz. :  1,  the  Scientific  exploration  of  the 
unknown  regions  of  Central  Africa :  2,  the  oi^ening-up  of  Central  Africa 
to  civilisation  and  commerce :  and,  3,  as,  iilterior  object,  the  extinction  of 
the  slave  trade.  The  affairs  of  the  Society  are  to  be  administered  by  a 
Council,  of  which  Prince  Henry  YII.  Eeuss  is  the  president.  Dr.  George 
von  Bunsen  the  secretary,  and  Dr.  Nachtigal,  Hcrr  Delbriik,  Dr.  A.  Bastian, 
Dr.  Herzog,  Baron  von  Eichthofen,  Dr.  Pioth,  and  Dr.  W.  Siemens,  the 
members.  The  Society  will  maintain  relations  with  the  International 
Commission  at  Brussels,  and  have  appointed  Dr.  Bastian,  Dr.  G.  von 
Bunsen,  and  Baron  von  Eichthofen  as  German  Delegates. 

"  The  Society  is  to  consist  of  Foiuiders  and  Members,  the  former  com- 
prising those  who  contribute  a  donation  of  300  marks  to  its  funds,  the 
latter  to  include  all  annual  subscribers  of  five  marks  and  upwards — all 
corporations,  chambers,  and  scientific  societies  to  bo  admissible  in  their 
corjDorate  capacities  as  members,  on  payment  of  proportionate  sub- 
scriptions. 

''  As  to  the  disposal  of  the  funds  accumulated  by  the  Society,  it  has  been 
decided  that  only  a  portion  of  the  yearly  income  shall  be  contributed  to 
the  International  Commission,  the  remainder  and  greater  part  being  set 
apart  for  German  undertakings  of  discovery  and  exploration  in  Africa. 
Like  the  Belgian  Commission,  a  leading  feature  of  the  German  operations 
will  be  the  foundation  of  stations  in  the  interior  of  Africa,  which  are  to 
serve  partly  as  bases  of  operations  for  travellers,  and  partly  as  centres  for 
the  spread  of  civilisation  and  commerce. 

"  Belgium. — The  'International  Commission  of  the  African  Association  ' 
met,  on  the  invitation  of  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  at  Brussels  on  the  20th 
and  21st  of  June  last ;  His  Majesty  presiding.    Delegates  from  all  the 


NATIONAL    COMMITTEES.  35 

nations  represented  at  the  Conference  of  September  1876  attended,  with      1877. 
the  exception  of  Great  Britain  and  Eussia,  the  National  Eussian  Com-  -'■ 

mittee  excnsing  the  absence  of  their  delegates  on  the  ground  of  their  ^"^i"*^  *• 
lieing  much  occupied  with  work  intrusted  to  them  by  their  Government. 
Delegates  from  the  Netherlands  attended  tiie  meeting  for  the  first  time. 
Various  subjects  of  detail  were  discussed  during  the  two-days'  sittings  ; 
amongst  them  the  choice  of  a  flag  for  the  Association,  and  the  question  of 
procuring  reductions  of  passage-money  and  so  forth,  in  favour  of  members 
of  expeditions,  from  the  various  steamboat  and  trading  companies  con- 
nected with  African  seaports.  With  regard  to  this  latter  subject,  it  was 
announced  by  Signor  Adamoli  (Italian  delegate),  that  the  Italian  Govern- 
ment had  made  a  stii^ulation  in  its  contracts  with  navigation  companies 
tliat  passages  at  a  reduced  rate  shall  be  granted  to  all  members  of 
scientific  expeditions.  A  Netherlands  delegate  (M.  Versteeg)  also  an- 
nounced that  the  directors  of  the  Afrikaansche  Handels-Yereeniging  to 
Eotterdam  had  agreed  to  convey  baggage  intended  for  the  various  ex- 
peditions free  of  charge,  and  to  grant  hospitality  in  their  factories  to  the 
members  of  the  expedition. 

'•  A  statement  of  the  financial  position  of  the  Association  at  this  date 
was  read  by  the  secretary,  by  which  it  appeared  that  the  Belgian  National 
Committee  had  already  paid  over  to  the  Central  Commission  287,000 
francs  in  donations,  and  44,000  francs  in  annual  subscriptions,  totals  which 
tlie  Committee  has  lu'omised  to  increase  during  the  current  year  by  11,000 
francs  and  58,000  francs  respectively.  The  donations  and  a  portion  of 
the  annual  subscriptions  are  to  be  invested,  and  the  interest  only  expended 
in  the  objects  of  the  Association  ;  in  this  way,  according  to  the  calculation 
of  tlie  treasixrer,  73,000  francs  will  be  at  the  disposition  of  the  Executive 
Committee  for  the  year  1877.  The  immediate  commencement  of  opera- 
tions has  accordingly  been  decided  upon,  and  an  expedition  is  to  be 
despatched  l)y  way  of  Zanzibar  towards  Lake  Tanganika,  with  the  object 
of  establishing  stations  either  at  the  lake  itself  or  at  certain  points  beyond 
it,  and  also  of  sending  explorers  who  will  make  the  stations  their  bases 
of  operations.  Tlic  drawing-up  of  detailed  instructions  is  confided  to 
the  Executive  Committee  appointed  to  direct  the  oi)e rations  of  the 
Association. 

"  National  Committees  to  co-operate  with  .the  Belgian  International 
Commission  are  stated  to  have  been  found  also  in : — 

"  France    .     .     .  President  Count  de  Lesseps. 

Austro-Hungary  „        The  Archduke  Eudolf. 

Italy  ....  „        The  Prince  de  Piedmont. 

Spain ....  „        His  Majesty  King  Alfonso. 

Switzerland .     .  „        M.  Bouthchier  do  Beamout. 

Eussia      ...  „        The  Grand  Duke  Constantine. 

Ilullaud  ...  „        The  Prince  of  Orange. 

Portugal ...  „        The  Duke  do  San  Januario. 

D    2 


36  THE   CONGO. 

1877.  "  The  Austro-Hungarian  Committee  has  made  a  first  contribution  to  the 

"  ^'      funds  of  the  Brussels  Commission  of  5000  francs." 


Brussel 


As  the  Eno'lish  had  withdrawn  from  the  Association 
through  a  fear  of  trammelling  themselves  with  engage- 
ments of  an  international  nature,  the  United  States  were 
invited  to  participate  in  this  widespread  geographical 
movement,  and  a  branch  society  was  formed  in  New 
York,  with  Judge  Daly  for  President,  who  was  after- 
wards succeeded  by  Mr.  Latrobe,  of  Baltimore — one 
of  the  founders  of  Liberia.  General  H.  S.  Sanford,  of 
Florida,  who  succeeded  in  the  place  of  Sir  Bartle  Frere 
as  the  representative  of  the  English-speaking  races, 
describes — in  a  letter  to  Senator  Morgan,  of  the  U.S. 
Senate,  dated  March  24,  1884 — the  International  Asso- 
ciation in  the  following  words  : — 

"Dear  Sir, 

"  In  reply  to  your  request  for  specific  information  as  to  the  origin 
and  objects  of  the  International  African  ^Association,  I  have  the  honour 
to  state  that  it  owes  its  origin  to  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  who  in  187G 
convened  a  Conference  of  distinguished  African  travellers  of  different 
nationalities  at  his  Palace  in  Brussels  in  September  of  that  year,  to  devise 
the  best  means  of  opening  up  to  civilisation  equatorial  Africa.  The  result 
of  this  Conference,  which  recommended  the  establishment  of  stations, 
l^rovided  for  a  permanent  central  organisation  and  branch  organisations 
in  other  countries,  was  the  convoking  a  Commission  or  Congress,  which 
met  at  the  Palace  in  Brussels  in  June  1877,  and  at  which  delegates  from 
Austria,  Belgium,  France,  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  Spain,  Switzerland, 
and  the  United  States  were  present.  An  Executive  Committee — consisting 
of  three  representatives  of  the  English-speaking,  Germanic,  and  Latin 
races,  in  the  persons  of  Henry  S.  Sanford  of  Florida,  Dr.  Nachtigal  (the 
African  explorer)  of  Berlin,  and  M.  de  Quatrefages  (of  the  Institute)  of 
Paris,  for  these  races  respectively,  under  the  presidency  of  the  King — ^was 
confirmed,  and  the  practical  means  of  carrying  out  the  objects  of  the 
Association  were  discus.sed  and  determined  upon. 

"  These  were,  the  organisation  of  a  branch  in  each  of  the  various  states 
of  Europe  and  in  America,  which  should  aid  in  attracting  attention  to 
this  work,  and  in  founding  '  hospitable  and  scientific '  stations,  nnder 
the  flag  of  the  Association,  which  flag  it  was  determined  should  be  a  blue 


GENERAL    CONFEDERATION.  37 

flag  with  a  golden  star  in  the  centre.     It  was  also  decided  to  commence       1877. 
the  founding  of  these  stations  on  the  East  Coast,  at  Zanzibar,  stretching    Brussels. 
over  to  the  lakes. 

"  An  extract  from  the  proceedings,  defining  what  these  stations,  des- 
tined to  form  a  chain  of  posts  from  ocean  to  ocean,  should  be,  is  given  as 
best  explaining  the  purpose  of  the  Association. 

"  '  JMiat  a  station  should  he. — The  Executive  Committee  receives  from  the 
International  Association  entire  liberty  of  action  in  the  execution  of  the 
following  general  dispositions  for  the  foundation  of  scientific  and  hospit- 
able stations:  The  personnel  of  a  station  is  to  consist  of  a  chief  and  a 
certain  rumber  of  employes,  chosen  or  accepted  by  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee. The  first  care  of  the  chief  of  a  station  should  be  to  jDrocure  a 
suitable  dwelling,  and  to  ixtilise  the  resources  of  the  coumtry,  in  order 
that  the  station  may  be  self-supporting. 

" '  The  scientific  mission  of  a  station  consists,  in  so  far  as  it  is  practicable, 
in  astronomical  and  meteorological  observations;  in  the  formation  of 
collections  in  geology,  botany,  and  zoology ;  in  the  mapping  of  the  en- 
virons of  the  station  ;  in  the  preparation  of  a  vocabulary  and  grammar  of 
the  language  of  the  country ;  in  ethnological  observations ;  in  reporting 
the  accounts  of  native  travellers  of  the  countries  they  have  visited ;  and 
in  keeping  a  journal  of  all  events  and  observations  worthy  of  notice. 

"  '  The  hospitable  mission  of  a  station  shall  be,  to  receive  all  travellers 
whom  the  chief  shall  deem  worthy;  to  provide  them,  at  their  cost  at  the 
place,  with  instruments,  goods,  and  provisions,  as  well  as  guides  and  in- 
terpreters ;  to  inform  them  as  to  the  best  routes  to  follow,  and  to  transmit 
their  correspondence.  It  will  also  be  the  duty  of  a  station  to  insui'e  as 
rapid  and  as  regular  communication  as  possible  from  post  to  post  between 
the  coast  and  the  interior. 

"  '  One  of  the  ulterior  objects  of  the  stations  will  be,  by  their  civilising 
influences,  to  sujjpress  the  slave  trade.' 

"  The  result  of  this  movement  has  been  the  opening  up  of  a  highway,  so 
to  say,  from  Zanzibar  to  Lake  Tacganika,  mostly  with  capital  furnished 
by  the  Belgians,  the  last  of  the  stations  being  at  Karema,  on  the  lake, 
two  of  the  intermediary  stations  being  founded  respectively  by  the  French 
and  German  branches  of  the  Association. 

"  After  .Stanley  discovered  the  Upper  Congo,  in  1877,  a  branch  of  the 
International  Association  was  formed  the  year  following  for  special  work 
on  the  Congo,  under  the  name  of  the  Comite  d'Etudes  of  the  Upper 
Congo,  but  under  tlie  flag  of  the  Association,  and  special  contributions  for 
it  were  made  by  ]ihilantlu-o}iic  friends  of  the  Association.  This  work, 
whicli  the  King  of  tlie  Belgians  has  taken  under  his  especial  jiersonal  and 
financial  protection,  has  developed  to  extraordinary  proportions,  and  lias 
had  for  practical  result  the  opening-up  to  civilising  influences  and  to  the 
world's  traffic  this  vast,  populous,  and  fertile  region,  and  securing  certain 
destruction  to  the  slave  trade  wherever  its  flag  floats.     The  only  practical 


38  THE   COXGO. 

1877.      difficulty  in  this  wonderful  progress  proves  to  be  an  unrecognised  flag, 
Brussels,    which  is  liable  to  be  misunderstood  or  abused,  and  the  people  under  it 
subjected  to  imiieiliments  in  their  pliilanthropic  work  on  the  part  of  those 
engaged  in  the  slave  trade,  or  for  other  selfish  ends. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  very  resjjectfully  yours, 

"H.  S.  Sanford, 
"  Member  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the 
International  African  Association." 

It  was  well  known  to  me  that  His  Majesty  King- 
Le'opold  II.  was  the  Founder  and  President  of  the 
African  International  Association,  and  also  the  Founder 
of  the  .society  called  Comite  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo, 
Avhicli  later  became  known  as  the  International  Associa- 
tion of  the  Congo,  and  that  the  two  societies  had  the 
same  secretary  and  the  same  bureau,  but  both  were  kept 
distinctly  apart,  as  the  contributed  funds  and  the  con- 
tributions were  entirely  separate.  On  the  Committee 
of  the  International  Association  no  Englishman  sat, 
but  on  that  of  the  Comite'  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo 
Great  Britain  was  represented  by  two  English  gentle- 
men well  known  in  commercial  circles  for  their  enter- 
prise and  their  benevolence  ;  and  many  more  doubtless 
would  have  joined  but  for  an  unfortunate  incident  in 
connection  with  the  chano-e  of  name  of  the  Afrikaan- 
sche  Handels-Yereeniging  of  Rotterdam  to  that  of  the 
Afrikaansche  Handels-Yenootschap,  for  which  change 
the  Comite'  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo  was  in  no  way 
responsible. 

The  first  relations  that  I  had  with  the  African  Inter- 
national Association  were  in  consequence  of  a  short 
letter  of  instruction  received  just  as  I  was  on  the  point 
of  starting  for  Egypt  to  meet  the  Albion.    In  tliat  letter 


AN  EXPEDITION  IN  DISTBESS.  39 

I  was  requested  to  collect  all  information  respecting  the 
condition  of  tlie  Association's  first  Expedition,  which 
was  reported  to  be  in  distress  somewhere  in  Mirambo's 
country  in  Unyamwezi,  in  East  Central  Africa.  If  tlie 
report  was  true,  I  was  authorised  to  take  all  measures 
necessary  for  the  rescue  of  the  travellers. 

In  December  1877,  on  my  return  round  the  Cape 
from  Western  Africa,  I  had  met  the  leaders  of  the 
first  International  Expedition  at  Zanzibar  ;  but  soon 
after  my  arrival  in  Europe  I  heard  that  two  of  the 
travellers  had  succumbed  to  the  heat  and  the  indiscre- 
tions which  inexperienced  men  generally  and  uncon- 
sciously commit  in  tropic  lands.  The  command  of  the 
Expedition  had  afterwards  devolved  upon  Lieutenant 
Cambier,  who  had  succeeded  in  taking  his  Expedition 
into  Unyanyembe,  and  by  some  means  had  got  into 
some  difficulties  with  Mirambo,  owing  to  engagements 
of  an  entangling  nature  with  a  Mons.  Broyon,  a  Swiss 
travelling  trader  well  known  at  that  time  on  the  East 
Coast  of  Africa. 

The  Albion  duly  arrived  at  Zanzibar,  and  after  many 
efforts  made  to  elicit  the  exact  condition  of  affairs, 
I  engaged  couriers  to  convey  the  following  letter  of 
instructions  to  Lieutenant  Cambier: — 

"  Zanzibar,  E.  C.  A. 
"  M.  Cambikr,  Commanding  Expedition  International  Association. 

"  Sir, 

"  I  have  been  requested  by  His  Majesty  the  Iviiig  of  the  I'.elt^ians, 
and  Colonel  Htrauch,  Secretary-General  of  the  Association,  on  this  my 
visit  to  Zanzibar,  to  give  my  best  advice  and,  if  necessary,  assistance  to 
you  and  your  comrades  in  Africa.  I  write  this  letter  with  the  view  of 
assisting  you  with  my  advice  out  of  the  troubles  whicli  your  letters, 


Zauzil.mr. 


40  TEE   CONGO. 

1879.      and  those  of  Doctor  Dutrieux,  give  me  to  understand  you  are  in  at  the 
Zanzibar,  present  time. 

"In  brief,  the  difficulties  under  which  you  suffer,  as  I  understand 
them,  are  as  follows : — 

"  You  visited  Mirambo,  King  of  Uramlx),  Unyamwezi,  and  T^ecame  his 
friend  and  '  blood-brother.'  M.  Broyoil,  advancing  towards  Ujiji  with  the 
London  ^lissionary  Society's  caravan,  was  met  by  you.  Tou  had  left  forty 
man-loads  at  Urambo ;  but  on  witnessing  Mirambo's  seizure  of  over  30O 
loads  of  goods  from  the  caravan  of  M.  Broyon,  you  thought  it  dangerous 
to  trust  your  person  in  the  j^ower  of  Mirambo  a  second  time,  and  accord- 
ingly fled  with  M.  Broyon  to  TJnyanyembe,  and  you  are  now  staying  at 
Ta1x)ra,  -nith  the  prospect  of  fighting  3ilirambo  in  company  with  the 
Arabs. 

"  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  you  vi.sited  ^Mirambo,  not  because  he  might 
at  any  time  prove  faithless  to  his  friendly  vows,  but  because  the  Inter- 
national Society's  objects  did  not  Lie  in  that  direction,  and  might  have 
.  been  better  secured  on  a  more  southern  route.  You,  however,  are  not  to 
blame  for  this,  as  I  xmderstand  that  you  received  orders  fi-om  Baron 
Grendal  to  do  exactly  as  you  have  done.  "With  your  jjermission  I  shall 
briefly  state  what  the  objects  of  the  International  Society  are.  The  society 
wishes  to  establish  stations  between  Nyangwe  and  the  Ea.st  Coast,  along 
the  best  secured  and  most  feasible  route  that  may  be  found  between 
Bagamoyo  and  Ma-sikamba  on  the  Tanganika  Lake,  and  Mompara's  on 
the  Tanganika  and  Jvyangwe  route.  Being  an  eminently  iaoffensive  and 
philanthropic  society,  stations  cannot  be  established  by  its  officers  or 
agents  in  exposed  countries  like  those  districts  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Unyamyembe,  northern  or  central  Unyamwezi,  but  in  localities  removed 
as  far  as  possible  from  the  chances  of  strife,  visits  of  Euga-Enga,  invasions 
of  barbarous  and  powerful  chiefs  like  ilirambo  and  Xyungu.  Neither 
wotild  it  l:>e  wisdom  to  establish  any  station  in  the  iromediate  neighbour- 
hood of  powerful  Arab  stations  like  Tabora  or  Ujiji,  as  the  local  ix>litics, 
manners,  customs,  life,  and  privileges  of  the  Arabs  at  these  stations  are 
at  variance  'nith  the  objects  of  a  peaceful  society  like  the  International, 
and  a  too  familiar  intimacy  with  the  slave-trading  Arabs  would  embroil 
the  agents  and  officers  of  the  society  in  matters  with  which  they  have  no 
concern. 

"  If  the  International  Society  can  secure  an  honourable  and  peaceful 
footing  among  inoffensive  tribes,  and  a  tolerably  safe  route  Ijetween 
Masikamba  and  the  coast  (oriental)  one  of  its  first  objects  has  been 
attained,  and  this  should  be  done  before  attempting  another  step.  In 
considering  your  situation,  I  perceive  that  you  have  the  opix»rtunity  of 
securing  this  grand  success  for  the  International  Society,  and  were  I  in 
your  2X)sition,  and  possessing  youi-  advantages,  this  would  be  my  first  aim. 
You  have  abundance  of  men,  and  means  at  least  sufficient  to  attempt 
this  essential  duty.     In  1871,  when  affairs  were  in  a  far  more  desperate 


IXSTBUCTIONS    TO   M.    CAMBIER.  41 

condition  than  they  are  now,  I  left  Unyamyembe  for  Ujiji  with  twenty-      18"9* 
four  Zauzibaris  and  a  few  score  of  native  porters,  succeeded  in  discovering    Zanzibar 
Dr.  Livingstone  despite  Mirambo's  bandits  and  the  hostility  of  the  Arabs. 
You,  armed  with  my  experience,  and  assisted  by  eighty  Zanzibaris,  can  do 
much  more  than  I  was  enabled  to  do. 

"  M.  DutaUs,  of  the  second  Expedition,  which  will  shortly  start,  will 
inclose  you  my  credentials ;  and  the  keen  interest  I  take  in  the  success  of 
the  International's  operations  are  my  excuses  for  thus  intruding  on  you 
my  advice. 

".Sixty  armed  men,  bearing  loads,  and  twenty  ordinary  pagazis  arc 

sufficient  for  the  enterprise  herein  suggested  to  you.    We  will  suppose 

you  have  eighty  loads,  which  ought  to  consist  of  forty  bales  of  mixed 

cloths,  principally  Merikani  and  Kaniki,  and  forty  loads  of  beads  as 

follows : — • 

"  12  bags  of  Sam-sam. 

10  „  blue  Mutoonda. 

12  ;,  cowrie-shells. 

2  „  white  (Merikani)  beads. 

2  „  brown  (Kadunduguru). 

1  „  blue  (Lungia)  small. 

1  „  i^ink        „        small. 

40 

If  you  have  not  these  goods  in  such  proportion  you  will  be  able  to  procure 
them  at  Unyanyembe,  and  if  you  have  not  the  number  of  men  supposed 
above  you  may  enlist  these  also  there.  The  goods  for  their  advance  pay 
should  not  be  given  from  yoiu-  provision  or  travelling  stock,  but  from 
goods  purchased  for  that  piu-pose  from  the  Arabs  at  Unyanyembe. 

"  Your  other  loads  should  consist  of — 

"Tent         lload. 

Cooking  utensils  ..         ..  1     „ 

Bedding   ..  ..  ..  ..       1     „ 

Ammunition        ..  ..  ..  14     „ 

Miscellaneous      ..  ..  ..       6     „ 

23    „ 
making  a  total  of — 

"Cloth 40  loads. 

Beads 40      „ 

Miscellaneous    ..  ..         ..23      „ 

103    „ 

These  loads  of  material  ought  to  support  you  and  your  Expedition  at 
Masikamba  on  the  Tanganika  for  three  years,  without  stinting  yourself  or 


42  THE   CONGO. 

1^70.      men  of  auy  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  or  any  of  the  productions  of  Central 
Zanzibar.   Africa  whicli  may  be  needful  for  comfortable  sujiport. 

"  I  should  advise  you  to  commence  organising  at  once  this  exj)editiou 
in  such  a  manner  that  it  cannot  easily  become  demoralised  or  deterred 
from  pursuing  the  plain  ])ath  of  duty.  You  should  leave  M.  Dutrieux 
at  Tabora,  for  he,  after  your  departure,  can  form  another  expedition,  and 
t-ake  position  at  some  locality  east  of  you;  besides,  it  is  my  belief  that  the 
less  white  men  you  have  -with  you  on  this  expedition  the  better  it  will  be 
for  the  interests  of  the  International  Society.  You  need  no  companion 
nor  help  for  this  task ;  you  Avill  march  quicker,  and  all  your  people  will 
jH-efer  to  be  under  one  man  rather  than  under  two ;  besides,  you  are  simply 
about  to  occuiTy  a  station  in  advance  of  all  others,  and  to  remain  there 
until  you  hear  from  Colonel  Strauch.  Before  departure  you,  as  chief, 
should  command  M.  Dutrieux  to  collect  a  force  of  sixty  men,  to  be  held  in 
readiness  by  him  until  he  shall  receive  orders  from  Brussels,  or  shall  hear 
from  some  one  here  at  Zanzibar  entitled  to  send  him  his  instructions, 
you  should  also  see  before  your  departure  that  M.  Dutrieux  has  in  his 
house — 

"  30  bales  of  cloth. 

10  bags  of  Sam-sam  beads. 

2        „      Mutoonda     „ 

2        „      Merikani      „ 

2        „      Kadunduguru  beads. 

1        „      Pink  I  .       ... 

\  (small)      „ 
1        „      Blue ) 

You  should  instruct  him  that  this  is  a  suj^ply  against  a  sudden  demand 
from  some  expedition,  or  a  provision  for  himself  when  he  shall  have  re- 
ceived his  instructions  from  Brussels.  This  stock  should  not  be  drawn 
on  by  him,  but  he  should  obtain  his  goods  for  the  support  of  himself  or 
men  from  a  special  stock  i:)urchased  for  that  imrpose.  M.  Dutrieux 
should  also,  while  he  resides  at  Unyanyembe,  abstain  from  interfering  in 
any  local  politics,  and  observe  friendly  intercourse  with  Arabs  as  well  as 
natives. 

"  I  enclose  you  a  small  chart  of  an  excellent  route  from  Tabora  to  your 
station,  Masikamba,  on  the  Tanganika.  Masikamba  is  about  a  month's 
journey  from  Tabora.  I  believe  three  Arabs  have  already  located  them- 
selves there.  The  name  of  the  village,  I  believe,  is  Karema,  the  chief  of 
which  is  Masikamba.  I  advise  you  to  organise  and  equip  your  expedition 
as  above  suggested,  and  take  the  road  within  ten  days  after  the  receipt  of 
this  letter. 

"  On  arriving  at  Masikamlja  you  should  endeavour  to  obtain  the  loan  of 
a  canoe,  and,  manning  it  with  ten  or  fifteen  men,  proceed  to  Ujiji,  where 
you  might  purchase  one  large  canoe  from  Moeni  Kheri  or  Sultan  Bin 


IXSTBUCTIOXS    TO   21.    CAMBIEE.  43 

Kassim.  You  ought  to  get  a  good  cauoe  for  200  dollars,  whicli  you  will  i-ST^. 
either  pay  in  goods  or  an  order  for  that  amount  on  M.  Grefulhe.  You  Zanzibar, 
may  then  hii-e  Wajiji  sailors  to  take  the  canoe  to  Masikamba,  you  of 
coui-se  accompanying  them.  By  means  of  this  canoe  you  Trill  render 
yourself  independent  of  the  Arabs  and  natives,  and  have  the  means  of 
crossing  over  to  Mompara's,  on  the  western  side  of  the  lake,  ■when  you  are 
relieved  by  your  successor,  and  you  receive  your  instructions  to  move 
westward.  However  eager  you  are  to  explore  the  interesting  countries 
west  of  the  Tanganika,  it  would  be  impolitic  for  you  to  abandon  Masi- 
kamlia  until  your  successor  arrives  there ;  and  I  would  strongly  recom- 
mend you  not  to  abandon  your  station  until  then.  Perhaps,  when  you 
receive  orders  to  move  west,  M.  Dutrieux  will  appear  Tvith  his  caravan  to 
relieve  you,  that  you  may  proceed  to  Bambarre  in  Manyema,  M.  Dutrieux 
taking  charge  of  Masikamba,  and  the  duty  of  transporting  you  and  your 
caravan  to  Mompara's  or  Uguhha.  Then,  when  you  have  stationed 
yourself  at  Bambarre,  after  a  few  weeks  M.  Dutrieux  will  be  relieved  by 
Captain  Poi^elin  or  31.  DutaUs,  to  allow  him  to  relieve  you  while  you 
proceed  to  Xyangwe.  This  mode  of  proceeding  will  secure  for  the  Inter- 
national Society  the  folloTsing  good  stations  : — 

"  Nyangwe      .    commanded  by  yourself. 

Bambarre      .  „  „     M.  Dutrieux. 

Masikamba  .  „  „     M.  Dutalis. 

-.r  (Captain  Lamborel 

^^■^^y^^''       •  "  "I       orPopeUn. 

.Tiwe-la-Singa         ,,  „     a  French  officer. 

Mpwapwa  or         i 

another  station \"  "     ' 

"  The  International  Society  will  thus  have  secured  a  safe  and  peaceful 
route  betweeii  Xyang-we  and  Zanzibar,  uninterrupted  by  Mirambo,  Xy- 
ungu,  or  other  barbarous  chieftains,  and  the  work  of  exploration  and 
philanthropy  may  then  be  said  to  have  begim,  and  may  continue  without 
fear  of  disasters,  other  than  those  caused  by  sickness. 

"  This  letter  of  advice,  as  you  will  observe,  refers  only  to  the  organisa- 
tion of  your  expedition  and  its  destination,  and  it  has  been  written  by 
the  special  request  of  His  Majesty  the  King  and  Colonel  Strauch.  I  shall 
request  M.  Dutalis,  whom  I  have  brought  with  me  to  Zanzibar,  to  be 
more  explicit  concerning  my  credentials  and  other  minor  matters  which 
will  be  of  interest  to  you. 

"  A  copy  of  this  letter  will  be  sent  to  Brussels  to  Colonel  Strauch,  who 
T\ill  indorse  and  confirm  all  herein  written;  but,  meantime,  I  liojie  that 
you  will  perceive  that  it  would  be  prudent  and  wise  to  act  inmicdiately 
in  accordance  with  the  advice  given. 

"I  have  only  to  add  that  I  wish  you  the  very  lx;st  succe.ss  in  tin's 


44  THE   CONGO. 

1879.      enterprise,  and  to  assure  you  that  the  day  you  shall  plant  the  flag  of  the 

Zanzibar.  International  Society  at  Masikamba's,  on  the  Lake  Tanganika,  will  have 

seen  one  brilliant  success  for  this  humane  and  philanthropic  body,  and 

that  you  will  deserve  and  obtain  an  honourable  recognition  for  your 

gallant  service. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be.  Sir, 

"  Your  most  obedient  servant, 

(Signed)        "  Henry  M.  Stanley." 

It  may  be  a  matter  of  interest  to  the  reader  to  know 
that  the  letter  was  safely  received  by  Lieutenant  Cam- 
bier,  and  that  he  arrived  at  the  Tanganika  near  the 
locality  specified.  Although  the  exact  spot  I  had  fixed 
in  my  mind  for  the  station  was  not  occupied,  still  all 
reports  from  the  Tanganika,  from  successive  chiefs  of 
the  station,  generally  agree  that  Karema  is  now  in  a 
most  prosperous  condition,  having  served  by  its  pro- 
mise of  refuge  at  a  distressed  period  to  draw  near  its 
friendly  walls  an  increasing  population,  by  which  the 
Commandant  is  regarded  as  the  umpire  and  arbiter  in 
matters  that,  without  him,  could  only  have  been  solved 
by  bloodshed  and  spoliation. 

The  second  International  Expedition,  which  set  out 
from  Zanzibar  under  the  command  of  Captain  Popelin. 
was  also  organised  by  me  during  my  stay  at  Zanzibar. 
Lieutenant  Dutalis  was  initiated  into  the  mode  of  life 
that  would  have  to  be  followed  by  him  during  various 
excursions  which  I  made  up  the  AVami,  the  Rufiji  as  far 
as  the  rapids,  and  to  the  island  of  Mafia,  and  the  port 
of  Dar  Salaam. 

The  following  letters  and  instructions  to  Captain 
Popelin,    commanding    the    second    Expedition,    may 


CAPTAIN  POPELIN's  EXPEDITION.  45 

prove  of  some  service  to  intending  explorers  starting     1879. 

ilay  16. 

from  the  East  Coast : —  Zanzibar. 

"Zanzibar,  2Imj  im,  1879. 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  As  you  have  been  delayed  longer  than  originally  projDOsed,  I  may 
no  longer  wait  for  you,  having  other  very  important  and  pressing 
business  of  my  own  to  perform ;  but  in  order  to  assist  you  to  the  utmost 
of  my  power,  as  requested  by  the  Secretary-General  of  the  Association,  I 
have  embodied  some  advice  to  you  in  the  accompanying  propositions 
which  cannot  fail,  if  followed,  to  contribute  to  the  success  of  your 
exjiedition. 

"  Beyond  what  the  "  propositions  "  contain,  I  have  only  to  say  that 
Monsieur  Grefulhe  will  be."  able  to  purchase  the  cloth,  beads,  and 
wire  mentioned  in  the  list  inclosed,  and  to  see  that  they  are 
packed  and  corded  according  to  custom.  If  Monsieur  Grefulhe  is 
unable  to  do  so  from  disinclination  or  other  reason,  a  Hindi  called 
Jetta  Wali,  known  to  the  American  consul,  will  be  able  to  do  so  to  your 
satisfaction. 

"  Monsieur  Grefulhe  can  also  enlist  your  thirty  "Wangwana  and  two  or 
three  good  lads,  make  contract,  and  pay  them  advance. 

"  I  should  caution  you  i^articularly  that  Monsieur  Dutalis  should  be 
sent  to  Bagamoyo  to  arrange  with  the  Hindi  Saywa  respecting  the 
Wanyamwezi  (100)  and  a  house  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  he  should 
take  with  him  to  Bagamoyo  one  boy,  one  cook,  one  cook's  mate,  and  two 
or  tlu'ce  Wangwana  with  rifles  to  prepare  for  the  reception  of  yourself 
and  companions,  Wangwana  and  stores. 

"  Three  good  donkeys,  averaging  in  price  from  fifty  to  eighty  dollars, 
should  be  purchased  with  their  saddles  and  equipments  for  the  Europeans, 
wliich  should  be  sent  to  Bagamoyo  with  Monsieur  Dutalis. 

"  If  you  arrive  before  the  30th  May,  one  week  should  be  enough  to 
enable  you  to  look  about  you  at  Zanzibar.  Then  the  order  should  be 
given  to  Monsieur  Grefulhe  to  begin  enlisting  Wangwana,  and  to  i^ur- 
chase  your  stores.  Three  weeks  should  be  enough  for  you  to  prepare  and 
complete  everything  at  Zanzibar,  and  about  the  24th  June  next  you 
should  sail  for  Bagamoyo.  At  Bagamoyo  you  should  muster  yoiir  pagazis, 
and  give  each  his  load,  and  if  you  have  more  luggage  than  stated  in  list, 
pagazis  should  be  secui-ed  immediately.  Pere  Oscar  at  Bagamoyo  will 
assist  you  with  his  vast  experience,  and  any  advice  you  may  ask  from  liim 
will,  I  am  sTiro,  be  given  at  once. 

"  By  the  10th  July  you  should  l)e  in  a  state  to  leave  Bagamoyo  for 
Sliamba  Goncra,  your  first  stjition  or  camp. 

"  On  arriving  at  Chunyu,  one  camp  from  Mpwapwa,  be  not  tempted  to 
take  the  southern  route  Ihimigh  Ugogo,  but  make  a  direct  march  across 


46  THE   COXGO. 

1871'.      Marenga  Mkali,  from  4  a.m.  to  8  p.m.,  resting  en  route  from  10.30  r.M.  to 
May  16.    ^  ^ ^^^    your  camps  tlirougli  Ugogo  should  be — 

"1st.   Cliikombo. 
2nd.  Itmnbi. 
3rd.  Leehnmwa. 
4th.  Dudoma. 
5th.  Mwitikira. 
6th.  Zingeh. 

7th.  Camp  in  wilderness. 
8th.  Kitalalo. 
9th.  Miikoudokwa. 

"  Ou  arriving  near  Jiwc  la  Singa,  make  direct  west  for  Ugunda,  leaving 
road  to  Unyanyembe  on  your  right.  There  discharge  your  pagazis,  and 
proceed  with  a  few  "Wangwana  alone  to  Unyanyembe  to  procure  ])agazis 
for  the  Tanganika,  either  Wangwana  or  Wanyamwezi. 

"  After  obtaining  your  porters  at  Unyanyembe  proceed  from  Ugunda  to 
Mpokwa,  ten  days ;  thence  to  Masikamba's,  on  Tanganika,  ten  days. 

"  On  arriving  here  you  will  be  governed  by  such  instructions  as  you 
may  have  received  from  the  Committee  and  Colonel  Strauch. 

"  Bear  in  mind,  please,  that  not  one  proposition  here  is  to  be  followed  if 
you  suppose  or  know  it  to  be  conflicting  with  your  orders  from  home. 
This  advice,  which  I  proffer  to  you,  is  only  to  be  taken  provided  it  is  in 
harmony  with  your  own  official  instructions.  My  sympathy  with  your  work 
is  a  sufficient  reason  why  I  should  trouble  you  with  this  note  and  advice. 

"  You  must  be  watchful  and  wary  night  and  day;  you  must  be  patient 
at  all  times,  both  with  your  white  and  dark  companions.  Be  kind  to 
your  blacks ;  do  not  tease  or  worry  them  with  unnecessary  orders,  but 
such  duties  as  are  necessary,  see  that  they  are  executed  efficiently. 

"  Construct  a  bush  fence*  round  your  camp  each  night  after  crossing 
the  Kingani  Eiver.  Eush  not  into  danger  by  any  overweening  confidence 
in  your  breech-loading  rifles  and  military  knowledge.  Be  not  tempted  to 
try  your  mettle  against  the  native  chiefs,  for  you  will  certainly  gain  no 
honour,  but  possibly  you  may  rush  to  your  own  destruction. 

"  Be  calm  in  all  contentions  with  native  chiefs ;  and  one  golden  rule 
which  you  shoiild  remember  is, '  Do  not  fire  the  first  shot,'  whatever  may 
be  the  xjrovocation. 

"  Eemember  also,  when  purchasing  anything  or  paying  tribute,  that  the 
natives  always  demand  nearly  twice  as  much  as  they  expect.  This  custom 
refers  to  Ai-abs,  Wangwana,  and  natives  in  Africa. 

"  Keep  clear  of  all  squabbles  in  which  you  have  no  interest. 

'•'  Also,  should  yoiu-  European  companions  disagree  together,  you  should 
remember  that  if  you  take  one  side  in  preference  to  the  other,  you  will 
have  alienated  the  other's  goodwill;  as  they  are  independent  and  iutelli- 

*  Boma,  or  zareeba. 


:\r:iy  16. 
Zanzibar. 


FBOPOSITIOXS  FOB    OBGAXISATIOX.  47 

gent  enough  to  settle  it  among  themselves,  suffer  them  to  do  so,  and  yonr      1S7& 
own  comfort  and  peace  of  mind  will  be  thus  secured. 

"  In  order  to  ensure  peace,  each  European  should  sleep  in  his  own  tent, 
and  only  meet  at  meal-times.  Then  disperse  each  man  to  his  own  tent  or 
duty.  It  is  by  the  prolonged  discussion  of  trivial  matters,  and  unneces- 
.sary  conversation,  that  most  quarrels  begin,  any  course,  therefore,  that 
will  prevent  quarrels  had  better  be  followed.  Banish  from  youi-  midst  all 
reports,  sayings,  &c.,  that  one  European  might  bring  against  the  other  ; 
for,  even  if  true,  it  is  evident  that  you  cannot  improve  your  condition  by 
taking  notice  of  them.  If  you  allot  each  person  his  separate  duty  and 
see  that  it  is  done  as  chief  of  the  expedition,  in  a  calm  and  dignified 
manner,  it  will  be  clear  to  you  that  you  have  done  all  that  you  are  in- 
structed to  do.  It  would  only  provoke  anger  to  maintain  a  discussion 
upon  a  plain  matter  of  duty. 

"  Yon  are  all  concerned  in  j^roving  that  the  confidence  of  the  Societe 
Internationale  was  properly  given  to  you,  and  it  becomes  a  point  of  honour 
with  each  Eui'opean  to  observe  this  faithfully. 

"  I  have  now  said  all  that  I  would  gladly  have  told  you  in  person ;  all  I 
can  say  now  is  to  devoutly  wish  God's  blessing  on  your  companions,  white 
and  dark,  and  on  your  enterprise,  and  subscribe  myself 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  Henry  M.  Stanley. 
"M.  Captain  Popelin, 

"  Chief  of  the  Second  Belgian  Expedition  to  Inner  Africa. 

"  Pkopositions  for  the  Organisation  of  the  Second  Expedition 

TO  Ujiji. 

"  1st.  An  expedition  to  Ujiji  ought  to  consist  of  thirty  "Waugwana  and 
10(»  "Wanyamwezi. 

'■  iiid.  The  Wangwana  may  be  obtained  at  Zanzibar  at  from  |5  to  $G 
per  mouth. 

"3rd.  They  should  be  well  chosen,  respectable  looking,  and  in  good 
Iioalth  and  condition. 

'■  itli.  The  leader  should  observe  carefully  whether  any  of  theWangwana 
are  suflfering  from  rupture,  ulcers,  dysentery,  or  whether  they  are  slaves, 
or  eaters  of  opium,  if  so  they  should  be  rejected. 

"5th.  The  Wangwana  should  be  armed  with  Snider,  Kemington,  or 
rVimblaine  breechloading  rifles. 

"  To  each  rifle  in  the  Expedition  should  bo  prepared  300  cartridges. 
Ilacii  cartridge-box  should  be  about  thirty  inches  long,  nine  inches  wide, 
five  inches  deep;  lids  should  be  screwed;  box  lined  witli  zinc  or  tin  or 
.soldered  air  and  water-tight;  box  should  not  weigh,  with  cartridges 
witliin,  over  sixty-five  pounds. 

'•  Ivicli  white  man  should  have  a  boy  for  gunbcarcr,  at  fi'om  $2'50  to  $o 


Zanzibar. 


48  THE    coy  GO. 

1879,  per  month.  If  he  is  alone,  then  there  Bhould  be  two  or  three  boys.  Such 
May  16,  ^^^y^,^  ^^  arriving  in  camp,  will  become  tent-boys,  waiting  or  messenger- 
boys. 

"  To  thirty  Wangwana  there  should  be  four  chiefs,  the  principal  chief 
and  three  sub-chiefs. 

"  The  principal  chief  should  receive  from  $10  to  $15  per  month,  and 
should  Ije  a  respectable  and  exi:>erienced  man. 

"  The  sub-chiefs  should  receive  a  dollar  or  two  more  than  the  privates 
of  the  expedition. 

"  Three  weeks  ought  to  be  ample  time  for  the  organisation  of  an  expedi- 
tion of  this  strength.  "When  it  is  decided  to  l;»egin  organising,  communi- 
cation should  be  made  with  the  Hindi  Saywa  at  Bagamoyo  about  a  house 
and  the  100  "Wanvamwezi  porters,  and  such  arrangements  entered  into  as 
will  secure  good  men.  Probably  it  would  be  best  to  arrange  with  the 
Hindi  that,  for  the  safe  arrival  of  the  "\i\"anyamwezi  at  Unyanyembe,  so 
much  i)er  head  should  be  paid  to  him.    It  would  l>e  far  the  safest  plan. 

"  If  there  are  more  than  one  white  with  this  esx>edition,  one  should  be 
detailed  to  attend  to  this  last  work  at  Bagamoyo,  and  should  be  com- 
petent to  complete  all  these  arrangements  by  the  time  that  his  friend  at 
Zanzibar  will  have  finished  organising  his  party  of  Wangwana. 

"  Fout  days  before  departure,  after  seeing  that  all  the  cloth-bales  are 
arranged  jjroperly,  corded,  matted  and  corded  over  again,  and  numbered, 
with  a  comjjlete  list  of  the  various  cloths  contained  in  each  bale  entered 
in  a  book,  the  Wangwana  should  be  called  up  to  sign  the  agreement,  and 
to  receive  not  more  than  three  months  pay  in  advance,  before  a  consul,  or 
a  respectable  merchant  of  Zanzibar  as  witness. 

"Two  days  li^fore  departure  from  Zanzibar  a  sufficient  number  of 
Arab  dhows  should  be  secured  to  convey  the  Expedition,  stores,  goods, 
animals,  &c.,  to  Bagamoyo.  On  arrival  at  Bagamoyo  everything  should 
be  housed  carefully  in  the  building  already  rented  by  the  month  by 
the  gentleman  who  was  detailed  for  this  purjKjse. 

"  If  the  Wanyamwezi  have  already  been  secured  from  Saywa,  they  should 
be  mustered  to  receive  their  loads,  and  the  day  of  the  first  journey  men- 
tioned to  them. 

"  The  first  day's  journey  should  not  be  further  than  to  Shamba  Gonera, 
three  miles  west  of  Bagamoyo. 

"  The  nest  day  should  be  a  halt  to  see  if  everything  is  in  proper  order 
for  the  journey,  and  such  necessary  trifles  as  the  following  should  be 
attended  to : 

"  1st.  Fifty  rupees  in  silver  should  be  kept  as  a  reserve. 

"  2nd.  Ten  ten-dollars  gold  pieces  should  be  kept  in  reserve. 

"  3rd.  Twenty  rupees  in  pice  should  l^e  kept  in  reserve. 

'•'  4th.  Xot  less  than  five  days'  rations  should  be  distributed  in  rice  to  the 
"SVangwana  and  Wanyamwezi,  a  day's  ration  l^ing  a  kubaba  each^  or 
I2  lbs.  jjer  man  j>er  day. 


ATTENTIONS  AT  ZANZIBAR.  49 

"  5t]i.  200  lbs.  of  rice  should  be  conveyed  for  a  reserve  for  tlie  whites.         1879. 

"  6th.  All  last  wordswith  the  coast  should  be  made  at  this  place,  because    ^^''^7  ^^• 
it  would  be  impolitic  to  halt  after  moving  from  Shamba  Gonera  until    Zanzibar, 
three  good  days' journey  have  been  made,  because,  besides  consuming 
IH'ovisions  heedlessly  where  j^rovisions  are  scarce,  it  would  be  offering- 
inducements  to  the  weak-minded  among  the  men  to  desert. 

"  After  the  first  three  days'  march  halt  one  day,  then  make  two  days' 
journey  and  rest.  Thus  make  it  alternately  three  days'  march  and  one 
day's  halt,  then  two  days'  march  and  one  day's  halt,  as  far  as  Mpwapwa. 

"  At  Mpwapwa  halt  three  days,  and  distribute  six  days'  provisions  to 
each  man.     In  Ugogo  take  the  northern  route  according  to  my  latest  map. 

"All  arrangements  for  tribute  with  the  Wagogo  suffer  your  chief  to  make, 
subject  to  your  own  approbation,  always  impressively  advising  him  to 
endeavour  to  reduce  the  tribute  as  low  as  possible. 

"  Your  temper  will  be  much  tried  in  Ugogo,  but  in  this  land  of  clamorous, 
greedy  and  extortionate  natives  it  will  be  your  duty  to  remember  that  your 
best  weapon  against  them  is  patience  and  good  nature. 

"  Beyond  Ugogo  the  road  is  tolerably  free  from  trouble,  and,  as  you  will 
liave  gained  experience,  it  is  unnecessary  to  give  advice  how  to  proceed." 

With  the  above  and  various  other  missions,  and  the 
enhstment  of  a  select  body  of  sixty-eight  Zanzibaris 
for  the  Congo  Expedition,  three-fourths  of  whom  had 
accompanied  me  across  Africa,  my  time  was  fully 
occupied. 

The  Sultan  of  Zanzibar  showed  great  kindness  to 
our  new  Expedition  by  loading  the  store-rooms  of  our 
steamer  with  abundance  of  provisions,  while  scores  of 
fowls,  geese,  and  ducks,  besides  half-a-dozen  bullocks, 
insured  a  considerable  supply  of  fresh  meat. 

Captain  Hathorne,  the  American  consul,  and  Mons. 
Grcfulhc,  a  French  merchant  at  Zanzibar,  were  most 
assiduous  in  polite  attentions  and  profuse  in  their  hos- 
pitality, and  towards  the  latter  part  of  May  1879  the 
steamer  Albion  departed  on  her  long  voyage  to  the 
liiver  Congo,  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Mediter- 
ranean, 

VOL.  I.  E 


50  THE   CONGO. 


CHAPTER  Y. 

EN  ROUTE  TO   THE    COXGO. 

Bankruptcy  of  Dutch  mercliants  at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo ;  its  effect — 
Letter  to  Colonel  Strauch — The  Expedition  charged  with  being 
mysterious — Groundlessness  of  the  charge — My  personal  conduct  iu 
the  matter — Accident  to  the  AWon — Compelled  to  call  at  Sierra 
Leone — An  amusing  misunderstanding — An  old  friend — Kind  atten- 
tions— Arrival  at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo. 

1879.     As  I  Lave  before  related,  the  "  Internationale  Associa- 

Julv. 

Zanzibar  ^^^^^  Africaine  "  was  organised  in  187G  for  tlie  purpose 
of  erecting  a  line  of  stations  from  the  East  Coast  into 
the  interior,  as  far  as  the  interest  of  their  subscribed 
fund  would  permit,  for  the  benefit  principally  of  such 
travellers  as  might  by  reverses  be  compelled  to  fall 
back  to  recruit  and  renew  their  efforts. 

The  "  Committee  of  Study  of  the  UpiDer  Congo  "  by 
their  very  title  only  undertook  the  Congo  River  as  the 
object  of  their  work.  There  were  several  merchants 
connected  with  the  latter  society  who  had  no  con- 
nection with  the  other.  At  the  outset  the  latter  had 
separate  and  distinct  objects  in  view,  with  the  ulti- 
mate intention  of  embarking  in  a  grander  enterprise 
if  the  reports  from  the  Congo  region  were  favourable. 
But  while  I  was  on  my  way  from  Zanzibar  to  Aden, 
the  Dutch  merchants  possessing  a  large  establishment 


BANKRUPTCY   OF  DUTCH  MERCHANTS.  51 

at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo,  having  embarked  in  various     i879. 

July. 

projects  beyond  their  means,  failed  at  a  crisis  to  meet  Aden, 
their  engagements,  and  consequently  were  declared 
bankrujDt.  Had  this  great  house  been  the  solvent 
establishment  it  was  generally  credited  to  be,  these 
merchants  would  have  been  by  no  means  unimportant 
factors  in  the  tentative  enterprise  about  to  be  begun. 

On  arriving  at  Aden,  however,  I  found  a  telegram 
awaiting  me  declaring  that  the  said  Dutch  merchants 
had  become  bankrupts,  and  that  one  of  the  principal 
directors  had  fled  to  America,  while  another  had  at- 
tempted to  commit  suicide.  The  presence  of  these  and 
other  merchants  had  given  a  commercial  character  to 
the  enterprise ;  and  as  the  succeeding  and  more  stable 
company,  called  the  "AfrikaanscheYenootschap,"  which 
was  formed  in  place  of  the  "  Handels  Yereeniging," 
solicited  the  committee  to  refund  the  subscriptions 
paid  in  by  its  predecessor,  the  committee  availed  itself 
of  the  opportunity  to  return  every  subscription  to  the 
merchants  of  all  nationalities  who  had  previously  ex- 
pressed by  their  various  subscriptions  their  sympathy 
with  the  project. 

There  then  remained  connected  with  the  "  Committee 
of  Study  of  the  Upper  Congo"  only  those  who  managed 
the  affairs  of  the  Internationale  Association  Africaine. 
Hence  the  committee  at  a  later  period,  having  satisfied 
itself  that  progress  and  stability  were  secured,  assumed 
the  title  of  "  Association  Internationale  du  Congo," 
win'ch,  be  it  remembered,  was  originally  started  with 
the    philanthropic   motive  of  opening   up   the   (,^ongo 

E  2 


52  THE   CONGO. 

1879.  basin,  and  of  exploring  and  developing,  according  to 
Gibraltar,  the  cxtcnt  of  its  mcans,  the  resources  oi  the  country 
around  each  station  as  soon  as  it  was  founded. 

At  Gibraltar,  I  received  my  final  instructions,  which 
bore  of  course  considerable  amendments  to  those  I  had 
originally  received. 

The  following  letter  will  prove  this,  and  it  will  also 
no  doubt  enlighten  the  reader  as  to  the  ideas  which  we 
then  entertained  respecting  our  novel  and  unique  enter- 
prise before  the  expedition  had  arrived  near  the  scene 
of  its  labours  : — 

GiBBALTAB,  JvXy  8th,  1879. 

"  Dear  Col.  StkaucHj — 

"  I  have  re-read  your  notes  with  care,  and  beg  leave  to  remark 
upon  them  as  follows,  and  in  succeasive  order  :— 

"  1st.  Ton  say, '  The  best  means  would  be  of  obtaining  from  the  Congo 
chiefs  concessions  of  ground,  with  privileges  of  making  roads,  and 
reducing  as  much  land  under  cultivation  as  we  should  be  able  to 
cultivate.' 

"  A  footing  cannot  be  made  on  the  Congo  without  having  first  entered 
into  agreement  or  treaty  with  the  cliiefs  either  for  commercial  or 
philanthropic  purposes.  This  must  be  done  with  tact  and  generosity, 
exercising  large  forbearance  in  all  communications.  Such  privileges  as 
they  may  grant  to  us  must  be  paid  for,  and  to  meet  all  such  exigences  I 
am  liberally  provided.  I  entertain  no  fear  that  the  natives  will  place 
any  impediment  in  my  way,  and  precaxitions  will  be  taken  to  prevent 
suspicion  and  ignorance,  aggravating  either  party  in  the  proposed  treaties, 
to  the  destruction  of  our  hopes.  As  the  greatest  danger  falls  to  the  share 
of  the  pioneer,  so  the  burden  of  cost  generally  falls  upon  the  promoter 
of  a  new  enterprise,  We  are  therefore  prepared  for  the  danger  and  the 
cost. 

"  2nd.  You  say, '  The  stations  should  be  occupied  by  coloured  men — 
freemen,  under  the  superintendence  of  white  men.' 

"  Indeed  with  any  person  but  a  genuine  freebom  and  free-living  man 
nothing  could  be  done  in  Congo  Land,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  in  our 
direst  extremity  we  should  be  wilhng  to  enlist  the  ser^-ices  or  place 
dei>endence  in  any  person  or  i^ersons  other  than  free. 

"3rd.  You  say,  'It  would  be  wise  to  extend  the  influence  of  the 
stations  on  the  chiefs  and  tribes  dwelling  near  them,  of  whom  a  republican 


LETTER    TO    COLONEL    STEAUOM.  53 

eonfecleration  of  free  negroes  might  be  formed,  sucli  confederation  to  be      1879. 
independent  except  that  the  King,  to  whom  its  conception  and  formation     "'^"'^  ^• 
was  due,  reserved  the  right  to  appoint  the  President,  who  shoukl  reside  in  ^'"■^''ilt-'*^* 
Europe.'    You  say  also  '  that  a  confederation  thus  formed  might  gTant 
concessions  (with  j^ower  to  make  good  what  they  granted)  to  societies 
for  the  construction  of  works  of  public  utility,  or  perhaps  might  be  able 
to  raise  loans  like  Liberia  and  Sarawak,  and  construct  theu-  own  i^ublic 
works.' 

'•'  I  expect  a  permanent  influence  for  good  upon  the  people  of  Congo  Land 
as  a  natural  result  of  fair-dealing  traffic  at  the  various  stations  that  we 
may  establish ;  that  this  influence  will  be  extraordinarily  extensive  I  do 
not  delude  myself,  for  we  labour  according  to  our  means  only,  and  we 
have  too  many  definite  objects  in  view  to  deviate  from  our  appointed 
path  with  the  mere  purpose  of  enlarging  our  influence  around  us.  Yoii 
must  remember  that  though  oiu-  path  is  long  it  will  be  for  some  time 
extremely  narrow,  and  neither  are  oiu*  present  resources  ample  enough 
to  justify  oui'  seeking  to  widen  as  well  as  lengthen  our  influence.  Along 
the  line  of  our  route  you  may  rest  assured  that  such  influence  as  we  may 
have  will  be  due  to  our  upright  and  strictly  honourable  commerce,  or 
enterprise  with  such  natives  as  may  seek  by  self-interest  oiir  acquaint- 
ance. We  shall  require  but  mere  contact  to  satisfy  all  and  any  natives 
that  our  intentions  are  jjure  and  honourable,  seeking  their  own  good 
(materially  and  socially)  more  than  our  interests.  We  go  to  spread 
what  blessings  arise  from  amiable  and  just  intercourse  with  people  who 
liitherto  have  been  strangers  to  them,  I  know  the  natives  of  Africa  to 
be  clever  enough  to  appreciate  this,  and  wise  enough  to  wish  to  cultivate 
all  material  good.  For  this  reason  I  apprehend  no  fears,  when  once  the 
stations  are  established,  that  they  will  seek  to  destroy  what  we  build 
upon  fairness  and  strictest  equity,  but  that  for  this  good  we  may  do 
them,  they  will  immediately  and  at  once  form  into  a  political  confedera- 
tion or  imion  for  tlie  general  benefit  I  entertain  no  hope ;  on  the  con- 
trary, they  will  retain  their  own  several  chiefs,  their  own  degraded  customs, 
be  as  jealous  as  ever  of  every  tribal  right,  and  resent  every  foreign 
interference  in  their  own  customs,  or  personal  modes  of  life.  If  we  were 
able  to  introduce  a  sufficient  number  of  persons  already  inoculated  with 
European  ways  and  manners  as  to  form  a  balance  of  i)ower,  I  might  then 
expect  that  the  task  would  not  be  difficult  by  the  influence  of  members 
and  wealtli  to  bring  the  largest  number  of  the  tribes  to  acquiesce  iu  what 
was  ordained  for  the  general  welfare.  All  we  can  hope  at  present  in 
brief  is  to  win  suffrage  to  live  and  move  about  without  fear  of  violence, 
by  patience,  good  nature,  loyal  friendship,  and  honourable  traffic. 
Whatever  progress  we  may  expect  of  them  can  only  be  made  in  its  own 
good  time.  Man,  of  no  matter  what  colour  he  is,  is  a  slow  creature,  dull 
and  incapable  frequently  of  judging  what  is  good  for  liimsclf,  or  unhesi- 
tatingly accepting  another's  judgment  of  what  is  best  for  him.    Such 


64  THE   CONGO. 

1879.  chiefs  as  "we  may  find  en  route  we  miLst  accept  as  the  tribes  appoint  for 
July  8.  themselves,  and  make  the  most  we  can  of  them  by  generosity  and  tact. 
Gibraltar,  i^q  must  subsidise  the  various  chiefs,  each  and  separate,  until  they  learn 
that  it  is  for  their  own  interest  to  conform  to  what  we  wish.  We  must 
endeavour  to  induce  them  to  accept  their  neigh1x)urs  as  friends,  on  the 
ground  that  as  they  are  our  friends  they  must  be  their  friends.  It  is  a 
very  simple  policy,  and  one  the  African  imderstands. 

"  4th.  You  say, '  This  project  is  not  to  create  a  Belgian  colony.,  but  to 
establish  a  powerful  negro  state.' 

"I  understand  that  there  is  no  intention  to  establish  a  Belgian  colony, 
but  your  other  alternative  is  far  more  difficult.  It  would  be  madness  for 
one  in  my  position  to  attempt  it,  except  so  far  as  one  course  might 
follow  another  in  the  natural  sequence  of  things.  I  repeat  we  must 
leave  the  jtettj  tribes  as  we  found  them,  and  leave  each  and  all 
to  observe  for  themselves  what  is  acceptable.  To  such  as  seek  the 
protection,  comfort,  and  care  of  the  stations,  a  kindly  refuge  will  be 
granted,  and  whatever  may  be  done  to  improve  their  condition,  such  will 
^}e  given  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  with  the  utmost  goodwill,  with  ;■ 
view  of  not  only  consolidating  the  influence  of  the  stations,  but  of 
improving  our  means  of  civilising  such  peoples  as  may  come  in  immediate 
contact  or  relationshiio  with  us. 

"  oth.  To  the  following  note  I  would  reply  that  over  the  stations,  or  the 
ground  attached  to  the  stations,  the  managers  of  the  stations  would  have 
the  moral  right  of  considering  themselves  legitimate  owners,  and  the 
natives  would  readily  accede  to  this,  as  they  are  firm  believers  in  the 
sajing  that  every  man's  house  is  his  castle,  and  every  man's  land  his 
own. 

"  6tli.  You  say, '  Each  station  should  be  a  little  commonwealth.' 

"  So  it  will  be,  but  you  might  go  further  and  say  that  though  each 
station  is  a  little  sovereign  commonwealth,  yet  it  is  but  part  and  parcel 
of  a  larger  commonwealth,  which  is  ruled  over  by  the  manager  appointed 
by  those  who  founded,  promoted,  and  sustained  the  unique  enterjirise. 

"I  beg  you,  my  dear   Colonel,  with  these  remarks  which  I  havr 
appended  to  your  notes  at  your  own  request,  to  believe  me  now  as  ever, 
"  Yours  very  faithfully, 

(Signed)  "  Hexey  M.  Stanley. 

"  Col.  SxEArcH, 
"  Hotel  Eoyal,  Gibraltar." 

Following  the  preceding  letter  it  is  necessary  that  I 
should  make  an  explanation  regarding  the  •'  silence  and 
mystery  "  which  we  were  accused  of  maintaining  about 
our  destination  and  intentions,  as  chagrined  editors  of 


charctE  of  mystification.  55 

journals  and  magazines  about  this  time  often  indulged     1879. 

f.  July  y. 

m  some  extraordmary  guesses  as  to  the  nature  ot  my  Gibraltar, 
mission. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  nothing  could  he  more  unjust 
than    the    accusation   that  there   was   an   intention   of 


COLONEL   HTllAUCH. 


mystifying  anybody  "wlio  had  a  right  to  know  the 
olject  of  the  expedition  then  on  its  way  to  the  Congo. 
I  have  constantly  asserted  that  the  conduct  of  the 
committee  was  singularly  indiscreet  in  divulging  its 
intentions  to  so  many  representatives  of  nationalities  as 


56  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     were  present  at  the  Conference.     That  success  was  at 

Julys. 

Gibraltar.  *^^  attainable  after  the  indiscretion  was  exceedingly 
doubtful ;  for  it  was  well  known  to  those  wlio  reflected 
at  all  upon  the  circumstances  that  the  so-called  Greo- 
graphical  and  Commercial  societies  were  not  intended 
solely  to  advance  geographical  knowledge,  but  also  to 
further  the  political  interests  of  their  Governments. 

The  Committee  was  informed  of  this  as  of  other 
facts,  but  yet  its  members  conducted  themselves  openly, 
and  without  guile. 

To  me,  indeed,  it  is  a  cause  of  wonder  that  we  were 
able  to  effect  anything,  even  to  make  a  landing  on 
the  Congo.  On  the  Council  there  were  five  nations 
represented,  and  a  number  of  persons  had  been  applied 
to  for  subscriptions  whom  we  discovered  afterwards 
entertained  not  the  least  sympathy  with  the  projected 
enterprise.  The  Comite  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo 
ought,  if  we  hold  the  scales  of  reason  justly,  to  be 
censurable  for  their  simple  and  credulous  guilelessness, 
rather  than  for  studious  mystification. 

At  the  same  time,  I  boldly  declare  that  I  personally 
resorted  to  every  method  of  withholding  information 
respecting  my  mission,  for  the  very  good  reason,  that 
I  wished  it  to  succeed.  I  have  restrained  myself  from 
writing  to  dear  and  valued  friends,  because  it  was 
dangerous  to  the  interests  .of  the  work  which  I  had 
undertaken  to  perform.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  I 
maintained  an  absolute  silence  for  several  years  respect- 
ing myself  and  my  actions.  If  my  friends  still  feel 
aggrieved  at  this,  I  have  the  consolation  of  feeling  that 


ACCIDENT  TO    THE  ALBIOX.  57 

my  conscience  still  approves  my  action ;  and  my  only     i^'p- 
regret  is  tliat  I  know  tlie  names  of  those  who  were  not     siena 

Leone. 

SO  consistent  in  this  reserve,  and  who,  while  professing 
warmest  sympathy  and  support,  armed  many  an  advei- 
sary  against  our  mission. 

While  off  Goree  an  accident  occurred  to  the  crown 
of  one  of  the  furnaces  of  the  steamer  ^/iw??,  and  Capt. 
Thompson  was  compelled  to  enter  the  port  of  Sierra 
Leone  for  repairs. 

The  follow^ing  j^ortion  of  the  report  to  the  President 

of  the  Association,  dated  Sierra  Leone,  30th  July,  1879, 

hears  upon  wh.at  followed : — 

"  These  repairs  nearly  involved  me  in  a  little  trouble — though  it  afforded 
me  a  great  deal  of  amusement — with  the  colonial  authorities.  It  appeals 
that  some  peojDle  have  been  playing  scandalous  tricks  with  Her  Britannic 
Majesty's  dark  colonials,  and  importing  to  the  equatorial  islands  of 
Princes  and  St.  Thomas,  under  fraudful  pretensions,  the  loyal  blacks  of 
Sierra  Leone.  Consequently,  when  the  hawk-eyed  and  vigilant  Collector 
of  Customs,  Hansens,  or  Hansons,  I  believe  his  name  is,  discovered  a 
small  steamer  like  the  Albion  with  so  many  coloured  people  on  board^ 
under  charge  of  a  gentleman  named  Swinbiu-nc,  he  was  justified,  if  the 
responses  were  not  direct,  to  attempt  penetrating  further  into  what 
appeared  to  him  extremely  singular ;  and  my  poor  young  secretary,  not 
accustomed  to  be  confronted  and  questioned  by  dread  Government 
officers,  soon  grew  confused,  whereupon — but  here  Mr.  Collector  was 
invited  to  the  cabin,  and  presently  made  aware  that  I  was  about  to  lead 
another  expedition  into  Africa,  and  the  fierce  governmental  wi'atli  sub- 
sided, I  am  happy  to  say." 

Lest  other  consequences,  the  nature  of  which  will  he 
discovered  hy  perusal,  should  result,  I  wrote  the  fol- 
lowing letter  to  the  Governor  : — 

"  Confidential.  "  SS.  Albion,  Pokt  of  Silura  Leone,  JkIi/ }S~0. 

"  De.\u  Sir, — 

"  I  am  informed  by  my  secretary,  !Mr.  Swinburne,  that  the  Doctor 
Rowe  whom  both  he  and  I  met  at  the  Volta  with  Capt.  Glover's  forces 
in  December,  1873,  is   His  Excellency   the  Governor  of  this  colony. 


08  THE   coy  GO. 

1879.      If  true,  permit  me  to  congratiilate  you  upon  the  liigli  position  you  have 

'^^^^'      attained,  and  to  assm-e  you  that  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  the  British 

Sierra     Government  did  not  forget,  in  its  distribution  of  rewards  and  honours,  one 

so  highly  recommended  by  Captain,  now  Governor,  Sii-  John  Glover,  as 

yourself. 

"  I  have  been  so  troubled  by  fevers,  which,  though  of  no  serious  nature, 
have  been  very  annoying,  since  my  explorations  on  the  east  coast  of  the 
rivers  Wami,  Kingani,  Eufiji,  and  Mombassa  Creek  during  the  height  of 
the  rainy  season,  that  I  have  since  been  unable  to  visit  any  one,  and  to 
prevent  good-natured  attentions  from  my  numerous  friends  en  rotde,  and 
in  the  hope  that  I  should  feel  bettered  by  a  rigid  dietary  before  launching 
out  on  my  next  exploration,  I  have  requested  the  captain  to  kindly 
conceal  the  fact  that  I  was  on  board.  Being  an  African  yourself  of  large 
experience  yoix  will  readily  acknowledge  that  such  a  course  of  living  is 
more  likely  to  ensure  good  health  on  the  continent  than  to  beget  bilious 
humours  by  self-indulgence.  At  every  call  port  then  I  have  instructed 
Mr.  Swinburne  what  to  do,  so  that  I  might  be  left  free  to  cure  the  last 
remnants  of  the  ague  before  exposing  myself  to  new  attacks. 

"  I  dare  say  you  have  read  paragraphs  in  the  Tirnes  and  other  i^apers 
relating  to  this  present  expedition  which  I  am  again  leading  to  Africa. 
Most  of  the  men  on  board  are  my  old  comrades  of  the  Daily  Telegraph 
and  Aew  York  Herald  expedition  which  came  down  the  Congo  in  1877. 
Some  are  from  Livingstone's  expedition  and  my  search  expedition  after 
Livingstone ;  the  others  are  their  friends.  The  Prince  of  Zanzibar  was 
applied  to,  and  he  very  kindly  granted  me  permission  to  enlist  such  as  I 
wanted,  and  he  also  very  generously  supplied  me  with  all  such  stores  as 
I  needed  during  the  voyage,  besides  letters  of  recommendation. 

"  I  chartered  this  vessel  in  behalf  of  a  body  of  philanthropists  of  whom 
the  King  of  the  Belgians  is  at  the  head,  whose  purpose  is  to  open  to  the 
world  of  commerce  and  Christian  missions  the  Congo  river.  As  explora- 
tion from  the  western  coast  is  impracticable  unless  a  portion  of  the 
expedition  consists  of  men  acquainted  with  travel  ia  these  parts,  it  was 
thought  best  to  re-engage  a  few  of  my  last  expedition  who  had  personal 
experience  with  the  natives  along  the  Lower  Congo,  and  with  whom  they 
had  made  firm  friendsliip.  Though  an  uncommonly  expensive  pro- 
ceeding it  was  the  only  alternative  that  promised  success,  and  I  was 
compelled  to  adopt  it.  While  on  our  voyage  we  have  experienced  several 
small  misfortunes.  I  had  intended  to  have  explored  the  Ozi  and  Jub 
rivers,  but  in  leaving  Mombassa  we  lost  our  port  anchor,  and  the 
increasing  monsoon  winds,  and  the  death  of  our  first  mate,  compelled  me 
to  defer  this  exploration  until  it  shall  please  Providence  to  permit  us 
another  visit  to  the  eastern  shores.  A  few  days  also  after  leaving 
Gibraltar  the  crowns  of  our  furnaces  showed  signs  of  weakening,  but  the 
engineers  speak  hopefully  at  present,  and  say  that  they  will  be  able  in  a 
day  or  so  to  efficiently  repair  them. 


AT  BANANA   POINT.  59 

"  i\Ieantiine  if  you  in  your  eminent  iDOsition  can  expedite  oiu*  dej)arture  1879. 
for  the  scene  of  oiu-  labours,  I  sliall  consider  myself  greatly  indebted  to 
you.  I  am  anxious  about  our  own  healths  as  much  as  for  the  health  of  Leone 
my  men,  who,  though  at  present  enjoying  excellent  health,  one  cannot  say 
what  a  iDroti'acted  detention  on  board  may  effect.  I  hav3  been  very 
fortunate  in  being  able  to  keep  the  Zanzibaris  in  perfect  health,  by 
Tuiremitting  attention  to  their  comfort  so  far,  and  I  hope  and  pray  that  I 
may  be  able  to  do  so  to  the  end  of  our  voyage.  You  can  contribute  to 
this  greatly  by  the  exercise  of  your  powerful  position,  and  such  good 
oflBces  as  we  may  need.  It  will  be  a  great  favour  to  me  also  if  you  can 
permit  me  to  remain  incog,  for  the  present,  as  I  do  not  feel  well  enough 
to  explore  Sierra  Leone. 

"  With  many  apologies  for  the  length  of  this  letter,  I  beg  to  subscribe 
myself, 

"  Very  sincerely  yoiu-s, 

(Signed)  "  Henry  M.  Stanley. 
"  To  His  Excellency  C4ov.  Sir  Sa3it:el  Eowe." 

"  The  Governor,  one  of  the  best  colonial  officers  that  Her  Majesty  has 
appointed  to  West  Africa,  was  unusually  kind  to  us,  and  through  his 
inliuence  we  were  speedily  ready  for  sea.  In  the  afternoon  the  Governor's 
steam  launch  took  us  down  to  a  pic-nic  in  a  shady  spot  near  the  light- 
house. The  iieople  are  in  perfect  health  and  spirits,  and,  when  the  ugly 
suspicions  relating  to  them  were  strongest,  preserved  their  composure  and 
good  humour  admirably.  The  captain  tells  me  we  shall  be  able  to  leaver 
on  Thursday.  I  count  twenty  days  between  here  and  the  Congo ;  if 
nothing  breaks  down  we  ought  to  be  there  in  eleven  days.  It  will  then 
require  some  days  to  hear  and  digest  and  well  consider  all  reports,  after 
v/hich  T  shall  make  a  reconnaisance  up  river.  I  am  devoured  with  a  wisli 
to  set  my  foot  on  terra  firina,  and  begin  the  great  work.  Tlie  prospect  to 
me  has  nothing  ominous,  though  I  must  ever  regret  that  the  mission  has 
been  so  long  deferred,  and  that  so  many  impediments  interfered  Avith  the 
execution  of  w-hat  was  long  ago  determined  upon. 

"  To  the  President,  Col.  Sthauch." 

In  the  preceding  pages  I  have  told  the  story  of 
two  years.  On  the  12th  August,  1877,  I  arrived  at 
]>aiiana  Point  after  crossing  Africa,  and  descending  its 
greatest  river.  On  the  l4th  August,  1870,  I  arrived 
l)efore  the  inouth  of  this  river  to  ascend  it,  with  the 
novel  mission  of  sowin;r  alonjr  its  banks  civilised  settle- 
nients,  to  peacefully  conquer  and  subdue  it,  to  remould 


60  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     it  iu  barmonj  with  modern  ideas  into  National  States, 

Auznst  14.  Tin 

Banana  Pt.  ^vitbin  Tvliose  liinits  the  European  merchant  shall 
o-o  hand  in  hand  with  the  dark  African  trader,  and 
justice  and  law  and  order  shall  prevail,  and  murder 
and  lawlessness  and  the  cruel  barter  of  slaves  shall  for 
ever  cease. 


APPROACHING   LAND.  61 


CHAPTER     YI. 

BAXAXA    POINT. 

Approaching  land — Appearance  of  the  coast— The  majestic  Congo — The 
factories — Our  manly  pilot — ^Banana  Point — A  good  anchorage — 
Effects  of  tropic  life — Advice  as  to  clothing,  food,  and  general  be- 
haviour— -The  "petit  verre  de  Co[]nac" — Senseless  abuse  of  Africa — 
Description  of  our  boats — The  eccentricities  of  the  En  Avant — 
Clamours  among  the  staff — Expenses,  pay,  and  precedence — Descrip- 
tion of  the  factories — A  factory  dinner — Youth  of  the  managers — 
The  coloured  helps — A  busy  scene— A  varied  collection  of  stores — 
Immense  powder  supply  and  its  purpose — A  melancholy  spot — 
Banana  Creek — Seething  mud — Local  origin  of  the  name  "  Banana  " 
— Prediction  regarding  the  fate  of  the  peninsula. 

While  yet  a  fall  day's  steaming  from  our  destination,     1879. 

August  14. 

we  observed  that  the  ocean  became  stained ;  the  blue  Banana  Pt. 
changed  to  a  muddy  green,  which  in  a  few  hours 
changed  to  a  pale  brown,  while  weeds  and  forest  debris 
languidly  rose  and  fell  on  the  low,  broad  rollers  that 
seem  to  be  continually  advancing  from  the  south-west 
towards  the  Continent  lying  a  few  scores  of  miles  east. 
About  n  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  14tli  August, 
1879,  wc  were  near  enough  to  the  shore  to  be  able  to 
define  its  features.  To  our  left  stretched  a  land  very 
little  in  accordance  with  our  ideas  of  tropical  luxuri- 
ance. The  sea-line  was  backed  by  low,  reddish  clif?s, 
and  beyond  these  extended  a  gradually  rising  land 
covered  with  sere  grass,  dotted  here  and  there  with 


62  THE   CONGO. 

,  ^''~^\,  clusters  of  trees  or  crroves,  which,  no  douLt,  marked 

August  14.  o  7  7 

Banana  Pt.  the  site  of  thc  sinall  native  villages ;  there  "u-ere  but 
few  prominent  hills  to  be  seen  anywhere ;  but  it  was 
noticeable  that  towards  the  interior  there  was  a  gene- 
ral uplift  of  the  land,  and  a  greater  irregularity  in 
its  contour,  until  it  culminated  in  a  ridge  of  hills  of 
nearly  uniform  altitude  running  N.N.E.  and  S.S.W. 

Over  the  prow^  of  the  steamer,  however,  there  w^as  to 
be  seen  a  large  triangular  mass  of  forest-land,  probably 
about  twenty  miles  wade  at  the  base,  both  sides  of 
w^hich,  as  the  eyes  followed  them  towards  the  interior, 
seemed  to  be  almost  meeting  in  a  point  far  inland,  and 
parallel  with  these,  a  few  miles  off  on  tlie  north,  the 
hilly  ridge  already  mentioned,  having  suddenly  curved, 
ran  due  east,  while  nearly  a  similar  line  of  hills 
appeared  from  the  south  curving  in  like  manner  and 
running  eastward.  Within  the  area  thus  described 
lay  the  valley  of  the  Lower  Congo.  Through  the 
centre  of  this  valley  and  forested  triangle  flowed  the 
mighty  river,  with  an  average  breadth  of  about  three 
and  a  third  English  miles,  widening  at  the  mouth  to 
seven  and  a  third  English  miles,  that  is  from  Banana 
Point  on  the  north  to  Shark's  Point  on  the  south. 

To  the  south  the  land  extends  with  much  the  same 
appearance  as  that  which  characterises  the  boundaries 
of  the  Congo  Talley  northward,  with  the  exception 
perhaps  that  the  cliffs  near  the  sea-line  are  more  con- 
tinuous and  of  a  more  rufous  colour. 

But  it  was  now  near  noon,  and  gradually,  as  we 
approached,   the    Congo    disclosed   itself   like   a   huge 


VIEW  FROM   THE  SEA.  63 

valve;  a  broad  stream  of  daylight  lias   disparted  the     isro. 

-,  r  1      •  •  1  1  •  August  14-. 

triangular  mass  ot  woods  into  two  sections,  and  bearing  Banaaa  Pt 
down  npon  us  we  see  a  majestic  stretch  of  river  twenty 
miles  long,  of  immense  volume  and  force,  whose  power 
we  are  made  to  feel  by  the  very  slow  progress  we 
make,  despite  the  full  head  of  steam  with  which  the 
Albion  had  been  prepared  for  the  ascent  of  the  river 
proper. 

With  Shark's  Point,  which  lies  now  on  our  right, 
and  its  hook  of  land  half  enfolding  Diegos  Bay,  with 
Point  Padron  and  its  monumental  stone  of  the  old 
Portuguese  navigator  far  receding,  and  the  long,  high, 
scarcely  penetrable  wall  of  tall  woods  whicli  darkly 
fringes  the  southern  shore,  we  have  nothing  to  do  ; 
for  on  our  left,  brilliantly  white  witli  lime-wash,  on  a 
projecting  tongue  of  fine  sand,  squats  low  a  long  line 
of  Congo  factories,  which  occupy  nearly  the  whole 
length  of  the  sandy  peninsula  known  as  Banana  Point. 
This  sandy  tongue  is  so  low  that  the  dark  hulls  of 
the  shipping  in  the  harbour  seem  to  be  riding  on  a 
plane  higher  than  the  ground  covered  by  the  buildings. 
High  up,  on  most  ambitious  spars,  above  buildings  and 
shipping,  wave  the  various  national  flags  of  Holland, 
France,  and  Great  Britain. 

Abreast  of  the  point  a  boat  descends  towards  us 
bearing  a  pilot,  the  very  sight  of  whose  size  and  build 
is  inspiring.  He  tells  us  he  has  been  living  on  that  low, 
spit-like  projection  of  sand,  and  guiding  the  shipping 
in  and  out  of  the  harbour  of  Banana  for  the  past  ten 
years.     He   stands   before  us  a  splendid  specimen  of 


64  TEE   COXGO. 

1879.  robust  and  healthy  manhood,  over  six  feet  in  height 
Banana  Pt.  ^nd  sixtccn  stone  weight,  with  clothes  so  well-fitted 
and  clean  that  they  would  have  graced  the  boulevards 
of  Nice.  Let  intending  settlers  on  the  Congo  note  this 
and  other  similar  facts,  for  possibly  by  due  reflection 
they  may  learn  something  of  how  to  live  in  a  tropic 
climate. 

Banana  Point  is  about  two  and  a  half  miles  long, 
extending  from  near  the  mouth  of  Mputu  Creek  to  its 
extreme  southern  end,  and  tapering  gradually  from  a 
mile -wide  base-line  to  a  point  adapted  for  building 
ground  scarcely  40  yards  wide.  It  folds  in  a  harbour 
into  which  ships  drawing  not  more  than  21  feet  can 
easily  enter,  and  its  width  varies  from  half  a  mile  to  a 
mile  and  a  quarter,  the  water  area  being  about  4500 
acres  good  anchorage,  easily  accessible  to  the  boats, 
launches  and  lighters  from  the  various  factories  on  the 
Point.  It  is  an  improvable  place  for  the  conveniences 
of  shipping,  the  improvement  being  only  a  question 
of  the  expense  of  building  wharves  along  a  line  of  two 
miles  to  afford  ample  accommodation.  The  islands, 
also,  between  which  Banana  and  Pirate  Creeks  flow, 
if  improved  as  commerce  gi'ows,  might  be  made  useful 
to  accommodate  shippers. 

In  a  short  hour  from  the  time  when  our  genial  pilot, 
^Ir.  Youngblood — whose  physical  system  and  nature, 
as  I  have  before  remarked,  correspond  with  his 
name — came  aboard,  the  Albion  had  ghded  quietly  in 
and  cast  anchor  abreast  the  upper  end  of  the  Dutch 
factories.      ^hen  we  were  well  within  the  still  Congo 


CLOTHING  AXD   FOOD   IX  THE   TROPICS.  G5 

haven  \xq    began    to    experience    the    heat.     The   tall     is79. 

August  14. 

woods  and  mangroves  that  stretched  from  Huard  Point  Banana  Pt. 
to  Bula-mhemba  Point  warded  off  the  dying  land-breeze, 
and    some   time    would   yet   elapse    before   the    cooler 
sea-breeze  from  the  S.W.  would  rise  to  cool  the  now 
cojDiously  perspiring  body. 

From  this  moment  of  arrival  the  body  undergoes 
a  new  experience,  and  a  wise  man  will  begin  to  govern 
his  appetite  and  his  conduct  accordingly.  The  head 
that  was  covered  with  a  proud  luxuriance  of  flowing- 
locks,  or  bristled  bushy  and  thick,  miust  be  shorn  close ; 
the  body  must  be  divested  of  that  wind  and  rain-proof 
armour  of  linen  and  wool  in  which  it  was  accustomed 
to  be  encased  in  high  latitudes,  and  must  assume,  if 
ease  and  pleasure  are  preferable  to  discomfort,  garments 
of  soft,  loose,  light  flannels.  That  head-covering  which 
London  and  Paris  patronise  must  give  place  to  the 
helmet  and  pugo'aree,  or  to  a  well-ventilated  light 
cap  with  curtain.  And  as  those  decorous  externals  of 
Europe,  with  their  sombre  colouring  and  cumbrous 
thickness,  must  yield  to  the  more  graceful  and  airy 
flannel  of  the  tropics,  so  the  api^etite,  the  extravagant 
power  of  digestion,  the  seemingly  uncontrollable  and 
ever-famished  lust  for  animal  food,  and  the  distem- 
pered greed  for  ardent  drinks,  must  be  governed  by 
an  absolutely  new  mj'ime.  Any  liquid  that  is  exciting, 
or  as  others  may  choose  to  term  it  exhilarating,  or 
inspiring,  the  unseasoned  European  must  avoid  during 
daylight,  whether  it  be  in  the  guise  of  the  commonly 
believed  innocuous  lager,  mild    Pilsen,  watery  claret, 

VOL.   I.  p 


66  THE   CONGO. 

1S7K.     vin  ordinaire,  or  any  other  "  innocent "  wine  or  beer. 

Au^.  14. 

Banana  Pt.  Otherwise  the  slightest  indiscretion,  the  least  unusual 
effort  or  spasmodic  industry,  may  in  one  short  hour 
prove  fatal.  It  is  my  duty  not  to  pander  to  a 
depraved  taste,  nor  to  be  too  nice  in  offending  it.  I 
am  compelled  to  speak  strongly  by  our  losses,  by  my 
own  grief  in  remembering  the  young,  the  strong,  and 
the  brave  who  have  slain  themselves  through  their 
own  ignorance. 

"  Un  petit  verre  de  Cognac  ?  " — "  a  glass  of  small 
beer  ?  "  "  What  can  they  matter  ?  "  ask  the  inexpe- 
rienced pleadingty. 

To  me,  personally,  nothing !  To  you,  a  sudden  death, 
perhaps — a  coup  de  soleill  A  frantic  and  insensate 
rush  to  the  hot  sun  out  of  the  cool  shade,  an  imprudent 
exposure,  may  be  followed  by  a  bilious  fever  of  who- 
knows-what  severity,  or  a  rheumatic  fever  that  will  lay 
you  prostrate  for  weeks,  perhaps  utterly  unfitting  you 
for  your  work  and  future  usefulness.  You  were  inspired 
by  that  petit  verre  of  Cognac — which  had  you  not 
taken,  you  might  have  been  more  deliberate  in  your 
movements,  and  more  prudent  than  to  needlessly  exert 
yourself  in  the  presence  of  an  enemy  so  formidable  as 
is  the  tropic  sun  to  a  white  man's  head,  when  sensitised 
by  the  fumes  of  Cognac. 

Should  you  recover,  you  will  blame  Africa.  "  Africa 
is  cruel !  Africa  is  murderous  !  Africa  means  death 
to  the  European!"  And  your  stupid  unreflecting  friends 
with  their  cowardly  jargon  in  Europe  will  echo  the  cry 
— simply  because  a  weakling  like  you  could  not  resist 


THE  PETIT   VEREE.  67 

your  j??^?'^^  v^rre  at  midday.     Must  all  this  continent  be     1879. 

.  .  Aug.  14. 

subjected  to  the  scourge  01  your  vituperative  powers  ?    Banana  Pt. 

"  A  man  cannot  exist  on  tea  and  coffee,  or  be  con- 
tinually drinking  soup  and  water !  "  whines  one  whose 
propensities  are  alarmed. 

I  do  not  demand  that  you  should  confine  yourself 
to  tea,  or  coffee,  or  soup — or  water,  or  lemonade,  or 
seltzer,  Apollinaris,  or  whatever  other  agreeable  liquid 
you  may  wish  to  quench  your  thirst.  I  only  suggest 
that  if  you  wish  to  enjoy  Africa,  and  do  your  pledged 
duty,  avoid  stimulants,  under  whatever  name  they  may 
be,  during  the  day ;  in  the  evening  moderate  indul- 
gence with  your  dinner  in  clarets,  Madeira,  or  white 
wines  and  champagnes  is  not  harmful  but  l)eneficial. 
xVt  the  same  time  this  advice  is  not  especially  intended 
for  you  ;  but  for  young  men  desirous  of  distinguishing 
themselves  for  their  ability  to  live  and  work  in  Africa. 
The  brave  man  is  he  who  dare  live,  and  will  not  yield 
to  death  without  a  contest. 

But  enough — at  the  present  time  I  see  our  officers 
coming  aboard  to  hear  the  news  from  the  Albion. 

By  this  time  the  officers  of  the  expedition,  consisting 
of  an  American,  two  English,  five  Belgians,  two  Danes, 
and  one  Frenchman — quite  an  international  group — 
had  discovered  that  the  long-expected  Albion,  with  her 
passenger  list  made  up  mainly  of  Zanzibaris,  had 
arrived,  and  they  came  aboard  to  pay  their  respects. 

The  steamer  Barga,  after  discharging  her  cargo 
and  passengers,  had  departed  for  p]urope.  The  cargo 
was  most  miscellaneous  in   character,  as  may  well  be 

F  2 


68  THE  CONGO. 

1879.     imagined,  since  the  expedition  was  for  the  purpose  of 

Aug.   14.  ITT  —  1 

Banana  Pt.  founding  permanent  establishments,  in  tiie  capacious 
hold  of  the  good  steamer  there  had  been  about  twenty 
huts,  besides  the  chiefs  chalet  which  was  to  crown  for 
years  a  conspicuous  coign — the  hill  of  Tivi — and  a 
small  flotilla  of  steamers  which  now  rode  each  intact, 
and  prond  of  its  brand-new  coating  of  gray  paint  and 
gay  striped  awning  fringed  with  red.  This  flotilla 
consisted  of — 

Steel  twin  screw-steamer  La  Belgique,  65  feet  long,  11  feet  beam  Oj 
feet  dranght,  16  nominal  horse  jxtwer ;  measurement,  30  tons. 

Zsperance,  42  feet  long,  7  feet  beam ;  6  hoKe  power  nominal ;  screw. 

£n  Avant,  paddle  lx)at,  43  feet  long,  7  feet  11  inches  beam;  6  horse 
power  nominal ;  draught,  11  inches. 

Eoyal,  screw.  Mahogany  lifeboat  built  by  White,  of  Cowes ;  30  feet 
long,  6  feet  beam,  fitted  with  mahogany  cabin,  plate  glass,  bine 
silk  hangings,  equipment  rich,  being  the  special  gift  to  the  expedi- 
tion by  His  Majesty  the  King  of  the  Belgians. 

Steel  lighter,  60  feet  long,  7  feet  beam,  4  feet  deep ;  capacity,  12  tons. 

Steel  hghter,  40  feet  long  by  6  feet  beam,  8  feet  deep ;  capacity,  6  tons. 

Jeune  Africaine,  screw  launch,  24  feet  long,  5  feet  10  inches  beam. 

"Wooden  whale  boat,  33  feet  long,  6  feet  beam ;  capacity,  3^  tons. 

The  total  cost  of  which  was  £4725,  exclusive  of 
freisiht. 

All  these  boats  in  a  line  along  the  shore  made  a  verv 
pretty  sight.  The  Esperance  was  so  far  advanced  that 
she  was  actually  at  work,  snorting  loudh-  as  she  darted 
about  to  test  her  machiner}-.  By  closer  examination, 
however,  I  discovered  much  work  to  be  done  before 
the  flotilla  could  ascend  the  powerful  stream  safely. 
The  Belgique  required  a  fender  all  round ;  the  Esjje- 
rance  was  almost  unmanageable — rudder  too  narrow, 
crunwale  too  low ;  the.  En  Avant  was  cruiltv  of  extra- 


ECGENTEICITIES   OF   THE  EX   AYAXT.  69 

ordinary  freaks,    and    as   stubborn    as   the    donkev   is     1879. 

Aug.  14, 

generally  supposed  to  be.  At  one  moment  she  had  Banana  Pt. 
oyer  ten  atmospheres  of  steam,  and  rushed  madly  on, 
while  we,  expectantly  watching  the  first  signs  of  an 
explosion,  were  ready  to  jump  overboard  ;  but  suddenly 
the  gauge  indicated  descent,  and  the  paddle-wheels 
cjuld  scarcely  revolve,  while  the  rudder  never  had  the 
slightest  control  of  her  movements.  The  poor  engineer 
was  in  a  most  painful  plight,  for  he  w^as  being  tested 
as  much  as  his  steamer.  All  the  engineers  of  the  flotilla 
frequently  assembled  to  discuss  the  causes  of  this 
aiysterious  behaviour  of  the  much-abused  boat.  The 
Guilders  ought  to  have  been  present  to  hear  the  severe 
•riticisms  of  the  Board.  Her  gunwale  was  also  too 
.ow,  her  rudder  too  narrow,  and  the  back-plate  of  the 
ooiler  had  to  be  plastered  with  mud  to  cause  a  draught 
in  the  furnace  at  all,  despite  the  continued  blast  from 
the  escape  pipes.  The  boat  did  not  gain  our  good 
opinion  until  she  had  nearly  driven  her  first  engineer 
to  the  verge  of  suicide,  given  unspeakable  mortifica- 
tion to  her  second,  and  impressed  her  third  with  a 
deep  and  bitter  sense  of  utter  failure.  The  fourth 
mechanician  was  an  Italian  named  Francesco  Flamini 
— a  quiet,  painstaking  man.  Being  informed  of  the 
steamer's  eccentricities — and  of  the  failure  of  each 
engineer,  with  the  various  changes  and  experiments 
that  had  been  made,  he  pursed  his  lips  and  puckered 
his  brow,  and  meditated.  It  was  interesting  to  watch 
him.  Finally  he  opened  the  furnace  door  and  gazed 
inside,  and  presently  lifting  his  head,  lie  said — 


70  THE   CONGO. 

1879.         "I  will  make  this  steamer  travel  as  cmickly  as  any 

Aug.  14. 

Banana  Pt.  Other/'  and — to  cut  the  story  short — he  did.  He  merely 
shifted  the  firebars  higher  up,  and  kept  a  regular 
supply  of  water  in  the  boiler.  Ever  afterwards  she 
performed  her  duty.  She  travelled  to  Yivi,  breasted 
boldly  the  rapids  above  Manyanga,  pioneered  the  way 
to  Lake  Leopold  IL,  and  was  the  first  to  cleave  the 
waters  of  the  Biyere,  and  the  first  to  steam  up  to 
Stanley  Falls.  Oh,  an  epic  poem  might  now  be 
written  of  the  brave  little  boat !  At  the  same  time  I 
do  not  quite  exempt  her  builders  from  censure  for 
having,  despatched  her  to  the  Congo  without  a  suffi- 
cient trial. 

I  have  long  since  shuffled  off  the  mortal  coil  of 
worries  and  anxieties  that  gradually  revealed  them- 
selves to  me  as  day  by  day  we  laboured  to  get  these 
boats  ready  for  the  rough  service  they  were  destined 
to  perform.  I  had  no  efficient  skipper  to  take  charge 
of  this  work,  and  I  have  never  been  honoured  with 
the  assistance  of  an  efficient  second.  I  therefore  am  not 
going  to  worry  the  reader  with  a  nauseating  criticism 
of  any  particular  man's  weaknesses,  though  I  prefer 
not  to  pass  over  in  silencethe  least  exhibition  of  worth. 
Greneralities,  however,  may  be  pardoned,  else  how  will 
the  character  of  our  work  be  e\'er  understood  ?  To 
neglect  these  might  subject  me  to  the  imputation  of 
being  interested  in  withholding  information,  a  charge 
which  might  detract  from  the  veracity  of  the  narrative. 

First  their  contracts  and  rank  were  complained  of 
by  the  various  assistants.    Almost  all  of  them  clamoured 


TROUBLESOME  ASSISTANTS.  71 

for  "  expenses  of  all  kinds,"'  which  included,  so  I  was  isto. 
made  to  understand,  wine,  tobacco,  cigars^  clothes,  shoes,  Banana  Pt. 
board  and  lodging,  and  certain  nameless  extravagances. 
One  said  that  he  would  not  stay  on  the  Congo  unless 
these  were  granted  to  him  freely ;  another  asserted  that 
if  he  was  expected  to  drive  a  steam-launch  unassisted, 
he  must  have  higher  pay,  and  that  if  he  was  to  be  de- 
tailed for  the  interior,  his  pay  should  be  increased  still 
more.  Another — an  eno-ineer — asserted  that  he  was 
engaged  as  sub-commander  of  the  expedition  ;  that  he, 
a  descendant  of  all  the ,  would  never  have  ven- 
tured into  Africa  upon  such  a  miserable  stipend  ;  he  had 
come  for  honour,  reputation,  fame  ;  he  would  write  to 
the  newspapers,  &c.*  Another  engineer  complained  that 
he  was  not  accorded  his  proper  rank ;  being  in  charge 
of  the  engines  of  the  30-ton  steamer,  he  certainly 
was  equal  to  the  general  accountant  of  the  expedition. 
The  gentleman  in  charge  of  the  smallest  steam-launch 
thought  himself  superior  to  the  sailor  in  charge  of  a 
rowing  boat,  and  considered  himself  disparaged  by 
being  requested  to  mess  at  the  same  table  as  the  latter. 

All  this  was,  of  course,  the  result  of  raw  inexperience 
and  misapprehension,  heightened,  perhaps,  by  the  mis- 
chievous practice  of  imbibing  strong  wine  at  their 
midday  meal. 

Tlie  tv/o  Danish  sailors,  Martin  and  Albert,  were 
tlie  only  two  who  had  no  coniDlaints,  and  who  seemed 
contented  with  their  lot. 

The  excited  men,  however,  were  gradually  soothed, 
*  This  was  a  threat  freqiiently  used. 


1879. 
Aug.  14. 

lianaua  Pt, 


72  377^    CONGO. 

Their  tender  siisceptibilities  were  considerably  flattered, 
and  after  a  sliort  time  harmony  was  restored,  with  the 
promise  of  explaining  to  the  Committee  at  the  first 
opportunity.  As  for  quarrelling  about  rank,  it  was 
absurd.  Were  we  not  all  brothers,  comrades,  partisans 
in  a  grand  international  cause,  the  vanguard  of  civili- 
sation? &c.  "Where  is  the  man  with  a  soul  so  dead 
to  honour,  to  fame,  to  immortality  ?  "  &e.  The  first 
mutiny  was  hushed,  and  "■  all  hands  turned  to." 

The  "  Dutch  House  "  has  been  mentioned  more  than 
once.  In  1879  the  term  stood  for  the  Afrikaansche 
Handels-Yereeniging,*  or  African  Trading  Company,  of 
Rotterdam ;  Messrs.  Pincoffs  &  Kerdyck  had  been  lately 
the  enterprising  managers.  Young  Mr.  Kerdyck,  the 
brother  of  the  elder  Kerdyck,  had  appeared  at  Banana 
Point  in  1869,  and  after  purchasing  the  ground,  and 
a  few  buildings  from  the  French  firm  of  Regis  &  Co., 
had  proceeded  to  establish,  on  a  permanent  basis,  a 
business  which  rapidly  grew  into  such  grand  propor- 
tions that  the  buildings,  with  their  yards,  sheds,  and 
courts,  cover  a  space  of  about  700  acres,  all  pure  sand, 
lifted  about  four  feet  above  high  water. 

A  large  number  of  people  are  employed,  both  white 
and  black.  The  whites  may  be  best  seen  at  dinner, 
ranged  on  the  sides  of  two  long  tables.  A  glance  at 
their  faces  serves  almost  to  reconcile  one  to  Africa. 
It  may  be  said  to  be  assuring  when  we  are  asked  to 
partake  of  the  hospitality.     For,  despite  the  abundance 

*  Towards  the  end  of  the  year  the  Afrikaansche  Genootschap  suc- 
ceeded to  its  business. 


YOUTHFUL   MANAGERS.  73 

with,  whicli  the  tables  bencl,  hearty  appetites  generally     1879. 

Auc.  14-. 

contrive    to    reduce   the    portion    left  for  the  kitchen  BanLa  pt, 
considerably  before  tlie  dinner  is  over.     When  I  was 
first  tisbered  into  the  dining-room  and  saw  the  array 
of  plates,  the  tout  ensemble  was  to  my  view  extremely 
like  to  a  Port  Said  table  cVhote. 

There  are  very  yonng  faces  to  be  seen  at  the  table, 
and  a  few  veterans.  They  started  their  tropic  life 
when  young,  some  at  sixteen  years  old,  but  mostly  all 
between  seventeen  and  tw^enty.  The  chief  manager, 
Mr.  A.  de  Bloeme,  director  of  nearly  eighty  commercial 
factories,  I  was  told,  was  only  twenty-seven,  and  he 
had  already  counted  nine  years  of  service.  Mr.  Antoine 
Greshoff,  now  manager  of  the  commercial  factory  of 
Boma,  was  only  twenty-two,  and  he  was  in  his  fifth 
year  of  service.  Mons.  Muller,  another  very  young- 
man,  almost  beardless,  had  experienced  seven  years  of 
r^ongo  life.  Mr.  Gray,  however  one  of  the  veterans  of 
the  coast,  had  been  "  out "  sixteen  years,  w^ithout  having 
once  returned  to  Europe.  And  here  he  stood  to  rival 
Mr.  Youngblood,  the  pilot,  as  a  healthy  representative 
of  how  a  European  could  endure  the  tropics. 

The  coloured  help  of  this  establishment  requires  a 
full-grown  village  to  house  its  numbers.  The  people 
with  their  wives  and  children  represent  every  tribal 
district  along  the  coast  to  Cape  Lopez,  and  distant  parts 
of  Interior  Ngoyo,  and  the  land  of  the  Bateke  and 
Basundi.  Kruboys — strong-] imbed,  broad-chested,  fine- 
muscled  men  of  the  labouring  class — are  also  here  by 
the  score.     Along  the  beach  or  on  the  piers  they  may 


74  THE   COS  GO. 

i?79.     be  seen  in  loin-clouts  and  hats  witli  brims  of  amiDle 

Aug.  14.  .  . 

Banana  Pt.  prominence  and  girth,  and  a  grotesque  variety  of  caps, 
heave-yo-ing  upon  heavy  weights,  rolling  lime-washed 
casks  of  palm-oil,  cooking  the  rich,  yellow  butter  of  the 
Elais  guineensis,  running  it  into  other  casks ;  at  the 
coal  yard  loading  trucks,  bearing  sacks  of  palm-kernels 
or  shelled  ground-nuts.  Under  the  lengthy  sheds  are 
the  boat-builders  building  new  lighters  or  dingeys. 
The  Kabinda  cask-makers  are  hammering  down  the 
iron  hoops  with  a  din  that  shocks  the  ears.  Along  the 
beach  the  boats  come  and  go,  or  the  galliots  enter,  laden 
with  fresh  water  from  the  south  bank,  or  with  African 
produce  from  Ponta  da  Lenha  and  Boma,  and  perhaps 
from  Mussuko,  higher  up  the  Congo. 

Scattered  at  corners  of  sheds,  or  in  heaps  along 
the  beach,  are  the  iron  refuse  of  vears  of  business 
of  this  large  and  prosperous  establishment :  ancient 
anchors  with  broken  flukes,  ancient  howitzers  and 
carronades  with  no  one  knows  wliat  history,  and  heaps 
of  old  cable,  iron  bars  and  hoops,  amidst  a  miscel- 
laneous debris  of  old  metal.  Under  another  large  shed 
are  perhaps  stored  5000  tons  of  coal,  for  this  House 
has  the  monopoly  of  coaling  the  men-of-war  and  mail 
and  casual  steamers. 

To  examine  the  interior  parts  of  these  lengthy  plank 
buildings  is  a  good  day's  work.  In  them  may  be  seen 
enough  to  make  a  Manchester  cotton  manufacturer 
weep  with  pleasure,  for  there  may  be,  piled  up  high 
in  bales  upon  bales,  a  million  yards  of  cotton,  from  the 
finest  to  the  flimsiest  qualit}' ;  huge  dry-goods  cases, 


IMMENSE  POWDER    SUPPLY.  75 

where  the  British  Government  seems  to  have  disposed     i870. 

Aug.  14. 

of  the  old  red  coats  of  their  army  years  ago.  In  Bauaua  Pt. 
another  store  Birmingham  and  Sheffield  might  rejoice 
at  the  sight  of  the  iron  kettles  and  pots  and  pans,  the 
tons  of  cutlery,  the  thousands  of  flintlock  muskets 
and  percussion  guns,  and  the  stores  of  brass  bells.  In 
another  place  the  millowners  of  Eochdale,  looking  at 
the  piles  of  red  and  blue  savelist,  might  have  cause 
to  wish  that  there  were  more  enterprising  Dutch 
Houses  to  buy  from  them  the  cunning  labour  of  their 
looms,  and  to  disperse  it  over  broad  Africa. 

At  the  extreme  end  of  the  Peninsula  of  Banana  is 
tlie  powder  magazine,  containing  enough  pow^der  appa- 
rently to  salute  the  dead  for  a  century  to  come ;  but 
no,  we  shall  be  informed,  just  enough  to  last  until  the 
next  ship  comes — "  expected  shortly."  This  might  be 
alarmino'  at  first  if  we  did  not  remember  that  almost 
every  child  that  dies  receives  a  salute  of  honour  of  five 
shots,  while  a  woman  has  ten,  and  a  man  twenty  :  for 
a  chief  ten  or  twelve  barrels  might  not  suffice.  When 
employed  for  such  harmless  purposes,  we  are  tempted 
to  regard  the  dangerous  compound  in  the  light  of  a 
beneficent  element  of  trade. 

Close  by,  and  between  the  i:)Owder  magazine  and  the 
white  factory  buildings  of  Banana,  is  the  cemeter}^ 
where  many  a  one  sleeps  fast  and-long,  whom  not  even 
the  explosion  of  all  those  tons  of  powder  would  awaken 
ngain  to  tedious  life.  Here  on  the  shore  the  waves  of 
the  Atlantic  beat  loud  and  solemn,  dirge-like,  mourning 
the  loss  of  those  wlio  appeared  in  the  tropic  land  only 


76  THE   CONGO. 

1870.     to  pass  to  their  final  rest.     It  is  a  place  to  be  avoided 

Aug.  14. 

Banana  Pt.  ^Y  tliose  apt  to  be  afilicted  with  jJi'esentiments.  The 
sound  of  those  waves,  the  view  of  that  dead  sand  and 
the  blank  waste  of  sea-waters,  which  yon  feel  are  so 
wide  and  stretch  so  far,  the  thought  that  you  cannot, 
if  you  would,  sail  away  on  thera — all  are  likely  to 
engender  a  profound  melancholy ;  for  those  silent 
mounds  seem  to  menace  yourself — you,  so  ignorant 
of  how  to  live  in  this  land  w'hich  has  already  slain  so 
many  as  strong,  if  not  stronger,  tlian  yourself.  Away 
from  the  scene,  to  the  habitations  of  the  living  ! 

Tlie  Dutch  know  how  to  make  their  young  men  com- 
fortable. The  tahle  d'hote,  w^ith  its  varied  abundance, 
may  be  cited  as  one  proof;  the  neat  frame  houses,  lofty 
and  cool,  another.  They  have  a  medico  at  hand 
wdio  possesses  a  well-stocked  dispensary ;  they  have  a 
billiard-table ;  they  have  a  number  of  riding-asses  ;  and 
though  the  sand  enclosed  by  the  buildings  is  by  no 
means  tempting  to  a  pedestrian,  still  the  beach  is  as 
firm  as  asphalt,  and  the  cool  sea-breeze  from  the  South 
Atlantic  is  grateful  after  a  windless  day. 

Beyond  the  larger  area  occupied  by  the  Dutch  House 
begins  the  establishment  of  Daumas,  Beraud  &  Co.^ 
who  trade  in  the  same  produce  and  conduct  it  in  a 
similar  manner  to  the  Dutch  method,  though  on  a 
much  humbler  scale.  Further  north,  and  separated 
from  this  by  a  few  rubbish  heaps  and  stagnant  pools, 
is  the  establishment  of  the  Congo  and  Central  African 
Company  on  a  still  smaller  scale.  When  we  have 
seen  all  these,  the   features  of  Banana  are  described, 


SEETHING   MUD.  77 

and  the  traveller  for  the  interior  will  wish  to  depart  as     isto. 

...  .        ^  Aug.  14. 

soon  as  possible.  Banaua  Pt. 

The  mangroves  of  Hnard  Point  across  the  harbour, 
and  which  cover  the  low  mud  deposit  which  separates 
Banana  Creek  from  that  of  Pirate  Creek,  are  not 
worthy  of  exploration,  neither  are  the  dull,  sombre, 
monotonous  creek-banks,  which  you  will  see  if  you 
ascend  either  creek,  worthy  of  regard. 

If  you  ascend  up  Banana  Creek,  there  is  deep  water 
sufficient  for  small  vessels,  and  you  will  emerge  out  of 
the  creek  somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ponta 
da  Lenha.  A  journey  up  Pirate  Creek,  a  famous  route 
in  slave  times,  will  take  you  finally  in  the  same 
direction.  If  the  tide  is  low,  the  view  of  the  seething 
mud,  alive  with  crabs  of  all  sizes,  which  enter  in  and 
emerge  out  of  their  holes  incessantly,  will  be  rather  de- 
pressing than  otherwise.  If  you  loiter  in  this  waste  of 
foetid  mud,  be  warned  that  you  endanger  your  health. 
Those  scraggy  roots  of  tlie  mangrove  are  like  so 
many  forked  radish  standing  on  the  tips  of  their  roots ; 
liowever  fantastic  they  may  be,  the  sense  of  dreariness 
and  desolation  and  homelessness  raises  such  a  chilling 
feeling — though  this,  I  admit,  depends  on  personal  tem- 
perament— that  an  ascent  up  the  Congo,  the  cleaving 
of  that  tawny  and  powerful  and  billowy  flood  in  a 
swift  steamer,  is  far  more  exhilarating. 

I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  why  this  low 
peninsula  of  sand,  whose  highest  crest  is  not  twelve  feet 
above  low-water,  and  only  six  feet  above  high-water, 
came  to  be  distinguished  with  the  title  of  Banana,  as 


78  TEE   CONGO. 

1879.  the  name  is  suggestive  of  a  tropic  plant  we  shall,  in 
Banana  Pt.  ^^^^^  tlistrict,  look  foF  in  vain  to-day.  I  can  well  ima- 
gine why,  bnt  this  is  not  history.  I  can  imagine  that 
before  the  advent  of  the  modern  establishment,  which 
has  so  overgrown  the  Point,  that  Regis  &  Co.'s  factory 
was  situated  nearer  the  centre ;  and  towards  the  Point, 
possibly  where  the  Dutch  flagstaff  stands,  a  few  banana 
plants  throve,  just  hke  the  pahns  which  flourish  in  the 
same  neighbourhood  at  the  present  time. 

Three  hundred  years  ago,  if  old  maps  are  to  be 
followed,  the  peninsula  was  not  so  long.  A  mere 
blunted-hook  shaped  cape  existed,  called  Cape  Palmas, 
and  it  may  very  possibly  be  so  again — at  least  the 
Dutch  have  a  suspicion  that  it  might  happen,  and  they 
have  taken  precautions.  Stakes  and  piles  and  stone 
debris  protect  the  inner  shore  of  the  point,  and  many 
a  ship-load  of  rocks  has  already  been  carried  and  piled 
along  the  sea-board. 

Once  or  twice  in  my  life  I  have  predicted  success- 
fully, and  reason  now  suggests  a  disastrous  combination 
of  a  hurricane,  or  long-enduring  tornado  from  the 
westward  or  north-west,  damming  m^  the  Congo  in  the 
month  of  December  to  the  overflow  of  that  low  point, 
and  with  the  receding  tide  scouring  the  Banana  j^enin- 
sula  clean  down  to  the  firm  rocks  that  first  attracted 
the  sands  and  sediment  to  form  this  prolongation. 


J 


LoiLilcm     Sampson  Low.Marston.Searlv  ^Rivuigtoii 


^^ 


THE  START   UP   THE   CONGO. 


CHAPTER   YII. 

UP    THE    "  MIGHTY  "    COXGO. 

The  flotilla  proceeds  up  the  river — Braving  the  giant  stream — Silence  on 
the  wooded  shores — Kissanga — Pouta  da  Lenha — Dutch  factories — 
Guarding  against  floods — The  dangers  of  hospitality — Depth  of  the 
river :  its  volume— The  dry  and  rainy  seasons — Tidal  action — Fetish 
rock — "  The  d — 1  had  done  it " — Ma-taddi  Nzazzi,  "  Lightning 
Stone" — Boma,  the  principal  emporium  of  trade — Means  of  com- 
munication— Loneliness  and  cheerlessness^A  refreshing  change — 
African  sunshine — The  blood-curdling  history  of  Boma — Horrors  of 
the  slave  trade — -A  terrible  punishment — The  trade  of  Boma — The 
"wicked  white  man" — Progress  of  Boma — Historical  treatment  of 
the  river — Hungry  whites— Baffled  by  the  stream — "  Hippopotamus  ? 
that's  a  rock,  mim !  " — A  dead  shot — Departure  of  the  SS.  Albion 
for  Europe. 

Sevex     days    after    the    arrival    of    the    Albion    in      ists. 

...  A"S-  -1- 

Banana   Creek,  the  expedition   flotilla  was  ready  for  Banana  pt. 

ascending  the  Congo.     The    Albion   herself  had  been 

beached,    scraped,   scrubbed    and   painted,    and    nuich 

other  work  required  by  serious   and   sober  prevision 

had  been  performed.     On  the  morning  of  August  21st, 

the  steam   whistles   sounded   the    signal,    and   we    all 

steamed  out  of  Banana  Haven.     It  was  an  event  that 

may  well  be  called  the  inauguration  of  a  new  era  for 

the  Congo  basin,  just  as  a  grander  array  of  mighty 

ships  in  the  year   1869  inaugurated  the  union  of  the 

Red  Sea  with  the  Mediterranean. 


80  THE   CONGO. 

1870.        The  Lower  Congo  has  been  ascended  many  a  time 

Auo-.  21. 

BanrnaPt.  sinco  the  date  of  its  discovery,  but  it  has  never  been 
described  satisfactorily.  For  my  previous  omission  in 
1877  I  could  well  be  excused,  for  my  fatigues  had 
utterly  prostrated  me,  and  it  was  the  blue  Atlantic  that 
I  yearned  for — I  and  my  poor  fellows. 

But  now,  strong  with  health,  both  they  and  I  look 
upon  it  with  different  eyes.  The  voluminous  flood, 
which  we  had  followed  all  the  long  way  to  its  spacious 
bourne,  and  had  seen  under  all  aspects — now  tranquil  as 
a  summer's  dream,  anon  raging  with  horrent-creamed 
crests  above  deep  brown  hollows,  engulfing  our  unwary 
mates,  menacing  our  frail  low  barks — smiled  on  us 
to-day,  as  with  calm  but  interested  glance  we  gazed 
down  secure  from  high  decks  on  its  placid  surface. 
We  have  forgiven  it  long  ago ;  we  have  buried  the 
past,  for  time  has  softened  our  memories  of  its 
treacherv.  We  feel  still  that  it  is  a  dano'erous  river 
to  be  trifled  with.  It  has  awful  power  when  ruffled 
by  impeding  rocks,  or  when  its  waves  rise  up,  re- 
monstrant to  the  breeze,  and  fall  heavy  and  sullen. 
But  we  also  have  power  now — -power  gained  by  know- 
ledge and  harsh  experience.  We  will  brave  the  giant 
stream  with  steel  cutters  driven  by  steam! 

With  the  sea  astern,  we  head  up  the  long  stretch, 
over  three  miles  wide,  along  a  course  whose  depth 
varies  from  60  feet  to  900  feet,  and  with  a  current 
in  mid-stream  of  five  knots.  On  either  hand  the 
dark- green  walls  of  mangrove,  intermixed  with  palm 
fronds,  are  apparently  impenetrable,  though  the  charts 


KISSAXGA.  81 

tell  us  that  many  a  lazy  creek  traces  its  winding*  course  1879. 
amid  the  cool  and  silent  shades  of  embracino;  leafa2:e,  p  T  * 
In  an  hour  we  are  abreast  of  Bulambemba  Point,  on  ''*^"'''*  ^'*- 
the  north  bank,  which  was  and  is  known  still  as 
Fathomless  Point,  though  it  is  not  accurately  described 
by  that  term.  There  is,  however,  abundance  of  water, 
for  our  pilot  edges  the  steamer  towards  it;  and  finally 
straightens  the  steamer  up  river,  keeping  about  half  a 
mile  off  the  shore,  along  the  northern  bank.  It  is  a  low 
land,  or  a  banked  deposit  of  rich,  damp,  foetid  alluvium 
and  many  towering  trees,  which  shelter  a  thick  bush 
and  scrub  most  uninviting  to  look  at.  A  break  here 
and  there  shows  the  entrance  or  debouchure  of  a  narrow 
creek,  within  the  mazes  of  which  a  flotilla  of  narrow 
piratical  canoes  might  well  hide.  It  is  devoid  of  all 
animate  nature  :  not  a  bird  is  seen,  not  a  movement 
breaks  the  melancholy  interest  with  which  uncon- 
sciously we  regard  it.  Neither  on  the  north  bank  nor 
on  the  south  Ijank,  nor  yet  on  the  river,  is  there  aught 
to  disturb  this  lifelessness  of  sleeping  nature.  The 
river-flood  glides  on  serene  in  one  unbroken,  unruffled 
mass,  but  yet  with  an  unmistakably  resistless,  though 
silent  energy.  On  the  wooded  shores  there  is  a  solemn 
loneliness  as  of  death  ;  on  the  tranrpiil  mass  of  cease- 
less moving  water  we  only  see  the  peace  of  an  undis- 
turbed slumber. 

AVlien  about  14  miles  from  l^anana  we  steer,  to  avoid 
the  shallows  of  Scotchman  Head,  towards  a  cluster  of 
factories,  known  as  Kissanga,  situate  on  the  south  bank, 
seven  miles  higher  up ;  thence  close  in  shore  for  a  few 

vor..  T.  a 


82  THE   COXGO. 

1879.     miles,  and  tben,  when  the  fiictories  of  Ponta  da  Lenha 

Aug.  21. 

Kissanga.  appear  well  in  sight,  we  strike  straight  up  the  deeper 
branch  of  the  Congo,  which  runs  by  these,  thus  avoiding 
the  less  known  Sonho  branch,  and  the  more  intricate 
channels  winding  erratically  between  the  island  gi'oups 
of  Drapei-,  Monkey,  Robson,  Stocking,  and  Farquhar. 
These  various  names  of  uninhabitable  forest-clothed 
mud-deposits  were  first  made  known  to  us  through 
the  survey  chart  of  Captain  Maxwell,  1793.  Though 
they  are  meaningless  enough  nowadays,  they  do  as 
well  as  others  would,  since  there  are  no  remarkable 
peculiarities  distingniishing  one  islet  from  another. 
They  are  all  wooded  densely,  as  well  as  the  banks. 
Xorth,  south,  and  middle  channels  might  serve  better 
to  describe  the  channels  than  that  of  Maxwell,  which 
stands  for  the  north,  Sonho  in  place  of  the  south,  and 
Mamballa  for  the  middle. 

Kissanga  is  situate  in  a  semi-circular  clearing  on 
dry,  black  vegetable  soil,  and  close  to  the  water's  edge, 
for  the  convenience  of  factory  business,  such  as  rolling 
15-cwt.  casks  of  palm-oil  aboard  the  launches  and 
galliots,  and  the  quick  discharging  of  cargo.  There 
are  three  factories  even  here,  but  the  stranger  is  apt 
to  wonder  where  the  customers  come  from ;  for  behind 
the  buildings  there  is  scarcely  sixty  yards  of  open 
ground,  and  beyond  these  rise  the  living  wall  of  dark- 
green  forest,  with  its  interwoven  creepers  and  palmate 
leafage  and  broad-leafed  plants  for  undergrowth.  A 
more  searching  investigation  along  the  bank  will  dis- 
cover the  mazy  lagoons  which  pierce  the  shore,  and  lead 


PliECAUTIONS  AGAINST  FLOODS.  83 

to  firm   foot-paths    on  the   main,   which   reach  to  the     1879. 

Auo-.  '21. 

villages  of  the  Miishirongos.  that  are  freely  scattered  Kislincra. 
on  the  level  grassy  plain  or  rolling  country  behind  the 
forest  screen.  The  Sonho  channel  washes  the  southern 
shore,  and  the  strong  current  soon  brings  the  trading 
natives  with  a  cargo  close  alongside  the  factory  landing- 
place,  while  by  hugging  the  shore  the  ascent  is  easy 
for  narrow  canoes. 

Exactly  four  hours  brings  the  Albion,  Belgiijue, 
Royal  and  Esperance  to  Ponta  da  Lenha,  or  Wood 
Point,  which  also  is  a*  decided  misnomer,  when  all  the 
shores  are  curtained  with  a  tropic  sea-wood,  and  every 
inch  of  the  islands  appears  to  be  cloistered  by  im- 
j^enetrable  masses  of  dark-green  groves.  Here  are 
three  factories,  each  consisting  of  a  mass  of  plank  and 
other  structures,  some  roofed  with  tarred  felt,  and 
others  thatched. 

The  Dutch  are,  as  usual,  far  ahead  in  the  style^ 
arrangement,  and  soHdity  of  their  structures.  They 
are  perpetually  improving,  building,  and  solidifying 
their  landed  possessions  and  establishments.  At 
Banana  they  have  lavished  thousands  of  pounds  in 
their  industrial  war  against  flood  encroachments,  and 
here,  warned  by  the  increasing  force  of  the  Congo 
against  the  frail  substratum  of  their  island,  their 
Dutch  instincts  have  been  roused,  and  they  are  busy 
<lriving  piles — massive  teak  and  red-wood  piles — deep 
in  the  mud,  to  restrain  the  inroads  of  the  impetuous 
current. 

Under  the  broad  and  commodious  verandahs  of  their 

G  2 


84  TEE   CONGO. 

1879.     islet  home  is  a  delicious  cool  place  on  a  Lot,  glaring 

Aug,  21.  . 

Ponta  da  suniiv  day.  There  you  may  sit  at  ease  watching  the 
brown  river  flow  swiftly  by,  angered  just  here  by 
steep  bulk-heads,  and  venting  its  muttered  wratli  with 
a  moanine:  o-uro'le.  The  view  of  the  backo-round  of 
jungly  forest  formed  on  one  of  the  Draper  Islands 
just  half  a  mile  away,  and  the  steady-flowiug  river, 
brightened  and  gleaming,  is  soothing  to  the  eyes,  and 
the  mysterious  unanah'sable  sounds  issuing  from  the 
dark  tall  forest  close  behind  us  woo  one  to  drowsi- 
ness, although  antidotes  of  seltzer,  or  good  hot  tea,  are 
to  be  had  from  the  ebon-hued  servitors  of  the  Dutch 
House.  The  master  of  the  factory,  too,  on  these  occa- 
sions places  his  time  at  the  disposal  of  the  guest,  as 
though  he  were  a  incutre  cVhotel.  I  regret  to  have  to 
record  also  that  stronger  licjuids,  the  bane  of  Western 
Africa,  are  only  too  temptingly  displayed  and  proffered, 
through  a  spirit  and  a  general  custom  of  mistaken 
hospitality.  To  the  thirsty  one,  slightly  fatigued,  or 
suffering  under  a  sense  of  trifling  lassitude,  these 
invitations  so  readily  given  are  almost  irresistible. 
It  may  be  that  people  might  in  time  be  educated  by 
such'  sufr^estions  as  the  above  to  withhold,  and  never 
offer  these  baits  to  inebriety  and  debility  unless  they 
are  urgently  requested  to  do  so,  w^hen,  of  course,  they 
are  to  be  excused. 

How  much  do  sailors,  engineers,  and  the  illiterate 
class  of  men  reason  about  what  is  beneficial  ?  Or 
when  were  such  people  educated  in  the  philosophy  of 
living,  and  the    proper  uses   of  that    lusty   life   with 


POXTA    DA    LENHA.  85 

Avliicli  tliev  bave  been  endowed  ?     Even  the  climates     1879. 

Aug.  21. 
they  were  born  in  they  scarcely  nnderstood  ;  but  when,  Pontad:i 

with  their  tender,  pale,  and  imtanned  skins,  and  their 
wealth  of  fat,  engendered  by  ever-existing  plentv,  they 
appear  at  the  tropics,  with  its  meagre  diet  and  lack  of 
variety,  how  can  they  be  taught  that  the  lassitude  they 
feel,  after  hours  of  copious  perspiration,  is  only  caused 
l)y  Xature  making  her  eifort  to  live  under  the  condi- 
tions so  suddenly  imposed  upon  her? 

Ponta  da  Lenha,  or  the  Wood  Point,  is  thirty-four 
statute  miles,  or  twenty-eight  sea  miles  by  the  steamer's 
track,  from  the  anchorage  in  Banana  Creek.  Though 
situate  on  an  island,  it  is  within  easy  reach  of  the 
natives  of  the  mainland  north,  w-ho  bring  their  palm- 
oil,  kernels,  and  ground  nuts,  live-stock  and  vegetables, 
to  their  favourite  factories  to  exchano-e  for  cotton  cloth 
of  all  qualities  and  colours,  cutlery,  powder,  and  guns. 

As  far  as  this  cluster  of  barter  establishments  the 
SS.  Great  Eastern  might  easily  enter  from  the  sea,  and 
lie  snugly  alongside  the  Dutch  wdiarf.  Men-of-war — 
British,  Dutch,  Portuguese  and  French — have  fre- 
quently ascended  to  this  place.  It  is  well  protected 
from  the  sea-breeze,  as  one  may  see  by  the  slight  north- 
east curve  w^e  made  from  above  Kissano-a.  A  few 
miles  above,  how^ever,  a  shifting  bar  j^reventsthe  ascent 
of  ocean  steamers.  The  local  pilots  are  not  unanimous 
as  to  a  safe  draught — some  say  12  feet,  others  10  feet ; 
it  depends  principally  upon  the  skill  and  local  know- 
ledge gained  by  the  pilot.  In  1882  I  ascended  in  the 
Hiirhiirai/,    drawing    15    feet   aft,  safely   and   without 


86  THE   CONGO. 

1879,     touch,  and  descended  drawing  even  17  feet  0  inches 

Aug.  21.  .  . 

r-.ntada  without  accidcnt.  Others^  again,  have  not  been  so 
fortunate  ;  various  tedious  delays  have  been  caused  to 
vessels  drawing  12  feet.* 

All  these  discrepancies  will  be  removed  as  the 
requirements  of  navigation  demand  more  reliable 
knowledge.  My  personal  opinion  is  that  the  maxi- 
mum depth  that  could  be  obtained  in  the  rainy  season 
would  be  22  feet,  and  in  the  lowest  of  the  dry  season 
16  feet. 

In  order  to  understand  why  there  should  be  such  a 

difference  between  the  depth  during  the  rainy  and  the 

dry  seasons,  let  me  observe  here  that  a  certain  section 

of  tlie  Kiver  Congo  above  Stanley  Pool,  after  nearly  an 

entire  day's  experiments,  showed  that  in  the  early  part 

of  March,  when  the  river  was  nearly  lowest,  a  volume 

of  1,440,000  cubic  feet  of  water  flowed  per  second  ;  and, 

by  taking  the  altitude  of  high  level  as  plainly  visible  on 

a  high  cliffy  rock,  my  calculations  prove  that  at  least 

2.530,000  cubic  feet  of  water  must  flow  every  second 

at  the  height  of  the  rainy  season.     Before  this  water 

reaches  the  sea  a  multitude  of  rivers  have  joined  their 

tribute    to    this    volume,  a    quantity   which    only   the 

Amazon  can  surpass.     Nay,  if  old  Captain  Maxwell's 

chart  of  1793  is  to  be  relied  uj)on,  I  find,  on  calculating 

his  items  of  soundings  and  current  and  breadth,  that 

a  few  miles  above  Boma  a  volume  of  4,382,000  cubic 


*  The  following  vessels  have  reported  differently  :—H.M.S.  Arkl, 
1875,  reports  3  fathoms  as  lowest;  Torch,  1872,  2  fathoms;  Firefly, 
1880,  4  fathoms  ;  French  ship  Sagitaire,  1883,  less  than  13  feet. 


RISE  AXIJ   FALL    OF   THE  BIVEE.  87 

feet  per  second  is  attained !     I  do  not  by  any  means     1879. 
voucli  for  the  accuracy  of  bis  soundings,  and  I  tbink  Pontada 
that  the  force  of  the  current  may  bave  been  ascertained 
by  rough  guess. 

Then,  if  a  river  becomes  nearly  doubled  in  volume 
twice  a  year,  it  is  important  to  know  what  months  are 
the  dry  and  rainy  seasons. 

Briefly,  this  not  being  the  place  for  all  the  informa- 
tion gathered,  I  may  state  that  a  sensible  rise  of  the 
river  be2:ins  at  Boma  in  the  latter  half  of  March,  and 
is  full  rise  between  the  1st  and  3 1st  of  May;  after  this 
there  is  a  gradual  decline  until  the  beginning  of 
August,  from  which  time  there  is  no  change  until  about 
the  1st  of  September,  The  rise  from  March  to  May 
inclusive  is  called  the  lesser  rise. 

From  the  1st  of  September  to  between  the  15tli  to 
the  2.')th  of  December  is  the  greater  rise.  Between 
the  13th  of  January  and  the  10th  of  March  there  is 
a  steady  fall,  after  which  time  the  river  is  changeless, 
until  the  lesser  rise  recommences  at  its  usual  date. 

Besides  the  due  observation  of  the  month  for  the 
ascent,  the  effect  of  the  tide  ebb  and  flood  must  be 
taken  into  consideration.  At  Banana  the  tide  rises 
G  feet;  at  Ponta  da  Lenha  about  21  inches — others 
say  18  inches.  At  Boma  the  effect  of  it  is  but  2  or 
3  inches.  The  ebb  races  near  the  mouth  at  the  rate  of 
a  few  knots  per  hour,  and  lasts  nearly  as  long  again 
as  the  flood.  AVitli  all  this,  it  must  not  be  supposed 
that  the  sea  is  admitted  into  the  Congo.  The  flood  is 
simply  the  effect  of  the  pressure  of  the  sea  upon  the 


88,  THE   CONGO. 

1S79.     current  of  the   river,  which,  checked  in  its  velocity, 

Aug.  21.       .  . 

Pontada  Tiscs  to  the  height  above  mentioned. 

After  a  night  spent  in  comfort  at  Ponta  da  Lenha, 
although  tlie  entire  flotilla  had  not  made  its  appear- 
ance— for  the  En  Avant,  which  should  have  been  most 
forward,  was  decidedly  en  arriere  on  this  day — we  de- 
parted from  the  landing-place  and  steamed  up  towards 
Boma  in  due  order,  the  Albion,  though  but  a  small 
steamer,  a  veritable  elephant  compared  to  the  dainty 
mosquito  flotilla,  which  made  far  more  noise  with  their 
high-pressure  engines  than  a  dozen  Albions  would 
have  made. 

It  was  a  cool  early  morning,  and  the  sun  had  not 
ventured  out  from  behind  the  thick  banks  of  light-grey 
clouds,  where  he  lurked  j)ale  and  rayless.  The  absence 
of  his  warmth  gave  rather  a  chilly,  gloomy  aspect  to 
the  stolid  lifeless  banks,  with  their  continued  monotone 
of  colouring — a  dead  green-black,  without  sheen  or 
movement — except  that  which  a  stray  calamus  made 
as,  brushed  hither  and  thither  by  the  chill  morning 
breeze,  it  aimlessly  sought  the  support  of  a  stiff 
stalk  or  limb,  or  that  made  bv  the  ever-noddinsr 
water-reeds. 

As  we  continue  steamirg  upward,  gradually  the 
dense  bush  looms  up  less  tall  and  dark  ;  it  becomes  lower 
and  scantier,  while  the  palms  on  the  islands  become 
more  conspicuous.  The  sea-loving  mangrove,  with  its 
sickening  ooze  and  fantastic  centipedal  roots,  has  quite 
disappeared,  and  now  grassy  plains,  strangely  silent,  yet 
waving  and  nodding  wildly,  recede  inland  towards  the 


GEE  AT  BREADTH   OF   THE  BIVEE. 


80 


liig'li  land  which  we  saw  from  the  sea  trending  eastward. 
The  hills  of  vrhich  it  consists  form  an  irrro-idar  rido-e 
deeply  indented  in  slope  and  summit-line.  Looking 
at  the  sonth  bank,  after  getting  above  Stocking  Island, 
we  see  similar  plains  stretching  towards  a  similar  hilly 
ridge  ;  and  following  both  ridges  with  our  eyes,  we  see 
them  away  np  river,  a  few  miles  above  Boma,  appa- 
rently meet,  and  the  course  of  the  river  is  untraceable 


1879. 
Aug.  21. 

Ponta  da 
Lenha. 


.^i^„ 


THE    FORESTED   BAXKS   OF   THE   I.OWEK   COXGO. 

by  a  stranger.  And  here  for  the  first  time  we  can 
\vell  see  the  enormous  breadtli  of  the  stream,  for  from 
bank  to  bank,  clearly  exposed,  it  is  about  four  and 
a  half  miles. 

At  10.30  x.yi.  we  were  passing  within  a  few  hundred 
yards  of  the  rock  called  Fetish  (bewitched),  a  low  and 
isolated  hilly  headland,  topped  with  large  masses  of 
granite,  clifty  in  its  river  front,  having  in  its  outlines 
something  of  the  appearance  of  a  huge  monumental 


90  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     stone.     To    the    rear    and    on  tlie    sides    stretches    an 

Aug.  21.  .  ,  .  •  r       T' 

Pontada  extensivc  and  low-lying  rich  grass  plain,  a  leeding- 
groimd  for  the  hippopotami,  though  the  inhabitants 
of  a  few  villages  which  are  in  the  neighbourhood 
have  endeavoured,  with  ill-success,  to  cultivate  some 
ground. 

In  the  old  sailing  days,  I  am  told  by  the  pilot,  few 
cared  to  approach  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Fetish 
Rock.  Whether  from  sheer  bewitchment,  or  the  eccen- 
tricities of  the  ever-boiling  flood,  tradition  becomes 
piquant  when  reciting  the  odd  adventures  that  have 
befallen  the  helpless  ships ;  how  they  suddenly  were 
sheered  off  their  course  and  curvetted  round  and  round 
with  lazy  see-saw  motions  of  prow  and  stern,  and  were 
swung  far  off  after  the  dance,  with  distracted  sails  and 
slack  ropes  and  braces,  while  the  pale  sailors  gazed 
upon  one  another  blankly,  and  finally  swore  "the  d — 1 
had  done  it,"  I  myself  tell  the  pilot  that  I  believe  all 
this,  "for,  my  friend,  it  was  a  wicked  time  altogether, 
for  tlien  white  men  believed  that  to  buy  and  sell  their 
black  brothers  was  a  work  sanctioned  by  God." 

Steamers,  however,  pay  no  heed  to  the  contemptible 
whirlpools,  though  they  are  noisy,  and  we  proceed 
upward  without  a  flaw  in  our  coui^se,  having  now  deep 
Avater  under  our  keels.  Looking  round  for  wonders, 
we  are  shown  a  feature  on  the  crest  of  a  tall  hill  on 
the  northern  shore,  said  to  be  the  Lightning  Stone,  by 
natives  known  as  Ma-taddi  Nzazzi,  and  sometimes  also 
as  Limbu  Li  Nzambi,  the  finger  of  God.  It  is  merely 
the  core  of  the  mountain  rock,  revealed  ages  ago  by 


BOMA.  ni 

the  washiiio-  away  of  the  soil  from  the  smooth  dome-     1879. 

°  "^  Aug.  2-2. 

hke  summit,  and  to-day  it  stands,  not  a  poor  resem-     Boma. 
blance  to  a  hghthouse,  or  some  monumental  structure. 

Precisely  four  hours  of  continued  steaming  from 
Ponta  da  Lenha  brought  both  Albion  and  Belgiqiie,  with 
tlieir  respective  barges,  alongside  the  wharf  of  one  of 
the  Dutch  factories  of  Boma. 

A  few  hundred  yards  from  the  pier,  Boma,  the  prin- 
cipal emporium  of  trade  on  the  Congo,  was  well  and 
fully  seen  from  end  to  end,  curving  along  the  bended 
shore.  It  consists  of  a  congeries  of  factories,  that  is,  a 
number  of  detached  buildings  used  as  stores  or  sheds, 
or  workshops,  flanking  the  dwelling-house  of  their 
owner,  or  of  the  chief  factor  of  some  English,  Dutch, 
French,  or  Portuguese  company  established  in  Europe, 
which  has  sent  its  agents  to  scatter  these  trading 
stations  at  every  available  point  along  both  banks 
of  the  river.  There  were  not  quite  so  many  in  1879 
as  nov7  in  1885.  These  various  companies  have 
.several  factories,  especially  the  Dutch  and  English  and 
French.  The  central  depot  is  at  Banana  Point,  where 
the  goods  from  the  ocean  steamers  are  received,  un~ 
shipped,  stored  in  the  go-downs  or  stores,  and  dis- 
tributed by  the  pri\'ate  steamers  belonging  to  the 
central  establishment.  The  Dutch  possess  the  Prince 
Jlendrik,  Carl  Nieman^  Banana,  and  Morian.  The 
tliree  first  named  are  capacious  steamers,  able  to  steam 
to  Europe.  The  Morian  is  a  40-ton  tug,  employed  to 
tow  galliots,  ships,  barges,  and  lighters  to  the  upper 
]-)ortions  of  the  Lower  Congo.     The  Prince  Hendrik 


92  THE   COXGO. 

1879.     and    Carl  Nleman  collect  the   ijroduce  from  the  coast 


Aug. 


Bomn.  factories,  and  at  stated  periods  the  ocean  steamer 
arrives  from  Eotterdani  and  ^ladeira  to  Banana  Point 
in  twenty-five  days,  and,  after  a  short  stay  in  port, 
departs,  loaded  with  rubber,  oil,  gum,  kernels,  ground- 
nuts, ivory,  orchilla  -weed,  coftee,  and  various  other 
products. 

The  English  house  keeps  its  river  and  coast  steamer, 
the  Kahinda,  250  tons,  collecting  from  its  scattered 
factories  the  African  produce,  ready  for  their  Liverpool 
steamer,  the  Angola. 

The  Congo  and  Central  African  Company  employs 
irs  river  steamer,  the  Albuquerque,  of  250  tons,  in  the 
collection  of  produce,  but  this  house,  I  believe,  ships  by 
the  English  mail  steamers,  which  call  once  a  month. 

The  French  and  Portuguese  employ  galliots  or 
schooners,  launches,  and  canoes,  and  ship  by  sailing 
vessels  frequently. 

If  we  add  to  these  various  vessels  that  ply  up  and 
down  the  Congo,  between  Banana  and  Boma,  the  native 
canoes  belonging  to  the  aboriginal  chiefs,  the  Congo 
cannot  be  said  to  be  quite  devoid  of  evidences  of 
trade-movement. 

Xotwithstandiug,  the  general  prospect,  whether  over 
river  or  land,  is  not  prepossessing ;  the  eye  is  dis- 
satisfied, it  hungers  after  more  evidences  of  man  and 
commerce ;  probably  the  human  gregarious  instincts 
are  shocked,  or  chilled  by  the  unaccountable  feeling  of 
loneliness.  Look  resolutely  away,  or  over  the  factories 
at  your  feet,  from   the  crest  of  yonder  hill,  and  you 


LONELINESS  AND    CIIEERLESSNESS.  93 

will    understand  why.      Tliere    is   a    grand    sweep   of     is79. 

Aug.  22. 

massive  hills  lifting  nnd  falling  to  the  north ;  a  long  Boma, 
undulating  line  of  hilly  land  is  visible  across  iha  river, 
stretching  away  into  the  grey  distance;  there  is  a 
mighty  breadth  of  living  water  slowly  moving  towards 
the  sea,  but  I  can  detect  no  boat,  large  or  small,  just 
at  this  present  moment,  on  any  part  of  its  hundred 
square  miles  of  surface.  Over  all  the  vast  area  of 
land,  visible  upland  and  plain,  I  see  no  aspiring  tower 
or  dome,  or  chimney,  nor  even  the  likeness  of  a  human 
structure.  Unfortunately  not  even  a  column  of  smoke 
threads  through  the  silent  air  to  suggest  the  thought 
that  I  am  not  alone.  All  is  nature,  large,  ample, 
untouched  and  apparently  unvisited  by  man.  From 
all  I  can  see  I  may  have  been  the  first  man,  black  or 
white,  who  has  ever  stood  on  the  ungrateful  soil  under 
my  feet.  Truly  this  would  be  the  impression  of  the 
view  only  a  few  miles  removed  from  Boma  ;  but  here 
I  can  turn  my  eyes  at  will  to  recall  my  unreal  fancies, 
to  gaze  down  upon  the  consoling  and  warm  view 
of  the  Boma  establishments  ranged  along  the  northern 
bank,  with  their  tall  flagstaffs  and  white-washed 
residences,  and  the  long  sombre  thatched  roofs  of  the 
stores  and  sheds,  with  sufticient  leafy  trees  scattered 
about,  and  the  tapering  masts  of  steamers  and  sailing- 
vessels,  topped  by  the  gay  national  flags,  all  combin- 
ing to  make  a  pretty  picture  worth  a  sketch. 
.  The  feeling  of  loneliness  and  cheerlessness,  touched 
upon  above,  is  intensified  through  iha  fact  that  the 
heavy  lines  of  hills,  and  broad  expansion  of  jilain,  lack 


94  7777:   CONGO. 

1870.     the  deep  dark  masses  of  forest  in  ever-living  exuber- 

Aug.  22.  ,  .  ,        , 

Boma.  ^^^®  Avliicii  Ave  are  ever  apt  to  associate  with  the 
tropics.  The  grotesque  baobabs,  thinly  scattered  Avith 
their  feeble  crowns  of  leafage  on  bits  of  terraces  and 
tabular  bits  of  hills,  in  no  wa^^  compensate  for  the 
general  and  unlovely  nakedness  of  tlie  view.  At  this 
season — August — all  nature  appears  parched,  sere, 
withered,  voiceless,  except  along  the  various  channels 
of  the  Congo.  This  almost  entire  absence  of  vegeta- 
tion is  due  to  fires,  which  during  every  dry  season 
consume  the  robust  crops  of  grass.  It  is  also  attribut- 
able to  the  minute  hilly  sections  into  which  the  land 
has  been  cut  by  heavy  rains,  and  the  steep  and  rapid 
drainage  of  every  slope  and  rounded  summit  which 
sweeps  away  the  de'bris  of  dead  vegetation  before  it 
has  had  time  to  affect  the  soil. 

A  month  or  so  later  the  first  rains  fall,  and  the 
aspect  appears  much  more  gracious  and  soft,  for  the 
grass  peeps  out  at  once  young  and  tender  and  green  ; 
and  lo !  the  land  under  the  influence  of  moisture  and 
temperate  sunshine,  has  been  transfigured  into  a  fairer 
development.  "When  suff"used  witli  a  vivid  green,  it 
rivals  the  softness  of  English  Xorthumbria,  rejoicing 
animal  nature,  bringing  out  the  birds,  and  herds  of 
cattle,  and  flocks  of  goats,  which  before  liad  been 
missed  from  the  scene. 

When  speaking  of  African  sunshine,  it  must  be  re- 
membered that  there  are  different  qualities  of  sunshine. 
For  instance,  there  is  the  hard,  white,  naked,  undis- 
guised sunshine  of  Xorth-eastern  America  ;    there  is 


AFRICAN  SUNSHINE.  95 

tlie    warm,    drowsy,    hazy    sunshine    of    the    Enghsh     1879 

Alio*   ^^ 

summer ;  there  is  the  bright,  cheery,  purified  sunshine  ^ 
of  the  Mediterranean.  African  sunshine,  however, 
always  appears  to  me,  with  all  its  great  heat,  to  be 
a  kind  of  superior  moonlight,  judging  from  its  effects 
on  scenery.  Once  or  twice  in  this  book  I  write  of 
'•  solemn-looking "  hills.  I  can  only  attribute  this 
apparent  solemnity  to  the  peculiar  sunshine.  It  deepens 
the  shadows,  and  darkens  the  dark-green  foliage  of  the 
forest,  while  it  imparts  a  wan  appearance  or  a  cold 
reflection  of  liglit  to  naked  slopes  and  woodless  hill- 
tops. Its  effect  is  a  chill  austerity — an  indescribable 
solemnity,  a  repelling  unsociability.  Your  sympathies 
are  not  warmed  by  it ;  silence  has  set  its  seal  upon  it ; 
before  it  you  become  speechless.  Gaze  your  utmost  on 
the  scene,  admire  it  as  you  may,  worship  it  if  you  will, 
but  your  love  is  not  needed.  Speak  not  of  grace  or  of 
loveliness  in  connection  with  it.  Serene  it  may  be, 
but  it  is  a  passionless  serenity.  It  is  to  be  contem- 
plated, but  not  to  be  spoken  to,  for  your  regard  is  fixed 
u[)on  a  voiceless,  sphynx-like  immobility,  belonging 
more  to  an  unsubstantial  dreamland  than  to  a  real 
earth. 

If  you  think  of  this  attempt  at  analysing  the  cause 
of  this  unspeakable  loneliness,  when  next  you  gaze 
upon  African  hill-scenes  you  will  perhaps  admit  the 
truth  of  these  remarks.  You  will  perceive  that  it 
is  purely  a  want  of  sympathy  between  you  and  them, 
owing  entirely  to  the  strange  sunshine.  If  you  doubt 
it,   view   the   same  scenes  in  the  months   (jf  October 


96  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     and  Xovember,  and  bear  witness  to  tlieir  vivid  colour- 

Aug.  22.     . 

Boma.    iiig  wrought  bj  the  spring-tide  of  Nature. 

Boma  (Mboma)  has  a  history,  a  cruel  blood-curdling 
history,  fraught  with  liorror,  and  woe,  and  suffering. 
Inhumanity  of  man  to  man  has  been  exemplified 
here  for  over  two  centuries  by  the  pitiless  persecution 
of  black  men,  by  sordid  whites.  The  natives  formerly 
were  purchased  by  thousands,  forciljly  expatriated, 
enchained  by  dozens,  packed  closely  in  the  holds  of 
slave-ships,  and  shipped  to  the  Brazils,  West  Indies, 
and  North  America,  whence  they  never  i-eturned. 
Whole  fleets  have  been  maintained  to  carry  on  the 
slave  traffic,  and  have  anchored  in  this  neighbourhood. 
The  miscellany  of  merchandise,  and  the  stores  of  gin 
and  rum  in  their  holds,  have  induced  the  people  of 
Boma  to  seek  by  all  iniquitous  means  to  gather  the 
victims  of  superstition,  folly,  ignorance,  and  of  violence 
from  all  parts  inland.  As  this  evil  spread  abroad, 
other  neighbouring  districts,  Ponta  da  Lenha,  Nokki, 
Mussuko,  and  all  the  river  and  coast  towns,  despatched 
their  emissaries  until  there  was  not  a  village  in  all 
the  wide  space  between  the  sea  and  the  meridian  of 
Stanley  Pool  which  had  not  cause  to  curse  the  evil 
that  had  suddenly  covered  the  land  with  mourning 
and  woe. 

Now  do  you  wonder,  as  you  look  about  over  the 
large  area  of  wilderness  and  sterility,  that  so  much  of 
those  rich  plains,  now  covered  with  mournfully  rustling 
grass,  lies  untilled?  Had  this  land  but  the  population 
which  has  grouped  itself  in   crowded  numbers   along 


A    TERRIBLE  PUNISHMENT.  97 

the  Upper  Congo  and  its  upper  affluents,  modern  Boma  1879. 
would  have  been  a  city  of  some  magnitude;  for  the  BomH. 
legitimate  trade  which  has  sprung  np  since  Britain 
moved  Europe  and  America  to  tenderness  and  com- 
passion, had  sufficed  to  have  stimulated  the  many,  as 
it  has  the  few  relics  of  vanished  tribes  now  living, 
to  honourable  industry  in  developing  the  natural 
resources  of  the  land.  Oh,  if  in  the  coming  times, 
which  I  see  with  eyes  inspired  by  faith,  the  land  shall 
be  redeemed  from  its  present  torpid  deadness ;  when 
o-eneraticns  shall  be  born  under  the  benig-n  influence 
of  civilised  institutions,  when  the  land  has  been  helped 
by  the  fostering  care  of  a  Government,  and  the  plains 
and  the  valleys  shall  rejoice  in  fatness  and  plenty, 
tlien  let  that  nation  that  initiated  the  slave-trade  in 
these  regions  beware  the  pen  of  the  Congo  poet ! 

Modern  Boma,  however,  in  1879  could  only  show 
one  man  who  knew  through  personal  experience  what 
old  Boma  had  been.  He,  and  another  living  at  some 
obscure  factory  lower  down,  had  been  guilty  two  years 
before  of  having  committed  a  crime,  which  I  doubt 
even  the  annals  of  old  Boma  could  match.  His  stores 
were  burnt  one  night,  much  stealing  of  gin  and  cloth 
had  become  common — the  dissatisfaction  among  the 
slaves  he  owned  being  shown  by  this  method  of  re- 
taliation on  their  unkind  master.  The  guilty  parties 
were  discovered.  The  master  caught  them,  encircled 
their  necks  with  iron-collars,  rove  a  short  chain 
through  the  collar  loops,  and  riveted  the  end-link, 
which  was  split  purposely,  over  another  link    of  the 

VOL.    I.  u 


98  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     chain  near  the  middle  of  the  gang.     The  slaves  being 

Aug.  22. 

Boma.  thus  sccured,  their  hands  were  bound  behind,  and  then 
they  were  put  into  a  boat  and  rowed  into  mid-channel, 
where  they  were  hustled  over  the  side  one  after 
another  into  the  river,  and,  thus  chained  and  fettered, 
were  soon  drowned. 

A  few  hours  after  death  the  bodies  floated  down  with 
the  flood,  and  were  stranded  somewhere  below  on  a 
sand-bank,  to  be  discovered  by  Captain  Hopkins,  H.B. 
Majesty's  Consul,  during  one  of  his  tours  of  inspection 
and  while  bound  up  river,  who,  on  examination  of  the 
chain,  found  the  name  of  the  owner  on  it. 

Since  the  commission  of  that  crime  modern  Boma 
has  been  free  from  stain  and  guilt.  Its  trade  is  now  very 
innocent — the  butter  of  the  oil-palm,  rubber  from  the 
forests,  kernels  from  the  oil-nuts,  nuts  from  the  ground, 
copal  from  old  deposits,  ivory  spoils  of  the  elephant, 
&c.,have  sufficed  to  keep  the  natives  busy  in  the  collec- 
tion of  them ;  and  the  barter  of  cottons  from  Manchester 
and  Glasgow,  woollen-savelist  from  Rochdale,  blankets 
from  Yorkshire,  cutlery  and  guns  from  Sheffield  and 
Birmingham,  crockery  and  hardware  and  beads  and 
brass-wire  from  various  parts  of  Europe,  gin  and 
rum  from  Holland  and  Hamburg,  tobacco  and  fish 
from  America,  have  been  remunerative  to  the  British, 
French,  Dutch  and  Portuguese  traders  who  have 
established  themselves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
once  great  slave  mart  of  the  Congo. 

Granted  that  some  of  the  traders  of  modern  Boma 
have  not  acted  always  in  consonance  with  the  strictest 


CONTENT  OF   THE  NATIVES. 


99 


principles  of  justice  and  equity  in  their  dealings  with 
the  natives,  yet  the  happy  results  visible  from  their 
influence  throughout  a  wide  area  inland  prove  that 
they  have  more  frequently  been  swayed  by  the  desire 
to  be  upright  than  otherwise.  As  we  note  the  character 


1879. 
Aug.  22. 

Boma. 


GKOUP   OF   NATIVES — MEN,    WOMEN,    AND    YOUTHS. 

of  the  present  intercourse  between  whites  and  blacks, 
we  become  convinced  that  no  ill-will  exists  ;  we  see 
tliat  tlie  natives  do  not  seem  embittered  or  soured,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  that  a  pleasant  familiarity  and  con- 
fident bearing  marks  their  behaviour  as  they  tread 
the    river   street  of  Boma.      Tliough  they  would    be 

H  2 


100  TEE   CONGO. 

1879.    powerless   to   resist   the    auxiliaries   that   a   union    of 

Aug.  22. 

Boma.  traders  could  call  to  its  aid,  the  natives,  on  closer 
investigation,  are  found  to  be  secure  against  tyranny, 
oppression,  and  persistent  evil-doing  of  the  whites,  by 
the  very  interests  which  have  compelled  the  traders 
to  make  their  homes  here  by  the  Congo  riverside. 
The  fierce  and  sharp  competition  which  exists  between 
the  traders  to  secure  the  largest  trade,  and  which  finds 
vent  in  the  undertone  of  talk  at  their  various  tables, 
supplies  a  better  protection  for  the  natives  than  a 
whole  fleet  of  cruisers  could  afford.  The  wicked  white 
man,  with  foul-mouthed  vituperation,  is  shunned  and 
tabooed  and  is  boycotted  completely.  His  name  and 
character  are  known  along  the  byways  and  highways 
of  the  trade  carriers.  A  reduction  of  trade  and 
absolute  ruin  follows,  which  speedily  drives  him 
away,  and  the  liberal  and  kindly  white  reaps  the 
advantage. 

The  fear  that  the  traders  in  general  have  been 
hardly  dealt  with  compels  me  to  do  them  this  justice. 
Missionaries,  who  possibly  have  misrepresented  them, 
may  have  been  vainly  seeking  an  arcadia  at  Boma 
and  other  places.  Instead  of  creating  one  for  them- 
selves far  removed  from  the  busy  centres  of  commerce, 
the  missionaries  follow  in  the  steps  of  the  traders,  and 
grumble  that  the  traders  do  not  sacrifice  what  they 
have  gained  to  the  sentiments  by  which  they  them- 
selves are  governed. 

Since  1879  Boma  has  considerably  increased  in  size. 
The  French  Catholic  mission  has  established  itself  on  a 


NO    CLASSIC  ASSOCIATIONS.  101 

low  bill  on  the  river  banks,  separating  the  Englisb  .^^^02 
factories  from  tbe  other  European  emporiums  of  trade.  Boma. 
The  banks  of  Crocodile  Creek,  which  serpentines  a 
course  by  a  low  meadow  near  the  lower  end  of  Boma, 
have  been  altered.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  creek  is 
the  Association  Accountant's  frame  chalet,  the  property 
of  the  International  Association,  and  near  the  machine- 
shops,  coal-sheds,  "  go-downs,"  and  the  coloured  em- 
ployes' little  village,  all  of  which  a  Decauville  railway 
connects  with  a  new  iron  pier  projecting  well  out  into 
deep  water.  On  a  breezy  plateau  a  mile  off,  com- 
manding an  extensive  view  of  the  valley  of  the  Lower 
Congo,  is  the  commodious  hospital  of  the  International 
Association,'  a  residence  in  which  I  know  by  experience 
is  not  by  any  means  disagreeable ;  nay,  rather  desir- 
able if  the  mind  is  occupied.  Finally,  on  the  western 
side  of  the  creek,  Boma  is  extending;  two  factories 
being  already  established,  and  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe  that  it  will  grow  more,  with  what  rapidity 
depends  of  course  upon  the  development  of  the 
interior. 

The  reader  will  have  guessed,  by  my  omission  to 
mention  the  fact,  that,  though  the  Congo  in  volume  is 
equal  to  the  Nile,  the  Zambezi,  and  the  Niger  together, 
it  is  utterly  barren  of  classic  associations.  Let  not  the 
stress  made  upon  this  be  too  great.  It  is  true  that 
Livingstone  once  humorously  said  that  he  would  not 
be  made  into  "  black  man's  pot "  for  it.  As  tliis  great 
and  dear  sacrifice  is  not  required  of  us  we  propose  to 
be  more  tender  in  dealing  with  it. 


102  THE   CONGO. 

1879.        Neither  rovino;  ancients  nor  wanderius;  moderns  of 
Aug.  22.  ....  . 

Boma.  great  renoVn  have  visited  it.  No  grand  event  is  con- 
nected with  its  name ;  nothing  has  ever  been  performed 
in  connection  with  the  Congo  to  make  its  history  popu- 
larly interesting  to  those  who  are  not  engaged  in  com- 
merce or  some  special  study  of  it.  No  military,  naval, 
or  scientific  enterprise  of  any  magnitude  is  associated 
with  its  name,  if  we  except  Tuckey's  expedition.  It  has 
a  dismal  local  history  that  arouses  a  gruesome  feeling 
when  we  recall  the  slave-trading  days.  Ships  of  war 
of  many  nations  have  ascended  the  river ;  they  have 
anchored  for  a  short  time  abreast  of  Boma,  and  have 
then  sailed  away.  British  consuls  and  other  European 
naval  officers  have  visited  Boma  frequently,  and  of  late 
years  some  have  even  ventured  as  far  as  the  lowest 
of  the  Livingstone  Falls,  known  as  Yellala.  Dutch, 
English,  French,  and  Portuguese  traders  have  made 
noble  efforts  to  obtain  the  largest  trade  in  local  pro- 
duce. Among  authors  and  wandering  litterateurs, 
Captain  Richard  Francis  Burton  and  Joachim  Monteiro 
are  known  to  have  visited  the  Lower  Congo  ;  and 
lately  Mr.  H.  H.  Johnston,  a  young  traveller  of 
promise,  has  written  a  charming  account  of  his  travels 
to  Bolobo ;  but  even  the  former,  who  is  unequalled 
in  the  art  of  exhausting  any  topic  of  interest  to  him, 
has  failed  to  discover  one  fact  connected  with  the 
history  of  the  Congo  to  make  a  lasting  impression  on 
account  of  its  intrinsic  worth.  It  is  owing  probably 
to  this  extreme  historical  barrenness  that  the  poet 
Camoens'  stanza  relating  to  it  is  so  often  quoted : — 


A   FES  TILE  ISLAND.  103 

"  AUi  0  mui  grande  reino  esta  de  Congo,  1S79. 

Per  nos  ja  convertido  a  fe  de  Christo,  "°* """ 

Per  onde  o  Zaire  passa  claro  e  longo, 
Eio  pelos  antiguos  nunca  Tisto." 

Translation. 

"  Here  the  great  kingdora  of  Congo  lies, 
That  we  converted  to  Christian  faith. 
By  which  tlie  Zaire  flows  clear  and  long, 
A  stream  unseen  in  ancient  days." 

Camoens,  Lusiads  V. 

The  island  opposite  Boma  has  been  farmed  by  the 
Dutch  from  the  princes  of  the  mainland,  and  I  am  told 
that  the  gardens  are  very  thriving,  and  that  European 
vegetables  take  to  the  soil  kindly.  In  the  gardens  of 
Boma  some  of  the  traders  have  reall}^  distinguished 
themselves  in  horticulture.  Oranges,  citrons,  limes, 
papaws,  guavas  and  pineapples,  are  among  the  fruits 
obtainable  in  the  season  ;  while  European  and  sweet 
potatoes,  tomatoes,  onions,  turnips,  lettuce,  cabbage, 
beet,  carrots,  and  beans,  thrive  sufficiently  well.  The 
eucalyptus  has  also  been  tested,  but  it  has  been  found, 
after  growing  to  15  feet  high,  to  perish,  probably 
owing  to  an  exposed  position. 

Fresh  meat  from  bullock,  sheep,  goat,  and  fowls, 
including  ducks,  may  be  also  obtained,  so  that  with 
rice,  wheaten  bread,  and  the  help  of  a  good  cook,  a 
European  has  no  cause  to  regret  Congo  life,  provided 
discretion  governs  his  conduct  regarding  "  pegs,"  and 
cold  draughts  are  avoided. 

Meantime,  while  acting  as  guide  to  the  reader,  we 
must  not  forget  the  absent  steamers  of  the  international 
flotilla.     The  Albion  and  Behjique  had  arrived  simul- 


104  THE   CONGO. 

1879,    taneously,  after  four  liours'  steaming  from  Ponta  da 

Aug.  22, 

Bcn.a.  Lenha,  but  it  was  fast  upon  11  p.m.  before  the  English 
boat  Royal  was  beard  puffing  bravely,  towing  the  paddle 
boat  En  Avant,  and  half  an  hour  later  before  the  Espe- 
rance  appeared  with  the  40-foot  steel  barge. 

The   whites   on    board   were   terribly   hungry,  and 
savagely  out  of  humour,  but  a  bountiful  repast  dulled 
the  disposition  which  w^as  sharp  previously  for  wordy 
warfare.      All   agreed,  however,  on    tlie  safe   neutral 
ground  of  blaming  the  builders  of  the  En  Avant,  for 
these  were  the  days  before  Flamini's  genius  came  to  the 
rescue  and  converted  an  apparently  worthless  craft  into 
a  marvel  of  utility.     A  shorthand  reporter  present  on 
that  evening,  among  the  raw  lads  of  Denmark  and  the 
young  gentlemen  from  Belgium,  might  have  enabled 
me  to  publish  for  public  benefit,  and  especially  for  the 
nse  of  future  navigators,  the  various  discoveries  made 
among   sand-bars    and    blind   water-alleys ;    lovers   of 
natural  history  too  might  have  been  highly  amused,  if 
not  instructed,  about  the  merits  of  vari-coloured  mos- 
quitoes, their  size,  and  the  peculiar  effect  of  the  bite. 
Though  I  know  something  of  Africa,  I  was  not  aware 
of  the  extent  to  which  susceptible  natures  could  enlarge 
trivialities.      Inexperience   evidently   possesses   micro- 
scopic powers  of  enlargement.     However,  I  have  but 
a  poor  memory  sometimes,  and  I  fear  I  cannot  rehearse 
the  stories  related  that  evening  with  due  justice. 

The  next  day  after  arrival  at  Boma  the  Albion  con- 
tinues to  discharge  her  cargo,  and  the  Belgique  is  also 
emptied.     On  the  25th  the  latter  is  despatched  down  to 


A   EECONNAISSANCE.  105 

Banana  Point  for  another  caro-o;  and  the  26th,  havins;    /S'^^- 

o     '  7  o     Aug.  26. 

cleared  the  Albion,  she  is  also  despatched  down  the  river    Boma. 
for  the  wooden  huts,  lumber,  machinery,  and  hardware. 

On  the  28th  the  Albion  returns  to  Boma,  with  her 
decks  lumbered  and  holds  full,  and  on  the  30th,  having 
employed  the  day  before  in  steaming  up  the  Congo  to 
explore  for  a  new  camp,  with  a  Kabinda  native  for  a 
pilot,  she  is  steamed  up  to  Mussuko  on  the  south  bank, 
four  hours  above  Boma.  So  convenient  was  the  landing- 
place  of  Mussuko,  that  we  could  tie  the  steamers  along- 
side the  shore  in  three  fathoms  of  water. 

While  cargo  was  discharged  in  afternoon.  Captain 
George  Thompson  of  the  Albion  and  myself  proceeded 
up  river  in  the  life-boat  Royal  on  reconnaissance,  and 
without  a  pilot,  to  secure  another  camp  to  move  to 
when  the  goods  should  all  have  been  brought  from 
Boma  to  Mussuko,  and  if  possible  to  employ  the  Albion  s 
services  to  transport  the  600  tons  of  material  lying 
at  Banana  Point  and  Boma. 

Two  hours  and  a  half  brought  us  to  the  little  islet 
marked  Zunga-chya-Idi  on  Tuckey's  chart,  the  island 
being  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  little  river  Lufu,  issuing 
from  the  north  shore. 

Viewing  a  fine  green  grassed  plateau  on  the  north 
bank,  about  two  miles  higher  up,  and  which  rose  some 
300  feet  above  the  river,  we  ventured  from  the  cove 
near  the  Lufu  and  dared  the  stream.  Ignorant  of  the 
proper  course  that  ought  to  have  been  taken,  and  having 
a  profound  belief  in  the  powers  of  steam,  we  steered 
the    tiny  launch   for   nearly  the   centre  of  the   river, 


106  THE   CONGO. 

1879.    where  we  kept  her  with  a  full  head  of  steam  for  several 

Aug.  30.         . 

Mussako.  minutes  struggling  against  the  mighty  current.  Now, 
if  you  place  a  bottle  cork  in  a  basin  of  water,  and  stir 
the  water  violently  about,  you  may  form  an  idea  of  the 
style  of  current  at  this  particular  place.  The  efforts 
of  the  little  steamer  to  make  headway  in  the  whirling 
bubbling  cauldron  were  frantic.  We  were  swung  and 
pirouetted  about  by  the  volumed  force,  belched  upward, 
sideways,  and  as  many  yards  back  as  we  had  advanced 
in  the  subsidence  of  the  whirl,  and  presently  found  the 
bow  rising  before  us  on  an  uplifted  ridge  of  water,  and 
again  we  were  swept  backward  to  become  once  more 
the  slight  plaything  of  the  wrathful  and  tumultuous 
waters.  "With  our  faith  in  steam  power  considerably 
diminished,  we  retreated,  baiSed,  and  went  racing  down 
the  river  towards  our  camp. 

"Wishing  to  give  our  worthy  skipper  a  little  taste  of 
the  pleasure  of  African  game  shooting,  on  arriving 
half-way  down  Palmyra  Reach,  we  searched  for  the 
hippopotami  which  we  supposed  usually  haunted  the 
shore  near  by,  for  the  sake  of  the  succulent  grasses 
that  grew  on  the  low-terraced  land.  Xor  were  we 
disappointed.  A  hippopotamus  was  sighted,  body  iu 
the  water,  head  resting  on  a  bank,  either  profoundly 
asleep,  or  lost  in  deep  meditation. 

"  That  a  hippopotamus  ?  "  cries  sea-bred  Thompson. 
"  That's  a  rock,  mun  !  " 

An  Express  rifle  was  fired  into  the  animal's  brain, 
and  not  the  slightest  movement  followed. 

"  There,"  cries  the  sea-wise  skipper.     "  I  told  you. 


iiii  I  iiiwfw'i  111!  I  mi 


A  DEAD   SHOT.  107 

You've  fired  at  a  rock  sure  enouo-h  this  time.     Ain't    ,^^'^l- 

o  Aug.  30. 

you  ashamed  of  yourself?"  he  asks  with  a  beaming  Mussuko. 
look  of  triumph. 

"  Well,  we  shall  see.  Gently  ahead,  boy  " — to  the 
coloured  engineer ;  and  a  few  turns  of  the  screw 
brought  us  aground,  which  enabled  Mr.  Thompson, 
who  was  a  jewel  of  a  sea-captain,  but  a  lubber  among 
hippos,  to  distinguish  between  a  hippo's  head  and  a 
rock ;  but  who  was  not  quite  satisfied  until,  like 
another  Thomas  Didymus,  he  had  buried  three  fingers 
in  the  wound. 

I  will  pass  over  the  complimentary  remarks  uttered 
by  George  Thompson,  Captain  of  the  SS.  Albion,  and 
introduce  the  reader  by  a  sketch  of  the  scene  that 
followed,  when  the  young  Danes  and  Scotchmen  on 
the  Albion  were  brought  up  in  the  whaleboat  to  drag 
the  beast  ashore  and  cut  the  meat  up  for  distribution 
among  our  people. 

Albert,  in  a  frenzy  of  delight,  must  first  bestride  the 
carcase,  that  he  might  write  to  his  papa  at  Copenhagen, 
how  he  bestrode  a  hippopotamus,  and  Martin  must 
spank  the  broad  rump  with  open  hand  to  his  own 
grief;  and  there  is  opening  of  the  jaws  to  judge, 
without  peril,  of  the  cavernous  extent,  count  the  solid 
molars  and  gleaming  tusks,  which  could  have  nipped 
the  strongest  man  in  twain  had  the  beast  been  alive, 
and  many  other  freaks  which  curious  inexperience  is 
prone  to  indulge  in. 

Until  September  13th,  the  Albion  was  busily  em- 
ployed, with   the  Belfjique,   in    conveying   the  multi- 


108  TEE   CONGO. 

1879.  tudinous  effects  with  which  we  proposed  to  effect  a  per- 
Mussuko,  manent  lodgment  on  some  unknown  point  on  the  north 
or  south  side  of  the  river.  As  fast  as  the  goods  and 
effects  were  brought  to  the  landing-place  at  Mussuko 
they  were  discharged  on  the  shore  by  relays  of  our  force, 
while  others  stored  the  perishable  materials  within  the 
factory,  the  coarser  articles  being  piled  in  order  near  the 
landing-place.  The  SS.  Albion  of  Leith  was  now  re- 
leased from  river  duty,  taken  down  to  Banana  Point, 
coaled  for  her  long  voyage,  and  sent  home  on  the  17th, 
direct  to  Europe.  She  carried  our  letters,  containing 
the  reports  of  our  first  movements  up  the  Congo, 
wherein  I  felt  we  must  congratulate  ourselves  upon  the 
fact,  that  in  thirty-four  days  we  had  advanced  to  our 
first  base  of  operations  about  ninety  miles  from  the  sea, 
with  all  our  materials,  with  our  flotilla  in  working  order, 
and  every  promise  of  future  success. 


VIEW  UP   THE  mVEB.  109 


CHAPTER   Till. 

UP    THE    COXGO  :    FROil    BOilA    TO    VI VI. 

Buka  Island—  Chinsalla  Creek — Prince's  Island — Burial-place  of  oflBcers 
of  the  Tuckey  Expedition — Tinda-le-Xzaddi  village — Mussuko — 
Number  of  trading  establishments — Xavigation  of  the  Congo — 
Ultimate  point  of  navigation — Eeconnaissance  for  a  site  for  our  chief 
station — Amount  of  steam-power  requii-ed  to  breast  the  current — 
Dedede,  the  merry  chief,  tells  us  of  a  site — Castle  Hill — "  Sure,  it 
is  beautiful,  this ! " — A  fiery  clearance — Amiable  natives — Features 
of  the  district — Access  and  routes  to  the  station — Arrangements  for  a 
"palaver" — Advantages  of  the  Yivi  country;  its  exploration — The 
five  chiefs  of  Yivi  and  their  men-at-arms — A  splendid  market  for  old 
clothes — The  "  palaver  " — A  tight  bargain — Congoese  shrewdness  in 
trade — ^Lingenji,  the  boy  trader  of  Bolobo — "Are  not  Yivi  and 
Nsanda  one  ?  " — The  bargain  closed. 

Viewed  from  Boma  upward  we  are  scarcely  able  to  1879. 
trace  tlie  direction  from  which  the  Congo  flows  to  widen  -^^^^ 
out  into  the  expansive  broad-bosomed  stream  we  have 
become  acquainted  with  in  our  ascent  from  Banana 
Creek.  The  hilly  ridges  on  the  north  and  south  shores 
— that  were  not  visible  until  we  were  within  about 
fifteen  miles  of  Boma,  but  which  had  still  run  easterly 
in  almost  parallel  lines  witli  our  course  some  distance 
inland — are  seen  to  almost  meet  just  above  Boma, 
and  isolated  spurs,  or  rocky  points  sharply  projected 
from  the  hitherto  uniform  lines,  impede  the  view  up 
stream. 

Steaming  upward   from  the  factory-Hned  shores  of 


no 


TEE   CONGO. 


1879. 
Sept. 

Buka  Is 


Boma,  and  keeping  well  off  the  shore,  we  deflect  our 
course  gradually  to  the  rising  grove-clad  head  of  Buka 
Island,  or  the  Isle  of  Crocodiles,  as  it  was  anciently 
called  by  the  natives.  The  north  main  shore  has  curved 
in  a  southerly  direction  from  the  east.  Approaching 
Buka  Island  we  see  on  our  left  the  narrow  sinuous 
Chinsalla  Creek,    separating   the  main   from    Prince's 


IM'^-..^^* 


ISLAND   OX   THE   LOWER   CONGO. 


Island,  and  enter  a  deep  channel  between  the  west  end 
of  Prince's  and  the  east  end  of  Buka  Islands.  A 
glance  at  the  sketch  will  show  the  nature  of  the  vege- 
tation and  trees  which  clothe  the  slopes.  It  is  this  gap 
between  the  two  islands  that  dispart  the  Congo  into  the 
two  broad  branches  visible  at  Boma. 

Rounding  Prince's  Island   to  the  east  we  see  the 
Congo  flowing  in  one  united  river  towards  us  through 


PBIXCrS  ISLAXD.  Ill 

a  deep  trough,  the  sides  of  which  slope  roughly  upward  1879. 
to  the  height  of  300  feet,  and  above  Nokki  gradually  pence's  is. 
rise  to  900  and  1100  feet.  Confined  to  the  average 
breadth  of  about  1400  yards,  its  force  is  increased  to  a 
current  of  four-and-a-half  knots  an  hour,  while  150, 
200,  and  even  300  feet  soundings  are  obtained  at  the 
narrower  portions. 

Prince's  Island  is  the  burial  place  of  several  of  the 
officers  of  the  Tuckey  Expedition,  and  in  it  are  also 
buried  the  remains  of  the  Boma  chiefs.  The  river  sides 
of  the  islands  are  clothed  in  a  luxuriant  tropical  tangle 
out  of  which  many  a  palm  and  its  feathered  fronds 
arises  graceful  to  the  view.  On  the  creek  side  may 
be  found  a  grassy  terrace,  over  which  a  narrow  path  is 
traced  by  the  natives.  Its  summit  is  jagged  and  un- 
even ;  the  grey  rock  peeps  out  bare  amid  the  heads 
of  vivid  crowns  of  trees, 

AVhen  we  have  well  passed  Prince's  Isle,  the  view  to 
the  stranger  is  enticing  enough  to  lead  him  to  expect 
that  round  the  sharp  rocky  points  something  unusual 
will  requite  him  for  the  time  given  to  the  ascent.  But 
the  utter  absence  of  artificial  scenes  throughout  all  the 
rude  and  rough  prospect  soon  makes  him  feel  that  once 
seen  the  view  is  in  no  way  worth  a  second  trip. 

Those  steep  slopes  of  red  clay  earth  thickly  strewn 
witli  grey  blocks  of  stone  and  quartz ;  those  ever  repeat- 
ing conformations  of  almost  precipitous  spurs  alter- 
nating with  gullies  scantily  green  with  poor  bush ; 
those  narrow  bits  of  terraces  adorned  with  a  palm 
or  two,  with  bluffy  river  frontage  and  long  line    of 


112  THE   CONGO. 

1879.  dark  naked  grit-rock,  and  the  deep  broad  brown-faced 
Mussuko.  river  confined  witbin  its  rocky  bed  and  sides  by  two 
almost  uniform  lines  of  high  hills,  cannot  offer  anythiog 
that  is  very  agreeable  to  the  eye.  We  are  never  freed 
from  a  faint  feeling  that  all  we  look  upon  verges  upon 
the  desolate ;  there  is  an  unmistakable  poverty  in  the 
aspect,  and  in  August,  when  the  grass  is  bleached  white, 
there  is  a  visible  thirstiness. 

The  point  on  the  southern  side  seen  at  the  end  of  the 
first  reach,  is  that  known  as  Makula,  and  in  the  centre 
of  the  concave  opposite  is  the  village  of  Vinda-le-Nzaddi 
or  "  Yinda  by  the  River."  When  we  have  swept  past 
this  the  long  view  up  the  river  is  rendered  more  attrac- 
tive by  the  factories  of  Mussuko,  where  the  concave  is 
now  on  the  southern  shore,  and  the  point  opposite  to 
it  is  distinguished  by  the  curious  name  of  Fiddler's 
Elbow,  a  designation  which  perpetuates  a  freak  of 
humour  on  the  part  of  old  Captain  Maxwell,  1793. 

By  the  time  we  have  arrived  at  Mussuko,  the  slopes 
of  the  river  gorge  are  perceptibly  higher  and  steeper, 
but  as  we  round  the  bend  of  Mussuko  to  look  up  the 
river  the  north  shore  seems  gradually  to  subside  in  alti- 
tude to  a  clump  of  low  hill-tops,  at  the  foot  of  which  was 
once  a  village  called  Sanda  Congo.  This  reach  of  river 
is  known  as  Palmyra  reach,  from  a  number  of  flourish- 
ing palms  on  the  narrow  terrace  which  extends  be- 
tween the  base  of  the  hills  and  the  river.  The  northern 
or  right  side  of  the  river  is  here  very  foul  with  rocks, 
but  the  southern  side  is  free  as  far  as  "  Diamond " 
Eock,  right  opposite  Sanda  Congo  bend. 


FACTORIES  AT  NKONGOLO.  113 

By  skirting  Diamond  Rock,  within  tliirty  ^'ards,  or  i879. 
as  tlie  safer  plan,  when  a  mile  below  Diamond  Rock,  xokid. 
striking  obliquely  across  the  river  until  well  clear  of  the 
troubled  waters  which  impinge  upon  some  rocks  near 
the  centre  opposite  the  Diamond  Rock,  a  vessel  of  any 
draught  can  safely  pass  upward  into  the  next  reach  at 
the  head  of  which  the  factories  of  Nokki  are  fully  in 
view. 

Opposite  Nokki,  on  the  north  point,  is  Nkongolo, 
wliere  the  International  Association  have  now  erected 
a  two-storied  chalet  and  some  store-houses,  but  in  1879 
there  were  only  two  factories  above  Boma,  that  of 
Scott's  at  Mussuko,  and  Faro's  at  Nokki.  In  1885, 
however,  there  are  nineteen  establishments  (only  six  of 
which  are  on  the  north),  commercial,  religious,  and 
philanthropic,  between  Yellala  and  Boma,  which  have 
considerably  animated  the  hitherto  lonely  river 
trough. 

Although  in  the  old  slave-trading  days  many  a 
sailing  vessel  had  no  doubt  ascended  the  Congo,  even 
as  far  as  Nokki,  later  navigators  had  not  been  so  bold, 
and  in  1870  the  traders  were  not  confident  in  their 
assertions  that  the  Alhion  could  ascend  as  far  as 
Mussuko,  But  now,  in  1885,  the  steamers  dash  boldly 
up  to  tlie  landing  place  of  Yivi,  and  a  sturdy  pilot 
possessing  nerve  and  local  knowledge  may  take  a 
vessel  with  a  draught  of  fifteen  feet  to  Yivi  as  easily 
as  to  Boma. 

On  the  26th  of  September  the  quick  and  2:»owcrful 
steam-launch    Esperance   having   been   prepared,    was 

VOL.  I.  I 


114,  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     steamed  ui)  from  Mussuko  landini^-place  at  1.30  p.m., 

Sept.  26.         .  t   . 

Xokki.  with  provisions  enough  on  board  to  feed  a  party  of 
three  wliites  and  ten  colom-ed  men  for  a  more  deU- 
berate  and  final  reconnaissance  which  should  fix  for 
ever  the  ultimate  point  of  navigability,  and  the  site  for 
the  principal  station  of  the  Comite  d'Etudes  du  Haut 
Congo.  At  2.20  p.m.  we  passed  Nokki,  and  the  first 
view  of  the  reach  before  us  proved  clearly  that  the 
river  trough  was  now  assuming  the  appearance  of  a 
canon,  for,  from  immediately  behind  Nkongolo  station 
to  the  end  of  the  reach,  the  north  bank  is  a  cliff 
gradually  rising  from  600  feet  to  1000  feet,  from  the 
verge  of  which  there  is  almost  a  sheer  drop  down  to 
the  water.  The  south  shore,  though  lofty  behind 
Nokki,  appears  to  sweep  down  gradually  to  the  Point 
of  Tunduwa. 

The  Esperance  passed  rapidly  upward  close  to  the 
bank  in  almost  still  water,  her  speed  increasing  as  we 
drew  near  Tunduwa  Point  owing  to  the  back  current. 
Keeping  within  ten  3'ards  of  the  shore,  we  turned  up 
the  reach  leading  to  Yivi_,  to  breast  which  current  as 
it  rushes  down  the  narrowed  canon  requires  nine-knot 
power,  otherwise  it  will  be  useless  to  attempt  journey- 
ing further.  At  the  foot  of  the  Yivi  reach,  the  river  is 
scarcely  600  yards  wide,  though  of  an  unusual  depth, 
possibly  300  feet.  Confined  within  this  narrow  gullet, 
and  before  emjDtying  into  the  broad-like  expansion  called 
Mayumba  Bay,  which  bathes  the  base  of  the  cliffs  just 
mentioned,  the  river  in  the  centre  acquires  great  force, 
and  has  too  swift  a  current  to  be  attempted  by  any 


CASTLE  HILL   AT   VIVL  415 

ordinary  nine-knot  steamer.     But  by  clino'ino-  within     i879. 

.  .  ,  1        Sept.  26. 

biscnit-throw  of  the  south  shore,  and  watching  sharply  y;,.; 
the  curve  of  the  point,  the  steamers  of  the  Association 
and  the  Kahinda  of  250  tons,  and  the  Morian  of  40  tons, 
have  been  able  to  master  the  difficultv.  But  there  is 
no  reason  why  a  5000-ton  steamer  .should  not  pass  if 
she  possessed  sufficient  power,  and  was  handled  by  an 
intelligent  and  experienced  pilot. 

As  we  ascended  along  the  southern  shore  the  current 
perceptibly  slackened  as  the  river  slowly  widened 
again,  and  we  made  good  headway.  Half  way  up  the 
reach,  from  abreast  of  a  low  green  grassy  terrace,  we 
struck  across  the  river  to  the  north  side  and  crept  up 
without  difficulty  to  the  mouth  of  the  Lufu  River,  which 
separates  Ichimpi  and  Chionzo  District  from  that  of 
Tivi.  It  being  5  o'clock  we  encamped  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  Lufu  on  Yivi  territory,  to  make  a  thorough 
inspection  on  the  morrow. 

Calavanga  Islet,  mentioned  by  Tuckey,  lay  just  below 
us  a  hundred  yards  oil".  The  smaller  rapids  of  Yivi — 
into  a  whirlpool  of  which  Tuckey 's  punt  disappeared — • 
sounded  its  wild  moaning  unchanging  rhythm  almost 
abreast  of  us  ;  the  Nomaza  Cove,  of  the  same  navigator, 
is  in  full  view  nearly  opposite,  just  above  Mataddi  Point 
(Rocky  Point)  ;  and  some  000  feet  above  us  towers  the 
steep  mount  now  known  as  Castle  Hill,  on  account  of 
its  slight  resemblance  to  a  castle  wall  when  seen  from 
a  camp  above.  As  it  finally  proved  that  we  were  iu 
close  vicinity  to  the  site  of  our  future  greatest  entrepot, 
\'ivi,   I    ]nay  as  well,  then,  summarise   the   time  that 

I   2 


IIG  THE   CONGO. 


1879.     will  be  employed  by  a  nine-knot  steamer  steaming  from 

Sept.  26.  \     . 

Banana  Creek  to  Tivi : — 


yivi. 


H. 

M. 

3 

30 

o 
o 

30 

3 

45 

1 

15 

1 

10 

.    Hours  13 

10 

Banana  Creek  to  Ponta  da  Lenlia 
Ponta  da  Lenlia  to  Boma 
Boma  to  Mussuko 
Mussuko  to  Xokki 
Isokki  to  XiTi 

Sea  to  limit  of  Xavigation     . 

De-de-de',  the  singing  and  gay  cbief  of  the  Nsanda 
village  from  which  in  1877  I  despatched  a  i^artj  to 
obtain  relief  for  my  starving  caravan,  had  been  met  by 
ns  in  Boma  with  his  lingster  Xsakala,  and  by  an  all- 
powerful  gift  had  been  bribed  to  accompany  us  in  the 
search  for  a  station.  According  to  him  and  his  fellow- 
voyagers  there  would  be  no  difficulty  at  all  in  finding  a 
capital  site  within  a  few  hours'  march  of  Nsanda.  As  I 
liad  already  ascended  as  far  as  I  thought  safe,  I  was  in 
considerable  doubt  of  this  statement.  At  the  same  time, 
tempted  by  his  assurance  and  led  by  curiosity,  I  had 
arrived  thus  far,  and  on  the  morning  after  our  arrival 
at  the  Lufu.  my  friend  was  requested  to  show  the  spot 
he  thought  would  suit  me.  He  took  me  to  the  crest 
of  the  little  hill  behind  our  camp,  led  me  to  a  spot 
whence  a  clear  view  was  obtainable,  and  with  his 
finger  pointed  out  a  deep  water  passage,  a  little  to 
the  left  of  the  track  followed  by  the  Royal  in  her 
vain  attempt  to  ascend  the  tumultuous  centre.  As  he 
professed  to  have  a  full  knowlege  of  the  course  up,  we 
embarked  on  board  the  Esperance.,  whicli  had  already 
full  steam. 


DE-DE-DE  PROPOSES  A    SITE.  117 

Xot  five  minutes  later  we  \Yere  in  the  seventy-foot     i879. 

Sept.  27. 

Avicle  channel  struggling  up  bravely.  On  our  right  a  vivi. 
few  yards  off  was  the  central  body  of  the  river,  heaved 
into  a  watery  ridge  which  every  minute  dissolved  into 
a  congeries  of  whirlpools,  and  colliding  glassy  masses 
that  presently  embraced  wildly,  and  became  involved 
under  the  vexed  surface,  and  ever  and  again  upheaved 
anew  in  circular  mounds  which  rolled  down  by  pres- 
sure from  above  into  the  broader  quieter  water  below. 
On  our  left  was  a  number  of  rocky  islets  forming  little 
nooks  and  watery  recesses  at  the  present  low  stage  of 
the  river,  but  which  during  high  water  are  covered 
with  spray,  and  have  to  bear  the  rage  of  many  strong 
streams  seeking  reunion  with  the  parent  flood  from 
w^hicli  they  have  for  a  time  been  parted.  With  a  long- 
pole  we  kept  sounding  constantly  and  carefully  this  deep 
channel,  to  be  informed  of  its  future  utility.  Thence 
emerging  after  a  short  time,  w^e  sped  on  at  a  quicker 
rate  through  an  undisturbed  river  to  a  broad  sandy 
landing-place  at  the  foot  of  an  isolated  level-topped 
spur,  projected  straight  river-ward  from  the  slope  of 
Castle  Hill.  The  river-head  of  this  hill  dropped  pre- 
cipitously down  to  our  standpoint,  a  depth  of  over  300 
feet,  as  I  guessed,  its  eastern  side  to  a  depth  of  about 
1 00  feet,  its  western  side  to  the  sandy  beach  on  which 
we  stood,  with  a  long  sweeping  slope. 

It  was  at  the  base  of  this  cliff-faced  rock,  which 
IVowned  so  grim  and  silent  above  us,  that  De-de-de' 
proposed  we  should  take  up  our  position  and  build  an 
emporium  to  whicli  all  tlie  world  of  Inner  Africa  could 


118  THE   CONGO. 

1S7'.'.     come  and  trade.     A  sand  i)lot,  one  luuidred  yards  lon^" 

Sept.  27.  .  c/  & 

vivi.  and  fifty  yards  deep,  which  to  our  strange  eyes  led 
nowhere  except  to  a  grassy  forest  some  fifteen  feet  high, 
or  back  again  to  the  deep  forceful  river,  or  up  that  tall, 
upright  grim  rock ! 

"  Which  way,  my  friend  De'-de-de  ?  " 

"  Why  cut  the  grass  away  and  Imild.  Sure,  it  is 
beautiful,  this  !"  he  replied. 

So  we  set  fire  to  the  grass,  for  in  its  present  density 
it  was  not  penetrable.  Piercing  it  with  a  score  of  ten- 
fathom-long  tongues  of  flame,  in  an  hour  the  fire  was 
running  wild  up  the  slopes  of  Castle  Hill,  had  gone 
raging  clear  over  the  western  slope  and  summit  of 
the  high  bluff  and  dipped  into  the  little  valley  on 
the  eastern  side,  where,  sheltered  from  the  wind,  it 
dallied  and  smouldered. 

Meantime  we  had  enjoyed  our  morning  meal,  and 
reminded  of  what  a  wise  man  had  uttered  once, 
"  Honour  to  him  who  makes  a  road  through  the  impas- 
sable," plunged  up  the  steep  slope  before  us,  and  after 
a  short  but  severe  struggle,  we  had  made  an  ascent  of 
343  feet,  so  our  aneroids  and  boiling  apparatus  proved 
later,  and  had  surmounted  the  isolated  hill. 

The  view  we  obtained  was  worth  the  struggle  of  the 
ascent.  We  found  ourselves  on  a  curious  platform, 
250  yards  long  by  45  yards  wide,  almost  level,  and 
habitable,  with  improvements,  343  feet  above  the 
river.  Two  sides  of  it — the  river  and  the  eastern — were 
absolutely  unclimbable  ;  on  the  western  it  was  tedious, 
though    a    road   might    improve    that,    and    from   the 


VIVI  STATION.  119 

landward  end   of  it  the   Castle  Hill  sloped  up  stiffly     iS79. 
steep  to  about    650  feet  higher.     Across   the   ravine,     yivi. 
which  bounded  this  platform  on  the  east,  was  a  nobler 
plateau,  probably  a  square  mile  in  surface,  which  made 
me  envious. 

From  a  rocky  coign  overlooking  the  river,  and  from 
whence  I  viewed  the  whole  as  on  a  map,  I  began  to 


DOWN    THK    HIVEU   I-K(»M    VIVI. 


study  the  value  of  this  platform,  and  rehearsed  to  my- 
self what  I  wished  to  discover.  I  had  fancied  I  should 
want  a  place  easy  of  access  from  the  sea,  a  neighbour- 
ing population  of  a  conciliatory  tendency,  salubrity  of 
position ;  a  spot  whence  a  feasible  route  to  the  interior 
could  be  made.  "While  pondering  over  the  problem, 
some  of  the  aborigines  from  Cliiusalla,  a  village  in  a 


120  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     Ijollow   to    the   left   of  the   larger   plateau,  presented 

?ept.  27. 

vivi.  themselves  before  me,  and  ere  long  I  had  one  of  my 
ideals  resolved  by  the  unmistakable  amiability  mani- 
fested on  their  features. 

I  turned  my  thoughts  again  to  the  river.  Do"\vn  as 
fiir  as  Mayumba  Bay  and  Tunduwa  Point,  up  to  the 
cliffy  river-front  of  the  gigantic  mountain  mass  of 
Palaballa,  the  wliole  of  the  south  bank  was  visible. 
Xu-ampozo  River,  opposite  to  where  I  stood,  whitening 
over  rock  and  boulder  in  its  steep  bed,  tumbled  into 
the  Congo.  Xomaza  Cove  of  Tuckey  was  1500  yards 
from  us  in  an  air-line,  the  river  in  its  narrowest  part 
here  was  about  000  yards  wide.  On  our  side,  begin- 
ning from  above  river,  Avas  the  broad  terrace  of  Tivi, 
of  the  same  altitude  as  the  hill  from  whence  we  ob- 
.served ;  then  came  the  ravine  of  Nkusu,  with  a  dry 
stream-bed  in  its  bottom ;  then  our  hill,  sloping  down 
into  an  amphitheatral  sweep,  which  would  have  been 
more  useful  but  for  the  river-front  of  it  bristling  with 
irremovable  rocky  islets.  Behind  or  north  of  this  low 
bottom  rose  Castle  Hill,  950  feet  high,  whose  curious 
rocks  near  the  summit  in  detached  horizontal  layers 
resembled  antique  and  decayed  walls.  Bounding,  on 
the  west,  the  amphitheatral  sweep  at  the  base  of  Castle 
Hill,  rose  the  jagged  buttress  whence  we  had  first  gazed 
on  this  very  hill ;  while  beyond  and  below  this  flowed 
the  Lufu  into  the  covelet  fronted  by  Calavanga  islet, 
and  from  the  narrow  Lufu  River  rose  in  a  grand  mass 
the  large  unbroken  and  stupendous  Chionzo  Plateau, 
on  the  airy  summit  of  which  we  saw  a  grove  of  palms, 


ADVANTAGES   OF  QUE   POSITIOX.  121 

waving,  wc  were  told,  over  the  village   of  Icliimpi.     1879. 

Sept.  27. 

Taking  it  all  together  it  was  not  an  uninteresting  yj^i 
view ;  there  was  a  certain  solemnity  about  the  massive, 
bold,  and  silent  features  that  I  could  well  have  dis- 
pensed with.  But  I  had  come  for  practical  purposes  ; 
and  the  artistic  will  be  appreciated  according  as  it  suits 
my  interest. 

Mentally  reviewing  the  various  sites  I  had  reserved 
for  comparison  with  the  very  highest  I  could  find,  I 
knew  of  none  to  compare  with  the  pjresent  one  for 
salubrity.  For  here,  on  this  comparatively  narrow  rock 
pkitform,  was  all  the  quick  drainage  that  was  needed. 
Insalubrity — whence  could  it  arise  here  ?  The  artis- 
tic— what  spot  on  the  lower  river  can  match  this  ? 
"  The  station  must  be  left  with  a  small  garrison  while 
you  wander  far  inland  ;  forget  not  to  provide  that," 
whispered  prudence.  Well,  if  anything  is  defensible 
against  people  only  armed  with  flint-locks,  certainly 
this  position  will  be  almost  impregnable. 

Accessibility  from  the  sea-ward  ?  Feasibility  of 
route  into  the  interior  ? 

The  accessibility  must  be  provided  for  by  a  more 
thorough  exploration  of  the  waters.  If  Tuckey  could 
sail  his  naval  sloop  into  yon  Nomaza  Cove,  surely  we 
in  the  days  of  steamers  may  drive  our  Belgi(]ue  through 
I  hat  current  without  impediment  or  trouble.  And  as 
for  a  route  into  tlie  interior,  I  think  that  will  de})end  on 
our  own  industry,  though  it  looks — hemmed  in  as  we 
are  by  that  massive  1100-fect  high  ridge  of  Tivi — a 
dubious  and  a  difficult  task. 


1879. 
Sept.  2' 

Vivi. 


122 


THE   CONGO. 


But,  before  deciding,  I  will  liave  a  look  at  the  ap- 
proaches to  that  larger  terrace  from  the  river  side ;  and 
I  must  have  a  touch  at  the  bottom  of  those  wild  waters 
and  of  the  north  and  south  channel  again.  So  we  de- 
scended into  the  Nkusu  ravine,  a  hundred  feet  below 
us;  we  crossed  the  now  dry  bed  of  it,  and,  making  our 


NATIVE    HOUSE    WITH    A    FAMILY   GROUP. 


way  up  a  high  tangled  mass  of  tall  grass  and  reeds, 
we  arrived  panting  on  the  longer  terrace.  After  a 
rough  survey  we  again  descended  to  the  river,  and  the 
huge  rock  masses  there  visible  and  the  general  inac- 
cessibility entirely  extinguished  our  hope  that  we_,  witli 
our  small  force  of  labourers,  could  render  it  easier  of 


ARBANGING   FOB   A   '' PALAVEIl.''  123 

access  witliin  a  reasonable  period.     Then  Massalla,  the     1879. 

^  Sept.  27- 

Hngster  of  Chinsalla  village,  in  the  hollow  north  of  the  vivi. 
terrace,  invited  ns  to  his  house,  and,  while  partaking  of 
his  hospitable  draughts  of  fresh  palm-juice,  we  listened 
to  the  gossipy  revelations  he  made  regarding  the  chiefs 
of  Yivi  district.  From  him  we  learned  that  there 
were  five  chiefs,  each  of  whom  had  a  village  and 
was  independent  of  the  other,  though  Yivi  Mavungu, 
who  dwelt  with  his  immediate  dependants  upon  the 
highest  crest  of  Yivi  mountain,  was  the  acknowledged 
senior. 

The  deep  cool  shade  of  the  umbrageous  trees,  the 
effect  of  the  effervescing  draught  of  palm  juice,  the  ami- 
ability of  the  villagers,  the  visible  signs  of  the  fertility 
of  the  soil  all  around  the  small  village  and  between 
its  dwarfed  dwellings,  were  fast  encroaching  upon  my 
affections,  creating  a  liking  for  the  locality,  and 
sapping  that  cynical  indifference  with  which  I  had  at 
first  associated  Yivi  with  the  scene  of  our  preliminary 
labours. 

Would  Massalla  be  good  enough  to  collect  the  chiefs 
of  Yivi  at  our  encampment  near  the  landing-place,  to 
hold  a  "  palaver"  ?  I  would  meanwhile  ascend  to  the 
summit  of  Castle  Hill,  take  a  wider  view  around, 
descend  again  to  the  steamer,  and  with  the  Ksperance, 
a  sounding-lead,  and  long  sounding-pole,  make  a 
sufficient  survey  for  present  uses.  To  this  proposition 
Massalla,  encouraged  by  the  friendly  females  Avho  had 
thronged  about  us,  gave  a  willing  assent. 

A  stifl'  climl)  up  a  steep  rugged  infliuo  to  another 


124  THE  coy 00. 

1879.     terrace  or  platform,   150  feet  hio-lier  tLan  the  first  we 

Sept.  27.  -^  '  ® 

Vivi.  had  explored,  and  a  longer,  steeper  ascent,  lasting  over 
half  an  hour,  brought  us  just  beneath  the  bluff  rock 
walls  we  had  compared  to  an  old  castle  ruin.  A  few 
minutes  later  brought  us  to  the  crown  of  the  Olympian 
height  dubbed  Castle  Hill.  As  the  eye  swept  rapidly 
over  the  view  of  massive  and  glorious  sweeps  of  laud 
and  numberless  detached  hills,  with  the  winding  Congo 
a  thousand  feet  beneath  us,  the  cool  breeze  fanning  our 
perspiring  faces  hot  from  the  ascent,  we  felt  ourselves 
repaid  in  some  degree  for  the  toil  of  coming.  For  the 
land,  with  its  rude  and  bold  irregularities  of  lofty  hills 
and  profoundly  deep  ravines,  the  general  admirable 
careless  disorder,  in  which  it  had  been  fixed  by  potent 
agencies^  and  worn  by  ages  of  hard  baking  and  tropic 
rain-storm,  the  whole  being  lightened  by  the  broad 
waving  band  of  silvered  water  beneath,  made  a  pros- 
pect which  won  from  us  an  ungrudging  compliment 
upon  its  solemn  melancholy  beauty.  But  it  had  not 
the  quality  of  fixing  the  affectrons.  The  churlish  soil 
had  rejected  the  copious  wealth  of  water,  and  its 
intrinsic  value,  through  its  merciless  ruggedness,  and 
the  departing  water  had  revenged  itself  by  washing 
away  every  bit  of  vegetable  humus  that  each  dry 
season  had  left  for  its  nourishment,  while  it  exposed 
large  patches  of  brick-red  ungrateful  clay,  inter- 
spersed amid  equally  large  patches  well  strewn  with 
quartz. 

The    larger    terrace    near    Chinsalla    villao-e    below 
us   appeared  adapted  for   cultivation    and    settlement. 


SURROUNDINGS   OF   VIVA. 


125 


judging  from  our  examination  of  tlie  ample   fold  of     i879. 

Sept.  27. 

ground  of  wliicli  it  formed  a  part.  The  rocky  plat-  vivi. 
form  below  us  looked  like  a  short  pier  projected  from 
the  slope  extending  from  us  for  the  purpose  of 
throwing  a  bridge  across  the  Congo.  To  the  westward 
the  noble  outline  of  Chionzo  Plateau  spread  as  far  as 
the  eye  could  note  in  gentle  waves  of  grass-covered 


SKETCH   MAP   OF   VIVI. 


land,  topped  here  and  there  by  palmy  clusters  or 
groves  of-  cottonwood.  Behind  us,  or  northward,  Vivi 
ridge,  now  like  a  giant  mountain  hump,  two  or  three 
hundred  feet  hiMier  than  Castle  Hill,  was  fully 
revealed  as  above. 

Along  its  spine  were  scattered   a    few  tall  groves, 


120  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     under  whose  shade  we  knew,  later,  were  nestled  the 

Sept.  27. 

vivi.     dark  peoj^le  of  Yivi. 

In  imagination  I  supposed  myself  planted  on  the 
larger  plateau  within  the  loop  formed  by  the  mountain 
masses  of  Yivi  ridge  and  Castle  Hill  on  one  half,  and 
the  river,  deep  down,  forming  the  sides  of  the  other 
lialf.  It  appeared  to  me  as  though  I  should  be  im- 
prisoned within  it  if  a  means  of  exit  were  not  found 
towards  the  interior.  I  therefore  rose  and  strode 
rapidly  along  the  spur  of  Castle  Hill,  climbed  up  the 
easy  gradient  to  the  higher  Yivi  ridge,  where  from  a 
commanding  spot  I  obtained  a  view  of  a  land  whose 
noble  scene  was  most  impressive. 

I  now  began  for  the  first  time  to  grasp  the  details  of 
the  topographical  situation.  The  slope  facing  inland  of 
Yiva  ridge  declines  easily  along ;  one  of  the  spurs  ex- 
tending from  it  down  to  the  valley  of  the  Loa,  a  tribu- 
tary of  the  Lufu,  whose  course  is  from  the  northward  in 
a  cleavage  of  a  tableland  down  towards  the  foot  of  Yivi 
ridge,  and,  joined  by  the  Loa,  it  winds  through  a  rocky 
and  narrow  ravine,  along  the  base  of  the  slope  of 
Castle  Hill,  to  empty  in  front  of  Galavanga  islet — thus 
forming  an  unmistakable  divisional  line  between  Yivi 
district  and  the  great,  broad,  tabular  mass  of  Chionzo 
Plateau.  The  parted  plateaus  caused  by  the  sunken 
line  of  the  Lufu  offered  in  their  expanding  wide  levels 
nothing  very  terrible  or  unpromising  to  the  formation 
of  a  wagon-road  over  them ;  the  plateau  of  Kulu, 
cut  by  the  Loa,  was  equally  good.  As  I  critically 
examined  the  scene,  I  judged  that  the  valley  of  the 


ACCESSIBILITY   OF   THE  STATION.  127 

Loa   was   miicli    of    the    same    altitude    as    Chinsalla     i879. 
plateau,    on    or   near    which    the   first    station    might  "  y'iyx 
possibly  be  constructed,  and  a  road  skirting  the  con- 
tour of   Castle  Hill  ridge  leading   from    the  pier-like 
platform    first    examined,    or    the    Chinsalla    terrace, 
seemed  feasible. 

The  mind  works  rapidly  and  eagerly  wdien  its  interest 
is  excited.  As  fast  as  the  eye  searched  for  all  these 
details  the  mind  leaped  into  the  future.  I  already 
viewed  tlie  completed  station,  the  broad,  well-travelled 
turnpike-road,  the  marching  columns  of  tradespeople, 
the  stream  of  traffic,  and  the  incessant  moving  to  and 
fro  of  multitudes.  But,  alas !  when  the  memory  re- 
verted to  the  scanty  band  of  labourers  which  were 
awaiting  my  decision,  I  could  not  conceal  from  myself 
the  fact  that  all  these  bright  scenes  were  unreal isable 
and  impossible  through  our  poverty  of  labour-power. 

An  hour's  descent  from  my  wind-swept  altitude  re- 
turned us  to  our  encampment  on  the  sandy  beach  at  tlie 
base  of  the  pier-platform,  fullj-  fatigued,  though,  after 
the  hunger  was  satisfied  and  the  limbs  rested  a  short 
time,  my  interest  was  now  excited  by  the  desire  to  see 
the  last  problem — that  of  accessibility  by  river  from  the 
sea — solved  before  the  chiefs  of  Yivi  should  assemble 
to  discuss  the  political  questions. 

Accordingly  we  proceeded  in  the  Esperance  straight 
into  the  stream.  Turning  her  head  down  the  channel 
we  had  ascended,  and,  shutting  off  steam,  we  floated 
witli  the  current,  sounding  quickly  with  a  twelve-foot 
pole  on  either  side  of  the  bow,  while  witli  a  similar 


128  THE   COXGO. 

1879.     pole   other   soundings  were   taken  at  the   stern ;  and, 

Sept.  27. 

Vivi.  having  reached  Calavanga  islet,  we  turned  her  head 
up  for  another  course  of  soundings  and  to  familiarise 
ourselves  with  the  channel.  VTe  then  steamed  up 
along  the  shore,  and  with  pole  and  line  ascertained 
the  depth  up  as  far  as  the  turn  leading  to  Upper  Tivi 
Rapids ;  then  across  the  river  to  the  foot  of  the  might}^ 
cliffs  above  the  Nuampozo  River  on  the  south  side. 
Judging  that  the  depth  about  here  must  be  unusual, 
twenty  yards  frora  the  bouldery  base  of  the  cliff  I  cast 
ray  line,  and  found  fifteen  fathoms.  Another  cast  at 
seventy-five  or  eighty  yards  from  it — a  long  length 
of  line  vanished,  and,  though  we  were  floating  down 
stream,  I  discovered  that  my  line  floated  upward  of 
me  much  faster,  so  that  we  would  have  to  steam  ahead 
a  little  to  keep  up  with  it ;  and  when  brought  up  rigid 
I  found  the  lead  was  inextricably  fixed  in  the  rocks 
beneath.  I  measured  what  was  left  in  the  boat,  and 
perceived  that  there  must  be  a  depth  of  ninety  fathoms 
of  water  at  this  spot.  We  discovered  two  facts  in 
connection  with  this :  viz.,  that  there  was  a  strong 
under-current  of  water  flowing  up  stream  in  this  bend, 
while  the  surface-water  flowed  downward,  and  that  the 
bottom,  deep  as  it  was,  was  covered  with  great  rocks, 
which  could  only  be  caused  by  a  yet  greater  depth 
midstream  and  below,  which  prevented  the  deposit  of 
alluvium  there. 

Our  last  piece  of  water-exploration  was  performed  by 
descending  with  the  current  along  the  south  shore  from 
just  below  the  Nuampozo  covelet.     T\"e  found  that  by 


MEETING    TEE   CHIEFS   OF   VIVL  129 

keepino;  well  in  shore,  awav  from  the  vicinity  of  the     1879. 

,      .  .         /  "^  ,  1  •  Sept.  27. 

boisterous  waters  m  the  centre,  that  the  river  was  per-     yj^^i, 
fectly  clear  to  a  great  depth,  and  that  for  the  helmsman 
locally  experienced  there  was  no  difficulty  to  hinder 
the  navigation  of  any  ship  possessing  greater  power 
than  the  current. 

At  4  P.M.  we  returned  to  our  camp  on  the  beach 
(having  exhausted  ten  hours  in  very  useful  work),  to 
meet  the  five  chiefs  of  Yivi  district,  who,  encircled 
about  by  about  two  score  of  armed  men,  and  led  out 
to  me  by  the  smiling  Massala,  were  in  due  order  and 
according  to  precedence  introduced  to  me. 

No.  1,  the  senior  lord  of  Yivi,  by  name  Yivi  Ma- 
vungu  of  Banza  Yivi,  sou  of  his  father  of  the  same 
name,  stood  out,  short  of  stature  and  club-footed,  with 
an  affected  scowl  of  defiant  truculency,  which  he  had 
intended  for  one  of  bland  amiability,  dressed  in  a  blue 
lackey's  coat,  a  knit  Phrygian  cap  of  vari-coloured 
cotton,  and  a  lower-cloth  of  gaudy  pattern. 

No.  2,  Ngufu-Mpanda,  of  Banza  Sombo,  a  hale  old 
man  with  gray  hair — a  veritable  Uncle  Tom — in  an 
English  red  military  tunic,  a  brown  felt  hat,  an  ample 
clotli  of  check  pattern  round  the  lower  portion  of  his 
body,  anklets  of  brass  wire,  and  a  necklace  of  elephant 
hair  wove  through  a  few  fetish  relics  for  good  luck. 
Like  Yivi  Mavungu,  he  brought  his  hand  up  to  his  hat, 
bent  his  body  in  a  not  ungraceful  salutation,  and 
"  scraped  a  leg  "  like  a  sailor. 

No.  3,  Kapita,  a  humorous-looking  elder,  of  short 
height,  befrocked  in  a  dark  blue  soldier's  coat,  a  good 

VOL.  1.  K 


130  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     cloth  round   his  lower   half,  ankles    and   neck    beinsr 

Sept.  27. 

vivi.  adorned  in  a  fashion  similar  to  the  above-mentioned. 
After  a  salute,  which  likewise  was  an  imitation  of  a 
sailor's,  he  retired  to  make  room  for — 

No.  4,  Yivi  Nku,  who  was  not  very  sober,  but  rather 
hilarious  in  manner,  and  degraded  in  feature,  in  a  black 
cloth  frock-coat  and  black  silk  hat,  and  his  nether  parts 
encircled  by  an  ample  robe  of  crimson  savelist. 

No.  5  was  Benzani  Congo,  a  handsome,  well-formed 
young  man,  in  a  dark  brown  coat  which  belonged  once 
to  a  London  club,  a  nether  robe  of  spotted  blue  cotton, 
neck,  ankles,  and  wrists  ringed  around  with  brass  wire. 

The  men-at-arms  were  not  bad-looking.  The  profits 
of  trade  had  sufficed  to  furnish  them  all  with  decent 
outfits  of  either  printed  cottons  or  unbleached  do- 
mestic, while  a  striped  cotton  cap  of  jaunty  Phrygian 
pattern  was  sported  by  nearly  all,  except  a  few  who 
preferred  the  English  felt  or  straw  hat.  Their  weapons 
were  flint-locks,  branded  "  Tower." 

Short  as  was  my  view  of  this  concourse  of  Yivi  abori- 
gines, I  foresaw  a  brilliant  future  for  Africa,  if  by  any 
miracle  of  good-fortune  I  could  persuade  the  dark  mil- 
lions of  the  interior  to  cast  off  their  fabrics  of  grass 
clothing  and  don  the  second-hand  costumes  visible,  say, 
in  Whitechapel.  See  what  a  ready  market  lies  here  for 
old  clothes !  The  garments  shed  by  the  military  heroes 
of  Europe,  of  the  club  lackeys,  of  the  liveried  servants 
of  modern  Pharaohs,  the  frock-coats  of  a  lawyer,  mer- 
chant, or  a  Rothschild ;  or  perhaps  the  grave  garb  of 
these  my  publishers,  may  here  find  people  of  the  rank 


A   MABKET  FOR    OLD    CLOTHES. 


131 


of  Congo  cliieftainsliip  to  wear  them,  and  strut  about     1879. 

,   .,  .  .    .  Sept.  27. 

^n  grande  tenue  while  on  ceremonious  visits.  vivi. 

Since  this  period  my  views  have  been  confirmed  by 
larger  experience,  and  I  have  seen  many  thousands  of 
dark  Africa's  sons  who  would  not  feel  it  to  be  a  dero- 


NATIVE  CHICKEN  SELLER. 


gation  of  their  dignity  to  wear  the  cast-off  costumes  of 
the  pale  children  of  Europe,  but  would  put  themselves 
to  some  little  trouble  to  gather  enough  raw  produce  to 
give  in  legitimate  exchange  for  them,  that  they  may 
wear  them  rightfully  and  nobly. 

K  2 


132  THE  CONGO. 

1879.         And  now — some  on  native  mats,  laid  over  a  lar2;e 

Sept.  27.  ,  , 

vivi.  space  under  the  shade  of  a  wide-spreading  tree — the 
chiefs  are  seated  in  the  fore-ground ;  decorously  behind, 
at  a  respectful  distance  are  the  men-at-arms.  Massala, 
the  lingster  or  spokesman,  is  requested  by  scowling  Vivi 
Mavungu  to  address  the  words  of  welcome  to  me ; 
and  a  clever  interpreter,  learned  in  the  English  as  well 
as  in  the  dialect  of  Yivi,  conveys  them  to  me  in  very 
complimentary  form,  as  thus  : — 

"  We,  the  big  chiefs  of  Vivi,  are  glad  to  see  the 
mundele  (trader,  formerly,  but  now  applied  to  every 
white).  If  the  mundele  has  any  wish  to  settle  in  our 
country  as  Massala  informs  us,  we  shall  welcome  him, 
and  will  be  great  friends  with  him.  Let  the  mundele 
speak  his  mind  freely." 

I  replied  :  "  State  that  I  am  glad  to  hear  them  speak 
so  kindly  to  the  white  man.  To-day  I  do  not  want 
much.  I  want  ground  to  build  my  houses,  for  I  am 
about  to  build  many,  either  here  or  elsewhere.  I  want 
ground  enough,  if  I  can  get  it,  to  make  gardens  and 
fields.  Vivi  is  not  good  for  that  unless  I  go  far  up ; 
but  what  I  do  get  I  want  for  myself  and  people,  and 
the  right  to  say  what  white  man  shall  come  near  me. 
At  Boma  the  chiefs  have  cut  the  ground  up  small  ; 
there  is  no  room  for  me.  I  want  plenty  of  room,  and 
that  is  why  I  have  come  up  here.  I  want  to  go  inland, 
and  must  have  the  right  to  make  roads  wherever  it  is 
necessary,  and  all  men  that  pass  by  those  roads  must  be 
allowed  to  pass  without  interruption.  No  chief  must 
lay  his  hand  on  them  and  say,  *  This  country  is  mine  ; 


CONSULTATION  OF  TEE  CHIEFS.  133 

pay  me  something  ;  give  me  gin,  or  cloth,  or  so  many  1879. 
guns.'  You  have  heard  of  me,  I  know,  for  De-de-de,  vivj, 
wlio  is  here,  must  have  told  you.  What  I  saw  on  the 
road  to  Boma  must  not  be  repeated  here.  You  have 
no  roads  in  your  country.  It  is  a  wilderness  of  grass, 
rocks,  bush ;  and  there  at  Banza  Yivi  is  the  end  of  all 
life.  If  you  and  I  can  agree,  I  shall  change  all  that.  I 
am  going  to  stop  here  to-night ;  think  of  what  I  have 
told  you,  and  I  will  listen.  To-morrow  you  can  return 
at  the  third  hour  of  the  day,  and  speak." 

After  a  little  consultation  together  they  returned 
homeward,  taking  with  them  De-de'-de'  and  Nsakala, 
my  friends  of  1877,  and  Massala,  the  lingster.  Each 
of  the  chiefs  begged  for,  and  received,  a  bottle  of 
gin. 

About  half-an-hour  before  sunset  we  were  made 
aware  of  a  curious  structure,  like  a  broad  high  raft,  in 
the  middle  of  the  stream  about  a  mile  below,  that 
vomited  forth  black  volumes  of  smoke,  and  seemed 
rooted  to  the  spot.  Through  a  glass  I  could  distinguish 
it  as  the  En  Avant,  which  had  managed  in  some  un- 
accountable way  to  ascend  so  far  on  an  errand  that  we 
could  not  divine,  unless  some  calamity  had  happened 
during  my  absence  at  the  camp.  Again  I  sjDed  down 
liver  eager  to  know  the  cause,  only  to  find  that  the 
boat  had  come  thus  far  in  the  effort  to  bring  me  a 
1)0X  of  goods  I  had  vainly  been  in  search  of  before 
leaving  Mussuko.  One  of  the  Zanzibaris  employed 
in  m}'  first  reconnoitring  trip  had  shown  tlic  way; 
and,  with  the  scientific  help  of  the  chief  engineer  of 


134 


THE   CONGO. 


1879. 
Sept.  27. 

ViTi. 


the  flotilla,  the  En  Avant  had  disclosed  her  dormant 
eapahilities. 

After  hours  of  cold  dispassionate  arguments  with 
myself  that  night,  while  seated  on  the  sand  in  the 
moonlight,  I  came  to  the  conviction  that  I  could  not 
better  my  choice  of  position,  but  that  industry  well 
directed,  and  plans  vigorously  pursued,  might  vastly 


tOXGO    FKOM   LAKDIXG-PLACE,    YIVI. 


improve  what  Nature  had  so  carelessly  left  in  disorder. 
I  then  retired  to  a  sound  and  well-deserved  rest,  and 
rose  next  morning  at  daybreak,  to  pace  the  shore  with 
mind  alert  and  busy — too  bnsy  indeed  considering  the 
smallness  of  the  force  of  men  with  whose  assistance  I 
proposed  to  perform  such  marvels. 

Punctually  to  the  time  appointed  the  Yivi  chiefs,  and 
their  armed  retinues  appeared  tricked  out  in  Congo 
fashion's  garb,  second-hand  military  and  lackey  coats, 


THE  PALAVER.  135 

and  gay  cottons.     All  tlie  men  were  sober  and  cleanly.     1872. 
The  mats  were  unrolled,  and  the  decorous  demeanour     yi^.j 
suited  to  the  important   palaver  was  assumed,  when 
suddenly  at  a  signal  from  the  lingster,  the  salute  was 
given,  none  rising  until  the  senior  in  rank  had  risen, 
bowed,  and  resumed  his  seat. 

The  conference  bep^an  bv  the  linsrster,  Massala, 
describing  how  the  chiefs  had  gone  home,  and  con- 
sulted together  for  a  long  time :  they  had  agreed  that 
if  the  Mundele  would  stay  with  them,  that  of  all  the 
land  unoccupied  by  villages,  or  fields  and  gardens,  I 
should  make  my  choice,  and  build  as  many  houses,  and 
make  as  many  roads,  and  do  any  kind  of  work  I  liked  ; 
that  I  should  be  considered  as  the  "  Mundele "  of 
Yivi,  and  no  other  white  man  should  put  foot  on  Yivi 
soil,  which  stretched  from  the  Lufu  up  to  the  Banza 
Kulu  district,  and  inland  down  to  the  Loa  River,  with- 
out permission  from  me  ;  no  native  chief  of  inland 
or  river-side  should  molest  any  man  in  my  employ 
within  the  district  of  Vivi ;  help  should  be  given  for 
work,  and  the  people  of  V^ivi,  such  as  liked,  should 
engage  themselves  as  workmen ;  anybody,  white  or 
black,  native  or  foreign,  passing  to  and  fro  through  the 
land,  should  do  so  freely,  night  and  day,  without  let  or' 
hindrance ;  if  any  disagreement  should  arise  between 
any  of  my  people,  wliite  or  black,  and  the  jieople 
of  Yivi,  they,  the  chiefs,  would  promise  not  to  try  and 
revenge  themselves,  but  bring  their  complaint  before 
<lie  Mundele'  of  Yivi,  that  he  might  decide  upon  the 


136  THE   C'OXGO. 

1879.     right  and  the  wrong  of  it ;  and  if  any  of  their  people 

vivi.     were  caught  in  the  act  of  doing  wrong,  then  the  white 

man  sljall  promise  that  his  chief  shall  be  called  to  hear 

the  case  against  him,  and  if  the  crime  is  proved,  the 

chief  shall  pay  the  fine  according  to  custom. 

"  All  this,"  continued  Massala,  "  shall  be  set  down  in 
writing,  and  you  shall  read  it,  and  the  English  lingster 
shall  tell  it  straight  to  us.  But  first  we  must  settle 
what  the  chiefs  shall  receive  in  return  for  these  con- 
cessions." 

Now  the  territory  of  Yivi  consists  of  twenty  square 
miles  at  the  utmost.  Its  productive  part  was  already 
occupied  and  cultivated,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of 
500  acres.  The  rest  was  all  mountain,  rock-strewn  slope, 
dry  river  course,  jagged  hill-tops,  and  patches  of  terraces 
too  much  torn  up  by  winding  nullahs  to  be  made  useful. 
It  was  mostly  barren,  mean,  worthless.  But  then  I, 
like  the  traders,  was  not  in  search  of  an  agricultural 
dis-trict.  I  needed  a  port,  a  point  of  debarkation  for 
the  interior.  Being  the  Ultima  Thule  of  navigation, 
labour  being  so  scarce,  and  the  bold  sloping  walls  of 
the  cailon  being  continuous  and  so  relentlessly  high,  I 
must  needs  accept  the  position,  and  by  industrious 
energy  attempt  to  tame  its  prevailing  wildness,  and 
put  a  veneer,  however  thin,  on  the  2}resent  undoubted 
riiggedness.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  therefore,  it  was  for 
the  sake  of  what  a  road  from  Yivi  might  promote,  not 
for  what  Yivi  in  itself  was  worth,  that  negotiations 
were  made. 


CONGOESE  SHREWDNESS  IN  TRADE.  137 

In  the  manao'ement  of  a  baro'ain  I  should  back  the     isro. 

.  .  .      .  Sept.  27. 

Congoese  native  against  Jew  or  Christian,  Parsee  or  vivi. 
Banyan,  in  all  the  round  world.  Unthinking  men 
may  perhaps  say  cleverness  at  barter,  and  shrewdness 
in  trade,  consort  not  with  their  unsophisticated  condi- 
tion and  degraded  customs.  Unsophisticated  is  the 
very  last  term  I  should  ever  apply  to  an  African  child 
or  man  in  connection  with  the  knowledge  of  how  to 
trade.  Apply  the  term  if  you  please  to  yourself  or  to 
a  Red  Indian,  but  it  is  utterly  inapplicable  to  an 
African,  and  this  is  my  seventeenth  year  of  acquaint- 
ance with  him.  I  have  seen  a  child  of  eight  do  more 
tricks  of  trade  in  an  hour  than  the  cleverest  European 
trader  on  the  Congo  could  do  in  a  month.  There  is 
a  little  boy  at  Bolobo,  aged  six,  named  Lingenji,  who 
would  make  more  profit  out  of  a  pound's  worth  of 
cloth  than  an  English  boy  of  fifteen  would  make  out 
of  £10  worth.  Therefore  when  I  write  of  a  Cono-o 
native,  whether  he  is  of  the  Bakongo,  Byyanzi,  or 
Bateke  tribes,  remember  to  associate  him  with  an 
almost  inconceivable  amount  of  natural  shrewdness, 
and  power  of  indomitable  and  untiring  chaffer. 

Four  hours  were  expended  before  the  bargain  was 
concluded,  and  I  found  myself  obliged  to  pay  £32  down 
in  cloth  and  a  rental  of  £2  per  month.  The  papers 
confirming  this  agreement  were  drawn  up  in  due  form, 
and  signed  by  the  respective  parties  concerned  in  the 
ti'ansaction. 

The  following  quotation  from  my  journal  that  even- 


138  TEE   CONGO. 

1879.     ing  sums  up  this  day's  "work  truthfully,  and  even  now, 

Sept.  27. 

x\y\,  with  larger  knowledge  of  the  locality,  not  much  im- 
provement is  needed. 

"  I  am  glad  we  have  so  happily  concluded  the  nego- 
tiations. My  friend  De-de-de  of  Nsanda  pleaded  and 
argued  hard,  so  much  so  indeed  that  Yivi  Mavungu 
became  suspicious  at  last,  which  caused  De'-de-de  to  fall 
at  the  feet  of  each  Yivi  chief,  with  finely  affected 
warmth  and  action,  crying  out,  *  Are  not  Yivi  and 
Nsanda  one  ?  why  should  I  seek  to  do  hurt  or  harm  to 
Yivi  ? '  We  had  the  usual  scenes  of  loud  applause  and 
silence  in  the  court." 

"  I  am  not  altogether  pleased  with  my  purchase.  It 
has  been  most  expensive  in  the  first  place,  and  the  rent 
is  high.  However,  necessity  has  compelled  me  to  it. 
It  is  the  highest  point  of  navigation  of  the  Congo 
opposite  which  a  landing  could  be  effected.  The 
landing-place  is  scarcely  300  yards  long,  but  if  the 
shores  ^vere  improved  by  levelling,  available  room  for 
ships  could  be  found  for  1500  yards. 

"  The  great  difficulty  is  to  be  found  in  the  steepness 
of  the  hill  slopes,  though  engineers  and  skilled  workmen 
with  effective  tools  would  make  light  work  of  it.  A 
city  of  20,000  inhabitants  might  be  accommodated  on 
the  larger  plateau,  with  sufficient  landing  conveniences. 
It  ought  to  be  healthy  (unless  the  air  exhaled  here 
is  impregnated  with  malaria),  and  with  hydraulic 
machines  for  lifting  water  to  the  plateau  it  might 
bloom  like  a  garden.     I  have  not  as  yet  measured  its 


CHINSALLA    VILLAGE.  139 

actual   extent   of  level,    but   I    should    say   from    my     1879. 

Sept.  27. 

memory  that  it  must  be  a  mile  long  by  half  a  mile  vi^-,, 
wide.  Chinsalla  vilJage  is  in  a  gentle  hollow  between 
this  and  the  first  spring  of  the  land  rising  to  Yivi 
Mountain  ;  around  it  palms  flourish,  cool  water  is  found, 
and  it  possesses  quite  an  acreage  devoted  to  gardens 
and  fields." 


140  TEE   CONGO. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE    FOUNDING   OF   VIVI  :   A   STORY    OF   WORK. 

An  unpromising  iielcl  for  work — "  He  makes  his  mark,  and  many  marks 
make  a  road " — The  signal  given — Work  offered  to  the  natives  : 
their  astonishment — Road-making — Transport  of  stores — Mapping 
the  sites  of  houses — 1  gain  the  name  of  BvJa  Matari,  "  Breaker  of 
Rocks" — Garden-making — Duration  of  our  working  day — Native 
fondness  of  grog — Completing  the  head-quarters  —  Extracts  from 
descriptive  letters  to  the  President — Officers  and  men  at  Vivi. 

1879.  A  MORE  cruel  or  less  promising  task  than  to  conquer 
vi^^i^  *  the  sternness  of  that  austere  and  sombre  region  of  Yivi 
could  scarcely  be  conceived.  Its  large  bold  features  of 
solidity,  ruggedness,  impassiveness,  the  chaos  of  stones, 
worthless  scrub,  and  tangle  of  grass  in  hollow,  on  slope, 
or  summit,  breathed  a  grim  defiance  that  was  undeni- 
able. Yet  our  task  was  to  temper  this  obstinacy,  to 
make  the  position  scaleable,  even  accessible ;  to  quicken 
that  cold  lifelessness ;  to  reduce  that  grim  defiance  to 
perfect  submission ;  in  a  word,  to  infuse  vigorous  ani- 
mation into  a  scene  which  no  one  but  the  most  devoted 
standard-bearer  of  Philanthropy  could  ever  have 
looked  at  twice  with  a  view  to  its  value.  Our  only 
predecessors  in  this  region  had  been  men  despatched 


Ichimpi_ 


BE.LGIAN    FACTORY 


Stanford's  Gecg'  Estai' 


London:  Sampson  Low,  Marston,  S*arle  &Rivuig«m. 


BEGINNING    WOBK.  141 

on  an  errand  of  geographical  exploration,  or  tourists     1879 

.  Sept.  30. 

who  had  hastily  passed  through  to  view  the  Falls  of  yivi. 
Yellala.  Trade  had  shunned  it,  religious  zeal  saw  no 
fit  field  here  for  its  labours;  perhaps  its  grimness  of 
feature  had  daunted  the  zealot.  But  let  us  see  what 
wakeful  diligence,  patient  industry,  and  a  trustful  faith 
can  make  of  it ;  the  power  of  man  is  great,  though 
he  is  a  feeble,  perishable  creature ;  with  little  strokes 
but  many,  he  has  before  this  performed  marvels ;  his 
working  life  counts  but  a  handful  of  hours,  but  with 
every  hour — industry  inspiring  him — he  makes  his 
mark,  and  many  marks  may  make  a  road. 

With  such  views  we  began.  The  Esperance  was 
despatched  with  the  steel  lighter  down  to  Mussuko  for 
men,  and  provisions  of  rice  and  beef,  and  on  her  return 
back  again  for  machettes,  hoes,  picks,  and  shovels, 
crow-bars  and  sledge-hammers ;  then  again  more  men, 
and  more  provisions,  and  a  third  time  for  more  men, 
tools,  provisions,  tents,  awnings,  canvas  sheds.  When 
we  numbered  a  hundred  workmen,  the  slow,  laborious 
work  before  us  was  commenced  by  tracing  a  line 
through  the  half-consumed  reeds — from  the  beach  to 
the  summit  of  the  rock  platform — now  known  as  Old 
Vivi  Hill.  In  order  to  see  clearly  what  gradient  could 
be  given  to  it,  this  tracing  had  to  be  at  least  fifty  feet 
wide,  running  at  right  angles,  for  the  comparatively 
short  length  of  the  Hill  (750  feet)  did  not  allow  of 
more  angles  without  a  work  which  would  have  ab- 
sorbed months  of  road-making  alone.  When  measured 
with  a  tape-line,  the  road  determined  upon  from  the 


142  TEE  CONGO. 

1879.     beach  to  the  straight  was  1965  feet.     We  divided  this 

October  1.    _  , 

Vivi.  into  sections,  and  made  five  working  squads.  At  a 
signal  we  saluted  the  dawn  of  the  new  era  with  the 
inspiring  sound  of  striking  picks,  ringing  hoes,  metal- 
lic strokes  of  crowbars,  and  dull  thudding  of  sledge- 
hammers, which  rang  out  on  the  morning  on  the 
1st  of  October,  1879,  brisk  and  busy,  foretokening  the 
manner  and  spirit  in  which  we  intended  to  prosecute 
the  first  great  enterprise  up  the  Congo. 

The  chiefs   of  Yivi   were   here   in   gay  robes  and 
bright  colours ;  their  retinue  was  for  the  first  time  with- 
out arms ;  they  stood  empty-handed  with  brawny  muscles 
which  made  me  envious,  and  suggested  other  thoughts. 
The  spirit  of  industry  had  been  aroused.     "  See,  oh 
chiefs !  "  I  said,  "  I  have  begun.     My  young  men  are 
at  work  ;  have  you  no  help  to  give  me  ?     Look  at  your 
strong-armed  young  fellows  standing  idle,  and  I  have 
abundance  of  cloth  bound  in  the  bales  below,  brighter 
handkerchiefs  than  any  you  have  yet  seen,  gay  strings 
of  beads  and  shining  brass  armlets  for  the  womankind  ; 
collect  fifty  people,  and  prepare  the  top  of  the  hill  for  me 
to  live  upon,  cut  down  the  grass,  clear  the  ground  of 
stones,  and  mark  your  welcome  of  my  coming  among  you 
thus,  and  to-night  at  sunset  the  wage  due  shall  be  paid, 
and  a  demijohn  of  good  rum  shall  celebrate  the  event !  " 
My  clever  interpreter,  for  at  this  period  I  knew  not 
the  Ki-Kongo  dialect,  put  the  above  in  perhaps  still 
more  forcible  language.     The  effect  of  it  was  seen  in 
the  universal  smile  which  lightened  their  features,  as 
they  all  looked  at  one  another  inquiringly.     But  pre- 


NATIVE  SUBPBISE  AT  PAID    WORK.  143 

sently   they    were   striding    towards    their   respective     i879. 

October  1. 

chiefs,  man,  woman,  and  child,  to  discuss  the  reality  of     vivi. 
the  offer. 

What !  they  who  had  to  delve  and  dig  in  their 
gardens  and  fields,  and  plant  the  fruitful  arachide,  and 
collect  the  palm-nut  and  crush  it  to  extract  the  precious 
kernel,  and  boil  the  yellow  butter  of  the  palm,  then 
load  it  in  canoes,  and  float  it  down  to  Boma,  and  spend 
days  in  the  sale  of  their  produce,  and  wearily  paddle 
against  the  stream  and  brave  the  danger  of  the  current 
•  luring  dreary  days,  to  have  a  white  man  in  their  midst 
offering  to  buy  wdiat  strength  lay  in  their  arms  and 
willingness  in  their  spirits  for  labour  ! 

It  is  an  event  which  neither  they,  and  certainly  not 
their  fathers,  had  ever  heard  or  dreamed  of.  Its  very 
novelty  unexpectedly  startles  them  to  demand  of  each 
chief  the  meaning  and  significance  of  the  offer.  The 
thing  was  totally  destitute  of  precedents,  might  there 
not  be  mixed  in  it  some  small  danger  of  which  they 
wot  not  ? 

I  watch  the  speaking  groups  ;  I  see  the  grave  faces  of 
the  chiefs  as  they  appear  to  be  imbued  with  the  gravity 
(jf  the  proposition  as  explained  eagerly  by  the  speaker, 
now  and  then  lighten  up  with  smiles  as  though  they 
would  pooh-pooh  some  ridiculous  alarm  suggested  by  a 
timid  creature.  I  see  the  face  also  of  my  interpreter, 
which  is  like  a  book  ;  there  is  a  good-natured  contemj)t 
on  it  as  he  hears  the  vain  alarms  loudly  uttered.  At 
last  I  note  a  growing  conviction  on  the  faces  of  the 
chiefs  that  after  all  it  might  be  of  great  good  to  them, 


144  THE   CONGO. 

1879.     an  enrichment  in  a  small  way  of  the  community  at 

October  1. 

Vjvi.  large,  productive  of  a  trifling  interest  to  them  in 
the  shape  of  bottles  of  gin,  social  drinks,  and — who 
knows? — perhaps  a  slight  increase  to  their  store  of 
cloth  currency. 

The  upshot  of  it  all,  after  due  bargaining,  is  that  I 
count  sixty-five  men,  women,  and  children  of  Yivi  on 
the  summit  of  the  hill,  clearing  its  face  of  the  rough 
stones  so  thickly  strewn,  and  cutting  the  scrub  bush 
and  levelling  the  ant  mounds.  I,  on  the  search  for 
omens,  like  the  men  of  old  on  the  verge  of  enterprises, 
take  this  sight  to  be  a  happy  augury  of  the  future. 

As  yet  I  had  brought  no  European  upon  the  scene, 
though  four  assistants  were  waiting  orders  below,  be- 
sides those  employed  on  the  steamers  running  up  and 
down,  who  were  familiarising  themselves  more  and 
more  with  the  river  track.  For  I  had  some  small  dread 
of  their  coming  to  such  a  work  and  viewing  a  scene 
so  barren  of  accommodation,  so  depressing  in  its  slow 
and  tedious  advance.  Besides,  the  force  was  too  small, 
and  the  task  at  iDresent  did  not  warrant  anv  sub- 
division.  All  hands  were  fresh  and  healthy,  and  a 
European  would  be  almost  a  hindrance  rather  than 
help.  The  Belgique,  also,  day  after  day  required  a 
number  of  Europeans  and  labourers  to  load  her  at 
Boma  and  discharge  her  at  Mussuko,  while  the  Royal 
the  En  Avant  and  the  Jeune  Africaine  needed  many 
improvements  and  repairs  before  they  could  be  em- 
ployed in  the  strong  current  between  Mussuko  and 
Vivi. 


OUR    TRANSPORTS.  145 

Between  the  1st  and  the  13th  of  October,  we  con-  isto. 
tinned  our  w^ork,  and  a  road  of  sufficient  breadth  yivi. 
for  the  transport  of  the  more  portable  effects  to  the 
summit  of  Yivi  Hill  was  completed,  though  before  the 
wagons  could  be  hauled  up  in  safety  many  days  of 
labour  had  yet  to  be  given  to  the  operations.  The 
Esperanee  meantime  had  been  twice  a  day  regularly 
to  Mussuko  and  back,  bringing  eacli  time  three  tons 
of  miscellaneous  stuff  to  the  landing-place. 

On  the  13th  of  October  the  Belgique  began  running 
up ;  then  the  Englishmen,  ]\Ir.  John  Kirkbright  of 
Birmingham,  and  ^Ir,  A.  B.  Swinburne  of  London,  were 
ordered  up  to  the  scene,  while  Mr.  Augustus  Sparhawk 
of  Boston  was  brought  up  from  Boma  to  Mussuko ;  his 
duty,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  A.  H.  Moore,  being  to 
superintend  the  camp  and  the  loading  of  the  Bdgiquc. 
The  En  Avant  was  brought  up  to  act  as  carrier  between 
the  landing-place  of  Yivi  and  the  beach  above  the 
covelet  called  Belgique  Creek  (a  cove  of  still  water  half 
a  mile  above  the  Lufu  mouth).  The  Royal  was  retained 
at  Yivi  to  act  as  a  despatch-boat  between  Yivi  and  Mus- 
suko. The  Belgique  towing  the  large  steel  lighter  com- 
menced transporting  the  wooden  house  and  iron  stores 
so  well  constructed  by  Francis  Morton  &  Co.  of  London. 
On  her  arrival  at  Belgique  Creek  a  force  of  men 
marched  down  from  the  camp  at  the  landing-place 
and,  quickly  discharging  the  cargo,  she  was  released  to 
depart  for  another  load,  while  we  began  to  transport 
ihe  house  sections  and  l)uild  them  in  a  pile  on  the 
Ell  Atytnf,  which,  when  loaded,  steamed  close  in  shore 

VOL.  I.  L 


146 


THE   CONGO. 


1879.     to  our  landing-place,  where  another  force  of  men  quickly 

October  13. 

Vivi.      unloaded  hei\.  and  conveyed  the  sections  of  huts  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  camp. 

The  Kabindas,  Yivi  natives,  coast  labourers,  aided  by 
a  few  Zanzibaris,  conveyed  them  up  the  new  road  to  the 


8PEC1MEXS    OF    OUR    EMPLOYES. 


summit  of  Yivi  Hill.  A  day  or  two  after,  my  tent  was 
taken  up  and  set  for  the  first  time  on  the  future  site  of 
old  Yivi,  which,  clean  cleared  of  rocks  and  scrub,  was 
now  revealed  in  all  its  length  and  breadth,  naked  and 
brick-red  of  colour,  exce2Dt  where  the  face  of  it  was 
disfigured  by  massive  boulders  rolled  down  from  some 


MAPPING    THE  SITES    OF  HOUSES.  147 

part  of  the  overhano-ino-  heio-lit,  and  which  were  too     1879. 

^  000  October  16. 

ponderous  to  be  touched   by  the    untutored  hands  of     y;^; 
natives. 

Now,  with  paper  and  pencil,  and  the  outUne  of  the 
top  of  Tivi  drawn  according  to  scale,  did  I  proceed 
with  -due  regard  to  safety  from  fire,  and  to  defensive 
qualities  as  a  provision  against  result  of  rupture  when 
absent,  to  map  out  the  site  of  each  house  and  store. 
Then  I  bethought  me  of  a  garden — the  place  looked  so 
devoid  of  grace  and  completeness  without  it — and  for 
the  sake  of  giving  a  finish  to  the  plan  a  long  oval  was 
drawn  which  should  represent  an  enclosure  wherein, 
some  time  hence,  verdure  might  give  relief  to  eyes 
aching  from  sun-glare,  and  wearying  of  the  view  of 
white-painted  structures  and  a  brick-red  plaza.  When 
this  was  done  tlie  carpenter  and  his  assistants  were 
appointed  to  begin  the  construction  of  the  wooden  huts  ; 
an  engineer,  disgusted  with  driving  an  engine  on  a 
three-ton  launch,  was  detailed  with  a  few  men  to  erect 
the  iron  stores ;  a  force  of  men  was  set  to  excavate  an 
oval  basin  150  feet  by  40  feet  18  inches  deep  in  the 
hard,  sterile  face  of  the  platform.  With  the  earth  from 
this  excavation  we  levelled  the  ground,  and  made  the 
foundations  for  the  houses  uniform.  Gangs  of  men 
with  crowbars  and  sledge-hammers  were  engaged  in 
prising  the  larger  boulders  over  the  precipitous  steep 
to  the  depths  below,  and  pulverising  others  for  road 
beds,  which  should  be  presently  covered  with  a  few 
inches  of  clay  soil. 

It  is  for  this  work  of  pulverisation  of  rock  that  the 

L  2 


148  THE   CONGO. 

1S79.  Yivi  chiefs,  wonderingly  looking  on  while  I  taught  my 
vivi.  men  how  to  wield  a  sledge-hammer  effectively,  bestowed 
on  me  the  title  of  Bula  Matari — Breaker  of  Rocks  — 
with  which,  from  the  sea  to  Stanley  Falls,  all  natives  of 
the  Congo  are  now  so  familiar.  It  is  merely  a  distinctive 
title,  having  no  privileges  to  boast  of,  but  the  friend  or 
"  son,"  or  "  brother"  of  Bula  Matari  will  not  be  unkindly 
treated  by  the  Bakongo,  Bateke',  or  By-yanzi,  and  that 
is  something  surely. 

As  fast  as  a  portion  of  the  garden  basin  was  excavated 
the  natives  of  Yivi,  male  and  female,  were  engaged  to 
carry  the  rich  black  alluvial  soil  from  the  Xkusu  valley 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  hill  at  so  much  per  hundred 
boxes  of  earth.  In  this  operation  there  were  many 
attempts  made  to  defraud  me  of  my  due  weight  of  earth, 
but  a  Zanzibari  policeman  at  the  head  of  the  road 
examining  each  box  soon  prevented  that  trick.  Five 
thousand  boxfuls  of  earth  for  twenty  days  represent 
roughly  2000  tons,  with  which  I  formed  2000  square 
feet  of  a  garden,  wherein,  after  dressing  and  levelling 
and  forming  narrow  alleys,  I  planted  my  nine  mango, 
a  few^  orange,  avocada  pears,  and  lime  plants  I  had 
brought  from  Zanzibar.  Beds  of  carrots,  onions,  lettuce, 
parsnips,  turnips,  cabbage,  beets,  tomatoes,  were  made  ; 
some  papaw  seeds  were  planted,  and  a  palisade  was 
constructed  around  it.  Thus  I  formed  my  garden, 
which,  under  careful  watering,  soon  showed  green,  and 
in  a  few  months  repaid  me  not  only  by  its  pleasant 
verdure,  but  contributed  much  variety  of  vegetables 
to  the   table,   limited  as  it  was.     In  January,  1883,  I 


DURATION  OF   OUR    WORKING   DAY.  149 

g-athered  eleven  large  mangoes,  the  first   year's  pro-     isio. 

T'ff"-  1     ^  f    ^  11  November. 

auction  01  iriut,  and  the  stones  of  them  were  planted  at     yi^; 
Le'opoldville  to  be  in  1885  ten  feet  high. 

With  the  exception  of  Sundays,  we  worked  hard 
every  day  from  6  a.m.  to  11  A.M.,  when  the  great  gong 
of  Yivi  told  of  breakfast  and  rest  from  work.  At 
1  P.M.  work  was  resumed,  and  lasted  till  G  p.m.  The 
native  workmen  and  Kabindas  at  sunset  were  treated 
to  a  small  glass  of  grog  well  mixed  with  water.  Their 
fondness  for  it  was  shown  by  the  manner  in  which  they 
scoured  their  gums  with  the  alcoholic  liquid.  The 
chiefs  require  two  glasses,  as  well  as  the  lingsters,  and 
the  lords  of  Tivi  during  this  busy  period  took  parti- 
cular care  on  various  pretences  to  linger  near  the  rum 
bucket,  that  they  might  have  a  trifle  of  a  taste  before 
saying  "  Good-night,"  and  crawling  up  to  their  cool 
villages  on  the  top  of  Yivi  mountain. 

The  good-natured  Committee  at  home,  under  the  idea 
that  we  might  need  some  time  to  lift  the  Belgique  on 
the  stocks  for  repairs  and  painting,  had  despatched  to 
us  some  large  timber  12"  x  12". 

The  beach  of  Banana  Point,  however,  afforded  a 
much  better  place  for  this  than  anything  we  could  con- 
struct in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  strong  current.  There- 
fore, when  the  head-quarters,  the  residence  of  the  chief  of 
Vivi  Station,  was  about  to  be  built,  this  timber  sawn  up 
into  thick  planks,  with  the  addition  of  some  extra  plank- 
ing, enabled  me  to  erect  a  two-storied  chalet,  with  cellar 
beneatli,  for  bottled  wine,  beer,  and  liquor,  and  tinned 
provisions.     The  unmanageable  and  unbreakable  heads 


150 


THE   CONGO. 


1879.     of  rotten  sandstone  and  mica  which  cropped  out  at  the 

December. 

YiTi.  river  end  of  Vivi  Hill,  were  covered  out  of  sight  by 
building  a  wall  across  the  face  of  the  hill,  and  filling 
up  the  space  with  waste  stones  and  rubbish  ;  surfacing 
all  with  a  smooth  layer  of  the  reddish  soil.  In  the 
centre  of  the  upper  platform  thus  made,  the  Yivi  head- 


\t:ew  of  vivi  headquarters  from  xorth. 

quarters  was  constructed,  facing  and  commanding  a 
view  of  the  entire  plaza  and  garden. 

At  the  opposite  end  were  the  Zanzibari  lines,  stables, 
with  sheds  for  hay  and  bran,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  lines 
were  the  poultry  houses,  and  goat  and  pig  yards,  where 
also  were  the  blacksmiths'  and  carpenters'  sheds. 

Perhaps  the  following  quotations  from  letters  to  the 
President  of  the  Comitc  d'Etude  du  Haut  Congo  will 


LESCRIPTION   OF    VJVI  STATION.  151 

serve  to  throw  a  more  vivid  light  upon  our  work  at  this     i8^ 

Jan 

period  than  any  retrospective   summary  that  I  could     yj 
draw  up : — 

"  A'lvi,  Congo  Eiver,  January  Sth,  1880. 
"My  deak  Colonel, 

"  Yesterday  we  comijletecl  head-quarters,  but  we  have  got  to  paint 
it.  We  shall  certainly  be  through,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned  with  the 
l^rincipal  and  lower  station,  in  a  short  time,  though  there  will  be  work 
enough  for  the  Chief  of  Vivi  and  his  party  for  a  very  long  time  yet. 

"  As  we  are  now  rapidly  rounding  off  our  work  on  this  station,  I  like  it 
more  than  ever,  and  am  quite  satisfied  with  it  as  being  the  best  place  on 
the  river,  above  the  highest  mercantile  establishment,  which  is  about  ten 
miles  below  us. 

"  Though  we  are  on  a  hill  o-iO  feet  above  the  river,  limited  in  area, 
something  similar  to  the  Acropolis  at  Athens,  we  look  across  a  narrow 
valley  fifty  metres  wide  and  forty  metres  deep  abreast  of  head- quarters, 
and  command  a  view  of  a  tolerably  level  terrace  or  plateau  sufficient  for 
a  city  I  should  estimate  of  20,000  inhabitants,  while  if  it  spreads  itself 
into  the  depressions  and  valleys,  there  is  space  enough  to  construct  a 
much  larger  one,  with  gardens  and  parks  quantum  suff.  between  the  Congo 
and  the  mountains,  while  picturesque  scenery  meets  the  eye  at  every 
point. 

"  Small  and  humble  as  our  lower  station  is,  it  is  the  most  imposing- 
place  on  the  Congo,  and  the  first  view  of  it,  as  people  tell  me  coming  uj) 
the  river  for  the  first  time,  is  very  striking.  They  say,  head-quarters 
appears  like  a  castle  or  a  church,  and  a  missionary  from  across  the  river 
said  it  was  like  a  town  with  a  grand  promise.  '  Certainly,'  said  he,  '  much 
superior  to  what  it  really  is  when  you  are  once  here.' 

"We  have  also  a  garden  in  the  centre  of  the  Acropolitan  Station, 
wherein  are  planted  nine  mango  trees,  six  papaws,  three  avocada  pear, 
six  oranges,  seven  lemons,  three  guavas,  and  where  presently  will  be  sewn 
the  flower  seeds,  Eucalyptus,  etc. 

"  In  order  that  you  may  fully  appreciate  this  garden  or  park  of  ours, 
you  should  be  told  that  our  Acropolis  consists  principally  of  a  rotten 
micaceous  stone  on  the  surface,  while  beneath  lies  the  hard  uncom- 
promising gritty  trap  of  the  Congo  region,  and  that  we  had  to  clear  and 
expose  its  bald  head,  on  which  it  was  evident  that  Nature  never  would 
consent  to  nourish  verdure. 

"  It  would  have  been  unspeakably  intolerable  if  our  infant  station  were 
to  have  no  shade,  and  last  month  I  remedied  this  juattcr  by  depositing 
two  thousand  tons  of  the  richest  l)lack  hothouse  soil,  that  the  adjacent 
valley,  prolific  in  its  grasses,  afforded.  Now  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  see- 
ing the  papaws  springing  up  visibly,  the  mango  leaves  deepening  their 


IVl. 


Jan.  8. 
Viri 


152  THE   CONGO. 

1880^  greenness,  the  lemon  assume  a  fresher  tint,  the  guavas  on  the  verge  of 
sending  out  new  twigs,  and  the  oranges  giving  every  promise  of  repay- 
ing our  trouble ;  and,  astonishing  to  relate,  the  palisade  I  had  closely 
planted  around  the  tiny  park  have  now  six-inch  long  twigs  in  full  leaf, 
and  almost  hide  the  marks  of  axe  and  saw  by  their  leaves. 

"  The  natives  round  about  daily  visit  us  and  watch  our  progress  with 
j)leasure.  They  and  I  get  along  very  amicably  together,  and  our  inter- 
course is  of  the  most  happy  character  and  irreproachable  in  its  peace- 
fulness  and  spirit  of  felicitous  concord.  If  continued  in  this  msnner 
without  the  meddling  of  strangers,  the  fabulous  arcadia  caimot  compete 
with  it  in  its  fewness  of  squabbles. 

"  There  is  no  slave  trade  in  any  part  of  the  country  in  our  vicinity.  It 
may  chance  that  a  chief  may  have  two  or  three  domestic  slaves,  but  you 
will  better  understand  what  I  mean,  if  I  .say  that  a  miserable  face  Ijetoken- 
ing  suffering,  soitow,  discontent  with  its  owners'  lot,  I  have  not  seen  in  all 
this  district  of  Yivi. 

"  I  have  great  pleasure  in  informing  you  of  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Deanes, 
2nd  Engineer  of  the  Albion  and  Francois  Flamini,  an  Italian  Engineer  ; 
both  are  of  very  good  character,  with  considerable  promise  of  work  about 
them. 

"  I  feel  as.sured  that  these  will  not  worry  me  about  '  expenses  of  tout 
nature,'  that  they  will  be  prompt  in  obedience,  respectful  in  demeanour, 
active  in  youi-  intere.sts,  assiduous  in  their  duties ;  and  they  will  not 
threaten  me  with  what  they  will  do  in  case  of  non-compliance  will  j^re- 
lX)sterous  demand.s,  or  for  expostulating  with  them  upon  neglect  of  duty  ; 
that  they  will  not  think  it  beneath  their  dignity  to  \ye  seen  in  their  shirt- 
sleeves, as  I  divest  myself  of  coat  and  devote  myself  to  manual  labour  from 
the  rising  of  the  sun  to  its  setting.  I  like  to  feel  that  I  am  accompanied 
by  a  band  of  men  to  whom  I  have  not  to  preach  daily  about  the  glorious 
dignity  of  doing  one's  duty. 

"  You  will  appreciate  this  fact  better  when  I  tell  you  that  I  have  not 

seen  the  Belgiqwe,  nor  Captain   L E G A ,  since  the 

16th  of  October,  two  months  and  twenty-three  days.  These  people  have 
kept  our  steamer  down  at  Banana  all  this  time  on  the  pretence  of  repairing 
her.  By  the  bills  sent  to  me  occasionally  I  am  informed  that  I  am  in  debt 
in  a  sum  of  £75  for  medical  attendance.  The  Europeans  with  me  are  un- 
commonly well,  but  it  is  perhaps  because  they  are  not  permitted  the  freest 
access  to  Portuguese  wine. 

"  I  have  no  particular  preference  for  any  nationality  here.  Duty  is 
our  law,  rule  and  guide.  Be  he  Dutchman,  Greek,  Turk,  Portuguese, 
Dane,  Belgian,  Englishman,  or  American,  is  perfectly  immaterial  so  long 
as  he  works  according  to  his  agreement.  We  are  here  charged  to  perform 
a  task  which  I  believe  is  a  sacred  one.  While  the  task  is  unfulfilled  there 
is  no  place  here  for  the  trifler,  laggard,  indolent,  peevish,  undisciplined 
man,  hostile  to  his  work. 


Jan.  8. 
Yivi. 


EXD    OF   OUR   FIRST  STAGE.  153 

"  With  the  feeling  of  immeuse  relief  I  regard  the  departure  of 1880. 

whose  conduct  has  revealed  to  me  an  amount  of  selfishness  that  has  l^een 
a  novelty  to  me  from  its  intensity  and  peculiarity. 

"  I  hear  the  merry  sound  of  the  hammer  struck  on  the  anvil  by  the 
capital  blacksmith  just  arrived.  I  must  also  note  the  arrivals  of  the  mules 
and  donkeys  with  an  abundance  of  fodder." 

Nearly  a  month  later  a  letter  to  the  President  records 
my  impressions  after  the  station  was  completed,  and  the 
end  of  the  first  stage  was  attained. 

*'  Congo  Eivek,  Feb.  m,  1880. 
"  My  dear  Coloxel, 

"  I  write  by  this  mail  to  say,  first,  that  our  lower  station  is  com- 
plete in  all  details,  and  that  we  finished  its  constniction  on  Saturday  the 
2ith  of  January.  The  houses  were  all  erected,  j^aiuted  within  and 
without,  and  ornamented  sufficiently  to  suit  a  modern  taste  befitting  our 
work,  and  this  coimtry,  the  roads  on  both  sides  of  the  hill  (i.e.,  from 
the  landing-place  to  head-quarters,  and  from  head-quarters  down  to  the 
Xkusu  rivulet,  where  we  get  drinking  water)  were  also  in  perfect  order, 
tlie  garden  in  the  centre  and  surrounded  by  the  station,  completely 
arranged,  flower  mounds,  vegetable  beds,  and  grass  plots,  &c.  About 
GOO  tons  of  miscellanea  conveyed  from  the  landing-place  stores  to  the 
station  magazines,  provisions  emptied  from  their  cases  and  stowed  away 
in  the  capacious  cellar  under  head-quarters,  the  dry  goods,  cloths,  beads, 
were  arranged  at  the  head-quarter  stores,  which  are  separate  from  the 
.station  magazines,  a  large  and  commodious  stable  had  been  built  for  the 
mules,  and  upon  everything  that  you  might  have  cast  your  eye  upon  you 
could  see  nothing  but  what  was  in  order  and  proper  to  its  necessity. 

"  This  work  was  begim  October  1st,  1879,  ended  January  24th,  1880. 
Time,  3  months  21:  days.  It  was  also  commenced  in  the  hot  season  when 
Europeans,  like  S ,  collapsed,  and  through  the  rainy  season. 

"  My  gratification  was  such  that  I  thought  all  hands  assisting  in  the 
work  deserved  a  holiday  and  suitable  gifts.  Accordingly  each  of  oui' 
working  jjeople  and  Kabindas,  206  total,  received  four  yai'ds  of  cloth,  and 
the  2oth  and  2Gth  days  of  January  were  allotted  to  them  that  they  might 
rejoice  and  rest  after  their  arduous  labours  before  commencing  the  second 
stage. 

"  The  Europeans,  twelve  in  number  (one  being  sick  and  four  absent 
with  the  Belgiquc),  were  banqueted  by  me  out  of  my  i)rivate  stores 
and  at  my  personal  expense,  and  fortunately  just  before  our  holiday, 
IMr.  Blundy,  my  friend  at  ^Madeira,  had  sent  me  three  cases  of  fine  wines 
for  '  auld  lang  syne's  '  sake,  and  with  other  jjrivate  stocks,  I  was  able  to 
make  a  very  decent  show  of  hospitality.     Besides  which  I  had  purchased 


Feb.  6 
Vivi. 


154  THE  CONGO. 

1880.  three  bullocks  at  Boina,  which  yon  ■will  have  to  pay  for,  aud  out  of  these 
we  had  something  like  800  lbs.  of  good  beef  for  the  first  time  on  the 
Congo.  This  quantity  divided  permitted  three  pounds  of  beef  to  each 
person  white  and  black,  and  sufficient  to  give  the  native  Chief  of  Vivi  a 
plentiful  share  in  cloth  and  liquor,  who  came  in  great  state,  with 
numerous  followers,  to  receive  these  goods. 

"  On  Sunday  the  25th  our  banquet  took  place,  and  everything  passed  off 
agreeably.  The  first  toast  was  '  His  Majesty  the  King  of  the  Belgians,' 
the  prime  mover  and  the  best  supporter  of  the  '  Expedition  du  Haut 
Congo.' 

"  Second  Toast,  '  Her  Majesty  Queen  Victoria '  and  the  '  President  of 
the  United  States.' 

"  Third  Toast, '  The  Contributors  to  the  support  of  the  Expedition  du 
Haut  Congo,'  &c. 

"  On  the  27th  we  began  oiir  work  on  the  bridge  over  the  Xkusu  and 
inspecting  the  launches,  overhauling  them,  clearing  and  landing  the  En 
Avant  on  shore,  for  dismounting  engines  and  boilers,  putting  transport 
caiTiages  together,  and  placing  the  Boyal  on  the  great  wagon  ready  for 
removal,  for  I  have  resolved  that  she  shall  be  the  courier  of  the  flotilla. 

"  Monday  the  2nd  we  l>egan  our  road-making  for  the  interior,  and  to- 
day we  have  reached  the  plateau  two  and  a  half  miles  distant.  Once  on 
the  plateau  we  have  a  tolerably  level  country  for  about  ten  miles,  but  as 
the  people  cannot  work  very  fast  after  walking  five  miles,  this  road- 
making  must  be  postponed  for  the  present  until  I  shall  have  reconnoitred 
the  ground  and  selected  the  most  feasible  route ;  then  we  shall  move  on  in 
a  compact  body  with  our  provisions,  step  by  step  as  we  make  the  road, 
and  shall  not  return  until  the  way  is  clear  of  obstacles,  brushwood  and 
rock.  Meantime,  while  we  are  absent,  3Ii'.  Sparhawk,  Chief  of  Vivi,  will 
prepare  bags  for  can-iage  of  rice,  beans,  peas,  flour,  which  articles  we  will 
economise,  of  course,  as  the  countiy  will  enable  us.  He  will  also  have 
them  iDacked  up  ready  into  suitable  man-loads,  so  that  when  a  party  is 
sent  back  for  provisions  there  will  be  no  delay. 

"  It  is  going  to  be  a  tedious  task  I  perceive  very  plainly,  and  a  pro- 
tra<jted  one  to  make  a  road  fifty-two  miles  long,  then  to  come  back  and 
transport  a  boat  which  may  be  moved  only  a  mile  a  day  perhaps,  then  to 
come  back  hauling  the  heavy  wagon  with  us  to  transport  another  heavy 
launch  and  move  on  a  mile  a  day  again,  then  back  for  another  heavy 
launch  and  repeat  the  same  operation  for  three  boilers  three  times,  by 
Avhich  we  see  we  have  to  drag  the  heavy  wagon  nine  times  over  a  fifty-two 
mile  rough  road,  total  936  miles,  before  we  can  embark  for  our  second 
station  without  counting  the  delays  caused  by  constant  parties  conveying 
provisions. 

"  Through  the  radical  change  in  the  food,  peoj^le  do  not  seem  to  have 
the  same  energy  as  they  have  in  temperate  countries,  and  animals  seem  to 
share  in  the  degeneration.   I  have  tested  the  mules  on  a  small  water-cart, 


Feb.  &. 
Vivi. 


AT    riVl    STATIOX.  155 

carrying  ninety  gallons  of  water,  freight,  exclusive  of  cart,  990  lbs.    Three      1880. 
mules  were  required  to  di-aw  this  cart  up  a  slope  one  foot  rise  in  six  feet. 
Now  if  it  requires  three  mules  to  draw  1000  lbs.,  how  many  are  required 
to  draw  three-and-half  tons  (weight  of  Boyal  with  boiler,  engine,  &c.)  ? 
Answer,  twenty-two  and  a  half  mules  power. 

"  I  have  with  me  130  efficient  working  men,  who  may  be  calculated  to 
assist  in  di-agging  these  enormous  loads,  but  as  each  can  only  draw  at  a 
dead  jduU,  without  assistant  power  fifty  lbs.,  this  total  man-power  amounts 
to  6500  lbs. 

"  Total  man  and  mule  power  available  .         .         8000  lbs. 
Weight  of  i?o^a? 7840  „ 

Difference  for  powers  .         .  IGO  lbs. 

"  But  some  men  will  pull  well  and  long,  others  will  shirk  their  work. 
Do  not  160  lbs.  make  up  a  very  small  reserve  in  power  ? 

"  If  the  country  were  level,  or  we  had  a  turnpike  road,  such  power  would 
ensure  a  small  steady  progress;  but  as  I  said  before,  this  is  a  hot,  troijical, 
and  very  rough  country  mainly,  through  which  there  are  no  roads,  and  the 
rise  between  our  station  and  the  plateau  is  nearly  1000  feet  in  two  and 
a  half  miles,  and  there  are  three  very  steep  hills  between.  The  first  has  a 
rise  of  343  feet  in  a  length  of  road  1965  feet. 

"  I  postpone  further  remarks  i;pon  the  future  until  I  shall  have  returned 
from  my  reconnaissance  to  Isangila.  Things  brighten  somehow  always 
when  you  examine  them  closely,  and  venture  upon  them  boldly.  Yet  it 
was  due  to  you  to  give  you  a  few  of  my  ideas  upon  a  subject  that  is  never 
out  of  my  mind. 

"  Of  white  men  I  have  enough  for  the  present. 

"  Agreeably  to  your  request  I  took  advantage  of  the  presence  of  the 
Chiefs  of  Vivi  during  our  holiday  to  impress  upon  them  the  necessity  of 
naming  a  day  on  which  we  could  discuss  an  important  question.  They 
named  Sunday,  February  1.  On  this  day  Mr.  Sparhawk  and  I  rode  out 
to  Vivi  Mavungu's  place  (the  principal  village),  and  after  partaking  of  a 
slight  breakfast,  this  question  and  many  others  of  less  importance  were 
seriously  discussed. 

"  They  were  reluctant  at  first  to  concede  what  I  wished ;  but  arguing 
that,  since  I  was  the  first  '  mundele '  (merchant)  who  came  to  Vivi  and 
chose  to  build  on  it,  despite  the  '  bad  river  and  the  big  hills  and  big  rocks,' 
and  had,  without  any  help  from  any  other  white  mundele  or  native,  broke 
down  the  big  rocks  and  cut  a  broad  road  through  the  hills  which,  by  next 
Sunday  would  be  brought  right  to  their  doors  on  top  of  the  plateau  (my 
]iromise  has  fortunately  proved  true),  it  was  but  right  that,  after  doing  all 
this,  and  paying  all  that  lliey  had  asked,  and  every  promise  made  thera 
strictly  and  justly  performed  at  the  end  of  every  moon,  and  not  a  single 


Feb.  6. 
Viri. 


150  THE    CONGO. 

1880^  thing  of  tlie  value  of  a  grain  of  Indian  corn  injured  by  us;  and  also  as  it 
was  a  condition  on  first  coming,  that  I  should  be  considered  as  the  only 
mundele  of  Yivi  and  Nsanda,  that  all  the  chiefs  of  Vivi  should  make  an 
agreement  with  me  that  without  my  permission  or  consent  no  other  white 
man  should  )>e  i^ermitted  to  reside  on  any  portion  of  Vivi  soil. 

'■'  The  reasons  I  gave  for  this  demand  were  :  the  difficulty  of  keeping  a 
country  quiet  where  there  was  no  law  or  force  for  that  purpose,  when 
a  number  of  mixed  characters,  with  varied  ideas,  suddenly  entered  into  a 
new  country.  Though  Senor  Fernandez  was  only  a  guest  of  mine  at  my 
camp,  and  had  no  right  to  deal  with  the  natives  of  Yivi  except  as  my 
friend,  yet  they  themselves  had  come  in  a  body  with  about  thirty  warriors 
to  demand  that  he  should  be  sent  away.  They  also  saw  how  Boma  was 
sometimes  disturbed.  The  merchants  gathered  together  to  punish  some 
villages  behind  it,  and  perhaps  only  one  of  those  merchants  had  a  griev- 
ance, and  one  man  and  one  grievance  were  easier  dealt  with  than  a 
number  of  men  with  a  number  of  grievances.  Supposing  now  those 
sixteen  whites  at  Vivi  were  all  independent,  and  had  their  own  shops  or 
stores  or  factories,  let  them  imagine  how  difficult  it  would  be  to  keep  the 
peace  between  them  and  the  natives ;  why,  each  man  probably  would  talk 
about  burning  villages  and  killing  people:  but  now  that  they  are  all 
under  one  man,  there  has  not  been  the  slightest  misunderstanding  between 
us.  If  they  required  more  whites  I  could  furnish  them  with  more.  I  said 
if  they  wanted  to  see  more  houses  we  could  build  them. 

"  They  demanded  for  this  concession  that  I  should  trade  in  ground  nuts, 
which  was  their  principal  wealth.  I  could  not  accede  to  their  demand, 
but  I  i^romised  I  would  introduce  a  white  man  to  them,  with  whom  they 
could  trade. 

"  There  evidently  must  be  money  in  this  trade,  or  else  the  merchants 
along  the  Congo  and  the  great  Afrikaansche  Company  could  not  con- 
tinue their  business.  Vivi  is  happily  situated  as  regards  trade ;  it  is  the 
very  highest  navigable  point,  and  our  road  into  the  interior,  if  continued 
far  enough,  might  bring  such  a  stock  of  this  article  (ground  nuts)  of  trade, 
that  would  overwhelm  us.  In  return  for  this  article,  the  natives  require 
various  odds  and  ends  of  articles  as  follows  : — 

"  Common  muskets,  locks  ringing  smartly. 

"  Gun^wwder.    Gun-stones. 

"  Machettes  (common). 

"  Butcher-knives. 

"  Small  paper  backed  gilt  framed  looking-glasses. 

"  Table  knives,  white  bone  and  ivory  handles. 

"  Table  spoons.    White  iron. 

"  Crockery  consisting  of  cheap  fancy  wash-basins. 

'■'  Pitchers,  figured.     Jugs,  white,  brown  and  figiired. 

"  Tumblers  and  other  fancy  glass  ware. 

"  White  glass  bottles,  quarts  and  half-gallons. 


ARTICLES  FOR   BARTER.  157 

"Mugs,  large  and  small,  some  holding  as  much  as  a  quart  and  a  half,      1880. 
and  two  quarts,  fancy  figured.  ".  ' 

"Fish-hooks.    Needles. 
"  Hoes  (Dutch). 
"  Hatchets. 

"  Tin  plates.     Tin  pans. 

"  Cast-iron  pots  from  one  gallon  to  five  gallons.     Sheet-iron  pans. 
"  Fancy  cheap  boxes,  painted  and  figured  neatly  but  cheaply,  size  from 
12"  long  by  9"  broad  by  8"  deep ;  some  papered  inside. 
"  Fancy  paper  boxes,  with  little  looking  glasses  inside  of  lid,  &c. 
"  Brass  ware.     A  few  brass  pans.     Trays,  figured.     Brass  rods. 
"  Brass  anklets,  figured. 

"  Brass  wristlets,  two  ends  ending  in  dogs  or  dragons  or  crocodile  heads, 
thickness  half-an-inch  diameter. 

"  Anklets  from  5"  to  Ij"  diameter,  thickness  of  metal. 
"  Brass  collars. 

"  Cloths,  just  such  as  come  out  to  West  Africa ;  calicoes,  printed  and 
figured  or  striped  of  all  colours,  red,  blue,  green,  brown,  pi-irjile. 
"  Handkerchiefs,  red-figured. 
"  Eed,  blue,  and  green  savelist  or  thick  flannel. 

"  Cotton  singlets  or  under-shirts,  white  and  striped,  and  fancy  flannel 
shirts. 

"Velvet  smoking  caps;  yellow,  red,  blue  braid  and  tassels. 
"  Straw  hats,  ribboned  black,  blue,  or  red. 
"  Caps,  military  or  fancy.     Felt  hats.     Eed  fezes. 
"  Eed  knitted  caps,  flannel  and  cotton.     Blue  ditto.     Striped  ditto. 
"  Blankets,  common  figured. 

"  Coats — British,  Belgian,  French  cast-off  uniform  coats. 
"  Lackey  coats. 

"  Blue  cotton  velvet  cloths  7  feet  by  G  feet. 
"  Counterpanes,  cheap  cotton  and  figured. 
"  „  red,  blue,  or  green. 

"  Table-cloths,  cheap.     Some  figured  flannel-cloth  carpeting. 
"  A  few  toys,  like  Jack-in-tlie-box,  monkey  trick,  etc. 
"  Malacca  canes,  5  feet  9  inches  long,  head  2i  inches  in  diameter, 
l)andc(l  with  figitred  brass,   strong  brass  biitt  at  end   with  iron,  and 
strongly  riveted  to  the  brass.    Each  cane  must  differ  from  the  others. 
They  are  admirable  as  presents  to  chiefs. 
"  Su])erior  machettes. 

"Cutlas.ses.     Cavalry  swords  in  scabbards. 
"  Umbrellas  (gingham),  a  few  cheap,  silk  or  alpaca. 
"  Small  l)rass  bells. 

"  Tyrolese  hats,  with  a  few  gorgeous   peacock  or  common  ostrich 
feathers  dyed  red  or  lilue  and  white. 
"Such   is  tlio  varied  miscellanea   required   for   African   trade,     llio 


158 


THE   CONGO. 


uuuiber  of  articles  or  quantity  is  not  great,  l)ut  it  is  the  great  variety 
where  judgment  and  some  amount  of  taste  is  required.  Tlie  Upper  Cougo 
would  be  the  country  that  would  require  the  greatest  variety.  These 
fancy  articles  bring  more  than  ordinary  goods,  though  their  price  is  less ; 
but  it  is  judicious  to  have  a  proj^er  mixture  of  goods.  I  advise  you  to 
keep  this  letter  at  hand,  for  you  might  need  it,  and  though  hurriedly 
written  it  is  copious  and  intelligible  enough  for  future  reference. 

"  In  your  letter  of  November  30th,  you  talk  of  *  agricultural  advan- 
tages ; '  indeed  we  have  ample  concessions  of  this  kind  so  far  as  verbal 
])romises  go,  and  the  soil  in  the  valleys  and  on  the  plateau  is  very  rich. 


VIEW  OF  VIVI  SSTATIUN  FROM  THE  KORTH. 


"We  have  not  many  Euphorbia  at  Yivi  or  in  its  neigbourhood ;  it 
requires  rather  a  sterile  and  rocky  soil  or  nooks  to  nourish  Euphorbia. 
Here  and  there  are  a  few  specimens,  but  they  might  be  easily  planted  on 
the  river  side  of  the  hill  of  Yivi  Station  and  in  the  glen  below, 

"  I  beg  to  assui-e  you  that  if  it  depended  on  me  I  would  have  no  more 
to  do  with  rum  than  with  poison,  but  the  traders  have  so  supplied  the 
people  with  rum  that  without  it  friendship  or  trade  is  impossible  on  the 
Lower  Congo.  Our  Kabindas,  the  people  who  will  be  left  in  charge  of 
the  station,  will  not  work  without  rum.    They  have  daily  rations  of  it; 


Feb.  6. 
Vivi. 


STRENGTH  OF   OUR   FORCES.  159 

they  will  have  it,  aud  it  is  a  coustant  topic  of  discord  between  lis  and     _1380 
them,  and  though  out  of  one  gallon  of  ruin  we  make  two  gallons  (with 
water)  while  others  make  three,  according  to  custom,  they  are  constantly 
exclaiming  and  quarreling  about  its  weakness. 

"  Relative  to  your  information  about  the  French  Expedition  going  over 
from  the  Ogowai  Eiver  to  Stanley  Pool,  or  the  missionaries  going  there,  I 
beg  leave  to  say  that  I  am  not  a  party  in  a  race  for  the  Stanley  Pool,  as  I 
have  already  been  in  that  locality  just  two  and  a  half  years  ago,  and  I  do 
not  intend  to  visit  it  again  until  I  can  arrive  with  my  50  tons  of  goods, 
boats,  and  other  proi^erty,  and  after  finishing  the  second  station.  If  my 
mission  simply  consisted  on  marching  for  Stanley  Pool,  I  might  reach  it 
in  fifteen  days,  but  what  would  be  the  benefit  of  it  for  the  expedition  or 
the  mission  that  I  have  undertaken  ?  " 

Yivi  station  being  thus  completed,  and  in  excellent 
order,  was  a  veritable  ornament  to  the  hitherto  lonely 
region.  Beautiful  in  situation,  and  with  its  snow-white 
cottages  and  chalet  visible  from  afar,  the  joj  of  all 
Yivi  district,  I  turned  it  over  formally  to  the  guardian- 
ship of  Mr.  Sparhawk,  its  future  chief,  who  acted  as 
my  principal  agent  in  the  Lower  River,  with  an 
expressed  hope  that  lie  would  do  the  utmost  in  his 
power  for  the  perfection  of  the  roads  leading  to  the 
landing-place  and  towards  the  interior. 

The  officers  at  Yivi  consisted  of — 

Augustus  Si)arhawk         .  .  Chief  of  Vivi. 

John  Kirkbright      .         .  .  Second  Chief  of  Vivi. 

A.  H.  Moore    ....  Storekeeper  and  Caterer. 

A.  B.  Swinburne      .         .  .  Secretary. 

Frank  Mahoney       .         .  .  Waiting  orders. 

Captain,  Engineer,  and  ^latu  .  SS.  Be/qique. 

Mate  and  Engineer  .  .  Esprrance. 

Mate  and  Engineer  .  .  En  Avant. 

And  the  muster-roll  of  the  personnel  at  this  day  at 
Yivi  consisted  of — 

12  Europeans ;  81  Zanzibaris ;  IIG  coast  natives  :  Kabindas  and  Sierra 
Leoncs;  G  interior  natives.    Total  215. 


160  TEE  CONGO. 


CHAPTER  X. 

TIYI    TO    ISAXGILA  :    A    EECOXXAISSAXCE. 

Looking  out  for  a  wagon  route— The  gardens  of  Banza  Sombo — The 
valley  of  the  Loa — Banza  Uvana — Fine  view  from  Kaishandi — "We 
visit  our  friend  De-de-de — Eeception  of  thirty  chiefs  and  their 
retainers — A  conference — ^lysterious  councils  and  final  decisions — 
Distribution  of  gifts — A  dear  bargain— A  deserted  plateau — The 
Bundi  valley — A  fine  retreat  for  a  recluse — Adventures  witli  buffaloes 
and  elephants — Harassing  search  for  a  herd-track — '•'  3Iabruki,  are 
you  hurt  or  dead  ?  " — A  lucky  fall — The  course  of  the  future  road 
revealed — Best  at  IXdambi  [Mbongo  —  DiflBculty  of  our  task  —  A 
tropical  nest— "  Tuckey's  Furthest "  — Faithful  "Mirambo"  — The 
Ijenitent  chiefs  of  Isangila — Future  operations— ^Proposed  railway 
— Infusing  confidence — Extracts  from  letters  to  Colonel  StraiTch. 

1880.     ^ViTH   a    sufficient    escort    I    set    out    from    Yivi   for 

^'eb.  21. 

vivi.  IsaDgila  on  the  21st  of  February  to  explore  the  country 
for  a  feasible  wagon  route  past  the  lower  series  of  the 
Livingstone  Cataracts,  which  consist  of  the  Yellala, 
Inga,  ond  Isangila,  and  various  intervening  rapids. 

From  Yivi  Station  we  suddenly  dip  down  100  feet 
lower  into  the  Nkusu  Ravine,  across  which  there  is 
an  immediate  rise  of  as  many  feet  to  the  larger 
plateau  of  Yivi,  on  which  is  found  a  habitable  level  of 
1,200,000  square  yards,  at  this  time  devoted  to  a  small 
bean-field  and  to  waste  grass.    In  a  gentle  hollow  flush 


NATIVE  BAXZAS,    07?    VILLAGES.  101 

with  palms,  and  shady  embowering  trees,  is  the  village  isso. 
of  Chinsalla,  in  which  our  native  lingster,  Massala,  Chinsaiia. 
lives  with  his  family  and  friends.  Beyond  this  begins 
the  first  steep  rise  which  has  to  be  climbed  to  reach 
the  summit  of  Yivi  mountain.  On  our  right,  in  a 
continuation  of  the  hollow  of  Chinsalla,  is  the  village 
in  which  lives  Benzani  Congo,  the  most  good-looking 
among  the  chiefs  of  Yivi  district. 

After  a  journey  of  two  miles  and  a  half  nearly  con- 
tinuous ascent,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  gardens  of 
Banza  Sombo,  on  the  top  of  Yivi  mountain,  at  an  alti- 
tude of  a  thousand  feet  above  Yivi  Station,  or  nearly 
1350  feet  above  the  Congo  river.  We  have  only  time 
to  give  a  glance  at  the  bean  and  ground-nut  gardens 
of  Banza  Sombo,  when  the  path,  which  is  but  a  foot 
wide,  plunges  into  dense  grass  exhaling  a  strong  odour 
of  wild  pig,  and  which  in  time  of  war  affords  fine 
ambushments  against  an  enemy.  Following  it  in  its 
erratic  course  along  the  spine  of  the  mountain,  the  path 
to  tlie  north  diverges  from  that  going  to  the  village  of 
the  senior  chief  of  Yivi,  and  descends  steeply  1000  feet 
along  the  northern  slope  of  Yivi  mountain,  in  which 
descent  we  are  agreeably  entertained  with  far-reaching 
views  of  the  groves  of  several  native  Banzas,  or  vil- 
lages, such  as  Banza  Uvana  and  Banza  Kulu  to  the 
front  and  right,  Ichimpi  and  Chionzo  to  the  left,  and 
north-westward  the  dark  tall  groves  of  Nsanda  villages. 

At  the  foot  of  the  Yivi  mountain  we  are  in  the 
valley  of  the  Loa,  a  stream  that  winds  clear  and  cool 
from  between  the  plateau  of  Banza  Lungu  and  Banza 

VOL.  I,  M 


162  THE   CONGO. 

y^l^l\  Kulu,  at  nearly  the  same  altitude  as  that  of  Vivi 
Banza  Station  Hill,  which  we  might  have  reached  by  skirting 
Vivi  mountain,  without  the  fatiguing  ascent  and  steep 
descent,  had  the  natives  been  pleased  to  have  made  a 
road.  By  following  their  path,  however,  we  have  been 
forced  to  travel  tbus  far  about  seven  Eno-lish  miles. 

From  the  Loa  stream  we  soon  begin  to  rise  again 
by  a  gentle  gradient,  which  continues  until  we  have 
Grained  the  village  of  Banza  Uvana,  at  an  altitude  of 
500  feet  above  the  Loa  valley,  in  three  miles.  From 
this  village  we  have  a  fine  view  of  Nokki,  Palaballa, 
Congo  la  Lemba  hills,  all  on  the  south  side  of  the 
Congo,  and  from  end  to  end  the  northern  face  of  Yivi 
mountain  is  revealed,  its  western  face  falling  smoothly 
down  to  the  Lufu  river,  its  eastern  side  dangerously 
precipitous  to  the  Congo. 

From  Banza  Uvana  the  path  leads  northerly  to 
Banza  Lungu,  along  tbe  summit  of  a  fine  plateau  of 
deep  rich  soil,  but  now  nourishing  only  the  rankest 
grass  ;  the  cultivated  portions  forming  only  an  eightieth 
part  of  rich  productive  land,  and  those  devoted  to  wine 
and  oil-producing  palms,  ground-nuts,  a  few  square  feet 
for  tobacco  and  vegetables,  such  as  cabbage,  brinjalls, 
tomatoes  and  sweet  potatoes. 

Beyond  Banza  Lungu  we  came,  at  the  fourteenth 
mile  of  our  journey  from  Yivi  Station,  to  Banza 
Kimpunzu,  situated  in  the  bottom  of  a  grassy  gorge 
called  Muzonzila,  about  500  feet  below  the  plateau 
surface,  which  in  rainy  seasons  contributes  a  stream  of 
the  same  name  to  join  the  Lufu. 


VIEW  FROM   KAISRANBL  163 

After  a  nio'ht's  rest  at   Kimpiinzu  we  crossed  the     isao. 

^  ^  Feb.  22. 

gorge,  and  a  steep  ascent  of  500  feet  enabled  us  to  Kaishandi. 
breathe  the  cooler  air  of  another  grassy  plateau,  and  to 
find  ourselves  in  the  village  of  Kaishandi,  whence  we 
obtained  a  more  extensive  view  than  we  had  previously 
enjoyed.  From  south  to  west  were  visible  the  groves 
of  Yivi  Mavungu,  Banza  Sombo,  Banza  Chionzo,  and 
Ichimpi.  Kaika  Sanda,  about  a  mile  distant,  Muvanga 
about  three  miles  and  a  half  off,  Mpangi  five  miles 
away,  and  from  south  to  east  were  those  groves  which 
indicated  the  villages  of  Banza  Uvana,  Banza  Lungu, 
and  Banza  Kulu. 

It  is'  from  such  points  as  this  of  Kaishandi  that  we 
can  first  obtain  an  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  country. 
While  imprisoned  in  the  tall  grasses  and  scrub,  from 
the  depths  of  which  nothing  is  seen  but  a  strip  of  grey 
or  pale  blue  sky,  one  is  only  sensible  that  he  is  walking 
over  tolerably  level  ground  by  looking  at  the  narrow 
strip  of  black  road  beneath  his  feet;  but  when  we 
arrive  at  a  clearing,  the  eye  hastens  to  obtain  a 
general  idea  of  the  surrounding  country,  and  such 
advantageous  points  as  Kaishandi  enable  him  to  obtain 
a  valuable  lesson  in  topography.  We  also  first  became 
conscious  that  a  good  road  is  possible  of  construction, 
despite  the  sudden  and  startling  descents  and  ascents 
we  make,  by  following  the  native  path,  which  has  been 
made  for  the  convenience  of  communication  between 
neighbouring  villages. 

At  Banza  Kaishandi  we  are  well  in  Nsanda  district. 
Leaving  the  village  and  passing  over  a  beautiful  breezy 

M  2 


164  THE   CONGO. 


1880-  plateau  thickly  studded  ^Yitll  villages,  we  arrive  in  an 
Banza  hour  at  the  populous  town  of  Bauza  Nsanda.  Here 
is  the  residence  of  the  senior  chief,  Samuna,  who  is  so 
corpulent  that  he  cannot  travel  afoot,  but  must  needs 
be  carried  about  in  a  litter.  Beyond  Samuna's,  after 
a  delightful  walk  over  the  level  plateau,  we  come  to 
the  Muzonzila  gorge  once  again,  and  at  the  bottom  is 
the  new-built  town  of  our  friend  De-de'-de,  who  made 
our  acquaintance  in  1877,  and  who  still  wears  the 
grey  coat  I  gave  him  two  and  a  half  years  ago. 

We  must  halt  here,  because  De-de-de  is  a  constant 
friend,  though  given  overmuch  to  the  drinking  of  gin, 
and  fond,  unsatisfied,  expectancy  of  gifts.  The*  guides 
of  Yivi  must  be  changed  here  also  for  the  more  expe- 
rienced travellers  of  Nsanda.  The  fact  of  my  arrival 
at  Nsanda  has  become  generally  known  ;  and  various 
chiefs  have  sent  their  boys  to  me  to  say  that  1  must 
expect  friends  and  visitors.  It  is  politic  to  submit  to 
any  trifling  delay  of  this  kind,  for  1  shall  presently 
have  to  obtain  workmen  from  them  to  make  the  great 
wagon-road  into  the  interior. 

Knowing  beforehand  that  the  gifts  expected  by  so 
many  this  day  will  amount  to  a  large  sum  by  night,  my 
trusted  servants  have  been  busily  sorting  and  arrang- 
ing the  various  piles  ever  since  daybreak.  First  comes 
Sadika  Banzi,  lord  of  an  untenanted  district  extending 
from  the  Mpagassa  gorge  south  to  the  Congo — fully  six 
miles ;  the  Mpagassa  stream  bounds  his  territory  south- 
ward, while  an  uninhabited  wilderness  lies  between  him 
and  the  Bimdi  five  miles  northward.    He  has  a  retinue  of 


THE    CHIEFS   OF  N SAND  A.  165 

cotton-clotlied  youths  armed  with  leno-thy  flintlocks,  and     i^so. 
his  gift  to  me  consists  of  a  goat,  six  chickens,  a  bunch  De-de-de's 
of  bananas,  and  a  large  gourdful  of  palm  wine,  which 
last  we  are  expected  to  finish  during  the  social  call. 

Xext  comes  Nkamampu,  of  Banza  Kinlele;  Kinkela- 
Nku,  of  Mpwelele' ;  Masiku  of  Masanda,  or  the  Night  of 
Nsanda,  each  with  their  goats,  their  fowls,  their  banana 
bunches,  and  gourds  of  palm  wine,  which  is  of  different 
degrees  of  sourness,  therefore  undrinkable  by  me,  but* 
for  them  it  is  fit,  because  it  is  inebriating.  Banza  Kulu, 
whose  chiefs  command  the  Yellala  districts,  is  repre- 
sented by  the  chiefs,  light- coloured  Nte'te',  and  Ngombe, 
and  the  chief  and  elders  of  Banza  Lungu  are  not  long- 
behind  those  of  Kulu,  and  they  are  introduced  to  me 
under  the  names  of  Matanga,  Nkingi,  and  Mariatta.  But 
Banza-Mgangila  is  resolved  to  make  an  imposing  show 
of  forces,  and  chiefs,  and  arm-bearing  youths,  for  here  are 
Ntolulu,  Xezau,  or  the  elephant ;  Ngombe,  or  the  ox ; 
Male'Ie,  Nevangi,  Mavangu,  Nempambu,  and  Makweta. 
Banza  Uvana  is  represented  by  Luzalla  Kindunga,  and 
Nsakala  Mpwassa,  the  first  remarkable  for  the  finest 
beard — though  not  the  longest — of  any  man  between 
Yivi  and  Stanley  Pool.  Kinkela  Ndunga  represents 
Banza  Chibweta ;  Ngandu,  or  the  crocodile,  is  from  the 
outermost  village  of  Xsanda ;  and  from  far  Ndambi 
Mbongo,  near  Isangila,  have  come  Ndambi  Mbongo 
himself,  with  his  confederates  Lusalla,  Kisungwa,  Mag- 
wale  ^Iwaka,  of  ^Mkimbwete,  in  all  fully  thirty  chiefs, 
mun  of  might,  influence,  and  renown  in  the  Lower 
Cataract  region,  with  altorrether  about  350  souls  follow- 


lOG  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     iijjv  them  as  retainers,  slaves,  bearers  of  the  ffifts  to  the 

reb.  23.  '--'  '-^ 

De-de-de's.  strange  white  man  who  passed  through  their  country 
from  some  unknown  quarter  eastward  some  six  rains 
ago,  and  who  has  now  built  a  town  at  Yivi  witli  a  view 
of  settling  amongst  them  as  a  friend.  These  thirt}^ 
chiefs  represent  a  population  of  about  12.000  souls,  who 
are  thinly  scattered  over  an  area  of  about  1000  square 
miles.  Many  villages  have  not  come  in  yet.  Nsanda 
•is  thinly  represented,  Chionzo  and  Nsekele'lo  have  no 
one  here,  and  many  a  low-lying  village  in  the  gorge  of 
the  Lufu  and  Muzonzila  have  no  one  to  speak  for  them. 

There  are  some  fine-looking  men  amongst  the  chiefs, 
and  some  very  regular-featured  men  amongst  the  re- 
tainers. Mostly  all  are  dressed  in  European  cloth^ 
cotton,  and  woollen,  white  and  red  being  the  pre- 
dominating colours.  The  chiefs  are  nearly  all  coated 
from  the  cast-off  clothing  of  London  and  Paris  clubs — 
of  English  and  French  armies.  The  head-dresses  are 
varied  in  make  and  style,  including  the  low-crowned 
felt,  the  round-rim  straw,  the  military  cap  of  three 
generations  ago,  the  crimson  fez,  and  the  striped 
knitted  cotton  cap. 

They  have  nearly  all  brought  goats,  fowls,  and 
bananas.  Before  midday  we  have  quite  a  flock  of 
domestic  animals,  which  I  shall  at  once  despatch  to 
Yivi  under  a  careful  escort,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
garrison  left  behind. 

Chief  De-de-de'  is  an  important  man  this  day.  He 
has  done  his  work  well,  his  messengers  have  been 
despatched   all    over   the   country,  summoning   to   an 


enlighteninct  the  chiefs.  167 

important  conference  *  the  powers  of  Nsanda.      The     issu. 

Feb.  2j. 

ceremonious  greetings  baing  over,  the  gifts  brought  De-de-de^ 
by  the  chiefs  duly  accepted,  I  open  the  j^^l^^^^sr  by 
announcing  the  purpose  of  my  presence  at  Yivi,  and 
explaining  the  reasons  for  this  convention ;  reasons 
which  are  very  well  known  to  them  for  some  time,  yet 
3tiquette  in  this  assembly,  as  in  others,  requires  that 
all  shall  be  publicly  explained. 

^'  I  am  going  to  make  a  road  through  your  countries 
from  Yivi  to  Isangila,  but  I  have  first  travelled  by  your 
own  path  here  in  order  that  I  might  find  out  whether 
it  were  possible  to  make  a  road  over  which  great 
wagons,  loaded  heavily  with  boats,  and  so  forth,  might 
pass ;  in  order,  also,  to  find  out  by  a  personal  interview 
with  you,  whether  you  had  any  objections  to  give  me 
the  riglit  to  make  such  a  road,  for  it  might  be  that 
your  gardens  or  fields  would  be  in  some  places  directly 
in  the  track  of  a  good  road,  and  that  no  way  could  be 
made  except  right  through  them.  Before  spending 
money  on  a  road  that  might  be  blocked  by  the  first 
garden  we  meet,  it  is  necessary  that  these  subjects 
sliould  be  touched  upon  and  explained.  Also  I  must 
find  out,  if  I  make  such  a  road  which  will  be  oj^en  to 
you  as  to  me,  whether  you  w^ill  expect  me  to  pay  you 
every  time  I  travel  by  my  own  road.  Also  I  must 
know  whether  you  will  allow  your  young  men  to  work 
for  me  on  this  road  at  a  fair  price,  as  the  people  of 
Vi\i  helped  me  to  build  my  town  ;  and  I  should  like 

*  The  sovereign  cliicfs  of  "Western  Africa  are  as  partial  to  Conferences 
as  the  peace-loving  Powers  of  Europe. 


168  THE   CONGO. 

1880.  to  have  an  agreement  witli  you  by  which  the  country 
D^-de'-dd's.  through  which  the  road  passes  shall  be  secure  from 
wars  and  troubles ;  and  in  order  to  do  this  it  is  neces- 
sary that  you  all  promise  not  to  make  any  war  without 
first  consulting  me,  lest  my  people  will  be  drawn  into 
it  without  their  knowledge." 

Towards  four  o'clock,  after  several  mysterious  coun- 
cils were  held,  during  which  they  had  all  risen  together 
and  assembled  at  a  little  distance  from  the  village  of 
De-de-de',  where  they  sometimes  seemed  to  discuss  mat- 
ters very  warmly,  judging  from  the  high  tones  and 
animated  gestures  of  some  of  the  speakers,  the  follow- 
ing was  verbally  agreed  upon  at  the  first  general 
council  of  the  chiefs  of  the  various  districts  between 
Yivi  and  Isangila. 

They  expressed  themselves  very  well  pleased  with 
our  coming  into  the  country.  It  would  be  a  good  thing 
to  the  country  that  a  road  should  be  made.  No  chief 
had  any  objection  whatsoever  to  the  idea.  In  their 
eyes  the  coming  of  the  white  man  would  be  productive 
of  good — good  to  chiefs  and  people.  It  meant  trade, 
and  they  were  all  traders.  The  road  to  Bom  a  was 
long,  and  there  were  many  people  afraid  of  the  long 
road  and  troubles  on  it.  If  trade  came  to  them  to  their 
very  doors  they  would  all  be  pleased.  Therefore  the 
proposed  road  may  be  made  without  fear,  and  there 
would  nothing  further  be  charged  for  it ;  after  the 
white  man  has  signed  a  paper  for  each  chief,  giving 
him  a  little  present  every  month  for  the  right,  the 
road  would   become  the  property  of  the  white  man. 


"  BULA   MATARI  AS  A   FBIEND."  169 

If  it   led   tlirou2:li  e'ardens,  or  fields  or  villao'es,  and     isso. 

'^       ^  '  ^      '  Feb.  23. 

there  were  no  better  way  to  be  found,  then  the  Du-de-de'i 
owner  of  that  garden^  or  field,  or  village  shall  say 
fairly  what  amount  of  goods  he  wants  in  return  for 
the  destruction  of  his  property ;  and  after  payment 
the  road  shall  be  untouched  in  future,  and  no  man 
passing  by  it  shall  be  liable  to  pay  anything.  Those 
of  the  young  men  of  the  different  districts  who  wished 
to  make  any  money  by  work,  had  full  permission  to 
engage  themselves  for  as  long  as  they  themselves 
should  prefer.  There  would  be  no  trouble  arising 
from  that,  and  when  the  wagons  came  into  a  district, 
then  every  district  shall  send  help  to  haul  them 
through  until  it  shall  have  passed  by,  and  if  the 
district  has  not  people  enough,  then  the  neighbouring 
districts  shall  assist ;  and  for  the  matter  of  agreement 
about  keeping  the  peace,  that  might  remain  for  the 
present  until  the  road  was  made,  and  all  the  people 
would  have  time  to  know  Bula  Matari  as  a  friend. 

I  ascertained  during  this  lengthy  council  sufficient 
to  confirm  me  in  my  belief  that  no  serious  obstacle  of 
any  kind  would  be  thrown  in  our  path  by  captiousness 
or  ill-natured  suspicion,  and  that  they  believed  that  our 
intents  were  not  wicked,  but  worthy,  deserving  of  their 
favourable  consideration.  Although  our  projects  were 
novel  and  unirpie,  they  could  divine  no  reason  for 
withholding  their  assistance  and  welcome. 

At  the  same  time,  being  an  impressionable  people, 
it  was  very  evident  that  it  was  easier  to  implant  sus- 
picion   and   distrust  of  our  objects,  even  to  violence, 


170  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     than  to  create  e:ood-will  and  confidence  in  us.     The- 

Feb.  23.  * 

De-de-de's.  Jattcr  could  onW  be  of  slow  growth  in  the  breasts  of 
barbarians — whose  everyday  intercourse  is  one  of  fraud 
and  crafty  cunning,  greed  of  plunder,  and  general  un- 
conscionable uncharitableness — and  would  be  fostered  by 
liberality,  never- slumbering  watchfulness  that  nothing 
untoward  should  happen  in  the  conduct  of  the  European 
employes,  a  care  that  one's  own  foreign  black  employes 
should  not  disturb  harmony  by  some  wicked  freaks  or 
cruel  malice  or  overbearing  behaviour,  and  by  a  pains- 
taking guidance  of  the  camp-followers  in  an  upright 
course  in  their  petty  dealings  with  the  natives.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  slightest  whisper  of  a  malicious 
European  might  upset  such  protracted  course  of  libe- 
rality and  fair-dealing,  and  instantly  make  enemies  of 
friends. 

The  day  was  closed  by  the  distribution  of  gifts  to  each 
of  the  thirty  chiefs.  And  though  the  gifts,  consisting 
of  military  coats,  gay  shawls  of  woollen  fabric,  cotton- 
velvet  cloths,  crimson  savelist,  cotton  handkerchiefs, 
and  pieces  of  unbleached  domestic,  with  a  few  cutlasses, 
swords,  knives,  beads  for  the  female  sex,  and  a  few 
bottles  of  gin  to  each,  might  be  considered  trivial  in. 
the  eyes  of  Europeans,  in  casting  up  the  gross  account 
of  the  expenditure,  I  discovered  that  £150  in  English 
gold  had  been  paid  for  them.  Considering  that  for 
this  sum  we  had  only  obtained  right  of  way  through 
a  territory  generally  unoccupied,  and  of  no  present  use 
to  any  person,  with  a  few  goats  and  bananas  thrown 
in,  it  was  a  prodigal  expenditure  of  money.     TVe  had 


SETTING    OUT  FOR   ISANGILA.  171 

no  reason  to  re^'ret  it,  however,  by  the  very  o;ood  effect     isso. 

°  '  '      -^  ''    ^  Feb.  23. 

it  created,  as  it  smoothed  the  way  for  future  and  more  De-de-de'5 
important  negotiations,  including  requests  for  labourers 
and  carriers.  It  created  a  hope,  too,  in  every  man  that 
he  possessed  something  that  was  saleable,  in  a  region 
hitherto  inaccessible,  and  where  products  were  only 
sold  by  dint  of  a  long  and  laborious  journey  to  Boma ; 
and,  finally,  that  the  force  of  those  masses  of  muscle 
on  their  arms  had  become  marketable  and  valuable. 

Guides  offered  themselves  very  freely  to  show  the 
road  to  Isangila,  but,  because  of  their  number,  I  be- 
came fastidious,  and  only  a  dozen  of  the  most  respect- 
able men  were  eng-asred. 

On  the  24th  we  were  escorted  by  a  large  number  of 
chiefs  for  several  miles,  and  the  women  and  children  of 
Ngandu's  frontier  lu-lu-lued  lustily  as  we  appeared,  and 
increased  our  numbers  greatly,  until  tlie  wilderness 
was  reached,  when,  with  abundance  of  good  wishes  for 
a  happy  journey,  they  finally  withdrew,  and  left  us  to 
pursue  our  road  in  peace. 

We  were  now  on  that  same  road  on  which  we  looked 
with  such  gloomy  eyes  in  1877,  wdien  all  the  world 
seemed  to  us  cold-hearted  and  unkind,  and  savage 
nature  itself  refused  us  food,  water,  and  even  the  least 
kindly  liope  that  some  day  an  end  to  the  dismal  time 
would  come.  Now  that  we  looked  upon  tlie  land 
under  kindlier  auspices,  it  did  not  seem  so  dull  and 
dreary — it  was  a  little  rugged,  perhaps,  but  pictu- 
resque. The  first  glance  of  what  is  offered  to  the  eye 
bears  an  unpromising  aspect  for  road-making,  but,  l)y 


172  THE  CONGO. 

Yh^^oA    observing  the  details  more  closely,  as  a  surveyor  would, 
Xgandu.   we  find  that  a  little  study  creates  a  sensible  increase  of 
hope  that  after  all  it  might  not  be  so  very  difiBcult. 

For  instance — Ngandu's  frontier  village  is  in  a  very 
peculiar  position.  By  looking  at  my  map,  which 
with  each  step  I  make  grows  clearer,  I  find  that  this 
village  stands  on  a  narrow  neck  of  plateau  land,  200 
feet  above  the  terminus  of  the  Muzonzila  gorge  ;  that 
the  Muzonzila  gorge  is  firm  enough  at  the  bottom, 
with  a  little  improvement  for  a  road  ;  that  the  slopes  of 
the  gorge  are  of  a  workable  clay ;  that  from  almost 
directly  under  the  foundations  of  Ngandu's,  it  winds 
along  through  the  very  heart  of  the  severed  plateau 
to  De'-de'-de"s,  and  from  De-de-de  with  a  more  valley- 
like breadth  down  to  Kimpunzu  :  a  few  miles  below  it 
issues  out  into  the  Lufii  and  Loa  valley,  and  down  along 
the  united  stream  to  the  Congo,  one  and  a-half  miles 
below  Yivi.  The  distance  from  the  river  is  sixteen 
miles ;  the  difierence  of  altitude  between  the  terminus 
of  the  Muzonzila  gorge  and  the  plateau  of  Yivi  Station 
is  700  feet,  making  about  one  foot  rise  in  120  feet. 

By  the  time  I  reach  the  Bundi,  my  map  tells  me 
that  by  cutting  through  that  narrow  neck  of  land  on 
which  Ngandu  stands,  I  should  have  200  feet  less 
descent  to  make  to  reach  the  Bundi  valley ;  and  that 
by  working  across  those  various  spurs  projected  out 
of  the  worn  and  farrowed  eastern  slopes  of  the  plateau 
of  Ngandu,  and  the  southern  face  of  the  Nsekelelo 
range,  one  would  be  able  to  cut  out  an  easy  decline  to 
the  Bundi  valley. 


AN  ABANDONED   DISTRICT.  173 

The  native  patb,  soon  after  leaving  Ngandu's  slopes,     isso. 

Feb.  24 

for  nearly  three  miles  to  the  clear  waters  of  the  Mvnzi     inga. 
streamlet,  again    rises  abruptly,  crosses    a    level-faced 
mount,  dips  once  more  into  a  chief  water-course,  and 
then  enters   upon   a  lengthy  spur  descending  to  the 
Bundi  river. 

About  halfway  down  this  long  spur,  the  Congo 
suddenly  comes  into  view  on  our  right,  winding  round 
the  great  Inga  bend  in  a  succession  of  tumbling  cata- 
racts. The  Inga  plateau  looms  large  and  massive, 
graced  with  forest  trees  on  the  summit  and  in  its  deep 
folds  and  gully  lines.  In  the  time  of  Tuckey  there  was 
an  important  Banza  and  its  dependencies  on  the  sum- 
mit, but  internecine  wars  have  long  ago  swept  away 
the  last  vestiges  of  human  life,  and  the  whole  of  the 
Inga  district,  sixty  square  miles  in  extent,  is  absolutely 
abandoned  to  l)ecome  a  park  for  wild  game,  elephants, 
buffaloes,  water-buck,  and  various  kinds  of  antelope, 
the  locality  1)eing  seldom  visited  even  by  the  boldest 
natives. 

A  valley,  from  half  a  mile  to  two  miles  in  breadth, 
which  extends  from  the  left  bank  of  the  Bundi  to  the 
Congo  river,  ten  miles  away,  entirely  separates  the  Inga 
plateau  and  group  of  hills  from  the  lofty  Nsekclelo 
range.  After  traversing  the  valley  you  cannot  help 
having  the  conviction  that  before  the  Congo  channelled 
a  course  through  the  obstructions,  over  the  relics  of 
which  there  are  at  present  many  cataracts  and  rapids, 
the  river  must  have  run  through  here,  and  made  a 
short  cut  to  its  lower  course,  leaving  the  valley  almost 


1880. 
Feb.  24. 

Insra. 


174 


TEE   CONGO. 


uniformly  level,  to  form  a  splendid  natural  track  for 
the  use  of  some  future  railway. 

The  Bundi  is  a  beautiful  stream  of  very  clear  water, 
brawling  in  the  dry  season  over  rocks  and  smoothly 
polished  stones  and  pjebbles  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep 


BASUXDI   NATIVE. 


rocky  gully,  some  twenty-five  yards  across.  The 
native  path,  rising  up  the  left  bank,  is  very  steep 
and  diflScult.  After  an  abrupt  climb  of  about  100 
feet,  we  find  ourselves  in  an  ancient  and  well-used 
native  camp,  where  the  pig-drovers  and  market  trades- 


MPAMBA    NGULU.  175 


Taen  from  Suiidi,  Ndambi  Mbono;o,  aud  Isanp-ila,  is^'^ 
bound  for  the  Xsanda  markets,  have  for  generations  inga 
halted  for  the  night.  From  this  spot  the  path  winds 
in  the  Bundi  valley,  crossing  once  or  twice  clear-water 
tributaries  of  the  Bundi,  and  through  cool  depths  of 
forest  groves,  until  the  base  of  the  lofty  truncated  cone 
of  Ulungu  is  reached,  when  it  enters  a  valley,  a  little 
less  regular  in  form,  to  terminate  in  another  valley 
admirably  adapted  for  the  growth  of  rice.  After  an 
hour's  march  we  camp  on  the  plain  of  Mpamba  Ngulu 
(Pig  Camp  ?),  about  40  feet  above  the  Congo,  and 
within  a  few  yards  of  it. 

I  leave  my  people  for  a  few  daj's  here,  and  follow 
the  Congo  downward  with  a  much  smaller  escort  of 
men  better  fitted  for  lono-  and  continuous  ramblino- 
search  for  that  local  knowledge  which  we  now  possess. 
I  find  that  by  following  the  Congo  down  to  the 
confluence  of  the  Bundi,  the  distance  is  seventeen  or 
eighteen  miles.  Soon  after  leaving  Mpamba  Xgulu,  I 
came  to  a  valley  running  westward,  parallel  with  the 
Congo,  which  turned  out,  after  a  little  while,  by  proofs 
visible,  to  be  another  disused  course  of  the  great  river, 
and  may,  indeed,  in  very  high  flood  seasons,  still 
serve  as  an  outlet  for  surplus  waters ;  for  a  winding- 
creek  of  still  water,  here  and  there  spreading  out  into 
pools,  extends  along  the  bottom  of  the  valley  for 
about  ten  miles,  until  it  is  lost  in  two  sandy  outlets  at 
the  elbow  of  Inga  district.  From  the  spine  of  any 
of  the  island-like  hills  which  rose  in  this  many- 
branched  valley,  we  could  see  the  fretted  Congo  in  a 


176  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     white    rage,    for   mile   after   mile,    one   furious   rapid 

February.  .  .  . 

ijjca.  chasing  another  m  succession  as  lar  as  the  Inga  elbow. 
Herds  of  buffaloes  grazed  in  the  conscious  security 
which  speaks  of  rare  disturbance ;  the  antelope's  grace- 
ful form  was  often  seen  pacing  carelessly  in  the  open, 
and  finally  a  herd  of  half-a-dozen  elephants  on  the  verge 
of  a  pool  luxuriously  spraying  their  own  sun-baked 
backs.  Yet,  with  all  this  animal  life,  and  the  wild  river 
dashing  headlong  down  its  rock-obstructed  bed,  there 
was  an  almost  palpable  stillness  about  the  strange 
scene.  It  is  a  capital  place  for  some  recluse.  In  any 
of  the  obscure  nooks  and  folds  under  the  shade  of  a 
grove — with  which  man  in  general  can  have  nought 
to  do — removed  as  this  corner  of  wild  land  is  from 
the  haunts  of  those  who  seek  a  living  by  barter — the 
recluse  might  build  his  hut — and  be  the  sole  human 
inhabitant  of  a  sixty  square  mile  tract,  over  which  he 
might  roam  at  pleasure  for  months  without  being 
disturbed. 

Of  the  adventures  with  buffaloes,  it  is  not  worth 
while  to  write.  We  were  continually  startling  a  herd, 
and  startling  ourselves  also  by  the  sudden  unlooked-^ 
for  encounter ;  both  animals  and  men  foolishly  gazing 
at  one  another,  until  the  quicker-witted  animals  soon 
discovered  it  was  a  dangerous  presence  they  stood  in, 
and  vanished,  with  their  tails  erect  in  the  air,  while 
the  men  passed  on  in  quest  of  more  useful  knowledge 
than  that  relating  to  their  habitat.  Nor  will  I  dilate 
much  upon  the  shock  I  suffered,  when,  after  breasting 
a  long  steep  slope,  almost  breathless,  I  found  myself  in 


EABASSING   SEARCH  FOR   A    TRACE.  177 

the    jDresence   of  a    red-hided   buffalo  some  forty  feet    'isso. 

Februarv. 

from  me,  and  imsuccessfuUy  fired  at  him.     How  such  a    ^luga. 
demon  of  fury  as  he  appeared  did  not  retaliate  upon 
me,  and  toss  me  twenty  yards  high  for  my  temerity, 
is  incomprehensible,  and  must  be  relegated  to  the  limbo 
of  things  inexplicable.     Nor  shall  I  say  much  of  the 
agonising  descent  through  a  hitherto  unexplored  forest 
which  clothed  a  deep  fold  in  the  Inga  plateau,  from 
summit  to  base,  and  while   descending  an  almost  in- 
terminable slope,  we  were  startled  by  the  ci-ashing  of 
an   elephant  herd  somew^here  away :    at  one  time  as 
though    a    charge   was    meditated    upon   us,  while   at 
another   the    forest    echoes    exaggerated    their    hasty 
movements  into  a  grand  march  of  trampling  squadrons, 
overwhelmingly  near.    Long  before  we  had  completely 
traversed   this  unknown  woodland,  the   sun  had  set ; 
the  exasperating  forest  had  yielded  us  liberty  only  to 
plunge  us  into  a  more  annoying  cane-brake,  whose  firm 
array  of  tall  stalks  daunted  us  all.     Another  half-hour 
was  lost  during  the  fast  deepening  gloaming,  in  search- 
ing for  the  shadow  of  a  herd-track  which,  when  found, 
only  seemed  to  lead  us  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  un- 
explored solitudes.     We  sought  for  water  beside  which 
we  might  rest  for  the  night,   and  in    the   hope    that 
another  hour  might  reveal  some  pool  at  the  bottom  of 
the  valley,  or  some  tiny  thread  of  a  stream,  the  drain 
of  the  towering  heights  half  enfolding  us,  we  bravely 
hold    on.      The  herd-track    disappeared ;     it   had    led 
nowhere,  or  we  had  lost   it  in   the  black  darkness  of 
the   gulfy  hollow.     Man  after  man  tried  to  force  his 
VOL.  I.  ;    N 


178  THE   COSGO. 

1880.     wav  throns'li  the  roadless  o-rass,  but  each  after  a  spell 

Jebniarv. 

inga.  retired  exhausted.  Finally  a  clever  lad  thought  he 
could  find  the  way,  and  led  us  half  an  hour,  guided 
solelv  bv  his  own  wit.  Another  clever  lad  started 
impatiently  to  dispute  the  knowledge  the  first  had 
boasted  of  possessing,  and  this  was  little  Mabruki  of 
the  "  Dark  Continent "  heroes. 

"  Do  you  come  here  and  try  to  do  better  ?  "  says  the 
first  clever  lad  to  Mabruki. 

Mabruki,  being  the  only  brave  who  had  not  as  yet 
exhausted  himself  in  crushing  the  grass  down,  cries 
"  Willingly — I  will  find  a  way  in  a  short  time,"  and 
while  he  hurls  himself  against  the  stubborn  grass,  he 
keeps  up  a  running  fire  of  bitter  comments  upon  the 
other's  unmanliness,  and  woful  ignorance  of  continental 
travelling,  which,  being  briskly  retorted  by  the  other, 
gradually  threatens  to  end  in  a  set-to  in  the  wilderness. 
Suddenly,  Mabruki  throws  himself,  under  the  impulse 
of  anger,  more  vigorously  than  ever,  in  a  fresh  assault 
upon  the  grass,  when,  to  our  horror,  he  disappears 
with  a  gurgling  cry,  in  a  lengthy  gravelike  fracture 
of  the  earth ! 

"  "Where — oh  where,  Mabruki,  are  you  gone  to  ? 
Are  you  hurt,  or  dead  ?  " 

"  Here,"  cries  the  lad's  voice  from  the  depths.  "  I 
have  found  water  ;  but  I  have  broken  my  gourd  !  " 

Poor  Mabruki  had  tumbled  into  a  narrow  water- 
course, twelve  feet  deep  ;  but  its  exceeding  narrowness 
had  caused  him  to  drop  on  his  feet — in  a  pool  of 
water.     The   lausrh   that   followed   the  announcement 


VIEW  FROM   ULUNQU.  179 

of  the  accident  to  his  gourd  chased  away  all  feelings     isso. 

r     '    '  ^        •  --ii  c  ^   '  •  February. 

of  rising  combativeness  m  the  bosom  of  his  antagonist ;     ii,ga, " 
it  contributed   to  make  our  beds  on  the  thick   grass 
seem  easier,  and  to  cause  us   to  forget  the  previous 
aching  pains  of  thirst  and  fatigue. 

The  next  day,  in  the  early  morning,  we  crossed  the 
valley  of  the  Bundi,  and  ascended  tall  Ulungu's  steep 
sides  to  the  very  summit,  not  in  search  of  the  pic- 
turesque, but  to  map  out  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  land 
around  it.  Though  it  is  only  1550  feet  above  the  sea, 
its  dominating  crown  is  conspicuous  from  afar,  and  the 
view  from  its  top  will  be  well  worth  the  toil  of  the 
ascent. 

Looking  towards  Yivi,  the  view  is  arrested  by  the 
noble  expanse  of  the  plateaus  of  Nsanda,  Sadika  Banzi, 
and  Mgangila.  The  deep  trough  of  the  Congo  is  seen 
from  above  Mpamba  Ngulu,  trending  towards  the  elbow 
of  Inga.  The  whole  of  the  Inga  district  is  visible  from 
end  to  end,  and  a  long  winding  stretch  of  the  Congo 
is  seen  from  near  the  Bundi,  flowing  westward  by 
and  between  the  districts  of  Congo  la  Lemba,  Sadika 
Banzi,  and  Mgangila.  West  of  lofty  Yellala,  Mount 
Palaballa  rises  into  view,  and  also  the  crown  of  the 
higher  hills  behind  Nokki.  To  the  north-east  is  a 
number  of  mountain  tops,  the  dark  forest-clad  summit 
of  Nyongena,  with  large  massive  Ngoma  just  beyond. 
On  the  south  bank,  I  can  see  almost  the  whole  of  the 
country,  distributed  in  a  series  of  ridges  running  S.W. 
and  N.E. ;  and  away  beyond,  some  isolated  hill-tops 
undistinguished  by  names,  because  of  our  scant  local 

X  2 


180  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     knowledge.     The  general  impression  we  have  is  of  an 

February. 

Ndambi  irregular  hilly  country ;  masses  of  level-topped  hills 
"^^'  alternating  with  trough-like  valleys  ;  narrower  depres- 
sions seem  well  wooded,  wider  valleys  are  grassy,  like 
the  hill-tops ;  thin  dark  threads  of  lines  of  trees  mark 
the  banks  of  streams,  or  of  deep  recesses,  wherein  the 
flames  from  the  annual  conflagrations  die  out  for  want 
of  the  fanning  breezes  that  drive  these  furious  fires 
on  their  destructive  course.  Below  the  aspiring  mass 
of  Ulungu,  the  Bundi  valley,  with  its  many  pene- 
trating branches  and  grassy  arms,  lies  distinctly  out- 
lined, and  the  course  of  the  future  road  for  many  miles 
is  revealed  to  us. 

In  the  afternoon  we  rejoined  our  company,  and  on 
the  next  morning  set  out  for  Ndambi  Mbongo,  a 
village  on  the  western  side  of  Xgoma  mountain. 
Soon  after  leaving  camp,  we  cross  the  Luenda  stream, 
and  begin  mounting  a  quartz-covered  path  leading 
up  a  high  hill;  after  a  few  ])aces  over  level  ground, 
the  path  dips  down  into  another  deep  ravine,  and  up 
an  opposing  hill  of  equal  height ;  then  down  to  the 
beautiful  Lulu  river,  from  which  the  path  winds  up 
and  down  to  across  the  Bula  river,  and,  finally,  after 
seven  hours'  march,  we  find  ourselves  at  rest  in  the 
village  of  Xdambi  Mbongo,  halfway  up  the  humpy 
mass  of  Xgoma  mountain,  whose  grand  outlines  we 
had  noted  from  the  top  of  Ulungu.  The  chiefs  of 
Ndambi  Mbongo  were  present  at  the  great  palaver 
held  at  De'-de'-de's,  and  are  jorepared  with  their  usual 
offerings  of  palm-wine  and  fowls. 


NGOMA   MOUXTAiy.  181 

Here  we  receive  an  accession  to  our  force  of  guides,     isso. 

.  .  •        1      ri  Februarv. 

and  on  the  next  day  wind  up  m  single  file  to  surmount  xgoma. 
the  commanding*  mountain  of  Ngoma,  which  has  an 
altitude  of  1600  feet  above  the  sea.  From  its  lofty 
summit  a  grand  view  is  obtained  of  the  upper  portion 
of  the  river  between  Isangila  and  Yivi.  Isangila 
Cataract  is  clearly  presented,  also  the  spacious  bay  in- 
denting the  left  bank  below  it,  and  the  long  winding 
reach  down  to  the  base  of  Ngoma  and  down  to  the 
narrows  of  Mpamba  Xgulu.  On  the  south  bank  of  the 
Congo  some  1500  square  miles  of  hilly  territory  lie 
extended,  the  surface  lifting  and  falling  in  great  irre- 
gular waves,  or  disjointed  masses  gullied  on  the  sides. 

From  the  preceding  description  of  the  country  lying 
between  Yivi  and  this  mountain,  it  will  appear  clear  to 
the  reader  that  the  thought  that  weighed  upon  me  most 
was  that  of  the  task  which,  as  we  advanced  towards 
Isangila,  became  more  imminent  each  day,  viz.,  that  of 
finding  available — in  Nature,  if  possible ;  by  laborious 
industry,  if  necessary — either  continuous  stretches,  or 
detached  pieces,  of  level  land,*which  might  be  deftly 
connected  together  by  a  passable  and  safe  road.  The 
native  path,  which  boldly  ran  up  and  down  inclines 
and  declines  of  formidable  steepness,  and  sometimes 
along  a  six-inch  wide  ledge  of  rock  round  the  ends  of 
watercourses,  was  simply  out  of  the  question.  Stand- 
ing here,  at  Ngoma,  and  looking  over  the  well- 
remembered  ups  and  downs,  deep  rocky  ravines, 
innumerable  nullahs  alternating  with  almost  impass- 
able ascents  of  hills  from  Isangila  to  the  extreme  foot 


182  THE   CONGO. 

1880.  of  Ngoma  mountain,  and  looking  down  that  1000  feet 
Neoma.  ^^  ^^^  almost  precipitous  descent  into  the  torrent  of 
Nkenge,  just  below  me,  I  may  well  consider  how  the 
awful  toil  that  lies  before  my  small  band  of  labourers^ 
of  dragging  those  heavy  steamers  and  launches  over- 
land before  they  are  set  afloat  above  the  cataract  of 
Isangila,  is  ever  to  be  accomplished.  It  is  with  that 
object  that  I  minutely  examine  with  my  glass  the 
river  between  Ngoma  and  Isangila,  and  search  the 
shores  on  either  side.  Then  I  come  to  the  resolution 
of  descending  along  the  spine  of  JSTgoma,  down  to  the 
water's  edge,  to  follow  the  river  shore  to  Isangila, 
while  the  people  shall  continue  along  my  old  road  over 
the  Nkenge'  and  the  Luazaza  rivers,  and  the  myriad 
of  intervening  hills  and  fatiguiug  spurs  that  form  the 
water-partiug  of  those  streams. 

Two  guides,  for  an  extra  consideration,  are  willing 
to  undertake  the  toilsome  work  of  exploration  with  me. 
A  small  gang  of  my  own  men  will  be  sufficient  for  an 
escort.  We  descend  along  the  crescented  curve  of  the 
spine,  and,  in  half  an  Eibur,  find  that  we  have  a  cliff  on 
the  eastern  side,  and  that  the  western  side  represents 
the  smooth  top  of  a  plateau,  tilted  over  on  its  side. 
On  the  summit  it  shows  to  the  sky  a  knife-like  edge  of 
quartz,  which  contiuues  down  to  the  middle  of  the 
river  bed,  offering,  of  course,  an  obstruction  to  the 
run  of  the  current,  and  creating  an  impassable  rapid. 
Just  at  the  point  where  the  rocky  extremity  of  Ngoma 
falls  headlong  into  the  river,  is  a  heap  of  huge  detached 
oblong  masses  of  quartz  covering  a  space  of  200  yards. 


ARDUOUS   TRAVELLING.  183 

A   track   used   by   buffaloes    and    hippopotami    leads     i^so. 

"^  J.  J.     i.  February. 

through  this  confused  heap  of  large  rocky  fragments  xgoma. 
to  a  terrace  consisting  of  debris  and  soil  washed  from 
above,  which  has,  from  its  sheltered  position,  nourished 
a  dense  forest  of  tall  trees,  bound  together  by  entangling 
lines  of  indiarubber  creepers,  whose  loops  and  pendent 
stalks  have  frequently  to  be  cut  with  machettes  to 
allow  an  advance  to  be  made  into  this  warm  tropical 
nest.  Sometimes,  as  we  slowly  struggle  through  the 
exuberance  of  vegetation,  we  catch  a  sight  of  the  white 
quartz  cliffs  of  Ngoma,  lifting  their  heads  high  above 
the  tallest  trees^  and  reminding  one,  in  a  strange 
fashion,  of  the  stanza  in  Milton  descriptive  of  the  point 
whence  Satan  first  viewed  enwalled  Paradise.  On 
our  right  we  catch  gleams  of  the  river,  now  gliding 
smoothly  towards  Ngoma  Rapids.  After  an  hour's 
work^  we  emerge  out  of  the  low-lying  tropical  nest  to 
a  grassy  terrace,  and  see  behind  us,  like  an  impassable 
barrier,  towering  grandly,  the  grim  outlines  and  un- 
scaleable  eastern  face  of  Ngoma  mountains. 

The  river  gradually  widens;  terraces,  cut  up  by 
channels  excavated  by  the  torrents  from  the  multitude 
of  hills  to  the  north  bank,  which  end  in  reefs,  or  are 
margined  by  sand,  are  crossed  as  we  proceed  upon  our 
laborious  march.  The  south  bank  is  in  full  view, 
rising  to  the  height  of  600  feet,  either  ^in  very  steep 
slopes  or  precipitously,  or  deeply  indented  at  the  con- 
flux of  the  tributary  with  the  parent  stream.  The 
Nkengc  is  forded  amid  deep  solemn  woods.  There  is  a 
succession  of  spurs  to   be  crossed  by  us,  whose  ends, 


184  THE   CONGO. 

1880.  abutting  on  the  river,  are  not  yet  fit  for  prospecting, 
isangiia.  OH  account  of  tlie  tall  grass  and  scrubby  jungle 
thriving  on  their  debris,  and,  after  a  gallant  effort 
over  many  hills,  we  emerge  on  the  plain  through 
which  the  Luazaza  issues  into  the  river,  just  at  the 
point  where  the  Congo  begins  to  regain  its  tranquil 
flow,  after  the  violence  and  turmoil  of  its  descent 
down  the  Isangila  Cataract.  Thence  beyond  the 
Luazaza  we  wind  in  and  out  of  various  far-reaching 
hill  folds,  and  in  a  short  time  find  ourselves  in  full 
view  of  my  camp,  made  memorable  to  me  as  the 
scene  where,  having  arrived  at  "  Tuckey's  Furthest," 
I  reluctantly  abandoned  my  boat,  canoes,  and  faithful 
ass  "  Mirambo,"  in  1877. 

When  the  chiefs  of  Isangila,  whose  churlishness 
was  a  theme  with  me  once  in  past  times,  came  down 
from  their  eyries  on  the  hill-tops  overlooking  the  em- 
bosomed valley  near  the  cataract,  to  visit  me,  en- 
camped in  exactly  the  same  spot  they  first  made  my 
acquaintance  thirty -two  months  ago,  they  were  better 
prepared  for  the  novelty  of  an  intercourse  with  a  white 
man.  My  numerous  guides,  while  passing  through, 
had  poured  forth  an  astonishing  tale  of  how  this  same 
white  man  had  built  a  town  "  bigger  than  Boma,"  had 
called  all  the  chiefs  of  the  country  together,  and  these 
had  all  consented  to  give  the  country  up  to  the  white 
man,  to  carve  out  and  cut  into  little  bits  if  he  wished  ; 
and  every  one  was  to  be  as  happy  as  possible,  revelling 
in  luxuries ;  and  he  thought  of  building  another  town 
at  Isangila,  if  the  chiefs  of  Isangila  were  wise  enough 


THE  PENITENT   CHIEFS    OF  ISANGILA.  185 

not  to   refuse  biiii   ground.     The  gifts  given  to  eacli     isso. 

JIarch. 

chief  had  been  magnified  tenfold,  until  the  poor  isangiia. 
chiefs,  whose  fears  had  been  first  excited  on  account 
of  the  manner  they  had  maltreated  the  forsaken  ass 
"  Mirambo,"  and  broken  up  the  boat  for  the  sake  of 
her  copper  tacks,  and  sold  the  canoe  flotilla,  gradually 
began  to  indulge  in  anticipations  much  brighter  than 
the  real  facts  warranted.  These  exaggerations  served 
at  least  to  quicken  a  kindlier  interest  in  me,  and  here 
they  had  come  laden  with  food  and  wine,  such  as  they 
could  afford,  prepared  to  make  the  amende  honorable  by 
attributing  past  churlishness  to  their  dense  ignorance 
of  what  the  white  men  really  were,  and  to  their  utter 
astonishment  at  the  discovery  of  white  men  coming 
down  the  river,  whose  waters  they  seemed  to  navigate 
with  the  utmost  assurance,  though  they  had  never 
heard  of  white  men  having  been  previously  seen  in  the 
interior. 

Rewarded  abundantly  by  an  ample  supply  of  fine 
clothes,  flunkey  coats,  and  tinsel-braided  uniforms,  with 
a  rich  assortment  of  divers  marketable  wares,  such  as 
knives,  beads,  brass  ornaments,  not  omitting  a  couple 
of  bottles  of  gin,  they  soon,  with  the  ready  oratory  of 
the  Nsanda  natives,  ceded  a  promise  to  the  effect  that 
a  choice  of  land  by  the  uninhabited  river-side  should  be 
reserved  for  my  "  town,"  with  as  large  an  acreage  as 
was  desirable  for  grazing-ground  and  fields. 

Regarding  it  now  from  a  purely  utilitarian  point 
of  view,  the  grassy  basin  at  the  foot  of  the  Isangila 
Hills  seemed  to  me  rich  with  promise.     The  land  was 


18G  THE  CONGO. 


1880.     exceedingly  fertile ;  over  its  fat  red  loam  the  grass  was 


3Iarch 


isangiia.  deiise  and  prolific,  and  with  cultivation  would  nurture 
plenteous  growths  of  edible  vegetables.  The  cultivable 
portion  might  be  estimated  at  800  acres,  ample  enough 
for  a  second-rate  station.  A  square-browed  hill  above 
the  cataract  overlooked  a  four-acre  baylet  of  deep, 
quiet  water,  which,  with  a  little  improvement  of  the 
shores,  might  afford  an  admirable  shelter  for  the  boats. 
And,  if  in  future  a  town  should  grow  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood, two  miles  higher  up  was  a  spacious  plain, 
well  watered,  six  or  seven  miles  long  by  a  mile  wide. 

Mentally  reviewing  what  information  had  been  ob- 
tained by  this  reconnaissance  to  Isangiia,  I  became 
convinced  that,  with  sufficient  labour  force  and  engi- 
neering appliances,  there  were  no  serious  obstacles  to 
a  railway  from  Tivi  to  Isangiia.  The  river-shore  of 
Yivi  would  need  improvement,  and  a  winding-engine 
would  be  required  on  the  plateau  to  haul  up  goods 
direct  from  the  piers;  thence  a  bridge  of  120  feet  over 
the  Xkusu  rivulet  and  ravine  might  run  to  the  station 
plateau  of  Tivi,  and  skirting  Yivi  mountain  a  road 
cut  from  the  slope,  with  here  and  there  small  culverts 
for  draining  the  water  in  the  gullies,  a  railway  might 
run  almost  level  to  the  Lufu  and  Loa  valley.  A 
slight  incline  of  1  foot  in  100  up  the  Muzonzila  gorge 
would  lead  it  either  through  a  tunnel,  or  a  cutting 
across  a  narrow  neck  of  clay  land,  to  the  slope  of 
a  ridge,  along  which  the  roadway  might  gradually 
decline  to  some  point  of  the  Bundi  valley.  A  bridge 
across  the  Bundi,  200  feet  long,  and  another  100  feet 


PROPOSED   RAILWAY.  187 

lonf>-,  would  "be    all  that  would  be   needed    of  extra-     issu. 

°'  _  March. 

ordinary  expense  and  skilled  work  as  far  as  the  mouth   is^ugiia. 
of  the  Luenda,  thirty-five  miles  from  Yivi.    Across  the 
mouth  of  this  stream  a  bridge  200  feet  would  have  to 
be    constructed,  thence  along   an  embankment   above 
hio'h  flood  two  miles  lono:  to  the  mouth  of  the  Lulu 
river,  which  would  require  a  somewhat  longer  bridge. 
From  the  Lulu  the  Congo  would  have  to  be  followed 
along  a  road  carved  out  of  the  slope  of  Xyongena  Hill, 
whence    the    railway   might    either   run    straight   to 
Ngoma  Point  on  a  light  iron  tressle  bridge  600  yards 
long,  or  wind  around  the  east  extremity  of  Nyongena 
Hill  to  the  Bula  river,  over  which  a  bridge  100  feet 
lono'  would  suffice  to  lead  it  round  after  a  detour  of 
half  a  mile  inland  to  Ngoma  Point.      The  blasting  of 
25  yards  of  rock  across  this  point,  and  10  yards  wide 
into  the  mountain,  would  furnish  a  very  spacious  and 
safe  roadway  to  the  forested  terrace  east  of  Ngoma. 
The  terrace,  almost  level,  found  here  would  be  available 
for  four  miles  to  the  heads  of  the  rocky  bluffs,  between 
the  Nkenge  and  Khonzo  plain,  across  which  a  roadway 
would  require  to  be  blasted,  and  a  few  culverts   or 
small  bridges  constructed   across  the   mouths   of  the 
gullies.     From  Khonzo  plain  to  Isangila  there  would 
be  no  difficult  work  to  perform. 

For  us,  however,  with  our  force  of  130  men,  such 
a  work  would  be  a  gigantic  one  indeed.  I  must^ 
therefore,  prepare  to  make  my  turnpike  in  a  very 
different  direction.  The  necessity  for  me  is  to  have  a 
road  over  which  wagons  conveying  five-ton  loads  may 


188 


THE   CONGO. 


be    hauled    without     a 
capsize,  and  consequent 
fracture  of  material,  of 
engines,    boilers,     or 
heavy  iron    or  wooden 
steamers.       Perhaps     a 
little  more   minute    ex- 
ploration     of      certain 
t   points  will  enable  me  to 
^;   do  so  without  a  ruinous 
^   delay.     Some  results  of 
I   a    happy    nature    have 
I   followed  this  rapid  sur- 
<    vey  of  the  country.     I 
i    Lave  infused  confidence 
-'  in  my  own  followers — 
r^    that  we  can  conquer  by 
'^    industry  what  appeared 
^    to  them  insurmountable 
g    difficulties.        My     safe 
u    return  to  Yivi  will  also 
encourage    the    inexpe- 
rienced Europeans,  and 
the     large      escort      of 
natives,    representatives 
of  many   districts,  will 
assure   them    also    tliat 
our    progress    will    be 
peaceful,     despite      the 
prognostications   of    the   traders   of   the   lower   river, 


INTEBCOUBSE    WITH  NATIVES.  189 

whose  hostility  to  ns.  thouo-h  passive,  is  unmistakable  ;  isso. 
and  I  am  a  little  elated  at  the  prospect  of  obtaining  ywu 
recruits  from  among*  the  natives  for  my  working  force. 

The  reconnaissance  was  terminated  b}^  our  arrival 
at  Yivi  on  the  10th  of  March  with  nearly  a  hundred 
natives,  who  came  to  see  wiih  their  own  eyes  the  new 
European  town  in  their  country  of  which  they  had 
heard  so  much  lately.  Instructions  were  issued  to 
the  Europeans  to  be  prudent  in  their  conduct,  and 
to  deport  themselves  as  amicably  as  possible  with  the 
natives,  lest  any  incident  might  rupture  the  peaceful 
intercourse  so  auspiciously  commenced.  ^ 

The  following  extracts  from  the  report  to  Colonel 
Strauch  will  furnish  other  information  which  no  doubt 
to  many  will  be  of  real  interest. 

"Yivi  Station,  March  lith,  1S80. 
"  My  dear  Colonel, 

"  On  February  21st  I  started  on  my  reconnaissance  as  far  as  Isaugila 
Cataract,  and  returned  March  lOtli,  having  travelled  during  my  eighteen 
days'  absence  190  miles.  The  distance  to  Isangila  from  Vivi,  where  we 
embark  on  our  boats  for  up-river,  is  fifty-two  English  miles.  Had  we 
merely  gone  to  Isangila  and  returned  direct  to  Yivi  by  tlie  same  route 
we  should  only  have  marched  101  miles,  but  the  country  after  leaving 
Nsanda  is  a  cruel  one  altogether.  Deep  ravines  cut  it  up,  and  steep  hills 
and  mountains,  here  shaggy  with  grim  forests,  there  rough  and  bristling 
witli  huge  rocks,  confront  us  every  mile  or  two.  The  native  roads  lead 
us  through  these  difiiculties,  which  are  in  some  places  simply  imjiassablc 
for  waggons.  If  you  will  read  the  account  of  my  march  1870,  vol.  ii. 
'  Dark  Continent  from  Isangila  Cataract  to  N?anda  Nsanga,'  you  will  have 
a  fair  idea  of  the  impression  a  second  visit  along  the  same  route  has  given 
me.  This  country  was  absolutely  impassable  for  waggons.  I  accordingly 
was  comiKiUcd  to  abandon  all  idea  of  following  the  native  track,  and  I 
rambled  about  the  mountains  and  along  the  river,  traced  the  courses  of 
streams,  i)lunged  into  the  depths  of  perfect  wildernesses — all  this  with 
the  view  of  obtaining  a  more  feasible  route  to  Isangila,  which  I  liave  at 
last  discovered.     Still  there  is  vast  work  before  wo  can  move  on  for 


y 


190  THE   CONGO. 

jgj^Q  Isangila.  Tlie  first  quarter  of  the  journey  is  beautiful.  I  can  proceed 
:M:ireh  10.  twelve  miles  at  a  tolerably  fair  rate  of  travel  with  the  launch  and  waggon 
after  cutting  the  grass.  Then  begins  the  uivand-down-hill  work,  the 
removing  of  great  rocks,  the  filling  up  of  hollows,  until  we  come  to  a 
forest  which  has  to  be  cut  through;  we  then  come  to  a  river,  its  bed 
filled  with  boulders,  out  of  which  we  emerge  to  drag  the  waggon  up  a 
slope  which  has  a  rise  of  one  foot  in  four.  Then  another  bit  of  fair  road, 
through  stubborn  bush  and  tall  grass,  takes  us  six  or  seven  miles,  when 
we  come  in  presence  of  the  worst  of  our  difficulties — ravine  after  ravine, 
hill  after  hill,  stream  after  stream,  while  the  great  river  itself  at  this 
particular  place  is  one  narrow  wild  rapid,  hemmed  in  by  tall  lilack  cliffs 
impassable  to  anything. 

"  Yet,  as  our  object  is  to  establish  stations  and  means  of  communication 
between  them,  the  difficult  task  must  be  performed.  First  we  have  to 
make  a  road,  then  to  return  to  Yivi  to  haul  the  Boyal  overland  52  miles 
with  its  boiler  and  machinery.  Third,  to  return  with  the  waggons 
to  Vivi,  and  haul  the  En  Avant,  boiler,  and  machinery.  Fourth,  to 
return  to  Yivi  with  the  three  waggons  to  haul  the  boats  and  heavy 
impedimenta.  Fifth,  to  return  to  Yivi  for  the  stores  up  river.  The  total 
mileage  of  all  these  journeys  will  be  520  English  miles,  exclusive  of  the 
journey  of  cutting  a  road.  All  tliis  distance  and  long  mileage  only  covers 
our  progress  to  Isangila. 

"  It  is  hard  to  think  of  all  this  labour,  but  we  must  do  it,  as  we  have 
only  a  small  force  compared  with  what  we  ought  to  have ;  and,  so  far  as 
I  can  see,  the  assistance  to  be  given  by  natives  in  the  region  between 
Isangila  and  Yivi  will  be  comparatively  small. 

"  Of  course  when  we  have  arrived  at  Isangila  our  labours  will  be 
lightened ;  the  river  will  enable  us  to  reach  Manyanga,  where  we  leave  the 
Boijal  and  one  boat,  and  one-third  of  our  force  and  impedimenta,  so  that 
a  couple  of  months  will  suffice  for  our  removal  from  Isangila,  with  boats 
and  stores  and  establishment  at  Manyanga.  On  leaving  Manyanga  we 
shall  not  have  so  difficult  a  country  to  travel  through ;  we  shall  be  able 
to  obtain  assistance,  and  we  shall  have  only  the  En  Avant  and  one  boat 
to  take  besides  our  stores,  so  that  three  trips  will  be  sufficient.  These 
three  trips  will  cover  a  mileage  of  570  miles,  which  I  am  sure  we  can 
l^erform  without  that  difficulty  we  shall  experience  between  Yivi  Station 
and  Isangila. 


"  It  is  in  this  way  I  was  enabled  in  1877  to  drag  my  canoes  overland. 
I  had  sixteen  canoes  (heavy — one  or  two  of  them  over  three  tons  in 
weight).  Sometimes  we  moved  only  500  yards,  some  days  we  moved  them 
all  one  mile ;  but  I  had  all  my  party  within  sound  of  musket  shot.  All 
were  encouraged  a  little  by  the  steady  progress  we  made ;  but  in  tliis 
journey  to  Isangila'we  shall  seem  to  make  scarcely  any  i^rogress.    Instead 


REPORTING  PROGRESS.  191 

of,  as  we  thonglit,  going  only  fifty-two  miles,  we  have  to  make  ten  trips      ^ggQ 

of  fifty-two  miles,  thus  : —  March  10. 

Distance.  Time.  Vivi. 

Roijal — From  Yivi  to  Isangila 52  miles  =  1  month. 

Eetuming  with  waggons  to  Yivi      ...  52      „  „  20  clays. 

En  Avant — From  Vivi  to  Isangila 52      „  „  1  month. 

Returning  with  three  empty  waggons  .     .  52      „  „  20  days. 

Two  steel  boats — From  Yivi  to  Isangila     ...  52      „  „  1  month. 

Beturning  with  empty  waggons.     ...  52      „  „  20  days. 
Heavy  material,  rope,  iron,  hardware — From  Yivi 

to  Isangila 52      „  „  1  month. 

Eeturning  with  empty  waggons ....  52      „  „  20  days. 
Provisions,  iron  houses,  tanks,  grindstones — From 

Yivi  to  Isangila 52      „  „  1  month. 

Making  road  and  returning  previous  to  hauling 

waggons 104      „  „  50  days. 

Total  distance,  572  miles.    Total  time,  10  months  10  days. 

"  But  supposing  we  had  three  large  waggons  and  five  small  waggons, 
lime  and  distance  would  stand  thus : — 

jMiles.  Days. 
.Making  road  to  Isangila  and  returning  to  Yivi  .     .     .       104  50 

Proceeding  with  all  boats  and  all  material  at  an  average 

rate  of  one  mile  a  day 52  48 

156  98 

A  clear  saving  of  seven  months  and  seven  days,  and  a  valuable  saAung  of 
strength. 

"  The  only  accident  that  might  occur  to  destroy  this  calculation  is  a 
"breakage  of  an  axle  or  a  wheel,  but  this  would  only  delay  us  a  few  days. 

"  On  the  journey  to  the  Stanley  Pool  from  Manyanga,  conveying  all  we 
have  by  one  steady  progress  without  returning  to  Manyanga,  would 
enable  me  to  make  the  most  of  my  little  force.  All  boats,  tools,  tents, 
xaachinery,  provisions,  sick  persons,  would  be  steadily  making  progress 
towards  the  Stanley  Pool,  and  you  may  safely  calculate  that  from  leaving 
Manyanga  to  the  Stanley  Pool  (the  distance  being  ninety-five  miles)  we 
should  not  be  more  than  fifty  days.  So  that  before  ten  montlis  from  this 
date  we  sliould  be  established  at  Stanley  Pool  with  everything  necessary 
for  the  station. 

"  Such  is  the  view  I  take  of  our  position  after  my  visit  to  Isangila.  I 
present  it  you  nakedly  and  without  obscurity. 

»•♦♦** 

"Our  working  force  being  so  intolerably  weak  compared  to  the  large- 
ness of  our  task,  wc  shall  appear  to  dawdle  along  in  a  most  agonising  way 


192  THE   CONGO. 

1880.      of  going  and  coming,  coming  and  going,  instead  of  marcliing  straight  along 
March  10.  ^Q  Q^^  destination  at  tl:e  Pool. 


Viv 


"  My  dearest  wish  is  to  get  on  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  the  hard 
marching  I  have  had  lately  has  lessoned  me  npou  various  expedients- 
You  sec  that  we  cannot  rush  on  with  about  eighty  tons  of  material,  but  if 
we  have  these  waggons  we  can  at  least  be  moving  on  every  day  a  little, 
and  all  our  company  will  be  together  within  call  of  one  another.  We 
shall  first  pitch  our  camp  a  mile  or  a  mile  and  a  half  off,  then  haul  the 
waggons  to  the  camp  one  after  another.  If  we  find  we  can  do  more  than 
this,  we  will  push  on  again,  and  so  march  on  to  our  destination  steadily. 
If  we  come  to  a  bad  place,  we  shall  all  be  together,  and  no  one  leaves 
until  we  have  conquered  the  difficulty. 

"From  Yivi  ridge  to  Ndambi  Mbongo  the  country  is  a  remarkable 
one,  more  especially  that  which  lies  between  Yivi  and  the  Bundi  Eiver. 
North  of  Yivi  ridge  the  land  rises  gradually  after  a  descent  into  the  Loa 
Plain  to  the  same  altitude  as  Yivi  ridge,  and  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  it 
seems  to  be  a  grand  and  noble  grassy  plain.  But  frequently  you  appear 
to  see  thin  lines  of  dark  foliage  winding  here  and  there.  These  lines,  on 
approaching  them,  turn  out  to  be  the  tops  of  wooded  gorges,  where  the 
trees  are  nourished  into  the  most  stately  proportions.  The  track  (native) 
dips  down  into  these  gorges,  and  runs  along  their  deep  shadowy  bottoms  for 
about  100  or  200  yards,  then  rises  abruptly  into  the  same  level  of  the  grassy 
plateau  from  which  it  had  jiist  descended.  These  wooded  gorges  are 
very  numerous,  and  run  for  miles,  maintaining  the  same  character  until, 
approaching  the  river  bank,  they  open  out  from  the  character  of  gorges 
into  valleys,  broken  and  rocky,  which  descend  rapidly,  by  terraces  or 
precipitously,  into  the  low  level  of  the  river  Congo.  But  in  any  of  the 
wooded  gorges  may  be  found  within  an  area  of  half  a  mile  over  200  tall 
trees,  rising  straight  as  flag-poles  to  the  height  of  100  feet,  with  diameters 
varying  from  twelve  inches  to  thirty  inches.  One  gorge  that  I  travelled 
along  to  ascertain  its  course  would  without  doubt  furnish  over  3000  such 
trees.  Further  from  the  river,  i.e.  N.N.\Y.,  these  gorges  with  their  fine 
noble  woods  give  place  to  an  extensive  forest,  which  is  probably  about 
150  square  miles  in  extent,  according  to  native  report.  These  fine  trees 
are  mostly  African  teak  ;  the  landolj^hia  or  india-rubber  flourishes  in  their 
shade,  and  many  fine  woods  are  also  found  suitable  for  cabinet  making, 
&c.  The  forest  of  Bundi  could  supply  Yivi  Station  with  magnificent 
timber,  as  its  trees  might  be  felled,  and  after  a  month's  drying  dragged  to 
the  Congo  and  floated  down  to  Yivi  without  further  trouble  than  picking 
them  up  at  Yivi.  The  forest  of  Bundi  begins  in  fact  at  the  confluence  of 
the  Bundi  with  the  Congo. 

"In  short,  this  country  described  above  is  a  remarkably  rich  country, 
and  its  natural  landing-place  is  at  Yivi.  My  conviction  is  that  had  I 
spent  a  year  in  trying  to  discover  a  route  more  accessible  into  the  interior. 


PAYMENT  OF  NATIVES.  193 

or  for  a  richer  district  for  a  neighbourhood,  I  could  not  have  bettered      isso 
myself.    The  only  drawback  to  what  would  have  been  a  most  enviable  March  10. 
possession  to  any  nation,  corporation,  or  company,  is  the  unconquerable      Vivi. 
indolence  of  the  people,  and  scantiness  of  their  numbers.    Compared  to 
the  extent  of  their  possessions,  the  people  are  really  too  rich  to  work 
because  all  are  comparatively  rich.    Palm  wine,  palm  oil,  sugar  cane, 
ground  nuts,  sweet  potatoes,  bananas,  plantains,  cabbages,  pine-apples, 
guavas,  limes,  tobacco,  Indian   corn,  pigs,  goats,  chickens,  &c.,  form  a 
variety  of  product  sufficient  and  more  than  sufficient  for  native  wants, 
inasmuch  as  it  requires  very   strong  inducements  to  tempt  them  to 
abandon  their  easy  home  and  village  life  for  work  at  stations  or  on  roads. 

"  What  this  country  requires  is  emigration  of  poor  people  (native),  or  a 
number  of  freed  slaves,  who  might  be  settled  in  homesteads,  and  could 
siipply  labour  to  the  stations  for  the  currency  of  the  country,  by  which 
they  might  support  themselves  and  families  and  acquire  comfortable 
homes. 

"  We  have  lately  received  reinforcements  of  labourers  from  the  coast, 
who  have  been  engaged  at  the  rate  of  from  four  to  eight  longs  of  cloth  per 
month,  besides  rations.  The  chief  men  receive  from  ten  to  fifteen  longs 
monthly. 

"  A  long,  though  consisting  of  only  six  yards  of  common  domestic,  is 
considered  on  the  coast  to  be  equal  to  a  dollar,  but  we  reckon  it  at  3s. 
A  inece  of  the  cloth  out  of  which  such  longs  are  cut  measures  twenty- 
four  yards,  or  four  longs. 

"  Many  of  the  coast  people,  however,  take  their  pay  largely  in  gin  to 
retail  when  home  at  a  profit.  Bottles  of  gin  or  rum  are  marketable,  and 
serve  as  currency.  Another  form  of  currency  is  the  cheap  cloth,  tin 
plates,  white-handled  table  knives,  spoons,  mugs,  drinking  glasses,  and 
small  mirrors. 

"  Though  we  may  regret  that  gin  is  considered  as  currency,  we  cannot 
help  it.  We  require  native  produce  for  food  daily ;  without  an  assort- 
ment of  currency  we  should  be  put  to  great  shifts  frequently. 

- "  The  gin  and  rum  are  also  largely  consumed  as  grog  by  our  native 
workmen.  We  dilute  both  largely,  and  so  reduce  its  spirit,  but  we  are 
compelled  to  serve  it  out  morning  and  evening.  A  stoppage  of  this  would 
be  followed  by  a  cessation  of  work.  It  is  '  custom,'  custom  is  despotic, 
and  we  are  too  weak  and  too  new  in  the  country  to  rebel  against  custom. 
If  we  resist  custom  we  shall  be  abandoned. 

"  It  would  be  madness  to  try  and  stop  a  team  of  frightened  horses  by 
standing  directly  in  the  way.  One  must  run  alongside,  if  possible,  and 
restrain  them  gradually,  even  though  we  appear  to  be  running  with 
thorn. 

"  Every  visitor  to  our  camp  on  this  part  of  the  Congo,  if  he  has  a 
palaver  with  us,  must  first  receive  a  small  glass  of  rum  or  gin.  A  chief 
receives  a  bottleful,  which  ho  distributes  tcaspoonful    by  tcaspoonful 

VOL.  I.  O 


194  THE   CONGO. 

1880.      among  his  followers.    This  is  the  Lower  Congo  idea  of  an  '  all-round 
March  10.  drink.' 

Viv).  "  J  jjaye  jjQt  sggji  any  ill-effects  from  this  as  yet ;  on  the  contrary,  it  has 

increased  their  sociality,  and  made  people  otherwise  silent  open  their 
minds  frankly.  However  I  should  not  like  to  have  it  introduced  into  the 
Upper  Congo. 

"  I  see  by  the  returns  of  the  station  chief  that  we  consume  125  gallons 
of  rum  monthly  by  distributing  grog  rations,  and  native  demands  for  it 
in  lieu  of  a  portion  of  their  wages." 


TEE  NATURE    OF   OUR    TASK.  195 


CHAPTER   XI. 

YIVI   TO   ISAXGILA  :    ROAD-MAKIXG A  CURIOUS  CHAPTER. 

My  working  force — The  whites — Camp  in  the  Loa  valley — Tracing  a 
way  through  the  tall  grass — Our  first  day's  road-making — "  "When 
in  Rome  you  must  do  as  the  Romans  do,"  a  mistake — What  food  to 
take  in  the  tropics — Village  idols — A  bigoted  medicine-man — Value 
of  buffalo  and  hippopotami  tracks — Gin-drinking  chiefs — A  deter- 
mined old  toper — DiflSculty  about  the  names  of  the  Congo — YeUala 
Falls — Market-days — Snakes — Abundance  of  game — The  sun  at 
noon — Birds — Completion  of  the  first  section  of  our  road — Overland 
conveyance  of  the  steam-launch  Royal — ^Troubles  with  the  Europeans 
— Arrival  of  Belgian  "  commercials " — The  coldest  part  of  the 
country — Death  of  a  promising  member  of  the  Expedition — My  first 
sickness — A  day's  thermometer  readings — Swinburne  ill — Settlement 
of  a  trade  dispute — Result  of  160  days'  hard  work— Reports  to  the 
President. 

The  account  of  the  work  from  Marcli  ISth,  1880,  to     isso. 

-J-,   1       __     1      -I  oni      T  •  1  March  18. 

reb.  ilst,  1881,  1  propose  to  put  mto  two  chapters,  yj^j 
with  the  pardonable  desire  to  exhibit  in  their  pages 
as  full  a  story  as  may  be  necessary  to  explain  pro- 
perly the  nature  of  the  task  we  had  undertaken  for 
the  Comite'  d'Etudes  du  Ilaut  Congo.  It  should 
deserve  attention  for  the  honest  candour  of  its  narra- 
tion, if  not  for  the  every-day  unromantic  details  of  its 
matter. 

On  mustering  the   force   of  foreign   pioneers  with 

0  2 


196  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     whlcli  I  was  about  to  carve  a  wagon-way  through  the 

March  18.  .  .  ^    ^       - 

vivi.  tropic  land  I  had  just  surveyed,  I  discovered  I  had 
exactly  106  men  at  my  di.sposal,  after  leaving  at  the 
station  of  Yivi  2  interpreters,  3  headmen,  43  labourers, 
14  house-boj's,  3  '^  washjacks,"  3  cooks,  and  4  native 
boys  of  Yivi  as  apprentice  waiters. 

There  were,  at  this  period,  fourteen  whites  besides 
myself.  Messrs.  Sparhawk,  Swinburne,  Kirkbright, 
and  Moore,  were  engaged  as  civilian  superintendents 
and  ao-ents  of  stations.  The  remainino-  ten  were 
officers  and  sailors  in  charge  of  the  steamers  Belgique, 
Esperance,  En  Avant,  Royal,  and  Jeune  Africaine, 
all  of  whom,  of  cour.se,  would  be  utterly  useless  to  me 
in  the  road-making.  At  this  period,  also,  no  white, 
with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Sparhawk,  understood  any 
African  dialect,  and  a  company  of  lOG  men  was  alto- 
gether too  small  a  force  to  bear  subdivision.  While  with 
a  woeful  face  I  regarded  my  small  company  of  pioneers, 
I  was  encouraged  by  the  promises  made  by  the  native 
chiefs  that  they  would  furnish  help  ;  but  I  did  not 
anticipate  at  this  early  stage  of  our  acquaintance  that 
they  would  venture  far  from  their  homes.  They  would 
no  doubt  wait  until  the  road-making  party  had  entered 
their  territory. 

On  the  18th  March,  1880,  we  marched  to  the  Loa 
river  and  valley,  and  formed  a  camp,  all  the  Yivi 
labourers  being  employed  in  conveying  70  sacks  of 
beans,  peas,  lentils,  rice,  and  salt,  as  a  first  instal- 
ment of  provisions  for  the  pioneer  force.  During  the 
rest  of  the  morning  we  traced  the  line  of  road,   by 


CLEARING  A   ROAD.  197 

means   of   flag-staffs    bearing*   white    cloth    streamers,     isso. 

March  18. 

and  a  tall  step-ladder  to  guide  through  the  tall  grass  vivi. 
the  bearers  of  the  half-mile  cord  and  reel.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  the  grass  in  many  places  was  10  feet 
high,  and  in  loamy  hollows  about  15  feet.  In  the 
months  of  July,  August,  and  September  fires  consume 
the  old  grass,  but  so  quick  is  the  growth  from  the 
moment  that  the  rains  begin  in  September,  that  by 
the  middle  of  March  it  is  as  tall  as  a  young  forest. 

At  midday  the  pioneers  were  formed  in  line,  hoes 
in  hand,  along  the  cord,  and,  at  a  signal,  the  work  of 
uprooting  the  grass  began.  By  night  there  was  a 
clean  roadway,  15  feet  wide,  and  2500  feet  long,  made ; 
and  by  the  evening  of  the  21st,  11,010  feet  of  roadway 
was  cleared. 

On  the  22nd  of  March  the  road  was  joined  to  that 
already  made  between  Yivi  station  and  the  summit  of 
Yivi  mountain.  During  the  progress  of  the  work  the 
hollows,  gullies,  depressions,  and  many  irregularities  of 
surface  along  the  roadway  had  been  revealed ;  much 
scrub  and  many  trees,  besides  large  rocks,  stood  ex- 
posed and  isolated ;  but  our  axes,  hoes,  crowbars  and 
sledge-hammers  had  been  distributed,  and  by  the 
evening  of  the  22nd  the  wagons  could  roll  in  safety 
from  the  Yivi  to  the  Loa  river. 

On  the  23rd  we  moved  camp  to  half-way  between 
Banza  Uvana  and  the  Loa.  Then  began  the  transfer 
of  tools,  provisions,  and  the  miscellaneous  goods  we 
carried  with  us  to  pay  for  the  hire  of  native  labourers 
when  they  should  come  to  apply  for  work. 


198 


THE   coy  GO. 


1880.         On  tlie  25th  we  aorain  moved  camp  witli  its  miscel- 

March25. 

Banza    lanBOus  property  to  Banza   u  vana,  where  we  engaged 
^'    five  natives,  who  were  immediately  initiated  into  the 
art  of  pioneering,  and  on  the  next  day,  after  measure- 
ment from  Tivi  landing-place   to  Banza  Uvana,   our 
completed  road  measured  50,354  feet,  or  9^  miles. 
I  write  that  evening  in  my  journal  a  sound  bit  of 


DIAGBAM   OF   TRUCK   FOB   MACHISEEY. 

information,  to  which,  when  describing  the  climate,  I 
shall  have  occasion  to  refer. 

"I  am  reminded  to-night  of  the  error  of  another  old 
adao^e,  'When  in  Eome  you  must  do  as  the  Romans 
do.'  Rome  being  a  civilised  city  of  great  renown,  &c., 
it  no  doubt  was  correct  and  proper.  But  the  world  is 
given  so  much  to  generalise  that  what  is  applicable  to 
Rome  is  supposed  by  irreflective  men  to  be  apphcable 
to  all   other  parts.     It  is   manifestly  absurd,   for   ex- 


FOOD   IX  TEE   TROPICS.  199 

ample,  to  apply  this  rule  to  a  hot,  equatorial  region,  so  isso. 
destitute  of  those  necessaries  of  life  to  which  people  Banza 
in  civilised  and  temperate  climates  are  accustomed. 
Habit  may  be  changed,  but  Nature  must  be  obeyed. 
If  I  could  carry  with  me  my  usual  provisions  of  roast 
or  boiled  mutton  or  beef,  potatoes,  bread,  and  frozen 
butter,  and  wine,  I  would  do  so  most  certainly,  and 
find  a  sure  reward  in  good  health  for  so  doing.  On 
two  expeditions  I  have  been  a  sad  victim  to  African 
fever,  and  its  consequent  weakness,  and  months  would 
sometimes  elapse  before  I  could  regain  my  old 
strength  and  energies.  Had  I  been  able  to  obtain 
nourishing  food  I  had  saved  much  valuable  time, 
and  recuperated  declining  energies  quicker ;  but  I 
lived  on  the  same  food  as  the  native.  On  this  third 
expedition  I  have  conformed  hitherto  to  the  dietary 
rules  of  civilised  life,  though  fresh  beef  and  mutton 
are  absent,  and  I  have  only  once  been  slightly  indis- 
posed during  these  eight  months  I  have  been  on  the 
Congo,  and  when  I  look  around  on  my  Zanzibar!  and 
other  employes,  and  on  the  mules  and  asses,  I  am 
confirmed  in  my  opinion  that  good  food  is  as  necessary 
to  preserve  health  in  this  climate  as  in  all  others." 

In  this  village  there  is  a  double-headed  wooden  bust, 
with  its  crown  adorned  (?)  with  old  iron  scraps  and  bits 
of  mirror  glass,  and  two  wooden  idols,  about  4  feet  high, 
ferocious  in  appearance,  placed  under  a  small  shed,  as  a 
chapel,  I  suppose.  These  are  the  great  gods  of  Banza 
Uvana.  The  well-bearded  chief,  Lusalla,  has  a  medicine- 
man, who  uses  a  small  gourd  in  which  are  a  few  pebbles. 


200 


THE   CONGO. 


1S80. 
JIai-ch  25. 

Banza 
Uvaua. 


The  medicine-man,  or  fetish,  is  in  requisition  frequently 
by  the  surrounding  villagers,  and  has  boasted  to  me  of 
the  many  cures  he  has  performed  with  that  gourd  and 
its  pebbles.  He  is  so  confirmed  a  believer  in  its  virtues 
that  in  very  despair  I  had  to  abandon  my  arguments. 


FETISH  IDOLS. 


Besides,  my  vocabulary  is  limited,  and  he  has  a  decided 
advantage  over  me  through  his  superior  volubility. 

March  28th. — Moved  camp  to  Ntombo-a-Lungu,  a 
village  in  the  Loa  gorge,  steamy,  and  most  depressing. 
The  wealth  of  verdure  under  rain  and  moisture  is 
perfectly  wonderful.  Temperature  averaged  80°  Fahr. 
in  shade. 


BENEFITS  FBOM  ANIMAL    TRACKS.  201 

"We  are  carvino*  out  roads  on  both  sides  of  tlie  2:or2:e,     isso. 

April  2. 

digging  into  the  stifif,  red  clay  with  strong  Dutch  hoes.  Ntombo-a- 
The  bottom  of  the  gorge  is  400  feet  below  the  level  of 
the  plateau. 

April  2nd. — Moved  camp  to  top  of  eastern  plateau 
from  Ntombo-a-Lungu ;  left  bank  of  Loa  gorge. 
Evening  is  threatening  ;  clouds  black ;  bursts  of  low 
thunder  and  vivid  lightning  usher  in  the  night.  But 
w^e  are  already  comfortably  housed  in  our  new  huts. 
Our  first  day's  acquaintance  with  the  neighbourhood  of 
Mgangila  has  not  been  very  auspicious.  We  are  about 
a  mile  and  a  half  from  Mgangila  village.  Ntombo-a- 
Lungu  is  below  us  400  feet ;  old  Banza  Kulu  is  about 
5  miles  west  of  us  on  this  same  plateau. 

April  3rd. — Making  our  fourth  bridge,  this  time  over 
the  Loa  stream,  and  a  corduroy  road  across  the  gorge 
leading  to  it.  The  slopes  of  both  sides  have  now  been 
graded ;  they  are  steep,  but  passable. 

April  4th. — Moved  camp  to  No.  6  halting-place,  a 
mile  north  of  Mgangila  village.  Ui)  to  this  time  I 
have  succeeded  in  enlisting  twenty-three  natives. 

April  6th. — Arrived  at  camp  No.  7,  west  bank  of 
Mpagassa  or  Buffalo  stream.  Length  of  road  com- 
pleted thus  far,  84,918  feet,  over  15  English  miles. 

I  have  been  much  indebted,  while  searching  through 
the  jungles  and  grassy  brakes,  to  the  buffalo  and 
hippopotami  tracks:  that  of  the  latter  were  sure  to  be 
of  the  most  gentle  ascent  and  descent,  and  hippo- 
potami evidently  wander  far  at  night  in  search  of 
suffar-cane. 


202  THE  COXGO. 

1880.         I    had    a    visit   yesterday   from    several    chiefs    of 

April  6.  .  "  "        . 

Mgangiia.  Mgangila  plateau,  who  were  tricked  out  in  the  cast-off 
finerj  of  Europe.  Most  of  the  lackey  coats  had  their 
large  buttons  stamped  with  unicorns. 

Too  much  gin-drinking  was  indulged  in  by  the 
natives.  I  attempted  to  frighten  them  with  hideous 
pictures  of  the  effects  of  indulgence  in  gin ;  but  one 
blear-eyed  man,  whose  eyes  were  even  then  red  with 
alcoholic  fire,  declared  that  he  was  never  so  happy  as 
when  glass  after  glass  was  poured  down  his  open 
mouth.  He  acted  the  intemperate  man  remarkably 
well,  proving  that  he  understands  by  experience  what 
a  figure  he  exhibits  when  inebriated. 

Xot  one  of  the  natives  can  give  a  distinctive  title  for 
the  Congo.  While  the  smallest,  as  well  as  the  largest, 
tributary  receives  a  name,  the  great  river  itself  has  no 
name  to  distinguish  it  from  another.  It  is  by  some 
called  the  Njali,  Njarri,  Nzali,  Xzaddi,  Zali,  which  the 
old  Portuguese  called  Zari  and  spelled  Zaire,  and  all 
of  these  mean  "the  river." 

I  paid  a  visit  during  the  day  to  Yellala  Falls.  The 
opposite  sketch,  taken  from  a  photograph  by  our  Dr. 
Allard,  represents  the  Congo  trough,  and  that  stirring 
scene  of  racing  waves  known  as  Yellala  Falls,  better 
than  any  amount  of  written  description.  In  the  five 
or  six  mile  stretch  shown  there  is  an  incline  of  about 
45  feet.  But  the  general  fury  of  the  water  is  caused 
by  the  obstructions  which  the  giant  volume  meets 
in  the  bed  of  the  narrow  defile.  Though  there  are 
absolute  falls,  the  impression  one  receives  is  that  the 


NATIVE  MARKETS.  203 

word   is   a  misnomer.      It   is   a    series   of  vehement,     isso. 
rushing,    tumultuous,  and    vexed    waters    precipitated    Yeiiaia. 
with   remarkable    force    and    energy,    and   seemingly 
eager   to   escape    out  of  their   constricted   and    deep 
mountain  prison. 

While  working,  even  eight  miles  away,  a  whiff  of 
wind  from  the  southward  would  bring  the  sound  of 
Yellala  Falls  startlingly  clear. 

These  last  few  days  the  thermometer,  at  the  lowest 
registered  70°  Fahr.,  highest,  91°  Fahr.  Mean  of  five 
readings  each  day,  during  nine  days,  78°  Fahr.  in 
shade. 

"  There  are  fixed  days  for  markets  in  this  country, 
which  are  held  in  central  situations  between  the  dif- 
ferent villages  whose  inhabitants  resort  thither  without 
fear  for  the  safety  of  their  persons  and  property,  or 
for  their  houses  and  chattels  during  their  absence.  In 
a  hilly  country  such  as  this  is,  the  market  is  held  on 
some  hill  commanding  a  wide  view  ;  in  the  level  districts 
a  spacious  clearing  in  the  grass,  or  the  woods,  serves  for 
a  market-place." 

I  have  now  thirty-four  natives  with  me  working  for 
weekly  pay,  on  the  road.  They  are  apt  to  learn ;  they 
fall  into  tlie  ranks  at  muster- time,  answer  to  their  names 
and  imitate  closely  our  more  disciplined  workmen  from 
Zanzibar,  but  it  requires  strict  personal  supervision  to 
keep  them  to  their  task.  They  are  inclined  to  shirk 
duty,  and  prefer  to  gossip,  and  argue  loudly  with  one 
another  when  my  head  is  turned  away.  A  mere  look  of 
surprise,  however,  is  sufficient  to  recall  them  to  a  sense 


204  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     of  duty,  and  a  threat  to  remember  tlieir  indolence  on 

April  10.  "^ 

Mgangiia.  p^v-day  prompts  tlie  most  stubborn  to  resume  work. 

April  lOtb. — Moved  to  Camp  No.  8.  Ascended  the 
northern  sloj^e  of  the  plateau  from  Mpagassa  stream, 
and  turned  river-ward  or  south-easterly  until  the  pla- 
teau narrowed  into  a  gently  declining  spur,  prolonged 
for  three  miles  just  above  the  ravine  of  the  Lufwen- 
kenya  streamlet.  As  we  near  the  Congo  the  country 
becomes  stony  and  arid.  The  soil  has  long  ago  been 
washed  away  down  to  the  naked  sheet-rock,  or  leaving 
the  stone  debris  of  quartz,  which  nourishes  only  scant 
crops  of  wild  grass.  The  summits  of  the  level 
plateaus,  which  our  turnpike  road  now  traverses, 
broad  and  straight  and  clean,  are  capable  of  produc- 
ing the  heaviest  crops  of  wheat  and  other  grain,  the 
rich  loam  being  still  deep  enough.  That  near  Mgan- 
giia village  is  30  inches  deep ;  towards  the  verge  of 
the  slopes  it  thins  away  to  the  red  impervious  clay. 

Snakes  are  frequently  met  with  in  this  road-making. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Congo  the  slate -coloured 
spitting  snakes  are  most  numerous.  Yivi  platform  was 
at  first  infested  with  a  large  number  of  these.  They 
robbed  us  of  our  laying  hens,  and  devoured  the  chicks, 
and  then  coiled  themselves  under  the  lower  shelves  of 
the  magazine,  and  menaced  our  store-men  with  their 
venom,  which  they  ejected  in  a  stream  from  a  distance 
of  six  feet.  The  poison  must  be  exceedingly  powerful 
and  especially  painful  to  the  eyes,  judging  from  its 
ill-effects,  which  lasted  eight  or  ten  days.  Whip- 
snakes  infest  the  grass ;  short,  bulky  pythons  are  near 


ABUNDANT  GAME.  205 

the   water-courses ;    green    snakes    are    coiled   on    the     isso. 
trees   m    the   stony   region ;   two  typlops  were  killed  Mgangiia. 
on  the  Lufwenkenya.     But  although  we  have  turned 
a    large    number    into    view,    no    accident    has    yet 
occurred.* 

This  day  I  shot  an  animal  of  the  size  of  a  small 
pig,  a  rodent,  with  a  snout  projecting  an  inch  over  the 
mouth.     I  take  it  to  be  an  orycterope,  or  ground-hog. 

Game  begin  to  be  abundant,  especially  of  the 
harte-beest  kind.  I  shot  two  to-day.  Their  meat  was 
delicious,  and  a  great  treat  to  us  in  the  wilderness. 

Since  we  turned  our  road  towards  the  Congo  we 
have  left  the  inhabited  district,  as  nothing  could  thrive 
in  the  stony  region. 

For  the  last  four  days  I  have  endeavoured  to  obtain 
a  noon  observation  of  the  sun,  but  have  not  been 
able  to  succeed.  The  sun  generally  comes  out  at 
10  A.M.,  and  beams  brightly  for  about  an  hour,  then 
becomes  intermittent.  At  noon  he  is  faintly  discerned 
through  a  silver  cloud.  At  1  p.m.  he  shines  gloriously ; 
at  2  ho  is  mighty  ;  at  3  he  is  violent ;  at  4  he  is  serene  ; 
at  5  lie  is  still  steadfast ;  at  6  he  disappears  with  a 
bright,  victorious  flush ;  at  6.30  it  is  dark  night. 

April  14th. — Camp  No.  0,  whence  we  obtain  a  fine 
view  of  Ulungu  Cone,  Sadika  Banzi's  Grove,  site  of 
camp  8,  Yellala  Mountain,  and  Palaballa's  grove-clad 
Mount. 

After  laying  the  line  of  road  and  appointing  the 

*  Tlic  year  1885  is  marked,  however,  by  a  fatal  accident  of  this  kind. 
A  Swedish  officer  was  lately  bitten  by  a  snake,  and  died  within  two  hours. 


206  THE  CONGO. 

1880.     daily  task,  explored  the  country  down  to  Congo  River, 

April  14-.  ^ 

Wgangiia.  and  discovercd  a  spur  leading  down  to  the  landing- 
place,  which  must  he,  by  my  map,  about  five  miles  from 
the  Bundi  River.    The  guide  calls  it  Makeya  Manguba. 

Our  next  camp  will  be  in  a  very  pleasant  spot  by 
the  Tendelay,  about  ten  acres  in  extent,  consisting  of 
beautiful  short  spring  grass,  with  abundant  game. 
Returned  to  camp  with  two  fine  hartebeest,  ^  which 
will  give  about  three  pounds  of  meat  to  each  man. 

Four  native  recruits  to  the  pioneer  force  arrived 
to-day,  with  a  promise  of  more  from  Nsanda. 

April  20th. — Camp  No.  10.  One  more  hartebeest 
and  one  kudu  obtained  close  to  the  camp.  Heavy 
grading  and  filling  up  of  holes,  with  much  prising  of 
large  quartz  boulders  required.  The  grass  is  thin. 
The  work  is  all  done  now  with  picks  and  shovels,  as 
hoes  are  useless.  The  land  seems  to  be  mainly  of 
compact  quartzose  ballast. 

I  made  a  curious  discovery  yesterday  at  the  Lufwen- 
kenya.  We  had  excavated  a  roadway  eight  feet  deep 
through  the  alluvial  banks,  when  there  rose  suddenly 
a  shout,  and  the  men  crowded  about,  drawing  me  also 
to  the  spot  out  of  keen  curiosity.  I  saw  from  a 
distance  in  the  hands  of  a  man  the  object  of  interest, 
and  it  seemed  to  me  like  a  12-pounder  cannon  ball, 
and  several  of  these  lay  at  his  feet.  On  closer  exami- 
nation they,  however,  proved  to  be  ancient  elephant 
dung.  As  these  were  so  far  below  the  surface,  and 
a  sturdy  grove  grew  above  the  spot,  it  would  have 
been  interesting  to  have  been  able  to  tell  how  many 


BIRDS.  207 

score  of  years  had  passed  since  the  elephants'  droppings     isso. 
had  been  thus  covered.  jigangiia. 

Of  birds  I  have  seen  but  few.  Kites  are  numerous, 
especially  since  our  camps  have  been  furnished  with 
fresh  meat.  Half  a  dozen  parrots  have  been  lately 
heard  whistling  overhead ;  wing-clappers  have  pre- 
dominated on  the  grassy  plateau,  and  the  drumbird's 
alarming  notes  have  been  heard  in  distant  woody 
hollows.  A  few  jays  have  darted  across  our  vision, 
and  the  wild  pigeon's  mournful  calls  have  attracted 
momentary  attention. 

April  22nd. — Camp  No.  11.  Arrived  at  last  at  the 
Congo,  and  completed  the  first  section  of  the  road, 
118,077  feet,  or  twenty-two  and  a  third  miles  long. 
From  the  landing-place  at  this  camp  the  steamers  will 
be  enabled  to  convey  in  a  few  days  the  entire  para- 
phernalia of  the  station-building  expedition  up  the 
Bundi  Eiver,  to  a  point  such  as  shall  seem  best  for  an 
easy  ascent  to  the  Bundi  Yalley. 

Widely  different  was  the  effect  on  us  as  we  viewed 
the  country  from  the  middle  of  a  road  15  feet  wide,  to 
the  impressions  derived  from  viewing  it  through  em- 
bracing grasses  and  obstructing  shrubbery;  and  the 
pace  of  the  march  home  to  Yivi  was  very  different 
from  that  crawling  gait  we  were  compelled  to  adopt 
when  following  native  paths.  Starting  at  daybreak 
on  the  23rd,  some  of  us  were  enabled  to  reach  Yivi 
by  11  A.M.,  while  the  last  stragglers  had  entered  it 
by  2  P.M. 

By  the  3rd  of  May  we  had  rested  sufficiently;  the 


208  THE   CONGO. 

1880.  steam-launch  Royal  had  been  mounted  on  the  great 
Vivi.  steel  wagon;  200  men,  pioneers  and  workmen  of 
Yivi,  had  pulled  the  five-ton  weight  up  from  the 
landing-place ;  two  carts  had  been  loaded  with  the 
boiler,  engine,  grindstones,  iron  plates,  &c. ;  over  a 
hundred  more  loads  of  cloth,  beads,  wire,  tents,  bag- 
gage and  provisions  for  five  Europeans — two  Danish 
sailors,  Albert  and  Martin,  Mr.  Swinburne,  and  two 
engineers ;  and  on  the  4th,  the  Royal,  with  the  aid  of 
fifty  natives  of  Yivi,  was  hauled  over  Yivi  Mountain  to 
the  camp  on  the  Loa.  On  the  5th  the  two  small  carts 
were  hauled  direct  to  Banza  Uvana.  In  the  same 
manner  the  goods  were  taken  with  the  Europeans  to 
our  camp  one  after  another,  followed  by  the  wagons, 
until,  amid  great  rejoicing,  wagons  and  goods  arrived 
at  Makeya  Manguba  camp  without  accident  on  the 
11th  of  May,  when  we  stored  the  goods  in  tents, 
launched  the  Royal  into  the  river,  and  the  same  day 
started  on  our  return  with  the  empty  wagons.  Mean- 
while the  engineers  were  instructed  to  put  the  steamer 
in  order,  and  have  wood  cut  ready  for  several  days'  fuel. 
On  the  13th  of  May  we  were  back  in  Yivi,  whereat 
troubles  with  the  Europeans  were  so  numerous  that 
some  mention  must  be  here  made  of  them.  One 
engineer,  Hubert  Pettit,  had  died  at  a  very  early  stage 
of  our  coming  ;  another  had  been  discharged  as  having 
misunderstood  his  vocation ;  the  captain  of  the  Belgique 
had  resigned;  a  French  sailor  had  also  lost  heart,*  the 
engine-driver  of  the  Esperance,  after  veering  around 
several  times,  had  also  departed ;  the  carpenter,  whose 


\ 


Di:VOUBED   BY  A    CBOCODILE.  209 


ideas  of  ConQ-o  life  had  been  somewhat  mixed  even     isso. 
^  .       .  Mav  1:5 

before  he  had  left  Europe,  finally  followed  his  friends,      vivi. 

and  left  ns  to  bewail  his  loss. 

Xow  on  my  return  from  the  interior  other  changes 
were  imminent.  Mr.  Moore  was  obliged  to  be  sent 
home  through  weakness  and  prostration.  Mr.  Kirk- 
bright  waited  until  I  was  one  day  inland,  and  then 
sent  .a  courier  with  his  resignation,  to  which  I  replied 
with  an  answer  that  it  was  accepted.  The  third  day 
another  courier  arrives  with  a  letter  withdrawing  the 
resignation,  to  which  I  answer,  "  Yery  good;  stay." 

On  the  27th  of  May  I  arrive  at  Makeya  Manguba 
for  the  second  time,  with  the  wagons  conveying  the 
FjII  Avant  steel  paddle  steamer,  after  having  been 
assisted  gallantly  by  170  natives  of  Xsanda  over  the 
steep  slopes  of  the  Loa  and  Mpagassa  gorge.  After  an 
hour's  rest  I  am  told  by  one  of  the  engineers  in  the 
camp  that  he  wishes  to  go  home,  that  he  has  had 
enough  of  Congo. 

If  my  work  is  to  imitate  the  tourist  conductor— to  l)e, 
as  it  were,  a  Cook  on  the  Congo,  escorting  engineers 
to  make  short  excursions  into  the  interior,  \  fear  that 
ray  interest  in  the  projects  of  the  "Comite"  will  be  but 
short-lived.  T  proceed  to  argue  the  point  with  him. 
to  temporise  ;  the  engineer's  face  finally  relaxes,  and 
he  expresses  his  wish  to  remain. 

At  this  camp  of  Makeya  Manguba,  during  my  ab- 
sence one  coast  native  has  been  devoured  by  a  crocodile  ; 
and  two  other  coloured  men,  one  from  Zanzibar,  have 
died  of  dysentery. 

vol..  I.  P 


210  THE   CONGO. 


1880 
May  29 


On  the  20th  of  May  I  start  ou  my  return  to  Tivi 
Vivi.  for  the  tliird  time  to  load  up  with  the  boiler  and 
engine  of  the  paddle-boat,  paddle-boxes,  and  other 
heavy  material,  and  the  next  day  I  arrive  at  the 
station  to  hear  that  another  European,  Mr.  Deanes,  has 
succumbed ;  on  the  same  day,  in  the  afternoon,  two 
fresh  EurojDeans  arrive,  who  have  obtained  permission 
from  the  Comite  to  settle  at  Yivi,  to  exploit  the 
district  commercially  for  a  Belgian  firm. 

On  the  2nd  of  June  we  start  a  fourth  time  to 
our  camp  inland,  with  the  heavy  boiler,  machinery, 
paddle-boxes,  paddle-wheels  and  shafting,  furniture, 
extra  iron  plates  for  re23airing  steamers,  forges,  &c. 
A  small  train  of  mules  and  asses  start  at  the  same 
time  with  provisions  of  rice  and  beans,  which  assist 
us  considerably. 

The  next  day  sixty  more  natives  of  the  districts  of 
Nsanda  and  Yivi  and  Kulu,  assist  in  hauling,  and 
with  this  additional  strength  we  march  swiftly. 
~  By  this  time  the  road  has  become  hard  and  well- 
trodden  ;  the  dryness  of  the  earth  and  season  assists  to 
give  it  the  appearance  of  an  ancient  turnpike. 

On  the  6th  of  June  we  arrive  at  the  old  camp  on  the 
verge  of  Mgangila  plateau  overlooking  the  Buffalo 
(Mpagassa)  gorge.  It  is  the  coldest  spot  in  the 
country.  To  all  points,  except  the  southward,  there 
is  an  abrupt  downward  dip  into  the  gorge  and  its 
neighbouring  gullies,  leaving  the  situation  very  much 
exposed  to  all  the  winds.  When  they  blow  from  the 
north-west,  every  one,  black  and  white,  shrinks,  and 


THE   COLDEST  SPOT  IN   THE   COUNTBY.  21] 

seems   to    contract   "under   their   pernicious    influence,     isso. 

.,■,-,  June  6. 

Even  our  dumb  companions,  tue  mules  and  asses,  ii^rano-iia. 
exhibit,  by  their  staring  coats,  ears  thrown  back, 
and  heads  drooping  low,  that  an  unwelcome  change 
has  taken  place  in  the  temperature ;  the  dogs,  too, 
avoid  the  chilling  blast  b}^  retreating  into  the  huts 
underneath  our  cots,  to  curl  themselves  up  into  warmth 
and  sleep. 

During  this  month  the  aspect  of  earth  and  sky 
appears  to  sympathise  with  our  misery.  The  grasses 
are  turned  into  the  sere,  the  rust  is  deeper  on  the 
heaps  of  hematite ;  the  bald  ridges  are  now  solemn 
and  lonely ;    the    sky,    which,    during   the    late   rainy 


ELEVATION   OK   STEEL   LIGHTER. 

season,  was  so  fickle  and  cliangeable,  varying  from 
dense  blackness  to  a  steel  blue,  is  now  of  a  depressing 
gray,  unrelieved  by  any  warm  tints,  but  presenting, 
near  the  horizon,  sombre  patches  of  clouds,  darkening 
•laylight,  obscuring  the  vision,  and  contracting  drearily 
the  limit  of  the  view. 

On  the  7th  of  June  the  boilers  and  machinery  of  the 
Kii  Avant  were  unloaded,  and  on  the  0th  the  wairons 
were  back  in  A^ivi  Station  for  a  fifth  load. 

On  the  14tli  of  June  we  start  again  for  our  inland 
camp  with  the  steel  lighter,  and  the  two  carts  loaded 
with   sheets   of  corrugated    iron   for    the    construction 

V  2 


212  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     of  a   fire-proof  store    at   INIanyanga.      While   we    are 

June  7.  ^ 

vivi  drawing  these  towards  our  camp,  couriers  arrive  daily 
with  news  of  Martin's  illness,  and  are  sent  back  with 
instructions  how  to  treat  the  patient;  but  on  the  10th, 
after  my  arrival  at  the  camp  with  the  lighter,  I  dis- 
cover, on  examining  the  sick  man,  that  it  is  a  severe 
case  of  typhoid  fever.  On  the  20th  IMartin  Martinson 
succumbs,  and  by  his  death  we  lose  one  of  the  most 
promising  members  of  our  Expedition. 

On  the  same  afternoon,  for  the  first  time  since  enter- 
ing on  my  present  mission,  I  am  stricken  down  with 
what  threatens  to  be  a  protracted  case  of  bilious  fever. 
The  next  day  I  rise  to  help  to  bury  my  young 
Danish  friend,  but  have  to  hasten  to  bed,  wherein  I 
am  confined  in  a  sem.i-delirious  state  until  the  27th. 
Meantime  the  wagons  have  been  to  Yivi,  and  have 
returned  with  another  large  steel  lighter  in  charge  of 
my  disciplined  and  trained  Zanzibari  chiefs. 

On  the  28th  I  am  again  in  Yivi,  where  I  find  affairs 
going  on  quietly. 

July  3rd. — The  wagons  return  to  inland  camp  loaded 
with  8000  lbs.  in  large  cloth  bales. 

On  the  7th  of  July  we  are  at  the  Cold  Camp  above 
the  Buffalo  River.  Lamed  by  an  ulcer  in  my  foot  I 
am  debarred  from  taking  as  much  exercise  as  I  should 
wish.  I  wear  an  under  flannel  and  a  heavy  shirt  over 
it,  a  sacque  coat,  and  an  ulster,  but  am  still  cold.  The 
minimum  temperature  has  been  63°  Fahrenheit,  yet  the 
draughts  of  wind  down  the  gorge  sweeping  over  and 
around  our  camp,  though  not  decreasing  the  tempera- 


TIIERMOMETltlCAL   BEADINGS. 


213 


tiire  tliermometrically,  add  to  our  feeling  of  miserable 
chilliness. 

The   following   readings   of  the   thermometer  were 
taken  to-day  : — 

(J  a.m.   Standard  Thermometer  F.  63°. 


1S8U. 
Juue  27 

Vivi. 


10.30  „ 

1  p.m. 

3  „ 

4.30  „ 

'-3  „ 

»5  ., 

10  „ 


65°. 

69°. 

71-30°. 

70°. 

69°. 

69°. 

65°. 

64°. 

63°. 


Messengers  returned  from  camp  state  Swinburne 
has  been  taken  ill  with  gastric  fever.  I  am  not  well 
myself.  I  feel  feverish  and  cold,  but  send  a  letter  to 
beg  Swinburne  not  to  be  discouraged. 

On  the  lOtli  I  am  at  Makeya  Manguba  with  the 
huge  load  of  cloth  and  miscellanea. 

While  the  people  return  with  wagons  to  Yivi,  and 
the  mule  train  with  them  for  the  transport  of  pro- 
visions of  rice,  fish,  beans,  lentils,  and  peas,  I  proceed 
up  the  river  with  the  steel  whaleboat  to  explore  for  a 
new  camp  on  l^iindi  River. 

A  live  elephant  is  seen  coming  down  tlie  Congo 
swimming.  It  finally  lands  on  the  south  bank  of  the 
(Jongo,  not  a  whit  discouraged  by  his  long  swim,  for 
he  strides  up  the  steep  banks  brisk  and  lively. 

'i'li(3  Bundi  River  is  iiavigablc  for  a  mile  and  a  hall, 
and  a  camping  place  is  found  behind  the  iliiii  l)clt  oi 
line  wood  liiiiiiir  its  banks.     Game  is  abundant,  but  un- 


214  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     fortunately  so  are  the  sand-flies,  o-ad-flies,  and  eliifj-oes, 

July  10.  .        ,         "  .  o  ' 

Makeya    wliile  ill  the  yellow  creek  the  crocodiles  are  numerous. 

Jlans;uba.    -,^-p  ,  ,  _    ._,^  ., 

However,  were  the  ten  plagues  or  -Cigypt  here  we 
should  have  to  endure  them,  for  no  place  but  this  is 
eligible  for  the  passage  of  the  wagons.  I  return  to 
Makeya  Manguba  next  day,  saddle  a  mule,  and  ride 
on  to  Yivi,  where  I  arrive  that  night  alone. 

A  trade-talk,  on  account  of  conflict  of  opinions 
between  the  representatives  of  the  Belgian  firm,  who 
have  undertaken  to  exploit  the  district  commercially, 
and  the  natives  of  Yivi,  detains  me  for  several  days,  to 
act  as  umpire  and  general  conciliator  between  the  dis- 
jDutants.  Finally  all  things  end  happily.  The  chiefs 
who  have  been  a  little  too  aggressively  disposed,  and 
the  whites  who  have  been  a  little  too  unyielding, 
embrace  and  vow  friendship.  Cups  of  effervescing 
palm  wine,  seasoned  with  gin,  are  said  by  the  con- 
noisseurs to  equal  tlie  brandy -pa  ni  of  India,  or  the 
"  whisky  and  seltzer "  of  Scotland.  However  that 
may  be,  both  parties  remain  mutually  delighted,  and 
the  old  iron  carronades  of  Yivi  Mountain  will  sound 
the  loud  siofiial  for  trade  to  all  the  surroundinc: 
districts. 

Meantime  the  wagons  have  taken  their  last  heavy 

CD  ^ 

loads  and  have  been  left  behind  at  Makeya  Manguba. 
The  pioneer  force,  aided  by  fifty  coast  natives  and 
sixty-three  Inland  natives,  and  a  small  mule  train,  are 
now  busily  going  to  and  fro  between  Yivi  and  the 
upper  camp  with  the  individual  loads,  provisions  of 
canned  meats,  flour,  fish,  fruit,  rice,  and  beans,  peas, 


CONVEYIXG   STOBES.  215 

and    lentils,  canvas,   cowries,  brass-wire,  beads,   tools,     isso. 

July  3U. 

nails,  &c.,  &c.  vivi. 

By  the  oOtli  of  Jidy  our  labours  between  Yivi  and 
Makeya  Manguba  are  concluded,  and  in  looking  at  my 
list  of  stores,  I  find  I  have  conveyed  the  following 
quantity  of  goods  there  : — 

Provisions  consumed 276  sacks  of  rice  and  beans. 

Provisions  in  cami) 233  „  „ 

European  provisions,  tents,  baggage,  cloth, 

beads,  cowries,  wire,  tools,  masts,  oars, 

sails,  cordage,  oils,  paints,  zinc  sheets, 

flour    in    kegs,    nails,    forges,    drills, 

powder,  boards,  furnitiu'e     ....     S71  loads  of  60  lbs. 
.Steamer  En  .l^•«?^^,  steamer  jRot/oJ,  two  steel 

lighters,  extra  iron,  complete     .      .    •.     450  loads  of  60  lbs. 

1827  loads,  nearly  54  tons. 

I  also  discover  that  we  have  travelled  since  February 
21st,  when  I  set  out  for  Isangila  to  explore  the  country 
for  a  road,  down  to  the  present  date,  inclusive  of  the 
construction  of  the  road  and  the  transport  of  the  above 
goods  to  this  camp,  966  miles,  which,  divided  by  the 
160  days  employed  in  the  various  works  described, 
gives  us  a  rate  of  0  miles  per  day. 

All  of  which  labour  and  marching,  this  toilsome 
effort,  this  sacrifice  of  life,  only  enables  us  to  be  22 
miles  on  our  road  to  Stanley  Pool !  Xevertheless, 
and  despite  the  fearful  odds,  we  Avill  reach  the  Pool 
some  day,  with  patience,  determination,  and  faithful 
striving: ! 

This  chapter  and  the  succeeding  one  will  appear  to 
me  as  I  grow  older  more  and  more  like  fal»le,  though 


210  THE   COSGO. 

188U.     it  is  a  veracious  relation  of"  a  series  of  soiTowful  facts. 

July  30. 

vivi.     A  tithe   of  its  bitterness  Las   not  been  written,  but 
enough  to  maflv:  it  as  the  epoch  of  struggle. 

I  will  close  it  with   a   quotation   from    one  of  my 
letters  to  the  President  of  the  Committee. 

"  I  have  already  described  at  large  and  in  various  letters  what  my  diffi- 
culties are,  and  how  valuable  any  reinforcements  will  be,  so  that  it  is 
needless  to  repeat  them.  You  quite  understand  them  by  this  time.  Be 
they  Chinese,  Zanzibaris,  Liberians,  &c.,  I  care  not,  they  will  be  welcome ; 
we  have  work  enough  for  a  thousand  men,  yet  I  have  only  108  effective 
men. 

"  In  your  report  of  the  dreadful  massacre  of  Messrs.  Carter  and  Caden- 
head,  you  observe  they  commanded  a  force  of  loO  men.  loO  men  I 
Probably  150  Zanzibaris  I  "What  could  I  not  have  done  with  such  a  force 
by  this  time  on  the  Congo.  If  I  had  only  the  services  of  such  for  one 
round  year,  I  doubt  whether  Nyangwe  would  ever  receive  one  yard  of 
cloth  by  the  way  of  Ujiji  again.  I  doubt  much  whether  the  International 
Association  would  send  such  valuable  men  by  such  a  long  and  dangerous 
route  again. 

"However,  we  are  all  well  in  camp,  and  have  enjoyed  good  health 
despite  the  hard  work.  We  are  strong  personally,  though  not  numeri- 
cally, and  though  we  are  engaged  against  such  long  odds,  my  people  tell 
me, '  Please  God,  we  sliall  finish  it,'  to  which  I  fervidly  say, '  Amen  I '  " 

In  another  letter  of  about  this  time  I  remark : 

"  You  have  instructed  me  to  convey  a  steamer  and  a  lx)at  to  Manyanga 
station,  and  another  steamer  and  boat  to  Stanley  Pool,  and  build  three 
stations — one  at  Yivi,  one  at  Manyanga,  and  one  at  some  convenient  point 
on  the  shores  of  Stanley  Pool ;  for  which  task  I  obtained  sixty-eight  Zanzi- 
baris, and  as  many  west  coast  natives  as  I  could  induce  to  enter  into  our 
service ;  the  number  of  the  latter,  despite  my  best  efforts,  is  to-day  exactly 
sixty-six.  On  this  morning's  sick  Ust,  which  is  only  an  average  number, 
I  have  sixteen  invalids,  who,  with  boys  and  cooks,  make  a  non-working 
numljer  of  twenty-four,  leaving  me  witli  an  effective  working  force  of  110 
men,  who  are  to  convey  fifty-four  tons  into  tlie  interior,  and  have  yet  to 
make  a  road  125  mUes  long  before  Stanley  Pool  is  reached. 

"I  beg  to  inform  you  that  if  the  whole  talent  and.  genius  of  Belgium 
were  here  to  assist  my  progress  with  their  advice,  they  could  not  increase 
my  working  force,  but  they  might  add  to  my  burdens  and  sick  List.  I  am 
quite  .satisfied  with  my  people ;  they  perform  aU  that  can  be  reasonably 


TEE  SICK  LIST.  217 

expected  of  tliem.    To  expect  they  sliould  do  more  would  be  criminal      ^g^Q 
ingratitude  in  me.  hiW  So 

"  These  and  similar  facts  have  been  repeated  to  you  ever  since  February       Vivi. 
of  this  year.     The  truths  they  describe  should  by  this  time  be  clearly 
obvious,  so  that  I  am  somewhat  ashamed  to  iterate  and  repeat  them. 

"  Our  part  in  the  Committee's  project  is  easily  demonstrable.  We  will 
continue  to  perform  it  eflFectively  and  zealously,  but  by  the  enclosed 
balance  sheet  of  work  done  you  may  be  able  to  calculate  how  fast  our  ad- 
vance must  be  forward,  so  long  as  we  have  only  these  few  men.  Whatever 
number  you  add  to  our  force  of  ivorhimj  men  you  may  easily  calculate  onr 
increased  rate  of  progi-ess.  "Whatever  orders  or  suggestions  you  give  or 
make  will  be  instantly  obeyed.  Double  our  power,  and  we  will  double 
our  speed;  treble  the  working  power,  and  our  progress  will  be  three 
times  quicker.  With  sufficient  men  we  could  be  at  Stanley  Pool  within 
one  month.  If  you  send  us  no  more  men,  then  wc  will  go  on  as  fast  as 
we  can,  steadily  and  faithfully." 


218  THE   CONGO. 


Vivi. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

VIYI   TO   ISAXGTLA — contmupfL 

Lutetu,  a  truculent  cliief — "Seize  him, boys  !  " — Fiote  law — Trial  and  fine 
of  Lutete — The  axe  and  the  forest — In  search  of  game — Nostalgia — 
No  more  Europeans  "wanted — Our  first  rain-storm — Hauling  the  En 
Avant  overland — A  Day  of  Eest — Arrival  of  Le  Comte  Savorgnan  de 
Brazza — His  travels  and  adventures — Ngoma  Point — A  diflSciilt 
engineering  feat — Successful  formation  of  a  road  roxmd  the  Point — 
Isangila — Captain  Anderson's  services — A  year's  i^rogress^Our  toil, 
trials,  and  losses, 

1880.     The  first  personal  difficulty  I  experienced  "witli  a  native 
'in  this  region,  occurred  immediately  after  our  arrival 
at  Makeva  ^Nlano-uba  with  the  last  loads  from  Tivi. 

The  vouno'  Eno'lish  o'entleman,  Mr.  Swinburne,  who 
was  gentleness  itself,  appeared  before  me  as  usual  with 
his  report  of  what  incidents  had  happened  during  my 
absence  :  and  anion 2:  these  incidents  was  a  storv  about 
the  conduct  of  a  brutal  native  named  Lutetc,  a  chief  of 
Banza  Lungu  plateau,  who  had  appeared  in  the  camp, 
and  had  been  pleased  to  forbid  the  sale  of  a  single  article 
of  food  to  the  white  man,  and  who  had,  after  vile  abuse 
of  the  three  harmless  Europeans  in  the  camp,  expecto- 
rated in  their  faces.  This  story  was  corroborated  by 
the  coloured  men.  Xo  person  could  assign  any  reason 
for  this  conduct,  and  the  chief  had  not  deigned  to  give 


"SEIZE  HIM,   BOYS!"  219 

any  himself,  except  that  as  the  landing-place  belonged     isso. 
to  liira — wliicli  was  an  untruth — lie  would    show  the     yivi, 
white  men  of  the  sea  country  who  he  was.     This  story 
appeared  so  improbable  that  I  was  loth  to  believe  it. 

Presently,  however,  Mr.  Swinburne  reappeared  at 
the  door  of  my  tent,  and  informed  me  that  the  same 
chief  had  arrived  from  across  the  river,  and  was 
behaving  rudely  as  usual,  beating  the  natives  whom  he 
found  sellino^  fowls  and  bananas  to  the  huns-rv  men 
who  had  just  arrived  from  Yivi  with  me.  Hastening 
out  I  encountered  him  as  he  was  laying  about  with  his 
staff,  and  seizing  him  by  the  arm  I  demanded : 

"Who  are  you,  that  you  strike  people  in  my  camp?" 
recognising  him  almost  at  a  glance  as  a  chief  to  whom 
I  had  made  a  liberal  gift  for  the  promise  of  two 
labourers  on  the  road. 

He  raised  his  hand  menacingly,  but  not  quick 
enough  to  avoid  a  severe  slapping  on  the  face  which 
followed  the  movement. 

Enracred  at  this  maulinii\  he  rushed  to  seize  his  o-un 
from  the  hands  of  his  slave  gun-bearer.  But  before 
he  could  shoot  me,  I  cried,  "  Seize  him,  boys ! "'  and 
tlie  crowd  of  pioneers  who  had  gathered  about  being 
extremely  quick  to  obey,  the  fellow  was  at  once 
made  a  prisoner  and  strongly  secured. 

His  men  were  told  to  depart  and  to  convey  to  the 
senior  chief  of  Ennza  Lungu  notice  of  the  cajDture,  and 
to  intimate  to  him  that  a  ransom  would  have  to  bo 
paid  as  a  fine  for  liis  maltreatment  of  my  white  men, 
and  also  for  haviriir  threatened  to  shoot  me. 


220  THE   CONGO. 

1880.         Our   natives    of    Nsanda    who    were    with    us    and 

August  1. 

Yivi.  witnessed  the  aifair,  proved  invaluable  in  tlie  negotia- 
tions which  Ibllowed.  Xative  custom,  so  despotic  in 
its  decrees,  ordains  that  the  one  who  commences  a 
quarrel,  if  a  loser,  must  pay.  This  is  Fiote  law — 
Fiote  being  the  name  of  the  language  the  Bakongo 
sjDeak — and  Fiote  law  is  as  unchangeable  as  that  of 
the  Modes  and  Persians. 

The  senior  chief  arrived  the  next  day,  and  the 
witnesses  were  numerous.  The  decree  of  the  umpire 
was  hostile  to  the  prisoner,  and  the  fine  was  four  pigs 
and  four  goats,  which  I  remitted  to  one  j)ig  and  three 
goats,  the  services  of  two  labourers  whose  time  liad 
been  paid  for  months  ago  as  far  as  Isangila,  and  the 
employment  of  the  chief  himself  to  convey  three  letters 
one  after  another  to  Yivi.  The  fine  was  religiously 
paid,  the  men  worked  well,  and  three  round  journeys 
were  made  to  Yivi  by  the  now  sobered  chief,  to  his 
subsequent  great  personal  benefit,  which  included  a  total 
remission  of  the  fine  before  I  left  Yivi  for  the  last  time. 

(3n  the  3rd  of  August  we  commenced  loading  the 
En  Avaiit  and  the  steel  lighters  with  goods  and 
machinery  for  the  new  camp  on  the  Bundi  River, 
and  by  night  we  had  conveyed  forty  men  and  265 
loads,  or  15,900  lbs. 

On  the  4th  of  August  19,G80  lbs.  weight  of  goods 
were  despatched. 

By  the  evening  of  the  5th  17,400  lbs.  weight  had 
been  transferred  thither. 

By   3  P.M.  of  the   9th  of  August,  the  old  camp  of 


THE  AXE  AND    THE  FOBEST.  221 

^[akeya  Manguba  was  completely  abandoned,  and  the     isso. 

August  9. 

new  camp  contained  all  tliepcr-sc>???z<?/  and  material  of     vi^.; 
the  pioneering  expedition. 

On  the  10th  we  were  at  work  with  axes  cutting 
through  a  dense  jungle  and  forest  which  belted  the 
Bundi  River.  For  ten  succeeding  days  the  axe-men 
Viewed  at  the  beautiful  shafted  columns  of  teak,  ma- 
hogany, guaiacum,  and  bombax.  Every  alternate 
hour  the  deep  forest  gorge  echoed  to  the  loud  crashes 
of  half-a-dozen  tall  forest  monarchs,  while  the  pickaxe, 
spade,  and  hoe  hands  delved  and  toiled  in  the  numerous 
gullies  and  rock-strewn  slopes  of  the  Inga  Plateau, 
which  lay  on  our  right. 

A  few  natives  followed  us  for  profitable  marketing 
even  into  this  silent  and  lonely  corner,  bringing 
sweet  jDotatoes,  bananas,  fowls,  and  eggs.  To  lessen 
the  requirements  from  Yivi,  Mr.  Swinburne,  the 
camp  caterer  and  acting  commissary,  purchased  every 
article  of  food  that  was  offered.  Our  consumption 
of  rice  was  nearly  400  lljs.  per  diem ;  so  that  any 
ficcident  to  the  provision  trains  would  seriously  incom- 
mode us,  and  most  certainly  delay  our  progress.  For 
we  were  now  25  miles  from  our  base  of  operations, 
and  in  tlie  midst  of  an  inhospitable  wilderness.  A 
round  journey,  with  safety  for  the  animals,  in  a  country 
so  ill-adapted  for  them  as  this  at  present  was,  could  not 
l)e  i^erformed  under  six  days,  and  in  the  interval  of 
their  absence  twelve  mule-loads  of  provisions  would  be 
consumed.  The  further  we  advanced  into  the  country, 
the  more  serious  became  this  question  of  food  supply. 


222  THE   CONGO. 

1880.         By  the  4tli  of  September  I  had  advanced  with   the 

Sept.  4. 

i.ueiuia  II.  l^ioneer  force  as  far  as  the  left  or  northern  banlv  of  the 
Luenda  River,  a  distance  of  53,395  feet.  All  the  Euro- 
peans and  the  sick — which  daily  augmented  in  number, 
and  amounted  to  between  a  sixth  and  a  seventh  of  the 
entire  expedition — had  been  left  at  the  Bundi  River, 
to  guard  the  camp  and  its  tons  of  goods,  to  dismount 
the  steamers,  and  to  cord  up  all  belongings  so  as  to  be 
ready  for  transport. 

Daily,  after  marking  out  the  route,  setting  the  flag- 
staffs,  arranging  the  line,  and  tracing  out  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  country  what  my  experience  sug- 
gested could  be  performed  during  the  day,  I  travelled 
ahead  through  tall  grass  or  dank  jungle  to  explore  the 
next  day's  route,  ending  the  journey  with  a  wdde  circuit 
on  my  return  to  camp,  in  pursuit  of  game,  so  that 
by  this  method  of  free  foraging  in  the  wilds  I  suc- 
ceeded in  assisting  the  commissariat  with  twenty-one 
hartebeest  and  three  buffalo.  These  provided  our 
force  with  an  almost  daily  supply  of  fresh  meat,  and 
sometimes  furnished  a  surplus  to  barter  for  vegetables 
from  the  natives  of  Nsekelelo.  Liberal  gifts  to  these 
natives  also  brought  a  few  hands  for  the  road,  until  I 
could  muster  sixty-three  aborigines. 

Between  the  Luenda  and  the  Lulu  Rivers  crowbars, 
sledge-hammers,  handspikes,  and  picks,  were  the  tools 
with  which  we  made  a  stony  road,  cutting  off  by  its 
directness  many  miles  of  inost  impracticable  country. 
At  the  Lulu  River  w^e  w^ere  among  immense  blue 
granite  boulders  imbedded  in  sand  at  low  water ;  but, 


NYONGENA   HILL.  223 

now  with  a  fast-rising  Congo,  tlie  river  was  gradually     isso. 
creeping  in  between  and  around  tliem.     A  great  many  Nvono-eiw 
.shifts  and  expedients  of  one  sort  or  another  would  have 
to  be  resorted  to  to  avoid  being  stalled  or  jammed  in. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lulu  rises  the 
precipitous  extremity  of  Nyongena  Hill,  of  appalling 
steepness,  covered  at  the  base  with  huge  boulders, 
while  half-sunk  masses  of  granite,  which  garnished  the 
slope  much  too  thickly,  required  to  be  dug  out,  up- 
turned, and  rolled  aside  from  the  wagon  track.  The 
Lulu's  cool  crystal  waters  rush  noisily  below  in  the 
cavernous  gulf  on  our  left ;  and  if  during  our  vehement 
endeavour  to  scale  the  steep  forehead  of  Nyongena, 
the  Avestering  sun  will  scorch  our  backs,  pails  of  water 
will  be  readily  at  hand  to  allay  thirst. 

AVhen  on  the  summit  we  are  350  feet  above  the 
Congo.  The  hill  of  Nyongena  rises  with  an  abrupt 
slope  from  the  river,  and  extends  all  the  w^ay  from  the 
Lulu's  mouth  to  within  000  yards  of  Ngorna  Point 
in  one  solid  compact  hill  mass.  Summit  and  river- 
flank  are  wooded  thickly  with  valuable  and  beautiful 
hard  woods  of  various  kinds,  while  the  river  chafes 
angrily  against  tlie  Ijlack  gritstone  masses  wliicli  lie 
in  an  irregular  heap  along  the  base  of  tlie  hill. 

Into  this  600  yards  wide  flat  of  scrub-covered  sand 
empties  the  Bula  river,  which  is  the  drainage  of  the 
western  slopes  of  the  grand  and  formidable  mountain 
of  Ngoma. 

Wlicn  about  to  pierce  the  deep  tall  woods  of  Nyon- 
gena our  native  help  affect  alarm.     ''  Bad  spirits,"  they 


224  THE   CONGO. 

18SU.     say,  worse  tlian  those  of  Inga,  guard   the  M'oods,  and 

Sept.  17.  _  ... 

Nyongena.  maiiy  a  hjckloss  wight  from  the  interior,  while  tra- 
versing its  darlc  depths,  has  Leen  abducted  from  the 
ken  of  human  kind.  But  when  they  see  our  foreign 
workmen  make  h'ght  of  this,  and  form  themselves  in 
line  against  the  blazed  trees ;  when  axes  are  strongly 
wielded,  and  the  tough  hard  woods  fall  prostrate,  and 
light  falls  on  the  unknown,  they  recover  courage : 
with  their  sharp  hoes  they  then  begin  to  grub  up  the 
small  undergrowth,  and  with  their  machettes  to  trim 
the  opening  and  enlarge  the  view. 

On  the  IStli  of  September  Ave  reach  the  Bula  River, 
and  our  road  from  the  Bimdi  River  hither  measures 
83,945  feet,  nearly  16  English  miles. 

We  return  next  day,  and  find  all  well  at  the  Bundi. 
Albert,  the  Danish  sailor,  has  acquired  confidence ;  he 
has  been  in  the  hunting  field,  and  the  convalescent^ 
weaklings,  and  the  sick  have  received  a  fair  share  of 
fresh  buffalo  and  antelope  meat. 

The  river  has  risen  two  feet  during  our  absence,  though 
as  yet  we  have  had  only  three  hours  and  fifty  minutes 
of  light  rains  during  seven  rainfalls  this  season. 

On  the  20th  of  September  I  take  the  opportunity  of 
a  day's  rest  to  report  to  the  Committee  on  events 
which  news  from  the  officials  at  Yivi  and  my  own 
experience  have  furnished. 

I  attempt  to  explain  why  Europeans  succumb  so 
readily,  as  the  frequent  changes  in  the  staff  at  that 
station  would  imply.  I  attribute  the  reason  mainly  to 
nostalf/ia,  which,  requires  wearisome  repetition  of  paternal 


HOMESICKNESS.  225 

advice  and  fraternal  encouragement.    However  salutary     isso. 

T  ...  Sept.  20. 

these  may  be  for  a  short  time,  a  little  biliousness,  a  Bundi. 
slight  cold,  or  a  trifle  of  over-indulgence,  are  sure  to 
superinduce  periodic  attacks  of  ill-humour  and  bile  of 
greater  virulence,  compelling  me  to  again  have  recourse 
to  the  most  tender  letter-writing.  When  these  attacks 
become  chronic,  people  who,  like  myself,  have  rather 
serious  and  absorbing  duties  to  perform  are  very  apt  to 
despise  such  ^veak-minded  petulance.  Chronic  home- 
sickness is  held  by  travellers  in  much  the  same  esti- 
mation as  incipient  sea-sickness  is  by  sailors.  The 
sailor  laughs  at  the  beginning,  but  pities  the  long 
continuance :  the  traveller  is  apt  to  scorn  the  con- 
tinuance, but  often  sympathises  with  the  first  attacks. 

Portuguese  officers  have  visited  Tivi ;  an  English 
consul  has  made  a  flying  trip  to  the  station  and  cast  a 
casual  glance  at  the  surroundings,  &c. ;  and  news  of 
danger,  causing  a  precipitate  retreat  of  two  Baptist 
missionaries  who  have  tried  to  reach  Stanley  Pool  vici 
Makuta,  is  received. 

Our  A-^ivi  agent  also  reports  the  arrival  of  about 
twenty  donkeys  from  Teneriffe, "  all  of  which,"  he  says, 
"  are  mean,  contemptible  little  things,  not  larger  than 
mastiffs." 

I  inform  the  Comite'  of  the  comino*  of  three  Bel- 
gian  military  officers,  and  deprecate  sending  many 
Europeans,  as  in  its  present  state  the  expedition  is  not 
ready  for  the  reception  of  people  who  may  become  a 
burden  by  their  never-ceasing  demands  for  luxuries 
and  medicine.     Europeans  mean  more  baggage ;  they 

VOL.   I.  Q 


226  THE   COXGO. 

1880.     have  stomachs  requiring  good  food,  they  are  tender 

5ept.  20. 

Bundi.  and  will  require  nursing.  "While  I  am  still  in  the 
wilderness  this  extra  work,  on  the  backs  of  110  men, 
is  like  the  harsh  behest  of  Pharaoh :  "  Let  there  be 
more  work  laid  upon  the  men,  that  they  may  labour 
therein,  and  let  them  not  regard  vain  words.  Go 
therefore  now  and  work,  for  there  shall  be  no  straw 
given  you,  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  of  the  bricks." 

The  Comite  must  by  no  means  be  compared  with 
unjust  Pharaoh,  but  it  is  true  that  new  arrivals  of 
Europeans  at  the  present  moment  increase  the  expense 
and  burden  without  a  commensurate  utility.  Our 
crying  need  is  for  coloured  men  to  enable  us  to  move 
on  quicker. 

A  M.  Xeve  has  also  arrived  to  drive  the  steam- 
launch  En  Avant  on  the  upper  river.  Another  person 
is  reported  to  have  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  Congo, 
taken  a  fond  look  at  Banana  Point,  and  gone  home 
without  even  having  had  the  courage  to  see  Yivi. 

Finally  I  conclude  a  letter  to  the  Comite  relating 
these  facts,  with  a  brief  summary  thus :  "  T\''e  have 
made  three  bridges,  filled  up  a  score  of  ravines  and 
gullies  at  the  crossings,  graded  six  hills,  cut  through 
two  thick  forests  of  hard  wood,  and  made  a  clear  road 
thirty-eight  miles  long." 

By  the  23rd  of  October  we  have  removed  the 
steamers,  boats  and  goods  to  the  camp  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  Luenda,  having  travelled  in  the  meantime 
322  English  miles  in  thirty-two  days  without  an 
accident. 


A   STORM.  227 

On  the  19th  I  find  the  followino;  note  in  my  lournal  •     isso. 

°  .  Oct.  19. 

"  At  4  p. jr.  yesterday,  after  an  excessively  hot  day,  luenda. 
the  sky  became  much  clouded  eastward.  A  high  wind 
with  frequent  severe  squalls  of  a  few  minutes'  duration 
soon  began,  as  the  murky  clouds  swept  northerly  and 
westerly.  Then  the  southern  horizon  became  blackened 
in  its  turn,  a  dead  calm  followed,  until  finally,  the 
clouds  havino;  settled  of  a  dense  blackness  from  south- 
east  to  north-east,  the  rain  (the  first  of  the  season), 
heralded  by  a  few  rumblings  of  thunder  and  flashes  of 
lightning,  came  down  in  torrents  until  midnight,  while 
the  wind  blew  fiercely  all  night.  The  roads  and  bridges 
must  needs  suffer  after  such  a  storm,  and  some  delay  in 
our  movements  may  be  anticipated." 

A  camp  at  the  Bundi  is  still  maintained  for  the  sake 
of  the  mule  trains.  When  provisions  are  required  by 
the  pioneering  force,  enough  men  can  be  despatched  to 
Jjundi  River  to  convey  to  us  within  two  days  sufficient 
for  twenty-five  days'  rations. 

On  the  verge  of  Nyongena — commanding  a  view 
down  the  at  present  wildly  roaring  Lulu,  and  a  long- 
stretch  of  the  Congo,  every  mile  of  which  is  marked  by 
rapids,  careering  swiftly  towards  the  cataracts  of  Inga 
— we  built  our  next  camp,  8500  feet  distant  from  the 
Luenda  River  camp.  By  the  2nd  of  November  we  have 
the  En  Avant  mounted  on  the  large  steel  wagon  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill,  ready  for  the  steepest  ascent  tliat 
we  have  yet  ventured  upon,  the  rise  being  1  in  4. 
For  this  work  we  have  been  most  careful  in  our  arrano'c- 
ments  ;  four  sets  of  large  tackles  are  laid  down  ready, 

Q  2 


228  TEE  CONGO. 

1880      \f'ii\i  the  ends  fastened  to  larofe  trees  on  the  side  of 

Not.  2.  ^ 

Nyongena.  the  road.  To  the  steel  l)ody  of  the  wa,iron  are  tied  a 
couple  of  the  stoutest  straps,  the  largest  (5-inch)  hawser, 
60  fathoms  long,  is  also  laid  up  the  hill,  two  new 
3-inch  manillas  lie  trailing  their  length.  Every  soul  in 
the  camp  is  mustered  for  the  occasion,  and  the  hauling 
song  is  chanted,  similar  in  refrain  to  the  nautical  "  Ho, 
heave  yo  !  "  It  is  a  slow  work,  but  it  is  sure  and  safe. 
Any  confusion,  misunderstanding  of  command,  slowness 
of  blocking  the  hind  wheels  when  the  haulers  cease 
work  or  shirking  must  be  guarded  against.  Up  and 
down  the  overseers  move  incessantly,  with  waving  arms 
and  hoarse  voices ;  thev  look  out  keenlv  for  the  slack 
arms  ;  and  after  one  hour  we  have  surmounted  the  steep 
slope,  are  high  on  the  crown  of  the  hill,  and  past  the 
camp  in  safety.  And  then  "  all  hands  "  sing  out  '•'  Hip, 
hip,  hurrah !  "  An  hour  is  expended  in  undoing  the 
lashings  and  dismounting  the  steamer  to  the  ground. 
In-  another  hour  the  great  steel  wagon  is  down  below 
at  the  Lulu,  to  receive  the  Royal  steam-launch,  the 
mounting  of  which  on  the  wagon  with  screw-jacks, 
&c.,  and  lashing  her  firmly  to  the  body,  occupies 
the  rest  of  the  morning.  AVe  then  halt  for  an  hour, 
for  the  despatch  of  breakfast,  which  the  cooks  have 
been  duly  preparing,  and  at  1  p.m.  descend  to  the  Lulu 
to  haul  the  Royal  up.  This  task  is  also  accomplished 
safely.  By  the  evening  of  the  second  day  of  our  arrival 
at  the  Lulu  the  other  boats,  boilers,  machinery,  furniture, 
and  more  lumbering  materials,  have  been  conveyed  to 
the  camp. 


[To/ace page  22S,  Vol.  J. 


ASCENDING   TUE   NYONCiENA    IIIIX. 


nctOma  mountain. 


229 


By  the  6th  of  November  we  have  moved  our  camp  to     isso. 

Nov.  6. 

a  spot  commanding  a  view  of  Xgoma  Mountain  and    Buia  r. 
Point,  at  the  commencement  of  a  sloping  spur,  descend- 
ing smoothly  to  the  Bula  River,  which,  as  I  have  men- 
tioned, empties  through  the  middle  of  the  sandy  flat 
between  Xgoma  Point  and  the   eastern  extremity   of 


UPLAND   ROAD   THROUGH   FOREST   ENX'AMPMEXT. 


Nyongena  Hill.  From  this  camp  the  view  reaches  up 
the  Congo  to  the  Isangila  Falls,  embracing  the  loch-like 
bay  below  the  crooked,  isle-dotted  stretch  descending  to 
the  rapids  of  Ngoma  Point.  Xgoma  ^lountain  looms 
large  and  grand,  and  seems  to  offer  an  insurmountable 
barrier  to  further  progress.    Between  our  camp  and  the 


230  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     base  of  the  mountain  lies  the  broad  trono-h  of  the  Bula 

Nov.  6.  ^         ^  ° 

Bula  K.  valley,  the  bottom  of  which  is  GOO  feet  below  our  camp  ; 
and  below  the  crown  of  Ngoma  1500  feet.  From  its 
north-western  extremity  round  leftward  to  our  camp, 
there  is  a  wide  sweep  of  mountain  land  tufted  with 
grove  clumps,  or  palmy  clusters,  denoting  the  villages ; 
and  we  know  that,  although  out  of  view,  there  are 
deep  chasms,  profound  ravines,  gulfy  rifts,  through 
which  the  Lulu  and  its  feeders  flow. 

The  En  Avant,  Royal,  and  a  steel  boat,  a  boiler  or 
two,  and  some  machinery,  have  been  carried  to  the 
camp ;  wiiile  a  few  hundred  loads  of  goods  have  been 
stored  in  the  tents. 

The  7th  of  November,  being  Sunday,  is  a  day  of 
rest.  The  people  wash  off  the  red  dust  of  a  week's 
work  from  their  bodies,  others  proceed  to  hunt  game, 
bearing  a  promise  in  their  memories  that  success 
will  be  rewarded  with  cloth,  as  meat  now  is  dearly 
prized ;  others  wander  to  the  neighbouring  villages 
in  search  of  vegetable  food,  and  to  sjoend  a  pleasant 
time  in  friendly  gossip  with  some  friends  of  long 
standing. 

To  me  also,  and  to  the  Europeans  who  are  gradu- 
ally becoming  useful,  the  Sunday  promises  to  be  a  day 
of  luxurious  rest.  So  eager  am  I,  however,  to  resolve 
the  problem  of  how  to  circumvent  old  Ngoma,  that 
since  daybreak  I  have  been  down  to  Ngoma  Point, 
with  an  idea  that  somehow  or  another  there  lies  the 
only  hope  of  delivery  from  this  hilly  environment.  But 
by  ten  o'clock  I  am  back  in  camp,  bathed,  shaved,  and 


ARBIVAL    OF  M.   DE  BUAZZA.  231 

dressed,  as  becomes  the  Sabbath :  and  after  a  hearty     isso. 

'^       Nov.  7. 

breakfast  I  have  sat  down  to  read.  But  presently  BuiaR. 
young  Lutete'  Kuna,  of  Xsanda,  is  seen  rushing  up 
towards  the  camp,  with  the  air  of  one  who  has  some- 
thing important  to  communicate,  and  coming  to  me 
hastily,  he  hands  a  paper  to  me,  on  which  I  find  traced 
with  a  lead  pencil  the  words,  "  Le  Comte  Savorgnan 
de  Brazza,  Enseigne  cle  VaisseaiL^ 

At  that  time  I  may  well  be  pardoned  if  I  did  not 
appreciate  rightly  the  position  of  this  gentleman. 
When  I  departed  for  Africa  in  1874  I  had  never 
heard  of  lihn,  and  in  1878,  during  all  my  travels  in 
Europe,  it  had  only  been  intimated  to  me  in  a  casual 
manner  that  he  had  accompanied  the  Messrs.  de 
Compeigne,  March,  and  Ballay  to  the  Ogowai. 

I  turn  to  Lutete'  Kuna,  and  demand  further  in- 
formation ;  and  Lutete,  nothing  loth,  describes  how 
he  was  startled,  on  reaching  the  village  of  Ndambi 
Mbongo,  by  seeing  a  tall  wdiite  man — "  Francess,  he 
tells  me  he  is — who  kept  on  firing  at  the  trees  with  a 
gun  that  shoots  many  times.  Now,  Bula  Matari,  tell 
me  why  do  white  men  shoot  at  trees  ?  Is  it  to  kill  the 
bad  spirit  ?  " 

"  Perhaps,"  I  say  ;  "  but  what  more  ?  " 

"  Oh,  after  he  found  out  I  belonged  to  your  com- 
pany, he  gave  me  tliat  piece  of  paper  and  told  me  to 
carry  it  to  3'ou." 

An  hour  later  the  French  gentleman  appears,  dressed 
in  helmet,  naval  blue  coat,  and  feet  encased  in  a  brown 
leather  bandage,  and  a  following  of  fifteen  men,  princi- 


232 


THE    CONGO. 


1880.     pally  Gabonese  sailors,  all  armed  with  AVincbester  re- 

Nov.  7.  , 

BniaR.    pcatiDg  nfles. 

The  gentleman  is  tall   in   appearance,  of  very  dark 
complexion,  and    looks   thoroughly   fatigued.     He    is 


MOy>.    DE   ERAZZA. 


-welcome,  and  I  invite  him  into  the  tent,  and  a  dejeuner 
is  prepared  for  him,  to  which  he  is  invited. 

I  speak  French  abominably,  and  his  English  is  not 
of  the  best,  but  between  us  we  contrive  to  understand 
one  another.  He  has  a  great  deal  to  say  of  his  travels, 
of  his  visit  to  Brussels,    of  his   interviews   with   the 


ADVENTURES   OF  M.    BE  BLAZZA.  233 

President   of    the    Council   of  the   Association   Inter-     isso. 

Nov.  7. 

nationale  Africaine ;  of  the  Congo  River,  and   of  its    buU  r. 
vahie  to  France  and  to  civilisation. 

I  gathered  from  him  that  on  his  first  expedition  up 
the  Ogowai  he  was  three  and  a  half  years,  and  only 
succeeded  in  penetrating  300  miles,  and  that  his 
experience  on  that  journey  made  him  resolve  not  to 
have  any  companions  on  another  exploring  expedition, 
in  order  that  he  might  not  be  thwarted  by  timidity  or 
irresolution  on  the  j)art  of  others,  to  whose  wishes 
deference  must  sometimes  be  made.  On  that  journey 
he  had  expended  money  freely,  and  had  lost  much 
time,  which  was  still  more  valuable.  The  region  he 
had  traversed  was  new,  the  natives  were  shy,  hostile 
to  encroachments  of  whites,  sometimes  capricious  in 
their  wants,  unstable  in  their  engagements,  and  divided 
in  opinion  between  their  love  of  the  white  man's  goods 
and  their  superstitious  and  unreasoning  fear  of  every 
innovation. 

It  was  a  sore  time  of  trial  to  him  when  he  first  saw 
the  Alima,  and  found  he  could  not  prosecute  the  ex- 
ploration of  its  course,  through  the  irresolution  of 
some  of  his  companions  and  the  hostility  of  the 
natives  ;  he  resolved  in  his  own  mind  to  return  some 
day  alone  and  finish  the  discovery.  On  his  arrival 
in  Europe  in  1878,  however,  he  learned  that  I  had 
descended  the  Lualaba  and  Congo,  and  then  he  knew 
he  had  seen  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Congo.  He 
liad  returned  to  Europe  sick  and  exhausted ;  but, 
recovering  his  strength,  he  had  come  out  again  in  the 


234  •  THE   CONGO. 

1880.  Jatter  part  of  1870,  and  in  February  1880  he  set  out 
BuiaR.  all  duly  prepared,  and  again  ascended  the  Ogowai. 
This  time  his  previous  tuition  of  the  natives  produced 
satisfactory  results  to  himself  and  pupils ;  tribe  after 
tribe  sent  its  quota  of  auxiliaries,  chief  after  chief  aided 
him,  and  finally  he  emerged  at  Stanley  Pool,  whence, 
after  leaving  a  corporal's  guard,  he  struck  north  about 
thirty  miles  from  the  north  bank ;  and,  after  eighteen 
days'  march  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  river,  he  had 
entered  Ndambi  INIbongo,  and  heard  of  my  being  in 
the  neio'hboarhood. 

After  resting  two  days  in  my  camp,  he  set  forward 
on  his  journey  to  Yivi,  with  a  few^  native  carriers  from 
our  employ  to  convey  his  small  stock  of  baggage. 
He  enjoyed  a  few  days  rest  at  Vivi,  and  then  took 
passage  in  one  of  our  steamers  to  Banana,  and  thence 
by  mail  to  Gaboon. 

On  the  13  th  of  November  wagons,  goods,  and  camp 
were  established  in  the  sandy  flat  which  extends  inland 
in  a  bay-like  form,  between  the  upper  head  of  Nyon- 
gena  Forest  mount  and  the  rocky  point  of  Ngoma 
mountain. 

When  at  my  camp,  Mons.  de  Brazza,  looking  up  at 
the  huge  mass  of  Ngoma,  had  said — "  It  will  take  you 
six  months  to  pass  that  mountain  with  those  wagons. 
Your  force  is  too  ^veak  altogether  for  such  a  work  as 
you  are  engaged  in;  you  should  have  at  least  500 
men." 

It  was  quite  true ;  but  seeing  that  no  greater  force 
could  be  obtained,  and  that  men  could  not  be  "  made  to 


DIFFICULTY  AT  NGOMA    POINT.  235 

order,"  it  would  have  been  weakness  to  stand  wrin2:inf>:     isso. 

'  ^   ^  O       &     Xov.  13. 

our  hands  and  bewaihng  our  helplessness.  We  were  Buia  r. 
in  the  wilderness,  and  the  large  and  valuable  stock  of 
material  must  be  taken  on  with  us,  so  long  as  the 
order  to  build  stations  was  in  force,  and  was  con- 
sidered of  primary  importance.  Before  I  could  ad- 
vance with  any  greater  rapidity,  some  man  of  force 
and  practical  knowledge  was  needed  to  replace  me  in 
the  charge  of  all  this  "  lumber,"  and  an  additional 
supply  of  men,  however  small,  was  also  required  to 
enable  me  to  do  so,  unless  I  wished  to  fix  the  chief 
of  the  transport  immovably  at  the  base  of  one  of  these 
formidable  heights.  As  may  be  seen,  our  present 
numbers  only  just  permitted  us  to  move  at  a  snail's 
pace,  but  to  deprive  it  of  about  fifteen  picked  men 
would  be  to  halt  the  wagon  expedition  at  the  spot 
where  I  left  it. 

Again  I  wander  to  Ngoma  Point,  while  the  people 
have  been  removing  the  goods  and  camp  to  the  base 
of  Ngoma,  and  examine  in  the  most  minute  manner 
every  portion  of  this  rugged  corner.  By  the  river  I 
am  effectually  closed.  The  stream  for  about  400  yards 
above  is  too  violent,  while  on  land  the  sharp  spine  of 
the  mountain  slopes  steeply  to  a  rapid.  But  at  about 
twenty  feet  above  the  fall  of  the  river  there  are  animal 
tracks  winding  between  immense  rocky  fragments  to 
the  Woody  terrace,  which  begins  just  beyond  the  Point. 
Could  I  remove  a  few  of  these  rocks  and  build  a  wall 
along  the  river  ?  What  time  would  tlie  work  occupy? 
Finally,  after  comparing  the  stiff  ascent  to  the  stiffer 


23G  THE   CONGO. 

1880.     descent   of  No:oma,  and   the  niimLer  of  ravines  and 

Nov.  20.  *        ^   ' 

Ngoma.  water-courses  wliich  must  needs  be  crossed  before 
reaching  Isangila,  I  choose  the  Point  as  the  scene  of 
operations. 

We  cut  some  tall  straight  trees,  about  forty  feet 
long,  also  about  fifty  handspikes,  of  strong,  hard,  tough 
wood,  and  convey  them  to  the  Point.  Only  forty 
picked  men  are  selected  for  the  more  skilled  work,  the 
others  are  scattered  over  the  neighbourhood  collecting 
building  stones.  We  begin  by  planting  one  of  the 
longer  trees  nearly  upright,  to  the  upper  end  of  which 
short  ropes  for  hauling  are  attached,  and  when  all  is 
ready  we  essay  the  task  of  toppling  over  a  large 
fragment.  So  well  is  it  done  that  the  great  rock 
turns  over  grandly,  and  glides  to  the  bottom,  forming 
a  solid  substructure,  on  which  with  care  and  judg- 
ment we  may  pile  others.  Again  we  try,  and  again 
a  great  fragment  is  rolled,  and  with  the  aid  of  jack- 
screws  is  pushed  to  its  place.  In  six  days  we  have 
obtained  quite  a  solid  line  of  large  rocks  for  a  founda- 
tion. Two  hundred  yards  of  a  length  is  needed 
before  we  can  begin  piling  up  a  wall  of  loose  rock, 
which  the  higher  we  can  build  straight  up  gives  us  of 
course  a  greater  width,  as  the  mountain  slopes  away 
from  the  river.  All  hands  after  this  are  scattered  over 
the  vicinity  to  convey  rock  to  the  builders ;  and  as  day 
after  day  advances,  the  more  certain  are  we  that  Ngoma 
will  be  passed  ! 

On  the  24th  of  November,  when  we  are  nearing  com- 
pletion, one  of  the  young  Belgian  officers,  Lieutenant- 


"  BULA   MATABI/'  237 

Yalcke,  being  an  engineer  officer,  arrives,  and  is  re-     igso. 
quested  to  blast  a  dozen  rocks,  which  are  irremovable  'r* 

■»■  ■'  Ngoma. 

and  annoying  to  sightliness.  Though  our  young 
friend  is  frequently  suffering  from  dysentery,  by  the 
time  he  is  through  with  his  task,  we  have  finished  off 
our  causeway,  have  levelled  it  with  24  inches  of  earth, 
and  a  fine  compact  broad  wagon  road  is  the  result, 
along  the  base  of  which  the  baffled  river  lashes  itself 
into  fury. 

The  natives  of  Ndambi  Mbongo  and  Isangila,  who 
have  been  day  after  day  coming  down  to  view  the 
busy  scene,  warmly  applaud  what  we  have  done,  and 
confirm  enthusiastically  a  name  that  I  have  already 
won  at  Yivi.  From  the  same  motive  that  the  name 
Africanus  was  given  by  the  Romans  to  Scipio,  they 
called  me  Bula  Matari,  "  Breaker  of  Rocks,"  which, 
strange  to  say,  travels  much  faster  up-river  than  I  can. 

When  the  forest  has  been  pierced,  and  a  roadway 
carved  along  the  sides  of  two  or  three  bluffy  hills, 
we  have  gained  a  fine  landing-place,  at  a  distance  of 
3700  feet  from  the  end  of  the  causeway.  On  the 
8th  of  December  the  0-feet  wide  wagons,  with  the 
boats  and  boilers,  are  rolled  over  it  without  a  halt, 
and  immediately  dismounted  of  their  loads  in  the  cool 
forest  camp.  In  calculating  our  rate  of  progress 
through  these  thirty  days,  w^c  found  that  we  had 
averaged  42  yards  per  day,  but  twenty-five  of  these 
days  had  been  spent  on  the  rocky  causeway,  the 
length  of  which  was  only  about  400  yards  from  end 
to  end. 


238  THE   CONGO. 

1880.  Qui-  j-^e^  camp  was  called  Khonzo.  About  thirty 
Khonzo,  natives,  engaged  from  the  villages  near  Ngoma's 
western  skirts,  enabled  us  to  transport  all  the  boxes, 
bales,  and  small  miscellanea,  while  the  engineer, 
Flamini,  prepared  the  Royal  for  river  exploration. 
Fortunately,  at  this  time  also  appeared  Mr.  Paul  Neve, 
a  smart  young  mechanician,  rather  delicate  looking, 
but  an  extremely  good  fellow,  who  assisted  us  in 
getting  ready  the  En  Avant  steamer. 

On  the  14th  of  December  a  note  in  my  diary  records 
the  almost  daily  troubles  constantly  rising  with  new 
recruits,  which  are  principally  caused  by  want  of 
fresh  meat,  and  the  total  absence  of  customary  trifling 
necessaries. 

"  Albert  Christopherson  better.  Ill  since  last  Monday, 
eight  days  ago.  Looks  poorly,  but  have  strong  hopes 
that  he  will  recover." 

"Lieutenant  Yalcke  was  down  again,  for  the  fourth 
time  in  twenty  days,  of  a  dysenteric  attack,  but  when 
out  he  evinces  an  industrious  disposition." 

I  steamed  up  the  Congo  in  the  Royal,  and  flattered 
myself  that  the  trip  had  a  most  fortunate  issue,  since  I 
was  enabled  to  discover  that  I  could  use  the  river  to 
within  one  and  a  half  miles  of  Isangila,  provided 
caution  was  used.  The  time  employed  in  the  ascent 
was  eighty  minutes,  and  the  return  was  accomplished 
in  thirty  minutes. 

Wadi  Rehani  led  a  hundred  men  overland  for  road- 
making,  to  complete  the  land-communication,  while  the 
steamers  conveyed  the  materials  by  water. 


ISANGILA.  239 

By  the  oOtli  of  December  our  camp  was  within 
three-quarters  of  a  mile  of  Isang-ila.  And  by  a  little 
pardonable  daring  we  were  able  to  pilot  our  boats  into 
a  cove,  from  which  a  road  could  be  made  leading  to  the 
place  where  I  proposed  Lieutenant  Yalcke  should  be 
left  in  charge,  while  I  returned  to  Yivi  to  haul  the  new 
wagons  which  had  been  sent  out,  and  to  bring  a  new 
steel  lighter  that  had  been  left  at  the  Bundi. 

On  the  2nd  of  January,  1881,  the  boats  were  on 
shore  in  the  camp,  where  they  were  to  be  repaired, 
scraped,  and  painted,  ready  for  the  long  journey  to 
Manyanga. 

Now  summing  up  the  road  measurements,  all  of 
which  were  taken  by  tape-line,  we  found  tliat  when 
Isangila  camp,  3,900  feet  distance,  was  gained,  we 
should  have  completed  a  road  274,472  feet,  or  52 
English  miles  less  88  feet. 

Lieutenant  Yalcke,  Mr.  A.  B.  Swinburne,  Francois 
Flamini,  Albert  Christopherson,  and  Mr.  Paul  Neve, 
Ijcing  left  in  the  camp,  on  the  3rd  of  January  I  set  out 
for  Yivi,  where  I  arrived  on  the  Gth.  Here  I  found 
Major  Yan  Bogaart  and  two  other  Belgian  officers, 
besides  Captain  Anderson,  just  arrived  from.  Brussels 
with  a  fresh  supply  of  mules. 

One  short  interview  with  Captain  Anderson  proves 
to  me  that  in  him  I  have  a  practical  assistant  who  will 
1  »e  of  great  service  to  me,  as  he  has  been  a  ship  captain 
in  the  Swedish  mercantile  service,  and  has  seen  life 
in  many  lands  to  some  purpose.  With  his  assistance 
I  contrive  to  transform  the  new  wagons  into  a  shape 


1880. 
Dec.  30. 


240  TEE   COKGO. 

1881.     and  form  more  serviceable  and  suitable  for  our  special 

Jan.  6.  ^ 

vivi.     Tvork. 

We  have  500  more  man-loads  to  carry,  and  two 
wagons  to  haul  to  Isangila,  with  only  ninety  -  five 
effective  men  as  our  working  force. 

On  the  loth  of  February  we  have  reached  our  camp 
near  Isangila,  with  half  a  thousand  loads,  two  wagons, 
and  a  large  new  steel  lighter.  We  find  Mr.  Swinburne 
is  ill  of  a  gastric  fever,  and  must  retire  to  recuperate  at 
Madeira.  Lieutenant  Talcke  also  is  but  feeble,  and 
must  be  sent  to  Yivi,  to  remain  there  until  we  are 
further  advanced  and  shall  require  his  services.  Mean- 
while he  will  act  as  second  in  command  of  Yivi.  Two 
other  Belgians  are  to  be  taken  with  us  up  river  in  his 
place. 

By  the  18th  we  are  in  Isangila  camp,  above  the 
cataract,  and  three  days  later  the  boats  are  launched, 
and,  vrith  the  Royal  steam-launch,  we  begin  the  first 
day's  conveyance  of  effects  to  a  camp  situated  at  the 
end  of  Long  Beach,  two  hours  and  twelve  minutes 
steaming. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  it  was  on  the  21st  of 
February,  1880,  that  we  set  out  on  our  first  reconnais- 
sance, directly  after  the  completion  of  the  building  of 
Yivi  Station,  to  explore  the  route  to  this  very  landing- 
place,  which  on  the  21st  of  February,  1881,  366  days 
later,  found  us  all  prepared  to  commence  another  sec- 
tion of  our  work,  of  a  somewhat  different  character  to 
that  which  was  now  happily  terminated. 

Computing  by  statute  miles  the  various  marchings, 


A    YEAR    OF   TRIAL   AND    TOIL.  241 

and  as  frequent  counter-marchings,  accomplished  during  i>^si. 
the  year,  we  find  they  amount  to  the  grand  total  of  isangUa. 
2,352  English  miles,  according  to  tape-line  measure- 
ment of  foot  by  foot,  making  an  average  of  six  and  a 
half  miles  performed  throughout  each  day  in  the  year, 
to  gain  an  advance  into  the  interior  of  only  fifty-two 
English  miles.  Take  away  the  necessary  days  of  rest 
enjoyed  during  the  year,  the  period  of  ninety-one  days 
employed  in  making  a  passable  road  for  our  wagons, 
which,  unless  tolerably  level,  would  have  been  impass- 
able for  our  top-heavy  wagon-loads,  and  the  average 
rate  of  travel  will  prove  that  we  must  have  had  an 
unusual  and  sacred  regard  for  duty,  besides  large  hope 
that  some  day  we  should  be  rewarded  with  positive 
success  after  all  this  strenuous  endeavour. 

That  it  was  not  a  holiday  affair,  with  its  diet  of 
beans  and  goat-meat  and  sodden  bananas,  in  the 
muggy  atmosphere  of  the  Congo  canon,  with  the  fierce 
heat  from  the  rocks,  and  the  chill  bleak  winds  bio  win  o- 
up  the  gorge  and  down  from  sered  grassy  plateaus,  let 
the  deaths  of  six  Europeans  and  twenty-two  natives, 
and  the  retirement  of  thirteen  invalided  whites,  only 
one  of  whom  saw  the  interior,  speak  for  us.  It  has 
been  a  year  dark  with  trial  and  unusual  toil.  Our  little 
band  of  labourers  are  proud  of  the  grand  work  their 
muscles  have  accomplished,  but  are  more  hopeful  of 
the  future,  inasmuch  as  their  labours,  by  means  of  the 
steamers,  will  be  greatly  lightened. 


VOL.  I. 


242  THE   COXGO. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

BETWEEX    THE    CATARACT   REGIONS  :    TO    MANYANGA. 

NumlDer  of  men  and  quantity  of  stores  bound  for  Manyanga — Isangila 
scenery — Ntombi's  dark  ravine — Crocodiles  chasing  us — The  Long 
Reach — Curious  rock-formations — Romping  on  the  sands — Advan- 
tages of  geniality  and  liveliness  in  dealing  with  aborigines — Kilolo 
Point — Getting  up  steam  pressure  for  a  stiff  current — ^Kuvoko — We 
encounter  two  missionaries — Their  repulse  by  the  natives  at  Ean- 
shassa  and  ^Ifwa — Soudi  of  Turu  is  killed  by  a  buffalo — Natives  still 
friendly — "  A'kumbi,  kumbi !  " — Nzambi  Eapids — The  Kwilu — Pro- 
curing food — A  whirlpool — Kimbanza  Island — A  memory  of  1877 — 
Hamadi's  slavery  and  wonderful  escape — Repairing  our  steamers — 
Minnow  fishing — Ndunga  Rapids — A  place  for  suicides— Ndunga 
dancing — An  exciting  and  extraordinary  performance — Manyanga — 
"  To-morrow  we  shall  not  work ;  we  shall  see  the  strangers  " — Doubt- 
ful reception  from  the  natives. 

1881.  It  appears,  after  carefully  counting  over  the  man- 
isangiia  ^^''^^^ — sixty  to  scventy  pounds  each — which  had  heen 
collected  up  to  this  date  at  Isangila,  through  tlie  assis- 
tance of  native  carriers  and  mule-trains,  that  we  had 
1815  separate  charges,  weighing  in  the  aggregate  a  little 
over  fifty  tons,  besides  the  steel  and  wooden  wagons, 
awaiting  transportation  to  Manyanga,  the  proposed  site 
of  our  next  station.  In  addition  to  this  freight  we 
have  118  coloured  men,  inclusive  of  natives  of  Isangila, 
and  their  luggage,  mats,  pots,  and  kettles ;  two  military 


ISANQILA   SCENERY.  243 

passengers,   Messrs.   Harou  and  Braconnier,  who  are     i«8i. 

Feb.  23. 

useful  in  superintending  the  camps,  the  one  in  advance,  isangiia. 
and  the  other  in  the  rear.  As  we  know  the  distance  to 
Manyanga,  and  the  number  of  loads  that  the  steamers 
and  boats  can  be  safely  burdened  with,  we  expect  that 
we  shall  be  about  seventy  or  eighty  days  in  reaching 
Manyanga  with  all  this  personnel  and  material. 

A  person  who  has  once  described  Isangiia  scenery, 
including  its  cataract — and  the  eternal  cone-shaped  hill 
of  iron-rust  rock  that  stands  silent  and  lonely  on  the 
southern  bank — will  scarcely  find  it  worth  while  to 
write  much  about  it  aQ:ain.  I  have  seen  it  so  often 
that  I  know  every  wrinkle  and  fold  of  the  scenery 
round  about  it.  To  me  nowadays  it  looks  very  tame  ; 
it  has  nothing  of  the  same  weirdness  and  mystery  that 
I  found  when  I  gazed  upon  it  in  1877.  Wild  as  the 
cataract  looks,  I  now  know  I  could  take  a  boat  within 
ten  yards  of  the  direct  fall.  Yet  I  remember  the  time 
when  in  my  utter  weakness  and  misery  it  seemed  awful 
to  me.  I  have  long  ago  forgiven  the  unkindly  people 
in  its  neighbourhood,  for  we  are  now  good  friends; 
but  neither  they  nor  I  gaze  at  one  another  as  we  did 
once,  with  an  intensity  of  look  as  though  we  were 
mutual  marvels.  The  mock  heroics  of  the  hills  also, 
which  crop  up  to  a  pretentious  altitude,  and  assume  a 
mimic  majesty  of  silence  and  mystery,  I  know  them  all. 
Up  and  down  I  have  wandered,  everywhere,  into  the 
depths  of  the  treacherous  stony  hollows,  cloaked  by  the 
tall  grass,  and  up  to  the  topmost  heights  of  the  highest 
hills  ;    and  I  see   nowadays   nothing  to   admire,  save 

R  2 


244  TEE  CONGO. 

1881.     when    I   look   down  the   river   and  catch  a   sig-ht  of 

Feb.  23.  ^  ° 

isangiia.  Ngoma  and  Xyongena,  and  allow  my  mind  to  dwell 
upon  scenes  that  are  gone,  and  dark  days  that  are  past. 

So  when  I  lead  the  way  up  the  short  stretch  of  river 
to  the  bend  of  the  long  reach  that  will  shut  the  view 
from  me,  I  feel  that  man  will  have  to  make  a  bitter 
fight  before  any  loveliness  will  come  over  the  bleak 
scenery  of  Isangiia. 

The  little  Royal,  that  has  carried  a  King  in  her  cabin 
along  the  shore  at  Ostend,  could  she  speak  might  have 
remonstrated  at  the  seemingly  interminable  work  she 
was  inaugurating,  as  she  began  her  useful  career  on 
the  stretch  of  navigable  water  between  Isangiia  and 
Manyanga,  and  might  have  expressed  vain  regrets  that 
between  her  and  the  blue  sea  on  which  she  had  floated, 
a  thing  of  grace  and  pride,  barrier  after  barrier  of  wild 
water  made  it  impossible  that  she  should  ever  ride  on 
the  ocean  again. 

But  with  her  friend  Flamini,  who  was  ever  lament- 
ing an  absent  wife,  she  performed  her  work  with  a 
grace  worthy  her  name,  littered  as  she  was  with  the 
nameless  miscellanea  of  our  expedition.  And  fast 
behind  her  stormed  the  En  Avant,  with  her  paddles 
revolving  vixenishly,  and  ploughing  up  a  broad  furrow 
of  dark  brown  water. 

The  bay  let  wherein  we  had  loaded  our  craft  was  a 
dent  in  the  grit-stone  shore,  about  100  yards  in  depth, 
topped  by  scrub,  amid  lines  of  reddish  soils.  Out 
of  this  we  had  steamed  with  the  cataract  behind  us, 
which  would  be  dangerous  only  if,  when  we  got  into 


CROCODILES    CEASING    US.  245 

the  stream,  anything  gave  way  in  the  mechanism  of  issi. 
the  little  steamer.  The  shore  is  rugged  with  rock  and  NtombL 
protruding  tops  of  sunken  boulders  until  we  have 
passed  Ntombi's  dark  ravine,  through  which  a  stream 
of  that  name  issues  into  another  baylet.  Then  skirting 
well  an  islet  rock  of  shale,  we  have  a  green  gorge 
in  view ;  snugly  hidden  behind  it,  and  right  before  us 
we  have  the  straight  stretch  of  Long  Reach  in  view, 
a  widened  stream  three-quarters  of  a  mile  broad.  If 
all  the  Congo  was  like  this  piece  of  water,  our  enter- 
prise on  the  river  had  certainly  been  forestalled  some 
centuries  ago.  The  land  that  slopes  towards  it  is  not 
an  improvement  on  that  we  left  behind.  The  southern 
shore,  if  closely  examined,  shows  only  quartz  -  rock 
covered  by  grass ;  the  northern  bank  contains  a  spacious 
area  that  might  be  utilised. 

The  crocodiles,  waked  into  anger  out  of  drowsy 
silence  by  the  strange  churning  of  screw  and  plash  of 
paddle-wheels,  come  out,  one  after  another,  from  the 
lazy  creeks  to  resent  our  approach.  They  dart  towards 
us  with  gleaming  eyes,  or,  vainly  imagining  that  our 
boats  are  some  strange  animals,  are  prepared  to  make 
an  attack,  but  when  within  a  few  feet  of  us  they  sud- 
denly sink.  Whether  they  explore  the  gliding  keels 
for  a  vulnerable  bite  I  know  not;  we  are  soon  over  the 
spot  of  submergence,  and  presently  we  see  them 
chasing  us  furiously  behind. 

The  Long  Reach  is  lengthy,  as  its  name  implies. 
Wc  hug  the  north  bank  closely.  It  is  deep  water 
all  along.     A''arious  trifles  amuse  the  eye.     The  shore 


IJeach. 


246  THE  CONGO. 

1881.     can  show  a  thin  Hne  frins-e  of  trees,  a  few  of  which 

Feb.  23.  _  ° 

Long  mark  a  great  eircuhir  shadow  on  the  sunht  earth. 
There  are  a  few  tall  trees,  of  clean-shafted  silkwood, 
and  of  a  more  dwarfed  but  sturdy  redwood.  Others 
are  weather- torn ;  there  is  bush  and  scrub  between,  and 
perhaps  a  young  palm  or  two,  alongside  of  which 
may  be  seen  at  odd  times  a  clump  of  tall  cane-grass 
aspiring  to  overtop  the  tallest  spike  of  a  palmate 
frond.  The  rocky  bank  for  two  or  three  trips  is  worth 
looking  at.  On  our  first  pioneer  voyage  we  thought 
it  interesting;  nay,  the  higher  we  went  the  more 
closely  it  attracted  the  earnest  gaze.  For  the  trees  dis- 
appeared, or,  if  afterwards  seen,  only  served  to  screen 
the  gaping  mouth  of  a  watercourse  that  without  them 
would  have  been  ugly.  The  rock  stepped  out  into 
view  in  naked  cliffs,  sometimes  from  the  deep  water, 
like  the  walls  of  a  massive  quay,  on  the  face  of  which 
we  can  read  the  lines  of  many  a  rise  and  fall,  or  where 
the  river  stood,  even  for  days.  Deep  into  such  places, 
especially  if  an  angle  is  above,  the  play  of  eddies  and 
the  revolution  of  water  have  worked  cavernous  holes, 
where  at  low  river  a  small  group  of  men  might  sit  at 
ease  drying  their  fish.  Or  the  cliffy  rock  begins  to 
rise  a  few  paces  inland  with  a  more  ambitious  height, 
massive  debris  being  at  its  base,  and  a  scant  edging  of 
bush  deepening  the  airy  outline  of  its  summit.  Gene- 
rally horizontal,  the  sandstone,  by  its  squared  blocks, 
which  the  washing  out  of  their  lines  of  clays  have 
separated,  apparently  hints  vaguely  that  man  aeons  ago 
had  not  a  little  to  do  with  its  present  appearance,  and 


CURIOUS  liOCK  FORMATIONS.  247 

seems  to  promise  that  further   ahead   lies   somethino*     issi. 

'-  °      Feb.  23. 

better.  Where  the  blue  rock  has  a  more  shaly  forma-  Long 
tion  we  have  an  idle  curiosity  in  following  the  lines  of 
the  horizontal  strata  ;  and  when  we  see  them  suddenly 
curve  in  parts  like  a  deeply-bended  bow,  we  are  set 
to  wonder  what  might  have  caused  this  phenomenon 
just  at  this  exact  place.  Perhaps  some  of  our  coloured 
sailors  may  have  imagined  that  it  was  caused  by  some 
mighty  hippopotamus,  which  had  been  fast  asleep,  and 
feeling  aweary  at  the  superincumbent  weight  that  had 
formed  over  him,  had  awaked,  and  in  his  struggle  thus 
bent  the  newly  formed  rock. 

Towards  the  upper  end  of  the  Long  Reach  the  shore 
softens  naturally.  We  are  out  of  the  influence  of  the 
current.  On  the  alluvium  deposited  a  long  time  ago 
in  this  inner  corner  of  the  angle  made  by  the  river's 
course,  has  grown  a  belt  of  trees,  densified  into  a  jungly 
wood  by  climbing  plants  and  undergrowth.  The  allu- 
vium is  not  rich  nor  thick,  but  sandy  just  where  a 
strong  tree  would  require  soil.  The  leafage  is  very 
green  and  gives  contrast  of  colour ;  where  the  sun 
shines  there  is  a  glistening  and  a  sheeny  glimmering : 
in  the  shadows  there  is  a  sombre  colouring  of  unde- 
fined dark  green,  and  below,  along  the  river,  a  line 
of  dead  white  fine  sand,  like  a  long  clean  sheet  of 
linen,  on  which,  for  the  life  of  them,  the  youngest  of 
our  party  cannot  walk  a  few  paces  without  feeling  a 
strong  desire  to  romp  and  have  a  lark. 

I  love  to  see  young  men  of  my  own  colour  take 
delight  and  enjoyment  in  life  in  Africa.     Nothing  so 


248  THE   COXGO. 


1881.     soon  excites  a  2:eDeral  smile  on  everybody's  face  than 


Feb.  26 


Long  to  see  young  Albert  racing  like  a  young  elepbant  over 
the  beautiful  and  pure  sand,  and  showing  to  the  aston- 
ished blackies  that  the  white  man  has  also  a  sense  of 
fun,  and  can  run,  and  leap,  and  race  like  themselves. 
The  dark  faces  light  up  with  friendly  gleams,  and  a 
budding  of  goodwill  may  perhaps  date  from  this  trivial 
scene.  For  far  different  is  the  reception  of  the  white 
man  whose  dignity  is  so  measureless  that  it  chills  the 
native  on-looker  on  coming  within  its  presence.  To 
such  an  impressionable  being  as  an  African  native, 
the  self-involved  European,  with  his  frigid,  imperious 
manners,  and  pallid  white  face,  and  dead,  lustreless 
eyes,  is  like  a  sealed  book.  The  nati%'e  views  the  form 
resembling  his  in  figure ;  he  hears  him  speak  in  veri- 
table human  tones ;  but  the  language  is  unintelligible, 
neither  can  he  utter  any  sound  that  is  famihar  to  him. 
But  let  the  strange  white  man  relax  those  stiff,  pallid 
features ;  let  there  enter  into  those  chill,  icy  eyes,  the 
light  of  life  and  joy,  of  humour,  friendship,  pleasure, 
and  the  communication  between  man  and  man  is 
electric  in  its  suddenness. 

By  the  2Cth  of  February  we  had  cleared  Isangila 
camp  of  every  portable  article,  a  corporal's  guard  only 
being  left  for  the  present,  to  keep  communications  open 
in  case  of  necessity.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day 
we  proceed  from  the  point  of  Long  Reach  known  to 
the  aborigines  as  Mbembe-Kissa,  up  along  the  deeply 
indented  but  comparatively  low  shore,  as  far  as  Kilolo 
Point,  or  the  southern  termination  of  the  second  reach 


GETTING    UP  STEAM.  249 

above    Isan^'ila,      The    northern    side    of    this    reach     i?si, 
bristles  with  tooth-Kke  projections  of  shale  rock,  just     khoIo. 
as  the  southern  side  of  the  first  reach  is  dangerous  to 
navigation. 

Rounding  Kilolo  Point,  we  look  wp  a  third  reach 
of  about  five  miles  in  length,  and  along  the  southern 
■quarter  of  the  river's  breadth,  a  long  djke-like  ridge 
of  shale  rock  is  visible  here  also,  while  the  remaining 
breadth  of  the  river  is  clear  of  all  danger.  But  on 
rounding  Kilolo  Point  there  is  a  serious  difiiculty 
before  us.  The  river  is  narrowed  at  the  bend,  by  islets 
on  the  northern  side,  and  by  the  extremities  of  the 
rocky  dyke.  Between  the  northern  islets  there  is  quite 
a  tiny  fall  at  low  water,  which  in  the  high  river  becomes 
a  fierce  current.  The  deep  swift  mid-channel  is  the  only 
clear  way  left  for  us,  but  the  river  is  so  narrowed  that 
to  make  an  ascent  possible  requires  a  high  pressure  of 
steam.  We  try  it  first  with  65  lbs.  steam  before  we  per- 
ceive the  hopelessness  of  the  efibrt.  Running  behind 
the  dyke  at  the  southern  corner,  we  wait  until  the  steam 
rises  to  75  lbs.,  and  again  go  at  the  channel  with  a  rush. 
Again  we  are  baffled,  but  while  testing  the  channel 
from  side  to  side,  we  become  acquainted  with  the  cur- 
rent's various  moods,  and  conclude  that  with  a  trifle 
more  power  the  ascent  may  be  made.  AVe  fire  up 
again  until  we  have  85  lbs.  steam,  and  keeping  about 
ten  yards  off  parallel  with  the  southern  dyke,  glow  witli 
triumph  in  seeing  we  are  gradually  mounting,  until, 
after  100  yards  of  this  sluggish  headway,  the  great 
power  collected  in  the  boiler  shoots  the  vessel  ahead 


250  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     like  an  arrow.    Clear  of  anxiety,  we  then  moderate  her 

Feb,  26.  -^  ' 

KuToko.  speed,  and  skirt  the  northern  bank,  ploughing  through 
peaceful  and  deep  water  to  Kuvoko — the  Kuvoko  Point 
on  the  north  bank  at  the  end  of  the  third  reach. 

The  trough  of  the  Congo  since  leaving  Isangila  has 
nothing  of  the  appearance  of  a  carion.  It  is  more  open. 
The  mountains  and  highlands  only  approach  the  river 
at  the  bends,  the  opposing  points  are  generally  low  pro- 
jected lengths  of  five  or  six  miles ;  the  immediate  river 
lines  show  a  thin  edge  of  trees,  more  to  grace  what  would 
without  them  be  grassy  nakedness.  If  we  take  a  look 
over  the  land  from  any  high  pjoint,  we  observe  that  the 
irregular  surface  is  all  clothed  with  grass,  except  where 
tree  2:roves  indicate  the  villao-es.  The  lono:er  reaches, 
such  as  that  from  Xtombi  Cove  to  Yoonda,  appear  to  be 
merely  continuations  of  valleys  that  extend  far  inland 
in  a  similar  direction  south  of  east,  bounded  by  chains 
of  hills  that  fall  drooping  at  the  points  of  the  shorter 
north  and  south  reaches. 

The  next  day  being  Sunday,  we  halted  at  our  new 
camp  opposite  Kilolo  Point,  at  the  foot  of  the  little 
rapid  just  mentioned.  About  9  A3r.  we  were  startled 
at  hearing  peremptory  shouts  at  the  little  nipid  just 
above  us.  After  a  short  pause  of  expectation  we  found 
two  missionaries,  Messrs.  Crudgington  and  Bentley, 
on  their  way  down  river  in  a  canoe  which  they  had 
purchased  near  Itunzima  rapids.  They  had  visited 
Ngalyema  of  Ntamo,  and  had  stayed  with  him  a  few 
days  most  pleasantly.  They  then  were  requested  to 
visit  Kinshassa.     On  landing,  liowever,  at  Kinshassa, 


ADVENTURES    OF  MISSIONABIES.  251 

they  were  met  by  a  furious  multitude,  who  ordered     issi. 

•^  ''  Teb.  27. 

them  back.  Surprised  at  the  excitement,  they  slowly  Kuvoko. 
retired,  but  the  natives  pressed  on  them,  some  trying 
to  surround  them,  others  advancing  with  levelled  mus- 
kets, and  otliers  flourishing  long,  broad  knives,  spears, 
bludgeons,  what  not,  as  though  they  would  annihilate 
them  on  the  spot.  For  a  time  it  appeared  to  be  in  the 
balance  whether  they  should  be  massacred  instantly,  or 
whether  their  death  would  receive  the  sanction  of  the 
old  chief  Nchuvila  and  his  principal  men.  Finally, 
however,  the  chief  decided  to  let  them  depart  safely, 
and,  relieved  of  the  fright,  they  hastened  off,  leaving 
one  of  their  number  behind  in  the  bushes  of  Kinshassa. 
Arriving  at  the  north  bank  they  nearly  met  the  same 
adventures  at  Mfwa,  but  with  the  help  of  Malameen,  a 
Senegal  sergeant,  they  managed  to  pacify  the  rising 
mob.  They  then  lost  no  time  in  making  their  way 
back  to  more  peaceful  districts  down  river. 

After  assisting  the  missionaries  to  Isangila,  we  con- 
tinued with  energy  our  work  of  transportation  of  effects 
to  Little  Rapid  Camp  until  the  4th  of  March,  when 
we  were  all  gathered  together  prepared  for  another 
forward  move. 

Two  days  later  I  despatched  Uledi,  Soudi  of  Turn, 
Khalfan  and  Sa'adala,  to  Yivi,  with  a  letter  of  instruc- 
tions to  the  chief  of  the  station,  and  to  bring  the 
European  mail  up.  After  being  taken  to  Isangila  by 
whale-boat,  and  charged  to  be  speedy,  they  started  on 
their  mission  witliout  delay.  But  on  arriving  at  the 
Luazaza   stream   tlicy  met  a  small  buffalo  herd,  and 


252 


THE   COXGO. 


1881. 
March  6. 

Kuvoko. 


Soudi,  who  had  been  half-slaughtered  in  Ituru  in  1875, 
was  swept  over  Kalulu  Falls  in  1877,  and  had  been 
captured  and  enslaved  for  a  short  time  by  the  natives, 
rashly  thought  that  with  his  Snider  he  was  a  match  for 


ELEVATION   OF   SAILING   BOAT. 


any  animal,  and  forthwith  with  extreme  caution  com- 
menced to  stalk  one  of  the  herd.  When  within  what 
he  supposed  to  be  a  safe  distance  for  a  shot  he  fired. 


PLAN    OF    SAILING    BOAT. 


and  wounded  the  bufialo.  Encouraged  by  seeing  him 
fall,  Soudi  rushed  up  to  sever  the  jugular,  since  without 
this  ceremony  the  meat  would  have  been  unfit  for  a 
Moslem  to  eat ;  but  the  buffalo,  not  yet  dead,  on  seeing 
its  enemy^  charged,  and  tossed  him  into  the  air,  made 


FLAMINI  ISLAND.  253 

a  mere  plaything  of  liim,  until  he  was  so   mangled     issi. 

March  6. 

that  he  died  soon  after  his  companions  had  come  up   Kuvoko. 
to  him. 

When  the  boat's  crew  returned  to  our  camp,  it  was 
evident  that  the  sad  tale  they  had  brought  of  the  sud- 
den death  of  one  of  the  bravest  young  fellows  in  our 
expedition,  had  caused  a  profound  grief,  for  throughout 
both  camps  reigned  a  sorrowful  silence. 

On  the  11th  of  March,  our  miscellaneous  effects  having 
been  all  conveyed  to  Kuvoko  Camp,  with  the  last  loads 
I  continue  the  journey,  taking  M.  Braconnier  with  me, 
up  the  fourth  turn,  and  found  a  camp  at  the  foot  of  the 
Mbundi  Afanda  Rapids,  over  which  he  was  placed  in 
charge.  As  the  distance  was  only  a  few  miles,  three 
days  later  I  was  able  to  take  Lieut.  Harou  to  an  island 
a  mile  below,  near  a  point  which  came  to  be  known 
afterwards  as  Bayneston.  In  honour  of  the  steady 
Italian  mechanician,  the  isle  was  named  Flaraini. 

Between  Kuvoko  Point  and  Bayneston  extends  a 
crooked  stretch  of  very  rough  water,  easily  passable, 
however,  during  six  months  of  the  year  by  striking  the 
northern  shore.  At  low  water  the  route  is  by  the 
southern  bank.  Reef  after  reef  of  tilted  shale  rock 
show  dangerous  teeth  above  the  water,  between  most  of 
Avhich  the  Congo  rushes  with  creaming  waves.  Though 
to  the  stranger  wicked  enough  in  appearance,  we 
passed  up  and  down  during  sixteen  round  trips  without 
an  accident.  The  scenery  about  the  rapids  is  not  quite 
devoid  of  the  picturesque.  Perhaps  we  are  inclined  to 
ascribe  this  to  the  wooded  island  of  Flamini,  or  to  the 


254  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     tree-topped  mountain  to  the  north  of  it.     Here,  how- 
March  n  -^  ^ 

Kuvoko.  ever,  the  mind  must  be  directed  to  the  course  of  the 
vessel,  otherwise  a  lamentable  accident  might  happen. 

The  natives  all  along  both  banks  have  been  easily 
won  to  friendly  intercourse,  and  every  camp  is  a  scene 
of  marketing.  Nothing  has  transpired  to  mar  the 
mutual  good  feeling  that  prevails.  Our  advance  being 
necessarily  slow,  the  country  becomes,  as  we  may 
say,  civilised.  The  steamers  passing  up  and  down 
continually  speak  for  us  in  a  clearer  manner  than  we 
could  ever  hope  to  employ.  They  seem  to  be  taken 
as  harbingers  of  trade ;  of  barter,  not  of  trouble. 
'^A'kumbi,  kumbi  !  " — boat,  boat, — is  no  sooner  seen 
ascending  than  it  is  immediately  welcomed  with  shouts 
from  people  who  have  come  from  the  hill  summits, 
and  have  gathered  on  the  banks  to  view  the  novel 
phenomenon  of  a  boat  self-impelled  against  a  current 
which  has  oftentimes  tired  their  muscles.  But  by  the 
time  that  the  tenth  voyage  is  made  it  has  become  a 
common-place  sight,  meaning  barter  and  profit.  No 
wonder  that  every  step  we  take  is  made  amid  wel- 
coming cries  and  friendly  greetings. 

To  move  upward  from  Flamini  Island  required 
various  trials  ;  but  experience  taught  us  that  the  north 
bank  course  was  the  most  feasible  until  the  high  point 
near  Bayneston  Hill  is  reached,  when  the  river  must  be 
crossed  to  reach  the  south  bank.  By  this  method,  in 
sixteen  voyages  we  were  enabled  to  transport  all  our 
effects  to  Mukanzi  Point. 

This  was   more   than    an    ordinarily   long    course. 


XZAMBI  BAPIDS.  255 

Rounding  Bayneston  Hill,  a  deep  baylet  is  seen  on  the     issi. 

March  11. 

south  side,  from  whicli  at  high  river  a  creek  flows  to  Bayneston. 
the  river  below  Bayneston  Hill,  transforming  it  into  an 
island.  Skirting  the  shore  of  this  bay  we  have  a  fine 
clear  run  of  about  six  miles.  The  left  bank  is  formed 
of  a  sloping  plain;  the  right  bank  is  hilly  and  rough, 
and  the  course  along  it  is  unpromising  owing  to 
various  ugly  outcroppings  of  rock.  At  the  end  of  it 
we  cross  to  the  north  bank,  skirt  along  that  until  at 
the  point  we  re-cross  again  to  the  south  bank,  and  in 
two  minutes  we  are  at  Mukanzi  Point.  Looking  up 
the  river  we  see  before  us  a  very  wilderness  of  rock 
islets  and  rapids,  which  is  called  by  the  natives, 
Nzambi  Rapids,  after  the  Deity. 

By  the  23rd  of  jMarch  the  2Jerso?i7iel  and  materiel  are 
concentrated  at  the  camp  at  the  foot  of  the  Nzambi 
Rapids,      * 

The  hills  that  confine  the  Congo  have  gradually 
drawn  nearer.  There  is  neither  grandeur  nor  beauty 
about  them.  The  entire  scene  is  one  approaching  to 
unloveliness,  and  nakedness,  joined  with  ruggedness. 
Naked  rocks,  and  broad  patches  of  reddish  soil  are 
intermingled  with  dark  green  clumps  of  scrub.  Even 
the  dusky  aborigine  knows  that  it  is  of  little  value. 
His  home  is  j^l^nted  away  on  the  summits,  where 
there  is  level  ground  and  rich  soil,  where  trees  can 
grow  and  his  cassava  thrive.  The  Congo,  therefore,  is 
left  to  flow  amid  its  chilling  loneliness  ;  not  a  voice  is 
jicard  in  its  praise,  not  a  note  rings  out  to  sing  the 
glory  of  the    great  brown  flood.     Perhaps   a   daring 


256  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     fisherman  haunts  its   solitudes  once  every  few  days, 

March  23.  ^  ^       J  J    7 

Nzambi.  craving  after  fish ;  Lut  whether  from  indolence,  from 
fear  of  crocodiles,  or  from  some  other  danger,  fisher- 
men between  Isangila  and  NzamLi  Rapids  are  very 
rarely  seen. 

A  careful  search  among  the  reefy  islets  informs  us 
that  the  extreme  left  channel  may  be  ascended  this 
month,  though  at  high  water  we  should  have  to  take 
one  of  the  middle  passages.  The  north  side  is  a  scene 
of  wild  confusion ;  great  rolling  waves,  capped  with 
spray,  chase  one  another  incessantly,  driving  by  their 
furious  rush  a  violent  stream  to  its  right  against  the 
northern  shore,  to  its  left  against  a  large  round  rock- 
bound  island.  Long  before  we  can  come  near  it,  we 
are  made  aware,  by  whirlpools  and  revolving  eddies, 
that  there  is  danger  in  its  vicinity. 

With  the  faithful  Royal,  we  steam  up  the  extreme 
left  channel,  which  washes  the  southern  bank,  and  by 
careful  steering  we  are  able  to  thread  our  way  up 
through  the  left  wing  of  the  Rapids,  and  so  clear 
through  a  narrow  gateway  leading  to  quiet  water 
above,  and  finally  to  a  baylet  near  the  Kwilu  River, 
from  which  there  is  another  clean  and  noble  stretch  of 
river  leading  up  to  Itunzima  Rapids.  The  southern 
side  is  a  sloping  plain,  margined  by  a  thin  belt  of 
trees  ;  the  northern  side  is  more  irregular  and  uneven, 
but  still  a  great  improvement  on  the  usual  view  below. 
Up  the  river,  about  six  or  seven  miles,  the  hills  seem 
to  gather  themselves  together  in  a  close  and  rugged 
group. 


ITUNZIMA   RAPIDS.  257 

The  Ivwilu — whicli  is  known  as  tlie  Lucage,  in  the  issi. 
neighbourhood  of  San  Salvador— appearing  to  be  a  xzambi. 
navigable  river,  I  ventured  to  ascend  it.  Its  average 
course  was  S.  by  E.  magnetic  ;  its  breadth  was  about 
forty  yards,  banked  by  low  liills  rising  from  forty  to 
one  hundred  feet,  and  fringed  by  trees  on  either  bank. 
A  punting-pole  showed  that  all  this  season  it  had  a 
greater  depth  than  eight  feet.  We  kept  midway  for 
about  five  miles  against  a  four-knot  current ;  a  clear, 
brown,  drinkable  water,  six  degrees  cooler  than  the 
Congo.  We  then  returned,  rushing  down  stream  at 
great  speed  to  the  ''  Receiver  of  all  Rivers,"  which, 
short  as  had  been  our  absence  from  it,  appeared  to  be 
an  ocean  compared  to  the  Kwilu. 

By  the  26th  of  March,  we  had  passed  the  Nzambi 
Rapids,  and  the  next  day,  being  Sunday,  we  rested. 

On  the  28th,  we  started  to  remove  our  camp  to  the 
foot  of  Itunzima  Rapids,  the  distance  being  effected  in 
forty-five  minutes.  Though  troubled  somewhat  by 
squally  weather  and  a  few  rainstorms,  we  were  above 
Itunzima  Rapids  by  the  2nd  of  April. 

Food  was  abundant,  though  dear,  and  our  upward 
advance  did  not  seem  to  cheapen  it.  Both  banks  were 
well  foraged  each  ration  day.  On  such  days,  gangs 
of  six  men  were  despatched  over  the  country  to 
purchase  cassava  bread,  bananas,  Indian  corn,  and 
sweet  potatoes;  special  agents  having  the  duty  of 
purveying  for  the  Europeans  such  articles  as  fowls, 
eggs,  goats,  &c.  Though  we  were  far  from  starving, 
it  was  but  a  poor  diet.     But  then  the  mind's  anxieties 

VOL.  I.  s 


258  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     jrave  one  scarcely  any  time  to  think  of  food.     Albert 
April  2.    ^  "  . 

itunzima.  Christopherson  and  Captain  Anderson,  were  valuable 

assistants,  both  being  sailors.     On  the  latter  I  could 

place  great  reliance,  so  steady  and  careful,  and  strong 

was  he.     Each  day  he  rose  to  the  stirring  work  most 

punctually.     Lieutenants  Harou  and  Braconnier  were 

military  officers,  who,  of  course,  could  not  be  expected 

to  know  much  of  river  navigation ;  but  their  services 

could    be    utihsed    in    superintending    the   constantly 

shifting    camps,   each   of   which    resembled    a   tented 

village,  when  the  great  store  and  officers'  tents  lined 

the  shore,  and  the  cloth  sheds  improvised  by  guards 

and  chiefs  were  grouped  around  the  tented  magazines. 

On  Sunday.  April  3rd,  I  went  ahead  in  the  whale- 
boat  on  an  exploring  excursion  up  the  now  narrowed 
Congo.  Tall  mountains  and  ridges  opposed  one  another 
with  steep  slopes,  declining  sharply  into  the  stream,  at 
a  distance  of  a  thousand  j-ards.  Some  obstructing 
boulders  that  stood  at  the  various  points  caused  ripples 
on  the  river,  and  a  greater  swiftness  in  the  current 
near  them,  but  the  water  was  generally  clear  of  rocks, 
and  in  the  middle  flowed  steadily  at  from  six  to  seven 
knots  an  hour.  The  ridge  facing  the  north  is  called 
Mubiri,  and  its  highest  altitude  above  the  river  is  about 
a  thousand  feet — just  where  it  dominates  the  ferry  of 
Xsona  Mamba.  The  southern  ridge  rises  scarcely 
higher  than  GOO  feet  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
river. 

Except  at  the  latter  part  of  tlie  rainy  season,  say  in 
May  or  December,  the  Congo  sweeps  round  from  an 


A    WHIRLPOOL.  259 

eastern  bend  and  washes  the  base  of  Mubiri  mountains ;     is>ii. 

April  3. 

but  in  those  two  months  a  wild  channel  is  formed  over  Kunzu. 
a  glazed  black  reef  above  the  ferry,  forming  a  large 
island  called  Kunzu.  Round  this  sharp  bend  we  had  to 
pull  hard  to  get  through  the  rather  dangerous  stretch. 
Once  we  got  into  a  whirlpool,  and  the  waves  almost  met 
over  the  bows  of  the  boat,  making  us  for  a  moment 
think  of  the  great  sin  we  committed  by  employing  our 
Sunday  in  this  manner.  By  perseverance,  however,  we 
rounded  the  evil  point,  and,  striking  across  the  river, 
came  down  the  channel  to  a  quiet  haven,  on  the  upper 
side  of  the  glazed  black  reef,  which  in  a  couple  of 
months  would  no  doubt  be  flooded  by  the  high  river. 
An  hour's  pull  enabled  us  to  descend  what  it  had  taken 
five  hours  to  ascend,  and  we  were  back  in  camp  to  pass 
the  rest  of  the  day  in  peace. 

By  the  7th  of  April  we  had  transferred  the  Expedi- 
tion and  its  fifty  tons  of  material  to  the  ferry  landing- 
place  of  Nsona  Mamba.  The  next  day  tbey  were 
removed  to  the  haven  on  the  other  side  of  the  neck  of 
rock  which  connected  Kunzu  Island  with  the  main 
southern  shore,  while  I  led  the  steamers  round  Kunzu. 
After  a  sickening  and  anxious  work  we  finally  mounted 
the  rapid,*  and  steamed  into  the  quiet  haven  near  the 
now  camp. 

Owing  to  the  abundance  of  provisions  in  the  neigh- 
l)()urhood  and  our  nearness  to  the  ferry  of  Xsona 
^lamba,  our  people  here  fared  well  on  bananas,  sweet 

*  CoiiM  our  steamers  have  steamocl  two  knots  an  liour  faster  we 
should  have  Ijecn  relieved  of  all  anxiety. 

S   2 


260  THE   CONGO. 

is«i.     potatoes,  melons,   cassava  bread,  or  plum-less  "duff," 

April  7.  ^ 

Kimbanza.  palm  wiue,  goats,  fowls,  pigs,  eggs,  &c.,  while  in  our 
tents  we  still  had  in  reserve  from  twenty  to  twenty- 
four  days'  provisions  of  rice,  beans,  peas,  and  lentils. 

Removing  from  the  haven  of  Kunzu  we  settled  our- 
selves on  the  island  of  Kimbanza,  opposite  the  mouth 
of  the  Lukunga  river  which  enters  the  Congo  from 
the  southern  shore ;  the  villas-e  of  Nkeniie  beino- 
near.  Kibonda,  on  the  northern  shore,  awakens  me- 
mories of  1877.  In  the  hands  of  its  natives  I  was 
compelled,  for  lack  of  means  to  ransom  him,  to 
leave  one  of  my  men  a  prisoner.  After  two  months  of 
imprisonment,  or  rather  slavery,  Hamadi  escaped  in  a 
canoe  to  this  island  of  Kimbanza,  and  thence  managed 
to  reach  the  southern  shore.  By  night  travel,  and  after 
manifold  adventures,  he  succeeded  in  reaching  the  sea, 
where,  making  his  case  known  to  the  American  consul, 
he  was  well  treated,  shipped  to  Madeira,  and  thence 
via  the  Cape  to  Zanzibar.  He  only  arrived  at  his 
home  two  weeks  before  I  appeared.  He  immediately 
re-enlisted  with  me,  and  from  Kimbanza  Island  he  can 
now  look  on  Kibonda  and  think  of  his  first  misfortunes 
even  with  a  smile  of  humour.  His  other  companions 
in  the  misery  of  that  year  also  escaped  their  forced 
bondao;e,  but  of  the  mad  Safeni  we  have  not  been  able 
to  hear  a  word,  though  man}'  inquiries  have  been  made 
after  him. 

It  is  one  of  the  most  picturesque  bits  of  scenery  on 
the  river  that  we  see  beyond  Kunzu  Haven  and  Kim- 
banza islet.    The  south  bank  is  very  irregular  in  its  shore 


KIMBANZA   ISLET. 


261 


lines.  After  cutting  across  a  bay-like  indentation  we  is.si. 
have  to  skirt  a  shore  that  bristles  with  shaly  projections,  xi,„,^an  \ 
until  w^e  are  abreast  of  Kalubu  village,  on  the  north 
bank.  Making  towards  it,  we  follow  its  sandy  flat,  which 
lies  deep  buried  in  a  half-cup-like  formation  of  high, 
steep  hills.  When  out  of  the  bend  we  find  ourselves  at 
the  base  of  cliffy,  rusty-red  hills,  which  match  the  pre- 
cipitous height  of  the  well-known  rock-mount  of  Gib- 
raltar. When  Kimbanza  islet  appears  in  view  we  have 
2)assed  the  reddish  cliffs,  getting  a  glimpse  of  the  grassy 
uplands  behind,  and  see  them  gently  sloping  to  the 
river,  forming  the  southern  shore  of  the  longest  reach 


PI.AX   OF   LIGHTER. 


we  have  yet  seen.  The  southern  shore  is  low,  being 
an  extensive  plain  spreading  out  from  the  river 
towards  the  distant  mountains  of  Ndunga. 

The  steamers  Royal  and  Ea  Avant  had  by  this  time 
gone  out  of  repair.  Tlie  side-valves  of  the  cylinders 
were  discovered  to  be  much  worn  by  fine  sand,  which 
liad  been  drifted  over  the  engines  during  the  frequent 
loading  and  unloading  of  goods — so  that  we  availed 
ourselves  of  this  quiet  camp  on  the  island  to  replace 
tliem  and  make  other  repairs. 

^leantime  with  the  lighters  we  transferred  a  group 
of  men  and  their  baggage  to  the  low  sandy  point 
of  Ngoyo,    whence    the    view,  though   comparatively 


262  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     limited,  took  in  quite  a  large  slice  of  the  rolling  country 

April  8. 

Kimbanza.  OH  tlic  uortli  sido  of  tlic  Cougo,  extending  from  the 
mouth  of  the  river  just  opposite  to  us  to  the  distant 
horizon  of  low  hills,  cleaved  by  its  upper  course.  On 
the  eastern  side  of  the  Lualla  the  land  suddenly  up- 
lifted into  a  tabular  mountain  block,  which  exposes 
naked,  stiff,  and  steep  slopes,  over  which  many  foot- 
paths lead  from  fishing  haunts  on  the  river's  rocks 
to  the  hamlet-clusters  under  the  palm-trees  and  cotton- 
wood  groves  on  the  summit.  All  the  way  from  Kim- 
banza Islet  to  Ngoyo  Point  the  Congo  is  a  noble  river, 
a  mile  wide,  and  more  in  some  places,  with  a  low  plain 
on  one  side,  and  an  interesting  open  country  of  low 
hills  on  the  other.  But  just  above  the  sandy  point  it 
becomes  confined  in  a  deep  carion  again,  of  only  some 
800  or  900  yards  wide,  where  it  is  swift,  wrathful  when 
obstructed ;  strong  everywhere. 

Crocodiles  are  numerous  at  this  place ;  every  baylet 
has  its  inhabitant ;  the  mouths  of  the  many  small, 
lazy  streams  entering  the  bays  and  deep  curves  of 
either  shore  furnish  the  sly  amphibia  with  harvests  of 
fish. 

Through  some  particular  cause  all  this  portion  of 
the  Congo  up  to  Ndunga  Rapids  is  a  great  resort  for 
minnow  fishing.  Every  few  hundred  yards  one  may  " 
see  the  canoes  going  round  with  the  eddies  within  the 
deep  curves  of  the  irregular  shores,  with  the  ample 
hoop  and  net  submerged,  and  on  the  flat  rocks  close  by 
the  minnows  are  spread  out  drying,  or  rather  baking, 
under  the  heat  of  the  fierce  sun. 


XGOYO. 


2()3 


The  population  of  this  region  is  much  more  dense     issi. 

1  1  1  •  1    r>       1  April  19. 

than  at  any  place  we  liave  seen  since  we  left  the  sea,  Kimbanza. 
but  the  people  are  unchanged  in  mood  and  temper,  all 
of  them   being   uniformly    amiable.     They   collect   in 
greater  numbers  on  the  shore  to  welcome  our  coming, 


DIAGRAM   OF   NEW   STEAMER,    "  LE   STANLEY." 

{Since  added  to  the  Flotilla  of  the  Association.     Capacity  30  Tons.') 

but  two  or  three  days  must  always  elapse  before  pro- 
visions are  brought,  and  bartering  is  in  full  swing. 

On  the  19  th  of  i^pril  I  left  Kimbanza  islet  with  the 
last  load  on  board  the  En  Avant,  at  3.45  p.m.  Tn  order 
to  clear  the  island  in  one  trip  I  had  greatly  overpacked 


I    n^i 


PLAN   OF   STEAMER. 


the  little  paddle-steamer,  which,  carrying  thirty-three 
men  and  two  tons  of  goods,  arrived  at  Ngoyo  at  0.53, 
in  a  rain-storm,  and  thick  black  clouds  which  threatened 
worse  weather.  Tired  as  I  was,  a  sick  engineer  demanded 
my  attention,  and  tlic  querulousness  of  others  of  ques- 
tional )]c  humour  considerably  increased  my  anxieties. 


264  THE   CONGO. 

1S81.         On  the  27tli  of  April  we  were  all  gathered  together 

April  27.  .  .  , 

xdunga,  ^^  the  NduDga  Rapids  in  the  gusty,  windy  trough 
where  the  Congo  is  pent  in  between  steep  sterile 
slopes,  which  show  not  the  slightest  trace  of  humanity. 
Were  it  not  for  the  all-absorbing  duties  which  require 
undivided  attention  from  the  grey  dawn  to  darkness, 
we  should  long  ago  have  surrendered  to  the  depression 
which  such  bleak  and  dreary  scenes  are  well  calculated 
to  produce.  Those  less  interested,  or  those  whose  minds 
were  not  so  fully  occupied  as  my  own,  have  long  been 
victims  to  shivering  and  chill  attacks  and  fever.  Xeve 
the  engineer  has  been  seriously  ill ;  the  two  military 
officers  have  suffered  lapses,  one  after  another ;  3'oung 
Albert  has  been  seen  with  his  eyes  less  bright ;  Flamini 
more  melancholy  than  ever.  Only  Captain  Anderson 
and  myself  have  as  yet  been  proof  against  the  malignant 
influences  prevailing  in  the  depths  of  the  gloomy  trough 
of  the  Congo.  It  is  past  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning 
before  the  sunshine  lights  up  the  river's  sombre  face ; 
at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  sunshine  has  gone. 
Then  the  winds  blow  chilly,  the  shadows  become 
deeper,  a  grey  spectral-like  solemnity  steals  over  the 
gorge  ;  and  from  a  light  bronze,  reflecting  numberless 
gleams  and  sparkles,  the  river  has  assumed  a  dull,  black 
hue.  All  of  these  aspects  combined  might  well  serve  to 
intensify  suicidal  thoughts  in  diseased  imaginations. 

I  marvel  not  at  tlie  utter  abandonment  of  the  Congo 
gorge.  Nature  has  begrudged  life — animal  as  well 
as  vegetable — to  the  scene.  Bare  rocks  and  naked, 
dull-red   clays,    coarse    grasses   and    worthless    scrub, 


XDUNGA   DAXCING.  2G5 

hanging  on  to  small  patches  of  humus,  cannot  offer  any     issi. 

.     .  April  "27. 

attraction  to  human  beings.  The  aborigines  have  ^dunga. 
therefore  abandoned  the  churlish  gorge,  and  contentedly 
settled  themselves  on  the  open  uplands  tliree  hundred 
yards  above  the  lonely  stream,  where  they  can  view  the 
sun  coming  fast  on  the  heels  of  night,  and  hear  the  birds 
sing,  and  feel  the  warmth  of  vivid  life  inspired  anew 
with  the  fulness  of  the  day. 

Ndunga's  people  came  down  from  their  hill-tops  and 
u|)lands  to  give  us  a  great  demonstration — the  women 
with  their  treasures  of  eatables,  the  children  with 
basketfuls  of  sweet  potatoes  and  eggs ;  the  men  with 
j^alm-wine  and  dried  minnows  ;  the  fishermen,  whose 
baskets  were  swinging  in  the  current  of  the  ruffled 
water  near  their  shore,  with  fresh  fish.  A  market  was 
extemporised,  which  was  well  attended ;  and  after  a  few 
hours  of  lively  barter  none  of  the  youths  and  maidens, 
all  fleshy  and  lithesome  creatures,  were  loth  to  show 
us  specimens  of  Ndunga  dancing.  Their  performances 
were  very  clever  considered  from  a  native  standpoint. 
It  was  barbarous,  of  course,  when  compared  with  Euro- 
pean art ;  but  the  leaping  and  prancing  and  Pyrrhic 
movements  were  thoroughly- —even  with  earnestness — 
done.  The  finale,  however,  was  curious.  While  tliey 
danced  they  joined  hands  and  formed  a  circle,  as  though 
they  were  about  to  sing  '  Auld  lang  syne.'  Two  de- 
tached themselves  from  the  crowd  without,  and  entered 
the  circle ;  the  youngest  climbed  up  on  the  shoulders 
of  his  companion,  unsheatlied  a  sliarp  knife,  and  tlieii 
led  out   a   loud   chorus.     AVlien  the  chorus  sang  out 


266  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     loudest,  eacli  time  he  drew  tlie  knife's  ede'e  down  the 

April  27.  .  .  *  _ 

xdunga.  length  of  his  tongue  until  tlie  blood  began  to  drip,  and 
his  jaws  were  covered  with  blood.  Hiirher  and  hi2:lier 
sang  the  choru?,  quicker  and  quicker  revolved  the 
circle,  and  more  frantic  and  daring  became  tlie  bloody- 
tongued  youngster,  until,  fearing  that  they  might  lose 
all  control  over  themselves,  the  signal  to  stop  was 
given,  and  the  dancers  were  made  happy  with  gifts. 
When  the  self-mutilated  youngster  had  washed  himself 
he  seemed  none  the  worse  for  his  extraordinary  excite- 
ment, and  softly  laughed  as  I  patted  him  on  the  back 
and  dismissed  him  with  his  reward. 

On  the  28th  of  April,  while  the  goods  were  being- 
conveyed  across  a  low  terrace  from  one  baylet  below 
to  another  above  the  Xdunga  Rapids,  to  assist  the 
steamers,  which  had  to  cross  the  river  at  this  place 
in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  smoother  water  on 
the  north  shore — I  ascended  in  the  whale-boat  as  far 
as  Manyanga,  even  up  to  the  foot  of  the  cataract.  I 
knew  that  the  cataract  was  impassable,  but  we  were 
now  Hearing  the  conclusion  of  our  river  journey,  and  it 
was  necessary  to  decide  upon  the  site  of  the  station  to 
be  established. 

A  more  lifeless,  cheerless,  unlovely  scene  than  that 
around  Manyanga  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  conceive. 
The  slopes  of  the  upland,  which  rises  on  either  side 
500  feet  above  the  river,  are  extremely  steep,  in  some 
places  even  precipitous.  All  the  soil  on  which  vegeta- 
tion might  thrive  seems  to  be  washed  clean  off  the  red 
clay  down  to  a  narrow  terrace,  or  into  the  depths  of  the 


"  TO-MOBROW   WE  SHALL   NOT   WOBK."  267 

narrow  ravines,  where  we  see  dark  lines  of  trees.  Where     issi. 

April  2S. 

tliese  slopes  run  slieer  down  to  the  Congo  we  have  only  >,Munga. 
masses  of  grit-stone  piled  one  above  another  in  admir- 
able disorder.  A  few  projecting  points  of  these  rocks 
have  permitted  a  broad  deposit  of  white  sand  to  fill 
np  indentations  in  the  shore,  which,  enriched  by  soil 
from  above,  have  become  fertile  terraces.  It  was  at  one 
of  these,  nearest  the  cataracts,  that  I  proposed  to  settle 
my  camp  initil  we  could  decide  where  we  should  build 
the  station — whether  on  the  terrace  or  upon  some  avail- 
able hill  near.  Since  Vivi  and  Isangila  were  on  the 
north  bank  of  course  I  "wished  to  continue  the  chain  of 
stations  on  that  bank,  so  that,  in  case  of  accidents  to 
boats,  communication  might  be  continued  by  land.  On 
the  terrace  nearest  to  the  cataract  a  group  of  fisher- 
men were  seated,  and  with  these  people  I  commenced 
a  conversation  to  test  their  good-will.  Old  memories 
were  revived  in  a  brief  time.  They  remembered  the 
white  man  and  his  many  canoes,  whom  they  had 
assisted  over  the  cataract  of  Xtombo  Mataka,  as  it  is 
called.  They  brought  us  a  present  of  fish,  and  promised 
til  at  provisions  should  be  got  ready  by  next  day. 
When  asked  where  we  might  camp,  they  indicated  that 
it  was  immaterial — anywhere  in  the  neighbourhood  we 
should  find  suitable. 

My  interpreter  said  to  me,  after  we  had  begun  our 
return  to  Ndunga,  that  he  heard  one  woman  say  to 
another,  "  Oh,  to-morrow  we  shall  not  work — we  shall 
see  the  strangers." 

At  0  A.M.  of  the  2nth  we  commenced  the  final  stau'e  of 


268  TEE   COXCW. 

1881.     the  river  work,  aud  to  remove  omv  personml  and  materiel 

April  29.  , 

isianvanga.  ^^  ^^^  higliest  terracs  nearest  the  cataract  oi  Manyanga. 
The  landing-place  was  all  we  could  wi.sh  it  to  be  at  this 
season — a  calm  haven,  shielded  from  the  currents  by 
a  sedge-covered  bank.  The  terrace  sloped  smoothly 
to  the  river,  which  would  be  admirable  for  us  when  we 
should  have  to  haul  the  En  Avant  for  her  overland 
journey  to  Stanley  Pool,  or  when  the  station  chief 
should  wish  to  haul  up  his  boats  for  repairs  or  for 
painting.  The  fertile  ledge  where  we  proposed  to 
lodge  ourselves  temporarily — the  more  I  looked  at  it 
the  more  promising  it  appeared,  though  it  had  the 
disadvantage  of  being  cultivated.  In  length  it  might 
be  over  a  mile,  while  its  breadth  varied  from  80  to  300 
yards.  A  small  perennial  brooklet  close  by  appeared 
to  promise  drinkable  water.  For  temporary  tenting 
ground  there  was  an  uncultivated  space  which,  when 
cleared,  proved  sufficiently  large. 

Captain  Anderson  and  Albert  were  appointed  to  the 
Royal  and  En  Avant  to  continue  the  transport  of  the 
camj),  while  I  waited  for  two  of  the  headmen  who  had 
been  requested  to  visit  me.  About  mid-day  two  head- 
men appeared,  called  Xakussa  and  Luamba.  They 
were  liberal  witli  their  offers  of  prdrn-wine,  which,  as 
u.sual  on  such  occasions,  they  drank.  In  return  they 
received  coats,  whole  pieces  of  cloth,  knives,  &c. 

I  then  hinted  that  I  might  like  to  settle  permanently 
at  Manyanga,  and  to  build  a  tow^h  where  I  might  leave 
my  men  and  goods  w^hile  I  visited  up  river.  They  did 
not  appear  to  be  very  elated  at  the  prospect,  and  the 


A   DOUBTFUL   BECEPTIOX.  209 

utmost  encouragement  that  I  conld  o-et  from  them  was     issi. 

,   .  ^     .  April  29. 

the  assurance  that  there  was  no  objection  to  our  stay-  :i[aavan<ra. 
ing  where  we  were  for  the  present.     They  were  not 
nearly  so  genial  in  manner  as  the  natives  of  Ndunga. 

When  asked  if  they  were  the  only  chiefs  of  ]Man- 
yanga,  they  said  that  the  chiefs  were  all  dead  ;  sickness 
had  killed  them  all — at  which  we  expressed  fitting 
sympathy.  Everything  that  our  experience  suggested 
proved  unavailing,  however_,  in  the  effort  to  evoke 
those  signs  of  hearty  friendship  which  we  had  met 
with  at  Xdunga  and  elsewhere.  Still,  though  not  so 
successful  as  to  enable  me  forthwith  to  send  carriers 
down  the  river  with  despatches  to  announce  that  we 
were  about  to  l3uild  our  central  depot,  we  had  sufficient 
grounds  for  believing  that,  beyond  a  vague  distrust 
of  us,  there  were  no  reasons  to  anticipate  a  serious 
opposition  to  the  building  of  our  station  in  the  district. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  day  of  May,  1881,  we 
had  completed  the  transfer  of  the  camp  from  Ndunga 
to  Manyanga. 

Thus  we  had  completed  within  seventy  days  a  total 
journey  of  24G4  English  statute  miles,  by  ascending 
and  descending  the  various  reaches  from  camp  to  camp 
in  fourteen  round  voyages,  the  entire  distance  of 
eighty-eight  miles  of  navigable  water  that  extends 
lietween  the  cataract  of  Isangila  and  the  cataract  of 
Xtombo  Mataka,  abreast  of  the  district  of  Manyanga. 
We  were  now  140  miles  above  Yivi,  to  accomplish 
wliich  distance  we  had  Ijeen  employed  43  G  days  in 
road-making  and    in    conveying   fifty   tons   of  goods 


270  THE   CONGO. 

1881.  with  a  force  of  sixty-eight  Zanzibaris  and  an  equal 
Manyanga.  i^umber  of  West  Coast  and  inland  natives.  During 
this  period  we  had  travelled  4816  English  miles  which 
divided  by  the  number  of  days  occupied  in  this  heavy 
transport  work  gives  a  quotient  of  over  eleven  miles 
per  day ! 

Between  us  and  our  destination  at  Stanley  Pool  we 
estimated  that  there  were  ninety-five  English  miles  still 
to  be  accomplished  in  the  face  of  similar  difficulties. 
For,  thouQ-h  I  intended  to  leave  about  three-fourths  of 
the  goods  at  the  Manyanga  station,  which  would  be  a 
kind  of  a  base  for  us,  yet,  as  I  should  have  to  leave 
a  garrison  behind  me  out  of  a  number  already  too 
limited,  our  difiSculties  would  not  be  much  lessened 
unless  we  could  engage  natives  along  the  route  to 
assist  us.  My  experience  of  the  kindly  natives 
between  the  Pool  and  Manyanga  in  1877  buoyed  me 
up  in  the  hope  I  now  indulged,  otherwise  my  position 
would  have  been  dismal  indeed. 


THE  APPROACH    OF  FEVEB.  271 


CHAPTER  XIY. 

FEVER    AT    MANYANGA. 

I  am  jDrostrated  by  fever — Preparing  for  death — Awakening  to  life — 
A  voracious  appetite — Joyful  news — Eeinforcements  from  Zanzibar 
— Lindner's  arrival — Agreement  with  the  chiefs  of  Manyanga — 
Erecting  the  station. 

To   whatever   it   was  owing — whether   to    the   chilly     issi. 

^lay  1. 

currents   of  wind   that   came  rushing  up   the  Congo  ^^lauvang 

gorge  day  after  day,  or  to  the  long-continued  exposure 

to  the  heat  of  the  fierce  sun  reflected  from  the  rocks,  or 

to  the  long  strain  on  my  system  that  this  continually 

harassing    work    had    caused,    or  to    the    cold    season 

which  annually  recurs  about  this  time  just  at  the  close 

of  the  rainy  season,  I  was  in  doubt, — but  four  days  after 

my  arrival  at  Manyanga,  I  felt  feverish.     My  illness 

on  tlie  fii'st  day   was  so  slight,   however,  that  it  did 

not  prevent  me  from  attending  an  important  palaver, 

at  which  I  obtained  a  promise  from  all  the  principal 

chiefs  of  Manyanga  district,  assembled   in  the  camp, 

tliat  at  anotlier  meeting  perhaps  a  definite  agreement 

about  settlement  in  Manyanga  would  be  arrived  at. 

On  the  0th  of  May  my  fever  returned  with  a  greater 
severity,  which  compelled  rae  to  keep  to  my  bed,  and 


272  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     tLe  chiefs,  not  Leing  able  to  see  me,  returned  to  their 
ManvaD<'a.  ^^^^   villages    Avithout    the    satisfaction   of   an    inter- 
view. 

The  next  day  the  fever  returned  with  still  greater 
virulence,  and  to  prevent  its  recurring  attacks  medicine 
seemed  to  he  useless.  I  had  enjoyed  about  twelve  full 
months  of  almost  uninterrupted  good  health,  and  this 
fever  appeared  to  me  to  be  too  slow  in  its  advance  to 
call  for  more  than  a  renewed  application  of  the  usual 
remedies  adopted  in  such  cases.  To  say  the  truth,  I 
was  more  exasperated  at  its  recurrence  at  such  an  un- 
lucky period  than  alarmed  at  the  persistence  and  the 
unyielding  nature  of  the  attack  ;  but  on  the  next  day, 
despite  potions  and  heavy  doses  of  medicine,  the  system 
was  not  relieved,  and  the  fever  advanced  each  twenty- 
four  hours  with  increased  virulence. 

On  the  9th  of  May  I  was  attacked  with  nausea, 
and  througliout  the  day  the  fever  burned  within  my 
veins  without  any  intermission,  although  I  watched 
my  state  intently,  to  take  advantage,  if  any  offered,  of 
the  slightest  pause,  Believing  that  the  terrace  was  per- 
haps too  close  for  a  sick  man,  I  caused  my  tent  to  be 
pitched  on  the  summit  of  a  hill  280  feet  above  the  river, 
and  commanding  the  terrace  on  which  the  camp  was 
situated.  But  the  seventh  day  of  the  fever  advanced, 
and  still  there  were  no  signs  of  remission,  until  the 
morning  of  the  eighth  day,  when  I  seized  the  opportunity 
of  taking  twenty  grains  of  quinine  dissolved  in  some 
hydrobromic  acid,  which  was  happily  retained  in  the 
stomach  without  a  qualm.     The  effect  of  this  powerful 


^.V  INCBEASING   FEVEIL  273 

dose  was  to  disturb   my   thoughts     and    clearness   of     issi. 

May  11. 
1^1^*^^'  Manyanga. 

On  the  eighth  day  of  the  fever,  wlieii  I  recovered  con- 
sciousness, I  became  convinced  that  I  was  exceedingly 
weak ;  but,  as  the  attack  might  recommence  shortly,  I 
caused  thirty  grains  of  quinine  to  be  weighed  out,  and 
when  mixed  up  with  the  acid  for  immediate  solution  I 
greedily  drank  the  medicine — and  not  a  whit  too  soon, 
for  again  I  became  unconscious  of  my  surroundings,  save 
a  certain  vague  indefiniteness  on  which  no  reliance 
could  be  placed. 

For  six  days  longer  the  fever  still  kept  on  unrelent- 
ingly. There  were,  each  twenty-four  hours,  short 
pauses  of  intermission,  during  which  I  was  clearly 
awake  and  alive  to  everything  uttered  in  my  hearing. 
But  these  pauses  were  too  curtailed  to  admit  of  more 
than  the  grim  impression  of  the  fact  that  I  was  very 
ill ;  that  I  was  exceedingly  weak,  almost  alone  on  the 
hill-top,  having  only  little  Mabruki  and  Dualla  to  attend 
to  me  ;  that  ]\I.  Braconnier  once  a  day  called  to  see 
me  to  suggest  some  new  remedy,  the  value  of  a  little 
broth,  or  a  beaten  ^%'g^  and  the  pressing  necessity  tliat 
existed  to  take  larger  and  larger  doses  of  quinine,  in 
the  tenacious  faith  tliat  it  alone  would  arrest  the 
terrible  malady. 

But  on  the  fourteenth  day  I  was  so  weak  that  1  could 
scarcely  lift  my  arms,  and  to  sit  up  in  bed  was  impos- 
sible without  support.  Limp  and  nerveless,  I  lay  to  be 
lifted,  turned,  or  moved  by  the  young  negroes,  to  whom, 
though  I  felt  grateful  for  their  services,  I  was  con- 

YOL.  r.  T 


274  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     vinced  I  was  gradually  becomino*  exceedino-ly  tedious. 

May  18.  .    .  "  .  . 

Manyanga.  Aiid  after  the  mediciiie,  wLiicU  Ijad  now  risen  to  fifty 
grains  of  quinine,  had  been  taken  my  head  would  be 
laid  on  the  pillow  to  hear  the  hard  throbbing-  in 
my  head  reyerberated  through  the  pillow  like  a  loud 
beating  of  a  drum,  until,  losing  consciousness,  I  was 
obliyious  to  my  pains  and  protracted  infirmity. 

On  the  20th  of  May,  about  7  a.m.,  my  sickness  and 
weakness  seemed  to  have  approached  a  climax.  As 
soon  as  I  woke  to  clearness  of  mind  and  realised  the 
dreadful  prostration  of  my  body,  a  presentiment  pos- 
sessed me  that  I  should  die.  Weaker  tljan  this,  and 
yet  possessing  powers  of  speech  and  thought,  I  doubted 
whether  man  could  possibly  be,  with  which  idea  came 
the  thought  that  the  crisis  had  arrived,  and  that  death 
was  not  far  off.  Then  came  an  urgent  desire  to  pay 
the  last  offices  of  friendship  and  regard  which  I  am 
eager  to  perform,  if  little  Mabruki  will  hasten  to  call  up 
the  people — European  and  Zanzibaris — to  me.  Dualla 
meantime  has  weighed  out  sixty  grains  of  quinine, 
over  whicli  he  has  dropped  a  few  minims  of  hydro- 
bromic  acid,  and  poured  an  ounce  of  Madeira  wine, 
which  he  must  deliver  between  my  lips,  for  if  all 
the  world  were  given  to  me  I  could  not  lift  the  glass 
unaided. 

Like  lightning  the  potent  medicine  courses  through 
mv  veins.  I  feel  its  overpowering  influence  stealing 
rapidly  over  my  fast  bewildering  senses,  and  I  beg 
Dualla  to  hasten  up  the  people  before  it  will  be  too 
late. 


*^ 


PnEPABING   FOB   DEATH.  275 

In  a  short  time  there  is  a  rush  of  many  feet  round  the     issi. 

May  20. 

tent.  Tlie  walls  of  the  tent  are  lifted  up.  I  can  see  a  Manyanga. 
bright  yet  cold  sunshine  on  the  semi-circular  rows  of 
seated  forms  around.  My  European  comrades  advance 
to  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  I  struggle  hard  to  recall 
my  fleeting  senses  to  address  and  to  advise  them  what 
they  should  do  when  all  would  be  over.  My  thoughts 
seemed  to  be  distracted  between  my  strong  desire  to 
say  something  intelligible,  and  a  strange  penitent 
brooding  over  a  hollowed  grave  somewhere  which 
drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  me,  wdiile  in  the  far  distance 
there  burned  a  great  white  light,  wdiose  bright  glowing- 
globe  attracted  me  despite  my  utmost  effort  to  concen- 
trate my  attention  on  the  silent  and  expectant  throng. 
Again  and  yet  again  I  strove  strenuously  to  utter  the 
words  that  my  lips  would  not  frame. 

"  Look  well  on  me,  Albert,"  I  cried.  "  Do  not  move. 
Fasten  your  eyes  on  me  that  I  may  tell  you." 

And  the  young  sailor,  whose  hand  clasped  mine,  fixed 
his  eyes  steadily  on  mine  to  enable  me  to  conquer  the 
oppressive  drowsiness,  and  the  sentence  was  at  last, 
after  many  efforts,  delivered  clearly  and  intelligently,  at 
which  I  felt  so  relieved  from  my  distress  that  I  cried 
out,  "  I  am  saved !  "  Then  suddenly  a  dark  cloud  came 
over  me,  the  perception  of  the  scene  faded  away, 
and  oblivion  which  lasted  many  hours  shut  out  the 
sense  of  things. 

When  I  woke  next  day  I  found  that  I  had  lain  for 
twenty-four  hours  in  one  position,  for  my  weakness  was 
so  great  that  unaided  I  could  not  have  moved.     ^Fy 

T  2 


276  TEE  CONGO. 

1881.     back  seemed  to  be  palsied,  and  bed-sores  tormented 

May  21.  ^  ' 

Manyanga.  mc^  but  Oil  waking  I  little  recked  of  these  tilings.  I 
felt  a  desire  to  eat,  and  a  repugnance  to  medicine.  I 
abandoned  all  idea  of  contesting  the  influences  of  the 
fever  further.  I  was  ready  without  further  care  to 
submit  to  the  inevitable ;  but  I  would  eat,  and  Ma- 
bruki's  astonishment  was  very  great  when  I  asked  him 
for  soup.  M.  Braconnier,  being  called  by  my  little  ser- 
vant, recommended  jjotacjey  and  was  good  enough  to 
assist  Mabruki  in  its  preparation.  In  an  hour  or  so 
the  boys  were  called  upon  for  some  more,  and  an  in- 
cipient voracity  was  noticeable.  Hours  glided  by, 
and  the  fever  did  not  return,  therefore  more  soup 
was  demanded.  M.  Braconnier  warned  me  to  be 
careful,  but  Dualla  and  Mabruki  did  not  heed  his 
warning.  Unprincipled  youths !  they  smuggled  into 
my  tent  various  little  luxuries  picked  up  some- 
where, and  the  stomach  was  untiring  in  its  powers 
of  digestion. 

On  the  30th  of  May  I  am  so  far  removed  from  danger 
that  Dualla  and  Mabruki  were  my  sole  visitors  and 
attendants.  Their  energies  as  well  as  my  own  were 
devoted  to  the  renewal  of  strength  in  the  worn-out  and 
feeble  frame.  But,  alas  !  although  the  Ijody  is  soon 
weakened  by  illness,  it  requires  a  long  time  to  re- 
cuperate ;  and,  although  the  period  is  relieved  by  the 
frequent  pleasures  of  eating  and  digestion,  it  is  still 
tedious. 

On  this  day,  however,  I  was  so  far  recovered  that 
I   caused   mvself  to  be  carried  round    on   a  visit   to 


/ 


REINFOBCEMENTS  AERIVE.  277 

mv  people  in  the  camp  below,  which  I  believed  to  be     issi. 

June  4. 

productive  of  great  benefit  to  me.  Maayanga. 

By  the  2nd  of  June  I  was  strong  enough  to  be  able 
to  sit  in  a  chair  under  the  awning  of  my  tent,  clad 
warmly  in  a  heavy  ulster. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  I  was  gladdened  at  the 
sight  of  the  whale-boat  coming  up  the  river  from  Isan- 
gila,  whither  I  was  told  it  had  departed  twenty  days 
previously.  At  the  landing-place  little  Mabruki  met 
it,  and  presently  came  hurrying  back  with  the  glorious 
news  that  a  large  body  of  recruits  had  come  from 
Zanzibar ;  and  that  a  small  body  of  picked  men,  headed 
by  a  young  German  named  Lindner,  was  already  close 
at  hand,  and  would  probably  arrive  at  Manyanga  in  a 
day  or  two. 

A  thrill  of  joy  at  the  good  news  filled  every  breast, 
especially  mine.  Oh,  what  labour,  what  anxiety  had 
been  saved  had  this  relief  arrived  earlier  !  Now  indeed 
did  it  seem  possible  to  joerform  something.  Only 
now  did  a  final  success  appear  in  a  clear  light.  For. 
although  not  even  to  myself  would  I  permit  a  doubt 
of  an  ultimate  happy  issue  to  the  immense  labour 
I  had  undertaken,  the  event  seemed  to  be  so  far  dis- 
tant that  at  times  it  was  almost  beyond  the  hojoe  of 
realisation. 

I  was  at  this  time  an  atom — scarcely  weighing 
100  lbs. !  My  lower  limbs  were  mere  sticks  supporting 
a  feeble,  weak  body,  to  which  the  few  paces  from  the 
bed  to  the  chair  appeared  an  immense  labour.  Yet  the 
mails  on  my  lap,  six  months  old,  contained  new  tasks 


278  THE   COS  (JO. 

1881.     that  would  require  an  aniiy  to  accomplish  !    "With  a  sick 
Manvan^a.  mau's  querulousuess  I  pushed  them  aside,  and  dared  not 
look  at  them  lest  I  should  become  mad. 

The  next  day  Mr.  Lindner  appeared  with  twenty-four 
men,  some  of  whom  were  ancient  comrades  of  mine,  and 
at  A'ivi  there  were  forty-six  more,  stout,  well-chosen 
fellows.  They  were  heartily  welcome ;  and  the  camp 
was  quickly  enlivened  by  the  recruits,  who  had  abun- 
dance of  news  to  impart  to  the  people  who  had  been 
so  long  absent  from  Zanzibar. 

On  the  11th  of  June  Mr.  Lindner  departed  for  Isan- 
gila  with  the  En  Avanf,  Royal,  and  two  steel  boats,  to 
convey  the  remainder  of  the  relief  expedition  at  once 
to  the  front. 

Meantime,  strength  returning  to  me,  on  the  12th  I 
began  to  prepare  for  my  journey  to  Stanley  Pool.  But 
there  was  a  host  of  duties  to  perform  preliminary  to  any 
forward  movement.  First  a  contract  was  to  be  made 
with  the  chiefs  of  Manyanga,  a  site  was  to  be  decided 
upon  for  the  new  station,  new  tents  were  to  be  made,  as 
our  old  ones  had  already  endured  through  four  rainy 
seasons,  a  road  had  to  be  constructed  round  the  Man- 
yanga  Cataract  to  convey  the  boats  to  be  floated  above. 
While  the  steamers  Avere  absent  bringing  up  the  relief 
partv,  we  might  employ  ourselves  in  assisting  to  build 
the  new  station,  for  nothing  had  been  performed  while 
I  was  prostrated  by  illness. 

Ample  time  had  been  given  to  the  chiefs  of  ^lan- 
yanga  to  ponder  upon  the  proposals  I  had  made  on 
my  arrival,  so  that  it  needed  but  a  signal  to  inform 


ROAB   MAKIXG.  279 

them  of  rav  readiness  to  close  the  arrangements.     These     issi. 

June  11. 

did  not,  therefore,  occupy  verv  long.  A  satisfactory  Manyanga 
contract  was  entered  into  by  which  I  obtained  the  choice 
of  a  site,  and  a  large  acreage  of  hill-slope  and  terrace 
to  build  upon  and  cultivate  to  my  heart's  content. 
Throughout  the  entire  district  of  Manyanga,  however, 
but  little  ground  is  available  for  cultivation  in  the 
nei2:hbourhood  of  the  river. 

M.  Braconnier  was  detailed  for  road-making.  M. 
Harou  was  commissioned  to  commence  buildino-  on 
the  hill,  whereon  I  had  spent  so  many  days  in  the 
lone  tent^  which  commanded  the  terrace  and  landing- 
place  below. 

After  twenty-two  days'  work  the  wagon  road,  fifteen 
feet  wide  and  six  miles  in  length,  was  completed  to  a 
landing-place  above  the  cataract,  and  the  pioneer  force 
was  directed  to  assist  in  the  construction  of  the  station. 
The  labour  of  levelling  the  ground  was  very  great,  but 
it  was  finally  rendered  habitable  and  presentable.  The 
timber  was  procured  from  a  wooded  gorge  at  the  bottom 
of  which  a  streamlet  flowed  ;  the  distance  to  it  was  not 
more  than  two  miles,  but  the  toil  of  conveying  the  logs 
to  the  ground  was  exceedingly  arduous. 

The  boiler-wagon  needed  many  repairs,  and  black- 
sraithing  was  one  of  the  handicrafts  that  I  was  called 
upon  to  perform. 

Then  the  new  tents  had  to  be  cut  by  myself,  and  Albert 
was  converted  into  a  sailmaker.  During  the  interval 
we  waited  for  the  long-delayed  boats,  a  strong  magazine 
was  erected,  with  corrugated  iron  walls,  pierced  here 


280  THE   CONGO. 

1881.  and  there  with  port-holes  for  musketry,  in  case  of  any 
.Aianyanga.  defence  being  required.  For  although  there  was  not 
much  fear  of  hostility  from  tlie  natives,  less  anxiety 
would  naturally  be  experienced  through  a  greater 
sense  of  security  that,  unless  affairs  were  very  much 
mismanaged,  hostility  would  be  powerless  to  effect 
much  harm. 


TURBULENT  MARKETING.  281 


CHAPTER  XY. 

A   RECONXAISSANCE    TO    STANLEY    POOL. 

An  outrage  upon  custom,  and  its  result — Turl)ulent  marketing — Death  of 
M.  Neve— Letter  respecting  the  support  of  3Ianyanga — On  the  march 
to  Stanley  Pool — Eeception  by  natives — A  boy  drowned — Bwabwa 
Njali,  a  dissembling  chief — Native  pomp — Malameen  appears,  bear- 
ing the  French  tricolour — A  treaty  regarding  territory — The  Gordon 
Bennett — Mfwa — Malima — Gamankono,  an  old  acquaintance — In- 
stance of  retentive  memory — "  We  are  all  kings  " — Arrival  of  Mala- 
meen, whose  fables  alarm  the  villagers  —  Friendship  supplanted 
by  hate — Forced  retirement  from  Malima — Evil  news  precedes  us 
— Stopped  by  an  armed  crowd  —  "  Tanley,  Tanley ! "  —  A  timely 
arrival. 

On  tlie  25tli  of  June  a   curious  incident  occurred  at     i88L 

June  1'k 

the  market  of  Manyanga  which  was  held  every  week,  ^yianyanga 
A  man  bought  a  goat,  and,  contrary  to  custom,  at- 
tempted to  resell  it  the  ^ame  day  in  the  same  market, 
which  was  considered  such  an  outrage  upon  custom  that 
the  public  indignation  was  aroused,  to  be  vented  upon 
the  goat  and  a  couple  of  pigs.  These  animals  were  cut 
to  pieces  and  distributed  round  the  market-place,  and 
not  until  a  general  smash-ui^  of  gourds  of  palm-wine 
Ijfid  taken  place  was  tlie  public  anger  sufliciently 
allayed. 

Every  other  day  a  market  is  held  in  the  neighbour- 


282.  THE   CONGO. 

issi.     hood  of  the  station,  on  various  hill-sumraits,  but  the 

June  25.  •  •  i      i  f«  -i 

Manyanga.  great  ManyangR  market  is  held  inland  about  five  miles 
from  the  station.  It  was  once  very  well  attended,  but 
it  is  not  so  now,  several  outbreaks  having  occurred  of 
late  years  to  render  the  attendance  at  it  less  numerous. 
Slaves,  ivory,  rubber,  oil,  pigs,  sheep,  and  goats  and 
fowls  were  plentifully  brought  for  sale  by  the  vast  con- 
course of  buyers  and  sellers  that  had  gathered  from  the 
country  for  many  miles  around.  Native  copper  was 
also  largely  for  sale.  Caravans  from  the  coast  bound 
for  Stanley  Pool  found  here  a  ready  exchange  for  their 
cloths  and  beads,  and  purchased  copper  and  wire  in 
enormous  quantities  to  suit  the  tastes  of  the  up-river 
people,  while  tons  of  cassava  bread  and  vegetables  were 
quickly  disposed  of.  But  prosperity  rendered  the  dis- 
trict tribe  and  chiefs  insolent.  Ruptures  became  fre- 
quent, the  slightest  pretext  serving  often  to  cause 
dispersion,  and  immediate  flight  of  the  market  people 
to  save  themselves  from  violence.  Even  durins:  the 
two  months  that  I  remained  there  our  own  people  were 
witnesses  of  many  an  outrageous  scene ;  and,  to  escape 
being  involved  in  fracases,  had  to  fly  away,  not  always 
with  impunity.  It  may  be  that  some  of  them  were 
not  guiltless  of  offence,  but,  as  no  accusers  ever  appeared 
against  them,  I  could  only  deliver  a  stern  warning  and 
bid  them  beware  of  the  consequences  if  any  charges 
were  brought  against  them  for  violence  and  mis- 
conduct. 

At  last,  after  an  extraordinary  delay,  dinging  whicli 
we  had  been  victims  to  fear  and  anxiety  as  to  what  bad 


DEATH   OF  J/.   PAUL   NEVE.  283 

befallen   the   boats,  the   steel  whale-boat   appeared  in     issi. 

Julv. 

sight,  and  shortly  after  landed  a  letter  from  Mr.  Lind-  Manyanga 
ner,  which  contained  the  distressing  intelligence  that 
M.  Paul  Neve,  engineer  of  the  En  Avant,  had  succumbed 
to  a  severe  attack  of  bilious  fever  at  Isangila  on  the 
26th  of  June.  This  was  the  second  fatal  termination  to 
illness  amongst  the  pioneer  expedition  during  a  term  of 
sixteen  months  of  unexampled  labour  and  privations. 
Like  the  case  of  the  sailor  Martinson  in  1880,  this  death 
had  also  occurred  during  the  cold  season  of  May,  June, 
and  July.  ^ly  own  serious  illness  in  1880  had  also 
occurred  in  June,  and  at  the  commencement  of  this 
year's  cold  season  I  had  again  been  prostrated  by  a 
much  more  severe  attack.  The  only  fatal  case  amongst 
the  Zanzibaris  occurred  during  last  year's  cold  season. 

On  the  14th  of  July  the  steamers  and  the  other  steel 
lighter  appeared,  conveying  the  long  expected  relief 
party,  including  Mr.  Louis  Yalcke  and  two  Germans, 
a  clerk  and  an  engineer.  The  news  from  Yivi  was 
very  satisfactory,  and,  in  accordance  with  my  instruc- 
tions, a  station  was  being  successfully  founded  at 
Isangila  under  Lieutenant  Eugene  Janssen,  a  young- 
Belgian  officer  just  arrived. 

The  following  quotations  from  a  letter  to  the  Comite 
about  this  time  will  serve  to  furnish  specific  informa- 
tion regarding  the  support  of  j\Ianyanga  during  my 
absence  up  river  : — 

"  Yon  will  oltserve  by  the  enclosed  list  of  gootls  and  articles  witli  wliicli 
the  station  of  Manyanga  has  been  ])rovide(l,tliat  there  is  an  abnndauce  of 
every  article  such  a  station  should  require. 


284  THE   COXGO. 

1881.  "  Par  exeinple,  I  have  left  the  following  quantity  of  cloth  for  the  i-ui- 

^^  ■      chase  of  proTisions  for  the  garrison  of  the  station : — 
Manjanga. 


"  Ordinary  striped  domestics 

.     io, GOO  yards 

Fine  cloths  . 

.     19,360     „ 

Eed  handkerchiefs 

2400     „ 

"White  domestic     . 

1200     „ 

I:ed  blanket  cloth 

700     ,, 

"  After  calculating  -with  the  utmost  liljeraUty,  I  find  that  the  chief  of 
the  station  has  over  three  years'  supplies,  supix)sing  that  the  above  cloth  is 
not  diverted  to  other  uses  than  the  purchase  of  provisions  and  wages  of 
his  jjeople.  Exclusive  of  this,  the  commandant  is  supplied  with  blue  glass 
Ijeads,  guni>owder,  muskets,  biuss  wire,  gun-stones,  &c.,  all  of  which  articles 
are  readily  saleable. 

"A  mere  perusal  of  the  tinned  provisions  left  for  Messrs.  Harou, 
Anderson,  and  Flaromi,  will  show  their  variety.  ;  In  weight  they  amount 
to  4950  lbs.  of  eatables,  enough  to  give  each  European  1  j  lbs.  of  extras  for 
three  years.  To  this  suj^ply  you  must  add  all  native  provisions  and  fresh 
meat  procurable  in  the  large  market  near  the  station,  among  which  you 
may  include  pigs,  goats,  sheep,  fowls,  yams,  sweet  potatoes,  cassava  bread, 
eggs,  bananas,  various  kinds  of  vegetables,  pine-apijles,  melons,  cucumbers, 
pumpkins,  &c.  Since  we  have  been  here  we  have  existed  on  native  pro- 
visions alone,  tea,  coffee,  milk,  butter,  and  sugar  teing  the  only  European 
articles  we  consider  indispensable. 

"  As  Manyanga  was  intended  by  me  for  a  central  deix)t,  for  which  in 
fact  it  is  particularly  adapted,  seeing  that  the  real  difficulty  of  transport 
commences  here,  you  will  observe  that  a  large  supply  of  ammunition  is 
also  stored  here.  I  scarcely  tliink  it  will  ever  be  needed  for  defence,  but  I 
never  trust  to  good  fortune. 

"Eorced  by  illness  first,  and  secondly  by  the  delay  attending  the  arrival 
of  the  relief  expedition,  I  have  employed  all  the  hands  that  were  left  at 
Manyanga  during  the  interval  to  bmld  a  spacious  and  strong  magazine 
for  the  third  station.  The  goods  are  this  day  completely  an-anged 
within.  At  present  it  serves  not  only  as  magazine  but  as  the  dwelling- 
house  for  the  three  Euror>eans  who  will  1>e  appointed  to  the  station — 
Harou  (commandant),  Anderson  (captain  of  boats),  and  Flamini  (engi- 
neer of  the  JioijaT) — until  they  have  had  time  to  constmct  their  own 
dwellings. 

"  There  is  nothing  further  that  may  delay  or  detain  me  here  longer. 
The  Ixjats  have  now  an-ived.  The  road  is  ready  as  fai-  as  the  landing- 
place  above  the  cataract.  The  chiefs  of  Manyanga  have  jiromised 
me  the  assistance  of  200  of  their  j^eople  to  assist  in  the  transport 
of  goods  from  the  station  landing-place  to  the  upper.    While  they  are- 


CONDITION  OF   THE  ENPEDITION. 


285 


"  Cloths. 
Beads. 
Wire. 

Tinned  provisions. 
Salt. 
Sugar. 
Tea. 
Coffee. 
Eice. 
Beans. 
Flour. 
Muskets. 
Engine-oil. 


Linseed-oil. 

Pickaxes. 

Shovels. 

Axes. 

Hammers. 

Crowbars. 

Adzes. 

Jack-screws. 

Tackles  and  blocks. 

Machettes. 

Hoes. 


engaged  in  the  transport  of  the  goods,  our  foreign  coloured  employes  will 
haul— 

"Waggon  Xo.  1,  conveying  En  Acant. 

„        No.  2,  „        boiler. 

,,        No.  3,         „         engine  and  plates. 

„        No.  4,         „         whale-boat. 

"  Our  goods  for  Stanley  Pool  Station  will  consist  of  560  man-loads,  con- 
sisting of — 

Forge. 

Blacksmiths'  tools. 

Anvil, 

Grindstone. 

Nails. 

Screws. 

Ammunition. 

Gunpowder. 

Medicine-chests. 

Sail-cloth. 

Cordage. 

Paints. 

Tallow. 

The  personal  baggage  of  Messrs.  Yalcke,  Braconnier,  Lindner,  Hertwig, 
Christopherson,  Mahoney,  which  amount  to  thirty-five  man-loads,  or 
nearly  a  ton. 

"  By  these  detailed  items  you  will  perhaps  better  appreciate  and  under- 
stand the  difficulties  attending  an  exi^edition  which  numbers  so  many 
Europeans  compared  to  the  very  small  number  of  coloured  men.  In- 
cluding myself,  there  are  eight  Europeans  to  only  103  foreign  coloured 
men,  and  tliirty  West  Coast  natives ;  whereas,  to  perform  creditable  work, 
there  should  be  at  least  fifty  coloured  men  to  each  European. 

"  There  are  at  present  on  the  expedition  138  coloured  foreign  employes, 
who  will  be  disposed  as  follows : — 97  to  accomiwny  advance  expedition ; 
IB  as  garrison  of  third  station — Manyanga;  8  garrison  of  Isangila;  15  as 
as  lioats'  crews. 

"  The  Jtoyul  and  stcul  lighter,  witli  their  crews,  will  maintain  the  com- 
munication between  Isangila  and  ]\Ianyanga.  The  natives  of  the  Yivi 
district  will  be  cmi)loyed,as  often  as  they  can  be  induced,  for  the  transport 
service  between  Vivi  and  Isangila. 

"  After  arrival  at  the  Pool,  communication  will  be  maintained  by  the 

relieved  force  of  pioneers  between  Manyanga  and  Stanley  Pool.    The 

En  Anint  and  lighter  will  serve  to  keep  iip  correspondence  between 

Stanley  Pool  aui.l  a  fifth  station,  established  at  some  eligible  s])ot  on  the 

>  L'ltper  Congo." 


1881. 
July, 

Manyanga. 


286  THE   CONGO. 

1881.         The  next  morning  after  the  arrival  of  the  Loats,  the 

July  15. 

iMauyanga.  forward  movemeiit  commenced  at  daylight,  210  natives 
assisting;  and  by  the  evening  of  the  19th,  goods  and 
wagons  had  been  moved  forward  six  miles,  and  the 
boats  launched  in  the  cove  above  the  Cataract. 

Herr  Lindner  proved  himself  after  a  short  acquaint- 
ance, to  possess  sufficient  practical  knowledge  to  render 
me  valuable  service.  I  felt  confidence  in  entrusting 
the  command  of  a  portion  of  the  force  to  him,  to  trans- 
port the  effects  and  wagons  by  water  to  Mpakambendi, 
distant  twenty-two  miles  from  Manyanga,  and  on 
arrival  at  the  landing-place  of  the  village  to  make  a 
wagon-road  leading  from  the  river  to  the  plateau ; 
while  I  should  lead  a  party  of  men  to  Stanley  Pool,  and 
secure  a  site  for  a  station  contiguous  to  the  point  where 
the  navigability  of  the  Upper  Congo  commenced.  Had 
I  been  fortunate  enough  to  have  secured  the  services 
of  two  such  men  as  Herr  Lindner  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  expedition,  Stanley  Pool  would  have  been 
reached  in  September,  1879  ;  but  now  there  was  no 
further  necessity  for  delaying  my  visit  to  my  friends 
in  that  region,  as  the  German  had  proved  himself  fully 
capable  to  carry  out  the  task  I  now  committed  to  him. 

Accordingly  I  set  out  with  Messrs.  Valcke  and  Bra- 
connier,  also  another  person  who  was  to  be  employed  as 
clerk  of  the  station,  should  we  be  enabled  to  secure  a 
site,  and  sufficient  goods  to  temporarily  provision  the 
place.  After  a  march  of  nine  miles,  over  a  high  land 
crossed  by  gullies  and  deep  stony  waterways,  we  camjoed 
at  Mungala  in  a  lovely  basin   nestling  cosil}^  in  the 


FRIENDLY  BECEPTION.  287 

inidst  of  tall  trees.     Durino:  the  march  we  had  passed     issi. 

Julv20. 

four  streams,    of  which    Mbika,  a  copious  clear-water  jumgaia, 
stream,  was  the  most  important. 

The  next  day  we  traversed  a  still  rougher  country, 
across  a  series  of  lofty  ridges,  separated  by  as  many 
streams  which  flowed  through  cool  forested  gorges,  and 
arrived  at  Mpakambendi,  where  I  expected  to  find 
Mr.  Lindner  on  my  return  from  Stanley  Pool. 

Continuing  our  march  on  the  third  day,  the  country 
was  discovered  to  be  much  more  regular  in  its  forma- 
tion, as  we  examined  its  adaptability  for  a  wagon  road. 
The  land  rose  and  fell  in  gentle  broadly-spreading 
waves  separated  by  wide  valleys,  at  the  bottom  of  which 
small  streams  of  clear  water  smoothly  flowed.  The 
mean  altitude,  2100  feet,  proved  that  we  were  at  least 
1500  feet  above  the  Congo.  Our  reception  along  the 
route  was  most  kindly — my  name,  which  the  natives 
had  tenaciously  remembered,  was  shouted  out  with  such 
clearness  sometimes,  that  I  half  suspected  some  of  my 
own  people  were  calling  me.  At  Zinga,  the  scene  of 
so  many  toils  in  1877,  the  excitement  was  xery  great. 
Until  deep  darkness  my  tent  was  besieged  by  the 
prying  youngsters  who  had  heard  from  their  parents, 
<loubtless,  of  the  white  man  with  the  many  canoes  who 
had  passed  down  their  wild  river. 

From  Zinga  we  marched  across  the  stream  of  the 
Edwin  Arnold,  past  palmy  Mowa,  and  over  a  healthy 
country,  whose  pure  breezes  brought  back  the  feeling 
of  health  to  my  frame.  Near  the  village  of  Nzabi, 
whose  chief  resembles  a  prominent  English  statesman, 


288  THE   cox  GO. 

1881.     there  were  crowds  avIio  entreated  us  to  stay  and  trade, 

July  23 

Xzab'i  *^  ^-'^y  palm-wine,  and  barter  cloth  lor  fowls  ;  but  we 
could  not  stay  lor  either,  for  the  spirit  of  movement 
was  on  us  now.  Xear  the  wooded  banks  of  the  Inkissi 
River  we  encamped  amid  a  whole  tribe  of  curious 
visitors. 

On  the  24th,  we  travelled  over  a  very  rough  country 
to  Msampala,  which  promised  to  give  us  great  trouble 
when  we  should  appear  with  our  heavy  wagons.  The 
people  of  Ngoma  were  very  amiable.  AVe  exchanged 
presents  with  nearly  all  those  in  authority  along  the  route 
— perhaps  because  it  was  policy  to  do  so^  and  perhaps 
because  I  met  so  many  old  acquaintances  who  renewed 
their  former  knowledge  of  me  with  unrestrained  friend- 
liness. It  was  a  marvellously  rich  country,  but  we  saw 
very  little  cultivation.  Food  was  abundant,  and  the 
natives  were  eager  to  trade. 

Between  Msampala  and  the  Mukoss  River,  where  we 
camped  on  the  25th,  the  journey  was  over  a  country" 
presenting  but  few  difficulties  to  a  wagon  road,  except 
at  the  Lubamba  River,  which  is  half-way.  The 
Lubamba  is  called  tlie  Xkenke'  at  its  confluence  with 
the  Congo,  It  is  a  rapid  stream  about  forty  yards  wide, 
and  there  is  canoe  ferriage  across  it  for  the  convenience 
of  the  numerous  caravan  traffic.  At  the  ferry  there  is 
sometimes  quite  a  gathering  of  bands  of  ivory  car- 
riers from  Stanley  Pool,  and  commodity  porters  from 
the  coast.  There  were  quite  a  number  of  people  on 
either  bank,  who  awaited  their  turn  of  ferriage  when 
we  arrived.    In  the  confusion  and  disorder — squabbling 


A   BOY  BEOWXED. 


289 


for  first  places — a  boy  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old,     issi. 

July  25 

fell  overboard  into  the  stream,  and  was  drowned.     His    jjuko'ss. 
friends  desired  to  obtain  the  body  for  burial,  but  none 
appeared   to   know   how  to    set   about   recovering   it. 
Finally  one  of  our  men  dived  into  the  stream  with  a 
cord  round  his  body,  and  brought  the  dead  boy  to  the 


CARAVAN   CROUP. 


surface.  The  body  was  received  with  a  solemn  silence  ; 
Init  there  were  no  thanks  returned. 

On  the  2Gth  we  left  the  village  of  ^lukoss  on  the 
Mukoss  River,  and  after  a  march  of  eleven  miles  reached 
Kinduta.     A  rainfall  occurred  in  the  morning,  which 

VOL.  I.  U 


290  TEE   COXGO. 

1881.     unexpected  at  this  season  in  other  parts  of  the  country, 

July  26.  ^ 

Mukoss.  may  be  attributed  to  the  extensive  woods  found  in  this 
district.  It  is  a  wonderfully  fertile  country  that  we  saw; 
every  mile  we  marched  growing  in  picturesquenessand 
worth.  Grand  sweeps  of  land,  bountifully  watered  by 
clear  streams,  well  wooded,  and  giving  valuable  promise 
to  future  comers,  met  the  eager  view  from  every  ridge 
and  uplift  of  surface.  About  three  hours  beyond  the 
Mukoss  River  we  came  to  a  square-browed  hill,  from 
whose  high  open  summit  we  saw  Stanley  Pool  far  away 
in  the  hazy  distance,  like  a  blurred  mirror  obscured  by 
gauze  set  in  a  gauze-covered  frame  of  dark  wood — 
thus  the  hazy  density  caused  by  heat  and  distance 
represented  it  to  us. 

A  long  march  of  fourteen  miles,  over  a  plain,  and 
soft  flat  spongy  boggy  country,  brought  us,  on  the 
27th,  to  Bwabwa  Njali,  a  chief  who  derives  import- 
ance and  revenue  through  his  ferry  over  the  Grordon 
Bennett,  which  flows  close  by,  east  of  his  village.  Most 
of  the  chiefs  we  have  met  have  been  kindly  common- 
place men,  but  Bwabwa  Njali  is  a  character  worth  a 
book.  He  is  an  actor — that  is,  he  is  a  man  who  affects 
to  be  what  he  is  not.  Polite  to  his  guests — let  them 
come  as  often  as  they  may — from  the  moment  he  makes 
anybody's  acquaintance,  a  systematic  approach  to  their 
affections  is  commenced  with  the  view  to  their  spolia- 
tion. He  presents  himself  to  you  as  one  who  is  as 
vain  as  a  woman,  and  as  frivolous  as  a  child ;  but  con- 
trives before  you  have  finally  parted  from  him  to 
impress  you  with  the  fact  that  he  is  an  unprincipled 


Njali 


BWABWA   NJALL  291 

roffue.  It  is  "  My  brother,  what  is  this  ?  My  brother,  1881. 
what  IS  that?  Ah,  truly,  my  brother!  rut  it  away,  Bwabwa 
good  brother.  Really  now,  has  my  brother  come  to  see 
the  country  ?  Dear,  good  brother  !  Yerily,  a  brother 
of  brothers  !  My  own  true  brother  !  "  And  thus  he 
purrs  continually  around  one,  his  eyes  wandering  about 
to  every  part  of  your  person  and  belongings. 

And  such  state  as  he  surrounds  himself  with  on  a 
stransrer's  arrival !  A  lion-skin — a  real  lion-skin — is 
spread  out,  a  fat  crimson  bolster  is  in  place  of  a  chair 
of  state,  and  a  circle  of  respectful  principals  are  seated 
around.  While  you  are  seated  expectant  of  his  ap- 
pearance, Bwabwa  Njali  is  touching  himself  up  before 
a  score  of  looking-glasses  hanging  around  the  walls  of 
his  house,  straightening  a  hair  here,  giving  another 
dab  of  ochre  on  his  cheeks  and  forehead,  a  streak  of 
yellow  under  an  eye,  a  line  of  white  under  the  other, 
the  ridge  of  his  nose  coloured  still  darker  with 
powdered  charcoal,  a  loving  tap  on  his  chignon,  a 
smooth  of  a  crease  in  his  red  blanket,  and  lo !  Bwabwa 
Njali  emerges  into  view. 

I  have  often  wondered,  on  viewing  these  efforts  of 
African  chiefs  to  ape  the  majestic  strutting  of  kingli- 
ness,  from  what  grand  prototype  they  have  drawn  their 
demeanour.  Mtesa,  of  Uganda,  is  too  far  off,  and  there 
is  no  one  nearer  that  I  have  ever  discovered  or  heard 
of,  able  by  the  rumour  of  his  pomp  to  impress  the  sense 
of  these  fantastic  mimics  of  kinghood.  I  presume  it 
must  be  natural  to  man — to  the  x\frican  Nfumu  as  it  is 
to  the  British  beadle  ! 

u  2 


292  TKE   CONGO. 

1881.  There  were  some  orood  points  about  him  which 
Bwabwa  naturallj  belong  to  persons  of  his  enormous  vanity. 
^^ ''  He  was  cleanly  in  person,  and  so  much  cannot  be  said 
of  all  African  chiefs  ;  he  was  not  at  all  uncomely,  or  ill- 
favoured,  being  a  bronze-coloured,  well-built  man  of 
thirty-five.  If  he  expected  largely  in  return,  he  first 
gave  nobly  ;  at  least  his  gifts  dwarfed  all  others  that  I 
had  received  between  Yivi  and  his  village.  Probably 
there  are  other  good  points  about  him,*  as  yet  buried 
in  his  half-revealed  personality. 

We  had  scarcely  been  three  hours  at  Bwabwa  Njali's 
village  before  we  saw,  borne  high  up,  a  French  tri- 
coloured  flag  approaching,  preceded  by  a  dashing 
looking  Europeanised  negro  (as  I  supposed  him  to  be, 
though  he  had  a  superior  type  of  face),  in  sailor 
costume,  with  the  stripes  of  a  non-commissioned  officer 
on  his  arm.  This  was  Malameen,  the  Senegalese 
sergeant  left  by  M.  de  Brazza.  Two  Gaboon  negro 
sailors,  in  blue  navy  shirt  and  pants,  followed  him,  one 
of  whom  carried  the  flag. 

Malameen  spoke  French  well,  and  his  greeting  was 
frank  and  manly.  After  a  few  words  had  been  said  on 
either  side,  he  showed  to  me  a  paper,  which,  duly  trans- 
lated, turned  out  to  be  a  treaty,  whereby  a  certain  chief 
called  Makoko  ceded  to  France  a  territory  extending 
from  the  Gordon  Bennet  River  to  Imjjila  on  the  north 
bank  of  Stanley  Pool,  and  which  M.  de  Brazza  noti- 
fied, to  all  whom  it  might  concern,  that  he  took 
possession  of  the  said  territory  in  the  name  of  France. 
*  In  the  latter  part  of  1B81  Bwabwa  Njali  died. 


MALAMEEN.  293 

Malameen  kuew  a  great  deal  about  the  transaction,     issi. 
Makoko  had  been  generous,  and  for  very  triQing  gifts   Bwabwa 


had  parted  with  a  territory  which,  as  far  as  I  could 
learn,  extended  along  the  river  about  nine  miles  ;  the 
extent  of  it  inland,  was  not  indicated.  He  said  he  had 
no  other  instructions  than  to  show  the  treaty  to  all 
Europeans  who  might  approach  Stanley  Pool. 

As  it  was  late,  he  slept  in  the  village,  and  through 
some  of  my  servants  I  became  well  informed  in  the 
politics  of  the  district  on  the  other  side  of  the  Gordon 
Bennett. 

A  very  short  acquaintance  w^ith  the  sergeant  proved 
to  me  that  he  was  a  superior  man,  even  though  he  was 
a  bronzed  Senegalese.  He  was  in  his  proper  element 
among  these  Africans,  who  were  of  a  lower  grade  than 
liimself,  and  very  tactfully  and  subtly  he  acted  on  his 
master's  instructions. 

The  next  day  he  returned  to  his  own  territory  on 
the  east  side  of  the  Gordon  Bennett,  and  at  1  p.m.  we 
prepared  to  follow  him,  according  to  an  invitation  he 
had  given  us  in  his  master's  name. 

The  Gordon  Bennett  is  a  deep  rapid  stream  of  about 
forty  yards  in  breadth  at  the  ferry  of  Bwabwa  Njali. 
About  four  miles  lower  down  it  descends  a  furious 
cataract  by  two  mouths  into  the  Congo,  about  fifty 
yards  below  the  first  dangerous  rapid  of  the  Congo. 
Had  the  mouth  of  tlie  Gordon  Bennett  joined  the 
great  river  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  higher  up  it 
wnidd  liave  been  worth  my  while  to  have  secured  from 
Bwabwa  Njali  the  right  to  a  landing-place  by  which 


Njali. 


294 


THE   CONGO. 


1881.     I  might  have  gained  access  to  nearly  1100  miles  of 

July  28.  .  . 

iifwa.     navigation  of  the  Upper  Congo. 

A  journey  of  six  miles  through  an  uninhabited 
countrj^,  alternately  scrubby  jungle  and  grassy  plain, 
brought  us  to  the  villao:e  of  Mfwa,  a  small  hamlet  of 


ITOKY   CABBIEUS. 


grass  huts  peopled  by  Bateke'  ivory  traders.  A  number 
of  them  were,  even  at  the  moment  of  our  arrival, 
engaged  in  counting  brass  rods — five  of  which  weighed 
a  pound  at  that  time — and  sorting  cloths,  while  many  a 
fine  ivory  tusk  gleamed  white  on  the  ground  near  by. 


MALIMA.  295 

Grroups  of  buvers  and  sellers  were  seated  around  dis-     issi. 

r  "  ^  ^  July  28. 

cussing  the  merits  of  their  respective  properties.     The    iifwa. 
buyers  were  Bateke,   who  inhabit   a  large  extent  of 
country  on  the  north  bank  and  far  inland  ;  the  sellers 
of  the  ivory  were   By-yanzi   and   Ba-bangi,  from  the 
Upper  Congo. 

The  chief,  Ingya,  received  us  good-naturedly,  showed 
us  a  place  to  camp  near  the  river,  and  promised  to 
bring  us  meat  and  palm-wine  (raalafu).  The  evening- 
passed  off  quietly,  I  might  say  agreeably,  since  decided 
civility  and  sociableness  marked  the  intercourse. 

In  the  morning,  however,  the  natives  hinted  to  us 
that  there  was  no  food  to  be  procured ;  and  indeed  it 
was  evident  that  they  themselves  were  dependent  on 
other  districts  for  their  daily  supply  of  provisions, 
because  they  did  not  cultivate.  The  entire  male 
population,  old  and  young,  of  Mfwa  could  not  have 
exceeded  150. 

Makabi,  an  important  ivory  factor  resident  at  Mfwa, 
who  had  shown  us  courtesy  on  the  previous  day,  was 
more  candid.  He  distinctly  stated  that  it  was  better 
for  us  to  try  Malima — whose  chief  was  Gamankono — a 
larger  village  higher  up  the  river,  where  the  chief, 
much  superior  to  Ingya,  might  be  better  able  to  talk 
with  us. 

Within  two  hours  we  arrived  at  Malima,  a  wide 
detour  having  been  forced  upon  us  by  the  black  mud 
and  swamps  which  are  a  feature  of  the  grass  flats  on  the 
north  bank.  ^lalima  consisted  of  about  fifty  widely 
scattered  huts.     Here,  however,  was  a  large  concourse 


296  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     of  By-yanzi  visitors  for  the  sale  of  their  ivory  ;  there 

July  29.  -^    -^  1  11  • 

Maiima.  ^veio  probaLlj  about  400  of  them,  mostly  tall,  strapping, 
broad-chested,  rather  yellowish  fellows,  to  whom  the 
Bateke  appeared  black  as  ink  in  colour.  They  made  an 
unusual  display  of  short  swords  of  curious  design  and 
beautiful  workmanship. 

We  were  first  escorted  to  the  shade  of  a  large  tree, 
where,  on  a  few  boxes  ranged  around,  we  seated 
ourselves,  wondering  at  the  large  circle  of  people  who 
had  gathered  in  such  an  insignificant  village. 

Presently  Gramankono  appeared,  who,  after  a  close 
view  of  his  features,  I  recognised  to  be  the  Mankoneh 
mentioned  in  the  book  '  Through  the  Dark  Continent.' 
But  he  was  so  splendid  in  his  dress  and  state  orna- 
ments that  his  aspect  was  very  different  from  that  of 
the  stalwart  chief  of  fishermen  he  appeared  to  be  four 
years  previously.  I  immediately  rose  to  shake  hands 
with  him.  The  recognition  was  mutual,  aud  after  he 
had  responded  with  a  hearty  clasp,  he  began  an  eccen- 
tric dance,  some  400  natives  accompanying  it  with  a 
barbarous  chant,  which  so  excited  our  following  that 
our  men  also  added  their  voices  to  the  unmelodious 
singing. 

Meantime  a  rug  which  had  the  picture  of  a  horse  on 
it  had  been  spread  out  at  a  respectful  distance  opposite 
to  us,  and  a  large  crimson  bolster  had  been  placed  on  it 
at  one  end,  then  a  leopard-skin  was  spread  over  the 
rug.  AiiQV  the  burst  of  excitement,  Gamonkono  seated 
himself  on  the  bolster,  his  feet  resting  on  the  leopard's 
spoil. 


A   EETENTIVE  MEMOBT.    ,  297 

While  seated  in  this  pride  of  native  state  and  in  this     issi. 

^  .  July  29. 

pose  his  photograph  may  be  taken.  In  figure  he  is  a  Maiima. 
little  larger  than  the  medium  size,  his  features  are  those 
of  a  burly  negro ;  he  has  a  plain,  solid  and  substan- 
tial face,  befitting  a  substantial  and  broad-shouldered 
person.  On  his  head  he  wears  a  thick  round  cap  of 
knit  wool,  into  which  a  native  artist  has  worked  colours 
of  red,  yellow,  blue  and  white  woollen  twist.  His  neck 
is  encircled  by  a  collar  of  many-coiled  fine  brass  wire, 
out  of  which  project  four  long  spikes  of  wood,  as  I 
suppose,  until  at  a  later  time  I  find  they  are  elephant- 
tail  hairs  bound  in  bundles  of,  perhaps,  two  dozen. 
His  robe  is  a  tartan  check  of  large  red  and  green 
squares,  while  his  under-cloth  is  a  bright-patterned 
print. 

Now  ensues  the  period  to  speak.  The  ceremonies  of 
introduction  are  over,  and  there  is  an  expectant  hush. 
Through  my  interpreter  I  intimate  that  I  had  come  to 
see  Gamankono  and  hear  from  his  own  lips  whether,  as 
Malameen  had  told  me,  he  had  sold  his  country.  If 
the  country  were  still  his  own,  then  what  I  had  to  say 
could  be  said  another  day  just  as  well. 

Following  the  custom  which  prevails  among  the 
people  on  the  Congo,  Gamankono  began  a  minute 
recital  of  events  from  the  date  of  my  arrival  at  Stanley 
P(^ol  in  1877.  Nothing  was  omitted,  which  shows  how 
very  retentive  the  memories  of  these  aborigines  are. 
He  could  repeat  almost  every  word  I  had  uttered  with 
him,  and  remembered  what  presents  were  exchanged 
between  us. 


298  TEE   CONGO. 

1881.         '•  Then,"  said  he,  "  a  long  time  elapsed,  and  another 

July  29. 

Maiima,  white  man  came  with  three  canoes.  He  stayed  with 
Nchuvila  of  Kinshassa  for  many  days.  He  had  a  few 
men  from  Makoko  with  him :  he  sent  word  to  all  of  us 
living  at  Mfwa  and  Maiima  to  come  and  see  him.  We 
went  and  talked  with  him,  but  I  heard  nothing  of 
selling  or  giving  away  a  country." 

"But  is  not  Makoko  the  great  king  of  all  this 
country  ?"  I  asked. 

"  There  is  no  jrreat  kinor  anywhere.     "We  are  all 


c 


kings — each  a  king  over  his  own  village  and  land. 
Makoko  is  chief  of  Mbe ;  I  am  chief  of  Maiima ;  Inorva 
is  chief  of  Mfwa  ;  Ganchu  is  chief  over  his  land. 

"  On  the  other  side,  Gambiele  is  chief  of  Kimpoko  ; 
Xchuvila  is  the  great  chief  of  Kinshassa.  But  no  one 
has  authority  over  another  chief.  Each  of  us  owns 
his  own  lands.  Makoko  is  an  old  chief;  he  is  richer 
than  any  of  us ;  he  has  more  men  and  guns,  but  his 
country  is  Mbe." 

The  meeting  shortly  afterwards  dispersed ;  we  were 
then  shown  to  a  camping-place,  the  Europeans  and  the 
goods  suitably  accommodated  and  stored,  and  gossip 
and  marketing  commenced  freely  and  unrestrainedly. 

Towards  night  G-amankono  and  his  sons  came  to  my 
tent,  and  here  we  began  to  reveal  to  one  another  our 
mutual  sentiments,  from  which  we  soon  learned  that 
there  really  existed  no  objection  in  any  one's  mind  to 
give  us  a  place  for  a  settlement.  G-amankono  and  his 
two  sons  were  perfectly  willing,  after  the  excitement 
consequent  upon  our  andval  had  subsided,  to  enter  into 


HATE  SUPPLANTS  FBIENDSEIP.  299 

an  agreement  cedino;  to  us  permission  to  reside,  build,     issi. 
,  .  .  .     Jiiiy  29. 

plant,  and  sow  in  the  territory  of  Malima.     On  this   Maiima. 

understanding  we  parted  for  the  night. 

At  dusk,  however,  Malameen  entered  the  village. 
He  had  crossed  from  Kinshassa  on  the  south  bank  to 
^Ifwa,  and,  learning  that  we  were  at  Malima,  he  had 
waited  until  near  the  evening  before  he  put  in  an 
appearance.  What  fables  Malameen  uttered  about  our 
fondness  for  meat  of  tender  children  will  never  be 
jDublished  perhaps ;  but  the  effect  of  what  he  told  them 
was  known  when  the  crier  beat  his  tom-tom  in  the 
night,  and  shouted  out  along  the  river  bank  and  amid 
the  huts  of  the  scattered  village  that  Gramankono  and 
Xtaba  of  Malima  had  resolved  that  none  of  the  people 
should  speak  with  us,  or  sell  us  anything  any  more. 

By  morning  this  notice  was  magnified  into  a  medi- 
tated rupture.  A  woman  was  caught  selling  fish  to  one 
of  my  people,  and  beaten  by  some  of  the  villagers,  while 
some  bold  fellows  crowded  around  the  tent  with  broad 
knives  like  butchers'  cleavers  in  their  hands.  The 
good  feelings  of  yesterday  had  become  replaced  by 
suspicion,  if  not  hatred.  Three  times  I  succeeded  in 
inducing  Gamankono  to  come  round  to  apologise  for 
this  unlucky  state  of  things.  Each  time  he  went  away 
to  persuade  Ntaba  to  be  friendly,  and  as  often  he 
came  back  to  his  village  with  feelings  more  and  more 
embittered  against  us.  The  By-yanzi  were  also  power- 
ful advocates  in  our  favour,  but  Ntaba  was  inexorable. 
Finally,  perceiving  that  our  presence  would  likely 
enough    create    trouble,   I    abandoned   the   effort    to 


300  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     influence    a  man   who  liad  no   will   of   his   own,  but 

July  30. 

iiaiima.   yielded  to  another,  and  I  gave  orders  to  prepare  for 
departure. 

Gamankono  came  out  of  his  hut  to  wish  us  a  farewell, 
and  the  column  proceeded  on  its  return,  with  the  inten- 
tion of  camping  below  Mfwa,  to  open  communication 
with  Ngaljema,  chief  of  Ntamo  on  the  south  bank. 
Two  runners  had,  however,  preceded  us,  and,  exagge- 
rating the  events  wdiich  had  occurred  at  Malima,  had 
detailed  at  Mfwa  accounts  which  led  them  to  believe 
that  a  rupture  would  ensue.  Arriving  at  the  path 
leading  to  Mfwa,  the  column  w^as  halted  by  a  band  of 
the  villagers  armed  with  guns.  Coming  up  to  this 
crowd,  I  had  to  lecture  them  upon  the  absurdity  they 
were  committing,  and  pointed  out  their  weakness  as 
compared  with  our  own,  which  seemed  to  satisfy  them 
that  to  risk  a  fight  with  us  would  be  unwise.  Then 
our  men  were  urged  on.  One  or  two  young  natives, 
with  a  rather  hardened  insolence,  seemed  a  trifle  too 
eager,  and  required  to  be  warned  as  they  flourished 
their  cleavers.  Others,  again,  snatched  at  various  little 
effects  which  some  of  the  men  carried,  and  it  is  impos- 
sible to  say  what  might  have  been  the  result  of  this 
rapidly-growing  fever  for  mischief,  had  not  the  atten- 
tion of  all  been  directed  at  that  moment  to  a  number 
of  natives  running  up  to  us,  shouting  out  "  Tanley, 
Tanley ! " 

They  were  almost  breathless  when  they  came  up.  The 
column  was  again  halted,  and  then  we  were  informed 
that  Ngalyema  of  Ntamo,  hearing  that  "  Tanley,"  his 


A    TIMELY  AEEIVAL.  301 

blood-brother,  bad  arrived,  wished  to  see  him,  and  had     issi. 

July  30. 

sent  these  his  well-arraed  sons  and  nephews  to  conduct    xtamo. 
ns  to  a  camj^  by  the  river-side  nearer  Xtamo,  where  he 
could  come  and  have  an  interview  with  ns, 

Xothing  could  have  been  happier  than  this  incident. 
A^'e  willingly  acceded  to  be  guided  to  the  camp  they 
suggested.  AVe  arrived  in  about  an  hour  and  a  half  at 
the  river-side  at  a  place  nearly  halfway  between  Mfwa 
and  the  Grordon  Bennett. 


302  TEE  CONGO. 


CHAPTER  XYI. 

NGALYEMA    OF    NTAMO. 

Approaching  starvation — Eelief  delayed  —  Threat  of  Bwabwa  NjaU  — 
Arrival  of  Kgalyema  of  Ntamo — A  blood  brother — Prosperity  of  a 
native  chief — A  grasping  fraternity — Xgalyema  demands  my  servant 
Dualla — We  meet  a  Eoman  Catholic  Mission — Its  repxilse  by  the 
natives — More  demands  upon  our  stores — The  cost  of  our  negotiations 
— Eicher  goods  required — Arrival  in  the  Zinga  district. 

1881.     "Whex  we  encamped  on  the  strip  of  beach-sand,  within 

July  31. 

Ntamo.  a  few  steps  of  the  river's  margin,  we  were  not  far  removed 
from  feeling  the  pangs  of  starvation.  Unprepared  for 
this  complete  estrangement  on  the  part  of  the  natives 
on  the  upper  side  of  the  Gordon  Bennett,  we  had  left 
Bwabwa  Njali's  village  with  no  more  than  two  days' 
rations.  More  than  that  would  have  been  most  weighty 
and  cumbersome.  Consisting  of  bananas  and  heavy, 
duff-like  bread,  the  rations  that  might  be  procurable 
were  by  no  means  easy  to  transport.  Had  the  country 
supplied  grain,  six,  or  even  eight  and  ten  days'  food 
might  have  been  easily  carried.  In  the  interim  that 
elapsed  between  our  departure  from  Bwabwa  Njali's 
and  our  arrival  at  this  river  camp  we  had  consumed 
our  rations,  and  it  now  entirely   depended  upon   the 


APPROACHING   STARVATION.  303 

good-will  of  Ngalyema  how  long  we  should  have  to     issi. 

July  31. 

endure  short  commons.  Ntamo. 

When,  however,  the  31st  of  July  passed  away,  I 
had  to  kill  our  three  goats  and  distribute  some  small 
loaves  among  our  own  men,  for  neither  canoes  nor 
messengers  appeared  from  Ntamo. 

This  great  village,  or  rather  town,  on  account  of  its 
magnitude,  was  distant  four  miles  below  us  on  the 
southern  bank  above  a  broad  and  spacious  baylet,  at 
the  lower  extremity  of  the  bank  which  ran  sharply 
towards  the  north  bank,  and  formed  the  narrows  where 
the  first  cataract  of  the  Livingstone  series  was  formed. 
With  a  poweiful  binocular  telescope  the  landing-place 
was  in  full  view  of  us.  AVe  could  note  considerable 
activity  of  canoe  traffic  tbere,  canoes  departing  and 
arriving  throughout  the  day  ;  but  those  ascending  were 
for  up-river  ports,  Mfwa,  Malima,  Kinshassa,  and  the 
Kwa  river  tribes ;  none  came  near  to  us  with  even  a 
word  of  consolation. 

On  Monday,  the  1st  of  August,  we  therefore  sent 
about  thirty  ration  foragers  to  Bwabwa  Njali  with  the 
usual  cloth  and  beads  to  purchase  food.  They  returned 
in  the  afternoon  with  sufficient  to  last  for  one  day. 
The  chief  Bwabwa  Njali  also  came  with  them.  He  had 
lieard  of  our  rejection  by  his  neighbours.  He  thought 
it  a  fine  opportunity  to  act  as  a  go-between.  One  of 
our  young  officers  credited  him  with  about  ten  fathoms 
of  red  savelist,  worth  about  £2  in  this  locality,  on  the 
strength  of  a  promise  that  on  the  next  day  he  would 
furnish  food  if  we  sent  our  men  to  convey  it  to  camp. 


304  TEE   COXGO. 

1S81.         Late  in  the  afternoon  a  canoe  came  from  Xgalyema 

August  1.  m  /-«  1  />       1 

Mamo.  under  the  charge  of  tall  young  G-anchu,  one  ol  the 
chiefs  nephews,  who  brought  a  message  conveying  an 
assurance  that  we  were  not  forgotten,  and  with  a 
request  for  the  sable  Newfoundland  dog  "Flora," 
belono-ing  to  one  of  our  party.  Flora  was  surrendered 
at  once,  poor  thing ! 

On  the  next  day  we  despatched  our  foragers  again, 
but  we  were  much  surprised  when  they  returned  several 
hours  later  without  a  particle  of  food,  and  with  the 
strange  story  that  Bwabwa  Xjali  and  his  men,  instead 
of  ferrying  them  across,  had  menaced  them  with  mus- 
kets, and  intimated  that  a  general  massacre  of  us  would 
happen  in  a  day  or  two  unless  we  left  the  country. 
The  latter,  of  course,  was  a  fiction  invented  to  intimi- 
date us  from  asking  for  the  woollen  cloth  that  he  had 
obtained  on  credit  on  the  previous  day,  very  few  natives 
being  incapable  of  dishonest  practices  if  they  have 
opportunities  of  pilfering. 

During  the  absence  of  the  food-hunters,  we  heard 
the  drums  of  Ntamo,  and  followed  with  interested  eyes 
the  departure  of  two  large  canoes  from  the  landing- 
place,  their  ascent  to  the  place  opposite,  and  their 
final  crossing  over  towards  us.  Then  we  knew  that 
Ngalyema  of  Ntamo  had  condescended  to  come  and 
visit  us.  As  soon  as  he  arrived  1  recognised  him  as 
the  Itsi  with  whom,  in  1877, 1  had  made  blood-brother- 
hood. During  the  four  years  that  had  elapsed  he  had 
become  a  great  man.  Xgako,  the  old  chief,  a  Mbari 
native,  had  become  old  and  superannuated.    Itsi,  grown 


NGALYEMA.  305 

licLer  by  ivory  trade  with  the  Bazombo  and  Bakongo,  issi. 
and  become  powerful  by  investing  his  large  profits  in  xtamo. 
slaves,  guns,  and  gunpowder,  had  gradually  superseded 
Ngako.  Success  in  life  had  considerably  developed 
other  ambitions.  Itsi  aspired  to  become  known  as  the 
greatest  chief  of  the  country.  The  Wambundu — an 
inland  people,  and  the  original  owners  of  the  land — 
were  slowly  falling  under  his  influence  by  a  timid 
recognition  of  his  greater  powers ;  and,  wheresoever  he 
and  others  like  Bwabwa  Njali  had  obtained  their  fan- 
tastic i^rototype,  ceremonies  of  the  most  finical  kind 
and  of  tedious  leno-th  were  beino;  introduced  to  shed 
lustre  on  this  assumption  of  kingly  power.  He  was 
now  about  thirty-four  years  old,  of  well-built  form, 
proud  in  his  bearing,  covetous  and  grasping  in  disposi- 
tion, and,  like  all  other  lawless  barbarians,  prone  to  be 
cruel  and  sanguinary  whenever  he  might  safely  vent 
his  evil  humour.  Superstition  had  found  in  him  an  apt 
and  docile  pupil,  and  fetishism  held  him  as  one  of  its 
most  abject  slaves. 

This  was  the  man  in  whose  hands  the  destinies  of 
the  Association  Internationale  du  Congo  were  held,  and 
upon  whose  graciousness  depended  our  only  hope  of 
being  able  to  efi'ect  a  peaceful  lodgment  on  the  Upper 
Congo.  Had  he  but  known  that  fact,  we  should  have 
been  obliged  to  pay  a  heavier  penalty  than  is  con- 
ceivable to  any  reader  of  these  pages.  This  chapter 
and  the  succeeding  one  will,  however,  portray  this 
African  chief  in  his  true  colours  ])y  a  simple  narration 
of  the  events  connected  with  him. 

VOL.  I.  X 


306 


THE   COXGO. 


1881.  Ngalyema  was  accompanied  by  several  chiefs  of 
"^Numo^  Ntamo;  such  as  Makabi,  :Mubi,  old  Ngako,  and  four 
others.  Ngalyema  was  my  brother,  of  course,  but 
Makabi  must  have  a  brother  ;  Mubi  is  eager  to  possess 
one  ;  old  Xgako  presses  hard  on  me  to  secure  him  one ; 
Enjeli,  son  of  Xgalyema,  chooses  my  servant  Dualla,  and 


XiiAIAEilA,    CHIEF   OF   KIXTAMO. 

Ganchu  pounces  upon  little  Mabruki.  Indeed,  we  soon 
find  that  the  desire  for  fraternity  has  become  universal. 
We  are  in  such  straits  for  food,  and  for  some  definite 
landed  settlement  on  the  south  bank,  that  we  are  as 
yielding  and  as  pliable  as  they  could  wish.  The  native 
chiefs  have  brought  gifts  of  goats,  pigs,  a  few  loaves  of 


MY  SEBVANT  IS  DEMANDED.  307 

bread,  and  gourds  of  that  sociable  beverage,  palm- wine,     1881. 

August  2. 

without  which  the  sacred  ties  of  brotherhood  would  xtamo. 
have  been  impossible,  nor  could  the  gods  that  favour 
such  beautiful  fraternal  love  be  propitiated.  The 
general  stock  of  the  expedition  was  heavily  drawn 
upon  to  reciprocate  these  many  gifts.  It  became  so 
expensive,  that  I  more  than  once  regretted  that  I  had 
so  many  Europeans,  though  such  sordid  thoughts  were 
but  temporary. 

My  brother  being  the  supreme  lord  of  Ntamo,*  as 
well  as  the  deepest-voiced  and  most  arrogant  rogue 
among  the  whole  tribe,  first  demanded  the  two  asses, 
then  a  large  mirror,  which  was  succeeded  by  a  S2:)lendid 
gold-embroidered  coat,  jewellery,  glass  clasps,  long  brass 
chains,  a  figured  table-cloth,  fifteen  other  pieces  of  fine 
cloth,  and  a  japanned  tin  box  with  a  "  Chubb  "  lock. 

Finally,  gratified  by  such  liberality,  Ngalyema  sur- 
rendered to  me  his  sceptre,  which  consisted  of  a  long 
staff,  banded  profusely  with  brass,  and  decorated  with 
coils  of  brass  wire,  wdiich  was  to  be  carried  by  me,  and 
shown  to  all  men  as  a  sign  that  I  was  the  brother  of 
Ngalyema  of  Ntamio  ! 

But  before  departing  he  had  one  request  to  make 
which  for  once  startled  me.  He  demanded  that  my 
servant  Dualla  should  accompany  him  to  Ntamo.  After 
a  little  pause  for  reflection,  Dualla  was  despatched  with 
him  alone.  As  he  was  about  going  aivay,  Ingya  of 
]\Ifwa    appeared  with   two   canoes,  and   after  hearing 

•  NtariKj  as  called  \>y  the  upper  river  natives  is  kuowii  as  Kiutamo  to 
the  lower  river  tribes. 

X  2 


308  THE   COXGO. 

1881.     \vliat  'd  happy  family  of  brothers  we  had  all  become, 

August  4.  ...  1        r  !•! 

xtamo.    begged  to  be  admitted  into  the  fraternal  circle. 

On  the  3rd  and  the  4th  of  August,  we  were  able  to 
procure  food  from  Gampa,  a  rival  chief  of  Bwabwa 
Njali,  who  lived  on  tlie  western  side  of  the  Gordon 
Bennett. 

On  the  5th  I  went  out  hunting  near  the  river  Gordon 
Bennett,  and  at  Gampa's  ferry  met  a  Catholic  priest, 
and  thirty-two  of  his  neophytes  from  Landana,  who 
had  come  to  take  advantage  of  French  annexations  by 
establishing  a  Roman  Catholic  Mission  on  the  French 
territory.  I  suggested  that  the  Pere  should  camp 
where  he  then  was,  until  he  might  learn  how  the 
natives  would  regard  his  coming. 

The  Pere,  however,  relied  upon  the  French  flag,  and 
his  bugle,  which,  as  he  had  been  a  Papal  Zouave,  he 
knew  well  how  to  sound.  He  proposed  to  charm  the 
native  ears  with  bugle-bla-sts,  and,  as  a  wilful  man  must 
have  his  way,  I  desisted  from  offering  advice. 

But  the  next  day  the  Pere  visited  our  camp,  which 
proved  at  least  that  he  had  not  been  massacred.  He 
tarried  two  days  longer,  in  the  hope  that  the  natives 
might  be  persuaded  to  permit  him  to  establish  his 
mission,  but  finally  was  obliged  to  return  to  the  coast 
to  wait  for  a  more  propitious  period. 

On  the  6th,  Ngalyema  returned  to  us  with  his  accus- 
tomed stateliness,  triumphantly  indicating  by  Dualla's 
presence  that  he  was  not  treacherous.  But  he  now 
required  a  larger  japanned  tin  box.  Then  he  begged 
for  some  more  nice  cloth ;  not  cut  pieces  or  fragments, 


XEGOTIATIOXS    WITH   XGALYEMA.  309 

but  entire  pieces  of  twenty-four  yards  eacli ;  silk-cotton  issi. 
velvets,  red  flannel,  red  cottons  of  superior  quality.  \\  e  >^-t,jj^^^, 
possessed  none  of  tliese,  but  we  substituted  ten  fathoms 
of  red  savelist,  and  a  dozen  uncut  pieces  of  handkerchiefs, 
of  the  total  value  of  £10.  Promisino-  to  consult  all  his 
Ijrother  chiefs  on  the  proposal  to  found  a  settlement 
at  his  place,  and  to  return  with  the  final  word,  he 
departed. 

AVe  waited  until  the  morning  of  the  11th.  Mala- 
meen  came  across  again  from  Kinshassa  with  an 
invitation  from  Xchuvila,  and  a  promise  that  the  old 
chief  would  permit  us  to  found  a  station  with  him. 
But  as  we  were  negotiating  with  Ngalyema  this  was 
impossible,  and  the  invitation  was  declined  for  the 
present. 

At  11  A.M.  Xgalyema  appeared,  bringing  five  chiefs 
and  three  canoes.  After  a  lengthy  palaver  it  was 
declared  that  the  natives  were  as  yet  undecided  on  the 
question  of  receiving  any  white  men  among  them,  as 
the  Bazombo  and  Bakongo  traders  were  jealous,  and 
had  threatened  that,  as  in  the  event  of  white  men 
settling  in  the  vicinity  of  Stanley  Pool,  they  would 
soon  be  able  to  undersell  them,  they  would  never  return 
to  purchase  ivory.  However,  the  chiefs  said,  "  Give  us 
ten  of  your  black  people,  who  will  behave  themselves, 
and  do  you  return  to  your  people  and  cross  the  river 
to  the  south  bank,  and  come  up  to  us  in  that  way.  By 
the  time  you  arrive  near  Kintamo  our  people  will  have 
had  time  to  consider  whether  it  would  not  be  l>etter 
after  all  to  have  you  live  with  us." 


310  .  TEE   CONGO. 

1881.         As   this    decision    was   irrevocable  on  tlieir   part,  I 

August  11-^, 

Ntamo.  finally  agreed,  and  detailed  ten  Zanzibaris  under  Susi 
(Livingstone's  head  man),  with  fifteen  loads  of  goods 
and  tools  to  halt  at  Ntarao,  until  we  should  be  able  to 
arrive  there  by  the  south  bank. 

In  summing  up  the  exact  cost  of  the  articles  with 
which  we  had  purchased  this  favour  from  the  chiefs  of 
Ntamo,  the  total  value  was  found  to  amount  to  £210, 
exclusive  of  the  two  asses  and  the  Newfoundland  dog. 
Besides  the  promise  of  a  concession  from  the  chiefs,  we 
had  received  :  1  ivory  tusk,  weight  15  lbs. ;  50  loaves 
of  bread.  2  pigs,  1  goat,  G  gourds  of  palm-wine,  6  cola 
nuts,  and  the  chief's  staff,  as  pledge  that  the  agreement 
would  be  kept  inviolate. 

As  we  were  returning  to  the  advancing  expedition, 
we  reflected  upon  the  various  experiences  of  native 
manners  and  customs  gathered  during  our  patient  inter- 
course with  Ngalyema  and  his  people,  and  among  other 
things  it  became  evident  to  us,  that  though  we  had 
sufficient  goods  of  the  proper  quality  to  purchase  food 
at  the  markets,  and  to  exchange  gifts  with  the  small 
chiefs  inland,  or  along  the  river  in  the  cataract  region, 
yet  we  were  but  poorly  provided  to  negotiate  with  such 
superb  creatures  as  these  ivory-trading  chiefs  around 
Stanley  Pool.  My  native  servant,  who  had  accom- 
panied Ngalyema  to  his  village,  had  been  commissioned 
to  employ  his  eyes  and  wits  while  staying  at  the 
village ;  and  availing  himself  of  his  opportunities,  he 
had  inspected  Ngalyema's  treasures.  In  one  hut  be- 
longing to   this  chief  he   had   seen  about  150  tusks 


RICHER    GOODS  REQUIRED.  311 

of  ivoiy,  mostly  large  tusks  of  from  50  to  90  lbs.  each;     issi. 

f»     -n  1  11        August  11, 

in  another  he  had  viewed  piles  of  silk,  velvet,  rugs,  bales  xtamo. 
of  blanket  clotli,  glass  ware,  crockery,  gunpowder,  and 
stacks  of  brass  rods,  &c.  As  I  have  no  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  there  was  any  exaggeration  in  this  report, 
it  was  clear  that  his  stores  of  cloth  were  far  greater 
than  the  united  properties  of  stuffs  of  all  the  chiefs 
from  Boma  to  the  Gordon  Bennett.  His  wealth  in 
ivory  alone  must  have  amounted  to  £1800.  Estima- 
ting his  entire  wealth  at  £8000  worth  of  marketable 
goods,  exclusive  of  his  armed  slaves,  and  considering 
the  nature  of  his  demands  for  even  the  promise  of  a 
concession — which  was  eventually  as  likely  to  be  broken 
as  to  be  kept — it  was  clear  to  us  that  to  purchase  his 
best  influence  in  our  favour  at  Ntamo  we  should  have 
to  be  supplied  with  goods  much  superior  in  quality 
to  any  that  I  had  as  yet  seen  on  the  Congo.  The 
traders  on  the  Lower  Congo  required  only  such  cheap 
goods  as  cotton  stripes,  twills,  domestics,  and  prints, 
with  blanket  stuffs ;  but  the  Bazombo  and  Bakongo  had 
access  to  seaports  where  superior  goods  were  always 
in  stock  for  the  purchase  of  ivory. 

Agreeably  with  these  considerations  I  despatched 
Lieut.  Yalcke  on  tlie  13th  of  August  to  St.  Paul  de 
Loanda,  with  cash  and  bills  amounting  to  £500,  to 
purchase  silks,  velvets,  fine  flannel  and  crimson  clotli, 
earnestly  impressing  on  him  the  necessity  of  being- 
expeditious  and  active. 

On  the  21st  of  August  we  met  Mr.  Lindner,  at 
Mpakambendi,  who  had  just  succeeded  ni  storing  liis 


bendi. 


312  TEE   coy  GO. 

"  1881.     goods  on  the  plateau.     The  steamers  were  below   :n 

AugTist  21.  ^ 

Mpakam-  the  river  at  the  landing-place.  This  gentleman  waf^ 
relieved  two  days  later,  and  despatched  to  the  south 
bank  at  ^lanyanga,  to  purchase  and  lease  ground  in 
that  locality  at  some  eligible  place,  which,  since  the 
sonth  bank  at  Stanley  Pool  was  to  be  our  destination, 
was  most  necessary  for  us. 

B}-  the  24th  we  had  reached  the  plateau  with  all  the 
wagons,  and  an  advance  camp  had  been  formed  near 
the  Lukuluzi  Eiver.  Thirty  men  were  detailed  under 
Albert  to  make  a  bridge  over  tliis  stream,  and  to 
continue  road-making  while  the  rest  of  the  expedition 
conveyed  goods  and  liauled  the  wagons. 

So  rapid  was  our  progress  with  the  fresh  strength 
lent  to  us  by  the  late  recruits,  that  by  the  31st  of 
August  we  were  in  Zinga  district,  eleven  miles  from 
Mpakambendi. 


London    Sampson  Low,  Marsttin ,  Searle  &■  Rivin|to]i . 


ZINGA.  313 


CHAPTER  XYIl. 

SETTLEMENT    AT    STANLEY    POOL. 

The  ouhi  study  of  mankind  is  man — "  Killing  the  road  " — A  broken  axle- 
tree— Braconnier's  accident — -We  encounter  Susi — "  The  news  from 
Xgalyema  is  good  and  bad"— Ivory-traders'  intrigues — Ngalyema  in 
reality  a  powerless  chief — Our  "  appetite  for  black  babies  " — lyumbi 
mountain — -Makoko  —  A  six-foot  beard  —  Overtures  to  Makoko — 
His  reply — "  But,  my  friend,  remember  we  own  the  coi;ntry  " — Mild 
but  valorous — "  Influential "  men — Makoko  gives  me  his  sword — 
Ngalyema  comes  to  fight — ^Our  preparations  for  war — A  ruse — Ngal- 
yema comes  to  the  camp — A  dissembling  welcome — Masked  hostility 
— "  What  nice  thing  has  my  brother  brought  ?  " — "  Make  up  your 
mind  that  I  go  to  or  near  Kintamo  " — A  war  fetish — The  signal  of  the 
gong — "  Strike — strike  it,  I  tell  you ! " — My  force  spring  xip  like 
armed  madmen — A  general  stampede — Success  of  the  ruse — "  Ah,  I 
was  not  afraid,  was  I  ?  " — Peace,  brotherhood,  and  conviviality. 

I  NOW  publish  the  notes  I  wrote  the  1st  of  September      issi. 

Sejit.  1. 

at  Zinga — a  place  which  will  ever  be  memorable  to  me     zinga. 
as  that  from  which  I  viewed  the  sad  end  of  Francis 
Pocock  in  1877. 

"  The  only  thing  left  to  the  traveller  to  study  in  this 
region  is  the  human  aborigine.  His  gun,  which  he 
always  faithfully  carries  with  him,  loaded  with  scraps 
of  iron  and  copper,  has  driven  away  every  other 
creature  except  such  as  are  domesticated  and  subject 
to  liis  interests. 


314  THE   CONGO. 

1881.         '•  He  is  not  a  bad  fellow,  provided  the  traveller  lias 

Sept.  1.  ... 

zinga.  the  happy  fortune  to  impress  him  with  confidence  that 
he  risks  no  personal  interest  or  inconvenience  in  accept- 
ing him  as  a  friend.  He  is  somewhat  of  a  traveller 
himself,  and  this  in  a  manner  creates  a  fellow-feeling ; 
but  he  is  easily  provoked  to  cry  out  '  Mandaka  mabi,' 
or  '  Evil  designs/  and  if  he  is  really  serious,  and  cannot 
be  persuaded  to  think  otherwise,  previous  acts  of  friend- 
ship or  kindness  are  soon  forgotten,  coolness  follows, 
and  a  drinking-bout  at  a  market  gathering  will  serve 
to  increase  the  trouble,  and,  to  use  his  own  words,  '  The 
road  is  dead.'  He  is  aware  that  to  '  kill  the  road '  is  to 
incur  punishment  or  retribution  elsewhere,  unless  he 
means  to  retire  from  the  caravan  business.  As  he  has 
meted  out  to  others,  he  is  in  danger  of  its  being  meted 
to  him,  if  he  travels  away  from  home.  The  bruit  of 
the  rupture  soon  spreads  over  a  wide  area,  and  the 
name  of  the  offending  district  and  village  is  exten- 
sively published.  At  the  same  time  he  is  such  a 
thoughtless  being,  especially  on  a  drinking-spree,  that, 
forgetful  of  this,  he  often  gives  vent  to  a  raging 
humour. 

"  To  an  expedition  of  some  strength  whose  only 
object  was  exploration,  this  rupture  and  closing  of  the 
road  would  matter  little  beyond  the  bad  repute  of 
having  successfully  forced  its  way  through  ;  but  to  one 
like  ours,  which  hopes  to  make  every  man  useful,  for 
all  time  to  come,  to  himself  and  country  and  tribe,  it 
would  be  lamentable,  if  not  fatal.  Howsoever  we  might 
emerge  from  a  conflict,  a  delay  of  many  months  would 


niLARIOUS  NATIVES.  315 

ensue,  besides  vexatious  parleying  and  explanation,  and     issi, 

S^pt.  1. 

extravagant  presents  to  every  person  of  consequence.        zinga. 

"  To-day  the  natives  returned  from  tlie  market  are 
very  hilarious,  even  in  a  worse  state  in  many  cases, 
proving  that  many  gourds  of  palm-wine  have  been 
emptied.  They  are  very  numerous  round  the  camp ;  but 
fortunately  we  have  surrounded  it  with  brushwood,  not 
against  attack,  but  to  prevent  a  temptation  to  it  during 
their  arrogant  moods,  and  to  prevent  them  from  laying 
their  hands  on  property  not  belonging  to  them.  If 
they  were  much  tempted  and  unreasonable  in  their 
inebriety,  it  might  lead  them  to  commit  acts  which  they 
would  ever  regret  afterwards. 

"There  are  six  chiefs  in  Zinga  district,  Mvula, 
Monanga,  Nzabu,  Makanga,  Kiubi,  and  Nsaka.  In 
the  aggregate  these  govern  eighteen  villages,  aver- 
aging fifteen  houses,  or  grass  huts,  each,  say  altogether 
about  270  houses,  spread  over  an  area  of  about  fifteen 
square  miles.  If  we  allow  five  souls  to  each  house,  Zinga 
district  will  have  a  population  of  2,350  souls,  or  ninety 
souls  to  the  square  mile. 

"  Close  to  Zinga  are  many  populous  districts.  East 
lie  Mowa  and  Massassa ;  west  are  ]\Ibelo,  Bukala,  Suki, 
Kilanga,  and  Kinzore. 

"  I  perceive,  by  looking  around  from  my  camp,  that 
these  several  communities  have  settled  near  or  under 
the  groves  which  crown  the  summit  of  almost  every 
hill;  that  they  are  ancient  for  a  country  left  to  the  hap- 
hazard care  of  patriarchal  chiefs  ignorant  of  written 
laws. 


316  THE  CONGO. 

1881.  "Monanf>-o  and  Lis  brother  Mviila  are  very  old  meu, 

Sept.  1.  ^  •  /     .        .  . 

zinga.  probably  near  eigbty.  Yangassa  of  Nzabi  district  is 
white-beaded ;  in  the  village  of  Mpakambendi  there  were 
three  men  between  sixty  and  eighty  years  old.  None 
of  these  aged  men  know  of  any  other  grove  as  the  land- 
mark of  his  village,  but  that  which  rises  high  above  his 
grass-covered  hamlet,  and  affords  him  friendly  protec- 
tion from  the  sun  during  his  open-air  meetings. 

"The  oldest,  tallest,  and  most  conspicuous  tree  for 
height,  girth,  and  umbrageousness  may  be  200  years 
old.  It  was  not  by  an  accident  it  grew  there  ;  of  that 
one  feels  assured  by  comparing  the  hill  on  which  it 
grows  with  other  hills.  It  was  planted  by  the  founder 
of  the  community  which  now  flourishes  under  its  shade. 
No  disastrous  event  can  have  marred  the  growth  of  the 
groves,  though  the  community  must  have  often  suffered 
from  small-pox,  dysentery,  fetishism,  and  internecine 
squabbles.  Had  the  community  utterly  perished,  the 
grove  had  died ;  the  fires  during  the  month  of  August, 
September  and  October  recurring  at  each  year  penetrate 
further  and  further  in  such  cases  until  at  last  the  wild 
grass  covers  all. 

"Reflecting  on  these  things_,  a  certain  amount  of 
respect  is  inspired  in  one  as  he  gazes  reflectively  upon 
the  scene.  I  am  not  ashamed  to  confess  to  feeling  even 
something  like  reverence, — not  for  the  hutted  village, 
for  the  huts  are  mere  mushrooms,  scarcely  one  of 
them  being  older  than  three  years — not  for  the  in- 
dividuals who  own  the  houses,  for  few  of  them  can 
boast  of  having  seen  three  generations, — but  for  the 


BBIDGE   OVER    THE  IXKISSL  317 

community  collectively  wliicli,  despite  many  vicissitudes,     issi. 

•Ill-  •  Sept.  1. 

sad  domestic  events,  evils  belonging  to  crassest  igno-  ^ino-a. 
ranee,  low  morals,  &c.,  has  maintained  its  own,  clung 
together,  and  flourished,  become  possessed  of  traditions, 
and  still  promises,  if  it  can  bear  the  influence  of  these 
novel  events,  of  iron  steamers,  engines  and  strange 
objects  rolling  overland  close  to  its  villages  without 
convulsion,  to  last  for  many  generations  yet." 

On  September  2nd,  the  axle-tree  of  the  boiler  wagon 
snapped  in  two.  We  took  out  the  piece  of  English  elm, 
which  had  arrived  from  the  honest  English  wagon- 
maker  only  about  a  year  ago.  It  was  perfectly  rotten. 
Externally  it  looked  a  piece  of  fine  wood  well  painted. 
It  was  four  feet  one  inch  long,  seven  inches  by  five 
inches  thick,  and  only  weighed  twenty-three  pounds ! 
An  exact  duplicate  of  this  made  in  African  guaiacum 
weighed  eighty-one  pounds. 

Across  the  Inkissi  River  Albert  built  a  strong  bridge, 
over  which  the  five-ton  wagons  rolled  safely. 

On  tlie  14th  of  September,  being  incapacitated  with 
a  slight  fever,  I  turned  the  command  over  to  Lieut. 
Braconnier,  and,  for  the  first  time,  he  had  cliarge  of 
the  wagons.  I  requested  him  to  take  them  down  the 
slope  of  a  hill  to  a  camp  at  the  river-side.  Five  minutes 
after  he  had  taken  the  command,  he  was  brought 
back,  supported  between  two  men ;  he  was  limping, 
and  deathly  pale,  his  body  considerably  bruised,  and 
his  shirt  in  tatters.  Some  confused  command  had  been 
given,  while  the  wagon  was  on  the  slope.  This  caused 
a  misunderstanding,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  boiler 


1881. 
Sept.  14. 

Zincra. 


318 


THE   CONGO. 


wagon  sliot  down  the  hill,  and  one  of  the  trailing  ropes 
gliding  swiftly  down  caught  the  officer,  and  dragged 
him  over  the  rough  road  at  a  frightful  speed  until  the 
wagon  ran  into  a  tree,  smashing  the  shafts,  and  damaging 
the  boiler.  Fortunately,  beyond  a  severe  bruising  and 
a  shock  to   the  nerves,   the  officer   suffered  no  harm. 


THE  NARBOWS  NEAR  MSAMPALA. 


He  was,  however,  placed  on  the  sick  list,  and  left  at 
a  small  ferry  which  we  established  at  Kinsende'  a  few 
days  later,  where  he  remained  for  several  weeks. 

On  the  18th  of  September  our  boats  were  in  the 
Congo  again,  to  avoid  the  terribly  broken  country  east 
of  the  Inkissi,  and  which  continues  to  beyond  Kinduta. 
By  the  river  we  ascended  past  Msampala's  narrows, 


IVOBY-TEADEES     INTRIGUES.  319 

Avliere  tlie  Congo  is  only  400  yards  wide,  sometimes  issi. 
by  ropes  helping  the  steamer  through  the  rapids  imtil  Ki^Lende 
we  arrived  at  the  confluence  of  the  Lnbamba  with  the 
Congo  at  the  foot  of  the  Lady  Alice  Eapids.  Here  the 
expedition  on  the  11th  of  October  crossed  to  the  south 
bank,  to  a  small  cove  in  Kinsende  district,  the  chief 
of  which  is  Luemba. 

Four  days  later  a  road,  that  cost  much  labour,  had 
been  made  to  the  Ufuvu  River,  the  steamer,  the  boiler 
and  engines  had  been  mounted  on  their  respective 
wagons,  and  were  preparing  to  depart,  when  two  shots 
were  fired  on  the  opposite  side,  and  through  the  bino- 
cular I  recognised  Susi  and  his  squad  from  Kintamo 
with  the  asses  that  we  had  given  Ngalyema.  The 
whale-boat  in  a  short  time  transported  the  people  across, 
and  as  Susi's  tale  was  interesting,  I  will  give  it  in  his 
own  words : — 

"  The  news  from  Ngalyema  is  good  and  bad.  That 
moon  ill  which  you  left  us  at  Kintamo  passed  peacefully 
away  without  troul)le,  but  the  next  moon,  some  native 
traders  from  Zombo  came,  and  asked  us  what  we  wanted 
in  the  country.  '  Leave  tliem  alone,'  said  Ngalyema. 
'  What  is  that  to  you  ?  They  are  staying  in  my 
village  ;  they  therefore  must  be  my  friends.'  From 
the  people,  however,  they  learn  that  Ngalyema  had 
invited  a  white  man  to  settle  with  him,  and  that  we 
wore  the  white  man's  people.  '  Very  well,'  said  they  ; 
'if  that  is  the  case  the  country  is  dead;  we  come 
no  more.  It  will  ]je  no  place  for  trade'  for  us  if  the 
wliite  man  comes.     They  left  Kintamo,  and  went  to 


320  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     the  Wambundii,  the  real  owners  of  the  country — for 

October  15. 

Kinsendc.  Ngaljema  himself  has  no  country.  AVhat  he  has  been 
saying  to  you  about  his  being  a  big  king,  and  all  that, 
is  all  boasting.  The  Wambundu,  not  having  seen  any 
white  man,  were  frightened,  and  came  storming  to 
Ngalyema,  asking,  '  Is  this  the  way  you  behave,  after 
we  gave  you  ground  to  live  on  and  trade ;  that  you  take 
upon  yourself  to  say  who  shall  come  into  the  country  ? 
Yery  well ;  we  shall  kill  your  trade,  your  markets  shall 
be  closed,  and  you  will  die  of  hunger.'  For  several 
days  there  w^as  no  market,  and  the  ^^eople  began  to 
suffer  for  want  of  food.  Then  Ngalyema's  chiefs  and 
great  men  came  to  him,  and  insisted  that  we  should  be 
sent  away,  otherwise  they  would  go,  and  live  at  Kin- 
shassa. 

"  Ngalyema  stood  alone  against  them,  for  a  few  days 
more,  but  it  was  clear  to  us  that  he  would  have  to  yield 
before  long.  We  had  not  long  to  wait.  He  said  to  us 
one  day,  '  You  must  go  back  to  your  father.  Take  the 
goods  and  the  asses  with  you.  I  send  the  asses  because 
they  have  a  great  name,  and  much  of  this  trouble  has 
arisen  because  of  them.'  Then  I  said,  '  Our  father  gave 
us  fifteen  loads  here,  and  we  are  but  eleven  men ;  how 
can  we  carry  all  of  them  ? '  He  replied,  'That  is  nothing 
to  me.  Do  you  not  see  that  the  country  will  die  if  you 
stay  here  longer  ?  Go  and  tell  your  father  not  to  come 
on  this  side,  but  to  return  and  build  with  Bwabwa 
Njali.'  He  put  us  into  a  canoe,  and  w^e  travelled  from 
Kintamo  here,  having  paid  seven  pieces  of  cloth  to  that 
wicked  Bwabwa  Njali.     I  have  ended." 


OUR   ''APPETITE  FOR   BLACK  BABIES^  321 

In   the   narrative   of    Susi,    despite     the    apparent     issi. 

.  Oct.  15. 

gloominess  of  our  prospects,  I  found  one  piece  of  con-  Ki„seiuie. 
soling  information.  Ngalyema,  in  our  absence,  over- 
awed by  the  unanimous  hostile  feeling  of  the  ivory- 
traders  at  Kintamo,  had  at  last  yielded  to  their  wish  to 
sever  all  connection  with  the  white  men^  and  we  might 
no  doubt  be  assured  that  he  would  become  as  active 
an  opponent  as  he  had  been  a  friend.  But  it  tran- 
spired that  Susi,  during  a  residence  of  a  few  weeks 
there,  had  discovered  that  Ngalyeraa's  fine  assumption 
of  principal  chieftainship  was  simply  vanity  and  arro- 
gance. Ho  was  a  Mteke  ivory-trader,  who  owned 
a  large  number  of  armed  slaves,  one  of  many  similar 
chiefs  in  the  territory  of  the  Wambundu.  Kintamo,  or 
Ntamo,  then,  w\as  merely  a  village  of  a  foreign  com- 
munity. True,  the  Wambundu  did  not  appear  to  be 
very  friendly  to  us  ;  but  they  had  never  seen  the  white 
men,  and  it  was  but  natural  that  the  Bazombo  and 
Bakongo  traders  from  the  coast — as  these  coast  middle- 
men have  been  the  bane  of  all  advance  of  Europeans 
from  the  West  Coast  of  Africa — would  excel  in  artful 
word-painting  of  our  fiendish  qualities,  our  insatiable 
appetite  for  l)lack  babies,  &c.  Therefore  the  expedition 
wjis  ordered  forward,  and  the  wagons  were  hauled 
that  day  to  the  Ufuvu  River. 

On  the  4th  of  November  our  camp  was  on  the 
summit  of  lyumbi  mountain,  245')  feet  above  the  sea, 
ami  1 450  feet  above  the  Congo  at  its  base. 

Since  leaving  the  Ufuvu  River,  we  had  made  sections 
of  road  in  advance  of  the  wagons.     Then,  all  united, 

VOL.  r.  Y 


322 


THE   COXGO. 


1881 
Xov.  4. 

Iviimbi. 


we  advanced  with  tliem,  first  across  the  plateau,  then 
into  the  Mpalanga  Gorge,  and  across  the  pretty  clear- 
water  stream  of  that  name,  over  another  stretch  of 
grassy  plateau  and  into  another  gorge,  then  across 
another  pretty  stream,  and  so  on  in  succession  of  gorges 
and  plateaus  until  we  came  to  the  beautiful  Lulu  liiver, 


THE    CASCADES   OF   THE   MPALAXGA. 


rejoicing  in  pretty  little  falls  and  cascades.  After  the 
Lulu  we  crossed  the  Kiki  stream,  and  after  the  Kiki, 
we  crossed  the  Loa  River,  whence  we  emerged  in  full 
view  of  lyumbi  Mountain. 

Provisions  were  abundant,  and  the  temper  of  the 
natives  excellent.  Our  slow  jorcgress  through  their 
district  was  in  fact  an  excellent  education  for  them. 


lYUMBI  MOUNTAIN.  323 

They  understood  very  well  why  the  Bazombo  traders  issi. 
had  spread  those  absurd  rumours  about  us.  Fond  of  lyumbL 
trading  a  little  themselves,  it  did  not  take  long  to 
prove  to  them  that  it  was  mere  jealousy  that  inspired 
the  traders'  hostility  to  the  entry  of  the  white  man  into 
a  region  which  for  generations  they  had  exploited  for 
the  large  profits  obtainable  in  the  ivory  trade. 

Lono:  before  we  had  surmounted  the  summit  of 
lyumbi  Mountain  we  were  thoroughly  informed  in  the 
politics  of  the  country.  Since  leaving  the  ferry  of 
Kinsende  we  had  heard  of  a  Makoko  who,  by  reason 
of  his  seniority  and  the  rank  and  powers  of  his 
father,  was  regarded  as  the  umpire  and  referee  in  all 
disputes  among  minor  chiefs  between  Kinsende  Ferry 
and  Kintamo.  His  immediate  district  lay  on  the 
Kintamo  side  of  lyumbi  Mountain.  Next  to  him  in 
rank  were  Ngamberengi  and  Kimpalampala,  and  after 
these  came  a  host  of  minor  chiefs  owning  small  vil- 
lages, every  other  mile  or  so,  all  along  the  road  to 
Kintamo.  The  people  of  these  villages  w^erc  called 
Wambundu,  sometimes  Banfumu,  or  Freemen,  a  very 
ancient  people,  for  in  the  very  earliest  accounts  of  this 
region  will  be  found  mention  of  them.  Their  territory 
begins  at  the  Inkissi  River,  and  extends  to  Kintamo,  a 
length  of  45  miles. 

At  first  Makoko  had  sent  word  prohibiting  the  sale 
of  food  to  the  white  people,  lest  the  country  might  die. 
We  bore  it  ungrudgingly,  though  it  imposed  on  us  the 
necessity  of  halting  every  three  days  to  permit  our 
people   to  go  great  distances  to  purchase  provisions. 

Y  2 


324 


THE   COXGO. 


1881.     But  as  favourable  reports  were  daily  carried  forward 
lyumbi.    t)y  the  country  people,  this  prohibition  was  withdrawn, 

provisions  flowed  abundantly,  and  everybody  became 

sanguine  of  success. 

From    the   broad  summit  of  lyumbi    Mountain  we 

may  have    a    wide-sweeping    view    over   a  panorama 


LOOKING   TOWARDS   THE   ST  AN  LI 


of  billows  and  hollows  covering  an  area  of  2000 
square  miles.  Its  commanding  altitude  will  enable 
generations  of  tourists  in  time  to  come  to  thoroughly 
understand,  by  one  round  glance,  the  character  and 
features  of  the  region  of  the  Lower  Congo.  Towards  the 
north-east  they  will  obtain  the  first  glimpse  of  Stanley 
Pool,    sixteen   miles   distant.      Dover  Cliffs  at    sunset 


VIEW  FHOJI  lYUMBI  MOUNTAIN.  325 

will  show  tlieir  white  glistening  walls,  and  every  peak  1881. 
at  the  entrance  to  the  Upper  Congo  will  be  easily  clis-  i^-unibi. 
tinguished ;  in  an  air  line,  they  are  about  thirty-five 
miles  away.  To  the  southward  we  now  can.  see  our 
red  road  conspicuously  winding  past  palm  clusters  and 
hamlets,  dipping  into  the  green  wooded  hollows,  and 
rising  up  the  lengthy  slopes.  Even  Mowa  is  distinctly 
visible,  while  the  twin  peaks  near  Nsangu  Ferry  offer 
unmistakable  landmarks.  If  we  look  on  the  rio:ht  bank 
of  the  Congo,  all  the  land  from  Mowa  to  Dover  Cliffs, 
a  distance  of  seventy  miles,  is  clearly  mapped  out,  with 
its  numberless  wrinkles  and  irregularities  softened  by 
distance  to  mere  trifles.  The  south  bank  is  likewise 
seen  of  similar  length  and  irregularities  ;  while  between, 
the  Congo's  gorge  may  be  easily  followed  until  it  is 
lost  in  the  blue.  The  land  is  fair  to  look  upon,  and 
were  it  possible  to  be  in  possession  of  a  tithe  of  the 
ordinary  necessaries  of  a  civilised  life,  and  to  be  able  to 
communicate  Ireely  and  safely  with  civilisation,  a 
residence  on  the  best  parts  of  this  breezy  ridge,  with 
such  a  daily  prospect,  would  by  no  means  be  considered 
a  privation. 

The  adv.'ince  pioneer  guard  prepared  a  road  down  to 
the  village  of  Ngoma's,  which  lay  at  the  end  of  a  spur 
projecting  westward,  and  planted  the  white  store  tents. 
.Vs  they  were  seen  by  us  from  lyumbi,  they  looked  like 
mere  snowballs,  amid  a  general  greenness  of  trees, 
shrubs,  palm  groves,  and  bananas.  Four  caravan  jour- 
nays  completed  the  transport  of  tlie  gO(xls,  and  a  hard 
day's  work  cndcMl  wIlli  [lie  arrival  of  tlie  entire  Ibrce  in 


326 


THE   CONGO. 


1881. 
Nov.  7. 

Usansi. 


Usansi,  at  a  camp  not  a  tliousaiid  yards  distant  from 
the  village  of  the  senior  chief  of  the  region,  Makoko. 

On  the  7th  of  November  the  man,  who  was  reported 
by  all  the  natives  on  the  south  bank  to  be  the  arbiter 
of  all  questions  relating  to  territory  between  Kintompe 
and  Stanley  Pool,  appeared  in  our  camp  with  an  im- 
posing following  of  neiglibouring  chiefs,  Bazombo  and 


A    VIEW   FKOM    A   CAMP. 

Bakongo  ivory-traders.  Not  that  he  had  sufficient 
authority  to  command  such  an  attendance,  but  man 
is  a  gregarious  animal,  and  naturally  of  a  curious,  in- 
quisitive mind.  A  caravan  having  arrived  from  the 
coast,  and  its  members  suddenly  viewing  this  tented 
camp  in  the  Usansi  hollow,  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  Makoko's  village,  and  hearing  that  Makoko 


MAKOKO.  327 

was  going*  to  visit  the  white  man  who  bore  the  name     issi. 
of  "  Breaker  of  Rocks,"  of  whom  they  had  heard  fre-    L'>aiisi^ 
qiientlj,  had,  out  of  sheer  curiosity,  joined  their  number 
to  others  inspired  with  the  same  idea. 

Xow,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  say  which  of  us 
was  most  curious  to  see  the  other.  As  Makoko  had 
been  daily  informed,  during  some  months,  of  my  doings, 
I,  on  the  other  hand,  for  some  weeks,  had  become 
impressed  with  the  fact  that  Makoko  was  to  decide  the 
future  of  the  Congo  State. 

One  look  at  Makoko  satisfied  me  that  he  was  not 
going  to  be  a  stern  opponent.  Such  a  little  man,  five 
foot  nothino-  hio-h,  with  such  a  o-uileless,  innocent  look 
on  his  thin  meagre  face,  could  surely  allow  his  goodwill 
to  be  purchased  if  there  was  any  merit  in  cloth  and 
amiability !  He  came  forward  bravely,  annoimced 
himself  as  Makoko,  lord  of  that  region  between  Kin- 
tompe  and  Stanley  Pool_,  and  held  out  his  hand  with  a 
kindly  smile.  An  old  man,  probably  sixty,  with  a  tall 
narrow  forehead,  temples  deeply  sunk,  a  pair  of  small 
eyes  gleaming  brightly  out  of  deep  cavities,  cheek- 
bones very  prominent,  face  thin,  a  curled  beard  on  his 
cliin,  which  proved,  when  at  a  later  period  he  unrolled 
it,  to  be  six  feet  in  length  ! 

His  mat,  covered  with  a  leopard  skin,  had  been  pre- 
pared to  receive  him.  He  pointed  his  finger  at  the 
leopard-skin  before  seating  himself,  and  said,  "  There  is 
the  proof  of  my  titles." 

There  were  about  100  people  present  at  this  meeting, 
and  all  were  now  seated  expecting  words  from  me. 


328  THE   COXGO. 

1881.         I  began,  "  People  call  me  Bula  Matari  (Rock-breaker). 

Nov.  7.  ^ 

Usansi.  I^  old  timcs  I  \vas  known  to  Kintamo  as  Stanle3\  I 
am  the  fir.st  Mundele  seen  by  the  natives  of  this 
country.  I  am  the  man  who  went  down  the  great 
river  with  many  canoes  and  many  men  years  ago.  I 
lost  many  men  in  that  river,  but  I  promised  my  friends 
at  Kintamo  that  I  would  come  back  some  day.  I  reached 
the  white  man's  land,  but,  remembering  my  promise,  I 
liave  come  back.  I  have  been  to  Mfwa  already.  The 
people  of  Mfwa  have  forgotten  me,  but  the  people  of 
Kintamo  have  remained  true.  I  saw  them  again,  and 
Ngalyema  asked  me  to  return  to  my  people,  and  lead 
them  along  the  south  Ijauk  to  his  village.  Here  is  his 
staff  as  a  sign  that  I  speak  the  truth.  I  am  going  to 
him,  to  live  with  him,  and  to  build  a  town  alongside 
of  his  village  ;  and  when  that  is  done,  I  will  put  the 
boats  you  see  on  the  wagons  here  into  the  water,  and 
I  will  go  up  the  great  river,  and  see  if  I  can  build  more. 
That  is  my  story.  Let  Makoko  speak  to  his  friend  and 
say  if  it  is  good." 

After  a  short  pause,  during  which  there  was  a  good 
deal  of  whispering,  Makoko  in  a  very  quiet  manner 
and  low  voice,  which  gradually  became  stronger  as  he 
proceeded  with  his  speech,  said  : 

"  We  have  heard,  day  after  day  for  many  moons,  of 
Bula  Matari.  When  we  heard  that  he  was  breaking- 
rocks,  and  cutting  wide  roads  through  the  forests,  we 
became  a  little  anxious.  What  manner  of  man  is  this  ? 
we  asked,  who  treats  the  country  in  this  way.  Does  he 
mean  to  destroy  it  ?     Then  we  suddenly  heard  of  Bula 


0VERTUDE8    TO   JIAKOKO.  329 

Matari  at  Kintamo,  and  the  word  was  whispered  around     issi. 

Nov.  7. 

that  you  had  made  a  league  with  Ngalyema  to  take  the  usansi. 
country  from  us.  Then  we  all  got  angry,  for  who  is 
Ngalyema  that  he  should  do  this  thing  ?  Is  he  not  a 
runaway  from  the  Bateke  country  who  asked  us  for  a 
place  to  build  a  house  that  he  might  trade?  Has  he 
not  grown  rich  and  great  through  our  kindness  to 
him  ?  Little  enough,  0  people,  have  any  of  us  received 
from  him.  Yet  he  pretends  to  own  all  the  land  for 
himself  now. 

"  Well,  your  people  had  to  leave  Kintamo.  We 
did  that.  For  how  could  you  do  what  you  proposed 
without  hearing  from  us  ?  Then  we  said,  If  the  white 
man  despises  us,  the  real  owners  of  the  land,  then  he  is 
a  bad  man,  and  there  will  be  war. 

"  But  now  you  are  passing  through  our  country  to 
Kintamo.  We  have  heard  of  you  daily.  We  are 
pleased  with  what  we  have  heard.  We  now  know  that 
you  break  rocks  and  cut  trees  to  pass  your  boats  over 
the  country.  That  is  right.  It  is  all  good.  But,  my 
friend,  remember  that  we  own  the  country.  Neither 
Ngalyema  nor  any  of  the  Bateke  who  buy  ivory  at 
Kintamo,  Kinshassa,  and  Kindolo,  have  any  country 
on  this  side  of  the  river." 

Then  followed  a  murmuring  approval  of  this  speech 
from  the  assembly. 

When  the  applause  had  subsided,  my  response  was 
as  follows:  "You  have  spoken  well,  Makoko.  Thougli 
I  passed  through  the  country  years  ago,  I  knew  nothing 
of  native  laws,  customs,  or  rights.    You  all  seemed  very 


330 


THE   CONGO. 


1881. 
Nov.  7. 

Usansi. 


much  alike.  Until  lately  I  could  not  tell  the  difference- 
at  sight  hetween  one  of  the  Bateke  and  an  Mbundu.. 
I  thought  you  all  black  men,  and  it  takes  a  long  time 
for  a  white  man  to  tell  the  difference  between  one  black 
face  and  another,  just  as  it  will  take  you  a  long  time  tO' 
tell  the  difference  between  Bula  Matari  and  one  of  his 
sons.  Therefore,  for  speaking  to  Ngalyema  about  the 
country  before  T  knew  Makoko,  you  will  forgive  me.. 
I  now  speak  to  Makoko,  and  ask  him 
what  has  he  to  say  to  my  request 
for  land  near  Kintamo,  or  somewhere 
near  the  river,  where  my  boats  can 
come  and  go  safely  ?" 

"  Only  this,"  replied  Makoko,. 
kindly,  "  that  I  am  glad  to  see  Bula 
Matari  and  his  sons.  Eest  in  peace. 
Land  shall  be  o'iven  to  vou  where  it 
will  suit  you  to  build.  I  want  to  see- 
plenty  of  white  men  here.  I  have 
many  things  given  me  long  ago  from 
the  white  men's  land,  and  I  have 
often  wished  to  see  those  who  could 
make  such  wonderful  things.  I  am 
told  you  people  make  all  the  cloth,  the  beads,  the  guns, 
the  powder,  plates,  and  glasses.  Ah !  you  must  be 
great  and  good  people.  Be  easy  in  your  mind.  You 
shall  build  in  Kintamo,  and  I  should  like  to  see  the 
man  who  says  No,  to  Makoko's  Yes." 

The  mild  old  man,  so  little  and  weak  in  frame,  w^as 
actually  valorous  !     Comfort  he  certainly  imparted  to- 


OXE    OF    THE    EATEKE. 


*^ influential''  men.  331 

me ;  but  how  mucli  reliance  in  himself  could  not  yet     issi. 
be  defined.     However  we  treasured  his  words.  Usansi. 

Under  the  cheerful  influence  of  his  softness  of  speech 
w^e  accepted  his  gifts  of  palm-wine,  goats,  fowls,  and 
l)ananas,  and  reciprocated  them  in  the  spirit  of  men  who 
had  been  just  gratified  with  a  life's  desire.  Perhaps  we 
were  over  liberal  at  this  first  meeting,  but  then  we  were 
overjoyed.  We  gave  largely  also  to  his  four  wives, 
beads  to  his  children,  and  draped  most  of  his  principal 
men  in  cloth.  Finally,  Makoko  introduced  a  man 
named  Ngako,  wlio  was  the  brother  of  an  Mbundu  chief, 
who  owned  the  land  near  Kintamo.  We  gave  him 
twelve  whole  cloths,  a  cap,  a  blanket,  a  mirror,  a  few 
white-handled  table  knives,  and  endowed  him  with 
various  other  trifles.  After  the  pile  of  gifts  were  made 
I'eady,  ^lakoko  appeared  with  Ngako  to  receive  them. 
Makoko  counted  the  gifts  over,  re-sorted  them  in  a 
curious  manner,  and  took  with  him  over  one  half  of 
them  for  his  own  share  without  demur  from  the  other. 

A  little  later  Makoko  appeared  with  another  man, 
and  ascribed  to  him  also  considerable  influence  on  the 
shores  of  Stanley  Pool,  to  which  I  only  answered, 
"  Indeed.  Well,  I  am  really  glad  to  see  you."  But  no 
present  of  clotli  came,  and  I  fancied  that  Makoko's 
dark  face — made  darker  by  the  soot  of  mourning — 
efl'used  a  stronger  odour  and  a  few  more  beads  of 
perspiration. 

Before  the  evening  of  a  very  pleasant  happy  day 
came,  Makoko  said  to  me,  "  Ngalyema  gave  you  his 
staff  to  show  tlie   people   he  was  your  friend.     Take 


oSZ  THE   CONGO. 

1881.  this  sword  from  Makoko  as  a  si^-ii  that  Biila  Matari  is 
Usaiisi.    Makoko's  brother." 

With  a  mind  emancipated  from  all  anxiety,  and  at 
peace  witli  the  whole  world,  so  far  as  I  knew,  I  was 
about  to  retire  for  the  night,  when  a  messenger  from 
Makoko  craved  admittance  to  my  tent  with  a  message 
which  boded  trouble  on  the  morrow,  perhaps  war. 

Said  he,  "  Makoko  has  sent  me  to  tell  you  that 
Ngalyema,  and  all  the  chiefs  of  Ntamo,  with  about  200 
guns,  have  arrived  at  his  village.  Ngalyema  has  already 
been  trying  to  engage  Ngamberengi,  Kimpalampala, 
and  others  to  assist  him.  He  has  also  asked  Makoko  to 
help  him  to  fight  you,  and  drive  you  back.  He  says  he 
does  not  want  you,  or  any  white  man,  near  him,  as  no 
Bakongo  trader  would  ever  come  near  him  if  you  did. 
But  Makoko  has  sent  me  to  tell  you  to  sleep  in  peace, 
and  that  if  Ngalyema  fights  he  will  cut  the  road  between 
here  and  Kintamo,  and  his  guns  will  help  you  to- 
morrow." 

This  was  not  very  agreeable  news,  nor  calculated  to 
produce  slumber  and  calm  forgetfulness.  To  have 
travelled  twelve  miles  so  swiftly  and  suddenly  indicated 
on  the  part  of  Ngalyema  earnestness  of  purpose,  and 
a  determination  to  nip  my  hopes  of  peaceful  settlement 
just  as  they  had  emerged  in  full  bloom. 

Tuesday,  November  the  8th,  began  with  a  drizzling 
rain,  but  at  ten  o'clock  the  sun  shone,  and  the  day 
promised  to  continue  fair. 

Ngoma's  village,  near  which  we  were  camped,  was 
situated  on  a  narrow  but  level-faced  spur,  extending 


PBEPABIXG   FOB    WAB. 


from  the  eastern  flank  of  lyumLi  Monnt.     It  was  one     issi. 


Nov.  8. 


of  several  such  spurs,  separated  from  one  another  by  usausi. 
wooded,  scrubby  gorges — the  sources  of  several  small 
crystal  streams.  On  the  next  spur  to  that  which  we 
occupied  stood  Makoko's  residential  village,  and  it  was 
from  this  direction  we  expected  Ngalyema's  approach. 
To  approach  our  camp  after  declaration  of  hostilities 
was  therefore  impossible,  if  we  chose  to  take  him  at 
his  word,  witliout  risk  of  utter  extermination.  Ngal- 
yema,  though  a  barbarian,  was  too  astute  a  person  to 
commence  operations  in  this  manner.  More  probably, 
on  the  strength  of  previous  brotherhood  and  mutual 
exchange  of  civilities,  he  would  enter  the  camp  with 
a  bland  face  and  an  affectation  of  fraternal  love,  with 
ostentatious  and  noisy  greeting,  and  trust  to  surprise 
in  the  midst  of  social  drinking  of  ]3alm-wine,  <S:c.,  &c. 

I  sent  my  tent-boy  to  tell  the  people  to  muster  on 
the  furthest  side  of  the  hill,  to  bo  out  of  view  of  any 
spies  wlio  might  be  on  the  watch  at  Makoko's  hill.  In 
a  few  minutes  I  proceeded  there  myself,  and  found  the 
men  all  assembled. 

The  instructions  I  gave  them  there  were  brief,  and 
such  as  they  could  easily  remember. 

"  Go,  each  of  you  to  his  own  hut ;  put  your  cartridge 
bolts  on.  See  that  your  cartridges  are  in  your  pouches. 
Place  your  guns  under  your  sleeping  mats  or  grass 
l)cds.  All  of  you  then,  excepting  Susi's  men  (twenty), 
scatter  yourselves  about  in  the  bush  on  this  side  of  the 
liill.  Some  lie  down  in  the  En  Avanf  in  tlie  wagon; 
some  of  you  behind  my  tent ;  a  dozen  in  tlie  store  tent; 


334  THE   CONGO. 

issi.     some  of  you  pretend  to  be  sick  in  your  liiits.    No  matter 

Xov.  8.  . 

Usansi.  l^ow  many  people  are  m  the  camp,  or  what  you  may 
hear,  do  not  stir  from  your  places  until  you  hear  the 
gong ;  but  when  you  hear  the  gong  struck,  then  all 
run  and  seize  your  guns,  and  rush  up  all  of  you, 
yelling  like  madmen  ;  flourish  your  guns  about  wildly, 
and  so  on,  like  the  Ruga-Huga  of  Unyamwezi.  Do 
you  understand  ?  " 

^'  Inshallah  ! "  they  cried. 

Susi's  detachment  were  instructed  to  seat  themselves 
about  in  the  open,  and  assume  a  listless  and  indifferent 
attitude. 

A  quarter  of  an  hour  later  a  long  line  of  men  W' ere 
seen  descending  Makoko's  hill  to  the  bottom  of  the 
valley  intervening  between  it  and  our  own.  I  counted 
197  persons,  inclusive  of  all  ranks,  who  were  in 
.  Ngalyema's  expedition.  Drum,  trumpet,  and  native 
music  announced  that  the  chief  had  assumed  state  and 
ceremony  for  this  occasion.  Before  any  of  them  had 
shown  themselves  on  our  hill  I  was  seated  in  a  chair  in 
the  front  of  my  tent,  reading  a  book.  I  cast  furtive 
glances  about,  and  saw  my  own  camp  almost  abandoned, 
except  by  a  few  Zanzibaris,  some  of  whom  were  alto- 
gether over-acting  their  parts  by  pretending  to  be 
half  asleep. 

Keeping  my  eyes  hidden  by  the  vizor  of  my  cap,  I 
noted  the  quick  glance  thrown  around  the  apparently 
abandoned  camp  by  the  advancing  natives.  When 
about  a  third  of  their  number  had  entered  the  camp 
I  rose,  at  the  same  time  the  near  sound  of  the  not 


A   DISSEMBLING    WELCOME.  335 

inharmonious  music  informed  me  that  No-alyema  was     issi. 

Nov.  8. 
not  far  off.  Usansi. 

I  advanced  towards  them,  and  when  Ngalyema  finally 
came,  gave  him  an  effusive  welcome.  I  turned  sharply 
round  to  Susi,  and  pretended  to  scold  him  well  for  not 
preparing  mats,  sails,  &c.,  to  spread  on  the  ground 
for  my  dear  brothers  and  friends  of  Kintamo. 

Ngalyema  was  moody-browed,  stiff,  most  unbrotherly 
ill  his  responses  to  my  w^elcome,  while  I  looked  like 
one  almost  ready  to  leap  into  his  arms  w^ith  an  irre- 
pressible affection.  Makabi  was  cold  and  repelling ; 
Mubi  grim  and  defiant ;  Ganchu  seemed  like  a  young- 
leopard  eager  for  bloody  sport ;  young  Enjeli  acted 
surely  like  one  who  had  suddenly  come  of  age,  so  well 
he  aped  the  man. 

"  Come,  my  brethren,  friends,  sit  down.  Tell  Ngal- 
yema, Susi,  through  Enjeli  there,  who  know^s  Kikongo 
so  well,  how  glad  I  am  at  seeing  them  all.  Though  it 
is  very  sudden,  I  take  this  visit  and  to  have  come  so 
lar  to  see  Bula  Matari  as  most  kindly  intended." 

Susi,  who  was  so  very  clever,  and  could  w^eli  enter 
into  the  elaborate  joke  I  was  perpetrating,  did  not, 
I  am  certain,  interpret  the  welcome  so  well  as  I 
acted  it. 

The  chiefs,  who  kept  their  eyes  wandering  over  the 
boat,  boilers,  and  machinery  tents,  and  kejDt  up  in 
imdertones  a  perpetual  interchange  of  ideas,  scarcely 
deigned  to  regard  me,  until,  after  being  seated,  Ngal- 
yema abruptly  spoke  to  Enjeli,  his  son,  in  Kiteke,  who 
translated  it  into  Kikongo  to  Susi  and  myself: 


336  THE   CONGO. 

1881.         "  I  have  come  from  Kintamo  to  see  my  brother.    Let 

Nor.  8. 

Usansi.    l^ii^^  ^^^^  "^^  wliat  he  has  come  here  for." 

I  repUed,  showing  the  brass-banded  staff :  "  This  is 
what  brought  me.  I  liave  done  exactly  what  you 
asked  me." 

At  this  moment  another  body  of  natives,  also  carrying 
guns,  came  by  another  path  up  the  gorge,  who  seated 
themselves  apart  from  Ngalyema's  large  force.  These 
were  Makoko's  men. 

The  appearance  of  this  force  caused  Ngalyema  to 
launch  forth  into  a  history  of  his  acquaintance  with  me, 
beginning  from  1877,  which  was  intended  for  their 
special  benefit,  as  they  had  been  accusing  him  of  an 
intention  to  overstep  his  proper  status  as  a  foreigner 
who  was  only  permitted  residence  on  their  soil  to  trade 
in  ivory.    He  ended  it  in  a  peremptory  manner  thus  : — 

"  Now,  my  brother  has  been  misinformed,  and  has 
misunderstood  me.  We  Batekc  are  strangers  living  on 
this  side  of  the  river  for  trade  only.  The  Bazombo  and 
the  Bakongo  are  our  customers.  AVe  have  no  objection 
to  trade  with  white  men  if  they  come  for  trade,  but  we 
do  not  think  you  have  come  to  trade ;  therefore  you 
cannot  come  to  Kintamo.  My  brother  must  go  back 
the  way  he  came,  unless  he  likes  to  stay  here  with 
Alakoko.     I  have  said  it." 

Through  my  interpreter  I  replied, 

"  I  am  not  a  little  boy,  Ngalyema,  and  I  will  not  use 
many  words.  You  have  brought  me  thus  far  yourself. 
Makoko  is  going  to  give  me  land  near  Kintamo,  and 
on  that  land  I  will  build  my  town.     I  know  something 


MASKED   HOSTILITY.  337 

about  the  country  now.     The  land  is  not  yours  to  give     issi, 
away,  therefore  he  easy.     I   have  but  one  tongue,  and    usansi. 
if  Makoko  will  take  me  to  Kintamo,  I  will  go  with  him 
and  build  a  fine  place  there,  where,  if  you  like,  you  may 
come  and  see  me  ;  if  not,  why  then,  keep  away,    I  have 
spoken." 

*'  Bula  Matari  speaks  well,"  he  responded  mockingly. 
''  We  know  white  men  are  clever,  but  Kintamo  is  still 
far,  and  in  the  way  is  Ngalyema  and  Makabi  and  Mubi, 
and  plenty  more  chiefs,  and  the  people  you  see  here  are 
few,  and  yet  these  people  know  how  to  shoot.  How 
will  Bula  Matari  reach  Kintamo  with  those  few  men 
that  he  has  got  ?" 

Adopting  the  tone  of  my  friend,  I  said,  "  Yes,  white 
men  are  clever,  I  believe,  and  ISTgalyema  will  say  so 
before  long.  Ngalyema  has  many  men  and  guns  as  I 
see,  but  Ngalyema  and  all  his  men  cannot  take  that 
wagon  to  Kintamo  ;  yet  you  see  I  have  crossed  many 
mountains  and  valleys  so  far  as  here,  and  in  the  same 
manner  it  will  reach  Kintamo.  But,  my  friend,  do  not 
let  us  quarrel.  Wait  and  see.  I  could  be  in  Kintamo 
to-day  if  I  wanted  to ;  but  I  will  take  my  time  about 
it ;  meantime,  be  easy  in  your  mind." 

Now  followed  a  consultation  among  the  Bateke  in 
an  undertone,  though  once  or  twice  some  vehemence  of 
manner  attracted  attention,  and  while  they  communed 
together  I  cast  my  eyes  about  the  assembly.  They 
were  mostly  fine-looking  men,  but  made  hideous  by 
daubs  and  splash-like  spots  and  lines  and  bars  of  white 
and  yellow  and  black  over  their  faces  and  bodies.  They 

VOL.  I.  z 


THE  CONGO. 


1881, 
Kov.  8. 

Usansi. 


were  all  armed  with  muskets,  except  those  who  carried 
the  ammunition,  the  gourds  being  full  of  powder  and 
slugs  of  iron  and  copper. 

Suddenly  Ngalyema  asked,  after  the  knot  of  chiefs 
had  ceased  their  whispers,  "What  nice  thing  has  my 
brother  brought  me  from  the  white  man's  land  since  I 
saw  him  ?" 

Evidently  Ngalyema  supposed  that  I  had  been  to  the 
coast  since  my  departure  from  Mfwa  ; 
but  I  simply  said,  "  Come  to  my  tent, 
and  see  for  yourself." 

Ngalyema  and  his  son  Enjeli,  with 
Ganchu  and  others,  rose  to  their  feet, 
and  followed  me  to  the  tent.  Here 
the  party  inspected  a  quantity  of  red 
baize,  bright  handkerchiefs,  a  pile  of 
figured  blankets,  and  lovingly  passed 
their  hands  over  japanned  tin  boxes 
and  iron  trunks  ;  and,  after  his  curio- 
sity was  thoroughly  satisfied,  and 
Ngalyema  had  chosen  a  quantity  of 
BATEKK  NATIVE.  goods  valucd  at  £138  for  his  own 
perquisites,  he  expressed  himself  as  follows  : 

"  I  will  take  these  goods,  but  on  the  condition  only 
that  you  stay  where  you  arc.  You  must  make  up 
your  mind  that  you  cannot  come  to  Kintamo.  The 
chiefs  will  not  have  it.  If  you  do  not  promise,  this 
must  end  in  war,  and  I  can  no  longer  be  your  friend. 
Now,  what  do  you  say  ?" 

"  It  is  useless,  Ngalyema,  to  talk  more  about  this,"  I 


A    WAn   FETISH.  339 

replied.     "  Make  up  your  mind  that  I  go  to  or  near     issi. 
Kintamo.     All  the  Wamhundu  are  willing.  You  admit    tjgansi 
that  you  have  no  right  to  the  country  ;  that  you  and 
the  Bateke  are  strangers  ;  that  the   AYambundu  own 
the  land.     How   can  you  stop    the  AYambundu   from 
doing  what  they  hke  with  their  own  country  ?" 

"  But  the  village  of  Kintamo  is  mine,"  he  said  ;  "  I 
and  my  people  built  it." 

"  That  is  all  well.  I  do  not  want  your  village  ;  I 
only  want  to  get  near  the  river  and  Imild  a  village  of 
my  own,  whither  many  white  men  will  come  to  trade. 
White  men  will  do  you  no  harm ;  you  do  not  care  to 
whom  you  will  sell  your  ivory." 

"  Enough,  enough  !"  he  cried.  "  I  say  for  the  last 
time  you  shall  not  come  to  Kintamo ;  we  do  not  want 
any  white  men  among  us.  Let  us  go,  Enjeli."  And  as 
he  said  the  last  words  he  pushed  aside  the  tent  door  and 
strode  outside,  with  the  emotions  of  suppressed  passion 
visil)le  on  his  face.  While  standing  near  the  tent  door, 
for  a  moment  irresolute,  he  caught  sight  of  the  large 
Chinese  gong  suspended  to  a  cross-bar  supported  by 
two  forked  poles. 

"  What  is  this  ?"  he  asked,  pointing  to  the  gong. 

'*  It  is  fetish,"  I  answered  sententiously. 

His  young  son  Enjcli,  who  was  much  more  acute 
than  his  father,  whispered  to  him  his  1)elief  that  it 
was  a  kind  of  a  bell,  upon  Avhich  Ngalyema  cried 
out — 

"  Jjiila  Matari,  strike  this  ;  let  me  hear  it." 

"  Oh,  Ngalyema,  I  dare  not;  it  is  the  war  fetish  !" 

z  2 


3-10  THE   COXGO. 

1881,         "  Xo^  no,"    said   lie,    imj)atieiitl3%     ''  Beat    it,  Bula 

Nov.  8. 

L'sansi.    Mataii,  that  I  may  hear  the  sound." 

"  I  dare  not,  Xgalyema.  It  is  the  signal  for  war ; 
it  is  the  fetish  that  calls  up  armed  men  ;  it  would  he 
too  bad." 

"  Xo,  no,  no !  I  tell  you  to  strike.  Strike  it,  Bula 
Matari ;"  and  he  stamped  on  the  ground  with  childish 
impatience. 

"  Well,  then  " — taking  the  beater  in  my  hand — ''  re- 
member, I  told  YOU  it  was  a  bad  fetish — a  fetish  for 
war ;"  and  as  I  lifted  the  beater  high  with  uplifted 
hand,  I  asked  again,  "  Shall  I  strike  now  ?" 

"  Strike— strike  it,  I  tell  you  !" 

With  all  my  force  I  struck  the  gong,  the  loud  bell- 
like tone  sounding  in  the  silence  caused  by  the  hushed 
concentrated  attention  of  all  upon  the  scene,  was  start- 
ling in  the  extreme,  but  as  the  rapid  strokes  we're 
applied  vigorously  the  continued  sound  seemed  to  them 
like  thunder.  They  had  not  recovered  from  the  first 
shock  of  astonishment  when  the  forms  of  men  were 
seen  bounding  over  the  gunwale  of  the  J^?i  Avant  right 
over  their  heads,  and  war-whooping  in  their  ears. 
From  my  tent,  and  from  the  gorge  behind  them,  a 
stream  of  frantic  infuriates  emer^'ed  as  though  from 
the  earth.  The  store-tent  was  violently  agitated,  and 
finally  collapsed,  and  a  yelling  crowd  of  demoniac 
madmen  sprang  out  one  after  another,  every  one  appa- 
rently madder  than  his  neighbour.  The  listless,  sleepy- 
eyed  stragglers  burst  out  into  a  perfect  frenzy  of  action. 
From  under  the  mats  in  the  huts  there  streamed  into 


THE  SIGNAL    OF   THE   GONG.  ?Al 

view  such  a  frantic  mob  of  armed   men,  that  to  the     issi. 

Nov.  8. 

panic-struck  natives  the  sky  and  the  earth  seemed  to  usansi. 
he  contributing  to  the  continually  increasing  number 
of  death-dealing  warriors.  Every  native  joresent, 
wo  aid-be  friend  and  would-be  foe,  lost  his  senses  com- 
pletely ;  the  seated  warriors  forgot  their  guns  and 
fled  before  this  strange  deluge  and  awful  scene. 
The  ammunition-bearers  threw  their  gourds  away 
— some  were  broken,  and  the  powder  and  slugs  were 
scattered  over  the  ground ;  and  as  Ngalyema  was 
standing  paralysed  with  fear^  and  with  his  faculties 
benumbed,  I  seized  him  by  the  arm,  and  said  softly 
to  liiin — 

"  Be  not  afraid,  Ngalyema.  Eemember  Bula  Matari 
is  your  brother.  Stand  behind  me;  I  will  protect 
you." 

The  Zanzibaris  were  now  a  yelling  crowd  in  front  of 
me,  calling  out  taunting  and  menacingly  — 

"  Ha,  ha,  Ngalyema  !  You  came  to  fight  Bula  Ma- 
tari, Ngalj^ema  !  AYhere  are  your  warriors,  Ngalyema  ?" 

There  could  not  be  a  better  representation  of  relent- 
less, bloodthirsty  fury  than  that  which  was  sliown  by 
t]iese  amateur  black  actors  in  the  suddenly  improvised 
scene.  Their  assumed  frenzy  was  the  next  thing  to 
reality.  Had  I  not  been  in  the  secret  I  also  should 
liave  been  duped  ;  while  the  valour  with  which  I 
defended  my  poor  brother,  who  with  his  two  hands 
grasped  me  round  the  waist,  danced  from  side  to  side 
to  avoid  furious  strokes  from  the  wild-eyed  men,  while 
young  Enjeli  clung  behind  his  father  and  followed  his 


342  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     movements,  reminded  me  of  tlie  long-forgotten  play  of 
Usan>i.    "  lien-and-chickens." 

"  Save  me,  Bula  Matari ;  do  not  let  them  hurt  me  !  I 
did  not  mean  anything,"  cried  Ngalyema. 

"  Hold  hard,  Ngalyema  !  "  I  cried,  "  keep  fast  hold 
of  me ;  I  will  defend  you,  never  fear.  Come  one, 
come  all!     Ah,  ha!"  &c. 

But  the  camp  was  ahnost  emptied  of  our  visitors, 
much  of  the  ammunition  was  left  behind,  the  guns 
were  strewn  over  the  ground,  and  the  play  was  well 
acted. 

"  Enough,  boys ;  fall  into  line,"  and  "  Silence  "  was 
cried  out  by  Susi  and  his  brother  captains,  and  the 
obedient,  well-trained  fellows  fell  into  line  at  "  Shoulder 
arms  "  with  all  the  precision  of  military  veterans.  Then, 
as  Ngalyema  had  allowed  his  hands  to  fall  down  by  his 
side  in  mute  surprise  at  this  other  transformation  scene, 
I  took  hold  of  his  two  hands,  and  said  with  an  assuring 
smile — 

"  Well,  Ngalyema,  what  do  you  now  think  of  the 
white  man's  fetish  ?" 

■  "Ah,  T  was  not  afraid,  was  I?  See,  all  my  people 
are  run  away !  Ay  me,  such  braves  !  Only  Enjeli 
and  Ganchu  left  with  me  !  But  tell  me,  Bula  Matari, 
where  did  all  these  people  come  from  ?  " 

"  Ah,  that  is  the  bad  fetish  I  told  you  of!  Do  you 
want  to  see  any  more  ?  Come,  I  will  strike  tlie  gong 
again,  and  the  next  scene  may  perhaps  be  more  wonder- 
ful still." 

""  What !  "  he  shrieked,  while  he  laid  his  hand  upon 


SUCCESS   OF   THE  BUSE.  343 

my  arm.  "  No,  no  ;  don't  touch  it.  Ay,  verily,  that 
must  he  a  bad  fetish,"  he  said  gravely,  shaking  his  head 
at  the  round  innocent  fiice  of  the  gong. 

"Look  yet  again  at  these  people,  Ngalyema," 
said  I,  pointing  to  the  long  line  of  smiling  soldier- 
labourers. 

"  Attention !  right  face !  all  of  you  march  forward 
quietly ;  no  noise ;  put  your  guns  away,  and  each 
go  about  his  business.  Forward,  march  !  "  The  line 
vanished,  and  it  was  onl}^  then  Ngalyema  began  to  re- 
cover himself,  while  Enjeli  and  Ganchu  halloed  loudly 
to  the  fugitives  for  their  return.  Half-an-hour  later 
they  were  all  back  again  in  the  camp,  retailing  to  one 
another,  amid  boisterous  merriment,  their  individual 
experiences,  while  Ngalyema's  loud  laugh  was  heard 
above  all  others.  Messengers  w^ere  then  sent  to  Ma- 
koko's  and  Ngoma's  for  great  gourds  full  of  palm-wine  ; 
others  were  sent  to  procure  goats  and  pigs  and  bananas, 
and  these  were  given  to  me.  Over  the  palm-wine  we 
mutually  swore  faithful  brotherhood  and  an  everlast- 
ing peace  ;  and  the  doughty  warriors  of  Ngalyema 
embraced  in  a  fraternal  manner  the  jolly  good  fellows 
of  Bula  ^latari,  and  the  Europeans — the  sons  of  old 
"  Bula  Mutari,"  who,  for  a  man  that  was  never  married, 
and  one  of  the  most  unlikely  of  men  to  be  ever  married, 
really  M'ere  a  credit  to  him — were  fondly  besieged  by 
their  ardent  Ijrothers  of  Kintamo.  Makoko,  who  was 
generally  believed  to  be  the  oldest  inhabitant  in  the 
country,  on  being  asked  his  opinion  of  the  scene,  said 
that  he  had  "never  witnessed  such  a  day  as  this." 


1881. 
Nov.  8. 

Usansi. 


344  THE  COXGfj. 

1881.         Before  evening,  Ngalyema  returned  on  bis  way  to 

Xov.  8.  _  .  \  ^ 

Usausi.  Kintamo  with  his  people,  much  wiser  than  when  he 
came,  and  I  was  left  with  the  memories  of  my  first 
practical  joking  on  this  expedition,  which  had  so  highly 
entertained  evervhodv  concerned  in  it. 


SUSI  FvECOXXOIinES.  345 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

THE    FOUNDING    OF    LEOPOLDVILLE. 

Susi  reconnoitres  the  country — ^Prospects  of  road-making — Payment  of 
native  workers — Xgamberengi's  account  of  Xgalyema's  life — ^Fighting 
strength  of  tribes — Our  advance  on  Kintamo — Native  villages — 
Selecting  camping  gi'ound — Leopold  Hill — An  offer  from  Xgalyema 
— New  camp  formed. 

The  next  day  a  clioseu  band  of  vonng  men  was  de-  i^^^^- 
spatched  under  Susi,  the  Lead  chief  of  the  foreign  Usan.ii. 
native  employe's,  and  Wadi  Rehani,  who  acted  as 
quarter-master  and  commissary-general  of  the  expedi- 
tion, to  reconnoitre  the  country  as  far  as  a  camp  near 
and  in  view  of  Kintamo,  and  to  inform  me  what 
chances  there  were  for  speedy  road-making  and  for 
the  movement  of  the  camp.  I  in  the  meantime 
devoted  myself  to  enlist  native  carriers. 

By  night  Susi  and  his  party  had  returned  and 
reported  that  the  nature  of  the  country  prevented 
any  very  quick  movement.  There  were  a  number  of 
streams,  valleys,  and  ridges  to  be  crossed  ;  but  about  an 
hour's  march  from  Kintamo  we  should  find  a  broad 
plain-like  ridge  covered  with  grass,  which  continued  to 
within  a  short  distance  of  the   river,   where  it  sloped 


346  TEE   COXGO. 

1881.     o-entlv  to  the  water's  edfre.    At  one  ijlace.  however,  the 

Csandi.    plain  maintained  its  level,  and  was  projected  to  a  point, 

whence  a  commanding  view  over  all  the  Pool  and  the 

cataract  was  oLtained.     At  the   foot   of  this   hill  the 

rapids  of  Kintamo  commenced. 

But  before  we  could  reach  the  plain  of  Kintamo  or 
Kintambu,  as  the  Wambundu  called  it,  there  was  hard 
work  to  be  done,  principally  cutting  through  forests, 
grading-  along  the  slopes  of  several  steep  hills,  where 
there  would  be  some  difficult  hauling.  Still  it  was  said 
to  be  not  so  bad  as  many  places  we  had  passed  already ; 
and,  what  was  more  promising  than  all,  they  related 
that  the  practical  joke  upon  proud,  boasting  Xgalyema, 
had  won  all  the  natives  alono-  the  road  to  erive  their 
adhesion  to  Makoko's  wish  that  we  should  settle  near 
Kintamo. 

The  bantering  humour  and  rough  "  horse-play '' 
practised  upon  Ngalyema  and  his  confederate  chiefs 
l^roduced  a  very  remarkable  effect  indeed  on  the  Wam- 
bundu, as  was  proved  by  our  enlistment  in  one  day  of 
78  native  carriers. 

Each  of  these  was  eno-ao-ed  at  the  rate  of  four  red 
handkerchiefs  for  the  carriage  of  a  man-load — 60  to 
65  lbs. — on  a  journey  of  sixteen  miles,  the  payment 
of  which  was  to  be  made  at  sunset,  according  to  his 
receij^t  given  to  him  by  the  European  in  charge  of  the 
advance  station.  It  was  agreed  also  that  the  hauling 
of  a  wagon  from  one  camp  to  another  should  be 
equivalent  to  the  carriage  of  four  loads,  inasmuch  as 
it  generally  occupied  an  equal  time. 


3IBAMA   HILL. 


347 


This  enabled  me  to  put  a  large  force  on  the  road 
under  Albert,  who  was  the  only  one  capable  of 
managing  a  company  of  men  in  the  advance  expedi- 
tion at  that  time.  By  the  aid  of  natives  and  the 
remainder  of  our  own  people,   we  should  be  able  to 


1881. 
Kuv,  10. 

UsaiiJi. 


TYPES   OF   OUn   COLOURED   EiirLOYES. 


overtake  the  pioneers  day  after  day  with  the  wagons 
and  goods. 

Our  camp  was  pitched  on  the  top  of  Mbama  Hill, 
on  the  16th  of  November.  Ngamberengi  and  Kimpa- 
lampala  appeared — as  we  were  now  in  their  immediate 
district,  and  as  these  were  the  next  in  rank,  authority, 
and    influence  to  old  Makoko— to  express  in  person 


Hill. 


348  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     their  full  consent  to  our  occupation  of  the  river  bank 
Nov.  16.  ^ .  .       .        ,     . 

Jibama    ^car  Kintamo.     They  were  so  cordial  in  their  manner 

and  reception  that  I  experienced  no  difficulty  in  initiat- 
ing- a  plan  of  action  which  was  to  he  carried  out  when 
our  vicinity  to  Stanley  Pool  would  necessitate  the 
selection  of  the  ground  to  he  occupied  by  the  future 
station. 

Ngamberengi,  an  intelligent  man,  far  better  qualified 
by  personal  appearance  and  worth  than  any  one  I  had 
seen  on  the  Congo  to  assume  the  rank  of  chief,  related 
to  me  the  followins:  history  of  ISTo-alyema,  which,  as 
it  was  delivered  publicly  in  the  presence  of  Makoko 
himself,  besides  Kimpalampala,  Sabuka,  Ngoma,  and 
Ngako,  and  others,  corrected  also  by  them  when  he 
was  at  fault,  I  believe  is  accurate. 

Xo-alvema  and  his  two  brothers  were  oriii-inally  slaves 
of  Bamanku,  an  important  man  and  a  chief  living  at 
Kinshassa,  When  Bamanku  died  his  property  was 
equally  divided  amongst  the  three  slave  brothers. 
They  continued  to  increase  their  properties  by  ivory 
trading,  i.e.,  buying  from  the  By-yanzi  canoe  men 
who  brought  the  ivory  from  up-river,  and  reselling  at 
considerable  profit  to  the  Bazombo  and  Bakongo  men 
nearer  the  coast,  who  periodically  brought  cotton  goods 
silk  and  woollen  stuffs,  crockery,  arms,  and  gunpowder 
to  Kinshassa  for  barter.  They  were,  in  fact,  ivory 
brokers,  like  the  Bateke'  whom  we  see  to-dav  established 
along  the  shores  of  Stanley  Pool. 

One  day  at  a  drinking  bout,  during  w^hich  a  great 
deal  of  palm-wine  and  native  beer  was  consumed,  there 


Hill. 


ACCOUNT   OF  NGALYEMA  S   LIFE.  3-19 

•was  a  quarrel,    and  one  of   Xg-alyema's   brothers  was     i83i. 

Xov.  16. 

slain.     This  caused  an  estrangement,  wherein  the  first    jn.ama 
signs  of  discontent  were  manifested  by  Ngalyema  to- 
wards Nchiivila,  chief  of  Kinshassa. 

Some  months  elapsed,  however,  without  any  rupture, 
but  at  a  subsequent  drinking  gathering  an  indignity  to 
his  house  was  fatally  resented  by  Ngalyema's  brother, 
who  shot  the  offender  dead.  The  murderer,  though 
once  a  slave,  being  a  person  of  importance,  could  not 
be  captured,  and  a  war  was  declared  by  Nchuvila  against 
him.  Xgalyema  and  his  brother  defended  themselves 
for  some  time  with  varying  success,  but  in  one  of  the 
many  fights  that  took  place  the  brother  was  killed. 
The  survivor,  Ngalyema,  took  to  flight  that  night,  and 
escaped  to  Mfwa.  There  he  resided  for  some  time 
in  peace,  but  trade  was  not  so  good  at  Mfwa  as  at 
Kinshassa,  and  much  jealousy  was  caused  by  his  pre- 
sence ;  whereupon,  to  avoid  further  complications,  he 
fled  to  Ngako,  a  brother  (by  a  different  mother)  of 
Xchuvila,  chief  of  Kinshassa.  Ngako's  village  of 
Kintamo  was  then  an  unimportant  place,  the  ground 
of  which  had  been  obtained  from  the  Wambundu. 
Ngalyema  was  then  known  as  Itsi.  Before  however 
he  could  avail  himself  of  Ngako's  village  as  a  place  of 
residence,  he  had  to  acknowledge  the  territorial  rights 
of  the  Wambundu,  the  chiefs  of  whom,  ^Makoko,  Ngam- 
Ijcrengi,  and  Kimpalampala  proceeded  to  Kintamo  to 
demand  his  authority  for  residing  there.  Ngalyema 
then  related  a  most  pitiful  story  of  wars  and  troubles, 
and  begged  them  to  grant  a  jDlace  to  build  a  village  in 


Hill. 


350  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     the  "Wambundu  country,   debasino-  himself,   as  is  the 

Nov.  16.  *  •      '  \  •     c         '       ^       ^ 

jibama  custoiii  wheii  pleading,  by  rubbino-  his  face  in  the  dust. 
He  said  that  he  only  needed  a  small  place  to  be  safe 
from  Nchuvila,  who  souglit  to  kill  him.  He  made 
each  of  the  chiefs  a  present  of  a  small  tusk  of  ivory, 
and  the  permission  was  granted. 

"  Since  which  time,"  saidNgamberengi,"hehas  grown 
great  by  trade.  He  is  now  a  rich  man.  He  married  a 
daughter  of  Makoko  of  Lema,  and  another  daughter  of 
the  chief  of  Kimbangu  (about  five  miles  above  Kins- 
hassa),  and  by  his  alliances  he  has  put  a  ring  round 
Kinshassa,  so  that  old  Nchuvila  has  been  obliged  to 
make  peace  with  him.  Ngako,  who  ought  to  succeed 
Nchuvila  as  kino-  of  Kinshassa  when  the  latter  dies,  is 
now  old  and  foolish ;  and  Itsi,  taking  the  poAver  into 
his  own  hand,  is  the  great  chief  of  Kintamo.  Several 
other  Bateke  chiefs  have  joined  him,  such  as  Makabi  and 
Mubi.  There  are  altogether  nine  chiefs  at  Kintamo, 
who  have  made  it  a  much  larger  place  than  Kinshassa. 

"  Ngalyema  has  about  150  guns ;  all  the  rest  put  to- 
gether have  perhaps  300  more.  Makoko  of  Lema  has 
almost  as  many  as  Kintamo  ;  Kimbangu  and  Mikunga 
have  about  200  each ;  while  Kinshassa  and  Kindolo 
cannot  muster  300  guns.  You  see  that  Ngalyema, 
when  going  to  war,  can  bring  over  a  thousand  guns 
easily.  It  is  this  that  has  made  Ngalyema's  head  big. 
All  the  Wambundu  chiefs  put  together  cannot  show 
half  so  many  guns  as  Ngalyema.  We  know  we  cannot 
fight  him  that  way,  but  we  have  our  own  way  of  fight- 
ings which  is  just  as  good.     We  stop  the  markets  until 


ADVANCE   ON  KINTAMO.  351 

tlie  question  is  settled ;  and,  as  there  are  more  people  at     issi. 
Kintamo  than  can  be  fed  by  their  fields,  the  ^^eople  put    jib^ma' 
a  pressure  on  Ngalyema  to  listen  to  us,  and  then  we      ^'^'' 
obtain  what  we  want. 

"  Now  you  follow  our  advice.  Go  on  the  way  you 
are  going  right  to  the  river ;  our  people  shall  carry 
your  goods  and  haul  your  wagons.  If  there  is  any 
question  against  what  we  say  we  shall  stop  the  markets, 
and  Ngalyema  will  foil  fi'om  his  high  place  deep  to 
the  ground  if  he  makes  any  trouble  in  our  country. 
Do  you  see  those  little  boys? — they  are  not  very  big- 
yet,  but  they  are  big  enough  to  chase  Ngalyema  and 
his  thieving  Bateke'  back  to  their  own  poor  country  of 
Mbe  where  they  came  from." 

After  this  stirring  speech,  delivered  in  an  energetic 
manner  with  frequent  fierce  gestures  when  emphasis 
was  required,  he  proceeded  to  indicate  the  exact  sjDot 
where  he  would  advise  me  to  build  my  town. 

On  the  lOtl],  the  camp  was  removed  from  Mbama 
mil  to  Lama-Lankori  Hill,  near  the  banks  of  the 
Lutess  stream.  Ngamljerengi,  Ngako,  Makoko,  and 
Nkwama,  all  Wambuiidu  chiefs,  proceeded  ahead  of  us 
to  silence  all  the  murmurs  of  the  j)etty  chiefs — Ganchu, 
Kimpe,  Kinswangi,  Kimyara,  and  Ngalyema — of  the 
AVainbundu;  and  that  night  Makoko  and  his  little 
daughter  slept  in  our  camp,  after  reporting  that  every- 
l>ody  was  quite  prepared  to  give  us  welcome,  and  that 
all  the  country  was  at  my  feet. 

Here,  also,  before  I  retired  :irri\"c(l  a  friendly  mes- 
sage  liuiii    Kintamo,  and   the    leiiiaiiiing   five   loads  of 


352  THE   COXGO. 

1881.     o-oods  left  in  No'alyema's  care  by  Susi.     Said  the  mes- 

Xov.  29.    ^  .  . 

Kintamo.  sengers  from  tlieir  chief :  "  Bula  Matari  lias  "^'on 
everybody  on  his  side.  Let  him,  therefore,  come  in 
peace,  and  all  will  be  well," 

Arriving  finally  at  the  plain  which  is  near  Kintamo 
on  the  29th,  I  left  the  camp,  accompanied  by  some  of 
the  natives,  by  a  path  which  would  take  me  to  the 
mount  above  the  rapids  of  Kintamo  described  by  Susi. 
After  tliree-quarters  of  an    hour's  journey  over   the 
almost  level  plain,  I  suddenly  obtained  a  view  of  the 
navigable  portion  of  tlie  river  leading  up  to   Stanley 
Pool.     To  my  riglit,  at  the  distance  of  a  mile,  was  the 
cluster  of  villages  called  Kintamo,  on  a  terrace  that  was 
about  175  feet  lower  than  the  plain  on  which  I  stood. 
To  my  left  there  was  a  narrow  projection  from  the 
plain,  like    an  index  finger,  the   topmost   altitude    of 
whicli  was  about  25  feet  higher  •than  the  mean  level 
of  the  plain.     AVe  continued  our  march  for  three-quar- 
ters of  a  mile,  when  we  obtained  a  view  of  the  great 
cataract  of  Kintamo.     Below  the  hill  215  feet,  and  at 
the  extreme  left  corner  of  this  ridge-like  formation,  the 
Upper  Congo  first  became  rufided  and_,  a  mile  below,  it 
became  a  dangerous  cataract,  nearly  opposite  to  whicli 
could  be  seen  the  divided  mouth  of  the  Gordon  Bennett. 
Tracing  the  northern  shore  for  five  miles,  our  eyes 
lighted  on  Mfwa.     Al)Ove  this  village  the  shore  was 
low  and  marshy,  but  wooded,  and  extended  to  a  point, 
three  miles  beyond  which  was  Malima.     A  few  miles 
higher  up,  the  low  grounds  around  Malima  were  bounded 
l)y  the  forest  mount  of  Kintari,  while  the  great  upright 


KINTAMO   BAYLET.  353 

walls  of  Dover  Cliffs  rounded  in  a  crescent  form  south-     issi. 

Nov.  29. 

ward,  to  the  base  of  the  Inga  Peak,  near  which  was  Kiutamo" 
the  entrance  to  the  Upper  Congo.  Opposite  to  Inga 
Peak,  on  the  south  bank,  was  a  tall  mount,  indicating 
the  neighbourhood  of  Kimpoko.  The  south  bank  con- 
tinued to  run  west  until  it  had  arrived  almost  in  a 
direct  southern  line  from  us,  and  distant  about  fifteen 
miles.  Near  here  was  a  cluster  of  villages,  forming 
Kimbangu  and  Mikunga.  From  the  banks  of  these 
villages  the  southern  shore  curved  a  little  east  of 
north  for  six  miles.  Between  Kinshassa  and  Kintamo 
there  were  two  deep  baylets  separated  by  a  cliffy 
point,  since  designated  Kallina  Point.  The  bay  let 
of  Kintamo  curved  grandly  southward  of  west  from 
Kallina  Point,  as  far  as  the  landing-place  of  Kintamo, 
whence  it  swept  towards  us  past  the  foot  of  the  ridge 
on  which  we  stood,  and  broke  into  small  rapids. 

As  the  shore  of  Kintamo  baylet  was  the  nearest 
navigable  portion  of  the  Upper  Congo,  and  between  it 
and  the  coast  the  country  was  open,  and  peopled  only 
by  friendly  tribes,  whom  we  liad  learned  during  our 
slow  progress  hither  to  esteem  for  their  kindly  dispo- 
sitions and  mild  manners,  necessity  as  well  as  prudence 
bade  me  select  for  the  station  such  ground  as  was  still 
unoccupied,  and  which  the  Wambundu  had  power  to 
give  me,  without  the  prospect  of  our  possession  being 
disputed.  The  natives  who  were  with  me  were  well 
acquainted  witli  the  distinctive  boundaries,  and,  on  an 
examination  of  the  water  front  of  the  unoccupied 
territory  still  available  for  navigation,  I  estimated  that 

VOL.  I.  2   a 


354  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     its  total  length  was  about  500  yards,  that  is  from  the 

Nov.  29.  _        ^ 

Kintamo.  beginning  of  the  rapids  to  the  first  stream  below 
Ngalyema's  village.  It  was  a  very  modest  acquisition. 
Inland  it  was  of  course  wide  enough  for  all  purposes  ; 
on  the  level  plain  of  wliich  this  hill  was  part  even  a 
city  might  be  built.  Khonzo  Ikulu  Hill,  now  called 
Leopold  Hill,  on  which  we  stood,  was  110  paces  wide, 
and  supplied  a  most  admirable  situation  for  a  sanata- 
rium,  with  a  very  pleasing  prospect  of  the  lake-like  ex- 
pjansion  of  the  Congo  known  as  Stanley  Pool.  It  would, 
however,  be  about  700  yards  direct  distance  from  a 
cove  in  the  shore  below,  near  which  I  marked  out  a  fit 
landing  place.  AVere  we  to  adopt  this  hill  as  a  site  for 
our  station  it  would  be  too  far  in  my  opinion  from 
the  boat  cove,  with  only  thirty  men  to  guard  it.  I 
judged  that  in  the  night  time  it  would  be  easy  enough 
for  a  few  bold  fellows  from  Kintamo  to  make  a  swoop 
upon  the  boats,  cast  off  their  chains,  and  shove  them 
out  into  the  current,  which  in  a  short  time  would  take 
them  down  the  great  cataract  to  total  destruction. 

There  only  remains,  to  refer  to,  the  hollow  and  slope 
of  Leopold  Hill,  which  was  now  a  wild  waste  of  tall 
grass,  several  feet  in  height.  I  could  not  return  to  the 
camp  Vv-ith  an  unsettled  mind,  and  I  traversed  the  whole 
of  it  in  various  directions,  to  find  the  eligible  spot,  for 
view,  defence,  and  safe  proximity  to  the  boats.  At 
last  I  stood  on  the  slope  of  Le'opold  Hill  at  a  height  of 
eighty  feet  above  the  river,  whence,  looking  southward, 
I  had  a  good  view  of  Kintamo  village,  600  yards  in 
front  of  me,  two  small  streams  Ijeing  between  us  and 


XGALTE^MA'S    IXVITATIOX.  355 

tlie  village.     Eastward  I  could  see,  up  the  river,  Mfwa     issi. 

^        .  ,  Xov.  29. 

on  the  north  bank,  Kallina  Point  on  the  south  bank,  Kintamo. 
and  a  long  stretch  up  the  Pool  extending  to  Dover 
Cliffs.  Between  Kallina  Point  and  Kintamo  I  could 
see  the  patriarchal  baobabs  of  Kinshassa,  and  the 
Adansonia  marking  Kindolo,  and,  bounding  the  view 
from  south,  the  uplands  and  mounts  inland  from 
Kimpoko  and  Mikunga.  I  should  be  300  yards  from 
the  landing  place,  but  the  ground  sloped  easily  towards 
it.  I  could  have  the  village  of  the  coloured  men 
between  the  store-room  and  residences  of  the  Euro- 
peans and  Kintamo,  with  abundant  spaces  for  gardens 
of  bananas  and  fruit-trees  around,  which  would  give 
vivid  greenness  to  the  view  from  the  front  door  of  the 
residence.  From  this  slope  I  could  carve  out  a  terrace, 
and  a  broad  road  could  lead  gently  up  the  plain,  on 
which  some  day  perhaps  we  should  see  rows  of  shade 
trees.  A  bloom  of  civilisation  should  l)e  the  fore- 
ground of  the  picture  that  would  first  meet  the  eyes  of 
the  traveller  from  the  coast,  as  he  looked  down  from 
the  verge  of  the  plain  over  the  expanse  of  the  Pool. 

Having  definitively  settled  the  site  of  the  new  station 
as  agreeably  with  our  circumstances  as  the  nature  of 
the  ground  would  permit,  we  returned  to  the  camp. 
Soon  afterwards  another  peaceful  message  came  from 
Ngalyema  inviting  me  to  build  in  his  village.  But, 
much  as  this  message  would  have  been  welcome  a  few 
weeks  previously,  it  was  now  too  late.  My  thanks  for 
proferred  kindness  was  all  that  I  could  give. 

On  the  1st  of  December  at  daybreak  a  hundred  men 

2  A  2 


356  THE   COXGO. 

1881.     vrere  led  out  of  the  camp,  and  with  machettes,  hoes, 

Nov.  29.  . 

Kintamo.  ^^^  ^^^s  marked  out  a  straight  path  to  the  ground 
intended  for  the  station.  Then  a  brush  circle  or  fence 
many  feet  deep  and  about  100  yards  in  diameter  was 
formed,  also  half-a-dozen  log  towers  to  command  the 
approaches.  This  work  was  followed  by  cutting  the 
grass  and  scrub  level  wdth  the  ground  for  a  hundred 
yards  clear  space  around  the  encampment,  which  com- 
pleted our  first  day's  task.  A  small  guard  of  men  were 
left  in  the  encampment,  and  we  then  retired. 

The  next  day  we  widened  the  road  for  the  wagons, 
and  by  noon  it  reached  the  camp  and  thence  to  the 
landing-place.  The  afternoon  was  employed  by  the 
united  force  of  aborigines  and  our  own  expeditionary 
people  in  transporting  the  tents  and  the  goods,  so  that 
by  sunset  on  the  2nd  of  December  there  remained  only 
the  wagons  behind.  We  now  slept  in  the  camp  near 
the  place  whence  the  steamers  should  depart  on  their 
mission  to  the  Upper  Congo.  By  noon  of  the  3rd  of 
December,  1881,  the  wagons  had  been  drawn  to  the 
landing-place,  and  the  steamer  Ea  Avant  was  floating 
in  the  quiet  haven  of  the  Kintamo  baylet,  with  no 
rapid  or  impediment  intervening  between  her  snug 
cove  and  Stanley  Falls,  and  with  open  navigation  of 
about  5000  miles  before  her. 


SGALTEMA   AND   "  BULA   MATATJr  357 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE  FOUXDIXG  OF  LEOPOLDYILLE — Continued. 

Ngalyema  and  "  Bula  Matari  " — Wily  tactics  of  Xgalyema — A  one-sided 
balance  sheet — Strained  relations — "  Everybody's  finger  is  on  the 
trigger  " — Armed  visits — Gorgeous  apparel — ' '  Speak,  Ngalyema  ;  is 
it  peace  or  war?  " — "  Ay,  kill  me,  Bula  Matari !  " — The  brotherhood  is 
not  broken — Kintamo  a  populous  j^lace — Proposed  palaver — Outbreak 
imminent — Mysterious  disappearance  of  two  of  my  men — Arrival  of 
Konko — The  palaver  takes  place — The  trouble  is  ended — Noisy  re- 
joicing— Trading  operations  —  Kinshassa  —  Xchuvila  —  Our  block- 
house— News  from  Yivi — New  recnoits — Bwabwa  Xjali's  convenient 
forgetfulness — Strength  of  the  expedition — Malingering — Anxiety 
about  the  exploring  party^ — Selling  to  the  natives — Witchcraft — 
Profit  on  ivory — Thriving  gardens — A  lost  jmrty — Enjeli's  enmity — 
Ivory  transactions — The  people  anxious  to  trade — Brotherhood  with 
Ngalyema. 

The    founding    of   Leopoldville    deserves   a   book    for 

itself.     It  is  such  a    curious  storv,   full    of  petty  but  , 

•■■      -  Leopold- 

interesting  incidents  woven  round  two  central  figures,     ^■''^^• 

namely,  Xgalyema  and  " Bula  Matari."  Doubtless  "  Bula 
^[atari"  is  well  known,  at  least  many  who  have  read 
his  works  on  Africa  f\\ncy  they  have  a  dim  idea  of  the 
man.  15ut  Ngalyema  ?  Who  could  describe  him  with- 
out giving  in  detail  the  illustrative  incidents  which 
presented  the  man  finally,  after  patient  study,  to  the 
full  comprehension  of  his  own  blood-brother  ? 


1881. 
Dec.  1. 


358  TEE  CONGO. 


18S1  I  must  endeavour  to  sum  l)im  up  in  a  few  paragraphs, 

Lebi-oui-  lest  this  early  photograph  of  him  will  fade  away.  He 
*■■  is  improving  so  fast  that  he  soon  will  be  unrecognisable. 
His  former  roguish  simplicity  has  been  supplanted 
by  the  faculty  of  knowing  that  his  cunning  acts  are 
being  detected  as  fast  as  they  are  formed,  so  that  his 
rogueries  are  now  only  practised  when  opportunities 
arise. 

At  Mfwa  his  cue  was  to  test  what  the  arri\'al  of  the 
white  man  signified  in  connection  with  the  possibilities 
of  his  own  enrichment.  Believing,  through  some  stupid 
exaggerations  of  the  native  coast  traders,  that  the  white 
man's  wealth  was  boundless,  he  set  about  fathoming 
the  readiness  of  the  white  man  to  select  his.  Ngalyema's, 
person  as  an  object  of  liberality.  Sobered  somewhat 
by  Susi's  descriptions  of  white  men  in  general,  he 
suddenly  came  to  the  conclusion  that  he  had  over- 
estimated their  liberality ;  he  listened  eagerly  to  sug- 
gestions that  the  white  man  might  choose  to  pay  only 
so  long  as  he  received  something  in  return,  and 
forthwith,  when  confirmed  in  these  impressions,  he 
drove  Susi  away. 

When  he  heard  that  the  white  man  was,  after  all  he 
had  said,  advancing  upon  Kintamo,  he  hit  upon  a  plan 
of  enforcing  the  withdrawal  of  the  white  man  for  ever 
from  the  scene,  and  presented  himself  at  the  camp  fully 
prepared  to  effect  his  object.  He  was  not  quite  so 
sanguine  that  he  could  compel  Bula  Matari  to  return 
when  the  Wambundu  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  his  offers 
and  Makoko  and  Ngamberengi  refused  their  aid ;  and 


A    ONE-SIDED   BALANCE-SHEET. 


359 


he  utterly  collapssd  after  that  late  astonishing  exhibition 
of  humour  on  the  part  of  the  white  man. 

From  that  day  he  started  on  another  tack.  The 
"U'hite  man  was  rich ;  he  had  seen  his  store-tents  full  of 
goods — it  might  be  that  some  portion  of  these  might 
fall  to  his  share.  He  became  interested  in  his  dear 
brother's  health  ;  although  at  heart  he  would  much 
prefer  to  have  seen  all  of  his  brother's  colour  poisoned 
right  off  the  face  of  the  earth  could  he  have  known 
some  safe  method  of  clearing  them  off.  He  despatched 
kind  messages  day  after  day,  accompanied  with  loaves 
of  bread,  goats,  sheep,  palm-wine  and  beer.  In  re- 
ciprocating these  the  white  man  was  expected  to  give 
presents  amounting  to  many  times  their  value.  About 
six  times  this  reciprocal  interchange  of  gifts  had 
been  effected  without  question.  The  white  man  then 
struck  a  balance-sheet  one  day  in  this  form  : — 


1881. 
Dec.  1. 

Leopold- 
ville. 


Debit. 

£    s. 

d. 

30  whole   pieces  ofj 
clotli      .     .     .     1 

CO    0 

0 

GO  yards  red  savelist 

10    0 

0 

Handkerchiefs 

3  15 

0 

Figared  blankets . 

1  10 

0 

2  japanned  tin  boxes 

7  10 

0 

1  wooden  trunk   . 

3    0 

0 

Gunpowder     . 

10    0 

0 

I'lnbrclla  .      .      . 

0  10 

0 

Large  bath-tub    . 

5    0 

0 

<;in       .... 

2    0 

0 

<^r-  £     s. 

To  value  of  4  goats  ..60 
„  1  gourd  of  i)aliu-wine  0  3 
„  56  breads  .  .  .  .  0  15 
„  1  tusk  of  ivory     ..50 


d. 
0 
0 
0 
0 


£103 


£11  18    0 


Convinced  of  the  enormous  disproportion  in  value  of 
these  mutual  offices  of  goodwill  and  friendliness,  Bula 


360  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     Matarl  ransacked  his  note-books,  and  castins;  up  tlie 

Dec.  1.  .... 

Leopold-  costs  of  the  various  articles  with  wliich  Ngalyema  had 
already  been  enriched,  he  was  amazed  to  find  that 
Ngalyema  was  debited  to  an  amount  exceeding  £900, 
while  to  ]]is  credit  scarcely  £G6  could  be  placed  ! 

Little  by  little  had  his  true  political  status  in  tlie 
country  become  known  to  us.  From  being  king  l)y 
divine  right  over  an  important  tribe  he  had  dwindled 
down  to  a  mere  ivory-trader  who  was  building  up  a 
future  power  by  investing  his  profits  in  the  purchase  of 
slaves  and  arms. 

He  had  developed  a  singular  talent  for  brag — he  had 
an  aptitude  for  assuming  airs  of  consequence  such  as 
well  might  become  a  born  African  king  ;  he  surrounded 
himself  with  the  state  of  a  great  chief,  was  exact  in 
suppressing  liberties  unbecoming  the  presence  of  one  in 
great  authority  and  power ;  withal  he  was  insatiable, 
the  more  he  received  the  more  devouring  became  his 
greed,  and  the  large  gift  of  one  day  seemed  to  be  utterly 
forgotten  on  the  next. 

This  man  was  to  be  our  neighbour.  His  residential 
village  was  only  600  yards  away  from  our  camp,  which 
we  proposed  to  replace  shortly  by  a  station.  To  build 
anywhere  above  his  village  would  have  been  impru- 
dent, because  our  native  caravans  while  following  the 
road,  which  would  of  necessity  run  by  his  district, 
might  be  dispersed  by  a  mere  threat.  Life  would  soon 
become  unendurable  under  such  conditions. 

Ngalyema  would  only  be  guided  by  his  own  lawless 
instincts.     If  he  were  daily  flattered  and  daily  bribed 


1881. 
Dec.  1. 

Ldopold- 


"  EVEBYBODY'S  FINGER    OX   THE    TBIGGEUr       361 

to  keep  the  peace,  we  slioiilcl  never  be  in  a  free  con- 
dition to  prosecute  our  work  on  the  Upper  Congo. 
Our  mission  would  be  only  an  endeavour  to  satisfy  an  ^■'^^^• 
appetite  growing-  ever  greater  by  gross  feeding.  He 
was  sharp  enough  to  be  able  soon  to  perceive  this,  and 
to  take  care  that  his  appetite  should  not  become  cloyed. 

We,  on  the  other  hand,  lived  in  a  constant  dread  of 
rupture,  and  had  to  contend  against  numerous  enemies 
of  various  nationalities,  castes,  creeds,  and  colour.  In 
our  joresent  condition  it  was  most  likely  to  be  a  pro- 
tracted war  of  wits.  My  supposition  turned  out  to 
be  correct,  and  tliat  is  the  reason  wliy  I  say  that  the 
founding  of  Le'opoldville  would  really  require  a  whole 
book  to  itself  to  give  due  justice  to  our  manoeuvres  to 
keep  the  peace. 

The  aboriginal  subjects  of  Makoko,  when  returning 
with  the  wages  they  had  earned  in  the  transport 
service,  were  asked  by  their  chief  about  the  state  of 
affairs  at  Kintamo  ;  they  replied,  "  Everybody's  finger 
is  on  the  trigger." 

This  was  a  pithy  and  concise  description  of  the 
attitude  in  which  Ngalyema  and  his  brother  chiefs 
of  Kintamo  and  the  Expedition  stood  towards  one 
another.  I  regret  to  say  that  it  existed  for  many 
months.  Every  now  and  then  it  appeared  as  if  an 
explosion  was  imminent;  but  the  rupture  was  always 
warded  off  by  some  triumph,  until  finally  it  has 
become  almost  an  impossibility,  so  thorouglily  has 
Ngalyema  learned  the  lesson  of  exercising  self-restraint 
on  his  passions. 


362  THE   COS  GO. 


L»t 


issi.         For   the   illustration   of  the   above  I   quote   a  few 


C.  6. 


Leopold-   extracts  from  my  diary  of  that  early  period. 
""'"'  "December    3rd,    1881.— Camp    by    Stanley    Pool. 

Xgalyema  appeared  after  we  had  finished  the  launch 
of  the  steamer,  and  had  secured  her  by  chains  to  stout 
trees.  He  was  accompanied  by  about  two  dozen  armed 
followers.  After  his  usual  gifts  of  palm-juice  and 
a  goat,  he  asked  to  see  some  of  our  nice  things.  I 
showed  him  silks,  satins,  velvets,  gold  and  silver  lace, 
fine  shawls,  military  and  livery  coats,  robes,  hand 
and  sleigh  bells,  swords,  and  cutlery,  &c. 

"  He  then  begged  for  a  fine  coat,  a  hand-bell,  a  knife,  a 
pair  of  brass  anklets  for  his  child,  and  finally  seized  upon 
a  boat  robe,  worth  £8  in  London,  my  private  property. 

"  I  put  mv  hand  on  them,  and  said,  '  Now,  Xcal- 
yema,  you  have  seen  all  these  nice  things  as  a  proof  that 
I  have  the  means  to  be  liberal.  To  get  nice  presents 
from  us  you  must  be  good.  It  will  not  do  to  get  into 
a  passion  and  storm  about.  Besides  goats  and  sheep, 
and  such  things,  you  must  prove  your  friendship  by 
keeping  your  people  in  order.  There  must  be  no 
fighting  between  your  people  and  mine  ;  and  to  jorevent 
that  we  must  make  a  law  to  stop  your  people  from 
carrying  guns  to  my  town,  and  I  will  make  a  law  to 
stop  my  peoj)le  from  taking  guns  to  your  place.  People 
when  they  have  taken  too  much  palm-wine  and  beer 
are  very  apt  to  be  quarrelsome,  and  fight ;  somebody 
is  killed,  then  there  is  eitlier  a  heavy  fine  or  a  fight. 
You  lost  a  brother  at  Kinshassa  in  this  manner.  Let 
us  agree  to  stop  it  right  here." 


STRAINED   RELATIONS.  363 

*' '  Ay,  true,'  said  he  ;  '  that  is  a  good  thing.     It  will     issi 

Dec.  3. 

not  do  for  two  great  men  like  you  and  I  to  fight.  Give   leopoid- 
me  your  hand.     You  have  spoken  wise  words.     Now 
let  me  have  the  things.     I  agree  to  all.' 

"  The  goods  were  delivered  to  him. 

"  December  4th. — To  day  is  Sunday,  and  a  day  of  rest ; 
though  I  cannot  keep  my  mind  from  dwelling  upon  our 
future,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  very  unsatisfactory — 
almost  hopeless. 

"December  5th,  Monday. — Ngamberengi  paid  me  a 
visit,  and  desired  to  know  how  things  were  going  on. 
^  Bad,'  I  replied.  *  I  think  Ngalyema  will  give  me  a 
deal  of  trouble.  He  is  asking  for  every  nice  thing  he 
sees.  I  cannot  satisfy  him.  If  refused  he  blusters, 
talks  about  the  country  being  his  own,  asks  us  what 
we  came  for,  if  not  to  irive  o'reat  chiefs  like  him  some- 
thing.' 

" '  Ah,  he  is  a  great  liar !  Never  mind  him.  If 
he  figlits  we  shall  all  be  at  your  back.  Do  not 
give  him  so  much  cloth.  He  has  got  too  much 
already.  That  is  what  has  given  him  such  a  large 
head.  If  he  wants  any  nice  cloth  tell  him  to  buy  it 
with  something.' 

"  At  3  P.M.  Ngalyema,  attended  by  Makabi,  Mubi, 
Ngako,  and  other  chiefs,  and  followed  by  about  100 
armed  men,  appeared.  I  gave  orders  that  none  of  the 
arms  should  be  admitted  within  the  fenced  camp.  One 
of  my  servants,  trying  to  block  the  gateway,  received 
from  the  hands  of  Ngalyema  an  imintentional  spear- 
wound   near   the   eye,    from   which  the  blood   flowed 


364  THE   CONGO. 


1881.     copiously.     I   iDointed  it   out  to  Ngalyema.     He  was 

Dec.  5.  1       •  1     T  1  •    i    J 

Leopold-  sorry,  and  assisted  to  stanch  it,  and  he  aJso  assisted 
with  his  orders  to  keep  all  weapons  out. 

"  Ngalyema  and  his  chiefs  were  dressed  splendidly 
this  day.  It  was  probably  a  visit  of  state.  Each  chief 
was  dressed  with  a  flowing  silk  robe,  under-vest  of  silk, 
cotton  underclothes,  with  an  outer  dress  of  silk ;  yellow, 
blue  and  crimson  seemed  to  be  the  favourite  colours. 
Ngalyema's  arms  were  almost  completely  covered  with 
polished  brass  rings,  over  which  were  heavy  brass 
wristlets  and  armlets.  His  ankles  were  adorned  with 
red  copper  rings,  which  must  have  weighed  10  lbs.  each. 
Makabi  was  similarly  dressed,  for  he  seemed  to  be  a 
rival  in  dress  and  equipments.  The  other  chiefs 
exhibited  their  individual  tastes. 

"  The  hair  of  all  the  Bateke  chiefs  and  people  was 
tucked  neatly  in  a  knot  or  chignon  over  the  hinder  part 
of  the  crown  of  the  head.  The  native  barbers  must 
have  liad  a  busy  time  of  it  this  day  preparing  for  the 
visit,  the  fetish  face-marks  of  ochre,  white  pipe  and 
yellow  clays,  relieved  the  bronze-coloured  faces,  though 
not  to  advantage.  Circlets  of  round  zinc-framed  look- 
ing-glasses were  worn  round  their  heads  as  a  makeshift 
for  kino'lv  crowns. 

"  Xgalyema  laughed  greatly,  as  though  pleased  with 
himself.  Makabi  strutted  about  more  than  usual — to 
hear  the  soft  rustling  of  his  silk — I  presume.  Mubi  was 
not  loth  to  attract  attention,  as  he  was  more  conversa- 
tional than  ordinarily.  Old  Ngako  or  Xkow,  as  they 
variously    called    him,    though   quite    in    his    dotage, 


ABMED    VISITS.  365 


asserted  himself.    Young  Eujeli,  in  his    silks,  was  in     issi. 

Dec.  5. 

better  form  than  usual.  Luopoid- 

"  I  again  took  an  opportunit}",  before  they  returned 
to  their  village,  of  telling  them  that  if  they  wished  to 
keep  on  friendly  terms  with  me,  they  must  omit  the 
habit  of  bringing  guns  and  spears  into  my  settlement, 
otherwise  it  was  impossible  to  say  how  long  the  peace 
could  be  maintained. 

"  I  marked  out  the  terrace  to-day,  and  work  has  begun 
in  earnest.  A  large  clearing  of  1  >ush  and  scrub  has  also 
been  made,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  feel  a  little 
safer  against  any  treacherous  attack. 

"December  Gth. — Xgalyema  visited  me  again  to-day, 
with  another  large  following  of  armed  men.  He  did 
not  seem  to  remember  that  we  had  mutually  passed  a  law 
against  the  carrying  of  arms  in  each  other's  territory. 
His  men  were  disagreeable  in  their  manners,  I  thought 
rather  insolent.  My  friend,  unstable  as  water,  pouted, 
looked  cross,  when  reminded  of  this  law.  •  Xgalyema 
to-morrow  will  return  the  things  Bula  Matari  gave 
him,  and  will  break  the  brotherhood  between  us.' 

"  '  Be  it  as  you  say,  Xgalyema.  The  trouble  is  not 
with  me ;  it  is  in  Xgal^'ema's  heart ;  it  is  not  in  ]3ula 
Matari's  camp,  it  is  at  Kintamo.  Keep  the  goods  or 
return  them.  Law  is  law,  and  nobody  will  be  received 
with  guns  in  my  camp  again.  If  I  see  you  approach 
this  camp  with  guns,  mark  me,  I  will  take  it  to  mean 
war ! 

"  December  7th,  at  2  i\M.,  Dualla  rushed  up  to  me, 
.saying,    '  Xgalyema   is  crossing  our  little   river  with 


)6()  THE   CONGO. 


1881.     forty  guns.     Makabi,  Mubi,  and  Ganchu  are  with  liim. 


Dec.  7.  . 

Loojioid-  Over  a  Imndred  men  with  guns  are  beyond  the  httle 
river  in  the  grass.'  Not  to  be  taken  at  a  disadvantage, 
forty  of  my  men  were  placed  quickly  under  arms,  and 
Ave  marched  down  to  a  large  marquee  tent  we  had  con- 
structed fifty  yards  away  from  the  palisaded  camp. 
Ngalyeraa  and  his  party  had  already  arrived,  but  our 
party  were  placed  in  skirmishing  order  about  twenty 
yards  away  from  them  in  a  crescent  from  between  the 
tent  and  the  path  which  led  to  Kintamo  ;  I  had  also 
my  double-barrel  smooth-bore  with  me,  and  advancing 
a  few  paces  forward  with  my  gun  in  the  hollow  of  my 
left  hand,  muzzle  downwards,  I  said, '  Speak,  Ngalyeina  ; 
is  it  peace  or  war  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  bringing 
guns  to  my  camp  ? ' 

"  The  poor  pagan  thought  he  was  in  my  power,  and 
looking  for  a  moment  at  the  stern  faces  of  my  men, 
who  had  also  followed  my  movements,  though  not  one 
gun  was  loaded,  instantly  threw  his  gun  away,  and 
threw  himself  on  the  ground,  rubbiug  his  face,  in  the 
dust,  and  crying  out — 

" '  Ay,  kill  me,  Bula  Matari !  Ay,  kill  me,  my 
brother.  Yes,  you  are  strong — strong  !  Kill  me  ;  see, 
here  is  my  breast.' 

"  Ngalyema  had  conquered  me  by  this  appeal.  I 
gave  my  gun  to  one  of  the  escort,  and  went  up  to  hiniy 
taking  hold  of  his  hands,  lifted  him  up,  and  said — 

"  '  Fear  nothing  from  me  ;  it  is  you  playing  the  child 
who  brings  this  trouble  constantly.  AYe  made  a  law 
together  against  the  carrying  of  arms  in  one  another's 


THE  BBOTHEREOOB   IS  NOT  BBOKEX.  3G7 

village.     We  don't  know  what  you  mean  by  bringing     issi. 

Dec.  7. 

SO  many  guns  to  see  a  friendly  neighbour  so  close  to  Li-opoi.!- 
you.  I  have  given  you  numbers  of  fine  tbings  to  prove 
to  you  that  with  us  there  is  no  fear.  As  you  brought 
yours  to-day  for  the  fourth  time  to  my  camp,  I  was 
determined  to  show  you  that  we  were  not  sleeping.  If 
we  meant  war  on  you,  how  long  do  you  think  it  would 
be  before  Kintamowas  in  our  power?  Tbe  Warnbundu 
come  to  see  me  every  day ;  they  do  not  bring  arms  ; 
they  bring  food  to  sell,  and  their  men  are  working  witli 
us  every  day.     Why  cannot  you  do  the  same  ?  ' 

"  But  poor  Ngalyema  was  so  excited  by  his  fears 
that  he  was  nearly  breathless  with  his  emotion,  and  he 
scarcely  knew  what  he  was  saying ;  yet  his  people  in 
the  grass  took  the  precaution  to  rouse  all  Kintamo,  and 
there  must  have  been  a  large  force  at  hand  ;  advance 
they  dare  not,  however,  as  Ngalyema  and  all  his  chiefs 
were  surrounded. 

"  I  kept  murmuring  pleasant  words  to  Ngalyema  to 
inspire  confidence  in  him,  wJiich  by-and-bye  he  ob- 
tained, and  while  fondly  patting  his  hand  I  explained 
further  to  him  that,  if  he  did  not  like  the  sight  of  my 
men  with  guns  in  their  hands,  he  must  not  bring  armed 
men  with  him  on  his  visit.  '  My  place,'  I  said,  '  is 
simply  a  market-place  for  everybody  to  meet  in  safety, 
and  it  was  not  the  custom  anywhere  to  carry  guns  to 
the  public  market.' 

"  I  then  turned  to  the  goods  he  had  brought,  and 
said,  '  Ah,  I  see  you  mean  to  return  the  things  I  gave 
you  !    Well,  count  them  out ;  our  brotherhood  will  then 


368  THE   COXGO. 

i88h     be   ended.     My   people  shall  not  cross  the  stream  to 


Dec 


Leopold-   go  to  Kintarao,  and  your  people   must  not  visit  my 


Tille.  .,, 

villa£:e. 


'• '  Xo,  no,  no,'  cried  Xgalyema  anxiously ;  '  our 
brotherhood  cannot  be  broken ;  our  blood  is  now  one. 
I  will  take  these  back  with  me ;  and,  in  future,  if  you 
see  any  of  my  people  in  your  village,  with  a  weapon 
in  his  hand,  seize  him,  bind  him  tight,  and  he  shall 
pay  dearly  for  it.' 

"  '  Ah-ah-h,'  cried  everybody  present.  '  If  that  law 
is  kept,  there  will  never  be  any  trouble.' 

"  This  ended  this  troublous  day. 

"Xow  I  am  bound  to  teach  this  intractable  brother 
of  mine  ;  first,  that,  although  my  brother,  he  must  not 
expect  several  bales  for  nothing.  He  is  king  of  no 
country,  he  can  give  no  privileges  nor  concessions ;  he 
is  simply  a  broker  in  ivory,  or  what  is  called  a  middle- 
man, from  the  Bateke'  country.  I  will  still  be  kind  to 
him,  and  lie  shall  have  decent  gifts,  but  I  must  draw  the 
line  at  bales. 

"  Second,  that  though  we  are  very  quiet  and  inoffen- 
sive people,  and  will  do  no  harm  to  any  body,  we  are 
well  abl^o  punish  violence. 

"  Third,  that  carrying  weapons  during  a  visit  to 
friends  is  not  permissible. 

"  Probably  when  he  has  well-acquired  these  lessons 
I  may  have  others  to  give  my  rude  pupil. 

"  December  7th. — The  En  Avant  made  a  trial  trip 
to-day,  and  the  By-yauzi  and  Bateke  who  are  living  at 
Kintamo  lined  the  banks  by  many  hundreds.    I  did  not 


PROPOSED   PALAVER.     ■  369 

know  until  to-day  what  a  populous  place  Kintamo  is.     issi. 
There  are  probably  5000  people  of  various  tribes  in  this   Lt-opoid- 
settlement.     Therefore  there  is    more  reason  for  per- 
severing in  the  effort  to  teach  Xgalyema  his  lessons 
before  I  leave  for  up-river. 

"  TTe  are  working  hard  on  the  terrace,  which  must 
be  of  considerable  length  and  breadth  before  we  are 
able  to  begin  building. 

"  December  8th. — Ngalyema,  mortified  after  the  scene 
of  yesterday,  no  sooner  returned  to  his  village  than  he 
recovered  his  usual  loud  bluster.  He  despatched  his 
son  to  Lema  and  Kimbangu,  requesting  their  assis- 
tance to  drive  us  out  of  the  country.  He  also  asked 
Kiuswangi,  Kimpe,  and  Kimfila,  \Yambundu  chiefs 
living  between  us  and  Makoko's  town,  to  help  him. 
They  have  refused,  and  sent  me  warning  that  Xgalyema 
means  mischief. 

"  December  9th. — No  visits  from  any  one  to-day  ex- 
cepting a  young  native,  wlio  informed  us  that  Xgalyema 
has  threatened  to  kill  any  one  caught  carrying  food  to 
sell  to  Bula  Matari's  people. 

"  Makoko  has  sent  a  messenger  to  tell  ^-alyema 
that  he  himself  is  the  cause  of  the  trouble,  because  of 
his  jealousy  of  the  white  man,  and  to  advise  him  to 
leave  Bula  Matari  alone. 

"December  10th. — Makoko's  messenger  arrived,  after 
conveying  his  chief's  message  to  Xgalyema  to  say  that 
he  intends  to  call  all  the  Wambundu  chiefs  together, 
and  visit  Kintamo  to  hold  a  palaver  wherein  the  trouble 
should  be  settled. 

VOL.  1.  L>    IJ 


rille. 


370  THE   CONGO. 

1881.         "  December  11  til.— Sunday  ;  rest  from  labour.    Eela, 
l>ec.  11.        .....  , 

Lt'opoid-   '^"^'if^^  of  Kibil)i,  an  important  trader  on  the  Kwa  river, 

paid  me  a  visit  to-day.  I  first  made  her  acquaintance 
at  Mfwa  in  August,  when  she  professed  to  commiserate 
the  poor  white  man,  when  driven  away  from  Malima  by 
wicked  Gamankono.  Eela  is  artful ;  she  knows  the 
Mdiite  man  is  rich,  and  she  accordingly  purrs  in  his 
jiresence  to  extract  more  cloth.  She  is  very  much  like 
her  white  sisters  in  her  nature  ! 

'^  December  12th  to  22nd. — Each  day  sees  us  at  our 
regular  work  of  excavating  the  terrace  from  the  slope 
of  Le'opold  Hill ;  making  roads  to  collect  the  trees  for 
building  purposes ;  sawing  planks  for  doors,  steps, 
window-frames,  tables,  stools,  shelves,  &c.  We  have 
also  made  a  fine  road  from  the  terrace  as  far  as  Kins- 
wangi's.  Ngalyema  observes  a  distant  attitude.  '  Every- 
body's' finger  is  on  the  trigger.  No  outbreak  has 
occurred,  but  it  is  imminent ;  the  position  is  very 
delicate ;  rumours  of  wars  and  councils  for  wars  reach 
us,  but  I  pay  no  heed  to  them.  I  am  just  now  acting 
the  part  of  a  schoolmaster.  My  pupil's  sulky  moods 
must  not  deter  me  from  pursuing  what  my  conscience 
approves. 

"  Two  days  ago  a  man  of  mine  mysteriously  disap- 
peared. To-day  another  is  reported  absent — lost,  killed, 
or  deserted.     I  strongly  suspect  Ngalyema. 

'"'  December  23rd. — Konko,  an  important  chief  and  a 
great  ivory  trader  owning  a  district  nearly  midway  be- 
tween Kintamo  and  the  Inkissi  River,  paid  me  a  visit 
to-day,  acting  as  spokesman  for  our  friends  Makoko 


KONKO  S  ABRIVAL. 


171 


and  Ngalyema.     He  said  that  lie  wished  to  make  peace     issi. 
lictween  Ngalyema  and  Bula  Matari,  and  that  two  of  Leopoid- 
ray  men  were  prisoners  in  Ngalyema's  hands ! 

"  Konko  was  told  to  cut  his  story  short,  as  he  had 
told  too  much  already.  He  was  asked  to  go  back  to 
Xgalyema,  and  bring  the  men  by  noon,  otherwise  I 
should  go  myself  to  fetch  them. 


TYPES  OF  OUB  EMPLOYKS. 


"  Konko  returned,  and  at  noon  brought  back  Ngal- 
yema liimself  and  tlie  two  prisoners,  who  were  charged 
by  liim  with  having  been  detected  steab'ng  cassava  in 
liis  gardens.  I  did  not  press  the  matter,  as  the  storj^  was 
as  likely  to  be  true  as  not.  A  velvet  cloak  of  the  value 
of  £15,  a  silk  shirt  wortli  £3,  a  private  rug  of  the 
vahio    of    eight    guineas    in   London,    were    given    to 

2  IJ  2 


372  TEE   CONGO. 

1881.     Ngalyema,  nor  was  Konko  permitted  to  deiDart  without 
Leopold-  substantial  proofs  of  my  wish  to  be  considered  his  friend, 

"  December  24th. — The  great  palaver  took  place  to- 
day. Ngalyema,  Makabi,  Mubi,  Ganchu,  Ngako,  and 
Enjeli  of  Kintamo ;  Kinswangi,  Kimpe,  Ganchu,  Kim- 
iila,  and  Ngalyema,  sub-chiefs  of  the  Wambundu ; 
Konko,  Makoko  of  Lema,  accompanied  by  134  of  their 
followers,  all  being  unarmed,  were  present.  This 
meeting  was  to  satisfy  the  Wambundu  that  Ngalyema 
had  not  attempted  to  sell  the  country  to  me,  as  he 
had  been  accused  of  doing  by  common  report. 

"  Ngalyema,  with  that  methodical  accuracy  for  which 
these  natives  are  distinguished,  first  recoimted  all  the 
incidents  attending  his  first  acquaintance  with  me,  and 
then  commenced  the  relation,  with  tolerable  fairness,  of 
the  events  of  the  last  few  days. 

"  I  then  was  requested  to  give  my  version  of  how  I 
met  Ngalyema  years  ago,  and  how  I  had  again  met 
him  at  Mfwa  ;  how  he  had  led  me  to  believe  that  he 
had  a  country  called  Kintamo ;  how  I  had  asked  him 
to  be  allowed  to  live  with  him ;  how,  finally,  he  had 
declined  as  his  friends  and  neighbours  were  unwilling ; 
how  I  at  last  came  to  ^lakoko,  and  Makoko,  with  the 
consent  of  the  other  Wambundu  chiefs,  had  given 
me  the  country  between  Kintamo  and  the  cataract, 
and  far  back  inland ;  how  Ngalyema  had  made  me 
presents  of  food,  and  I  had  reciprocated  with  many 
gifts,  but  that  the  gifts,  though  many  and  rich,  were 
not  for  the  country  but  to  secure  his  friendship. 

"  The    Wambundu   chiefs   then   spoke,    and   finally 


ville. 


NOISY  BEJOICING.  373 

Makoko   of  Lema,  father-in-Jaw  of  Ngalyema,  chosen     issi. 

Dec.  24. 

umpire  in  the  palaver,  said  :  '  I  have  heard  the  story  L^opoi,^. 
of  Ngalyema  and  I  have  heard  what  Bula  Matari 
has  said.  Let  Bula  Matari  make  the  sign,  and  clear 
Ngalyema  of  the  crime  he  has  been  charged  with  hj 
the  Wambundu,  otherwise  there  can  be  neither  friend- 
ship nor  peace.' 

"  Dualla,  at  a  sign  from  me,  drew  a  piece  of  pipe-clay, 
and  marked  a  broad  white  band,  running  from  the 
wrist  to  the  shoulder  along  each  arm  of  Ngalyema  as  a 
sign  to  all  men  present  that  he  was  guiltless,  at  which 
all  the  people  shrieked  with  joy  and  surprise  that  Bula 
Matari  knew  the  custom  of  the  Bateke." 

(Cunning  Konko  had  imparted  the  secret  previous 
to  the  meeting.) 

"  It  is  ended  ;  it  is  ended — the  trouble  is  ended  !" 
cried  Makoko  of  Lema.  "  Build,  build,  everywhere  as 
much  as  you  like  ;  the  country  is  free  and  open,  and  all 
of  us  are  now  your  friends." 

"  All  shortly  after  retired  to  Kintamo,  when  such  a 
fusillade  began  in  that  village  that  we  first  thought 
that  a  mutual  massacre  had  commenced.  But  our 
messengers  were  informed  that  it  was  to  celebrate  the 
results  of  the  palaver.  Ngalyema  expended,  it  is  said, 
seven  ten-pound  kegs  of  powder ;  Makoko  of  Lema, 
five  kegs ;  Ngamberengi,  on  behalf  of  the  Wambundu, 
three  kegs. 

"  December  25th.^ — Sunday,  and  Christmas  Bay. 
Desirous  of  celebrating  this  day  by  gifts,  but  being 
uiial)lc    througli    poverty  of  material   to   make   much 


374  THE   CONGO. 

1881.     parade,  I  gave  500  cheroots,  one  bottle  of  brandy,  and 

Dec.  25, 

Ltopoid-  one   bottle  of  sherry  to  the  Europeans,  and  to   each 
member  of  the  coloured  force  four  yards  of  cloth. 

"  December  26th. — Began  bartering  cloth  for  brass 
wire,  at  the  following  prices  : — 

"  1  piece  of  unbleached  domestic,  24  yards  .  14  brass  rods  (5  to  the  lb.) 

1  fathom  of  red  savelist  .         .         .         .  14     „ 

1  piece  of  common  striped  cloth,  22  yards  10 

1      „     „  superior  striped,  26  yards  .  15     „ 

1  knife,  white-handled  table,  3  rivets         .  6     „ 

1      „         „  „  „      1  rivet  .  3     „ 

"  The  brass  rods  are  the  currency  of  the  country, 
beginning  from  lyumbi  ridge,  and  ending  at  the  upper 
extremity  of  Uyanzi.  They  are  to-day  about  twenty- 
six  inches  long,  but  they  may  be  shorter,  as  the  clipping 
in  many  instances  is  excessive.  Three  of  these  brass 
rods  purchase  two  five-pound  loaves  of  cassava  bread. 
A  five-pound  loaf  is  a  two-days'  ration  for  the  coloured 
men.  Any  extra  work  is  paid  for,  which  serves  to 
keep  most  of  the  people  in  dried  fish,  bananas,  ground- 
nuts, and  palm-oil. 

"  December  28th. — Heard  several  rifle-shots  on  the 
north  bank.  Ngalyema's  people  inform  me  to-night 
that  another  party  of  white  men  has  been  driven  away 
by  the  Mfwa  natives. 

"  December  29th. — The  terrace  is  so  far  advanced 
that  we  began  to  plant  the  heavy  timber-frames  of  the 
block-house  I  intend  to  raise  here  for  defence  and  shelter. 
The  heavy  timbers  are  solid  logs  thirty  feet  long,  one 
foot  in  diameter.  AVe  have  already  collected  about 
eighty  of  these  large  logs,  and  duly  prepared  them. 


KINSHASSA.  375 

''  The  visits  of  the  natives  are  frequent  and  amicable,     issi. 

,  ,  .  .  .  Dec.  29. 

There   is    no    question  pending  between   us  and   any   L,;opoki- 
natives.     The  health  of  everybody  is  excellent,  as  usual 
at  this  season  with  all  those  who  have  employment  for 
mind  and  body. 

"  December  30th. — Despatched  a  caravan  of  fifteen 
men  to  Manyanga. 

"  January   1st,   1882. — I  paid  a  visit  to  Kinshassa 
this  New  Year's  day.     Large  crowds  collected  at  Kin- 
tamo  shore  to  see  the  first  steamer  on  the  Upper  Congo. 
At  Kinshassa  a  similar  crowd  appeared  ;  but  instead  of 
the  angry  demonstration  that  drove  the  missionaries  in 
1880  away,  our  reception  was  most  flattering.      Mala- 
meen  was  there,  of  course,  with  his  bright  tri-coloui', 
which  he  never  seems  to  part  from.     Nchuvila,   the 
chief,   is  a  tall,   thin  bronze-coloured   old  man   about 
seventy-five   years   old.       His  nephew,  Bankwa,   is   a 
burly  stout  man  of  about  thirty,  who,  it  is  said,  will 
succeed  Nchu\'ila,  when  he  dies,  as  chief  of  Kinshassa. 
Though  he  has  two  sons,  twenty-five  and  tv/enty  years 
old  respectively,  Bankwa  will  inherit  the  chieftainship. 
We  spent  the  visit  sociably  and  mannerly.     Our  long- 
stay  at  Kintamo  without  rupture  deprived  ^lalameen 
of  the  power  of  slandering  us  by  his  absurd  reports  of 
our  cannibalism.      Kinshassa  and  Kintamo  have  still 
a  feud  between  them,   though  latterly  they  have  not 
ventured  into  exchanging  musket-shots. 

"  Jan.  10th. — Tlie  frame  of  the  block  house  is  ahnost 
complete.  "We  have  consumed  125  noble  trees — teak, 
red-wood,  and  plane ;  2582  small  trees  4  inches  diameter, 


376  THE   CONGO, 


villc 


1882.     15  feet  lono-;  21,15G  rods  8  feet  lono- ;  18,900  lbs.  of 

Jan.  10.  O  '  '  ^  ,  T  1        n 

Leopold-  long  grass.  The  house  is  to  be  2^  feet  above  the  floor 
of  the  terrace,  which  is  now  100  yards  in  length  by  50 
in  breadth.  We  shall  now  begin  to  clay  it.  As  the 
central  section  of  the  house  will  have  walls  22  feet 
high,  wing-walls  15  feet  high  and  2  feet  thick,  it  will 
be  a  slow  work,  as  the  clay  is  300  yards  off,  being  at 
the  landing-place,  and  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that 
the  Europeans  and  small  garrison  should  be  above  all 
anxiety.  In  the  event  of  a  rupture  with  Ngalyema  in 
my  absence,  they  would  be  able  to  retire  within  an 
impregnable  house.  It  would  be  very  imprudent  to 
trust  any  man's  professions  of  friendship,  whether  he 
be  white  or  black.  Show  any  man  that  you  depend 
only  on  his  goodwill,  and  your  position  is  a  very 
insecure  one. 

"  January  12th. — Our  caravan  returned  from  Man- 
yanga  to-day,  by  which  we  have  news  that  the  chief  of 
Yivi  station  has  suddenly  left  for  Europe  !  This  person 
having  been  engaged  by  me,  by  formal  contract,  has 
not  thought  it  necessary  to  inform  me  of  his  inten- 
tion. However,  Lindner,  his  successor  pro  tern.,  is  a 
sufiScient  person,  and  his  first  correspondence  conveys 
me  the  news  of  this  sudden  change  of  chiefs  at  my 
princi^Dal  base. 

"  A  better  piece  of  news,  however,  is  that  informing 
me  of  the  arrival  of  one  hundred  new  recruits  for  the 
Expedition,  and  the  arrival  of  thirty  other  men  to 
accompany  a  Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche  on  an  exploring 
tour  in  the  Loango  district. 


NEW  RECRUITS.  377 

"Janiiaiy  19th. — Thirty-two  of"  the  new  recruits  1882. 
have  arrived,  accompanied  by  a  woman,  who,  being  the  Leopold- 
only  female  in  the  expedition,  has  created  a  great  inte- 
rest in  the  minds  of  the  natives.  She  is  very  neat,  and 
can  boast  of  youth  and  superior  charms  to  any  that  I 
have  seen  on  the  Congo.  We  are  all  rather  proud  of 
her. 

"  January  21st. — I  despatched  an  officer  and  a  small 
expedition  along  the  south  bank  to  Manyanga,  prelimi- 
nary to  forming  a  regular  transport  service. 

"January  22nd. — The  block-house,  terrace,  garden, 
and  native  village  are  well  advanced  this  last  week. 
We  have  now  153  coloured  people  at  station,  out  of 
w^iom  eighteen  are  detailed  three  times  a  w^eek  to  pro- 
cure rations  for  such  a  large  number.  Nineteen  of  the 
others  are  tent-boys,  body-servants,  sick  people,  (tc,  so 
that  there  are  really  only  117  men  at  active  work. 

"  January  26th. — All  last  night  up  to  9  a.m.  to-day  the 
natives  of  Kintamo  have  been  celebrating  a  marriage. 
Singing,  dancing,  shouting,  and  firing  guns  have  been 
going  on  incessantly.  The  Wambundu  chiefs  and  Ma- 
koko  pay  me  regular  visits.  Ngalyema  has  also  fre- 
quently condescended  to  visit  me,  but  the  screw  is  being 
gently  pressed  to  reduce  him  to  order  and  manageability. 
Some  of  these  days  I  hope  to  be  proud  of  my  pupil. 
The  weather  has  been  extremely  hot  the  last  three  or 
four  days. 

"January  27tli. — Caravan  brought  goods  from  Man- 
yanga.    All  well  down  river. 

"  February  3rd. — Bwabwa  Njali  paid  me  a  visit  to- 


378  THE   CONGO. 

1882      day,  and  I  have  enjoyed  a  triumpli  over  him.    The  last 
Ltopoid-   time  I  noticed  him  in  my  diary  he  was  indebted  to  me 

ville. 

for  ten  fathom  of  red  saveUst  which  he  had  received  as  a 
loan.  He  was  next  heard  of  as  levelling  muskets  at  my 
people  wlio  had  gone  to  his  village  by  his  own  invita- 
tion. Imagining  that  we  had  forgotten  this  trifling 
episode,  he  came  to  day  with  a  goat  and  a  black  pig  and 
some  fowls.  I  received  him  very  graciously,  and,  after 
handing  them  over  to  the  goatherds^  I  smilingly  re- 
minded him  that  he  was  in  debt  to  me  for  the  ten 
fathom  of  blanket  cloth  received  last  August,  and  1 
w^ould  therefore  be  greatly  obliged  to  him  for  them. 
A  quick  flash  of  guilt  stole  over  his  features,  but  he 
promised  that  he  would  repay  me  to-morrow. 

"  February  4th. — Bwabwa  Njali  brought  me  200 
loaves  of  bread  to-day,  which  included  principal  and 
interest.  As  bread  is  a  necessity  at  this  station  it  was 
received,  and  a  noble  present  relieved  my  friend  of  all 
fear  of  consequences. 

"  February  .5  th. — I  perceive  from  my  last  accounts 

from  down-river  that  we  are  progressing  exceedingly 

well,  despite  drawbacks  caused  by  faithless  Europeans. 

The  following  table  will  explain  : — 

"  Vivi       .         .         .  Europeans  5  Coloured  people    74 

Isangila           .         .          „          1  „            ,,        12 

Manyanga       .         .          „          15  „            „        36 

Ferry  of  Kinsende  .           „         0  „            „        12 

Stanley  Pool  Station         „         0  „            „      153 

14  287 

Exploring  expedition         „         1  „  „        22 

En  route  with  caravan      „  0  „  „        78 

Total  15  387 


2IALINGERING.  079 


One  of  my  Europeans  has  been  malingering  for     i8S2. 


Feb. 


five  weeks,  while  the  value  of  him  since  he  joined  us  Leopoid- 
about  eight  months  ago  has  been  absolutely  nil.  I  have 
spoken  to  him  in  the  most  paternal  manner  several 
hours  altogether,  endeavouring  to  encourage  him,  but  I 
perceive  that  it  is  useless.  It  will  probably  end  in  his 
sudden  dismissal  some  day.  However,  the  jDrompting 
of  it  will  emanate  from  him. 

"  February  25th. — Our  house  is  completed  and  we 
broke  up  our  camp,  each  European  moving  to  his  own 
chamber.  Compared  to  our  tent  life  it  is  palatial. 
There  are  five  chambers,  a  dining-saloon,  and  a  formi- 
dably strong  magazine.  Shelves  are  made  also  to 
exhibit  our  stock  of  goods. 

"  February  27th. — TTork  begins  on  the  Steamer's 
Cove,  so  that  at  high  water  steamers  and  boats,  besides 
a  flotilla  of  canoes,  may  enter  into  harbour,  safe  from 
all  danger  of  flood  and  marauders. 

"  March  2nd. — Caravan  with  steel  whale-boat  arrived 
to-day,  and  also  another  from  Manyanga  with  goods. 
The  native  village  is  finished  and  roads  swept  clean. 

"March  4th. — "We  are  also  at  work  on  large  garden. 
Wadi  Rehani's  company  clear  the  ground  for  it.  Susi's 
company  builds  goat  and  fowl  houses.  Everything  is 
proceeding  most  satisfactorily,  though  I  see  a  prodi- 
gious amount  of  labour  yet  before  me.  I  am  anxious 
about  news  of  the  exploring  party. 

"  March  5th. — The  goods  are  now  on  exhibition  in  tlie 
magazine.  The  barred  windows  are  crowded  by  curious 
natives.      Native   imagination,  fired   by   the    brilliant 


380  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     display  of  doths  of  all  colours,  silks,  satins,  ribbons, 

ilarch  '). 

Leopold-  fancy  jewellery,  cutlery,  joottery,  crockery,  glass  ware, 
guns,  swords,  machettes,  threads,  bobbins,  ribbons,  gold 
and  silver  laces,  &c.,  &c.,  will  report  that  my  wealth 
exceeds  calculation  !  Who  would  have  expected  such 
a  result  as  this  three  months  ago  ?  Over  £500  worth 
of  goods  were  sold  by  us  before  night. 

"March  6th. — Sale  continued  to-day,  brought  £300. 
Ngalyema  went  to  visit  Gamankono  of  Malima  on 
account  of  !Mwana  Mundele,  his  nephew,  who  was 
arrested  there  on  a  chai^ge  of  witchcraft.  Being  a 
person  of  importance,  seven  slaves  and  a  tusk  of  ivory 
were  given  to  hush  the  charge.  Had  he  been  a  poor 
man  he  would  have  been  burnt. 

"  March  7th. — Xgako,  our  old  chief  of  Kintamo, 
during  a  visit  to  Kinshassa,  has  been  assaulted  there 
by  Bankwa's  people. 

"  March  8th. — A  grand  council  of  war  was  held  at 
Kintamo  to  avenge  the  indignity  to  Ngako.  The 
By-yanzi  stoj)ped  the  preparations  for  war,  because  I 
had  not  received  the  news,  and  no  one  knew  what 
Bula  Matari  might  do  in  case  of  a  war  near  his  country. 

"  This  is  the  second  time  that  our  presence  in  this 
vicinity  has  prevented  a  sanguinary  native  conflict. 

"  March  9th. — The  first  ivory  v/as  purchased  to-day 
as  a  test  of  the  price.  The  weight  was  2  lbs.  I  paid 
six  handkerchiefs,  which  cost  in  England  1,9.  3(i.  We 
have  to  pay  something  for  learning.  The  number  of 
our  coloured  force  at  present  is  171  men,  the  money 
cost  of  rations  for  whom  is  £1  12s.  %d.  per  day. 


THRIVING    GARDENS.  381 

"  Marcli  lOtli. — Ganchn,  who  first  met  us  at  Mfwa     1882. 

.  March  10. 

last  year,  sang  the  praises  of  Jsgalyema.  He  attributes  Leopoid- 
to  him  infinite  and  powerful  virtues.  He  possesses 
charms  which  render  him  invisible.  More  than  once 
during  some  of  the  petty  wars  of  their  region  he  has 
suddenly  appeared  in  the  midst  of  his  foes  with  his 
short  sword  destroying  men  like  a  demon  before  any 
one  knew  by  whom  the  fatal  blows  were  dealt.  Aged 
Ngako,  Ganchu's  father,  enjoys  also  this  faculty,  and 
demonstrated  it  only  a  short  time  ago  at  Mfwa,  for  when 
assaulted  and  seized  by  two  of  Bankwa's  people  he  sud- 
denly disappeared,  leaving  his  torn  robe  in  their  hands  I 

"  March  15th. — Indian  corn  planted  in  the  hollows 
below  the  European  gardens.  A  few  peas  have  begun 
to  sprout  up  in  the  latter;  the  parsley,  radish,  and 
lettuce  are  thriving  famoush^  Onions  we  look  for  in 
vain.  White  beans  do  not  thrive.  Melons,  pumpkins, 
Spanisli  pepper,  cucumbers,  are  doing  well.  Sweet 
230tatoes,  being  native,  are  spreading  vigorously.  We 
are  such  tyros  in  gardening  that  these  are  mere  expe- 
riments. The  season  is  too  late.  We  should  have 
begun  in  October,  I  fear.  However,  we  shall  learn 
something  from  our  maiden  efforts  as  to  quality  of  soil, 
season,  bugs,  and  insects.  A  pine-apple  plat  has  also 
been  planted,  and  a  few  dozen  bananas. 

"  March  22nd. — Caravan  from  Manyanga  arrived 
with  news.  Hardworking  Flamini,  the  engineer  of 
tlio  Iioi/al,  has  suffered  an  accident,  and  gone  home  ; 
and  another  European  has  relieved  us  of  his  presence. 
The  exploring  party  declares  the  road  to   Manyanga 


382  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     bv  south  bank  free  and  safe,  thouo^h  tbe  chief  expects 

March  22.      '  „ 

Lc^opoid-  trouble  some  day  at  a  place  called  Lutete's.  The 
seventy-eight  recruits  left  Isangila  on  the  lOth  of 
February,  yet  up  to  the  14th  of  March  there  is  no 
news  of  them,  the  European  in  charge  having  resigned 
and  gone  home,  leaving  the  people  in  the  bush. 

"  March  23rd. — Sent  a  detachment  of  first-class  men 
to  search  for  the  lost  relief  party. 

"March  26th. — Caravan  entered  the  station  with 
letters  from  Europe.  Am  told  by  Comite  of  Association 
to  expect  Lieut.  Yalcke  out  again ;  also  Capt.  Hannsens, 
ofiScers  Xilis  and  Grang.  Yisited  Kinshassa.  The  chiefs 
were  uncommonly  amiable.  They  have  made  overtures 
to  me  to  build  there.     I  have  promised  to  think  of  it. 

"  ]\rnrch  27th. — The  Kintamo  people  have  become 
jealous ;  they  have  heard  that  Kinshassa  people  have 
made  offers  to  me.     Xgalyema  and  Enjeli  are  furious. 

"  March  30th. — A  formal  accusation  was  sent  to 
Xgalyema  against  his  son  Enjeli  for  five  ofiences  : 
1st,  Of  having  locked  me  up  in  my  room  and  abscond- 
ing with  the  key,  which  had  caused  me  to  command 
through  a  window  that  he  be  arrested  and  the  key 
taken  from  his  person.  2nd,  Of  having,  after  passing 
over  the  first  offence,  shaken  a  spear  at  me  defiantly 
on  the  public  terrace,  loudly  saying,  '  See  how  easy 
it  would  be  for  me  to  kill  Bula  Matari  now.'  3rd,  Of 
having  cried  out  the  same  day,  '  Look  through  the 
T\-indows  and  see  what  nice  things  Bula  Matari  has 
got.  Some  day  my  father  will  carry  all  away.' 
4th,  Of  having   hidden  himself  behind  the   staircase 


IVORY   TEANSACTIONS.  38.- 

leading'  to  the  upper  storey  to  listen  what  I  had  to     1882. 

March  3 
Lcopold- 


say  at  a  palaver   with  By-yaiizi  strangers    from    np- 


river.  5th,  Of  having  said  to  his  brothers,  after  most  ^'''^®- 
of  the  people  had  gone  out  to  the  station  to  carry 
the  meat  of  a  shot  hippo.,  '  Oh,  if  Ngalyema  only 
knew  how  few  people  Bula  Matari  has  got  with  him 
now,  my  father  could  kill  all  who  are  here  and  seize 
upon  everything  ! '  A  warning  that  any  other  such 
dangerous  speeches  uttered  in  the  hearing  of  any  man 
in  the  station  would  be  instantly  followed  by  arrest, 
sound  flogging,  and  a  heavy  fine. 

"March  31st. — The  Kinshassa  people  now  resort  to 
the  station  for  barter. 

"  April  2nd. — The  Kintamo  chiefs  paid  me  a  visit, 
and  impressed  on  me  the  necessity  of  making  blood 
brotherhood  with  Ngalyema,  as  security  against  the 
fears  they  entertained  that  my  visits  to  Kinshassa 
boded  evil  to  them.  The  promise  was  given  that  some 
day  I  should  do  so. 

"  April  7th. — The  following  transactions  in  ivory 
took  place  to-day.  It  is  not  quite  a  fair  test,  as  we 
must  visit  the  upper  river  before  we  are  able  to  know 
anything  about  what  we  ought  to  pay :  — 

£    s.  (I. 
"To  1  ivory  tusk, -weight  97i  lbs.  at  9.s.  per  lb.  in 

England 4P.  17  0 

Purchased  for  2438  brass  rods,  value  in  England  ,     16     1  M 

Diifercnco  for  profit  and  carriage  £27  13  10 


*'  To  1  ivory  48i  lbs.  at  9.s'.  per  lb.  in  England  .         .     21  16    G 
Purchased  for  1864  brass  rods,  value  in  England  .       7  10    4 


Difference  for  freight,  insurance  and  profit  £14     1     2 


38-1  TEE   coy  GO. 

1882.  "  These. brass  rods,  after  being  paid  to  the  ivory-seilers, 
Leopold-  were  then  exchanged  for  silks,  cotton-goods,  guns, 
glass-ware,  crockery,  powder,  red  handkerchiefs,  &c., 
in  which,  if  for  silks  and  good  cloths,  another  profit 
was  possible.  It  would  never  have  paid  us  to  efifect 
any  large  purchases,  as  our  mission  is  for  a  totally 
different  purpose  than  trade ;  but,  in  endeavouring  to 
find  the  real  truth  about  the  state  of  trade  here,  we 
must  put  it  to  a  practical  test.  I  find  then  that  ivory 
is  abundant  at  all  these  trading  villages  at  Stanley 
Pool;  that,  while  the  By-yanzi  sell  the  ivory  to  the 
Bateke'  of  Stanley  Pool  at  the  average  of  eleven  brass 
rods,  or  Is.  4c?.,  to  the  pound,  the  Bateke  have  been 
induced,  after  eighteen  experiments,  to  sell  it  to  us  at 
3-5-.  4c?.  and  3>-.  5c/.  per  pound.  If  we  were  willing 
to  purchase  more,  the  Bateke  possess  suflBcient  ivory 
to  exhaust  the  stock  of  goods  that  a  hundred  men  per 
day  could  carry  ;  besides  which  we  are  pestered  with 
people  who  wish  to  sell  rubber,  camwood  powder,  &c. 
''Durino;  our  Ions:  residence  here  we  have  become 
intimate  with  the  people's  wants.  AVe  note  the  eager, 
hungry  look  of  the  strangers  who  come  from  hundreds 
of  miles  to  visit  us  in  the  hope  that  we  would  purchase 
something  from  them.  TThen  we  tell  them  that  we 
do  not  want  ivory,  or  rubber,  or  camwood  powder,  or 
cola  nuts,  or  gums,  they  appear  to  despair,  and  ask 
sorrowfully,  '  Well,  what  is  it  you  do  want  ?  Tell  us, 
and  we  will  get  it  for  you.  AVe  came  here  to  get  some 
cloth,  and  now  we  come  here  with  thina's  to  sell  vou 
will  not  buy  them.    "What  kind  of  a  white  man  are  you?' 


BROTHERHOOD    WITH  NGALYEMA.  385 

*'  April    8th. — Recruits   arrived    to-day.      Caravans     1882. 
leave   here  now  every  five  days  for   Manyanga,  and    Leopold- 
goods  arrive  as  often  regularly.     I  am  only  waiting 
for  the  arrival  of  an  officer  to  start  up-river  to  establish 
another  station. 

"April  9th. — Brotherhood  with  Ngalyema  was  per- 
formed. TVe  crossed  arms ;  an  incision  was  made  in 
each  arm ;  some  salt  was  placed  on  the  wound,  and 
then  a  mutual  rubbing  took  place,  while  the  great 
fetish  man  of  Kintamo  pronounced  an  inconceivable 
number  of  curses  on  my  head  if  ever  I  proved  false. 
Susi,  not  to  be  outdone  by  him,  solicited  the  gods  to 
visit  unheard-of  atrocious  vengeances  on  Ngalj^ema  if 
he  dared  make  the  slightest  breach  in  the  sacred 
brotherhood  which  made  him  and  Bula  Matari  one 
and  indivisible  for  ever." 


vor>.  r.  2  c 


')S6  THE   coy  GO. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

UP  THE  COXGO  TO  LAKE  LEOPOLD  IL 

Xaming  the  new  station  "  Leopoldville  " — "  The  middleman,"  "  lingster," 
or  "  ivory  trader,"  and  his  influence — Docility  of  Ngalyema — Descrip- 
tion of  Leopoldville — Fine  view  from  Leopold  Hill — Companionable 
neighbours — The  pomp  of  death — A  rich  but  neglected  land :  what 
might  be  made  of  it — Departure  of  the  first  Upper  Congo  expedition 
— Bamu  Island — Wild  animals — ^Stanley  Pool — Slow  progress— The 
fierceness  of  crocodiles — Impressions  of  scenery — Comparison  with 
Scotch  scenery — ^Width  and  sonndings  of  the  Congo— Yolume  of  the 
river  with  its  tributaries — Jottings  for  future  pilots — Mswata — Xew 
acquaintances  —  Gandelay's  favourable  decision  —  Giral,  a  French 
quartermaster — EetumtoKintamo;  a  cordial  greeting — SusuMpembe, 
the  "  White  Chicken  "—The  Kwa  river. 

1882.     By  general  consent  the  new  station  was  named  Leo- 

April  9.  .  . 

Leopold-  poldvillej    in   honour    of    the   munificent    and   Eoja] 


ville. 


Founder  of  the  "Association  Internationale  du  Congo." 
"We  will  now  leave  that  system  of  stringing  together 
daily  incidents  in  th.e  manner  observed  in  the  preceding 
chapter,  and  betake  ourselves  soberly  to  our  narrative. 
The  diary  form  has  the  merit  of  presenting  the  ups 
and  downs  of  our  long  stay  at  Leopoldville  in  a  far 
more  convincing  and  life-like  manner  than  could  be 
done  by  the  happiest  style  of  narrative;  for,  despite 
the  implicit  belief  in  our  veracity,  which  our  polite 
readers  would  be  willing  to  profess,  I  fear  there  would 


"  TEE  MIDDLEMAN."  387 

still  be  a  lurkino;  suspicion  in  manv  minds  that  there     is82. 

April  9. 

must  have  been  more  play  than  work  in  the  building  of  Leopoid- 
Le'opoldville. 

Ngaljema's  peculiar  temper  also  required  more 
than  a  few  phrases  before  an  exact  representation  of 
the  man  could  be  given.  The  dullest  reader  mav  now 
see  what  an  African  '•  middleman,"  "  lingster,"  "  ivory- 
trader,"  is  in  disposition  and  nature.  On  the  West 
Coast  of  Africa  he  has  been  one  of  the  strongest  im- 
pediments to  civilisation.  TTho  that  has  been  on  the 
Niger  does  not  know  him  ?  Where  is  that  West  Coast 
trader  in  the  oil  rivers — or  near  any  part  of  the  surf- 
beaten  African  shore — who  has  not  regarded  this  class 
as  his  greatest  enemy,  and  the  most  inveterate  opponent 
to  his  progress  into  the  interior  ?  To  be  sure,  Stanley 
Pool  is  a  little  too  far  in  the  interior  to  have  been  an 
obstacle  to  the  trader ;  but  that  is  because  the  impass- 
able Congo  canon  forbade  his  approach  to  the  Upper 
Congo.  We  found  in  Ngalyema  the  rearguard  of  the 
Congo  middlemen — and  trouble  enough  he  gave  us, 
as  has  been  seen.  It  cost  more  money  to  overcome 
this  man  peacefully  than  the  aggregate  expenditure  on 
all  the  chiefs  of  the  country,  who  possessed  something 
substantial  to  give  us  in  exchange.  Ngalyema  was  a 
landless  slave  owner,  and  had  nothing  but  his  un- 
founded pretensions,  his  unreal  claims,  his  loud  bully's 
voice,  and  an  insatiable  appetite  for  the  dues  of  black- 
mail. Through  long  patience,  liberality,  and  a  timely 
hint  now  and  then,  that  he  might  be  sorry  for  going 
beyond  certain  bounds,  he  was  at  last  fairly  won  to  good 

2  c  2 


ville 


388  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     beliaviour,  and  to  stout  and  friendly  alliance,  by  wliicli 

April  9. 

Leopold-  I  eventually  succeeded  in  getting  other  obstreperous 
chiefs,  notably  those  of  Kinshassa,  Lema,  Kimbangu, 
and  Mikunga,  to  confederate  with  me  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  peace  on  the  south  shore  of  Stanley  Pool. 

My  content  was  extreme,  as  may  well  be  believed, 
when  the  annoyances — the  perpetual  fluctuations  from 
bilious  ill-humour  to  fawning  friendliness,  from  the 
peevish  intermittent  temper,  to  a  few  hours  of  sun- 
shiny moods  of  feeling — were  finally  substituted  by 
the  steady  glow  of  good-nature,  and  I  had  leisure  to 
prepare  for  my  long-deferred  journey  up-river  to  seek 
other  fields  of  adventure. 

Le'opoldville,  with  its  one-storey  block-house  com- 
manding from  its  windows  all  approaches,  impregnable 
to  musket-armed  natives,  and  proof  against  fire,  des- 
pite its  grass  roof — because  underneath  that  grass  roof 
there  was  an  earth  roof  two  feet  thick,  on  which  the 
fire  might  burn  itself  out  harmlessly — ajDpeared  a  safe 
refug-e  should  trouble  arise.  The  terrace  was  lono- 
and  wide — the  native  village  was  formed  of  one  broad 
street — flanked  by  a  row  of  clay  huts  on  either  side. 
Starting  from  a  point  thirty  feet  below  the  block- 
house, and  sloping  gentlj?-  down  to  the  landing-place, 
gardens  of  young  bananas  and  vegetables  extended 
beyond  these  huts.  Water  was  handy  ;  fuel  was 
abundant.  The  agricultural  TTambundu  were  our 
landlords  as  well  as  our  good  friends.  In  a  basin  right 
in  front  of  his  residence,  which  time  and  industry 
might  render  pretty,  the  work  of  the  station  chief  lay 


VIEW  FROM  LEOPOLD   HILL. 


:J89 


before  him.     On  Sundays,  the  Europeans  might  find     ib82. 

April  9. 

pleasant  exercise  in  promenading  along  a  smooth  road   Leopoid- 
to   Leopold   Hill,   whence   a   view   worth  seeing  was 
always  obtainable.    From  its  coign  of  vantage  the  great 
leaping  cataract  of  Kintamo,  at  a  moderate  distance 
off,  could  be  seen.     The  circular  basin  of  Stanley  Pool, 


.KDS-ETE    VIEW   OF   STANLEY    POOl,, 


rimmed  with  mountains  and  cliffs  and  isolated  mounts, 
could  be  admired,  as  well  as  the  great  island  of  Bamu, 
and  its  tiny  sister  islets,  slumbering  in  sunshine  and 
liaze,  or  lying  silent  under  the  black  clouds  which 
threatened  to  deluge  it  all  with  rain,  and  shroud 
it  with  tlie  darkness  of  the  coming  tempest.     If  the 


ville. 


o90  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     rain    has   already    fallen   the   niorht   before,    and    the 

April  9.  ,  ,  .  "^ 

Leopold-  opalesque  skies  give  promise  that  the  day  will  be 
bright  and  clear,  the  glories  of  the  Pool  and  iis 
encircling  ring  of  hill  and  mountain,  with  their  wooded 
slopes,  are  unequalled.  Both  the  mountains,  and  the 
wide  plains  they  enclose,  islands,  and  lake-like  river 
emerge  through  the  bright  atmosphere  into  view,  with 
a  clearness  of  detail  and  beauty  of  outline  almost  new, 
although  you  may  have  before  gazed  at  every  feature 
in  the  scene  until  nearly  sated.  Nor  is  the  view 
inland  or  westward  to  be  despised.  To  be  delighted, 
however,  I  could  confidently  recommend  an  ascent 
to  the  top  of  some  structure  on  the  hill,  from  wlience 
the  vision  embraces  an  uninterrupted  view  over  the 
trees  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.  One  will  be 
astonished  at  the  enlarged  breadth  and  improved  beauty 
in  the  wilderness  of  hill-cones,  and  tabular  heights,  and 
winding  wood-clothed  ridges,  or  sinuous  depressions, 
and  irregular  waves  of  land  which  are  exposed. 
There  is  lyumbi's  massive  form  and  bald  top,  the 
cones  of  Nsangu  and  Kinduta's  square-edged  mount. 
To  our  left  advances  Lama  Lankori's  dark  forest  ridge, 
while  Usansi's  frowning  mountain  liue  is  to  our  right. 
Across  the  Congo  expands  in  rich  brown  colours  the 
grassy  plains  of  Mundele  Masuna  ;  and  right  oj^posite 
the  woods  gather  thicker,  shrouding  Bwabwa  Njali's 
and  Gampa's  villages.  From  under  the  depths  of 
the  dark  green  leafage  shoots  the  flood  of  the  Gordon 
Bennett  in  two  silver  sheets,  while  a  long  broad  band 
of  sun-lighted  water  recedes  further  and  further  into 


COMPANIONABLE  NEIGHBOURS.  391 

the  stony  heart  of  the  hilly  world.     Many  and  many     1882. 

M  •  in         April  9. 

a  time  had  I  stood  alone,  dreamily  gazmg  at  the  really  Leopold- 
interesting  view  visible  from  the  summit  of  Leopold 
Hill,  without  once  suspecting  that  there  was  such  a 
luxury  within  reach,  until  one  day  I  mounted  the  roof 
of  the  Sanatorium,  and  then  I  knew  what  a  pleasure 
had  been  hitherto  unknown. 

That  broad  low  plain — from  Kintamo  south,  to  the 
foot  of  Mabengu  mountain — which  forms  the  western 
shore  of  the  Pool,  is  to  me  full  of  promise  and 
beauty.  Even  now  it  is  almost  idyllic  in  appearance, 
yet  there  is  only  the  grass  huts  of  Kintamo  con- 
spicuously in  view ;  the  rest  is  literally  only  a  wilder- 
ness of  grass,  shrubs,  and  tree-foliage.  But  my  mind, 
when  I  survey  the  view,  always  reverts  to  the 
possibilities  of  the  future.  It  is  like  looking  at  the 
fair  intelligent  face  of  a  promising  child  ;  we  find 
nought  in  it  but  innocence,  and  we  fondly  imagine 
that  we  see  the  germs  of  a  future  great  genius ; 
perhaps  a  legislator,  a  savant,  a  warrior^  or  a  poet. 
Supposing  the  rich  fertile  soil  of  that  plain,  well- 
watered  as  it  is  by  many  running  streams,  were 
cultivated,  how  it  would  reward  the  husbandman  ! 
How  it  would  be  bursting  with  fulness  and  plenty  ! 
In  all  the  Mississippi  valley  there  is  no  soil  to  equal 
it ;  yet  here  it  lies  a  neglected  waste.  And  perhaps 
for  generations  yet  the  prospect  will  possess  the  same 
idle  slumbrous  appearance  it  presents  to-day. 

If  the  station-chief  and  his  comrades  are  sociable 
beings,  they  may  form  warm  friendships  with  some  of 
the  people  in  that  human   hive  at   Kintamo.     There 


392  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     are  human  beings  here,  as  elsewhere,  amenable  to  the 

April  9.  . 

Leopold-  softer  emotions,  though  the  principal  chief  is  such  an 
eccentric  wrong-minded  person.  Old  Ngako  is  garru- 
lous and  amusing,  and  requires  but  little  prompting  to 
spin  out  tales  of  adventure  and  war.  The  ancient  fifer 
of  Ngalyema,  who  lives  recluse-like  in  his  lone  hamlet 
halfway  between  Leopold ville  and  Kintamo,  is  a  chatty, 
agreeable  old  man,  and  is  by  no  means  churlishly  in- 
clined. Makabi  is  a  character  also  deserving  closer 
study ;  he  is  an  acute  fellow,  neat  in  person,  fully 
possessed  of  the  authority  of  a  chief,  and  lord  over 
a  large  number  of  pretty  wives  and  bright-eyed 
children.  Even  Ngalyema  himself  at  home  is  a  better 
man  than  Ngalyema  abroad  ;  he  has  a  miscellaneous 
treasure  which  he  has  no  objection  to  show ;  he  will 
tell  you  with  equanimity  of  what  will  happen  ^vlien 
he  is  dead  ;  how  he  will  be  swathed  in  cottons  and 
woollens  and  silks  and  satins,  and,  after  many  days 
of  continued  fusilading,  will  be  buried  in  an  honoured 
grave.  Indeed,  from  the  pleasure  he  takes  in  reciting 
all  this,  he  seems  to  you  as  a  person  whose  life  is 
devoted  to  prepare  for  the  great  event  of  death. 
The  part  of  dying  is  hateful,  because  it  involves 
pain ;  but  the  period  after  death  will  be  glorious.  All 
those  robes,  and  silken  stuffs,  and  velvet  cloaks  that 
I  have  given  him,  will  adorn  his  body  as  it  is  con- 
veyed in  state,  followed  by  chanting  warriors,  and 
multitudes  of  female  mourners  loudly  lamenting,  while 
the  youths  of  all  the  surrounding  villages  will  fire  in- 
cessant volleys  of  musketry  for  many  days  and  nights. 
"  Ah,"    says    Ngalyema,    admiringly    shaking    his 


A   Pi  ICE  BUT  NEGLECTED   LAND. 


head,   "  that   is  what  I  call    e-rand,  and  worthy  of  a  1882. 

.  April  9. 

king ! "  from  which  I  gather  that,  in  his  opinion,  life  Leopold- 
does  not  become  a  king:  half  so  well  as  death. 


ville. 


'O 


A  five-mile  march  across  that  intervening  stretch 
of  plain  between  Kinshassa  and  Kintamo  may  cause 
our  Europeans  to  reflect  upon  the  prodigious  waste 
which  this  madcap  population  by  whom  they  are  sur- 
rounded is  guilty  of.  Eight  hundred  muscular  slaves, 
retainers,  followers  of  the  nine  Kintamo  chiefs,  abso- 
lutely doing  nothing.  Nay,  they  are  almost  starving, 
only  one  day  from  it  at  least,  and  here,  round  about 
them,  are  nearly  50,000  square  acres  of  the  richest 
alluvium  it  would  be  possible  to  find  in  any  part  of 
the  world !  At  Kinshassa  there  are  some  500  stal- 
wart male  bodies  just  as  lazy.  Mikunga,  Kimbangu, 
Kindolo,  Lema,  and  other  places,  can  show  over 
1500  more,  whose  most  industrious  employment  is 
sitting  down,  while  they  are  being  rubbed  over  with 
palm-oil  and  ochre  by  their  females,  or  having  their 
beautiful  chignons  or  hair  top-knots  dressed.  While 
they  have  to  despatch  squads  of  men  miles  away,  to 
hunt  up  provender  for  their  people,  there  exists  on 
this  immense  waste  of  fat  earth,  enough  virtue,  if 
solicited,  to  raise  half  a  million  tons  of  rice  annually, 
and  wheat,  sugar,  yams,  sweet  potatoes,  millet,  Indian 
corn  ad  infinitum.  The  lower  slopes,  too,  of  those 
ridges,  which  lovingly  shield  the  plain  from  the  cold 
sea  winds  of  the  South  Atlantic,  would  permit  the 
remunerative  growth  of  tea,  coffee,  cocoa,  sago,  and 
other  spices. 


ville. 


394  THE   CONGO. 

^^2  In   short,  if   these   Europeans  will    only  use   their 

Leopold-  Sundays  in  pleasant  excursive  walks,  to  study  human 
nature  in  the  vicinity,  they  will  go  home  thoughtful 
men,  and  may  return  again  to  this  land  to  put  to  good 
use  the  wisdom  they  should  have  gained, '  and  the 
kindly  social  relations  created  during  their  peaceful 
sojourn  at  Leopoldville. 

By  the  19th  of  April,  friendly  relations  had  heen 
established  with  all  our  neio-hhours.  Within  Le'o- 
poldville  all  w^as  in  foir  order.  The  caravans  marched 
in  and  out  of  the  station  at  regular  periods.  Goods, 
provisions,  tools,  &c.,  flowed  in  as  they  were  wanted, 
a  flock  of  goats  formed  the  live-stock,  among  which 
there  were  two  or  three  milch  goats.  The  fowls  were 
also  numerous ;  a  few  hens  were  hatching,  a  few 
furnished  fresh  eggs,  a  few  tended  their  young.  I 
directed  the  chief  of  the  station  to  continue  the  work 
of  improvement ;  to  build  another  store-room  in  a 
line  with,  or  a  few  feet  removed  from,  the  block- 
house ;  to  extend  the  terrace,  to  look  after  his  gar- 
dening, to  increase  his  stock  of  goats,  and  to  do  all 
he  could  towards  consolidating  our  political  interests, 
as  well  as  promoting  the  comfort  of  his  people  and 
the  prosperity  of  his  estate. 

At  6  A.M.  of  the  19  th  we  embarked  the  first  Upper 
Congo  expedition,  as  follows  : — 

En  Avant  .     .     19  coloured  men.    3  whites.    Freight  62  loa<ls. 
Whaleboat.     .     10        ,.  „        1      „  „      53     „ 

Two  canoes      .     20        „  „  „      11     „ 

Total  .     .     49        ,,  „        4     „  129     „ 


CO 
00 


BAMU  ISLAXD   AXD    STAXLEF  POOL.  395 

The  powers  of  the  little  paddle-steamer  were  tasked     is82. 

.  ,  April  19. 

to  the  utmost,  towing  the  two  canoes,  as  the  twenty   i^opoid- 
men  in   them  were  totally  unpractised  in  the  use  of 
paddles,  and  the  steersmen  gave  us  an  infinite  trouble 
by  their  ignorance  of  knowing  on  which  side  their 
steering  paddles  should  be  used. 

We  crept  along  the  south  shore,  rounded  the  clifly 
point  now  called  Kallina  in  an  hour,  and  continued 
upward  along  the  coast  of  the  Kinshassa  district, 
"-mtil,  coming  abreast  of  the  town,  we  cast  the  canoes 
off,  and,  driven  by  necessity,  the  men  were  compelled 
I J  paddle  their  own  canoes,  an  art  which  they  soon 
cquired.  The  steamer  occupied  nearly  an  hour  in 
crossing  the  broad  southern  arm  of  the  Congo,  running 
between  Bamu  Island  and  the  left  bank.  From  thence 
to  5  P.M.  we  skirted  Bamu  Island,  and  in  a  cove 
opposite  the  river  Xseleh,  which  issues  into  the  Congo 
from  the  southern  side,  we  halted  to  cut  fuel,  and  rest 
for  the  nio'ht. 

Bamu  Island  is  about  fourteen  miles  in  length,  and 
occupies  the  centre  of  the  Pool.  The  larger  portion 
of  it  is  low ;  at  high-water  about  three-fourths  of  it 
may  be  inundated.  On  the  southern  shore  it  shows 
many  miles  of  stiff  clay  bank,  three  feet  of  which  may 
be  above  the  highest  flood.  On  the  northern  shore  it  is 
much  lower ;  abundance  of  timber  fit  for  native  uses 
may  be  found  on  it.  Buffalo,  elephant,  and  hippos, 
haunt  its  interior  parts.  Its  south-eastern  extremity  is 
a  more  grassy  or  reedy  flat,  close  to  which  are  wide  and 
extensive  sandbanks.    During  a  very  low  Congo,  all  this 


396  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     part  resembles  a  low  sandy  plain,  where  the  fishermen 

April  19.  ^  . 

Stanley  lovB  to  ercct  little  grass  huts  to  dry  their  fish.  During 
a  high  Congo  the  steamers  may  skirt  Bamu  right  up  to 
the  head  of  the  Pool.  The  south-eastern  part  of  the 
island  may  be  called  the  hippopotamus  preserve ;  the 
herds  are  always  numerous  here.  Altogether  there  may 
be  about  two  hundred  of  these  amphibious  animals 
depending  upon  the  reedy  flats  for  their  subsistence. 

Stanley  Pool  is  a  lake-like  expansion  of  the  Congo, 
about  250  square  miles  in  extent,  of  which  Bamu  and 
the  other  islands  in  it  cover  about  42  square  miles. 
Kallina  Point  is  at  its  lower  extremity ;  Inga  Peak 
dominates  the  entrance  to  the  united  river  above  the 
Pool.  The  distance  in  an  air-line,  which  runs  between 
the  base  of  Inga  Peak  and  Kallina  Point,  is  seventeen 
and  a  half  English  miles,  the  greatest  breadth  from 
shore  of  southern  mainland  to  shore  of  northern  main- 
land is  sixteen  English  miles.  Bamu  Island  disparts 
the  river  into  main  branches,  each  of  which,  however, 
contains  several  small  rocky  or  sandy  islets.  The 
southern  branch,  which  is  the  navigable  one  at  all  sea- 
sons, has  a  shore-line  twenty-four  statute  miles  long, 
while  the  northern  is  only  nineteen  English  miles  long. 
Nearly  one  third  of  the  northern  shore  is  occupied 
by  Dover  cliffs ;  the  other  half  is  mainly  a  low  plain, 
which  in  one  part  projects  in  a  low  grassy  valley 
between  high  ridges.  On  the  southern  shore,  however, 
the  mountainous  ridge  which  has  formed  the  left  bank 
of  the  river  above,  recedes  from  the  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  river  a   few  miles   above  Kimpoko, 


Pool. 


ANIMAL   LIFE.  397 

leavino-  a   series  of  low  hills,  which  descend  into    a     i8S2. 

...  -^Pi'il  -0- 

terrace,  or  low  alluvial  plain,  of  considerable  breadth,  Stanley 
between  the  river  and  the  base  of  the  mountain  ring, 
terminating  about  three  miles  to  the  south-west  of 
Leopoldville.  It  is  on  the  verge  of  this  alluvial  plain, 
close  by  the  river^  that  Kimpoko,  Mikunga,  Kimbangu, 
Kindolo,  Kinshassa,  and  Kintamo,  are  placed,  and 
further  inland,  near  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  other 
large  villages  such  as  Lema  may  l:)e  found. 

The  southern  branch  sweeps  by  the  shore  of  the 
mainland  with  great  force,  and  with  destructive  effect 
at  Kimpoko,  the  high  clay  bank  of  which  is  constantly 
falling  in  large  masses  into  the  river  to  be  dissolved 
into  sediment,  and  carried  below  by  the  current. 

A  rain-storm  began  at  1  am.  of  the  20th,  continuing 
until  8  A.M.,  wetting  our  fuel,  and  retarding  the  start 
for  an  hour.  For  three  hours  we  continued  along  the 
reedy  flats  of  Bamu,  and  within  forty  minutes  more  had 
crossed  the  south  branch.  With  the  whale-boat  and 
canoes  in  tow  we  made  but  slow  progress.  At  two  we 
were  well  above  Kimpoko,  in  a  channel  between  a 
woody  island  and  the  south  shore,  which  was  now 
a  steep  elevation  clothed  with  tall  young  trees. 
Presently  the  steep  rise  took  a  bolder  height,  the 
woods  became  taller,  wherein  monkeys  flung  them- 
selves with  desperate  leaps  from  tree  to  tree,  whence 
the  white-collared  fish-eagle,  with  a  shrill  scream, 
sprang  from  its  perch  and  winged  its  way  across  to 
the  island,  and  divers  and  kingfishers  darted  ahead  of 
the  i)anting  steamer,  whose   strange  noiise  caused  all 


Pool. 


398  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     animal  life  to  skurry  away  from  its  fearful  nei&'libour- 

April  20.  . 

Stanley  bood.  It  was  amusing  to  observe  tbe  effect  of  tbe 
steamer  on  tbe  bippo  berds  in  tbe  vicinity,  tbe  pointed, 
attentive  ears,  tbe  steady  earnest  attention,  and  a 
sudden  disa2:)pearance  from  tbe  borrible  distracting 
noise ;  wbereas  tbe  crocodiles  darted  witb  tbe  velocity 
and  directness  of  a  Wbitebead  torpedo.  Evidently 
tbey  were  fully  determined  not  to  stop  until  tbey  bad 
pierced  tbe  steel  bull  witb  tbeir  wedge-like  beads 
tbrougb  and  tbrougb ;  but  tbe  creatures  generally 
sank  wben  tbey  were  about  twenty  feet  off,  probably 
to  explore  tlie  keels,  rising  up  a  sbort  distance  bebind 
to  pursue  us  again,  no  doubt  wondering  greatly  mean- 
wbile  wbat  strange  animal  tbis  could  be  tbat  bad  no 
legs  to  give  a  crocodile  a  cbance  to  bite  ! 

It  was  an  exceedingly  bot  day,  and  tbe  current 
flowed  tbree  miles  an  bour  in  tbe  cbannel.  Tbe  towing 
of  tbe  boat  and  canoes  was  a  severe  strain  on  tbe 
powers  of  tbe  En  Avant.  Added  to  tbe  bot  sun,  wbicb, 
as  it  westered,  sbot  an  intolerable  beat  under  tbe 
awning,  was  tbe  beat  of  tbe  boiler  ;  and  besides  tbis 
trouble,  trifling  as  it  may  appear  in  tbese  pages,  tbe 
cramped  posture,  and  tbe  most  unluxurious  materials 
— boxes  and  bales — on  w^bicb  we  lay,  vastly  increased 
our  discomforts.  At  4.30  p.m.  we  arrived  at  Firf^t 
Point,  on  tbe  soutb  side  above  tbe  Pool.  "We  bad 
occupied  seventeen  and  a  balf  bours  on  tbis  first 
trip,  to  perform  wliat  we  bave  several  times  since 
performed  in  eleven  bours  witb  tbe  same  steamer. 
From  tbis  first  point  to  Mswata  we  generally  occupy 


IMPHESSIOXS    OF  SCEXERY.  399 

in  tlie  U/i  Avant  twentr-one  and  a  half  hours,  but  on     1882. 

„  "  .   ,      ,  .  April  21. 

our  nrst  voyage  u-e  were  twenty-eight  hours  m  per-    ^n^^-ata. 

forming  the  journey. 

Our   impressions  depend  on  our  feelings.     A  man 

travelhng  in  misery  is  not  Hkely  to  be  so  enthusiastic 

as    the    one   who   jDerforms    his    journey   in    comfort. 

Given    a   comfortable   and    quick  steamer,  good  food, 

and  my  mind  free  from  anxiety,  it  is  most  likely  that 

I  should  try  to  do  full  justice  to  the  real  beauty  of  the 

scenery  of  the  river  between  Stanley  Pool  and  Mswata. 

Until  that  happy  hour  arrives    I  had  better  confine 

myself  to  sober  description  of  it.     It  never  struck  me 

that  I  ought  to  be    enthusiastic   about   the   towering 

ridges   that   rise    in    stately  majesty  above  the  broad 

brown  flood,  or  to  paint  the  dark-green  foliage  of  the 

guaiacum,  or  to  point  out  how  it  contrasts  with  the 

tender  green  leafage  of  the  bombax,  or  floss-wood,  and 

the  silver-grey  stem  resembling  a  marble  column  amid 

the  wealth   of  leafy   verdure  which   it   overtops ;    or 

that  I  ought   to    dwell  upon   the  petty   details    of  a 

jungly  grove,  to  point  out  the  difi'erence  between  the 

tender  green  of  the  climbing  calamus,  and  the  darker 

green  of  tlie  bending  feathery  frond  of  the  elais,  and 

to   show  how  there   are    colours   in    a   tropic   forest, 

from   the   crimson    glories    of   the    travellers'  tree,  to 

the  yellow  blossoms  of  the  acacia  ;  that  deep  shadows 

and   bright   lights   are   here   as   elsewhere,   and   that 

when  the  sun  is  slowly  setting,  the  watching  of  the 

rosy  light  diffused  over  the  lengthy  slope  of  the  hills 

on  the  left  side  of  the  river, — now  narrowing,,  ever 


400  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     narrowino: — chased  by  the  shadows  of  the  rig'ht  side, 

April  21.  ....  .  . 

Mswata.  which   are   rising   in    fantastic    lines,    fast    after  the 

retreating  light,  until  it  is  seen  for  an  instant  tipping 

the  very  crown  of  the  tallest  hill,  and  the  shadows 

grow  deeper  and  deeper,  and  darkness,  as  of  the  grave, 

has  fallen  upon  us ; — I  say  that  I  knew  not  to  what 

pitch   of  poetic   fancy  I  ought  to  have  been   exalted 

until  the  other  day  I  travelled  with  a  sober  American 

friend  from  Grreenock  to  Tarbert  through  Loch  Fyne. 

It  had  been  a  damp,  dismal,  disagreeable  day,  with 

the  wind   howling,  and  dense  stormy  clouds  rushing 

wildly  above.     When  we  were  about  the  middle  of  the 

Loch  my  sober  friend  became  excited,  and  touching  me 

upon  the  arm,  cried  out,  "  Look  there  !      What  do  you 

think    of    that?      Is    it   not    lovely!      Ah,    there    is 

nothing  like  Scotch  scenery  !  " 

"  What  is  it  ?  What  is  lovely  ?  "  I  asked  quickly, 
fearing  that  I  should  lose  the  sight  of  some  rare  thing. 

"  Why,  look  at  that  sky — and  look  at  those  hills. 
See,  the  sun  is  coming  out !  " 

I  saw  a  bit  of  mist  just  whitened  by  a  sun,  deep 
buried  beneath  fold  upon  fold  of  stormy  clouds  struggling 
to  beam  upon  desolate,  cold-looking  hills  covered  wdth 
a  low  growth  of  heather.  These  hills  were  really  of 
equal  height  to  those  grand  hills  which  hue  this  part 
of  the  Congo,  and  Loch  Fyne  was  about  the  same  width. 
The  colour  of  its  water  differed  from  the  brown  volume 
of  the  Congo.  But  why  this  sober  gentleman  should 
have  gone  into  such  ecstacies  of  language  about  Loch 
Fyne,  with  its  cheerless  grey  sky  and  desolate-looking 


TEE   COXGO    COMPAEED    TO    OTEEB   EIVEBS.        4.01 

hills,    ])asses   mv   comprehension.     If    such   exag^era-     1882. 

"  -rrr-     •  April  21. 

tions  are  permissible  because  "William  Black  has  set  the    Mswata.' 
fashion  of  enveloping  every  bit  of  Scotch  scenery  from 
the  Clyde  to  Stornoway  with  wealth  of  word-picturing, 
what  language  shall  do  justice  to  the  infinitely  supe- 
rior  glories  of  Congo  scenery  ?     How  shall  we  paint 
the  effects  of  steady,  bright  sunshine  on  the  lonely,  un- 
tenanted woods  which  clothe  the  gorges  and  the  hill- 
slopes  and  the  lordly  mountain-tops,  which,  with  bare 
heads,  tower  for  500  and  600  feet  high  to  salute  the 
tropic   sun  ?     They  meet   the    eye    proudly  on   either 
bank,  and  wait  tranquilly  the  advent  of  the    Congo 
poet  who  shall  sing  of  the  glories  of  the  Congo  moun- 
tains,  and    their    own    unequalled   river.      American 
patriots   have   invented   poetic   imagery   to  extol  the 
beauties  of  scenery  which  should  perhaps,  but  do  not, 
belong  to  the  Mississippi.     From  the  Belize  to  Omaha 
I  have  seen  nothing  to  excite  in  me  a  poetic  madness, 
"What  there  is  of  beauty  on  its  shores  belongs  solely 
to  the  industry  and  enterprise  of  man  and  to  the  spirit 
of  utility  pervading  it.     The  Hudson  is  a  trifle  better 
in  its  upper  parts,  the  Indus,  the  Ganges,  the  Irawaddy, 
the  Euphrates,  the  Xile,  the  Xiger,  the  La  Plate,  the 
Amazon — I  think  of  them  all — and  I  can  see  no  beauty 
on    their    shores     that    is    not    excelled    many    fold 
by  the  natural   beauty  of  this   scenery,   which,   since 
the  Congo  highlands  were  first  fractured  l)y  volcanic 
caprice   or   by   some    wild  earth-dance,  has   remained 
unknown,  unhonoured,  and  unsung. 

VOL.  I.  2   D 


402  THE   CONGO. 

1882.  My  purpose,  however,  is  not  to  make  nations  envious, 

Mswata.   SO  We  will  drop  this  view,  and  become  austerely  modest 
in  our  description. 

In  measuring  the  width  of  the  Congo  I  found  it  to 
be  2200  yards;  a  little  below  the  first  point  we  meet 
above  Stanley  Pool  I  made  a  careful  survey  of  the 
bed  of  the  river.  Beginning  at  the  right  bank  the 
soundings  across  ran  thus  : — 

1st  500  yards,  39,  48,  09,  78,  73,  72,  75,  72,  G3,  GG,  G2,  GO,  57,  48,  42  ft. 
2nd   „       „      36,  35,  34,  32,  31,  30  feet. 
3rd  „       „       31,30,28,27,26,30    „ 
4th   „       „       32,30,31,29,32,33    „ 
200  yards,  30,  28,  26,  24,  20,  18, 17,  15  feet. 

Which,  at  three  and  a  half  knots  per  hour,  will  give  a  volume  of 
1,436,850  cubic  feet  per  second. 

By  a  plain  high-water  mark  on  a  rock  on  the  right 
bank  near  by,  I  observe  the  river  rises  twelve  feet 
higher.  If  we  suppose  that  the  current  is  increased  a 
knot  faster  per  hour,  we  shall  find  that  at  flood  time 
the  Congo  discharges  into  Stanley  Pool  a  volume  of 
2,529,000  cubic  feet  per  second.  In  addition  to  this 
gigantic  flood,  before  the  mighty  river  issues  into 
the  ocean,  it  has  received  from  the  right  bank  the 
Gordon  Bennet,  Lubamba,  Inkissi,  Edwin  Arnold, 
Mbika,  Lualla,  Lulu,  and  Bundi  Rivers,  and  from  the 
left  bank  it  has  been  increased  by  the  Nseleh,  Lulu, 
Loa,  Mpalanga,  Inkissi,  Kwilu,  Lunionzo,  Lufii,  Luizi, 
and  Mpozo,  besides  hundreds  of  smaller  streams,  the 
united  waters  of  which  may  well  swell  the  Congo 
during  its  flood  to  discharge  the  full  sum  of  three 
millions  of  cubic  feet  per  second. 


JOTTINGS  FOR   PILOTS.  403 

The  mean  width  of  the  river  from  the  head  of  Stanley     i8S2. 

•^      April  21. 

Pool  to  Mswata  is  ahoiit  1500  yards.  The  base  Hue  Mswata. 
of  the  hills,  which  is  of  rock,  except  in  the  bights  or 
curves,  is,  of  course,  very  irregular.  I  counted  thirty- 
four  different  and  distinct  points  within  the  distance 
of  64  Eno-lish  miles  intervenino-  between  the  Pool  and 
Mswata. 

From  the  following  brief  jottings  for  future   pilots 
some  information  may  be  gleaned  : — 

Ist  point  above  Stanley  Pool,  S.  side.  Two  or  tlu'ee  large  trees  at 
point  serve  excellently  for  shade.  Good  camping  place.  Forest  behind  a 
few  i^aces.  Hill  steep — 600  feet.  Native  path  to  district  of  Xfumn  Ngiima, 
cliief  of  the  Banfunu.  Eed  wood  abundant,  good  for  fuel.  Inga  Peaks  on 
right  bank  visible  from  Leopoldville  just  opposite  here.     Yiew  noble. 

2nd  point.  Not  very  prominent,  except  to  small  boat  skirting  close  to 
shore. 

3rd  point.    On  rounding  this  point  you  lose  view  of  Pool.    Go  a  little 
way  out  into  stream,  see  view  of  river  over  twenty  miles  long. 
■1th  point.     Xot  prominent,  but  distinct  to  boat  hugging  the  shore. 
5th  i)oint.    Opposite  two  gullies  close  together  on  X.  side,  just  above 
tabular  hill. 

6th  point.    Opposite  deep  valley  N.  side. 

7th  point.  Opposite  another  deep  valley,  tall  woods.  Game  abundant 
sometimes  at  river-side. 

8th  point.  One  Palm  Point  on  X.  side  comes  into  view.  Bald  top, 
mount  oioposite.    Beware  of  rocks  at  point,  keep  100  yards  off  shore. 

9th  point.  Low  Point  extreme  end  of  low  spur.  HUlls  recede  a  little 
from  river.  You  are  not  far  below  One  Palm  Point,  right  bank,  and  just 
below  Hyphscne  Palm  Grove,  left  bank. 

10th  point.  Some  rocks  close  to  point.  You  are  now  half  way  between 
One  Palm  Point  and  Long  Yiew  Point,  right  bank.  Manioc  gardens  on 
liill  slope,  on  left  bank,  are  seen  after  rounding  tliis  point. 

11th  point.  You  are  now  above  Ilyphrene  Palm  Grove,  left  bank,  yet 
below  Long  Yiew  Point,  right  bank. 

P-itli  point.  Another  hyphajne  palm  grove  above,  and  this  is  called 
Kapid  Point.  Stream  strong,  six-knot  power  required  to  pass.  Row 
boats  must  be  pulled  by  hands  in  shore. 

13th  ix)int.  Before  you  come  to  this,  pass  close  to  fine  forest-clad  hills. 
You  are  now  a  few  hundred  yards  below  Wanipoko  Ilivcr,  entering  Congo 

2    D    2 


Mswata. 


404  THE  CONGO. 

1882.  from  left  bank.  Stream  dark  as  strong  tea,  water  much  colder  than  Congo 
^I'l'  -  •  "Wampoko  is  sixty  yards  wide ;  a  terrace  plain  on  each  side  of  mouth. 
Keep  well  oiit  to  avoid  shallows.  At  this  point  you  are  just  at  liend. 
Best  side  for  ascent  is  left  bank. 

14th  point.  Above  Wampoko  River  and  plain.  A  small  village  not 
far  off.  Good  marketing,  fowls  cheap,  eggs  proem-able,  and  dried  fish. 
Peoi^lc  iileasant,  and  love  to  trade. 

15th  point.     Eivcr  strong  at  this  point.    A  narrow  creek  is  just  above. 

16th  point.  Just  below  the  grey  cliffs  on  right  bank.  Strong  current 
at  point. 

17th  point.     Opposite  brown  rock  bluffs,  right  bank. 

18th  point.     Narrows.    Brown  rock  bluffs,  right  l)auk. 

19th  point.  Hyphfene  Palm  Point,  cliffy  rock  opposite,  and  you  are 
just  below  Dualla  Island.    Fuel  on  island. 

20th  point.  Just  above  Dualla  Island,  and  first  below  Pururu  Island. 
This  island  is  large.  Splendid  grove  of  hyphfene  palm.  Twenty  minutes 
steaming  by  to  pass  it. 

21st  ])oint.  Thirteen  minutes  above  Pururu  Island.  Tillage  close  by 
in  plain.    Food  procurable.    Fuel  abundant  on  right  bank. 

22nd  point.     One  hour  forty  mimites  above  21st  point. 

23rd  point.  Forty  minutes  above  last  point.  Land  poor.  Hills 
tinpicturesque  on  left  Ixank.     Plight  bank  better. 

21:tii  jwint.     Five  minutes  above  last  point. 

25th  point.  Twenty-five  minutes  above  last  point.  Cross  over  to 
right  bank  unless  you  have  plenty  of  fuel  on  board. 

26th  point.  Eight  bank.  Splendid  young  trees  for  building,  on  low 
terrace  along  shore.  Hill  slopes  forested.  Lions,  elephant,  and  buffalo,  and 
many  antelope  frequent  this  shore.    The  right  bank  is  utterly  uninhabited. 

27th  point.  Half  an  hour's  steaming  above  last  point.  Mswata  in  view 
on  left  bank.  Note  the  large  trees  near  river  to  distinguish  it.  Ganchu's 
Point,  right  bank,  visible  above  it. 

28tli  point.  Thirty-five  minutes  above  last.  Opposite  tall  bush  and 
trees  on  S.  side  in  Malivu  Bend.  Villages  opposite.  Hills  on  left  bank 
lower  than  on  right. 

29th  point.  Just  above  first  village  seen  on  right  bank  from  Stanley 
Pool.     Twenty-five  minutes  from  last  point. 

30th  point.  Just  above  little  river.  Grassy  Point  very  suitalile  for 
camp.    Thirty-five  minutes  above  last  point. 

31st  point.  Just  above  little  snug  cove.  Twenty-five  minutes  above 
last  point. 

32nd  point.  IMalivu  village  is  opposite.  Thirty-five  minutes  above 
31st  point. 

33rd  point.    Just  below  Mswata.    Forty-five  minutes  above  last  i^oint. 

34th  point.  You  are  now  opposite  native  village  of  Mswata.  About 
twelve  miles  below  confluence  of  Kwa  and  Congo. 


MSWATA.  405 

"These  directions  are  for  small,  lia^lit-drauQ-lit  steamers     1^82. 

°  _  *  April  21. 

and  row  boats.  Fifty  yards  off  shore  will  clear  most  Mswata. 
points.  Xo  trouble  of  ascent  to  six  knots  steam-power. 
Between  the  points  there  is  slack  water  clear  of  rocks. 
If  steamer  is  powerful,  say  ten  knots,  night  and  day 
are  available  for  navigation  without  fear.  No  night 
so  dark  but  you  can  see  Ihe  grey  gleam  of  water,  or 
black  outline  of  shore.  Centre  of  stream  has  depth 
from  GO  to  2.")0  feet  deep.  Average  velocity  of  current 
in  middle,  five  knots ;  in  many  places  it  is  seven  knots, 
which  our  small  steamers  could  never  ascend," 

On  April  26tli  we  appeared  before  Mswata,  and 
after  coquetting  a  little  with  the  people  on  shore,  were 
invited  to  approach.  The  chief,  Grobila,  was  an  ex- 
ceedingly stout  man,  of  about  forty-five,  very  unking- 
like  in  dress.  Beyond  friendly  greetings,  no  business 
was  done  on  this  our  first  arrival.  Eleven  full  days 
were  employed  in  the  negotiations.  A  great  deal  of 
patient  palavering  was  needed  for  both  parties  to 
arrive  at  a  thorough  understanding. 

Above  Kimbangu,  on  Stanley  Pool,  the  chief  Gobila 
is  the  first  Kiteke  chief  we  meet  on  the  left  bank. 
The  aborigines  are  Banfunu,  whose  chief  is  Gandelay, 
without  whose  permission  and  consent  it  would  have 
been  useless  to  conclude  negotiations,  as  a  contrary  word 
from  him  would  have  made  them  impossible.  After  he 
was  informed  of  our  arrival,  he  appeared  at  Mswata  with 
an  unusual  display,  heralded  by  musical  instruments. 
Ganchu  of  the  Bateke,  on  the  right  bank,  also  came  in 
three  canoes,  drums,  bells,  and  horns  melodiously  an- 


406  THE   coy  GO. 

188L'.     nouncing  his  approach.     Granchn,  however,  was  not  on 

Jlav  1. 

Mswata.  ^^^^  ^^'^  •^*^^1»  great  as  he  might  be  on  the  territory  of  the 
Bateke.  He  was  a  very  handsome,  light-complexioned 
man,  exceedingly  vain  and  ceremonious.  His  head 
was  covered  with  a  knit  cap,  made  of  palm  fibre,  to 
which  was  fastened  the  tail  feathers  of  several  chanti- 
cleers. Some  of  his  men  sported  the  downy  feathers 
of  the  pelican. 

Gandelay's  state  eclipsed  both  Gobila's  and  Ganchu's, 
for  he  was  borne  in  a  hammock,  possessed  a  couple 
of  leopard  skins  to  sit  upon,  several  females  to  brush 
off  the  flies  from  his  stateliness,  servants  to  blow  sweet 
music  on  ivory  horns,  and  drummers,  great  and  small, 
to  increase  the  sound.  He  was  also  a  good-looking 
person,  amiably  disposed,  if  one  may  judge  by  results. 
He  presented  three  goats,  a  basket  of  ground-nuts,  a 
jar  of  palm  oil,  a  pot  of  honey,  half-a-dozen  fowls,  and 
several  bunches  of  bananas. 

Gobila  broached  the  subject  of  my  coming  amongst 
them.  The  land,  he  said,  belonged  to  Gandelay,  chief 
of  the  Banfunu,  while  he  was  only  an  ivory  trader, 
long  settled  on  the  river.  He  was  quite  willing  to 
admit  me  as  his  neighbour  and  friend.  A  choice  of 
places  would  be  given  me,  but  Gandelay,  who  was 
present,  must  confirm  the  deed. 

Ganchu,  tax-collector  of  Mpumu  Xtaba,  the  great 
chief  of  the  Bateke  country  on  the  north  bank,  spoke  : 
*'  I  belong  to  the  Bateke'.  I  like  white  men  to  come 
into  the  country.  If  Gandelay  refuses  Bula  Matari,  I 
will  take  him,  and  take  '  Commanda,'  and  take  all  who 


GOBILA   ASD    GANDELAT.  407 

come  ;  the  more  the  better.     AVe  will  make  plenty  of    issi'. 
trade   then.     Speak,  Gandelay.     Will  you  take    him,    jis^^ata. 
or  let  him  come  with  ine  ?  " 

Gandelay  replied :  "  I  am  chief  of  all  this  countrj^, 
from  the  TVampoko  to  the  Kwa,  and  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Kwa  to  the  land  of  the  AYabuma.  To  Gobila  I 
have   o-iven  the  river  bank  from  Malivu  to  the  Kwa. 

o 

If  Gobila  accepts  Bula  Matari  as  his  white  man,  the 
Banfunu  will  also  accept  him,  and  Bula  Matari  shall 
be  my  brother." 

Under  such  friendly  auspices  we  were  duly  initiated 
into  the  lordship  of  our  little  estate.  Lieutenant 
Eugene  Janssen  was  introduced  to  the  chiefs,  by 
whom  he  was  taken  by  the  hand,  and  made  to  stand  on 
a  low  hill,  where  he  was  bade  to  look  around  and 
choose  the  site  of  his  house.  AYe  chose  a  long-  low 
liill,  commanding  a  lengthy  prospect  down  the  river, 
and  a  shorter,  though  not  more  unpleasing  prospect, 
above.  It  was  situated  about  800  yards  below  the 
native  village. 

The  day  succeeding  the  termination  of  our  negotia- 
tions was  marked  by  the  arrival  of  a  good-looking* 
quartermaster  of  the  French  navy,  named  Giral.  He 
rejoiced  in  perfect  health,  and  was  as  merry  as  a 
cricket.  He  had  been  visiting  Le'opoldville,  of  course, 
and  had  at  last  relieved  poor  ^lalameen  from  his  com- 
])ulsory  residence  at  Kinshassa,  AYith  100  such  young 
men  as  Giral,  so  good-natured,  so  brave,  so  intelligent, 
one  might  found  an  empire  in  Africa  easily  enough. 

Gobila  had  imbibed  a  larger  quantity  of  Ki3'anzi  beer 


408  THE   COXGO. 

1882^     than  usual  this  morning,  and  was  disposed  to  be  rude 

31  ay  3. 

Mswata.  at  first  to  the  stranger,  which  Giral  had  the  good  sense 
to  laugh  at.  We  finally  persuaded  Gobila  to  be  happy 
and  good,  when  he  became  zealous  to  show  Giral  what 
a  remarkably  hospitable  chief  Gobila  could  be  when 
pleased.  After  partaking  of  our  hospitality  for  one 
night,  Mons.  Giral  left  next  morning  for  Ganchn's 
village,  which  is  just  above  Ganchu's  Point,  on  the 
north  side.  From  here  he  proposed  to  travel  to  the 
capital  of  Mpumu  Xtaba  in  Mbe',  on  the  right  side  of 
the  Congo. 

Fourteen  hours'  steaming  from  Mswata  down  the 
river  brought  us  to  Le'opoldville  on  the  9  th  of  May, 
when  the  assembled  chiefs  of  Kintamo  clustered  at  the 
landing-place  and  greeted  us  with  cordial  welcomes.  I 
was  much  affected  by  this  manifestation  of  friendship, 
as  it  encouraged  me  greatly.  It  was  like  a  return 
home. 

During  my  absence  four  caravans  had  arrived  at 
Le'opoldville^  and  I  learned,  among  other  news,  that 
Lieutenant  Harou  had  delivered  up  his  station  to 
Lieutenant  Xilis,  but  that  no  officer  had  arrived  at  the 
Pool  to  take  command  of  the  Sixth  Station,  nor  was 
any  officer  tn  route,  despite  my  frequent  letters  urging 
the  despatch  of  the  Europeans  from  Yivi. 

Unable  to  wait,  I  despatched  the  whale-boat  and  two 
canoes,  with  the  men  and  stores  for  the  Sixth  Station, 
on  the  lOtli  of  May,  and  on  the  11th  I  steamed  up 
river  again  in  the  En  Avaut,  arriving  at  Mswata 
Station  at  sunset  on  the  14th. 


THE   "  WHITE    CHICKEX:'  409 

Young  Lieutenant  Janssen  bad  distinguished  liim-  ^]^^'{^y 
self  meanwhile  by  a  great  progress  in  the  construction  Mswata. 
of  a  commodious  house,  while  to  Papa  Gobila  he  bore 
himself  with  filial  respect.  The  stout  old  man  regarded 
him  with  paternal  pride.  Gobila,  with  rare  humour, 
had  christened  his  white  son  '•  Susu  Mpembe,"  or  the 
"  White  Chicken." 

As  it  would  be  a  month  at  least  before  any  Europeans 
could  arrive  at  the  Pool,  after  the  departure  of  the 
special  courier  bearing  the  order  to  the  chief  of  Yivi 
to  despatch  all  the  Europeans  designed  for  the  Upper 
Congo,  it  appeared  to  me  advisable  to  set  forward  with 
the  steamer,  and  explore  the  Kwa  river,  in  order  to 
discover  whether  any  special  advantages  would  result 
from  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  that  river  and 
its  tribes.  Meantime  the  men  of  the  Sixth  Station 
might  render  valuable  assistance  to  Lieutenant  Janssen, 
and  expedite  the  construction  of  the  station,  clear  the 
ground  in  its  neighbourhood,  lay  out  gardens,  and 
improve  the  approaches  to  it  from  the  river,  and  from 
Mswata  and  the  inland  villa":es. 


410  THE   CONGO. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

DISCOVERY    OF    LAKE    LEOPOLD    IT. 

Start  on  the  exploration  of  the  Kwa — The  Mbiho  and  the  Mfini — The 
scenery  of  the  Kwa — Fertile  soil — Towing  canoes,  nnsnccessfnl — 
Curions  natives — "  Don't  frighten  Gankabi  too  mnch  " — Kemeh 
Island — Sepulchre  of  chiefs — Different  colonrs  of  the  river — Musye — 
Eela,  the  faithless — Mosquitoes  in  myriads — Natives  extracting  salt 
from  grass — Gankabi,  Queen  of  Musye — A  commanding  woman — 
"  Follow  me  this  instant  to  Ngete  I  " — Scarcity  of  food — Musyo 
ZMunono — Difficulty  in  getting  information — Hostile  natives  on  the 
river's  banks — An  unexpected  lake — Film  of  dust  ui)on  the  water — 
Bays  and  wood-clad  shore — Our  lessening  food — Encounter  with 
native  canoes — Fright  and  skurry — Pursuit  and  a  dive  for  a  captui-e 
— "  There  are  many  better  than  I  in  our  village " — Piepelled  by 
natives — Circumnavigation  of  Lake  Leopold  II. — Himger,  illness, 
and  return  to  Leopoldville — Pest  at  Isangila. 

1882.     Having  engaged  a  couple  of  guides  from  Gobila,  and 

3Iay  19. 

iiswata.  one  from  Ganclm — the  tax-collector  on  the  north  bank 
— we  set  out  in  the  En  Avant  on  the  19th  of  May  for 
our  exploring  trip  up  the  Kwa.*  which  river,  from  all 
we  could  hear,  was  formed  of  two  rivers,  white  and 
Llack  waters,  respectively  named  Mbihe'  and  Mfini. 
Further,  we  were  told  that  the  Mbihe  was  large  and 
rapid,  and  that  it  was  dangerous  to  canoe  navigation 

*  This  river  was  falsely  named  Ibari  Nkutu  to  me  in  1877  by  the 
Tinscrupulous  sons  of  Chumbiri.  The  natives  along  its  banks  call  the 
united  river,  below  the  junction  of  the  Mbihe  and  the  Mfini,  the  Kwa. 


THE  MBIHE  AND    THE  MFINI.  411 

because  of  frequent  explosive  movements  in  the  water,  1882. 
which  was  liable  to  sudden  boiling  up  wath  wild  com-  Mswata. 
motion,  followed  by  an  equally  abrupt  subsidence.  The 
Mfini,  however,  was  a  wide  and  even-flowing  stream, 
navigable  for  a  great  distance  until  there  was  a  barrier, 
formed  by  the  two  banks  curving  and  meeting  to- 
gether. The  natives,  by  embracing  two  hands  together, 
endeavoured  to  explain  this  union  of  the  banks,  or 
formation  of  a  barrier — by  which  I  supposed  they  meant 
a  reedy  tangle  of  jDapyrus,  w^ater-cane,  Pistia  stratiotes, 
water-lilies,  &c.,  a  feature  of  tropical  aqueous  vegetation 
common  to  many  African  rivers  of  sluggish  current. 
Clearer  information  about  these  rivers  w^e  could  not 
obtain,  owing  to  the  jealousies  of  trade,  and  the  informa- 
tion w^e  did  receive  was  coloured  deeply  with  alarming- 
reports  of  aboriginal  ferocity  :  the  spears  were  sharper 
and  longer,  the  muscular  force  greater,  and  the  will  to 
do  mischief  upon  every  possible  occasion  more  ready 
than  elsewhere.  Consequently  I  was  not  very  sanguine 
that  I  could  do  more  than  merely  examine  a  certain 
length  of  river  and  return  speedily. 

I  prepared  for  a  200  miles  journey,  or  six  days 
steaming  against  the  current.  At  the  utmost  I  sup- 
posed I  should  be  absent  nine  days,  and  rations  for 
that  period  were  accordingly  placed  aboard.  With  a 
few  bales  and  boxes  of  beads,  some  packages  of  brass 
rods,  fuel,  reserve  of  oil,  fourteen  men,  and  three 
guides,  ^^  En  avantV  was  uttered  to  the  engineer,  and 
wo  started. 

Within  a   little  less   than  an  hour  we  had  rounded 


412  THE    CONGO. 

1882.     Gancliu's  Point,  when,  on  account  of  the  narrowness 

May  19. 

Mswata.  ^^  the  strcam,  we  encountered  a  strong  current ;  but 
a  rush  across  to  the  left  bank  enabled  us  to  avoid  the 
tedious  ascent  of  the  north  side,  and  to  make  a  notice- 
able headway.  The  bend  below  is  a  grand  sweep  of 
water.  On  the  southern  shores  of  it  is  a  fine  field  for 
the  future  agriculturist.  Its  rich  soil  shows  its  adapta- 
bility to  his  wants,  which  are  furtlier  met  Ijy  the 
l^resence  of  clear  water,  fuel,  timber  on  the  slopes  of 
the  hills  for  building,  and  the  choice  of  many  points 
on  which  a  farmhouse  could  be  built  having  the  enjo}^- 
ment  of  a  long  prospect  of  river  scenery. 

In  half  an  hour,  Ganchu's  promontory  was  out  of 
view,  and  the  river  opened  out  to  the  width  of  a 
mile  and  a  half  by  the  receding  north  bank,  which 
shows  from  the  south  bank  in  agreeable  and  well- 
wooded  lines  of  hills,  pierced  by  many  little  streams 
issuing  cool  and  clear  from  beneath  shady  depths. 
On  the  south  side  we  have  nothing  very  agreeable 
to  look  upon  ;  the  ground  rises  in  a  dry  front  of  arid 
bluffs,  with  scrub  on  their  edges  ;  in  the  hollows  are 
a  tree  or  two,  and  at  the  mouths  of  gullies  a  clumj)  of 
trees,  guarded  by  ugly  rock,  close  in-fihore,  until  by- 
and-bye,  a  few  miles  above  Gancliu's  jDromontory,  a 
belt  of  young  trees  lines  the  low  shore,  and  screens  the 
hungry  features  of  rocky  hills,  and  lean  wasted  knolls, 
while  above  us,  we  have  as  grateful  a  view  as  could 
be  desired.  The  left  bank  curves  outward  to  the 
north-north  west,  and  midway  w^e  see  the  mouth  of  the 
Kwa  Eiver,  variously  called  the  Kwango,  and  Ibari 


THE  KWA   EIVEB.  413 

Nkutii.  Uyanzi  begins  on  the  right  bank,  presentino-  1882. 
to  us  a  triangular  tract  sloping  up  irom  the  confluence  Mswata. 
with  a  green  smoothness  of  aspect,  like  the  glacis  of 
a  fortress,  to  the  top  of  some  hills  behind,  which  may 
be,  perhaps,  250  feet  above  the  river.  The  north  bank 
opposite  presents  a  bolder  outline,  with  hills  of  more 
commanding  height  and  steeper  slopes,  but,  by  their 
woods,  proving  the  fertility  of  the  soil. 

The  Kwa,  at  the  mouth,  we  found  to  be  a  deep 
rapid  stream,  450  yards  wide,  of  a  much  browner 
colour  than  the  Congo.  It  enters  from  the  north-east, 
while  the  Congo  meets  it  here  from  the  north  by  w^est. 
The  first  view  upward  is  not  promising  ;  the  banks  are 
sheer  bluff  walls,  of  reddish  stone  and  clay. 

We  had  been  three  hours  and  forty  minutes  ascend- 
ing the  twelve  miles  from  Mswata,  which,  with  a  little 
palaver  at  Ganchu,  had  so  delayed  us  that  it  was  now 
1 .  30  P.M.  when  we  entered  the  liver.  The  Kwa  w^e 
soon  discovered  to  be  much  more  crooked  than  the  Great 
River,  and  until  w^ell  after  sunset,  our  course  up  was 
a  series  of  traverses  from  right  bank  to  left  bank,  and 
vice  versa,  or  from  point  No.  1  to  point  No.  2,  and  so 
on  ;  no  portion  of  the  route  offering  a  resting-place 
until  we  had  passed  the  third  point,  when  the  low 
plain  of  Manabiza,  on  the  left  bank,  offered  at  least 
51  change  in  the  scene.  The  river  now  widens  a  little, 
and  presents  a  longer  reach  ;  while  presently,  on  the 
right  bank,  we  see  another  village,  called  Matari's. 
Before  we  come  to  point  No.  5.  we  have  a  little  islet 
to  admire  ;  tlie  hills  fall  back,  giving  place  to  narrow 


414  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     level  terraces,  wlncli  luio'lit  he  of  some  use  to  man  if 

May  19.  /^      , 

Gobiia's.  there  were  more  trees  in  view.  Round  Point  5  is  an 
old  village  of  Gobila's  ;  in  fact,  a  poor  brother  of  Gohila 
has  been  made  lord  of  it,  but  judging  from  the  poverty- 
stricken  look  of  the  village,  he  appears  to  be  a  sliiftless 
kind  of  character.  Gobila's  guide  being  a  headman, 
of  course  obtains  for  us  a  welcome,  and  dark  night  has 
covered  us  all  before  we  can  see  the  outlines  of  the 
huts. 

Next  morning,  while  the  crew  of  the  steamer  is  busy 
cutting  fuel,  and  steam  is  being  made  by  my  young 
Danish  sailor,  Albert  Christopherson, — who  by  this  time 
is  clever  at  native  languages,  clever  at  hauling  wagons, 
clever  at  carpentering,  and  now  shows  his  cleverness 
at  driving  an  engine — we  have  a  chance  of  seeing  what 
kind  of  soil  is  on  these  liverine  terraces.  Gobila's 
headman  takes  me  round  the  fields,  to  the  cassava 
plantations,  and  he  pulls  up  several  mammoth  tubers 
well  fitted  to  obtain  the  prize  at  an  Agricultural  Exhibi- 
tion for  healthiness  and  size ;  he  also  shows  the  sugar- 
cane, of  gigantic  height  and,  when  tried,  of  exquisite 
saccharine  flavour.  I  am  like  a  city  boy  on  a  rustic 
outing.  I  admire  everj^thiug,  eat  raw  cassava,  try 
the  sugar-cane  like  a  barbarian  of  inner  Africa,  eat 
the  ground-nuts,  which  are  so  fat,  so  white,  and  so 
tender.  I  load  my  pockets,  and  finally,  pockets  and 
hands  being  full,  think  of  my  cap,  and  return  to  the 
steamer  with  my  gifts  of  rural  produce  to  exhibit  to 
Albert,  who  shows  his  hearty  appreciation  by  driving 
his  white  teeth  into  the  cane-stalk,  and  smiling  broadly 


TOWING    CANOES.  415 

his  full  content  with  the  situation — because,  for    the     1882. 

3Iav  20. 

first  time  since  coiiiino-  into  Africa,  we  are  relieved  k..,"p- J,, 
from  stern,  severe,  and  exacting-  work.  We  have 
thrown  off  memories  of  anxieties  and  privations  en- 
dured together,  and  are  now  as  happy  as  schoolboys 
out  on  a  holiday,  during  which  we  intend,  God  willing, 
to  procure  a  maximum  of  pleasure. 

Steam  ready,  fuel  stacked  aboard,  we  leave  the 
landing-place,  and  continue  the  journey  up  the  Kwa. 
There  is  a  grassy  islet  close  to  the  soft  bank  oppo- 
site, and  a  quiet  channel.  We  steered  for  the  channel, 
and  soon  met  a  canoe  bound  down  river  to  Stanley 
Pool  with  ivory.  Our  native  guide  had  friends  aboard, 
who  were  hailed.  Soon  we  overtook  two  other  canoes 
going  up  to  Queen  Gankabi,  who  lived  with  her  tribe 
at  a  place  called  Musye  (pronounced  Musyay).  The 
crews  seemed  in  a  terrible  fright ;  1  »ut  our  chief  guide 
Ankoli  soon  quieted  them.  They  had  great  pots  of 
beer  aboard,  heaps  of  dried  fish,  crockery  from  Uyanzi ; 
they  had  been  on  a  trading  expedition,  and  were 
returning  to  Musye'. 

"  Would  they  like  to  l)e  towed  up  river?" 

"  Ah,  well,  we  don't  know.  We  are  rather  afraid 
of  those  turning  things  (paddle-wheels)." 

•'  Oh,  no.  We  will  give  you  a  rope,  to  which  you 
will  hold  fist  ;  and  if  you  look  after  your  steering, 
it  will  be  all  right,  and  ^bikoli  says  we  shall  reach 
.Musye  to-night." 

They  were  persuaded  to  try.  We  gave  them  a  rope, 
to  which   they  held  on   firmly.     The  steamer  moved 


4JG  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     ahead,    the    paddle-wheels   revolved    fast,    and    drove 

May  20. 

Mabwa.  the  browu  waves  far  astern.  The  prow  of  the  canoe 
was  draii'O'ed  throuo-h.  and  its  steersman,  becominG-  a 
little  excited,  deflected  the  prow  athwart  the  waves. 
Then  the  water  began  to  enter  the  canoe ;  the  excite- 
ment increased  with  the  imminent  danger ;  the  native 
was  being  dragged  overboard ;  the  canoe  was  capsis- 
ing ;  then  we  halted  the  steamer,  and  the  poor  natives 
shook  their  heads  and  said — 

"  Ah,  no  ;  those  turning  things  are  bad — they  throw 
too  much  water  at  us." 

We  waved  our  hands  to  them,  and  went  on  our  own 
way  alone. 

The  village  of  Mabwa  is  first  seen  on  the  right  bank, 
l)Owered  in  banana-fronds ;  the  peaky  hills  sweep 
round  in  a  comfortable,  cosy  fold.  It  is  a  pretty, 
agreeable  locality.  The  river  opens  out  finely.  On 
the  left  bank  is  a  Ijroad  plain.  By  the  depth  of 
alluvium  which  the  broken  banks  show,  we  know  the 
plain  must  l)e  a  fertile  tract. 

Above  Mabwa,  the  river  appears  a  veritalile  Congo 
in  breadth — more  than  two  miles  wide. 

Erabo-Embo  comes  into  view,  with  a  grove  of  tall 
trees  around  it,  and  a  still  more  spacious  plain  extend- 
ing inland  to  blue  hills.  The  left  bank  is  also  a  rich 
plain  well-wooded,  while  along  the  river  border  num- 
bers of  villages  appear.  They  include  Livini,  Mabula, 
and  intervenino;  and  recurrino-  fishing-  hamlets,  eacb 
owning  a  little  flotilla  of  dug-outs.  Grassy  islets  are 
of  course  numerous,  in  series  with  channels  between 


CURIOUS  KATIVES.  417 

them.     Eo-rets  and  ducks  and  pelicans  are  startled  in     1882. 

^  ^        ^  May  20. 

successive  flocks  away  from  these  islets,  by  the  strenii-  Mabwa. 
ous  throbbing  of  the  engine,  and  the  noise  of  the 
escape-pipe.  The  hippos  gather  in  sober  conclave  to 
wait  the  advent  of  this  terrible  disturbing  demon 
intruding  on  tlieir  quiet  haunts,  and  then,  utterly  be- 
wildered by  the  increasing  clearness  of  the  sounds, 
they  abandon  their  apparent  studious  indifference,  and, 
h'ke  fish,  disappear  from  the  surface. 

At  Mabula  the  valley  of  the  Kwa  is  broad.  On 
either  banks  are  tlie  plains  of  rich  grass,  stretching  to 
distant  lines  of  deep  blue  hills. 

Soon  after  passing  Mabula  w^e  take  advantage  of  a 
channel,  and  cross  over  to  the  right  bank.  Seeing  some 
canoes  which  desire  to  accost  us,  we  halt,  and  allow 
them  to  come  up  for  conversation. 

"  Where  are  you  going  ?  And  what  is  tbis  all  for  ? 
What  Icind  of  a  thing  is  this  that  goes  up  by  itself  on 
our  waters  ?  " 

^'  Oh,"  Ankoli  responds  in  a  matter-of-fact  manner 
(he  has  forgotten  that  l:fe  was  also  frightened  by 
it  a  few  days  ago),  "  we  are  going  to  visit  Gankabi. 
This  is  Bula  Matari,  you  know,  brother  of  great 
Gobila,  and  this  is  the  white  man's  boat.  Ah^  it 
takes  the  likes  of  white  men  to  do  things  like  this, 
3'ou  know !  " 

At  wliicli  there  is  a  great  cry  of  admiration,  and 
very  cautious  approaches,  lest  those  things  begin  to 
revolve  again,  and  send  them  all  to  the  bottom. 

Finally,  when  we  express  a  desire  to  go  on  to  find 

VOL.  I.  2   E 


418  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     a  camp  before  nio'lit,  tliev  cry  out.  "  No\v    mind  don't 

May  20.  ^  . 

Mabuia.  frighten  Gankabi  too  mncli.  AVe  hope  you  will  be 
very  good  to  lier." 

"  Oh,  we  won't  frighten  her,  not  for  the  world,  poor 
woman,  not  for  the  world!" 

Kemeh  Island  appeared,  with  its  tall  trees,  far 
ahead,  dominating  the  waters  and  the  plains.  The 
pale  blue  sky,  out  of  which  tlie  sun  had  shone  with 
fervour  all  day,  now  began  to  be  overcast.  Large 
masses  of  grey  clouds  advancing  from  the  west,  finally 
shrouded  the  sun  ;  and  then  tlie  clouds  grew  blacker, 
auguring  that  the  day  would  close  with  a  rain-storm. 
Long  before  we  could  see  any  immediate  signs  of  a 
camp,  the  lightning  began  to  play,  darting  through 
the  dark  clouds,  and  with  the  rolling  of  thunder 
announcing  that  the  temjoest  was  near.  The  breeze 
rose,  fair  and  strong  astern,  and  a  sail  was  hoisted  to 
assist  our  progress.  On  the  level  expanse  of  plain  to 
our  right  we  w^ere  yet  unable  to  see  aught  by  which 
we  could  replenish  our  fuel  ;  but  at  5.45  p.m.  the  rain 
began  to  drop,  and  we  had  to  lay  up  for  the  night, 
a  clear  mile  away  from  a  scrubby  grove,  where  fuel 
might  perhaps  be  found  in  the  morning. 

We  were  ill-prepared  for  the  rainy  tempestuous  night 
that  followed.  With  the  sail,  however,  stretched  over 
an  oar,  we  contrived  to  pass  the  night  without  being- 
wetted,  though  a  certain  dampness  was  unavoidable. 

We  were  a  long  time  in  getting  under  way  next 
mornino'.  Fuel  had  to  be  carried  a  o-reat  distance  over 
a  sloppy  plain.     The  young  scrubl)y  grove  furnished 


SEPULCHRE   OF   CHIEFS.  419 

but   poor   material.      The    mud    at    the    landino'-place     ^^82. 
hecame  a   quagmire,  aud  looking  at   it  in    this  chilly,  Kemeh  is 
damp  state  added  to  the  disagreeableness  of  our  situa- 
tion.    Steam  took  hours  of  coaxing  before  it  rose  in 
the  meter,  despite  our   fond  nourishment  of  the  fire ; 
l)ut  at  noon  we  started. 

Kemeh  Island — the  Holy  Isle — wherein  the  kings 
and  queens  of  the  Wabuma  are  sepulchred  under  the 
shade  of  the  tall,  deep  grove,  was  soon  reached.  Clouds 
of  parrots  rioted  above,  and  made  the  air  alive  with 
sound.  Turtle-doves  cooed  their  love-songs  to  missing 
mates ;  hawks  soared  in  the  clear  air  contemplating 
some  desired  prey.  Aboard  came  dragon-flies ;  and 
great  gad-flies  now  and  then  bit  us  viciously.  Tsetse, 
too,  were  not  wanting  to  force  us  to  desist  from 
romantic  brooding  over  the  histories  of  the  dead  cliiefs 
who  in  sweet  oblivion  lie  honorably  interred  in  the 
Holy  Isle. 

Still  skirting  the  right  bank,  we  arrive  at  a  place 
where  grey  rocky  hills  slope  to  the  water's  edge. 
AVe  round  tlie  first  point,  and  half-circle  with  the 
curve  of  a  bight,  and  come  to  another  rocky  point, 
passing  which  we  discover  ourselves  at  the  lower  ex- 
tremity of  the  populous  settlement  of  Musye. 

What  wnth  tlie  miserable  feeling  of  the  morning,, 
and  the  racino*  of  the  niffht  before  in  search  of  some 
convenient  trees,  I  have  omitted  to  say  that  the  right 
Iialf  of  the  Kwa  is  black  as  coffee,  while  the  left  half 
is  a  pale  grey,  resembling  lime-wash  in  colour.  The 
black  water  is  discharged  by  the  Mfini  River,  which  is 

0    7?     0 

^  ij   t^ 


420  THE   CONGO. 

1882     the  right  branch  ;   the  grey  comes  out  of  the  Mbihe', 

Musre.    or  the  left  branch. 

The  centre  of  Musye'  settlement  commands  the  con- 
fluence of  these  two  rivers.  As  they  are  so  different 
in  colour,  it  will  be  easy  for  the  future  traveller  to 
find  his  way  from  one  stream  to  the  other  without  a 
guide.  But  a  hasty  glance  at  the  prospect  will  scarcely 
denote  the  route  he  should  take.  He  sees  only  a 
wide  flat  prospect  covered  ,with  pale  green  reeds, 
from  a  distance,  not  unlike  a  wide  field  of  wavinu- 
grain,  through  which  he  views  two  broad  watery 
channels  as  wide  as  the  Seine  at  Paris,  conflowing 
towards  the  united  river  he  has  voyaged  upon  to 
Musye. 

Xaturally  the  appearance  of  a  steamer  created  a 
sensation  among  the  inhabitants  of  Musye.  For  us  it 
is  well  that  it  did  so,  since  anything  less  w^ould  scarcely 
have  roused  the  drowsy  people  from  their  noon-sleep, 
or  from  their  noon-carousals  over  beer  and  trade-gossip 
under  their  verandahs,  or  in  the  cool  twilight  of  their 
houses.  Within  two  minutes  the  rumour  had  awakened 
the  whole  place ;  the  people  mustered  in  crowds  on  the 
bank ;  and  man}^  of  the  most  daring  shot  out  into 
the  river  in  their  light  dug-outs  to  examine,  while 
floating  down  the  stream,  the  strange  structure  that, 
without  aid  of  hand  or  eS"ort  of  muscle,  cleaved  the 
waters  of  the  Kwa,  and  beat  them  astern  into  two 
lines  of  rolling  waves. 

The  first  founder  of  the  community  must  have 
possessed   an   eye   to   business.     Xo  European  could 


EELA,    THE  FAITHLESS.  421 

have  chosen  better.     The  site  was  a  rich  earth  terrace      1882. 

'     May  21. 

20  to  40  feet  above  the  highest  flood.  Behind  it,  at  a  Musye." 
respectable  distance,  was  a  low  grass^^  ridge,  in  the 
folds  of  which  there  was  ample  room  for  gardens,  fields, 
and  pasture  ground.  The  grey  Mbihe  was  open  to 
them  for  several  days'  journey ;  the  black  stream  of 
the  Mfini  offered  to  them  the  same  advantages.  The 
lower  course  of  the  Kwa  offered  access  to  the  cloth 
markets  of  Stanley  Pool,  or  to  the  upper  markets  of 
Uyanzi  for  ivory,  beer,  and  crockery,  in  exchange  for  the 
camwood  powder  and  dried  fish  and  millet  and  Indian 
corn  and  tobacco  that  could  be  obtained  from  some 
tribes  of  their  rivers. 

Ankoli  discovered,  after  some  inquiries,  that  Gan- 
kabi,  the  queen,  was  absent  up  the  Mfini.  The  people 
did  not  know,  or  would  not  tell,  when  she  would  be 
back,  and  no  one  would  undertake  to  invite  us  to  the 
settlement. 

We  asked  for  Eela,  the  wife  of  Kibibi,  the  woman 
who  had  vowed  a  score  of  times  that  Bula  Matari  was 
her  "  man."  Eela  came  raving  up.  Oh,  woman,  coy, 
and  hard  to  please,  faithless  like  all  the  rest !  In  the 
hour  of  danger  she  denied  her  "  man." 

''  Ha !  Bula  Matari,"  she  screamed,  clutching  her 
throat.  "  Have  I  no  throat  ?  Must  this,  my  only  one, 
Ije  slit  to  please  you  ?  Who  am  I  that  you  ask  me  to 
take  you  in  when  Gankabi  is  away  ?  Out  upon  you 
lor  a  fool !  ^ly  throat  is  worth  more  to  me  than  all 
your  cloth  !  " 

"  0  Eela,  Eela";  never  more  will  I  trust  the  word 


422  THE    CONGO. 

1882.     of  a  woman  ! "  I  cried.     "  Is   this  the  extent  of  your 

3Iav  -21.  "^ 

Musye.  iovB  for  me  ?  Have  I  dared  the  dangers  of  the  mighty 
river's  flood  and  many  stony  points  and  rapids,  and 
come  up  the  Kwn,  to  be  denied  by  you,  who  exclaimed 
before  all  Mfwa  and  Kintamo  that  I  was  your  'man'? 
Oh,  Eela  I  Eela !  ungrateful,  faithless,  fickle  Eela ! 
Adieu,  wicked  traitress  !     I  go.     Eest  in  peace  !  " 

The  steam  meanwhile  had  risen  to  ten  atmospheres, 
and  when  I  gave  the  order  to  '*  go  ahead,"  the  En 
Avant  seemed  to  partake  of  my  rage,  for  she  darted 
off  with  such  velocity  that  a  cry  of  admiration  was  raised 
along  the  peopled  bank. 

The  villa o'es  of  Musve  extended  alono;  the  rio-ht 
bank,  continuously  from  the  Mfini  to  the  Kwa,  a 
distance  of  five  miles.  The  population  may  be  esti- 
mated at  5000  souls.  Gankabi's  reign  is  absolute  over 
this  portion  of  the  tribe  of  the  TTabuma,  and  it  is 
evident  that  her  subjects  stand  in  considerable  awe  of 
her.  Her  son,  Buguku,  is  chief  over  both  banks  of  the 
Kwa,  and  his  territory  must  be  extensive,  judging  from 
the  reports  of  the  guides. 

TVe  camped  at  5.45  on  a  little  island  in  the  Mfini 
River,  a  few  miles  below  Mbutchi.  Hitherto  we  had 
enjoyed  considerable  immunity  from  mosquitoes.  At 
Yivi  and  Manyanga  mosquitoes  were  unknown ;  at 
Le'opoldville  they  troubled  us  occasionally  at  first,  but 
the  large  clearing  and  terrace  cliilled  them,  and  finally 
drove  them  away.  At  Mswata  they  were  so  rare  that 
they  were  comparative  curiosities,  but  in  this  low 
grassy    region,    in    the    extensive    reedy    flats    in    tlie 


JIO.SQUJTOES   IX  MYRIADS.  423 

Mfini,  they  existed  in  myriads  upon  myriads.     Xot  an     is82. 

May  21, 

incli  of  space  above  or  below,  except  within  the  boiler,  Musve. 
seemed  untenanted  by  the  vicious  and  insatiable  insects. 
Our  moscj[uito-nets  contributed  some  relief  to  Albert  and 
myself,  but  as  for  the  poor  crew — fires  all  round  them, 
and  clouds  of  smoke  and  long  wisps  of  grass  availed 
them  but  little — they  said  it  was  one  long  agony  all 
night. 

Fuel  was  very  scarce.  Everything  that  bore  the  sem- 
blance of  being  dry  wood  was  industriously  searched 
for,  but  it  was  eight  o'clock  on  the  21st  before  we 
were  able  to  move  from  the  islet. 

We  seemed  to  be  voyaging  up  some  reedy  river 
delta.  High  green  spear-grass,  taller  than  a  man's 
head,  spread  over  a  space  some  fifteen  miles  in  breadth, 
and  of  unknown  length,  through  which  these  two 
rivers  flowed  for  many  miles.  About  a  mile  to  our 
left,  as  we  ascended,  was  a  continuous  range  of  low 
hills,  with  the  crest  partly  wooded,  and  the  slopes  and 
base  wholly.  If  we  look  to  our  right  the  line  of  hills 
seems  to  be  between  fifteen  and  twenty  miles  off,  and 
all  the  space  between  seems  to  be  occupied  with  this 
low  and  level  grassy  expanse,  excej^t  where  some 
scrubby  tree  grew,  or  a  clump  of  worthless  cotton-wood, 
whose  soft,  pithy,  fibrous  texture  was  most  unfit  for 
fuel.  Altogether  this  was  a  most  singular  condition  of 
things  to  us  who  had  l>een  so  long  amongst  rocks 
and  hard  wood  forests.  Yet  it  should  be  mentioned 
that  the  river  was  now  at  high-flood,  or  near  the  com- 
menceineiit  of  its  subsidence,  as  the  black   loam  which 


424  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     nourished   this   dense    crop   of  spear-grass    here    and 
Musye.    there  showed  itself. 

Necessity  has  taught  the  natives  that  a  nitrous  salt 
can  he  extracted  from  this  grass.  In  June,  July,  and 
August  they  cut  large  quantities  of  it,  which  they 
leave  on  swathes  on  the  ground  until  it  is  dry,  and 
then  collect  it  into  heaps  and  burn  it.  Afterwards 
they  collect  the  lye,  and  in  their  pots — which  this 
black  clay  and  loam  enable  tliem  to  make — they  boil 
it.  In  the  residuum  they  find  their  salt,  which  is  a 
dirty  grey  in  colour. 

A  singular  thing  which  we  observed  in  this  river, 
so  close  to  such  fat  pastures,  was  the  utter  absence  of 
hippopotami,  whereas  in  the  Mbihe  they  are  very 
abundant.  This  may,  however,  be  due  to  the  fact  that, 
being  high-flood,  the  river  overflows  the  water-courses, 
and  penetrates  the  depressions  behind  the  natural 
banks  of  the  river,  where  they  may  lie  undisturbed. 
But  in  the  whole  course  of  the  Mfini  River  we  did 
not  observe  one  of  these  animals  ;  crocodiles  also  were 
very  rare. 

About  an  hour  after  we  left  our  camp  we  were  met 
b}'  two  well-manned  canoes ;  in  the  foremost  of  which 
there  was  a  female  paddling  vigorously  for  a  few 
strokes,  and  then  in  a  peculiar  style  bringing  her  right 
arm  akimbo  to  her  waist.  Ankoli  recognised  her,  and 
cried  out,  "  There  is  Gankabi !  " 

Naturally,  to  meet  such  a  celebrity,  the  Queen  of 
Musye,  the  friend  of  Clobila,  and  the  principal  person 
on  the  river,  we  halted  very  quickly  ;  and,  without  the 


GANKABI,    QUEEX   OF  MUSYK  425 

sli  '•litest  sio'ii  of  timidity,  she  steered  her  forty-five  foot     1882. 
canoe  alongside.     This  very  action    on    ner   part   de-    Musye. 
noted  a  person  of  character.     She  brought  her  paddle 
in-board,   and  with   her  right   arm  to    her  waist  she 
examined  ns  keenly  and  attentively  for  some  minutes 
without  speaking. 

She  probably  was  listening  to  Ankoli,  who,  like  all 
other  natives,  begin  at  the  yery  beginning  of  a  story, 
and  continue  to  the  end.  Her  attentiye  survey  of 
Bula  Matari  was  with  interest  reciprocated.  Excepting 
her  hair  and  colour  she  had  nothing  negroid  about  her. 
Draw  a  figure  with  the  Martha  Washington  type  of 
face,  colour  it  with  rich  bronze,  put  short  frizzly  hair  of 
a  ne2:ro  above,  and  one  has  a  strikino^  likeness  of 
Queen  Gankabi.  If  of  full  length,  draw  it  to  represent 
a  figure  of  5  feet  Ih  inches  of  sturdy,  square-shouldered, 
substantial  form,  with  an  ample  grass-cloth  about  her ; 
bare  bust,  bare  feet  and  bare  head,  with  no  ornaments 
about  her  except  a  heayy  copper  wristlet,  and  you 
have  a  life-like  picture  of  Queen  Gankabi. 

Amons:  neffro  women  this  kind  of  face  of  the  Martha 
AVashington  type — austere,  fixed,  resolute,  and  earnest- 
eyed — is  very  unusual.  Probably  I  have  seen  200,000 
African  women  during  my  many  years  of  travel  in  the 
Dark  Continent,  and  I  cannot  remember  to  have  seen 
more  than  half-a-dozen  such  women.  A  certain  feminine 
softness  was  prevalent ;  they  were  narrow  browed,  with 
narrow  and  receding  chins,  but  the  best  of  these  for- 
midable types  were  governing  women,  great  in  their 
own  way,  such  as  the  Queen  Mother  of  Uganda,  and 


426  THE  CONGO. 

1882.     Gankabi,  Queen  of  Musye.     That  the  latter  was   not 

llay21.  '   ^  *' 

Musye.  greater  is  due  solely  to  a  lack  of  opportunities.  Per- 
haps Candace  of  Ethiopia,  and  Cornelia,  the  mother  of 
the  Gracchi,  may  have  been  women  of  the  same  type. 
I  observe,  however,  that  such  women  have  one  strong 
character  written  on  their  features,  viz..  Maternity, 
the  ideal  maternity ! 

"  So  3^ou  are  Bula  Matari !  "  Slie  did  not  speak 
gently,  but  abruptly,  rather  with  the  air  of  a  judge. 

"  Yes." 

"Come  along  with  me.  You  can  stop  at  Ngete' 
to-day,  and  to-morrow  we  can  go  to  Musye." 

This  woman  commanded  already. 

"  Pardon,  Gankabi.  Musye'  I  saw  yesterday,  Musye 
drove  me  away.  I  came  up  river,  and  I  am  now  going 
to  the  end  of  it." 

"  What !  you  cannot  go  higher  than  Ngete'  with  me. 
Do  you  know  I  am  Gankabi,  and  what  I  say  is  done  ? 
Ay?" 

"  Oh,  well,  Ankoli  has  told  me  of  Gankabi.  Gobila 
has  spoken  of  Gankabi.  I  know  Gankabi  is  great,  the 
mother  of  Buguku,  and  Queen  of  the  Wabuma ;  but  my 
name  is  Bula  Matari,  '  the  man  who  breaks  rocks.'  " 
(Tbere  is  nothing  like  asserting  one's  self  in  such  an 
obstinate  presence.  If  I  had  not  done  so,  this  virago 
would  have  taught  me,  I  believe,  what  a  stout-armed 
mother  can  do.     The  paddle  was  in  her  hand  !) 

"  Be  quiet.  Follow  me  this  instant  to  Ngete'.  What 
do  you  want  to  see  tlie  river  for  ?  There  is  nothing 
beyond  Ngete'.     The  two  banks  meet  so.     [She  inter- 


A    COMMANDING    WOMAN.  427 

laced  the  fingers  of  both  hauds.]   Take  my  word  for  it,     i88-2. 

jMay  "21. 

and  come  along."  Mu>^yo. 

"  Xo,"  I  re2:)lied.  "  To-day  I  do  not  wish  to  see 
Ngete'.  I  am  going  to  see  the  end  of  this  river,  and 
when  I  return,  if  you  are  at  Musye,  I  will  see  you,  that 
is,  if  you  wish  ;  if  not,  T  go  down  as  I  came  up  past  you." 

"  Well,  what  next,  I  wonder  !  How  will  you  go 
past  Ngete'  ?  The  people  will  fight  you.  No  one  is 
allowed  to  go  past  Xgete.  The  people  are  bad ;  they 
will  kill  you  all." 

"Ah,  well,  I  shall  be  very  sorry  to  get  killed,  of 
course ;  but  I  must  go  all  the  same." 

'^  What  for  ?  " 

"  To  see  the  river." 

"  And  what  will  you  do  with  it,  when  you  do  see  it?" 

"  Nothing.  When  I  have  seen  the  end,  I  will  return." 

"Enough  then.  Listen.  Stay  here.  Gro  close  to 
the  bank  there,  and  I  will  go  and  get  you  something 
to  eat,  and  we  will  go  together  down  to  Musyc." 

"  No.  I  am  glad  to  have  seen  you.  You  go  and  do 
your  work  at  Ngete.  Wait  there  two  or  three  dnys, 
and  I  shall  return  to  you,  and  together  we  will  go 
to  Musye." 

"  No,  no,  no  ;  do  not  be  fooHsh,  Bula  Matari.  Come 
on  with  me  to  this  next  village,  and  I  will  give  you 
some  food  and  you  shall  stay  there.  Meantime,  1  will 
go  to  Ngete'  and  get  my  things,  and  we  will  go  down 
to  Musye  to-day." 

I  assented  to  go  with  her  as  far  as  the  village,  where 
she  procuie<l  me  a  goat  and  some  bananas,  which  were 


428  THE   CONGO. 

1882.  very  accej^table  presents.  AVe  waited  an  hour  for  lier 
:Musye.  retum  from  Xgete,  after  she  had  departed  on  her 
errand,  and  then,  fearing  that  she  might  have  another 
opportunity  to  begin  her  obstinate  entreaties,  we  con- 
tinued on  our  voyage.  When  Xgete',  which  was  also 
a  populous  place  almost  as  large  as  Mus3'e,  appeared 
in  view,  Albert  received  a  hint  to  fire  up  to  eight 
atmospheres  of  steam,  with  which  we  dashed  on  despite 
the  frantic  shouts  of  the  people  of  Xgete,  in  the  midst 
of  which  Gankabi's  conspicuous  figure  Avas  seen  waving* 
her  hands  energetically  with  all  the  stern  mothers 
manner  so  noticeable  in  her  character. 

Xgete  is  on  the  left  bank,  and  commands  the  en- 
trance to  two  channels  caused  by  a  long  island.  The 
site  is  a  reddish  clay  hump  rising  above  the  surround- 
ing sea  of  spear-grass.  Just  above  are  the  villages  of 
Impali,  and  five  or  six  miles  higher  is  the  district  of 
Muleke',  where  we  arrived  at  3  F.3I.  Our  fuel  was 
almost  consumed,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  prospect 
of  obtaining  any.  The  wooded  hills  appeared  to  be 
about  a  mile  away  from  either  bank.  After  consulta- 
tion with  Ankoli  we  thought  it  best  to  treat  for  fuel,, 
bread,  and  bananas.  It  may  be  imagined  wdiat  kind 
of  a  country  this  was  when  we  had  to  pui  chase  w^ood 
for  fuel ! 

The  people  found  a  means  to  approach  the  steamer, 
and  visit  us  by  a  natural  canal.  We  found  them 
a  wild-looking  set.  Their  women,  like  the  Wy-yanzi, 
affect  heavy  brass  collars,  from  ten  to  sixty  pounds 
weio-ht  of  brass  around  their  necks,  while  le^'lets  and 


SCARCITY   OF  FOOD   AND   FUEL.  429 

armlets  were  also  massive.     The  hair  was  in  towerino-     I882. 

^     Jlav  -22. 

top-knots.    They  carried  spears  like  Zulu  assegais  ;  the    xgete. 
shafts  being  slender  and  long,  and  beautifully  grooved. 

With  Ankoli's  assistance  we  were  not  lono;  in  makina- 
friends  with  Ifwe,  chief  of  Muleke.  But  negotiations 
with  African  chiefs  are  tedious  affairs,  and  require  a 
vast  deal  of  patience.  The  explorer  may  fret  and 
fume,  and  wish  to  finish  his  set  task  within  a  reason- 
able time ;  but  the  force  of  circumstances  in  this  grass- 
banked  river  were  too  strong  for  once,  even  with  a 
steamer.  Our  fuel  cost  us  100  brass  rods,  which  at 
this  distance  were  worth  sixpence  each.  Fish — dried 
and  fresh — was  abundant ;  one  dried,  twelve  inches 
{Silurus)^  was  worth  one  brass  rod,  or  a  sixpence  ;  six 
fresh  fish,  a  foot  long,  were  purchased  for  four  brass 
rods,  or  two  shillings. 

On  the  23rd,  our  steamers,  well  loaded  with  dry  fuel, 
set  out  from  Muleke  at  noon. 

The  tribes  inhabiting  the  district  on  the  left  bank, 
and  wlio  extend  far  inland,  are  the  Basazza.  Muleke 
is  the  first  district  we  encountered.  There  is  but  a 
slight  difference  in  dialect  between  their  language  and 
that  of  the  Wabuma.  Ankoli  was  therefore  still  useful 
to  us. 

Ndua,  a  village  situated  on  another  humpy  rise  in  the 
land,  reminded  us  of  a  Nilotic  village  during  an  inun- 
dation. Though  it  was  only  12  feet  above  the  level  of 
the  liver,  it  was  at  a  commanding  height  above  it,  the 
sea  of  grass  rustling  and  waving  beneath,  judging 
from  the  prominence  of  the  black  figures  of  its  people, 


430 


THE   CONGO. 


18S-_'. 
Ndua. 


who    stood   grouped,  watching   the    approacli    of  the 
steamer  under  sail  and  steam. 

A  few  miles  above  Ndiia,  we  came  to  the  upper 
end  of  the  long  island,  to  pass  which  had  required  five 
hours'  steaming.  At  its  upper  extremity  on  the  right 
bank  stands  the  village  of  Ganto.  At  5  p.m.  we  pre- 
pared to  camp  on  the  left  bank  near  a  clump  of 
cotton-wood  trees,  from  which  we  managed  to  pick 
some  remnants  of  dried  wood. 


VILLAGE   OF   NDUA. 


Early  dawn  on  the  24th  found  us  moving  up  river, 
and  about  7  a.m.  we  came  to  a  grove  of  hard  wood  in 
a  bend  of  the  stream.  Such  being  a  great  rarity  in 
this  region,  we  availed  ourselves  of  the  treasure,  and 
in  two  hours  we  were  well  loaded  with  at  least  enough 
for  eighteen  hours'  continuous  steaming. 

Ndu  Kumbi,  a  large  village  on  the  left  bank,  was- 
reached  within  an   hour,  and  about   1   p.m.   we  were 


HOSTILE  NATIVES.  481 

abreast  of  ]\Iusye  Munono,  wliere  Ankoli  iDossessed  1882. 
friends.  This  compelled  another  stoppage  for  the  day,  Ndu 
which  was  not  considered  regrettable,  since  we  obtained 
a  supply  of  fresh  bread,  made  of  millet,  sufficient  to 
last  for  several  days.  The  bread  was  in  the  form  of 
a  roll  of  about  nine  inches  long  and  one  inch  in 
diameter,  thirty  being  obtainable  for  a  brass  rod. 

All  this  time,  despite  our  utmost  efforts  to  obtain 
information,  nothing  was  elicited  tending  to  make  one 
suppose  that  farther  up  there  was  any  extraordinary 
feature  worth  seeing.  The  natives  willingly  imparted 
all  they  knew ;  they  gave  the  names  of  villages  and 
peoples,  and  told  us  what  villages  possessed  "  good 
people.''  At  "  the  end  of  the  river,''  they  said,  was 
a  meeting  of  the  banks,  beyond  which  the  steamer 
could  not  travel. 

Since  leaving  Ngete  the  river  had  varied  in  breadth 
from  250  3-ards  to  400  yards,  deep  enough  for  all  the 
purposes  of  navigation.  Although  the  man  at  the  bow 
held  the  sounding-pole  in  his  hand,  and  continually 
tested  the  depth,  we  were  never  warned  of  shoal  water. 
The  current  was  a  steady  even  flow  of  two  and  a  half 
knots  per  hour,  and  the  river  was  clean  from  bank  to 
bank,  presenting  no  obstructions,  such  as  snags  or 
sand-bars,  between  the  sedgy  banks.  Had  there  been 
wood  on  its  shores  we  should  have  considered  it  as 
superior  even  to  the  Congo  for  navigation,  from  its 
unruffled  flow,  deep  water,  and  clean  bed.  An  artifi- 
cial canal  could  not  have  excelled  it.  It  had  also  a 
gently-winding  course,  though  erratic  in  the  detail  of 


432  THE   COXGO. 

1882.     the  curves,   but   was   witliout   eddies,    backwaters,  or 

3Iay  25.  '  '  ' 

Yamru.  rusbing  ciUTents  at  tlie  corners  ;  everywliere  it  was 
smoothly  flowing,  even  at  the  angles. 

On  the  25th,  soon  after  leaving  Miisje  Munono,  we 
passed  the  village  of  Miikana — right  bank — which  was 
hostile,  we  were  told,  to  the  former.  Near  noon, 
on  a  bluff  about  80  feet  above  the  river,  appeared 
Yamvu,  the  people  of  which,  despite  our  endeavour  to 
be  peaceable,  would  not  respond,  but  kept  regarding 
us,  weapons  in  hands,  vrith  a  mute  and  stupid  curiosity. 
By  the  banana  groves  flourishing  around,  we  should 
judge  Yamvu  must  be  blessed  with  plenty.  Abund- 
ance of  fish,  unequalled  growth  of  bananas,  with  palm- 
oil,  millet-seed  for  bread,  form  a  luxurious  chop  for 
black  Africans  bred  on  such  a  diet. 

The  latitude  at  noon  showed  we  were  in  S.  Lat. 
2^  27'.  At  12.45  p.m.  we  sighted  and  passed  Unkuri. 
Until  near  night  we  held  on  our  way — sedgy  banks  on 
either  hand,  to  the  depth  of  half  a  mile,  backed  by  a 
line  of  low  hills,  which  were  always  inaccessible,  except 
for  narrow  dug-outs,  wliich  could  be  j)^iii^ed  through 
the  foot-wide  channels  in  the  sedge. 

Near  the  evenins:  of  this  dav,  at  the  end  of  a  lono- 
reach,  we  came  to  a  sudden  curve  of  the  river.  The 
hills  on  the  right  ran  sharply  to  the  left,  while  the 
river  reach  appeared  to  end  at  their  base.  The  sedge 
became  narrower  on  the  right,  and  for  the  first  time  we 
looked  upon  the  space  between  the  river's  course  and 
the  base  line  of  the  hills,  and  saw  they  were  lines  of 
silent  pools  or  lagoons,  connected  by  intricate  narrow 


LAKE  LEOPOLD.  433 

channels.     On  an  ant-hill,  where  there  were  a  couple     i8S2. 
of  ruined  huts,  we  made  our  camp.     The  next  morning    \^-^q  ' 
we  were  obliged  to    break  up  one    of  these   huts    to     '"^^°^*^* 
obtain  fuel. 

But  next  morning,  pressing  onward,  we  found  the 
river  course  simply  curving  at  right  angles  to  the  long 
reach,  and  that  we  had  not  arrived  at  the  end  yet. 
An  hour  later  a  change  in  the  monotony  of  sedgy 
banks  and  broad  sedgy  valley  appeared.  The  river 
now  washed  on  the  rio-ht  the  base  of  well-wooded  and 
green  hills  of  moderate  height,  and  green-topped  bluffs, 
crowned  with  populous  villages,  were  seen.  Mutumba 
was  first  spoken.  Ankoli  had  never  been  so  far.  He 
mentioned  the  name  of  Gankabi,  but  the  name  evoked 
not  that  interest  we  should  have  expected.  They 
crowded  to  the  steamer  in  unpleasant  numbers,  which 
seemed  to  be  augmenting.  ^Ve  should  have  purchased 
food  were  there  any  immediate  prospect  of  being  able 
to  effect  a  favourable  impression.  But  time  was  valu- 
able to  us,  and  we  were  not  prepared  for  a  lengthened 
sojourn  on  the  present  voyage.  "^Ve  steamed  on,  with 
a  promise  that  we  should  call  on  our  way  back.  Half 
a  dozen  other  villages,  pleasantly  situated,  came  into 
view  one  after  another.  The  two  last  commanded  tlie 
confluence  of  two  channels,  the  left,  a  hundred  yards 
wide,  "  led  to  Ngana ;  "  but  whether  Ngana  is  a  river, 
lake,  village,  or  district,  we  did  not  know.  We 
chose  the  right-hand  channel,  as  being  the  largest,  or 
rather  widest,  being  three  times  the  width  of  the  other. 
A  sedgy  tract,  which  spread  out  like  a  waving  grain- 

VOL.  I.  2    F 


434  THE   CONGO. 

1882.  field,  separated  one  from  tlie  other.  The  riglit  bank 
Lake  "^'^s  a  tree-clothed  steep,  exquisitely  green,  and  the 
''"°^°''  larcre  nmbrao'eous  red-wood  trees  towered  from  near 
the  water's  edge  for  up  the  bluffy  face  of  the  hills.. 
Then  we  were  sheered  from  their  immediate  nei^-h- 
bourhood  by  a  tract  of  sedge  again,  but  there  was  still 
500  yards  of  clear  water.  Within  two  hours,  a  break 
in  the  dense  low  sedge  on  our  left  gave  us  a  view  of 
two  miles  of  clear  water,  and  it  was  only  now  I  began 
to  suspect  that  we  were  about  entering  a  lake,  perhaps 
a  wide  marsh. 

I  examined  with  interest  the  shores,  and  observed 
that  we  were  passing  them  at  an  unusual  speed.  We 
halted,  and  reversed  the  engines ;  there  was  a  slight 
current  perceptible  still.  AYe  dropped  a  lead-line 
overboard,  and  found  22  feet. 

A  low  point,  with  one  palm  conspicuous  on  it,  stood 
out  from  the  right  bank,  and  the  nearer  we  approached 
it,  the  more  I  became  convinced  that  we  had  stumbled 
unexpectedly  upon  a  lake,  for  to  our  left  the  low 
liills  were  five  miles  away,  and  between  us  was  open 
water. 

As  we  steamed  along,  we  observed  on  the  inky  sur- 
face of  the  lake  a  film  of  dust,  which  was  like  flour  of 
sulphur  in  colour,  and  far  away  in  the  wake  of  the 
steamer  astern,  the  water  was  like  a  lengthy  mirror 
set  in  a  broad  gilded  frame. 

Just  above  One  Palm  Point  we  found  a  bight,  with 
a  smooth  pebbly  shore,  and  deep  impenetrable  woody 
tangle  aback.     Here  we  camped,  at  5  o'clock,  to  obtain 


TEE  SHORES    OF  LAKE  LEOPOLD.  435 

fncl,   to  romp   on   the    clean    pebbled    shore,   to  skim     1882. 

May  26. 

flat  blue  slate  stones,  and  sling  round  marble-like  L^k-e 
pebbles  of  quartz  and  porous  red  stone  on  the  yellow  '''^^ 
sulphurous  face  of  the  lake.  The  light  pithy  cotton- 
wood  we  had  obtained  on  the  banks  of  the  river  below 
was  here  discarded  and  thrown  overboard^  and  harder 
white  wood,  with  a  deep  red  core,  was  substituted 
instead.  In  the  morning  the  discarded  firewood  was 
still  floating  in  our  neighbourhood. 

The  water,  when  held  to  the  light  in  a  glass,  was 
of  the  colour  of  brandy,  but  looking  down  into  deep 
water,  it  was  like  ink. 

The  next  day,  the  27th  of  May,  we  continued  our 
voyage  of  exploration,  and  skirted  the  shore,  at  the 
distance  of  1 00  yards  off  from  it. 

As  we  proceeded,  we  observed  that  the  left  shore 
receded  gradually  from  view,  until  our  eyes  rested  on 
a  watery  horizon  eastward.  But,  by  the  dark  loom  of 
land  over  the  bow  of  the  steamer,  we  became  convinced 
that  this  lake  possessed  great  bays  indenting  far  in- 
land, or  that  there  were  large  islands  in  it.  We 
sounded  occasionally,  and  found  the  depth  to  vary 
from  10  feet  to  24  feet.  Not  a  ripple  rufEed  its  smooth 
dead  surface,  but  that  winds  did  occasionally  agitate  it 
was  proved  by  the  line  of  wave-washed  shore,  by  the 
rounded  pebbles  strewn  on  it,  by  the  form  of  the  sand}' 
beach,  and  the  traces  of  the  effects  of  spurted  spindrift, 
and  sprayed  surge  visible  in  the  shade  of  overhanging 
shrubbery. 

Most  of  our  attention  was,  howevcr_,  attracted  to  the 

2  F  2 


43G  THE   COXGO. 

1882.     wood-clothed    shore,  which   rose    in  harmonious   hnes 

May  27. 

Lake  from  the  margin  of  the  lake  to  the  leafy  summit  of 
hills  varying  from  150  to  300  feet  above,  to  the  wag- 
tails and  sand-pipers  which  were  hopping  briskly  on 
the  beaches,  while  jays  careered  from  bush  to  bush, 
and  contemplative  fish-eagles  perched  on  the  highest 
boughs,  curiously  regarded  us.  Parrots,  flying  with 
affected  weary  wing,  and  uttering  harsh  strident  cries 
as  they  passed  overhead;  a  family  of  weaver-birds, 
liovering  under  their  pendent  nests,  with  their  yellow 
bellies  upward;  divers  darting  in  alarm  from  our 
proximity,  or  some  slow  lumbering  fat  crocodile,  loth 
to  be  disturbed,  sneakingly  moving  his  lengthy  form 
waterward,  added  to  the  satisfaction  we  felt  as  we 
steamed  swiftly  along. 

Let  it  not  be  forgotten,  however^  that  much  as  we 
were  willing  to  enjoy  ourselves,  there  were  serious 
drawbacks  to  enjoyment.  Our  pleasure  jaunt  was  dis- 
turbed by  the  fact,  ever  recurring  to  the  memory,  that 
we  had  but  little  food.  It  was  now  the  ninth  day  of 
our  departure  from  Mswata.  It  would  require  three 
days  to  return  to  the  station,  even  if  we  on  the  instant 
desisted  from  further  exploration.  Who  could  tell  how 
many  days  we  might  be  occupied  on  this  circumnaviga- 
tion of  the  lake  ? — for  that  is  naturally  what  we  had 
resolved  upon,  the  moment  that  the  idea  flashed  upon 
us  that  a  lake  had  been  discovered.  Some  wise  man 
had  implanted  the  lesson  in  my  mind  when  I  was  still 
young,  "  Never  to  abandon  a  good  thing  until  you 
have  seen  it  through,   lest  you    may  never  have  the 


Leopold. 


A    STOEM.  437 

opportunity  again."     In  other  words,  if  you  discover  a     is82. 

Mav  '11, 

new  Jake,  or  a  new  river,  exert  yourself  to  see  as  niucli     Lake 
of  it  as  you  can,  lest  the  accidents  of  life  may  prevent 
another  visit  to  it. 

This  is  what  we  were  bent  upon  doing,  although  the 
crew  were  already  looking  unutterable  things  at  me 
for  my  hardihood.  But  we — Albert  and  I — were  not 
a  whit  better  off  than  they.  Two  days  more  would 
make  us  poor  indeed.  Who  could  have  dreamed  of  a 
sedgy-banked  river  whereon  fuel  was  so  scarce  that 
we  should  be  compelled  to  lose  precious  half-days  in 
bargaining  for  it  ?  And  who  could  have  dreamed  of  a 
lake  lying  in  this  direction  ? 

The  bights  were  noble  curves  of  land,  but  the  rising- 
land  behind  showed  nothing  more  than  one  continuous 
forest,  the  notable  details  being,  perhaps,  some  tower- 
ing cotton-wood,  attracting  attention  by  its  large  and 
UDrio-ht  ii'rev  columnar  trunk,  or  some  palm  raising 
its  head  in  a  tuft  of  bending  fronds.  But  there  was 
not  a  break  to  indicate  that  there  might  be  human 
habitants  in  the  unknown  land.  Unbroken  by  any 
incident  the  day  passed,  and  in  the  evening  we  camped 
in  the  wilds  beside  a  silver  beach,  being  apparently  the 
undisputed  lords  of  the  silent  lake  and  land. 

Near  midnight  we  were  roused  from  our  slumbers 
\^y  a  storm  of  driving  rain.  The  lightning  darted  in 
fierce  flaming  pennants  and  blinding  white  flashes 
through  the  intense  blackness  of  the  night,  and  the 
thunder  followed  with  long-continued  reverberating- 
rolls,  or  in  short,  sharp  explosions  which  stunned  our 


438  THE   coy  GO. 

1882.     senses.     Then  the  rain  fell  afresh  in  eaffer  showers,  as 

May  28.  ^ 

Lake  though  forced  down  upon  us ;  and  presently  the  wind 
rose  into  a  gale,  and  we  soon  heard  the  surge  respond- 
ing by  sounding  Llows  upon  the  hollow  shore.  For- 
tunately, we  had  been  so  far  prudent  that  the  steamer 
was  safe,  though  we  did  not  quite  escape  the  swell. 
I  should  have  wished  that  this  stormy  event  had 
happened  during  the  day,  that  I  might  have  seen  the 
inky  water  rise  in  waves  crested  with  its  syrup- 
coloured  foam. 

But  ly  morning  of  the  28th  the  rain  had  ceased, 
the  wind  had  been  hushed,  and  only  the  uneasy  swell 
reminded  us  of  the  wilduess  of  the  past  night.  Our 
sail  had  ill-protected  us  from  either  rain  or  damp ;  the 
steamer  had  six  inches  of  water  after  the  copious  rain. 
Baling  had  to  be  done,  fuel  had  to  be  cut,  steam 
required  careful  attention,  a  warm  breakfast  had  to  be 
prepared  of  very  mild  tea  and  roasted  bananas,  before 
we  were  encouraged  to  venture  out. 

About  ten  o'clock,  as  we  were  issuing  out  of  a  long 
bay-like  bight  in  the  shore,  we  saw  half  a  dozen  small 
canoes  well  out  in  the  lake,  and  one  probably  two 
miles  further  out,  and  after  passing  the  rocky  point, 
we  saw  the  village  to  which  these  canoes  evidently 
belonged.  I  thought  this  an  excellent  opportunity  to 
obtain  some  information  respecting  the  country,  and 
perhaps  obtain  fresh  fish  and  food.  We  bore  down 
upon  the  fishermen,  who,  all  engrossed  in  hauling  their 
seines  aboard,  permitted  us  to  approach  within  a  mile 
of  them  before  they  were  aware  of  our  presence.     And 


ALARMED   FISHERMEN.  439 

siicli  a  presence  as  we  must  have  been  to  tliem !  A  1882. 
large  white  boat  with  outspread  and  ample  '^'ing,  {^^^ ' 
emitting  strange  noises,  which  was  unlike  the  sounds  '"^^°  ' 
sent  out  by  any  animal  they  had  ever  heard  !  They 
lift  their  hands  up  in  dismay.  One,  with  more  pre- 
sence of  mind  than  the  others,  claps  his  hands  to  his 
paddle,  and  instinctively  skims  away.  "An  admirable 
idea,"  the  others  seem  to  cry,  and  all  strike  their 
paddles  deep  in  the  black  water,  and  urge  their  tiny 
dug-outs  until  they  appear  to  fly  over  the  lake.  But 
the  other — the  canoe  all  alone  in  the  watery  waste — in 
which  the  fisherman,  profoundly  abstracted  in  his  task, 
sits  heedlessly  hauling  his  seines  aboard  ?  When,  hark ! 
What  is  that  ?  What  strange  sighing  sound,  and 
harsh  grating,  and  plashing  noise  is  that  ?  He  turns 
toward  our  direction,  and  beholds  a  strange  structure, 
all  white,  with  lofty  wing,  and  a  pair  of  revolving 
clappers  striking  the  lake  water  into  long  trailing 
waves  behind.  He  falls  sideways  into  his  little  canoe 
completely  paralysed,  as  if  striving  to  realise  that  the 
vision  is  not  all  a  dream.  No  doubt  the  thought  flashes 
into  his  mind,  "  But  a  moment  since  I  swept  my  eyes 
around,  and  saw  naught  strange  to  inspire  fear  or 
anxiety  in  me.  But  this !  Whence  could  this  have 
issued  ?     It  must  be  a  wild  dream,  surely." 

But  again  the  gentle  wind  bears  to  his  ears  the 
strong  pulsating  sounds,  and  the  deep  but  sharp 
sighing ;  he  hears  the  desperate  whirl  of  the  paddle- 
wheels  ;  he  sees  the  trail  of  rolling  wavelets  astern. 
Leaping  to  his  feet  with  frantic  energy,  he  takes  one 


440  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     short  e'lance   around,  and   realises  that   he,  insensate 
*iay28.  ^.     .  .      '.  .  .      .       -11 

Lake     fool,  while  indulging-  in  Waltonian  reveries  in  midday, 

''^°  ■  has  been  abandoned  by  his  friends  !     However,  there 

is  hope  while  there  is  life  ;   he  bends  his   back,  and 

draws,  with  long-reaching  grasp,  the  water  sideways, 

this  way,  and  that,  and  the  tiny  pirogue,  sharp  as  a 

spear-point,    leaps    over    the    water,  obeying    his    will 

dexterously. 

"  Down  with  the  sail,  boys,"  and  the  wing  is  folded, 
and  a  tall  shaft  stands  revealed,  with  a  black  column 
behind  vomiting  flame  and  smoke  from  its  muzzle. 

Nearer  and  nearer  the  steamer  draws  on  the  fugitive 
pirogue,  but,  by  a  whirl  of  the  paddle,  the  dark  man 
shoots  triumphantly  at  right  angles  away,  while  the 
En  Avanf,  confused  by  this  sudden  movement,  careers 
madly  along.  In  a  short  time,  however,  she  is  in  full 
chase  again,  this  time  carefully  watching  every  move- 
ment. The  man  has  kept  throwing  wild  glances  over  his 
shoulders ;  he  observes  the  monster  rapidly  gaining  on 
him,  and  each  time  it  seems  to  loom  larger  and  larger 
to  his  excited  imagination  ;  he  hears  the  tremendous 
whirl  of  the  wheels,  and  tlie  throbbing  of  the  engines, 
and  the  puffing  of  the  steam.  Another  glance,  and  it 
seems  to  be  overwhelming  him,  when,  "Ach  Gott !" 
he  springs  overboard,  and  we  sweep  past  the  empty 
canoe. 

"  Now,  Uledi  and  Dualla,  we  will  go  round  to  the 
spot  where  he  sank,  and  as  he  comes  up  jump  over- 
board and  catch  him." 

We  steered  the  steamer  round,  and  proceeded  slowly 


llilUi'«r:i;  '  Mllih.ii'  ■llliitllSlJ' 


iil'I'lfll 


r\ 


OUR    CAPTIVE.  441 

towards  the  empty  canoe.     Tlie  man  was  swimmins:  in     1882. 

.  ,  May  28. 

its  vicinity.  As  we  came  up  he  divecl,  and  our  two  L^ke 
sailors  flashed  into  the  depths  after  him.  It  was  a  '*'°^° 
pretty  sight  to  see  the  graceful  bodies  darting  like 
sharks  towards  their  prey.  They  brought  him  up, 
each  holding  an  arm,  and  swam  with  him  to  the  boat. 
We  lifted  him  up  tenderly,  and  seated  him  on  the  sail, 
waiting  patiently  for  his  pulses  to  beat  less  wildly,  and 
the  excited  heart  to  cease  its  rapid  throbbing. 

"Now,  Ankoli,  speak  softly  to  the  poor  man." 

No  answer  was  given  to  Ankoli's  cooing  tones  and 
wooing  accents. 

•'  Try  again — softer  still,  Ankoli." 

And  again  Ankoli,  in  soothing  whispers,  asked  what 
his  name  was. 

"  What  did  you  pick  me  out  for  ?  There  are  many 
better  than  I  in  our  village." 

"One  what?"  I  ask.  "How  better?  What  does 
he  mean  ?  " 

"  He  means,"  answered  Ankoli,  "  that  there  are  finer 
slaves  than  he  in  the  village." 

"  Ah !  There  have  been  slave-catchers  here,  then. 
Where  do  they  come  from  ? " 

"  How  do  I  know  ? — I  never  saw  this  lake  before. 
Perhaps  Gankabi,  perhaps  Ingya  of  Ngete'." 

Having  evidently  obtained  all  the  information  the 
])Oor  fellow  could  give,  Dualla  filled  his  two  hands 
with  bright  beads,  and  laid  a  dozen  handkerchiefs  by 
his  side,  then  bringing  the  canoe  alongside,  we  asked 
him  to  step  in,  and  placed  his  cloth  in  the  stern  of  it, 


442  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     with  a  small  parcel  of  cowries.     After  lie  liad  stepped 

INIay  28.     .  . 

Lake  11^5  ^16  did  not  seem  to  realise  that  he  was  a  free  and  rich 
'°^'°  ■  man  until  there  was  such  a  distance  between  us  that  he 
thought  it  impossible  for  us  to  catch  him  again,  even 
if  we  tried.  When  he  seemed  a  small  speck  in  the 
lake,  we  saw  the  figure  rise  to  its  height,  and  then  we 
knew  that  he  was  conscious  that  his  old  life  had  begun 
again. 

We  arrived  at  the  head  of  the  lake,  which  is  in 
south  lat.  1°  28',  and  after  going  into  two  or  three 
deep  bights  in  the  hope  that  in  this  direction  we  should 
meet  some  navigable  river,  we  came  in  sight  of  a  very 
large  village.  We  halted,  and  lay  to  about  150  yards 
off"  shore,  while  Ankoli  endeavoured  to  make  himself 
understood.  But  the  inhabitants  gathered  together, 
and  only  made  hostile  demonstrations  with  their 
bows  and  arrows.  To  put  the  matter  beyond  doubt,  a 
native  advanced  to  a  projecting  log,  and  deliberately 
placed  his  arrow  ready,  while  a  few  more  lined  the 
shore  with  light  assegais.  Ankoli  recited  Gobila  and 
Gankabi's  names,  as  though  they  were  the  names  of 
protecting  deities,  \ml  never  a  word  of  reply  gave 
these  people.  Under  such  conditions,  with  time  flying, 
and  food  now  at  starvation  scantiness,  we  could  not 
stay  to  convert  them  into  showing  hospitality  to 
strangers.  Rebuffed  by  these  coercive  intimidations 
we  steamed  away,  still  skirting  the  rock-bound  shore, 
until,  coming  to  an  island,  we  encamped  for  the  night. 
On  the  29  th  we  were  away  before  the  dawn,  running 
in  and  out  of  deep  bays,  along  a  low  shore  of  rock 


LAKE  LEOPOLD    CIRCUMNAVIGATED.  443 

capped  by  humus  and  alluvium,  until  about  noon,  when     1882. 
we  entered  another  bay  in  the  southern  coast,  where  a     Lake 
large  extent  of  forest  was  submerged,  and  the  water 
penetrated  far  inland. 

On  the  30th  we  were  still  engaged  in  exploring  the 
deep  bays  of  the  irregular  south  coast.  Only  a  few 
villages  were  seen,  but  the  instant  we  appeared  the 
inhabitants  betook  themselves  to  the  bush.  Numbers 
of  small  streams  entered  these  bays. 

On  the  31st  I  wrote  the  following  in  my  diary : — 
*'  Explored  three  bays  to-day,  and,  clinging  closely  to 
the  shore  until  2  p.m.,  I  crossed  over  to  the  west  side, 
arriving  at  One  Palm  Point  at  3.30  p.m.,  and  the  circum- 
navigation of  Lake  Leopold  IL  was  completed.  The 
greatest  depth  I  discovered  is  24  feet ;  its  average 
depth  is  perhaps  16  feet  at  this  season;  it  may  be 
6  or  8  feet  less  in  the  dry  season.  Though  so  shallow, 
it  covers  a  considerable  area — nearly  800  square  miles. 
I  have  only  discovered  one  river  of  any  importance, 
which  is  at  the  north-east  extremity  of  the  lake.  I 
penetrated  upward  5  miles.  Ankoli  informed  me  that 
the  Wyyanzi  sometimes  came  down  by  the  Mfini,  but 
by  what  means  they  could  have  reached  the  lake,  if 
true,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know.  A  great  many  small 
streams  converge  into  the  lake. 

"  The  southern  coast  presents  mainly  the  irregular 
fracture  that  a  cake  of  slag  might  be  supposed  to 
jiresent  after  being  struck  with  a  hammer,  it  is  so 
jagged  in  outline.  Tt  is  a  hard  grit-stone,  and  j^itted 
like  pumice-stone  in  its  character,  veined  with  iron  ore. 


444  THE   COXGO. 

1882.  The  north  coast  is  com2:)Osed  of  lines  of  hills,  well- 
Lake  ^oodcd,  witli  Open  bights  and  a  few  snug  coves.  Red 
''^^^  ■  wood  powder,  and  rubber  and  fish,  with  ivory,  are 
the  jorincipal  products  of  these  people,  according  to 
my  guide,  who  has  traded  often  with  Gankabi,  who, 
in  her  turn,  has  obtained  most  of  her  trade  with  the 
villages  near  the  entrance  to  tbe  lake. 

"  AVe  are  almost  famished,  because  I  was  buoyed  up 
with  the  hope  that  we  would  be  able  to  obtain  food 
somewhere ;  but  such  is  the  extraordinarily  wild  and 
timid  character  of  the  natives  around  the  lake,  that, 
with  the  best  desire  in  the  world,  prompted  by  pinched 
vitals,  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  anything.  It 
would  jDrobably  take  two  voyages  more  to  conquer  this 
suspicion  of  our  intentions. 

'•  Besides  my  anxiety  about  obtaining  food  for  my 
crew  I  am  oppressed  to-night  with  a  deathly  languor. 
My  entire  frame  aches  with  pains,  but  fortunately  I 
have  all  my  observations  worked  out,  and  if  I  am 
taken  seriously  ill,  it  is  only  a  descent  down  a  river 
that  has  been  sufficiently  surveyed  while  ascending. 

*'  June  1st. — AVe  start  at  7.55  a.m.  from  One  Palm 
Point,  Lake  Le'opold  II.  Arrive  at  confluence  of 
Ngana  with  Mfini  at  11.20  a.m.,  and  Musye'  Munono 
at  6.20  P.M.,  when,  late  as  it  is,  the  ravenous  jrieople 
begin  bartering-,  and  the  natives,  never  loth  to  trade 
after  their  confidence  has  been  obtained,  respond 
heartily. 

"  I  have  a  strong  fever  on  me  to-night. 

"June  2nd. — Left  Musye'  Munono   7.5  a.m.;  arrived 


Tille. 


AGAIN  IN  SICKNESS.  445 

at    Muleke   11.45    a.m.:    arrived   at    Musye    4.45    p.m.     1882. 

.  '  ,       ,  June  12. 

Gankaoi  has   received  my  excuses.     My  illness  is  in-    Leopold- 
creasing  in  intensity.     Albert  and  Dualla  must   no^v 
take  charge. 

"June  3rd  to  6th. — Halt,  and  sick  at  Gankabi's. 

"June  7th. — I  urge  departure,  and  at  11.30  a.m.  we 
leave  G-ankabi's,  and  arrive  at  Mswata  3.45  p.m." 

By  this  time  I  had  become  perfectly  helpless.  On 
the  11th,  Albert,  engineer  and  captain,  took  the  boat 
to  Stanley  Pool.  Xext  day  we  arrived  at  Le'opoldville, 
where  I  dimly  remember  being  carried  to  the  station. 

Four  or  five  days  later  I  remember  to  have  been  told 
that  some  Europeans  had  arrived,  those  very  people  I 
had  waited  for  so  long.  I  remember  that  they  came 
to  my  bedside,  but  I  have  no  distinct  recollection  of 
anything  particular  relating  to  them. 

There  were  brief  intervals  of  consciousness  each  day. 
In  one  of  these  I  gave  orders  for  a  caravan  to  be  pre- 
pared ;  and,  as  the  Zanzibaris  who  had  accompanied 
ine  from  Zanzibar  had  performed  their  three  years'  term 
of  service,  they  should  convey  me  to  Tivi. 

It  was  on  the  27th  of  June,  in  camp  at  Mpakambendi, 
that  my  position  fully  dawned  upon  me,  and  I  believed 
myself  free  from  danger.  We  had  left  Le'opoldville  on 
the  23rd,  and  had  since  crossed  the  Congo  to  the  north 
bank.  On  the  28th  I  was  conveyed  to  Manyanga,  and 
liere  incipient  gastritis  made  itself  manifest. 

During  the  interval  of  waiting  for  the  boat  from 
Isangila,  Mr.  T.  J.  Comber,  head  of  the  Baptist  Mission, 
applied  to  me  fur  advice,  and  I  strongly  recommended 


446  THE   COXGO. 

18S2.     to  him  a  settlement  at  Leopoldville,  and  agreeably  to  liis 
isancriia.  I'^qucst  I  managed  to  scraM'l  a  letter  with  a  trembling 
hand  to  the  chief  in  charge. 

And  now  with  other  infirmities — excessive  weakness 
after  my  month's  illness  ;  with  gastric  attacks  in  the 
stomach — my  lower  limbs  assumed  a  dropsical  largeness. 
I  was  glad  to  hear  the  boat  had  arrived,  that  I  might 
reach  some  locality  w'here  a  little  good  nourishing-, 
palatable  food  was  obtainable. 

Though  I  had  been  absent  from  Manyanga  station 
nearly  twelve  months,  I  cannot  say  that  I  was  other 
than  depressed  by  the  very  little  progress  made  in  that 
time. 

Within  sixteen  hours  we  arrived  at  Isangila,  of  which 
my  former  secretary,  Swinburne,  had  command.  Poor 
and  humble  enough  the  station  seemed,  but  at  least 
goodwill  was  manifest.  Within  the  station-house  the 
young  chief  had  contrived  to  modify  the  harsh  squalor 
•  of  his  surroundings  by  the  simple  elements  of  neatness 
and  cleanliness.  A  few  yards  of  j^i'inted  calico  over 
the  bed,  a  scrap  of  snow-white  sheeting  over  the 
window,  a  narrow  fringe  of  crimson  savelist,  a  cloth 
hanging  here  and  there,  tastefully  distributed,  did 
wonders;  and  so  rude  had  my  existence  for  the  last 
three  years  been,  that  the  effect  of  even  this  small 
effort  acted  like  a  tonic  on  my  vitiated  system. 


XO   PnOGBESS  AT  VIVI.  447 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

liETURX     TO     EUROPE. 

Keturn  to  Yivi — Xo  progress — Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche  — Zanzibaris  sent 
home — Good-bye  to  Vivi — St.  Paul  de  Loanda — Appearance  of  the 
city — Absence  of  sanitary  measures — The  hospital  and  prison — A 
Howard  wanted — The  Governor-General  in  the  past — Neglected 
■water  and  railway  works — En  route  to  Lisbon — ^Ports  of  call — Dis- 
comforts of  the  voyage — Madeira,  the  Pearl  of  tlie  Atlantic. 

Towards  noon  of  July  the  8tli  the  caravan  ascended  1882. 
the  steep  road  that  led  up  immediately  to  the  v  ivi  xlxi. 
rock  platform.  When  near  the  summit  the  hammock 
was  stopped,  and  a  group  of  strange  Europeans  ap- 
peared to  tender  a  welcome.  Among  them  was  a 
middle-aged  gentleman,  whom  Herr  Lindner  intro- 
duced as  Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche. 

"  "What  ?  Good  heavens  !  Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche  still 
here !  I  thought  he  had  gone  four  montlis  ago  on  his 
mission.     I  am  surprised." 

Yivi  was  in  the  same  condition  as  I  had  built  it  in 
Dec-Jan.  1879-80.  Only  one  magazine  had  been 
added,  and  for  that  Herr  Lindner  deserves  the  credit. 
The  roads  also  were  much  in  the  same  condition — 
if  anything   they    were  wois?.     The  bridge  over  the 


448  THE  CONGO. 

1882.  Nkusu  had  Jong  ago  been  swept  away,  and  no  attempt 
vivi.  had  been  made  to  build  another.  Man  had  been  in- 
dififerent,  but  nature  had  not  been  idle.  The  mango 
trees  were  growing  finely,  the  papaws  were  tall,  and 
by  their  verdure  relieved  the  glaring  white  of  the 
painted  magazines.  Had  nature  been  assisted  by  man 
I  should  have  had  cause  to  be  grateful. 

Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche  was  currently  reported  to  be  an 
enterprising  person,  and  believed  to  be  a  man  of  intense 
energy.  He  had  been  of  some  note  in  tlie  German 
Expedition  of  1873-1875,  on  the  south-west  coast 
of  Africa.  He  volunteered  his  services  to  the  Comite 
of  the  Association,  and  was  despatched  in  December 
1881  to  Tivi,  whence  he  was  to  obtain  thirty-four 
picked  men  to  make  an  expedition  to  Loango  and 
the  interior.  Two  or  three  Europeans  were  deputed 
to  assist  him  in  his  mission.  It  is  unnecessary  for  me 
to  dwell  upon  the  causes  that  seem  to  have  arrested 
the  party.  His  staff  and  expedition,  after  some  months 
of  preparation,  were  still  resting  at  Yivi,  patiently  in- 
active, although  I  had  reason  to  believe  that  in  March 
the  expedition  had  departed  on  its  mission. 

Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche  appeared  before  me  with  other 
credentials.  He  bore  a  sealed  commission  from  the 
President  of  the  Association  appointing  him  com- 
mander of  the  Expedition  du  Haut  Congo  in  the  event 
of  my  being  disabled  by  accident  or  by  serious  indispo- 
sition. Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche  could  scarcely  have  done 
me  greater  service  than  by  showing  this  document  from 
the  supreme  authority.    To  a  person  in  my  state  it  was 


GOOD-BYE   TO    VIVI.  44:9 

a  reprieve.     But  for  this  I  slioiild  have  heen  anxious,     i8S2. 

.  .   .  July  8 

and  worn  myself  out  with  fretting  over  my  pitiful  vivi. 
condition  and  slow  convalescence.  I  should  have 
dreaded  the  arrival  of  every  courier  from  the  interior, 
lest  he  bore  some  grievous  news  necessitating  my 
instant  departure.  But  the  legitimate  substitution  of  a 
person  of  Dr.  Peschuel-Loeche's  attainments  and  well- 
known  character  for  energy,  coupled  with  his  African 
experience  and  scientific  acquirements,  satisfied  every 
hope  that  my  work  would  be  prosecuted  with  the  same 
devoted  spirit  that  had  animated  me. 

To  the  learned  doctor  I  imparted  such  necessary 
information  and  hints  for  guidance  as  would  enable 
him,  provided  that  he  was  endowed  by  nature  with  a 
moving  impulse,  to  realise  perfect  success.  As  a  further 
encouragement  and  augury  of  success,  Lieutenant  Louis 
Yalcke  appeared  with  225  new  recruits  for  the  expe- 
dition. 

The  services  of  Albert  Christopherson,  who  was 
the  first  European  to  serve  his  three  years'  term 
faithfully  and  honestly,  were  rewarded  by  his  being 
charged  with  the  escort  of  the  brave,  hard-working, 
patient  Zanzibari  pioneers  on  their  voyage  home. 

On  the  15th  of  July  I  was  conveyed  down  the  hill- 
road  of  Yivi,  placed  aboard  the  Comite  steamer  La 
Belgique^  and,  with  many  cheers  from  my  dark  com- 
rades in  our  late  terrible  work  ringing  in  my  ears,  I 
was  quickly  carried  away  by  the  little  steamer  which 
sped  down  the  river  to  the  steamer  Heron,  which  was 
waiting  for  me  at  Mussuko. 

VOL.  I.  2  o 


450  TEE  coy: GO. 

1882.         Four  davs  later  Tre  were  in  the  harbour  of  St.  Paul 

July  19. 

Loanda.  ^^^  Loaucla,  the  capital  of  Angola,  where  we  found 
that  the  Portu^-uese  mail  steamer  liad  already  de- 
parted.  This  misfortune  compelled  a  stay  in  the  city 
for  a  month,  during  which  time  I  was  comfortably 
housed  and  kindly  attended  to  by  Herr  Xieman  of  the 
Afrikaansche  Tenootschap  and  doctored  by  Senhor 
OHviera,  a  noted  physician  of  the  city.  Through  the 
skilful  treatment  of  Doctor  Oliviera  and  the  pleasant 
hospitality  of  ^Ir.  Xieman,  I  gradually  recovered 
strength,  although  the  dropsical  swelling  of  the  lower 
limbs  prevented  me  from  enjoying  many  excursions. 

A  few  paragraphs  will  dispose  of  the  city  of  St. 
Paul  de  Loanda,  although,  being  over  three  centuries 
old,  it  has  a  famous  history. 

From  the  harbour  and  sea  the  view  is  noble,  and 
presents  an  aspect  of  importance.  The  city  extends  in 
a  row  of  substantial  structures  along  the  shore-line  of 
the  harbour,  up  the  steep  red  bluffs,  and  continues 
over  the  summit,  on  which  there  are  a  number  of  de- 
tached and  disjointed  buildings  of  commodious  length 
and  commanding  prominence,  stuccoed,  washed  with 
lime,  and  coloured  white,  zinc-blue,  or  yellow.  There 
are  three  forts  in  view,  possessing  a  strength  and 
solidity  sufficient  to  resist  the  attacks  of  the  puny 
cannon  of  past  ages ;  but  ill  adapted  for  defence 
against  the  prodigious  dynamic  power  of  modern  guns. 
The  Custom  House  is  a  tremendous  erection,  covering 
some  acres  of  flat  ground  near  the  water  side. 

I  mentioned    the    steep   red   bluffs.      These   are   a 


ST.   PAUL   BE  LOAXDA.  451 

portion  of  the  almost  continuous  sea  frontage  of  the     i8S2. 

^  .  ,  Julv  19. 

land,  extending  from  the  Congo.     Being  of  soft  clayey    Loamia. 
material,  the   rains   have  gnawed    and  eaten  into  its 
face,  until,  on  a  close  examination,  you  see  that  the 
bluffs  are  a  series  of  precipitous  earth  cliffs,  showing- 
dangerous  crevices  and  fissures,  several  fathoms  deep. 
In  places  that  are  unoccupied  by  houses,  this  state  of 
dangerous  ugliness  is   immaterial ;   in  the  city,  how- 
ever, it  has   caused  painful    troubles.       Once  upon  a 
time,  when  tlie  slave-trade  was  at  its  height^  and  legi- 
timate,  St.   Paul    de   Loanda  was    solidly  paved,   and 
laid  out  with  all  the  semblance  of  prosperity.     Dark 
days    have,  however,  come   over   the   city.     Civilised 
nations   frowned   upon    the   nefarious    and    inhuman 
trade.      The    abandonment    of    the    slave-trade    was 
decreed.      Like  falcons,  the  British  cruisers   pounced 
upon   and   hunted   the   slave   vessels,   and   St.  Paul's 
commercial    prosperity   shrank    before    the   punishing 
policy  of  England.     Deficits  in  the  colonial  treasury 
became   frequent.     The    churches   fell   out   of  repair, 
and   became  roofless  as   they  are  to-day.     The  pave- 
ment of  the  streets  was  forgotten.     Year  by  year  the 
rains  swept  down  the  sands  from  the  bluffs,  and  deeply 
buried  the  streets.     The  ruin,  unchecked,  grew  each 
year  worse  and  worse ;   the  sand  was   washed   down 
into   the   harbour,  so  that   now  that   fine  expanse  of 
protected  water  is  half  filled.     If  it  continues  in  this 
state,  and  no  Governor  with  intellect  and  energy  rises 
to  stop  this  decay,  arising  from  the  slovenly  neglect 
of  a  gift  of  Nature,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  a  few 

2  G  2 


452  THE   CONGO. 

1882.     o'enerations  the  harbour  will  be  of  no  use  whatever. 

July  19.    ^^ 

Loanda.  NatuVe,  while  untouched,  kept  that  harbour  deep  for 
man's  use.  The  Portuguese,  however,  with  a  view,  it 
may  be  presumed,  of  utilising  what  they  had  seized 
upon  before  the  law  of  meiim  and  tuum  was  so  strictly 
defined  as  it  is  now,  made  paved  streets  perpendicular 
to  the  harbour.  Of  course  the  rains  swej^t  the  de'bris 
of  the  clay  bluffs  down  the  scoured  pavement,  into 
the  flats  below,  and  thence  straight  into  the  harbour. 
An  expenditure  of  £50,000  would  be  required  to 
remove  the  effects  of  this  madness  of  the  colonial 
engineer^  and  perhaps  £100,000  would  hardly  suffice 
to  cover  the  expense  of  clearing  out  the  sands  in  the 
harbour. 

They  need  not  have  told  me  that  it  was  useless  to 
unearth  the  pavement,  because  the  next  rains  would 
cover  the  streets  to  as  great  a  depth  with  sand.  That 
is  true  enough  ;  but  the  sand  meanwhile  is  an  un- 
deniable nuisance.  Every  street  corner  is  a  nuisance. 
The  lowest  of  the  inhabitants  find  it  convenient  to 
use  the  sand  of  the  streets  as  latrines.  This  is  surely 
an  abominable  system  for  the  cathedral  city  of  Angola 
to  maintain. 

Worthy  efforts  have  been  made  to  plant  rows  of 
umbrageous  trees  and  sweet-flowering  shrubbery  in 
the  streets ;  but  they  are  unable  to  thrive,  owing  to 
the  censurable  neglect  which  leaves  them  exjDOsed  to 
injury  through  the  filthy  practices  of  the  inhabitants. 
Sanitary  laws  receive  no  enforcement ;  and  the  absence 
of  restrictions  in  this   respect   is  only  too  pungently 


LOANDA   HOSPITAL   AND   PEISOX.  453 

exemj^lified.     There  never  was  a  city  in  the  old  or  the     1882. 
new  world  where  a   hroom — a  broom  of  power — was    Loaada. 
so  wanted  as  it  is  in  modern  Loanda. 

I  went  to  the  summit  of  the  bluff,  where  the  resi- 
dences of  the  dignitaries  are  found.  I  was  first 
attracted  by  the  new  hospital  they  are  building  for 
Loanda.  The  architects  and  builders  have  effected 
their  work  worthily  and  well.  It  is  a  notable  and 
magnificent  feature  in  the  modern  city,  and  will  be 
visible  from  afar.  If  the  attendance  and  the  diet 
will  bear  any  comparison  to  the  commodiousness 
and  airiness  of  the  hospital,  the  place  will  deserve 
renown. 

In  the  front,  grading,  excavating  and  levelling  the 
approaches  to  the  hospital,  were  seen  some  hundreds 
of  convicts  from  the  mother  couQtr}^  I  have  no  idea 
of  the  nature  of  the  crimes  these  people  were  guilty 
of  to  render  them  liable  to  compulsory  expatriation. 
But  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  numbers  of  men  who 
have  been  received  in  this  penal  colony  ought,  under 
a  wise  administration,  to  have  contributed  something 
towards  its  enrichment.  When  I  think  of  the  number 
of  fair  and  rich  valleys  in  the  interior  of  Angola,  it 
appears  to  me  that  by  this  time  good  work  might 
have  been  done  by  the  establishing  of  agricultural 
reformatories. 

One  Sunday  I  saw  the  exterior  of  the  prison,  where 
many  of  these  people  are  confined,  and  I  observed 
that,  for  such  a  warm  climate,  the  poor  prisoners  were 
much   too    closely   packed,    and    must    have    suffered 


454  THE   COXGO. 

1882.     greatly.     Everv  window  was  crowded  with  pale  sallow 

Loanda.    feces,  wbosc   black   evcs   glared   despairingly   at    the 

passer-by.    A  man  having  the  instinct  and  benevolence 

of  a  Howard  would  probably  discover  painful  incidents 

iu  connection  with  this  Loanda  Bastille. 

The  Governor-Greneral's  palace  is  much  too  fine  a 
building  for  the  official  who  generally  occupies  it ;  but 
not  too  fine  for  the  type  of  man  who  used  to  govern 
Angola  in  former  days.  I  have  never  yet  been  within 
the  mansion  without  giving  a  mental  Requiescat  in 
pace  for  the  heroes  of  the  old  days  when  a  Governor- 
General  of  Angola  acted  as  a  man  of  spirit  and 
bravery.  "Within,  it  has  the  air  of  faded  stateliness, 
with  its  time-worn  crimson  carpets,  plush  gilt-edged 
couches  and  chairs,  full-length  portraits  in  gilt  frames, 
laro^e  chandeliers,  and  suites  of  semi-eors^eouslv  fitted 
rooms.  A  garden  adjoining  the  palace  presents  a 
dreary  scene  of  neglect,  unworthy  of  being  looked  at 
twice.  The  jDublic  park  or  garden  close  by  is  better ; 
but  it  seems  to  be  hard  work  to  get  its  verdure  to  look 
fresh. 

I  recollect  that  in  IS 77,  there  was  an  intention  to 
convey  water  in  pipes  from  the  Bengo  Eiver  ;  but 
this  very  necessary  public  work  has  never  yet  been 
accomplished.  The  intention  even  has  become  dor- 
mant through  some  inexplicable  difficulty  to  raise 
means.  In  1877,  also,  there  were  surveyors  at  work 
in  connection  with  a  proposed  railway  to  Ambacca  on 
the  Kwanza  Eiver.  The  survey  was  completed,  and 
cost  a  large  sum  of  money  for  outfits,  etc. ;   but  the 


ox  BO  J  ED    THE  "  CfflXA:'  455 

railway  sclieme,  as  well  as  the  water-supply  project,     1882. 

Julv  19. 

has  utterly  collapsed.  Loanda. 

St.  Paul  de  Loanda  is  reported  to  have  a  popula- 
tion of  11,000  souls,  consisting  of  Europeans  and 
natives.  It  is  the  chief  city — euphoniously  termed 
"  cathedral  city  " — of  the  province  of  Angola.  The 
recognised  northern  boundary  of  the  Portuguese  do- 
minion on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  is  the  River 
Loge,  S.  Lat.  7'  50",  whence  it  runs  southerly  to 
S.  Lat.  18^,  a  distance  of  over  GOO  geographical 
miles.  Direct  authority  is  exercised,  so  officials  report, 
over  an  area  of  about  300,000  square  miles. 

On  the  iTth  of  August,  the  mail  steamer  China 
appeared  at  the  port  of  Loanda,  bound  for  Lisbon. 
The  China  belongs  to  a  line  of  steamers,  subventioned 
by  the  Portuguese  government,  to  run  from  Lisbon  to 
Madeira,  St.  Vincent,  St.  Jago,  Bulama,  Prince's  Island, 
St.  Thomas  Island,  Ambriz,  St.  Paul  de  Loanda,  Ben- 
guella,  and  Mossamedes  once  a  month.  From  Mossa- 
medes  northward,  they  return,  via  each  of  the  above- 
mentioned  ports,  back  to  Lisbon.  A  first-class  passage 
ticket  from  Loanda  to  Lisbon,  or  vice  versa,  costs  £35  ; 
a  second-class  ticket  costs  £24. 

Our  dates  of  arrivals  and  departures  on  our  voyage 
to  Lisbon  by  the  China  were  as  follows  : — 

Left  Loanda Aug,  17th,  midniglit. 

Arrived  at  Ambriz ....  „    18th,  at  8  a.m. 

St.  Thomas  Island  „    21st,  „  9    „ 

Left  St.  Thomas     ....  „    25th,  „  9  p.m. 

Arrived  at  Prince's  Island     .  „    2Gth,   „  7  a.m. 

Arrived  at  Bulama      .     .     .  Sept.  3rd,   „  5  p.m. 


456  THE   CONGO. 

1882.  Departed  from  Bulama     .     .  Sept.  dth,  at  2  p.m. 

Aug.  17.  Arrived  at  St.  Jago      ...  „      8th,  „  6  „ 

Loanda.  Departed  from  St.  Jago     .     .  „     9th,  „  2   „ 

Arrived  St  Vincent      ...  „    10th,   „  9  a.m. 

(Cape  de  Yerde  Islands.) 

Departed  from  St.  Vincent     .  „    10th,  „   o  p.m. 

Arrived  at  Madeira     ...  „    17th,   „  6  a.m. 

Departed         „  ...  „       „        „  2  p.m. 

Arrived  at  Lislx)n.     ...  ,,    21st,    ,,  5    „ 

A  voyage  of  25^  days'  actual  steaming.     The   China 
was,  however,  au  unusually  slow  boat. 

Xo  more  than  mere  useful  notes  can  be  given  of  the 
voyage,  as  I  have  yet  much  to  relate  directly  bearing- 
upon  the  subject  of  this  book. 

At  Benguella  the  China  had  received  on  board  about 
sixty  or  seventy  Africans  from  the  interior.  I  am 
informed  that  these  people  were  taken  before  an 
official,  and  answered  in  the  affirmative  to  all  questions 
asked.  These  answers  were  officially  understood  ta 
express  a  willing*ness  to  depart  from  Benguella  volun- 
tarily for  a  term  of  service  lasting  five  years  in  the 
coffee  and  cocoa  plantations  of  the  Island  of  St. 
Thomas.  Each  native  received  a  fathom  or  so  of 
cloth  to  cover  their  nudity.  Arriving  at  St.  Thomas 
they  appeared  to  be  averse  to  leave  the  steamer^ 
Some  required  gentle  but  firm  coercion  before  they 
would  descend  into  the  lighter. 

Six  thousand  bags  of  coffee  were  shipped  on  board 
the  China  from  the  port. 

St.  Thomas  is  a  perfect  tropical  island,  eminently 
picturesque,  and  fertile  beyond"  conception.  It  is  well 
worthy  a  visit,  though  it  is  scarcely  advisable  for  a 


PBINCI7S  2SLAXD.  457 

tourist  to  endure  a  month's  detention  for  the  privileo'e.     1882. 

Aug.  21. 
The  time  generally  occupied  by  a  steamer  in  the  port,  st. Thomas. 

may   be    well    employed    in   visiting   the    plantations, 

waterfalls,  and  mountains. 

Prince's  Island  is  another  of  these  extraordinarily 
exuberant  tropical  islands,  fit  for  the  production  of 
valuable  spice  of  all  kinds,  as  well  as  coffee  and  cocoa. 
The  bananas,  palms,  and  jungle,  grow  down  to  the 
very  edge  of  the  salt  sea ;  and  to  the  highest  pinnacles 
of  the  soaring  peaks  the  fertile  isle  seems  clothed  in 
richest  green. 

The  town,  or  port,  is  undergoing  the  process  of 
abandonment,  judging  from  what  I  have  seen.  It  lies 
at  the  entrance  to  a  valley  which,  but  for  its  seaward 
gap,  would  have  been  intolerable  to  human  life ;  so 
narrow  is  it,  and  so  high,  and  sharply  upward,  do  the 
mountains  rise  to  a  height  of  some  thousands  of  feet. 
And  yet  there  is  presented  an  inconceivable  depth  of 
vegetation  that  must  exhale  such  oppressively  warm 
vapours,  that  the  physical  constitution  of  the  strongest 
man  must  soon  yield  to  its  enervating  influence. 
From  the  desire  to  obtain  breathing-room,  or  from 
the  limited  space  in  the  valley,  the  townspeople  have 
actually  constructed  •  their  houses  over  the  low  flats 
which  are  visited  by  each  recurring  tide.  That  the 
power  of  humanity  to  resist  the  steamy  atmosphere 
has  been  patiently  tested  is  proved  by  the  number  of 
ruined  churches,  ruined  forts,  ruined  houses,  mansions, 
shops,  stores,  cottages,  that  are  visible  everywhere. 
Those  not  yet  convinced  of   the  inability  of  man  to 


458  THE   COS  GO. 

1882.     bear  it,  wliether  official  or  civilian,  are  in  sucli  a  state 

Aug.  2G. 

Prince's   that  onc's  compassioH  is  immediately  aroused. 

The  steamer  received  on  board  800  bags  of  cocoa 
from  the  port.  The  stories  relating  to  the  voracity  of 
sharks  in  the  bay  remind  one  of  incidents  heard  in 
mid- Africa  relating  to  crocodiles. 

This  was  the  very  first  Portuguese  steamer  that  I 
had  been  aboard ;  and,  possibly  from  ideas  derived 
from  reading  about  severity  and  of  Portuguese  mili- 
tary and  naval  discipline,  I  had  the  opinion  that  the 
mercantile  service  might  perhaps  have  become  im- 
pregnated with  just  enough  of  this  discipline  to  have 
produced  a  wholesome  effect.  I  was  disappointed. 
The  world  is  wrong  altogether  in  its  rules,  from  its 
proneness  to  generalise  upon  isolated  facts.  The 
Americans,  for  instance,  possess  the  largest  civil  liberty 
in  the  world,  but  the  discipline  in  the  army,  navy,  or 
mercantile  service  of  the  United  States  is  most  severe. 
In  the  mercantile  service  it  is  Draconian,  and  the 
distance  between  the  forecastle  and  the  cabin  is  im- 
measurable. But,  with  these  reputedly  severe  Por- 
tuguese, less  restraint  than  the  ofiBcers  of  the  ship 
exercised  can  not  be  conceived.  The  second-class 
passengers  occupied  the  seats  of  those  of  the  first  class 
on  the  after  deck  above  their  cabins,  and  the  limited 
promenade  that  ought  to  have  been  secured  to  the  first- 
class  passengers  was  always  monopolised  by  the  second. 
These,  permitted  to  leave  their  own  quarters,  and 
intrude  on  the  narrow  deck,  expectorated,  smoked,  and 
sprawled,  in  the  most  socialistic  manner.     Hundreds  of 


UNCOMFOBTABLE  SUBBOUXDIXGS.  459 

parrots,  filthy  monkeys,  gazelles,  and  other  creatures,     1882. 

Sept.  1. 

were  placed  in  cages  only  ten  feet  away  from  the  saloon  The  ss. 
skylights.  They  made  such  hideous  shrieking  noises 
and  emitted  such  an  ammoniac  stench  that  the  life  on 
board  was  simply  one  of  torment.  Adjoining  the  saloon 
of  the  first-class  cabin  was  the  main  deck-room  into 
which,  for  the  convenience  of  the  stewards,  Avas  an 
open  doorway.  The  heavy  baggage  of  the  first-class 
passengers  was  stored  here  ;  and  on  mattresses  thrown 
over  the  bao'2:ao;e  reclined  the  third-class  females,  and 
half  a  score  of  half-naked  white  children,  who  reminded 
us  of  our  misery  by  the  moans,  cries,  and  complaints 
provoked  by  their  own.  To  gain  the  upper  deck  from 
the  saloon  we  were  obliged  to  endure  these  sights  and 
sounds,  as  often  as  we  wished  to  exchange  the  misery 
of  being  stewed  in  our  cabins,  for  that  of  being  com- 
pelled to  walk  over  the  catarrhic  mucus  expectorated  on 
.  the  deck  by  the  underbred  men  of  the  second  class. 

The  food  was  execrable,  and  consisted  of  a  series  of 
messes  (unexplored  but  by  few  daring  Portuguese) 
floating  in  palm-oil,  wliich  provoked  the  gorge.  Every 
dish  either  floated,  or  sank  sodden  in  the  bilious-looking 
unguent.  The  butter  was  a  pallid,  rancid-flavoured 
oleomargarine. 

After  the  indigestiljle  meal  was  over,  the  criados, 
or  servants,  took  the  rice,  calavances,  beans,  or  bread, 
to  the  monkeys,  which  might  be  called  the  fourth-class 
])assengers.  As  they  were  frequently  tethered  apart 
on  each  side  of  the  rpiarter-deck,  their  food  was 
scattered  al)Out  by  the  stewards,  and  the  unruly  crea- 


460  THE   CONGO. 

1882.  tiires  in  their  sportive  playfulness  did  not  improve  the 
Thess.  scene.  Thus  man  and  Least,  tne  underbred  colonist 
and  the  denizen  of  the  woods,  with  their  mutual  filth  ; 
the  squalling  child,  and  the  unwashed  females  below, 
made  all  parts  of  the  ship  equally  unpleasant.  To 
avoid  these  extreme  socialistic  tendencies,  one  had  to 
escape  to  the  hot,  close  cabin,  where,  by  thrusting  my 
head  into  an  open  port,  I  was  enabled  to  live. 

An  undisguised  familiarity  marked  the  intercourse 
between  the  principal  officers  and  the  stewards ;  hence 
the  latter  were  frequently  sulky,  and  continually  scowled 
when  a  mild  request  was  made  for  their  services.  Were 
they  unhappy  convicts  they  could  not  have  evinced  a 
stronger  dislike  to  a  compulsory  servitude  than  their 
faces  showed  to  offices  which  were  sure  to  be  remune- 
rated before  the  passengers  disembarked.  An  Ameri- 
can or  a  British  captain_,  with  a  few  iron  belaying-pins 
within  easy  reach,  would  have  restored  order  in  the 
most  peremptory  manner  ;  but  Portuguese  officers  are 
altogether  too  good-natured  to  use  coercive  measures. 
It  w^as  not  so,  however,  if  Camoens  relates  truly,  in  the 
days  of  Da  Gama. 

By  the  time  the  China  reached  the  beautiful  island 
of  Madeira,  I  could  walk  a  few  paces,  though  my  limbs 
seemed  weighted  w^ith  lead.  At  Read's  Hotel  I  obtained 
a  royal  breakfast  worthy  of  an  epic.  The  Portuguese 
know  the  value  of  this  superb  island,  for  they  have 
generally  made  it  as  inaccessible  as  the  Happy  Yalley 
of  Rasselas  by  means  of  frequent  stringent  quarantine 
rules.     Three  or  four  times  I  had  passed  by  it  before,. 


THE  PEAEL    OF   THE  ATLANTIC.  461 

but  the  yellow  flag  at  the  fore  signalled  that  the  ship  is82. 
was  under  a  ban.  If  ever  a  ship  deserved  not  to  Madeira. 
approach  the  sacred  shores  of  Madeira,  it  was  our  own, 
with  its  matchless  disorder,  its  unhealthy,  almost  over- 
powering emissions  of  ammonia ;  its  freight  of  mon- 
keys, animals,  and  birds,  bearing  a  stenchy  plague  in 
their  furs  and  feathers,  and  for  the  general  disreputable 
ajopearance  of  its  passengers.  However,  we  had  the 
glorious  Portuguese  flag  waving  proudly  above  us, 
wafting  with  rippling  glee  from  the  masthead  its 
salutes  to  the  royal  standards  above  the  forts  which 
dominate  the  Pearl  of  the  Atlantic. 


462  TEE   CONGO. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

COXDITIOX    OF    AFFAIRS    OX    THE    COXGO. 

Tlie  position  explained  to  the  Comite — A  raikoacl  imperative — Import- 
ance of  retaining  the  guardianship  of  the  territory — The  prospects  of 
trade — Arrangements  for  the  Upper  Congo  expedition — Difficulty  in 
getting  an  efficient  assistant  chief. 

1882.     Before  many  days  were  over  I  bad  laid  before  tbe 
Europe.    "  Comite  of  tbe  Association  Internationale  du  Congo," 
wbicb  by  tbis   time  bad   assumed   tbe    antbority  and 
duties  of  tbe  '^  Comite  d'Etudes,"  by  oral  communica- 
tions, tbe  true  condition  of  affairs  on  tbe  Congo. 

In  brief,  I  pointed  out  tbat  by  strenuous  effort  we 
bad  acbieved  more  tban  was  intended  by  tbe  modest 
and  pacific  Comite  d'Etudes  du  Haut  Congo,  m 
December  1878.  "  Tbree  stations  were  to  be  built,  a 
steamer  launcbed  on  tbe  Upper  Congo,  and  communi- 
cations were  to  be  kept  open  to  tbe  sea."  Tbrougb 
tbe  fidelity  of  sixty-eigbt  Zanzibaris,  and  tbe  faitbful 
co-operation  of  a  few  Europeans,  five  stations  bad 
been  constructed,  a  steamer  and  sailing-boat  launcbed 
on  tbe  Upper  Congo,  wbile  anotber  small  steamer  and 
ligbter  maintained  communications  between  tbe  second 


A   I^ AILS 0 AD   IMPERATIVE.  463 

and  third  station.     A  wagon-road  had  also  been  made     is82. 

.  .  October. 

at  great  expense  and  tune  between  Yivi  and  Isangila,    Europe. 
and  Manyanga  and  Stanley  Pool. 

We  had  now  to  secure  what  we  had  gained  by  our 
toils.  The  object  of  our  work  hitherto  had  been  to 
demonstrate  the  practicability  of  communicating  with 
the  Upper  Congo  from  the  sea.  We  had  succeeded  far 
beyond  what  we  anticipated  in  1878.  We  had  reached 
the  confluence  of  the  Kwa  with  the  Congo,  440  miles 
from  the  sea.  We  had  found  the  people  amiable.  In 
several  districts  we  had  found  them  even  willine  to 
work,  which  is  a  reason  for  hoping  that  this  willing- 
ness will  increase  with  better  acquaintance.  We  had 
discovered  that  no  native  is  averse  to  trade — that  the 
very  name  of  barter  actively  excites  the  aborigines. 
Unless  we  are  prepared  to  relinquish  our  discoveries, 
and  the  moral  success  we  have  gained,  we  had  to 
secure  all  the  rights  that  the  native  chiefs  could 
endow  us  with,  that  we  might  exercise  the  political 
power  necessary  for  guaranteeing  the  permanency  of 
the  benefits  we  had  sought  to  obtain. 

I  declared  that  the  Congo  basin  was  not  worth  a 
two-shilling  piece  in  its  present  state.  To  reduce  it 
into  profitable  order,  a  railroad  must  be  made  between 
tlie  Lower  Congo  and  the  Upper  Congo,  when  with  its 
accessibility  will  appear  its  value.  I  said,  "  To  render 
it  even  prospectively  valuable,  you  must  first  have  a 
charter  from  Europe  that  you  shall  be  permitted  to 
Imild  that  railroad,  that  you  shall  govern  the  land 
through  which  it  passes,  that,  in  short,  the  guardian- 


464  THE   COXGO. 

1882.     sliip  of  it  shall  not  pass  into  the  liands  of  any  power 

October, 

Europe,     ^^^t  JOUr  OWn/' 

No  European  government  can  make  such  a  railway 
remunerative,  for  the  simple  reason  that,  in  addition  to 
to  the  fare  and  freight  money,  there  will  be  duties, 
imposts,  over-regulation,  over-interference,  restriction 
here,  restriction  there,  municipal  taxes,  li.a^hthouse  and 
navigation  dues,  &c.,  &c.,  in  a  country  where  nature 
has  already  imposed  such  severe  laws  that  the  un- 
conscious unpremeditated  infraction  of  them  incur 
death  penalties.  All  these  matters  are  duly  considered 
Ijy  cautious  traders. 

The  railway  will  not  be  remunerative  unless  com- 
mercial men  and  settlers  will  be  induced  to  attempt 
the  exploitation  of  the  Upper  Congo  basin,  by  the  large 
liberty  guaranteed  to  them  and  by  the  large  margin 
of  profits  on  trade  secured  to  them  by  the  absolute 
immunity  from  oppressive  tariffs,  and  from  the  black- 
mailing tricks  of  officials  who  have  no  interest  in 
anything  save  their  own  pecuniary  advantages.  The 
railway  must  be  made  solely  for  the  benefit  of  Central 
Africa,  and  those  Europeans  who  are  desirous  to  trade 
in  that  region. 

"  The  first  phase  of  the  mission  is  over.  As  I  said,  it 
has  been  successful ;  we  now  know  what  communica- 
tion can  be  preserved  uninterruptedly  between  the 
Upper  Congo  and  the  Atlantic.  The  second  phase  is 
the  consolidation  of  the  work,  by  obtaining  the  con- 
cession of  their  authority  from  all  the  chiefs  along  the 
route,    and   such   other   rights   as    they   may   possess, 


THE    UPPER    CONGO    EXPEDITION.  465 

which  could  be  obtained  by  others  to  oppress  us  who  is82. 
pioneered  the  way.  These  rights  are  necessary  for  Europe 
the  existence  of  the  Association,  and  for  the  success  of 
your  grand  projects  of  developing  Africa,  for  without 
these  rights  you  have  merely  sown  that  some  idle 
power  may  reap  the  harvest,  and  toiled  to  invoke  com- 
pulsory abandonment." 

The  Comite  were  unanimously  of  the  same  convic- 
tion. The  maps  were  brought  out,  and  the  localities 
where  action  ought  to  be  immediately  taken  explained 
in  detail.  As  the  field  was  surveyed,  it  became  evident 
that  to  occupy  the  various  strategic  points  would  in- 
volve a  large  annual  expenditure,  that  a  much  greater 
increase  of  jyersoniiel  would  be  necessary,  including 
Europeans  and  African  employes.  For  all  this  the 
Comite,  however,  expressed  themselves  fully  prepared, 
provided  that  I  would  undertake  the  charge  of  the  work. 
Though  somewhat  taken  aback  by  the  proposal,  as  my 
physical  system  was  completely  deranged,  I  at  last  pro- 
mised to  return  to  the  Congo  and  complete  the  establish- 
ment of  the  stations  as  far  as  Stanley  Falls ;  provided 
that  within  a  reasonable  time,  say  two  or  three  months, 
some  efficient  assistant-chief  would  be  despatched  to  ad- 
minister the  establishment  on  the  Lower  Congo  during 
my  absence  on  the  Upper  Congo.  Experience  had 
taught  me  already  that  to  leave  my  principal  base  in 
the  hands  of  flighty-headed  young  people,  who  recog- 
nised no  higher  law  than  their  own  heedless  impulses 
and  passions,  was  to  prepare  for  myself  endless  troulde 

VOL.  I.  2    II 


466  THE   CONGO. 

1SS2     and   continual    anxiety.       I  needed    a   solid,    reliable 

October.  ^        ^^    .  .  i  •    ^  c    •     ^ 

Europe,  gentleman,  of  sumcient  reputation  and  weight  oi  judg- 
ment to  inspire  respect  in  his  subordinates ;  one  whose 
name  would  be  a  guarantee  for  stability  of  character, 
whose  word  would  be  as  good  as  his  bond,  and  whose 
past  conduct  might  be  taken  as  an  indubitable  proof 
that  his  future  actions  would  be  also  highly  creditable 
to  him.  Such  persons,  so  new  to  the  necessities  of  a 
hard  practical  life,  that  they  at  once  confessed  them- 
selves crushed  in  the  presence  of  every  new  exigency 
that  they  encountered ;  or  such,  as  soon  as  they  were 
left  alone  to  contend  against  the  trivial  troubles  of 
a  tropic  life,  had  no  other  resource  than  to  send  a 
letter  of  resignation  to  their  chief,  who  might  be 
hundreds  of  miles  away  from  them,  and  incontinently 
throw  up  their  command  and  run  away  to  Europe — 
could  not  be  trusted  with  a  responsible  command  in  so 
important  an  enterprise.  These  people  had  already 
given  me  more  trouble  than  all  the  African  tribes  put 
together.  They  had  inspired  such  disgust  in  me  that 
I  would  rather  be  condemned  to  be  a  boot-black  all  my 
life  than  to  be  a  dry-nurse  to  beings  who  had  no 
higher  claim  to  manhood  than  that  externally  they 
might  be  pretty  pictures  of  men. 

If  my  experience  of  such  men  had  been  so  annoy- 
ing when  only  400  miles  from  the  sea,  what  would 
it  be  now  when  I  should  be  nearly  1500  miles  away? 
It  was,  therefore,  absolutely  necessary  that  I  should 
be  represented  on  the   lower  river  by  a  person  who 


A    GOOD   SECOXD   IN   COMMAND.  467 

not  only  could  work  himself,  and  loyally  perform  his     1832. 

Ill  1  T       •  •  1  in         October. 

duty,    but  who    could    inspire    other   men    to    loyally    Europe. 
execute  each  his  special  trust  and  mission.    The  Comite 
promised  to  send  me  such  a  person,  in   consequence 
of  which  my  stay  in  Europe  was  to  be  limited  to  six 
weeks. 


1  II  '1 


4G8  TEE   COXGO. 


CHAPTER  XXIY. 

TO      STANLEY      POO  L. 

Lisbon  to  Banana  Creek — Dismal  news — Yivi  demoralised — Elliott's 
expedition  to  Kwihi-Xiadi — Massala  shot  by  a  French  trader — An 
enormous  fine — I  act  as  peacemaker — Lieutenant  Van  de  Yelde's 
mission  to  Kwilu-Niadi — Appearance  of  the  Saggitaire — Eelief  of 
Elliott's  expedition — Bad  news  from  Leopoldville — A  starving  station 
— Feny  tratfic  on  the  Congo— Kindly  attentions  from  the  natives — 
Leopoldville  neglected  and  gi-ass-grown ! — A  sad  state  of  matters — 
An  imfortunate  young  ofl&cer — Canoe  accidents — A  false  alarm  of 
murder! — A  suicide — Ke-establishing  friendly  relations  with  the 
chiefs— An  important  conference^  and  its  results —Noble  work  of 
English  missionaries. 

1882.     I    SAILED    awav   for    CoDfi-0-laud    from    the    Port    of 

Dec.  20.  ^  -^  ^ 

Vi^_  Cadiz,  in  the  steamer  Harhaway,  on  tlie  23rd  of 
November,  1882.  This  steamer  had  left  England  a 
few  days  previously  with  fourteen  officers  and  about 
six  hundred  tons  of  miscellaneous  goods,  consigned  for 
the  Expedition  of  the  Association  Internationale  du 
Congo. 

On  the  14th  of  December  the  Harkawar/  entered 
Banana  Creek,  and  on  the  20th  of  the  month  I 
arrived  in  Yivi,  with  physical  energies  recuperated 
and  freshened  during  my  five  months'  absence  from 
the  expedition. 


riVI  DEMOBALISED.  469 

But,  alas !   what  dismal  news  was  borue  to  me  as  I     1882. 

Dec.  20. 

made  myself  more  and  more  acquainted  with  the  state  viyj, 
of  affairs  in  the  expedition!  The  German  gentleman 
who  had  presented  such  high  credentials  for  potent 
force  of  character  and  earnestness  of  purpose,  well- 
known  experience  and  scientific  acquirements,  had  gone, 
he  had  departed  from  the  Congo  for  home  nearly  a 
month  before !  The  expedition  had  been  nearly  four 
weeks  without  its  leader.  The  chief  of  Vivi,  the  second 
in  rank,  had  also  disaf)peared ;  the  chief  of  Leopold- 
ville,  the  third  in  importance,  was  rusticating  on  the 
coast ;  the  chief  of  Isangila  had  hurried  homeward ; 
the  second  chief  of  Le'opoldville  had  fled  ;  the  captain 
of  La  Belglque  had  been  dismissed  by  somebody ;  the 
En  Avant  had  been  robbed  by  a  spiteful  miscreant  of 
her  steam-valve,  and  had  ever  since  lain  idle  at  the 
landing-place  of  Leopoldville,  as  useless  as  a  log;  an 
engineer,  by  some  odd  freak,  was  doing  duty  at  Yivi  as 
a  clerk  or  storekeeper,  and  some  person  was  reported 
to  be  acting  with  unlimited  powers  in  the  interior,  and 
in  a  manner  not  very  conducive  to  peace  and  order. 
The  temporary  chief  had  been  shot  at  while  passing 
Mowa,  which  was  supposed  to  be  a  justification  for 
retaliating  on  Mowa.  Yerily  the  news  could  scarcely 
have  been  worse.  There  tvere  numbers  of  other  dis- 
agreeable incidents  unnecessary  to  rehearse,  because 
mention  of  them  could  not  be  made  without  bringing 
into  this  book  the  names  of  those  whom  it  is  my  desire 
to  screen  from  the  slightest  implicatiou.  That  the 
conduct  of  the  expedition  had  not  been  a  happy  one 


470  TEE   CONGO. 

1882.     may   be    imagined,    however,    from   the   departure   en 

Dec.  20. 

vivi.  masse  of  those  in  authority.  What  could  be  expected 
from  a  number  of  subordinates  when  the  responsible 
head  retires  from  his  duties  with  such  undignified 
haste  ? 

During  my  absence  Yivi,  which  was  always  remark- 
able for  the  latitude  it  assumed  even  when  I  was  on 
the  Upper  Congo,  was  now  in  a  most  demoralised 
state.  The  steamers  had  been  taken  possession  of  by 
a  jDarty  that  had  attached  itself  to  the  expedition, 
originally  for  the  service  of  transjDort  on  the  Lower 
•  Congo,  but  which  now,  by  some  inscrutable  process 
of  evolution,  dominated  the  expedition  effectively  by 
withholding  all  the  steamers  and  boats  and  dis- 
charging the  goods  where  it  pleased,  generally  a  mile 
below  the  landing-place.  The  entire  strength  of  the 
station  was  thus  wasted  in  the  removal  of  goods 
from  this  distant  landing-place  to  Yivi,  and  the  temper 
of  the  officials  and  employes  was  much  embittered 
accordingly. 

This  required  correction  immediately,  but  it  was  a 
most  unpleasant  task,  as  the  crews  of  the  steamers 
seemed  to  be  persuaded  that  they  had  changed  masters. 
However,  by  dint  of  insistence,  the  steamers  were  com- 
pelled to  deliver  their  cargoes  at  the  landing-place  of 
Yivi  as  before,  and  the  great  strain  on  the  staff  of  the 
station  was  thus  relieved. 

The  next  important  work  was  the  equipment  of  an 
expedition  under  Captain  J.  Gr.  Elliott  to  the  Kwilu- 
Niadi   district  to    found  a   line   of  stations  from   the 


MISSION   TO   KWILU  XIADL  471 


nearest  point  on  that  river  to  Isangila  Station,  along     isss. 

Jan.  13. 
Vivi. 


its  lower  course  to  its  mouth.  The  arrival  of  a  new 
force  of  recruits  was  very  opportune.  Captain  Elliott's 
force  numbered  some  seventy  coloured  men,  and  four 
European  assistants — Messrs.  Yan  Schuman,  an  Aus- 
trian ofScer,  Mons.  Lehrman,  a  Croat,  and  two  Eng- 
lishmen. They  marched  from  Vivi  on  the  13th  of 
January. 

The  object  of  this  mission  was  to  secure  to  the  Asso- 
ciation a  wide  stretch  of  inland  country  and  an  extent 
of  coast  line  between  the  French  territory  on  the 
Gaboon  and  the  d'houchure  of  the  Congo  as  a  free 
alternative  route  to  the  Upper  Congo. 

The  chief  of  Le'opoldville,  discovered  rusticating  on 
the  coast,  was  despatched  back  to  his  post  with  a  small 
caravan,  and  on  the  14th  of  January  the  medical 
director  of  Leopoldville  and  Stanley  Pool  started  up- 
river  with  four  whites  and  a  caravan  of  forty-eight 
coloured  men. 

On  the  loth  of  January  Yivi  was  startled  by  a 
report  that  a  French  trader,  in  the  employ  of  the  party 
in  charge  of  our  Lower  Congo  transport  service  had 
shot  Massala,  a  native  lingster  or  interpreter  attached  to 
the  station.  Massala  is  a  native  of  Vivi,  a  fine  well- 
behaved  man  of  calm  and  equable  temper,  who  was 
well  known  to  be  guiltless  of  any  antipathy  to  white 
men ;  but,  like  the  natives,  fond  of  a  glass  of  grog, 
though  quite  too  dignified  ever  to  l)e  seen  inebriated. 
It  is  doubtful  whether  he  would  perform  any  service 
for  a  wliite  man  without  at  least  some  small  recognition 


472  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     or  payment  according  to  stipulation.     Tins  is  human 

Jan.  15. 

vivi.  nature  everywhere.  Altogether  Massala  was  most 
harmless,  and  at  the  same  time  invaluable  to  us  for  the 
faithful  and  good-tempered  manner  with  which  he 
looked  after  our  mutual  interests.  Fortunately  the 
wound  was  not  mortal,  but  as  he  was  a  man  of  im- 
portance, it  caused  a  great  excitement  in  the  Yivi 
native  community,  and  at  first  a  large  force  poured 
down  for  vengeance.  The  guilty  trader  was,  however, 
safe  in  our  hands;  and  after  the  doctor  had  declared 
the  wound  to  be  not  dangerous,  the  natives  were 
induced  to  leave  the  case  in  my  hands.  There  was  a 
fair  trial,  and  the  chiefs  were  told  that  the  wrong  was 
on  the  side  of  the  white  man,  and  were  asked  to  state 
the  amount  of  the  fine  they  expected. 

They  went  aside  for  a  private  parlance  among  them- 
selves, and  in  half  an  hour  they  brought  the  following 
demand,  which  I  publish  to  show  how  severe  are  native 
laws  against  the  shedding  of  blood  : — 

£  s.  d. 

100  whole  pieces  of  cloth 20  0  0 

„    flintlock  muskets 30  0  0 

„    kegs  of  powder 25  0  0 

„    machettes 20  0  0 

„    blankets 30  0  0 

„    demijohns  of  rum 30  0  0 

„   boxes  of  gin 60  0  0 

„    i^ieces  of  handkerchief 15  0  0 

liliscellaneous  articles 200  0  0 

£430    0    0 


The  trader  declared  his  total  inability  to  pay  such  a 
sum,  but  as  the  natives  insisted  that  they  would  take 


AN  ENOBMOUS  FINE.  473 

no  less,  I  had  to  obtain  from  each  permission  to  pass     isss. 

Jan.  15. 

judgment,  and  an  agreement  that  they  wonld  consider  yw\. 
themselves  as  mutually  bound  to  accept  it  as  final. 
It  cost  me  two  hours'  work  to  reduce  the  above  sum 
to  £24  4s.  Od.,  and  as  a  propitiatory  gift,  the  revolver 
which  had  done  the  wicked  deed  was  also  added,  that  it 
might  be  broken  in  pieces,  and  thus  rendered  for  ever 
incapable  of  doing  future  harm.  The  verdict  was 
accepted,  but  the  natives  also  insisted  that  the  Euro- 
pean should  be  banished  the  land  for  ever,  otherwise 
he  might  commit  a  similar  crime. 

Treaties  were  made  also  with  all  the  surroundino- 
chiefs  conceding  to  the  Association  sovereign  power. 
This  was  not  difficult  to  obtain,  as  we  were  in  ex- 
tremely intimate  relations  with  the  north  and  south 
bank  natives  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Yivi. 

Fully  expecting  that  the  Comite  would  send  some 
qualified  officer  to  take  charge  of  its  valuable  interests 
on  the  Lower  Congo,  I  entrusted  the  command  of 
Yivi  to  Lieutenant  Van  de  Yelde  until  the  arrival 
of  a  person  from  the  coast  who  had  applied  and  ob- 
tained the  promise  of  this  position.  Unfortunately,  a 
few  months  had  to  elapse  before  he  could  be  available. 
Meantime,  of  the  young  and  inexperienced,  though 
willing,  officers  within  call.  Lieutenant  Yan  de  Yelde 
was  the  most  eligible  for  the  post. 

On  the  22nd  of  January  I  left  Yivi,  trusting  that  the 
minute  instructions  deposited  with  the  chief  would  tide 
me  over  the  difficulties  wliich  I  constantly  dreaded  in 
connection  with  this  station.     There  is  an  old  proverb 


474  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     wliicb  says  "  when  the  cat's  away  the  mice  will  play.'* 

Jan.  22. 

vivi.  There  was  no  actual  proof  tliat  any  officer  in  the 
service  of  the  Association  did  play  ;  but  there  was 
abundant  evidence  that  the  lower  stations  did  not  ad- 
vance in  improvement ;  and  that  they  suffered  greatly 
in  appearance  in  comparison  with  those  on  the  upper 
river. 

On  arrivino-  at  Isano-ila  news  was  received  that  it 
would  be  wise  not  to  rely  too  much  on  the  overland 
expedition  to  the  Kwilu-Niadi.  Taking  into  considera- 
tion the  many  days  that  would  be  occupied  in  the 
journey  from  Isangila  to  the  Kwilu-Niadi  valley,  it 
would  be  as  well  to  supplement  it  with  a  sea  expedition 
direct  to  the  Kwilu-Niadi.  Lieutenant  Yan  de  Yelde 
was  chosen  to  conduct  this  mission,  and  the  Association 
steamer,  the  Heron,  was  j^b^ced  at  his  disposal  to  con- 
vey his  men  and  stores,  while  a  deputy-resident  at  Vivi 
was  appointed  to  j^^rform  the  Lieutenant's  station 
duties  in  the  meantime. 

Lieutenant  Van  de  Velde,  accompanied  by  two 
officers,  sailed  on  the  5  th  of  February,  1883,  for  the 
Kwilu,  where  he  arrived  on  the  Oth  of  the  same  month, 
and  proceeded  to  negotiate  for  ground  for  a  station, 
and  for  the  sovereignty  of  the  territory  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. In  a  short  time  he  had  purchased  the 
houses,  stores,  and  tents  of  a  person  named  Saboga. 
Here  he  erected  his  station  and  called  it  Rudolfstadt. 
On  the  12th  of  February  a  treaty  was  made  with  Mani- 
pambu,  the  senior  chief  of  the  district  of  Chissanga,  at 
the  mouth  oi  the  Kwilu,  on  the  left  bank,  by  which 


THE  FOUNDING    OF  RUDOLFSTADT.  475 

tliat  cliief  ceded  his  sovereign  rights  to  the  Association  isss. 
Internationale  du  Congo.  Active,  and  most  loyal  to  Rudoif- 
his  duties,  Lieutenant  Yan  de  Yelde  negotiated  several 
treaties  in  succession — first  at  Chilungu,  on  the  right 
of  the  debouchure  of  the  River  Kwilu,  and  con- 
tinuously upward  along  both  banks  to  the  rapids, 
situated  twenty-eight  miles  from  the  sea. 

Eeturning  to  Rudolfstadt  in  the  beginning  of  March, 


LIEUTEXAXT    VAN    HE    VELDE. 


he  heard  from  Loango  on  the  9th  of  the  same  month, 
of  the  arrival  of 'the  Saggitaire  of  the  French  navy  in 
that  port.  On  the  11th  of  March  he  was  able,  by 
means  of  his  boats,  to  render  efficient  service  to 
Capilaine  Cordier  of  the  Saggitaire,  by  which  that 
officer  was  enabled  to  enter  the  river,  and  partake  of 
the  hospitalities  of  the  young  Lieutenant. 

On  the  1  Uh  of  ]March  Lieut.  Yan  de  Yelde  heard  a 
rumour  bruited  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Loango  of  the 


stadt. 


476  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     arrival  of  white  men  at   a  place  called  Kitabi,  some 

March  11.  .  . 

Kudoif-  distance  inland,  who  were  said  to  be  in  distress. 
Rightly  surmising  that  these  whites  must  belong  to 
Captain  Elliott's  expedition,  the  energetic  officer  lost 
no  time  in  equipping  a  boat  expedition  for  their 
relief. 

In  April  Captain  Elliott  arriving  with  his  party  at 
Rudolfstadt,  was  able  to  relieve  Lieutenant  Yan  de 
Yelde  from  his  temporary  duty  at  the  Kwilu,  upon 
which  the  Lieutenant  returned  to  resume  the  superin- 
tendence of  Yivi.  The  abilit}^,  activity  and  zeal  dis- 
played by  Lieutenant  Yan  de  Yelde  on  this  Kwilu 
mission  was  remarkable,  and  I  fondly  hoped  that  I  had 
discovered,  after  much  painful  search  and  weary  wait- 
ing, a  valuable  assistant  for  effective  work  in  Africa. 
L'nfortunately,  however,  after  a  few  months'  stay  at 
Yivi,  his  failing  health  compelled  him  to  return  to 
Europe. 

Captain  Elliott,  during  his  journey  from  Isangila  to 
Rudolfstadt,  had  left  an  officer  and  a  few  men  at  each 
of  the  stations  along  the  course  of  the  river,  to  be 
established  at  Stephanieville,  Franktown  and  Kitabi. 
A  continuous  stretch  of  territory  along  the  entire  line 
secured  by  treaties  duly  signed  in  presence  of  European 
witnesses,  was  a  proof  of  how  this  officer  distinguished 
himself. 

On  the  4th  of  February  I  arrived  at  Manyanga. 
From  this  station  Captain  Hanssens  received  com- 
mand of  an  expedition  to  depart  immediately  for  the 
Upper  Kwilu-Xiadi^  his  instructions  being  to  establish 


Feb.  4. 
anyanga. 


ESTABLISHING    COMMUNICATIONS.  4:11 

a  line  of  communication  between  Manyanga  and  that  isss 
river,  and  to  continue  his  explorations  downwards  mitil  ^,l^ 
he  had  effected  a  junction  with  Captain  Elliott's  party 
at  Stephanieville.  Captain  Hanssens,  some  months 
later,  sent  in  a  lengthy  and  interesting  report  of  his 
extensive  explorations,  by  which  I  was  informed  that 
by  means  of  the  stations  at  Phillippeville  and  Bulan- 
gungu  the  Upper  Kwilu-Niadi  was  in  direct  com- 
munication with  the  Congo. 

Lieutenant  Yalcke,  whom  I  encountered  at  Man- 
yanga, was  despatched  along  the  south  bank  of  the 
Congo,  to  make  treaties  with  all  the  principal  chiefs 
betv»'een  Manyanga  and  Leopoldville,  and  to  found  a 
station  at  Sabuka's,  from  which,  without  further  cause 
of  alarm  and  anxiety  at  Leopoldville,  provisions  could 
be  sent  to  that  entrepot  of  the  Upper  Congo.  He  was 
also  charged  to  take  with  him  the  boilers  of  the  new 
ho^i  A.  I.  A.,  which  some  careless  official  had  left  at  a 
wayside  village,  where  they  had  been  lying  some 
months  rusting. 

Couriers  were  also  hurried  forward  to  the  chief  of 
Leopoldville  with  orders  to  proceed  immediately  to 
make  treaties  with  the  chiefs  of  Kinshassa,  Kimbangu, 
and  Kimpoko. 

On  the  7th  of  February  the  steam  launch  Royal 
was  mounted  on  a  wagon  for  transport  overland  to 
Leopoldville. 

Aiiother  engineer  was  also  dc.'simtchcd  on  the  same 
<lay  to  Stanley  Pool,  with  a  suflicient  escort  to  assist 
in  the  completion  of  the  steam-launch  A.I.  A.  (Asso- 


478  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     ciation    Internationale  Africaine),   the  construction   of 

Feb.  7.  .  . 

^Manyanga.  which  had  Leeu  unaccountably  delayed  during  my 
absence. 

Lieutenant  Parfoury  was  detailed  with  forty  men 
to  commence  the  construction  of  a  good  road  on  the 
south  bank  of  the  river  between  Manyanga  and  the 
Pool. 

Lieutenant  Grang  and  Captain  Anderson,  with  164 
coloured  men,  I  reserved  to  assist  me  in  hauling  the 
steam-launch  Royal  by  our  old  road  on  the  north 
bank. 

On  the  27th  of  February  we  arrived  with  the  boat 
at  the  Tnkissi  River,  where  I  received  the  astonishing 
news  from  the  chief  of  Leopoldville  that  the  station 
was  nearly  starving  for  want  of  food.  As  he  had 
already  been  thirty-eight  days  at  his  post  from  his 
coasting  excursion,  I  thought  it  singular  that  he  should 
have  withheld  this  important  information  so  long,  as 
Yivi  possessed  food  enough  to  supply  any  number  of 
stations.  Numerous  caravans,  too,  were  conveying 
their  goods  inland  to  Isangila,  the  boats  jDcrformed 
their  voyages  regularly  between  Isangila  and  Man- 
yanga, and  we  were  not  short  of  men  nor  unwilling 
that  Europeans  should  be  dieted  according  to  the  most 
liberal  scale,  provided  the  chiefs  of  stations  would  only 
give  sufficient  notice  of  their  requirements. 

At  Nsangu  Ferry,  a  large  caravan  of  independent 
natives  from  the  coast  crossed  the  Congo  from  the 
south  bank,  bound  for  Mfwa,  north  bank  of  Stanley 
Pool.     The  chief  of  the  ferry,  under  the  influence    of 


BAD   NEWS  FROM  LEOPOLDVILLE.  479 

sociability  inspired  by  our  liberal  joatronage  of  his  isss. 
canoes,  informed  me  that  he  frequently  transported  xsano-u.' 
500  people  a  week  with  their  stores  from  the  south 
side  to  the  north  side,  and  as  many  people  from  the 
nortli  side  to  the  south  side,  who  were  taking  ivory  and 
rubber  to  the  coast.  As  this  business  of  ferrying  had 
been  continued  for  years,  I  have  often  wondered  why 
the  ferrymen  did  not  appear  more  prosperous  than  the 
inland  chiefs. 

The  transport  of  a  thousand  people  across  the 
Congo  implies  at  least  a  hundred  voyages  of  a  canoe, 
for  which  they  would  receive  a  hundred  pieces  of 
cloth  per  week.  In  a  year  the  transit  receipts  de- 
rived from  native  custom  alone  ought  to  amount  to 
5200  pieces  of  cloth,  which,  at  a  dollar  each,  would  be 
equivalent  to  $5200,  while  the  caravans  of  the  Asso- 
ciation might  increase  the  sum  to  $7000.  Yet  with 
all  this  prosperous  business,  the  Nsangu  chiefs  and 
people  exhibit  no  improvement  in  j^ersonal  appearance, 
nor  any  increase  of  population,  such  as  is  shown  in 
Kintamo  for  instance,  where  the  effects  of  a  profitable 
trade  present  substantial  proofs  in  the  increasing- 
numbers  of  armed  people,  claiming  Ngalyema,  and 
Makabi  as  their  chiefs. 

On  reachinu:  the  summit  of  the  hif^hland  on  the 
south  bank,  another  courier  was  received  from  the 
chief  of  Leopoldville,  bearing  a  letter  which  implored 
me  not  to  bring  too  many  men  to  that  station,  as  it 
would  be  impossible  to  supply  them  witli  Ibod ;  that  the 
countiy  was — if  not  actually  hostile — so  indifferent  to 


480  THE   CONGO. 

1883.  our  existence  that  no  native  ever  visited  the  station ! 
Uo^o\'i-  Although  the  chief  evidently  had  cause  to  write  in  such 
a  despairing  manner,  I  was  utterly  unable  to  divine 
why  such  an  extreme  change  had  come  over  the 
country,  because  the  only  information  obtainable  was 
through  this  gentleman,  and  he  confined  himself  to 
reports  of  imminent  starvation  for  the  Europeans — 
"  No  tea,  no  coffee,  no  cocoa,  no  milk,  nor  anything." 
The  bread  had  risen  to  famine  prices,  the  country  was 
scoured  round  about  by  parties  of  foragers,  who  gene- 
rally returned  with  only  a  scant  quantity,  insufficient 
to  last  until  another  foraging  party  could  appear  with 
a  fresh  supply. 

Yet  in  our  immediate  neighbourhood  wherever  we 
moved  there  was  abundance^  as  an  evidence  of  which 
there  were  twenty-five  goats  in  our  camp,  besides 
dozens  of  fowls.  On  the  receipt  of  this  sad  intelli- 
gence from  Leopoldville,  two  dozen  goats  and  baskets 
of  fowls,  with  a  few  luxuries  for  the  sick  Europeans, 
were  immediately  despatched,  along  with  a  letter 
urging  Lieutenant  Valcke  to  hasten  the  establishment 
of  his  supply-collecting  station  at  Sabuka. 

Our  wagon  broke  down  frequently,  compelling 
annoying  delays,  the  most  serious  taking  place  at  the 
Mpalanga  crossing.  Rains  of  four  seasons  had  com- 
mitted havoc  on  our  former  road,  and  young  shrubs 
and  reeds  had  thriven  over  our  once  cleared  path. 
But,  notwithstanding  these  various  impediments,  we 
were  advancing  on  Leopoldville  at  the  rate  of  2 J  miles 
per  day,  with  our  heavily- weighted  wagon. 


ville. 


UNREALISED   ANTICIPATIONS.  481 

The  nearer  I  approached  Stanley  Pool  the  warmer     isss. 

March  19 

grew  the  kindly  attentions  of  the  natives.  From  long  Liopoid- 
distances  they  came  to  welcome  me  back  into  their 
country,  bringing  with  them  acceptable  gifts  of  food 
— goats,  and  sheep,  and  fowls — and  the  heartiest 
assurances  of  their  friendship,  so  that  in  presence 
of  this  real  and  marked  amicability  of  the  natives, 
I  was  still  more  perplexed  to  understand  the  gloom 
and  depression  under  which  the  chief  of  Leopoldville 
laboured. 

On  the  19th  of  March  Lieutenant  Yalcke  wrote  to  me 
that  he  had  established  himself  at  Sabuka,  and  was  pur- 
chasing at  the  rate  of  400  rations  per  day,  besides  pigs, 
goats,  fowls,  eggs,  bananas,  &c.,  and  two  days  later 
I  marched  to  Le'opoldville,  leaving  Messrs.  Grrang  and 
Anderson  to  conduct  the  Royal  and  the  hauling  force 
to  the  landing-place. 

I  expected  to  have  seen  great  changes  at  Leo23old- 
ville — to  have  seen  a  thriving  station,  and  gardens 
beautifully  laid  out,  and  plants  and  fruit-trees  in  a 
flourishing  condition,  for  since  the  latter  part  of  April, 
1882,  I  had  been  absent,  establishing  Mswata  station, 
exploring  Lake  Ijeopold  IL,  and  in  Europe  recuperat- 
ing. I  had  fondly  calculated  upon  the  effect  of  forty 
or  fifty  labourers  united  in  the  joint  cause  of  beauti- 
fying, improving,  and  cultivating  the  township,  under 
the  direction  of  a  sharp,  enterprising,  intelligent 
European,  during  a  period  of  eleven  months.  My 
imagination  had  revelled  in  the  scenes  of  beauty  it 
pictured,  of  walks  shaded  by  rows  of  year-old  banana 

VOL.  I.  2    I 


viUe. 


482  TEE   CONGO. 

1883.  stalks,  at  least  10  feet  high;  a  broad  and  imposing 
Leopold-  approach  to  the  station,  embellished  by  hedges  of  shrub- 
bery ;  along  its  flanks  budding  fruit-trees  in  clusters, 
a  vigorous  young  forest  of  papaws,  plots  of  pine-apple, 
with  promise  of  a  surfeit  of  delicious  odour  of  fruit  and 
flowers ;  while  in  the  background  would  lie  the  broad 
acres  devoted  to  the  more  humble  but  useful  vegetables, 
such  as  sweet  potatoes,  Indian  corn,  beans,  cassava,  and 
what  not.  Indeed,  in  my  hours  between  sunset  and 
bed-time,  having  not  much  else  to  do,  the  lapses  of  time 
had  often  been  lubricated  with  these  beauties  which  my 
vigorous  fancy  had  conjured  up. 

"  For,"  I  argued  with  myself,  "  it  must  be  so.  What 
else  can  they  have  had  to  do,  unless  they  have  been 
building  a  series  of  fine  residences  and  store-rooms  ? 
They  have  lived  in  some  manner,  and  surely  they  have 
not  been  asleep  for  eleven  months  !  " 

And  now,  on  entering  on  the  terrace  of  Leopoldville, 
.1  quickly  cast  my  eyes  around  to  enjoy  the  delightful 
vision,  and  my  first  feeling,  I  remember,  was  one  of 
stupefaction,  an  inability  to  realise  the  details,  but 
conscious  that  all  I  looked  upon  was  very  sad  and 
disheartening. 

Grass  everywhere:  grass  on  the  terrace,  tall  grass 
luxuriantly  thick  on  its  slope,  grass  in  the  crevices 
of  the  wall  of  the  one  residence,  a  damp  green  on 
the  unbarked  tree  pillars  of  the  veranda,  the  broad 
way  of  the  native  town  like  a  grass-covered  marsh, 
above  which  the  roofs  of  the  huts  could  only  be  seen 
even  from  the  commanding  position  of  the  terrace.     A 


LEOPOLD  VLLLE   GRA  SS-  GROWN  /  483 

few  acres  of  cassava,  perhaps  a  liiindrecl  bananas  inde-  i883. 
pendently  apart  and  widely  scattered,  not  a  single  itSopoid- 
jDapaw  stalk  in  view,  and  if  the  semblance  of  a  garden  "  '^' 
possessed  any  virtue  within  its  ricketty  fence,  it  was  of 
such  a  mythical  and  modest  nature  that  the  prolific 
grass  completely  shrouded  it  from  view.  At  one  end 
of  the  terrace  there  was  a  palisaded  enclosure  intended 
for  a  redoubt,  which  I  took  to  be  evidence  of  unfriendly 
relations  with  the  natives.  Since  the  block-house  of 
Le'opoldville  was  finished,  only  one  small  magazine  had 
been  added  to  the  European  quarter.  The  native  town 
stood  intact  as  it  had  been  built  eleven  months  previ- 
ously, though  in  a  dilapidated  condition,  and  smothered 
by  the  wild  and  stubborn  tall  grass.  Externally  there 
was  an  unmistakable  air  of  abandonment.  Leopold- 
ville  could  not  have  been  worse  had  it  been  uninhabited 
ever  since  I  left  in  April,  1882.  When  I  examine  the 
magazines  internally,  I  find  that  the  treasury  of  Le'o- 
poldville is  at  its  lowest  ebb:  there  are  only  783  brass 
rods  in  the  station,  sufficient  to  purchase  three  days' 
provisions  for  the  eleven  Europeans  and  212  coloured 
men  now  at  the  station.  There  are  numbers  of  bales 
of  cloth  and  boxes  of  beads,  but  these  have  to  be 
bartered  for  brass  rods  before  purchasing  bread.  The 
caravan  book,  with  its  notices  of  arrival  and  depar- 
ture of  caravans,  informs  me  that  there  need  have  been 
no  such  agony  of  scarcity  as  the  empty  food  shelves 
exhibit. 

Down  at  the  grass-grown  port  the  En  Avant  and 
whaleboat  lie,  rust-blistered  and  almost  ruined.     For 

2  I  2 


484 


TEE   CONGO. 


1883.     seventeen  months  tlie  steel  boats  have  lain  in  the  water; 

March  21.  . 

Leopold-  the  slime  covers  their  sides;  they  have  never  been 
looked  at  apparently.  The  boatmen  confess  that  they 
have  never  been  drawn  out  of  the  water  to  be  scrubbed 
and  painted. 


OUK   WEST   COAST   EMPLOYES. 


The  new  steamer  A.  I.  A.,  put  on  the  stocks  months 
ago,  is  still  many  weeks  from  completion.  She  is  only 
41  feet  long.  From  three  to  four  engineers,  with 
several  coloured  artisans,  have  been  engaged  the  last 
month  on  her,  but  the  progress  is  very  slow. 

As  for  the  political  state,  it  is  still  worse.     There  has 


A    SAD   STATE   OF  MATTERS.  485 

been  a  quarrel  about  something'  very  trivial,  and  both     isss. 

,  .  ,  .       ,  111  ^l-'^rch  21. 

whites  and  natives  have  seemingly  agreed  that  they  Leopoid- 
had  best  leave  one  another  severely  alone,  in  which 
impassive  warfare  the  whites  have  suffered  severely. 
It  has  been  a  mutual  challenge  as  to  who  can  best 
survive  this  forced,  unsociable  situation ;  and  while  the 
natives  are  abounding  in  plenty,  the  garrison  of  Le'o- 
poldville  has  fallen  into  a  disgraceful  poverty.  No 
wonder  that  the  chief  of  the  station  thinks  fit  to 
implore  me  not  to  bring  the  force  of  wagon-haulers  to 
sufi'er  from  the  famine  at  Leopoldville. 

Thus,  instead  of  having  entered  upon  a  fair  land  of 
order  and  plenty,  with  the  view  of  which  my  imagina- 
tive speculations  had  fed  me  with  pleasant  dreams  and 
glorious  prospects,  I  had  been  abruptly  introduced  into 
a  scene  of  disorder,  waste,  strife,  and  peevish  recrimi- 
nations. Every  man  struggled  to  free  himself  from 
the  imputation  of  being  involved  in  the  blame,  but 
without  success,  since  every  one  of  them  had  certain 
duties  to  perform,  with  one  all-paramount  responsibility, 
viz.,  that  of  looking  out  for  himself,  which  he  could  not 
have  done  as  a  passive  spectator  to  this  decay,  ruin, 
and  discomfort. 

The  extraordinary  impassivity  and  most  imprudent 
tlioughtlessness,  which  had  drawn  on  them  the  miseries 
of  impending  famine  and  the  contempt  of  the  natives, 
cannot  be  better  illustrated  than  by  relating  an  episode 
which  had  a  tragic  ending. 

A  young  Austrian  cavalry  lieutenant  named  Kallina, 
of  aristocratic  connections  in  Vienna,  I  am  told,  eager 


486  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     to  distinguish  liimself  on  the  Upper  Congo,  succeeds 

March  21.    _ 

Leopold-  in    purchasing   a    canoe  from    Ngalyema.      The   day 
arrives  that   he  is  about  to  depart  from  the  port  of 
Leopoldville.     A  small  and  narrow  dug-out  is  manned 
with  a  crew  half  native  and  half  of  our  own  employes, 
A  long  black  portmanteau  stands   on  its   end  in  the 
pirogue,  to  serve  for  a  seat  to  Mons.  Kallina.     This 
military  officer  is   a  tall,  stalwart   young  gentleman, 
fitter  for  a  grenadier  corps  than  for  service  in  a  small 
canoe  as  an  explorer ;  but  he,  unwittingly  of  this,  and 
unconscious  that  there  is  any  unfitness  in  his  circum- 
stances,  stands  helmet   in  hand,  bov^-ing  and  smiling 
his  adieus  to  the  gallant  group  of  military  officers  who 
have  gathered  at  the  landing-place  to  exchange  these 
bland  amenities  of  civilisation.     He  takes   his   place, 
with  cavalry  boots  reaching  his  knees,  a  heavy,  double- 
barrelled  rifle  strapped  over  one  shoulder,  a  cartridge- 
holder  slung  over  the  other,  and  a  brace  of  revolvers 
attached  to  his  waist.     While  the  military  officers  on 
shore    simultaneously    doff   their    helmets    with    true 
military   grace  and   precision,    not    one    shadow   falls 
athwart   their   minds   to   indicate   to   them  that   they 
have  done   the  least  wrong,  or  have   been   guilty  of 
almost  criminal  thoughtlessness  in  thus   permitting  a 
worthy   though    rash   young  man   to   depart   in   this 
manner.     Not  until  an  hour  later,  when  there  is  loud 
shouting  at  Kintamo,  a  rushing  hither  and  thither,  as 
many  canoes  dart  from  Kintamo's  water-side  towards 
the  centre  of  the  river,  do  they  feel  the  least  anxiety  or 
alarm.     They  are  then  told  that  Lieutenant  Kallina's 


niPRUDEXT  OFFICERS.  487 

canoe  was  capsized  at  the  CliSy  Point,  in  view  of  the     isss. 

Ill  fv«  ^    n  fi-  March  21. 

station,  and  that  the  young  omcer  and  tour  of  his  crew    Leopold- 
have  been  drowned. 

Not  many  days  after  this  calamity  an  officer  started 
to  go  up  the  river  in  a  canoe.  Coming  to  KalHna 
Point  his  frail  craft  was  met  by  a  strong  current,  which 
almost  swept  him  and  his  crew  over  the  cataracts. 
This  young  gentleman,  distinguished  otherwise  for 
manly  qualities  when  on  terra  jirma,  informed  me  that 
after  desperate  paddling  across  the  river,  he  barely 
succeeded  in  saving  his  party  and  himself  by  snatching 
wildly  at  overhanging  trees  on  the  north  bank,  while 
the  cataract  roared  like  thunder  a  few  yards  below 
him. 

Another  officer  suddenly  affecting  nautical  tastes, 
after  buying  a  canoe  and  nailing  a  keel  on  it,  rigs 
a  sail,  and  adventurously  floats  away  before  a  fair 
breeze  up  the  river  all  alone.  But  presently  the  breeze 
treacherously  leaves  him,  while  the  current  bears  him 

resistlessly  down  river.  His  people,  alarmed,  man  a 
pirogue  and  proceed  in  search  of  him,  and  hours  after, 
through  the  fast  gathering  darkness,  they  hear  him 
lustily  cry  for  aid,  as  they  paddle  down  an  inland 
channel  halloing  to  him. 

As  if  this  intolerable  condition  of  affairs  at  Leopold- 
ville  did  not  require  all  my  best  efforts,  the  following 
day's  notes  of  the  24th  of  March,  three  days  after 
arrival,  will  serve  to  show  tlie  desperate  nature  of  my 
duties  about  this  time. 

"  March  24th.    Despatched   Lieutenant  Orban  with 


488 


THE   CONGO. 


1883.     thirty-one  men  to  Vivi,  to  liurrv  up  by  forced  marclies 

March  24.  "^  '  ^        i        J 

Leopold-  a  caravan  with  brass  rods. 

"He  takes  orders  also  for  Lieutenant  Harou  to 
depart  for  the  Luemme  River,  and  build  a  station  on 
the  coast  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Massabe'.  Twenty 
men  are  to  be  delivered  to  him  by  the  Chief  of 
Yivi. 


LIEUTENAXT   ORBAN. 


*' Lieutenant  Grang  departs  with  sixty-four  men  to 
Matoma's  village  to  haul  the  boilers  of  the  Royal  to 
Leopoldville. 

"  Received  news  to-day  that  a  Mons.  Callewart  had 
been  killed  and  decapitated  at  Kimpoko,  the  station 
near  head  of  Stanley  Pool  on  the  south  bank." 

"I  send  thirty  men  to  Sabuka  to  bring  a  store  of 
rations  from  Lieutenant  Yalcke." 

"  The  Chief  of  Leopoldville  has  been  instructed  to 
proceed   instantly   with    whale-boat   with   twenty-five 


RELIEVING   LEOPOLDVILLE.  489 

men  to  Kimpoko,  to  searcli  out  the  truth  of  this  rumour     isss. 

/-in  55  «■  March  24. 

about  Callewart.    '^  Leopoid- 

"This  evening  I  received  by  courier  letters  from  down 
river.  Second  chief  at  Yivi  declaims  against  asking 
him  to  manage  the  duties  of  chief,  second  chief,  and 
storekeeper,  and  declares  he  will  not — suffer  who  may. 
His  letter  is  remarkable  for  impoliteness,  and  is  replete 
with  gross  accusations  against  a  number  of  people. 

"  The  officer  in  charge  of  the  transport  of  a  whale- 
boat  from  Yivi  to  Isangila,  having  fifty-eight  men  with 
him,  writes  that  he  cannot,  and  will  not  carry  the  boat 
with  such  a  limited  number.'' 

"The  Chief  of  Manyanga  writes  that  the  chief  in 
charge  of  Yivi  is  acting  an  *  infamous  comedy,'  that 
his  letters  demanding  supplies  are  unanswered." 
-  "  He  also  writes  that  Mons.  Luksic,  an  Austrian 
marine  officer,  has  committed  suicide  by  shooting  him- 
self through  the  head. 

"  I  have  now  to  sit  up  till  past  midnight  to  prepare 
letters  for  to-morrow's  courier,  to  cheer  up  these 
various  gentlemen  down  river.  Were  there  a  man 
on  the  expedition  that  I  could  believe  capable  of 
executing  his  instructions  faithfully  and  intelligently, 
Yivi  would  be  the  place  for  him ;  but  Captain  Hanssens 
is  away  on  his  expedition  to  the  Kwilu-Niadi,  Lieu- 
tenant Yalcke  is  performing  valuable  service  at 
Sabuka,  Lieutenant  Grang  distinguishes  himself  in  a 
different  field,  Lieutenant  Orban  is  en  route  to  Yivi, 
where  he  may  assist  the  clamorous  and  defiant  second 
*  Which  turned  out  to  be  false. 


490  TUE   CONGO. 

1883.     chief  of    that    miicli    disturbed    station.      Lieutenant 

March  24. 

Leopold-  Eugene  Janssen  is  up  at  JMswata,  and  cannot  be  com- 
municated with.  In  my  neighbourhood  are  young 
and  inexperienced  people.  What  is  wanted  is  a  strong 
and  efficient  officer  of  note  and  years,  able  during  my 
absence  to  manage  the  ever  intractable  Europeans  at 
Vivi.     Until  he  comes  I  must  have  patience." 

On  the  1st  of  April,  after  having  thoroughly  informed 
myself  of  the  causes  which  brought  about  this  pitiful 
condition  of  the  station,  the  chief  of  Leopoldville 
received  word  that  his  resignation  would  be  accepted, 
and  two  days  later  he  was  sent  to  the  coast  under  an 
escort  of  thirty  men. 

Since  my  arrival,  observing  the  severe  silence  of  the 
chiefs  of  Kintamo,  I  strove  to  re-establish  that  kindly 
feeling  that  had  animated  us  mutually  before  my  de- 
parture in  June,  1882.  On  Sunday  evening,  the  8th 
of  April,  I  indited  the  following  notes  in  my  diary  : 

"  About  one  p.m.  the  native  chiefs  of  Leopoldville 
district — Kimpalampalla,  G-anchui,  Mballa,  Kinswangi 
Kimpe — appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Wambundu,  and 
presently  Ngalyema,  Makabi,  Mubi,  Manswala,  Gan- 
chu  and  old  Ngako,  came  from  Kintamo  with  a 
large  following.  The  meeting  was  very  cordial,  and 
after  congratulations  upon  my  return  had  been  de- 
livered by  each  in  his  turn,  Ngalyema  proceeded,  as 
the  orator  of  the  occasion,  to  utter  his  views  upon 
the  causes  of  the  unpleasant  relations  existing  between 
the  different  peoples  in  the  district.  He  recapitulated 
as   usual  in  detail  the   incidents   attending   our   first 


EE-ESTABLISHIXG   FBIEXDLT  BELATIOXS.         491 

acquaintance,  and  the  ceremony  of  brotherhood,  down     isss. 
to  the  numerous  episodes  which   marked  the  advent   LeopoW- 
of  Bula  Matari  a  second  time  to  the  neighbourhood ; 
and  then  began  to  expatiate  upon   the    difiSculties  of 
maintaining  friendly  relations  with  the  Europeans  who 
had  been  left  in  charge  of  Leopold  ville,  after  I  had  been 
conveyed  away  in  a  condition  which  they  regarded  as 
hopeless.     He  thought  he  had  been  treated  very  ill, 
and   the    native    chiefs   of   the    neighbourhood   would 
corroborate  every  word  he  said.      '  One  after  another 
the  white  men  have  treated  me  as  if  I  were  a  common 
slave.     One  said  he  would  kill  me,  another   said   he 
would  fight  me,  another  said  he  would  drive  me  away 
from  Kintamo.      One  who  calls   himself  Tembo  (ele- 
phant) asks  me   if  I  know  who   he  is.      No,   I  say. 
Well,    I    am    the     elephant,    and    Ngalyema     must 
remember  that,  because   he   knows  what  an  elephant 
does  to  small  people  who  are  insolent.     The  elephant 
crushes  them  thus  and  thus,  and  he  dances  with  his 
feet  to  show  me  what  he  will  do  with  me,  if  I  do  not 
do  what  he  wants  with  me.     Another  of  your  white 
men — a  little  fellow,  he  is  not  here  now — if  we  came 
to  the  station  to  exchange  brass  rods  for  cloth,  screams 
at  us,  pushes  our  people  about,  and  treats  us  like  little 
slaves ;    and   there   sits   one   before   us   now,   he    has 
behaved  badly  to  us  all ;    he    has   threatened   several 
times  to  kill  me.    As  for  the  chief  of  the  station  whom 
you  left  here,  no  one  could  get  along  with  him.     If 
any   of  our  children  came   near  him — there,  that  will 
do,  he  said,  you  may  go,  go  away,  go  away  quick.     At 


492 


TEE   CONGO. 


1883.     last   I  kept  myself  and  people  away  from  liim,  and 

Leopold-  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  white  men.     I 

have   not  been  here  f6r  now  six  moons,  and  I  would 

not  have  come  now  if  you  had  not  sent  for  me  to  hear 

these  things.' " 

Turning  around  to  the  officer  accused  by  Ngalyema, 
I  asked  him  to  give  me  his  version  of  these  complaints, 
of  which  I  had  not  heard  before. 

He  replied  in  a  frank  and  straightforward  manner 
as  follows : 

"  *  There  may  be  a  little  truth  in  what  Ngalyema 
says,  but  he  has  exaggerated  these  trifling  matters  in 
order  to  prove  to  you  that  he  is  blameless.  But  he  is 
not  at  all  blameless  in  this  matter.  It  is  his  arrogance 
and  pig-headedness  that  is  really  the  cause  of  this 
trouble.  For  instance,  my  troubles  began  with  him  at 
the  time  of  Lieutenant  Kallina's  death  by  drowning. 
Ngalyema's  people  picked  up  Kallina's  private  port- 
manteau floating  about,  and  on  hearing  of  it,  I 
demanded  that  he  should  return  the  box.  Ngalyema 
would  not  return  the  property  unless  I  paid  him  a  tax 
of  ninepence  on  each  article  within.  That  was  the 
first  quarrel. 

"  The  second  was  when  the  chief  of  division  paid 
a  visit  of  inspection  here,  and  wished  to  see  Ngalyema, 
that  gentleman  refused  to  come  unless  a  white  man 
was  sent  as  hostage  to  Kintamo  during  his  visit.  I 
volunteered  to  go  and  be  the  hostage.  On  reaching 
the  village,  unarmed  and  alone,  the  people  began  to 
search  me,  and  fumbled  me  about  most  rudely,  and 


AN  IMPORTANT  CONFERENCE.  493 

then  Ngalyema  ordered  a  hundred  men  to  surround     isss. 

1   •    1         1  T  1  ^  '  April  8. 

me,  which  they  did,   making  savage  gestures  at  me   Leopoid- 
with  their  swords  and  spears,'  while  Ngalyema  was 
received  at  the  station  with  every  mark  of  honour  be- 
coming a  guest  of  his  rank.     That  was  a  small  affair, 
but  officers  do  not  like  to  be  treated  as  I  was  treated. 

"  The  third  quarrel  between  us  arose  from  Ngalyema 
striding  into  the  station  and  seizing  upon  two  little 
boys,  sons  of  Ngamberengi,  who  had  brought  us  a 
message  from  their  father.  Some  quarrel  between  the 
two  chiefs  had  provoked  Ngalyema  to  act  in  this 
arbitrary  manner,  and  seize  upon  these  two  children 
to  keep  as  sureties  that  the  other  would  yield  to  him. 
We  had  nothing  to  do  with  their  quarrel ;  this  station 
was  our  property;  the  ground  of  the  Association  is 
free,  and  acting  upon  that  idea  I  chased  Ngalyema, 
caught  him,  and  swung  him  round,  and  snatched  the 
children  from  him ;  and  perhaps  I  may  have  been 
rougher  than  I  intended,  but  that  is  the  extent  of  my 
offence,  and  if  you  judge  me  to  have  done  wrong,  you 
must  accept  my  resignation,  for  I  am  sure  to  do  the 
same  again,  and  perhaps  this  arrogant  savage  will  not 
escape  with  a  whole  skin  if  he  carries  his  slave-making 
tricks  to  a  district  where  I  am  chief." 

"  Nobly  spoken,   my   dear    ;     but   do  not   be 

excited ;  there  is  no  necessity  for  talking  about  resig- 
nations. Good  gracious,  cannot  I  ask  about  the  truth 
of  a  matter  like  this  without  you  all  flying  into  a  fury, 
and  at  once  offering  your  resignations  and  your  dis- 
missions ?     You  must  know  all  this  is  new  to  me.     I 


494  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     never  heard  about  hostages,  and  I  would  rather  offer 

■Aprils. 

Leopold-  myself  a  hostage  than  ask  any  man  with  me  to  do 
a  thing  I  would  not  care  to  do  myself.  I  remember 
too  many  fatal  accidents  attending  this  giving  of 
hosta,Qres.  You  are  a  brave  man,  sir,  and  I  honour 
you  for  your  moral  courage,  and  the  ofifer  of  j'our 
person  as  a  sacrifice  to  keep  the  peace." 

I  then  turned  to  Ngalyema  and  the  assembled  chiefs, 
and  said  gravely,  yet  in  kind  and  softened  tones,  for 

the  frank  and  noble  reply  of  Mr. had  considerably 

affected  me : 

"Ngalyema,  and  you,  chiefs  of  the  TTambundu,  I 
Lave  heard  what  vou  have  said,  and  I  have  heard  the 
words  of  the  white  man.  You  and  he,  and  all  of  you, 
have  been  wrong.  Xot  one  of  you  have  followed  the 
right  way  to  be  friends.  You  have  all  been  head- 
strong and  hard-hearted  to  one  another.  This  is  not 
the  way  to  be  brotherly.  You,  Xgalyema,  should  have 
known  better.  These  vouns*  white  men  do  not  know 
you  as  I  do.  They  are  strangers  to  you,  and  you 
to  them.  Knowing  that  you  were  safe  with  your 
brother  Bula  Matari,  why  need  you  have  cared  what 
white  boys  say  ?  You  must  have  known  that  they  had 
a  father  who  would  be  very  angry  with  them  if  they 
did  any  harm  to  you.  Supposing  that  you  had  been 
fighting  with  them,  how  would  you  have  answered  me 
when  I  should  ask  you,  '  Xgalyema,  why  did  you  fight 
your  brother's  people  ?  '  Xow  that  I  have  come  back 
you  must  drop  all  talk  of  this  trouble.  All  the  white 
men  who  have  been  quarrelling  with  you  shall  go  to 


^.V  IMPOETANT  CONFERENCE.  -^95 

other   jDlaces,    and   you    must    make   peace    with   the     iss3. 
Elephant,  for  you  have  misjudged  him.     To-dav,  being   Leopold- 
Sunday,  Tve  do  not  work  except  when  we  are  making 
friendship.     If  you  all  come  back  to-morrow  we  will 
come  to  an  ao'reement,  bv  which  no  one  can  hurt  his 
fellow  without  incurrins;  the  ano-er  of  every  one." 

The  next  day  a  treaty  was  made  uniting  all  the 
chiefs  of  the  Wambundu,  Kintamo  and  the  Association 
in  a  confederation  for  the  preservation  of  peace  in  the 
region  south,  and  west  of  Stanley  Pool.  The  chief 
sovereign  power  was  vested  in  the  Association,  which 
reserved  to  itself  the  power  to  declare  war,  and  to 
arbitrate  on  all  questions  likely  to  endanger  the  peace. 
It  was  also  further  stipulated  that  no  foreigner  could 
enter  any  district  belonging  to  any  of  the  confederated 
chiefs  witliout  a  recommendation  from  the  ofiicers  of  the 
Association,  who  would  guarantee  that  such  stranger 
was  a  bond  fide  trader,  or  that  he  was  not  a  political 
agent. 

It  was  also  stipulated  that  the  flag  of  the  Association 
should  be  hoisted  over  the  villages  of  the  signatory 
chiefs  every  Sunday  morning,  and  upon  all  great  or 
festive  occasions,  notice  of  wdiicli  would  be  given  by  the 
hoisting  of  the  flag  from  the  summit  of  Leopold  Hill. 

Three  days  later  negotiations  w^ere  seriously  com- 
menced with  the  chiefs  of  Kinshassa,  who,  hearing  of 
the  terms  of  the  agreement  with  Kintamo,  wished 
to  share  in  its  privileges.  A  verbal  agreement  was 
entered  into,  and  an  officer  was  temporarily  placed 
there,  who  was  withdrawn  a  few  days  later ;  but  after 


ville. 


496  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     the  lapse  of  sufficient  time  for  mature  consideration, 

April  12. 

Ldopoid-  9-  garrison  was  finally  accepted,  Mr.  A.  B.  Swinburne 
being  adopted  as  the  chief  of  the  station. 

It  should  have  been  observed  before  that  two  English 
religious  missions  had  established  themselves  at  Leopold- 
ville,  one  to  the  right,  and  one  to  the  left  of  the  station, 
on  ground  belonging  to  the  Association.  The  one 
established  on  Leopold  Hill  is  called  the  Arthington 
Mission  of  the  Baptist  Church ;  the  other  is  undenomi- 
national, and  is  styled  the  Livingstone  Inland  Congo 
Mission.  Mr.  T.  J.  Comber  presides  over  the  Baptist 
Mission,  and  Dr.  Sims  is  chief  of  the  other.  Both 
gentlemen  take  a  warm  interest  in  their  respective  Mis- 
sions, both  have  been  remarkably  energetic,  and  both 
have  especially  distinguished  themselves  for  zeal  in 
looking  after  the  important  interests  entrusted  to  their 
charge.  It  has  been  a  well-contested  race  to  the  great 
goal ;  the  Baptists  were  the  first  to  win  the  race  to 
Stanley  Pool ;  Dr.  Sims  was  the  first  to  navigate  any 
portion  of  the  waters  of  the  Upper  Congo.  The 
Baptists  were  the  first  to  occupy  a  station  above 
Stanley  Pool ;  but  soon  after,  the  Livingstone  Mission 
had  arranged  for  a  station  even  at  the  Equator.  The 
Baptists  were  the  first  to  launch  a  steamer;  but  the 
Livingstone  Mission  were  engaged  in  building  their 
steamer  at  Leopoldville  at  the  same  date  that  the  other 
was  launched.  It  has  been  a  singular  religious  duel 
between  two  missions  of  the  Protestant  Church ;  both 
mission  chiefs  alternately  have  gained  the  advance 
post,  and  have  exhibited  remarkable  individual  apti- 


NOBLE    WORK   OF  ENfJLISH  MISSIONABIES.        497 

tudes.     Where  and  when  this  unique  race  will  end  no     isss. 

-^  .      ,  April  12. 

one  knows,  teo  long  as  these  missions  are  supported  Leopoid- 
by  the  subscriptions  of  their  faithfid  and  loyal  sup- 
porters, it  will  no  doubt  be  continued,  until  the  Congo 
basin  has  been  over-run,  conquered  morally,  and  won 
over  to  the  Christian  fold.  Meantime  the  author 
wishes  the  two  leaders  in  this  daring  spiritual  cam- 
paign against  moral  darkness  more  wisdom,  light, 
renewed  courage,  and  abundant  success.  They  also 
have  passed  through  dark  days,  and  have  been  sorely 
afflicted ;  but  each  month  the  horizon  has  been  clear- 
ing:-, and  the  prospect  is  infinitely  brighter  before  them 
to-day  than  they  could  have  anticipated  some  time 
airo. 


VOL.  r.  2  k 


498  THE   COXGO. 


CHAPTER    XXY. 

TO    BOLOBO. 

Improving  Leopoldville — Departxvre  of  tlie  Upper  Congo  expedition — Its 
eqiiipment — Kimpoko,  "Good  View  Station" — Gambiele,  chief  of 
KiiniX)ko  —Stanley  Pool  again — Papa  Gobila — IMakoko  of  ^MIdc* — Fumn 
Xtaba — "Bula  Matari,  don't  you  go  to  ]ND:)e — Growth  of  Mswata 
town  — The  beer  of  Mantu — The  Lawson-Lufini  river  —  The  real 
heart  of  equatorial  Africa — A  splendid  region — My  former  repulse  by 
the  wild  men — Two  Palm  Point — Mnrder  of  two  of  our  men — Bolobo 
district — A  populous  neighboiu'hood — Difficulty-  ia  finding  Europeans 
adapted  for  intercourse  with  natives — Ibaka,  the  senior  chief  of 
Bolobo — Incidents  in  his  life — A  bellicose  garrison — A  jealous  chief, 
and  conjugal  infidelity — "  Blood  must  be  shed  for  blood,  or  money 
must  pay  for  it " — A  tardy  payment — Dangers  of  beginning  war — 
Bolobo  cession  of  territory. 

1883,     Xo  sooner  was  Leopoldville  relieved  of  its  retarding 

April. 

Leopold-  influence  in  the  person  of  its  indifferent  chief,  than  it 
began  to  assume  the  decently  progressive  aspect  that  it 
should  present  as  the  entrepot  of  the  Upper  Congo. 
The  grass  was  certainly  not  permitted  to  smother  the 
place  long ;  the  native  town  was  pulled  down  and 
transferred  to  another  locality  more  on  the  direct  road 
to  Kintamo,  the  redoubt  and  the  ricketty  fence  dis- 
appeared ;  the  terrace  was  enlarged  right  and  left  to 
permit  more  space  for  buildings,  and  the  cutting  was 
deepened  into  the  hill  to  allow  more  air ;  the  terrace 


2  K  2 


500  THE   CONGO. 

1883.  slopes  were  faced  with  stone ;  a  large  banana  garden 
i.eopoid-  occupied  the  site  of  the  old  native  town,  and  in 
it  mangoes  and  papaws  were  planted  ;  barracks 
for  Europeans  began  to  be  raised,  and  a  number 
of  other  improvements  were  commenced,  which  pro- 
mised greatly  to  improve  the  sanitary  condition  of 
Leopoldville.  Before  I  left  the  station  of  the  Upper 
Congo,  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  it  approach 
that  respectable  appearance  it  should  have  presented 
months  before,  and  which  its  position  in  the  rank 
of  stations  required.  Instead  of  detailing  foragers 
every  other  day  for  scouting  the  country  in  search  of 
food,  the  native  men,  women,  and  children  conveyed 
food  to  Le'opoldville's  terrace  plaza,  to  vend  it  in  open 
market,  either  wholesale  to  the  chief  of  the  station, 
or  to  barter  it  individually  to  such  as  appeared  to  buy, 
either  dwellers  in  the  town  or  natives  of  Kintamo. 
When  I  saw  the  terrace  j^laza  being  employed  as  a 
common  market-ground,  I  became  conscious  that  the 
victory  against  aboriginal  conservatism  was  won.  I 
believed  that  I  enjoyed  more  real  pleasure  in  watching 
the  groups  of  buyers  and  sellers  pursuing  their  in- 
tending bargains  within  the  shadow  of  the  old  Block- 
house of  Leopoldville,  than  I  had  in  any  other  event 
that  transpired  this  year.  For  before  any  place  can 
aspire  to  the  dignity  of  a  town  on  the  Congo,  it 
must  possess  a  market-place  of  its  own,  and  this  was 
one  of  the  little  successes  I  considered  essential  to 
our  well-being.  Not  having  many  women  of  our 
own   I   felt,  when    I    saw  two    scores  of  women   and 


TEE  STABT  FOR    THE    UPPER    CONGO.  501 

children    squatted   in    the    perfect    enjoyment   of    ini-     isss. 
limited  confidence,  that  I  had  become  endowed  with   ^^    y. 
the  honour  of  paternity,   and  not  for  untold  wealth     ^^^^^' 
would   I    have    permitted  that  confidence   to    be   tar- 
nished   with    the     least     exhibition     of     distrust     or 
violence. 

The  A.I.  A.  steam-launch  had  been  finished,  painted 
repeatedly,  and  effectively  tried  two  or  three  times. 
The  Royal  steam-launch  was  almost  brand-new  again, 
with  Tiewly-coppered  hull,  and  minutely  repaired.  The 
Ell  Avant  had  been  on  the  stocks,  and  was  scraped, 
scrubbed,  polished  with  emery-paper,  and  re-painted 
three  times  over.  An  ornamental  cap  had  been  placed 
above  the  funnel,  new  masts  had  been  rigged,  and 
furnished  with  new  sails ;  awnings  were  put  up,  and, 
better  than  all,  a  cabin  sufficiently  large  to  stow  the 
goods  and  house  myself;  wdiile  instruments  had  been 
erected,  as  I  had  a  vague  idea  that  the  sun-roasting 
received  on  Lake  Leopold  II.  in  1882  had  been  the 
cause  of  my  terrible  illness. 

On  the  9th  of  May,  1883,  every  article  is  aboard,  and 
every  man  is  in  his  place,  as  the  En  Avant  leads  the 
way  up  at  6  a.m.,  towing  the  whaleboat.  The  Royal 
follows  next,  with  a  large  GO-foot  canoe  alongside ;  the 
A.  I.  A,  comes  last. 

The  inventory  of  the  cargoes  is  as  follows : — 

En  Avant.        Cloth     .......  21  bales. 

Cowries GOO  lbs. 

Oil  (engine) 10  gallons. 

Flour  and  potatoes    .  .  140  lbs. 

Beans 70   „ 


502 


THE   CONGO. 


1883. 
Jlay  9, 

Leopold- 
ville. 


^Mixcd  provisions  ....  1  ease. 

Sugar 50  lbs. 

Biscuits 30  „ 

Tea 25  „ 

Cofifee 40  „ 

Cognac 1  case. 

Mess  chest 1    „ 

Bedding 140  lbs. 

Medicine 2  cases. 

Instruments 1  case. 

Personal  baggage       .     .     .  250  lbs. 

Cooking  utensils  ....  GO   „ 

Ammunition 4  cases. 

Fine  cloth 1  trunk. 

Crew 7  men. 

Passengers 10    „ 

Whale-boat.    Crew 10    „ 

Brass  rods 56  loads  =  3640  lb.=. 

Garden  seeds 2  cases. 

Boyal.              Crew 4  men. 

Passengers 9  men. 

Ammunition 19  cases. 

Engine  oil 5  gallons. 

Canoe.             Passengers 26  men. 

Engine  oil 50  gallons. 

Brass  rods 650  lbs. 

A.  I.  A.            Cloth 26  bales. 

Engine  oil 5  gallons. 

Salt 4  kegs. 

Boat  provisions,  European  .  4  cases. 

Up-river  station  provisions  .  22    „ 

Biscuits 4    „ 

Velvet  caps  and  hats      .     .  1  case. 

Fancy  beads 6  cases. 

Medicine  chest     ....  1  case. 

Cutlasses 1  package. 

Carpenters'  tool  chests    .     .  4 

Eip-saws,  cross  cut -saws,)  „,     , 

,       -,           ■                        ?■  2  loads, 

hand-saws ) 

Picks,  axes,  spades,  shovels,^  .  ,     . 

adzes,  hoes j 

Nails,  spikes,  screws       .     .  6    „ 

Passengers 8  men. 

Crew 6    „ 


May  9. 

Leopold- 
ville. 


EQUIPMEXT  FOR    THE    UPPER    COXGO.  503 

A  well-equipped  expedition  of  eighty  men,  with  isss 
about  six  tons  of  material,  consisting  of  every  necessary 
article  for  the  construction  of  two  small  stations,  and 
provisions  and  means  for  the  sustenance  of  the  garri- 
sons for  at  least  six  months.  An  equal  number  of 
colonists  could  not  have  been  better  provided.  We 
have  axes  for  them  to  hew  the  forest,  hammers  to 
break  the  rock,  spades  to  turn  up  the  sod  and  to  drain 
the  marsh,  or  shovels  to  raise  tlie  rampart,  scythes  to 
mow  the  grass,  hatchets  to  penetrate  the  jungle,  and 
seeds  of  all  kinds  for  sowing.  Saws  to  rip  planking, 
and  hammers,  nails,  and  cabinet-makers'  tools  to  make 
furniture ;  needles  and  thread  for  sewing  all  the  cloth 
in  their  bales,  twine  to  string  their  beads,  and  besides 
these  useful  articles  in  the  cases,  there  are  also  count- 
less "notions"  and  fancy  knick-knacks  to  appease  the 
cupidity  of  the  most  powerful  chief  or  excite  the 
desire  for  adornment  in  the  breast  of  woman.  Nor  has 
the  white  man  been  neglected  ;  there  is  enough  for  him 
to  eat  and  grow  fat  upon  while  in  good  health,  and 
enough  medicine  to  cure  a  hundred  fevers  for  each.  It 
were  well  that  these  things  should  be  told  perhaps  once 
in  a  while  to  the  reader,  that  he  may  have  a  sensible 
idea  of  what  planting  stations  in  distant  places  really 
means.  These  articles  were  not  thrown  promis- 
cuously into  the  boats  ;  a  due  «nd  equitable  j^roportion 
of  each  had  to  be  calculated  and  measured  out  per  head 
of  white  and  black  per  month  ;  otherwise  turmoil  and 
peevish  discontent  were  certain  to  be  heard  in  a  very 
short  time: 


504  THE   CONGO. 

1883.         It  was  liiffli  water  in  the   Cono-o  now.     We  could 

May  9.  ^  ^  ,  ^  ,  .  . 

Kinshassa.  travel  in  still  havens  in  shore,  under  the  overhanging 
boughs  of  trees,  screened  from  the  heat.  At  eight 
o'clock  we  passed  Kinshassa,  nestling  under  the  shade 
of  its  grove  of  mighty  baobab,  the  low  grassy  bank 
near  the  village  being  lined  by  a  wall  of  black  bodies, 
who  gave  us  a  rousing  cheer  as  the  flotilla  hove  in 
view  round  its  point,  and  steamed  past,  dipping  ensigns 
to  show  our  appreciation.      From  here  we  bore  across 


-m-  '-^'^*%-- 


^ 
^^"-C'^-  ^^^ 


VIEW   FEOM    THE   TEBBACE   BELOW   K15IP0K0. 

the  wide  Congo,  and,  clinging  to  the  southern  shore  of 
Bamu,  steamed  steadily  through  deep  water,  past  dense 
forests  of  sturdy  young  timber,  and  then  skimming 
along  the  edges  of  fat  green  reedy  flats,  until,  a  little 
after  4  p.m.,  we  were  abreast  of  Kimpoko  Station,  to 
which  we  now  headed  in  order  to  rest  for  the  night  in 
such  comfort  as  we  could  find  in  a  place  that  was 
undergoing  process  of  construction. 


GOOD    VIEW  STATIOX. 


505 


Kimpoko  ouo-bt  to  be  called  "  Good  View  Station,"     isss. 

.  .  .  May  9. 

since  from  it  we  have  a  sight  of  a  really  noble  breadth  Kiaipoko. 
of  river.  It  shows  fully  five  miles  of  clear  water, 
stretching  down  to  a  grey  horizon  fifteen  miles  away. 
A  vast  length  of  Bamu  Island  is  seen  north,  and  far 
beyond  the  tallest  trees  on  the  island  rise  the  purpling 
hills  enfolding  De  Brazza's  future  settlements  •,  while 


VIEW    IRO.M    KIMrOKO. 


to  the  eastward  is  the  cliffy  crescent  known  as  Dover 
Cliffs.  Inland  from  the  river's  verge  a  few  pillared 
hyphoene  stand  rustling  their  fan-like  leaves,  and 
Itetween  these,  at  a  distance  of  a  mile,  rise  low  hills, 
iiacked  by  higher  liills,  beyond  which  rise  the  outlying 
spurs  of  the  uplands  of  the  Banfunu,  governed  by 
Nfumu  Nguma. 


1883. 
May  9. 

KimiJoko. 


506 


THE   CONGO. 


Grambiele  is  the  chief  of  Kimpoko's  native  com- 
munity— a  tribe  of  the  Babari,  or  river  people — and 
he  it  was  who  was  falsely  reported  to  have  murdered 
Callewart.  A  man  with  but  slight  force  of  character, 
there  is  little  to  commend  him  to  our  esteem.  He  has 
studied  liis  own  interests  well  in  the  invitation  extended 


THE  UPPEE  CONGO  ISSUING  INTO   STANLEY  POOL. 

{From  a  photograph?) 

to  US.  He  is  placable  now.  because  his  senses  are  fed 
with  seeing,  and  far  too  often  tasting,  the  good  things 
we  possess.  To  satisfy  him  and  Nfumu  Nguma  has 
been  a  costly  matter.  Nevertheless,  if  the  peace  is  only 
kept,  time  and  better  acquaintance  may  modify  his 
ardour  for  begging;  the  future  may  disclose  virtues 
that  are  at  present  invisible. 


FAPA    GOBILA.  507 

The  next  day  wo  leave  Kimpoko,  and  a  few  hours     isss. 

May  10, 

later  have  entered  the  gates  of  the  Upper  Congo,  at  ^,u^;,^i 
the  head  of  Stanley  Pool.  On  the  evening  of  the  third 
day  we  are  alongside  of  the  landing-place  of  Mswata 
Station.  Lieutenant  Janssen,  brought  here  thirteen 
months  ago,  has  by  this  time  completed  his  station. 
His  residence  is  like  a  genteel  farmhouse  in  appear- 
ance, with  a  cool  and  shady  porch,  where  he  holds  his 
joalavers  and  chats  twice  a  day  with  Papa  Gobila,  or, 
as  he  is  now  called,  Grantiene. 

This  old  gentleman,  stout  of  form,  hearty  and  genial 
in  manner,  came  up  breathlessly  and  held  out  his  fat 
hands,  and  welcomed  Bula  Matari  after  his  long- 
absence.  He  expressed  a  positive  opinion  that  it  was 
the  fetish  of  the  Wabuma  which  so  sickened  me  last 
year,  and  insisted  on  my  yielding  him  a  promise  never 
to  live  with  them. 

We  halted  a  few  days  at  Mswata  to  purchase  food  for 
the  up-river  journey  to  Bolobo,  our  next  destination. 
During  the  morning  of  this  day  Fumu  Ntaba,  with 
about  sixty  musketeers,  and  a  few  women  and  domestic 
slaves,  arrived.  Fumu  Ntaba  is  the  principal  chief 
of  the  Bateke'  of  Mbe'  district,  which  lies  W.N.AV.,  five 
days'  journey  from  the  landing-place  on  the  north 
bank  opposite  Mswata. 

A  great  deal  has  been  uttered  within  the  last  few 
years  about  Makoko  of  Mbe,  and  of  Fumu  Ntaba,  but 
in  order  to  thoroughly  understand  the  power  of  these 
two  chiefs  in  one  and  the  same  district,  it  is  necessary 
to  compare  Makoko  with  Ngako,  the  hereditary  chief  of 


ISSiJ. 
May  12. 

Alswata. 


508 


THE   CONGO. 


Kintamo,  and  Fuimi  XtaLa  \^-itli  Xgalyema,  the  actual 
chief. 

Makoko  is  the  hereditary  chief  of  the  north-westeru 
Bateke',  but  being  infirm  through  years,  and  dulled 
b}'  age,   he   has   become,  by  common  consent,  super- 


PAPA    GOBILA   OF    SISWATA. 


annuated,  and  the  sovereignty  has  been  assumed  by 
the  Regent,  Fumu  Ntaba.  ^lakoko  is  now  only  fit 
for  the  seclusion  of  his  hut  and  the  ministrations 
of  his  female  attendants.  And  although  he  may 
appear  in  j)ubhc,    and  receive  a    sympathetic   respect 


FU2IA   NTABA.  509 

from  the  chiefs  In  council,  it  is  the  dictum  of  Fumu     isss. 
Xtaba  that  obtains  ooedience ;  nor  is  there  any  hesita-   Mswata. 
tion  felt  in  proving  to  Makoko  that  his  days  of  power 
are  over. 

Along  the  riverside  and  mountain  slopes  between 
Stanley  Pool  and  the  Lawson  River  there  are  only 
four  villages,  two  of  these  being  nearly  opposite  to 
i\Iswata.  The  lions,  elephants,  buffixloes,  and  antelope 
found  as  we  voyage  on  the  Congo  between  these  tw^o 
points  are  also  proofs  that  the  territory  of  Fumu 
Ntaba,  within  five  days'  journey  from  the  Congo 
must  be  singularly  denuded  of  population,  and  the 
paucity  of  people  on  the  north  bank  of  Stanley  Pool 
is  already  known  to  us. 

Fumu  Xtaba  asked  me  when  I  was  going  to  send 
white  men  to  live  at  Mbe,  as  Lieutenant  Yalcke  had 
promised  they  would  be  sent  to  him.  Under  altered 
circumstances,  I  could  scarcely  explain  clearly  why  we 
had  not  already  occupied  a  station  on  his  land,  but  he 
■pressed  me  to  make  a  promise  to  meet  him  and  talk  it 
over  at  Malima,  whither  he  intended  to  pay  a  visit  in 
about  two  months. 

"  And,"  said  he,  "  have  no  fear  about  Malima  and 
Mfwa.  I  want  all  white  men  to  come  who  like  to 
come.  I  have  made  blood-brotherhood  with  Valcke ; 
he  and  his  people  are  my  friends,  and  they  may 
build  freely  in  any  part  of  the  country,  either  by 
the  riverside  or  inland." 

I  comforted  Fumu  Ntaba  with  the  ]»romi.se  that 
I  should  "  see  about  it ; "  and,  exchanging  ]jresents, 


510  THE   CONGO. 

1883.  we  parted,  vowing  eternal  friendship  and  immutable 
Mswata.  fidelity  to  one  another. 

Gobila^  genial,  aldermanic  Gobila — Papa  Gobila — 
had  been  listening  quietly  to  all  this,  never  uttering  a 
word,  but  an  hour  after  came  to  me,  and  said : 

"Bula  Matari,  don't  you  go  to  Mbe ;  you  will  be  a 
fool  if  you  will.  There  are  no  people  there,  nothing 
but  a  little  ivory  to  l^e  had.  Your  bread  will  cost  you 
three  times  more  than  it  costs  you  here.  There  is 
nothing  in  Mbe  but  elephants  and  lions.  Ask  yourself 
why  we  should  have  left  Mbe',  if  it  were  not  that  it  was 
a  poor  country.  I  j)refer  to  live  with  Gandelay,  on 
the  south  side  of  the  river,  than  with  Fumu  Xtaba  on 
the  north  side.  Xgalyema  of  Kintamo,  Nchulu  of 
Kinshassa,  myself  and  people,  have  all  run  away  from 
there,  because  they  were  all  killing  one  another  at 
Mbe',  continually  fighting,  fighting.  We  have  now  all 
got  rich,  and  have  slaves,  ivory,  and  plenty  of  wives  on 
this  side,  but  if  we  went  over  to  Mbe'  we  should  lose 
everything.  Ob,  they  will  take  your  cloth  and  speak 
you  fair  so  long  as  you  give  it  to  them ;  but  what  will 
you  p-et  for  it  all  ?  If  you  think  I  speak  falsely,  go 
over  to  Ganchu,  and  try  to  buy  even  a  roll  of  Ijread, 
and  see  for  yourself.  They  come  to  me  for  food,  and  I 
send  my  canoes  full  of  l>read  every  week  to  Mfwa  and 
Malima.  Did  you  see  any  lions  or  buffaloes  on  this 
side  as  you  came  up  ?  Xo  !  '\^^ell,  that  proves  it. 
The  Banfunu  of  the  south  side  are  too  numerous, 
and  Xfumu  Xguma  has  too  many  people  to  allow 
lions  and  buffaloes  to  live  long  here." 


GBOWTH    OF  3ISWATA.  511 

Grobila's    town    of   Mswata   had   greatly   grown    in     isse 

May  ] 
Mswata. 


May  12 

thirteen  months.     It  now  contained  about  1,500  souls. 


Gandelay  also  had  sent  one  of  his  chiefs  to  build  a 
small  town  above  Mswata,  close  to  the  river.  The 
lesser  chiefs  below  the  station  seemed  to  be  extendino- 

o 

their  hutted  areas.  All  this  I  naturally  took  to  be  the 
effect  of  the  residence  of  our  people  amongst  them, 
because,  being  non-producing,  yet  having  abundance  of 
means  to  purchase  the  necessities  of  subsistence,  their 
daily  wants  stimulated  the  natives  to  greater  efforts. 

On  the  15th  the  flotilla  left  Mswata  for  Bolobo. 
About  9  A.M.  it  passed  the  confluence  of  the  Kwa  with 
the  Congo,  and  proceeded  up  the  main  river. 

From  this  point,  as  we  ascend  the  Congo,  which  has 
a  width  hereabouts  of  one  mile,  or  one  and  a  quarter 
miles,  up  to  one  and  a  half  miles  in  some  places,  we 
have  Uyanzi  on  our  right,  forming  the  left  bank  of 
the  river,  and  Ml)e  on  our  left,  forming  the  right  bank. 
Uyanzi  begins  with  a  tame  aspect  of  low  ridges, 
sloping  gradually  but  grandly  to  the  Kwa  and  the 
Congo,  and  robed  with  a  grassy  covering  of  tender 
green.  The  village  of  Mantu,  close  squatted  by  the 
Congo  water,  really  makes  a  pretence  to  look  some- 
thing different  from  ordinary  villages  by  a  broad  path 
kept  clear  of  weeds,  leading  from  the  landing-place  to 
the  palm-shaded .  village.  The  observant  traveller,  on 
landing,  will  soon  discover  that  this  appearance  is 
delusive;  the  pleasing  impression  formed  by  anything 
approaching  to  neatness  and  cleanliness  soon  vanish- 
ing, when  ho  finds  that  the  inside  of  the  place  is  not 


512  THE  cos  GO. 

1883.     a  wliit  better  tlian  elsewhere.     Beer  wliich  tastes  like 

May  15.  . 

jiaintu.  stale  lager  is  a  great  manufacture  here ;  its  colour 
is  like  water  darkened  by  a  slight  quantity  of  infusion 
of  tea.  It  is  made  of  fermented  millet,  or  more 
generally  of  fermented  juice  of  sugar-cane,  and  stored 
in  great  black  ten-gallon  pots.  Doubtless  they  find 
it  a  remunerative  manufacture,  as  customers  from  the 
Kwa  and  Stanley  Pool  are  frequently  found  here. 

Beyond  Mantu  the  long  tender  green  slopes  become 
more  and  more  shortened,  until  finally  the  low  ridges 
drop  sheer  into  the  depths  of  tlie  river,  and  jut  out  in 
harsh  and  naked  rocky  points. 

Viewing  the  opposing  shores  of  Mbe,  the  eye  com- 
mands long  curving  sweeps  of  half-wooded  slopes  of 
hills,  rising  to  300  feet  in  height,  with  sufficient  deptli 
and  breadth  of  green  woods  over  them,  however,  to 
make  them  present  a  more  refreshing  aspect  than  that 
furnished  by  the  treeless  ridges  of  Uyanzi . 

We  hoisted  our  sails,  as  there  was  an  eight-knot 
breeze  on  the  river,  and  stretched  them  out  flat,  wliich 
greatly  relieved  the  engines,  and  increased  our  rate 
of  progress. 

At  noon  we  were  opposite  the  confluence  of  the 
Lawson-Lufini  Biver  and  the  Congo.  The  former 
flows  into  the  Congo  from  the  west-south-west.  The 
main  river  comes  from  a  northern  direction. 

At  its  mouth  the  Lawson  has  a  few  small  islets 
which  disjoint  it  into  two  main  branches,  and  under 
the  lee  of  these  a  wide  sandy  bar  has  been  formed, 
which  necessitates  vessels  to  edge  away  towards  the 


TEE  LAWSON-LUFINI  BIVEB.  513 

shore  of  Uyanzi,  until  they  have  well  passed  tlie  river.  i883. 
It  is  about  250  yards  wide  above  the  confluence,  and  :Mantn. 
of  a  much  paler  colour  than  the  ochreous  brown  of  the 
Congo.  It  is  considered  to  be  the  boundary  between  the 
Bateke  of  Mbe,  ruled  by  Fumu  Ntaba,  and  the  Bateke', 
ruled  by  two  chiefs,  named  Muijuba  and  Kamolondo. 
A  few  miles  above  it  the  hilly  ridges  on  the  right  bank 
recede  from  the  water-side,  and  form  wide  folds,  half 
enclosing  broad  and  fertile  basins.  Uyanzi  begins 
again  to  show  grand  slopes  of  distant  grassy  ridges. 
A  cluster  of  palms  span  the  river's  margin  or  an 
isolated  grove,  specking  darkly  the  green  of  the 
surrounding  grass,  denotes  the  presence  of  villages, 
and  as  these  features  are  on  a  lars-e  scale  we  do  not  see 
much  improvement  in  the  scene  on  either  side  until 
above  Chumbiri,  when  the  Congo  widens  rapidly  from 
a  width  of  two  miles  to  four  miles. 

On  passing  Rocky  Point,  and  emerging  in  view  of 
this  broader  width,  we  may  be  said  to  have  entered 
fairly  on  the  Upper  Congo.  Hitherto  we  have  been 
voyaging  since  leaving  Boma,  and  the  estuary-like 
breadth  of  the  Lower  Congo,  in  a  pass  or  defile.  From 
Boma  to  Yivi  we  steamed  between  two  lines  of  moun- 
tain heights ;  between  Yivi  and  Isangila  we  tra- 
velled in  a  narrow  valley  parallel  with  the  chasmic 
trough  of  the  Congo ;  between  Isangila  and  Manyanga 
our  boats  ran  up  the  crooked  ravine-like  valley  of  the 
river  ;  between  Manyanga  and  Leopoldville  we  marched 
along  the  edge  of  the  deep  fracture  in  the  highlands 
through  which  the  Congo  continuously  roars;  then  after 

VOL.  I.  2   L 


514  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     a  slight  relief  obtained  by  the  lake-like  expansion  called 

May  15.  n         t  •        ^ 

Chumbiri.  Stanley  Pool,  we  have  been  confined  again  between 
two  mountain  lines  of  more  or  less  picturesqueness,  np 
as  far  as  the  Rocky  Point  above  Chnmbiri,  to  finally 
emerge  into  this  lacustrine  breadth  which  the  volu- 
minous waters  of  the  Congo  have  scooped  out  of  the 
plains  and  lowlands  which  we  now  behold  extended 
on  either  hand,  with  scarcely  any  extraordinary  rise  or 
hill,  until  we  shall  approach  the  Biyerre  affluent. 

The  real  heart  of  equatorial  Africa,  is  this  central 
fertile  region,  whose  bountiful  and  unparalleled  richness 
of  soil  will  repay  the  toil  and  labour  required  to  bring 
it  within  the  reach  of  Europe.  It  was  not  the  up- 
lands of  the  maritime  region,  with  their  millions  of 
ravines,  and  narrow  oven-hot  valleys,  and  bald  grass 
tops,  and  limited  bits  of  grassy  plateaus,  with  here  and 
there  a  grove  of  jungly  forest  scattered  like  islets  amid 
the  grassy  wastes,  that  I  strove  for  ;  it  was  this  million 
square  miles  of  almost  level  area,  which  we  may  call 
the  kernel,  that  was  worth  the  trouble  of  piercing  the 
235  miles  of  thick  rude  mountain  husk  which  separates 
it  from  the  energies  of  Europeans,  who,  could  they  but 
reach  it,  would  soon  teach  the  world  what  good  might 
come  out  of  Africa. 

In  my  voyage  down  the  great  river  in  1877,  I  had 
but  a  dim  glimpse  of  the  mainland.  To  escape  the 
unaccountable  ferocity  which  then  menaced  us  as  soon 
as  we  came  in  sight  of  the  wild  men,  we  had  to  seek 
refuge  in  the  mazy  channels  between  the  islets.  [NTow, 
however,  our  mission  is  to  build  in  the  midst  of  these 


31 Y  FORMES   REPULSE  BY   WILD   MEN.  515 

wild  men,  but  before  we  can  do  so  we  must  seek  for     isss. 

May  15. 

them,  confront  them  cahnly,  persuade  them  to  hush  chumbin. 
their  clamours,  soothe  their  unquiet  hearts,  and  win 
them  to  gentle  ways  and  arts  of  peace.  To  those  who 
read  the  narrative  of  my  journey  '  Through  the  Dark 
Continent,'  this  work,  as  the  sequel  of  that  story,  must 
doubtless  be  interesting.  I  shall  endeavour  not  to  be 
tedious. 

From  the  low  E,ocky  Point  on  the  right  bank  above 
Chumbiri,  we  cross  over  to  the  left  bank  with  the  sea- 
like river  dotted  with  distant  spectral  islets  extending 
above  us  to  an  infinite  horizon.  There  is  a  blazing 
sun  reflecting  its  brightness  on  the  river,  the  waters 
of  which  lie  as  smooth  and  motionless  as  a  mirror. 
The  breeze  has  gone  down,  and  not  even  a  breath 
disturbs  the  pendant  star-flag  hanging  down  its  staff, 
or  flaps  the  lappets  of  the  awning.  The  smoke  from 
the  funnel  shows  almost  a  horizontal  and  straight 
line  nearly  parallel  with  the  disturbing  wake  of  the 
steamer.  It  lakes  us  quite  an  hour  to  reach  the  left 
bank,  which  we  now  begin  to  follow,  for  Bolobo,  our 
destination,  lies  on  the  left  bank,  and  is  distant  about 
nine  hours'  steaming. 

We  arrive  at  the  upper  end  of  the  hill  range,  pass 
two  or  three  villages  at  Mompurengi,  situated  within 
cosy  folds  of  wood-covered  hills,  and  then  we  observe 
the  hills  trend  further  and  further  eastward,  and  we 
come  abreast  of  a  low  clay  bank,  with  tall  dense 
grass  above.  The  river  is  bank-full  at  this  season,  but 
some  portions  of  it  are  a  clear  five  feet  higher.    Grey 

2  L  2 


616  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     clay  is  at  the  water's  level,  darkening  to  blackness  as 

May  15.  . 

3iompu-  it  rises  upright  as  a  wall  to  the  grassy  roots, 
rengi.  rpj^^  islets  are  now  in  parallel  lines  to  the  shore, 
for  just  at  this  place  the  river  is  divided  into  five 
broad  channels.  At  a  short  distance  the  islets  purple  ; 
they  become  indistinct  masses,  more  like  hills  than 
trees,  so  curious  is  the  influence  of  the  misty  veil 
with  which  the  extreme  heat  has  covered  them.  TThen 
wearied  by  the  monotonous  length  of  the  clay  bank, 
we  veer  towards  the  tree-covered  isles,  which  in  the 
afternoon  act  effectively  as  a  screen.  We  are  steaming 
in  the  shadow  of  the  forest  grove,  and  although  fully 
50  feet  away,  our  eyesight  can  penetrate  far  into  the 
cool  recesses  of  the  shade,  and  up  the  bole  of  stout 
Cottonwood  and  its  great  leafy  crown,  and  through  the 
lesser  but  sturdy  growth  of  hardwood,  under  whose 
shade  and  shelter  are  the  shrubs,  climbing  Calamus  and 
sprouts  of  palm. 

At  a  place  on  the  mainland  called  Two  Palm  Point, 
so  called  from  the  solitary  specimens  of  the  Hyphoene 
guineensis,  which  stand  above  the  grassy  covered 
point,  we  camp.  Presently  two  canoes  are  seen  de- 
scending. They  boldly  paddle  towards  us,  and  give 
us  a  letter,  in  which  we  are  told  by  the  chief  of  Bolobo 
Station  that  two  of  our  men  have  been  murdered  by  a 
native  chief  called  Gatula,  who  lives  close  by. 

At  nine  o'clock  next  morning  we  are  at  the  lower 
end  of  Bolobo  district,  which  begins  with  the  pretty 
village  of  Itimba,  situated  on  a  low  hill,  thickly 
wooded.    Then  village  after  village  appears  in  a  nearly 


MUBDER    OF   TWO    OF  MY  MEX.  517 

continuous  line  for  about  an  hour,  when  the  station     isss. 

May  16. 

comes  into  view  on  the  open  higher  ground  behind  the    Boiobo. 
narrow  belt  of  tall  timber  lining  the  river  side. 

Were  it  not  for  the  dense  population  of  this  district 
Boiobo  would  not  be  called  a  happy  choice  for  a 
station.  That  it  is  a  healthy  situation,  there  can  be 
no  doubt,  as  we  have  had  abundant  proof  of  its 
salubrity.  But  kinder  people  to  dwell  with  might 
have  been  found,  as  it  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  find 
Europeans  adapted  by  nature  and  disposition  for  con- 
verting suspicious  natives  into  harmless  friends.  Un- 
fledged Europeans  fresh  from  their  homes,  brimful  of 
intolerable  conceits,  and  indififerent  to  aught  else  save 
what  submits  to  their  own  prejudices,  are  not  as  a  rule 
the  best  material  to  work  with  for  the  civilisation  of 
the  African.  As  the  European  will  not  relax  his 
austerity,  but  will  very  readily  explode  his  unspeakable 
passions,  the  aboriginal  native  does  not  care  to  venture 
into  familiar  life  with  the  irascible  being.  The  native 
therefore  shrouds  himself  with  his  own  sulkiness  and 
savage  hate  of  what  he  does  not  like.  But  there  are 
natives  who  are  as  likely  to  explode  into  mischievous 
passions  as  the  Europeans  ;  and  Gatula  was  one  of 
these  blacks  who  had  a  tendency  to  show  what  he 
could  do  in  the  way  of  hurtful  outbursts.  In  this  way 
he  showed  his  first  attempt  by  murdering  and  hacking 
to  j^ieces  two  of  the  garrison  of  Boiobo. 

Imagine  a  strip  of  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  about 
twelve  miles  long,  a  thin  line  of  large  umbrageous  trees 
close  to  the  water's  edge,  and  a  gently  sloping  back- 


518  THE   CONGO. 

1883.     ground  of  cleared  country  rising  to  about  30  feet  above 

ilay  16. 

lioiobo.  the  tallest  tree.  Just  about  the  centre  of  this  strip  on 
the  open  ground  is  the  station  of  Bolobo,  consisting  of 
a  long  mat-walled  shed,  a  mud  and  wattle  kitchen,  a 
mud  walled  magazine  with  grass  roofs,  and  about 
twenty  huts  arranged  in  a  square  on  the  outside  of  the 
inner  group  of  buildings.  Above  and  below  it  close 
to  the  water-side,  amid  banana  and  palm  groves,  are 
scattered  about  fifteen  villages.  Seven  of  these,  Itumba, 
Mungolo,  Biangala,  Ururu,  Mongo,  Manga,  Yambula, 
and  Lingenji,  are  below  the  station.  Eight  are  above, 
among  which  is  Mbanga  and  a  few  villages  of  the 
Banunu  tribe.  These  form  what  is  called  Bolobo, 
which  is  a  rich  district,  affording  excellent  fields  for 
a  colony  of  white  agriculturists  who  could  live  here, 
if  they  could  be  supplied  with  their  usual  luxuries 
of  tea  and  coffee,  &c.,  as  well  as  they  could  live  any- 
where in  the  world.  The  population  of  the  river  front 
of  Bolobo  is  about  10,000,  over  whom  Ibaka  is  the  senior 
chief.     The  back  country  is  also  rich  and  populous. 

To  effect  an  influence  on  this  population  with  a 
garrison  of  about  twenty-five  men  would  by  no  means 
be  a  difiScult  task,  provided  that  the  European  chosen 
over  the  station  was  ingenuous  and  easy  in  disposition, 
and  devoted  himself  to  win  the  friendship  of  Ibaka. 
The  chief  would  not  long  be  considered  the  senior,  unless 
he  had  friends  with  whom  a  union  of  interests  could  be 
formed  to  defend  himself  against  attack,  and  to  advance 
the  mission  entrusted  to  liim.  Captain  Hanssens,  who 
established   this   station,  understood   all   this,  and   he 


TEE  STORY   OF  IBAEA.  519 

placed  young  Lieutenant  Orban  in  charge.    But  Orban,     isss. 

May  16. 

after  a  few  months  of  agreeable  residence  and  pleasant  Boiobo. 
relations  at  Boiobo,  at  last  sighed  for  a  change ;  be 
did  not  like  being  cooped  up  in  Boiobo  all  alone  ;  he 
imagined  himself  ill,  and  asked  permission  to  visit  the 
coast.  Unwilling  to  refuse  the  young  gentleman — 
who  was  in  all  other  respects  a  most  estimable  person — 
he  received  leave  to  depart,  and  another  was  substituted 
in  his  stead,  who  had  not  the  faculty  of  making  him- 
self amiable.  Another  was  then  tried,  but  he  also 
failed,  and  it  was  about  this  time  that  the  murder  at 
Boiobo  happened. 

From  my  note-book  I  quote  verbatim  the  history  of 
Ibaka,  as  given  to  me  by  Ibaka  himself,  and  translated 
by  Sergeant  Khamis,  his  friend,  from  which  the  causes 
of  the  restlessness  which  distinguished  Boiobo  above 
all  other  districts  may  be  divined. 

"  About  thirty  years  ago  Ibaka,  a  powerful  chief, 
lived  at  Kutumpuku,  on  the  bauks  of  the  Mikene 
(on  riglit  bank).  Among  his  subject  chiefs  were 
those  known  by  the  names  of  Manga,  Mwekwanga, 
Ururu,  and  Mongo.  They  quarrelled  with  Ibaka,  and 
after  several  little  battles,  they  discovered  that  Ibaka 
was  too  strong  for  them,  and  fled  to  settle  on  the  left 
bank  at  Boiobo.  Mwekwanga  chose  the  very  spot  on 
which  the  station  now  stands,  the  others  occupied  the 
villages  named  after  them  to-day.  Some  time  after, 
when  friendship  was  re-established  between  Ibaka  and 
his  mutinous  chiefs,  Ibaka,  still  residing  at  Kutumpuku, 
was  himself  chased  away  from  the   right   bank  by  a 


o20  THE   CONGO. 

1883. "   horde  of  savages  from  the  interior,  and  he  was  corn- 
May  16.  °  ' 

Boiobo.  pelled  to  seek  shelter  at  Bolobo,  between  Mwekwanga's 
village  and  Manga's.  He  lived  for  several  years  in  his 
new  place,  recognised  by  all  as  the  superior  chief,  and 
undisturbed  in  his  authority.  When  he  died,  his  son 
Lingenji  being  a  minor,  his  name  and  authority  was 
assumed  by  his  principal  slave.  This  being  the  custom 
of  the  Wy-yanzi,  Lingenji  became  no  more  than  an 
inferior  chief,  lord  of  his  own  domestics.  The  new 
Ibaka; — the  same  whom  we  know  to-day  under  that 
name— had  soon  to  contend  against  the  jealousies  of  the 
older  chiefs  who  had  often  fought  his  old  master  ;  but, 
being  a  vigorous  and  resolute  man,  he  gradually  com- 
pelled recognition  as  the  superior  chief  of  Bolobo. 
Mwekwanga,  however,  his  right-hand  neighbour^  a 
sullen  and  obstinate  old  fellow,  long  defied  him,  until 
the  superiority  was  decided  after  a  series  of  stubborn 
contests,  when  he  was  finally  driven  away  from  his 
place,  to  locate  himself  inland  of  Manga,  on  the  borders 
of  a  timber  belt  near  that  chiefs  village.  Since  that 
day  Ibaka  has  been  duly  acknowledged  as  the  principal 
in  authority. 

"  A  few  vears  after  this  affair  with  Mwekwangra, 
Captain  Hanssens  arrived  at  Bolobo,  and  having 
ascertained  from  the  natives  he  spoke  with  that  Ibaka 
was  the  senior  chief,  he  applied  to  him  for  permission 
to  build  a  station,  more  for  the  sake  of  provisioning  the 
steamers  than  from  any  merits  the  locality  possessed, 
though,  as  an  agricultural  and  commercial  station  it  is 
not  to  be  despised." 


A   BELLICOSE   0>ABBISOX.  521 

The  fact  that  Ibaka  has  thus,  by  a  lucky  accident,  '  isss. 

,  .  .       •  May  16. 

considerably  improved  his  strength — this  being  the  Boiobo. 
lio^ht  in  which  his  old  rivals  reocard  our  settlement 
amongst  them — has  aroused  and  intensified  the  bate 
they  always  bore  him.  Long  before  we  knew  why 
Bolobo  was  so  inimical  to  white  men,  in  various  ways 
our  people  were  made  to  understand  that  they  bore 
a  stubborn  dislike  to  them.  They  were  not  allowed 
to  trespass  beyond  a  certain  limit  near  the  station, 
whether  to  cut  timber  for  building,  fuel  for  cooking, 
or  grass  for  roofing.  Nor  were  they  allowed  to  go 
to  the  markets  to  buy  food.  If  through  ignorance  of 
this  antipathy,  any  one  strayed  beyond  the  set  limits, 
he  was  chased,  and,  if  caught,  severely  beaten  with 
sticks.  Finally,  as  months  passed  away,  the  fire  of 
their  enmity  cooled  slightly,  but  its  flame  was  soon 
rekindled  by  Gatula,  who,  during  a  drunken  fit,  sus- 
pecting that  a  female  slave  preferred  the  society  of 
one  of  the  Bolobo  garrison  to  his  own,  and  seeing 
two  of  the  garrison  near  his  village,  ordered  his  people 
to  massacre  them,  and  in  his  revengeful  spleen  hewed 
them  to  pieces. 

Thus,  on  my  arrival  at  Bolobo,  I  found  a  serious 
affair  to  settle.  The  two  white  men  in  cliarge  declared 
to  me  that  it  was  necessary  to  give  the  natives  a  lesson. 
Our  crews  and  large  reliefs,  which  made  a  force  of 
eighty  men,  were  soon  thoroughly  impregnated  with 
the  hostile  views  of  the  Bolobo  garrison.  They  took 
this  lucky  arrival  of  the  flotilla  to  mean  revenge  for 
the  murder  of  their  comrades.     They  primed  the  new- 


522 


THE   CONGO. 


1883.     comers  with  the  heat  for  battle  which  raered  within 

May  16.  ° 

Boiobo.    themselves,  and  the  arguments  they  used  to  me,  when 
I  questioned  them,  were,  I  admit,  very  powerful. 

Ibaka  himself  came  up  to  see  Bula  Matari,  of  whom 
he  had  heard  often  enough.  The  chief  was  not  a  bad- 
looking  man.  On  his  head  he  wore  a  tall,  brimless, 
Armenian-shaped  hat,  knit  out  of  hyphcene  fibre,  and 


^a^^ 


TYPES   OF   OUR   COLOURED   EMPLOYES. 

sprinkled  over  with  gilt  lizards,  presented  to  him 
by  Hanssens.  He  and  his  vizier,  Lugumbila,  recited 
the  details  of  the  tragedy.  Gatula's  female  slave,  like 
other  women,  frequently  visited  the  garrison  to  sell 
bread,  corn,  chickens,  and  sugar-cane.  Perhaps,  as 
acquaintance  grew,  they  stayed  too  long — at  least,  so 
long  that  Gatula's  suspicions  were  aroused.      Gatula 


A   JEALOUS    CHIEF.  523 

one   day,  inebriated   from    the   quantity  and   potency     isss. 

•^  May  16. 

of  the  native  beer   he  had  drank,  found    her   at   the    Bdobo. 
station,  where  he  belaboured  her  with  his  staff  most 
brutally,  and  then  took  her  to  the  superintendent  of 
the   station,  and   demanded  that   he    should    buy  her 
off-hand,  as  he  cast  her  off  for  her  conjugal  infidelity. 
The  European  probably  did  not  understand  him  very 
well,  but  his  gestures  were  too  violent  to  be  endured, 
and  he  was  expelled  ignominiously  from  the  grounds  of 
the  station.     Three  days  passed,  and  on  the  fourth  day 
eight  of  the  garrison  proceeded  to  cut  timber,  four  of 
them  by  G-atula's  house  ;  and  two  were  no  sooner  seen 
than  they  were  killed.    A  native  next  day,  perched  up 
in  a  tree  near  the  station  boundary,  was  heard  calling 
on  Sergeant  Khamis  to  come  out  from  the  station  and 
fight.      Khamis,  nothing  loth,  walked  up  to  about  a 
hundred  yards  from  the  tree  and  shot  the  native  dead. 
"  Thus  Gatula  has  lost  one  man,"  said  Lugumbila ; 
"  and  now,  Bula  Matari,  Ibaka  requires  to  know  what 
you  intend  doing." 

Now,  the  truth  is,  I  am  never  in  a  mood  for  fighting 
when  cold-blooded.  The  murdered  men  were  buried 
and  out  of  sight.  The  inspiration  to  fury  was  absent. 
To  Gatula  I  was  a  stranger.  However  much  reliance 
I  might  place  on  the  story  as  related  to  me,  I  had  a 
vague  suspicion  that  laxity  of  discipline,  springing  out 
of  inexperience,  may  have  caused  this.  Besides,  blood- 
shedding  leaves  resentment,  feeds  rumour,  and  rumour 
exaggerates  and  breeds  general  distrust.  I  had  still 
700  miles  of  a   river    alon^^    the  banks  of  which  the 


524  TEE   CONGO. 

1883.     natives  were  to  be  converted  to  peace  and  confidence 

May  16.     .  _  ^    _ 

Boiobo.  in  the  white  man.  If  I  began  fighting  here,  how  could 
I  hope  to  prosper  if  my  advent  was  to  be  heralded  with 
stories  of  bloodshed  ?  At  the  same  time,  this  massacre 
of  two  men,  if  permitted  to  go  unpunished,  might  be 
a  preliminary  to  a  more  serious  calamity. 

I  replied,  "  We  are  strangers  in  Ibaka's  country. 
Ibaka  gave  us  ground,  for  which  he  took  much  money. 
Our  people  were  put  into  his  hands.  Two  of  these 
people  are  not  to  be  found.  I  want  them.  I  cannot 
do  without  them.  They  were  freemen.  They  had 
families.  Those  families  will  ask  me  for  them.  Shall 
I  show  them  empty  hands.  Blood  must  be  shed  for 
blood,  or  money  must  pay  for  it.  Gatula  must  pay  or 
fight.  Ibaka  says  he  has  heard  of  Bula  Matari  before. 
Ibaka  and  the  other  chiefs  must  advise  Gatula  which  is 
best.  I  will  wait  two  suns  for  the  money.  If  it  is  not 
paid  I  will  go  to  Gatula's  village  and  bring  him  out." 

It  was  bravely  said,  but  I  hoped  Ibaka  would  not  put 
my  courage  to  the  test. 

On  the  18th  of  May  a  conference  of  several  chiefs  was 
held.  Ibaka  first  demanded  his  fee,  120  brass  rods — 
£3 — for  the  tribunal  of  justice.  The  conditions  were 
related,  and  discussed  in  excellent  temper.  It  was  the 
custom  of  the  By-yanzi  to  pay  or  fight.  A  rainstorm 
broke  up  the  conference  at  sunset. 

On  the  19th  I  am  told  Gatula  and  Manga  have 
fortified  their  village  with  palisades,  and  sent  their 
women  to  Biangala.  The  conference  sat  at  ten  o'clock, 
and  the  question  was  given  to  Gatula,  Would  he  pay 


BLOOD   MONEY.  525 

or  fio:lit  ?     Gatula  replied  he  would  pay.     Then  comes     isss. 

r  •  ^  ^  i  ■     r  i  ^^^^^  19. 

the  amount  of  compensation  ;  but  the  chiefs  resolved  to  Boiobo. 
demand  of  Bula  Matari  how  much  he  required,  and 
Ibaka  was  commissioned  to  sound  Bula  Matari  on  this 
important  topic,  which  he  did  in  a  manner  showing 
that  he  was  well  fitted  for  his  position  of  an  adviser 
in  an  exceptionally  disagreeable  and  turbulent  com- 
munity. 

The  next  day  I  replied  to  Ibaka  that  I  must  receive 
ray  fee  from  Gatula  before  speaking,  since  he  had 
admitted  that  he  would  pay,  w^hich  Ibaka,  wondering 
whence  I  had  obtained  this  knowledge  of  By-yanzi 
law  customs,  said  was  quite  riglit. 

The  fee  must  be  :  One  goat,  five  fowls,  one  Win- 
chester rifle  (belonging  to  one  of  the  murdered  men\ 
twenty  rolls  of  camwood  powder,  one  pot  of  palm  oil, 
and  two  bunches  of  bananas. 

On  the  21st  the  legal  fee  of  Bula  Matari  was  paid. 

The  next  day  the  blood-money  for  the  murdered 
men's  families  was  fixed  by  me  at  3000  brass  rods, 
value  in  cash  here  £50,  which,  added  to  costs  already 
paid  by  Gatula,  will  amount  to  £83  6s.  Sof.,  and  then 
and  not  till  then  will  the  odium  of  murder  be  removed, 
and  peace  and  tranquillity  restored. 

On  the  23rd  Ibaka  brought  a  tusk  of  ivory  weighing 
58  lbs.,  as  the  utmost  that  Gatula  would  be  induced 
to  give.  It  was  instantly  rejected,  despite  the  most 
eloquent  appeals  on  the  part  of  Ibaka,  and  the  loud 
banter  of  Gatula  and  his  confederates  Manga,  Mwek- 
wanga,  and  Yambula. 


526 


THE   CONGO. 


1883.         Mv   position  however  was  extremely  difficult.     To 

May  23.  "^      ^  "^ 

Boiobo.  figlit  and  conquer  was  easy  enough,  and  to  wreck  the 
murderer's  fortunes  was  possible,  but  war,  whether 
followed  by  victory  or  defeat,  leaves  its  stings  to  both 
sides.  Even  victory  would  be  only  a  temporary  and 
small  advantage,  since  it  would  quadruple  the  diffi- 
culties of  settling  up-river,  to  which  purpose  we  were 
on   our  way  when   halted   by   these    dismal    tidings. 


Rumour  would  magnify  its  terrors  until  it  would 
shortly  appear  that  I  was  the  aggressor,  and  Gatula 
was  the  wronged  victim  of  our  misused  strength. 
And  it  is  also  certain  that,  possessing  a  reputation 
for  strength,  it  would  be  hinted  about  that  I  enter- 
tained sinister  designs  against  the  whole  country. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  danger  was  imminent  of 
causing  the  natives  to  suppose  that  the  lives  of  our 
people  were  held  but  cheaply  by  me  if  I  accepted  less 
than  the  price  usually  given  for  shedding  blood.     This 


DANGERS   OF  BEGINNING    WAS.  527 

miglit  inspire  them  to  try  again,  perhaps  next  time  to  isss. 
murder  a  European  or  two.  My  pohcy  was  therefore  Boiobo. 
to  stand  out  to  the  utmost  verge  of  war,  and  maintain 
an  ostentatious  readiness  to  fight  and  exact  summary 
vengeance  immediately  on  the  rupture  of  negotiations 
or  confessed  failure  to  pay,  until  they  would — to  avoid 
the  necessity  of  pushing  the  affair  to  the  extreme  of 
bloody  arbitration — make  two  or  three  offers  more, 
then  accept  the  ransom,  and  seal  a  true  and  effective 
peace,  taking  the  opportunity  to  admonish  them 
carefully  in  the  future. 

On  the  24th  the  fine  was  paid,  and  amounted  to 
£42  4.S.,  and  the  acceptance  of  it  was  announced  by 
salvoes  of  musketry,  which  was  immediately  followed 
by  the  return  of  the  women,  children,  and  effects 
by  land  and  water  to  the  villages  of  the  guilty 
confederates. 

Ibaka's  comments  on  the  case  were  summed  up  in  his 
pithy  declaration  that  "  Gatula  has  received  such  a 
fright,  and  has  lost  so  much  money,  that  he  will  never 
be  induced  to  murder  any  man  again.  No,  indeed, 
he  would  rather  lose  ten  of  his  women  than  go  through 
this  scene  again." 

Lugumbila,  the  vizier  of  Boiobo,  expressed  his  be- 
lief that  I  would  have  been  still  more  successful  if  I 
had  appeared  amongst  them  in  a  dress  covered  with 
cowries,  instead  of  the  common  tweed  and  grey  serge 
and  white  flannels  of  which  my  clothes  consisted,  as 
By-yanzi  people  did  not  respect  a  chief  who  bore  not 
on  his  person  the  garb  of  sovereignty. 


nC^R   MBRARY 


528 


THE   CONGO. 


Ma^^24        ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^^^  ^^y  ^^^  passed  in  a  grand  assembly 

Boiobo.    of  the  chiefs ,  of  Bolobo,  who  confirmed  the  cession  of 

territOFy  to  the  Association.     The  men  gathered  about 


NATIVE   METHOD   OF    HOLDISG   A   GUN. 

(^From  a  sketch  by  Mr,  Glave.) 


gave  me  a  better  insiglit  into  the  dangers  I  was  pro- 
voking with  an  apparently  reckless  spirit,  but  the 
reader  whom  I  have  taken  into  my  confidence  will 
know  whether  the  recklessness  was  real  or  assumed. 


END    OF   VOL.    I. 


LOSPOX  :   PRINTED   BT    WILLIAil   CLOWES  AND   SONS,  LIMITED,  STAMFORD   STREET 
ASD   CHARING   CROSS. 


SOIITHCDM  «lL!!:^''*y  °^  California 
LOS  ANGELES,  CAlIfS^S mVoslTall"'' 
