EPICTETUS HIS MORALS, WITH SIMPLICIUS HIS COMMENT
Made English from the Greek by George Stanhope; with the Life of Epictetus from Monsieur Boileau
London: D. Midwinter et al., 1741. Fifth edition (first published 1694).
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/epictetushismora00epic).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

'EPICTETUS

H  I  S

MORALS,

^fl/ru^^-:/u'  WITH 0(^1yi^^^^^  '

SIMPLICIUS

HIS

COMMENT.

Made  Englifh  from  the  Greek,
B  Y

George  Stanhope  D.D.

Dean of  Canterhur^^  and  Chaplain
in  Ordinary  to  his  Majesty.

The  Fifth  Edition  corred:ed.

With the LIFE  of  EPICTETUS,
from  Monfieur  BOILEAU.

LONDON,

Printed  for  D.  Midwinter,  R.  Ware,  W.  Innys,
C.  RiviNGTON,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  P.  Knapton,
S.  BiRT,  T.  Longman,  R.  Hett,  C.  Hitch,
J.Hodges,  S.Austen,  J.Wood  and  C.Woodward,
J.  Pemberton,  and  T.  Harris, mdccxli.

To  the  Worthily  Honoured,

WILLIAM GORE

O  F

TEWING,

I N T H E

4

County  ofHerfford^Efq;

■r:colston>*

S I Ry

TO  omit  the  many  trifling  Pre-
tences, commonly  made  ufe  of
upon  thefe  Occafions,  I  £hall
think  this  Dedication  abundantly  juftifi-
ed,  by  only  alledging  One  thing  in  its  Ex-

B  z  cufe

Epistle  Dedicatory,

cufe  ;  That  every  Man  is  by  no  me^ns
duly  prep^^^^  to  Read,  or  Reliih,  much
lefs  is  every  Man  of  Quality  a  proper
Patron  for  EpiBetus*

So  Exquifite  a  Piece  of  Morality  re-
quires, not  only  a  Good  Underftanding,
but  a  Virtuous  and  Well-difpofed  Mind,
a  Serious  Senfe  of  the  Dignity  of  a  Rea-
foning  Soul,  and  a  due  Care  to  keep  up
its  Charaaer : Affedlions raifed  above
the  Sordid  Enjoyments  of  the  World,
and  a  fix  d  Opinion,  that  the  Trouble
we  are  at  about  thefe  things,  ought  not
to  be efteemed  the  Bufinefs, but  the
great  Misfortune and Incumbrance of
Human  Life :  A  fteddy  Government  of
the  PafTions,  and  a  Temper  Even  and
Eafy,  Affable  and  Obliging. Without
thefe  Qualifications,  or  fome  good  Ad-
vances towards  them, a  Man's Palate
can  never  ftand  to  the  following  Re-
fledions ;  and  the  moft  excellent  Rules
of  Living  would be entertained  with
Coldnefs  and  Contempt.

"V^HETHER

Epistle  Dedicatory.

Whether  I  have  done  this  Author
Reafon  in  the  following  Tranflation,  is
neither  poffible  nor  proper  for  Me  to
determine  :  But,  though  that  perfor-
mance were  allowed  to  be  never  fo  per-
fect, it  is  yet  a  very  neceflary  Ad-
vantage, and  indeed  a  Right  due  both
to  Him  and  my  Self,  to  take  Sanduary
in  theGoodnefs  of  a  Perfon,  who  knows
the  better  how  to  Pardon,  becaufe  he
knov^s  how  to  Judge  ;  and  whofe  Vir-
tues have  already  not  only  approved,
but  tranfcribed^  and  by  the  beft,  the
Chriftian,  Morality,  have  even  Corredl-
ted  and  Refined  upon  all  the  moft  va-
luable Parts  of  this  Book.

Mow  far  this  is  Your  cafe,  1  will  tiot^
I  need  not  take  upon  me  to  determine ;
all,  Sir,  that  have  the  Happinefs  to
know  you,  will  do  it  for  me:  Permit
me  only  to  clofe  this  Addrefs,  with  my
moft  finfcere  Wifhes,  that  you  may  long
continue  an  Ornament  to  Learning,  Re-
ligion, and  your  own  Family;  a  pub-
lick  Bleffing  to  your  Country  and  your

B  3  Friends  i

Epistle  Dedicatory.

Friends ;  and  that  I  may  have  the  ho-
nour of  being  ever  acknowledg'd  in  that
Number.  One  Teftimony  whereof,
will  be  the  accepting  thefe  Profeffions
which  I  am  now  delirous  to  make  to
the  World,  of  my  being,  with  all  pof-
fible  Refped,

SIR,

FT!^r\ ^^^^^  ^^fi  Obltged^

and  mofi  Humble  Servant^

Geo.  Stanhope.

PREFACE.

Do  not  ghe  the  Reader  this  "Trouble^  out  of
any  Intent  to  make  an  Apology  for  fjew^
ing  the  following  Book  in  Englifli  ;  for
fure  the  rendring  fuch  admirable  Injlruc-^
tions  as  difufvue  as  it  is  pofjible^  cannot  need-
an  Excufe.  Nor  do  I  intend  to  give  him  a  tedi-
ous  Account  of  the  Performance  itfelf\  but  jhall
only  fay^  that  it  hath  bee?z  my  Endeavour  to  eX"
prejs  the  Author  s  Senfe  ivith  all  the  Eajtnefs,
and  Freedo?n  I  could^  fo  as  to  decline  both  the
Slavery  of  a  Liter aly  and  the  Licentioufnefs  of
a  Loofe  and  Luxuriant  Interpretation.

My  Defign  at  prefent^  is  only  to  make  fome  ne^
cejjary  Reflexions  upon  thofe  Parts  of  the  Stoical
Philofophy^  which  are  apt  to  prejudice  Men  a~
gainjl  it,  and  tempt  fome  Perfons^from  thefe  ex-
travagant Syfems  of  Moral  PerfeBions^  to
think,  (at  leaf  to  plead  in  Vindication  of  their
own  Excejfes)  that  the  Generality  of  Pules  pre-
fer ibed  for  the  Reforming  our  Manners,  are
Ihings  too  nicely  thought,  fublime,  airy^  and  im-
pra£fi cable  Speculations,

It  is  not  my  Purpofe,  nor  ought  it  to  be  any
Mans  to  vindicate  thefe,  or  any  other,  Mafters
of  Heathen  Morality,  in  every  particular  Notion
they  advanced. But  I  muft  beg  heave  to  put  my

B  4  Reader

PREFACE.

Reader  in  mindy  what  is  the  proper  Advantage
to  be  made  of  thefe  Errors ;  and  that  fur  e  is,  not
to  run  down  Morality ,  as  an  empty  Name  (to
which  the  Stoicks  mufi  be  allow ed,  in  defpight  of
all  the  Aggravations  their  Failings  dre  capable
of,  to  have  done  excellent  Service)  but  to  dif-
cern  in  this  the  Wifdom  of  Almighty  God^  who,
in  the  midfl  of  his  moji  liberal  Endowments,
never  fuffered  the  greatefl  Heathens  to  be  with-
out fome  notable  DefeB  of  Judgment,  but  ever
debafed  their  Knowledge  with  an  Alloy  of  Ig-
norance and  Folly  \  And  that,  no  doubt,  to  cre-
ate in  us  a  more  juft  Ffteetn  and  Veneration  for
his  own  Chriflian  Philojophy,  to  which  alone
this  PerfeSlion  was  referved,  of  Truth  with-^
out  Error ^  and  Light  without  Darknefs.

1  think  it  therefore  my  Duty,  fo  far  to  com^
fly  with  the  ObjeBor  in  condemning  thefe
Schemes  of  Ethicks,  as  to  floew  upon  this  Oc-
cafion.  That  the  Frinciples  of  Religion  have
exalted  our  Virtues,  and  adjufled  the  meafures
of  them ,  infinitely  better ,  than  any  Human
■Infiitutions  were  ever  able  to  do.  For,  though
the  Stoicks  are  mofl  defervedly  admired  for
their  Noble  Notions  in  thefe  Matters  above  any
other  Se5l,  and  the  brave  Attempts  they  made
towards  the  reducing  Nature  to  its  Primitive
Purity  and  PerfeBion  j  yet,  I  think^  it  cannot
fairly  be  denied,  that,  in  their  Way  of  Treat-
ing the  Paffions  and  Powers  of  the  Soul,  they
much  over-fhot  the  Mark^  and  have  quite  mif-
taken  the  Cafe.  How  far  it  is  poffible  to  go,
in  fubduing  the  Paffions  abfolutely,  I  flmll  not

now

PREFACE.

now  Difpnte ;  I  take  it  for  granted^  that  the
generality  of  'People  might  do  a  great  deal  more
in  ity  than  they  either  doy  or  imagine  they  can-
do  :  A}id  that  Sloth,  which  is  the  prevailing
Vice,  and  the  mojl  fatal  Obftrti5iion  to  a  good
and  happy  Life,  affrights  us  with  many  Diff-
culties  and  Difcouragements ,  by  no  means  of
Nature^ Sy  but  entirely  of  our  own  making.  Tety
to  deliver  ourfelves  from  thofe  inward  Commo-
tionsy  which  are  vifible  Occafions  of  fo  much
Mifchief  we  mift  7tot  prefently  pajs  a  rafi
and  rigorous  Sentence  of  utter  Excifon  upon
them,  but  try  fome  gentler  and  more  prudent
Method^  becauje  the  fame  things  are  equally
capable  of  producing  a  great  deal  of  good.

T^hefe  are  indeed  the  Secret  Springs  that
move  and  aBuate  us  -,  and  all  the  Care  incum-
bent upon  the  Governing  Fart  of  the  Mind,  is
to  fet  them  rights  and  at  a  true  Pitchy  that  fo
every  Motion,  which  flows  from  thence,  may  be
yujl  and  Regular,  They  are  like  the  Acid  in
our  Stomachs,  that  conjiantly  provokes  and  re-
news our  Appetites,  and  prevents  the  mojl  ne-
cefjary  FunBions  of  Life  from  becofning  fat
and  7iaufeous  to  us.  And  accordingly.  He,  who
contriv  d,  and  confequently  muft  be  befi  ac-
quaiiited  with  our  Frame,  found  them  neceffary
to  infpire  and  invigorate  this  heavy  Mafs  -,  He
faw,  that  thus  to  eafe  us  of  all  our  Pains,  would
be  to  rob  us,  at  the  fame  time,  of  all  our  Plea-
fiires  ;  and  for  this  Reafon  he  hath  made  Pro-
mifes  and  Threatnings,  Rewards  and  Punifh-
mentSj  the  Gayeties  and  Anxieties  of  Heart  (all

which

PREFACE,

which  are  but  fo  many  different  ways  of  working
upon  our  PaJJionSy)  the  tnoft  proper  and  powerful
Inducements  to  the  beji  Keligion  in  the  World,
So  that  in  truth,  the  main^  I  might  fay  the  whole,
of  our  Duty  and  Happinefs,  cofifjis,  ?iot  injii-
fiing  thefe  AffeBions,  and  condemning  them  to  a
State  of  utter  InaBivity,  but  in  moderating  and
regulating  them  :  And  no  Degree  of  Love,  or
Hatred,  or  Dejire ,  or  Fear,  or  Anger,  or
Grief,  or  any  other  fimple  Paffion,  can  be  too
ifitenfe,  when  placed  upon  worthy  ObjeBs,  and
direBed  to  worthy  Ends.

The  fame  Difficulty  lies  againfi  Stoicifm,  with
regard  to  Civil  Society,  and  the  mutual  Concerti
we  feel  for  one  another.  For  fome  Rules  given
here,  if  literally  and  fir iBly  followed,  may  feem
to  threaten  the  DefiruBion  of  all  Natural  Af-
feBion  and  Charity  anioiig  Men ;  which  there-
fore Chriflianity  hath  taken  into  its  peculiar
Care  and  ProteBion.  It  reprefents  T^emporal
AffliBions  as  Chafiifements ,  and  expeBs  we
Jldouldfeel  the  Smart,  in  order  to  be  amended  by
the  Rod,  It  remits  us  jor  Comfort  to  higher
and  better  Confiderations  ,  and  does  not  a-
mufe  us  with  vain  Notions ,  that  thefe  Things^
neither  touch  nor  ought  to  afeB  us  ;  but  tells
tis,  I' hat  the  more  fenfbly  they  do  fo,  the  more
glorious  the  Improvement  and  the  Reward  is
capable  of  being  made.  It  infpires  Compaffion
and  good  Nature,  and  the  tender efi  Refent?nents
of  other  People's  Misfortunes.  It  commands  no
Man  to  attend  the  Funeral  Obfequies  of  his
Friend  or  Deareji  Relation^  with  a  gay  or  per*

feclly

PREFACE.

fe5fly^  compofed  Countenance,  as  knowing  very
wellj  that  this  Behaviour  is  Barbarous  mid
Brutifi  ;  and  that  whatfome  have  called  Phi-
lofophy  and  Confiancy  injuch  Cafes^  may  feem
rather  the  Effe5i  of  Stzipidity,  or  Sullemiefs,
or  Pride  j  that  this  is  an  imagiiiary  Perfeciiony
which  jew  ever  did,  and  nofie  ought  to  attain
to  :  And,  in  a  word,  that  the  Excefs  and  In-
ordinacy  of  our  PaJJions  is  the  only  ^hing  blame^
able  in  them.  Againfi  which  therefore  it  makes
ample  Provifion  j  fuch  as  offers  no  Violence  to
the  Original  Softnejs  cf  Human  Nature ,  but
preferves  all  thofe  RefpeSis  entire,  which  we
owe  to  ourfelves  and  to  one  another  %  fuch  as  may
be  ufed  with  a  very  good  Grace,  and  fuch  as  will
be  mofi  effectual,  when  rightly  applied.

This  Cenfure  is  no  more,  than  what  appeared
to  Me  highly  feafonable  and  expedient,  to-  con-
vince the  mofi  partial  Admirers  of  Heathen
Philofophy,  that,  wherein  foever  thofe  Sy/lems
of  Morality  differ  from  the  Chriflian,  they  are
manifeftly  infer iour  to  them.  In  other  Poifits,
we  can  fcarce  give  them  greater  Commendation,
*  than  they  really  deferve :  And  among  thsmall,
1  know  none,  that  challenges  more  Efleem,  than
this  Book.  The  InjlruBions  are  fo  wife ,  the
Alliifions  fo  lively,  the  Exhortations  fo  movi?ig,
and  the  Arguments  foftrong,  that  they  may  well
be  allowed,  not  only  to  convince  our  Reafon,
but  to  excite  our  greateji  Admiration.  The  Ap-
plication  is  fo  eafy,  by  a  little  Change  of  Phi.
lofophy  into  Rdigion,  and  the  Plurality  of  Di-
vine Beings  into  the  pne  only  True  God, that

any

PREFACE.

any  confidering  Chrijlian  may  here  find  a  Scheme
of  what  Himj elf  ought  to  be,  Andy  except  fsme
particular  Subtleties  in  the  Firjlj  thirteenth,
thirty  Fourth^  and  I'hirty  Eighth  Chapters
(which  I  mention  here  particularly,  that  the
more  unlearned  Readers  may,  if  they  pleafe^
pafs  them  over,  without  fuffering  themfelves  to
be  prejudiced  againfi  the  reft  of  the  Book)  the
Arguments  arefo  plain  and  fubftantial,  as  to  re~
commend  themfelves  to  the  Stnfe,  and  to  fuit
the  Capacity  of  every  Common  Man.  But  it
mufi  be  r^fjiembered  again,  what  is  the  proper
Benefit  offuch  Writings :  and  T^hat,  no  Doubt,
muft  be,  to  let  us  fee,  what  a  Reproach  the
Perfediion  of  thefe  Ancients  is  to  us.  at  this
Day,  And  I  heartily  wijh,  that  the  prefent
^reatife  may  have  its  due  Influence  upon  every
One  who  Jhall  perufe  it ;  by  provoking  Men  to
a  holy  Emulation,  and  a  generous  Difdain,
that  Epi(5tetus'j  Proficient  fhould  outdo  any
Profejfor  of  the  Gofpel,  who  walks  by  a  clearer
Light,  and  excels  in  every  Advantage  of  Good-
nefs,  except  fuch  as  he  wilfully  denies  to  him-
felf,  thofe  of  Confideration  ^  and  Refolution,
and  an  aBive  Xeal.

G.  S.

THE

L I F E

O  F

EPICTETUS

FROM THE

French CoUeftions  of  Boileau.

INTRGDUCTON.

HILE  my  'Tlooughts  were  employed  about
making  good  the  Promife,  which  my  Reader
will  find  in  the  firfi  Pa^e  of  this  Edition^  it
was  my  Fortune  to  light  upon  the  following
Account  of 'E.'pi&.QX.m  in  Yx^nch.  Which,  by  comparing
with  the  Original  Authors,  from  whom  the  fever al  Paf-
fages  are  taken,  I  ohferved  to  be  colle5ied  with  fuch  Fi-
delity, as  might  reafonably  excufe  any  farther  Pains  of
mine,  than  that  of  tranflating  it  into  our  own  'tongue.
I  have  therefore  only  added  a  marginal  Note  or  two,  and
given  the  Narration  as  I  found  it,  Ihe  greateji  part
will  approve  itfelf  Authentick,  becaufe  gathered  from
thofe  very  Difcourfes  of  this  Philofopher,  which  Arrian
hath  preferved  for  us ;  and  with  regard  to  them,  the
References  here  are  much  more  exa5f,  than  in  Mr.  Boi-
leau, or  any  other  Author  I  have  met  Wtb  upon  this
Subject,

THE

fi  T  H  E L  I  F  E O  F

TH  E  Time  of  Epiufetus  his  Birth  feems  to  have
been  near  the  End  of  Nero's  Reign,  the  Place
of  it  Hierapolis,  a  City  in  Pbrygia.  The  other  Cir-
cuuilfances  relating  to  it  are  uncertain  :  For  we  have
no  farther  Knowledge  of  either  his  Father  or  IMo-
ther,  but  that  they  were  both  without  queflion,  of
very  mean  Condition.  "  j1.  Gellius^  and  Suidas  tell
us,  that  he  was  Slave  to  Epaphroditus^  a  Freeman  of
Nero's,  and  a  Captain  of  his  Guards,  and  in  fhort,  a
Man,  of  whom  Story  hath  delivered  down  nothing
valuable,  or  worthy  of  Remark,  but  only  his  being
Mafter  to  fo  renowned  a  Slave.  Among  fome  other
of  this  Man's  Aclions,  Arria7i  hath  taken  occafion  to
mention  Two,  which,  \  think,  ought  not  to  be
omitted  here,  becaufe  they  are  exactly  agreeable  to
his  Temper,  and  feera  to  give  us  a  very  exprellive
Idea  of  the  Perfon.

'"  This  Man  had  fold  one  of  his  Slaves,  who  was
a  Shoemaker,  to  an  Officer  of  Nero's,  becaufe  he
found  him  a  Bungler  at  his  Trade  ;  but  the  fame  Fe-
iicio  (for  fo  the  Slave  was  called)  coming  afterwards
to  make  the  Empgror's  Shoes,  Epaphroditus  upon  the
News  of  this  Preferment,  was  particularly  civil,  and
mofc  furprifingly  refpefcful  to  him  ;  confulted  him
in  Bufinefs,  applauded  his  Parts,  and  made  this  Good-
for-nothing  Fellow  his  principal  Coi^fident,  and  inti-
mate Friend.

^  Another  time,  there  came  a  Man  to  him,  and
in  great  PalTion  threw  himfelf  at  his  Feet,  complain-
ing moft  heavily  of  his  hard  Fortune,  and  what  Di-
ftrefs  he  was  reduced  to  ;  declaring,  that  now,  out
of  all  his  Eftate,  he  had  not  above  a  hundred  and
fifty  thoufand  Crowns  left ;  to  which  Epaphroditus
replied, not  by  way  of  Raillery,  as  any  other  Man

a.Wi.  mEpia.  A.Gell.  Lib.  11.  Cap.  i8.  ^Arrian.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  19,

^  Arrian,  Lib.  i.  Cap.  26.

would

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  ill

would  have  done  upon  fo  extravagapt  a  Complaint,
but  with  great  Serioufnefs,  and  an  appearance  of  Con-
cern, that  he  was  really  aftoniflied  at  his  Patience,
in  forbearing  fo  long  to  make  his  cafe  known.

^  Under  the  Dominion  of  this  coxcomblj^Mafter
it  was,  that  Epi5fetus  pafTed  the  firft  part  of  his  Life.
At  what  time,  or  by  what  means,  he  obtained  his
Liberty,  we  have  no  pofitive  Account :  But  thus
much  we  are  aiTured  of,  that  upon  an  Edi6l  of  Do-
mitian,  for  banifhing  all  Philofophers  from  Rotne  and
Italy^  he  withdrew  to  Nicopolis,  a  City  of  Epirus,
called  by  the  Moderns  Prevefa.  And  his  being  in-
cluded under  that  Prohibition,  in  the  Quality  of  a
Philofopher,  is  a  manifeft  Proof  that  he  was  a  Freeman.
For  indeed,  it  is  not  to  be  imagined,  that  a  Perfon,
whofe  Merit  had  recommended  him  to  the  particu-
lar Favour  and  Efteem  of  the  Emperors  of  his
time,  fhould  be  fuffered  to  continue  in  Slavery.  It
hath  been  'generally  thought,  that  after  this  Re-
treat, he  never  returned  any  more  to  Rome^  but
paffed  the  remainder  of  his  Life  at  Nicopolis :  And
this  Opinion  is  grounded  upon  Arrian's  taking  ex-
prefs  notice  in  feveral  parts  of  his  Collecflions,  that
thofe  Difcourfes,  of  which  his  Book  confifts,  were
made  and  delivered  at  Nicopolis  ^  But  notwithftand-
ing  this  conjefture  be  fupported  by  the  Authority  of
Salmaftus^  I  am  apt  ftill  to  fufpedl,  that  it  wants
Confirmation.  And  in  this  fufpicion  Spartian  ^  bears
me  out,  who,  in  the  Life  of  Adrian^  tells  us,  that
Emperor  was  very  intimate  with,  and  bore  a  par-
ticular Refped  to  Epi5fetus.  Now  it  will  by  no
means  enter  into  my  Head,  how  this  regard  fhould
be  fo  remarkable,  and  that  familiarity  fo  ftridly  kept
up,  if  Epi5fetus  his  conftant  refidence,  from  the  time
of  Bomitianh  Ed  id:,  had  been  in  a  place  fo  remote,
as  the  City  of  Nicopolis,

d  A.  GelL  Lib.  XV.  Cap.  ii.  Eu.Jtb,  Cbron, e  iVa/.  tfiEpift.  ^  Simpl.  />.  4.
f  Sfart.  in  Adr,  Cap.  i6.

It

iv  THE LIFE OF

It  does  not  certainly  appear,  whether  he  were  ever-
married,  but  as  I  have  not  Authority  fufficient  for
affirming,  fo  neither  do  I  think  there  is  enough  for
denying  it.  For  Arriariy  in  feveral  Pafiages,  takes
notice  of  Epi£letus  his  averfion  againft  the  Epicureans^
upon  this  Provocation  particularly,  that  they  fpoke
in  prejudice  of  Marriage.  But  whether  a  married
or  a  fingle  Man,  I  take  it  for  highly  probable,  that
he  had  no  Children.  For,  befides  that  no  Author
mentions  any  fuch,  that  Repartee  of  Demonax  in  Lu-
cian  ^,  intimates  that  he  had  none.  Who,  when
Epi5fetu5  advifed  him  to  marry  and  leave  Children,
replied  pleafantly,  JVith  all  my  Hearty  provided  you.
give  me  one  of  your  own  Daughters.

But  how  liberal  foever  Spartian^  hath  been  in  the
commendation  of  Adrian^ s  generofity,  and  high
Efteem  for  the  Poets,  and  Orators,  and  Philofophers,
and  Mathematicians,  and  the  Mafters  of  any  fort  of
Science  (though  at  the  fime  time  no  Man  living
took  more  Delight  in  rallying  them  than  he)  yet  we
have  no  Grounds  to  believe,  that  either  that  Empe-
ror or  any  of  his  Succeffors,  who  profeffed  fuch  Ve-
neration for  Epi5letus.,  bellowed  upon  him  fo  much,
as  might  fet  him  above  even  extreme  Poverty.  The
reafon  of  this  probably  was  his  obltinate  contempt  of
Riches,  which  would  not  fuffer  any  Favours  of  that
kind  to  be  faftened  upon  him.  And  this  appeared  by
his  manner  of  living  at  Kome^  in  a  little  Cottage,
without  fo  much  as  a  Door  to  Ft,  no  Attendants  but
one  old  Woman,  no  Houfhold-Stuff,  but  an  earthen
Lamp,  to  the  Light  of  which  we  owe  thofe  beauti-
ful, thofe  Divine  Thoughts,  of  which  Arrian  hath
preferved  fome  noble  Remains:  And  by  all  thefeCir-
cumftances,  we  may  make  a  judgment  how  poor  this
Philofopher  was.

S  Lucian  in  Dmon.  h  Spart.  in  ddr,  ubi  fupra.

#  «  I  come

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  V

I  come  now  to  give  an  account  of  his  Opinions,
and  his  Virtues.  Among  which  his  peculiar  and  dar-
ling one  feems  to  have  been  Modeily.  This  was  moil
eminent  in  his  own  pradlice,  as  well  as  in  his  recom-
mendation to  others.  Hence  he  ufed  to  fay,  '  that
there  is  no  need  of  adorning  a  man's  Houfe  with  rich
Hangings  or  Paintings,  ^  for  the  moft  graceful  Fur-
niture is  Temperance  and  Modefty  :  Thefe  are  the
lafting  Ornaments,  and  will  never  be  the  worfe  for
wearing.  He  was  fo  perfeflly  mortified  to  all  Am-
bition and  Vain-glory,  that  if  any  Philofopher  ever
made  Humility  the  conflant  Principle  of  all  his  Ani-
ons, this  was  certainly  the  Man.  For,  as  no  Man  of
his  age  did  fo  much  good,  fo  no  body  fure  was  fo
very  induftrious  to  conceal  the  good  he  did.  This
gave  occafion  to  thofe  Rules,  which  we  meet  with  in
the  following  Manual  :  '  "  If  you  have  fo  far  maf-
"  tered  your  Appetite,  as  to  have  brought  your  Body
*'  to  coarfe  Fare,  and  to  be  well  contented  with  mere
"  Neceffaries,  do  not  glory  in  your  abllemious  way
*'  of  living.  And  if  you  drink  nothing  but  Water,
"  proclaim  not  your  own  Sobriety  upon  every  Oc-
"  cafion.  Or  if  you  would  inure  yourfelf  to  hard-
"  fhip,  do  it  for  your  own  Benefit,  not  to  attraifl  the
"  Admiration  of  the  People.  Let  vain-glorious  Fools
*'  make  their  Trials  as  publick  as  they  can  ;  but
"  know,  that  all  Affeflations  of  this  kind  are  utterly
*'  unworthy  the  Charader  of  a  Philofopher.'*

Another  Inftance  how  free  he  was  from  Vanity,
is  this,  that,  although  no  Perfon  whatfoever  of  his  time
was  better  qualified  for  becoming  an  Author  -,  yet
he  was  fo  infenfible  of  any  Excellence  that  v/ay,
fo  perfedly  untouched  with  an  Inclination  predomi-
nant ufually  in  the  mofl  exalted  Minds,  as  to  leave
nothing  of  his  own  compofition  behind  him. And,

i  Stei.  S?rm.  38. , kjrrian.  Lib,  IV.  Cap.  8, 1  Ch.  LXX.

flP S:  had

vi  THELIFEOF

had  not  Arrian  tranfmitted  to  Pofterity  the  Maxims
taken  from  his  Mafter*s  Mouth,  we  have  fome  rea-
fon  to  doubt,  whether  the  very  Name  of  Ep^etm.
had  not  been  loft  to  the  World.

It  was  his  Judgment,  "  that  a  true  Philofopher
was  obliged  to  diftinguifh  himfelf,  not  fo  much  by
what  he  fpoke,  as  by  what  he  did :  And  this  gave
him  occafion  to  fay,  that  the  greater  part  of  them,
who  made  profeffion  of  this  Science,  were  only  Phi-
lofophers  in  Word,  but  not  in  Fafl.  One  day,
^  meeting  with  a  certain  Perfon,  who  was  angry  at
being  pitied,  Zp^^/aj  reprefented  to  him,  how  very
unjuft  that  Anger  was,  fince  his  very  being  out  of
humour  upon  fuch  an  occafion  was  an  evident  proof,
that  his  cafe  was  fo  wretched  as  to  call  for  Pity.
Another  time,  °  upon  meeting  a  Man  of  nioft  pro-
fligate Life,  and  infamous  Charadler,  who  yet  had
the  confidence  to  fet  up  for  Learning  and  Philofo-
phy,  he  accoPced  him  thus :  "  O  fenfelefs  Creature,
"  what  is  it  thou  wouldeft  be  at?  Haft  thou  been
**  careflil  to  fee,  that  thy  Veflel  be  fweet  and  clean,
"  before  thou  put  any  Liquor  into  it  ?  For  if  that
"  be  not  feafoned,  whatever  is  poured  into  it,  will
"  turn  four  as  Vinegar,  rank  as  Urine,  or  if  you
*'  can  think  of  any  thing  yet  more  offenfive  and
"  corrupt  than  either."  A.  Gellius,  who  cites  the
paff\ge,  gives  it  this  Commendation,  that  nothing-
could  be  more  weighty,  nothing  more  true  ;  mean-  •
ing,  that,  when  m.oral  Principles,  or  any  fort  of  ufe-
ful  Knowledge,  are  infufed  into  a  Soul  deprelTed,  and
polluted  with  vicious  Habits ;  this,  like  a  foul  Veffel,
gives  them  fuch  a  tindlure,  that  they  prefently  be-
come good  for  nothing,  and  turn  all  to  corruption.

P  But  there  was  in  Epi^etus  one  Quality,  fo  much
the  more  valuable,  becaufe  Philofophers  are  but  fel*

IT  Arrian.  Lib.  II. Cap.  19.  Lib.  III.  Cap.  12.  &  alibi  pajfim.  ^Arrian

Lib.  IV.  Cap. 6.  0.4,  Cell,  Lib.  XVII. Cap.  19.  Z  Arrian. Difert.

Lib.  L  Cap.  II.

dom

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  vii

dom  famous  for  it  •,  which  is,  that  he  was  a  very
great  Lover  of  Neatnefs,  and  faid  himfelf,  upon
cccafions,  that  he  had  much  rather  fee  one  of  his
Scholars  come  to  him  well  dreffed  and  curled,  and  had
more  hopes  offucha  one's  improvement,  than  of  one,
whofe  Hair  was  matted  and  greafy,  and  his  Habit
flovenly.  He  did  indeed  fhare  with  the  moft  cele-
brated Philofophers  of  old,  in  that  common  mif-
fortune  of  an  ill  Perfon.  A  weaknefs  and  lam.enefs
in  his  Body  he  fuffered  under,  by  means  of  a  Hu-
mour that  fell  into  his  Leg.  This  he  acknowledges
very  frankly  in  an  Epigram  compofed  upon  himfelf,
and  quoted  by  "^y^  Gellius.

Although  hy  Birth  a  Slave,  In  Body  lame^
In  Fortune  poor^  yet  dear  to  Heaven  I  am,

'  "Planudes  in  his  Anthology  muft  needs  be  miftaken
in  attributing  this  Epigram  to  Leonidas,  becaufe,  as
Salmafius  hath  rightly  obferved,  he  was  a  Poet  of  note
long  before  Epi^letus  his  time.  But  then  Salmafius
himfelf  will  not  allow  this  to  be  compofed  by  Epi5ie-
tus  neither,  but  thinks  that  fome  half-witted  Pedant
firft:  made,  and  then  inferred  it  into  the  Text  of
A.  Gellius.  The  only  Argument  alledged  for  this
Opinion  is,  that  this  Epigram  is  not  to  be  found  in
any  ancient  Manufcript  oi A.  Gellius.  But  admitting
this  to  be  io ;  if  the  conjedure  be  true,  we  muft  fay
that  the  fame  Pedant  foifted  it  into  ^  Macrohius
too:  For  he  alfo  quotes  it  for  Epiffetui  Ms  own,  in
the  firft  Book  of  his  Saturnalia.  I  own  however,
there  is  one  reafon  which  inclines  me  to  fufpecft  his
being  the  Author  of  it,  which  is  the  inconfiftence  that
appears  to  me, for  a  Man  of  Epicfetus  }^s  fingular

q  j^.  Gell.  Lib.  II.  Cap.  18.  '  Salmaf.  in  Epi£iet.  Si  Sirrpt. p.  3.

i  Macrob.  Lib.  1.  Cap,  ii.

C  2  Modefty

viii  THE LIFE OF

Modefty  and  Humility,  to  fpeak  fo  advantageoufly
of  himfelf  ^

But  whatever  become  of  the  Compofer,  the  Mat-
ter of  the  Diftich  is  incontellabje.  It  being  certain,
that  Epiofettis  was  very  ill  ufed  by  Fortune  ;  but  how
niggardly  foever  She  was  to  him,  Providence  made
him  good  amends,  by  the  liberal  endowments  of  his
Mind.  And  it  looks  as  if  Fortune  were  permitted
to  make  War  upon  him,  on  purpofe  to  add  to  the
Glory  of  his  Triumphs  :  For  I  will  venture  to  affirm,
that  the  Condition  and  Hardfliip  of  a  Slave,  as  vyeil
as  the  Infirmities  of  his  Body,  were  necefiary  to  re-
commend his  Virtue,  and  fet  it  off  in  a  brighter  luilre
to  all  Pofterity.

The  meannefs  of  his  Fortune  had  no  Influence  up-
on the  greatnefs  of  his  Soul:  nor  could  he  ever  be
brought  to  a  fervile  Flattery  of  Perfons  in  the  moft
exalted  Station,  but  dealt  with  them  very  plainly,
when  he  faw  occafion.  Speaking  of  Princes  and  Ty-
rants, the  Power  they  boaft  of  over  their  Inferiors,
and  the  Submiffions  they  expedl  upon  that  account,
heexpreffcs  himfelf  to  this  purpofe:  "  "  Thefe Great
"•  People  are  much  in  the  wrong,  when  they  value
*'  themfelves  upon  the  deference  and  fer vices  paid
*'  them  by  thofe  under  their  Jarifdiiflion.  Do  they
"  think  all  this  Court  is  made  to  them  for  their  own
*'  fakes?  Nothing  lefs.  Each  Man  that  makes  it,
*'  hath  a  regard  to  his  particular  Intereft ;  and,
*'  when  fuch  addreffes  ceafe  to  be  for  the  Intereft  of
«'  their  Subjecfts,  the  Prince  quickly  finds  himfelf
*'  neglefted  and  defpifed.  We  take  care  of  fuch,
•'as  we  do  of  Beafts  of  burden,  as  we  feed  and  rub

*  This  Argument  Cajauhcn  will  by  no  means  admit,  but  contends  for  a  very
differ  nt  Senfe  of  this  Diftich,  and  thinks  it  defigned  only  to  fhew,  that  the
Profperity  or  Adverfity  Men  meet  with  in  the  AITairs  of  the  World,  ought  not
to  be  efteemed  a  diftingnifting  Mark  of  their  bung  more  cr  lefs  Favourites  of
Heaven.

'^Arrian,  Lib.  I.  Ca;.  19.

down

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  Ix

«  down  our  Horfes,  that  they  may  be  capable  of
*'  doing  LIS  better  Service.  We  adore  them,  as  the
"  Men  of  Rojjie  facrifice  to  Difeafes  :  if  the  Fever
**  have  Altars,  it  is  from  the  fear  of  being  hurt
"  by  it."  And  in  another  place  ;  *'  ^  Why  all  thefe
*'  Terrors  ?  fiys  he :  What  is  it  that  they  can  do  to  us,
"  which  we  fliould  be  fo  much  afraid  of?  The
"  worft  their  Malice  can  infli(5t  upon  us  is  Death.
"  And  muft  we  not  of  Neceflity  die,  fome  time,
"  and  fome  way  or  other  .?  If  we  cannot  avoid  going
"  out  of  the  World,  what  mighty  matter  is  it  how  we
"  go  ?  Nay,  is  not  that  the  Ihorteft  and  eafiefi;  way,
*'  which  Violence  and  Rage  fends  us  out  by  ?  Was
"  any  Tyrant  ever  fo  cruel  to  his  bittereft  Enemy,
"  as  to  be  killing  him  fix  Months  together  ?  And
"  why  then  is  not  fuch  a  Death  rather  to  be  chofen,
**  than  a  Hedick  Fever,  which  oftentimes  is  whole
**  years  before  it  has  difpatched  us?

^  Oferve,  what  freedom  he  takes  with  thofe,  who
fancy  themfelves  free,  becaufe  they  were  nobly  de-
fcended.  "  You  think,  fiys  he,  becaufe  you  have
"  been  twice  Conful,  your  Father  v/as  a  ,  Senator,
*'  and  you  are  the  Emperor's  Favourite,  that  your
*'  Quality  makes  you  more  free,  than  others  of  a
"  meaner  Birth  and  Fortune.  Alas !  you  are  more  a
"  Slave,  than  the  defpifed  Man  who  v/as  born  fo  •,
"  and  his  Condition  is  more  at  large  than  yours.  FIc
*'  may  be  fometimes  ill  ufed  by  a  barbarous  Mafter,
"  but  you  are  perpetually  plagued  and  harrafied,
*'  by  as  many  Mafl;ers,  as  you  have  ungovcrncd
*'  Paffions.  The  dilierence  is,  that  he  is  a  Slave  in
"  Hemp  and  Hair- cloth,  and  you  in  Silk  and
"  TilTue.  ^  If  he  be  wanting  in  his  Duty,  he  under-
"  goes  the  lafh  ;  but  if  you  negled:  yours,  you  arc
*'  punifhed  according  to  your  Quality  \  and  becaufe
"  you  are  noble,  and  C(Ffcir\  Favourite, you  have

I  ■ w  4rrian.  Lib.  II.  C^p.  6, ^  Lib.  IV.  Cap.  i. V  Lib.  IIL  dp,  zS,

C 3  "  the

X  T  H  E L  I  F  E O  F

"  the  privilege  to  have  your  Head  taken  off. A»
"  worthy  privilege  indeed.

So  little  Referve  did  Epi^etus  ufe  to  thofe  above
him,  when  it  was  necelFary  to  fhew  them  to  them-
felvesj  and  convince  them  of  the  Vanity  of  thofe
Prerogatives  they  were  fo  cauflefsly  proud  of;  "Where-
as, in  truth,  they  contributed  nothing,  either  to
their  Virtue  or  their  Happinefs.  Contentednef^:  gave
him  true  Liberty  under  the  moft  calamitous  Cir-
cumfcances:  And,  without  any  flourifli  upon  the
matter,  it  may  be  truly  faid,  that  no  Man  ever
carried  the  point  of  Conftancy  to  fo  high  a  degree
of  Perfedlion.

While  he  was  yet  a  Slave  to  Epaphroditus,  this
Brute  of  a  Mafter  one  day  took  a  Frolick  to  wrench
his  Leg.  Epitletus  obferving  him  delight  with  fo
barbarous  a  Pleafure,  and  that  he  continued  it
with  greater  Violence,  faid,  with  a  fmile,  and  free
from  any  appearance  of  Paffion,  If  you  go  on^  you
will  certainly  break  my  Leg.  In  fhort  he  did  fo,  and
then  all  the  return  he  made  was  this.  Did  I  not
tell  you.  Sir,  that  you  would  Ireak  my  Leg  ?  ^  Celfus
tranfported  with  the  admiration  of  Philofophy,  ex-
tols this  Patience  fo  far  above  any  other  Inftance  of  it
ever  feen  in  the  World,  that  he  runs  his  Argu-
ment up  to  a  moft  extravagant  and  blafphemous
Impiety.  If,  through  the  Injuries  of  time  and  ne-
gledl,  we  had  not  loft  that  Book  which  yfrm^com-
pofed  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  this  excellent  Per-
fon  •,  I  make  no  doubt,  but  we  fhould  lee  a  great
many  other  like  Examples  of  his  Conftancy.  For  it
cannot  reafonably  be  fuppofed,  but  he,  who  could
with  fo  much  calmnefs  fupport  the  breaking  of
a  Leg,  had  exercifed  his  Patience  upon  feveral  other
very  trying  occafions.

z  See  Orig.  cont.  Celf.  Lib.  VII.  Pag.  368. Edit.  Cantabr.  1658. where  C?lfus
pretends  to  prefer  the  Conftancy  of  E^iSUui  above  that  oijejus  Chrift.

!  Himfelf

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  xi

,  '^  Himfelf  hath  told  us,  of  what  ufe  it  is  to  ac-
cuftom  one's  felf  to  bear  the  fmallefl:  accidents  with
evennefs  of  Temper.  *'  If  your  Oil,  Hiys  he,  be
"  fpilt,  or  your  Wine  ftolen,  reflect  prefently,  that
"  by  fuch  flight  LolTes  as  thefe,  the  Virtue  and
"  Habit  of  Conftancy  is  purchafed."  ^  Accord-
ingly having  purchafed  an  Iron  Lamp,  which  he  ac-
counted a  very  coftly  piece  of  Furniture,  as  he  fat
one  day  deep  in  thought,  it  was  flolen  out  of  his
Hut.  When  he  looked  about,  and  mifTed  it,  he
faid  with  a  fmile,  ''  I  fliall  cheat  this  Rogue  next
"  time,  for  when  he  comes  to  fteal  another  Lamp,
"  he  fhall  find  only  an  earthen  one."  This  is  not  in-
deed an  inftance  equal  to  that  of  his  broken  Leg,
but  yet  it  well  deferves  our  mention  :  Becaufe  ia
matters  of  greater  moment.  Vain-glory,  or  fome
other  Paffion  is  apt  to  ftep  in  ;  but  in  thofe  which
are  trivial,  a  Man  is  under  no  Temptation  to  dif-
guife,  and  therefore  muft  be  fuppofed  to  proceed
according  to  the  true  and  natural  difpoficion  of  his
mind.

In  Him  the  Habit  of  Suffering  was  fo  m:\flerly,
that  no  Man  ever  had  learned  that  Art  more  per-
fedlly.  He  needed  no  partakers  in  his  Afflictions,  to
foften  them  •,  but  had  all  the  Guard  within  himfelf.
Nay,  he  thought  it  a  fign  of  a  very  corrupt  Nature,
for  a  Man  to  folace  himfelf,  from  others  fharing  la
his  Miferies ;  as  if  what  anyone  felt  were  abated
or  increafed,  in  proportion  as  his  Neighbours  felt
more  or  lefs.  And  he  would  expofe  the  ridiculous
folly  of  thofe,  who  aggravated  their  own  Misfor-
tunes, by  the  confideration  of  their  being  fingular.
"  What,  fays  he,  in  cafe  you  were  condemned
*'  to  be  beheaded,  muft  all  mankind  be  fentenced
**  to  the  fame  Punifliment, merely  for  the  fake  of

a  Enchirid,  Chap.  XVII.  b  Arrtan.  Lib,  I.  Cnp.  i8.

C  4  "  giving

xil  T  H  E L  I  F  E O  F

"  giving  you  that  fantaftical  Comfort, that  other
"  People  fufFer  as  well  as  You  r"

And,  as  Epi^etus  his  pradtice  advanced  him  far
above  other  Philofophers,  fo  did  the  correclnefs  of
his  Notions  likewife,  concerning  this  Virtue  of  Refo-
lution.  For  he  diftinguifhed  very  rightly  between
Courage  and  Fool-hardinefs  ;  between  enduring  and
courting  Suffering  and  Danger.  He  advifed  no  Man
to  chule  a  rough  way,  if  he  had  it  in  his  Power  to
take  a  fmooth  one  j  nor  to  climb  Rocks  and  Preci-
pices, when  Providence  allowed  him  to  travel  this
Journey  of  Life  upon  even  ground.  He  was  not
like  that  fturdy  Philofopher,  who  would  rather  fuffer
a  Carriage  to  drive  over  his  Body,  than  turn  out  of
the  way  to  avoid  it.  When  Epaphroditus  broke  his
Leg,  he  bore  it  patiently ;  but  he  could  have  been
very  v/eil  fatisfied,  to  have  found  him  better  natured.
He  thought  it  as  much  a  Reproach,  to  run  into
Danger,  as  to  run  away  from  it  j  and,  though  Ho-
nour oblige  Men  to  encounter  it  when  it  aflaults
them,  yet  he  acknowledged  no  fuch  high-flown  Pun-
dlilio,  as  fhould  render  it  commendable  to  prefer  it
before  Safety,  and  make  it  their  own  Ad  and  Deed,

"When  Reafon  and  Duty  lead  us  on,  then  he  ad-
mits of  no  changing  a  right  courfe,  upon  the  account
of  any  hazards  or  inconveniences,  which  may  attend
our  perfevering  in  it.  To  fuch  occafions  we  m.ufl:
apply  what  he  fays  of  the  advantage  fuch  tryals  are
to  good  Men.  '*  ^  Had  Hercules  fat  at  home  by  the
"  Fire-fide,  and  paffed  his  Life  in  effeminate  eafe
' '  and  indulgence,  he  had  never  been  Hercules.  ^  They
*'  were  the  Lion,  the  Hydra,  the  Boar,  andallthofe
**  Monflers  he  fo  laborioufly  defeated,  which  exer-
*'  cifed  his  Gallantry.  What  honour  had  he  acquired,
*'  if  his  Virtue  had  not  been  thus  dangeroully  em-
*^  ploy*d?  What  benefit  had  Mankind  reap'd  from

e ^m'fli«.  Lib-. U.  Cap,  l6. • ^  Lib.  I.  Cap.  6.

«'  fo

EPICTETUS.  xili

<<  fo  great  a  Soul,  if  he  had  declined  the  occafions
**  of  exerting  it  ?"  This  plainly  fhews,  that  he  did
not  think  thofe  Monfters  defirable  things,  but  only
maintained  the  combating  with,  and  quelling  of
them,  to  have  been  an  occafion  for  difcovering  what
kind  of  Perfon  Hercules  was,  and  for  perpetuating
his  Glory  in  the  World.

EpiSfetus  had  been  very  juft  to  the  Reputation
of  Helvidius,  for  his  undaunted  fteadinefs  in  this  Vir-
tue. *'  ^  This  Senator  thought  it  became  him  to
"  make  a  motion,  which  the  Emperor,  Senate,  and
"  People,  all  confpired  together  to  obftruft ;  but
'*  ftill  that  univerfal  Combination  was  not  able  to
*'  difcourage  him  from  profecuting  his  purpofe,
"  and  afting  according  to  the  dictates  of  his  own
"  Reafon  and  Confcience.  Vefpafian  was  extremely
•*'  defirous  to  get  fomething  paffed  in  the  Houfe,
"  which  he  forefaw  Helvidius  would  be  fure  to  op-
"  pofe.  He  therefore,  knowing  his  Flumour,  fent
"  a.melTage  to  defire,  he  would  not  come  to  the
*'  Houfe  that  day.  Helvidius  his  return  was,  that  it
".was  in  the  Emperor's  Power  to  deprive  him  of
*'  his  Senatorfhip,  but  fo  long  as  he  continued  a
*'  Member  of  that  Body,  he  could  not  difpenfe  with
"  himfelf  from  attending  the  Bufmefs  of  his  Pofb.
*'  Well,  fays  Vefpafian^  I  am  content  you  fhould
"  be  there,  provided  you  will  be  fure  not  to  fpeak
"  in  the  debates  that  fhall  arife  to  day.  I  en-
*'  gage  to  be  filent,  faid  he,  provided  my  Voice
♦'  and  Opinion  be  not  afked.  Nay,  but  if  you  are
*'  there,  you  muft  be  advifed  with,  faid  Vefpafian:
**  And  if  I  be,  replied  Helvidius^  1  muft  give  my
*'  Advice  freely,  and  according  to  what  I  conceive
"  moft  reafonable  and  juft.  But  do  it  at  your  Pe-
"  ril,  {aid  Fefpafan,  for  be  afTured,  if  you  are  againft
"  what  I  propofe,  your  Head  Ihall  pay  for  it. Sir

lAriian,  Lib,  I.  Cap.  2,

** returned

xiv  T  H  E L  I  F  E O  F

"  (returned  Hehidius)  did  I  ever  tell  you  I  was  im-"'
"  mortal  ?  You  will  do  Your  part,  and  I  Ihall  en-
"  deavour  to  do  Mine.  It  may  be  Your  Bufmefs
''  to.fentence  me  to  die,  and  it  muft  be  mine  to
"  die  bravely  and  chearfiilly.  If  you  will  pleafe  to
*'  order,  I  Ihall  take  care  to  fubmit."

He  had  alfo  a  very  particular  regard  for  Agrippi-
Jius  \  becaufe  one  day  being  told  of  an  Accufation
preferred  againft  him  before  the  Senate,  he  only  re-
plied, ^  "  'Tis  very  well,  but  what  of  the  Clock  is
"  it?"  And  when  they  told  him  it  was  about  five  :
''  Well  then,  faid  he,  let  us  go  to  the  Bath,  it  is
"  time  to  be  moving."  In  his  return  he  was  met  by
one,  who  brought  him  News  that  the  Caufe  was
given  againft  him.  "  Well,  fays  he,  what  have
"  they  fentenced  me  to.''  to  Death }  No,  replied  the
"  other,  to  Banifhment  only."  Whereupon  Agrip-
pinus  anfwered  without  any  Concern,  '*  Come  then,
'*  we  will  fup  to  Night  at  Aricia  '."

EpiSfetus  had  alfo  a  particular  Refpe6t  for  Pyrrho^
becaufe  he  looked  upon  Life  and  Death  as  things
indifferent.  He  valued  him  more  efpecially,  for  the
fmartnefs  of  a  Repartee  to  one  who  had  a  mind
to  banter  him  upon  this  Subjed.  "  If  living  and
"  dying  be  indifferent  in  your  efteem,  why  then,
"  fays  he,  do  you  not  fhev/  it  by  dying?  For  this
*'  very  reafon,  replied  Fyrrho^  becaufe  they  are  both
"  fo  indifferent,  that  I  know  no  Reafon  for  pre-
V  ferrins;  either."

'O

In  fhort,  Ep'Loletus  made  all  Philofophy  to  confiit
in  Continence  and  Patience,  for  which  reafon  he  had
always  thofe  two  words  in  his  Mouth,  Bear  and  For-
lear  :  Words,  which  in  Greek  have  a  peculiar  Ele-
gance, there  being but the  difference  of  a  fingle

^Stohaus,  Arrian.  Lib.  I.  Csp.  I.  •  J  A  little  Village  not  far  from  Rome,

Letter

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  XV

Letter  between  them.  He  frequently  exprelTed  his
admiration  of  Lyciirgus  the  Lacedemonian's  Bravery,
to  a  Man  who  had  put  out  one  of  his  Eyes.  The
People  delivered  this  Offender  up  to  his  Mecy,  to  be
punilhed  as  he  faw  fit.  But  Lycurgm^  inftead  of
revenging  the  Injury,  inflructed  him  in  Virtue,  and
after  he  had  modelled  him  into  a  good  Man,  he
brought  upon  the  publick  Theatre  the  Perfon  fup-
pofed  to  have  long  before  been  put  to  death,  and
to  the  aftonifliment  of  all  the  People,  told  them,
*'  that  the  Malefador,  whom  they  had  delivered
"  into  his  hands  full  of  Treachery  and  Wickednefs,
*'  he  now  reftored  to  them,  with  all  the  Qualifica-
•*  tions  of  Juitice  and  true  Goodnefs.

^  EpEletus  would  frequently  extoll  the  Gallantry
and  invincible  Courage  of  Lateranus^  who,  when
condemned  by  Nero  to  be  beheaded,  flretched  out
his  Neck  to  receive  the  Blow  •,  and,  when  the  Exe-
cutioner gave  the  ftroke  too  feeble  for  the  Bufinefs,
difpofed  himfelf  a  fecond  time,  and  laid  his  Neck
fairer  for  the  fecond  ftroke.  The  fame  Perfon,
hqving  been  before  examined  by  Efaphroditus,  con-
cerning the  Confpiracy  of  which  he  flood  accufed,
made  this  refolute  Anfwer,  "  If  I  had  any  thing  to
"  difcover,  I  would  tell  it  to  thy  Mafter,  and  not
*'  to  thee.'*  Thefe  PafTages  I  the  rather  mention,
becaufe  Epcletus^  being  a  Perfon,  v/ho  made  fo  nice
and  fo  juft  a  judgment  of  Men  and  Adtions,  it  is
much  for  the  Etonour  of  Their  Memory,  whofe  be-
haviour merited  his  Approbation  •,  and  the  greateft
Men  need  no  more,  for  eftablifhing  their  Reputation
with  confidering  Perfons  among  all  Poflerity.

He  all  along  profefTed  the  Stoical  Philofophy,
which  was  of  all  others,  the  moft  fevereand  exalted  ;
and  no  Man  of  all  the  Ancients,  was  more expert

Jt  Arrian,  Lib.  I.  Cap.  i.

at

xvi  T  H  E L  I  F  E O  F

at  reducing  the  rigour  of  their  Maxims  and  Pre-
cepts into  Practice.  For,  though  he  was  one  of  the
laft,  who  formally  applied  himfelf  to  the  Rules  of
this  Sect,  ^  yet  was  he  one  of  the  greateft  Ornaments
of  it.  He  conformed  himfelf  in  his  Difcourfe  and
Behaviour,  to  the  manner  of  Socrates,  and  Zeno,  and
Diogenes.  And  upon  undertaking  any  thing  of  mo-
ment, ufed  in  the  firfl  place  to  confider,  what  one  of
thofe  \¥orthies  would  have  done  upon  a  like  Occa-
fion.  VYhenever  he  reproved  any  Perfon  for  his
Vices,  or  inftrufted  him  in  Virtue,  it  was  his  con-
flan  t  Cuilom  to  quote  fome  of  thefe  Philofophers
for  Examples.  In  fliort,  he  reverenced  them,  as  Per-,
fons  of  an  extraordinary  Character,  far  above  the
common  ftandard  ;  but  above  all,  he  was  an  ad-
mirer bf  Socrates,  and  formed  his  Style  upon  the
Model  he  had  kt  him.  The  Comparifons  he  made
ufe  of  in  all  his  Difcourfes,  were  fo  familiar,  fo
apt,  fo  juiL  in  every  Circumftance,  that  every  body
was  infenfibly  won  over  by  them.  He  did  not  affeft
elegance  and  politenefs  in  fpeaking,  but  was  con-
tent with  making  himfelf  intelligible,  and  delivering
found  and  good  Senfe  in  perfpicuous  and  fignificant
Terms.  In  this  too  he  copied  2ifitv  Socrates,  as  in-
deed he  did  rhioughout,  m.aking  him  his  univerfal
Pattern  for  all  his  Actions,  and  all  his  Inftruftions.  ,

Thouc^h  he  bore  a  particular  regard  to  Pyrrho
himfelf,  yet  was  he  a  mofl  irreconcileable  Enemy  to
the  '  ridiculous  Scepticifm  of  the  Sect  that  went  un-
der his  Name.  He  afked  one  of  his  Followers  upon
occafion,  who  pretended  there  could  be  no  fuch
thing  as  Certainty,  and  that  Men  werecontinuall}  im-
pofed  upon  by  the  Report  of  their  Senfes,  "'  Who
among  them>,  was  ever  fo  grofly  deceived,  as  to  go
to  the  Mill,  vv^hen  they  intended  to  go  to  the  Bagnio  ?
And  often  he  ufed  to  hy,  "  That, v;ere  he  a  Ser-

!^-sVr;fif.  •  ^Arri^^n. Lib.  I. Cap.  27.

«'  vant

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  xvii

«  vant  to  one  of  thefe  Scepticks,  he  fhould  take
«  delight,  in  plaguing  him.  "  For  when  fnch  a
'  Mafter  comnianded  him  to  pour  Oil  into  his  Bath,
'  he  would  pour  Brine  upon  his  Head:  When  he
«  called  for  a  Julep,  he  would  bring  him  Vinegar ;
'  and  if  he  fhould  pretend,  fays  he,  to  be  angry
«  at  this  perverfenefs,  I  would  either  oblige  him  to
'  acknowledge  that  that  Vinegar  was  his  Julep,
'  or  conftrain  him  to  renounce  his  own  fantafd-
'  cal  Principles."

Fancy  and  Fortune,  the  Two  things,  by  which
Mankind  are  governed,  were  what  he  waged  War
againft,  all  his  Life  long.  For  the  Former,  he  ob-
ierved,  that  all  the  moft  important  Events  of  hu-
man Life,  all  the  Revolutions  that  make  the  greateft
Noife  in  Story,  were  at  the  bottom,  nothing  but
Fancy  and  Humour  °.  "  What  is  the  whole  Iliad
"  of  Homer,  but  a  Succeffion  of  moft  unreafonable
*«  Humours?  Paris  took  a  Fancy  to  carry  off  Me-
**  nelaus  his  Wife,  and  Helena  to  go  away  with  him.
"  Now,  if  her  Hufband  had  been  ^o  prudent,  as  to
"  account  the  lofs  of  fuch  a  Wife,  rather  a  Deliver-
*' ance  than  an  Affliction,  the  whole  Jeft  had  been
**  fpoiled.  We  had  had  neither  7/iW  nor  0J)'/7d';.  But
*'  upon  his  being  as  extravagantly  humourfom  as
"  the  reft,  followed  Wars  and  Tumults,  the  Slaugh-
»•  ter  of  infinite  innocent  Men,  and  the  utter  fubver-
"  fion  of  feveral  ancient  Cities.  And  this  in  good
"  truth,  is  the  general  v^^ay  of  t^ie  World."  The
Latter  he  ufed  to  compare  to  a  Woman  of  Quality,
who  proftitutes  herfelf  to  Servants.  *'  The  Life,
*'  which  Men  lead  in  dependence  upon  Fortune,
"  he  would  refemble  to  a  Torrent,  foul  and  rapid,
"  whofe  Stream  is  dangerous  to  pafs,  fierce  in  its
"  Courfe,  and  yet  runs  quickly  off.  On  the  other
*'  hand,  a  Mind  devoted  to  Virtue  he  compared  to

'^  /irrhn.  Lib.  l\-  Cap.  20.  «  Arrian.  Lib.  L  Cap.  28.

*'  a  per^

xviii  THE LIFE OF

"  a  perpetual  unexhaulted  Spring,  whofe  Waters
"  are  Clear  and  Smooth,  delightful  to  the  Eye  and
"  Tafte,  fweet  and  wholefom,  free  from  all  man-
"  ner  of  fully  or  corruption."  In  agreement  with
thefe  Notions,  his  vigour  in  the  ftudy  of  Virtue  was
fuch,  that  no  Man  ever  afpired  more  eagerly  after
perfedion.

p  He  had  intirely  renounced  all  the  Delights
which  gratify  the  Senfes,  to  devote  himfelf  fole-
jy  to  the  nobler  Satisfactions  of  the  Soul.  Whea
he  was  any  time  at  an  Entertainment,  his  Care
was  not  fo  much  to  regale  his  Body,  as  his  Mind :
as  being  duly  fenfible,  that  whatever  is  bellowed
upon  the  Body,  perifhes  quickly,  and  turns  to  no
account,  but  whatever  is  beftowed  upon  the  Mind,
is  a  lafting  Advantage,  and  can  never  be  loft.
This  Confideration  moved  him  to  prefer  inward
Peace  and  Tranquillity,  before  the  greateft  Advan-
tages in  the  World :  for,  as  it  would  be  no  Com-
fort to  a  Man  to  be  drowned  in  a  VefTel,  though
never  fo  beautiful,  or  laden  with  the  richeft  Trea-
fures  ;  fo  that  Man  makes  a  very  ill  Choice  for
himfelf,  who,  for  the  fake  of  Wealth  and  Magni-
ficence, is  content  to  be  oppreffed  with  Cares  and
Difquiets,  and  purchafes  any  degree  of  Grandeur,
or  what  the  miftaken  World  calls  Happinefs,  at
the  expence  of  his  own  Eafe  and  Liberty.  To
this  purpofe  he  would  fometimes  argue  as  follows:
«  A  Man  born  in  Perfia,  would  never  be  uneafy
"  that  he  did  not  dwell  in  Greece.  All  that  Na-
"  ture  fuggefts  upon  this  occafion,  being  only  a
<'  defire  to  live  happily  in  one's  own  native  Coun-
tc  try  '^.  When  a  Man  therefore  is  born  in  mean
"  and  low  Circumftances,  why,  fhould  he  torture
«  himfelf  with  ambitious  Thoughts,  and  fo  eagerly
«'  afpire  after  Greatnefs  and  Abundance  ^  Why  does

X  Stobaui.'Jieim.  I.  qStohaus.  Serm.  XXXVIII.

««  he

xix  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.

«'  he  not  rather  employ  his  Care,  about  making
*«  that  Condition  eafy  to  him,  which  Providence
«  at  firft  had  placed  him  in  ?  Is  it  not  much  more
«'  defirable  to  fleep  in  a  hard  Bed,  fnort,  and  narrow,
**  with  good  Health  ;  than  to  be  Tick  in  Damafk
*'  or  Velvet,  and  tofs  about  upon  Down  ?  And  the
"  preference  is  manifeftly  due  to  a  Mind  perfedtly
*«  compofed,  and  eafy  with  a  moderate  Fortune,
*'  when  compared  with  the  higheft  Elevation  of
"  worldly  Greatnefles,  foured  by  Vexation  and  per-
<'  petual  Anxiety  of  Heart.  '  V^e  are  infinitely  in
<'  the  wrong  (would  he  often  fay)  to  charge  our
*'  Mifery  upon  our  Poverty;  no,  'tis  our  Ambition,
*'  or  our  Difcontent,  that  makes  us  truly  miferable.
"  And  had  we  the  whole  Earth  at  command,  the
*'  polTefiion  of  this  could  not  kt  us  at  eafe  from
*'  our  fears  and  melancholy.  That  muft,  and  can
"  be  the  Work  of  Reafon  only  ;  therefore  the  Man,
"  who  cultivates  his  Mind  well,  and  provides  againft
"  this  Evil,  by  flocking  it  with  found  Principles,  is
*'  fatisfied  from  himfelf,  and  never  complains  of
Poverty,  or  Fortune  ^"  Thus  I  have  given  you  a
Ihort  fample  of  Eipi^fetus  his  manner  of  arguing  upon
thefe  occafions.

He  would  by  no  means  bear  with  thofe,  who  in-
duftrioufly  fought  for  fome  colourable  pretence,  ei-
ther to  cover,  or  to  give  countenance  to  what  they
did  amifs.  "  Such,  he  ufed  to  fay,  were  like  the
"  wanton  Wives  of  Rome^  who,  the  better  to  con-
*'  ceal  their  own  Shame,  ufed  to  make  Platans,  Books
*'  of  his  Commonwealth,  the  conftant  Subjed:  of.
"  their  Commendation  and  Difcourfe,  merely,  be-
*'  caufe  he  there  is  againfl  Women  being  confined
"  to  one,  as  now  they  are.  But  in  this  Point  too,
"  they  put  a  very  partial  and  malicious  Conftruclion
"■upon  that  Philolbpher*s  Words, without  attend-

'  /trrian.  Lib.  II.  Cap.  16.  i  Stilaus,

"  ing

XX  THELIFEOF

"  ing  to  his  true  meaning  and  defign.  For  it  was  no
"  part  of  his  Intent,  that  a  Woman  fliould  firii:
"  contract  herfelf  to  one  Man,  and  then  profticute
*'  herfelf  to  all  the  Sex  ;  but  the  Marriage  now  in
*'  ufe  he  thought  fit  to  be  abolifhed,  only,  that
*'  way  might  be  made  for  Engagements  of  another
«  kind."

This  Principle  appeared  no  lefs  in  the  Pracflice,
than  it  did  in  the  Doftrine  and  Difcourfes,  q{  Epicie-
tus.  For,  when  he  was  fenfible  at  any  time  of  hav-
ing failed  or  done  amifs,  his  Sincerity  never  was  fo-
licitous  to  find  out  an  Excufe  for  it.  Nay,  he  upon
no  occafion  exprefied  greater  Satisfaflion,  than  in
having  his  Faults  or  Defects  roundly  told  him.
"  Rufus  one  Day  happened  to  reproach  him  in
*'  terms  immoderately  fevere,  for  having  over-looked
*'  a  fallacy  in  a  Syllogifm.  Epioietns  to  mitigate  his
*'  Fury,  made  anfwer,  Why  fo  rough  and  hot,
"  Sir  ?  I  have  not  fet  Fire  to  the  Capitol.  Slave,
*'  ^  replied  i?z//^/i,  doft  thou  think  no  Fault  deferves
"  reproof,  but  burning  the  Capitol?  Thou  haft  been
"  guilty  of  the  worft  this  Cafe  could  bear."  Epi^e-
tus  was  fo  far  from  refenting  this  fmartnefs  amifs,
that  he  fmiled  at  the  Wit  of  it,  acknowledged  the
Juftice  of  the  Argument,  and  took  delight  in  telling
the  Story  publickly.

Another  time,  one  who  had  formerly  lived  in
great  Plenty,  ""  but  was  then  reduced  to  extremity
of  want,  came  to  him  with  a  Requeft,  that  he  would
recommend  him  to  the  People.  EplSletus^  very  ready
to  do  him  that  piece  of  Service,  indited  a  Letter
in  his  behalf,  full  of  kind  and  tender  Expreffions,
reprefented  his  Misfortune  in  complaints  fo  moving,
that  the  hardeft  Hearts  muft  needs  have  been  foft-
ened  by  them  ;  which  when  the  Party  concerned  had

t  Arrian.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  7.  ^  Arrian.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  9.

perufedj

E  iP  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  xxi

pefufed,  he  gave  it  back  again,  telling  him,  *'  That
*'  he  made  that  Addrefs  in  hopes  of  receiving  fome
**  Relief,  and  not  with  a  Defign  to  be  taught
<'  how  to  bemoan  himfelf,  for  of  that  he  had  no
"  need,  as  not  thinking  that  his  Sufferings  were
"  any  real  Evil."  This  difdainful  Anfwer  pleafed
EpiMetm  fo  exceedingly,  that  he  never  forgot  it
afterwards.

But  above  ail,  Epi^etus  Was  a  Perfon  of  moft  nice
Honour  in  the  matter  of  Friendlhip. The  Reader
need  only  be  put  in  mind, ^  that  he  was  a  Stoick,
to  convince  himfelf,  that  he  did  not  proceed  upon  a
Principle  of  Intereft  in  this  point. "  "  He  would
<«  not  allow  Men  to  confult  the  Oracle  for  Advice,
<«  when the  Defence  of  a  Friend was  under  con-
"  fideration:  Being  fatisfied,  that this  was  a  Caufe,
«'  in  v/hich  they  were bound  to  engage, though
««  with  the  hazard  of  their  very  Lives. As  he  was
«  once  maintaining,  ^  that  the  Wife  Man  only  was
"  capable  of  making  a  true  Friend,  and  loving  fm-
"  cerely  ; a  certain  Perfon  in  the  Company  made
««  anfwer,  that  he  was  none  of  the  Wife,  and  yet  he
<'  loved  his  Son  with  a  moft  true  and  tender  Affec-
*«  tion notwithftanding. You  do  but  imagine  fo,
"  vt^iWtd  Epi^etuSy  but  I  will  convince  you  of  your
"  miftake.  Have  you  never  feen  a  couple  of  Whelps
"  playing  together? One  would  think  thefe  little
"  Dogs  were  infinitely  fond of  one  another-, and
"  ye*:  do  but  caft  a  piece  of  Meat  before  them,  and
"  this  Experiment  will  foon  fhew  you,  how  far  they
*'  are  from  the  love  you  fancy. Juft  thus  is  the  Cafe
»*  between  you  and  your  Son. Throw  in  a  bone  of
"  Contention, a  bit  of  Land, or  any  fjch  trifling
"  Advantage, and fee, whether  he  will  not  wifh
t'  your  Death  in  order  to  get  into  poiTeffion.'*  and,
"  whether  you  will  not  hate  him  mortally  in  a  very

*  Arrian.  I,ib.  II,  Cap.  7.

^  Efiaet.  Erifbifid.  Chap.  39.

^  Arrlan,

Lib.  11.  Cap.uz.

D

«'  little

xxli  THE LIFE OF

"  little  while  upon this  account. Were  not  Eteo-

**  cles  and Folynkes  Children  by  the  fame  Father

"  and  Mother  ?  Were  not  they  brought  up  all  along

"  together  ? Had not ten  thoufand folemn  Pro-

"  teftations  of  the  mod  inviolable  Friendfhip  pafTed

"  on  both  fides?  And  yet,  when  a  Kingdom  fell  to-
"  them, which is  the  Piece  of  Meat  that  makes

*'  Dogs  worry  one  another,  v/ere  not  all  their  for-

"  mer  Promifes  and Profeffions  as  abfolutely  for-

"  gotten,  as  if  they  had  never  been? Did  not  their

"  brotherly  AfFeftion  vanifii  in  a  moment?  And  did
"not  thefe  two  Perfons do  their utmoft,  with  a

"  mod  favage  Cruelty,  to  deftroy  and  murder  one

*'  another  ?

"  "^  Menelaustnttn2AV\td  Parts  with  great  Hofpita-

"  lity,  and  fo particular  a  Kindnefs,  that  any  Man,

*'  who had  feen  how  dear  thefe two  were, while

*'  under  the  fame  roof,  would  have  paffcd  for  a  per-

*'  fc6b  Infidel,  if  he  had  fo  much  as  feemed  to  doubt,

"  whether  they  were  true  and  eternal  Friends. But

"  here  again, another Bone  of  Contention,  a  fine

"  Lady,  was  caft  between  them;  and  this  gave  rife

"  to  one  of  the  longeft  and  moft  bloody  Wars,  that

*»'  hath  ever  been  recorded  in  Story. So  vain  a  thing

*■'  it  is,  to  conclude  Perfons  Friends  indeed, whofe

*'  Paffions are  irregular, v/hofe Minds  are unfta-  '

'-'■  ble, and  who, fo long  as  they  are  enamour'd

'■'  with  the  things  of this  World, cannot  poffibly

"  be  fixed,  and  firm  to  any  Profeffions  or  Principles

^'^  v/hatfoever.

"  "^  A  Gentleman  of  the  firil:  Quality  coming  one
"  day  to  vifithim,  after  feme  Difcourfe  about  other
"  Affairs,  Epi5felus  happened  to  enquire,  whether
'^  he  were  married,  and  how  he  liked  that  State  ;
"  the  other  anfwered,  that  he  vais  indeed  a  married
"  Man,  but  extremely  un!:appy  in  being  fo. How

^  jtiiia::,  J-ib.  il.  Cap.  22.  ^  Jnian,  Lib.  I.  Cap.  1 1 .

"  fo?

EPICTETUS.  xxiii

*'  for"  fays  Epi5fetus,  for  I  prefume  all  People  that
"  marry,  do  it  with  with  a  Profpeft  of  betterin<y
"  their  Condition.  True,  fays  the  Nobleman,  but
"  it  is  my  misfortune,  never  to  enjoy  one  quiet  hour,
*'  for  my  extreme  fondnefs  and  folicitude  for  my
"  Children.  I  had  a  little  Daughter  fick  lately,
*«  and  my  Tendernefs  was  fo  great,  that  I  was  forced
"  to  quit  the  Houfe  and  run  away  from  the  poor
"  Girl  And  do  you  reckon  that  an  Argument  of
"  Affeaion.^  fays  EpiBetus%  Methinks  we  would
"  be  glad  to  have  our  worft  Enemies  fhew  their
*'  Concern,  juft  as  you  do  yours  for  your  deareft
"  Friends.  The  very  truth  is,  it  was  not  Love,  that
"  drove  you  from  your  Child  ;  but  fome  other  dif-
"  order  of  mind,  like  that  of  acertain  Racer  at  R.oine^
"  who^  when  his  Horfe  was  upon  full  fpeed,  wrap-
"  ped  himfelf  up  in  his  Cloak,  for  eagernefs  at  the
"  Sport ;  and,  when  he  had  won  his  Prize,  without
"  knowing  his  good  Fortune,  was  fiin  to  be  dif-
*'  mounted,  and  refrefiied  with  Spirits  and  Cordials,
*'  to  recover  him  to  his  Senfes.  Confider  of  this
"  inftance  a  little,  and  then  you  will  come  to  judge

"  nghtlyof  that,  which  you  xnifcall  Excefs  of  Love
"  for  others."

"  Some  Perfons  had  alledged  the  neceffity  of  en-
deavouring to  be  rich  ;  upon  a  pretence,  that  Po-
verty incapacitates  a  Man  for  being  ferviceable  to  his
Friends.  «  Alas!  faid  EpiBetus,  how  infinitely
*'  you  deceive  yourfelves!  Do  you  think,  that  there
«'  IS  no  way  of  being  ufeful  to  one's  Friend,  but
*'  only  by  lending  him  Money .?  No  fuch  matter.  I
"  allow  Men  to  take  all  lawful  and  honeft  methods
1^'  of  getting  Wealthy  that,  when  they  have  it,  they

may  be  in  a  Condition  of  relieving  their  Friends
"  m  want.  But  then  take  care,  that  you  ufe  no
"  methods, but  fuch  as  are  fair  and  decent. And

^  E^iaet.Enchirid.  Ca^.'^i,

^ 2  if.

xxiv THE LIFE OF

"  if,  as  the  World  now  goes,  you  can  inftrufl  me
*'  in  any  fuch  way  of  growing  and  being  Rich,  I
**  engage  to  employ  my  utmolt  endeavours  to  be  fo
*'  my  felf.  But  if  you  exped  from  me,  that  I
*'  fhould  purchafe  things  not  really  good,  at  the  ex-
*'  pence,  and  with  the  certain  Lofs  of  others,  which
"  are  really  fo ;  there  I  muft  defire  to  be  excufed.
*'  And  you  are  doubtlefs  unreafonable  and  unjuft  to
"  the  laft  degree,  in  requiring  me  to  fubmit  to  fuch
"  hard  Conditions  -,  and  much  in  the  wrong,  if  you
*'  do  not  prefer  the  good  Qualities  of  the  Mind,  be-
"  fore  the  Advantages  of  Fortune  j  a  good  Man  be-
*'  fore  a  wealthy  one  ;  a  Man  capable  of  being  a
"  faithful  Friend,  before  a  rich  unfaithful  pretender
"  to  Friendfhip."  This  was  an  Anfwer  truly  wor-
*'  thy  a  Philofopher.

But  that,  which  feems  to  be  the  peculiar  Glory  and
Commendation  of  Ep^elus^  is,  that  of  all  the  an-
cient Philofophers,  he  feems  to  have  made  the  near-
eft  Approaches  to  the  true  Chriftian  Morality,  and
to  have  entertain'd  more  juft  and  becoming  No-
tions concerning  the  Nature  and  Providence  of  God,
than  any  who  were  not  enlightened  by  the  Gofpel.
His  Doftrines  were  in  truth,  fo  very  agreeable  to
ours,  ^  tlmt  St.  Jugnjiin,  notwithftanding  his  violent
prejudice  againft  the  generality  of  the  Heathen  Sages,
thought  himfelf  in  Juftice  bound  to  make  one  ex-
ception at  leaft,  and  to  fpeak  of  this  Author  with  a
great  deal  of  Refpeft.  Nay,  fo  far  hath  he  pro-
ceedeJ  in  this  Point,  as  to  make  no  difficulty  of
honouring  him  with  the  Character  of  a  very  wife
and  exceeding  good  Man.  And  reafon  good  there
was,  ^  v/hy  Epitletus  fhould  be  treated  in  a  manner
different  from  the  reft-,  when  we  refledl,  how  clearly
he  .vas  convinced  of,  and  how  nobly  he  argues  for
the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  j  the  Unity  and  Per-
fections of  God  ;  the  Wifdom  and  Goodnefsof  Pro-

« De  Clvit.  Dii. d  ^rrian.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  9 Lib.  IL  Cap.  14, ^  aliii.

vidence  j

E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S.  XXV

t^  dence ',  and,  which  can  be  faid  of  none  befides,  when
Humility  was  fo  truly  his  Charader,  that  neither  his
Morals,  nor  his  Pradice,  have  the  leaft  tindure  of
Vanity  in  them.

Another  Excellence  peculiar  to  himfelf,  is,  that  he
admitted  all  t4ie  Severity  of  theStoicks,  without  tak-
ing in  any  of  their  Sournefs.  He  hath  nothing  of  the
Infolence  fo  ufual  with  that  Sedl,  of  making  their
Romantick  Wife  Men  in  a  manner  equal  with  God.
He  rejected  their  Chimerical  and  imprafticable  Per-
fections ;  and  thought  a  Philofopher  never  more
truly  fo,  than  when  moll  modeft.  So  that  he  re-
formed Stoicifm  as  well  as  profefled  it,  and  efpoufed
no  Principles  fo  implicitely,  as  not  to  leave  himfelf  a
Liberty  of  departing  from  them,  or  altering  them
for  the  better,  as  he  faw  occafion.  If  then  St.  Je-
rome did  not  grudge  a  Philofopher  of  that  Sedt,  the
honour  of  being  numbered  among  the  Saints,  What
place  fhall  we  allow  Epi^etus  ?  Who,  befides  that  he
vindicates  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  asftrenuoufly  ■
as  Seneca^  or  ever  a  Stoick  of  them  all ;  hath  the  ad-
vantage over  his  Brethren,  ^  in  declaring  openly^
againft  that  moft  impious  and  Anti-chrillian  Maxim,
maintained  by  the  reft  of  this  Profeffion,  {viz.)  'That
a  Man  may  lawfully  die  by  his  own  hands.

^  I  am  fenfiblc,  Wolfius  thinks  him  as  deep  in  here
as  the  reft,  but  this  feems  to  be  only  from  a  wrong
Interpretation  of  that  Pafiage,  That  when  a  Man  ist
weary  of  playing  his  part.,  he  may  he  comforted  with  re-
memhering  that  the  Door  is  open.  But  the  meaning  of
the  Door  being  open.,  is  not,  that  we  may  go  out  wheni
we  pleafe  •,  but,  that  cur  term  of  Life  is  fo  fhort,
that  it  cannot  be  long  before  v/e  are  called  out.
That  this  was  his  true  Intention  is  evident  from
another  PafTage,  where  he  expofes  the  folly  of  being

^Arrian.  Lib.  I.  Cup.  9.  <"  Lib.  L  Cap.  g,&  24..

D  3  full

xxvi  THE LIFE OF

full  of  Care  for  to  morrow.  ^  If  you  have  any  Sujie-
nance  (fays  he)  you  will  he  fupported  j  if  not,  you  will
make  your  exit ;  the  Door  ftands  always  open.  The
Phrafe  here  is  the  fame,  and  let  Epi5ietus  be  his  own
F-xpofitor,  who  two  or  three  Lines  before  hath
this  remarkable  Sentence.  Let  us  wait  God's  leifure
to  deliver  us  from  enraged  Tyrants :  TVhen  he  gives
the  fignal^  then  march  out  to  him.  And  again,  How
ridiculous  is  it  to  fuppofe,  that  a  Man  ought  not  rather
to  be  cut  in  Pieces,  than  defert  the  Poft  his  General  hath
fixed  him  in  ;  and  to  imagine  oiirf elves  at  Liberty  to  quit
the  Poft  God  hath  fet  us  in,  whenever  we  pleafe  ?

^  But  to  return.  The  unblemifhed  Probity,  fo
remarkable  throughout  his  whole  Converfation,  was
the  very  thing,  which  recommended  him  to  the
particular  Favour  and  Efteem  of  all  the  greateft
Men  of  the  Age,  in  which  he  lived.  He  con-
traded  a  particular  intimacy  v/ich  Favorinus,  and
Herod  the  Sophiil,  who  are  two  very  eminent  Per-
fons  in  Antiquity ;  as  we  find  by  Pbiloftratus  in  his
Lives.  '  Spartian,  as  I  obfcrved  before,  ranks  him
among  the  Emperor  Adrian*^  moft  confiderable
Friends.  ^  Themiftius,  in  his  Oration  to  the  Empe-
ror Jovinian,  fays,  that  he  received  feveral  Marks  of
Honour,  and  particular  Refpeft  from  the  two  Anto-
Jiines.  And  accordingly  Marcus  Aurelius,  in  his  Book
of  Mediations,  !<$•  iccwov,  or  Soliloquies,  mentions
him  more  than  once,  with  fo  great  regard  as  to  fet
him  upon  the  fame  level  with  the  Socrates's,  the  Ze-
no^s,  and  the  Ch-ryfippus^s.  In  fliort,  his  Reputation
was  fo  great,  that  ^  Lucian,  who  calls  him  a  wonder^
ful  Man,  rallies  an  ignorant  Fellow,  for  purchafing
.Epicletus^ ~^s  Earthen  Lamp  at  three  thoufand
Drachms,  upon  a  vain  imagination,  that  fludying  by

tArrian,  Lib- 1.  Csp.  9. "  J.  Gell.  Lib.  XVII.  Cap.  19. Lib.  L  Cap.  2.
J  Span,  in  Adr.  *  Themiji.  Orat.  la.  ad  J  win. Lib.  \.  Seft.  7.  Lib.  XI.,

Sect.  34.,  36j  &c. ^  Dialog,  ^dvirj,  Indo&t  multgs  Lwros  eme/iUm,

the

EPICTETUS;  xxvli

the  Light  of  this  Lamp,  would  infpirc  him  with
the  Wifdom  of  its  former  Mafter.  Whatever  he
faid  carried  fuch  Force,  and  met  with  fo  general  Ac-
ceptance and  Refped,  that  no  body  could  ftand  out
againft  his  Arguments.  '  "  Herod  the  Sophifl,  met
*'  one  day  with  a  pert  young  Blade,  who  pretended
«'  himfelf  ProfefTor  of  the  Stoick  Philofophy ;  and
"  talked  and  fwaggered  at  fo  infolent  a  rate,  as  if  he
"  thought  all  the  Greeks  and  Latins  to  be  mere  Igno-
««  ramus's  in  comparifon  of  himfelf.  After  having
*'  heard  patiently  all  he  had  to  fiy,  the  way  Herod,
"  took  to  reprove  and  put  him  out  of  countenance,
"  was  to  fend  for  Arria?fs  Colledion  of  Epi^ietus''
<'  his  Difcourfes,  and  turn  him  to  that  Chapter  ""  in
"  the  Second  Book,  where  he  fpeaks  of  thofe  con-
"  ceited  People,  who  talk  much,  and  fancy  them-
*'  felves  Philofophers,  becaufe  they  can  do  it  fluently.
««  This  fo  confounded  that  forward  young  Gentle-
*'  man,  that  he  had  not  one  Word  to  fay  for  him-
*'  felf."  We  may  judge  from  this  inllance,  of  what
Authority  Epi^etus  and  his  Dodirines  were,  at  that
time  in  the  World.

Of  all  his  Scholars,  Arr'ian  is  the  only  one,  whofe
Name  hath  been  tranfmitted  with  Reputation  to
Poflerity ;  and  He  is  fuch  a  one,  as  fufficiently  de-
monilrates  the  Excellence  of  his  Mafter,  though  we
fhould  fuppofe,  that  he  alone  had  been  of  his  form-
ing. For  this  is  the  very  Perfon,  who  was  after-
wards advanced  to  be  the  Preceptor  o{  Antonine^  "fur-
named  the  Tiom^  and  diftinguifhed  by  the  Title  of
Xemphon  the  Tounger  -,  becaufe,  like  that  Philofopher,
he  committed  to  writing  the  Didates  delivered  by
his  Mafter  in  his  Life-time;  and  publifhed  them  in
one  Volume  under  the  Name  of  Epi^etu^  kts  Bifcoiirfes
or  Differ tations',  which  at  prefent  we  have  in  four
Books. After  this  he  compofed  a  little  Book,  called

M.  Ge//.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  2.  m  Cap.  19.  "  Cw^.  in  Chron. A.  Cell.

Lib.  XViL  Cap.  19. .

\,.(k^^  D  4  his

xxviii THE LIFE OF

his  Enchiridion^  °  which  is  a  fhort  Compendium  of
all  Epi^eius  kis  Philofophical  Principles*,  and  hath
ever  been  acknowledged  for  one  of  the  moft  valaable
and  beautiful  Pieces  of  ancient  Morality.  He  like-
wife  wrote  another  large  Book  of  the  Life  and
Death  o^  EpiSfetus,  which  is  now  unfortunately  loft.
Marcus  Aurelius  mentions  a  Trad,  called  the  Com-
mentaries of  Epitfetus.  which  he  had  read  with  great
application.  ^  But  thefe  probably  are  the  fame  with
thofe  Difcourfes  mentioned  before.  For  Arrian^  in
his  Preface  to  thofe  Books,  gives  them  the  title  of
J;rop'/i|Ot«7(5«.  Probably,  this  double  Title  might  pro-
ceed from  the  different  form,  under  which  they  were
publifhed,  in  two  feveral  Copies,  during  Arrian's
own  Life.  I  am  alfo  apt  to  believe,  that  thefe  Dif-
fertations  were  formerly  larger,  than  we  now  enjoy
them  ;  and  poffibly,  ^  there  might  not  be  four  only,
but  five  or  fix  Books  of  them..  Thus  much  is  cer-
tain, thatyf.  Gellius '  cites  a  Palfage  out  of  the  fifth,
and  that  Stohmis  relates  feveral,  as  of  the  fame  Au-
thor, which  no  where  occur  in  his  Writings  extant  at
this  Day.  It  is  not  unlikely,  that  Arrian,  in  a  fe-
cond  Edition,  might  think  fit  to  leave  out  fome
things  publifhed  in  a  former,  and  that  he  might  new
cafl  the  Work,  by  reducing  fix  Books  into  four.  But
however  that  be,  I  can  by  no  means  credit  Siiidas
his  Account,  when  he  tells  us,  that  Epi^etus  was
himfelf  a  great  Writer-,  for  this  is  very  hard  for
any  Man  to  conceive,  who  hath  read  Arrian  at  all,
and  is  acquainted  with  Epi^etus^)m's,  Manner,  and
Principles,

'  There  are  befides,  fome  Anfwers  pretended  to
be  made  by  him  to  Queftions  put  by  Adrian  the  Em-
peror ;  but  any  Man,  who  gives  himfelf  the  trouble

0  S'lmpl.  injcvin,  P  Dt  feipfo,  \jmiu.vi!fxala. Arrian.  Praf.  A.  Gellius.

1  Some  fay  XII.  of  thefe  called  AtaXi^n;,  and  l^III.  entituled  AiolfiCaj. See
flolfieii], de Fit.  & Script,  Porphyrii. Pag.  a. Edit,  Cantabr, 1655.

»■  A,  Cell,  Lib.  XIX.  Cap.  i. s  Altenat,  ad  Cakem  Edit.  Wolf.

of

EPICTETUS.  xxix

of  reading  them,  will  eafily  difcover  the  Forgery,
and  that  they  cannot  belong  to  this  Philofopher.
*  IVolfius  indeed  did  once  put  us  in  hopes  of  feeing
fome  Letters,  written  by  this  great  Man,  publifhed,
which,  he  had  been  infornned,  were  in  the  Library
at  Florence.  But  in  all  probability  the  Perfon  who
communicated  this  Piece  of  News  to  him,  was  not
rio-htly  informed  himfelf -,  anci  we  are  like  to  wait  a
crreat  while,  before  our  Eyes  are  gratified  with  the
fight  of  that  Curiofity.

"  We  have  no  account  that  can  be  depended  upon,
either  of  what  Diflemper,  or  about  what  time,  Epi^e-
tus  died.  Suidas  indeed  affirms,  that  he  died  when
Marcus  Aurelius  was  Emperor  -,  but  I  am  very  apt
to  fufpeft  the  Truth  of  this  AfTertion.  ""  Salmafius,
who  hath  enlarged  upon  this  matter,  is  of  Opinion
that  Suidas  is  miftaken  •,  and  produces  feveral  Reafons
for  thinking  fo,  which  I  fhall  confider  in  this  place.

I.  ^  The  firil  is,  that  the  fame  Author  tells  us,
Epi5letus  was  Slave  to  Epaphroditus,  a  Captain  of
Nero's  Life-Guard,  Now  from  the  Death  of  NerOy
to  the  beginning  of  Marcus  Aurelius'\^h  Reign,  there
intervened  no  lefs  than  ninety  four  Years.  That
which  adds  more  to  the  improbability  of  this  ac-
count, is,  that  we  mufl  fuppofe  EpiEletus  fome  Years
old,  before  he  was  capable  either  of  doing  Epaphro-
ditus  any  Service,  or  of  removing  from  Hierapolis  to
Rome.  So  that  according  to  this  Computation,  E-
pi5fetus  may  be  prefumed  to  have  reached  a  Plundred
and  Fifteen  Years,  or  thereabouts,  which  is  not  very
eafy  to  believe.  This  Conjefture  carries  fomewhat
of  Argument  in  it,  though  it  be  not  abfolutely
conclufive  \  becaufe,  as  ^  Lipfius  hath  obferved  judi-
cioudy  enough,  'tis  pofllble  he  might  not  be  taken
into  Epaphroditus  his  Family,  'till  after  iV^ro's  Death.

t-InPraf.  a^Altercat.Adr.  ^  Suid.  InEflBct.  ""  Sa!maJ.  in  An-

r.ci.  ^6  Ei>iffei.  Sc  Simp.  7  Pag.  z>  ''^  Li/'f.  Mznud>i&.,  zd  Stoic.

PLirJf.  Lib.  I.

But

XXX  T  H  E L  I  F  E O  F

But  then  in  anfwer  to  this  Solution,  it  may  be  re-
plied, that*  Epaphroditus,  being  diflinguifhed  by
that  Title  of  Captain  of  Nero's  Guard,  it  is  more
credible,  that  Nero  was  living  at  the  time  when  E-
poietus  belonged  to  him,  and  that  he  ferved  him
whilft  in  that  Q|jality.

2.  ^  The  fecond  Argument  is,  that  Marcus  Aure-
lius  does  not  reckon  this  Philofopher  among  the  Per-
fons  with  whom  he  had  any  Converfation,  but'  only
fpeaks  of  reading  fome  Difcourfes  of  his,  which  Ju-
nius Rufiicus  had  communicated  to  him.  This  to
me  feems  to  carry  lefs  Strength  than  the  former.  For,
belidcs  that  EpiSetus  had  retired  to  Nicopolis  long  be-
fore that  time,  we  may  allow  his  Death  to  have
happened,  much  about  the  beginning  of  this  Em-
peror's Reign.  Suidas  affirms  no  more,  than  that
he  lived  till  the  time  of  Marcus  Aurelius.  And  he
might  very  well  be  fuppofed  to  live  till  the  beginning
of  his  Reign,  without  implying  any  neceffity  of  this
Emperor's  feeing  his  Difcourfes,  till  after  the  Author
was  dead.

3.  ''  The  Third  Reafon  is,  in  my  Judgment,  of
little  or  no  Confideration.  Epi5ietus^y(%  Lamp  was
fold  in  Lucian's  time,  and  from  thence  it  is  inferred,
that  Epioietus  was  dead,  before  that  Sale  was  made.
But  this  is  no  confequence  at  all.  For  we  have  all
the  Reafon  in  the  World  to  believe,  that  Lucian
outlived  Marcus  Aurelius. And  fo  this  Lamp  being

a  I  cannot  but  obferve  here  a  grofs  miftake  in  the  Preface  to  Berkeliui^s
Edition  of  the  Enchirid.  with  JVolfius  his  Notes  printed  at  Lugd,  and  Amjl.  1670-
where  this  Epapbroditus  is  taken  for  the  Perfon  of  that  Name,  Coloj.  iv.  18
who  brought  that  Church's  Charity  to  St.  Paul  at  Rome.  'Tis  true,  that  Chap-
ter mentions  Saints  of  Csid^x^sHoupold,  -ver.  23.  But  the- Charadler  given  of
EpiEietus  his  Mafter,  will  not  incline  us  to  believe  him  one  of  them.  And  though
it  be  highly  probable,  that  EpiSetus  had  fome  knowledge  of  the  Chriftian  Do-
ctrine (  as  indeed  the  Philofophers,  who  write  after  the  publication  of  the
Gofpel,  do,  by  their  way  of  arguing  fo  much  more  refined  than  their  Prede-
ceffors,  feem  all  to  have  had)  yet  we  have  little  ground  to  imagine,  that  a
Perfon  of  fuch  infamous  Qualities,  fuch  infolence  and  barbarity,  and  meannefs
of  Spirit,  as  this  Epaphrcditus,  either  inftrufted  him  in  it,  or  ever  imbibed  iC
heartily  himfelf.

i>  Salmaf.  Vt).  MarcA-Uonin,  Lib,  I.  Cap.  7,  c^  Dialog,  adverf,  Indcc?,

siuhos  Liircs  cmcntim,

fold

EPICTETUS.  xxxi

fold  while  Lucian  was  yet  alive,  is  no  bar  to  Epi£fe-
tus^jfAs  being  alive  in  ^  Marcus  'jj-is  Reign.  Nay,  it
might  very  well  happen,  that  the  Lamp. might  be
fold  in  Epicietus]^s  own  life-time  -,  and,  if  this  be  ad-
mitted, that  Circumttance  will  create  us  no  Diffi-
culty at  all.

4.  ^  The  Fourth  is,  that  A.  Gellius,  who  wrote
under  Antoninus  PiuSy  or  at  leaft  in  the  very  begin-
ning of  Af(?ra/j  yf«mm,  fays  of  EpiBetus^  that  the
Memory  of  that  Philofopher  was  ftili  frefh  at  Rome.
But  Salmafms  hath  not  produced  that  Paffage  in  tire,
fory^.  Gellius  does  not  fpeak  thereof  his  Memory  in
general,  but  of  every  body's  remembering,  that  he
had  been  a  Slave ; which  alters  the  cafe  very  much.

5.  ^  The  lall  Reafon  allesnged  by  Salmafius  is
taken  from  that  Exprefllon  of  Gellius^  1  have  heard
Favorinus  fay\  And  fmce  Favorinus  died  under  ^-
drian,  Salmafms  concludes  it  impcffible,  for  Epi5fetus
not  to  have  died  before  the  Reign  of  Marcus  Aure-
lius.  Now  this  Reafon  is  not  convincing  •,  becaufe
JPavorinus  might  very  well  inform  A.  Gellius,  what
Epi^etus  had  faid  upon  fome  certain  occafions ;
though  Epi^etus  himfelf  were  ftill  alive.  But  ftill
it  muft  be  confefTed,  there  is  fome  Ground  for  urg-
ing it.  For  A.  Gellius,  who  wrote  his  Book  under  An-
toninus Pius,  the  Predeceffor  to  Marcus  Aurelius,
when  mentioning  Epi5ietus,  does  it  in  thefe  terms:
Epifletus  would  fay,  that  venerable  old  Man  ufed  to
fay,  fuch  a  one  hath  told  me,  that  Epi6tetus  was  wont
to  fay,  and  the  like.  Now  this  is  a  manner  of  fpeak-
ing,  very  unufual  and  odd,  when  the  Perfon  fpoken
of  is  yet  in  being.  And  I  am  indeed  the  rather  in-
clined to  embrace  the  Opinion  Salmafus  contends
for,  becaufe  it  feems  to  me  highly  probable  that
EpiEietus  was  dead,  before  the  compofing  of  Arrian's
Book, in  which  he  colleds  his  Difcourfes. And  if

^Salmaf.  p.  3.  e  Salmaf.WyA.  ^.2.  &p.  3. A,GelLUh.  II.  Cap.  18.

f  A.GelU  Lib.  XVII.  Cap.  19.

xxxii THE LIFE OF

fb,  I  fee  no  poffibility,  how  Suidas  his  Account  of
his  living  dov/n  to  Marcus  Aurelms  his  time  Ihould
ftand  good.  For  it  is  evident,  that  Book  was  publifhed,
when  A.  Gellius  wrote  his  No^es  Attic ce^  and  that  is  as
much  as  to  fay,  that  it  was  well  known,  and  com-
monly read  in  the  Reign  of  Antoninus  Pius.  I  own
k  may  be  objedled,  that  Arrian  might  colled:  and  pub-
lifh  thofe  Differtations,  before  the  Death  of  his  Ma-
fter  i  but  I  can  fcarce  think  he  did  fo  ;  it  being  highly
improbable,  and  a  thing  out  of  the  common  way,
to  fet  forth  the  Difcourfes  and  memorable  A6lions
of  a  Perfon  furviving  the  publication.  And  there-
fore, without  fome  Authority  to  warrant  fuch  a  Con-
jeflure,  bare  Prefumptions  ought  not  to  prevail  far
its  being  received.

One  Difficulty  more  indeed  occurs  to  me,  which
Salmafms  takes  no  notice  of,  and  yet,  in  my  ap-
prehenfion,  it  is  as  confiderable  as  any  of  the  former.
'Tis  the  fpace  of  time  between  the  Death  of  Nero,
and  the  Edi(fl  of  Bomitian  for  banifhing  the  Philo-
^  fophers.  ^  Now  this  very  little,  if  at  all,  exceeds
Twenty  Years.  For  that  Edid:  is  placed  in  the
Eighth  of  Domitian,  And,  if  Lipfms  his  Notion  be
admitted,  that  EpiSfetus  did  not  ferve  Epaphroditus^
till  after  A'i?r(?*s  Death,  the  difficulty  grows  yet  more
upon  us.  For  at  that  rate  he  could  not  be  above
Eighteen  or  Nineteen  at  moft,  when  he  left  Rome, .
in  obedience  to  the  Emperor's  prohibition.  But
this  is  never  to  be  reconciled  with  A.  Gellius  his  ac-
count, who  fpeaks  of  him  as  a  Perfon  of  great  Re-
pute at  that  time,  and  conftrained  to  withdraw  to
Nicopolis^  in  the  Quality  of  a  Philofopher  concerned
in  the  Edict.  We  can  hardly  allow  him  this  Cha-
rader  at  lefs  than  Thirty  Years  old  ;  and,  accord-
ing to  that  calculation,  to  bring  him  down  as  far
as  Marcus  Aurelius^lpKs  Reign,  will  afk  a  Hundred
and  Eight  or  Nine  Years. And  yet  fo  many  we

S  Eujeb,  in  Cbrtnt.

cannot

EPICTETUS.  xxxiii

cannot  afford  him  neither,  when  it  is  remembered,
that  Lucian^  ^  who  was  his  contemporary,  makes
no  mention  of  him,  in  that  Dialogue,  concerning
Perfons  who  lived  to  a  great  Age,  I  acknowledge,
that  Eufebius  takes  notice  of  a  fecond  Edift  againft
the  Philofophers,  not  publilhed  till  the  Fifteenth  of
Domitian ;  but  befides  that  he  ftands  fingle  in  this
Point,  and  is  not  ftrengthened  by  the  Teftimony  of
any  other  Chronologer  or  Hiftorian,  Scaliger  in  his
Animadverfions  hath  obferved  exprefsly,  that  the  De-
cree meant  by  A.  Gellius  (which  is  plainly  that  un-
der debate  at  prefent)  was  publiflied  in  the  Eighth
Year  of  Domitian.  This  Argument  is  of  fo  great
weight  with  me,  that  it  would  quite  bear  down  all
that  Siiidas  hath  faid,  were  it  not,  that  I  find  myfelf
Hill  in  fome  fufpenfe,  from  a  paflage  in  Themiftius ' ;
who  pofitively  affirms,  that  the  two  Antonines  fhewed
Epi5ietU5  particular  Marks  of  their  Favour  and  Efteem.

But  this  Obje(5tion  too  may  be  taken  off,  by  re-
plying, that  Orators  in  their  Speeches  do  not  al-
ways tye  themfelves  up  to  the  fame  Rules  of  Exa6l-
nefs,  which  are  ftridtly  required  of  a  Faithful  Hifto-
rian j  Or  elfe  by  faying,  that  Marcus  Aurelius  might
exprefs  an  Honour  for  Epi5ietus  in  the  time  of
Adrian^  diXxd.  Antoninus  Pius,  and  before  he  came  to
be  Emperor  himfelf:  Orlaftly,  that  this  Veneration
was  paid  to  his  Character  and  Memory,  after  the
Perfon  was  dead.  And  this  we  plainly  find  done
in  the  Books  he  hath  left  us,  where  Epi5ietus  is  men-
tioned upon  feveral  occafions,  with  a  more  than  or-
dinary Refpe<5t.

Upon  the  whole  Matter,  the  Difficulties  on  both
fides  of  the  Queftion  are  fuch,  that  I  will  not  take
upon  me  to  determine  either  way;  but  fhall  fatisfy
myfelf  with  thus  laying  before  my  Reader  what  may
be  faid  for,  and  againft,  this  Relation  of  Suidas.  And
yet,  if  I  may  be  admitted  to  interpofe  my  own  pri-

*■  Z,«f/^«.  in  Dialog.  c\u  Tituht  MacroHi.  '  Orat.  aJ  Jovia.

vatQ

A  Chronological  Table.

Tears  of

Tears  of

i?(3rj"

Rome.

Chrift.

from
Nero.

819

69

14

820

70

15

821

71

16

822

72

1-7

823

73

18

824

74

19

825

IS

20

826

j6

21

827

77

22

828

78

23

829

79

0  _

24

830
831

832

S34

S35
836

S37
838

839

840

841

842

843

844

845
846

847

848

849
850

8^1

bo
81
82

.83

S4

85

86

87
88

89

90

91

92

93
94

95

96

97
98

99
100

lOI

25
26

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
•34
35
3^
37
38

39

40

41
42

43
44

45
46

Galba,  Olbo,  Vitellms,

FL  Vefpafian,

HelviditiS, Arr.  Lib.  I.
Cap.  2.

77/.  Vefpafian,
Domilian.

Philofophers  banlflied.

Euphrates  Philolbph.  vid,
Arrian.  L.  III.  C  15.  IV.
8.  Flin.  Epift.  I.  10.

Second  Decree  for  banifh-
ing  Philofophers.

'Mer'^ja.
'Trajan.

Tfars

[/^Chronological Table.

Tears  of

Tears  of

Years

Rome.

Chrift.

from

Nero.

852

102

47

Corn.  Tacitus.

^5Z

103

48

Pliny  the  Younger,

854

104

49

^55

105

50

856

106

51

?57

107

52

^58

108

5Z

^59

109

S\

860

no

55

86r

III

5^

862

112

57

tSz

113

58

864

114

59

865

115

60

866

116

61

^6^

117

62

868

118

63

869

119

64

Adrian.

870

120

65

Plutarch. Charon. Fa-

871

I2£

66

mous  about  this  Time.

872

122

6y

873

123

6^

Euphrates'* %  Deaths

874

124

69

Arrian,

875

125

70

876

126

71

877

127

72

878

128

73

Favorinus  and  Polemo,

879

129

74

880

130

75

881

131

y6

882

132

77

883

133

78

Aulus  Gellius. i

884

154

79

E

2 eats

A  Chronological  Table.

Tean  of
Rome

885
886
S87
888
889
890
891
892

%3

894

%5
896
897
898

^9
900

901

902

904

906
907
908
909
910
911
912

9^Z

Tears  of

Tears

Chrift.

from

Nero.

135

80

136

81

137

82

138

83

139

84

140

85

141

U

142

87

143

88

144

145

90

146

91

147

92

148

91>

149

94

150

9S

151

96

152

97

^SZ

98

154

99

155

100

156

lOI

"^57

102

158

103

159

104

160

105

161

106

162

107

163

108

Antoninus  Pius,  to  whom
Arrian  was  Frcecepor.

Lucian  wrote  before  and
about  this  Time :  died
at  the  Beginning  of
Comfnodus's  Reign.

Epi5fetus\  Death.

Marcus  Aurelius,

EPIC'

[I]

EPIcrETUS^

KM  S

ENCHIRIDION,

WITH

SIMPLICIUS

-n^  s

COMMENTARY.

IF  the  Reader  be  curious  to  know  Epi&etus's  Charaifler,
he  may  find  it  at  large  in  an  Account  of  his  Life  and
Death,  written  by  Arrian^  *  who  alfo  compiled
the  Difcourfes  of  EpiSietus^  and  digefted  them  into
feveral  diftincft  Tracfis.  The  fame  Arrian  compofed
this  very  Book  too,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  Eiichiridionf
being  a  CoUedtion  out  of  Epi fetus's  Difcourfes,  of  fuch
Remarlcs  and  Rules,  as  he  thought  moft  feafonable  and  ne-
cefTary,  and  moft  likely  to  affed:  Mens  Minds.  For  thus
much  Arrian  himfelf  declares  in  his  Epiftle  Dedicatory  to
''  Mejfalinus^  to  whom  he  addreffed  this  Book,  as  being  both
a  particular  Friend  of  his,  and  an  exceeding  Admirer  of
Epi&etus.  Though  the  fame  Things  indeed,  and  delivered
in  almoft  the  fame  expreffions,  lie  fcattered  up  and  down

a  The  Reader  will  find  all  that  is  material,  not  only  in  Arrian,  but  others
who  have  given  an  Account  of  EpiBetus,  prelixed  to  this  Edition,  fo  far
as  occurs  at  prell-nt  to  the  Memory  and  Obfervation  of  the  Tranflator.

•>  Mejfalinus  ]  So  Salmafiui  proves  it  ought  to  be  read,  and  not  Mafgalenut.
See  his  Note  on  the  Placet

E  a  in

2  EpicteTus's  Morals,

in  thofe  Writings  of  Arrian^  which  are  called  EpSietus's
Difcourfes.

The  principal  Defign  of  this  Book  (if  Men  would  but
fuffer  themfelves  to  be  wrought  upon  by  it,  and  would  re-
duce what  they  read  into  Pradice)  is,  to  fet  our  Souls  as
free,  as  when  their  Great  Father  and  Creator  firft  gave  them
to  us  i  to  difengage  them  from  all  thofe  flavifh  Fears,  and
confounding  Troubles,  and  other  Corruptions  of  human
Nature,  which  are  wont  to  fubdue  and  tyrannize  over  them.

It  is  called  an  Enchiridmi,  or  Manual,  becaufe  all  Perfons,
who  are  deiirous  to  live  as  they  ought,  fhould  be  perfed  in
this  Book,  and  have  it  always  ready  at  Hand  :  A  Book  of  as
conftant  and  necelTary  Ufe,  as  the  Sword  (which  commonly
went  by  this  Name,  and  from  whence  the  Metaphor  feems
to  be  taken)  is  to  a  Soldier,

The  Difcourfes  are  lively  and  moving ;  and  all,  but  the
ftupid  and  fottifli ,  mull  needs  be  afFe(^ed  with  them  :
And  though  not  all  equally,  yet  all  in  fome  Degree.  And
it  is  to  be  hoped,  they  will  be  {o  afFeded,  as  to  be  made
fenfible  of  their  own  Failings  and  Infirmities,  and  awakened
into  ferious  Thoughts  and  Endeavours  of  Reformation.  In
ihort;  the  Man,  that  can  read  thefe  Refledions,  without  any
Impreflion  or  Concern  at  all,  is  loft  to  all  the  Methods  of
Amendment  in  this  World,  and  can  only  be  made  wifer  by
the  '^  fiery  Difcipline  of  the  next.

The  Inftrudions  he  gives,  are  built  upon  Human  Nature :
and  on  the  Foundation  of  them  all  is  Man,  confidered  as  a
Rational  Soul,  making  ufe  of  the  Body,  as  its  Inftrument  of
Operation.  Upon  this  Account  he  allows  all  thofe  inno-
cent Pleafures,  which  Nature  requires,  and  fuch  as  are  ne-
ceirary  to  keep  up  a  Succeffion  of  Mankind  in  the  World  ^
and  fo  he  does  likevv'ife  the  Enjoyment  of  fuch  other  Things,
as  the  Condition  of  the  prefent  Life  makes  defirable  to  us :
But  then  it  is  conftantly  with  this  Referve ;  that  the  Reafon-
ing  Facujty  preferve  its  own  Liberty,  fo  as  not  to  be  enflaved
to  the  Body,  or  any  of  its  fenfual  Inclinations  j but  be  con-

*  The  ^ery  Difcipline  of  the  next.']  This  Expreflion  pvocerds  upon  an  Opi-
nion of  the  Pythagoreans  and  Plator.ifti,  which  fuppofed  Men  (like  Metals)
to  be  refiiied  from  their  Drofs,  and  their  paft  Offences  to  be  punifiied  by  feveral
forts  of  Tortures  after  Death  ;  but  thefe  to  be  in  the  Nature  of  Corrections,  as
Well  as  Punifhments.  From  them  the  Do<ftrine  of  Purgatory  feems  to  have
been  derived :  and  indeed  many  other  erroneous  Opinions  among  Chriftians
were  either  the  Remains,  or  the  Improvement  of  jome  fond  Conceits  and  odd
Expreffions  among  the  old  Philolcphers.  This  is  plain  in  thz  Gnojiick  zai  Va-
lentmian  Herefies  particularly.

ftantly

•with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 3  .

fiantly  raifing  itfelf  up  above  thefe,  and  afpiring  to  the  En-
joyment of  its  own  proper  Happinefs.  So  that  we  rnay
take  the  Advantage  of  all  the  World  calls  Good,  which  can
any  Way  conduce  to  our  true  Happinefs,  provided  it  be  done
with  due  Temper  and  Moderation.  Bur,  as  for  fuch  as  are
wholly  inconiiftent  with  that  true  Happinefs,  we  are  abfo-
lutely  forbidden  the  having  any  thing  at  all  to  do  with  them.

One  very  remarkable  Excellency  thele  Writings  have,  is,
that  they  render  all,  who  govern  themfelves  by  them,  truly
happy  at  prefent,  and  do  not  content  themfelves  with  turn-
ing Men  over  to  a  long  Payment,  by  didant  Promifes  of
their  Virtues  being  rewarded  in  a  future  State.  Not  but
that  there  moft  certainly  fhall  be  fuch  a  State,  and  fuch  Re-
wards :  For  it  is  impoffible,  that  that  Being,  which  ferves
itfelf  of  the  Body,  and  of  its  Appetites  and  AfFedlions,  as  fo
piany  Inftruments  to  ad:  by,  fliould  not  have  a  diftind  Na-
ture of  its  own;  a  Nature  that  continues  intire,  after  thefe
are  loil  and  deftroyed;  and  confequently  it  mull:  needs  have
a  Perfedlion  of  its  own  too,  peculiar  and  agreeable  to  its
Eflence  and  Nature.  Now,  though  we  fhould  fuppofe  the
Soul  to  be  mortal,  and  that  it  and  the  5ody  perilli  both  to-
gether 'j  yet  he  that  lives  according  to  thefe  Directions,  will
be  fure  to  find  his  Account  in  them  ^  for  he  cannot  fail  of
being  a  truly  happy  Man,  becaufe  he  attains  to  the  Perfedlion
.  of  his  Nature,  and  the  Enjoyment  of  that  Good,  which  is
accommodated  to  a  Rational  Soul.  And  thus  the  Body  of  a
Man,  which  is  confefledly  mortal,  enjoys  its  own  proper
Happinels,  and  can  afk  nothing  farther,  when  it  attains  to
all  that  Vigour  and  Perfedtion,  of  which  the  Nature  of  a
Body  is  capable.

The  Difcourfes  themfelves  are  fliort  and  fententious ;
much  after  the  manner  of  thofe  Precepts,  which  the  Pytha-
goreans call  their  Memorandums  or  Moral  Injiitutions :  Though
among  thefe  indeed,  there  is  fome  Sort  of  Method  and  Con-
nexion,'and  a  mutual  Relation al moft  all  through;  as  will  ap-
pear hereafter,  when  we  come  to  confider  them  particularly.
And  thefe  Obfervations  and  Maxims,  though  they  be  put
into  diftinft  Chapters,  are  all  yet  upon  one  Subjedl,  and  be-
long to  the  fame  Science ;  wz.  That  of  ame^iding  the  Life  of
Man.  They  are  all  direcfted  to  one  and  the  fame  End  j  which
is,  to  rouze  and  invigorate  the  Reafonable  Soul,  that  it
may  maintain  its  own  Dignity,  and  exert  all  its  Powers  in
fuch  Operations,  as  are  agreeable  to  uncorrupt  Nature.

E  3  The

4  Epi  CTETus's  Morals,

The  Expreffions  are  perfpicuous  and  eafy ;  but  yet  it  may
not  be  amifs,  a  little  to  explain  and  enlarge  upon  them ;  and
that,  as  well  for  the  Writers  own  fake,  who  by  this  means
will  be  more  fenfibly  affected,  and  carried  to  a  clofer  and
deeper  Confideration  of  the  Truths .  contained  in  them  ,•  as
for  the  Reader's  Benefit,  who,  perhaps,  not  being  very  con-
verfant  in  fuch  kind  of  Writings,  will  be  led  into  a  more
perfecfl  Underitanding  of  them  by  thefe  Explanations.

Now  the  firft  Thing  to  be  cleared  upon  this  Occafion,  is.
What  fort  of  Perfons  thefe  Inftruftions  were  defened  for;
and  what  Virtues  efpecially,  they  are  capable  of  cultivating
in  the  Men  thatfubmit  to  be  dire<fted  by  them.

And  firft,  it  is  plain, they  are  not  proper  for  the  Man  of
confummate Virtue, who hath  abfolutely  purged  away  all
the  Dregs  of  Human  Nature: for  he  (fo  far  as  this  mortal
State  will  admit  of  fuch  Perfection)  makes  it  his  Bufinefe  to
diveft  himfelf  of  Flefh  and  Senfe,  and  all  the  Appetites  and
Paffions  that  attend  and  ferve  the  Body  j  and  is  intirely  taken
up  with  the  Improvement  of  his  own  Mind, Much  lefs
can  they  fuit the  Circumftances  of  a fpeculative Virtue,
which  is  a  Degree  firill  higher  than  the  former. For  fuch  a
Perfon  is  exalted even  above  the  rational  Life,  and  attains
to  a  fort  of  God-like  Contemplation. They  are adapted
then  more  peculiarly  to  an'  inferior  Rank, who  lead  their
Lives  according  to  the  Dicftates  of  Reafon,  and  look  upon
the  Body  as  an  Inflrument  of  AAion,  contrived  for  the  Ufe
of  the  Soul: Men, who  do  not  confound  thefe  two, nor
make  either  a  Part  of  the  other, nor  the  Body  and  Soul
both,  as  equally  conftituent  Parts  of  Human  Nature. For
he  that  fuppofes the  Man, ftridly  fpeaking, to  confift  as
much  of  Body  as  Soul, hath  a  vulgar  Notion of  Things  ,•
is  depreft  and  funk  down  into  Matter ;  hath  no  more  Pre-
tenfions  to  Reafon,  than  a  Brute  j  and  fcarce  deferves  the
Name  of  Man. He  that  would  anfwer  that  Charjdler in
good  earnelt,  and  affert  the  Dignity  and  Prerogative  of  a  Na-
ture, by  which  God  hath  diftinguiflied  him  from  Beafbs,  mult
take  care  to  preferve  his  Soul, as  Nature  requires  it  fliould
be,  in  a  State  of  Superiority  over  the Body  ^ fo  as  to  ufe
and  manage  it,  not  as  a  Part  of  the  fame  common  Nature,  but
as  an  Inftrument,  wholly  at  its  Government  and  Difpofal.  And
fuch  a  Perfon  as  this  is  the  proper  Objedl  of  thofe  moral  and
political  virtues,  which  the  following  Difcourfes  are  intended
to  excite  Men  to.

That

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 5

That  the  real  Effence  of  a  Man  is  his  Rational  Soul,  So-
0ates  hath  undertaken  to  demonftrate  in  that  Dialogue,
which  Tlato  gives  us,  between  him  and  his  beloved  Alcihia-
des.  And  EpiBetus,  proceeding  upon  this  Foundation,  di-
red:s  his  Scholars,  what  Sort  of  Pradices  and  Converfation
are  proper  to  make  a  Man,  thus  framed  by  Nature,  perfeft.
For  as  the  Body  gathers  Strength  by  Exercife,  and  by  fre-
quently repeating  fach  Motions  as  are  natural  to  it  j  fo  the
Soul  too,  by  exerting  its  Powers,  and  the  Pradlice  of  fuch
Things  as  are  agreeable  to  Nature,  confirms  itfelf  in  Habits,
and  ftrengthens  its  ov^'n  natural  Conftitution.

I  would  not  have  the  Reader  take  it  ill,  to  be  detained  a
little  longer  from  the  following  Difcourfes,  only  whilft  I
prefent  him  with  fo  neceflary  an  Introdudion  to  them,  as
the  explaining  a  little  this  Notion,  which  Epidetus  all  along
takes  for  a  granted  Truth  ^  'uiz.  That  the  real  EJfence  of  the
Man  is  his  Rational  Soul,  -which  makes  ufe  of  the  Bodj>,  as  its
Injlrument  of  ABion.  For  Epi&etus  fets  before  us  the  Ope-
rations peculiar  to  fuch  a  Perfon,  and  becoming  his  Cha-
rader  j  and  then  he  makes  it  his  Bufinefs  to  excite  all  his
Scholars  to  get  a  perfed  Knowledge,  and  to  employ  them-
felves  in  the  conftant  Pradice  of  them  :  That  by  fuch  daily
Exercife  we  may,  as  I  faid,  give  the  finifhing  Stroke  to  Na-
ture, and  be  as  perfed,  as  our  Condition  is  capable  of  being.
This  is  the  Ground  Epi&:etus  goes  uponj  which  he  does
not  at  all  attempt  to  prove,  but  takes  it^  as  I  faid,  for  a
fundamental  Truth,  fufficiently  plain,  and  acknov^ledged
before.

But  the  Method,  in  which  Socrates  proceeds,  is  this :  He
makes  ufe  of  clear  and  familiar  Examples,  and  tells  us.
That  a  Man  in  cutting  (for  inftance)  ufes  his  Knife,  and
he  ufes  his  Hand  too  :  Then,  inferring  from  hence,  that  the
Thing  ufed,  confidered  as  an  Inilrument,  is  different  from
that  which  employs  itj  he  concludes,  that  it  is  the  Man,
which  employs  the  Body  as  an  Inftrument.  Now  in  Truth  it  \s
the  Rational  Soul,  and  nothing  elfc,  that  employs  this  Bo-
dy, ia  the  Exercife  of  Arts,  and  Trades,  and  all  Manner
of  Operations.  From  hence  again  he  draws  this  farther  In-
ference, 7;iz.  That  which  employs  the  Body,  hath  the  Go-
vernment and  Difpofal  of  what  it  fo  employs.  And  then
he  forms  his  Argument  into  this  disjundive  Syllogifm,  Ei-
ther the  Soul  alone,  or  the  Body  alone,  or  Both  together,
muft  needs  be  the  Man.  Now  if  the  Man  have  the  Com-
mand of  the  Body,  and  the  Body  cannot  command  nor  dif-

E  4  pofe

6  Epictetus's  Morals,

pofe  of  itfelf  i  then  it  is  evident,  that  the  Body  alone  cannot  bo
the  Man.  It  is  evident  again,  that  Body  and  Soul  together
cannot  be  the  Man,  for  the  very  fame  reafon :  For  if  the
Man  have  the  Government  of  the  Body,  and  the  Body  itfelf
have  no  part  of  that  Government  ^  then  it  is  plain,  this  Pre-
rogative does  not  extend  to  Soul  and  Body  both,  and  there-
fore Both  cannot  be  the  Man.  But,  in  fhort.  if  the  Body
in  its  own  Nature  be  void  of  all  Life  and  Motion,  and  if
it  be  the  Soul,  which  animates  and  moves  it  (as  we  fee  ia
handycraft  Trades,  the  Workman  is  the  Principle  of  Mo-
tion, and  the  Tools  have  none,  but  what  they  derive  from
him)  then  it  follows,  that  the  Body  is  to  the  Soul,  what  a
Tool  is  to  the  Artificer :  And  confequently,  that  the  Soul,
being  the  Original  of  all  Operation,  is  truly  and  properly  th^
Man.

So  then,  whoever  would  make  the  Man  his  Care,  muft
confult  the  Advantage  and  Improvement  of  the  Soul,  and
purfue  the  Happineis  peculiar  to  this :  for  he  that  beftows
his  Pains  upon  the  Body,  does  not  (it  feems)  advance  him-
felf  and  his  own  Good  (properly  ipeaking)  but  only  that
of  his  Inftrument.  Much  more  extravagant  and  abfurd  is  it
then,  to  lay  himfelf  out  upon  Riches,  or  any  external  Ad?
vantages  of  that  Kind ;  becaufe,  in  fo  doing,  he  purfues  a
very  foreign  Incereft,  one  much  more  diftant  than  the  former ;
For  he  neither  makes  the  Man,  nor  the  Man's  Inftrument,
the  Objedl  of  his  Care  j  but  all  terminates  in  thofe  Things,
which  make  for  the  Convenience  of  this  Inftrument  only.

Epi^et^

nvitf) S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S's G  O  M  M  E  N  T. 7

EpiBeti  Enchiridion,

CHAP. I.

ALL  Things  whatfoever  may  be  divided  into  two
Sorts  i  thofe  that  are,  and  thofe  that  are  not
within  our  own  Power  :  Of  the  former  Sort  are  our
Opinions  and  Notions  of  Things ;  ^  our  AfFeftions,
our  Defires,  and  our  Averfions.  And  in  Ihort,  all  our
A(5lions  of  every  Kind  are  in  our  own  Power,

COMMENT,

HE  calls  thofe  Things  in  our  onvn  Po'voer,  which  we  our-,
felves  are  Mafters  of,  and  which  depend  purely  upon
our  own  Difpofal  and  Choice ;  as  we  commonly  fay,  any
Thing  is  a  Man's  own,  which  he  is  not  beholden  to  any  body
elfe  for;  fo  as  that  it  fhould  fall  within  the  compafs  of  a  fe-
cond  Perfon  to  grant  or  deny  it,  to  permit  or  debar,  or  any
way  hinder  him  in  the  Enjoyment  of  it.  Now  fuch  are  the
Motions  and  Operations  of  the  Soul ;  they  are  born  and
bred  within  us,  and  owing  folely  to  our  own  Judgment,
and  our  own  Choice ;  for  indeed,  it  is  not  poffible  for  any
thing  without  us  to  determine  our  Choice.  The  Qbjeff  of  our
Choice,  'tis  confefl,  is  very  often  fomething  without  us;
but  the  y^B  of  it,  and  the  Motions  toward  it,  are  intfrely
our  own,  and  within  us. Such,  for  inftance^  are  the  par-

*  jiffeBions^  This  is  the  moft  convenient  Rendring  I  could  think  of  for
the  Greek  o^,m.*«  ;  which  though  the  Latin  Impetus  may  do  right  to,  yet  I
queftion  whether  any  Englijh  Word  will  fully  exprefs  it  :  If  any,  this  of
u^ffeSiion-j  which  yet  I  do  not  fo  nicely  confine  myfelf  to  in  this  Tranflation,
as  not  to  render  it  by  Paraphrafe  in  fome  Places.  But  I  muft  own,  that  in  the
midft  of  rny  Doubts  what  to  exprefs  it  by  generally,  the  Authority  of  our
learned  Gataker  in  his  Latin,  and  of  Meric  Caj'auh.  in  his  EngUp  Tranflation  of
jintonwu%,  •vt'Tj  much  prevailed  with  me  ;  who  have  chofen  this  Expreflion  for
it  in  that  Palfage,  which  fcems  very  pertinent,  and  direfting  to  this  Purpofe.
Lib,  III.  .Sfi?.  XVI.  'S.SfAa,  •\v)(ri,  \iSg'  <rctfAc^^  ctt't^KVcij,  4"^.^'  o^/ueti,  vit
ioy/xala,  Gat.  ^fetJuj. Calaub.  JffeSimi,  ^

*^  J  Wit-  lktA.fK*r  vn.  ffi't.  fiTefPLce. z?A*t^i'T»^^fc

8  Epictetus's  Morals,

ticular  Opinions  we  entertain,  and  the  Judgments  we  make
of  Things ;  as  that  Riches,  or  Death,  or  the  Hke,  are  Things
in  their  own  Nature,  good,  or  evil,  or  indifferent.  And,
though  we  are  often  induced  to  take  up  this  or  that  particular
Opinion  upon  Trull,  and  from  the  Credit  we  give  to  what  we
hear  other  People  fay  of  it  j  yet  is  not  their  Authority,  or
their  Perfuafion  of  fuch  abfolute  efficacy,  as  that  the  Opi-
nion fhould  not  ftill  be  our  own.  For  at  this  rate,  we  fiiould
make  ourfelves  as  fenflefs  Creatures  as  Parrots,  who  when
they  call  for  a  Cup  of  Sack,  know  not  v/hat  they  fay.  If
we  be  allowed  then  to  think  at  all,  the  Opinion  muft  be  our
ov/n  Adl  and  Deed  ;  occafion'd,  'tis  true,  foraetimes  by
Things  without  us,  and  recommended  and  conveyed  to  us
by  the  Infrrudions  and  Arguments  of  others  j  but  not  infu-
fed  fo  mechanically,  as  that  we  fhould  be  purely  paflive  in
the  Cafe.

Thus  again,  The  Objedt  which  moves  our  AfFec^lion,  is
without  us,  but  the  AfFeftion  itfelf  is  excited,  and  arifes
within  us.  For  there  is  a  great  Difference  obfervable  bc"
tween  the  internal  Motion  of  the  Mind,  and  the  external
Motive  or  Inducement  to  it.  This  Motion  is  not  like  that
of  Men  thruft  forward  by  another,  forcibly  and  againft  their
Wijis  •  but  fuch  a  one,  as  when  we  move  our  own  Bodies
by  our  own  Strength,  and  of  our  ov/n  accord.

The  Cafe  is  the  fame  with  our  Defires,  by  which  the  Soul
does  (as  it  were)  put  herfelf  forv/ird,  and  go  in  purfuit  of
the  Thing  defired ;  and  fo  likewife  vi'ith  our  Averiions  too,
which  are  but  a  kind  of  turning  afide,  or  running  away  to
avoid  the  Objedl  that  provokes  them.

Now  it  is  fufficiently  manifeft,  that  of  all  thefe,  the  firffc
in  order  of  Nature  mufl:  be  Opinion  j  by  which  I  underfland
fuch  a  Knowledge  or  Judgment  of  Things,  as  is  grounded
upon  Reafon,  and  worthy  the  Character  of  a  Man.  When
this  Opinion  relates  to  any  real  or  feeming  Good,  or  Evil,
which  Vv^e  apprehend  ourfelves  to  be  concern'd  in,  then  it
prefently  excites  either  Deiire  or  Averfion;  and,  purfuant
to  cither  of  thefe,  the  proper  AiFedlions  or  Motions  of  the
Soul.  For  the  Good  mufl  needs  be  defired,  before  the  Soul
be  affected  with  it,  or  move  towards  it  j  and  the  Evil  mull
be  difapproved,  before  fhe  flee  from  it.  Though  indeed  the
Scoicks  have  advanced  a  contrary  Method,  and  reprefented
the  AfFecflions,  by  which  the  Soul  is  carried  to  or  from  its
Objed,  as  if  they  were  antecedent  to  Defire  and  Averfion  j
thus  confidering  thefe  Affedions,  as  the  Beginnings  and  im-
mediate;

'ze;/V^  SiMPLICIUS's  COMMEN  T. 9

mediate  Caufes  of  thofe  Defires  and  Averfions  in  the  Soul.
But  after  all,  the  brutifh  Inclinations,  fuch  particularly  as
Anger  and  fenfual  Appetite,  are  fo  much  of  a-piece  with
the  Body,  fo  clofely  and  manifeflly  interwoven  with  the
Blood  and  animal  Spirits,  that  they  feem  to  grow  fiom
the  particular  Complexions  and  Conftitutions  of  Men.  So
that  thefe  muft  of  neceffity  derive  their  Morion  from  an  ex-
ternal Caufe  in  great  Meafure,  and  cannot  be  perfe(fHy  at
their  own  Difpofal,  nor  under  the  abfolute  Maftery  of  the
Perfons  thus  defiring,  (^c.  though  they  are  begun  too,  and
proceed  originally  from  within.  Not  only  fo,  but  the
rational  Soul  itfelf,  when  fubdued  by  the  Body,  and  the
brutiOi  Impulfes  of  Senfe,  does  in  a  great  Degree  degenerate
into  Machine^  is  violently  agitated,  drawn  and  managed  at
pleafure,  and  lofes  much  of  its  native  Liberty  and  Power.
But  when  it  ads  in  agreement  with  Nature  and  Reafon,  it
maintains  an  abfolute  Freedom,  and  moves  only  by  an  inter-
nal Principle  of  its  own.  In  a  Mind  thus  regularly  difpcfed,
it  is  very  eafy  to  difcern,  how  much  we  have  in  our  own
Power  j  tho'  in  the  former  Inftance  of  a  diforderly  Mind,
the  Cafe  be  fomewhat  intricate  and  perplexed.  But  how-
ever, in  order  to  a  more  exad  Underilanding  of  the  whole
Matter,  both  what  this  Liberty  and  Power  is,  and  what  Ob-
iedis  it  extends  to ;  as  alfo,  to  fhew,  that  all  the  Happinefj
and  Mifery  of  a  Man's  Life  depends  upon  the  Ufe  or  the
Abufe  of  this  Liberty  j  I  will  trace  the  Thing  up  to  its  firft
Caufe,  and  examine  the  whole  Matter  particularly.

The  Source  and  Original  of  all  Things  is  Good.  For  in-
deed, that  muft  needs  be  both  the  Caufe  and  Beginning,
and  the  End  and  confummate  Perfection  of  all,  in  which
all  Defires  center,  and  to  which  all  Things  naturally  tend.
Now  this  Good  forms  and  produces  all  Things  out  of  its  own
Fulnefs,  both  the  moft  excellent,  the  middle  Sort,  and  thelaft
and  loweft  Rank  of  Beings.  The  firft  and  moft  excellent
bear  the  clofeft  Affinity  to  itfelf,  are  of  a-piece  with  it  (as  it
were)  and  exprefs  Images  of  it.  Thus  one  good  Being
produces  many  good  Beings  j  one  fimple  and  uncorapounded
Being,  Independent  and  Supreme,  produces  many  ciher  fim-
ple Beings  like  itfelf,-  one  Principle  produces  many  Prin-
ciples: And  this  One,  this  fimplc  Being,  this  Principle,  and
this  Good,  are  but  fo  many  feveral  Names  for  God,  who
is  before  all  Things,  and  the  Caufe  of  all  Things.

Now  whatever  is  firft-,  muft  of  neceffity  be  the  pureft  an!
moft  fimple  Being. For  all  compounded  Things  and  Num-
bers

30  Epictetus's  Morals,

bsrs  are  after  the  Simple  and  Unites  in  order  of  Nature,
and  inferior  to  them  in  Dignity.  And  all  Compounds,  and
Things  not  good,  do  defire  the  Good,  as  fomething  above,
and  better  than  themfelves.  And  whatever  is  not  relf-ex-»
iftent,  muft  have  received  its  Being  from  fotnething  elfe.
So  that  the  firft  Principle,  and  original  Caufe,  muit  have
all  abfoiute  and  infinite  Power  ;  the  Excellence  of  which
confifts,  and  its  Exuberance  is  feen  in  the  Produdlion  of
all  Things  from  icfelf,  and  in  giving  to  thofe  that  referable
its  own  Perfedions,  the  Precedence  before  others,  that  bear
no  fuch  Referablance  to  it.  And  hence  it  is,  that  one  comr
mon  Principle  produces  many  Principles,  many  fimple  Be-r
ings,  many  GoodnefTes,  imnaediacely  from  itfelf,  and  its  own
Fulnefs.

Thus  all  Beings,  which  are  diilinguiflied  from  one  an-
other by  their  own  peculiar  Differences,  and  multiplied  into
feveral  Species,  according  to  the  particular  Forms  and  Cir-
cumftances  in  which  they  differ,  are  yet  each  of  them  reduci-r
ble  to  one  Principle,  more  properly  their  own.  All  Things
beautiful  and  lovely  (for  inftance)  of  what  Kind  foever  that
Lovelinefs  and  Beauty  be,  or  what  Qbjed  foever  it  belong  to,
whether  Bodies  or  Souls,  are  yet  derived  from  one  com-
mon Source  of  Beauty  and  Gracefulnefs.

The  Cafe  is  the  fame  with  all  Manner  of  Corigruities,  and
all  Truths,  and  all  Principles  j  for  thefe,  fo  far  forth  as  they
are  Principles  and  Originals  to  other  Things,  do  exadly  agree,
and  are  of  the  fame  Nature  with  that  primary  Goodnefs,
and  original  Truth,  and  firft  Principle  of  all  ,•  allowing  on-
ly for  fome  Abatements,  and  taking  that  Agreement  in  fuch
Proportions,  as  the  Capacity  of  thefe  derived  and  fecondary
Caufes  will  admit.  For  the  fame  Relation,  which  that  firil
univerfal  Principle  bears  to  all  Beings  in  general,  the  fame
does  each  of  thefe  fubordinate  Principles  bear  to  the  feveral
Species,  and  Individuals  contained  under  it,  and  partaking
of  the  Property  peculiar  to  it.  For  every  Species,  which  is
diftinguifhed  from  the  reft  by  a  peculiar  Difference  of  its  own,
muft  needs  have  a  tendency  to,  and  terminate  in  its  proper
Principle-  from  whence  one  and  the  fame  Form  is  refle<fted
down  upon  all  the  particular  Kinds  and  Creatures  compre^
hended  under  it.

Thus  an  Unite  is  the  Foundation  of  all  Numbers,  and  a
fingle  Caufe  is  the  Original  of  all  Properties  in  this  vaft  Va-
riety of  Beings.  So  that  all  partial  and  fubordinate  Caufes
do  really  fubfift,  and  are  contained  in  the  firft  and  univerfal

one;

mth  SiMPLicius's  Comment, ii

one^  and  this,  not  locally  or  numerically,  but  eflentially
and  virtually  j  as  the  Parts  in  the  Whole,  as  Generals  in  a
Singular,  and  as  Numbers  in  an  Unite.  For  this  indeed  is
itfelf  All,  above  and  before  All ;  and  out  of  one  Principle
many  Principles  grow,  and  in  one  common  Good  many
GoodnefTes  fubiift  and  dwell.

Nor  is  this  Principle  a  limited  or  particular  one  (as  for
inftance,  a  Principle  of  Beauty  or  Gracefulnefs,  or  Good-
nefs,  or  Truth)  as  each  of  the  refb  are ;  but  limply  and  uni-
verfally  a  Principle  or  Caufe ,  a  Principle,  not  only  of  Spe*
cies  and  Beings,  but  even  of  all  other  Principles  too.  For
the  Property  of  a  Principle  cannot  take  its  Rife  from  Parti-
culars, and  from  many,  but  muft  center  at  laft  in  an  Unite,
and  that  One  is  the  greai  Original  of  All,  the  firft  Beginning
and  Caufe  of  Caufes.

Now  the  firft  and  immediate  Produftions  of  this  firft  Ori-
ginal Good  are  of  the  fame  Kind  and  Nature  with  itfelf.
They  retain  their  native  Goodnefs,  and,  like  that  from
whence  they  fpring, .  are  fixed  and  unchangeable,  rooted  and
confirmed  in  the  fame  Happinefs :  they  ftand  in  need  of  no  ad-
ditional Good  from  abroad,  but  are  themfelves  naturally  and
elTentially  good  and  happy.  Now  all  other  Beings,  who.'e
Defcent  from  that  one  original  Good  is  more  remote,  and
who  derive  themfelves  from  that  Firft  and  thefe  Secondary
Caufes  in  Conjuntftion,  lofe  that  Perfedlion  of  being  elFen^
tially  good,  and  enjoy  v^hat  they  have  by  Participation  on-
ly. Fixed  indeed  they  are  in  God's  efTential  Goodnefs,  and
therefore  he  continually  communicates  it  to  them.  Buc
the  laft  and  loweft  Sort,  which  have  no  Power  of  ading  or
moving  themfelves  (as  Bodies  for  example)  as  their  Ex-
iftence  and  Motion  is  fomething  from  without,  and  v/hat
themfelves  are  purely  paftive  inj  fo  likewife  is  all  theii*
Good  owing  to  fomething  without  them  too.  And  that
their  Motion  and  Exiftence  is  from  without,  is  plain,  be-
caufe  they  have  no  difcerning  or  governing  Faculty  ,•  they
are  fubje(ft  to  perpetual  Change  and  Divifion,  and  confequent-
ly  cannot  be  prefent  to  themfelves  in  every  Part,  fo  as  to  be
all  in  all,  or  produce  themfelves  intire  at  oncej  nor  have
they  any  Power  of  moving  themfelves,  as  being  in  their  own
Nature  void  of  Spirit  and  Life.  Yet  ftill  there  is  a  mid-
dle State  between  thefe  extremes,  a  Sort  of  Beings,  inferior
to  that  fixed  immutable  Nature,  which  is  always  confiftent
with  itfelf,  and  yet  fuperior  to  the  loweft  and  mechanical
Sort. And  thefe  are  moved,  not  in  the  fame  Manner  v/irh

Bodies,

12  EpI  CTE  TUS'S MoRALSj

Bodies,  by  a  Motion  impreffed  upon  them  from  fomething
elfe,  but  by  one  internal  and  purely  theirs.  And  in  this  Ca-
pacity are  Souls  Mailers  of  their  own  Motion,  and  of  that
of  the  Body  to  which  they  are  united.  For  which  Reafon
we  call  all  Bodies,  fet  into  Motion  by  a  Principle  from  with-
in, A^iimate ;  and  thofe  that  have  none,  but  what  proceeds
from  fomething  without,  Inanimate  Bodies.

So  then  the  Soul  gives  Motion,  both  to  itfelf,  and  to  the
Body.  For  if  it  received  its  own  Motion  from  fomething.
without,  and  afterwards  put  the  Body  into  Motion,  this  Mo-
tion of  the  Body  could  not,  with  any  Propriety  of  Speech,
be  imputed  to  the  Soul,  but  would  be  wholly  owing  to  that,
which  firft  moved  the  Soul.  Now  this  free  Being  \^  beneath
the  fix'd  and  unchangeable  Goodnefs,  and  enjoys  its  Good
by  Participation  only,  and  fo  is  carried  towards  it  j  yet  this  is
done  by  no  foreign  Force,  but  by  its  own  fpontaneous  Acl,
its  own  Inclinations  and  Defires.  For  Inclinations,  and  De-
fires,  and  AfFedions,  and  Choice,  are  Motions  proper  to
Souls,  and  intirely  their  own.

Now  of  thefe,  the  firfl  and  beft  being  the  immediate
Produ(ftion  of  Things  effentially  and  in  their  own  Nature  good
(though  with  this  Abatement,  that  they  are  not  fo  themfelves,
but  only  are  defirous  of  Good)  do  bear  fo  near  a  Relation  to
them,  that  they  deiire  it  with  a  natural  and  unchangeable  Af-
fedion  j  their  Choice  is  ever  uniform  and  conliftent  j  deter-
mined to  the  good  Part,  and  never  perverted  to  the  worfe.
And  if  by  Choice  we  mean  the  preferring  of  one  Thing  before
another  ^  they  can  fcarce  be  allowed  to  have  any,  unlels
you  will  call  it  fo,  becaufe  they  ever  take  the  chiefcfb  and
moft  perfect  Good.  But  the  Souls  of  Men  are  lb  contrived,
as  to  link  together,  into  one  Perfon,  an  heavenly  and  an
earthly  Nature  ^  and  confequently,  muft  be  capable  of  in-
clining to  both  Sides,  of  fearing  upwards,  or  of  finking
downwards.  When  they  make  the  former  their  conftant
Care,  their  Defires  and  their  Determinations  are  uniform,
and  free,  and  above  Contradidion  j  but  when  they  lofe  this
Power,  all  is  inverted  and  out  of  courfe,  becaufe  they  em-
ploy themfelves  wholly  upon  purfuing  mean  Ends,  and  only
affect  low  Actions  :  Notwithftanding  Nature  hath  quali-
fied them  for  the  animating  and  moving  of  Bodies  inanimate
and  purely  paffive  j  and  for  governing  thofe  Things,  which
are  incapable  of  procuring  or  partaking  of  any  Good  by
their  own  A6t  j  and  hath  given  them  a  Power,  not  only  of
ading  as  they  pleafe  themfelves,  but  of  putting  other  Things

into

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 13

into  Adion  at  Pleafure  too,  which  otherwife  are  not  capable
of  any  fuch  Thing.

Now  v/hen  the  Soul  hath  converfed  too  familiarly  with,
and  addicfled  herfelf  too  much  to  temporal  and  corruptible
Things,  f-ich  as  have  but  a  perifhing  and  tranfitory  Good  in
them  j  her  Choice  is  no  longer  above  Contradicftion,  but  at-
tended with  many  Struggles  and  ftrong  Oppofitions :  'Tis  d'l-
red:ed  ftill  indeed  to  Objedrs  eligible  and  good,- but  then
this  is  fometiraes  a  real  Good,  and  fometimes  a  treacherous
and  deceitful  one,  which,  upon  the  Account  of  fome  Plea-
fure attending  it, prevails  upon  us. And  becaufe  this  is  moft
certain,  that  true  Good  is  always  attended  with  true  Plea-
fure j  hence  it  is,  that,  wherever  the  Soul  discovers  the  leaft
Shadow  of  this,  fhe  catches  at  it  greedily,  without  flaying  to
confider  of  what  Kind  the  Pleafure  is  j whether  it  be  real,
and  agreeable  to  that  Good  which  is  truly  fo  j  or  whether  it
be  falfe,  and  only  carries  a  counterfeit  Face  of  Good  j  never
recolleding  that  it  is  neceflarily  attended  with  many  Troubles
and  great  UneafinefTes,  and  v/ould  not  be  Pleafure  without
thefe  to  introduce  and  recommend  it  to  us. For  he  that
takes  Pleafure  in  eating,  would  have  none  if  he  bad  not  hrft
been  hungry  y  nor  would  Drinking  give  a  Man  any,  but  for
the  Thirft  that  afHicfled  him  before. Thus  Uneaiinefs  and
Pain are  the conftant Attendants  of  Pleafure, and ever
mingled  with  it :  So  that  if  you  fuppofe  any  Pleafure  in  drink-
ing,  you  fiiall  find, that  it  comes  from  fome  Remains  of
Thirft  J  for  the  Pleafure  lafts  no  longer,  than  while  the  Pain
continues  with  it. So  long  as  we  are  hungry,  or  dry,  or  cold,
or  the  like,  the  Meat,  and  Drink,  and  Fire,  that  allay  thefe
UneafinefTes,  are  agreeable  to  us  ,• but  when  once  the  Senfe
of  thofe  Pains  ceafes,  we  quickly  grow  weary,  and  have  too
much  of  them  j and  what  before  gave  Satisfa(ftion  and  Re-
lief, foon  becomes  our  Loathing  and  Averfion,  and  is  itfelf  a
Pain  to  us. Thus  alfo  the  Men,  who  fufFer  themfelves  to
be  carried  away  into  inordinate  and  extravagant  Enjoyments,
and  make  Pleafure  the  only  End  and  Bufinefs  of  their  Lives,
generally  undergo  a  great  deal  of  Trouble  and  Uneafinefs
along  with  it.

Now  the  Choice  of  this  pleafant  treacherous  Good  is  the
Caufe  of  all  our  Faults ;  as  on  the  contrary,  the  Choice  of
true  fubflantial  Good  is  the  Foundation  of  all  our  Virtue.
And  indeed  all  the  Good  and  Evil  of  our  whole  Lives,  the
Happinefs  and  Mifery  of  them  depend  upon  this  Freedom  of
Will,  and  Power  of  Choice  in  us. For  when  the  Will  is

difen-

14  Epictetus's  Moral Sj

difengaged,  when  it  proceeds  from  a  free  Principle,  and  its
Determinations  are  properly  the  Acfts  of  that  rational  Soul,
of  which  our  very  EfTence  and  Nature  confifts  • then  it  is
direded  to  Objedts  truly  eligible  and  good. And  for  this
ReafontVirtue,  which  is  its  proper  Happinefs  and  Perfediori,
is  called  in  Greek,  'a^st-^,  <^c. a  Name  which  hath  great
Affinity  to  a  Word  that  iignifies  *  eligible ;  not
*  Ai^ETjj. only  becaufe  Virtue  is  properly  the  Objed,  but
alfo,  becaufe  it  is  the  EfFed:  of  our  own  Choice.
But  when  the  Will  adls  in  Compliance  with  the  brutifh  Ap-
petites and  Inclinations,  and  propofes  their  Enjoyments  to»
itfelf  as  its  own  Happinefs  j  then  it  makes  an  ill  Choice,  arid
fixes  upon  counterfeit  Good  inftead  of  true :  So  that  all  this
Freedom  and  Choice  is  in  our  own  Difpofal. For  the  Opi-
nions and  Alledioris  of  the  Soul,  its  Incliriatiohs  arid  Aver-
fions,  are  but  fo  many  Steps  towards  Chpice  j  and  all  termi-
nate in  that  at  laft : and  thefe  are  properly  the  Motions  of
the  Mind,  arifmg  from  within  ;  and  not  from  any  violent
Impulfes  from  without  us. So  that  we  ourfdves  afe  Matters
of  all  thcfe  Things.

This  is  the  very  Reafon,  why  the  Laws  of  God  and  Man,
and  the  Judgment  of  all  wife  Men,  make  our  own  Freedom
and  Choice  the  Standard  to  meafure  our  Aftions  by.  They
look  upon  the  Intention  as  a  Thing  abfolutely  in  our  own
Power  j  and  they  pronounce  of  our  Vices  and  our  Virtues,
according  to  this,  and  not  according  to  the  Quality  of  our
Adions  themfelves.  For  thefe  are  not  abfolutely  ours,  but  are
fpecified  and  difiinguifhed,  become  formally  good  or  evil  by
Cur  own  Will,  and  our  own  Choice.  The  Adion  of  killiiTg
is  always  the  fame,  confidered  ftridly  in  itfelf  j  but  when  this  .
Adion  is  involuntary,  it  is  excufed  and  pardoned,  becaufe  in
fuch  Cafes  it  is  not  properly  ours,  nor  in  our  own  Power :
Nay,  when  done  in  a  juft  Caufe,  or  in  a  legal  Way,  it  is
not  only  excufed,  but  applauded  and  highly  commendable.  So
that  the  formal  Good  or  Evil  of  our  Adiions  does  not  de-
pend upon  the  Adions  themfelves,  but  upon  the  Intention,
the  Choice,  the  Freedom,  and  Power  which  we  have  in  them,
and  which  give  them  their  moral  Qualities  accordingly..

By  all  this  it  appears,  that  Epifietus  took  the  right  Me-
thod, when  he  began  his  Inftrudions  with  this  Confideration
of  Things  within  our  own  Power,  and  advifed  us  to  make
it  the  general  Rule  of  our  Condud  j  fince  all  the  Excellen-
cy, and  all  the  Diihonefty  of  our  Adions,  all  the  Happi-

neis

W//j  Si MPL  iciu  s's  Comment, i^

fteCs  and  all  the  Mifery  of  our  Lives  depends  upon  it.  Bur,
when  be  fays  in  general  TerniSj  That  all  Things  may  he  dijiin-
guijhed  into  two  Sorts  j  fovte  that  are^  and  fome  that  are  not
in  our  oiun  Fewer  j  \vc  muft  not  fo  underftand  him,  as  if  all
things  whatfoever  Were  meant  by  it;  but  only  fuch  as  are
within  usj  or  any  Way  concern  us.  For  at  that  rate,  there
would  be  no  Propbrtidn  at  ail  betwixt  the  two  oppofite
Parts,  which  ought  tb  be  obfetved,  and  is  neceffary  to  make
a  juft  Divifiort.  And  this  Proportion,  I  fay,  would  be  quite
loft,  if  all  Things  whatfoever,  both  thofe  that  are  contained
in  the  World,  and  thofe  that  are  above,  and  out  of  the
World,  were  fet  in  oppofition  to  the  few,  in  comparifon,
that  are  within  our  own  Power.

But  now,  in  regard  forae  People  quarrel  with  this  Diftin-
ftion,  even  when  limited  in  the  moft  cautious  Manner  that
can  be,  and  will  allow  us  to  have  nothing  at  all  in  our
Power;  and  among  thefe,  fome  aflert,  that  all  our  Actions,
Appetites,  and  Paffions,  proceed  from  Neceflity,  and  not
from  Choice ;  and  others  make  us  like  Stones  put  into  mo-
tion, that  aft  mechanically,  by  Chance,  and  without  any
Purpofe  or  Defign  at  all;  though  what  hath  been  faid  already
upbn  our  natural  Power,  and  the  Place  which  our  Choice
and  Free-will  hath,  and  the  NecefTity  that  lb  it  muft  be,
might  fuffice ;  yet  perhaps  it  may  not  be  amifs,  to  confider
the  Objedions  of  thofe  Men,  who  would  rob  us  of  this
Liberty  and  Power,  and  to  refute  them  particularly.

Now,  if  by  this  mechanical  and  forced  Sort  of  Aftion,
without  Purpofe,  and  by  pure  Chance,  they  intend  to  fay,
that  we  propofe  to  ourfelves  no  End  at  all  in  what  we  do  j
it  is  by  no  Means  true;  or  if  it  would  hold  in  ibme  Cafes,
yet  it  is  evident,  there  are  very  many  Inftances,  in  which  ic
will  not.  For  all  Arts  and  Sciences,  nay,  all  Natures  and
Beings,  have  conftantly  fome  particular  Aim  and  End  fixed  to
them;  to  which  they  diredl  their  Endeavpurs  perpetually,
and  make  every  Adion  in  fome  Degree  fubfervient.  And
it  may  be  laid  in  general,  that  there  is  no  one  Ad,  no  one
Motion  of  any  living  Creature  in  the  whole  World,  but  is
performed  out  of  a  Profped  of  fome  real,  or  at  leaft  fome
feeming  Good:  Even  where  the  Objed  is  Evil,  this  Obfer-
vation  holds;  fmce  the  avoiding  that  Evil  is  for  the  attaining
fome  Good,  and  for  the  Advantage  we  m  7  find  in  efcaping
from  it.

But  if  this  ading  by  Chance,  and  without  any  Purpofe,  be
fo  underftood,  that  what  we  dejlire  may  prove  impolEWe  to

F  be

i6  Epictetus's  Moral s>

be  compafTed,  or  incapable  of  anfwering  our  end,  or  hiivt^
ful  when  we  have  attained  it  (as  we  fay  fometimes,  that
a  Man  took  a  Medicine  without  any  thought,  or  to  no
Purpofe,  which  did  him  no  Good,  or  perhaps  did  him  Harm)
neither  does  this  Senfe  deftroy  our  Free-will.  For  we
maintain,  that  thofe  Defires  and  Averfions  are  in  our  Power,
which  concern,,  not  only  Things  that  may  be  attained,  and
turn  to  our  Benefit,  when  they  are  fo  ^  but  thofe  too,  which
cannot,  and  which  are  prejudicial  to  us  when  we  have  them.
And  for  this  Reafon  we  affirm,  that  our  Errors  and  our
Vices  are  as  truly  the  EfFedls  of  this  Liberty  and  Choice,  as.
our  greatefb  Virtues  themfeives  are.

Thofe  who  pretend,  that  our  Opinions  and  Defires,  and  ge-
nerally fpeaking,  all  our  Choices  and  Intentions,  are  ne-
cefTary,  and  not  at  our  own  Difpofal,  as  proceeding  from.'
Motives  without  us,  and  not  beginning  of  our  own  Accord
within  us,  argue  for  their  Opinion  feveral  Ways.

Some  of  them  make  the  V/ants  of  human  Nature  the
Ground  of  this  NecefiSty.  For  we  all  know,^  that  a  Maa
in  Extremity  of  Hunger,  or  Thirft,  or  Cold,  defires  Meat,
and  Drink,  and  Warmth,  whether  he  will  or  no ;  and  a
Perfon  upon  a  Sick-bed,  cannot  help  defiring  Health  and
Eafe.

Some  lay  all  upon  the  Nature  of  the  Thing  itfelf,  whicfe
is  the  Objefb  of  our  Opinion,  or  Defire,  or  Averfion ;  and
contend,  that  this  excites  our  Paffions,  and  aSedrs  our  Minds
by  its  own  Power  and  Evidence,  whether  we  are  confent-
ing  to  it,  or  not.  Who  is  there,  for  Inilance,  that  hath
attained  to  the  leaft  Knowledge  in  Arithmetick,  and  does
not  readily  allow,  and  firmly  believe,  thai  t-wke  Tivo  viake
tour  ?  And  which  Way  fhall  we  call  fuch  an  Opinion  as
this,  the  EflTeft  of  Freedom  and  Choice,  and  not  rather  of
abfolute  Conftraint,  becaufe  arifing  from  the  Evidence  of  the
Thing  allented  to,  and  the  Impoffibility  of  its  being  other-
wife.^  So  again,  when  a  Man  hath  entertained  a  Notion  of
any  Goodnefs  or  Excellence,  v.'hen  he  apprehends  a  Thing  to
be  lovely,  or  profitable,  or  the  dired  contrary  j  does  he
not  forthwith  naturally  defire  the  one  Sort,  and  decline  the
other  .^  For  the  beft  Philofophers  are  agreed,  that  the  Ob-
ject of  our  Defire,  and  the  final  Caufe,  are  the  Motives,
which  fet  all  the  reft  on  Work :  and  if  this  be  true,  how
fhall  we  challenge  that  as  our  own  Ad  and  Deed,  which  ia-
fo  abfolutely  the  Effed  of  Conflraint  and  Necefiity,  impo-
fed  by  the  Nature  and  Quality  of  Things  v/ithout  us,  which

ftii

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 17

ftir  our  AfFeclions accordingly, without  any  Difpofal  or
Confent  of  ours?

Others  rather  think,  that  the  Difpofition  of  the  Perfon
defigning  is  the  Caufe  of  all  this  Neceffity.  This,  fay  they,
mull  needs  be  wrought  upon,  according  as  it  ftands  inclin-
ed ,•  nor  is  it  in  one's  own  Choice,  whether  he  will  defire
thofe  Things  or  not,  which  his  own  Nature,  and  Temper,
and  Cuftoin,  ftrongly  determine  him  to.  Thus  the  tem-
perate Perfon  finds  in  himfelf  an  habitual  Defire  of  fuch
Adtions,  and  fuch  Converfation,  as  are  agreeable  to  the  Vir-
tue of  Temperance  i  and  the  intemperate  is  no  lefs  fond  of
all  Occafions  to  exercife  his  Extravagance.  Thus  the  De-
figns  of  them  both  are  fixed,  and  it  is  not  in  their  Power
to  alter  them.  For  fome  we  fee  plainly,  who  are  angry  at:
themfelves,  condemn  their  own  Defires,  and  wifh  with  all
their  Souls  that  they  could  reftrain  and  fubdue  them,  yet
find  their  Habits  and  Cuftoms  fo  violent  and  prevailing,  that
they  are  hurried  on,  and  thruft  forward,  like  fo  many  En-
gines ^  and  feel  and  lament  the  Force  which  they  cannot  re-
fift,  when  Objedls,  which  are  agreeable  to  their  Inclinations
(fuch  as  by  Cuftom  are  become  familiar  and  natural  to  them)
offer  themfelves.  By  the  fame  Reafon  a  ficilful  and  judi-
cious Man  will  give  a  right  Judgment  of  Things,  and  enter-
tain true  Opinions  of,  them  j  and  the  ignorant  and  unlearn-
ed will  have  falfe  and  miftaken  Notions.  For  it  cannon
agree  with  the  Charader  of  a  wife  Man,  to  take  up  with
an  Error  j  nor  with  that  of  an  ignorant  one,  to  find  out
tl^e  Truth:  But  it  ftands  to  great  Reafon,  that  the  igno-
rant xnle  fhould  afTent  to  a  Falfiiood,  and  the  fkilful  and
learned  iliould  rejed:  it.  And  yet,  if  thefe  Things  were
intirely  at  oire's  own  Difpofal,  this  v/ould  not  be.  For
the  ignorant  Man  would  never  prefer  Falfliood  before  Truth,
if  he  could  help  it  >  and  the  wife  Man,  if  we  fhould  allow
him  to  afTcnt  to  Truth,  merely  by  Virtue  of  his  own  Free-
will, might  alfo  be  allowed  to  take  up  falfe  Opinions,  if  you
do  but  fuppofe  his  Will  to  incline  him  that  Way  too.  But
this,  they  tell  you,  cannot  be :  For  it  is  with  the  Under-
ftanding,  and  the  Objeds  about  which  it  is  employed,  as  we
find  it  with  the  Senfes  of  the  Body,  and  fenfible  Objeds  •  I
mean,  it  is  impoffible  to  have  Things  apprehended  other-
wife  than  they  reprefent  themfelves,  unlefs  we  fuppofe  fome
Weaknefs  or  Defed  in  the  Organs  which  fliould  apprehend
and  reprefent  them  to  us,

F  a  Thefe

i8  Epic T ETus's  Morals,

Thefe  are  the  Cavils  commonly  made  ufe  of  againft  Free-
will 5  though  indeed  a  great  many  Men-  infill;  upon  one  more*
and  fancy,  that  there  is  a  Fatality  in  the  Motion  and  Pofi-
tion  of  the  Heavens,  v/hich  inflctencing,  not  only  all  other
Things,  but  even  oiir  very  Defires  and  Inclinations  too,  de-
termines lis  in  the  Opinions  we  fliall  efpoufe,  and  the  Choices
we  fhall  make.  And  in  confirmation  of  this  Argument,  they
produce  the  PreditHiions  of  Aftrologers,  who,  upon  cal-
culating Nativities,  and  finding  what  Planet  each  Perfon  iff
born  under,  take  upon  them  to  pronounce  very  peremptorily,,
that  fuch  a  one  Ihall  be  a  voluptuous  Perfon ;  a  fecond,  cove-
tous j  a  third,  a  Lover  of  learning  and  Wifdom  j  and  thus  de-
clare before-hand  the  Inclinations  and  Defires,  which  in  the
whole  Courfe  of  their  Lives  ihall  afterwards  be  difcovered
by  their  Behaviour  and  Converfation.  Now  thefe  Men
could  never  fay  true,  nor  defcribe  Rich  Tempers  and  Pra-
ctices fo  exadly  as  tbcy  do,  if  there  were  not  feme  Conftek
lation,  feme  fatal  over-ruling  Influence,  v/hich  enforces
fhcfe  particular  Inclinations  and  Apperites,  and  puts  it  paft
Men's  Power  to  change  or  conquer  them.  A-Jid  if  any  fuch
Fatality  there  be;  how  abfurd  is  it  to  pretend  to  a  Power  of
regulating  and  determining  our  ov/n  Defires,  and  of  fixing
them  upon  what  Objects  we  pleafe,  when  we  are  abfolutel)r
and  irrevocably  flaked  down  to  this  or  that  particular  Ob-
jed:  before-hand,  and  muft  defire  and  purfue  it,  whether  we
will  or  no.^  This,  I  think,  is  the  Sum  of  all  the  Objedions,
commonly  urged  againft  that  Liberty  we  profefs  to  aflerr,
and  the  Power  of  difpofing  our  Defires  and  our  Averfions,
the  Refolutions  we  take,  and  the  Adioas  we  do,  as  we  fee
fit  ourfelves.

Now,  in  Anfvver  to  the  firft  of  thefe,  which  made  our
Wants  the  Foundation  of  .that  pretended  Necefllty  and  Con-
flraint ;  we  may  reply.  That,  if  this  were  true,  then  Want
would  always  create  Defire.  But  this  it  does  not  do.  For
there  are  many  Things,  and  particularly,  inanimateCreatures,
that  are  oftentimes  in  great  Want  of  fome  Quality  or  other  ^
Heat,  or  Cold,  or  Drought,  or  Moiftyre,  and  yet  they
never  defire  what  they  ftand  fo  much  in  need  of  The
Reafon  is  plain,  becaufe  their  Nature  is  not  capable  of  De-
fire :  For,  in  order  to  defiring,  it  is  neceflary,  both  to  have
a  Senfe  of  the  Thing  defired,  and  to  be  moved  by  that
Sefife :  from  whence  it  is  plain,  that  Want  does  not  always,
infufg,  or  infer  Defire.

But

tviih  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 19

"But  the  Creatures,  which  are  endued  with  a  Faculty  of
defiring,  when  they  feel  themfelves  in  Want,  do  then  exert
Defire,  in  order  to  the  Relief  of  the  Wants  they  feel

Thus  (to  illuftrate  the  Thing  by  a  familiar  Inftance)  Itch-
ing difpofes  us  to  fcratch^  and  upon  a  Senfe  of  the  Uneafi-
nefs  it  gives  us,  the  Hands  apply  themfelves  to  the  Relief
We  want;  but  yet  this  Itching  does  not  give  us  the  Hands
we  fcratch  with :  Nor  is  it  true,  that  the  Neceffities  of  hu-
man Life  have  invented  the  Arts  and  Trades  made  ufe  of  for
the  Support  of  It.  For  it  is  the  Mind  of  Man,  which  in-
vented them,  faw  the  Need  there  was  of  tliem,  and  took
occafion  from  thence  to  feek  out  this  Relief.  For  all  De-
fire  is  a  Motion  of  the  Soul  defiring,  born  and  begun  with-
in, and  exerted  by  the  Soul,  when  called  out  by  any  de-
firable  Objed ;  but  it  is  by  no  means  infufed  into  the  Soul
from  without.  Now  the  irrational  Life  of  brute  Beafts,  being
wholly  corporeal,  and  having,  in  truth,  little  or  nothing,
but  what  is  Matter  and  Body  belonging  to  it,  is  troubled
with  no  Difference  or  Diftradion  of  Defires,  hath  no  Wants,
except  thofe  jelat-ing  to  the  Body,  to  fupply;  and  confe-
quently,  but  one  Sort  of  Defires  to  exert.  And  this  con-
ftant  Uniformity  in  their  Cafe  makes  us  think  them  the
.Effeifl,  not  of  Liberty,  but  Neceffity.

But  now  the  rational  Soul  of  Man,  being  placed,  as  I  faid
before,  in  a  middle  Station,  may  be  confidered  in  a  threefold
Capacity  and  Difpofition ;  one,  that  inclines  it  to  the  worft
Part,  that  is,  the  bodily  and  brutifh  ;  a  fecond,  that  regards  its
own  felf ;  and  a  third,  that  better  and  more  excellent  Pare
above  it ;  So  that'here  maybe  a  threefold  Converfation,  a  three-
fold Want,  and  a  threefold  Defire.  When  it  gives  itfelf  tame-
ly up  to  the  Body,  and  confuks  the  brutijfh  Appetites  and
Wants  of  that  Part  only  ;  then,  of  Neaeffiry,  it  complies  and
concurs  with  all  ihc  bodily  Defires.  And  this  is  that  Sort  of
Defire,  which  captivates  the  Will,  and  hath  brought  the  Free-
dom of  it  to  be  a  Matter  of  fo  much  Concroverfy.  But  when
it  purfues  the  Inclinations,  and  lives  agreeably  to  i^ie  Nature,
either  of  its  own  felf,  or  the  excellent  Beings  above  it ;  then
it  exerts  its  Faculties  freely,  and  defires  the  Good  peculiar
to  thefe  Conditions,  without  Difficulty  or  Oppofition.  Now
the  Power  and  Liberty  of  the  Soul  confifts  in  this  ^  that,
whereas  Nature  hath  made  her  capable  of  Defires  of  feveral
Qualities,  fome  of  a  better  and  more  excellent  Kind,  and
others  of  a  worfe  and  more  vile ;  fhe  can  fo  far  difpofe  of  her-
felf,  as  to  fix  upon  either  the  one  pr  the  other  of  thefe  Sorts :

F  3  Wliich

20  jEpi  CTETus's  Morals,

Which  yet  is  done  with  this  Difference,  that, by  purfuing
the  worfe  her  Faculties  are  enfeebled  and  debafed,  and  by
following  the  better  they  are  exalted  and  confirmed  j  for  the
Choice  of  thefe  is  indeed  truly  and  properly  Choice. And
hence  we  fee  it  often  happens,  that  when  the  Body  finds  it-?
felf  low  and  empty,  and  requires  Meat,  or  fome  other  Sufte-
nance,  the  Mind  fteps  in,  and  countermands  this  Defire  with
another  over-ruling  one  of  fafting  or  Abftemioufnefs; and
this  too  taken  up  poflfibly  upon  fome  religious  Account,  or
in  Obedience  to  fome  Law,  or  perhaps,  merely  in  Point  of
Prudence, as  thinking  it  better  upon  its  own  Account, or
more  conducing  to  the  Health  of  the  Body. Now  1  think
no  body  can  fay,  but  the  Mind,  in  fuch  a  Cafe,  might,  if  it
had  ib  pleafed, have  complied  with  thofe  firft  Defires, a§
indeed  we  find  the  Generality  of  People  do  upon  thefe  Oc-
cafions ;  but  you  fee,  it  exerted  another  oppofite  Defire,  and
profecuted  that,  as  the  greater  Good, and  fo  more  eligible
of  the  two. So  that  EpiBetus^ looking  upon  the  Soul  aj;
endued  with  Reafon, might  upon  this  Account  very  juftly
fay,  that  fhe  had  it  in  her  Power  to  qualify  her  Defires,  and
to  place  them  upon  fuch  or  fuch  Objeds,  as  fhe  faw  Caufe.
The  next  Objedion, which  tells  us,  the  Objed  of  De-
iire  neceflarily  excites  the  Soul  to  a  Defi.re  of  it,  mull  be
acknowledg'd  to  have  a  great  deal  of  Truth  in  it  • but  yet
not  fo  much,  as  the  Perfons  who  urge  it  imagine. For  the
Objed  does  not  move  the  Soul  to  Defire  forcibly  and  me-
chanically, but  by  propofing  irfelf, as  fomething  fit  to  be
embraced  j  and  thus  calling  forth  thofe  Powers  of  the  Soul
into  Adion, which  Nature  hath  qualified  to  meet,  and  to
receive  it :  Juft  as  the  fenfible  Objed  does  not  infufe  the  Fa-
culty of  Senfation  into  the  Perfon  who  receives  its  Impref-
fions,  nor  draws  him  by  Violence  to  itfelf  j  but  onlyprefents
itfelf  to  the  Eye  in  fuch  Proportions  as  are  proper  for  uniting
with  that  Organ  of  Senfe,  which  was  ordained  by  Nature,
and  fitted  for  that  Union. And  fo  the  Objed  of  Defire  pre-
fents  its  Convenience  and  Fitnefs  to  the  Soul,  and  this  in-
vites fuch  Motions,  as  Nature  hath  provided  proper  for  this
Purpofe. Thus  it  mufl  needs  be,- becaufe  we fee, that,
when  defirable  Objeds  offer  ihemfelvps,  fome  People  are,
and  others  are  not  affcded  with  them  j  whereas  if  the  Ob-
jed were  endued  with  fuch  Efficacy  and  Power,  as  perfedly
to  conftrain  -the  Perfon  defiring  -^ and  if  the  Motion  of  the
Mind  were  neceflarily  imprefled  by  it ;  it  muft  needs  follow,
that  upon  fuch  Occaficns  every  one  muft  be  affeded  with  it, .

5  though

m)ith  SiMPLicicrs*s  Comment. 21

though  perhaps  not  every  one  in  the  fame  Degree.  And,  in
Truth,  fuch  an  Operation  upon  the  Mind  would  not  be  De-
iire,  but  a  violent  Impulfe,  or  forcible  Attraction  j  fuch  as
we  fee,  when  one  Body  is  thruft  forward,  or  dragged  along
'by  one  another.  For  Defire  is  a  Kind  of  Expanfion  in  the
Mind,  as  moving  forwards  toward  the  Thing  defired,  with-
out any  local  Motion  in  the  Perfon  defiring ;  fuch  as  we  may
referable  to  a  Man's  ftretching  out  his  Hand  to  meet  or  em-
brace one,  while  the  rell  of  his  Body  is  in  no  Motion.  So
that  Defire  is  a  Motion,  begun  originally,  and  proceeding
from  within:  as  are  alfo  our  Opinions,  and  the  other  Things
mentioned  here  by  EpEletus,

This  Motion,  indeed,  is  fometimes  what  it  ought  to  be,
and  \s  duly  proportioned  to  the  Nature  of  the  Thing,  which
we  defire  or  conceive  of;  and  fometimes  it  is  miftaken,  and
very  different  from  it,  when  vife  are  inclined  to  fomething,
which  to  us  appears  very  defirable,  but  is  really  what  fhould
rather  provoke  our  Averfion.  For  it  fhews  us  a  gaudy  Out-
iide  to  invite  our  Defire,  and  hath  a  great  deal  of  hidden
£vil  within,  which  all  the  while  lies  concealed  under  fome
Advantage,  which  the  Idea  of  this  Objed  flatters  us  with.
Thus  the  Thief  is  carried  away  with  an  Idea  of  Gain  and
Riches,  as  a  defirable  Thing  ^  and  this  keeps  him  from  con-
fidering,  or  having  any  Dread  at  all  of  that  horrible  Evil,
which  lies  (heltered  under  this  Gain,  defiles  the  Soul,  and
taints  it  with  Injuftice.  And  then,  as  for  any  Apprehen-
fions  of  Difcovery,  and  Imprifonment,  and  Punifliment,
which  are  the  only  Calamities  fo  wicked  a  Wretch  fears;
the  excefiSve  Eagernefs  of  his  Defires  utterly  overlooks  and
ftifles  all  thefe;  for  he  prefently  reprefents  to  himfelf,  what  a
World  of  Men  do  fuch  Things,  and  yet  are  never  found  out.
Now,  thus  much  is  plainly  in  our  Power,  to  examine  this
Objedl  of  our  Defire  more  nicely ;  and  to  inform  ourfelves
well,  whether  it  be  a  real  Good,  and  worth  our  purfuing ;  or
whether  it  only  cheats  us  with  a  fair  Outfide  and  counterfeit
Appearance  of  Good ,  as,  particularly,  in  thelnftanceof  Gain
jufl:  now  mentioned.  Nay,  we  may  go  fomething  farther  yet^
for  wemaycorred  and  regulate  our  Defires ;  may  bring  them
to  fix  upon  fuch  Objecfls  only,  as  are  truly  defirable ;  and  may
teach  them  not  to  be  impofed  upon  with  falfc  Appearances.

We  are  told  again,  that  our  Defires  and  our  Opinions  arc
carried  to  their  proper  Objedl  with  as  invincible  n  Neceffity,
as  a  Stone  or  Clod  of  Earth  is  carried  downwards ;  and  con-
fequently^  that  Nature  hath  left  us  nothing  in  our  own  Power :

F.  4  Nor

12  Ep  I  cTiftj'"^'s  Morals,

Kpr  have  we  any  more  Reafon  to  conclude,  that  we  are  free
to  think,  or  to  defire  after  this  or  that  Manner,  when  we
fee  our  AfiTent  and  Appetite  always  moved  by  the  Credibility
or  the  Defirablenefs  of  their  Objefts,  than  we  have  to  fup-
pofe  that  a  Stone  can  afcend,  when  we  never  fee  it  do  fo.

Now  to  this  it  may  be  replied,  that  there  is  a  two-fold
Neceffityj  the  one  abfolutely  deftruftive  of  Free-will,  the
other  very  confillent  with  it.  That  Kind  of  Neceffity,  which
proceeds  from  any  thing  without  us,  does  indeed  take  away
all  Liberty  and  Choice  j  for  no  Man  can  be  faid  to  act  freely,
when  he  is  compelled  by  any  other  exrernal  Caufe  to  do  a
Thing,  or  to  leave  it  undone.  But  then  there  is  another
Sort  of  Neceffity  from  within  ourfelves,  which  keeps  every
thing  within  its  due  Bounds,  and  obliges  each  Faculty  and
Part  to  aft  agreeably  to  its  own  Nature  and  original  Confti-
tution.  And  this  is  fo  far  from  deftroying  Free-'will,  that
it  rather  prelerves  and  fupports  it.  For  by  this  Means  it  comes
to  pafs,  that  a  free  Agent  can  be  wrought  upon  by  no  other
Ways,  but  fuch  as  are  confiftent  with  the  Nature  of  a  free
Agent,  which  is  from  a  Principle  of  Motion  within  itfelf
And  this  Neceffity  "is  'by  no  Means  a  mechanical  Neceffity,
becaufe  it  is  not  impofed  by  any  thing  from  without  us;  but
is  what  the  Nature  of  fuch  an  Agent  admits  and  requires;
what  is  neceffary  for  its  Prefervation,  and  for  exerting  the
Operations  proper  to  a  Creature  endued  with  fuch  a  Fa-
culty as  Self-motion.

Befides,  if  the  Soul  can  bring  itfelf  to  fuch  Habits  and  Dif-
poiltions  as  are  virtuous  or  vicious ;  can  grow  better  by
WiI'dom  and  Sobriety,  and  worfe  by  Perverfenefs  and  a  diflo-
lute  Behaviour;  and  can  confirm  itfelf  in  each  of  thefe  Courfes
by  the  frequent  Repetition  ofAfts  fuitable  to  them;  then  the
Soul  is  the  true  Caufe  of  all  this.  Though,  in  truth,  ic
muft  not  be  admitted  for  a  general  Rule  neither,  that  the
Liberty  and  Power  of  the  Will  is  to  be  judged  of  by  Mens
being  able  to  do  Things  contrary  to  one  another.  For  the
Souls  immediately  united  to  the  Original  Good,  prefer  that
conftantly ;  and  yet  the  Freedom  of  their  Choice  is  ftill  the
/ame;  fbr  that  Preference  is  no  more  conftrained  and  ne-
ceffary, than  if  they  took  Evil  infbead  of  it.  But  it  is  their
Excellence  and  Perfeftion,  that  they  continue  ftedfaft  in  their
own  Good,  and  never  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  drawn  off  to
the  contrary.  But  as  for  our  Souls,  which  are  more  re-
motely dticended  from  that  great  Original,  their  Defires  are
according  to  their  Tempers  and  Difpofitions :  Thpfe  of  them

that

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 23

that  are  well-difpofed,  have  good  Defires ;  and  thofe  that  are
ill,  have  evil  ones :  But  ftill  thefe  Souls  of  ours  are  capable
of  great  Alterations  ;  they  frequently  recover  themfelves
from  Vice  to  Virtue,  by  Reformation  and  better  Care ;  rhey
decline  too,  and  fink  down  from  Virtue  to  Vice,  by  Supine-
nefs  and  a  foolifh  Neglecft  ;  and  boih  thefe  Changes  are
wrought  in  them  by  their  own  voluntary  Choice,  and  not  by
any  Force  or  Neceffity  that  compels  them  to  it.  So  that
there  can  be  no  Manner  of  Pretence  for  charging  any  Part  of
our  Wickednefs  upon  God.  He  created  the  Soul  after  fuch
a  Manner  indeed,  as  to  leave  it  capable  of  being  corrupted  ;
becaufe  its  Eflence  is  not  of  the  firll  and  beft  Sort  of  Natures,
but  hath  a  Mixture  of  the  middle  and  the  loweft ;  and  this
Mixture  was  fit,  that  fo  all  mightremain  in  its  Perfedion;
and  the  firft  and  beft  continue  ftill  fuch,  without  degeneratiiig
into  Barrennefs,  and  Imperfedion,  and  Matter.  God  there-
fore, who  is  infinitely  good  Himfelf,  made  the  Soul  in  a  Ca-
pacity of  beirig  perverted  j  and  it  is  an  Argument  of  his'Mer-
fy,  and  the  exceeding  Riches  of  his  Goodnefs,  that  he  did
fo  :  For  he  hath  fet  it  above  the  reach  of  all  external  Violence
and  Neceffiry,  and  made  it  impoflible  for  it  to  be  corrupted
without  its  own  Confent.

There  is  one  Argument  more  ftill  behind  j  which  pretends,
that  a  fatal  Revolution  of  the  Heavens  hath  fo  ftrong  and
abfolute  a  Power  upon  us,  as  not  only  to  influence  our
Adions,  but  even  to  determine  our  Choice,  and  all  our  In-
clinations, and  leave  us  no  Liberty  at  all  to  dilpOiC  of  our-
felves,  but  only  the  empty  Name  of  fuch  a  Liberty.  Now
to  thefe  we  may  anfwer,  That  if  the  rational  Soul  be  eter-
nal, and  immortal  (which  I  fhall  not  go  about  to  prove,
that  beipg  foreign  to  this  Suhjedt,  but  fhall  defire  at  prefent
to  take  for  granted,  tho'  it  rauft  be  confefs'd  not  in  all  Points
agreeable  to  the  Dodrine  of  the  Stoicks  in  this  Particular,  but)
if  the  Soul,  I  fay,  be  eternal  and  immortal,  it  cannot  be
allowed  to  receive  its  Being  from,  or  to  have  its  Dependence
upon  Matter  and  Motion.  Its  Inftrument  indeed,  tliat  is,
the  Animal  taken  in  the  grofs,  by  which  I  mean,  the  Body
animated  by  the  Soul,  may  owe  its  Nature  and  it  Changes
to  fuch  Caufes:  For  material  Caufes  produce  material  Ef-
fedsj  and  thefe  may  differ,  according  as  thofe  Caufes  are
differently  difpofed,  with  regard  to  Things  here  below.
And  the  Inftrument  is  formed  fo,  as  to  be  proper  and  fer-
viceable  to  the  Soul,  whofe  Bufinefs  it  is  to  make  ufe  of  it.
Now  as  the  difference  of  Tools  teaches  us  to  diftinguifli  the

feverai

24  Epic TETus's  Morals,

feveral  Profeffions  thaC  ufe  them,  fo  as  to  fay,  Thefe  belono-
to  the  Car  pent  efSy  thofe  to  the  Mafon's,  and  others  to  the
Smith's  Trade  j  and  not  only  to  diftinguilh,  the  Trades  them-
felves,  but  the  Skill  and  Capacity  of  the  Artificers  them-
felves;  to  judge  of  their  Defigns  and  Intentions,  and  the
Perfe^ftioa  of  the  Work  itfelf  (for  thofe  who  are  Matters
-of  their  Trade,  have  better  Tools,  and  ufe  them  with  greater
Dexterity,  than  others)  in  like  Manner,  they  who  have  at-
tained to  the  Knowledge  of  Aftrology,  find  out  the  Nature
and  Temper  of  the  Inftrument  (the  Body)  from  the  diffe-
rent Conftitution  of  material  Caufes,  and  irom  hence  make
their  Conjedures  of  the  Difpofition  of  the  Soul ;  and  this  is
the  Reafon,  why  they  often  guefs  aright.  For  indeed,  the
Generality  of  Souls,  when  fallen  undejr  ill  Management,
and  the  Converfation  of  naughty  Men  (a  Sort  of  Degrada-
tion, inflided  upon  them  by  way  of  Punifhment  for  the  Lofs
of  their  primitive  Purity)  addid:  themfelves  too  much  to  the
Body,  and  are  govern'd  and  fubdu'd  by  it  j  fo  as  to  ufe  it  no
i:-nger  as  their  Inftrument  of  Adion,  but  to  look  upon  it  as
aPart  and  Piece  of  their  own  EfTence,  and  conform  their
Defires  to  its  brutifli  Appetites  and  Inclinations.

Befides,  this  Pofition,  and  fatal  Revolution  of  the  Hea-
vens carries  fome  Sort  of  Argument  to  the  Produdion  of
the  Souls  united  to  Bodies  under  it,  yet  not  fo,  as  to  impofe
any  abfolute  Neceffity  upon  their  Appetites  and  Inclinations,
but  only  to  infer  a  Refemblance  of  their  Temper.  For,  as
in  Cities,  there  are  fome  particular  folemn  Seafons  and  Places,
which  give  us  good  Grounds  to  diflinguifh  the  Perfons  af^
fembled  in  them  j  as  the  Days  and  Places  of  publick  Wor-
ship commonly  call  thofe  that  are  wife,  and  religious,  and
well-difpofed,  together  ,•  and  thofe  that  are  fet  apart  for
Pomp  and  publick  Spoits,  gather  the  Rabble,  and  the  idle,
and  the  diflblute ;  fo  that  the  obferving  thefe  Solemnities
gives  us  a  clear  Knowledge  of  the  People  that  attend  upon
them  :  By  the  fame  Reafon,  the  particular  Seafons  and  Places
(the  Houfes  and  Conjundions  of  the  Planets)  may  be  able
to  give  us  fome  Light  into  the  Temper  of  the  Souls  uni-
ted to  Bodies  under  tb^m,  as  carrying  fome  Affinity  to  the
Conjundions,  under  which  Men  are  born.  For,  when
God,  in  his  Juiiice,  hatli  ordained  fuch  a  particular  Pofition,
and  all  the  Fatalities  confequent  to  it  j  then  thofe  Souls,
which  have  deferved  this  Vengeance,  are  brought  under  that
Pofition.  For  Likenefs,  and  Affinity  of  Tempers  hath
a  itrange  Power  of  bringing  a|l  that  agree  in  it  together.

This

'le;///??  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 25

This  fatal  Revolution  then  does  by  no  Means  conftrain-  or
bind  up  the  Soul,  nor  take  av/ay  its  native  Freedom  j  buc
the  Soul  only  bears  fome  Refemblance  to  the  Temper  of  this
Revolution,  and  is  framed  agreeably  to  fuch  a  Body,  as  it-
felf  hath  deferved  to  be  given  it  for  its  Ufe.  And  this  gives
Men  an  Opportunity  of  learning  its  particular  Defires  and
Inclinations,  by  considering  the  Conftellations  that  People
are  born  under.

Again,  The  Souls  chufe  their  particular  Ways  of  Living,
according  to  their  former  Dignity  and  Difpofition ;  but  ftilJ,
the  behaving  themfelves  well  or  ill  in  each  of  thefe  Ways,
is  left  in  their  ov/n  Power.  Upon  this  Account,  we  fee
many,  who  have  chofen  a  Way  of  Trade,  and  Bufinefs,  and
great  Temptation,  yet  continue  very  honeft  and  good  Men
in  it ;  and  many  who  profefs  Philofophy,  aiid  the  Improve-
ment of  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  are  yet  of  very  loofe  Con-
verfation,  notv/ithftanding  all  the  Advantages  of  fuch  an
Employment.  For  the  different  Methods  of  Life,  as  that
of  Hufbandry,  or  Merchandife,  or  Mufic,  or  the  like,  are
chofen  by  the  Soul  according  to  her  former  Difpofition  j  and
Mens  Station  in  the  World  is  affigned  them,  fuifable  to  their
Dignity  and  Deferts  j  but  the  Management  of  themfelves,
in  any  of  -thefe  Callings,  is  the  Choice  and  Work  of  the  Soul
afterwards^  and  we  do  not  fo  much  blame  or  commend
Men  for  their  Callings  themfelves,  as  for  their  different  Be-
haviour in  them.

Farther  yet :  This  fatal  Pofition  or  Revolution  does  never
(as  fome  Men  too  boldly  affirm  it  does)  caufe  any  thing  of
Wickednefs  in  us,  fo  as  to  make  it  neceflary,  that  Men
born  under  it  fiiould  be  Knaves  and  Cheats,  adulterous,  or
addided  to  beaftly  and  unnatural  Lufts.  For  though  the
Cafters  of  Nativities  fometimes  fay  true,  when  they  foretel
thefe  Things;  yet  this  only  happens,  according  as  we  re-
ceive particular  Qualities  or  Imprellions ;  which  is  done,
fometimes  in  a  moderate,  and  fometimes  in  an  immoderate
Degree.  And  it  is  not  the  Influence  of  the  Stars,  but  the
Corruption  of  the  Mind,  that  makes  Men  knavifli,  or  la-
fcivious,  or  unnatural  and  brutifh.  Thofe  that  receive  thefe
Influences  moderately,  and  do  not  affifl:  them  by  their  own
Depravity,  are  cautious  and  wary,  corred  the  Heat  of  Youth,
and  ufe  it  virtuoufly^  but  thoie  that  receive  them  immiO-
derately,  that  is,  give  way  to  them,  and  promote  them,  de-
bafe  and  proftitute  themfelves  to  all  Manner  of  Wicked-
nefs. And  what  Refledtion  upon  Nature  can  this  be  ? For

even

26  Epi  cTETus's  Morals,

even  that,  which  is  moft  beneficial  to  us,  may  turn  to  our
Prejudice  by  a  perverfe  Ufe  of  it.  The  Sun  gives  us  Light  j
it  both  makes  Things  vifible,  and  enables  us  to  fee  them  ;
and  yet,  if  a  Man  will  be  fo  foolifli,  as  to  take  too  much
of  it,  to  gaze  upon  his  Rays  when  they  fliine  in  their  full
Streflgth,  he  may  lofe  Bis  Eye-fight  by  his  Folly.  But
then,  that  Folly,  and  not  the  Brightnefs  of  the  Sun,  is  to
be  blamed,  if  that,  which  is  the  Author  of  Light  to  all  the
World,  be  the  Occafion  of  Blindnefs  and  Darknefs  to  him.
Now,  when  the  Aftrdlogers  have  (as  they  think)  formed  to
them-felves  certain  Marks  and  Rules,  whereby  to  know
who  will  receive  thefe  Impreffions  in  a  due  Meafure,  and
who  in  a  vicious  Excefs ;  then  they  pronounce  feme  M^n
wife,  and  others  fiibtle  and  knavifli  accordingly.  Though,
after  all,  I  very  much  doubt,  whether  the  creeling  of  any
Schemes  can  furnifh  them  with  fuch  Marks  of  Diftinftion,  Or
no.  Some  Things  indeed  are  fo  manifeft,  that  all  the  World
nmft  allow  them  ;  as,  that  when  the  Sun  is  in  Cancer^  our
Bodies  feel  exceffive  Heat ;  but  fome  again  are  exceeding
dark  and  doubtful,  and  fuch  as  none,  butthofe  who  have  made
themfelves  Mafl:ers  of  Aftrology,  can  make  any  thing  of.

Now,  that  thofe  Things  which  ad  conftantly  according  to
the  Defign  and  Direftions  of  Nature,  preferve  the  original
Conftitution  given  them  at  firft  by  their  great  Creator,  and
are  endued  with^  the  greareft  Power  and  Strength  ;  that  fuch
Things,  I  fay,  always  afl  upon  a  good  Defign,  and,  proper-
ly fpeaking,  are  never  the  Caufe  of  any  Evil,  feems  to  me
very  plain.  For  all  Evil  is  occafioned,  not  by  the  Excefs,
but  by  the  V/ant  of  Power ;  and  if  it  were  not  fo,  Power
ought  not  to  be  reckoned  amono;  thofe  Things  that  are
good.  And  yet  it  is  as  plain  that  even  good  Things  in  excefs
oftentimes  prove  hurtful  to  us  j  but  then,  that  hurt  is  not
owing  to  the  Things,  but  to  ourfelves.  And  thus  much
may  fuffice,  in  Anfwer  to  them  who  deny  the  Freedom,  of
the  Will,  upon  the  Pretence  of  any  Fatality  from  the  Mo-
tion or  Poficion  of  the  Heavens ''.

But

'■  If  this  Argument  feem  obfcure  in  fome  of  the  Parts  of  it,  that  muft  be
imputed  to  the  dark  Notions  of  the  old  Philofophers  upon  this  Matter,  and
the  fuperftitious  Regard  that  they  had  to  judicial  Aftrology  ;  which  Simplicius
himfelf  is  content  only  io  far  to  comply  v/ith,  as  to  allow  fome  confiderable
'Influence  of  the  Heavens  upon  the  Bodies  and  Tempers  of  Menj  and  that
Stroke,  which  the  Complexions  of  People  have,  in  forming  the  Difpofitions
of  their  Minds.  Some  Paflages  there  are  too,  which  proceed  upon  the  Hy-
pothefes  of  the  Pre-exiftence  and  Tranfmigration  of  Souls,  and  their  being
^provided  with  Bodies  of  good  or  bad  Complexions  here,  according  to  their
Merits  or  33:meihs  in  fome  former  ScatCi But  in  truth,  this  whole  Notion

of

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 27

Bur  indeed,  to  all  who  deny  this  Liberty,  upon  any  Ar-
gument whatfoever,  it  may  be  replied  in  general,  That  thofe
who  go  about  to  deilroy  it,  do  by  no  Means  confideror  un-
derftand  the  Nature  of  the  Soul,  but  overthrow  its  very  ori-
ginal Conftitution,  without  feeming  to  be  fenfible  of  it.
For  they  take  away  all  Principle  of  internal  and  Self-mo-
tion, in  which  the  Eflence  of  the  Soul  chiefly  confiflis.  For
it  muft  be  either  moved  of  its  own  Accord,  and  then  it  is
excited  by  a  Caufe  within  itfelf  to  its  Appetites  and  AfFedions,
and  not  thruft  forward  and  dragg'd  along,  as  Bodies  are  j  or
elfe  it  is  moved  by  an  external  Force,  and  then  it  is  purely
mechanical.

Again,  They  who  will  not  allow  us  to  have  our  Aftions-
at  our  own  Difpofal,  do  not  attend  to,  nor  are  able  to  ac-
count for  the  vital  Energy  of  the  Soul,  and  its  affenting
and  difTenting,  accepting  or  rejedling  Power,  Now  this
is  what  Experience  and  common  Senfe  teaches  every  Man^
that  he  hath  a  Power  of  confenting  and  refufing,  embracer
ing  and  declining,  agreeing  to  or  denying  j  and  it  is  to  noi
Purpofe  to  argue  againft  that,  which  we  feel  and  find  every
Moment,  But  now  all  thefe  are  internal  Motions,  begun
in  the  Soul  itfelf  ,•  and  not  violent  Impulfes  and  Attradions
from  Things  without  us,  fuch  as  inanimate  Creatures  muft
be  moved  by.  For  this  is  the  Difference  between  animate
and  inanimate  Bodies,  that  the  one  Sort  are  moved  by  an  in-
ternal Principle,  and  the  other  are  not.  Now,  according
to  this  Diflindion,  that  which  puts  the  inanimate  into  Mo-
tion, mufl  have  a  Principle  of  Motion  of  its  own,  and  can^-
not  itfelf  be  moved  mechanically.  For  if  this  alfo  derived
its  Motion  from  fomething  elfe,  then  (as  was  ui-ged  before)
the  Body  is  not  moved  by  this,  but  by  that  other  Caufe,  from
whence  the  Motion  is  at  firft  imparted  to  this  j  and  fo  the
Body,  being  moved  no  longer  from  within,  but  by  fome  for-
cible ImprefTion  from  without,  as  all  other  inanimate  Crea-
tures are,  mufl  itfelf  be  concluded  inanimate.

Once  more.  By  denying  that  we  have  Power  over  our
Aftions,  and  a  Liberty  of  willing  or  not  willing,  of  con-
fidering,  comparing,  chufmg,  defiring,  declining,  aod
the  like,  all  moral  Diftindlions  are  loft  and  gone,  and  Vir-
tue and  Vice  are  utterly  confounded. There  is  no  longer

of  judicial  Aftrology  is  now  very  juftly  exploded,  as  groundlefs  and  fan-
taflical  ;  and  many  modern  Philofcphers  have  proved  it,  by  very  fubftantial
Arguments,  to  be  no  better.  See  particularly  GaJ[tnd)_  in  Lis  Animadverfions-
on  the  Tenth  Book  of  Dl-igtria  Lairtius*,

any

^8  EpiCTETtrs's  Morals^

any  jufl:  Ground  left  for  Praife  or  Difpraife,  Applaufe  dr*
Reproach,  Rewards  or  Punifhments.  The  Laws  of  God
and  Man,  inftituted  for  thofePurpofes,  and  enforced  by  thefe
Sandions,  are  evacuated  j  and  the  very  Foundations  of  therri
all  torn  up,  and  quite  overturn'd.  And  then,  do  but  con-
fider,  how  difmal  the  Confequences  muft  be.  For  when
once  we  are  come  to  this  pafs,  all  Order  and  Society  muft
needs  be  loft ;  and  nothing  left  us,  but  a  Life  of  Rapine  and
Violence,  of  Mifery  and  Confufion ;  a  Life,  not  of  civiliz.'d
Men,  but  of  ravenous  and  wild  Beafts.

But  I  expeft  that  the  Adverfaries  of  this  Opinion  will
appeal  back  again  to  our  own  Experience,  and  urge  afreili :
What?  do  we  not  often  find  ourfelves  forced  by  the  Ty-
ranny of  ill  Men,  and  the  over-bearing  Torrent  of  our  own
Paffions,  and  the  ftrong  Bent  of  natural  Sympathies  and  An-
tipathies? Do  not  thefe  compel  us  to  do  and  fufFer  many
Things  againft  our  Wills ;  and  fuch  as  no  Man,  in  his  Senfes,
would  chufe,  if  it  were  in  his  Power  to  avoid  ?  To  this
my  Anfwer  is  ftill  the  fame.  That  notwithftanding  all  this,
our  Liberty  is  not  deftroyed,  but  the  Choice  upon  thefe  Oc-
cafions  is  ftill  free,  and  our  own.  For  here  are  two  Things
propofed  j  and,  though  the  Side  we  take  be  not  eligible  for
its  own  fake,  and  when  confidered  abfolutely,-  yet  it  is  fo,
v/ith  regard  to  the  prefent  Straits  we  are  in,  and  when  com-
pared with  fomething  which  we  avoid  by  this  Means,-  and
for  this  Reafon  it  is,  that  we  make  choice  of  it.  And  it  is
utterly  impoffible  that  a  Man  fliould  be  carried  to  do  any
thing  without  the  Confent  of  his  ov/n  Mind  :  For  he
that  does  a  Thing  without  his  own  Choice,  is  like  a  Man
thruft  down  a  Precipice  by  fome  ftrcnger  Hand,  which  he
cannot  refift:  and  this  Perfon  is  at  that  Time  under  the  Cir-
cumftance  of  an  inanimate  Creature  j  he  does  not  ad:  at  all,
but  is  purely  paffive  in  the  Cafe.  So  that  when  we  really  do
adt,  though  with  never  fo  great  Unwillingnefs  and  Reludancy,
yet  ftiil  we  chufe  to  act,  after  fuch  and  fuch  a  Manner.

This  is  farther  evident  from  Mens  own  Practice.  For
we  find  feveral  Perfons  take  feveral  ways,  when  yet  the
Neceffity  that  lies  upon  them  is  the  fame.  Some  chufe  to
comply  with  what  is  irapofed  upon  them,  for  fear  of  endur-
ing fome  greater  Evil,  if  they  refufe  it ;  others  again  are  pe-
remptory in  the  refanng  it,  as  looking  upon  fuch  Compli-
ance to  be  a  greater  Evil,  than  any  Punilhment  they  can  pof-
fibly  undergo  upon  the  Account  of  their  Refufal.  So  that,
even  in  thofe  Adions  that  feem  moft  involuntary,  there  is

ftili

with  S I  M  p  L I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 29

ftill  a  Place  for  Liberty  and  Choice.  For  we  muft  diftinguifii
between  what  is  voluntary,  and  what  is  free.  That  only  is
voluntary,  which  would  be  chofen  for  its  own  fake ;  but
that  is  free,  which  we  have  Pov/er  to  chufe,  not  only  for  its
own  fake,  but  for  the  fake  of  avoiding  fome  greater  Mifchief.
And  indeed  there  are  fome  Cafes,  in  which  we  find  both
fomething  voluntary,  and  fomething  involuntary  meet.  For
which  Reafon  thofe  are  properly  call'd  mix'd  ASlions-^  that
is,  when  what  is  eligible  upon  thefe  Occafions,  is  not  fimply
and  abfolutely  fo,  but  carries  fomething  along  with  it,  which
we  fhould  never  chufe,  if  we  could  help  it.  And  Homer
very  elegantly  defcribes  the  Perplexity  of  Thought,  this  Mix-
ture of  Voluntarinefs  and  Involuntarinefs  in  the  Soul,  whea
he  fays  to  this  Purpofe,

Great  Strife  in  my  divided  Breaji  I  find^
ji  Will  conjentingj  yet  un-willittg  Mind.

Thefe  Things  I  thought  fit  rather  to  enlarge  upon,  becaufc
almoft  all  the  following  Book  depends  upon  this  Diftindiont
of  the  Things  in  our  own  Power  :  For  the  Defign  of  it  being,
wholly  moral  and  inftrudive,  he  lays  the  true  Foundationi
here  at  firft ;  and  fhews  us,  what  we  ought  to  place  all  our
Happinefs  and  all  our  Unhappinefs  in  j  and  that,  being  at
our  own  Difpofal,  and  endued  with  a  Principle  of  Motion
from  within,  we  are  to  expedl  it  all  from  our  own  Adions.
For  Things  that  move  mechanically  and  necefTarily,  as  they
derive  their  Being  from,  fo  they  owe  all  the  Good  and  Evii
they  are  capable  of,  to  fomething  elfe  •  they  depend  uport
the  Imprefifions  made  upon  them  from  without,  both  for  the
Thing  itfelf,  and  for  the  Degree  of  it.  But  thofe  Creatures,
which  aft  freely,  and  are  themfelves  the  Caufe  of  their  own
Motions  and  Operations,  receive  all  their  Good  and  Evil
from  thefe  Operations.  Now  thefe  Operations,  properly
fpeaking,  with  regard  to  Knowledge  and  fpeculative  Mat-
ters, are  their  Opinions  and  Apprehenfions  of  Things ;  but
with  regard  to  defirable  Objedts,  and  Matters  of  Pradice,
they  are  the  Appetites,  and  Averfions,  and  the  AfFeftions  of
the  Soul.  When  therefore  we  have  juft  Ideas,  and  our  No-
tions agree  with  the  Things  themfelves  j  and  when  we  apply
our  Defires  and  our  Averfions  to  fuch  Objeds,  and  in  fuch
Meafures,  as  we  ought  to  do  j  then  we  are  properly  happy,
and  attain  to  that  Perfeftion,  which  Nature  hath  defigned  us
for,  and  made  peculiar  to  us :  But  when  we  fail  in  thefe
Matters,  then  we  fail  of  that  Happinefs  and  Perfedtion  too.

Now

30  Ep I CTETUs's  Morals,

Now  by  our  own  Aftions  I  mean  fuch,  as  are  wroughe
by  ourfelves  only,  and  need  nothing  more  to  efFed:  them,
but  our  own  Choice.  For  as  to  Adions  that  concern  Things
without  us,  fuch  as  Sciences  and  Trades,  and  fupplying  the
Neceffities  of  human  Life,  and  the  making  ourfelves  Ma-
Iters  of  Knowledge,  and  the  inftructing  others  in  it,  or  any
other  Employments  and  Profeflions  of  Credit  and  Reputa-
tion in  the  World  j  thefe  are  not  intirely  in  our  own  Power,
but  require  many  Helps  and  external  Advantages,  in  order
to  the  compafling  of  them.  But  the  regulating  of  our  Opi-
nions, and  our  own  Choices,  is  properly  and  intirely  our
own  Work,  and  ftands  in  need  of  no  foreign  Affiflances.
So  that  our  Good  and  Evil  depend  on  ourfelves  j  for  this  we
may  be  fure  of,  that  no  Man  is  accountable  for  thofeThingSj
that  do  not  come  within  the  Compafs  of  his  own  Power.

BUT  our  Bodies,  PofTefllons,  Reputations,  Pre^
ferments,  and  Places  of  Honour  and  Authority,
and  in  fhort,  every  Thing  befides  our  own  Adions,
are  Things  out  of  our  own  Power.

TH  E  Reafon,  why  thefe  are  faid  to  be  out  of  our  own
Power  and  Difpofal,  is  not,  becaufe  the  Mind  hath  no
Part  in  them,  or  contributes  nothing  towards  them ;  for  it  is
plain,  that  both  our  Bodies  and  our  Eftates  are  put  into  a
better  or  a  worfe  Condition,  in  Proportion  to  that  provi-
dent Care  the  Soul  takes  of  them,  or  the  Negled  flie  is  guil-
ty of  with  regard  to  them.  The  Soul  does  alio  furnifh  Oc-
cafions  for  the  acquiring  Credit  and  Fame,  and  by  her  Dili-
gence and  Wifdom  it  is,  that  we  attain  to  Pofts  of  Great-
nefs  and  Government.  For  indeed  there  could  be  no  fuch
Thing  as  the  Exercife  of  Authority,  efpecially  as  the  World
goes  now,  without  the  Choice  and  Confent  of  the  Soul.
Bur,  becaufe  thefe  Things  are  not  totally  at  her  Difpofal,  and
fhe  is  not  the  fole  and  abfolute  Miftrefs  of  them,  but  muft
be  beholden  to  the  favourable  Concurrence  of  feveral  other
Things  to  compafs  them ;  therefore  they  are  faid  not  to  be
in  our  own  Power.  Thus  the  Body  requires  found  feminal
Principles,  and  a  ftrong  Conftitution,  convenient  Diet,  and
moderate  Exercife,  a  wholfome  Dwelling,  a  good  Air,  and
fweet  Watery  and  Strength  and  Ability  to  perform  the
Functions  of  Nature  will  depend  upon  all  thefe.  And  -
yet  thsfe  are  all  of  them  Things  fo  far  out  of  our  own
.^  reach.

with  SiMPLiciu  s's., C q M m.e n t. 31

reach,  that  we  can  neither  beftow  them  upon  ourfelves,  nor
keep  off  the  contrary  Inconveniences,  when  we  Would;  When
a  more  potent  Enemy  rufhes  in  and  aflaults  u?,  we  would  be
glad  to  lie  undifcovered,  but  cannot  make  curlelves  invifiWe.
When  we  are  fick,  we  defire  a  fpeedy  Recovery,  and  yet
our  Wifhes  do  not  bring  it  to  pafs. '  ''"-'

The  Cafe  is  the  fame  with  our  Wealth  and-PofTeffions  too :
for  thefe  are  owing  to  a  world  of  fortunate  Accidents  that
contribute  to  our  getting  them,  and  to  as  many  unfortunate
Accidents  that  confpire  to  deprive  us  of  them :  Accidents
too  mighty  for  us  to  ftruggle  with,  or  to  prevent. -

Reputation  and  Fame  are  no  more  in  our  Power,  than
Riches :  For,  though  by  the  Management  of  ourfelves,  we
give  the  Occafions  of  Efteera  or  Difefteemj  yet  ftiil  the
Opinion  is  not  ours,  but  theirs,  that  entertain  it  •  and,  when
we  have  done  all  we  can,  we  lie  at  their  Mercy,  to  think
what  they  pleafe  of  us.  Hence  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  feme,
who  are  profane  and  irreligious  Men  at  the  bottom,  gain  the
Charafter  of  Piety  and  Virtue,  and  impofe,  not  upon  others
only,  but  fometimes  upon  themfelves  too,  with  a  falfe  Ap-
pearance of  Religion.  And  yet  on  the  other  hand,  others,
who  have  no  Notions  of  a  Deity,  but  what  are  highly  reve-
rent and  becoming  j  that  never  charge  God  with  any  of  our
Frailties  or  Imperfedions,  or  behave  themfelves  like  Men
that  think  fo  of  hirn,  are  miftaken  by  fome  People  for  Infi-
dels and  Aiheifts.  And  thus  the  referved  and  temperate  Con-
verfation,  is  defpifed  and  traduced  by  fome,  for  m.ereSertfe-
lefnefs  and  Stupidity.  So  that  the  being  well-efteemed  of  is
by  no  Means  in  our  own  Power,  but  depends  upon  the
Pleafure  of  thofe  that  think  well  or  ill  of  us.
.  Pofts  of  Authority  and  Government  cannot  fubfift  wi:h-
.^.put  Inferiors  to  be  governed,  and  fubordinace  Officers  to
affift  in  governing  them :  And  particularly  in  fuch  States,  as
allow  Places  to  be  bought  and  fold,  and  make  Preferment
the  Price,  not  of  Merit,  but  Moneys  There  a  Man,  that
wants  a  Purfe,  cannot  rife,  though  he  would  never  fo  fain.
From  whence  we  conclude,  that  all  Things  of  this  Nature  are
not  in  our  own  Power,  becaufe  they  are  not  our  Works,  nor
fuch  as  follow  upon  our  Choice  of  them.

I  only  add  one  Remark  m,ore  here,  which  is.  That  of  all
the  Things  faidto  be  out  of  our  Power,  the  Body  is  firft  men-
tioned ;  and  that  for  this  very  good  Reafon,  becaufe  the
Wants  of  this  expofe  us  to  all  the  reft.  For  Mfiney  is  at  the
Bottom  of  all  Wars  and  Contentions,  and  this  we  cannot

G  be

32  Epictetus's  Morals,

be  "without,  but  muft  feek- it,  in  order  to  the  providing  con-
venient Food,  and  Raiment,  and  fupplying  the  Neceffities
of  the  Body.

CHAP. II.

TH  E  Things  in  our  own  Power,  are  in  their  own
Nature  free,  not  capable  of  being  counter-
manded or  hindered ;  but  thofe  that  are  not  in  our
Power,  are  feeble,  fervile,  liable  to  Oppofition,
and  not  ours,  but  anothers.

COMMENT.

AFTER  having  diftinguiflied  between  thofe  things  that
are,  and  thofe  that  are  not  in  our  own  Power,  he  pro-
ceeds, in  the  next  Place,  to  defcribe  the  Qualities  proper  to
each  of  them.  The  former  Sort  he  fells  us,  are  free,  be-
caufe  it  is  not  in  the  Power  of  any  other  Thing  or  Perfon,
either  to  compel  us  to  them,  or  to  keep  us  back  from  them.
Nor  is  the  Management,  and  the  Enjoyment  of  them,  at
any  body's  Difpofal  but  our  own ;  for  this  is  the  true  Notion
of  Freedom^  to  govern  ones  felf  as  one  pleafes,  and  to  be  un-
der the  Command  and  Direftion  of  no  other  whatfoever.
But  the  Things  out  of  our  Power,  which  are  fubjedl  to  be
given  or  with-held,  it  is  not  we,  but  they  are  Matters  of
them,  in  whofe  Power  it  is  to  communicate  them  to  us,  or
keep  them  from  us ;  and  therefore  thefe  are  not  free^  but
fervile^  and  at  the  Pleafure  of  others.

So  again,  thofe  Things  are  felf-fufficient,  and  confequentljr
firm  and  Jirong ;  but  thefe  that  depend  upon  the  afliftance  of
another,  are  'weak  and  indigent.

Again,  Thofe  cannot  be  countermanded  [as  being  in  a  Man's
own  Power]  For  who  can  pretend  to  correft  my  Opinions,
and  compel  me  to  fuch  or  fuch  particular  Notions  ?  Who  is
able  to  put  a  reftraint  upon  my  Defires  or  my  Averfions?
But  now  theThings  that  are  not  in  our  Power,  are  fo  contrived,
as  to  depend  upon  the  Inclinations  of  other  People,  and
we  may  have  them, or  lofe  them, as  they  pleafe: And

accord-

W/^SiMPLi  CI us's  Comment. 33

accordingly  thefe  are  fubjed  to  many  Hindrances  and  Difap-
pointments,  fo  as  either  never  to  1)6  at  all,  or  to  be  deilroyed
again  when  they  have  been  j  never  to  be  put  into  my  Hands,
or  to  be  fnatched  away  from  me,  after  that  I  am  poflefTed  of
them.

Once  more,  it  is  evident,  that  the  Things  in  our  Power,
are  our  own,  becaufe  they  are  our  Actions  ^  and  this  Conli-
deration  gives  us  the  greateft  Propriety  in  them  that  can  be  :
But  thofe  that  depend  upon  the  Pleafure  of  any  body  elfe,
are  properly  anothers.  From  v/hence  we  muft  infer,  that
every  Kind  of  Good  or  Evil,  which  refpeds  the  Things  in  our
Power,  is  properly  ours  j  as  for  inftance,  true  or  falfe
Apprehenfions  and  Opinions,  regular  or  irregular  Defires,
and  the  like  :  Thefe  are  the  Things,  that  make  a  Man  happy
or  unhappy.  But  for  the  Things  out  of  our  Power,  they  are
none  of  ours :  Thofe  that  relate  to  the  Body,  belong  not
to  the  Man,  ftridly  fpeaking,  but  only  to  our  Shell,  and  our
Inftrument  of  Adtion.  But  if  we  talk  of  a  little  Reputa-
tion, an  empty  and  popular  Applaufe,  alas !  this  is  fomething
much  more  remote,  and  confequently  of  little  or  no  Con-

cern at  all  to  us.

i\!S  «^  i)'*:^  SiStoij^SiS^-**®  S5^A*^

CHAP. III.

REmember  then,  that  if  you  miflake  thofe  Things
for  free,  which  Nature  hath  made  fervile  ;
and  fancy  that  your  own,  which  is  indeed  ano-
ther's i  you  (ball  be  fure  to  meet  with  many  Hin-
drances and  Difappointments,  much  Trouble,  and
great  Diftraftions,  and  be  continually  finding  fault
both  with  God  and  Man.  But  if  you  take  Things
right,  as  they  really  are,  looking  upon  no  more  to
be  your  own,  than  indeed  is  fo  •,  and  all  that  to  be
another's,  which  really  belongs  to  him ;  no  body
fhall  ever  be  able  to  put  any  Conftraint  upon  you,
no  body  Ihall  check  or  difappoint  you  :  You  fliall
accufe  no  body,  fhall  complain  of  nothing,  Ihall  ne-

G  2  vef

34  Epictetu  s's  Morals,

ver  do  any  thing  unwillingly,  Ihall  receive  harm
from  no  body,  lliall  liave  no  Enemy,  for  no  Man
will  be  able  to  do  you  any  Prejudice.

C  0  M  M  E  N  r.

HE  had  told  us  before,  what  -was^  and  what  n):as  not  in
our  o'uin  Foiver^  and  defcribed  the  Qualities  peculiar  to
both  Sorts,  and  what  Relation  they  bear  to  us  :  That  the  things
in  our  Power  are  properly  ours  j  that  thofe  out  of  our  Poiver,
are  anothers.  And  now  he  advifes,  that  Men  would  manage
themfeives  fuitably  to  the  Nature  of  thefe  Things,  and  not
be  guilty  of  perverfe  and  ridiculous  Abfurdities  with  regard
to  them.  For  this  is  the  true  Foundation  of  all  the  Happi-
nt(s^  or  the  Wretchednefs  of  our  Lives.  The  fucceeding
well  in  our  Attempts,  attaining  to  the  Good  we  aim  at,
and  reftraining  all  the  Mifchief  that  could  befall  us,  makes
us  happy :  The  being  difappointed  in  our  Hopes,  miffing
our  Ends  and  Advantaged,  or  the  falling  into  Mifchiefs  and
Inconveniences  are  the  Things  that  make  us  miferable.  But
now,  if  our  Happinefs  confifts  in  regular  Defires,  and  juft
Averfions,  and  thefe  Defires  and  Averlions  are  in  our  own
Power  ,•  we  mufi:  feek  our  Happinefs  here,  that  v/e  may  be
fure  to  find  it;  and  to  find  that  Happinefs,  which  is  pro»
perly  ours,  and  peculiar  to  us.  And  we  fliall  be  fure  to  find
it;  for  how  is  it  poffible  we  fliould  not,  when  the  Regula-
tion of  our  Defires  and  Averfions  depends  intirely  upon
ourfelves }

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  place  our  Aflfeftions  and  Defires
upon  Things  not  in  our  Power,  and  expert  to  find  our  Hap-
pinefs in  fuch;  this  double  Misfortune  muft  needs  follow
upon  it :  One  Way  the  Difappointment  is  unavoidable,  that,
though  v/e  Hiould  prove  fuccef^ful,  and  obtain  what  we
are  fo  fond  of,  yet  Hill  thefe  T|iings  are  not  what  we  take
them  for,  nor  can  we  meet  with  that,  which  is  properly
our  Happinefs,  in  them.  But  befides,  it  is  agreeable  to  all
the  Reafon  in  the  World,  to  believe,  diat  generally  we  muft
needs  be  difappointed  of  the  Things  themfeives.  For  how
Jliould  in  be  otherwife,  when  a  Man  fets  his  Heart  upon  that
Vv'hich  is  anothers,  as  if  it  v/ere  his  own ;  and  when  he  muft
depend  upon  other  Perfons  and  Accidents,  whether  he  iliall
ever  obtain  it  or  no  .^

Now  the  natural  Confequences  of  fuch  Difappointments
are,  the  being  interrupted,  and  having  all  our  Meafures
-. --  broken,

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 35

.kroken,  and,  a  World  of  Grief  and  Remorfe,  when  we  find
our  Pains  have  been  employed  to  no  Piirpofe,  and  that  we
are  engaged  in  wrong  Courfes.  For,  as  Plcafure  and  Joy
are  the  Effeds  of  good  Succefs,  the  accomplidiing  what  we
wifh,  and  being  delivered  from  wl'rat  we  dread  j  fo,  when  we
are  overtaken  by  the  Mifchiefs  we  feared,  and  defeated  in  our
Endeavours  after  that  we  delired,  we  prefently  fall  into  Trou-
ble and  Difcontent,  and  complain  of  every  one  that  we  think
contributed  to  our  Misfortune,  and  fpare  neither  Men,  nor
fometimes  Providence,  and  God  him.felf.

Befides,  there  is  another  Mifchief  comes  of  this.  For
by  being  fo  tenderly  affeded  for  things  that  are  not  in  our
Power,  we  lofe  fometimes  thofe  that  are  j  and  he  that  de-
prives us  of  what  he  could  take  away,  robs  us  of  vv'hat  he
hath  no  Power  to  take  from  us  ,•  ^viz..  regular  and  moderate
Defires  and  Averfions.  But  if  we  be  difpofed  and  aiTedled
as  we  ought,  and  make  a  true  Diftindion  between  what  is
ours,  and  what  is  notj  if  we  fettle  our  Affedtions,  and
beftow  our  Care,  not  upon  things  which  belong  to  another,
but  upon  our  own,  our  proper  Happinefs,  and  what  falls
within  the  Compafs  of  our  own  Power  j  that  is,  upon  the
entertaining  fuch  Defires  and  Averfions,  as  are  agreeable
to  Reafon  and  Nature  j  then  we  may  reft:  fecure  that  we
fhali  never  be  annoyed  by  any  Conftraint  or  Compulfion,  any
Difappointment  or  Hindrance ;  but  fhall  have  the  fole  Govern-
ment, and  entire  Difpofal,  of  fuch  Defires  and  Averfions.
And  i^  fo,  then  we  fhall  have  no  Occafion  of  Grief  or  Re-
morfe :  For  that  can  happen  but  in  two  Cafes,  either  the
mifling  of  what  we  wifhed,  or  the  falling  into  what  we
feared,  and  would  fain  have  avoided.  Now  we  can  never
be  fruftrated  in  our  Dejires,-  nor  ever  be  endamaged  by  any
Inconvenience  we  fear,  provided  we  will  but  make  thofe
things  our  Care,  which  are  in  our  own  Power.  Confequently,
we  can  never  live  in  Awe  and  Dread  of  any  Man  j  for  the
Reafon  why  we  fear  any  Body,  is  becaufe  he  may  do  us  fome
Prejudice,  or  fome  Way  obflrud:  our  Advantage.  But  no
Man  alive  hath  it  in  his  Power  to  offer  violence  to  our  De-
fires and  Averfions  j  and  thefe  are  the  things  in  which  the
Man  who  lives  according  to  the  Dictates  of  right  Reafon,
places  his  Happinefs.  At  this  rate,  we  can  have  no  7/0  Enemy
neither,  for  he  is  accounted  our  Enemy,  that  does  us  mif-
chief ;  but  no  body  can  do  this  to  a  Man  who  is  out  of  the
Power  of  all  Mankind  to  hurt  him :  By  the  fame  Reafon,
fuch  a  Perfon  will  accufe  no  Man, complain  of  nothing,  nor

G  ^  ever

36  Epictetus's  Morals,

ever  do  any  thing  againjl  his  Will.  So  that  the  Life  of  this
Man  is  untainted  with  Perturbation  and  fenfual  Pleafure,
muft  needs  be  above  all  Grief,  and  all  Fear,  abfolutely  free,
and  exquiiitely  happy.

And  here  we  may  obferve  farther,  how  excellently  well
he  proves  the  Life  of  a  wife  and  good  Man,  to  be  not  only
the  beft,  and  moft  for,  one's  Advantage,  but  the  pleafanteft,
and  moft  for  one's  Satisfaftion  too.  For,  as  Plato  tells  us,
every  Creature  does,  by  natural  Inftind:,  endeavour  after
Pleafure,  and  run  away  from  Pain.  Now  fome  Pleafures
attend  thofe  Things,  that  are  truly  good  and  advantageous  to
us  j  and  others  thofe  that  are  prejudicial  and  hurtful.  And
this  makes  it  neceffary  to  take  good  heed  what  Choice  we
make,  that  fo  we  may  embrace,  and  purfue,  and  accuftom
ourfelves  to  the  Enjoyment  of  fuch  Pleafures  only,  as  may
be  beneficial  to  us.  Temperance  (for  Example)  is  really
more  delightful  to  a  virtuous  Man,  than  Extravagance  and
Licentioufnefs  are  to  the  diflblute.  This  needs  no  other
Proof,  than  that  many  Debauchees  leave  their  loofe  Way  of
living,  and  turn  fober,  when  they  confider,  and  come  to  a
better  Senfe  of  Things.  But  there  are  no  Inftances  to  be  pro-
duced of  any  temperate  Perfons,  who  proceed  upon  wife
and  reafonable  Confiderations,  that  ever  abandoned  them-
felves  to  Debauchery  and  Excefs.  Now  if  this  Way  of  liv-
ing had  not  more  than  ordinary  Pleafure  in  it.  Men  would
never  chufe  it  with  fo  much  Eagernefs  and  Satisfaftion.
And,  that  fuch  a  virtuous  Life  as  this  muft  needs  be  more
eafy  and  pleafant,  EpiHetus  demonftrates,  from  its  being
free  and  uncontrouled,  above  Checks  and  Contradicftions,
above  Hindrances  and  Difappointments,  but  depending  and
doing  all  upon  the  Didlates  of  one's  own  Mind  :  And  thus
thofe  happy  Men  live,  who  place  all  their  Good  and  Evil
in  their  own  Adions,  and  the  Ufe  of  that  Liberty  and  Power,
which  Nature  hath  given  them.

CHAP. IV.

SINCE  therefore  the  Advantages  you  propofe  to
yourfelf,  are  fo  valuable,  remember,  that  you
ought  not  to  content  yourfelf  with  a  cold  and  mo-
derate Purfuit  of  them  i  but  that  fome  Things  muft

be

with  Si  MPLi  cius's  Comment. 37

be  wholly  laid  afide,  and  others  you  muft  be  con-
tent to  fufpend  for  a  while.  But  if  you  will  needs
be  grafping  at  both,  and  expert  to  compafs  thefc,
and  at  the  fame  time  attain  unto  Honours  and  Riches
too  ;  there  will  be  great  Hazard  of  your  lofing  the
latter  by  purfuing  the  former;  or  if  not  fo,  yet
you  will  be  fure  to  find  yourfelf  fruftrated  in  all
that  can  make  you  free  and  happy,  while  you  pur-
fue  the  latter.

COMMENT.

HAving  direded  us  what  it  is  we  are  to  expect  Happi-
nefs  from,  and  how  defirable  the  Life  of  fuch  Perlons
■muft  needs  be,  who  depend  not  upon  external  Enjoyments,
and  Things  out  of  their  Power  for  it,  but  place  it  in  their  own
natural  Liberty,  and  what  falls  within  the  Compafs  of  that  j
that  fuch  a  Life  is  above  all  Moleftation  and  Controul,  fafe
from  the  Aflaults  of  any  ill  Accidents,  not  only  advanta-
geous, but  eafy  and  delightful  roo,  the  Good  it  defires  never
deceiving,  the  Evil  it  declines  never  overtaking,  but  in  one
Word,  exquifitely  happy,  and  divinely  bleft  j  he  now  pro-
ceeds to  excite  in  his  Reader  a  Zeal  worthy  of  fuch  mighty
Expedlations  j  and  tells  him,  that  he  muft  not  look  upon
this  as  a  Bufinefs  by  the  by,  while  his  main  Defign  and  Care
is  for  fomething  elfe;  but  that  his  Pains  and  his  Affedion
muft  be  fo  intirely  devoted  to  this  one  Thing,  as  not  to  ad-*
mit  of  any  thing  befides  into  a  Partnerftiip  with  it.

The  external  Enjoyments  of  the  World  then  muft  fit  fo
loofe  about  his  Heart,  that,  as  many  of  them  as  are  incon-
fiftent  with  a  vircuous  Converfation,  and  the  Rules  of  right
Reafon  (fuch  as  Excefs,  and  fenfual  Pleafure,  and  fordid
Wealth,  and  Pov/er,  and  Ambition)  muft  be  abfolutely  dis-
carded^ it  being  impoffible,  that  any  Man,  who  makes  thefe
his  Concern,  fhould  at  the  fame  time  preferve  his  own  Free-
dom, and  Innocence,  and  Wifdom.  But  as  for  fuch  others
of  them,  as  may  be  no  Obftrudlions  to  the  Soul's  Good,
provided  they  be  managed  with  Difcretion  j  fuch  as  a  decenc
Dwelling,  a  competent  Equipage,  the  Satisfactions  of  Mar-
riage, the  Care  of  connnuing  a  good  Family,  the  Exercife  of
juft  Authority,  and  fome  Degree  of  Solicitude  and  Pains  for
the  providing  all  neceflary  Supports;  thefe,  and  all  the  reft

G  4  of

38  Epictetus's  Morals,

pf  the  like  Nature,  he  advifes  his  Scholars  to  fuperfede,  for
fpme  convenient  time  at  leaft.  And  that  for  very  good  Rea-
son; it  being  neceffary,  that  they  v/ho  would  be  truly  and
eminently  good,  fhould  make  the  Exercife  of  Virtue  their
whole  Bufmefs  and  conftant  Study,  and  fuiFer  no  other  thing
whatfoever  to  divert  them  from  it.

Whoever  propofes  to  himfelf,  not  merely  to  be  popular,
and  impofe  upon  the  World  with  a  diffembled  Virtue,  but
to  anfwer  the  Charader  of  a  fincere  and  truly  good  Man,
mufl. take  care  of  two  things.  Firft,  he  muft  attain  to  iucli
a  Degree  of  Wifdom,  as  may  enable  him  to  diftinguifh,  be-
tween what  will  really  make  for  his  Advantage,  and  what
will  turn  to  his  Prejudice:  And  then  fecondly,  he  muft  keep
under  his  brutifh  Appetites,  that  they  m.ay  never  revolt,  nor
rebel  againft  Reafon  j  but  may  be  fo  ready  and  obfervant  to
k^  as  to  move,  only  at  fuch  Times,  and  in  fuch  Proportions,
and  toward  fuch  Objedts  as  the  reafonable  Soul  fhall  limit
and  prefcribe  to  them.  For  Men  are  betrayed  into  Vice  two
Ways.  Either  for  Want  of  the  Underftanding  being  fufE-
ciendy  enlightened,  when  we  do  not  difcern  what  is  good
and  proper  lo  be  done ;  Or  elfe,  through  the  Ungovern-
ablenefs  of  the  AfFedtions  and  fenfual  Appetites  j  when,  though
the  Mind  hath  a  Notion,  though  but  a  weak  and  imperfed:
one,  of  what  ought  to  be  done,  yet  the  Paffions  mutiny  and
make  head,  ufurp  a  Power  that  belongs  not  to  them,  and
over-rule  the  calm  judgment  of  fober  Reafon.  Thus  the
Tragedian  introduces  Medea^  complaining  of  the  Impotence
of  her  Mind,  when  about  to  murder  her  Children  :

'Remorfe  and  Senfe  of  Guilt  draiu  hack  7ny  Soul^
But  Jlronger  Fajjion  does  her  Po-vSrs  controuly
With  Rage  tranjportedy  I  ptijh  boldly  on^
And  fee  the  Frecipce  I  cannot  JJran.

It  is  neceffary  then,  in  order  to  enjoying  the  World,  fo
as  to  maintain  one's  own  Virtue  and  Innocerxe,  that  a  Man
provide  himfelf  with  a  competent  Degree  of  Knowlege  and
Prudence,  and  reduce  his  Appetites  to  Moderation  and  Obe-
dience. And  when  he  engages  in  Buiinefs  and  Converfation,
that  he  be  fure  to  do  it  cautioufly  and  feafonably,  and  to  put
on  this  impenetrable  Armour,  For  this  Reafon,  Ep£ietus  is
urgent  with  his  young  Beginners  to  fufpend  even  thofe
things  that  are  coniiftent  with  Virtue,  for  a  while;  till  Time
and  Pradice  have  confirmed  their  good  Habits,  and  qualified

them

with S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S'S C  O  M  M  E  N  T. 39

them  to  ufe  the  World  with  Safety  and  Difcretion.  For,  as
it  is  Rafhnefs  and  Folly  to  go  into  the  Field  unartn'd;  fo  it
is  to  enga8;e  with  the  World,  till  a  Man  hath  fortified  him-
feif  with  Temper  and  Prudence.

But  he  acquaints  us  farther ;  that,  for  thofe  who  as  yet  are
but  raw  and  unexperienced  in  Virtue,  to  employ  themfelves
in  Bufinefs  and  worldly  Care,  is  not  only  mconvenient  and
hazardous,  but  ridiculous  and  vain,  and  to  no  Manner  of
Purpofe.  They  that  place  their  Defires  and  their  Averlions
upon  fuch  Things  as  are  out  of  a  Man's  Power,  muft  needs
fail  of  Prudence  and  Moderation,  and  cannot  have  inclina-
tions and  Averfions  grounded  upon,  and  govern'd  by  right
Reafon,  which  are  the  only  Things  that  make  Men  free,  and
eafy,  and  happy.  For  they  muft  of  Neceffity  live  in  Sub-
jediion  to  their  wild  and  brutiili  Paffions,  which  lord  it  over
them  like  fo  many  cruel  Mailers,  or  enraged  Tyrants.  They
muft  alfo  live  perpetually  in  a  ilavifh  Fear  of  all  thofe  Men,
in  whofe  Power  it  is,  either  to  gratify  their  Hopes,  or  to
obitrud  and  defeat  them;  who  can  intercept  the  Good  they
wifh,  or  inflid  the  Ills  they  fear ;  leil  they  ihould  exert  this
Power  to  their  Prejudice.

Befides  all  this,  when  our  Care  and  Concern  is  laid  out
upon  the  feeming  good  Things  without  us,  it  expofes  us  to
Difappointments  in  our  true  Happinefs,  by  taking  off  our
Care  from  thofe  Things  that  are  more  properly  ours.  For
they  who  divide  their  I3e{ires  and  Endeavours  between  both,
do  neither  make  a  juft  Diflintflion  between  thofe  Things
that  are,  and  thofe  that  are  not  really  good ;  nor  do  they
exprefs  a  becoming  Concern,  for  that  which  is  their  own  pe-
culiar Happinefs ;  nor  beftow  the  Pains  about  it  that  it  de-
ferves  :  and  till  they  do  fo,  it  is  impoffible  they  fhould  attain
to  it.  For  the  moil  Part  therefore,  they  fall  fhort  of  thofe
external  Advantages  theypropofe  to  themfelves,  becaufe  they
do  not  apply  their  Minds  to  thefe  intirely,  but  nov/  and  then
are  diverted  by  Delires  and  Endeavours  after  their  true  and
proper  Happinefs ;  and  out  of  a  fecret  Shame  and  Confciouf-
nefs,  that  this  requires  their  Care,  fall  into  fuch  Perplexities
and  Diftradions,  as  reilrain  and  flop  their  Career,  and  will
not  fuffer  them  to  do  nor  to  endure  every  Thing  that  is
neceffary  for  obtaining  the  falfe  Good  they  chiefly  puriiie.

Now,  though  fuch  a  divided  Life  as  this,  mufb  be  acknow-
ledge to  be  lefs  vicious,  than  that  which  addids  itfelf  whol-
ly to  the  World,  Vvithout  any  Check  or  Interruption  at  all;
yet  ic  cannot  but  be  exceeding  troublefome  and  uneafy,-

much

40  Epic TETus's  Morals,

much  more  fo  indeed,  than  that  of  the  Worldling.  For  it
is  one  continual  Labour  in  vain,  ever  ftriving  to  reconcile
Contradidtions,  full  of  perpetual  Inconfiftencies  and  Remor-
fes,  Diflike  of  one's  own  Adions,  and  eternal  Self-condem-
nation. So  that  it  muft  needs  be  infinitely  painful  and  de-
teftable.

But  it  is  worth  our  taking  notice,  that  Epi&etus^  upon
thefe  Occafions,  does  frequently  in  the  following  Difcour-
fes  admonifh  and  awaken  us  with  a  Remember.  The  Rea-
fon  of  which  is,  that  he  addreffes  himfelf  to  the  rational  Soul  j
■which,  though  it  be  naturally  and  effentialiy  endued  with  juft
Ideas  of  Things,  and  hath  an  inbred  Faculty  of  difcerning
and  adhering  to  Truth,  yet  finds  but  too  often,  that  this  Eye
of  Reafon  is  darkened,  hath  dim  and  confufed  Reprefenta-
tions  of  Things  impofed  upon  it  by  the  material  Principle,
to  which  it  is  united  j  and  by  this  Means  is  betrayed  into  Ig-
norance and  Forgetfulnefs,  the  true  Caufe  of  all  its  Mifcar-
riages  and  all  its  Miferies.  So  that,  confidered  in  thefe  Cir-
cumftances,  it  ftands  in  need  of  a  continual  Monitor  to
rouze  it  into  Thought  and  Remembrance.

But  when  he  fays,  that  A  Man  'who  propofes  to.  himfelf  Ad-
•vantages  fo  'valuable^  ought  not  to  be  content  ivith  a  moderate
Trofecution  of  them  ;  this  Expreffion  is  not  to  be  underftood
as  we  take  it,  when  ufed  to  diftinguifh  between  Moderation
and  Excefs,  but  is  intended  here  of  the  Defed,  and  fignifies
a  fupine  Negledr,  and  cold  Indifference.  For  where  our
Happinefs  and  our  All  is  at  flake,  there,  as  Pindar  exprefTes
himfelf,

Difrefs  and  Danger  fbould  our  Courage  fre.
Move  genWous  Thoughts^  and  brave  Refolves  infpire.

C  H  A  P. V.

WHEN  therefore  any  frightful  and  difcourag-
ing  Imagination  alTaults  you,  harden  yourfelf,
and  meet  it  boldly  with  this  Refledlion,  That  it  is
only  your  Apprehenfion  of  Things,  and  not  the  real
Nature  of  the  Things  themfelves.  Then  bring  it
to  the  Teft,  and  examine  it  by  fuch  Rules  of  Mo-
rality as  you  are  Matter  ofj  but  efpecially  by  this

moH

W/i&  Si MPLicius's  Comment. 41

moft  material  Diftindlion,  of  Things  that  are,  or  are
not  in  our  Power.  And  if,  upon  Enquiry,  it  be
found  one  of  the  latter  Sort,  remember,  that  it  is
what  you  are  not  at  all  concerned  in,  and  flight  it
accordingly.

COMMENT.

HE  had  told  us,  That  the  Man,  who  propofeth  to  him-
felf  the  Attainment  of  Virtue  and  Happinefs,  muft  be
conftant  and  indefatigable,  and  nor  fufFer  the  World,  or
any  of  its  Temptations,  to  feduce  or  draw  him  off  from  the
purfuit  of  it.  But  fince  even  they,  who  do  make  thefe
Things  their  Study  and  Care,  are  yet  fubjed  to  frequent
Fancies  and  Apprehenfions  j  fome  that  put  them  upon  defir-
ing  fome  of  thofe  external  Advantages,  and  others  that  ter-
rify them  with  Calamities  of  that  Kind ;  he  informs  us  here,
how  to  manage  fuch  Apprehenfions,  fo  as  to  receive  no  In-
convenience from  them.  And  thefe  Apprehenfions  he  calls
frightful  and  difcouraging ;  becaufe  they  are  extravagant  and
unreafonable,  and  imbitter  one's  Life  with  a  world  of  Ter-
rors and  Troubles,  by  the  Exceis  and  Irregularity  of  their
Motions.

In  the  following  Difcourfes  he  advifes  more  at  large,  not
to  be  hurried  away,  and  immediately  tranfported  with  any
Imagination,  whether  it  tend  to  Hope  or  Fear ;  And  here  he
fays  much  the  fame  Thing  in  fewer  Words,  That  a  Man
ought  to  harden  and  fet  himfelf  againit  it,  and  difarra
it  of  all  its  Force,  by  this  Confideration,  That  it  \s  but  a
Fancy  of  our  own,  and  no  more.  Now  our  Fancies,  we
know,  do  fometimes  give  us  the  Reprefentations  of  Things
as  they  really  are,  as  in  Things  that  are  indeed  pleafant  and
beneficial  ,*  and  fometimes  they  delude  us  with  wild  Incon-
fiftencies,  gaudy  Vanities,  and  empty  Dreams.  But  the
Strength  of  thefe  Reprefentations  depends  upon  the  Im-
prefTions  which  they  make  in  our  Minds.  And  this  is  ex-
ceedingly weakened,  by  making  that  fingle  Confideration  ha-
bitual to  us.  That  there  is  very  often  a  wide  Difference  be-
tween the  Things  themfelves,  and  the  Reprefentations  of
them  to  us :  For  when  once  we  are  thus  fixed,  no  Violence
they  can  ufe,  will  be  able  to  juftle  out  our  Reafon,  or  per-
vert our  Judgment ;  which  he  tells  us,  as  foon  as  we  have
allayed  the  Heat  of  the  Imagination,  and  made  our  Minds

quiet

42  Epi  CTETu  s's  Morals,

quiet  and  calm,  fhould  be  prefently  employed,  in  a  nice  Ex-
amination of  the  Idea  reprefented  to  us.

Now  there  are  feveral  Rules  to  try  it  by:  Some  taken
from  the  Nature  of  thefe  Ideas  themfelves,  and  the  Things
they  reprefent ;  as.  Whether  they  be  fuch  Objeds  as  tend
to  the  Good  of  the  Mind,  or  whether  they  concern  our
Bodies,  or  our  Fortunes  only  :  Whether  they  contribute  to  any
real  Advantage,  or  whether  Pleafure  is  the  only  Thing  they
can  pretend  to :  Whether  what  they  propofe  be  feafible,  or
not.  There  is  likewife  another  Method,  which  proceeds  up-
on the  Judgment  of  wife  and  unwife  Men,  and  the  Con-
cern they  exprefs  for  them ;  but  efpecially  upon  the  Judg-
ment and  Determination  of  Almighty  God.  For  that  which
God  himfelf,  and  wife  and  good  Men  have  approved  of,
every  one  that  confults  the  Safety  and  Happineis  of  his
Soul,  muft  needs  be  convinced,  will  challenge  his  greateil
Care  and  Concern  j  as  on  the  contrary,  whatever  they
diflike  and  condemn,  ought  by  all  Means  to  be  detefted  and
avoided.  And  no  Man  yet  ever  arrived  to  that  Degree  of
Folly,  or  was  fo  far  blinded  by  Paffion  and  Luft,  as  to  per-
fuade  himfelf  that  Injuftice  and  Luxury,  and  Excefs,  are
Things  well-pleafing  to  God.

-  But  though  there  are  many  Rules  which  may  be  fervice-
able  to  us,  in  diftinguifliing  between  the  feveral  Ideas  and  the
Things  they  reprefent,  yet  there  is  one  peculiar  to  Men,  con-
fidered  as  Men,  and  which  is  of  general  ufe  upon  all  Oc-
cafions.  And  this  depends  upon  the  Diftindion  of  Things  that
are^  and  Things  that  are  not  in  our  own  Power.  For  if  the
Object  that  prefents  itfelf,  as  a  Thing  inviting  our  Defire,
or  provoking  our  Averfion,  be  out  of  our  own  Difpofal ;
the  ready  Courfe  to  be  taken  is,  to  fatisfy  ourfelves,  and
to  difmifs  it  with  thisAnfwer,  That  this  is  no  Part  of  our  Con~
cern.  For  it  is  impoffible  for  any  Thing  to  be  ftridly  Good
or  Evil  to  us,  which  is  not  within  our  own  Power  j  becaufe
the  Freedom  of  the  Will  is  the  true  fpecifick  Difference  of
human  Nature,  The  very  Being  of  a  Creature  thus  quali-
fied, necefTarily  infers  this  Prerogative,  that  all  its  Good
and  all  its  Evil,  iliall  depend  merely  upon  its  own  Choice.

CHAP.

ijoith  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 43

CHAP. VI.

REmember,  That  the  Thing,  which  recommends
any  Defire,  is  a  Promife  and  Profpecl  of  ob-.
taining  the  Objed  you  are  in  purfuit  of ;  As  on
the  contrary,  the  Thing,  which  your  Averfion
aims  at,  and  propofes  to  you,  is  the  efcaping  the.
Evil  you  fear.  And  in  thefe  Cafes,  he,  that  is
baulked  of  his  Defires,  is  an  unfortunate  Man  ;  and
he,  that  is  overtaken  by  the  Mifchief  he  declines,
is  a  miferable  Man.  But  now,  if  you  confine
your  Averfions  to  thofe  Evils  only,  which  are  at
the  Difpo/al  of  your  own  Will ;  you  can  be  never
overtaken  by  any  Calamity  you  would  decline  ;  but
if  you  extend  them  to  fuch  Things,  as  Sicknefs,  or
Poverty,  or  Death,  you  will  of  Neceffity  be  mi-
ferable.

7A

CHAP. VII.

LE  T  your  Averfions  then  be  taken  off  from  all
Things  out  of  your  own  Power,  and  transfer-
red to  fuch  Things  as  are  contrary  to  Nature,  with-
in your  own  Power.  And  as  for  Defires,  lay  them
for  the  prefent,  wholly  afide:  For  if  you  fix  them
upon  Things  out  of  your  Power,  you  are  fur^
to  be  unfuccefsful  -,  and  if  you  would  reftrain  them
to  fit  and  proper  Objefts,  fuch  as  come  within  it,
know  this  is  not  come  to  your  Turn  yet.  Let  your
Mind  therefore  go  no  farther  than  the  mere  Ten-
dencies and  Propenfions,  to  moderate  and  ufe  thefe
gently,  gradually,  and  c^utioufly.

COM'

44  Efict£^t-^&'s  Morals,

CO  M  ME  N^.

'J

THIS  now  follows  in  a  dired  Method  from  what
went  before,  and  is,  as  it  were,  a  Demonftration  of
the  Truth  of  the  laft  Chapter  j  where  we  were  told,  that  our
Apprehenfions  and  Ideas  of  Things  defirable  muft  be  regulated
by  that  necefTary  Diftindion  of  Whaf  is,  and<what  h  not  luith-
in  our  own  Power.  The  Obfervation  of  this  Rule  would  be
fure  to  make  us  fuccefsful  and  happy,  and  the  Negledt  of  it
unfortunate  and  wretched.  To  this  Purpofe,  his  firft  Bufi-
nefs  is  to  explain,  what  Sort  of  Perfons  we  ufe  to  efteem
lucky  or  unluclcy ;  and  he  tells  us,  that  the  End  our  Aver-
iions  propofe  to  themfelves,  is,  not  to  fall  into  the  Mifchief
we  endeavour  to  decline ;  fo  that  in  this  Cafe,  the  miffing
our  Objed:  is  fortunate;  as  on  the  contrary,  it  is  unfortu-
nate, in  Cafes  of  Defire,  when  we  do  not  get  our  Objed:.
And  the  Misfortune  oppofite  to  good  Succefs  is,  when  the
Thing  we  would  avoid,  does  happen  to  us ;  for  here  we  get
our  Objedt  indeed,  but  then  this  getting  is  to  our  Prejudice,
and  what  we  might  much  better  have  been  without.

When  he  hath  fet  thefe  Matters  in  a  true  Light,  then  he
proceeds  thus :  If  you  take  care  to  make  thofe  Things  only
the  Objedls  of  your  Averfions,  which  are  contrary  to  Na-
ture, and  within  the  Compals  of  your  own  Choice,  as  In-
temperance, for  Example,  and  Injuftice,  and  the  like  ,•  you
can  never  be  overtaken  by  any  Thing  you  fear,  becaufe  in
thefe  Matters  you  may  be  fure  to  efcape,  if  you  pleafe ;  and
confequently,  you  are  fure  never  to  be  unfortunate.  But  if,
inftead  of  thefe,  you  pitch  upon  Sicknefs,  or  Poverty,  or  any
of  thofe  Things  that  are  out  of  your  own  Difpofal ;  you
muffc  needs  fall  into  calamitous  Circumftances  fometimes,
becaufe  it  cannot  depend  upon  yourfelf,  whether  you  fliall
be  delivered  from  thefe  or  not.  So  again  for  Defire :  That
Man  cannot  fecure  himfelf  againft  frequent  Difappoint-
ments,  who  fixes  upon  Objeftsout  of  his  own  Power  j  but  if
our  Defires  and  our  Averfions  be  confined  to  Matters  with-
in our  own  Power  and  Choice,  then  it  will  not  be  poffible
for  us  to  be  baulked  in  our  Hopes,  or  overtaken  by  our  Fears,
but  Happinefs  and  Succefs  will  attend  us  continually.

The  Subftance  and  Connexion  of  all  which,  in  fhort,  lies
here.  He  that  extends  his  Denres  and  his  Averfions  to
Things  out  of  the  Difpofal  of  his  own  Will,  very  frequently

milTes

with  SiMPLicrus's  Comment. 45

miffes  his  Aim,  falls  ihort  in  his  Hopes,  and  is  overtaken  by
his  Fears :  And  he  muft  needs  do  fo,  becaufe  thefe  Things
depend  not  on  himfelf,  bur  upon  others.  Now  fuch  a  one
is  confefTed  to  be  an  unfuccefsful  and  unfortunate  Perfon,
and  therefore  wretched  and  miferable.

But  it  is  worth  our  Notice,  how  Epi^etus  imitates  Socra~
tes's  way  of  arguing  upon  this  OccafiOn,  and  accommo-
dates himfelf  to  his  Hearers,  fo  as,  by  defcending  to  their
Notions,  to  raife  them  up  higher  to  fomething  better  and
more  perfed. For  that  Happinefs  confifts  in  obtaining  Mens
Wifhes  and  Defires,  and  in  efcaping  the  Mifchiefs  and  Dan-
gers they  fear,  is  the  general  Notion  Men  have  of  it,'  and
thus  far  Men  of  all  Perfuafions,  and  the  moil  diftant  Tem-
pers and  Converfations,  agree  j  but  then  herein  they  differ,
that  they  do  not  employ  their  Defires  and  Averfions  alike.
For  the  wife  and  virtuous  purfue  fuch  Objedls  only,  as  are
really  profitable  and  good,  and  avoid  only  the  truly  mifchie-
vous  and  fubftantial  Evils ;  and  this  they  do  by  the  free  Guid-
ance of  their  Reafon,  and  the  due  Government  of  their  Paf.
fions  j  for  the  brutifh  Appetites  in  them  are  fo  fubdued,  (o
difciplin'd  by  Acts  of  Obedience  to  the  Judgment,  that  they
do  not  fo  much  as  think  any  thing  pleafant,  but  what  Reafon
hath  approved,  and  found  to  be  fo : But  the  Generality  of
Mankind, partly  for  want  of  duly  improving  their  Judg-
ments, and  partly  from  their  brutifh  Affetftions  being  kept
in  perpetual  Commotion  and  Diforder,  diftinguifli  the  Ob-
jeds  of  their  Defire  by  no  other  Mark  than  Pleafure  j  with-
out examining,  whether  this  Pleafure  be  fuch  as  makes  for
their  true  Advantage,  or  not : And  thefe  Men  often  hit  up-
on very  impure  and  unfincere  Pleafures,  fuch  as  carry  a  Mix-
cure  and  Allay  of  Pain  along  with  them. For,  in  truth,  they
are  not  really  and  properly  Pleafures,  but  only  the  empty
Shadows  and  falfe  Refemblances  of  Pleafure. Yet  ftill,  as
was  faid  before,  all  Mankind  are  agreed  in  the  general,  that
Profperity  and  Succefs  confift  in  obtaining  the  good  Things
we  wilh,  and  keeping  off  the  Evils  we  fear. So  that  even
the  fenfual  and  moft  vicious  Men  may  convince  themfelves
from  this  Difcourfe,  that  the  true  way  never  to  be  difappoint-
ed  in  their  Defires,  or  overtaken  by  their  Fears,  is,  to  agree,
that  thofe  Things  which  are  within  our  Power,  are  the  only
good  and  proper  Objeds  of  Defire ;  and  that  the  Evils  in  our
own  Power,  are  the  only  noxious  and  deftrudlive,  and  pro-
per Objedls  of  Fear  and  Hatred  :  Since  it  is  plain,  that  they,
who  fix  upon  Things  without  their  Power,  muft  needs  fall

ihorc

46  Epictetus's  Morals,

fhort  very  frequently  of  their  Hopes,  and  lofe  what  they  defire,
and  endure  what  they  fear :  And  this  is  v/hat  even  vicious
Perfons  acknowledge  to  be  a  great  Misfortune.

Let  then  J  fays  he,  your  Aversions  he  taken  off  from  all  Things
out  of  your  own  Foiver^  a^id  tra-asferred  to  fuch  Things  as  are
contrary  to  Nature^  -xithin  your Power. For  if  you  place
them  upon  Sicknefs  or  Poverty,  or  the  like,  you  mufl  una-
voidably be  unfortunate,  becaufe  thefe  are  Things  not  in  your
Power  to  efcape. For  though  we  can  contribute  confider-
ably  towards  the  avoiding  of  them,  yet  the Thing  is  not
wholly  and  abfolutely  in  ourfelves  j  but  it  will  depend  upon
fundry  other  Circumftances  and  Accidents,  whether  our  En-
deavours fhall  fucceed,  or  not. But, if  we  would  follow
his  Advice,  take  oft  our  Fears  from  thefe  Things,  and  put
them  upon  thofe  within  our  ov\'n  Choice,  which  are  preju-
dicial and  againit  Nature:  If,  for  Infbance,  we  would  make
it  our  Care  to  avoid  erroneous  Opinions,  and  falfe  Appre-
henfions  of  Things,  and  whatever  elfe  can  be  any  Obftruction
to  a  good  Converfation, and  fuch  a  Life,  as  Reafon  and
Nature  have  made  fuitable  to  our  Character  ,•  we  fhould  ne-
ver be  opprelTed  with  any  of  the  Calamities  we  fear,  becaufe
it  is  in  our  own  Power  abfolutely  to  avoid  thefe  Things. For
nothing  more  than  our  own  Averfions  and  Refoiutiojis  is
requilite  to  the  doing  this  efFedually.

All  here  is  fufHciently  plain,  and  needs  no  Enlargement;
but  that  which  follows  hath  fomeching  of  Difficulty  in  it.
For  what  can  be  his  Meaning  in  that  Advice,  that  All  Be  fire
Jljould  for  the  prefe?it  be  wholly  laid  afde  ?  There  is  a  manifcfl
Reafon,  why  we  fhould  difcharge  all  thofe  Defires,  than
concern  Things  without  our  Power;  becaufe  thi^  evidently
makes  for  our  Advantage,  both  in  regard  of  the  Difappoint-
ments  and  perpetual  UneafinefTcs,  which  this  Courfe  delivers
us  from  ;  and  alfo  in  Confideration  of  the  Things  them-
felves,  which,  though  we  fhould  fuppofe  no  fuch  Troubles
and  Difappointments  attending  them,  are  yet  not  capable  of
bringing  us  any  real  Advantage,  nor  that,  which  is  the  proper
Happinefs  of  a  Man.

But  what  fhall  we  fay  to  his  forbidding  the  Defire,  even
of  thofe  good  Things,  which  come  within  the  Difpofal  of
our  own  Wills?  The  Reafon  he  gives  is  this,  Becaufe  you
are  not  yet  come  to  this.  But  if  you  were  come  to  it,  there
would  then  be  no  farther  Occafion  for  Defire ;  for  this  h  no
other  than  a  Motion  of  the  Mind  defiring,  by  which  ir  reaches
for-ward  to  what  it  is  not  yet  come  to. And  thii  feems  to

cut

w/Vj6  SiMPL  I  CI  us's  Comment. 47

cut  oflF  all  Defire  in  general :  For  how.  is  it  pollible  to  obtain
any  Good,  without  firft  defiring  it  ?  Efpecially,  if,  as  hath
been  formerly  fhewn,  the  Good  and  Happinefs  of  a  Man
confiftj  not  fo  much  in  Acftions,  and  the  effecting  what  he
'would,  as  in  the  entertaining  fuch  Defires  and  Averfions,  as
are  agreeable  to  Nature  and  Reafbn  j  what  Ground  can  there
be  for  fufpending  all  our  Defires,  and  utterly  forbidding  us
for  a  while  to  entertain  any  at  all  ?  Or  how  can  we  imagine
it  poffible  for  a  Man  to  live  void  of  all  Defire  ?  I  add,  that
this  looks  like  a  dired  Contradidion  to  what  went  before,
when  in  the  4'''  Chapter  he  gave  this  Advice  :  Since  therefore
the  Ad'vantages  you  propofe  to  y our f elf  are  fo  exceeding  va^
liiahle^  Remember,  that  you  ought  not  to  content  yourfelf  'with  a
cold  and  moderate  Turfuit  of  them.  For  by  that  Purfuic  he
did  not  underftand  any  bodily  Motion,  but  the  Eagernels  of
the  Soul,  by  which,  in  the  Adl  of  Defiring,  fhe  moves  to-
wards, and  makes  after  the  Objed.  And  again,  how  can  we
fuppofe  any  Affedions  and  Propenfons  without  Defire  ?  For
the  Order  of  Things  infers  a  Necefficy,  before  there  can  be
any  fuch  Affeftions  and  Propenfions  of  the  Soul.

In  Anfwer  to  thefe  Objections,  it  may  be  replied,  that
■Epifietus  here  addreffes  himfelf  to  young  Beginners  in  Phi-
lofophy ;  for  whom  it  cannot  be  fafe  to  indulge  any  Defires
at  all,  till  they  be  tirft  competently  informed,  what  are  the
Objedrs  wbfch  they  ought  to  fix  upon.  And  fo  that  thefe
Affedlions  and  Propenfions  of  the  Soul  are  to  be  underffcood,
only  of  thofe  firft  Motions  to  or  from  its  Objeds,  which,
the  Stoicks  contend,  are  always  antecedent  to  Defiire  and
Averfion.

Or  if  he  dired  his  Difcourfe  to  Men  akeady  inftruded  ;
•  then  we  muft  not  interpret  the  Words  as  they  feem  to  found  ^
nor  may  we  fuppofe  that  he  intends  to  cut  off  all  Defire  of
the  good  Things  incur  Power,  abfolutely  fpeaking;  but  only
to  reftrain  the  Vehemence  and  Eagernefs  of  that  Averiion
and  Defire,  which  in  a  moderate  Degree  he  is  content  to
allow.  For  you  fee,  that  he  advifes  in  the  very  fame  Place,
to  make  ufe  of  our  Propenfions  and  AffeBlons  of  the  Soul
gently,  cooly,  and  cautioufly.  For  we  mult  iieceffarily  move
.  towards  the  Objed  of  our  Defires,  and  from,  that  which  is
our  Averfion,-  but  our  Defires  and  Averfions  are  antecedent
to  fuch  Motions  to  and  from  the  Objed,  and  do  produce
them,  as  Caufes  do  their  proper  Effeds.

H  Again?

48  Epicte  TiTs*s  Morals,"

Again,  when  he  advifed  before,  that  Men  would  not  con-
tent themfelves  with  a  cold  and  moderate  Purfuit  of  fuch
valuable  Advantages,  it  was  no  Part  of  his  Intention,  to  re-
commend an  eager  and  violent  Defire,  but  rather  that  we  '
fliould  be  fixed  and  refolved  in  this  Profecution,  as  to  fatisfy
ourfelves  in  doing  what  he  adds  himfelf  immediately  after,
the  abandonirg  fome  'Enjoyjnents  for  altogether ^  and  the  fuj-
pejjding  of  others  for  fo?ne  conve?iient  Tivie.

Now  a  vehement  Degree  in  any  of  thefe  things,  either  the
Propenfities  of  the  Mind,  or  the  Defires  and  Averfions  of  it,
is  with  great  Reafon  condemned,  becaufe  of  the  ill  Confe-
quences  it  is  apt  to  have,  when  Men  fhoot  beyond  the  Mark  :
through  an  Excefs  of  Delire,  and  attempt  things  above  their
Strength. For  this  ufually  tends  to  the  weakening of  the
Soul,  as  much  as  overftraining  injures  the  Body. And  this
is  an  Inconvenience,  which  many  have  found  experimentally
from  the  immoderate  Violence  and  Heat  of  Adlion,  which
Men  fond  of  Exercife,  and  eager  in  it,  are  moft  unfeafon-
ably  guilty  of. For  there  are  but  very  few  Perfons  of  fuch  a
Conftitution, either  in  Body  or  Mind,  as  to  be  able,  all  on
the  fudden,  to  change  from  a  bad  State  to  a  found  and  good
one. Diogenes  indeedy  and  Crates^  and  Zeno,  and  fuch  emi-
nent Lights  as  thefe,  might  be  fo  happy ; but  for  the  gene-
rality of  People,  their  Alrerations  are  gradual  and  flow  •  they
fall  by  little  and  little,  and  they  recover  themfelves  fo  too  j  and
this  is  fuch  a  Condition  as  Nature hath  appointed  for  us,
with  Regard  to  the  Soul,  as  well  as  the  Body. For  gentle
Methods  are  commonly  more  likely  to  hold, and  a  more
fafe  Way  of  proceeding. Thefe  keep  the  Soul  from  fpending
its  Strength  too  faft,  and  put  fome  Checks  upon  its  Forward-
nefs  j  which  is  the  true  Way,  both  of  preferving,  and  by  De-
grees, though  but  flow  ones, of  confirming  and  increafiog
the  Vigour  of  it. This  is  the  true  Reafon  why  we  are  advi-
fed  to  put  a  Reftraint  upon  the  AfFedions  of  the  Soul,  to
move  leifurely  and  gradually^  and  'with  much  coolnefs  and  cau-
tion. That  li^  to  flacken  the  Reins  by  little  and  little  •  and
not  to  let  loofe  our  Defires  and  our  Averfions, nor  give
them  their  full  Range  immediately. For  the  Man,  who  from
a  dillblute  and  head-Ilrong  Courfe  of  Life,  would  bring  him-
felf to  the  contrary  Habits  of  Sobriety  and  ftridl  Difcipline,
mufl  not  prefently  leap  to  the  diftant  Extream,  from  Luxury
and  Excefs, to  Abftemioufnefs  and  Faftingj but  he  muffc
advance  by  Steps,  and  be  fatisfied  at  firft,  with  abating  fome-
v.'hat  of  his  former  Extravagance. For  what  the  Author  of

the

with  S  i  M  p  L  i  c  i  u  s's  G  o  M  M  E  N  T. 49

the  Gdlden  Verfes  hath  obferved,  is  very  confiderable  upon
thefe  Occafions.

The  Rafj  ufe  Force^  and  'with  foft  Vleafures  fight  j
The  Wife  retreat ^  and  fa-ve  themfelves  by 'Blight.

Thus  it  is  in  Matters  of  Learning  and  Knowledge  :  Young
Students  muft  admit  the  Idea's  of  Things  warily,  and  not
take  every  Appearance  of  Truth  for  an  unconteftable  Axiom;
that  fOj  if  upon  a  fecond  View,  there  be  Occafion  to  alter
their  Judgments,  it  may  be  done  with  greater  Readinejs  and
Eafe,  when  their  minds  are  not  too  ftrongly  poflefTed  v/ith
their  flrft  Notions.

Once  more,  Epi&etu^  advifes  his  Scolars  to  move  leifurely  ,
and  gradually  to  Objefts  of  both  Kinds,"  but  now,  if  fo
much  Caution  and  Coldnefs  be  necefifary,  why  does  he  allow
our  Averfions,  any  more  than  our  Defires?  for  he  bids  as  take
off  our  Averfions  from  thofe  frejtidicial  things  that  are  not  in  our
Voiuer^  and  bend  them  againjl  thofe  that  are  j  and  yet  at  the
fame  time  he  prohibits  all  Manner  of  Defire,  and,  for  fome
time,  will  not  permit  us  to  indulge  that  at  all. <^

One  probable  Account  of  this  may  be  taken  from  the  Na-
ture and  Condition  of  Men,  who  are  beginning  to  reform.
The  firfl  Step  towards  a  good  Life  is  to  throw  off  all  the  Ve-
nom and  Corruption  of  a  bad  onej  and  till  the  Breail  have
difcharged  itfelf  of  this,  no  Nourifhment  can  be  had  from
any  Principles  of  Virtue  infufed  into  it.  What  the  great  Hip-
pocrates has  mofl:  excellently  obferved  concerning  our  Bo-
dies, is  much  more  truly  applicable  to  our  Souls :  That  fb
long  as  a  Man  continues  full  of  grofs  and  noxious  Humours^
the  Nourifhment  he  receives,  does  not  feed  him,  fomuch  as
his  Diftemper.  For  the  vicious  Principles,  which  had  taken
Poffeffion,  corrupt  all  the  good  ones  that  are  put  to  them.
Sometimes  they  make  us  difrelifh  them,  as  upleafant;  fome-
times  dread  and  avoid  them,  as  hurtful  and  injurious  to  us  j
fometimes  condemn  them  as  Evil,  and  rejedl  them  as  im-
poffible  to  be  complied  with.  And  all  this  while,  the  Difeafe
gathers  more  ftrength,  and  grows  upon  us,  by  bringing
us  to  a  Contempt  of  better  Principles,  after  a  Pretence  of
having  tried,  and  found  them  defedlive.  Thus  at  laft  it  be-
comes incurable,  and  will  not  fo  much  as  fuffer  us  to  admit
of  any  Arguments  or  Adions,  that  might  advance  us  in  Vir-
tue, but  produces  in  us  a  loathing  of  all  thofe  Remedies,
that  contribute  to  our  Recovery. Juft  as  in  the  Jaundice,

Ha  when

50  Epi  CTETus's  Morals,

when  the  vitiated  Palate  thinks  Honey  bitter,  a  Man  nau-
feates  it  prefently,  and  will  never  endure  to  tafte  Honey  af-
ter, in  order  to  the  removing  that  Prejudice.  Thus  the
Averfions  are  allowed  in  young  Beginners,  becaufe  the  Me-
thod of  their  Cure  requires  it ;  and  the  firft  Step  towards  a
Reformation,  is  by  growing  into  a  Diflike  of  Vice,  to  put
themfelves  into  a  Condition  of  receiving  virtuous  Principles
and  good  InftruAions.

This  Difcourfe  is  alfo  excellently  well  fuited  to  fuch  Per-
fbns,  in  regard  it  fhews  them  the  right  Way  to  Liberty,  and
Security,  and  an  eafy  Mind,  that  fo  their  Lives  may  be  plea-
fant  and  fweet  to  them',  which  indeed  is  the  very  Thing  all
Creatures  aim  at.  Now,  though  an  abfolute  Freedom  from
Paffion,  and  a  Converfation  in  all  Points  agreeable  to  the
Rules  of  Decency  and  Nature,  be  the  proper  Excellency,
which  we  ought  to  defire  and  purfue ;  yet  Beginners  muft  fa-
tisfy  themfelves  with  lefs  j  and  think  they  do  very  well,  when
they  can  abate  of  their  Paffions,  and  reduce  them  within
fome  reafonable  Bounds,  though  they  cannot  gain  an  abfo-
lute Maftery  over  them.  They  muft  exped:  to  relapfe  fome-
times,-  and'  are  not  fo  much  to  be  condemned  for  falling,  as
encouraged  and  commended,  when  they  rife  again.  Such  as
thefe  therefore  are  not  yet  arrived  to  the  Perfedlion  of  thofe
Things  which  fhould  be  the  Objedl  of  their  Defires:  And
this  I  take  to  be  the  Meaning  of  that  Expreflion,  This  is
not  come  to  your  Turn  yet :  i.  e.  the  imperfedl  State  you  are
in,  hath  not  qualified  you  for  fuch  Defires:  For  when  we
aim  at  fomething  that  exceeds  our  Capacity,  and  find  we  can-
not reach  it,  then  Troubles  and  Difappointments,  and  a  fink-
ing of  our  Spirits,  and  fometimes  a  defponding  Mind,  follow
upon  it.  Men  violently  bent  upon  Things  above  their
Strength,  flight  fuch  as  are  proportionable  to  it,  and  think
them  vile  and  defpicable,  becaufe  they  judge  of  them  by  Way
of  Comparifon  with  greater.  And  yet  it  is  by  fmall  Begin-
nings only,  that  we  can  ever  arrive  at  great  Perfedions  •  and
before  we  can  cope  with  Things  above  us,  we  muft  praftife
upon  lefs,  and  make  ourfelves  Matters  of  fuch  as  we  are  a
Match  for.

CH  Af,

W//6  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 51

CHAP. VIII.

REmember  upon  all  Occafions  to  refled  with
yourfelf,  of  what  Nature  and  Condition  thofe
Things  are,  which  minifter  Delight,  or  are  ufeful  and
beneficial  to  you,  or  which  you  have  a  natural  Ten-
dernefs  for :  And  that  thefe  Refledlions  may  anfwer
their  End,  make  them  familiar,  by  beginning  at  the
flighted  and  moft  inconfiderable  Things,  and  fo
rifing  to  the  higher  and  more  valuable.  For  in-
ftance  ;  if  you  are  fond  of  an  earthen  Cup,  confi-
der  it  is  but  Earthern  Ware;  and  you  cannot  be
much  troubled  or  furprized,  whenever  it  happens  to
be  broke.  And  if  you  be  fond  of  a  Child  or  a  Wife,
confider,  that  thefe  are  of  Human,  that,  is  of  a
Frail  and  Mortal  Nature;  and  thus  your  Surprize  and
Concern  will  be  the  lefs,  when  Death  takes  either  of
of  them  away  from  you.

COMMENT.

AFTER  the  Diftindion  between  things  within,  and  things
out  of  our  own  power ;  and  an  Advertifemenc  how  we
ought  to  efteem  each  of  them  :  that  the  former  Sort  only
mull  be  looked  upon  as  our  own,  the  latter  as  Foreign,  and
in  the  Difpofal  of  others  j  he  had  told  us,  how  we  ought  to
be  afFeded  with  regard  to  thofe  that  fall  within  our  power :
To  make  fuch  of  them  as  ar,e  contrary  to  Reafon  and  Nature,
the  Objed  of  our  Averlion,  and  to  fufpend  all  manner  of
Defire,  for  fome  convenient  timej  (which  Advice,  in  all
probability  is  grounded  upon  the  Arguments  already  men-
tioned.) But  fince  it  is  impoffible  to  live,  without  having
fomething  of  Intereft  in,  and  much  Dealing  with,  thofe
things  that  are  not  at  the  Difpofal  of  our  own  Will  j  he  now
informs  us  how  to  converfe  with  them,  and  tells  us,  that,
though  they  be  not  at  our  own  pleafure,  yet  they  may  not
be  able  to  create  to  us  any  manner  of  Difquiet  and  Confu-
fion.

H  5  And

52  Epi  GTE  Tus^s  Morals,

And  here  he  takes  notice  of  three  Sorts  of  thefe  exter-f
nal  Things :  Firft,  fuch  as  can  only  pretend  to  pleafe,  with-r
cut  profiting  us  at  all;  thefe  are  fuch,  as  minifter  to  our  En-
tertainment and  Delight.  The  fecond,  fuch  as  are  benefi-
cial and  convenient  for  Ufe.  And  the  third,  fuch  as  we
have  a  particular  AfFed:ion  for,  by  reafon  of  fbme  natural
Relation  they  bear  to  us,  and  which  we  are  tender  of,  with-'
out  any  Regard  to  our  'ovm  Benefit  and  Convenience.  And
this  is  a  very  juft  and  true  Diftindion.  For  Pleafure,  and
Profit,  and  natural  Affeftion,  are  the  three  Things  that  en-
gage our  Hearts  j  and  it  is  alv^^ays  upon  one  or  other  of  thefe
Accounts,  thar  we  are  fond  of  this  mortal  State,  and  recon-
ciled to  all  the  Hardfhips  and  Miferies  attending  it.

Now  the  Entertainments  and  Diverfions  that  Men  are  de-
lighted Vv''ith,  differ,  according  to  their  feveral  Tempers  and
Inclinations:  Some  find  their  Pleafure  in  Plays  j.  others  in
Sports  and  Exercifes,  in  Races,  or  Tilting,  or  the  like.  Others
in  Dancings,  or  Tricks  of  Legerdemain,  in  Jugglers,  or  Za-
nies, or  Buffoons.  Some  again  in  curious  Sights ;  either  the
Beauties  of  Nature,  as  the  Colours  of  Peacocks  and  other
fine  Cirds ;  pleafant  Flowers  and  Gardens,  and  Meadows,
and  Groves  :  Or  in  the  Perfedions  of  Art,  as  Piftures,  and
Statues,  and  Buildings,  the  exquifite  Workmanfhip  of  other
^rofeflions.  Some  value  thofe  of  the  Eye  lefs,  and  find
greater  Satisfaction  in  the  Entertainm-ent  of  the  Ear,  as  the
Harmony  of  vocal  and  inflrumental  Mufick^  and,  which  is
a  Pleafure  more  generous  and  improving,  in  Eloquence  or
Hiftory,  fnckfometimes  in  Fables  and  Romances,  For  tjiat
thefe  contribute  much  to  our  Delight,  is  plain,  from  that
Fondnefs,  which  all  of  us  naturally  have  to  Stories,  from
bur  very  Childhood.

The  feccnd  Sort,  which  tend  to  cur  Ufe  and  Benefit,  are
h'kewife  various.  Some  contribute  to  the  Improvement  of
the  Mind ;  as  a  fkilful  Mafler,  viraious  Converfation,  in-
ftruclive  Books,  and  the  like:  Som.e  are  ferviceabie  to  the
Body;  as  Meats  and  Clothes,  and  Exercife:  Some  regard
only  our  Fortune  ;  as  Places  of  A^uthcrity,  Lands  and  Te-
nements, Money  and  Goods,  and  the  like.

But  the  third  Sort  we  have  a  natural  Tendernefs  for,
without  any  Profpedt  of  Advantage  from  them;  and  thefe
are  recommended  to  our  Affedion,  by  fome  common Tye  of
"Nature  and  AflSnity  between  us :  In  this  Relation  ftand  our
Wives  and  Children,  our  Kindred,  our  Friends,  and  our
Countrymen.

Now

'With  SiMFLicius^s  Comment. 53

Now  the  Advice  given  with  refped  to  every  one  of  thefe,
iSy  that  we  would  fit  down,  and  ferioufly  confider,  what
the  Nature  and  Condition  of  each  of  them  is  ^  what  Hazards
and  Uncertainties  they  are  liable  to ;  that  they  are  fubjed  to
Corruption  and  Decay  ;  that  the  Enjoyment  of  them  is  Ihort,
and  not  to  be  depended  upon  j  and  that  none  of  them  are
abfolutely  at  our  own  Pleafure  and  Difpofal.  For  fuch  a
Reflection  as  this,  which  fuggefts  to  us  continually,  what
their  Nature  and  Circumftances  are,  is  no  other  than  a  Me-
ditating upon  the  Lofs  of  them.  And  fuch  a  Meditation
would  render  the  thing  eafy  and  familiar  to  usj  and  when
any  Accident  of  this  Kind_  befals  us,  would  prevent  all  that
Surprize,  and  Confufion,  and  extravagant  Concern,  which
the  unthinking  part  of  the  World  are  opprefled  with  upon
fuch  Occafions.  And  indeed  the  Cafe  here  is  the  very  fame
with  feveral  other  Inftance«,  wherein  we  find  that  the  Trou^
bles  and  Pains  of  Body  and  Mind  both,  though  very  grievous
at  firft  and  in  themfelves,  yet  grow  much  more  fupportable
by.  Cuftom  and  Ufe.

To  this  Purpofe,  the  next  Words  give  us  very  good  Coun-
fel  j  to  begin  at  firil  with  little  Matters ;  nay,  not  only  v/ith
little,  but  with  the  leaft  and  moft  inconfiderable  j  for  ac-
cording to  the  old  Greek  Proverb,  *  The  Pot-
ter muji  try  a  Cnp^  before  he  can  make  a  far.  Bv  mi-cf,  Wv
He  that  undertakes  the  biggefl  firft,  is  pre-  Adag/pl]^ .  2^7!
fently  worded,  proves  unfuccefsful,  fpends
his  Strength  to  no  Purpofe,  and  gives  out  in  utter  Defpair.
But  he  that  fets  out  leifurely,  and  begins  v/ith  fmall  and  eafy
Trials,  grows  ftronger  and  bolder  with  his  good  Succefs,
and  by  gaining  ground  upon  what  was  a  Match  for  him  be-
fore, advances  more  furely,  and  conquers  ftill  greater  and
greater  Difficulties.  Thus  a  Man  ufed  to  four  Meals  a.  Day,
if  be  attempts  all  on  a  fudden  to  faft  a  whole  Day  together,
will  find  the  Change  too  violent  for  his  Body  to  bear,  and
never  get  through  the  Trouble  and  Pain  of  it.  And  this  Force
upon  Nature  is  the  Reafon  why  fach  warm  Undertakings
are  generally  of  dangerous  Confequence,  only  juft  for  a
Spurt,  and  away.  But  if  fuch  a  one  abate  of  his  former  In-
dulgence by  Degrees  i  firft  take  himfclf  down  to  three  Meals,
and,  when  this  Proportion  is  grown  habitual  and  eafy,  then
allow  himfelf  but  two :  Thus  it  will  be  very  feafible ;  and
afterwards  he  may,  without  any  great  Trouble,  cqme  to  con-
tent himfelf  with  one  j  and  fuch  a  Change  will  be  infinitely  ^
more  fafe,  and  more  likely  to  continue.

H  4-  Apply

54  Epictetus's  Morals,

Apply  this  now  to  the  Inftance  before  us :  We  lliould
confider  thofe  Things  that  are  dear  to  us,  upon  the  Account
of  their  Ufefulnefs  and  Convenience  ;  and  from  fuch  among
them  as  are  of  leaft  Confequence  and  Value,  acquaint  our-
felves  with  the  Condition  of  all  the  reft ;  as  that  their  Na-
ture is  corruptible,  the  Enjoyment  of  them  uncertain,  and
the  Lofs  of  them  what  we  have  Reafon  to  exped  every  Mo-
ment. As  in  an  earthen  Pot,  which  can  have  nothing  but
its  Ufefulnefs,  to  incline  us  to  value  it  j  we  are  to  remem-
ber, it  is  of  a  brittle  Subftance,  and  daihed  to  pieces  with
the  leaft  Accident.  And  what  can  be  a  poorer  and  more
contemptible  Inftance  than  this,  to  begin  with  ?  Yet  mean
and  trifling  as  it  is,  a  Man  that  lays  a  good  Foundation  here,
and  rifes  by  Degrees  to  Matters  of  greater  Concern,  fhall  be
able  at  laft  to  encounter  his  AfFedion  for  a  Child  j  and  not
only  in  mere  Speculation,  and  empty  formal  Words  to  fay
it,  but  to  make  his  v/hole  Behaviour  fpeak,  and  all  the  Dii-
pofitions  of  his  Mind  to  carry  the  Impreffion  of  this  wife
and  feafonable  Refledion,  That  what  he  thus  dotes  upoh,  is
but  a  Man  j  if  a  Man,  confequently  a  brittle  and  frail  Crea-
ture, and  fuch  as  he  is  in  a  continual  PofTibility  of  lofing.
And  if  his  Mind  be  once  thoroughly  pofTefied  with  thisCon-
fideration,  and  confirmed  with  an  habitual  Recolledion  of
it-  whenever  that  Child  is  fnatched  av/ay  from  him,  he  is
prepared  for  the  Stroke,  and  cannot  be  furprized  and  con-
founded with  Paflion,  as  if  fome  ftrange  or  new  Thing  had
happened  to  him.

And  here  it  is  very  well  worth  a  Remark,  what  Abundance
of  Wifdom  and  Artifice  there  is  in  this  Management  of
Things.  For  by  it  we  get  a  Maftery  over  thofe,  that  are  not
by  Nature  within  our  Povv/er,  and  deal  with  them  as  though
they  were.  The  faving  my  Child  from  Death,  is  a  Thing  not
in  my  Power,*  but  a  due  Confideration  of  his  being  liable
to  it,  the  rendring  this  Confideration  familiar  and  eafy  to  me,
and  living  in  expedation  of  it,  as  a  Thing  no  lefs  natural  and
likely  than  his  Life ;  the  not  being  difturbed  if  he  do  die,  and
the  behaving  myfeif  with  fuch  Evennefs  of  Temper,  as  if
he  were  not  dead  ,•  thefe  are  in  my  Power :  And  which  is  a
great  deal  more,  they  do  in  EfFed  bring  the  very  Accident
of  his  Death,  which  is  of  itfelf  not  fo,  within  it  too.  For
a  Man  thus  compofed  may  fay,  7>^ji  Child  is  not  dead  to  vte  ,*
or,  to  fpeak  more  truly  and  properly.  Though  he  he  dead^  yet
I  am  fall  the  Came  Man  as  if  he  'were  Jiill  alive.

I  only

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 5-^

I  only  obferve  farther,  that  the  Infcances  produced  here
by  EpiSietus^  are  fetch'd  from  the  Two  latter  forts  of  Things  j
fuch  as  are  ufeful  and  beneficial  to  us,  and  fuch  as  Nature,
and  Affinity  gives  us  a  more  than  ordinary  Tendernefs  for:
And  thefe  were  prudently  chofen,  with  an  Intent,  I  prefume,
to  intimate,  that  thofe  things,  which  are  for  Entertainment
and  Diverfion,  and  can  only  pretend  to  pleafe  v/ithout  pro-
firing  us,  are  fo  very  mean  and  defpicable,  as  to  deferve  no
Confideration  at  all,  from  Perfons  who  have  made  any  to^-
lerable  Advances  in  the  Studv  of  Wifdom  and  Virtue.

CHAP. IX.

IN  every  Adion  you  undertake,  confider  firft  with
yourfelf,  and  weigh  well  the  Nature  and  Circum-
ilances  of  the  thing :  Nay,  though  it  be  fo  flight  a
one,  as  going  to  bathe  •,  reprefent  to  yourfelf  be-
fore-hand, what  Accidents  you  may  probably  jneet
with  :  That  in  the  Bath  there-  is  often  Rude  Be-
haviour, Dafbing  of  Water,  Juftling  for  Paflage,
Scurrilous  Language,  and  Stealing.  And  when  you
have  done  thus,  you  may  with  more  Security  go
about  the  thing.  To  which  purpofe  you  will  do
well  to  fay  thus  to  yourfelf;  My  Defign  is  to  bathe,
but  fo  it  is  too,  to  preferve  my  Mind  and  Reafon
undifturbed,  while  I  do  fo.  For  after  fuch  wife
preparation  as  this,  if  any  thing  intervene  to  ob-
ftrud:  your  Wafliing,  this  Refledlion  will  prefently
rife  upon  it  :  Well,  but  this  was  not  the  only  thing
I  propofed  ;  that  which  I  chiefly  intended,  was  to
keep  my  Mind  and  Reafon  undifturbed  ;  and  this
I  am  fure  can  never  be  done,  if  I  fufFer  every  Acci-
dent to  difcompofe  me.

COM'

56  Epic TETu$'s  Morals,

C  O  M  M  E  N  f.

AFTER  giving  Inftruc^ions  concerning  our  Behaviour,
with  regard  to  the  Things  of  the  World,  which  ufe  to
engage  our  Aftedions,  either  upon  the  Account  of  the  Delight
they  give  us,  the  Convenience  they  are  of,  or  the  Relation
they  bear  to  us-  the  next  Seep  in  order,  is  to  confider  our
Afftions,  For  thefe  two  have  a  great  many  Circumftances
out  of  our  Power,  and  muft  therefore  be  undertaken  with
great  Prudence,  and  much  Preparation.  The  Rule  th,en  that
he  lays  down  is  this :  That  you  take  a  juft  Account  of  the
Nature  of  each  A(ftion,  and  fairly  compute  the  feveral  Acci-
dents, which,  though  they  do  not  neceflarily,  yet  may  pofll-
bly  attend  it;  and  to  expecfl,  that  thefe  are  very  like  to  hap-
pen in  your  own  Cafe  particularly.  Now  the  Fruit  of  this
wUi  be,  either  not  to  be  furprized,  if  fuch  Difficulties  do
encounter  you ;  or,  if  the  Thing  be  not  of  abfolute  Ne-
ceffity,  to  decline  the  Ha7,ard  by  letting  it  alone.  For  the
Great  Cato  reckons  this  for  one  of  the  Errors  of  his  Life,
that  he  chofe  to  take  a  Voyage  once  by  Sea,  to  a  Place,  whi-
ther be  might  have  travelled  by  Land.  In  fuch  a  Cafe,  though
no  Misforrune  fliouid  actually  happen,  yet  if  there  be  a  Like-
lihood of  any  fuch  Accident,  and  if  it  do  frequently  happen
to  others,  it  is  an  Act  of  Imprudence,  to  make  choice  of
:fuch  a  Courfe,  without  being  driven  to  it  by  Necefficy  :  And
this  Anfwer,  that  mgny  People  do  the  fame,  and  come  ofF
iafe,  will  not  bear  us  out,  in  chufing  a  more  dangerous
Paflage,  when  it  is  left  to  our  own  Liberty  to  take  a  fafer.
But  now,  where  there  is  abfolute  Occadon  for  our  run-
ning fome  Rifque;  as  if  we  have  neceiTary  Affairs  to  dif-
patch,  which  require  a  Voyage  to  or  from  fome  llland ;  Or
if  v^^e  are  obliged  to  ftand  by  a  Father  or  a  Friend  in  fome
ha7.ardous  or  unlucky  Buiinefs,  or  if  v/e  are  called  upon  to
take  up  Arms  in  defence  of  our  Country :  Then  there  is  no
Thought  of  declining  the  Matter  wholly,  and  our  Method
muit  be  to  undertake  it  upon  due  Deliberation  j  and  to  lay
together  the  feveral  accidental  Obltrudions  wont  to  arife  in
flich  aCale:  Thar  fo  by  this  timely  Recoilciftion,  we.  may
render  them  eal'y  and  fiimJiiar,  and  not  be  difturbed,  when
any  of  them  come  upon  us,  A  Man  thus  prepared,  hath
this  double  Advsniage  ;  If  they  do  not  happen,  his  Joy  is  the

greater.

with  S^iMPLicius^s  Comment, ^y

greater,  becaufe  having  fo  fully  pofleft  himfelf  with  an  Ex-
pe<3:ation  that  they  would,  this  is  aln:ioft  a  Deliverance  to  him :
And  if  they  do,  then  he  hath  the  Advantage  of  being  pro-
vided againll;  them,  and  fo  can  encounter  them,  without  much
Danger  or  Diforder.

'  Now  againft  this  Counfel  I  expeft  it  will  be  urged,  Firft,
That  if  every  one  iliould  take  fuch  Pains  to  reprefent  all  the
CrofTes  and  Difappointments  which  may  probably  happen  to
to  them  in  every  Undertaking,  the  EfFe<fi  of  this  would  be
Cowardice  and  Idlenefs:  For  Men  v/ould  find  themfelves
utterly  difcouraged  from  attempting  any  thing  at  all.  Befides
nothing  can  be  more  grievous  to  any  Man,  than  to  have  the
Jmage  of  his  Troubles  and  Misfortunes  conftantly  before  his
Ej^s  ,*  and  efpecially,  if  the  Affair  he  be  engaged  in,  conti-
nue any  time,  to  converfe  all  that  while  with  this  ghaftly  Ap-
parition. Tlierefore  Bemofiheizes's  Advice  feems  much  more
prudent  and  eligible :  To  be  fure,  that  what  you  attempt,
be  good  and  virtuous ;  then  to  hope  well,  and,  whatever  the
Event  be,  to  bear  it  generoufly  and  decently.

But  by  the  Objedlor's  good  Leave,  if  by  hoping  well,  De-
mojlhenes  mean  a  good  Confidence,  grounded  upon  our  un-
dertaking Things  virtuous  and  commendable,  and  refting  fa-
tisfied  in  this  Confideration,  whatever  the  Event  be  j  he  fays
the  very  fame  thing  with  Epiiietui.  Only  indeed  he  gives  us
no  Direction,  Vv^hich  way  we  fhall  attain  to  this  generous
Temper  of  Mind,  which  may  enable  us  to  entertain  the  Dif-
penfations  of  Providence  decently,  though  they  fhould  hap-
pen to  be  harfh  and  fevere.  B'dtEpidetus  declares  himfelf  of
Opinion,  that  the  Method  to  qualify  ourfelves  for  fo  doing,
is,  to  take  a  true  Profpecl  of  the  whole  Affair,  and  reprefent
to  ourfelves,  that  it  is  fit  for  us  to  undertake,  and  that  there
may  be  feveral  Circumftanees  attending  it,  v;hich  thouo^h
they  may  not  be  agreeable  to  us,  are  yet  very  tolerable,  and
fuch  as  we  may  reconcile  ourfelves  to,  upon  thefe  two  Ac-
counts. Firft,  becaufe  the  Acffion  itfelf>  which  brings  them
upon  us,  is  virtuous,  and  becoming;  and  then,  becaufe
whenever  they  happen,  they  are  no  more  than  what  were
exped;ed,  and  provided  againft  before.

But,  if  by  hoping  well,  Deviofihenes  intend  a  firm  Perfua-
fion  of  Safety  and  Succeis;  then  I  think  it  is  very  difficult,
nay,  I  may  venture  to  fay,  it  is  impoffible  ro  conceive,  how
a  Man  thus  perfuaded,  can  ever  bear  Difappointments  and
Crolfes  with  Moderation  and  Temper.  For  when  a  Man
falls  from  what  he  was  in  Imagination,  the  Shock  is  the  fame,

as

58  Epictetus's  Morals,

^  as  if  he  were  fo  in  reality.  And  neither  the  Body,  nor  the
Mind,  are  of  a  Conflitution  to  bear  fudden  and  violent  Alte-
rations, without  great  Dillurbance.  You  fee,  the  very  Wea-
ther, and  Seafons  of  the  Year,  though  they  change  gently
and  by  Degrees,  yet  put  our  Humours  into  a  great  Ferment
and  generally  occafion  many  Diftempers  among  us ;  and  the
more  violent  this  Change  at  any  Time  is,  the  greater  in  Pro-
portion the  Diforders  that  follow  upon  it,  muft  needs  be.

Nor  is  it  true,  that  a  juft  Compuration  of  all  the  Difficul-
ties and  Dangers  wont  to  attend  our  Anions,  muft  needs
condem.n  Men  to  llavifh  Fears,  and  an  unae'1:ive  Life.  For
if  our  Reafon  convince  us,  that  v/hat  we  attempt,  is  good
for  the  Advantage  of  the  Soul,  or  (which  is  all  one)  of  the
Man  (for  that  Soul  is  the  Man)  the  Defire  of  that  Good
muft  needs  infpire  us  with  Courage  and  Vigour,  notwith-
ilanding  all  the  difcouraging  Dangers  that  attend  it.  And
the  Connderation  of  this  Danger  will  be  very  much  foftened
by  this  moil  rational  and  virtuous  Perfuafion-  that  we  ought
to  perfevere  in  iuch  an  Undertaking,  though  at  the  Expence
of  fome  Hazard  and  Inconvenience.  For  all  Danger  and
Detriment,  of  either  Body  or  Fortunes,  is  not  properly  an
Evil  to  us,*  nor  fhall  we  think  it  ours,  if  we  be  wife.  But
the  Benefit  of  chufing  a  virtuous  Aftion,  and  perfifting  in
it,  in  Defpight  of  all  Dangers  and  Difcouragements,  is  our
own  Good  j  for  it  is  the  Good  of  our  Souls,  which  are
truly  and  properly  ourfelves.  And  this  Advantage  is  confi-
derable  enough  to  be  fer  ag^inft  many  Troubles,  and  LofTes,
and  Rmifhrnents,  and  Difgraces:  Nay,  it  is  fufficient,  not
only  to  be  fet  againft,  but  to  over-balance  them  all ,  becaufe
the  Good  0/  this  does  fo  very  much  exceed  the  Evil  that  feems
to  be  in  them.  For  if  a  Man  think  himfelf  obliged  to  chufe
a  Greater  Good,  when  attended  only  with  a  lefs  Evil  ^  how
is  it  poffible,  that  he  fhould  be  difcouraged  and  uneafy,  un-
der the  Expectation  of  fome  crols  Accidents,  which  fome-
times  follow  upon  virtuous  Actions  when  the  Good  of
r-he!e  Aftions  is  truly  and  properly  his  own,  but  the  Evil  of
rhofe  Accidents  is  only  fomething  remote,  and  not  his.?
Efpeciallv  roo,  when  this  is  by  no  Means  a  fuperficial  and  no-
tional Diitin^ftion,  but  iuch  a  real  Difference,  as  his  v/hole
Practice  and  Behaviour  fhews  him  fcnfible  of.  This  is  the
very  Reafon,  why  Men  of  Virtue  and  Wifdom  have  made
it  their  Glory,  to  chufe  Good  with  the  greateft  Dangers;
why  they  have  done  it  cheerfully,  and  lacrificed  their  very
Lives  for  it;  and  accounted  iheir  Sufferings  upon  fuch  an

Account,

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 59

Account,  matter  of  the  greateft  Joy  to  them.  So  did  *  Me-
naceus  particularly,  and  all  thofe  other  Heroes,  fam'd  in
Story,  who  have  voluntarily  devoted  themfelves,  and  died
for  the  Service  and  Sake  of  their  Country.

Now  Epi^etus  couches  his  Advice  here,  under  one  of  the
meaneft  and  moft  infignificanr  Inftances  that  can  be ;  partly
to  illuftrate  what  he  lays,  by  an  Example  taken  from  com-
mon Converfation,  and  lb  to  gain  the  Aflent  of  his  Hearers
to  the  truth  of  what  he  v/ould  infer  from  it  j  and  partly  too,
as  himfelf  had  told  us  before,  to  put  his  Scholarj  upon  ex^r-
cifing  their  Virtue  in  lelTer  Trials;  that  fo  from  Trivial  Mat-
ters, they  may  rife  by  Degrees  to  others  of  greater  Difficulty
and  Confequence.  And  the  Succefs  of  this  Method  hath
been  already  fliewn  to  depend  upon  Reafons,  which  need
not  be  repeated.  But  his  Defign  is  alfo,  that  we  ihould  be
careful  to  apply  thefe  things  to  Af&irs  of  Moment,  in  pro-
portion as  the  Hazards  of  them  are  more  dil'couraging:  and
in  thofe  Occafions,  always  to  take  our  Meafures  from  the
Nature  of  the  thing;  whether  it  be  agreeable  to  Decency  and
our  Duty,  and  what  thofe  Hardfhips  are  that  ufually  accom-
pany it.  Then  after  fuch  Profpedl  taken,  to  fettle  our  Minds
in  this  Refolution,  that  if  the  worft  happen,  we  will  bear
it  with  Temper  and  Moderation.  For  this  is  the  Way  to
maintain  the  Charadler  of  virtuous  and  rational  Men  j  this
mufb  let  us  into  all  the  Advantages  of  doing  well,  and  de-
fcn(^  us  from  all  that  Perplexity,  into  which  unexpected  Events
commonly  betray  Men.  For  he  that  is  troubled  and  Dii-
compofed,  and  fancies  himfelf  unhappy  in  what  he  lufFers,  ic
is  plain,  either  had  not  fufficiently  conlidered  what  he  v;enc
about,  before  he  engaged  in  it,  or  ii  he  did  forefee  all  this,
then  his  Diforder  is  the  Effed  of  Effeminacy  and  Cowar-
dice, which  makes  him  give  out,  and  repent  his  Undertak-
ing. But  both  thefe  Failings  are  highly  Criminal,  and  con-
trary to  the  Rules  of  Nature,  and  Right  Reafon.

*  This  Perfon  was  Son  to  Creon,  King  of  Thebes,  and  upon  an  Anfwer  of
the  Oracle,  that  a  PJague,  which  then  infefted  the  City,  could  not  be  re-
moved, till  the  Race  of  Cadmus  were  all  extindj  He,  who  was  the  only  re-
mainder of  that  Family,  flew  himfelf.  Of  the  fame  nature  was  that  Acl;  of
Curtitts,  and  the  Decii,  ia  much  celebrated  by  the  Riwan  Poets  and  Hifloiians.

CHAP.

6(^  E  E I  c  T  E  t  u  s*8  Mora  l  s^

CHAP. X.

THAT  which  gives  Men  Difquiet,  and  makes
their  Lives  Miferable,  is  not  the  Nature  of
Things  as  they  really  are,  but  the  Notions  and
Opinions,  which  they  form  to  themfelves  concern-
ing them.  Thus,  even  Death,  which  we  look  up-
on as  the  moft  perplejiing  and  dreadful,  hath  in
truth,  nothing  of  Terror  in  it :  For  if  it  had.  So-
crates  muft  needs  have  feared  it,  as  much  as  we.
But  our  Opinion  that  it  is  Evil,  is  the  only  thing
that  makes  it  fo.  Therefore,  whenever  we  meet
with  Obllrudions  and  Perplexities,  or  fall  into
Troubles  and  Diforders,  let  us  be  Juft,  and  not  lay
the  blame  where  it  is  not  due;  but  impute  it  all  to
our  own  felves,  and  our  prejudicate  Opinions.

COMMENT.

WE  were  told  before,  what  Means  would  be  proper  and
Effectual,  for  preferving  an  even  and  Compofed  Tem-
per of  Mind,  in  the  midft  of  all  thofe  Hardfhips  which  fre-
quently attend  our  beft  Adions  :  That  this  might  be  accom-
plifhed  by  the  Power  of  Premeditation  j  by  reprefenting  >
thefe  inconveniences^  as  fore  to  happen  ^  and  when  we  had
made  the  worft  of  it,  convincing  ourfelves,  that  fuch  Adlions
were  worth  our  Undertaking,  even  with  all  thofe  Incum-
brances. Now  that  Rule  proceeded  upon  the  Work  ol  our
own  Minds  j  but  here  is  another,  fetch'd  from  the  Nature
of  the  Things  themfelves,  and  the  Confideration  of  thofe
Difficulties  and  Dangers  which  ufe  to  give  us  Difturbance.
And  here  he  changes  his  Method,  and  confirms  what  he  fays,
not  by  fome  flight  and  trivial  Inftances,  as  he  did  before,
but  by  Death  the  greateft  and  moft  confounding  one  to  Hu-
man Nature  that  can  be.  For  if  the  Argument  hold  good  in
this  Cafe,  it  muft  needs  be  a  great  deal  ftronger  with  regard
to  all  the  reft  j  fmce  Thofe,  by  our  own  Confellion,  are  lefs
difmal  and  affrighting.

T»

with  $iMPLicius*s  Comment. 6i

To  this  Purpofe  then  he  cells  us,  That  thofe  Things  which
we  apprehend  to  be  evil,  and  which  for  that  Heafon  difcom-
pofe  our  Spirits,  becaufe  we  think  ourfelves  mifcrable  under
them,  are  really  neither  evil  themfelvcs,  nor  the  true  Caufes
of  any  Evil  to  us:  Quite  contrary,  that  all  our  Troubles
and  Perplexities  are  intirely  owing  to  the  Opinions,  which
we  ourfelves  have  entertained  and  cheriined  concerning
them.

For  Proof  of  this  Determination,  he  produces  that,  which,
of  all  the  Things  that  we  apprehend  as  evil,  is  confefledly
the  greateft  and  moft  terrible .;  and  fliews,  that  even  Death,
nay  a  violent  and  untimely  Death,  is  yet  no  Evil.  The  Ar-
gument he  ufes  is  fhorc  indeed,  but  very  full  and  conclufive;
the  Method  and  Confequence  whereof  lies  thus.  What-
ever is  evil  in  its  own  Nature,  muft  needs  appear  fo  to  all
Mankind^  more  efpecially  to  thofe,  whofe  Apprehenfions are
moft  improved,  and  moft  fuitable  to  the  real  Nature  of
Things.  Thus  all  Things  naturally  hot  or  cold,  or  beauti-
ful, or  the  like,  appear  fuch  to  all  People  in  their  right  Senfes.
But  Death  does  not  appear  evil  to  all  People,  nor  are  they
univerfally  agreed  in  this  Notion  of  it.  For  Socrata  did
not  think  it  foj  He  chofe  to  undergo  it,  when  it  was  in
his  Power  to  have  declined  it  j  He  endured  it  with  all  the
Calmnefs  and  Compofure  imaginable  j  He  fpent  that  v/hole
Day  in  which  he  died,  with  his  Friends,  demonftraring  to
them  the  Exillcnce  and  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  and  the  EP-
ficacy  of  a  philofophical  Life,  in  order  to  Virtue  and  Refor-
mation. From  all  which  Premifles  this  Conclufion  evi-
dently follows,-  That  Death  is  not  in  its  own  Nature  evil:
And  confequently,  that  our  Fears  and  Troubles  concern-
ing it  do  not  come  from  the  Thing  itfclf,  but  from  a  dK-
quieting  Perfuafion  of  its  being  evil,  with  which  we  poITefs
and  dilorder  our  own  Minds.

And  fuch  a  Perfuafion  there  may  very  v/ell  be,  though  there
be  no  Ground  for  it  in  the  Nature  of  the  Thing.  For  Ho-
ney is  not  bitter,  and  yet  Men  in  the  Jaundice,  who  have
their  Palates  vitiated,  from  a  conftant  Bitternefs  occafioned
by  the  overflowing  of  the  Gall,  are  prejudiced  againfl:  it,  as
if  it  were  fo.  Now,  as  the  only  Way  to  bring  thefe  Perfons
to  difcern  Taftes  as  they  really  are,  is  to  carry  ofF  that  Re-
dundance of  Choler,  which  corrupts  their  Palate :  So  in  this
Cafe,  we  muft  remove  the  Diftemper  of  the  Mind,  corre<ft
cur  Notions  of  Things,  and  make  a  right  Judgment  of  what
is  really  good  and  evil  to  us,  by  juft  Dillinctions  between

.  :  Things

bz  Epi  CTETU  s's  Morals,

Things  that  Are^  and  Things  that  Are  not  in  our  own
Power  j  what  is  properly  ours,  and  what  belongs  not  to  us.
for,  according  to  this  Rule,  if  Death  be  none  of  the  Things
in  cur  Power,  it  cannot  be  Evil  \  and  though  it  fhould  be
granted  fuch,  with  regard  to  the  Body,  yet  if  it  do  not  ex-
tend to  the  Soul,  nor  do  any  Harm  to  that,  it  cannot  be
evil  to  us.

Tlato  indeed,  or  Socrates  as  he  is  introduced  by  Tlato^  goes
a  grear  deal  farther,  and  boldly  affirms,  that  it  is  Good,  and
much  to  be  preferred  before  this  Life  that  we  lead  in  the
Body ;  and  this,  not  only  to  fome  Perfons,  and  in  fome  Cir-
cumftances,  as  Men  may  be  better  or  worfe  j  but  in  gene-
ral, and  without  Exception  to  all.  For  thus  Socrates  expreffes
himfelf  in  his  Fh^don :  It  may  pojjibly  furprize  you^  and
feem  a  Jlrange  Paradox,  that  this  Jljould  he  the  only  Accident,
iiihich  is  good  at  all  Ti?nes,  and  'without  any  Referve  ^  but  yet
Co  it  is.  In  all  other  Cafes,  nothing  happens  to  a  Man,  ijjhich,
as  his  Circu?f2fiances  w.ay  alter,  he  might  not  at  another  Ti?ne
better  be  loithout :  But  no  Ti?ne,  no  Circumjlance  luhatfoever,
can  render  it  more  for  a  Maris  Advantage  to  Live  than  to  Die.
And  Plato,  in  his  Book  concerning  Laws,  fpeaking  in  his
own  Perfon,  delivers  himfelf  to  this  purpofe :  If  I  may  be  al~
lonved  to  fpeak  my  Opinion  freely,  it  is  really  my  judgment.  That
the  Continuatiofi  of  Soul  and  Body  together,  ought  not  upon  any
Co7if  deration,  to  he  rather  chofen,  than  the  Separation  and
Tajfolution  of  them.

Now  Bpi&etus,  'tis  true,  hath  drawn  his  Argument  from
that  which  is  generally  efteemed  the  moft  formidable  Evil
that  v/e  are  capable  of  fufFering.  But  however,  fuice  moft
of  us,  when  we  lye  under  the  prefent  Smart  of  any  Cala-
mity, ftraightway  imagine  it  worfe  than  Death  (for  what  can
be  more  ufual,  than  for  People  in  Pain,  and  very  often  in  no
great  Extremity  of  it  neither,  to  wiili  for  Death  to  deliver
them  from  it ;  and  when  reduced  to  Poverty,  to  tell  us,  they
had  much  rather  be  Dead  than  live  in  Want  })  upon  this
Account,  we  may  apply  Epi^etus's  Argument  to  diefe  In-
ilances  alfo.

As  to  Pain,  what  Degree  of  it  is  there  fo  violent,  which
Men,  nay  even  thofe  of  low  and  vulgar  Spirits,  are  not
content  to  go  through,  to  cure  a  dangerous  Difeafe?  They
do  not  only  endure,  but  Chufe  and  Pay  for  it.  They  thank
their  Phyficians  for  putting  them  to  Torture,  and  look  upon
Cutting  and  Burning,  as  Ads  of  the  greateft  Tendernefc  and
Friendfliip.  Now,  though  this  make  it  pretty  plain,  that
" ■  '  Men

W/i>  SiMPLi  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 63

Men,  who  are  well  pleafed  to  purchafe  Life  fb  dear,  muit
lieeds  be  of  Opinion,  that  no  Pain  is  fo  terrible  to  Human
Nature  as  Death ;  yet  the  principal  Ufe  I  would  make  of  this
Obfervation  is,  to  fliew  that  Men  can  really  fufFer  with
great  Patience  and  Refolution,  can  harden  themfelves  againft
what  they  count  very  dreadful,  and  meet  it  with  a  com-  ■
pofed  Countenance,  when  once  they  are  perfuaded,  that  en-
during will  be  for  their  Advantage.  What  prodigious  In-
ftan ces  of  Patience  were  the  Lacedamofiian  Youths,  who  en-
dured Scourgings  fo  barbarous,  as  almoft  to  expire  under
the  Rod,  and  all  this,  merely  for  a  little  Oftentation  and
Vain-glory  ?  Nov/  this,  it  is  evident,  they  did  not  out  of
any  Compulfion,  but  freely  and  chearfully  j  for  they  offered
themfelves  to  the  Tryal,  of  their  own  Accord.  And  the
Reafon  why  they  held  out  fo  obftinately,  was,  not  that  their
Senfe  of  Pain  was  lefs  quick  and  tender  than  that  of  other
People,  (  though  more  harden'd  too  than  People  who
indulge  themfelves  in  Effeminacy  and  Eafe)  but  becaufe
they  thought  it  their  Glory  and  their  Virtue,  to  fuffer  fully
and  refolutely.

For  the  fame  Reafon,  Epi&etus  would  tell  you,  that  Po-
verty is  no  fuch  formidable  Thing  neither-  becaufe  he  can
produce  the  Example  of  Crates  the  Theban  to  the  contrary  •
who,  when  he  diipofed  of  all  he  was  worth  to  the  Publick,
and  iaidj

L,et  others  keep^  or  viourn  lojl  fidre^
Crates'  oiy^  Hands  make  Crates  poor^

that  Moment  put  an  end  to  his  Slavery ;  and  his  Freedom
commenced,  from  the  time  he  had  diiburthened  himfelf  of
bis  Wealth.  Now  the  manifeft  Confequence  of  all  this  is,
That  nothing  of  this  kind  is  terrible  and  infupportable  in  its
own  Nature,  as  we  fondly  imagine.  So  far  from  it,  that
there  may  be  fome  Cafes,  when  fuch  things  are  much  more
eligible,  and  better  for  us ;  I  mean,  when  they  are  converted
to  higher  and  more  excellent  Purpofss  for  our  own  felves  j
by  tending  to  the  Advantage  and  Improvement  of  the  Rea-»
fbnable  Soul.

The  only  Expedient  to  retain  an  Even  Temper  in  the
midft  of  thefe  Accidents,  is,  to  pofiefs  our  Minds  with  juft
Notions  of  them.  And  the  regulating  of  thefe  Notions  is
in  our  ov/n  Power :  confequently,  the  preventing  thofe  Dif-
orders,  that  proceed  from  the  Want  of  fuch  a  Regulation,

I  is

64  Epictetus's  Morals,

is  in  our  own  Power  too.  And  one  great  Advantage  to  Per-
fons  thus  difpofed  will  be,  theJearning  how  to  manage
thofe  Things  that  are  not  at  our  Difpofal,  as  though  they
were.  For  if  it  be  not  in  my  Power  to  prevent  Defamation
or  Difgraee,  the  Lofs  of  my  Goods  or  my  Eftate,  Affronts
and  violent  Infults  upon  my  Perfon  j  yet,  thus  much  is  in
my  Power,  to  poflefs  myfelf  with  right  Apprehenfions  of
thefe  Things  j .  to  confider  them,  not  only  as  not  Evil,  but
fometimes  the  Inftruments  and  Occafions  of  great  Good.
Now  fuch  an  Opinion  as  this  makes  it  almoft  the  fame
Thing  to  a  Man,  as  if  they  did  not  happen  at  all  j  or,  which
is  all  one,  makes  him  think  himfelf  never  the  Worfe,  but
fometimes  the  Better  for  them,  when  they  do.  And  I  take
it  for  granted,  that  every  Wife  Man  will  allow  it  more  for
Our  (that  is,  for  the  Soul's)  Honour  and  Advantage,  to
have  behaved  ourfelves  gallantly  under  Afflidions,  than  never
to  have  been  afflicled.at  all :  And  the  greater  thefe  Affliftions
Vv'ere,  the  greater  ftill  in  Proportion,  is  the  Honour  and  Ad-
vantage gained  by  them.  For,  as  to  Bodies  that  are  able  to
bear  it,  the  violentefl:  Motions  exercife  them  beft,  and  make
greateft  Improvements  of  Health,  and  Strength,  and  Adivity  ^
fo  the  Mind  too  muft  be  put  upon  fiiarp  Trials  fometimes,
to  qualify  it  for  fuffering  gallantly,  when  any  Accident  gives
us  an  Occafion.  And  this  may  be  accomplifhed  thefe  two
Ways :  By  getting  a  right  Notion  of  them  j  and.  By  being
well  prepared  againft  them.  And  this  is  to  be  done,  partly,
by  accuftoming  the  Body  to  Hardfhip,  which  indeed  is  of  ge-
neral Ufe,  and  hath  enabled  even  Ignorant  and  111  Men  to
liight  Blows,  and  other  Pains,  which  we  commonly  think
intolerable  j  and  partly  by  fixing  the  Mind  in  a  provident
Fore-caft,  and  diftant  Expedation  of  them.  And  all  thefe
Things  we  may  certainly  do  if  we  pleafe.

Now,  if  neither  Death  nor  any  of  thofe  Things  we  dread
moft,  have  any  Thing  formidable  in  their  own  Nature ,  it
is  plain,  neither  They,  nor  the  Perfbns  that  inflid  them,  arc
the  Caufe  of  our  Trouble,  but  we  ourfelves,  and  our  own
Opinions,  bring  this  upon  ourfelves.  When  therefore  the
Mind  feels  itfelf  perplexed  with  Grief,  or  Fear,  or  any  Paflion,
the  Blame  is  our  ownj  and  nothing  but  our  Opinions  is
accountable  for  fuch  Diforders.

NONE

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 6^

NONE  but  Ignorant  and  Undifciplin'd  Peo-
ple tax  others  with  their  Misfortunes.  The
Young  Proficient  blames  himfelf ;  but  he  who  is
a  Philofopher  indeed,  blames  neither  others  nor
himfelf.

TH  E  Connexion  of  this  with  what  went  before,  is  fb
clofe,  that  if  a  Conjundlion  were  added,  and  we  read
it  thus,  "For  none  but  Ignorant  and  Undifciplind  People  tax  others
•with  their  Misfortunes^  it  had  given  a  very  good  Reafon,  why
we  fliould  never  lay  our  Troubles,  or  Fears,  or  Diforders,
or  any  other  Calamity  we  fancy  ourfelves  in,  to  any  Thing,
or  any  Body's  Charge,  but  our  own :  Since  this  Way  of
proceeding,  he  fays,  comes  from  want  of  being  taught  bet-  '
ter.  And  then  to  this  Charadler  of  the  Ignorant  and  Un-
difciplin'd, he  adds  thofe  of  One  who  is  a  Beginner  only
in  Philofophy,  and  one  who  hath  attained  to  a  Maftery
in  it.

The  perfed  Philofopher  never  thinks  any  Thing,  that
befals  him.  Evil  ,•  or  charges  any  Body  with  being  the  Occa-
fion  of  his  Misfortunes  j  becaufe  he  lives  up  to  the  Diftates
of  Nature  and  Reafon,  and  is  never  dilappointed  in  his  Pur-
fuits  and  Defires,  nor  ever  overtaken  with  his  Fears.

He  that  is  but  Raw  and  Unfiniflied,  does  indeed  fome- "
times  miis  of  his  Defires,  and  fall  into  the  Mifchiefs  he  would
flee  from,  becaufe  the  brutifb  Inclinations  move  too  ftrong-
ly  in  him  at  fuch  times.  And  when  this  happens,  the  firfl:
Elements  he  learn'd,  which  taught  him  to  diftinguifh  Things
In  and  Out  of  our  Power,  teach  him  too.  That  he  himfelf,
and  none  but  he,  is  the  true  Caufe  of  all  his  Difappoint-
ments,  and  all  his  Difafters.  And  the  Occafion  of  them  all
was  his  miftaking  the  Things  without  us,  and  placing  a
Man's  proper  Good  and  Evil  in  them.

But  you  will  fay,  perhaps.  Since  this  Young  Philofopher
knows.  That  our  own  proper  Good  and  Evil  depends  upon
our  own  Power  and  Choice  (and  the  accufing  himfelf  implies
that  he  knows  thus  much)  how  comes  it  to  pafs,  that  he
takes  wrong  Meafures,  and  renders  himfelf  liable  to  this
Blame  ?  Probably,  becaufe  the  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil
is  the  firft  flep  to  be  made  toward  Virtue,  this  being  the
proper  Ad  of  Reafon  j  but  the  brutifh  Appetites  do  not  al-
ways prefencly  fubmit  to  Reafon,  nor  fuffer  therofelves  to

I  2  be

66  Epictetus*s  Morals,

be  eafily  reduced  and  tempered  by  it  j  and  efpccially,  where'
it  happens,  as  it  does  very  often,  that  Resfon  is  Negligent
and  Sluggifh,  end  the  Irrational  Part  a6live,  and  perpetually
in  Motion  j  by  which  means  the  Paffions  gather  Strength,
and  ufurp  an  abfolute  Dominion.  This  was  the  Cafe  of  her
in  Playj

Re'/norfe  and  Senfe  of  Guilt  pull  back  my  SguI^
"But  Jironger  Faj]io7i  does  her  Poiurs  co/ttrouly
With  Rage  tranj ported  I  pujh  boldly  on^
A7id  fee  the  Precipice  I  can:iot  flmn.

So  that  for  fome  time  it  is  pretty  tolerable,  if  Reafon  can'
work  upon  the  Paffions,  and  either  draw  them  by  Force,  or
charm  and  win  them  over  ibme  fbfter  way:  For,  when  this
is  done,  then  the  Knowledge  of  the  Intelligent  Part  is  more
clear  and  inftrudive,  and  proceeds  without  any  Diflradtion
at  all.  No  wonder  therefore,  if  Men  but  little  trained  in
Philofophy  make  fome  faife  Steps  while  their  Paffions  are
not  yet  totally  fubducd,  and  their  Reafon  does  not  operate
in  its  full  Strength.  And  when  they  do  io^  they  accufe
Themfelves  only,  as  having  omitted  that  Diftinction  of
Things  in  and  out  of  our  own  Power,  though  as  yet  they
feem  to  have  but  an  imperfect  Notion  of  it.

But  they  that  are  Ignorant,  and  ablolutely  Untaught,  mull:
needs  commit  a  World  of  Errors,  both  becaufe  of  that
violent  Agitation  which  their  Paffions  are  continually  jn,  and
of  the  Ignorance  of  their  rational  Part,  which  hath  not  yet
learned  to  diftinguifh  real  Good  and  Evil,  fi'om  what  \s  fo  in
appearance  only :  Nor  does  it  take  them  off  from  Brutality,
not  fo  much  as  in  Thought  only.  By  BrutaUry  I  mean  fudi
low  and  mean  Notions,  as  perfuade  us,  that  our  Body  is
properly  ourfelves,  and  our  Nature  j  or,  which  is  yet  worfe,
when  we  think  our  Riches  fo,  as  the  Covetous  do.  Now
while  we  continue  thus  ignorant,  there  are  feveral  Accounts
to  be  given  for  our  doing  am i fs :  We  do  it,  becaufe  we  think
all  our  Good  and  Evil  confifts  in  Things  without  us  j  and,
not  being  at  all  fenfible,  what  is  properly  the  Happinefs  or
Unhappinefs  of  Human  Nature,  or  whence  it  proceeds,  we
fall  foul  upon  other  People  j  and  fanfy,  that  they,  who  ob-
ftrucl  or  deprive  us  of  thofe  External  Advantages  we  fo  ea-
gerly purfue,  or  that  bring  upon  us  any  of  the  Calamities  we
would  avoid,  are  the  real  Caufes  of  all  our  Mifery.  Though
in  truth, neither  thofe  External  Adyantagos  which  we  call

Good

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 67

Good,  nor  thofe  Calamities  we  call  Evil,  are  what  we  take  "
them  for  j  but,  as  Circumftances  are  fometimes  ordered,
may  prove  the  diredl  contrary.  For  our  Folly  in  this  cafe  is
juffc  like  that  of  liUy  Boys,  who  cannot  endure  their  Mailers,
but  think  them  their  worft  Enemies,  and  the  Caufe  of  a
World  of  Mifery,-  but  value  and  love  thofe  as  their  Friends,
indeed,  that  invite  them  to  Play  and  Pleafure.

Thus  Bp&etus  hath  given  a  fhort  but  ex'ad:  Charader  of
thefe  three  forts  of  Perfons.  The  Perfect  Philofophers  are
guilty  o^  no  Mifcarriages ;  for  their  Underilanding  is  luf-
ficiently  accompliflied  to  dire<fb  them,  and  the  irrational  Part
readily  fubmits  to  thofe  Diredions.  So  that  here  is  nothing
but  Harmony  and  Compliance,  and  confequently^  they  have
no  Body  to  lay  any  Mifery  to  the  Charge  of,-  for  indeed,  they
cannot  labour  under  any  Thing  that  is  truly  and  properly
Mifery.  They  caufe  none  to  themfelves  ;  for  this  were  a
Contradicflion  to  the  Perfection  of  their  Wifdom  and  Vir-
tue :  And  nothing  elfe  caufes  them  any,  for  they  do  not  fup-
^ofe  any  External  Caufes  capable  of  doing  it.

The  Ignorant  and  Untaught  err  in  both  thefe  Refpeds.
Neither  their  Reafon,  nor  their  Paffions,  are  rightly  difpofed.
They  lay  all  their  Unhappinefs  to  others,  upon  an  Erroneous
Imagination,  that  it  proceeds  from  Things  without  us.  And
indeed,  it  is  eafy  and  pleafant,  and  fit  for  Ignorant  Wretches,
to  lliuiffle  off  their  own  Faults  from  themfelves,  and  throw
them  upon  other  People.

The  Young  Proficient,  who  hath  attained  to  the  firft
Principles  of  Wifdom,  though  he  be  guilty  of  fome  Mif-
carriages,  and  fall  now  and  then  into  Evil,  yet  he  under-
ftands  wherein  it  confifts,  and  from  whence  it  is  derived,
and  what  it  was  that  firft  gave  Birth  to  v:  \  and  therefore  he
lays  it  at  the  right  Door.  And  thefe  Marks  are  fo  diftinguifh-
ing,  that  no  Man,  who  makes  a  wife  ufe  of  them,  can  be  in
Danger  of  confounding  thefe  three  Claffes  of  Men,  the  Ac-
complifli'd  Philofopher,  the  Rude  and  Untaught,  and  the
Young  'Proficient.

This  Metaphor  is  (o  much  the  more  warrantable  and  per-
tinent, from  the  Refemblance,  v^hich  Education  bears  to  the
Management  of  ourfelves :  For  this  is  properly  the  Tram-
ing  up  of  a  Child,  under  the  Care  and  Correcflion  of  a
Mafter.  Our  Senfual  Part  is  the  Child  in  us  •  and,  like  all
other  ^Children,  does  not  know  its  own  Good,  and  is  vio-
lently bent  upon  Pleafure  and  Paftime.  The  Mafter  that  has
tlie  Care  of  it,  is  Reafon,- This  falliions  our  Deiires,  prc-

I  3  i'cribes

68  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S's M  O  R  A  L  S,

fcribes  them  their  Bounds,  reduces  and  reftrains  them,  and
direds  them  to  that,  which  is  beft  for  them.  So  that  the
Ignorant  and  Untaught  live  the.  Life  of  a  Child  left  to  him-
felf,  run  giddily  on,  are  perpetually  in  Fault,  as  being  heady
and  heedlefs,  and  minding  nothing,  but  the  gratifying  their
own  IncHnationsj  and  fo  thefe  Men  never  think  themfelves
to  blame.  The  Young  Proficients  have  their  Matter  at  hand,
Correding  and  Intruding  them ;  and  the  Child  in  them  is
pretty  towardly,  and  begins  to  fubmit  to  Rules.  So  that  if
thefe  Men  are  at  any  time  in  the  wrong,  they  are  prefently
fenfible  who  hath  been  to  blame,  and  accufe  no  Body  but
the  Offender  himfelf.  But  the  Perfeft  and  Accomphfh'd
Philofophers  are  fuch,  whofe  Mafter  keeps  a  conftant  Eye
upon  them,  and  hath  conquered  the  Child's  ftubborn  and
perverfe  Spirit.  So  that  now  he  is  correcfted  and  improved,
and  hath  attained  to  the  Perfedlion  he  was  intended  for  ^  that
is,  the  being  obfervant  to  the  Mafter,  and  abfolutely  at  his
Diredion.  For  the  proper  Virtue  of  a  Child  is  this  Readi-
nefs  to  receive  and  to  obey  Inftrudions.

CHAP. XL

Suffer  not  yourfelf  to  be  exalted  with  any  Ex-
cellence not  properly  your  own.  If  your  Horfe
fhould  be  tranfported  with  his  Beauty,  and  boaft  of
it,  this  were  tolerable  in  him :  But  when  you  value
yourfelf,  and  brag  of  his  Beauty,  confider,  That
you  are  not  proud  of  an  Excellence  in  yourfelf,  but
in  your  Horfe.  You  will  fay  then.  What  is  a
Man's  own?  I  anfwer,  A  right  Ufe  of  his  Ideas.
And  when  you  manage  thefe  as  you  ought,  then
you  may  be  allowed  to  pleafe  yourfelf.  For  this  is
being  exalted  with  feme  Excellence  that  is  properly
yours.

C  0  M'

W//6  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 69

COMMENT.

THE  foregoing  Chapters  acquainted  us,  what  Method
muft  be  taken  to  deliver  ourfelves  from  Grief,  and
Fear,  and  Confufion,  when  any  calamitous  Circumftances
from  without  threaten  our  Peace  :  This  direfts  us,  how  to
preferve  an  even  and  compofed  Mind,  when  any  External
Advantages  would  fhake  our  Moderation.  Now  thefe  Ad-
vantages he  calls  None  of  Our i^  in  Agreement  with  what  he
faid  at  the  Beginning'  of  his  Book,  That  the  Things  out  of  our
Tower  are  'Feeble ^  and  Servile^  and  liable  to  Oppojition,  and  not
OurSj  but  Another's.  And  upon  the  being  confcious  to  our-
felves of  any  fuch  feeming  Advantages,  he  forbids  us  to  be
exalted.

By  this  Exaltation  I  underfland  here,  not  any  Infolence,
or  Haughtinefs,  or  Arrogance  of  Humour,  as  the  Word  is
fometimes  ufed  in  an  ill  Senfe  (for  fure  we  are  not  allowed
to  be  exalted  in  fuch  a  manner  as  this,  upon  the  account  of
any  Advantage  whatfoever,  though  never  fo  real  a  Good,
though  never  fo  truly  our  own)  but,  as  I  apprehend,  this
Exaltation  fignifies  the  being  fatisfied  with  ourfelves  j  and
imagining,  that  we  are  Better  or  Happier  upon  the  account
of  fome  additional  Good,  which  now  we  have,  but  had  not
formerly.  So  that  he  fays,  we  muft  not  think  ourfelves  ever
the  better  for  that  Good  which  belongs  not  to  us  j  nor  ima-
gine, that  another's  Excellence  adds  any  thing  to  ours.  For
every  Good  belongs  to  his  own  proper  Subjed,  m  which
it  fubiifts,  and  whofe  Quality  it  is ; .  and  no  other  can  pre-
tend to  any  right  in  it.  The  Goodnefs,  for  inftance,  of  a
Horfe,  belongs  to  the  Horfe  himfelf,  and  not  to  us:  For
if  he  be  Bold,  and  Fleet,  and  Manageable,  he  hath  indeed
the  proper  Excellencies  of  a  Horfe  ;  but  which  way  does  this
make  for  our  Commendation }  How  is  this  the  Excellence
of  a  Man  ?  Or  what  augmentation  can  the  Virtue  or  the
Happinels  of  his  Owner  receive  from  it  }

Yes,  you'll  fay,  the  Excellence  of  any  PofTeffions  re-
dounds to  the  PofTefTor,  and  the  Goodnefs  of  the  Inftru-
ments  to  the  benefit  of  the  Artificers  that  ufe  them.  Ac-
cording to  the  common  Opinion  of  the  World,  'tis  acknow-
ledged they  do.  But  pray,  is  the  Excellency  of  an  Ax,  fup-
pofe,  able  to  make  him  a  good  Carpenter,  who  was  not
one  before  }  In  this  cafe  therefore  we  would  diftinguifh  be-

1 4  tv/cen

7©  Epictetus*s  Morals,

tween  the  Excellencies  peculiar  to  the  Tool,  and  thofe  pe-
culiar to  the  Workman,  with  relation  to  the  Trade  he  pro-
feiTes.  The  proper  Excellence  of  an  Ax  is  to  carry  a  good
Edge,  and  to  be  made  near  and  true  j  this  renders  it  fie
for  Service,  and  for  the  Work  to  be  cut  out  by  it :  For
every  Inflrutnent  is  commended  by  its  Work.  But  this  con-
tributes nothing  to  the  Perfedion  of  the  Carpenter  •  for  his
Excellence,  and  proper  Commendation,  confifts  in  obferving
Proportions,  and  Rules  of  Art^  and  he  is  judged  by  this,
and  not  by  the  Work  done  by  him  ^  becaufe  that  may  hap-
pen to  fail,  from  fome  Defeft^  either  in  the  Stuff  he  wrought
upon,  or  the  Tools  he  wrought  with,  or  Twenty  other  ac-
cidental Obftrudions.

Well,  but  what  is  properly  our  own  Excellence,  upon
the  account  of  which  we  may  be  admitted  to  look  upon  our-
feives  ?  as  better  and  happier  than  we  were  before  ?  At  the
beginning  of  this  Book,  the  firft  thing  he  mentioned  of  this
kind,  was  a  ji^/l  and  true  Qphtion-^  hut  here  he  calls  it  a  right
life  and  Management  of  Ideas  j  fo  that  Opinion  in  that  place,
and  Ideas  in  this,  fignify  one  and  the  fame  thing.  For  we
judge  of  things  by  the  different  Reprefentations  of  them  to
our  Minds,  and  thofe  Judgments  are  fometimes  true,  and
fometimes  falfe.  Now  the  right  Management  of  Ideas  is,
when  what  appears  to  Us^  agrees  exadly  with  the  nature  of
things  themifelves^  and  when  we  proceed  upon  thefe  Ap-
pearances fo,  that  the  Judgments  we  form  upon  them^  carry
nothing  in  them  that  is  falfe  and  inconfiftentj  as  it  would
be  if  we  fhould  affirm,  that  Intemperance  is  Good,  and  Tem-
perance Evil.

But  the  moft  proper  Senfe  of  this  Ufe  of  Ideas,  as  Nature
and  Reafbn  dired,  I  look  upon  to  be  a  Defire  of  thofe
things  that  are  Good,  and  an  Averfion  and  Deteftation
of  thofe  that  are  Evil.  When  we  have  not  only  a  bare  fpe-
culative  Notion,  what  is  Good  and  Vv^hat  is  Evil ;  but  de-
fire  and  purfue  that  which  we  think  to  be  Good,  and  de-
cline and  abhor  that  which  we  think  to  be  Evil.  And  this
may  very  well  be  called  our  own  proper  Exccellence;  be-
caufe the  Reguiarion  of  our  Defires  and  Averfions,  according
to  Rcafon  and  Nature,  is  always  in  our  own  Power  j  though
the  Exerting  thefe,  and  making  them  efFedual  by  outward
Ads,  is  not  always  fo.

And  yet  it  is  highly  probable,  tha-t  EpiBetus  may  intend
fomething  farther  ftill,  by  ibis  right  ufe  of  Ideas  j  v/hich  is^
That  our  Fractice  and  Behaviour  fhould  cxprefs  a  conftant

Con-

W//'  Si  MPLicius's  Comment. 71

Conformity  to  thefe  true  Opinions,  and  Regular  Defires:
That  we  fliould  not  think  it  fufficient  to  declare  it  our  Senfe,
that  Temperance  is  a  VirtuCj  but  fhould  be  adtually  Tempe-
rate, and  make  all  our  Adlions  fpeak  the  Conceptions  of  our
Mind,  and  the  regularity  of  our  Defires  upon  this  occafionr
Not  to  (atisfy  ourfelves  with  the  empty  Commendations  of
Juftice,  no  nor  with  a  few  faint  and  feeble  Defires  of  this
Virtue  j  (for  this  is  what  follows  of  courfe,  and  whatever
v/e  apprehend  as  Defirable  too  at  the  fame  time)  and  yet  al-
low ourfelves  in  Acfts  of  Injullice.  This  is  the  Cafe  of  Im-
potent and  Incontinent  Perfcns  j  they  defire  Virtue,  but  that
Defire  is  overborn  by  a  ftronger,  which  inclines  to  Pleafure.
Their  Reafon  difcerns  what  iliould  be  done,  though  not  fo
clearly  and  powerfully  as  it  might  and  ought,  and  for  a  while
ftands  up  in  its  Vindication  j  and  the  Virtuous  Defires  and
Averfioni,  which  are  rightly  difpofed,  but  weak  and  confufed,
Urike  in,  and  take  its  part  3  but  prefencly  the  brutifli  Incli-
clinations,  ?like  an  impetuous  Torrent,  bear  down  all  before
theta,  diflrad:  and  divert  the  Man  from  his  cooler  purpofes,
and  drive  him  to  what  is  moft  agreeable  to  his  prefent  heat.
This  is  juft  the  Defcription  I  gave  before  of  Medea,  when
the  Tragedian  brings  her  in  with  thefe  Words,  which  I  have
fo  oft  had  Gccafion  to  repeat :

Remorfe  and  Senfe  of  Guilt  pull  back  my  Souly
But  Jlronger  Pajiion  does  her  Po-vSrs  controuly
With  Rage  tranfported  I  pujh  boldly  on,
jind  fee  the  Precipice  I  cannot  flmn.

So  then,  it  is  by  no  means  fufficient,  that  a  Man's  Judg-
ment is  rightly  inlormed,  and  that  his  Defires  be  virtuoully
inclined  in  many  Inftances,  unlefs  he  be  all  of  a  piece  j  un-
lefs  he  take  care,  that  the  Commendablenefs  of  his  Pradlice
hold  correfpondence  with  the  Truth  of  his  Opinions.  This
is  the  right  and  beft  ufe  of  our  Ideas,  and  this  we  may  think
our  own  peculiar  Excellence ;  but  no  External  Advantage
can  ever  be  fo.  For,  as  the  particular  Commendation  of  a
Carpenter,  confidered  as  a  Carpenter,  is  his  working  accord-
ing to  the  Rules  of  Art  and  Proportion;  fo  the  peculiar  Ex-
cellence of  a  Philofopher,  depends  upon  the  Ideas  and  Af-
fe(ftions  of  the  Mind  being  jull  and  Good,'  and  the  exerting
this  Excellence  is  the  calling  thefe  out  into  Acf,  and  demon-
ftrating  them  to  the  World  by  a  Virtuous  Convcrfation.

C  H  A  P.

JZ  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S'S M  0  R  A  L  S,

CHAP. XII.

AS  when  a  Ship  lies  in  Port,  and  you  go  out  for
Frefh  water,  you  happen  to  meet  with  Shell-
fifh,  or  Sallads  upon  the  Coaft ;  this  is  an  accidental
Advantage,  and  befide  your  main  purpofe;  but
{till  your  Thoughts  muft  be  fixed  upon  the  Ship,
and  it  fhould  be  your  great  Care,  to  attend  the
Mailer's  Call  -,  that  fo,  when  he  gives  you  the  Sig-
nal, you  may  quit  all  readily,  and  not  be  bound,  and
carried  away  by  Violence,  as  Sheep  muft  be  ferved  :
So  here  in  the  Affairs  of  the  World,  if  it  be  your
Fortune,  inftead  of  Fifti  or  Sallad,  to  light  upon  a
Beloved  Wife  or  Child,  which  give  an  agreeable
relifh  to  Life,  none  of  thefe  Matters  muft  be  fuffer-
ed  to  detain  you.  But  when  the  Mafter  gives  you
the  Signal,  all  muft  be  left,  and  the  beft  of  your
Way  made  to  the  Ship.  But  if  you  are  in  Years,
be  fure  you  never  ftir  far  from  the  Ship,  for  fear  you
be  out  of  the  way,  when  the  Mafter  calls.

COMMENT,

HE  hath  by  a  Short  but  Ingenious  Difcourfe,  endeavour-
ed to  draw  us  off  from  the  purfuit  of  thofe  External
Advantages,  upon  which  we  are  ufed  to  fet  fo  great  a  value,
by  (hewing  us,  that  all  thefe  things  are  neither  in  our  Difpo-
fal,  nor  any  fuch  Happinefs  as  can  be  properly  called  Ours.
But  now,  left  this  Argument  of  his  fliould  be  fo  far  miftaken,
or  wrefted  beyond  its  true  purpofe,  as  to  be  thought  to  debar
us  of  Marriage,  and  other  innocent  Enjoyments  and  Satif-
faiftions,  and  abfolutely  to  forbid  us  the  having  any  thing  at
all  to  do  with  the  World  and  its  Advantages^  he  acquaints
us  in  the  next  place,  what  things  thofe  are,  which  he  allows
the  Enjoyment  of,  and  with  wltat  Limitations  we  ought  to
enjoy  them  j  'viz,.  That  we  fhould  leave  ourfelves  and  Them
at  the  Difpofal  of  God,  and  refign  all  this  to  his  Providence,
without  Referve  ^  and  then,  in  fuch  an  Humble  Dependence

as

•zi)//^  S  iMPLi  cius's  Comment. 73

as  this  is,  to  ufe  them  moderately,  and  to  value  them  as  they
deferve :  That  our  Concern  is  due  in  the  greateft  Meafure,
to  the  Neceffities  of  Life,  and  fuch  as  Human  Nature  can-
not fubfift  without  J  which  EfiBetus  here  hath  expreffed  by
a  Ship's  Watering ;  meaning  by  this,  Food,  and  Raiment,
and  Dwelling,  and  fuch  other  things,  as  they,  who  look  no
farther  than  juft  needful  Supplies,  fatisfy  themfelves  withal. -
Thefe  things  therefore  are  allowed  to  be  a  part  of  our  Care,
provided  it  be  but  in  the  Second  place,  and  with  fubordina-
tion  to  a  Higher  Good,

As  for  fuch  things,  as  are  not  abfolutely  neceflary,  but  only
the  Conveniencies  of  Life  j  as  a  Wife,  Children,  Eftate,  and
the  like,  thefe  he  calls  Accidental  Advantages^  and  bejtde  our
main  purpofe;  and  therefore  they  are  allowed  the  Third  Place
in  our  Eiteem.  When  a  bountiful  Providence  beftows  thefe
upon  us,  v/e  are  to  receive  and  ufe  them  feafonably  j  but  be
fure  to  keep  our  Mind  ever  fixed  upon  our  Chief  and  moft
Defirable  Good.  But  as  for  Pleafures,  and  Riches,  and  Ho-
nours, and  Preferments,  and  fuch  other  Impercinencies,  he
will  not  fo  much  as  admit  thefe  into  the  number  of  his  Ac-
cidental Advantages,  but  fuppofes  them  inconfiftent  with
a  flriftly  Ratipnal  and  Virtuous  Converfation.  For  thefe  are
what,  he  told  us  before,  muft  be  wholly  laid  afide :  But  the
Enjoyments  of  Marriage,  and  fuch  other  Conveniencies  of
Human  Nature,  he  advifed  to  have  fufpended  for  a  time
only,  while  Men  were  Young  and  Unexperienced  in  the
Study  of  Virtue  j  that  fo  their  firft  Beginnings  might  meet
with  no  Interruption,  but  take  good  Root,  and  faften  upon
the  Mind.  And  for  this  Reafon,  when  Men  have  made
fome  progrefs,  and  are  arrived  to  fuch  a  degree  of  Perfedlion,
as  may  qualify  them  to  ufe  thefe  with  fafery  j  then  he  allows
them  to  enjoy  them,  provided  ftill  it  be  in  the  quality  of  an
Additional  Advantage,  and  not  a  principal  Defign.

Now  the  AUufion  he  hath  made  ufe  of  for  this  purpofe,
feems  to  be  exceeding  proper  and  pertinent ;  for  the  old  Mo-
ralifts  in  their  Fables  have  commonly  chofen  the  Sea,  to
reprefent  this  Mortal  State.  The  Roughnefs  of  its  Waves,
its  frequent  Ebbs  and  Floods,  the  Tempeftuous  Weather  to
which  it  lies  ex'pofed,  and  the  fuffocating  all  that  fink  into
it,  do  abundantly  juftify  the  Metaphor.  By  the  Ship  may  be
meant,  that  which  unites  the  Soul  to  the  Body,  and  brings
her  into  this  Mortal  State  j  whether  it  be  Fate,  or  Fortune,
or  whatever  elfe  you  will  pleafe  to  call  it.  The  Mailer  of
this  Ship  is  God, who  governs  and  difpoies  all  things, and

commands

74  Epigtetus's  Morals,

commands  the  Souls  into  their  refpedlive  Bodies,  according
as  his  ovm  Infinite  Wifdom  and  tender  Care  fees  fir,  and  in
proportion  to  their  own  Defsrts.  The  bringing  this  Ship  in-
to Port  is  the  afTigning  to  thefe  Souls  their  proper  Station,
and  Country,  and  Family :  by  virtue  whereof,  fome  are
•born  in  one  Climate  and  Nation,  and  fome  in  another;
.Some  are  dcfcended  from  Great  and  Noble  Families,  and
others  meanly  born  :  Some  of  Virtuous  or  Healthful  Parents,
•and  others  of  Vicious  and  Difeafed  ones.  The  going  out
for  frefh  Water,  is  the  Care  we  take  for  fupplying  the  Ne-
<:eflities  of  Nature,  without  which  it  is  impoffible  that  Life
iliould  be  fupported :  And  indeed,  what  is  there  in  this  ftate
of  Mortality  of  fuch  general  ufe  ?  what  that  we  can  fo  lit-
tle want-  both  for  ^e  making  of  our  Meat  and  Drink,  as
Water?  What  is  intended  by  gathering  Sallads,  or  Shell-
Fifli  by  the  by,  himfelf  hath  very  elegantly  informed  us,  by
inftancing  in  a  Wife,  and  an  Eflatej  and  acquainting  us
withal,  that  when  Providence  is  pleafed  to  beftow  them
-upon  us,  we  are  not  to  refufe  them :  but  fo  neither  are  v/e  to
•receive  or  value  them,  as  either  the  principal  and  moft  de-
iirable  Goods,  or  indeed  fuch  as  are  properly  ours.  For  the
■Firft  and  Chief  Goods  is  that  Difpofition  of  Mind,  which  is
€ver  obedient  to  the  Mafter  of  the  Ship,  ever  attentive  to
his  Call.  Nor  muft  we  lay  ourfelves  out  upon  thefe  Mat-
ters, as  we  were  allowed  to  do  upon  Water,  or  ncceffary
ihingsj  butlook  upon  them  as  additional  Comforts  only,  and
fuch  as  help  to  make  Life  eafy  and  convenient.  Now  if  this
Mafter  call  us  to  the  Ship,  and  give  order  for  our  return-
ing back  to  Himfelf,  and  to  that  v/hich  is  our  true,  our  Na-
tive Country :  Make  the  bejl  of  your  Wa)\  (fays  he)  to  the
Shipy  leave  every  thing  that  relates  to  this  Mortal  Life,  be
i-eady  to  obey  his  firft  Orders,  and  do  not  loiter,  or  hanker
upon  any  thing  behind,  for  fear,  when  Nature  cuts  the  Ca-
ble, your  Inclinations  ftill  be  left  on  Shore.  Go  you  muft,
that's  moft  certain,-  and  therefore  it  is  that  he  tells  you,
if  you  do  not  follow  readily  and  chearfully,  and  quit  all  of
your  own  accord,  you  fhall  be  tied  Neck  and  Heels,  like
Sheep,  and  thrown  under  the  Hatches  j  that  is,  you  ftiall  be
forced  and  torn  away,  and  thruft  out  of  the  World,  like
thofe  Foolifii  and  Sheepifh  Wretches,  who  dye  with  Cowar-
dice, and  Reludancy,  and  Unmanly  Lamentations  of  themr
felves  and  their  Friends.

But'tliere  is  yet  another  Caution  obfervable  here,  which  is.
That  the  Perfon,  to  v/hom  the  Enjoyment  of  Marri?ge,  and

fuch

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 75:

fuch  others  as  are  the  additional  Advantages  of  Life,  are  al-
lowed, muft  be  fure  to  indulge  himfelf  in  fuch  Enjoyment
©f  them  only,  as  is  feafonable  j  that  fo,  when  he  hath  taken
as  much  of  thefe  as  is  fit  for  him,  he  may  remove  without
any  delay,  and  readily  comply  with  the  Mailer's  Firft  Call.
But  if  a  Man  be  Old,  and  draw  near  his  End ;  he  will  do
beft  to  keep  himfelf  wholly  difengaged,  and  entertain  himfelf
with  nothing  fo  much  as  the  confhant  Thought  and  Expecta-
tion of  the  Ship's  Sailing,  and  his  quitting  the  Shore  j  for
fear,  when  the  time  of  his  Return  comes,  and  the  Mafter
Galls,  he  be  retarded  by  his  Burden,  and  faftened  down  to
Land  ^  and  be  forced  with  a  great  deal  of  unbecoming  Con-
cern, to  leave  a  Young  Wife,  and  Pretty  Children  behind.
And  furely  an  Old  Man,  upon  all  Accounts,  hath  much
greater  Reafon  to  prepare  for  leaving  the  World,  than  to  en-
tertain himfelf  with  vain  Projeds  of  fettling  in  it.

CHAP. XIII.

T  Rouble  not  yourfelf  with  williing,  that  things,  j^
may  be  juft  as  you  would  have  them  ;  but  be '
well  pleafed  that  they  ihould  be  juft  as  they  are,  and
then  you  will  live  eafy.

COMMENT.

THEIaft  Chapter  inftrucfled  us,  v/hat  External  Advan-
tages thofe  are,  which  we  are  allowed  to  partake  of,
and  how  we  muft  govern  ourfeives  with  regard  to  them  j
that  thofe,  which  are  neceflary  for  the  fupport  of  ¥,  ..-man
Nature,  muft  be  ufed  and  valued  accordingly  j  lioie,  which
are  convenient  as  additional  Comforts,  and  only  things  by
the  byj  but  that  neither  the  One,  nor  the  Other,  muft  be
made  our  Chief  Aim.  Now,  after  the  Enjoyment  of  thefe
things  allowed  under  fuch  Limitations,  he  proceeds  here  to
dired  us,  by  what  means  we  may  ufe  and  enjoy  them,  with-
out any  Prejudice  or  Panfion,  fo  as  to  avoid  Difquiet,  and  live
always  free  and  eafy.  The  great  Obftruction  to  this  is  a  per-
petual Fretfulnefs  of  Temper,  and  repining  at  whatever  hap-
pens

76  Epictetus's  Morals,

pens  to  us.  And  this  can  never  be  cured,  but  by  one  of
thefe  Two  ways :  Either,  that  Providence  fliould  order  all
things  agreeable  to  our  Humour  j  Or,  that  we  fhould  bring
our  own  Humour  to  be  fatisfied  with  whatever  Providence
thinks  fit  to  order.  The  Former  of  thefe,  that  Providence
lliould  appoint  every  thing  juft  as  we  would  have  it,  is  nei-
ther poffible  for  us  to  bring  about,  nor  would  it  at  all  times
be  for  our  Advantage,  if  we  could  j  for  it  often  happens,
that  we  are  moft  eager  and  fond  of  thofe  things,  which  are
prejudicial  to  us.  This  comes  to  pafs,  either  upon  the  Ac-
count of  our  Ignorance,  becaufe  we  do  not  fee  the  Nature
and  Confequences  of  them  j  Or  the  predominancy  of  our
Pailions,  which  puts  a  Byafs  upon  the  Judgment,  and  in-
clines Reafon  to  comply  with  the  Senfual  and  Brutiili  part.
So  that  in  effect,  there  is  but  One  way  left  to  be  eafy  •  and
that  is,  to  be  of  fo  equal,  fo  refigned  a  Difpofition,  as  to  fit
down  well  content  with  whatever  Providence  (ees  good  to
appoir?t.

Now this  may  pofiibly  be  cenfured  by  Some, as  an  ex-
ceeding hard,  and  indeed  an  Impraclicable  Precept;  and  that
no  Man  can  be  in  good  earneft,  when  he  pretends  to  per-
fuadc  People,  that  they  ought  to  be  ivell  pleafed^  things  Jljould
be  as  they  are  :  For  what  Man  of  Common  Senfe  can  be  fo,
when  he  obferves  the  publick  and  general  Calamities  of  Man-
kind?  Is  it  poffible,  that  fuch  dire  effects  of  Providence,  as
Earthquakes,  and  Inundations,  and  Fires,  and  Famines,  and
Pellilences,  and  Murrains  of  Cattel,  and  Bladings  of  Fruit ;
or  that  the  Wicked  and  Barbarous  Infolencies  Men  are  guilty
of  to  one  anotlier, the  Ravaging  whole  Countries,  Burning
and  Sacking  of  Cities,  the  Imprifonments  and  Slaveries,  the
Murders  and  Robberies,  the  Rapine,  and  Violence,  and  un-
bounded Luft,  that  have  driven  them  paft  all  Senfe  of  God
and  Religion,  and  utterly  deftroyed Morality, and  Virtue,
and  Friendfhip,  and  Mutual  Faith,  and  have  fo  utterly  ruined
feveral  Arts  and  Sciences, which it  hath coft  many  Ages
to  contrive  and bring  to maturity, that  we  have  nothing
left  of  fome,  but  the  empty  Names  ,* and  of  others, which
ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  elpecial  Gifts,  and  immediate
Difcoveries  of  Heaven,  for  the  Benefit  and  Support  of  Man-
kind (fuch  as  Phyllck, and  Architedure, and  the  like)  we
have  no  more  than  {bme  faint  Shadows, and  imperfedl  I-
mages  remaining ;  How,  I  lay,  is  it  poffible,  that  thefe,  and
many  other  C Calamities,  and  monftrous  V/ickednefles,  which
the  preienc  Age  is  perfectly  over-run  with,  fliould  be  matter

of

with S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S'S C  O  M  M  E  N  T. J  J

of  Pleafure  or  Contentment  ?  And  who  is  there,  that  can
take  Satisfadlion,  lliall  I  fay,  in  feeing,  or  bearing  a  part  in
them  ?  Nay,  who  can  fo  much  as  endure  the  very  hearing
them  named,  except  he  be  firft  forfaken  of  all  Humanity,
and  all  Goodnefs?

Such  Doubts  as  thefe,  which  give  fometimes  great  Per-
plexity, not  only  to  the  Weak  and  Common  Man,  but  to
the  Thinking  and  more  Accomplifhed  Perfons,  will  receive
fatisfadion  ,•  if  either  Epiiietus  be  allowed  to  have  any  Au-
thority in  what  he  fays,  or  the  great  Governor  of  all
things  be  granted  to  order  the  World  in  Wifdom  and  Juftice,
For  our  Piety,  and  our  Advantage,  will  be  fure  to  termi-
nate in  the  fame  Object  j  as  Epidetus  himfelf  will  alTure  us-
more  fully  hereafter.

In  anfwer  therefore  to  the  Objedion,  I  fay.  That  if  all
thefe  deplorable  Accidents,  which  the  Objedtor  hath  given
fo  Tragical  an  Account  of,  be  really  Evil,  and  fuch  as  they
are  generally  efteemed  to  be,  it  is  not  poffible,  that  any  Good
Man  Ihould,  without  forfeiting  that  Character,  be  pleafed  to
have  them  fo  j  nor  could  the  Providence  of  Almighty  God
be  acquitted  from  the  Imputation  of  being  the  caufe  of  Evil
to  us  j  nor  could  Men  ever  prevail  with  themfelves,  to  ho-
nour, or  love,  or  pay  Adoration  to  fuch  a  Deity.  For  lee
Men  pretend  what  they  will,  no  Arguments  in  the  World
are  able  to  produce  thefe  AfFedions  for  the  Author  of  Mi-
fery  and  Mifchief  It  is  a  Principle  rooted  in  every  Creature^
as  EfiBetus  will  fhew  you,  to  hate,  and  decline,  and  run
away  from  all  things  that  are  prejudicial  to  it  themfelves,  or
the  caufe  of  other  things  being  fo  to  it.  But  whatever  is  for
its  Benefit,  and  productive  ot  its  Happinels,  thefe  things  it
naturally  courts  and  admires.

Thus  much  is  certain,  upon  fuppofition  that  thefe  Acci-
dents are  really  Evil,  But  now,  if,  notwithftanding  our
dreadful  Apprehenfions  of  them,  they  be  in  truth  no  fuch
matter,  but  rather  Good,  as  conducing  very  much  to  fome
mighty  Benefit,  and  direded  to  excellent  Purpofes ;  and  that,
if  any  Evil  do  indeed  attend  thefe  Difpenfations,  this  is  what
the  Nature  of  the  things  is  no  way  concerned  in,  but  fuch  as
is  wholly  owing  to  the  Delires  and  ftrong  Impulfes  of  our
own  Minds  •  in  this  cafe,  it  will  by  no  means  follow,  that
he,  who  is  well  enough  pleafed  all  things  fliould  be  juft  as
they  are,  is  either  a  Vicious  or  a  Bc:rbarous  Man  j  nor  can
we,  with  any  colour,  charge  the  Evil  we  find  in  the  World
upon  chefe  Occafions,  to  Almighty  God,  but  muft  acquiu

hi5

7$  Epictetus's  Morals,

his  Providence,  and  acknowledge  k  to  be  infinitely  Wife  an^
Good.

Now  the  Things,  in  which  all  chefe  fceming  Evils  are,
and  from  whence  they  fpring,  muft  be  confidered  in  this
Condition  of  Mortality,  as  undergoing  the  vicifTitudes  of  Ge-
neration and  Corruption,  either  as  Bodies  or  Souls.  And  of
thefe  Souls  again,  fome  are  irrational,  of  the  fame  Date
and  Duration  with  the  Body ;  and  having  none,  or  but  very
little  peculiar  Excellence  of  their  own,  their  Office  and
Pov/er  extends  no  farther,  than  merely  the  animating  thofe
Bodies  to  which  they  belong  j  and  therefore  all  their  Mo-
tions depend  upon,  and  proceed  in  Conjunction  with,  their
refpedlive  Bodies.  But  other  Souls  are  Rational :  Thefe
have  an  inward  Principle  of  Motion,  and  an  EfTence  and
Excellence  diftind  from  their  Bodies ;  they  move  by  their
own  Choice,  and  are  abfolute  in  the  difpofmg  their  own
Defires  and  Inclinations.  Now  the  Bodies  belonging  to  thefe,
being  in  their  own  Nature  purely  Mechanical,  and  deriving
their  EfTence  from  External  Caufes,  are  fubjed  to  the  Mo-
rions of  Heavenly  Bodies,  which  influence  their  Generation
and  Corruption,  and  the  various  Alterations  through  which
they  pafs.

But  if  we  come  nearer,  and  defcend  to  the  immediate  and
Material  Caufes  j  then  they  are  moved  and  affected  by  a
mutual  Operation  upon  one  another.  For  this  is  agreeable
to  ail  the  Reafon  in  the  World,  that  Temporary  and  Cor-
ruptible things,  Ihould  depend  upon  the  Eternal  for  their  Sub--
iiftence,  and  be  obedient  to  their  Influences :  Mechanical
Beings,  upon  fuch,  as  are  endued  v/ith  a  Faculty  of  Seif-Mo-
tionj  and  thofe  that  are  contained  v/iihin  others,  upon  the
Ambients  that  contain  them.  .  This  is  the  conflant  Method
and  Rule  of  Nature,  that  thefe  fhould  follow  the  other  Su-
perior to  them,  as  having  no  Principle  of  Motion  in  them-
lelves,  no  Faculty  of  Chufing,  no  Power  of  Determining
the  Defires  or  AfFetftions  of  their  Nature  j  no  Merit  or  De-
merit from  Choice  or  Adions,  but  are  only  Good  or  Evil,
in  refpecfl  and  proportion  to  their  Caufes.  Jufl  as  the  Sha-
dows of  Bodies  do  not  cliufe  their  Sides  or  Shapes  as  they
pleafe^  but  are  necefTarily  determined  by  their  Caufes  and
their  Circuraitances,  and  are  never  the  better,  or  the  worfe,
for  thofe  Determinations. .

Now  as  to  Bodies  j  Whatever  Changes  thefe  undergo^  this
Variety  can  he  no  111  to  them, whether  they  be  Corx)pound
or  Simple  Bodies. Firft  of  all,  becaufe  it- is  what  the  Condi-
tion

with  SiivrpLicius's  Comment. 79

tibn  of  their  Nature  hath  made  them  liable  to.  They  are
bound  in  Laws  irrevocable,  which  they  may  neither  con-
troul  nor  refift  •  and  confequenrly  can  receive  no  Harm  by
whatever  they  impofe,  as  having  no  Power  to  do  otherwife.
For  Ignorance  would  be  no  Evil,  nor  the  moft  brutilh  and
ektravagant  Converfation,  nor  v/ould  the  Rational  Soul  be
one  whit  the  worfe  for  either,  had  not  Nature  endued  her
with  a  Faculty  of  Difcerning  and  Underftanding  the  Truth,
and  given  her  a  Power  over  the  brutifh  Appetites,  by  which
fhe  is  enabled  to  fubdue  and  over-rule  them.

Secondly,  Bccaufe  the  Compound  Bodies,  which  confiil:
ibf  fimple  Ingredients,  of  contrary  Qualities,  fuch  as  are  per-
petually ftruggling  with,  and  ufurping  upon  one  another,  by
Difeafes,  and  Excefs  of  Humours,  are  fom.etimcs  ftrength-
ned  by  throv/ing  off  the  corrupt  Parts-  and  fom.etimes  by
Decay  and  Death,  are  delivered  from  all  that  Trouble,  and
Pain,  and  mutual  Strife  of  contrary  Qualities  m  them.  And
in  this  Cafe,  each  of  the  Simples  is  reftored  to  its  primitive
Mafs,  and  recovers  itfelf  from  that  Weaknefs,  which  was
occafioned  by  this  Oppofition  of  contrary  Humours.  For,
as  each  of  the  Ingredients  in  Compofition  made  fome  Im-
preflion  upon  its  Oppofite,  fo  it  likewife  continually  receiv-
ed fome  from  it,  and  fufFered  by  it.  But  now,  v/hen  the
Simples  are  changed,  according  to  the  Changes  of  the  con-
trary Qualities,  they  return  again  to  their  ov/n  primitive  Being.
Thus  Water  evaporates  into  the  Air  from  whence  it  came,
and  Air  is  turned  into  Fire,  from  whence  it  originally  was.
And  I  cannot  fuppofe  any  Evil  in  Things  of  this  Kind,  though
Inundations,  or  Fire,  or  any  the  moft  violent  Changes  in  Na-
ture, fliould  be  the  EfFed  of  thefe  Inequalities,  in  the  Ele-
ments which  compofe  the  Univerfe  j  or  though  Peftilences
and  Earthquakes  fhould  deftroy  and  dalli  in  pieces  the  Bodies
compounded  of  thole  Elements.

But  farther,  if  thefe  Things  contribute  to  fome  good  Ef-
fe(fl  j  if  by  the  infinite  Revolutions  of  Matter  and  Motion,
the  Corruption  of  one  Thing  produces  the  Generation  of
another  j  how  then  can  the  Corruption  of  any  fingle  part  be
Evil,  when  at  the  fame  time  it  conduces  to  the  Benefit  of
the  Whole }  This  is  a  Rule,  which  Nature  itfelf  hath  made
evident  to  us,  and  every  particular  Creature  pratfliles  it,  in
flighting  the  Advantage  of  its  Pares,  in  Comparifon  of  the
Good  of  the  Whole.

Thus,  when  any  Noxious  Humours  are  reduj;idant  in  the
Body, Nature  throws  them  off  from  the  Heart,  or  Bqwels,

K  or

So  E^  I  c  T  E  T  u  s's  Moral  s,

or  Lungs,  or  Brain,  and  all  the  parts  that  are  princijTally
conceFned  in  the  fundions  of  Life,  into  the  Hands,  the  Feet,,
the  Skin,  or  any  of  the  Extreme  P^^rts :  fhe  raifes  Blifters,
and  caufes  Putrefadions,  to  remove  the  Humour,  and  is
content  to  corrupt  fome  parts,  for  the  prefervarion  of  the
whole.  This  is  fometimes,  I  fay,  the  work  of  Nature ;  and
when  it  is  not  fo,  we  endeavour  to  fupply  it  by  Art.  For
when  Phyficians  and  Chirurgeons  draw  Sores,  and  cup,  and
fcarify,  and  fear,  and  cut  off  Limbs,  to  Yave  our  Lives  j  they-
only  imitate  Nature,  and  do  that  by  Medicines,  which  fhe
was  not  able  to  do  without  thera.  And  no  Wife  Man  blan^es
thefe  Methods,  nor  thinks  thole  Pains  Evil,  which  he  fuflfers
upon  fucb  good  Accounts.

From  hence  it  appears,  that  if  Bodies  fubfifted  by  them-
felves  alone,  and  v/hatever  they  en-dured  had  no  relation  at
all  to  the  Souls  of  Men,  none  of  the  different  Changes  they
undergo,  would-be  efteemed  Evil :  So  that  if  there  be  any
real  Caufe  for  this  Complaint,  it  muft  be  upon  the  account
of  the  Souls  in  thofe  Bodies.

Now  Some  of  thefe  are  Irrational,  perfedly  of  a  piece
with  the  Bodies,  and  no  more  than  the  animating  part  of
them.  Their  EfTence,  their  Power,  and  their  Operations, fub-
lifts  in,  and  depend  intirely  upon,  and  are  in  inleparable  Con*
junction  with  the  Body.  But  others  are  Rational,  of  a  Na-
ture fuperior  to  the  Body,  and  diflinft  from  it,  ading  upon
a  free  Principle  of  Motion  and  Choice,  a  Principle  of  their
own,  by  which  they  difpoie  their  own  Inclinations  and  De-
fires,  ,as  they  fee  fit  themfelves.  All  which  hath  been  abun-
dantly proved  already.

Now  the  Irrational  Souls  have  not  the  leaft  Sign  or  Foot-
flep  of  Free-agency,  no  manner  of  Tendeiky  or  Appetite
from  within,  but  are  only  the  Principle  of  Life  and  Adivity
to  the  Body.  Confequently  their  Being  v^^as  ordained  by  the
fame  Fate,  and  is  fubjed  to  the  fame  Calualries  wirh  the  Body  :
They  have  no  Dignity,  no  Merit  or  Demerit  of  their  own;
but  are  more  or  leCs  valuable  according  to  the  Dignity  of
their  refpedive  Bodies ;  and  are  as  irreliftibiy  difpofed  to  their.
Motions,  as  Shadows  are  to  their  Subftances.

It  is  true  indeed.  This  is  more  peculiarly  the  Condition
of  Plants,  which  have  only  a  Vegetative  Soul,  and  wane
the  Seniitive  one,  and  are  not  exercifed  with  tho.e  Motions,
which  accompany  the  Delires,  and  vehement  Impulfes  of
the  Soul.  But  Beafts  are  in  a  higher  Form,  and  are  endued
with  this  alfo. And  therefore  the  Souls  of  Brutes,  being

confidered.

with  SiMPL ici us*3  Comment. 8i

confidered  in  a  middle  State,  in  a  Capacity  fuperior  to  Vege-
rableSj  and  yet  inferior  to  ilich  as  Nature  hath  made  free
Agents,  muft  in  all  Reafon  have  Ibme  Refemblance,  fome
Foot-fteps  at  leafl,  of  Appetites  and  AfFecftions  arif^ng  front
within  ^  and  fuch  as  fhall  be  moved,  fomecimes  in  Agreement
to  the  Nature  of  its  particular  Species,  and  fometimes  contrary
to  it.  As  when  a  Lion  hath  that  Courage  and  Fury  agreeable
to  its  kind ;  and  this  is  fometimes  more,  and  fometimes  lefs,
than  it  ought  to  be.  And  in  this  refped,  the  Dignities  and
Degrees  of  fuch  Souls  are  different  ■  and  their  Livts  are  fo
too,  according  to  the  Difpofition  which  Fate  and  Nature
have  given  them,-  which  is  fuch  that  they  are  ftill  moved
mechanically,  and  by  external  Impreffions.  For  it  is  necef-
fary,  that  whatever  is  placed  between  two  Extremes,  fhould
in  fome  meafure  partake  of  each  of  thofe  Extremes.

But  now  the  Rational  Soul,  which  is  a  Free-agent,  and
hath  an  abfolute  Dominion  over  her  own  Defires  and  Pro-
penfions,  derives  its  Dignity  from  Choice ;  She  ufes  the  Bo-
dy indeed,  but  hath  all  its  Appetites  and  PaiTions  at  her  De-
votion. This  Soul  therefore,  when  fhe  makes  ufe  of  the
Body,  only  as  an  Inftrument  of  Action,  and  maintains  her
own  Superiority  over  it,  is  obftruded  in  all  thofe  Opera-
tions, in  which  the  Body  bears  a  part,  by  the  Suiferings  and
Difeafes  of  the  Body,  but  it  is  not  itfelf  at  all  afFedled  with
thofe  Pains.  From  whence  it  was,  that  the  great  Socrates
ufed  to  fay,  the  Anguifh  was  in  the  Leg,  but  not  in  the
Mind.  But  if  the  Soul  contract  too  intimate  a  Familiarity
with  the  Body,  and  grow  fond  of  it,  as  if  it  were  no  longer
its  Inftrument,  but  a  part  of  itfelf,  or  rather  its  very  felf  ^
then  it  communicates  in  all  its  Afflitflions,  degenerates  into
Brute,  and  efteems  all  the  Extravagancies  of  Anger  and  De-
fire  its  own,  is  enflaved  to  them,  defcends  to  little  Trick-
ings,  and  is  eternally  contriving,  how  to  compafs  external
Objedsj  and,  being  thus  corrupted  and  difeafed  in  fuch
manner  as  a  Soul  is  capable  of  being  difeafed,  it  flands  in
need  of  Phylkk.and  ftrong  Remedies,  to  cure  thefe  Diftcm-
pers.  For  it  is  a  Rule  in  Application,  that  one  Contrary  is
cured  by  another.  Thus,  when  the  Defire  is  depraved  by
Lufcioufnefs  and  Pleafure,  and  hath  coni-ormed  itlelf  to  th^
Body  too  much,  by  the  Love  of  Senfual  Enjoyments,
and  Riches,  and  Honours,  and  Preferments,  and  Pofts  of
Authority,  and  the  like  j  there  is  a  neceffity  of  meeting  with
Crofles  and  Difappoinrments,  that  fo  the  iubfequent  Pain  in
the  very  fame  Irjftances,  may  corre<ft  and  chaftile  the  Excefs

K  a  of

Szi  Efi  CTE  Tus's  Morals,

of  Pleafure  we  formerly  took  in  them.  And  this  is  no  where"
more  requifitethan  in  Pains  and  Pleafures  of  the  Body.  Fon
this  is  neareft  to  the  Soul,  and  its  Torments  are  received,
with  a  quicker  and  more  tender  Senfe  than  any  other.  When-
therefore  the  Soul  hath  revolted  from  her  Supreme  Com-
mander, and  forfakes  her  own  Reafon,  abandoning  herfelf
to  the  Body  and  the  World,  and  thinking  Their  Enjoyments
and  Their  Happinefs  her  own,  and  by  this  means  grows  vi-
tiated and  diftempered;  there  feems  no  other  way-lefc,  of
putting  her  out  of  Conceit  with  thefe  Things,  and  poifing
the  Byafs  that  carried  her  to  them  (that  fo  fhe  may  defpife
them,  and  condemn  herfelf,  and  return  to  God  and  right
Reafon,  again,  and  exped:  all  her  Happinefs  from  an  Obe-
dience to  thefe)  but  by  making  her  fenfible,  both  of  the  Evih
of  her  former  Courfes,  and  of  the  Smart  that  follows  them.
This  only  can  take  off  the  Propenfity  of  that  Pleafure,  which
fhe  hath  felt  in  and  by  them:  For,  fo  long  as  fhe  continue.?^
to  find  this,  flie  continues  fond  of,  and  faftened  down  to
thefe  Enjoyments.  And  no  Nail  takes  fafter  hoW,  or  fixes
Things  clofer,  than  Pleafure  and  the  Allurements  -  it  brings,
do  the  Soul  to  the  Objefts  that  ocsafion  it.  And  this  is  the
Reafon  why  our  fkilfijl  and  tender  Phyfician  mingles  Bitter
with  our  Sweets,  and  makes  what  we  are  fondelt  of,  to  be-
come naufeous  and  painful  to  us  ^  he  deals  with  us  as  Nurfes
do  with  fucking  Children,  and  puts  Wormwood  andMuftard
upon  the  Breaft,  to  wean  our  Affedions,  and  make  us  loath  ■
Things  which  are  no  longer  convenient  for  us^.

In  fuch  Cafes  then,  the  firft  Choices  of  our  Mind  are  de-
termined to  the  lefs  of  two  Evils ;  they  prefer  Death  before
Bodily  Pain  and  Afflictions,  and  had  rather  be  quite  out  of
the  Body,  than  miferable  in  it ;  a  Wifh,  which  no  Man  would.,
ever  make,  if  he  were  always  eafy  and  profperous.  And.
thus,  by  Degrees,  we  are  wrought  up  to  an  Hatred  and  A-
verfion  of  prefent  Pleafure,  by  a  Profpe6t  and  Dread  of  a
much  greater,  and  more  complicated  Mifery  that  attends  it :
As  Children  are  brought  off  from  what  is  hurtful  to  them
at  firft  by  a  Principle  of  Fear;  Or  a  Man,  who  loves  any
Meat  or  Drink  prejudicial  to  his  Heath,  and  hath  found  by
Experience,  that  it  gives  him  Gripings,  or  is  oifeofive  to  his
Stomach,  is  concent  afterwards  ta  forbear  the  gratifying  his
Palate,  provided  that  Abftinence  will  but  fecure  his  Eafe,
and  prevent  the  much  more  lafting  Pains,  wliich  that  fliort
Pleafure  ufes  to  bring  after  it.  This  is  the-  Gaie  of  moil  of
us: For  alas! How  very  few  are  content  to -forego  even.

thofe

With  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 83

thoie  Pleafures,  which  they  are  farisfied  ought  not  to  be  in-
dulged, (o  long  as  they  find  no  Trouble  or  Inconvenience
from  them  ?

Now  the  Truth  is,  This  abftaining  from  Pleafure  for  fear
of  fome  greater  Pain,  is  not  fo  properly  the  fubduing  or  de-
ftroying  our  PalEon,  as  the  exchanging  of  one  Paflion  for
another.  For  we  are  willing  to  make  a  faving  Bargain,  and
barter  the  Pleafure  of  Enjoyment  away  for  the  Pleafure  of
Eafe  and  Security,  And  thus  one  PafTion  rifes  up  in  fuccef-
fion  to  another,  But  yet  this  is  a  very  good  Method  to  begin
with,  while  we  retain  our  filly  Childifh  Difpofitions ;  that  we
may  grow  jealous  and  fearful  of  thofe  Things,  to  which  our
Inclinations  lead  us  moA,-  and  when  this  Diftafte  is  once
igiven,  therij  by  confidering  their  Nature,  and  obferving,  that,
bcfides  their  being  Vicious,  the  very  XJnealineis  and  Trou-
bles that  attend  them,  are  more  exquifice  and  more  various,
than  the  Pleafures  they  afford  j  and  fo  returning  to  Reafon,
and  finding,  that  our  Happinefs  is  really  within  our  own
felves,  and  expedled  in  vain  from  the  Delights  of  the  Body,
or  the  Advantages  of  the  World;  and  thus,  by  Degrees
growing  confcious  of  fome  Refemblance  between  Us  and
God,  and  reverencing  his  Image  in  our  Souls,  we  chufe  a
wife  and  good  Lite  ^  now  no  longer  out  of  Fear,  but  from
the  more  generous  Principles  of  a  virtuous  and  well-inftrucl-
ed  Mind,  For  even  Children,  When  they  grow  wifer,  come
at  laft  to  decline,  and  to  do  thofe  Things  out  of  Judgment
and  Inclination,  which  at  firft  nothing  but  Fear,  and  the
Rod,  could  have  driven  them to.

And  this  is  the  Defign  of  our  good  God,  and  his  tender
Care  ovet  us ;  That  the  Soul  fliould  neither  cling  too  fail  to
the  Body  and  its  Pleafures,  and  the  Enjoyments  of  the
World ;  nor  yet  abHain  from  them,  when  driven  only  by  a
Principle  of  Fear ;  but  from  its  own  free  generous  Choice,
as  confidering,  that  all  our  Good,  and  all  our  Evil,  confifts
in  our  own  Choice,  and  our  own  Averfions.  So  that  ail
'the  healing  Methods  of  his  Providence  are  directed  to  no
f other  purpofe  than  this;  to  reftore  the  Soul  to  Reafon  and
Prudence,  and  to  the  Preferring  a  Virtuous  Life.  Jutt  as
the  moft  eminent  Phyficians,  when  they  proceed  to  fuch
fmarting  Severities,  as  Cutting,  and  Burning,  and  the  like,
..do  it  only  wiih  a  Defign,  to  reduce  the  Body  to  its  natural
,flnd  healthful  Temper,  and  to  enable  the  Parts  which  were
before  obftrucfled,  to  perform  their  proper  Funflions  again,
Now  Punilhment  is  the  beft  Cure  for  Wickedncl*  j  and  this

K  3  i.

84  Epictetu  s's  Morals,

is  the  peculiar  Ufe  and  Benefit  of  thofe  Calamities,  which
we  account  Evils.  And,  as  we  are  commonly  very  angry
^t  our  Phyficians,  when  they  torture  and  put  us  to  Pain  j  fo
do  Men  likewife  generally  take  it  ill,  to  have  thefe  fharper
Remedies  of  Providence  applied  to  them.  But  they  are  only
the  Childifh  and  Effeminate,  the  Foolilh  and  Unthinking
Part  of  the  World,  that  do  fo.  For  whoever  will  give  him-
felf  the  Trouble,  of  making  a  diligent  Obfervation  of  him-
felf  and  others,  upon  Occalion  of  the  feveral  Accidents  that
befall  him  j  and  takes  Notice  of  the  Difpolitions  of  his  Soul  j
by  Vv'hat  Springs  they  are  moved,  and  how  they  are  correcled
snd  changed  j  he,  I  make  no  queftion,  will  readily  acknow-
ledge, That  AfHidions  are  generally  the  firftOccafionofMens
conquering  their  Inclinations,  and  coming  up  to  a  due  Con-
tempt of  the  Body  and  the  World,  or  (as  our  great  Author
exprefles  himfelf )  of  all  thofe  things  that  are  out  of  cur
own  Power.

But,  as  the  Phyfick  applied  to  our  Bodies  is  of  Two  forts  j
the  One  Reftorative,  the  Other  Prefer vative;"  the  One,  to
purge  off"  our  Difeafes,  and  corredl  the  Noxious  humours
by  Drugs  of  contrary  Qualities  j  the  Other  to  continue  and
confirm  Health,  by  convenient  Diet,  due  Regimen,  and  mo-
derate Exercife :  And  as  fome  Exercifes  require  great  La-
bour and  Adivity,  and  are  fit  only  for  hardy  and  robuft  Bo-
dies ,•  fo  this  excellent  Phyfician  of  our  Souls  does  not  only
adminifter  to  the  Sick  and  Difeafed,  and  recover  them  by
Sufferings  and  Misfortunes  j  but  he  exercifes  the  Sound  and
Healthful,  and  by  fo  doing,  adds  to  their  Strength  and  Vi-
gour, and  renders  their  Virtue  more  confpicuous  j  a  Pattern
to  others,  tjnd  a  Provocation  to  be  good.  And  thiols  but  ne-
celTary^  for  the  Souls  of  Men,  Seven  the  Good  and  Vir-
tuous, {land  in  need  of  Exercife  to  confirm  them,  no  lefs
than  healthful  Bodies  do.  And  Hippocrates's  Maxim  wOl  hold
good  upon  this  occafion  too.  That  Motion  gives  Strength,
but  Sloth  and  Inaclivity  waftes  it.  The  Reafon  is  plain  :  For
thofe  Things  which  are  fo  ordered,  that  they  are  continually
as  perfecl  as  Nature  intended  them,  and  are  continually  em-
ployed in  fuch  Operations  as  Nature  appointed  for  them,
perform  thefe  Operations  with  great  Readinefs  and  Dexterity  :
But  thofe  that  are  not  thus  continually,  mufl:  imitate  and
fupply  the  Want  of  that  perpetual  Morion  by  their  own
Pradice-  that  fo  they  may  not  forget  by  Difufe,  and  find
themifelves  at  a  Lofs,  v/hen  any  ursrent  Occafion  calls  for
the  exerting  their  Powers : For  v/hatever  is  fometimes  in,

and

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 85

and  at  other  Times  out:  of  Motion,  confefles  its  own  VVeak^
nefs,  of  which  this  Viciflkude  is  the  EfFed:  j  and  that  Weak-
.nefs  muft  be  worn  off,  and  Strength  acquired  by  Adlion.
Now  all  Exercife  confifts  in  the  fame  Acfls  frequently  repeat-
-ed  j  the  very  fame,  I  fay,  with  that  principal  Ad:,  for  the
fake  of  which  we  ufe  this  Excercife.  Thus  in  the  Olyrapick
Sports,  the  Exercife  ufed  to  perfed  them  in  Wreftling,  vi
Wreftling  very  often ;  and  that  in  order  to  the  Cafius  and
Cuffing,  is  the  inuring  themfelves  to  Blows,  Thus  Men
learn  the  A'rt  of  War  by  imitating  Adion,  and  engaging
one  Party  with  another,  when  they  train  together :  And  the
more  lufty  and  ftrong  the  Perfons  are,  who  perform  thefe
Exercifes,  the  more  efFedually  does  this  Practice  attain  its
end.  So  that  if  any  Man  would  get  a  Maltery  over  Plea-
fure,  it  is  necefifary  whenever  any  entertaining  Objeds  offer
themfelves,  to  learn  and  pradife  the  Contempt  of  them-
and  they  that  would  conquer  Pain,  muft  ufe  themfelves  to
endure  ie^  and  to  mafter  our  Fears,  we  muft  make  danger
familiar  to  usj  and  to  flight  Torments,  we  muft  imitate  the
Patience  of  the  -noble  luacedemoman  Youths,  who  plaid
Prizes  of  Scourging,  and  esercifed  themfelves  in  every  Thing
that  was  painful,  to  qualify  them  for  it :  Or  do,  as  Sallufi  in
our  Times  did,  that  laid  a  red  hot  coal  upon  his  Thigh,  and
blow'd  the  Fire,  to  try  how  long  he  was  able  to  undergo
the  Smart.  For  thefe  Trials,  and  the  principal  Adions  they  -
are  intended  to  perfed  us  in,  do  not  differ  in  Nature  and
Kind,  but  in  Degree  and  Duration  only,  as  thefe  are  eafier
and  lighter,  and  may  be  defifted  from  at  Pleafure.

Since  therefore  Almighty  God,  when  he  difpofed  of  Mens
Souls  in  Mortal  Bodies,  and  afligned  them  to  the  Condition  in
which  we  live  at  prefent,  endued  them  with  Faculties  capable
of  managing  every  Accident  (fo  as  to  receive  no  Injury,  either
from  the  enticing  Pleafures,  or  from  the  Terrors  and  Difafters
of  the  World)  and  of  fetting  the  Mind  above  them  all  j  the
fame  infinite  Wifdom  keeps  thofe  Faculties  in  Exercife,  that
they  Ihould  not  grow  iluggiili,  and  confequentiy  feeble,  and
ilack  for  want  of  Adion  j  and  puts  the  Soul  upon  many
fharp  Conflids,  that,  when  there  is  Occafion  for  exerting  her
Powers,  fhe  may  not  be  found  Unexpert  and  Defedive.  This
is  it  which  hath  made  fo  many  illuftrious  Heroes :  This  made
Jiercuksy  and  Thefeus,  and  DiogeneSj  and  Socrates^  to  become
Perfons  of  fuch  eminent  Virtue  and  Renown.  Their  Cha-
raders  would  have  been  little,  and  their  Excellencies  loft  j  nor
would  Manliind  ever  have  known,  to  what  vv^onderfui  Per-

K  4.  fedion

86  Epictetus*s  Morals,

fedion  an  exalted  Virtue  can  carry  them,  if  there  had  been
no  fuch  Things  as  Wild  Bsafts  and  Monfters,  Tyrants  and
wicked  OpprefTors,  Mortification,  and  fevere  Abftinence,
to  perpetuate  the  Memory  of  thefe  Worthies,  and  provoke
the  Proofs  of  their  Courage  and  Refolution,  and  recom-
mend their  Examples  to  Pofterity.

Now,  I  think,  no  Man  that  confiders  the  Matter  well,  will
doubt,  whether  Afflidions  do  not  better  thofe  that  have  fup-
ported  them  as  they  ought,  and  add  infinitely  to  their  For-
titude and  Patience.  For  fince  we  fee  by  the  Initances  of
Gladiators  and  the  like,  that  Ufe  reconciles  Men  to  the  moft
formidable  Dangers,  and  makes  them  a  perfed  Sport  and
Diverfion,  infomuch  that  they  enter  the  Lift  chearfully,  and
play  their  Prizes  for  a  very  fmall  Conhderation  j  how  can
we  imagine,  that  Exercife  fliould  fail  in  Matters  of  lefs  Dif-
ficulty, and  enable  Men  to  difdain  thofe  Calamities,  which
none  efteem  infupportable,  but  they  only,  who  have  not
hardened  themfelves  by  Pradice  ?  From  all  which  we  may
conclude,  that,  when  we  confider  Afflictions,  either  in  the
Quality  of  Remedies  to  cure  our  Diftempers,  or  as  Tryals
and  Exercifes  to  confirm  our  Health  and  Strength,  they
cannot  be  Evil  with  refped  to  the  Soul,  which  receives
fuch  mighty  Benefit  both  thefe  ways,  how  harfh  and  unpa-
latable foever  the  Application  may  leem.  For  at  this  rate,
we  muft  run  into  another  intolerable  Abfurdity,  and  con-
demn all  thofe  Medicines  and  Exercifes  as  Evil,  in  refped:
of  the  Body :  to  which,  though  they  be  grievous  for  the
prefent,  all  our  Recovery  and  all  the  Continuance  of  our
Health  is  owing.

Again,  whatever  is  done  in  fuch  Proportion  and  Manner,
as  Nature  and  Choice  both  require,  cannot  be  Evil  j  for  a
due  regard  to  this  is  Juft;  and  whatever  is  Jufv,  is  Good  :
Nay,  even  Cutting  and  Burning  are  not  Evil  to  our  Bodies  j
for  thefe  Bodies,  confidered  abfplutely  and  by  themfelves,
are  infenfible,  and  the  Refolution  of  a  Compound  into  its
Simples  is  not  in  Nature  Evil  to  that  Compound,  Since
then  we  allow,  that  Phyfick  and  Exercife,  Burning,  and  Bind-
ing, and  Lopping  off  of  Limbs,  and  all  the  Tortures  that  Mei^
ufe,  when  they  turn  their  own  Executioners,  are  not  Evil,
but  Good ,'  Since  we  think,  the  Perfons,  who  put  us  to  thefe
Pains  for  our  Advantage,  deferve  to  be  thanked  and  rewarded
for  it,  why  do  we  find  Fault  with  Almighty  God,  when
He  proceeds  in  the  fame  Method  ?  For  alas^  it  is  not  An-
ger, nor  Revenge,  nor  Injuftice,  nor  Cruelty,  nor  any  Defign

nvith  S I M  p  L I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 87

of  Tormenting  us,  that  puts  him  upon  thefe  Courfes ;  buc
he  ads  with  all  the  Skill  and  prudent  Care  of  a  Phyfician,
with  the  Faithfulnefs  and  TenderneCj  of  a  Friend,  with  the
Bowels  of  a  Father,  with  the  kindefl:  Intentions  of  our  greater
Benefit;  and,  to  fay  all  in  one  Word,  with  all  that  incom-
prehenfible  Love  and  Goodnefs,  which  is  any  way  agreeable
to  the  Nature  and  Perfedions  of  a  God.

Now  the  Remedies  he  adminifters  upon  fuch  Occafipn^,
are  divers.  Some  he  humbles  with  Difeafes,  or  Poverty,  or
Difgrace;  Some  with  the  more  publick  Calamities  of  Fa-
mines, or  Earthquakes,  or  Inundations,  or  Shipwrecks,  or
Warsj  Some  he  cures  with  fuch  Medicines,  as  come  im-r
irediately  from  his  own  Hand,  and  Others  by  more  remote
and  diftanc  ones,  makirig  Men  the  Minifters  of  his  Juftice,
and  Inftruments  of  punifhing  one  another.  But  ftill,  if  Phy-
Tick  and  the  Methods  of  Cure  be  not  Evil,  but  Good ;  all
thefe,  and  all  other  Remedies  muft  be  allowed  to  be  fo  too,
notwithftanding  any  Uneafinefs,  that  we  may  feel  in  the
Operation.

If  any  one  fhall  fcruple  the  calling  of  thefe  things  Good,
becaufe  they  are  not  eligible  purely  for  their  own  fakes  (as  all
things  abfolutely,  and  truly  Good  muft  be)  yet  at  leafl:  let  hiin
forbear  ftigmatizing  them  with  the  name  of  Evils,  and  ra-
ther call  them  neceflary  Expedients,  for  the  attaining  what
is  truly  Good.  In  Order  to  which,  and  for  the  fake  where-
of, we  chufe  thefe,  becaufe  that  other  is  not  to  be  had  with-
out them.  For  there  is  no  Man  (o  fottifli  and'fenfelefs,  as
to  chufe  Amputations  and  Searings,  or  any  fuch  violent  Re-
medies, for  their  own  fakes ;  but  yet  we  do  it  from  our  De-
fire  of  Health,  which  thefe  means  muft  be  aflifting  to  us  in.
And  indeed,  the  Philofophers  have  with  great  Propriety
ftyled  all  thofe  things  neceflary  Expedients,  which  are  fo  or-
dered, as  to  be  preliminary  to  our  Good,  and  fuch  as  we
muft  make  ufe  of  for  it.  Thefe  very  Things  then,  fo  far  as
they  conduce  to  our  Good,  and  in  that  refpecl,  are  thcm-
felves  Good.  Some,  as  they  contribute  to  the  Health  of  the
Body,  and  Others  to  that  of  the  Soul,  though  indeed  rhey  be
fo  in  a  Qualified  Senfe  only,  and  much  inferior  in  Dignity
and  Value  to  thofe  things  that  are  abfolutely  Good.  And
it  is  with  regard  to  thefe  more  excellent  Things,  that  the  Ge-
nerality of  People  look  upon  them,  and  fo  think  them  com-
paratively Evil :  Which  yet  furely  is  a  Cenfure  too  fevere  to
t3ejuftified,  if  they  do  not  only  Contribute,  but  are  Neceflary
%o  our  Happinefs

If

88  Epic  TETus's  Morals,

If  then  the  Objedor's  Arguments  are  fufficiently  refuted  ;
in  that  all  Things  that  happen,  are  fo  ordained  of  God,  as  that
Nature  and  Choice  have  both  their  due,  and  as  is  moll:  bene-
ficial to  Mankind  j  Every  Wife  Man  certainly  will  think
himfelf  obliged,  to  be  ludl  content  things  JJjould  be  juji  as  they
-are  (unlefs  you  will  fuppofe  him  to  envy  the  Giving  every'
Thing  its  Due,  and  the  Recovering  fuch  as  are  Diftempered,
and  need  fharp  Remedies)  he  will  moft  fincerely  love,  and
honour,  and  adore  this  Excellent  Phylkian,  and  look  upon
him,  as  the  World's  great  and  ocly  Benefador.

Now,  that  Calamitous  Circumftances  are  a  fort  of  Reme-
tiies,  and  that  the  Admin iftration  of  proper  PhyficJc,  where
the  cafe  requires  it,  is  good  both  to  the  Body  and  Soul,  no
Body  I  prefume,  will  take  upon  him  to  difpute.  But  v;'hat
courfe  fhall  we  take  to  perfuade  Men,  that  this  very  Difbem-
per  itfelf  of  Soul  or  Body,  this  miferable  Condition  that  ren-
ders fuch  painful  Applications  neceflary,  is  Good  and  not
Evil,  and  that  the  Author  of  it  is  not  the  Caufe  of  Evil  to  us  ?

To  this  purpofe,  I  fhall  briefly  recoiled  what  was  obferved
before.  That  Difeafes  are  not  Evil  to  the  Body  itfelf,  as
being  by  Nature  made  fubjedt  to  them,  and  tending  to  a  dilTo-
lution  of  the  Compound,  Refolving  each  of  its  Parts,  and
Reftoring  the  Simple  Elements  to  their  proper  Maflesj  the
Releafing  them  from  a  ftrange  place  where  they  were  kept  in
Bondage,  and  putting  an  end  to  the  perpetual  Combat  of  op-
pofite  Qualities  among  them.  Neither  can  the  Difeafe  of  the
Body  be  Evil  to  the  Soul,  for  it  hath  been  already  fhewn  to
be  its  Phyfick,  and  its  Cure:  And  thus  Experience  often
ihews  it  to  be.  But  granting,  that  Sicknefs  and  Corruption
were  injurious  to  one  particular  Body,  yet  it  ftill  appears  to
be  for  the  Advantage  of  the  Soul  that  owns  that  Body,  and
to  the  Conftitution  of  the  Univerfe  in  general  j  of  the  Ele-
ments of  which  it  is  formed,  and  the  infinite  Revolutions  of
Matter  and  Motion,  which  are  therefore  Infinite,  becaufe
the  Deftroying  of  one  thing  becomes  the  Produdiou  of
another.  Well  therefore  may  the  wife  Governor  of  all
things  not  value  a  Creature,  which  was  by  Nature  corrupti-
ble, and  difregard  a  particular  inconfiderable  Corruption,
confined  to  a  fingle  inftance;  when  the  whole  Creation  \&
benefited,  and  the  better  Ends  are  ferved,  and  the  Eternal
Revolutions  of  Things  are  continued  and  kept  up  by  this
means.

But  perhaps  you  will  fay,  Though  all  this  fhould  be  admit-
ted with  regard  tp  the  Body,  y£C  how  ihall  we  account  for

the

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 89

the  Difeafes  of  the  Soul  ?  The  frail  and  diftempered  State  fhe
is  in,  can  neither  be  for  the  good  of  herfelf  that  languifhes
under  it,  nor  does  it  contribute  any  Advantage  to  the  Creation
in  common.  So  that  the  Author  and  Ordainer  of  this  ftate
muft  needs  be  the  Caufe  of  Evil  to  her  •  and  he  that  is  con-

*tent  ihe  ihould  be  thus  depraved,  and  fees  and  fufiers  her
Sickneffes,  muft  needs  be  an  lU-natur'd  Being-  and  therefore,
as  to  this  particular,  the  Difficulty  remains  Hill  the  fame.

Now  in  anfwer  to  this  Scruple,  I  beg  leave  to  refrefli  your  Me-
mory with  what  was  difcouried  before,  concerning  the  Caufe
of  Evil  and  Vice  to  the  Soul :  while  we  were  explaining  Epi&e-
tus's  Diftiniflion  between  inhat  is^  and  'what  is  not^  in  our  ov:n
foiuer;  viz.  That  the  Good  and  Happinefs  of  the  Soul  con-
fifts  in  Prudent  and  Regular  Defires  and  Averfions  j  and  that
the  Evil  and  Mifery  of  it  proceeds  from  fuch  as  are  Vicious
and  Exorbitant.  Now  I  hope  the  Defires  and  Averfions  have
been  fufficiently  proved  to  be  in  our  ov/n  Difpofal  ,• and  if

■  fo,  then  we  ourfelves  are  the  Caufe  of  our  own  Vices  and
Virtues.  This  is  the  true  Ground  of  all  that  Commendation,
which  is  thought  due  to  Good  Men,  that  their  Happinefs  and
Excellence  is  the  EfFed  of  their  own  free  Choice^  for  which
reafon  the  Greeks  call  Virtue  by  a  Name,  which  bears  fome
Affinity  to  that,  Vv'hich  imports  Chufing.  And  for  the  fame
Reafon,  Wicked  Men  are  condemned  and  reproached,  be-
caufe  they  are  fuch  through  their  ov/n  Sloth  and  Bafenefs  of
Soul,  when  it  is  in  their  own  Power  to  be  othcrwife.  But
now,  if  tbefe  Matters  proceeded  from  any  External  Caufes,
this  Virtue  or  Vice  would  be  no  longer  Choice,  but  blind
Chance,  or  fatal  Neceffity.  And  confequentiy  our  Evil  and
Miftry  can,  with  no  colour  of  Reafon  and  Juftice,  be  charged
upon  Almighty  God.

May  we  not  indeed  drive  this  Argument  a  great  deal  far-
ther, and  urge,  that  even  Vice,  which  is  properly  the  Difeafe
of  the  Soul,  is  not  pofitively  and  in  all  refpects  Evil  ^  but  is
itfelf,  in  ibme  Degree,  neceflary  to  the  very  Being  of  Virtue
among  Men  ?  For,  as  our  Bodies,  if  Nature  had  not  made
them  capable  of  Sicknels  and  Infirmities,  could  not  properly
be  faid  at  anytime  to  enjoy  a  ftate  of  Health-  becauie  in
truth,  this  would  not  be  Health,  but  a  funple  and  fixed  Dif-
pofition,  above  the  power  of  Fraikies  and  Difeales,  fuch  as
the  Ceieftial  Beings  enjoy :  So  the  Virtues  proper  to  Hu-
man Souls,  fuch  as  Temperance,  and  Juftice,  and  Pru-
dence, and  all  the  reft  of  that  Glorious  Catalogue,  would
\)C  no  fuch  thing,  qnlcfs  the  Scul  were  of  fach  a  Nacure,  as

is

■go  Epi  CTE  Tus's  Mcrik:L'5,

is  liable  to  be  depraved.  For  at  this  rate  fhe  would  be  graced^
not  with  the  Virtues  of  a  Man,  but  with  the  Perfecftions  of
an  Angel,  or  a  God^  whofe  peculiar  Excellence  it  is,  that
they  can  never  be  feduced,  or  deviate  into  Vice;  but  it  is  a
Quality  rooted  in  the  very  Nature  of  Men,  and  Human  Vir-
tue?, that  they  may  degenerate,  and  be  corrupted.

If  then  Human  Virtues  in  the  Soul  and  if  the  Health  of
the  Bodyj  though  neither  of  them  abfolutely  Uniform  and
Inflexible,  be  yet  Good ;  and  if  the  Order  of  Nature  re-
quired, that,  befide  the  Firfl,  Simple,  and  Fix'd  Beings,  Others
of  a  Middle  and  Inferior  Nature,  fliould  derive  themfelves
from  the  great  Original  and  common  Source  of  all  Good ;
then  there  was  likewife  a  necefUcy,  that  there  fhould  be  De-
pravations of  fuch  gooa  things  as  are  fubjed:  to  be  deprav-
ed, which  have  not  any  poGtive  and  ablblute  Exiilence  of
.their  own,  but  only  a  fort  of  additional  one,  caft  into  thofe
that  have.

And  in  this,  the  exceeding  Goodnefs  of  God  is  very  re-
.raarkablej  that  he  hath  ordained  the  DifTolution  of  the  Bo-
dy, which,  as  I  faid,  does  as  necelTarily  follow  upon  Matter
and  Motion,  as  the  Shadow  attends  upon  its  Subftance.  This
"DifTolution  he  hath  made  even  a  good  thing,  both  with  regard
to  the  Bodies  fo  Difeafed  and  Diflblved  (as  they  are  reftored  ,
.back  again  to  their  Primitive  Elements,  and  fo  the  Simples
out  of  which  Dhey  are  compounded,  are  renewed)  and  with
regard  to  the  Souls  that  own  and  ufe  them,  as  they  are  cured
and  made  better  by  this  Means  j  and  alio  to  the  Univerfe
in  common,  by  reafon  of  that  infinite  Succeffion  of  Changes
and  Motions,  which  thefe  Diflblutions,  as  I  fliewed  before,
keep  continually  on  Foot.  But  as  for  Vice,  the  Evil  of  the
Soul,  and  indeed  the  only  thin^,  which,  when  well  confi-
dered,  proves  to  be  Evil,  of  this  he  utterly  acquits  himlelf,
and  hath  no  p^rt  in  it  at  all.  Firft,  Becaufe,  he  only  per-
mits to  it  an  Additional  and  Accidental  Being,  and  that
not  in  the  quality  of  Evil  neither,  but  as  being  itfelf  a
iiecefTary  Expedient  for  the  promioting  of  Good.  And  Ser
condly,  Becaufe,  even  after  all  thefe  Limitations,  it  depends
wholly  upon  the  Choice  and  Determination  of  the  Soul,
and  can  have  no  Being  at  all,  without  our  owa  Confent  and
actual  Concurrence.  For  which  Reafon  it  i?,  that  all  the
Laws,  both  of  God  and  Man,  fuffer  fuch  Aftions  as^are  done
Involuntarily,  to  go  unpunifhed.

And  indeed, ail  Evil  whatfoever,  is  in  fome  Senfe  an  in-
voluntary Misfortune  to  the  Soul. For  the  Soul  never

chufei"

<with  Si  mtl i  c  i u  s's  Co  mme n  t. 91:

chufes  Evil,  confidered  ss  Evil,  but  under  the  Difguife  and
Pretence  of  fome  Good;  as  fometimes  Riches,  fometimes
Senfual  Enjoyments,  or  Honours,  or  Preferments,  and  Great-
nefs.  Now  in  fuch  Cafes,  the  Mifchiefs  attending  thefe,  are-
either  wholly  overlooked,  or  elfe  they  are  lelTen'd  and  ftifled
by  that  prevalency  of  Paflion  which  bribes  and  fways  the  Soul :
So  that  there  cannot  pofllbly  be  any  fuch  thing  Tn  Nature,  as.
an  abfolute  Evil,  when  confidered  in  all  the  Circumftances  of
it.  And  that,  which  never  had  any  Being,  may  fooner  be,
than  even  this  Accidental  Being  in  the  Soul,  can  be  intirely
Evil,  and  chofen  and  fuch.  "•

Some  perhaps  may  imagine,  that  God  is  the  Gaufe  of  fevii^
as  having  given  the  Soul  this  Freedom  to  Virtue  or  Vice}  to-
the  ill  Management  whereof  that  Evil  is  owing.  Now  'in-^
deed,  if  the  Soul's  being  endued  with  a  Faculty  of  adting:
freely  and  abfolutely  be  Evil,  then  he  v/ho  gave  this  Faculty,
muft  be  confefFed  the  Caufe  of  Evil :  But  if  fuch  a  Power-
be  Good,  a  greater  and  more  valuable  Good,  than  all  the-
Advantages  of  the  World  befides,  why  then  fhould  he,  who*
bath  given  us  the  Good,  be,  for  fo  doing,  charged  with  the
Evil?  Since  therefore  that  which  is  moft  agreeable  to  our
Nature  and  Reafon,  is  alfo  moft  eligible  and  defirable,  what
arcount  can  be  given,  why  any  one  that  is  a  Man,  and  un-
derftands  at  all  wherein  the  peculiar  Excellence  of  a  Mairr-
♦confifts,  fhould  rather  wifh  to  be  a  Plant,  or  any  other  Ir-
•  rational  Creature,  than  that  which  God  hath  made  him  ?
Though  at  the  fame  time  we  mufV  allow,  that  even  Plants,
and  other  Irrational  Beings,  are  Good  in  their  Kind  and  Ca-
pacity; that  is,  in  a  lower  Degree,  and  a  qualified  Senfe,  and
in  proportion  to  the  Ufes  they  are  defigned  to  ferve.

Now,  if  it  be  in  our  own  power  to  be  Good  and  Happy,  and
we  have  the  fole  Difpofal  of  this  Matter, -fo  that  nothing  can
poHTibly  bring  our  Defires  or  our  Averfions  under  any  Com-
puliion  to  adt  as  we  would  not  have  them ;,  or.  under  any  Re-
ikaint  not  to  a<fl  as  we  would  have  them  ;  fuch  a  Free  Na-
ture, andi  Abfolute  Power  as  this,  is  (in-  my  Opinion)  a
Glorious  Privilege,  a  moft  magnificent  and  Royaf  Preroga-
tive ,•  and  the  Perfon  in  whom  it  is  lodged,  is  thereby  made
a.  Great,  a  Happy,  an  Arbitrary  Prince.  But  if  fuch  a  Soul
contribute  to  its  own  Deviations,  and  can  chufe  whether
it  will  fo  deviate  or  no ;  where  can  any  Mifcarriage  of  that
kind  be  laid,  with  any  tolerable  Juftice,  but  to  the  charge  of
the  Soul  itfelf;  which  is  the  true  Original  and  Caufe,  both
of  ifs  own  Good,  and  of  all  the  Defle.Kions  from  it,  fincc-

in

^2  Epi  cTETtj  s*s  Morals,

in  and  by  it  fuch  Deflexions  firft  began  ?  For  the  Great  Crea-
tor, who  hath  thus  made  it,  fo  as  to  be  the  Caufe  of  its  own
Ruin,  did  not  abfolurely  ruin  it,  but  only  made  it  capable  of
being  ruined  ^  and  yet  at  the  fame  time  too,  utterly  incapa-
ble of  it,  without  its  own  Confent.  If  therefore  this  Voli-
lition,  or  Confent,  be  an  internal  Motion  of  her  own,  Ihe
is  the  fole  Caufe  of  her  own  Sin  and  Mifery.

Behold  therefore  the  Goodnefs  and  the  Wifdom  of  God !
For,  fince  the  Confdtution  of  the  World,  and  the  Order  of
Nature  made  a  middle  fort  of  Beings  necefTary,  which
fhould  ftand  between  thofe  that  are  always  above,  and  thofe  ,
that  are  always  below  •  things  that  iliould  bear  a  Refemblance,
and  be  conformed,  fometimes  to  the  one  and  fometimes  to
the  other  of  thefe  Beings,  and  thus  make  the  whole  perfed^
by  partaking  of,  and  knitting  together  the  diftant  Extremes ;
Since  alfo  this  tendency  to  things  below  us  is  but  an  acci-
dental and  additional  thing,  and  this  Tendency  is  the  very
thing  capable  of  Depravation  j  he  hath  endued  this  middle
fort  of  Beings  with  fuch  a  Tendency ;  yet  fo,  as  that  they  may
Hill  remain  Untainted  and  Undepraved,  if  they  will  do  fo  j
and  that  he  himfelf  might  be  clear  upon  all  Accounts,  and  in
no  degree  the  Caufe  of  any  manner  of  Evil.

Thefe  Arguments  I  have  infifted  on  the  more  largely;  Not
only,  becaufe  they  are  proper  for  the  explaining  what  Epi<^e-
tus  hath  delivered  upon  this  occafion,  but  alfo  in  regard  they*
give  us  a  great  light  into  what  he  tells  us  afterwards  con-
cerning the  Nature  of  Evil.  For  we  might  have  made  very
fhort  work  of  the  Cafe  now  before  us,  and  needed  only
have  given  this  Anfwer  to  all  the  Objedlions,  that  when
"Ep^etus  advifesMen  to  he  ivell  pleafed^  Thai  Things  Jhould  be
jufi  as  they  are^  he  does  not  intend  it  of  Vice,  or  that  which
is  Evil  to  the  Soul  (for  he  could  never  have  faid,  that  Men
who  are  pleafed  with  their  own,  or  other  People's  Vices,
are  eafy  and  happy)  but  that  we  muft  reftrain  it  to  thofe
Accidents,  that  affed:  our  Bodies,  or  our  Fortunes.  For
thefe  are  things  which  a  Wife  and  Good  Man  v/ill  be  fure
to  make  Advantage  of,  however,  they  are  ordered  j  and  the
more  Crofs  and  difficult  they  are,  the  more  ilill  will  he  pro-
fit by  them.  And  thefe  are  the  things  he  means,  which
fooiifh  and  ignorant  Men  wiih  may  be  conformable  to  their
own  Wiffies  and  Defires;  and  not  the  Defires  and  Averfi-
ons  themfelves,  in  which  all  our  Good  and  Evil  conlifts.
For  they  are  in  our  own  power;  juft  what  we  pleafe  to
make  them  j  Confequentiy  it  were  moil  abfurd  and  fooiifh,

to.

with  S I M  p  L I  e  1  u  s's  C  O  M  M  E  N  T. 9^'

to  wifii  they  were  as  we  wopld  have  them.  But  he  advifes,
that  we  would  forbear  wiftiing  thus  of  Things  out  of  our
power  ^  becaufe  this  is  what  we  cannot  cooipalst  by  any
Strength  of  our  own,  nor  would  ic  always  prove  for  our
Advantage  to  do  it,  if  we  could :  For  v/e  often  are  paffio-
nately  defirous  of  what  is  pleafant,  though  ac  the  fame  time  ic
be  prejudicial  to  us  j  and  we  as  often  decline  what  is  harfb
and  unpalatable,  though  Providence  intend  it  for  Phyfick,  and
defign  our  mighty  Benefit  in  the  Application^

SIcknefs  is  a  Hindrance  to  the  Body,  but  it  does
not  enfeeble  the  Mind,  nor  can  it  obftrud  her
Freedom,  unlefs  fhe  pleafe  herfelf :  And  Lamenefs
is  a  Confinement  to  the  Foot,  but  it  can  put  na
Reftraint  upon  the  Will,  nor  make  that  one  jot  the
lefs  Aftive.  The  fame  Coniideration  is  applicable
in  proportion  to  every  Accident  of  Human  Life.
For  you  will  find,  that  though  thefe  may  prove
Obftrudtions  to  fomething  elfe,  yet  they  cannot  or
need  not  ever  be  fo  to  you.

T_T  E  had  told  us  immediately  before,  that  the  Way  to  live
\,  X,  Eafy  and  Happy,  was  for  a  Man,  not  to  v/ifh  that
things  might  be  juft  as  he  would  have  them,  but  to  be  welt
pleafed,  that  they  fhould  be  juft  as  they  are :  And  now  he
proves  the  Argument,  intended  to  be  deduced  from  thence  j^
which  is,  that  all  outward  Misfortunes  are  to  be  enter-
tained with  Temper  and  Moderation  ^  and  not  only  fo,  but
he  removes  (as  I  conceive)  an  Objeftion  that  might  be  raifed
againft  it.

The  Argument  itfelf  feems  to  me  to  be  thus :  If  thofe
Calamities,  v/hich  happen  in  our  Fortunes,  or  from  any  Ex-
ternal Caufes,  were  properly  Ours  j  yet  even  upon  this  Sup-
poiition,  we  ought  to  fufFer  them  wiih  great  Patience  and:
Refignation,  though  they  were  much  more  Difaftrous,  thaa
really  they  are  j  v/hen.  it  is  remembered  that  even  thefe  are
for  our  Advantage.  But  if  they  be  not  indeed  ours,  if  each
of  them  terminates  in  fomerhing  elfe,  and  cannot  extend  to-
us;  then  it  would  be  the  laft  degree  of  Folly,  tobedifturbed
at  the  Misfortunes,  which  are  none  of  our  own.  Sicknefs,
he  fays,  is  a  Hindrance  to  the  Body ;  and  he  fays  very  well^
that  it  is  a  Hindrance  only,  not  an  Evil. For  we  have  feen

already.

94  EpicTEtus's  Morals,

already,  that  neither  the  Difeafes  nor  the  DifTolution  of  the
Body  is  Evil  j  but  all  that  it  does,  is  only  to  put  a  ftop  to  its
Operations,  as  Lamenels  likewife  does,  which  was  Epifie-
tui^s  own  Infirmity  j  fo  that  he  does  riot  fp6ak  to  us  now
in  a  Formal  Speculative  way,  but  from  his  own  Praclice  and
Experience.  Thus  Laroenefs  is  an  Obftruclion  to  the  Parts
affe(fled,  as  Poverty  is  to  a  Man's  Expences  and  way  of
Living  j  but  neirlier  the  One  nor  the  Other  is  fo  to  the  Will,
and  the  Mind,  unlefs  they  voluntarily  fubmit  to  be  obftru<fted
by  it.  I  confefs,  if  the  Body,  or  the  Foot,  or  our  Eftates,
were  our  very  Effence  and  Nature,  then  thefe  Hindrances
would  be  truly  and  properly  ours ;  but  fince  we  fubfift  in
none  of  them,  and  the  Rational  Soul  only  is  ourfelves  j  iince
our  Bodies  are  no  more  than  Inftruraents  by  which  we  aft,
and  our  Pofleffions  only  Conveniences  for  miniftring  to  our
necefTary  Occafions :  and  fince  all  our  Good  and  Evil  depends
upon  the  Choice  of  our  own  Mind,  and  confequently  can-
not be  reflrained  or  obftrufted  by  them,  it  is  evident,  that
we  ourfelves  are  not  hindred  by  thefe  tbmgs  neither  :  For  no
outward  Accident  whatever  can  put  any  Confinement  upon
Us,  but  only  upon  fomething  elfe,  fomething,  which  We
are  not.  And  therefore  we  mull  not  fuffer  ourfelves  to  be
difordered  at  thefe  Misfortunes  as  if  they  were  onr  own  j  be-
caufe,  by  this  means,  we  Ihall  fall  into  an  Evil,  that  is  pro-
perly ours,  upon  the  account  of  fomething  that  is  not  fo^^
For  Difcontent,  and  a  Difturbance  of  the  Mind,  are  truly
our  own  Evils.  This  I  take  to  be  the  Force  and  Connexion
of  this  Argument.

But  befides  this,  he  removes  at  the  fame  time  an  Ob*
jeclion,  drawn  as  the  Rhetoricians  ufe  to  terai  it,  Ab  Utili,
from  the  point  of  Advantage  and  Convenience.  For  it  may
be  faid  upon  this  occafion,  that  Sicknefs  and  Poverty  cannot
poffibly  be  for  our  Benefit  j  for  how  is  it  poffible,  that  a
Difeafed  Man  fhould  perform  all  the  Fundions  of  Nature
as  he  ought }  or  how  can  we  deny,  that  a  Man,  when  re-
duced to  extreme  Poverty,  is  under  an  abfolute  Conftraint,
to  bend  all  his  Care  and  Pains  to  the  relief  of  his  Wants,
and  furnifhing  himfelf  with  necefTary  Supports  ?  This  Ob-
jedion  now  he  takes  off,  by  fliewing,  that  Sicknefs,  and  Po-
verty, and  all  Hardihips  and  Inconveniences  of  that  kind,
put  the  Will  under  no  Confinement  at  all  ,•  and,  that  in  this
free  Principle  it  is,  that  the  very  Being  of  Men  conaits,  and
all  their  Good  and  Evil  depends  entirely  upon  it.  For  how
is  the  Sick Man  tied  up  frora  chufing  and  defiring  fuch

things.

with  S I M  P 1 1  c  I  IT  s's  C  o  ]vi  M^  n  t. 95

things,  as  are  Virtuous  and  Reafonable,'  and  ha':irig  and  de-
clining the  contrary?  Or  what  Violence  can  Extreme  Po-
verty put  upon  a  Man,  which  fhall  be  able  to  compel  him  l<i
ad  contrary  to  the  principles  of  Honefty  and  Honour  ?
Were  not  'Diogenes^  and  Crates^  and  Zeno  in  thefe  Circum-
ftances?  And  did  They  ever  fhew  themfelves  more  truly
Philofophers  ?  Did  they  ever  give  more  illuftrious  Proofs  of
Virtue  and  Greatnefs  of  Soul,  of  Contentment  and  SatisfacTrion^
and  even  of  Abundance  in  the  flendereft  Fortune,  than  when
they  chofe  to  forego  their  Plenty,  and  thought  it  Wifdorri
to  exchange  that  for  Want,  and  to  have  no  Pofleffions  of
their  own  at  all  ?  And  indeed,  who  is  there  io  Blind  and  Bru-
tifh,  but  would  be  pleafed  and  proud  to  fuftain  fuch  a  Man
in  his  Neceflities,  and  think  his  Liberality  a  greater  Obliga-
tion and' Honour  to  himfelf,  than  to  the  Receiver?

But  what  need  we  go  fo  far  for  Examples  of  this  kind,  \k7heti
even  EpiBetus  himfelf  who  makes  this  Declaration,  was  (o
eminent  an  Inftanceof  it?  As  to  his  Fortune  and  Condition,
he  was  a  Slave,*  Infirm  in  his  Body,  Lame  from,  a  Child,'
and  one  who  was  fo  much  exercifed  with  Poverty,  and  made
it  fo  much  his  Choice,  that  his  little  Cottage  at  Rome  was
not  thought  worth  a  Lock  or  2  Bolt,  For  alas!  there  v/as  no
Temptation  v/ithin,  nothing  but  a  Coarfe  Coverlet,  and  a
hard  Mattrefs,  upon  which  he  lay.  And  yet  this  is  the
very  Man,  that  tells  us,  Lamenefs  may  obftrud  the  Feet,
but  the  Mind  it  cannot,  except  we  pleafe  to  let  k.  Thus
you  fee,  he  did  not  make  it  his  Bufinefs,  as  a  great  many
do,  to  fay  'fine  things,  and  entertain  his  Readers  v/ith  fub-
lime  and  airy  Speculations  j  but  he  made  the  Experiment
himfelf,  and  fpeaks  from  his  own  Knowledge  and  Practice*
And  for  this  Reafon,  his  Difcourfes  are  the  more  valuable.
For  they  manifeft  a  truly  Great  Soul  in  himfelf,  and  will  make
the  deeper  ImprelTion  upon  all  others,  whofe  Minds  are  well
difpofed.

CHAP.

96  Epi  CTETus's  Morals^

CHAP. XIV.

UPON  every  frefh  Accident,  turn  your  Eyes
inward ;  and  examine  how  you  are  quali-
fied to  encounter  it.  If  you  iee  any  very  Beauti-
ful Perfon,  you  will  find  Continence  to  oppofe
againft  the  Temptation.  If  Labour  and  Difficulty
come  in  your  way,  you  will  find  a  Remedy  in
Hardinefs  and  Refolution.  If  you  lie  under  the
obloquy  of  an  111  Tongue,  Patience  and  Meek-
nefs  are  the  proper  Fences  againft  it.  And  thus,  if
you  do  but  prepare  and  ufe  yourfelf  by  degrees,  ro
Accident  whatever  will  be  able  to  furprize  or  fijb-
due  yoAi.

COMMENT.

Fter  having  advanced  feme  llrange  fublime  Notions,
and  required  Men  to  do  that,  which  the  generality  of*
the  World  will  be  fure  to  think  Romantick  and  Impoffible-
As  for  Example,  to  flight  the  Difeafes  of  the  Body,  as  no
Evil  of  ours ;  and  to  be  well  pleafed,  let  our  Circumftances
be  what  they  will,  that  things  fliould  go  juft  as  they  do ,  ne-
ver to  fuffcr  ones  felf  either  to  be  caught  with  the  Bait  of
Senfual  or  Worldly  Pleaiure,  or  to  be  dejeded  with  any
outward  Calamities :  It  is  but  reafonable,  that  he  fliould  ap-
ply himfelf  in  the  next  place,  to  fhew,  that  thefe  are  Per-
fedrions  not  above  the  Powers  of  Human  Nature,  and  that
he  enjoyns  us  nothing,  but  what  we  are  capable  of  dif-
charging.

To  this  purpofe  he  proves,  that  the  Great  Creator  to  whom
the  Soul  of  Man  owes  its  Being,  was  pleafed  to  give  it
fuch  a  Frame  and  Temper,  that  it  fhould  not  be  conftantly
determined  to  Sublime  and  Heavenly  things,  nor  always
-dwell  above,  as  the  BlefTed  Spirits,  the  Angels,  and  thofe
other  of  a  Divine  and  ftill  more  Excellent  Nature  do  i  but
hath  ordered  the  Matter  fo,  that  this  fhould  fometimes  be
degraded  to  a  State  of  Matter,  and  Motion,  and  Mortality,

be

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 97

be  joyned  to  the  Body,  and  converfe  with  Frail  and  Cor-
ruptible things.  But,  though  he  hath  fubjeded  the  Soul  to
thefe  Hazards  and  Tryals,  yet  he  hath  endued  her  with  par--
ticular  Faculties  and  Powers,  fuitable  to  each  occalion-  by
means  whereof,  flie  may  engage  with  all  the  Accidents,  that
can  affault  her,  and  come  off  without  Lofs  j  nay,  and  van-^
quifli,  and  keep  them  under  too.

Againfl  fuch,  as  tempt  us  with  an  Appearance  of  Plea-
fure,  he  propofes  Continence^  (and  thefe  he  rather  chofe  to
mention,  than  thofe  higher  Degrees  of  abfolute  Chaftity  and
Temperance  j  in  conlideration,  that  the  Perfons  now  ad-
dreft  to,  are  but  Imperfed:  and  Young  Proficients  in  Virtue.^.,
Now  thefe  Objeds  ftir  the  Paffions  up  to  Rebellion,  and
beget  a  Combat  between  Reafon  and  Them.  But  by  Dif-
cipline,  and  a  ftrid:  hand  over  ones  felf,  they  are  fubdued
and  reduced  to  Obedience  again.  And  this  is  a  true  De-
fcription  of  that  which  we  properly  call  a  Continent  Life^
as  on  the.  contrary,  that  Man  is  properly  faid  to  be  Incon-
tinent, whofe  Reafon  is  Impotent  j  and  though  it  may  ftrug-
gle  for  a  while,  yet  yields  at  lafl:  to  the  ftronger  Infults  of
Paffion.  But  now  in  Perfons,  who  have  have  attained  to  the
Perfeftion  of  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  the  Paffions  and  Appe-
tites (which,  as  I  hinted  before,  are  the  Child  to  be  trained
up  in  every  one  of  our  Minds)  are  in  abfolute  Subjedion  to
Reafon,  without  any  Difpute  or  Mutiny  at  all  j  fo  that  they
are  moved  and  direfted,  entirely,  towards  fuch  Objedls,  and
at  fuch  Times,  and  in  fuch  Meafures  as  this  (qqs  fit  to  pre-
fcribe  them.  And  this  is  truly  Temperance,  which  the
Greeks  call  'Loj(p^oavvvi  •  As  being  that,  which  fecures  the  Rea-
fon, and  preferves  the  Government  ^d  Prerogative  of  thd
intelligent  Part  in  us.  For  when  this  is  brought  under,  and
diftraded  by  Paffion,  the  Mind  is  torn  in  pieces,  and  de-
ftroyed.  But  while  it  maintains  its  own  Superiority  over
the  Affections,  it  continues  vigorous  and  found.

So  again,  to  Perfons  that  are  Matters  in  Philofophy,  For-
titude is  always  a  prefent  Security  againfl:  all  Difficulty  and
Pain.  It  keeps  the  very  Outgards  of  the  Soul,  and  fuffers
nothing  of  this  kind  to  get  the  leaft  Footing  there  j  but  per-
feveres  without  any  Perplexity  or  Difl:urbance,  and  looks
upon  all  the  Hardfliips  that  come  in  its  Way,  as  fo  many
Trials  to  exercife  it.  But  the  Proficients,  who  are  lefs  ex-
pert, mufl:  be  content  with  Hardinefs  and  Refolution  j  Such
as  may  maintain  its  Poft,  and  make  a  gallant  Refiftance,  and

L  2  prevenc

98  Epictetu  s*s  Morals,

prevent  the  Sinkings-of  the  Soul,  by  enabling  it  to  continue
the  Fight,  and  ward  againfl;  the  Blows,  when  Trouble  and
Pains  aflault  it.

For  a  conftant  and  vigorous  Oppofition,  and  hardening
ones  felf  againfl:  Difficulties,  will  conquer  all  our  EfFemi-
nacy  and  Paflion,  and  make  Reafon  and  Virtue  triumphant :
And,  by  fuch  Conquefts  frequently  gained,  and  prudently
managed,  our  Paffions  will  be  ufed  to  the  Yoke,  fubroit  to
Difcipline,  and  obey  without  Reluclancy.  And,  when  a
Man  hath  brought  himfelf  to  this  pafs,  there  will  be  no  far-
ther Trouble  to  exercife  his  Patience.  He  is  now  above
it  all ;  for  he  neither  defires  any  Thing,  capable  of  giving
him  Difappointment,  not  does  he  make  any  Thing  his  Aver-
fion,  which  can  overtake  him  whether  he  will  or  no.  And
confequently,  he  can  have  no  Trouble  and  Pain,  which  al-
v/ays  muft  proceed  from  one  of  thefe  Caufes.

Againfl:  Scandal,  and  an  111  Tongue,  he  tells  us  we  fhall
find  our  befl:  Defence  in  Meeknefs.  For  in  truth.  Scandal,
in  its  ovm  Nature,  hath  nothing  that  can  afflidl  us  j  and  all
that  ufes  to  do  fo,  is  not  what  is  faid,  but  the  Judgments
and  Reflexions  we  pafs  upon  itj  which  we  evermore  aggra-
vate to  ourfelves,  according  as  we  are  blown  up  with  Vanity,
or  tranfported  with  Anger.  For  all  that  Scandal  can  do  with-
out this,  is  only  to  make  us  condemn  the  Defamer.  And
for  the  proceeding  regularly  in  this  Condemnation,  without
Heat  or  Prejudice,  we  fliall  do  well  to  confider,  wherein
the  Defamer  is  really  to  blame  j  and  that  it  is  upon  one  of
thefe  two  Accounts  j  that  he  flanders  and  afperfes  us,  either
falfly,  or  out  of  Malice.  Now  the  Scandal  itfelf  may  very
well  be  borne  with,  becaufe  it  is  not  capable  of  doing  us  any
real  Injury  •  and  fo,  in  truth,  may  the  Party,  who  raifes  or
fpreads  it  too,  when  we  coniider,  that  the  Injury  is  done,
not  to  Us,  but  to  Himfelf  j  for  fo  it  is,  in  reality,  when  his
own  Mind  is  the  Sufferer,  by  doing  an  ill  and  a  bafe  Thing.
Nay,  if  this  be  too  little,  we  may  confider  farther,  that
Scandal  is  always  capable  of  being  made  an  Advantage  to  us.
It  is  manifeftly  fo,  when  falfe  •  and  when  it  is  true,  we
gain  this  by  it.  That  it  difcovers  our  own  Faults  and  Fail-
ings ;  and  either  fhews  us  fomething  we  did  not  know  be-
fore, or  which,  though  we  did  know,  yet  we  were  apt  to
indulge,  upon  a  Prefumption,  that  no  Body  knew  it  but
ourfelves.  And  this  very  Confideration  is  of  great  Import-
ance, to  reftrain  young Proficients  in  Virtue. For  fuch,

though

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 99

though  they  are  not  come  up  to  that  noble  Principle  of  -
pra<flifing  Virtue  for  its  own  fake,  vnW  yet  give  check  to
many  exorbitant  Paffions,  and  abftain  from  grofs  Evils,  out
of  Shame,  and  Tendernefs  to  their  own  Reputation.  And
indeed,  this  muft  be  faid  in  behalf  of  Ambition,  and  a  De-
fire  of  Praife  ;  that,  though  it  be  a  Paffion  itfelf,  yet  it  is  of
excellent  Ufe,  for  the  moderating  and  correding  all  the  reft.
For  this  Reafon  it  hath  been  called,  by  a  pertinent  Allufion,
the  Shirt  of  the  Paflions ;  becaufe  it  fits  clofeft  to  the  Soul ;
and  when  the  Mind  hath  by  the  help  of  this  put  off  all  other
Paflions,  it  divefts  itfelf  of  this  laft  of  all,  that  fo  it  may  come
to  Virtue  naked,  and  ftripped  of  all  its  former  Prejudices  and
Incumbrances.

For  this  Reafon  (fays  EpiSietus)  we  muft  not  fufFer  our-
felves  to  be  furprized,  or  over-born  by  any  Accident,  which
would  engage  our  Minds,  and  draw  them  off  to  any  Exter-
nal Advantages  or  Calamities^  fo  as  that  we  Ihould  be  dif-
compofed  with  any  falfe  Ideas  of  its  being  Good  or  Evil.
Nor  muft  we  give  coo  great  a  Scope  to  our  Delires  and  our
Averfions,  or  let  them  be  too  hafty  in  their  Motions,  but
call  up  the  Powers  within  us  to  our  Ailiftance  j  and,  when
we  have  found,  which  are  the  Succours  proper  for  each  Cir-
cumftance,  then  rally  them  together,  and  enter  the  Lifts  with
Refolution,  and  ward  off  every  Accident  accordingly.

L  3  CHAP.

200 E  PICT E  Tus*s  Morals,

CHAP. XV.

Ever  ufe  yourfelf  to  fay  upon  any  Occafion,
That  you  have  loft  any  thing,  but  reftored
it.  If  your  Wife  or  your  Child  die,  you  have  re-
turned them  to  the  Owner.  If  your  Eftate  be  taken
from  you,  this  too  is  paid  back  to  the  Giver.  But
you'll  Hiy,  he  was  a  Knave  that  defrauded  me  of  it.
Alas !  What's  that  to  the  Purpofe  ?  Or  how  does
it  concern  you,  by  what  Means,  or  by  what  Hand,
he  that  gave  it  refumes  it  to  himfelf  ?  Trouble  not
yourfelf  therefore  about  thefe  Matters;  but  while
he  permits  the  Enjoyment,  ufe  it  as  a  Thing  that
is  not  your  own,  but  another's  •,  and  let  your  Con-
cern and  Affe6lion  for  it  be  juft  fuch,  as  Travellers
have  for  an  Inn  upon  the  Road.

C  O  M  M  E  N'T,

HE  had  inftrucled  us  before,  in  the  Nature  of  External
Accidents  and  Advantages  :  Which  of  them  we  might
profecute,  and  how  far,  and  by  what  Methods  we  are  allow-
ed to  do  it.  How  we  fhould  entertain  both  our  profperous
and  pleafant,  and  our  adverfe  and  lefs  grateful  Fortunes  j  and
what  Improvement  to  be  made  of  each  of  them  j  and  here
he  comes  to  fjpeak  of  the  Lo(s  of  any  Advantages  we  have,
and  directs  us,  not  only  how  to  enjoy,  but  hov/  to  part  with
them  too.  Now  every  Man,  who  loles  what  he  efteems  his
own,  muft  needs  apprehend  himfelf  injured,  and  naturally
flie  out,  not  only  into  Excefs  of  Grief  for  his  Lofs,  but  into
reproachful  Language  againft  thofe  that  deprived  him  of  it.
But  he,  who  reftores  upon  Demand,  what  he  knew  and
confidered  vvas  none  of  his  own,  mufb  be  the  fenfleflcft  Fool
in  the  World,  to  be  troubled  at  its  being  taken  away  from
him,  or  to  fall  foul  upon  the  Proprietor  that  requires  it.  This
then  is  our  Cafe  directly.  The  World,  and  its  Enjoyments,
are  not  ours  j  and  for  that  Reafon,  not  v/ithin  the  Com-
mand and  Difpofal  of  our  own  Wills:  Nothing  indeed  is
properly  fo,  but  our  Defires  and  Averfions^  and  the  Inclina-
"^ '  ■ '  tions

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment,  ioi

■nations  of  our  own  Minds  j  and  all  our  Virrue  and  Vice,
all  our  Happinefs  and  Mifery,  do  depend  upon  theft.  So
that  we  fiiould  always  keep  our  Minds  fcrongly  pofleft  with
this  Confideration,  and  be  afFedled  accordingly  to  every  Thing
•wirhouc  us,  as  that  in  which  we  have  no  Propriety  at  ail.
And  the  way  to  keep  our  Minds  thus  poflcft,  and  thus  af-
fe(5led,  is  not  only  to  fay  fo,  and  content  ourfelves  with
Verbal  Diftinclions  j  but  to  fhew  it  in  our  Pradice,  and  be-
have ourfelves,  like  Men,  who  are  convinced  they  have  no
Title  to  them,

6'uppofe  then,  upon  the  Death  of  a  Child,  that  a  Man
gives  himfelf  over  to  Tears  and  Groans,  deplores  his  Mif-
fortune,  and  complains  of  his  Lofs  ,•  is  it  not  evident,  that
this  Man,  while  his  Son  lived,  looked  upon  him  as  ftridlly,
and  by  Right,  his  own  ?  If  it  were  not  fo,  with  what  Pre-
tence does  he  call  this  being  taken  away,  a  I^ofs,  or  relent
it  fo  deeply  ?  The  Man  that  does  thus,  'cis  plain,  v/ould  go
farther  too,  if  he  could  ,•  and  revenge  the  Injury  he  fancies
he  hath  received,  upon  the  Perfon  who  took  him  away,  if
it  were  in  his  Power,  But  the  Man  who  confiders  this
Child,  as  one  in  whom  he  had  not  any  abfolute  Propriety,
and  that  Death  hath  only  paid  him  back  to  the  Perfon  that
lent  him,  will  neither  al^id:  himfelf  upon  the  Occafion,  nor
accufe  the  Owner  that  dema'nded  him  again.

And  here  the  Artifice  of  Epiiietus  is  very  obfervable.  For
he  inflrutfls  us,  not  only  to  adapt  our  Words  to  our  Thoughts,
and  correct  our  Expreffions  by  more  juffc  Appreheniions  of
Things  j  but  contrives,  that  even  our  Expreffions  may  redify
our  Notions.  For  to  this  purpofe,  he  fays,  it  is  necedary,
that  we  fpeak  of  the  Enjoyments  of  the  World  in  iuch
Terms,  as  may  not  flatter  us  with  any  Imaginations  of  Pro-
perty in  them,  but  fuch  as  may  wean  our  Afredions,  and
make  them  fii?  loofe  about  us  ^  that  fo,  from  calling  and
thinking  them  anothers,  and  not  our  own,  we  may  bring
ourfelves  to  ufe  them  as  fuch.

And,  fince  nothing  adds  more  to  our  Tendernefs  for  any
thing,  than  the  Care  and  Concern  we  are  in  about  itj  he  ad-
vifes  us  to  moderate  thefe,  and  to  bellow  only  fo  much  upon
them,  as  we  think  worth  our  while  to  lay  out  upon  that
which  is  another  Man's,  Some  regard  indeed  muft  be  had
to  them  j  nor  may  we  fo  negled  them,  as  to  give  ourfelves
up  to  Supinenefs  and  Sloth  j  but  yet  we  muffc  not  fo  fix  our
Hearts^  or  our  Endeavours  upon  them,  as  if  they  were  our
own, and  that  which  is  never  to  be  taken  away  from  us.

L  4.  And

IQ2  Epictbtus's  Morals,

And  therefore  all  the  Concern  allowed  us  in  this  Cafe,  is
only  that  of  Travellers  in  an  Inn  j  vjho  confider,  that  they
are  not  at  home,  and  that  their  Stay  is  like  to  be  very  ihort ;
and  are  folicicous  for  nothing  farther,  than  only  to  get  the
beft  Conveniences  the  Place  will  afford,  and  be  latisfied  with
what  they  can  get,  for  the  little  Time  they  do  ilay.

For  this  Reafon  he  hath  added  very  conveniendy,  ivbi/e
he  prvzits  us  the  Enjoyn2entj  to  put  us  continually  in  Re-
membrance that  all  our  Enjoyments  are  upon  Sufferance,
the  Effecft  of  a  permiffive  Providence,  what  we  cannot  give
ourfelves,  but  derive  from  the  Bounty  of  another,  and  that  nq
other,  than  the  very  Perfon  who  takes  them  av/ay  from  us.

Now,  becaufe  fome  People  are  apt  to  aggravate  their  Mif-
fortunes,  by  tragical  Accounts  of  the  Circumftances  that  at-
tend them,  and  the  Manner  of  their  being  deprived  of  their
Comforts :  As,  If  I  muffc  lofe  my  Eftate,  yet  what  need  was
there  of  lofing  it  by  fo  much  Treachery,  or  Injuftice,  or  In-
gratitude r  Or  if  my  Child  or  my  Wife  had  died  of  a  natu-
ral or  lingrmg  Death,  a  Fever,  or  a  Coniumption,  I  could
have  fupported  itj  but  to  be  fnatch'd  away  all  on  the  fud-
den,  to  die  a  violent,  an  untimely,  or  a  i'candalous  Death,
or  to  be  Vd&Jd  with  Tortures  and  ftrong  Convulfions;  this
is  a  difmai  and  intolerable  Affliction.  All  thefe  Complaints
favour  of  Difconcenc,  and  at  the  bottom  are  a  finding  Fault,
not  with  the  Manner,  but  the  Thing  itfelf.  For,  as  we  could
not  prefcribe  to  our  Great  Benefador  the  Methods,  or  the
Inftruraents,  by  which  he  beftowed  them  upon  us ,  fo  nei-
ther muft  we  find  Fault  with  thofe,  by  which  he  recalls
them  :  and  it  is  but  fir,  that  he  who  gave  as  he  pleafed,
jliould  take  away  as  he  pleaies  too.

We  may  take  Notice  farther,  that  Epideius  chufes  to  in-
ftance  in  the  tendereft  Points,  the  Death  of  a  Wife  or  a
Child  j  becaufe  thefe  ^it  clofefl  to  our  Hearts  j  and  any  other
LolTes,  if  compared  to  thefe,  are  no  more  than  every  vul-
gar Virtue  can  fuftain  and  flight.  But  ftill,  as  he  told  us  be-
fore, and  will  do  again  in  the  following  Dilcourfes,  Vv'e  fhall
do  well  to  begin  with  lefs  Tryals,  and  by  rendering  thofe  fa-
miliar and  ealy,  to  harden  ourfelves  by  Degrees  againft  fharper
and  greater.  The  fame  Rule  therefore  holds  much  ftronger,
and  is  more  pracT;icable,  when  any  one  hath  taken  my  Purfe,
pr  fpirited  away  my  Servant,  or  defrauded  me  of  my  Houfe,
or  my  Efbate  •  to  fay  (and  we  may  fay  it  with  as  great  Truth
in  thefe  Cafes  too)  I  have  not  lofb  thefe  Things,  but  reftored
them  to  the  Ovvner,  and  Lender  of  them  to  me.

CHAP.

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 103

CHAP. XVI.

IF  you  are  indeed  defirous  to  improve  in  Wif-
dom  and  Virtue,  you  muft  never  allow  yourfelf
in  fuch«iean  Thoughts  as  thefe  ;  I  muft  follow  the
Bufinefs  of  my  Calling  clofe,  or  elfe  I  and  my  Fa-
mily (hall  ftarve :  I  muft  take  Pains  with  this  Boy
of  mine,  and  chaftife  him,  or  he  will  be  ruined.
Thefe  are  the  Mifgivings  of  an  anxious  Mind,  and
unworthy  a  Philofopher,^  whofe  firft  Care  ftiould  be
the  Eafe  and  Quiet  of  his  own  Breaft.  For  a  Man
had  better  perifh  for  Hunger,  and  preferve  his  Mind
from  immoderate  Fear  and  Concern  *,  than  live  in
the  greateft  Plenty,  and  continual  Perplexity  with
it.  And  it  were  a  lefs  Evil  for  you,  that  your  Ser-
vant or  your  Child  were  Vicious,  than  that  yourfelf
Ihould  be  perpetually  unhappy  with  an  anxious  Care
to  prevent  it.

c  h:  A  p. XVII.

Us E  yourfelf  therefore  to  little  Trials  firft :  If
a  Cruife  of  Oil  be  broken,  or  a  Pint  of  your
Wine  ftolen,  refied  immediately,  that  this  is  the
Purchafe  of  Conftancy  and  a  compofed  Mind  ;  and
fmce  nothing  can  be  had  Free-coft,  he  that  gets
thefe  fp  cheap,  hath  a  good  Bargain.  So  again.
When  you  call  your  Servant,  confider  that  it  is
poflible  he  may  not  attend  to  you  ;  or  if  he  do,
that  he  may  not  do  what  you  command  him.  And
it  is  too  great  an  Advantage,  which  you  give  him
over  yourfelf,  if  you  put  it  in  his  Power,  whether
your  Mind  Ihall  be  eafy  or  no.

C  0  M'

104 Epictetus's  Morals,

COMMENT.

UPON  the  Advice  laft  given,  that  the  Things  of  this
World  are  v.'hat  we  ought  not  to  think  we  have  any
Propriety  in,  or  ihould  be  any  farther  foUcitous  abfeut  them,
than  TraveUers  are,  to  acconimodate  themfelves  in  in  Inn  j
It  might  very  propably  be  objeded  j  Thar  this  C6ntenipt.of
rhs  World  v/ill  expofe  us  to  vaft  Inconveniencies.  For  ac
this  rate,  fays  one,  if  I  negled  the  looking  after  my  Eltate,
I  fhall  reduce  my  felf  to  Want  and  Beggary  j  and  if  for  the
the  avoiding  this  Anxiety,  whicli  you  fo  ftriftly  forbid,  I  omit
the  chiding  and  corredring  my  Servant,  I  fliall  be  accelTory
to  his  utter  Ruin.  In  anfwer  to  both  thefe,  he  inilfts  upon
that  eminent  Diflindlion  in  the  Beginning  of  his  Book,  by
which  he  hath  proved,  that  all  our  Good  and  EviJ,  truly  fo
called,  depends  entirely  upon  the  Ufe  of  cur  Natural  Li-
berty, and  fuch  Things  as  are  within  the-Compafs  of  our
own  Choice  j  and  that  no  Condition  either  of  our  Bodies,
or  our  Fortunes,  can  make  Men  truly  Happy  or  Miferable.
But  at  prefent  he  addrefles  himfelf  principally,  to  fuch  as
are  in  a  State  of  Proficiency,  and  have  not  yet  attained  to
fuch  a  Maftery  in  Wifdom,  as  fhould  qualify  them  to  attend
to  the  cultivating  their  own  Minds,  and  the  Management  of
their  Worldly  Concerns  both  at  once,  in  fo  prudent  a  man-
ner, that  thefe  Cares  fhould  not  be  prejudicial  to  one  another,
or  unfafe  for  the  Perfon  himfelf  For  this  is  the  peculiar
Perfeclion  of  accomplifh'd  Philofophers,  that  they  ride  fe-
cure,  and  fear  no  Storms  from  thofe  brutifli  Appetites,  which
they  have  ahfolutely  fubdued :  Nor  is  there  any  Danger,  if
They  do  look  abroad  into  the  World  fom.etimes,  and  give
themfelves  a  little  loofe,  that  their  AfFeftions  fhould  be  feduced
and  perverted  by  any  thing  they  meet  with  there,  or  the
Peace  and  Tranquillity  of  their  Souls  at  all  difturbed  upon
that  Account.  Thefe  Men  {land  firm,  and  coUeded  within
themfelves^  and,  whatever  Confufion  they  meet  in  the
World,  they  manage  and  compofe  it  all,  by  the  fixt  fband-
rng  Order  of  their  own  Minds.  But  where  the  Paffions  run
high,  and  are  ftill  upon  the  Ferment  ^  there  it  is  dangerous
to  engage  a  Man's  felf  in  Bufinefs  at  all,  or  to  be  the  lead
taken  off  from  the  beft  and  fevereft  Studies.  For  there  is  a
wonderful  Affinity  betv/een  the  World  and  the  brutifli  Incli-
nations j  and  thefe,  not  being  yet  duly  tempered,  nor  re-
1  duced

'With  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 105

<3uced  to  the  Obedience  of  Reafon,  drag  down  the  Mind,
and  utterly  imraerfe  it  in  Cares  and  Pleafures :  which,  lil^e
a  Ship  without  Rudder  or  Pilot,  v/ill  drive  a  wild  and  fatal
Courfe,  till  at  laft  ilie  ftrand  herfelf,  and  all  be  loft.

But  in  the  mean  while,  what  Courfes  fliall  this  "i'oung
Proficient  take  ?  For  NecefTaries  he  muft  have  j  and  it  is  to
no  Purpofe  to  give  him  Rules  of  Living,  if  you  put  it  out
of  his  Power  to  live  at  all.  To  this  Difficulty  Epicietus,
if  he  had  pleafed,  might  have  replied.  That  a  great  part  of
the  Prejudice,  a  Man's  Fortune  would  receive  from  ne-
glecfting  and  defpifing  the  World,  might  be  made  amends
for,  by  the  ftrid  Temperance,  and  Abfcemious  Life  of  a  true
Philofopher,  the  eafy  Contentment  and  confined  Defires,
which  are  an  elfential  part  of  his  Charadter.  And,  ii  this
Remedy  be  not  granted  a  fufficient  Cure  for  the  Difeafe  j
yet  at  lead:  it  may  fairly  be  prefumed,  that  there  are  People
enough,  who  would  preferve  fuch  a  Man  from  periniinp-.
Such  a  one,  I  fay,  whofe  Wants  and  Willies  will  be  fo  ea-
fily  fupplied,  and  who  muft  needs  attrad;  Love  and  Efteem,
when  he  neglects  and  fcorns  the  World,  for  the  Exercife  of
Virtue,  and  the  Improvement  of  his  own  Mind.  This  Re-
ply, I  fay,  Epi^etus  might  have  made  j  and  the  Reafon  of
the  Thing  would  have  born  him  out  in  it.  But  he  palTes
fuch  Comforts  over,  as  too  effeminate  and  indulgent  •  fuch
as  were  likely  to  enervate  our  Virtue,  and  fully  its  Bright-
nefs ;  and  therefore,  as  if  it  were  a  Blemilh  and  a  Difparage-
ment,  for  a  Wife  and  Good  Man  to  ftand  in  any  need  at  all
of  any  thing  without,  he  runs  the  Comparifon  up  to  the  high-
eft  and  boldeft  Extreme  j  and  pronounces  peremptorily,  That
a  Man  had  better  die  for  Want,  and  preferve  his  Mind  from
immoderate  Fear  and  Concern,  and  by  that  Means  attain  to
the  peculiar  Perfecftion  of  his  Nature ,  than  live  in  continual
Perplexity,  though  he  had  the  greatefl:  Plenty  with  it,  which
can  never  give  him  that  Perfedlion.  For  v/hat  does  all  this
World  fignify  to  a  vicious  and  a  difordered  Mind,  one  that
in  truth  receives  more  hurt  than  good,  from  the  Enjoymenrs
of  it?  Juft  as  fumptuous  Entertainments,  and  rich  Sauces
gratify  a  Sick  Man,  who  either  cannot  relifli,  or  muft  not
tafte  them  j  or  if  he  do,  is  fure  to  nourifli,  not  himfelf,  but
his  Difeafe.

So  again,  it  were  a  lefs  Evil, he  fays,  for  you,  that  your
Servant  or  your  Child  were  Vicious,  than  that  you  yourfelf
ihould  be  perpetually  unhappy,  with  an  Anxious  Care  to  pre-
vent it. If  indeed  Matters  could  be  fo  ordered,  as  to  pre-
ferve

io6 Epi  CTETU  s's  Morals,

ferve  him  and  yourfelF  both,  and  attend  to  what  is  necefTary
for  each  of  you,  without  Diftradtion,  this  were  much  more
eligible.  But  this  can  never  be,  for  Two  Reafons.  Firft,
Becaufe  a  Man,  void  of  Wifdom  and  Virtue  himfeJf,  will
never  be  able  to  make  another  Virtuous  and  Wife,-  And
then,  becaufe  by  this  inordinate  Concern,  you  do  him  no
manner  of  Good,  but  yourielf  in  the  mean  while,  an  infi-
nite deal  of  Hurt.  So  that  in  fuch  a  cafe  the  belt  courfe  we
can  take,  is  to  let  the  Incorrigible  Wretch  alone  in  his
Wickednefs,  and  not  difcompofe  ourfelves,  but  take  care  at
leafl:  to  fave  one.

But  when  he  had  propofed  the  higheil  pitch  of  Refolution,
and  advifed  rather  to  chufe  Poverty  and  Death  with  Wif-
dom and  Virtue,  than  Plenty  and  Solicitude  without  them;
and,  if  a  Man  be  driven  to  that  hard  NeceflTry,  rather  to
over-look  the  Vice  and  Ruin  of  one  under  his  Care,  than
to  lofe  his  own  Happinefs,  and  undo  himfelf,  by  trying  to
preferve  another,-  to  fhew,  that  Men  mult  be  wound  up  to
ifhis  pitch  by  degrees,  and  that  he  had  a  jull  regard  to  the
Abilities  of  his  Scholar,  he  advifes  thern  here  to  begin  with
lefs  and  gentler  Trials,  and  fuch  as  the  Condition  of  Young
Beginners  are  capable  of.  For  Exercife  and  Pradlice,  in
Matters  of  lefs  Moment  and  Difficulty,  is  a  fafe  and  a  fuc-
cefifui  Method ;  but  when  fuch  things  are  look'd  upon  with
Difdain,  and  below  one's  Notice,  ani  a  Man  fcorns  the  in-
itances  here,  of  his  Oil  being  fpilled,  or  his  Wine  ftolen,
and  will  needs  fly  at  all,  and  attempt  great  Hardihips  at  firft,
he  Will  fall  under  this  double  Inconvenience :  Neither  to  be  a
Match  for  what  he  encounters,  as  having  not  made  his  v/ay
up  to  ii  gradually ;  nor  to  receive  the  Benefit  and  Advan-
tage he  might  have  done,  from  thofe  others ;  and  which,
had  he  not  flighted  them,  would  have  qualified  him  for  the
Combat  he  hath  loft,  for  want  of  them.  For  tec  us  ima-
gine, that  a  Man,  without  any  preparation,  or  previous
practice  in  Matters  of  lefs  confequence,  would  needs,  all
lipon  the  fpurt,  take  upon  him  to  rival  Crafes,  and  diveft
himfelf  of  all  his  Pofifeffions  at  once;  hov/  is  it  poffible,  that
this  Perfon  fhould  not  immediately  repent,  and  condemn  him-
fclfj  and  v/ifh  Ten  Thoufand  times,  that  the  thing  were  un-
done, and  he  in  his  former  Circumftances  again  ?  For  though
Crates  himfelf,  or  Diogenes^  or  Zeno^  or  fome  other  Eminent
Philofopher,  may  perhaps  have  made  a  fudden  turn,  and
brought  themfelves  to  extreme  Stridtnefe,  and  Virtue,  and
voluntary  Poverty, without  fuch  leifurely  advances ; yet

le^///^ SiMPLI  CIU  S'S COMME  NT. 10/

ftill  this  is  a  thing  that  very  rarely  happens  ,•  and  that  which
is  extraordinary,  is  no  Rule  for  us  to  follow ;  efpecially  too,
when  we  conlider,  that  thefe  were  themfelves  very  extraor-
dinary Perfons,  and  confequenrly  no  proper  Meafure  for  the
common  rate  of  Men  to  govern  themfelves  by.

After  he  had  direded  us,  how  to  make  great  LofTesand,
Misfortunes  in  our  Eftates  eafy  and  familiar  to  us,  by  Firft
defpifing  thofe  that  are  fmall  and  inconfiderable,  for  the  im-
provement and  confirmation  of  our  Virtue ;  he  inftrucfls  us,
which  way  to  get  above  all  the  Difcompofure  and  Pailion,
that  the  Negligence,  or  the  Saucinefs  of  our  Servants  may
be  apt  to  caft  us  into.  For  he  tells  us,  we  ought  before-
hand to  reprefent  to  ourfelves,  that  it  is  very  poffible  your
Servant  may  not  give  his  Attendance  when  called  upon,-  or,
that  if  he  anfwer  to  your  Call,  he  may  not  obferve  your
Commands:  And  that  we  Ihould  fettle  our  Mindsj  not  to
give  him  Co  great  Advantage  over  us,  as  the  putting  us  into
Diforder,  would  be.  And  this  fettling  our  Minds  is  very
confiderable,  in  that  the  Inconvenience  is  in  a  great  meafure
defeated,  by  being  forefeen.  For  it  is  the  fuddennefs  of  an
Accident,  that  is  moft  apt  to  confound  young  Proficients :
this  breaks  their  Meafures,  puts  them  out  of  their  Bials,  and
beats  them  from  their  Pofts.  But  Premeditation  keeps  the
Mind  firm  and  cool,  it  preferves  our  Thoughts,  and  gives
us  the  power  and  leifure  to  recoiled  j  and,  by  Ufe  and
Cuftom,  prepares  and  arms  the  Mind  againft  all  thofe  things,
which  our  Fears  and  Imaginations  reprefent  molt  difficult
and  infupportable.

.  Now  what  a  mighty  Advantage  this  Preparation  is,  and
how  much  better  we  entertain  any  Accident,  when  we  are
not  furprized,  every  Man's  own  Confideration  and  Expe-
rience will  inform  him.  Nor  is  this  the  cafe  of  Misfortunes
only,  but  even  of  Pleafures  and  Good  Fortune  too,  when
they  come  upon  us  unexpected,  Afflidions  immediately  over-
turn our  Thoughts,  and  cramp  up  the  Faculties  of  Reafon,
and  put  both  Body  and  Soul  out  of  Temper;  and  Pleafures
and  Good  Fortune,  when  fudden  and  furprizing,  fcatter  and
diffolve  them,  and  enervate  both  Body  and  Mind.  From
hence  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  thefe  Caufes,  though  fo  very
diftant  in  themfelves,  are  yet  attended  wi;h  the  fame  EfFeds'
and  the  fame  Symptoms  plainly  prove  the  Dlfeafe  to  be  the
fame.  For  an  Excefs,  either  of  Joy  or  Grief,  fhocks  the  Confti-
tution  equally  j  and  throws  us  into  Swoonings,  and  Sweats,
and  the  Ms  of  Senfcj  fometimes  even  to  Death  itfelf.

But

3o8  Epictetus*s  Moral  s.

But  thefe  things  are  fo  evident,  that  they  need  no  enlarge-
ment j -and  therefore  I  rather  chufe  to  obferve  the  Method
Bpidefits  hath  taken  upon'  this  occafion,  and  the  Improve-
ments we  may  make  of  it.  When  any  Lofs  or  Difappoint-
ment  in  out  Affairs  hath  happened  to  us,  he  advifes,  that  we
would  compofe  ourfelves  with  this  Reflexion ;  That  Confimicy
and  a  Compofed  Mittd  are  Treafures  ivkicb  inuji  be  bought ^  and
this  J  it  jeems^  is  the  Trice  ive  viufi  pay  for  them.  But  when
our  Servants  provoke  us,  either  by  being  out  of  the  way,
and  not  ready  to  receive  our  Commands  •  or  by  being  Info-
lent,  and  not  obeying  them ;  the  Remedy  in  this  cafe,  is  to .
prepare  our  Minds,  and  confider  before-hand,  that  thefe
were  things  very  Hkely  to  happen.

This  is  the  Method  he  prefcribes,  but  the  Improvement
we  fhould  make  of  it,  is  to  join  both  thefe  Directions  toge-
ther, and  apply  them  to  either  of  the  Cafes  indifferently.  For
indeed,  we  are  no  lefs  obliged  to  receive  any  Loffes  what-
foever  with  all  that  Premeditation,  and  fhall  find  them  infi-
nitely leflened  to  us  by  Expedation,  and  a  poifeffing  our
Minds  early  with  the  Thought,  that  thefe  Things  may  very
probably  happen  to  us.  And  on  the  other  Hand,  when  we
are  incenfed  by  the  Negligence  or  the  Difobedience  of  Ser-
vants, or  any  other  Provocation  of  that  kind,  it  will  turn  to
very  good  account  to  recollect,  That  Conftancy,  and  a  Com-
pofed  Mind,  are  Treafures,  which  will  not  come  for  nothing  •
and  this  is  the  Price  we  are  to  purchafe  them  at.

Now  the  Reafons,  why  Epi&etus  himfelf  did  thus  apply
both  indifferently,  fecm  to  be.  That  the  Inftances  produced
by  him,  of  Oil  fpilt,  and  a  little  paltry  Wine  ftolen,  are  too
mean  and  trivial,  to  need  the  folemnity  of  any  fuch  Prepa-
ration J  and  that  in  Matters  fo  fmall,  a  fhort  Recollection  is
fufncient,  after  the  thing  hath  happened.  And  not  only  fo,
but  becaufe  in  things  of  left  Confideration,  the  profpedt  of
the  Gain,  and  comparing  the  Price  with  the  Purchafe,  is
abundantly  enough  to  prevail  upon  the  Soul.  For  what  oc-
cafion  can  there  be  of  Grudging  or  Difcontent,  when,  for
fuch  a  Trifle  as  a  little  Oyl  or  Wine  loft,  a  Man  has  it  in
his  power  to  receive  a  thing  fo  valuable,  as  Conftancy  and
a  Compofed  Mind,  by  way  of  Exchange  ^  nay,  and  not  only
to  procure  this  for  once  and  no  more,  but  to  gain  the  ftand-
ing  Difpofition  and  Habit  of  it,  which  may  be  ready  at  hand,
and  ferviceable  upon  every  occafion,  provided  he  drive  a  wife
Bargain,  and  manage  his  Market  with  any  Skill  and  Dexte-
rity }  Who  would  not  be  proud  and  pleafed  to  make  that

Exchange,

W/i'  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 109

Exchange,  which  Homer  tells  us  Diomede  did,  when  he  bar-
tered Brafs  for  Gold  ?  And  who  that  hath  the  Senfe  and
Reafon  of  a  Man,  would  not  gladly  forego  any  advantages
of  Fortune,  if  he  can  obtain  the  greateft  and  moft  defirable
Advantages  of  the  Mind,  in  return  for  themj  efpecially  too,
v.'hen  the  Matter  may  very  frequently  be  to  ordered,  as  not
properly  to  forego  them  neither ;  but,  by  a  prudent  fore-
thought and  preparation,  to  think  That  a  thing  of  no  Con-
cern to  him,  and  fo  not  b&  feniible  of  any  Lofs  at  all  ?

CHAP. XVIII.

F  you  would indeed  improve in  Wifdom, you
muft  be  content  to  be  thought  Foolifli  and  Stu-
pid, for  neglefting  the  Things  of  the  World.

COMMENT.

THE  Reafon,  why  many  of  us  lay  out  fo  much  of  our
Thoughts  and  our  Pains  upon  the  World,  is  not  al-
ways a  Defire  to  be  fupplied  with  what  is  neceffary  and  con-
venient for  our  Circumftances,  but  to  avoid  the  Cenfure
of  being  thought  Singular,  and  Infenfible,  and  Speculative
Drones.  Now  in  oppofition  to  this  Principle,  and  all  the
Difcourageraents  fuch  Apprehenfions  give  ns,  he  advifes
every  Scholar  of  his,  who  would  be  wife  in  good  earneft,
not  to  let  fo  poor  a  Pretence  prevail  upon  him,  to  abandon
himfelf  to  the  Cares  of  the  World,  and  negled  the  true  and
inward  Advantages  of  his  own  Mind.  For  what  a  Mon-
ftrous  Abfurdity  is  it,  for  a  Man  to  be  really  Mad,  for  fear
of  being  thought  fo  j  and  to  commit  the  moft  defperate  Adt
of  Folly,  left  he  fhould  be  called  Fool,  by  thofe  who  are  no
better  than  Fools  themfelves  ?  And  in  truth,  there  is  nothing
contributes  to  a  Virtuous  Life,  and  fuch  a  Behaviour  as  is
eyery  way  {i.iitable  to  the  Charader  of  a  Man,  confidered  2  s
a  Rational  Creature,  more  than  to  refolve  not  to  be  a  Slave
to  the  Opinions  of  the  World  j  not  to  make  what  idle  and
filly  People  approve,  any  Meafure  of  our  Actions,  or  rule
to  walk  by^  but  to  ufe  ortes  felf  to  defpife  both  their  Com-
mendations and  their  Cenfures,  and  to  keep  our  Eyes  fteddy

upon

no Epictetus's  Morals,

upon  the  Didates  of  right  Reafon,  and  the  Judgments  of
thofe  few  Good  and  Wife  Perfons,  who  Uve  in  Conformity
to  it  j  and  let  thefe  guide  and  govern  us  in  the  Management
of  all  our  Afiairs.  For  Reafon  is  the  proper  Standard,  to
which  all  our  A<flions  fhould  be  agreeable,  and  all  the  Men,
whofe  Opinions  are  worth  our  regarding,  will  be  fure  to
approve  whatever  is  fo.

DO  not  affed  to  be  thought  exceeding  Wife;
and  if  other  People  think  you  fomething  more
than  ordinary,  let  this  make  you  fo  much  the  more
Diftruftful  and  Jealous  of  yourfelf.  For  be  aflbred,
it  is  no  eafy  matter  to  profecute  your  Defigns  upon
Virtue,  and  other  external  Advantages,  at  one  and
the  fame  time.  But  he  that  fets  his  Heart  upon
either  of  thefe,  will  of  courfe  find  his  Concern  for
the  Other  abate  and  grow  cold.

T^  PiSietus  hath  taken  a  great  deal  of  Pains,  to  confine
"^-^  the  Soul  of  his  Young  Philofopher  within  a  narrow
compafs,  that  all  his  Care  may  be  employed  at  Home,  upon
the  Improvement  of  himfelf  j  efpecially,  when  he  firft  enters
into  this  reform'd  courfe  of  Life.  And  fince  the  Defire  of
Riches,  and  the  Cares  of  the  World,  are  but  a  part  of  thofe
Temptations  which  engage  the  AfFedlions,  and  mifplace  them
abroad  j  for  a  fuperftitious  value  for  Reputation,  and  popu-
lar Applaufe  is  every  whit  as  dangerous  a  Bait  (and  fo  much
the  more  fo  indeed,  in  regard  they  who  are  accomplifhed
Perfons,  and  have  fome  real  Excellencies  to  recommend  them
to  the  World,  are  the  more  apt  to  be  infnared  by  them)
he  advifes  to  root  out  this  vain-glorious  Appetite  by  all
means.

Do  not  affeB  to  be  thought  Wife^  fays  he ;  not  that  he  con-
demns the  moft  zealous  Deiires  or  Endeavours  after  Know-
ledge, but  only  to  fupprefs  the  Vanity  of  defiring  to  appear
Knowing.  For  this  fwells  the  Mind,  and  puffs  it  up  with
flafliy  Imaginations,  and  inclines  it  to  the  World.  It  reprefents
the  Opinion  of  others,  as  the  Rule  of  Ading,  rather  than
Duty,  and  the  Didates  of  a  Man's  own  Confcience  j  and
makes  him  live  no  longer  to  himfelf,  but  to  his  Mafters,
the  People ;  and,  which  is  worft  of  all,  ir  makes  a  Man  fa-
tisfied  with  the  empty  Shadows,  and  outward  Appearances

of

nioith  SiMPLicius*s  Comment, in

of  things,  and  negligent  of  the  Subftance.  For  the  Van-
glorious  are  not  half  fo  much  concerned  to  be  really  Vir-
tuous or  Wife,  as  they  are  to  impofe  upon  themfelves  and
the  World,  in  feeming  fo.  For  this  Reafon  he  exprefTes
himfelf  very  prudently  here,  and  fays  not,  30  not  he  thought
Wife^  but,  Do  not  affeB  to  be  ihought  fo :  For  in  truth,  the
Eileem  other  People  have  of  us,  is  a  thing  by  no  means  in
our  own  Power  j  nor  can  we  make  them  think  as  we  would
have  them  ;  but  the  courting  that  Efleem,  and  being  fond  of
fuch  a  Character,  is  intirely  our  own  A6t  and  Deed.

Since  therefore,  Bnce  the  Vv'orld  will  fometimes  have  a
great  Opinion  of  our  Abilities,  whether  we  feek  it  or  no  j
in  fuch  a  cafe,  fays  he,  let  their  Commendations  ??2ake  you
hut  fo  much  the  more  Dfcrufful  and  Jealous  of  yourfelf.  For
this  will  be  a  moft  excellent  Prefervative  againft  the  giving
yourfelf  up  to  be  governed  by  other  People's  Judgments,  and
taking  up  with  the  Fame  or  Falfe  Images  of  Goodnefs,  in-
ftead  of  the  thing  itfelf  Befides,  that  the  fafpeding  and
thinking  more  meanly  of  ones  felf,  when  the  World  extols
one  mod,  is  a  Duty  particularly  feafonable  for  young  Philofo-
phers.  For  they  that  are  Mafters  in  it,  IQc  fecure  above  the
Breath  of  Fame,  pafs  juftand  impartial  Judgments  upon  their
own  Adions,  and,  as  they  do  not  think  the  better,  fo  nei-
ther need  they  think  at  all  the  worfe  of  themfelves,  for
what  the  World  fays  of  them.

Now  Reputation  and  Applaufe,  we  knov/  very  well,  is
not  the  Attendant  of  Knowledge  only,  but  of  Temperance
and  Moderation  too,  of  Juflice  and  Fortitude,  of  Prudence,
and  indeed  of  every  Virtue  whatfoever.  Every  Accomplifli-
ment,  that  qualifies  us  for  Bulinefs,  and  makes  us  ufeful  to
our  Country  and  to  one  another  j  every  Charadler  of  any
extraordinary  Eminence  in  the  World  j  all  thefe  he  hath
comprehended  here  in  this  fliort  Expreffion  of  being  thought
fomething  more  than  ordinary  ,•  which  extends  to  every  kind  of
Opinion,  for  our  Advantage,  let  the  Ground  of  it  be  what
it  will.

At  laft,  he  (huts  up  all  with  a  Conclufion,  applicable  not
only  to  this  Chapter,  but  to  thofe  that  went  before,  concerning
the  Care  that  is  due  to  our  own  Minds  j  and  intimates,  that
a  Learner  in  Philofophy  will  find  it  no  eafy  Matter  to  pro-
fecute  his  Defigns  upon  Wifdom  and  Virtue  with  Succefs,
and  at  the  fame  time  to  grafp  at  Riches,  or  Fame,  or  any
other  Worldly  Advantages.  And  the  Reafon  is,  becaufe  the
keeping  our  Minds  tight  in  the  profecutiou  of  Virtue  con-

M  - fifts

112  Epictetus's  Morals,

fifts  in  an  extraordinary  Vigilance  and  Concern  for  our-
felves,  and  the  regulating  our  own  Wills ;  and  in  making
all  without  us,  all  that  are  called  the  Goods  of  Fortune,
little  or  no  part  of  our  Concern.  But  now  an  eager  purfuit
of  Fame,  or  any  other  exiernal  Advantage,  utterly  over-
turns ^his  whole  Frame  of  Mind  j  for  it  engages  our  Affedri-
ons  upon  foreign  and  diftant  things,  and  makes  us  cold  and
carelefs  for  ourfelves.  Therefore  it  can  be  no  eafy  matter
to  reconcile  thefc  wide  Extremes,  and  manage  both  at  once.
But  flill  you  may  obferve,  with  what  Caution  the  Author
delivers  himlelf  j  he  declares  it  difficult,  but  he  dares  not
pronounce  it  impoffible :  becaufe  fome  exalted  Minds  exert
themfelves  to  the  Wonder  of  Mankind,  and  confequently
mufl  be  admitted  for  Exceptions  from  the  general  Rules  of
Nature.  But  as  for  the  reft,  who  are  of  the  fame  Mould
and  Tempering  with  their  Neighbours,  to  Them  the  Rule
in  the  Clofe  holds  good.  That  he  who  propofes  to  follow
One  of  thefe,  in  good  earneft  and  to  purpofe,  muft  wholly
lay  afide  all  Concern  for  the  Other.

f^^^J^M  e,Vf*y  ^  ''Z^,  t,\(*

mmmmmmw^&^mmm&

•Qf^^^*'^^

CHAP. XIX.

F  you  defire  that  your  "Wife,  and  Children,  and
Friends  may  never  die,  this  is  a  Senfelefs  Wifh  -,
for  you  would  have  what  is  not  your  own,  to  be
in  your  own  power  ♦,  and  would  difpofe  of  that
which  isanothers.  So  again,  if  you  deiire  that  your
Boy  may  live  without  any  Faults,  this  is  Foolifti  too:
For  it  is  to  wifh,  that  Vice  and  Corruption  may
change  their  Nature,  and  be  no  longer  what  they
cannot  but  be.  But  if  you  will  needs  be  williing,
and  would  wilh  fo  as  not  to  be  difappointed,  this
may  be  done  ;  and  therefore  the  bed  way  is  to  pra-
dile  upon  that,  which  is  in  your  own  power.

C  0  M-

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment* 113

COMMENT.

TH  E  firft  Care  of  a  Man  fhould  be,  to  confider  wliat
things  are  worth  his  Pains  j  and  thofe  that  deferve  to
be  thought  fo,  'tis  plain,  muft  have  the  following  Qualifi^
cations.  They  muft  be  poflible,  for  none  but  Fools  lay
themfelves  out  upon  what  can  never  be  compafifed :  And
they  muft  be  decent  and  proper  for  the  Perfon  that  takes
pains  for  them  j  Something  that  fuits  his  Charafter  and  Con-
veniencies,  and  fuch  as  he  may  call  his  own  when  he  hath
them.  For  nothing  can  be  more  impertinent,  than  to  con-
cern ones  felf  in  other  People's  Matters,  and  negled:  out
own  J  or  to  be  extremely  folicitous  for  obtaining  that,  which
another  will  always  retain  the  propriety  to.  A  Third  Con-
fideration  fhould  be,  of  what  value  the  Prize  we  propofe  to
ourfelves  v/ill  be  ;  of  what  conftancy  and  continuance  j  and
whether  we  can  be  fecure  of  keeping  it,  when  we  have  got
it.  For  no  prudent  Man  will  give  himfelf  trouble  about
Trifles,  and  things  that  will  turn  to  no  account ,  or  fuch
as  are  likely  very  foon  to  decay,  or  forfake  him.

And,  therefore,  in  purfaance  of  his  Defign,  to  call  off  his
young  Philofopbers  Affeftions  from  the  World,  and  to  drive
on  his  former  Diftindion  of  Things  that  are^  and  Things  that
are  not  in  our  oion  potuet-j  he  proves,  that  all  external  Ad-
vantages whatfoever,  are  really  not  Ours,  but  Anothers.  And
he  had  fliewed  at  the  beginning,  that  whatever  is  Anothers,
cannot  be  any  of  the  things  in  our  own  power,  nor  confe-
quently  a  proper  Objeifl  of  our  Choice.

When  a  Man  then  is  dellrous,  that  his  Wife,  and  Children,
and  Friends,  may  never  be  taken  av/ay  from  him,  this  Man
is  folicitous  for  a  thing  in  which  his  Choice  hath  nothing  to
do  j  a  thing  that  it  is  not  poflible  for  him  to  beftow  upon
himfelf;  for  when  things  are  not  intirely  at  our  own  Dif-
pofal,  nor  fubmitted  to  the  Determination  of  our  own  Wills,
it  is  not  for  Us  to  make  ourfelves  Mafters  of  them  j  but  we
muft  depend  upon  the  good  pleafare  of  thofe  Perfons  for  them,
in  whofe  Poflsftion  and  Difpofal  they  are.

Befides,  there  are  not  any  of  thofe  Advantages  we  are  Co
fond  of,  but  they  are  really  mean,  and  of  no  value  at  all,
frail  and  perifhing,  and  the  Enjoyment  of  them  fliort  and  un-
certain. Who  then  would  give  himfelf  trouble,  for  fo  low,
fo  poor  a  Rccompence  ?  Or  who  would  engage  his  AfFedi-

M  2  ons

114 Epicte  Tus's  Morals,

ons  upon  what  fo  many  Cafualties  may,  and  daily  do  con-
fpire  againft,  and  what  they  muft  at  length  deftroy,  and  rob
him  of?  So  vain  is  it  to  fix  ones  Happinefs,  or  ones  Defires,
in  the  Lives  of  our  tenderefl  Friends  (for  in(lance)  or  to
-.delude  ones  felf  with  vain  Hopes,  and  fond  Wifhes  of  their
living  always  j  when  at  the  fame  time  they  are  Mortal,  and
muft  fubmit  to  the  fame  fatal  Neceffity,  with  every  thing
elfe  that  is  fo  j  which  is,  to  depart  without  delay  or  mercy,
whenever  Death  fummons  them  away.

So  again,  if  a  Man  wifli,  that  his  Servant  may  be  Vir-
tuous, nay,  even  an  honefter  and  better  Man  than  himfelf
(as  many  of  us  are  apt  to  do  fometimes,  when  provoked
by  the  Knavery  of  Servants)  this  Man  (fays  EpiBetus)  is  a
Fool,  and  wiihes  an  idle  and  impoilible  thing.  For  fince  all
Knavery  proceeds  from  Vicious  Principles,  and  the  Corrup-
tion of  the  Mind  ;  how  can  it  pofTibly  be,  that  a  Man,  who
takes  no  care  to  govern  or  reform  his  Brutifli  Appetite,  but
fubmirs  and  lives  according  to  it,  fhould  ad  any  otherwife
than  Vicioufly }  So  vain  is  it  for  Men  to  expecft  Succefs  in
thefe  Matters,  when  they  place  their  Affections  and  Concern
upon  things  either  impofiible  to  be  had,  or  at  the  dilpofal  of
fome  other  Perfon,  or  poor  and  perifhing,  and  as  hazardous
and  unfure  in  the  Enjoyment,  as  they  v/ere  difEctilt  in  the
Acquifition.  Muft  not  Men  needs  fail  of  their  hopes,  where
fo  many  Accidents  concur  to  difappoint  them  7  And  if  they
lead  a  Life  of  Difappointment,  muft  they  not  of  neceffity  lead
a  Life  of  Sorrow  and  perpetual  Torment  too.?  Again  ft  all
thefe  Miferies  there  is  but  one  Remedy,  and  that  is  an  efledual
one  indeed :  'Tis  to  make  Ourfelves,  and  what  Nature  hath
pat  within  our  own  power,  the  fole  Objed:  of  our  Care  and
Concern.  Now  Nature  hath  given  us  an  abfolute  power  of
confining  our  Defires  to  fuch  things,  as  fhe  hath  made  ne-
ceffary  and  expedient  for  us.  And  therefore  we  fliall  do  well,
not  to  be  too  lavifh,  or  fquander  them  away  upon  vain  and
unprofitable  Matters,  but  to  lay  them  out  upon  thofe  others:
For  thefe  can  never  fail  our  Expedlation,  and  will  be  fure  to
turn  to  good  account,  when  we  have  attained  them.

CHAP.

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 115

CHAP. XX.

THAT  Perfon  is  properly  my  Lord  and  Mafler,
who  hath  it  in  his  power  to  gratify  my  Wifhes,
or  to  inflid:  my  Fears  ;  to  give  what  I  defire  to
have,  or  to  take  from  me  what  I  am  loth  to  part
with.  The  only  way  then  to  preferve  ones  Liberty,
is  to  reftrain  ones  own  Paflions,  and  to  have  neither
Defire  nor  Averfion  for  any  thing  in  the  power  of
others :  For  he  that  does  not  fo,  is  fure  to  be  a
SlaV-e  as  loner  as  he  lives.

'to

COMMENT.

HERE  again  we  meet  with  another  fevere  Reflexion  up-
on the  World,  and  a  juft  Cenfure  upon  thofe,  who
abandon  then:)felves  to  the  Love  and  the  Cares  of  it.  For
by  this  means  we  do  not  only  betray  our  Minds  to  Mifery
and  Trouble,  when  our  Defires  are  fruftrated,  and  the  Mis-
fortunes we  fear,  overtake  us^  bur,  which  is  more,  we  fmk
into  a  ftate  of  Slavery,  and  fubmit,  not  to  one,  but  to  many
Matters,  to  a  thoufand  imperious  and  mercilefs  Matters.
For  whoever  it  be,  fays  he,  that  hath  it  in  his  own  power,
to  gratify  our  Defires,  or  to  bring  our  Fears  upon  us,  to  give
what  we  would  fain  have,  or  to  take  away  what  we  are  loth
to  part  with,  that  Perfon  is  moft  truly  our  Lord  and  Matter.
So  that,  at  this  rate,  every  Paflion,  and  every  Accident  ty-
rannizes over  the  worldly  Man,  without  Refittance  or  Con-
troul.

With  what  humble  Submiffion  do  we  cringe  to  thofe  that
have  the  Riches,  or  Preferments,  or  Honours  we  defire,  in
their  Difpofal  ?  How  fervile  are  all  our  Applications,  and  how
obfequious  all  our  Behaviour,  that  we  may  incline  their  Fa-
vour, and  prevail  for  the  Advantages  we  propofe  to  ourfelves
from  it  ?  And  again,  when  any  of  thefe  Enjoyments  lie  at
their  Mercy,  with  what  Terrors  and  mifgiving  Fears  do  we
approach  them  ?  What  mean  Ads  do  we  make  ufe  of,  to
keep  their  Countenance  and  Good  Graces  ?  and  how  pitifully
do  we  flatter  and  fawn  upon  them,  to  fecure  the  Continuance

M  3  of

1 1 6 E  p  I  c  T  E  T  u  s's  Morals,

of  that,  which  they  may  deprive  us  of  whenever  they  pleafe  ?
So  poor  and  precarious  are  all  the  Goods  of  Fortune,  fo  ab-
folutely  anothers,  and  fo  little  our  own.  For  That,  which
another  can  beftow,  or  call  back  again,  is  properly  His  j  and
nothing  is  really  Ours,  but  what  falls  intirely  within  the
Compafs  of  cur  own  Power  and  Choice.

If  then  Liberty  be,  as  certainly  it  is,  a  mofb  defirable  Thing  j
and  if  we  would  aflfert  our  own  Freedom,  and  break  our
Chains,-  the  Courfe  we  muft  take,  is,  to  contract  our  Fears
and  Defires,  to  contain  them  within  their  proper  Sphere,
and  not  faffer  them  to  rove  abroad,  or  fix  them  upon  any
thing  within  the  Pov/er  of  any  but  ourfelves.  For  if  we  do
fo,'  our  Slavery  is  fure,  and  the  Inftances  of  it  infinite.  Our
Defires  are  our  Mafters,  when  we  would  obtain  them,  and
our  PoiTeHions,  when  we  dread  the  Lofs  of  them:  Our
Averfions  are  fo,  when  we  fear  Dangers,  and  our  Misfor-
tunes, when  we  fall  into  them.

To  this  we  may  add  another  Obfervation  too;  That  every
Man  in  thefe  Circumftances  is  fubjed:  to  two  Mafters  ^  one
ac  home,  and  another  abroad :  For  the  Brutal  Appetite  with-
in, which  moves  our  Reafon  (that  is,  ourfelves,  whofe
very-Effence  confifts  in  this)  and  carries  it  away  captive,
Submits  boi:h  Reafon  and  icfclf  to  another  Mafter,  which  is
the  outward  Objed  of  ojur  Paffions  :  So  that  we  are  not  only
Slaves,  but  the  meancft  and  moft  abject  of  them  all,  even
the  Slaves  of  Slaves.

Befides,  Other  Servants  have  fome  Intervals  oi'  Freedom
and  Leifure  at  leafl  ^  they  are  not  always  confined  to  their
Mailer's  Prefence;  they  are  upon  the  Level  with  other  Men
at  fome  times;  Night  and  Sleep  fets  them  free  ;  and  they  ob-
tain Leave  and  Eafe  now  and  then,  under  the  hardeil  Go-
vernment. But  our  Atttendance  is  without  any  Intermiffi-
on;  We  can  neither  fly  from  our  Mafbers,  nor  will  They
ever  remit  or  difpenfe  with  our  Service ;  fleeping  or  waking
we  ftill  drudge  on,  and  are  ever  labouring  to  fatisfy  the  in-
folent,  unjuft,  and  extravagant  Commands  of  our  cruels  Ty-'
rants,  No  Moment  of  Reil  is  allov/ed  us,  after  once  we
have  fubmitted  to  them  ;  but  they  are  perpetually  teazing,  and
baraffing  us,  and  employing  us  either  with  wicked  Adions
or  Words ;  or  when  there  is  an  Opportunity  for  neither  of
thefe,  then  diftradling  us  with  idle  Thoughts  and  fantaftick
Imaginations.  -

Nay,

with  SiMPLiciu s's  Comment. 117

Nay,  which  is  yet  word  of  all,  and  the  moft  deplorable
Aggravation  of  our  Milery  in  other  Cafes,  the  better  fort  of
Servants  have  a  Soul  above  their  Condition,  and  owe  their
Bondage  to  the  Neceflity  of  their  Affairs,  and  the  Rigour  of
a  penurious  Fortune ;;  but  ours  is  not  our  Fate,  but  our
Choice :  We  hug  and  are  fond  of  our  Chains,  are  perpe-
tually contriving  to  bind  our  Slavery  fafter  upon  us,  exceed-
ing [nduflrious  to  make  ourfelves  miferable,  and  ingenious
in  finding  out  new  Methods  of  ruin  •  that  is,  ever  feeking
out  fome  frefh  Objed  of  Deiire  or  Fear ;  and  in  order  to  it,
complying  with  fuch  Commands,  as  are  never  obeyed,  but  to
our  infinite  Damage,  if  not  our  utter  Uzidoing.

CHAP. XXI.

LET  it  be  your  conflant  Care,  to  behave  your-
felf  in  all  the  Affairs  of  Human  Life,  with  the
fame  Decency  that  you  would  at  a  publick  Enter-
tainment. If  any  thing  be  offered  you,  receive  it
with  Modefty  ;  If  it  pafs  by  you,  and  be  fent  to
another,  do  not  with-hold  it  from  him,  or  keep
what  was  not  intended  you.  If  the  Difh  be  not
•yet  come  down  fo  low  •,  fhew  not  yourfelf  eager,
nor  fnatch  at  it  greedily,  but  wait  patiently,  till  it
comes  to  your  turn.  Manage  yourfelf  with  the  fame
good  Manners  and  Refervednefs,  in  cafe  of  a  Wife,
or  Children,  or  Honours,  or  Riches,  or  Power,  or
Preferment.  This  will  render  you  worthy  to  be  en-
tertained by  the  Gods.  But  if  you  can  conquer  Ap-
petite fo  far,  as  even  to  refufe  and  difdain  the  deli-
cious Meats  that  are  fet  before  you  ;  this  will  not
only  qualify  you  to  feafb  with  the  Gods,  but  exalt
you  to  the  fame  Dignity  and  Perfediion  with  them
too.  Such  were  Diogenes,  and  Her  adit  us,  and  thofe
other  renowned  Heroes,  who  by  this  generous  Scorn
were  juftly  efteemed,  and  in  reality  were  Divine
Perfons.

M  4.  COM'

Ii8  Epi  CTETus's  Morals,

COMMENT.

AFTER  To  many  Arguments  ufed  to  check  the  ,migbty
Propenfitics  of  Human  Nature,  and  reftrain  his  Scholars
from  too  eager  a  Purfuit  of  the  Goods  of  Fortune ;  left  his
Difcourfe  fhould  prove  lefs  perfuafive,  for  being  thought  too
fevere  ;  he  tells  us,  that  it  is  not  his  Intention  to  debar  Men
from  all  Communication  with  the  World ,  and  therefore  he
inftruds  us,  what:  Advantages  they  are  allowed  to  partake  of,
and  how  they  ought  to  demean  themfelves  with  regard  to
them.  He  had  before  indulged  us  the  U'ie  of  not  only  the
NecefTaries,  but  the  Conveniencies  of  Pluman  Life ;  pro-
vided that  we  accepted  of  thefe,  as  additional  Enjoyments,
and  did  not  miftake  them  for  our  main  Concern,  but  kept
our  Minds  and  Eyes  conftantly  intent  upon  the  Ship,  and
(as  he  expreft  it  there)  were  ready  to  come  on  Board,  and
Sail  at  the  Mafter's  Call.  And  now  he  tells  us,  that  what-
ever of  this  kind  is  prefented  to  us,  we  may  receive  it,  whe-
ther it  be  a  Wife,  or  Children,  or  Riches,  or  Advancement;
but  then  we  muft  take  it  modeftly  and  decently,  and  not  y
fufFer  our  Appetites  to  grow  impatient,  and  ihatch  or  reach
at  it  rudely,  before  it  is  offered.  So  again,  if  they  were  once
ours  and  are  taken  away  (for  thus  I  underftand  that  Expreflion
of  pafling  by,  and  being  fent  to  fome  body  elfe)  we  muft  by
no  means  detain  them,  he  fays;  that  is,  we  fhould  part  with
them  patiently,  neither  ftruggling  to  keep  them,  nor  repin-
ing at  the  Lofs.  If  they  be  not  yet  come  to  us ;  it  will  ill
become  us  to  defire  them  before  our  Turn,  to  feed  our  Wiflies
and  Imaginations  with  them,  and  be  fo  taken  up  with  thefe,
as  to  forget  both  Virtue  and  ourfelves.

When  they  are  given  to  us,  we  muft  not  receive  them
even  then  voracioufly,  and  with  too  much  feeming  Trans-
port J  but  decendy  and  gently,  that  fo  we  may  keep  our-
felves above  them,  and  ufe  them  prudently,  without  fufter-
ing  our  Affedions  to  be  overpower'd  by,  and  wholly  im-
merft  in  them.

Now  the  Condition  of  Men  in  the  World  is  here  repre-
fented,  by  People  met  together  at  a  Common  Entertain-
ment J  where  Almighty  God  makes  the  Invitation  and  the
Feaft;  and  every  one  of  the  Guefts  partakes  of  the  Provi-
fion,  according  as  his  own  Appetite  ftands  afFefted.  Some
|3ehaye  themfelves  with  a  prudent  Referve,  like  well-bred

PerfonSj,

iDith  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 119^

Perfons,  as  the  Didlates  of  Reafon  and  Nature  dired  them,
and  in  a  manner  acceptable  to  the  Mafter  of  the  Feaft,  fo
as  to  feem  Guefts  worthy  of  the  Gods.  Others  again,  are
infolent  and  unruly,  greedy  and  gluttonous,  injure  themfelves,
and  difpleafe  the  Great  Lord  that  receives  them.

But  the  efpecial  Excellency  is  yet  behind.  For  if  you  are
a  Perfon  of  fo  exalted  a  Virtue,  as  not  only  to  wait  with
Patience,  and  accept  with  Modefty,  but  even  to  decline  and
flight  thefe  worldly  Advantages,  which  the  Generality  of
Mankind  dote  upon  fb  infinitely,  and  can  deny  yourfelf  what
the  Mafter  of  the  Feaft  offers  to  you  ,•  this  is  the  utmofl:
Perfedion  Mortality  is  capable  of :  The  World  is  no  longer
worthy  of  fuch  a  Perfon  j  he  hath  tranicended  Human  Na-
ture itfelf,  and  is  not  only  fit  to  be  a  Gueft  of  the  Gods,
but  to  be  admitted  into  a  fhare  of  that  Dignity,  and  thofe
Divine  Excellencies,  which  he  hath  wrought  himfelf  up  to
fo  near  a  Refemblance  of.

This  was  the  Cafe  of  Crates  and  Diogenes^  the  latter  of
which  expreft  fo  juft  a  Contempt  of  the  World,  that  when
Alexander  tbe  Great  faw  him  bafking  in  the  warm  Sun,  and
alked,  what  he  lliouid  do  for  him  ^  he  defired  no  more,  than
only  that  he  would  ftand  out  of  the  Sunfhine. Which  An-
fwer  gave.fo  true  an  Idea  of  the  Gallantry  of  his  Soul,  that
this  mighty  Conqueror  thought  that  Philofopher  a  Braver  and
Greater  Man,  than  himfelf  in  all  his  Triumphs,- and  faid,
that  he  could  wifli,  if  that  were  pofTible,  to  be  Diogenes ;  but  if
not,  then  bis  fecond  Wifli  fhould  be  to  continue  Alexander.
Thus  then  the  Good Providence, which  conftitutes  this
Mortal  State,  and  mingles  Men's  Circumftances  in  it,  as  it
(qqs  moft  fuitable  and  convenient,  advances  thofe  Perfons
to  the  Table  of  the  Gods, who  manage  the  Incumbrances
of  the  Body  and  the  World,  according  to  the  Directions
given  us,  and  temper  all  their  A(ftions  with  Prudence  and
Moderation. But  when  Men  do  not  only  manage,  buttran-
fcend  the  World  and  its  Enjoyments  j  when  they  get  quite
above  thefe  Things,  and  exercife  an  abfolute  Maftery  over
them  i  then  the  fame  Providence  calls  up  thofe  Souls,  which
fo  well  imitate  the  Divine  Excellencies,  into  a  fort  of  Part-
ner/liip  and  Government  j and  makes  them  (as  it  were)  its
Affiftants  in  the  difpofing  of  Things  here  below. For  what
can  we  think  lefs  of  them  while  they  fit  enthroned  on  high
and  look  down,  and  order  all  Things,  with  fuch  undifturb-
ed  Security,  and  fo  Imperial  a  Sway,  as  if  themfelves  were
00  longer  a  part  of  this  Univerfe,  but,  like  thofe  Beings  a-

bove.

420 Epictetus*s  Morals, -

bove,  were  diftind:  and  feparate  from  ir,  and  governed  theSr
own  World  ?

For  this  Reafon  EpiBetus  fays,  Herachtus  and  Diogenesy
Kuho  had  a  generous  Difdain  for  thefe  Things^  ivere  jufily
efleerned^  and  in  reality  ijjere  Divine  Ferfons.  And  indeed,
they  are  truly  fo,  who  live  up  to  the  utmoil  Perfeiflion  of  their
Nature,  and  diveft  themfelves  of  all  Concerns  for  the  Body
and  the  World.  They  are  fpiritualized  already,  and  have
no  more  to  do  with  any  Impreffions  of  Flefh  and  Senfe.
This  is  the  utmoft  Perfecftion  of  a  Human  Mind  j  and  what'
ever  is  abfolutely  perfect,  is  Divine;  becaufe  it  is  of  God,
who  is  the  Source  and  Sum  of  all  Perfedion,

^^^^^i

CHAP. XXII.

HEN  you  fee  a  Neighbour  in  Tears,  and
hear  him  lament  the  Abfence  of  his  Son,  the
Hazards  of  his  Voyage  into  fome  remote  Part  of  the
World,  or  the  Lofs  of  his  Eftate  ;  keep  upon  your
Guard,  for  fear  fome  falfe  Ideas  rifing  upon  thefe
Occafions  furprize  you  into  a  Miftake,  as  if  this
Man  were  really  miferable,  upon  the  Account  of
thofe  outward  Accidents.  But  be  fure  to  diftinguifli
wifely,  and  tell  yourfelf  immediately,  that  the  Thing,
which  really  afflifts  this  Perfon,  is  not  really  the  Ac-
cident itfelf  ffor  ether  People,  under  his  Circum-
ftances,  are  not  equally  afflidted  with  it)  but  merely
the  Opinion,  which  he  hath  formed  to  himfelf  con-
cerning this  Accident.  Notwithftanding  all  which,
you  may  be  allowed,  as  far  as  Expreffions  and  out-
ward Behaviour  go,  to  comply  with  him  ;  and  if
Occafion  require,  to  bear  a  part  in  his  Sighs,  and
Tears  too.  But  then  you  muft  be  fure  to  take  Care,
that  this  Compliance  do  not  infefb  your  Mind,  nor
betray  you  to  an  inward  and  real  Sorrow,  upon  any
fuch  Account.

Q'O  M'

njDtth  S I M  p  L  I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 121

C  O  M  M  E  N  r,

AS  this  Confideration,  that  the  defirable  Things  of  this
World  are  nor,  cannot  be  our  Happinefs,  though  we
fhould  fuppofe  a  Man  never  fo  profperous,  fhould  reitraia
our  Eagernefs,  and  check  our  too  forward  Defires  after  them ;
(o  that  other  Reflexion,  that  no  External  Misfortune  can
make  us  truly  miferable,  fhould  be  an  argument  no  lefs  pre-
vailing, to  buoy  up  our  Spirits,  and  make  us  entertain  them
with  Courage  and  Refolurion.

To  this  purpofe,  our  Author  urges  the  following  Inftance,
of  a  Man  in  sreat  Grief  and  Lamentation  for  fome  Calamity  ;
the  Death  or  the  Difbance  o?  a  Darling  Child^  the  Lofs  of
an  Eftate,  and  being  reduced  to  extreme  Poverty,  or  the  like.
And  the  Caution  he  gives  upon  fuch  Occafions,  is,  that  the
Spedators  would  not  fufFer  therafelves  to  be  borne  down  by
the  Torrent  of  this  Man's  Tears,  and  carried  into  an  Erro-
neous Opinion  of  his  being  made  miferable  by  any  of  thefe
Difafters :  For  they  are  to  recoiled  themfelves,  and  confi-
der,  that  no  Man's  Happinefs  or  Ui.happinefs  does,  or  ever
can,  depend  upon  his  Succeffes  in  the  World^  or  any  of  the
Good  or  Bad  Events  from  without.

But  if  this  be  fo,  how  comes  it  then  to  pafs,  that  this  Per-
fon  is  fo  infinitely  afflicted,  as  if  fome  real  III  had  happened
to  him?  The  Accident,  it  is  plain,  cannot  be  Evil  in  its  own
Nature.  Were  it  fo,  all  Perfons  that  lye  under  the  fame
Misfortune,  would  feel  the  {nvnt  ImprelTions,  and  be  car-
ried to  an  equal  Excefs  of  Grief.  For  this  is  a  Rule  in  Na-
ture, that  Natural  Qualities  have  always  the  fame  Operation,-
and  what  feels  hot  to  one,  will  feel  fo  to  every  one  that
touches  it.  At  this  rate  then,  every  one  who  buries  a  Son,
muft  mourn  and  lam.ent :  and  yet  AnaxagoraSj  v/hen  News
was  brought  him  of  the  Death  of  His,  made  Anfwer,  with
all  the  Bravery  and  Unconcernednefd  in  the  World,  Well,
I  knew  my  Child  could  be  no  more  than  mortal.  But  what
then  is  the  true  Caufe  of  all  this  Melancholy  .?  Nothing  ehe,
but  the  Man's  own  Notions  of  this  Accident  :  This  is  the
Root  of  all  the  Difeafe  j  and  our  Opinions  are  properly  our
own.  So  that  we  will  grant  the  Ground  of  this  exceffive
Grief  to  be  not  only  a  feeming,  but  a  real  Evil ;  but  then
the  Miftake  of  the  Perfon  ftill  remains  j  for  it  is  not  in  any
Accident  from  without, but  rifes  iatirely  from  within  him-

lelf.

12:?  Epictetus's  Morals,

ielf,  and  is  owing  to  nothing  elfe  but  his  own  wrong  Ap-
prehenfions.  And  this  is  both  a  real  Evil,  and  properly  ones
own  too,  becaufe  Opinions  are  forae  of  the  Things  within
our  own  Power,  and  the  Truth  and  Falfhood  of  thefe  de-
pends purely  upon  the  Will,  and  falls  within  the  Compafs  of
our  own  Choice.

You  will  afk  perhsps,  in  the  next  place,  what  Behaviour  k
proper  in  fuch  a  Cafe  ?  Is  no  Compaffion  due  to  this  afflidred
miftaken  Man  ?  And  muft  I  only,  with  a  fullen  Magifterial
Pride,  condemn  his  Error,  and  chide  or  fcorn  his  Folly?  By
no  means.  This  Deportment  is  unfuitable  to  the  Charadler
of  a  Good  Man.  You  are  allowed  therefore  to  pity  and
comply  with  him,  to  condefcend  in  fome  meafure  to  his  Frail-
ties, to  fpeak  kind  and,  tender  Things,  and  if  you  fee  Occa-
fion,  to  drop  a  few  Tears  for  Company.  Nor  is  all  this  id
be  put  on  merely  for  Oftentation,  or  to  fhew  Good  Nature :
For  Diflimulation  and  Trick  is  what  no  Circuraftance  can
render  excufable  to  a  Good  Man.  But  your  Trouble  may
be  realj  and  indeed,  there  is  but  too  jult  a  Pretence  for  it,
when  you  fee  fuch  an  Inftance  of  Human  Infirmity,  as  a  Man
who  thinks  the  Misfortunes  of  the  Worlid  worth  To  immode"
rate  a  Concern.

But  ftill  you  mufc  fet  Bounds  to  your  Pity  and  Condefcen-
fion,  for  Grief  is  catching  j  and  therefore  be  fare  to  take  care,
that  it  do  not  fallen  upon  your  Mind,  and  lb  you  fall  into
the  fame  Difeafe  of  a  real  Concern  for  the  Accident  icfelf.
If  once  you  fink  fo  low,  you  are  for  the  future  incapable  of
doing  the  Sorrowful  any  Service.  He  that  would  be  fer-
viceable  to  another's  Cure,  and  quiet  the  Anguifli  of  his
PafTions,  muft  make  fome  Advances  indeed,  and  fome  Com-
pliances j  but  he  muft  be  fure  to  keep  out  of  the  Reach  of
Infedion  too.  A  Man  who  ftands  ftill  upon  the  Bank,  and
will  not  fo  much  as  ftep  into  the  Water,  can  never  draw  his
Friend  out  when  he  is  drowning ;  and  a  Man  that  jumps  in,
and  lets  the  fame  Stream  carry  him  av/ay  too,  can  as  little
do  it.  He  that  appears  infenfible,  and  void  of  all  tender  Im-
preffions,  will  never  be  able  to  compofe  another's  Paffion,
and  bring  him  to  Reafonj  but  He  that  fufFers  the  fame
Paffion  to  overcome  his  own  Reafon  too,  will  be  fo  far  froni
ferving  his  Friend,  that  he  himfelf  muft  be  beholden  to  the
Affiftance  of  fome  third  Friend.

CHAP.

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 123

CHAP. XXIII.

Emember,  that  the  World  is  a  Theatre,  and
that  your  Part  in  this  Play  of  Life  is  deter-
mined by  the  Poet.  Upon  him  it  muft  depend,
whether  you  fhall  a6l  a  long  or  a  fhort  one:  whe-
ther your  Charafter  fhall  be  high  or  low:  If  there-
fore he  affign  you  that  of  a  Beggar,  take  care  to
humour  it  well  •,  if  a  Cripple,  or  a  Prince,  or  a
private  obfcure  Man,  or  whatever  it  be,  make  the
beflb -ef  it:  For  conlider,  that  the  playing  of  the
Fart  afligned  you  commendably,  depends  upon  your-
felf.  This  is  your  Bufinefs :  but  the  giving  out  of
the  Parts,  and  chufing  the  Adors,  is  not  Yours,
blit  another  Perfon's.

COMMENT.

IN  one  of  the  Chapters  a  little  before,  this  prefent  Life,
and  the  Diftribution  and  Enjoyment  of  the  Comforts  and
Advantages  of  it,  was  compared  to  aPubiick  Entertainment-
and  the  Maker  and  Mafter  of  that  Entertainment  was  faid
to  be  Almighty  God,  who  left  us  at  Liberty,  either  to  ac-
cept, or  to  refafe  the  Diflies  {tt  before  us.  For  this  Rea-
fon  it  was,  that  fuch  Pains  were  taken  to  corred  and  form
our  Appetites  aright  j  and  to  inftrud  us  how  we  ought  to  go-
vern Ourfelves,  and  our  Choice,  with  regard  to  all  External
Events,  paft,  prefent,  and  future.  For  at  Feafts  every  Gueft
feeds  on  what  is  fet  before  him,  according  as  his  own  Palate
ftands,  and  his  own  Judgment  direcfts  him.

But  here  we  meet  with  another  kind  of  Reprefentation :
Life  is  refembled  to  a  Play,  ia  which  every  Man  breathing
bears  a  part,  but  the  Compofer,  and  Dilpenfer  of  thefe  Parts
is  God.  For  in  this  refpedl,  the  prefent  Similitude  differs
from  the  former,  that  in  it  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  Dif-
pofal,  whether  we  will  accept  what  is  affigned  us  or  not.
Providence  hath  appointed  our  Characfber,  and  we  cannot
change  or  decline  it. There  are  infinite  Inftances  of  this

kindj

124  Epictetus's  Morals,

kind,  which  feem  to  carry  a  plain  Fatality  in  them.  Fox
though,  when  Riches  are  offered  us,  it  is  in  our  Power  to  re-
ject them,  and  embrace  a  voluntary  Poverty;  yet  when  Po-
verty or  Sicknefs  is  laid  out  for  us,  it  is  not  then  in  our  Power
to  decline  thefe.  So  again,  we  may  chufe  whether  we  v/ill
be  Mafters  and  Governours,  or  not  •  but  we  canfiot  chufe
whether  we  will  be  Servants  or  Subjeds,  or  not.

All  then  that  is  left  to  our  own  Liberty  here,  is  the  Ma-
nagement of  what  falls  to  our  fliare ;  and  the  Blame  or  the
Commendation,  the  Happinefs  or  the  Mifery,  of  a  Man  in
fuch  Cafes,  does  not  confift  properly,  in  defiring  or  not  de-
iiring,  accepting  or  refufing  (for  this  laft  does  not  fall  with-
in oar  Sphere)  but  in  fuch  a  Management,  as  is  fhill  left  at
our  own  Liberty;  that  is,  in  behaving  ourfelves  decently,
or  otherwife  fuitably  or  unfuitably  to  our  Condition.  For,
though  we  cannot  avoid  Poverty  or  Sicknefs  when  we  would,
yet  we  can  make  a  Virtue  of  Necefficy  j  and,  if  we  pleafe,
can  carry  ourfelves  handfomly  under  them.  And  all  the
Fate  in  the  World  cannot  tye  us  up  fo  far,  but  that  the  huf-
banding  and  mnking  the  beft  of  thofe  things,  which  we  can-
ndt  help,  fhall  be  ftill  as  much  in  our  own  Breafts,  as  ot
tho  "e,  which  we  chufe  and  procure  for  ourfelves.

Thus  it  is  in  the  pracftice  of  the  Stage.  The  Choice  ot
the  Players,  is  the  Poet's  Work :  It  is  He  that  gives  out  the
Parts,  according  to  the  particular  Humours  of  the  Acftors  :
He  takes  notice  of  their  Qi^ialifications  and  Abilities,  and  then
fuirs  the  Perfons  to  the  Charadters  they  are  capable  of.
One  he  appoints  to  perfonate  a  Prince,  another  a  Servant,
another  a  Mad-Man,  (for  every  one  is  not  fit  to  play  Orejies.)
Thus  far  his  Care  goes,  and  he  is  anfwerable  no  farther ;
For  the  Perfons,  to  whom  thefe  Parts  are  afligned,  muft  ac-
count for  the  doing  them  Juftice  in  the  Adlion.

For  this  Reafon  it  is,  that  Men  do  not  judge  of  the  En-
rercaimnent  of  a  Play-Houfe,  by  the  Greatnefs  or  Quality
of  the  Charadler,  but  by  the  jufl  Proportion,  and  the  natural
Reprefentation,  and  the  Gracefulnefs  of  the  Action  irfelf.
How  often  do  we  fee  a  Beggar,  or  a  Servant,  or  a  Madman,
clapped,  and  at  the  fame  time,  a  Rich  Man,  or  a  Gene-
ral, or  a  King  hiffed  .^  The  Reafon  of  which  is,  that  one
hath  hit  the  Humour  of  his  part,  and  maintained  the  Cha-
rader  be  was  to  appear  in,  and  the  other  did  not  (o.  The
Beggar  behaved  himfelf  as  a  Beggar  fhould  do,  and  the  King
funk  beneath  the  Grandeur  of  his  Poffc ;  and  this  Behaviour
was  the  proper  Bufmefs  of  the  Adors  themfelves,  though  the

chufing.

«Z£;/V/&>Sl  MPLICIU  S's COMME  N  T. 12^

chufing,  whether  they  fliould  perfonate  a  King,  or  a  Beggar,
was  not.

Juft  thus  we  find  in  this  vaft  Theatre  of  the  World.  How
many  Emperors,  and  Wealthy,  and  Strong  Lul'cy  Men,  have
fpoiled  their  Parts,  while  the  Poor,  the  Lame,  the  Slave,  the
Delpiied  EpiftetuSj  perforin ed  His,  with  the  approbation  of
his  Great  Matter,  and  to  the  wonder  of  all  the  Spectators  ?
For  though  his  Part  had  Icfs  of  Pomp  and  Shew  than  theirs,
yet  he  ftudied  the  Charader  throughly,  and  kept  it  up  to  the
very  lift,  and  anfwered  the  Defign  and  Diredlions  of  the  Poet,
v/ho  deftinM  him  to  it.  This  was  his  proper  Bufinefs,  and
therefore  this  Commendation  is  due  to  him  for  it.  For,  as
no  Man's  Happinefsor  Mifery  can  confifl:  in  any  thing,  but
what  falls  within  his  own  Choice  ^  lo  neither  will  any  Wife
Man  allow,  that  either  Praiie  or  Commeudaticn,  Honour
or  Infamy,  belongs  properly  to  any  thing  elfe.  And  ccnfe-
quently,  it  is  not  the  Part,  but  the  Manner  of  ading  it,  that
every  Man  diftinguiflies  himfelf  by.

CHAP. XXIV. .

WHEN  the  Ravens  croak,  or  any  other  Omi-
nous thing  happens,  let  not  any  Superftiti-
OLis  Fancies  difturb  or  affright  you :  But  have  im-
mediate Recourfe  to  this  Diilindion,  for  the  quiet-
ing your  F>ars,  that  nothing  of  this  kind  can  Bode
III  to  you:  To  your  Body,  or  your  Efiiate,  or  your
Reputation,  or  your  Wife,  or. your  Children,  *tis
pollible  it  may  •,  but  as  for  yourfelf,  'tis  in  your  own
power  to  make  every  thing  aufpicious  to  you :  be-
caufe  whatever  Difafter  happens  in  any  of  the  fore-
mentioned  Refpe6ls,  you  may,  if  you  pleafe,  reap
fome  very  confiderabie  Advantage  from  it.

C  0  M-

X

126 Epi  CTETUs's  Morals,

' COMMENT.

THIS  Chapter  feems  to  me  to  be  mifplaced,  and  would
be  more  Methodical,  if  fet  before  the  former,  and  im-
mediately after  that  which  begins  with.  If  jou  fee  a  Neighbour
in  Tears,  &c.  For,  having  told  us  there,  that  a  Man  ought
not  to  be  too  feniibly  affected  with  the  exceflive  Paflk)n  of
thofe,  who  think  themfelves  unhappy,  for  the  lofs  of  any  of
the  Comforts  of  this  World;  nor  fympathize  fo  far,  as  to
imagine,  that  fuch  a  one  is  really  Miserable  upon  any  of  thefe
Accounts ;  (fmce  a  Man's  Happinefs  or  his  Wretchednefs
does  notconhil:  in  any  outward  Profperous  or  Adverfe  Events,
but  purely  in  the  ufe  of  his  own  Free-Will,  and  the  Practice
or  Negled:  of  Vv'hat  God  and  Nature  have  made  incirely  the
Object  of  his  ov/n  Choice  and  Povv^ev)  here  he  adds,  that  if
any  inaufpicious  Bird,  or  other  Omen  feem  to  foretel  Mif-
chief  and  Ill-luck,  this  ought  not  to  terrify  or  difcompofe  us.
But,  though  V7e  fhould  fuppofe  them  to  carry  any  ill  portent
to  our  Bodies  or  our  Fortunes,  yet  we  mult  diftinguifh  be-
tween thefe  and  ourfelves  j  and  lliould  confider,  that  our  own
Happinefs  and  Miiery  depends  upon  our  own  Difpofal,  and
can  come  from  nothing  but  ourfelves.

Do  but  refolve  then,  not  to  make  yourfelf  unhappy,  and
all  the  molt  direful  Significations  of  Misfortune,  and  all  the
Misfortunes  confcquent  to  thofe  Significations,  fiiall  never
be  able  to  do  it.  Your  Body,  'tis  true,  may  be  Sick,  or  Die  j
your  Reputation  may  be  Blafted,  your  Eftate  Deftroyed  or
Wafted,  your  Wife  or  Chidren  taken  from  you ;  but  ftill  all
this  does  not  reach  yourfelf;  that  is,  your  Reafoning  Mind.
This  can  never  be  Miferable,  nay,  it  muft  and  will  be  Hap-
py, in  defpight  of  all  thefe  lU-bodings,  except  you  confent
to  your  own  Wretchednefs :  For  all  your  Good  and  Evil
depends  wholly  upon  yourfelf.

Nay,  which  is  more,  and  the  greateft  Security  imaginable,
thefe  very  Misfortunes  fhall  confpire  to  render  you  yet  more
Happy.  For  out  of  this  Bitter  you  may  gather  Sweetnels,
and  convert  what  is  generally  miftaken  for  Mifery,  to  your
own  mighty  Benefit.  And  the  greater  thofe  Calamities  are,
the  more  confiderable  will  the  Advantage  be,  provided  you
manage  them  prudently,  and  behave  yourfelf  decently  under
them.  Now  it  is  plain  from  hence,  that  thefe  are  not  Evils,
properly  fpeaking  j  for  whatever  is  fo,  muft  always  do  hurt,

and

ijoith  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  127

.  and  can  never  change  its  Nature  fo  far,  as  to  contribute  to
any  good  EfFecfl:.  Since  then  tliefe  may  be  fo  ordered,  as  to
become  fubfervient  to  your  Good  j  and  fince  no  111  can  come
to  you,  but  what  yourfelf  muft  be  inftrumental  in.  and  ac-
celTary  to ;  you  muft  of  neceffity  grant,  that  all  Omens^  and
all  the  Evils  thrcatned  by  them,  are  not,  cannot  be  Evils  to
you  yourfelf,  unlets  you  pleafc  to  make  them  fo  ^  and  thac
all  they  can  pretend  to  is  toj  affedl  fomething  that  belongs,
or  bears  fome  diftant  Relation  to  you.

H^iK!C-!e:»'%%»;«%<^^!K)K^^$%^'9;%^^^%«!K^!!i%Hi'!{!%%

CHAP. XXV.

IT  is  in  your  power  always  to  come  off  Con-
queror, provided  you  will  never  engage  in  any
Combats,  but  fuch,  whofe  Succeffes  will  be  determined
by  your  own  Choice.

COMMENT.

HE  had  faid  jufb  before,  that  no  Ominous  Predielions  bo-
ded any  ill  to  Men,  except  they  brought  the  Evil  upon
themfeives,  bccaufe  it  is  in  the  power  of  every  one  not  to
be  Miferable.  And  this  Chapter  I  rake  to  be  a  farther  Pro-
fccurion  of  that  Argument,  and  added  by  way  of  Proof  and
Confirmation  to  the  former.

For  it  is  in  our  own  power,  never  to  enter  the  Lifts  with
any  external  Accidents:  that  is,  we  may  fo  reftrain  our  De-
fires  and  Averfions,  as  not  to  concern  ourfelves  with  them.
If  we  ftake  our  Happinefs  upon  the  Succefs  of  fuch  an  En-
counter, we  muft  needs  retire  with  Lofs ;  becaufe  fuch  De-
fires  will  meet  with  frequent  Difappointmenrs,  and  fuch  A-
verfions  cannot  always  deliver  us  from  the  Dangers  we  fear.
Let  all  our  Combats  therefore  be  confined  to  ourfelves,  and
to  fuch  things,  as  Nature  hath  put  in  the  power  of  our  own
Wills  ^  for  when  you  itrive  with  your  ovvn  Defircs,  and  A-
verfions,  and  Opinions,  the  Prize  is  in  your  own  Hands,  and
you  may  reft  fecure  of  Danger  or  Difi^.ppointmcnt.  This
he  had  fticwn  at  large  formerly,  and  thl:.  h  in  efFc»5t  ihe  fame

N  thing.

12S  Epictetus's  Morals,

thing,  as  to  fay,  that  a  Man  fhall  never  be  vanquiflied,  but
always  come  off  triun:iphantly.

And  if  this  be  true,  then  it  is  no  lefs  evidently  fo,  that  it
is  in  a  Man's  ov/n  Power  never  to  be  Miferable :  For  he
that  is  Miferable  is  a  fubdued  Man:  and  if  ic  depend  upon
one's  own  Choice,  v/hether  any  Evil  iliall  happen  to  him,
then  it  muft  needs  be  in  his  own  Bread  too,  whether  any
Omens  or  Predictions  fhall  'portend  111  to  him.  So  that
EpiBetus  had  reafon,  when  he  pronounced  fo  peremptorily,
that  no  inaufpicious  Events  are  iignified  to  any  Man,  unlefs
himfelf  confpire  to  make  them  fo :  That  is,  unlefs  he  engage
in  fuch  Difputes  as  he  is  not  qualified  for,  and  where  the
Victory  is  doubtful  at  leaf!:,  iF  not  fure  to  go  againft  him.
And  this  is  done  by  every  one,  who  overlooks  his  own
Mind,  and  places  his  Happinefs  and  Unhappinefs,  in  the
Events  of  Fortune,  and  the  Affairs  of  the  World.

m

CHAP. XXVI.

TAKE  heed,  when  you  fee  any  Perfon  advanced
to  an  eminent  Station  of  Honour  or  Power,  or
any  other  kind  of  Profperity,  that  you  be  not  pre-
fently  furprized  with  a  falfe  Idea  of  his  Condition,
and  rafhly  pronounce  him  Happy.  For,  if  all  the
Happinefs  and  Tranquillity  of  cur  Minds  depend
upon  things  within  our  own  power,  there  can  be  no
room  for  Envy  or  Emulation.  And  you  yourfelf,
when  you  confider,  do  not  defire  to  be  a  General,
or  a  Senator,  or  a  Conful,  but  to  be  free  and  eafy.
Now  the  only  way  to  be  fo,  is  to  defpife  the  World,
and  every  thing  that  is  out  of  your  own  Power.

C  0  M-

W//&  Si MPL I  cius's  Comment. 129

COMMENT.

TH  E  only  Method  of  infuring  a  Conqueft  upon  all  En-
counters, the  laft  Chapter  told  us,  is  never  to  engage
with  what  is  out  of  our  own  Power.  But  becaufe  we  are
exceeding  apt  to  be  drawn  into  fuch  Conflidls ;  and  by  no-
thing more  indeed,  than  by  the  Examples  of  other  Perfons,
who  feem  Profperous,  and  Happy,  and  by  the  Envy  and
Emulation  that  ufually  follows  upon  fuch  occalionsj  there-
fore he  fhews  us  here  very  briefly,  that  no  body,  who  makes
rhe  real  Happinefs  of  a  Man  his  ferious  Study  and  fincere
Endeavour,  is  capable  of  Envy  or  Emulation-  and  that  ic
were  utterly  inconfiftent  with  his  Principles,  to  be  guilty  of
either.

For  if  the  proper  Happinefs  of  a  Man  depend  upon  the  ufe
of  his  Free- Will,  and  upon  thofe  things  that  are  fubjedled  to
it ;  and  if  the  Perfons  who  are  promoted  to  Power  and  Ho-
nour, and  courted  with  popular  Applaufe  and  Admiration,
have  not  in  all  this  any  of  thofe  Advantages,  which  Nature
hath  put  in  our  own  power  j  it  is  manifeit,  that  thefe  feem-
ingly  Happy  Men  are  not  in  reality  fuch;  nor  have  they,
by  this  Advancement,  attained  to  any  degree  of  that,  which
vi  the  peculiar  and  true  Happinefs  of  Human  Nature.  What
occafion  then,  can  all  thefe  flattering  Appearances  give  for
Envy  or  Emulation  ?  For  Envy  is  properly  the  repining  at
another's  Happinefs;  and  Emulation,  is  an  impatient  Defire
of  raifmg  ourfelves  up  to  an  Equality  with  others,  who  ex-
ceed us  in  fomething  which  we  take  for  Happinefs,

Now  the  Original  Caufe  of  thefe  Paflions  \s,  rooted  in
,our  Nature  and  Conftitution  ;  which  determines  us  to  thirft
after  Honour  and  Efteem,  and  is  uneafy,  when  we  come  be-
hind any  of  our  Equals.  Hence  it  is,  that  Men  of  meaii
Souls,  and  Vulgar  Attainments,  and  fuch  as  defpair  of  ad-
vancing themfelves  by  the  Strength  of  their  own  Worth,  en-
deavour to  undermine,  and  detrad:  from,  others  of  better  De-
fert,  that  fo  they  may  rife  upon  their  Ruins.  And  to  fuch
ungenerous  Tempers  no  coniideraticn  is  fo  afifliding,  as  the
good  Succefles  of  their  Neighbours :  And  in  this  Vile  Dif-
pc.>rition  the  very  Eflence  of  Envy  conflfts.  For  Envy  lleals
in  upon  the  Profperous,  or  thofe  that  are  efteemed  fo ;  buc
'  efpccially,  if  thofe  Perfons  are  upon  the  fime  level  with  our-
felves, either  in  refpcLl  of  then-  Birth,  or  Fortune, or  Pro-

N  2  felTion

130  Ep  I  c  TE  Tus's  Morals,

feffion,  or  other  Accomplifhments.  For  Perfons  either  very
much  above,  or  very  much  below  ourfelves,  are  not  the  Ob-
ject of  our  Envy.  Becaufe  thefe  are  not  a  match  for  us,
but  the  one  fort  excite  our  Admiration,  and  the  other  pro-
voke our  Contempt.

But  where  Nature  hath  given  a  greater  ftrength  of  Parts,
and  a  more  acftive  and  generous  Difpofition,  there  Men  feel
a  gallant  warmth  of  Soul,  which  exerts  icfclf  vigoroufly,  and
l^ruggles  to  come  up  to  the  perfection  of  Others  by  virtue
of  one's  own  Merit,  without  any  invidious  Arts  of  leflen-
ing  theirs  :  Nay,  not  only  to  com.e  up  with  them,  but  to  out-
ftrip  them  in  the  Race,  and  bear  away  the  Prize.  From  the
difference  then  of  thefe  two  Tempers,  and  the  Pradices  con-
fequent  to  them,  we  may  plainly  perceive,  that  Envy  is  a
Vicious  Paflion,  and  no  Qualification  can  render  it  other-
wife.  But  Emulation  is  fometimes  commendable,  and  near-
ly related  to  the  Love  of  Goodnefs,  v/hen  Virtue  is  the  thing
we  drive  to  excel  in  ^  but  it  degenerates  into  Vice,  and  is
•little  better  than  Envy,  when  the  Advantages  of  Fortune,
and  the  World,  are  the  Prize  we  contend  for.

Since  therefore  Good  is  the  proper  Objecfl  of  Envy  and
Emulation,-  and  fince  Preference  in  Honour,  cr  Power,  or
Reputation,  is  only  miitaken  for  fuch  by  the  Vulgar,  but
can  really  be  no  fuch  thing,  becaufe  none  of  thefe  fall  with-
in our  own  Choice-  it  is  plain,  that  in  Men,  who  examine
Matters  nicely,  there  can  be  no  fuch  Paffion,  as  Envy  and
Emulation,  excited  upon  any  of  thefe  Accounts.  Confe-
quently,  thefe  are  Refentments  moft  unbecoming  a  Man,
■who  makes  Wifdom  and  Virtue  his  Study,  becaufe  they  plain-
ly argue,  that  while  he  accounts  fuch  Perfons  worthy  of  his
Envy  or  Emulation,  he  does  likewife  exped;  to  find  his  Hap-
pinefs  in  thofe  Advantages  which  they  enjoy.  Now  this
contradicts  the  very  firlt  Principles  of  Philofophy,  and  is  in-
confiftent  with  the  Character  he  pretends  to.  For  the  thing
that  ought  to  be  firft  in  his  Defires,  is  Liberty  ,•  the  breaking
•thofe  Chains  his  Paflions  have  bound  him  in,  and  getting
loofe  from  all  the  Incumbrances  of  the  World.  And  the
only  way  to  deliver  himfelf  from  this  Bondage,  is  to  flight
and  difdain  the  World,  and  to  afTert  his  Native  Freedom
■from  all  thofe  external  Accidents,  thofe  Rivals  in  his  Affedi-
ons,  which  fubdued  and  enflaved  his  Mind.  For  thele  only
have  the  power  to  vanquifh  and  captivate  him,  by  difappoint-
•ing  his  Hopes  and  Expedations,  and  opprefiinghim  wiih  the
•  Calamities  he  fears.  Upon  thefe  it  is,  that  our  BrutiHi  In-
!. '  clinations

•with  S I M  p  L I  c  I  J  s's  Comment. 131

clinations  let  themfelves  loofc;  and  from  hence  comes  ail
that  remorfelefs  Tyrann}',  which  they  ufurp,  and  fo  arbi-
trarily exercife  over  us.  The  Contempt  of  the  World  there-
fore is  the  moft  effeftual  Method  of  reducing  all  into  Order
ag^in  j  for  by  a  brave  and  jail:  fcorn  of  thole  outward  Ob-
jecft^,  we  weaken  the  Dehres  that  lead  to  them ;  and  when
on  -e  thofe  Succours  are  intercepted  and  cut  off,  thefe  can-
not iland  alone  j  bat  fall  in  of  courfe,  and  fubmit  themfelves
to  Reafon.

CHAP. XXVII.

Emember,  when  any  Man  reviles  or  ftrikes
you,  it  is  not  the  Tongue,  that  gives  you  the
Opprobrious  Language,  or  the  Fland  that  deals
the  Blow,  that  injures  or  affronts  you  ;  but  it  is
your  own  Refentment  of  it,  as  an  Injury  or  Affront,
that  makes  it  fuch  to  you.  When  therefore  you
are  provoked,  this  is  owing  intirely  to  your  own
Apprehenfions  of  the  Thing.  And  efpecially  guard
yourfelf  well  againfb  the  firft  Impreffions;  for  if  you
can  but  fo  fir  fubdue  your  Pafllon,  as  to  gain  Time
for  cooler  Thoughts,  you  will  eafily  attain  to  a  good
Government  oi  yourfelf  afterwards.

CHAP. XXVIII.

BUT  be  fure  to  keep  Death,  Perfecution,  and
Banifhment,  and  all  thofe  Calamities,  which
Mankind  are  moft  afraid  of,  conftantly  before  your
Eyes,  and  let  them  be  very  familiar  to  your  Mind.
But  above  all,  let  Death  be  ever  prefent  there :  For
you  will  find  this  a  moft  excellent  Remedy  againft
bafe  and  mean  Thoughts,  and  a  powerful  Lleftraint
to  all  immoderate  Defires.

N  3  COM-

132  Epict  E  T  us's  Morals,

COMMENT.

AFTER  having  again  expofed  the  Vanity  of  all  thofe
imaginary  HappinefTes,  which  Men  depend  upon  the
World  for,-  and  fliewed  us,  that  a  Gallant  and  Generous  Dif-
dain  of  thefe,  is  the  only  poffible  Courfe  of  fetting  our  Souls
at  Liberty,  and  living  eafy  j  he  proceeds  in  the  next  place,  to
take  off  all  thofe  formidable  Objedlions,  which  Men  are  apt,
either  to  raife,  merely  for  Difcourfe  fake,  or  ufed  to  feel  the
difcouraging  effeds  of  it  in  themfelves,  while  they  are  yet
but  raw  and  untrained  in  the  Difcipline  of  Wifdom  and  Vir-
tue. And  in  this  he  obferves  his  former  Method,  of  hav-
ing recourfe  to  the  firft  Principles  of  Morality.

The  Sum  of  what  the  Objedors  have  to  fay,  is  this :  That
fuch  a  Contempt  and  Negled  of  the  World,  how  Great  and
Gay  foever  they  may  look  at  firft,  are  yet  really  attended
with  many  Inconveniences  ,•  for  they  render  Men  Defpicable
and  Cheap,  keep  them  Impotent  and  Low,  and  lay  them  open
to  all  the  Infolencies  and  Injuries  imaginable,  while  they  are
neither  in  a  capacity  to  repel  the  Wrongs  that  are  done  them
by  Force,  nor  can  defcend  fo  low  as  to  prevent  them  by
Flattery,  and  Servile  Applications.  When  People  fee  this,
there  is  no  Indignity,  that  there  is  not  ill  Nature  enough
to  offer ;  no  Liberty,  that  they  will  not  give  themfelves  •
Nor  Tongue,  nor  Hand  will  know  any  Reftraint.  And  thus
we  fee  daily,  that  when  Men  have  got  the  Afcendant,  there
is  nothing  they  ftick  ar,  they  wound  fuch  unrefifting  Phi-
lofophical  Perfons  in  their  Reputation,  with  Slanders  and
Reproaches^  offer  Violence  and  Indignities  to  their  Perfons  j
treat  them  with  all  manner  of  Contumacy  and  Scorn  ;  op-
prefs  them  in  their  Eftates-  drive  them  from  their  Dwel-
lings j  clap  them  into  Prifons  j  make  them  fly  their  Country-
and,  as  if  all  this  were  too  little,  fometimes  take  away
their  very  Lives  too.  Now,  Who  would  chufe  to  be  thus
trampled  upon  j  and  not  only  chufe,  but  make  a  Virtue  of  it
too }  A  Virtue  that  provokes  the  moft  barbarous  Injuftice
and  all  manner  of  Affronts,  and  leaves  a  Man  naked  and
defencelels  to  them  all  ?

To  all  this  Epi&etus  replies  in  fliort,  that  there  is  nothing
grievous  or  terrible  in  all  this  difmal  Reprefentation.  For
if  there  v/ere,  all  the  V7orld  would  agree  in  efteeming  it  fo.
But  in  truthj  the  only  thing  that  carries  Terror  in  it,  is  the

Opinion

"dDtth  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  13^

Opinion  we  entertain  of  the  injuries  being  fuch.  So  that  the
affront  is  not  from  the  Aftion  of  the  Perfon  that  offers,
but  from  the  Opinion  of  the  Perfon  that  refents  it^  And
confequently,  we  expofe  and  injure  ourfelves,  for  thefc
Opinions  are  our  own  hSk.  and  Deed.

Now,  that  Reproach  and  Slanders  are  no  fuch  mighty  Af-
flidion,  nor  what  ought  to  move  our  Indignation,  and  dif-
quiet  our  Minds,  will  very  ealily  be  made  appear.  For,
they  muft  be  either  true  or  falfe.  If  the  former,  why  fo  veiy
loth,  and  fo  very  much  difpleafed,  to  hear  the  Truth }  Our
Shame  in  this  Cafe  comes  too  latej  and  we  fhould  have  done
much  better,  in  hating  to  commit  the  Fad,  than  in  hating
to  be  told  of  it  afterwards.  But  if  what  is  faid  of  us  be  falfe,
it  is  the  Reporter,  and  not  We,  that  are  the  worfe  for  it.

What  Courfe  then  is  to  be  taken  in  this  cafe  !  He  tells
you,  the  Remedy  is,  Not  to  let  this  Affront  make  too  fud-
^tn  and  fenfible  Impreffions  upon  you,  nor  provoke  you  to
Lamentations,  and  Complaints,  as  if  you  thought  yourfelf
unhappy  upon  this  Account  j  but  to  give  yourfelf  Leifure  to
recoiled:,  and  confider  the  true  Nature  of  the  Thing  calmly
and  coolly.  But  if  you  once  can  gain  time,  and  defend  your-
felf againft  the  Surprife  of  the  Thing,  you  v/ill  live  eafy
and  quiet,  and  your  Mind  will  be  in  a  Condition  to  weigh
and  apply  the  Principles  of  Philofophy,  and  to  diftinguifh,
whether  this  Accident  be  any  thing  within  your  own  Power
or  not.  And  when  you  find  it  to  be  fomewhat  that  your
Will  cannot  command,  the  Refult  of  this  will  prefently  be,
to  conclude,  that  neither  your  Happinefs  or  Unhappinefs  can
depend  upon  it ;  and  that,  be  it  as  bad  as  it  is  poffible  to  fup-
pofe,  yet  you  have  it  in  your  Power  to-  convert  it  to  an  ex-
cellent Ufe  j  and,  by  a  true  Elevation  of  Soul,  Vv^hich  ex-
prelTes  a  decent  Contempt  of  the  World,  and  all  its  Ma-
lice, to  reap  great  Advantages  from  fuch  crofs  Accidents  as
thefe.

Now  the  befl  Expedient  for  Evennefs  of  Temper  is  Cu-
ftom.  And  therefore,  upon  any  fuch  provoking  Occafion,
there  is  no  Prefervative  againft  falfe  Notions  and  immode-
rate Refentments,  like  Silence,  and  refufing  to  give  one's
PaflTion  vent  j  and  though  it  may  boil  and  foam  within,  yet
flill  to  ftiHe  the  Fire,  till  we  feel  its  Heat  abate  •  and  not  let
loofe  the  Dog,  till  he  have  done  fnarling.  This  Praftice  is
recommended  to  us  particularly  by  the  Example  of  Socrates^
who  was  taken  notice  of,  for  never  fpeaking  a  Word,  when
any  thing  anger'd  him.

N  4  Wbas

134 Epi  CTETU  s*s  Morals,

What  Ept£ietus  fays  upon  this  Subjed,  -  and  that  which
follows  in  the  next  Chapter,  have,  in  my  Opinion,  fo  clofe
a  Coherence,  that  they  ought  to  be  conneded  by  that  Parti-
cle But  J  which  feems  to  me  by  no  means  redundant,  but  a
very  fignificant  Conjundion  in  this  place.  Thus  then  the
Author  carries  on  his  Argument;  But  as  for  Death  -andExile^
and  all  thofe  Calamities  -xxhich  Mcnikind  are  ufually  afraid  of^
be  fur e  to  keep  thefe  conjiantly  before  your  Eyes:,  and  fo  on.

For  having  proved,  concerning  all  External  Events  in
general,  even  the  difmaleft  and  dreadfuleft  of  them  all,  that
there  is  not  any  thing  formidable  or  injurious  in  the  Nature
of  the  Things  themfelves ;  but  that  this  is  intirely  owing  to
Mens  own  Notions  and  Refentments  of  them  ;  he  prefcribes
Caution,  and  Leifure,  and  cooler  Confideration,  as  the  bell
Remedy  againft  fuch  Impreffions,  and  particularly  againft  our
being  enraged  at,  or  deje<fted  under  any  Vexation  or  crofs
Accidents.  But  he  direcfts  to  another  fort  of  Application :
againft  Death,  and  Exile,  and  fuch  Misfortunes,  as  are  of  the
firft  and  moft  formidable  Kind  ;  which  is,  to  bear  them  con-
tinually in  mind,  and  live  in  Expecftation  of  them  every  Mo-
ment, as  Things  that  may  come  at  any  time,  and  fome  of
which  moft  certainly  v;ill  come  at  one  time  or  other.
For  when  onceReafon  hath  convinced  us,  that  thefe  Things
are  not  really  fuch,  as  make  a  Man  one  whit  the  better,  or
the  worfe  ,•  and  when  cuftomary  Meditation  hath  re<:onciled
us  to  them,  taken  off  all  their  Terror,  and  rendered  the
Thoughts  of  them  eafy  and  familiar  to  the  Soul,  we  pre-
fently  look  upon  the  moft  dreadful  of  them  all,  as  Things
frequent  and  common ;  and  by  this  means  we  feel  both  our
Spirits  fupported  againft  the  Terrors,  and  our  Attetftions
much  moderated,  and  weaned  from  the  Pieafures  of  thq
World.

CHAP.

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 135

CHAP. XXIX.

IF  you  refolve  to  make  Wiicloni  and  Virtue  the
Study  and  Bufinefs  of  your  Life,  you  muft  be
fure  to  arm  yourfeJf  before-hand  againft  all  the  In-
conveniencies  and  Difcouragements,  that  are  like  to
attend  this  Refolution.  Imagine,  that  you  fhall
meet  with  many  Scoffs,  and  much  Derifion  ;  and
that  People  will  upbraid  you  with  turning  Philo-
fopher  all  on  the  fudden  ;  and  afk  in  Scorn,  What
is  the  meaning  of  all  this  affecfted  Gravity,  and
thefe  difdainfal  Looks  ?  But  be  not  you  affefled,
or  fupercilious,  only  flick  clofe  to  whatever  you  are
in  your  Judgment  convinced  is  virtuous  and  b*e-
coniing ;  and  confider  this  as  your  proper  Station
affigned  you  by  God,  v/hich  you  muft  not  quit  upon
any  Terms.  And  remember,  that  if  you  perfe-
vere  in  Goodnefs,  thofe  very  Men,  who  derided  you
at  firft,  will  afterwards  turn  your  Admirers,  But  if
you  give  way  to  their  Reproaches,  and  are  vanquifned
by  them,  you  will  then  render  yourfelf  doubly,
and  molt  defervedly  ridiculous.

COMMENT.

TH  E  former  Advice  extended  to  all  Mankind  in  general,
and  concerned  them  as  Men  j  there  he  had  very  largely
diflliaded  them  from  engaging  in  the  Affairs  of  the  World,
and  all  the  Difquiets  and  Superftitious  Fears  about  them-  in
confideration,  that  thefe  are  remote  and  foreign,  out  of  our
Reach  and  Difpofal,  and  that  a  Man  mull-  look  at  home
for  all  that  is  properly  good  or  evil;  this  being  the  pecu-
liar Prerogative  of  a  Rational  and  Free  Agent,  that  ail  its
Happinefs  and  Mifery  depends  upon  itfelf  alone.  But  now
he  takes  another  Method,  and  addrcffes  himfelf  particularly
to  fuch,  as  have  made  fome  Advances  in  Wifdom  and  Good-
nefs, and  are  affeded  with  a  real  Love  and  Dciire  of  it.  And

here

136  Epic TETus's  Morals,

here  his  firft  Care  is,  to  fecure  the  Approaches,  and  firft  Ef-
forts of  fuch  a  Defire,  by  giving  timely  Warning  of  the  Dif-
ficulties it  may  probably  encounter,  left  the  Surprize  of  any
fudden  and  unforefeen  Oppofition  fliould  difturb  the  Mind,
and  break  its  Meafures.

Now  nothing  is  more  ufual,  tha^for  Men  to  take  it  ill,
when  any  of  their  Companions  leave  a  v>'ay  of  Living,  to
which  they  have  been  long  accuftomed.  And  the  Method
they  take  for  expreffing  fuch  Refentments,  is,  fometimes  by
expofmg  and  ridiculing  them,  that  fo  the  World  may  think
their  own  CourfeSj  at  leaft  as  good,  as  thofe  they  ufe  with
fuch  rude  Infolence  and  Contempt :  And  this  is  commiOnly
the  Treatment  Men  who  take  better  Courfes  meet  with,  from
their  old  Cronies  and  inrim.ate  Acquaintance.  Somerimes
they  do  it,  by  reproaching  them  with  Arrogance  and  Pride,
and  valuing  themfelves  upon  their  Philofophy,  more  than
they  ought  to  do.  And  this  proceeds  partly  from  Anger,
and  partly  from  Envy,  and  a  malicious  Defire  to  obftruct
their  farther  Progrefs.

And  indeed,  this  fpightful  Dealing  does  but  too  often  meet
with  its  defired  Succefs;  for  many  Perfons  are  overcome
with  thefe  Reproaches,  and  defert  their  Poft,  and  relapfe  in-
to their  former  Follies,  merely  to  deliver  themfelves  from
fuch  Teazings.  Some  of  thefe  Derifions  are  expreft  in  con-
temptuous Looks  and  Geftures,  and  they  are  properly  Moc-
keries. Others  do  not  content  themfelves  with  Apifh  Fi-
gures and  ill  Language,  but  run  Men  upon  Precipices,  and
draw  both  thofe  that  would  fain  be  good,  and  all  that  take
their  part,  and  affift  them  in  fo  neceffary  a  Reformation,  in-
to real  Difficulties,  and  great  Dangers.  And  if  this  were
done  by  Strangers  only,  it  were  fomething  more  tolerable  j
but  their  own  Friends  and  Relations  have  oftentimes  the
greateft  Hand  in  it.  Thefe  do  it  upon  an  idle  Pretence,  That
a  Philofophical  Retirement  renders  Men  ufelefs,  and  loft  t©
the  World  ,*  and  Others  do  it,  partly  out  of  Envy  againft  9
Life,  fo  infinitely  more  happy  and  commendable  than  their
own :  and  partly  out  of  a  Refentment,  that  this  will  make
Them,  and  their  way  of  Converfation  defpifed,  by  thofe
that  have  exchanged  it  for  a  better.

Nor  muftit  be  diifembled,  that  there  is  fometimes  too  juft
ground  for  the  latter  of  thefe  Reafons  j  for  we  very  often
fee  Men,  whofe  good  Difpofitions  and  happy  Temper  in-
cline them  to  V/ifdom  and  Virtue,  while  they  are  not  arriv-
ed to  any  Maftery  or  Perfection  in  it,  but  only  big  WBch  the

Hope

W/^  SiMPLiciu  s's  Comment. 137

Hope  of  attaining  to  it  in  time,  exalted  with  Self-conceit,  and
full  of  Difdain,  as  if  they  only  had  all  Perfection,  and  other
People  none  at  all.  When,  in  truth,  this  mighty  Opinion
proceeds  only  from  v/ant  of  Difcretion  and  Judgment,  and
is  the  moft  undeniable  Evidence  againft  fuch  Men,  that  they
really  have  not  that,  which  they  with  (o  much  Confidence
pretend  to.  For  there  is  not  in  the  v/hole  World  any  thing
more  inconfiftent  with  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  than  an  haughty
flipercilious  Carriage,  and  that  f-vvelling  Vanity,  vAiich  dil-
dains  and  negleds  that  excellent  and  moft  divine  Rule  of
Knowing  oiies  Self-  A  Rule,  which  is  in  truth,  the  Sum  and
Subftance  of  all  Philofophy,  the  firft  Principle,  and  the  laft
and  higheft  Principle  in  it.

When  Men  behave  themfelves  with  fo  much  Pride  and
Oftentation,  theWorldjI  rhinl^the  Character  of  Philofophers
fuits  very  ill  with  them.  For  this  Exaltation  does  not  pro-
ceed from  any  true  Gallantry  or  Greatnefs  of  Soul,  but  it  k.
a  vain  Tumour,  which  draws  ill-Humours  to  it  from  with-
in, and  fwells  to  an  unnatural  Bulk  j  an  Excrefcence,  which
caufes  Deformity,  and  proceeds  from  fome  Difeafe.  Where-
as true  Greatnefs  and  Strength  of  Mind,  lilce  that  of  the  Bo-
dy, refults  from  a  good  Difpoiition  of  the  Parts,  is  diftri-
buted  equally  and  regularly  through  the  whole  Mafs,  and
preferves  a  due  Tem.per,  and  mutual  good  i\fiiftance,  be-
tween the  Purts  within,  and  thofe  without.

Againft  this  Diftemper  he  cautions  all  that  make  Philofo-
phy their  Study,  as  againlr  a  Thing  detefred  by  all  Mankind,
and  that  which  gives  a  juft:  Provocation  to  Malice,  and  ex-
pofes  a  Man  to  all  the  mifchicvous  EfFecls  of  it.  But  when
all  due  Care  hath  been  taken  to  get  clear  of  this  Folly ;  then
a  Man  ought  to  harden  himfdf  againfc  all  Scoffs  and  Reproa-
ches, with  the  Confideradon  of  the  Dignity  of  Human  Na-
ture, and  what  is  decent  and  agreeable  to  i'o  excellent  a  Be-
ing ;  and  then  to  perfevere  in  the  Choice  of  Virtue,  in  de-
fpight  of  all  Oppotition  to  the  contrary  •  and  in  a  full  Per-
fuaiion,  that  thefe  good  Pvcfolutions  and  Defires  are  the  Mo-
tions and  Impulfes  of  a  Divine  Power.  For,  in  truth,  Phi-
lofophy is  the  nobleft  and  moft  valuable  Bleffing,  that  ever
God  beftowed  upon  Mankind.

The  Excellence  of  the  Thing  is  confefTed  by  thefe  very
Scoffers  themfelves ;  who,  when  they  reproach  us  with  pre-
tending to  an  Accomplifhment  above  us,  do  at  the  famctim^e
exprefs  the  high  Efteem  they  have  for  it ;  and  by  not  allov/-
jng  any  Man  to  profefs  himfelf  a  Philofophcr  on  a  fudden,

they

138  Epi  o  TETU  s's  Moral  s,

tliey  expofe  indeed  the  Arrogance  and  Forwardnefe  of  the
Perfons  who  prefume  to  do  io  j  but  then  withal  they  ac-
knowledge this  to  be  en  Attainment,  which  requires  much
Time,  and  great  Application.  Now  thefe  very  Men,  who
refent  rhe  Vanity  of  bold  Pretenders  with  fo  much  Indigna-
tion, and  expreis  their  Honour  of  Philofophy  that  way,
will  difcern  the  Beauty  and  Majefty  of  it  much  better,  and
admire  it  ten  thoufand  times  more,  when  they  behold  its
efFefts,  in  the  modeft  Converiation  of  one  who  conftantly  im-
proves, and  perfeveres  in  being  refolutely  and  obilinately  vir-
tuous, in  defpight  of  all  the  Scoffs  and  Difcour^igements,  by
which  they  attempted,  in  vain,  to  draw  him  off  Buc  the  Man,
that  yields  tamely  to  their  Reproaches,  and  upon  that  Account,
defifts  from  his  good  Purpofes,  and  compounds  for  his  Quiet
by  returning  to  his  former  Courfes,  renders  himfelf  doubly
ridiculous.  The  Jeils  and  Scorn,  which  paffed  upon  fuch
a  one  at  firft,  were  v-/hat  he  had  really  no  Concern  in  ;  but
the  Reproach  mull:  return  all  upon  the  Authors  themfelves,
and  none  of  their  Afperfions  would  ftick,  fo  long  as  he  pro-
ceeded in  a  generous  Negledt  of  them,  and  by  degrees  was
preparing  to  change  their  Scorn  into  Admiration  and  Efteem.
But  the  luffering  one's  felf  to  be  vanquiftied  by  their  Malice,
does  not  only  juftify  their  firft  Infolence,  by  quitting  our
former  Pretenfions,  and  falling  io  low,  after  looking  ib  high-
('thus  vainly  actem.pting  to  reconcile  Philofophy  with  a  mean
and  fordid  Temper )  but  it  alfo  provokes  Contempt  up-
on another  Account  j  that  of  being  fubdued  by  fuch  bafe
defpicable  Enemies,  and  letting  a  fenfclefs  Flear,  or  a  ma-
licious Jeft,  beat  one  off  from  that  Poft  of  Virtue,  which  God
and  Wifdom  had  afligned  to  him.  Moft  juftly  therefore  does
this  poor-fpirited  Wretch  deferve  a  double  Portion  of  Scorn-
the  Scorn  of  wife  and  good  Men,  after  having  fabmitted  to
that  of  Fools  and  Knaves,  which  could  have  done  him  no
Harm  at  all,  in  cafe  he  had  perfifted  in  his  Duty  ;  but  returns
upon  him  with  double  Force,  and  is  rendered  moft  reafon-
able  and  due,  by  his  own  Inconftancy  and  Defertion.

Thefe  Confiderations  are  abundantly  fufficient  to  infpire
any  Mind,  not  utterly  funk  into  FeebJenefs  and  Effeminacy,,
with  generous  Refolutions  to  perfevcre  in  Goodnels,  and-
hold  out  againft  all  manner  of  Oppolicion.  And  in  this  there
is  one  very  confiderable  Advantage,  That  even  our  Piiflions.
commence  good  Difpofitions,  and  the  natural  Ambition  e-
very  Man  hath  after  Honour  and  Fame,  becomes  upon  this
Occafion  an  Affiftant to  Virtue : It  adds  Strength  and  Vi-r

gour

TOzV/^ S  I  M  PLI  CIUS'S COMME  NT. I39

gour  to  Reafon;  and  is  refined  and  exalted  by  it.  For  thus
we  come  to  a  true  Notion  of  Honour:  we  covet  it  no  long-
er for  its  own  Sake,  nor  are  proud  of  it,  upon  the  Account
of  the  Perfons  who  pay  the  Refpe<5l,  and  fo  place  our  Hap-
pinefs  upon  foincthing  without  us ;  but  we  value  it,  as  a
Mark  and  Teftimony  of  real  Virtue  and  Defert.  And  there-
fore the  Honour,  which  a  Man  ought  to  be  fatisfied  with,  is
by  no  means  that,  which  comes  from  the  Applaufe  of  the
Rabble,  and  unthinking  part  of  the  World,  who  often  mif-
take  Men  and  their  Characfters  ;  but  that  which  is  founded
upon  the  Commendation  of  the  Wife  and  the  Good.  For
Thefe  know  how  to  .difcern  between  Perfons,  and  their  re-
fpedtive  Merits  j  and  the  Teftimony  of  fuch  is  what  may  be
depended  upon,  without  any  Danger  of  being  led  into  falfe
Judgments  by  it.

CHAP. XXX.

IF  you  ever  happen  to  accommodate  yourfeif  to
the  Humours  of  the  World,  for  the  fake  of  Re-
putation and  Applaufe,  take  notice,  that  this  is  be-
low a  Philofopher.  And  therefore  content  yourfeif
upon  all  Occafions,  with  really  being  what  you
would  be  thought.  But  if  you  will  needs  be  thought
fo  too,  deferve  your  own  good  Opinion,  and  that
will  be  fufficient.

C  0  M  M  E  N  r.

E  were  told  before,  That  when  once  a  Man's  Judg-
ment is  convinced  of  his  Duty,  he  ought  conftandy  to
perfeverein  it,*  to  look  upon  this,  as  the  particular  Poffc,  and
Charadler,  which  Providence  hath  appointed  him  to  fill:
That,  however  Men  may  run  down  Goodiiefs  for  a  while,
yet  the  Refolute  and  Brave  break  through  all  that,  and  in
time,  gain  the  Admiration  of  their  Enemies  and  Deridersj
but  the  Tame  and  the  Fickle,  who  fink  under  the  Reproach-
es of  ill  Men,  draw  down  a  juft  Scorn,  and  a  double  Shame

upon

140 Epicte  Tus's  Morals,

upon  themfelves.  Now  to  sllthis  he  adds,  Thar,  for  a  Man
to  forfake  his  Principles,  and  ccnfulr,  not  fo  much  his  own
Judgment,  as  the  Humoar  of  the  World,  thereby  to  render
himfelf  acceptable  to  others,  is  a  Weaknefs,  of  which  a  Phi-
lofopher  muftnot  be  guilty  j  It  being  a  fixed  Rule  to  all  fuch.
That  their  only  Care  ought  to  be,  to  recommend  themfelves
to  their  own  Confciences,  and  to  Almighty  God,

Therefore^  fays  he,  content  yourfelf  'with  being  a  Thilofopher  ;
which  is  but  another  Name  for  a  Good  Man.  But  if  the  be-
ing fo  alone  feem  too  little ;  and  you  defire,  that  your  Light
fhould  fhine,  and  that  your  Virtue  fhould  be  known  and  ob-
ferved,  (As  indeed  it  is  the  Nature  of  Goodnefs,  to  difcover
its  Beauties  and  flied  its  Luflre ;  and  a  Man  can  with  better
Confidence  take  Satisfatflion  in  his  own  Virtues,  when  they
sre  confpicuous  and  acknowledged,*)  then,  fays  he,  do  not
fix  your  Eye  upon  the  World,  nor  be  fohcitous  to  pleafe  the
Multitude  ?  for  thefe  are  but  very  incompetent  Judges  of  fuch
Matters:  But  rather  ftrive  to  approve  yourfelf  to  your  own
Breaft,  and  let  the  Senfe  and  Confcioufnefs  of  your  own  Vir-
tue fatisfy  you.  For  a  Man  who  hath  attained  to  fome  good
meafjre  of  Philofophy  (and  fuch  a  one,  you  muft  obferve
Epi^ietus  applies  himfelf  to  at  prefent)  will  be  fare,  both  to
aft  confiftently  with  his  Principles,  while  he  makes  it  his
Bufmefs  to  approve  himfelf  to  his  own  Confcience  j  and  he
will  alfo  fecure  a  more  difcerning  and  impartial  Judge  of  his
Adions,  Vv'hen  they  are  to  be  tried  by  his  own  Reafon,  than
if  he  appealed  to  the  Judgment  of  the  World.

And  here  it  may  be  proper  to  take  notice,  how  different
this  Advice  is  from  fomething  which  was  faid  before  j  all
which,  in  truth,  depends  upon  the  Difference  of  the  Perfons
concerned  in  it.  There  he  addreft  his  Difcourfe  to  a  Young
Beginner  ^  One  but  juffc  entering  upon  the  Siudy  of  Philofo-
phy j  and  to  him  the  Counfel  thought  fit  to  be  given,  was
I>o  not  ajfc^  to  be  thought  JVife :  Becaufe  Perfons  in  his  Cir-
cumtknces,  are  ftrangely  fond  of  Fame  and  Applaufe,  tranf-
ported  beyond  Meafure  with  Noife  and  em.pry  Breath,  and
not  only  too  creduloufly  vain  upon  the  falfe  Judgments  of
others,  but  unqualified,  as  yet  to  pafs  any  true  Judgment
upon  themfelves.  But  at  prefent  he  hath  a  good  Proficient
to  deal  with,  one  better  difpofed  to  ad  upon  Principle,  and
to  follow  the  Dictates  of  his  ov/n  Reafon :  And  therefore
to  fuch  a  one  his  Advice  is,  That  he  would  content  himfelf
with  being  what  he  fliould  be  j  but  if  he  will  needs  be  thought
fo  too, he  is  now  in  a  Condition  to  make  a  juft  EiLimace

of

<with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 141

of  himfelfj  and  therefore  msy  be  fatisfied  v.'ith  his  own  Ap-
probation.

This  feems  to  be  the  true  Importance  of  the  Chapter :
Though  poffibly  there  may  be  another  very  convenient  Stn^e.
of  it  too.  For  this  Great  Man,  very  probably,  defigned  it
^s  a  neceffary  Caution  alfo  (as  indeed  he  generally  takes
care  to  prevent  any  Mifconftrudlions,  to  which  his  Expreffi-
ons  may  be  liable.)  Now  by  faying  in  the  former  Chapter,
That  thofe  luho  expofe  Virtue  at  firji^  ijuill  afternvards  admire
the  Refolute  and  Conftant  in  it ,  hut  the  Men  ivho  yielded  to
thofe  Reproaches^  deferve  to  be  doubly  [corned  \  he  might  be
thought  to  propound  the  Opinion  and  Efteem  of  the  World,
as  the  principal  Motive  to  Goodnefs ;  And  therefore  here  he
retradls  that,  and  takes  off  all  fuch  Sufpicions,  by  calling  away
the  Soul  from  the  Purfuit  of  Fame  and  Reputation  abroad,
as  that  which  is  apt  to  corrupt  her  Principles,  and  make  a
Man  more  induftrious  to  pleafe  others  than  himfelf.  And  in
Oppofition  to  this,  he  would  have  a  Man  gain  his  own  Ap-
probation;  for  the  Judgment  a  wife  Man  makes  of  himfelf,
'n  lefs  fubject  to  Partiality,  and  Prejudice,  and  Vanity,  and
of  greater  Ufe  in  the  Encouragement  it  gives  to  Virtue,  than
that  of  the  World  can  poffibly  be.  For  the  being  approved
and  commended  by  Wife  and  Good  Judges,  is  the  moft  fa-
tisfadory  and  convincing  Evidence,  that  a  Man  is  truly  Vir-
tuous. Now  the  Perfon,  to  whom  Efiiietus  fpeaks  in  this
Place,  is  fuppofed  to  be  fuch  a  Judge  j  and  upon  this  Pre-
fumption  I  imagine  it  is,  that  he  fays  in  the  Clofe  of  the
Chapter,  Do  but  deferve  your  O'wn  Good  Opnion^  and  that  is
enough  in  all  Confcience.

C  HAP.

142 Epi  c  TE  Tus's  Moral  s.

CHAP. XXXL

NEver  perplex  yourfelf  with  anxious  Thoughts
like  thefe  •,  /  Jhdl  lead  a  wretched  obfcure  Life,
without  any  Name^  or  Notice  taken  of  me.  For  if
you  fuppofe  (as  this  Complaint  evidently  does)  that
Obfcurity  and  Difreped  is  an  Evil ;  confider,  that
it  is  no  more  in  the  power  of  any  but  yourfelf  to
bring  any  Evil  upon  you,  than  it  is  to  bring  any
Bafenefs  or  Diflionefty  upon  you.  But  befides,  pray
confider,  Was  it  any  part  of  your  proper  Bufinefs,
to  be  chofen  into  a  Place  of  Command,  or  to  be  ad-
mitted to,  or  carefled  at  publick  Entertainments?
You  muft  allow  it  was  not.  Where  is  the  Difre-
fpe<5l  then  ?  And  what  juft  Reflexion  can  it  be  upon
you,  if  you  are  not  ?  Befides,  why  fhould  you  fay,
you  fhall  be  defpifed,  and  have  no  Name,  or  Notice
taken  of  you,  when  yeur  Bufinefs  lies  wholly  in
Matters  at  the  difpofal  of  your  own  Will,  and  for
■which  confequently  you  have  it  in  your  own  power
to  make  yourfelf  as  valuable  as  you  pleafe  ?  But  your
Friends  will  be  7uver  the  better  for  you.  What  do
you  call  being  never  the  better .''  You  will  not  fur-
niHi  them  with  Money,  nor  have  Intereft  enough  to
give  them  the  Privileges  of  Citizens  of  Rome.  And
why  fhould  you  trouble  yourfelf  for  this  ?  Who
told  you,  that  this  was  ever  incumbent  upon  you  ;
or  one  of  thofe  Things  in  your  own  power,  which
you  ought  to  look  upon  as  a  Duty?  Or  how  can
it  be  expefted,  you  fhould  beftow  that  upon  ano-
ther, w'hich  you  are-  not  poflen;  of  yourfelf?  But
your  Friends  will  anfwer.  Pray  get  it  then^  that  you
may  impart  to  us.  Yes,  I  will,  with  all  my  H^art,
.provided  you  can  direct  me,  how  I  may  attain  thefe
Things,  and  at  the  fame  time  preferve  my  Integri-
ty,

Hvith  SiMPtrcrus^s  Comment.  143

ty,  my  Modcfty,  and  true  Greatnefs  of  Soul,  invio-
late, but  if  you  defire  me  to  part  with  my  own
real  Good,  that  I  may  procure  you  fome  imaginary
Good  only ;  this  is  the  greateft  Injuitice,  and  the
greateft  Folly  imaginable.  And  which  of  thefe  do
you  efteem  the  more  valuable ;  Money,  or  a  true,
virtuous,  and  modeft  Friend  ?  Therefore  it  would
better  become  you  to  aflift  my  Virtue,  than  to  ex:-
pecl  fuch  things  from  Me,  as  cannot  be  had,  but  at
the  Expence  of  that.  But  it  will  he  ohje^ied  again^
That  your  Country  receives  no  Advantages  from  you.
What  Advantage  do  you  mean?  You  will  not  build
publick  Porticoes  or  Bagnioes,  nor  Exchanges .''  And
what  if  you  do  not.^  Does  your  Country  exped  to
be  furnifhed  with  Arms  from  a  Shoemaker,  or
Shoes  from  a  Smith  ?  Surely,  if  every  one  do  it
Service  in  his  own  Way,  this  is  all  that  can  in  Reafon
be  required.  And  Ihall  you  then  be  thought  to  have
done  it  none,  if  you  make  an  honeft  and  good  Pa-
triot.'' No  iure.  You  are  very  far  from  being  an
Ufelefs  Member  of  the  Commonwealth,  when  yoU
do  fo.  Well,  but  what  Rank  then,  what  Place»
(you'll  fay)  fhall  you  but  have  in  the  Commonwealth  ^
Why  truly,  even  juft  fuch  a  one,  as  is  confiftent
with  your  Integrity  and  Modefty.  But  if  once  yoU
part  with  thefe,  upon  a  Pretence  of  promoting  the
Publick  Good  •,  know,  that  you  are  lefs  capable  of
ierving  your  Country,  when  you',  are  grown  Kna-
vifh  and  Impudent.

-C  a  M  M  E  Nt,

WHEN  Men  apply  themfel\^es  to  the  Study  and  Pradi<i>e"
of  Virtue,  and  are  convinced,  that  nothing  fo  well
deferves  their  Care,  as  the  Improvement  of  their  Minds  j  ma-
ny Difficulties  offer  themfelVes,  to  fhake  thefe  Refolutions.
And,  as  Men  differ  in  their  Circumftances,  fo  thefe  Obje<^i-
ons  prefent  themfelves  differently,  botl?  to  difquiet  their  own'

O  Thoughts,

J44 Epictetus*s  Morals,

Thoughts,  and  to  evacuate  the  Good  Advice  of  others.  To
Young  Beginners,  vt^hofe  Minds  have  not  yet  purged  off  the
Drofs  of  the  World,  fuch  mean  and  fordid  Reflexions  as
thefe  are  apt  to  ftep  in ;  If  1 7iegleB  my  Bufutefs  a?td  Efiate,
I  and  my  iamily  Jhall  Jiarve  ,•  and  except  I  take  the  Trouble  of
funijbing  my  Servant^  my  Indulgence  ivtll  be  his  Ruin.  But  to
Them,  who  have  made  any  confiderable  Progrefs,  thofe  Ob-
jecftions  appear  Defpicable  and  Low  :  they  are  above  fuch  ^ri-
fling Confiderations,  and  while  they  are  doing  their  Duty,
can  truffc  Providence  for  a  Provifion.  But  then  at  the  fame
time,  they  are  concerned  for  the  difcharge  of  all  thofe  good
Offices,  which  may  be  expefted  from  them  ,•  and  think,  that
both  the  intrinfick  Goodnefs  of  the  thing,  and  the  Honour
attending  it,  will  abundantly  juftify  fuch  a  Concern.  For
their  Defires  are  Generous  and  Noble  j  they  aim  at  nothing
elfe  but  true  Honours  they  decline  Infamy  and  Obfcuriry,
and  propofe  to  themfelves  the  Advantage  of  their  Friends,
and  the  Service  of  their  Country :  And  from  thefe  Topicks,
they  ftart  fome  Objeftions,  which  Epifietus  here  undertakes
to  examine,  and  to  refute  particularly.

Firft  of  all  he  applies  himfelf  to  that  General  one  of  Ob-
fcurity  or  Difgrace ;  that  if  a  Man  retire  from  the  Gainful
Employments  and  Bufinefs  of  the  World,  or  quit  his  Practice
at  the  Bar,

Where  Eloquence  acquires  a  jufl  and  lajling  Eajne^

(as  Homer  obferves ;)  it  muft  be  his  hard  fate  to  be  buried
alive,  without  any  Refpeft  paid,  or  notice  taken  of  him.

Now  this  Objeftion  Epi&etus  takes  off  moft  efFec1:ually,
by  the  following  Syllogifms :  Difgrace  is  an  Evil,  and  Evil  as
well  as  Good,  is  focnething  within  our  own  power.  But
whatever  is  fo,  no  other  but  ourfelves,  can  bring  upon  us.
Therefore,  when  any  Man  is  really  in  Dilgrace,  this  is  in,
and  by,  and  from  Himfelf,  whether  Others  difiefpedl  him,
or  whether  they  do  not.  So  then  the  Difgrace  from  others,
is  what  V7e  have  no  jufl:  caufe  to  fear,  nor  indeed  ought  it
to  pafs  for  Difgrace  in  our  Opinion,  if  Difgrace  be  allowed
to  be  Evil ;  for  then  it  muft  by  confequence  be  our  owa
and  Deed.

This  is  the  Sum  of  the  Argument.  And  nov/  if  you  pleafe,
let  us  examine  the  feveral  Propofirions  whereof  it  confifts.
Firft  of  all,  Difgrace  or  Obfcurity  (fays  he)  is  an  Evil :
Now  if  Honour  be  (as  all  Men  fure  wi/l  allow  it  to  bej  a

Good  ;

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 145;

Good  j  Difgrace,  and  any  thing  that  is  Diflionourable,  muit
needs  be  Evil :  For  if  it  were  Good,  ic  would  ceafe  to  be
Difhonourable,  and  be  valued  and  efteemed.  Bur,  befides
the  confenc  of  all  Mankind  in  this  notion  of  Honour  j  this
very  thing  proves  it  to  be  Good,  that  it  is  what  we  account
moft  properly  to  belong  to  the  beft  Perfons  and  Things.
For  Honour  is  attributed  to  God,  to  BlefTed  Spirits,  and  to
the  moft  excellent  of  the  Sons  of  Men,  as  their  ftrid  and
juft  due,  as  the  beft  acknowledgment  we  can  pay,  for  their
A'lerit  and  Goodnefs,  So  that  Difhonour  muft  needs  be  an
Evil  upon  this  Account  alfo  j  for,  where  one  Contrary  be-
longs to  one  Extreme,  the  other  Contrary  will  belong  to  the
diftant  Extreme  j  and  this  is  the  Cafe  of  Honour  and  Diflio-
nour,  with  regard  to  Good  and  Evil.

The  Next  thing  to  be  proved  would  be,  that  this  is  a  thing
wholly  in  our  own  power^  but  this,  I  prefume,  is  done  al-
ready. For  there  hath  been  fo  much  faid  in  the  former  pare
of  this  Treatife,  to  fhew,  that  all  the  Good  and  Evil;  pro-
perly fo  called,  poffible  to  fall  upon  Rational  and  Free
Agents,  muft  needs  depend  upon  the  Liberty  of  their  own
Choice ;  and,  that  nothing  which  does  not  fall  within  a  Man's
own  Difpofal,  can  in  true  and  fbridl  Speaking,  be  call'd
Good  or  Evil ;  that  it  is  to  be  hoped,  there  is  no  need  of  re-
peating thofe  Arguments  any  more.  But  now,  if  Difgrace,
and  want  of  Honour  be  our  own  Aft  j  what  depends  upon
none,  and  comes  from  none  but  ourfelves,  when  we  lye  un-
der it ;  a  Man  may  abfolutely  defpife  and  negledl  the  World,
without  incurring  any  real  Diftionour  upon  that  account.
You  will  fay  indeed,  this  excludes  him  from  Places  of  Dig-
nity and  Refpedi  that  it  hinders  him  from  making  a  Figure
and  Intereft  in  his  own  Country ;  that  he  fits  at  Home,  and
eats  in  Private.  But  then  I  muft  afk  you  again,  whether  the
Office  of  a  Lord  Mayor,  or  a  Member  of  Parliament,  whe-
ther the  City-Feafts,  or  the  CarefTes  of  the  World,  are  things
in  our  own  Difpofal,  and  fuch  as  any  Man  can  give  himfelf
when  he  pleafes :  You  muft  grant  me  they  are  not.  Now
from  thence  1  infer,  that  no  Man  is  really  unhappy  for  the
want  of  them  j  and  confequenrly  that  Obfcurity,  and  want
of  publick  Honour,  of  which  thefe  are  alledged  as  the  dif-
couraging  Inconveniences,  is  no  Evil  or  Unhappinefs  nei-
ther.

Now,  to  the  Meaning  of  what  follows,  there  feems  to
be  fome  difficulty  in  that  fhorc  Sentence,  It  is  no  more  in  the
fo<weT  of  atiy  but  yourfelf  to  bring  any  Evil  upon  you^  than  it  is

O  a  to

146  Epictetus's  Morals,

to  bring  Vilenefs  or  Diponejiy  upon  yon.  For  this,  not  being  in
the  power  of  any  other  Verfon  to  bring  any  ^vil  upon  a  Man^
feems  to  be  urged  from  a  proof  more  eviden:  than  itfelf  ^
and  the  Infinuation  here  i?,^  that,  as  the  Decency  of  an  Acfli-
on  \s  more  eafily  difcerned,  than  the  real  and  intrinfick  Good-
nefs  ?  (for  it  is  by  its  Comelinefs  and  Beauty,  that  Virtue  re-
commends itfelf,  and  invites  us  to  its  Embraces,  and  en-
gages our  AfFedion)  fo  alfo  the  Vilenefs  and  Difhonefly  is
more  vifibie  than  the  Immorality  and  Evil.  Now  Vilenefs
or  Turpitude  is  properly  applied  to  an  undue  Ufe  of  Pleafures
and  Senfual  Delights ;  and  this  abufe  can  be  the  effeft  of  no
other  thing  but  Choice  j  becaufe  the  indulging  thofc  Pleafures
vi  purely  our  own  Adl.  It  is  therefore  no  more  in  the  power
of  any  other  Perfon,  to  bring  Evil  upon  a  Man,  than  to
bring  Vilenefs  or  Diflionefty  u[)on  him  j  and  Evil  it  is  plain
he  cannot  •  for  a  Man  has  no  more  power  to  engage  us  in
Vlce^  than  he  has,  to  engage  us  in  bafe  and  unbecoming
Practices,  and  Evil,  both  of  Crime  and  Mifery,  is  as  much
in  his  own  free  Difpofal,  as  Turpitude  and  Dillionefty :  So
that,  if  a  Man  cannot  be  brought  into  this  latter  by  another,
and  if  he  can  no  more  be  brought  into  Evil,  than  into  That  j
it  follows,  that  he  cannot  be  brought  into  Evil  at  all  by  ano-
ther.

But  poflibly  the  place  may  be  clearer,  and  a  more  full  and
expedient  Senfe  found  out,  if  we  tranfpofe  that  Negative
Particle,  that  fo  the  Sentence  may  run  thus :  It  is  impoffible
for  any  Perfon  to  be  made  Miferable  by  any  other  ;  nay,  much
more  fo,  than  to  be  made  Vile  and  Bafe  by  him  j  and  thus
the  ftrength  and  ftrefs  of  the  whole  Argument,  will  lie  up-
on that  note  of  Comparifon.  And  this  Conjecture,  as  well
as  the  whole  interpretation  grounded  upon  it,  feems  to  carry
a  great  deal  of  Truth,  if  we  attend  to  the  Notions,  upon
which  the  Mafters  of  Reafon  and  Oratory  proceed  in  thefe
Matters  j  for  they  define  Floneily  and  Turpitude,  by  that
which  is  Praife  or  Blame-worthy,  and  fo  make  Decency  and
Vilenefe  to  depend  upon  the  Judgment  of  the  World.  But
of  what  is  Profitable  or  Hurtful,  and  Good  and  Evil,  they  give
us  a  very  different  Account  j  for  thefe,  they  tell  us,  have  a
Diftinguifliing  Character  founded  in  Nature,  and  are  not  fo
precarious,  as  to  depend  on  the  Opinions  or  Determinations
of  Men.  Now  according  to  this  Notion,  which  allows
fo  much  to  the  Commendations  of  Men,  and  makes  Diflio-
nefty to  coniift  in  the  Condemnation  and  Diflike  of  the

-  World,

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 147

World,  he  fays,  a  Man  muft  admit,  that  it  is  at  leaft  as  im-
pofTible  for  another  to  bring  evil  upon  him  as  it  is  to  bring
Diflionefty.  And  if  ( as  was  proved  before )  This  can-
not be  done,  much  lefs  can  That  j  and  fo  the  Conclufion
is  ftill  the  fame,  viz.  that  it  is  utterly  impoffible  to  be  doiie
at  all.

But  then  again,  What  occafion  (fays  he)  is  there  for  that
Complaint  of  living  without  ^wyN^we,  or  Notice  taken  of  you'?
Is  there  no  Way  of  becoming  Eminent,  but  by  appearing  in
fome  Office  of  Authority,  and  beiug  advanced  to  the  Admi-
niftration  of  Publick  Bufinefs  ?  Alafs !  poor  Man, you  have
forgot,  it  feems,  that  this  is  not  the  Field,  where  Humane
Good  and  Evil,  the  proper  and  peculiar  Happinefs  or  Mifery
of  our  Nature,  is  to  be  contended  for. The  Defires  and  A-
verfions  of  your  Mind, the  Adlions  of  your  Life,  and  in  a
word,  the  Management  of  your  Freedom, and  what  is  left
to  its  Difpofal,  thefe  are  the  Lifts  which  you  muft  enter,  for
that  Prize :  And  this  is  a  Combat,  in  v/hich  if  you  behave
yourfelf  Gallantly, and  aft, as  uncorrupt  Nature  and  right
Reafon  would  direft,  you  may  render  yourfelf  highly  valu-
able and  confpicuous. Why  then  do  you  complain  of  Ob-
fcurity  and  Contempt,  when  you  have  the.Poft  of  Honour
within  yourfelf,  and  may  become  as  Signal  and  Eminent  in
it, as  you  pleafe  ?  Why  indeed  ?  But  becaufe  you  have  not
yet  unlearned  the  Folly,  of  placing  your  Happinefs  in  Fo-
reign and  External  Advantages,  fuch  as  it  is  a  neceflary  Qua-
lification of  every  one,  who  would  be  a  Philofopher  in  good
earneft,  to  negledt  and  defpife.

Well,  but  allowing  (fays  the  Objeftor)  that  I  may  figna-
lize  myfelf  never  fo  much  •  yet  ftill  this  is  but  a  private  Sa-
tisfaftion :  it  gives  me  no  Credit  or  Influence  in  the  World,
and  my  Friends  are  never  the  better  for  my  Merit.  This
now  is  a  Pretence,  calculated  for  one,  who  hath  made  fome
competent  Proficiency  in  Wifdom  and  Virtue.  It  argues  the
Man  to  have  got  above  all  fordid  Seekings  of  his  Own  In-
tercft,  and  to  value  the  World  and  its  Advantages  no  longer
for  the  fake  of  himfelf,  but  in  kindnefs  to  his  Friends.  The
AfTifting  of  Them,  he  looks  upon,  as  a  Good  and  Gallant
Ad:ion-  and  therefore  allows  himfelf  in  thepurfuit  of  Wealth,
and  Powetj  and  Intereft,  to  prevent  his  being  an  ufelefs  and
unprofitable  part  of  the  Creation,  and  to  render  the  Good
he  hath,  as  diffufive  as  may  be.

This Objedlion  too, Epiiietus  removes  by  Two  Argu-
ments: The  Firft  proceeds  upon  the  diftindlion  of  things

O  3  within

I4§  Epictetus's  Morals,

within  our  own  Power ;  the  Othet  urges,  that  a  Man  who
retains  his  Virtue  and  Fidelity,  and  all  the  good  Qualities,
that  create  and  preferve  a  true  Friendfhip,  is  more  fervice-
able  and  beneficial  to  his  Friends,  than  if  he  fhould  enrich
or  promote  them,  when  the  power  of  doing  fo  was  pur-
chafed  at  the  Expence  of  thofe  good  Qualities.

From  the  Difl-indion  of  Things  in  our  Power,  he  argues,
that  Riches,  and  Honours,  and  Preferments  are  none  of
thofe,  which  Nature  hath  left  within  the  Difpofal  of  our
own  Wills ;  If  therefore  it  happen  at  any  time,  that  a  Wife
and  Good  Man  be  pofTefTed  of  thefe  Advantages,  let  him
impart  to  others  hberally;  Nay,  let  him  efteem  the  Opportu-
nity of  doing  Good,  a  greater  kindnefs  to  himfelf,  than  to
the  Perfon  who  receives  it  from  him.  But  if  it  be  not
his  Fortune  to  be  placed  in  fuch  Circumftances  ;  this  is  no
Refledion  upon  his  Virtue,  or  any  Difparagement  to  his
Kindnefs  and  good  Intentions.  He  is  not  one  whit  the  worfe
Man  in  himfelf,  nor  the  lefs  a  Friend  to  others.  For  (as
EpBetus  fays)  what  Madnefs  is  it  to  exped  that  a  Man
jhould  give  that  to  Us,  -which  he  is  7iot  pojjejfed  of  Himfelf  ?

But  pray  get  thefe  things^  fay  your  Friends,  that  lue  may  par-
take of  them  'with  you.  Yes,  with  all  my  Heart,  if  I  can  get
Them,  and  not  lofe  my  Self.  Do  but  order  Matters  fo,  that
I  may  ftill  retain  my  Fidelity  and  my  Innocence,  and  not
bring  any  Afperiaon  upon  the  Charaders  I  pretend  to,  viz,.
Thofe  of  a  Friend  and  a  Philofopher  •  and  when  you
have  thus  fmoothed  the  way,  give  your  Diredions,  and
I  will  not  fail  to  follow  them.  Now  by  this  Anfwer  our
Author  feems  plainly  to  allow  a  Liberty,  both  of  endeavour-
ing to  improve  an  Eftate,  and  to  embrace  publick  Offices
and  Honours ;  provided  thofe  Riches  and  Honours  may  be
acquired  and  enjoyed,  without  being  engaged  in  any  thing  in-
confident  with  Virtue,  or  unbecoming  our  Charader.  But
if  this  be  an  impoffible  Condition,  as  it  too  often  proves  j  If
the  Corruption  of  the  World  be  fuch,  that  a  Man,  who  makes
it  his  Bufmeft  to  acquire  thefe  Advantages,  do  at  the  fame
time  bring  himfelf  under  a  manifeft  hazard,  if  not  a  fa-
tal Neceffity,  of  parting  with  fomething  that  is  a  greater  and
more  fubftantial  Good  j  a  Good  more  properly  His,  in  ex-
change for  them:  Then,  what  do  thole  Friends  who  im-
portune a  Man  to  make  them  do  fo  too  j  what  do  they,  I  fay,
but  defire,  that  he  would  part  with  a  Happinefs  that  is  real
and  his  own  :  (chat  is  the  Good  of  his  Rational  Soul)  to
procure  tiiem  a  Kappinefs  which  is  but  imaginary,  and  can-
not

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  149"

not  be  truly  called  their  own,  though  they  had  it  ?  For  the
Advantages  they  are  fo  eager  for,  have  no  Relation  to  the  Ra-
tional Mind,  in  which  the  very  EfTence  and  Nature  of  a  Man
confifts  (and  confequently  all  the  Happinefs  he  is  capable  of,
confidered  as  a  Man,  muft  needs  depend  upon  that,)  but
they  are  the  Objeft  of  meaner  Appetites.

This  therefore  is  the  mojl  unequal  Dealing^  and  the  greateji
Folly  imagiitahle  :  They  deal  unequally,  becaufe  they  tranfgrefs
the  Laws  of  true  Friendfliip:  (For  the  Pythagoreans,  you
know,  made  Friendfliip  to  confift  in  Equality.)  And  No-
thing can  be  more  unfair,  than  for  Me  to  engage  a  Friend
in  fome  great  hazard,  and  expofe  him  to  certain  and  extreme
Mifery,  and  all  this,  only  to  fatisfy  fome  unreafonable  De-
fire  of  my  own.  The  Folly  of  it  is  double  •  for  Who  but
Fools,  would  be  fo  barbarous,  as  to  impofe  fuch  an  unrea-
fonable Trial  of  his  Kindnefs,  upon  an  intimate  Acquaint-
ance, and  particular  Friend  ?  And  Who  but  fuch,  could  be
fo  blind,  as  not  to  difcern  the  mighty  difference,  between
the  Lofs  their  Friend  would  fuflain,  by  gratifying  their  Re-
quefls,  and  the  Gain  themfelves  fhould  reap,  in  cafe  he  did
lo  ?  He  facrifices  his  All :  forfeits  his  Greatefl,  his  Own  pe-
culiar Happinefs,  to  purchafe  that  for  Them,  which  is  not,
cannot  be  Their  proper  Happinefs  j  and  is  fo  far  from  being
a  Great  Good,  that  it  very  often  proves  to  be  none  at  all
in  the  Event,  but  a  great  and  fore  Evil.

But  befides  all  this,  there  may  flill  another  very  good  Rea-
fon  be  given,  why  he  fhould  call  fuch  Men  Foolifli  and  Senfe-
lefs ;  and  that  is,  their  efleeming  Money  to  be  of  greater
and  more  valuable  Confideration  to  them,  than  the  Modefly
and  Fidelity  of  a  Friend.  And  to  this  purpofe,  he  proceeds
to  flicvv,  that  a  Perfon  thus  qualified,  is  fo  far  from  being  un-
ferviceable  to  his  Friends,  that  he  is  much  more  ufeful  and
beneficial,  than  even  they,  who  feed  them  with  the  Drofs
they  fo  much  admire.

But  if  among  Servants^  thofe  who  arehoneft  and  refpeift-
ful,  recommend  themfelves  more  to  the  Efteem  of  their  Ma-
ilers, than  others  who  are  of  quicker  Pares,  and  more  dex-
terous in  the  Bufmefs  of  their  Trade  j  fure  the  Reafon  holds
much  flronger,  why  a  Faithful  and  Virtuous  Friend  fliould
have  the  Preference,  infinitely  before  what  the  World  calls
a  gainful  one :  And  that  Preference  they  will  have,  in  the
Opinion  of  all  wife  Men.  For  we  feel  the  Benefit  of  thefe
upon  every  Occafion ;  they  give  us  the  Sweets  of  good  Con-
verfation, and  the  Afliflance  of  feafonable  Advice  j they  are

O  4.  a  per»

J^P  EpiCTETUS's M0RAL5,

a  perpetual  Guird  upon  whatever  we  efteem  moft  dear,  and  a
fure  Relief  in  Dangers  and  Diftreffesj  they  are  Phylicians
in  our  Difeafes,  and  (as  if  Life  were  too  Oiort  a  Space  for
fo  much  Goodnefs  to  exercjle  itfelf  in)  wq  find  our  Ac-
count in  fuch  Friends,  even  after  Death :  And,  upon  all  O-
cafions  there  is  a  perpetual  good  Correfpondence,  a  mutual
Agreement  between  the  Giver  and  the  Receiver  of  Favours  ;
no  Difcord  in  the  whole  Courfe  of  their  Lives,  but  conftant
Confent  and  perfedt  Harmony  of  Souls.  Thofe  therefore,
that  are  Friends  indeed,  wilt  contribute  their  utmoft  Endeav-
eurs,  tpwards  the  preferving  the  Virtue  and  Fidelity  of  their
Friends  j  ISTay,  they  will  find  themfelves  obliged  to  it,  in
Tendernefs  to  their  Intereft ;  and  cannot  be  guilty  of  fo  great
an  Abfurdity,  as  to  defire  any  Thing  for  their  Own  Sakes,
which  muft  turn  at  laft  fo  infinitely  to  their  Prejudice,  by
robbing  tlieir  Friend  of  his  Honefty,  and  rendring  him  inca-
pable of  doing  them  any  farther  Service.

Thus  alfo  that  other  Argument  might  be  anfwered  j  and
the  obferving  what  is  in  a  Man's  own  Power,  and  proper-
ly belongs  to  him  tp  do,  would  ferve  to  refute  what  follows.
For,  Who  ever- told  you,  that  it  was  a  Duty  incumbent
upon  you,  or  a  Thing  in  your  own  Power  and  Choice,  to
procure  Porticoes  and  publvck  Buildings,  for  the  Benefit  of
your  Country  ?  To  this  may  be  replied  again,  as  it  was  in
the  Cafe  of  your  Friends  j  Who  can  be  expected  to  beftow
That  upon  others,  which  he  never  had  himfelf  ?  And  if  to
this  it  be  rejoined,  Get  them  yourfelf,  that  you  may  have  it
in  your  own  Power  to  give  to  your  Country  ^  what  was  faid
before,  will  ferve  every  jot  as  well,  upon  this  Occafion  too.
But  thefe  Confiderations  he  hath  left  in  the  general,  for  Us
to  apply,  as  we  fee  requifitej  and  hath  fupplied  us  with  ano-
ther clear  and  full  Anfwer,  much  more  pertinent,  and  parti-
cular to  the  Matter  in  hand.

What  need  this  trouble  you  (fays  hej  ?  Is  it  Your  Con-
cern, to  provide  Cloiders  and  Exchanges  for  your  Country  ?
The  Smith  doej  not  think  it  his  Bufinefs  to  fupply  his  Coun-
try with  Shoes,  but  with  Arms ,  and  the  Shoe-maker  does  not
think  himfelf  obliged  to  furnifh  out  Arms,  but  Leather  and
Shoes.  And  fure  every  Commonwealth  is  ferved  in  belt
Order,  and  to  moft  Advantage,  when  every  one  attends  ftridly
to  the  proper  Bufinefs  of  his  Calling,  and  does  not  inter-
meddle with  the  Concerns  of  other  People  -,  but  takes  care
to  do  his  own  part,  and  interrupts  no  Body  elfe  in  the  Dif-
charge  of  His.  ■»

Well,

noith  S I M  p  L I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 15  i

•Well,  but  what  is  my  part  then,  fays  the  Philofopher,
and  wherein  will  it  be  expedled,  that  I  fKould  contribute  to
the  Public  Good  ?  The  feeming  force  of  this  Queftion  he
obviates  moft  excellently,  by  appealing  to  the  Man's  own
Judgment  in  another  ;  What !  fays  he,  if  you  have  been  the
Means  of  making  a  good  Man,  have  not  you  been  benefi-
cial to  your  Country  ?  Is  not  this  a  piece  of  Service,  of  much
greater  Confequence,  than  the  Profits  every  mean  Artificer
brings  to  the  Publick?  This  would  be  the  Advantage,  and  this
the  Thanks  and  Honour  due  to  you,  for  making  your  Self
an  honeil  Man  and  a  good  Subjedl:  But  if  your  Wifdcm
and  Virtue  have  a  kindly  Influence  upon  Others  too ;  if  your
Inftrudtions  and  your  Example  form  them  into  the  fame  good
Principles,  you  are  then  a  Public  Bleffing,  and  more  bene-
ficial ftill  in  proportion  to  the  Numbers, you  have  an  Influ-
lence  upon.

And  now  you  defire  to  know,  what  Rank  or  Office  iliali
be  afligned  you,  and  would  fain  be,  like  the  General  in  the
Army,  or  the  Magiftrate  of  the  City,  or  the  Artificer  in  the
Shop,  who  know  their  refpedlive  Trufts,  sjind  have  fome
Station  or  Bufinefs,  Milita^'y  or  Civil,  which  they  can  pro-
perly call  their  own.  To  this  the  Author  replies  in  general
Terms,  You  may  have  any  that  will  fall  to  your  fhare,  only
with  this  Proviiion,  that  it  beconfiftent  With  Virtue  and  Ho-
nefty :  But  if  you  make  Shipwreck  of  thefe,  while  you  pre-
tend to  venture  for  Monuments  and  ftately  Buildings;  it  is
great  odds,  but  you  lofe  your  Magnificence,  at  the  fame  time
that  your  Modefly  and  Fidelity  is  caft  away.  And,  I  pray,
Whether  of  the  two  is  the  greater  Grace  to  a  Common-
wealth }  A  City  well  ftored  with  true  and  good  Men,  or  ad-
prned  with  fumptuous  Halls  and  fplendid  Palaces?

But,  to  come  nearer  to  che  Queftion,  What  Place  or  Efteem
IS  due  to  a  Philofopher,  or  what  Regard  fliould  the  State  have
to  him.?  Surely  Men  fbould  be  efteemed,  according  to  the
Dignity  and  Value  of  their  Work.  And,  by  this  Rule,  the
Philofopher  may  claim  Precedence,  as  a  Former  and  Maker
of  Men  j  Ofie  who  frames  and  moulds  them  into  virtuous
Perfons,  and  ufeful  honeft  Subjeds.  The  Matter  he  hath  to
work  upon,  is,  Himfelf  and  Others  j  and  the  Pains  he  is  at
about  them,  is,  to  refine  and  purify  their  Nature,  and  exalt
them  to  a  Life  of  Reafon  and  Virtue.  He  is  indeed,  and
ought  to  be  refpecled,  as  a  Common  Father  and  Mailer,  a
Corre<n:or  of  Errors,  and  a  Counfellorand  Affiftant  inGood-
t^tisy  He  is  liberal  of  his  Care,  makes  every  other  Man's  Be-

-nefit

152 Epictetus's  Morals,

nefit  and  Improvement  his  Endeavour  and  Concern,  and  hath
a  Hand  in  all  the  Good  tliat  is  done.  He  adds  to  the  En-
joyments of  the  ProfperouSj  by  congratulating  and  rejoicing
with  them,  and  lightens  the  Burden  of  the  Wretched,  by
miniftring  feafonable  Comforts j  and  himfelf  bearing  apart
in  their  Afflidions.  In  one  word.  He  will  do  all  thofeThings,
that  are  poffible,  or  can  be  expected,  to  be  done,  by  one  who
thinks  no  part  of  the  World  exempt  from  his  Care,  but  feels
in  himfelf  a  conftant  Defire,  and  kind  Intention,  to  promote
the  Good  of  all  Mankind.

Now,  if  this  general  Employment  do  not  fatisfy,  but  you
would  needs  have  this  wondrous  Man  faftened  down  to  fome
one  particular  Profeffion  j  in  a  wife  and  well-conflituted  Go-
vernment, this  Perfon  would  be  chofen  their  Head,  becaufe
his  Eminence  and  Ufefulnefs  muft  needs  give  him  the  Pre-
ference before  others.  And  indeed,  his  Qualifications,  if
we  confider  them  particularly,  feem  to  defcrve  no  lefs.  His
Prudence,  fo  much  fuperior  to  the  Common  Sheep,  capaci-
tates him  for  a  Shepherd  to  the  Flock.  His  Learning  and
Wifdom  entitle  him  to  the  Degree  of  ft  Senator  or  Privy-
Counfellor.  And  if  he  had  applied  himfelf  at  all  to  that
fort  of  Difcipline,  none  can  be  fitter  to  command  an  Army,
becaufe  he  muft  needs  excel  both  in  true  Courage  and  regu-
lar Condudl.  *  Thus  Socrates  gain'd  immortal  Renown,  by
his  Bravery  at  the  Battle  of  Delium ;  and  caft,  as  we  are  told,
fo  univerfal  an  Awe  into  his  Enemies,  that  they  all  flood
amazed  at  his  Courage,-  and  he  made  good  his  Retreat  An-
gle, through  a  whole  Body  of  them,  without  their  daring
to  fall  upon  him.  So  likewife  f  Xenophon  brought  off  that
great  Body  or  Greeks,  and  had  his  Praifes  celebrated  in  the
Olympick  Games,  for  fo  noble  an  Atchievement.

This,  I  fay,  would  be  the  cafe,  this  the  Refped  paid  to  a
Philofopher,  in  a  wife  and  well- conftituted  Government.
But  we  muft  take  notice,  that  wicked  and  licentious  States

*  This  Aflion  of  Socrates  is  particularly  taken  Notice  of  by  Diogenes  Laertius,
The  Battel  mentioned  here,  was  fought  between  the  Athenians  and  Bceotians,
in  which  the  latter  won  Delium,  under  the  Command  of  Pantaades  ;  and  the
former  being  put  to  the  Rout,  Socrates  is  faid  to  have  retreated  very  leifurely,
and  feveral  Times  to  have  ftood  ftill,  and  look'd  back,  to  fee  if  any  of  his
Enemies  would  dare  to  purfue  and  attack  him.  He  is  alfo  faid,  a  little  before
this  Fight  to  have  faved  the  Life  of  Xenophon,  and  to  have  brought  him  off,
when  Unhorfed  at  the  Battel  of  Amphibious.  See  Diog.  Laert.  Edit.  Meibom.
Amjl.  1692.  Segm.zz,  23.  Pag.  (j^.  See  aX^o  PlatoH,  Apolog,  Socrat.  Edit,
Marfil.  Ficin.  Lugdun.  1590.  Pag.  363.  %

t  See  Xenophon,  in  Expedit,  Cyri,

do

with  S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S'S  fe  O  M  M  E  N  T. 1 53

do  quite  contrary :  They  are  moft  inaufpicious  Places  to
dwell  in,  and  have  deftrudlive  Effe^fts  upon  the  Minds  of
Men  j  they  ftifie  and  quench  that  Light,  which  Heaven  hath
given  us^  caft  a  Blemilli  upon  the  beft  Employments,  dif-
courage  the  moft  ufeful  Sciences,  disregard  the  Perlbns,
and  obftrud  the  good  Influence  of  them,  who  teach  us  by
their  Dodrines,  and  lead  us  by  their  Examples.  And,  where
fo  much  wicked  Induftry  is  ufed  to  damp  the  Luftre  of  Vir-
tue, that  Place  muft  be  confeft  very  improper,  either  for  Men
to  lay  the  firft  Foundations  of  Wifdom  and  a  good  Life  in,
or  to  improve  and  confirm  themfelves  in,  after  fuch  good
Beginnings.  But  then  we  muft  obferye  withal,  that,  if  in
the  midft  of  fuch  perverfe  Converfadon,  fome  One  be  found
of  a  happier  Complexion  than  the  reftj  One,  whole  Soul  a
particular  good  Genius  hath  made  proof  againft  all  Corrup-
tion j  the  greater  fuch  a  one's  Difficulties  are,  and  the  more
Tryals  his  Virtue  is  exercifed  with,  the  m.ore  perfect  and  il-
luftrious  it  will  appear,  and  fhed  abroad  its  Pvays  with  greater
Advantage,  in  the  midft  of*  fo  much  Darknels.  So  true  it
is,  that  all  the  Traverfes  of  Fortune,  and  this  vafb  Variety
of  Accidents  in  Human  Life,  contribute  exceedingly  to  the
Increaie  of  Virtue  j  and  that  both  Profperity  and  Adveriiry
work  together  for  the  Good  of  thofe  Alen,  who  have  the
Wifdom  to  chufe  Things  with  Judgment,  and  to  manage
them  with  Dexterity.

«Cfi;

CHAP.

1^4 Epictetus*s  Morals,

CHAP. XXXIL

IT  is  poflible, you  obferve  fome  other  Perfon more
careffed than yourfelf, invited to Entertain-
ments,  when  you  are  left  out ; faluted  before  you
are  taken  any  notice  of; thought  more  proper  to
advife  with,  -  and  His  Counfel  followed  rather  than
Yours. But  are thefe Refpedls paid him Good
Things,  or  are  they  Evil  ?  If  they  deferve  to  be  e-
lleemed  Good, this  ought  to  be  Matter  of  Joy  to
you,  that  that  Perfon  is  happy  in  them  :  But  if  they
be  Evil,  how  unreafonable  is  it  to  be  troubled,  that
they  have  not  fallen to  your  own  fhare  ? Befides,
Confider,  I  pray,  that  it  is  not  poflible,  you  fhould
have  thofe  Civilities  paid  to  you  in  the  fame  degree
that  ethers  have; becaufe  the  Profeflion  you  have
taken  upon  you  will  not  fuffer  you  to  do  the  fame
Things  to  deferve  them  that  others  do. And  how
can  it  be  expeded, that  He,  who  thinks  the  trou-
ble of  waiting  at  a  great  Man's  Levee  below  him,
Ihould  have  the  fame  Interefl, with  one  that  con-
ffently  pays  his  Morning  Devotions  there  ?  Or  He,
that  only  minds  his  own Bufmefs, with Another
that  is  eternally  cringing, and  fawning,  and wrig-
gling himfelf  into  a  Lord's  Train  ; or  He, that
will  not  ftrain  a  Point  to  commend  him; with  a
Parafite,  that  is  ever  blowing  him  up  with  his  own
Praife, indulging  all his  Vices, and admiring  his
Follies  and his  Nonfenfe  ? At  this  rate, you  are
a  very  unjufl:, and  a  moft  unreafonable  Man; for
you expeft  to  receive  that  gratis, which  is  really
fet  to  Sale, and  cannot  be  obtained  without  paying
the  Price. For  inftance  now,  and  to  ufe  a  very  fa-
miliar one.  You  enquire  in  the  Market,  how  Let-
tice  go  and  are  fold,  they  are  a  Half-penny  a  piece.

Suppofe

W/i>  SlMPLICIUS*S  COMMEN  T. I55

Suppofe  now,  another  Perfon  bids,  and  pays,  and
takes  them  *,  and  you  will  neither  bid,  nor  pay,  and
go  without  them :  Is  there  any  Wrong  done  ?  Or
hath  the  Buyer  a  better  Bargain  than  You?  He
parted  with  his  Money,  and  hath  the  Sallad  ;  you
have  no  Sallad  indeed,  but  you  have  kept  your
Money.  Juft  fo  it  is  in  the  Cafe  before  us.  You
were  not  invited  to  a  great  Man's  Table ;  the  Rea-
fon  is,  becaufe  you  did  not  buy  the  Invitation.  Pay
the  Price,  and  you  may  have  it ;  but  that  Price,
is  Commendation  and  Flattery.  If  therefore  you
think  the  Thing  for  your  Advantage,  it  is  fet  to
Sale,  and  you  know  the  Market  Rates.  But  if
you  expert  it  fhould  come  without  making  Pay-
ments, you  are  very  unreafonable.  And  if  it  be
thought  too  dear,  then  fure  you  have  no  reafon  to
complain  ?  for,  though  you  have  not  his  Lordfhip's
Dinner,  yet  you  have  fomething  as  good  in  the  room
of  it  i  for,  you  have  the  Satisfadion  of  keeping  the
Price  in  your  own  Hand  ftill ;  that  is,  of  not  com-
mending a  Man  againft  Truth  and  Confcience ;  ^  [and
of  avoiding  his  formal  haughty  Reception  of  you ,  which
carries  in  it  a  thoufand  times  more  of  Infolence^  than
Civility. '\

a  Thefe  Words  are  not  in  Simplkius'i  Copy  ;  but  being  generally  found  in  tl4(
xdt,  I  have  inferred  them  in  a  different  CharaAer.

COM'

i5«6  Epictetu  s's  Morals,

COMMENT.

HIS  Difcourfe  feems  to  be  a  Continuation  of  the  for-
mer j  proceeding  to  obviate  fome  Objedions  ftill  be-
hind, and  fuch  as  feem  all  to  arife  from  the  fame  Habit  and
Difpofition  of  Mind,  For,  when  a  Man  hath  turned  all
his  Thoughts  and  Care  upon  his  own  Improvement,  and  hath
difengaged  himfelf  from  the  World,  and  its  Incumbrances ;
when  he  hath  arrived  to  that  Largenefs  and  Sufficiency  of
Soul,  as  to  defpife  Riches,  and  Honour,  and  Popularity  ;_
when  he  thinks  it  unbecoming  his  Character,  to  court  the
Countenance  of  Great  Perfons,  by  all  the  mean  Arts  and
obfequious  Attendance  of  Slaves  and  Sycophants  j  there  will,
in  all  likelihood,  follow  this  Inconvenience  upon  it,  that  he
iliall  be  flighted  and  difregarded  himfelf  Many  of  his  E-
quals  and  Inferiors  fliall  be  invited  home  to  Entertainments,
fhall  be  more  particularly  addreft  to  in  publick  Places,  and
receive  all  outward  Marks  of  Refpedl  j  nay  many  lefs  ca-
pable of  advifing  than  He,  fhall  be  admitted  into  the  Secrets
of  Families,  and  confulted  in  all  their  Affairs  of  Importance,
while  this  Perfon,  fo  much  their  Superior  in  Worth  and
Wifdom,  is  induftrioufly  negleded.

Now  all  the  feeming  Hardfhip,  that  appears  in  fuch  U-
fage,  EpiSletus  might,  if  he  had  thought  fit,  have  taken  off
in  one  Word,  by  remitting  us  to  his  ufual  Diftindlion,  of  the
Things  that  are,  and  that  are  not,  within  the  Compafs  of
dtir  own  Choice  :  For,  if  thofe  Things  that  conduce  to  pur
real  Happinels  be  at  our  own  Difpofal,  and  the  Things  here
mentioned  are  not  fo  ,•  then  ought  we  not  to  fuppofe  our
Happinefs  at  all  to  confift  in  them.  But  this  Solution  of
the  Difficulty  he  takes  no  notice  of  here;  partly  becaufe  it
is  general,  and  applicable  to  many  other  Cafes  as  well  as
this;  and  partly,  as  prefuming  it  abundantly  enlarged  upon,
and  that  his  Reader  was  fufflciently  perfedt  in  it  before.
That  therefore,  which  he  chufes  to  infilt  upon,  is  fomething,
that  comes  up  clofer  to  the  Matter  in  Hand ;  and  proves,
that  the  Inconveniencies  here  alledged,  m.inifter  an  Occalion
of  much  greater  Advantage,  to  thofe,  who  have  the  Wif-
dom to  make  a  right  Ufe  of  them.

To  this  Purpofe,  he  tells  us,  that  the  Inflances  in  which

Men of  inferior  Qualification  have  the  Preference  and  Re-

fpedlj before  thofe,  who  have  made  a  ftricl  Philofophical

' .  Life

W/y&  SiMPLICI  US'S COMMEN  T. I57

Life  their  Choice,  muft  be  either  Good  or  Evil.  If  you  pleafe,
to  make  the  Divifion  perfed,  I  will  take  the  Confidence  to
add,  or  Indifferent  j  for  in  truth,  there  are  a  great  many  Things
of  this  middle  fort.  But  then  it  muft  be  confeft  too,  that
thofe  which  are  indifferent,  can  neither  l:>e  called  Honour-
able nor  Difhonourable.  And  for  that  Reafon,  the  Author
(eems  not  to  have  thought  this  Branch  worth  any  Room  in
his  Divifion,  Well,  we  will  fay  then,  according  to  Him,
that  they  are  all  in  one  of  the  Extremes,  either  Good  or  Evil :
Now  if  they  be  Good,  fays  he,  this  ought  by  no  means  to
be  matter  of  Difcontent  to  you.  But  quite  contrary,  it  ihould
add  to  your  Joy  and  Satisfadion,  that  another  Perfon  is  happy
in  them.  For  this  calls  for  the  Exercife  of  a  very  Exalted
and  Philofophical  Virtue ^  that  of  wifhing  well  to  all  Man-
kind, and  rejoicing  in  the  Profperity  of  others.

And  here  we  fhall  do  well  to  obferve,  what  a  mighty  Good
he  makes  this  feeming  Evil  to  contain,  and  how  prodigious
an  Honour  this  Difrefpe<5l  derives  upon  us.  For  This  in-
deed is  the  very  Quality  of  the  Mind,  which  brings  us  to  the
trueft  and  neareft  Refemblance  of  God,  which  is  the  greateft
Happinefs,  any  of  his  Creatures  can  poffibly  attain  to.  For
God  is  himfelf  of  abfolute  and  unbounded  Power,  being  in-
deed the  only  Source  of  all  the  limited  Powers  communicated
to  any  other  Beings.  And  as  his  Power  is  infinitely  Great,
fo  his  Will  is  infinitely  Good.  From  hence  it  comes  to
pafs,  that  he  would  have  all  things  good,  and  not  any  thino-
evil,  fo  far  as  that  can  be.  And  becaufe  his  Will  can  intend
nothing  but  what  his  Power  is  able  to  accompli/h,  therefore
he  does  really  make  all  things  Good;  and  this  he  does  not
niggardly  and  grudgingly,  but  communicates  to  every  Crea-
ture of  his  own  Goodnefs,  in  as  large  Proportions,  as  the
Condition  of  each  Creature  is  capable  of  enjoying  it.

Now  the  Soul  of  Man,  'tis  true,  does  not  referable  God,
in  infinite  and  uncontroulable  Power;  for  this  is  a  Perfedlion
of  the  Divine  Nature,  which  our  Conftitution  cannot  re-
ceive ;  and  befides,  there  are  many  Degrees  of  intermediate
Beings,  which,  though  much  inferior  to  God,  are  yet  much
fuperior  to  Us  in  Point  of  Power.  But  ftill  in  the  other  pare
of  his  Excellence,  he  hath  condefcended  to  make  us  like  him-
felf, and  given  us  the  Honour  of  a  Will  Free  and  Unbounded,
a  Will  capable  of  extending  its  good  Wiflies,  and  kind  Incli-
nations to  all  the  World,  provided  we  have  but  the  Grace
to  make  this  good  Ufe  of  it.  It  is  therefore  an  inftance  of  his
wonderful  Wifdom,  and adorable  Goodnefs, that  he  hath

made

1S8

Epictetus's  MokalS,

made  This  to  be  his  Image  and  Similitude  in  our  Souls,"  He-
caufe  this  is  the  true  and  proper  principle  of  all  Operatioff
and  Ad:iort.  And  though  the  Soul  cannot  pundlually  make
all  things  Good,  as  God  Can,  and  doesj  yet  it  goes  as  far  a^
it  can  in  making  them  fo  ;  and  for  the  reft,  it  does  its  parr,
by  wifhing  that  Good,  which  it  cannot  give  them.  For  that
is  perfed  and  true  Volitioifi,  when  the  Perfon  willing,  exerts
his  whole  Strength,  and  all  the  Faculties  affift  and  concur
with  it  j  for  we  have  the  abfoluce  Difpofal  of  our  own  Minds,
and  fo  the  wifhing  well  to  all  Mankind,  is  whWt  any  Man
may  do,  i{  he  pleafe.  And  indeed  a  truly  Good  Man  goes
farther  than  all  this  ,•  he  wifhes  the  Profperity  of  all  Men
whatfoever;  and  he  flops  not  there,  but  extends  his  Kind-
nefs  to  Creatures  of  different  Species,  to  Brutes,  to  Plants,
to  even  Inanimate  things  j  in  a  word,  to  all  that  make  tip  this
great  Body  of  the  World,  of  which  himfelf  is' a  part.  'Tis
true,  he  cannot  make  thofe  Wifhes  efFecftual  to  ^%  becaufe,  as
I  faid,  the  Willing  is  a  Perfedion  given  us  by  Nature,  but
the  Power  of  Efi'ed:ing  is  not.  For  this  requires  the  Co-ope-
ration of  many  other  Caufes,  the  Permiflion  of  the  Gods,
and  the  Concurrence  of  feveral  Agents,  which  we  cannon
command.  And  hence  it  is,  that  all  our  Virtue  eonfifts  in
our  Will  j  the  Merit  of  all  our  Adlions  is  meafured  by  That ;
and  that  all  the  Happinefs  and  Mifery  of  our  Lives  is  made  to
depend  upon  the  Good  or  111  ufe  of  it.  And  thus  you  have
the  force  of  this  Argument,  proceeding  upon  the  Slippofition'
that  thefe  things  are  Good,

But  if  on  the  other  hand,  the  Refpecfts  denied  to  the  Phi-
lofopher,  and  paid  to  others,  be  Evil  j  here  can  be  no  ground
of  Diiratisfadion,  but  a  frefli  occafion  of  Joy:  Not  upon
His  account  indeed  who  hath  them,  but  upon  your  Own,
who  have  them  not.  At  this  rate,  the  Good  Man  can  never
be  Melancholy  at  the  Want  of  thefe  things,  nor  look  upon
it  as  any  difparagement  to  his  Perfon,  or  diminution  of  his
Happinefs,  but  is  fure  to  be  pleafed,  let  the  Event  be  what
it  will ;  that  is,  either  for  the  good  Succefs  of  Others,  if  it
be  Good ;  or  for  his  own  Efcape,  if  it  be  Evil,  And  thus
all  angry  Refentments  are  taken  off,  in  point  of  Intereft  and
Advantage;  for  though  we  allow  thefe  things  to  conduce
to  our  Happinefs,  yet  it  is  a  much  greater  Happinefs,  to  aC-
pire  after  a  Refemblance  of  the  Divine  Perfedions,  which,
the  mining  of  them  gives  Men  an  opportunity  to  do ;  and  if
they  rather  tend  to  make  us  Miferable,  than  the  Being  with-
out them,>(^is  noE  fo  properly  a  Want  as  a  Deliverance.

After

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 159

After  this  he  proceeds  to  Two  other  Topicks,  the  Poffi-
bility  of  obtaining  them,  and  the  Reafonablenefs  of  exped:ing
them.  From  the  former  of  thefe  he  argues  thus,  It  is  not  to
be  imagined,  that  one  who  never  makes  his  Court,  flioald
have  the  fame  Privileges,  with  one  who  is  eternally  labouring
to  ingratiate  himfelf  This  Labour  muft  confift  of  all  the  Ce-
remonious Fopperies,  and  Servile  Submiffions  imaginable  ;
the  waiting  at  the  Great  Man's  rifmg,  expeding  his  coming
out,  cringing  and  boyving  in  the  Streets,  the  Court,  and  all
Places  of  publick  Concourfe  j  the  Commending  all  he  does,
though  never  fo  bafe,  and  admiring  all  he  fays,  though  never
fo  fenfelefs.  And  therefore,  for  a  Philofopher,  and  a  Man
of  Honour  and  Truth,  who  cannot  fubmit  to  thefe  unworthy
Methods  of  infinuating  himfelf,  to  meet  with  the  fame  Coun-
tenance and  Marks  of  Kindnefs,  with  thofe  who  proftitute
themfelves  at  this  rate  for  them  j  is,  as  the  World  goes,  abfo-
lutely  impoffible.

Nay,  it  is  not  only  unreafonable  upon  that  account  to  ex-
pedl  them,  but  in  Point  of  Juftice  too.  It  argues  a  Man
greedy  and  infatiable,  when  he  experts  his  Meal,  and  yen
will  not  confent  to  pay  his  Ordinary.  It  is  defiring  to  invade
anothers  Right,  and  ingrofs  to  yourfelf  what  he  hath  already
bought  and  paid  for  :  For  though  he  left  no  Money  under  his
Plate,  yet  he  gave  that  Purchafe,  which  you  would  have
thought  much  too  dear.  And  confequently  (as  he  fhews  by
that  Inftance  of  the  Lettice).  you  who  went  without  the  Din-
ner, have  as  good  a  Bargain  at  leaft,  as  he  that  was  admitted
to  it :  He  had  the  Varieties  indeed,  but  then  you  have  your
Liberty  ^  you  did  not  enflave  yourfelf  fg  far,  as  to  laugh  at
his  Lordfliip's  dull  ]e&Sj  nor  to  commend  what  your  better
Senfe  could  not  like,  nor  bear  the  affected  Coldnefs  of  his
Welcome,  nor  tJie  tedious  Attendance  in  his  Anti-chamber.
In  (hort,  you  were  not  the  Subjed  of  his  haughty  Negligence,
and  ftiff  Formality,  nor  the  Jeft  of  his  faucy  Servants  :  Now
all  this  you  muft  have  been  content  with,  to  have  dined  with
his  Greatnefs.  If  you  exped:  it  upon  eafier  Terms,  you  are
miftaken,  for  it  will  come  no  cheaper  j .  and  if  you  expert  it,
without  paying  as  others  do,  it  argues  you  greedy,  and  an  -un-
fair Chapman.  And  this  Chararter  is  not  confiftent  with  thaf
of  a  Good  Man  ;  fo  that  you  muft  change  your  Temper,  and
be  more  moderate  in  your  gxpertances  pf  this  kind.

P  ,CHA

i6o  Epictetus's  Morals,

C  HAP. XXXIIL

*  VJ/E  cannot  be  at  a  lofs  to  know  what  the  Con-
W  dition  of  Things  is  by  Nature,  what%er  Laws
and  Methods,  nor  how  Men  ought  to  deport' them-
felves,  with  Regard  to  them  :  For  thefe  are  Things  fo
plain,  that  all  the  Worlds  at  one  time  or  other,  are  uni-
verfally  agreed  about  them.  For  Inftance,  if  a  Neigh-
bour's Child  happen  to  break  a  Glafs,  we  prefently
anfwer,  that  this  is  a  very  common  Accident.  Now
the  Application  fit  to  be  made  from  hence  is,  that,
when  one  of  our  own  happens  to  be  broken,  we
fhould  HO  more  think  it  extraordinary,  nor  fuffer  it
to  give  us  any  greater  Difturbance,  than  when  it
was  another  Man's  Cafe.  And  this  trivial  Example
ihould  prepare  us  for  bearing  Cafualties  of  greater
Confequence,  with  the  like  Temper.  When  any
of  our  Acquaintants  buries  a  Child,  or  a  Wife,
every  body  is  ready  to  mitigate  the  Lofs,  with  the
Reflexion,  that  all  Men  are  mortal,  and  this  is
what  all  Men  have  therefore  Reafon  to  exped.  But
when  the  Misfortune  comes  home  to  ourfelves,  then
we  give  a  loofe  to  our  Paflions,  and  indulge  our
Lamentations  and  bitter  Complaints.  Now  thefe
Things  ought  quite  otherwife  to  awaken  the  fame
Confiderations ;  and  it  is  but  reafonable,  that,  what
we  thought  a  good  Argument  to  moderate  the  Re-
fentments  of  other  People,  fhould  be  applied  with'
the  fame  Efficacy  to  reftrain  the  Exceffes  of  our
Own.

■■•■*  The  Condition  of  Nature  and  our  own  Duty,  is  plain  to  be  learn'd  from
thofc  Accidents,  in  which  ourfelves  have  no  Intereft.  So  Cajauhon,  upon  the
Place,  by  a  peculiar  Notion  of  the  Word  ha'^i^z^,  and  in  a  Senfe  highly
agreeable  to  the  reft  of  the  Chapter.

C  O  M'

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment.  i6i

COMMENT,

THERE  are  fome  Notions  concerning  the  Nature  of
Things,  in  which  all  Mankind  confent  j  and  not  any  one
confidering  Perfon  ever  pretended  to  conteft  or  contradift
them.  Such'  are  thefe  that  follow ;  That  whatever  is  Good,
is  Profitable,  and  whatever  is  truly  Profitable,  is  Good :  That
all  Things  are  carried  by  a  natural  Propenfion  to  the  Defire
of  Good  :  That  Equal  Things  are  neither  left  nor  more  than
one  another  :  That  Twice  Two  are  Four  :  And  thefe  No-
tions are  fuch  as  right  Reafon  hath  recommended  and  riveted
into  our  Minds,  fuch  as  long  Experience  hath  confirmed,  and
fuch  as  carry  an  exad  Agreement  with  the  Truth  and  Nature
of  Things,

But  when  we  defcend  from  the  general  Truths  to  the  par-
ticular Ideas  and  Dodrines  of  fmgle  Perfons,  there  we  very
often  findourfelves  miftaicen.  And  thefe  erroneous  Opinions
are  of  different  Sorts.  Some  of  them  deceive  us,  by  too  cre-
dulous a  Dependence  upon  the  Report  of  our  Senfes,  as  when
we  pronounce  the  Circumference  of  the  Moon  to  be  as  large
as  that  of  the  Sun,  becaufe  it  appears  fo  to  the  naked  Eye.
Some  we  are  prepoffefTed  in  favour  of,  by  inclining  too  much
to  our  fenfual  Inclinations  j  as  when  we  fay,  that  all  Pleafure
is  Good.  Some  are  owing  to  the  Admitting  of  Arguments
before  they  are  well  weighed  j  as  thofe  which  advance  the
Belief  of  the  World  being  made  by  Two  Principles,  and  that
the  Soul  is  Corporeal.  Now  thefe  are  what  Men  argue  dif-
ferently upon,  and  they  are  fo  far  from  being  always  crije,"
that  many  times  the  Truth  lies  on  the  contrary  Side  of  the
Queftion.  And  it  can  never  be  fafe  for  us  to  depend  upon
fuch  particular  AfTumptions,  for  the  Knowledge  of  that  true
State  of  Things,  which  Epiiiettts  means  here,  by  the  Condi-
tion, the  Laws,  and  the  Methods  of  Nature.

But  nothing  can  be  a  more  pregnant  Proof,  how  exceeding
fickle  and  unfaithful  particular  Opinions  are,  and  how  firm
and  unalterable  thofe  general  and  acknowledged  ones,  than
the  Variety  of  Behaviour,  in  one  and  the  fame  Cafe.  For  let
any  Accident  happen  to  a  Man's  felf,  and  he  is  quite  an-
other Perfon,  tranfported  with  the  Vehemence  of  his  Con-
cern, and  all  his  Reafon  proves  too  feeble  to  fupport  it.  Bud
when  the  very  fame  Misfortune  happens  to  another,  there  is
none  of  this  Diforder  •  he  then  looks  upon  it  as  it  really  is,

P  2  confiders

1 62 Epi  CT  ET  u  s's  Morals,

confiders  k  calmly  and  coolly,  without  Paffion  or  Prejudice,
and  palTes  the  fame  Judgment  upon  it  with  the  reft  of  the
World  who  have  no  partial  Affection,  or  particular  Concern
to  pervert  them  j  but  regard  only  Truth,  and  the  clear  Rea-
fon  of  the  Thing.

This  he  illuftrates  by  a  very  trivial  Inftance,  that  of  breaking
a  Glafs  :  Which  when  done  by  a  Neighbour's  Child  or  Ser-
vant, we  are  apt  prefently  to  excufe,  by  putting  him  in  Mind,
how  exceeding  common  this  is :  that  it  is  what  happens  every
Day  j  that,  conlidering  how  little  a  Tiling  throws  a  Child
down,  how  often  they  let  Things  drop  out  of  their  Hands,
and  Vv'irhal,  of  how  exceeding  brittle  Matter  the  Veflel  is
made,  that  the  lesft  Blow  in  the  World  dailies  it  to  pieces,  it
is  rather  to  be  wonder'd,  that  iuch  Things  happen  no  oftner  :
Thus  we  fay,  when  our  Difcourfe  is  Sober  and  DifpaiEonate.
But  when  one  of  our  own  is  broken,  then  we  rage  and  ftorm,
as  if  fome  new  Thing  had  happened  to  us.  _  And  yet  in  all
Reafon  the  fame  Confideration  of  the  Accident  being  fo  ufual,
ought  to  offer  itfelf  to  our  Minds  then  too,  and  with  the  fame
Succefs.

Now  this  (fays  he)  you  may,  if  you  pleafe,  apply  to  Mat-
ters of  greater  Importance :  When  any  of  our  Acquaintants
buries  his  Wife  or  his  Child,  Who  is  there,  that  does  not  pre-
fently fay,  this  is  every  Man's  Cafe  ?  And  the  Reafon  of  it  is,
becaufe  they  pals  this  Reflexion,  from  the  common  Principles
in  their  own  Minds,  and  the  plain  conftant  Courfe  of  Na-
ture, which  they  find  agreeable  to  them.  For  to  die  there  is
a  Neceflity  unavoidable  j  'tis  the  very  Condition  of  humane
Nature  ^  To  be  Man,  and  not  fubjed  to  this  Fate,  would
imply  a  Contradidion.  And  yet  for  all  this,  when  fuch  a
Lofs  happens  in  a  Mans  own  Family,  what  Groans,  what
Tears,  what  loud  Exclamations,  what  wild  Extravagances  of
Paffion  do  immediately  follow  ?  Nay,  how  hard  is  it  to  per-
faade  Men  tliat  there  is  not  a  juftifiable  Caufe  for  all  this,  or
that  any  other  Peribn  living  ever  lliffer'd  fuch  an  AfHiftiorr
before  ?  Now,  why  fhould  not  fuch  a  one  recolleft,  how,  he
felt  himfeif  affeifted,  when  he  (kw  his  Neighbour  in  fuch  Ex-
cefles,  and  how  v/ifely  he  could  tell  him  then,  that  he  mif-
took  his  own  Cafe  ?  That  Death  was  inevitable,  and  nothing
more  frequent  •  and  that  there  v/as  nothing  in  the  Accident
itfelf,  which  could  create  all  this  Diforder,  but  it  was  owing
entirely  to  his  own  miftaken  Apprehenfions  and  the  violent
Paffions  of  his  own  Mind,  which  Hiewed  hira  the  Thing  in  a
falfe  Light  ^

Now

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  163

Now  indeed  there  are  Two  Reafons,  why  we  fTiouId  be
thus  partial  and  paffionate  in  our  own  Cafe  :  One  is,  the
exceeding  Fondnefs  and  tender  Sympathy,  between  the  Ra-
tional Soul,  and  the  Mortal  Body;  which  confidering  that  thi:>
Part  muft  Die,  is  much  more  clofe  and  moving,  than  in  Rca-
fon  it  ought  to  be.  The  Other  is,  that  though  we  know  and
are  fatisfied,  that  Die  we  muft,  yet  we  do  not  care  to  think
of  it  j  and  fo  thefe  Two  dear  Friends  live  together,  as  if  they
were  never  to  part.  Now  there  is  nothing  that  gives  a  Man
lb  much  Difturbance  and  Confufion,  as  the  being  flirprifed
v/ith  any  Accident  j  for,  whatever  we  have  forefeen,  and
made  familiar  to  our  Thoughts  by  long  Expe6tation,  never
gives  us  thofe  violent  Difturbances.

This  I  take  to  be  fufficiently  plain,  from  what  we  fee  in
our  Behaviour  afterwards.  For  even  Thofe  that  are  moft
intemperate  in  their  Griefs,  yet  within  a  little  while,  when
they  come  to  be  ufed  to  the  being  without  what  they  lament
the  Lofs  of,  return  to  t!:emfelves  and  their  Reafon  again,  and
all  is  quiet  and  eafy,  as  if  no  fuch  Misfortune  had  ever  hap-
pened. Then  they  can  fuggeft  to  their  own  compofed
Thoughts,  what  at  firft  they  could  not  endure  to  hear,  that
this  is  no  more  than  we  fee  daily  come  to  pais ;  That  other
People  are  liable  to  it,  and  have  born  it  as  v/ell  as  They  j
that  the  Condition  of  our  Nature  is  Mortal,  and  moft  ab-
furd  it  is  to  fuppofe  any  Man  can  be  exempt  from  the  com-
mon Fate  of  his  Nature  ;  that  ourFriends  are  only  gone  a
little  way  before,  in  the  beaten  Road,  v/hich  all  our  Fore-
fathers have  troden,  and  in.  which  wc  ourfelves  fliall  ftiorcly
follow  them.

Now  if  this  Separation,  when  a  little  Time  and  Cuftom
hath  rendred  it  familiar,  become  fo  very  iupportable,  after
the  Thing  hath  happened  ;  I  would  fain  know,  what  Reafon
can  be  alledged,  why  the  making  fuch  a  Separation  familiar
to  us  beforehand,  by  frequent  Thoughts  and  perpetual  Ex-
pecflations  of  it,  fhould  not  enable  us  to  bear  it  with  great
Evenncfs  of  Temper,  whenever  it  ftiall  happen.  For  furely
the  true  Caufe  of  all  immoderate  Concern  upon  thefe  Occa-
(ions,  is,  that  we  do  not  reprefcnt  thefe  Things  to  our  own
Thoughts,  nor  accuftom  ourlelves  to  them  fo  efFedually  as
we  might  and  ought  to  do.  And  the  Reafon  of  this  again
fccms  to  be,  that  the  Generality  of  People  have  their  Minds
•  fattened  down  to  their  Fortunes  ^  and  all  their  Imaginations
formed,  according  to  the  Model  of  their  preient  Condirion.

P  ^  Hence

i64 Epictetus's  Morals,

Hence  it  is,  that  the  profperous  Man  is  always  Gay  and  Big,
as  depending  upon  the  Continuance  of  his  Happinefs,  and
never  dreaming  of  any  poffible  Change  in  his  Affairs.  And
thus  People  alfo  under  unhappy  Circumftances  are  as  com-
monly Difpiriced  and  Diffident,  and  can  entertain  little
Thought  of  a  DeUverance,  and  better  Days.  But  another
Caufe,  v^^hich  contributes  to  this  Fault  as  much  as  the  former,
is  the  unreafonable  Fondnefs  of  thefe  Things,  which  Men
lament  the  Lofs  of  fo  tenderly  :  They  perfecftly  dote  upon
them,  while  they  have  them  j  and  cannot  therefore  admit  any
Thought  fo  uneafy  as  that  of  parting  with  them  j  for  no  Man
alive  cares  to  dwell  long  upon  Meditations  which  are  trouble-
fome  and  afHiding  to  him.  This  Fondnefs  is  the  Thing  we
fhould  guard  ourfelves  againft,  at  leaft  cut  off  all  the  Exceffes
tof  it,  by  reflecting  ferioufly  what  we  are  ourfelves,  and  v,'hat
that  is,  which  we  fo  paffionately  admire.  We  fliould  con-
fider,  that  it  is  what  we  cannot  call  our  own  j  and  that,
though  we  could,  yet  it  is  fo  imperfed  a  Blifs,  as  to  cloy  and
weary  us  with  long  Enjoyment.  Our  Kindnefs  therefore
fhould  be  reduced,  and  brought  withm  fuch  Proportions  as
are  confiftent  with  Decency  and  Moderation :  And  in  all  our
Converfation,  it  will  be  great  Prudence  to  abftain  from  all
Expreffions  and  Difcourfe,  and  efpecially  from  all  fuch
Acfiions  in  our  Behaviour,  as  tend  to  endear  thefe  Things  the
more,  and  ferve  in  Truth  for  no  other  End  than  to  cherifh
our  own  Folly,  and  make  our  Paffions  more  Exorbitant  and
Ungovernable.

CHAP. XXXIV.

Jjk S  no  Man  fets  up  a  Mark,  with  a  Defign  to

77^  ,  jl\  fhoot  befide  it :  fo  neither  hath  the  Maker  of

I  the  World  formed in  it  any  fuch  real  Being, as

COMMENT.

TH  £  Difputes,  which  are  wont  to  arife  concerning  the
Nature  and  Original  of  Evil,  have  by  being  unfkilfiilly
pianaged, proved  Qccaiions  of  grievous  Impiety  towards

Goda

with S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S's C  O  M  M  E  rN  T. 1 65

Godj  fubverted  the  very  Foundation  of  Virtue  and  good  Man-
ners, and  perplexed  many  unwary  Perfons,  with  feveral  dan-
gerous Scruples,  and  inextricable  Difficulties.

Firft,  As  to  that  Opinion,  which  makes  Evil  a  firft  Prin-
ciple, and  will  have  Two  common  Principles,  a  Good  and
a  Bad  one,  from  whence  all  Things  whatfoever  derive  their
Being,  it  is  attended  with  a  Thoufand  prodigious  Abfurdi-
tits.  For,  whence  fhould  this  Power  of  being  a  Principle,
which  is  One,  and  is  imparted  to  both  thefe  Contraries  m.
common ,  whence,  I  fay,  ihould  it  come  ?  Or  how  fhould
one  and  the  fame  Caufe  give  it  to  them  both  ?  And  how
is  it  poffible,  that  thefe  Two  fhould  be  Contraries,  onlefs
they  be  ranked  under  one  common  Genus  ?  For  we  muft
diftinguifli  between  Diverjity  and  Contrariety  y  that  which
is  White  cannot  be  termed  Contrary  to  that  which  is  Hot
or  Cold  ;  but  Contraries  are  properly  thofe  Things  that  are
molt  diftant  from  one  another ,  yet  ftill  under  the  fame
common  Genus.  White  then  and  Black  are  Contraries,  be-
caufe  both  bear  relation  to  the  Genus  of  Colour  •  for  they
are  both  Colours  alike.  And  Hot  and  Cold  are  Contra-
ries, for  they  likewife  meet  under  the  Genus  o^TaHile  pa-
nties. And  this  is  Reafon  enough  to  fhew,  that  Contraries
cannot  poffibly  be  firft  Principles,  becaufe  there  muft  have
been  forae  common  Genus  antecedent  to  them,  or  they
could  not  be  Contraries  :  And  farther,  becaufe  One  muft
needs  have  a  Being  before  Many  ;  for  Each  of  thofe  many
Beings  muffc  fubfift,  by  Virtue  of  its  EfTence,  communicated
from  that  firft  Being,  otherwife  nothing  could  ever  have  been
at  all.

Again,  Some  Single  Original  Being  there  muft  needs  have
been,  which  muft  have  been  a  Foundation  for  particular  Pro-
perties, and  for  which  thofe  Properties  muft  have  been  diftri-
buted  among  the  Many.  For,  from  the  Divine  Original
Good  all  good  Things  whatfoever  proceed  ^  and  in  like  man-
ner all  Truth  from  the  fame  Divine  Fountain  of  Truth.  So
that,  though  there  be  feveral  Principles  of  feveral  Proper-
ties, yet  ftill  thefe  all  are  comprehended  in  and  refolded  in-
to One  Principle  at  laft  ;  and  that  not  fomc  fubordinate
and  particular  one,  as  thefe  are  in  their  ov/n  Kind  only  ■  but
a  Principle  from  whence  all  the  reft  fpring.  One  that  tran-
fcends,  connedts,  contains  them  all,  and  communicates  to
qach  of  them  its  Caufal  and  Produdive  Power,  with  fuch  Li-
'mitations  and  Abatements,  as  their  refpeclive  Natures  re-
"quire.  So  exceeding  irrational '- and  abfurd  it  is^  t-o  think  of
••■■■''•> '-P  4 " •  - '  advan*.

i66  Epi  CTE  Tus's  Morals,

advancing  Two  Principles  of  all  Things,  or  to  fuppofe  it  pof-
fible  that  there  fliould  be  more  than  One.

Befides,  They  that  will  have  this  Univerfe  to  proceed  from
Two  Principles,  are  driven  by  their  own  Tenets  into  aThou-
fand  wild  Inconfiftencies.  They  tell  us,  one  of  thefe  Prin-
ciples is  Good,  and  the  other  Evil  ,•  they  call  the  Good  one
God,  but  yet  at  the  fame  time  they  do  not  allow  him  to  be
t;he  Univerfal  Gaufe  :  They  cannot  worfhip  him  as  Almighty,
for  indeed  they  have  clipped  the  Wings  of  his  Omnipotence,
and  are  fo  far  from  afcribing  all  Power  to  him,  that  they  di-
vide it  into  halves,  or,  to  fpeak  more  properly,  they  call  him
the  Source  of  Goodnefs  and  Spring  of  Light,  and  yet  deny,
that  all  Things  receive  Light  and  Goodnefs  from  him.

Now  what  horrid  Blafphemies,  what  opprobrious  Reflexions
does  this  Docl:rine  caft  upon  the  Majefty  of  God  ?  They  re-
prefent  him  as  a  Feeble  and  a  Fearful  Being,  uneafy  with
continual  Apprebenfions,  that  Evil  will  invade  his  Territo-
ries. And,  to  eafe  himfelf  of  thefe  Fears,  and  buy  off  his
Enemy,  contrary  to  all  Juflice  and  Honour,  and  Intereft,
calling  fome  Souls  away,  (which  are  fo  many  Parts  and  Par-
cels of  himfelf,  and  never  merited  by  any  Offence  of  theirs  to
be  thus  delivered  up)  that  fo,  by  parting  with  thefe,  he  may
compound  for  the  reft  of  the  Good  ones  with  him.  Like
fome  General  in  Diftrefs,  who,  when  the  Enemy  attacks
him,  facrifices  one  Part  of  his  Army,  to  gain  an  Opportu-
nity of  bringing  off  the  other.  For  the  Senfe  of  what  they
fay  amounts  to  thus  much,  though  it  be  not  exprefled  in  the
very  fame  Words.  Now  he  that  delivered  up  thefe  Souls,
or  commanded  them  to  be  delivered  up  in  this  barbarous
Manner,  had  fure  forgot,  or  at  leaft,  did  not  duly  confider,
what  Miferies  thofe  wretched  Spirits  muft  endure,  when  in
the  Hands  of  that  Evil  Principle.  For  (according  to  them)
they  are  Burnt,  and  Fryed,  and  Tormented  all  manner  of
ways  ;  and  this  too,  notwithftanding  they  were  never  guilty
of  any  Fault,  but  are  ftill  Parts  of  God  himfelf  And  at  laft
they  tell  us,  that,  if  any  fuch  Souls  happen  to  apoftatize  and
degenerate  into  Sin,  they  never  recover  themfelves  j  nor  are
from  thenceforth  in  any  PofTibility  of  returning  to  Good,  but
continue  infeparably  united  to  Evil  for  ever.  (Only  here  it
is  fit  we  take  Notice  what  Souls  thefe  are,  and  how  they  thus
degenerate  j  for  they  do  not  admit  their  Crimes  to  be  Adul-
tery or  Murder,  or  any  of  the  groffefl  and  moft  flagitious
Enormities  of  a  diflblute  and  wicked  Converfation,  but  only
the  denying  of  Two  Principles,  an  evil  and  a  good  one.)

In

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  167

In  the  mean  while,  this  God,  it  feems,  is  left  maimed  and
imperfed,  by  the  Lofs  of  fo  many  of  his  Parts,-  he  is  ftupid
and  fenfelefs  too,  (in  Their  Hypothefis  I  mean,  fo  far  be  it
from  Me  to  entertain  fo  irreverent  a  Thought)  for  he  under-
ftands  nothing  at  all,  either  of  his  own  Intereft,  or  the  Na-
ture of  Evil :  If  he  did ,  what  Dread  could  he  be  under,  or
how  fhould  Evil  enter  into  any  Part  of  that  Province  which
Good  poffeffes  j  fince  their  Natures  are  fo  very  diffcant  and
irreconciieable,  that  they  cannot  run  into  each  other,  but  their
Bounds  are  fix'd,  and  immovable  Barriers  fet  between  them
from  all  Eternity  ?

For  this  they  fay  too.  But  who,  in  the  Name  of  Wonder,
(et  thefe  Bounds  and  Barriers  ?  Did  Chance  ?  Then  it  feems
they  make  Chance  a  Common  Principle  too.  Did  any  other
Being,  which  had  Authority  over  both  thefe,  and  prefcribed
to  them  as  itfelf  thought  fit  ?  Then  it  feems  That  had  a  Sub-
fiftance,  before  They  made  the  World.  But  how  could  that
be  done  before  the  Creation  ?  For  the  Divilion  they  make  is
like  this  upon  Earth ;  they  affign  the  Eaftern,  Weftern,  and
Northern  Regions  to  Good,  and  referve  only  the  South  for
Evil.

Afterwards  they  go  on,  and  fanfy,  that  Evil  hath  five  Apart-
ments, like  fo  many  Dens  or  Caverns  ^  and  here  they  tell  us
of  Woods  and  all  manner  of  Animals,  fuch  as  frequent  both
Sea  and  Land ;  that  thefe  are  at  eternal  Wars  with  one  an-
other j  and  though  they  are  faid  to  be  immortal,  as  being  ori-
ginally Good,  yet  they  pretend  at  the  fame  time,  that  they  are
devoured  by  their  Five-formed  Monfter,

Now  then,  fince  thefe  diftind  Regions  have  been  fet  out,
as  you  fee,  from  the  Beginning  of  the  World  at  leaft ;  and
each  afligned  and  accommodated  to  its  peculiar  Inhabitant;
I  would  fain  be  fatisfied,  which  way  Evil  fhould  make  an  In-
curfion  into  the  Dominions  of  Good.  Or,  if  we  fhould  fup-
pofe  this  pofiTible,  yet  could  it  be  done  however,  and  ftill
thefe  Two  remain  contrary  to  one  another  ?  May  we  not  as
well  fay,  that  White  may  be  Black,  and  yet  retain  its  White-
nefs  ftill ;  and  that  Light  can  admit  Darknefs,  and  ftill  be
Light,  as  that  perfeft  Evil  can  make  Approaches  to  perfcd
Good,  and  ftill  continue  perfed  Evil  }  And,  if  this  Impofli-
bility  be  evident  and  unavoidable,  what  Occafion  is  there  to
defcribe  God  as  they  do,  committing  an  Ad  of  fo  much  un-
neceflary  Fear,  and  Folly,  and  Injuftice^  as  is  the  cafting  away
Souls  to  Evil  for  his  own  Security,  and  ever  fince,  la-
bouring to  no  Purpofe,  (for  fo  they  will  needs  have  it  too)

i68 Epictetus's  Morals,

to  redeem  thefe  Souls  from  Mifery  ?  A  Defign  never  to  be
effecftedj  becaufe,  as  I  obfery'd  before,  fome  of  them  have
lapfed,  and  fo  mull  abide  under  the  Dominion  of  Evil  to  alj.
Eternity :  And  all  this  they  will  not  allow  the  Good  to  hav^
had  any  Knowledge  or  Forefight  of,  though  with  the  fam^
Breath  they  pretencJj__£hat  the.  Evil  Principle  knew  perfedlly
well,  what  Number  of  Souls  would  fall  intO:,  his  Hands,  and
laid  his  Stratagems  accordingly.  .,  .  ' ,

Their  Schem^e  certainly  had  been  much  better,  contrived ^.^
liad  they  reprefented  the  Good  Principle,  as  always  employed'
and  taken  up  with  the  Contemplation  of  itfelf,  and  not  en-
gaged it  in  perpetual  War,  with  an  Enemy  never  to  be  vari^
quifhed  or  deftroyed.  For  they  make  Evil  to  be  no  lefs  Eter-
nal and  Immortal  than  Good.  And  this  indeed  is  a  confi-
derable  Objedion,  and  a  jull  Reproach  to  their  whole  Syftem,
that  Eternal  Exiftence  and  Incorruptible  Duration,  no  Begin-
ning and  no  End,  are  allowed  to  Evil  as  well  as  to  Good.
And  when  thefe  glorious  Attributes  are  given  to  that  which
we  cannot  but  deteft,  what  Difference  is  there  left,  or  what
can  we  fay  more  in  Honour  of  That,  which  we  cannot  but
love  and  admire  ?

Let  us  now  proceed,  if  you  pleafe,  to  take  a  fhort  View
of  the  Account  they  give,  concerning  the  Creation  of  the
World.  Pillars  then  there  are ,  they  tell  us,  not  like  thofc
of  the  Poet,

Which  this  vajl  Globe  of  Earth  an4  HcA'v'n  fujiainy

(for  they  fcorn,  that  any  Poetical  Fiftions,  or  the  leaft  fabu-
lous Circumftance,  ihould  be  allowed  a  Place  in  their  Philo-
ibphy  j )  but  (as  one  of  their  greateft  Mafterb'  hath  informed
lis)  of  folid  unhewn  Stone,  and  twelve  Windows,  one  of
which  is  conftantly  opened  every  Hour.

But  their  marvellous  Wifdom  is  not  more  eminently  fecQ
in  any  one  Inftance,  than  the  Account  they  pretend  to  give
of  Eclipfes.  They  tell  us.  That  when  in  Framing  of  the
World,  the  Evils  that  were  in  Conjunction  together,  gave
great  Difburbance,  by  their  Juftling  and  diforderly  Motions,
the  Luminaries  drew  certain  Veilc  before  them,  .to-  (helter
them  from  the  ill  Influences  of  that  Diforder  ^  and,  that
Eclipfes  are  nothing  elfe  but  the  Sun  and  Moon  hiding  theror
ielves  ftill  behind  thofe  Veils,  upon  fome  extraordinary  and
tbreatning  Emergencies.

Thea

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 169

Then  again.  How  odd  and  unaccountable  is  it,  that,  of  fp
many  Heavenly  Bodies,  which  give  Light  to  the  World,  they
fhould  hold  only  the  Two  great  ones  in  Veneration,  and
contemn  all  the  reft  i  afligning  the  Sun  and  Moon  to  the  good
Principle,  but  putting  all  the  Stars  into  the  PofTeffion  of  the
Evil,  and  deriving  them  from  a  bad  Caufe  ?

The  Light  of  the  Moon  they  do  not  agree  to  be  bor-
rowed from  the  Sun,  but  think  it  a  CoUeftion  or  Conftella-
tion  of  Souls,  which  ihe  draws  up,  like  fo  many  Vapours
from  the  Earth,  between  Change  and  Full ;  and  then  tranf-
lates  them  by  Degrees  into  the  Sun,  from  the  Full  to  the
next  New  Moon.

In  fliort,  they  have  a  world  of  extravagant  Fancies,  which
do  not  fo  much  as  deferve  to  be  reckoned  among  Fables.
And  yet  they  are  by  no  means  content  to  have  them  look'd
upon  as  fabulous,  nor  do  they  ufe  them  as  Figures  or  Hiero-
glyphicks,  fo  as  to  fignify  fomething  elfe  of  more  fubftantial
Goodnel's,  but  will  needs  have  them  believed  to  be  ftridly
and  literally  true.  Thus  the  Image  they  give  us  of  Evil,  is
a  Monfter,  compounded  of  five  feveral  Creatures  •  a  Lion,
a  Fifh,  an  Eagle,  and  fome  other  two  Things,  I  do  not  well
remember  what  •  but  all  thefe  together  are  fuppofed  to  make
a  very  ravenous  and  formidable  Compofition.

Such  abominable  Impiety  againft  God  are  thefe  Notions
and  Principles  chargeable  with ;  and  yet  (which  is  ftill  more
amazing)  the  Perfons ,  who  advance  them ,  profefs  to  take
Sanctuary  in  thefe  Opinions,  out  of  a  more  than  common
Refpeft,  and  a  profounder  Reverence  to  the  Divine  Perfec-
tions, than  the  reft  of  the  World  (as  they  think)  exprefif.
They  could  not  bear  the  imputing  any  Evil  to  God  j  and,  to
avoid  this  Inconvenience,  they  have  found  out  a  parciailar
Principle  and  Caufe  of  all  Evil ;  a  Principle  equal  in  Honour
and  Power  to  the  Good,  or  rather  indeed  Superior  and  more
Potent  than  He.  For  in  all  the  Attempts  made  hitherto,  to
corrupt  the  World,  and  render  it  miferable,  Evil  feems  plainly
to  have  got  the  better.  For  they  reprefent  Evil  upon  all  Oc-
cafions  taking  Advantage  againft  Good,  and  contriving  all  man-
ner of  Ways  not  to  let  it  go.  This  is  conftantly  the  bold  and
daring  AggrefiTor  •  while  Good  in  the  mean  while  gives  way  to
and  mingles  itfelf  with  Evil,  would  fain  compound  the  Matter,
and,  for  any  thing  that  yet  appears,  hath  difcovered  nothing  in
its  whole  Management,  but  Fear,  and  Folly,  and  Injuftice.
Thus,  while  they  abhor  to  call  God  the  Caule  of  Evil ,  they
wake  him  nothing  but  Evil  in  the  moft  e.^quifite  Degree  •

and

170 Epic  TETus's  Moral  5,

and  (according  to  that  vulgar  Proverb)  leap  out  of  the  Fry-
ing-Pan  into  the  Fire.

Bur,  befides  thefe  vile  Profanations  of  the  Majefiy  of  God,
this  Syftem  of  Philofcphy  does,  as  much  as  in  it  lies,  tear
up  the  very  Roots  of  all  Virtue  and  moral  Inftrudion,  by
deftroying  and  utterly  taking  away  all  that  Liberty  of  Choice,
which  God  and  Nature  hath  given  us.  For,  befides  thofe
Attributes  of  Eternity  and  Immortality,  it  does  alfo  afcribe
to  this  Principle  of  Evil  a  compulfive  Power  over  our  Wills  •
and  that  fo  very  abfolute  and  ftrong,  that  it  is  not  only  out  of
our  own  Difpofal,  whether  we  will  commit  Wickednefs  or
no,  but  fuch  as  even  God  himfelf  is  not  able  to  controul  or
over-power.  In  the  mean  while  it  muft  be  confeft,  that  this
is  a  very  idle  and  extravagant  Imagination  :  For,  if  our  Souls
are  violently  thruft  and  born  down  into  Murder  or  Adulte-
ry, or  any  other  that  are  reputed  the  mofb  grievous  Crime?,
and  commit  thefe,  merely  by  the  Impulfe  of  fome  ftronger
Power,  without  any  Confent  or  voluntary  Concurrence  of
their  own,  then  are  they  clear  of  all  Guilt.  And  this  is  a
Matter  fo  evident  and  acknowledged,  that  all  Laws,  both
Divine  and  Humane,  acquit  Perfons  in  Cafes  of  Violence,
and  fuch  a  Force  as  they  could  not  refift,  and  where  it  is
plain  they  aded  againft  their  Will.  And  indeed  there  is  not,
nor  can  be  any  Sin  at  all  in  fuch  Adions  where  the  Minds
of  Men  are  fuppofed  to  have  no  Concern,  but  to  proceed
iipon  Neceffity  and  Conffcraint,  and  fuch  as  could  not  be  re-
fifted  by  them.

Now  if  thefe  wife  Philofophers,  while  they  were  at  a  I06,
vhere  to  fix  the  true  Caufe  of  thefe  Things,  confidered  as
Evils,  bethought  themfelves  of  this  Remedy,  and  fet  up  fuch
a  Principle  of  Evil,  as  you  have  heard,  to  refolve  the  Diffi-
culty j  ■  they  have  done  their  own  Bufinefs  efFecflually,  and,
by  a  very  pleafant  Blunder,  over-turned  their  whole  Scheme
at  once.  For,  if  it  follows  likewife,  (upon  the  Suppofal  of
fuch  a  Conftraint  put  upon  the  Wills  of  Men  by  that  Prin-
ciple) that  nothing  they  do  is  any  longer  Evil,  then  obferve,
how  pleafant  a  Conclufion  they  have  brought  their  Matters
to  :  For  the  Confequence  lies  plainly  thus.  If  there  be  fuch
a  Thing  as  a  Principle  of  Evil,  then  there  is  no  fuch  Thing
as  Evil  in  the  World  j  and  if  there  be  no  fuch  Thing  as
Evil,  then  there  cannot  poffibly  be  any  fuch  Thing  as  a  Prin-.
ciple  of  Evil  i  and  fo  upon  the  whole  Matter,  they  have  left
themfelves  neither  a  Principle  of  Evil,  nor  any  Evil  at  all.

Since

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 171

Since  therefore  this  is  difcovered  to  be  but  a  rotten  Foun-
dation •  if  any,  confcious  of  its  Weaknefs,  fhall  prefurae  to
affirm,  that  God  is  the  Author  of  Evil  as  well  as  Good,
the  Faliliood  and  Impiery  of  this  Affertion  will  afk  but  little
Time  and  Pains  to  evince  it.  For  how  indeed  can  we  fup-
pole  it  poflible,  that  that  Opinion  fhould  be  true,  which
cafts  fuch  unworthy  Afperfions  upon  Him,  who  is  the  Au-
thor and  Giver  of  all  Truth  ?

And  firftj  which  way  can  one  conceive,  that  God,  v/hofe
very  Eflence  is  pevfeft  and  immutable  Goodnefs,  fhould  pro-
duce Evil  out  of  himfelf?  For,  fince  Evil  and  Good  are
contrary  to  each  other,  ss  our  Adverfaries  themfelves  grant.
How  can  we  imagine  one  Contrary  to  be  the  Produdtion
of  another  ?

Befides,  he  that  produces  any  thing  out  of  himfelf,  does
it  by  being  the  Caufe  of  its  exifting,  by  having  the  Caufe
within  himfelf,  and  by  having  fome  Likenefs  to  it  in  his  own
Nature  j  and  fo,  if  you  refpecl  him  as  the  Caufe,  the  Pro-
ducing and  the  Produced  are  in  fome  Degree  the  fame.  Sq
that  the  Promoters  of  this  Opinion  feem  not  to  have  attended
to  the  manifeft  Difhonour  they  put  upon  God ,  by  making
him  not  only  the  Caufe  and  Author  of  Evil,  but  to  be  the
firft  and  original  Evil  in  his  own  Nature.

Since  therefore  there  is  no  fuch  Thing  as  a  common  Prin-
ciple of  Evil,  and  iince  God  is  not  the  Author  and  Caufe  of
it,  what  Account  ftiall  we  give  of  its  coming  into  the  World  ?
For  it  is  impoffible  any  thing  fliould  have  a  Beginning,
without  a  Caufe.  And  the  belt  Courfe  we  can  take  for
this  will  be,  firft  to  explain  what  v/e  mean  by  Evil,  and
then  to  enquire  into  its  Original  \  for  the  Caufes  of  Things
will  very  hardly  be  found,  till  their  Natures  are  firft
known.

Now  as  to  that  Evil,  which  They  fuppofe,  who  profefs  to
believe  a  common  Principle  of  Evil,  and  many  of  thofe  wKo
difpute  this  Queftion  underftand,  we  may  be  bold  to  pro-
nounce ,  that  there  is  no  fuch  Thing  in  Nature.  For  riiey
pretend,  that  this  Evil  hath  a  pofitive  Subfiftence  of  its  own,
as  Good  hath  ^  that  it  hath  a  Power  equiil  to  Good,  and
contrary  to  it  ^  that  its  Eflence  is  incompatible  with  that
of  Good,  and  will  no  more  endure  any  Mixcure  with  iz^
than  White  will  with  Black,  or  Hot  with  Cold.  But  if  there
were  any  fuch  real  and  fubftantial  Evil,  like  the  Subftance
of  a  Man,  or  a  Horfe,  or  any  other  Species,  which  really
and  ad'ually  lubfifts  ;  it  muft  needs  have  fome  Ibrt  of  Per-

fedtion

172  Epictetus's  Morals,

feftion  in  Proportion  to  its  Nature  ,*  and  a  particular  Form,
which  makes  it  what  it  is,  and  diftinguiflies  it  from  all  other
Beings.  Now  every  Form,  confidered  as  fuch,  is  Good  and
not  Evil,  becaufe  it  is  indued  with  the  Perfedions  peculiar
to  its  Nature.  And  indeed  they  are  Co  fenfible  of  this,  as  to
make  that  Evil  of  theirs  defire  Good,  and  embrace  and  court
it,  and  receive  Advantage  by  it,  and  love  to  partake  of  it,
and  ufe  all  poffible  Diligence  not  to  part  from  it.  And
how  very  ridiculous  an  Attempt  is  it,  to  impofe  upon  us  a
Thing  which  does  all  this,  for  a  Being  fimply  and  abfo-
lutely  Evil.?

But  then,  if  we  confider  in  the  next  Place,  that  Evil,  by
the  Commiffion  whereof  Men  are  denominated  wicked,  and
are  puniflied  by  God  and  Man  for  contradifting  the  Guilt  of
it  j  this  is  purely  accidental,  and  hath  no  real  EfTence  of  its
own  :  For  we  find  that  it  both  is,  and  ceafes  to  be,  without
the  Deftruftion  of  the  Subjed,  which  is  the  very  diftin-
guilhing  Character  of  an  Accident  ;  and  likewife,  it  never
fubfifts ,  but  by  Inhering  in  fome  Subjeft  :  For,  what
Evil  of  this  Kind  was  there  ever  in  the  Abftrad,  without
being  the  Evil,  that  is,  the  Crime,  of  fome  Perfon  who
committed  it  ?  And  fo  in  like  manner,  Moral  Good ,  which
is  the  true  Oppofite  of  Evil,  in  this  Senfe  is  merely  an  Acci-
dent too.

Only  herein  they  differ,  that  Good  is  that  Quality  of  its
Subjed,  by  which  it  is  rendered  agreeable  to  Nature,  and  at-
tains its  proper  Perfedlion.  But  Evil  is  the  Depravation  or
Indilpofition  of  its  Subjed,  by  which  it  fwerves  and  departs
from  Nature ,  and  lofes  or  falls  fhort  of  its  natural  Perfec-
tion, that  is,  of  Good,  For,  if  Evil  were  the  right  Difpofi-
tion,  and  natural  Perfedlion  of  the  Form  to  which  it  belongs,
then  would  it  by  this  Means  change  its  Name  and  its  Na-
ture, and  commence  Good.  3o  that  from  hence  we  may
conclude  againft'any  primary  Nature  and  pofitive  Subfiftence
of  Evil  j  for  it  is  not  in  Nature  as  good  is,  but  is  only  an
additional  Thing  fuperinduced  upon  Good ,  the  Privation  of
and  Fall  from  it.

Juft  thus  we  may  conceive Sicknefs,  with  regard  to  Healthy
and  the  Vices  of  the  Mind,  with  refpeft  to  Virtue.  And  as
the  Walking  flrong  and  upright  is  the  defigned  and  primary
Adion  of  an  Animal,  and  the  End  which  it  propofes  to  it-
felf  when  it  moves  ;  but  Stumbling  or  Halting  is  an  Acci-
dent befide  the  Purpofe,  and  happens  through  fome  Defedl,
and  miffing  the  intended  Aim  j  being  a  Motion,  not  of  Na-

ture's

with  SiMPLicip-s's  Comment. 173

ture's  making,  nor  agreeable  to  her  Operations  j  diredlly  fo  we
may  affirm  of  Evil,  when  compared  to  its  oppofite  Good.
And  though  thefe  be  Contraries,  as  White  and  Black  are^
yet  no  Man  can  maintain,  that  they  do  equally  fubfift,  o^
are  equipollent  to  one  another,  as  White  and  Black  are  m.
a  Phyfical  Confideration.  For  thefe  do  both  fubfift:  alikei
and  neither  of  them  can  pretend  to  a  greater  Perfedion  in
Nature  than  the  other  j  and  confequendy,  one  is  not  the
mere  Privation  of  the  other.  For,  a  Privation  is  properly  a
Defed,  or  Kind  of  falfe  Step  in  Nature,  whereby  the  original
Form  is  not  fully  come  up  to,  as  Limping  is  in  a  Man's  Gate.-
But  now  each  of  thofe  Colours  hath  its  Form  entire,  and  as
much  of  what  Nature  intended  fhould  belong  to  it,  as  ixs
Contrary,  Whereas,  in  the  Cafe  before  us.  One  of  the  Ex-
tremes is  agreeable  to  Nature,  and  the  Other  contrary  to  it ;
and  that  which  is  contrary  to  Nature,  is  an  accidental  Addi-
tion to  that  Part  which  is  agreeable  to  it ;  for  Good  was  firft,
and  then  Evil  ^  not  Evil  firft,  and  afterwards  Good.  As  no
Man  can  fay,  that  Miffing  the  Mark  was  antecedent  to  the
Hitting  of  it  ^  nor  Sicknefs  before  Health  j  but  quite  other-
wife.  For  it  was  the  Archer's  primitive  Defign  to  hit  the
Mark,  and  he  fhot  on  Purpofe  that  he  might  do  fo.  Thus
alfo  it  was  the  original  Intent  of  Nature,  to  give  us  a  Ibund
Health,  and  a  good  Conftitution  j  for,  the  Prefervation  and
Continuance  of  the  Creature  was  the  very  End  flie  propofed
to  herfelf  in  forming  it.  And,  in  general  Terms,  whatever
any  Adrion  is  direded  to,  that  is  the  proper  End  of  it.  But
now  the  miffing  the  Mark  happens  afterwards  by  Accident,
when  the  Operation  does  not  fucceed  as  it  ought,  nor  at-
tain the  End  at  firft  propofed,  but  hits  upon  fomething  elfe,
fome  Difappointment  inftead  of  it.  Now  then  this  Difap^
pointment,  which  comes  in  afterwards  and  by  the  By,  may
very  truly  be  faid  to  be  Additional ,  and  Accidental  to  the
Original  Purpofe  of  Hitting  the  Markj  but  that  Purpofe
can  with  no  Propriety  of  Speech  be  called  fo,  with  regard
to  that,  which  happened  afterwards,  belides  and  againfc  the
Man's  Purpofe.

If  then  all  Things, naturally  defire  Good,  and  every  Thing
of  any  Kind,  afts  y/ith  a  Profped:  of  or  in  order  to  fome
Real  or  fome  Seeming  Good  j  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  ob-
taining fome  Good,  is  the  Primary  End  of  all  Operations
whatloever.  Somctiines  indeed  it  happens,  that  Evil  fteps
in  between  j  whe^i  the  Defire  is  hx'd  upon  fome  Objed  not
really  and  truly  good,  but  iixch  in  outward  Appearance  on-

174  Epictetu  s's  Moral s,

ly,  and  which  hath  an  Allay  and  Mixture  of  Evil  with  it.
Thus  when  a  Man  in  Purfuit  of  Pleafure,  or  greedy  of
Wealth,  turns  a  Robber,  or  a  Pirate  ,•  his  Delire,  in  this  Cafe,
is  principally  fixed  upon  the  feeming  Good ;  and  that  is  the
Spring,  upon  which  all  thefe  Adions  move;  but,  as  Mat-
ters ftand,  he  is  forced  to  take  the  Good  and  the  Bad  together.
For  no  Man  alive  was  yet  fo  unnaturally  profligrvte,  as  to  be
guilty  of  Lewdnefs  for  Lewdnefs  fake  ,•  or  to  rob  any  Man
merely  for  the  fake  of  Stealing,*  or  indeed,  difpofed  to  any
manner  of  Evil,  purely  for  the  Satisfaftion  of  doing  Evil.
Becaufe  it  is  pafl:  all  Doubt,  that  Evil,  confidered  and  appre-
hended as  Evil,  can  never  be  the  Object  of  any  Man's  De-
fire.  For  if  it  were  the  Principal  and  original  Caufe  of  thofe
Things  which  proceed  from  it,  then  would  it  be  the  End  of
all  fuch  Things :  As  an  End  it  would  be  defirable  to  them,
as  Good.  For  Good  and  Delirable  are  Terms  reciprocal  and
convertible ;  and  confequencly,  at  this  rate,  it  would  become
Good,  and  ceafe  to  be  Evil.

'Tis  moft  certainly  true  then,  that  all  Things  whatfoevef
do  defire  and  purfue  their  own  Advantage  ^  not  all  their  true
and  real  Advantage  indeed  ^  but  all  their  feeming  Benefit,
and  fuch  as  they  at  that  time  take  for  the  true  and  beft.
For  no  Man  is  willingly  deceived  ;  no  Man  chufes  a  Falf-
hood  before  Truth,  nor  Shadows  before  Subftances,  who
knows  and  is  fenfible  of  the  Difference  between  them,  when
he  does  it.  But  this  Misfortune  happens  generally  from  a
blind  Admiration  of  fome  apparent  Good,  which  fo  dazJes
our  Eyes,  that  either  we  do  not  at  all  difcover  the  Evil  it  is
attended  with,  or  if  we  do  difcern  that,  yet  we  fee  the  Thing
through  falfe  Opticks,  fuch  as  magnify  the  Good,  and  lef-
fen  the  Evil  to  the  Eye.  Now  it  is  a  frequent  and  a  rea-
fonable  Choice,  when  we  are  content  to  take  a  greater
Good  with  the  Incumbrance  of  a  lefs  Evil  :  As  for  In-
flance ,  When  we  fufTer  an  Incifion,  or  a  Cupping,  and  ac-
count the  Evil  of  thefe  Pains  much  too  little,  to  counter-
balance the  Good  there  is  in  that  Health  which  they  reftorc
to  us.

Once  more  yet.  That  all  Things  defire  Good,  is  farther
plain  from  hence;  That,  fuppofing  Evil  to  have  a  real  Be-
ing, and  a  Power  of  Afting,  whatever  it  did  would  be  for
its  own  Advantage,  that  is,  in  other  Words,  for  its  own
Good.  And  thus  much  they  who  afcribe  a  Being  and  Ope-
ration to  it,  confefsj  for  they  pretend,  that  it  purfues  after
^ood, 'Would  fain  detain  it,  and  ufes  all  poffible  Endeavours

not-

«;/>^  Si  MPLI  cius's  COMM-E  NT. 1^5

not  to  let  it  go.  And  if  Evil  be  the  Obje<ft  of  no  Defire,
then  is  it  not  any  primary  and  defigned  Nature.  But,  fince
the  Condition  of  it  is,  in  all  Particulars ,  according  to  the
Defcription  here  given  of  it  •  it  is  moft  truly  faid,  to  be  aa
Accidental  and  Additional  Thing,  fuperinduced  to  fomc-
thing  that  did  fubfift  before,  but  to  have  no  Subfiftence  of
its  own.

Well,  (fays  the  Objecflor)  I  allow  what  you  fay.  We  will
fuppofe,  that  Evil  is  only  an  Accident,  a  Defedl,  a  Privation
of  Good,  and  an  Additional  Difappointment  of  the  firft  and
original  Intent  of  Nature.  And  what  of  all  this  ?  How  are
we  advanced  in  the  Queftion  before  us  ?  For  let  this  be  what,
or  after  what  manner  you  pleafe,  ftill  it  muft  have  feme
Caufe :  Ocherwife,  How,  in  the  Name  of  Wonder,  did  it
ever  find  the  Way  into  the  World  ?  How  then  will  you  gee
out  of  this  Maze  ?  You  allow  God  to  be  the  Caufe  of  all
Things ;  you  mult  grant  that  Evil  hath  fome  Caufe ;  and  yet
you  tell  me,  that  God  is  infinitely  Good,  and  fo  cannot  be
that  Caufe.

This  Objedion  hath  been  already  confidered,  and  fpoken
to,  both  at  the  Beginning  of  the  Book,  where  we  explained
this  Author's  Diftindion  of  the  Things  in  and  not  in  our
own  Power  i  and  alfo  in  the  Comment  upon  the  XIIP''
Chapter,  upon  Occafion  of  thofe  Words,  Trouble  not  yourfelf
'With  luifiingy  that  Things  may  be  juji  as  you  "would  have
them^  &CC.  But  however,  I  will  fpeak  to  it  once  more  here
too,  and  that  briefly,  as  follows.

God,  who  is  the  Source  and  Original  Caufe  of  all  Good-
nefs,  did  not  only  produce  the  Higheft  and  moft  Excellent
Things,  fuch  as  are  good  in  themfelves  j  nor  only  thofe
that  are  of  a  Rank  fomething  inferiour  to  thefe,  and  of  a
middle  Nature  ^  but  the  Extremes  too,  fuch  as  are  capable  of
falling,  and  apt  to  be  perverted  from  that  which  is  agreeable
to  Nature ,  to  that  which  we  call  Evil.  Thus ;  As ,  after
thofe  incorruptible  Bodies,  which  are  always  regular  in  their
Motions,  and  immutably  good,  Others  were  created  fiib-
ject  to  Change  and  Decay  j  fo  likewife  it  was  with  Souls.
The  fame  Order  was  obferved  with  thefe  too  j  for  after
Them  which  were  unalterably  fixed  in  Good,  Others  were
produced  liable  to  be  feduced  from  it.  And  this  was  done,
both  for  the  greater  lUuftration  of  the  wife  and  Mighty  Crea-
tor's Glory  j  that  the  Riches  of  his  Goodnefs  might  be  the
more  clearly  feen ,  in  producing  good  Things  of  all  Sorts,
as  many  as  were  capable  of  fubfifting  j  and  alfo,  that  the

Q^  Univcrfe

1^6  Epi  c  TE  T  us's  Morals,

Univerfe  might  be  full  and  perfed,  when  Beings  of  all  Kinds
and  all  Proportions  were  contained  in  it.  (For  This  is  a  Per-
fedion^  to  want  nothing  of  any  Kind.)  And  likewife,  to  vin-
dicate the  Higheft  and  the  Middle  fort,  which  never  decline
or  deviate  from  their  Goodnefs,  from  that  Contempt,  which
always  falls  upon  the  Loweft  of  any  fort  j  and  fuch  thefe
had  been,  if  the  Corruptible  and  Mortal  Things  had  not  been
Created,  and  Supported  the  other's  Dignity  by  their  own
Want  of  it.

And  Corruptible  they  muft  be.  For  it  could  never  be,
that  while  the  Firft  and  the  Middle  fort  of  Bodies  continued
as  they  are  ^  Some  Immutable,  both  as  to  their  Nature  and
their  Operation  ,•  Others  Immutable  indeed,  as  to  their  Sub-
ftance,  but  Mutable  in  their  Motion  ;  it  could  not  be,  I  fay,
that  the  Loweft  and  Sublunary  Bodies  fhould  ever  hold  out,
while  the  violent  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  ones  were
perpetually  changing  their  Subftance,  and  putting  them  into
Unnatural  Diforders.

For  thefe  Reafons  certainly,  'and  perhaps  for  a  great  many
others more  important than  thefe,  which  are  Secrets  too
dark  and  deep  for  us ,  Thefe  Sublunary  Bodies  were  made,
and  this  Region  of  Mortality,  where  the  Pervertible  Good
hath  its  Refidence. For  there  was  a  Neceflity,  that  the
Loweft  fort  of  Good  fhould  have  a  Being  too  j  and  fuch  is
that,  which  is  liable  to  Change  and  Depravation, Hence  alfo
there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  Evil  in  the  Regions  above  us  ;  for
the  Nature  of  Evil,  being  nothing  elfe  but  a  Corruption  of
the  Meaneft  and  moft  Feeble  Good,  can  only  fubfifl  where
•  that  Mean  and  Mutable  Good  refides. For  this  Reafon  the
Soul,  which,  confidered  by  herfelf,  is  a  Generous  and  Im-
mutable Being,  is  tainted  with  no  Evil,  while  alone  in  a
State  of  Separation. But  being  fo  contrived  by  Nature,  as
to  dwell  in  this  lower  World, and  be  intimately  united  to
Mortal  Bodies, (for  fo  the  good  Providence  of  our  great
Father  and  Creator  hath  ordered  it, making  thefe  Souls  a
Link  to tye the  Spiritual and Material  World  together,
joyning  the  Extremes by  the  common  Bands  of  Life) it
feems to  bear  a  Part  in  all  thofe  Diftempers  and  Decays,
which  Evil  fubjecls  our  Bodies  to,  by  difturbing  their  natu-
ral Habit  and  Frame. Though  indeed  I  cannot  think  this
to  be  Evil,  ftriftly  fpeaking,  but  rather  Good  j fmce  the
Effed  of  k  is  fo  : For  thus,  the  fimple  Elements,  of  which
thefe  Bodies  are  compounded,  come  to  be  fet  free  from  a
great  Confinement,  'aad  fevered  from  other  Parts  of  Matter
'• •■  of

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment,  lyy

of  a  different  Conftitution,  with  which  they  were  interwo-
ven and  entangled  before  j  and  fo,  getting  loofe  from  the
perpetual  Combat  between  contrary  Qualities,  are  reftored
to  their  proper  Places  and  their  Primitive  Mafs  again,  in
order  to  acquiring  new  Life  and  Vigour.

And  if  this  Proceeding  be  the  Occalion  of  perpetual
Change,  yet  neither  is  that  Evil ;  becaufe  every  thing  is  re-
folved  at  laft,  into  what  it  was  at  the  Beginning.  For  Water,
though  evaporated  into  Air,  yet  is  by  Degrees  congealed  into
Water  again  :  and  fo,  even  particular  Beings  lofe  nothing  by
thofe  Viciffitudes.

But  that  which  ought  to  be  a  Confideration  of  greater  Mo-
ment, is,  that  the  DifTolution  of  Compound  Bodies,  and  the
mutual  Change  of  Simple  ones  into  each  other,  contributes
to  the  Advantage  of  the  Univerfe  in  general,  by  making  the
Corruption  of  one  Thing  to  become  the  Rife  and  Birth  of
another.  By  this  perpetual  Round  it  is,  that  Matter  and
Motion  have  been  fuftained  all  this  vv'hile.  Now  it  is  ob-
vious to  any  obferving  Man,  that  both  Nature  and  Art  (as
Vas  urged  heretofore)  do  frequently  negleft  a  fingle  Pare,
when  the  Detriment  of  that  in  particular,  may  conduce  to
the  Gpod  of  the  Whole.  The  former  does  it,  as  often  as
our  Rheums  and  Ulcerous  Humours,  are  thrown  off  from
the  Vitals,  and  turn'd  into  Sores  or  Swellings  in  any  of  the
extreme  Parts  j  and  Art  imitates  this  Method  of  Nature,  as
oft  as  a  Limb  is  feared,  or  lopped  off  for  the  Prefervation
of  the  Body  :  So  that  upon  the  whole  Matter,  thefe  Shocks
and  Corruptions  of  Bodies  deferve  rather  to  be  eileemed
Good  than  Evil  j  and  the  Caufe  of  them  the  Caufe  of  Good
and  not  Evil  Events.  For  thofe  Sublunary  Bodies,  which
are  Simples,  fufFer  no  Injury,  becaufe  they  are  fubje<fl  to  no
Decay  or  Deftrudion  :  And  for  the  Evil,  which  the  Parts
feem  to  undergo,  this  hath  been  fliewn  to  have  more  Good
than  Evil  in  it,  both  in  Simples  and  Compounds,  even  when
confidered  in  itfelf  j  but,  if  taken  with  refped  to  the  Be-
nefit which  other  Creatures  reap  by  it,  then  it  is  manifeftly
Good.  So  that  the  Diftempers  and  Decays  of  Bodies,  take
them  which  way  you  will,  are  not  Evil,  but  produce  great
Good.

But  if  any  one  fiiall  be  fcrupulous  upon  this  Occafion,'
and  quarrel  with  our  calling  That  Good,  v/hich  is  confeired
to  be  no  betcer  than  a  perverting  of  the  Courfe  of  Nature  ;
let  not  this  nice  Caviller  take  upon  him  however  to  call  ic
Evil, in  the  grofs  Senie  and  common  Acceptation  of  the

CL2  Wordi

Epictetus's  Morals,

Word ;  by  which  we  underftand  fomething,  utterly  repugnant
and  irreconcileable  to  Good.  But  let  him  call  it  rather  a  Ne-
cellicy  or  Hardfhip  j  as  not  delirable  for  its  own  fake,  but
having  fome  Tendency  and  contributing  to  that  which  is  fo :
For,  were  it  fimply  and  abfolutely  Evil,  it  could  never  be  an
Inftrument  of  Good  to  us.  Now  that  which  I  mean  by
Neceflary,  though  it  have  nor  Charms  enough  of  its  own
to  recommend  it ,  yet  does  it  deferve  to  be  accounted  Good,
for  leading  us  to  that  which  is  Good  j  and  That  which  can
become  a  proper  Object  of  our  Choice,  under  any  Circum-
ftance,  is  fo  far  forcii  Good,  Thus  we  chufe  Incifions,  and
Burnings,  and  Amputations  ,*  nay,  v/e  are  content  to  pay
dear  for  them,  and  acknowledge  ourfelves  obliged,  both  by
the  Prefervation  and  the  painful  Operation  j  AH  which
were  merely  ridiculous  to  be  done,  if  we  thought  thefe
Things  Evil.  And  yet  I  own,  this  is  but  a  Qualified  and
Inferiour  Good,  not  ftrittly  and  properly  fo,  but  only  in  ,a
Second  and  Subordinate  Senfe  :  Yet  fo,  that  the  Creator  of
thefe  Things  is  by  no  means  the  Caufe  of  Evil,  but  a  ne-
ceffary  and  meaner  Good,  though  a  Good  ftill  ;  for  fuch
we  ought  to  efleem  it,  fince  it  is  derived  from  the  fame
Univerfal  Fountain  of  Goodnefs ,  though  embafed  with  fome
Alloys  and  Abatements.  And  thut  much,  I  hope,  may  be
thought  fufficient,  in  Vindication  of  the  Nature  and  Caufe  of
that  Evil,  which  Bodies  are  concerned  in.

Nothing  indeed  can  fo  truly  be  called  Evil,  as  the  Lapfes
and  Vices  of  the  Soul  of  Man.  And  of  thefe  too,  much
hath  been  faid  before  j  but  however,  we  will  refume  theDif^
courfe  on  this  Occalion,  and  enquire  afrelli,  both  into  the
Nature  and  Caufe  of  them.

And  here  we  lliall  do  well  to  take  Notice,  That  the  Souls
of  a  more  excellent  Nature,  which  dwell  in  the  Regions.
above  us,  are  immutably  fixed  in  Goodnefs,  and  wholly  un-
acquainted with  any  Evil.  There  are  alfo  the  Souls  of  Brutes
of  a  baler  Alloy  than  ours,  and  {landing  in  the  middle,  as
it  were,  between  the  Vegetative  Souls  of  Plants  and  our
Rational  ones.  Thefe,  fo  far  forth  as  they  are  Corporeal,
are  liable  to  that  Evil,  to  which  Bodies  are  fubjed:  j  but  fo
far  as  concerns  their  Appetites  and  Inclinations,  they  bear
ibme  Refemblance  to  the  Humane.  And  the  Evil,  they  are
in  this  P.efped;  obnoxious  to,  is  in  Proportion  the  famej
fo  that  One  of  thefe  will  be  fufficiently  explained  by  giving
an  Account  of  the  Othci'.

Now

with  S I M  P  L I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 179

Now  the  Humane  Soul  is  in  a  middle  Station,  between
the  Souls  above  and  thofe  below.  It  partakes  of  the  Qua-
lities of  both  J  Of  thofe  more  excellent  ones,  in  the  Subli-
mity of  its  Nature,  and  the  Excellence  of  its  Underftanding  ^
Of  the  Brutal  and  Inferior  ones,  by  its  ftrid  Affinity  to  the
Body  and  Animal  Life.  Of  Both  thefe  it  is  the  common
Band,  by  its  Vital  Union  with  the  Body ;  and  by  izs  Habitual
Freedom  it  affimilates  itfelf  fometimes  to  the  one  fort,  and
fometimes  to  the  other  of  thefe  Natures.  So  long  as  it
dwells  above,  and  entertains  itlelf  with  Noble  and  Divine
Speculations,  it  preferves  its  Innocence,  and  is  fixed  in  Good-
nefs  j  But  when  it  begins  to  flag  and  droop,  when  it  finks
down  from  that  blifcful  Life,  and  grovels  in  the  Filth  of  the
World ,  which  by  Nature  it  is  equally  apt  to  do,  then  it  falls
into  all  manner  of  Evil.  So  that  its  own  voluntary  Depre{^
fion  of  itfelf  into  this  Region  of  Corruption  and  Mortality,
is  the  true  Beginning  and  proper  Caufe  of  all  its  Mifery  and
Mifchief.  For  though  the  Soul  be  of  an  Amphibious  Dif-
pofition,  yet  it  is  not  forced  either  upv/ards  or  downwards  ;
but  acts  purely  by  an  internal  Principle  of  its  own,  and  \s  in
perfedl  Liberty.  Nor  ought  this  to  ieem  incredible  in.  an
Agent  which  Nature  hath  made  Free  j  fince  even  thofe
Brutes  that  are  Amphibious,  dwell  fometimes  in  the  Water
and  fometimes  upon  dry  Ground,  without  being  deter-
mined to  Either,  any  otherwife  than  by  their  own  Incli-
nation.

Now  when  the  Soul  debafes  herfelf  to  the  World ,  and
enters  into  a  near  Intimacy  with  the  Corruptible  Body,  and
efteems  this  to  be  the  other  Conftituent  of  the  Humane  Na-
ture, then  it  leads  the  Life  of  Brutes,  and  exerts  itfelf  in
fuch  Operations  only,  as  They  are  capable  of.  Its  Intel-
ledual  Part  degenerates  into  Senfe  and  Imagination ,  and  its
Affedions  into  Anger  and  Concupifcence.  By  thefe  the
wretched  Mortal  attains  to  Knowledge,  juft  of  the  fame
Pitch  with  that  of  other  Animals  ^  Such  as  puts  him  upon
ieeking  frefti  Supplies  for  a  Body  continually  wafting,  and
upon  continuing  the  World  by  Pofterity,  to  fill  the  Place
of  one  who  mud;  fliortly  leave  it;  and  upon  making  the
bcft  Provifion  he  can,  for  his  own  Prefervation  and  Defence
in  the  mean  while.  For  thefe  Cares  are  what  no  Mortal  would
have,  were  he  not  endued  with  Senfual  Faculties  and  Pafifion?.
For  what  Man,  who  is  any  thing  Nice  and  Confidering,
would  endure  to  fpend  fo  many  Days  and  Years  upon  the

Q^i  fupporc

i8o Epictetu  s's  Morals,

fupport  of  this  Body,  (when  the  Burden  of  the  whole  Mat-
ter comes  to  no  more  than  always  filling  and  always  emptying)
if  Senfual  Inclinations  did  not  whet  his  Appetite  ?  Or  who
could  undergo  the  tedious  Fatigue  by  which  Succeffion  is  kept
up,  if  vehement  Defires  did  not  perpetually  kindle  new
Flames,  and  thePrbfpedl  ofPoilerity  make  us  more  eafy  to
be  warmed  by  them  ?  Thefe  Arguments  have  been  in  fome
meafure  infilted  on  before,  and  I  take  them  to  be  abundantly
dear  in  this  Point ;  that,  though  our  Paffions  and  Appetites
be  the  Caufe  of  Moral  Evil,  yet  they  are  extremely  Bene-
ficial to  the  Creatures,  in  which  Nature  hath  implanted
them  j  as  being  neceffary  to  their  Conftitution,  and  giving  a
Relifh  to  fome  of  the  mofl  indifpenfable  Adions  of  lAfe.
Upon  all  vi'hich  Accounts,  even  thefe  cannot  with  anyjuftice
be  called  Evil  j  nor  God,  who  infufed  them,  the  Caufe  of
Evil.

But  the  Truth  of  the  Matter  is  this  :  The  Soul  is  by  Na-
ture fuperior  to  this  Body,  and  this  animal  Life,  and  hath  a
commanding  Power  over  them  put  into  her  Hands.  This
Dignity  and  Power  fo  long  as  fhe  preferves,  keeping  her  Sub-
jects under,  and  at  their  due  Diftance  ;  while  flie  ufes  the
Body  as  her  Inflrument,  and  converts  all  its  Fund:ions  to  her*
own  Ufe  and  Benefit,  fo  long  all  is  well,  and  there  is  no
Danger  of  Evil.  But  when  once  flie  forgets  that  the
Divine  Image  is  ftampt  upon  her  ^  when  fhe  lays  by  the  En-
figns  of  Government,  and  gives  away  the  Reins  out  of  her
own  Hands  j  when  fhe  finks  down  into  the  Dregs  of  Flefli
and  Senfe ,  (by  preferring  the  Impetuous  Temptations  of
Pleafure,  before  the  mild  and  gentle  Perfuafions  of  Reafon)
and  enters  into  a  llrid  Union  with  the  brutifh  Part  j  then
Reafon  ad;s  againft  its  own  Principles,  divefts  itfelf  of  its
Defpotick  Power,  and  bafely  fubmits  to  be  governed  by  its
Slave.  And  this  Confufion  in  the  Soul  is  the  Root  of  ail
Evil ;  an  Evil  not  owing  to  the  more  excellent  and  ratio-
nal Part,  v;hile  it  maintains  its  own  Station  ^  nor  to  the
Inferiour  and  Senfual,  while  that  keeps  within  its  due
Bounds  -y  but  to  the  inverting  of  thefe,  the  violent  Ufurpa-
tion  of  the  one,  and  the  tame  Submiffion  of  the  other  ^  that
is.  The  Perverfe  Choice  of  Degenerating  into  Body  and  Mat-
ter, rather  than  Forming  ones  felf  after  the  Similitude  of
the  Excellent  Spirits  above  us.  But  flill  all  this,  as  I  faid,  is
Choice  and  not  Conftraint ;  it  is  flill  Liberty,  though  Li-
berty- abufed.

And

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. i8i

And  here  I  would  befpeak  the  Reader's  Attention  a  little,
to  weigh  the  Reafons  I  am  about  to  give,  why  Choice  and
Volition  mufl  needs  be  the  Soul's  own  Adl  and  Deed,  an  In-
ternal Motion  of  ours,  and  not  the  EfFedt  of  any  Compulfion
from  without.  I  have  already  urged  the  Clearnefs  of  this
Truth  at  large,  and  that  the  Soul  only  is  concerned,  and  ads
purely  upon  the  Principles  of  her  own  Native  Freedom,  in
the  Choice  of  the  Worfe,  no  lefs  than  of  the  Better  Part.
Thus  much  I  apprehend  to  have  been  plainly  proved,  from
the  EJfample  of  Almighty  God  himfelf ;  the  Determinations
of  all  Wife  Laws,  and  well-con ftituted  Governments,  and
the  Judgment  of  Sober  and  Knowing  Men  j  Who  all  agree
in  this,  That  the  Merits  of  Men  are  to  be  meafured  not  by
the  Fad  itfelf,  or  the  Events  of  Things,  but  by  the  Will  and
Intention  of  the  Perfon.  And  accordingly  their  Rewards
and  Punifhments,  their  Ccnfures  and  their  Commendations,
are  all  proportioned  to  the  Intention  j  becaufe  this  alone  is
entirely  in  a  Man's  own  Power,  and  confequently,  it  is  the
only  Thing  he  can  be  accountable  for.  From  hence  it  comes
to  pa(s,  that  whatever  is  done  by  Conftraint  and  Irrefiftible
Force,  though  the  Crime  be  never  fo  grievous,  is  yet  par-
doned or  acquitted,  and  the  Guilt  imputed,  not  to  the  Party
that  did  it,  but  to  the  Perfon  that  forced  him  to  the  doing  of
it.  For  he  who  ufed  that  Force,  did  it  Voluntarily  j  but  he
who  was  born  down  by  it,  had  no  Will  of  his  own  concerned
in  the  Fad,  but  became  the  mere  Inftrument  of  EfFeding  it,
againft  the  Inclination  of  his  own  Mind.

Since  then  our  own  Choice  is  the  Caufe  of  Evil  j  and
fince  that  Choice  is  the  Soul's  Voluntary  Acl:,  owing  to  no
manner  of  Compullion,  but  its  own  internal  mere  Motion,
what  can  we  charge  Evil  upon,  fo  juftly  as  upon  the  Soul  ?
But  yet,  though  the  Soul  be  the  Caufe  of  Evil,  it  is  not  the
Caufe  of  it,  confidered  as  Evil  j  for  nothing  ever  is,  or  can
be  chofen,  under  that  Notion.  But  Evil  difguifes  itfelf,  and
deludes  us  with  an  Appearance  of  Good  j  and  when  we  chufe
that  feeming  Good,  we  take  at  the  fame  time  the  real  Evil
concealed  under  it.  And  thus  much  in  EfTed  was  faid  be-
fore too.

And  now,  having  thus  difcovered  the  true  Origin  of  Evil,
it  is  fit  we  proclaim  to  all  the  World,  That  God  is  not
chargeable  with  any  Sin  j  becaufe  it  is  not  He,  but  the  Soul
which  produces  Evil,  and  that  freely  and  willingly  too :  For,
were  the  Soul  under  any  Conftraint  to.do  amifs,  [hen,  f  allow,
there  would  be  a  colourable  Pretence  to  lay  the  Biame  on

CL4-  God,

iSz  Epictetus's  Morals,

God,  who  had  fufifered  her  to  lie  uiider  fo  fatal  a  Neceffity,
and  had  not  left  her  free  to  refcue  and  fave  herfelf :  (Though,
in  truth,  upoii  this  Prefumption,  nothing  that  the  Soul  was
forced  ro  do,  could  be  ftriflly  Evil.)  But  now,  fince  the
Soul  is  left  to  herfelf,  and  a<fls  purely  by  her  own  free  Choice^
{he  muft  be  content  to  bear  all  the  Blarrve.  • ''uV  i{&  -a  ,-;■;•-

If  it  fhall  be  farther  objeded,  That  all  This  does  not  yet
acquit  Almighty  God ;  for  that  it  is  ftill  his  Ad,  to  allow  Men
this  Liberty,  and  leave  them  to  themfelves ;  and  that  he  ought
not  to  permit  them  in  the  Choice  of  Evil :  Then  we  are  to
confider ,  that  one  of  thefe  Two  Things  muil  have  been  the
Confequence  of  fuch  a  Proceeding  :  Either  Firft,  That,  after
he  had  given  Man  a  Rational  Soul,  capable  of  chufing  fome-
times  Good  and  fometimes  Evil,  he  muft  have  chain'd  up
his  Will,  and  made  it  impoffible  for  him  to  chufe  any  thing
but  Good  J  Or  elfe,  that  the  Soul  ought  never  to  have  had
this  Indifference  at  all ,  but  to  have  been  fo  framed  at  firft,
that  the  Choice  of  Evil  fliould  have  been  naturally  impoffible.
One  of  thefe  Two  Things  the  Objedor  muft  fay,  or  he  fays
nothing  at  all  to  the  Purpofe.

Now  the  Former  of  thefe  is  manifeftly  abfurd  ;  for  to  what
Purpofe  was  the  Will  left  Free  and  Undetermined  either  way,
if  the  Determining  itfelf  one  way,  was  afterwards  to  be  debar-
red it  ?  This  would  have  been  utterly  to  take  away  the  Power
ofC^hufing  j  for  Choice  and  Neceffity  are  Things  Inconfiftentj
and  where  the  Mind  is  fo  tied  up,  that  it  can  chufe  but  one
Thing,  there  (properly  fpeaking)  it  can  chufe  nothing.

As  to  the  Latter,  It  muft  be  remembred  in  the  Firft  Place,
that  no  Evil  is  ever  chofen,  when  the  Mind  apprehends  it  to
be  Evil ;  But  the  Objedor  feems  to  think,  it  were  very  con-
venient to  have  this  Freedom  of  the  Will,  which  is  fo  Abfo-
lute  in  the  Determining  of  itfelf  fometimes  to  real  Good,  and
fometimes  to  that  which  deceives  it  with  a  falfe  Appearance
of  being  fo,  quite  taken  away :  Imagining  it  to  be  no  Good,
to  be  fure,  and  perhaps  fome  great  Evil  :  But  alas !  he  does
not  confider,  how  many  Things  there  are  in  the  World,  ac-
counted exceeding  Good,  which  yet  are  not  really  in  any
Degree  comparable  to  this  Freedom  of  the  Will.  For  in
truth,  there  is  no  Thing,  no  Privilege,  in  this  lower  World  fo
deiirable.  And  there  is  no  Body  fo  ftupid  and  loft,  as  to
wifli,  that  he  were  a  Brute  or  a  Plant  rather  than  a  Man.
And  therefore,  fince  God  difplayed  the  Abundance  of  his
Goodnefs  and  Power,  in  giving  Perfedions  inferior  to  This;
bow  inconiiftent  would  it  have  been  with  tliat  Bounty  of

bis.

with  S I  M P L I  C  I U  S's  Co  M M  £  N  T. 1 83

his,  not  to  have  beftowed  this  moft  excellent  Privilege  upon
Mankind  ?

Befides,  (as  hath  been  intimated  formerly)  take  away  this
undetermined  Propenfion  of  the  Soul,  by  which  it  inclines
itfelf  to  Good  or  Evil,  and  you  undermine  the  very  Founda-
tions of  all  Virtue,  and  in  Effect  deftroy  die  Nature  of  Man.
For  if  you  fuppofe  it  impoffible  to  be  perverted  to  Vice,  you
have  no  longer  any  fuch  thing  as  Juftice,  or  Temperance,  or
any  other  Virtue,  left  in  the  obferving  Moral  Duties.  This
State  of  Purity  may  be  the  Excellence  of  an  Angel  or  a  God;^
but  impeccable  and  indefecftible  Goodnefs  can  never  be  the
Virtue  of  a  Man.  From  whence  it  is  plain,  that  there  was  a
N^cefiity  of  leaving  the  Soul  in  a  Capacity,  of  being  cor-
rupted, and  of  committing  all  that  Evil  confequent  to  fuch
Depravation,  becaufe  otherwife  a  Gap  had  been  left  in  the
Creation.  There  could  have  been  no  Medium  between  the
Blefled  Spirits  above  and  Brutes  below  ^  no  fuch  thing  as  Hu-
mane Nature  or  Humane  Virtue  in  the  World.

So  then  we  allow,  that  this  Self-determining  Power,  by
which  Men  are  depraved,  is  a  Thing  of  God's  own  Creation
and  Appointment ;  and  yet  we  confider  withal,  how  neceffary
this  is  to  the  Order  and  Beauty  of  the  Univerfe,  and  how
many  good  EfFeds  it  hath.  In  other  Refpeds,  we  can  by
no  means  admit,  that  God  fhould  be  traduced  as  the  Caufe
and  Author  of  Evil  upon  this  Account.  When  a  Surgeon
lays  on  a  drawing  Plaifter  to  ripen  a  Swelling,  or  Cuts
or  Sears  any  Part  of  our  Bodies ,  or  lops  off  a  Limb ,  no
Man  thinks  he  takes  thefe  Methods  to  make  his  Patient
worfe,  but  better  j  becaufe  Reafon  tells  us,  that  Men  in  fuch
Circumflances  are  never  to  be  cured  by  lefs  painful  Appli-
cations, Thus  the  Divine  Juftice,  in  his  deferved  Vengeance,
fuffers  the  Paffions  of  the  Soul  to  rage  and  fwell  fo  high,
becaufe  he  knows  the  Condition  of  our  Diftemper  j  and  that
the  fmarting  fometimes  under  the  wild  Suggeftions  of  our
own  furious  Appetites  is  the  only  way  to  bring  us  to  a  bet-
ter Senfe  of  our  Extravagance,  and  to  recover  us  of  our
Frenfy.

'Tis  thus  we  fuffer  little  Children  to  burn  their  Fingers,
that  we  may  deter  them  from  playing  with  Fire.  And  for
the  fame  Reafons  many  wife  Educators  of  Youth  do  not
think  themfelves  oblig'd  to  be  always  thwarting  the  Inclina-
tions of  thofe  under  their  Charge ;  but  fometimes  connive
at  their  Follies,  and  give  them  a  Loofe  :  Tjktc  being  no  Way
fo  effiidual  for  the  Purging  of  thele  PafTiojJ  j  as  to  let  them  .

fometimes

184  Epictetus's  Moral Sj

fometimes  be  indulged,  that  fo  the  Perfons  may  be*  cloyed,
and  naufeate,  and  grow  Sick  of  thera.  And  in  thefe  Cafes  k
cannot  be  Taid,  that  either  thbfe  Parents  and  Governours,  or
the  Juftice  of  God,  is  the  Caufe  of  Evil,  but  rather  of  Good,
becaufe  all  this  is  done  with  a  Virtuous  Intent.  For  what-
ever tends  to  the  Reformation  of  Manners,  or  confirming  the
Habits  of  Virtue,  may  be  as  reafonabiy  called  Virtuous,  as
thofe  Things  that  are  done,  in  order  to  the  Recovery  and
Continuance  of  Health,  may  be  called  wholefome.  For  Ac-
tions do  principally  take  their  Denomination  and  Quality  from
the  End  to  which  they  are  direded.  So  that,  although  God
were  in  fome  meafure  the  Caufe  of  this  Neceffity  we  are
in,  of  deviating  from  Goodnefs  j  yet  cannot  Moral  Evil
be  juflly  laid  at  his  Door.  But  how  far  he  is  really  the  Caufe
of  our  Reflexion  from  our  Duty,  I  fhall  now  think  it  be-
comes me  to  enquire.

God  does  not  by  any  Power,  or  immediate  ad  of  his  own,
caufe  that  Averfion  from  Good,  which  the  Soul  is  guilty  of,
when  it  Sins  j  but  he  only  gave  her  fuch  a  Power,  that  flie
might  turn  herfelf  to  Evil  j  that  fo  fuch  a  Species  of  free  A-
genrs  might  fill  a  void  Space  in  the  Univerfe,  and  many  good
EfFeds  might  follow,  which,  without  fuch  an  Averiion,  could
never  have  been  brought  about.  God  indeed  is  truly  and
properly  the  Caufe  of  this  Liberty  of  our  Wills ;  but  then  this
is  a  Happinefs  and  a  Privilege,  infinitely  to  be  preferred  above
whatever  elfe  the  World  thinks  moil  valuable  j  and  the  Ope-
ration of  it  confifts  in  receiving  ImpreflSons  and  determining
itfelf  thereupon,  not  from  any  Conftraint ,  but  by  its  own
mere  Pleafure.

Now,  that  a  Nature  thus  qualified  is  Good,  I  cannot  fup-
pofe  there  needs  any  Proof  j  we  have  the  Confedion  of  our
Adverfaries  therafelves  to  ftrengthen  us  in  the  Belief  of  it.
For  even  they  who  fet  up  a  Principle  of  Evil,  declare  they
do  itj  becaufe  they  cannot  think  God  the  Author  of  Evil  j  and
thefe  very  Men  do  not  only  acknowledge  the  Soul  to  be  of  his
forming,  but  they  talk  big,  and  pretend  that  it  is  a  Part  of  his
very  Ellence  ;  and  yet,  notwithftanding  all  this,  they  own  it
capable  of  being  vitiated,  but  fo  as  to  be  vitiated  by  itfelf
only.  For  this  is  the  manifeft  Confequence  of  their  other
Tenets  ^  that  it  depends  upon  their  own  Choice,  whether  we
will  overcome  Evil,  or  be  overcome  by  it ;  that  the  van-
quifhed  in  this  Combat  are  very  juftly  punillied,  and  the  Vidors
largely  and  defervedly  rewarded.  Now  the  Truth  is,  when
they  talk  at  this  race,  they  do  not  well  confider,  how  diredly

thefe

.  with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 185

thefe  Notions  contradift  that  irrefiftible  Neceffiry  to  fin,  which
they  elfewhere  make  the  Soul  to  lie  under.  But  however,
whether  the  Soul  be  depraved  by  its  own  Foolifh  Choice,
or  whether  by  fome  fatal  Violence  upon  k  from  without,  frill
the  being  naturally  capable  of  flich  Depravation,  is  agreed  on
all  Hands ;  for  both  fides  confefs  it  to  be  actually  depraved,
which  it  could  never  be,  without  a  natural  Capacity  of  being
fo.  Therefore  they  tell  us,  the  Firft  Original  Good  is  never
tainted  with  Evil,  becaufe  his  Nature  is  above  it,  and  incon-
iiftent  with  any  fuch  Defed;  ;  as  are  alio  the  other  Good-
neffes,  in  the  next  Degree  of  Perfecliion  to  him,  fuch  as  in
their  Cant  are  called  the  Mother  ofLife^  the  Creator^  and  the
JEones.  So  then  thefe  Men  acknowledge  the  depravable
Condition  of  the  Soul  ;  they  profefs  God  to  be  the  Maker
of  it,  and  to  have  fet  \i.  in  this  Condition  :  and  yet  it  \s  plain
they  think  the  Nature  of  the  Soul  depravable,  as  it  is  Good
and  not  Evil  ^  becaufe  at  the  fame  time  that  they  afcribe  this
Freedom  of  the  Will  to  God,  they  are  yet  fuperftitioufly  fear-
ful of  afcribing  any  Evil  to  him.  And  this,  I  think,  may  very
well  fuffice,  for  the  Nature  and  Origin  of  Evil.

Let  us  now  apply  ourfelves  to  confider  the  Paffige  before
us,  and  obferve,  how  artificially  EpiBetus  hath  comprifed  in  a
very  few  Words,  the  Subftance  of  thofe  Arguments,  Vv'hich
we  have  here  drawn  out  to  fo  great  a  length.  For  in  regard
the  Choice  of  Good,  and  the  Refufing  of  Evil,  are  the  Ob-
}tdi  and  Ground  of  all  Moral  Inftrudlions  whatsoever,  it  was
proper  for  him  to  fhew,  that  the  Nature  of  Evil  was  fome-
thing  very  odd  and  out  of  Courfe.  In  fome  Senfe  it  has  a
Being,  and  in  fome  Senfe  it  is  denied  to  have  any  ,•  it  has  no
Exiftence  of  its  own,  and  yet  it  is  a  fort  of  fupernumerary,  and
a  very  untoward  Addition  to  Nature.  In  the  mean  while,
this  fhews,  that  we  ought  not  to  make  it  Our  Choice,  becaufe
Nature  never  made  it  Hers ;  and  whenever  it  got  into  the
World,  it  was  never  brought  in  by  Defign,  but  came  in  by
Chance.  No  Man  ever  propofed  it,  as  the  End  of  any  Ac-
tion ,•  no  Artificer  ever  drew  his  Model  for  it  :  The  Mafon
propofes  the  Houfe  he  is  Building,  and  the  Carpenter  the
Door  he  is  Plaining,  for  his  End  3  but  neither  the  One  nor
the  Other  ever  works  only  that  he  may  work  ill.

JE/v/<^e/»rs  Argument  then  lies  in  the  following  Syllogifm  :
Evil  is  the  miffing  of  the  Mark  :  For  what  Nature  hath  given
a  real  and  a  defigned  Exiftence  to,  is  the  Mark  •  and  the  com-
pafljng  of  that,  is  the  hitting  of  the  Mark.  Now,  if  what
Nature  really  made  and  defigned,  be  not  the  miffiijg  of  the

Mark,

i86  EpicTETirs's  Morals,

Mark,  (as  it  is  nor,  but  the  hitting  it  indeed)  and  if  Evil  be
the  miffing  of  the  Mark,  then  it  is  plain,  that  Evil  can  be
none  of  thofe  Things  which  have  a  real  and  a  defigned
Exiftence.  ■  |"

Now,  that  Evil  is  properly  the  miffing  the  Mark,  is  plaih
from  what  hath  been  fpoken  to  this  Point  already.  Tor,  fup^
pofe  a  Man  makes  Pleafure  his  Mark,  he  aims  at  it  as  a  Good
and  Defirable  Thing ;  he  lets  fly  accordingly,  his  Imaginations
I  mean,  which  indeed  fly  fwifter  than  any  Arrow  out  of  a
Bow.  But  if  be  do  not  attain  the  Good  he  defires,  but
fhoots  wide,  or  fliort  of  it ;  'tis  plain  this  Man  is  worfted,
and  hath  miffed  his  Mark.  And  again,  that  fomething,  to
which  Nature  defigned  and  gave  a  Being,  is  conftantly  the
Mark  every  Man  aims  at,  and  the  obtaining  thofe  Things,
the  bitting  of  his  Mark,  is  no  lefs  evident  from  the  Inftances
I  gave  of  the  Mafon  and  the  Carpenter.

Now,  when  the  Author  fays,  there  is  no  fuch  real  Being
as  Evil  in  the  World  ^  you  are  to  underftand,  that  Nature
never  formed  or  defigned  any  fuch  thing :  And  then,  if  you
plcafe,  you  may  take  his  Minor  Propofition  fmgly  by  itfelf,
which  con  fills  of  thofe  Words,  As  no  Man  fets  up  a  Mark
ivith  a  Dejign  to  Jhoot  befide  it^  (for  this  intimates  that  Evil
is  a  miffing  of  one's  Aim)  without  mentioning  the  Major ;
which  implies,  that  the  principal  Defign  and  real  Work  of
Nature,  is  never  the  miffing,  but  the  hitting  of  the  Mark ;
and  fo  add  the  Conclufion,  which  is  this,  Therefore  Evil
is  none  of  the  principal  Defigns  or  real  Works  of  Nature.

It  may  likewife  be  put  altogetlier  into  one  fingle  Hypo-
thetical Propofition  thus  :  If  no  Man  fets  up  a  Mark  on  Fur-
pofe  to  fhoot  befide  itj  then  there  is  no  fuch  real  Being  as  Evil
in  the  World.  For  if  there  were  fuch  a  Thing,  then  it  would
be  propofed  as  the  End  or  Produd:  of  Adion.  But  Evil  is
never  propofed  as  a  Thing  to  be  produced  or  obtained,  but  as
a  Thing  to  be  declined  ^  for  Evil  is  always  the  Object  of  our
Refufal  and  Averfion.  So  that,  at  this  rate,  it  would  follow,
that  there  is  a  Mark  fet  up,  only  that  it  may  not  be  hit  5
which  is  contrary  to  common  Senfe  and  the  Pradice  of  all
Mankind.  And  therefore  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  in  Na-
ture as  Evil,  becaufe  Evil  is  not  capable  of  being  the  End  of
any  Action  in  Nature.

IF

with  S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S*S  C  O  M  M  E  N  T. 187

' :'rr!  'S'V'  j;;.'"  .'c  '■':  zi  zt

IF  any  one  fhould  take  upon  him  to  expofe  your
Body  to  be  abufed  by  every  Man  you  meet,  you
would  refent  it  as  an  infupportable  Infolence  and  Af-
front. And  ought  you  not  then  to  be  much  afliamed
of  yourfelf,  for  enflaving  and  expofing  your  Mind
to  every  one  who  is  difpofed  to  take  the  Advan-
tage ?  For  fo  indeed  you  do,  when  you  put  it  in
the  Power  of  every  Malicious  Tongue  to  diiturb  the
inward  Peace  and  Order  of  your  Bread.  For  this
Reafon,  before  you  attempt  any  thing,  weigh  dili-
gently with  yourfelf  the  feveral  Difficulties  it  is
like  to  be  incumbered  with,  the  Circumftances  pre-
liminary to  and  confequent  upon  it.  For  unlefs  you
come  well  fettled  with  this  Confideration,  you  will
afterward  be  difcouraged  *,  and  what  you  began
with  Eagernefs  and  Vigour,  you  will  defift  from  with
Cowardice  and  Shame.

CHAP. XXXV.

YO  U  are  extremely  defirous  to  win  the  Olympic^
Crown.  I  wilh  the  fame  for  myfelf  too ;  and
look  upon  it  as  an  Immortal  Honour.  But  not  fo
fall :  Confider  the  Preparations  neceflary  to  fuch  an
Undertaking,  and  the  Accidents  like  to  follow  upon
it  *,  and  then  let  me  hear  you  fay  you'll  attempt
it.  You  muft  be  confined  to  a  ftrid  Regimen  ;  muft
be  cramm'd  with  Meat  when  you  have  no  Appe-
tite ;  muft  abftain  wholly  from  boiled  Meats  *,  muft
exercife,  whether  you  be  difpofed  to  it  or  no,  whe-
ther it  be  hot  or  cold  ;  muft  drink  nothing  but
what  is  warm,  nor  any  Wine,  but  in  fuch  Pro-
portions as  ftiall  be  thought  proper  for  you. In  a

Word,

i8B Ep  ic  TE  Tu  s's  Moral  s.

Word,  you  muft  refign  yourfelf  up  to  your  Gover-
nour,  with  as  abfolute  an  Obedience,  as  you  would
to  a  Phyfician.  When  all  this  Hardfhip  is  maftered,
you  have  all  the  Chances  of  Combat  to  go  through
ftili.  And  here  it  is  many  a  Man's  Fortune  to
break  an  Arm,  or  put  out  a  Leg,  to  be  thrown  by
his  Adverfary,  and  yet  nothing  but  a  mouthful  of
Duft  for  his  Pains  -,  and,  as  it  may  happen,  to  be
lafhed  and  beaten,  and  become  the  Jeft  and  Scorn
of  the  Spedators.  Lay  all  thefe  Things  together ;
and  then  perhaps  your  Courage  may  be  cooled.  But
if,  upon  confidering  them  well,  you  neverthelefs  re-
tain your  Refolution  •,  then  are  you  fit  to  fet  about
the  Purfuit  of  what  you  fo  much  deiire.  Other-
wife  you  will  come  off  like  little  Children,  who  in
their  Sports  a(5t  fometimes  Wreftlers,  and  fometimes
Fidlers  •,  now  they  are  Fencers,  and  play  Prizes ;
then  they  turn  Trumpeters,  and  go  to  War  •,  and  by
and  by  build  a  Stage  and  ad:  Plays.  Juft  fo  we
ihall  have  you,  one  while  an  Olympick  Fighter,
and  another  a  Gladiator  •,  by  and  by  an  Orator,  and
after  that  a  Philofopher ;  but  nothing  long,  except
a  ridiculous  Whiffler,  a  mere  Ape,  mimicking  all
you  fee,  and  venturing  at  all  Profeffions,  but  flick-
ing to  none.  And  all  this  is  occafioned,  by  your
taking  Things  upon  you  Hand  over  Head,  with-
out being  feafoned  and  duly  prepared  for  them  ;
but  either  with  a  rafh  Heat,  or  fickle  Inclination.
Thus  it  is  with  many  People,  when  they  fee  an  Emi-
nent Philofopher,  or  hear  him  quoted  with  Admi-
ration and  Refped,  (as.  How  excellently  did  Socra-
tes write  on  fuch  a  Subjeft  I  fure  no  Man  was  ever
like  him)  nothing  will  ferve  their  Turn,  but  thefe
Hotfpurs  muft  needs  be  Philofophers  too,  and  each
of  them  does  not  doubt,  but  he  fhall  make  a  Socra-
tes in  time.

CHAP.

N

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  189

CHAP. XXXVI.

OW  I  advife  thee,  Friend,  firft  of  all  to  con-
_  ,  fider  perfedily  the  Nature  of  the  Thing  thou
woLild'ft  undertake,  and  then  thy  own  Qualifications
for  it,  whether  this  be  what  thou  art  cut  out  for,  or
no.  Examine  thy  Limbs  a;nd  thy  Sinews  ;  every
Man  is  not  built  for  the  Olympck  Exercifes.  Do
you  imagine,  when  you  apply  yourfelf  to  Philo-
fophy,  that  you  can  be  allowed  to  live  at  the  fame
rate  you  do  now  ?  To  indulge  your  Appetite,  and
be  as  nice  in  all  you  Eat  and  Drink  ?  Alas  !  you
muft  "prepare  for  want  of  Sleep,  for  hard  Labour,
for  Abfence  from  your  Family  and  your  Friends,
for  Contempt  and  Infolence  from  your  Inferiors,
and  to  have  others,  lefs  worthy,  put  over  your  Head
in  Preferments,  countenanced  more  than  you  in  Courts
of  Juftice,  and  refpected  more  in  Converfition.  Sit
down  now,  and  alk  yourfelf,  if  the  Prize  be  worth
all  this  Pains.  Whether  you  can  be  content,  at  fo
dear  a  Rate  to  purchafe  an  equal  Temper,  a  quiet
Mind,  perfed  Freedom,  and  unmoveable  Conftancy.
If  you  think  the  Price  {^x.  upon  thefe  Things  too
high,  leave  them  for  fome  other  Purchafer,  and  do
not  expofe  yourfelf,  like  thofe  ridiculous  Boys  I
mention'd,  by  being  a  Philofopher  this  Flour  and
an  Excife-Man  the  next  ;  a  School-mafter  to  Day
and  a  Statefman  to  Morrow.  Thefe  Things  are
not  for  your  Credit.  In  fhort,  you  have  but  One
Man  to  make,  and  you  may  make  him  either  a  Good
or  a  Bad  one.  You  muft  either  make  yourfelf  or
the  World  your  Care.  In  a  Word,  you  muft  be
either  a  Fool  or  a  Philofopher.

COM-

ipo Epictetus's  Morals,

COMMENT.

TH  E  Thing  Ep-Metus  drives  at,  is  very  much  iliuflrated
by  the  Comparifons  he  ufes  here,  fetting  ourfelves  in
Oppoficion  to  Others,  and  the  Soul  to  the  Body  :  For,  to  be
injured  by  one's  own  felf  is  much  worfe  than  if  it  were  done
by  another.  If  we  are  apt  to  refent  an  Unkindnefi ,  when
coming  from  a  Friend,  with  much  more  Impatience,  than
the  fame  Thing  from  a  common  Man  •  becaufe,  the  Con-
fiderations  of  intimate  Acquaintance  and  former  Obligations
ftep  in,  and  heighten  the  Provocation,  by  telling  us  we  had
Reafon  to  expeft  better  Ufage ;  how  much  more  is  the  In-
juftice  aggravated,  when  a  Man  does  any  thing  to  his  own
Prejudice  ?  And  again,  If  the  Affronts  and  Injuries  done  to
the  Body,  are  fo  deeply  refented  j  how  much  more  tender
ought  we  to  be,  when  the  Soul  is  injured  and  abufed  ?

Again,  if  we  think  it  an  infupportable  Infolence  in  any
other  Perfon  to  expofe  our  Body  to  Abufes,  when  yet  his
Affronting  or  not  Affronting  us  after  this  manner  is  a  Thing
not  in  our  own  Power ;  and  if  the  expofing  our  Minds  to  be
abufed  by  the  next  Man  we  meet,  by  fuffering  ourfelves  to
be  difordered  at  the  Calumnies  of  every  malicious  Railer,  be
a  Thing  which  depends  purely  upon  our  own  Choice,  whe-
ther it  fliall  be  done  or  not  ,•  then  we  ought  to  be  alhamed
upon  a  double  Account :  Firfl,  for  taking  a  Thing  ill,  which
was  not  in  our  Power  to  help,  and  which  too ,  when  done,
was  not  ftriclly  Evil  to  us  •  and  then,  for  expofing  our  own
felves  to  that  which  is  a  real  Evil,  and  that  Evil  fo  much  the
worfe,  becaufe  fuch  a  one,  as  it  was  in  our  Power  to  prevent.

Now,  upon  this  Occafion  he  changes  his  Expreflion,  and
does  not  call  it  Indignation,  but  Shame.  For  the  Injuries
which  come  upon  us  from  another  Hand ,  we  receive  with
Refentments  of  Anger  ;  but  thofe  that  ourfelves  are  guilty
oi,  we  refleft  upon  with  Shame  and  Remorfe.  And  furely
there  is  much  greater  Reafon  for  doing  fo,  when  we  ourfelves
have  been  guilty  of  injuring  ourfelves  j  Efpecially,  when
thefe  Injuries  need  not  have  befallen  us,  indeed  could  not
have  done  fo,  but  by  our  own  Choice,  And  this  is  the  pro-
per Notion  of  Shame  :  the  being  out  of  Countenance  at  the
Folly  and  Foulnefs  of  our  own  voluntary  Mifcarriages.
And  what  can  more  deferve  a  Blulli,  than  the  not  difcern-
ing  the  mighty  Difference  there  is  between  the  feverai  Bran-
ches

w/V/^  SiMPLiciu  s's  Comment. 191

ches  of  Co  liwiy  a  Comparifon  as  this  ?  And  when  one  does
difcern  ic,  what  can  be  more  fcandalous,  than  not  to  a<ft  ac-
cordingly ?

C  II  A  P. XXXVII.

IT  may'be  faid,  generally  fpeaking,  That  the  Qua-
lity o-i  the  Perlbns  we  converfe  with,  and  the
mutual  Relations  they  bear,  are  t-lie  true  Standard
of  a  Man's  Duty  and  Behaviour  towards  them.  Thus
my  Duty  to  a  Father  is  to  afiift  and  take  care  of  him  ;
to  fupport  his  Age  and  his  Infirmities ;  to  yield  to
him,  and  pay  him  Service  and  Refpect  upon  all  Oc-
cafions,  and  to  receive  both  his  Reproofs  and  his
Chaftifements,  with  Patience  and  SubmifTion.  But
you'll  fay.  He  is  a  rigorous  and  unnatural  Father.
What  is  that  to  the  purpofe  ?  You  are  to  remember,
this  Obligation  to  Duty,  does  not  arife  from  the
Confideration  of  his  Goodnels,  but  from  the  Rela-
tion he  bears  to  us :  No  Failings  of  his  can  make
him  ceafe  to  be  a  Father.  And  confequently  none
can  abfolvc  you  from  the  Obedience  of  a  Son.  Your
Brother  hath  done  you  an  Injury  ;  but  do  not  fup-
pofe,  that  this  difpenfes  with  the  Kindnefs  you  owe
him :  You  are  ftill  to  obferve  what  becomes  You  ;
not  to  imitate  what  mif-became  Him.  Befides,  no
body  can  do  you  a  real  Injury,  without  your  owa
Concurrence  :  You  are  not  one  whit  the  worfe,  un-
kfs  you  think  yourfelf  fo.  After  this  manner  it  will
be  eafy  to  difcover,  what  is  fit  for  you  upon  all  Oc-
cafions.  For  it  is  but  confidering  yourfelf  under  the
feveral  Qiialities,  of  a  Neighbour,  or  a  Subjed,  or
a  Civil  Magiftrate,  or  a  Military  Officer,  and  you
will  loon  difcern,  what  Behaviour  is  proper  from,
or  to,  a  Perfon,  in  each  of  thefe  Stations  refpe<fl:ive-
ly.

R  - COM-

1^2 E  p  I  c  T  E  T  u  s's  Moral  s,

C  O  MM  E  N  r.

THE  Duty  of  a  Man  is  properly  that  which  it  becomes
him  to  do  upon  every  occaiion,  and  the  rendring  to  eve-
ry one  what  is  fit  to  be  expeded  from  him.  This  is  more
peculiarly  called  the  Work  of  Juftice,  taken  in  a  fenfe  fo
comprehenfive,  as  to  include  all  manner  of  Virtue,  For
the  Word  is  fometimes  reftrained  to  one  particular  Virtue,
diftinguiflied  from  the  reft  j  and  fometimes  enlarged  and  ex-
tended to  them  all.  Now  it  is  the  bufinefs  of  Juftice  to  give
every  one  his  due :  Upon  which  account  all  Inftitutions,  both
Moral  and  Political,  have  this  for  their  proper  Objecfl.  There
is  private  Juftice,  with  regard  to  a  Man's  own  Mind,  and
this  afligns  to  every  part  of  his  Soul  what  belongs  to  it  i
And  there  is  the  Publick  Juftice  of  a  Country,  which  diftri-
butes  to  every  Member  of  the  Commonwealth,  according
to  his  Dignity  and  Deferts.  Having  therefore  inftrucfted  his
young  Philoii)pher,  as  you  fee  before  (which  Precepts  have
indeed  fome  reference  to  this  kind  of  Duty  too)  he  proceeds
•here  to  diredl  him,  how  he  may  difcover  what  it  is,  and  dif-
charge  it  upon  all  occafions :  And  what  others  have  been  very
prolix  and  voluminous  upon,  (as  particularly  Nkholaus  Da-
.majcenus)  he  hath  here  reduced  into  a  very  narrow  compafs,
.^nd  laid  before  us  with  wonderful  Energy  and  Clearnefs.

Now  the  Duty  of  a  Man,  if  you  will  branch  it  out  into  its
feveral  Heads,  concerns  his  Behaviour,  Firft,  towards  Men,
and,  in  general,  to  all  his  Equals.  Then,  to  thofe  Beings
that  are  above  him.  Thirdly,  to  thofe  below  him:  And,
Laftly,  to  his  own  felf.  Each  of  thefe  Heads  have  diftincl
Rules  and  Meafuresj  the  Principal,  whereof  E/>/V?e/wx  treats  of,
beginning  in  this  Chapter  with  our  Duty  to  one  another.

To  this  purpofe  he  gives  us  a  convenient  Intimation,  how
we  may  find  out  what  is  properly  our  Duty  j  and,  that  this
differs,  according  to  the  feveral  Pofts,  in  which  Men  ftand
to  one  another.  There  is  one  kind  of  Deportment  due  to  a
Father,  and  another  to  a  Son  ;  one  to  our  own  Country-
man, and  another  to  a  Stranger  j  one  to  a  Friend,  or  a  Be-
nefaftor^  and  another  to  an  Enemy  who  hath  injured  us.  And
the  rcafon  of  this  is,  Becaufe  the  Relation  I  bear  to  a  Father,
as  the  Perfon  to  whom,  next  under  God,  I  owe  my  Being,
and  the  Comforts  of  it,  differs  from  that  v/hich  I  bear  to  a
Son,  whom  I  am  to  confider,  not  as  a  Caufe,  but  as  an  £f-
fedj  of  my  felf^  and  to  look  upon  him,  as  one  to  whom  I

have

•K^/'/i^  Si  MPL  I  CIUS'S  Co  MME  NT. I93

have  communicated  part  of  my  own  Subftance.  So  that  in
all  thefe  Cafes,  the  firft  thing  we  have  to  do,  is,  to  enquire
into  the  Quality  and  Relation  of  the  Perfon,  and  then  to  fuic
our  Demeanour  accordingly.  ' '  "I  '

Now  this  Relation  (generally  fpeaking)  is  the  Ordehr  of
Things,  or  the  mutual  Regard  they  have  to  one  another.  And
this  may  be  the  Effed  of  NeceflTuy  and  Nature,  or  of  Choice  ;
it  may  have  refped  either  to  Similitude  or  DiffimUitude,  either
to  Proximity,  or  to  Diftance.  For  this  Relation  is  a  fort  of
Common  Band  of  the  Perfons  concerned  in  it ;  which  links
them  fo  together,  that,  though  they  be  diftind  in  other  re-
fpeds,  yet  they  cannot  be  abfolutely  disjoinec},  but  muft  con-
tinue to  have  an  Intereil:  in  each  other.  For  which  Reafon
it  is,  that  Relatives  are  faid  to  belong  to  one  another.

Nov/  the  natural  Order  and  Refped,  which  proceeds  up-
on Proximity,  joins  fometimes  Equals,  as  Brothers  j  and
here  both  the  Denominations  and  the  Duty  of  each  Party  is
the  fame  j  for  both  are  Brothers  :  And  fo  likewife  it  is  in
other  like  Cafes.  Bnth  are  Equals,  both  are  Coufms,  both
are  Countrymen.  There  is  alfo  a  natural  Refped,  which
implies  Diftance,  and  this  regards  People  of  different  Birth
and  Countries  j  and  likewife  proceeds  upon  the  like  Names,
and  the  like  Duties,  as  of  one  Stranger,  or  Foreigner  to  zn-<
other.  And  this  is  a  Refped  inferring  Diftance,  becaufe,
as  that  which  exprefs'd  nearnefs  of  Blood  and  Family  brought
them  clofer  together,  fo  this  Vv'hich  denies  fuch  a  nearnefs,
does  in  that  very  Idea  fet  them  farther  afunder.  This  how-
ever is  a  general  Rule,  That  in  all  Cafes,  where  both  Par-
ties are  upon  the  Level,  and  go  by  the  fame  Names,  there
they  owe  the  fame  Duties  too,  and  that,  whether  the  Term
by  which  the  Relation  is  exprefs'd,  imply  Proximity,  or  Di-
ftance.

Again,  there  is  alfo  a  mutual  Refped  founded  in  Nature,
where  a  Difparity  is  implied  j  as,  between  Father  and  Son :
For  here  the  Expedances  are  not  the  fame,  as  between  Bro-
thers they  were  fiid  to  be,  nor  are  the  Denominations,  as
there,  the  fame.  This  then  is  a  natural  Regard,  which  joins
People  upon  unequal  Terms  j  and  this  Inequality  is  the  fame
in  Proportion,  as  in  a  Caufe  and  its  EfFed.  There  is  an-
other Relation  too  of  Difparity  between  Things  which  feera
Contraries,  as  between  the  Right  Side  and  the  Left;  for
thefe  have  a  mutu;il  Refped  to  each  other,  and  yet  that  depends
upon  a  kind  of  local  Contrariety.  There  is  likewife  a  dif-
jundive  Relation  in  Nature,  which  is  between  Pifparates  too,

R  2  as

194  Epi  c  TETus's  Morals,

as  Things  of  lad  Year  and  this  Year  j  for  this  (hews  an  Ine-
quality in  Time.

The  Relation  upon  Choice,  which  implies  Proximity,  and
lies  between  Equals,  is  that  of  Friends^  and  that  which  im-
plies Diftance,  or  the  Disjunftive,  is  that  of  Enemies.  For
even  Enemies  are  under  a  voluntary  Relation  to  one  another  j
and  thefe  Relations  lying  between  Equals,  have  (as  I  obferv-
ed  before)  the  fame  Names,  and  are  obliged  to  the  fame
Duties.  This  voluntary  Relation  lies  fometimes  in  Difparity
too,  as  between  Mafter  and  Scholar,  confidered  as  the  Caufe
and  the  EfFed; ;  between  the  Buyer  and  the  Seller,  as  contradi-
flinguifhed  from  each  other.  The  disjundlive  Relations  of
this  kind  which  carry  a  Difparity,  are  the  Fleer  and  the  Pur-
fuer  j  for  thefe  Men  are  under  a  voluntary  and  an  unequal
Relation  to  one  another,  though  this  be  fach  an  one,  as  im-
plies Diftance  and  Disjundion  toQ.

The  Relation  between  Hufband  and  Wife,  feems  to  be
fomething  betwixt  that  by  Nature,  and  that  by  Choice,  for
in  Truth  it  is  partly  one,  and  partly  the  other,  and  infers  a
Difparity  both  of  Name  and  Duty.  But  that  of  Neighbours,
which  is  a  kind  of  intermediate  Relation  too,  hath  an  equa-
lity in  Duty,  and  the  fame  Title.  Between  the  Perfon  in  Au-
thority, and  him  under  it,  there  is  fome  kind  of  natural  Re-
lation (for  Nature  intended,  in  all  her  ProducTiions,  that  the
Better  iKould  govern  the  Worfe.)  It  depends  partly  upon
Choice  too,  as  when  by  fome  Common  Agreement  the  Weal-
thy bear  Rale,  and  the  Meaner  People  fubmit  to  it-  and  it
is  a  mix'cure  of  both  thefe,  when  inftead  of  Wealth  and  Power,
the  Wifeft  are  advanced  to  the  Chair  by  Confent.

And  now  that  this  rough  imperfect  Draught  hath  been  laid
before  us,  the  feveral  Relations  Men  bear  to  one  another,  it
will  concern  us  to  confider,  in  which  We,  and  the  Perfons
we  converfe  with,  ftand,  and  to  take  our  Meafures  from
thence.  But  v/nh  this  Caution,  That  We  ftill  anfwer  Our
Character,  whether  They  make  good  Theirs,  or  no;  and
efpecially  where  Nature  hath  made  the  Relation,  and  prefcribed
the  Duty.  For,  where  it  is  only  founded  in  Choice,  there
the  Good  Man  who  difcharges  his  own  Part,  hath  it  in  his
Pow;er  to  untie  the  Knot  when  he  will,  and  let  the  Relation
fall  afunder :  That  is^  he  can  withdraw  his  Affedlion  and  Ac-
quaintance from  an  unworthy  Friend ;  and  he  can  melt  down
a  fpightful  Man  with  good  Offices,  and  ceafe  to  be  an  Ene-
my. For  the  fame  free  Choice  which  conrracfled  the  Rela-
tion, can  as  eaiily  diffolve  it  too  :  But  the  Relations  founded

in

with  S I M  p  L I  c  I  u  s*s  Comment. 195

in  Nature  are  Eternal,  and  no  Ad  of  our  own  Will  can  ever
make  them  ceafe.

So  that  if  a  Friend  ufe  us  ill,  and  become  an  Enemy;  he
hath  broke  the  Bond  that  linked  us  together,  and  releafed  us
from  all  that  was  due  to  him  upon  the  account  of  FriendHiip,
becaufe  he  hath  ceafed  to  be  our  Friend,  and  chofen  to  be
our  Enemy.  But  if  a  Father  behave  himfelf  vicioufly,  or
unnaturally,  the  Cafe  is  much  otherwife:  Neither  his  Ri-
gour nor  his  Vices  can  make  him  ceafe  to  be  a  Father,  be-
caufe thefe  are  only  the  EfFeds  of  his  own  Choice ;  but  the
Relation  between  us  is  not  founded  in  Choice,  but  in  Na-
ture ;  and  the  Obligation  lies  to  him  as  a  Father,  not  as  a
good,  or  a  kind  Father:  fo  that  though  he  be  not  fuch,  yet
our  Duty  continues  the  fame.  We  are  bound  flill  to  pay  him
all  manner  of  Duty,  awful  Obfervance,  and  tender  Concern;
ro  confider  him,  as  the  Means  made  ufe  of  by  God,  to  bring
us  into  the  World ;  to  remember  that  his  provident  Care
and  Tendernefs  fuftained  the  Being  he  gave  us ;  an.d  that  our
Prefervation,  as  well  as  our  Produdlion,  is  in  a  great  mea-
fure  owing  to  Him.  Children  fhould  always  look  upon
themfelves  as  Debtors  to  their  Parents,  and  pay  back  all  their
Kindnefs,  with  much  Gratitude  and  large  Intereft :  They
fhould  give  moft  ready  Obedience  to  all  their  Commands,
except  fuch  as  tend  to  the  detriment  of  the  Soul ;  and  in  thefe
cafes  their  Compliance  is  difpenfed  with,  becaufe  they  are
under  a  higher  Engagement  to  the  Father  of  Spirits,  and
muft  not  difpleafe  Him  at  any  rate.  And  yet  upon  thefe  oc-
calions  too,  they  fliould  endeavour  to  give  as  little  Offence
as  is  poffible;  and,  though  their  Refufal  may  and  ought  to
be  refolute,  yet  Pvlodefty  muli  temper  their  Zeal,  and  con-
trive that  it  may  be  refpedtful  too.

In  all  other  Matters,  we  are  to  ferve  them  with  our  utmoft
Power,  both  in  our  Bodies  and  our  Goods :  For  if  the  Per-
fons  and  the  Poflfcfiions  of  Slaves  are  at  the  abfolute  Difpofal
of  thofe,  whom  Fortune  and  Purchafe  have  made  their  Ma-
ilers; how  much  more  ought  Ours  to  be  at  the  Command
of  Them,  whom  Nature  made  the  Caufe  of  our  very  Being  ?
For  this  reafon,  we  ought  to  fubmit  to  Their  Corredion,
with  much  more  Eafuiefs  and  Patience,  than  Servants  do  to
their  Mafters ;  and  if  to  their  Blows,  then  certainly  rather
ftill  to  their  Reproaches  and  hard  Ufage,  The  ancient  Ro-
mans  had  a  Law,  (grounded  it  feems,  upon  the  Dignity  of
this  Relation,  upon  the  abfolute  Right  it  gave,  the  infinite
Trouble  Parents  are  at  for  the  fake  of  their  Children,  the  un-

R  3  limited

196  Epict  E  Tus*s  Morals,

limited  Subjection  due  to  them,  prefurfiing  favourably  withal
of  the  natural  AfFedion  of  Parents)  which  gave  the  Parents
a  Power,  if  they  pleafed,  to  fell  their  Children  ,•  and  which,
if  they  killed  them,  called  them  to  no  account  for  it.  And
the  Times  of  yet  greater  Antiquity  bore  fo  great  a  Reve-
rence to  Parents,  as  almoft  to  venture  to  call  them  Gods :
But  finding  fome  check  from  the  incommunicable  Devotion
due  to  the  Divine  Nature,  they  called  their  Parents  Brothers,
©Hsc  ^  hereby  intimating,  what  profound  Refpedt  belonged  to
their  Parents  therafeives,  when  even  their  collateral  Rebti-
ons  were  complemented  with  the  Name  of  fomething  Di-
vine in  them.

Now  indeed  in  the  Difcharge  of  our  Duty  to  Parents,  the
firft  and  principal  Motive  is  the  Equity  of  the  thing,  and  the
afting  as  becomes  Men  who  make  Pretenfions  to  Wifdom
and  Virtue,  which  this  is  moft  highly  agreeable  to :  And  af-
ter this,  we  fhould  reprefent  to  ourfelves  the  Divine  Juftice
and  Vengeance,  which  is  very  likely  to  punifli  us  in  our  own
kind.  And  we  have  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to  expect,  chat
we  fhall  hereafter  find  the  fame  mjeaiure  from  Our  Children,
which  We  give  our  Parents  now.

So  again,  if  a  Brother  deal  unjuftly  by  you,  let  it  be  your
part  to  anfwer  all  the  Particulars  of  the  Relation  between
you,  and  to  make  good  that  Covenant,  which  Nature  hath
ratified  and  made  unalterable  :  For  though  the  World  be  a
wide  place,  yet  you  can  have  no  other  Parents,  nor  Brethren,
nor  Kinfmcn  but  thofe  you  have.  And  therefore,  fince  you
inuft  take  them  upon  Content,  and  there  is  no  remedy  ,•  be-
have yourfelf,  as  though  you  had  made  them  your  own  Choice,
Confidcr  too,  that  His  Behaviour  towards  you,  is  not  in  your
own  Power  to  determine  ^  but  Yours-  towards  him  is.  You
fliould  not  therefore  fo  much  regard  his  Anions,  which  you
cannot  heip,  nor  are  in  any  degree  refponlible  for,  as  what
is  agreeable  to  your  own  Duty,  and  fit  for  You  to  do  j  be-
caufe  in  this  confifts  all  the  real  Advantage  and  Prejudice  that
can  happen  to  you.  He  can  do  you  no  harm,  let  him  defign
never  fo  much ;  provided  you  do  but  depend  upon  your  own
fclf  for  j'our  Good  and  Evil :  Bat  if  you  ramble  abroad,  and
expedt  to  find  it  there,  you  are  the  v/orfe  then  indeed,  not  by
your  Brothci's  Menace,  but  your  own  Miftakes,  and  by  place-
jng  Happinefs  and  Mifery  in  things  without  you.  Add  to  all
fhii-,  the  Advantage  of  winning  him  over  by  good  Ufage.
For  if  your  Forbearance,  and  Meeknefs,  and  Affedion,  can
retider  hi:iv  not  only  your  Brother,  but  your  Friend;  thefe
" '  two

with  Simp  l  i  c  i  u  s\s  Co m  m  e^n  t. 19.7.

two  Relations  meeting  in  one,  and  joining  Forces,  will  mak6
the  Union  wonderful  clofe  and  ftrong.

Now  the  Duties  we  owe  to  our  Mafters,  and  Teachers,
whofe  Bufinefs  it  is  to  inftrucT:  us  in  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  are
much  of  the  fame  nature  with  thofe  due  to  Parents  :  though
in  fome  refpe<n:s,  I  confefs,  the  Obligation  feems  to  be  greater
in  the  Cafe  before  us  j  For  thefe  Perfons  nourifh  and  train
up,  not  our  Bodies,  but,  which  is  much  more  confiderable,
our  Souls,  that  is^  our  very  felves.  They  do  it  too  upon  a
different  Principle;  not  conftrained  to  it  by  Nature  and  Ne-
ceffity,  like  our  Parents ;  and  by  fuch  an  inftinft,  as  Brutes
obey  no  lefs  than  Men ;  but  they  do  it  out  of  free  Choice,  and
a  Defire  to  promote  Goodnefs  and  Virtue.  And  this  makes
a  near  Approach  to,  and  is  a  lively  Refemblance  of,  the  Di-
vine Bounty  j  which  takes  Compaffion  upon  funk  and  lapled
Souls,  is  perpetually  retrieving  them  from  their  Mifery,  and
reftoring  them  to  the  Blifs  they  have  loft.

Now  thefe  Obfervances  muft  needs  be  peculiarly  due  to
our  Inftru<fl;ors,  becaufe  we  ought  to  look  upon  their  In-
ftruftions,  as  coming  out  of  the  Mouth  of  God  himfelf  j  and
confequently  we  fhould  fubmit  to  them,  without  troubling
ourfelves  to  find  out  peevifh  Cavils  and  frivolous  Exceptions
againft  them.  For  certainly,  it  is  not  eafy  to  conceive,  how
He,  whofe  End  and  Profellion  it  is,  to  inform  us  in  true
Wifdom  and  Goodnefs,  fhould  impofe  any  thing  upon  us,
but  what  tends  to  the  furthering  fo  excellent  a  Defign.  But
now,  if  our  parents  take  the  pains  to  teach  us,  and  thus  to
the  Engagement  of  being  our  Parents,  that  other  be  added  of
being  our  Teachers  too,  then  we  are  to  pay  them  all  that  Ob-
fervance  and  "Refpedl,  which  can  be  challenged  upon  both
thefe  accounts.  We  muft  then  look  upon  them,  as  the  very
Image  of  God ;  reverence  them  as  the  Formers  of  our  Souls,
as  well  as  of  our  Bodies  j  and,  like  God,  the  Caufes,  to  which
not  our  Being  only,  but  alfo  our  Well-being  ought  to  be
afcribed.

The  Next  thing  that  offers  itfelf  is  the  Duty  of  Friends.
And  this  I  fliall  treat  with  all  the  Clearnefs,  yet  all  the  Brevity,
fo  weighty  and  ufeful  a  Subjed  will  bear.  The  Firft  thing
to  be  regarded  here  is,  The  Choice  of  friends :  The  Next,
How  to  ufe  and  keep  thofe  we  have  chofen :  and  upon  thefe
Things  all  the  Benefits  of  FriendHiip  depend.

The  Firft  thing  we  fhould  look  at  in  our  Choice  of  Friend*:,
is  Likenefs  of  Temper  and  Difpoiition.  For  there  are  feve-
ral  Humours,  which  though  very  good  when  fingle,  yet  will

R  if  make

19B Epictetu  s's  Morals,

make  but  ill  Mufick,  when  brought  together.  The  Sour,  and
Phlegmatick,  and  Cold  Temper,  will  fuit  but  ill  with  the
Brifk  and  Sanguine ;  and  yet  each  of  thefe  alone,  each  well
coupled,  may  be  excellent  Perfons.  The  Next  Confidera-
tion  is,  How  the  Perfon  whom  we  make  Choice  of,  hath  be-
haved himfelf  to  his  other  Friends  before.  A  Third  Rule,
which  is  indeed  of  fuch  moment,  that  it  may  be  juftly  thought
to  include  all,  is  to  obferve.  Whether  he  be  a  Man  governed
by  his  Paffions,  or  his  Reafon.  When  this  is  done,  we  fliali
find  it  very  proper  to  examine  into  his  Inclinations,  and  fee
which  way  the  Bent  and  Byafs  of  his  Soul  lies  j  whether  they
draw  him  to  Goodnefs  and  Virtue,  and  fuch  Adions  and  En-
joyments as  are  commendable,  arid  befitting  a  Man  of  Piety
and  Honour;  Or  whether  to  vile  and  unmanly  Pleafures,
and  fuch  as  none  but  fliamelefs  Fellows  and  Scoundrels
abandon  thcmfelves  to.  We  ihall  do  well  to  obferve  farther,
whether  thefe  Defires  and  Inclinations  be  tradable  and  gentle,
fuch  as  are  fit  to  be  fpoken  with,  and  ready  to  hearken  to  Rea-
fon ;  Or  whether  they  be  violent  and  unperfuadeable,  fuch
as  mind  nothing  but  their  own  Gratification,  and  are  deaf
to  all  Arguments  which  would  draw  them  off  from  it :  For
Men  of  fuch  Pafnons  are  always  hot  and  peremptory,  nnd
by  no  means  fit  to  make  Friends  of.  Thofe  alfo  that  are
fond  of  the  World,  and  exped  their  Happinefs  any  where
but  from  their  own  Minds,  are  very  improper  to  fix  upon  :
For  they  dote  upon  Riches,  or  Miftreffes,  or  Preferments ;
and  in  all  things  of  a  communicable  Nature,  they  carve  to
thcmfelves  too  largely,  and  aredefirous  toengrofs  the  Whole;
fo  deilroying  that  Equality,  which  Friendfhip  cither  fuppofes
or  introduces.  This  in  Riches,  and  fuch  Inftances,  is  plain
beyond  a  doubt;  and  the  Vain-glorious  difcovers  it  as  evi-
dently in  the  Defires  of  Reputation  and  Applaufe.

Now  it  is  the  peculiar  Excellence  of  rhofe  things  which
tend  to  the  Soul's  Good,  that  the  FofTelior  hath  them  en-
tirely to  himfelf,  even  when  he  imparts  them  to  others.
They  are  not  diminiflied,  but  augmented,  by  Communicc?-
tion.  For  they  are  excited  and  kindled  in  the  Breaib  of  the
Perfons  on  whom  we  beftow  them ;  and  the  farther  they
fpread,  the  more  and  larger  they  grow.  So  that  the  Light
of  Truth  and  Virtue  takes  fire  by  Converfation,  as  a  Match
does  by  the  mutual  Attrition  of  Flint  and  Steel,  which
kindles  by  the  Sparks  that  drop  from  it,  but  lofes  none  of
the  Virtue  it  gives  away.

A  rrn  in

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 199

Again,  When  Friends  make  true  Good  their  End,  and
right  Reafon  their  Rule,  they  are  fure  never  to  differ  in
point  of  Intereft  j  for  they  judge  of  Advantage  by  the  fame
common  Standard.  Now  when  they  are  thus  agreed  in  one
Meafure,  and  judge  of  Pleafure  and  Profit,  and  the  Q:)n-
traries  to  thefe  alike ;  they  have  fecured  themfelves  againft
the  moft  dangerous  and  ufual  Bane  of  Friendlhip  For  with-
out a  perfed  Agreement  in  thefe  Matters,  Difputes  and
Quarrels  are  always  unavoidable.  And  fo  much  for  the
Choice  of  our  Friends.

As  for  our  Behaviour  to  the  Friends  thus  chofen.  That,
in  one  Word,  muft  make  Reafon  and  Equity  ks  conftant
Rule.  Upon  this  Account  we  muft  never  do  any  thing  to
our  Friends,  which  we  would  not  be  perfe<ftly  fatisfied
with,  when  done  by  Them  to  iJs.  Whatever  Kindneffes
They  receive  from  Us  muft  be  extenuated,  and  thought  mo-
derately of  j  but  whatever  Obligations  We  receive  from
Them  muft  be  very  highly  efteemed  and  rated  above  their
juft  Value.  The  Courfe  diredlly  contrary  to  this  muft  be
obferved  in  Failings  and  Mifcarriages :  Theirs  muft  be  leC-
fened  and  excufed,  our  Own  aggravated  and  feverely  con-
demned. We  muft  think  nothing  fo  ftridtly  our  own,  as
that  a  Friend  fliould  not  have  an  equal,  or  rather  indeed  a
greater.  Share  and  Right  in  ir.  And  upon  all  Occafions  we
fhould  give  them  Precedence  and  Refped  j  and  we  fhould
do  it  willingly  and  chearfullyj  as  confidering,  that  Their
Honours  devolve  upon  Us,  and  that  a  Friend,  according  to
the  Proverb,  is  a  Man's  fecond  Self.

But  fince,  after  all  out  niceft  Circumfpedion  and  Care,
it  is  impoflible  for  us  to  continue  Men,  and  not  give  fome
Occafion  of  Offence ;  this  Point  is  to  be  managed  very  ten-
derly. A  Friend  in  good  earneft,  ought  efpecially  to  guard
this  Breach ;  and  to  reprove  what  is  done  amifs  with  great
Temper  and  Softnefs,  in  Obedience  to  that  old  and  truly
Golden  Rule,

Lofe  not  a  friend  on  etfry  flight  Tretence-^
Ready  to  pardon^  Jlonv  to  take  Offence.

Pythag.  Xgi'<r<»"Ew»;.

That  fo  you  may  admit  him  to  a  perfed  and  firm  Reconci-
liation j  and  deliver  him  from  the  Remorfe  of  his  own  Mind,
by  leaving  no  ground  of  Jealoufy,  that  he  hath  not  ftill  the
fame  Place  jn  your  Affedtion  and  Efteem.

It

200  Epictetus's  Morals,

It  is  alfo  certain,  that  our  Kindnefs  and  Concern  ought
iiot  to  be  confined  to  our  Friend  alone,  but  extend  to  his
Relations  and  Acquaintants,  and  thofe,  whole  Affairs  and
Succefies  he  thinks  himfelf  ittterefted  in.  We  fhould  be  as
ready  to  fefve  them  upon  His  Account,  as  He  would  be  to
do  it  otl  their  own.  Our  Concern  and  Affeftion  ought  not  to
be  reftrained  to  Place  neither  ^  but  we  fhould  have  the  fame,
and  upon  feme  Accounts,  a  more  tender  Regard  to  our
Friend  in  his  Abfence,  than  we  think  our  felves  obliged  to
exprefs,  when  he  is  prefent  with  us.  An  eminent  Inftance
whereof  I  could  give,  from  my  perfonal  Experience  in  a
Friend  of  my  own.  And,  to  conclude  all ;  vvhen  once  we
have  made  a  prudent  Choice,  and  laid  the  Foundations  of
Friendfhip  in  an  agreeable  Humour,  and  tried  Conftancy^
land  virtuous  Difpoiitions,  the  Aifeiftions,  which  naturally
follow  upon  fuch  powerful  Attridives,  will  not  fail  to  con-
dudl  us  in  the  right  Method  of  Converfation,  and  all  the
Duties  and  good  Offices,  that  can  be  expeifled,  as  Tefti-
monies  and  Endearments  of  Friendfhip,  will  follow  of
Courfe.

Now  what  a  Blefling  Friendfhip  is^  how  rich  a  Treafure,
and  how  fruitful  in  the  Advantages  of  Life,  is  a  Subjedl
worthy  of  a  long  and  ftudied  Difcourfe  ^  but  at  prefent  I
fhall  content  my  felf  with  a  few  Particulars  only,  and  fuch
as  occur  to  my  prefent  Thoughts.

Firfl  then;  Every  Friend  hath  Two  Souls,  and  Two
Bodies ;  and  it  is  as  plain  from  the  fore-going  Rules,  that  he
muft  needs  have  two  Eftates :  If  then  a  Man  have  feveral
fuch  Friends,  his  Advantages  grow  upon  him  ftill  more,
and  he  is  multiplied  into  more  Souls,  and  Bodies,  and
Eflates,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  his  Friends.  In
the  Study  of  Wifdom  and  Nature,  Souls  thus  united  have
an  infinite  Advantage ;  and  the  Light  of  Truth  difplays  itfelf
fnuch  more  early  and  fully  to  them.  Nor  have  they  lefs  in
the  Exercife  of  Virtue ,  by  mutual  Conferences,  and  joint
Endeavours  :  Thefe  bring  their  Improvements  into  one  com-
mon Bank,  from  whence  every  Man  fupplies  his  own  Oc-
cafions,  and  eafily  grows  rich  at  the  publick  Stock,  Befides,
fuch  united  Perfedion  will  find  a  more  than  ordinary  Blef-
fing  and  Encouragement  from  Heaven,  they  are  lecure  of
prudent  and  feafonabie  Advice  in  all  their  Difficulties ;  their
Motions  Will  be  regular  and  well  weighed ;  and  their  Suc-
cefFes  more  probable,  as  having  more  Heads  to  contrive,
and  more  Hands  to  act,  than  thofe  can,  who  ftand  alone,

and

i£;zV^  Si MPLiciu  s's  Comment. 20 r

and  muft  encounter  Fortune  fingly.  When  fuch  a  Man  is
abroad  from  his  Family  and  Acquaintants,  that  Abfence,  and
all  Want  of  him  is  made  good  to  them  by  his  Friend  j  in  Him
he  is  prefent  while  living,  and  living  when  dead.

Thefe  are  fome  of  the  Advantages.  And  the  Pleafures  of
Friendfliip  are  not  lefs  than  the  Profits  of  it.  For  what  De-
light can  be  compared  to  that  fenfible  Joy,  which  runs  through
all  our  Spirits  at  the  light  of  a  Friend  ?  What  Charms  do
we  find  in  his  Perfon  ?  What  Mufick  in  his  Difcourfe  ?
What  an  engaging  Gracefulnefs  in  all  his  Aftions  ?  The
Confidence  we  repofe  in  him,  is  above  what  any  Ties  of
Blood  and  Nature  can  give  our  nearefl  Relations  a  Title
to  i  And  our  Minds  are  more  at  eafe,  and  more  fecure  in.
his  Fidelity,  than  any  Degree  of  Wealth  or  Power  can
make  them.  Of  which  Alexander  the  Great  gave  a  very
pregnant  Inftance,  who,  we  are  told,  when  he  was  afked
where  his  vaft  Treafures  lay,  pointed  to  his  Friends,  and  faid,
Thofe  were  they.

A  Friend  is  likewife  the  beft  Inftrudor,  and  the  beft  Cor-
rexflor  that  can  be.  For  Reproof  is  leaft  offenfive,  when
coming  from  fuch  a  Hand :  Nor  is  there  any  Perfon,  whofe
Obfervation  keeps  us  in  equal  Awe,  or  whofe  Cenfure  we
fear  fo  much,  if  it  hath  been  our  Misfortune  to  fail  in  point
of  Duty.  Our  profperous  Fortunes,  and  all  the  Gayeties
of  Heart  we  feel  upon  them,  grow  double  by  Communi-
cation, but  are  flat  and  infipid  without  a  Friend  to  partake
of  the  Pleafure  :  And  all  our  AfHiclions  are  difarmed,  and
their  Force  broken,  when  a  Friend  takes  off  part  of  the
Burden,  by  his  tender  Sympathies,  and  feafonable  Com-
forts.

Friendfliip  indeed  is  the  beft  School  for  training  a  Man  up
in  all  manner  of  Virtue  and  Prudence,  and  to  learn  the
World  in.  This  forms  him  for  Converfation,  and  fits  his
Soul  for  all  poffible  Accidents  and  Encounters  :  It  teaches
him  Civility,  and  Meeknefs,  and  Truth.  For  one  makes
no  difficulty  of  giving  Precedence  to  a  Friend  j  nor  takes
Offence  at  every  Slip  or  ImperfecT:ion  of  his  j  and  accuftoms
one's  felf  to  open  his  Mind  freely,  and  to  fpeak  his  Thoughts
without  any  Trick  or  Referve.  Here  we  find  a  ftrange  In-
clination to  be  grateful,  and  juft,  in  returning  Favours  j  and
the  pleafure  of  doing  them  is  upon  no  occafion  fo  great,
nor  lb  generoufly  put  in  Pradlice,  as  in  the  Cafe  of  a  Friend.
No  Man  will  run  fo  many  Rifques,  nor  expofe  his  Perfon
fo  freely  to  prevent  another's  Danger,  as  He :  For  a  true

Friend

202 . Epictetits's  Morals,

Friend  (corns  to  decline  any  Difficulty,  and  is  ready  to  re&ae
iiis  Friend,  though  at  the  expence  of  his  own  Life.  Could
sn  Army  be  levied  of  fuch  Men,  they  would  rout  double
their  Number,  by  their  united  Force,  and  firm  Refolurions
not  to  defert  one  another.  Thefe  are  the  Qualifications,
that  fit  a  Man  for  the  World,  and  the  exercife  of  them
among  Friends  is  eafy,  and  pleafant :  Whatever  feems  barfii
at  firftj  is  foftned  by  AfFedion,  and  by  degrees  a  Man  will
£nd  himfelf  a  Mafter,  capable  of  acquitting  himfelf  as  he
ought  in  all  Points,  as  Occafions  are  offered.  .  Firft  to  his
Friends ;  and,  when  Praftice  with  Them  hatb  perfeded  him,
then  to  all  Mankind.

"  This  farther  Confideration  is  likewife  worth  our  Notice,
ThatFriendiliip  ties  ail  other  Relations  clofer,  and  binds  them
fsilier  upon  us.  It  endears  us  to  thofe  whom  God  and  Na-
ture have  commanded  us  to  love  •  it  fweetens  and  recom-
jnends  their  Company,  and  inclines  us  to  do  all  that  is  ex-
pedled  from  us,  wich  Chcarfulnefs  and  Satisfacflion.  For  un-
kis  Brothers,  and  Children,  and  Hufbands,  and  Wives,  be
Friends  too,  and  have  a  particular  Kindnefs  and  Regard  for
one  another  ;  though  they  may,  with  much  ado,  follow
Ep^etus  his  DiretStion,  and  difcharge  the  feveral  Offices  be-
longing to  their  particular  Station,  yet  all  their  Performan-
ces, will  come  hard  and  drained.  There  will  be  nothing  of
Pleafure  or  Alacrity,  to  whet  their  Duty,  and  giveit  a  relilli;
hilt  all  is  look'd  upon  as  a  Burden  and  a  Slavery,  the  effecfl  of
Necefficy,  not  Choice  j  done,  not  becaufe  they  would,  but
becaufe  they  muft  do  ic  j  and  not  fo  much  to  oblige  the  Re-
ceiver, as  to  avoid  Guilt  and  Reproach.

Now  the  true  Reafon,  why  this  Relation  of  a  Friend  is
more  (acred  and  engaging  than  any  other,  feems  to  be,  that  it
is  not  our  Fate,  but  our  Choice.  Our  natural  Relations  we
Vv'ere  born  to ;  But,  v/here  ourfelves  rye  the  Knot,  it  is  ge-
nerally ftronger  than  where  Nature  does  it :  Becaufe,  of  all
the  Endowments  of  the  Soul,  that  of  Reafon  and  Liberty
feems  to  be  the  higheft,  and  that,  by  which  we  make  the
neareft  approach  to  the  Perfedlions  of  that  Great  One,  in
and  by  whom  all  things  are  united.

Thefe  are  fome  of  the  Excellent  and  Marvellous  Effedls
of  FriendHiip,  and  fuch  Humana  Confiderations  as  abundant-
ly recommend  it:  But  the  moft  valuable,  and  truly  Divine
Recommendation  is  ftiil  behind.  Is,  That  the  Union  of
Souls  by  an  Innocent  and  Sincere  Friendfiiip  is  the  Noblefb
Contemplation,  and  the  Livelieft  Image,  of  our  Union  with

God

with  S  I M  p  L I  c  I  u  s's  Comment.  203

God  hiaifelf.  And  indeed  we  cannot  here  upon  Earth  afpire
to  any  better  and  more  intimate  Conjun<flion,  with  Him,
and  thofe  Bleiled  Spirits,  who  are  ever  in  perfed  Harmony
and  Concord.  It  was  not  therefore  without  excellent  Rea-
ibn,  that  Pythagoras  and  his  Followers  gave  the  Preference
to  Friendliiip  above  all  other  Virtues  j  and  called  it,  The
very  Chain  and  Complement  of  them  all.  For  in  Truth,
if  any  One  Virtues  be  wanting,  Friendlliip  will  not  dwell
there.  For  how  can  we  fuppofe  an  Unjuft,  or  an  Intem-
perate, or  Debauch'd  Man,  or  a  Coward,  capable  of  Friend-
ihip  ?  And  an  obftinate  perverie  Fool  is  fo,  lefs  than  any  of
them.  No,  no,  this  Treafure  is  too  rich,  too  refined,  for
fuch  fordid  Wretches.  A  Man  therefore  that  pretends  to
Friendfhip,  muft  afpire  to  as  high  degrees  of  Perfeclion,  as
the  Frailiies  of  Human  Nature  will  admit;  he  mull  work
off  the  Drofs  of  fenfual  and  brutifh  FafTions,  purify  and
fublimate  his  Mind,  and  then  he  is  qualified  to  feek  a  Mate
in  Friendlhip  ;  and  when  he  hath  found  fuch  another  as  him-
felf,  he  muft  hold  him  clofe  to  his  Heart,  as  his  Dearer  and
Bectex-  Half.

If  I  have  been  tedious  upon  this  Subjed,  the  Reader  will
be  kind,  in  imputing  it  to  fo  good  a  Caufe,  as  my  Zeal  for
Friendfliip  ;  to  which  it  were  a  moft  defirable  thing  to  fee
fome  few  at  leaft  pay  that  Regard,  which  it  defervcs,  And
indeed  a  fev/  Inftances  would  be  fome  Comfort  in  this  mi-
fcrable  Age ,  when  the  Vices  and  Vilenefs  of  Mankind  feem
to  have  baniih'd  it  almoft  quite  out  of  the  World.  But  it  is
now  high  time  to  come  off  from  this  long  Digrefiion,  and
return  to  that,  which  this  Chapter  direds  us  to  j  which  is,
to  examine  fomething  more  briefly,  thofe  other  Relations,
which  E^i&eius  here  hath  thought  fit  to  make  exprefs  men-
tion of.

After  having  told  us,  that  the  Confideration  of  feveral
Qualities  and  Relations  is  the  beft  Rule  of  their  refpedive
Duties,  he  proceeds  to  inftance  in  that  of  a  good  Citizen,
or  Patriot :  For  this  too  gives  us  a  fort  of  Affinity  to  all
our  Fellow-Citizens,  or  Subjeds.  The  Country  reprefentj
our  Parents ;  and  all  who  are  born  in  it,  who  are  comprehend-
ed within  its  Privileges,  and  live  under  its  Laws,  are  in
fome  Senfe  Brethren  j  and  a  manifeft  Relation  (though
more  diftant,  I  confefs,  than  any  hitherto  infifted  upon )
there  is  between  all  the  Natives  of  it.  The  likenefs  of  Dif-
pofitions  flrews  fuch  a  Relation  to  be  of  Nature's  making  ;
and  this  is  very  often  obfervable  in  People,  not  only  of  the

fame

204 E  P I  e  f  E  T  u  s's  Morals,

fame  City  or  Corporation,  but  extends  iifelf  to  thofe  of  the
^lame  Nation too. Our  Behaviour  therefore  to all  fuch
;  ought  to  referable  that  to  our  Kindred; and  all  imaginable
Care  fhould  be  taken  for  their  Imprcveraent  ;  for  in  this
.  we  fhall  confuk  our  own  Benefit  alfo,  and  feel  the  Advan-
riiages,  of  living  among  Honeft  and  Virtuous  People  j  of  .be-
ing fupplied  in  all  our  Neceflicies, and  afiifted  in  all  our
DiftrefTes ;  and  of  providing  Hufbands,  and  Fathers,  for  .all
our  Orphans  and  Widows  ;  For  every  Man  is  capable  of
lending  a  helping  Hand,  though  not  every  Man  in  the  lame
7  'way : One  may  be  a  Friend  with  his  Money ;  Another  by
his  Authority  • a  Third  by  his  Intereft  and  Acquaintance,  or
good  Advice  ^  a  Fourth  by  his  Labour  and  Pains  j  and  thofe,
who  have  nothing  elfe  in  their  Power,  may  be  ferviceable  by
their  Pity  and  Compaflion.

Now  if  a  Man  be  both  a  Fellow-Citizen  and  a  Neighbour,
this  renders  the  Relation  fomething  nearer  ftill.  For,  as
the  State  we  were  born  in,  and  the  Family  we  are  defcend-
ed  from,  are  not  the  Gifts  of  a  blind  undiftinguifhing  Chance ^
fo  are  we  to  look  upon  that  particular  Habitation,  and  pare
of  the  fame  City  where  we  dwell,  to  be  affigned  us  by  a
wife  Providence.  So  that  thofe  of  our  Countrymen,  who
dwell  neareft  to  us,  are  upon  that  account  allied  more  clofe-
ly  ftill.  And  whatever  have  been  fpecified  as  Duties  to  the
One,  are  fo,  and  indeed  more  fo,  to  the  Other,  as  We  have
Opportunities  of  paying,  and  They  of  receiving  them.
Therefore  we  are  to  rejoice  in  their  Succefles,  and  be  hearti-
ly concerned  for  their  Misfortunes ,  and  when  any  of  them
are  fick  or  indifpofed,  we  rnuil  endeavour  to  be  ferviceable
to  them,  as  if  they  were  a  part  of  our  own  Family.  In  all
our  Converfation  abroad,  we  fliould  make  it  appear  to  the
World,  that,  while  our  Neighbour  hath  no  Deligns  but
what  are  honeft  and  fair,  we  will  ftand  by  him  to  our  ut-
moft  i  and  we  fhould  think  it  a  ihameful  Reflexion,  that  he
Hiould  upon  any  occafion  afk  or  receive  a  kindnefs  from
them  that  dwell  at  a  greater  diftance,  which  it  was  in  the
power  of  Us,  his  next  Neighbours,  to  have  done  for
him.

There  is  alfo  a  fort  of  Relation  betwixt  Us,  and  Fo-
reigners, who  come  to  fpend  fome  time  in  our  Country  j  a
Relation,  of  which  God  is  the  Author,  who  hath  declared,
that  he  bears  a  particular  regard  to  Strangers.  The  good
Offices  therefore,  <iue  upon  this  account,  ought  very  pun-
diually  to  be  difcharged;  both  in  refpeft.to.the  Alfflighcy,

who

with  SiMf»ncius*s  Comment. 205

who  hath  taken  fuch  Perfons  into  his  peculiar  Proteftion:
and  alfo,  to  exercife  and  enlarge  our  good  Nature,  which
ought  not  to  be  confined  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  our
own  Acquaintance  or  Country,  but  muft  flretch  its  concern
over  the  whole  World,  and  look  upon  itfelf,  as  a  Debtor
to  all  Mankind.  There  is  alfo  another  very  weighty  Rea-
fon  ftill  behind-  which  is,  that  this  will  give  us  Confi-
dence, when  we  prefent  our  Addrefics  before  the  God  of
Scrangers  j  and  we  may  with  a  better  Grace  aflc  and  exped:
that  Affiftance  from  Him,  which  we  have  given  to  Them
without  grudging.  For  fuch  is  his  condefcenlion,  that  he
allows  us  to  look  upon  all  our  Endeavours  and  Adlions
of  Kindnefs,  as  (o  many  Loans  to  Himfelf ;  and  he  will  be
fure  to  repay  them  with  large  Ufury,  and  more  to  the  Cre-
ditor's Advantage,  than  any  the  moft  Generous  of  the  Sons
of  Men.

Above  all  things,  we  muft  take  fpecial  care  never  to  in-
jure or  opprefs  a  Stranger ;  but  quite  contrary,  to  give  him
our  Countenance,  and  Help,  and  refcue  him,  if  it  be  poffi-
ble,  from  the  Injuftice  of  any  other  that  fliall  attempt  it.
For  God  hath  charged  his  Providence  with  a  peculiar  care
of  Suchj  becaufe  they  are  more  expofed  and  deftitute  of
Humane  Helps  j  and  he,  who  hath  promifed  to  proted  them
more  eminently,  will  be  fure  to  revenge  their  wrongs  more
feverely.  It  is  fit  too,  that  thofe  who  can  do  it,  be  aflift-
ing  to  them  in  the  difpatch  of  the  Affairs  they  come  about,
and  furnilK  them  with  what  conveniences  they  ftand  in  need  of  ^
that  they  be  particularly  tender  of  them  in  cafes  of  Sicknefs ;
and,  when  the  ends  of  their  Journey  are  fatisfied,  contri-
bute all  poffible  endeavours,  tov;ards  facilitating  their  return
home  again.

EpEietus  tells  us  moreover.  That  a  Private  Soldier  ought
CO  confider  his  own,  and  his  Commander's  Pofl,  and  from
thence  inform  himfelf,  what  is  due  to  his-  Superior  Officers.
Now  in  fuch  a  cafe,  it  is  not  enough,  that  their  Orders  be
obeyed,  but  it  is  necelTary,  that  they  fhould  be  executed
fpeedily  j  becaufe,  in  time  of  Adlion,  many  favourable
Opportunities  prefent  ihemfelves,  which  if  not  prefently
fnatch'd,  are  loft  for  ever.  And  they  muft  be  executed
with  Bravery  and  Refolution  too  j  becaufe  the  Fortune  of
the  Field  may  depend  upon  fuch  Obedience.  A  Private
Soldier  is  likewife  obliged  to  expofe  his  own  Perfon  for
the  Safety  of  his  Cornmander,  becaufe  fuch  an  one's  Life  is
of  Infinite  Confequence. If  a  fuigle  Soldier  fall,  there  is  no

great

2o6 Ep  I  cTETus's  Morals,

great  Advantage  gained,  nor  does  this  Lofs  change  the  face  of
Affairs;  but  if  a  Generar  fall,  though' the  Soldiers  under
him  were  vidlorious  before,  yet  their  Spirits  fink  imme-
diately, their  Order  is  broken,  and  every  one  makes  the  beft
of  his  way  to  fave  himfelf,  as  Sheep  without  a  Shepherd  run
before  Wolves.  So  that  indeed,  not  only  theSuccefs  of  the
Day,  but  the  Fate  of  whole  Countries  and  Kingdoms  is  of-
ten brought  into  extreme  hazard,  by  the  lofs  of  one  emi-
;iient  Commander-  of  which  Xenophon  hath  Ith  us  an  Ex-
ample, in  the  account  he  gives  of  what  happened  upon  the
Death  of  Cyrus.

It  is  no  lefs  evident,  That  there  is  alfo  a  Relation,  be-
tween Civil  Magift races,  and  the  Perfons  under  their  Ju-
rifdicftion,  and  feveral  Duties  which  follow  from  that  Re-
lation. And  here,  if  Men  do  not  bear  the  empty  Name  of
Governours,  but  are  really  what  they  are  called,  all  ready
Obedience  is  due  to  them,-  all  Honour  and  Refped,  as  to
Perfons,  next  under  God,  the  Authors  of  our  Peace  and
Happinefs,  and  greateft  Benefaftors  to  the  Publick.  For
good  Governours  make  this  the  Study  and  Bufinefs  of  their
Lives  j  they  let  about  it  zealoufly  and  heartily,  and  omit  no
Care,  which  may  any  way  conduce  to  the  Benefit  of  the
State.  What  Hippocrates  faid  of  the  Phyficians,  is  much
more  eminently  true  of  Princes  j  they  do  not  torment  them-
felves  to  no  purpofe  with  the  Calamities  of  other  People,
(and  EpiBetus  advifes  they  fhould  not)  but  they  faerifice
themfelves  and  all  their  Quiet  to  Care  and  Trouble  j  they
negledt  their  own  private  Affairs  and  Families,  and  m.uft  be
content  with  perpetual  Vexations  and  Interruptions,  and  the
lois  of  many  Opportunities,  which  might  be  improved  to
very  wife  and  virtuous  Purpofes.

Upon  all  thefe  accounts,  and  to  make  them  fome  amends,
every  Man  is  bound,  not  only  to  be  obedient,  but,  fo  far  as
in  him  lies,  to  eafe  them,  and  to  bear  a  part  of  their  Bur-
den ^  to  be  acftive  and  vigorous  in  their  Support  and  De-
fence, as  looking  upon  Their  Dangers  to  afFedt  the  State  in
common,  and  threaten  the  whole  Conftiturion.

And,  if  thefe  Governours  be  fuch,  as  do  by  no  means  an-
fwer  their  Character,  nor  take  the  Care  they  ought  ^  though
we  are  not  bound  to  vindicate  their  Errors,  or  their  Wicked-
nefs,  yet,  even  in  fuch  cafes,  we  are  obliged  to  pay  them  all
that  is  due  to  the  Dignity  of  their  Poft  j  we  muft  fliew  them
all  fit  Deference.,  and  Refpe<ft:,  and  comply  with  their  Com-
mands, as  far  as  with  a  good  Confcience  we  may.

But

with  SiMPLiGius's  Comment.  207

Bat  it  is  very  fit  t  fliould  now  apply  myfelf  ta  the  fdl-
Idwirig  Chapters,  and  not  quit  my  firlt  Defign  j  which  was
to  explain  BfiBetui^  and  not  to  run  out  into  unnecefTary
Enlargements,  upon  the  feveral  Relations  Men  ftand  in  to
each  other  j  for  otherwife,  while  I  teach  my  Reader  His
Duty,  he  will  be  apt  to  fufped,  that  I  have  forgot  ray  Own.

CHAP. XXXVIIL

TAKE  notice.  That  the  principal  and  moft  im-
portant Duty  in  Religion,  is  to  poflefs your
Mind  with  juft  and  becoming  Notions  of  the  Gods;
to  believe  that  there  are  fuch  fupreme  Beings,  and
that  they  govern  and  difpofe  all  the  Affairs  of  the
World, with  a  juft  and  good  Providence. And,
in  agreement  to  fuch  a  Ferfuafion,  to  difpofe  your-
ielf  for  a  ready  and  reverential  Obedience, and  a
perfcft  Acquiescence  in  all  their  Difpenfations  :  And
this  Submiffion  is  to  be  the  Effect  of  Choice , and
not  Conftraint  •,  as  confidering,  that  all  Events  are
ordered  by  a  moft  Wife  and  Excellent  Mind  :  For
this  is  the  only Principle, which can fecure you
from  a  querulous  Terriper,  and  prevent  all  the  im-
pious  Murmurings  of Men, who imagine them-
felves  negleded, and their  Merits overlook'd by
a  partial  Deity. Now  for  attaining to  the good
Difpofition I have  been defcribing, there  is but
one  poflible  Method  ;  viz.  To  difregard  the  Things
of  the  World,  and  be fully  fatisfied, that  there  is
no  Happinefs  or  MIfery in  any  other  thing, but
what  Nature  hath  put  within  your  own  Power  and
Choice. For,  fo  long  as  you  fuppofe  any  external
Enjoyments  capable  of  making  you  happy,  or  the
Want  of  them, miferable, you  muft unavoidably
blame  the  Difpofers  of  them,  as  oft  as  you  meet

S  with

2o8  'Epictetus's  Morals,

with  any  Difappointment  in  your  Hopes,  or  fall
into  any  Calamity  you  fear.  This  is  a  Principle
fix'd  in  all  Creatures  by  Nature,  and  nothing  can
change  or  remove  it,  to  run  away  from  all  that
that  feems  hurtful  and  deftrudtive,  and  to  have  an
averfion  for  the  Caufes  of  thefe  Things  to  us.  So
is  it  tikewife,  to  purfue  and  court  the  contrary,
.and  love  and  admire  the  Perfons  we  owe  our  Good
to:  Nor  can  a  Man  take  pleafure  in  the  fuppofed
Author  of  his  Mifchief,  any  more  than  in  the  Mif-
chief  itfelf.  Hence  it  is,  that  Sons  complain  of
their  Fathers,  and  reproach  them  for  not  letting  them
into  a  greater  fliare  of  their  Eftates,  in  which  they
■place  their  Happinefs.  Hence  Polynices  and  Eteo-
cles  engaged  in  that  unnatural  War,  becaufe  they
placed  their  Happinefs  in  a  Crown.  Hence  the
Hufbandman  cries  out  againfb  God,  when  the  Sea-
fon  is  unkindly  ;  and  the  Merchant  repines  at  Storms,
and  Lofles  at  Sea  ;  and  Mailers  of  Families,  at  the
death  of  their  beloved  Wives  and  Children.  Now
no  Man  can  have  Religion,  without  mixing  fome
profpecl  of  Advantage  with  it  •,  nor  can  we  heartily
ferve  and  adore  a  Being,  of  whofe  Juilice  and  Kind-
nefs  we  have  not  a  good  Opinion.  So  that,  by
making  it  our  Bufinefs  to  regulate  our  Defires  and
our  Averfions,  and  dire6l  them  to  worthy  and  proper
Objefts  j  we  do  at  the  fame  time  molt  effedualjy
fecure  our  Piety.  It  is  neceflary  al fd,  that  you
fhould  offer  Sacrifices,  and  conform  to  the  Cuftom
of  your  Country  in  the  Exercife  of  Religion  ;  and
that  all  things  of  this  kind  be  performed  with  Sin-
cerity and  Devotion  ;  and  not  flovenly  and  care-
lefly,  but  with  a  decent  Application  and  Refpeft ;
and  that  your  Offerings  be,  according  to  your  Abi-
lity, fo  tempered,  as  neither  to  betray  an  Unwil-
Jingnefs  or  fordid  Grudging  in  One  extreme,  nor  to
run  out  into  the  Other  of  Profufenefs  and  Oflen-
tation.

COM-

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  209

COMMENT.

AFTER  the  Duties  expecfted  from  us  to  our  Equals,  that
is,  of  Men  to  one  another  ^  he  proceeds  now  to  inftrudt
us,  what  we  owe  to  our  Superiours,  viz,,  thofe  of  a  Nature
more  excellent  than  our  own.  And  in  all  Difquilitions  of
this  kind,  it  is  a  very  convenient  Method,  to  begin  with
thdfe  Things  that  are  neareft  and  moft  familiar  to  us,  and
fo  by,  degrees  afcend  to  thofe  above,  and  at  a  greater  diftance
from  us.

Now  thefe  Duties  arelikewife  difcovered,  by  takings  juft
View  of  the  Relation  between  the  Gods  and  Us ;  and  that  is
fuch  an  one,  as  Effefts  bear  to  their  Higheft  and  Firft  Caufes.

U  then  they  are  to  be  conlidered  under  this  Notion  ^  it  is
evident,  that  they  ftand  not  in  any  need  of  our  Services,  nor
can  we  add  to  their  Happinefs  or  Perfeftion,  Our  Duties
confequently,  and  the  Intent  of  them,  are  only  fuch,  as  may
exprefs  our  Subjecflion,  and  procure  us  a  more  free  acceis
and  intercourfe  with  them  :  For  this  is  the  only  Method  of
keeping  up  the  Relation  to  Firft  and  Higheft  Caufes.  The
Iiiftances  of  this  Subjection  due  from  us,  are  Honour  and
Reverence,  and  Adoration,  a  voluntary  Submiflion  to  all
they  do,  and  a  perfed  Acquiefcence  in  all  Events  order'd  by
them  j  As  being  fully  fatisfied,  that  they  arc  the  Appoint-
ments of  Abfolure  Wifdora  and  Infinite  Goodnefs.

Thefe  are  fuch  Qj_ialificarions,  as  we  muft  attain  to,  by
redifying  the  Ideas  ot  our  Minds,  and  reforming  the  Errors
of  our  Lives.  The  Ideas  of  our  Minds  muft  be  reftified,  by
entertaining  no  Thoughts  of  the  Gods,  but  what  are  wor-
thy of  Them,  and  becoming  Us :  as,  That  they  are  the  Firft
Caufe  of  all  Things :  That  they  difpofe  of  all  Events,  and
concern  themfelves  in  the  Government  of  the  World;  And
That  all  their  Government,  and  all  their  Difpofals,  are  wife,
and  Juft,  and  Good.  For  if  a  Man  be  of  Opinion,  That  there
is  no  God  ;  Or  if  he  allow  his  Exiftence,  but  deny  his  Provi-
dence;  Or  if  he  allow  both  thefe,  but  think  that  God,  and,
that  Providence,  defedive  in  his  Counfels,  or  unjuft  in  his
Diftributions  ,•  fuch  an  one  can  never  pay  him  true  i-Ionour
and  hearty  Adoration,  or  fubmit  with  a  refigned  and  conten-
ted Spirit,  to  the  various  Accidents  of  Human  Life,  as  if  all
were  ordered  for  the  beft.

S  2  Again  J

210 . Epigtetus's  Morals,

Again ;  It  is  likewife  neceffary,  that  the  Life  and  Conver-
fation  of  Men  be  fo  difpofed,  as  to  exprefs  this  Perfuafion:
of  a  Wife  and  Good  Providence  by  not  flying  out  into  pee-
vi0i  Murmurings  and  Complaints;,  or  thinking  that  Almigh-
ty God  hath  done  us  wrong  in  any  of  his  Difpenfations.  But
this  is  a  Temper  we  can  never  attain  to,  fo  long  as  we  expecft
Happinefs,  and  dread  Mifery,  from  any  thing  but  ourfelves.
The  Management  of  our  own  Will  muft  be  our  only  Care  •
and  all  our  Defines  and  Averfions  reftrained  to  the  Objedts
of  Choice ;  and  then-  we  need  never  be  difappointed  in  our
Hopes,  nor  furprized  by  our  Fears.  But  this  muft  needs  hap-
pen to  all  v-'ho  place  their  Happinefs  and  Mifery,  in  the  En-
joyment, or  the  Want,  of  any  external  Advantages  ;  and
fuch  Dil'appointments  and  Surprises  will  neceCTarily  carry
them  to  a  Deteftation  of  That,  which  they  look  upon  as  the
.Caufe  of  fuch  Misfortunes :  And  they  will  very  hardly  re-
frain from  fpeaking  ill  of  that  Power,  which  might  have
prevented  their  Mifery,  but  took  no  care  to  do  it.  For  every
Creature  naturally  defires  Good,  and  abhors  Evil  ,*  and  there-
fore not  only  the  Things  themfelves,  but  the  Caufes  of  theni,
are  fliunned  and  hated,  courted  and  admired,  in  proportion
as  they  really  are,  or  as  we  apprehend  them  to  be.  Good  or
Evil.  There  is  no  fuch  Thing  in  Nature,  nor  can  there  be,
as  that  a  Man  iJiould  take  Delight  in,  and  bear  a  true  AfFe-
d:ion  to,  the  Perfon,  whom  he  looks  upon  to  have  done  him
fome  real  Injury  or  Hurt,  any  more  than  he  can  be  fond  of
that  Hurt  or  Injury  itfelf.  And  fince  all  Good  naturally  at-
tracfls  Love  and  Defire,  and  all  Evil  provokes  Averfion,  we
muft  needs  be  affected  alike,  both  to  the  Things  themfelves,
and  the  C-aufesof  them  to  us.  ;■ ; ,

Nay  though  we  be  miftaken  in  our  Notions  of  Good  and
Evily  yet  that  we  fliall  proceed  according  to  our  apprehenfi-
ons  of  thefe  Things,  as  if  they  were  really  fo,  and  cannot
reftrain  ourfelves  from  hating  and  reviling  the  Authors  of  our
Calamity,  or  the  Deceivers  of  our  Hope,  he  proves  from
hence ;  That  the  ftrideft  Ties  of  Nature,  and  Duty,  and  Af-
fedion,  are  generally  found  too  feeble  Engagements,  to  keep
Men  in  Temper,  or  moderate  their  Refentments.  Thus  we
fee  greedy  and  impatient  Children  perpetually  railing  at  their
Fathers,  for  keeping  them  out  of  their  Eftates,  which  they,
.account  their  Good-  Or  for  infli(fting  fome  Severities  upon
them  which  they  think  Evil ,  as  when  ihey  chaftife  their  Fol-
lies, or  deny  them  their  Liberty.  Thus  the  two  Sons  of  Oe<///»f ,
Tol^nices  and  Euocles,  forgetting  jth^C  they  were  Brothers,

quarrell'd

with  S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S'S Co  MM  E  N  T. 211

^quarrell'dj  and  kill'd  one  another,  for  the  Crown  in  vrhxch.
they  were  Rivals.  Thus  the  Farmer,  when  his  Seed-time  or'
his  Harveft  happens  ill ;  if  it  rain  too  much,  or  too  little,  or
if  any  other  crofs  accident  come  to  his  Crop,  prefently  rails
and  murmurs  againft  the  Gods :  Or  if  he  have  the  modefty
to  hold  his  tongue,  yet  he  is  fare  to  fret  and  curfe  inwardly  :
Thus  Mariners,  when  they  want  a  fair  Wind ;  even  though
they  are  bound  to  different  Ports,  and  muft  fail  with  different
Winds,  one  perhaps  wifhes  for  a  Northern,  another  for  a
Southerly  Gale,  a<id  the  fame  cannot  ferve  or  pleafe  them
all ;  yet  they  fwear  and  rant  at  Providence,  as  if  it  were  o-
bliged  to  take  care  of  Them  only,  and  negled  all  Thofe,
whofe  Bufinefs  requires,  it  Ihould  blow  in  the  Quarter
where  it  does.  So  likewife  Merchants  are  never  content.
When  they  are  to  buy,  they  would  have  great  Plenty,  and  a
low  Market  j  when  it  is  their  turn  to  fell,  then  they  wifli
for  fcarcity,  and  a  rifing  Price :  And  if  either  of  thefe  hap-
pen otherwife,  they  grow  difcontented,  and  accufe  Provi-
dence. And  in  general,  when  Men  bury  their  Wives,  or
Children,  or  have  fomething  very  dear  taken  from  them,  or
fall  into  fome  difafter  they  feared,  they  grow  angry  at  the
Difpofer  of  thefe  Events.  For  we  are  naturally  inclined  to
honour  and  refped  the  Perfons  who  oblige  and  gratify  us ;
and,  as  nothing  excites  thefe  Refentments  in  us  fo  foon,  or
fo  powerfully,  as  our  own  advantage ;  fo  nothing  gives  fuchi
an  effedual  difguft,  and  fo  irreconcilable  a  difrefped,  as  the
apprehenfion,  that  any  Perfon  hath  contributed  to  our  lefs
and  difadvantage.

A  Man  therefore  in  taking  care  to  fix  his  Defires  and  his
Averfions  upon  the  right  Objeds,  does  at  the  fame  time  fe-
cure  his  Piety  and  Reverence  towards  God.  For  this  Man's
Hopes  are  always  anfwered,  his  Fears  always  vanifh  into  no-
t-hing ;  becaufe  he  neither  hopes  nor  fears  any  thing,  out  of
his  own  Power  ^  He  is  confequently  always  pleafed,  Jted  un-
der no  Temptations  to  accufe  Providence,  for  any  thing  that
can  poffibly  happen  to  him.  But  the  Man  that  gives  his  De-
fires  a  Loofe,  and  expeds  his  Fate  from  external  Acci-
dents, is  a  Slave  to  all  the  World,  He  lies  at  the  mercy  of
every  Man's  Opinion,  of  Health  and  Sicknefs,  Poverty  and
Riches,  Life  and  Death,  Vidories  and  Defeats,-  nay,  even
the  Wind  and  the  Rain,  the  Hail  and  the  Meteors,  and,  in
fhort,  every  Caufeand  every  Effed  in  Nature,  is  his  Mafter.
For,  except  every  one  of  thefe  fall  out  juft  according  to  his
mind,  his  Dcfxrcs  muft  be  fruftrated,  and  his  Fears  accom-

S  3  pliflicd.

212  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  s's  M  O  R  AL  S,

pliilied'.  What  a  Weathercock  of  a  Man  is  this !  Hov/  un-
eafy  and  unfettled  his  Life !  How  tedious  and  troublefome
tnuft  he  be  to  bimfelf !  How  dilladsfied  in  his  Breaffc,  and  how
impious  in  his  Reflexions  upon  Providence !  So  that  in  fhort,
no  one  Circumftance  is  wanting,  which  can  conduce  to  the
rendring  fuch  a  one  miferable.

Having  thus  laid  the  Foundations  of  ReHgion,  in  true  No-
tions of  the  Divine  Nature,  in  a  contented  SubmifTion  to
all  Events,  and  in  a  firm  Perfuafion  of  a  Wife  and  Good
Providence,  difpofing  them  as  we  feej  -ind,  having  more-
over fhewn  the  neceGfity  of  defpifing  the  World,  and  depend-
ing upon  our  own  Will  and  the  Objecfts  of  it,  for  all  the  Hap-
pineis  and  Mifery  we  are  capable  of  j  he  proceeds  now  to
dired  us,  what  methods  we  fhould  take,  to  ex'prefs  our  Reve-
rence and  Honour  for  the  Gods.  Some  of  thofe  that  are  ge-
nerally pradifed,  and  become  univerfal,  it  is  highly  probable,
that  God  himfelf  inftituted,  declaring  (as  fome  Hiftories  in-
form us  he  did)  what  Services  would  be  moft  acceptable  to
him  •  and  this,  with  a  gracious  Defign  of  bringing  us  better
acquainted  with  Himfelf,  and  likewife  to  fanftify  and  en-
large our  Enjoyments,  that  our  Offerings  might  invite  his
Bleffings  and  his  Bounty,  and,  for  giving  back  a  little,  we
might  receive  the  more.

As  therefore  we  hold  our felves  bound,  in  the  firft  place,  to
fee  apart  that  Soul,  which  we  received  from  him,  to  his  Ser-
vice j  and  to  confecrate  this  by  refined  and  holy  Thoughts,  by
worthy  and  reverent  Ideaf  of  his  Majefty,  and  a  regular  un^
corrupt  Life;  fo  it  fhould  be  our  next  care,  to  purify  and  de^
dicate  this  Body  too,  which  came  to  us  from  the  fame  Hand ;
and  carefully  to  wafli  away  all  the  feen  or  hidden  Blemifhes
and  Pollutions,  which  it  may  have  conrraded.  When  the
Soul  and  its  Iniirument  are  thus  clear  from  all  their  Stains,
iec  us  come  decently  cloathed  into  his  prefence,  and  there  de-
vote a  part  of  what  God  in  his  Bounty  hath  conferred  upon
us,  to  his  Ufe  and  Service.  For  it  is  highly  reafonable  and
jail,  that  a  Part  fliould  be  given  back  to  him,  from  whom
we  receive  the  Whole :  Not  that  he  needs,  or  is  the  better
for  it :  (nor  is  he  fo  indeed,  either  for  the  Holinefs  of  our
Lives,  or  the  reverent  and  worthy  Ideas  we  have  of  him  :
And  fo  this  Objeftion,  if  it  were  a  good  one,  would  lie
equally  againft  all  Piety  in  general)  but  it  is  for  our  ov/n  Ad-
vantage :  For,  when  we  have  thus  qualified  ourfelves  for  his
benign  Influences,  he  communicates  himfelf  to  us,  in  fuch
prppprtions  as  we  are  capable  and  worthy  of.  So  do  the  Of-
ferings

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 213

ferings  we  devote  out  of  our  Fortunes,  when  recommended
by  a  pure  Confcience  and  a  good  Life,  derive  down  the  Blef-
fing  and  Goodnefs  of  God  upon  our  Eftates,  and  procure  us
fignal  Teftimonies  of  the  Power  and  Efficacy  of  his  Provi-
dence. One  Man  hath  found  them  the  Inftrunaents  of  a  mar-
vellous recovery  from  fome  Epilepfy,  or  other  incurable
Diftemper  •  Another  of  calming  boifterous  Winds  and  Seas;
befides  the  Divine  Favour  and  f  Uumination,  which  the  Vo-
taries ofcen  acquire  by  fuch  Religious  Services.  But  ii  there
were  none  of  thefe  advantagious  Effeds  to  follow,  yet  it
muft  be  conferred  a  mod  equitable  thing,  and  a  decent  ex-
preflion  of  Gratitude,  to  pay  back  thefe  Acknowledgments,
to  the  Giver  of  all  we  enjoy :  How  much  more  then,  when
the  parting  with  fo  fraall  a  proportion  fandifies  and  confe-
crates  the  Whole,  and  enfures  his  Favour  and  Affiftance  in
our  Undertakings  ?

Now,  as  to  the  Kind  and  the  Manner  of  thefe  Oblations,  he
would  have  us  determined  by  the  Cuftom  of  our  Country.
For  there  is  this  mighty  Difference,  among  others,  between
God  and  us  ,•  He  is  prefent  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,
and  equally  difpofed  to  exert  his  Power,  and  communicate
his  Influences,  the  whole  World  over.  But  We  are  confined
within  a  narrow  compafs.  We,  as  Men,  are  but  one  of  the
many  Species  which  God  hath  created,  and  of  the  many,
who  partake  of  the  fame  Nature,  have  applied  ourfelves  to
one  Profeflion  and  Way  of  Life,  out  of  many.  Our  Habi-
tations are  diftincl  and  confined  to  one  little  Spot  of  this
vaft  Globe  i  and  fo  we  partake  of  the  Divine  Goodnefs,
Some  in  one  place  and  time,  and  Some  in.  another.  Thus
there  are  Countries  oppofite  to  us,  whofe  Night  is  our  Day,
and  Climates  fo  diftant,  that  it  is  Winter  in  one,  and  Sum-
mer in  another,  at  the  fame  time.  So  likewife  Fruits  and
Animals  are  peculiar  to  fome  Countries,  and  do  not  grow
or  breed  in  others  j  the  Divine  Bounty  imparting  itfelfto  all
the  World,  and  every  Creature  in  it,  though  to  different
parts  of  the  World,  in  different  manners.  As  therefore  the
particular  manifeftations  of  God  are  fuited  to  feveral  Places,
and  Profeffions,  and  Seafons,  and  Modes  j  lb  in  the  choice
of  Vidlims  and  Acknowledgments,  each  Perfon  and  Coun-
try obferve  what  is  peculiar  to  Them,  and  proper  for  their
Circumftances.  And,  when  by  common  Confent  folemn
Feflivals  are  celebrated  as  they  ought  to  be,  for  the  Honour
and  Worfhip  of  God,  a  more  extraordinary  Effedl  of-the
Divine  Favour  and  Influeuce  is  freqiiently  feen  upon  thefe

S  4  Occa-

214  Ep I CT  E  Tus*s  Morals,

Occafions;  as  miraculous  Cures,  ftrange  and  ufeful  Predi-
ctions, and  the  like.  Such  remarkable  efficacy  do  we  find,
and  fo  much  more  fignal  Teftimonies  of  the  Divine  Prefence
and  Aid  may  we  obferve,  at  one  time  above  another.  And
the  fame  Succefs  is  no  lefs  obfervable.  in  the  proper  Choice
and  Accommodation  of  the  Places  in  which  we  worlhip,  the
Supplications  we  ufe,  the  Ceremonies  we  conform  to,  and
the  Oblations  we  prefent.

Now  all  the  Religious  Performances,  by  which  we  would
exprels  our  Honour  for  God,  ought,  he  fays,  to  be  attend-
ed with  Holinefs  and  Sincerity,  and  not  done  in  a  flovenly
and  fordid  manner.  For  it  is  by  no  means  fit,  that  any  im-
pure thing,  fhould  prefume,  or  be  admitted,  to  make  its  ap-
proach to  the  Pureft  and  moft  PerfeA  Being :  And  any  mix-
ture which  adulterates  what  is  pure  and  fincere,  does  at  the
fame  time  pollute  and  ftain  it.  Therefore  nothing  of  this
kind  is  to  be  done  flovenly  and  fordidly  j  for  that  is  EpiBetus
his  meaning;  and  the  Word  he  makes  ufe  of  to  exprefs  it,
fignifies  fuch  Daft  and  Naftinefs,  as  is  contrafted  from  lying
upon  a  dirty  Floor.  Nor  muft  we  behave  ourfelyes  loofly
and  negligently,  fo  as,  through  Idlenefs  and  Inadvertency,
ro  leave  out,  or  change,  or  to  confound  the  Order  of  any
part  of  our  Worfliip.  For,  as  Words  are  not  the  fame,  if
you  leave  out,  or  put  in,  or  invert  the  courfe  of  the  Letters  ;
nor  Sentences  the  fame,  if  you  confound  the  Words  they
confilt  of,  fo  the  Negle(fls  and  Wandrings  of  a  loofe  Wor-
fhip  check  the  Divine  Influences,  and  render  all  our  Devoti-
ons flat  and  feeble ;  as,  on  the  contrary,  a  wife  and  fteady
Zeal  is  the  beft  Recommendation  of  our  Prayers,  and  gives
them  fuch  energy  and  force,  as  never  returns  empty.  And.
what  is  there  indeed  of  fo  great  Confequence,  or  of  fo  ftrid:
Obligation,  as  to  be  able  to  rouze  a  Man  into  Thought,  and
difpofe  him  to  Warmth  and  Attention,  if  the  Prefence  of
God,  and  his  folemn  Approaches  to  fo  awful  a  Majefty,
have  not  the  power  to  do  it  ?  Hence  it  is,  that  we  are  advi-
ied  to  addrefs  ourfelves  with  reverence  and  fear ;  for  nothing
is  more  ofFenfive,  than  a  fawcy  irreligious  Boldnefs.  And
the  greater  Veneration  we  hold  all  things  in,  which  bear  any
relation  to  God  and  his  Worfliip,  the  more  advantage
we  (hall  receive  from  them,  and,  by  hi^mbling  ourfelves  be-
fore the  Throne  of  God,  we  take  the  moft  effedlual  method
to  be  truly  exalted.

But,  fearing  iome  wrong  Interpretation  upon  what  he  had
^d'r^  and  fuppoiing,  that,  by  forbidding  Men  to  be  cold  and

fordid^

•z£^//^  Si MPLic I u  s's  Comment.  215

fordid,  he  intimates,  that  they  fhould,  upon  all  Occafions,
Gome  up  to  the  u:n:oft,  or  rather  ftrain  a  point,  and  go  be-
yond their  power;  therefore  he  prevents  that  Miftake  in  the
Clole  of  the  Chapter.  And  indeed,  if  Moderation  be  a  Vir-
tue, it  cannot  fhew  itfelf  any  where  to  more  advantage,  thaii
in  the  Bufinefti  of  Religion :  The  very  end  whereof  is  to  re-
duce all  things  to  their  juft  proportions,  and  keep  them  with-
in due  bounds.  Befides,  nothing  tends  more  to  the  preferv-
ing  of  Religion,  and  keeping  up  the  conftant  Pradlice  of  it,
than  for  Men  to  proceed  in  the  fame  evenltourfe,  with  as
few  Alterations  as  the  thing  is  capable  of  j  for  Cuftom  and
frequent  Repetition  make  Men  perfed  and  eafy  :  But  what-
ever is  excelTive  and  upon  the  llretch,  we  can  never  be  re-
conciled to,  fo  as  to  make  it  our  daily  Bafinefs.

Farther  yet,  the  Men  that  ftrain  themfelves  to  be  profufe  in
their  Sacrifices,  or  any  other  way  to  exceed  what  others  do,
and  what  their  own  Circumftances  will  bear,  feem  to  do  it
out  of  a  very  mean  and  miftaken  Principle :  For  this  looks,
as  if  God  were  to  be  bribed  in  their  favour,  and  the  value  of
the  Prefent  laid  an  Obligation  upon  him :  Whereas,  alas  I  all
rhcfe  things  are  done,  not  for  His  fake,  but  our  Own  ;  arid
the  Firft-Fruits,  which  we  confecrate  to  him,  are  defigned
for  no  other  than  decent  Acknowledgem.ents  of  his  Libera-
lity, and  a  fmall  return  out  of  what  he  hath  been  pleafed  to
give  us.

Thus  have  I  trod  in  the  Steps  of  this  excellent  Man,  and
done  him  what  Right  I  could,  in  the  Paraphrafe  and  Expla-
nation of  the  Chapter  now  before  us.  But  becaufe  in  the
beginning  he  touches  upon  three  Points  concerning  the  di-
vine Nature,  and  thefe  fo  fundamentally  neceflary,  that  all
Pofitive  Laws,  and  all  Moral  Inftitutions,  do  prefuppofe  the
Belief  and  Acknowledgment  of  them;  and  fmce  fome  per-
verfe  and  refradlory  Men  have  neverthelefs  the  Confidence
to  oppofe  them ;  we  will  fo  far  comply  with  their  Obftina-
cy,  though  moft  unreafonable,  as  to  prove  the  Truth  of
thefe  Three  Points,  vrz.  That  there  is  a  divine  Nature  and
Power;  That  the  World  is  governed  by  it;  and.  That  the
Providence  by  which  it  is  fo  governed,  is  Juft  and  Good  in
all  its  Difpenfations.  The  Importunity  of  thefe  Men  is  fo
much  the  greater,  and  our  trouble  of  refuting  it  will  be  the
kCs;  becaufe,  not  Mankind  only,  but  Brutes  and  Plants,
and  every  Creature  in  the  World,  do,  according  to  their  Ca-
pacity, all  declare  their  Relation  to  God.  Men  indeed  do
lb  the  nio£^  of  atiy,  becaufe  they  are  early  inftruded  by  their

Parents.

2i6  ^ Epictetus's  Morals,

Parents.  Religion  grows  up  with  them  from  their  Cradle  i
and  the  Ideas  common  to  their  Species  take  root  in,  and  car-
ry a  great  Sway  with  them.  For  the  Barbarous  as  well  as
the  Civilized  Countries,  and  that  in  all  Ages  of  the  World
too,  though  they  have  dilFer'd  exceedingly  in  other  Opinions,
yet  have  ever  agreed  univerfaily  in  this,  That  there  is  a  GOD.
I  know  of  no  Exception  to  this  Rule  j  except  \kioiQ  Acrothe-
ites^  of  whom  Theofhrafius  gives  an  Account,  that  they  own'd
ijO  Deity  j  but,  as  a  punilhment  of  their  Arheifm,  the  Earth
opened  and  fallowed  them  up.  Befides  Them,  we  meet
with  no  People,  and  but  very  few  fingle  Perfons,  who  ever
pretended  to  difown  this  j  not  above  Two  or  Three,  firom
the  beginning  of  the  World  to  this  Day.

But  yet  fo  it  is,  that  a  great  many  do  not  duly  attend  to  thefe
univerlally  received  Notions  j  Partly  becaufe  they  take  them
upon  Truft,  without  confidering  or  underftanding  the  Argu-
ments upon  which  they  are  grounded :  And  partly,  from  fome
Difficulties  in  Providence,  fuch  as  the  Misfortunes  and  Af-
flidions  of  fome  very  good,  and  the  Profperity  of  fome  ex-
ceedingly wicked  Men,  which  are  apt  to  raife  in  them  the
fame  Scruple,  with  that  in  the  Tragedian,

Tardov^  ye  Powers ,  if  yet  fuch  Powers  there  be  j
For  fure  that  Douht  is  modefi^  'when  ive  fee
Triumphant  Vice^  4i7id  injur'' d  Piety.

Now  fuch  Perfons  as  thefe  v/ould  foon  be  convinced,  if  they
did  but  follow  Epifietus  his  Method,  and  not  imagine,  that
either  the  Happineis  or  Mifery  of  a  Man  can  depend  upon
external  Accidents,  or  indeed  upon  any  thing  elle,  but  the
Freedom  and  Ufe  of  his  own  Will.  For  at  this  rate  it  v/ili
not  be  poffible  for  any  good  Man  to  be  wretched,  or  any  vi-
cious one  happy.  And  now,  if  you  pleafe,  we  will  confi-
der  thofe  Propoficions,  which  are  barely  laid  down  by  Epiiie-
tusj  and  try  to  prove  the  Truth  of  them,  by  fuch  Arguments
as  .ire  proper,  and  occur  to  my  prefent  Thoughts.

The  firft  ftep  I  fliall  make  in  this  Argument,  is  to  confi-
der  the  Name,  by  v/hich  we  call  this  Being,  and  what  the
Word  GOD  fignifies.  And  here  we  muft  obferve.  That
the  Greek  Word  ©£»?  was  applied  to  the  Stars,  and  other  Ce-
leftial  Bodies  ;  which  therefore  were  fo  called  from  ©/&;,
which  fignifies  to  JR«;/,  and  had  that  Appellation  given  them
for  the  fwiftnefs  of  their  Motion.  But  this  Title  was  after-
ward extended  to  Incorporeal  Caufes,  and  Intellectual  Beings ;

and

with  S I M  P  L  I  c  I  u  s's  Com  M  E  N  T. 217

and  more  peculiarly  to  the  Firft  Caufe  and  Being  of  all  Things.
So  that  by  this  Name  we  underftand  the  Origin-,iI  of  the  Uni-
verfe,  the  Firft,  and  Principal^  and  intelledual  Caufe  of  every
Thing.  For,  whatever  hath  any  exiftence,  muft  either  be
derived  from  fome  Determinate  Caufe,  or  it  muft  fubfift  by
Chance,  and  Mechanical  Neceftity.  Bat  v/hatever  fubfifts
after  this  manner,  hath  neither  any  particular  efficient  Cauf©,
nor  is  itfelf  the  Final  Caufe  of  its  own  Produftion  ,•  For
both  thefe  Qualifications  are  abfolutely  inconfiftent  with  the
nature  of  Fortuitous  Beings^  and  indeed  no  lefs  fo,  is  the
following  any  conftant  Rule  and  regular  Method  hi  the  Pro-
dutflion  of  them.

Now  it  is  obvious  to  any  confidering  Perfon,  that  the^
Works  of  Nature,  and  of  Choice,  are  a  final  Catife  to  the
Doer,  and  the  Exift-ence  of  them  is  propofed,  as  that  which
anfwers  his  Defign.  Thus  the  Hufbandman  plants,  and
fows  his  Ground,  in  profpedl  of  the  Corn,  and  the  Trees,
that  will  grow  upon  it.  Thus  the  Coition  of  all  Animals
propofes  to  itfelf  the  continuation  of  the  Species,  And  in
all  the  Progrefs  of  thefe  Produdions,  there  is  a  conftant  Or-
der, and  fix'd  Courfe  obferved  j  Some  Operations  which  are
proper  to  the  Beginning,.  Others  to  the  Promoting,  and
others  to  the  Perfeding  this  Work,  each  performed  conftant-
ly  in  their  proper  place.  The  Seeds  of  Plants  are  firft  caft
into  the  Ground,  then  moiftened  and  impregnated  there,  then
they  take  root  and  fprout,  they  fhoot  up  in  Straw,  or  Bran-
ches, and  fo  on,  till  at  laft  they  bloflbm,  and  bud,  and  bring
Fruit  to  maturity.  So  likewife  that  of  Animals  is  cherifhed
and  enlarged,  and  formed  into  an  Embryo;  which  receiving
vital  Nourifhment  and  convenient  Growth,  is  at  a  ftated
time  brought  to  a  juft  Perfec1:ion,  and  then  comes  to  the
Birth.  But  ftill  in  thefe,  and  in  all  other  Cafes  of  the  like
nature,  there  is  the  fame  Chain  of  Caufes  j  and  thefe  general-
ly keep  their  fix'd  Times  and  Meafures.

Now,  if  all  the  Prcducftions  of  Nature,  and  all  the  Eftecfls  o^
Choice,  have  fome  particular  Caufe  to  which  they  owe  their
Being;  if  the  Exiftence  of  thefe  things  be  the  final  Caufe  of
rheir  Produdlion ;  and  if  the  iiime  Order  and  a  regular  Me-
thod be  conftantly  and  duly  obferved  in  the  producing  them,
the  natural  and  neceffary  Refult  of  this  Argument  is^  That  all
the  Works  of  Nature  and  of  Choice,  that  is,  all  Things
in  this  whole  World,  which  have  any  real  Exiftence,  are  not
the  EfiTects  of  Chance,  or  Mechanifm,  but  are  owing  to  fome
particular  pofitive  Caufes. And,  fince  thefe  Caufes  muft

needs

2i8  Epictetus's  Morals,

needs  be  antecedent  to  their  EfFeds,  if  They  be  futhf  as
had  a  Beginning  themfelves,  they  mufl  be  owing  to  fome
Others  who  had  a  Being  antecedent  to  Theirs  •  and  fo  we
may  trace  them  up,  till  at  laft  we  come  to  Caufes  which  had
no  Beginning  at  all.  And  thefe  being  eternal,  are  moft  tru-
ly and  properly  faid  to  Exift,  as  having  never  not  been,  not
owing  their  Subfiftence  to  any  External  Caufe,  but  folely  to
the  Inherent .  Perfedions  of  their  own  Nature.  So  that
the  Firft  and  External  Caufes  of  Things  muft  needs  be  Self-
exiftent,  or  fomething  more  noble  and  excellent  than  Self-
exiftent,  as  the  following  Difcourfe  will  convince  you.

The  fame  Argument  holds  as  flrong  with  regard  to  Mo-
tion too.  For  if  we  trace  this  up  to  its  beginning,  we  fliall
find,  that  thofe  Bodies  which  made  the  firft  Impreflions,
were  either  fuch  as  moved  by  an  Internal  Power  and  Prin-
ciple of  their  own  j  or  fuch  as  were  fixed  themfelves,  and
had  no  fliare  -in  the  Motion  they  imprelTed  upon  others.
For  whatever  is  moved  Mechanically,  is  moved  by  fome-
thing elfe ;  and  That  again  by  fome  other  thing ,  and  fo  on
for  ever :  But  fuch  an  account  as  this  of  Motion  in  Infi?u^
turn,  is  neither  poflible  to  be,  nor  to  be  conceived.  For  at
this  rate,  if  there  were  no  Begianing  of  Motion,  the  only
Confequence  from  hence  muft  needs  be.  That  there  would
be  no  Mover,  nor  any  Moved  Bodies  at  all  t  And  if  v/e
will  allow  any  Beginning,  as  allow  it  we  mull,  that  Firft
Mover  muft  be  either  endued  with  a  Principle  of  Self-
motion,  or  it  muft  have  no  motion  at  all.  But  the  Latter
of  thefe  it  cannot  be  neither ;  For  this  is  ev^ident  in  all  mo-
tion, that  hx'd  Bodies  are  fo  far  from  cornmunicating  mo-
tion to  thofe  Bodies  which  have  it  not,  that  on  the  con-
trary they  check  and  ftop  it  into  thofe  that  have,  and  difpol'e
them  always  to  continue  in  the  fame  State  and  Pofture^
without  any  manner  of  alteration.  So  that  Free  and  Spon-
taneous motion  muft  at  laft  be  refolved  to  be  the  firft  Caufe
of  Mechanical.  Now  the  things  concern'd  in  Mechanical
motion,  are  fuch  as  are  fubject  to  Generation  and  Cor-
ruption, to  Augmentation  and  Diminution,  and  to  any  fort
oF  Alteration,  whether  that  referred  to  the  Qualities  of  the
Things  themfelves,  or  whether  to  their  Local  Diftances  and
Situations.  For  whatever  is  produced  could  never  produce
icfelf ;  becaufe  then  it  muft  have  had  a  Being  before  it  was
produced,  and  fo  begin  to  be,  both  before  and  after  itfelf.
And  whatever  receives  increafe  is  not  augmented  by  itfelf;
-to  Augmeritation  is  nothing  elfe,  but  the  addition  of  fome-
thing:

with  S I M  p  L  I  c  I  u  s^s  Comment. 219

thing  which  it  had  not  before.  So  again,  whatever  is  altered,
is  altered,  by  fc^ne  other  thing,  and  not  from  itfelf  j  for
alteration  is  properly  the  introducing  of  a  contrary  Qija-
iity.  So  hkewife  Local  Motion  cannot  be  from  the  Body
moving  ^  for  fince  all  Motions  are  fubje(ft  to  the  Rules  I  have
here  laid  down,  and  Generation,  Corruption,  Augmentation,
and  Alteration,  are  all  but  fo  many  EflFeds  of  Motion  •  it  is
plain  this  mult  be  derived  from  fomething  ehe,  and  could
not  fet  itfelf  on  going.

Thofe  things  therefore,  which  in  the  Courfe  of  Nature
are  fuperior  to  thefe  Prod  unions,  and  the  Caufes  of  nc-
ceflary  Motion,  muft  needs  be  capable  of  moving  themfelves.
For,  if  we  fliould  fuppofe  but  one  Minute's  perfedl  Repofe,
nothing  would  ever  move  again,  except  fome  Free  Self-
moving  Agent  began  the  Dance.  For  whatever  is  once  fix'd,
is  dilpofed  to  continue  fo  to  all  Eternity-  and  whatever
moves  mechanically  muft  wait  the  leifure  of  fome  other
Body,  and  cannot  ftir,  till  it  receive  the  ImpreJflion,  2nd  is
■put  into  action.

Now  whatever  the  firfl  Principles  of  Things  are,  'tis  ne-
ceffary  that  they  fhould  be  of  a  fimple  Nature.  For  all  mix'd
Bodies  are  compounded  of  Simples,  and  confequently  the
Ingredients  muft  have  a  Priority  in  Nature,  before  the  Com-
pofirion  made  of  them.  Let  us  then  confider  fome  of  the
groffeft  and  moil  ovious  Bodies  j  and  fo  by  degrees  afcend
higher,  to  try  at  laft,  whether  it  be  poffible  for  us  to  con-
ceive Body  to  be  fuch  a  Principle,  as  Reafon  will  tell  us  the
firfb  Principles  of  all  things  muft  needs  have  been  ,•  Or  whe-
ther it  will  not  be  impoflible  to  conceive,  that  thefe  Bodies
which  we  fee  move  and  llibfift,  fhould  ever  have  had  that  Mo-
tion and  that  Exiftence  from  themfelves.

Whatever  moves  itfelf,  is  called  Self-moving  ,•  either  be-
caufe  one  part  of  it  is  active,  and  the  other  paffive  in  this
motion  i  or  elfc,  becaufe  the  whole  is  adlive,  and  the  whole
paffive.  Now  if  we  imagine  One  part  to  communicate,
and  the  Other  only  to  receive  the  Impreffion  ;  ftill  the  fame
Queftion  will  return,  as  to  that  part  which  begins  the  mo-
tion j  v;hether  this  be  done  from  a  Principle  of  its  own,  or
ftom  any  external  Impulfe  ;  and  fo  up,  till  at  laft  you  muft
be  forced  to  flop  at  fomething,  which  muft  be  acknowledged
an  entire  moving,  and  entire  moved.

The  fame  is  to  be  faid  of  Self-exiftence  too.  For  what-
ever is  originally  and  properly,  muft  be  an  entire  Exiftence,"
and  the  fole,  and  entire  Caufe  of  its  own  Exiftence  :  And

whatever

220 Epi  c  TE  Tus's  Moral  s,

whatever  is  fo,  muil  be  indivifible,  and  without  Parts.  For
whatever  conlifts  of  Parts,  and  is  capable  of  being  divided,
could  never  unite  its  Vv'hole  Celf  to  its  whole  felf,  fo  as  to
be  entirely  moving,  and  entirely  moved  •  entirely  fubfift-
ing,  and  yet  the  entire  Caufe  of  fo  fubfifting  at  the  fame
time.

Again:  It  is  no  lefs  impoffible,  that  any  Bodies  fhouid
be  of  a  fimple  Nature ;  for  they  muft  of  neceffity  coniift  of
Matter,  and  Form,  and  feveral  other  Propsrries,  which  go
to  the  compleating  of  their  Nature^  fuch  as  Magnitude,  and
Figure,  and  Colour,  and  fundry  other  Qualities,  which  are
not  original  and  caufal  Species  themfelves,  but  only  parti-
cipations of  thefe,  produced  in  fome  Matter  without  Form,
which  partakes  of  them.  For,  v/here  thefe  Original  Forms
lie,  there  every  thing  is  in  its  true  Eflence  and  Perfection,
and  there  is  no  need  of  any  Matter  unformed  to  receive
them.  But,  when  thofe  Originals  are  communicated,  then
there  rauft  of  neceility  be  fome  Matter  to  receive  rhem,
which,,  till  it  hath  done,  is  itfelf  void  of  Form.  "  Since
then  the  FirH  Principle  of  things  are  incorporeal  and  indi-
vii:ble ;  Since  their  Nature  muft:  be  fimple,  and  that  they
are  properly  efficient  Caufes ;  Since  the  Exiftence  and  their
Motion  mufl  be  entirely  from  themfelves ,-  and  fince  it  hath
been  fliewed,  that  Bodies  are  not  in  any  degree  capable  of
thefe  Qualifications  j  it  muft  needs,  I  think,  be  concluded,
that  Body  could  not  be  the  Firil  Principle,  nor  the  Univerfe
owing  to  any  fuch  Original.

Where  then  fliall  we  find  fuch  a  felf-moving  Agent,  as
infufes  Motion  into  the  neceflary  ones,  and  may  be  confi-
dered  as  a  Caufe  with  refpect  to  them  ?  This  furc  muft  be
fomething  which  moves  iTom  an  internal  Principle,  But
ftill,  if  this  Motion  from  within- were  derived  from  fome-
thing elfe,  and  not  from  itfelf  ^  we  fliould  not  call  this  an
Internal  Motion,  but  an  External  Impulfe,  as  we  do  in  Bo-
dies. For  if  I  by  a  Staff'  that  is  in  my  Hand  move  a  Stone,
though  both  my  Staff  and  my  Hand  contribute  to  that  Mo-
tion more  immediately,  yet  I  my  felf  am  the  true  and  pro-
per Caufe  of  it.  What  iliail  we  fay  then  moves  Bodies  from
within  ?  What  indeed  but  the  Soul  ?  For  animated  Bodies
are  moved  from  an  internal  Principle,  and  all  Bodies  fo
moved  are  Animates.  If  then  it  be  the  Soul,  which  gives
an  interrial  Motion  to  Bodies  j  and  if  this  internal  Mover
be  felf  moving  j  it  remains,  that  the  Soul  is  a  free  and  fpon-
taneous  Mover,  the  caufe  of  Produdions  and  beginning  of

Motions,

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  221

Motions,  containing  in  her  felf  the  feveral  Patterns,  and
Meafures,  and  Forn?.s,  according  to  which  thofe  Produdi-
ons  and  Motions  are  modelled  and  proportioned.  For  i^
the  conftituent  Forms  are  not  in  Bodies  originally,  but  de-
rived immediately  from  fome  free  Agent ;  then  certainly  the
Soul  is  the  efficient  Caufe,  and  affigns  to  each  Body  its  parti-
cular Form.  Now  thefe  Forms  in  the  Soul,  are  exxeedino-
pure  and  untainted :  As  for  Example  •  Beauty  in  the  Body
ot  an  Animal  confifts  in  the  Flefli,  and  Skin,  and  Veffels,  and
Blood,  which  make  and  fill  up  this  Mafs.  Now  it  does  in-
deed, to  the  beft  of  its  power,  temper  and  adorn  thefe  things  •
but  at  the  fame  time  it  is  fullied  and  changed  by  rhem,  and  •
finks  into  their  Deformity.  But  Beauty  in  the  Soul  is  free
from  all  thefe^  Allay?,  and  is^  not  only  the  Image  and  Re-
prefentation  of  Beauty,  but  pure,  fubftantial,  unblemifhed
original  Beauty  ^  not  graceful  in  one  place,  and  not  in  an!
other,  but  perfectly  and  all  over  fo.  From  whence  it  comes
to  pafs,  that,  when  the  Soul  contemplates  its  own  or  another
Soul's  Beauty,  all  bodily  Graces  lofe  their  Charms,  and  ap-
pear defpicabie  and  deformed  in  comparifon.  And  this  in-
Itance  hints  to  us  the  Purity  of  all  other  original  Forms  as
rhey  are  in  the  Soul.  ^

Now  it  is  very  plain,  that  as  there  are  different  Bodies
moved  by  thefe  Souls,  lb  there  are  likewife  different  forts
of  Souls  which  move  them  •  Some  of  thefe  are  celeflial
and  others  fublunary :  For  it  were  intolerable  abfurdity  to
fuppofe,  that  Bodies  lefs  refined,  and  inferior  in  Dignity
and  Duration,  fliould  have  Life,  and  Souls,  and  that  thofe
above  fliould  want  both.  It  is  therefore  in  this  cafe  with
Souls,  as  with  Bodies,  the  Heavenly  ones  are  the  Caufes  of
the  fublunary  ones.  And  indeed  the  Soul  is  a  noble  and
moft  excellent  Being,  efpecially  the  heavenly  one,  advanced
by  Nature  to  the  hrft  Prerogative  of  being  a  Principle,  thoueh
not  the  Firft  and  Higheft  in  the  Order  of  Caufes  For
though  the  felf-moving  and  felf-exiftent  Being,  is  fuperiorto
thofe,  whole  Motion  and  Exiftence  is  derived  from  fome
thmg  elfe  ,•  yet  ftiU  even  This  is  capable  of  beincr  confidered
m  a  double  Capacity,  as  Aftive  and  Paffive,  as  a  Caufe  and
an  Effect ;  and  ^tis  plain,  that  Simples  muft  have  been  before
Compounds,  and  One  before  Two.

Again:  Though  this  felf-moving  Agent  depend  upon  no
other  for  its  Motion,  yet  Motion  it  hath,-  and  Motion  in-
fers Mutation:  not  an  efTential  Change  indeed,  but  fuch  as
relpefts  its  Operations;  And  neither  are  thefe  Motions  Lo-
cal

i22 ^ Epictetus's  Morals,

cal  and  Corporeal,  (for  in  that  refpeft  it  is  immovable)  but
Spiritual,  and  peculiar  to  the  Soul  i  fuch  as  we  call  Confide-
ration  and  Debate,  and  Difcerning,  and  Opinion  j  and,  ac-
cording as  flie  is  moved  by  thefe  motions,  ihe  impreffes  cor-
poreal ones  upon  the  Body.

Now  whatever  this  Change  be,  yet  that,  which  is  muta-
ble in  any  kind  or  proportion,  muft  have  fomeching  before
it  abfolutely  immutable,  that  fo  thofe  thing,<:,  which  are  mu-
table  may  ftill  be  preferved  fo. For  all  Motion  and  Mu-
tation both  in  the  higher  and  our  lower  Regions,  proceeds
from  'the  impreffion  made  by  the  Firft  Caufe. But  fince  all
things  undergo  fuch  various  Changes,  and  fince  great  mo-
tions are  violent  -, How  come  the  heavenly  Bodies  to  con-
tinue fo  much  the  fame,  in  their  Conftirution,  their  manner
of  movin'^ the  Centre  about  which  they  roul,  their  mutual
Order  and' Pofition? And  whence  is  it; that  though  the
fublunary  ones  undergo  more  vifible  and  frequent  Altera-
tions  yet  ftill  there  is  a  perpetual  Reftitution  and  conftant
Return  to  their  firft  Form  ? Thus  we  obferve  it  plainly,
in  Elements,  and  Seafons,  and  Plants,  and  Animals  :  For,
thou<'h  thefe  do  not  continue  to  be  numerically  the  iame,
as  Celeftial  Bodies  do ;  yet  they  go  round  in  a  Circle,  till
at  laft  they  return  to  the  point  from  whence  tney  let  out  at
firft Thus  Fire  is  converted  into  Air,  Air  condenfed  into
Wa"t«r Water  into  Earth,  and  then  Earth  rarified  into  Fire
affain"  '  So  the  Year  brings  us,  firft  into  Spring then  to
Summer,  after  that  Autumn,  and  at  laft  Winter  thaws  into
Spring  again. So  again.  Wheat is  turned  into  the  Stem,
then  the  Blade,  after  that  the  Ear,  and  fo  ripe  Wheat  again.
So  from  Man  proceeds  firft  the  Seminal  Principle,  after  that
the  Formation,  and  Vital  Nourifhment;  and  this  at  laft  comes
to  be  Man  again. Now  I  would  afk  any  one,  fince  Motion
is  of  itfelf  always  violent,  and  always  tending  to  Change,
how  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  the  fame  Species,  and  the  fame
Courfe  and  Conftitution  of  Nature  is  lo  exadly  preferved.
Certainly  this muft  needs  be  the  EfFed  of  fome  Superior
Caufe which  is  itfelf  Immoveable,  and  Immutable,  and  re-
mains'for  ever  in  all  Points  exadly  the  fame. For  even  in
mental  Motions,  that  Agent  which  is  uncertain  in  his  Mo-
tions, and acls  fometiraes with  Eafe,  and  Freedom, and
fpeed  •  and  fometimes  ftowly,  and  with  difficulty  mvift  needs
have  fome  other  mind  Antecedent  to  it  j  One,  whofe  Effence
and  Operations  are  always  the  fame,  who  brings  all  things
to  pafs  in  an  inftant,  and  a:  pleafure:  And  no  Man  need

1

With  S I  M p t it; I u s's  Com u ^  n  t.  2 f^

be  told,  how  much  fuch  a  Bekig;^  as  this,  which  is  fix'd  and
unchangeable,  not  only  as  to  his  own  Nature  and  Eflence,
but  as  to  his  Influence  too,  is  more  excellent  than  that,
which  is  ftill  in  motion,  and  liable  to  change,  though  thait
Motion  be  from  it  felf  alone.  And  Reafon  will  convince
us,  that  thofe  Beings,  which  are  moft  Noble  and  Excellent,
muft  needs  have  had  an  Exiftence  before  thofe  which  afc
indigent  and  depending.

Now  we  fhall  do  well,  according  to  this  Rule,  to  afcend
the  whole  Scale  of  Caufes  in  our  Thoughts,  and  try  whe-
ther we  are  able  to  find  any  Principle  mote  Excellent,  than
what  is  already  fix'd  upon;  and  if  we  can  do  fo,  then  to
drive  that  ftill  higher,  till  we  come  to  reft  at  laft  in  the
lofcieft  and  moft  majeftick  Notions  that  we  aire  capable  of
entertaining.  And  this  is  a  Courfe  we  may  boldly  take  :
hor  is  there  any  fear  of  going  too  far,  or  overflioocing  the
Mark,  by  conceiving  any  Ideas  too  great,  and  above  the
Dignity  of  this  Firft  Caufe.  For  alas !  the  boldeft  Flights,
our  Minds  can  afpire  to,  are  too  low  and  feeble  j  fo  far
from  futmounting,  that  they  fall  infinitely  fhort  of,  his  Di-
vine Perfedions.  This  Contemplation  upon  God,  as  it  is
the  moft  Excellent,  fo  it  is  the  only  One,  in  which  we  are
fure  not  to  be  guilty  of  any  Excefs,  or  over-valuing  the
Objedt.  And,  when  we  have  taken  all  imaginable  pairis  to
colled  all  the  Ideas  that  are  Great,  and  Venetable,  and  Ho-
ly, and  Independent,  and  Produdive  of  Good  ;  all  thefe
Names,  and  all  thefe  Perfedions  put  together,  do  yet  give
us  but  a  very  poor  and  imperfed  Notion  of  hirh ;  Only  he
is  gracioufly  pleafed  to  pardon  and  accept  thefej  becaufe  it
is  not  in  the  power  of  humane  Nature,  to  admit  any  higher
ind  better.

When  therefore  our  Confideration  hath  carried  lis  from
Self-moving  Beings  up  to  that  which  is  Immovable,  and  ab-
folutely  Immutable,  always  the  fame  in  itsEfTence,  its  Power,
and  its  Operations ,'  fix'd  for  ever  in  a  vaft  Eternityj  out  of
which  Time,  and  all  the  Motions  that  meafure  itj  are  ta-
ken and  derive  their  Being  ;  there  we  may  contemplate  the
Primitive  Caufes,  of  much  greater  Antiquity  than  thofe  we
obferved  in  the  Self-moving  Agent ;  and  there  we  fhall  fee
them  lie  in  all  their  Perfedions,  Immovable,  Eternal,  En-
tire, United  to  each  other  j  fo  as  chat  each  fhould  be  all  by
Virtue  of  this  intimate  Conjundion,  and  yet  the  intelledu-
al  Differences  betvt^een  them  fhould  remain  diftind  and  un-
confufed. For  what  account  can  be  given  of  fo  many  dif-

T  ferenC

224 Epictetus's  Morals,

ferent  Forms  in  the  World,  but  only,  that  the  Great  God
and  Creator  of  the  World  produces  thefe,  as  he  thinks  fie
to  feparate  and  diftinguifh  the  Caufes  of  them  in  his  own
Mind  ?  which  yet  we  mull  not  fuppofe  to  make  fuch  adual
and  incommunicable  Differences  between  the  Originals,  as
we  obferve  between  the  Copies  c^f  them  here.  Nor  are  the
Diftinftions  of  the  differing  forts  of  Souls  the  fame  with
thofe  of  Bodies.  Each  of  the  Eight  Heavens  we  fee,  and
the  Conftellations  peculiar  to  them,  are  a  part  of  the  whole
Heaven  taken  together  j  a  full  and  integral  Part,  and  yet
each  hath  its  Eflence,  and  Influences,  and  Operations,  pro-
per to  itfelf.  So  likewife  the  Forms  of  Sublunary,  as  well
as  Celeftial  Bodies,  which  are  always  the  fame,  as  that  of  a
Man,  a  Horfe,  a  Vine,  -  a  Fig-tree ;  each  of  thefe  are  per-
fed  and  fullj  though  not  in  Individuals,  as  the  Heavenly
Bodies  arcj  yet  according  to  the  Various  Species,  with
which  they  fill  the  World,  and  by  the  Effential  Differences,
which  diflinguifh  them  from  one  another.  Jufl  thus  it  is
with  thofe  more  fimple  and  Inteileftual  Confiderations,  of
which  thefe  Forms  are  compounded,  fuch  as  Effence,  Mo-
tion, Repofe,  Identity,  Beauty,  Truth,  Proportion,  and  all
thofe  other  Metaphylical  Qualities,  belonging  to  the  Cora-
pofition  of  Bodies ;  Each  of  which  is  perfecT;  in  its  own  kind,
and  hath  a  diftinft  Form  of  its  own,  and  many  Differences
peculiar  to  itfelf  only.  And  if  this  be  the  Cafe  in  fo  many
Inferior  Beings,  how  much  more  perfed  and  entire  fhall
every  thing  fubfift  in  the  great  Soul  of  the  World  }  Thefe  are
the  fpontaneous  Caufes  of  the  Bodies  here  below,  and  all
their  differences  lie  united  there.  According  to  this  Pat^
tern  all  things  here  are  formed  •  but  that  Pattern  is  abundantly
more  perfect,  and  pure,  and  exadt,  than  any  of  its  Refem-
blances.  Much  more  perfed  ftill  then  are  thefe  Divine  and
Intelledual  Forms,  than  any  Corporeal  ones,  of  which
they  are  the  great  Originals.  For  thefe  are  united,  not  by
any  mutual  Contad,  or  Continuity  of  Matter,  or  bodily
Mixture  j  but  by  the  Coalition  of  indivifible  Forms.  And
this  Union,  being  fuch  as  flill  preferves  the  Diftindions  be-
tween, them  clear  and  unconfus'd,  makes  each  of  them  per-
fed  in  itfelf,  and  qualifies  it  to  be  the  common  Principle
and  Root  of  all  the  Forms  of  its  own  Likenefs  and  Kind^
from  the  higheft  to  the  loweft.

Now  the  feveral  diflind  Principles  of  things  derive  their
Caufai  Power  and  Dignity,  from  fome  One  Siiperiour  Prin-
ciple. For  it  is  plain,  that  Many  could  not  exift  without

an

W/^  Si MPLic I us's  Comment. 225

2n  antecedent  Caufe.  For  which  Reafon  each  of  Many  is
One,  but  not  fuch  a  One,  as  was  before  thofe  Many.  For
the  One  of  Many  is  a  part  of  that  Number,  and  is  diftin-
guifhed  from  the  reft  by  fome  particular  Qualifications,
which  give  him  a  Being  apart  to  himfelf :  But  the  One  be-
fore Many  was  the  Caufe  of  thofe  Many  •  He  comprehend-
ed them  all  within  himfelf,  exifted  before  them,  is  the  Caufe
of  Caufes,  the  firft  Principle  of  all  Principles,  and  the  God
of  Gods ;  for  thus  all  the  World,  by  the  mere  Didates  of
Nature,  have  agreed  to  call  and  to  adore  him.

He  is  likewife  the  Supreme  and  Original  Goodnefs.  For
all  EfFedls  have  a  natural  defire  and  tendency  to  the  re-
fpedive  Properties  of  their  firft  Caufe.  Now  that,  which
all  things  defire,  is  Good ;  and  confequently  the  firft  Caufe
muft  be  the  Original,  and  the  Supreme  Good.  So  likewife
he  muft  be  the  Original  and  Supreme  Power  :  For  every
Caufe  hath  the  higheft  Power  in  its  own  kind,  and  confe-
quently the  firft  Caufe  of  all  muft  needs  exceed  them  all  in
JPower,  and  have  all  of  every  kind.  He  muft  needs  be  en-
dued with  perfect  Knowledge  too  ;  for  how  can  we  ima-
gine him  ignorant  of  any  thing  which  himfelf  hath  made  ?
It  is  no  lefs  evident  too  from  hence,  that  the  World,  and
all  things,  were  produced  by  him  without  any  difficulty  ac
all.  Thus,  by  confidering  particulars,  we  are  at  laft  arri-
ved to  a  general  Demonftration ;  and  from  the.  Parts  have
learnt  the  Whole,  (for  indeed  we  had  no  other  way  of
coming  to  the  Knowledge  of  it,  but  by  its  Parts,-  the  Whole
itfelf  is  too  vaft  for  our  Comprehenfion,  and  our  Under-
ftandings  are  fo  feeble,  as  often  to  miftake  a  very  fmall  part
for  the  whole)  And  the  refult  of  the  Argument  is  this.
That,  as  all  Things  and  Caufes  are  derived  at  laft  from
One  Caufe  ;  fo  they  ought  to  pay  all  manner  of  Honour
and  Adoration  to  that  Caufe.  For  this  is  the  Stem  and  Root
of  them  all ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  an  empty  Name  only,
but  there  is  a  Similitude  in  Nature  too,  by  which  every
Caufe  is  allied  to  this  Univerfal  One.  For  the  very  Power
and  Privilege  of  being  Caufes,  and  the  Honour  that  is  due
to  them,  when  compared  with  their  Effefts,  is  the  free
Gift  of  this  Supreme  Caufe,  to  all  the  inferiour  and  par-
ticular ones.

Now  if  any  Man  think  it  too  great  an  Honour  of  thefe
lower  and  limited  ones  to  be  called  Caufes^  or  Fmici^hs^  as
well  as  that  Original  and  General  one  ^  It  muft  be  owned
in  the  firft  place,  That  there  is  fome  Colour  for  this  Scru-

T  z  pie,

226 Epictetus's  Morals,

pie,  becaufe  this  feems  to  argue  an  equality  of  Caufal  PowcTj
But  then  this  may  eafily  be  remedied,  by  calling  Thefe  bare-
ly CaufeSj  and  That  the  Firft  and  Univerfal  Caufe.  And»
though  it  be-  true,  that  each  particular  Principle  is  a  firft  and
general  one,  with  refpecfc  to  others  of  lefs  extent  and  power
contained  under  it ;  (as  there  is  one  Principle  of  Graceful-
neCs  with  regard  to  the  Body,  another  with  regard  to  that
of  the  Mind,  and  a  third  of  Gracefulnefs  in  general,  which
comprehends  them  both  ,• )  yet  in  Truth,  and  ftrict  Propriety
of  Speech,  none  is  the  Firii  Principle,  but  that  which  hath
no  other  before  or  above  it  j  and  fo  likev/ife  we  may,  and
do,  fay  by  way  of  Eminence,  the  Firft  and  Supreme  Caufe,
the  Firit  and  Supreme  God,  and  the  Firft  and  Supreme
Good.

Moreover  we  muft  take  notice,  that  this  Firft  Caufe,
which  is  above  and  before  all  things,  cannot  poflibly  have
any  proper  Name,  and  fuch  as  may  give  us  an  adequate  Idea
of  his  Nature.  For  every  Name  is  given  for  Diftinftion's
fake,  and  to  exprefs  fomething  peculiar,-  but  fince  all  di-
ftinguiihing  Properties  whatever  flow  from,  and  are  in,  Him  ,*
All  we  can  do,  is  to  fum  up  the  moft  valuable  Perfedions
of  his  Creatures,  and  then  afcribe  them  to  Him.  For  this
Reafon,  as  I  hinted  at  the  beginning  of  this  Difcourfe,  the
Greeks  made  choice  of  a  Name  for  God,  derived  from  the
Heavenly  Bodies,  and  the  Swiftnefs  of  their  Motion.  And
thus  we  ftyie  him  Holy,  and  Juft,  and  Merciful,  and  Good,
and  Lord,  and  Omnipotent  j  and  fometimes  take  the  Con-
fidence to  ufe  fuch  Appellations,  as  we  think  applicable  to
fome  of  the  Sons  of  Men.

And  thus  much  fliall  fuffice  at  prefent  for  the  Firft  of  the
Three  Points  before  us ;  which  pretends  to  fhew.  That  there
are  Firft  Caufes  of  Things,  and  that  G  O  D  is  the  truly  Firft
and  Original  of  them  all.  And,  though  I  have  pafs'd  over
feveral  Steps,  which  might  have  been  taken  in  running  from
EfFefts  to  their  Caufes,  and  would  perhaps  have  made  the
Demonftration  more  gradual  and  complete  j  yet  I  muft  be
content  to  enlarge  no  farther,  as  being  duly  fenfible,  that
fome  Perfons  will  think  what  is  already  done  a  great  deal
too  much ;  and  that  thefe  Excurfions  are  by  no  means  a-
greeable  to  my  firft  Defign,  which  was  to  give  as  compendi-
ous an  Dluftration  as  I  could,  to  this  Manual  of  EpiBetus.

The  Next  Affertion  to  be  proved,  is,  That  this  God  go-
verns and  difpofes  all  Things  by  his  Providence.  Which,
though  it  be,  I  prefume,  largely  demonftrated  upon  feveral

Occa-

■:£;//;?>  Sim PLi  CI  us's  CoMMEN  T. 227

Occafions  in  the  foregoing  Chapters,  fliall  yet  be  allowed
a  parcicular  Confideracion  in  this  place.  For  fome  People
are  ready  enough  to  acknowledge  the  Being,  and  the  Per-
fcdions  of  God ;  they  ac-quiefce  in  his  Power,  and  Good-
nefs,  and  Wifdom  j  but,  as  for  the  Affairs  of  the  World,
thefe  they  do  not  fuppofe  him  to  regard  at  all,  nor  to  be  in
the  leaft  concerned  for  them  •  as  being  too  little  and  low,
and  in  no  degree  deferving  his  Care.  And  indeed  the  great-
eft  Temptation  to  this  Opinion  they  frankly  own  to  be  mi-
niftred,  by  the  very  unequal  Diftribution  of  things  here  be^
low,  and  the  monftrous  Irregularities,  which  the  Govern-
ment of  the  World  feems  chargeable  withal.  They  obfcrve
fome  exceedingly  wicked  Men  high  in  Power  and  Prefer-
ments, their  Eftates  plentiful  and  growing,  their  Health
found  and  uninterrupted  j  and  thus  they  continue  a  Profpe-
rous  and  pleafant  Life,  to  extreme  old  Age,  go  down  to
their  Graves  gently  and  peaceably,  and  frequently  leave  their
Poftericy  Heirs  of  their  good  Fortune,  and  tranfmit  their
ill-gotten  Wealth  to  fucceeding  Generations.  In  the  mean
v/hile,  many  Perfons,  as  eminently  virtuous  and  good,  are
mil'erably  opprefs'd  by  the  Infolence  and  Barbarity  of  thofe
wicked  Great  Ones  j  and  yet  for  all  this  Injuftice,  no  Ven-
geance, fo  far  as  we  can  obferve,  overtakes  the  Oppreflbr,
nor  is  there  any  Comfort  or  Reward,  to  fupport  the  Sufferer.
Thefe,  as  was  hinted  before,  are  the  Speculations,  which
give  Men  the  Confidence  to  difpute  againft  GOD.  Some
have  been  fo  far  emboldened  by  them,  as  to  deny  liis  very
Being  j  but  Others,  in  compliance  with  tl:ie  univerfal  Con-
fent  of  Mankind,  and  the  natural  Intimations  we  have  of
Him,  are  content  to  allow  his  Nature  and  Perfections,  buc
can  by  no  means  allow  his  Providence.  Efpecially,  when
it  happens  to  be  their  own  cafe,  and  their  particular  Misfor-
tunes have  given  an  edge' to  the  Objedlion,  and  made  it  en-
ter deeper  and  more  fenfibly.  For  then  they  can  by  no
means  be  perfuaded,  that  fo  great  an  Inequality  can  be  con-
fiftent  with  Providence  ,•  or  that  GOD  can  intereft  Himfelf
in  the  Management  of  the  World,  and  yet  do  a  thing  fo
unworthy  his  Juftice,  and  fo  contrary  to  his  Nature,  as  to
fuffer  infulting  Wickednefs  to  pafs  unpuniflied,  and  injured
Virtue  to  pcrifli  unredrefTed.

Now  the  firft  Return  I  ihali  make  to  this  Objedlion,  fliall
be  in  more  general  Terms,  by  dehring  the  Perfon  who  pro-
pofes  it,  to  anfwer  me  to  the  feveral  Parts  of  this  disjunctive
Argument.

T  3  If

228  EpiCTETUS's M  ORALS,

If  there  be  a  God,  and  nor  a  Providence,  then  the  Reafoa
tnuft  be,  Either  want  of  Knowledge,  and  a  due  Senfe,  that
thefe  Things  ought  to  be  his  Care  ^  Or,  if  he  knows  that
they  ought,  and  yet  does  not  make  them  fo  ;  then  this  muft
proceed,  either  from  want  of  Power,  or  want  of  Will.  For
the  want  of  Power  there  may  be  two  Caufes  affigned  ;  Ei'
ther,  that  the  Burden  and  Difficult)'  of  Governing  the  World
is  fo  great,  that  GOD  is  not  able  puntflually  to  difcharge
it ;  Or  elfe,  Thar  thefe  are  Matters  fo  very  mean  and  in-
Gonliderable,  that  they  efcape  his  Notice,  and  are  not  worth
his  Care  and  Obfervation.  If  the  Sufficiency  of  his  Power
be  granted,  and  the  Want  of  Will  be  infilled  upon,  this
may  likewife  be  imputed  to  two  Reafons :  Either,  That  he
indulges  his  own  Eafe,  and  will  not  take  the  pains  ,*  Or
elfe,  as  was  argued  before.  That  theie  Matters  are  of  fo
mean  Confideration,  that  tho'  he  could  attend  to  the  moft
minute  Circumftances  of  them,  if  be  fo  pleafed,  yet  he  does
not  do  it,  as  thinking  it  more  becoming  the  Greatnefs  of
his  Majefty,  to  flight  and  overlook  them.

This  disjundlive  Argument  being  thus  propofed  in  the  ge-
neral, the  feveral  Branches  of  it  may  be  replied  to,  as  fol-
lows :  That,  admitting  God  to  be  fuch  a  Being,  as  hath
been  here  defcribed,  perfect  in  Wifdom  and  Knowledge,
abfolute  and  uncontroulable  in  Pov/er,  and  of  Goodnefs  in-
compreheniible ;  and  withal,  the  Original  Caufe  and  Au-
thor of  all  Things,  produced  from  and  by  Himfelf  ,•  and  io
thefe  fo  many  parcels  ( as  it  were )  of  his  own  Divinity  ;
it  is  not  poflible,  Firft,  he  fhould  be  ignorant,  that  the  Pro-
duds  of  his  own  Nature,  and  the  Works  of  his  own  Hands,
require  his  Care  :  For  this  were  to  reprefent  him  mote  in-
fenfible,  than  the  wildeft  and  moll  ftupid  of  all  Brute  Beafts
(fince  even  thefe  exprefs  a  veiy  tender  regard  for  the  Crea-
tures, to  whom  they  give  Birth  and  Being.)  It  is  as  abfurd
every  whit  to  fay,  in  the  Next  place,  That  this  is  a  Care
too  weighty,  and  above  his  Power  and  Comprehenfion  :
For  how  is  it  pollible  to  conceive  an  EiFed,  greater  and
ftronger  than  the  Caufe,  to  which  it  entirely  owes  its  Prc-
dudrion  ?  And  no  lefs  fo,  Thirdly,  to  alledge,  That  thefe
Matters  are  negledled,  becaufe  too  little  and  low  to  fall
within  his  Obfervation.  For  furely,  had  they  been  fo  de-
fpicable,  he  would  never  have  created  them  at  all.  The
want  of  Will  is  no  more  the  occafion  of  fuch  a  Neglect,
than  the  want  of  Power.  To  fuppofe  this  Care  omitted,  on-
ly for  the  indulging  his  own  Eale,  and  to  avoid  the  Inter-.

ruption

with  SiMPLiciu  s's  Comment.  '229

ruptionof  his  Pleafures,  would  be  to  fix  upon  him  the  In-
firmities and  Paffions  of  Men  ;  nay,  and  fuch  as  are  peculiar
to  the  vvorft  and  mod  profligate  of  Men  too.  For  not  on-
ly human  Reafon,  but  natural  Inftind,  infufes  an  anxious
Tendernefs  into  Brutes,  fuch  as  fufFers  them  to  decline  no
pains,  for  the  Provifion  and  Support  of  their  Offspring.
Nor  can  we  in  any  reafon  imagine  fuch  want  of  Will,  from
a  Confideration  of  the  Vilenefs  of  thefe  Things  ;  fince  no-
thing certainly  is  contemptible  in  His  Eyes  who  created  it  ;
and,  whatever  he  thought  worthy  the  Honour  of  receiving
its  Exiftence  from  him,  he  cannot  think  unworthy  of  bis
Protedion  and  Care.  So  that,  when  you  have  made  the
inoft  of  this  Argument  that  it  can  poflibly  bear,  ftiil  every
part  meets  you  with  fome  intolerable  abfurdity  ^  and  no  one
of  thefe  Confiderations,  nor  all  them  put  together,  can  ever
induce  a  Man,  who  believes  that  God  created  all  thefe
Things,  to  think,  that  he  does  not  now  infpect  and  concern
himfelf  for  his  own  Productions.

But  now,  af:er  this  general  Confideration,  I  fliall  apply
myfelf  more  particularly  to  thofe,  who  either  do  really,
or  would  feem  to,  entertain  a  due  fenfc  of  the  Divine  Ma-
jefty ,'  and  in  pretended  Honour  to  that,  difparage  and  lower
the  Affairs  of  human  Life,  as  Things  below  his  Notice,
and  fuch  as  it  would  be  an  unbecoming  Condefcenfion,  a
debafing  of  Himfelf,  to  exprefs  any  Care  or  Concern  for.

And  here  I  muft  take  leave  to  vindicate  the  Honour  of
Human  Nature  ;  by  telling  the  Objedcrs,  That  Mankind
and  their  Affairs  are  no  fuch  fmall  and  contemptible  mat-
ters ,  as  they  have  thought  fit  to  reprefent  them.  For,  in
the  -firft  place,  Man  is  not  only  an  Animal,  but  a  Rational
Creature  too  ;  his  Soul  is  of  exceeding  Dignity  and  Value,
capable  of  Wifdom,  and,  which  is  more,  of  PveJigion-  and
qualified  for  advancing  the  Honour  of  God,  above  any  other
Creature  whatfoever.  There  is  no  manner  of  ground  then
for  fo  wild  a  Suppofition,  as.  That  God  fliould  undervalue
and  difregard  fo  very  confiderable  a  part  of  the  Creation  j
nor  are  the  Adlions  and  Affairs  of  Men  to  be  thouglit  de-
fpicable  neither,  fince  they  ^re  the  Refults  of  a  Thinking
Mind.

But  withal  I  muft  add,  That  they,  who  thus  leffen  Man-
kind, furnifli  us  with  another  Argument  in  behalf  of  Provi-
dence, and  cut  themlclvcs  off  from  taking  any  advantage  of
that  part  of  the  Objedlion,  which  would  Ibppofe  thefe  things
to  exceed  the  Power  of  God. For  the  more  j^ou  difparage

T  4  Mankind,

23Q  Epigtetus's  Morals,

Mankind,  the  more  eafy  ftill  you  confefs  it  to  take  care
of  them.  The  Senfes,  'tis  true,  difcern  greater  Objeds
with  more  eafe  than  fmaller  (as  we  find  plain  by  the  Pro-
portion of  thofe  that  afFe<9:  our  Sight,  and  the  Loudnefs
of  thofe  that  ftrike  our  Ears )  but  the  Faculties  of  the
Mind  and  Body,  quite  contrary,  bear  fmall  Trials,  and
mafter  them  much  more  eafily  and  fpeedily ,  than  greater.
A  Pound  weight  is  carried  with  lefs  pains  than  a  Hund^
red,  and  a  half  Acre  of  Ground  ploughed  fooner  and  eafier
than  an  Acre  j  fo  that,  by  Parity  of  Reafon,  the  lefs  Man-
Mnd  is  reprefented,  the  lefs  troublefome  you  make  the  Go-
vernment and  Care  of  them  to  be.

Again :  They  who  deny.  That  Providence  defcends  to
every  little  Nicety  ( as  they  call  it )  do  yet  acknowledge
a  Superintendence  over  the  whole  World  in  general.  But
^hat  Providence  is  that,  which  takes  care  of  the  Whole,
and  not  of  its  Parts  ?  Ac  this  rate,  we  fhall  imagine  the
Almighty  God  to  come  behind  what  almofl  every  Art  and  -
Science  among  Men  pretends  to.  For  the  "hyfician,  whofe
Profeflion  obliges  him  to  ftudy  the  Diftempers  and  the  Cure
of  the  whole  Body,  does  not  think  himfelf  at  liberty  to
negled  the  feveral  Parts;  and  the  fame  rnay  be  rai4  of  the
Mafter  of  a  Family,  the  Commander  of  an  Army,  and
the  Civil  Magiilrate  in  a  State.  Which  way  indeed  is  it;
pofilble  to  preferve  the  Whole  frotn  ruin,  but  by  con-
fulting  the  Safety  of  the  Parts,  of  which  it  is  compound-
ed ?  Far  be  it  therefore  from  us  to  imagine,  that  J^lmigh-
ty  God  ihould  betray  that  want  of  Skill  and  Induftry,
which  feeble  Men  attain  to.  He  takes  care  of  the  Whole,
and  the  feveral  Parts  of  it,  at  the  fame  time,  and  with  the
fame  trouble.  And  this  moil  wifely,  for  the  fake  of  the
Parts  themfelves,  in  a  great  meafure  j  but  much  more,
with  a  defign  to  promote  the  Good  of  the  Whole.  Where-
as, We  poor  unthinking  Mortals  are  often  tempted  to  Im-
patience, by  particular  and  private  Misfortunes,  not  duly
confidering,  how  far  thefe  contribute  to  the  Benefit  of  the
Whole. ■  ' ' ' ■ '

Now  if  any  Man  fhall  imagine  the  Difpofal  of  bumaii
Affairs  to  be  a  Bufmefs  of  great  Intricacy,  and  Trouble,
and  Confufion  j  and  confequently  that  it  muft  needs  per-
plex the  Almighty,  diftrad  his  Mind,  and  diflurb  his  Hap-
pineis  :  This  Perfon  muft  be  taught  to  make  a  difference,
between  the  Frailties  of  a  Man  and  the  Perfeftions  of  a
God. For  it  is  plain,  all  this  Objedlion  is  built  upo?,  ^  '^^^^

Ims'

nvith  SiMPLicius's  Comment,  f^i

Imagination,  that  God  is  fuch  a  Supervifor  as  one  of  Us  ■
and  that  He  is  under  the  fame  neceffity  of  attending  every
part  of  his  Charge  diftinctly,  and  proceeding  by  fingle  and
fubfequent  Adions  j  fo  that,  while  he  is  employed  in  one
Affair,  it  is  not  poflible  for  him  to  apply  his  mind  to  any
thing  elfe.

Methinks  it  were  eafy  for  fuch  a  Perfon  to  reflect,  bow
Lawgivers  and  Princes  manage  themfelves  upon  thefe  oc-
caiions.  They  ordain  wife  and  convenient  Laws,  and
affign  particularly,  what  Rewards  fhall  be  given  to  Merit
and  Virtue  ;  what  Punishments  inflicfted  upon  Vice  and
Difobedience ;  what  Satisfadion  made  for  Injuries,  and
the  like.  And  thefe  Laws  they  contrive  fo,  as  to  extend
even  to  the  fmalleft  matters,  fo  far  as  they  can  forefee
and  provide  againft  them.  When  this  is  done,  they  do  not
give  themfelves  the  trouble  of  v/atching  and  prying  into
every  Corner ;  they  live  and  enjoy  their  Eafe  as  they  ufed
to  do  ,•  and  the  Care  they  take  of  the  State  is  not  feen  in
perpetual  Confulion  and  Difquiet  of  Heart,  but  in  the  Efta-
blifhment  and  Obfervation  of  thefe  v/holefome  Conftituti-
ons.  Now,  if  Men  can  have  fo  general  an  Influence,  and
fo  efFedtual  too,  without  perfonal  Anxiety  j  much  more
mufl:  we  confefs  it  poflfible  for  God.  He  founded  the  World,
and  formed  every  Creature  in  it,  and  fixed  wife  Laws  for
the  Government  of  them  all  :  He  confidered,  that  our
A(flions  are  fuch  as  are  proper  to  Souls  ;  that  there  is  a
great  mixture  of  Virtue  and  Vice  in  them,  and,  according
as  each  Perfon  exceeds  in  the  one  or  the  other  of  thefe,  he
allots  his  Punifliment,  and  his  Portion.  Some  he  place?
more  commodioufly,  and  others  lefs  fo  ;  and  ranks  us  ac-
cording to  our  Deferts  ;  thofe  that  have  done  well,  wiih
good,  and  thofe  'that  have  done  ill,  with  worfe  Souls  ;
and  hath  determined  too,  what  each  of  thefe  fhall  do  to
one  another,  and  fuffer  from  one  another.  Now  herein  is
the  Juflice  of  God  vindicated,  that  the  Fundamental  Cau  e
of  all  thefe  different  Fates,  is  abfolutely  left  to  our  owa
difpofal.  For  it  is  in  our  Power,  what  fort  of  Perfons  v/e
will  bej  and  we  may  make  ourfelves  fuch  as  we  choofe,
and  relblve  to  be,  by  the  native  Liberty  of  our  Minds,  and
by  having  Virtue  and  Vice  properly  and  entirely  the  Obje<ft
of  our  own  Choice.  And  befides  this,  God  hath  appointed
over  Men  particular  Guardian  Spirits,  which  nicely  obfervc
the  fmalleft  Adions,  and  are  exad  in  fuch  Retribuiions,  as
each  Man's  Behaviour  deferves.

Now

*1  "^

32 Epictetus's  Morals,

Now  in  this,  the  Care  of  God  differs  from  that  of  Men  i
That  His  Providence  did  not  fatisfy  itfelf,  to  conftitute
Things  in  good  Order  at  the  beginning,  and  afterwards  dif-
penfe  with  any  farther  Concern  about  them ;  nor  doth  ir  ceafe
from  afting,  as  the  Law-giver  in  the  State  was  fuppofed  to
do.  For  indeed,  properly  fpeaicing,  the  Goodnefs  of  God
knows  no  Beginning  j  nor  is  there  any  time  when  it  was
not,  and  when  it  did  not  communicate  irfelf,  and  make  all
Things  good  from  its  own  exuberant  Fulnefs.  Nor  are  we
to  fuppofe,  that  this  Infpedion  requires  any  laborious  atten-
dance, as  if  God  were  fometimes  prefent,  and  fometimes
abfent  j  for  thefe  are  fuch  Confinements,  as  Bodies  and  Mat-
ter only  are  fubjed  to ;  whereas  He  is  prefent  at  all  times,
in  all  places,  with,  and  above,  all  Things  And  the  Pro-
vidence of  this  mighty  Being,  thus  Eternal  and  Omnipre-
ient,  and  infinitely  Good,  finds  no  difficulty  in  expanding
itfelf,  and  imparting  its  Influences  to  every  Creature,  as  the
Dignity  of  their  Nature,  and  the  Deferrs  of  each  Individu-
al, require.  And  as  the  Sun  fheds  his  Rays  of  Light  upon
the  whole  World,  and  every  thing  partakes  of  them  with
different  EfFedls :  Some  things  are  made  capable  of  feeing,
others  of  being  feen  j  Some  bloiTom  and  bud,  others  are
impregnated  and  multiply  ,•  Som,e  fhew  black  to  the  Eye,  and
others  white  j  Some  grow  ftiff  and  hard,  others  are  melted
and  foftned ;  and  all  this  by  the  fame  Light  and  the  fame
Heat,  adapting  itfelf  to  the  feveral  Capacities  and  Difpofi-
tions  of  the  Things  upon  which  it  falls :  and  that  too,  with-
out any  Trouble  to  the  Sun,  or  the  leaft  Interruption  to
his  Happinefs  :  So  the  Goodnefs  of  GOD,  whofe  Gift:
and  WorkmanfJiip  that  very  Sun  is,  doth  moftafifurediy  know
how  to  impart  itfelf  to  every  Creature,  in  fuch  proportions,
as  the  Neceffities  of  each  require,  or  the  Condition  of.  its
Nature  will  admit,  much  more  eaiily,  than  any  Creature  of
the  moft  general  Influence  can  do.  And  that,  without
creating  any  Perplexity  to  Almighty  GOD,  or  giving  the
leafl:  difturbance  to  his  Blifs,  by  fo  extcnfive  a  Care.  For  God
is  not  like  the  Works  of  Nature,  which  are  afted  upon  at
the  fame  time  they  ad,  and  fo  fpend  themfelves ;  nor  is  his
Goodnefs  any  acquired  Perfedion,  that  it  fhould  tire  and
be  exhaufl:ed,  but  it  is  natufal  and  unbounded.  Nor  is  he
confin'd  to  one  Angle  Adtionata  time,  (as  we  find  our  feeble
Minds  are)  that  he  fliould  not  be  able  to  comprehend  or  ma-
nage fo  great  a  variety  of  Affairs,  and  yet  enjoy  Himfelf  in
the  Contemplation  of  that  Perfed  and  Supreme  Good,  which

.  V  ■  is

moith  S I MPLi  cius's  Comment.  233

is  infinirely  more  excellent,  and  above  the  World.  For,  if
when  the  Soul  of  Man  afpires  to  Perfection,  and  foars  up
to  God,  it  be  faid  to  converfe  and  dwell  on  high,  and  to
difpofe  and  govern  the  World  j  How  much  more  juft  and
eafy  is  it  to  believe,  That  the  Author  and  Infufer  of  that
Soul  muft  needs,  without  any  manner  of  difficulty  or  di-
ftradion,  guide  and  govern  that  Univerfe,  which  himfelf  has
form'd.

Now,  as  to  that  Objerlion  of  the  amazing  Inequality  in
the  Diltribution  of  the  Things  of  this  World,  I  can  never
yield,  That  the  Profperity  of  III  Men  or  the  Affliftions  of
the  Good,  are  of  ftrength  {lifficient  to  lliake  our  Belief  of
Providence.  For,  in  the  firft  place,  we  wholly  miftake  the
matter ;  and  it  is  a  very  wrong  Notion  which  generally  pre-
vails. Of  Wicked  Men  being  happy,  and  Good  Men  mi-
ferable.  If  this  obtain  fcill  with  my  Readers,  it  is  to  very
little  purpofe,  that  fuch  pains  have  been  taken  to  prove  that
Neceffary  Truth,  That  the  Good  Man  is  one,  who  places
all  human  Happinefs  and  Mifery  in  the  Freedom  of  his
-own  Mind,  and  the  direfting  this  aright  to  fuch  Objeds,  as
fall  within  the  compafs  of  his  own  Power  and  Choice  ■  and,
That  he  who  does  fo,  can  never  be  difappointed  in  his  De-
fires,  nor  opprefTed  by  his  Fears ;  and  confequently  can  ne-
ver have  any  Unhappinefs  befal  him.  For  the  Objedors
themfelves  agree  with  us  in  the  Notion  of  Evil,  That  it  is
the  Difappointment  of  fome  Defire,  or  the  Falling  into
fomething  that  we  fear.  So  that,  even  according  to  their
own  Rule,  the  Good  Man  can  never  be  wretched,  or  lie
under  any  misfortune  which  can  make  him  unhappy,  conii-
der'd  as  a  Man.

On  the  other  fide.  All  Men  agree  in  their  Notions  of  Wick-
ed Men,  that  they  pervert  the  Courfe  and  Defign  of  Nature,
and  do  not  live  as  becomes  Men.  They  forget  the  Privilege
God  hath  given  them,  and  neglefl  the  Ufe  and  Improvement
of  that  Liberty,  which  is  the  dillinguilTiing  Charader  and  Pre-
rogative of  Human  Nature;  they  look  for  Happinefs  from
external  Advantages,  fuch  as  Health,  and  Riches,  and  Honour,
and  Power,  and  High  Birth,  and  fenfual  Enjoyments,  and  the
like ;  and  the  want  of  thefe  they  efteem  Mifery :  for  which
Reafon,  all  their  defires  are  fix'd  upon  thefe  imaginary  Good
Things,  and  all  their  Fears  and  Averfions  upon  the  contrary
Evil  Ones.  Now  it  is  not  poffible  for  thefe  outward  Things
always  to  anfwer  a  man's  Wifhes  and  Endeavours  j  Difap-
pointed ExpeclationSj and  furprifing  Calamities  there  muft

and

234  Epictetus's  Morals,

and  will  be;  and  therefore  thefe  men  cannot  but  be  unhap-
py, by  the  Confeilion  of  the  Obje<5tors  themfeJves,  And
the  very  Perfons  concern'd,  if  they  would  but  give  them-
felves  leave  to  be  feriofis,  and  reflect  cooly  and  impartially
upon  the  many  Accidents  of  this  kind  which  difquiet  them,
muft  needs  be  driven  to  a  ^enie  and  acknowledgment  of  their
own  Mifcry.

Bat,  if  this  do  not  fatisfy,  bcjcaufe  they  are  plainly  prof-
psrous,  and  fucceed  above  other  men,  in  the  Advantages  and
Interefts  of  the  World  j  I  fliall  make  no  fcruple  to  afBrm,
That  thefe  Succefifes  do  but  add  to  their  Unhappinefs.  For
they  only  put  them  upon  greater  Extravagancies,  and  are  fo
many  frefh  Temptations  to  commit  more  Violence,  and  caft
a  greater  Blemi/h  upon  Humane  Nature.  And  this,  I  think,
mutt  be  admitted  for  an  unconteftable  Truth,  That  what-
ever is  contrary  to  Nature  and  Duty,  mull  of  neceflity  be
both  a  Fault,  and  a  Misfortune.

Now  becauie  our  Auditors  are  to  be  dealt  with,  not  only
by  dry  Demonftrations,  but  by  moving  and  gentle  Perfua-
lions,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  win  them  over  to  this  Opinion,
of  the  oalj  feeming  Good  and  Evil  in  all  external  Accidents
and  Advantages,  by  reminding  them  of  what  was  faid  be-
fore ;  that  the  things  we  commonly  call  Evil,  are  not  pro-
perly fo,  notwithftanding  the  Troubles  and  UneafinefTes  at-
tending them ;  and  that  v/hat  paffes  for  Good  in  the  Opi-
nion of  the  World,  is  very  far  from  being  fuch,  notwith-
ilanding  all  its  outward  Gaities  and  deluding  Appearances.
Sometimes  what  we  call  Evils,  are  made  ufe  of  to  excel-
lent purpofes;  they  are  either  fliarp  Remedies  to  cure  a  di-
ftemper'd  Mind,  or  wholefome  Trials  to  exercife  a  found
Virtue.  And  v/hat  we  term  Good  Things,  are  difpofed  fo,
as  to  illuftrate  the  Juftice  of  God ;  and  are  proportioned  to
the  prefent  Occafions,  or  to  the  Deferts,  of  the  Perfons  on
whom  they  are  bellowed,  and  from  whom  they  are  taken
away.  Thus  Riches  are  given  to  a  wife  and  good  man,  both
for  his  own  eafe  and  comfortable  Enjoyment,  and  alfo  to  fur-
nifli  him  with  larger  Abilities  of  doing  good,  and  Opportuni-
ties to  exercife  a  generous  and  charitable  Difpofition.  But  the
very  fame  Things  to  the  vicious  man  are  fent  as  a  Curfe,
and  a  Punifliment  :  For  the  covetous  and  worldly  man
makes  his  Life  a  perpetual  Drudgery  and  Toil ;  he  enflaves
himfelf  to  Anxiety,  and  Anguifh,  and  continual  Fear,-  and
never  enjoys  the  Plenty  he  hath  taken  fuch  pains  to  procure.
And  this  indeed  is  a  moll  jufl  and  a  mofl  ingenious  Revenge

upon

with  SiMPLicius's  Com  me  n  t. 235

upon  them,  tkat  they  ihould  thus  prove  their  own  Tormen-
tors.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Luxurious  and  Exrrava^nt  are
poorer  than  the  very  Beggars  in  the  Streets.  To  many  of
thefe  their  Riches  are  their  Ruin,  by  tempting  ihem  to  Ex-
c&Q^ts^  and  running  them  upon  dangerous  and  deftruftive
Courfes.  So  that  all  the  Advantage  they  make  of  them,  is
but  to  oTow  the  worle,  and  fee  themfelves  farther  off  from
all  fuch  Improvements,  and  fuch  a  Converfation,  as  befits
the  Dignity  of  Humane  Nature,  and  is  agreeable  to  the
Dictates  of  Reafon.  Thus  Health  and  Power,  and  Prefer-
ments, very  often  turn  to  the  Prejudice  of  vicious  Men.
And  thefe  are  fent,  partly  in  vengeance  to  fcourge  them  for
their  pall  Follies,  and  partly  as  Chaftifements  to  reduce
them ;  that  when  they  have  given  a  Swing  to  their  Appetites,
and  gorg'd  themfelves  with  criminal  Pleafures,  they  may  at
laft  grow  lick  of  them,  throw  off  their  ill  Humours,  and  be-
come reform'd  Men.  For  the  Tendernefs  of  that  Good  Pro-
vidence, which  is  fo  affiduous  in  promoting  the  True  Hap-
pinefs  of  Souls,  is  not  fo  much  to  reftrain  us  from  the  grofs
and  outward  ads  of  Sin,  and  from  gratifying  our  Appetites,
by  Fear  or  any  other  fuch  curbing  Paffions  which  ufe  to  give
check  to  them ;  but  rather  to  fubdue  the  Appetite  itfelf,  and
utterly  waft  and  deftroy  all  the  evil  Habits,  that  had  gain'd  up-
on us  by  the  frequent  indulging  of  it  before.  TheSubftance
of  what  I  have  hinted  here,  was  difcourfed  more  largely  in
fome  foregoing  Chapters,  ( Ch.  XIII.  and  XXXIV. )  and
there,  if  the  Reader  think  fir,  he  may  refrefli  his  Memory.
And  fo  much  for  my  Second  Argument,  in  reply  to  thofe
who  deny  a  Providence,  and  would  make  us  believe,  that
GOD  hath  no  Hand  at  all  in  the  Government  and  Difpofal
of  things  here  below.

And  now,  as  the  old  Proverb  hath  it.  The  *  Third  Cup  t9
Jove,  and  thm  ive  have  done  •  for  there  remains  only  One  Ob-
je<flion  more  to  be  refuted ;  which,  though  it  own  both  God
and  his  Providence,  yet  does  not  profefs  itfelf  faiisfied  with
the  Juftice  of  either,  in  the  Government  of  the  World.

They  reprefent  Almighty  God,  as  one  capable  of  being
perverted  and  byaffed  v/ich  Gifts  and  Oblations.  And  in-
deed it  is  a  modern,  and  but  too  vulgar  Imagination,  that
the  moft  greedy  Extortioner,  and  the  mercilefs  Oppreflbr,

*  Thii  it  an  Exprejion  tairn  from  the  Cutom  of  the  Olyinpick  Entertainmentt,
and  other  publi:!'  Feajis, See  Erai'm.  Adig.  and  Pindar.  Ifthm.  Ilyran.  6.

who

23^  Epictetus's  Morals,

who  minds  nothing  but  his  own  Intereft,  and  makes,  or  re-
gards, no  difference  between  Right  and  Wrong,  if  he  do  but
expend  a  very  inconfiderable  part  of  his  ill-begotten  Wealth
upon  pious  Ufes ;  and  diftribute  a  piece  of  money  among  thofe
v/ho  pretend  it  is  their  Bufinefs  to  addrefs  to  the  Gods,  and
that  they  have  a  fecret  Faculty  o?  inclining  their  Favour ;
then  all  fiiall  be  v/ell  ^  they  may  perfift  in  their  Wickednefs
fecurely,  and  fliall  never  be  called  to  account  for  it.  And
ibme  indeed  there  are,  who  both  entertain  thefe  Opinions
without  any  Judgment,  and  declare  without  any  due  Cau-
tion, that  they  think  it  no  Reflexion  upon  the  Goodnefs  of
God,  that  he  fhould  connive  at  the  Wickednefs  of  Men  and
pafs  it  by  patiently.

.  What  Anfwer  i]iaU  we  find  now  to  refute  this  Error  ?  The
beft  courfe  will  be  to  take  it  in  pieces ;  and,  becaufe  it  refers
both  ta  the  Perfon  that  does,  and  to  him  that  receives  the
Injury,  to  examine  of  what  Confequence  this  Remif2on  and
Indulgence  would  be  to  both,  and  how  each  of  them  are  af-
fefted  and  concerned  in  it.

Now,  if  it  be  for  the  Intereft  and  real  Advantage  of  the
wicked  and  unjuft  Perfon,  to  have  his  vicious  Courfes  con-
nived at,  and  that  no  Punifhment  at  all  Ihould  be  infii(fted
for  them ;  then  it  is  poffible  God  may  remit  and  wink  at
them,  becaufe  it  is  moll  certain,  that  every  good  thing,  of
what,  kind  foever  it  be,  is  derived  down  from  that  Original
Source  of  all  Goodnefs,  upon  his  Creatures  here  below.
But  if  this  would  really  be  the  worft  and  moft  deftrudive  of
all  Evils,  to  have  their  Wickednefs  thus  affifted  and  encou-
raged ,•  if  Impunity  would  only  harden  them  in  YicCy  and
render  them  but  io  much  more  bold  and  unreclaimable  ,■
then  how  can  we  admit  fo  abfurd  a  thought,  as  that  God  Ihould
become  accefTary  to  all  this  Mifchief,  who  hath  been  fo  large-
ly and  clearly  proved,  to  have  no  hand  at  ail  in  bringing  any
of  our  Evils  upon  us?

Now  Injuftice,  and  Avarice,  and  Intemperance,  and  In-
juries, and  Extravagancies  of  all  forts,  are  but  fo  many  Cor-
ruptions and  Indifpofitions  of  the  Mind  ;  they  are  contrary
to  Nature,  and  no  better  than  the  Difeafes  and  Scandals,  as
well  as  the  Vices,  of  Mankind.  If  God  therefore  contri-
bute to  the  growth  of  thefe  Diftemp>ers,  if  he  add  to  their
Malignity,  and  let  them  go  on  till  they  are  paft  all  Cure  j
the  Mifery  and  Corruption  will  be  charged  upon  him.  But
if  Prefencs  and  Bribes  prevail  upon  him  to  do  fo  j  this  is  fome-
thing  more  vile  and  mercenary,  than  even  the  ordinary  fort

of

W/-&'SiMPLicius*3  Comment. 257

of  Men,  who  can  boaft  of  no  remarkable  Virtue,  will  ftoop
to.  For,  Who  of  a  moderate  Underftanding,  and  com-
mon Honefty,  will  fufFer  his  Charge  toperiih  for  Hircj  Will
any  tolerable  Phyfician,  when  he  finds  his  Patient  furfeited,
for  the  fake  of  a  good  Fee,  or  the  Interceffion  either  of  his
Friends,  or  himfelf,  permit  him  to  eat  and  drink  freely  of
thofe  very  things  which  brought  the  Diftemper  ?  nay,  which
is  more,  Will  he  not  only  permit,  but  procure  them,  and
aflift  the  fick  perfon  in  that  which  muft  prove  his  certain
Ruin  ?  So  far  from  it,  that  if  he  at  all  anfwer  the  Charadler
and  Duty  of  his  Profeffion,  he  will  let  nothing  divert  him
from  the  moft  ungrateful  Remedies,  and  painful  Applications,
when  the  State  of  the  Diftemper  requires  them.  Since  then
the  angry  Juftice  of  God,  and  the  avenging  Difpenfations  of
Providence,  have  been  fo  fully  fhewn,  to  carry  in  them  the
Nature  and  Defign  of  Medicines,  to  diftempered  Mankind ;
how  can  we  fuppofe  this  great  Phyfician  of  Souls,  lefs  care-
ful of  our  Recovery,  than  we  think  ourfelves  obliged  to  be
to  one  another  ?

But  the  Perfons,  who  are  opprefs'd  by  Injuftice,  are  no
lefs  the  Objed  of  his  Providence,  than  thofe  who  commie
it ;  and  therefore  we  fliall  do  well  to  examine  a  little  how
this  eafinefs  to  wicked  Men,  and  this  affifting  and  encourag-
ing their  Villanies,  for  the  fake  of  their  Oblations,  can  be
reconciled  with  his  Tendernefs  and  Care  for  the  innocens
Sufferers.  What  Opinion  mufl  we  needs  have  of  that  Ge-
neral, who  would  fuffer  himfelf  to  be  corrupted  by  the
Enemy,  and  deliver  up  his  Camp  and  whole  Army  for  Re-
ward ?  Or  what  Shepherd  would  be  fo  treacherous  to  his
Flock  >  Shepherd  did  I  fay  ?  nay,  What  Shepherd's  Curs,
when  they  _have  recovered  a  part  of  their  Flock  from  the
Wolves,  will  fit  down  contentedly,  and  fee  the  refl  devoured  ?
And  then  fure  this  part  of  the  Argument  needs  no  farther
Confutation,  than  only  to  refledl,  what  monftrous  Impiety
that  Opinion  is  guilty  of,  which  taxes  God  with  fuch  Infide-
hty,  and  Bafenefs  to  his  Chaise,  as  not  Men  only,  but  even
brute  Beafts,  difdain  and  abhor.

Indeed  if  we  confider  the  thing  only  in  the  general,  it  is
moft  irrational  to  conceive,  that  the  Offerings  of  wicked
Men  Ihould  ever  prevail  upon  God,  or  incline  him  to  be
propitious  at  all.  'Tis  true,  he  gracioufly  accepts  thofe  of  the
Pious  and  Upright :  Not  for  any  refpedt  to  the  Gifts  them-
felves,  or  any  occafion  he  hath  for  them ;  but  for  the  fake
of  the  Votaries,  who,  when  they  thus  apply, defire  that,

not

238 Epictetus's  Morals,

not  only  their  Minds,  but  their  Eftates,  and  all  they  pofTefs,
may  be  confecrated  to  his  Ufe  and  Service.  There  is  like-
wife  no  doubt  to  be  made,  but  the  matter  may  be  fo  order'd,
as  even  to  render  the  Gifts  and  Prayers  of  wicked  men
acceptable  to  him ;  that  is,  provided  they  come  with  a  pur-
pofe  of  growing  better,  and  beg  to  be  reformed  by  his  Pu-
nifiiments,  and  be  ready  to  fubrait  to  the  Methods  of  their
Cure.  But  if  the  fecret  and  true  Intent  of  their  Devotions
be  only  to  avert  his  Judgments,  and  to  confirm  themfelves
in  V^ice,  it  is  moft  abfurd  to  fuppofe,  they  can  ever  be  well
received  upon  thefe  Terms.  For,  though  there  were  no
Guilt  to  be  laid  to  their  Charge,  yet  this  alone  were  fufE-
cienc  to.  render  them  abominable  in  the  Sight  of  God,  That
they  fuppofe  him  a  Bafe  and  Mercenary  Being,  and  hope  by
Bribery  to  foften  his  provoked  juftice,  and  to  buy  off  their
own  Punifhment.

And  now  I  exped  to  have  the  Queftion  put,  From  whence
this  Notion  of  God,  pardoning  mens  Sins,  came  to  be  fo
univerfally  received ;  and  what  Foundation  there  is  for  fay-
ing, and  believing,  as  almoft  every  body  does.  That  Prayers,
and  Alms,  and  the  like,  have  a  power  to  make  God  flexible
and  propitious.  For  fure  the  World  hath  not  taken  all  this
upon  Truft;  and  yet  they  are  much  to  blame,  to  lay  that
ftrefs  they  do  upon  it,  and  to  propagate  this  Opinion  with
fo  much  Confidence,  if  it  be  unfafe,  and  impious  to  be  be-
lieved, that  God  forgives  wicked  Men,  and  paffes  by  their
Offences,  without  punifhing  them,  as  they  have  deferved.

In  order  to  fatisfy  this  Doubt,  we  muft  obferve.  That,
where  men  are  duly  fenfible  of  their  Faults,  and  heartily  pe-
nitent for  them,  thefe  things  contribute  very  much  to  their
Converfion,  as  being  decent  and  proper  Teftimonies  of  a
iincere  Repentance.  The  Bending  of  the  Knees,  and  Bo-
dily Proftrations,  exprefs  the  Sorrows  and  Submiffions  of  a
dejeded  Soul,-  and  the  Offering  up  their  Goods,  or  lay-
ing them  out  to  Pious  and  Charitable  Purpofes,  fuch  as  God
peculiarly  regards  and  delights  in,  proclaims,  how  entirely
their  Minds,  and  Perfons,  and  all  they  have  are  devoted  to
Him.

For  when  we  are  told.  That  our  Sins  turn  God's  Face
away  from  us.  That  he  is  angry  at  them,  and  leaves,  or  for-
fakes  us,  upon  the  Provocation  they  give  him ;  Thefe  Ex-
preffions  muft  not  be  taken  in  a  drift  and  literal  Senfe.  They
fpeak  the  Paflions  and  Infirmities  of  Creatures,  fuch  as  car-
ry no  Congruity  with  the  Divine  Nature,  and  its  immutable

Happinefs

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  239

Happinefs  and  Perfections.  But  the  Truth  is,  we  deprave
and  debafe  ourfelves,  by  forfaking  the  Didlares  of  Nature
and  Reafon  •  we  deface  the  Image  of  the  Divinity  in  our
Souls,  and  by  our  Wickednefs  and  Folly,  fall  off,  and  with-
draw ourfelves  from  him.  Not  that  we  can  run  away  from
that  watchful  Eye  to  which  all  things  are  prefent ;  but  we
change  the  manner  of  its  Influences  upon  us,  and  expofe
ourfelves  to  a  different  fort  of  Treatment ;  for  now  we  have
brought  a  Difeafe  upon  our  Souls,  and  made  Severity  and  a
harflier  Providence  neceflary  for  our  Cure.

Bur, when we  recover  the  foundnefe  and  perfeftion  of
our  Nature,  and  make  nearer  Approaches  to  God,  by  reftor-
ing  that  Image  and  Charafter  of  his  Divinity  in  U5,  which
confifts  in  the  imitation  of  his  Juftice,  and  Holinefs, and
Wiidom  •  we  then  return,  and  are  admitted  to  a  more  ea-
fy  kzctii. We  renew our  Acquaintance,  and  contrad:  a
fort  of  frefh  Affinity  with  him. And  this  Return  of  Ours
to  God,  we  often  exprefs  in  fuch  Terms,  as  if  it  were  His
Return  to  us  j  Juft  as  men  at  Sea,  who  when  their  Cable  is
faftned  to  a  Rock, while  they  draw themfelves  and  their
Veffel  to  the  Rock,  are  fo  idle  as  to  imagine,  that  they  draw
the  Rock  to  Them. And  this  is  our  Cafe  ;  Repentance,  and
Devotion, and  Works  of  Piety  and Charity,  anfwer ex-
adly  to  that  Cable  : For  thefe  things  are  the  Inftruments  of
our  Converfation,  and  the  bell  Proofs  of  its  being  unaffedted
and  real : When  v/e  cherifh  and  fupport,  either  the  Perfons
themfelves  who  have  fuffered  by  our  Oppreffion,  or  our  In-
folence,  or  our  Slanders ;  Or,  if  that  cannot  be,  make  Sa-
tisfadion  to  their  Families,  and  relieve  thofe  that  are  in  ne-
cefTity  ,•  When  we  hate  Injuftice,  V/hen  we  decline  the  Con-
verfation of  naughty  Men, and  become  the  Companions
and  Friends  of  the  Wife  and  Virtuous  j and  when  we  are
full  of  Indignation  againft  ourfelves,  and  content  to  turn  our
own Punifhers. And  if  we  would  be  throughly  reformed
indeed,  we  muft  perfevere  in  this  method,  not  fuffer  our  Re-
folutions  to  be  fickle  and  uncertain, or  any  IntermifCons
to  cool  our  zeal  j  till  we  have  aded  a  fuiKcient  Revenge  up-
on ourfelves,  and  perfected  the  Defign  of  our  Amendment.
And  there  is  not,  there  cannot  be,  any  other  certain  Tefti-
mony  of  a  fincere  and  perfedl  Repentance,  but  only  this  One,
That  of  forfaking  our  Sins,  and  doing  fo  no  more. Nay,  I
nuift  add  too.  The  not  allowing  ourfelves  in  any  lefe  or  low-
er degrees  of  Guilt,  or  complying  with  the  Temptations  and
Tendencies  toward  them. For  in  this  Cafe  we  mufl  behave

U  ourfelves

s^4^ Epictetus's  Morals,

ourfelves  like  Sailors,  who  fteer  their  Courfe  beyond  the
Point  they  would  make,  and  bear  dov/n  towards  One  fide,
when  they  v/ould  crofs  over  to  the  Other.

Now  as  to  the  EflFiCacy  of  Repentance^  whether  it  be  of
Merit  and  Power  enough  to  reftore  the  Soul  to  its  Primitive
Purity  j  this,  I  think,  can  admit  of  no  Difpute,  when  it  is
Confidered,  That  Almighty  God  does  in  all  his  Difpenfati-
ons  propofe  it  as  his  End,  and  always  clesnfe  and  reform  us
by  this  Means.  For  what  other  account  can  be  given  of  all
the  Punifhments,  and  thofe  dire  EfFecfts  of  his  Vengeance  up-
on us,  both  in  this,  and  the  next  World,  but  only,  that  they
are  defigned  to  change  the  Soul,  by  the  Suffering  and  Tor-
tures inflicted  upon  •  that  a  Senfe  of  her  own  Wretched-
nefs  may  provoke  her  to  a  juft  Detefbation  of  the  Vices  that
were  the  wicked  Caufe  of  it ;  and  may  inflame  her  with  a  more
fervent  Love,  and  impatient  Defire  of  Virtue  ?  There  is  in-
deed fomerhing  very  inftrudling  in  Aflflidlion,  and  a  ib-ange
Aptnefs  in  the  rational  Soul,  to  hearken  to  it,  and  be  taught
by  it.  But  a  Man  is  never  fo  well  difpofed  to  learn,  nor
makes  fuch  quick  and  fure  Progrefs,  as  when  he  exercifes
this  Difcipline  upon  himfelf.  Becaufe  then  the  very  Punifli-
ment  is  voluntary,  and  ihe  Improvement  is  much  more  like-
ly to  be  fo.  And  indeed,  confidering  that  Pleafure  and  fen-
fual  Profpefts  tempt  Men  to  offend  j  the  Rule  of  curing  DiC-
eafes  by  their  Contraries,  makes  Sorrow  and  Pain  abfolutely
neceflary,  to  rem.ove  this  Sickneis  of  the  Mind,  and  expel  the
Humours  Vvhich  brought  it  upon  us.  And  Repentance  wants
no  Quahfications  of  this  kind ;  for  the  truly  penitent  Perfon
chaftifes  himfelf  wi:h  the  Scourge  of  a  guilty  Confcience  j
and  feels  fuch  bitter  Remorfe,  and  Anguifli  of  Heart,  as  are
infinitely  fharp  and  ftinging,  and  more  inconfolable,  than
any  Smart  or  bodily  Pain  can  poffibly  be.

Thus  much  in  oppcfition  to  the  Third  Objection  againft
God  and  Religion,  v/hich  is  indeed  the  worft  and  moft  impi-
ous of  all  the  Three.  For  it  were  a  much  more  excufable
Error,  to  deny  a  God  and  a  Providence,  than  to  allow  both
thefe,  and  yet  advance  fuch  Incongruous  Notions  concern-
ing him.  Better  it  were  for  Us  and  Him  both,  that  he  had
no  Being,  and  no  Concern  in  governing  the  World  at  all,
than  that  he  fiiould  be  guilty  of  fo  much  Treachery  andBafe-
nefs,  as  this  Objedlion  lays  to  his  Charge :  For  this  is  to  be
Evil,  and  that  is  much  worfe  than  not  to  be  at  all.  The  rea-
fon  is  evident,  becaufe  Goodnefs  and  Happinefs  is  Superiour
fo  ^^{lence. It  i§  the  Principle  of  Being,  the  Caufe  from

whene»

nvtw  SiMPLiciuss  Comment, 241

\vhenceall  things  derive  it,  and  the  very  End  for  which  they
have  it.  For  Exiftence  icft-lf  is  V'hat  no  Man  would  dcfire,
but  merely  upon  the  Apprehenfion  of  its  being  Good  ;  and
therefore,  whenever  we  apprehend  ourfelves  in  Evil  Circum-
ftanceSj  we  naturally  v/ifli  not  to  be  at  all.

If  I  have  here  again  enlarg'd  beyond  the  juft  Bouncs  of  a
Commentary,  the  Importance  of  the  Argument  will  jullify
me  in  it.  For,  in  Truch,  a  regular  and  well  grounded  De-
votion tov/ards  God,  Jufl  and  Becoming  Apprehenfions
■concerning  the  Perfedions  of  his  Nature,  the  CertamLy  of
his  Providence,  and  the  Juftice  and  Goodnefs  of  all  his
Proceedings  with  Mankind  ,•  and,  ccnfequent  to  fuch  a  Per-
fuafion,  a  fubmiilive  religned  Temper,  and  eafy  Acquief-
cence  under  all  his  Difpenfations,  as  the  EfFe<fls  of  a  moft
excellent  WifJom,  and  fuch  as  are  always  befl:  for  us  ;  Thefe
are  the  Sum  of  all  human  Accomplifhments,  the  Founda-
tion and  the  Perfedlion,  ihe  Firft  and  the  Laft  Seep  of  all
Moral,  and  all  Intelleftual  Virtue.  For,  though  the  Soul  of
Man  be  ( 'tis  confeG'd )  a  Free  Agent ,  and  proceed  upon
Internal  Principles  of  Good  and  Evilj  yet  ilill  this  Liberty
and  Power  of  determining  herfelf  v/as  the  particular  Favour
and  Gift  of  God  j  and  therefore,  while  flie  holds  fall  by  the
Root,  flie  lives  and  improves,  and  attains  the  Perfection
God  made  her  capable  of.  But  when  fhe  feparates  herfelf,
and,  as  it  were,  difengages,  and  tears  herfelf  off  j  Ihe  grows
barren,  arid  withers,  and  putrifies,  till  ihe  return,  and  be
united  to  the  Root  again,  and  fo  recover  her  Life  and  Per-
fe<ftion  once  more.  Now  nothing,  but  a  firm  and  a  vigo-
rous Senfe  of  thefe  Three  Points  we  have  been  explaining,
can  ever  prevail  upon  the  Soul  to  endeavour  fuch  a  Refto-
ration.  For  how  is  it  pofiTible  to  apply  to  God,  when  we
do  not  believe  that  he  is }  Or  what  Encouragement  is  the
belief  of  his  Exiftence,  without  a  Perfuafiion,  that  he  is  con-
cerned for  us,  and  takes  notice  of  us  ?  Leaft  of  all  iliould
we  addrefs  to  a  Being,  who  does  infped:  and  govern  our
Affairs,  if  we  were  poffeGi'd  with  an  Opinion,  That  all
that  Care  and  Infpection  were  direded  to  Evil  and  Mali-
cious Purpofes,  and  that  he  waited  over  us  only  for  Mife-
ry  and  Mifchief

U  a  CHAP:

242 Epicte  Tus's  Moral

CHAP. XXXIX,

WHEN  you  confulc  the  Oracle,  remember  'tis
only  the  Event  that  you  are  ignorant  of,  and
come  to  be  inftrudled  in.  But,  though  you  do  not
know  what  that  jfhall  be  particularly,  yet  Philofo-
phy  (if  you  have  any)  hath  already  taugKt  you,  of
what  Quality  and  Conlequence  it  fhall  prove  to  you  :
For  you  are  fatisfied  before-hand.  That  if  it  be  any
of  the  Things  out  of  our  own  Power,  it  mull
needs  be  indifferent  in  its  own  Nature,  and  neither
good  nor  bad  of  itfelf.  Therefore,  when  thefe  Oc-
cafions  call  you  abroad,  leave  all  your  Hopes  and
Fears  behind  you  •,  and  do  not  approach  the  Pro-
phet with  fuch  anxious  Concern,  as  if  you  were  to
hear  your  Doom  from  his  Mouth  -,  but  behave  your-
felf  as  becomes  a  Man  fully  perfuaded,  That  no  ex-
ternal Accident  is  any  thing  to  You  -,  and  that  no-
thing can  poffibly  happen,  which  may  not,  -by
good  Management,  be  converted  to  your  Advan-
tage, though  all  the  World  fhould  endeavour  to
obftruft  it.  When  therefore  you  addrefs  ^^•the
Gods,  come  boldly,  as  one  who  afks  their  Advice ;
and  withal,  when  they  have  given  it,  be  all  Com-
pliance ;  for  confider,  whofe  Counfel  you  have
ask'd,  and  how  impious  a  Difrefped  it  will  be,  not
to  follow  it.  When  therefore  you  apply  yourfelf
to  the  Oracle,  obferve  Socrates''  hks  Rule,  To  afk
no  Queftions,  but  what  the  Event  is  the  only  mate-
rial Confideration  to  be  cleared  in  ;  They  lliould  be
Matters  of  great  Importance  and  Difficulty ,  and
fuch  as  are  not  capable  of  Refolution,  by  Reafon,  or
Art,  or  any  human  Methods.  But  if  you  are  in
difpute,  whether  you  ought  to  afllft  your  Friend
in  diifrefs,  and  expofe  your  Perfon  for  the  Defence
of  your  Country  j thefe  are  not  Queftions  fit  to  be

put.

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 243

put,  becaufe  they  anfwer  themfelves :  For,  though
the  Sacrifice  be  never  fo  inaufpicious,  though  it
ihould  portend  Flight  or  Banifhment,  lofs  of  Limbs,
or  lofs  of  Life  ;  yet  flill  Reafon  and  Duty  will  tell
you.  That,  in  defpight  of  all  thefe  Hazards,  you
muft  not  defert  thofe  that  have  a  right  to  your
Service  and  AlTiftance.  In  this  cafe  you  need  no
other  Determination  than  that  memorable  one,
which  Apollo  gave  fo  long  fince,  when  he  thrull
that  Wretch  out  of  his  Temple,  who  fuffered  his
Friend  to  perifli  for  want  of  Help.

COMMENT.

AFTER  having  given  Direcflions  for  the  underftanding  and
due  difcharge  of  our  Duty  to  one  another,  and  towards
God  j  the  next  thing  to  be  done,  was  to  inform  us,  What:
we  owe  to  Ourfelves.  Bur,  before  this  could  be  methodi-
cally undertaken,  it  was  neceffary  to  take  notice  of  a  fort
of  mix'd  Duty,  which  refpeds  both  God  and  ourfelves  ^  snd
this  arifes  from  Divination,  or  the  confuking  of  Oracles.
To  this  purpofe  he  divides  his  Difcourfe  into  Three  Parts,
and  tells  us,  upon  What  Occafions  we  ought  to  confulc
them,  with  What  Difpofition  it  fhould  be  done,  and  What
ufe  is  to  be  made  of  their  Determinations,

He  begins  wkh  the  Second  of  thefe,  thinking  it  perhaps
the  Firft,  both  in  Confequence,  and  in  Order  of  Nature  j
and  tells.  That  the  Mind  fliould  preferve  fuch  a  firm  and
even  Temper  upon  thefe  Occafions,  as  neither  to  bring  any
Defires,  nor  any  Averfions  along  with  it  :  For  at  this  rate
it  would  be  impofTible  to  come  without  great  anxiety  and
diforder.  If  our  Dellres  are  eager,  we  fhall  be  afraid  of  hear-
ing that  what  we  wifli  will  not  come  to  pafs  ■  and  if  our  Aver-
fions are  violent,  we  fhall  be  in  no  lefs  concern  to  be  told,
That  what  we  fear  mofb,  fhall  certainly  happen  to  us.  But
the  Queftion  is.  What  courfe  we  fiiall  take,  to  throw  off
thefe  Paffions,  snd  poflefs  ourfelves  with  that  Indifference.
To  This  he  replies.  That  the  Confideration  of  thofe  Things
we  enquire  about,  will  be  able  to  effect  it :  For  we  need
only  refled.  That  they  are  external  Accidents,  and  Things
out  of  our  Power  j  for  no  man  is  fo  fcnfelcfs,  as  to  confult  an

U  3  Oracle

i244  Epictetus's  Morals,

Oracle  upon  the  Events  of  ihofe,  which  his  own  Choice
muft  determine.  Who  ever  enquired  at  a  Shrine,  Whether
he  ought  to  regalai:e  his  Inclinations  and  Averfions,  to  re-
duce them  within  juft  bounds,  or  to  fix  them  upon  fit  and
Wordiy  Objeifls  ?  The  ^eries  ufually  put,  are  quire  of  ano-
ther (train  j  Whe Jier  a  Voyage  fhall  be  profperous  ?  Whe-
ther it  ba  advifable  to  marry  ?  Whether  the  purchafing  fuch
a  parcel  of  Land  v-^ould  turn  to  good  account  ?  And  thefe,
being  fuch  things,  as  we  ourfelves  are  not  made  Mafters  of
by  Nature,  'tis  pl-^in  our  De'ires  and  our  Averfions  ought
not  to  have  any  concern  in  the  Divination.  The  only  thing
V7e  want  to  be  fatisfied  in,  is  fome  particular  Event.  This
is  the  Southfayer's  Work,  and  cut  of  the  compafs  of  our
own  Knowledge  :  But  the  QLiality  of  that  Event  we  know
as  well  as  he.  For  Philofophy  hath  ailured  us^  That  none
of  thofe  natters,  which  are  out  of  our  own  power,  can  be
in  themfelves  good  cr  evil  j  and  by  confequence  none  of
them  proper  Objedls  of  our  Inclination  cr  7\verfion.

Befides,  They  that  are  fkiil'd  in  thefe  Myflenes,  have  a
Notion,  That  an  extreme  Paflion  and  Concern  in  the  Per-
Ibn  applying  to  the  Oracle,  difturbs  the  whole  method  of
Divination,  and  confounds  the  Omen.  So  that  this  Calm-
uefs  will  be  of  advantage  in  that  refped  alfo  j  And  you  will
efcape  all  immoderate  folicitude,  when  you  remember,  that,  be
the  Accident  whatever  it  will,  you  have  it  ftill  in  your  power
to  convert  it  to  your  own  Benefit  j  and  the  more  dilaftrous,
lb  much  the  more  beneficial  ilill  may  a  prudent  manage-
ment render  it  to  you:  And  therefore  co^^ie  holdly  (fays  he)
and  call  afide  vain  Fears,  and  unneceflary  Scruples,  ivhen
you  prcfejs  to  ajk  Comifel  of  the  Gods.

From  that  Expreffion,  he  takes  occafion  to  inform  Men,
what  is  their  Duty  to  the  Gods  in  thefe  Cafes  j  namely.  That
when  we  have  afked  their  Advice,  we  fiiould  be  lure  to  take
it :  For  he  that  confults  God  himfelf,  and  yet  refufes  to
follow  his  Advice  j  Whom  will  that  Man  be  direded  by  ?
And  indeed,  there  is  not  any  more  probable  or  more  fre-
quent ground  for  our  StifFnef?  and  Difobedience ,  than  the
Prepofleflions  we  lie  under,  and  the  ftrong  Byafs  of  our
. -own  Inclinations  and  Averfions.  So  that  from  hence  we
have  difcovered  one  advantage  moreof  approaching  the  Deity
with  a  difpalfionate  and  unprejudiced  Mind :  For  this  will
not  only  deliver  us  from  all  thofe  A^^nxieties  and  Fears ,  fo
"inconvenient  and  fo  hazardous  upon  fuch  occafionsj  but  it
will  alfo  dilpofe  us  exceedingly to  a  ready  Compliance,

and

njokh  SiMPLicitJs's  Comment.  245

and  leave  us  free  to  refign  ourfelves  entirely,  to  be  govern-
ed by  the  Will  and  Direclions  of  God.

The  Next  Enquiry  he  goes  upon,  concerns  thofe  things,
which  are  the  proper  Objedts  of  Divination;  andthefe  he  de-
clares to  be  fuch  only,  whofe  End  is  perfectly  dark  and  un-
known :  Where  nothing  but  the  Event  itfelf  can  give  us  any
light  j  things  fo  purely  accidental,  that  no  human  Prudence,
no  Rules  of  any  particular  Art,  no  helps  of  Experience  and
long  Obfervation,  can  enable  us  to  pronounce  what  they
lliall  be.

Thus  much  is  agreeable  to  Reafon  and  common  Senfe.
For  no  body  confuks  an  Oracle,  v/hether  it  be  fit  for  a  Man
to  Ear,  or  Drink,  or  Sleep,  becaufe  Nature  teaches  us  the
necefficy  of  thefe  Refrefhments,  and  we  cannot  poffibly  fub-
fift  without  them.  Nor,  whether  it  beadvifable  for  a  Man
to  improve  in  Wifdom,  and  lead  a  virtuous  Life;  for  every
wife  and  good  Man  fees  and  feels  the  Advantage  of  doing
fo.  Nor  does  he  defire  the  Prophet  to  refolve  him,  v/hat
fort  of  Houfe  he  fhall  build ;  becaufe  this  is  the  Bufmefs  of
a  Surveyor,  and  his  Schemes  and  Models  are  drawn  by  Rule
and  Art.  Nor  does  the  Farmer  defire  to  be  fatisfied,  whe-
ther he  fliould  fov/  his  Corn,  or  not ;  for  this  is  a  thing  ab-
folutely  neceflary  to  be  done.  But  he  may  perhaps  enquire,
what  Seafon,  or  what  parcel  of  Land,  or  what  .fore  of
Grain,  and  which  Plants  will  turn  to  belt  account ;  upon  a
fuppofal  ftill,  (I  mean)  that  Experience,  or  fome  other  na-
tural Caufes,  have  not  inftruded  him  in  thefe  things  before.
Or  a  Man  may  reafonably  enough  afk,  if  it  be  proper  to
undertake  fuch  a  Voyage,  efpecially  if  the  Seafon  of  the
Year,  or  any  other  Circumftances,  contribute  to  the  ren*
dring  it  hazardous  for  him.

Nor  would  it  be  proper  to  enquire,  whether  one  fliould
go  abroad  into  the  Market,  or  to  WeftmtnJhr-HaU^  or  walk
a  turn  into  the  Fields :  For  tho'  it  be  true,  that  even  thefe
trivial  Undertakings  are  fbmetimes  attended  with  very  ftrange
and  very  difmal  Confequences ;  yet  generally  fpeaking,  they
fall  out  juft  as  we  intend,  and  defire  they  fhould.  And
where  there  is  a  very  high  Probability,  and  fuch  as  is  molt
commonly  anfwered  by  the  Event,  there  all  Divination  is
needlefs.  If  it  were  not  fo,  nothing  in  the  World  could  be  ex-
empt from  it ;  for  the  beft  concluding  Reafon,  and  the  fureft
Rules  of  Art,  do  not  always  fucceed  right.  Nature  fomc-
times  works  out  of  her  common  courfe,  and  Choice  does
frequently  miftake,  and  fall  fhort  of  what  is  defigned. But

U  4.  ftiU

246  Epict  E  Tus's  Morals,

jRiill  there  is  no  difficulty  worthy  an  Oracle  in  thefe  matters  ;
becaufe  we  reft  fatisfied  in  great  Probabilities,  and  are  not  to  be
difturbed  at  the  few,  the  very  few  Exceptions  to  the  contrary.
Otherwife  we  fhall  be  over-run  with  idle  Whimfies,  and
fuperftitious  Fears  ;  fuch  as  improve  every  little  Accident
into  fomewhat  terrible  and  omineus,  and  would  make  us
utterly  unadive,  and  afraid  ever  to  attempt  any  thing  fo  long
as  we  live.

But  here  arifes  a  ^ery  worth  a  little  confideration.  It  is.
Whether  the  confuking  of  Oracles  concerning  matters  with*
in  our  own  power  be  wholly  difallowed  ?  As  for  inftance ;
What  Opinion  we  ought  to  entertain  of  the  Soul :  Whether
it  be  mortal  or  immortal  :  And,  Whether  we  fliould  apply
ourfelves  to  fuch  a  particular  Mafter  or  not :  And  the  Rea-
ibn  of  this  doubt  is,  Becauie  feveral  of  the  Ancients  feem
to  have  confulted  the  Gods  about  fome  Difficulties  in  Na-
ture j  and  yet  the  making  fuch  or  fuch  a  Judgment  of  Things
is  our  own  proper  Ad;  j  and  confefled  to  be  one  of  thofe
Things  which  come  within  the  compafs  of  our  Will.

Now  I  muft  needs  fay,  with  Submiffion,  That  whatever
is  attainable  by  Reafon  and  Logical  Demonftration,  ought
to  be  learn'd  that  way.  For  this  will  give  us  a  clear  and
undoubted  perception,  and  the  difcovery  of  EfFeds  from  their
Caufes  is  the  true  fcientifical  Knowledge.  It  leaves  no
Doubt  behind,  but  fatisfies  ourfelves,  and  enables  us  to  in-
ftrudt  and  convince  others.  An  aflurance  from  Divine  Te-
ftimony,  that  the  Soul  is  immortal,  may  give  us  a  firm  be-
lief of  the  thing,  and  we  fhould  do  ill,  and  unreafonably,  in
refufmg  Credit  to  fuch  a  Teftimony  j  but  ftill  this  is  only
Faith,  and  differs  very  much  from  Science.  And  if  God
vouchfafe  to  communicate  to  any  Man  the  Knowledge  of
Natural  Caufes  by  immediate  Revelation  j  this  is  to  be  look'd
upon  as  an  extraordinary  Favour,  a  fpecial  Cafe,  and  fuch
as  falls  not  under  the  common  Rules  of  Divination,  nor  to
be  depended  upon  from  it.  For  the  primary  Talent,  and
proper  Objed  of  this,  is  only  to  inftrud  Men  in  fuch  un-
certain Events  of  human  Adions,  as  no  Art  or  Confidera-
tion can  bring  them  to  any  certain  Knowledge  of.  And,  tho'
fome  Perfons  have  addrefs'd  to  Oracles  for  Myfteries  in  Na-
ture; yet  they  were  but  few  who  did  !b  ;  and  thofe,  none  of
the  moft  eminent  Reputation  for  Philofophy  neither ,  but
fuch  as  contented  tberafelves  with  credible  Tefti monies,  and
chofe  rather  to  take  Things  upon  Truil,  than  to  be  at  the  trou-
ble of  attaining  to  a  demonftrative  Evidence. Whereas  God

feems

with-  Si  MP  Licius's  Comment. 247

feems  plainly  to  have  defign'd  This  for  the  Soul's  own  Work ;
and  by  infufmg  into  us  a  Principle  of  Liberty  and  Reafon,  to
have  left  the  Contemplation  of  our  own  Nature  as  one  of
the  Subjects  moft  proper  to  employ  our  own  Study  and
Pains.  And  upon  that  account,  both  Epi^etus^  and  Socra-
tes before  him,  feem  to  condemn  and  forbid  fuch  Queftions,
as  impertinent  and  fuperfluous;  in  regard  that  the  Soul  is
fufficiently  qualified  to  make  thofe  Difcoveries  by  her  own
Strength.

For  the  fame  reafon,  you  fee  he  difapproves  of  that  ^ery^
Whether  a  Man  ought  to  relieve  his  Friend  in  diftrefs,  or
expofe  his  Perfon  in  defence  of  his  Country  }  Becaufe  right
Reafon  cries  out  aloud,  that  thefe  things  mufi:  be  done;  and
no  Hazards  can  be  fo  formidable,  as  that  the  moft  certain
profpe<ft  of  them  fliould  juftify  our  neglecting  to  do  fo.  To
what  purpofe  then  do  we  trouble  the  Gods,  for  that  which
hath  no  difficulty  in  it ;  and  where  we  muft  be  loft  to  all
fenfe,  if  we  be  not  able  to  iatisfy  ourfelves  ?  And  befides,
he  gives  us  an  inftance,  wherein  the  Prophetick  God  declared
his  Difpleafure,  againii  One  who  came  to  have  this  Scruple
refolved  :  For  That,  which  our  own  Reafon  will  convince
us  is  fit  and  neceffary  to  be  done,  we  muft  kt  about  without
more  ado;  and  not  raife  idle  Doubts,  or  frame  frivolous
Excufes,  though  we  are  fatisfied,  that  the  performance  of
it  would  coft  us  our  Fortunes,  or  our  Lives.  This  may
feem  a  Hardfiiip,  but  it  is  back'd  with  this  invincible  Argu-
ment, That  Virtue  is  our  own  proper  Good,  and  ought  to
be  dearer  to  us  than  our  Bodies,  or  our  Eftates ;  which  in
comparifon  of  our  Souls,  bear  but  a  diftant  Relation  to  us.

After  this  Argument,  intimating.  That  our  Duty  ought  to
be  difcharged,  even  at  the  expence  of  the  greateft  Sufferings
and  Dangers ;  he  introduces  a  God  confirming  this  Opinion
by  his  own  praftice,  and  expelling  that  Mifcreant  out  of  his
Temple,  who  did  not  relieve  his  Friend,  but  fuffer'd  him
to  be  murder'd,  that  he  might  fave  himfelf.  The  Story  in.
fhort  is  thus :  Two  Perfons  upon  their  Journey  ta.DeIphos
were  fet  upon  by  Thieves ;  While  One  of  thefe  was  no  far-
ther felicitous  than  to  make  his  own  efcape,  the  Other  was
killed.  The  Survivor  conriued  his  Travels ;  and  when  he
came  to  the  Oracle,  the  God  rejected  his  Addrefs,  expell'd
him  the  Temple,  and  reproached  his  Cowardice  and  bafe
Defertion  of  his  Friend,  in  this  following  manner :

Do

24  S

EpicTETirs^s  Morals

Do  noty  prefumptious  Wretch^  thefe  Rites  profane^

Nor  luith  polluted  Gifts  our  Altars  fiain:
Nor  prudent  Fears,  and  threatmng  Fate  pretend  j
Falfe  to  thy  God,  thy  Honour,  and  thy  Friend.
Thefe  claim  thy  Blood  in  any  danger  near^
Jhid  miift  condemn  that  hafe  and  guilty  Fear,
Wloich  of  a  Coward  made  a  treacherous  Murderer.
Henceforth  dare  to  bejujl  and  brave  j  for  hio'v^.
He,  that  declines  to  nvard  it,  gives  the  Blo'm.

Now  tho'  it  is  plain,  that  this  Perfon,  would  he  never  fb
jfain,  yet  poffibly  he  might  not  have  been  able  to  fave  his  Fel-
low Traveller's  Life ;  y&z  that  Uncertainty  by  no  means  dif-
penfed  with  him  for  not  attempting  it.  His  Inclination  and
Endeavour  fliould  not  have  been  wanting  j  tho'  that  Relief
fie  intended  had  been  never  fo  unfuccefsful ;  n^y,  tho'  it  had
aasvolv'd  himfelf  in  the  fame  Fate.  That  then,  which  rendred
Mm  unv.'orthy  to  approach  the  Shrine  of  Apollo,  was  the
Bifpofition  of  his  Mind ;  which  prevail'd  upon  him  to  betray  •
Bis  Friend,  and  to  facrifice  a  F.ife  which  he  ought  to  have
defended,  in  tendernefs  to  That  which  he  ought  to  have  ex-
gofed.

And  that  this  is  the  true  ftate  of  the  Cafe,  is  no  lefs  evi-
«ient  from  another  Inftance  of  two  Perfons,  who  were  Hke-
wile  befet  with  Thieves.  Thefe  had  got  one  of  them  at  an
Advantage,-  and  whilft  the  other  darts  at  the  Rogue,  he  mifs'd
Ms  Aim,  and  kill'd  his  own  Friend.  When  he  came  to  the
Cfracle,  he  durft  not  approach,  as  having  Blood  upon  him ;
but  the  God  juftified  his  Adion,  cleared  him  of  the  Scruple
fee  lay  under,  and  gave  him  this  following  kind  Invitation :

jippwaeh,  brave  Man,  the  Gods  are  Juf;  and  Kind-^

They  only  hate  a  hafe  and  murdWous  Mind.

Thy  flatighter'd  Friend  to  Us  for  yuf  ice  cries,

And  his  expiring  Groans  have  pierc'd  the  Skies :

Tet  not  for  Vengeance,  but  Reivards  they  fue-,

Rewards  to  Courage,  and  to  Friendfhip  due.

That  'Leal,  which  Heath  and  Banger  did  difdain,

A  difobedient  Weapon  camtot  Jfain:

Spotlefs  thy  Hand,  and  generous  thy  Defgn,

The  Giiilt  mifguiding  Fate's,  the  Glory's  Thine.

Now

niDith  SiMPLicf u's's  Comment.  249

Now,  if  by  the  fhedding  this  Blood,  he  did  not  only  contraft
no  Pollution  at  all  ^  buc  was  rnore  pure,  and  KComn:iended
by  it  to  the  Acceptance  of  the  Deity,  becaufe  he  irttended
well,  though  it  was  his  Misfortune,  that  the  Event  was  fo
very  Tragical,  fo  exceeding  contrary  to  his  Intention  j  then
it  is  very  plain,  that  Virtues  and  Vices  are  not  to  be  meafur'd
by  Succefs,  or  by  the  Aftions  themfelves  j  but  by  their  in-
nocent Intentions,  honeft  Defires,  and  the  Sincerity  of  their
own  Hearts.

One  Caution  I  think  neceiTary  to  be  added  here,  for  the
better  underftanding  of  our  Author,  Is,  That  we  are  to
confider,  what  fort  of  Perfons  thefe  things  are  addrelfed  to.
Now  thofe  which  I  have  laft  explained,  and  feveral  of  thofe
which  follow  afterwards,,  are  adapted  particularly  to  a  mid-
dle fort  of  Men :  Such  as  are  neither  utterly  ignorant  of  Phi-
lofophy,  nor  abfolutely  Mafters  of  it  ■  but  have  applied  them-
felves to  the  Study  of  it  for  Ibme  time,  and  made  tolerable
advances  towards  Perfedlion,  tho'  they  liave  not  yet  attain'd
to  it.  And  this  is  fufficiently  intimated  to  us,  by  the  fre-
quent repetition  of  thofe  Words  {If  you  have  any  Fhilofo^hy)
upon  every  occafion.

CHAP. XL.

COnfider  with  yourfelf  ferioufly,  what  Figure
is  moft  fit  for  you  to  make  in  the  World  ;  and
then  fix  upon  a  Method  and  Rule  in  order  hereunto  5
which  be  fure  to  obferve  nicely,  both  at  home  alone,
and  abroad  in  company.

CHAP. XLI.

LET one  of  your  Principle  Rules  be  Silence;
and  when  your  difcourfe, confine  yourfelf  to
fuch  Subjeds  as  are  necefTary,  and  exprefs  yourfenfc

in

250  Epictetus's  Morals,

in  as  few  Words  as  you  can.  But  if  an  Opportu-
nity happens,  as  fometimes  perhaps  it  will,  which
makes  it  feafonable  for  you  to  ftart  the  Difcourfe,
let  it  not  be  upon  any  of  the  common  Topicks  of
Talk,  fuch  as  Plays,  Horfe-Races,  Fencers,  Fafhi-
ons,  Meats,  Wines,  or  Entertainments  •,  which  the
generality  of  the  World  ufe  to  make  the  Subjed  of
their  Converfation.  But  above  all  things  take  care
not  to  talk  of  other  People  ;  neither  fo  as  to  cen-
fure  their  Conduft,  nor  to  be  lavifh  in  their  Com-
mendation, nor  to  make  invidious  Comparifons  be-
tween one  another.

ic* -K  iS -K  ;;•  iK  :«$ -^^ -K  «•%' ifi  :««!«!»($«  >it  »>»  <K  •!•  js  •{•  a^

CHAP. XLII.

WHEN  ever  you  happen  into  Company,  where
you  have  Authority  and  Influence  enough  to
do  it,  try  to  change  the  Difcourfe,  and  bring  it
to  becoming  Subjects.  But  if  you  are  among  Peo-
ple of  another  Temper,  and  fuch  as  will  not  en-
dure Reftraint  or  Reproof,  then  hold  your  own
Tongue.

COMMENT.

TH  E  Duties  owing  to  a  Man's  felf,  are  the  Next  thing
to  be  learn'd  j  and  thofe  he  begins  to  treat  of  here,  ad-
vifing  his  Proficient  (for  to  fuch  a  one  he  writes  now)  to
make  it  his  firft  Care,  to  determine  with  himfelf,  what  Fi-
gure he  intends  to  make,  and  what  Part  to  play  upon  this
Theatre  of  the  World.  And  v;hen  once  that  is  done,  the
Next  muft  be,  fo  to  model  all  his  Atftions,  as  th:t  they  may
confpire  together  to  the  maintaining  of  that  Charridcer.  This,
he  tells  him,  muft  be  kept  conftantly  in  view,  that  his  whole
Behaviour  may  be  level'd  at  it,  both  in  publick  and  in  private.

By

with  SiMPL  i.crus*s  Comment. 251

By  which  I  fuppofe  he  means,  that  a  Man  iliould  be  always
confiftent  with  himfelf,  and  his  Life  all  of  a  piece ;;  not  flu-
duating  and  uncertain,  like  a  troubled  Sea,  which  is  ever
ebbing  and  flowing,  as  the  Winds  and  Tide  change.  For  the
Circumflances  of  Human  Life  are  no  lefs  fickle  than  thefci
and  therefore  we  muil  fix  ourfelves  upon  a  good  Bottom,
that  v/e  may  be  able  to  f^and  the  Shock  and  the  Variety  of
them.  Socrates  is  faid  to  have  attained  to  fo  great  a  Maftery
in  this  Point,  that  the  Air  of  his  Face  was  always  the  fame  ;
Neither  Pleafure  and  Profperity  could  give  him  a  more  fe-
rene  and  gay  Countenance  j  nor  any  of  thofe  which  the
Word  call  Calamities,  force  him  into  a  dejeded  and  melan-
choly one.  In  fuch  perfed  Agreement  was  he  conftantly
with  himfelf.

Now  of  all  the  Expedients  proper  for  this  Charader,  the
firft  and  moft  confiderable,  which  he  recommends,  is  a  great
degree  of  Silence.  For  the  defign  of  all  Moral  Inftrudions
is  chiefly  to  confine  the  Soul  within  her  own  proper  Sphere,
which  is  the  Improvement  and  Contemplation  of  herfelf,  and
to  draw  her  Thoughts  and  AfFedions  off  from  the  World,
and  the  feiifual  Appetites  and  Paffions,  and  an  inordinate
Concern  for  the  Body.  And  no  One  thing  contributes  more
to  the  effeding  of  this,  than  Silence.  The  Vythagoraans^  you
fee,  were  fo  fenfible  of  the  Benefit,  that  they  impofed  a  ^/k-
quen7iial  Silence  upon  all  that  entred  into  their  Difcipline ;
and  thought  it  the  moft  aufpicious  Beginning  they  could  poffi-
blymake.  For,  as  the  Senfes,  when  fix'd  upon  External  Ob-
jeds,  do  carry  the  Mind  abroad  with  them  (a  plain  Inti-
mation whereof  v/e  have  in  that  common  Cuftom  of  Men
fhutting  their  Eyes,  when  they  would  think  v.'irh  greater  At-
tention) fo  Speech  of  neceffity  lets  Icofe  the  Mind,  and
fets  the  Thoughts  to  roving  •  and  that  much  more  indeed,
than  any  outward  and  fenfible  Objed.  For  there  the  Soul
only  cooperates  wiih  the  Organ,  and  bears  it  Company ;  but
here  flie  is  the  firft  and  principal  Mover,  and  didates  what
the  Tongue  utters.  And  the  only  efredual  cure  for  this  Ram-
bling is  to  keep  it  at  home,  by  holding  ones  Peace,  and  not
indulging  it  in  all  its  EfFuiions.

Not  that  an  Univerfal  Silence  is  expeded  from  us.  No,
nor  fo  high  a  degree  of  it,  as  that  the  Pythagoncans  required.
Thefe  are  loo  exalted,  and,  as  the  World  goes,  unattainable
Perfedions.  But  he  hath  fuited  himfelf  to  our  Temper,
and  Circumftances,^  and  expeds  only  (uch,  as  will  confiifc
with  our  Infirmities,  and  the  Affairs  of  the  World :  There-
fore

252  EpicTETu  s's  Moral  s,

fore  he  advifes  us  either  to  be  filenr,  or  at  leaft  to  fpeak  no
oftner,  and  no  more,  than  is  neceffary  -  as  the  anfwering  to
what  is  asked  us,  or  the  like.  And  in  mentioning  this  Word
'Neceffary J  he  hath  given  us  a  very  compendious  Hint,  what
Subje(5is  we  ought  to  converfe  upon.  Such  as  fpecially  tend
to  the  promoting  of  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  the  improvement
of  the  Mind,  and  the  necefTities  of  the  Animal  Life.  For
thefe  being  but  very  few,  and  having  fomeching  of  Subftance
and  Bufmefs  in  them,  not  loofe,  and  empty,  and  imperti-
nent things,  do  not  confound  the  Mind  with  Levity,  nor  fill
it  with  wild  and  extravagant  Ideas.

He  hath  alfo  ordered  us,  even  upon  thefe  moft  allowable
Occafions,  to  be  as  brief  as  conveniently  we  can.  For  it  is
very  oblervable.  That  thofe  who  talk  moft,  generally  under-
ftand  leaft.  There  is  nothing  dx'i'^Q^!^?,  a  Man  to  a  multitude
of  Words,  fo  much  as  flight  and  fuperficial  Notions  of  the
Things  he  is  talking  of  He  does  not  know  what  he  fays,
and  that  is  the  Reafon  he  does  not  know  when  to  give  over.
But  one  who  goes  to  the  bottom  of  Things,  and  hath  a  clear
and  true  Apprehenfion,  will  collecl  himfelf  into  a  little
Room,  becaule  he  will  lay  nothing  but  what  is  material,  and
diredly  to  the  Point  in  hand.

But  if  at  any  time  an  Occafion  of  enlarging  offer  itfelf,
by  which  I  underftand  Speaking,  not  only  when  you  are  pro-;-
voked  to  it,  but  beginning  fome  Difcourfe  of  your  own  Ac^
cord  j  tho'  there  may  be  a  necelTity  for  difpenfing  with  the
Latter  of  thefe  Rules,  and  indulging  yourfelf  in  a  larger
propoiLion  of  Talk  j  yet  be  fure  ftiil  to  obferve  the  former,
and  not  go  out  of  the  Road  I  have  direfted  you.  Let  your
Subjedls  be  fomething  of  Neceffity  and  Ufe;  fomething
which  may  advance  the  Love  and  Pradice  of  Virtue,  reform
the  Paffions,  or  inftrud  the  Underftanding,  Such  as  may
minifter  Advice  to  Men  in  Difficulties,  comfort  them  un-
xier  Afflictions,  aflift  them  in  the  fearch  of  the  Truth,  give
them  a  reverent  Senfe  of  God,  an  awful  Admiration  of  his
Divine  Excellencies,  honourable  and  becoming  Opinions
of  his  Providence,  and  of  his  readinefs  to  help  and  forward
all  thofe  in  the  praftice  of  Virtue,  v/ho  are  careful  to  im-
plore his  Aid  by  Prayer.  But  as  for  the  commoij  ridiculous
Themes,  fach  as  Fencers,  Horfe-Races,  and  the  like,  or
Feafts,  or  FaiTiion,,  Cookery  and  Wines;  Who  eats  and
ilrinks,  and  drefles  beft,  and  fuch  Stuff,-  fcorn  the  idle  Prat-
tle. For  tliefe  Subjefts  are  apt  to  make  a  ftrong  Impvefiion
upon  the  Fancy,  and  femetiraes  get  within  a  Man's  Affedii?-

ons.

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 253

•ons  before  he  is  aware  j  they  give  a  Tirnfture  ro  his  AppeticeSj
and  have  a  very  unhappy  Influence  upon  all  his  Converfa-
tion:  And  it  is  really  no  unufual  thing,  for  Peoples  Man-
ners to  be  formed  by  their  Difcourfe.  :
But  above  all  things,  he  gives  us  warning  not  to  entertaiil
ourfelves,  and  our  Compnny  with  talking  of  other  People.-
neither  fo  as  to  call  their  Behaviour  to  Account,  nor  to  be
profufe  in  their  Praifes,  nor  free  in  making  Comparifons  be-
tween one  Man  and  another.  As,  That  this  Lady  is  hand-
fomer  than  That,  or  this  Man  Braver,  or  Hcnefter  than
That,  or  the  like.  There  is  nothing  more  evident  than  tliat
this  Topick  does,  in  a  more  than  ordinary  manner,  divert
the  Soul  from  iifelf,  and  its  own  Bufmefs ;  for  it  makes
Men  bufy,  and  curious,  and  impertinent,  extremely  inqui-
fitive,  and  troublcfome,  where  they  have  nothing  to  da
But  why  idiould  this  (youUfoy)  do  fo  more  than  any  orher?
And  what  can  our  talking  of  other  Men  have  in  it,  worfe
than  the  Subjefts  mentioned  before.!^

To  this  we  may  reply,  That  the  Perfon  to  wbom  the  Ad-
vice is  here  dired:ed,  being  one,  who  hath  made  fome  pro-
grefs  in  Philofopby,  is  not  fo  likely  to  entertain  himfelf  with
thofe  trivial  Matters,  as  with  fomething  that  relates  to  Man-
kind, and  their  Affairs  and  Adlions.  It  was  therefore  con-
venient to  draw  him  off  from  thofe  things  efpecially,  v/hicla
his  ov/n  Inclination  v/ould  mofl:  difpofe  him  to ;  and  hence
he  adds  that  Emphatical  Caution,  But  above  all  things.

Befides,  tho'  it  be  true,  That  the  fame  Affedions  are  ftir-
red  in  us  by  both  Difcourfes  alike,  (for  we  are  infenfibly
drawn  in,  to  love  and  hate  Things  and  Men  by  talking  of
them)  yet  there  is  one  peculiar  Vice  in  Converfation,  when
we  pretend  to  give  Charaders  of  other  People  j  which  is.
That  it  ftrangely  fwells  one  with  Vanity,  and  Pride,  and
Contempt  of  others.  For  whoever  pretends  to  fit  in  Judg-
ment upon  the  Condud  of  Others,  he  does  it  out  of  fome
imagined  Excellence  in  Himfelf,  which  he  faniies  gives  him.
a  Right  to  arraign  his  Neighbours.  And  befides,  any  miftake
in  our  Judgments  Of  Men  is  more  inexcufable,.  and  of  infi-
nitely worfe  Confequence,  than  if  we  pronounce  wrong  in
thofe  other  trifling  Matters ;  and  therefore  we  fliould  be  very
{paring  and  tender  in  this  Point.

To  prove  the  Importance  of  this  Advice  yet  more  j  he
proceeds  farther,  and  lays  a  reflraint  upon  our  Ears,  as  well
«is  our  Tongue.  And  indeed,  with  good  Reafon.  For  our
Ima^iaations,  and  inconvenient  Deiires  are  ciieriihed,by  hear-  .

ing

254 Epictetus's  Morals,

ing  the  Subje<fls,  which  minifter  fuch  Thoughts,  fpokdn  of
by  oihers,  as  well  as  by  fpeaking  of  them  ourfelves.  And
befides^  They  who  give  themfelves  thefe  indecent  Liberties,
if  fome  perfon  of  Gravity  and  Authority  fit  by,  and  do  not
check  them,  take  Advantage  of  his  Patience,  and  grow  per-
feftly  carelefs  ^  they  then  think  they  have  a  privilege  of  fay-
ing what  they  will,  and  no  Shame,  no  Senfe  of  Decency
hath  any  longer  power  upon  them.  Therefore  he  direfts  us,
to  take  all  the  prudent  Methods  we  can,  of  purring  a  flop  to
fuch  Difcourfe,  and  turning  it  to  fome  other  more  manly
and  becoming  Topick,  But,  becaufe  this  is  not  to  be  done
at  all  times,  nor  will  every  Company  bear  it;  therefore
({ays  he)  if  you  are  fallen  in  among  Men  of  ill  Temper,
no  Breeding,  or  vicious  Converfation,  (for  thefe  are  the  Per-
Ibns  he  calls  People  of  a  another  Kidney)  yet  at  leaft  dif-
countenance  them  by  your  Silence,  and  preferve  yourfelf
from  Infection,  by  withdrawing  from  their  Difcourfe  into
your  own  Breaft.

C HAP. XLIII.

Augh  but  upon  few  Occafions ;  and  when  you  do,
'  let  ic  not  be  much,  or  loud.  . ^

COMMENT,

AFTER  the  former  General  Precept  of  an  even  Temper,
an  Uniform  Behaviour  j  to  which  he  tells  his  Profi-
cierit  in  Philofophy,  nothing  will  more  effevflually  conduce,
than  a  prudent  Frugality  in  Difcourfe,  the  Next  reftraint  is
put  upon  the  Exceffes  of  Mirch,  which  are  commonly  ex-
preffed  by  Laughter.  And  perhaps  by  this  of  Joy,  he  might
defign,  that  we  fliould  underftand  him  to  extend  his  Rules
to  the  contrary  Extreme  of  Grief  too.  Now  Laughter  is  a
fort  of  Evacuation,  which  the  Mind  gives  itfelf ;  a  kind  of
Vent,  which  it  finds  for  Joy,  when  it  is  full  and  runs  over.
The  very  nature  and  manner  of  it  feems  to  fpeak  thus  much.
The  fweiUng  of  the  Lungs,  the  Interruptions  of  Breath,  the

Rever-

tvith  Si.MPLi  cius's  Comment.  255

Reverberations  of  the  Air,  and  that  cackling  noiie,  which
iefembles  the  puding  of  Waters,  All  thefe  betray  an  extra-
ordinary Vehemence,  and  Emotion,  in  the  Soul  and  Body
both ;  AH  confefs  plainly,  That  neither  of  them  are  then  in
that  iedate  and  fteady  Temper,  Vv^hich  Nature  and  Reafon
find  moil  agreeable.  The  fame  Inconvenienci^s  follow  upon
the  other  Extreme :  For  immoderate  SorroW,  and  indulged
Tears,  give  as  great  a  fliock  to  a  Man's  Judgment,  and  Con-
fiftence  with  hirafelf  Which  indeed  h  never  to  be  pre-
iQtwtdy  but  by  jaft  mealures,  and  a  conftant  Moderation  in
every  thing.

For  this  Reafon  it  is,  that  he  condemns  the  laughing  upon
eveiy  occafidn,  as  an  Argument  of  infufFei'able  Levity.  But
if  there  happens  any  thirig,  which  may  juftly  provoke  Laugh-
ter •  though  we  are  not  abfolutely  to  decline  it,  for  fear
we  be  fufpeded  to  want  this  property  of  Human  Nature,
and  appear  unreafonabiy  four  and  morofe  ;  yet  at  leaft  it
muft  be  allowed,  Th?.c  there  are  very  few  things  in  Conver-
fation,  which  will  juftify  much  of  it.  A  man  that  is  eter-
nally upon  the  Giggle,  fhews  a  mighty  defed:  of  Judgment,
and  that  every  little  occafion  of  mirth  is  mafter  of  his  Tem-
ber  when  it  thus  blows  him  up  into  excellive  Joy.  For
this  reafon  it  ought  not  to  be  frequent,  nor  to  continue
long  at  a  time.  For  fo  I  underdand  his  forbidding  it  to  be
much.  Nor  Ihould  it  be  noify,  and  violent,  and  convul-
(ive;  but  fliew  the  Evennefs  and  Government  of  the  Mind,
bv  being  modcit,  and  fcarce  exceeding  a  Smile,  which
rr.oves  the  Lip-;  a  little,  yet  fo  as  to  make  no  great  altera-
tion in  the  Face.

G  H  A  P, XLIV.

IF  it  be  pofTible,  avoid  Swearing  altogether ; but
if  you  cannot  do  that  abfolutely,  yet  be  fure  to

decline  it  as  much  as  you  can.

C  O  M  M  E  N  r.

THE  Fii'ft  place  in  this  Catalogue  of  Duties,  which  re-
fpedts  Ourfelves, was  due  to  the retraining thofe
Eruptions  and  Vehemences  of  Paffion,  which  give  a'diftur-

X  bance

256 Epi  CTET  u  s's  Morals,

bance  to  the  Quiet  of  our  Minds,  and  render  our  Behaviour
Irregular  and  Inconfiftervt.  The  Next  he  affigns  to  that,,
wherein  the  Honour  of  God  is  concerned.

For  the  very  Nature  of  an  Oath  confifts  in  this,  That  it
invokes  Almighty  God  as  a  Witnefs,  and  introduces  him  as
a  Mediator,  aCid  a  Bondfman,  to  undertake  for  our  Honefty
and  Truth.  Now  to  make  bold  with  God,  upon  every
trivial  Occafion,  (and  few  of  the  Affairs  of  Mankind  are
any  better)  is  to  take  a  very  unbecoming  Freedom,  and
fuch  as  argues  great  want  of  ReV-erence  for  fo  tremendous
a  Majefty.  Re{peft  and  Duty  then  ought  to  make  us  de-
.cline  an  Oath.  Even  fo,  as  if  we  can  poffibly  help  it,  ne-
ver to  bind  our  Souls  with  fo  Sacred  an  Engagement  at  all.
And  a  man,  that  is  duly  cautious,  and  tender  in  thefe  mat-
ters, would  rather  undergo  ibme  Trouble,  or  pay  fome
Forfeiture,  than  allow  himfelf  the  Liberty  of  Swearing.  But
if  their  he  an  urgent  and  unavoidable  Neceffity  for  doing
ir;  As,  if  that  Teftimony  of  my  Truth  be  required  to  refcue
my  Friend,  or  my  Relation,  from  the  Injuries  of  an  Op-
prefTor,  or  a  Falfe  Accufer  ;  Or  if  my  Country,  and  the
.Peace  of  it  command  this  Afllirance  of  my  Fidelity:  In
.fuch  Cafes,  and.  other  fuch  like,  we  may  take  an  Oath'  in-
deed i  but  then  we  muft  be  fure  not  to  proftitute  our  Con-
fciences.'  For,  when  once  we  have  brought  ourfelves  un-
der fo  folemn  an  Obligarion,  and  engaged  God  as  a  Wit-
nefs and  a  Party  in  ir,  no  Confideration  muft  ever  prevail
with  us,  to  be  unfaithful  to  our  Promife,  or  uiitrue  iw,pux
Aflercions.

C  H  A  P. XLV.

DEcline  all  Publick  Entertainments,  and  mlx'd
Companies-,  but  if  any  extraordinary  oceafion
call  you  to  them,  keep  a  ftrid  Guard  upon  your-
fslf,  left  you  be  infected  with  rude  and  vulgar  Con-
verfation : ,  For  know,  that  though  a  Man  be  never
fo  clear  himfelf,  yet,  by  frequenting  Company  that
are  tainted,  he  will  of  neceffity  contrad:  fome  Pollu-
tion from  them,

C  O  M^

ivith  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 257

COMMENT,

THE'  ifbriVier  Chapter  was  'iriterided  to  give  us  a  due
and  awful  regard  to  God ,  and  to  check  thofe  Liber-
ties, which  light  Thoughts  of  his  Majefty  are  apt  to  en-
courage in  us.  His  Next  defign  is^  to  chain  up  that  many-
headed  Monfter,  Bejire.  And,  in  order  hereunto,  he  pre-
fcribes  Rules ,  and  fets  Bounds  to  feveral  inftances  of  it  ^
beginning  with  fhofe  Vv^hich  are  moft  neceffary  for  the  fufte-
nance  of  Life  j  and  fo  proceeding  to  others,  which  make
Provifion  for  the  Body  j  till  at  iaft  he  defcend  to  thofe,
which  Nature  is  mofl  prone  to.  '

And  there  was  good  reafon  here  to  give  a  particular  Ad-
vertifement concerning  Feafts,  and  large  Companies,  in  re-
gard of  the  mighty  difference  obfervable,  between  thofe  of
Philofophers ,  and  thofe  of  common  Men,  .  The  Eating
and  Drinldng  part,  and  all  the  Jollity,  which  is  the  End
and  Bufinefs  of  moil  Invitations,  Men  of  Senfe  have  always
look'd  upon,  as  the  leall  part  of  a  Feaffc :  And  their  Meet-
ings have  been  defigned  only  for  Opportunities  to  improve
'one  another,  by  mutual  Conference,  wife  Difcourfes,  affi-
duous  Enquiry  into  the  Truth,  and  a  free  Communicatioii
of  each  others  Studies  and  Opinions.  This  is  exceeding
plain,  to  their  immortal  Honour,  from  thofe  admirable
Pieces  of  Tlato^  and  Xenophon^  and  Tlutarchy  and  Others,
called  by  the  Name  of  rheir  Sympojia,  and  are  an  account  of
the  Difcourfe  which  paflcd  ,  when  Friends  met  to  eat  and
drink  together.  But  the  Entertainments  of  the  greateft  pare
of  the  World  propofe  nothing  to  themfelves,  but  Luxury,
end  Excefs,  gratifying  the  Palate  and  fenlual  Appetites :
They  are  not  the  Entertainment  of  a  Man,  but  the  Cram-
ming and  Gorging  of  a  Brute  j  and  moft  juftly  fall  under
the  Reproach  of  an  old  Obfervation  :  The  Table  which  gives  us
Meat  "Without  Difcourfe^  is  tiotfo  properly  a  Tabk^  as  a  Manger.

A  good  Man  therefore  will  be  careful  how  he  mingles
himfelf  in  fuch  Meetings ,  and  will  decline  them  as  much  ■
as  is  poflible.  But  if  any  extraordinary  occafion  drav;  us  a-
broad,  fuch  as  a  Solemn  Feftival,  the  Invitation  of  a  Parent,
a  common  Meeting  of  Friends  or  Relations,  or  Civility  and
Complaifance,  where  the  thing  cannot  in  good  Manner^
be  refufed  j  then  the  Next  care  is,  That  we  keep  a  ftridl
guard  upon  ourfelves  j That  we  awaken  our  Reafon,  and

X  2  call

^jS K  p  I  c T  E  T  u  s*s  Morals,

call  up  all  our  Powers,  ,t«|)waceh  the .  Motion^  of  the  Mind',,
and  keep  her  under  a  fevere  Confinement,  for  fear  ihe;
ramble  abroad;,  indulge  herfelf  in  the  Diverfions  of  tbs^
Company,  and  by  degrees  degenerate  Jnto  their  FoJli^iii
For  there  is  a  ftrange  Contagion  in  Vicej  .and  no  DiA
eafe  conveys  itfelf  more  infenfibly,  or  more  fatally,  than]
fenfual  and  brutifti  Inclinations  do.  Whoever  therefore  al-
lows himfelf  in  the  Converfation  of  Perfons  addifted  to
them,  and  grows  accuftomed  to  their  Vices,  Cfor  that  Itak^'
to  be  the  meaning  of  frequenting  them)  will  foon  contra<f|,;
their  Pollutions.  His  own  Innocence  and  Purity  will  n.ofe
be  able  to  fecurehini:  In  thefe  cafes,  the  leafl  Touch  leaver
a  Tindiure  behind  it.  And  this  indeed  is  the  proper  Noti-
on of  Pollution,  the  foiling  of  a  clean  thing:  with  an  un-
clean, and  thereby  cairing  a  Blemifh  and  StaiiijJ$ion  it.

C  H  A  P. XLVI.

LET  Ufe  and  NecefFity  be  the  Rule  of  all  the
Provifions  you  make  for  the  Body.  Chufe,
your  Meats  and  Drinks,  Apparel,  Houfe,  ^nd  Re--.
tinue,  of  fuch  Kinds,  and  fuch  Proportions,  as  wilt
moil  conduce  to  thefe  Purpoles.  But  as  for  all  be-)
yond  this,  which  minifters  to  Vanity  6r  Luxury*
retrench  and  defpife  it.

COMMENT.

TH  E  neceflary  Supports  and  Conveniences  of  the  Body*
muft  firft  be  acquired,  and  then  made  ufe  of.  But  JS-
piietus  bath  inverted  this  Order  j  for  he  gives  us  Diredlions ;
for  ihe  \J(q  of  them  here,  and  referves  the  Procuring,  of;
them  to  be  treated  of  hereafter.

It  were  a  thing  perhaps  much  to  be  wiflied,  arid  would
make  greatly  for  the  Honour  of  Human  Nature,  that  fo  no- .
ble  a  Being  as  the  Rational  Soul, could  be  independent,
and  not  ftarid  in  need  of  thefe  outward  Conveniences. But
whatever  Glories  belong  tp  that  5oul,  coniidered  in  itfelf  ^

yet

with  S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S*S C  O  M  M 15  N  T. 259

yet  its  own  Immortality  will  not  fuffice,  in  this  indigent  and
precarious  ftate,  where  it  is  joined  to  a  mortal  and  corrqp*
tible  Body,  and  a<fls  in  and  by  it,.  Yet  ftill,  tho'  this  Con-
fideration  expofes  it  to  fome  Wants  j  it  lliews  us  withal,
that  thofe  Wants  are  not  Many.  For,  the  Body  being  the
Inftrument  of  the  Soul,  can  need  no  more,  than  juft  fo
much  as  will  qualify  it  for  Service  and  Adion.  This  is
the  true  meafure  of  our  Expences  upon  it,  and  all  beyond,
favours  of  Luxury  and  Extravagance.  When  the  Garpen^
ter  chufes  an  Axe,  and  fees  afterwards,  that  it  be  kept  in
good  order,  he  concerns  himfelf  no  farther,  than  to  confj-r
der  the  Size,  and  the  Shape,  and  the  Sharpnefs  of  the  Edge:
He  is  not  fo  folicitous  to  have  the  Helve  gilded,  nor  the'
Handle  ftudded  with  Pearl  or  Diamonds:  The  reafon  is,  be-
caufe  fuch  coftly  Ornaments  would  be,  not  only  fuperfluous,
but  prejudicial ;  they  would  be  extremely  ridiculous  and  fin-
gular  too,  and  they  would  be  a  hindrance  to  his  Tools,  and
render  them  lefs.fit  for  the  Ufes  they  were  defigned  to  ferve.
Juft  thus  ought  we  to  behave  ourfelves  to  this  Body  of  ours,
this  Inftrument  of  our  Soul^  giving  ourfelves  Concern  for
no  Supplies,  but  fuch  as  may  contribute  to  the  maldngit  pf
conftant  Ufe  to  us.

That  which  flaould  determine  oiir  Choice  in  Meats  and
Drinks,  fhould  be  the  Confideration,  which  is  moft  natu-
ral, and  the  moft  ready  at  hand  ,•  for  thofe  are  generally  the
moft  fimple,  moft  eafy  of  digeftion,  and  moft  wholefome.
We  are  to  remember,  that  the  Animal  Life  in  us  mult  be
fupported  j  but,  that  Nature  hath  not  made  Varieties  and
0jielques  Choifes  neceflary  to  this  purpofe.  And  therefore  we
may  very  well  difpenfe  with  the  Niceties  of  the  Kitchen -
and  Preferving  Room,  and  all  the  Arts  of  ftudied  Luxury.
ifor  the  only  Bufinefs  we  have  to  do,  is,  to  repair  the  De-
cays of  a  Body  which  is  perpetually  wafting.  And  that  this
may  be  done  at  a  much  eafier  rate,  is  very  plain,  from  the
^Examples  of  thofe  whom  neceffitous  Circumftances  compel
to  a  plain  and  cqarfe  Diet ;  who  yet  generally  have  more
Strength,  and  better  Health,  than  thoie  that  indulge  their
Palates,  and  fare  fumptuoufly.  This  we  fliall  foon  be  con-
vinced of,  if  we  do  but  compare  Country-men  with  Cour-
tiers, Servants  with  their  Matters,  and,  in  general,  poor
People  with  Rich.  For  Superfluities  and  dainty  Meats  do
but  opprefs  Nature  j  they  are  treacherous  Delights,  and  car-
ry a  kind  of  fecret  Poifon  in  them.  Hence  it  is,  that  we
fee  the  Conftitutions  of  Men  who  live  deliciouUy,  fo  mi-

X  3  ferably

26o  Epi  cTETus*s  Moral  i,

ferably  broken  j  and  inftesid  of  good  Nourifliment,  all  their
Pood  turns  into  Corruption  and  ill  Hujuours,  Catarrhs  and
Vapours,  and  all  the  wretched  Confequences  of  weak  Sto-
machs, and  indigefted  Fumes.

The  Health  therefore  of  the  Body,  and  the  preferving  it
in  a  vigorous  and  adive  llare,  iTiouId  prefcribe  to  us,  both
for  the  Kind,  and  the  Quantity,  of  our  Diet.  Ocherwife  we
lliall  be  but  the  worfe  for  the  Care  and  Expence  we  are  at
about  it  j  and,  by  a  very  impertinent  and  tniftaken  Tender-
nefs,  fliill  render  this  Initrument  lefs  capable  of  doing  the
Soul  Service,  and  perhaps  too,  quite  break,  or  wear  it  out
the  fafter.

Now  it  is  a  very  great  happinefs,  to  have  been  brought
up  fparingly,  and  ufed  to  a  plain  Diet  from  one's  Cradle.
For  by  this  means  there  will  be  no  ftiife  between  Nature  and
Appetite  i  but  that,  which  is  mofl  for  the  Benefit  of  the  Bo-
dy, will  be  likewife  moft  agreeable  to  the  Palate.  Such  a
Man  lies  under  no  Temptation  of  deftroying  the  one,  for
the  fake  of  gratifying  the  other.  "^

■  The  fame  Rule  ought  to  take  place  in  our  Apparel  too-^
in  which  Socrates  gave  himfelf  fo  little  trouble^  that  we  are
told,  he  wore  the  fame  Cloaths,  both  in  Winter,  and  Sum-
mer. Now  I  can  allow  a  Man  to  indulge  himfelf  to  die-
»rees  of  Tcndernefs,  which  would  m^ake  him  feem  a  per-
fect Epicure  in  comparilon  of  Socrates  ^  and  yet  I  fhould  think
he  might  content  himfelf,  with  wearing  fuch  Linen  and
Woollen  as  our  own  Country  affords,  and  to  change  thefe
for  Warmth  or  Coolnefs,  as  the  Seafbns  of  the  Year  fhall
make  it  moft  eafy  and  convenient  for  him.  But  fof  foreign
Vanities,  and  fantaftick  DrefTesj  fuch  as  put  us  upon  fifliing
all  the  Eaft  and  Weftern  Rivers  for  Pearl,  and  flaying  whole
Forefts  for  Furrs  and  Ermins,  and  rifling  the  Indias  for
Silks,  and  exchanging  fubftantial  Gold  and  Silver  for  the
Cobwebs  of  Worms  ^  this  can  be  noihing  elfe,  but  Foppe-
ry and  Nonfenfe,  the  mark  of  a  profligate  Mind,  and  the
jfctndal  of  an  Age  ab-^ndoned  to  Luxury  and  Madnels.

So  again  for  our  Houles.  Crates  is  faid  to  have  fatisfied
himfelf  with  a  Tub,  tho'  at  the  fame  time  he  had  a  very  fine
Wife,  which  would  have  given  him  a  fair  prccence  for  a  more
fp:'.cious  Dwelling.  This  is  a  piece  of  rhorcificatibn  not  re-
quired at  Qur  hands:  and  EpiHetus  is  well  contented,  we
lliould  have  a  Houfe,  and  all  Conveniences  about  it;  pro-
.  vide,d  /:hat  both  the  Proportion  and  the  Finifhing  be  contrived
_  jforXJife,  and  not  for  Poinp  and  Excefs. It  is  fit,  there  ihould

be

with  SiMPLiciiTs's  Comment.  261

be  a  decent  Apartment  for  the  Men,  and  another  for  the  Fe-
males, of  the  Family  ;  tho'  indeed  thefe  diftind  Apartments
are  not  abfolutely  neceflary  neither. But  to  talk  of  thirty  or
forty  Lodging-Rooms,  of  inlaid  Floors,  and  Marble  Hearths,
of  Carvings, and  Paintings,  and  Fret-work, and  different
Apartments,  fuiced  to  the  feveral  Months  of  the  Year; this
is  not  to  fupply  our  Neceflity, but  to  gratify  our  Curiofity
and  Pride. And  it  hath  this  farther  Inconvenience  in it;
That  a  Man  ufed  to  fuch  Things,  is  condemned  to  a  perpe-
tual Unealinefs,  whenever  his  own  Occafions  call  him  to  a
Place  where  he  cannot  be  equally  accommodated  ,• or  when
the  change  of  his  Fortunes  reduces  him  to  a  neceflity  of  part-
ing with  thofe  Conveniences, which,  at  the  Expence  of  fo
much  Labour  andTreafure,  he  hath  provided  for  himfelf I
might  add  too,  and  that  very  feafonably.  That  a  Man  who  hath
ufed  himfelf  to  take  delight  in  thefe  things,  cannot  efcape  the
Folly  and  Mifery  of  placing  his  Happinefs  in  them  ,•  and  fo
will  utterly  negleft  the  Improvement  of  his  own  Mind,  and
forget  the  true  Felicity  of  human  Nature. And,  if  by  any
Misfortune  (as  indeed  there  are  a  great  many  that  may  con-
tribute to  it)  he  lofe  thefe  Enjoyments ;  he  muft  confequent-
ly  be  expofed  to  all  the  Excefifcs  of  Paffion,  and  an  impotent
Mind,  and  imagine  himfelf  wretched  to  the  very  lafl  degree :
And  yet, to  any  who  efteems  things  rightly,  it  will  appear,
that  he  was  much  more  unhappy,  and  had  more  jufl  occafions
of  lamenting  his  own  Condition, when  itj  the  midft  of  his
fo-much-admired  Gaiety  and  Splendour,

The  number  of  our  Retinue,  and  ufe  of  our  Servants,  are
fubjeft  to  the  fame  Limitations;  i.  e.  the  Occafion  we  have  for
them,  and  the  proportion  ofourEflates.  For  Servants  fhould
be  always  kept  fo,  as  to  have  enough  of  that  which  is  neceffa-
ry  and  convenient  for  them;  and  yetto  be  always  in  Employ-
ment too :  Here  we  muft  cut  the  middle  way  between  the  two
Extremes,  Idlenefs  and  Indulgence  on  the  one  hand,  and  Bar-
barity and  Slavery  on  the  other.  But  as  for  vaft  Crowds  of  Pa-
ges and  Footmen,  fuch  as  have  nothing  to  do,  but  to  clear
the  way  in  the  Streets,  or  to  make  a  great  Appearance,  run
before  a  Chair,  or  hang  behind  a  Coach;  the  iVIafters  would
do  well  to  confider,  that  fo  many  Attendants  are,  in  plain
Terms,  but  fo  many  Keepers,  And  fure  there  cannot  be  a
greater  Slavery,  than  fo  many  Eyes  continually  upon  you;
to  have  every  Motion  watched,  every  Difcourfe  over-heard,
no  Freedom  or  Privacy  left;  no  Retirement  fafe  from  Ob-
fervation;  and,  in  a  word,  nothing  done  or  faid,  without

X  4.  their

26 2  E  P- 1  C  T  E  T  U  S'S M  G  R  A  L  8,

theirKnowIedge,  and  fauey  Cenfuresupon  It  and  You.  But,,
hefides  the  infuppor cable  Inconvenience  of  them  in  one's
Own  Family^  they  are  often  very  troublefome  and  injurious
to  Others;  knavifh  and  vexatious  to  Tradelinen,  Ourking
out  of  Markets  and  Shops^  rude  and  infolent  to  their  Bet-
ters, guilty  of  a  thoufand  Violences  and  "Affronts  ^  and  all
this,  upon  a  Confidence  of  their  own  Strength ;  that  their
Mailer's  Authority  will  proted:  them,  or  their  Pellow-Ser-
vants  ftand  by  them  in  their  Rogueries,  and  be  able  to  bear
them  out  againft  all  Oppofition.  By  thefe  wicked  Qualities,
and  their  abominable  Idlenefs,  they  grow  lewd  and  debauch-
ed, and  are  thev/orft  Enemies  commonly,  thaj  their  Mafter^
have.  Who  all  the  while,  for  the  State  of  keeping  thefe
Rake-hells  about  them,  are  forced  to  break  their  own  Reft,
and  undergo  many  Hardiliips,  and  fubmic  to  the  mean  Arts
of  Flattery,  and  making  their  court,  and  become  Slaves  their
own  felveSj  and  which  is  worft  of  all,  abandon  the  Rules  of
Wifdom  and  Virtue.  But  if  Men  will  be  lb  fond  of  a  pro-
fligate Life,  the  matter  is  not  great,  if  they  pay  dear  for  their
Vanity,  and  therefore  let  them  go  on,  till  Repentance  make?
them  wifer.

As  for  the  Philofopher,  who  conforms  himfelf  to  EpiSie-
tus  his  Rules,  a  very  moderate  Attendance  will  ferve  his
Turn.  For  his  Concerns  wich  the  World  are  not  like  to
be  very  great,'  and  he  will  not  think  himfelf  too  good,  to  do
all  that  he  can  in  his  owri  Perlon,  without  being  troublefome
to  Others.  So  that,  except  in  cafes  of  Sicknefs,  or  fome
Bufinefs,  which  he  alone  cannot  poffibly  difpatch,  or  Retire-
ment from  the  Affairs  of  the  World,  to  gain  leifure  for  at-
tending to  fome  better  Employment,  he  will  have  very  lit-
tle occafion  for  a  Servant.  Thus  Epi&:etus  is  laid  to  have
lived  a  long  time  all  alone ,  'till  at  lafl  he  Vv'as  forced  to  hire
a  Nurfe,  to  bring  up  a  poor  Friend's  Child:  whofe  extreme
Neceffity  had  made  him  refoived  to  drop  the  poor  Infant,  if
EpBetus  in  Charity  had  not  taken  it  home,  and  maincaiit-
td'it.'  ■  .. \j'j  i^  fio-;.f

'sAfter  having  made  particular  mention  of  the  Neceflaries
of  human  Life,  he  exhorts  in  general  to  retrench  all  Super-
fluities, reducing  whatever  is  fuch,  to  thefe' tv/o  Heads^
Luxury  and  Vanity  For  indeed,  whenever  v/e "exceed  the
Bounds  of  Moderation  in  any  of  our  Expeace^*  Qoe-Df
thefe  two  is  always  the  Caufe  of  it.  And  we  ^rTe.;toid,
that  the  Perfons  of  immortal  Renown  for  their  Wifdom
aod  Virtue  heretofore,  were  Xo;  extremely  nice  in  this  Point,
.  • .  .  ■ '  anc^

with  S I  M  PL  I  CI  U  S'S  C  O  MM  EN  T. sSj

and  fo  careful  not  to  indulge  themfelves  in  any  thing  but
what  was  abfolutely  needful  ;  That  Dioge7ies,  after  having
ufed  a  Jong  time  to  carry  a  Wooden-Difli  in  his  Pocfec  to
drink  Water  in,  paCTed  by  one  Day,-and  faw  a  poor  Fellow-
taking  up  Water  in  the  Palnas.  of  his  Hands,  and  fo  drinrfc-r.
ing  it :  Whereupon  he  flung  away  his  Difh  immediately  in-
to the  River,  and  faid,  He  had  now  no  farther  occafion  for^
it,  fince  it  only  ferved  for  a^  Ufe,  which  his  Hands  could  a^i
well  luppiy  without  if. :•.  .•-■j^-  ^^

C  H  A  P. XLVII.

ABftain  from  Familiarities  with  Women  before
Marriage,  as  much  as  poffibly  you  can  ;  At
Jeaft,  if  you  indulge  yourfelf  in  any  Liberties  of
this  kind,  be  fure  to  wrong  no  Man's  Bed,  nor
tranfgrefs  any  JLaw.  But,  how  perfeft  foever  your
own  Chaftity  may  be,  let  not  the  Conceit  of  this
make  you  troublefome  to  others  that  are  more  frail :
And  be  not  too  lavifh,  either  in  reproving  Their
Failings,  nor  in  Comrpendation  of  your  own  Vir-
tue,

C  O  M  M  E  N  r.

ABftinence  from  all  kind  of  Bodily  Pleafure  bath  this  pe-
culiar good  EfFedj  that  it  confirms  and  -invigorates  the
Rational  Soulj  and,  by  the  Experience  of  Conquefts  gained
by  fmgle  Ads,  encourages  it  to  exert  icfelf  in  new  Attempts
upon  a  Confidence,  that  it  is  able  to  mailer  the  Brutifli  and
Rebellious  Appetites.  Now  the  Diforders  of  thofe  Appe-
tites are  to  be  fubducd  Two  ways  j  by  wafting  the  Habits
of  them,  and  keeping  from  frequent  Repetitions  of  their
feveral  Ads  ^  and  by  ufing  them  to  fubmit  to  the  Dif-
cipline  of  Reafon.  But  the  Virtue  of  Continence  in  the
Pleafures  of  the  Bed,  which  is  a  Species  of  the  Brutal,  is  of
fo  much  greater  Benefit  to  the  Soul,  and  deferves  to  be
jnore  highly  dkemed,  in  proportion  as  the  Temptation  is

ftronger,

264 Epic  TETus's  Moral  s,

ftfonger,  and  the  Conqueft  more  difficult  and  noble  thm
the  reft.

Now,  although  in  this  Cafe  Reafon  be  informed  and  di-r
refted  by  Dodrines  of  Prudence  and  Morality,  and  alio  by
pofitive  Laws,  excellently  fitted  for  this  purpofe  •  and  the
Impetuous  Sallies  of  the  brutifh  Inclination  are  check'd,  and
held  in  by  this  means;  yet  many  Inltaaces  make  it  plain.
That  there  is  another  Method  of  dealing  with  them.  The
Appetites,  which  lead  to  ail  thofe  Enjoyments  whereof  Senfe
is  moft  fond,  notwithftanding  they  are  natural  to  us,  and'
very  vehement  in  their  Solicitations,  may,  by  good  Ma-
nagepient  and  Cuftom,  be  reduced  j  vanquiflied  by  mild  and
gentle  ways,  and  without  any  great  Violence  committed
upon  Human  Nature.  Thus  we  fee,  Perfons,  who  have
habituated  themfelves  to  Fairing  and  Abtlemioufnefs,  find
no  difturbance  at  all  from  the  craving  of  their  Appetites  ^
but  quite  contrary  feel  themfelves  opprelTed  and  inciifpofed,
if  they  allow  themfelves  to  eat,  either  above  their  ufual
Quantity,  or  before  their  ufua!  Hour.  And  thus  we  find
too,  that  Ambition  for  the  Olympick  Crown,  reftrjins  all
inclinations  of  another  kind,  Vv'hile  Men  are  dieting  for
the  Exercifes  ;  though  Ps.eafon  and  common  Senfe  will  tell
us.  That  the  unreafonable  quantity  of  Meat,  whfch  they
are  forced  to  take,  to  nourifli  and  flrengthen  them  at  fuch
times,  muft  needs  raife  thofe  Defires,  and  render  the  Soli-
citations of  them  more  importunate,  than  otherwife  they
would  be.  Now  we  cannot  with  any  good  Grace  call
that  Invincible,  which,  for  the  fake  of  a  Sprig  of  Laurel,
is  vanqulfh'd  every  Day.  So  alfo  both  Cuftom  and  Pofitive
Law  h-ave  utterly  forbidden.  That  very  near  Relations
lliould  come  together;  and  the  Inclinations  of  tbefe  Per-
fons, tho'  infufed  into  them  by  Nature,  are  yet  almofl  in-
capable of  being  moved  towards  one  another,  notwith-
ftanding any  the  moft  engaging  Charms  of  either  Party ;  and
whenever  they  are  fo,  we  look  upon  it  as  an  extreme  Un-
happinefs,  and  particular  Judgment.  The  Confequence  of
this  I  take  to  be,  That  the  Paffion,  which  can  very  hardly
be  provoked  in  One  cafe,  might,  with  good  Care  be  fup-
prefs'd  in  Another.

Now  that  ftridi  Chaftity,  v/hich  is  here  required  before
Marriage,  is  very  Reafonable  and  juft  upon  Many  Ac-
counts; but  is  particularly  fo  upon  This,  That  the  Man
may  be  upon  equal  Terms  with  his  Wife,  and  give  her  the
Satisfadion  o:  the  fame  unblemifh'd  Virtue  in  his  Own  Per-
-  fon.

with  S I  ivi  PL  I  c  I  u  s*s  Comment.  265

fon,  which  he  expedrs  to  meet  with  in  HePs.  But  (fays  he)
if  fome  Liberties  muft  be  taken,  yet  keep  at  leaft  within
the  *  Compafs  which  the  Lav/  allows :  For  all  beyond
thatj  is  impious  and  abominable  ;  or  elfe  the  Law  would
not  have  made  a  Difference,  and  fenced  it  in.  Befides,  it
argues  great  Impotence,  and  an  ungovernable  mind,  to  lay
all  this  in  common  ;  and  is  of  ill  Example,  and  peftilenc
Confequence  j  for  it  hardens  a  Man's  fclf,  and  emboldens
Others  to  flight,  not  only  this,  but  all  Laws  whatfoever,
when  once  the  Authority  which  gave  them  Sanction,  is  vio-
lated.

But  hoiv  perfeB  focver  you  o'wn  Cba/iity  may  hs^  let  not
(fays  he)  the  Conceit  of  this  inake  you  trouhlefoine  to  others
ivho  hanje  the  Misfortune  of  being  viore  frail.  And  be  not  too
lavijhj  either  i?i  reproving  Their  Failings^  or  in  commending  your
Own  Virtue.  This  is  veiy  prudent  and  feafonable  Advice ;
for  fuch  Reproaches  cannot  but  be  very  harfh  and  grating,
from  Perfons  with  whom  we  ordinarily  converfe,-  fmce  we
fee,  how  tenderly  human  Nature  can  bear  Reproof,  and
how  very  few  can  endure  to  be  chidden,  even  by  thofe  who
have  a  Right  to  do  it,  by  virtue  of  their  Poll  and  Authority,
ISTow  one  great  Reafon,  why  even  the  fofteft  Pvcbukes  are
generally  fo  very  ill  refented,  I  take  to  be  this,-  That  fo
long  as  no  Body  tells  us  of  our  Faults,  we  pleafe  ourfelves
v/irh  an  Opinion,  that  they  are  concealed  from  all  the  World,
and  by  degrees  come  to  think  nothing  a  Fault,  which  is  not
known.  And  this  again  proceeds  from  a  bafe  Principle  of
Hypocrily  and  Oftentation :  which  makes  the  Opinion  of  the
World  our  Rule  in  Judging  ourfelves  j  and  if  we  can  but
approve  ourfelves  to  Other  Men,  we  arc  not  much  con-
cerned, whether  we  can  do  it  or  no,  to  the  Truth  j  that  is,
to  God,  and  to  our  own  Confciences.

But  if  the  Perfon  reproving  us^  do  not  only  take  off  the
Veil  from  Us,  but  put  it  upon  himfelf,-  and  while  he  is  ex-
pofing  our  Faults,  exalt  and  proclaim  his  ovi'n  Virtues  j  this
aggravates  the  provocation  yet  more.  For  at  this  rate  he  in-
fults  over  us  like  a  Conqueror,  and  upbraids  our  Weak-
nefles,  and  makes  the  Comparifon,  only  that  we  may  look
a  great  deal  lefs,  and  ferve  as  Foils  for  his  Merit. And

*  This  is  to  be  unierjiood  of  the  Heathen  Countries  only,  tuhere  Simple  Fornica-
tion ivas  net  prohibited  by  any  Human  dnjliiution^  but  the  Cbrijlians  Lave  re-
fmmed  thoft  Abuje,

what

266  Epi€tetus's  Morals,

what  can  be  more  unequal  than  this, that  our  Compctiror
ihould  be  our  Judge  ?'^'  '''  • ^

Beiides,  fuch  haughty  Rebukes,  and  inviduous  Compari-
fons,  are  not  only  injurious  to  the  Perfon  defigned  to  be
leffened  by  them,  but  even  to  the  Author  himfelf.  For
they  fweli  his  Mind  with  Ptide,  and  confirm  him  in  bis  In^
folence  and  Vain-glory ;  they  corrupt  all  his  Reproofs,  and
incline  him  to  correct  Mifcarriages,  not  fo  much  out  of  any
defire  to  reform  them,  as  to  raife  his  Own  Reputation  by
finking  that  of  Others.  And  he,  who  hath  once  difcover'd'
fuch  bafe  indirect  Defigns,  muft  never  expedl  to  have  his
Reproofs  heard  with  any  Patience,  or  to  work  any  Good
by  them.  For  he  gives  a  Man  the  faireft  Opportunity  in  the
World  to  excufe  his  Folly,  by  laying  hold  on  the  odious
Comparifon.  And  if  he  can  but  return  this  Anfwer,  That
lefs  is  expefied  from  Hiniy  He ^  for  his  part  is  no  Pbilojopher  ;
and  therefore  his  'Failings  are  no  great  Matters  :  he  thinks  his
Reprover  eflfeftually  fjlen,c;ed^  and  Himfelf^  fuffidently  Vin-
dicated. •i-'0">-:>7  ■  -jrioifl  £  jv/Dnt  vinic';

CHAP. XLVIIL

IF  you  happen  to  be  told  at  any  time,  That  an-
other Perfon  hath  fpoken  ill  of  you,  never  trou-
ble yourfelf  to  confute  the  Report,  or  excufe  the
thing  ',  but  rather  put  all  up  with  this  Reply,
That  you  have  feveral  other  Faults  befides  that,
and  if  he  had  known  you  more  intimately  he  woiild
have  faid  worfe  of  you.

C  0  M  M  E  N  r,

THIS  feems  direded  more  particularly  againft  Anger :
a  Paflion  which  never  feels  itfelf  more  eafy  to  be  proi
voked,  than  upon  the  News  of  our  being  flandered  and
mifreprefented.  But  befides,  it  is  likewife  'a  Check  to  Am-
bition and  Vain-glory,  The  Two  great  Foraenters  of  that
PaffioHi

But

*with S.I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  s'S C  O  M  M  E  N  T. 26^

But -it  may  very  well  feem  ftrange,  that  he  ftiouldadvire
us  here  not  to  juftify  ourrelves,  and  make  a  Man  the  Pub-
lifTier  of  his  own  Follies  and  Misfortunes^  by  lb  frank  an
Acknowledgment ,  That  he  hath  feveral  other  Faults  be-
lides  that  particular  one  laid  to  his  Charge.  You-  may  call
this  Moderation  and  Temper,  but  it  feems  to  be  a  very  great
Extreme,  and  more  AfTedation  than  Evennefs  of  Spirit.

To  this  Objedlion  v/e  may  fay.  That  the  Diredtion  is  a-
greeable  enough  to  the  main  defign  of  the  Author  in  this
place:  which  is.  To  wean  the  Soul  from  what  flie  is  mo^
fond  of,  to  draw  her  off  from  the  World,  and  all  that  cari
engage  her  Affections  there,  and  to  make  the  Improvement
of  the  Mind,  and  the  Teftimony  of  ones  Breaft,  the  fole
End  and  Bufmefs  of  Life.  Now  when  a  Man  is  extremely
folidtous  to  be  cleared,  and  cannot  reft  fatisfied  in  the
Approbation  of  his  own  Confcience,  and  throw  himfelf
upon  an  Appeal  to  the  Judgment  of  God,  to  whom  all
hearts  are  open,  and  every  adion  known  •  this  Man,  I  fay
plainly  iliews  a  fbrong  Defire  to  recommend  himfelf  to  the
good  Opinion  of  the  WorJd.  And  the  EfFed:  of  fuch  a
Defire  will  be,  That  if  he  can  impofe  upon  the  World
with  falf^  Pretences,  he  will  be  fatisfied  with  the  deceitfui
Appearance  of  Vircue  too,  and  perfuade  himfelf  of  his  In-
nocence j  becaufe  tbofe  Judges,  to  whofe  Sentence  he  re-
fers his  Adions,  think  him  fo,  and  are  able  to  urge  nothing
to  the  contrary.  Bur  now-  when  a  Man  is  got  above  the
Cenfure  of  the  World,  and  fcorns  to  make  that  a  Rule  for
his  Behaviour  j  he  is  under  no  Temptation  of  partiality  to
himfelf,  but  fees  his  own  Faults,  and  ftands  condemned  by
the  Teftimony  of  his  own  Mind  againft  him.

Now  the  accufing  ones  own  klf,  and  owning  other
Faults,  befides  v^hat  the  World  lays  to  our  Charge,  (trikes
at  the  very  Root  of  Oftentacion  and  Vain-glory.  And  in-
deed it  is  neceflary  fomething  iliould  do  fo :  For  This  is  a
prevailing  Paffion,  riveted  dole  into  the  Soul,  fo  intricately
faftned  and  intangled  there,  that  it  fixes  itfelf,  while  we
endeavour  to  pluck  it  up  ■  for  even  thole  Adions,  wherein
we  xnduftrioufly  avoid  Vain-glory,  are  often  ftrongly  tindu-
red  with  it  ,•  and  chiefly  owing  to  it.

It  hafli  alfo  one  confidcrable  advantage  above  other  Padi-  ^
ons, which  is. That  its Vicioufnefs and Deformity  lies
concealed  ionger  than  any  elfe,  and  deceives  us  with  a  Co-
lour of  Virtue, becaufe  it is  by  Virtuous  Adions  on'y  th":
we  hope  for  Reputation. Not confidering  in  the  mean

while

268  EpicTETu  s's  Moral  s,

while.  That  this  very  courting  of  Applaufe  fullies  the  moil:
^commendable  Adions,  and  robs  them  of  all  pretenfion  to
."Virtue,  becaufe  we  do  not  make  That  our  principal  End,
nor  cbufe  the  Good  for  irs  own  fake,  but  for  the  Credic
8nd  Honour  it  will  derive  upon  us.  For  it  is  plain,  The
Mark  v/e  aim  at  is  Glory  and  Commendation,  and  the  Good
we  apply  ourfelves  to,  is  not  the  EfFeft  of  Choice  but  Ne-
cefiSry.  Thus  many  a  Man  would  not  be  Juft  (for  inftance)
but  only  that  there  is  no  way  to  get  the  good  Opinion  of  the
World  without  it.

There  is  this  to  be  faid  farther  in  its  excufe,  That  this
Paffion  feems  to  be  extremely  ufeful  for  the  qualifying  of
feveral  others.  For  we  are  content  to  undergo  many  lliarp
Confiicls  with  ourfelves,  and  deny  feveral  Inclinations  and
Enjoyments,  upon  this  account.  And,  as  it  is  a  refcraint
to  our  Vices,  ib  it  is  likewife  a  powerful  Incentive  and
;3f  ur  to  Virtue  i  it  puts,  as  upon  engaging  in  many  difficult
Encounters,  reconciles,  us  to  Auflerities  and  Mortifications,
and  impofes  T^sk.s,  which,  though  perfornied  v^ith  greac
Alacrity  upon  this  account,  would  orherwife  feem  fevere
and  infupportable  Punifiimenrs.

For  this  Rcafbn,  Ambition  and  Defire  of  Applaufe  arc
very  fignificantly  termed  the  inmofl  Garment  of  the  Soul,
as  fticking  clofell  to  it  of  all  Pafnons  v/hatfoever ;  becaufe,
when  we  have  ftript  ourfelves  of  the  reft,  yet  this  is  ftill
retained  j  And  jn  truth  the  reft,  are  Jiiany  rimes  laid  afide
for  the  fake  of  this.  At  ieafl:  they  appear  to  be  foj  for
to  fpeak  ftridlly,  this  is  all  but  Appearance,  and  Hypocri-
fy  j  nor  does  this  Paflion  in  reality  make  the  Soul  abandon
Vice;  It  only  puts  a  Reftraint  upon  the  outward  A6t,  with-
out any  efreclual  Reformation  of  the  Mind,  or  correcl:ing
the  inward  Motions  to  Wickednefs.  Thus  we  find,  that
.thofe  very  Perfons,  who,  to  preferve  their  Reputation,  ab-
ftain  from  grofs  and  fcandalous  Lewdnefs,  do  yet  without
any  remorfe  indulge  themfclves  in  unfeen  Liberties,  and
loofe  Imaginations.  So  that,  upon  the  whole  matter,  men
are  not  one  whit  the  better,  but  the  worfe  upon  this  account.
There  are  not  any  vicious  Defires  reclaimed  by  it;  and  the
abftaining  from  the  open  Gratification  of  thofe  Defires  blows
men  up  with  a  falfe  Opinion  of  Virtue,  and  adds'  to  their
Vanity  ten  times  more.

It  feems,  I  confefs,  capable  of  doing  fome  Service  to
Young  men,  whofe  Paflions  ride  highj  by  curbing  the  Ex-
orbitancieSj  which  Youth,  through  the  Heat  and  Rafhnefs  of

that

I

^ith  S I M  p  L  I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 269

that  Age, is  fo  exceeding  apt  to  fly  out  into. But  when

"'^hofe  importunate  SolicitatioBS  wear  off  and  men  grow  in-
to cooler  Reafbri,  no  Quality  of  the  Mind  can  be  more  dan-
gerous and  deftruclive.  For  it  abfolutely  ruins  all  Virtue,
by  reducing  the  Soul  to  bafe  Principles.  It  makes  the  Opi-
nion of  the  World  the  chief  End  of  Action,  and  lays  more
ftrefs  upon  recommending  one's  felt  to  Others,  than  upon
the  Satisfaction  and  Tcftimony  of  one's  own  Confcience.
It  propofes  Good  to  us,  as  eligible,  not  for  any  Intrinfick
Excellence  of  its  own,  but  for  the  Honour  and  Fame  con-
fequent  to  the  doing  of  it :  So  that  in  fhort  we  never  really

-choofe  Good ; not  Good  I  mean,  conlidered  as  fuch,  be-

"caufe  we  do  not  chufe  it  for  its  ov;n  fake.

Nor  is  this  only  a  dangerous  Vice,  but  a  mofb  extrava-
gantly ridiculous  one  too ;  and  fuch  as  expofes  all  who  are

'  rainted  with  it,  to  one  moft  abfurd  and  inconfiftent  Folly.
For  Men  of  this  Temper  commonly  value  Themfelves,  and
defpife  Others  extremely  ;  and  yet  at  the  fame  time  do  they
court,  and  flatter,  and  fear  Others  j  and  pin  all  their  Happi-
nefs,  and  all  their  Expe<ftation,  upon  thofe  very  Wretches,
whom  they  think  fo  delpicable.

Now  nothing  can  cure  this  extravagant  and  flavifh  Paffion,
fo  effecTruallv  r:s  Moderation  ,•  an  evennefs  of  Mind,  and  a

:  frank acknowledgment of  our own Faults and Failings.

■'And  yet  even  This  hath  fome  hazard  in  it  too.  For  afFedt-
ed  Humility  is  the  greateft  Pride,  and,  without  due  Caution
and  prudent  Care,  v/e  fhall  fall  into  the  very  danger  we
v/ould  avoid,  and  become  Vain-glorious,  even  in  the  Accu-
rations  of  ourfelves.  Many  men  know,  that  to  leffen  them-
felves in  their  owqi  ExprefRons,  is  to  befpeak  the  Com-
mendation of  others  by  a  fly  and  a  furer  way.  But  this
Temper  recommended  by  Epidietin  muft  be  fmcere,  free  from
underhand  Trickings,  and  indiredl  Ends.  And  indeed  he
recommends  it  upon  very  good  Grounds.  For  it  is  eafy  to
perceive,  Thar,  if  Fate  fliould  fo  order  the  matter,  as  that
cur  Virtues  and  Advantages  fhould  be  known  to  ourlelves
alone  j  and  our  Follies and  Defecfts  publiflied  to  all  the

.  World  ;  there  would  prefently  be  an  end  of  all  Vain-glory,
and  whatever  Good  we  do,  we  fhould  be  invited  to  it  for
its  Own  fake,  when  there  could  be  no  Profpeft  of  Applaufe
to  tempt  us,

CHAP.

270  EpI  CTE  t^US's MORAL^^

CHAP. XLIX,

T  is  by  no  meatis  convenkht,  that  you  fbould
frequent  the  Theatres ;  but  if  any  occafion  hap-
pen to  call  you  thither,  difcover  no  Concern  but
for  yourfelf  alone.  That  is,  do  not  wifh  the  Suc-
cefs  any  other  than  it  is,  or  that  the  Viflory  fhould
fall  on  any  Petfon,  except  him  that  gains  it.  For
this  will  keep  your  Mipd  free  and  difengaged.  Let
your  Behaviour  there  be  eafy  and  fedate,  not  l3e-
traying  any  Tranfpoi't  of  the  Mind,  by  Shouting
or  loud  Laughter,  of  long  and  Vehement  Emotion,
So  again,  when  the  Play  is  over,  do  not  difcoorfe
much  of  what  you  faw  there,  nor  enlarge  upon
things  for  which  you  are  never  the  better:  jFor  if
,  you  do,  this  plainly  implies,  that  the  Entertainment
,  hath  gotten  within  you,  and  that  you  admired,  and
were  highly  pleafed  with  it.

COM  M  E  N  r.

THE  lenlual  and  brutifli  Appetites  are  not  confined  to
fuch  Objeds  only,  as  our  Touch  and  Tafte  are  em-
ployed in,  but  extend  themfelves  lilv-ewirc  to  thofe  which
entertain  our  Sight  and  our  Hearing.  And  what  fort  of
Behaviour  and  Difpofitton  will  become  us  with  refpeft  to
thefe,  he  tells  us  here,  by  laying  down  this  Rule:  That  it
is  by  no  means  tiecejfary  or  co7zvenievt  to  frequent  the  Tuhlick
Theatres.  He  might  have  faid  indeed,  That  it  is  abfolutely
necefTary,  and  highly  expedient,  not  to  frequent  them :  For
in  truth  fuch  Places  leave  a  ftrong  Infedion,  and  make  the
whole  Life  of  thofe  that  ufe  them,  to  become  Theatrical,
all  Show  and  Formality.

But  there  may  fometimes  an  occafion  fail  out,  in  which
a  Man  cannot,  without  Injury  to  himfclf  or  his  Charafter,
refufe  appearing  there ;  as,  either  upon  feme  Pubhck  Fefli-
val,  which  the  Entertainm.ents  are  defigned  to  Honour,
and  make  more  folemn  • or  in  compliance  with  the^  Cu-

- ftoms

mth  Si  MPLT  cius's  Comment.  271

ftoms  of  the  World ;  or  at  the  requefl  of  Friends  ^  ( for  it
looks  (bur  and  morofe  to  be  fingular,  and  decline  the  re-
ceived Praftices  of  Mankind  ^ )  or  we  may  be  invited  thither,
only  to  make  an  Experiment  upon  our  own  Selves,  as  hav-
ing a  mind  to  be  fatisfied ,  what  In)provements  we  hav^.
made,  and.  how  differently  we  are  affedled  with  thefe  Mat-|
ters,  at  different  times.  If  therefore  any  of  thefe,  or  any
other  reafonable  Caufe,  bring  us  to,  the  Theatre,  we  muft
be  fare  to  call  up  all  our  Vigilance  j  to  Ci.'Vci-  ourfelves ,
and  not  let  our  Paffions  get  loofe  ^  but  be  v.  Ucitous  only
for  the  Peace  and  Evennefs  of  our  Mind,  and  perfectly  in--
differenr  where  the  Succefs  of  the  Combat  lights.  For  we
are  to  remember,  that  all  thefe  are  things  foreign,  and
without  us,  and  confequently  fuch  as  cur  Defires  and  A-
verlions  ought  by  no  means  to  fallen  upon.

This  '*  ward  Tranquillity  is  what  Epi&etus  expecfls  our
outward  Air  and  Behaviour  fhould  fhew :  That  our  Mien
Slid  Countenance  be  fettled  and  compofed  ,  yet  eafy  and
good  natured  too  ;  fuch  as  may  ex'prefs  Gravity  without
Sullennefs,  and  Mirth  without  Levity  :  Not  making  our-
felves troublefome  and  ridiculous,  either  by  loud  Acclama-
tions and  Appliiufes  at  what  is  well  performed  j  or  by  burft-
ing  out  into  loud  and  exceffive  Laughter  at  any  comical
Paffagcs  that  come  before  us  j  but  commending  the  one  fort
with  Judgment  and  Moderation,  and  approving  the  other
with  a  filent  Smile.

When  the  Sight  is  over,  there  is  a  farther  care  to  be  taken.
Not  to  difcourfe  largely  upon  any  thing  ive  have  been  entertained
'With  there ;  as  conlidering,  that  thefe  matters  contribute
not  at  all  to  the  making  a  Man  wi'fer  or  better.  And  fince
they  are  in  no  degree  inftruiflive,  or  reforming^  a  Man
ought  not  to  think  them  worthy  to  be  the  fubjecft  of  his
Difcourfe.  Now  indeed  Epi&etus's  Caution  here,  of  not
difcourfmg  much  upon  Things  for  which  we  are  never  the
better,  may  bear  different  Interpretations :  For  he  may  either
intend  it  of  all  Things  relating  to  thefe  Publick  Entertain-
ments, the  Succeffes  of  the  Gladiators,  and  every  Event
which  is  there  prefented  to  us ;  and  that  a  Man  cannot  poffi-
bly  be  ediSed,  by  talking  upon  luch  Subjecfls  as  thefe  :  Or
elfe  he  may  only  cut  off  fome  particular  parts  of  our  Dif-
courfe upon  thefe  Subjeds,  and  advife  us,  when  we  do
make  them  the  matter  of  our  Talk,  that  we  fhould  fay  no
more  upon  thefe  occafions,  than  what  may  fome  way  con-
duce to  the  corre(fling  of  Manners ,  and  making  us  wifer.

Y  And

272  Epi  cTETus*s  Morals,

And  fuch  Topicks  particularly  are  thofe,  which  rrake  Ob-
fcrvations  upon  the  Behaviour,  and  condemn  all  fuch  inde-
cent and  irregular  Geftures ,  as  plainly  difcover,  that  the
Mind  is  not  in  due  temper.  But  to  run  out,  and  enlarge
extravagantly,  upon  what  hath  pafTed,  is  a  manifefl:  Indica-
tion, that  our  Minds  were  too  much  affeded  wich  it  ;  and
that  it  appeared  to  be  great  and  juft  matter  of  Admiration
to  us.  All  which  is  very  unworthy  a  Philofopher,  and  a
Defect  peculiar  to  little  and  vulgar  Souls.

CHAP. L.

E  not  fond  of  going  to  every  body's  Rehear-

fdls. But  when you  do,  be  fure  to  preferve

a  grave  and  fedate  Temper  ;  yet  do  not  run  into  the
other  Extreme  neither ,  of  rude  and  unmannerly
Morofenefs.

COMMENT.

TH  E  next  thing  he  gives  Direclion  in,  is,  thofe  Publick
Rehearfals,  which  the  Pretenders  to  Oratory  and  Poe-
try ufe  to  make,  merely  for  ORentation,  and  to  proclaim
their  own  Eloquence.  The  Subjed:s  of  thefe  Rehearfals
were  various.  Sometimes  a  Panegyrick  upon  fome  great
Prince,  ■  or  General,  or  Sratefman  ^  Sometimes  they  were
Politick  Harangues  ^  Sometimes  a  fine  Defcription  of  a  Ci-
ty, or  Country;  Sometimes  the  difcuffing  a  Point  of  Law,
or  the  like.  Now  fuch  as  thefe,  which  propofe  nothing
■farther  to  themfelves  than  Vanity  and  Oftentation,  and  have
no  concern  with  Virtue,  or  any  thing  that  is  properly  Ours,
•lie  advifes  us  not  to  be  forward  in  frequenting ;  nor  indeed
ever  to  attend  them  at  all,  without  fome  good  Reafon  which
may  juftify  our  coming.  For  it  may  very  often  happen,
that  this  will  be  expedled  from  you,  either  as  a  Teftimony
of  your  Friendlhip  to  the  Com.pofer,  or  a  Mark  of  Refpecl:
due  to  the  Great  Man,  who  is  his  Theme  ;  or  upon  fome
other  account,  which  Civility  and  Good-Breeding  may  make

necef-

isciith  SiMPLicitJs's  Comment.  273

neceiTiiry.  And  thcfe  Compliances  are  fomedmes  of  great
Ufa,  and  have  good  EfFecft  j  by  raking  off  rhe  edge  of  chat
Envy  and  Spighc,  with  which  all  People  are  naturally  per-
fecuted,  who  recede  from  the  common  way  of  living,  and
do  not  do  as  the  World  does.

Since  then  you  muft  in  all  likelihood  be  there  fometimes,
the  Next  point  to  be  gained  is  a  due  and  decent  Manage-
ment of  yourfelf  upon  thele  occafions.  And  this  will  beil
be  done,  by  a  grave  and  compofed  Temper  j  yet  not  fo  fe-
vere,  as  to  be  rude  and  troublefome.  Your  Gravity  muft
fhew  icfelf  in  commending  Things  as  they  defervej  fo  as
neither  to  be  unfeafonable,  nor  immoderate  and  lavifh  in
your  Praife.  Your  compofed  Temper  will  keep  you  or-
derly and  quiet  ,*  it  will  prevent  all  irregular  Motion,  and
loud  Applaufe,  and  impercinent  InterrtipcitJns.  It  will  con-
tinue rhe  fame  modeft,  decent  Air,  'without  thofe  fudden
and  vehement  alterations,  both  in  Body,  and  Mind,  and
Mien,  which  are  but  too  frequent  in  fuch  cafes.  Your  Eaii-
nefs  muft  be  prefervcd  too  all  this  while,  that  you  may  a-
void  the  Indecency  of  being  over-thoughtful,  and  feeming
■not  to  attend.  By  this  alfo  you  will  be  kept  from  a  fuUen
and  affeded  Silence  j  and,  when  Things  arc  v/ell  faid,  will
not  grude  them  their  due  Commendation.  It  will  prevent
all  peevifii  Cenfures  and  malicious  Cricicifms,  and  that  ill-
bred  Roughnefs,  which  calls  out  to  the  Poet,  and  reproaches
him  with  Fallliood  and  Flattery,  or  a  duii  Thought,  or  fiac
£nd  improper  Exprcfiicn).  In  fhort,  the  Eafinefs  and  Com-
placency expecfled  from  you,  ^ill  confift  in  fuch  Candour
and  Good  Nature,  as  feems  pleafed  with  the  Eloquence  of
the  Rehearfer,  and  the  Merit  of  the  Perfon  commended,  and
can  congratulate  Both  freely,  when  they  deferve  it,  with-
'Ouc  any  mixture  of  Envy  or  Detra(fl:icn.

CHAP. LI.

HEN  you  are  engag'd  in  Bufmefs  with  any
Perfon,  btu  efptcially  if  he  be  a  Man  of
Q^ialicy  and  Power,  confider  with  yourfelf,  how
Socrates  and  Zem  would have  behaved  theinfelves

y  2  upon

274 E PICT E  Tus's  Morals,

upon  this  occafion,  and  then  you  will  never  be  af
a  lofs,  how  to  manage  your  Affairs  with  decency,
and  to  advantage.

C  0  M-M^  NT.

PHrlofophical  Perfons  make  their  own  Improvement  the
i^iain  Bufinefs  of  their  Lives,  and  confequently  meddle
not  <vith  any  but  themfelves  ;  fo  that  they  are  very  feldotn
troubled  with  attendance  and  application  to  Great  Men.  Be-
fore Perfons  fo  unpractifed  therefore,  be  fets  Socrates  ^xA
Zeno  for  Patterns  j  that  by  tailing  Meafures  from  their  Vir-
tues and  Demeanour,  they  may  be  able  to  manage  fo  nice  a
Point  of  Converfation  ^  and  cenfider,  that  thefe  excellent
Perfons,  when  they  addrefs'd  to  Authority  and  Greatne(s,
'did  not  put  on  a  ftiff  Formality  and  diflemble  Refpedl  ,•  but
{hewed  a  true  and  genuine  Noblenefs  of  Soul,  agreeable  to
the  Tenour  of  their  whole  Lives.  And  this  too  fuch,  as
was  the  Refult  of  Philofophy  and  Prudence,  and  not  the
EfFedt  of  Infolence  and  Vanity  :  That  this  kept  them  in  a
due  Moderation  and  Decorum  ^  between  a  fubmiffive  Cring-
ing, and  a  fawcy  Perinefs.

The  fame  Temper  will  prevent  any  fuch  mean  and  abjeft
Awe  for  the  Eminence  of  any  Man's  Station,  as  fliould  betray
us  into  Flattery,  and  prevail  v/ith  us  to  complement  their  Fail-
ings, and  commend  their  Vices.  And  yet  it  will  not  fuf-
fer  u$  to  prefume  upon  our  own  Authorit}'  and  Vfe^ifdom
neither;  or  fo  far  to  forget  Decency  and  Good-Manners,
as  to  reproach  and  rip  up  thofe  Vices,  in  rude  and  opprobri-
ous Language.,  It  teaches  us  the  fofteft  and  moft  gentle
methods  of  Reproof;  and  advifes,  firft,  to  allow  what  they
have  done  well ,  its  due  Praifes ,  and  fo  to  make  way  for
juft  and  neceffary  Rebukes.  Thus  fweetning  the  lefs-pala-
table  part  of  our  Difcourfe,  with  what  we  know  hath  art  a-
greeable  Relifh,  as  Phyficians  wrap  up  bitter  Pills  in  Honey,
to  make  them  go  down  the  more  glibly.  And  when  we  muft
at  laft  proceed  to  this  moft  ungrateful  good  Office,  it  will
become  us,  not  to  be  too  rigorous  Obfervers,  nor  too  fe-
vere  Interpreters  of  their  Aiflions,  as  if  their  Deformities
were  any  Diverfion  to  us,  or  v/e  took  a  m.aiicious  Joy  in
finding  fault  :  But  to  dem.onftrate,  by  all  our  Carriage,
That  Reformation  is  our  only  End ;  and  to  purfue  this
with  a  moft  affedionate  Zeal,  expreffing  great  Tendernefs,

and

with  S I M  p  L I  c  I  u  s's  Com m en  t. 275

and  much  Trouble  and  Concern,  that  the  Luftre  of  their
good  Adions  fhould  be  thus  fulHed  and  ecJipfed,  by  thefe
Failings,  and  Blemiflies,  and  rebellious  Paffions.

There  is  alfo  another  Topick  applicable  to  this  purpofe,
which  I  do  not  doubt  but  Socrates  and  Zeno  managed  with
marvellous  dexterity  and  fuccefs  :  Which  was.  To  con-
vince People  of  Condition,  what  a  world  of  Inconvenien-
ces and  Troubles  Greatnefs  was  ever  incumbred  with  j  and,
that  the  only  defirable  thing  in  it,  is  the  Power  and  Oppor-
tunities of  doing  good,  and  making  that  Good  difFufive  and
effectual,  above  Men  of  a  meaner  Capacity.  So  that  thofe,
who  in  fuch  a  Poft  abandoned  themfelves  to  Vice,  and  ne-
gled:  to  improve  this  advantage,  retain  the  bitter  part,  and
throw  av/ay  all  the  fv/eet  j  are  opprefs'd  with  the  Miferies
and  the  burdenfome  Cares  of  Riches  and  Honour,  and  lofe
all  the  Comfort  and  all  the  Happinefs  of  them.

But  all  this  while  it  muft  be  remembred,  that  Socrates  and
Zeno  are  propofed  to  us  as  Patterns,  becaufe  it  is  conve-
nient, that  we  fhould  fix  oiir  Eyes  upon  the  nobleft  and
moft  perfeft  Examples,  and,  fo  far  as  we  can,  afpire  by  de-
grees to  their  Perfediions.  But  ftill  we  muft  in  matters  of
Pradice  be  content  to  keep  to  our  own  Model^  and  fhaU
acquit  ourfelves  very  well,  if  our  Aftions  bear  proportion
to  our  Condition  and  Charadler.  Nor  can  it  be  expeded,
that  a  young  Proficient  in  Philofophy,  and  one,  whom  E-
fi^etus  fuppofes  fcill  to  ftand  in  need  of  his  Inftrud:ion,
ihould  be  able,  in  his  Behaviour  and  Converfation,  to  pro-
ceed juft  as  Socrates  and  Zeno  did.  The  pretending  to  per-
Jpnate  thefe  Great  Men  in  all  things,  would  not  be  Imita-
tion, but  Mimicry,-  and  lit  fo  ill  upon  fuch  a  one,  as  to
make  Him  and  what  he  did  ridiculous.  How  vain  an  at-
tempt this  would  prove,  we  need  no  other  Argument,  than
that  account  given  of  Zeno  by  Antigomis^  the  Succeffor  of
Alexander  in  Syria  j  v/ho,  tho'  he  had  converfed  with  fevCr
ral  Philofophers,  yet  declared,  That  he  never  could  fo  far
command  himfelf  in  Company  with  Zeno^  as  to  conquer  his
Diforder  and  Confufxon  •  and,  That  the  very  Prefence  of
that  Man  did  (what  no  other  could  do)  damp  him  with  an
unufual  Awe  and  Concern.

And  thus  EpHetus  takes  occaHon,  from  diredling  us  wl  at
Methods  are  proper  to  be  ufed  in  addrefs  to,  and  conferenc  e
^with, Men in  eminent  Dignity, to  defcend  to  inferioiT
Conditions,  and  give  Rules  for  Converfation  in  general.

y  3  CHAP;

27^ Epictetus's  Morals,

CHAP. LII.

HEN  your  Occafions  make  it  necelTary  to  vi-
fit  a  Man  of  Quality,  reflect  with  yourfelf
before  you  go,  what  may  happen  to  you.  Podi-
bly  he  may  not  be  at  home  j  or  if  he  be,  that  he
■will  not  be  fpoken  with  ;  that  the  Porter  may
ihut  the  Door  rudely  upon  you  -,  that  you  may
wait  in  the  Hall  among  the  Foot-men  j  that  none
of  them  will  carry  your  Meflage  to  his  Lord  •,  or,
if  they  do,  that  you  will  meet  with  nothing  but
Scorn  and  Neglecl.  When  you  have  prepared  your-
felf thus,  if  you  think  it  worth  your  while  to  go
upon  fuch  Terms,  do  it  •,  and  bear  whatever  hap-
pens, as  you  ought.  But  do  not  repine  afterwards,
and  fay  with  yourfelf.  That  the  Bufmefs  was  not
worth  all  this  Trouble  :  For  that  is  a  Reflexion
unbecoming  a  Philofopher ,  and  fhews  a  vulgar
Soul,  not  reconciled  fufficiently  to  the  Accidents
of  the  World.

COMMENT.

THE  Advice  he  gives  here,  is  much  of  rhe  fame  nature
with  what  we  m.et  with  before  in  the  Ninth  Chapter  \
where  he  begins  thus  :  In  every  Aciion  you  undertake^  conf.der^
iirft,  ijjith  yourfelf^  and  weigh  well  the  Nature  and  Circum-
flancesof  the  Things  SiC-  Only  there  indeed  he  continues  and
illuftrates  his  Difcourle,  by  a  very  low  and  familiar  inftance
ci  Bathrng-j  but  here  he  applies  it  to  that  much  m.ore  im-
portant one,  of  application  to  Great  Men.  There  is  alio
this  other  difference  between  the  two  Paflages,  That  the
Conclufion  and  Deiign  of  his  Advice  there,  was  to  per-
fuade  Men,  not  to  be  too  much  concerned  at  things  v.'hen
they  had  happened,  but  to  keep  their  Temper  even,  and
their  Reafon  undifcurbed  ;  v,'hereas  here  his  Bufinefs  is  to
bring  Men  to  a  prudent  Forecail,  that  they  may  not  run  on
giddily,  nor  fee  Things  by  halves  j  but  reprefent  to  them-

felves

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 277

elves  before-hand,  all  the  poffible  Difficulties  and  Inconve-
niences, which  can  rife  upon  them-  that  they  may  take  as
true  an  Idea  of  all  the  difcouraging  Circumftances  nov/,  as  it
is  poffible  for  the  Event  to  give  them  afterwards.

For,  after  we  have  taken  upon  us  the  flavery  of  waiting
upon  a  Great  Man,  and  met  with  thefe  Difappointments
and  cold  Negledsj  we  are  apt  to  fit  down  difcontented,
and  v^^ich'  much  remorfe  to  condemn  our  own  Folly,  and
take  it  exceeding  ill  to  be  treated  with  fo  much  Infolence
and  Scorn,  and  fo  unbecoming  our  Quality  or  Defert.  Now
all  that  DilTatisfadion  is  owing  to  one  of  thefe  two  Caufes  j
Either,  That  we  made  a  rafh  and  ill  Choice  at  firft  j  Or,
e\k^  That  thefe  external  Accidents  make  too  ftrong  and  too
^tender  an  Impreffion  upon  us.  And  both  thefe  Defed:s  be-
tray a  bafe  and  a  narrow  Soul  j  not  fuitable  in  any  degree
to  the  Dignity  of  a  Philofopher,  who  fhould  know  how  to
manage,  and  how  to  flight,  every  Accident  of  this  kind  :
Not  fuffering  himfelf  to  be  impofed  upon,  like  the  ignorant
Vulgar,  with  the  falfe  Appearances  of  Things  ;  nor  miftaking
thofe  for  matters  of  Confequence  which  are,  really  and  in
their  own  Nature,  tnere  Trifles,  and  of  little  or  no  confi-
deration  at  all  to  him.

So  that,  having  in  the  former  Chapter  inftrudled  us,  what
Decorum  is  to  be  obferved  towards  Perfons  of  Honour  and
Authority,  who  are  content  to  admit  us  to  fome  Familiarity
and  free  Conferences  with  them,  and  propofed  the  Pru-
dence of  Socrates  and  Zeno  for  the  Standard  of  our  Behavi-
our ;  he  prefcribes  to  us  here,  the  Rules  proper  to  be  fol-
lowed, where,  we  are  received  with  Coldnefs,  and  Difdain,
and  rougher  ufage :  That,  except  where  fome  abfolute  Ne-
ceffity  requires,  we  fhould  have  nothing  at  all  to  do  with
fuch  Perfons  j  and  when  any  urgent  occafion  compels  us  to
chufc  this  Attendance,  and  our  Bufinefs  mufl:  be  followed,
though  at  the  Expence  of  all  thofe  Hardfhips  and  AflFronts  j
then  we  fhould  fettle  and  compofe  our  Minds  before  j  and
not  expole  ourfelves  to  the  misfortune  of  a  Surprize,  or  the
weaknefs  of  a  late  Repentance,  and  wifh  we  had  never  un-
dertaken it,  when  thefe  things  are  come  upon  us.

y  4  CHAP.

Z^$ ■■: ,  |^jPf^Q;TET#s's MoRAtS,

C  H  A  p. LIII.

N  familiar  Converfation  with  your  Friends  and
Acquaintance,  do  not  make  it  your  Bufinefs,  to
entertain  Company  with  tedious  Narratives  of  your-
felf,  and  your  own  Affairs.  Confider,  that  Their
Refentments  and  Yours  are  very  different  upon  thefe
occafions.  And  though  the  Exploits  by  which  you
have  fignalized  yourfelf,  the  Succeffes  you  have  ob-
tained, the  Dangers  you  have  encountred,  or  th^
Afflidlions  you  have  undergone,  may  be  a  vi^jr^
agreeable  Story  to  yourfelf  to  tell,  yet  it  will  not  ba
equally  fo  for  others  to  hear,

CHAP. LIV.

AS  little  will  it  become  you  to  render  yourfelf
the  common  Buffoon,  and  be  always  trying  to
make  the  Company  laugh.  This  is  a  very  nice
and  ticklifh  thing  i  exceeding  apt  to  degenerate  into
Vice  and  Folly,  and  (obferve  it  when  you  will)TJje:
that  only  fludies  Diverfion,  iliall  be:fqre  at  the  fame
time  to  lofe  Refpeft.

o^^J^-^^:^J7t;Xif^J?t^^..'?.w.rj«.xie:rj7E.w;^j

CHAP. LV.

OF  dl  kind  of  Difcourfe,  none  is  more  unfafe,^
none  more  defpicable,  than  That,  which  breaks'
'n  upon  Modefty  and  Good  Manners.  When-,
ever  therefore  any  Ferfon  in  your  prefence  iiies  out;
iaio  Qbfcenity, (if  fo  great  "a  Liberiy;. can  decently-

be

with  S I M  p  L I  c  I  # s^s  Comment. 279

be  taken)  reprove  him  publickly,  and  put  a  flop
to  the  lewd  Talk.  But  if  that  cannot  convenient-
ly be  done,  yet  at  leaft  do  yourfelf  the  Juftice  to
difapprove  it ;  and,  by  forbearing  to  join  with  him,
by  blufhing  for  him,  and  by  chiding  Looks,  let  all
the  Company  fee  plainly,  that  you  deteft  his  filthy
Ribaldry.

C  O  M  M  E  N  "T.

HERE  he  defcends  from  converfing  wich  Great  Perfons,
to  prefcribe  the  Meafures  fit  to  be  taken  with  thofe  of
common  Qaality,  fuch  as  are  of  a  Condition  equal,  or  in-
ferior to  our  own.  The  thing  we  are  chiefly  concerned  ro
take  care  of  in  this  cafe,  is  the  rcndring  ourfelves  eafy  and
acceptable  to  all  kind  of  Company  in  general ;  to  obferve
fuch  a  prudent  Medium^  as  may  prevent  a  ftiff  and  formal
diftance  in  One  extreme,  and  keep  off  fuch  a  fawcy  Free-
dom, as  may  make  us  cheap  and  contemptible  in  the  Other.
Nay,  Vv'hich  is  more,  we  are  not  only  to  fecure  a  due  re-
fpect  and  value  for  ourfelves,  but  to  confult  the  Intereft  of
thofe  we  converfe  with.  And  a  wife"  Man  will  not  only
endeavour  to  recommend  himfelf,  by  making  his  Difcourfe
free,  and  eafy,' and  diverting,  but  by  making  it  beneficial  and
improving  it  too.

In  order  to  the  learning  this  Art,  EpiBetus  gives  us  warn-
ing of  feveral  Indecencies,  which  are  apt  to  prejudice  Peo-
ple againft  us.  The  Firft  of  thefe  is  the  expatiating  upon
ourfelves,  choofing  out  fome  of  our  own  Performances,  or
our  own  Hardfhips,  for  our  conftant  Topick  j  and  running
Divifions  perpetually  upon  our  Families,  or  our  Fortunes.
And  this  in  truth  is  the  moft  naufeous  and  tirefome  thing  in
the  World.  For  there  is  a  Principle  of  Jealoufy  in  every  Man,
which  turns  again  at  all  the  fulfome  Commendations  of  our-
felves, and  the  Company  prefenrly  grow  fick  of  them  in
their  own  defence.  Nothing  is  more  afTuraing,  and  confe-
quently  nothing  can  be  more  provoking :  It  argues  very  lit-
rie  and  low  Thoughts  of  all  Mankind  befides,  when  we
can  with  fuch  difdain  overlook  the  reft  of  the  World,  and
imagine  no  Affairs  but  our  own,  worthy  to  furnifla  out  mat-
ter for  Difcourfe.  Befides,  all  thefe  extravagant  Panegy-
ricks  upon  ourfelves,  are  no  better  than  fo  many 'fly  In-

vedivxs

sSo  Ep ICTE Tit s's  Morals,

vedlives  againft  other  People ;  and  He,  that  takes  pains  to
extol  his  own  Condud,  only  makes  an  invidious  Compa-
rifon,  and  always  defires  to  be  fo  underftood,  as  by  a  Side-
V7ind  to  reproach  and  condemn  that  of  his  Neighbour.  So
that  a  Man  full  of  himfelf,  is  a  common  Enemy ;  No  Pa-
tience can  brook  him  ^  And  confequently  nothing  can  more
effectually  contribute  to  render  our  Converfation  agreeable
and  entertaining,  than  declining  to  trouble  the  Company
with  our  own  Affairs.  Which  hath  alfo  this  farther  advan-
tage too,  that  it  checks  the  Vanity  of  our  Temper,  abates
our  Love  of  Popular  Applaufe,  and  difcovers  a  true  Bra-
very and  Noblenefs  of  Spirit.

His  Next  piece  of  Advice  concerns  the  gay  and  the  face-
tious Pare  of  Converfation :  And  here,  in  purfuance  of  his
former  Directions,  not  to  indulge  ourfelves  in  long  and  vio-
lent Laughter,  nor  ro  burll  out  upon  every  trivial  occafion  j
he  forbids  his  Proficient  to  be  always  afting  the  Buffoon,
and  endeavouring  to  make  the  Company  laugh.  And  that,
for  this  very  good  reafon,  becauie  Mu'th  is  a  fiippery  and  un-
faithful Ground;  and  they  who  refolve  never  to  wantajeft,
will  eafily  degenerate  into  Impertinence  and  Folly.  For,
when  a  Man  accommodates  himfelf  fo  far  to  the  Humours
of  the  Vulgar,  as  to  confult  their  Merriment  and  Diverfion ;
it  fliews  that  his  Soul  is  of  their  Size  and  Temper,  and  re-
liflies  the  fame  mean  unworthy  Pleafures.  Indeed,  it  there
be  any  difference  between  them,  he  that  labours  to  enterr
tain  another  with  fuch  Diicourfe,  is  the  worfe,  and  the
greater  Fool  of  the  two.  So  that,  whoever  makes  the
Company  merry  after  this  manner,  does  in  at  his  own  Ex-
pence.  For  this  naturally  renders  him  cheap,  and  encoura-
ges the  Flearers  to  be  lavifh  and  fawcy  in  their  turn  too.
And  there  cannot  be  any  more  effcdtual  courfe  to  lofe  a
Man  in  the  Reputation  of  the  World,  and  rob  him  of  ail
the  Refpeft,  otherv/ife  due  to  his  Quality,  or  his  Parts,  than
to  be  thus  profufe  of  his  VVir,  and  to  fet  up  for  a  common
Jefter.

And  yet  it  muft  be  owned,  that  Diverfion  is  the  very  Soul
of  Converfation ;  and  fome  wife  Men  have  frequently  flu-
died  to  entertain  the  Company  with  pleafant  Difcourfe,  to
take  off  the  Imputation  of  Morofenefs  aud  Ill-humour.
To  thofe  therefore,  who  upon  occafions  find  it  convenient
to  give  a  little  Loofe  to  Mirth,  he  adds  this  moft  neceffary
Caution,  Alv:ays  to  keep  'vaitkin  the  Botmds  of  Modejiy  and
Decency. For  all  obfccne  Difcourfe  is  ablblutely  inconfiflent

with

with  SiMPLiciHs*3  Comment. 281

with  the  Charader  of  a  wife  and  good  Man ,  and  he,  who
pretends  to  any  progrefs  in  Philofophy,  will  be  fo  far  from,
'.iliowing  hitnfelf  in  it,  that  he  muft  not  with  patience  hear
any  fuch  thing  from  another.  And  therefore  Epi^etui  com-
mands fuch  a  one,  to  reprove  thefe  uncomely  Liberties,
provided  it  can  conveniently  and  properly  be  done.  As  for
inflance  j  If  the  Perfon  be  younger  than  we,  and  fo  our
Aige  feem  to  give  us  fome  Authority  over  him  ,•  If  he  be
one  who  hath  any  remains  of  Modefty  left,  and  we  have
any  reafon  to  hope  our  Rebukes  will  prove  fuccefsful  ,•  If
there  be  no  great  diftance  between  his  Quality,  or  hisEftate,
and  ours ;  fo  that  he  is  not  too  big,  or  too  vain  to  be  re-
proved. For  in  thcfc  Circum (lances,  you  may  without  any
breach  of  CiviHty  do  it;  and  neither  the  Offender  nor  th^
Company  will  take  it  ill  ^  or  think  you  too  bold,  if  th^y
iinderii:and  themfelves  at  all.  But  it  muft  be  confeft'd','  that
this  Duty  is  not  always  pradicable ;  for  there  are  fome  Per-
fons,  with  whom  this  Liberty  cannot  be  taken.  Their
Age,  or  their  Condition,  may  give  what  they  fay  a  Privi-
lege of  being  paffed  over.  Their  Temper  may  render  them
incapable  of  Animadverlion,  cr  their  hardened  VVickednefs
may  have  put  them  paft  all  power  of  its  doing  good  upon
them.  And  in  fuch  cafes^  the  attempt  would  not  only  be
ridiculous,  but  might  poffibly  be  dangerous  too.  For  no
Man  is  obliged  to  do  Vv'hat  does  not  become  him,  becaufe
another  hath  done  foj  nor  mufb  our  Zeal  be  fo  warmly
purfued,  as  to  break  good  Order,  or  give  the  Company  di^
fturbance,  or  create  ourfelves  Enemies,  by  fuch  indifcreet
and  unnecefTary  Corredlions.  But  IWI  there  is  one  Remedy
left,  which  muft  be  taken  in  Juftice  to  ourfelves  j  which  is
by  our  Silence  to  refufe  the  becoming  a  Party ;  to  demon-
ftratc,  that  we  underfland  what  Behaviour  is  fit  for  us,-  and
that  we  do  difcreetly  difallow  thofe  things,  which  Prudence
or  Good-Manners  Vv'ill  not  fuffcr  us  openly  to  rebuke.

And  here  I  cannot  omit  obferving,  how  nice  and  punc-
tual Ep&etus  is,  in  fuiting  the  Rules  he  gives,  according
to  the  different  Circumftances  of  the  Cafe  in  hand.  He  had
treated  before  of  Difcourfe,  concerning  the  Entertainments
of  the  Publick  Theatre,  the  Combats  of  Gladiators,  Uorfe-
Races,  Fealts,  Meats  and  Wines,  and  Modes,  and  giving
Charaders  of  Men  to  their  prejudice,  or  their  advantage  ^
and  upon  all  fuch  Occafions,  he  directs  us  to  turn  the  Dif-
courfe off  to  fome  other  more  ufefui  Subjecft.  But  here,  it
feems,  that  is  nor  fufficieot  j  for  we  muft  not  only  change,

but

282  E p I c  T £ T u s*s  Morals,

but  reprove  it  too,  if  that  can  properly  be  done.  There,  if
we  cannot  turn  the  Difcourfe,  we  may  content  ourfelves
with  being  filent ;  but  here  it  is  not  every  Silence  that  will
ferve  the  turn :  It  is  neceflary,  it  fhould  be  a  fort  of  empha-
tical  and  very  {ignlficanc  one,  fuch  as  may  diftinguifli  our
Thoughts,  and  exprefs  a  Diflike  and  Deteilation  of  what  is
indecently  fpoken.

CHAP. LVI.

W,

HEN  the  Idea  of  any  Pleafure  flrikes  your
Imagination,  as  you  muft  in  other  Cafes,  fo
fhould  you  in  this  efpecially,  (land  upon  your
Guard,  and  not  fufFer  yourfelf  to  be  hurried  away
with  the  impetuous  Torrent.  Run  not  eagerly  up-
on Enjoyment,  nor  improve  the  Thougbt  into
Aftion  :  but  take  time  to  confider  :  and  let  that
time  be  employed  in  making  a  juft  Computation,
between  the  duration  of  the  Pleafure,  and  that  of
the  Repentance  fure  to  follow  it ;  and  then  you
will  not  fail  to  check  your  Inclinations,  and  chide
yourfelf  for  indulging  them  in  any  Degree  at  all.
Confider  farther  too.  That  the  denying  thofe  Incli-
nations will  certainly  give  you  an  inward  Joy  ;  and,
inftead  of  being  reproached  by  your  own  Confcience,
you  fhall  be  comforted  and  commended  by  it.  But
if,  upon  mature  Deliberation,  the  thing  you  are
moved  to,  appear  no  way  inconvenient,  you  may
gratify  your  Appetite,  but  you  muft  not  let  it  loofe.
For  even  innocent  Enjoyments  require  a  ftrait  Rein,
and  a  fte^dy  Hand,  for  fear  the  Impreffion  be  too
ftrong  and  powerful,  and  the  Pleafures  of  Senfe  charm
and  captivate  your  Reafon.  And  therefore,  even
in  thefe  Cafes  too,  reprefent  to  yourfelf  the  inward
Complacency  of  having  done  well,  and  wifely  ;  and
the  Triumphs  of  a  good  Confcience,  after  fubduing
Temptations. -

C  0  M-

v)ith  S  I  M  P  L  I  c  r :tt s!s X  O  M  M  E  n  t. 2 81  f:
COMMENT.

THere  is  not  in  the  whole  World  any  thing  more  per-
nicious to  the  Soul,  than  the  Pleafures  of  Flefh  and
SenCe. For  thefe  fetter  and  failen  down  the  Mind,- and
God, who  faw  thofe  deilrucflive  Confequences of  them,
hath  therefore  in  his  infinite  Wifdom,  and  marvellous  Good-
neis, made  all  fuch  Pleafures  of  exceeding  fliort  Continu-
ance. Thus  thde  of  the  Epicure  laft  no  longer, than  juft
while  his  Meats  and  Drinks  lie  upon  the  Tongue. When
once  they  are  fwallowed  inro  the  Stomach, all  the  Relifh
of  them  is  loft  and  gone, and  the  Palate  retu-^nsjo  its  for-
mer Habit  again. So  likewife  thofe  Pleafures,  which  Senfe
is  fondefl:  of, and  the  mo  ft  exquifitely  affeded  with, con-
tinue no  longer, than  juft  the  time  of  Fruition. When
that  fhort  moment  is  once-  paft, the  Man  is  as  if  it  had
never  been  at  all. It  is  alfo  very  plain, that  Pleafure  is
properly  the  Objed  of  the  Senfitive  Faculties,  and  does  not
extend  to  the  Rational  Soul  j for  Creatures  void  of  Senfe,
are  not  capable  of  bodily  Pleafure.

Nor  is  this  the  Condition  of  bodily  Pleafures  only,  but  of
thofe  other  Satisfatflions,  which  we  call  fo-  fuch  as  Men  take
in  gay  Cloaths, pompous  Equipage, rich  Jewels  and  Furni-
ture, large  Eftates,  and  the  like  ^  even  Thofe  are  but  very
lliort-liv'd.  For  when  once  the  firftFlufli  of  Joy  is  over,  they
pall  and  link  down  into  nothing ;  and  Time,  in  proportion  as
it  makes  them  familiar  to  us,  makes  them  flat  and  infipid  too.
But,  alas!  the  Cafe  is  not  the  fame  in  the  contrary  Extreme  j
nor  do  our  Griefs  for  the  lofs  of  thefe  things  wear  ofFfo  faft,
as  our  Satisfad:ions  of  acquiring,  or  pofleffing  them : Thefe
are  long  and  lafting,  and  very  often  grow  by  time. Thus
Pleafure  it  feems.  of  all  forts, but  efpecially  fuch  as  affedls
our  bodily  Senfes,  vanilTies  very  quickly- and  wellit  were
for  us,  if  it, and  all  its  Eflfeds, went  off  together : But  it
leaves  a  Sting  behind, wounds  the  Soul,  difirms  Reafon^
and,  if  it  be  indulged  to  excefs, does  not  ftop  there  neither,
but  many  times  proves  of  terrible  Confequence  to  the  Body
too. Whereas  Abftinence  from  Pleafure,  and the  Conquefts
we  gain  over  ic, are  of  infinite  Advantage  to  the  Soul^
they  fill  it  with  durable  Satisfadfion, and  infpire  Joys of
quite  another  kind, Joys  agreeable  to  Reafon  and uncor-
rupt  Nature,  fuch  as  no  Guilt  pollutes, no  mixture  or  re-
mains of  Sorrow  taint,  no  Time  wears  away.

Thus

284 Epictetus's  Morals,

Thus  much  I  thought  neceffary  to  premife  in  general,  by
way  of  Introduction  to  Epicfetus's  Advice,  which  begins
in  thefe  Terms:  "  When  the  Idea  of  any  Pleafure  ftrikes
"^  your  Imagination,  as  you  muft  in  other  Cafes,  fuch  as
"  Power  or  Riches,  or  the  like  ,•  fo  fhould  you  in  this  of
''  Pleafure  more  especially,  ftand  upon  your  Guard,  and  noc
"  fuffer  yourfelf  to  be  harried  away,  from  Thought  to  Act."
Be  not  too  rafh  and  haflry,  but  allow  yourfelf  leifure  for
better  Coniideradon.  And,  when  you  have  fo  far  prevail-
ed upon  yourfelf,  as  to  gain  time,  and  fufpend  the  gratify-
ing of  your  Fancy  for  a  while;  employ  this  time  in  making
a  juft  Computation.  Weigh  firlr  the  time  of  Enjoyment
well;  and  afterwards  obferve,  how  innnitely  this  is  over-
balanced by  that  of  Repentance.  Think  how  many  fad  Re-
membrances, vvhat  bitter  Remorfe,  what  lafting  Shame,
what  felf-condemning  ReflecT:ions_,  the  being  vanquiihed  by
this  Temptation  will  coil  you ;  and  then  you  will  be  sfliam-
ed  to  purchafe  fo  fugitive  a  Pleafure,  with  fo  permanent  a
Mifery.

But,  that  you  may  have  no  pretence,  no  Colour  left  for
fo  imprudent  an  Exchange  j  conhder  once  more  the  durable
Advan'rages  of  Self-denial ;  the  fmcere  and  never-fading
Satisfadions  which  reflik  from  a  Lull  fubdued;  the  perpe-
tual Applaufes  of  a  good  Confcience,  and  the  Flappinefs  of
being  approved  by  onej  ownBreaft:  Do  but  call  the.e  things
into  the  Scale,  and  give  them  their  due  weight,  and  then
the  Difparity  will  be  fo  manifeil,  that  Appetite  mull  yield
to  Reafon.  And  if  you  repeat  this  again  and  again,  ss
fit  Occalions  offer  themfelves;  you  will  by  degrees  gain  an
habitual  and  complete  Victory,  and  fo  abfoiutely  reduce  the
fenfual  Inclinations,  that  they  will  not  be  in  a  Condition  to
rebel,  or  give  you  any  confiderable  dillurbance.

Since  then  the  Pleafure  lafts  no  longer  than  the  fingle  In-
ftanc  of  Action ;  v/hen  once  that  Inilant  is  over,  there  ii
no  difference  between  one  who  hath  had  this  Enjoyment,
and  one  who  had  it  not.  And  hence  it  is  evident,  that  Plea-
lure  can  have  but  very  little  to  recommend  it.  You  will
fay,  perhaps,  that  the  Voluptuous  Perfon  hath  the  Satis-
fadion  of  Remembrance,  and  recollecting  the  Delights  he
enjoyed;  which  is  a  kind  of  bringing  them  back  again,  and
an  afting  them  over  in  Imagination  a  fecond  time.  But,
alas!  this  is  a  very  poor  and  lame  Satisfa<flion ;  and  we
need  no  other  proof  of  its  being  fo,  than  thofe  dark  and
imperfedldeas,  which  the  remembrance  of  a  pleafanc Dream

gives

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  285

oives  us^  for  thofe  of  a  paft  Pleafure  are  exadly  the  fame,
every  whit  as  feeble  and  imaginary.

But  in  regard  there  are  feme  Pleafares  no  way  inconfiftenc
with  Duty,  and  right  R-cafon ;  fuch  as  thofe  of  the  Mar-
riage-Bed, or  Bathing  after  a  Fever,  and  the  like  ;  therefore
he  adds  one  neceffary  Caution  more  j  That  even  thefe  Plea-
fares,  which  may  be  innocent  and  convenient  in  themfelves,
fiiould  yet  be  lb  tempered  with  a  prudent  Reftraint,  that  the
Gratefulnels  of  them  to  Senfe  do  not  overbear  our  Reafon.
Nor  muft  we  fo  ablolutely  give  ourfelves  up  to  the  Enjoy-
ment, as  to  be  tranfported  with  Rapture  and  Joy.  But  even.,,
then,  v/ben  we  allow  ourfelves  the  Fruition,  we  fhould
check  and  correcft  the  Exurberance  of  our  Pleafare,  by  a  fea-
fonable  Reflexion,  that  Reafon  ought  always  to  be  upper-
moft-  and  that  it  is  infinitely  more  becommg  and  advanta-
gious,  to  be  above  Senfe,  than, to  be  a  Slave  to  it.  For  in-
deed, this  is  as  much  more  eligible,  as  the  due  Government
of  our  Faffions  is  better,  than  the  living  under  the  Tyranny
and  Ufurpation  of  them  ■  as  much  more  Noble,  as  Reafon
isSuperiour  to  Inftind,  and  the  Dignity  of  the  Human  Nature
above  that  of  a  Brute.

CHAP. LVII.

^J"HEN,  upon  mature  Deliberation,  you  are
perfuaded  a  thing  is  fit  to  be  done,  do  it
boldly  ;  and  do  not  aiTed  Privacy  in  it,  or  concern
yourfelf  at  all  what  impertinent  Cenfures  or  Re-
flexions the  World  will  pafs  upon  it.  For  if  the
thing  be  not  Juft  and  Innocent,  it  ought  not  to  be
attempted  at  all,  tho'  never  fo  fecretly.  And  if  it
be,  you  do  very  foolifhly  to  ftand  in  fear  of  thofe,
who  will  themfelvcs  do  ill,  in  cenfuring  and  con-
demning what  you  do  well.

COMMENT.

THERE  is  not  any  thing  for  v/hich  EpiBetus  fcems
more  concern'd,  than  that  Virtue  fliould  be  chofen  for
Virtue's  fakej  that,  fo  the  Good  we  do  might  be  complete

and

286 Epicte  Tus's  Morals,

and  perfe(5t,  when  Hone  out  of  a  juft  Senfe  and  value  of  its
own  intrinfick  Worth,  without  any  fordid  Allays,  or  indi-
reift  Ends,  fuch  as  the  Opinion  of  the  World,  and  the  delire
of  Applaufe  and  Reputation  particularly.  For  whoever  chufes
Good  upon  this  account,  make  this,  and  not  doing  well,  his
ultimate  End,  that  is,  indeed,  his  Good,

Now  if  a  Man  hath  con  alted  his  own  Reafon,  and  is
upon  good  Grounds  convinced,  That  fuch  and  fuch  a  thing
ought  not  to  be  done  j  no  confideration  whatfoever  fliould
prevail  upon  him  to  do  it,  becaufe  it  ought  not  to  be  done.
Again,  if  upon  a  grave  and  wile  Debate  with  himfelf,  he
come  to  a  Refolution,  That  it  fhould  be  done,  and  do  it
in  this  Perfuafion  ^  it  is  moil  fenfelefs  and  fneaking  to  en-
deavour the  concealing  of  it,  from  any  apprehenfions  of  the
Conftruftions  other  People  will  put  upon  it.  For  if  He  be
right  in  refolving,  they  cannot  be  fo,  in  interpreting  it  to
his  Difadvantage  j  and  at  this  rate,  a  Man  betrays  lefs  Ho-
nour and  Regard  for  a  real  Good,  (for  fuch  is  a  wife  and
virtuous  Atflion)  than  he  does  for  a  fceming  Evil  j  (for
fuch  is  a  falfe. Opinion,  and  malicious  Cenfure.)  And  in-
deed, generally  fpeaking,  this  is  the  Cafe  of  the  Errors  and
Mifapprehenfions  of  the  Vulgar  :  which  Men  ftand  in  fo  much
fear  of,  and  are  fo  apt  to  forego,  or  at  leaft  to  difown  the
Practice  of  Virtue,  left  they  ihould  fall  under  them.

From  hence  likewife  refults  another  very  mifchievous  Ef-
feft,  which  is.  That  the  Conclufions  and  Didates  of  right
Reafon  {hould  be  look'd  upon  ss  Evil.  For  fo  they  plainly
are,  when  Men  decline  and  difavow  them,  fince  nothing  is
ever  ihunn'd  or  difclaim'd,  but  under  the  Notion  of  Evil.

Farther  yet,  there  is  a  third  great  Inconvenience  conse-
quent upon  taking  thefe  mean  and  indirect  Methods  ;  which
isj  That  fuch  a  Man  turns  Deferter  to  Virtue,  and  runs  away
from  the  true  Standard  of  all  his  Behaviour,  viz.  the  Nature
of  the  Adions  themfelves,  and  the  Judgment  and  Tcftimony
of  his  own  Breaftj  and  gives  himfelf  up  entirely  to  be  go-
vern'd  by  common  Opinion,  expeds  no  Happinefs  but  what
Applaufe  can  give  him,  fears  no  Mifery  but  Cenfure  and  Re-
proach, and  is  fo  bigotted  to  the  World,  as  utterly  to  re-
nounce his  own  Reafon,  and  think  nothing  Good  or  Evil,
True  or  Falfe,  but  what  Common  Fame  declares  to  be  fo.

CHAP.

Si JiPticiuss  Comment.  28;;^

G  H  A  ?. LVill,

AS  this  Sentence^  It  is  Day^  and^  It  is  Night,
if  you  take  it  apart,  is  mod  true  ;  but  if
you  join  it' together,  is  abfolutely  falfe  :  So  for  a
Man,  at  a  publick  Entertainment,  to  car\^e  himfelf
the  belt  and  gi-eateft  fhare  ;  though  if  he  cbnfidef
his  own  Body  fingly,  it  might  be  well  enoiigh  j  yet
in  regard  of  that  Common  Right,  which  this  la-
X'itation  gives  to  all  that  are  prefent,  it  is  moft  un-
becoming and  unreafonable.  And  therefore,  wheri
you  eat  abroad,  remember,  you  are  to  look  farther
than  the  bare  fat isfying  of  your  own  Appetite^  and  t6
obferve  all  that  Decency  and  Refped:,  which  is  due,
both  to  the  Company  yoii  are  joyned  with,  and  td
the  Mafler  of  the  Houfcj  that  invited  yoUi

t 0  MM  E Nt

Tyi'EStokhs  are  particularly  nice  arid  fubtle,  in  illuftra-
ting  and  arguing  from  Hypothetical  Syllogifms :  And
tiiefe  ate  of  two  forts,  One  they  .call  DisjundtivCj  the  Other
Conjunifiive  or  Complex.  The  DisjundHve  are  fuch  as  con-
fift  of  contradidtory  paj-fs,  fo  that  if  one  be  true,  the  other
mult  needs  be  falfe  j  and  if  the  one  be  falfe  the  other  is
certainly  true.  As  for  inflance  j  when  I  fay,  It  is  either  Da/
6r  Night,  but  it  is  Night,  therefore  it  is  not  Day.  Thus  by
affirming  the  one  part,  you  deny  the  other ;  and  by  deny-
ing the  one,  you  affirm  the  other :  As  when  I  make  my
Aflumption  thus  ;  hut  it  is  not  Day,  and  conclude  from
thence,  therefore  it  is  Night  ^  or,  i>ut  it  is  not  Night,  ihsrefore
it  is  Day.  And  fuch  a  Disjuniftive  Propofition  as  this,
whofe  parts  are  inconfifterit,  (  aS  when  We  fay,  It  is  either
Day  or  Night,)  is  received  as  an  Axiom ;  that  is,  as  a  Truth
lelf-evident,  fuch  as  is  plain  and\agreeable  to  the  Common
Senfe  and  Notions  of  all  Mankind.  For  fuch  Propofitions
the  Stoicks  ufed  to  call  Axioms.

Now  a  Con:iplex  Propofition  confifls  of  two  Parts ;  but
thefe  fuch,  as  have  a  neceflary  connexion  with,  aad  depen-

t'EE  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  tJ  s's Mo  R  AL  S,

dence  upon,  one  another.  So  that  if  one  be  allowed,  the
other  follows  in  Gourfe  j  for  which  occafion  they  are  very
properly  termed  the  Antecedent  and  the  Confequent.  And
the  Condition  of  thefe  Propofitions  is  this  j  That  if  you  af-
firm- the  Antecedent,  you  efbablifh  the  Confequent  j  but  if
foil  deny  the  Confequent,  you  overthrow  the  Antecedent
at  the  fame  time.  For  inftance,  this  is  a  true  Conjundion-^
If  if  he  Daj^  it  is  not  Night  j  becaufe  upon  this  Antecedent,
It  is  Day ^  the  Afilimption  follows,  But  if  it  be  l>ay^  it  is  jioP
l^ight  •  fo.  that  putting  this  into  one  Complex  Propofition^
xh&  Antecedent  infers  the  Confequent  ,•  for  thus  you  proceed^
But  it  is  Day^  therefore  it  is  not  Night.  And  fo  likewife  if
you  deny  the  Confequent,  you  deny  the  Antecedent  alfo  j
as  if  you  fay.  But  it  is  not  Night  (which  is  as  much  as  to
fay  that  it  is,  for  the  two  Negatives  here  make  one  Affir-
mative) therefore  it  is  net  Day.  And  this  is  a  Cafe  of  a
Conjunftive  or  Complex  Propofition,  and  the  Rule  it  pro-
cjeeds-  upon.

h^it  us  now  fee,  what  ufe  Epiifetus  makes  of  this,  anc|
how  he  applies  it  to  his  prefent  purpofe.  This  Propofition,
It  is  either  Day^  or  Nighty  in  a  DiRJun(flive  Syllogifm,  he  tell*
«s,  carrries  its  cwm  Evidence  along  with  it,  and  is  uncon-
teftably  true.  But  in  a  Conjunctive  Syllogifm  the  cafe  is
much  ctherwife.  For  when  thefe  two  parts  are  brought  in-
to one  Complex  Propofition,  then  to  affirm  the  one,  we
muft  deny  the  other  j  and  the  Sentence  muft  of  neceffiicy  run;
ihnSy  If  it  be  Day^  it  is  not  Night.  Now  then  (fays  he)  as
this  DisjuncT:ive  Propofition,  in  a  Disjundive  Syllogifm,  is
fnoft  true,  becaufe  the  whole  Argument  depends  upon  it,
dnd  all  the  &:reCs  lies  in  the  oppolition  of  the  parts_^  thus  dis-
|oyned  j  but  in  a  Complex  Propofition  it  is  moft  falfe,  for
the  ConjuncTiion  is  there  torn  afunder,  by  the  neceflary  in-
fertion  of  the  Negative  Particle,  If  it  be  Bay^  it  is  not  Night :
So  likewife  at  a  publick  Entertainment,  however  it  may  be
for  the  Advantage  of  a  Man's  own  Body  to  carve  the  bcfl:
for  one's  felf,  and  to  fcramble  for  the  greateft  iJiare  ^  yet
this  is  abfolutely  inconnfirent  with  the  Equity  and  Common
Kight  of  Human  Society  at  all  fuch  publick  Meetings.  For
a^  Man  is  not  here  to  look  upon  himfelf,  as  a  Disjun^ive,
and  to  a(ft  as  if  he  ftood  fingle  j.  but  to  confider  himfelf  in
conjundrion  with  the  reft  of  the  Company,  and  to  be  guilty
4ijf  nothing,  to  br-eaJcthat  Conjunvtion,  by  infringing  the  Pri-
vileges^which'lie  in  common,  and  engroffing  any  fuch  for
Kis  own  private  Intercil.'
'-■■■'  -  Whea

wifh,  S I M P L ic  I u s's  Comment. 289

When  therefore  you  dine  in  Company  (fays  he)  do  noc
regard  the  Cravings  of  your  own  Appetite,  nor  pick  out  the
thoiceftpart  of  the  Dinner  to  gratify  your  own  Palate.  But
confidcr,  that  there  is  another  Duty,  befides  what  you  owe
to  your  own  Bodyj  a  Duty  of  mutual  participation,  and
aflliming  no  more,  than  what  you  are  content  to  allow  to
Others,  who  have  indeed  equal  pretenfions  with  yourfelf.

Now  nothing  can  be  more  manifeft,  than  that  by  this  in-
ftahce  of  a  Feaft,  EptBetus  meant  a  great  deal  more  than
he  hath  exprefled.  He  intended  no  doubt,  that  we  iliould
flretch  this  Rule  to  all  the  affairs  of  Human  Life,  which
concern  others  as  well  as  ourfelves,  and  to  all  our  Com-
merce and  Dealing  with  one  another.  For  all  greed inefi*,
and  grafping  at  m.ore  than  belongs  to  us,  loofens  and  breaks
the  Boncis  of  Human  Society,  which  can  never  be  main-
tain'd  otherwife,  than  by  allowing  every  body  the  ihare  due
to  him.  Of  how  great  efficacy  this  is  towards  uniting  Men
together,  and  making  that  Union  durable  and  ftrong,  be-
fides what  common  Experience  teaches  us,  we  have  an  in-
ftance,  even  in  the  worft  and  vilefl  Men.  For  the  very
Combinations  of  Thieves  and  publick  Robbers,  though  thefe
Men  have  caft  off  all  the  Ties  of  Juftice  and  Common  Ho-
nefty,  are  yet  prelerved,  fo  long  as  they  keep  to  the  private
Agreements  made  among  themfelves,  and  are  content,  that
the  Booty  fliould  be  divided  equally.  And  fure  flridl  Juftice
mufl  needs  cement  Men  very  flrongly,  when  even  this  fee-
ble imitation  of  it  can  go  fo  far,  in  confirming  and  main-
taining a  Community  founded  in  Injuftice.

So  then,  after  the  various  Directions  and  Exhortations  in
the  foregoing  parts  of  this  Book,  Some  of  which  were  de-
figned  to  excite  Men  to  true  Freedom,  Some  to  recommend
Fortitude,  Others  Generofity,  and  Greatnefs  of  Soul,  O-
thers  Prudence,  and  Temperance :  This  Chapter  is  deljgned
to  make  Men  juft  j  and,  in  order  to  the  efieding  this,  to  re-»
move  firfl:  of  all  that  greateft  obftrucflion  to  it,  which  is  A-
varice,  and  an  inordinate  Defire  of  more  than  in  ftridtnefs
belongs  to  us.

Z  X  CHAP,

C  H  A  R LIX.

IF  you  fake  upon  you  a  Charafler  above  your  €&-
pacity,  yoa  fall  into  this  two-fold  Inconveni-
ence, firft  to  mifcarry  in  what  you  have  undertaken.,
and  then  to  lofe  the  opportunity  of  undertaking
fomewhat  eife  more  proportionable  to  your  ability,
in  which  you  might  have  conie  alF  with  Honour.

COMMENT,

WE  are  not  always  to  aim  at  that  Good,  which  is  moS:
noble  and  excellent  in  itfelf,  but  that  for  which  we
are  beft  qwalified,  and  which  is  mofi  fuitable  to  our  owa
Circumftances. For  there  never  comes  any  good  of  extra-
vagant Undertakings. So  that  v/e  fliall  do  well  to  proceed
leifurely,  in  the  choice  of  the  Figure  we  defire  to  make  in
the  World,  and  not  afpire  to  things  above  us. An  eminent
Orator,  or  a  Philofopher  in  a  Commonwealth  j  a  Pilor,  or
Mafterin  a  Ship  j  a  Prince,  or  pubhck  Magiftrate  in  a  State :
Thefe  Charaders  look  great  and  gay  ^  but  every  body  is  not
cut  out  for  them. And  it  is  much more  graceful,  for  a
Man  to  aft  in  a  lower  Station, where  he  fills  his  Poft,  and
tops  his  part ;  than  to  be  in  a  higher,  which  he  cannot  come
up  to,  nor  difcharge  the  Duties  of,  with  that  decency  and  ap-
plaufe  that  is  expeded. Thus  a  Man  had  better  be  a  good~
Uiher,  and  teach  the  firft  Grounds  of  Learning  well,  than
an  unable  Mafter,  who  canilot  finifh  what  is  well  begun.
And  it  is  more  defirable  to  be  an  honeft  and  prudent  Ma-
r.iger  of  a  private  Family,  than  a  bad  Governour  of  a  City '
or  Nation. For,  befides  the  prejudice  fuch  perfons  do  then>-
felves,  in  not  coming  up  to  the  Dignity  of  a  Charader  too'
lofty  for  them,  (which mifcarriage  I  would  have  rated,  not
by  the  Approbation  of  the  Cenfure  of  die  World,  but  accord-'
ingto  the  real  Nature  of  the  Character  itfelfj  they  are  unfor-'
tunate  in  another  refpedl. For  they  have  not  only  come  oif
very  fcurvily  in  attempting  what  they  were  not  fit  for  •  but'
they  have  alfo  flipp'd  an  opportunity  of  behaving  themfelves
well, and  gaining  applaufe  in  fomething  elfe,  which they
y/ere  fit  for.  For  it  is  in  Huraaa  Life,  as  it  is  in  a  Play-houfe,

where

nvith  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 2-91

where  the  Praife  is  due,  not  to  the  Parr,  but  to  the  Perfor-
inance  j  and  he  that  plays  a  Servant  well,  is  look'd  upon
with  more  approbation,  and  reputed  a  better  Aftor ,  than
he  that  attempts  to  play  a  Man  of  Honour,  or  a  PrincCj
an<l  does  it  ill.

This  Chapter  too  feems  to  have  a  more  immediate  regard
to  Equity  and  Jaftice  j  for  it  advifes  every  body  to  be  con-
tent with  tliac  pare ,  which  Providence  fees  fitteil  for  them
upon  this  Stage  of  Life  j  that  they  fliould  not  affect  Cha-
racflers  above  them,  nor  be  defxrous  of,  or  diflausfled  with,
thofe  that  are  alTigned  to  other  People-

CHAP. LX.

AS  in  walking  it  is  your  great  Care,  not  to  mn
your  Foot  upon  a  Nail,  or  to  tread  awry,  and
ftrain  your  Leg  •,  fo  let  it  be  in  all  the  Affairs  of
Human  Life,  not  to  hurt  your  Mind,  or  offend
your  Judgment.  And  this  Rule,  if  obferved  care-
fully in  all  your  deportment,  will  be  a  mighty  fe-
curity  to  you  an  your  Undertakings.

COMMENT.

TH  E  Soul  of  Man  is  mjur'd  or  wounded  two  ways :
Either,  when  it  is  pricked  with  brutifli  Inclinations,
and  vehement  PafSons,  wliich  faften  it  to  the  Body  :  in  which
it  makes  feme  refiftance,  but  yet  is  overpowered  by  the  pre-
vailing force  of  Paflion,  and  yields  at  laft,  though  with  re*
ludancy.  Or  elfe,  when  its  Judgment  is  perverted,  and  the
Byafs  of  fenfqal  Objeds  draw  it  fo  ftrongly,  that  it  does  not
make  any  diftinftion  betwixt  its  own  rational  Nature ,  and
the  other  inferiour  and  irrational  parts ,  which  are  the  Seat
of  the  Paflions.

This  excellent  Guide  therefore  warns  us  to  have  a  care  of
both  thefe  Inconveniences,  and  to  proceed  varily  in  all  the
Affairs  of  Human  Life,  as  we  do,  when  we  would  tread
fure  in  walking.  We  muft  decline  thofe  brutilh  Appetites,
w^iich  gall  and  wound  the  Soul ;  and  fix  wholly  upon  bo-

Z  3  dil/

292  Ep I CTETus's  Morals,

<?ily  ObjciSs,  and  faften  down  the  Soul  to  the  Body  much'
ftronger  and  clofer,  than  any  Nail  can  poffibly  join  mate-
rial things  j  for  they  make  the  Mind  forget  itfelf,  and  mi-
ftake  thefe  Affedions,  and  the  Body  they  ferv^,  for  one  and
the  fame  Subftance.

This  therefore  is  analogous  to  piercing  the  Foot  with  a
Kail.  But  the  Other  Misfortune,  that  of  a  perverted  Judg-
mentj  he  refembles  to  treading  awry,  and  {training,  or  put-
ting out  a  Leg ;  becaufe  this  Error  of  the  Mind  proceedi
from  the  Imagination,  that  part  which  is  loweft  in  the  Soul,
as  the  Foot  is  in  the  Body  •  and  by  which  it  holds  corref^
pondence  with  the  corporeal  and  animal  Life.  And  the  A.d-
vice  he  gives  upon  this  occaiion  is,  that,  as  we  take  carq
to  keep  our  Body  upright  when  we  walk,  fo  we  fhould  be
exceeding  cautious  and  tender  of  the  Soul,  when  it  goes  a-
broad,  and  concerns  itfelf  in  the  Affairs  of  the  World  ;
That  the  Faculty  of  Reafon,  which  is  predominant  in  our
Minds,  and  the  very  Charadier  and  Prerogative  of  Hunian
Nature,  make  no  falfe  fteps  j  That  it  do  not  forget  itfelf,  or
its  Authority;  That  it  be  neither  giddy  through  eagernefs  of
Defire,  and  heat  of  Paffion,  or  grow  corrupt,  and  dull,  and
ftupid,  through  Sloth  and  Effeminacy.

And  if  we  did  but  manage  ourfelves  with  the  fame  wa-
xinQl's  in  our  Adions,  as  we  do  in  our  fteps  j  if  we  would
but  look  before  us  conftantly,  and  be  fure  to  take  good
footing,  this  he  tells  us,  would  be  a  mighty  fecurity  to  us
in  all  our  Undertakings.  For,  though  Human  Nature  will
be  the  fame  ftiJI,  and  all  our  Vigilance  cannot  fet  it  ablo^
lutely  above  Error  and  Frailty ;  yet  the  ill  Confequences  of
thefe  Infirmities  would  be  in  a  great  meafure  prevented.
We  might  flip,  but  we  fhould  not  fall  •  and  the  flips  we  did
make,  would  be  but  few,  and  thofe  eafily  recover'd  too.
Fcir  thus  we  find,  that  when  through  fom.e  little  incogit^-
ty  we  happen  to  touch  upon  a  Nail,  or  make  a  falfe  fiep  ;
a  fmall  recolledion  will  ferve  the  turn,  to  difengage  our
Foot,  before  the  Nail  hath  run  in  too  deep ;  and  to  corred:
tlist  Trip,  which  was  but  a  flight  one,  and  made  before  we
V/ere  aware  of  it.

C  H'A  K

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.

C  H  A  R LXL

293

TH  E  Neceffities  of  the  Body  are  the  '  proper
meafure  of  our  Care  for  the  things  of  the
World  ;  and  thofe  that  fupply  thefe  are  enough ,
as  the  Shoe  is  faid  to  lit  the  Man,  which  anfwers  to
the  bignefs  of  the  Foot.  But  if  once  you  leave  this
Rule,  and  exceed '  thofe  Neceffities,  then  you  are
carried  into  all  the  Extravagancies  in  the  Worlds
then  you  do  not  value  your  Shoe  for  fitting  the
Foot,  unlefs  it  be  gilded  too,  and  afterwards  fro^n
gilding  you  go  to  a  rich  Purple  j  and  from  that  a-
gain,  to  having  it  ftudded,  and  {tt  with  Jewels,
For  when  once  a  Man  hath  exceeded  the  bounds
of  Moderation  and  Convenience,  he  never  knows
where  to  flop.  "  -

C  O  M  M  E  N  T,

THERE  are  two  things  to  be  confidered  in  Clothes,  and
Diet,  and  Goods,  and  Eftate,  and  whatever  elfe  is  requi-
fite  for  our  Bodies,  that  is,  the  getting,  and  the  ufing  of
them.  He  hath  informed  us  already,  after  what  manner
they  are  to  be  ufed,  and  dire<fted  to  this  purpofe  ^  that
thofe  wants  of  the  Body,  which  are  neceflary  to  be  fuppli-
ed,  fo  as  to  render  it  ferviceable  to  the  Soul,  fliould  deter-
mine this  point.  By  which  means  all  Superfluities  are  cut
offy  and  every  thing  which  tends  only  to  Luxury  and  vain
Pomp.  Now  he  tells  us,  what  proportion  we  ought  to  be
content  with,  and  What  fhould  be  the  meafure  of  our  La-
bours and  our  Delires  in  the  getting  an  Eftate;  and  This
he  {ays  is  the  Body  too.  For  the  end  of  getting  thefe  thing?,"
IS,  that  we  may  ufe  them  j  as  far  then  as  they  are  of  ufe  to
us,  fo  far,  and  in  fuch  proportions  may  we  dehre,  and  ^-
deavour  after  them.  But  they  are  only  fo  far  ufeful,  as  they
become  ferviceable  to  the  Body,  and  fupply  its  Neceflicies.
Confequently,  the  Body,  and  its  Wants,  which  determine
how  far  theie  things  are  capable  of  being  ufed,  do  alio  de-
termine,  how  far  they are  fit  to  be  defired, and  what

Z  4  rneafurc

294 ^ Etjcte t jU &■  s  Morals,

|T!cafure  of  them  a  Man-  ought  in  reafon  tp  fit  down  Sa-
tisfied with.

Let  U5  look  thpn  at  the  Foot,  for  inftance,  and  fee  whaE
wants  it  labours  under,  and  what  fupplies  are  fufficient  for
it;  and,  when  we  have  done  fo,  we  (hall  find,  that  good
plain  Leather  is  all  it  needs.  A  good  upper  Leather,  to
keep  the  Foot  tight  and  warm  ,•  and  a  ftout  Sole,  to  de-
fend the  Ball  of  the  Foot  from  being  hurt  by  what  it  treads
upon.  But  now,  if  a  Man  bear  regard  to  Ornament  and
Luxury,  as  well  as  Ufa  and  Convenience  ;  then  nothing
lefs  than  Gold,  and  Purple,  and  Jewels,  will  fervc  the  turn*
and  one  of  thefe  Extravagancies  only  ferves  to  make  way
for  another.  For,  it  feems,  the  B-omans  were  grown  fo  cu-
rious and  vain,  as  to  wear  rich  Purple  Shoes,  and  Shoes  fet
with  precious  Stones,  and  thefe  were  more  exquiiite  and
modifli  Vanities  than  gilded  ones.

Now  jufb  thus  it  is  in  getting,  and  fpending  an  Eftate.
When  a  Man  hath  once  tranfgreffed  thofe  bounds ,  which
JN^atqre  and  Neceffity  have  fet  him,  he  wanders  no  body
knows  whither ;  and  is  continually  adding  one  foolifli  Ex-
pence  to  another,  and  one  idle  Wbimfey  ro  another,  till  at
laft  he  be  plunged  over  Head  and  Ears  in  Luxury  and  Vanity^
For  thefe  were  the  only  Caufes  of  feducing  him  at  firft  ;  and,
when  once  he  had  broke  loofe  from  his  Meafures,  a  thoufand
imaginary  Wants  prefented  themfelves,  and  every  one  of
thefe  gave  him  as  great  a  difturbance,  as  if  they  had  been  real
ones.  At  firft  he  wanted  only  Ten  thoufand  Pound,  then
Twenty  •  and  when  he  was  poffefs'd  of  this,  he  wanted  Forty,
as  much  as  ever  he  did  the  firft  Ten  ^  fo  he  would  a  Hundred,
if  he  had  Forty,  and  fo  to  all  Eternity ;  for  he  has  now  let  his
Defires  loofe,  and  thefe  are  a  boundlefs  Ocean  never  to  be
filled.

Now  nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that  thofe  Defires
which  do  not  keep  within  the  bounds  of  Ufe  and  Conve-
nience, do,  and  muft  needs,  grow  infinite  and  infatiable.
Not  only,  becaufe  this  is  the  laft  Fence,  and  there  is  no-
thing left  to  ftop  them  afterwards ;  but  becaufe  we  fee  plain-
ly, that,  when  they  exceed  thefe  things,  they  quickly  n&r-
gled  and  difregard  them  too  ;  forget  the  ends,  to  which  they
are  direded,  and  inftead  of  prefervnig,  fomettmes  deftroy,
the  Body.  Thus  we  often  ruin  our  Health,  and  diftort  our
Limbs,  only  for  Ornament  and  Fafliion ;  and  make  thofe
very  things  our  Difeafes,  which  Nature  intended  for  Renae-
dies  againft  them.

wit^  Si  MPLICIUS^S  CoMMEN  T. ZOf

And  poflibly,  upon  this  account  more  particularly,  EpiffeZ
tus  might  make  choice  of  a  Shoe  to  illuftrace  his  Argument.
For  this  instance  is  the  more  emphatical  and  fio-nificant  •  be-
caufe,  if  we  do  not  take  care  to  fit  the  Foot,  but  make  it
bigger  than  it  ought  to  be,  for  Beauty  and  Ornameht,  #
hinders  our  going,  inftead  of  helping  us,  and  oftentimes
makes  us  ftumbie,  and  fall  very  dangeroully.  Hence  it  is
plain,  the  Confiderations,  which  relate  to  our  ufino-  the
things  of  the  World,  will  give  us  great  light  into  that''  pare
of  our  Dury,  which  relates  to  the  getting  of  th^-m  ^  and  the
Rules,  we  are  to  be  governed  by,  are  in  great  meafure  the
fame  in  both  Cafes.

Thefe  Chapters  too,  which  prefcribe  to  us  the  Rules  and
the  Duty  of  Moderation,  both  in  ufing.and  getting  an  Eftace
may,  in  my  Opinion,  be  very  properly  referred  to  the  fame
common  Head  of  Jurtice,  v/ith  the  Former.

CHAP. LXII.

"1X7 HEN  Women  are  grown  up  to  Fourteen,  they
■VV  begin  to  be  courted  and  carafred  •,  then  they
think,  that  the  recommending  themfelves  to  the
Affeaions  of  the  Men  is  the  only  buPinefs  they  have
to  attend  to,  ancj  fo  preffently  fall  to  tricking,  and
drefling,  and  pradifing  all  the  litde  engaging  Arts
peculiar  to  their  Sex :  In  thefe  they  place  all  their
hopes,  as  they  do  all  their  happinefs  in  the  fuccefs
of  them.  But  it  is  fit  they  fhould  be  given  to  un-
derftand,  that  there  are  other  Attraftives  much  more
powerful  than  thefe  ;  That  the  Refpeft  we  pay
them,  is  not  due  to  their  Beauty,  fo  much  as  to
their  Modefty,  and  Innocence,  and  unaffeded  Vir-
tue. And  that  thefe  are  the  true,  the  irrefiftibic
Charms,  fuch  as  w^ll  make  the  fureft  and  mod  hiil-
ing  Conquefts,

'^<fO''M-

v.^6 Ep  I  CTE tush's  Morals,

COMMENT.

SINCE  he  had  in  the  foregoing  Difcourfes  allowed  his
Philofopher  to  marry,  it  was  but  reafonable,  he  fliould
inftrudl  him  h^re,  what  Methods  are  moft  proper  to  be  made
life  of  in  the  choice  of  a  Wife,  and  which  are  her  moft  necef-
fary  and  defirable  Qualifications.  This  therefore  he  does,
in  fhort,  but  very  iignificant  Obfervations  •  fhewing  what  a
wife  Man  fhould  chiefly  regard,  and  exponng  at  the  fame  time
the  Mifchiefs,  which  the  generality  of  Men  fall  into,  by
taking  wrong  meafures.  Moft  People,  fays  he,  when  they
are  difpofed  to  marry,  look  for  a  young  and  a  beautiful  Mi-
ftrefs  J  then  they  cringe,  and  flatter,  and  adore  her ;  keep  a
mighty  di (lance,  and  accoft  her  in  the  moft  refpeftful  and
fubmiilive  Terms  imaginable  j  and  the  end  of  all  this  is  no
other,  than  the  enjoyment  of  her  Perfon.  The  Women
knov/  the  meaning  of  all  this  well  enough,  and  manage
themfelves  accordingly  •  they  drefs,  and  fet  off  their  Perfons
to  the  beft  advantage,  and  thcfe  are  the  Arts  they  fludy  to
recommend  thenvfelves  by.

Now  in  truth,  though  v/e  declaim  againft  this  Vanity  and
Folly  in  that  Sex,  yet  the  Men  are  much  more  to  blame,
than  They.  For  the  Original  of  all  this  Vanity  is  from  our-
felves:  And  the  Folly  is  Ours,  when  we  pay  fo  much  re-
ipedl  upon  accounts  that  fo  little  deferve  it.  It  is  in  our
power  to  reform  what  we  condemn,  and  it  is  our  Duty  to
do  it.  We  fhould  fhew  them,  that  no  Beauty  hath  any
Charms,  but  the  inward  one  of  the  Mind ;  and  that  a  Gface-
fulnefs  in  their  Manners  is  much  more  engaging,  than  that
of  their  Perfon  and  Mien.  That  Mceknefs,  and  Oljediencc,
and  Modefty,  are  the  true  and  lafting  Ornaments :  For  fhe,
that  has  thefe,  is  qualified  as  flie  ought  to  be,  for  the  manage-
ment and  governing  of  a  Family,  for  the  bearing  and  edu-
cating of  Children,  for  an  affedtionate  and  tender  Care  of
her  Hufband,  and  for  fubmitting  to  a  prudent  and  frugal
way  of  Hving.  And  when  all  is  done,  thefe,  and  thefe  only,
are  the  Charms  and  the  Ornaments,  which  render  Wives
amiable,  and  give  them  the  beft  Title  to  our  Honour  and
Refped.

CHAP,

mttSiuvLicivs's  Comm;ent.  297

C  H  A  P, LXIII.

THERE  is  no  furer  fign  of  Stupidity  and  want
of  Senfe,  than  to  trifle  away  a  great  deal  of
time  in  things  relating  to  the  Body  ;  as  to  be  long  at
Exercife,  or  at  Meals,  or  in  Drinking,  or  in  the
other  Functions  of  Nature.  For  we  ought  to  look
upon  all  that  is  done  to  the  Body,  as  things  by  the
bye  ;  and  upon  the  Improvement  of  the  Soul,  as  that
which  challenges  our  Time,  and  is  the  true  and  main
End  and  Bufinefs  of  our  Lives.

COMMENT.

AS  Men  of  excellent  Parts  and  noble  Dirpofitions,  are  al-
ways aiming  'at  fomething  manly  and  brave,  and  afpire
after  as  high  degrees  of  Accuracy  and  Perfeftion,  as  their
Nature  can  carry  them  up  to ;  So  fluggifh  and  heavy  Souls
are  ever  employing  themfelves  in  fomething  that  is  litde,
and  vulgar,  and  infignificant,  where  they  hope  to  meet  with
no  Difficulty,  and  from  whence  they  are  fure  to  reap  no
Honour.  So  that,  when  we  confider  Man,  as  he  is  a  Crea-
ture, whofe  very  Effence  is  a  Reafoning  Soul,  and  whofe
Body  is  only  the  Inftrumenc  of  that  Soul,  contrived  for  her
Ufe,  and  to  be  employed  at  her  Pleafure  j  for  fuch  a  one,  I
fay,  to  concern  himfelf  very  little  in  the  Operations  of  the  Soul,
but  to  let  That  lie  idle  and  uncultivated,  while  all  his  Time
and  Pains  are  beftowed  upon  the  Body  j  argues  a  mighty  De-
fect in  Nature,  and  indeed  can  fcarce  proceed  from  any  other
Caufe,  than  fuch  a  Defect.  For  what  Artificer  of  any  Note
or  Skill  at  all  would  fpend  his  whole  time  upon  fcouring  his
Tools,  without  putting  them  to  the  Uies  they  were  intended
for,  and  following  his  Trade  with  them  ?  And  yet  this  fenfe-.
lefs  Wretch  is  every  Man,  who  applies  all  his  Care  and  Time
to  the  Service  of  his  Body,  and  neglefts  his  Mind.

But  in  Trudi,  this  mighty  Affiduity  upon  tlvj  Body,  does
not  only  betray  want  of  Senfe, but  excefs  oi  PafTion  too.'
For  the  time  we  fpend  upon  any  Objecfb,  is  ufually  propor-
tioned to  the  Pleafure  we  take  in  it,  and  the  Aftcvflion  we
have  for  it. And  for  this  Reafon,  we  ought  to  look  upoii

aU

29S  Ep^ctetus*s_  Morals,

all  the  Pains  we  are  at  upon  the  Body,  only  as  a  thing  by
the  bye ;  to  have  very  little  Tendernefs  for,  and  take  but
fmall  Satisfaclion  in  it ;  and  to  transfer  all  thefe  things  to  an
Object  more  worthy  of  them,  even  that  Soul,  whofe  Inftru-
ment  and  Servant  this  Body  is;  for  they  are  ail  its  due :  and
this  is  the  true  Meafure  and  Rule,  by  which  we  fhould  be  gb-
vern'd,  in  the  diilribution  of  our  Services  to  each  of  them.

CHAP. LXIV.

WHEN  any  Man  does  you  an  Injury,  or  refle(5ls
upon  your  Good  Nature,  confider  with  your-
felf,  that  he  does  this  out  of  a  Perfuafion,  that  it
is  no  more  than  what  you  deferve,  and  what  be-
comes him  to  fay  or  do. And  it  cannot  be  expeifled,
that  Your  Opinion  of  things,  but  his  own,  fhould
give  Lav/  to  his  Behaviour. Now  if  that  Opinion
of  his  be  Erroneous,  the  Misfortune  is  not  Yours,
but  His,  who  is  thus  led  into  Miftakes  concerning
you. For  the  Truth  of  a  Propofition  is  not  fliaken
one  whit,  by  a  Man's  fuppofing  it  to  be  falfe ;  the
Confequence  is  not^the  worfe,  but  the  Perfon  who
judges  amifs  of  it  is. Such  Confiderations  as  thefe
may  ferve  to  difpofe  you  to  Patience  and  Meeknefs ;
and  by  degrees  you  will  be  able  to  bear  the  moft
fcurrilous  Reproaches, and  think  the  bittereft  and
mod  infolent  Traducer  worth  no  other  Return,  than
this  mild  Anfwer, That  thefe, it  feems, are  his
Thoughts  of  you, and  it  is  not  ftrange, that  this
Man  fhould  vend  his  own  Opinion  freely,  and  adu
accordino:  to  it.

'O

COMMENT.

THIS  Chapter  is  plainly  intended  to  perfuade  us  to  bear
Injuries  with  Meeknefs  and  Moderation  j  The  Argu-
lijents  made  ufe  of  to  this  purpofe,  are  Two.

The

with  S I  M  p  L  t  c  I  u  s*s  Comment. 290

The  Firft  proceeds  upon  a  Foundation  evident  to  com-
mon Senfe,  and  confirmed  by  the  Pracflice  and  Experience
of  all  the  World  j  which  is,  That  every  Man  a^fls  in  agree-
ment with  his  own  particular  Notions  of  things,  and  does
what,  at  the  inftant  of  doing  it,  appears  to  Him  fcitten:  to  be
done.  If  therefore,  his  Apprehenfions  differ  from  Ours  as
it  cannot  be  any  great  matter  of  Wonder,  fo  neither  doe's  ft
minifter  any  juft  Caufe  of  Refentment  ,•  becaufe  He  follows
the  Didates  of  His  Breaft,  and  I  follow  Mine,  and  fo  do  all
the  World.  So  that  it  would  be  a  moft  extravagant  and
fenfelefs  thing,  for  me  to  be  angry,  for  his  ading  according-
to  Nature,  and  upon  a  Principle  univerfally  connoted  to  by
all  Mankind.

But  you  will  fay  perhaps,  Thar  his  following  his-  own
Opinion  is  not  the  thing  you  quarrel  with,  but  the  enter-
taining an  ill  Opinion  of  you,  for  which  there  is  no  Ground
or  Colour  of  Juftice.  Now,  upon  Examination  of  this  Pre-
tence too,  it  will  be  found,  that  you  have  not  at  all  mended
the  Matter,  but  that  this  is  as  ridiculous  and  abfurd  a  Pafi
fion  as  the  other.  For  if  he  have  done  you  no  harm,  wiiere
is  the  Provocation?  and  that  it  is  plain  he  hath  not; 'for  no
Body  is  the  worfe  for  it,  but  himfelf  He  that  thinks  he
does  well  when  he  really  does  ill,  and  millakes  Falfhoods
for  Truth,  is  under  a  dangerous  Delufion,  and  fuffers  ex-
tremely by  his  Error.  And  therefore  the  Man  who  injures
your  Perfon  or  your  Reputation,  does  but  wound  himfelf
all  the  while :  And  this  he  does  more  efFedually,  and  to  his
own  greater  Prejudice,  than  it  is  poffible  for  You  in  the
height  of  all  your  defircd  Revenge,  or  for  the  moft  Potent
and  malicious  Enemy  in  the  World,  to  do.  For  whatever
the  World  commonly  efteems  moft  noxious,  can  reach  no
farther  than  the  Body,  or  the  External  Enjoyments;  and  con-
fequently  does  not,  in  ftric^  fpeaking,  hurt  the  Man  himfelf:
But  Error  is  a  Blemifh  upon  the  Soul,  an  Evil  which  affeds
his  Eilence,  and  taints  the  very  diftinguilhing  Character  of
the  Human  Nature.

Now,  that  the  Perfon  who  entertains  this  falfe  Opinion
and  not  He  concerning  whom  it  is^  entertained,  receives  all
the  Prejudice  by  it,  he  proves  beyond  all  Contradidion,  by
the  Inftance  of  a  complex  Propofition,  For,  fuppofe'one
fnould  fay,  If  it  he  Daj^  then  the  Sun  is  above  the  Horizon
and  another  Perfon  fhould  maintain  that  this  is  falfe,-  his
ftanding  out  againft  it,  does  not  in  any  degree  weaken  the
Truth  of  the  Allcrcion,  nor  invalidate  the  neceHary  depen-
dence

joo  EpicteTus's  Morals^

dence  of  the  Two  Parts  of  k  upon  each  other:  It  remains
in  the  fame  Perfedion  ftill  i  but  the  Perfon,  who  judges
amiTs  concerning  it,  does  not  fo.  Thus  the  Man  who  af-
fronts or  traduces  you,  contrary  to  all  the  Rules  of  Juftice,
and  Honour,  and  Duty,  injures  himfelf,  but  You  continue
unrouch'd;  and  neither  the  Edge  of  the  Weapon,  nor  the
Venom  of  his  Tongue  can  enter  you  :  Efpeciaily  if  you  are,
as  you  ought  to  be,  fully  convinced,  that  there  is  no  fuch
thing  as  Good  or  Evil  to  be  had  from  any  thing,  but  what
falls  within  the  Compafs  of  our  ov/n  Choice.

When  therefore  you  have  called  up  your  Reafon,  and
have  refiedted,  firft, "bow  natural  it  is  for  every  Man  to  be
governed  by  his  own  Senfe  of  things ;  and  then,  that  the
Injury  does  not  really  reach  you,  but  falls  back  upon  the
Perfon  who  vainly  intended  it  for  you  •  this  will  cool  your
Paflion,  and  fill. you  with  a  generous  Difdain.  You  will
think  his  impotent  Malice  deferves  to  be  flighted  only,  and
may  check  both  his  Folly,  and  your  own  Refentment,  with
fome  fuch  fcornful  return  as  this.  That  he  does  hut  what  all  the
World  do ;  for  though  all  are  not  of  the  fame  mind,  yet  in
that  vaft  variety  of  Opinions  every  Man  adts  according  to
his  Own.

E

CHAP. LXV.

V  E  RY  thing  hath  two  Handles :  the  One  fofc
and  manageable,  the  Other  fuch  as  will  not  en-
dure to  be  touched.  If  then  your  Brother  do  you  an
Injury,  do  not  take  it  by  the  hot  and  liard  handle,
by  reprefenting  to  yourfelf  all  the  aggravating  Cir-
cumftances  of  the  Fad  j  but  look  rather  on  the  fofc
fide,  and  extenuate  it  as  much  as  is  poffible,  by  con-
fidering  the  nearnefs  of  the  Relation,  and  the  long
Friendlliip  and  Familiarity  between  you,  Obliga-
tions to  Kindnefs,  which  a  fingle  Provocation  ought
not  to  dilTolve.  And  thus  you  will  take  the  acci-
dent by  its  manageable  handle,

CO  M^

^jDlth  S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S'S Go M  M  E  N  T. 30!

COMMENT,

AL  L  the  'parts  of  this  material  World  are  compofed  of
different  Principles  and  contrary  Qualities :  FroiTi
whence  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  in  Some  refpefts  they  agree
sind  can  fubfift  together,  and  in  Others  they  are  oppofite,
and  incompatible,  and  deftrudive  of  one  another.  Thus
the  Fire  hath  two  Qualities  of  hot  and  dry,  mofl  remarkable
in  it.  With  regard  to  its  Heat,  it  agrees  Vv'eil  with  the  Air,
and  is  compatible  with  it  j-  but  its  Drought  is  repugnant  to
the  moifture  of  the  Air,  and  contends  v/ith  it,  and  deftroys
it.  And  this  Obfervation  holds  in  Moral,  as  well  as  Natu-
ral Philofophy.  For  thus  an  Injury  received  from  a  Brother,
hath  two  Handles,  and  i&  capable  of  different  Conftruftions
and  different  Refentments,  according  to  that  Plandle  we  take
it  by.  Confider  the  Man,  my  Brother,  my  Friend,  my  old
Play-fellow,  and  Familiar,  and  this  is  the  foft  and  pliable  fide^
it  difpofes  me  to  Patience  and  Reconciliaticm,  and  Kindnefs,
But  if  you  turn  the  other  fide,  and  regard  only  the  Wrong,
the  Indignity,  the  unnatural  Ufage  of  fo  near  a  Relation  y
this  is  the  untradlable  partj  it  will  not  bear  the  Touch,  and
difpofes  to  nothing  but  Rage  and  Revenge.  Now  it  isplain^j
that  what  we  efteem  light  and  very  tolerable,  is  entertained
hy  us  with  Eafinefs  and  Patience,  and  makes  no  change  in
our  Cheerfulnefs  and  Temper  j  but  what  we  look  upon  as
grievous  and  infupportable,  leaves  very  angry  Refentments
and  melancholy  Imprefiions,  and  utterly  difcompofes  the
Evennefs  and  Quiet  of  our  Minds.  This  is  the  natural  re-
fult  of  fuch  Accidents,  and  fuch  Apprehenfions.  But  now,
fince  it  is  our  Duty  always  to  preferve  the  Mind  fedate
and  calm,  nor  to  fufter  it  either  to  be  dejeded  with  Grief
and  Sullennefs,  or  ruffled  with  Anger  j  fince  we  are  obliged
to  bear  whatever  happens  to  us  with  Patience  and  Modera-
tion ;  and  fince  all  things  have  two  handles,  one  that  will,
and  the  other  that  will  not,  abide  the  Touch  ,•  It  is  plain
that  the  way  to  difcharge  this  Obligation ,  is  always  to  lay
hold  on  the  right  and  the  tradable  handle.  For  in  Truth,
all  things  whatfoever.  Riches  and  Poverty,  Health  aiid  Sick-
nefs.  Marriage  and  Celibacy,  Children  and  no  Children,
and  to  be  fiiort,  all  the  Accidents  of  human  Life,  are  juft
as  you  ufe  and  receive  tliem  :  They  have  both  their  Conve-
niences to  recommend  them ,  and  their  Inconveniences  to
IcHeJi  our  efteera  of  them.

Thus

20Z Epigte^us's  Morals,

Thus  Riches  are  defireable,  if  you  confider  the  Advan^
tages  of  Plenty,  and  this  is  their  fok  Handle,-  but  then  rtiey
arfe  attended  wich  infinite  Care,  acqaired  With  Toil,  pofTefs'd
with  >Fear,  loft  with  Remorie  and  Trouble  ^  and  thefe  Anxi-
eties are  Allays  and  Abatements  upon  them,  and  their  untra-
^able  Handfe.  Poverty  feems  very  tolerable,  when  we  re-
fled  upon  the  Quiet  and  the  undiftiirbed  Retirements  of  that
State;  but  if  we  turn  the  Tables,  and  obfei^ye  the  Indigence
and  Dependence  of  it,  the  Neglect,  and  the  Scorji  that  it
expoles  one  to,  thefe  make  it  very  dreadful  and  almoft  in-
fupportable.  Health  is  very  defireable,  upon  the  account  of
that  perfed  Eafe  and  Freedom  we  enjoy  wich  it;  the  Vi-
gour of  our  Spirits,  and  the  ready  and  puhclual  Obedi-
ence of  all  our  Parts,  in  difcharging  their  refpe<ftive  Duties :
But  even  This  hath  its  Incumbrances  too,  the  Arrogance
and  affuming  Pride,  and  that  Confidence  in  their  owii
Scrength,  to  which  Fulnefs  of.  Blood  commonly  expotes
Men.  Sicknefs  appears  a  very  tolerable  Evil,  when  we  re-
fled,  that,  as  the  Spirits  are  low,  fo  are  the  PafTions  too,
and  the  Mind  is  then  more  free  and  undifturbed :  But  the
Paintings,  and  Languifiiings ,  and  Uneafmefs  of  a  fick  Bed,
are  the  hard  and  the  heavy  Handle.  Marriage  is  recommended
to  us  by  the  fatisfadion  of  having  IfTue  of  our  own ;  the  ten-
der Care  and  mutual  Affedion  of  both  Parties;  but  then  ic
hath  its  Bitter,  "as  well  as  its  Sweet,  the  rnultiplyirig  of
Cares,  and  creating  new  Wants  to  one's  lelf,  an  inordinate
Fondnefs,  and  a  perpetual  Uneafinefs  and  Fear  for  thofe
we  love  fo  dearly.  And  furely  the  want  of  Children,  which
is  commonly  efteemed  fo  mighty  an  Unhappinefs,  hath  a
great  deal  to  extenuate  it;  for  this  leaves  a  Man  free  arid  eafy,
qualifies  him  to  encounter  with  any  Difficulties,  delivers
him  from  that  anxious  Concern,  which  the  Care  arid  De-
pendence of  a  Family  muft  of  neceffity  diftrad  him  v/ich;
it  allows  him  leifure  for  attending  better  Studies,  and  dif-
engages  him  from  that  extravagant  Folly,  of  making  himfelf
a  Slave  to  the  World,  and  enjoying  nothing  while  he  lives,
that  he  may  leave  a  little  more  to  his  Family  when  he  dies,-
and,  which  in  my  Opinion  is  the  greateft  misfortune  of  all,
it  brings  him  under  no  Temptation  of  Indulgence  and  Fond-;
nefs  for  lewd  and  ungi-icious  Children.  For  though  their  be-
ing fuch  is  a  mighty  Afflidion,  yet,  alas !  We  too  often  make
it  a  greater  to  ourfelves;  and  love  their  very  Vices,  becaufe
our  own  Children  are  guilty  of  them.  Even  Infolencies,
^nd  Injuries, and  Affrorits, have  fomething to  extenuate

thenij

w///&  Si MPt I  cJtus's  Comment.  303

^:Cm  ^  for  very  often,  when  Men  reproach  us,  they  bring  us
better  acquainred  with  our  wn  Coheerhs,  and  tell  us
ibm<jthing  w,e  did  not  know  before  j  but,  to  be  fure,  they
always  minifter  occalions  of  Patience,  and  exercife  pur  Vir-
tue. Corporal  Pains  and  Punifhrnezus  are  of  all  others  the
tnoil  formidable  to  human  Nature  j  and  yet  the  Anguifli  of
thefe  would  be  mitigated,  arid  we  mould  in  forhe  degree  be
reconciled  tb  them  ^  did  we  but  refiledi  w'hat  good  they  do
us,  did  we  corifider,  that  they  try  the  Soul,  as  Fire  does
Metals,  and  purify  it  from  its  Drofs.  Arid  if  there  were
50  other  Benefit  to  be  had  from  theho,  yet.the  very  enduring
them  with  Courage  and  Conftancy  is  itlelf  a  very  great  on^^.
And  much  more  it  is  for  a  Man's  real  advantage,  to  fall
into  Affliftions  and  behave  himfelf  gallantly  under  them,
than  never  to  be  diftrefied  br  affliifted  at  all.  For  the  efcap-
ing  Afflictions  is  only  a  piece  of  good  Fortune,  which  reaches
to  the  Bordyj,  or  the  Eftate,  and  no  farther  j  but  the  bearing
them  with  Fortitude  and  Decency  is  a  Happinefs  of  the  Soul,
and  what  the  Man  is  properly  the  better  for.  Nay,  laftly,
to  fliew  that  there  neither  is^  nor  cari  be,  ariy  thing  withouc
the  Two  Handles  we  fpeak  of,  even  our  Enemies  themfelves
have  them  ;  and  it  is  a  very  feafiblc  thing  to  make  a  Benefit
of  Them  too  j  For  their  Spight  awakens  our  CarCj  puts  us
upon  examining  into  our  own  Paffions  and  Failings  more
nicely  j  and  the  knowing,  how  curious  they  will  be  to  ob-
fef  ve,  and  how  pleafed  to  find  our  Faults,  renders  us  more
circumipecfl  and  wary  in  ail  our  Behaviour.  And  thefe  are
fuch  valuable  Confiderations,  that  Plutarch  thought  it  worth
his  while  td  write  a  Tr3(ft  *  on  purpofe  upon  this  Subjeft,
to  fhew,  how  a  Man  may  manage  himfelf  fo,  a^  to  improve
the  Malice  of  his  Enemies,  and  convert  it  to  his  own  Ad«
vantage.

CHAP. LXVI.

THere  is  no  Confequence  or  necefTary  Connexi-
on at  all  between  thefe  AiTertions :  I  am  richer
than  you,  therefore  I  am  a  better  Man  than  you  ;

A  a  ' "• "  or,

3.t)4  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S'S M  O  R  A  L  S,

or,  I  am  more  learned,  or  eloquent  than  you,  there-
fore I  am  better  than  you.  But  all  the  Inference
that  can  be  made  from  fuch  Comparifons ,  is  only
this:  I  am. a  richer  Man  than  you,  therefore  my
Eftate  is  larger  than  yours  -,  I  am  more  Eloquent  than
you,  therefore  my  ExprelTions  are  more  proper,  and
my  Style  more  delicate  than  yours.  And  what  is  ali
this  to  the  purpofe  ?  for  neither  the  Eftate  nor  the
Style  is  the  Man  :  and  confequently  Thefe  may  be
the  better,  and  yet  You  may  not  be  one  whit  the
better.

COMMENT.

MEN  of  Letters  commonly  fhew  their  Talent  in  quaint-
nefs  of  Expreffion  and  exaft  Coirpofition :  which  is
a  nicecy  unbecoming  a  Philofopherj  except  this  Faculty  were
inftilled  very  early,  and  grew  up  with  him  j  fo  that  Educa-
tion and  long  Cuilom  have  made  him  fo  great  a  Matter  of
Language,  that  his  Rhetorick  be  not  laboured  or  affeded,
but  flow  naturally  from  him.  And  even  the  Man  who  is
thus  happy,  muft  not  value  himfelf  upon  it ;  becaufe  this  is
not  the  End  a  Philofopher  ought  to  aim  at,  nor  the  peculiar
Excellence  of  human  Nature.  Elegance  is  properly  what
fuch  Studies  pretend  to  j  and  he  that  fucceeds  well  in  them,
gains  the  Reputation  of  a  good  Poet,  or  a  good  Hiftorian.
But  he  that  afpires  to  the  Charader  of  a  Good  Man,  and
defires  to  diftinguifli  himfelf  by  a  Life  conformable  to  the
beft  Reafon,  propofes  an  End  agreeable  to  fuch  a  Life  ;  and
confequently  cannot  have  any  pretence  to  prefer  himfelf  be-
fore another,  for  any  advantages  of  Eloquence  which  he
may  have  above  him.  For  there  is  a  wide  difference  be-
tween fuch  a  one's  Eloquence  and  himfelf  :  Nor  is  this  the
effential  Property  and  Prerogative  of  his  Nature,  that  he
ihould  receive  his  Denomination  from  it,  as  every  Artificer
is  diftinguifhed  by  his  Profeffion.  All  the  boafi:  then,  that
can  be  allowed  him  in  this  cafe,  comes  only  to  thus  much,
My  La7igtiage  is  better  than  your i.  And  this  Inilance  is  what
1  the  rather  have  cbofen  to  infift  upon,  becaufe  I  imagine,
Efi^etus's  main  intention  here,  was  to  give  his  Philofo-
pHera  Check,  for  that  fuperftitious  Nicety  very  common  a-
xnong  them,  of  being  over-curious  and  elaborate  in. their
; •  Conipo-

with  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 30?

CoifipofitionSj  and  fpcnding  too  much  rime  and  pains  about
Words.  Bur,  becaufe  rhis  was  a  render  poinr,  thac  other
Inftance  of  the  Richer  i\4an's  exalting  himfelf  is  added,  the
better  to  cover  his  Delign,  andmal.'e  the  Reproof  the  fofter.

mrnmmmmmmmmmmmmwmmwmim

CHAP. LXVII.

IF  any  Man  bathes  too  foon,  do  not  you  preient-
ly  fay.  He  hath  done  ill  in  it  ;  buc  only,  that
he  did  it  early.  U  a  Man  drink  a  great  deal  of
Wine,  do  notcenfure  him  fqr  having  done  ill  i  buc
only  fay.  That  he  drinks  a  great  deal  :  For  hov^^
is  it  pofTible  for  You  to  know  whether  he  did  ill
or  no,  unlefs  you  were  confcious  of  his  Intentions,
and  law  the  Grounds  he  went  upon  ?  And  this  Cau-
tion, which  I  here  advife  you,  is  the  only  w'ay  to
prevent  that  common  Injury  and  Inconvenience,  of
determining  raflily  upon  outward  appearances,  and
denouncing  peremptorily  concerning  things  thac
you  do  not  know.

COMMENT.

HE  would  have  us  proceed  in  our  Judgment  of  Men  and
Actions,  with  great  accuracy  and  circumfpediioa  :
Not  to  be  too  forward  in  giving  cur  Opinion  of  any  kind,
cither  in  praife  or  difpraife,  acquitting  or  condemning  of*
them,  till  v/e  are  firll  well  fatisfied  of  the  Perlbn's  Intenti-
on, what  Reafons  he  proceeded  upon,  and  what  End  he  di-
reded  it  to.  For  thcfe  are  the  very  Con fi derations  which
make  an  Adlion  formally  good  or  evil  ^  and  according  as
thefe  vary,  they  may  deferve  a  very  different  Interpretation.
Thus  a  Man  may  give  Blows,  and  do  good  in  it  (if  this
be  intended  to  corretl  a  Fault  ^ )  he  may  give  dne  Subftance
to  his  prejudice  (if.it  be  deligned  to  feed  his  Difeafe  j  )  nay,
matters  may  be  fo  ordered,  that  Stealing  fliall  be,  an  At\  of

A  a  2  JufticCj

5o6 Epictetus's  Morals,

Joftice,  and  Reftitution  an  Injury,  as  if  the  Obje^  of  Botft
be  a  Mad-man's  S^vord.

Ifth^n  wc  would  deal  honeftly  and  fairly,  we  muft  judge
ct  A^ftions  according  to  the  Circumftances  that  appear  to  us^
and  as  they  are  in  themfelves.  When  we  fee  a  Man  bathe
before  the  ufual  Hour,  all  we  fhould  fay  of  it  is,  That  he
liatli;  done  it  early,  without  pretending  to  determine  the
Quality  of  the  Faifl ,  or  calling  it  good  or  evil ,  till  we
know  what  it  was  that  moved  him  to  do  fo.  Poffibly  he
was  obliged  to  fit  up  all  Night,  and  wanred  this  Refrefh-
ment  to  fupply  his  lofs  of  Sleep.  Now  this  and  the  like
are  very  nraterial  Confiderations  ,•  for  a  Man's  motives  and
intention  quite  alter  the  nature  of  the  thing.  You  ought
rjot  then  to  be  too  bafty  in  palling  Judgment  upon  this  Bath-
ing out  of  courfe  j  for  till  thefe  things  are  known-,  the  Qua-
lity of  the  Fad  does  not"  lie  before  you,.iaor  have  you  any
Matter  to  proceed  upon.  Thus  again,  a  'Man  may  drink  a
larger  proportion  of  Wine  than  ordinary,  and  there  may  be
feveral  Reafons  which  will  juftify  him  in  it  j  the  Conftituti-
on  of  his  Body,  or  the  Seaibn  of  the  Year,  or  the  Tempe-
rament of  the  Air,  may  make  it  neceilary.  And  •  confe-
quently,  what  ralh  and  bufy  People  are  apt  to  condemn,
when  well  enquired  into,  proves  no  more  than  Duty  and
Prudence;  done  to  fatisfy  Nature,  of  to  fupport  the  Spirits
in  faint  fultiy  Weather,  or  to  keep  out  moift  Fogs  or  pefli-
lential  Vapours.

Now  it  we  do  thus,  as  he  advifes,  and  Hop  at  the  A(ftions
themfelves ,  without  prefuming  to  applaud  or  to  condemn
them,  till  we  have  throughly  exammed  into  the  Grounds  of
them,  and  are  fatisfied  of  the  ATan's  Difpolition  and  Defign ;
v/e  decline  an  Injuftice  and  an  Inconvenience,  which  other-
wife  It  is  impoffible  to  avoid.  And  that  is,  the  knowing  onfc
thing,  and  judging  another  j  the  determining  more  than  we
have  Evidence  for.  For  in  both  the  Inftances  before  us,
nothing  appears  but  the  outward  Act,  and  its  Circumftances  ,*
that  the  Bathing  ivas  early ^  that  the  iVine  "jjas  much  •  but  the
Caufes  of  thefe  do  not  appear,  upon  which  depends  the
moral  Good  or  Evil  of  the  thing ;  and  yet  the  bufy  World
are  ever  giving  their  definitive  Sentence  in  this  point  too.
And  what  can  be- more  raih,  more  injurious,  more  abfurd
than  this,  from  what  they  do  fee,  peremptorily  to  pronounce
of  what  they  do  not  fee  ?

.  Now  fince  the  Minds  of  Men,  and  the  fecret  Springs  of
their  Adions, do  fo  very  feidom  fall  within  our  fN'^otice,  I

taki?

^'tth  S I M  p  L T  c  I  u  s's  Com  men  t. 307

take  Epiiietus's  Defign  here  to  be,  the  difluading  us  in  ge-
neral from  judging  Men  at  all.  And  indeed  it  is  but  prudent
for  our  Own  fakes,  as  well  as  fit  for  Theirs,  to  be  very
{paring  in  this  particular  ,•  that,  by  fufpending  our  Judgment,
we  may  not  fall  under  the  fhame  of  retracing  it  afterwards
npon  better  Information.  And  therefore  he  would  not  have
us  over-forward,  either  in  our  Cenfures,  or  our  Commen-
dations i  though  he  levelled  this  Chapter  chiefly,  no  doubt,
againft  the  Condemning  fide,'  becaufe  the  Injury  done  by
ralli  Cenfures,  is  generally  greater ;  and  becaufe  the  Evil  is  4
great  deal  more  popular.  For  the  World  is  not  raili  only,
but  ill-natur'd  too  ^  they  are  apt  and  glad  to  find  Faults,
and  forward  fomctimcs  to  make  th'cra.  This  bafe  Pradice
rhereffere  lay  more  diredly  to  the  Author's  purpofc,  which
was  to  inflrud  us  in  another  Branch  of  Juftice,  one  indeed
tio  lefs  neceiTary  than  any  of  the  reft  j  njiz.  That  whicli
cbncerns  our  Neighbour's  Reputation.

C  H  A  P, LXVIII.

NEVER  profefs  yourfelf  a  Philofopher,  nor  talk
much  of  Rules  and  wife  Obfervations,  among
the  Ignorant  and  Vulgar  ;  but  let  your  Rules  be
feen  in  your  Praftice.  Thus,  when  you  are  at  a
Publick  Entertainment,  difcourfe  not  of  Tempe-
r-ance  and  Moderation  to  the  Company ;  but  let
your  own  Example  teach  it  them  ;  and  remember
that  Socrates  upon  all  occailons  declined  Oftenca-
tion  i  infomuch,  that  when  fome  Perfons  in  deri-
fion  came  to  him,  afid  defired  him  to  recommend
them  to  a  Philofopher,  he  carried  them  to  fome
who  profcfs'd  themfelvcs  fuch,  without  exprefling
tlic  lead  Indignation  at  the  Affront  they  had  put
upon  Him.

Aas  CHAP.

;o8 E  p  I  c  T  E  T  u  s's  Morals,

CHAP. LXIX.

AY,  if  you  happen  in  ConveiTation  with  ig-
norant and  common  Men,  though  they  ftarc
a  Difcourfe  concerning  fome  Points  of  Philofophy,
do  you  forbear  joining  with  them  in  it  :  For  when
Men  are  forward  to  vent  their  Notions,  it  is  a
fiirewd  fign  they  are  not  well  digefted.  It  is  poffi-
ble  your  Silence  may  be  interpreted  Ignorance,
and  that  fome  of  the  Company  may  be  confident,
and  rude  enough,  to  tell  you  fo.  But  if  you  hear
this  Reproach  without  being  concerned,  then  be
aflured,  your  Philofophy  begins  to  have  its  due  ef-
fect :  For,  as  Sheep  do  not  give  up  again  the  Grafs
they  have  eaten,  to  fhew  how  well  they  are  fed  ;
but  prove  the  Goodnefs  of  the  Pafture  and  their
own  Cafe,  by  concocling  their  Meat  well,  and
bringing  a  large  Fleece,  and  giving  large  quantities
of  Milk  •,  fo  muft  You  approve  the  Excellence  of
your  Dodirines  to  the  World,  not  by  Difputes  and
plaufible  Hasangues,  but  by  digefting  them  into
Pracftice,  and  growing  ftrong  in  Virtue,

COMMENT.

BY  this  Paflage  you  may  plainly  perceive,  that  the  Per-
fon  nddrefs'd  to,  is  not  fuppofcd  to  be  a  complete  Phi-
lofopher  ^  for  fuch  a  one  is  in  no  danger  of  bringing  up  indi-
gelted  Notions ,  nor  can  he  need  the  Advice  given  to  that  pur-
pofe.  This  is  applicable  only  to  one  ftill  in  a  ftate  of  Proba-
tion and  Proficiency,  who  hath  not  yet  abfolutely  deliver-
ed his  Mind  from  the  importunate  PafTions  of  Popularity,
and  Seif-conceit,  and  afFeclling  to  be  thought  wife.  Vices,
which  this  Author  hath  taken  great  Pains  to  expofe  and  re-
form •  as  by  other  Arguments,  fo  particularly  by  one,  which
the  Method  taken  in  this  Chapter  plainly  infinuates;  viz..

That  as  one  cannot  with  any  Truth  fay,  That  the  Brafs,
while  it  is  melting  down,  is  a  Statue,  or  that  an  Embryo  is  a

Man  3

Ijjifh S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U  S's C  O  M  M  E  N  T. '  3  Q9

Man  ;  fo  neither  can  we,  That  a  Perfon,  who  is  ftill  un-
der Difcipline  and  Proficiency,  is  a  Philofopher,  Thefe
are  the  rude  and  imperfe<fc  Beginnings  of  what  is  to  come
after  j  but  they  are  not  the  Things  themfelves.  They  arc
the  Matter  under  preparation,  but  they  h^ve  not  the  Form,
v/hich  muft  conftitute  their  EiTence  :  And,  though  they  be
in  never  fo  fair  a  Difpofition  to  receive  it,  yet  till  this  is
done,  they  are  not  the  perfect  Beings,  Vv'hich  they  muft  and
would  be.  But,  though  in  Other  cafes  it  be  I'ufficient  to
fay,  That  to  call  them  fo  were  a  Breach  of  Truth,  yet  in
This  That  feems  too  gentle  an  Imputation  :  For  there  is,
in  a  truly  Philofophical  Life,  fomething  fo  great  and  vene-
rable, fomething  fo  much  above  the  common  Condition  of
Human  Nature,  and  fo  very  near  approaching  to  Divine,
that  the  afcribing  fuch  exquifite  Perfection  to  Perfons,  who
are  as  yet  only  climbing  up  to  it,  may  juftly  feem ,  not
only  a  bold  Falfliood,  but  aa  impious  and  blafphemcus
one  too.

Shall  then  that  Man,  who  muft  not  prefume  to  call  him-
felf  a  Philofopher,  take  upon  him  the  OfSce  of  one  ?  Shali
he  fet  himfelf  in  the  Chair,  and  think  it  becomes  Him,  who
is  but  a  Learner,  to  teach,  and  magiflerially  didate  to  o-
thers  }  No,  certainly.  It  is  fit  he  fhould  know  his  diirance,
and  keep  it.  But  you'll  objed.  That  this  'will  he  a  mighty
Hindrance  to  his  Vrojicie',icyj  by  debarring  him  that  Difcourfe
luith  Men  of  Isfs  Attainment s^  ii^bich  JJjould  exerdfe  and  ith-
prove  his  Talejit.  I  anfwer,  The  Difcourfe  Epidetus  difal-
lows,  is  not  fuch,  as  is  intended  for  a  Trial,  but  the  Effect
of  Vanity ;  nor  is  the  Defign  of  it  Advancement  in  Wif-
dom,  but  Oftentation  and  Applaufe.  Well,  but  How  nmft
he  behave  himfelf  in  fuch  Company  then  ?  Why,  the  propereft
and  moft  efFeftual  courfe  to  recommend  himfelf,  will  be,
to  forbear  the  venting  his  Principles  in  Words,  which  is
but  an  empty  and  a  very  fuperficial  way  of  propagating
them  y  and  to  demonitrate  the  Power  and  Influence  of  chem
in  his  Adtions.  This  is  a  fubftancial  Argument,  and  an-
fwers  the  true  End  of  Philofophy,  which  is  not  florid  Ha-
rangue and  nice  Difpute,  but  prudent  and  unblamable  Pra-
ftice  j  for  this  was  never  intended  to  teach  us  to  talk  v/ell,
but  to  live  well.  If  therefore  you  he  at  a  Fuhlick  Dinncn,  do
not  trouble  yourfe/f  to  read  grave  IjcHures  to  the  Compa-iiy^  coti-
cerning  Temperance  in  Eati?ig^  and  its  jufi  Bowads  and  Mea^
fures  ^  hut  take  care  to  obferve  thofe  Meafures^  and  keep  iviihin
(hoje  Bounds  yourfelf For  by  this  means  you  v/ill  gain  Au-

A  a  ^  thority

Jl  Q  E  p  r C  T  E  T  vl'5  M  O  R  A  L  s,

jthority  to  your  Ipftruclipns  j  and,  when  it  comes  to  your
turn  to  prefcribe  to  ptbers,  every  Word  will  make  its  own
5vay.  For,  how  ridiculous  and  abfurd  is  jc,  to  let  othqr
Men  Rules  of  Temperance,  or  Patience,  and  at  the  fame
time  to  be  guilty  of  Gluttony,  or  fink  under  the  Barden
of  AfBictlion  ones  felf  ?  What  force  or  weight  can  fach  a
one  exped  his  moft  ftudied  Difcourfes  fhouTd  find?  And,
How  unreafonable  and  inconfiftent  is  it,  to  impofe  fuch
I^aws  upon  the  Conduct  of  Others,  as  we  are  not  content
to  fubmic  to  in  our  own  ?

But  thi$  is  not  all.  He  requires  a  higher  degree  of  Self-
denial  ftill.  He  does  not  only  forbid  the  beginning  fuch
kind  of  Difcourfe  j  but  if  any  of  the  Ignorant  and  Vulgar  en-
gage in  it  of  their  own  accord,  he  will  not  allow  us  to  join
with  them,  nor  fet  up  for  an  Oracle,  or  great  Doftor,  a-
rnong  Men  of  meaner  Attainments  than  ourfelves.  For
this  (he  fays)  is  very  fufpicious  j  It  looks,  as  if  what  is  fo
very  ready  to  come  up,  loaded  the  Stomach,  and  was  never
well  digefted.  For  as  Meats,  when  duly  concodled,  diftri-
bute  themfelves  into  the  (everal  Parts,  and  mix  with  the  vi-
tal Juices  and  Blood  to  nouriHi  r.nd  ftrengthep  the  Body  j  fo
do  Maxims  and  Doftrines,  when  well  gligefted,  conyert  in-
to Nourifhment,  and  make  the  Soul  healthful  and  vigorous.
There  they  lie,  like  Sap  in  the  Root ;  which,  when  occa-
lion  ferves,  fpreads  itfelf,  and  brings  forth  the  Fruits  of  vir-
tuous Adions  firft  •  and  when  the  proper  Seafon  comes,
and  thefe  have;  attairied  a  juft  Maturity,  then  of  edifying  Dif-
courfes in  great  abundance.  But  if  any  one  fhall  force  this
Fruit  Qi  Difcourfe  before  its  time,  when  it  is  not  yet  ripe
and  kindly  j  this  in  all  likelihood  will  turn  to  no  better  ac-
count, than  the  difcharging  ones  Stomach  of  undigefted
Meat.  And  there  cannot  be  a  clearer  proof  that  it  want$
Digeftion,  than  out  not  being  able  to  I^eep  it  any  longer.
For  this  is  diredly  that  Man's  Cafe,  who  brings  up  bis  Pre-
cepts of  Philofophy  again,  While  they  are  raw  aqd  whole,
and  does  not  fhew  the  effeft  and  ilrength  of  them ,  in  the
improvement  of  his  Alind,  arid  growing  in  thofe  virtuous
Habits,  which  they  were  intended  to  produce  and  confirm.

Farther  j  in  regard  the  Soul  is  naturally  given  to  look  a-
broad  into  the  World,  and,  for  that  reafon,  feels  itfelf  very
powerfully  wrought  upon  by  good  Examples,  he  propofe^
Socrates  for  an  eminent  pattera  of  Mqdeily :  who,  though  a
rnoft  accomplifhed  Philofopher,  and  declared  by  the  Tefti-
jaony  of  ^^o/lo  himfelf  to  be  the  Wifeft  Man  in  the  World  ;

Onej

Witk  S  I  M  P  L  I  C  I  U.  &'-S Co,  M  M  E  N  T. 3  II

One  who  confequently  had  good  warrant:  to  take  more
upon  him,  thaa  any  mere  Proficienc  ought  ro  'pretend  ro,
.was  yet  the  fartheft  that  could  be  from  an'afTuming  Tem-
per, and  made  it  the  bufinefs  of  his  whole  Life,  to  decline
and  difcountenance  Pride  and  OHenration.  One  very  re-
markable Inftance  of  this  kind  was  his  Behaviour  to  fome
filly  People,  who  came  with  a  defign  to  put  a  Slur  upon
him,  and  defired,  that  he  would  recommend  them  to  fome
Philofopher,  capable  of  inftruding  them.  He  faw  thro'
their  prerence  well  enough  j  but  without  raking  any  notice,
pr  (hewing  the  leaft  Refentment  of  theAirront  they  inrended
him,  carried  them  to  the  Sopbifters  :  Men,  who  had  the
Confidence  ro  call  themfelves  Mafters  and  ProFeffors,  and
made  a  Trade  of  Teaching  others.  Thus  when  Hippocrates  the
Son  of  ApollodoruSj  made  it  his  requeft,  to  be  helped  to  a  Ma-
iler, he  recommended  him  to  Vrotagoras.  And  in  ttiat  Tract
qfPlaiOj  which  is  intided  Theatetus^  he  fays  of  himfelf,  that  he
delivered  over  feveral  to  the  Tuition  of  Frodicus^  and  feveral
to  other  wife  and  great  Men:  So  very  fparing  was  this  Divine
Eerfon  in  putting  himfelf  forward,  and  fo  far  v^as  he  from
thinking  it  a  Diminution  or  Reflection  upon  himfelf,  to  be  fo.

For  this,  after  all,  is  the  mighty  Objecftion,  and  tba:
againft  which  Epi^eius  fortifies  his  Scholar.  He  does  not
think  it  a  fufficient  renouncing  of  Vain  glory,  not  to  begin
g  Philofophical  Difcourfe  among  Men,  who  do  not  make
Philofophy  their  Burjnejs :  No,  nor  to  fit  ftill,  and  net
interpofe '  w^en  they  have  begun  it:  but  there  is  yet  a  far-
ther difclaiming  of  this  vicious  QLiality  expedled.  It  is  pro-
bable, this  Silence  may  be  thought  to  betray  your  Igno-
nnce  j  it  is  poffible  fome  of  the  Company  may  be  fo  plain
as  to  tell  you  fo^  and  tho'  no  Reproach  can  be  more  grat-
ing, than  chat  of  a  defedt  in  one's  own  Profeffion,  yet  this
Proficient  is  tq  run  tlje  rifque  of  that,  and  to  hear  it  with-
put  being  pnoved.  This  if  he  can  do,  it  is  a  furer  fign  that
he  hatl)  mortified  his  Vanity,  than  his  uttering  the  moil  ela-
borate Satyr  in  the  World  againfb  it  j  for  you  have  an  adb-
rance  now  that  other  People  contemn  you.  And  if  you
can  fee  and  hear  this  without  PalTion  j  if  you  find,  that  the
Refentraents,  which  ufed  formerly  to  boil  up  in  your  Brealt
upon  the  like  occafions,  now  lie  cool  and  quiet  ■  Take
comfort,  and  triumph.  Kor  the  fubduing  of  your  Anger
proves,  that  the  Operation  is  begun,  and  that  you  are  now
reaping  thofe  Fruits,  which  all  the  wife  Exhortations  you
iuve"he4rd,  were  intended  to  cultivatCj  and  all  your  ov.n

•  Pdins

312  E  P  I  C  T  E  T  U  S's M  O  R  A  L  S,

Pains  and  Study  propofed  to  produce.  I  mean,  a  Life  of
Virtue  and  ftrict  Reafonj  and  the  making  you  not  (o  much
a  florid  and  v/ell-fpoken,  as  a  prudent  and  a  good  Man.  For
Moral  Precepts  are  learnt,  not  to  be  repeated  but  pradifed  ;
and  the  Excellency  of  them  muft  be  proved,  not  by'the  Me-
mory, or  the  Tongue,  but  by  the  Converfation  of  the  Hearer,
And  the  bearing  this  imputation  of  Ignorance  without  any
difofder,  is  itfelf  fuch  a  Proof;  for  it  fliews  the  Mind  to  be  got
above  both  the  Fame  and  th^  Cenfures  of  the  World.  And
this  is  the  Improvement  every  Matter  expeds  to  find;  for
he,  that,  inftead  of  Pradice,  gives  him  his  Ledures  again,
and  thinks  himfeif  the  better  for  being  able  to  remember  and
repeat  them,  is  guilty  of  as  great  an  Abfurdiry  in  Nature,  as
it  would  be  for  Sheep  to  throw  up  the  Grafs  they  had  eat,
that  fo  the  Shepherd  may  be  fatisfied  of  that  good  Feeding,
which  ought  to  fhew  itfelf  in  a. large  Fleece,  firmnefs  of
Flefh,  and  abundance  of  Milk.

CHAP. LXX.

IF  you  have  fo  far  maftered  your  Appetite,  as  to
have  brought  your  Body  to  coarfe  Fare,  and  to
be  well  contented  with  mere  Neceffaries,  do  not  glo-
ry in  your  abftemious  Diet.  And  if  you  drink  no-
thing but  Water,  proclaim  not  your  own  Sobriety
upon  every  occafion :  Or  if  you  would  inure  yourfelf
to  Hardfiiip,  do  it  for  your  own  Benefit,  not  to  at-
tract the  Admiration  of  other  People.  Let  Vain-
glorious Fools  embrace  Statues  in  the  Streets,  to
ihew  the  Crowd,  how  long  they  can  endure  the
Cold  ;  but  let  Your  Trials  of  yourfelf  be  private  :
And  if  you  would  be  Hardy  in  good  earneft,-  when
you  are  almoft  quite  parched  with  extreme  ThirfV,
take  cold  Vv^ater  in  your  Mouth  ;  then  deny  your-
felf the  fatisfddion  of  Drinking,  and  fpic  it  out
again,  and  tell  no  body.

COM-

«with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 31;^

COM  ME  N  T.

VAin-glory  hath  a  thoufand  feveral  Pretences  to  ground
isfelf  upon  j  but  the  moft  ufual,  and  moft  plaufible,  are
fuch  as  Epiiietus  hath  touched  upon  in  this  Treatile.  Some
People  court  Applaufe,  by  alTun^iing  Narratives  of  their  own
Performances  ;  Others  depend  upon  their  Eloquence  for  it ;
a  Third  fort  expedl  to  be  admired,  by  did:ating  to  all  the
Companies  they  come  in;  and  taking  upon  them  to  talk
gravely,  and  teach  every  one  they  converfe  with  his  Duty  ;
and  thefe  he  hath  e^^ploded  and  warned  us  of  already.  There
is  another  fort  of  Vanity  very  frequent,  whicli  is  the  valuing
ourfelves  upon  voluntary  Aufterities  ;  a  fpare  Diet,  a  frugal
way  of  Living,  abftaining  from  lawful  Pleafures,  and  ufing
the  Body  to  great  Hardships  ,•  and  That  makes  the  Subject  of
the  Chapter  now  before  us.

The  Perfons  therefore,  who  put  thefe  Severities  upon  them-
felves,  are  advifed  not  to  look  big  upon  the  Matter  ^  that  is,
not  to  be  too  much  exalted  with  an  Opinion  of  their  own  Me-
rit ;  or  imagine,  that  they  have  attained  to  fome  peculiar  Ex-
cellence, and  made  fome  mighty  Conqueft  upon  Human  Na-
ture, which  none  but  They  ever  made  before.  For  alas !  how
extravagant  an  imagination  is  this,  when  we  fee  ourfelves
out-done  everyday  and  many  hundred  of  indigent  Wretches
take  up  with  lefs,  and  endure  more,  than  the  greateft  of  thefe
Boafbers  can  pretend  to.?  'Tis  true,  the  One  do  it  out  of  Ne-
cefTity,  the  Other  out  of  Choice.  But  ftill  Human  Nature
is  the  fame  in  Both ;  and  therefore  it  is  plain,  thefe  Men,  after
all  their  Pradice  and  Pains,  have  not  carried  it  fo  far  as  it  is
capable  of  going.  Befidcs,  there  is  always  this  Confideration
ready  at  hand  to  mortify  our  Pride  and  Self-conceit  of  all  kinds:
that  if  we  excel  in  this  particular,  yet  there  are  feveral  others
wherein  .we  are  deficient ;  and  for  one  good  Quality,  which
We  have  and  Others  want,  there  might  be  many  reckoned,
which  Others  have  and  We  want.  But  there  is  indeed  one
peculiar  Misfortune,  which  attends  a  Man's  thinking  highly
of  himfelf  upon  the  account  of  any  Excellence  wkatfoever  j
which  is.  That  it  both  hinders  him  from  improving  and  re-
fining that  particular  Virtue,  as  other  wife  he  might  do,  fup-
pofing  that  he  hath  attained  to  the  Perfe<flion  of  it  already  ;
and  it  checks  and  cools  his  Endeavours  after  other  Virtues,  as
over-racing  this  Tingle  one,  and  chinking  That  alone  fufficient.

But

J 14  Epictetus*s  Morals,

But  do  not  (fays  he)  exercife  any  of  your  Virtues  for
Pomp  and  Shew;  nor,  if  you  drink  Water,  beat  about  the
Bufh  in  all  Companies,  to  wriggle  in  a  Difcourfe  of  your
own  Abftemioufnefs  and  Sobriety:  If  you  wou'd  exercife
any  bodily  Severity,  do  it  for  your  Benefit,  for  a  trial  of
your  own  Parience,  to  harden  your  Con ftitution,  and  to
qualify  you  ftill  more  and  more  for  Toil ,  and  Trouble ,
and  Self-denial.  And  if  thefe  be,  as  they  fKouId  be,  the  true
Ends  you  propofe  from  the  Pradlice  of  them,  you  will  be
well  fatisfied  with  repeating  them  in  private,  and  not  covet
the  Eyes  and  Admiration  of  the  Multitude,  nor  make  it  your
Bufmefs  to  gather  a  number  of  Spectators*;  hke  thofe
Wretches,  who  Vv^hen  they  run  away  from  the  violence  of
too  miglity  an  Enemy,  implore  the  Affiilance  of  the  People,
and  get  upon  the  Statues  to  cry  help,  that  they  may  be  more
feen,  and  fooncr  get  a  Rabble  about  them :  Their  bufinefs
being  only  to  draw  Company  together  in  their  own  Defence,
and  to  make  thcmfelves  and  their  Opprefiion  more  confpi-
cuous  and  deplorable.

But,  if  you  will  be  mortifying,  do  it  privately  and  in  good
eirnefl.  When  you  are  extreme  thirfly,  take  cold  Water
into  your  Mouth,-  and  though  your  Entrails  are  ready  to  be
burnt  up,  yet  fpit  it  out  again ;  and  when  you  have  thus  fub-
dued  the  importunate  Clamours  of  Nature  and  NecefHty,  tell
nt)  body  what  you  have  done.  This  is  Mortification  and
Severity  indeed.  But  things  of  this  kind,  done  to  be  feen
and  commended  of  Men,  Ihew  plainly  that  the  bent  of  the
Soul  lies  outwards;  that  the  Man  is  more  concerned  for
the  Fame  of  the  World,  than  the  real  and  intrinfick  Good-
nefs  of  the  Aftion ;  and  lays  a  greater  ftrefs  upon  Their
Praife  or  Difpraifc,  than  upon  the  Approbation,  or  the  Re-
proaches of  his  own  Confcience. Belides,  he  lofes  all  the

*  The  Account  given  of  this  PafTage  by  Cafauhon,  in  his  Notes  on  this
Chapter,  feems  much  more  pertinejit  and  fatisfaftory,  than  this  given  here
by  Simplicius.  He  tells  us,  that  the  Afcitics  formerly,  amongft  other  Trials
in  which  they  exercifed  thcmfelves,  uled  to  pradife  the  enduring  of  Cold:
To  which  purpofe,  in  a  frofty  Winter's  Morning,  it  was  very  common  to
go  out  into  the  Streets  and  Publick  Places,  and  there  cling  round  one  of
the  Brafs  or  Marble  Statues.  And  becaufe  this  was  very  juftly  fufpe£led  to  '
be  done,  more  to  get  the  Obfervation  and  Applaufe  of  a  gazing  Rabble,
than  out  of  any  good  Defign  upon  thenifelves ;  therefore  EpiBetui  chufej
that  inftance  of  expofing  Vain-glory  upon  tkefe  Accounts.  This  is  a  very
clear  and  natural  Account  of  the  Place,  and  feems  grounded  upon  Authori-
ties fufficient  to  give  it  the  Preference  before  that  of  Him^liciut,  Sec  Cafaub,
.'la  EpiBett  N(jt.  f,j.

<with  S I  M  p  L  I  c  I  u  s's  Comment. 5:15

real  Good  of  his  Abftinence  and  Severity,  and  profanes  a
virtuous  Aiflion,  by  an  end  fo  bafc  and  indirect,  as  popular
Applaufe.

Now^,  that  the  praftifing  fuch  Aufberities  as  thefe  upon
one's  feif,  is  of  excellent  ufe,  Experience  daily  demonftrates.
For  by  this  bufFerting  of  the  Body,  we  keep  Thar,  and  its
fenfual  Inclinations  under  ,•  and  reduce  them  fo  low,  as  not
only  to  prevent  any  rebellions  Infurrcftions  againfl  Rcafon,
but  to  bring  them  to  a  willing  and  ready  compliance,  even
with  thofe  of  its  Commands,  which  are  of  hardefl:  digellion
to  Flefh  and  Senfe.  There  is  moreover  this  mighty  Con-
venience in  it ;  that  thefe  voluntary  Hardfhips  fit  and  pre-
pare us  for  neceffary  and  unavoidable  ones.  Every  Man's
Circumftances  are  fickle  and  changeable  ;  and  fure,  when
any  Afflidion,  as  Want,  or  the  like,  happens  to  us  ,•  it  is  no
fmall  advantage  for  the  Body  to  be  fo  habituated,  as  to  bear
thofe  Evils  without  any  great  alterarion  or  reludtancy,  which
it  is  not  poffible  to  run  away  from.  This  gains  an  abfolute
Maftery  over  the  World,  and  fets  us  above  all  the  uncer-
tainties of  Human  Affairs,  when  it  is  no  longer  in  the
power  of  the  moft  fpightful  Fortune  to  hurt  us.  For  what-
ever extremity  of  Suffering  fhe  can  polTibly  drive  us  to,  this
is  only  what  we  have  by  long  Cuftom  made  eafy  and  familiar
to  ourielves  before.

;•  yn  '
« jfi  IK  »  »: -K  !8>  JK .«  »•:  Jfi  JS; «  « i^:  »$  JK  ^  >:!  iS;  $ !« IK !« !« •91 « >!^

G H  A  P LXXI.

IT  is  the  peculiar  Quality,  and  a  Charader  of  an
undifciplin'd  Man,  and  a  Man  of  the  World,
to  expeft  no  advantage,  and  to  apprehend  no  niif-
chief  from  himfelf,  but  all  from  Objefts  without
him':  Whereas  the  Philofopher,  quite  contrary,
looks  only  inward,  and  apprehends,  no  Good  or
Evil  can  happen  to  him,  but  from  liixufelf-alpne^..

G  H  A  P.

3l6  EpICTETUS's MoRALSj

CHAP. LXXII.

THE  marks  by  which  a  Proficient  in  Phllofophy
may  be  known,  are  fuch  as  thefe.  He  is  not
inquifitive  or  bufy  in  other  Men's  Matters,  fo  as  to
cenfure,  or  to  commend  ;  to  accufe,  or  to  complain
of  any  body.  He  never  talks  big  of  himfelf,  nor
magnifies  his  own  Virtue  or  Wifdom.  When  he  falls
under  any  hindrance  or  difappointment  in  his  De-
ligns,  he  blames  none  but  himfelf.  If  any  Perfon
commend  him,  he  fmiles  within 'himfelf,  and  re-
ceives it  with  a  fecret  Difdain  ;  and  if  other  People
find  Fault  with  him,  he  is  not  at  all  folicitous  in  his
own  Vindication.  His  whole  Behaviour  is  like  that
of  a  fick  Man  upon  recovery,  full  of  caution  and
fear  left  he  fhould  relapfe  again,  and  injure  his  ad-
vances towards  Health,  before  it  be  confirmed  and
perfe(5lly  found.  As  for  Defire,  he  hath  utterly
abandoned  it,  except  what  depends  upon  his  own
lelf  i  and  Averfions  he  hath  none,  but  to  fuch  Ob-
jecfts  only,  as  are  vicious  and  repugnant  to  Nature
and  Reafon,  The  Affeftions  and  Appetites,  which
Nature  made  ftrong,  he  hath  abated,  and  taken  off
all  the  edge  and  eagernefs  of  them.  If  he  be  dif-
paraged,  and  pafs  for  an  ignorant  or  infenfible  Man,
he  values  it  not.  And,  to  fum  up  all  in  a  word,  hs
is  exceeding  jealous  of  himfelf,  and  obferves  every
Motion  of  his  Mind  as  rigoroufiy,  as  a  Man  would
watch  a  Thief,  or  an  Enemy,  who  lies'  lurking  to
rob,  or  to  kill  him.

COMMENT.

HE  hath  now  gone  through  all  the  inftruftivc  part  of  his
Book  and  is  drawing  on  cowards  a  Concluuon. And
the  Subftance  of  what  he  chui'es  to  cloie  up  all  with,  is

this

'with  SiMPLicius's  Com  me  n  t.  317

this  mofl: neceffary  Caution-  That  v/e  muft  not  content  our-
felves  with  reading,  or  underftanding,  or  remembring  Rules
of  MoraUty ;  but  take  care,  that  they  influence  our  Lives,
and  be  tranfcribed  in  all  our  A(T:ions.  That  no  Man  who
addicts  himfelf  to  the  Study  of  Philofophy,  muft  propofe
fo  mean  an  End,  as  only  the  informing  his  Judgment  the
filling  his  Head  with  curious  ^s^otions,  or  furniflajng  his
Tongue  with  Matter  of  learned  Difcourfe-  but  the  reform-
ing his  Vices,  and  bettering  his  Converfation  :  conliderino-,
that  the  Defign  of  Moral  Precepts  is  never  anlwered  by
any  thing  fliort  of  Pradice.  To  this  Purpofe,  he  firft  de-
fcribes  to  us  Three  forts  of  People,  whofe  Charaders  are
fo  comprehenfive,  that  all  Mankind  come  under  fome  one
or  other  of  them.

For  every  Perfon  whatfoever  is,  Either  a  fecular  Man
one  that  lives  at  the  common  rate,  and  minds  the  Affairs
of  the  World,  and  This  is  one  Extreme :  Or  elfe  he  is  a
Philofopher,  who  hath  abandoned  all  other  Care  and  Concern
but  what  relates  to  Virtue,  and  the  Improvement  of  his  own
Mind-  and  this  is  the  other  oppofite  Extreme:  Or  elfe  he
muft  be  one  of  a  rank  between  both  thefej  neither  fo  un-
taught as  the  fecular  and  common  Man,  nor  yet  fo  accom-
pliftied  as  the  Philofopher  •  but  fuch  a  one  as  hath  renounced
the  World,  and  is  afpiring  to  a  Moral  Perfecflion.  Thefe
are  called  Proficients,  and  to  Them  the  feveral  Exhortations,
which  hath  lately  fallen  under  our  Confideration,  are  parti-
cularly direded.  But  of  thefe  we  are  to  take  notice,  that
Epiiietus  makes  Two  forts  j  Some  that  are  young  Bec^in-
ners,  and  lately  entred  into  this  Difcipline,-  and  Others,  thac
have  ufed  it  longer,  and  made  fome  competent  advances
in  it.

Now  here  he  prefents  us  with  a  Defcription  of  every  one
of  thefe.  He  begins  with  that  of  the  Vulgar  and  undifci-
plin'd  Man,  he  gives  him  this  diftinguifliing  Mark,-  That
he  expccls  no  part  of  his  Happinefs  or  Mife^y  from  himfelf
but  from  outward  Objeds :  And  the  Account  of  this  is  as
follows.

Reafon,  which  is  our  very  EfiTence  and  Form,  that  which
makes  and  denominates  us  Men,  is  placed  in  our  own  Power
And  fo  likewife  are  the  Senfual  Appetites  and  Paffions-  On-
ly with  this  difference,  That  thefe  are  not  peculiar  co  \Js
alone;  but  given  to  us  in  common  with  Brutes.  So  thac
Reaion  is  the  incommunicable  Privilege,  and  proper  Pre-
rogative of  Human  Nature, That which  is  given  to all

Men

^iS Epi  CTE  Tus's  Morals,"

iVien  in  common,  and  to  none  but  Men.  For,  though
there  be  a  difference  between  one  Man's  Reafon  and  ano-
thers,  when  yoa  come  to  particular  t'erfons,  and  Operati-
ons, and  Objcds-  yet  the  Faculty  in  gerferal  is  the  fame^
the  Foundation  it  proceeds  upon,  tHe  fame ;  and  its  Ends
and  Modves  are  the  fame.  All  men  are  directed  by  it  to
jjurfae  the  fame  good  Things^  to  deteit  and  mun  the  fame
Evils ,  to  alTent  to  the  fime  Truths,  and  to  rejed  the  fame
Errors  and  Untruths.  So  that  Reafon  is  every  Man's  Guide  5
and  from  this  he  takes  his  Meafures  of  Good  and  Evil ,  of
True  and  Falfe.

Now  tlie  Obje<fls,  which  R^eafbn  infpires  us  with  a^  Love
and  Defire  of,  are  certain  incorporeal  Excellencies,  Indivi-
fible  aiid  Immutable  j  fuch  as  Juftice,  and  Modcratidn,  and
Prudence.  The  advantage  of  chefe,  and  the  like  good  Things  ,
is.  That  each  Perfoh  may  enjoy  the  v/hole  of  them,  with-
out injuring  Or  depraving  his  Neighbours.  They  are  of  un-
bounded extent;;  and  no  one  Man  hath  the  lefs,  for  any
other  Man's  having  more.  From  hence  it  comes  to  -pafs^
that  the  Determinations  of  Right  Reafon  can  never  be  re-
pugnant to  one  another  j  and,  fo  long  as  we  purfue  the  Ob-
iecSs  it  prefents  and  recommends  to  our  AffeiSion,  there  fol-
lovv^s  no  Scrife  or  Contention,  but  all  is  Union,  and  mutual
Confent,  fweet  Harmony,  and  perfed  Peace.

But  now,  the  Senfual  Appetites  and  Paflions,  fuch  as  An-
o-er  and  Concupifcence,  and  the  reft  which  are  fubordinate
to  thefe  Two  ^  tho'  in  general,  and  in  their  own  Nature,  they
be  the  fame  in  You,  and  Me,  and  Every  one,  yet  the  Ob-
jeds  tbey  faften  upon  are  not  the  fame  in  each  Perfon.  But
I  fix  upon  one  thing,  and  you  upon  another  j  and  fo  both
the  Deures  themfelvcs,  and  the  Objeds  of  them,  and  con-
fequently  the  Averfions ,  and  Their  Objeds  too,  are  ex-
tremely diftant  from  one  another,  and  peculiar  to  each  fin-
ale Man.  And,  tho'  it  fliould  happen.  That  all  fliould  a-
gree  in  the  fame  Objeds,  yet  would  not  this  put  an  end  to
the  Difference  neither;  becaufe  the  things  themfelvcs  which
engage  thefe  Affedions,  are  Corporeal,  and  Singular,  and
Divifible,  fuch,  as  that  one  Man's  Plenty  neceffarily  infers
another  Man's  Want:  as  Money,  for  inftance,  or  Lands,
or  Women,  or  Honour,  or  Power,  or  Preferments.  No
Man  can  enjoy  the  Whole  of  thefe,  nor  indeed  a  Part  of
them,  without  depriving  or  confining  fome  body  elfe,  in
proportion  to  the  Quantity  which  himfelt  enjoys.  Upon
thefe  Accounts  it  is,  that  in  thefe  Cafes  Men  differ  vaftly

in

with  S I M  p  L I  c  1  u  s*s  Comment. ii(^

in  their  Judgment,-  and  not  only  fo,  but  the  Order  and  good'
Government  of  the  World  is  overturned  by  thdm.  For
whenever  the  Peace  of  Mankmd  is  difturbed,  either  by  pri-
vate Grudges,  Family-Quarrels,  Civil  Infurre(ftions,  or  Fo-
reign Wars ;  fome  of  thefe  thirlgs  are  conftantly  at  the  bot-
tom of  them.  So  then,  the  common  and  untaught  Man  be-
trays his  Folly,  in  forfaking  the  general  Rule,  arid  flighting
the  Common  Good  of  his  Nature,  and  fetting  up  a  particu-
lar Standard  of  his  own,  One,  that  mifleads  his  Judgment,
and,  inftead  of  that  Good  which  is  univerfal,  cramps  v,^  his
Defires,  and  confines  him  to  one  that  is  Perfonal,  Individu-
al ,  and  Corporeal ,  fuch  as  does  not  approve  itfelf  to  the
concurring  Judgment  of  all  Mankind,  but  only  feems  fo  to
his  own  private  Opiniqn  and  miftaken  Senfe  of  things.  For
this  is  the  true  Cafe  of  External  Objeds.  And  wherefoever
theDefire,  or  the  Averfion  fixes;  whether  it  be  a  Virtuous
and  Reafonable,  or  whether  a  Vicious  and  Unrir.tural  one;
That,  to  be  fure,  is  what  we  apprehend  to  be  our  Good,'
and  our  Evil;  and  we  look  for  the  Happincfs  and  the  Mife-
ry  of  our  Lives  from  thence.  For  whatfoever  we  defire,
excites  our  Love  under  the  Notion  of  Good,-  and  whatfo-
ever we  deteft  or  avoid,  provokes  our  Averfion  under  the
Notion  of  Evil.

Now  the  Philofopher,  on  the  other  hand,  hath  difcarded
all  Outward  things ;  he  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  Matter
and  Body,  but  looks  upon  them  as  things  that  very  little  con-
cern him,  and  fuch  as  he  cannot  have  any  flrid  Propriety  in.
He  hath  diverted  his  Mind  of  all  thofe  Prejudices,  which
might  mifguide  it,  and  refined  his  Reafon  from  the  Drofs
of  Senfe  and  Paffion;  fo  that  thefe  Shadows  and  gaudy  De-
lufions  can  impofe  upon  him  no  longer.  Confequently  he
is  concerned  for  no  Good,  but  what  is  fubftantial ;  nor  at-
tends to  any  other  Bufinefs;  than  the  Improvement  of  him*
felf,  the  Promotion  of  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs,  and  the  af-
piring  after  thofe  Incorporeal  Excellencies,  which  appear
fo  charming  and  lovely  to  clear-fighted  Reafon.  Such  a  one
need  never  go  out  of  himfelf  to  be  happy ;  Virtue  is  his
Good,  and  that  is  always  at  home :  And  as  for  Evil,  it  is
utterly  baniflied  hence,  and  can  never  annoy,  oir  get  within
him.

After  this  Defcription  of  the  Perfons,  who  make  up  the
two  diflant  Extremes,  he  proceeds  in  the  next  place  to  give
a  Reprefentation  of  the  Middle  Sort ;  wz,  Thofe  whom  he
calls  his  Proficients^ and  for  whofe  Ufe  all  that  went  be-

B  b  fore

320  Ep I  c  TETus's  Morals,

fore  was  principally  intended.  For  the  very  Nature  of  the
Subjed  fhews  us  plainly,  that  it  could  belong  to  none  elfe.
The  compleatPhilofopher  needs  no  Inftrudion  or  Affiftance,
but  it  is  properly  his  Bufinefs  to  affift  and  inftruft  others.
Nor  can  this  be  laid  down  as  a  necefTary  Qualification  of  a
Philofopher,  That  he  neither  cenfures,  nor  commends  any
Body;  for  he  is  a  Mailer^  and  a  Corrector  of  Manners,
and  confequently,  as  his  Authority  will  bear  him  out  in
bothj  fo  his  Poft  requires  he  iliould  do  both,  as  he  fees  occa-
fion.  Nor  can  thefe  Difcourfes  belong  properly  to  the
Common  and  Undifciplin'd  Man ;  for  as  the  Other  is  above
them,  fo  This  man  is  not  capable  of  them;  they  would  be
utterly  loft  upon  him,  'till  he  change  his  Courfe  of  Living,
and  begin  to  ad  upon  a  nobler  Principle.  This  Chapter
therefore  is  a  very  Compendious  Recolledion  of  what  went
before  at  large ;  It  is  a  kind  of  Remembrancer  to  us,  and
prefents  us  with  the  Subftance  of  the  whole  Book  in  little,
and  at  one  view.

I  only  add,  before  I  quite  fhut  up  this  Chapter,  that  That
Pafl'age  of  watching  himfelf^  as  he  'would  loatch  an  "Enemy ^  is
very  pertinent,  and  elegantly  exprefs'd.  For,  we  are  to
confider  fuch  a  Man,  in  the  Mid-way  as  it  were,  between
that  Vice  which  he  hath  difclaimed,  and  is  running  away
from,  and  that  Virtue  which  he  is  moving  towards  the  Per-
fedion  of.  In  this  State  we  cannot  but  fuppofe  him  fre-
quently to  refied  upon  his  former  Mifery  ^  and  like  a  Pa-
tient, who  is  in  a  way  of  Recovery,  but  far  from  perfed
Health,  to  be  exceeding  jealous  and  tender,  fearful  of  a  Re-
lapfe,  and  cautious  of  indulging  himfelf  in  any  Liberties,
which  may  keep  him  back  from  a  found  and  confirmed  State.
This  Jealoufy  therefore  muft  needs  make  him  a  curious
Obferver  of  his  own  Adions,  and  as  fevere  in  his  Sentences
upon  them,  as  if  they  were  done  by  an  Enemy.  And  this
Rigour  is  of  excellent  Ufe ;  becaufe  it  frees  the  Mind  of  all
that  partial  Fondnefs,  to  which  we  are  too  much  inclined  y
and  which  oftentimes  makes  us  either  wholly  over-look  our
own  and  our  Friend's  Faults;  or  at  leaft  pafs  very  gentle
and  favourable  Conftrudions  upon  them.  And  indeed  this
is  the  only  way  to  make  us  honeft  and  fincere ;  for  a  diflb-
lute  Man  hath  no  Principles  to  reftrain  him ;  but  is  *  (ac-
cording to  the  Proverb)  A  Limber  Leather^  which  will  ftretch
and  bend  to  any  thing,  and  you  never  know  where  to  have  him.

•  Set  Erafaii  Adag.  Mftt9?ws.

CHAP,

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment. '?2i

CHAP. LXXIII.

IF  you  obferve  any  Man  value  himfelf  for  under-
ftanding  Chryft^pus^)iis  Book  throughly,  and  giv-
ing a  juft  Explanation^  of  it;  feprefent  to  yourfelf
the  intolerable  Abfurdity  of  fuch  a  IVJan's  Pride,  by
this  fingle  Reflexion;  that  if  Chryftppus'^M^  Writ-
ings had  not  been  obfcure,  this  Expounder  would
have  nothing  to  brag  of.  Well,  but  what  is  it  that
I  think  moft  worthy  my  Study?  Why  my  Duty,
refulting  from  the  Condition  of  my  Nature.  I  de-
fire  to  know  then,  who  it  is  that  can  teach  me  this
Duty,  and  I  am  told  Chryfippus  can.  Upon  this
Information  I  apply  myfelf  to  the  reading  his  Book ;
I  read,  but  I  do  not  underftand  him.  My  next  Care
then  is  to  look  out  a  good  Expofitor.  In  all  this
I  have  done  no  great  Matter.  For  when  by  the
help  of  this  Expofition  I  comprehend  his  Meaning,
yet  ftill  I  want  the  Pradical  Part ;  and  this  in  truth  is
the  only  valuable  Progrefs.  For,  If  I  reft  in  the  Au-
thor, or  in  the  Commentator,  and  content  myfelf
with  a  bare  Underftanding,  or  apt  Explication  ;  I
have  forgot  the  Matter  I  took  in  hand,  and  am  no
longer  ftudying  the  Perfecflions  of  a  Philofopher,
but  thofe  of  a  Grammarian.  The  Difference  is  on-
ly this,  that,  whereas  I  have  chofen  Chryfippus  to
exercife  my  Talent  upon.  He  would  have  pitch*d
rather  upon  Horner^  or  fome  other  ClaJJick  Author.
But  this  I  am  fure  of,  that  the  more  capable  I  am
thought  of  explaining  Chryfippus^  the  more  I  ought
to'  be  out  of  Countenance,  if  what  I  can  teach  o-
thers  fo  well,  I  do  not  take  due  care  to  pradtife  as
exa(ftly  myfelf.

B b  2  CO M-

322  Epictetus*s  Morals,

COMMENT,

AFTERhavingdiftinguifhed  Mankind  into  Three  ClafTes,
and  reprefented  the  QuaUties  proper  to  Each  of  them ;
and  alfo  made  a  fliort  recapitulation  of  the  Diredlions  given
before  at  large  to  his  Proficient;  he  now  begins  to  enter
upon  the  concluding  Part,  inculcating  in  this  and  the  fol-
lowing Chapters,  that  Rule,  which  alone  can  give  Life  and
Energy  to  all  the  reft;  viz.  That  the  reducing  thefe  Pre-
cepts into  Pradlice,  muft  be  our  chief  Study  and  Care  j  and
that  the  Good  Works,  which  they  are  excellently  accom-
modated to  produce,  are  the  genuine  Fruits  expedled  from
them,  and  the  very  End  for  which  they  were  compofed  and
communicated.  For  what  an  Eminent  Orator  faid  once  upon
a  like  Occafion,  is  extreamly  applicable  to  the  Cafe  now  in
Hand,  Words  without  Anions  are  but  mere  Air,  and
empty  Sound.

To  this  purpofe,  he  fays,  a  Man  fhould  refled  ferioufly
withhimfelf,  what  his  meaning  is,  when  he  reads  fuch  Mo-
ral Inftrudlions,  and  puts  his  Mind  upon  a  fedulous  Enqui-
ry after  its  true  and  proper  Happinefs.  The  Anfwer  to  this
Queftion  will  be,  That  he  intends  to  examine  into  human
Nature,  and  fee  what  is  the  Conftitution,  and  true  Condi-
tion of  it :  And  from  thence  to  purfue  his  Enquiry  farther,
and  confider  what  Anions,  and  what  Sentiments  are  agree-
able to  this  Nature;  what  Impreffions  are  fit  for  a  Creature
io  framed  to  admit  and  indulge ;  and  what  are  to  be  ftifled
and  reftrained  as  incongruous  and  unfeemly.  Well,  upon
due  Reflexion,  I  find,  that  I  have  a  Principle  of  Reafon,  and  a
Body  i  But  thefe,  not  equal  in  Authority  or  Value,  For
my  Reafon  is  the  Chara<^ler  of  my  Nature,  it  challenges  a
Right  over  my  Body,  and  commands  it  as  an  Inftrument,
fubfervient  to  it,  and  over-ruled  by  it.  The  Inference  then
fr»m  hence  is  plainly  this,  That  God  and  Nature  defigned  I
fliould  live  a  Life  of  Reafon,  and  not  of  Senfe ;  that  all  my
bodily  Paffions  fhould  conform  themfelves  to  the  Com-
mands of  their  Lawful  Superior ;  that  all  my  Fears,  and  all
my  Defires,  fhould  be  reduced  into  due  Order,  and  pay
Homage  to  the  more  illuftrious  Perfedions  of  the  Soul.

But  (till  I  am  at  a  lofs,  how  this  is  to  be  effeded.  I  am
told,  That  Chryjipptti  hath  written  an  excellent  Piece  to  this
purpofe. I  fall  immediately  to  reading  his  Book, but  I

find

*with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  3^^

find  it  fo  abftrufe  and  dark,  that  I  can  make  nothing  at  all
of  it.  I  am  diredled  to  a  good  Commentary,  and  by  the
help  of  this  I  underftand  him  perfedly.  But  all  this  while
here  is  very  little  good  done,  and  but  fmall  praife  due,  ei-
ther to  the  intelligent  Reader,  or  the  peripicuous  Commen-
tator. For  when  Chryfippus  wrote  this,  he  did  not  intend
only  to  be  underftood  and  expounded,  He  had  a  farther  and
much  better  View  j  viz.  That  both  his  Reader  and  his  In-
terpreter fhould  pradife  what  he  hath  written.  If  then  I  do
this,  I  attain  to  the  Benefit  thefe  Writings  were  properly
intended  for,  and  they  have  had  their  due  and  full  effed  up-
on me.  But  if  I  delight  in  the  Author,  or  applaud  the  Ex-
pofitor  never  fo  much ;  if  I  am  Ikill'd  in  all  his  Criticifms,
fee  through  all  his  Intricacies,  admire  the  weight  of  his  Sen-
tences, or  the  turn  of  Style;  in  fliort,  if  I  matter  every
Difficulty,  and  have  every  Attainment,  but  only  that  of
Pradice  ;  I  am  not  one  whit  improved  in  my  Bufmefs.
The  Title  of  a  more  nice  and  exact  Grammarian  I  may
indeed  have  fome  pretenfion  to,  but  can  lay  no  claim  at  all
to  that  of  a  Philofopher.  For  this  Talent  of  explaining  an
Author's  Meaning,  is  properly  the  Qualification  of  a  Gram-
marian ;  The  only  difference  is.  That  Chryfippus  is  an  Au-
thor fomething  out  of  his  way,  and  Homer  a  much  more
likely  Man  to  come  under  his  Confideration.

But  there  is  another  difference,  which  is  much  more  to
my  Difadvantage.  For  a  Man  may  read  Horner^  or  ex-
plain him,  and  reft  there,  and  yet  not  be  the  wode,  if  he
be  never  the  better  for  it.  Whereas  with  Chryfippus  it  is
much  otherwife  j  for  the  unedifying  Reader,  in  this  cafe,
cannot  be  innocent :  And  thofe,  who  do  not  mend  by  his
Precepts,  contrad:  a  deeper  guilt,  and  incur  a  jufter  and
more  fevere  Condemnation.  Would  it  not  be  an  intolerable
reproach  to  any  fick  Man,  who  fhould  read  Prefcriptions
proper  for  his  own  Diftemper,  and  value  himfelf  upon  pro-
nouncing the  Receipts  gracefully,  and  defcanting  handfomely
upori  the  Virtues  of  the  feveral  Ingredients,  and  upon  be-
ing able  to  dired  others,  how  thefe  are  to  be  applied,  and
yet  make  ufe  of  none  of  them  himfelf  ?  Does  fuch  a  Man
deferve  Pity  }  And  yet,  as  extravagant  and  abfurd  a  Folly
as  this  is,  ours  is  every  whit  as  bad,  or  worfe ;  when  we
have  the  Difeafes  of  our  Souls  fet  plainly  before  us,  and  are
fully  inflruded  in  the  Medicines  and  Refloratives  proper  for
ihem,  and  yet  are  fo  carelefs  and  ftupid,  as  to  do  nothing
rewards  our  Recovery.

Bb3  CHAP.

324 Epictetu  s*s  Morals,

CHAP. LXXIV.

WHatevcr  Direftions  are  given  you,  look  upon
them  as  fo  many  Laws,  which  have  a  bind-
ing Power,  and  fuch  as  you  cannot  without  Im-
piety depart  from.  Perfevere  therefore  in  the  Ob-
fervance  of  them  all  •,  and  be  not  diverted  from
your  Duty  by  any  idle  Reflexions  the  filiy  World
may  make  upon  you  ;  for  Their  Cenfures  are  not
in  your  Power,  and  confequently  fhould  not  be  a-
«y  part  of  your  Concern.

COMMENT.

ON E  Swallow,  we  commonly  fay,  makes  no  Summer ;
no  more  do  a  few  fmgle  Acts  Ads  of  Virtue  make  a  Habit,
or  obferving  the  Direcflions  of  Chryjippus,  in  one  or  two  In-
ftances,  conftitute  a  good  Man.  But  our  Obedience  muft
be  firm  and  conftant  j  we  muft  confider  our  Duty,  as  that
which  is  our  Happinefs  and  trueft  Advantage  •  and  muft  fuf-
fer  no  Confideration,  how  tempting  foever,  to  draw  us  off
from  It.  We  muft  look  upon  ourfelves  as  under  indifpen-
fable  Obligations,  fuch  as  cannot  be  broke  loofe  from,  with-
out the  higheft  Impiety.  And  reafon  good  there  is  to  do  fo  ;
for  if  we  efteem  it  dilTionourable  and  impious,  to  fail  of  our
Promife,  or  fly  off  from  an  Agreement  in  every  trifling
matter,  becaufe,  though  the  thing  is  of  no  value,  yet  the
Violation  of  our  Word  is  of  horrible  confequence  (as  tend-
ing to  take  away  that  mutual  Faith  and  good  Affurance,  by
which  all  Society  and  Commerce  is  maintained  among  Men  j )
How  much  more  folemn  and  facred  ought  thofe  Engage-
ments to  be  efteemed,  by  which  we  have  tied  ourfelves  up
to  Wifdom,  and  Virtue,  and  Innocency  of  Life  ?  Now
thefe  are  violated,  when  a  Man  affenrs  to  the  Truth  of  what
he  is  taught,  and  the  Reafonablenefs  of  Vk'hat  he  is  com-
manded, and  expreffes  this  Afient  by  living  accordingly  for
a  time,  but  afterwards  relapfes  and  turns  Deferter,

Upon  this  account,  he  advifes  us  by  all  means  to  perfe-
vere in  Goodnefs,  and  particularly  not  to  be  difcompofcd
with  any  Reflexions  the  idle  World  fliall  caft  upon  us :  For,

as

nvith  SiMPLicius*s  Comment. 325

ds  he  intimated  before  {Chap.  XXIX.)  it  is  highly  proba-
ble, they  will  take  upon  them  to  cenfure  our  Condud  pret-
ty freely  j  they  will  tax  us  with  Singularity  and  Precifenefs,
and  call  our  Change,  Pride  or  AfFedlation,  Now  fuch  Dif-
couragements  as  thele,  we  muft  be  provided  againft,  and
not  .let  them  cool  our  Zeal ,  or  fliake  our  Virtue  j  and
that,  becaufe  other  Men's  Tongues  are  not  at  our  difpofal,
and  therefore  what  they  fay  fhould  give  us  no  difturbance.

This  Paffage  may  probably  enough  allude  to  that  allego-
rical Saying  of  Pythagoras  and  his  Followers  :  That  'ujken  a
Man  comes  into  the  Temple^  heJJjould  never  look  behind  him.  By
which  they  defigned  to  infinuate.  That  Religious  Purpofes
fhould  be  fixed  and  fleady  j  and  that,  when  we  come  to
God,  we  fhould  come  with  fettled  Refolutions,  not  wilh
doubtful  and  wavering  Minds,  fuch  as  would  fain  divide
themfelves  between  God  and  the  World.

CHAP. LXXV.

UP  then,  and  be  doing  ;  How  long  will  you
defer  your  own  Happinefs,  and  negledl  the
due  obfervance  of  thofe  Direftions,  which  fhew
you  the  way  to  it,  and  the  Didates  of  Reafon ,
which,  if  duly  followed,  would  always  chufe  the
beft  !  You  have  the  Rules  and  Precepts  to  this
purpofe  laid  plainly  before  your  Eyes  j  you  have
perufed  and  alTented  to  the  Truth  and  Equity  of
them  :  What  Mafter  do  you  ftay  for  now  ?  Whom
can  you  with  any  colour  lay  thefe  Delays  of  Refor-
mation upon  ?  You  are  paft  the  Giddinefs  of  Youth,
and  have  all  the  Advantages  of  found  Reafon,  and
a  ripe  Judgment.  If  you  negle<5t  this  Opportunity,
and  grow  llothful  now,  and  make  one  Refolution  af-
ter another,  and  fix  firft  one  Day,  and  then  another,
for  the  turning  over  a  new  Leaf  with  yourfelf,  and
ftill  do  nothing  ;  you  will  cheat  yourfelf,  and  go
backwards,  and  at  laft  drop  out  of  the  World,  not

B  b  4  one

326 Epicte  Tus's  Morals,

one  jot  a  better  Man  than  you  came  into  it.  Lofe
no  time  then,  but  fet  about  a  good  Life  jult  now  ;
and  let  the  Determinations  of  Right  Reafon  be  an
inviolable  Law  tp  you  from  this  very  Moment.  If
you  meet  with  a  difcouraging  Difficulty,  or  an  en-
ticing Pleafure  ;  if  you  are  invited  by  a  profpeft  of
Honour,  or  affrighted  with  the  Fear  of  Difgrace,
encounter  the  Temptation  bravely,  whatever  it  be.
Remember  this  is  the  Combat  you  are  called  to  ;
this  is  the  Field,  in  which.you  are  to  fignalize  your-
felf,  and  there  is  no  declining  the  Trial.  All  your
Fortunes  depend  upon  one  Engagement  ;  and  the
Ground  you  have  gotten  heretofore,  muft  either  be
maintained  by  one  gallant  Viftory,  or  loft  by  one
bafe  Retreat.  It  was  thus  that  Socrates  ^vtv^  fo  great,
by  putting  himfelf  forward  upon  all  all  occafions,  pufh-
ing  every  Advantage  as  far  as  it  would  go,  and  ne-
ver hearkning  to  any  other  Perfuafions,  but  thofe
of  his  own  Reafon.  And  if  yo\i  are  not  fo  great  a
Man  as  Socrates^  yet  it  will  become  you  to  live  and
^d,  as  if  you  intended  in  time  .to  be  as  great  as  he.

COMMENT.

THIS  alfo  is  an  Admonition,  no  lefs  requifite  than  the
former :  and  highly  neceffary  it  is,  that  a  Man,  who
hath  embraced  this  philosophical  DifcipUne,  and  refolved  to
fubmit  to  it,  fhould  be  put  in  mind  how  precious  Time  is,
and  awakened  into  Diligence.

Delays  (as  we  commonly  fay  of  them)  are  dangerous  j  and
one  certain  ill  effed:  of  them  is,  that  they  are  but  fo  many
Pretences  for  indulging  our  Sloth.  To  what  Purpofe  there-
fore (fays  he)  do  you  defer  your  own  Happinefs,  and  the
pradice  of  thofe  Rules  you  have  received  }  For  it  is  this
Practice  only,  that  can  render  you  virtuous  and  happy,  and
anfwer  the  Defign  both  of  the  compofing  and  the  learning
them.  The  Operation  expsdled  from  them,  is,  To  conform
all  your  Adiions  to  right  Reafon  j  to  fix  this  as  a  perpetual
a|id  inviolable  Law ;  to  retrench  your  Defires,  allay  all  your

PafTions,

mth  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 327

Paflions,  and  bring  every  Inclination  and  every  Averfion,  to
fix  upon  proper  Objefts,  and  confine  themfelves  within
their  juft  bounds.

Another  poffibly  might  alledge  want  of  Inftrudion  in  his
own  excufe,  and  declare  himfelf  moft  ready  to  be  good,
were  he  but  fiafficiently  taught  how  to  be  fo.  But  this  cannot  do
You  any  fcrvice,  who  have  had  all  the  advantages  imagina-
ble of  Knowledge  and  Improvement.  You,  I  fay,  who  have
not  only  had  the  Maxims  of  Philofophy,  and  the  Meafures
of  Virtue  fully  explained  and  illuftrated-  but  have  applied
your  Mind  to  the  ftudy  of  thefe  things,  and  made  fome  con-
fiderable  progrefs  in  them.  You  efpecially,  who  have  had
it  evidently  proved,  That  you  are  by  no  means  to  content
yourfelf,  with  having  your  Underftanding  enlightned,  and
your  Judgment  convinced  by  thefe  Rules,  unlefs  you  digefb
and  make  them  of  a  piece  with  your  Soul,  that  they  may  be
like  a  Principle  of  new  Life  within  you,  exerting  itfelf  in  vir-
tuous Habits,  and  influencing  your  whole  Converfation.
Since  therefore  all  this,  and  indeed  all  that  can  be  neceflary
for  your  due  Information,  hath  been  fo  fully  opened,  and
fo  pathetically  urged  upon  you ;  make  not  Ignorance  and
want  of  Means  a  pretence,  as  if  you  ftill  were  to  wait  for
fome  more  powerful  Call.

Others  may  poffibly  plead  their  Age,  and  the  Heats  and
unthinking  Follies  of  Youth,  which  render  them  incapable
of  fober  Reflexion  and  fevere  Difcipline.  But  you  are  in
the  very  Seafon  of  Life,  which  is  mofl  kindly  for  Virtue ;
the  Vehemences  of  Youth  are  worn  off,  and  the  Weaknefles
of  old  Age  have  not  yet  difabled  you.  Your  Paflions  are
fedate,  your  Judgment  folid,  and  your  Strength  in  its  per-
fe(flion.  And  if  this  inviting  Opportunity  be  fufFered  to  Hip
through  your  hands ;  if  you  cannot  now  find  in  your  heart
to  take  fome  pains  to  be  good,  when  you  are  beft  qualified
to  mafler  what  you  attempt  j  if  Sloth  and  Supinenefs  get
the  power  over  you,  to  make  Appointments  and  break  them :
to  fix  upon  particular  Days  for  fetting  about  this  Great
Work  j  and,  when  they  are  come,  to  drive  it  off  to  a  far-
ther Day  again,  you  do  but  play  booty  with  your  Confci-
ence,  and  deal  like  difhonefl:  Debtors,  vyho  flop  their  Cre-
ditor's mouths  with  fair  Promifes,  and  fix  a  difl:ant  time  for
thofe  Payments,  which  they  never  intend  to  make.  Thus,
while  your  Soul  is  deluded  with  a  vain  Hope  and  Exped:ation
of  doing  fomething,  you  flifle  the  Reproaches  from  within,
by  frefh  Refolves  j  but  ftill  thofe  New  are  as  infignificant  as

the

328  Epictetus*s  Morals,

the  Old,  and  pitch  upon  a  To-morrow  which  will  never
come.  And  it  were  well  indeed^  if  this  were  the  worft  of
it ;  bur,  alas !  in  Virtue  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as  Hand-
ing ftill :  While  you  defer  growing  better,  you  neceflarily
grow  worfe,  and  by  infenfible  Decay  relapfe  into  Ignorance
and  Vice  again.  Thus,  after  a  number  of  Years  fpent  in
fruitlefs  Intentions,  you  live  and  die  a  Fool,  and  fo  muft
continue  for  ever.  For,  as  our  ftate  of  Separation,  be-
fore we  came  into  thefe  Bodies,  had  a  great  influence  upon
what  we  do  here,  and  the  Difpofition  of  the  Souls  we
brought  into  the  World,  is  a  marvellous  advantage  to  our
future  Virtue  :  So  our  Behaviour  here  is  but  the  Preface
and  Preparation  to  what  we  fhall  do  there  again.  For  the
whole  of  this  taken  together,  is  one  entire  Life,  and  the
time  we  pais  here  but  one  ftage  of  it  j  Only  the  *  ftate  of  Pre-
exiftence  makes  fome  alteration  in  our  Life  here ;  and  our
Life  here  makes  a  confiderable  one,  and  indeed  determines
us,  as  to  the  ftate  of  our  Separation  hereafter.

Now  therefore,  now  afpire  (fays  he)  to  perfe&iottj  arid  live
as  one  that  does  fo.  Abfolute  Perfection  he  does  not  mean  ■
for  then  his  Exhortation  would  be  needlcfs :  But  the  Per-
fediion  of  a  Proficient,  fuch  a  degree,  as  a  ftate  of  Difcipline
and  Probation  is  capable  of^  that  is,  fo  as  never  to  lofe
ground,  but  to  be  continually  advancing  forwards.  And  to
this  purpofe,  whatever,  upon  mature  Confideration,  appears
moft  reafonable,  let  it  have  the  force  of  a  Law  with  you  j
a  Law,  I  fay,  which  cannot  be  fatisfied  vi'ith  being  known
and  underftood,  but  requires  a  pofitive  and  punctual  Obe-
dience.

To  ftrengthen  you  in  this  Refolution,  you  have  one  migh-
ty Encouragement  j  which  is,  That  all  the  Accidents  of  hu-
man Life  are  fo  far  in  fubje6tion  to  you,  that  you  may
with  a  paident  Care  make  them  all,  though  never  fo  diffe-
rent in  themfelves,  confpire  together  to  your  own  advan-
tage. For,  whether  you  meet  with  any  thing  fuccefsful  or
difaftrous,  pleafant  or  painful  ^  whether  it  tend  to  Honour
or  Ignominy,  All  are  manageable  :  Only  be  fure,  let  the
Temptation  be  never  fo  fmall,  do  not  flight  or  negledl  it,-
and  though  it  be  never  fo  great,  do  not  be  difpirited  at  it.
Security  will  give  a  Defeat,  where  there  v/as  no  Strength

*  This  proceeds  upon  the  Platonick  Pythagoregn  Hypothefs^  and  agrees  to  the
2^\tions  mare  largely  taken  Notice  of^  Chap.  I.

t©

W/Vi^ SiMPLICIUS's COMMEN  T. 329

to  do  k ;  and  Defpondency  will  lofe  the  Prize,  where  there
is  Force  enough  to  win  it.

Be  fure  then,  that  you  let  no  Accident  pafs  unimproved ;
But  imagine,  that  every  one  is  an  Adverfary  challenging  you
to  the  Field,  and  that  Virtue  is  the  Crown  you  are  to  con-
tend for.  Remember,  that  there  is  no  middle  ftate,  no  get-
ting off"  without  Blows,  but  Conquefl  or  Ruin  mufl  be  the
Fate  of  the  Day.  Nor  are  you  to  flip  one  Day,  or  overlook
one  fingle  Acftion,  upon  a  vain  imagination.  That  fuch  lit-
tle things  cannot  turn  to  your  prejudice :  For  that  one  Day,
that  fingle  Adion,  determines  your  whole  Fortune  j  and
your  Prefervation,  or  your  Deftrudion,  depends  upon  this
nice  point.  Thus  Epi^etus  affures  you,  and  he  tells  you
very  true.  And  if  it  feem  incredible  and  furprizing,  pray
be  pleafed  to  confider,  that  every  Indulgence  of  a  Vice  gives
it  new  force  to  affault  us,  and  abates  of  our  power  to
refift  it.  He  that  is  flothful  and  i'-refolute  to  day,  v^ill  be  a
great  deal  more  fo  to  morrow  ^  and  if  there  be  (as  there  will
be  fure  to  be)  any  frefli  ObjecT:ion  to  palliate  his  Idlenefs,
he  will  have  a  great  deal  left  mind  to  encounter  it  the
Third  day,  than  he  had  the  Second.  Thus  by  degrees  the
Difpofition  to  Goodnefs  will  wafte  away,  and  all  the  Vi-
gour of  his  Mind  will  languiHi  and  die.  It  will  yield  more
.  and  more  tamely  to  every  frelh  attack,  till  at  laft  Reafon  be
<juite  enfeebled  and  over-powered,  and  all  the  advances  the
Man  had  formerly  made  in  Goodnefs,  be  loft  to  all  other
Intents  and  Purpofes,  except  that  only  of  adding  to  his  Sliarne
and  his  Guilt.

Now  the  very  fame  fingle  Trials,  which,  when  negled-
ed,  do  thus  lofe  ground,  do,  when  attended  to  and  impro-
ved, get  and  maintain  it.  For  Virtue  increafes  by  the  fame
methods,  and  much  in  the  fame  proportions,  that  it  declines.
The  pratflice  of  one  Day,  and  the  performance  of  one  A<fl,
leaves  an  Imprellion  behind  it,  and  confirms  the  Mind  fo,
that  the  next  Attempt  proves  a  great  deal  more  eafy.  The
Jleluclancies  of  Seni'e  wear  off,  and  repeated  Afts  become
Jiabitual  and  familiar,  and  we  daily  feel  our  own  Advanta-
ges. Frequent  ufe  gives  us  a  more  mafterly  hand  j  and  what
we  can  do  well,  and  with  eafe,  we  naturally  come  to  do
with  delight.  Thus  Men  never  continue  long  the  fame;
but  every  Hour,  every  moral  Adion,  every  fingle  Accident
of  their  Lives,  makes  fome  alteration  in  them.

Socrates  had  a  juft  fenfe  of  this,  and  exprefs'd  it  j^bundantly
in  the  circumfpedion of  his  Life.  For  the  very  thing,  which

railed

33© Epictetus's  Morals,

raifed  himfo  high,  and  gave  him  the  Charaderofthe  Wifell
of  Men,  was  his  conftant  Care,  never  to  negled  any  ad-
vantage, or  delay  the  doing  any  good.  He  made  every  Ac-
cident of  every  kind  turn  to  fome  good  account  ^  and  was
deaf  to  all  other  Solicitations,  though  never  fo  importunate,
except  thofe  of  his  own  Reafon,  and  the  Refults  of  his  mofl:
careful  and  eompofed  Thoughts.  You  will  fay,  perhaps.
This  iignifies  very  little  to  You,  who  have  not  the  Vanity,
to  think  yourfelf  like  Socrates.  But  give  me  leave  to  fay.
If  you  are  not  like  him,  you  would  do  well  to  endeavour
it.  And,  whatever  you  want  of  his  Perfedions  at  prefent,
live  with  that  exadlnefs,  as  if  you  meant  and  hoped  one  day
to  equal  them.  For  the  profpedt  of  an  eminent  Example  is
a  wonderful  advantage  j  it  fires  a  Man  with  noble  Emula-
tion ^  and,  whilfthe  keeps  the  Pattern  in  his  eye,  he  is  pro-
voked to  imitate  his  Excellencies,  and  feels  himfelf  at  once
diredled  how  to  copy  after  them,  and  afharaed  not  to  do  fo.

CHAP. LXXVI.

THE  f5rft  and  moft  ufeful  Topick  in  Philofo-
phy,  is  the  Moral  part,  which  teaches  Men
their  Duty ;  as  for  inftance.  That  they  fhould  not  lie :
The  fecond  is  the  Demonflrative  part,  which  gives
us  infallible  Proofs  of  it,  and  fhews  us  evident  Rea-
ibns  wherefore  we  ought  not  to  lie  :  The  Third  is
^he  diftinguifhing  and  Argumentative  part,  which
inftrufls  us,  what  a  Demonftration  is,  and  how
this  in  the  cafe  before  us  is  one  ;  What  is  a  Confe-
quence  ;  What  a,  Contradidlion  ;  What  is  True  ;
and  what  is  Falfe.  Now  from  hence  it  is  plain,
that  the  Laft  of  thefe  is  fubfervient  to  the  Second  ;
that  the  Second  is  fubordinate  to  the  Firft,  and  that
the  Firft  is  the  moft  important  and  neceffary  point
of  all:  That  which  all  our  Studies  fhould  bedireft--
ed  to,  and  wherein  they  fhould  all  center  and  reft
at  laft. But we quite invert  this Order. The

Third

W^y&  Si MPLicius's  Comment. 331

Third  employs  moft  of  our  Time  and  Pains,  and
the  Firft  is  not  thought  worth  either  :  So  that,  by
a  ftrange  Abfurdity,  we  commit  the  Crime,  and  at
the  fame  time  value  ourfelves  exceedingly,  for  be-
ing able  to  demonftrate  beyond  all  contradidlion,
that  we  ought  not  to  commit  it.

COMMENT,

IT  is  abfolutely  neceffdry,  that  a  Man,  who  makes  any
pretenfions  to  Philofophy,  and  aims  at  the  peculiar  per-
fedionof  his  Nature,  both  as  he  is  an  Animal  and  a  Rational
Creature,  Ihould  have  a  clear  and  demonftrative  knowledge
of  the  Truth.  Otherwife,  he  may  be  liable  to  great  Errors,
and  run  into  infinite  Inconveniencies,  by  taking  things  upon
Truft,  and  leaning  too  much,  either  to  the  bare  Authority,
or  the  infufficient  Proofs,  of  confident  Pretenders.  Virtue
is  a  thing  of  the  higheft  Confequence,  and  it  is  not  fit  we
iliould  take  up  with  fo  flight  and  feeble  Perfuafions  concern-
ing it,  as  mere  Opinion  and  Probabilities  are  capable  of  cre-
ating in  us.  Now  clear  and  undoubted  Evidence  is  an  effect
owing  only  to  Demonftration.  And  it  is  Logick's  peculi-
ar Province,  to  inform  us  in  the  Nature  of  a  Demonftrati-
on :  as,  That  it  is  a  Syllogifm  conlifting  of  Propofitions  put
together  according  to  Rules  of  Art ;  and  that  thofe  Propo-
fitions muft  be  of  clear  and  undoubted  Truth  :  As  alfo  to  ac-
quaint us,  what  Propofitions  are  qualified,  and  what  Method
is  to  be  obferved,  for  the  forming  them  into  a  true  Syllo-
gifm.

From  hence  we  plainly  perceive,  that  the  whole  compals
of  Philofophy  may  be  reduced  to  Three  Heads ;  and  that
thefe  will  comprehend,  if  not  all  abfolutely,  yet  all  that
is  material  and  neceflary  in  it.  The  Firft  is  the  Perceptive
part,  that  which  converts  our  Speculation  into  Pradlice,
which  prefcribes  Modefty  and  Temperance  in  our  Adlions,
and  prohibits  Lying  in  all  our  Difcourie  and  Converfation.
The  Second  is  the  demonftrative  part,  which  fhews  us  clear-
ly, not  only  that  we  fhould  or  fliould  not,  but  alfo  afiigns
convincing  Reafons,  why  we  fliould  or  fliould  not,  do  this
or  that.  The  Third  is  the  llluftrating  and  Arguing  parr,
which  fets  Rules  to  our  Reafoning,  and  aflifts  Nature  by
Art.  This  prevents  our  being  impofed  upon  by  any  falfe
i  appear-

332 Epictetus's  Morals,

appearances,  by  teaching  us  the  Difference,  between  a  red
demonftration,  and  a  pretended  one  j  and  fhews  the  mutual
Connexions  and  Confequences  of  fome  Propofitions,  and  the
irreconcileable  Oppofition  between  others  j  as.  That  the
Species  necefFarily  infers  its  Genus^  and  the  Being  of  a  Man
implies  that  of  an  Animal :  That  a  particular  Affirmative
and  an  univerfal  Negative,  and  fo  likewife  a  particular  Ne-
gative and  an  univerfal  Affirmati.e,  are  direct  Contradidi-
ons,  never  to  be  reconciled,  and  impoflible  to  be  both  true,
or  both  falfe  together.  It  acquaints  us  too  with  the  quali-
fications of  a  Syllogifm  :  What  Propofitions  it  confifts  of  ^
How  thefe  Propofitions  muft  be  put  together  j  What  diffe-
rence there  will  be  in  the  Conclufion  according  to  the  manner
of  forming  it  j  and  what  differences  there  are  between  true  and
fair  Syllogifms,  and  irregular,  fophiftical,  and  enfnaring  ones.

Now  nothing  can  be  more  plain,  than  that  this  Third
Topick,  which  inflrufts  us  in  all  the  Subtleties  of  Reafon-
ing,  is  intended  to  ferve  the  Second  j  and  that  This  is  an
Ingenious  and  Artificial  Expedient,  contrived,  as  we  fee,  to
remove  all  the  Scruples  and  DifIatisfacl:ion  of  our  Minds,
to  diredt  and  fix  our  Judgments,  and  give  us  the  moft  uncon-
teflablc  and  fatisfaclory  Affurance,  what  is  our  real  Happi-
nefs,  and  what  our  Duty.  This,  I  fay,  is  the  Bufmefs  of
the  Second  Head,  which  confifts  in  Demonftrative  Proofs.
But  then  it  is  every  whit  as  plain  too,  that  this  Second  is
fubordinate  to  fomething  beyond  it ;  viz.  The  Pra<5tical  and
Preceptive  Part ;  and  confequently  Both  the  other  are  re-
folved  into  the  Firft.  For  our  Knowledge  is  intended  oftly
to  qualify  us  for  A(ftion,  and  lead  us  to  it ;  and  therefore
the  Pradice  of  Virtue  and  a  good  Life  is  the  ultimate  De-
ligri  of  all  Study,  and  all  Inftruftion.  Here  we  mult  fix  at
laft  j  for  every  thing  elfe  confpires  to  promote  this  j  but  be-
yond this  there  is  no  End  of  greater  Confequence,  or  higher
Perfedrion.

And  happy  were  it  for  us,  if  we  governed  ourfelves  by
this  Rule.  But,  alas !  we  take  quite  contrary  Meafures.  The
greateft  part  of  our  Time  and  Pains  is  employed  upon  the
Third  Head  ;  in  nice  Difputes  and  Controverted  Points  ;
and  we  can  fpare  but  very  little  for  the  Second,  which  fhould
convince  us  of  the  Excellence,  and  the  Neceffity  of  being
Virtuous,  and  polfefs  our  Souls  with  a  lively  and  vigorous
Senfe  of  our  Duty.  But  for  the  firft  of  thefe  Topicks,
which  confifts  in  reducing  our  Knowledge  into  Pracftice,  we
allow  this  no Portion  of  our  Care  at  all. We  wrangle

and

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  ?^^

and  difpute  eternalty,  about  curious  and  unprofitable  Quefti-
ons  •  and  overlook  that  which  would  conduce  to  tlie  pro-
moting true  Goodne(s.  We  ftudy  this  now  and  then  and
talk  learnedly,  and  afFedionately  upon  it,-  but  ftill  we  do  no
part  of  what  we.  fay.  Nay,  which  is  the  moft  monftrous
inconfiftence  that  can  be,  we  are  guilty  of  grofs  Enormities
in  our  own  Perfons,  and  at  the  fame  time  are  proud  that
we  are  able  to  convince  and  perfuade  Others  ,•  That  we  can
ihew,  we  ought  not  to  be  what  we  are  •  And  it  pleafes  us
much  to  think,  that  no  body  can  expofe  the  Deformity  of
our  own  Adions,  better  than  Ourfelves.

Now  all  this  is  turning  things  up-fide  down,  and  b^gin
mng  at  the  wrong  End.  The  Method  in  which  we  ought  to
proceed  is  this :  Firft,  to  learn  how  to  argue  againft  Vice  ■
Then,  to  employ  our  Talent  in  demonftrating  the  Bafenefs
and  Incongruity  of  it  to  ourfelves  •  and,  when  we  are  ar-
rived to  a  full  and  undoubted  Convidion,  Then  adually  to
decline  it,  and  to  perfevere  in  the  Praftice  of  what  we  have
learnt.  Confidering,  that  we  learnt  it  for  that  very  pur
pofe-  and  that  the  Preceptive  Part,  tho'  Superiour  to  all
the  reft,  is  yet  itfelf  fubordinate  to  the  Pradical.

This  is  the  Subftance  and  Defign  of  Epidetus  in  the  Chap-
ter now  before  us  j  where  he  does,  with  great  Dexterity
inforce  the  Pradice  of  his  Moral  Maxims,  and  expofe  the
Vanity  of  thofe  Men,  who  make  Speculation  the  end  of
their  Knowledge,  with  that  Indignation,  which  fo  exquifire
a  Folly  deferves.  ^

CHAP. LXXVII.

I  N  every  undertaking  we  fliall  do  well  to  refien
X  ourfelves' to  the  Difpofal  of  Providence,  in  fome
luch  iyaculation  as  this :

COndud  me,  Jove,  and  thou,  O  powerful  Fate
In  every  Enterprife,  in  every  State,  ^

As  You  determine  :  For  I  mufc  obey
The  wife  Injundions,  which  you  on  me  lay

^34  EpicTEfus's  Morals,

For  fhould  I  at  your  dread  Decrees  repine.
And  ftrive  your  Sacred  Order  to  decline  ;
I  fliould  but  labour  wickedly  in  vain,  ^

And  ftruggle  with  an  everlafting  Chain, ^^  ^

And  after  all,  be  dragg'd  along  with  pain.  J

E.  Walker's  Epihet.  Eng.  Paraphraf.

7u/ cc^^y  ^tocd^"^  /..Vr-"^

CHAP. LXXVIII.

HE  that  fubmits  to  Deftiny's  Decrees,
Is  juftly  counted  wife  by  Men,  and  knows
The  due  Refpeft  which  to  the  Gods  he  owes.

COMMENT.

IN  regard  Some  of  the  Ancients  have  coUeded  together
thofe  Moral  Axioms,  which  were  occafionally  deliver-
ed, and  lie  fcattered  up  and  down  in  larger  Books  j  he  advifes
us  to  have  fome  of  thefe  fignificant  Sentences  always  ready
at  hand  j  as  being  not  only  fliort,  and  fo  no  Burden  to  the
Memory,  but  alfo  likely  to  make  a  deeper  and  more  lafting
Impreffion,  both  upon  the  Account  of  their  own  Weight,
and  the  celebrated  Name  of  their  Authors.  For  this  Rea-
fon  he  fubjoins  fome  here.  The  firft  was  a  Meditation  of
Cleanthes^  Scholar  to  Zeno^  and  Mafter  to  Chryfippus.  The
Eminence  of  this  Man  was  fo  great,  that  I  myfelf  have
feen  at  Ajfoi,  fof  which  place  he  was  a  Native)  a  very  no-
ble Statue,  worthy  his  Fame,  and  the  Magnificence  of  the
Senate  of  Rome,  who  fet  it  up  in  Honour  of  him.

In  thefe  Verfes  he  begs  the  Guidance  of  God ,  and  that
Providence  and  Power,  whereof  God  is  the  Source,  and
which  makes  and  moves  all  things.  This  he  calls  here  by
the  name  of  Fate  ^  and  promifes  for  his  part,  that  he  will
obey  its  Motions,  and  follow  it  whitherfoever  it  leads  him.
And  it  is  but  reafonable,  that  He,  and  every  Man,  ihould
difpofe  his  Mind  to  a  willing  and  ready  compliance  j  be-
caufe  Oppofition  (as  he  obferves )  will  nor  only  be
Wicked  but  Fruitlefs  too,  and  follow  it  we  muft,  whether

we

nvith  SiMPLicius's  Comment. 335

we  will  or  no.  Only  it  is  in  our  Choice,  whether  this  iiiall
be  done  with  Cheerfulnefs  and  Contentation  ;  or  with  Re-
luftance  and  Sorrow.  Shake  our  Chain,  and  gall  ourfelves
with  it  we  may,  but  break  it  we-  cannot.  For  the  Caufe
will  always  be  ftronger  than  its  EfFeft,  and  there  is  no  get-
ting loofe  from  Him,  in  luhom  'we  live^  and  move^  and  have
our  "Being.

'  To  this  purpofe  Epi&etus  advifed  us  before  (Chap.  XIII.)
Trouble  not  yourfelf  (fays  he)  luith  luiJJmzg^  That  things  may
he  juji  as  you  <would  have  them^  but  he  loell fleafed  they  JJjould
he  juJi  as  they  are  j  a7id  then  you  ivill  live  eafy.  And  indeed
this  of  Submiffion  is  a  moft  comprehenjive  Duty  ,  it  takes
in  the  whole  Subftance  of  Moralicy  and  Virtue  :  And  a  Man
may  very  defervedly  be  called  Good,  when  he  is  facisfied
with  his  Lot  in  common  with  the  reft  of  the  World,  and
can  look  upon  himfelf  as  a  part  of  this  vaft  Univerfe,  with-
out any  fuch  greedy  and  alTuming  Notions,  as  would  re-
ftrain  Providence  within  a  narrow  Compafs,  and  make  a
World  of  himfelf  alone,  and  oppofe  that  Harmony  of  Events,
which  confults  the  Good  of  the  whole.  As  if  the  Courfe
of  the  World  were  to  be  changed,  and  its  Order  difturbed,
to  follow  fo  inconfiderable  a  Part  j  rather  than  He  fhould
move  along  with  this  great  Engine,  and  take  up  with  what
falls  to  his  own  Share.

The  Second  Sentence  is  taken  out  of  one  of  Euripides*s
Tragedies,  and  hath  a  great  Affinity  to  the  Former.  For
Neceflity  fignifies  that  over-ruling  Power,  v/hich  fubmits
all  things  to  God,  and  makes  all  contribute  to  the  Firffc
Caufe,  (that  is,  to  obeying  the  Divine  Pleafure,  and  pro-
moting his  Glory)  whether  they  will  or,  no.  The  Mati
therefore  who  ftrikes  in,  and  adls  in  confent  with  This,
who  follows  it  with  Alacrity,  and  betrays  no  Lothnefs,  or
Regret,  gives  a  good  Proof  of  his  Wifdom  :  His  Behaviour
fhews,  that  he  underftands  the  Nature  of  the  World  ;  and,,
that  Partiality  to  a  private  Intereft,  hath  not  fo  far  bialFed
him,  but  he  can  llill  make  a  juft  Diftinction  between  a
Whole  and  a  Part.  And,  as  This  proves  his  Wifdom,  fo
does  it  his  Piety  too  ;  for  nothing  better  expreffes  our
Reverence  for  God,  than  fuch  a  cheerful  Refignation  of
ourfelves,  and  receiving  contentedly  whatever  he  fends
upon  us.

Gc  CHAP,

33^  Epictetus's  Morals,

CHAP. LXXIX.

OR  this  other.  O  Crito,  If  this  be  God's  plea-
fure  concerning  me.  His  Will  be  done  j  Any-
Uis  and  Melitus  may  take  away  my  Life,  but  it  is
not  in  their  power  to  do  me  any  Hurt.

COMMENT.

TH I S  is  quoted  out  of  a  Difcourfe  of  'Plato\  entided
Crito^  and  is  fpoken  there  in  the  Perfon  of  Socrates.
The  Senfe  is  much  the  fame  with  the  Former,  only  wrap-
ped up  a  little  clofer,  and  delivered  in  fewer  Words,
And  indeed  the  Man,  who  can  make  this  Profeflion ,  and
whofe  Life  Ipeaks  it  as  well  as  his  Tongue,  hath  vanquifh-
ed  all  his  Pride  and  Difcontent,  and  cured  the  Degeneracy
of  his  Nature.  He  hath  abandoned  Corruption,  given  up
himfelf  to  God  without  any  referve,  and  fubmits  to  all  his
Difpenfatioi^  iwith  a  perfect  acquiefcence  of  Mind.  And
{o  me  E'ptlietus  feems  to  have  produced  thefe  Sayings  at
the  clofe  of  his  Book,  that,-  by  the  Teftimony  and  Exam-
ple of  fuch  eminent  Perfons,  he  might  confirm  us  in  this
Belief,  that  the  utmoft  Perfeftion  attainable  by  a  Human
Soul,  is  a  fincere  Converfion  or  turning  to  God  ;  and  that
a  ready  compliance  with  the  Divine  Will  upon  all  occafions,
is  the  Crown  and  Complement  of  all  Virtues.

That  laft  Claufe,  Anytus  and  Melitus  may  kill  me^  but
they  cannot  hurt  me^  is  taken  out  of  Plato's  Defence  of  So-
cratesj  and  fpoken  to  his  Accufers.  And  thus  our  Author
brings  both  ends  together,  by  refrefhing  our  Memory  here,
with  what  he  infifted  upon  fo  largely  at  the  beginning  j  viz.
That  the  Man,  who  places  his  Good  and  Evil  in  the  ufe  of
his  Native  Liberty  only,  and  in  thofe  things  which  come
within  the  compafs  of  his  own  Choice,  does  not  depend
upon  external  Objefts  for  his  Happinefs  j  This  Man,  I  fay,
is  above  the  World ,  he  cannot  be  brought  under  the  Do-
minion of  any  thing,  nor  \s  it  in  the  Power  of  Men,  or
Accidents,  to  do  him  the  leafl  Prejudice.

Thus  I  have  finifhed  thofe  Meditations,  which  occur'd  to
me  upon  this  Subjed. And  becaufe  I  thought  they  might

be

with  SiMPLicius's  Comment.  337

be  of  fome  Service  to  as  many  as  fliall  read  Epi&etus^  I  was
willing  to  contribute  the  little  Affiftance  I  could,  to  the  tru-
ly underftanding  fo  excellent  an  Author,  Nor  does  my
writing  this  Commentary  prove  beneficial  to  Others  only,
for  I  myfelf  have  already  found  great  Advantage  from  it,  by
the  agreeable  Diverfion  it  hath  given  me,  in  a  Seafon  of
Trouble  and  Publick  Calamity.  All  I  have  more  to  add,
is  only  a  Prayer,  proper  to  this  Subjed,  and  with  it  I  con-
clude.

*'  Grant,  I  befeech  thee,  O  Lord,  the  Giver  and  Guide
"  of  all  Reafon,  that  we  may  always  be  mindful  of  the
"  Dignity,  of  the  Nature,  and  of  the  Privileges,  thou  haft
"  honoured  us  withal  j  that  we  may  zdc  in  all  things  as  be-
^'  comes  free  Agents,  to  the  fubduing  and  governing  our
**  Paffions,  to  the  refining  them  from  Flefh  and  Senle,  and
''  to  the  rendring  them  fubfervient  to  excellent  Purpofes.
••'  Grant  us  alfo  thy  Favourable  Affiftance,  in  the  reform-
*'  ing  and  diredring  our  Judgment  j  and  enlighten  us  with
''  thy  Truth,  that  we  may  difcern  thofe  things  that  are
''  really  Good ;  and,  having  difcovered  them,  may  love
"  and  cleave  ftedfaftly  to  the  fame.  And,  finally,  Difperfe,
*'  we  pray  thee,  thofe  Mifts,  which  darken  the  Eyes  of  our
"  Mind,  that  fo  we  may  have  a  perfedt  Onderftanding :
"  And  (as  Homer  exprefles  it)  know  (^^  0=97,  nh  t^  ca§^)
''  hoih  God  and  Marij  and  luhat  to  each  is  due.

FINIS.

C  c  J  TABLE.

TABLE.

T

H  E  hitroduiiion.  Page  i

The  jyiftinBion  of  Things  in  and  out  of  out  Po-wer.  Ch.  I.  7
The  Nature  and  Cor.ditjon  of  Things.  Ch.  II.  3  s

The  Effects  of  a  true  andfalfe  Judgment  of  Things.  Ch.  III. 3  3

The  NeceJJtty  of  due  Confederation^  and  Preparation  of  Mind.
Ch.  IV.  16

That  Virtue  and  Vanity  cannot  he  Both  attended  to  at  once 3  7

That  nve  mujl  fufpend  our  Judgments^  till  things  are  duly  ex-
amined. Ch.  V.  40

That  OUT  Misfortunes  proceed  from  the  fear  of  Mifery^  and  the
DifappoiJitmentof  our  Defres. Ch.  VI.  43

That  young  Begi-aners  in  Virtue  fJjould  proceed  floiuly  and  gra-
dually. Chap.  VII.  ib.

That  the  Nature  ofiohat  lue  lo've  is  a  very  material  and  necejfa-
ry  Confideration. Ch.  VIII.  51

The  Circumftances  and  probable  Confequences  of  every  Under-
taking^ Jhould  he  luell 'weighed  before  ive  undertake  it.  Ch.
IX.  5^

Our  Difurbances  are  owivg^  not  to  the  Things  themfelves,  but
our  Ideas  of  thern. Chap.  X.  60

"fVife  Men  make  no  Complaints.  ib.

Meti  ought  not  to  value  themfelves  upon  the  Goods  of  Tortune^
but  thofe  of  the  Mind. Ch.  XI.  ^8

The  IJfe  and  Improvement  of  our  Notions  of  things^  is  our  proper
Bujincfs  and  Virtue  6^

Our  Minds  Jhould  be  fixed  upon  God^  and  all  external  Advanta-
ges ufed  and  valued^  as  things  only  by  the  bye.  Ch.  XII. 72

We  fhould  not  trouble  ourfelves  -with  iDifhing  Impojjibilities.  Ch.
XIII.  7y

A.  ivell-difciplin^d  Mind  isfubjeH  to  no  ObJiruBions.  ib.  92

The  Poivers  of  the  Mind  mujl  he  fet  againjl  ill  Accidents  and
vicious  Defires. Ch.  XIV.  ^6

What  lue  part  ivith  is  not  lojl^  hut  refiored  to  God  the  Giver.
Ch.  XV.  100

The

TABLE.

7^)6  Iwprovemejit  of  the  Mind  ought  to  be  every  Marfs  chief
Care. Ch.XVI.  Page  105

We  muji  improve  ourfehes  bj  rifingfromfmall  things  to  greater.
Ch.  XVII.  ib-

It  is  not  to  be  expelled  that  every  thing  flmtld  be  jufi  as  vie  nuonld
have  it.  ib»

We  muJi  not  be  difcouraged  at  other  "Peoples  Hi  Opinion  of  us,
Ch.  XVIII.  lop

Uo  Man  is  capable  of  purfuing  fever al  Ends  at  once.  no

It  is  a  vain  thing  to  defire  the  fecuri7ig  to  ourfelveSy  vjhat  Na-
ture hath  put  out  of  our  own  Povjer. Ch.  XIX.  112
Who  is  properly  our  Mafter. Ch.  XX.  1 15:
We  muji  take  vjhat  God  gives  us  thankfully^  and  be  content  to
want  vjhat  he  denies  us. Ch.  XXI.  II7
Good  Nature  muJi  be  fo  rejlrained  as  not  to  di/iurb  the  Peace
of  our  own  Mind. Ch.  XXII.  120
The  Part  we  muJl  aEl  in  this  Play  of  Life^  depends  upon  God's
Appointment. Ch.  XXIII,  12^
A  wife  Man  improves  every  Accident  of  Human  Life. Ch.
XXIV.  125
Nothing  (Ijould  he  attempted  that  is  out  of  our  Reacb^  and  above
our  Strength. CH.  XXV.  127
The  way  to  avoid  envying  and  admiring  others. Ch.  XXVI.

128
Liberty  is  no  way  to  be,  but  by  defpifing  the  World.  ib.

No  Man  is  injured  except  by  himfelf. Ch.  XXVII.  131

The  Benefit  of  Deliberation.  ib.

The  Advantage  of  Premeditation. Ch.  XXVIII,  ib.

A  Philofopher  muJi  he  above  Derifon  and  Cenfure.  Ch.  XXIX.

Per  fever  ance  conquers  all  Difficulties.  ib_

The  Confcioufjiefs  cf  our  own  Virtue  ought  tofupport  and  fatisfy

us. Ch.  XXX.  15^

A  Good  Man  needs  not  the  Advantages  of  Portune^  to  render

him  ufefultothe  Publick. Ch.  XXXI.  142,  &  feq.

We  Jhould  rejoice  with  all  Men^  and  envy  none. Ch.  XXXII.

154,  &feq.
The  Cotirtefies  of  the  World  never  come  for  nothing.  ib.

We  fhould  pafs  the  fame  judgment  upon  our  own  Misfortunes^

that  we  do  upon  other  Peoples. Ch.  XXXIII.  160

Concer?iing  the  Nature  of  Evil. Ch,  XXXIV,  16^

l^arly  Confideration prevents  late  Shame  and  Repentance.  187
The  Mifchief  and  Polly  of  PaJJj Attempts. Ch.  XXXV,

XXXVI.  ib.  189

<^f

TABLE.

of  the  Duties  Men  owe  one  another^  and^  that  nve  muji  do  our
Farts  J though  other  People  do  not difcharge  theirs Ch
XXXVII.  Page  191

A  Difcourje  of  Vriendfljip.  192,  &  feq.

A  Difcoarfe  concerning  God  and  Providence ^  and  the  Duties  of
Religion. Ch.  XXXVIII.  207,  &  feq.

N(?  Danger  JJjould  difcour(ige  us  in  our  Duty.  200

In  ivhat  CafeSy  and  ivith  njohat  Difpoftion^  Oracles  fhould  he
confulted. Ch.  XXXIX.  242,  &  feq.

Rules  for Converfation.

Every  Man  Jhould  refolve  ivhat  Charaiier  he  will  maintain.
Ch.  XL.  249

Of  the  Go'verj^mext  of  the  Tongue. Ch.  XLI.  ib.

Of  Reproof Ch.  XLII.  250

Of  Laughter. Ch.  XLIII.  254

Of  Siuearing. Ch.  XLIV.  255

Of  our  Behaviour  at  publick  Entertaiiiments.  Ch.  XLV. 25^
Our  ToffejJionsJJjould  be  tneafured  not  by  Luxury^  but  Ufe. Cb.
XLVI.  258

Men  mufi  be  chajle^  ivithout  Vanity  and  Cenforioufnefs . Ch,
XLVII.  263

Calumnies  fhould  be  defpifed. Ch,  XLVIII.  166

Public k  shows  fhould  be  feen  ivith  an  even  a?id  compofed  Mind.
Ch.  XLIX.  '  270

RehearfalsofPoets  and  Orators.^  hovj  to  be  heard.  Ch.  L. 272
Great  and  V/ife  Men  fhould  he  ?nade  our  Patter?is  for  Conver-
fation. Ch.  LI.  273
We  mufi  prepare  ourfelves  for  cold  Reception  from  Great  Men.
Ch.  LII.  z-j6
Talking  of  ofie' s f elf  to  be  avoided. Ch.  LIU.  278
Of  Jejiing. Ch.  LIV.  ib.
Of  obfcene  Difcourfe. Ch.  LV.  ib.
The  Glory  of  denyins,  ourfelves^  and  ahjlaining  from Tleafure.
Ch.  LVl. 282
The  Senfe  of  Duty^  and  not  common  Fame^  mujl  be  the  Rule
of  ourABions. Ch.  LVII. • 285
We  muji  confult  the  Rights  of  Men  in  conwion^  and  not  our  pri-
vate Inter  ejl. Ch.  LVIil. 287
"Every  Man  Jhould  conftder  his  own  Abilities.^  and  not  aim  at
things  above  him. Ch.  LIX. 290
The  Integrity  of  the  Mind^fjould  be  our  great  Care. Ch.  LX.

291
Haiurt

TABLE.

^fiture  is  foon  fatisjied,  but  extravagant  Dejires  never. Ch.

LXI.  ^  Page  293

Modejiy  in  a  Wife  is  a  mere  valuable  Excellence  than  Beauty.

Ch.  LXII.  295

7ioe  Body  defer  ves  but  little  of  our  Time  and  Fains,  but  the  Mind

is  loorthy  of  them  all. Ch.  LXIII.  297

iVloat  other  People  fay  or  think  of  us,  is  not  fo  jmch  our  Con-
cern as  theirs.  LXIV.  298
Weflmild  take  every  thinghy  its  bejl  handle.  Ch.  LXV.  300
N(7  Man  is  really  the  better  for  any  external  Advantages. Ch,

LXVI.  305

0/  rafly  Cenfures. Ch.  LXVII.  305

Virtue  is  to  be  Jbevun  not  in  nxife  Harangues,  hut  good  ABions,

Ch.  LXVIII.  307

Of  Forivardnefs  in  Inflru^ion, and  how  our  Improvement  in

Knowledge Jhould  be  manifejied. Ch.  LXIX.  308

Again'i  Ojientation. Ch.  LXX.  312

Every  Man's  Happinefs  and  Mifery  is  from  himfelf.  Ch.  LXXI.

The  CharaBer  of  a  Proncient  in  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs. Cb.

Lxxir.  31^

PraBiie  is  the  End  of  all  Moral  Knowledge. Ch.  LXXIII.

321

We  mufl  mind  our  Duty  JlriBly,  and  defpife  the  Cenfures  of  the
World. Ch.  LXXIV.  324

Againfi  deferring  a  good  Life. Ch.  LXXV.  325

True  WifdoTn  confifts  not  in  learyied  Difputes  about  Virtue,  but
in  the  PraBice  of  it. Ch.  LXXVI.  3  30

The  Duty  of  Self-Refgnation  and  Submijjion  to  the  Divine  Will.
Ch.  LXXVII,  LXXVIII,  LXXIX."  33^,  &  feq.

The  Coficlufion.  337

FINIS.
