Coomassie and Magdala: The Story of Two British Campaigns in Africa (Henry Morton Stanley, 1874)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1874 Sampson Low first edition (https://archive.org/details/coomassieandmag00stangoog). Stanley's dispatches as war correspondent on the Ashanti expedition (1873–74) and the Abyssinian campaign — the reporting that made his name.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Go  ogle 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non- commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 


Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at  http  :  /  /books  .  google  .  com/ 


"1 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 


THE  STORY 


TWO    BRITISH    CAMPAIGNS    IN  AFRICA. 


BY 

HENRY  M.  STANLEY 

8PBCIAL    COIIRESPONDKKT   OF    THE    NEW    TORK  HERALD 
GOLD     MEDALLIST     OF     THE     HOTAL     OBOORAPHICAL  80CIKTT 
roRRKSPOXDIKG    MBMBRB    OF    TBI    AMERICAN    OBOORAPHICAL  MOCIKTT 
AUTHOR    OF    *  HOW    I    FOUND  LIVINaSTOHE.V 


WITH  NUMEROUS  ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  OUAWINQS 
BY  MELTON  PRIOR  (SPECIAL  ARTIST  IN  ASHANTCE  OP  THE  ILLUSTRATED 
LONDON  NEWS)  AND  OTHER  ARTISTS.  AND  TWO  MAPS. 


LONbON: 

SAMPSON   LOW,  MARSTON,   LOW,  &  SEARLE, 

CROWN  BUILDINGS,  188  FT.EET  STREET. 

1874. 


UAJOB-aXVBBAL  SIB  OABVBT  WOL8ELRY,  K^B.,  BTa 


Jfirtm  m  IttrnHfrmpM  hp  Mntt$.  Wtmitm  it  Om«  (Ay  tttrmiuim). 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 


THE  STORY 

OF 

TWO    BRITISH    CAMPAIGNS    FN  AFRICA. 


BY 

HENRY  M.  STANLEY 

SPECIAL    CORRESPONDBN'T   OP    THE    NEW    YORK  HERALD 
aOLD     MEDALLI8T     OF     THE     BOTAL     GBOOBAPHICAL  80CIKTT 
rORRR8POKDIKa    MEMBER     OF    TBI    AMERICAN    GEOGRAPHICAL  HOCTETT 
AUTHOR    OF    *  HOW    I    FOUND  LIVINOSTOHB.' 


WITH  NUMEROUS  ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  OUAWINQS 
BY  MELTON  PRIOR  (SPECIAL  ARTIST  IN  ASHANTEE  OP  THE  ILLUSTRATED 
LONDON  NEWS)  AND  OTHER  ARTISTS.  AND  TWO  MAPS. 


LONDON: 

SAMPSON  LOW,  MARSTON,   LOW,  &  SEARLE, 

CROWN  BUILDINGS,  188  FLEET  STREET. 

1874. 


All    fiahtt  rrifrvfti. 


Z)T32 


PEEFAOE. 


^  CooMASSiE  and  Magdala  :  the  Story  of  Two  British  Campaigns 
in  Africa/  is  the  title  I  have  chosen  for  this  volume,  written 
to  record  two  grand  successes  gained  by  English  soldiers  in 
East  and  West  Africa. 

Before  proceeding  to  Abyssinia  as  a  Special  Correspondent 
of  the  *  New  York  Herald,'  I  had  been  employed  for  American 
journals — ^though  very  yoimg — in  the  same  capacity,  and  wit- 
nessed several  stirring  scenes  in  our  Civil  War.  I  had  seen 
Americans  fight ;  I  had  seen  Indians  fight.  I  was  glad  to  have 
the  opportunity  of  seeing  how  Englishmen  fought.  In  Abys- 
sinia I  first  saw  English  soldiers  prepared  for  war.  What  I 
think  of  them  I  have  written  frankly,  and  without  malice. 
The  story  of  Magdala  was  written  five  years  ago.  The  readeor 
will  perceive  it  to  be  in  a  fresher  style  than  the  stoiy  of 
Coomassie.  Much  of  what  I  formerly  wrote  was  re-written 
several  times,  but  the  MS.  was  still  reserved  for  an  oppor- 
tunity which  I  hoped  would  come.  I  now  avail  myself  of  it, 
and  present  it  to  English  and  American  readers. 

The  story  of  Coomassie  is  dull  compared  to  that  of  Magdala ; 
but  it  is  more  heroic,  and  more  worthy  of  our  sympathy  in  be- 


iv  PREFACE. 

half  of  those  who  fought,  who  suffered  grievouB  sickness,  and 
died. 

Coomassie  was  a  town  insulated  by  a  deadly  swamp.  A  thick 
jungly  forest — so  dense  that  the  sun  seldom  pierced  the  foliage ; 
so  sickly  that  the  strongest  fell  victims  to  ihe  malaria  it 
cherished — surrounded  it  to  a  depth  of  140  miles  seaward, 
many  hundred  miles  east,  as  many  more  west,  and  100  miles 
north.  Through  this  forest  and  swamp,  unrelieved  by  any 
novelty  or  a  single  pretty  landscape,  the  British  army  had  to 
march  140  miles,  leaving  numbers  behind  sick  of  fever  and 
dysentery.  Five  days'  hard  fighting  ended  the  march,  and 
Coomassie  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  conquerors,  to  sack  and 
bum  to  the  ground.  When  this  work  was  done,  the  com- 
mander of  the  force  was  compelled  to  march  his  soldiers  back 
again  to  the  sea,  to  save  the  remnant  from  perishing  by  flood 
and  disease. 

Magdala  was  a  town  planted  on  the  top  of  a  mountain 
about  10,000  feet  above  sea  level,  amid  gigantic  mountains 
piled  one  upon  another,  grouped  together  in  immense  gather- 
ings— profound  abysses  lying  between  2,000,  3,000,  and  even 
4,000  feet  deep— a  region  of  indescribable  wildness  and  gran- 
deur. It  ma  an  almost  impregnable  stronghold,  situate  400 
inileB  from  the  point  of  disembarkation  —  a  strange,  weird 
country,  fiill  of  peaks  and  mountains,  and  ruggedness  lay  be- 
tween it  and  the  sea.  The  scenes  which  flanked  the  march 
bristled  with  rocks  and  crags ;  but  they  possessed  the  charm  of 
novelty  and  picturesqueness,  and  the  country  was  one  of  the 
most  healthy  coimtries  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  march 
was  full  of  interesting  incidents,  more  especially  as  we  drew 
near  the  end.    A  battle  was  fought ;  Magdala  was  taken  by 


PREFACE.  V 

assault,  then  fired,  and  utterly  destroyed.  The  Emperor  com- 
mitted suicide ;  the  captives  were  released ;  and  the  conquerors 
returned  to  the  sea,  flushed  with  unequalled  success,  having 
suffered  the  smallest  loss  that  could  possibly  follow  an  inva- 
'sion  of  a  hostile  country. 

A  greater  contrast  could  not  be  made  than  is  presented  by 
the  story  of  the  two  expeditions  which  England  undertook  in 
Afirica^  in  behalf  of  her  honour,  her  dignity,  humanity,  and 
justice  ;  and  more  brilliant  successes  than  attended  these  two 
campaigns  in  hostile  countries  are  not  recorded  in  history. 

HENEY  M.  STANLEY, 
Spedal  Correspondent '  New  York  Herald.' 

LoNDOK :  April  1874. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

PAOS 

Leaving  England — Oiir  Passengers — ^Fancj  Portrait  of  Sir  Garnet — 
The  Sahara — Liberia — Kru  Boys — Extracts  from  Blue  Books  .      .  1 


CHAPTER  n. 

Government  House  at  Cape  Coast  Castle-r-Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  de- 
scribed— Neglect  of  Cape  Coast  Castle — ^The  Fantees — ^The  Peace 
Society— The  African  Fever  .20 


CHAPTER  m. 

The  Fantees — Cape  Coast  Castle — Fetich — The  Ashantees  and  their 
Customs — History  of  King  Coffee  s  Dynasty — The  King  described   .  49 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  Voyage  proposed— Adventures  Afloat — The  Surf  of  the  Gold  Coast 
— Scenes  along  the  Gold  Coast — Accra — Trade  andTraders — Captain 
Glover  ^      .      .  67 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  Town  of  Elmina— Captain  Helden,  2nd  W.  L  R.— Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley's  Expedition  83 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Trip  down  to  Addah — Commissioner  J.  H.  Glover  and  his  Expedition 
— Captain  Goldsworthy — Biographical  Sketch  of  Glover  .      .  .88 


.viii 


CONTENTS. 


CHAFER  VII. 

PAOK 

The  '  Black  Watch '  and  its  Officers— Teetotaliem— The  Rage  among 
them — Stewards  disgusted—  Christmas — Commissary  O'Connor — 
The  Quality  of  the  Control  Officers  on  the  Gold  Coast     .      .  .103 

CHAPTER  Vm. 

To  the  Front  I— The  Jungle— The  Forest— The  Camps— Along  the 
Road  to  Prahsu — ^The  Officers  commanding  described — Majors  Home, 
Festmg,  Webber,  Evelyn  Wood— Baker  Russell      .      .      .  .111 

CHAPTER  IX. 

An  Ashantee  Embassy — Captain  Arthur  Rait  exhibits  the  Gatling 
Gun — ^Aniyal  of  the  Naval  Brigade— The  2nd  W.  Indians — Bow- 
ditch's  Book — Coomassie  as  it  appeared  in  1817 — Questions    .      .  125 

CHAPTER  X. 

Scenes  in  Camp  at  Prahsu — The  Press  Corps — The  Sailors  and  Marines 
in  Camp — ^A  Sullen  Youngster — Catching  Deserters — How  a  Sergeant 
of  the  Rifles  was  frightened— Running  away  from  a  Mule      .      .  136 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Arrival  of  a  Captive  Missionary— His  Story— His  Report  of  the  Ashan- 
tees — How  the  King  looks — ^Dismay  in  Coomassie — Probable  move- 
ments  144 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

Napoleon  m.  —  The  Qualities  oi  Sir  Garnet  —  Retrospective  —  The 
Special  Service  Corps — Crossing  the  Prah — Ashantee  Land— The 
Adansi  Hills — ^Arrival  in  Ashantee  Proper  152 

CHAPTER  XHI. 

Giflbrd's  Advance — Fomannah  described — Palace  of  the  King  of 
Adansi — ^Native  Architecture  and  Customs— The  Fetich  Place — Re- 
lease of  the  German  Captives— Captain  Butler  164 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Advance  of  the  Army — ^Position  of  the  Four  Columns— Attack  upon 
Adubiassee— Death  of  Captain  Nicol — Battle  of  Borborassi     «  .181 


CONTENTS. 


iz 


CHAPTER  XV. 

VAQM 


Before  the  Battle— On  to  die  Battle— The  Beginning  of  the  End— The 
'  Black  Watch '  in  Action— Battle  of  Amoaful— Village  of  Amoaful  191 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Battle  of  Becquah — Burning  of  the  Village— Human  Sacrifices — Cap- 
tain Butler — Preliminaries  of  a  Battle — Battle  of  Ordahsu — ^Dash 
upon,  and  Capture  of  Coomaarie  209 

CHAPTER  XVn. 

Within  Coomassie — Execution  of  a  Fantee  Policeman — ^Errors  of  Sir 
Garnet — The  Golgotha  of  Coomassie — List  of  the  'Lost*  —  Sir 
Garnet  Explains  225 

CHAPTER  XVm. 
Conclusion— GloTer*s  Expedition  246 


FART  11. 


CHAPTER  L 

A  British  Camp— The  'Best  Fellow  in  the  World'— The  Require- 


ments of  a  Gentleman— Introductory  265 

CHAPTER  n. 

Annesley  Bay — Colonel  Merewether  287 

CHAPTER  m. 

An  Adventurous  Journey  by  Night — An  Abyssinian  Areopagus — 
Native  Oratory  303 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  Sand-stone  Plateau— Strange  Freaks  of  Nature— Exploits  of  Smel- 
fungus  at  Focadar— An  Abyssinian  Church,  and  a  Funeral       •      .  307 


X 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 

PAGE 

Napier'fl  Proclamation — Diplomacy — ^Major  Grant — Meeting  between 
Napier  and  Prince  Kussai — ^Affecting  Scenes  323 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Antalo— Mode  of  Marketing  332 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

Smelfimgus  and  I  part — ^The  British  Press — ^Irresponables  and  their 
Prophecies — Dismay  of  the  Anglo-Indians — Unhappy  Theodore  I — 
Poor  Ci^tiyes  I — Political  Intelligence— Sir  Robert's  able  General- 
ship and  diplomatic  Talents — Delay  is  explained — The  *  Elephants 
of  Asia '  in  Abyssinia — The  Transport  Train    .      .      .      .      .  366 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Abyssinian  Scenery — Lake  Ashangi  in  the  Lap  of  the  Mountains — A 
Hopeful  Heir  Apparent — Our  Grog  is  stopped  374 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Political^Intelligence — Magdala — The  Last  Act  of  the  Drama— Theo- 
dore opens  Fire  —  Charge  of  Abyssinians  —  Colonel  Penn's  last 
Salute — The  Jackals  and  Hyaenas  at  work  401 

CHAPTER  X. 

Casualties  after  the  Battle — A  Well  Dressed  Captive — ^Theodore  in 
Despair — Raasam — Strange  Reception  of  the  Captives — The  Final 
Sunmions  to  Surrender  420 

CHAPTER  XL 

Preparing  for  the  End — A  Welcome  from  Thirty  Thousand — Theodore's 
Last  Challenge — The  Bombardment — ^At  the  Gates  of  Magdala — 
Suicide  of  the  Emperor — Within  Magdala  438 

CHAPTER  XH.  . 

The  Emperor's  Household — Loot — The  Gentlemen  in  Black — The 
Dead  Tyrant   ...  464 


CONTEliTS. 


xi 


CHAPTER  Xin. 

FAOa 

Interment  of  Theodore — The  Eival  Queens — Farewell  to  Magdala— 
General  Napier's  Order — The  Auction  of  Loot — Official  Reports     .  463 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Homeward — March  to  Takazze — Death  and  Burial  of  Lieutenant 
Morgan— The  Ark— The  Priests'  Song  of  Thanksgiving— The  Head- 
Waters  of  the  Great  Nile — Parting  with  the  Fugitives  from  Magdala 
— Still  Homeward  Rejoicing — Queen  Victoria  Congratulates  the 
Crusaders — Death  and  Burial  of  the  Empress  of  Ahyssinia — Prince 
Ala  Mayu — Kussai's  Good  Faith  and  its  Reward — His  Parting  with 
Napier — ^The  Great  Flood  in  the  Sooroo  Pass  and  a  Miraculous 
Deliverance— Mj  Arab  Horse — Hospitable  Friend — Morning — The 
Tender  Farewells — On  the  Sea — Homeward  Bound — The  Last  of 
the  Abyssinian  Expedition  484 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  L 

UATI170  ENOLANB— OITB  PASSENOEBS — FAKCT  PORTRAIT  OF  BIB  GABltXT — 
THB  SAHARA — LIBERIA — KRU  B0T8 — ^EXTBACTS  FROM  BLITE  BOOKS. 

November  1,  1873. 

We  stood  on  the  deck  of  the  *  Benin,'  of  the  African  Steamship 
Company,  a  mixed  lot  of  passengers,  gazing  on  the  murky 
loom  which  marked  where  Liverpool  stood,  growing  more  and 
more  indistinct  as  the  good  steamer  shot  bravely  down  the 
Mersey. 

As  Liverpool  receded  from  view,  and  English  land  disap- 
peared, we  turned  to  one  another  for  novelty,  and  mutual 
questioning  elicited  the  fact  that  we  were  mostly  all  bound 
for  Ashantee. 

There  were  six  doctors,  five  Control  officers,  one  Staff  officer, 
one  volimteer,  and  one  correspondent  of  us  who  were  going  to 
the  war,  but  there  were  a  few  others  destined  for  ports  south 
of  the  equator.  There  were  two  Germans  of  the  West  African 
Expedition  bound  for  the  exploration  of  Central  Africa ;  one  of 
them  was  Dr.  Falkenstein,  a  serious,  earnest  man,  industrious, 
reflective,  and  fearfully  copious  in  note-taking.  The  other, 
his  companion,  was  a  student.  I  was  quite  amused  by  the 
way  in  which  the  two  evidently  anticipated  future  delight  in 
store  for  them  when  they  should  set  foot  on  the  shores  of  the 
classic  Congo.  Jf  a  fly  buzzed  about  them  a  chase  was  made 
after  him,  and  he  was  remorselessly  prepared  for  the  inspection 
of  the  savants  of  Germany.  Two  or  three  insignificant  little 
shore  birds  were  also  added  to  the  slaughtered  and  stuffed.  I 
have  been  through  all  this  myself,  I  have  shared  in  this  boyish 

B 


2 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


eagerness  to  grasp  at  once  the  delights  which  the  fancy  has 
painted  in  the  perspective,  and  I  can  sympathise  with  men 
of  robust  health  and  untamed  energy  who,  while  they  cannot 
at  once  stride  into  the  enchanted  land,  clutch  at  anything, 
however  trivial,  which  belongs  to  its  outskirts,  and  regard  it 
with  wonder  and  undisguised  admiration,  whereas  in  a  few 
weeks  or  so  they  will  throw  it  away  and  wonder  at  their  own 
simplicity.  * 

Our  doctors,  six  in  number,  were  all  young  men,  one  or  two 
of  them  with  a  high  idea  of  their  mission  in  the  /ever-field, 
while  the  others  seemed  better  adapted  for  anything  rather 
than  a  hospital.  The  Control  officers — though  what  in  the  world 
they  control  i  know  not — were  overgrown  boys  from  Sand- 
hurst College,  airing  their  sub-lieutenant's  imiform  for  the  first 
time.  They  had  plenty  of  stamina  in  them,  and  I  have  no 
doubt  Africa  will  demand  a  large  share  of  it,  if  not  all.  The 
Staflf  oflicer  was  Captain  Butler,  the  author  of  the  *  Great  Lone 
Land'  and  the  *\Vild  North  Land,'  who  is  going  to  join  Sir 
Oamet  Wolseley,  and  who  perhaps  will  be  able  to  pick  up  notes 
for  a  book  he  may  well  call  the  *  Great  Black  Land.' 

Our  destination  in  Africa  is  yet  far ;  many  days  will  transpire 
before  we  shall  see  the  Gold  Coast,  and  in  the  meantime 
we  shall  amuse  ourselves  as  best  we  may.  We  begin  to  tell  each 
other  our  varied  experiences,  puEBng  ^^gorously  in  each  other's 
faces  the  while  at  our  cigars,  or  briarwoods,  but  the  tales 
cannot  last  for  ever,  so  we  borrow  each  other's  books,  and  read 
listlessly.  By  this  process  of  borrowing  I  procured  a  little  red 
book  called  the  *  Soldiers'  Pocket  Book'  edited  to  my  surprise 
by  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley. 

Amid  very  much  valuable  matter,  purely  military,  I  came  to 
Sir  Garnet's  opinions  concerning  newspaper  correspondents. 

If  my  memory  serves  me  right,  Sir  Garnet  calls  correspond- 
ents a  *  curse  to  modem  armies' — and  in  other  places  he  has 
bestowed  opprobrious  epithets  upon  the  Press  corps,  among 
which  is  the  term  *  drones.' 

Dropping  the  book  on  my  knee,  I  picture  to  myself  the 
kind  of  man  tjie  military  author  must  be.  I  have  never  seen 
him,  and  I  have  only  this  excessive  animus  to  the  Press  corps 
to  guide  me  in  my  fancy  portrait.  A  primmish  man,  of  a 
Spanish  cast  of  face,  vexy  stiffs  formal,  sour,  crusty,  vain,  and 


A  FANCY  PORTRAIT  OF  SIR  GARNET. 


3 


afraid  of  criticism,  conscious  perhaps  that  he  might  commit 
faults  and  would  fear  being  reviewed. 

I  ask  a  gentleman  on  board  who  are  on  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley's  staff?  I  am  answered — 

*  Captain  Brackenbury  for  one.' 

'  Ah  !  yes.  Brackenbury,  of  course,  the  "  Times  "  man.  A 
military  correspondent,  nothing  would  ever  stop  him  from 
writing  to  the  "  Times."  Strange  that  Sir  Garnet,  with  his 
unconcealed  hatred  to  newspaper  people,  should  choose  such  * 
an  indefatigable  caterer  for  the  Press  as  Captain  Bracken- 
bury.   Who  else,  pray  ? ' 

*  Lieutenant  Maurice.' 

*  What,  Maurice  the  author  of  the  "  Wellington  Prize  Essay." 
He  is  another  Press  writer,  I  would  bet  anything  he  writes 
for  one  if  not  two  newspapers.  You  need  not  name  the 
others;  I  will  take  it  for  granted  that  they  are  mostly  all 
newspaper  writers  in  military  clothes.' 

Apart  from  his  hatred  of  the  *  Gentlemen  of  the  Press,'  as  he 
.facetiously  terms  them.  Sir  Garnet  shows  himself  in  liis  book  as 
a  man  who  would  dare  anything  rather  than  brave  defeat ;  he 
shows  himself  energetic  and  a  master  of  all  military  detail, 
from  the  smallest  minutiae  of  an  officer's  outfit  to  the  most 
difficult  tactics  for  an  army.  Were  the  book  reviewed  bit  by 
bit,  there  is  many  a  place  where  Sir  Garnet  might  be  hit  very 
strong  on  tender  points ;  taken  as  a  whole,  it  is  a  good 
instructor  for  officers,  a  treasury  of  knowledge  for  engineers, 
doctors,  mechanics,  drill-masters,  generals,  commissariats,  for 
anybody  you  please  connected  with  an  army ;  in  short,  it  is 
the  work  of  a  thorough  soldier. 

This  exciting  theme  being  over,  we  are  now  approaching 
Madeira,  and  the  trade  wind  blows  us  southward  and  eastward 
at  a  cheering  rate  ;  and  on  the  sixth  morning,  about  the  time 
for  breakfast,  the  anchor  was  dropped  in  the  harbour  of 
Funchal,  but  we  were  not  permitted  to  land.  The  Spanish 
Consul,  with  a  malice  I  could  not  understand,  had  written  in 
his  own  language,  across  the  English  bill  of  health  an  account 
of  the  cholera  case  which  has  occurred  at  Liverpool  on  boaid 
*  a  French  brig ;'  and  we  were  at  once,  as  the  phrase  is, « put  in 
quarantine.' 

Venting  her  spite  upon  the  ill-maxinered  boors  who  refused 

b2 


4 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


US  permission  to  land  upon  the  beautiful  '  Isle  of  Woods,'  the 
<  Benin '  turned  her  stem  indignantly  towards  the  port  of 
Funchal,  and  pointed  her  stem  for  Teneriffe,  at  which  port 
we  arrived  in  twenty-four  hours.  Nor  at  Teneriffe  were  we 
permitted  to  land.  The  yellow  flag  was  at  our  fore  peak, 
and  we  a  thing  to  be  dreaded.  For  the  discourtesy  with  which 
we  were  treated  shall  I  say  anything  good  of  these  isles  ?  Shall 
I  when  one  cheek  has  been  smitten  desire  the  other  to  be 
smitten  also  ?  Shall  I  for  a  curse  give  a  blessing  ?  I  have  my 
private  opinion  of  these  islands  and  their  people.  ' 

I  will  tell  you  a  story  about  them.  Occupying  the  ladies' 
cabin  of  our  steamer,  the  *  Benin,'  we  had  three  passengers  of 
the  family  of  Jacob.  Doegling,  of  Chicago,  the  husband,  wife, 
and  daughter ;  the  wife  was  in  bad  health,  and  the  husband 
out  of  love  for  her  left  Chicago  to  give  his  wife  and  daughter 
the  benefit  of  the  salubrious  air  of  Madeira.  Arriving  at 
Madeira  they  were  refused  permission  to  land,  and  as  there 
was  no  place  to  receive  passengers  in  quarantine  in  the  port, 
they  were  taken  to  Teneriffe,  in  hopes  that  they  could  have 
accommodation  there.  When  we  came  to  TeneriflTe  the  same 
refusal  to  land  met  them.  They  were  compelled  to  journey  on 
to  Sierra  I^eone,  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  1,400  miles  further 
still.  Sierra  Leone  is  the  last  place  in  the  world  to  banish 
delicate  women  to,  unless  they  are  to  be  got  rid  of,  when,  if 
such  is  the  case.  Sierra  Leone  ofiers  special  advantages  from 
its  well-known  insalubrious  position.  Fortunately,  however, 
we  met  a  steamer  coming  from  the  southward,  and  the  sick 
woman,  the  daughter,  and  the  loving  husband  were  put  on 
board,  either  to  be  landed  at  Madeira  or  to  be  taken  back  to 
England. 

Three  days  after  leaving  Madeira  the  trade  wind  died  away 
and  the  burning  white  Sahara  desert  hove  into  view. 

Freiligrath's  apostrophe  to  Africa  comes  to  the  mind  as  we 
sight  the  burning  shores  :  — 

Oh  zone  so  hot  and  glowing, 
Queen  of  the  earth  art  thou ; 
Sand  is  thy  mantle  flowing, 
^  The  sun  doth  crown  thy  brow. 

Of  gold,  thou  queenly  woman, 
Arc  aU  thy  cl;i.s|)«  and  rims. 
That  fasten  with  fiery  splendour 
The  gAment  to  thy  burning  limbs. 


THE  SAHARA. 


6 


The  sandy  dunes  and  hills  along  the  shore  are  bleached 
and  forbidding.  What  a  sad  history  has  this  shore.  We  all 
know  the  story  of  poor  Captain  Eiley.  His  story  a  thousand 
times  told  would  not  complete  the  history  of  misfortunes  which 
the  inhospitable  strand  could  relate  were  it  able  to  speak.  Be- 
sides the  many  many  scores  of  foreign  vessels  wrecked  on  this 
shore,  with  their  crews  plundered,  stripped,  and  hurried  to 
the  interior  into  a  hellish  slavery,  how  many  a  poor  Canary 
fisherman  has  also  found  a  home  far  inland  in  galling  servi- 
tude of  which  we  know  nothing  ? 

The  sea  along  this  coast  swarms  with  fish  for  which  the 
Canary  fishermen  have  left  the  neighbourhood  of  their  own 
snug  little  isles.  Gladdened  at  heart  at  the  prospect  of  soon 
filling  their  vessels,  they  approach  too  close  to  the  shore 
and  anchor ;  a  storm  rises,  and  the  unlucky  mariners  are 
driven  on  the  beach  by  the  cruel  gales,  where  the  Moors  lie  in 
wait  to  bind  and  take  them  into  life-long  captivity. 

While  looking  at  the  serrated  line  of  sandy  shore  we  can- 
not help  fancying  ourselves  trudging  across  that  torrid  extent 
with  blistering  feet  and  backs,  with  the  remorseless  man-drivers 
behind  us  urging  us  to  quicker  pace  with  point  of  lance  and 
snaky  kurbash.  But  kind  heaven  forbid  the  mischance,  and 
speed  us  on  our  way  to  more  auspicious  shores ! 

Imagination  is  assisted  in  the  above  doleful  picture  by 
the  fervid  atmosphere  through  which  we  move  as  we  steer 
south  towards  Sierra  Leone.  We  are  impatient  of  the  slightest 
vestments.  The  cabin  is  suffocating,  for  the  thermometer 
is  88**  Fahrenheit.  On  deck  we  have  the  cruel  glare  of  the 
ocean,  ruffleless  all  around.  Sharks  are  frequently  seen  on 
either  side  of  the  vessel.  I  suppose  their  traditions  delude 
them  into  the  belief  that  here  more  than  anywhere  else  man- 
meat  is  found.  The  '  Benin,'  however,  disappoints  them,  and 
as  we  glide  ahead  their  black  fins  are  seen  cleaving  the 
water  at  random,  while  they  are  looking  for  that  which  we 
cannot  afford  them. 

On  the  sixth  day  from  Teneriffe  and  the  fifteenth  from  Liver- 
pool the  '  Benin'  enters  by  night  the  mouth  of  th^iiv^f  of  Sierra 
Leone,  and  the  Lion  Bange  obtrudes  itself  aslth^  tmek  mist 
dissolves  before  the  light  of  day.  One  glance  at  the  position 
of  the  town  reveals  the  cause  of  Ufi  insalubrity  to  the  traveller. 


4 


COOMASSIB  AND  MAGDALA. 


US  permission  to  land  upon  the  beautiful  *  Isle  of  Woods,'  the 
*  Benin '  turned  her  stem  indignantly  towards  the  port  of 
Funchal,  and  pointed  her  stem  for  Teneriffe,  at  which  port 
we  arrived  in  twenty-four  hours.  Nor  at  Tenerifie  were  we 
permitted  to  land.  The  yellow  flag  was  at  our  fore  peak, 
and  we  a  thing  to  be  dreaded.  For  the  discourtesy  with  which 
we  were  treated  shall  I  say  anything  good  of  these  isles  ?  Shall 
I  when  one  cheek  has  been  smitten  desire  the  other  to  be 
smitten  also  ?  Shall  I  for  a  curse  give  a  blessing  ?  I  have  my 
private  opinion  of  these  islands  and  their  people.  ' 

I  will  tell  you  a  story  about  them.  Occupying  the  ladies' 
cabin  of  our  steamer,  the  *  Benin,'  we  had  three  passengers  of 
the  family  of  Jacob.  Doegling,  of  Chicago,  the  husband,  wife, 
and  daughter ;  the  wife  was  in  bad  health,  and  the  husband 
out  of  love  for  her  left  Chicago  to  give  his  wife  and  daughter 
the  benefit  of  the  salubrious  air  of  Madeira.  Arriving  at 
Madeira  they  were  refused  permission  to  land,  and  as  there 
was  no  place  to  receive  passengers  in  quarantine  in  the  port, 
they  were  taken  to  Teneriffe,  in  hopes  that  they  could  have 
acconunodation  there.  When  we  came  to  Teneriffe  the  same 
refusal  to  land  met  them.  They  were  compelled  to  journey  on 
to  Sierra  J^eone,  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  1,400  miles  further 
still.  Sierra  Leone  is  the  last  place  in  the  world  to  banish 
delicate  women  to,  unless  they  are  to  be  got  rid  of,  when,  if 
such  is  the  case.  Sierra  Leone  offers  special  advantages  from 
its  well-known  insalubrious  position.  Fortunately,  however, 
we  met  a  steamer  coming  from  the  southward,  and  the  sick 
woman,  the  daughter,  and  the  loving  husband  were  put  on 
board,  either  to  be  landed  at  Madeira  or  to  be  taken  back  to 
England. 

Three  days  after  leaving  Madeira  the  trade  wind  died  away 
and  the  burning  white  Sahara  desert  hove  into  view. 

Freiligrath's  apostrophe  to  Africa  comes  to  the  mind  as  we 
sight  the  burning  shores  : — 

Oh  zone  so  hot  and  glowing, 
Queen  of  the  earth  art  thou ; 
Sand  is  thy  mantle  flowing, 
^  The  sun  doth  crown  thy  brow. 

Of  gold,  thou  queenly  woman, 

Are  all  thy  clasps  and  rims, 

That  fastton  with  fiery  splendour 

The  garment  to  thy  burning  limbs.  ^ 


THE  SAHARA. 


6 


The  sandy  dunes  and  hills  along  the  shore  are  bleaclied 
and  forbidding.  What  a  sad  history  has  this  shore.  We  all 
know  the  story  of  poor  Captain  Eiley.  His  story  a  thousand 
times  told  would  not  complete  the  history  of  misfortunes  which 
the  inhospitable  strand  could  relate  were  it  able  to  speak.  Be- 
sides the  many  many  scores  of  foreign  vessels  wrecked  on  this 
shore,  with  their  crews  plundered,  stripped,  and  hurried  to 
the  interior  into  a  hellish  slavery,  how  many  a  poor  Canary 
fisherman  has  also  fDund  a  home  far  inland  in  galling  servi- 
tude of  which  we  know  nothing  ? 

The  sea  along  this  coast  swarms  with  fish  for  which  the 
Canary  fishermen  have  left  the  neighbourhood  of  their  own 
snug  little  isles.  Gladdened  at  heart  at  the  prospect  of  soon 
filling  their  vessels,  they  approach  too  close  to  the  shore 
and  anchor;  a  storm  rises,  and  the  imlucky  mariners  are 
driven  on  the  beach  by  the  cruel  gales,  where  the  Moors  lie  in 
wait  to  bind  and  take  them  into  life-long  captivity. 

While  looking  at  the  serrated  line  of  sandy  shore  we  can- 
not help  fancying  ourselves  trudging  across  that  torrid  extent 
with  blistering  feet  and  backs,  with  the  remorseless  man-drivers 
behind  us  urging  us  to  quicker  pace  with  point  of  lance  and 
snaky  kurbash.  But  kind  heaven  forbid  the  mischance,  and 
speed  us  on  our  way  to  more  auspicious  shores ! 

Imagination  is  assisted  in  the  above  doleful  picture  by 
the  fervid  atmosphere  through  which  we  move  as  we  steer 
south  towards  Sierra  Leone.  We  are  impatient  of  the  slightest 
vestments.  The  cabin  is  sufibcating,  for  the  thermometer 
is  88**  Fahrenheit.  On  deck  we  have  the  cruel  glare  of  the 
ocean,  ruffleless  all  aroimd.  Sharks  are  frequently  seen  on 
either  side  of  the  vessel.  I  suppose  their  traditions  delude 
them  into  the  belief  that  here  more  than  anywhere  else  man- 
meat  is  found.  The  '  Benin,'  however,  disappoints  them,  and 
as  we  glide  ahead  their  black  fins  are  seen  cleaving  the 
water  at  random,  while  they  are  looking  for  that  which  we 
cannot  afford  them. 

On  the  sixth  day  from  Teneriffe  and  the  fifteenth  from  Liver- 
pool the '  Benin'  enters  by  night  the  mouth  of  th^mei^of  Sierra 
Leone,  and  the  Lion  Bange  obtrudes  itself  as*lh^  tiiiek  mist 
dissolves  before  the  light  of  day.  One  glance  at  the  position 
of  the  town  reveals  the  cause  of  its  insalubrity  to  the  traveller. 


6 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


It  is  placed  in  an  amphitheatral  terrace  or  shelf  of  ground, 
with  an  immense  and  lofty  crescent  of  mountain  at  the  back 
rising  to  a  height  of  1,000  and  1,500  feet  above  it.  Between 
the  town  and  sea  a  few  spurs  and  outlying  ridges  prevent  the 
full  benefit  of  the  pure  sea  breeze,  and,  as  the  breeze  does  not 
always  come  from  seaward,  when  it  comes  from  the  interior 
the  town  becomes  steamy,  muggy,  vaporous,  a  very  hot-bed  of 
sickness  and  fever.  Nature  has  pointed  to  man  the  breezy  up- 
land above  the  town  as  the  site  whereon  to  build  a  house,  yet 
the  European  has  neglected  the  warning,  and  consequently  has 
sickened  and  died ;  hence  Sierra  Leone  has  a  bad  reputation. 
English  governors  have  endeavoured  to  mitigate  evil  sanitary 
regulations  by  industriously  circulating  clear  fresh  water 
through  every  street,  but  it  has  not  been  enough  ;  the  evil  lies 
in  the  air,  the  air  is  the  noxious  exhalation  from  the  leafy, 
umbrageous,  close  crescent  around  it.  It  is  the  want  of 
that  fresh  air  which  bends  the  tall  grass  on  the  top  of  yonder 
mountain  that  has  caused  the  fragile  European  to  sicken, 
and  fade,  and  die. 

The  first  view  of  Sierra  Leone ,  is  very  deceptive.  The 
stranger,  on  seeing  the  apparently  strong,  substantial,  civilised- 
looking  houses,  rich  in  their  luxuriant  tropical  surroundings, 
velvet-green  palm  fronds,  rustling  and  waving  oyer  steeple 
and  roof,  papaw  and  bread-fruit  trees,  oranges  and  limes,  and 
every  tree  that  is  delightful  to  the  eye  and  taste,  growing 
thickly  about,  would  be  apt  to  say,  '  Oh,  here  is  the  fulfilment 
of  my  dream  at  last;  this  is  the  initial  footstep  of  civilisa- 
tion which  by-and-bye  is  to  penetrate  to  Central  Africa.'  He 
enters  the  town  hopeful  and  sanguine,  but  the  truth  slowly 
penetrates  into  his  brain  that  this  town  has  been  about  a 
hundred  years  progressing  towards  its  present  pitch  of  pros- 
perity. After  a  hundred  years  of  occupation,  the  English 
are  building  a  wharf  1  After  a  hundred  years  of  occupa- 
tion, the  Episcopal  church  is  but  half  constructed,  and  I 
should  fear  to  say  how  much  precious  money  has  been  spent 
on  the  rickety-looking  edifice  1  After  a  himdred  years  of  oc- 
cupation, the  zealous  English  missionaries  have  not  been  able 
to  inculcate  in  the  negro's  mind  that  it  is  sinful  to  lie,  to  steal, 
and  to  be  lazy  I  And  this  is  the  result  of  christianising  Africa 
at  Sierra  Leone !   If  I  were  asked  where  I  could  find  the  most 


SIERRA  LEONE. 


7 


insolent,  lying,  thieving  negroes,  I  should  undoubtedly  say  at 
Sierra  Leone.  Through  some  strange  caprice  the  English  have 
permitted  a  colony  of  semi-civilised  Africans  to  grow  up  in 
order  to  experiment,  perhaps,  how  wild  and  how  rank  a  colony 
of  negroes  can  become  when  left  to  their  own  sinful  and  wicked 
devices,  unchecked  and  uncurbed  by  the  hand  of  law.  The 
English  will,  perhaps,  plead  as  an  excuse  that  the  climate  is 
against  the  exercise  of  strong  will ;  that  no  matter  how  valiant  a 
man  be  in  his  intentions  when  he  sets  out  to  govern  the  blatant 
woolly-headed  rabble  of  this  colony,  he  will  find  his  nerves 
and  will  prostrated  before  the  unconquerable  lassitude  which 
the  climate  quickly  engenders  in  him  as  soon  as  he  sets  foot 
on  its  shores. 

The  rumour  of  war  with  Ashantee  had  penetrated  even 
here.  One  would  have  thought  that  Great  Britain,  after 
careful  nurture  of  such  a  settlement,  would  have  prepared  a 
nursery  of  disciplined  negroes  as  auxiliaries  in  time  of  need. 
Nothing  of  the  kind ;  the  only  eflScient  force  of  Sierra  Leone 
natives  I  have  been  able  to  see  is  composed  of  the  few  constables 
who  perambulate  the  town,  baton  in  hand,  to  crack  the  heads  of 
the  unruly.  What  she  has  been  able  to  effect  in  the  way  of 
a  constabulary  force  ought  to  have  suggested  to  her  the 
raising  of  a  faithful  cohort  of  natives.  It  has  not  been  done, 
however,  and  she  has  been  obliged  to  despatch  some  of  her 
West  Indian  legions  to  protect  her  possessions  here ;  and  not 
only  those  here,  but  her  possessions  all  along  the  coast.  Her 
West  Indian  negroes  are  fine  tall  fellows,  marvels  of  discipline, 
showing  what  might  be  done  with  the  raw  material  of  Sierra 
Leone.  Perhaps  Great  Britain,  good  nursing-mother  as  she  is, 
has  failed  in  this  instance  by  proceeding  too  tenderly  with  her 
black  children  of  Sierra  Leone.  It  seems  to  me  she  has  aimed 
at  too  high  a  standard  of  excellence  in  her  mode  of  dealing 
with  these  people. 

Mostly  all  of  us  on  board  the  *  Benin,'  destined  for  the  war, 
wished  to  procure  servants.  But  we  found  servants  scarce, 
while  applicants  for  clerkships  far  exceeded  the  demand. 
Indeed,  I  do  not  know  that  any  of  us  were  so  effeminate,  or  so 
hixurious,  as  to  demand  a  clerk  to  write  our  letters  from  the 
palace  of  King  Coffee  at  Goomassie,  while  we  really  did  need 
black  servants,  who  could  stand  the  climate,  to  carry  our 


8 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


baggage  to  Coomassie.  The  applicants  of  Sierra  Leone  said 
they  could  do  anything,  from  reading  the  Bible  to  making  long 
prayers  for  our  success  in  the  field,  but  when  we  asked  them  if 
they  could  carry  a  few  pounds  of  canned  meat  for  us  at  a 
shilling  a  day,  they  mostly  all  demurred  at  the  ignoble  task. 
In  almost  every  street  in  Sierra  Leone  I  heard  the  voice  of 


A  CITIZEN  OF  SIB&UA  LEONE. 


praise  and  vocal  prayer  from  the  numerous  aspirants  to  clerk- 
ships and  civil  service  employ ;  but  I  am  compelled  to  deny 
that  I  heard  the  sound  of  mallet  and  chisel,  of  mortar,  pestle, 
and  trowel,  the  ringing  sound  of  hammer  on  anvil,  or  roar  of 
forge,  which  to  my  practical  mind  would  have  had  a  far 
sweeter  sound.  There  is  virgin  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Sierri  Leone  yet  untilled,  there  are  buildings  in  the  town  yet 


LIBEBIA. 


9 


unfinished,  there  are  roads  for  commeice  yet  to  be  made,  tlie 
trade  of  the  African  interior  yet  waits  to  be  admitted  into 
the  capacious  harbour  of  Sierra  Leone,  for  the  enrichment  of 
the  fond  nursing-mother  of  races  who  sits  dreamily  teaching 
her  children  how  to  cackle  instead  of  how  to  work. 

After  a  stay  of  twelve  hours  the  *  Benin '  turns  ff om  Sierra 
Leone,  and  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  passes  the  wreck  of  the 
steamer  *Nigiitia,'  three-fourths  of  which  splendid  steamer 
was  lately  sold  for  the  sum  of  4002.  It  is  not  too  late 
yet  for  some  enterprising  man  to  charter  a  couple  of  ships 
to  purchase  the  wreck  of  the  'Nigritia'  at  Sierra  Leone,, 
and  that  of  the  '  Monrovia,'  which  lies  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
oflf  Cape  Palmas.  The  upper  parts  of  both  vessels  are  \m- 
injured.  Clever  people  setting  out  with  plenty  of  appli- 
ances might  make  an  immense  ^um  out  of  the  venture. 
The  latter  vessel  was  almost  a  new  one,  and  cost  60,000i. 
Striking  a  reef  off  Palmas  Point,  she  was  at  once  nm  full  speed 
into  the  beach  where  she  now  lies. 

We  steamed  by  Liberia's  low  wooded  shores  without  the 
chance  to,  observe  how  the  sable  republic  flourishes  by  a 
personal  view  of  things.  Beport  speaks  evilly  of  her,  of 
her  pride  and  her  vanity,  of  the  disinclination  of  her  chil- 
dren to  work  and  their  pretensions  to  high-sounding  titles 
and  high  places.  Those  on  board  the  ^ Benin'  who  have  stopped 
at  Liberia  say  that  mostly  every  other  man  is  styled  an  *  Honom*- 
able,'  that  the  people  are  fonder  of  standing  in  groups  in  the 
street  Xo  disciiss  politics  than  of  bringing  the  produce  of  the 
rich  back  country  into  the  markets  for  sale,  which  if  true  is 
very  disheartening. 

Off  Cape  Palmas  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  one  of  the 
Liberia  '  Honourables,'  who  introduced  himself  to  me  as  the 

Honourable  J  M  ,  named  after  the  Honourable  J  

M  ,  Chief  Justice  of  old  V  .    Said  he,  *  I  was  bom 

in  old  .V  ,  sir.    A  good  old  state,  sir.    I  was  named 

after  old  J  M — — ,  sir.    You  may  have  heard  of  him,  sir. 

The  Chief  Justice,  sir.  I  have  been  here  seventeen  years,  sir, 
now,  and  we  are  improving  little  by  little  ;  there  is  a  promising 
future,  fidr.  Oh  yes,  sir,  I  do  not  feel  discouraged  at  all, 
sir ;  rather  have  I,  have  we  all,  cause  to  regard  the  prospects 
of  liberia  as  being  very  hopeful,  sir.    Good  aftemoto,  sir. 


10 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


If  you  were  to  stop  here  a  week,  sir,  I  should  feel  hoDoured 
by  your  making  my  poor  house  your  home,  sir.  Good  day, 
sir,  A  pleasant  voyage  to  you,  sir and  the  pleasant-faced, 
simple-hearted  old  gentleman  evanished  into  his  canoe,  in 
which  he  was  rowed  ashore  by  a  parcel  of  naked  Kj:u  boys. 

This  Gape  Palmas  is  said  to  be  the  most  healthy  place  on 
the  west  coast  of  Africa,  and  looking  at  its  position,  exposed  to 
the  healthy  winds  of  the  Atlantic,  it  does  not  want  much  exercise 
of  reason  to  be  informed  of  its  salubrity.  The  highest  point 
on  the  Cape  is  75  feet  above  the  sea,  and  five  substantial  houses 
occupy  the  commanding  sites,  a  graceful  clump  or  two  of 
palms  adding  beauty  and  life  to  the  little  rocky  peninsula. 
The  colony  have  called  their  town  Harper  as  a  tribute  to 
Mr.  R.  G.  Hai-per,  of  Baltimore,  who  has  distinguished  himself  as 
a  sincere  philanthropist  in  the  cause  of  the  poor  Africans, 
and  have  erected  a  capital  lighthouse;  but  as  the  'Mon- 
rovia' struck  a  reef  or  rock  500  fathoms  off  the  extremity  of 
the  Cape,  the  passage  on  a  dark  night  by  this  point  is  not 
without  its  dangers. 

One  of  the  most  singular  tribes,  according  to  all  accounts, 
on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  is  the  Kroo,  commonly  called 
Krumen.  They  hire  themselves  out  at  a  shilling  a  day,  per 
capita,  to  every  steamer  and  man-of-war  destined  for  the 
southern  ports.  They  are  the  most  athletic  people  I  ever  saw ; 
the  masses  of  corded  muscle  one  sees  on  the  arms  of  some 
of  them  are  absolutely  astoimding.  The  largest  I  saw 
seemed  half  as  large  as  a  32-pound  cannon-ball  clapped 
on  a  human  arm,  while  the  amorphous  muscles  of  the  hips, 
and  hams  and  calves  give  many  of  them  a  most  ungainly 
gait  in  walking. 

The  Krus  are  remarkable  for  their  good  nature,  and  like 
all  tribes  in  Eastern,  Central,  and  Western  Africa,  lighten 
their  labours  with  a  rousing  song,  which  though  monotonous 
after  a  while,  is  not  disagreeably  so,  the  tones  having  some- 
what the  effect  of  a  sedative  on  a  white  man.  While  they 
are  certainly  an  industrious  people,  and  valuable  for  the 
extension  of  commerce  in  the  torrid  regions,  tliey  are  rightly 
considered  the  most  cowardly.  They  are  in  many  respects 
the  very  counterpart  of  the  Wanyamuezi  of  Central  Africa, 
with  whom  the  Arab  caravans  are  able  to  penetrate  to  the 


KEU  BOYS. 


11 


unknown  regions  north  and  south  of  the  equator  in  search 
of  the  precious  ivory.  The  Arabs  never  dream  of  arming  the 
Wanyamuezi  as  escorts,  as .  they  are  utterly  unreliable.  A 
Mgogo  boy  with  a  spear  in  his  hand  would  be  sufficient  to 
make  a  legion  of  Wanyamuezi  tremble. 

The  British  General,  in  his  search  for  dusky  allies  to  drive 
back  the  insoleiit  Ashantees  from  the  Protectorate,  has  long 
before  this  time  been  informed  that  though  the  Kiumen  are 
invaluable  aids  on  board  British  cruisers  and  mercantile  steamers 
trading  along  the  coast,  they  are  useless  as  allies  in  war.  The  very 
name  of  battle  is  a  terror  to  them,  and  they  earnestly  stipulate 
with  all  new-comers  just  now  that  they  shall  not  be  expected  to 
go  to  the  war. 

The  Krumen  rejoice  under  names  which  prove  who  their 
sponsors  have  been.  The  sailor's  genius  is  well  known  for  the 
invention  of  marine  nicknames.  He  has  excelled  himself  in  the 
multiform  and  mixtiform  cognomens  he  has  bestowed  upon  his 
smiling,  large-mouthed,  white-teethed,  flat-nosed,  dusky  ship- 
mates of  ICruland.  I  heard  the  muster  roll  of  those  on  the 
*  Benin,'  engaged  at  Grand  Sestros  near  Cape  Palmas,  among 
which  I  distinguished  such  names  as  Pea  Soup,  Jolly  Nose, 
Tar  Bucket,  Flying  Jib,  Salt  Junk,  Main  Topsail,  Jack  Slush, 
Hard  Tack,  Tom  DufiF,  Sheet  Anchor,  Cabin  Boy,  Star  Gtizer, 
Wool  Pate,  and  other  curious  titles.  The  British  sailors  regard 
these  as  far  more  adapted  to  distinguish  the  ICru  boys  one  from 
another  than  such  names  as  Kalra  Klemku,  or  Marpoholongola. 

Leaving  the  shores  of  Liberia  behind,  we  come  to  the  Ivory 
Coast,  the  French  possessions,  which  extend  as  far  as  the  Assinee 
river.  Eastward  of  that  river  we  sail  along  the  Gold  Coast, 
which  has  finally  come  entire  through  transfer  and  purchase 
into  the  hands  of  the  English,  extending  from  Assinee  river 
to  the  Danoe,  a  coast  line  of  about  290  miles,  or  from  longitude 
3**  2(y  west  of  Greenwich  to  longitude  1**  10'  east  of  Green- 
wich. The  town  of  Danoe  on  the  Slave  Coast  serves  as  a  boun- 
dary line  to  the  British  possessions  and  Dahomey.  The  Assinee 
river  marks  the  boundary  between  the  British  possessions  and 
the  French  possessions  to  the  West  of  the  Cape. 

While  the  actual  British  possession  comprises  no  morp  than 
a  thin  coast  line,  yet  the  Protectorate,  according  to  the  Ashantee 
Treaty  of  April  27,  1831,  extends  north  along  the  parallel  of 


m 


12 


COOIVLVSSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


longitude  3°  west  of  Greenwich  for  a  distance  of  nearly  100 
miles,  but  in  1873  the  proposed  jurisdiction  was  to  extend  only 
to  the  southern  bank  of  the  Prah,  or  Boosum  Prah,  Within  this 
extensive  Protectorate  are  found  the  tribes  of  Denkera,  Anka, 
Aowin,  Amanahea,  Ahanta,  Wassaw,  Fantee,  Assin,  Goomwah, 
Adjumacoom,  Agoona,  Aquapim,  Accra,  Akim,  Adampe,  Aqua- 
moo,  Crepee,  Aveno,  Kerapah.  Besides  these  tribes  there  are 
many  sub-tribes  within  the  British  Protectorate  who  were  all 
formerly  tributary  to  the  famous  despotic  king  Coflfee  Calcali, 
who  holds  court  at  Coomassie,  a  large  and  strong  town  situated  * 
north  of  the  Boosum  Prah. 

We  arrived  at  Cape  Coast  Castle  on  the  morning  of  October 
24.  The  first  view  of  the  place  was  one  of  a  seven-hilled 
position,  the  hollows  between  the  hills  being  occupied  with 
houses  white  and  coloured,  which  connected  in  neighbourly 
manner,  one  hill  with  another.  The  mass  of  mQrtared  walls 
and  houses,  in  the  foreground,  close  to  which  the  big  waves 
of  the  Atlantic  rush  with  terrible  fury  over  the  rock  that 
forms  the  Cape,  is  Cape  Coast  Castle. 

The  background  is  formed  of  three  hills :  Victoria  Tower 
stands  on  the  right ;  Fort  William — a  round  cheese-box  affair 
about  as  large  as  the  mammoth  cheese  we  are  going  to  exhibit 
at  the  Centennial  Exhibition,  1876,  at  Philadelphia — is  planted 
on  top  of  a  steep  cone  in  the  centre  ;  and  Connor's  Hill  rises  to 
the  left,  on  the  summit  of  which  are  some  bell  tents,  officers' 
marquees,  and  a  hospital.  Connor's  Hill  is  the  sanatorium. 
The  middle  ground  is  filled  up  with  hills  covered  with  Govern- 
ment buildings,  churches,  and  hollows  filled  up  with  long  lines 
of  mud  houses,  said  to  be  occupied  by  Christian  and  Pagan 
Fantees.  This  is  as  much  as  you  can  take  in  at  a  glance  from 
shipboard,  of  an  obscure  settlement  just  springing  up  into  a 
notoriety  which  must  make  the  place  and  its  history  a  matter 
of  common  talk  for  months  to  come. 

At  anchor  in  the  roads  are  a  hospital  ship,  the  '  Simoom,' 
commanded  by  Captain  Piele,  H.M.S.  '  Barracouta,'  Captain 
Fremantle,  Senior  Naval  Officer  at  present,  H.M.S.  '  Decoy,'  and 
a  couple  more  ;  the  British  and  African  steamer  '  Bonny,'  the 
African  Steamer  Company's  *  Benin,'  two  American  sailing 
vessels,  and  a  brig  owned  by  the  great  fiim  of  Swanzy  Brothers, 

About  8  miles  to  the  right  of  Cape  Coast  Castle,  a  glaring 


ELMINA. 


13 


white  mass  of  buildings  rises  to  view,  which  I  am  told  is 
Elmina  and  the  Castle  of  St.  George  of  Elmina. 

This  latter  place  is  classic.  It  was  discovered  and  settled  by 
the  Portuguese  navigator  Diago  d'Azambuja,  as  Aldea  or  the 
village  of  two  parts,  but  soon  became  more  generally  known  as 
Mina  or  the  Mine ;  but  when  the  castle,  which  took  86  years 
to  build,  was  completed,  it  was  called  St.  Creorge  Da  Mina. 
The  name  Mina  was  derived  I  suspect  from  a  family  of  that 
name,  who  were  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  exceed- 
ingly rich,  and  who  advanced  large  sums  of  money  to  fit  out 
the  exploring  caravels.  How  it  came  to  be  called  Elmina  is 
easy  to  explain ;  the  prefix  translated  into  English,  means 
the— El  Mina— The  Mine. 

About  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Admiral  de 
Euyter  captured  Elmina  for  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  and 
left  his  batoi^there  as  an  insignia  of  authority  for  all  succeeding 
governors.  That  baton  of  ivory  and  gold  passed  into  the 
hands  of  the  British  Governor  Hennessey  on  May  6,  1872,  the 
time  of  the  transfer  of  the  Dutch  territory  into  the  hands  of 
the  English,  after  its  occupation  by  the  Dutch  during  235 
years. 

My  object  in  drawing  attention  to  the  old  Portuguese 
castle,  is  because  the  cession  of  the  place  to  the  English  is  one 
of  the  causes  which  led  to  the  Ashantee  invasion  of  1873. 

The  history  of  the  settlements  is  too  complicated  a  matter 
for  a  special  correspondent  to  unravel  while  he  is  on  the  eve  of 
a  stirring  campaign,  where  his  pen  will  be  required  any  moment 
to  describe  what  transpires  ;  but  it  would  be  unjust  to  expect 
readers  to  feel  interested  in  this  campaign  without  revealing  a 
few  salient  points  such  as  will  furnish  them  with  an  idea  as 
to  the  purposes  and  objects  of  this  war. 

The  Ashantees  have  been  life-long  enemies  of  England, 
principally  because  her  Commissioners  and  Governors  have 
never  thought  it  worth  while  to  cultivate  their  friendship 
properly,  such  as  their  importance  merits.  It  is  tnie  they 
have  always  been  polite  to  the  King  and  his  envoys,  and  have 
sent  him  many  rich  presents. 

Ashantee  is  as  large  a  countiy  as  the  whole  of  PVance  or 
Abyssinia,  though  not  as  populous  even  as  the  latter  country  ;  the 
whole  of  it  is  united  under  one  man  whom  every  native  is 


14 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


bound  to  obey  to  the  extent  of  his  life  and  piroperty.  Abyssinia 
under  Theodore  in  his  last  years  was  torn  by  <5ontending  factions 
and  ambitious  princes,  and  weakened ;  but  Ashantee  can  muster 
under  the  banner  of  its  king  a  force  of  100,000  warriors. 

Time  and  time  again  has  Ashantee  entreated  of  England  the 
right  to  come  and  go  freely  from  the  interior  to  the  coast  and 
vice  versa.  This  right  has  been  refused.  Yet  England,  great 
mistress  as  she  is  of  the  art  of  commerce,  might  have  listened 
to  the  entreaties  of  Ashantee  and  granted  what  they  asked,  to 
her  own  lasting  credit  and  enduring  profit. 

For  nearly  a  couple  of  centuries  Ashantee  traded  with  the 
Dutch  settlement  of  Elmina,  eight  miles  from  Cape  Coast, 
When  England  purchased  Elmina  she  sent  conciliatory  letters 
to  the  Ashantee  potentate,  telling  him  of  her  desire  to  re- 
main on  peaceful  terms  with  him,  and  her  hope  that  the  trade 
might  continue. 

On  May  6, 1872,  she  took  possession  of  Elmina,  with  a  blare 
of  trumpet,  cannon  salvoes,  and  imposing  ceremonies. 

I  now  open  the  Parliamentary  Blue  Books,  from  which  I 
extract  the  following  news,  which  goes  to  show  what  was  done  by 
England  from  her  occupation  of  the  Dutch  territory  down  to 
the  time  of  the  Ashantee  invasion  of  1873  : — 

Mm/  31,  1872. — Prince  Ansah,  a  cousin  of  King  Coffee,  of  Ashan- 
tee, being  at  Coomassie,  writes  to  say  that  the  King  is  pleased  with  the 
news  which  Governor  Hennessey  has  sent,  which  is  to  the  effect  that 
the  road  will  be  opened  for  trade. 

Some  missionaries  of  the  Basle  mission,  pursuing  their  religious 
profession  quietly,  had,  about  two  years  before,  been  captured  by  Adu 
Bofu,  an  Ashantee  general,  and  Prince  Ansah  suggests  that  the  pay- 
ment of  1,000/.  would  release  Messrs.  Kuehae,  BcHiat,  Ramseyer,  Mrs. 
Hamseyer  and  child. 

It  should  be  noted  that  Governor  Hennessey  made  a  demand  for 
their  release,  and  offered  to  ransom  them,  though  they  were  not  British 
subjects.  The  British  Foreign  Office  has  already  informed  the  German 
Government  of  their  good  intentions.  Von  Strausse,  in  the  name  of  his 
august  master,  has  thanked  the  British  Government  for  its  good  inten- 
tions. 

This  was  a  diplomatic  mistake,  leading  the  Ashantees  into  the 
belief  that  they  were  people  of  importance. 

The  Ashantee  General  Adu  Bofu,  their  captor,  demands  1,800 
oimces  of  gold  or  6,480^ 


EXTRACTS  FROM  BLUB  BOOKS. 


15 


Later. — Governor  Hennessey  sends  a  present  of  pieces  of  gold- 
embroidered  silk  to  the  King  of  Ashantee. 

In  June  a  son  of  Adu  Bofu  is  made  prisoner,  but  is  unconditionally 
released  by  Governor  Hennessey,  in  the  evident  hope  of  stimulating  a 
reciprocal  release  on  the  part  of  General  Adu  Bofu. 

This  month,  also,  Oovernor  Hennessey  makes  a  further  diplomatic 
gifl  of  a  ring  marked  with  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac. 

At  a  later  period  Earl  Kimberley,  of  the  Colonial  Office,  advises 
Grovemor  Hennessey  to  inform  the  King  of  Ashantee  that  if  Europeans 
are  detained,  the  annual  stipend  promised  him  will  be  suspended ;  and 
at  the  same  time  to  warn  Europeans  that  if  they  go  beyond  the  limits  of 
the  Protectorate  they  do  so  at  their  own  risk. 

[A  grave  diplomatic  mistake  this  on  the  part  of  Earl  Kimber- 
ley, making  use  of  such  a  threat  when  those  Europeans  were  not 
British  subjects,  and  when  he  was  not  called  upon  to  do  anything 
in  their  behalf.  This  fault,  too,  after  Chinese  and  Abyssinian  expe- 
riences !] 

October  11,  1872. — The  Ashantee  King,  lulling  poor  Governor 
Hennessey  into  a  false  security,  writes  to  say  that  he  is  about  to  send 
to  make  peace,  upon  which  Governor  Hennessey  states  his  belief  to  be 
that  the  release  of  the  captives  is  of  minor  importance  compared  to  peace 
with  Ashantee. 

Pcjpr  Governor  Hennessey  seems  to  have  forgotten  that  he  stated 
that  peace  could  only  be  made  by  the  release  of  the  Europeans  at 
Coomassie. 

^  Peace  with  Ashantee  means  an  influx  of  gold  dust  and  native  pro- 
vduce  from  Coomassie  to  Cape  Coast  and  Elmina,  which  the  conclusion 
W  a  sound  peace  would  surely  bring. 

September  24,  1872. — ^The  Ashantee  King  writes  to  say  that  he  is 

willing  to  let  the  captives  go  for  1,000/.  which  shall  be  paid  half  in  gold 

dust  and  half  in  goods. 

At  this  time  a  negro  named  H.  Plange  is  the  commissioner  at 

Coomassie,  negotiating  for  the  release  of  the  European  captives,  at  a 

salary  of  30/.  per  month.    Mr.  Plange  writes  to  say  that  the  chiefs, 

who  overrule  the  young  king,  declare  it  their  belief  that  if  they  only 
'  hold  out  they  will  obtain  the  whole  sea  coast  in  exchange  for  the 

captives. 

[No  wonder  they  do,  after  what  Earl  Kimberley  and  Governor 
Hennessey  have  written.] 

^Mr.  Plange  further  says  that  the  question  at  issue  seems  to  be,  shall 
the  Ashantees  come  down  to  the  coast  to  trade  with  British  merchants 
without  being  made  to  pay  to  Fantees  as  middlemen  ?  for  by  trading 
directly  with  the  merchants  they  gain  50  per  cent. 

.  FArvary  5,  J87d. — ^There  is  a  sudden  rumour  of  an  Ashantee  in* 


16 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDAI.A. 


vasion  of  the  British  protectorate.  Colonel  Harley  is  at  this  time  ad- 
ministrator at  Government  House,  Cape  Coast  Castle. 

February  10,  1873. — ^An  Ashantee  prisoner  states  that  King  Coffee 
is  coming  down  to  take  Elmina,  and  -Colonel  Harlej  asserts  that  the 
King  of  Elmina  has  eaten  fetish  with  the  King  of  Ashantee  against  the 
British  Government.  The  opinion  prevails  at  this  time  that  there  is  a 
strong  dislike  to  the  British  Government  throughout  the  towns  lately 
ceded  by  the  Dutch  to  the  English  from  Elmina  to  Assinee. 

Governor  Hennessey,  at  Sierra  Leone,  charges  Colonel  Harley  with 
having  quarrelled  with  the  Elmina  King ;  that  he  has  also  refused 
permission  to  Elmina  people  to  practise  certain  indecent  ceremonies. 
The  only  evidence  of  dislike  to  be  found  is  in  Governor  Hennessey  to 
Colonel  Harley. 

Middle  of  February/, — Colonel  Harley  reports  the  first  outbreak  of 
the  war.  The  Ashantces  have  invaded  Assin  in  the  British  protec- 
torate, and  have  burned  nine  villages. 

A  new  cause  of  the  war  now  discovered,  through  a  letter  which 
was  mislaid  somewhere  at  Sierra  Leone,  but  which  finally  comes  to 
light  at  the  Colonial  Office.  It  reports  the  capture  of  an  Ashantee 
chief,  called  Atjeimpon,  who  is  imcle  to  the  King  of  Ashantee,  and  his 
subsequent  imprisonment  at  Cape  Coast  Castle.  He,  however,  has 
been  started  towards  the  Prah  through  the  Assin  country,  which  the 
Assins  were  loth  to  permit,  but  prevailed  upon  by  Colonel  Harley,  they 
finally  withdrew  opposition.  It  was  on  or  about  the  12th  of  December, 
1872,  when  he  started  from  Cape  Coast.  It  must  have  been  about 
the  beginning  of  January  1873,  when  he  found  himself  across  the 
border  river,  in  Ashantee  land,  from  which  we  may  deduce  the  not 
unreasonable  supposition  that  the  time  which  intervened  between  his 
arrival  at  Coomassie  before  his  nephew  the  King  and  the  invasion  of 
the  British  protectorate  was  spent  in  the  organization  of  the  three 
great  Ashantee  divisions  which  rolled  into  the  protectorate  at  three 
different  points — Denkera  to  the  right,  Prahsu  in  the  centre,  and  Akim 
to  the  left,  computed  to  be  in  the  aggregate  between  30,000  and 
40,000  warriors. 

Opposed  to  these  splendid  organizations  there  is  a  statistical  number 
of  60,000  or  more  of  the  Fantee  confederation,  badly  disciplined  and 
organized,  and  incapable  of  effectual  resistance,  owing  to  their  inco- 
hesion  and  want  of  a  recognized  chief. 

Later  in  February. — King  of  Abrah  volunteers  the  information  to 
Colonel  Harley  that  the  invasion  has  been  caused  by  the  cession  of  the 
Elmina  fort,  and  the  Elminas  having  become  British  subjects,  since  King 
Coffee  declares  that  from  time  immemorial  his  ancestors  ate  and  drank 
at  Elmina — in  other  words,  that  the  fort  should  have  been  his,  and  that 
he  means  to  come  and  take  it.    It  is  also  ascertained  beyond  doubt  that 


EXTRACTS  FROM  BLUE  BOOKS. 


17 


the  King  of  Elmina,  having  eaten  fetish  with  him,  was  his  sworn  ally, 
and  that  he  only  waited  the  near  approach  of  the  Ashantees  to  declare 
himself  and  his  friends  from  Elmina  to  Assinee  for  the  Ashantees. 

The  King  of  Elmina  is  taken  prisoner  and  shortly  finds  himself 
deported  to  Sierra  Leone,  having  first  positively  refused  to  take  the 
oath  of  allegiance.  At  Sierra  Leone  he  is  to  be  retained  until  peace  is 
declared  between  Ashantee  and  Great  Britain. 

The  above  are  the  notes  I  have  taken  from  the  valuable 
blue  books  ;  and  since  the  British  Government  and  Press,  up  to 
the  time  of  my  departure,  failed,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  to  perceive 
the  causes  which  have  led  to  this  present  Anglo- Ashantee  war,  I 
feel  myself  at  liberty  to  suggest  reasons  for  it.  From  all  I  can 
see,  war  with  Ashantee  might  easily  have  been  avoided.  It  has 
not  been  thrust  upon  the  British  Government,  The  Ashantees 
have  simply  invaded  the  Protectorate,  at  which  the  British 
Government  might  have  smiled  undistiu-bed,  for  all  that  the 
Ashantees  might  have  iojured  any  of  England's  actual  posses- 
sions along  the  seaboard.  Not  a  castle  nor  fort  need  have 
been  surrendered  had  there  been  a  million  Ashantees  encamped 
within  rifle  shot  of  the  weakest.  British  merchants  might 
certainly  have  suflFered  diminution  of  trade.  This,  however, 
need  have  been  no  cause  for  England  taking  an  active  part  in  the 
war  or  launching  into  a  campaign  to  take  Coomassie.  Slackness 
of  trade  and  decrease  of  revenue  were  things  to  be  deplored, 
but  ought  not  to  be  considered  just  causes  of  war. 

How,  then,  will  you  answer  the  question  why  England  has 
taken  up  arms  against  Ashantee  ? 

If  we  are  right  in  assuming  that  the  Protectorate,  which 
was  never  more  than  nominal,  is  of  sufficient  importance  to 
England  to  maintain  it  as  her  own  against  Ashantee,  of  course 
we  may  then  find  a  cogent  reason  for  resisting  the  invasion,  but 
to  assume  that  such  is  the  case  is  going  beyond  what  the 
British  Press  has  strenuously  denied.  Regarding  Great  Britain 
only  in  the  light  of  a  great  commercial  Power,  I  should  say 
that,  whether  there  were  logical  reasons  or  not  for  accepting  the 
gage  of  battle  which  King  Coffee  has  thrown  down,  she  has 
done  perfectly  right  in  entering  upon  the  war,  not  that  she  was 
bound  to  do  so,  for  that  I  distinctly  deny — Earl  Kimberley  and 
Colonel  Harley's  letters  being  sufficient  for  my  authority — but 

c 


18 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


because  it  promises  to  be  a  gain  to  her.  There  is  no  re^^on  at 
all  why  she  should  not  strive  to  make  Ashantee  tributary  to 
her.  King  Coffee  is  too  rich  a  neighbour  to  be  left  all  alone 
with  his  riches,  with  his  tons  of  gold  dust  and  accumulations  of 
wealth  to  himself.  Gold  ought  not  to  be  hoarded,  it  ought  to 
be  circulated  freely. 

Ashantee  would  be  as  rich  an  acquisition  to  the  British 
Crown  as  the  Island  of  Cuba  to  the  United  States,  for  the  people 
are  bom  traders,  and  it  only  requires  a  little  careful  manage- 
ment to  be  paid  twenty  times  over  for  the  cost  of  the  expedi- 
tion to  Coomassie.  Those  who  fail  to  see  this  thing  in  its  true 
light,  fail  because  of  prejudice  and  bad  taste.  A  change  of 
masters  would  be  a  glorious  thing  for  Ashantee.  Instead  of 
the  despot  who  chops  off  a  couple  of  thousand  heads  on  the 
burial  of  his  predecessor,  the  people  would  have  a  rich  and 
generous  nation  to  treat  with,  which  is  among  the  most  skilful 
and  industrious  in  the  world,  and  stands  higher  than  Ashantee 
even  in  its  love  for  trade.  All  Central  Africa  would  soon  be 
benefited,  and  the  inhabitants  around  Lake  Tchad  would  in 
time  come  to  marvel  at  the  palatial  houses  of  the  white  mer- 
chants whose  kafilahs  ranged  through  the  imtrodden  wilds  of 
the  interior.  The  people  of  the  Protectorate  think  that  this  is 
as  much  England's  war  as  their  own,  though  Colonel  Harley  has 
often  told  them  that  the  English  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
war,  that  it  is  the  Fantee- Ashantee  war ;  but  the  British  Go- 
vernment is  now  inclined  to  their  way  of  thinking — hence  the 
expedition  to  Coomassie. 

It  is  now  nine  months  since  the  war  began.  Another  month 
will  probably  roll  by  before  the  white  soldiers  will  come  and 
take  up  their  line  of  march.  England  wasted  time  in  talking 
and  negotiating;  but  she  might  have  learned  a  lesson  of 
promptitude  from  the  savage  Ashantees,  who,  quick  as  were 
the  Prussians  to  invade  France,  were  quicker  and  more  expedi- 
tious than  even  they  in  their  invasion  of  Fanteeland. 

The  English  have  been  twice  unsuccessful  in  their  war  with 
Ashantee.  In  1823  Sir  Charles  McCarthy  and  600  gallant 
fellows  perished  before  the  furious  onset  of  the  Ashantees,  and 
that  brave  soldier's  skull,  gold  rimmed  and  highly  venerated,  is 
said  to  be  still  at  Coomassie,  used  as  a  drinking-cup  by  King 
Coffee.    In  1863-64  the  English  suffered  severe  loss.  Couran 


ASHANTEE  VICTORIES. 


19 


marched  to  the  Prah,  80  miles  from  here^  and  marched  back 
again,  being  obliged  to  bury  or  destroy  his  cannon  and  hurriedly 
retreat  to  Cape  Coast.  I  have  not  the  information  by  me  to 
give  you  the  details  of  the  disaster,  but  all  the  coast  men  speak 
of  that  expedition  as  *  ill-fated.' 

It  is  now  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  who  is  to  try  his  fortune 
with  the  Ashantees.  His  antecedents  lead  us  all  to  expect  that 
it  will  be  as  successful  as  Napier's  march  to  Magdala,  though 
not  so  bloodless. 


c  2 


20 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  II. 

oovEiunyLEinr  hoxjse  at  cape  coast  castle  — sir  garnet  wolseley 

DESCRIBED — NEGLECT  OP  CAPE  COAST  CASTLE— THE  FANTEES— THE  PEACE 
SOCIETY — THE  AFRICAN  FEVER. 

November  8,  1873. 

In  the  first  chapter  I  endeavoured  to  inform  readers  how,  and 
why  this  war  began ;  I  must  now  introduce  them  to  Cape  Coast 
Castle,  its  authorities,  and  its  people. 

I  could  not  go  ashore  with  the  other  passengers,  as  I  had 
to  superintend  the  lifting  overboard  of  the  little  steamer  the 
*  Dauntless,'  which  the  proprietor  of  the  *  Herald '  had  been 
generous  enough  to  let  me  have  for  the  collection  of  news  along 
the  Gold  Coast. 

About  four  in  the  afternoon,  however,  the  *  Dauntless,'  with  a 
large  surf-boat  loaded  with  coal  in  tow  steamed  from  alongside 
the  *  Benin,'  towards  the  shore.  The  waves  were  uncommonly 
high,  and  the  surfy  sea  rolled  its  waves  ominously  in  front. 
Arriving  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  beach,  the  *  Daunt- 
less '  was  anchored  in  eight  fathoms  of  water,  her  engineer  and 
two  Krumen  were  left  in  charge  of  her,  vnth  a  cautioil  not  to 
leave  her  imtil  morning,  by  which  time  it  would  be  supposed 
I  should  find  some  quiet  anchorage  for  her. 

The  coal  boat  was  then  rowedashore.  There  were  twelve  Fan  tee 
paddlers  on  board,  strong  brawny  fellows,  who  had  been  buflfeted 
by  the  fierce  surf  of  the  Gold  Coast  for  many  and  many  a  year. 
We  soon  began  to  feel  the  influence  of  the  big  waves ;  the 
Fantees  paddled  gently,  until  one  wave  after  another  had 
impelled  the  boat  past  the  point  of  rocks  on  which  the  Castle 
is  built,  when  with  a  mighty  shout  and  a  mighty  simultaneous 
effort,  tlie  boatmen  saw  their  chance,  and  sent  her  far  on  the 
beach  on  the  crest  of  a  devouring  wave. 

Coal,  however,  was  such  a  cargo  that  would  take  hours  to 


GOVERNMENT  HOUSE. 


21 


imload,  and  the  booming  surf  still  kept  up  its  unceasing  bluster 
and  lashed  itself  into  white  foam  all  round  the  boat,  which 
made  it  a  most  difficult  job  to  unload ;  but  about  an  hour  after 
sunset  we  had  got  the  coal  on  shore,  and  at  this  time,  faint  from 
exertion,  dinned  by  the  briny  confusion  and  vocal  noises  of  the 
Fantees,  I  was  glad  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  boy-servant  of 
Captain  Butler  say — 

'  Please,  sir.  Captain  Butler  told  me  to  tell  you  his  room  is 
ready  for  you,  and  dinner  will  be  sent  to  you  from  Government 
House.' 

A  watchman  had  to  be  engaged  to  keep  watch,  over  the  coal 
on  the  beach,  lest  the  Fantees  might  carry  the  "  black  stone  " 
away,  and  I  then  turned  my  steps  towards  Butler's  quarters  at 
the  Colonial  Surveyor's  house. 

Arriving  at  the  house  in  anything  but  a  presentable  state, 
I  found  Captain  Butler  and  another  gentleman,  who  was  intro- 
duced to  me  as  Captain  Charteris,  A.D.C.  to  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley.  Captain  Charteris  was  the  bearer  of  an  invitation  to 
dinner  from  the  head-quarters  mess.  Captain  Charteris  had 
already  impressed  me  most  favoiu^bly,  but  the  hospitable 
invitation  considerably  prejudiced  me  in  his  favour.  After 
granting  me  time  to  dress,  to  change  my  surf-soaked  clothes 
for  the  soft  white  flannels  suitable  for  an  enjoyable  night  in  the 
tropics,  we  marched  for  Government  House. 

It  is  a  bam-like  building,  about  100  feet  by  80,  mortared 
and  whitewashed.  It  looks  very  imposing  with  its  grand 
staircase  buttressing  the  house,  with  a  garden  of  bright  flowers 
in  front,  in  which  may  be  seen  the  stuccoed  forms  of  antelopes 
side  by  side  with  the  broad  gaping-mouthed  mortars  pointed 
threateningly  at  the  innocent  stars  in  the  heavens.  A  couple 
of  sentries  promenading  in  front  of  the  house  add  very  much 
to  the  imposing  appearance  of  the  building.  They  gave  effect 
to  the  house,  in  my  mind,  and  smothered  the  half-formed  desire 
to  criticise  Government  House.  We  ascend  the  staircase,  lights 
flash  here  and  there,  I  get  a  peep  at  the  pantry  as  I  arrive  at  the 
top,  my  eye  strikes  off  at  a  tangent  to  my  right  and  catches  sight 
of  a  well-laid  dinner  table  ;  but  to  my  left  is  the  reception  room 
of  Government  House,  where  the  intending  diners  are  assembled. 

Captain  Butler  steps  up  with  a  gentleman  to  welcome  his 
compagnon  de  voyage^  and  says — 


22 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


'  Mr.  S  ,  Sir  Grarnet  I ' 

This  stately  little  gentleman  of  proud  military  bearing,  quick 
bright  eye,  broad  high  forehead,  ardent  temperament,  a  spark- 
ling vivacious  intelligence  animating  every  feature — this  then 
is  Sir  Grarnet  Wolseley — the  pacificator  of  Red  River,  and  the 
young  hero  chosen  for  the  command  of  the  British  Expedition 
to  Coomassie. 

He  is  the  very  reverse  of  ftiy  conception  of  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley,  who  called  the  gentlemen  of  the  press,  *  drones,'  and 
a  *  curse  to  modem  armies.'  If  he  had  not  been  a  soldier  by  his 
appearance,  I  should  judge  him  to  have  made  a  first-class 
special  correspondent,  just  the  man  to  have  seized  an  item  and 
dared  a  general-in-chief  to  lay  hands  on  him,  just  the  man  to 
be  sent  to  any  part  of  the  world  to  collect  news.  His  eager 
eyes  betray  the  inquisitive  soul  and  indomitable  energy.  Taking 
no  oflFence  whatever  at  his  sharp-tempered  criticism  of  the 
*  Necessity  of  the  Age,'  [  admit  at  once  that  the  British 
Government  could  have  found  no  worthier  man  to  entrust  the 
castigation  of  the  Ashantees  to  than  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley. 

At  a  luxuriously-spread  table  I  found  Captain  Fremantle, 
of  H.M.S.  *  Barracouta,'  with  his  left  arm  in  a  sling,  from 
a  wound  received  at  the  mouth  of  the  Prah ;  Major  Baker, 
of  the  18th  Royal  Irish,  Chief  of  Staff;  Captain  Bracken- 
bury,  military  secretary  of  Sir  Garnet,  wlio  is  reputed  to 
be  a  very  able  oflBcer ;  Captain  Charteris,  A.D.C. ;  Lieut. 
Maurice,  author  of  the  *  Wellington  Prize  Essay,'  who 
received  the  prize  even  above  Sir  Garnet  himself;  Captain 
Butler,  author  of  the  *  Great  Lone  Land,'  who  is  about  to  be 
sent  on  a  special  commission  to  the  tribes  of  Akim  ;  and  three 
other  officers,  whose  names  I  forget. 

Sir  Garnet  I  foimd  to  have  extensively  travelled  through 
the  United  States.  He  is  said  to  be  the  youngest  general  in 
Her  Majesty's  service ;  he  is  not  forty  years  old  yet ;  and  as 
he  has  not  risen  to  his  present  rank  through  interest,  it  may 
be  assumed  that  he  has  shown  himself  a  capable  and  energetic 
officer,  to  have  attained  to  his  present  position. 

A  glance  at  his  *  Soldiers'  Pocket  Book'  will  show  the 
qualities  of  which  he  is  possessed.  Whatever  its  faults  every 
line  is  written  like  a  soldier,  and  from  a  soldier's  stand-point. 
There  is  no  nonsense  about  him.    The  great  aim  he  has  in 


SIR  GAENET'S  HOSTILITY  TO  THE  PRESS. 


23 


view  seems  to  be  to  iDstruct  young  officers  in  their  duties,  and 
to  inculcate  the  idea  that  everything  should  be  sacrificed  to 
success.  He  teaches  them  the  art  of  diplomacy  in  their  dealing 
with  ignorant  savages,  as  well  as  with  European  armies;  he 
tells  them  how  to  avoid  being  interviewed  by  their  messmates 
or  press  people,  and  how  to  govern  their  features  when  sub- 
mitted to  a  too  close  questioning. 

The  G-eneraFs  dislike  to  press  people  does  not  arise  from 
any  black  humour  or  any  bilious  acridity  in  him,  for  he  is 
a  most  urbane  gentleman ;  but  it  arises  from  some  exaggera- 
tive conception  he  has  formed  of  the  Special  Correspondent.  I 
can  imagine  a  meeting  between  this  proud  and  haughty  soldier 
and  a  *  special '  from  some  of  the  imclassic  districts  of  Western 
America,  who  has  neither  fear  of  danger  nor  ret^erence  for  good 
in  him.  I  see  the  soldier  struggling  to  be  polite,  and  calm 
and  to  be  forbearing  with  the  sneering  and  fleering  man  from 
the  West,  who  is  perpetually  troubling  him  with  impertinent 
and  irrelevant  questions  about  his  age,  the  soundness  of  his 
teeth,  the  good  character  of  his  ancestry,  until  the  choler  of 
the  soldier  is  kindled  to  white  heat,  and  the  impudent  pen- 
trotter  is  seen  fanning  with  his  arms  fifty  feet  in  mid-air. 

It  must  have  been  some  sinister  figure  of  this  kind  that  Sir 
Q^xnet  had  encountered  or  imaged  to  himself  as  '  a  gentleman 
of  the  press,'  until  he  had  conceived  a  morbid  dislike  for  the 
whole  tribe,  and  never  omitted  an  opportunity  to  inveigh  in 
terms  unmeasured  against  them  as  ^  a  curse '  to  modern  armies. 

Fortunately,  however,  the  representatives  of  the  great  London 
and  New  York  dailies  are'  of  widely  diflferent  material  from 
the  irresponsible  reporters  *  out  West,'  and  Bussian,  Prussian, 
French,  and  English  generals  have  foimd  them  not  an  hind- 
rance but  a  valuable  aid  in  their  campaigns. 

A  gentleman  on  Sir  Gramet  Wolseley's  staff  during  an  argu- 
ment with  me  relating  to  this  very  subject,  and  who  thoroughly 
shares  Sir  Garnet's  hatred  for  newspaper  men,  when  it  was  sug- 
gested to  him  by  me  that  if  Sir  Garnet  in  a  European  war  merely 
trusted  in  a  reporter's  honour  not  to  mention  anything  that 
would  furnish  information  to  the  enemy,  no  gentleman  of  the 
press  would  disappoint  him,  blurted  out — 

'  Trust  in  his  honour,  by  heavens !  I  would  trust  to  nothing 
less  than  his  back.    On  the  first  publication  of  anything  that  I 


24 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


thought  not  proper,  I  would  tie  him  to  the  triangle  and  trust 
to  fifty  lashes  well  laid  on  his  bare  back,  not  to  do  the  like 
again.' 

Whence  one  may  infer  that  Sir  Garnet  is  not  singular  among 
the  military  class  in  his  hatred  for  the  Press,  and  that  it  is 
rather  a  queer  position  a  correspondent,  however  unobtrusive  and 
considerate,  occupies  with  this  British  Expedition  to  Ashantee. 

I  have  been  about  Cape  Coast  Castle  for  some  days  now, 
and  begin  to  feel  able  to  write^  iatelligently  concerning  this 
expedition  to  Coomassie.  ;f 

I  know  not,  however,  who  to  blame  for  choosing  Cape  Coast 
Castle  as  a  point  of  departure  for  Coomassie,  whether  it  is  the 
British  Government,  the  ^rmer  governor  of  the  Gold  Coast, 
or  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley. 

Probably  all  three  should  have  a  share  in  the  blame.  Cape 
Coast  was  settled  by  the  Portuguese,  but  was  ceded  to  the 
Dutch  in  1641,  with  whom  it  remained  till  1655,  when  it  was 
taken  by  the  English  and  secured  by  treaty  in  1667. 

For  206  years  this  place  has  been  in  possession  of  the 
British,  yet  one  knowing  the  character  of  this  enterprising 
people,  would  barely  believe  it  to  be  the  fact,  that  the 
English  have  not  improved  the  place  since  the  first  day  they 
occupied  it.  They  have  kept  the  Dutch-Portuguese  Castle 
which  they  received  from  the  Dutch,  in  repair,  they  have  built 
a  Government  House,  post-oflBce,  and  two  or  three  other  oflSces, 
and  a  church,  and  that  is  all  during  206  years'  possession  1 

The  harbour  they  have  left  as  nature  made  it,  though  a 
ship-load  of  concrete  laid  down  to  a  distance  of  100  feet  from  the 
point  of  rocks  on  which  the  castle  stands,  would  have  secured 
an  admirable  landing-place  for  ships'  boats  and  passengers. 

What  the  Dutch  have  done  at  Elmina  is  in  striking  contrast 
to  the  apathy  of  the  English  at  Cape  Coast  Castle.  The  Dutch 
m,ade  the  Beyah  River  a  little  port,  they  walled  it  up  on  each 
side,  threw  a  bridge  over,  until  it  looked  like  a  miniature 
Thames,  they  built  a  formidable  castle  on  the  hill  of  St.  lago, 
besides  constructing  the  De  Veers  and  the  Beckenstein  Kedoubts. 
They  cleared  the  downs  and  hills  in  the  neighbourhood  from 
forest,  built  charming  residences  in  the  suburbs,  and  cultivated 
farms  whose  buildings,  embowered  by  orange  and  papaw  trees, 
are  pictiures  of  rural  felicity. 


NEGLECT  OF  CAPE  COAST  CASTLE. 


25 


A  view  from  the  top  of  Connor's  Hill  will  show  you  the 
wide  prospect  of  bush  which  seems  to  threaten  to  bury  the 
town  itself  in  its  wide-spreading  arms. 

The  blame  is  not  in  the  country ;  even  with  very  little 
system  it  has  had  always  a  surplus  of  revenue,^  which  one  may 
see,  by  the  blue  books,  has  been  squandered  inadvisedly  and 
fruitlessly.  Instead  of  expending  the  surplus  for  the  improve- 
ment of  the  port  and  the  construction  of  roads  into  the  interior, 
it  has  been  spent  in  sending  presents  to  the  King  of  Ashant^e 
and  feasting  hi3  ambassadors,  stipending  the  fractious  tyrant 
instead  of  improving  and  disciplining  levies  of  native  troops 
against  the  emergency  of  an  invasion  which  is  now  upon  them. 

The  invasions  of  1821-23—1840,  1863-64,  and  1869,  have 
not  taught  the  English  that  the  time  had  come  to  demonstrate 
to  the  Fantees  what  object  they  had  in  holding  any  part  or 
parcel  of  their  coast.  Probably  that  of  1873-4  will  pass 
away  without  any  lesson  also  being  derived. 

So  little  did  the  English  Government  know  what  Cape 
Coast  Castle  was,  what  had  been  done,  what  ought,  and  what 
might  have  been  done,  that  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  was  despatched 
before  the  troops  to  report  on  the  situation,  and  find  out  what 
remained  to  be  done. 

Sir  Garnet  landed  with  one  of  the  most  efficient  staffs  that 
a  general  could  be  blessed  with,  and  anticipating  doubtless 
that  difficidties  would  be  encountered,  from  sheer  despair  of  ever 
being  able  to  do  anything  systematic  in  time,  before  the  patience 

'  The  statement  issued  of  revenue  and  expenditure  shows  a  considerable  increase 
during  the  last  twenty  years  in  the  public  income  of  all  the  West  African  settle- 
ments, except  the  Oambia,  in  which,  however,  there  has  been  some  increase,  though 
not  80  great  as  in  the  other  settlements. 

The  revenue  of  Sierra  Leone  in  1853  was  26,659/.  In  1871  it  was  80,406/. 
The  average  revenue  of  that  settlement  for  the  ten  years  1853-62  was  32,397/. 
The  average  revenue  for  the  ten  years  1863-72  was  64,0i66/. 

The  average  revenue  of  the  Gambia  for  the  ten  years  1853-62  was  15,645/.  The 
average  revenue  for  the  ten  years  1863-72  was  18,208/. 

The  average  revenue  of  the  Gold  Coast  for  the  ten  years  1853-62  was  9,540/. 
That  for  the  years  between  1863  and  1872  (as  far  as  the  returns  have  come  to 
hand)  was  about  20,000/.  The  income  in  the  year  1853  was  13,249/.;  that  of  1872 
was  42,745/.    The  estimated  revenue  for  1874  is  52,438/. 

The  settlement  of  Lagos  was  only  annexed  in  the  year  1862.  The  public 
revenae  for  the  year  1863  was  15,837/.,  that  for  1872  was  41,346/. 

The  general  increase  of  revenue  which  has  occurred  in  the  settlements  is  due  to 
the  growth  of  trade  chiefly,  not  to  additions  to  the  burden  of  taxation. 


26 


COOMASSIB  A.ND  MAGDALA. 


of  England  was  exhausted,  determined  to  accept  the  diflSculties 
as  he  found  them  without  losing  time  in  attempting  to  remedy 
them. 

The  first  act  that  Sir  Gramet  did  was  to  accept  Cape  Coast 
Castle  as  the  place  of  depart.ure  for  Ashantee,  though,  as  I  say, 
he  would  have  done  much  better  by  making  Elmina  the  port, 
dredging  the  Beyah  Hiver,  and  laying  a  railway  from  Elmina  to 
Cape  Coast  along  the  smooth  sandy  beach,  a  work  of  about 
three  days. 

Sir  Gramet's  intentions  are  to  send  forward  provisions  and 
Btores  of  war  to  the  front,  to  stockade  posts  along  the  main 
road  to  the  Prah  River,  then  to  send  for  the  white  troops,  and 
on  their  arrival  march  them  immediately  to  the  interior  with- 
out tents. 

They  say  no  animals  are  available  for  carriage  here — all  ani- 
mals die  as  soon  as  imported.  This  may  be  true  of  the  horse, 
the  mule,  and  the  ass  ;  but  there  is  one  animal  not  yet  mentioned 
which  would  feel  quite  at  home  in  this  country,  and  that  is  the 
elephant. 

Any  one  of  England's  troop-ships  is  capable  of  conveying 
100  elephants  here  within  40  days  via  the  Suez  Canal  from 
Ceylon  or  Bassein  to  Cape  Coast  Castle.  The  elephants,  though 
timorous  at  the  sound  of  battle,  would  not  be  so  timorous  as 
Fantees ;  besides  the  Ashantees  are  not  supposed  to  know  that 
the  ponderous  brutes  might  be  stampeded  by  the  strife  of 
battle.  A  certain  lasting  awe  would  be  created  in  the  Ashantees' 
mind  at  the  fact  that  the  white  men  could  compel  the  service 
of  so  many  lords  of  the  forest. 

Another  benefit  would  accrue  from  the  employment  of 
elephants.  They  would  tramp  a  road  out  for  themselves  and 
the  use  of  the  troops — a  broad  path,  3  feet  wide — and  tlius 
the  long  delay  of  cutting  out  a  road  would  bq  avoided.  The 
road  thus  made  might  easily  be  widened  to  10  feet,  from 
the  sea  to  Prahsu,  the  central  depot,  and  future  outpost  of  the 
Protectorate.  When  I  left  England,  it  was  reported  that  a 
railway  was  to  be  constructed  from  the  sea  to  a  point  40  miles 
inland.  Such  a  project  has  been  abandoned,  being  imprac- 
ticable, and  traction  engines  have  been  adopted  instead. 

The  railway  was  impracticable  from  the  nature  of  the  land, 
which  is  very  uneven  ;  but  if  it  was  ever  seriously  meditated — 


THE  WORTHLESS  FANTEES. 


27 


as  I  haye  no  doubt  it  was,  otherwise  the  Groverament  would 
never 'lhaye  shipped  the  materials — all  I  can  say  is,  that  the 
country  was  not  surveyed  for  a  railway ;  that  if  it  had  been,  I 
have  no  doubt  a  route  would  have  been  found  offering  special 
advantages.    The  depot  might  have  been  established  near  the 


AM  ELDBB  OF  THE  PEOFLB  AND  A  WARRIOR. 


Salt  Pond,  to  the  right  of  Cape  Coast  Castle,  and  the  railway 
traced  along  the  low  valley  that  nms  from  it  to  the  interior. 

One  of  the  traction  engines  has  been  landed  on  shore 
with  a  couple  of  trucks.  The  whole  is  made  of  steel,  combining 
strength  with  lightness,  the  engine  weighing  about  two  tons 
and  a  half;  but  it  is  totally  inadequate  to  the  requirements. 


28 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


After  a  feeble  travel  of  about  two  miles,  and  twice  tumbling 
into  a  ditxjh,  it  returned  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  castle, 
where  it  is  now  employed  in  the  more  undignified  labour  of 
cutting  planks  for  the  Control  Department.  It  was  found  that 
nearly  as  good,  and  as  level  a  road,  as  would  be  required  for  a 
railway  was  required  for  the  traction  engine. 

The  General  perceives  that  the  great  drawback  is  want 
of  labourers.  He  cannot  get  the  Fantees  either  to  labour  or  to 
fight.  Every  Fantee  man  thinks  himself  qualified  to  fight,  and 
has  for  long  contrived  to  imbue  the  minds  of  the  Cape  Coast 
Governors  with  a  high  idea  of  his  noble  courage  and  martial 
worth ;  and  the  Governors,  consequently,  have  not  been  slack 
in  supplying  the  Fantee  with  the  means  to  exhibit  his  fighting 
qualities  with  the  improved  Snider  and  ammunition.  But 
alas  I  for  their  trustful  confidence,  the  Ashantees  have  caused 
them  to  retreat  precipitately  before  them,  and  in  their  per- 
petually recalcitrant  flights  have  involved  the  death  of  many 
a  noble  British  officer,  who  thought,  by  sacrificing  himself,  to 
make  them  more  worthy  of  their  leaders  at  a  future  time. 

The  more  I  ponder  upon  the  long  possession  of  this  country 
by  the  English,  the  more  I  wonder  that  the  qualities  of  the 
people  whom  they  govern  have  not  been  perceived  before,  and 
that  they  have  resolutely  closed  their  eyes  to  the  superiority 
of  the  Ashantees  over  the  Fantees.  With  5,000  Ashantees  a 
British  officer  might  be  able  to  defeat  and  annihilate  a  force 
of  50,000  Fantees ;  but  with  '  70,000  Fantees '  any  number 
of  British  officers  are  not  able  to  drive  10,000  Ashantees  from 
the  neighbourliood  of  Cape  Coast  Castle.  In  the  meantime, 
aft^r  advancing  thirty-three  miles  into  the  interior,  we  are 
halted. 

The  Fantees  lack  confidence,  owing  to  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  dreaded  enemy,  and  are  fearful  of  trusting 
themselves  under  the  superintendence  of  a  few  officers  to  tlie 
labour  of  constructing  a  road,  and  we  must  either  wait  for  the 
retreat  of  the  Ashantees  across  the  Prah,  or  for  the  arrival  of 
500  English  navvies,  who  will  shame  the  natives  to  work.  In- 
deed, it  is  getting  to  be  a  most  serious  question  this  of  transport 
and  labour,  and  knowing  the  disadvantages  under  which  a  young 
general  like  Sir  Garnet  must  labour,  I  begin  to  feel  anxious 
for  him.    I  doubt  he  would  have  the  courage  to  express  the 


THE  PEACE  SOCIETY. 


29 


depth  of  despondency  be  must  feel  sometimes,  when  in  spite  of 
all  his  eflforts,  his  wonderfully  patient  treatment  of  the  people, 
and  his  long-suffering  with  their  shortcomings,  he  is  told  by  the 
Control  Department,  by  the  engineers  and  others,  *  We  can't 
get  men,  sir.    They  have  all  run  away  into  the  bush.' 

Sir  Garnet  has  the  power  to  remedy  this  evil,  but  I  fear  it 
requires  a  more  callous  and  obdurate  soul  than  he  is  possessed 
of  to  employ  the  power  his  position  and  authority  has  given 
him.    If,  instead  of  sending  out  traction  engines  and  railways, 
the  British  Government  should  send  500  sets  of  slave  chains, 
and  bind  these  runaways  into  gangs  of  fifties,  each  controlled 
by  a  non-commissioned  officer  with  a  long  whip,  the  transport 
and  labour  question  were  for  ever  resolved,  and  success,  a 
brilliant  success,  would  be  certain.    When  the  expedition 
would  be  over,  and  the  war  ended,  the  British  Government 
might  compensate  the  people  for  the  annoyance  of  being 
collared  with  iron  bands,  and  apologise  to  them  for  the  extreme 
measure  they  were  compelled  to  resort  to,  to  insure  the  indepen- 
dence of  the  country  and  lasting  immunity  from  Ashantee 
atrocities.    At  first  sight  the  proceeding  may  appear  very  cruel ; 
but  the  other  side  of  the  picture  should  be  seen  before  con- 
demning the  measure.    Supposing  that  the  British  Govern- 
ment, seeing  the  utter  impossibility  of  taking  an  expedition  to 
Coomassie  without  the  means  of  transport,  withdrew  from  the 
war  and  surrendered  the  Protectorate  to  the  mercy  of  the 
Ashantees,  what  would  be  the  consequence  ?    The  Fantees, 
through  their  cowardly  fears,  unable  to  resist  the  fierce  attacks 
of  their  enemies,  would  lay  down  their  arms  and  be  driven  as 
slaves  to  Coomassie,  to  be  butchered  by  thousands  at  the 
obsequies  of  some  of  the  royal  blood  of  Ashantee.    On  the  one 
side  is  a  temporary  inconvenience ;  on  the  other  side  is  an 
eternal  servitude  or  death. 

This  expedition  to  Coomassie  is  to  insure  the  future 
peace  of  the  Protectorate ;  to  prevent  future  invasions  and 
their  consequent  relentless  butchery  of  thousands;  to  res- 
trict the  Ashantees  within  their  own  territory;  to  visit 
them  with  some  portion  of  the  severity  with  which  they 
have  repeatedly  visited  the  British  Protectorate  since  1811. 
All  British  expeditions  to  Ashantee  hitherto  have  failed,  and 
the  conceit  and  arrogance  of  the  enemy  have  grown  in 


30 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


proportion.  If,  through  fear  of  the  condemnation  of  the 
Peace  Society  of  Great  Britain,  the  present  expedition  fails, 
because  the  Government  dare  not  prove  all  measures  to  insure 
ilfi  success,  all  I  can  say  is  that  the  British  Government  will 
deserve  the  disgrace  that  will  inevitably  follow  the  final  defeat, 
and  to  become  the  laughing-stock  of  the  civilised  world. 
Bather  than  suffer  defeat  for  the  sixth  time,  the  British  Govern- 
ment should  seize  upon  every  member  of  the  sentimental  Peace 
Society  and  deport  them  to  the  Gold  Coast,  to  supply  the 
deficiency  of  labour  that  is  daily  growing  more  alarming,  to 
make  the  road  to  Prahsu  through  the  jungle  and  convey  the 
stores  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  the  British  battalions 
now  on  their  way  out.  This  might  probably  be  called  an  ex- 
treme measure,  but  I  doubt  if  civilisation  would  visit  the 
British  Government  with  much  harsliness  for  it — nay,  I  think 
it  would  consider  the  act  commendable  and  justifiable. 

I  have  been  wandering  through  Cape  Coast  Castle.  Now 
behold  the  town  of  Cape  Coast,  like  a  smouldering  volcano, 
blazing  and  burning  and  smoking  in  the  hollows  between  the 
seven  hills,  domed  by  a  sky  of  brass  seven  times  heated  by  fire. 
In  these  smoking  hollows,  subjected  to  the  heat  of  the  sky  of 
brass,  are  young  English  oflBcers,  fresh  from  the  cool  shades  of 
the  willows,  the  elms,  and  the  oaks  of  England ;  from  the 
verdant  parks  and  breezy  green  hills ;  from  the  banks  of  salmon 
and  trout  streams.  They  are  superintending  what  gangs  of 
labourers  they  have  been  able  to  obtain,  removing  hills  of 
commissariat  stores  from  one  spot  to  another. 

Speak  to  any  one  of«  them  about  the  heat  of  Cape  Coast. 
You  would  be  surprised  at  the  depth  of  compassion  in  your 
soul  when  you  would  see  the  poor  fellow's  parched  face,  his 
blistered  cheek,  and  the  compassionate  longing  for  a  draught 
of  cool  water,  which  you  see  lurking  in  his  eye.  His  tongue 
almost  refuses  to  move,  it  feels  so  stiff  and  dead  within  the  dry 
mouth,  and  finding  it  too  great  a  task  to  talk,  he  gasps  a  deep 
deep  sigh,  which  finds  an  echo  in  every  recess  of  your  soul. 

Before  long,  rendered  desperate  by  his  sufferings,  he  seizes  a 
cooler  of  water  in  the  vain  hope  of  assuaging  the  intolerable  thirst, 
and  firinks  a  long  long  draught  of  the  tepid  liquid,  which  soon 
transudes  through  every  pore  of  his  body  in  large  drops  of 
perspiration.    He  feels  but  a  slight  mitigation  of  the  thirst 


THE  AFRICAN  FEVER. 


31 


which  consumed  him,  and  ever  and  anon  during  the  day  the 
friendly  cooler  is  sought  for. 

When  he  finds  the  sun  unbearable  the  half-scorched  officer 
seeks  the  shade,  where  the  breeze  lulls  him  iuto  the  belief  that 
the  shade  is  &r  more  comfortable  than  the  glare  and  heat  of  the 
sun,  but  somehow  or  other  there  is  a  clanmiy  chilly  feeling  at 
his  back  which  he  cannot  explain.  The  air  is  warm,  nay  it  is 
hot,  sometimes  so  hot  that  it  appears  to  scorch  his  very  vitals, 
yet  the  spinal  column  feels  uncomfortably  cold,  and  a  vague 
feeling  of  regret  steals  over  his  mind  that  he  has  allowed  him- 
self to  drink  so  much  water. 

The  next  morning  at  breakfast  he  feels  all  right  enough, 
accosts  his  messmates  with  a  cheery  good  day,  and  sits  down 
wondering  at  the  ravenous  appetite  which  seems  to  possess 
him,  and  while  commenting  upon  it  to  his  companions  with  a 
light  laugh,  declares  it,  as  his  opinion,  that  the  G-old  Coast  has 
been  very  much  slandered,  that  the  sickness  has  been  very 
much  exaggerated,  and  ends  generally  by  saying  that  he  never 
felt  better  in  his  life,  and  that  he  wonders  at  people  getting 
sick. 

Suddenly,  however,  he  pushes  his  plate  ayray ;  an  uncom- 
fortable feeling  has  taken  possession  of  him,  even  before  the 
sound  of  his  words  has  died  away.  He  rises  to  his  feet, 
stretches  his  arms,  and  yawns  terribly,  and  with  an  effort  re- 
presses the  half-formed  shudder  that  his  body  makes.  He  soon 
leaves  the  room,  complaining  that  he  feels  chilled  a  little.  If 
you  would  follow  him  in  about  half  an  hour,  you  would  see 
him  stretched  on  his  bed  with  a  pile  of  blankets  over  him. 

With  all  the  blankets,  however,  you  will  hear  him  complain 
that  he  is  cold,  and  his  chattering  teeth  are  sufficient  evidence 
that  he  does  feel  cold.    He  is  suffering 

The  bitter  change 
Of  fierce  extremes — extremes  bj  change  more  fierce — 
From  beds  of  raging  fire  to  freeze  in  ice. 

He  drifts  from  the  equator  to  the  arctic  zone,  and  from  the 
frigid  to  the  torrid  within  a  few  minutes ;  he  is  one  moment 
trembling  and  blue  from  cold,  the  next  every  pore  of  his  body 
is  a  perspiring  fountain,  he  shivers  with  quick-chattering  teeth 
from  raw  waves  of  cold  that  seem  to  flow  along  his  spine  one 


32 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


minute,  the  next  he  tosses  the  clothes  away  as  though  he  were 
being  parboiled. 

Finally  the  cold  fits  or  aguish  feeling  is  over,  and  a  crack- 
ing headache  follows  with  a  steady  profuse  perspiration.  When 
he  has  undergone .  about  ten  hours  of  this  horrible  experience, 
he  feels  as  weak  as  a  kitten,  and  with  an  abashed  face,  which 
has  strangely  enough  assumed  a  jaundiced  hue,  he  confesses 
that  he  has  had  the  fever,  as  many  a  good  man  has  had  before 
him. 

The  next  day  he  is  down  again,  and  on  the  third  day  also, 
when  the  Tertian  departs  from  him,  if  he  has  been  wise  and 
taken  the  invaluable  specific,  quinine  sulphate,  in  time — if  not 
fever  is  not  to  be  got  rid  of  imtil  the  tomb  closes  over  its 
imhappy  victim. 

This  fever,  as  also  the  Indian  jungle  fever,  is  nothing  more 
than  a  virulent  ague.  The  agues  of  the  Mississippi  and 
Arkansas  Valleys  are  mild  compared  with  these  agues  of  the 
African  Equator.  The  former  may  be  laughed  at,  may  be 
taken  and  endured,  to  take  and  endure  again,  without  seriously 
endangering  the  constitution,  just  as  one  would  take  a  fit  of 
sea  sickness.  The  experience  is  bitter  enough  while  it  lasts, 
but  the  patient  after  a  while  finds  in  his  secret  heart  a 
certain  contempt  for  it.  The  African  fever  is  a  vicious 
sickness,  deluding  one  into  the  idea  that  it  is  not  very  danger- 
ous by  its  mild  preliminary  symptoms,  but  it  sometimes 
changes  suddenly,  drops  itu  intermittent  form  and  becomes 
remittent,  or  continued,  and  from  three  to  five  days  only  are 
required  to  kill  the  stoutest  men.  It  is  the  remittent  type 
that  has  been  so  fatal  to  travellers  in  Africa,  that  slaughtered 
the  members  of  the  Zambesi  Mission,  that  terminated  poor 
Mrs.  Livingstone's  life  at  Shupanga,  that  decimated  the  unfor- 
tunate marines  atElmina.  Even  now  I  see  that  its  brother,  the 
yellow  fever,  has  appeared  at  Shreveport  and  those  towns  along 
the  lagoons  of  the  Mississippi,  reaping  a  fearful  harvest  of  lives. 
The  malignant  remittent  fever  of  the  Equator  is  a  distinctive 
name  without  much  difference  from  *  yellow  jack.'  The  symp- 
toms are  almost  the  same,  except  that  the  African  remittent 
is  not  contagious. 

The  intermittent  or  ague  of  this  continent  insidiously  saps 
the  best  constitution.    Its  effects  are  either  seen  in  an  early 


THE  CAUSES  OF  SICKNESS  AT  CAPE  COAST. 


33 


decay  of  the  whole  system  or  in  a  weakening  of  the  mental 
faculties.  A  man  hitherto  noted  for  his  excessive  energy  and 
industrious  habits  soon  begins  to  feel  a  heavy  languor  or  torpi- 
tude  restraining  every  impulse  and  faculty. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  in  a  British  Expe- 
dition to  me  is  the  quantity  of  varied  but  excellent  advice 
which  each  oflBcer  gives  his  fellow  on  first  arrival,  whether  it  is 
in  Abyssinia  or  Ashantee  Land. 

In  Abyssinia  the  advice  was,  *  Fortify  the  system,  sir,  drink 
brandy,  soda,  and  bottled  beer,'  often  pronoimced  by  the  educated 
classes  in  England  bottled  *  beah.' 

In  Ashantee  the  advice  is  more  varied,  but  as  excellent. 
*  Live  generous,  sir.  It  is  the  best  thing  in  the  world,  sir, 
depend  upon  it.  Patronize  beer,  claret,  and  good  wines,  wear 
a  cholera  belt  about  the  loins,  wear  flannel  next  the  skin,  bathe 

twice  a  day,  avoid  the  sun  as  you  would   ,  exercise 

moderately,  but  not  in  the  early  morning  or  at  night.  Beware 
of  late  dinners  and  suppers.  Avoid  excess  in  eating,  and 
all  unripe  fruits.  Should  you  feel  a  fainting  in  the  stomach 
don't  rush  to  the  bottle  to  sustain  it,  but  take  a  wee  wee  glass 
of  sherry  and  bitters.  Take  a  glass  of  wine  every  morning  as 
a  stimulant.' 

With  all  of  which  excellent  advice,  however,  men  suffer 
from  the  fever,  confess  to  languor,  lassitude,  feeble  appetite, 
and  failing  of  strength,  and  in  a  few  weeks  are  compelled  to  be 
invalided  and  sent  home  to  regain  their  bloom  and  brightness 
of  manhood,  which  had  almost  been  wrecked  during  their  short 
stay  on  the  Gold  Coast. 

It  is  a  common  mistake  with  many  new  arrivals  here  to 
suppose  because  a  week  or  so  elapses  before  they  have  been 
attacked  by  fever,  that  the  climate  on  the  Gold  Coast  has 
been  exaggerated ;  but  before  long  it  turns  out  that  these 
robust  people,  who  pride  themselves  upon  their  strong  con- 
stitutions, invariably  suffer  more  in  the  end  than  those  who  have 
had  to  imdergo  on  short  notice  a  seasoning  fever. 

Yet  it  is  so  difficult  to  conceive  that  Coast  Castle  is  so  very 
unhealthy,  especially  to  those  who  have  their  head-quarters 
at  the  castle,  exposed  to  the  genial  sea  breeze,  or  to  the 
dwellers  on  Connor's  Hill,  in  the  cool  chambers  of  Govern- 
ment House,  or  at  the  Colonial  Surveyor's  office.  They 


3i 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


are  wonderfully  exempt  from  fever,  I  admit,  and  so  was 
I  while  I  enjoyed  the  refreshing  sea  breezes ;  but  owing  to 
the  crowded  state  of  the  castle,  and  the  continual  arrival 
of  new  people,  I  was  obliged  to  seek  quarters  elsewhere ;  and 
as  few  eligible  quarters  oflFered,  I  sought  a  house  in  one  of 
the  valleys  between  the  hills  in  the  native  quarter.  Through 
this  hot  and  oppressive  valley  a  mere  thread  of  a  rivulet 
meanders  sluggishly  from  the  base  of  Connor's  Hill  to  the  beach 
near  the  Gape.  On  its  banks  a  thin  greenish  scum  rests, 
slightly  covering  the  earth.  In  front  of  my  house,  close  by  the 
stream,  is  a  grove  of  palm-trees.  Under  the  cool  damp  shade 
the  humid  atmosphere  has  begotten  the  malarious  fungi 
whicli  cover  the  soil,  as  with  a  green  veil.  A  little  to  the  left 
of  the  palm  grove,  not  a  hundred  yards  fro  n  my  house,  there  is 
a  deep  excavation,  about  thirty  feet  in  diameter,  and  lower  than 
the  little  rivulet  flowing  by  its  mouth.  The  excavation  has 
drained  itself  full  of  water  ;  the  surface  of  the  excavation,  now 
a  pond,  is  covered  over  with  weeds  and  plants.  Out  of  this 
pond,  the  sluggish  little  stream  and  the  slime  imder  the  palm 
grove,  is  exhaled  every  evening  and  throughout  the  night  the 
miasma  which  causes  so  much  misery  in  Cape  Coast. 

What  follows  ?  What  followed  with  me  after  coming  to  live  in 
tlie  neighbourhood  answers  the  question.  On  the  second  day 
I  was  ill  with  fever;  on  the  third  day  my  servant  had  an 
attack ;  on  the  fourth  my  native  cook  came  to  me,  with  swim- 
ming eyes  and  throbbing  forehead,  to  ask  for  medicine. 

The  fever  was  defeated  again,  and  left  us  all  with  only  its 
bitter  memories ;  witli  abated  energies  and  strength  ;  with 
frames  susceptible  to  a  new  attack  of  the  disease,  when  it  has 
once  more  gathered  force  sufficient  to  be  aggressive.  When  I 
summon  resolution  to  leave  the  fetid  valley  for  the  heights, 
crowned  by  the  Government  offices,  my  lungs  inhale  new  life 
from  the  pure  sea  breezes  which  are  constantly  being  wafted 
ashore  from  the  wide  Western  Ocean,  and  a  spasmodic  energy  is 
felt  for  a  time,  until  the  stagnant  vapours  of  the  valley,  where 
I  live,  shall  sap  and  destroy  it  again,  and  lay  me  once  more 
prostrate. 

In  addition  to  this  valley,  with  its  filth,  which  poisons  the 
whole  of  Cape  Coast,  the  late  rains  have  demolished  over  300 
mud-built  houses,  which  crushed  to  death,  as  they  fell  on  the 


PROSPECT  HOUSE. 


35 


occupants,  about  eight  human  beings  ;  and  what  the  mud  huts 
buried  besides  is  not  known.  The  ruined  heaps  are  very 
suggestive,  as  you  look  at  them  with  eyes  constantly  seeking 
for  the  causes  of  the  disease  which  has  given  Cape  Coast  its 
unenviable  reputation,  though  you  would  hardly  hazard  the 
statement  that  death  lurks  under  the  brown  ruins  in  the  shape 
of  putrid  garbage  and  corrupting  humanity ;  yet  I  know  it 
would  make  one  feel  more  comfortable  if  the  ruins  were  cleared 
away,  and  the  spaces  given  up  to  light  and  air.  No  one  can 
deny  that  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  place  would  be 
improved. 

On  a  hill  proudly  rising  above  the  bush-clad  terraces  and 
hollows  in  its  neighbourhood  behind  Cape  Coast  stands  Prospect 
House,  whence  your  eye  may  command  quite  an  extensive  view. 
The  whole  town  of  Cape  Coast  seems  to  slumber  at  midday  in 
the  warm  haze  which  floats  above  it.  Fort  William  stands  silent 
and  sentry-like  before  Prospect  House,  as  the  stranger  looks 
towards  the  ocean ;  Victoria  tower,  away  to  the  right,  seems 
solitary  and  alone  ;  and  Connor's  Hill  to  the  left  during  the  hot 
hours  of  day,  crowded  as  it  is  with  white  tents,  looks  deserted. 
The  view  from  Prospect  House  is  worth  seeing,  and  one  would 
imagine  that  when  the  breeze  blew  strong,  the  veranda  at 
Prospect  House  would  be  very  enjoyable. 

Yet,  strange  to  say.  Prospect  House  has  proved  to  be  very 
unhealthy.  Every  inmate  of  it  since  the  landing  of  Sir 
Garnet  Wolseley  has  been  laid  prostrate  through  fever.  The 
cause  of  it  lies  in  the  bush-choked  hollows  around  it,  and  the 
fetid  valley  which  runs  a  straight  course  from  foot  of  the 
House  to  the  beach.  The  wind  bears  on  its  wings  the 
exhalations  and  drops  the  genesis  of  disease  with  which  its 
wings  are  clogged  right  at  the  portals  and  on  the  veranda  of 
the  house,  and  human  lungs  respire  a^d  inhale  the  poisoned 
air.  Major  Baker  Russell,  who  occupies  the  house  with  other 
officers,  seems  to  be  a  favom-ed  child.  He  is  tall,  stalwart, 
and  strong;  and  when  we  landed  was  a  very  picture  of 
robust  manhood.  He  was  happy  at  the  prospect  of  living 
at  Prospect  House.  Men  envied  him  the  breezy  height  which 
seemed  to  ensure  health,  and  said,  *What  a  lucky  fellow  I' 
Of  all  the  officers  which  the  steamer  ^Ambriz'  brought  to 

D  2 


36 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


Cape  Coast  Castle  with  Sir  Garnet,  Major  Hiissell  suffered  from 
fever  first. 

Already  the  hospital  ship  *  Simoon '  has  been  the  residence 
of  many  a  fever-stricken  patient.  Every  man  however  con- 
fessing to  ill-health  is  not  suffering  from  fever.  The  disease 
in  some  cases  manifests  itself  in  severe  attacks  of  dysentery, 
and  three  oflBcers  of  the  staff  are  at  present  laid  up  with  this 
sickness  on  the  'Simoon.' 

What  is  the  element  which  produces  so  much  sickness 
amongst  Europeans  in  Africa  ?  Opinions  are  divided.  Some 
doctors  say  it  is  the  water,  some  doctors  say  it  is  the  poison 
exhaled  from  stagnant  water,  while  others  again  declare  it  to 
be  a  deficiency  of  ozone  in  the  atmosphere  to  disinfect  the 
malaria  in  the  air.  It  has  been  proved  that  if  a  man  spent 
twelve  hours  in  a  hot  bed  of  malaria,  and  lived  the  next  twelve 
hours  where  the  ozone  is  pretty  well  developed,  the  quantity 
of  ozone  inhaled  into  the  lungs  would  be  sufficient  to  neutralise 
the  malaria  taken  into  the  system. 

When  a  person  cannot  move  so  quickly  into  an  ozonic  at- 
mosphere, twenty  grains  of  quinine  should  be  taken,  which  is 
said  to  contain  the  same  quantity. 

I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt  myself  but  that  the  savants 
are  correct,  and  the  quantity  of  ozone  in  an  atmosphere  should 
be  seriously  considered  by  people  when  about  to  choose  resid- 
ences. Fortunately  this  is  easy  to  discover  by  an  ozonometer, 
When  this  instrument  indicates  over  8°  in  the  atmosphere,  the 
resident  might  accept  the  comfortable  assurance  that  if  the 
malaria  was  not  in  excess  the  intending  resident  might  enjoy 
tolerably  good  health. 

But  what  can  the  traveller  or  the  soldier  effect  in  the  way  of 
preserving  himself  from  a  deficiency  of  ozone  ?  What  can  we 
do  in  the  expedition  to  Coomassie  ?  What  can  the  traveller  in 
the  wilds  of  Africa  do  ?  What  comfort  could  be  found  by  the 
traveller  reading  on  his  ozonometer,  maximum  of  ozone  during 
the  day  2%  maximum  during  night  1^.  He  must  do  as  others 
have  done  before  him — grin  and  bear  it,  and  take  quinine. 

Do  you  who  live  in  healthy  coimtries,  who  are  able  to  pre- 
serve your  health  with  a  fair  amount  of  exercise  and  a  little 
attention  to  diet,  realise  what  it  is  to  be  constantly  suffering 
from  fever,  to  bear  about  with  you  the  seeds  of  that  which  may 


THE  PROPER  ADMINISTRATOR  FOR  THE  GOLD  COAST.  37 

at  any  moment  lay  you  prostrate  in  delirium,  to  be  perpetually 
anxious  about  the  due  taking  of  quinine  and  cathartics  ? 

Our  condition  is  best  described  by  the  melancholy  reply 
given  to  the  traveller  when  crossing  the  Pontine  Marshes : — 

'  Nous  ne  Tivons  pas,  nous  mourons/ 
(We  do  not  live :  we  die.) 

In  a  town  on  this  coast  where  statistics  are  kept,  records  prove 
that  within  eight  years  the  deaths  nimibered  1,649,  while  the 
births  were  only  812,  showing  that  the  deaths  exceeded  the 
births  by  837.  These  people,  with  the  poor  marines  who  lately 
went  into  action  105  strong,  and  returned  aboard  ship  only 
25  strong,  might  well  say  with  us  who  have  come  to  the  Gold 
Coast,  *  We  do  not  live,  we  die.' 

If  the  administratorship  of  the  Gold  Coast  were  given  to 
some  one  who,  combining  great  experience  in  oflBce  with- 
enough  energy  in  him  to  carry  out  what  his  experience  sug- 
gested was  necessary  for  improving  this  unhappy  state  of  things 
at  Cape  Coast,  the  evil  name  now  attached  to  the  place  might 
soon  be  eradicated.  Such  a  man  is  Captain  Lees,  now  Colonial 
Secretary  at  Cape  Coast.  He  has  had  a  great  experience  at 
Lagos,  and  is  the  witness  of  what  energetic  administratorship 
can  do.  He  has  seen  the  success  of  good  work,  and  no 
doubt  would  be  induced  to  attempt  to  convert  the  principal 
settlement  on  the  Gold  Coast  to  a  habitable  place.  The 
climate  agrees  with  him  better  than  w^ith  most  men ;  he  has 
studied  the  great  necessity  of  the  settlement ;  and  none  better 
could  be  employed  than  such  a  man. 

The  Anglo-Ashantee  war  threatens  to  be,  for  a  time 
at  least,  until  the  arrival  of  British  regulars  from  England, 
as  full  of  insignificant  details  and  puerile  prognostications 
as  the  Carlist-Republican  war  now  raging  in  the  Iberian 
Peninsula.  Even  then  I  fear  that  we  shall  have  nothing  to 
write  about,  unless  it  be  about  the  immediate  return  of  the 
troops  to  their  native  shores. 

From  all  I  can  hear  or  see,  the  whole  expedition  depends 
upon  the  caprice  of  King  CoflFee  Calcali.  If  this  sober  gentle- 
man sees  fit,  after  repeated  blows  given  to  his  army  now  in 
the  Protectorate,  to  eat  himible  pie,  to  acknowledge  that  he  was 
wrong  to  disturb  the  peace  of  Western  Africa,  it  is  reported 


38 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


and  believed  that  Sir  Garnet  has  received  orders  to  close  with 
any  proflFers  of  peace  or  settlement  that  may  be  received  from 
the  stricken  king.  As  a  soldier  proud  of  his  reputation,  and 
ardent  for  fame,  I  presume  that  such  a  tame  conclusion  to  what 
promised  at  first  sight  to  be  such  a  fair  opportunity  for  glory, 
would  not  be  very  palatable  to  Sir  Garnet,  but  then  Sir  Garnet 
is  bound  to  obey  orders. 

Almost  every  oflBcer  on  the  Gold  Coast  expresses  a  hope 
that  England  will  not  withdraw  from  the  war  now  that  she  has 
armed  herself  for  an  earnest  conflict  with  her  old  enemy  of 
Ashantee,  without  retaliating  for  the  long  series  of  enormities 
against  her,  or  her  Protectorate,  which  Ashantee  has  committed 
since  the  beginning  of  this  century,  by  burning  Coomassie,  the 
capital,  and  reducing  it  to  a  smoking  ruin  like  Magdala  in 
1868. 

Considering  the  extent  of  injury  so  many  thousands  of 
Fantees  have  suflFered  at  King  CoflFee's  hands,  in  the  utter 
desolation  and  havoc  wrought  in  the  Protectorate  by  his  armies, 
it  is  somewhat  assuring  to  those  who  have  come  out  to  engage 
in  the  war  to  think  that  King  Coffee  will  never  be  able  to  pay 
one  twentieth  of  the  demands  that  would  l>e  made  should  he 
hesitate  to  prosecute  the  war  and  show  a  desire  to  avoid  the 
stroke  of  retributive  justice  by  sending  propositions  for  peace. 

Meanwhile  we  wait  patiently  the  course  of  events,  though 
it  is  a  dreary  task  imposed  upon  correspondents  to  write  letters 
upon  such  uninteresting  topics  as  the  preliminaries  of  an  expe- 
dition that  may  never  take  place.  The  task  is  made  much 
drearier  by  the  tantilizing  mystery  with  which  Sir  Garnet  has 
seen  fit  to  involve  his  intentions.  I  fear  the  days  of  the 
garrulous  and  good-natured  official  who  told  one  everything 
that  was  in  his  heart  are  passing  away,  and  that  we  are  about 
to  have  the  insufferable  oflBcer  who  will  tell  one  nothing,  but 
will  delight  to  wear  an  air  of  mystery  that  he  may  hold  the 
world  in  suspense. 

Lest  perhaps  you  should  deem  me  exaggerating,  I  will  give 
you  an  instance  of  the  new  method  of  military  tactics  which 
Sir  Garnet  has  initiated  by  means  of  that  extraordinary  volume 
of  his,  the  '  Soldiers'  Pocket  Book.'  Three  or  four  days  ago  a 
rumour,  soon  followed  by  official  intelligence,  came  to  Cape 
Coast  Castle  of  a  battle  that  was  being  fought  between  the 


SIR  GARNET'S  RETICENCK 


39 


Ashantees  and  the  Allies  of  Abracrampa,  which  had  already 
lasted  several  hours.  At  3  a.m.  Captain  Brackenbury,  the 
military  secretary,  was  sent  to  the  Senior  Naval  Officer  from 
Sir  Garnet  with  an  order  to  hold  himself  and  a  detachment  of 
marines  and  sailors  in  readiness  to  march  to  the  &ont.  The 
head-quarters  mess  sat  down  to  breakfast  about  9  a.m.,  and  from 
some  casual  remarks  which  were  made  at  table,  Lieut.  Maurice, 
the  private  secretary  of  Sir  Garnet,  gleaned  sufficient  to  make 
him  suppose  that  the  General  intended  making  a  move  upon 
the  besieged  villagers  some  time  during  the  day.  Half  an  hoiur 
elapsed,  and  Sir  Garnet  was  being  drawn  in  his  carriage  towards 
Abracrampa,  but  his  own  private  Secretary,  living  in  the  same 
house,  was  not  aware  that  Sir  Garnet  had  departed  until  an 
hour  later. 

Some  military  readers  may  see  much  to  commend  in  this 
excessive  reticence  and  silence  on  the  part  of  a  general,  as 
auguring  well  of  his  conduct  when  engaged  on  more  important 
expeditions.  I  fail  to  see  anything  commendable  in  it.  Sir 
Garnet  is  now  engaged  in  an  expedition  against  savages  on  the 
West  Coast  of  Africa,  far  removed  from  the  influence  or  the  en- 
terprise of  the  public  press,  and  any  intelligence  he  would  care 
to  impart  could  not  injure  his  mission  whatever,  but  rather 
benefit  him.  It  takes  twenty-one  or  twenty-two  days  for  a  letter 
to  reach  England,  it  will  take  as  many  days  for  the  newspaper 
publishing  it  to  return  to  Cape  Coast  Castle,  I  therefore  fail  to 
see  any  plausible  reason  for  Sir  Garnet's  reluctance  to  speak  of 
his  intentions.  I  suspect,  however,  that  Sir  Garnet  does  not 
desire  to  deprive  the  Colonial  Office  and  the  Home  Govern- 
ment of  the  honour  of  being  the  first  to  receive  any  news 
there  may  be  to  transmit. 

Sir  Garnet's  reluctance  to  speak  of  his  mission  and  its  purpose 
has  found  many  imitators  on  his  staff.  It  is  carried  to  such  an 
extent  that  they  may  all  be  compared  to  a  lot  of  wise-looking 
owls,  and  it  is  evident  that  they  share  in  their  chiefs  distrust 
of  special  correspondents  and  *  gentlemen  of  the  Press,'  as  Sir 
Garnet  courteously  calls  them.  Whether  these  silent,  dis- 
trustful gentlemen  of  the  staff  are  possessed  of  any  items 
of  news  that  the  world  would  care  specially  to  know,  I 
know  not,  but  if  each  one  carried  in  his  breast  the  fate  of  a 
continent  they  could  not  look  more  important.    For  my  part, 


40 


COOMAS&IE  AND  MAGDALA. 


I  only  hope  that  Sir  Garnet  holds  the  fate  of  a  continent  in 
his  hands,  that  he  will  employ  his  well-known  prudence  and 
discretion  in  arbitrating  wisely  and  well,  and  that  in  the  course 
of  a  few  years  at  least  he  will  see  fit  to  let  the  admiring  world 
know  what  cares  and  responsibilities  weighed  down  his  great 
souL 

Having  traced  the  history  of  the  Ashantee  War  down  to 
the  date  of  the  arrival  of  Sir  Garnet  on  the  Gold  Coast,!  should 
proceed  to  relate  what  I  know  of  the  preliminary  little  battles 
in  which  he  has  participated. 

When  Sir  Garnet  arrived  here,  he  heard  of  an  immense 
force  of  40,000  Ashantees  being  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Abracrampa  and  Dunquah,  as  a  menace  to  the  weak  garri- 
sons occupying  the  posts.  While  staying  but  long  enough 
at  Cape  Coast  to  gather  information  concerning  their  tactics, 
their  plans,  and  their  mode  of  fighting,  he  heard  that  a  large 
force,  evidently  bent  upon  fulfilling  King  Coffee's  threats  of 
capturing  Elmina,  had  suddenly  diverged  from  the  main  road 
and  marched  past  Abbaye  and  Napoleon  towards  that  place. 
Sir  Garnet  arrived  upon  the  scene  next  morning,  and  aided  byi 
an  auxiliary  force  of  marines  and  sailors,  plunged  upon  the  foe, 
which  proves  him  possessed  of  energy  and  daring,  and  deserving 
the  honour  conferred  upon  him  of  leading  a  British  army  to 
Coomassie. 

The  enemy  lay  hiding  in  wait  in  the  middle  of  what  they 
call  here  a  *  bush,'  but  should  be  more  appropriately  called  a 
jungle.  It  is,80  dense  in  some  places  that  one  wonders  at  first 
sight  how  naked  people  can  have  the  temerity  to  risk  their 
bodies  in  what  must  necessarily  punish  their  unprotected  cuti- 
cles most  painfully.  This  jungle  probably  covers  many  thou- 
sands of  acres,  literally  choking  the  earth  with  its  density  and 
luxuriance.  It  admits  every  kind  of  shrub,  plant,  and  flower 
into  a  close  companionship,  where  they  intermingle  each  other's 
luxuriant  stalks,  where  they  twist  and  twine  each  other's  long 
slender  arms  about  one  another,  and  defy  the  utmost  power  of 
the  sun  to  penetrate  the  leafy  tangle  they  have  reared  ten  and 
fifteen  feet  above  the  dank  earth.  This  is  the  bush  into  which 
the  Ashantee  warriors  creep  in  on  all  fours,  and  lie  in  wait  in 
the  gloomy  recesses  for  the  enemy.  It  was  in  such  a  locality 
as  this  that  Sir  Garnet  found  the  Ashantees,  and  where  he 


THE  PRELIMINARY  BATTLES. 


41 


suffered  such  loss  in  his  staff  and  officers.  Until  the  sonorous 
sounds  of  Danish  musketry  awoke  the  echoes,  few  of  the 
English  suspected  the  foe  so  near ;  uptil  they  themselves  be- 
trayed their  presence,  the  English  might  have  searched  in  vain 
for  the  hidden  enemy.  Secure,  however,  as  they  were  in  their 
unapproachable  coverts,  the  volleys  of  bullets  which  their 
loud-mouthed  challenge  evoked,  searched  many  a  sinister- 
looking  bush,  and  in  a  couple  of  hours  had  effectually  silenced 
their  fire,  but  not  before  Colonel  McNeil,  the  Adjutant  General, 
had  the  muscles  of  his  fore-arm  torn  off  by  a  discharge  of  iron 
slugs,  and  Captain  Fremantle,  E.M.,  and  other  officerij  had 
been  wounded. 

This  was  the  first  affair  in  which  Sir  Garnet  was  engaged? 
where  he  showed  himself  by  his  activity  and  energy  and  dis- 
position of  forces  to  be  what  he  really  is,  a  dashing,  brave, 
and  skilful  officer,  who,  if  he  lives,  has  a  splendid  future 
before  him.  Undoubtedly  he  is  possessed  of  high  soldierly 
qualities.  One  half  the  encomiums  which  have  been  passed^ 
upon  his  activity  would  suffice  for  even  the  most  ambitious. 
Indeed  I  have  heard  no  general  more  highly  spoken  of  by  his 
own  officers  after  so  short  an  acquaintance,  than  Sir  Garnet 
has  been. 

After  this  little  brilliant  affair  the  Ashantees  seem  to  have 
contented  themselves  with  procuring  supplies  for  their  starving 
numbers,  cutting  roads  through  the  bushes  towards  Abracrampa 
and  Dunquah,  and  avoiding  the  scouts  of  the  allied  tribes. 
Rumours  floated  down  occasionally,  that  they  were  suffering 
greatly  from  famine,  that  in  order  to  satisfy  craving  hunger, 
they  lived  on  eatly  yams  and  unripe  plantains,  which  dis- 
agreed so  much  with  them,  that  they  were  fast  perishing  from 
dysentery  and  famine  fevers.  This  was  borne  out,  it  seems,  by 
the  reports  of  the  scouts,  who,  it  was  said,  frequently  met  the 
poor  worn-out  frame  of  an  Ashantee  who  had  died  of  starvation. 

Meanwhile,  in  the  quiet  interval  that  elapsed  after  the  re- 
pulse which  the  Ashantees  suffered  at  Elmina,  Sir  Garnet  was 
not  idle  either  in  the  bush  or  at  Cape  Coast.  The  white 
man's  tactics  sorely  perplexed  the  Ashantee  chiefs.  His  scouts 
mainly  consisting  of  Arabs,  Kossoes,  Winnebahs,  with  a 
sprinkling  of  Houssas,  were  everywhere  now  along  the  line  of 
the  main  road,  between  the  garrison  posts  of  Mansu,  Dunquah, 


42 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


and  Abracrampa,  and  soon  along  the  path  between  Elmina  and 
Napoleon.  His  labourers,  under  the  command  of  a  gallant 
officer  named  Gordon,  were  extending  their  work  beyond  Mansu, 
cutting  a  road  Prah-ward.  Capt.  Gordon  was  not  to  be  deterred 
by  ever  so  many  reports  of  a  wild  nature,  and  kept  his  unarmed 
and  defenceless  squad  manfully  at  their  toils. 

Stores  were  also  being  landed  at  Cape  Coast  by  many 
himdreds  of  tons.  Huts  for  conmiissariat  stores  were  put  up, 
and  hospitals,  prepared  in  England,  were  being  erected  for  the 
use  of  the  troops,  and  being  conveyed  by  male  and  female 
porters,  in  long  lines  to  the  front,  and  as  day  after  day  passed 
by,  without  molestation  from  the  enemy,  the  materials  of  war 
were  being  safely  transported  and  housed  at  Dimquah  and 
Mansu,  two  days'  journey  from  Cape  Coast. 

While  Sir  Garnet  and  his  staff  were  thus  busy  at  Cape 
Coast,  the  former  never  lost  an  opportimity  to  glean 
information  of  the  intentions  of  tlie  enemy.  The  scouts 
and  the  commandant  of  the  advanced  posts  kept  Sir  Garnet 
well-infoiined.  The  force  of  the  enemy  was  variously 
estimated  at  from  10,000  to  40,000,  much  too  large  a 
force  to  operate  against  in  the  bush,  with  his  detachment 
of  marines  and  blue-jackets;  but  at  the  beginning  of  this 
month  he  heard  that  the  Ashantee  general  had  been  re- 
called by  the  king,  and  that  tlie  army  was  now  separated  to 
operate  in  three  columns.  One  of  these  colunms  was  reported 
to  be  in  the  neighbourliood  of  Mampon,  a  small  town  not  far 
removed  from  the  main  road  to  the  Prah.  The  British  general, 
observant  of  liis  opportunities,  hastily  collected  what  force  of 
sailors  and  marines  he  could,  consisting  §£  about  200,  and 
marching  from  Cape  Coast  Castle,  encamped  at  Assayboo,  ten 
miles  distant.  The  next  morning  he  proceeded  to  Abracrampa, 
three  miles  from  Assayboo,  and  ordered  a  reconnaissance  to  be 
made  by  Lieutenant  Pollard  with  the  irregular  native  troops, 
who  succeeded  in  making  a  few  Ashantee  prisoners,  and  creat- 
ing some  confusion  in  the  enemy's  van. 

While  Sir  Garnet  was  resting  this  day  at  Abracrampa,  a 
reconnaissance  was  made  by  Lieut.-Colonel  Festing  from  Dun- 
quah,  a  fortified  post  situate  about  twenty  miles  from  Cape  Coast 
Castle.  This  was  a  very  successful  aflfair,  inasmuch  as  the 
enemy  was  surprised  in  his  camp  while  at  breakfast.  Several 


THE  COMMANDANT  OF  DUNQUAH. 


43 


prisoners  were  taken,  and  a  quantity  of  powder  and  camp  furni- 
ture was  destroyed  before  the  enemy  recovered  himself. 

Out  of  nine  officers  engaged  with  Lieut.-Colonel  Festing, 
five  were  wounded.  The  other  losses  were  four  wounded  out 
of  the  2nd  West  India  Eegiment,  forty-two  wounded  native 
allies,  and  one  killed. 

The  next  day  Sir  Garnet  moved  from  Abraci-ampa  towards 
Dunquah,  hoping  to  encounter  the  enemy ;  but  taught  by  the 
signal  defeat  they  had  suflFered  the  day  before,  the  Ashantees 
did  not  dare  to  make  their  appearance. 

The  Commandant  at  Dunquah,  ]  lieutenant-Colonel  Festing 
of  the  Eoyal  Marine  Artillery,  had  been  requested  by  Sir 
Garnet  to  meet  him  on  this  day  at  a  village  half-way  between 
Dunquah  and  Abracrampa,  but  the  native  troops'  commander 
dared  not  leave  the  friendly  shelter  of  the  palisades,  showing 
plainly  that  no  reliance  could  be  placed  in  the  Fantee 
auxiliaries. 

Hitherto  the  Ashantees  had  boasted  that  the  white  men 
were  afraid  to  meet  them  in  the  bush,  but  the  manner  in  which 
they  were  met,  and  forced  from  their  hiding-places  by  Festing's 
people,  has  dissipated  the  illusion. 

Finding  that  nothing  more  could  be  done  against  the  re- 
treating enemy,  Sir  Garnet,  after  leaving  a  force  of  fifty  blue- 
jackets for  the  defence  of  Abracrampa,  returned  to  Cape  Coast 
Castle. 

Soon  after  the  British  general's  retiurn  to  the  coast,  the 
Ashantees  once  more  appeared  on  the  scene.  The  Ashantee 
chief  Amanquatiah,  had  sworn  to  the  king  that  he  would  des- 
troy the  village  of  Abracrampa,  and  with  this  view  no  doubt  he 
directed  his  energies  to  cutting  a  road  through  the  jimgle  to- 
wards this  fort.  His  people  were  said  to  be  busy  as  ants  upon 
the  work. 

On  the  5th  of  this  month  the  enemy  appeared  out  of  the 
jungle  in  force  in  front  of  Abracrampa,  and  at  once  opened  fire. 
But  tie  station  was  well  able  to  sustain  such  siege  as  the 
Ashantee  general  meditated,  or  any  attack  tliat  might  have 
been  made  upon  it.  Besides  a  strong  palisade  that  completely 
surrounded  the  village,  a  deep  trench  had  been  excavated  and 
the  jungle  cleared  for  a  space  of  250  yards  around. 

The  attack  began  at  4*30  p.m.  and  continued  without  inter- 


44 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


mission  until  5*30  p.m.,  accompanied  by  vigorous  tom-toming  at 
all  points,  and  much  inharmonious  chanting  from  lusty  throats. 
But  the  native  troops  ensconced  behind  thick  palisades,  with 
superior  weapons  in  their  hands,  were  not  to  be  daunted  by 
ever  so  much  tom-toming  or  inharmonious  vocal  music,  and 
replied  with  their  Sniders  with  such  good  eflfect  that  the  enemy 
were  obliged  to  withdraw  for  a  time. 

This  pause  was  taken  advantage  of  by  Major  Baker  Eussell, 
13th  Hussars,  who  commanded  the  station,  to  despatch  word 
to  Assayboo  that  the  Ashantees  were  in  the  neighbourhood, 
evidently  determined  on  a  persistent  effort  to  reduce  Abra- 
crampa.  The  commandant  of  Assayboo  despatched  the  news  to 
Sir  Garnet,  who  received  it  about  midnight. 

Whether  the  British  General  expected  to  receive  more 
hopeful  news  is  not  known,  but  he  delayed  his  departure  from 
Cape  Coast  until  9  a.m.  next  morning. 

Meantime  the  Ashantees  had  soon  broken  the  truce,  and 
recommenced  the  attack  after  dark,  keeping  up  a  determined 
firing  until  1 1  p.m.  At  4  a.m.  they  renewed  their  attack,  and 
continued  it  until  the  morning  of  the  7th.  Sir  Garnet  had 
arrived  at  Assayboo  about  4  p.m.  of  the  6th,  having  marched 
his  troops  during  the  hottest  part  of  the  day,  thereby  causing 
much  sulfering  to  the  blue-jackets  under  Captain  Fremantle. 
Numbers  of  these  poor  fellows  fell  out  on  the  wayside,  com- 
pletely prostrated  by  the  heat,  the  glare,  and  thirst  induced 
by  the  fierce  sun,  which  so  enfeebled  his  force  that  he  was 
unable  to  proceed  to  the  rescue  of  Abracrampa.  Before  Sir 
Garnet's  arrival  at  the  besieged  station  the  enemy's  firing  had 
ceased — Eussell  had  driven  the  enemy  away. 

It  would  be  difficult  even  for  those  who  saw  the  action, 
which  I  did  not,  to  render  any  account  of  the  loss  inflicted  on 
the  enemy  ;  the  circimistances  imder  which  the  siege  occurred, 
though  favourable  to  the  besieged,  were  specially  disadvan- 
tageous to  the  besiegers.  The  besieged  were  armed  with  first 
class  breech-loaders  and  Enfields,  and  were  protected  by  their 
defences ;  while  the  Ashantees,  hidden  by  the  jungle,  were  be- 
trayed by  the  puffs  of  white  smoke  which,  in  the  breezeless  air, 
rested  above  their  heads  after  they  fired  ;  and  frequently  these 
localities  became  the  special  regard  of  many  a  cool  rifleman. 
It  may  be  presumed  that  above  a  hundred  Ashantees  lost  their 


THE  SIEGE  OF  ABRACRAMPA. 


45 


lives  before  Abracrampa,  while  only  one  white  sailor  and  about 
a  dozen  natives  were  wounded  of  the  defenders.  But  even  the 
great  loss  inflicted  on  the  foe  hardly  compensates  for  that  in- 
flicted on  a  reconnoitring  party  that  set  out  from  Dunquah  on 
November  4. 

Colonel  Festing,  adjudged  by  Sir  Grarnet  to  be  active  and 
unceasing  in  persecuting  the  enemy,  had  left  the  garrison 
station  of  Dunquah  for  the  Ashantee  camp  situate  a  mile  beyond 
the  barriers,  with  a  mixed  force  consisting  of  Houssas,  Kossoes, 
Arabs,  and  Annamaboes.  Festing  attempted  to  attack  the  camp 
from  the  rear,  but  he  was  not  as  successful  as  he  hoped  to  be. 
The  Ashantee  scouts  had  already  alai*med  their  people,  and  each 
warrior  had  immediately  hastened  to  the  bush,  and  taken  his 
post  in  the  vicinity  of  the  abandoned  camp.  WTien  Festing's 
force  came  up  they  found  it  had  been  deserted,  and  their  pre- 
sence known ;  and  barely  had  they  arrived  at  this  conclusion 
when  the  bullets  and  slugs  of  the  ambuscaded  foe  came  hurtling 
amongst  them,  informing  the  astonished  Fantees  of  their 
presence.  Lieutenant  Eardley  Wilmot  of  the  Eoyal  Artillery 
received  a  severe  wound  in  the  left  arm  as,  with  a  revolver  in 
his  left  hand  and  a  sword-bayonet  in  his  right,  he  was  at- 
tempting an  advance  against  the  enemy,  and,  by  placing  him- 
self at  the  head  of  his  men,  hoped  to  encourage  the  Annamaboes 
under  his  command.  The  young  officer — he  was  only  twenty- 
four — fearing  to  discourage  his  men  by  going  to  the  rear  to 
have  his  wound  attended  to,  never  moved  from  his  post  in 
the  van,  but  simply  told  his  servant  to  run  to  the  fort  to  get 
lint,  and  continued  shouting  to  his  men  to  advance,  plunging 
foremost  himself  sword  in  hand.  When  the  servant  returned  with 
the  lint  young  Eardley  Wilmot  was  dead,  with  a  rifle  bullet-hole 
through  his  heart.  The  spot  where  he  fell  became  dyed  soon 
after  with  the  blood  of  his  fellow  officers.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Festing,  while  lifting  the  body  of  the  dead  officer,  was  hit, 
and  Dn  Gore,  coming  up  to  offer  his  services,  also  received  a 
wound  in  the  groin.  Lieutenant  Paget  was  scarred  with  a  slug, 
and  a  non-commissioned  officer  of  the  West  India  regiment  had 
a  pebble  imbedded  in  his  neck  at  the  angle  of  the  jaw,  which 
,  inflicted  a  ghastly  woimd.  The  cowardly  allies  deserted  the 
fatal  spot,  and  a  retreat  was  sounded ;  but  the  body  of  Wilmot 
was  taken  away  by  Festing  so  that  it  might  not  be  decapitated 


46 


COOMASSIE  AND  IkLlGDALA. 


by  the  savages.  The  victory  was  undoubtedly  on  the  side  of 
the  Ashantees  at  Dimquah,  but  those  who  attacked  Abracrampa 
paid  dearly  for  it  next  day. 

The  body  of  Lieutenant  Eardley  Wilmot  was  conveyed  to 
Cape  Coast,  where  it  was  buried  in  the  presence  of  the  General 
and  his  staflF  and  a  large  concourse  of  sorrowing  oflBccrs. 

The  camp  of  the  enemy  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Abracrampa 
was  attacked  after  Sir  Garnet's  arrival  with  reinforcements. 
So  well  was  the  attack  planned,  and  so  well  was  it  made,  that 
the  Ashantee  general,  Amanquatiah,  barely  escaped  capture; 
one  of  his  wives  and  two  of  his  nephews  fell  into  the  hands  of 
the  British,  besides  his  own  chair  in  which  he  was  accustomed 
to  be  carried  by  his  slaves.  If  reports  are  to  be  believed, 
Amanquatiah  is  in  deep  disgrace  with  his  own  people,  who 
complain  that  they  have  been  deceived,  for,  when  they  set  out 
in  February  on  this  invasion,  they  understood  that  they  were  to 
fight  against  the  Fantees,  but  they  now  find  themselves  opposed 
to  white  men  whom,  they  say,  it  was  never  their  intention  to 
fight.  Captain  Grant  and  his  company  of  2nd  West  Indians 
distinguished  themselves  nobly  and  gallantly  in  this  action. 

The  Cape  Coast  Volunteers  have  fallen  into  disgrace  with 
the  British  authorities.  They  were  despatched,  soon  after  the 
defeat  of  the  Ashantees  at  Abracrampa,  in  pursuit  of  the  flying 
enemy,  along  with  the  Abras,  Kossoes,  and  Houssas.  The  latter, 
over  eager  to  harass  what  they  considered  to  be  a  demoralised 
force,  hung  so  close  upon  the  skirts  of  the  retreating  Ashantees 
that  they  compelled  the  enemy  to  turn  on  them,  so  that  the 
Abras,  Kossoes,  and  Houssas  were  compelled  to  return  faster  than 
they  had  advanced.  As  they  reciu:ned  they  were  met  by  the 
Cape  Coast  Castle  Volunteers,  who,  in  their  fright,  mistook 
them  for  enemies,  and  they  were  fired  upon,  by  which  two 
of  their  number  were  killed  and  six  wounded.  Sir  Gurnet,  on 
hearing  of  their  cowardice,  disarmed  the  Cape  Coast  Volimteers, 
and  transformed  them  into  labourers  and  commissariat  porters. 
Indeed,  it  were  a  wise  thing  if  Sir  Garnet  transformed  the 
major  part  of  the  allies  of  the  Protectorate  into  pack-bearers 
and  commissariat  store  carriers,  the  most  useful  employment 
he  could  give  them,  and  one  quite  in  accordance  with  the  opinion 
of  all  Europeans  who  have  seen  them  display  their  hare-valour 
in  battle. 


CAPE  COAST  VOLUNTEERS. 


47 


Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  has  paid  the  penalty  which  Africa 
inflicts  on  the  European  who  treads  her  shores.  His  audacity 
in  braving  the  hot  sun  at  mid-day  has  been  punished  by  an 
attack  of  fever. 

Others  are  sufferers  as  well.  Two  officers  only,  however,  have 
been  buried  since  my  arrival— Eardley  Wilmot,  already  men- 


FAMTEB  VOLrUTEEBS. 


tioned,  and  Harry  Mount,  of  the  Control  Department,  who  died 
of  dysentery.  Colonel  M'Neill,  Chief  of  Staff*,  has  been  in- 
valided home  ;  Captains  Brackenbury  and  Charteris  have  been 
on  the  sick  list;  Major  Baker,  Acting- Adjutant-General,  vice 
M'Neill,  has  suffered  from  dysentery  ;  Deputy-Surgeon-General 


48 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


Home  has  sore  throat;  Surgeon-Major  Jackson  has  had  the  inter- 
mittent fever ;  and  almost  every  officer  who  came  with  Sir  Garnet 
to  the  Gold  Coast  has  been  compelled  to  succumb  to  the  general 
unhealthiness  for  a  time.  Out  of  ninety-two  labourers  who 
arrived  from  Sierra  Leone  lately,  forty-two  have  been  sent  back 
unfit  for  duty.  When  these  facts  are  simimed  up  and  digested, 
it  will  perhaps  be  admitted  that  the  Ashantee  king  has  terrible 
allies  to  fight  his  battles  for  him  in  shape  of  fever  and 
dysentery  which  attack  the  highest  as  well  as  the  lowest,  and 
penetrate  even  to  the  comfortable  chambers  of  Government 
House. 


THE  FAKTEES. 


49 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  PAKTEES — CAPE  COAST  CASTLE — FETICH — THE  ASHANTEE8   AlH)  THETR 
CUSTOMS— -HISTORY  OF  KING  COFFEE'S  DYNASTY — THE  JLISQ  DESCRIBED. 

November  20,  1 874. 

Next  to  my  surprise  at  the  unaccountable  apathy  of  the 
English  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  is  my  surprise  that  the 
English  should  have  adopted  for  allies  the  Fantees,  the  miser- 
able and  worthless  tribe  occupying  the  country  lying  between 
Cape  Coast  Castle  and  the  boundary  river  flowing  between 
Ashantee  and  the  J^antee  Land.  It  may  be  said — with  justice 
— by  the  English,  that  they  could  not  help  themselves ;  that 
they  found  the  Fantees  in  possession  of  the  country  and  of  Cape 
Coast  itself,  and  that  they  had  no  right  to  displace  the  Fantees 
for  the  Ashantees  or  any  other  people ;  that  such  a  course  on 
their  part  would  have  been  the  grossest  injustice. 

It  is  true  the  English  could  not  have  done  this  arbitrary 
act  without  incurring  great  guilt.  But,  after  the  cession  of 
Elmina  to  them  by  the  Dutch,  good  policy  would  have  indicated 
what  course  they  should  adopt  towards  furthering  the  wishes  of 
the  opulent  and  commerce-loving  Ashantees. 

Elmina  is  the  only  place  suitable  for  the  residence  of  an 
Administrator-in-Chief  or  Governor  on  the  whole  shore  of  the 
Gold  Coast  from  Assinee  river  to  the  Volta.  It  is  centrally 
located :  nature  has  furnished  it  with  a  river  which  might  be 
made  a  capital  harboiu:  for  small  craft ;  there  is  a  good  anchor- 
age outside  for  larger  vessels.  The  Dutch  have  furnished  it 
with  two  castles,  infinitely  superior  to  the  miserable  castles  or 
forts  at  Cape  Coast.  Elmina  was  a  large,  thriving  town,  in  a 
healthy  situation,  exposed  to  the  pure  sea  breezes  ;  the  country 
around  was  well  cultivated ;  numerous  plantations  studded  the 
eminences  behind  the  town ;  plenty  reigned  everywhere ;  and 
though  the  Elmina  natives  were  formerly  a  branch  of  the  Fantee 
nation,  they  were  far  more  industrious,  and  were  able  to  supply 

E 


60 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  necessaries  of  life  to  the  garrison  at  one-fourth  the  cost 
those  around  Cape  Coast  Castle  could  aflford. 

In  every  way  Elmina  was  a  desirable  locality  for  the  principal 
station  of  the  Gold  Coast ;  and  had  the  English  at  once  trans- 
ferred their  offices  of  administratorship  hither  they  would  not 
have  been  under  the  deplorable  necessity  of  reducing  to  dust- 
heaps  the  native  quarter  eighteen  months  after  the  exchange. 

Having  acquired  this  rich  territory  from  the  Dutch,  and 
aware  of  the  anxiety  of  the  Ashantees  to  possess  a  small  portion 
of  coast  line  which  should  be  theirs  and  none  other,  the  English 
out  of  their  abundance  might  have  set  apart  a  strip  of  ten  miles 
immediately  adjoining  Elmina,  and  proflFered  it  to  the  Ashan- 
tees, and  they  might  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  assist  the 
Ashantees  in  the  construction  of  a  road  from  Prahsu  to  the  new 
Ashantee  settlement,  thus  proving  to  them  that  they  were  as 
ready  to  enter  into  a  friendly  alliance  with  them  as  the  Dutcli 
had  been.  The  fear  that  the  Ashantees  would  soon  have  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  country  need  not  have  deterred  the 
English,  for  the  coast  line  would  always  remain  in  their  power, 
and  always  within  reach  of  tlie  guns  of  their  African  naval 
squadrons.  Elmina  and  Cape  Coast  also  would  ever  be  pro- 
tected by  the  guns  of  the  castles  and  the  forts,  so  that  such  a 
policy  as  the  one  indicated  above  might  have  been  prosecuted 
to  a  very  desirable  end — viz.,  that  of  populating  an  uninhabited 
part  of  the  coast  with  a  portion  of  an  opulent  tribe  desirous 
of  opening  direct  commerce  with  the  English,  and  securing  the 
friendly,  alliance  of  a  nation  which,  in  a  commercial  sense,  was 
worthy  of  being  allied  with. 

The  traveller,  after  observing  the  tremendous  energy  of  the 
English  in  other  lands,  and  the  keen  intelligence  which  always 
directs  their  policies,  finds  himself  compelled  to  condemn  the 
extraordinary  apathy  which  characterises  the  British  autho- 
rities on  the  West  Coast,  and  the  unwisdom  of  their  mode 
of  government.  From  Sierra  Leone  down  to  Accra,  ruin, 
decay,  and  neglect  are  visible  in  every  settlement.  Thirty 
years  ago  Sierra  Leone  was  a  thriving  and  prosperous  com- 
mercial mart.  A  forest  of  masts  reared  their  tall  heads  in  the 
unrivalled  harbour,  the  soul  of  business  seemed  to  animate  her 
streets,  the  natives  appeared  to  possess  some  idea  that  they  were 
made  to  work,  and  that  their  limbs  were  formed  for  labour. 


THE  FANTEES. 


51 


Now,  however,  an  oecasioral  steamer  may  be  seen  in  the  har- 
bour, homeward  or  outward  bound,  and  the  natives  are  utterly 
spoiled  for  work,  and  seem  to  think  that  celestial  state  has 
already  arrived  when  humanity  ceases  from  toil  and  betakes 
itself  to  perpetual  psalm-singing  and  hallelujah  chanting. 
ApoUonia,  Dix  Cove,  Chamah,  and  Elmina  are  heaps  of  ruins. 
The  Dutch  left  them  prosperous  and  happy  ;  the  English  took 
it  upon  themselves  to  govern  them,  and  within  eighteen 
months  ruined  them,  laying  the  settlements  in  mortar  and  dust- 
heape. 

The  Fantees  have  not  found  out  that  their  alliance  with 
the  English  has  been  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing,  because 
they  have  not  yet  been  taught  the  art  of  deduction.  But 
should  they  ever  be  schooled  to  logic,  I  have  no  doubt  but  they 
will  say : — '  If  we  had  not  been^  friends  with  the  English  the 
Ashantees  would  not  have  burned  our  villages,  or  consumed  our 
produce,  or  laid  waste  our  plantations.'  To  which  tlie  English 
may  perhaps  answer : — '  We  went  to  war  with  the  Ashantees 
for  your  sakes  ;  if  we  had  not  been  fools,  we  should  not  have 
rejected  the  Ashantees  and  accepted  such  miserable  cowards  as 
you  have  turned  out  to  be  for  our  allies.' 

I  have  already  informed  you  that  the  Fantees  occupy  the 
country  between  Cape  Coast  Castle  and  the  Prah,  though  upi 
reality  the  Fantees  proper  inhabit  the  town  of  Cape  Coast  and 
its  immediate  neighbourhood.  Those  of  the  Fantees  who  dwell 
in  the  villages  of  the  interior  are  distinguished  after  the  names 
of  their  villages.  The  whole  of  the  Fantee  territory  may 
be  about  2,000  square  miles.  It  is  not  a  kingdom.  Fantee 
Land  is  more  of  a  republic  of  villages,  whose  chiefs  are  banded 
together  for  military  protection  against  the  common  enemy — 
the  Ashantees.  Cape  Coast  has  its  king,  or  chief.  Annamaboe 
has  another,  though  it  is  but  seven  miles  distant.  Dunquah, 
sixteen  miles  distant,  has  another  chief,  and  Abracrampa  has  its 
chief.  When  any  chief  has  a  grievance  against  any  other,  the 
British  Governor  of  the  Castle  is  called  upon  to  arbitrate,  and 
his  word  is  supposed  to  settle  the  '  palaver.' 

Confining  my  remarks,  however,  to  the  Fantees  of  Cape 
Coast,  and  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  Fantees  of  the  interior 
are  no  better,  I  must  say  that  the  town  presents  the  strongest 
evidence  that  could  possibly  be  produced  of  the  apathy  of  the 

15  2 


52 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGBALA. 


English  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa.  Two  hundred  and  five 
years  has  this  town  been  in  possession  of  the  British,  and  yet 
out  of  its  population  of  20,000  souls  I  doubt  whether  there  are 
1,000  of  them  who  understand  English.  The  people  are  as 
barbarous,  untutored,  and  superstitious  as  though  they  had 
never  seen  an  Englishman's  face.  They  are  as  wild  in  appear- 
ance, as  naked  in  body,  as  filthy  in  their  habits  as  any  tribe  of 


FAHTKE  WOMEN. 


savages  I  have  ever  seen.  Their  fetich  idols,  and  medicine 
and  Mumbo  Jumbo  rites,  are  visible  in  the  streets  of 
Cape  Coast.  The  ])izarre  fantastics  in  which  women  caper 
about  nude,  and  ancient  hags  disagreeably  remind  you  of  the 
honyness  of  the  human  body  in  old  age,  and  little  conscience- 
less children  prank  and  hop,  involved  inextricably  between 
the  pedal  extremities  of  their  grandmothers,  form  a  pictiure 


CAPE  COAST. 


53 


utterly  unsuited,  I  sliould  say,  at  least,  for  any  portion  of  the 
British  colonies. 

If  I  have  to  echo  the  opinions  of  all  white  men  who  have 
come  out  lately  to  join  this  expedition,  and  declare  that  these 
people  are  the  most  indolent,  toil-hating  tribe  it  has  ever  been 
my  lot  to  see,  I  am  bound  also  to  say  that  the  administrators, 
the  administrators-in-chief,  the  governors  and  sub-governors, 
sent  out  to  rule  them  must  have  been  selected  by  the  British 
Government  for  those  very  qualities  which  we  are  all  so  ready 
to  condemn  in  the  Fantees  of  Cape  Coast  Castle. 

Consider  the  thing  ;  205  years  in  possession  I  Why,  Prussia 
was  made  a  kingdom  only  172  years  ago  !  The  battle  of  the 
Boyne  was  fought  only  183  years  ago  I  Just  think,  then,  how 
many  things  have  transpired  during  the  205  years  since  first 
John  Bull  laid  his  paw  on  tliis  spot  on  the  Gold  Coast,  and  yet 
the  Fantees,  the  population  of  this  government  station,  have  to 
be  described  as  the  most  shiftless  and  indolent  of  the  negro 
race ! 

I  must  charge  the  British  also  with  their  usual  fault  of 
raising  the  cost  of  labour  and  necessaries  of  life  to  about  twenty 
times  what  it  ought  to  be.  Englishmen  are  as  much  sufiferers 
as  I  am  myself.  They  suffered  as  much  from  the  same  folly  as 
I  did  in  Abyssinia.  When  we  might  have  obtained  fowls  at 
the  rate  of  twelve  for  gl  in  Abyssinia,  Sir  William  Merewether 
commanded  three  fowls  only  should  be  given  for^l.  There 
has  been  as  yet,  to  my  knowledge,  no  such  order  from  Sir 
Garnet  respecting  the  number  of  fowls  to  be  given  for  #1,  but 
I  do  expect  some  such  order  will  be  issued  soon,  as  proclama- 
tions are  being  issued  almost  daily.  In  the  meantime,  however, 
the  prices  of  everything  have  risen,  until  I  should  much  prefer  to 
pay  the  high  prices  of  living  at  the  Fifth  Avenue  Hotel  rather 
than  at  a  miserable  Fantee  hut. 

Two  chickens  cost  $1  here,  and  mutton  is  not  purchasable 
under  25  cents  per  pound.  Much  of  anything  else  cannot  be 
had  for  love  or  money,  except  rice,  which  sells  at  sixteen  pounds 
for  /I.  The  houseliold  expenses  are  enormously  high.  First, 
your  hammock -bearers  cost  you  at  the  rate  of  $4:5  per  month  ; 
your  porters,  who  are  to  carry  your  effects  and  provisions  to  the 
'  bush,*  cost  you  as  much  more ;  your  house  rent  costs  you  $20, 
and  your  cook  g\S  per  month  :  so  that  if  one  finds  his  bills  at 


64 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  end  of  a  month  to  be  under  $200  one  must  consider  himself 
specially  fortunate. 

I  did  not  intend  that  my  remarks  about  the  Fantees  should 
be  abusive  of  them  when  I  began  this  chapter,  so  that  I  think  I 
had  better  bottle  up  my  indignation  for  the  present. 

I  have  already  remarked  that  the  Fantees  are  very  super- 


FA>TKE  SEBYANT  BOY. 


stitious.  Their  fetich  consists  of  a  wooden  image  of  an  arm- 
less and  legless  man,  which  is  placed  upright  by  the  side  of 
some  public  street,  and  at  its  back  is  generally  found  a  medi- 
cine heap,  covered  over  with  either  a  turtle's  back,  or  a  huge 
stone.  If  the  fetich  is  not  formed  of  wood,  a  figure  of  clay, 
or  a  padded,  doll-shaped  thing  answers  just  as  well.  This 
image,  made  of  wood,  oi}  clay,  or  old  rags,  is  endowed  by  the 

/ 


FETICH  AT  CAPE  COAST. 


55 


fetich  priest  with  extraordinary  powers.  A  white  man,  edu- 
cated at  a  university  in  all  the  secrets  of  medicine  and  surgery, 
is  not  gifted  with  one-half  the  powers  commonly  ascribed  to 
and  commonly  believed  to  be  possessed  by  this  miserable  idol. 
The  fetich  man  carries  the  image  to  the  bedside  of  a  fever- 
stricken  patient,  mumbles  formidas  into  the  ear  of  the  sick 
one,  waves  the  fetich  over  his  head,  and  departs  satisfied  that  a 
cure  has  begun  already.  But  should  the  British  surgeon  come 
up  in  time  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  disease  and  eflfect  a 
cure,  the  fetich  man  curses  the  surgeon  for  making  his  fetich 
to  lie,  believing  that  the  failure  of  the  image  was  caused  by 
the  underhanded  and  false  machinations  of  the  surgeon. 

If  I  were  to  describe  all  the  ceremonies  which  I  have 
noted  under  my  verandah  I  should  fill  many  columns  ;  but  there 
is  one  which  I  have  seen,  which  causes  intense  disgust  to  the 
coloured  missionaries  of  the  town.  It  is  the  exhibition  of  a 
virgin  arrived  at  years  of  puberty  to  the  rude  gaze  of  the 
rabble  of  Cape  Coast.  Before  the  British  authorities  interfered, 
the  scene  was  really  disgusting  and  downright  savage ;  but  at 
present,  though  it  is  a  singular  one,  the  inmiodesty  of  it  is 
.veiled  somewhat.  The  young  girl,  in  former  times,  was  ac- 
customed to  be  stripped  naked,  and  obliged  to  march  thus 
through  the  streets,  loaded  with  gold  and  silver  ornaments. 
The  wealth  of  the  family  was  sometimes  seen  on  her  person, 
amounting  in  value  to  several  hundred  dollars'  worth,  while 
her  friends  and  relatives,  her  playmates  and  acquaintances,  fol- 
lowed her  with  all  the  fanfaronade  which  delights  the  ears  of 
savages.  Several  Idnkaaaia^  or  drums,  were  beaten  in  the  most 
energetic  manner ;  fifes  were  blown,  and  the  vocal  noises,  in- 
harmonious at  the  best  of  times,  were  absolutely  deafening. 
She  was  thus  paraded  round  the  town,  until  every  household 
had  enjoyed  the  ineflfable  felicity  of  seeing  the  virginal  maid. 
At  dusk,  she  was  conducted  to  the  bridal  bed  of  her  husband, 
who  had  probably  paid  dowry  to  her  parents  to  the  amount 
f)f  j?40  or  /50.  The  earlier  hours  of  hymeneal  joy  were  honoured 
with  an  increase  of  din,  at  which  all  the  friends  and  rela- 
tives participated,  and  a  bestial  orgie  concluded  the  singular 
ceremony.  In  these  modest  times,  however,  the  maid  is 
shown  about  properly  clothed  and  bejewelled,  and  since  the 
absence  of  the  Fantee  males  in  the  '  bush '  the  noise  and  din 


56 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


of  the  festivity  is  not  so  unbearable  and  soul-distracting  as 
formerly. 

Lest  this  chapter  may  be  intolerably  long — dull  as  I  know 
it  to  be  from  lack  of  war  news — I  propose  to  give  a  few  remarks 
concerning  the  Ashantees. 

To  begin  with  the  King,  then.  The  present  chief  or  king 
of  Ashantee  is  called  Coffi  or  Coffee  Calcali,  the  son  of  Coffee 
Tutee,  an  Ashantee  noble  of  great  power,  by  Princess  Efinah 
Cobee,  of  the  blood  royal.  He  was  born  about  the  year  1837, 
and,  is  therefore,  at  present  in  his  thirty-sixth  year.  He  as- 
cended the  throne  of  the  kings,  August  26,  1867,  as  the 
eighth  monarch  since  the  dynasty  was  established  and  the 
Ashantees  became  a  nation,  which  occurred  about  the  year 
1700. 

To  attempt  to  trace  the  past  history  of  any  savage  African 
nation  which  has  no  written  record  for  its  basis,  would  appear 
too  much  like  romancing ;  but  such  facts  as  the  sages,  and 
courtiers,  and  elders  could  store  in  their  minds  and  transmit 
from  father  to  son  we  have  been  able  to  obtain.  No  doubt  a 
further  acquaintance  with  Ashantee  chiefs  would  enable  us  to 
add  still  more  to  our  rimmS ;  but  what  we  have  at  present 
suflSces  for  the  ordinary  reader,  whose  desire  would  be  mainly 
to  have  an  idea  of  what  the  Ashantees  are,  and  whence  they 
came. 

The  special  correspondent  in  a  peculiar  land  like  this  feels 
a  melancholy  pleasure  in  being  able  to  glean  somewhat  from 
the  past  of  this  now  powerful  nation,  and  transfer  some  portion 
of  its  history  to  the  pages  of  a  book  ere  the  traditions  which 
now  inspire  the  elders  at  sunset,  under  the  patriarchal  trees 
of  their  villages,  to  recite  the  glories  of  the  great  founder  of 
the  nation,*  and  the  deeds  of  the  heroes  and  conquerors  who 
succeeded  him,  should  pale  and  fade,  and  become  lost  in 
oblivion. 

If  any  reader,  after  coming  to  this  land,  should  become 
interested  in  any  tribe  or  nation,  and  attempt  to  write  its 
history,  he  would  soon  find  how  difficult  a  task  it  would  be 
to  distinguish  fact  from  fiction,  and  be  able  to  understand  the 
pleasure  I  feel  in  writing  the  following  remarks  upon  the 
Ashantee  nation. — 

In  the  days  of  Cada  Mosto,  Fernando  Gomez,  D'Azambuja, 


THE  ASHANTEES. 


57 


Vasco  da  Grama,  and  other  heroic  navigators,  who  flourished 
about  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  Ashantee 
nation  wajs  not  known.  If  it  were  a  concrete  people,  organised 
under  a  despotic  king,  as  renowned  in  war  as  the  Ashantee 
nation  is  to-day,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  sorne  of  the  enter- 
prising Portuguese  explorers  and  writers,  especially  De  Barros 
and  Cada  Mosto,  would  have  heard  something  about  its  exist- 
ence and  noted  it  in  their  journals  with  the  same  exactness  and 
accuracy  with  which  they  penned  their  notes  of  other  kings 
and  nations  whom  they  came  in  contact  with  or  of  whom  they 
heard  report ;  for,  while  looking  eagerly  over  their  quaintly- 
written  journals  of  discoveries  along  the  coast  of  Guinea,  we 
are  struck  at  the  ease  with  which  the  steps  of  the  Portuguese 
navigators  may  be  traced  to-day.  It  is  true  that  many  names 
of  tribes  and  rivers  have  become  lost,  but  the  major  number 
are  still  to  be  recognised. 

Cada  Mosto  writes  in  1469  of  the  success  of  Fernando 
Gomez  in  his  trading  for  gold  dust  at  the  port  of  Mina, 
which  we  at  once  recognise  to  be  Elmina  of  the  present  day, 
where,  during  peaceful  times,  the  same  trade  in  the  precious 
metal  is  still  carried  on.  Again,  he  says  that  the  first  ex- 
change in  gold  dust  occurred  at  a  village  called  Sanmia,  a  few 
miles  further  up  from  Mina,  wliich  we  know  to  be  the  place 
called  Chamah,  where  Commodore  Commerell  and  his  boat 
fleet  received  such  a  check  lately.  It  may  not  appear  singular 
that  Mina,  now  called  Elmina,  should  have  retained  its  name, 
since  it  has  been  in  the  possession  of  a  European  Power  ever 
since;  but  it  is  singular  that  a  small  village  like  Chamah 
should  have  retained  its  native  name  in  a  country  like  Guinea, 
where  everything  is  so  mutable  and  where  changes  transpire  so 
quickly,  and  nations  and  tribes,  once  prominent  in  local  tradi- 
tions, so  soon  sink  into  oblivion. 

My  opinion  is,  that  the  Ashantees  at  the  time  of  which  1 
write  were  divided  into  small  village  clans  or  sul>-tribes, 
acknowledging  no  ruler,  save  their  local  chiefs,  or  elders ;  that 
wars  for  supremacy  and  right  of  way  to  the  coast  were  frequent 
among  them  ;  that  defeat  of  one  village  served  to  add  power 
and  subjects  to  the  conquering  sub-tribe,  which,  probably,  in 
the  wurse  of  time  was  augmented  by  other  victories  over 


58 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


weaker  neighbours.  There  is  a  tradition  among  the  Fantees 
that,  in  former  times  very  far  back,  the  Fantees  and  Ashantees 
composed  one  tribe ;  but  that  while  engaged  on  a  war  expe- 
dition into  a  distant  region  they  suffered  severely  from  hunger  ; 
that  one  portion  sustained  itself  by  feeding  on  a  shrub  or  plant 
called  Fan,  while  another  portion  found  sustenance  in  a  shrub 
called  Shan,  from  which  the  eaters  of  Fan  became  known 
afterwards  as  Fantees,  while  the  others  in  like  manner  became 
known  as  Shantees,  to  which  imperfect  hearing  has  added  the 
prefix  A,  so  that  the  tribe  is  now  called  Ashantees  by  the 
English.  This  is,  of  course,  fable,  but  only  a  more  thorough 
knowledge  of  the  roots  of  the  language  would  enable  us  to 
decide  whether  the  fable  is  correct. 

We  know,  however,  to  a  certainty,  by  the  records  of  the 
Portuguese  navigators,  that  gold  dust  in  considerable  quantities 
was  brought  down  from  tlie  interior  to  Elmina,  by  people  who 
were  not  distinguished  under  any  distinctive  title  during  the 
latter  half  of  the  fifteenth  century ;  and  we  know,  through 
official  records  by  the  Dutch  governors,  who  succeeded  the 
Portuguese  at  Elmina,  that  the  same  trade  was  carried  on  be- 
tween Elmina  and  the  interior  during  the  whole  of  the  sixteenth 
century. 

But  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  there 
struggles  slowly  into  the  minds  of  the  Eiu*opean  authorities  on 
the  Cruinea  or  Gold  Coast  a  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  a 
nation  growing  in  opulence  and  power  where  the  gold  dust 
comes  from,  called  the  Ashantees,  and  of  a  chief  or  king  who 
governs  them  whose  name  strikes  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the 
sub-tribes  on  the  coast,  who  were  accustomed  to  convey  palm 
oil  and  cloths  into  the  interior  to  exchange  for  gold  dust.  This 
king's  name  was  Sy  Tutu.  During  his  lifetime  the  sub-tribes, 
the  clans,  villages,  and  towns  throughout  a  great  extent  of 
country  were  consolidated  into  one  kingdom,  with  Sy  Tutu,  the 
conquering  chief,  as  a  sovereign.  In  the  attempt  to  extend  his 
power  on  this  side  of  the  Prah  river,  in  the  territory  of  the 
Akims,  at  the  great  battle  of  Coromantee,  fought  on  a  Saturday, 
the  conqueror,  Sy  Tutu,  was  slain. 

As  in  more  civilised  countries,  a  glorious  era  of  conquest 
and  power  was  not  forgotten  by  the  nation  he  had  founded  and 
made  great  by  a  series  of  victories,  and  the  memory  of  Sy  Tutu 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  FANTEES  AND  ASHANTEES.  59 

is  kept  green  to  this  day  by  the  Ashantees.  The  most  binding 
oath  known  to-day  among  this  people  is  the  one  which  is  made 
by  '  Coromantee  Saturday.'  The  present  king,  CoflFee  Calcali, 
has  taken  this  solemn  oath  that  he  will  either  drive  the  British 
from  Elmina,  or  he  will  make  a  prolonged  and  bloody  war. 

It  was  natural  that,  after  a  glorious  reign  such  as  Sy  Tutu's, 
his  successor  should  be  his  son,  and  accordingly  the  throne 
devolved  upon  Apuku,  his  eldest  son,  who  during  his  reign 
maintained  the  supremacy  of  the  Ashantees,  conquered  the 
Akim  territory  and  added  it  to  Ashantee.  It  is  said  that  Apuku, 
like  the  Plantagenet  John,  desirous  of  curtailing  the  power  of 
the  sub-chiefs,  exasperated  the  chieftains  and  caused  them  to 
band  together  and  drive  the  monarch  from  Coomassie,  the 
capital;  but,  more  successful  than  his  British  prototype,  he 
was  enabled  to  rally  to  his  standard  an  army  of  warriors  who 
had  probably  shared  in  his  father's  conquests,  with  whose  aid 
he  retook  Coomassie  and  subdued  the  fractious  and  turbulent 
rebels. 

Apuku  died,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Akwassi.  This 
king,  after  extending  his  power  towards  Denkera,  in  the  west, 
turned  his  attention  to  a  powerful  country  on  the  east  called 
Dahomey.  The  fact  that  Dahomey  is  still  independent,  and  is 
understood  to  be  as  powerful  as  Ashantee,  proves  that  Akwassi 
obtained  little  or  no  success  in  his  wars  against  the  Dahomans. 

Akwassi,  dying  about  the  year  1752,  was  succeeded  by  his 
son,  Sy  Kudju,  a  warlike  prince,  whose  memory  is  venerated  for 
the  numerous  successes  which  attended  his  arms  throughout  a 
long  and  prosperous  reign. 

Sy  Kwamina,  the  fifth  monarch  since  the  dynasty  was 
established,  succeeded  Kudju ;  but  he  was  shortly  dethroned  by 
the  chiefs,  and  was  replaced  by  a  younger  brother,  Sy  Tutu 
Kwamina,  about  the  year  1800. 

It  was  during  the  reign  of  this  prince  that  the  British 
became  personally  acquainted  with  the  prowess  of  the  Ashan- 
tees. 

The  first  war  was  that  of  1811.  Then  came  the  disastrous 
campaign  of  1823  and  1824,  during  the  Governorship  of  Sir 
Charles  McCarthy.  Major  Ricketts,  a  member  of  his  staff — one 
of  the  very  few  who  survived  the  fatal  battle  of  Esmacow — has 
left  us  a  very  interesting  account,  simply  written,  but  full  of 


60 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


pith  and  matter.  When  the  Ashantees  were  marching  up  to 
attack  Sir  Charles  they  advanced  singing  and  beating  a  wild 
alarm  of  drums  and  tom-toms,  as  is  their  custom.  Sir  Charles, 
not  to  be  outdone  by  noise,  ordered  his  band  to  strike  up  '  God 
save  the  King.'  However,  the  music  had  no  eflfect  on  the 
enemy,  and  soon  both  forces  were  engaged  in  desperate  strife. 
After  a  battle  of  some  hours  the  British  allies  were  without 
ammunition,  and  a  mistake  committed  by  a  commissariat  oflBcer, 
who  despatched  biscuits  instead  of  ball  cartridges,  proved  fatal 
for  the  allies  and  their  gallant  commander.  Sir  Charles  and 
all  his  staff,  with  the  exception  of  Major  Bicketts  and  a  Lieu- 
tenant Jones,  were  beheaded,  and  the  heads  were  carried  in 
triuimph  to  Coomassie,  where,  it  is  reported,  they  are  even  to 
this  day  held  in  high  honour,  being  decorated  with  gold  bands 
and  jewels. 

Sy  Tutu  Kwamina  died  soon  after  the  battle  of  Esmacow, 
and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother,  Sy  Okoto. 

After  the  victory  of  Esmacow  the  Ashantees  advanced  upon 
Cape  Coast  Castle,  when  there  was  but  a  garrison  of  about  fifty 
men  in  the  fort.  Even  the  streets  of  the  town  were  invaded  by 
the  enemy,  and  the  slaughter  which  ensued  was  terrific.  It  is 
calculated  that  about  20,000  Fantees  lost  their  lives  in  that 
campaign,  while  the  miserable  state  into  which  the  protectorate 
was  plunged  is  indescribable.  It  may  be  said  that  until  1 826 
the  Ashantees  were  masters  of  all  the  protectorate  up  to  within 
a  mile  of  the  seacoast  forts.  The  tables  were  reversed  in  1826. 
The  British  collected  a  force  at  Accra,  and  met  the  Ashantees 
at  Dudowah.  The  battle  that  ensued  then  was  most  sangui- 
nary, but  nearly  at  the  commencement  of  it  the  Ashantees 
were  stricken  with  a  panic  and  fled,  and  a  great  many  of  their 
captains,  rather  than  meet  the  king,  committed  suicide  on  the 
field.  The  Fantees  and  their  allies  on  this  day  amply  avenged 
the  horrors  of  1823  and  1824,  and  an  even  balance  of  losses 
was  thus  struck. 

The  successor  of  Sy  Okoto  was  a  prince  called  Kwaweda, 
who  departed  this  life  in  1867.  Kwaweda  invaded  the  pro- 
tectorate in  1840,  and  waged  a  bloody  and  relentless  war  on 
the  Fantees ;  but  the  English  were  not  summoned  to  take  up 
arms  for  the  latter  in  this  campaign  ;  they  simply  advised  them, 
and  supplied  them  with  arms  and  ammunition.    On  the  death 


THE  LOUVRE  OF  COOMASSIE. 


61 


of  Kwaweda,  the  present  King  Coffee  Calcali  ascended  the 
throne,  in  his  thirtieth  year. 

The  present  king  of  Ashantee  is  said  to  be  an  intelligent 
man,  with  the  appearance  of  a  mulatto,  slight  but  sinewy  in 
figure,  hospitable  and  gracious  to  strangers.  He  resides  at 
Coomassie,  the  capital,  which  is  described  by  those  who  have 
seen  it  as  a  populous  and  well-regulated  town.  The  palace  of  the 
king  is  a  structure  of  stone,  large  and  capacious,  with  great 
squares,  where  reviews  and  assemblages  are  held.  The  whole 
is  walled  around,  having  an  outer  and  inner  enclosure.  The 
rooms  are  lofty  and  commodious,  and  those  occupied  by  his 
Majesty  are  furnished  with  European  and  native  articles.  The 
presents  he  has  been  continually  receiving  diplomatically  have 
assisted  in  supplying  him  with  unusual  luxuries.  Pictures 
adorn  the  walls ;  sumptuous  sofas  are  ranged  round  his  walls  ; 
thick  carpets  cover  his  floors ;  his  tables  are  loaded  with  a 
thousand  costly  knick-knacks. 

Next  in  importance  to  the  Palace  among  the  public  build- 
ings is  the  Bantanmiah,  which  is  the  Tower  or  the  Louvre  of 
Coomassie,  wherein  are  stored  the  more  precious  gifts  it  has 
been  the  good  pleasure  of  tlie  kings  of  Ashantee  to  receive  from 
the  British,  the  Dutch,  and  the  French  Grovemments.  It  is  the 
treasure  house,  filled  with  the  costly  ware  the  kings  have  gathered 
from  time  to  time :  the  Bank,  wherein  lie  the  specie  and  the 
gold  dust,  ingots  and  bars  of  solid  gold,  and  many  a  chestful 
of  rings  and  chains  of  gold,  gorgeous  silks  and  satins,  and  much 
else  of  wealth  that  goes  to  make  up  the  treasures  of  a  rich  and 
powerful  despot  like  the  Ashantee  king.  In  the  Bantammah, 
side  by  side  with  the  crown  of  the  kings,  is  laid  the  gold 
decorated  cup  fashioned  out  of  the  skull  of  the  unfortimate 
Governor  of  Cape  Coast  Castle,  Sir  Charles  McCarthy.  It 
is  only  on  days  of  state  and  high  festival  that  this  ghastly 
cup  is  used.  I  fancy,  if  the  English  take  the  Bantammah, 
that  this  state  cup  will  be  considered  one  of  the  most  valuable 
trophies  that  could  be  secured. 

The  king  possesses  a  numerous  harem,  like  the  sable 
monarch  of  Dahomey.  He  is  privileged  to  marry  as  many 
as  he  pleases;  for  even  in  Ashantee  the  king  can  do  no 
wrong  or  trespass  on  any  law.  I  should  fear  to  say  how  many 
wives  he  has  married,  for  we  shall  probably  know  the  exact 


62 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


number  by-and-by ;  but  he  can  take  his  pick  out  of  the  noblest, 
the  fairest  and  best  in  the  land,  after  which  it  is  certain  death 
for  any  other  man  in  Ashautee  to  look  on  her  face,  for  she  is 
the  king's.  The  harem  is  jealously  guarded  in  a  quarter  of  the 
palace  overlooking  the  palace  gardens  by  a  body  of  150  eunuchs. 
It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  rights  of  ordinary 
women  are  curtailed  thus;  in  the  households  of  all  but  the 
king  the  women  are  at  liberty  to  stare  and  be  stared  at,  to 
talk  with  any  man  or  be  talked  with. 

The  king,  with  the  usual  privilege  of  monarchy,  may  stay 
at  home  during  war,  while  he  may  command  every  soul  capable 
of  bearing  arms  to  proceed  to  the  war.  He  has  his  Prime 
Ministers,  his  Commander-in-Chief,  Keeper  of  the  Treasury, 
Chief  of  the  Eunuchs,  Generals  of  Divisions,  and  Nobles  of  the 
Council. 

The  Prime  Ministers,  two  in  number,  the  most  important 
of  his  household,  manage  all  public  business,  and  proflFer  advice 
to  the  king  upon  all  matters  of  vital  importance  to  the  state. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  generally  some  ancient  warrior, 
whose  deeds  in  his  prime  form  never-ending  subjects  of  social 
chat  among  the  old  and  yoimg.  When  he  assumes  this  high 
post  he  does  not  venture  into  battle  any  more;  his  work 
seems  to  be  limited  to  portioning  the  levies  to  each  noble,  to 
keeping  the  army  up  to  a  certain  standard  in  numbers,  to  organ- 
ising, and  appointing  the  officers  and  troops  for  active  service. 
Next  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  comes  another  venerable  old 
soldier,  whose  post  seems  to  be  that  of  strategician-in-chief, 
who  plans  campaigns  and  wars,  and  whispers  military  advice 
in£o  the  ears  of  the  generals  about  to  proceed  on  active  service. 

The  Keeper  of  the  Bantanmiah  or  Treasury  of  Coomassie 
is  a  most  important  man.  He  is  generally  a  noble,  and  a  dis- 
tinguished soldier.  The  present  keeper  is  the  chief  called  Aman- 
quatia,  already  mentioned.  He  is  reported  to  be  in  our  front 
seeking  honours  in  skirmishing  with  the  British  allies. 

The  generals  of  divisions  are  generally  great  and  powerful 
chiefs,  who  have  supplied  the  king's  army  with  hundreds  of 
their  retainers  and  slaves,  and  are  appointed  for  their  influence. 

As  may  be  seen  from  the  above,  the  Ashantee  nation  is 
composed  of  four  classes — the  monarch ;  the  nobles,  or  feudal 
chiefs ;  the  free  Ashantee  yeomen,  land  proprietors,  small 


THE  ASHANTEE  ARMY. 


63 


village  chiefs,  all  free-born  Ashantees ;  the  slaves  taken  in  war 
or  bom  in  bondage  form  the  fourth  class. 

The  great  nobles  own  vast  territories  and  are  lords  of 
thousands  of  vassals.  They  may  be  said  to  be  petty  kings,  sub- 
sidiary to  the  central  government  at  Coomassie.  Foremost 
among  these,  like  another  Warwick,  is  the  Prince  of  Jwabin,  in 
whose  territory  is  the  populous  city  of  Selaga,  with  a  popula- 
tion of  400,000  (?)  souls,  situate  on  the  upper  Volta.  This 
prince  can  furnish  the  king  with  a  force  of  20,000  vassals  for 
his  army.  He  seldom  ventures  out  himself  into  active  service 
unless  the  King  of  Ashantee  proceeds  in  person  to  the  war. 

The  Princes  of  Becquah  and  Mam-pon  are  each  able  to  fur- 
nish the  national  army  with  contingents  varying  from  5,000  to 
10,000  vassals.  The  Chief  of  Fomanah,  between  Coomassie 
and  the  Prah,  enters  on  service  with  a  force  of  1,000  of  his 
own  retainers.  But  there  are  several  large  cities  beyond 
Coomassie,  both  affluent  and  populous,  of  which  we  may  know 
more  when  we  shall  have  entered  Coomassie  as  conquerors. 

The  Ashantee  army  in  the  field  bears  flags  for  distinctive 
signals  or  ensigns  of  vassalage,  but  they  have  no  importance  in 
the  eyes  of  soldiers,  save  as  distinguishing  pennants  or  banners. 
The  loss  of  any  of  them  involves  no  disgrace  or  misfortune. 
The  chiefs'  umbrellas  represent  in  the  Ashantee  soldiers'  eyes 
what  a  regimental  flag  does  in  a  European  army.  The  gorgeous 
sunshade  which  an  Ashantee  chief  holds  over  his  head,  ornate 
with  vari-coloured  pieces  of  silk,  rich  with  its  appendages  of 
silver  and  gold,  embodies  in  an  Ashantee's  eyes  the  honour  of 
his  chief.  The  loss  of  one  of  these  in  battle  involves  disgrace 
and  defeat. 

The  chiefs  are  borne  from  place  to  place  by  hammock  or 
chair  bearers.  The  chair  which  the  British  captured  at 
Abracrampa  was  a  specimen  of  Ashantee  manufacture  in  that 
line.  It  appeared  to  be  exceedingly  cumbrous,  though  it  was 
not  of  great  weight.  In  shape  it  was  exactly  like  the  body  of 
a  light  phaeton  lifted  from  its  wheels.  Eight  stout  fellows 
bearing  it  on  their  heads,  protected  by  thick  pads  resting  on 
each  bearer's  cranium,  sufficed  to  take  Essamanquatiah,  the 
Ashantee  general,  from  camp  to  camp.  The  woodwork  of  the 
chair  was  studded  with  an  infinite  number  of  brass  tacks,  and 
specimens  of  what  skill  in  tracery  and  ornate  woodwork  of 


64 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 


which  the  Ashantee  artisans  are  capable  were  visible  on  the 
sides  and  front  of  the  chair. 

The  king  appears  in  the  field  only  in  extremis — when  his 
presence  is  necessary  to  inspire  the  flagging  enthusiasm  or 
devotion  of  the  army  to  his  cause,  when  discouragement  has 
followed  repeated  reverses  in  battle.  Then  every  soul  capable 
of  bearing  arms,  eveiy  chief  owing  allegiance,  every  oflBcer  of 
his  household,  arms  himself  for  battle,  and  a  force  of  100,000 
men  is  thus  speedily  raised. 

His  state  umbrella  is  borne  over  or  before  him  by  a  chief 
wherever  he  moves,  the  sight  of  which  rouses  the  interest  and 
zeal  of  every  member  of  his  army.  This  umbrella  costs  a  small 
fortune — about  3,000  or  4,000  dollars.  It  is  made  of  alternate 
pieces  of  crimson  and  black  velvet,  while  hundreds  of  gold 
pendicles  form  a  fringe  around  it,  and  a  large  boss  of  pure 
gold  surmounts  it  above. 

The  dress  of  the  king  on  sucli  occasions  is  exceedingly 
costly.  A  tunic  of  crimson  velvet  covers  his  body,  his  loose 
Moorish  pantaloons  are  made  of  the  same  stufl^,  a  broad  band  of 
gold  encircles  his  waist,  a  cap  or  turban  of  silk,  richly  em- 
broidered, covers  his  head  ;  his  weapons  are  decorated  profusely 
with  the  precious  metal. 

The  king's  revenue  is  derived,  apart  from  his  own  private 
estates,  which  are  vast,  from  the  gold  mines.  The  dust  becomes 
the  property  of  the  miners  or  proprietors,  but  every  nugget, 
great  or  small,  throughout  his  dominions,  belongs  to  the  king. 
Whatever  person  is  guilty  of  reserving  any  of  the  king's  por- 
tion is  liable  to  the  death  penalty,  which  is  invariably  carried 
out. 

The  arms  of  the  Ashantees  consist  of  long  five-foot  Danish 
guns  (flint  locks),  though  many  are  also  found  with  blunder- 
busses. The  cartridge  boxes  serve  as  girdles,  the  leather  or 
wooden  cups  into  which  the  powder  is  poured  being  sewed  on  a 
belt,  the  two  ends  of  which  are  either  tied  with  a  leather  thong 
or  buckled  in  front.  The  bullets  or  iron  slugs  are  in  a  small 
leathern  pouch,  slung  over  the  shoulder.  This  pouch,  some- 
times found  on  the  dead  Ashantees,  is  generally  found  to  contain 
as  miscellaneous  a  set  of  articles  as  may  be  seen  in  any  Jack 
tar's  box  or  bag.  Bark  thread,  bark  waste  (probably  for  wad- 
ding), iron  pins,  queer-looking  stones,  an  assortment  of  dark- 


THE  ASflANTEE  WARRIOH. 


65 


coloured  beans,  a  stale  piece  of  yam  or  manioc,  a  piece  of  chew- 
stick,  a  handful  or  so  of  small  snail  shells  and  other  extraordi- 
nary articles,  represent  what  an  Ashantee's  pouch  contains  on 
the  battle-field.  Any  reader  who  may  have  seen  a  Greek 
brigand's,  an  Albanian's,  a  Kurd's,  or  a  Bedouin's  cartridge 
box  may  guess  at  once-  what  kind  of  a  cartridge  box  the 
Ashantees  use,  and  they  undoubtedly  derived  their  notions  of 
the  utility  of  such  a  thing  from  the  trading  Tuaregs  of  Tim- 
buctoo.  One  need  not  wonder,  then,  at  the  very  few  severe 
wounds  inflicted  upon  the  English,  despite  the  very  many 
splendid  opportunities  the  ambushed  Ashantees  have  had  to 
inflict  instantaneous  death.  The  powder  is  thrown  loosely  into 
the  barrel,  and,  being  often  without  wadding  material,  the 
bullets  or  slugs  of  iron,  or  handfuls  of  snail  shells,  or  a  piece 
of  unsmelted  iron  ore,  are  dropped  on  the  loose  powder,  and  the 
loose  charge  is  thus  fired  when  only  a  few  feet  from  their  foes. 
Hence,  at  least,  we  need  not  wonder  that  so  few  wounds  received 
by  the  English  have  proved  fatal. 

There  is  not  the  least  doubt  but  the  Ashantees  have  im- 
proved immensely  since  they  first  became  a  nation.  They  can 
now  point  to  eight  kings  who  have  worn  the  crown  of  Ashantee, 
who  have  carried  terror  and  dismay  to  the  hundred  nations 
around,  and  have  spread  the  reputation  of  the  Ashantees  far  and 
wide.  The  certain  consciousness  of  the  fact  that  their  Ashantee 
fore&thefs  were  warriors,  and  their  kings  were  conquerors,  and 
that  they  themselves  have  not  degenerated,  has  imparted  dignity 
of  bearing  and  an  air  of  superiority  to  the  meanest  Ashantee 
soldier. 

The  Ashantee  warrior,  miserable  as  he  may  appear  compared 
to  the  gaudily-dressed  West  India  British  soldier,  is  his  equal, 
nay,  I  may  say  superior  to  him,  in  the  battle.  The  West 
Indian,  confronted  with  the  almost  nude  warrior  of  Ashantee, 
may,  with  a  serene  smile  of  self-satisfaction,  tap  his  breech- 
loading  Snider  rifle  and  dare  his  foe  to  the  battle,  sure  that  his 
weapon,  his  own  superior  knowledge  of  military  laws  and  tactics 
and  the  discipline  in  which  he  has  been  trained  will  carry  the 
day.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Ashantee — full  of  the  traditions 
of  his  race,  conscious  only  of  the  power  of  his  king  and  that  he 
is  the  king's  warrior  even  to  the  death  ;  that,  until  he  saw  the 
British  soldier,  the  Ashantee  went  to  the  battle  only  to  conquer; 

F 


66 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


that  in  four  campaigns,  at  least,  against  the  British,  the  British 
were  worsted ;  that  in  the  Bantammah,  the  king's  treasure 
house  at  Coomassie,  there  lies  a  bleached  skull  of  a  British 
Governor  as  a  trophy  of  the  Ashantee's  might — can  tap  his 
*  cheap  Brummagem  gun  with  its  old-fashioned  flint  lock,  his  bad 
powder  and  his  cast-iron  slugs,  and,  relying  on  his  superior 
craft  in  the  bush,  may  with  a  smile  of  proud  serenity,  accept  the 
combat  which  the  bedizened  and  tasselled  negro  of  the  West 
Indies  proffers  him. 

Give  the  Ashantees  the  same  weapon,  the  breech-loading 
Sniders,  with  the  proper  ammunition,  with  which  the  allies  of 
the  English  have  been  furnished,  and  even  the  white  troops 
would  find  that  the  Ashantees  are  a  foe  worthy  of  their  best 
efforts. 

It  is  a  thousand  pities  that  the  British  Governors  have  not 
succeeded  in  winning  the  confidence  of  the  Ashantees.  Yet, 
who  knows  but  this  war  may  prove  the  greatest  blessing 
that  could  befall  these  people  ?  If  the  English  are  wise  they 
will  deprive  their  present  enemy  of  their  king,  attach  to 
themselves  these  brave  and  formidable  warriors,  and  through 
them,  open  the  whole  of  Central  Africa  to  trade  and  commerce 
and  the  beneficent  influences  of  civilisation.  The  Bomans 
would  have  been  delighted  at  such  an  opportunity  of  extending 
their  power  for  the  benefit  of  themselves  and  the  world  at  large. 
Two  thousand  Ashantees,  under  the  leadership  of  an  intelligent 
British  officer,  would  soon  extend  the  power  of  the  English  from 
Cape  Coast  Castle  across  the  Thogoshi  moimtains  to  Timbuctoo, 
and  from  the  Mandingo  land  to  Benin. 


WAITING  FOR  NEWS. 


67 


CHAPTER  IV. 

▲  VOYAOB  PB0P08ED — ABYENTUBBS  APLOAT — THE  SURF  OF  THE  GOLD  COAST 
— SCENES  ALOKO  THE  GOLD  COAST — ACCRA  —  TRADE  AND   TRADERS —  * 
CAPTAIN  GLOTER. 

November  22,  1873. 

It  was  dreary  waiting  at  Cape  Coast  Castle  for  news,  and  expect- 
ing the  arrival  of  the  white  troops  and  the  soldiers  of  Her 
Majesty  the  Queen,  who  are  said  to  be  coming  to  destroy 
Coomassie,  the  capital  of  the  ferocious  king  of  Ashantee.  In- 
activity and  ennui  were  rapidly  sapping  every  ounce  of  energy 
and  vitality. 

Many,  like  myself,  found  it  hard  work  to  live  week  after 
week  in  a  Fantee  hut,  stationed  in  a  malarious  valley,  doing 
nothing  but  smelling  the  abominations  around  us,  or  counting 
the  minutes  which  must  elapse  before  being  prostrated  by 
another  attack  of  fever,  listening  to  the  tweedle-dee  and 
tweedle-dum  of  Fantee  music,  staring  in  a  kind  of  lack-lustre- 
eyed  way  at  the  antics  of  sireless  little  negroes  who  seem  to 
have  been  bom  no  one  knows  how.  If  one  went  in  a  desperate 
state  straight  to  head-quarters  seeking  news,  it  was  ever  the 
same  answer,  ^Nothing  new.'  If  one  met  an  officer,  and  judging 
by  his  face  that  he  would  be  likely  to  impart  something,  one 
would  say  'Good  morning,  good  morning.  How  do  you  do. 
Glad  to  see  you  look  so  well.  Anything  new  this  morning  ? ' 
the  answer  would  inevitably  be, '  Good  morning,  good  morning. 
Quite  well,  thanks.    No,  nothing  new.    Ta-ta,  old  fellah ! ' 

The  question  *  Anything  new  ? '  as  soon  as  uttered  seemed 
to  annihilate  all  courtesy,  cordiality,  and  good  feeling.  Mind 
you,  not  that  there  was  really  anything  to  impart ;  not  that 
the  officer  was  in  possession  of  state  secrets  and  regarded  the 
man  who  had  the  audacity  to  ask  him  for  any  ^th  distrust. 


68 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


but  because  Greneral  Wolseley  has  so  thoroughly  imbued  his 
subs  with  his  own  peculiar  notions  of  special  news-gatherers, 
and  stamped  his  own  individuality  on  almost  every  member 
of  his  staff.  Socially,  then,  there  is  not  a  disagreeable  man 
here — at  least  I  have  not  met  any.  Meet  any  of  them  with- 
out the  face  of  inquisitiveness,  and  the  nose  of  a  news- 
gatherer,  and  the  eye  of  an  itinerant  newspaper  man,  and  you 
will  find  them  as  genial  souls  as  any  who  ever  called  themselves 
English  gentlemen.  The  general  himself  is  chiefest  and  best 
of  them ;  as  hospitable  and  kindly-mannered  as  he  can  be.  But 
on  the  matter  of  furnishing  news  to  newspapers  he  entertains 
most  peculiar  ideas,  which  are  by  this  time  patent  to  all  the 
world. 

In  the  meantime  it  was  dull  dreary  waiting  for  the  arrival 
of  the  troops:  one's  eyes  became  quite  jaundiced  looking 
at  the  same  objects;  one's  ears  became  tired  with  the  meaning- 
less hum  and  babble  of  people  on  the  verge  of  inanity.  Even 
the  stirring  items  of '  Ashantees  in  retreat,'  *  two  Houssas  killed,' 
*  four  of  the  allies  woimded,'  and  news  such  as  another  officer 
down  with  the  fever,  one  of  the  staff  has  a  dysenteric  affection, 
a  marine  has  had  a  sunstroke,  failed  to  attract.  If  letters 
had  had  to  be  written  upon  such  things  as  these,  I  fear  that 
the  Anglo- Ashantee  war,  with  its  tedious,  small,  uninteresting 
details,  would  soon  be  placed  on  a  par  with  the  ever-enduring 
Carlist  war,  as  the  most  uninteresting  campaign  ever  planned. 

Well,  I  said  it  was  dull  dreary  waiting  for  the  troops :  it 
was  becoming  positively  sickening,  for  already  about  fifty  per 
cent,  of  the  officers  who  had  been  attached  to  the  prospective 
expedition  were  down  with  fever. 

I  proposed  one  evening  that  we,  the  Correspondents,  should 
proceed  down  the  coast  to  Accra  in  the  '  Dauntless,'  and  find 
out  how  things  were  progressing  to  leeward  with  Glover's  ex- 
pedition. The  time  was  after  dinner,  stomachs  were  more 
than  usually  full  of  a  good  dinner,  eyes  were  a  little  brighter, 
and  faces  were  a  little  more  animated  with  good  cheer.  There 
were  four  of  us  ;  one  was  the  agent  of  a  great  London  house; 
one  was  special  correspondent  for  a  London  daily,  a  man  of 
some  impoilance  ;  a  third  was  the  partner  of  the  agent  afore- 
said ;  the  fourth  was  your  obedient  servant. 

The  London  special  replied  kindly :  '  My  dear  fellow,  this 


ADVENTURE  PROPOSED. 


69 


is  really  very  kind  of  you ;  I  should  have  thought  you  would 
have  considered  me  a  rival.' 

Answered  I : — *  I  just  happen  to  have  a  little  steamer 
here,  and  you,  like  myself  want  to  go  down  the  Coast  to 
gather  news.  Permit  me,  then,  to  offer  you  a  passage.  If  I 
considered  you  as  a  rival,  I  would  not.' 

Then  spoke  the  agent :  *  Oh,  we  can  manage  it  easily 
enough.  It  will  only  take  us  ten  hours  to  go  to  Accra;  thence 
six  hours  more  will  take  us  to  Adda,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Volta. 
It  will  be  impossible  to  cross  the  bar  with  the  steam  launch, 
but  we  can  hail  a  surf-boat,  and  go  ashore.  If  Glover  is  there, 
our  journey  is  at  an  end  ;  if  he  is  not  there,  we  shall  have  to 
manage  to  enter  the  river  and  go  after  him :  one  day  will  be 
enough  for  that.' 

The  partner  chimed  in  with  all  the  agent  said,  and  the 
London  special  hailed  the  idea  with  pleasinre. 

We  all  felt  uncommonly  brave,  imusually  energetic,  youth- 
fully sanguine.  What  we  were  going  to  do,  and  what  we  were 
not  going  to  do,  were  themes  which  were  fertile  and  talkable. 
It  was  left  for  me  to  provision  and  coal  the  '  Dauntless ; '  they 
were  simply  to  consider  themselves  as  guests.  It  was  finally 
resolved  that  we  should  set  out  on  our  adventurous  cruise  at 
evening  of  the  next  day. 

The  morning  of  the  day  dawned,  noon  came,  and  the  after- 
noon was  rapidly  drawing  towards  evening,  when  the  gentlemen 
who  were  to  be  my  passengers  were  seen  advancing  towards  my 
house. 

When  they  had  come  in,  and  been  greeted,  I  said:  *I 
suppose  you  are  all  ready  to  start  ? ' 

*  N6-0-0,'  drawled  the  agent,  with  not  one-twentieth  of  the 
assurance  or  the  audacious  fire  which  lit  his  face  the  night 
before.  *  You  see,  I  have  been  reckoning  up  my  time  pretty 
closely,  and  I  don't  see  how  I  can  spare  eight  days,  for  it  will 
take  eight  days  and  no  less  this  trip  of  yours,  and  my  ship  is 
coming,  she  may  be  here  to-morrow  or  any  day,  and  it  would 
not  do  for  me  to  be  absent.  If  you  were  only  going  to  Accra 
now,  and  coming  straight  back,  why  then  I  think  I  should  go.' 

*  What  do  you  say,  Mr.  Correspondent  ? ' 

*  Well,  you  see,'  he  replied,  *  if  Mr.  Agent  was  going  to  Addah,  ^ 
where  Olover  is.  I  would  not  mind  going  because  he  knows  the 


70 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


whole  coast.  But  going  to  Accra  doesn't  tempt  me  at  all,  besides 
I  fear  I  should  be  fearfully  sick,  your  laimch  is  such  a  small 
thing.    No,  I  don't  think  I  can  go.' 

'  Very  well,  Mr.  Agent,  we  shall  go  down  to  Accra,  and  if  I 
can  get  the  information  I  need  there,  I  shall  come  back  at  once. 
Will  that  suit  your  book  ? '  The  new  arrangement  suited  Mr. 
Agent,  though  it  evidently  was  a  labour  to  him  to  get  his  mind 
up  to  the  travelling  pitch,  as  he  begged  me  to  defer  starting 
until  next  morning. 

It  must  be  imderstood  the  agent  of  the  great  London 
house  is  a  kind  of  king  on  the  Gold  Coast.  He  has  sub- 
agents  everywhere,  all  of  whom  keep  very  hospitable  houses. 
He  is  the  man  whom  we  expect  will  cash  our  bills  by-and-bye, 
when  ready  money  has  gone,  and  he  is  the  man  who  could 
furnish  me  with  more  coal  if  I  required  any ;  it  was  therefore  a 
matter  of  policy  to  submit  to  the  caprices  and  humours  of  such 
an  important  man. 

At  7  A.M.  we  proceeded  on  board  the  '  Dauntless,'  and  were 
about  to  weigh  anchor  when  I  asked  the  agent  if  he  had 
remembered  the  oil-cans. 

No,  he  had  not ;  he  would  send  a  man  immediately  after 
the  oil,  which  he  did.  It  was  no  light  matter  to  have 
forgotten  the  oil  for  the  engines,  neither  was  it  a  light  matter 
to  send  a  boat  back  through  that  awful  surf,  which  the 
English  have  left  to  be  a  curse  and  an  annoyance  to  all 
who  seek  this  part  of  the  Gold  Coast.  We  had  both  in  coming 
through  the  frantic  surf  been  drenched  to  the  skin  by  a  vicious 
wave,  which  had  simply  wetted  us  for  spite,  though  it  might 
have  drowned  us  had  we  submitted  the  boat  to  its  power. 

Patience,  mixed  with  a  little  undercurrent  of  fuming  and 
fretting,  obtained  its  reward  finally ;  the  oil-cans  came  on  board, 
we  soimded  our  whistle  for  a  parting  signal,  we  weighed  anchor 
and  steamed  to  leeward,  that  is  towards  the  east,  along  tlie 
African  shore  at  the  rate  of  nine  knots  per  hour. 

I  was  falling — not  falling,  but  gradually  sinking — into  a 
delicious  stupor,  a  soft  quiet  ecstasy,  lulled  into  uncon- 
sciousness, or  listlessness  rather,  by  the  gentle  cradling 
of  the  deep,  by  the  soft,  pure,  healthy  breeze  which  stole 
whisperingly  under  our  awning,  by  the  luxuriant  scenery  of  the 


ADVENTURES  AFLOAT. 


71 


tropics,  which  was  banked  up  on  our  left,  in  the  palm-clad 
hummocks  and  low  ranges. 

We  had  reached  Annamaboe,  about  10  miles  from  Cape 
Coast,  within  a  very  short  time  it  seemed  to  me,  when  I  was 
awakened  from  the  repose  of  mind  and  body,  and  the  influence 
of  the  wind,  the  sky,  and  the  scenery,  by  a  gurgling  sound 
proceeding  from  my  friend  the  agent,  through  whose  good 
offices  I  expected  to  have  my  note-book  full  of  interesting  notes 
respecting  the  war. 

'  What  is  the  matter,  my  friend  ?'  I  asked.  *  Sick,  eh  I  it  will 
do  you  good.' 

*  Oh  I  much  good  ;  bile,  you  see,  collects  so  quickly  in  these 
tropical  countries,  that  really  when  one  inhales  fresh  sea  air  the 
whole  system  seems  to  revolt  at  the  tax  laid  upon  it  by  the 
vicious  bile  when  ashore,  and  gladly  frees  itself  from  that  which 
choked  and  impeded  the  machinery  of — ugh-ugh-ugh — the  body. 
I  feel  much  better  already.  But  what  in  the  name  of  fortune 
is  the  matter  with  the  engine  ? ' 

*  Eh !  what,  of  course  we  have  considerably  slackened,  haven't 
we  ?  what  can  be  the  matter,  I  wonder.' 

The  engineer  was  at  once  questioned  imperiously  upon  the 
subject.  He  answered  that  he  himself  had  been  wondering  what 
the  matter  could  be,  and  he  had  been  anxiously  asking  himself 
the  question,  besides  examining  carefully  the  engine  and 
machinery.  The  cause  was  far  beyond  his  ken,  but  he 
feared  the  boiler  was  not  adapted  for  salt  water.  He  had 
started  with  80  pounds  of  steam,  but  it  had  gradually  got 
lower  and  lower  until  he  had  no  more  than  15  pounds  left,  and 
though  there  was  a  splendid  fire  he  could  not  increase  the 
steam-power. 

The  yacht  was  going  at  the  rate  of  about  2  knots  an  hour.  My 
friend  the  agent  was  perfectly  miserable  from  the  disagreeability 
imposed  on  him  by  Neptune.  The  sky  lost  its  cerulean  aspect 
and  assimied  a  gloomy  color,  which,  I  was  assured  by  the 
agent,  who  knew  the  coast  well,  was  the  forerunner  of  the 
tornado. 

*^My  God,'  said  he, '  I  would  not  be  overtaken  in  this  little 
thing  for  the  world.  Nothing  would  save  us.  We  are  only 
500  yards  from  the  beach,  and  if  she  can't  do  better  than  this. 


72 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


she  would  he  driven  ashore  in  no  time.  I  vote  we  go  hack 
hefore  it  is  too  late.' 

I  turned  her  head  round,  and  inwardly  vowed  that  once  I 
landed  him  I  should  continue  my  voyage  without  him. 

In  a  couple  of  hours  we  were  abreast  of  the  fleet  we  left 
some  three  hours  before  full  of  happiest  anticipations.  Every- 
thing seemed  changed  in  that  short  time.  Our  own  thoughts 
were  sullen,  baffled  hopes  soured  the  mind,  the  sky  vras  of 
an  inky  blackness,  the  sea  was  dark,  the  land  appeared  over- 
hung with  a  murky  pall,  there  was  no  pleasantness  in  anything, 
looked  we  inwardly  or  outwardly. 

Suddenly  the  funnel  gave  a  roar,  and  before  we  could  re- 
cover from  our  astonishment  the  engineer  shouted  through  the 
rising  breeze,  *  It's  all  right  now,  sir ;  the  damper  was  up,  that's 
all,  sir  I  She  will  go  now,  sir.  She  will  beat  anything  about 
this  neighbourhood.' 

'  Shall  we  go  back,  Mr.  Agent  ?  Would  it  not  be  better 
for  us  to  continue  the  voyage  ?  The  engineer  has  found  the 
secret  out,'  I  asked. 

'  All  right,'  he  answered,  '  if  you  think  there  are  no  more 
secrets  that  may  wreck  us,  I  am  willing  to  prosecute  the 
voyage.'  Considering  that  the  gentleman  was  miserably  sea- 
sick, and  advancing  tornadoes  are  not  to  be  sneered  at  on  this 
coast  on  board  a  tiny  steamer  like  ours,  the  answer  was  plucky, 
and  worthy  of  the  best  John  Bull  that  ever  was  afloat. 

The  little  yacht  was  now  throbbing  through  every  beam  in 
her,  the  steam  sizzed  and  swished  vigorously,  the  funnel  roared 
in  concert,  while  the  fan  kicked  up  a  foaming  wake  behind  in 
quite  an  exhilarating  style. 

We  were  going  a  steady  eight-knot  pace,  and  soon  sighted 
Annamaboe,  an  ochrish-coloured  fort  situated  on  a  spur  sloping 
from  a  palm-clad  range  to  the  sea. 

As  we  continued  our  journey,  glimpses  of  unrivalled  shady 
groves  of  palms,  shrubs,  plantains,  and  tall  arrowy  silk  cotton 
trees  met  the  ravished  eyes.  It  was  such  a  change  to  see  real 
nature  once  more  after  all  the  dreary  waiting  for  active  life  at 
Cape  Coast  Castle.  The  tornado  clouds  vanished  over  the 
horizon,  the  sky  regained  its  tropic  tints,  the  shores  emerged 
out  of  the  gloom,  the  sea  vied  with  the  sky  in  its  blueness,  the 
surf,  ever  fitintic,  ever  roaring,  ever  plunging,  reared  its  myriad 


THE  SURF  ON  THE  GOLD  COAST. 


73 


crests  of  snowy  foam  and  dashed  itself  on  the  sinuous  beach 
with  a  noise  almost  deafening. 

The  *Daimtless,'  as  trim  and  taut  a  little  yacht  as  ever 
bent  to  surging  wave,  raised  her  head  proudly  and  gracefully, 
and,  despite  the  uproar  on  her  lee,  cleaved  the  Grold  Coast's  sea 
as  if  she  cared  nought  for  rock,  or  reef,  or  wreck. 

By  hugging  the  shore  closely  we  were  enabled  to  detect 
beauties  tiiat  are  never  seen  by  passengers  travelling  on  the 
steamers.  Tiny  nut-brown  villages  modestly  hiding  under  a 
depth  of  green  plantain  fronds,  and  stately  silk  cotton  trees, 
which  upheld  their  glorious  crowns  of  vivid  green  foliage  more 
than  fifty  feet  above  the  tallest  palm' tree ;  depths  of  shrubbery 
wherein  every  plant  struggled  for  life  and  breathing-space  with 
its  neighbour,  through  which  the  eyes  attempted  to  penetrate 
in  vain  beyond  a  few  feet ;  tracts  of  tall  wavy  grasses,  tiger, 
spear,  and  cane,  fit  lurking  places  for  any  wild  beast  of  prey, 
varied  by  bosky  dells,  lengthy  winding  ravines  literally  choked 
with  vegetation,  and  hills  on  the  slope  of  which  perhaps  rested 
a  village  of  a  timid  suspicious  sub-tribe.  And  if  the  eye,  ever 
in  search  of  the  picturesque  and  novel,  ever  roving  for  strange 
scenes,  chanced  to  fall  on  the  long  line  of  surf,  and  the  ear 
listened  to  the  sonorous  deep-soimding  thunder,  the  mind 
recurred  to  the  Psalmist's  expressive  words :  *  They  that  go 
down  to  the  sea  in  ships,  that  do  business  in  great  waters,  these 
see  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  his  wonders  in  the  deep.' 

The  surf  on  the  African  coast  is  ever  a  wonder  and  a 
danger.  There  is  no  other  coast  in  any  part  of  the  world  a 
thousand  miles  in  length  without  possessing  a  cove  or  harbour 
where  a  ship  could  anchor  secure  from  being  rocked  by  the 
surf  waves.  Try  along  the  whole  of  the  Grain,  Ivory,  the 
Gold,  and  Slave  Coasts,  and  there  is  not  one  port.  But  for- 
tunately for  ships  trading  to  these  places,  there  is  seldom  a 
hurricane  or  a  gale  blowing,  so  that  they  are  able  to  anchor 
about  a  mile  from  shore.  There  is  never  any  dead  calm. 
The  sea  is  ruffled  in  the  morning,  by  the  breeze  from 
oceanward :  during  the  night  it  is  moved  by  the  land  breeze, 
80  that  ships  anchoring  in  the  roadsteads  are  ever  to  be  seen 
rolling  uneasily ;  they  are  never  at  rest.  Unceasingly  the  long 
line  of  waves  is  to  be  traced,  rolling  onwards  towards  the  shore, 
gathering  strength  as  they  advance  nearer,  until,  receiving 


74 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  ebbing  waters  flowing  from  the  beach  from  preceding  seas, 
there  is  a  simultaneous  coiling  and  rolling,  and  at  once  the 
long  line  of  water  is  precipitated  with  a  fririous  roar  on  the 
land.  Where  the  water  meets  a  rock  a  tall  tower  of  spray  and 
foam  is  suddenly  reared,  the  wave  line  is  broken  and  is  in  mad 
confusion.  Where  the  beaeh  is  smooth  sand,  you  may  trace 
a  straight  imbroken  line  of  foam  nearly  a  mile  long. 

One  may  easily  understand  then  the  trouble  and  annoy- 
ance trade  imdergoes  on  such  an  inhospitable  coast.  An 
ordinary  ship's  boat  is  useless ;  it  would  be  a  drowning  matter 
for  a  crew  of  sailors  unaccustomed  to  the  surf  to  attempt  to 
land  anywhere  along  the  coast  between  Slierbro  and  Lagos,  a 
distance  of  nearly  1,200  miles.  The  mouths  of  the  insignificant 
rivers  which  feed  the  sea  along  this  distance  ofier  just  as 
dangerous  impediments  to  an  ordinary  ship's  boat  as  the  beach 
does.  A  long  line  of  mighty  breakers  rim  across  the  mouth  of 
each  river  and  form  a  bar,  which  is  almost  certain  death  to 
cross,  except  in  boats  especially  constructed  for  the  peculiar 
work,  and  native  canoes.  These  surf-boats  have  no  straight 
stems  or  stems,  the  keel  is  in  the  shape  of  a  bow,  which 
allows  the  advancing  wave  to  be  well  under  the  boat  before 
its  crest  lifts  it  aloft  to  precipitate  it  in  the  deep  trough 
left  in  the  track.  A  straight-stemmed  boat  cuts  the  wave,  and 
its  divided  crest  as  it  falls  unites  and  swamps  it.  Many 
and  many  a  poor  sailor,  ignorant  of  these  things,  has  lost  the 
number  of  his  mess  on  this  coast,  and  the  history  of  trade  on  it 
is  fraught  with  many  a  doleful  tale. 

Beyond  Annamaboe,  Accra  is  seen  nestling  comfortably  in 
the  lap  of  palm-clad  hills,  a  small  unpretentious  village,  and 
soon  the  five  hill  cones  of  Cormantine  rise  to  view.  A  mass  of 
white  buildings  glisten  in  contrast  to  green  palm  fronds ;  an 
old  fort,  and  a  ruined  tall  tower,  also  catch  the  eye.  Cor- 
mantine was  evidently  a  place  of  some  importance  once; 
its  position  is  admirable,  the  range  behind  it  augurs  well  for  .  the 
salubrity  of  the  climate ;  and  the  five  tall  singular  hills  just 
aback  of  the  range  would  have  been  well  adapted  for  sanitoria 
if  the  authorities  of  Cormantine  were  acquainted  with  sanative 
principles. 

Cormantine  has  a  history.  I  wish  I  could  give  you  the  plain 
simple  story  that  one  of  the  stones  in  the  ruined  fort  could  tell, 


HISTORY  OF  CORMANTINE. 


75 


had  it  a  tongue  to  speak.  I  daresay  it  would  be  one  of  the  most 
pathetic  stories  that  could  be  told  connected  with  the  Gold 
Coast.  It  has  the  merit  of  having  been  the  first  settlement 
which  the  English  made  on  this  coast.  Admiral  de  Ruyter 
wrested  it  from  the  English  in  1663,  and  called  it  Fort  Amster- 
dam, after  his  beloved  natal  place ;  it  was  a  great  slave  mart 
once,  human  cattle  have  filled  the  square  of  the  fort,  after 
tramping  long  weary  leagues  from  far  Gaudo  and  Sokoto  on 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  Great  Niger.  Descendants  of  the 
Moorish  trader  and  his  Fellatah  slave  now  inhabit  the  town  of 
wicked  memories,  and  in  the  olive  bright-eyed  mulatto  of 
Cormantine  you  may  recognise  the  seed  of  the  Dutchman. 

Beyond  the  old  town  a  few  miles,  the  range  dips  down  into 
a  broad  alluvial  valley  formed  by  the  Amissa  and  the  Nacqua 
rivers,  which,  however,  in  the  dry  season  never,  and  seldom  even 
in  the  rainy  season,  empty  themselves  into  the  sea.  This  is  another 
feature  peculiar  to  the  West  Coast  of  Africa.  There  are  numer- 
ous small  rivers  within  the  bank  of  comminuted  shell  and  sand 
which  the  Atlantic  waves  have  forced  up,  but  very  few  of  them 
have  current  enough  to  withstand  the  force  of  the  restless  surf. 

Rivers  such  as  the  Assinee,  the  Prah,  and  Volta,  have  volume 
sufficient  to  clear  to  a  superficial  depth  the  sand  which  the 
action  of  the  sea  heaves  up,  but  the  smaller  rivers,  with 
their  feebler  currents,  find  themselves  imprisoned  by  a  bank  of 
sand  averaging  from  a  few  yards  to  a  few  miles  in  bre€ulth ; 
consequently  finding  their  natural  debouchures  barred  up, 
they  form  lagoons,  like  those  of  Grand  Bassam,  Volta,  and 
Lagos,  many  scores  of  miles  in  length.  Lagoons  of  limited 
extent  are  here  called  salt-ponds,  such  as  the  salt-ponds 
ilear  Cape  Coast  Castle,  Annamaboe,  Cormantine,  and  Accra, 
and  a  score  of  other  places.  The  alluvial  deposits  conveyed 
by  the  small  rivers  settle  down  in  the  lagoons,  the  bottom 
of  which  in  the  course  of  ages  will  become  of  the  same 
altitude  as  the  beach  ;  the  rivers  will  then  overrun  their 
f^arriers,  eat  out  a  channel  to  be  again  imprisoned  by  a  new 
bank  of  sand  to  again  form  lagoons,  and  be  again  created  land ; 
and  thus  the  process  of  land-making,  I  have  no  doubt,  has  been 
going  on  for  ages  here. 

The  soil  from  Cormantine  to  the  distant  low-lying  cape  of 
Tantamquarry,  for  which  we  now  point  our  little  steamer,  must 


76 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


be  very  fertile.  Large  groves  of  cocoa-nut  trees  stand  apart, 
apparently  but  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the  utmost  reach  of 
the  surf,  embosoming  villages  with  their  ample  and  verdant 
leafage. 

Roimding  Tantamquarry  we  saw  another  ruined  fortlet, 
another  evidence,  if  more  were  wanting,  that  the  Grold  Coast 
was  considered  to  be  an  important  acquisition,  and  that  a  foreign 
Power  was  determined  to  guard  what  they  had  acquired  at  all 
cost,  at  one  time.  And  right  in  sight,  a  few  miles  away,  we  saw 
still  another,  that  of  Assam,  once  held  by  the  Dutch,  but  des- 
troyed by  the  Ashantees  in  1811. 

A  truncated  conical  hill  of  unusual  height  above  its  neigh- 
bour, possibly  1,000  feet  above  the  sea,  marks  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Winnebah,  an  important  settlement  once,  and  still 
the  seat  of  some  trade  in  palm  oil,  oil-nut  kernel  and  other 
customary  articles  of  the  African  trade.  The  whitewashed 
houses  of  the  merchants  were  soon  visible,  situated  on  a  terrace 
overlooking  the  bend  of  the  shore,  called  its  harbour :  a  river 
empties  into  the  sea  close  by,  said  to  come  from  a  great  distance 
inland. 

Barracoe  Cape  was  reached  a  few  hours  later,  and  on  roimd- 
ing it  a  stretch  of  country  was  visible,  which  extended  to 
Accra,  the  second  most  important  settlement  of  the  English 
on  the  Gold  Coast. 

At  two  in  the  morning,  after  a  rim  of  over  70  miles,  we  arrived 
opposite  Accra,  and  hailing  a  mail  steamer,  the  *  King  Bonny,' 
Captain  Hamilton,  just  arrived  from  leeward,  were  soon  on  board, 
recipients  of  large-minded  hospitality  from  the  kind  old 
Scotch  skipper. 

At  seven  o'clock  I  was  wakened  by  a  hideous  din  of  human 
voices  jabberiug  alongside  the  ship  in  their  siuf-boais  an 
unintelligible  jargon  of  words  such  as  no  Christian  like  myself 
could  stand  without  nerves  getting  unstrung.  I  therefore 
looked  upon  what  was  called  Accra  with  a  sullen  face  and  in  no 
amiable  frame  of  mind. 

The  scene  ashore  was  that  of  a  straight  beach  backed  by 
a  mud  terrace,  which  stretched  to  the  right  and  left  and  rear 
of  Accra  for  many  miles,  singularly  open  and  clear  as  seen 
from  shipboard.  Accra  itself  straggled  for  nearly  a  mile  on 
"tiie  edge  of  a  terrace  overlooking  the  beach,  many  pretentious 


ACCRA. 


77 


houses,  whitewashed,  attracting  attention  from  their  prominence 
above  the  clay-brown  huts  amongst  them.  Almost  to  the  ex- 
treme left  was  the  Commandant's  house,  aloof  and  exclusive ;  its 
wide  verandah  denoted  luxurious  coolness,  its  wide  space  around 
it  informed  you  that  at  one  time  or  another  some  occupant  of  it 
had  been  assiduous  to  procure  unpolluted  air.  Away  to  the  ex- 
treme right  was  another  large  house  with  wide  verandahs,  and 
abundant  grounds  about  it.  This  was  the  Basle  Mission 
House,  occupied  by  a  singular  commimity  of  religious  Swiss 
and  Germans  who  have  banded  together  for  the  very  sensible 
purpose  of  teaching  the  natives  and  making  money  by  them 
by  honest  trade  in  palm  oil  and  gold  dust.  In  the  very  centre 
of  the  town  was  the  port  and  lighthouse  of  Accra.  Between 
these  houses  the  body  of  the  town  of  native  and  European  build- 
ings jammed  itself.  Some  three  miles  to  the  east  of  the  Basle 
Mission  is  the  village  of  Christianburg,  a  picturesque  mass  of 
whitewashed  buildings,  consisting  of  a  ruined  castle,  a  ruined 
Martello  tower,  and  another  large  establishment  of  the  enter- 
prising Basle  Mission. 

You  would  hardly  believe  it  perhaps,  but  what  I  have 
described  to  you  as  Accra  was  in  the  possession  of  two  foreign 
Powers  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Great  Britain  and  the 
Netherlands.  The  two  portions  of  what  appears  to  be  one  town 
were  known  respectively  as  Jamestown  and  Dutch  Accra.  Each 
town  had  its  own  native  king.  King  Kudjo  was  under  the 
protection  of  the  British,  King  Pakki  owned  allegiance  to  the 
Dutch,  and  at  Christianburg  there  reigned  Eang  Dawunah. 
Indeed,  the  same  excessive  confusion  reigned  throughout  the 
Gold  Coast  until  the  British  purchased  the  Dutch  out-and-out 
a  couple  of  ye,ars  ago. 

After  breakfast  I  proceeded  ashore  in  a  surf-boat  manned  by 
native  Accras.  Please  bear  in  mind  what  I  have  already  rela- 
ted of  the  difficulties  of  landing  on  the  Gold  Coast ;  at  Accra, 
the  difficulties  are  terrible.  The  boatmen  urge  their  heavy 
short-built  British  boat  with  an  admirable  nonchalance; 
though  looking  ahead  at  the  awful  confusion  on  the  beach, 
I  could  not  tell,  to  save  my  life,  how  or  where  they  pro- 
posed to  land.  I  saw  only  long  lines,  apparently  unbroken,  of 
dark,  damp  rocks,  and  the  confusing,  bellowing,  thundering, 
foaming  waves,  in  which,  unless  my  men  are  steady,  I 


78 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


shall  be  presently  engulphed  and  swept  high  on  those  dark 
rocks  a  battered  corpse.  Pleasant,  is  it  not?  Destiny  is 
inevitable,  however ;  I  must  go  on.  The  boatmen's  paddles  are 
lifted  high  and  dashed  emphatically  into  the  waves,  their  clear, 
sweet,  healthy  toned  voices  rise  in  sonorous  chorus,  and  the 
outer  line  of  rocks  is  reached.  It  is  only  now  that  I  am 
made  aware  that  there  is  a  passage  running  obliquely  through 
the  rocky  series,  and  now  the  steersman  astern  deftly  threads  the 
way,  wave  after  wave,  roaring  and  menacing,  lift  us  higher,  still 
higher  —  Ah  I  God  of  mercy  I — ^We — ^No — By  George  that 
was  a  narrow  escape  I  The  boat's  keel  bites  the  beach  of  Accra, 
and  we  are  safe. 

I  will  forbear  giving  another  version  of  my  sentiments  or 
opinions  respecting  what  I  think  of  the  British  Government 
for  leaving  this  place  in  the  state  of  natm*e  it  has  been  left  in, 
as  every  other  place  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa.  Referring  to 
the  boatmen,  I  will  say  that  they  valued  their  labour  of 
bringing  me  ashore  at  the  very  same  rate  I  valued  their  deft- 
ness and  skill ;  but  I  would  not  like  to  risk  a  frequent  passage 
among  those  Accra  rocks,  much  as  I  admire  those  Accra  boat- 
men, nor,  indeed,  have  I  seen  a  European  who  did  care  to  risk 
it  often. 

When  we  were  freed  from  the  boat-gang,  my  chaperone 
conducted  me  to  the  old  fort  of  the  slave-traders.  Almost  the 
very  first  thing  I  saw  that  was  interesting  was  a  large  mural 
tablet  near  the  gate,  dedicated  by  a  man  to  the  memory  of  his 
friend  whom  he  had,  to  his  eternal  sorrow,  shot  to  death  by 
accident.    Both  were  English  officers. 

Accra's  fort,  like  all  forts  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  is  a 
mere  stuccoed,  or  lime  and  mortar,  imitation  of  one.  Its 
walls,  comparatively  speaking,  are  as  thin  as  cardboard,  but 
I  presume  it  answered  its  purpose  in  the  antiquated  times  of 
24-pounders.  It  serves  now  as  a  prison  for  refractory  Accras 
and  coloured  culprits,  who  are  fed  with  kenke '  balls. 

On  moimting  the  stone  stairs  leading  to  the  battlements,  I 
am  enabled  to  appreciate  the  change  which  has  come  over  the 
fort  since  the  town  of  Accra  became  wholly  a  British  possession. 
The  old  cannon  have  been  tumbled  into  dishonoiu-able  heaps 

'  Kenke — a  stiflT-doughy  mixture  of  corn-meal  and  water. 


ACRA  TRADE  AND  TRADERS. 


79 


over  the  walls,  and  are  now  the  prey  and  sport  of  the  briny 
surf.  There  were  probably  500  old  pieces  of  artillery  in  the 
forts  of  St.  George  da  Mina,  Cape  Coast  Castle,  Annamaboe, 
Jtfumford,  Apam,  Winnebah,  Accra,  Christianburg,  at  the  be- 
ginning of  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley's  administratorship  of  the  Gold 
Coast,  and  it  was  seriously  intended  to  collect  and  ship  them  to 
England  to  be  recast ;  but  when  the  authorities  came  to  cal- 
culate the  cost,  they  found  that  the  cost  of  shipment  would  be 
greater  than  the  value  of  the  material,  and  the  guns  were  ac- 
cordingly tumbled  out  of  the  forts  as  rubbish. 

Having  completed  an  examination  of  this  Dutch  slave  fort, 
we  proceeded  through  the  intense  heat  iuto  the  town.  The 
huts  of  the  natives  have  been  established  anywhere,  without 
regard  to  order  or  to  any  symmetrical  arraugement.  The  conse- 
quence is  that  the  streets  are  xmiformly  narrow,  crooked,  and 
oppressive  from  the  filthy  habits  of  the  natives.  The  principal 
merchant  of  the  town  is  a  Mr.  Croker,  the  agent  of  the  great  , 
mercantile  house  of  F.  and  A.  Swanzy  Brothers,  sons  of  the 
famous  Swanzy  who  founded  the  legitimate  West  African 
trade.  Mr.  Croker's  house  raises  its  tail  head  above  a 
mass  of  dingy  grey  thatches,  so  that  the  outlook  from  the 
windows  of  the  second  storey  takes  in,  perhaps,  a  hundred  of 
these  thatched  roofs,  in  all  stages  of  decay  and  native  impro- 
vidence. From  the  third  storey,  however,  the  eyes  are  de- 
lighted with  views  of  sea,  shipping  in  the  roadstead,  the  area 
of  the  ill-planned  town,  the  houses  of  the  European  residents, 
and  a  vast  stretch  of  plain  country,  covered  with  cactus,  and 
gums,  and  thorns,  and  grass,  and  a  winding  lagoon  of  grey- 
green  water,  on  which  Mr.  Croker,  who  is  an  intelligent  and 
energetic  Briton,  finds  pleasure  sometimes  in  paddling  his 
Bob  Koy  canoe,  to  the  shame  of  half-a-dozen  sallow-faced 
and  moribund  European  clerks. 

The  trade  in  which  these  Europeans  xmder  Mr.  Croker  are 
engaged  is  that  of  purchasing  palm  oil,  gold  dust,  and  gum- 
copal;  while  the  Basle  Mission  buys  not  only  palm-oil,  gold 
dust,  and  gum-copal,  but  black  monkey-skins,  cotton,  india- 
rubber,  gum,  and  almost  everything  that  can  be  turned  into 
money  remuneratively  in  Europe. 

The  currency  of  the  Gold  Coast  is  gold  dust,  and  in  some 
parts  cowrie  shells  are  still  used,  though  they  are  being  rapidly 


80 


COOMASSIE  AHh  MAGDALA. 


superseded  by  British  silver  coin.  An  ounce  of  gold  dust  is 
sold  for  3^  128.  The  natives  frequently  exchange  among 
themselves  the  weight  of  even  a  small  bead  in  the  precious 
dust,  which  they  call  a  pessua,  a  trifle  as  insignificant  to  the 
Accras  as  a  dime  or  a  groat  would  be  to  us. 

The  Basle  Mission  House,  on  closer  inspection,  is  a  large 
roomy  building  of  two  lofty  storeys,  surrounded  by  broad 
verandahs.  The  yards  about  the  building  resound  with  the 
hammering  of  the  coopers,  making  up  pimcheons ;  with  the 
tattle  of  the  gossipy  traders  in  palm  oil,  who  have  just  arrived 
from  the  interior  somewhere,  with  scores  of  black  earthen  pots 
full  of  the  yellow,  buttery  palm  oil.  Puncheons  are  being 
rolled  about,  palm  oil  pots  are  being  shifted,  black  people  are 
in  the  height  of  business  in  the  heat  which  threatens  to  strike 
the  first  European  who  dares  it  unprotected  dead.  I  see  that 
a  little  store  also  is  kept  in  the  lower  storey,  and  I  am  think- 
ing that  these  Swiss-Germans  are  making  much  money  by 
these  African  pupils  and  converts  of  theirs.  The  super- 
intendent informs  me  that  the  principal  educational  establish- 
ments are  at  Christianburg-on-the-Sea,  a  few  miles  lower 
down,  and  at  Akropong  in  the  interior.  After  a  look  at  his 
own  breezy  quarters  upstairs,  I  proceed  to  Ghristianburg  in  a 
carriage  drawn  by  fourteen  half  naked  Krumen  on  the  run. 

It  is  a  very  large  establishment  at  Ghristianburg  which 
the  Basle  Mission  has  put  up  for  trade  with,  and  conversion, 
and  education  of  the  natives — very  large  indeed.  In  its  yards 
are  numbers  of  men  at  work  upon  puncheons  and  palm  oil. 
Trade,  I  fear,  is  uppermost  here  also;  though  the  superin- 
tendent tells  me  he  has  80  children  in-doors  of  both  sexes 
under  the  tuition  of  male  and  female  teachers.  I  did  not  see 
them  being  instructed. 

Two  buildings  made  in  Germany  and  shipped  to  and 
erected  here  a  little  behind  the  village  of  Ghristianburg,  con- 
tain the  pupils  now  under  process  of  Ghristianising.  Their 
very  aspect  promises  that  within  their  walls  the  divinity  of 
Ghrist  is  being  taught  the  students ;  and  taken  in  connection 
with  the  fact  that  at  Akropong  the  college  of  the  mission,  with  a 
model  farm,  &c.  is  situated,  the  Basle  Mission,  let  us  hope,  have 
a  more  brilliant  future  than  the  past  has  been,  and  that  the 


CAPTAIN  GLOVfiR. 


81 


members  of  it  will  go  on  doing  a  vast  amount  of  good,  spiritu- 
ally and  temporally,  to  all  concerned. 

When  I  come  to  speak  of  the  political  and  war  news  col- 
lected at  Accra,  I  am  reminded,  by  a  glance  at  the  nimiber 
of  my  page  above,  how  very  brief  I  must  be. 

Captain  Glover,  formerly  of  the  Koyal  Navy,  but  for  some 
years  past  connected  with  the  Civil  Service,  has  imparted  a 
degree  of  confidence  among  white  and  black  in  his  powers  of 
administration  by  fighting,  which  is  quite  extraordinary. 

He  must  be  a  Wellington  in  strategy  and  the  very  model  of 
an  administrator.  A  white  trader  on  this  coast  does  not  feel 
comfortable  when  he  meets  a  newspaper  man  until  he  has 
conversed  about  Glover's  genius,  his  Clive-like  abilities  and 
energy.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  noticed  a  faint  attempt  at 
depreciating  him  on  the  part  of  the  military  officers,  who 
acknowledge  Sir  Garnet  as  chief.  Either  the  man  must  be  a 
great  and  skilful  leader  or  be  one  of  ordinary  calibre,  imfit  to  be 
a  leader,  but  capable  of  conducting  a  small  insignificant  busi- 
ness tolerably  well—  which  is  it  ?  The  British  have  entrusted  to 
him  a  most  important  duty,  second  only  to  that  of  Sir  Garnet,  if 
not  as  arduous.  I  believe  it  to  be,  myself,  a  very  important  and 
a  very  arduous  task,  and  I  hope  sincerely  he  will  bear  out  the 
high  praise  I  have  heard  spoken  of  him. 

Captain  Glover  has  been  entrusted  with  the  duty  of  con- 
quering the  contumacious  tribes  of  the  Volta,  and  of  collecting  a 
force  many  thousand  strong  to  take  the  Ashantees  by  the  right 
flank,  by  marching  north-west  from  the  Volta  river.  He  has 
succeeded  very  well  so  far.  For  weeks  he  waited  at  Accra  for  the 
5,000  men  promised  him  by  the  king  of  West  Akim,  until  in 
high  displeasure  he  sailed  with  some  1,800  men  to  Addah,  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Volta,  where  he  has  made  his  camp  of  rendezvous. 
The  5,000  reinforcements  of  his  force  which  he  had  waited  for 
so  patiently  drew  near  Accra  at  last,  only  to  be  tempted  by  the 
offers  of  Sir  Garnet  J.  Wolseley.  It  is  not  quite  decided  yet 
whom  the  king  of  Akim  will  join.  If  he  joins  Sir  Garnet,  then 
Captain  Glover  is  considerably  weakened,  and  the  full  measure 
of  success  which  he  expected  may  not  be  given  him,  though  his 
energy  is  such,  it  is  said,  that  he  would  not  stand  passive,  and 
see  himself  robbed  of  all  opportunities  of  winning  glory,  but 

G 


82 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


would  march  upon  Coomassie  with  the  2,000  native  troops  he 
had  been  able  to  secure. 

Before  starting  on  his  expedition  he  has  to  distinguish  him- 
self by  marching  upon  the  Aquamoos  and  Awoonahs  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Volta  and  crush  them,  lest  when  he  is  absent  on 
the  expedition  to  Coomassie  these  warlike  tribes  should  overrun 
the  countries  of  the  tribes  who  are  his  allies. 

The  Aquamoos  were  formerly  allies  of  England,  but  they 
invited  the  Ashantees  to  attack  the  British  Protectorate  in 
1867.  The  Duflfas  and  the  Ulos  are  also  to  be  summarily 
suppressed,  in  the  same  manner  and  for  the  same  reason,  by 
Glover.  He  has  a  steamer,  the '  Lady  of  the  Lake,'  and  several 
steam-launches,  to  assist  him  in  his  enterprise  along  the  Volta. 
He  has  also  several  able  young  English  officers  to  help  him. 
Nothing  as  yet,  however,  has  been  done,  though  he  will 
attempt  something  shortly.  Both  Glover  and  Sir  Garnet,  it 
seems,  are  waiting ;  a  dreary  thing  enough  in  this  unhealthy 
climate,  as  I  found  it  to  be  at  Cape  Coast  Castle. 

The  first  cruise  of  the  'Daimtless'  ended,  I  have  just 
returned  to  Cape  Coast,  to  wait  another  opportunity  of  getting 
news. 


ELMINA. 


83 


CHAPTER  V. 

the  town  op  elmina  —  captain  hbldbn,  2nd  w.  i.  b. — sir  oaknkc 
wolselby's  expedition. 

November  29,  1873. 

I  AH  writing  from  the  old  Dutcli  town  of  Elmina,  or  the  'Mine,' 
whence  the  Portuguese,  who  farmed  the  revenues  of  the  Gold 
Coast  in  the  sixteenth  century,  obtained  ingots  and  gold  dust 
enough  to  stir  the  kings  of  Portugal  to  mightier  and  grander 
achievements,  which  finally  culminated  in  the  discoveries  of 
the  Eastern  and  Western  Indies.  I  love  the  old  town 'for  its 
associations  and  its  history,  for  the  impetus  it  gave  to  civilisa- 
tion, for  the  fair  promise  that  it  held  out  to  Don  Juan  and  his 
brave  captains  of  an  empire  to  be  established,  of  the  redemption 
of  Africa  by  means  of  the  Catholic  missionaries,  a  dream,  how- 
ever, that  has  not  yet  been  realised. 

The  Castle  of  St.  George,  a  tall  mass  of  wliite  buildings, 
stands  on  a  spit  of  sand  and  rock  to  my  right ;  the  Castle  of  San 
lago,  situate  on  a  hill  wliich  commands  the  town  of  Elmina  and 
Castle  of  SL  Geofge,  stands  on  my  left;  the  harbour  of  Elmina, 
formed  by  the  river  Beyah,  is  between  the  castles.  The  town 
of  Elmina  groups  itself  at  the  base  of  San  lago,  and  then 
straggles  in  two  irregular  lines  along  the  shore  of  the  bay  of 
Elmina*  It  probably  contains  a  population  of  5,000  souls  in 
time  of  peace,  but  just  now  the  warriors  have  been  mustered  in 
as  auxiliaries  of  the  Englisli  against  the  Ashantees,  while  the 
drones  have  been  captured  by  press-gangs  and  enrolled  as 
carriers  to  convey  material  of  war  from  Cape  Coast  to  the  front. 
The  people  do  not  like  this  state  of  things  a  bit ;  it  is  in  such 
striking  contrast  to  what  they  have  been  accustomed  to  under 
the  benign  rule  of  the  Dutch.  Tliey  feel  aggrieved  that  they 
are  compelled  to  do  service  under  a  flag  which  they  never  ac- 
knowledged, and  that  they  are  foreed  to  fight  against  the 

o  2 


84 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Asbantees,  a  people  whom  they  were  accustomed  to  look  upon 
as  allies  and  friends  in  the  old  days. 

The  Elminas  see  a  vast  difference  between  their  treatment 
by  the  Dutch  and  the  English.  The  Dutcli  indulged  them  in 
long-winded  pahivers  in  tlie  castles,  treated  their  chiefs  with 
deference  and  respect,  were  merciful  to  their  foibles,  their  old 
customs,  and  their  ignorances ;  the  English  are  brusque  and 
peremptory  in  their  dealings  with  them,  absolve  them  from 
attending  at  palavers,  content  themselves  with  giving  them 
orders  and  to  seeing  that  such  orders  are  carried  out  by  armed 
police,  pooh-pooh  their  antiquated  and  ignorant  objections, 
keep  watch  and  ward  over  them  vigilantly,  drive  their 
warriors  to  fight  against  old  friends,  and  press  men  to  trans- 
port service  without  so  much  as  asking  the  consent  of  their 
chiefs.  All  these  peremptory  doings  of  the  English  are  causes 
of  grievance. 

Nearly  all  the  Elminas  can  speak  Dutch  fluently,  because  the 
Dutch  were  accustomed  to  keep  two  schoolmasters  at  the  fort 
for  the  instruction  of  their  subjects.  There  are  several  clever 
mechanics  and  sailors  there,  also,  whom  the  English  find  ex- 
ceedingly useful  at  the  present  busy  time. 

The  superiority  of  this  town  over  Cape  Coast,  as  the  head- 
quarters of  the  British  on  the  Gold  Coast,  is  at  once  seen  by 
anyone  coming  here  for  the  purpose  of  comparing  the  advan- 
tages of  the  two  towns.  The  people,  in  the  first  place,  are 
very  much  more  advanced  than  those  of  Cape  Coast ;  the  Dutch 
have  mingled  more  with  them,  and  inculcated  in  tliem  indus- 
trious habits,  and  their  intelligence  has  been  very  much  more 
expanded.  The  castles  are  stronger  and  better  adapted  for 
defence ;  the  country  is  healthy  and  might  be  made  more  so, 
until,  in  fact,  fevers  would  be  as  rare  as  in  any  part  of  Europe. 
Then,  as  a  last  argument  in  favour  of  Elmina  over  Cape  Coast, 
the  former  has  a  harbour  which  is  accessilile  to  boats  at  a  high 
tide,  and  with  a  better  outlay  and  a  small  dredging  machine, 
schooners  imder  100  tons  might  enter  with  ease  and  safety; 
a  very  important  thing  for  tlie  Gold  Coast,  which  has  not  a 
single  harbour  where  a  ship's  boat  can  land  with  safety.  I 
should  say  that  an  outlay  of  20,000Z.  would  make  Elmina  a 
first-class  harbour.  The  sand  and  mud  at  the  bar  and  in  the 
river  are  the  only  impediments ;  these,  however,  are  easily 


ELMINA. 


85 


removable.  Large  schooners  once  floated  in  the  harbour, 
there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not  float  again,  even  in 
deeper  water.  ; 

The  civil  commandant.  Captain  Helden,  of  the  2nd  West 
India  Regiment,  is  doing  a  good  work,  however,  and  in  the 
right  direction.  It  is  a  step  which  if  followed  up  by  the 
Colonial  authorities  would  lead  towards  establishing  Elmina  as 
head-quarters,  and  promoting  the  commerce  of  the  Gold  Coast. 
The  ruins  that  have  disfigured  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Castle 
of  St.  George  since  the  destruction  of  the  native  town  last  June, 
by  the  launches  and  boats  of  the  English  fleet,  are  being  re- 
moved by  convict  labour,  and  a  wide  embankment  is  being 
constructed  along  the  right  bank  of  the  Beyah,  which  will  con- 
fine the  waters  to  narrower  limits,  and  enable  the  swift  ebb- 
current  to  deepen  the  harbour.  When  the  ruins  have  been 
cleared,  a  noble  promenade  or  plaza,  worthy  of  a  European 
watering-place,  will  be  left  exposed  to  the  cool  breeze  of  the 
sea,  which  will  ensure  to  the  European  quarters,  or  the  town  of 
Elmina  as  it  is  now,  an  impoUuted  atmosphere  and  a  healtliy 
future.  The  prospect  is  encouraging ;  and  if  only  the 
authorities  abandon  that  nest  of  malaria  and  sickness,  Cape 
Coast,  remove  to  Elmina,  and  continue  the  good  work  of  im- 
provements, which  would  be  a  pleasure  to  most  people,  on  con- 
sidering the  vast  advantages  to  be  derived  from  them  in  a 
sanitary,  social,  and  moral  sense,  Elmina  will  have  been  the 
means  of  removing  from  the  Gold  Coast  much  of  the  evil  cha- 
racter it  now  bears. 

The  news  from  the  front  is  tame  and  uninteresting.  A 
skirmish  between  the  advanced  forces  and  the  retreating  laggards 
of  the  enemy  happens  now  and  then,  which  has  a  local 
interest  for  the  weary  souls  at  Cape  Coast.  The  last  account 
we  have  received  is  about  Colonel  Evelyn  Wood.  It  seems  he 
was  making  a  reconnaissance  beyond  Sutah  near  Fasua,  with  a 
force  of  100  Houssas  and  a  few  hundred  of  native  allies, 
when  a  large  body  of  the  enemy  suddenly  attacked  him  on 
all  sides.  Though  taken  somewhat  by  surprise,  he  instantly 
formed  a  square,  putting  the  transport  porters  in  the  centre 
with  their  burdens,  and  in  this  position  fought,  it  is  said,  for 
three  hours,  after  which"  he  retreated  in  order  to  Sutah, 


86 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  point  he  started  from.  He  lost  but  few  men  comparatively, 
while  the  enemy's  audacity  was  punished  severely. 

Hardly  a  day  passes,  however,  but  a  few  are  wounded  on 
either  side.  The  Ashantees  keep  well  under  cover  of  bush,  and 
the  British  allies  stick  to  the  protection  of  the  palisades,  until 
they  emerge  out  in  strong  parties  to  reconnoitre.  This  state 
of  aflfairs  will  end  only  on  the  arrival  of  the  white  troops. 

Sir  Garnet  informed  me  the  other  day  that  as  great  a  force 
will  ultimately  move  upon  Coomassie  as  Napier  marched  upon 
Magdala.  This  force  will  be  made  up  of  three  battalions 
of  the  line  (white)  ;  one  battalion  of  marines  and  sailors 
(white) ;  one  battery  of  Artillery ;  one  company  of  Eoyal 
Engineers  (white) ;  two  battalions  of  West  Indians ;  one 
ba£taUon  of  Houssas ;  two  battalions  of  native  allies :  total, 
about  4,000  men.  You  may  imagine  then,  with  what  interest 
we  all  wait  the  arrival  of  the  white  troops.  Their  very  presence 
will  revive  every  sick  man  at  Cape  Coast,  and  inspire  every 
weary  correspondent  who  finds  the  task  of  feeling  interested  in 
these  petty  skirmishes  that  now  take  place  a  work  of  real 
difficulty.  Meanwhile  we  sicken  more  from  inactivity  than 
from  the  malaria.  It  is  to  the  inactivity  to  which  we  are 
compelled  that  I  ascribe  the  sickness  and  overpowering 
lassitude  which  has  already  prostrated  so  many.  There  is 
really  nothing  to  write  about,  nor  hardly  anything  to  talk 
about.  We  make  the  most  of  every  little  accident  that 
comes  to  our  notice,  and  in  the  absence  of  anything  of  real  im- 
portance we  are  inclined  to  think  skirmishes  great  battles. 

Sir  Garnet  must  have  felt  that  he  was  bound  to  do  some- 
thing to  revive  his  fading  energy  when  he  last  week  pro- 
ceeded to  the  front  to  examine  personally  into  the  state 
of  the  advanced  stations.  He  travels  slowly  from  place  to  place, 
as  he  has  found  out  that  it  is  highly  dangerous  in  this  climate 
to  expose  himself  too  freely.  Some  have  expressed  an  opinion 
that  it  is  very  unlikely  that  he  will  see  the  end  of  this  expedi- 
tion, simply  because  he  was  too  ^advanced  in  life  to  begin  an 
expedition  into  Africa  and  that  the  climatic  influence  will  tell 
severely  on  his  frame.  With  this  opinion,  however,  I  disagree. 
Sir  Garnet  is  not  over  forty  years  old,  and  is  the  youngest 
General  in  the  British  service.  To  choose  a  younger  man, 
therefore,  the  British  Government  would  have  had  to  entrust 


THE  'BONNY'  AUXILIAJRIES. 


87 


the  command  of  this  expedition  to  a  young  Lieutenant-Colonel. 
While  in  England,  Sir  Garnet  looked  remarkably  well  an|i 
hearty,  and  his  indomitable  energy  promised  everything  that 
could  be  required  in  a  man  to  fill  his  position.  If  Sir 
Garnet  becomes  invalided  through  fever  or  other  sickness,  it  will 
be  because  he  exposed  himself  too  freely  to  the  sun  and  climate 
before  active  operations  began,  and  to  tell  the  truth  because  the 
doctors  of  his  staflf  have  coddled  him  too  much. 

We  have  lately  had  auxiliaries  from  Bonny.  Prince  Charles 
Pepple,  and  Prince  John  Jumbo,  have  arrived  with  a  force  of 
100  men,  from  King  Pepple,  and  Oko  Jumbo,  the  rival  of  the 
famous  Ja  Ja  Jumbo,  of  Bonny,  to  fight  against  the  Ashantees. 

The  officers  of  the  Control  Department  are  as  busy  as  ever 
in  their  duties.  The  stores  are  being  rapidly  conveyed  into 
the  interior,  and  there  is  every  prospect  that  by  the  time 
the  troops  arrive  Prahsu  will  be  in  the  hands  of  the  English, 
with  abundance  of  stores  safely  housed  therein.  The  advance 
guard  is  now  within  twenty  miles  of  the  Prah ;  and  the 
Ashantees,  it  is  reported,  barring  a  few  of  the  rear-guard, 
who  exchange  skirmishing  shots,  have  crossed  the  Prah. 


88 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

TRIP  DOWW  TO  ADDAH— COMMISSIONEB  J.  H.  GLOVER  AND  HT8  BXPEDITIOH 
— CAPTAIJr  GOLDSWORTHT — BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OP  GLOVER. 

December  16,  1878. 

Events  at  Cape  Coast  Castle  had  become  tame  and  uninterest- 
.  ing  ;  they  lacked  the  charm  of  novelty.  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley 
and  his  intentions  unconsummated,  indeed  as  yet  not  begun, 
had  been  written  about  threadbare.  There  remained  actually 
nothing  upon  which  anything  more  might  be  said  connected 
with  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley's  expedition.  Before  rendering  my- 
self up  to  utter  despair,  I  bethought  me  of  the  other  expedi- 
tion to  leeward,  about  which  I  had  attempted  to  write  at  a  dis- 
tance, but  of  which  few  people  of  Cape  Coast,  the  authorities 
included,  knew  anything  rationally  and  intelligently.  This 
was  Commissioner  J.  H.  Glover's  expedition  to  Ashantee-land, 
via  the  Volta. 

The  '  Dauntless '  was  lying  peacefully  at  anchor  in  the  lagoon 
of  Beyah,  close  under  the  frowning  white  castle  of  San  lago 
Teredos,  and  saline  particles  gradually  corroding  her  iron  works 
below,  and  the  hot  sun  blistering  her  bulwarks  and  scorching 
her  decks  after  her  troublous  trip  to  Accra.  The  '  Dauntless ' 
offered  me  the  means  to  proceed  in  search  of  Commissioner 
N  Glover,  and  I  at  once  ^availed  myself  of  her.  But  it  appeared 
to  me  to  be  a  very  selfish  proceeding,  this  availing  myself  alone 
of  the  only  means  to  hunt  up  Glover,  when  there  were  so  many 
of  my  itinerating  colleagues  hungering  after  such  information 
as  would  be  derived  from  the  trip  to  Addah,  the  reputed  loca- 
tion of  Commissioner  Glover's  camp ;  and  I  oflFered  to  take 
down  any  of  the  correspondents  who  chose  to  venture  within 
the  limited  confines  of  the  tiny  cockpit  of  the  '  Daimtless.' 
One  only  was  found  brave  enough  to  accept  the  oflfer.  '  It  is 


UNCOMFORTABLE  SUGGESTIONS. 


89 


very  tempting,  I  confess,'  said  my  colleague  of  the  '  '  but 

I  would  not  venture  in  such  a  tiny  boat  on  the  Atlantic  for  a 
thousand  pounds  1 '  'Oh  no,  by  George,'  said  another,  ' you 
don't  catch  me  on  board.  If  I  lost  my  life  on  the  trip,  my 
people  would  say, "  Well,  what  a  fool  the  fellow  was  to  be  sure," 
a  very  scant  reward,  as  you  will  admit.  I  like  the  sound  of 
the  surf  and  waves,  when  I  am  safe  on  shore  ;  but  I  do  not  like 
the  idea  of  being  tossed  about  on  big  waves  with  the  thought 
prevailing  in  my  mind  that  the  launch  would  very  probably  go 
down,  and  I  should  immediately  be  gobbled  up  by  the  sharks. 
You  are  very  kind  and  obliging,  sir,  but  I  must  really  decline.* 

The  brave  man  who  accepted  my  offer  was  my  colleague 
Mr.  George  A.  Henty,  of  the  '  Standard,'  whom  I  first  met  in 
Abyssinia.  As  soon  as  he  had  made  his  determination  known, 
he  and  I  were  set  upon  by  all,  with  a  doleful  chorus  of  voices 
predicting  direst  calamities,  such  as  *  Sure  to  go  down,  battered 
by  the  surf,  a  certain  shipwreck  in  store.  The  bar  of  the  Volta 
is  awful,  plenty  of  crocodiles  about.  Think  of  the  bar  at  Lagos ; 
the  launch  will  never  cross  those  breakers  ;  vessels  three  times 
larger  have  been  upset  on  that  bar.  You  won't  find  any  one 
at  Addah  ;  Glover  is  certain  to  be  gone  to  the  front.  If  he  is 
marching,  how  will  you  catch  him  ?  The  white  troops  will 
come  in  yom*  absence,  and  you  will  have  lost  the  opportunity 
of  seeing  them  landed.'  These  and  a  hundred  other  uncom- 
fortable suggestions  were  thrown  out  for  our  benefit.  We 
treasured  them  in  our  memories,  but  declined  to  act  upon  them, 
knowing  as  we  did,  that  if  we  fell  in  the  cause  of  our  respec- 
tive journals  we  would  fall  gloriously. 

The  '  Dauntless '  awoke  from  her  slumberous  repose  in  the 
lagoon  of  Beyah  about  midnight,  and  steamed  down  the  coast 
at  a  rattling  rate,  heedless  of  the  burden  of  forebodings  which 
had  been  heaped  on  the  heads  of  her  passengers.  The  beaming 
stars  and  silver  moon  shone  over  our  heads  brilliantly,  and  lit  up 
oiu*  course,  and  in  the  morning  the  sun  arose,  and  with  the  sun 
the  wind  came  and  blew  the  sea  into  a  million  million  imeasy 
wavelets,  which  made  the  tiny  yacht  hop  up  and  down  merrily. 
On  our  left  was  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  darkly  green  and 
beautiful ;  now  rising  into  gentle  hills  and  anon  subsiding  into 
valleys,  or  stretching  away  a  level  plain,  scantily  tufted  with 
cjustus  and  thorn  clumps.    Clusters  of  conical  huts  appeared  at 


92 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


notes.  Soon  we  beheld  the  bell-tents  and  marquees  of  the 
camp  rising  through  the  fast  deepening  darkness,  a  multitude 
of  dark  forms  gliding  through  uncertain  flickerings  of  soft  fire- 
light and  several  crouching  men,  and  distinguished  shortly 
after  the  low  humming  sound  that  indicates  the  neighbourhood 
of  a  camp. 

After  inquiring  of  a  coloured  man  in  a  cap  and  European 
clothes,  whom  we  were  certain  from  his  costume  could  speak 
English,  the  whereabouts  of  the  head-quarters,  we  soon  arrived 
before  a  large  hospital  tent,  wherein  we  introduced  ourselves 
to  Captain  Goldsworthy,  who  is  second  in  command  of  the 
Volta  expedition. 

Unlike  the  reserve  and  diplomatic  dumbness  which  char 
acterised  our  intercourse  with  the  authorities  at  Cape  Coast 
Castle,  we  met  a  gentleman  in  Captain  Goldsworthy  who, 
while  tendering  the  most  gratifying  hospitality,  omitted  not  to 
impart  the  information  we  had  come  so  far  to  obtain.  He  fur- 
nished us  with  ample  materials  of  a  letter,  and  I  soon  found 
myself  compelled  to  have  recourse  to  my  notebook  to  treasure 
manifold  items. 

One  singular  thing  I  noticed  in  Captain  Goldsworthy,  and 
that  was  the  enthusiasm  which  marked  his  conversation  when 
Commissioner  Glover's  name  was  the  topic.  He  never  cared 
to  restrain  the  impulse  to  endow  his  chief  with  all  the  high 
qualities  which  a  great  chief  should  possess.  It  was  sin- 
gular that  Captain  Goldsworthy  should  share  in  the  enthu- 
siasm for  Glover  which  I  had  perceived  strongly  imbued  tlie 
remarks  made  on  him  by  every  merchant  and  trader  on  the 
Gold  Coast.  I  was  compelled  to  reflect  that  when  a  man  re- 
ceives the  high  encomiums  of  which  Commissioner  Glover  has 
been  the  recipient,  from  both  civilians  and  soldiers,  that  there 
must  be  some,  if  not  much,  good  in  him.  As  there  was  no 
equivocation  whatever  in  the  praise  bestowed  on  Glover,  I  was 
prepared  to  see  and  converse  with  an  extraordinary  man  in 
some  respects.  Before  introducing  him  I  might  give  in  brief 
some  account  of  him. 

Commissioner  J.  H.  Glover  was  bom  in  the  year  1829,  and 
consequently  is  in  his  forty-fourth  year.  He  entered  the  Royal 
Navy  when  very  young,  and  rose  rapidly  to  the  rank  of  Com- 
mander.   He  was  specially  detailed  for  service  on  the  West 


COMMISSIONER  J.  H.  GLOVER. 


93 


Coast  of  Africa,  where  he  has  undergone  some  remarkable 
adventures.     After  cruising  about  several  years  in  the  waters, 
he  left  the  Naval  service  and  became  attached  to  the  Colonial 
service  as  Governor  of  Lagos,  which  is  an  island  and  port  on 
the  Guinea  C'Oast.    His  career  while  in  charge  of  this  African 
colony  in  the  Benin  Bight,  has  established  his  fame  as  one  of 
the  wisest  administrators  the  British  Government  ever  exiled 
to  Africa ;  he   has  endeared  himself  to  the  whole  native 
population  of  Lagos  and  its  dependencies ;  his  name  is  as 
universally  known  among  the  tribes  of  the  interior  bordering 
the  West  Coast  as  Livingstone's  is  known  in  Central  Africa. 
He  has  enriched  the  country  beyond  belief,  until  from  a 
miserable  settlement,  with  an  unenviable  notoriety  for  fevers, 
its  annual  imports  and  exports  amounted  in  1872  to  5,432,310 
dollars  and  the  poi-t  of  Lagos  is  considered  as  healthy  a  place  to 
live  in  as  any  town  in  West  Africa.    Its  wharves,  piers,  drains, 
houses,  public  buildings,  order,  systematical  government,  its 
local  police,  and  its  volunteers,  mark  the  port  of  Lagos  as  having 
been  under  the  fostering  care  of  a  man  who  took  an  interest 
in  his  work,  and  was  possessed  of  the  requisite  energy  and 
will  to  carry  out  his  projects  of  reform  and  improvement.  One 
of  the  most  important  acts  of  his  administratorship  at  Lagos 
was  the  raising  of  a  force  of  Mohammedan  soldiers,  or  armed 
policemen,  emigrants  from  the  country  of  Houssa,  and  a  faithful 
loyal  band  of  Mussidmen  from  the  Yoruba  country,  with  which 
he  contrived  to  repress  tlie  turbulent  and  contumacious  tribes 
in  the  neighboiurhood,  and  to  inspire  them  with  respect  for 
the  British  Queen's  Government.  When  this  able  man  resigned 
his  administratorship  of  Lagos  last  year,  there  was  a  general 
feeling  of  sorrow  among  all  West  African  natives,  as  well  as 
white,  and  it  was  the  universal  belief  that  no  man,  however 
great  he  might  be,  could  ever  replace  the  great  Governor 
'  Golibar,'  as  he  was  called  by  the  Yorubas  and  Houssas. 

The  military  camp  at  Addah  Forh  was  the  nearest  thing  I 
had  seen,  since  I  joined  the  proposed  expedition  to  Coomassie, 
approaching  a  warlike  a&pect.  Cape  Coast  Castle,  with  its 
commissariat  surroundings,  the  Government  House,  and  its 
resident,  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley,  surrounded  by  a  brilliant  staflF, 
the  medical  hospital  and  control  huts,  marked  and  numbered 
and  guarded,  were  all  well  enough.;  but  they  did  not  strike  the 


94 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


eye  and  mind  accustomed  to  a  long  series  of  military  scenes  so 
eflFectually  as  did  one  glance  at  the  trimly-set  bell-tents,  the 
well  ordered  arrays  of  cloth  houses,  the  lines  of  sable  soldiery 
at  drill,  the  outdoor  piles  of  Government  stores,  the  row  of 
cannon  open-mouthed  and  ready  pointed  towards  the  distant 
enemy,  and  the  constant  outgoing  and  incoming  of  military 
orderlies. 

We  were  awakened  very  early  at  Commissioner  Glover's 
camp.  Soldiers  may  not  sleep  late,  newspaper  correspondents 
in  soldiers'  camps  must  wake  early  whether  they  will  it  or  not. 
At  5  A.M.  we  struggled  hard  to  sleep,  despite  the  premonitory 
rolls  of  a  large  drum,  and  had  in  a  measiure  succeeded,  or  per- 
haps would  finally  have  succeeded,  had  we  not  ten  minutes 
later  been  suddenly  startled  with  a  full-blown  bugle  blast  close 
to  our  ears,  which  drove  away  all  desire  to  sleep.  The 
Governor's  voice  was  heard  calling  for  his  coflFee ;  his  gallant 
subordinate  Goldsworthy  halloed  with  lungful  force  for  his 
unusually  dilatory  servant ;  the  commissary  screamed  for  his 
chocolate,  and  the  hum  of  a  stirring  camp  was  wafted  into 
our  ears  by  the  morning  air.  Before  I,  to  speak  personally, 
had  quite  recovered  the  full  use  of  jny  faculties,  Gt)vemor 
Glover  had  dressed,  drank  his  coflFee,  and  had  gone.  A  desire, 
growing  stronger  every  minute,  to  watch  the  strange  man, 
had  more  eflfect  in  rousing  me  than  my  coflFee  had. 

*  Which  way  Ras  the  Governor  gone,  boy  ?'  I  asked  of  a 
coloured  menial  adjunct  of  the  Governor's  staflF,  named  Sam. 

'Ah,  massa,  the  Gobner,  sir?  He  gone;  praps  ribber, 
praps  town,  praps  Yoruba,  praps  Houssa  palaver,  praps  Accra ; 
no  tell,  no  savey.' 

It  was  not  yet  daylight,  but  I  sauntered  towards  the  river, 
whose  noble  breadth  was  overhimg  by  a  thick  haze,  and  whose 
further  bank  was  a  long  black  line  of  mangroves.  The  stream 
was  but  300  yards  from  the  camp.  The  landing-place  was 
about  500  yards  from  head-quarters. 

I  soon  discerned  the  sturdy  form  of  Governor  Glover 
striding  hither  and  thither,  and  recognised  his  cool  calm  voice 
giving  orders.  He  was  superintending  personally  the  loading 
of  the  '  Lady  of  the  Lake '  for  an  up-river  trip  with  ammuni- 
tion ;  he  was  giving  orders  to  a  blacksmith ;  he  was  showing 
a  carpenter  what  his  day's  duties  were  to  be ;  he  was  speaking 


HIS  TIKELESS  ENERGY. 


95 


to  the  engineer  about  his  boilers  ;  he  was  telling  the  coloured 
captain  at  what  hour  to  be  ready  and  what  sand  bai*s  to  avoid ; 
he  was  assisting  a  man  to  lift  a  box  of  ammunition  on  his 
shoulders;  he  was  listening  to  a  Yoruba's  complaint  about 
some  unfairness  in  the  distribution  of  accoutrements ;  he  was 
inspecting  the  crews  of  the  steam  launches  ;  he  was  directing 
some  of  the  steamboat  men  how  to  treat  the  wild  bullocks  ;  he 
was  questioning  the  commissariat  officer  about  his  supplies; 
he  was  rebuking  the  Accra  king,  Tarkey,  for  the  dilatoriness 
of  his  men ;  he  was  specifying  the  day's  duties  to  a  Houssa 
sergeant ;  he  was  here,  there,  and  everywhere ;  alert,  active, 
prompt,  industrious.  He  was  general-in-chief,  quartermaster- 
general,  commissariat  officer,  military  secretary,  pilot,  captain, 
engineer,  general  supervisor  of  all  things,  overseer  over  all  men, 
conductor  of  great  and  small  things,  a  most  remarkable  man, 
and  in  short,  the  impellent  force  of  his  army. 

•  I  was  led  to  think  by  the  varied  scenes  in  which  I  saw  him 
engaged  within  an  hour,  '  What  on  earth  would  become  of  the 
expedition  if  this  ready-handed,  ready-witted,  energetic  com- 
mander and  supervisor,  were  to  fall  sick  and  be  incapacitated 
from  duty  ? '  He  has  good,  able,  clever  men,  a  few,  under  him ; 
but  capable  as  they  may  be,  there  is  only  one  Glover.  The 
Houssas,  the  Yorubas,  the  Accras,  and  Aquapims  will  tell  you 
that  there  is  but  one  '  Golibar '  whom  they  will  obey.  '  English 
officers  very  good,  sir,  but  they  no  Captain  Golibar.' 

I  don't  suppose  they  would  actually  disobey  Captain  Golds- 
worthy  or  Captain  Sartorius,  they  have  too  much  respect  for 
them ;  but  they  have  not  become  so  intimately  acquainted  with 
these  officers,  they  have  not  been  objects  of  such  solicitude  with 
them  as  they  have  been  with  their  dear  old  '  Golibar.' 

'  Golibar'  brought  them  out  of  the  jungle  and  marsh  of  the 
Niger-country,  treated  them  kindly,  fed  and  dressed  them, 
made  them  soldiers,  and  endeared  himself  to  them.  He  has 
led  them  to  victories  against  their  perverse  brothers  of  the 
savage  bush,  coimselled  them,  given  them  self-respect,  made 
them  feel  they  were  men  and  soldiers  of  the  British  Queen ; 
but  Glover's  subs  have  not  as  yet.  This  is  why  I  was  led  to 
think  of  the  consequences  resulting  from  Glover's  sickness. 

I  am  glad  I  xmdertook  to  discover  Glover's  whereabouts.  It 
has  been  a  pleasure  to  me  to  have  seen  this  great  man  in  camp, 


96 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


where  a  great  man  may  best  be  seen.  I  shall  ever  think  of  the 
time  when  my  eyes  first  lit  on  the  kindly  face,  the  massive 
features  with  the  genius  of  commanding  men  lighting  up  every 
lineament ;  on  the  sturdy  form  so  full  of  energy,  as  an  event. 
Glover,  in  my  opinion,  is  really  a  gr^at  man ;  he  has  the 
elements  of  greatness  in  him.  Perhaps  he  would  not  shine  in 
the  small  details  of  an  army,  such  as  a  man  well  educated  for 
the  pure  military  line  would ;  but  I  doubt  that  I  shall  soon  see 
his  equal  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  in  the  purely  administra- 
tive and  the  organising  line.  Sir  Garnet  J.  Wolseley  would, 
perhaps,  strike  an  observer  as  being  the  most  brilliant  of  the 
two,  but  Governor  Glover's  greater  power  and  solidity  would 
be  acknowledged  as  being  very  marked. 

Glover  compels  men  to  love  him.  There  is  something 
specially  attractive  in  him  ;  all  who  come  in  contact  with  him 
thaw  before  his  general  kindliness  of  manner.  There  is  no 
affectation  about  him  ;  he  is  a  plain,  hearty,  genuine  man. 

He  is  not  one  to  endeavour  to  make  men  believe  that  his 
mission  in  Africa  is  one  of  universal  importance ;  that  a  word, 
of  explanation  respecting  his  intentions  and  purposes  would 
destroy  the  whole  subtle  machinery  of  tliis  campaign.  Oh,  no  ! 
he  speaks  without  reserve,  answers  all  questions  about  his 
mission  as  if  his  mission  were  really  a  public  one,  to  be  can- 
vassed, talked  of,  criticised  by  the  public  which  sent  him  out. 
On  an  enterprise  like  this  he  does  not  think  it  would  injure  his 
reputation  or  his  mission  if  the  British  or  American  public 
were  told  something  about  it,  were  to  be  informed  of  all  and 
everything  concerning  it. 

The  *  Lady  of  the  Lake '  was  about  to  ascend  the  Volta 
river  to  the  second  post  occupied  by  a  portion  of  Governor 
Glover's  expedition.  The  Governor  kindly  asked  if  we  sliould 
like  to  visit  the  first  and  second  posts,  for,  if  we  did,  we  were 
welcome  to  proceed  in  company  with  Captain  Goldswortliy. 
Of  course  we  instantly  accepted.  Captain  Goldsworthy  con- 
veyed some  mess-dishes  and  what  provisions  and  wines  his  mess 
could  furnish.  I  saw  the  gallant  soldier  was  fidgetting  about, 
desirous  of  making  the  trip  enjoyable  to  his  visitors. 

Before  we  started,  some  amusement  was  afiForded  by  the 
antics  and  pugnacity  of  the  wild  cattle,  Commissary  Blissett 
had  procmed  from  tribes  to  leeward  of  the  river  Volta — the 


THE  VOLTA. 


97 


largest  of  which,  though  full-grown,  was  not  as  large  as  a 
year  old  heifer.  The  Houssas  who  drove  them  were  butted 
rearward  and  frontward,  were  dashed  at  on  the  flanks  and 
tumbled  over  to  the  intense  joy  of  the  crowds  drawn  toge- 
ther by  the  vociferous  merriment  which  first  signalled  the 
onset  of  the  cattle  and  the  defeat  of  the  Houssas.  Eeinforce- 
ments  of  the  uniformed  warriors  arriving  with  long  coils  of 
rope,  however,  turned  the  tables  on  the  valorous  beeves.  They 
were,  after  a  few  ineflfectual  struggles,  finally  captured,  bound 
fore  and  hind  legs,  and  dragged  ignominiously  along  the 
gangway  planks  to  the  lower  decks  ;  and  the  steamer,  swinging 
to  midstream,  soon  revolved  her  paddles  and  shot  down  stream, 
until  nearing  Dolben's  Point  and  the  surfy  bar,  she  rounded  the 
extremity  of  Kennedy's  Island,  and,  with  her  stem  pointing  up 
river,  breasted  the  noble  current  of  the  Volta. 

The  Volta,  near  the  mouth,  is  from  two  to  three  miles 
wide ;  imless,  indeed,  you  dare  call  the  lagoon,  formed  by  the 
confluence  of  the  Volta  and  the  Troyeny  rivers  a  mouth,  when 
you  may  say  it  is  near  thirty  miles  wide.  From  Dolben's  Point, 
on  the  Addah  side  of  the  Volta,  to  Richards  Point,  on  the 
opposite  side,  is  but  about  a  mile  and  a  half.  These 
two  points,  however,  are  the  eastern  and  western  extremities 
of  narrow  sand  spits,  which,  with  the  exception  of  a  mile  and  a 
half  of  river  exit  to  the  sea,  enclose  a  large  area  of  water,  in  which 
are  many  islands  overgrown  with  mangroves  and  bush,  the 
resort  of  numerous  aquatic  birds  and  crocodiles. 

The  Volta  needs  exploring,  and  as  we  ascend  it  from  the 
sea  it  must  be  described,  because  we  are  ignorant  of  its  source 
and  course  above  Pong :  otherwise,  we  might  take  readers  from 
its  cavernous  birthplace,  or  its  natal  dell  in  some  far-away 
mountain  range  in  the  interior,  and  glide  downwards  singing 
of  its  charms,  as  the  current,  now  rapid,  now  slow,  bore  us  on. 
We  might  give  them  glimpses  of  the  picturesque  and  inspiring 
scenes  through  which  it  rushed,  of  new  coimtries  as  yet  un- 
touched by  a  traveller's  pen,  of  strange  animals  and  vegetables. 
But  above  Pong  we  know  nought  of  this  river,  and  very  few 
ordinary  stay-at-home  people  know  anything  of  its  mouth. 

All  can  imagine  what  a  river  like  the  Volta  must  be  near 
its  mouth.    It  is  an  African  tropical  river  of  some  magnitude, 

H 


98 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


not  as  large  as  the  Nile,  the  Congo,  or  the  Niger,  It  is  as  wide, 
when  from  bank  to  bank  of  mainland  you  see  its  breadth, 
as  the  Missomi  is  at  Omaha,  as  the  Hudson  is  at  3ing  Sing,  or 
as  the  Thames  is  at  Greenwich.  I  should  say  it  was  altogether 
as  large  a  stream,  as  many  miles  in  length,  as  the  Hudson, 
though  not  so  deep  nor  so  useful  for  navigation. 

The  Volta  has  all  the  peculiarities  of  a  tropical  river.  Its 
course  is  wayward,  running  at  random  around  numerous  low  islets 
in  midstream,  at  one  time  giving  you  a  view  of  a  long  oblique 
stretch  of  water,  a  mile  wide,  and  three  or  four  or  five  miles 
in  length,  with  a  shallow  depth  averaging  five  feet,  because  a 
vast  quantity  of  water  has  been  absorbed  by  the  creek-like 
channels  which  separate  the  islands  from  each  other,  and  into  / 
the  innumerable  small  arteries  which  lead  to  the  broad  lagoon.  \  ^ 

The  banks  of  the  mainland  are  fringed  with  the  indispen-  ' 
sable  and  everlasting  mangrove,  while  the  low  islands  appear 
to  be  dark,  gloomy,  forbidding  masses  of  the  same  bush,  fit 
lairs  for  the  amphibious  monsters  with  which  the  African  rivers 
of  the  tropics  swarm.  • 

Were  you  able  to  so  crane  your  neck  as  to  look  over  the  • 
dark  mangrove  lines  on  either  side,  you  would  see  a  vast  extent 
of  morass,  half  shaded  by  dense  overhanging  clumps  of  bush, 
vivid  green  thick  bulbous-leafed  plants,  only  inhabited  by 
crocodiles,  divers,  and  other  aquatic  birds.  No  sign  of  man  or 
vestige  of  cultivation  would  be  seen  in  all  the  wilderness, 
because  Nature's  laws  will  not  permit  that  man  shall  breathe 
the  fatal  air  of  those  marshes  and  live.  To  live  there  would 
be  like  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  The  black  vegetablt 
mould  of  the  morass  is  still  in  a  state  of  chaos,  the  air  and 
light  which  belong  to  the  habitable  portion  of  the  globe  may 
not  enter  until  the  morass  shall  have  been  transformed  by  the 
subtle,  slow  proceeding  of  nature  into  healthy  productive  earth. 
At  present  man  flies  the  vicinity,  and  wisely  leaves  it  until  time 
shall  have  prepared  it  for  him. 

Though  we  on  board  the  steamer  hurry  by  the  fatal  district, 
the  wind  wafts  the  deadly  exhalation  towards  us,  and  in  its  im- 
relenting  embrace  we  are  involved  for  a  time,  where  particles 
are  deposited  in  the  limgs  and  the  stomach  to  incubate  and 
torment  the  frame  with  the  rackings,  the  torments,  and  agonies 
of  perhaps  a  remittent  fever  which  will  last  four  or  five  days. 


THE  VOLTA. 


99 


and  show  the  verge  of  the  dark  pit  so  many  poor  bodies  have 
ahready  barely  escaped  on  this  Ashantee  campaign. 

Even  while  we  hurry  by  we  feel  the  influence  of  the  for- 
bidden region,  we  feel  unusual  lassitude  of  frame,  are  conscious 
that  a  veil  of  death  hangs  over  us,  and  sensible  that  for 
breathing  that  noxious  air  we  shall  suflfer.  It  is  low  tide,  the 
river  has  decreased  in  height,  and  the  mangrove  roots  stand 
revealed  in  all  their  hideous  deformity.  The  bushes  seem  as 
if  they  grew  on  stilts,  for  so  the  mud-painted  stems  appear, 
entangled  amongst  one  another,  and  disgustingly  naked ;  and 
below  is  the  rich  deep  alluvial  deposit  of  the  river,  fermenting 
the  fervid  sim,  and  adding  still  more  to  the  disease  which 
begim  to  permeate  through  our  frames. 
Despite,  however,  the  sad  reality  of  the  picture  I  have 
attempted  to  give  you,  any  one  fond  of '  gunning '  and  solitude 
would  here  find  ample  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  his  skill 
with  his  weapon,  and  ample  space  in  the  broad  stream,  in  the 
,  sluggish  creeks  and  lagoons,  to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of 
Lorough  solitariness.  Here  are  crocodiles,  and  hippopotami, 
.divers,  cranes,  pelicans,  storks,  whydahs,  paddy  birds,  and  ibis 
by  thousands.  With  enough  powder  and  anmiunition,  a  man 
in  time,  might  slaughter  a  pile  of  birds  as  high  as  Cheops' 
Pyramid,  and  still  leave  a  vast  number  for  his  successor.  From 
the  upper  point  of  Kennedy's  Island,  where  a  good  view  of  the 
main  river  is  to  be  seen,  I  can*  see  that  the  banks  on  both 
Vies  are  as  thick  with  divers  and  whydahs  as  the  mangrove 
ches  are  able  to  bear.  On  a  single  branch  I  see  as  many 
ivers  perching,  and  above  their  heads,  resting  on  higher 
ies,  are  so  many  white  paddy  birds,  that  it  seems  as 
ough  they  have  been  reared  thereon,  and  the  two  lines  of 
;^Diangroves,  stretch  I  should  say,  three  miles  up  on  either  side. 

About  2  P.M.  the  steamer  arrived  opposite  Gravie  Point, 
the  site  of  the  first  camp  beyond  Addah.  The  intelligent 
coloured  officer,  Mr.  B.  Bannerman,  whose  presence  with 
Commissioner  Glover  is  a  great  satisfaction  to  the  Accras, 
came  aboard  and  saluted  Captain  Goldsworthy,  and  informed 
him  in  answer  to  a  question  proposed  to  him  by  his  superior, 
that  there  were  2,000  natives,  armed,  equipped,  and  organised, 
at  the  qamp.   The  camp  was  in  a  satisfiEkctory  state ;  it  lacked 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


not  as  large  as  the  Nile,  the  Congo,  or  the  Niger,  It  is  as  wide, 
when  from  bank  to  bank  of  mainland  you  see  its  breadth, 
as  the  Missouri  is  at  Omaha,  as  the  Hudson  is  at  @ing  Sing,  or 
as  the  Thames  is  at  Greenwich.  I  should  say  it  was  altogether 
as  large  a  stream,  as  many  miles  in  length,  as  the  Hudson, 
though  not  so  deep  nor  so  useful  for  navigation. 

The  Volta  has  all  the  peculiarities  of  a  tropical  river.  Its 
course  is  wayward,  nmning  at  random  around  numerous  low  islets 
in  midstream,  at  one  time  giving  you  a  view  of  a  long  oblique 
stretch  of  water,  a  mile  wide,  and  three  or  four  or  five  miles 
in  length,  with  a  shallow  depth  averaging  five  feet,  because  a 
vast  quantity  of  water  has  been  absorbed  by  the  creek-Uka 
channels  which  separate  the  islands  from  each  other,  and  into] 
the  innumerable  small  arteries  which  lead  to  the  broad  lagoom^ 

The  banks  of  the  mainland  are  fringed  with  the  indispen- 
sable and  everlasting  mangrove,  while  the  low  islands  appear 
to  be  dark,  gloomy,  forbidding  masses  of  the  same  bush,  fit 
lairs  for  the  amphibious  monsters  with  which  the  African  riven 
of  the  tropics  swarm.  J 

Were  you  able  to  so  crane  your  neck  as  to  look  over  thd 
dark  mangrove  lines  on  either  side,  you  would  see  a  vast  extent' 
of  morass,  half  shaded  by  dense  overhanging  clumps  of  boah^ 
vivid  green  thick  bulbous-leafed  plants,  only  inhabited  by 
crocodiles,  divers,  and  other  aquatic  birds.  No  sign  of  man  or 
vestige  of  cultivation  would  be  seen  in  all  the  wilderness, 
because  Nature's  laws  will  not  permit  that  man  shall  breathe 
the  fatal  air  of  those  marshes  and  live.  To  live  there  woulfl 
be  like  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  The  black  veget^H 
mould  of  the  morass  is  still  in  a  state  of  chaos,  the  nlt^BSf 
light  which  belong  to  the  habitable  portion  of  the  globe  mafL 
not  enter  until  the  morass  shall  have  been  transformed  by  tho 
subtle,  slow  proceeding  of  nature  into  healthy  productive  earth. 
At  present  man  flies  the  vicinity,  and  wisely  leaves  it  until  time 
shall  have  prepared  it  for  him. 

Though  we  on  board  the  steamer  hurry  by  the  fatal  district, 
the  wind  wafts  the  deadly  exhalation  towards  us,  and  in  its  un- 
relenting embrace  we  are  involved  for  a  time,  where  particles 
are  deposited  in  the  limgs  and  the  stomach  to  incubate  and 
torment  the  frume  with  the  rackings,  the  torments,  and  agonies 
of  perhaps  a  remittent  fever,  which  will  last  four  or  five  days, 


THE  VOLTA. 


99 


and  show  the  verge  of  the  dark  pit  so  many  poor  bodies  hsive 
ahready  barely  escaped  on  this  Ashantee  campaign. 

Even  while  we  hurry  by  we  feel  the  influence  of  the  for- 
bidden region,  we  feel  imusual  lassitude  of  frame,  are  conscious 
that  a  veil  of  death  hangs  over  us,  and  sensible  that  for 
breathing  that  noxious  air  we  shall  suffer.  It  is  low  tide,  the 
river  has  decreased  in  height,  and  the  mangrove  roots  stand 
revealed  in  all  their  hideous  deformity.  The  bushes  seem  as 
if  they  grew  on  stilts,  for  so  the  mud-painted  stems  appear, 
entangled  amongst  one  another,  and  disgustingly  naked ;  and 
\  below  is  the  rich  deep  alluvial  deposit  of  the  river,  fermenting 
^in  the  fervid  sun,  and  adding  still  more  to  the  disease  which 
^bas  begim  to  permeate  through  our  frames. 

Despite,  however,  the  sad  reality  of  the  picture  I  have 
^'  attempted  to  give  you,  any  one  fond  of '  gunning '  and  solitude 
t  would  here  find  ample  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  his  skill 
\  with  his  weapon,  and  ample  space  in  the  broad  stream,  in  the 
'\nazy,  sluggish  creeks  and  lagoons,  to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of 
Thorough  solitariness.    Here  are  crocodiles,  and  hippopotami, 
divers,  cranes,  pelicans,  storks,  whydahs,  paddy  birds,  and  ibis 
by  thousands.    With  enough  powder  and  ammunition,  a  man 
in  time,  might  slaughter  a  pile  of  birds  as  high  as  Cheops' 
Pyramid,  and  still  leave  a  vast  number  for  his  successor.  From 
the  upper  point  of  Kennedy's  Island,  where  a  good  view  of  the 
main  river  is  to  be  seen,  I  can  see  that  the  banks  on  both 
'l|4es  are  as  thick  with  divers  and  whydahs  as  the  mangrove 
faranches  are  able  to  bear.    On  a  single  branch  I  see  as  many 
^  |niD^vers  perching,  and  above  their  heads,  resting  on  higher 
'  b];fm(Sfies,  are  so  many  white  paddy  birds,  that  it  seems  as 
though  they  have  been  reared  thereon,  and  the  two  lines  of 
inangroves,  stretch  I  should  say,  three  miles  up  on  either  side. 

About  2  P.M.  the  steamer  arrived  opposite  Grravie  Point, 
the  site  of  the  first  camp  beyond  Addah.  The  intelligent 
coloured  officer,  Mr.  B.  Bannerman,  whose  presence  with 
Commissioner  Glover  is  a  great  satisfaction  to  the  Accras, 
came  aboard  and  saluted  Captain  Groldsworthy,  and  informed 
him  in  answer  to  a  question  proposed  to  him  by  his  superior, 
that  there  were  2,000  natives,  armed,  equipped,  and  organised, 
at  the  qamp.   The  camp  was  in  a  satis&ctory  state ;  it  lacked 


100 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


nothing,  but  the  men  were  somewhat  impatient  to  be  on  the 
march  against  their  enemies. 

Gravie  Point  is  to  be  held  until  Glover's  force  of  Accras, 
Houssas,  and  Yorubas  arrive ;  when,  after  garrisoning  it  with 
a  couple  of  hundred  men,  the  Point  will  be  abandoned  by  the 
main  body,  which  intends  to  cross  to  the  opposite  side,  and 
strike  north-easterly  to  hem  in  the  enemy,  which  the  Com- 
missioner thinks  will  be  a  very  easy  matter. 

About  5  P.M.  we  arrive  within  view  of  Blappah,  the  second 
post  on  the  Volta,  chosen  by  Glover.  The  aspect  of  the 
country  changes  for  the  better  about  Blappah.  The  mangroves 
have  been  gradually  thinning  and  have  now  finally  disappeared. 
Stately  silk  cotton  trees,  doum  and  Guinea  palms  lord  it  over 
fields  of  grain,  undisturbed  by  the  aggressions  of  the  mangroves 
and  the  shrubs  of  the  morass.  Little  hills  begin  to  show  their 
crest  above  the  river  bank,  and  villages  are  more  frequent. 
The  atmosphere  is  more  salubrious,  the  river  current  is  swifter 
and  browner,  the  banks  are  higher,  and  the  red  clayey  earth 
begins  to  show  itself. 

The  debarkation  of  our  party,  and  the  landing  of  the 
pugnacious  bullocks,  furnished  us  with  humorous  scenes. 

Captain  Reginald  Sartorius,  of  the  6th  Bengal  Cavalry,  is 
Commandant  at  Blappah. 

Sartorius  is  hankering  for  the  time  when  Glover  will  tell 
him,  *  Cross  the  river,  dear  Sartorius,  and  slay  them.'  It  did 
not  need  him  to  tell  us  how  tired  he  was  of  staying  at 
Blappah,  how  he  was  suflfering  from  the  inactivity  which  he 
could  not  help.  We  had  seen  his  impatience  in  his  face. 
Sartorius  reminded  me  by  his  physique  of  Guy  Livingstone, 
and  that  class  of  large-limbed,  resolute,  undaimted  heroes 
Laurence  delights  to  describe.  When  the  fight  with  the 
Awoonahs,  and  Aquamoos  begins,  I  am  sure  they  will  be  as 
much  surprised  by  the  vigour  of  this  English  officer  as  they 
will  be  by  the  spiteful  alarming  hiss  of  Hale's  rockets. 

I  have  described  Captain  Sartorius  first,  because  he  is  the 
chief  of  the  forces  at  Blappah ;  but  his  brother  officers  are 
no  meanly  formed  men  either.  Especially  one,  Lieutenant 
Moore,  of  the  Royal  Navy,  a  tall,  long-limbed,  energetic  fellow, 
with  the  lives  and  vivacity  of  a  hundred  common  men  in  him. 
His  long  boots  flitted  with  his  body  from  one  end  of  the  «amp 


CAPTAIN  REGINALD  SARTORIUS. 


101 


to  the  other  in  a  surprising  way.  The  man  seemed  to  be 
everywhere  at  one  time.  Surely  though  Glover  has  but  ten 
officers  with  him,  he  cannot  say  but  what  he  has  selected  the 
very  fittest  men  he  could  wish  to  assist  him  in  his  enterprise, 
for  ten  such  men  as  I  have  seen  with  him  are  worth  a  hundred 
ordinary  men,  and  so  long  as  they  retain  their  health,  I  have 
no  doubt  Glover  will  eflfect,  with  their  aid,  what  he  has  deter- 
mined upon.  Sartorius  thought,  with  Captain  Goldsworthy, 
that  the  enemy  should  not  be  permitted  to  stand  quietly  and 
undisturbed  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  to  survey  the 
actions  of  his  men,  and  accordingly  sent  a  nine-poimd  shell, 
and  a  Hale's  rocket,  one  after  another,  at  the  curious  and  over- 
much unconcerned  group,  which  had  the  eflfect  of  dispersing 
the  insolents  in  a  very  precipitate  manner,  in  all  directions. 
Sartorius  said  after  the  excitement  was  over,  he  wished  he  could 
show  us  better  fun,  but  if  we  only  stayed  a  week  with  him,  he 
would  enable  us  to  see  how  his  men  would  pimish  that  party 
across. 

The  exact  number  in  his  camp  at  Blappah,  as  made  out  by 
the  sergeants,  was  2,948,  consisting  of  AquapimSjCrobboes,  a  few 
Crepees,  Houssas,  and  Yorubas,  all  of  which  Captain  Sartorius 
assured  us  that  night  would  be  drawn  out  in  nimiber  for  our 
special  information  the  next  morning.  Unfortimately,  however, 
the  next  morning  a  tornado  set  in,  accompanied  by  a  heavy 
shower  of  rain,  which  entirely  precluded  the  possibility  of 
muster  or  manoeuvre. 

Captain  Sartorius,  under  directions  from  Glover,  while  his 
chief  was  compelled  to  be  inactive  at  Accra,  travelled  through 
the  country  lying  between  Accra  and  Pesse  on  the  Volta 
above  the  rapids,  and  his  map  of  his  route  furnishes  most 
invaluable  information  concerning  unknown  lands.  He  says 
the  country  lying  between  Accra  and  Accropong  is  an  open 
country,  interspersed  with  hills,  until,  on  approaching  Accro- 
pong, the  hills  become  attached,  and  fonn  a  range  which, 
from  salubrity  and  fertility,  has  no  equal  on  the  West  Coast  of 
Africa.  Beyond  Accropong  to  Pong,  or  Amedika,  lying  near 
the  rapids  of  the  Volta,  the  land  is  exceedingly  diversified  by 
wooded  plain,  hill  and  dale.  North  of  Pong  the  country  be- 
comes open  again,  entirely  devoid  of  bush.  Clumps  of  forest 
make  travel  agreeable  and  pleasant.    The  traveller  is  protected 


102 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


from  the  heat  of  the  sun,  while  being  free  from  the  annoyances 
of  the  jungle.  Captain  Sartorius  thinks  that  the  steam 
launches  may  be  easily  drawn  over  the  rocks  of  the  rapids  by 
which  an  advance  of  the  expedition  will  be  advantageously 
made  by  means  of  the  river  as  far  as  Pesse.  From  Pesse  three 
moderate  marches  will  enable  the  expedition  to  reach  the  Prah, 
whence  no  diflSculties  interpose  beyond  to  Coomassie. 

After  the  most  generous  hospitality  shown  to  us  by  the 
captain  and  his  brother  officers,  we  descended  the  river  next 
morning,  and  arrived  at  Addah  Forh,  where  the  Commissioner 
and  chief  of  the  expedition  was  ready  to  welcome  us  with  the 
news  that  nearly  all  the  Accras  had  joined  them,  and  to 
prophesy  that  in  four  days  Addah  Forh  would  be  a  deserted 
camp. 

I  hope  that  Governor  Glover  will  be  able  to  make  his 
prophesy  good  ;  but  aft^r  some  experience  of  the  native  African, 
I  am  not  prepared  to  be  so  sanguine  as  to  say  that  on  the  fifth 
day  from  this  date  the  Governor  will  have  departed  to  the  war. 
I  incline  to  the  opinion  that  perhaps  within  eight  days  he  will 
be  ready,  and  once  having  started,  the  great  obstacle  to  rapid 
travel  and  movement  of  forces  has  been  removed ;  and  he  may 
be  able,  if  he  will  be  stem  and  uncompromising  with  the  dila- 
tory chiefs  and  permit  of  no  delays,  to  be  on  the  Prah  even 
before  the  end  of  this  month. 

The  entire  strength  of  Glover's  expedition  now  assembled 
on  the  Volta  numbers  about  23,000  men.  11,000  are  at 
Yankitty,  consisting  of  Akims  and  Aquapims;  3,000  are  at 
Blappah ;  2,000  are  at  Gravie,  or  Agravie  Point ;  550  are 
Houssas,  600  are  Yorubas,  encamped  at  Addah  Forh.  5,000 
Accras  are  advancing  to  assist  him,  under  kings  Solomon  and 
Tarkey. 

The  assembling  of  this  powerful  force  proves  the  qualities 
of  Glover  and  his  subordinates.  If  the  commission  had  about 
100  British  officers,  all  capable  men,  the  expedition  under  Sir 
Garnet  would  be  unnecessary. 

To-morrow  I  return  by  the  *  Dauntless'  to  Cape  Coast 
Castle,  at  which  point,  perhaps,  there  may  be  by  this  time 
something  interesting  to  describe.  So  far  this  Ashantee  cam- 
paign has  been  devoid  of  interesting  incidents,  which  may  be 
ascribed  to  the  fact  that  the  camjpaign  has  not  as  yet  begun. 


ABMVAL  OF  WHITE  TROOPa 


103 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  'BLACK  WATCH*  AKD  ITS  OFFICEBS — TEBTOTALISM — THE  RAGE  AHONa 
THEM— STEWARDS  DISGUSTED — CHRISTMAS — COMMISSARY  O'CONKOR— THE 
aUALITT  OP  THE  COKTROL  OFFICERS  ON  THE  GOLD  COAST. 

December  16,  1873. 

Arriving  from  Addah  Forh,  I  found  that  the  white  troops,  con- 
sisting of  the  Rifle  Brigade,  the  23rd  Fusiliers,  and  the  42nd 
Highlanders — the  Black  Watch — had  at  last  come,  to  the 
immense  satisfiaction  of  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  and  his  staflF,  and 
the  press  correspondents.  The  troop-ships  *  Tamar,'  *  Himalaya,' 
and  the  *  Sarmatian '  conveyed  the  soldiers  from  their  natal 
shores  to  the  African  coast. 

I  had  always  a  strong  desire  to  see  the  Hig^hlanders  in  their 
kilts,  and  from  my  knowledge  of  Africans,  I  was  pretty  certain 
that  the  sight  of  such  a  splendid  body  of  kilted  men  would  have 
a  fine  effect  on  the  native  mind,  but  on  visiting  the '  Sarmatian ' 
I  heard  to  my  regret  that  they  had  left  their  kilts  behind  them, 
and  that  they  were  breeched,  like  ordinary  British  soldiers,  in 
the  unpicturesque  Norfolk  grey.  The  cause  was,  I  am  told,  the  » 
kilts  were  not  fit  for  the  bush-work ;  that  the  authorities  feared 
that  thorns  and  cacti  would  have  so  wounded  the  epidermis 
of  the  soldiers,  that  they  would  in  a  short  time  be  disabled  from 
active  service. 

To  me,  who  am  an  old  campaigner  on  the  West  Coast  of 
Africa,  having  been  here  now  seven  weeks,  it  was  amusing  to 
watch  the  officers'  faces.  They  are  mostly  all  young  men  of  very 
good  families,  with  cream-coloured  complexions,  light  hair  and 
whiskers,  as  if  they  had  all  been  turned  out  of  one  mould — ^they 
appear  to  be  so  very  much  alike. 

They  all  seem  weighed  down  by  the  one  pervading  thought, 
^How  shall  I  stand  the  climate?'  and  their  features  conse- 


104 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


quently  are  cast  in  an  interesting  pensive  melancholy.  Not 
that  they  are  a  bit  afraid  of  the  campaign  or  of  however  ad- 
verse a  future,  but  they  have  heard  so  much  about  the  dis- 
agreeable climate,  that  they  naturally  feel  anxious  about  it. 
Each  has  taken  great  eflForts  to  study  the  very  latest  sug- 
gested precautionary  measures  by  those  who  fortunately  or 
imfortunately  have  been  to  Africa  and  still  survive,  and  whose 
effusive  correspondence  on  the  African  climate  has  done  more 
harm  than  good. 

With  a  naivete  quite  interesting,  these  young  Highland 
oflScers  tell  you  of  the  plans  they  have  adopted  to  guard  against 
the  fever ;  of  the  good  advice  which  some  friends  have  been 
kind  enough  to  give  them,  which  they  think  the  best  thing 
in  the  world.  One  beardless  boy,  whose  soft  face  and  pure 
complexion  neither  sim  has  tanned  nor  wind  embrowned,  tells  us 
confidentially  that  he  has  adopted  the  mosquito  bar  plan : '  They 
tell  me  it  is  a  sure  protection  against  fever ;  what  do  you  think 
of  it  ?'  Another,  tells  us  he  means  to  stick  to  quinine  :  '  Two 
grains  in  a  glass  of  sherry  taken  each  morning  before  coffee  or 
chocolate,  will  do  the  job  sure,  won't  it.  Don't  you  think 
so  ? '  he  asks  anxiously.  Another,  a  fleshy  stalwart  young  man, 
whose  muscles  have  foimd  ere  this  ample  exercise  over  Scotch 
moors,  is  determined  to  eschew  all  liquors,  *None  of  your 
brandies,  soda,  sherry,  gin,  or  anything  of  that  sort  for  me.  My 
opinion  is  that  people  wouldn't  die  if  it  were  not  that  they  kill 
themselves  drinking.'  This  he  delivered  with  an  air  of  one 
who  knew  all  about  it  long  before  Adam  was  created,  and  to 
prove  how  brave  his  resolutions  are,  he  bawls  out  to  the  steward 
to  bring  him  an  ice  lemonade  mixture.  The  stewards  of  the 
*Sarmatian'  complained  to  me  that  during  the  voyage  the 
oflScers  drank  nothing  but  lemonade.  *  Hi  never  seed  such  a 
teetotal  set  in  my  life,'  uttered  a  cockney  waiter,  as  he  passed 
by  me,  bearing  a  tray  loaded  with  lemonade  mixtures. 

I  never  saw  such  a  number  of  youthful  looking  oflScers  be- 
longing to  any  regiment. 

How  these  yoimg  fellows  will  stand  the  climate,  and  how 
they  bear  up  imder  privations  in  the  African  tropics,  must  be 
left  for  future  chapters  to  tell.  They  will  do  their  duty,  no 
doubt,  and  up  to  the  moment  of  debarkation  and  the  day  of 
departure  for  the  interior,  the  British  Government  will  assist 


CONSIDERATION  OF  THE  BRITISH  GOVERNMENT.  105 


them  with  prudent  wisdom  and  care  to  retain  what  energy 
they  possess  for  the  fulfilment  of  that  duty.  The  white  regi- 
ments will  remain  quartered  on  board  the  transports;  nay, they 
have  already  departed,  seaward  for  a  cruise  which  is  to  last  ten 
days. 

Meantime,  during  this  cruise,  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  will 
hurry  the  final  preparations  for  the  great  march.  The  road  has 
already  been  cleared  of  bush  as  far  as  the  Prah  river.  Stores  in 
large  quantities  are  being  conveyed  to  Prahsu,  the  frontier 
post  of  the  Protectorate  situated  on  the  other  side  of  the  Prah. 
There  are  probably  some  4,000  carriers  altogether  engaged  in 
the  work  of  transport,  and  each  station  is  amply  furnished  with 
a  supply  of  stores.  The  arrangements  of  hospitals  for  the  sick 
are  superb,  and  a  strong  force  of  medical  men  has  been  placed 
at  each  camp. 

The  British  Government  has  been  lavish  in  the  outfit  for  this 
campaign ;  every  imaginable  thing  requisite  for  a  soldier  in 
health  and  in  sickness  is  to  be  found  here  in  abundance.  As 
yet  I  have  not  heard  of  a  single  deficient  article,  though  I  have 
heard  of  the  arrival  of  many  unnecessary  articles,  but  that  is  a 
small  fault. 

Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  leaves  Cape  Coast  for  the  Prah  on 
December  27th ;  the  stafi*  leave  on  the  26th.  I  also  intend  to 
depart  for  the  front  on  the  26th,  and  will  push  on  as  far  as  the 
Prah  river,  hoping  to  meet  with  scenes  and  incidents  worth 
describing.  Excepting  a  description  of  the  country  and  the 
camp,  I  do  not  expect  that  there  will  be  much  of  interest 
attached  to  an  eighty-mile  march.  The  excitement  of  the  cam- 
paign will  begin  when  the  white  troops  shall  have  crossed  the 
Prah,  and  shall  begin  to  struggle  through  the  bushes  of 
Ashantee-land,  peppered  by  iron  slugs.  That  is  the  lively  time 
to  which  I  am  looking  forward. 

On  December  23  Sir  Gtimet  proceeded  to  Chamah  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Prah,  in  the  flagship  of  the  African  squadron,  the 
*  Active.'  He  expected  to  have  to  rebombard  the  village  which 
behaved  so  treacherously  to  Commodore  Commerell,  but  he  found 
no  inhabitant  on  the  beach,  though  he  landed  with  a  force  of 
marines  to  search  for  the  natives  who  have  been  so  vicious. 

We  hear  that  the  African  mail  steamer,  the  '  Soudan,'  has 
been  lost  between  Madeira  and  Sierra  Leone.  She  had  on 
board  15,000{.  in  specie  for  the  use  of  Sir  Garnet,  who  is  with- 


106 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


out  any  money  at  present,  having  sent  his  cash  lately  down  to 
Glover. 

Glover  is  to  be  at  the  Prah  by  January  15,  and  as  this  river, 
or  a  branch  of  it,  runs  diagonally  across  the  country  from 
north-east  to  south-west,  he  will  be  able  to  reach  the  Prah 
within  three  days  after  leaving  the  Volta,  and  both  forces  will 
then  continue  their  march  to  Coomassie  along  two  lines  of  a 
triangle,  the  apex  being  the  capital  of  Ashantee. 

Christmas  of  1873  is  over.  We  commemorated  the  great 
Christian  day  with  as  much  goodwill  towards  one  another  as 
good  Christian  men  appear  to  possess  elsewhere.  To  temper 
the  comfortless  sterility  of  such  a  day,  passed  alone  in  our  own 
houses,  on  such  theer  as  tinned  Australian  meat,  which  is  an 
ummctuous  heap  of  coarse  fibre,  we  met  by  invitation  in  social 
circles  at  the  houses  of  our  friends. 

Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  entertained  his  friends  at  Government 
House,  with  what  means  of  hospitality  his  caterer  permitted 
him.  There  were  any  number  of  convivial  tables  scattered  among 
the  dwellings  of  oflBcers  at  the  Fort  and  other  places.  The 
Press  Corps  met  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  William  Cleaver,  the 
agent  of  the  great  house  of  the  Swanzy  Brothers,  where  we 
dined  on  turkey  and  other  edible  substances,  and  drank  hock 
and  champagne,  to  the  regeneration  of  the  physical  man  and 
the  improvement  of  our  minds.  i 

We  have  been  strongly  tempted  to  criticise  Sir  Garnet's 
apparent  inattention  to  transport*  matters.  Some  men  will 
perhaps  think  that  Sir  Garnet  should  escape  censure,  and  that 
the  officer  of  tlie  '  Control '  in  charge  should  be  blamed,  but 
though  this  may  be  right  in  a  measure,  still  Sir  Garnet  is  chief 
of  the  expedition,  and  any  failure  in  the  undevtaking  must  rest 
on  Sir  Garnet's  shoulders,  as  well  as  the  principal  merit  of 
success.  Sir  Garnet  determines  the  number  of  oflScers  required, 
appoints  the  official  in  charge  of  the  whole,  or  at  least,  his 
name  is  submitted  to  him  for  appro vaL  If  he  leaves  the 
whole  charge  to  this  official,  without  supervision,  and  if  this 
official  is  unqualified  by  experience,  or  want  of  tact,  or  fore- 
thought to  provide  for  his  necessities  in  the  commissariat  and 
transport  line,  he  should  be  justly  held  responsible  for  this  dis- 
qualification. 

Please  bear  in  mind  that  I,  for  my  part,  augur  nothing 


THE  CONTROL  DEPARTMENT. 


107 


but  completest  success  eventually  in  the  conduct  of  this  expedi- 
tion, but  it  is  an  anxious  question  just  now.  *  Shall  we  be  able 
to  march  this  distance  of  140  miles  to  Coomassie  and  be  back 
to  Cape  Coast  before  the  rainy  season  commences  ? '  when  we 
evidently  are  much  behindhand  already.  If  not  the  English 
people  will  have  ample  cause  for  dissatisfaction ;  if  we  do,  they 
shall  have  as  ample  reason  to  bless  the  Government  which 
selected  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  for  the  command.  We  all  like 
Sir  Garnet  so  much  that  we  would  wish  to  see  him  return  with 
honour  and  glory  to  himself. 

There  is  no  doubt  of  the  capability  of  the  British  troops, 
now  at  sea  oflf  Cape  Coast,  to  force  their  way  to  Coomassie 
against  all  odds.  They  consist  of  picked,  regiments — the  famous 
*  Black  Watch,'  the  42nd  Highlanders,  the  Eoyal  Welsh  Fusiliers, 
and  the  Rifle  Brigade,  with  a  naval  battalion  of  picked  men. 
We  may  confidently  back  these  white  men  against  any  number 
of  Ashantees.  Even  the  tribes  of  the  entire  West  Coast  of 
Africa  combined  could  not  oppose  them  successfully,  bush  or  no 
bush.  Their  nimibers  are  comparatively  few,  but  their  disci- 
pline is  perfect,  their  pluck  is  traditional,  their  heroic  endurance 
of  evils  undoubted,  their  chief  is  a  soldier  of  reputation  and 
great  promise,  their  officers  are  superb  men  individually  and 
collectively. 

Give  them  food^  look  after  their  healths  as  best  you  can,  do 
your  duty  to  them,  and  they  will  walk  to  Coomassie,  though 
every  tree  in  the  forest,  befween  here  and  Coomassie,  became 
transformed  to  armed  men. 

Well  then,  whence  may  we  fear  serious  obstacles  ?  I  answer 
in  the  dilatoriness  and  inefficiency  of  the  Control  Department, 
which  has  the  transporting  of  stores  and  provisioning  of  the  troops 
in  its  charge.  Hence  the  important  necessity  of  unceasing 
watchfulness  and  supervision  of  this  department  by  the  General 
in  command.  He  should  seize  upon  every  able-bodied  man  in 
the  Protectorate  for  this  duty,  pay  him  well  in  sterling  coin  if 
he  behaves  as  he  should  behave,  punish  him  if  he  will  not  by 
forcing  him  to  the  work,  even  with  a  bayonet  if  necessary. 
For  the  General  has  the  safety  and  welfare  of  the  army  under 
him  at  stake,  and  this  is  no  time  for  feeble  effort  and  windy 
orations  about  *  humanity.'  It  would  be  the  humane  thing 
to  exercise  the  severest  measures  towards  the  deserters,  the 


108 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


unwilling,  and  obstinate,  for  the  sake  of  every  white  man  at 
present  in  the  country,  and  the  future  prosperity  of  themselves 
and  their  country. 

I  do  not  say  that  there  are  any  ineflBcient  officers  in  the  Control 
Department ;  far  from  it ;  what  I  mean  to  say  is  that  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley  should  be  certain  that  he  has  a  sufficient  number  of 
officers  and  carriers  for  the  work  on  hand,  and  that  he  should 
exercise  the  greatest  caution  that  he  is  not  persuaded  by  any 
feeling  of  personal  friendship  or  bias,  to  retain  any  man  in 
charge  of  the  Control,  who  may  prove  himself,  by  want  of 
energy  and  general  incapacity,  to  be  unfit  for  his  position.  It  is 
not  a  time  for  personal  friendships,  it  is  a  time  for  serious  work 
of  body  and  mind,  and  if  Sir  Garnet  recognizes  the  importance 
of  the  hour  and  this  duty — the  greater  praise  will  be  awarded 
him — that  he  sacrificed  personal  feeling  for  duty. 

There  is  one  man  on  the  Control  Staff  whom  I  am  com- 
pelled, as  an  impartial  eye-witness  of  the  man's  vigour  and  energy 
during  most  trying  weeks,  to  commend,  and  he  is  Commissary 
O'Connor.  At  all  times  and  all  hours  this  poor  overworked 
officer  has  dauntlessly  braved  the  fierce  heat  of  this  sea-coast 
town,  has  manfully  stood  at  his  post  when  associate  after 
associate  was  stricken  down,  and  sub  after  sub  invalided.  His 
constitution  has  enabled  him  to  withstand  the  fever  in  a  great 
measure,  but  even  his  iron  frame  has  been  racked  with  its 
agonies  several  times, 

Indeed  there  are  half-a-dozen  sterling  men  of  whom  I  might 
speak  solely  as  an  eye-witness,  with  unstinted  praise :  as  I  might 
of  the  zeal  which  has  animated  such  officers  as  Messrs.  Ravens- 
croft,  Coates,  yoimg  Hamilton  lately  from  Sandhurst^  and  the 
untamable  vigour  with  which  they  have  performed  the  most 
arduous  duties. 

A  peep  within  the  Castle  yard  would  give  one  a  better  idea 
of  the  labour  of  a  Control  officer  than  anything  else. 

Fancy  a  castle,  a  huge  structure  of  stone  and  mortar,  white- 
washed a  glaring  white,  with  galleries  and  walls  enclosing  a 
spacious  courtyard.  Lounging  in  the  galleries,  out  of  the  torrid 
heat,  are  the  invalids,  officers,  who  being  unable  from  sickness 
to  work,  look  do¥ni  on  their  fellows  out  in  the  painful  glare 
reflected  from  the  snowy  whitewashed  walls.  In  the  coiurtyard 
are  immense  piles  of  stores,  being  checked  by  a  boyish  youth 


A  YOUTHFUL  OFFICER. 


109 


who  braves  tropical  heat  for  the  first  time,  He  is  fresh  from 
an  English  niiUtary  school.  His  slender  figure,  dressed  neatly 
in  Norfolk  grey,  his  head  with  short  clustering  curls  of  light 
brown  hair  escaping  from  under  his  helmet,  his  face  almost 
transparent,  and  pallid  complexion  forms  an  agreeable  picture 
in  the  midst  of  the  nude  athletes  of  Fantee  land,  who  obey 
his  slightest  gesture  with  an  affecting  readiness.  He  is  like  a 
young  Daniel  in  the  midst  of  lions. 

Yonder  before  a  great  heap  of  bread  sacks  just  landed  from 
the  transport  ship  stands  Conmiissary  O'Connor.  He  is  never 
tired,  never  complaining,  his  jacket  is  off,  beads  of  perspiration 
stand  out  on  his  practical  face.  His  hand  is  just  now  upraised 
directing  a  burly  chief  of  a  tribe  how  to  pile  the  stores  under 
another  shed.  His  frank  bearing  and  humorous  language 
make  him  a  general  favoiurite  with  the  Africans.  His  artless 
commands  win  for  him  respectful  and  ready  obedience  from  all, 
though  he  has  all  sorts  of  irrepressible  characters  to  deal  with. 

To  my  right  is  another  officer,  Mr.  Ravenscroft,  who  has 
also  a  cheery,  hearty  way  of  ordering  men  about.  He  is  also 
in  his  shirt  sleeves.  The  hot  sun  has  burnt  his  face  to  redness, 
and  though  he  perspires,  and  is,  I  am  sure,  uncommonly  thirsty, 
he  strides  from  place  to  place,  with  eyes  roving  about  to  see 
that  all  goes  on  well. 

Endless  files  of  half-naked  bearers  come  and  go,  go  and 
come,  with  bread  sacks^  meat  kegs,  flour,  and  rice  boxes,  chests 
of  tea  and  sugar,  and  an  indescribable  variety  of  things  which 
troops  on  a  campaign  will  require. 

A  large  number  of  men  and  women  are  arranged  in  rows, 
ready  for  the  porterage  of  supplies  required  immediately  at  the 
front.  They  will  shortly  take  their  leave  in  charge  of  an 
officer,  who  must  give  accoimt  to  another  officer  at  the  front 
of  what  he  brings. 

Some  sinewy,  athletic  fellows  are  preparing  to  move  off  to 
stations  in  the  interior,  with  hammocks.  Their  beautiful 
bronze  figures  captivate  the  eye  for  an  instant,  until  it  is 
distracted  by  another  fresh  gang  of  men  coming  in  with  great 
water-casks  on  the  hand-carts,  for  the  use  of  the  Fort,  from  the 
condenser  at  Salt  Pond. 

Over  all  shines  the  sun  relentlessly  with  a  fierceness  which 
few  who  have  not  experienced  its  uncomfortable  heat  in  the 
torrid  region  can  understand. 


110 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Just  outside  the  castle  yard  are  other  scenes,  where  the 
Control  men  are  observed  distinguishing  themselves  by  their 
devotion  to  their  hard  duties.  Perspiring  faces,  and  coatless 
figures  of  Europeans  are  seen  here  also  superintending  the 
landing  of  stores  amid  the  roar  of  surf  which  is  almost  stun- 
ning. Surf-boats,  go  out  and  come  in,  but  nothing  is  done 
unsystematically.  Though  the  picture  is  one  of  a  large  con- 
course of  men,  white  and  black,  in  a  confused  mass  while 
engaged  in  their  various  duties,  and  a  wild,  foaming,  surfy  sea 
dashing  against  rock  and  whelming  boats  and  men,  every 
article  landed  must  be  rigorously  accounted  for,  every  group 
has  its  overseer  and  director  from  the  Control  Corps. 

These  are  a  few  of  the  labours  which  the  men  in  this 
department  are  engaged  in ;  to  enumerate  them  all  would  be 
almost  impossible  ;  to  dwell  upon  them  longer  is  needless. 

But  a  gentleman  has  lately  landed  at  Cape  Coast  Castle, 
who  is  about  to  restore  our  confidence  in  the  General  command- 
ing, and  we  anticipate  a  perfect  triumph  for  him  over  all  diffi- 
culties. This  officer  is  Colonel  CoUey,  reputed  to  be  a  first  • 
class  organiser.  His  duties  will  be  to  apportion  the  transport 
gangs  along  the  road  to  Coomassie  between  the  several  stations, 
to  procure  as  large  a  force  of  bearers  as  may  be  possible,  to 
guard  against  the  wholesale  desertion  of  natives  which  has  been 
going  on,  to  the  delay  of  the  advance. 

Strong  contingents  have  been  already  procured.  From  600 
to  700  have  been  received  from  king  Blay  at  Dix  Cove,  and  from 
500  to  600  from  Elmina.  But  there  will  now  be  a  constant 
accession  of  carriers  to  the  already  large  nmnber  in  active 
employment,  and  we  may  begin  to  congratulate  Sir  Garnet 
that  the  great  difficulty  of  the  hour  has  been  tided  over  so 
rapidly. 

The  stations  at  which  the  European  troops  will  rest  on  their 
journey  to  the  Prah  are  as  follows : — 


Ist  day,  Inquibim  from  Cape  Coast   6 

2nd  „  Accroful  from  Inquibim  6 

3rd  „  Yan  Coomassie  from  Accroful               .      .      .  10 

4ih  „  Manstt  from  Yan  Coomassie   10 

5th  Sutah  from  Mansu   9 

6th  „  Yan  Coomassie  (Assin)  from  Sutah  .             .      .  12 

7th  Barracoe  from  Yan  Coomassie   10 

8th  ,t  Prahsu,  on  the  Prah  from  Barracoe  ....  G 


Total,  69 


TO  THE  FKONTl 


111 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

TO  THB  FRONT  I — THS  TinfOLB— THB  FOEEST— THE  GAMPS^ALOlCO  THE  BOAD 
TO  FSAHSU  —  THE  OFFICERS  COMXAITDINO  DESCRIBED  —  MAJOR  HOME| 
FESTINO,  WEBBER,  ETELTN  WOOD— BAKER  RUSSELL. 

January  6,  1874. 

At  3  P.M.  we  deserted  the  houses  that  had  sheltered  us 
during  the  probationary  term  of  our  stay  at  Cape  Coast  Castle. 
The  sun  was  hot,  the  incandescence  of  the  stone  walls  was 
disagreeably  warm,  the  streets  were  almost  empty  of  white  men 
as  we  emerged  out  into  such  oppressive  sunlight;  but  the 
natives  were  out,  that  is  the  female  portion,  for  the  men  were 
*  absent  in  the  war.'  The  little  children  were  grovelling  on 
the  warm  streets,  and  tumbling  about  in  the  gutters  and  on 
the  door-steps,  recklessly  unconscious  that  the  *  Press  Gang ' 
were  moving  for  the  front,  the  little  savages  I 

The  road  to  Coomassie  led  by  the  main  drain  of  Cape  Coast, 
and  as  we  looked  at  the  green  slime  and  lazy  rillet,  we  con- 
gratulated ourselves  that  we  should  have  little  of  its  evil  odour 
any  more.  Then,  skirting  the  base  of  Connor's  Hill  on  one 
side,  and  passing  by  Prospect  Hill,  we  were  soon  shut  off,  by 
low  hills  such  as  are  found  scattered  along  the  coast  line,  from 
all  view  of  Cape  Coast  Castle,  and  finally  from  the  sea,  the  last 
impression  of  which  was  that  of  a  blue  expanse  of  water  in 
perfect  tranquillity. 

The  road  was  about  fifteen  feet  wide,  with  a  rise  along  its 
centre,  and  a  furrow  on  each  side  to  drain  off  the  water.  The 
telegraph  line,  a  very  novel  institution  in  Fantee  land — a  long 
Fetich  charm,  as  some  of  the  natives  believed  it  to  be — was 
laid  along  on  bamboo  poles,  and  as  we  looked  at  that  the 
barbarity  of  the  country  was  somewhat  relieved. 

We  had  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  <  bush '  while  at  Cape 


112 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 


Coast ;  here  it  was,  on  either  hand,  covering  hollows,  hills, 
slopes,  and  summits,  overwhelming  the  earth  with  its  luxu- 
riance and  density. 

Fancy  an  untrimmed  English  hedge,  if  you  can,  fifteen  and 
twenty  feet  high,  scores  of  miles  in  depth,  where  you  see  only  an 
innumerable  variety  of  brushwood  and  plants  trying  to  overjgrow 
one  another,  and  you  will  form  an  approximate  idea  of  the  thick- 
ness and  character  of  the  bush.  There  are  but  few  large  trees 
to  be  seen  the  first  few  miles ;  bush  has  usurped  every  inch  of 
groimd :  which  proves  that  in  former  times — how  long  ago  no 
one  can  tell — this  tract  of  country  between  Cape  Coast  and 
Inquibim  was  pretty  extensively  cultivated.  Adding  to  this 
impression  are  the  frequent  patches  of  the  undying  and  ever- 
living  plantain  plant,  whose  broad  fronds  of  a  pale  green 
colour  are  in  agreeable  contrast  to  the  darker  ^een  of  the 
ordinary  bush. 

After  six  miles  of  such  scenery,  the  road  every  now  and  then 
dipping  down  into  hollows  and  rising  up  short  abrupt  steeps 
and  brush-covered  knolls,  rising  to  sufficient  altitude  to  relieve 
the  monotony,  we  arrived  at  Inquibim. 

At  Inquibim  we  have,  for  the  first  time,  an  idea  how  well 
the  British  Government  can  and  does  take  care  of  its  troops. 
Accommodations  for  sleeping,  in  the  shape  of  immense  sheds 
thickly  thatched,  and  walled  with  plantain  leaves  arranged 
symmetrically,  are  constructed  to  relieve  the  soldiers  from 
further  labour  upon  arrival  at  camp.  Under  these  sheds  are 
long  platforms  of  split  bamboo,  raised  a  couple  of  feet  above 
the  earth  to  prevent  the  tired  men  from  throwing  themselves 
upon  the  ground  as  they  arrive  hot  and  perspiring  after  their 
march. 

Opposite  these  sheds  are  the  spacious  huts  constructed  for 
the  reception  of  stores,  for  the  accommodation  of  Control  and 
regimental  officers.  In  the  centre  of  the  camp  is  an  open  shelter, 
covering  an  enormous  iron  tank  weighing  over  two  tons,  which 
contains  a  filter  invented  by  Captain  Crease  of  the  Royal  Marine 
Artillery.  One  of  its  qualities  is  that  it  filters  beautifully 
clean  water  as  fast  as  it  may  be  required.  The  tank  contains 
many  hundred  gallons  of  water.  By  this  provident  measure 
the  thirsty  troops  are  saved  from  the  inconvenience  and  illness 
consequent  upon  drinking  the  unfiltered  water  of  these  parts, 


ACCEOFUL- 


113 


the  properties  of  which  have  an  exceedingly  bad  effect  on  the 
constitutions  of  Europeans. 

Three  or  four  bullocks  imported  from  San  lago,  of  the  Cape 
de  Verd  Isles,  in  the  meanwhile  feed  on  the  sweetest  plantain 
fronds  around  the  camp,  until  they  are  converted  into  beef  for 
the  troops. 

Between  Inquibim  and  Accroful,  where  we  stop  on  our  first 
night,  the  scenery  is  of  the  same  character  as  between  Inquibim 
and  Cape  Coast,  though  it  is  noticeable  that  the  large  trees  are 
more  numerous.    The  bamboo,  the  most  useful  of  all  woods  for 


ACCBOFUL. 


an  aimy,  grows  more  frequent.  We  passed  by  two  or  three 
remnants  of  Fantee  villages  which  were  abandoned  by  the 
people  when  the  news  of  the  Ashantee  invasion  startled  them 
from  their  homes. 

Accroful  was  a  pretty  station  occupying  the  crown  of  a 
low  hill,  in  charge  of  a  youth  just  from  Sandhurst  College. 
He  was  a  rosy-cheeked,  beardless  lad  when  he  arrived, 
but  he  has  already  been  converted  into  something  resem- 
bling a  campaigner.  The  sim  has  tanned  his  face,  and  he 
has  been  a  victim  to  two  or  three  attacks  of  fever.    But  the 

I 


114 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


insouciant  way  in  which  he  takes  his  punishment,  shows,  that 
though  there  is  but  gristle  and  aptitude  in  him  as  yet,  there 
will  be  bone  and  muscle  and  value  in  him  before  many  years. 
These  young  tough  Britons  show  remarkable  plasticity  and 
adaptiveness  in  their  characters.  Old  General  Jackson,  our 
'  Old  Hickory,'  would  have  at  once  embraced  the  young  hero, 
and  pronoimced  him  to  be  of  the  *  right  sort.' 

Filters,  iron  tanks,  sleeping  accommodations,  stores,  &c., 
await  the  arrival  of  the  troops  at  Accroful  station,  and  I  am 
told  that  these  will  be  found  at  every  station. 

On  the  28th  we  left  Accroful  and  resumed  our  journey. 
About  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  beyond,  we  came  to  a  still 
deep  pool  and  creek^  bridged  over  by  Major  R.  Home  and  his  - 
engineers.  In  {te  pool  sported  several  dusky  mermaids  in  a 
state  of  nature.  When  the  waters  were  undisturbed,  the  pool 
lay  black  and  still,  with  here  and  there  a  water-lily  resting  its 
large  leaves  on  the  surface. 

A  njile  or  two  beyond  the  creek  we  came  to  a  perfect  arbour, 
formed  by  the  embracing  stalks  of  two  rows  of  bamboo  clumps, 
where  the  shade  was  gratefully  cool.  At  frequent  intervals, 
after  this  experience,  the  over-sunny  road  became  sheltered  by 
gigantic  trees,  cotton-woods,  and  teak ;  palms  also  cropped  out 
above  tall  masses  of  brush,  and  by  their  graceful  feathery  leaves 
Qxlded  a  charm  to  an  otherwise  tame  scenery. 

The  soil  about  this  part  is  evidently  difiFerent  to  that  which 
6^n48  out  such  luxuriant  crops  of  bush  near  the  coast.  There 
the  soil  is  conjposed  of  coarse  sand,  covered  with  a  slight  coat 
of  vegetable  mould  ;  here  the  vegetable  deposit  is  of  a  greater 
depth,  and  has  more  consistency,  hence  the  more  vigorous  cha- 
racter of  the  shrubs  and  trees  and  the  greater  variety  of  plants. 
Flowers  were  also  more  numerous ;  in  some  parts,  from  their 
rich  colouring,  they  were  a  perfect  feast  to  the  eye,  and  diffused 
a  subtle,  fragrant  aroma.  And  as  we  passed  over  more  than 
usually  moist  places,  a  singularly  sweet  fragrance,  as  of  lotus 
and  lilies,  was  bonie  on  the  gentle  air,  from  the  bosom  of  the 
forest,  as  if  far  in  the  dusky  recesses  tliere  were  deep  and  still 
expanses  of  water  nourishing  the  beautiful  plants. 

About  noon  we  came  to  Dunquah,  commanded  by  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Festing.  This  post  was  first  occupied  by  this 
brave  soldier  on  October  11,  1873.    Here  were  also  Lieutenant 


LIEUT.-COLONEL  FESTING,  R.M.A. 


115 


Filleter,  of  the  2nd  West,  Lieutenant  Vandermeulen  of  the 
50th  Regiment,  Doctor  Gore,  Mr.  Irvine  of  the  Scotch  Fusi- 
liers, Surgeon  Major  Fox,  Messrs.  Beardmore  and  Hamilton  of 
the  Control  Department. 

Whatever  reputations  may  be  made  by  officers  for  gallantry 
aroimd  Coomassie,  it  will  never  be  forgotten  that  long  before 
Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  and  his  Special  Service  Corps  arrived  at 
Cape  Coast  Castle,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Festing,  Royal  Marine 
Artillery,  had  several  times  distinguished  himself  in  actions 
with  the  Ashantees.  Until  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  came  to 
take  command,  it  was  the  prominent  figure  of  Festing 
which  attracted  men's  attention.  He  had  met  and  defeated 
the  enemy  near  Elmina  in  August,  had  driven  them  back  from 
several  points  along  the  Prahsu  and  Cape  Coast  road ;  had  de- 
feated them  at  Dunquah,  and  indeed  contributed  by  his  restless 
activity  and  intrepidity  to  the  demoralisation  of  Am^nquatia's 
army  more  than  any  other  officer.  As  he  is  very  likely  to  be 
kept  behind  in  charge  of  Prahsu,  it  will  be  well  to  remember 
these  things,  that  they  may  not  be  obliterated  by  memories  of 
later  achievements. 

Upon  conversing  with  one  of  the  Control  officers,  I  find  the 
British  Government  is  evidently  determined  to  win  praise  for 
the  very  liberal  allowance  of  food  distributed  to  the  soldiers, 
as  well  as  for  many  other  prudential  measures  it  has  adopted 
for  the  welfare  of  the  troops. 

The  following  scale  of  rations  for  each  man,  is  exceedingly 
liberal,  and  any  soldier  who  can  retain  his  appetite  must  sur- 
vive all  malarial  influences  on  such  fare  : — 

1  \  pound  of  moat,  salt  or  fresh. 

1  pound  of  pressed  moat, 
l\  pound  of  biscuit. 

4  ounces  of  pressed  vegetables. 

2  ounces  of  rice,  or  2  ounces  of  preserved  peas. 

3  ounces  of  sugar, 
f  ounce  of  tea. 

^  ounce  of  sfilt. 
^  ounce  of  pepper. 

The  meat  is  either  to  be  tinned  Australian  beef  or  mutton, 
salt  beef,  or  salt  pork,  which  is  carried  in  50-lb  kegs.  The 
fresh  meat  is  procured  from  the  bullocks  imported  from  San 

1  2 


116 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Up  to  this  time  there  are  60  officers  on  service  in  the  Fantee 
country  belonging  to  the  Medical  and  Control  Departments, 
exclusive  of  the  Line  officers.  There  are  also  new  arrivals  on 
each  steamer. 

I  sometimes  think  how  well  Sir  Gramet  Wolseley  could  spare 
a  few  of  these  officers  for  the  service  of  Captain  Glover.  Alto- 
gether, Sir  Gramet  must  have  over  250  officers  in  his  command, 
though  his  force  numbers  only  3,000  men.  Poor  Captain  Glover 
has  only  10 1  Yet  Glover  had  a  force  eight  times  numerically 
stronger  when  I  visited  him.  I  have  been  fearfully  chafiFed 
for  my  championship  of  him.  Many  officers  ask  me  when  I 
mean  to  start  an  expedition  in  search  of  Glover  the  second 
time.  But  I  still  maintain  my  faith  that  Coomassie  will  not 
fiEill  without  the  assistance  or  the  influence  of  his  force  being 
recognised,  and  in  that  faith  I  mean  to  remain  until  the  war  is 
oven 

Dunquah  as  it  appears  now,  under  the  able  and  efficient 
management  of  Colonel  Festing,  has  a  very  neat  and  symmetric 
appearance.  Rows  of  well-built  huts,  sheds,  store-rooms,  meet 
the  eye  everywhere,  and  on  the  northern  side  of  the  camp  is  a 
redoubt  fenced  with  abattis.  It  is  also  considered  a  tolerably 
healthy  station.  Certainly  the  large  clearing  about  it  tends  to 
create  that  belief ;  besides,  Dunquah  being  placed  on  a  low  hill, 
is  fortunate  in  having  sufficient  steepness  of  slope  on  each  side. 

Out  of  the  sunlight,  garish  and  dazzling,  into  the  gloom 
again,  as  we  resume  our  journey  to  Mansu,  the  next  station. 
The  forest  grew  denser,  loftier ;  there  were  cotton-woods  of  ex- 
traordinary height,  and  girth,  and  lengthy  prolongations  of 
buttresses  to  support  the  colossal  stems ;  there  were  sturdy  teaks 
with  lower  crowns  of  foliage,  and  tamarinds  spreading  out  in 
broad  terraces  of  lighter  green,  gum-trees  upreared  their  dark 
foliage,  and  slender  palm-trees  shot  their  graceful  heads  to 
view,  all  of  which  become  more  frequent,  assimie  taller  propor- 
tions and  greater  girth,  as  we  move  on. 

The  road  is  all  a  glade ;  an  impervious  deptt  of  leafage 
formed  by  the  commingling  branches  overhead,  shelter  us  from 
the  sun.  The  engineers  have  done  their  work  so  well  that  it 
becomes  a  pleasure  to  walk  on  the  smooth,  broad  road,  though 
there  are  parts  where  the  corduroys  make  it  unpleasant  for  a 
Ishort  time.    Steeps  and  descents,  up  and  down  hills,  vary  the 


LIEUT.-COLONEL  WEBBER. 


117 


uniformity  of  the  level  forest  land  and  jungle ;  a  few  rippling 
streams  which  we  have  to  cross  during  the  day  are  not  un- 
picturesque  reliefs  to  eyes  jaded  with  the  flanking  walls  of 
vegetation. 

Mansu  is  a  camp  of  which  Lieut.-Colonel  Webber,  of  the 
2nd  West  Indians,  is  Commandant.  It  is  to  be  the  great 
central  depot  between  Prahsu  and  Cape  Coast. 

Report  had  conveyed  to  us  an  impression  that  this  camp 
was  most  salubrious,  but  at  a  glance  we  perceived  its  incorrect- 
ness. As  if  any  one  spot  in  this  great  tract  of  jungle-forest 
could  be  more  salubrious  than  another  I  Why  the  very  sight 
of  the  dull  skies  and  moisture-dripping  woods  and  the  wet 
tangle,  made  darker,  more  melancholy  by  the  murky  atmo* 
sphere,  disabused  us  of  the  impression  that  we  had  found  a 
sanitorium. 

Report  had  also  erred  and  gone  widely  astray  from  the  truth 
when  it  stated  that  Mansu  was  situated  on  a  plateau.  I  have 
been  compelled  to  state  that  certain  stations  are  situated  on 
hills,  but  imless  the  statement  is  qualified  by  the  remark  that 
these  hills  are  mere  crests  of  forested  land-waves,  people  may 
have  an  idea  that  this  is  a  hilly  country,  and  therefore  healthy. 
Neither  is  the  location  of  Mansu  on  a  plateau. 

Perhaps  a  truer  idea  of  this  coimtry  may  be  gained  if  I 
state  that  from  Cape  Coast  to  Mansu  the  land,  stripped  of  its 
thick  garniture  of  forest  and  jungle,  would  appear  to  be  undu- 
lating, some  land-waves  higher  than  others,  some  troughs,  op 
hollows,  or  dells,  deeper  than  others ;  but  there  is  a  general 
uniformity  of  undulation,  all  of  which  is  covered  with  forest, 
undergrowth  of  all  tropical  trees,  and  plants.  This  intense 
block-like  mass  of  vegetation  spreads  out  on  each  side  of  the 
road,  and  the  road,  shaded  by  the  commingling  and  embracing 
branches,  is  more  like  a  timnel  than  a  highway. 

There  were  about  1,500  natives  at  work  at  Mansu,  when  we 
passed  through,  engaged  under  various  officers  in  the  different 
services.  Colonel  Webber,  of  the  2nd  West  India  Regiment, 
despite  the  frequent  invaliding  of  his  subordinates,  has  con- 
trived by  attention  to  sanitary  rules  to  make  Mansu  as  healthy 
as  its  melancholy  surroundings  will  permit.  A  pool  near  by, 
to  which  some  youths  have  given  the  term  '  lake,'  affords  the 


118 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


advantages  of  bathing,  which  if  visited  with  moderation 
conduces  to  health. 

Two  of  the  2nd  West  India  Eegiment  were  the  first  to  cross 
the  Prah  Eiver.  Colonel  Webber  had  invited  volunteers  to 
step  forward  for  the  very  dangerous  task  of  following  the 
retreating  Ashantee  army,  and  making  their  way  to  the  river, 
to  discover  whether  any  of  the  Ashantees  were  still  on  the 
southern  side.  Two  brave  fellows  volunteered,  one  of  whom  is 
Robert  Fagan,  B,  905,  2nd  West  India  Regiment.  I  regret 
that  I  do  not  remember  his  comrade's  name.  These  two 
plunged  into  the  bush  after  the  enemy,  traced  them  to  the 
river,  then  crossed  the  river,  and  writing  their  names  on  a  piece 
of  paper,  nailed  it  to  a  tree  as  a  witness  that  they  had  per- 
formed their  mission  faithfully. 

These  West  Indians  are  imdoubtedly  fine  men.  I  do  not 
bestow  on  them  this  praise  being  affected  by  the  incident  just 
related,  but  from  impartial  observation  of  their  conduct  and 
discipline*  For  size  they  may  well  be  called  Her  Britannic 
Majesty's  West  Indian  Grenadiers,  to  ivhich  title  may  be  at- 
tached, for  their  long  and  trying  service,  the  yet  more  honour- 
iable  title  of '  Most  Faithful.' 

As  an  evidence  of  their  fidelity  may  be  cited  the  readiness 
of  these  soldiers  to  carry  loads,  when  the  Fantees,  by  their 
desertion,  seemed  to  have  demoralised  all  arrangements  of  trans- 
port. It  must  not  be  said  that  the  West  Indians  were  more 
fitted  for  the  work  than  European  soldiers  ;  the  statistics  of 
mortality  amongst  them  during  their  period  of  service  on  the 
Gold  Coast  and  Sierra  Leone  prove  that  their  constitutions  are 
as  frail  before  malarial  diseases  as  those  of  Europeans.  Had 
they  been  so  disposed  they  need  not  have  volunteered  as 
porters,  for  all  medical  men  would  have  refused  to  countenance 
arbitrary  orders. 

A  great  deal  of  the  merit — though  it  does  not  detract  from 
that .  belonging  to  Colonel  Webber,  of  having  brought  this 
regiment,  by  kindly  treatment  and  constant  personal  super- 
vision, to  the  present  high  standard  of  excellence — is  due  to 
Major  Bravo.  It  is  well-known  that  up  to  a  few  years  ago 
British  officers  had  the  reputation  of  being  very  stem,  and  dis- 
playing too  much  of  the  zeal  of  martinets  to  make  themselves 
beloved  by  the  coloured  troops  in  Her  Majesty's  regiments,  but 


MAJOR  BRAVO. 


119 


this  belief  is  utterly  at  variance  with  the  attachment  the  2nd 
West  India  Regiment  bears  towards  Major  Bravo,  who  has 
evinced  his  interest  in  his  profession  and  care  for  the  welfare 
of  his  conmiand,  through  long  months  of  most  arduous  service 
on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa, 

Captain  Grant,  also  of  the  2nd  West  India  Regiment,  is 
another  officer  who  has  distinguished  himself  on  this  campaign. 
The  memorable  exploit  of  his,  in  precipitating  his  company 
against  the  besiegers  of  Abracrampa,  will  not  be  readily  for- 
gotten.   Acts  of  great  gallantry  and  intrepidity  serve  to  give 


SUTAH. 

an  historical  interest  to  a  regiment,  and  when  the  history  of 
this  campaign  is  written,  it  will  be  found  that  the  2nd  West 
India  Regiment  has  a  conspicuous  name  in  its  pages  for  gal- 
lantry and  devotion  to  the  cause  of  their  Sovereign  Lady  the 
Queen. 

The  march  to  Sutah,  and  thence  to  Yan  Coomassie  (Assin), 
was  through  a  forest,  where  powers  of  description  fail.  In 
density  and  wild  luxuriance  it  eclipsed  everything  I  have  ever 
seen  in  Africa.  I  do  not  suppose  that  anything  in  Brazil  even 
can  give  one  a  more  thorough  realisation  of  tropical  luxuriance 


120 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


than  a  march  through  the  district  that  intervenes  between  Yan 
Coomassie  (Assin)  and  Mansu. 

Yet  even  through  this  forbidding  region  of  swamps  and 
streams,  shadowy  forest  and  tangled  jungle,  Home's  Engineers 
have  laboured  triumphantly  to  our  comfort,  convenience  and 
health. 

Aye,  what  languishing  heaviness  of  soul  fills  a  man,  as  he,  a 
mere  mite  in  comparison,  travels  through  the  lofty  and  fearful 
forest  aisle  ?  If  alone  there  is  an  almost  palpable  silence,  and 
his  own  heart-pulsations  seem  noisy.    A  night  darkness  en- 


TAN  COOMASSIE  (aSSIN). 


velopes  him,  and  from  above  but  the  faintest  gleams  of  daylight 
can  be  seen.  A  brooding  melancholy  seems  to  rest  on  the 
face  of  nature,  and  the  traveller,  be  he  ever  so  prosaic,  is  filled 
with  a  vague  indefinable  sense  of  foreboding,  and  becomes 
affected  and  morbid  in  like  manner  as  the  forest.  When  he 
emerges  out  of  the  depths  of  gloom  and  awesome  shades,  how 
like  a  burst  of  dazzling  glory  appears  the  glaring  daylight  I 

At  Sutah  there  were  vigorous  efforts  being  made  to  prepare 
the  camp  for  the  reception  of  the  troops,  and  Dr.  Thornton  was 


THE  ROYAL  NAVAL  BRIGADE. 


121 


in  hopes  of  being  able  to  ameliorate  the  sanitary  conditions  of 
the  place  within  a  very  brief  period.  At  Yan  Coomassie,  Com- 
missaries Marsh  and  Rainsford  were  bestirring  themselves  for 
the  same  purpose,  and  sheds  fifty  yards  in  length  were  in  pro- 
cess of  construction. 

Between  Sutah  and  Barracoe,  the  forest  retained  the  same 
density  and  luxuriance.  At  Barricoe,  as  I  rode  up  on  my  mule, 
the  first  of  the  species  seen  in  the  front,  my  appearance  was 
greeted  by  a  broad  smile  from  each  of  the  blue-jackets  and 
marines  encamped  here. 


HABBACOB. 


Query.  Were  the  sailors  amused  at  something  odd  in  my 
appearance,  or  at  the  solemn,  serious  face  of  the  long-eared 
animal  I  rode  ?  I  incline  to  the  belief,  though  I  shoidd  feel 
gratified  at  the  thought  that  it  was  I  who  afforded  the  amuse- 
ment, that  the  sailors  were  amused  by  the  sight  of  the  mule. 
But  what  is  it,  can  anybody  tell  me,  that  lies  in  a  mule's 
appearance  that  a  sailor  must  always  laugh  and  joke  when  he 
sees  one  ?  I  have  noticed  in  many  other  lands  that  the  sight 
of  a  poor  donkey,  or  of  his  cousin,  the  mule,  provokes  a  smile 


122 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


in  the  face  of  Jack.  It  is  an  exceedingly  interesting  psycho- 
logical fact  which  deserves  attention.  I  should  be  sorry 
indeed  if  there  was  any  relation,  even  in  the  remotest  degree, 
between  a  sailor  and  a  mule.  I  have  always  been  of  the  opinion 
that  there  was  not  the  slightest  kinship,  because  a  sailor's  sense 
of  the  ludicrous  is  very  keen,  while  a  mule  is  an  uncommonly 
grave  animal,  seldom,  if  ever,  disposed  to  wear  a  smile.  There 
is  a  stately  gravity  in  him,  even  under  the  most  ludicrous 
circumstances.  A  mule  might  be  carrying  a  monkey  on  his 
back,  but  he  would  be  just  as  serious  and  solemn  as  though  he 
carried  the  great  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  or  the  President  of 
the  United  States. 

The  sailors  are  certainly  lively  fellows,  and  do  their  duties 
manfully  whether  on  ship-board  or  ashore.  Though  there  is  as 
much  discipline  in  their  camp  as  in  any  military  force,  yet  their 
awe  of  their  superior  is  not  so  great  as  to  repress  the  high 
animal  spirits  which  they  bring  with  them  on  the  campaign. 
They  are  like  great  school-boys,  fond  of  sport  and  levity,  and  as 
they  swing  their  lithe  bodies  round  they  seem  to  enjoy  the 
roving  life  ashore.  As  their  hearty  laughter  is  heard  echoing 
through  the  woods,  I  can  fancy  the  wan  face  of  some  invalid 
in  the  hospital  hard  by  lighting  up  pleasurably  at  the  sound, 
as  though  it  were  delicious  music.  Their  songs  at  night  tend 
to  enliven  both  oflBcers  and  men ;  and  though  the  fare  is  hard 
and  the  work  is  plenty,  and  the  campaign  is  not  yet  very  in- 
teresting, their  hilarious  liveliness  may  be  taken  as  evidence 
of  the  spirit  with  which  the  sailors  of  the  Naval  Brigade  will 
perform  their  allotted  duties  when  called  upon. 

The  march  from  Barracoe  to  Prahsu  was  a  short  one,  along 
an  excellent  road.  The  labour  performed  by  the  Engineers 
was  illustrated  by  the  sight  of  the  immense  logs  of  mahogany 
and  hard  African  teak,  which  lay  on  each  side  of  '  the  road. 
Some  of  these  logs  were  four  feet  in  diameter,  and  the  way  in 
which  they  were  chopped  through,  was  a  witness  with  wha^  raw, 
unskilful  material  Major  Home  and  his  subordinates  Buckle 
and  Bell  eflfected  a  road  through  the  mammoth  timber  of  this 
region. 

As  we  arrived  at  the  outskirts  of  the  camp,  we  realised  what  ^ 
mighty  changes  had  been  wrought  since  December  14.  A  space 
of  about  thirty  acres  was  here  cleai-ed  of  the  great  lords  of  the 


RAirS  HOUSSA  ARTILLERY.  123 

forest,  and  the  tangle  of  bush  that  formed  the  undergrowth : 
lengthy  huts  arranged  on  each  side  for  the  diflferent  regimental 
quarters,  for  the  Control  Department,  the  hospitals,  and  StaflF 
met  the  eye  in  orderly  array. 

Travelling  through  the  vast  camp,  which  echoed  to  the  sound 
of  axes  and  forges,  and  vocal  commands,  we  came  to  the  river 
bank,  where  Bait's  Houssa  Artillery  were  encamped  with  their 
tiny  cannon  and  Gatling  menacingly  pointing  across  the  river 
towards  the  enemy's  land. 

Captain  A.  Bait,  Lieutenants  Knox  and  Saunders  of  the 
Artillery,  had  constructed  a  redoubt  at  the  landing,  close  to  the 
old  redoubt  of  1863,  with  the  aid  of  the  fine  force  of  Houssas, 
which,  by  constant  drill  and  persevering  and  patient  attention  to 
discipline,  has  been  brought  to  a  high  state  of  efficiency.  The 
Houssas,  as  I  have  said  before,  are  MohanmiedaqA  from  the 
interior  of  West  Africa,  beyond  the  Benin  Bight. 

I  witnessed  the  evolutions  of  the  Houssa  force  yesterday, 
as  conducted  by  Captain  Bait,  and  I  must  candidly  confess  that 
few  European  artillerymen  could  have  gone  through  them  in 
better  style ;  they  certainly  could  not  have  done  so  well  under 
the  hot  sun  in  which  the  Houssas  worked. 

And  just  here  I  must  digress  to  give  a  warning  note  to 
Great  Britain.  Though  I  do  not  really  think  she  needs  it,  those 
of  England  who  hear  it  may  rest  assured  that  it  is  sound  advice. 
It  is  said,  though  I  do  not  know  how  true  it  is,  that  the  British 
Government  intend  after  the  campaign  is  over  to  surrender  the 
Protectorate  to  natives  and  the  Fantees,  to  which  I  say  to 
English  people — Do  no  such  thing  1 

In  this  people,  specimens  of  which  I  have  just  seen  in  the 
Houssa  Artillery,  in  Wood's  and  Eussell's  native  regimentB, 
you  have  the  elements  of  unlimited  power  and  usefulness.  You 
may  do  with  them  what  you  desire  ;  subject  them  to  discipline, 
and  you  have  allies  of  no  contemptible  order  to  labour  for  your 
interests  in  this  land.  You  see  in  them,  poor  and  ignorant 
though  they  be,  the  nucleus  of  a  great  empire ;  if  your  ambition 
be  to  establish  one,  an  empire  that  in  process  of  time  will  rival 
that  of  India.  The  soil  of  the  land  is  as  rich,  the  forests  are  as 
useful,  as  those  of  India.  The  natives  of  the  soil  you  may  con- 
vert into  allies  as  faithful  as  your  most  loyal  Indian  sepoys. 
Baise  a  fort  on  the  banks  of  this  river,  leave  a  garrison  of 


124 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


Houssas  here,  let  the  telegraph  stand  between  Prahsu  and  Cape 
Coast,  extend  the  clearing  all  about  the  fort,  invite  natives  to 
settle  in  the  settlement,  keep  your  road  to  Cape  Coast  open, 
and  the  peace  of  the  Protectorate  is  assured  for  ever.  This 
present  expedition  has  begun  the  work  of  utility  and  civilisa- 
tion, has  opened  the  path  for  progress  and  beneficent  influence. 
Why  should  you  not  reap  what  you  have  sown  ?  Continue  the 
good  work,  and  set  at  nought  all  doubt-s  about  the  future  of  the 
land  and  the  capability  of  the  people.  You  have  suflBciently 
demonstrated  the  capabilities  of  the  people  as  to  the  land,  no  one 
can  deny  its  superabundant  richness. 

By  keeping  a  garrison  at  Prahsu,  your  timber  merchants, 
who  buy  the  valuable  teak  of  India  at  38. 6c2.  the  cubic  foot,  may 
obtain  the  material  they  need  at  one  half  the  cost.  The  Prah 
river  will  float  anything  needed  on  barges  to  the  coast.  When 
this  clearing  is  extended  around  the  fort,  cotton  planters  may 
be  able  to  export  a  large  cargo  of  cotton  annually  to  England, 
for  if  the  seed  is  properly  planted,  I  am  certain  that  the  capacity 
of  the  soil  is  so  great  as  to  yield  a  bale  of  six  hundred  pounds 
to  the  acre.  If  you  prefer  to  cultivate  sugar  cane,  wliat  part  of 
the  world  is  better  for  the  purpose  than  this  extent  of  alluvial 
deposit,  which  lies  for  miles  between  here  and  the  sea  ?  Many 
other  staple  products,  such  as  rice,  and  other  things  might  be 
grown  to  the  enrichment  of  men  disposed  to  work  under  the 
auspices  of  the  protection  which  the  little  fort  of  Prahsu  would 
guarantee  to  them. 

The  Commanding  officer  of  Prahsu  camp  is  Colonel  Evelyn 
Wood  of  the  90th  Kegiment. 

Here  are  also  Major  Baker  BusselFs  Begiment,  Major  B. 
Jitnne's  Engineers  and  Bait's  Artillery.  Sir  Garnet  will 
-  Arive  to-morrow  or  the  next  day,  and  the  European  battalions 
Vlill  be  rolling  in  day  after  day. 

>V  Major  Home,  upon  arrival  of  Sir  Garnet,  will  begin  to  bridge 
*  the  Prah  river.  The  pontoons  and  materials  for  the  bridge  have 
all  been  brought  up.  There  is  a  faint  rumour  flying  about,  that 
the  general  advance  across  the  Prah  will  be  made  on  January  15. 
Captain  Glover  must  be  ready  by  that  date,  Butler  with  the 
Akims,  and  Messrs.  Moore  and  Dalrymple,  if  successful  in  their 
mission,  will  have  the  honour  of  leading  the  Wassaws  to  the 
dread  Ashantee  land. 


SIB  GARNET  WOLSELEY  AT  PBAHSU. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

AN  A8HANTEE  EMBASSY — CAPTAIN  ARTHUR  RAIT  EXHIBITS  THE  QATLINQ  GITN 
—ARRIVAL  OF  THE  NAVAL  BRIGADE— THE  2nD  WEST  INDIANS— BOW- 
DITCH's  book — C00MA8SIB  AS  IT  APPEARED  IN  1817 — QUESTIONS. 

Prahsu:  January  8,  1874. 

Sir  Garnet  Wolsblbt,  the  young  chief  of  the  Anglo-Aahantee 
expedition,  arriving  here  on  the  morning  of  the  2nd  inst.,  was 
well  received.  He  was  mounted  in  solitary  state  on  the  top  of 
a  light  buggy,  which  had  been  drawn  all  the  way  from  Cape 
Coast  Castle  by  six  strong  Fant^ees,  assisted  now  and  then  over 
the  deeper  sloughs  by  the  police  bodyguard.  Colonel  Wood, 
Majors  Russell  and  Home  were  in  the  great  square  of  the  head- 
quarters ready  to  receive  their  chief,  and  when  the  news  passed 
through  camp  that  the  general  had  arrived,  the  enthusiasm  of 
the  native  troops  manifested  itself  in  a  hoarse  murmur  and 
deep  hum  of  joy. 

Sir  Garnet,  having  reported  himself,  in  excellent  health 
and  spirits,  to  the  numerous  queries  propounded  to  him, 
expressed  himself  very  well  satisfied  with  the  vast  clearing,  the 
construction  of  the  spacious  huts,  the  ample  accommodation 
provided  for  the  white  troops,  and  with  the  prospective  sanitary 
condition  of  the  camp  on  the  Prab.  The  officers  of  his  staff 
corroborated  to  a  man  the  descriptions  I  have  already  given 
of  the  coimtry  between  the  sea  and  the  Prah,  and  gave  the 
palm  for  general  discomfort,  muddy  cataclysms,  desponding 
sloughs,  dreary,  depressive,  melancholic  appearance  to  that 
part  which  lies  between  Sutah  and  Yan  Coomassie  (Assin.) 

Early  the  same  morning  Lieutenant  Grant,  in  charge  of 
the  pickets  on  the  other  side  of  the  Prah,  was  informed  by  his 
people  that  there  were  some  strange  people,  probably  Ashan- 
tees,  skulking  behind  trees  at  some  distance  beyond.  When 
Lieutenant  Grant  arrived  upon  the  scene,  he  found  both  pickets 


126 


COOMAfiSIE  AND  HAGDALA. 


and  strangers  gesticulating  violently  towards  each  other,  ducking 
their  heads  and  dodging  behind  any  defensive  tree  that  offered 
itself,  each  evidently  desirous  to  impress  the  other  party  with 
the  feelings  of  amity  which  possessed  tliem ;  but,  in  the  words 
of  a  British  officer  who  critidnd  the  perfonnance, '  both  parties 
were  in  a  beastly  funk.'  The  Lieutenant,  however,  contrived  tp 
calm  the  gcsticulative  pantomine,  and  to  induce  the  small  party 
of  Ashantees  to  come  forward,  when  he  was  told  by  a  small, 
stoutly  formed  Asliantee,  wearing  a  large  square  gold-plated 
badge  on  his  breast,  that  he  was  tlie  town  crier  of  the  Ashantee 
capital,  come  upon  an  errand  from  the  king  to  the  English 
chief ;  that  his  com|xinion8,  at  least  six  of  them,  were  sent  with 
him  to  see  that  he  did  his  duty. 

'  But  who  are  the  others  ?  There  arc  eleven  of  you  alto- 
gether,' demanded  the  Lieutenant. 

*  Foiu-  of  tliem,'  replied  the  messenger,  *  are  Ashantees,  who 
overtook  us  on  the  road  from  Amanquati.'ih's  camp.' 

. '  Well,  what  do  they  want  here  if  they  are  not  of  your 
party?' 

'  They  came  to  find  out  where  th^^  white  men  are.' 

'  Oh,  indeed !  they  are  scouts,  tlien,'  said  the  Lieutenant. 
'  If  they  will  accomi)any  me  they  shall  see  where  the  white 
men  are.' 

*  Could  you  not  let  them  return  to  tlieir  chief,  who  is 
waiting  to  hear  from  tliem  ?'  demanded  the  messenger. 

*  No,  I  could  not  do  such  a  thing.  They  came  to  look  for 
the  white  men.  The  white  men  are  on  tlie  otlier  side  of  the 
Prah  ;  but  tliey  must  come  and  see  them  for  themselves,  that 
they  may  be  better  able  to  report  about  tlie  white  men.' 

The  eleven  were  accordingly  brought  acrt»^"  the  Prah,  and, 
as  the  General  liad  arrived,  were  con:  .  im  ;  but  as  lie 

was  too  fatigued  to  see  them  just  then  they  were  taken  to  a 
hut  guarded  by  a  detachment  of  the  Second  West  India  Kegi- 
ment. 

The  gold-badged  amlwissador  had  ])roiiglit  a  letter  to  Sir 
Garnet  Wolseley  from  the  Ashantee  king,  the  contents  of 
which,  when  read,  created  no  small  astonishment  among  the 
staff. 

The  King  of  Ashantee,  in  his  customary,  ambiguous  way, 
which  may  be  seen  by  a  glance  at  his  former  letters  published 


^ 


r 


THE  '  SfiCOMD  WEST.* 


129 


swamp  between  Cape  Coast  Castle  and  the  Prah  river.  Sailors 
always  march  as  if  marching  were  natural  to  them,  as  if  they 
were  animated  men,  of  joints  and  muscles;  while  English 
soldiers  appear  stiff  and  rigid,  more  like  walking  machines  in 
comparison. 

The  uniform  of  the  sailors  is  the  naval  blue  shirt  and  wide 
trousers,  which  they  use  on  shipboard,  while  they  appeared 
somewhat  jauntier  in  their  broad-brimmed  straw  hats,  covered 
with  a  canvas  cape  fastened  around  the  hat  by  a  brown  muslin 
veil    The  Naval  Brigade  is  armed  with  Sniders. 

To-day  300  of  the  2nd  West  India  Regiment  arrived,  under 
the  command  of  Lieut.-Col.  Webber,  who  has  been  rusticating 
so  long  with  his  people  at  Mansu.  The  2nd  West  India 
Regiment  consists,  as  most  persons  are  aware,  of  coloured 
soldiers  enlisted  from  the  negro  populations  of  Jamaica,  Nassau, 
and  other  British  settlements.  Pliysically  they  are  fine,  huge 
fellows,  some  of  them  giants  in  frame,  but  as  soldiers  they  don't 
strike  me  favourably.  Tliey  are  faithful,  loyal  men  though, 
and  I  suppose  as  ai'dent  in  Queen  Victoria's  cause  as  the  blue- 
jackets are,  and  no  one  can  rob  them  of  the  laurels  they  have 
already  acquired  on  this  campaign  in  the  bush  skirmishes  of 
Abracrampa,  Dunquah  and  Fasua.  But  their  appearance  con- 
trasted unfavourably  with  that  of  the  Naval  Brigade.  Their 
marching  was  a  mere  slouch,  a  heavy,  careless,  leaden  walk. 
There  was  no  dignified  military  pace  among  them ;  they  jerked 
their  heavy  feet  forward,  after  which  they  permitted  them  to  * 
fall,  without  order,  unison  or  emphasis,  on  the  ground ;  and,  of 
course,  their  bodies  were  as  ill-regulated  as  their  pace.  Their 
arms  were  swung  about  as  if  they  were  using  sledge  hammers ; 
their  heads  bobbed  up  and  down  irregularly,  and  their  bodies 
swayed  indolently  from  side  to  side,  with  a  downward  droop 
distressing  to  witness. 

One  need  only  have  glanced  at  either  of  the  battalions  whose 
entrSe  to  Prahsu  I  have  described  to  know  at  once  where  must 
lie  Sir  Garnet's  chief  anxiety.  The  Naval  Brigade  was  accom- 
panied by  a  force  of  carriers  laden  with  baggage  and  hammocks, 
the  sight  of  which  was  almost  disheartening,  and  the  battalion 
of  the  2nd  West  India  was  almost  as  bad.  There  were  probably 
800  carriers  for  550  soldiers.  How  many  carriers  will  at  this 
rate  be  required  for  the  42nd  Highlanders,  the  23rd  Fusiliers, 

K 


130 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


and  the  Eifle  Brigade?  At  the  least,  I  should  say,  2,500. 
Where  are  the  control  carriers  to  come  from  ?  For  a  body  of 
2,500  wliite  men,  300  West  Indians,  1,000  native  allies,  500 
Haussas  and  500  irregulars,  how  many  carriers  will  be  required 
to  provision  them  on  the  march  to  Coomassie  ?  A  movable  force 
of  nearly 5,000  soldiers,  exclusive  of  their  auxiliaries,  in  the  shape 
of  burden-bearing  men,  requires  no  small  amount  of  provisions 
for  thirty  days.  The  intention  is  to  march  by  battalions  on 
the  15th  inst.  across  the  Prah  to  the  next  camp,  ten  miles 
distant.  The  bridge  has  not  been  completed  as  yet,  and  the 
advance  force,  which  was  expected  to  leave  on  tlie  3rd,  has  not 
begun  its  forward  movement.  I  have  been  at  this  camp  now 
four  days,  and  not  an  ounce  of  provisions  have  I  seen  arrive  as 
yet,  althougli  every  new  arrival  must  pass  before  my  tent  door, 
as  the  t^nt  is  planted  witliin  a  few  feet  of  tlie  road.  If  we  are 
to  leave  this  on  the  15th  inst.  and  the  expedition  is  destined  to 
have  an  early  success,  this  transport  and  control  matter  is  really 
all-important.  *  The  road  must,  in  some  measure,  be  widened 
to  admit  of  the  artillery  and  rapid  progiess  of  the  troops,  a 
strong  detachment  must  always  be  engaged  some  distance 
ahead,  and  supplies  for  such  a  concourse  of  men  as  will  follow 
ought  to  be  constantly  pushed  forward.  Unremitting  attention 
and  energy  paid  to  these  matters  will  far .  more  insure  the 
success  of  the  expedition  than  the  most  consummate  skill  in 
war  tactics,  because  Sir  Ganiet  is  not  alwut  to  measure  his 
military  knowledge  with  that  of  the  Ashantee  generals ;  he 
has  only  the  task  of  showing  the  Ashantees  to  his  gallant 
Scotch  Highlanders,  Fusiliers  and  Eiflemen,  who  will  know  how 
to  deal  with  them,  without  any  generalship.  This  is  as  certain 
as  though  it  had  l)een  an  already  accomplished  fact. 

We  have  come  so  far  fairly  enough  ;  it  would  be  a  thousand 
pities  if  any  laggardness  were  sho>vn  now,  and  a  fine  body  of 
white  men  compelled  to  wait  at  Prahsu  until  they  perished  by 
hundreds  from  the  fatal  imhealthiness  of  the  climate.  I  do  not 
suppose  that  they  will  be  permitted  to  remain  thus  exposed ; 
still,  it  is  a  matter  of  anxiety  that  four  days  have  (jlapsed  and 
we  are  not  a  foot  advanced  forwanl.  I  have  confidence  in  Sir 
Garnet  that  he  has  in  him  all  the  elements  of  a  good  leader — 
that  he  is  a  dashing,  intrepid  chief — and  if  I  hesitate  to  give 
him  the  full  measure  of  praise  that  more  enthusiastic  and  less 
prudent  admirers  have  already  accorded  him,  it  is  that  I  but  wait 


BOWDITCH'S  BOOK. 


131 


to  see  those  elements  of  fitness  for  his  work  developed.  In  what 
has  been  done  heretofore  Sir  Garnet  has  evinced  considerable 
ability,  but  it  is  in  that  which  lies  immediately  before  him 
that  he  must  show  the  full  extent  of  his  genius. 

I  have  just  finished  reading  Bowditch's '  Mission  to  Ashantee,' 
and  a  more  interesting  book  of  travels  I  have  seldom  read. 
The  only  fault  to  be  found  in  it  is  his  exaggerated  notion 
of  such  scenery  as  we  have  passed  through  on  our  journey 
from  Cape  Coast.  I  would  hardly  take  it  upon  me  to  criticise 
at  this  late  hour  a  book  so  long  ago  obscured  by  later  volumes 
on  the  same  subject,  except  that  it  has  just  emerged  from  ob- 
scurity, and  is  so  valuable  a  guide  to  the  country  which  we  are 
now  boimd  for.  As  it  is  so  generally  commended,  and  as  I 
can  heartily  join  in  the  commendation,  it  only  remains  to  be 
said,  as  a  guide  to  those  who  may  entertain  wrong  ideas  of 
the  country  from  its  reading,  that  its  scenic  descriptions 
must  have  been  written  by  a  very  young  man  in  the  flush  of 
ardent  youth,  gazing  for  the  first  time  upon  a  wilderness  of 
tropical  vegetation.  Such  expressions  as  *  enchanting,'  *grand,' 
'  magnificent,'  *  beautiful,'  '  unrivalled,'  '  extensive  area  of  sum- 
mits,' ai*e  entirely  out  of  place  in  connection  with  what  we 
have  seen.  To  be  literally  true,  he  should  have  used  such 
strongly  contrasting  words  as  '  disagreeable,'  '  monotonous,' 
*  melancholy,'  '  depressing,'  '  gloomy,'  '  fetid,'  &c.  We  have 
seen  nothing,  as  yet,  that  could  be  called  grand  unless  you  were 
to  call  the  lofty  cotton-woods  by  that  title  ;  and  the  most  ex- 
tensive areas  have  been  ancient  clearings  not  more  than  twenty 
acres  in  extent.  As  for  anything  being  magnificent  in  this 
densely-forested  land,  where  yoiu:  vision  is  limited  by  tall,  thick 
brush  and  colossal  cotton-woods,  I  can  hardly  conceive  the 
meaning  of  such  a  word  in  this  country.  '  Beautiful '  is  evi- 
dently a  misnomer,  for  nothing  can  be  regarded  as  beautiful 
that  inspires  disgust  and  nausea;  and  the  expression  *  unrivalled' 
could  only  be  used  by  one  who  had  never  seen  much  of  tropical 
vegetation,  though  the  density  of  forest  and  brush  is  really 
unrivalled.  Apart  from  the  enthusiastic  freshness  of  language 
kindled  by  tropical  novelties,  there  is  a  wonderful  amount  of 
industry  manifested  in  Mr.  Bowditch's  book,  and  it  has  been 
with  the  utmost  pleasure  I  have  taken  his  narrative  to  glean 
some  idea  of  the  coimtry  still  before  us,  for  our  march 

K  2  ♦ 


-132 


GOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Crossing  the  Boosumprah,  according  to  Bowditch,  we  come 
to  Prahsu,  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  the  river.  (This  has 
no  existence  in  1874,  and  its  site  can  barely  be  recognised.) 

Kickiwhirri,  beyond  Prahsu  one  mile  and  a  half — *  a  larger 
town,  not  so  regular ' — is  a  collection  of  old  huts,  untenanted 
in  1874. 

Atobiassee,  four  miles  from  Kickiwhirri,  a  ruined  village, 
insignificant  and  uninhabited,  but  now  occupied  by  us  as  a 
post. 

Asharaman,  or,  as  we  call  it,  Essiaman,  nine  miles  from 
Atobiassee,  a  small  village  on  an  eminence,  was  occupied  by  a 
few  Ashantee  families  January  6,  1874,  who,  excepting  two 
women,  deserted  the  place  on  the  appearance  of  GifFord's  scouts. 
The  two  women,  who  expected  death  or  slavery,  were  very 
much  astonished  when  Lord  GifFord  informed  them  that  if 
they  did  not  leave  the  camp  he  would  compel  them  to  do  so. 

Akrofroom,  twelve  miles  beyond  Essiaman.  Path  thither, 
swampy ;  forest  thick. 

Moissee,  the  furthest  town  in  Assin,  eleven  miles  from 
Akrofroom,  situate  at  base  of  three  high  hills  (Adansi  Hills), 
which  are  the  southern  barriers  of  the  Ashantee  kingdom. 

Ascending  a  steep  a  mile  and  a  half  in  length,  which  is 
very  rocky,  thence  descending  and  crossing  a  small  river  called 
the  Bokmen,  noted  for  the  virtue  of  eloquence  which  its  water 
is  supposed  to  give,  and  passing  through  the  first  Ashantee 
village,  called  Quissa-Quisha  or  Kevisa,  we  come  to  an  im- 
portant town  called  Doompassy,  after  a  march  of  six  miles. 

Two  miles  beyond  Doompassy  is  Tioboso,  situate  on  a  high 
hill ;  thence  to  Datiassoo  is  seven  miles,  and  one  mile  further 
is  Dadawassi. 

Descending  a  hill  and  a  march  of  eight  miles  brings  us  to 
Assiminia. 

Proceeding  through  Boposo,  situate  on  another  high  hill, 
and  passing  through  several  unimportant  villages,  we  come  to 
Sarrasoo,  at  a  distance  of  eleven  miles  from  Assiminia. 

Crossing  the  river  Dah,  a  stream  sixteen  yards  wide  and 
four  feet  deep,  a  march  of  six  and  a  half  miles  brings  us  to 
Coomassie,  or  Kumassi,  the  capital  of  Ashantee. 

The  distance,  then,  we  have  to  march  before  reaching 
Coomassie  is : — 


DESCRIPTION  OF  COOMASSIE  IN  1817.  133 


Miles. 

Prah  River  to  Atobiassee   6 

Atobiassee  to  Essiaman   9 

Essiaman  to  Akrofroom   12 

Akrofroom  to  Moissee  (Adansi  HillH)   11 

Moissee  to  Doompissy   6 

Doompassy  to  Diidawassi   9 

Dadawassi  to  Assiminia   8 

Assiminia  to  Sarrasoo   11 

Samisoo  to  Coomassie   6\ 

Total,  78i 


According  to  Bowditch,  who  was  there  on  a  political  mis- 
sion in  1817,  Coomassie  is  built  upon  the  side  of  a  large 
rocky  hill  of  iron-stone.  It  is  insulated  by  a  marsh  close 
to  the  town  northwards,  and  by  a  narrow  stream,  half  a  mile 
distant  from  it  northwest,  and  sixty  yards  broad;  close  to 
it  northeast,  east,  southeast,  and  south,  and  about  a  hundred, 
twenty,  seventy,  and  fifty  yards  broad  at  these  points.  In  many 
parts  the  depth,  after  heavy  rains,  was  five  feet,  and  commonly 
two.  The  marsh  contains  many  springs  and  supplies  the  town 
with  water,  but  the  exhalation  coveis  the  city  with  a  thick  fog 
morning  and  evening,  and  engenders  dysentery.  It  is  a  little 
extraordinary  that  we  never  saw  a  mosquito  in  Ashantec.  I 
could  find  none  but  bird's-eye  views  of  the  city,  which  were 
uninteresting,  presenting  nothing  but  the  thatch  of  the  house. 
It  was  encircled  by  a  beautiful  forest,  which  required  more 
time  than  I  could  spare,  and  a  more  expressive  pencil  to 
portray.  Coomassie  is  an  oblong,  four  miles  in  circumference. 
Four  of  the  principal  streets  are  half  a  mile  long  and  from  fifty 
to  a  hundred  yards  wide.  The  streets  were  all  named,  and  a 
superior  captain  in  charge  of  each.  The  palace  was  situated  in 
a  long  and  wide  street  running  through  the  middle  of  the  town, 
from  which  it  was  shut  out  by  a  high  wall,  terminating  at  each 
end  at  the  marsh,  when  it  was  discontinued,  that  being  a  suffi- 
cient boundary.  I  reckoned  twenty-seven  streets  in  all,  wliich 
I  have  laid  in  a  ground  plan  of  the  town.  The  small  grove  at 
the  back  of  the  large  market-place  was  called  Sammonpone,  or 
the  Spirit  House,  because  the  tnmks  of  all  the  human  victims 
were  thrown  into  it.  The  bloody  tracks,  daily  renewed,  showed 
the  various  directions  they  had  been  dragged  from,  and  the 
number  of  vultures  on  the  trees  indicated  tlie  extent  of  the 


134 


GOOMASSI£  AND  MAGDALA. 


recent  sacrifice.  The  stench  was  insupportable,  and  the  visits 
of  panthers  nightly. 

The  Ashantees  persisted  that  the  population  of  Coomassie, 
when  collected,  was  upwards  of  100,000.  I  say  when  collected, 
because  the  higher  class  could  not  support  their  numerous 
followers,  or  the  lowest  their  large  families  in  the  city,  and 
therefore  employed  them  in  plantations,  generally  within  two 
or  three  miles  of  the  capital,  where  their  labours  not  only  feed 
themselves,  but  supply  the  wants  of  their  chief,  his  family,  and 
more  immediate  suite.  Perhaps  the  average  resident  popula- 
tion of  Coomassie  is  not  more  than  from  12,000  to  15,000. 

'  The  markets  were  held  daily  from  about  8  a.m.  to  sunset. 
The  larger  contains  about  sixty  stalls  or  sheds,  a  small  square 
frame  covered  with  cotton  cloth.  Among  the  articles  for  sale, 
were  beef,  mutton,  wild  hog,  deer,  monkey's  flesh,  fowls,  pelts 
of  skin,  yams,  plantains,  com,  sugar-cane,  rice,  peppers,  vege- 
table butter,  oranges,  papaws,  pineapples,  bananas,  salt  and 
dried  fish,  large  snails  smoke-dried  and  stuck  in  rows  of  sticks 
in  the  form  of  a  herring-bone,  eggs  for  fetich,  palm-wine,  rum, 
pipes,  beads,  looking-glasses,  sandals,  silk,  cotton  cloth,  powder, 
small  pillows,  white  and  blue  cotton  thread,  calabashes,  &c.* 

(Bowditch's  account  of  Coomassie,  as  it  appeared  to  him  in 
1817,  will  stand  very  well  for  the  Coomassie  of  1874.) 

The  Rifle  Brigade  has  arrived  at  Barracoe,  the  first  station 
between  here  and  Cape  Coast,  and,  to  quote  an  oflScer's  words, 
'  is  in  a  great  rage  because  of  detention.'  The  battalion  will 
be  kept  there  for  a  week  longer,  owing  to  failure  of  transport. 

The  1st  West  Indians  are  said  to  have  been  also  added  to  the 
list  of  carriers  between  Cape  Coast  and  Dunquah.  You  must 
remember,  as  you  pass  your  judgment  upon  this  glaring  mistake 
of  the  authorities  here,  that  the  detention  of  the  white  regi- 
ments at  the  unhealthy  stations  on  the  road  means  much  more 
than  delay — it  means  sickness  and  mortality — and  also  remem- 
ber that  to  make  carriers  of  West  Indian  negroes,  who  are 
as  little  capable  of  standing  this  climate  as  white  troops  are, 
is  to  make  them  nearly  all  unfit  for  the  active  prosecution  of 
the  war. 

There  is  another  mistake  which  Sir  Garnet  is  committing, 
and  that  is  to  pay  such  attention  to  the  road  in  front  after  the 
white  regiments  have  been  landed  and  are  beginning  to  be 


QUESTIONS. 


135 


exposed  to  the  malaria  of  the  climate.  He  has  actually  des- 
patched black  native  regiments  in  advance,  beyond  the  Prah, 
while  the  work  which  an  English  regiment  is  naturally  capable 
of  performing  they  have  been  withdrawn  from.  In  such  a 
climate  as  this,  the  least  the  ardent  Englishmen  are  fit  for  is  to 
be  detained  inactively  at  an  unhealthy  post. 

Why  were  not  the  Eifle  Brigade  and  the  42nd  Highlanders 
sent  across  the  Prah  at  once  to  occupy  the  Adansi  Hills,  ac- 
companied by  Colonel  Wood's  and  Major  Eussell's  regiments 
of  Fantees,  Bonnymen,  Kossoes  and*  Sierra  Leone  natives,  as 
carriers  of  supplies  for  them?  The  natives  might  return 
and  employ  their  whole  strength  to  moving  as  much  eatables 
to  the  Adansi  Hills  as  they  could  carry,  while  the  native 
carriers,  reorganised  under  efficient  non-commissioned  officers, 
might  continue  the  transport  work  between  Prahsu  and  Cape 
Coast  Castle.  In  the  meanwhile  a  small  force  only  under  the 
Royal  Engineers  might  improve  the  path  into  a  proper  road 
between  the  Adansi  Hills  and  the  Prah  river. 

There  are  enough  black  men  at  Prahsu  Camp,  engaged  in 
constructing  huts  and  other  improvements,  to  form  a  very  re- 
spectable force  of  carriers.  Major  Home  informed  me  he  had 
about  1,500  men  under  him  for  engineering  work,  which,  in 
such  a  crisis  as  the  present,  is  a  number  exceeding  the  necessity 
of  such  work  by  exactly  1,000. 

Why  Major  RusseU's  black  warriors  should  have  the  honour 
of  occupying  advance  posts,  while  the  white  regiments  are 
detained  at  the  lower  stations  to  sicken  and  die  of  disgust  and 
inactivity  is  incomprehensible  ? 

Major  Susseirs  regiment  is  expected  to  arrive  at  Accrofoomu 
to-night. 


136 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  X. 

SCENES  IS  CAMP  AT  TBAHSU — THE  PRESS  CORPS— THE  SAILORS  AND 
MARINBS  IN  CAMP — A  SULLEN  T0T7NO8TEB— CATCHING  DESERTERS — HOW 
A  SERGEANT  OP  THE  RIFLES  WAS  FRIGHTENED — RUNNING  AWAY  FROM 
A  MULE. 

January  14,  1874. 

Despite  the  frigid  reticence  and  chilling  reserve  maintained 
by  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  and  his  staff  toward  newspaper  corre- 
spondents respecting  future  movements,  the  past  week  has  fur- 
nished us  with  suflScient  food  for  comment.  We  have  seen  a 
young,  ambitious  General,  who  at  the  War  Office  drew  up  an 
elaborate  plan  of  the  Ashantee  campaign,  and  subsequently,  on 
his  arrival  at  Cape  Coast,  proclaimed  the  date  on  which  his 
little  army  should  cross  the  Prah,  as  confidently  as  if  his  army 
had  already  crossed  that  river,  struggling  to  keep  his  word  in- 
tact ;  though  most  men,  seeing  the  lack  of  material  at  Prahsu, 
believed  the  thing  to  be  impossible.  Sir  Garnet  has  gone  to 
great  lengths  to  secure  the  fulfilment  of  his  promise  ;  he  has 
employed  Colonel  Wood's  men,  the  1st  and  2nd  West  India 
Regiments,  as  carriers  to  bring  up  supplies  from  the  down 
stations,  and  finally,  the  famous  Black  Watch,  tlie  42nd 
Highlanders,  have  volunteered  to  carry  provisions,  which  in 
such  an  enervating  climate  as  this  is  an  act  deserving  of  as 
much  praise  as  the  most  conspicuous  bravery  on  the  field  of 
battle. 

•  While  waiting  for  the  advance,  let  me  tell  you  something  of 
ourselves.  We  are  now  told  that  certain  regiments  shall  move 
on  to-morrow.  These  will  comprise  Colonel  Wood's  regiment 
of  mixed  natives,  and  the  2nd  West  India,  and  perhaps  the 
Naval  Brigade,  though  the  latter  name  has  not  transpired  as 
yet.  They  will  proceed  to  Essiaman,  and  the  next  day  to 
Accrofoomu.    We  are  not  told,  however,  how  these  troops  are 


SCENES  IN  CAMP. 


137 


to  be  fed,  what  supplies  there  are  in  front,  what  arrangements 
have  been  made  for  the  regular  transport  of  provisions  from 
Prahsu  to  the  advanced  posts.  There  cannot  be  a  large  supply 
at  the  front,  as  Major  Eussell's  force  has  been  engaged  in  im- 
proving the  road  beyond  the  Prah.  It  is  very  probable,  how- 
emr,  that  each  regiment  will  convey  a  few  days'  provisions 
irith  it,  which  will  allow  for  certain  arrangements  to  be  made 
after  their  departure.  When  a  staff  officer  was  asked  the  other 
day,  whether  the  white  troops  would  depart  on  the  15th,  he 
replied  that  when  the  white  troops  would  march  they  would 
proceed  from  the  down  stations  directly  for  the  front.  This 
reply  is  in  the  usual  vague  way  the  staff  employ,  according  to 
the  instructions  of  Sir  Garnet. 

^  The  23rd  Fusiliers  have  been  wondering  all  this  time  what 
is  to  become  of  them.  Tlie  day  has  arrived  for  their  debarka- 
tion, after  a  weary  cruise  some  distance  out  to  sea ;  but  after 
one  wing  had  debarked,  an  order  arrived  at  Cape  Coast  that 
they  sliould  stay  on  board.  Indignant  at  this  treatment,  the 
first  wing  continued  its  march  through  Cape  Coast,  driving  its 
ancient  goat  ahead,  which  presently  died  from  sheer  old  age 
and  change  of  climate.  On  arriving  at  Accroful  this  wing  was 
halted  until  further  orders.  We  are  informed  that  only  100 
men  of  this  regiment  will  be  permitted  to  enter  Coomassie 
with  the  European  brigade  under  Sir  Archibald  Alison. 

The  Eoyal  Engineers  under  Captain  Buckle,  have  left 
Prahsu  for  road-making  and  otherwise  improving  transit. 
Major  Home,  the  indefatigable  chief  of  the  Engineers,  some 
time  ago  proceeded  to  Essiaman,  where  he  has  prepared  abun- 
dant work  for  his  people.  Major  Eussell  has  advanced  eight 
miles  beyond  Essiaman,  and  will  immediately  prepare  a  camp 
for  the  oncoming  troops.  The  Naval  Brigade  has  been  ordered 
to  provide  its  own  transport,  which  it  is  very  well  qualified  to 
do,  having  a  whole  fleet  whence  to  draw  carriers  from  the  Kru 
boys  on  board.  Four  hundred  and  twenty  of  these  faithful, 
hard-working  Kru  boys  will  accompany  the  Naval  Brigade  in 
that  capacity. 

For  the  last  few  days  there  have  not  been  heard  the  joyous 
chorus  and  the  roaring  songs  which  made  the  evenings  lively 
and  pleasant  at  the  camp  of  the  Naval  Brigade.  A  profound 
silence  has  brooded  over  that  locality  lately.  .  This  was  so 


138 


COOMASSIB  AND  MAGDALA. 


unusual  that  inquiries  were  made  as  to  the  reason,  and  we  were 
told  by  a  weather-beaten  blue-jacket,  in  most  respectful  but 
melancholy  language,  that '  Sailors  can't  sing,  sir,  leastways  it 
oughtn't  to  be  expected,  when  they  have  no  rum.  It.  makes 
us  boys  think  better  of  this  beastly  country  while  we  have 
rum,  or  we  forget  it  when  we  sit  and  sing  round  a  blazing  fire ; 
but  when  there  is  no  rum,  sir,  ah;  we  begin  to  tell  one 
another  what  people  say  of  the  fever  of  this  country ;  how  such 
and  such  a  mat^  died  or  how  some  shipmate  was  sent  to  the 
hospital  very  much  gone,  poor  fellow,  and  such  stories,  sir, 
carry  one  far  into  the  night,  and  finally  to  bed  with  the  feeling 
that  something  isn't  as  it  ought  to  be.' 

Last  night,  however,  the  songs  and  chorus  startled  every 
one  into  smiles  and  social  chattiness,  and  we  all  knew  that  a 
fresh  supply  of  rum  had  come  up,  and  the  sturdy  blue-jackets 
had  been  fired  into  blissful  unconsciousness  of  the  mortalities 
and  imhappy  memories  of  an  African  climate. 

Very  few  amusements  suffice  to  make  life  enjoyable  in 
a  camp.  The  Press  Corps  have  been  very  fortunate  in  their 
mess  and  surroimdings,  and  they  eke  out  what  is  pleasurable 
in  such  a  country  as  this,  a/ad  depend  upon  themselves  for 
amusement  and  sociat  joys.  Our  first  week  on  the  Prah  was 
passed  in  constructing  a  comfortable  Imt,  out  of  which  we 
contrived  to  make  two  apartments,  a  dining  room,  a  bath  room 
and  store  room.  Our  tents,  of  course,  sheltered  us  at  night. 
Having  possessed  ourselves  of  a  hut,  we  sought  to  increase  oiu: 
comfort  with  the  adventitious  aid  of  architectural  improve- 
ments ;  we  railed  off"  our  quarters  by  a  lattice-like  rail,  and 
within  the  enclosure  still  more  embellished  our  quarters  by 
making  a  flower-garden,  which  elicited  tlie  admiration  of  the 
entire  camp.  An  abundant  supply  of  creature  comforts  enables 
us  of  an  evening  to  contemplate  a  longer  stay  in  this  camp  with 
philosophic  resignation. 

From  oiu:  hut  door  we  can  see  across  the  square  to  head- 
quarters, which  have  a  very  deserted  aspect  during  the  day; 
but  towards  evening  things  begin  to  look  livelier.  An  oflScer 
loimges  out,  gives  a  yawn  or  two  and  casts  an  eye  about  for  a 
human  face ;  presently  another  emerges  out  of  his  wattled  den, 
and  the  two  engage  in  talk  and  form  a  nucleus,  which  attracts 
a  group.    By-and-by  Sir  Garnet  appears,  bright  and  genial 


A  SULLEN  YOUNOSTEB. 


189 


looking,  and  a  promenade  is  begun  which  probably  ends  across 
the  river.  At  the  late  hour  of  7  p.m.  the  headquarters  mess 
dines ;  at  9  p.m.  the  symposium  breaks  up,  and  each  member 
betakes  himself  to  rest.  At  decline  of  day  others  of  the  camp 
betake  themselves  to  the  river  for  a  bath. 

It  is  singular,  considering  that  all  African  rivers  are  peopled 
with  amphibious  monsters,  what  a  complete  immunity  the  bathers 
of  the  Prah  have  enjoyed  from  the  attacks  of  the  crocodiles. 
That  these  animals  have  their  haunts  in  the  river  there  can 
be  no  doubt,  for  a  party  of  oflScers  captured  a  sullen  youngster 
of  the  deep  the  day  before  yesterday.  This  little  fellow  measures 
about  three  feet  in  length,  and  affords  wonder  and  amusement  to 
all  who  look  upon  him.  Wonder,  at  the  peculiar  way  in  which 
nature  has  fitted  him  for  both  land  and  wat^r,  at  the  strong, 
flexible,  ridgy  tail,  at  the  scaly  armour  on  his  back  and  neck 
and  the  homy  shield  which  covers  his  eyes  ;  amusement,  at  the 
way  in  which  he  takes  his  imprisonment,  his  unconquerable 
snllenness  and  the  way  in  which  he  affects  death.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  there  are  crocodiles  in  the  Prah,  but  so  far  we 
have  escaped  an  accident,  for  which,  in  my  opinion,  we  may 
congratulate  ourselves. 

We  are  collecting  cattle  here  to  an  important  number,  but 
the  mismanagement  of  the  Superintendent,  in  surrendering 
them  solely  to  the  charge  of  natives,  has  caused  the  loss  of 
some  of  the  finest  of  them.  Even  the  very  light  work  of 
tending  cattle  requires  to  be  superintended  by  a  European, 
otherwise  the  Fantee  permits  his  charge  to  wander  astray 
where  nothing  but  the  most  meagre  vegetation  can  be  procured 
for  their  subsistence,  and  where  they  drop  down  quietly  to 
the  earth  from  sheer  starvation.  Apropos  of  the  Fantees,  the 
Kossoes,  a  tribe  of  hunters  from  Sierra  Leone,  who  have  the 
faculty  of  scouting  and  searching  out  paths  and  traces  of  human 
footsteps  almost  as  much  as  the  North  American  Indians,  have 
discovered  the  hiding-place  of  the  Fantees. 

Away,  deep  in  tangled  woods,  surrounded  by  a  fetid  morass,  an 
uninhabitable  spot,  but  one  of  the  best  hiding-places  that  could 
be  imagined,  these  deperters  had  sought  and  found  a  locality 
which  Ashantee  scouts  could  not  find,  into  which  no  Fantee 
policeman  could  penetrate  unless  guided  thither  by  the  unerring 
instinct  of  a  Kossoe  man.  Hither  they  had  invited  a  few  trust- 


140 


COOMASSEE  AND  MAGDALA. 


worthy  women,  who  were  made  to  purvey  food  for  them,  while 
they  enjoyed  themselves  serenely  after  their  brief  period  of 
hard  toil  and  high  wages.  A  few  bruised  twigs,  a  few  crushed 
blades  of  grass,  were  sufficient  for  the  Kossoes,  and  the  trail  was 
followed  swiftly  imtil  the  deserters'  lair  was  discovered  and  the 
recreants  were  brought  to  camp  for  punishment.  In  these 
fastnesses  of  nature  many  such  lairs  might  be  found,  if  it  were 
worth  while  to  discover  them ;  but  time  presses.  The  Kossoes, 
as  well  as  other  men,  are  needed  for  other  pressing  services, 
so  that  the  majority  of  the  deserters  will  never  be  apprehended. 

But  justice  is  to  be  meted  out  to  the  rogues  who  have  thus 
placed  obstacles  to  our  progress,  by  not  only  refusing  to  despatch 
their  men  to  aid  the  expedition,  but  digressing  from  their  way 
to  preach  sedition  and  mutiny  among  the  disaffected  still  in 
the  employ  of  the  British  General.  A  cliief  of  Abra  was  tried 
by  a  court  and  sentenced  to  be  shot.  When  Sir  Garnet  heard 
of  the  sentence,  it  is  said,  he  at  once  ordered  that  the  chief  should 
be  hanged,  and  not  shot.  The  chief  was  a  traitor,  and  did  his 
best  by  precept  and  example  to  disaflFect  others.  As  regards 
the  natives,  the  English  Government  cannot  be  accused  of 
cruelty  or  injustice,  but  certainly  of  gross  leniency.  The 
British  have  treated  Africans  as  we  treat  dainty  children. 
They  have  petted  them  and  spoiled  them,  but  they  have  never 
punished  them.  Sir  Garnet  seems  to  liave  discovered  this 
fact.  Leniency  is  weakness  with  the  vulgar  and  ignorant,  and 
in  future  dealings  with  the  native  Africans  England  will 
do  well  to  remember  this.  In  a  great  measure  this  excessive 
leniency  aided  to  produce  this  campaign.  My  references  for 
this  statement  are  the  Blue  Books.  Those  who  care  to  read 
them  will  blush  at  the  depth  of  self-degradation  the  Colonial 
Office  and  its  employes  have  been  guilty  of  in  their  written 
intercourse  with  the  sable  potentate  of  Ashantee  in  past  times. 
I  cannot  say  worse  of  England  and  lier  colonial  government 
than  that  in  her  past  intercom^se  with  the  king  of  Ashantee 
she  has  deeply  humiliated  herself. 

But  passing  by  such  topics  for  the  present,  I  will  attempt 
to  describe  the  vast  difference  that  lies  between  our  life  on  the 
Prah  and  life  on  the  Hudson.  I  have  the  advantage  over 
folks  at  home  for,  by  the  slightest  effort  of  fancy,  I  can  sketch 
New  York  and  its  teaming  population  dwelling  under  the 


THE  RIFLES. 


141 


rule  of  a  hard  frost;  the  filthy  snow  heaps  ranged  on  each 
side  of  Broadway ;  the  long,  long  lines  of  animals  struggling 
amid  the  debris  of  winter  more  than  knee-deep ;  the  cheerless 
faces  of  the  citizens,  made  more  cheerless  by  the  nipping  cold, 
and  many  more  uncomfortable  and  dismal  things  attending  a 
residence  in  New  York  during  winter.  Could  they  imagine  in 
their  turn  our  life  in  camp  on  the  Prah  ?  The  terrible  sun  which 
has  death  in  its  fierce,  merciless  heat,  apopletic  strokes  in  its 
beams;  the  dark  earth  steaming  hot,  emitting  its  baleful 
vapour;  the  dense  forest  and  denser"  undergrowth  whence 
issues  the  fever;  the  long  continuous  lines  of  naked  blacks 
bearing  burdens  of  rice,  flour,  sugar,  tea,  beef,  &c.,  to  the  control 
sheds ;  the  unjacketed  officers  who  pass  by  us  complaining  of 
the  heat  and  the  lassitude  it  engenders ;  the  crowds  in  the 
evening  who  hasten  to  cool  their  parboiled  bodies  in  the 
waters  of  the  Prah  ;  the  perspiring  people  who  brave  the  heat 
and  the  glare  of  the  tropics  and  sigh  for  one  drop  of  cool  water 
to  cool  their  parched  tongues. 

The  newly  arrived  soldiers  give  us  rich  fun.  Sailors  have 
always  carried  oflF  the  palm  for  ingenuous  sayings,  but  in  this 
campaign  I  am  certain  the  soldiers  will  win  the  day.  What 
they  have  done  has  convulsed  the  camp  with  laughter.  The 
Eifie  Brigade,  or,  at  least,  a  portion  of  it,  is  encamped  at  a 
•place  called  Barracoe.  It  may  be  remembered  that  Prince 
Ai-thur  is  a  captain  in  this  corps,  and  that  the  regiment  has  a 
very  high  reputation  for  gallantry.  Soon  after  its  arrival  at 
Barracoe  one  of  the  number  was  placed  at  night  as  sentry  at  a 
place  looking  toward  the  deepest  part  of  the  forest,  whence 
issued  during  the  darkest  hours  of  night  a  chorus  of  unmelodious 
soimds  which  were  sometimes  followed  by  a  series  of  harsh, 
unearthly  screams.  The  sounds  caused  by  a  laughing  hyaena 
were  as  music  compared  to  them ;  the  shrill  cry  of  the  fish 
eagle  is  not  half  as  alarming.  These  startling  screams  were 
uttered  at  regular  intervals  and  seemingly  in  close  proximity 
to  the  bewildered  sentry.  He  dared  not  fire,  for  to  alarm  the 
camp  by  a  shot  fired  at  random  into  the  black  forest  with  the 
hope  that  the  beast  or  whatever  it  was  might  be  frightened 
into  silence  was  not  to  be  thought  of.  But  the  sentry  deter- 
mined that  by  preparing  himself  against  attack  by  fixing  his 
sword-bayonet,  he  would  be  guarding  himself  in  some  measure 


142 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 


against  any  manifestations  of  hostility  the  beast  might  exhibit. 
Thus  he  stood  constantly  peering  into  the  impenetrable  dark- 
ness, vainly  seeking  to  pierce  the  almost  palpable  blackness  of 
the  night  imtil  the  relief  party  came  round.  The  sentry  had 
no  time  to  recover  himself  and  sheath  his  sword  before  the 
party  in  charge  of  the  officer  was  close  upon  him,  so  he  thrust 
his  sword  under  his  arm,  and,  after  challenging,  brought  his 
weapon  to  a  '  port  arms '  to  receive  the  relief.  Seeing  his 
evident  confusion  and  the  sword  under  his  arm,  the  officer 
demanded  the  cause,  and  was  told  by  the  sentry, '  If  you  plaze, 
zur,  there's  some  snake  of  a  wild  baste  a  constantly  screaming 
close  by  here.  Divil  a  bit  has  he  stopped  since  oi  have  been  stand- 
ing here,  and  oi'm  thinking  the  crathur  can't  be  far  off.  Sure 
the  divil  must  be  in  him.  So  oi  just  fixed  my  swurd  for  him  to 
give  him  some  cold  steel.'  '  Oh,  you  mean  that  lemur  which 
cries  out  so.  Why,  my  dear  fellow,  that  wild  beast  is  not  as 
large  as  a  rabbit.  You  need  never  fear  anything  from  him.' 
The  poor  sentry,  it  is  reported,  has  been  fearfully  chaffed  by 
the  Eifles  for  his  fright  at  an  animal  not  bigger  than  a  rabbit. 

A  soldiers'  camp-fire  is  a  cheery  sight.  Each  face  as  you 
see  it  by  the  firelight  seems  tinted  with  a  warm,  rosy  hue,  and 
there  is  very  much  of  genial  life  and  kindly  spirit  around  it. 
Fires  are  not  always  kindled  for  the  warmth  they  give,  and  even 
a  winter  fire  is  as  welcome  for  its  blaze  and  cheeriness  as  for 
its  warmth ;  but  in  the  tropics,  the  military  camp  fire  is 
kindled  for  the  magnetic  geniality  its  bright  blaze  evokes. 
With  the  Eifles  as  with  the  sailors  the  camp  fire  is  a  nightly 
institution,  and  around  these  the  bonny  faces  are  gathered  and 
become  wreathed  in  smiles  as  some  highly-coloured  story  is 
being  told  for  their  delectation.  Every  imaginable  thing 
affords  a  subject  for  graphic  illustration  and  embellishment, 
and  the  Eifles  enjoy  the  tales  with  a  zest  which  speaks  well  for 
the  good  fellowship  which  distinguishes  them.  But  the  stories 
generally  treat  of  wild  animals  and  their  savagery,  of  thrilling 
adventm-es  with  beasts  of  prey.  One  night  the  fire  circle  had 
sat  up  rather  late,  the  anecdotes  had  been  frequent  and  various, 
and  more  than  usually  illustrative  of  the  dangers  to  be  en- 
countered in  an  Afirican  forest.  The  weird  sounds  which  issued 
from  the  deep,  dark  forest  surrounding  the  camp  at  Barracoe, 
and  stole  through  the  darkness  on  their  quickened  ears,  }ent 


WHAT  SOARED  A  SEROEANT. 


14 


somewhat  of  an  alarming  reality  to  the  themes  which  had  en- 
gaged their  ears  that  night,  and  if  the  brave  Bifles  had  been 
subjected  to  the  confessional  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  many 
of  them  would  have  confessed  they  would  much  prefer  encoun- 
tering the  dangers  of  the  forest  during  the  daylight  than  at 
night  time.  It  chanced  that  a  sergeant  was  compelled  to 
proceed  alone  to  a  distant  quaiter  of  the  camp,  after  a  whole 
repertoire  of  alarming  stories  had  been  exhausted.  The  night 
was  pitch  dark,  the  tall  cotton-woods  seemed  to  rise  to  infinity 
in  the  darkness,  while  the  noises  that  issued  from  them  were 
extremely  depressive  to  the  soul.  The  sergeant  thought  he 
might  as  well  prepare  against  contingencies  ;  for,  *  who  knows  ? 
something  might  happen  to  a  fellow  in  such  an  unchristian 
country.'  He  unbuttoned  his  holster,  and  kept  his  hand  on  the 
stock  of  his  revolver.  He  stopped  once  or  twice  to  listen,  as 
he  imagined  he  heard  footsteps.  Again  he  continued  his  fearful 
way,  and  again  and  again  he  halted  to  listen.  Through  the 
darkness  he  could  faintly  distinguish  the  outlines  of  a  huge 
beast;  but,  whatever  it  was,  the  beast  remained  motionless 
when  he  stopped.  Did  the  thing  mean  to  spring  upon  him  ? 
lions  and  tigers  and  leopards  generally  did  on  a  benighted  man; 
that  was  the  usual  mode  of  attack.  Arguing  thus,  the  sergeant 
drew  out  his  revolver  and  kept  it  directed  at  the  monstrous 
thing,  which  still  persisted  in  following  him.  As  he  drew  near 
his  own  quarters  the  sergeant,  whose  fears  had  risen  to  the 
highest  pitch,  shouted  out  to  his  comrades  in  most  agonising 
accents,  '  I  say,  Bill,  Jack,  Tom,  hurry  up,  for  God's  sake,  and 
show  us  a  light  I  quick,  for  mercy's  sake ;  here  is  a  wild  beast 
going  to  attack  me  I '  Eesponsive  to  the  poor  sergeant's  cries 
for  assistance  came  the  cheery  '  Aye,  aye '  of  his  messmates, 
who  sprang  out  of  their  tents  with  lights  and  Sniders  and 
swords  to  the  rescue.  But  imagine  the  astonishment  of  all 
when  the  lanterns  disclosed  the  form  of — a  mule ! 

The  sergeant,  however,  is  not  the  only  man  who  has  been 
frightened  nearly  out  of  his  wits  by  such  a  domestic  animal,  for 
it  was  but  the  other  day  when  a  native,  being  requested  to  lead 
a  donkey  to  water,  started  with  him  gaily  enough,  xmtil  the 
animal  began  to  bray,  when  the  native  ran  away  from  him  with 
the  speed  of  lightning,  and  never  halted  until  he  foimd  himself 
a  good  half  mile  away  from  the  strange  brute,  which  could 
excel  even  the  African  lion  in  noise. 


144 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  XL 

ABRIYAL  OF  A  CAPTIVE  MISSIONARY — HIS  STORY — HIS  REPORT  OF  THE 
ASHANTEBS — HOW  THE  KINO  LOOKS — DISMAY  IN  COOMASSIE— PROBABLE 
MOVEMENTS. 

January  15,  1874. 

The  answer  to  Sir  Garnet's  third  ultimatum  has  been  received 
from  Coomassic.  It  speaks  of  the  king's  desire  for  peace  with 
the  white  men.  The  envoy  who  brought  it  and  his  suite  of 
fifteen  men  were  halted  at  Essiaman.  Yesterday,  also,  the  ap- 
parition of  a  pale-faced  captive — a  shadow  of  a  man  suflFering 
from  pulmonary  consumption,  one  who  had  lingered  in  com- 
pulsory detention  at  the  capital  of  Ashantee  since  June  12, 
1869 — startled  the  entire  camp.  This  sick  captive  is  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Kuhne,  of  the  Basle  Mission,  a  zealous  missionary,  a  native 
of  Neufchatel,  who,  after  five  years'  residence  at  Coomassie,  was 
suddenly  permitted  to  leave  Ashantee  and  proceed  to  the  camp 
of  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley. 

The  poor  man  is  in  such  a  wretched  state  of  bad  health  that 
I  could  not  find  it  in  my  heart  to  subject  him  to  a  prolonged 
interview ;  but  in  the  following  remarks  you  will  find  inter- 
woven such  information  of  interest  as  I  have  been  able  to 
glean : — 

The  king  of  Ashantee  is  a  young  man  thirty-five  or  thii-ty- 
six  years  old,  strongly  pitted  with  traces  of  small-pox,  possessing 
some  natural  ability,  which  however  has  been  warped  by  the 
assiduous  and  constant  flattery  of  his  parasitical  and  trembling 
subjects. 

The  adulatory  cries  of  the  town  crier  of  the  capital  are 
more  than  sufficient  to  transform  any  man,  white  or  black,  into 
a  vain,  incarnate  despot.  They  are  generally  in  the  strain  of — 

'  0  King,  thou  art  the  king  above  all  kings  1 


KING  COFFEE  DEPCTIBED. 


145 


*  Thou  art  great ! 

'  TKou  art  mighty  I 

'  Thou  art  strong ! 

'  Thou  hast  done  enough  ! 

'The  princes  of  the  earth  bow  down  to  thee,  and  humble 
themselves  in  the  dust  before  thy  stool  I 

'  Who  is  like  unto  the  King  of  all  the  Ashantees  ? ' 

King  Coffee,  though  arrogant  and  vain,  and  cruel  beyond 
measure,  has  the  eye  of  a  king,  which  means  that  it  is  the  eye 
of  one  possessing  unlimited  power  over  life  and  death.  So 
little  does  he  value  human  life  that  he  frequently  says, '  By  the 
slaughter  of  one  hundred  shall  I  be  able  to  produce  a  thousand.' 
ITie  king  is  placed  on  the  stool  by  the  united  voice  of  the 
chiefs ;  but  immediately  he  is  seated,  in  him  becomes  vested 
the  supreme  power  over  life  and  death.  If  the  coimcil  of 
chiefs  and  captains  propose  that  he  shall  engage  in  war,  he 
dare  not  absolutely  refuse  to  make  war,  lest  some  ask  him,  with 
a  sneer,  if  he  is  afraid,  when,  if  he  replies  in  the  aflBrmative,  the 
monarch's  prestige  departs  from  him.  When  the  chiefs  propose 
that  he  shall  make  peace,  after  engaging  in  a  war  which  turns 
out  to  be  ruinous,  he  may  then  proclaim  that  peace  shall  be 
declared  without  incurring  disrespect. 

A  great  power  in  Ashantee  is  the  king's  mother,  who  often 
with  her  advice  has  plunged  Ashantee  into  war  or  hastened  a 
peace. 

Thfi  king's  palace  consists  of  many  houses  connected 
together,  after  the  native  style  of  architecture,  and  adjoining 
it  is  another  residence,  the  two-storeyed  stone  house  constructed 
for  him  by  Dupuis,  a  traveller  who  visited  Ashantee  about  1820. 
The  missionaries  have  lately  constructed  another  house  for  him, 
44  feet  long,  25  feet  wide,  and  two  storeys  high,  of  brick 
which  they  themselves  manufactured  for  the  king. 

The  king  possesses  about  three  hundred  wives,  though  they  do 
not  all  live  in  the  palace,  but  are  scattered  among  the  suburban 
crooms,  or  villages.  It  is  death  for  a  man  to  look  at  the 
female  possessions  of  the  monarch.  When  any  of  the  harem 
ventures  out,  the  criers  hasten  ahead  to  clear  the  way,  and  warn 
the  citizens  of  the  advance  of  the  fatal  procession  with  cries  of 
^  Ecow!  ecmv  !  eh!  eh!  eh!^  the  first  two  words  being  drawn 
out  like  oxir  *  halloo,'  while  the  last  three  are  delivered  in  quick 

L 


146 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDAI.A. 


succession  and  in  higher  tones.  As  they  approach,  the  pas- 
sengers turn  their  backs  to  the  road  and  cover  their  faces  with 
tlieir  hands,  so  they  may  not  be  thought  to  take  any  advantage 
of  the  confidence  of  the  king  in  thus  exposing  his  human 
treasures  to  the  light  of  day. 

Bowditch's  graphic  descriptions  of  the  stately  processions 
and  the  wealth  of  barbaric  gold  dispensed  at  Coomassie  on 
grand  occasions  turn  out  to  be  correct.  This  wealth  principally 
consists  of  golden  heirlooms,  cmaments  of  massy  gold,  which 
for  generation  after  generation  the  natives  have  treasiu-ed  in 
secret  places.  If  a  hostile  army  approaclied  the  capital  tliis 
gold  would  be  hidden,  and  the  death  of  all  slaves  would  be 
almost  certain,  lest  they  might  betray  the  localities  where  the 
treasure  was  concealed. 

The  permanent  population  of  Coomassie  is  I  find  esti- 
mated at  15,000  souls — men,  women,  and  children. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  war  the  army  of  Ashantee  mustered 
48,000.  This  force  was  collected  from  the  combination  of 
nations  known  as  Ashantee  and  the  tributary  countries  adjoin- 
ing the  kingdom,  which,  according  to  all  accounts,  extend  far 
into  the  interior,  one  of  the  allied  chiefs  having  volunteered 
from  the  borders  of  the  Sahara  Desert.  The  army  that 
returned  to  Coomassie  lately  under  the  famous  Amanquatiah 
numbered  only  28,000,  the  large  number  of  20,000  having 
fallen  victims  to  disease.  With  this  sadly  reduced  army  were 
the  remains  of  279  officers  or  chiefs  who  had  fallen  in  battle  or 
died  of  disease,  enclosed  in  so  many  boxes.  This  army  was 
received  in  the  great  market  of  Coomassie  by  the  king,  and 
was  thanked  and  rewarded  witli  presents  of  gold,  100  sheep,  and 
forty  loads  of  salt ;  but  there  was  no  ovation  paid  to  it.  The 
reception  was  singularly  silent,  utterly  unlike  the  indescribable 
triumphal  fanfaronade  formerly  made  on  such  occasions.  Then 
the  people  dispersed  to  their  crooms,  their  plantations,  and 
houses.  Fifty-five  slaves  were  slaughtered  to  the  manes  of  the 
departed  chiefs  on  the  custom  day,  January  1  of  this  year. 

Amanquatiah  and  the  chiefs  who  have  been  engaged  in 
battle  have  sought  to  dispel  depression  from  the  mind  of  the 
king  by  boasting  of  his  performances  in  the  war,  and  declaring 
to  him  that  there  are  enough  men  still  left  to  defend  the 
capital  fi*om  any  attack.    It  appears  that  the  British  letter 


DISMAY  AND  CONFUSION  IN  COOMASSIE. 


147 


created  astonishment,  alarm,  and  yet  unmitigated  contempt  in 
the  mind  of  the  king.  The  first  feeling  was  caused  by  the  stem 
purpose  which  his  words  implied;  alarm,  by  the  amount  of 
compensation  to  be  exacted  for  the  injury  done  to  the  Assins 
and  Fantees  ;  and  unmitigated  contempt  at  the  long  explana- 
tion which  the  General  had  seen  fit  to  enter  into  concerning 
the  cause  which  led  to  the  death  of  one  of  his  envoy's  suite. 

It  is  known  now  why  the  unhappy  Ashantee  ambas- 
sador committed  suicide.  It  seems  that  it  was  proposed  to 
send  a  white  man  to  Coomassie  with  Sir  Garnet's  terms  to  the 
king,  and  that  this  man  ventured  a  remark  to  the  eflFect  that 
if  any  white  man  went  to  Coomassie  the  king  would  kill  him  ; 
whereupon  the  envoy,  who  was  his  brother,  censured  him  for  his 
unjust  suspicion,  and  promised  to  report  him  to  his  Majesty, 
Fully  satisfied  of  the  extent  of  the  king's  anger  on  hearing  the 
calmnny,  he  put  an  end  to  his  own  life. 

When  the  English  General's  letter  had  been  read,  the  chiefs 
who  composed  the  council  began  to  extol  themselves,  and  the 
tributary  king  of  Adansi  sprung  to  his  feet  and  shouted, 
*  Behold !  I  am  the  king  of  the  Adansis.  Who  can  cross  my 
country  without  my  permission  ?' 

Attifowah  got  up  and  said, '  Lo  !  I  am  strong,  my  warriors 
are  brave,  and  none  can  overcome  me.'  But  Amanquatiat,  who 
had  just  returned  from  the  war,  said,  *  He  who  lias  seen  no  war 
cannot  show  a  scar.' 

Presently  cooler  counsels  and  more  prudent  advice  prevailed ; 
hence  the  letter  which  Sir  Garnet.  Wolseley  received  the  day 
before  yesterday,  treating  of  peace.  The  king's  first  intention 
after  his  general's  return  to  Coomassie  was  to  permit  his  war- 
riors a  week's  rest  and  occupy  the  Adansi  Hills,  and  when  the 
white  people  should  appear  to  attack  them  with  vigour.  If  he 
were  successful  in  driving  the  English  back,  he  would  slaughter 
every  prisoner,  white  or  black,  he  had  taken  in  this  war ;  if  he 
were  defeated,  he  intended  to  await  at  Coomassie  the  arrival  of 
his  foe,  reserving  his  prisoners  to  plead  for  peace  for  him. 

The  reputation  of  the  Gatling  is  now  spread  throughout 
Ashantee.  *  It  is  a  terrible  gun,  which  shoots  all  day.  Nothing 
could  stand  before  it ;  the  water  of  the  Prah  ran  back  aflfrighted.' 
The  effect  of  this,  combined  with  many  other  things,  has  been 

L  2 


148 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


to  induce  the  king  and  his  council  to  deliberate  and  reflect  on 
the  possibility  of  peace. 

Of  himself  Mr.  Kuhne  said  he  had  been  captured  on  June  12, 
1869,  by  the  General  Addo  BufiFo  or  Adu  Bufu  ;  that  a  valuation 
of  6,000Z.  sterling  was  placed  by  his  captor  on  Mr.  Kuhne,  Mr. 
Kamseyer  and  wife,  and  M.  Bonat,  a  French  trader,  which  was 
finally  reduced  to  1,000Z.  He  and  his  brothers  were  treated  as 
captives  who  might  probably  be  of  value  eventually  or  not.  They 
were  granted  a  sufficient  amount  for  subsistence,  but  nothing 
more.  What  money  was  despatched  to  them  was  retained  by 
the  king,  who  doled  out  the  sum  of  four  and  a  half  dollars  per 
period  of  forty  days  for  the  subsistence  of  each  white  man  and 
his  servants.  They  have  preached  a  few  times  in  the  streets  to 
the  Ashantees  of  the  capital,  but  the  king  never  gave  permission 
to  his  subjects  to  become  converts.  The  populace  of  Ashantee 
treated  them  at  first  with  contumely;  but,  when  the  king  gave 
permission  to  them  to  punish  insolence  with  thewhip,  some  more 
consideration  was  shown  to  them. 

It  was  amusing  the  way  in  which  some  of  the  people  en- 
deavoured to  exempt  themselves  from  being  subject  to  the 
privilege  granted  to  the  captives  by  crying  out,  *Know  ye 
what  ye  do  ?  I  am  the  king's  shirt-washer  I  I  wash  the  king's 
robes  I  I  wash  the  king's  feet  I'  While  another  would  venture 
to  cry  out, '  My  sister  is  one  of  the  king's  wives  I' 

The  Fantee  prisoners  were  exceedingly  insolent  to  the  white 
captives.  They  were  pleased  to  utterly  disbelieve  that  the 
English  General  would  ever  approach  Coomassie,  and  omitted 
no  pains  to  imbue  the  Ashantees  with  that  idea.  Of  the  Fantees 
Mr.  Kuhne  and  his  missionary  brethren  entertain  the  very 
lowest  opinion. 

On  October  18,  Mr.  Kuhne  wrote  to  the  king  requesting 
leave  to  return,  as  he  was  suffering  from  a  disease  which,  unless 
he  was  able  to  obtain  good,  nourishing  food,  must  soon  kill  him. 
Last  Friday  night  his  second  request  was  granted,  and  he  left 
Coomassie  at  once  by  torchlight,  and  arrived  in  Karsi,  a  place 
situate  about  three  miles  from  the  capital.  During  Saturday 
he  travelled  for  eig^t  hours,  and  reached  Akankwassi.  On 
Sunday  he  made  a  short  march  to  Quisa,  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Adansi  Hills. 

On  Monday  he  travelled  to  Essiaman,  a  village  occupied  hy 


SHALL  IT  BE  PEACE  OR  WAR? 


149 


the  British  advance,  and  by  10  a.m.  on  Tuesday  he  reached  this 
camp,  a  subject  of  compassion  to  all. 

Mr.  Kuhne's  opinion  is  that  the  king  will  not  fight ;  that 
his  fears  have  been  so  worked  upon  by  the  reports  of  his  chiefs, 
who  have  exaggerated  the  power  of  the  white  men  and  their 
guns,  that  he  has  no  combativeness  left  in  him.  He  does  not 
suppose,  either,  that  King  CoflFee  would  perform  theharikari  upon 
himself,  as  his  illustrious  prototype  did  in  Abyssinia,  or  that  he 
has  the  moral  courage  to  do  anything  uncommon.  The  flow  of 
spirits  which  caused  him  to  dance  in  the  streets  of  Coomassie 
before  his  subjects  when  he  heard  that  his  army  had  arrived  at 
Dunquah,  in  the  early  part  of  the  war,  and  prompted  him  to 
order  tlie  remorseless  butchery  of  the  white  men  on  the  coast, 
has  evaporated  and  left  him  like  one  who  has  just  passed  through 
a  long  debauch — nerveless,  fearful,  and  an  object  of  contemp- 
tuous pity. 

As  the  advance  of  the  British  army,  under  the  impetuous 
Bussell,  has  already  scaled  the  Adansi  Hills  and  made  good  its 
position  at  Quisa,no  one  can  conceive  the  possibility  of  defence 
left  to  the  Ashantee  king.  The  very  fastnesses  he  boasted  of — 
the  frontier  of  his  kingdom — have  been  unlocked,  and  between 
Quisa  and  Coomassie  is  but  twelve  hours'  march.  From  which 
we  may  accept  it  as  a  fact  that  there  is  no  fighting  spirit  left 
in  the  king  of  Ashantee,  and  that  the  British  campaign  of 
1873-74  is  destined  to  end  in  a  peaceful  parade  at  Coomassie. 
Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  has  sent  his  fourth  letter  to  the  king,  and 
entrusted  it  to  Captain  Buller,  chief  of  the  Intelligence  Depart- 
ment, who  will  deliver  it  to  the  envoy,  who,  with  his  suite  of 
fifteen  men,  is  awaiting  it  at  Essiaman.  It  is  rather  disheartening 
to  oflBcers  who  have  dared  the  fatigues  and  the  climatic  dangers 
of  Africa  to  be  told  that  peace  will  be  made.  It  is  more  dis- 
heartening for  an  expedition  which  numbers  so  many  Europeans 
to  have  to  go  through  the  form  of  marching  to  Coomassie  only 
to  sign  a  peace — such  a  peace  as  has  been  made  already  too 
frequently.  It  must  be  annoying  to  Great  Britain,  after  such 
an  expense— after  cherishing  the  delusion  that  now  she  had  the 
opportunity  to  crush  the  insolent  Power  which  has  insulted  her 
representatives  during  the  past  century — to  be  told  she  shall 
not  have  the  power  to  punish  or  avenge  her  wrongs ;  but  she 
shall  have  her  expenditure,  the  losses  of  life  she  has  incurred, 


150 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  sickness  and  fever  which  her  sons  have  endured,  all  for 
nothing. 

That  is  of  course  certain  ;  a  score  of  valuable  lives  may  be 
lost  on  the  journey,  half  a  million  of  pounds  sterling  will  be 
added  to  the  expenditure,  but  England's  honour  demands  that 
her  army  shall  enter  Coomassie  and  go  through  the  form  of 
taking  possession.  Hostages  will  be  demanded,  and  probably  a 
much  larger  number  of  ounces  of  gold  than  the  king  can  ever 
pay  will  be  imposed  as  a  fine,  and  the  army  will  return  to  re- 
embark  for  home,  having  accomplished  absolutely  nothing,  for 
in  ten  years  or  so  the  Ashantees  will  reinvade  the  Protectorate, 
and  the  same  anger  and  impotent  wrath  will  be  roused  just  as 
fruitlessly  as  before.  The  desire  of  the  king  is  for  peace.  Both 
the  answer  to  Sir  Garnet's  letter  and  the  release  of  the  mission- 
ary confirm  it.  The  missionary  says  that  the  Ashantees  have 
lost  so  many  chiefs  that  they  have  become  disheartened.  They 
have  not  lost  so  many  in  skirmishes,  but  by  sickness.  The 
warriors  are  returning  to  their  villages ;  and  so  satisfied  is  the 
king  with  the  result  of  his  letter  that  he  makes  no  eflFort  to 
keep  them  together.  There  is  only  one  hope  remaining,  after 
this  probably  tame  ending  of  the  expedition,  that,  as  the  honour 
of  England  demands  that  the  troops  shall  enter  Coomassie,  this 
event  may  not  be  accepted  by  the  Ashantees  as  a  sign  of  amity. 
The  king  may  be  very  willing  to  declare  his  readiness  to  sign  a 
treaty,  to  send  any  number  of  hostages  to  Cape  Coast  Castle,  to 
pay  any  reasonable  sum  as  an  indemnity  to  the  Assins  and 
Fantees  for  the  losses  they  have  sustained ;  but  will  he  be  willing 
to  allow  an  invading  army  to  occupy  his  capital  and  dictate 
terms  of  peace  to  him  from  an  apartment  in  his  own  palace  ? 
That  he  will  fear  treachery  on  the  part  of  the  white  men,  some 
deep  scheme  of  revenge,  some  bloody  massacre,  some  wholesale 
spoliation,  is  the  only  hope  left  to  the  English  that  they  will 
not  be  permitted  to  enter  Coomassie  bloodlessly  or  without  some 
opportunity  of  inflicting  a  pimishment  on  the  savages,  that  it 
may  become  a  tradition  among  them  of  what  may  be  expected 
should  they  venture  to  attack  any  territory  under  the  protection 
of  white  men  again. 

It  is  decided  that  the  white  troops  shall  not  move  from  here 
before  the  23rd  of  this  month,  because  of  the  non-arrival  of 
sufficient  stores.    The  2nd  West  Indians  left  here  last  night  for 


PKOBABLE  MOVEMENTS. 


161 


Essiaman,  Colonel  Wood's  regiment  left  this  morning,  taking 
with  it  provisions  for  six  days. 

Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  has  just  informed  me  personally  that 
we  shall  move  on  the  23rd  to  occupy  Essiaraan ;  tliat  on  the 
24th  we  shall  reach  Accrofoomu ;  on  the  25th,  Quisa,  or  Fo- 
mannah,  at  which  place  we  may  probably  stay  until  the  29th, 
and  that  by  the  31st  we  shall  probably  be  in  Coomassie. 


152 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  XIL 

NAPOLEON  III. — Tire  QUALITIES  OF  SIR  OAKXEI — RETB03PECTITE  —  THE 
SPECIAL  SERVICE  CORPS — CROSSING  THE  PR  AH — ASHANTEE  L-\ND — TUB 
ADANSI  IHLLS — ARRIVAL  IN  ASHANTEE  PROPER. 

jADuaiy  22,  1874. 

Napoleon  III.  writing  from  Compi^gne,  October  22,  1856, 
to  Marshal  Vaillant,  Minister  of  War,  said  that  the  able  and 
indefatigable  minister  who  day  and  night  occupies  himself  in 
organising  a  large  force,  and  in  insuring  to  it  at  a  distance  of 
800  leagues  from  his  country  the  means  of  living,  fighting,  and 
conquering  in  an  almost  barren  spot,  has  merit  fully  equal  to 
that  of  a  general  who  triumphs  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  that 
the  nation  should  unite  in  its  thanks  him  who  prepares  for 
victory  by  combining  the  necessary  means  as  well  as  him  who 
achieves  it  by  plans  well  conceived  and  grounded. 

If  the  Emperor  could  so  highly  recommend  the  provide:  of 
the  material  of  war,  what  shall  be  said  of  the  young  General  in 
command  of  tliis  expedition  to  Coomassie,  in  whom  is  found 
united  not  only  the  prudent  qualities  of  a  War  Minister,  but 
the  energy  and  will,  tactical  skill  and  forethought  of  a  Com- 
mander of  an  army  in  the  field  I 

I  admit  that  I  sometimes  think  that  there  are  things  to 
wliich,  in  my  opinion,  more  attention  should  have  been  and 
should  be  paid  by  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  ;  but  while  any  man  of 
mortal  mould  is  constantly,  as  he  is,  under  the  ever-searching 
and  critical  eyes  of  a  number  of  journalists,  no  man  can  escape 
entirely  from  blame. 

In  his  conduct  of  this  expedition  so  far,  I  impute  no  blame 
to  him ;  on  the  contrary,  I  give  him  large  credit.  He  has  done 
his  best,  and  his  best  has  been  a  mixture  of  untiring  energy  and 
determination — youthful  ardour,  toned  down  by  the  sense  of  his 


THE  QUALITIES  OF  SIB  GARNET. 


153 


grave  responsibilities ;  exuberant  good  nature,  which  nothing 
seems  to  damp;  excessive  amiability,by  which  we  are  all  benefited ; 
discreet  judgment,  which  will  surely  meet  its  reward;  wise  fore- 
thought, which,  assisted  by  his  devotion  to  his  work,  prove  that 
the  trust  reposed  in  him  by  the  British  Government  will  not  be 
betrayed. 

Looking  back  upon  the  great  tract  of  forest  country  we 
have  left  behind,  which  stretches  between  the  Prah  river  and 
the  sea,  and  in  imagination  following  the  74  miles  of  road 
already  traversed,  we  are  tempted  to  ask  what  value  may  Le 
placed  upon  our  progress  to  this  date. 

It  is  useless  to  recapitulate  what  is  already  contained  in 
previous  chapters ;  but  it  may  be  as  well,  before  crossing  the 
Pf ah  to .  the  real  Ashantee  land,  to  be  sure  that  we  properly 
appreciate  what  has  already  been  accomplished. 

When  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  landed  at  Cape  Coast  Castle, 
with  a  retinue  of  about  thirty  special  service  oflBcers,  which 
seemed  to  be  a  kind  of  a  gallant  Forlorn  Hope,  he  found  the 
enemy  swarming  over  the  forest  tract  lying  between  the  Prah 
river  and  the  sea.  In  his  front  they  were  within  a  few  miles ; 
to  his  right  and  left  they  were  masters  of  every  inch  of  ground 
outside  the  forts.  Even  between  Elmina  and  Cape  Coast  the 
road  was  considered  so  dangerous  that  communication  was 
precarious. 

With  his  Special  Service  Corps  he  began  work,  first,  to 
create  a  semblance  of  order  in  the  disorganised  masses  of 
Fantees;  second,  to  induce  the  several  chiefs  of  the  friendly 
natives  to  a  more  ready  submission  to  his  dictates ;  third,  to 
organise  new  regiments  under  European  officers  ;  fourth,  to 
discover  the  enemy  and  his  intentions ;  fifth,  to  measure  the 
scant  material  he  could  obtain  against  the  enemy's  numerous 
horde;  sixth,  to  worry  and  pound  the  enemy  unrestingly,  to 
attack  them  front  and  rear  from  all  points,  proving  to  them  in 
this  energetic  manner  that  a  new  and  strange  force,  of  which 
the  Ashantees  had  never  before  known,  was  now  opposed  to 
them  to  the  death. 

Sir  Garnet's  Special  Service  Corps,  though  much  ^  too  in- 
adequate for  his  wants  in  numbers,  was  composed  of  select 
men. 

Such  men  as  Lieut.-Col.  M'Neil,  wounded  near  Elmina,  are 


152 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  XIL 

NAPOLEON  in. — THE  QUALITIES  OF  SIR  GARNEI — RETROSPECTIVE — THE 
SPECIAL  SERVICE  CORPS — CROSSDJO  THE  PRAH — ASHANTEE  LAND— TUB 
ADANSI  HILLS — ARRIVAL  IN  ASHANTEE  PROPER. 

January  22,  1874. 

Napoleon  III.  writing  from  Compi^gne,  October  22,  1856, 
to  Marshal  Vaillant,  Minister  of  War,  said  that  the  able  and 
indefatigable  minister  who  day  and  niglit  occupies  himself  in 
organising  a  large  force,  and  in  insuring  to  it  at  a  distance  of 
800  leagues  from  his  country  the  means  of  living,  fighting,  and 
conquering  in  an  almost  barren  spot,  has  merit  fully  equal  to 
that  of  a  general  who  triumphs  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  that 
the  nation  should  unite  in  its  thanks  him  who  prepares  for 
victory  by  combining  the  necessary  means  as  well  as  him  who 
achieves  it  by  plans  well  conceived  and  grounded. 

If  the  Emperor  could  so  highly  recommend  the  provider  of 
the  material  of  war,  what  shall  be  said  of  the  young  General  in 
command  of  this  expedition  to  Coomassie,  in  whom  is  found 
\jnited  not  only  the  prudent  qualities  of  a  War  Minister,  but 
the  energy  and  will,  tactical  skill  and  forethought  of  a  Com- 
mander of  an  army  in  the  field ! 

I  admit  that  I  sometimes  think  that  there  are  things  to 
which,  in  my  opinion,  more  attention  should  have  been  and 
should  be  paid  by  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  ;  but  while  any  man  of 
mortal  mould  is  constantly,  as  he  is,  under  the  ever-searching 
and  critical  eyes  of  a  number  of  journalists,  no  man  can  escape 
entirely  from  blame. 

In  his  conduct  of  this  expedition  so  far,  I  impute  no  blame 
to  him ;  on  the  contrary,  I  give  him  large  credit.  He  has  done 
his  best,  and  his  best  has  been  a  mixture  of  imtiring  energy  and 
determination — youthful  ardoiu-,  toned  down  by  the  sense  of  his 


THE  QUALITIES  OF  SIB  GARNET. 


153 


grave  responsibilities ;  exuberant  good  nature,  which  nothing 
seems  to  damp;  excessive  amiability,by  which  we  are  all  benefited ; 
discreet  judgment,  which  will  surely  meet  its  reward;  wise  fore- 
thought, which,  assisted  by  his  devotion  to  his  work,  prove  that 
the  trust  reposed  in  him  by  the  British  Government  will  not  be 
betrayed. 

Looking  back  upon  tlie  great  tract  of  forest  country  we 
have  left  behind,  which  stretclies  between  the  Prah  river  and 
the  sea,  and  in  imagination  following  the  74  miles  of  road 
already  traversed,  we  are  tempted  to  ask  what  value  may  Le 
placed  upon  our  progress  to  this  date. 

It  is  useless  to  recapitulate  what  is  already  contained  in 
previous  chapters ;  but  it  may  be  as  well,  before  crossing  the 
Pf ah  to .  the  real  Ashantee  land,  to  be  sure  that  we  properly 
appreciate  what  has  already  been  accomplished. 

When  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  landed  at  Cape  Coast  Castle, 
with  a  retinue  of  about  thirty  special  service  oflScers,  which 
seemed  to  be  a  kind  of  a  gallant  Forlorn  Hope,  he  found  the 
enemy  swarming  over  the  forest  ti-act  lying  between  the  Prali 
river  and  the  sea.  In  his  front  they  were  within  a  few  miles  ; 
to  his  right  and  left  they  were  masters  of  every  inch  of  ground 
outside  the  forts.  Even  between  Elmina  and  Cape  Coast  the 
road  was  considered  so  dangerous  that  communication  was 
precarious. 

With  his  Special  Service  Corps  he  began  work,  first,  to 
create  a  semblance  of  order  in  the  disorganised  masses  of 
Fantees;  second,  to  induce  the  several  chiefs  of  the  friendly 
natives  to  a  more  ready  submission  to  his  dictates ;  third,  to 
organise  new  regiments  imder  European  oflScers ;  fourth,  to 
discover  the  enemy  and  his  intentions ;  fifth,  to  measure  the 
scant  material  he  could  obtain  against  the  enemy's  numerous 
horde;  sixth,  to  worry  and  pound  the  enemy  unrestingly,  to 
attack  them  front  and  rear  from  all  points,  proving  to  them  in 
this  energetic  manner  that  a  new  and  strange  force,  of  which 
the  Ashantees  had  never  before  known,  was  now  opposed  to 
them  to  the  death. 

Sir  Garnet's  Special  Service  Corps,  though  much  too  in- 
adequate for  his  wants  in  numbers,  was  composed  of  select 
men. 

Such  men  as  Lieut.-Col.  M'Neil,  wounded  near  Elmina,  are 


154 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


few.  His  eflSciency  as  chief  of  staflF  met  warm  commendation 
from  the  young  General  in  command. 

Major  Baker,  18th  Royal  Irish,  a  quiet  and  amiable 
character  apparently,  was  a  man  of  trust,  discretion,  and  tact, 
who  seconded  Sir  Garnet's  efforts  to  the  utmost  of  his  power. 
When  Colonel  M'Neil  was  invalided  home,  Major  Baker 
became  temporarily  chief  of  staff. 

Captain  Brackenbury,  whose  reputation  as  a  writer  on 
military  matters  is  established,  was  Sir  Garnet's  military 
secretary. 

Captain  Buller  was  at  the  head  of  the  Intelligence  Depart- 
ment, in  which  capacity  he  exhibited  traits  of  character  which, 
on  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  them,  will  prove  him 
not  unworthy  of  filling  posts  of  the  most  onerous  and  most 
responsible  nature. 

Captain  Lanyon,  of  the  2nd  West  India  Eegiment,  officiated 
as  colonial  secretary  for  a  time,  where  his  fitness  for  the  post 
showed  what  an  invaluable  aid  the  new  Governor  and  General 
had  secured.  He  brought  with  him  long  experience  in  a 
similar  office  in  the  West  Indies.  Captain  Lanyon  is  an  emi- 
nently shrewd  and  diplomatic  officer. 

Captain  Huyshe,  who  is  at  present  suffering  under  severe 
illness,  is  another  man  of  Sir  Ganiet's  choice  and  liking;  always 
efficient  and  alive  to  his  duties,  wonderfully  hard-working,  and 
faithful. 

Captain  W.  F.  Butler,  author  of  the  '  Great  Lone  Land,' 
needs  no  recommendation  from  me.  He  is  a  favourite  officer 
of  Sir  Garnet,  and  occupies  an  enviable  post.  He  has  proceeded 
to  Akim  to  raise  an  auxiliary  force  of  natives.  He  is  one  of 
those  energetic  men  who,  by  their  own  example,  infuse  a  vital 
force  in  others,  whence  we  may  expect  that  important  allies 
will  be  raised. 

Lieutenant  Maurice  is  Sir  Garnet's  private  secretary.  He 
has  not  had  the  opportunity  to  distinguish  himself  before  the 
world ;  but  we  may  rest  assured  that  he  is  a  credit  to  Sir 
Garnet's  choice,  otherwise  we  should  have  heard  something  to 
the  contrary ;  and  besides,  he  is  the  winner  of  the  '  Wellington 
Prize,'  a  prize  for  which  his  own  chief  competed. 

The  Hon.  Evelyn  Wood,  Lieut-Colonel  of  the  90th  Regi- 
ment, to  whom  has  been  awarded  the  Victoria  Cross,  a  high  dis- 


MAJOBS  RUSSELL  AND  HOME. 


155 


tinction  only  conferred  for  undoubted  bravery,  was  selected,  at 
first,  to  fill  the  post  of  Commandant  of  Elmina,  where  he  raised 
a  force  of  natives;  but  he  was  soon  sent  to  distinguish  himself  in  . 
the  field,  where  his  indefatigable  zeal,  and  his  intelligent  per- 
formance of  the  commands  of  his  chief,  elicited  high  encomiums 
from  those  who  understood  the  spirit  which  animated  him,  and 
the  measure  of  his  services. 

Major  Baker  Bussell  of  the  13th  Hussars,  who  commands 
a  native  regiment,  is  one  of  those  invaluable  characters  which 
a  general  must  have — a  reliable,  efficient  officer ;  a  resolute, 
hard-handed  man,  with  vim  and  nerve  in  him,  a  powerful 
sharp  sword  for  an  enemy,  and  a  soft  tongue  for  a  friend.  Lord 
Napier  of  Magdala  had  such  a  man  in  Abyssinia  in  Colonel 
Penn  of  the  Artillery.  Commissioner  Glover  has  now  with 
him  a  similar  friend  in  Captain  Sartorius  of  the  Bengal  Cavalry, 
who  would  be  in  his  glory  and  proper  place  at  the  head  of  a 
Balaklava  charge.  Such  men  as  he  the  eye  of  the  special 
correspondent  loves  to  dwell  upon. 

Major  Home  of  the  Eoyal  Engineers  has  been  before  the 
public  so  often,  and  ever  with  praise,  that  it  is  almost  im- 
necessary  to  do  more  than  mention  his  name.  He  has  chopped 
his  way  through  over  a  hundred  miles  of  forest  and  jungle 
tangle,  made  oiu:  road  smooth  for  us,  constructed  an  infinite 
number  of  bridges,  miles  of  corduroy  road  across  swamps, 
erected  over  a  thousand  huts,  every  stick  and  thatch  of  which 
he  had  to  procure  from  the  forest,  constructed  miles  of  tele- 
graph lines ;  and  while  a  portion  of  his  men  is  now  building  the 
pontoon  across  the  Prah,  another  portion  is  miles  ahead  cut- 
ting bush,  widening  roads,  erecting  more  huts  ;  and  another  is 
miles  in  our  rear  putting  up  the  telegraph  line,  widening  and 
improving  the  road ;  and  Major  Home  has  to  employ  mind  and 
body  in  attending  to  these  several  onerous  duties.  Words  fail 
to  express  our  sense  of  the  obligation  every  soul  of  this  expedi- 
tion is  under  to  him.  He  has  made  the  path  through  the 
wilderness  smooth  and  pleasant,  and  all  but  bedded  and  boarded 
us.    May  his  Government  honour  him  as  he  deserves  I 

With  most  of  the  above  heroes  Sir  Garnet  set  to  work :  the 
how  and  why  have  already  been  explained  in  previous  chapters ; 
but  it  has  had  this  extraordinary  result,  that  without  aid  of 
others  than  marines,  blue-jackets,  West  Indians,  and  two  native 


15(5 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


regimei^s,  he  has  driven  a  force  of  (variously  estimated)  from 
20,000  to  40,000  Ashantees  in  hurried  flight  across  the  Prah. 
This  work  occupied  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  from  October  1,  1873, 
to  December  13,  1873.  So  much  being  understood,  let  us  cross 
the  Prah  into  Ashantee  land. 

Major  Eussell's  native  regiment,  preceded  by  Lord  Giflford's 
native  scouts,  were  the  first  to  cross  the  Prah  river  in  force,  and 
since  their  departure  to  the  front  we  have  received  news  from 
day  to  day  of  the  rapid  advance  into  the  enemy's  country  made 
by  the  impetuous  Russell  and  the  gallant  Giflford. 

Close  behind  Bussell,  picking  his  camps  up  as  he  deserts 
them  for  other  encampments  further  forward,  are  Colonel  Wood 
and  his  regiment,  and  behind  Wood's  Eegiment  are  Colonel 
Webber  and  two  companies  of  the  2nd  West  India  Regiment. 

Major  Home,  Captain  Buckle,  and  Lieutenant  Bell  of  the 
Royal  Engineers  are  in  the  advance  with  Russell,  engaged  in 
the  usual  arduous  task  of  cutting  bush,  and  making  the  road 
available  for  the  European  force  and  the  native  porters  of  the 
transport  service. 

We — that  is,  the  members  of  the  Press — left  Prahsu  on  the 
19th;  Sir  Garnet  and  staflF  left  the  next  day  with  the  Naval 
Brigade  and  Rifles. 

On  crossing  the  Prah,  we  set  foot  on  the  soil  of  what  is  still 
an  integral  portion  of  Assin.  But  we  searched  in  vain  for  a 
change  in  the  landscape.  No  sooner  had  we  departed  from 
under  the  sunlight,  which  poured  hot  and  strong  upon  the  cleared 
camp  of  Prahsu,  than  we  discovered  ourselves  to  be  involved  in 
the  impenetrable  shade  of  cotton-woods,  teak,  and  mighty 
tamarinds,  with  the  insatiable  jungle  clustering  thickly  around 
their  girths,  and  impeding  the  keenest  eyesight,  such  as  we 
experienced  between  Dunquah  and  Prahsu.  Though  we  saw 
nought  below  the  dense  shadows  which  the  thick  foliage  of  the 
forest  formed,  above  our  heads,  far,  far  above,  the  coloms  and 
tints  of  the  leaves  were  discovered  to  be  of  an  agreeable  variety 
as  the  twigs  and  branches  bent  and  rustled  before  the  gales. 
Intermittent  gusts  of  wind  sometimes  swept  down  on  us,  and 
caused  us  to  gratefully  doflf  our  hats  to  enjoy  the  cooling 
draughts ;  but  Nature,  ever  grave  and  sombre  in  the  forest 
shade,  relaxed  nothing  of  its  sullen,  lifeless  aspect. 

Mile  after  mile  was  passed  of  this  forest.    Sometimes  the 


EN  ROUTE  TO  ASHANTEE. 


157 


eye  caught  glimpses  of  broad-fronded  plantain  stalks,  or  the 
tall  feathery  palm,  or  the  slender  parasitical  rattan,  or  a  huge 
length — ^like  a  monster  serpent — of  a  gigantic  lliane,  swinging 
in  mid-air,  from  tree  to  tree,  which  served  to  relieve  somewhat 
the  dead  monotony  of  the  march. 

Four  miles  from  Prahsu  we  came  across  the  encampment  of 
Attobiassi,  constructed  as  a  half-way  station  between  Essiaman 
and  Prahsu. 

Beyond  the  camp  the  ground  sloped  abruptly  a  few  yards  to 
a  narrow,  sinuous  stream,  which  in  the  rainy  season  overflows 
its  banks,  and  forms  a  broad  extent  of  water  shallows  and 
muddy  sloughs  in  the  tangle  of  bush  on  the  river  banks.  The 
consequence  is  that  in  these  depressions  the  over-fruitful  soil 
shoots  out  with  renewed  vigour  a  denser  crop  of  bush,  plantain, 
palm,  and  hosts  of  parasites. 

We  had  reason  to  be  grateful  to  the  genius  of  Major  Home, 
who  had  laid  down  entire  furlongs  of  cordiuroy  while  we  traversed 
these  miry  troughs,  for  we  were  permitted  to  travel  without 
losing  our  boots  and  stockings,  and  perhaps  our  feet,  in  the 
mud. 

A  short  distance  beyond  Attobiassi  we  came  across  a  third 
village  of  dismantled  huts,  and  wrecks  of  Assin  habitations ;  and 
a  charred  human  skeleton,  lying  close  to  the  road,  reminded  us 
of  the  purpose  of  the  English  expedition  to  Coomassie. 

Another  hour  brought  us  to  where  a  great  tract  of  tall 
timber  was  deadened,  and  glints  of  dayUght  ahead  announced 
oiu:  approach  to  the  camp  of  Essiaman. 

Essiaman  is  in  charge  of  Captain  Frank  Eussell,  who  has 
been  displaying  his  knowledge  of  engineering,  and  making  tlie 
camp  habitable.  An  injury  to  his  foot  incapacitated  him  for 
active  service  in  the  front,  to  which  he  aspired  like  most  others 
of  the  gallant  fellows  who  have  braved  the  heat  of  the  day  in 
this  apparently  irreclaimable  and  uncivilisable  land. 

Essiaman  at  present  consists  of  the  body  of  the  old  village, 
half-a-dozen  huts  massed  together,  and  encompassed  with 
strong  timbers  placed  upright  to  the  height  of  eight  feet,  until  it 
bears  the  resemblance  of  a  fortlet.  Lengthy  huts,  which  stand 
outside  the  fort  in  a  row,  and  thatched  with  palm,  bamboo, 
and  plantain  leaves,  are  an  agreeable  shelter  for  a  night  for 
even  European  troops. 


158 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


A  clear  space  of  about  500  feet  all  around  leaves  room  for 
light  and  air  to  penetrate  into  the  camp,  and  an  excellent 
chance  for  Snider  bullets  to  hit  straight  at  any  foe  having  the 
temerity  to  advance  from  under  cover. 

At  Essiaman  we  heard  of  the  death  of  Captain  Huyshe  of 
the  staflF,  and  all  who  knew  him  sorrowed  over  the  fate  of  the 
brave,  faithful,  and  willing  oflScer,  and  amiable  gentleman. 

The  next  day  we  left  Essiaman,  and  resumed  our  march,  in 
order  to  avoid  the  disagreeableness  of  travel  in  rear  of  a  long, 
straggling  line  of  people. 

On  leaving  Essiaman  we  were  tempted  to  congratulate 
ourselves  that  the  country  was  improving.  The  bush  was  not 
nearly  so  dense,  and  something  very  like  the  ghosts  of  hills 
looming  through  the  forest  kindled  a  hope  that  the  bush  would 
gradually  thin,  until  long  views  might  be  had.  The  sound  of 
living  waters,  brawling  over  stones  and  down  rock  steeps, 
strengthened  the  hope ;  but  for  a  long  time  we  doubted  the  good 
prospects. 

An  hour's  march  brought  us  to  the  stream  Fumasu,  a 
muddied  torrent ;  lumps  of  hematite  iron  ore,  breaking  up  from 
the  depths,  impeded  its  flow,  and  made  it  gurgle,  and  murmur, 
and  chatter  most  pleasantly  to  the  ears.  Eocky  lumps  appeared 
on  the  other  side  of  the  stream,  and  limited  vistas  through  the 
trees  gladdened  us. 

A  deposit  of  sand  with  glistening  yellow  particles  in  it 
caused  me  to  dismount  from  my  mule  to  examine  it ;  but,  though 
I  had  flattered  myself  for  a  moment  that  the  El-Dorado  of  the 
Ashantees  had  been  reached,  a  very  short  glance  at  the  glisten- 
ing particles  sufl6ced  to  inform  me  that  they  were  only  pyrites 
of  iron. 

I  find  I  am  not  the  only  one  who  has  been  deluded  by  the 
deceptive  shine  and  glitter  of  the  sands  in  this  stream.  Cap- 
tain Nicol  and  others  of  Russell's  Regiment  have  been  actually 
panning  at  the  same  place. 

My  mule  seemed  to  understand  my  disappointment ;  for,  as 
I  resumed  my  saddle,  the  sage  animal,  before  breaking  into  his 
accustomed  jog-trot,  wagged  his  head  as  if  to  say,  ^No  use, 
my  dear  master ;  the  'Shantees  find  the  precious  dust  further 
north  a  good  bit.' 

At  noon  we  reached  the  second  station  in  the  trans-Prah 


FOREST  EVERYWHERK. 


159 


land,  Akrofoomu,  a  camp  at  present  in  process  of  constraction. 
Half-naked  black  wood-cutters  make  the  place  resound  with 
blows  of  axe  and  hatchet.  Others  are  swarming  on  the  tops  of 
sheds  at  thatch-work  ;  others,  with  spade,  shovel,  and  pick,  are 
clearing  weeds,  grass,  and  dead  vegetation  away.  Busy  ac- 
tivity is  exemplified  by  the  aspect  of  labour  which  the  hurrying 
forms  of  helmeted  oflScers,  and  men  black  and  white,  give  the 
scene.  In  a  few  days  the  scene  will  be  that  of  an  orderly, 
well-conducted  camp,  under  rigid  discipline,  for  so  quick  do 
ready  hands  and  skilled  minds  change  and  subdue  the  virgin 
forest. 

On  the  2l8t,  hearing  that  Sir  Garnet  would  be  at  Essiaman 
about  noon,  we  deserted  our  quarters  at  Akrofoomu,  and 
plunged  again  into  the  forest  shades,  as  we  began  our  march  to 
Fomannah. 

Again  spectres  of  hills  or  wooded  heights  were  seen  through 
the  forest ;  again  were  heard  the  pleasant  sounds  of  running 
wat^r,  and  again  we  anticipated  an  agreeable  change.  But 
looked  we  ever  so  long,  looked  we  ever  so  far,  waited  we  ever 
so  expectantly,  no  natural  clearing  met  the  eye.  It  was  all 
forest:  forest  here,  forest  there,  forest  monopolising  every 
fathom  of  land,  save  the  road. 

An  hour  and  a  half  brought  us  to  the  camp  of  Parakomi, 
in  command  of  Lieut.-Colonel  Webber  and  his  West  Indian 
coloured  troops.  Again  was  I  compelled  to  wonder  at  the 
amount  of  labour  an  intelligent  English  oflScer  can  get  out  of 
such  raw  material  as  he  finds  at  hand.  Colonel  Webber  had 
but  occupied  this  place  two  or  three  days  before,  yet  in  this 
brief  period  a  large  camp  had  been  cleared  and  made  agreeable 
to  the  eye.  The  camp  was  situated  on  a  ^  hog's  back,'  a  ridgy 
eminence  with  an  abrupt  fall  on  either  side  for  drainage. 

The  Parokomi  stream  ran  south-west  towards  the  Prah, 
under  arbours  of  weed,  grass,  and  brush.  The  bush  brake  was 
very  dense  along  the  banks,  and  for  a  few  yards  beyond  the 
forest  seemed  to  vie  in  density  with  the  jungle. 

After  leaving  Colonel  Webber's  camp,  a  quarter  of  an  hour's 
brisk  trot  brought  us  to  the  junction  of  the  '  King's  road  '  with 
the  Army  road — a  locality  about  which  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley 
seemed  to  be  anxious,  as  he  had  despatched  an  urgent  command 


160 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


to  Colonel  Webber  to  occupy  the  position  with  a  portion  of  his 
force. 

The  King's  road  runs  obliquely  from  the  left  of  the  road, 
and  skirts  one  of  the  Adansi  peaks  which  we  shall  have  to  sur- 
mount. The  road  then  runs  north-west  into  the  Elmina,  Bor- 
l)ora8si,  Becqua,  and  Coomassie  road.  That  which  the  army  of 
invasion  must  follow  runs  parallel  with  the  ESng's  road,  from 
three  to  ten  miles  off,  by  Fomannah,  Doompoassi,  Amoafiil, 
and  Agimamu,  into  Coomassie. 

Five  miles  distant  from  the  Parakomi  stream  lay  Moinsee 
station  at  the  base  of  one  of  the  towering  hill  peaks  of  Adansi, 
commanded  by  Lieut.-Colonel  the  Hon.  Evelyn  Wood.  The 
troops  occupying  the  post  consisted  of  Wood's  Native  Eegiment 
and  Bait's  Artillery. 

Colonel  Wood  and  Captain  Furze,  with  their  usual  hospi- 
tality to  wayfarers  in  search  of  the  wherewithal  to  satisfy 
hunger,  offered  us  a  substantial  repast ;  and  just  as  I  was  about 
to  seat  myself,  Colonel  M'l^od  of  the  42nd  Highlanders  ap- 
peared. I  had  heard  that  this  gentleman,  so  highly  spoken  of, 
was  a  veteran,  and  something  of  a  hero.  The  Colonel  in  ap- 
pearance is  a  tall  man  with  bowed  shoulders,  hazel  eyes,  bright 
with  fires  that  need  but  a  breath  to  kindle  to  a  blfize,  and  a 
powerful  frame.  But  I  have  seldom  seen  so  quiet  and  modest 
a  hero.  I  found  him  a  very  affable  gentleman,  disposed  to  wise 
observations,  not  unapproachable  by  reason  of  his  position  or 
power,  nor  ungenial. 

Colonel  Wood  is  fortunate  in  having  splendid  officers  as  his 
associates.  Captain  Furze  is  one  of  these  geniuses,  who,  like  the 
natives  of  Connecticut,  are  so  ready-handed  and  ready-knacked. 
He  takes  photographs,  improves  tents  d'abri  to  wall  tents ;  he 
constructs  huts  with  a  view  to  comfort  and  convenience ;  and 
Wood's  neat  encampments  have  always  been  touched  up  by 
Captain  Furze. 

Lieutenant  Eyre,  son  of  Sir  William  Eyre,  is  another  whom 
Colonel  Wood  has  secured  as  an  associate.  Though  heir  to  a 
large  fortune,  the  young  fellow  has  volunteered  for  this  cam- 
I»aign,  and  roughs  it  with  as  cheery  a  face  as  though  he  were 
surrounded  by  every  home  comfort.  He  is  one  of  the  most  in- 
dustrious of  young  men,  and  always  assiduous  in  his  duties. 

Leaving  our  hospitable  hosts  sighing  for  the  time  thVy 


ADANSI  HILLS. 


161 


should  be  permitted  to  surmount  the  Adansi  or  Moinsey  hills 
and  view  the  promised  land,  we  turned  our  faces  up  the  great 
looming  mass  in  our  front,  and  were  shortly  engaged  in 
panting  and  perspiring,  as  our  failing  breath  became  spent  in 
climbing  the  steep  slope. 

Major  Home's  engineers  had  endeavoured  to  reduce  the 
diflSculty  of  climbing  by  making  ever  so  many  zigzags  through 
the  tall  woods  that  clothe  the  hill  from  base  to  crown  ;  our 
progress,  nevertheless,  induced  considerable  exhaustion.  But 
the  very  tallest  of  hills  has  a  top,  as  all  roads  have  an  end,  and 
so  in  time  we  reached  it  completely  fagged  out. 

Our  first  impulse  was  to  ask  for  water  to  cool  our  parched 
throats  and  furred  tongues;  but  before  we  had  framed  the 
request,  the  young  commandants  of  the  post.  Lieutenant 
Richmond  and  Lieutenant  Woodgate,  ofifered  a  cup  of  warm 
tea,  which  in  this  country  is  much  superior  to  cold  water  as  a 
quencher  of  thirst. 

There  was  a  delightful  sense  of  freedom,  revivification,  and 
elasticity  pervading  one  on  the  summit  of  this  hill.  An  oppression 
and  vague  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  and  biliousness  disappeared. 
A  man  felt  permeated  through  and  through  with  pure,  healthy 
air  ;  he  became  glad,  and  less  austere  to  himself  and  fellows. 

From  the  summit  of  the  Adansi  hills  we  obtained  a  better 
idea  of  the  nature  of  the  country  which  we  had  left  behind 
than  we  had  while  traversing  it,  and  the  natme  of  that  portion 
which  we  are  destined  to  travel  through  in  a  few  days  if  we 
proceed  to  Coomassie  was  revealed  to  us. 

The  Adansi  hills  appear  to  be  a  line  of  truncated  hills, 
rising  to  an  equal  altitude,  and  spreading  out  crescent-shaped 
eastward  and  westward,  inclining  northerly,  as  if  to  hem  in  that 
land  in  which  we  are  informed  Coomassie  lies.  Each  hill  is 
wooded,  each  dip  and  depression  of  land  is  wooded,  high  land 
and  low  land ;  far  and  near,  north,  south,  east  and  west,  every- 
where the  forest  land  of  Ashantee  north  of  the  Adansi  hills 
heaves  and  rolls,  wave  after  wave,  varicoloured  and  uneven,  now 
a  ridge,  then  a  hollow.  South  it  bears  the  same  aspect ;  west 
it  is  a  line  of  peaks ;  east  it  is  alike. 

At  our  feet,  as  we  gaze  down  from  a  height  of  1,500  feet 
above  sea  level,  that  contiguous  to  us  presents  us  with  a  beau- 
tiful play  and  mixtiure  of  colours,  the  mixture  of  the  sere  with 

M 


162 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  green,  and  the  rich  autumn  hue  with  the  spring.  There 
are  terraces  of  tamarinds,  great  wide-spreading  branches  like 
parachutes,  globes  of  silk  cotton  with  pale  green  leaves,  round 
uprising  towers  of  teak  leafage,  flat  extents  of  ordinary  vegetar- 
tion,  deep  hollows,  which  plantain  and  palm  fronds  combine  to 
fill,  until  the  eye  tracing  the  variety  and  form  of  the  foliage 
insensibly  is  carried  away  to  where  the  colour  of  the  vegetation 
is  lost  amidst  purple  haze  and  blue  ether. 

This  scene  is  similar  to  that  which  might  be  obtained  by  a 
sail  in  a  balloon  from  Cape  Coast  to  Coomassie.  The  eye  could 
not  pierce  through  the  heavy  drifts  of  foliage  heaped  up  in 
ridges,  globes,  pyramids,  or  the  thick  carpet  which  covers  the 
hollows.  Indeed,  looking  down  from  this  height  on  such  a 
scene,  the  power  or  force  of  the  eyesight  is  compelled  to  give 
way  to  that  of  the  mind  ;  for,  after  an  ineffectual  effort  of  the 
eyesight,  'tis  the  mind  which  observes  here.  It  is  the  imbroken 
expanse  of  foliage  that  baffles  the  eye,  subdues  its  power  and 
vitality,  and  compels  the  mind  to  an  indolent  and  careless 
observation  of  the  whole. 

I  have  noticed  this  peculiar  power  of  African  scenery  else- 
where. It  is  derived  from  its  unimpassioned  aspect,  its  want 
of  tremor  or  motion,  the  drowsy  calm  or  lifeless  phase  which 
a  warm,  hazy  atmosphere  imparts  to  the  ocean  of  foliage^  which 
such  a  large  and  wide  extent  of  forest  presents. 

Leaving  the  peak,  we  were  soon  concerned  in  the  necessity 
of  restraining  the  impetuosity  which  the  steepness  of  the 
descent  induced.  It  was  almost  a  continual  slide  down  hill ; 
our  strides  were  lengthened  to  an  incredible  distance. 

As  we  descended  we  were  sensible  that  the  delicious  fresh- 
ness of  the  air  we  breathed  on  tlie  summit  of  the  hill,  laden 
with  the  fragrance  of  tender  leaflets  and  buds,  and  sapful  twigs, 
and  young  verdure  of  the  topmost  forest  boughs,  had  left  us, 
and  that  we  were  breathing  the  heavy,  infragrant  air  circulatizkg 
languidly  between  the  massive  stems  and  forest  colonnades. 

We  passed  several  small  streams,  which  raced  over  pebble 
and  rock  merrily,  along  many  a  bend  and  curve,  down  towards 
the  dark  dells  which  surround  the  village  of  Quisah. 

As  we  emerged  into  the  light  of  the  clearing  around  the 
village,  we  saw  a  circle  of  officers  seated  before  a  pretentious 
house  in  the  shade,  and  I  soon  recognised  Major  Bussell  and  hia 


LORD  GIFFOBD. 


163 


subs,  and  the  gallant  boy  Lord  Giflford,  who  has  handled  his 
scouts  so  well  as  to  merit  unqualified  praise  from  his 
superiors. 

Quisah  is  the  first  village  of  Ashantee  proper  which  we  have 
seen.  It  is  situated  in  the  kingdom  of  Adansi,  whose  king 
holds  court  at  Fomannah,  at  which  place  we  shall  arrive  to- 
morrow. 


164 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

OIFFORD'S  advance — FOMANNAH  DB8CRIBZD— PALACE  OP  THE  SJMB  OF 
ADAII8I — NATHE  ABCHITECTURE  AND  CUSTOMS — THE  PETICH  PLACE — 
RELEASE  OF  THE  OEBMAN  CAPTIVES — CAPTAIN  BUTLER. 

Fomannah :  January  24,  1874. 

QuiSAH,  the  frontier  village  of  the  Adansi  kingdom,  was 
vacated  by  Kussell's  regiment  and  Lord  GiflFord's  scouts  the 
second  day  of  our  arrival  in  Ashantee  proper.  The  advance  of 
the  army  and  the  staflF  were  at  Moinsey,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Adansi  Hills,  and  as  room  would  be  needed  for  their  lodge- 
ment, Russell  was  compelled  to  move  on. 

The  position  of  Quisah  was  felicitous  in  the  extreme; 
abundance  of  fresh  clear  water  was  provided  by  the  numerouB 
streams  pouring  down  the  Adansi  slopes,  and  quantities  of  fruit 
(plantain)  were  discovered  by  the  Fantees  in  their  ramblings 
through  the  woods.  Our  more  esthetic  senses  were  refreshed  by 
the  views  of  bold  hills  looming  upward  in  a  crescent  shape 
towards  the  south,  with  their  heads  buried  amid  wreaths  of 
gray  cloud. 

Yoimg  Lord  GiflFord,  who  has,  throughout  the  march  from  . 
the  Prah  to  Quisah,  exhibited  great  tact  and  energy,  informed 
us  how,  when  struggling  up  the  stiflF  steep  of  Adansi,  he  was 
warned  not  to  make  further  advance  into  the  country  by  a 
detachment  of  the  enemy  under  the  king's  head  scout. 

'  We  have  no  palaver  with  white  men/  said  the  scout.  *  Go 
back  ;  we  were  not  sent  to  fight  you.  We  may  not  fight  until 
the  king  tells  us.' 

But  GiflFord  pressed  on  up  the  hill,  and  the  Ashantees  re- 
treated before  him  with  reversed  muskets,  showing  by  this  that 
they  were  not  prepared  to  resist.  When  he  arrived  on  the 
crest  he  found  two  white  kids  impaled  alive,  and  the  head  of  a 
simiad  on  a  stake.    This  was  the  first  specimen  of  the  super- 


OIPFORD'S  ADVANCE. 


165 


stition  which  enslaves  the  Ashantee  warriors.  On  the  next  day 
Giflford  pushed  his  scouting  parties  forward  as  far  as  Quisah, 
where  he  encountered  the  still  palpitating  body  of  a  woman, 
just  beheaded  in  the  name  of  fetichism,  that  most  monstrous 
feith  which  insatiably  demands  human  blood  as  a  propitiatory 
oflFering  to  its  deities. 

After  securing  himself  at  Quisah,  Giffbrd  scouted  the  country 
round  in  search  of  paths  and  villages,  of  the  former  of  which 
he  foimd  a  great  many,  and  having  ascertained  a  knowledge 
of  his  surroundings,  he  pushed  forward  to  Fomannah 
the  capital  of  the  Adansi  kingdom,  whence  I  date  this 
chapter.  The  Ashantees  on  discovering  him  and  his  party, 
again  warned  him  to  desist  from  further  advancing,  as  the  ven- 
geance of  the  king  would  be  most  awful  if  the  white  men 
angered  him;  but  they  still  held  their  muskets  reversed  as 
a  token  of  amity  to  the  white  men.  Giflford,  having  received 
orders  not  to  fire,  retired  upon  Quisah  for  further  orders,  but 
visited  the  town  again  on  the  21st  and  discovered  it  to  be 
deserted,  upon  which  his  native  scouts  precipitated  themselves 
upon  the  '  loot,'  consisting  of  handsomely  carved  stools,  short 
ivory  tusks,  belts,  guns,  hides,  skins,  earthenware  and  empty 
jars. 

On  the  22nd,  after  due  permission  from  Sir  Garnet,  Major 
Baker  Bussell  with  his  regiment  moved  at>on  Fomannah. 

The  distance  from  Quisah  to  FomannafcLwas  traversed  within 
an  hour,  so  that  it  was  not  very  great.  Along  the  road  we  saw 
the  strange  delusion  under  which  the  Ashantees  laboured.  Some 
of  their  scouts  having  very  probably  seen  the  telegraph  line, 
imagined  doubtless  that  it  was  some  powerful  fetich,  and  imi- 
tated it  by  stretching  along  the  path  a  cotton  string  extending 
from  Quisah  to  Fomannah.  Besides  this  they  had  piled  up 
heaps  of  black  crockery,  strung  an  endless  nimiber  of  charms  on 
the  bushes,  and  trees.  But  little  recked  Bussell's  Begiment 
while  the  men  had  Sniders  in  their  hands  for  the  false  fetiches 
of  Ashantees,  and  no  doubt  before  this  campaign  is  over  the 
Ashantees  themselves  will  have  lost  much  of  their  former  faith 
in  their  abominations  and  frivolities. 

As  we  entered  the  capital  of  Adansi  we  discovered  that  it 
was  not  by  any  means  a  despicable  village.  A  broad  avenue, 
flanked  by  family  residences  one  story  high,  with  very  steep 


166 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


roofs,  led  through  the  town,  and  when  we  had  arrived  in  the 
central  part,  where  the  king's  house  was  located,  we  saw  that 
another  broad  street  ran  at  right  angles  from  it. 

There  was  an  instant  rush  to  occupy  good  houses,  but  good 
houses  happened  to  be  plentiful  in  the  town,  and  I  should  say 
there  were  quarters  enough  for  a  force  of  6,000  white  troops  in 
Fomannah. 

You  will  naturally  ask  what  an  Ashantee  house  is  like,  I 
mean  to  answer  the  question  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and  I 
take  the  house  wherein  my  press  colleagues  and  myself  find 
ourselves  lodged  as  a  fair  specimen  of  Ashantee  architecture. 
Externally  this  house  presents  us  with  four  houses,  each  of  which 
is  about  ten  feet  long  by  six  wide,  standing  corner  to  comer 
and  enclosing  a  quadrangle,  or  court.  Abutting  against  two 
of  these  houses  are  two  others  of  similar  size  joined  together  by 
a  wall  of  mud,  and  pierced  by  a  doorway  which  admits  you  into 
the  outer  court,  or  court  of  receptions,  for  the  inner  court  is 
evidently  devoted  to  family  uses,  for  retirement  and  privacy. 
Each  house,  though  joined  by  its  comers,  seems  to  be  indepen- 
dent, for  as  many  houses  which  go  to  form  this  family  residence 
have  independent  roofs,  which  consist  of  layers  of  palm  leaves 
neatly  laid  over  one  another. 

The  exterior  of  the  house  i§  plain  and  impretending.  We 
see  mere  expanses  of  walls  roughly  plastered  over  with  mud, 
but  when  we  cross  the  threshold  and  enter  the  first  courtyard 
we  are  at  once  struck  with  the  fact  that  a  strangely  original 
people  have  been  found  in  the  Ashantees,  infinitely  superior  to 
the  Fantees  and  Assins,  whose  countries  we  have  just  tra- 
versed. 

The  comrtyard  is  of  course  littered  with  the  pottery  of  the 
inhabitants,  which  but  proves  how  hasty  was  the  departiure.  We 
lift  our  eyes  to  the  walls  and  elevated  alcove,  and  are  astonished 
at  the  immaculate  cleanliness  of  it,  and  the  elaborate  ideas  of 
omamentation  which  they  possessed. 

For  a  height  of  three  feet  above  the  ground  the  walls  are 
painted  an  ochrish  red  colour,  and  so  is  the  floor,  but  above  this 
they  are  of  a  waxen  white,  covered  their  entire  length  and 
breadth  with  designs  in  alto-relievo,  half  an  inch  thick,  comices 
are  set  oflF  with  many  grooves,  friezes  with  singularly  bold 
diamond-shaped  designs  with  embossed  centres,  pediments  are 


FOMANNAH  DESCRIBED. 


167 


sometliing  of  the  Ionic  order,  severely  plain  and  square,  the 
walls  with  intricate  scroll-work  relieved  by  corollas  in  alternate 
squares. 

The  alcoves  are  open,  raised  to  the  height  of  the  ochrish- 
coloured  portion  of  the  walls,  and  are  six  feet  in  depth,  by  about 
eight  feet  in  length.  In  the  inner  courtyard,  the  front  of  the 
alcoves  are  divided  by  one  or  two  roimd  columns  supporting 
an  open  lattice  work  in  waxen-hued  plaster  obtained  from  white 
clay.  You  at  once  understand  the  divisions  of  the  family,  and 
their  respective  apartments,  for  the  largest  of  them,  which  has 
a  drop  curtain  of  woven,  or  plaited  straw,  is  the  one  evidently 
used  by  the  lord  of  the  house  and  his  favourite  wife,  another  is 
that  given  to  the  other  wives,  another  is  devoted  to  the  use  of 
the  children,  and  another  must  be  the  store-room,  for  there  are 
numbers  of  black  earthenware  jars,  wooden  chairs,  and  knick- 
knacks  of  wood-work,  ladles,  spoons,  basins  and  platters  of 
wood.  In  the  centre  of  the  inner  courtyard  is  a  little  tree  which 
we  have  already  foimd  to  afford  shade,  as  we  sit  at  our  table  for 
our  meals. 

Many  little  things  which  we  see  about  us  evince  the  taste 
and  industry  of  the  Ashantees.  Take  one  of  their  stools  for 
instance  and  examine  it.  Formerly  it  was  one  square  block  of 
white  wood,  very  like  sycamore.-  An  artisan  has  chiselled  and 
shaped  a  beautiful  stool  which  any  drawing-room  might  possess 
for  its  unique  shape,  design  and  perfection  of  workmanship.  The 
seat  is  crescent  shaped,  the  ends  of  which  when  we  are  seated 
in  it  come  up  half-way  to  the  hips ;  a  central  column  beautifully 
carved,  resting  on  a  flat  board  twelve  or  fifteen  inches  in  length 
by  about  eight  in  breadth  supports  it,  on  each  side  of  the  column, 
is  a  side  support  chipped  until  it  resembles  a  lace- work  pattern. 
There  is  art  in  this  stool,  and  whether  it  is  original  with  the 
Ashantees,  or  borrowed  from  strangers,  it  is  certainly  a  most 
interesting  specimen  of  woodwork,  the  whole  of  which  is  cut 
from  a  solid  block  of  wood.  I  think  I  have  seen  the  shape  of  a 
stool  similar  to  it  painted  on  one  of  the  tombs  of  Thebes. 

Take  again  this  soup,  or  water  ladle,  and  regard  the  designs 
which  ornament  the  handle.  A  European  turner  would  be 
proud  of  the  work,  yet  all  that  finical  carving  and  cutting  was 
done  with  an  iron  knife  of  native  manufacture.  Yonder  are 
some  specimens  of  earthenware,  the  figures  on  which  are  very 


168 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


praiseworthy,  and  here  at  my  feet  are  sandals  excellently  done.; 
nay,  you  might  almost  declare  upon  oath  that  they  are  as  good 
as  anything  worn  by  a  middle-class  Turk  or  Egyptian.  Sandals ! 
At  tlie  mere  repetition  of  the  word  one's  thoughts  revert  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Egypt,  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  Why  not  to 
Tunis,  Tripoli,  the  Touaregs  of  the  desert,  to  the  Moors  of 


A.  Sanko,  musical  instrumont.    b.  Cushion,   c.  Aslmntee  Minister's  state  beg. 

D.  Fantco  stool,  cut  out  of  one  solid  block  of  cotton-wood, 

Timbuctoo  ?  Then,  if  these  sandals  of  such  shape  are  one  of 
the  necessities  which  intimacy  with  Moorish  visitors  taught  the 
Ashantees,  why  may  not  this  elaborate  scroll  and  flower  designs 
on  the  walls  have  been  an  esthetic  taste  imparted  to  them  by 
tlie  Moors  ?  Is  it  only  an  ingenious  deduction,  or  may  it  not 
be  likely  that  this  semi-civilized  taste  has  been  imparted  to 
them  by  long  contact  with  Moors  ? 


PALACE  OF  THE  KING  OF  ADANSI. 


169 


Bowditch  in  1817  mentions  that  there  were  Moorish  visitors 
in  Coomassie  when  he  was  a  resident  in  that  city.  It  is  likely 
enough  the  Moorish  merchants  were  there  before  his  time,  for 
the  fame  of  Ashantee  prowess  has  been  spreading  amongst  the 
tribes  of  the  interior  ever  sinde  1740  when  Sy  Tutu  founded 
the  reigning  dynasty. 

If  we  only  visit  the  king's  psdace — which  is  reserved  for 
Sir  Garnet  and  his  staff — we  shall  find  this  ornamentation  and 
elaborate  tracery  in  alto  relievo  on  a  larger  scale.  Court  after 
court  opens  to  the  view,  expanses  of  ochre-washed  walls,  and 
lengths  of  white  plastered  walls  and  columns,  arcades,  deep 
alcoves,  lattice  work,  and  great  catharine-wheel  shaped  circlets 
in  plaster. 

It  is  with  some  feeling  akin  to  a  compassionate  half-regret 

the  fugitive  lord  of  Adansi,  who  but  three  or  four  days  ago 
l\i|diniiii8tered  sternest  justice  within  the  precincts  of  this  palace, 
^Vlat  we  wander  through  this  many-courted  residence.  But  he 
^^iDUst  have  been  a  polygamous  and  Jealously  uxorious  chief ;  all 
tfafiBe  inner  courts  so  screened  from  peeping  Toms  were  never 
intended  for  men-servants,  imless  they  were  eunuched  to  guard 
the  peopled  harems« 

No  two  of  the  courts  are  ornamented  alike.  The  prevailing 
design  of  one  court  is  an  involved  and  complicated  coil  pattern, 
while  another  affects  the  square  within  square  work.  One  lias 
numbers  of  circles  with  depressed  centres,  another  has  circles 
with  globular  bosses.  One  alcove  is  so  large  that  it  becomes  a 
good  sized  room  partitioned  with  three  columns  supporting 
open  lattice-work  :  another  alcove  is  divided  by  square  pillars 
severely  simple,  and  another  is  rounded,  with  a  raised  band 
circling  around  and  curving  upwards. 

Nor  are  the  courts  of  uniform  length  and  breadth.  One 
large  court  seemed  to  be  that  for  receptions  and  audiences,  and 
others  are  for  domestic  purposes.  There  are  only  two  double 
storey  buildings  in  the  king's  house,  but  I  do  not  think  the 
npper  storeys  are  for  any  other  purpose  than  store-lofts. 

Almost  every  house  is  decorated,  more  or  less,  but  as  we 
have  not  seen  other  villages  or  towns  in  Ashantee,  except  the 
small  frontier  village  of  Quifah,  it  is  difficult  as  yet  to  know 
what  importance  as  a  town  we  shall  ascribe  to  P^omannah  the 
Adansi  capital.    If  Fomannah  presents  such  extraordinary 


168 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


praisewortliy,  and  here  at  my  feet  are  sandals  excellently  done.; 
nay,  you  might  almost  declare  upon  oath  that  they  are  as  good 
as  anything  worn  by  a  middle-class  Turk  or  Egyptian.  Sandals  1 
At  the  mere  repetition  of  the  word  one's  thoughts  revert  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Egypt,  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  Why  not  to 
Tunis,  Tripoli,  the  Touaregs  of  the  desert,  to  the  Moors  of 


A.  Sanko,  musical  instrument,    b.  Cushion,    c.  Ashootee  Minister*8  state  bog. 
D.  Fantee  stool,  cut  out  of  one  solid  block  of  cotton- wood. 


Timbuctoo  ?  Then,  if  these  sandals  of  such  shape  are  one  of 
the  necessities  which  intimacy  with  Moorish  visitors  taught  the 
Ashantees,  why  may  not  this  elaborate  scroll  and  flower  designs 
on  tlie  walls  have  been  an  esthetic  taste  imparted  to  them  by 
the  Moors  ?  Is  it  only  an  ingenious  deduction,  or  may  it  not 
l)e  likely  that  this  semi-civilized  taste  has  been  imparted  to 
them  by  long  contact  with  Moors  ? 


PALACE  OF  THE  KING  OF  ADANSI. 


169 


Bowditch  in  1817  mentions  that  there  were  Moorish  visitors 
in  Coomassie  when  he  was  a  resident  in  that  city.  It  is  likely 
enough  the  Moorish  merchants  were  there  before  his  time,  for 
the  fame  of  Ashantee  prowess  has  been  spreading  amongst  the 
tribes  of  the  interior  ever  sinde  1740  when  Sy  Tutu  founded 
the  reigning  dynasty. 

If  we  only  visit  the  king's  palace — ^which  is  reserved  for 
Sir  Garnet  and  his  staff — we  shall  find  this  ornamentation  and 
elaborate  tracery  in  alto  relievo  on  a  larger  scale.  Court  after 
court  opens  to  the  view,  expanses  of  ochre-washed  walls,  and 
lengths  of  white  plastered  walls  and  columns,  arcades,  deep 
alcoves,  lattice  work,  and  great  catharine-wheel  shaped  circlets 
in  plaster. 

It  is  with  some  feeling  akin  to  a  compassionate  half-regret 
for  the  fugitive  lord  of  Adansi,  who  but  three  or  four  days  ago 
administered  sternest  justice  within  the  precincts  of  this  palace, 
that  we  wander  through  this  many-courted  residence.  But  he 
must  have  been  a  polygamous  and  jealously  uxorious  chief ;  all 
these  inner  courts  so  screened  from  peeping  Toms  were  never 
intended  for  men-servants,  unless  they  were  eunuched  to  guard 
the  peopled  harems« 

No  two  of  the  courts  are  ornamented  alike.  The  prevailing 
design  of  one  court  is  an  involved  and  complicated  coil  pattern, 
while  another  affects  the  square  within  square  work.  One  has 
numbers  of  circles  with  depressed  centres,  another  has  circles 
with  globular  bosses.  One  alcove  is  so  large  that  it  becomes  a 
good  sized  room  partitioned  with  three  columns  supporting 
open  lattice-work  :  another  alcove  is  divided  by  square  pillars 
severely  simple,  and  another  is  rounded,  with  a  raised  band 
circling  around  and  curving  upwards. 

Nor  are  the  courts  of  uniform  length  and  breadth.  One 
large  cowct  seemed  to  be  that  for  receptions  and  audiences,  and 
others  are  for  domestic  purposes.  There  are  only  two  double 
storey  buildings  in  the  king's  house,  but  I  do  not  think  the 
upper  storeys  are  for  any  other  purpose  than  store-lofts. 

Almost  every  house  is  decorated,  more  or  less,  but  as  we 
have  not  seen  other  villages  or  towns  in  Ashantee,  except  the 
small  frontier  village  of  QuiFah,  it  is  difficult  as  yet  to  know 
what  importance  as  a  town  we  shall  ascribe  to  P^omannah  the 
Adansi  capital.    If  Fomannah  presents  such  extraordinary 


170 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


evidences  of  semi-civilised  culture,  what  must  the  capitkl  of 
Ashantee,  to  which  this  town  is  tributary,  be  like  ?  I  anticipate 
many  curious  revelations  when  we  reach  there. 

Close  by  our  house  is  a  shady  spot  formed  by  two 
banian  trees,  a  gum  tree,  and  a  palm  tree  railed  around,  and 
enclosing  a  circular  space  which  I  have  no  doubt  is  de- 
voted to  fetich  uses.  The  altar  is  composed  of  poles  lashed 
together  resting  on  forked  uprights.  The  sacred  vessels  con- 
sist of  the  bottom  of  a  glass  bottle,  an  earless  mug,  and  a 
very  ancient  china  tea  cup,  relics  of  a  visit  paid  to  the  shops  of 
Cape  Coast  Castle  in  byegone  peaceful  times.  Bits  of  cloth, 
rag,  cotton,  twine,  form  the  only  things  approaching  to 
hangings  we  see ;  splashes  of  commeal  water  mark  the  trees 
over  which  the  fetich  priest  flung  his  consecrated  liquid.  A 
large  black  earthenware  pot,  filled  with  some  suspicious  mix- 
ture, is  dragged  out  to  daylight  from  a  recess  in  the  circular 
space ;  but  we  cannot  divine  what  its  contents  are. 

An  examination  of  the  interior  of  the  houses  revealed  to  us 
much  of  the  domestic  life  of  the  Ashantees.  We  saw  the 
sleeping  apartments,  those  set  apart  for  reception,  and  those 
used  for  store  rooms.  These  last  were  filled  with  a  strange 
medley  of  articles,  hide  chairs,  carved  stools,  hide  bedsteads, 
wooden  basins,  pipes,  drums,  snuff-mills,  ladles,  platters,  spoons, 
large  earthenware  crockery,  bolsters  stuffed  with  silk  cotton, 
antelope  skins,  bags  of  leopard  skins,  rolls  upon  rolls  of  hard 
pressed  tobacco,  a  heap  of  Indian  com  on  the  cob,  spiked 
walking  staflFs,  iron  knives  and  cleavers,  curious  teak  boxes 
studded  over  with  brass  tacks,  old  locks,  keys,  gun  flints, 
leathern  pouches  and  belts,  forsaken  accoutrements  and  disused 
rusted  guns,  and  many  more  things  too  numerous  for  detail. 

Some  of  the  houses  contained  long  suspicious  rolls  covered 
with  long  grass  and  tightly  bound,  which,  on  being  opened, 
were  discovered  to  be  dried  corpses  of  chiefs  or  heads  of  in- 
fluential families.  There  were  six  of  these  bodies  found  alto- 
gether, but  as  soon  as  they  were  discovered  they  were  taken  out 
of  the  houses  and  deposited  in  the  jungle. 

About  a  couple  of  hours  after  our  arrival  at  Fomannah  we 
heard  that  the  remainder  of  the  captives,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ram- 
seyer,  with  two  children,  a  boy  and  a  girl,  born  in  Coomassie,  and 
M.  Bonat,  a  French  trader,  had  arrived  at  Major  Russell's  headr 


THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE  GERMAN  CAPTIV 


qua^rs  with  a  considerable  retinue  of  servants  (Fantees)  who 
had  shared  their  captivity  with  them. 

Mr.  Eamseyer  was  a  sturdy  bearded  German,  with  a  true 
Teutonic  cast  of  face,  the  French  trader  was  one  of  our  ideal 
Frenchmen,  a  lively  \Tivacious  man  who  enjoyed  detailing  his 
experiences  to  a  knot  of  sympathizers  which  had  gathered  about 
him.  These  gentlemen  confirmed  the  news  that  M.  4Cuhne 
brought  to  us  at  Prahsu.    The  king  emphatically  declares  '  he 


Pipe.    2.  Hat.    3.  Snuff  mill.    4.  War  drum.    6.  Swoid. 


has  no  palaver  with  white  men,'  and  that  his  sole  object  in 
sending  his  army  of  invasion,  February  1873,  was  to  recover  his 
provinces  of  Akim,  Assin,  and  Denkerah — his  right  by  conquest 
long  ago — tributary  to  him  until  they  rebelled.  He  wishes  to 
be  a  friend  to  the  white  people,  and  to  establish  commerce  with 
them. 


172  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

M.  Bonat  informs  us  that  King  Coflfee  could  never  pa^alf 
a  million  pounds  sterling  indemnity,  and  that  stories  current 
in  cam ^of  his  fabulous  wealth  are  based  upon  the  state  pageantry, 
at  whi<A  everything  of  value  or  ornament  is  exhibited,  which 
taken  at  a  lump  valuation  cannot  exceed  50,000f.  altogether. 

These  gentlemen  bjought  a  letter  from  the  king  to  Sir 
Gamai^  wherein  he  betrays  the  great  anxiety  he  labours  imder 
and  a  most  conciliatory  spirit.  The  letter  states  that  he  is 
willing  to  pay  the  indemnity,  that  he  can  in  time  make  Aman- 
quatia  pay  the  whole,  but  Sir  Garnet  must  stay  where  he  is  and 
not  advance  further.  This  letter  makes  the  third  received 
from  the  king,  and  is  in  answer  to  the  general's  ultimatum 
despatched  from  Prahsu. 

In  the  ultimatum  Sir  Garnet  informed  the  king  that  he 
would  wait  a  certain  number  of  days  at  Prahsu  for  his  answer ; 
if  no  answer  complying  with  his  demands  for  indemnification 
to  the  Fantees  and  Assins  for  the  terrible  desolation  and  misery 
inflicted  upon  the  people  of  the  Protectorate,  he  threatened  to 
move  upon  Coomassie,  attack  it,  and  destroy  it  utterly. 

Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  of  course  cannot  wait  even  to  receive 
the  indemnity,  this  would  be  out  of  the  question.  He  has  th^ 
welfare  of  the  troops  to  provide  for,  as  well  as  the  realization 
of  fhe  punishment  meditated  on  Ashant^e,  or  the  conclusion  of 
a  treaty  of  peace.  Delays  in  the  transport  service  may,  how- 
ever, interpose  for  a  time,  of  which  delays  King  Coflfee  Calcali 
may  avail  himself  to  his  own  peace  of  mind  if  he  be  so  dis- 
posed, but  if  he  neglects  his  opportunities  he  cannot  stave  oflf 
the  entry  into  Coomassie  of  the  European  troops  by  ever  so 
many  protests  that  he  has  '  no  palaver  with  white  men,'  or  vain 
regrets  that  he  did  evil  without  knowledge  of  what  he  was 
incurring. 

But  apropos  of  this  news  from  the  king.  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley  has  telegraphed  the  news  of  the  king's  promise  to 
Cape  Coast,  with  orders  to  the  Senior  Naval  OflScer  of  the  fleet 
to  despatch  the  '  Sarmatian,'  one  of  the  swiftest  steamers  now 
lying  there,  to  convey  the  news  to  Gibraltar  for  the  benefit  of 
Parliament  about  to  assemble,  February  4.  This  excessive 
desire  which  Sir  Garnet  has  manifested  to  inform  Parliament 
of  his  progress  will  cost  the  British  people  the  little  sum 
of  7,000Z. !    Surely  Sir  Garnet  lays  too  great  stress  upon  the 


SIR  GARNET'S  VICTORY  OVER  THE  PRESS ! 


173 


valuS  of  an  Ashantee  king's  promise^  if  it  were  a  fact  now  that 
he  received  200,000i.  or  500,000i.,  whichever  the  sum  it  is  that 
he  demands,  the  sum  of  7,000Z.  were  a  small  matter.  But  on 
a  promise  which  may  never  be  fulfilled,  which  the  kit g,  per- 
haps, never  intends  to  perform,  the  sum  of  7,000f.  is  surely 
too  large  to  spend. 

I  have  noticed  another  trait  in  our  young  General  wKch  is 
a  novel  one.  He  seems  to  be  animated  with  a  desire  to  compete 
with  the  natural  purveyors  of  news,  with  us  special  corres- 
pondents. I  do  not  blame  him,  for  it  may  be,  perhaps,  a  very 
laudable  idea ;  but  it  is  none  the  less  novel  and  singular.  I 
never  observed  it  in  any  other  general  before.  We,  of  course, 
cannot  compete  with  him  if  he  refuses  us  the  same  facilities  he 
employs  himself,  as  he  has  certainly  done  in  this  instance. 
The  '  Sarmatian '  had  already  departed  from  Cape  Coast  Castle 
before  any  of  the  newspaper  representatives  knew  of  the 
General's  strategical  stroke.  As  Sir  Garnet  may  be  priding 
himself  upon  the  successful  *  beat '  over  four  special  corres- 
pondents, I  may  a^  well  record  the  feat  in  his  favour  with  a 
good  grace. 

On  the  23rd  the  German  missionary  Eamseyer  and  his 
poor  wife  and  children  departed  from  Fomannah  for  Cape 
Coast,  exhibiting  considerable  emotion  and  gratitude  on  fining 
himself  and  family  in  the  bosom  of  such  friends  as  all  the 
English  oflScers  and  men  were  disposed  to  be.  M.  Bonat,  on 
the  other  hand,  preferred  to  stay  with  the  army,  to  give  the 
staflF  the  benefit  of  his  knowledge  of  the  country  and  language, 
as  a  slight  return  for  the  service  the  English  had  done  him  in 
procuring  his  release  from  a  long  and  tedious  captivity. 

Sir  Garnet  arrived  at  Fomannah  on  the  morning  of  the  23rd, 
looking  as  bright  and  cheery  as  he  used  to  look  during  the  first 
days  of  his  arrival  at  Cape  Coast,  before  he  was  stricken  down 
with  a  recurrence  of  the  Burmah  fever  which  has  tenaciously 
clung  to  his  frame.  As  he  came  in,  mounted  on  his  magnifi- 
cent mule,  he  was  greeted  by  kindly  faces,  for  he  is  universally 
beloved. 

Commodore  W.  N.  Hewett,  V.C.,  who  has  come  up  to  see 
his  '  bould  sailor  bhoys '  taking  Coomassie  by  assault,  was  also 
warmly  welcomed,  for  he  has  a  very  enviable  reputation  for 
being  a  first-class  officer  and  genuine  man  in  the  Naval  Brigade. 


174 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Captain  Gnibbe,  of  the  troopship  '  Tamar,'  is  the  Commtnder 
of  the  Naval  Brigade  vice  Captain  Blake,  E.N.,  lately  invalided 
home  for  a  serious  attack  of  acute  dysentery. 

Th*  Naval  Brigade  marched  into  P^omannah  to  a  merry 
tune,  which  they  sang  with  gusto,  with  a  marino-militario  gait 
which  their  loose  pliable  dress  of  blue  shirt  and  pants  admirably 
set  off. 

After  the  sailors  and  marines  came  the  Eifle  Brigade,  in 
grey  suits  and  sun-helmets,  numerically  pretty  strong,  though 
over  seventy  of  their  number  were  invalided  at  Prahsu.  Thirty- 
two  out  of  a  force  of  275  sailors  were  left  behind  at  hospital, 
incapacitated  by  reason  of  intermittent  fevers  and  dysenteric 
affections  from  continuing  the  march. 

Captain  Bait's  splendid  body  of  Houssa  Artillery  appeared 
behind  the  Rifles,  officers  and  men  looking  remarkably  well. 
The  Highlanders  remain  at  Moinsey  until  the  day  after  to- 
morrow. 

Since  the  European  troops  have  arrived  at  Cape  Coast, 
many  a  man  has  been  stricken  down  with  fever,  some  have 
died,  many  have  been  invalided  home.  The  officers,  from  the 
nature  of  their  duties,  have  been  the  worst  sufferers,  and  the 
Special  Service  Corps,  twenty-eight  in  nimiber,  who  came  out 
with  Sir  Garnet,  show  a  gradual  but  certain  reduction  in 
number. 

Up  to  date  the  list  of  casualties  of  the  Special  Service 
Corps  reads  thus : — 


Lieutenant  Eardley  Wilmot,  R.A 
Captain  Iluyshe,  Staff  . 

„  Townshcnd 

„  Charteris,  Staff 
Lieutenant  Wells,  R.N. 
Colonel  McNeil,  Chief  of  Staff 


Captain  Godwin  . 
„  Gordon 
„  McDermott 
„     McAlmont,  Staff 

Surgeon-General  Home  . 

Captain  Crease,  R.M.A. 

Major  McLean,  Rifles  . 

Captain  Lanyon,  Staff  . 


Died  in  Action 
Died  of  Dysentery 


„  Fever 
Invalided  Home.  Wounded 

in  Action 
Wounded.  Invalided  Home 
Invalided  Home 

»  fi 
If  It 
jf  if 


ff 


If 


„   Cape  Coast 
Home 


AUTHOB  OF  THE  *  GREAT  LONE  LAKD.' 


175 


Ifc  will  be  thus  seen  by  the  list  how  serious  a  thing  even  a 
sniall  expedition  becomes  in  a  malarious  country  like  this,  and 
what  a  waste  of  human  life  and  wreck  of  brave  men's  constitu- 
tions have  been  incurred.  It  is  in  striking  contrast  to  the 
comparative  immunity  from  disease  the  British  troops  enjoyed 
in  Abyssinia. 

The  arrangements  entered  into  by  Surgeon-General  Home 
have  proved  admirable  so  far,  in  the  transport  of  sick  to  the 
coast,  and  in  the  immediate  replacement  of  the  loaded  ham- 
mocks by  long  relays  of  empty  ones.  There  are  about  300 
hammocks,  each  of  which  is  borne  by  four  natives,  thus  giving 
a  force  of  1,200  men  at  the  disposal  of  the  Medical  Depart- 
ment. 

The  Medical  StaflF  is  constantly  receiving  fresh  accessions 
of  army-surgeons,  some  of  whom  are  most  valuable  and  efficient. 
Among  those  who  are  very  likely  to  distinguish  themselves  on 
the  campaign,  having  shown  by  their  assiduity  to  their  pro- 
fession and  their  fitness  for  their  duties,  are  Surgeons  McNalty, 
Fox,  Turton — the  energetic  Sanitary  Inspector — Jackson,  of  the 
100th  Foot,  Mosse,  and  Waters.  The'  task  of  controlling  the 
Medical  StaflF  now  devolves  upon  Surgeon-Major  MacKinnon 
since  the  retirement  of  the  veteran  Doctor  Home. 

The  news  from  Captain  W.  F.  Butler,  formerly  of  the  68th 
Regiment,  and  the  well-known  author  of  the  'Great  Lone 
Jjand,'  is  bad.  Poor  Butler,  a  man  of  undoubted  zeal,  not  only 
as  a  devoted  friend  of  Sir  Garnet's,  but  as  an  officer  who  regards 
his  profession  with  a  noble  pride,  I  fear  will  not  be  able  to  return 
from  this  campaign  with  the  laurels  which  are  bestowed  upon 
those  who  prove  successful.  I  do  not  think  that  his  want  of 
success  can  be  attributed  to  lack  of  tact  on  his  part,  but  rather 
to  the  natural  stubbornness  and  obstinaqy  of  the  savages  whom 
he  was  sent  to  organise  into  an  auxiliary  force  on  the  right 
flank. 

The  report  is,  to-day,  that  he  is  on  his  way  to  camp  with 
the  same  number  of  policemen  he  started  with.  Captain 
Brabazon,  Lieutenant  Paget,  and  Mr.  Lowe,  a  medical  officer, 
who  composed  Butler's  staflF,  are,  I  hear,  returning  with  him. 

Apropos  of  this  failure  of  Butjer,  I  am  reminded  of  a 
remark  made  to  me  by  an  officer  a  few  days  ago,  when  we 
spoke  together  about  Glover  and  Butler's  chances  of  success. 


176 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Said  he  :  *  Captain  Glover  has  done  considerable  injury  to  Sir 
Garnet  by  withdrawing  from  the  Akim  country  all  the  best 
fighting  men  that  were  available.  Now  if  we  (Sir  Garnet's 
officers)  had  had  a  special  representative  in  the  Akim  country 
to  enlist  a  force  of  Akims  to  co-operate  with  Sir  Garnet's 
column,  it  would  be  impossible  to  estimate  the  value  of  sudi  a 
force ;  but  what  possible  good  can  Glover  do  so  far  from  our 
neighbourhood.  However,  Butler  writes  encouragingly  from 
Akim ;  he  says  he  will  be  able  to  muster  a  force  of  2,000  men 
to  be  ready  to  cross  the  Prali  river  by  the  15th,  but  I  do  not 
think  Glover  will.  Glover  wrote  in  his  last  letter  to  Sir 
Garnet  that  if  he  had  time  he  would  be  able  to  march  with 
12,000  men  into  Ashantee  territory.  Time,  indeed  1  how 
much  time  does  he  need  ? — but  that  since  his  orders  were  to  be 
on  the  Prah  by  the  loth  he  could  muster  barely  1,000  men, 
with  which  force  he  would  start  at  once.' 

Why  this  jealousy  of  poor  Glover  should  exist  I  cannot 
understand.  He  has  shown  himself  industrious,  indefatigable, 
and  capable,  and  willing  to  sacrifice  everything  of  honour  that 
he  might  have  won  with  a  strong  force,  by  implicit  obedience 
to  Sir  Garnet's  commands.  What  could  any  commander  desire 
more  than  a  ready  acquiescence  to  his  wishes,  allied  with  such 
efficiency  as  Glover  brings  ?  I  should  hope  that  this  feeling  of 
depreciation  of  Glover's  merits  has  not  sprung  from  head- 
quarters, for  Sir  Garnet  is  generally  so  amiable,  and  so  in- 
variably disposed  to  be  good-natured,  that  I  should  feel  surprised 
if  by  any  accidental  expression  of  dissatisfaction  he  assented  to 
the  general  feeling  of  jealousy  of  Glover  which  now  imhappily, 
yet  most  undoubtedly  exists. 

If  the  news  of  Butler's  failure  be  unfortunately  true,  it  may 
serve  to  enhance  Glover's  efforts  should  he  meet  with  success.  I 
have  not  the  least  doubt  myself  but  that  Glover  will  come  out 
of  this  campaign  with  more  fame  than  he  entered  upon  it ;  and 
should  he  be  successfid,  as  I  earnestly  hope  he  will.  Sir  Garnet 
is  that  kind  of  magnanimous  man  that  he  will  not  be  back- 
ward to  officially  recognise  his  merit. 

I  hope  I  do  not  bore  you  with  this  championship  of  Glover ; 
I  cannot  help  it,  since  I  have  been  a  witness  of  the  genius  of 
the  man  in  organising  that  large  force  he  had  on  the  Volta,  and 
from  what  I  see  out  here  in  the  English  correspondence,  I 


COMPOSITION  OF  THE  MAIN  COLUMN. 


177 


think  I  am  the  only  one  who  still  retains  faith  in  his  ultimate 
success.  The  combined  talent  and  energy  of  such  a  group  of 
officers  as  Glover  fortimately  has  to  aid  him,  though  by  far  too 
small  in  numbers  for  their  health,  must  contribute  to  do  some- 
thing. Even  Sir  Gurnet  Wolseley  can  boast  of  no  finer  officers — 
though  they  are  picked  men — than  Captain  Sartorius  and 
Goldsworthy.  These  last,  when  I  visited  their  camps  on  the 
Volta  were,  to  use  a  Western  Americanism,  'just  spiling  for  a 
fight,'  which  means  that  they  were  pining  and  fretting  at  the 
delay  which  the  management  of  such  a  large  force  of  savages  as 
they  had  contributed  to  raise  entailed  on  them.  If  they  were 
pining  and  fretting  at  delays,  they  are  more  likely  when  the 
time  comes  to  move  at  an  astonishing  rate,  and  to  drive  their 
men  forward  with  astonishing  vigour. 

The  left  column,  imder  Captains  Dalrymple  and  Moore,  do 
not  seem  to  make  any  headway  through  the  Denkera  bush, 
though  they  were  reported  travelling  at  last  accounts.  It  is 
very  probable  that  these  gentlemen  encounter  the  same  obstacles 
as  Captain  Butler,  and  that  very  little  if  any  aid  will  be  affi)rded 
by  them. 

Major  Baker  Russell  (13th  Hussars),  with  his  native  regi- 
ment, preceded  as  usual  by  Lord  GiflFord  and  his  scouts,  move 
forward  to-morrow,  and  immediately  after  the  advance  guard 
will  follow  Colonel  Evelyn  Wood's  Eegiment  and  Captain  Bait's 
artillery. 

The  following  list  of  officers  may  be  useful  for  a  better 
comprehension  of  the  status  of  affairs  as  they  exist  at 
present : — 

MAIN  COLUMN. 
Sir  Garnet  Josepli  Wolseley,  C.B.,  K.C.M.G.,  Major-Qeneral  CommandiDg. 

Colonel  Greaves,  Chief  of  Staff. 
Major  Baker,  18th  Royal  Irish,  AssiBtaiit  Adj.-General. 
Captain  BuUer,  Deputj-Asst-Adj  .-General  and  Chief  of  the  Intelli- 
gence Department. 

Captain  Brackenbury,  Military  Secretary. 
Lieutenant  Maurice^  Private  Secretary. 
Lieutenant  the  Hon.  A.  H.  Wood,  Aid-de-Camp. 
Lieutenant  Rolfe,  R.N.,  Aid-de-Camp. 

N 


178 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAODALA. 


Surgeon  McNalty,  Medical  OfBcer  in  charge  of  Staff. 
Surgeon-Major  MacKinnon,  Principal  Medical  OfBcer. 
Captain  Baker,  CMef  and  Inspector-General  of  Police. 

Regimental  Offii^s. 

Lieut.-Col.  the  Hon.  Evelyn  Wood,  V.C.,  90th  Regiment,  commanding 
Native  Regiment  of  Apoboes,  Kossos,  and  Bonnjs,  under  Prince  Pepple. 
Captain  Paul  Methuen. 
Captun  Furze,  42nd  Highlanders. 
Lieutenant  Douglas,  7th  Fusiliers. 
Lieutenant  Barton,  7th  Fusiliers. 
Lieutenant  Woodgate,  4th  King's  Own. 

Major  Baker  Russell,  13th  Hussars.  Commanding  2nd  Native  Regi- 
ment. 

Captain  Bromhead. 

Lieutenant  Lord  Gifford,  in  command  of  Scouts. 

As^nd  Highlanders, 

Colonel  Mac  Leod,  Commanding ;  Major  Mac  Pherson ;  Lieut- Major 
W.  Baird ;  Major  A.  Stephens,  of  79th,  with  42nd ;  Captain  Whitehead ; 
Captain  A.  M.  Crcig^h ;  Lieutenant  I.  B.  Cumberland;  Lieutenant  Souther ; 
Lieutenant  Stevenson  ;  Lieutenant  W.  A.  Berwick ;  Lieutenant  W.  H.  C. 
Mowbray  J  Lieutenant  R.  C.  Annesley,  of  79th,  with  42nd;  Lieutenant  C. 
D.  Shoton,  of  79th,  with  42Dd ;  W.  I.  Smyth,  of  79th,  with  42nd. 

The  42nd  Highlanders  will  probably  arrive  to-morrow, 
Fomannah  being  the  general  rendezvous  of  the  army. 

2nd  Battalio-n  Bifle  Brigade, 

Major  Warren,  Commanding  ;  Lieut.-Col.  Warren ;  Majors  Stephens 
and  J.  P.  C.  Glyn;  BrcTet-Majors  NichoUs  and  Sotheby;  Captains  Slade, 
Dugdale,  Somerset,  Cary,  Lascelles,  and  Cope;  Lieutenants  Hon.  T,  0, 
Scott,  Maberly,  Sackville,  Taylor,  Hopwood,  Thompson,  Harrington,  Smyth, 
and  Brune;  Sub-Lieutenants  Hon.  0.  S.  F.  Cuffe,  Noel,  and  Prittie; 
Surgeon-Major  Wiles,  Surgeon  Macrobin,  Paymaster  Harvey,  and  Quarter- 
master Stanley ;  Colonel  the  Hon.  S.  Mostyn,  Majors  S.  C.  MiUett  and 
T.  B.  Hackett,  V.C. ;  Brevet-Majors  L.  O'Connor,  V.C.,  and  J.  de  V.  Tapper ; 
Captains  H.  F.  Hutton,  E.  M.  Roe,  and  G.  B.  Luxford ;  Lieutenants  T.  B. 
Graves,  G.  H.  Hutton,  F.  E.  Shepherd,  C.  J.  Gilbert,  W.  F.  Cowan,  Hon. 
D.  de  Moleyns,  R.  H.  Palk,  H.  R.  Boyle,  and  A.  F.  Bernard;  Sub-Lieu- 
tenants  LI.  Griffiths  and  C.  £.  Clough. 

2nd  Battalion  2Srd  Boyal  Welsh  Fusiliers, 
Colonel  the  Hon.  Savage  Mostyn,  and  subs. 


THE  ARMY  UNDER  SIR  GARNET. 


179 


Native  Houssa  Artillery. 

Captain  Arthur  Hait,  .R A.^  Commanding ;  Lieutenant  Knox,  B.A. } 
Lieutenant  Saunders,  B.  A. 

Boyal  Engineers, 
Major  R.  Home,  Commanding;  Captain  B.  N.  Buckle ;  Lieutenant  Bell. 

Control  cund  Transport. 

Mr.  Irvine,  Chief  of  the  Control  Department ;  Lieut.-Col.  CoUey,  2nd 
Queens,  in  charge  of  Transport,  Messrs.  Bayenscroft,  Coates^  Hamilton, 
Felleter,  2nd  West  Indians,  Lieutenant  Qraves,  18th  Boyal  Irish,  Assist.- 
Commissary  Ward,  Control  Department 

Medical  Department, 

Surgeon-Major  MacKinnon,  F.M.O.;  Surgeon  MacNalty;  Surgeon 
Major  Jaekson,  100th  Begiment;  Surgeon  Fox;  Surgeon  Turton,  Sanitary 
In^wctor ;  Surgeon  J.  A.  Murphy,  B.E. ;  Surgeon  S.  Moore,  4th  Dragoon 
Guards. 

Boyal  Naval  Brigade. 

Commodore  W.  N.  Hewitt,  V.C.,  H.M.S.  Active ;  Captain  W.  I.  Hunt 
Grubbe,  HM.S.  Tamar,  Commanding  N.B. ;  Commander  Percy  Luxmore, 
H.M.S.  Argus,  Second  in  Command;  Lieutenant  Gerard  Noel,  H.M.S. 
Active,  Brigade  Major ;  Lieutenant  Edward  S.  Evans,  Senior  Lieutenant, 
H.M.S.  Encounter,  Commanding  No.  4  Company ;  Lieutenant  A,  B.  Pipon, 
H.M.S.  Active,  Commanding  No.  1  Company ;  lieutenant  W.  F.  S.  Mann, 
Senior  Lieutenant,  H.M.S.  Amethyst,  Adjutant;  Lieutenant  Angus, 
McLeod,  H.M.S.  Barracouta,  in  charge  of  Transports;  Sub-Lieutenant 
Victor  Bradshaw,  H.M.S.  Encounter,  Sub- Lieutenant  of  Company;  Sub- 
Lieutenant  Charles  Windham,  II.M.S.  Active,  Sub-Lieutenant  of  Company; 
Sub-Lieutenant  Gerald  Maltby,  n.M.S.  Active,  Commanding  No.  3  Com- 
pany; Sub-Lieutenant  Tom  Ficklin,  H.M.S.  Active,  Sub-Lieutenant  of 
Company;  Sub-Lieutenant  Wyatt  Bawson,  H.M.S.  Active,  Transports; 
Sub-Lieutenant  Augustus  Coker,  H.M.S.  Druid,  Commanding  No.  2  Com- 
pany ;  Sub-Lieutensnt  Archibald  Kennedy,  H.M.S.  Druid,  Sub-Lieutenant 
of  Company ;  Midshipman  Charles  Gladstone,  H.M.S.  Druid,  Aide-de-Camp 
to  Commandiing  Officer ;  Lieutenant  Adolphus  Crosbie,  Boyal  Marine  Light 
Infantry,  H.M.S.  Active,  Commanding  Boyal  Marines ;  Lieutenant  Bichard 
Deane,  Boyal  Marine  Light  Infantry,  Commanding  No.  2  Company  Boyal 
Marine  Light  Infantry ;  Staff  Surgeon  Henry  Fegan,  M.D.,  HM.S.  Active 
principal  Medical  Officer ;  Surgeon  John  Fisher,  H.M.S.  Decoy. 

Special  Service  Officers. — Captain  Hon.  Paul  Methuen,  Scots  Fusilier 
Guards;  Captain  Burnet,  15th  Infantry ;  Lieutenant  Pollock,  2l8t  Fusiliers; 
Lieutenant  Hare,  22nd  Begiment;  Captain  Aldridge,  95th  Begiment; 
Captain  St  A.  H.  Phayre,  late  Inniskilling  Dragoons. 

M  2 


180 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


The  force  now  assembled  between  here  and  Prahsu  may  be 


roughly  estimated  at — 

Meii. 

Colonel  Wood's  Regiment   400 

Major  Eu8sell*8   400 

42nd  Highlanders   575 

Eifle  Brigade   050 

23rd  Fusiliers   75 

Boyal  Naval  Brigade   225 

2nd  West  Indians   350 

Koyal  Engineers   40 

Rait's  Artillery   50 


Total      .      .  2,705 


ADVANCE  OF  THE  ARMY. 


181 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

ADVANCE  OF  THE  ARMi' — rOSITION  OF  THE  FOUR  COLUMNS — ATTACK  UPON 
ADUBIA88EB — DEATH  OF  CAPTAIN  NICOL — BATTLE  OF  B0RB0RA8SI. 

Quarman :  Januaiy  30,  1874. 

We  have  tragic  accounts  of  villages  attacked  and  destroyed  to 
write  of  now,  and  our  interest  in  the  campaign  is  daily  in- 
creasing. The  blood  of  the  Britons  is  warming  up  to  fighting 
heat,  and,  unless  all  auguries  prove  false,  the  great  battle  of  the 
war  will  be  fought  to-morrow. 

Our  march  hither  from  Fomannah  has  been  through  the 
villages  of  Doompoassie,  Detehiasu,  Akkankawassie,  Insarfii, 
thence  to  Quarman. 

Doompoassie  was  an  important  town  about  three  miles  from 
Fomannah.  Detchiasu  was  a  small  village  situated  on  the 
crown  of  a  hill,  with  a  well-watered  country  round  about  it. 
Akkankawassie  was  a  large  village  occupying  a  terrace  and  slope 
of  a  prolonged  hill,  leading  down  to  a  small  stream.  Insarfu, 
a  small  village,  occupied  a  clearing  with  very  deep  woods 
around  it.  Quarman  is  a  still  smaller  village  on  the  crown  of 
a  low  hill  from  which  the  forest  land  slopes  down  to  streams 
and  sinuous  water-courses,  overhung  by  dense  brake  and 
bush. 

While  we  have  been  agitated  by  doubts  as  to  whether  this 
campaign  will  furnish  subjects  interesting  enough  for  historical 
record,  and  swayed  by  fears  that  the  expedition  is  destined  to 
terminate  peacefully,  the  inhabitants  of  Coomassie,  we  are  told, 
are  troubled  and  disturbed  by  doubts,  anxieties,  and  fears  of 
other  kinds. 

Astonishing  portentous  omens  have  occurred  at  Coomassie. 
Braggart  chieftains  appear  to  regard  the  entry  of  the  English 


182 


COOMASSrE  AND  MAGDALA. 


into  their  capital  as  an  impossible  feat,  and  talk  loud  and 
windy.  The  queen-mother  is  said  to  have  threatened  to 
commit  suicide  if  peace  be  not  made  immediately.  The  king 
perambulates  through  his  capital  in  his  usual  state,  and  travels 
between  Coomassie  and  the  fetich  places,  the  Bantammah  and 
Manpontem,  to  consult  his  oracles  on  the  probable  issue  of  the 
war.  The  populace  is  subject  to  excitements  and  panics. 
Loud  sounds  are  heard  in  the  air,  and  strange  noises  are  heard 
at  a  distance. 

To  add  to  this  excitement  and  ferment,  a  heavy  aerolite  has 
fallen  in  the  great  market  place.  A  male  child  on  issuing 
from  the  womb  is  reported  to  have  commenced  to  speak 
fluently.  A  house  swept  clean  over  night  was  found  in  the 
morning  to  be  filled  with  bushes,  and  the  wonderfully  fluent 
child  was  dead.  The  great  fetich  tree  of  Coomassie  has  been 
destroyed,  and  many  other  things  have  presented  such  a 
category  of  omens,  that  the  hearts  of  the  stoutest  braves  seem 
paralysed.  All  these  things  may,  or  may  not,  be  true  ;  busy 
rumour  ever  active,  has  given  us  the  benefit  of  them.  Virtue 
of  fetichism  seems  to  be  on  the  wane ;  the  traditional  terrors 
of  Coomassie,  the  stronghold  of  the  Ashantees,  have  lost  their 
effect.  Heaps  of  broken  crockery,  corn-meal  flour  splashed  on 
trees,  and  stakes,  and  dwelling-houses,  are  of  no  avail ;  human 
sacrifices,  performed  with  all  due  ceremony,  daunt  not  the 
palefaces;  lengthy  lines  of  cotton  thread  strung  across  bush 
and  branch  impede  not  the  advance;  all  the  howling  and 
loud  incantations  of  fetich  priests  are  so  much  power  of  de- 
mented men's  lungs  spent  in  vain  ;  and  vociferous  vaunting  of 
braggart  chieftains  deter  not  the  Saxons'  march.  No,  men 
with  Sniders  in  their  hands  march  on  unrestingly  ! 

A  letter  received  from  the  king  yesterday  implores  time  to 
collect  the  indemity,  to  which  Sir  Garnet  replied  that  he  would 
march  on  as  long  as  the  heir-apparent  and  queen-mother  were 
not  forthcoming  as  hostages,  and  the  indemnity  demanded  to 
compensate  the  injuries  committed  upon  the  Fantees  and 
Assins  was  not  paid  at  once.  Sir  Garnet  further  charges  the 
unfortunate  king  with  having  instigated  the  inhabitants  of 
Borborassi  to  fire  upon  his  troops,  and  he  menaces  him  with 
his  anger  in  consequence ;  and  declares  that  he  will  bum  his 
capital  to  the  ground  if  his  terms  are  not  acceded  to  at 
once. 


POSITION  OF  THE  FOUR  COLUMNS. 


188 


The  position  of  the  various  columns  up  to  date  are  as 
follows : 

Right  column. — Captain  Glover  has  reported  up  to  the  17th 
instant.  He  had  crossed  the  Prah  on  the  15th,  mth  750 
Houssas  and  Yorubas,  and  had  advanced  to  Obogo,  whence  he 
dates  his  despatch.  He  had  taken  this  village  by  assault,  his 
troops  having  been  fired  upon  as  they  were  marching  towards 
it.  He  had  seven  Houssas  and  one  Yoruba  wounded  ;  the 
enemy's  loss  not  being  ascertained.  Being  in  want  of  ammuni- 
tion and  supplies,  he  would  be  compelled  to  halt.  His  troops 
had  behaved  well,  except  in  their  *wild  and  unnecessary 
firing.' 

Second  Column. — Captain  Butler's  last  report  is  dated  24th 
instant.  He  writes  from  Yancoma,  where  he  had  arrived  on 
the  22nd  instant,  about  twenty  miles  north  of  the  Prah. 
Hence  two  paths  branch  oflF,  one  towards  Lake  Boosum-Eching, 
'the  other  towards  Dadiasoo,  in  a  westerly  direction.  He  had 
proposed  to  follow  the  latter  path,  but  the  opposition  of  the 
kings  was  such  that  he  was  forced  to  abandon  the  movement. 
He  hoped  to  get  his  whole  force  to  move  on  the  25th  ;  but  he 
thus  describes  his  position — '  I  can  scarcely  convey  to  you  a 
true  conception  of  the  position  in  which  I  find  myself.  All 
information  is  studiously  withheld  from  me ;  carriers  are  con- 
stantly refused ;  distances  are  grossly  exaggerated ;  the  most 
vexatious  and  trifling  pretexts  are  put  forward ;  anjrthing  and 
everything  is  done  to  effect  the  one  great  object, — delay.' 

'  Third  Main  Column. — Advanced  posts  are  to-day  on 
the  River  Dunsaboo,  about  two  and  a  quarter  miles  beyond  this 
place,  and  within  three-quarters  of  a  mile  of  the  enemy's  forces 
at  Egginassie.  The  entire  force  is  concentrated  here  and  at 
Akkankawassie,  two  and  three-quarter  miles  in  rear,  and  it  is 
probable  that  to-morrow  we  may  have  to  fight  whatever  force 
the  king  has  been  able  to  collect  to  resist  our  advance. 
Further  details  of  my  position  are  given  in  the  despatch  which 
accompanies  this.' 

FouHh  Column. — The  last  report  from  Captain  Dalrymple 
is  dated  25th  instant  from  Kotakee ;  he  had  arrived  there  on 
the  24th  with  King  Apecoon  about  fifty  men ;  King  Aquasi 
Bedoo  was  here  with  no  men ;  Kroo  of  Commendah  had  gone 
home  ;  Buarbin  and  Atrew  were  still  at  Pamun  on  pretence  of 
collecting  their  men. 


184 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Captain  Dalrymple,  though  he  had  used  every  effort  to 
influence  the  kings,  was  of  opinion  that  he  would  be  fortunate 
if  he  should  succeed  in  crossing  the  frontier  with  200  men. 

The  hill  of  Quarman  slopes  down  to  the  River  Dunsaboo, 
and  at  this  little  village  are  Colonel  Wood's  and  RusseU's 
regiments,  and  two  rocket  detachments.  Headquarters,  the 
Brigadier's  staff,  the  42nd  Regiment,  and  2nd  Battalion  Rifle 
Brigade,  with  Rait's  Artillery,  two  7-pounder  rifled  guns,  and 
two  rocket  detachments,  are  at  Insarfu. 

Between  Insarfu  and  Akkankawassie  two  and  three-quarter 
miles  in  rear,  are  the  head-quarters  of  the  Naval  Brigade,  and 
detachments  2nd  Battalion  23rd  Regiment,  headquarters  and 
detachment  2nd  West  Indian  Regiment,  the  small-arm 
ammunition  re8er^'e,  and  field-hospitals. 

At  Fomannah,  to  advance  to-morrow  is  a  detachment  of 
the  1st  West  Indian  Regiment,  lately  disembarked  at  Cape 
Coast  Castle. 

Tlie  following  fortified  posts  have  now  been  established  be- 
tween here  and  Prahsu : — 


Miles. 

Prahsu  to  Essiaman   10  i 

„      AccTofoomu   11 

Cross  Roads,  near  Parakwrno  Rivor    ...  6 

„      Moinsey   6 

,«      Crest  Adansi  Hills   } 

„      Fomamiah   3 

„      Akkankawassie   8| 

„      Insarfu   2} 

„      Quarman   2| 


Totil,  50J 

The  estimated  distance  between  here  and  Coomassie 
according  to  guide-map,  which  has  proved  so  far  tolerably 
accurate  is : — 


Quarman  to  Amoaful   3^ 

„       Agimamu   7 

„       Ordahsu   7| 

Akkankawassio   1} 

„       Karsi   2| 

„       Coomassio   3 


Total,  25i 


ATTACK  UPON  ADUBIASSEE. 


185 


Total  distance  from  Cape  Coast  to  Frahsu  . 

„     Frahsu  to  Coomassie  . 


Miles. 
71 
75J 


Total,  U6J 


At  the  beginning  of  this  letter  I  spoke  of  tragical  events ; 
these  events  were  brought  about  by  the  keen  intelligence  and 
intrepidity  of  Lord  Gifford.  This  young  nobleman  is  not  twenty- 
four  years  of  age,  has  a  fair,  almost  eflfeminate  face,  is  a  man 
slight  of  figure,  and  appears  to  be  anything  but  robust  in  health. 
Yet  his  daring  feats,  his  gallantry,  have  carried  him  over 
more  ground  afoot  than  any  four  oflBcers  have  marched,  and  the 
intrepidity  which  has  distinguished  him,  have  been  themes  of 
praise  with  all  on  the  Expedition,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest. 

Lord  Gifford,  leading  his  scouts  westerly  through  the  bush, 
came  upon  the  king's  road,  which  runs  parallel  with  our  road 
from  the  Adansi  hills  to  Coomassie.  Following  the  road,  he 
discovered  a  village,  inhabited,  and  after  acquiring  all  the 
information  he  could  of  the  place,  the  various  routes  that  led 
to  it  from  that  traversed  by  the  army,  he  reported  his  intelli- 
gence to  head-quarters. 

The  intelligence  amounted  to  this :  that  Adubiassee,  a  small 
village  almost  abreast  of  Doompoassie,  was  occupied  by  a  force 
under  the  king  of  Adansi,  and  that  further  north,  about  three 
or  four  miles  on  the  same  road,  was  Borborassi,  a  more  impor- 
tant village,  and  more  strongly  defended,  situate  almost  abreast 
of  Kiang  Boassu,  which  is  half-way  between  Doompoassie  and 
Akkankawassie. 

On  the  25th  instant,  while  at  Fomannah,  Sir  Garnet  warned 
the  king  of  Adansi  that  he  could  not  permit  his  people  to 
assemble  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his  line  of  conmiunication ; 
that  unless  he  moved  away  he  would  be  compelled  to  attack 
him,  a  measure  which  was  absolutely  necessary. 

On  the  26th  Major  Russeirs  native  regiment,  with  Lord 
Gifford's  scouts,  supported  by  a  number  of  men  from  the  Naval 
Brigade,  were  ordered  to  make  a  reconnaissance  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Adubiassee,  and  if  they  found  the  enemy  within 
the  village,  to  attack  it. 

Major  Russell  approached  the  village  from  Doompoassie,  and 
on  discovering  it  to  be  inhabited  by  about  two  himdred  of  the 


186 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


enemy,  made  a  dasli  upon  it,  and  captured  it  without  much 
trouble.  The  attack  was  made  with  spirit,  and  was  singularly 
successful,  without  a  single  casualty,  though  the  enemy  opened 
a  brisk  fire  as  soon  as  the  attacking  party  was  discovered 
advancing. 

On  the  28tli  Lord  Gifford,  having  approached  the  Ashantee 
village  of  Borborassi,  and  finding  it  defended  by  a  strong  force 
of  the  enemy,  returned  to  Kiang  Boassu,  and  imparted  the 
intelligence  to  head-quarters.  While  lying  in  wait  in  the 
bushes  between  Borborassi  and  Bccquah,  he  had  also  waylaid 
two  men  carrying  witli  them  some  fowls  and  a  keg  of  powder, 
of  which  articles  he  became  possessor,  after  tumbling  over  one 
contumacious  wretch  who  imagined  he  had  a  better  right  to  the 
goods  than  Gifford  with  the  stronger  might. 

While  we  halted  the  night  of  the  28tli  at  Akkankawassie, 
an  attack  was  planned  upon  Borborassi,  and  the  charge  of  it 
was  given  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  McLeod,  who  acted  as  Briga- 
dier of  the  Advance  Brigade. 

The  plan  of  attack  was  as  follows :  Colonel  McLeod  would 
start  from  Kiang  Boassu  with  a  detachment  of  the  2nd  battalion 
23rd  Royal^Welsli  Fusiliers,  consisting  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  the 
Hon.  Savage  Mostyn  and  79  non-commissioned  officers  and 
men. 

The  Naval  Brigade,  consisting  of  Captain  Walter  James 
Hunt  Grubbe  of  H.M.S.  'Tamar'  14  officers,  24  petty  officers 
and  195  blue-jackets,  2  rocket  detachments  under  Lieutenant 
Kn«x,  R.A.,  of  Bait's  artillery,  and  one  company  of  Annamaboes, 
57  in  number,  imder  Captain  James  Nicol,  formerly  Adjutant 
of  the  Hampshire  militia. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  the  Hon.  Evelyn  Wood,  was  to  start 
simultaneously  with  the  advance  from  Kiang  Boassu,  witli  a 
portion  of  his  regiment  of  native  allies,  and  to  penetrate  to  the 
road  running  l)etween  Borborassi  and  Becquah,  along  which  he 
would  deploy  his  men  in  the  bush  as  an  ambuscade  to  take  the 
fugitives  on  the  flank. 

It  is  said  that  Sir  Garnet  gave  orders  to  Colonel  McLeod 
not  to  burn  I^orborassi,  and  he  regretted  that  the  village  of 
Adubiassee  liad  l:)oen  destroyed.  This  has  caused  some  talk 
among  the  offic<*rs,  and  a  great  many  are  wondering  at  this 
magnanimity  in  Sir  Garnet.  I  presume  that  despite  the  presence 


L 


DEATH  OF  CAPTAIN  NICOL. 


187 


of  the  large  force  in  our  front,  the  General  still  entertains  a  hope 
that  hostilities  will  be  averted. 

However,  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  instant  the  several 
detachments  took  their  respective  roads,  Colonel  McLeod  land- 
ing his  party  direct  for  Borborassi,  Colonel  Evelyn  Wood  leading 
his  force  for  the  appointed  ambuscade. 

Within  about  two  hours  and  a  half,  after  a  march  through  a 
forest  choked  with  a  jimgly  under-bush,  the  force  of  Colonel 
McLeod  appeared  before  Borborassi,  and  as  they  emerged  into 
the  clearing  opened  fire.  The  surprise  was  complete,  and  an 
indiscriminate  flying  for  shelter  into  the  bush,  and  almost  an 
immediate  desertion  of  the  village  was  the  consequence. 

Gathering  courage  from  the  gloom  and  density  of  the  bush, 
the  enemy,  according  to  their  usual  tactics,  attacked  the  Naval 
Brigade  on  the  left  flank,  but  the  sailors,  delivering  their  fire 
steadily  into  the  bushes,  soon  overcame  that  force,  and  silenced 
the  fire  of  the  Ashantees.  Though  a  few  sputtering  shots  were 
heard  at  intervals,  no  damage  was  done. 

The  centre  was  carried  in  gallant  style  by  the  23rd  Welsh 
Fusiliers ;  led  by  Colonel  Mostyn,  while  the  right  flank  consisted 
of  the  Annamaboes  of  Russell's  regiment,  imder  Captain  Nicol. 
This  last  gentleman,  while  leading  his  men  to  the  attack,  on 
seeing  a  group  of  the  enemy,  ran  up  to  them  and  called  on 
them  to  surrender  in  the  English  language.  The  enemy  of 
course  could  not  comprehend  what  the  old  man,  who,  animated 
by  genuine  kindness  of  heart  called  out  to  them  wanted,  and  a 
savage  deliberately  shot  him  through  the  heart.  The  loss  of 
the  fine  old  gentleman  so  infuriated  his  faithful  Annamaboes, 
that  they  opened  a  murderous  fire  on  the  wretches,  stretching 
several  of  them  in  death  agonies  on  the  ground,  and  pursuing 
them  with  fatal  shots  far  into  the  bush. 

The  village  of  Borborassi  was  soon  in  possession  of  the 
English.  Some  fowls,  a  couple  of  goats  running  about  the 
village  were  especial  objects  of  pursuit,  over  fifty  Ashantee 
guns  and  twelve  kegs  of  powder  were  found  and  destroyed. 
Several  objects  of  curiosity  and  a  small  quantity  of  gold-dust 
comprised  the  '  loot '  the  captors  gained. 

As  the  force  returned  from  the  scene  of  their  success,  the 
Ashantees  who  had  quietly  concealed  themselves  in  the  bush, 
rose  from  their  coverts  and  attempted  to  £Etll  upon  the  rear- 


188 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


guard,  but  the  Naval  Brigade,  to  whom  was  entrusted  the  rear 
of  the  force  coolly  dropped  on  their  knees  and  delivered  such  a 
scattering  fire,  that  the  enemy  were  but  too  glad  to  beat  a 
precipitate  retreat.  After  this  futile  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy,  the  force  were  permitted  to  return  in  peace  to  Kiang 
Boassu,  where  they  anived  at  4  p.m.  after  an  absence  of  eight 
hours. 

The  ambuscade  imder  Colonel  Wood  had  no  results  save  the 
killing  of  two  Aslianteea  by  the  premature  firing  of  the  Apoboes. 
A  party  of  the  enemy  was  seen  advancing  along  the  path  from 
Becquah,  when  the  Annamaboes,  unable  to  restrain  themselves 
from  firing  at  the  unconscious  and  careless  foe,  delivered  their 
fire  with  the  above  meagre  results. 

On  this  affair  at  Borborassi  Colonel  McLeod  reported  to 
Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  as  fellows : — 

Camp  Qiiarman,  January  30,  1874. 

Sir, — In  compliance  with  the  instructions  received,  I  marched 
yesterday  witli  a  force  to  reconnoitre  the  village  of  Borborassi, 
situated  on  our  lefl  flank,  and  said  to  contain  a  large  body  of  the 
enemy  imder  Essamanquatia  and  other  Asliantee  chiefs.  Striking 
into  tlie  bush  path  at  8.15  a.m.,  we  marched  W.S.W.,  and  at 
11  A.M.  arrived  before  the  place,  taking  it  quite  by  surprise.  The 
Ashantees,  driven  out  of  the  village  by  our  advance,  took  to  the 
bush  ou  all  sides ;  a  party  of  them  came  back  upon  our  left  flank,  and 
fired  on  the  Naval  Brigade.  This  attack  was  brushed  away  with  a  few 
rounds  of  ammunition.  The  village  was  immediately  in  our  possession, 
but  not  without  loss  on  our  side.    List  of  casualties  enclosed. 

Captain  Nicol,  commanding  the  Annamaboe  Company  of  Russell's 
Regiment,  was  killed  leading  his  men,  with  the  devotion  of  an  English 
gentleman,  round  the  right  flank  of  the  village.  I  estimated  the  killed 
of  the  enemy  at  50.  Fifty-three  Ashantec  muskets  were  collected. 
Twelve  kegs  of  powder,  and  the  umbrella  of  Essamanquatia  were  found 
in  the  village.  It  seems  this  old  chief  ran  away  just  before  the  attack, 
and  so  narrowly  escaped  capture.  The  troops  after  their  long  march 
were  halted  in  the  village  for  one  hour  and  refreshed  themselves  from 
their  havre-sacks  before  commencing  the  retuni  march.  On  oiu:  re- 
turn the  blue-jackets  formed  the  rear  guard.  Before  quitting  the 
village  they  broke  up  the  arms  which  were  taken,  and  blew  up  the 
powder.  As  soon  as  ever  the  Ashantees,  lying  perdu  in  the  bush, 
discovered  that  we  had  gone,  they  retiumed  to  the  village  with  shout- 
ing and  blowing  of  homs^    Presently  a  body  of  them  came  down  upon 


MCLEOD'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BATTLE  OF  BOBBOBASSI.  189 


the  rear  guard  and  opened  fire ;  the  blue-jackets  calmly  &ced  about, 
and  poured  amongst  them  such  a  fire  of  Snider  bullets  as  sufi^ced  to 
rid  us  of  their  presence  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  The  troops  arrived 
at  their  camp  at  Kiang  Booasu  at  4  f.m.  The  discipline  and  conduct 
of  the  blue-jackets,  under  Captain  Grubbe,  R.N.,  who  formed  the 
advance  and  afterwards  the  rear  guard,  merited  my  special  commenda- 
tion. Captain  Wood,  A.D.C.  to  the  Major-General,  accompanied  me 
and  did  good  service ;  after  the  loss  of  Captain  Nicol,  I  placed  him  in 
command  of  the  Annamaboes.  I  would  desire  to  acknowledge  to  the 
Major-General  the  valuable  services  rendered  by  my  staff  officer. 
Captain  Farquharson,  V.C.,  in  carrying  out  all  the  staff  arrangements, 
which  he  did  to  my  complete  satisfaction.  Lieutenant  Wauchope, 
42nd,  was  with  me  throughout  the  day  as  my  orderly  officer.  My 
thanks  are  also  due  to  Lieut-Col.  Mostyn,  23rd  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers, 
who  was  present  with  the  men  of  his  regiment  engaged. — I  have,  &c., 

J.  C.  M*Leod  Colonel, 
Commanding  A2nd  Royal  Highlanders, 

Tho  Chief  of  the  Staff,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

>  P. 

Camp,  Royal  Naval  Brigade,  Medowma,  January  29,  1874. 
LIST  OF  KILLED  AND  WOUNDED  OF  liOTAL  NAVAL  BRIGADE. 

Killed. — One  man,  Fantee  carrier — wound  of  chest.  Wounded.— 
One  petty  officer,  woimd  of  head — very  severe;  one  petty  officer, 
wound  of  chest — very  severe ;  one  petty  officer,  wound  of  leg — slight ; 
one  marine,  burnt  by  explosion  of  gunpowder — severe. 

ANNAMABOE  COMPANY,  MAJOR  RUSSELL's  REGIMENT. 

Killed. — Captain  Nicol,  wound  of  neck  and  chest ;  one  man,  woimd 
of  head.  Wounded. — One  man,  abdomen — dangerously;  one  man 
arm — severe ;  one  man,  back — severe. 

II.  Fegan,  M.D.,  Stoff'Svrgeon,  R,N. 

All  ihc  w-unded  are  now  under  my  care,  and  are  comfortably 
provided  for. 

n.  Fegan,  M.D. 

To  Brigadier-Colonel  M'Lcod,  C.B.,  the  Front. 

The  information  received  at  headquarters  to-day  prepares  us 
to  meet  a  great  struggle  to-morrow.  It  is  positively  known  that 
a  numerous  force  is  in  front  of  iis  beyond  Egginassie.  Major 
Home's  Engineers  have  prepared  the  road  to  within  a  couple  of 
hundred  yards  or  so  of  this  village,  or  at  least  to  such  a  close 


190 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


distance  that  they  were  enabled  to  hear  the  voices  of  the  advance 
quartered  within. 

Lord  Gififord,  with  an  audacious  temerity,  not  satisfied  with 
ascertaining  that  the  village  of  Egginane  was  an  outpost,  made 
a  reconnaissance  to  the  left  of  the  village  close  to  the  camp  of 
the  main  body,  and  returned  with  the  intelligence  that  the 
Ashantees  are  in  force  not  more  than  three  mQes  from  Qoar- 
man,  whence  we  may  conclude  that  'the  decisive  battle  of  the 
campaign  will  be  fought  to-morrow. 

With  the  aid  of  the  knowledge  of  the  ground  furnished  to 
him  by  Lord  Grifford  Sir  Garnet  has  been  able  to  make  a  plan 
of  attack  which  if  successful,  as  no  doubt  it  will,  must  lead  to 
good  results. 

The  very  fact  of  the  presence  of  this  force  in  our  front,  is 
an  evidence  of  the  treachery  of  the  king  of  Ashantee,  and  in 
divining  the  tactics  of  his  wary  enemy  Sir  Garnet  has  furnished 
further  proofs,  if  any  were  wanted,  of  his  capability  to  conunand 
this  expedition. 

The  missionaries  reported  to  us  that  the  army  of  the  king, 
disheartened  at  the  results  of  their  campaign  beyond  the  Prah, 
had  disbanded,  that  they  saw  no  large  bodies  of  the  enemy  as 
they  were  brouglit  down  to  the  Prah.  This  may  have  been  true, 
so  far  as  their  own  personal  knowledge  went,  but  it  only  tends 
to  prove  how  successfully  the  king  had  deluded  them,  and  how 
their  ingenuous  simplicity  had  contributed  to  conceal  his  designs. 
The  skill  with  which  Gifford,  with  his  clever  scouts,  discovered 
them,  has  frustrated  the  king's  plans,  clever  as  they  were.  By 
to-morrow  night  he  may  know  whether  he  has  adopted  the  wiser 
course,  or  has  more  ensured  the  safety  of  his  capital  and  the 
stability  of  his  power  by  the  system  of  duplicity  and  treachery 
he  has  pursued. 


JUST  BEFORE  THE  GREAT  BATTLE. 


191 


CHAPTER  XV. 

BSFOBE  THE  BATTLE — ON  TO  THE  BATTLE — THE  BEGINH'INO  OF  THE  ENB— 
THE  *  BLACK  WATCH*  m  ACTION— BATTLE  OF  AMOAFUL — ^YILLAGB  OF 
AMOAFUL. 

February  1,  1874. 

The  great  battle  of  the  campaign  has  been  fought  and  won  by 
the  English  troops.  The  Ashantees  were  met  and  defeated 
before  Amoaful  with  immense  loss,  January  31.  All  skir- 
tnishes,  and  sieges  hitherto  fought  in  this  land  pale  in  interest 
before  this  most  decisive  victory.  The  enemy's  utmost  strength 
on  their  own  selected  position  proved  unable  to  withstand  the 
steady  and  determined  advance  of  the  British  troops,  and  the 
cunning  designs  he  had  laid,  as  well  as  the  hopes  he  had  cherished 
of  being  able  to  drive  back  the  invaders,  have  been  frustrated 
by  the  sagacity  and  bravery  of  his  opponents. 

We  had  retired  to  bed  in  the  huts  of  Quarman,  with  a  vague 
foreshadowing  of  the  great  morrow,  which  dawned  on  January 
31.  We  had  conversed  long  together  about  the  pros  and  cons 
of  what  was  fated  to  happen,  around  the  cheery  hospitable  bon- 
fire which  Major  Russell  had  kindled,  to  ward  oflF  the  evils 
arising  from  evening  mist  and  hurtful  night  dew.  We  were 
an  imcommonly  lively  lot,  being  disposed  to  regard  the  event 
of  the  following  day  only  in  the  light  of  a  precursor  of  a  vic- 
torious and  speedy  return  to  the  sea  coast  and  home.  And  as 
we  regarded  it,  no  doubt,  many  others  in  that  little  army 
quartered  within  the  huts  of  the  Ashantees,  regarded  it  also. 
Some,  perhaps  devoted  their  time  on  the  eve  of  the  great  battje 
to  writing  their  affecting  adieus  to  their  wives  and  children, 
while  others,  perhaps  ignorant  of  the  exact  character,  niunber, 
and  position  of  the  enemy,  were  sceptical  that  anything  very 
serious  would  happen. 


192  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

But  at  about  7  a.m.  as  we  had  but  barely  finished  our 
breakfasts  in  Quarman  village,  and  buckled  oiu:  belts  on,  our 
servants  informed  us  that  the  white  troops  were  close  by. 
Hastening  to  the  square,  or  plaza  of  the  village,  we  were  in 
time  to  witness  the  famous  '  Black  Watch '  come  up,  all  primed 
and  ready  for  action.  This  was  our  first  view  of  the  fighting 
42nd  Highlanders,  and  I  must  say  I  improved  the  occasion  to 
get  a  good  look  at  them  as  though  I  never  had  seen  a  British 
regiment  in  my  life.  I  was  so  intent  upon  observing  their 
march  past  which  was  done  with  an  earnest,  determined  stride 
that  promised  well  for  their  behaviour  whatever  might  lie  at 
the  front,  that  I  did  not  observe  that  one  of  my  colleagues, 
through  ignorance  of  the  danger,  no  doubt,  for  he  was  a  new 
hand  in  battle  scenes,  had  foolishly  followed  their  regiment. 
Griffbrd's  Scouts  were  ahead  of  the  42nd  waiting  for  them, 
before  they  began  to  move  on  to  rouse  up  the  enemy  to  action, 
and  to  develop  his  hiding  places. 

Close  behind  the  42nd  Highlanders  followed  one  hundred 
Fantee  porters  bearing  the  reserve  ammunition,  closely  guarded 
by  a  strong  detachment  of  soldiers  scattered  amongst  them. 
Behind  these  went  about  thirty  or  forty  hammocks  each  ham- 
mock borne  by  four  men,  and  soldiers  jealously  guarding  them 
also.  Then  went  a  detachment  of  the  Houssa  artillery,  two 
7-pound  guns  commanded  by  Captain  Eait  himself,  and  fol- 
lowing these  were  a  detachment  of  Eoyal  Engineers  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Major  Home. 

All  the  above  force  composed  the  front  column,  under  the 
command  of  Brigadier  Greneral  Sir  Archibald  Alison,  Bart., 
C.B.,  son  of  the  great  Scotch  historian  of  that  name. 

Now  came  the  veteran  Colonel  J.C.  McLeod,  C.B.,  leading 
the  left  column,  consisting  of  the  right  wing  of  the  Naval 
Brigade,  Captain  Luxmoore,  of  H.M.S.  *  Druid,'  conunanding. 
Major  Baker  Eussell's  Eegiment  of  Native  Allies,  Bait's  Artil- 
lery, two  rocket  detachments,  and  a  detachment  of  Boyal 
Engineers  under  Captain  Buckle. 

The  blue-jackets  still  wore  the  careless  gait  which  distin- 
guished them  on  the  road,  as  if  they  recked  not  what  good  or 
evil  fortunes  awaited  them  in  the  front,  and  Eussell's  native  allies 
were  brave  in  feathers,  and  horns,  and  ribbons,  and  had  much 


ON  TO  THE  BATTLE. 


193 


singular  garniture  of  the  head.  The  Houssas  marched  on  with 
the  serene  appearance  of  veterans. 

The  reserve  ammunition,  and  string  of  liammocks  for  the 
use  of  the  left  column  followed  behind  carefully  guarded,  and 
watched  by  armed  men  who  seemed  determined  that  not  one 
bearer  of  a  timid  heart  should  face  about  in  a  panic  and  de- 
moralise his  fellows. 

Here  comes  Colonel  the  Hon.  H.  Evelyn  Wood,  a  Victoria 
Cross  oflBcer,  in  the  van  of  the  right  column  which  he  is  to 
command ;  and  close  to  him  is  Captain  Walter  James  Hunt 
Grubbe,  of  H.M.S.  '  Tamar,'  in  command  of  the  left  wing  of 
the  Naval  Brigade,  Wood's  Native  Allies,  a  detachment  of  Bait's 
Houssa  Artillery,  two  rockets,  and  a  detachment  of  the  Royal 
Engineers. 

Following  the  right  coliunn  comes  Sir  Garnet  Joseph  Wolse- 
ley,  the  young  General  who  is  about  to  manipulate  this  force 
of  British  troops  in  opposition  to  the  Ashantee  army.  He  is 
smiling,  cordial  in  his  salutations,  and  in  no  way  distrusts 
his  fortune  or  his  soldiers.  He  is  mounted  on  a  Madeira  cane 
chair  elevated  on  the  shoulders  of  four  burly  and  semi-nude 
Fantees,  a  conspicuous  object  for  a  lurking  enemy  in  the  bush. 
His  staflF  is  about  him,  and  in  the  beaming  faces  of  the  officers 
you  see  reflected  the  good  hope  and  perfect  contentment  which 
possess  their  chief. 

The  rear  column,  consisting  of  the  2nd  Battalion  Rifle  Bri- 
gade, is  brought  up  by  Lieut.-Col.  A.  F.  Warren ;  and  with  the 
last  man  of  the  battalion  has  rolled  by  a  perfectly  equipped 
fighting  force  of  over  2,500  men,  Europeans  and  natives. 

As  the  line  extended  itself  into  greater  length  along  the 
road,  the  progress  became  very  slow.  It  wound  in  coils  as  it 
followed  the  sinuosity  of  the  path,  and  uncoiled  itself  slowly 
as  a  straight  stretch  of  the  road  permitted  it.  We  seemed  to 
be  marching  to  every  alternate  beat  of  the  second  hand  of 
our  watches,  so  slow  the  long  procession  moved  on.  The  road 
was  but  five  feet  wide,  barely  that,  yet  we  were  in  double 
files. 

The  following  represents  the  plan  of  the  battle-field  to  which 
the  tight  little  British  army  were  now  moving  on,  to  occupy 
face  to  face  with  the  Ashantee  army. 

o 


194 


Akanqvatia 


COOMAiSSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 
AMOAFUL 

ASHANTEE  AKMY  Kiko  op  Mampok 


3 


Naval  Brigade 


Front  Column 

42nd  Highlanders 
Halt's  Artillery 


Naval  Brigade 


STAFF 

Bait's  Artillery         Milage  of  Egginassie         Bait's  Artillery 
23rd  Boyal  Welsh  Fusiloers 

Bossell's  Bcgimont 


Boyal  Engineers 


Bussell's  Begixnent 


Boyal  Engineers 


Bifle  Brigade 
Bear  Column 


<2 


•  Quarman 

At  this  slow  pace  we  could  but  look  listlessly  on  what  we  had 
often  looked  upon  before.  Tliere  were  no  strong  contrasting 
colours  to  relieve  the  wearied  eye.  Grey  coats  and  white  sun- 
helmets  in  front  of  us,  grey  coats  and  white  helmets  in  rear  of 
us ;  dense  dark  bush  to  the  right,  dense  dark  bush  to  the  left ; 
a  strip  of  blue-grey  sky  above  our  heads.  Where  is  the  grandeur 
and  pomp  of  war  here  in  this  pictiure  ?  Where  tl^e  excitement 
and  blood-heating  scenes  of  battle  ?  The  quiet  sober-coloured 
line  has  absolutely  nothing  in  it  to  disquiet  the  glance  or  to  at- 
tract a  fixed  gaze ;  on  the  contrary,  the  funereal  movement  of 
the  procession  has  something  somnific  in  its  pace. 

But  suddenly — faint  rumbling,  detonating  sounds  pulsate 


THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  END.  195 

through  the  thick  curtains  of  woods  about  us,  and  our  eyes  seek 
each  other's  faces  with  looks  of  inquiry. 

*  They  have  begun,'  says  one.  *  Yes,  the  ball  has  opened,' 
answers  another ;  and  we  press  hard  on  each  other's  heels  as 
though  a  simultaneous  wish  to  be  nearer  to  the  sounds  was 
transmitted  through  every  mind. 

The  time  of  commencement  was  noted  down,  8.5  a.m.  Lord 
Gifford's  scouts  were  feeling  the  enemy.  Though  the  detona- 
tions were  but  faint  they  might  have  been  counted  by  one 
interested  in  doing  so. 

By  8.15  A.M.  we  had  either  arrived  much  nearer  the  scene  of 
contention  and  strife,  or  the  firing  was  getting  warm,  for  at  this 
time  we  could  hear  long-continued  rolls  of  musketry,  and  some 
of  the  staff  remarked  that  the  42nd  Highlanders  must  have 
become  engaged. 

We  still  continued  to  move  on  slowly,  with  the  alarum  of 
war  constantly  rising  in  volume,  listening  for  want  of  something 
else  to  do — for  we  were  imprisoned  between  lofty  walls  of  vege- 
tation— to  the  crackling,  ripping  sound  of  Snider  rifles  varied 
by  the  louder  intonations  of  the  over-loaded  muskets  of  the 
Ashantees. 

Five  minutes  thus,  and  nothing  disturbed  any  man's  thoughts, 
unless  of  those  with  responsibilities  on  their  minds  who  had  no 
time  to  think  of  the  ideal,  or  the  aesthetic  aspect  of  the 
moment.  An  officer  of  the  42nd  here  rode  up  on  a  white  mule, 
to  conmiunicate  with  Sir  Garnet,  who  leaned  eagerly  forward 
on  his  chair  to  hear  the  news  from  the  front.  He  Was  wounded, 
but  his  intelligence  was  to  the  effect  that  the  left  column  had 
lost  touch  of  the  left  wing  of  the  42nd  Highlanders.  The  officer 
received  orders  to  tell  Colonel  McLeod,  who  commanded,  to  cut 
diagonally  to  the  right  through  the  bushes  until  both  columns 
should  join. 

At  9.15  our  pace  quickened  somewhat,  until  suddenly  light 
was  exchanged  for  the  gloom  of  the  forest  shade,  and  we  en- 
tered the  village  of  Egginassie,  which  the  scouts  of  Lord  Gifford 
had  carried  with  a  rush  at  8.5  a.m.  ;  and  oh,  what  a  scene  I  We 
travelling  so  soberly  and  unexcitedly  through  the  narrow 
avenue  leading  through  the  forest  had  not  thought  of  this — 
the  possibility  that  while  we  listened  to  the  rumbling  and 

o  2 


196 


C00MAf5SIE  AM)  MAGDALA. 


mutteriDg  of  musketry,  there  were  fellow-creatures  being 
smitten  to  death  in  the  dark  recesses  of  the  forest  around 
Egginassie. 

Right  at  the  mouth  of  the  umbrageous  pass,  the  wounded, 
and  dying,  and  dead,  sat  grouped  or  lay  stretched  on  the 
ground,  attended  by  the  kind  ministering  hands  of  their  white 
brothers.  It  may  be  that  the  readers  as  well  as  the  writer  of 
this  have  seen  many  a  gory  battle-field,  but  I  must  confess 
that  I  felt  much  affected  at  the  sight  of  the  first  blood  drawn. 

The  first  eager  enquiries  as  to  who  were  woimded  elicited 
the  information  that  poor  Captain  Buckle,  of  the  Royal 
Engineers,  was  shot  through  the  heart  and  abdomen,  and  was 
dying.  That  three  or  four  others  were  most  seriously  woimded, 
and  seventeen  or  eigliteen  of  the  42nd  Highlanders,  who  were 
then  bearing  the  brunt  of  the  battle,  were  wounded  more  or 
less  seriously. 

During  the  interval  that  elapsed  between  8.5  a.m.,  the  time  of 
the  first  shot,  and  that  of  our  arrival  within  the  village  of  Eggin- 
assie,  much  progress,  considering  the  nature  of  the  struggle, 
had  been  made  by  the  front  column,  under  Sir  Archibald 
Alison ;  but  the  right  column  had  remained  almost  stationary, 
having  advanced  but  little.  The  left  wing  of  the  Naval  Brigade 
was  the  only  portion  of  the  right  column  engaged  in  earnest. 

The  front  column  pushing  on  to  occupy  the  village  of 
Egginassie  close  after  Gifford's  scouts,  had  swept  across  the  open 
ground  of  the  clearing  and  deployed  into  position  in  the  jimgle. 
Reserving  its  fire  until  they  encountered  the  enemy,  the  High- 
landers had  continued  advancing  until  they  had  penetrated 
about  two  hundred  yards  beyond  the  \dllage,  when  the  con- 
cealed enemy  suddenly  revealed  himself  by  firing  into  their 
faces  from  cleverly  contrived  ambuscades.  Henceforward  the 
Highlanders  continued  to  sweep  the  bush  in  front  of  them  with 
steadily  poured  volleys,  until  they  had  silenced  the  enemy's  fire, 
during  which  pause  the  Engineer  laboiu'ers  were  pushed 
forward  to  cut  the  bush  for  a  farther  advance.  When  the 
labourers  had  siicceeded  in  clearing  a  space  of  ground  in  front, 
the  Highlanders  moved  forward  until  they  discovered  the 
enemy  again.  The  road  to  Amoaful  from  Egginassie  served 
as  a  guide  to  the  wings  spread  out  on  each  side  of  Bait's 
artillery,  which  continued  to  move  down  in  line  with  the  in- 


THE  •  BLACK  WATCH  '  IN  ACTION. 


197 


fentry.  Whenever  a  favourable  opportunity  presented  itself, 
Captain  Arthur  Eait  with  his  brave  Houssas  sent  telling  shot«. 
Thus  Artillery  and  Highlanders  slowly  marched  down  the 
sloping  ground,  driving  the  foe  steadily  out  of  his  numerous 
hiding-places  which  he  had  constructed  of  bush  with  a  skill 
which  almost  defied  detection  by  the  eye. 

The  best  means  of  discovering  his  whereabouts  were  found 
to  be  telling  volleys  from  Sniders,  and  booming  rounds  from 
the  tiny  7-pounders,  which  sent  their  shot  with  disastrous 
effect  through  the  forest. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  slope  ran  a  lazy  stream,  which  coursed 
sluggishly  through  expanses  of  morass,  and  over  depths  of 
black  slime.  A  hundred  yards  beyond  this  stream  were  seen 
the  sylvan  huts  which  the  Ashantees  had  constructed  out  of 
tree  boughs  and  plantain  leaves.  These  huts  numbered 
hundreds,  spread  out  far  on  each  side  of  the  road. 

Such  was  the  place  the  Ashantees  chose  to  defend,  which 
they  did  with  a  pertinacity  that  won  high  praise  and  admira- 
tion from  the  Highlanders.  The  soldiers  were  put  to  their 
mettle,  and  the  Houssas,  as  if  catching  the  fierce  enthusiasm 
which  animated  the  Scotch  Highlanders,  laboured  with  a  vigour 
and  energy  not  eclipsed  by  any  on  the  field.  Captain  Bait, 
halting  at  the  same  altitude  above  the  stream  below,  as  the 
Ashantee  camp  was  on  the  other  side  of  it,  aimed  his  guns 
with  such  good  efiFect  at  the  huts,  that  on  passing  them,  the 
ghastly  heaps  that  met  the  sight,  of  rent  bodies  and  dis- 
figured dead  bore  a  silent  but  significant  testimony  of  the  im- 
portant service  the  Houssa  artillery  had  contributed  on  this 
day  towards  crushing  the  pride  of  the  enemy. 

When  the  front  column  had  dislodged  the  Ashantees  from 
their  several  positions,  and  finally  driven  them  with  fearftd 
loss  from  tlieir  camps.  Sir  Archibald  pushed  it  forward ;  and 
while  bagpipes  blew  their  most  strenuous  notes,  and  the  wild 
Highland  cheers  for  victory  pealed  through  the  forest,  the 
whole  line  surged  across  the  stream,  and  swept  up  the  opposite 
slope  until  the  outskirts  of  Amoaful  were  reached. 

Here  Highlanders  and  Houssas,  now  animated  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  valour,  rushed  forward  at  the  top  of  their  speed,  to  the 
entrance  of  the  broad  avenue  which  divides  the  town  into  two 
equal  portions.    As  they  appeared  within  the  town  at  the  foot 


198 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


of  this  avenue,  they  saw  several  excited  groups  of  natives 
hurrying  away  from  it,  some  bearing  away  wounded  chiefs, 
others  transporting  their  household  property. 

One  group  specially  attracted  the  attention  of  Lieut.  Saun- 
ders, B.A. — that  of  four  slaves  carrying  on  their  shoulders  the 
wounded  body  of  their  master,  with  two  others  following  closely 
behind.  Aiming  a  shell  at  them,  the  missile  exploded  but  a  few 
inches  above  the  heads  and  in  the  centre  of  the  group,  killing 
every  soul  instantly.  After  a  few  more  desultory  shots  the 
capture  of  the  town  of  Amoaful  was  complete. 

But  the  reader,  hurried  away  with  the  front  column  by  the 
narrator  with  such  breathless  impetuosity,  must  not  forget  that 
this  is  but  one  scene  of  the  battle.  We  have  noted  the  progress 
of  the  front  column  first,  as  imtil  11.30  a.m.,  the  great  interest 
of  the  battle-field  concentrated  on  its  movements,  though  it 
must  not  be  supposed  that  the  other  columns  were  idle,  or 
that  we  even  who  are  with  the  stafiF,  and  are  stationed  in  the 
very  centre  of  the  square  formed  by  the  colmnns,  are  disin- 
terested spectators  or  listeners.  We  are  with  the  pivot  around 
which  the  sonorous  sounds  of  the  battle  ring  their  loud  echoes. 
We  were  better  able  to  read,  while  grouped  around  head-quarters, 
the  history  of  the  advance  of  the  '  Black  Watch  '  than  we  should 
have  been  were  our  attention  diverted  by  immediate  contact 
with  the  combatants. 

At  11. 30  we  knew  at  Egginassie  that  the  men  of  the  glorious 
Scotch  regiment  had  brushed  the  trucculent  and  contumacious 
foe  from  its  front,  and  had  elbowed  him  on  against  the  right 
flank. 

Wounded  men  of  the  42nd  ceased  coming  into  the  square 
of  Egginassie  ;  they  were  the  men  of  the  right  column  that  were 
now  borne  in  to  us.  At  11.30  the  right  column  was  rudely 
awakened  from  apparent  inactivity  into  a  fierce  blaze  of  ex- 
citement, and  as  the  \dllage  of  Egginassie  was  situated  on  the 
slope  of  the  long  low,  forest-clad  hill,  the  enemy  when  he  crested 
it,  and  bore  down  on  the  right  column  in  force,  visited  ourselves 
with  a  hail  of  slugs,  which  caused  the  trees  around  and  the 
branches  above  us  to  shed  their  leaves  over  us  as  thick  as  flakes 
in  a  snow  storm. 

A  few  seconds  after  this,  tremendous  firing  in  our  immediate 
vicinity  began.  Colonel  Wood,  commanding  the  right  column. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  AMOAFUL. 


199 


was  brought  in  .with  an  iron  slug  in  his  chest ;  then  his  aide- 
de-camp  followed,  disabled  with  a  slug  in  his  hip ;  then  we 
find  that  in  a  short  time  fourteen  blue-jackets  have  been  as- 
sisted into  the  village,  some  of  them  grievously  wounded. 

The  firing  at  such  close  quarters  to  us  waxes  terrific.  The 
line  of  the  fighting  right  column,  now  hotly  engaged  with  a 
persisting  foe,  who  crawls  serpent-like  closer  and  closer  to  them, 
is  not  fifty  yards  away  from  us,  and  we  are  plentifully  touched 
and  tapped,  lightly  it  is  true,  by  the  hail  of  slugs.  Men  with 
whom  I  am  conversing  abruptly  spin  round  as  they  feel  the 
blows.  Lieutenant  Maurice  sitting  on  a  log,  listening  to  the 
thunder  of  the  unceasing,  ear-splitting  fusilade,  is  struck  in 
the  back.  Doctor  Fegan,  of  the  *  Active,'  while  conversing  for 
a  moment  with  Commodore  Hewett  and  myself,  is  violently 
struck  on  his  scarf  pin,  and  others  have  similar  experiences  to 
relate.  Every  man  of  the  right  column  feels  that  this  is  a 
critical  moment,  and  that  he  must  roll  back  the  tide  of  attack, 
or  be  driven  himself  in  hot  haste  to  infamous  flight,  and  so  he 
plies  his  faithful  Snider  with  that  nervous  rapidity  bom  of  des- 
perate necessity.  Probably  Sir  Garnet  feels  that  it  is  a  critical 
moment  also,  considering  that  Wood's  regiment  of  native  allies 
only  lies  between  his  headquarters  and  the  enemy,  and  ho 
orders  the  23rd  Eoyal  Welsh  Fusiliers  forward  to  the  support, 
to  advance  in  a  north-easterly  direction. 

The  firing  rises  to  the  deafening  pitch,  there  is  not  a  break 
or  a  pause  in  the  thick  volume  of  sound,  lazy  clouds  of  gun- 
powder smoke  enwrap  the  forest  tops  as  with  a  curtain. 
Things  proceed  at  this  rate  for  a  short  interval,  wounded  com- 
batants drop  in  rapidly  ;  there  are  about  100  wounded,  dying, 
and  dead  in  the  village,  though  several  of  the  wounded,  having 
had  their  wounds  dressed,  have  been  borne  to  Quarman,  when 
Sir  Grarnet  orders  up  a  second  support  of  two  companies  of  the 
Rifle  Brigade,  with  emphatic  orders  to  push  on  and  drive  the 
stubborn  enemy  from  his  coverts.  We,  waiting  to  hear  this 
siipport  of  fresh  men,  can  tell  the  very  minute  they  commence 
firing,  can  mark  the  progress  which  they  make  through  the 
thick  jungle  by  the  diminishing  volume  of  the  musketry, 
can  almost  reckon  the  rate  at  which  they  advance,  and  feel 
very  much  relieved  when  at  12.30  the  wild  cheers  which  the 
Apoboes  utter  tell  us  of  thp  rapid  retreat  of  the  Ashantees. 


200 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


But  while  we  are  congratulating  ourselves  that  the  important 
battle  of  Amoafiil  is  ended — loud  and  continuous  musketry  is 
heard  in  our  rear  along  the  road  to  Quarman,  whither  the  wounded 
have  been  taken  for  safety,  and  the  entrance  to  the  village  from 
Quarman  is  choked  by  the  forms  of  the  frightened  Fantee 
carriers.  Sir  Gramet  thought  of  this  possibility,  and  prepared 
his  plan  of  battle  for  just  such  a  contingency.  The  four  com- 
panies of  the  Rifle  Brigade,  hitherto  unemployed  in  the  battle, 
are  ordered  to  take  the  back  track  and  defend  the  line  of 
communication,  and  they  are  soon  engaged  with  the  Ashantees 
in  vigorous  earnestness,  until  1.45  p.m.,  when  a  cessation  of  the 
musketry  announces  that  the  enemy,  having  attempted  the 
power  of  the  Europeans  on  the  left,  the  front,  the  right  and 
rear  columns,  is  convinced  that  he  has  been  defeated,  and  is 
unable  to  withstand  the  strange  weapons  which  the  white  men 
use  in  war. 

The  battle,  however,  was  not  yet  ended,  for  a  reinforcement 
under  the  Ashantee  General  Essamanquatiah,  who  is  considered 
the  Von  Moltke  of  the  enemy,  appeared  to  the  right  and  rear 
of  Quarman  at  about  3  p.m.  Captain  Burnet,  of  Russell's  native 
regiment,  having  been  left  behind,  severely  ill  of  a  fever,  much 
to  his  annoyance,  hearing  the  tremendous  musketry  in  such 
close  vicinity,  rose  from  his  sick  bed,  assmned  command  of  the 
detachment  of  33  of  the  2nd  West  Indians,  being  senior  oflScer 
at  the  post,  and  resisted  them  for  several  hours  until  the  Rifles 
appeared  from  the  direction  of  Egginassie,  despite  the  con- 
fusion around  him  caused  by  the  native  carriers,  whose  first 
impulse  had  been  to  take  to  precipitate  flight. 

The  provident  sagacity  of  Sir  Garnet  saved  him  from  even 
the  shadow  of  a  reverse  even  at  this  small  village,  for  a  wide, 
clearing,  extending  a  hundred  yards  around  Quarman,  and  a 
redoubt  of  earth  and  bushes,  enabled  the  detachment  of  the 
2nd  West  to  employ  their  Sniders  to  good  effect. 

Baffled  at  this  point,  the  tireless  and  raging  foe  sought  to 
make  an  impression  at  Insarfu,  two  and  a  half  miles  in  rear  of 
Quarman  ;  but  though  they  were  engaged  in  it  until  midnight, 
they  experienced  nothing  but  repeated  reverses. 

At  3  A.M.  of  this  morning  (Feb.  1)  they  again  attempted  to 
assault  Quarman  with  a  diabolical  vigour,  which  caused  the 
harehearted  Fantee  carriers  to  rush  into  the  jungle ;  but  at 


ACCOUNT  CONTINUED. 


201 


dawn  the  Ashantee  army  retired  from  the  long-protracted 
contest— a  twenty  hours'  almost  continuous  battle. 

The  left  column  under  Colonel  McLeod,  consisting  of  the 
right  wing  of  the  Naval  Brigade  under  Captain  Percy  Luxmoore, 
Russell's  Native  Allies,  Annamaboes,  Mumfords,  Cape  Coast 
people,  and  Ja-Jas  fro^l  the  Bight  of  Benin,  and  detachments 
of  the  Houssa  Artillery  and  Royal  Engineers,  were  hotly  en- 
gaged, as  soon  as  they  had  taken  their  position  on  the  left  of 
the  42nd,  for  over  an  hour  and  a  half.  It  was  in  this  column 
that  Captain  Buckle  was  killed.  But  as  they  advanced  into 
the  jungle,  endeavouring  to  keep  pace  with  the  front  column, 
fighting  their  way  now  sharply  for  a  breathless  period,  then 
subsiding  into  a  few  spluttering  shots,  they  lost  touch  of  the 
left  wing  of  the  *  Black  Watch,'  and  had  to  cut  their  way 
diagonally  by  a  road  through  the  bush,  arriving  in  the  main 
road  a  little  in  rear  of  the  front  column. 

But  the  historian  of  the  battle,  to  be  true  to  fact  and  to  all 
scenes  enacted  in  the  stirring  event,  must  not  be  beguiled  from 
observing  what  transpired  within  the  village  of  Egginassie,  by 
the  more  absorbing  scenes  of  the  struggle. 

Sir  Garnet  Wolseley,  himself  retaining  the  calm,  proud  air 
of  the  general  who,  wisely  forecasting  the  issue,  was  prepared 
for  the  triumph,  spared  none  of  his  willing  and  obedient  staff. 
Captain  BuUer  was  kept  trotting  backwards  and  forwards  with 
orders  and  reports  until  it  was  feared  he  would  over-exert 
himself  in  the  warm  work.  Captain  Brackenbury  was  also  an 
ardent  co-operator  in  the  designs  of  the  general,  and  assisted 
him  unremittingly  by  the  sagacity  of  his  suggestions,  and 
intelligent  reports  of  the  progress  of  the  battle. 

Colonel  Greaves,  the  chief  of  the  staff,  must  of  course  be 
identified  with  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley,  for  on  him  devolved  much 
of  the  responsibility  and  the  faithful  execution  of  his  chiefs 
plans. 

Lieutenant  the  Honourable  A.  H.  Wood,  A.D.C.,  employed 
himself  actively  around  headquarters,  conveying  orders  to  the 
front,  and  returning  with  hopeful  reports,  besides  keeping  a 
sharp  eye  upon  all  men  emerging  from  the  scene  of  the 
struggle. 

Commodore  Hewett,  V.C.,  was  beside  Sir  Garnet  during 
the  entire  time,  and  throughout  the  various  phases  and  for- 


202 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


tunes  was  either  engaged  in  assisting  Sir  Gramet  with  his 
advice,  or  superintending  with  interest  the  care  and  welfare  of 
the  wounded  sailors. 

And  last  but  not  least  of  the  deserving,  we  must  not  forget 
the  assiduous,  indefatigable  conduct  of  Surgeon  Mackinnon, 
the  principal  medical  officer,  and  Dr.  Henry  Fegan  of  the 
Royal  Navy.  Dr.  Fegan  simply  behaved  wonderfully.  Soldier 
or  sailor,  white  or  black  man,  almost  everyone  had  cause  to 
bless  the  deft  hand  of  this  skilful  surgeon.  A  dozen  ordinary 
surgeons  could  not  have  bestowed  quicker  aid  and  relief  to  the 
wounded  than  this  invaluable  officer.  It  was  a  pleasure  to 
watch  the  extraordinary  devotion  of  the  man,  and  those  who 
witnessed  his  work  will  know  what  a  first-class  surgeon  can  do 
to  alleviate  pain  and  exhaustion  during  the  exciting  moments 
of  a  battle. 

At  2.30  P.M.  I  left  Egginassie,  proceeding  to  Amoaful  town, 
which  was  captured  by  the  Highlanders  at  11.30  a.m. 

The  road  sloped  down  very  gradually  for  about  500  yards 
to  the  lazy,  sluggish  stream  coursing  amid  marshes  and  deep 
mire,  on  each  side  of  which  the  heaviest  fighting  had  taken 
place  that  morning.  The  entire  distance  was  strewn  with 
cartridge-cases,  and  frequently  one  paused  to  observe  those 
which  the  Ashantees  had  used,  which  revealed  to  us  the  fact 
that  among  the  weapons  employed  by  the  enemy  were  double- 
barrelled  breech-loading  central-fire  guns. 

Around  the  Ashantee  camp  the  dead  Ashantees  were  thickly 
lying,  with  most  frightful  wounds,  proving  that  Snider  rifles 
have  terrible  force  and  penetration.  If  other  evidences  were 
needed  to  establish  this  fact,  the  wreck  of  the  bush,  and  the 
deep  rugged  rents  of  great  trees,  seen  all  around,  did  so.  Those 
who  undervalue  this  gun  make  a  great  mistake.  Its  rapidity 
and  ease  of  manipulation  is  such  that  a  regiment  has  t-o  be 
kept  constantly  supplied  from  the  reserve-ammunition,  while 
the  perfect  construction  of  the  Boxer  cartridge  and  its  excellent 
materials,  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired  in  the  shape  of  an 
efficient  small  arm  for  any  service. 

Proceeding  up  the  hill,  with  our  minds  dwelling  on  the 
great  tragedy  of  the  day,  we  arrived  within  about  15  minutes 
at  Amoaful. 

The  town  is  conveniently  situated  on  the  extensive,  tabular 


AMOAFUL. 


203 


summit  of  a  low  hill,  the  sides  of  which  slope  down  into  thin 
threads  of  ooze,  and  marsh,  and  running  stream,  all  clothed  in 
impenetrable  underbrush  and  dense  growths  of  tropical  plants 
and  trees. 

A  broad  street  or  avenue  about  60  yards  wide  running  the 
whole  length  of  the  town,  a  distance  of  about  400  yards, 
divided  it  into  equal  portions. 

The  residences  consisted  of  four,  or  six,  or  eight  small  huts, 
with  interiors  facing  one  another,  and  enclosing  small  courts  ;  but 
none  of  these  came  up  to  the  neatness,  taste,  and  architectural 
ornamentation  of  Fomannah,  the  capital  of  the  Adansi  king- 
dom. 

As  I  entered  the  town  the  aspect  of  the  principal  avenue 
was  a  busy  one.  Under  one  gi-eat  tree  reclined,  on  benches  or 
cots  taken  from  the  houses,  the  woimded  officers  of  the  42nd 
Highlanders.  Major  Duncan  Macpherson,  who  commanded 
the  42nd  under  Sir  Archibald  Alison,  was  rubbing  his  wounded 
leg,  and  doubtless  thinking  what  a  narrow  escape  he  had  from 
losing  his  poor  limb.  Others  were  detailing  the  scenes  through 
which  they  had  passed,  and  the  exciting  incidents  which  came 
imder  their  personal  observations. 

Among  the  various  remarks  I  lieard  as  I  passed  through, 
were : — 

'  Ah,  Sandy,  my  lad,  it  wor  a  braw  fight,'  with  a  rich  accent 
from  a  Scotch  Highlander. 

'  What  a  pity  we  didn't  have  our  kilts  and  bonnets ;  how 
they  (the  Ashantees)  would  have  speered,  and  no  mistake,' 
from  another  Highlander  evidently,  with  which  I  sympathised. 

*  By  jingo,  but  they  cut  a  gangway  through  my  beard,  any- 
how. I  say  Bill,  what  will  Sally  say  when  she  hears  how  they 
have  spoiled  my  beauty  ? '  said  a  frank-faced  blue-jacket,  run- 
ning his  fingers  through  the  evidence  of  his  manhood  which 
garnished  his  chin,  and  which  truly  enough  exhibited  a  *  gang- 
way '  cleared  to  the  throat  by  an  Ashantee  missile. 

'  Oh,  hang  them !  just  look  at  my  figure-head,  will  you  ? ' 
said  another,  exhibiting  a  swollen  black  eye,  and  an  ugly  scar 
on  his  temple.    *  What  d'ye  say  to  that,  now  ? ' 

Indeed  there  were  but  few  men  who  had  not  a  story  of 
burts  suffered  and  clothes  damaged  by  slugs. 

There  were  a  great  many  Ashantees  killed  around  and  in 


204 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  town  of  Amoaful,  and  the  effect  of  Saunders's  last  dead 
shot  was  visible  at  the  northern  end  of  the  town  in  a  group  of 
six  slaves  stark  and  stiff  around  their  dead  master,  who  lay  still 
on  his  stretcher.  Many  too,  wounded  at  the  battle,  had  hurried 
to  the  village,  and  breathed  their  last  quietly  within  the  huts. 
Yet,  though  the  slaughter  must  have  been  fearful,  we  were  dis- 
appointed at  the  results,  until  recollecting  the  invariable 
custom  of  the  enemy  to  bear  his  wounded  and  dead  away  from 
the  field,  and  the  almost  instinctive  haste  with  which  the 
wounded,  who  are  able  to  crawl  away,  plunge  into  the  dark 
bushes  for  shelter,  out  of  fear  of  decapitation,  with  which  they 
generally  visit  the  wounded.* 

An  instance,  only  one  fortunately,  of  this  kind,  occurred. 
A  wounded  Highlander  on  the  extreme  left  flank  of  his  regi- 
ment, perceiving  himself  to  be  wounded  too  severely  to  con- 
tinue in  line,  sought  to  retrace  his  steps  to  the  village  of 
Egginassie  to  have  his  wound  dressed.  He  lost  his  way,  appa- 
rently, and  was  unfortunate  enough  to  be  discovered  by  a  party 
of  Ashantees,  who  overpowered  him  and  cut  his  head  off.  The 
struggle  which  the  doomed  man  made  for  his  life  was  too 
apparent  in  the  slashed  hands  and  almost  severed  fingers. 

About  5  P.M.  Sir  Garnet  arrived  at  Amoaful.  The  troops 
bivouacked  on  the  avenue  in  the  open  air,  as  the  baggage  had 
been  left  behind  at  Insarfu,  five  miles  in  the  rear,  and  a  series 
of  brilliant  bonfire  lights  marked  the  positions  of  the  bivouac 
during  the  night  after  the  great  battle. 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  report  of  the  Major-General 
commanding,  interpolated  here  just  before  the  publication  in 
book  form. 

Head  Qaarters,  Amoaful,  February  1. 

Sir — According  to  the  intention  expressed  in  my  despatch  of  the 
30th  ultimo,  I  yesterday  attacked  the  enemy  to  the  south  of  this  town, 
and  drove  them  with  heavy  loss  from  the  position  they  had  selected  to 
fight  upon,  and  where  I  now  find  that  the  King  of  Ashantee  had  been 
for  some  time  collecting  his  army. 

*  The  losses  which  the  Ashantees  suffered  have  been  variously  estimated  to  be 
between  800  and  1,200  killed,  with  as  many  more  wounded.  Their  entire  force 
with  which  they  engaged  the  British  cannot  have  been  less  than  12,000.  The 
King  of  Mampon,  who  commanded  the  right,  was  wounded  mortally;  Amanquatia, 
who  commanded  the  left,  was  kiUed ;  Appia,  one  of  the  great  chiefs  engaged  in  the 
centre,  was  also  killed. 


SIR  garnet's  despatch. 


206 


My  whole  force,  divided  into  four  columns,  as  per  margin,  advanced 
along  the  main  road,  preceded  by  the  scouts,  until  the  enemy  were  met 
at  the  village  of  Egginassie,  which  was  carried  by  a  rush  of  the  scouts 
at  about  8  a.m.  The  front  column  then  extended  into  the  thick 
bush  on  each  side  of  the  road,  which  was  cut  and  widened  by  labourers 
under  the  Royal  Engineers  so  as  to  admit  of  the  advance  of  the  guns. 

As  the  leading  column  advanced  northward  the  left  column,  accord- 
ing to  orders  previously  issued,  cut  a  path  diagonally  to  the  left  front, 
with  a  view  of  protecting  the  left  flank  of  the  front  column  ;  and  as  it 
moved  along  this  path,  the  right  column,  closing  up,  cut  a  path  diagon- 
ally to  the  right  to  protect  the  right  flank,  while  the  rear  column  ex- 
tended, so  as  to  gain  touch  of  the  right  and  left  columns,  which  were 
designed  to  follow  the  flanks  of  the  front  column  and,  should  it  be  out- 
flanked, to  face  east  and  west  outwards.  My  intention  was  to  flght  in 
the  form  of  a  square,  and  so  oppose  the  invariable  flanking  tactics  of  the 
enemy,  which  their  superior  numbers  would  probably  allow  them  to 
carry  out  against  any  line  which  I  could  form. 

The  front  column,  under  Sir  A.  Alison,  found  the  enemy  in  great 
force  beyond  a  swampy  stream  to  the  north  of  Egginassie,  and 
suflered  heavily  in  dislodging  them.  They  were  driven  out  by  the 
steady  advance  of  the  infantry,  aided  by  the  fire  of  Rait's  guns.  The 
large  numbers  of  dead  Ashantees  at  this  part  of  the  field,  and  the 
numbers  of  the  42nd  Highlanders  here  wounded,  showed  the  stubborn 
resistance  made  by  the  enemy.  The  42nd  Highlanders  finally  advanced 
and  captured  the  town  of  Amoaful  about  noon,  after  being  more  than 
four  hours  in  action. 

Meanwhile,  the  left  column,  advancing  under  a  heavy  fire,  by 
which  Captain  Buckle,  R.E.,  was  killed  while  urging  on  his  labourers, 
occupied  the  crest  of  a  hill,  where  a  clearing  was  made,  and  the  enemy 
driven  away  from  this  portion  of  their  camp  by  an  advance  of  the  Naval 
Brigade  and  Rus.seirs  Regiment.  Colonel  M^Leod  haying  cleared  his 
front,  and  having  lost  touch  of  the  left  of  the  front  column,  now  cut  his 
way  in  a  north-easterly  direction,  and  can>e  into  the  main  road  in  rear 
of  the  Highlanders  about  the  same  hour  that  the  advance  occupied 
Amoaftil.  I  protected  his  left  rear  by  a  detachment  of  the  Rifl« 
Brigade.    Our  left  flank  was  now  apparently  clear  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  right,  Lieut.- Col.  Wood  was  met  by  a  fire  which  prevented 
the  advance  of  his  column  for  more  than  a  very  short  distance  into  the 
bush,  consequently  when  the  front  column  took  Amoaftd  it  would  have 
become  detached  from  the  right  column,  but  that  c<Mnmunication  was 
kept  up  along  the  main  road  by  two  companies  of  the  42nd,  the  head- 
quarters and  detachment  23rd,  and  a  company  of  the  Rifle  Brigade. 
Long  after  Amoaful  was  taken,  the  Ashantees  kept  up  a  heavy  fire  on 


206 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  right  of  the  main  road,  and  these  troops  lay  down,  and  replied  to  it, 
repelling  the  enemy,  but  not  without  loss. 

Up  tx>  1.30  P.M.  the  enemy  kept  up  a  very  heavy  fire  on  Lieut.- Col. 
Wood^s  column,  whose  right  was  extended  into  the  bush,  east  of  the 
Tillage  of  Egginassie.  But  they  made  no  progress,  and  soon  after  half- 
past  one  an  advance  of  the  Kossoes  and  Bonny  men  of  Wood's  raiment 
drove  them  away,  clearing  the  flank  of  the  Naval  Brigade,  and  enabling 
them  to  complete  the  discomfiture  of  the  enemy  on  thisfiank.  By  1.45 
P.M.  firing  had  ceased. 

At  this  time  heavy  firing  was  heard  in  rear,  and  I  learnt  that 
another  body  of  the  enemy  had  attacked  my  entrenched  post  at  Quar- 
nian.  I  sent  back  part  of  the  Rifle  Brigade  ;  but  the  attack  was  con- 
tinued till  nightfall,  though  of  course  repulsed.  Shortly  before  dark 
a  large  convoy  of  baggage  which  had  been  parked  at  Insarfu  during 
the  action,  and  was  now  ordered  on,  was  fired  upon,  though  accom- 
panied by  a  large  escort.  A  number  of  carriers  threw  down  their 
loads  and  ran  away,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  great  exertions  of 
Lieut. -Col.  Colley,  whom  I  have  placed  in  charge  of  my  line  of  commu- 
nications, and  who  recovered  much  of  the  baggage  during  the  night, 
more  serious  consequences  might  have  ensued  than  the  loss  of  the  few 
loads  which  occurred.  On  learning  of  this  affair  I  took  immediate 
steps  for  clearing  my  line  of  communications,  and  brought  in  large 
convoys  this  morning  in  perfect  safety  to  Amoaful.  The  ofiicers  com- 
manding the  columns  as  above-named  performed  their  difficult  tasks 
most  excellently,  and  were  efficiently  aided  by  their  staff.  Lieut-Col. 
Evelyn  Wood,  V.C.,  was  wounded  while  at  the  head  of  his  troops. 

Nothing  could  have  exceeded  the  admirable  conduct  of  the  42nd 
Highlanders,  on  whom  fell  the  hardest  share  of  the  work.  As  Colonel 
M*Leod  was  in  command  of  the  left  column,  this  regiment  was  led  by 
Major  Macph arson,  who  was  twice  wounded.  The  two  wings  of  the 
Naval  Brigade,  under  command  of  Captain  Grubbe,  R.N.  (severely 
wounded),  and  Conmiander  Luxmore,  R.N. ;  the  head-quarters  and 
detachment  of  the  2nd  battalion  23rd  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Mostyn ;  the  2nd  battalion  Rifle  Brigade,  under 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Warren  ;  Wood's  Regiment,  under  Captain  Furse 
(42nd  Highlanders) ;  Russell's  Regiment  under  Major  Russell  (iSth 
Hussars),  and  the  scouts  under  Lieutenant  Lord  Gifford  (24th  Regi- 
ment), all  behaved  steadily  and  coolly  under  the  trying  conditions  of  a 
fight  in  dense  bush.  Sir  A.  Alison  has  brought  the  valuable  services 
of  Captain  Rait  and  his  Artillery  specially  to  my  notice ;  and  Major 
Home,  commanding  Royal  Engineers,  led  the  advanced  working  party 
of  the  firont  column,  being  slightly  wounded  in  so  doing. 

Commodore  Hewett,  V.C.,  R.N.,  was  present  with  me  during  the 
action,  and  placed  his  services  at  my  disposal.    I  received  every  pos- 


THE  CASUALTIES. 


207 


able  aadstance  from  him  and  from  the  following  officers  of  my  staff : 
Colonel  Greaves,  Chief  of  the  staff;  Major  Baker,  18th  Regiment, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General;  Captain  H.  Brackenburj,  R.A.,  Assistant 
Military  Secretary;  Captain  Buller,  60th  Rifles,  D. AQ.M.G.;  Lieutenant 
Rolfe,  R.N.,  Naval  A.D.C.;  Lieutenant  the  Hon.  H.  Wood,  10th 
Hussars,  A.D.C. ;  Lieutenant  Maurice,  RA..,  Private  Secretary. 

The  arrangements  for  the  wounded  by  Surgeon-Major  M'Kinnon, 
C.B.,  Principal  Medical  Officer,  were  excellent,  and  I  regret  that  the 
enclosed  return  of  casualties  shows  that  his  duties  w^re  not  light 

It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  numbers  of  an  enemy  in  thick  bush, 
but  still  more  difficult  to  estimate  their  loss,  but  the  Ashantees  opposed 
to  us  must  have  numbered  many  thousands ;  and  as  we  have  buried 
about  150  corpses  beside  the  main  road  only,  and  as  the  enemy  ran 
great  risks  to  carry  off  their  dead,  their  loss  in  killed  and  woimded 
must  have  been  very  heavy. 

I  intend  to-day  to  attack  Becquah,  which  the  scouts  report 
occupied  by  the  enemy. 

I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       G.  J.  Wolselet,  Major-  General. 
The  Bight  Honourable  the  Secretary  of  State  for  War. 


Army  Headquarters,  Amoaful,  February  1,  1874. 

Nominal  return  of  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  men 
killed  and  woimded  in  action  at  Amoaful,  on  January  31,  1874 : 

OFFICERS  KILLED. 

Royal  Engineer^, — Captain  R.  N.  Buckle,  gunshot  wound  through . 
lung  and  heart  and  abdomen  (penetrating). 

NON-COMMISSIONED  OFFICERS  AND  MEN  KILLED. 

42nd  UigJdanders, — Private  Thos.  Thompson,  gunshot  wound 
through  head ;  Private  P.  Reid,  gunshot  wound  through  heart. 

WMCa  Regiment, — Private  Salyah  (Kosso),  gunshot  wound  of 
brain. 

OFFICERS  WOUNDED. 

Royal  Engineers, — Major  R.  Home,  gimahot  woimd  of  thigh — 
slight. 

23rd  Regiment, — ^lieutenant  G.  H.  Button,  gunshot  wound  of  right 
aide— severe. 

42nd  Highlanders. — Major  D.  Macpherson,  gunshot  wound  through 
right  1^ — severe ;  ditto  right  side  of  neck — slight ;  Brevet-Major  W. 


208 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAODALA. 


Baird,  gunshot  wound  of  left  thigh — dangerous ;  ditto  of  right  leg — 
severe ;  ditto  of  right  forearm  and  back — slight ;  Captain  E.  Whitehead, 
gunshot  wound  of  left  thigh  (contusion) — slight ;  Captain  A.  M.  Creagh, 
gunshot  wound  of  scalp  and  right  side  of  neck  (contusion) — slight ; 
Lieutenant  G.  B.  M.  Cumberland,  gunshot  wound  of  right  arm — severe ; 
Lieutenant  A.  S.  Stevenson,  gunshot  wound  of  neck — slight ;  Lieutenant 
W.  A.  Berwick,  gunshot  wound  of  right  leg  and  ankle — severe;  Lieu- 
tenant W.  H.  C.  Mowbray,  gunshot  wound  of  left  temple  and  contusion 
of  right  arm — slight. 

79^^  Regiment  attached  to  i2nd  Highlanders, — ^Lieutenant  R.  C. 
Annesley,  gunshot  wound  of  left  thigh  (contusion) — slight. 

2nd  Battalion  Rifte  Brigade. — Miqor  A.  Stephens,  gunshot  wound 
of  wrist — slight ;  Lieutenant  C.  D.  Sharston,  gunshot  wound  of  right 
arm  with  fracture — ^very  severe;  Lieutenant  W.  J.  Smyth,  gunshot 
wound  of  thigh — slight. 

Wood's  Regiment.— Liexit.-Col.  Evelyn  Wood,V.C.,  90th  Regiment, 
gunshot  wound  of  left  side  of  chest — slight. 

NON-COMMISSIONED  OFFICERS  AND  MEN  WOUNDED. 


Royal  Engineers   4 

2nd  Battalion  23rd  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers      ....  3 

42nd  Highlanders  ,  .       .       .       .  106 

2nd  Battalion  Rifle  Brigade   6 

Bait's  Artillery   1 

Wood's  Native  Regiment   16 

Russell's         „    17 

Lord  Giflford's  scouts   6 

Royal  Naval  Brigade,  Sailors  and  Marines      ....  84 

193 

Sailors  and  Marines,  killed  and  wounded  at  Becquah      .      .  6 

Total     ...             .      •      .      .  198 


% 


BATTLE  OF  BEOQUaH. 


209 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

BATTLE  OF  BECQUAH — BURNINO  OF  THE  VILLAGE — HUMAN  SACRIFICES — 
CAPTAIN  BUTLER — PRELIMINARIES  OP  A  BATTLE — BATTLE  OF  ORDAHSU — 
DASH  UPON,  AND  CAPTURE  OF  COOMASSIE. 

Coomassie:  Februarys,  1874. 

On  THE  1st  instant,  the  day  after  the  battle  of  Amoaful,  we  re- 
ceived news  that  during  the  night  much  baggage  was  lost,  and 
officers  were  lamenting  the  loss  of  the  only  change  of  clothes  they 
possessed.  This  unlucky  accident  was  caused  by  the  flight  of  the 
carriers,  who  when  attacked  by  the  Ashantees  between  Insarfu 
and  Egginassie  dropped  their  loads  and  ran  into  the  bush. 
Later  in  the  day,  however,  much  of  the  baggage  was  recovered, 
though  many  of  the  gentlemen  were  utterly  stripped  of  every 
article  of  clothing  they  possessed  beyond  what  they  wore  on 
their  persons. 

About  11  A.M.  the  force  for  the  attack  on  the  town  of 
Becquah  was  mustered  in  the  main  street.  This  place  was 
considered  to  be  a  most  important  one,  lying  as  it  did  within 
such  a  short  distance  from  our  line  of  communication,  and  Sir 
Garnet  determined  to  destroy  it  before  moving  farther  north. 

The  force  to  be  employed  for  the  work  of  necessary  destruc- 
tion consisted  of  the  Naval  Brigade,  a  gun  and  a  rocket  trough 
of  Eait's  Artillery,  Russell's  Regiment,  Lord  Gifford's  Scouts, 
and  a  small  detachment  of  Home's  Engineers,  and  formed  an 
advanced  guard  under  the  command  of  Colonel  McLeod  of  the 
42nd  Highlanders.  The  main  body  consisted  of  the  23rd 
Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers  and  five  companies  of  the  42nd  High- 
landers imder  Sir  Archibald  Alison,  the  Brigadier-General  com- 
manding the  brigade. 

The  advance  moved  on  to  the  west  of  Amoaful  by  a  road 
which  ran  in  that  direction  from  the  north  end  of  the  town. 

P 


210 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


It  was  not  a  very  great  distance  to  Becquah — not  more  than 
a  mile  and  a  half — so  that  we  were  soon  creeping  quietly 
towards  the  entrance  of  the  village. 

Presently  sharp  firing  was  heard  in  the  advance,  and  as 
company  after  company  took  up  the  fire,  and  as  we  began 
to  move  at  a  quick  pace,  we  were  in  time  to  observe  the 
rapidly  retreating  forms  of  the  Ashantees  as  they  fled  around 
an  angle  of  the  main  street,  and  darted  into  the  bushes.  At 
first  they  seemed  disposed  to  resist  vigorously  after  they  had 
recovered  from  their  surprise,  but  the  volleys  upon  volleys  shot 
into  them  from  each  company  of  the  advance,  soon  silenced 
them,  so  that  the  main  body  was  not  employed  at  all.  The 
advance  continued  its  march  through  the  town  to  its  other 
extremity  imtil  the  Colonel  in  command  became  satisfied  that 
there  was  not  a  single  amied  foe  remaining. 

After  the  usual  search  for  *loot'  had  been  completed. 
Colonel  McLeod  ordered  the  place  to  be  set  on  fire,  and  every 
thatch  was  in  a  short  time  blazing,  and  the  destruction  of 
Becquah  became  assured. 

On  the  return  march,  the  Naval  Brigade,  which  had  the 
honour  of  entering  Becquah  first,  followed  Russell's  Eegiment, 
and  the  rear  was  guarded  by  the  Fusiliers  and  Highlanders. 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  oflScial  report  which  Sir 
Archibald  wrote  the  same  day  for  the  information  of  the  Chief 
of  the  Staff:— 

Amoaful,  February  1. 
Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  report  to  you  for  the  information  of  his 
Excellency  the  Major-General  commanding,  that  in  compliance  with 
instructions  received  from  him,  I  this  day  proceeded  in  charge  of  the 
troops  (Naval  Brigade,  detachment  of  Rait's  Artillery,  detachment  of 
Home's  Engineers,  detachment  23rd  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers,  five  com- 
panies 42nd  Highlanders,  Russell's  Regiment,  Lord  Gifford*s  Guides) 
to  destroy  the  village  of  Becquah.  The  force  was  divided  into  an  ad- 
vanced guard  and  main  body.  The  advanced  guard  was  under  the 
command  of  Colonel  McLeod,  C.B.,  42nd  Royal  Highlanders,  and  con- 
sisted of  the  Naval  Brigade,  a  gun  and  rocket  trough,  Rait's  Artillery, 
Russell's  Regiment,  Lord  Gifford's  Guides,  and  a  detachment  of  Major 
Home's  Engineers.  The  main  body,  which  I  retained  imder  my  own 
direction,  consisted  of  the  23rd  Fusiliers  and  five  companies  42nd 
Highlanders.  I  entrusted  the  entire  arrangements  for  the  attack  on 
the  village  to  Colonel  McLeod,  with  the  advanced  guard,  merely  follow- 


BUBNING  OF  BEC5QUAH. 


211 


lug  myself  with  the  main  body  in  reserve.  Colonel  McLeod's  arrange- 
ments met  with  my  entire  approbation,  and  the  attack  on  and  capture 
of  the  village  were  effected  with  his  usual  ability  and  vigour.  He 
executed  it  entirely  with  his  own  force,  and  I  did  not  require  to  sup- 
port him  with  any  part  of  the  reserve.  I  enclose  his  despatch,  in 
which  the  full  particulars  are  given.  When  the  village  was  fully  in 
flames,  I  occupied  the  entrance  and  eastern  portion  of  it  with  the  de- 
tachment 23rd  and  three  companies  42nd  Highlanders.  Through  these 
I  withdrew  the  whole  of  the  advanced  guard,  except  Halt's  Artillery, 
which  I  retained.  When  they  were  well  clear  of  the  village  I  filed  off 
23rd,  defachment  Rail's  Artillery,  and  three  companies  42nd.  The 
Ashantees  in  small  numbers  beginning  to  drop  into  the  village,  and 
threatening  to  harass  the  rear  guard,  I  kept  a  company  of  the  42  nd 
concealed  behind  some  houses  at  an  angle  of  the  main  street.  When  a 
considerable  number  of  the  enemy  had  entered  and  were  crossing  the 
street,  I  wheeled  up  the  company  and  dispersed  them  with  a  few 
volleys.  I  then  withdrew  quietly  from  the  village,  and  my  return  to 
camp  was  entirely  unmolested  by  the  enemy.  My  best  thanks  are  due 
to  Colonel  McLeod,  for  the  very  able  manner  in  which  the  capture  and 
destruction  of  the  village  were  executed.  In  addition  to  the  officers 
mentioned  in  his  despatch,  I  must  mention  the  perfect  satisfaction 
afforded  to  me  by  the  way  in  which  the  dispositions  for  the  evacuation 
of  the  village  were  carried  out  by  Lieut.- Col.  the  Hon.  S.  Mostyn, 
commanding  23rd  detachment,  and  Major  Scott,  42nd  Highlanders, 
who  had  the  particular  direction  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  rear  guard. 
My  best  thanks  are  still  further  due  to  Captain  Robinson,  my  brigade 
major.  Captain  Russell,  my  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant  Fitzgerald, 
my  extra  aide-de-camp,  for  the  indefatigable  way  in  which  they  carried 
out  the  staff  duties.  Colonel  McLeod  encloses  a  list  of  the  casualties 
in  the  expedition. 

1  have,  &c., 
(Signed)       A.  Alison, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Forces, 
The  Chief  of  the  Stuff,  Head-quarters. 

On  the  2nd  instant,  the  army,  leaving  the  baggage  behind, 
resumed  its  march  towards  Coomassie,  preceded  by  Russell's 
Regiment  and  GiflFord's  Scouts. 

We  were  again  in  the  twilight  shadows  which  the  tall 
forest  cast  over  the  path,  trampling  over  the  relics  of  property 
which  the  fugitives  had  dropped  in  their  hurried  flight,  when 
the  screaming  shells  from  Rait's  Artillery  came  tearing  after 
them.    Stools,  silk-cotton  bolsters,  native  accoutrements,  scores 

p  2 


212 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


and  scores  of  com  rations  contained  in  neatly  plaited  corn 
leaves,  bestrewed  the  ground  everywhere;  they  either  lay 
thrown  on  one  side  of  the  road,  or  we  stumbled  over  them  as 
they  littered  the  centre  of  the  path.  Each  bundle  of  Indian 
com  seemed  sufficient  to  last  a  man  ten  days,  and  we  thought 
that '  fortimate  must  be  the  General  who  can  have  such  simple 
eflfectiveness  of  commissariat,'  as  we  mentally  compared  the 
cumbersome  ineflFectiveness  of  the  Control  System  to  that  of 
compelling  each  man  to  carry  on  his  own  person  ten  days'  pro- 
visions for  himself.  How  easy  a  thing  the  capture  of  Coomassie 
might  have  been  if  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  commanded  3,000 
troops  who  conveyed  their  own  provisions  and  ammunition ! 

However,  it  mattered  not.  We  might  take  a  little  longer 
time  to  accomplish  the  purpose  of  the  Expedition,  but  it  might 
as  well  be  done  efficiently  and  with  comfort  to  one's  self,  as  to  do 
it  speedily  to  our  sore  discomfort  and  inconvenience.  Besides, 
Hhe  race  is  not  always  with  the  swift,'  as  was  proved  at 
Amoaful. 

We  were  sensible  that  in  the  jungle  which  bounded  our 
road  on  each  side  there  were  a  great  many  dead,  not  only  by 
the  empty  litters  which  we  saw  frequently  along  the  road  as  we 
hurried  on,  but  by  the  strange  peculiar  odour  of  death  which 
filled  the  air.  The  road  was  also  tramped  down  broad  and 
smooth  by  the  hurried  throngs  who  were  driven  from  Amoaful 
on  the  fatal  31st  of  January. 

About  a  couple  of  hours  from  Amoafid  we  came  to  a  stream 
which  had  been  the  scene  of  a  tragedy  but  a  short  time  before. 
Just  beyond  the  crossing  there  were  broad  patches  of  mire  and 
marsh,  while  struggling  through  which  the  advance  guard  was 
fired  on  by  the  enemy.  Major  Eussell  instantly  deployed  his 
men  in  line  across  the  road,  and  commenced  poiu-ing  a  vigorous 
fire  ahead  and  into  the  bush  on  either  side.  Here  Captain 
Bromhead  seconded  his  superior's  efibrts  in  an  admirable 
manner,  and  the  indefatigable  GiflFord,  whom  no  service 
daunted,  distinguished  himself  with  his  Scouts,  who  penetrated 
into  the  bush  quite  fearlessly.  Rait's  Artillery  coming  up,  the 
*  Steel  Pen's '  7-pounders  began  to  speak,  and  the  firing  with 
fresh  accession  of  force  began  to  be  quite  spirited,  and  for  a 
while  the  afiair  promised  to  be  a  battle  of  some  importance. 
But  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  terrible  defeat  at  Amoaful 


HUMAN  SACRIFICES. 


213 


was  fresh  in  the  memories  of  the  Ashantees,  for  their  musketry 
soon  slackened,  and  they  were  flying  from  before  the  rapidly 
advancing  men  of  Russell's  Eegiment. 

As  soon  as  it  was  discovered  that  the  flight  of  the  enemy 
was  begim,  the  impetuous  Russell  urged  his  men  in  the  pursuit, 
and  onward  they  strode  after  the  fugitives  with  long  strides, 
until  they  reached  the  village  of  Agimamu. 

The  main  body  did  not  participate  in  this  action.  The 
road,  though  clear  for  them,  was  marked  with  the  dead  fallen 
in  the  aflFair  of  the  morning  ;  and  each  village  had  its  human 
sacrifice  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  path,  for  the  purpose  of 
affrighting  the  conquerors.  The  sacrifice  was  of  either  sex, 
sometimes  a  young  man,  sometimes  a  woman.  The  head, 
severed  from  the  body,  was  turned  to  meet  the  advancing  army, 
the  body  was  evenly  laid  out  with  the  feet  towards  Coomassie. 
This  laying  out  in  this  manner  meant  no  doubt,  '  Regard  this 
face^  white  men,  ye  whose  feet  are  hurrying  on  to  our  capital^ 
and  learn  the  fate  awaiting  youJ* 

We  arrived  at  Agimamu  about  noon  of  the  2nd,  and  on 
the  morning  of  the  3rd  pressed  onward  towards  the  Ordah 
River. 

Between  Agimamu  and  Edunkoo,  one  mile  beyond,  the 
forest  was  intersected  by  many  paths  leading  from  the  main 
road  to  the  short  road.  This  last  had  been  abandoned  by  Sir 
Garnet,  who  had  chosen  the  longer  and  more  roundabout  road 
we  were  now  pursuing. 

Half  a  mile  beyond  Edimkoo  was  another  village,  called 
Sakrabah,  consisting  of  two  or  three  huts,  and  a  mile  farther 
we  came  to  Adwabin.  Between  Adwabin  and  the  Ordah  River, 
distant  two  and  a  half  miles,  the  advance  was  again  resisted 
from  behind  a  series  of  ambuscades,  and  after  such  a  hot  style 
that  out  of  the  regiment  under  Russell  over  thirty  were  wounded 
and  three  were  killed ;  seven  out  of  the  detachment  of  eleven 
of  Rait's  Artillery  were  wounded,  and  the  officers  had  exceed- 
ingly narrow  escapes.  But  the  passage  through  the  woods  to 
the  Ordah  was  soon  forced,  and  the  river  gained  by  the  advance 
about  10  A.M.,  whereupon  Home's  Engineers  went  gallantly  to 
work  to  construct  a  bridge  across. 

When  the  main  column  arrived  at  the  Ordah,  we  heard  the 
news  of  the  fourth  day's  fight,  and  the  report  of  a  large  force 


214 


COOMASSIB  AND  MAGDALA, 


being  at  Ordahsu,  a  village  situate  a  mile  and  a  half  beyond 
the  northern  bank  of  the  river. 

Between  Sakratah  and  Adwabin  Sir  Garnet  had  received 
another  letter  from  the  king,  imploring  him  to  halt,  and  so 
give  him  time  to  collect  the  indemnity,  promising  him  also 
that  the  heir  apparent  and  the  queen  mother  should  also  be 
given  up.  To  which  Sir  Garnet  replied  that  he  should  Jialt 
only  when  the  money  and  the  hostages  demanded  were  in  his 
power,  as  substantial  guarantees  of  his  good  faith.  If  they 
were  not  in  his  camp  by  morning  of  the  next  day.  Sir  Gtirnet 
would  march  upon  Coomassie,  and  burn  it  to  the  ground. 

We  were  again  then  on  the  eve  of  a  great  fight.  Events 
were  so  crowding  themselves  into  these  later  days  of  our  march, 
that  we  had  barely  leisure  to  think  and  reflect  upon  the  prob- 
able issue  of  the  campaign.  Every  man  congratulated  himself, 
as  each  day  shortened  the  distance  to  Coomassie,  that  there 
were  fewer  days  for  him  to  remain  in  the  country. 

Most  of  my  colleagues,  with  myself,  joined  Russell's  advance, 
which  was  bivouacked  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  river, 
whence  there  was  but  about  a  mile  and  a  half  of  forest  inter- 
vening between  us  and  10,000  or  12,000  of  the  enemy.  The 
main  column,  under  Sir  Gurnet,  remained  on  the  southern 
bank. 

News  came  this  evening  from  Captain  Butler  in  command 
of  the  Akim  force,  that  he  was  almost  ready  to  join  the  main 
column  with  1,400  Akims,  which  was  most  agreeable  news 
after  the  discouraging  rumour  afloat  at  Fomannah. 

But  while  we  were  being  gratified  with  the  encouraging 
report.  Captain  Butler  had  written  a  letter  the  night  previous 
from  Tribee,  a  place  to  the  right,  nearly  due  east  of  Amoaful, 
to  the  following  effect : — 

Tribe©:  February  2,  1874. 

Sir, — After  the  despatch  of  my  letter  of  the  29th  and  30th  ultimo,  a 
rapid  retreat  commenced  in  the  whole  Akira  force.  So  universal  was 
the  panic  that  during  the  greater  portion  of  the  night  bodies  of  men  con- 
tinued to  move  south,  and  early  on  the  morning  of  the  31st  Yancoma 
was  reached  and  left  behind.  No  attempt  was  made  on  the  part  of  the 
kings  to  excuse  or  explain  their  gross  treachery,  and  I  could  elicit 
nothing  more  tangible  than  that  they  were  too  far  advanced  into 
Ashantee  territory,  and  that  they  must  be  cut  off  before  assistance  could 
reach  them. 


CAPTAIN  BUTLER. 


215 


My  belief  is  that  the  statements  of  a  blind  Ashantee  prisoner  taken 
at  Nansuah,  coupled  with  a  verbal  message  sent  bj  King  Attah  of  East 
Akim,  the  purport  of  which  I  was  not  made  aware  of,  did  much  to  in- 
duce the  disgraceful  flight. 

In  the  hasty  postscript  to  my  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo  I  had  only 
time  to  make  yeu  acquainted  with  the  fact  of  the  retreat. 

No  previous  warning — no  intimation  whatever — had  been  given  to 
me  that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  kings  and  chiefs  to  abandon  Akina ; 
indeed,  up  to  the  very  moment  that  the  retreat  began  I  was  ^moving 
through  the  camps,  endeavouring  to  get  the  Akims  to  move  to  Dadlasso 
en  route  to  Amoaf  ul,  and  I  had  actually  engaged  a  party  of  hunters  to 
proceed  through  the  bush  to  the  main  line  near  the  latter  place.  Yet, 
so  complete  was  the  flight  that  within  two  hours  not  a  man  was  left  in 
Akina,  and  long  before  midnight  every  Akim  was  beyond  the  Ennoon 
River,  ten  miles  distant.  All  this  without  a  reverse  having  taken  place, 
and  after  a  loss  of  only  two  killed  and  two  wounded  in  the  entire 
force. 

I  cannot  express  to  you  the  feelings  which  which  I  beheld  this  total 
break-up  of  the  movement.  Little  by  little,  step  by  step,  I  had  succeeded 
in  leading  these  savages  to  within  a  very  trifling  distance  of  the  point 
aimed  at. 

It  is  true  that  there  were  many  indications  of  how  utterly  untrust- 
worthy was  the  composition  of  the  force  under  my  command ;  but, 
nevertheless,  at  Akina  I  naturally  looked  at  the  task  as  all  but  accom- 
plished, and  my  junction  with  the  main  body  at  Amoaful,  within  a  few 
miles  of  Coomassie,  as  only  a  question  of  some  hours.  Encumbered 
with  baggage,  without  carriers,  save  those  given  me  by  the  kings,  and 
with  three  of  my  officers  sick  from  actual  fever  or  its  recent  presence, 
I  dared  not  wait  at  Akina  the  chance  of  communication  from  the  main 
body.  I  had  to  abandon  the  fruits  of  no  little  labour  at  the  moment 
success  seemed  most  assured. 

The  kings,  with  about  a  quarter  of  the  original  force,  are  now 
encamped  close  to  the  Prah  at  Embronen  ;  they  have  refused  to  move 
to  Prahsu.  The  remainder  of  the  men  are  scattered  or  dispersed  to  their 
homes. 

I  will  proceed  to  head-quarters  with  all  speed,  and  afterwards  be 
ready  to  tmdertake  such  punishment  as  the  Major- General  may  deter- 
mine to  inflict  upon  the  Akim  chiefs. 

Captain  Paget  has  had  a  relapse  of  fever.  He  proceeds  with 
carriers  to  Prahsu, — I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)      W.  F.  Butler, 

Captain.  W.  F.  B. 

To  the  Chief  of  the  Staff; 


216 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


The  above  requires  no  comment,  it  speaks  for  itself,  and 
concludes  the  career  of  poor  Captain  Butler  on  the  Grold  Coast. 
All  his  months  of  labour  and  energy  were  ended  in  one  night, 
by  the  total  desertion  of  his  entire  force,  leaving  him  to  return 
to  Amoaful  with  the  escort  of  policemen  that  had  accompanied 
him  to  Akim. 

We  received  also  news  of  the  attack  made  upon  Fomannah 
on  February  2,  by  the  same  force  which,  probably,  baffled  at 
Quarman  and  Insarfu,  had  struck  across  the  road  from  the  right 
side  to  that  on  which  Becquah,  and  Borborassi  on  the  left, 
stands,  and  following  it  south,  had  made  an  attempt  upon  the 
fortified  station  on  left  flank  and  rear.  Some  women  about  to 
proceed  to  the  stream  to  the  left  of  the  village,  discovered  an  un- 
usual number  of  men  in  the  bushes,  and  hastened  back  at  once 
to  give  alarm.  A  few  minutes  after  they  made  their  presence 
known  with  a  tremendous  fire  of  musketry,  and  several  of  their 
number  succeeded  in  penetrating  within  a  few  yards  of  the 
hospital  (the  king's  palace).  During  the  beginning  of  the 
attack  the  place  was  defended  by  Captain  A.  W.  Duncan,  B.  A., 
who  contrived  to  muster  some  80  men,  several  of  whom  were 
on  the  sick-list.  Subsequently  Colonel  CoUey  (2nd  Queen's) 
took  command,  who  ultimately  drove  the  Ashantees  out  of  the 
post  with  great  loss. 

The  loss  on  the  British  side  was  small.  Captains  Duncan 
(E.A.)  and  Dudley  North  (47th  Regiment)  were  wounded,  the 
latter  officer  seriously.  Three  of  the  soldiers  of  the  42nd  High- 
landers, 1  of  the  Eifles,  and  4  men  of  the  2nd  West  India  Regi- 
ment were  woimded. 

The  night  before  the  entry  into  Coomassie  was  spent  on  the 
Ordah  most  imcomfortably.  It  began  to  rain  about  dusk,  and 
continued  until  men,  wearied  with  the  day's  fatigues,  dropped  oflF 
to  sleep  despite  the  rain  and  discomfort.  The  discomfort  may 
be  imagined  when  it  will  be  remembered  that  every  man  had, 
according  to  orders,  left  his-  blankets,  rugs,  changes  of  flannel, 
&c.,  in  tlie  rear  stations  of  Amoaful  and  Agimamu. 

The  morning  of  the  day,  the  night  of  which  saw  us  assembled 
in  the  main  street  of  the  Ashantee  capital,  the  ever-memorable 
February  4,  was  long  dawning.  It  seemed  as  if  the  day 
sympathised  with  the  waning  of  the  once  terrible  power  of  the 
Ashantees,  and  lagged  behind  in  its  course  to  delay  what  had 


1 


PREUMINAKIES  OF  A  BATTLE.  217 

now  become  inevitable,  viz.,  the  total  rout  of  the  last  army  of 
King  Coffee,  and  the  capture  of  Coomassie.  If  this  false 
and  treacherous  king  had  been  spending  the  night  imploring 
the  fetiches  of  the  aulic  Bantammah  to  spoil  the  powder  of  the 
white  men,  to  drown  them  with  rain,  he  must  have  been 
specially  pleased  to  observe  how  faithfully  the  royal  fetiches 
laboured  for  him,  and  as  he  looked  at  the  clouds  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  4th  it  may  be  he  felt  still  more  encouraged  by 
observing  the  deep  gloom  of  the  sky.  It  is  very  probable, 
since  there  is  no  end  to  the  superstitious  crotchets  of  an  Ashantee 
king. 

Perhaps  also  the  long  period  of  daylight  that  elapsed — nearly 
two  hours,  before  a  move  was  made — contributed  to  impress  King 
CoflFee  still  more  with  the  power  of  the  royal  fetiches.  The 
bridge  across  the  Ordah,  some  fifty  yards  in  length,  was  having 
the  finishing  touches  put  to  it  by  Home's  Engineers,  but  at 
7  A.M.  the  bridge  was  completed,  and  Russell's  Regiment  moved 
on,  preceded  on  this  day  by  the  Rifle  Brigade,  who  were  to  have 
the  honourable  duty  of  first  trying  the  mettle  of  the  Ashantees, 
as  the  *  Black-Watch  '  had  done  at  Amoaful.  The  Rifles  were 
preceded  only  by  the  Scouts  of  GifFord,  whose  good  fortune  it 
seemed  to  be  to  have  the  honour  of  initiating  every  battle 
since  the  army  crossed  the  Prah. 

The  advanced  guard,  consisting  of  GifFord's  Scouts,  the  Rifle 
Brigade,  Russell's  Regiment,  and  Rait's  Artillery,  had  barely 
begun  to  leave  the  banks  of  the  Ordah  when  the  sharp  eyes  of 
Gifford's  men  discovered  the  Ashantee  scouts  about  five  hundred 
yards  in  front  of  the  village  of  Ordahsu.  The  first  shot  on  this 
morning  was  fired  at  7.40  a.m.  Henceforward  during  oiu:  march 
with  the  main  body,  we  heard  nothing  but  the  rising  or  sub- 
siding volleys  of  musketry  as  fired  by  the  combatants.  Now 
and  then  a  more  than  usually  loud  volley  of  the  enemy's  guns 
was  heard,  which  was  answered  immediately  by  repeated 
volleys  from  the  Sniders.  And  while  this  loud  music  continued 
we  were  marching  on  with  the  main  body,  with  only  a  little  gap 
separating  us  from  the  advance. 

As  each  advancing  company  drew  nearer  the  scene  of  the 
combat,  it  became  engaged  in  it.  Throwing  themselves  down  in 
the  road,  the  men,  as  they  received  orders  to  fire,  simply  took  care 
to  keep  their  guns  level  with  the  ground  about  a  foot  above  it, 


218 


COOMASSrE  AND  MAGDALA. 


and  thought  more  of  firing  with  nervous  rapidity  than  of  taking 
aim  at  human  objects.  I  opine  that  such  was  the  case  with 
the  Ashantees,  otherwise  they  may  well  be  pitied  by  those  who 
know  what  a  deadly  scathing  storm  of  bullets  swept  just  over 
the  ground  to  100,  200,  and  300  yards  distance.  This  kind  of 
fighting  may  perhaps  be  not  the  most  scientific,  but  it  certainly 
was  the  only  one  possible  under  the  circumstances,  and  the 
waste  of  ammunition  was  amply  recompensed  by  the  number  of 
lives  saved. 

Even  Sir  Garnet  was  heard  to  say,  when  a  remark  was  made 
to  him  about  the  fearful  waste  of  ammunition,  '  It  does  not 
matter,  let  them  fire  it  away ;  it  will  prevent  the  Ashantees 
from  doing  any  injury  while  it  lasts.' 

Such  was  precisely  the  fact.  The  British  soldiers  had  been 
severely  punished  by  the  enemy  at  Amoaful,  because  their 
training  and  discipline  restrained  them  from  firing  until  they 
were  fired  at.  Hence  the  casualties  which  the  42nd  High- 
landers sufiered.  The  '  Fire  low — fire  slow,'  though  reading 
well  in  the  general  orders  of  Sir  Garnet,  did  not  appear  to  be 
the  best  rule  that  ought  to  have  been  made  for  the  guidance  of 
the  troops  in  Ashantee.  With  all  due  deference  to  Sir  Garnet, 
a  better  rule  would  have  been,  '  A  fast  fire,  and  a  fast  advance.' 
For  the  Ashantees  in  presence  of  an  immovable  force  seem  to 
be  able  to  stick  to  the  earth  they  lie  on,  and  fire  in  that  posi- 
tion as  well  as  most  men.  But  a  rapid  advance,  and  a  rapid  fire, 
simply  discomposes  and  destroys  them. 

The  village  of  Ordahsu  was  but  a  mile  and  a  quarter  from 
the  Ordah  River ;  it  yet  took  us  until  9.30  to  get  within  600 
yards  of  it.  About  this  time  the  main  body  halted,  and  we  sat 
down  in  the  road  to  listen  to  the  awful  sound  of  battle,  the 
ripping,  tearing  sound  of  himdreds  of  fast-firing  Sniders,  the 
sonorous  volleys  of  the  Ashantee  guns,  and  the  harsh  barking  of 
Eait's  artillery. 

While  we  were  seated,  listening  to  these  battle  soimds, 
some  nervous  man  ahead  of  the  42nd  fancied  he  saw  an 
Ashantee  stealing  southward  through  the  woods,  as  if  he  were 
heading  a  force  for  attacking  our  flanks,  and  fired,  which 
startling  the  next  to  him,  made  him  nervous,  and  he  fired,  and 
in  a  second  almost  the  alarming  firing  ran  from  end  to  end, 
before  one  could  make  up  his  mind  whether  the  enemy 


BATTLE  OF  OKDAHSU. 


219 


was  attacking  the  42nd,  or  whether  the  42nd  had  cause  for 
firing.  For  a  second  this  rapid  gush  of  fire,  without  warn- 
ing, from  a  line  extending  over  a  mile  of  road,  was  one  of  the 
most  alarming  things  that  happened  during  that  day.  Sir 
Garnet  rising,  however,  in  a  calm  manner,  ordered  the  42nd 
to  cease  firing ;  and  after  a  second  or  tw^o,  the  gallant  regiment 
had  become  as  submissive  and  as  cool  as  ever,  and  were  the 
first  to  laugh  at  the  idea  that  the  '  Black  Watch '  could  have 
been  by  any  possibility  startled  from  its  usual  enduring  self- 
control  and  steadiness. 

Sir  Gramet  at  this  time  received  the  news  that  the  Rifle 
Brigade  had  carried  the  village  of  Ordahsu,  and  his  quick  mind 
at  once  conceived  a  bold  design,  viz.,  that  of  rushing  his 
baggage  inmiediat^ly  after  the  Eifles. 

Colonel  Colley,  Captain  Baker,  the  Inspector  of  Police,  and 
Mr.  Irvine,  chief  of  the  Control,  were  requested  to  send  the 
baggage  up ;  the  main  body  of  the  column  parted  on  each  side 
of  the  road,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the  head  of  the  long  baggage 
train  came  up  at  a  fast  pace,  every  officer  lending  his  voice  to 
cheer  the  Fantee  porters  on. 

Within  fifteen  minutes  after  the  design  had  been  conceived 
the  last  porter  had  passed  by  Sir  Garnet,  and  the  main  body  of 
the  column  closed  up  its  lines  again  fast  and  sure.  Sir  Gtmiet 
followed  the  porters,  the  main  body  following  him,  and  thus  an 
impenetrable  obstacle  to  any  panic  flight  of  the  porters  was 
raised.  Ten  minutes  later  we  were  among  the  dying  and  dead 
Ashantees,  some  fifty  or  so  slain  at  the  mouth  of  the  village ; 
but  porters  and  main  body  passed  over  these  into  the  village  of 
Ordahsu. 

Another  such  scene  as  that  which  first  presented  itself  as 
we  entered  Egginassie  during  the  early  part  of  the  battle  of 
Amoafiil,  appeared  here,  viz.,  the  death  of  Lieutenant  Eyre 
(90th  Light  Infantry),  son  of  Sir  William  Eyre.  It  was  a  sad 
event,  for  young  Eyre  had  made  himself  imiversally  beloved. 
The  word  '  Mother !'  was  the  last  sound  heard  from  his  lips  as 
he  breathed  his  last,  surrounded  by  groups  of  sorrowing  friends, 
even  while  the  battle  roared  its  discordant  symphony  around 
them. 

For  two  hours  after  entering  the  village  of  Ordahsu,  we 
listened  to  the  battle  soimds^  which  had  now  become  monotonous. 


220 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Towards  the  north  of  the  village  there  was  a  dead  silence  in 
the  woods,  but  on  each  flank  and  rear  the  musketry  continued 
to  bellow  without  intermission.  For  the  Ashantees,  according 
as  Sir  Garnet  had  divined,  after  being  driven  from  the  front  or 
north  of  the  village  had  surged  on  the  right  flank,  and  then 
precipitated  their  numbers  on  the  road,  expectant  of  plunder. 
Enraged  at  their  ill-luck,  they  swung  round  both  flanks  of  their 
enemy,  united,  and  together  they  attacked  the  rear ;  but  the 
Naval  Brigade,  nearly  two  hundred  strong,  under  Captain 
Grubbe,  had  added  their  number  to  Wood's  and  Russell's  native 
allies,who  were  coolly  marking  their  victims  as  they  came  to  view. 

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  Colonel  Wood,  wounded 
by  a  slug  in  the  chest  at  Amoaful,  and  almost  invalided  on 
accoimt  of  it,  had  implored  Sir  Garnet  to  be  permitted  to  join 
again,  which  request  was  granted.  Hence  it  happened  that 
Colonel  Wood's  regiment  was  in  the  action  at  Ordahsu,  and 
Lieutenant  Eyre,  who  served  in  the  native  regiment,  was 
killed. 

Sir  Garnet  now  did  that  which  he  ought  to  have  done 
before,  but  which  done  even  at  noon,  half  an  hour  before  the 
battle  ended,  shows  better  than  anything,  in  my  opinion,  the 
audacity  of  his  character,  and  the  quick  intelligence  of  the 
active  and  capable  General  who  is  prompt  to  conceive  and  ready 
to  execute. 

He  ordered  up  the  42nd  Highlanders,  and  gave  orders  to 
Colonel  McLeod,  to  carry  the  positions  in  front,  and  march 
straight  into  Coomassie.  Captain  Rait's  artillery  was  to  cover 
the  attack. 

No  man  is  more  cool  than  Colonel  McLeod  in  action.  He 
drew  up  his  men  in  double  file  from  one  end  of  the  village  to 
the  other.  The  famous  *  Black  Watch'  appeared,  though 
greatly  reduced  in  niunbers,*  to  be  fit  followers  of  their  Colonel. 
Both  Colonel  and  soldiers  mutually  understood  one  another. 
There  was  no  doubt  or  hesitancy  in  either  commanding  officer 
or  men. 

During  the  brief  halt.  Colonel  McLeod  surveyed  his  men, 
and  then  said, '  The  42nd  will  fire  volleys  by  companies,  accord- 
ing to  order.    Forward ! ' 

Then  began  the  sublime  march  to  Coomassie,  the  most 

'  340,  on  this  day. 


THE  MATCHLESS  GALLANTRY  OF  THE  42ND. 


221 


gallant  conduct,  and  most  impressive  action  of  the  Ashantee 
campaign.  It  was  on  the  *  fire  fast '  and  *  advance  fast '  prin- 
ciple. 

The  Highlanders  marched  out  of  the  village,  from  the 
garish  sunlight  of  the  open,  into  the  gloomy  chasm  of  the 
forest,  by  a  road,  beset  by  ambuscades,  with  a  proud  military 
bearing,  full  of  determination  and  a  joyous  courage. 

Soon  after  they  advanced  into  that  fearful  gaping  pass  in 
the  forest,  the  enemy  opened  on  them  from  his  coverts.  Colonel 
McLeod  shouted  out  clear  and  loud, 

*  Company  A,  front  rank  fire  to  the  right,  rear  rank  fire  to 
the  left.    Forward  ! ' 

The  companies  fired  in  succession,  according  to  order,  front 
ranks  firing  to  the  right,  rear  ranks  firing  to  the  left,  and 
halting  not  even  to  deliver  their  volleys,  marched  past  the 
ambuscades,  the  bagpipes  playing,  and  the  wild  Highland 
cheers  echoing  as  loud  as  the  musketry  ;  Captain  Rait,  with 
his  hard-striking  artillery  hurling  his  shot  and  rockets  to  the 
right  and  left  of  the  enemy. 

This  was  a  new  game  of  war  which  the  white  man  inaugurated 
in  Ashantee,  and  which  the  Ashantees  did  not  understand.  It 
was  out  of  all  precedent.  The  custom  used  to  be  to  lie  down 
and  adhere  to  the  earth,  and  fire  away  for  hours  until  one  party 
or  the  other  expended  all  his  ammunition,  or  got  tired  of  the 
tedium  of  this  kind  of  fighting  to  try  in  another  part  of  the 
field.  But  this  marching  past  ambuscades  with  salutes  of  bullets 
they  did  not  understand,  they  became  anxious  and  then  panic- 
stricken,  and  within  half-an-hour  after  the  Highlanders  had 
departed,  the  impression  that  something  unusual  had  happened 
in  the  front  seemed  to  have  been  transmitted  throughout  the 
ranks  of  the  enemy  on  all  sides. 

A  loud  blowing  of  horns  heard  on  our  right,  and  in  oiur  rear, 
seemed  to  annoimce,  *  To  your  tents.  Oh  Ashantees !  Coomassie 
is  fallen,  the  battle  is  lost and  subsiding  notes  heard  at  a 
distance,  soimded  like  a  wail  of  despair,  as  the  gentle  breeze 
bore  them  through  the  forest  to  our  ears. 

As  the  last  sounds  of  the  battle  of  Ordahsu  died  away,  the 
last  clod  of  earth  was  thrown  over  the  remains  of  the  young 
and  gallant  gentleman  who  had  fallen  in  the  early  part  of  it. 
Then  the  Native  Begiments  were  ordered  to  advance,  the 


222 


COOMASSn?  AND  MAGDALA. 


porters  carrying  the  reserve  ammunition  and  medical  stores 
were  driven  after  them;  the  StaflF followed,  then  came  the Bifles, 
and  finally  the  Naval  Brigade.  It  was  in  this  manner  we 
followed  the  road  which  the  42nd  Highlanders  had  cleared  for 
US  but  half  an  hour  before.  A  few  of  the  results  of  their  volleys 
we  saw  in  dead  men  lying  across  or  on  the  side  of  the  road.  We 
saw  one  man  who  had  evidently  taken  shelter  behind  a  thick 
cotton-wood  buttress.  A  Snider  bullet  with  great  penetrative 
force  had  gone  clean  through  the  five  inches  of  cotton-wood, 
and  had  slain  the  man  behind  it. 

A  mile  from  Ordahsu  we  passed  through  the  village  of 
Ensiayu,  a  small  cluster  of  huts  nestling  among  plantain  fronds. 
Three  quarters  of  a  mile  beyond  Ensiayu  we  came  to  Akkan- 
wassi,  which,  during  the  battle  just  ended,  had  been  honoured 
with  the  presence  of  the  king,  who,  seated  on  a  golden  stool, 
under  a  temporary  shelter  made  of  plantain  leaves,  was  com- 
manding his  army  at  this  distance  from  it. 

Early  in  the  morning  he  had  taken  his  seat  here,  vowing 
that  he  would  behead  the  first  chief  who  from  cowardice  deserted 
his  post.  To  the  last,  apparently,  this  king  of  an  unconquered 
people  entertained  the  belief,  that  at  the  eleventh  hour 
there  would  be  some  special  intervention  of  a  fetich  deity  in  his 
behalf,  or  his  army  would  drive  the  insolent  white  men  back, 
with  woful  results  to  all  prisoners  he  could  lay  his  hands  on. 

The  chiefs  seem  to  have  cheered  him  up  to  the  last.  Their 
chairs  were  all  aroimd  the  shelter  under  which  the  king  had 
been  seated.  But  the  firing  had  got  nearer  to  His  Royal  Self, 
a  thing  not  on  the  programme  at  all ;  strange  sounds  of 
music,  and  ringing  cheers  of  advancing  white  men  were  heard ; 
and  the  strangest  thing  of  all,  despite  all  predictions  of  Fetich 
TJlemas  to  the  contrary,  a  sacrilegious  Snider  bullet  sang  past 
his  ears ;  thereupon  the  poor  deluded  king  was  fain  to  have 
himself  borne  away  by  fear-inspired  slaves,  with  a  volley  of 
bullets  screaming  behind  him. 

The  king  fled  !  the  last  hope  of  His  Majesty  had  died  away ! 

But  the  Highlanders  continued  their  march  past  Karsi, 
meeting  with  flags  of  truce  on  the  way — Sir  Archibald  Alison 
on  his  white  mule,  and  Colonel  McLeod  on  foot,  leading  them 
across  the  fetid  deathly  swamp  which  insulates  Coomassie. 
While  crossing  this  place.  Sir  Archibald's  mule  stumbled,  and 


APFROACHINa  COOMASSIE. 


223 


the  gallant  Brigadier  fell  under  the  animal  into  the  nauseoug 
liquid,  which  reeked  with  human  putrefaction.  As  Sir  Archi- 
bald has  but  one  arm,  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  him  to 
have  extricated  himself  from  his  dangerous  position,  had  not 
his  Brigade  Major,  Captain  Robinson,  immediately  relieved 
him. 

In  the  meantime  the  main  body,  consisting  of  the  23rd 
Eoyal  Welsh  Fusiliers,  Wood's  and  BusselFs  regiments,  Bifles 
and  Naval  Brigade,  were  toiling  on  hard  and  fast  after  the 
42nd. 

On  the  road  Sir  Garnet  received  a  cheery  despatch  from  Sir 
Archibald  Alison  to  this  eflFect : — 

*  We  have  taken  all  the  villages  but  the  last  before  entering 
Coomassie.  The  enemy  is  flying  panic-stricken  before  us. 
Support  me  with  half  the  Rifles,  and  I  enter  Coomassie  to- 
night.' 

Then  came  by  two  different  flags  of  truce,  letters  from 
Dawson  the  missionary,  begging  in  piteous  terms  for  delay  for 
the  sake  of  his  life  and  that  of  his  fellow-captives.  A  bearer 
of  one  of  them  informed  us  that  the  king  had  left  Coomassie 
the  night  before  for  the  battle-field,  and  had  not  returned  to 
his  capital  since,  but  he  and  his  army  were  known  to  be  in  full 
flight  towards  -^mineeha,  a  country  residence  of  His  Majesty. 

Still  marching  past,  we  came  through  and  passed  by  Karsi, 
and  at  6  p.m.,  the  Staff"  and  head  of  the  main  body  of  the  column 
had  crossed  the  swamp  and  entered  a  long  broad  avenue  flanked 
on  each  side  by  pretentious-looking  edifices  of  porticoed  and 
alcoved  houses. 

We  were  at  last  in  Coomassie ! 

As  we  arrived  at  the  market-place,  we  saw  himdreds  of 
wondering  Ashantees  with  weapons  in  their  hands,  regarding  us 
most  curiously.  It  was  attempted  at  first  to  disarm  them,  but 
the  General,  doubtless  thinking  that  at  this  late  hour  of  the 
day  it  was  bad  policy  to  begin  hostilities,  ordered  them  to  be 
treated  kindly  and  to  be  left  alone. 

Turning  to  the  left  when  we  arrived  at  the  market-place, 
we  saw  another  wide  and  noble  street  half  a  mile  long,  where 
the  42nd  Highlanders  were  drawn  quietly  in  line,  awaiting  the 
arrival  of  the  General. 

As  the  General  arrived  in  front  of  them,  the  Highlanders 


224 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


uttered  their  victorious  cheers ;  and  soon  every  straggler  and 
new  arrival  of  the  main  body  caught  up  the  hearty  cries,  and 
announced  to  those  far  behind  not  yet  arrived  in  the  capital  as 
well  as  to  the  wondering  citizens  regarding  us,  and  the  advanc- 
ing fugitives  from  the  battle-field,  the  certain  Fall  of  Coo- 
MASSIE,  the  dread  capital  of  the  Ashantee  kingdom. 


WITHIN  COOMASSIE. 


225 


CHAPTER  XVII. 
wrranT  cooicassib — sxecution  of  a  fantee  roLicBMAN— ebrors  of  sib 

GARWET  —  THE  GOLGOTHA  OF  COOMASSIE — LIST  OF  THE  'LOOT* — SIR 
GARNET  EXPLAINS, 

February  14,  1874. 

The  march  of  the  British  Army  from  Cape  Coast  to  Coomassie 
culminated  in  the  capture  of  the  enemy's  capital  on  the  4th 
instant,  and  in  the  destruction  of  it  by  fire  on  the  6th.  The 
same  day  that  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  the  army  began  its 
homeward  march,  and  that  night  was  encamped  at  Agimamu, 
13|  miles  distant  from  it. 

My  colleague,  Mr.  Winwood  Reade,  the  Special  Corre- 
spondent of  the  London  '  Times,'  and  myself  arrived  at  Cape 
Coast  Castle  on  the  12th  from  Coomassie.  Mr.  George  A. 
Henty,  of  the  'Standard,'  Mr.  Melton  Prior,  the  Special 
Artist  of  the  *  Illustrated  London  News,'  and  several  officers, 
arrived  to-day  from  the  front,  whence  the  reader  may  infer 
that  the  late  Ashantee  Expedition  is  \artually  at  an  end. 

There  remains  only  to  chronicle  what  occurred  within  Coo- 
massie after  the  entry  of  the  army,  to  describe  the  city  during 
the  time  it  was  occupied  by  the  troops,  and  its  destruction  on 
the  6th,  before  rendering  our  verdict  upon  the  Campaign. 

After  the  triumphant  cheering  which  greeted  the  arrival  of 
Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  within  Coomassie,  the  soldiers  were  dis- 
missed from  line  to  seek  their  quarters  along  the  main  street. 
The  authorities  seemed  to  content  themselves  with  solely 
defending  the  broad  avenue  along  which  the  troops  were 
quartered. 

While  we  sought  our  quarters  weary  with  the  long  march 
and  the  fetigue  consequent  upon  the  high  excitement  so  long 
maintained  throughout  the  long  day,  we  met  several  hundreds 

Q 


226 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


of  fugitives  coming  up  by  another  road  from  the  battle-field 
around  Ordahsu.  These  men  had  double-barrelled  guns,  some 
excellent  Enfields,  appearing  almost  new,  while  the  majority 
were  armed  witli  the  long-barrelled  Danish  guns  with  flint- 
locks. One  or  two  individual  officers,  moved  by  indignation  at 
sight  of  these  bold  knaves  appearing  in  the  camp,  made  an 
effort  to  disarm  a  few  of  them ;  but  the  sturdy  resistance  they 
made  compelled  them  to  desist,  lest  at  such  a  late  hour  blood- 
shed might  be  provoked,  and  a  general  massacre  of  them  take 
place. 

Had  Sir  Garaet,  however,  taken  the  precaution  to  set  a 
cordon  of  guards  around  the  city  at  the  end  of  each  street, 
with  strict  orders  to  allow  the  entry  of  every  Ashantee  who 
desired  to  come  in,  but  on  no  account  to  permit  one  man  to 
depart  with  his  weapons,  Sir  Grarnet  would  have  enhanced  his 
success  without  doubt. 

But  the  yoimg  General  was  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the 
African,  and  retained  his  faith  in  the  king's  good  intentions 
to  the  last. 

The  following  letter  will  serve  to  show  the  nature  of  the 
communication  he  made  to  the  king  soon  after  our  arrival  in 
Coomassie : — 

Coomassie,  February  4,  1874. 

King, — You  have  deceived  me,  but  I  have  kept  my  promise  to  you. 

I  am  in  Coomareie,  and  my  only  wish  is  to  make  a  lasting  peace 
with  you.  I  have  shown  you  the  power  of  England,  and  now  I  will  be 
merciful. 

As  you  do  not  wish  to  give  up  your  mother  and  Prince  Mensah, 
send  me  some  other  hostages  of  rank,  and  I  will  make  peace  with  you 
to-morrow  on  the  terms  originally  agreed  upon. 

If  either  your  Majesty,  or  your  royal  mother,  or  Pnnce  Mensah, 
will  come  to  see  me  to-morrow  morning  early,  I  will  treat  you  with  all 
the  honour  duo  to  your  royal  dignity,  and  allow  you  to  return  in  safety. 
You  can  trust  my  word. — I  am,  &c., 

(Signed)  G.  J.  Wolselet, 

Major 'General  and  Administrator  of  the  Gold  Coast, 
To  his  Majesty  Coffoo  Calcali,  King  of  Ashantee,  Coomassie. 

The  above  letter  was  sent  by  the  ambassadors  who  came  from 
t  he  king  to  hear  what  the  General  proposed  to  do  now  that  he 
was  captor  of  his  capital. 


EXECUTION  OF  A  POLICEMAN. 


227 


We  were  preparing  to  retire  to  our  well-earned  couches  for 
the  night,  which  were  made  under  the  porticoes  or  in  the 
alcoves  of  the  rich  men's  houses  which  lined  the  street  on 
either  side,  when  we  were  alarmed  by  seeing  a  great  blaze  of 
fire  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  king's  palace.  Soon  after 
this  another  fire  started  to  the  right  of  it,  and  still  another  to 
the  left,  and  before  we  had  barely  time  to  reflect  upon  its 
origin,  two  more  fires  started  on  the  southern  side  of  the  town. 
Looking  towards  head-quarters  to  see  whether  they  were  con- 
cerned in  the  matter,  we  found  all  the  members  of  the  Staff 
unconcernedly  looking  on,  except  Captain  Buller  of  the  Intelli- 
gence Department,  who  had  volunteered  to  go  and  find  out 
what  it  meant.  Captain  Buller  was  presently  seen  returning 
from  the  scene  of  one  of  the  conflagrations  and  heard  to  remark 
quietly,  that  he  thought  he  would  '  turn  in.' 

This  unconcern  of  the  Staff  caused  people  to  think  that 
these  conflagrations  were  of  no  moment,  and  resolve  to  think 
no  more  of  the  matter,  but  to  obtain  the  rest  which  we  all 
needed. 

But  about  midnight  even  the  soundest  sleepers  were 
awakened  by  continued  cries  of  some  one,  who  was  either 
suffering  extreme  torture,  or  who  was  undergoing  severe 
punishment.  Those  who,  attracted  by  the  despairing  screams, 
hurried  to  the  scene,  were  witnesses  of  a  most  fearful  tragedy. 
A  poor  boy,  about  seventeen  or  eighteen  years  old,  lately  en- 
listed in  the  Fantee  Police,  was  being  hanged  by  the  neck  in 
the  most  clumsy  and  barbarous  manner,  by  the  Military  Com- 
mandant of  Coomassie.  It  seems  that  at  12  p.m.  this  lad  was 
relieved  from  guard,*  and  following  other  examples  of  plunder- 
ing, had  gone  to  seek  such  plunder  as  he  could  find.  Soon 
after  entering  a  house  he  was  discovered  with  a  cloth  in  his 
hand  by  the  patrol,  and,  taken  before  the  Commandant  with  the 
evidence  of  his  guilt  on  his  person,  was  ordered  by  that  stem 
official  to  be  hanged  then  and  there  to  a  tree  about  sixty  yards 
from  head-quarters  on  the  main  street.  Those  deputed  to  be 
his  executioners  flung  a  rope  about  his  neck,  and  began  to  hoist 
him  up  to  the  branch  of  the  tree  above  his  head.  By  the 
omission  to  tie  his  hands  before  hoisting  him  up,  the  young 

'  The  author's  authority  for  the  above  is  Captain  Akin,  Inspector-General  of 
Police.   The  scene  itself  was  witnessed  by  hundreds. 

Q  2 


228 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


policeman  was  able  to  protract  his  agonies  by  his  han(}s,  and  to 
harrow  every  man's  soul  with  the  cries  with  which  he  startled 
us  all  from  sleep.  Half-strangled,  he  was  lowered  again,  and 
his  executioners,  after  a  fearful  scene,  were  able  finally  to  tie 
his  arras  behind  his  back  ;  but  the  bunglers,  instead  of  quickly 
hoisting  him  up  to  end  his  sufferings,  passed  the  rope  from  his 
throat  to  his  mouth  to  gag  him,  and  by  this  singular  mode 
protracted  the  hateful  scene  fifteen  minutes  longer. 

After  this  example,  which  was  done  to  terrify  the  plun- 
derers, persons  far  more  guilty  than  this  unfortunate  were  let 
off  with  the  comparatively  light  punishment  of  flogging.  So 
ended  that  strange  night  in  Coomassie. 

For  a  moment  it  appeared  to  the  narrator  that  the  frenzy  of 
severe  and  capital  punishments  was  being  communicated  to  the 
army,  which  had  hitherto  travelled  to  Coomassie  without  a  blot 
on  its  proud  escutcheon,  as  alarming  rumours  of  other  capital 
punishments  were  being  promulgated.  These,  however,  fortu- 
nately were  not  true. 

In  the  morning  the  e\idence  of  the  night's  fearful  work  was 
still  hanging  to  the  fatal  tree,  and  when  the  native  allies  and 
carriers  of  Russell's  and  Wood's  regiments  were  about  departing 
on  their  homeward  march,  several  hundreds  of  them  were 
marched  by  this  scene,  that  the  memory  of  the  hateful  sight 
might  cling  to  them,  and  so  save  them  from  a  like  fate. 

If  it  were  supposed  that  this  human  sacrifice  on  oiu-  side 
would  have  the  effect  of  proving  to  the  Ashantees  how  sincere 
the  British  were  in  their  assurances  of  friendship  and  esteem 
for  them.  Sir  Garnet  must  have  been  sadly  disappointed  when 
he  woke  that  morning,  and  perceived  that  out  of  the  crowds  of 
Ashantees,  to  the  number  of  four  or  five  thousand  armed  and 
unarmed  men,  that  were  in  the  city  the  night  previous,  there 
were  but  thirty  or  forty  men  left.  They  had  departed,  with 
their  guns  on  their  shoulders,  and  their  treasm*es  on  their  per- 
sons, with  their  slaves,  overnight,  and  we  were  left  to  deplore 
the  faith  which  had  induced  the  General  to  trust  them  and 
treat  them  with  such  consideration. 

Had  he  never  relaxed  the  vigour  which  characterised  him  at 
Amoaful,  at  Ordahsu,  and  on  that  rapid  dash  to  Coomassie,  his 
success  would  have  entitled  him  to  still  higher  glory  as  a  diplo- 
matic General  diuring  most  critical  periods. 


ERRORS  OF  SIR  GARNET. 


229 


It  was  tact  that  was  now  needed  ;  a  patient  calm  temper,  a 
perspicuous  reason,  and  a  strong  determination  to  act  unflinch- 
ingly on  every  occasion  that  would  contribute  to  exhibit  the 
strength  and  power  of  England,  and  impress  on  the  mind  of  the 
cunning  king  that  all  art  was  in  vain,  and  only  his  sincerity 
would  obtain  mercy  for  him. 

Not  one  weapon  should  have  left  Coomassie,  nor  even  one 
sword,  or  sheath-knife,  nor  one  oimce  of  powder,  nor  anything 
of  the  value  of  a  farthing  or  half  a  farthing,  until  the  king  had 
submitted  himself  wholly  to  the  mercy  of  the  conqueror.  Then 
clemency  would  have  become  a  virtue,  and  the  king's  mind 
would  have  become  convinced  that  the  English  desired  only 
friendship  with  him. 

Through  Sir  Garnet's  omission  to  guard  the  capital  for  the 
prevention  of  such  a  wholesale  withdrawal  of  arms  and  ammuni- 
tion, the  king  was  persuaded  to  believe,  as  he  saw  his  simimer 
palace  of  Amineeha  surrounded  by  his  still  numerous  adherents, 
and  his  force  increased  every  moment  by  fugitives  fresh  from 
Coomassie,  that  his  state  was  not  hopeless,  that  he  had  still 
sufficient  people  with  him  perhaps  to  create  a  new  kingdom.* 

'  At  the  banquet  given  to  Sir  Garnet  Wolsoley  and  his  officers  in  the  Egyptian 
Hall,  Mansion  House,  London,  the  General  said : — 

*•  The  military  world  has  learnt  many  military  lessons  in  recent  years,  but  the 
most  valuable  to  us  as  a  nation  that  has  been  taught  us  by  the  Abyssinian  and 
Ashantee  wars  is  that  when  you  have  to  appoint  an  English  General  to  command 
any  military  undertaking,  it  is  necessary  to  trust  him ;  to  supply  him  with  aU  he 
asks  for ;  and  above  all  things,  to  avoid  the  error  committed  during  the  New 
Zealand  war  of  severing  the  military  command  from  the  diplomacy  necessarily  con 
nected  with  the  operations.  (Hear.)  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  had  my 
operations  been  encumbered  by  the  presence  with  me  of  a  Civil  Governor,  or  of  an 
Ambassador  authorized  to  give  me  orders,  I  do  not  think  I  should  ever  have  reached 
Coomassie."  This  raises  at  once  the  question  of  what  has  been  contemptuously 
termed,  'making  war  by  contract/  a  fruitfal  source  of  recent  discussion  in  the 
newspapers. 

What  Sir  Garnet  states  about  the  bad  policy  of  placing  a  civilian  over  a 
General  in  actual  warfare  is  true.  The  New  Zealand  war  proved  it.  Yet  I 
have  never  seen  an  occasion  which  more  required  the  presence  of  some  civilian 
of  the  Diplomatic  Department  to  manage  the  political  questions,  and  to  conclude 
gracefully  a  campaign,  than  the  occupation  of  Coomassie  by  the  British. 

The  military  part  of  the  campaign  was  pcrformetl  exceedingly  well,  but  the 
attempt  which  Sir  Garnet  and  his  Military  Secretary  made  to  play  the  Diplomats 
was  a  total  failure  ;  and  to  cover  the  various  gross  blunders  committed  Sir  Garnet 
was  compelled  to  abandon  the  idea  of  burning  the  Bantamma,  which  was  more 
important  than  Coomassie,  to  content  himself  with  destroying  the  capital,  and  to 


230 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


It  is  certain  that  much  valuable  plunder  was  taken  from 
Coomassie  during  the  night.  Assistant-Commissary  Bavens- 
croft,  while  looking  for  gin  to  supply  the  troops  with  '  grog,' 
stimibled  upon  a  house  whose  courtyard  was  crowded  with 
objects  of  value.  In  the  morning,  when  he  visited  the  housd 
again,  he  found  the  whole  had  been  carried  away. 

We  were  curious  to  see  the  capital,  with  its  most^litaiark- 
able  objects — the  king's  palace,  the  place  of  exeeutiofiy  ,tiie 
great  market,  squares,  &c.,  &c.,  as  the  various  reports  ^  its 
wealth  and  magnificence  had  considerably  whetted  the  appetite 
to  put  them  to  the  test  of  personal  observation. 

In  size  Coomassie  came  up  to  the  standard  I  had  formed  of 
it.  The  streets  were  numerous,  some  half-a-dozen  were  broad 
and  uniform.  The  main  avenue,  on  which  the  troops  had 
bivouacked  during  the  night,  was  about  seventy  yards  wide,  and 
here  and  there  along  its  length  a  great  patriarchal  tree  spread 
wide  its  branches.  ^ 

The  houses  in  the  principal  streets  were  formed  after  the 
style  of  those  at  Fomannah.  They  were  wattled  structures,  with 
alcoves,  and  stuccoed  fa9ades,  embellished  with  Mauresque 
patterns.  Behind  each  of  the  pretentious  buildings  which 
fronted  the  streets  were  grouped  the  huts  of  the  domestics,  en- 
closing small  courtyards.  From  one  courtyard  might  be  seen 
a  small  alley  leading  to  another,  where  the  store-rooms  and 
closets  were  located.  By  the  general  order  and  neatness  of  the 
arrangements  in  the  rear,  I  am  compelled  to  say  that  in  their 
domestic  life  they  appear  to  me  to  be  a  very  cleanly  people. 

Coomassie  is  said  to  be  over  three  and  a  half  miles  in  cir- 
cumference. It  is  such  a  '  city  of  magnificent  distances '  that 
one  could  well  believe  it. 

It  stands  on  a  low  rocky  eminence,  consisting  of  iron-stone, 
the  greatest  breadth  of  which  may  be  half  a  mile.  It  extends 
across  this  hill,  descends  into  a  valley,  and  occupies  a  portion 

hurry  back  to  the  Prah.  Never  was  a  brilliant  success  marred  so  completely  by  want 
of  tact,  and  a  little  patience,  as  was  that  of  the  Ashantee  campaign.  Yet  the 
presence  of  a  Civil  Commissioner,  which  Sir  Garnet  thinks  unnecessary  in  war,  was 
the  only  thing  needed  to  have  made  the  Ashantee  campaign  an  unprecedented 
success. 

Sir  Garnet  amply  supplied  the  Von  Moltko  of  the  war  in  his  own  person,  but 
the  Bismarck  was  absent,  to  oup  sorrow. 


THE  GOLGOTHA  OF  C00MAS8IB. 


231 


of  a  neighbouring  eminencse.  The  greatest  length  of  the  town 
may  be  about  a  mile  and  a  half. 

Each  house  fronting  on  the  great  streets  had  its  lower  part^ 
as  high  as  the  floor  of  the  elevated  alcoves,  painted  an  ochrish- 
red,  the  upper  part  was  coloured  white.  In  the  courts,  also, 
the  houses  were  decorated  in  the  same  manner. 

Vmmng  down  the  main  street,  which  was  littered  with 
drums  Ittrge  and  small — from  the  great  Idnkasai,  which  sounded 
the  alarm  of  battle  or  the  death-minute  of  a  condemned  person, 
to  the  little  drum,  the  plaything  of  children  during  the  even- 
ing dance— we  came  to  the  grove,  whence  the  terrible  effluvia 
issued  which  caused  all  men  in  Coomassie  to  describe  the  place 
as  a  vast  charnel-house. 

The  grove,  which  was  but  a  continuation  of  the  tall  forest 
we  had  travelled  through,  penetrated  as  far  as  the  great  market- 
place. A  narrow  footpath  led  into  this  grove,  and  now  the  foul 
smells  became  so  suflFocating  that  we  were  glad  to  produce  our 
handkerchiefs  to  prevent  the  intolerable  and  almost  palpable 
odour  from  mounting  into  the  brain  and  overpowering  us. 

After  some  thirty  paces  we  arrived  before  the  dreadful 
scene,  but  it  was  almost  impossible  to  stop  longer  than  to  take 
a  general  view  of  the  great  Golgotha.  We  saw  some  thirty  or 
forty  decapitated  bodies  in*  the  last  stages  of  corruption,  and 
countless  skulls  which  lay  piled  in  heaps  and  scattered-  over  a 
wide  extent.  The  stoutest  heart  and  the  most  stoical  mind 
might  have  been  appalled. 

Bowdich,  in  1817,  speaks  of  this  death-grove,  and  we  heard 
along  the  road  from  Cape  Coast  hither  strange  reports  of  it. 
M.  Bonat  says  he  has  seen  some  two  or  three  hundred  slaves 
slain  at  one  time,  as  customary  after  the  death  of  the  king's 
sister,  and  during  his  long  residence  as  a  prisoner  in  Coomassie 
he  has  frequently  seen  as  many  as  a  dozen  slaves  executed  in 
the  most  barbarous  manner  and  dragged  to  the  grove,  now 
filled  with  the  relics  of  the  butcheries  which  have  been  going 
on  year  after  year.  If  it  is  true  that  about  a  thousand  slaves, 
oflFenders,  rebels,  and  others  are  executed  annually,  we  may 
form  an  approximate  idea  of  the  number  of  victims  which  have 
contributed  to  swell  the  terrible  death-roll  of  the  Coomassie 
Golgotha  since  the  time  of  Sy  Tutu,  the  founder  of  the  present 
dynasty,  established-  his  capital  here  in  the  middle  of  the 


232 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


eighteenth  century.  At  the  rate  of  a  thousand  victims  a  year, 
it  would  be  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  over  120,000  people 
must  have  been  slain  for  '  custom '  since  Ashantee  became  a 
kingdom  1 

From  the  Golgotha  we  proceeded  to  the  king's  palace.  It 
was  situated  about  300  yards  off,  and  occupied  a  level  area  in 
the  valley  or  depression  dividing  the  two  eminences  on  which 
Coomassie  is  situated.  The  first  view  of  what  was  designated 
as  the  *  palace '  was  a  number  of  houses  with  steep  thatched 
roofs,  clustered  together,  and  fenced  around  with  split  bamboo 
stakes,  occupying  an  area  400  or  500  feet  square,  at  one  comer 
of  which  rose  a  square  two-storied  stone  building.  In  appear- 
ance it  was  like  any  of  those  merchants'  residences  which  we 
saw  at  Cape  Coast  Castle. 

The  first  court  we  entered  was  similar,  though  larger,  to 
the  court  of  the  King  of  Adansi's  palace  at  Fomannah,  already 
described.  The  lower  part  of  the  lofty  walls  of  stucco  was 
painted  red,  the  upper  part  white.  The  designs,  diamond- 
shaped,  scroll-work  done  in  alto-relievo,  were  bolder  than 
anything  of  the  kind  yet  seen.  The  columns  were  square,  with 
simple  pediments  and  capitals.  The  alcoves  were  spacious, 
probably  14  feet  long  by  8  feet  deep.  Other  courts  were  after 
the  same  style  as  this,  but  the  columns  were  circular  and 
smooth  in  some,  while  others  were  curved. 

A  tame  crested  crane  was  the  only  inhabitant  of  the  courts : 
he  trumpeted  his  assumption  of  regal  authority  in  the  absence 
of  his  master  in  clear  musical  sounds,  as  he  stalked  about  rest- 
lessly from  place  to  place. 

The  alcoves  were  littered  with  curious  articles.  One  con- 
tained a  large  number  of  war  dnuns,  stained  with  blood,  and 
decorated  with  ghastly  trophies  of  wars  and  triumphs,  with 
human  skulls.  Another  contained  a  number  of  cutlasses,  rusty 
sabres  without  scabbards,  accoutrements  plated  with  gold,  old 
worn-out  guns  with  bands  of  silver  or  gold,  horse  tails,  and 
wisps  of  elephant  t.ails,  a  great  number  of  ivory  war-horns,  each 
with  its  human  jaw-bone  ;  and  in  another  we  beheld  any  number 
of  tall  umbrellas — of  silk,  satin,  velvet,  crimson  damask,  and 
woollen  cloth,  bespangled  with  bits  of  gold  and  silver,  or  fringed 
with  small  gold,  silver,  and  brass  bells. 

On  proceeding  finally  to  the  stone  structure,  which  is  the 


LIST  OF  THE  'LOOT.' 


288 


king's  private  residence,  we  found  the  interior  court  and  the 
rooms  opening  upon  it  filled  with  curious  but  intrinsically 
valueless  articles,  while  the  upper  story  contained  much  valu- 
able plimder.  The  following  hastily  written  inventory  taken 
on  the  spot  will  serve  better  than  any  description  to  convey 
information  as  to  the  nature  of  these  articles : — 

A  breakfast  and  dinner  service  of  silver,  with  English  cutlery. 

Bohemian  vases. 

Large  glass  goblets. 

Strings  of  the  valuable  Aggry  beads. 

Gold  nugget,  and  bead  bracelets  and  necklaces. 

Piles  of  faded  Kidderminster  carpets. 

Persian  rugs. 

Fetiches  and  charms  covered  with  leopard  skins. 
Leopard  skins. 
European  regimental  drums. 
Swords,  European  and  native. 
•  Yataghans  and  scimetars  of  Arabic  make. 
Grold  and  silver-headed  canes. 
Kegalia  stafEs,  gold  topped. 

Royal  stools,  beautifully  carved  and  ornamented  with  gold  and 
silver. 

Seven  gold  masks,  each  weighing  several  oiuices. 
Golden  toys. 

Damask  bed-curtains  and  counterpanes. 
Silken  and  cotton  cloths. 
Enormous  silken  umbrellas. 
African  teak  boxes  and  trunks. 
English  engravings. 
Glass  bottles. 

An  oil  painting  of  a  gentleman. 
Silver  tankards  and  cups. 
Skull-caps  of  leather  and  velvet. 
Leathern  shakoes. 

An  old  uniform  of  a  West  Indian  soldier. 

Gold  decorated  muskets. 

A  sword — a  gift  from  Queen  Victoria. 

Several  knives,  with  bits  of  gold  on  hafts. 

Sandals,  gold  plated. 

A  pistol  or  two. 

Brass  blimderbusses. 

Porcelain  and  china  ware. 


234 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Common  European  delf  ware. 

Prints  from  illustrated  newspapers. 

A  copy  of  the  London  *  Times,*  October  17,  1843. 

A  copy  of  *  Bristol  Courier,'  same  year. 

And  so  on,  ad  infinitum^  of  valuable,  curious,  and  worthless 
things  heaped  together  in  every  room.  An  old  curiosity-shop 
could  not  exhibit  a  more  miscellaneous  variety  of  things  than 
the  interior  of  the  king's  bed-chambers,  his  private  apart- 
ments and  store-rooms,  contained. 

From  the  flat  roof  of  the  palace,  which  is  surrounded  by 
battlements,  a  very  extensive  view  of  the  city  and  the  sur- 
rounding forest  and  swamp  was  obtained. 

During  the  day  the  prize  agents  went  into  the  palace  and 
principal  chiefs'  houses,  and  proceeded  to  pack  up  the  most 
costly  things  they  could  discover  to  sell,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
army  after  arrival  at  Cape  Coast.* 

Had  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  planted  a  cordon  of  guards  around 
Cooraassie  when  he  first  arrived,  and  ordered  every  person 
desirous  of  leaving  the  city  to  be  searched,  he  might  have  been 
able  to  have  secured  much  wealth  of  gold  dust  and  valuable 
plunder.  As  he  neglected  to  do  so,  it  is  unnecessary  to  say 
that  the  troops  will  sufier  in  the  loss  of  prifce-money. 

Beyond  the  king's  palace  and  the  Golgotha  nothing  else  of 
interest  remained  to  be  seen. 

Some  of  the  king's  messengers,  after  bringing  to  Sir  Garnet 
news  that  the  king  intended  to  come  to  him  to  sign  a  treaty  of 
peace,  were  discovered  later  in  the  day  giving  out  arms  and 
ammunition  to  their  fellows  to  carry  away.  When  asked  what 
they  were  doing,  they  replied,  in  a  matt-er-of-course  way,  '  We 
are  taking  our  things  away  to  the  king.' 

They  were  arrested  on  the  spot,  and  all  of  any  consequence 
found  promenading  tlirough  the  town  were  ordered  to  be  taken 
up  and  confined.  A  confidential  messenger  of  Sir  Garnet's 
informed  him  that  the  king  evidently  did  not  mean  to  approach 
him,  as  he  was  even  then  marching  towards  the  north.  Only 
now,  at  this  late  hour,  seemed  to  dawn  on  the  General's  mind 
that  the  king  had  never  entertained  the  least  intention  to  make 

*  Tho  trophies  tiiken  at  Coomassio  wero  subsequently  sold  at  Cape  Coaat^  and 
netted  about  6,000/. 


SIR  GARNET  EXPLAINS. 


235 


peace  with  him,  only  now  it  seemed  clear  to  him  that  the  - 
destruction  of  Coomassie  was  a  thing  that  must  happen. 

Sir  Gramet's  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies, 
obtained  subsequently,  may  be  introduced  here,  that  the  reader 
may  imderstand  his  views,  according  to  his  own  explanation  of 
them : — 

.  Camp  Agimamu,  February  7. 

My  Lord, — I  have  the  honour  to  report  that  immediately  after  the 
despatch  from  this  station  of  my  last  letter,  on  the  3rd  instant,  I  for- 
warded a  Hying  column,  taking  with  me  five  days*  provisions,  and 
marched  upon  Coomassie.  The  enemy's  resistance  on  the  3rd  was 
considerable,  very  large  numbers  being  in  our  front.  I  halted  on  the 
•river  Ordah. 

During  the  course  of  the  day's  march  I  received  from  the  king  a 
letter,  of  which  I  enclose  a  copy,  with  a  letter  from  Mr.  Dawson,  also 
enclosed,  and  returned  at  once  the  enclosed  reply. 

On  the  4th  I  advanced  again  at  daybreak.  The  enemy  had  occupied 
a  position  of  considerable  strength  near  the  village  of  Ordahsu.  This 
they  held  against  us  from  about  seven  till  a  quarter  to  two,  when  they 
yielded,  and,  on  my  advance-guard,  imder  Colonel  M'Leod,  being 
pushed  on  against  them,  broke  and  fled  in  all  directions,  leaving  behind, 
strewed  along  the  road,  the  chiefs'  lunbrellas  and  chairs,  &c.,  and  the 
food  which  had  been  carried  with  the  army. 

In  the  course  of  this  day's  march  I  received  from  Mr.  Dawson  two 
letters,  of  which  I  enclose  copies.  T  ordered  that  the  troops  should  be 
pushed  on  at  once.  No  opposition  was  offered  to  our  entry  into  the  town. 

We  occupied  the  town.  Mr.  Dawson  was  met,  at  full  liberty,  walk- 
ing in  the  streets. 

I  immediately  issued  stringent  orders  for  the  protection  of  the  in- 
habitants and  the  safety  of  the  town.  But  night  fell  almost  imme- 
diately after  our  entry,  and  in  the  darkness  it  was  impossible  to  prevent 
some  of  the  numerous  camp  followers  from  pillaging.  The  Fantee 
prisoners  had  also  been  released,  and,  in  all  probability,  were  largely 
engaged  in  the  same  pursuit.  The  result  was  the  outbreak  of  many  fires. 
Captain  Baker,  Inspector-General  of  the  Police,  and  several  officers, 
were  engaged  nearly  all  night  in  the  suppression  of  the  pillaging  and 
in  putting  out  the  fires.    One  policeman  taken  in  the  act  was  hung. 

I  endeavoured  immediately  on  my  arrival  to  communicate  with  the 
king  through  Mr.  Dawson,  and  through  every  channel  that  appeared  to 
offer  an  opportunity.  A  chief  having  come  into  Coomassie,  who  was 
said  to  be  sent  by  the  king,  I  saw  him  myself,  and  impressed  upon  him 
my  wish  to  spare  the  town,  and  my  desire  to  impose  on  the  king  no 
severer  conditions  than  those  be  had  already  accepted. 


236 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Moreover,  I  told  this  man  that,  now  that  I  had  shown  the  power  of 
England,  I  was  ready,  if  the  king  would  make  peace  at  once,  to  accept 
a  small  indemnity,  and  not  to  exact  the  half  I  had  previously  required 
to  be  paid  in  ready  money.* 

Other  messengers  were  obtained,  who  undertook  to  reach  the  king. 
To  these  I  entrusted  the  letter  dated  Ooomassie,  February  5,  1874. 

All  was,  however,  of  no  avail. 

The  men  whom  I  endeavoured  to  employ  as  messengers,  and  who 
came  avowedly  as  envoys  of  the  king,  were  foimd  treacherously  re- 
moving powder  and  gold  dust  from  the  houses 

The  whole  scheme  of  Ashantee  politics  is  so  based  upon  treachery 
that  the  king  does  not  either  understand  any  other  form  of  negotiation 
or  believe  it  possible  that  others  can  have  honest  intentions. 

Under  these  circumstances,  my  Lord,  it  became  clear  that  a  treaty 
would  be  as  valueless  to  us  as  it  was  difficult  to  obtain. 

Nothing  remained  but  to  leave  such  a  mark  of  our  power  to  punish 
as  should  deter  from  future  aggression  a  nation  whom  treaties  do  not 
bind. 

I  had  done  all  I  could  to  avoid  the  necessity,  but  it  was  forced  upon 
me.  I  gave  orders  for  the  destruction  of  the  palace  and  the  burning  of 
the  city  .2  I  had  at  one  time  also  contemplated  the  destruction  of  the 
Bantamah,  where  the  sacred  ashes  of  former  kings  are  entombed,  but  this 
would  have  involved  a  delay  of  some  hours.  Very  heavy  rain  had 
fallen.^  I  feared  that  the  streams  might  have  risen  in  my  rear  suffi- 
ciently to  seriously  delay  my  march.*  I  considered  it  better,  therefore, 
not  to  risk  further  the  health  of  the  troops,  the  wet  weather  having 
already  threatened  seriously  to  affect  it. 

The  demolition  of  the  palace  was  complete.  From  all  that  I  can 
gather  I  believe  that  the  result  will  be  such  a  diminution  in  the 
prestige  and  military  power  of  the  Ashantee  monarch  as  may  result  in 
the  break-up  of  the  kingdom  altogether.  This  I  had  been  anxious  to 
avoid,  because  it  seems  impossible  to  foresee  what  power  can  take  this 
nation's  place  among  the  feeble  races  of  this  coast.  I  certainly  believe 
that  your  lordship  may  be  well  convinced  that  no  more  utterly  atro- 

*  This  is  vacillation,  and  contributed  (in  a  small  way,  it  is  true)  to  the  non-suc- 
cess of  Sir  Garnet's  attempt  at  diplomacy. 

*  The  Bantammah  mtis  but  1^  miles  from  the  capital,  to  which  one  long  street 
leads. 

'  This  rain  was  but  a  freak  in  the  weather.  Siirtorius'  experience  subsequent 
to  our  departure  proves  this. 

*  The  real  cause  of  our  panic-like  departure  from  Coomassie,  was  want  of 
food,  which  the  Oenewl's  inattention  to  the  Transport  and  Control  Department 
caused. 


SIR  GARNETS  EXPLANATIONS. 


237 


clous  Goyemment  than  that  which  has  thus,  perhaps,  fallen  ever 
existed  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Their  capital  was  a  charnel-houfle ; 
their  religion  a  combination  of  cruelty  and  treachery ;  their  policy  the 
natural  outcome  of  their  religion.  I  cannot  think  that,  whatever  may 
be  the  final  fate  of  the  people  of  this  country,  the  absolute  annihilation 
of  such  a  rule,  should  it  occur,  would  be  a  subject  for  unmixed 
regret. 

In  any  case,  my  Lord,  I  believe  that  the  main  object  of  my  expedi- 
tion has  been  perfectly  secured.  The  territories  of  the  Gold  Coast 
will  not  again  be  troubled  by  the  warlike  ambition  of  this  restless 
power.  I  may  add  that  the  flag  of  England  from  this  moment  will  be 
received  throughout  Western  Africa  with  respectful  awe — a  treatment 
which  has  been  of  late  years  by  no  means  its  invariable  fate  among 
the  savage  tribes  of  this  region. 

The  troops  are  now  on  the  march  homewards,  and  will  embark  for 
England  immediately  on  reaching  Cape  Coast. 

As  the  mission  entrusted  to  me  has  now,  I  may  say,  been  brought 
to  an  end,  I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  for  bringing  to  your 
lordship's  most  favourable  notice  the  valuable  services  rendered  to  me 
throughout  the  war  by  Lieutenant  Maurice,  R.A.,  my  private  secre- 
tary. I  would  also  take  the  liberty  of  mentioning  the  name  of  Captain 
Lanyon,  2nd  West  India  Regiment,  who  for  some  time  performed  the 
duties  of  Colonial  Secretary,  and  whose  knowledge  of  colonial  duties 
and  regulations  were  of  great  service  to  me  since  my  arrival  in  this 
country. 

The  police  duties  in  connection  with  the  recent  military  operations 
have  been  most  effectively  performed  by  Captain  Baker,  Inspector- 
general  of  Police.  lie  has  rendered  the  force  under  my  command 
most  valuable  service,  and  his  zeal  and  energy  mark  him  out  as  pecu- 
liarly suited  for  the  post  he  occupies. 

My  aide-de-camp,  Lieutenant  the  Honourable  H.  L.  Wood,  10th 
Hussars,  who  is  tiie  bearer  of  this  despatch,  I  have  the  honour  to  re- 
commend to  your  lordship's  favourable  notice. — I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       G.  J.  Wolseley, 
Major- General  and  Administrator^  Gold  Coast, 

After  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of  the  chief  who  pretended 
to  be  the  king's  messenger,  Sir  Garnet's  first  duty  should  have 
been  to  have  sent  the  42nd  or  the  Kifles  to  occupy  the  Ban- 
tamah — the  semi-palace  and  treasure-house  of  the  King 
of  Ashantee.  The  distance  from  the  capital  was  but  a  mile  and 
a  half,  and  a  broad  road  led  direct  to  it.  Until  the  morning  of 
his  departure  from  Coomassie  the  troops  might  have  remained 


238 


C00MA8SIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


in  possession,  that  the  least  chance  of  an  amicable  settlement 
should  not  be  said  to  have  been  thrown  away.  But  the  entire 
day — the  only  day  remaining  to  him  in  Coomassie,  since  he  had 
determined  to  leave  next  morning  for  the  sea-coast — was  spent 
in  listlessly  wandering  about  the  capital,  or  gazing  with  a  vague 
curiosity  at  the  miserable  remnant  of  the  plunder  that  had  been 
gathered,  and  I  felt  myself  sympathising  strongly  with  Sir 
Garnet  as  he  still  hoped  against  hope  for  the  arrival  of  the 
king. 

In  the  afternoon  there  came  a  heavy  downpour  of  rain, 
which  converted  the  streets  into  broad  streams ;  and  this  was 
another  piece  of  ill-luck,  both  as  regarded  our  comfort  and 
the  meditated  destruction  of  the  city  by  fire  the  following 
morning. 

Night  came,  bringing  more  rain  with  it — a  sleety,  dropping 
rain,  which  lasted  the  whole  night,  to  our  sore  discomfort. 

In  the  morning,  the  Royal  Engineers,  who  had  been  work- 
ing hard  during  the  early  part  of  it  in  mining  the  stone 
palace  of  the  King,  began  their  work  of  destruction  by  setting 
fire  to  the  western  end  of  the  city,  and  as  they  passed  from 
house  to  house  with  their  fiery  torches,  the  rear-guard,  composed 
of  the  42nd  Highlanders,  moved  slowly  away  before  them.  At 
9.30  A.M.  the  Highlanders  were  drawn  up  close  to  the  swamp 
along  the  avenue  they  had  first  entered  on  the  evening  of  the 
4th  inst.,  and  soon  after  an  explosion  was  heard,  quickly  followed 
by  two.  others,  and  the  king's  stone  palace,  blown  up  with  125 
kegs  of  powder  discovered  in  the  capital,  had  become  an  un- 
sightly ruin. 

The  army  experienced  the  usual  discomforts  of  travelling  in 
Africa  after  a  heavy  rain.  The  streams  were  flooded ;  tiny 
rivulets,  that  we  lightly  leapt  over  as  we  advanced  towards 
Coomassie,  had  now  become  almost  unfordable.  The  road  had 
become  a  series  of  puddles,  broad  expanses  of  swift  running 
water.  The  Ordah  ford  had  become  unfordable ;  only  the  strong 
bridge  constructed  by  Home's  Engineers  yet  stood,  of  which, 
by  careful  management,  we  were  able  to  avail  ourselves.  It 
was  night  when  we  came  to  Agimamu,  the  village  at  the  forks 
of  the  Coomassie  road  where  we  had  halted  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  3rd,  but  the  rear  guard  did  not  arrive  until  the  next  day. 


THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  COOMASSIE. 


239 


From  the  7th  inst.  the  troops  continued  their  return  march 
to  Amoaful,  thence  to  Detchiasu.  From  the  latter  place  the 
Gheneral's  followinp^  despatohes  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the 
Colonies  relate  what  happened. 

Sir  G.  Wolseley  also  writes  to  the  Earl  of  Kimberley  on  the 
same  date : — 

Head-quartors,  Camp,  Fomannah,  February  13, 1874. 

My  Lord, — I  have  the  honour  to  report  that,  on  the  9th  instant,  at 
Detchiasu,  I  received  from  the  king  of  Ashantee  a  fresh  mesf<enger, 
who  assured  me  that  the  king  was  most  anxious  now  to  accede  to  all 
my  terms  and  to  make  peace.  I  told  him  at  once  that  I  was  quite  as 
desirous  of  peace  myself,  and  that  as  the  Ashantee  kingdom  had  been 
already  so  severely  punished,  I  would  waive  the  question  of  the 
hostages,  who  were  no  longer  necessary,  and  if  the  King  would  send  to 
me  5,000  ozs.  of  gold-dust  as  an  earnest  of  his  sincerity  and  as  a  first 
instalment  of  the  indemnity,  I  should  be  willing  to  arrange  the  terms 
of  a  treaty  of  peace  with  any  envoy  of  sufficient  authority  whom  the 
king  would  send  to  Fommanah,  where  I  would  wait  till  the  evening  of 
the  12th,  to  allow  sufficient  time  for  him  to  communicate  vnth  the 
king  and  collect  the  money.  Last  night  I  was  informed  that  envoys 
from  the  king  had  arrived  at  a  point  about  two  miles  from  my  out- 
posts, arid  that  they  desired  permission  to  treat  with  me;  saying,  at  the 
same  time,  that  they  would  not  have  come  had  they  not  fulfilled  all  the 
conditions  I  had  demanded.  This  morning  I  received  the  messengers 
here,  but  found  that  they  had  only  brought  with  them  1,000  ounces 
of  gold.  They  declared,  however,  that  the  king  could  not  at  the 
moment  produce  more — that  1,000  ounces  was  more  than  had  ever 
been  demanded  of  them  before.  Governor  M*Clean  having  only  required 
them  to  deposit  600  ounces  as  a  temporary  security,  to  be  subsequently 
given  back  to  them.  I  thought  it  exceedingly  probable  that  additional 
pressure  might  have  induced  them  to  produce  the  larger  sum ;  *  but  I 
considered  that  the  main  point  was  to  obtain  the  treaty  of  peace,  and 
that  the  money  being  important  chiefly  as  a  proof  of  complete  submis- 
sion, the  quantity  actually  now  paid  was  a  matter  of  comparatively 
secondary  importance.  I  therefore  allowed  the  envoys  to  go  into  the 
question  of  the  treaty,  the  nature  of  which  was  carefully  explained  to 

*  Histx>rian^  must  bear  in  mind  the  above  frank  admission.  It  is  a  pitj  that 
Sir  Qarnet  did  not  think  so  before  commencing  his  return  march  ;  a  greater  pity 
that  some  kind  friend,  even  though  he  were  a  Civil  Commissioner,  was  not  near 
him,  to  whisper  '  patience  I ' 


240 


C00MA8SIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


them.  They  made  objection  to  two  clauses  only.  First,  they  pro- 
fessed not  to  have  understood  that  the  sum  of  money  demanded  was  so 
large  as  50,000  ounces.  When,  however,  I  informed  them  that  the 
king  had  already  expressly  agreed  to  this  sum,  they  withdrew  this  ob- 
jection. I  fancy  that  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  whole  of  the 
money  will  ever  be  obtained  by  Her  Majesty's  Government;  but  as  the 
payment  of  a  few  thousand  pounds  cannot  be  a  matter  of  relatively  so 
great  importance  as  the  maintenance  of  peace,  I  have  caused  the  word- 
ing of  this  clause  to  be  carefully  so  framed  as  to  make  it  clear  that  the 
money  is  only  to  be  paid  in  such  instalments,  and' at  such  times,  as  Her 
Majesty  may  direct.  The  whole  question  of  the  money  will  thus  be 
open  for  solution  in  any  way  Her  Majesty's  Government  may  think  fit. 
The  second  point  to  which  objection  was  raised  is  one  which  has  caused 
me  much  more  anxiety.  As  1  have  already  explained  in  my  despatch 
of  this  same  date,  I  have  not  felt  myself  justified  in  refusing  absolutely 
to  allow  the  King  of  Adansi  and  his  people,  on  their  earnest  petition, 
to  join  with  the  Wassaw  people  and  occupy  their  lands  together..  I 
considered,  therefore,  that  it  was  indispensable,  in  order  to  avoid  future 
trouble,  that  the  King  of  Ashantee  should  distinctly  acknowledge  the 
independence  of  the  Adansi  people.  I  carefully  explained  to  the 
envoys,  at  the  same  time,  that  I  had  taken  no  steps  whatever  myself  in 
this  matter,  that  the  action  on  the  part  of  the  Adansi  people  was  purely 
voluntary,  and  that  it  was  one  with  which  it  was  impossible  for  me  to 
interfere.  It  has  been  agreed  that  within  a  fortnight  the  king  shall 
send  to  Cape  Coast  tlie  treaty  signed  by  himself.  I  incline  to  believe 
that  the  danger  of  breaking  up,  to  which  his  kingdom  is  exposed,  unless 
we  are  are  on  friendly  terms  with  him,  will  induce  him  to  fulfil,  with 
as  much  punctuality  as  he  is  capable  of,  the  conditions  of  the  treaty. 
For  not  only  have  the  Adansi  people  begged  to  be  allowed  to  migrate, 
but  I  have  heard  through  the  King  of  Adansi  that  the  much  more 
powerful  Becquah  tribe  is  quite  as  anxious  to  do  the  same,  and  only 
awaits  my  decision  on  the  case  of  the  King  of  Adansi,  before  declaring 
its  intention  to  join  some  tribe  nearer  the  coast.  These  and  other 
indications  that  only  very  slight  action  on  our  part  is  required  to  cause 
the  complete  dissolution  of  his  kingdom,  will,  I  believe,  be  for  thu 
fulfilment  of  the  engagements  he  has  now  entered  into,  better  securities 
than  any  others  we  could  have. 

I  have,  &c. 
(Signed)       G.  J.  Wolselet, 
Major- General  and  Administrator^  Gold  Coast, 


SIB  gabnet's  despatches. 


241 


Head-quarters,  Camp,  Fomannah,  February  13,  1874. 

My  Lord, — I  have  the  honour  to  report  that  the  King  of  Adanai  has 
applied  to  me  for  permission  to  transfer  his  whole  tribe  to  the  Wassaw 
country,  the  Wassaws  being  willing  to  receive  him  and  all  his  people. 
I  told  him  that  there  was  not  land  for  him  in  the  place  he  asked  first  to 
be  allowed  to  enter,  I  assured  him  tliat  I  could  give  him  no  protection, 
that  he  must  figlit  his  own  battles,  and  that  I  could  guarantee  nothing 
as  to  what  course  Her  Majesty  might  think  fit  to  pursue  in  the  future. 
But  when  he  declared  that  he  feared  the  vengeance  of  the  King  of 
Ashantee  if  he  remained  here  after  he  had  negotiated  with  mo,  and 
when  he  declared  that  he  and  all  his  people  detested  the  Ashantee  rule, 
and  were  anxious  to  escape  anywhere  from  it,  I  did  not  think  I  should 
be  justified  in  interfering  with  an  arrangement  which  will,  at  all  events, 
have  the  advantage  that  it  will  to  some  further  extent  render  the 
Ashantees  less  able  to  invade  the  Fantee  territory.  I  feared  lest,  if  I 
refused,  I  should  be  simply  handing  over  the  Adansi  people  to 
massacre.  I  have  therefore  allowed  the  King  to  migrate,  as  he  pro- 
poses, but  on  the  express  understanding  that  it  is  an  arrangement 
between  himself  and  the  Wassaw  people,  with  which  Her  Majesty  does 
not  interfere.  The  whole  subject  has  caused  me  very  great  embarrass- 
ment. I  have  been  infiuenced  in  the  decision  I  have  arrived  at  by  the 
consideration  tliat  the  Adansi  people,  who  formerly  formed  a  part  of 
the  same  tribe  as  the  Wassaws,  are  now  only  imitating  the  example 
which  was  set  them  some  years  ago  by  that  portion  which  now  passes 
under  the  Wassaw  name ;  and,  moreover,  before  the  question  had  to 
be  decided  by  me  the  Adansi  and  Wassaw  people  had  arranged  the 
matter  together,  and  I  should  have  had  to  exercise  an  authority  I  did 
not  ft-el  myself  altogether  entitled  to  employ  in  forbidding  a  tribe 
always  so  vaguely  under  our  influence  as  the  Wassaws  to  enter  into 
such  an  arrangement,  calculated  as  it  is  to  contribute  to  their  national 
safety.  Moreover,  at  the  time  the  application  was  first  made  to  me, 
the  King  of  Ashantee  had  not  given  any  trustworthy  indications  of  a 
wish  for  peace.  To  refuse,  therefore,  an  important  accession  of  strength 
would  have  been,  on  military  grounds,  an  action  scarcely  defensible.  I 
very  much  regret  that  tlie  point  should  have  arisen  at  all,  because  it 
seems  to  me  surrounded  with  difficulty.  But  under  the  conditions  of 
time  and  place  at  which  I  had  to  decide,  1  do  not  think  I  could  have 
arrived  at  any  other  solution.  I  hear  that  the  jwwerful  Becquah  tribe 
is  anxious  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Adansi ;  but  I  intend,  now 
tliat  the  preliminary  negotiations  as  to  the  treaty  have  been  completed, 

R 


242 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDAT.A. 


to  evade,  at  least  for  a  time,  tlieir  embarrassing  questions  by  returning 
to  the  coasit. — I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       G.  J.  Wolselet, 
Major- General  and  Administrator^  Gold  Coast. 

The  following  is  the  Treaty  of  Peace  between  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley,  acting  on  l)e]mlf  of  her  Majesty,  and  Saihee  Enquie, 
acting  on  behalf  of  his  Mjijesty  Coffee  Calcali,  King  of 
Ashantee : — 

Treaty  of  Pcac^. 

Art,  1.  There  sliall  be  liereafter  perpetual  peace  bet^vecn  the 
Queen  of  England  and  her  allies  on  the  coast  on  the  one  part,  and  the 
King  of  Asliantee  and  all  his  people  on  the  other  part. 

Art,  2,  The  King  of  Ashantee  promises  to  pay  the  sum  of  50,000 
ounces  of  approved  gold  as  indemnity  for  the  expenses  he  has  oc- 
casicned  to  her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  England  by  the  late  war ;  and 
undertakes  to  pay  1,000  ounces  of  gold  forthwith,  and  the  remainder  by 
such  instalments  as  her  Majesty's  Government  may  from  time  to  time 
demand. 

Art.  3.  The  King  of  Ashantee,  on  the  pirt  of  himself  and  his  suc- 
cessors, renounces  all  right  or  title  to  any  tribute  or  homage  from  the 
Kings  of  Denkera,  Assin,  Akim,  Adansi,  and  the  other  allies  of  her 
Majesty's  formerly  subject  to  the  kingdom  o£  Ashantee. 

Art,  4.  The  King,  on  the  part  of  himself  and  of  his  heirs  and  suc- 
cesBors,  does  hereby  further  renounce  for  ever  all  pretensions  of  supre- 
macy over  Elmina,  or  t)ver  any  of  the  tribes  formerly  connected  with 
the  Dutch  Government,  and  to  any  tribute  or  homage  from  such 
tribes,  as  well  as  to  any  payment  or  acknowledgment  of  any  kind  by 
the  British  Government  in  respect  of  Elmina  or  any  other  of  the  British 
forts  and  possessions  on  the  coast. 

Art,  5.  The  King  will  at  once  witlidraw  all  his  troops  from 
Appolonia  and  its  vicinity,  and  from  the  neighboiurhood  of  Dixcove, 
Secondee,  and  the  adjoining  coast  line. 

Art.  G.  There  shall  be  fi-eedom  of  trade  between  Ashantee  and  Her 
Majesty's  forts  on  the  coast,  all  persons  being  at  liberty  to  carry  their 
merchandise  from  the  coast  to  Coomassie,  or  from  that  place  to  any 
of  II«'r  Majesty's  possessions  on  the  coast. 

Alt,  7.  The  King  of  Ashantee  guarantees  that  the  roads  from 
Coomassie  to  the  Uiver  l*iah  shall  always  be  ke\)t  open  and  free  from 
bush  to  a  width  of  15  feet. 

Art.  8.  As  Her  Majesty's  subjects  and  the  people  of  Ashantee  are 


THE  TREATY  OF  PEACE. 


henceforth  to  be  friends  for  ever>  the  King,  in  order  to  prove  the  sin- 
cerity of  his  friendsliip  for  Queen  Victoria,  promises  to  use  his  best 
endeavours  to  check  the  practice  of  human  sacrifice,  with  a  view  to 
hereafter  putting  an  end  to  it  altogether,  aa  the  practice  is  repugnant  to 
the  feelings  of  all  Christian  nations. 

ArU  9.  One  copy  of  this  treaty  shall  bo  signed  by  the  King  of 
Asliantee,  and  sent  to  the  administrator  of  Uer  Majesty's  Government 
at  Cape  Coast  Castle  within  foiurteen  days  from  this  date. 

Art,  10.  This  treaty  shall  be  known  as  the  Treaty  of  Fommanah. 

Dated  at  Fommanah  this  13th  day  of  February,  1874. 

At  Agimamu  Sir  Gramet  met  the  unfortunate  officer  Captain 
Butler,  who  had  been  deserted  by  the  Akims,  after  weeks  of 
ceaseless  labour  and  trouble  he  had  taken  to  raise  a  force  of 
them.  It  is  only  fair  to  Captain  Butler  to  permit  Sir  Garnet  to 
be  heard  in  his  defence,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Captain  Dalrymple, 
who  equally  failed  to  accomplished  anything  with  the  Wassaws 
on  the  left  flank. 

Head-quartore,  Cumpi  Agiinamu,  February  7.  1874. 
My  Lord, — I  have  the  honour  to  enclose  a  copy  of  a  report  just 
received  from  Captain  Butler.     Your  lordship  will  perceive  that 
it  represents  the  complete  collapse  of  the  expedition  under  his 
orders. 

From  Captain  Glover  I  have  received  no  report  since  that  of  the 
17th  from  Opogo,  the  contents  of  which  I  forwarded  to  your  lordship 
from  Fomannah,  and  which  represented  him  as  short  of  ammimition 
and  awaiting  its  arrival,  after  the  success  which  placed  him  in  posses- 
sion of  the  town. 

From  Captain  Dalrymple  I  have  received  no  official  report,  but  I 
hear  that  the  chiefs  under  his  orders  have  almost  entirel}'  deserted  him. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  Captain  Butler  himself  has  arrived.  I 
cannot  express  too  strongly  my  sense  of  the  efforts  which  he  and  the 
officers  under  his  orders  have  made  for  the  cause  in  hand.  In  so 
far  as  fiiilure  represents  an  additional  trouble,  which  has  to  be  under- 
gone by  a  man  of  energy  and  resource,  and  an  additional  hardsliip  from 
which  he  suffers.  Captain  Butler  has  had  all  the  bitterness  of  it.  He 
has  failed  to  induce  the  miserable  chiefs  of  this  district  to  do  all  that 
he,  in  his  fine  belief  in  native  character,*  fancied  he  would  be  able  to 

*  Sir  Garnet  very  fraDkly  declares  the  cause  of  Butler's  failure.  Capt-ain  Butler 
is  a  gentleman  of  such  largo  nobility  of  heart,  that  ho  believes  that  kindness  will 
enable  a  man  to  mould  as  ho  pleases  an  African  savage.  Over-leniency  is  as  bad 
as  harshness,  indiseriminatu  kindness  is  fatal  to  discipline.  If  Captiiin  Batler,  with 

B  2 


244 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


induce  them  to  do.  But  so  far  as  tlie  interests  of  the  expedition  under 
niy  orders  are  concerned,  Captain  Butler  has  not  failed,  but  most  suc- 
cessfully achieved  the  very  object  which  1  had  in  view  in  detaching  him 
for  the  work  he  so  cheerfully  and  skilfully  undertook.  He  has  effected 
a  most  important  diversion  in  favour  of  the  main  body,  and  has  de- 
tained before  him  all  the  forces  of  one  of  the  most  powerful  Ashantee 
chiefs. 

For  any  purpose  for  which  energy,  practical  ability;  high  spirit, 
and  much  knowledge  of  character  are  required,  I  cannot  too  highly 
commend  Captain  Butler  to  your  lordship's  attention.  All  these 
qualities  have  been,  under  the  most  trying  circumstances,  displayed  by 
him  upon  the  present  occasion.* 

In  speaking  of  Captain  Dalrymple,  I  must  point  out  that  his  posi- 
tion has  been  in  some  respects  a  far  more  difficult  one  than  even 
Captain  Butler's.  Captain  Butler  is  not  only  a  man  known  to  the 
world  at  laige,  but  I  have  on  a  previous  occasion  had  opportunities 
myself  of  recognising  his  ability.  He  was  known  personally  to  all 
those  officers  who  were  with  me  in  Canada,  and  of  whom  many  are 
here.  Captain  Dalrymple  came  as  a  perfect  stranger  to  most  of  us. 
The  difference  is  very  considerable  in  the  situation  of  two  men,  each 
in  positions  of  somewhat  painful  isolation.  Under  these  most  difficult 
circumstances  Captain  Dalrymple  has  worked  with  a  heartiness  and 
energy  which  I  cannot  too  highly  commend. 

Captain  Glover's  position  before  the  world  is  so  conspicuous,  and 
your  lordship's  knowledge  of  his  ability  is  so  complete,  that  I  scarcely 
think  it  would  be  suitable  for  me  to  report  upon  him  as  if  he  were  one 
of  the  officers  in  any  ordinary  sense  under  my  orders.  In  fact,  since 
his  military  operations  have  been  carried  out  under  my  orders,  I  have 
received  but  one  report  from  him,  and  know  nothing  of  what  has  been 
the  history  of  his  force. — I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       G.  J.  Wolselet, 
Major-General  and  Administrator^  Gold  Coast. 

By  February  22  the  troops  had  nearly  all  arrived  at  Cape 

whom  all  sympathized  in  his  misfortune,  had  been  stem  but  just,  he  would  have 
succeeded.    'Always  spare  the  whip,  but  firmly  grasp  the  reins.' 

'  It  must  strike  the  reader^  with  what  exceeding  warmth  Sir  Garnet  speaks  of 
his  personal  friends.  Of  his  military  and  private  secretaries— the  former  of  whom, 
as  Sip  Garnet  said  at  the  Mansion  House,  is  about  to  write  the  OflBcial  History  of 
the  Ashantee  Campaign — the  General  speaks  unqualifiedly.  Of  Captain  Butler, 
who,  though  he  possesses  many  virtues  and  many  social  qualities,  Sir  Garnet 
speaks  as  tliough  he  had  made  a  brilliant  success.  But  of  Captain  Glover  he  has 
towcely  a  civil  word.  Undoubtedly  Sir  Garnet  makes  it  clear  that  he  is  a  man  of 
iliong  ftseodshipe. 

'Sr.- 


HOMEWARD  BOUND. 


245 


Coast,  and  were  embarked  as  fast  as  they  arrived  at  that  un- 
healthy seaport,  on  board  the  splendid  steamers  the  munificent 
British  Government,  who  had  watched  over  them  with  paternal 
care  throughout  the  campaign,  had  provided  for  them.  The 
'  Himalaya'  troopship  conveyed  away  to  Gibraltar  and  England 
the  Eifle  Brigade ;  the  *  Tamar '  was  assigned  for  the  use  of 
the  23rd  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers,  and  the  *  Sarmatian '  for  the  re- 
doubtable *  Black  Watch,'  who  had  so  much  increased  their  feme 
in  Ashantee  land,  while  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  and  staff  left 
the  Gold  Coast  by  the  '  Manitoban.'  In  due  time  the  entire 
force  arrived  in  England,  where  soldiers  and  officers  were  re- 
ceived with  honours,  and  distinctions  showered  upon  them  by 
Her  Majesty  the  Queen,  and  a  grateful  nation. 


246 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  XVIir. 

CONCLUSION. — glover's  EXPEDITION. 

Beadebs  desirous  of  understanding  thoroughly  what  Captain 
Glover  accomplished,  before  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  received  his 
despatches  announcing  his  march  to,  and  occupation  of  Jwabin, 
the  second  city  in  the  Ashantee  kingdom,  might  read  with  ad- 
vantage Chaps.  IV.  and  VI,  of  this  book,  wherein  the  author 
describes  a  visit  he  made  to  his  camps  on  the  Volta  in  the 
month  of  December.  Two  weeks  after  I  left  him  (December 
28)  he  writes : — 

December  28,  1873. 

Yesterday  I  was  with  a  force  of  12,000  men;  to-day  I  am  march- 
ing on  the  PnJi,  under  orders  from  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley. 

I  had  just  effected  crossing  the  Volta  when  this  order  arrived.  I 
wanted  a  fortnight  more  to  have  brought  him  a  force  of  16,000  men, 
but  they  stipulated  to  fight  the  East  Bank  people  first,  and  this  was 
the  programme  with  which  I  left  England. 

This  little  brief  note  will  be  understood  also  better  after 
reading  Chaps,  VII.  and  VIII.,  wherein  Captain  Glover  is  referred 
to  as  being  ordered  to  leave  the  Awoonahs  unmolested,  and  to 
lead  his  expedition  to  the  Prah,  that  he  may  be  ready  to  cross 
the  river  by  January  15,  simultaneously  with  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley's  force.  Captain  Butler's,  and  Captain  Dalrymple's. 

In  the  following  briefer  note  than  the  preceding,  this  man 
of  action  and  energy  describes  how  he  fulfilled  the  peremptory 
commands  of  his  superior : — 

In  Eastern  Akim,  January  6. 

Three  days  from  the  Prah,  which  I  shall  cross  on  the  15th,  I  left 
Mr.  Goldsworthy  with  17,000  across  the  Volta. 

Captain  Glover  subsequently  writes  from  Abogoo,  on 


CAPTAIN  GLOVER'S  EXPEDITION. 


247 


January  22,  by  which  we  are  informed  that  he  had  crossed  the 
Prah,  and  was  16  miles  north  of  it,  on  that  date.  Sir  Gtunet 
at  the  same  date  was  at  Moinsee,  32  miles  from  the  Prah, 
Vith  the  Naval  Brigade. 

Abogoo,  January  22. 

We  took  this  place  with  a  rush,  and  are  now  waiting  for  ammu- 
nition to  come  up. 

We  are  16  miles  north  of  the  Pi-ah,  and  25  from  Coomassie. 
I  shall  move  the  day  after  to-morrow  on  Conuam,  five  hours  from  this, 
and  shall  then  hope  to  open  communication  direct  with  the  General.  I 
have  only  50  spare  roimds  per  man,  instead  of  250. 

On  January  21  he  had  written  from  Abogoo  the  following 
letter  to  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley : — 

Abogoo,  January  21,  1874. 

Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  Excel- 
lency's despatches,  dated  December  31,  1873,  January  8,  January  13, 
and  your  Excellcncy^s  communication  of  the  14th  instant. 

2.  My  entire  force  of  Houssas  and  Yorubas,  which  are  capable 
of  being  brought  to  the  front,  are  now  up  as  per  state  enclosed,  and  Mr. 
Ponsonby,  R.N.,  joined  head-quarters  on  18tli,  and  Dr.  Rowe  on  the 
afternoon  of  19th  instant. 

3.  Yesterday  came  up  23  boxes  of  Snider  and  20  boxes  of  Enfield 
ammunition,  2  cases  of  rockets,  and  1  trough. 

4.  This  afternoon  came  in  other  loads,  completing  spare  ammunition, 
458  spare  rounds  Snider  for  350  men,  and  55  spare  rounds  Enfield  for 
500  men,  one  7-pounder  gun,  and  15  charges  for  ditto,  4  troughs,  and 
72  rockets. 

5.  To-morrow  I  am  expecting  2  boxes  containing  fuses,  friction- 
tubes,  slow-match,  &c.,  4  cases  of  shot  for  7-pounder  guns,  16  cases 
of  shell  (common),  5  cases  of  double  shell,  17-pounder  gim,  and  7  cases 
of  charges  for  7  -pounders. 

6.  I  r^ret  to  have  to  report  that  I  received  yesterday  tlie  news  pf 
the  death  of  Dr.  Paule,  R.N.,  who  died  at  Assoom  of  fever  and  jaundice, 
followed  by  dysentery,  on  the  19th  instant.  The  loss  of  this  ofiUcer  is 
very  much  regretted  by  the  officers  of  this  expedition,  as  well  as  by 
myself.  His  kindness  and  genial  disposition  had  endeared  him  to  all, 
and  since  the  27th  ultimo,  owing  to  the  illness  of  Lieutenant  Cameron, 
19th  Regiment,  he  had  been  in  command  of  an  advanced  detachment  of 
force  until  it  reached  Assoom  on  the  10th  instant. 

7.  On  the  19th  instant  came  up  the  chief  of  Assoom  with  120  men. 
Yesterday  the  King  of  Eastern  Akim  came  with  300  more,  and  to-day 
some  50  others  have  arrived 


248 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


8.  On  the  17th  a  broad  road  leading  northwards  was  reconnoitred 
for  three  miles  by  Lieutenant  Barnard,  19th  Regiment,  with  100  men, 
but  was  found  to  end  in  farms.  On  the  18th  the  same  officer  and  forcQ 
examined  road  to  Conomo  for  three  or  four  miles  without  seeing  any- 
one. Reconnaissances  were  pushed  out  five  or  six  miles  towards  the 
villages  of  Bangsu  and  Jo-Ashi.  On  left  flank  and  left  rear  nothing 
was  seen,  remainder  of  force  being  occupied  in  unroofing  and  loopholing 
houses  and  cutting  patrol  paths  through  forest  around  village. 

9.  To-day  Captain  Larcom,  R.N.,  and  Lieutenant  Barnard,  19th 
Regiment,  with  100  men,  examined  country  ten  miles  on  lefl  rear, 
burning  two  deserted  villages,  and  King  of  East  Akim  drove  out  the 
enemy  from  Bangsu,  a  village  eleven  miles  on  left  flank,  which  he 
burned,  having  four  men  wounded.  To-morrow  Lieutenant  Barnard, 
in  command  of  160  Houssas  and  Yorubas,  with  Mr.  Ponsonby,  in 
charge  of  rocket  party  and  300  Akims,  will  occupy  Bargens,  and  day 
afler  to-morrow  move  upon  Jaashu  for  the  purpose  of  dislodging  the 
enemy  from  that  place,  and  opening  commimication  with  Captain 
Butler,  whose  force  cannot  be  more  than  four  hours  to  the  westward, 
in  neighbourhood  of  Atcheyasswah. 

10.  Jaashi,  like  this  place,  is  five  hours  distant  from  Conomo,  which 
will  be  occupied  by  force  not  later  than  25th  or  26th,  and  is  three  from 
Coomassie  or  Daubin.  I  calculate  approximately  the  position  of  this 
place  to  be  in  latitude  6  d^.  30  min.  N.,  and  57  deg.  30  min.  W. — I 
have,  &c. 

(Signed)       John  H.  Glover, 

Special  Commissioner. 

His  Excellency  Major-General  Sir  G.  Wolsoley. 

Three  days  before  the  battle  of  Amoaful,  he  writes  to  Sir 
Garnet  as  follows : — 

January  28,  1874. 

Sir, — Since  date  of  my  last  despatch  to  your  Excellency  of  the  21st 
instant.  Lieutenant  Barnard,  having  with  him  Mr.  Ponsonby,  R.N.,  who 
was  in  charge  of  rocket  troughs,  and  1 60  Houssas  and  Yorubas,  with 
200  Akims,  occupied  B^gsu,  and  the  next  day  drove  out  the  enemy 
from  Jaashu,  ten  miles  south-west  of  this  place ;  caf^ualties,  nil.  25th, 
200  Akims  more  despatched  to  attack  a  small  village  to  lefl  rear  were 
repulsed ;  loss  of  2  killed  and  4  wounded,  20  Akims  only  being  en- 
gaged, the  rest  retreating,  Akims  reporting  that  from  loudness  of  the 
guns  they  believed  the  village  to  be  occupied  by  Cobrah  Fuah's  army 
(Western  Akim),  and  requested  from  Lieutenant  Barnard  some  Houssas  ; 
but  fearing  an  attack  from  th^s  pl^c.e,  i^rhich  was  known  to  be  occupied 
by  the  enemy.  Lieutenant  Barnard  sent  only  a  bugler  and  four  men 


CAPTAIN  GLOVER'S  EXPBPITION. 


249 


with  a  red  English  flag.  The  men  reported  that  the  Akims  could  not 
be  induced  to  proceed  more  than  a  mile,  and  on  their  return  were  only 
prevented  from  bolting  to  Abogos  by  a  rocket  being  directed  down  the 
road  to  head  them  back.  The  next  day  Lieutenant  Barnard  was  to 
have  effected  a  junction  with  me  at  this  place  at  1  P.M.,  so  was  com- 
pelled to  leave  Assufoo.  He  left  Jaashie  at  10  a.m.,  but  did  not  reach 
this  place  until  3.30  p.m.,  and  carried  it  after  fifteen  minutes*  firing. 

Mr.  Ponsonby  was  hit  by  a  spent  ball,  which  caused  him  to  fall ; 
also  two  Houssas  hit,  one  seriously.  The  enemy  held  the  bush  or 
border  of  the  village  for  about  five  minutes,  until  dislodged  by  two 
rockets,  when  they  retreated  in  direction  of  Coomassie  or  Juabin. 

In  the  meantime  I  had  left  Abogo  at  7  a.m.,  and  forming  junction 
with  100  men  under  Captain  Sartorius,  who  had  left  the  day  previous 
and  encamped  two  and  a  half  hours  in  advance,  I  proceeded  for  ConomO| 
three  miles  due  east  of  this  place.  It  was  quite  dark  when  we  arrived 
within  a  mile  of  this  place,  and  I  encamped,  intending  to  attack  at  day- 
break ;  but  a  reconnaissance  made  by  the  King  of  Eastern  Akim  and 
twenty  men  found  it  deserted,  and  it  was  immediately  occupied  by  his 
force — about  400  men. 

On  the  27th  I  moved  to  this  place,  leaving  Dr.  Rowe  and  200 
Houssas  and  Yorubas  with  King  of  Akim  to  prevent  Akim  force  from 
going  off*  in  sudden  panic.  The  King  himself  is  brave,  so  is  his  general, 
and  perhaps  100  out  of  700  of  the  entire  Akim  force  with  me. 

Captain  Butler  does  not  inform  me  of  his  line  of  march  after  crossing 
Prah,  and  the  few  Ashantee  prisoners  with  me  give  no  information. 
The  slaves  taken  know  nothing  except  the  road  from  the  farm  they 
work  on  to  the  village  in  which  they  are  taken.  I  cannot  see  the 
Akims  to  reconnoitre,  so  that  unless  Captain  Sartorius  should  succeed 
in  getting  this  despatch  to  Captain  Butler,  I  do  not  know  how  I  shall 
effect  communication  with  your  Excellency. 

I  am  awaiting  reinforcements  of  Aquapims  with  spare  ammimition, 
also  King  of  Crobo  with  a  large  force,  all  of  whom  are  within  three  or 
four  marches  of  us,  being  in  lat.  6  deg.  38  min.  N.,  and  long.  1  W., 
fifteen  or  twenty  miles  from  Coomassie  or  Juabin. 

From  such  information  as  I  can  gather,  the  enemy  will  oppose  my 
crossing  the  river  at  Assoom,  six  hours  from  this. 

Excepting  *  Abogoo,'  every  place  occupied  has  been  found  swept  of 
sheep  and  fowls,  consequently  my  force  has  been  living  on  yam  and 
plantains  for  the  last  seven  days,  ^d  the  officers  have  no  preserved 
meat  up  of  any  description. 

One  of  my  messengers  was  robbed  and  flogged  by  some  West  India 
soldiers,  consequently  the  Akims  at  Assoom  refuse  to  convey  letter, 
and  I  am  too  fiir  in  advance  to  influence  them. 


250 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


I  shall  endeavour  to  get  duplicate  of  this  and  previous  one  of  the 
21st  instant  sent  to  your  Excellency  by  route  south  of  Prah. 

Enclosed  is  a  copy  of  Lieutenant  Bamard^s  (19th  Hegiment)  report 
of  attack  and  occupation  of  this  place,  Odumassie. 

It  is  with  much  pleasure  that  I  bring  to  tlie  notice  of  your  Excel- 
lency the  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Barnard  (1 9th  Regiment),  a  most  pro- 
mising and  indefatigable  young  officer.  Captain  Sartorius,  in  com- 
mand of  the  advanced  force  which  carried  Abogoo,  brought  to  my 
notice  his  gallant  bearing  on  that  occasion ;  and  he  displayed  great 
discretion  and  judgment  while  in  command  of  the  column  which  I 
found  in  possession  of  this  place  yesterday.  I  therefore  hope  your  Ex- 
cellency will  remember  Lieutenant  Barnard's  gallant  conduct  on  this 
second  occasion  when  this  campaign  is  finished. 

I  take  the  opportunity  of  bringing  to  the  notice  of  your  Excellency 
the  invaluable  assistance  which  I  have  received  from  Captain  Sartorius, 
6th  Bengal  Cavalry.  It  was  entirely  owing  to  his  indefatigable  exer- 
tions and  great  personal  influence  that  the  Croboes  and  Aquapims  were 
induced  to  move  on  the  Volta  when  they  did,  thereby  showing  the 
Accras,  and  enabling  me,  with  the  assistance  of  Dr.  Rowe  on  the  sea- 
board, to  cross  a  large  force  of  17,000  men  over  the  Volta  by  December 
27;  nor  could  any  force  have  reached  the  Prah  on  15th  instant,  but  for 
the  amount  of  pressure  put  upon  the  king  and  chiefs  of  Eastern  Akim 
by  Captain  Sartorius.  I  shall,  on  another  occasion,  bring  this  officer's 
service  more  fully  to  the  notice  of  your  Excellency,  trusting  that  you 
will  forward  them  to  the  Secretiiry  of  State  for  India. 

I  have,  &c., 
(Signed)         John  H.  Glover, 
Special  Commissioner. 

His  Excellency  Major- General  Sir  G.  Wolseley. 

When  within  20  miles  from  Coomassie,  at  a  place  called 
Odumassie,  Glover  halted  imtil  February  8,  on  which  date  he 
received  news  of  the  capture  of  the  Ashantee  capital  by  the 
main  column  under  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley.  He  then  made  a 
two  days'  march,  and  on  the  10th  despatched  Captain  Beginald 
Sartorius,  of  the  6th  Bengal  Cavalry,  with  twenty  men  to  open 
communication  with  Sir  Garnet. 

Sartorius  undei*took  the  dangerous  mission,  and  though  he 
was  fired  upon  several  times  en  route^  he  entered  Coomassie ; 
and  after  satisfying  himself  that  the  capital  was  in  ruins,  and 
the  main  column  far  on  its  way  back  to  the  Coast,  he  hurried 
on  after  it,  arriving  at  Fomannah  on  the  12th,  where  he  found 
Sir  Garnet,  who  congratulated  both  Glover  and  Sartorius  for 


CAPT.UN  GLOVERS  EXPEDITION. 


251 


the  spirited  way  in  which  they  contributed  to  the  success  of 
the  campaign.  The  following  is  the  letter  which  Captain  Sar- 
torius  brought  from  Captain  Glover  to  Sir  Garnet : — 

Essiemampon,  February  10,  1874,  12.80  p.m. 

Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  report  my  arrival  at  this  place  with  700 
Houssas  and  Yorubas,  three  7-pound er  guns,  three  rocket  troughs,  204 
spare  rounds  ammunition  per  man.  Last  engagement  with  enemy  was 
on  2nd  inst.,  when  they  were  driven  from  line  of  Amoon  River.  King 
of  Duabin  has  sent  in  his  submission.  I  sent  his  messenger  back, 
ordering  king  to  go  to  your  Excellency  at  Coomassie.  I  have  with  me 
some  1,600  allies,  and  5,000  over  River  Prah  coming  up.  I  suppose 
myself  to  be  seven  miles  from  Coomassie,  aud  shall  halt  at  Atrirea,  the 
next  village,  until  I  receive  orders  from  your  Excellency.  My  men 
have  had  only  one  oimce  of  salt  meat  per  man  since  January  18,  and 
that  once  four  days  since.  Captain  Sartorius,  6th  Bengal  Cavalry, 
who  takes  this,  has  done  excellent  and  hard  service. — ^I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       J.  H.  Glover,  R.N. 

llis  Excellency  Major-General  Sir  G.  Wolseley,  C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  &c. 

In  the  following  letters  we  have  official  despatches  which 
conclude  such  acpounts  as  we  have  been  able  to  obtain  of  the 
work  accomplished  by  Captain  Glover,  and  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley's 
hearty  though  tardy  apknowledgments  of  his  services. 

OdumASB^o,  February  4,  1874. 

Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yoiu:  Excel* 
Icncy's  despatches  dated  Prahsu,  19th,  and  Moinsee,  January  23, 1874. 
Since  my  despatch  from  this  place  dated  28tih  ultimo,  reporting  the 
occupation  of  this  place  and  that  of  Conomo  on  26th,  I  have  been  en- 
deavouring to  open  communication  with  Captain  Butler  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Jjake  Borsumaque,  which  I  estimate  to  be  not  more  than 
nine  hom-s  south-west  of  this.  Captain  Sartoriiis  went  to  the  south- 
west on  the  29th  and  30th,  returning  on  the  31st,  finding  no  road 
leading  westward  from  Jaahsi,  and  lefl  again  on  the  1st  inst.  See 
report.  The  river  Anoom,  three  hours  in  my  front,  is  occupied  in 
force  by  the  enemy.  The  Akims  fron^  Conomo  have  felt  the  enemy 
three  hours  in  their  front  on  the  Jwbin-road  and  op  this  side  of  the 
river  Anoom,  while  Captain  Sartorius,  crossing  the  Anoom  six  miles  to 
the  west,  drove  them  from  two  camps  on  both  sides  of  that  river,  with 
loss  on  our  side  of  four  killed,  eleven  wounded,  and  one  missing. 
Yesterday  more  ammunition  came  up,  making  145  spare  rounds  per 
man  for  350  Houssas,  and  1^6  spare  rounds  for  400  Yorubas  armed 


252 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


witli  Enfields,  together  with  195  rockets,  and  72  rounds  of  shell  and 
case  for  one  7-pounder  gun.  I  am  waiting  for  reinforcements  to  come 
up,  having  only  in  camp  fit  for  duty  262  rank  and  file  Houssas,  and 
262  rank  and  file  Yorubas ;  total  524.  1  am  obliged  to  keep  200 
Houssas  and  Yorubas  at  Abogoo,  in  consequence  of  the  unreliableness 
of  the  Akims,  who  withdraw  their  men  without  leave  or  warning,  and 
the  road  between  that  place  to  the  Prah  had  been  interrupted  because 
I  cannot  get  tlie  Akims  to  patrol.  Fortunately  it  was  the  Akims  who 
suffered,  losing  three  of  their  men  by  a  surprise,  and  being  unarmed. 
The  sick-list  to-day  shows  27  Houssas  and  21  Yorubas,  besides  9 
Houssas  and  3  Yorubas  wounded ;  total  60.  Until  reinforcements 
arrive  I  cannot  move  firom  this  without  cutting  off  all  communication 
with  my  rear,  and  I  have  not  sufiScient  ammunition  up  to  run  such 
risk.  Captain  Butler,  writing  on  the  26th  from  Enoomsu,  would 
appear  to  be  on  the  Anoom  or  Enoom  river,  *  Su '  meaning  in  Ashan- 
tee  upon  or  on.  Lieutenant  Barnard  patrolled  road  leading  north-west 
to-day,  three  miles  towards  Anoom  river,  and  observed  traces  of 
party  who  h^d  been  foraging.  I  am  expecting  Lieutenant  Moore  to- 
morrow with  some  1,000  Aquapims  and  Croboes,  who,  he  reports,  are 
very  loth  to  move  forward.  He  also  reports  2,000  more  coming  up 
from  south  of  Prah.  As  soon  as  reinforcements  and  ammunition  come 
up  I  shall  close  in  on  the  main  body. — I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       JouN  H.  Glover. 

His  Excellency  Major- General  Sir  G.  Wolseloy. 

The  next  enclosure  is  the  communication  of  Captain 
Sartorius  referred  to  in  the  preceding  letter  of  Captain 
Glover : — 

Odumassic,  February  3,  1874. 

Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  report  that,  after  leaving  this  place  on 
February  1,  on  my  way  to  Apinaraapu,  according  to  your  order,  I 
reached  the  Anoom  river,  running  east  and  west,  at  eleven  o'clock  noon, 
after  five  hours' march,  and  crossed  the  river  without  seeing  anything  of 
the  enemy.  About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  on  the  other  side  I  surprised  a 
spy  village  of  about  fifteen  spies.  They  evidently  had  no  idea  of  any 
force  being  so  near,  for  they  left  their  guns,  as  also  some  venison  they 
were  cooking  at  the  time  of  the  attack.  From  this  place  I  continued 
my  march  in  a  westerly  direction,  and  after  about  two  miles  came  upon 
the  enemy,  who  were  in  force ;  in  a  short  time  they  fled,  having  wounded 
Serjeant  Major  Alii  and  one  Houssa  (neither  of  them  severely).  I  still, 
continued  my  march  west  for  about  a  mile,  and  came  upon  an  empty 
village  of  some  ten  houses.  No  one  could  have  occupied  this  place  for 
some  time  ;  I  therefore  did  not  expect  any  more  fighting,  and  sent  back 


GLOVER'S  EXPEDITION. 


263 


a  Serjeant,  with  twenty  Houssas  and  twenty  Yorubaa,  to  you  with  my 
report  so  far.  After  sending  off  this  party  I  continued  my  march  still 
west,  and  again  came  upon  a  large  camp  of  the  enemy,  having  had  a 
morning  fire  for  the  last  two  miles  from  village.  I  forced  my  way  on 
about  three  miles;  the  road  all  this  time  was  along  bank  of  River 
Anoom.  My  guide  then  reported  that  he  had  lost  his  way,  so  we  had 
to  return  nearly  three  miles,  and  struck  a  path  leading  north  north-west. 
This  we  followed  for  some  five  miles,  till  we  turned.  I  therefore  found 
the  guide  was  again  at  fault,  and,  as  it  was  getting  late,  and  the  troops 
had  had  a  very  hard  day's  work,  I  returned  to  bank  of  river,  three- 
quarters  of  a  mile  from  the  last  Ashantee  camp ;  this  being  the  most 
open,  and  with  river  on  right  Hank,  and  therefore  easiest  held  against 
any  attack,  and  encamped  for  the  night.  Next  morning  I  sent  out  a 
patrol  of  40  men,  Houssas  and  Yorubas,  with  order  to  patrol  the  road 
leading  north  from  enemy's  camp  for  one  hour,  meaning  to  follow 
myself  a  little  later  and  find  out  where  the  path  led  to.  I  had  no  idea 
at  the  time  that  they  would  find  the  camp  re-occupied  by  the  enemy  so 
close  to  me ;  the  serjeant  in  charge  had  the  usual  orders  ;  in  case  he  met 
the  enemy  in  any  force  he  was  to  return.  About  fifteen  or  twenty 
minutes  after  they  left  I  heard  heavy  firing  in  their  direction,  and  im- 
mediately fell  in  with  my  detachment  and  followed  them.  Just  as  I  was 
starting  a  corporal  came  from  the  patrol  to  report  the  enemy  were  in 
great  force.  I  had  not  got  more  than  half  a  mile  when  I  met  some 
Yorubas,  who  said  the  enemy  were  too  strong  and  that  the  patrol  were 
retreating;  my  detachment  got  into  confusion  and  I  halted  them. 
Directly  the  rest  of  the  patrol  came  in.  I  had  intended  retreating  to 
last  night's  camp,  as  it  was  a  much  stronger  position,  but  Captain 
Larcom,  R.N.,  who  was  with  me,  thought  that  this  would  cause  a  panic, 
so  I  took  his  advice  and  threw  out  a  line  of  sentries  front  and  rear. 
Captain  Larcom  placed  his  rocket  trough  on  pathway  leading  to 
enemies'  camp.  While  this  was  going  on  the  Ashantees  came  down  to 
attack,  singing  their  war  song ;  but  when  within  sixty  yards  one  of  the 
Houssas  shot  a  man,  and  I  sounded  the  advance  at  the  same  time.  The 
enemy  bolted  at  once,  and  fearing  an  attack  on  my  rear,  as  all  my  men 
were  in  disorder,  I  returned  to  my  position  It  was  then  reported  to 
me  that  fifteen  men  were  missing,  and  that  they  had  crossed  the  river 
and  were  coming  down  the  other  bank  to  join  me ;  one  Iloussa  reported 
killed.  I  then  made  up  my  mind  to  remain  where  I  was  till  12  p.m. 
(four  hours),  that  being  the  time  when  the  return  party,  sent  to  you 
the  day  before,  was  expected  by  me,  and  also  to  give  the  missing  men 
time  to  rejoin.  At  twelve  my  intention  was  to  force  my  way  through 
the  enemy  back  to  head-quarters,  or,  if  I  found  them  too  strong,  to  cross 
the  river  in  l^e  night  and  return  by  the  south  bank.    This  would  have 


254 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


been  difficult  on  account  of  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  river,  and 
therefore  only  to  have  been  done  as  an  extreme  measure.  Whilst 
waiting  till  12  a.m.  to  advance,  two  Iloussas  and  Yorubas  came 
across  from  the  other  side.  At  nine  or  half-past  heavy  firing  was  heard 
from  the  other  side  of  the  enemy's  camp.  We  at  once  advanced  and 
came  up  in  time  to  meet  Lieutenant  Barnard's  force,  who  had  had  a 
running  fight  for  some  distance  before  reaching  the  Ashantee  camp 
near  us.  I  again  halted  till  a  quarter  to  1  p.m.,  so  as  to  give  the 
missing  men  time  to  return,  which  they  did,  with  the  exception,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  of  four  Houssas  hilled,  and  seven  Yorubas,  who  had 
crossed  the  river  and  made  their  way  back  to  head-quarters.  The 
Ashantees  had  cut  off  the  heads  of  the  three  Houssas,  but  had  left  them 
behind  on  the  advance  of  Lieutenant  Barnard's  force.  These  heads 
were  pluckily  recovered  by  Mr.  Phillips,  a  missionary  teacher,  acting 
as  my  interpreter,  and  were  sunk  in  the  river  by  the  serjeant-major  of 
my  detachment  before  we  left.  The  enemy  were  in  large  force — I 
should  say  about  800  or  1,000 — ^and  attacked  us  in  a  very  determined 
manner.  Their  loss  must  have  been  considerable,  for  they  left  traces 
of  blood,  as  also  some  stretchers. — I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)       Reginald  Sartorius, 

Captain  ijth  Bengal  Cavalry, 
Captain  Glover,  R.N.,  Special  Commissioner. 

The  next  enclosure  forwarded  by  Captain  Glover  to  Sir 
Garnet  is  the  copy  of  a  letter  addressed  by  the  former  to  King 
Quabbira  Fuah,  which  is  as  follows  : — 

Head-quarters,  Adoomassie,  Fobmary  7i  1874. 

King  Quahbira  Fuah, — News  reached  me  this  morning  that  you 
recrossed  the  Prah  eight  days  ago,  and  that  Captain  Butler  had  left 
you  to  join  tlie  General.  I  shall  endeavour  to  open  communication 
with  you  from  Joahsi  and  Prahsu,  both  of  which  places  I  destroyed 
ten  days  ago.  I  have  with  me  660  soldiers,  gims  and  rockets^  and 
3,000  Akims,  Croboes,  and  Aquapims,  and  2,000  more  expected  in  a 
day  or  two.  You  should  immediately  recross  the  Prah,  and  endeavour 
to  meet  me  either  at  Odumassie  or  nearer  on  road  to  Prahsu.  It  is 
quite  impossible  that  King  Calcali  can  leave  the  General  and  come 
down  to  surround  you.  Do  not  spoil  tlie  good  name  you  have  gained 
by  your  previous  bravery,  but  join  your  force  to  mine  and  go  on  with 
me  to  the  General,  upon  whose  line  of  advance  I  am  ordered  to  close. 
Captain  Butler  has  not  communicated  with  me :  but  in  the  event  of 
your  receiving  any  orders  from  the  General  counter  to  my  request  you 


GLOVER'S  EXPEDITION, 


will  at  once  comply  with  tlie  General's  order.  Tou  may  expect  to  hear 
of  my  force  being  in  your  front  before  you  receive  this. 

Faithftdly,  &c., 
(Signed)         John  H.  Glover, 
Special  Commissioner, 

To  KiDg  Quahbira  Fuah. 

The  next  letter  is  from  Captain  Glover  to  the  Chief  of  the 
Staff:— 

Koraman  (Quarman),  February  14,  1874. 

Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  the  Idth  instant,  acquainting  me  that  the  King  of 
Aahantee  has  paid  the  first  part  of  the  indemnity  demanded,  and  that 
the  Major-General  is  going  to  sign  the  treaty  of  peace.  In  compliance 
with  the  orders  of  his  ExceUency  the  Major-General  Commanding,  I 
shall  leave  this  place  to-morrow  en  route  for  Prahsu,  on  my  way  to 
Accra.  I  regret  that  your  letter  of  the  9th  instant,  to  which  you  refer, 
has  not  reached  me  up  to  the  present  time.  I  shall  require  to-morrow, 
for  the  provisioning  of  my  force,  1,0001b.  salt  beef,  2,0001b.  bread, 
5001b.  tobacco,  and  25  gaUons  of  rum.  I  have  the  honour  further  to 
request  that  you  will  be  good  enough  to  cause  seven  days*  provisions 
for  1,000  men,  and  a  ration  of  rum  for  the  same  number  for  the  same 
time,  to  be  detained  for  me  at  the  dep6t  on  the  River  Prah. 

I  have,  <&c, 
(Signed)         John  H.  Glover, 

Special  Commissioner, 

Colonel  E.  B.  Greaves,  Chief  of  the  Stafil 

A  second  despatch  from  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  to  the 
Colonial  OflSce,  also  bearing  date  February  22,  is  also 
published : — 

GoTemment  House,  Cape  Coast,  February  22,  1874. 

My  Lord, — have  the  honour  to  forward  a  copy  of  a  despatch 
dated  20th  instant,  from  Captain  Glover,  R.N.,  describing  the  con- 
cluding phase  of  the  operations  carried  out  by  the  force  under  his 
immediate  command,  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  originally 
conveyed  to  him  by  me  on  December  31,  as  reported  to  your  lordship 
in  my  despatch  No.  1,  of  1st  ultimo.  Captain  Glover  has  conducted 
these  operations  with  great  skill  and  ability,  having  overcome  all  the 
numerous  difficulties  that  he  had  to  encounter  with  the  zeal  and  enei^ 
for  which  he  is  well  known.  Captain  Glover  reports  to  me  that  the 
Eastern  Akims,  who  accompanied  him,  proved  to  be  utterly  worthless, 
having  evinced  the  greatest  cowardice  throughout  the  campaign  The 


25(5 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


fact  tliat  he  was  not  able  to  bring  the  large  native  force  into  the  field 
north  of  tlie  River  Prah  tliat  he  had  at  one  time  reckoned  on,  is,  Uiere- 
fore,  in  my  opinion,  a  fortunate  circumstance,  as  useless  and  cowardly 
allies  are  always  a  serious  clog  upon  all  military  operations.  The 
diversion  effected  by  Captain  Glover's  force  in  favour  of  the  main  army 
operating  direct  upon  CJoomassie  under  my  own  immediate  orders 
contributed  materially  to  the  success  that  has  been  achieved  in  this 
war,  and  I  have  great  pleasure  in  recommending  Captain  Glover  and 
the  officers  serving  under  him  to  your  lordship's  most  favourable  con- 
sideration. 

I  have,  &c., 
(Signed)  G.  J.  Wolselet, 

Major- General  and  Administrator^  Gold  Coast, 

Captain  Glover's  letter  enclosed  in  the  preceding  runs  as 
follows  : — 

Mansu,  February  20,  1874. 

Sir, — Ammunition  having  come  up  during  the  two  previous  days, 
completing  spare  ammunition  to  200  rounds  per  man,  I  left  Odumasm 
on  the  morning  of  8th  instant  and  bivouiicked  for  the  night  in  Ashantee 
camp,  on  north  side  of  River  Anoom,  from  which  the  enemy  had  been 
driven  by  the  two  detachments  commanded  by  Captain  Sartorius,  6th 
Bengal  Cavalry,  and  Lieutenant  Barnard,  19th  Regiment,  on  2nd  instant, 
as  reported  in  previous  despatch  ;  here  we  found  com  and  corn  flour, 
which  had  been  lefl  by  the  enemy.  The  next  day  we  halted  to  break- 
fast in  a  large  camp  capable  of  containing  4,000  to  5,000  men,  where  I 
was  joined  by  Lieutenant  Moore,  R.N.,  and  some  4,000  Akims, 
Aquapims,  and  Croboes.  Here  it  was  evident  the  enemy  had  left  in  hot 
baste,  and  for  miles  along  the  road  we  found  stools,  calabashes,  corn  and 
com  flour,  which  the  enemy  had  thrown  away  in  their  flight.  A 
wounded  straggler  from  Captain  Sartorius*  force,  who  only  came  in  the 
day  before  I  left  Odumassie,  had  approached  the  enemy's  camp  during 
the  night,  and  had  heard  them  discussing  the  hopelessness  of  fighting 
Europeans  and  Houssas,  as  it  was  evident  that  it  was  not  a  force  of 
Akims  with  whom  they  had  been  engaged.  After  a  marcli  of  ten 
miles,  principally  northwards,  alon^  a  hunter's  path  with  much  bog  and 
fiiUen  timber,  I  bivouacked  for  the  night  on  left  bank  of  a  river  (name 
unknown) ;  the  next  morning  I  marched  north-west  about  five  miles, 
to  a  village  on  the  south  of  Essianimpon,  from  which  at  noon  I  de- 
spatched Captain  Sartorius  witli  escort  of  twenty  men  to  open  communi- 
cation with  your  Excellency,  supposed  to  be  at  Coomassie,  and  at  2.0 
P.M.  finding  myself  one  mile  distant  from  River  Dah,  I  halted  at  Akinna, 
until  I  should  either  receive  orders  or  hear  from  Captain  Sartorius.  At 


GLOVER'S  EXPEDITION.  257 

3.0  r.M.  next  day  I  crossed  River  Dah,  and  baited  for  the  night  at 
Apraymassie,  and  at  2.0  f.h.  on  12th  instant  entered  Coomassie.  I 
then  learned  that  messengers  had  passed  down  from  the  king  accepting 
your  Excellency's  terms  and  carrying  a  first  instalment  of  indemnity, 
I  have  since  come  up  by  easy  marches  to  this  camp,  where  I  arrived  at 
9.0  A.M.  this  morning,  en  route  for  Anamaboe  and  Accra. 

At  Moisee,  at  the  foot  of  the  Adansi-hill,  on  the  15th  instant,  a 
messenger  from  the  kin;^  of  Coomassie  arrived  bringing  with  him  four- 
teen ounces  of  gold,  and  a  gold  dish,  as  a  present  to  me,  and  requesting 
that  I  would  order  the  king  of  Eastern  Akim  (who  they  said,  had  gone 
to  Juabiu  to  attempt  to  detach  the  king  of  that  place  from  his  alliance 
with  the  king  of  Ashantee)  to  return  at  once  to  his  own  country. 

I  returned  the  money  and  dbh  to  the  king  of  Coomassie  and  seiit 
the  king  of  Akim  a  copy  of  Colonel  Greaves'  letter  to  me  of  the  14th 
instant,  and  directed  him  at  once  to  rccross  ihe  Prah  and  return  to  his 
country  with  all  his  people.  I  took  the  opportunity  of  sending  by  this 
messenger  also  a  letter  to  Mr.  Bannerman  directing  him  also  at  once  to 
break  up  the  camp  at  Abagoo  and  march  to  Accra  with  the  detachment 
of  Houssas  and  Yorubas  left  in  Abagoo,  taking  with  him  the  sick  which 
had  been  left  at  the  various  stations  on  the  march  up. — I  have,  &c.| 

(Signed)       J.  H.  Glover, 

Special  Commissioner. 
His  Excellency  Major-Goneral  Sir  O.  Wolseloy,  C.B.,  K,C.M.G.,  &c. 

The  following  is  a  portion  of  a  note  sent  by  Captain  Glover 
to  a  ifriend  in  England,  which  was  written  by  him  at  Yan-Coo- 
massie  (Fantee)  February  20,  when  only  30  miles  from  Cape 
Coast  Castle ;  and  a  more  fitting  conclusion  to  this  chapter  and 
the  book  than  the  following  generous  acknowledgment  by  Sir 
Garnet  Wolseley  of  Captain  Glover's  valuable  services  and 
brilliant  success,  cannot  be  written  :— 

En  route  for  Accra ;  but  I  intend,  if  possible,  to  go  straight  to 
England,  and  am  going  to  Cape  Coast  Castle  to  see  the  General. 

You  may  perhaps  know  that  the  troops  had  to  leave  Coomassie, 
having  no  provisions  and  without  the  General  having  heard  from  the 
king,  and  that  it  w^us  much  to  the  relief  of  his  mind  that  I  had  occupied 
Coomassie  afler  he  had  left. 

I  give  you  a  copy  of  his  telegram  : — 

*  Congratulate  you  moat  sincerely  on  all  you  have  done.' 

Captain  Sartorius,  whom  I  had  sent  on,  writes: — 

'  The  General  just  drank  your  health.' 

I  was  fighting  up  to  the  2nd  instant,  when  the  enemy  was  driven 
from  the  lino  of  the  Anoom  Biver  and  Coomassie  was  taken  on  the  4th« 

s 


258 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


The  General  found  the  Ashantees  so  tongh  that  my  force  was  sap- 
posed  to  be  destroyed,  and  our  marching  considered  wonderfnL 

I  had  6,000  men  over  the  Prah,  and  marched  4,600  into  Goomassie. 

The  day  afler  the  king  sent  me  140  ounces  of  gold  on  a  gold  salver, 
hegging  me  to  order  the  force  I  had  left  on  the  Anoom  River  to  recrosa 
the  Prah. 

I  returned  the  gold  and  complied  with  his  request 

I  also  received  the  submission  of  the  King  Iwabin,  and  have  lost 

ten  killed,  and  have  one  officer  and  twenty-four  men  wounded.  So 

ends  my  share  in  the  Ashantee  Campaign  ! 

Cicero  said  very  wisely  that  '  war  should  be  so  engaged  in 
that  nothing  but  peace  should  appear  to  be  aimed  at.'  The 
Ashantee  war  was  undertaken  with  that  aim,  as  all  the  world 
knows,  but  it  was  marred  on  the  threshold  of  perfect  success  by 
a  series  of  accidents.  First:  By  the  fire  which  raged  in 
Coomassie  the  night  following  the  entry  of  the  troops  into  the 
capital.  Secondly:  By  the  omission  of  the  British  commander 
to  guard  what  he  had  captured.  Thirdly :  By  the  impatience 
of  Sir  Garnet,  and  his  intense  desire  to  hurry  from  the  capital, 
because  he  feared  that  the  rainy  season  had  begun,  which,  of 
course,  would  have  been  calamitous  to  the  white  troops. 

The  first  contributed  to  mar  the  success  which  was  almost 
assured,  by  the  evident  impression  on  the  king's  mind  that  the 
destruction  of  his  capital  was  already  begun.  Whether  the  fire 
was  the  handiwork  of  some  trucculent  Ashantees,  or  an  accident 
arising  from  permitting  the  Fantees  to  plunder,  matters  not. 

The  omission  or  neglect  of  the  British  commander  to  secure 
what  he  captured,  served  to  furnish  the  king  with  a  force 
which  he  believed  to  have  been  utterly  destroyed,  and  a  con- 
fidence in  his  fortunes  which,  but  a  few  hours  before,  were  at 
the  very  lowest  ebb. 

The  king's  confidence  in  his  fortunes,  so  quickly  restored, 
was  soon  lost  again  when  the  news  of  the  arrival  of  Glover 
between  Jwabin  and  Coomassie  came  to  him;  but  the  im- 
patience of  Sir  Garnet  and  his  anxiety  to  return  to  the  coast, 
prevented  him  from  reaping  the  results  of  his  brilliant  success 
as  General  commanding  the  British  Expedition ;  and  this  is 
proved  by  the  immediate  despatch  of  messengers  after  him  by 
the  hard-pressed  king,  and  the  volimtary  gift  of  1,000  ounces 
of  gold,  with  a  prayer  for  peace. 


COKGLTJDINa  REMARKa 


259 


The  return  march  was  begun  on  February  6.  Five  days 
later  Captain  Sartorius  rode  through  Coomassie  accompanied 
by  only  twenty  men.  The  next  day  Special  Commissioner 
Glover  marched  4,600  native  allies  into  Coomassie. 

If  Sir  Gramet  could  only  have  stayed  five  days  longer,  peace 
might  have  been  made,  which,  as  all  will  agree,  was  a  desirable 
ending  of  the  Expedition.  RusselPs  and  Wood's  native  regi- 
ments, with  Salt's  artillery,  were  well  able  to  have  kept  Coo- 
massie against  all  odds,  and  the  white  troops  might  have 
departed  at  once  for  the  Coast. 

Such  historians  of  the  Anglo-Ashantee  Campaign  as  Sir 
Garnet's  own  personal  StaflF  may  furnish,  will  naturally  take  a 
eulogistic  view  of  things,  and  no  doubt  will  lavish  eulogistic 
paragraphs  on  the  genius  of  their  Chief.  This  will  be  but 
natural.  Sir  Garnet  has  spoken  well  of  his  StaflF,  which  no 
doubt  they  all  deserved,  and  the  historians  of  his  StaflT  will,  as 
a  matter  of  course,  speak  jrell  of  him.  But  a  good  advice  to 
an  historian,  which  I  havfli|triven  to  remember  in  this  book  is 
— ^  Ne  quid  falsi  dicere  audeat,  ne  quid  veri  non  audeat.'  (Let 
him  not  dare  to  say  anything  that  is  false,  nor  let  him  fear  to 
state  the  truth.) 

The  last  act  of  Sir  Garnet's  was  a  culpable  one  in  more  than 
one  respect,  and  it  is  a  fortunate  thing  that  it  had  no  evil 
results,  which  it  might  very  easily  have  had. 

Glover,  about  to  cross  the  Volta  to  crush  the  Ahwoonas 
with  16,000  men,  received  peremptory  orders  from  Sir  Garnet 
to  be  ready  to  cross  the  Prah  on  the  15th.  If  the  Com- 
missioner was  expected  to  be  there  by  this  date,  he  had  no 
time  to  lose,  and  he  obediently  set  about  fulfilling  his  com- 
mands. But  it  was  impossible  on  the  short  notice  he  received 
to  march  the  entire  force  of  native  allies  he  had  been  at  so 
much  pains  to  collect,  and  he  accordingly  set  oflF  for  the  Prah 
with  his  faithful  Houssas  and  Yorubas,  numbering  about  1,100 
men.  By  the  time  however  he  had  arrived  within  such 
dangerous  proximity  to  Coomassie  as  he  was  on  the  day  he  re- 
ceived the  information  that  the  capital  was  destroyed.  Glover's 
force  numbered  about  1,400  men. 

The  error  which  Sir  Gtumet  committed  in  not  disarming 
every  Ashantee  whom  he  found  in  Coomassie  the  night  he 
entered,  might  have  had  most  fatal  results  for  Glover^  Sir 

s  2 


260 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Garnet  permitted  quite  a  little  army  of  fugitives  to  gather 
about  the  king ;  and  if  he  had  been  made  of  different  material, 
no  doubt  that  would  have  inspired  him  to  retaliate  on  the  com- 
paratively weak  force  of  Glover,  and  by  this  means  have  re- 
trieved the  disasters  of  Amoaful  and  Ordahau. 

To  the  first  error  he  adds  another  one,  by  leaving  Coomasde 
without  communicating  with  the  man,  whom  we  might  say,  he 
had  despatched  from  the  Volta  to  an  almost  certain  doom. 
Fortunately,  however,  the  Fates  willed  it  otherwise,  and  Sir 
Garnet  has  escaped  blame.  The  king  turned  out  to  be  such  a 
coward  that  he  had  no  heart  left  in  him  after  tlie  defeat  of 
Ordahsu ;  thus  Le  never  attempted  to  snatch  the  prize  which 
lay  so  close  to  his  grasp.  But  such  an  act  as  Sir  Garnet's 
abandonment  of  his  faithful  and  brave  ally  could  not  be  done 
in  Europe  without  being  quickly  taken  advantage  of  to  the 
ruin  of  the  party  concerned. 

However,  ^all  is  well  that  ends^ell.'  The  campaign  has 
been  a  success,  and  the  brave  and  deserving  have  been  rewarded 
by  their  Queen  and  the  nation.  A  baronetcy  and  a  pension 
have  been  conferred  on  Sir  Gramet  Joseph  Wolseley,  and  another 
decoration,  the  Grand  Cross  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George,  has 
been  added  to  the  many  he  already  possesses.  Nearly  all  the 
officers  have  been  promoted,  the  gallant  Lord  Gifford  has 
received  the  Victoria  Cross,  and  Sergeant  M'Graw  of  the  42nd 
for  his  conduct  at  Amoaful  has  received  a  like  distinction. 

But  there  is  one  man  who  deserves  a  Victoria  Cross,  which 
the  newspapers  have  not  recorded  as  yet,  and  he  is  Captain 
Beginald  Sartorius,  of  the  6th  Bengal  Cavalry,  for  that  daring 
ride  of  fifty-five  miles  with  a  force  of  twenty  men,  through  an 
enemy's  country,  while  numbers  of  the  foe  lurked  behind 
bushes,  whence  he  was  fired  upon  twice.  It  was  a  remarkable 
and  imique  act  of  daring  bravery,  which  had  good  results.  It 
calmed  the  mind  of  the  general  who  must  have  been  naturally 
anxious  about  Commissioner  Glover's  fate,  it  assured  him  also 
of  the  extent  of  his  success,  and  was  the  means  of  impelling  the 
king  to  despatch  messengers  with  the  first  instalment  of  the 
idenmity  and  to  abjectly  sue  for  peace. 

Some  reward  should  also  be  given  to  the  gallant  Glover, 
who  lent  such  aid  to  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley,  by  distracting  the 
attentions  of  a  larger  force  of  the  enemy,  for  compelling  the 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 

PART  ir. 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA 

PAKT  n. 


LORD  NAPIFU  OF  MAODAUk,  G.C.B.,  ETC. 


t'rnm  >f  nh4,tiHtrni»h  h«  Mr.  John  Wntktnn,  PnrlirtmcHt  Slr<rt<,b«>  |»«^m«»«ioH^. 


CHAPTER  L 


A  BBITI8H  CAMF--THE  ^  BEST  FELLOW  IK  THE  WOBLD  * — THE  BBaVIBElfEHTB 
OF  A  OSNTLESCAN^IirrBOBVCTOBT. 

A  MOST  extraordinary  and  novel  sight  to  me,  presented  itself  as 
I  landed  upon  the  bunder  at  Zoulla.  Thousands  of  half-naked 
coolies  were  shouting  and  chanting  a  barbaric  song  while  they 
worked  under  as  hot  a  sun  as  ever  blazed  in  the  tropics,  and 
hundreds  of  uniformed  superintendents,  armed  with  long  cour- 
baches,  were  coercing  the  labourers  under  their  charge  to  work. 
The  braying  of  hundreds  of  donkeys,  the  neighing  of  horses, 
the  whinnying  of  mules,  the  lowing  of  thirsty  kine,  the  shrill 
shriek  of  two  anomalous  locomotives,  the  noisy  roll  of  ricketty 
cars  as  they  thxmdered  to  and  fro,  caused  the  scene  to  appear  at 
the  first  impression  as  if  a  whole  nation  had  immigrated  here, 
and  were  about  to  plaijit  a  great  city  on  the  fervid  beach  of 
Annesley  Bay.  The  mountainous  piles  of  stores  covered  with 
tarpaulins,  the  long  warehouses  with  their  roofs  of  brushwood, 
filled  to  the  utmost  with  the  matirid  of  war,  and  the  noble  bay 
crowded  with  majestic  transports,  steamers,  men-of-war,  great 
sailing  packets,  tiny  tug-boats,  elegant  little  yachts,  and  innu* 
merable  Turkish  kanjeahs,  from  Mocha,  Jeddah,  Souakim  and 
Massowah,  flitting  about  with  their  swallow-winged  sails,  only 
served  to  heighten  the  illusion. 

As  I  knew  nobody  as  yet  of  the  English  army,  it  was  neces- 
sary I  should  scrape  acquaintance  with  some  person  who  could 
initiate  me  to  British  camp-life.  Becollecting  I  had  a  letter 
of  introduction  to  a  commissariat  officer,  given  to  me  by  Major 
S  ,  I  bade  my  servant  Ali  remain  near  a  certain  large  ware- 
house until  I  should  return  to  him.   I  hastened  on  to  where 


266 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


I  observed  a  group  of  lofty  bell-tents,  pitched  close  to  a  wooden 
building  where  numbers  of  white-robed  and  turbaned  Indians 
were  running  about  in  seeming  great  hurry.  Asking  a  soldier 
who  stood  guard  near  the  largest  and  most  luxuriously  furnished 

tent,  *  Which  was  Captain  Z  's  quarters  ? '  he  directed  me 

to  a  lofty  marquee  whicli  stood  not  very  far  off,  surrounded  by  a 
hedge  of  baubool  bushes,  the  very  picture  of  exclusiveness. 

On  arriving  at  the  indicated  tent  I  made  the  occupant 
aware  of  a  visitor  being  present  by  scratching  on  the  canvas. 
I  was  immediately  invited  to  enter  by  a  person  who  was  lying 
full  length  on  a  sofa,  dressed  in  the  cool  morning  costume  of 
India,  which  consists  of  a  striped  cotton  shirt  ahd  a  voluminous 
pair  of  drawers,  which  they  call  pyjamas. 

*  I  came  to  see  Captain  Z         of  the  Commissariat,  sir  ;  * 

said  I,  surprised  at  his  nonchalance  in  the  presence  of  a 
stranger.    '  Are  you  the  gentleman  ? '  I  asked. 

'  Yes,  I  am  the  gentleman,'  he  replied,  slightly  lifting  his 
eyebrows.    '  Who  ai*e  you,  and  what  do  you  want  ? ' 

*  I  am  the  bearer  of  a  letter  of  introduction  to  you  from 

Major  S  said  I,  at  the  same  time  bending  forward  to 

hand  him  the  letter. 

*  Hum ;  ah  1  to  be  sure  ;  Major  S  ;  aw  1  let  me  see. 

Won't  you  sit  down  ?  Excuse  my  indolence ;  this  country  is  so 
hot  that  it  melts  the  marrow  in  a  fellow's  bones  I ' 

He  had  half-risen  when  he  commenced  to  deliver  this 
apology,  but  directly  relapsed  into  his  former  attitude  with  a 
deep  sigh  of  relief,  turning  an  almost  helpless  look  upon  me 
before  he  read  his  letter,  which  told  as  well  as  volumes  of  the 
anguish  he  had  suffered  in  rising. 

Soda  water  and  brandy  having  been  called  for  by  my  host 
and  served  by  a  dark-featured  native  to  the  great  relief  of  both 
of  lis,  I  asked  if  I  could  procure  a  tent  and  rations. 

'  Oh,  yes,'  replied  the  Captain ;  '  easy  enough.  Make  out 
your  indent.   No,  let  me  see.    First,  you  will  have  to  go  to 

Major  X         and  get  an  order  for  your  rations  and  a  tent, 

after  which  you  will  be  pretty  comfortable.' 

Major  X  ,  he  further  told  me,  was  Acting  

of  the  Force  at  Zoulla,  '  a  very  nice  gentleman ;  splendid 
fellow ;  first-rate  chap ;  do  anything  in  the  world '  for  me  1 
Wishing  to  see  this  paragon  of  an  ofl&cer  and  settle  my  business. 


THE  BEST  FELLOWS  IN  THE  WORLD  I 


267 


I  bade  Captain  Z  a  <  good  momiDg,'  telling  him  I  should 

see  him  again  before  long. 

I  was  about  to  depart  when  the  Captain  bawled  out,  <  I  say, 
you ;  can  you  dine  at  our  mess,  and  would  you  please  consider 
yourself  as  an  honorary  member  of  ours  while  you  are  in  camp? 
We  have  a  fine  set  of  chaps,  all  perfect  gentlemen.  There's 

A  of  the  Commissariat,  B  ,  an  old  sailor,  now  Bunder 

Master ;  then  there  is  C  :  of  the  3rd  Light  Cavalry,  D  

of  the  elephant  lines,  and  lastly,  we  have  E  of  the  Bombay 

 .    Do  come,  will  you  ?   JBe  sure,  now  1  dinner  sharp  9  p.m. 

Ta-ta,  ole  fellah.' 

^Certainly,  my  dear  Captain,  with  the  greatest  pleasure. 
Au  revoir.  Ta-ta,  ole  fellah ! '  and  out  I  departed  to  find  the 
quarters  of  that '  splendid  chap'  Major  X  . 

The  Major's  tent  was  fully  a  mile  from  Captain  Z  ^'s  tent, 

and  during  the  painful  walk  there,  with  the  hot  sand  burning 
my  shoes,  and  the  wind  coming  in  hot  fervid  gusts  in  my  face, 
I  began  to  experience  the  discomforts  of  a  tropical  life,  and  I 
fully  sympathised  with  the  gallant  Captain  in  his  endeavours 
to  alleviate  the  miseries  that  tortured  him  by  imbibing  cooling 
drinks. 

Upon  entering  the  Major's  tent  I  made  known  my  presence 
by  a  cough,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  a  gentleman 
whose  face  was  garnished  with  an  abundance  of  whiskers  and 
who,  while  he  advanced  towards  me,  popped  a  huge  eye-glass 
to  his  eye,  looking  at  me  in  a  very  inquisitive  manner.  Tlie 
mute  but  critical  interrogative  I  answered  by  instantly  inform- 
ing him  who  I  was  and  stating  my  business,  presenting  my 
credentials  at  the  same  time,  which  he  examined  with  the 
greatest  care.  After  a  satisfactory  perusal  of  the  letters,  he 
enquired,  with  much  anxiety  faithfully  depicted  on  his  features, 
what  I  should  like  to  have.  '  Some  brandy  and  soda,  cherry 
brandy,  port  wine,  lemonade?'  The  very  names  of  these 
grateful  refreshments  uttered  in  the  unctuous  accents  of  the 
hospitable  major,  were  enough  to  revive  a  fainting  pilgrim. 

His  servants — quiet,  well-trained  fellows — glided  in  at  the . 
sound  of  his  voice,  bearing  trays  with  most  delectable  drinks 
on  them.    The  Major  taking  it  for  granted  that,  being  an 
American,  a  little  brandy  would  be  of  infinite  service  to  me, 
poured  half  a  glass-full  into  my  tumbler,  filling  up  with 


268 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


sparkling  soda-water,  cool  and  fresh.  We  toasted  each  other, 
and  then  the  Major  carefully  screwing  that  eyeglass— apparently 
indispensable  for  right  judgment — into  his  right  eye,  com- 
menced to  question  me  concerning  American  affairs :  was  very 
positive  I  was  a  *  Finnegan,'  and  only  came  to  enter  Theodore's 
service — to  all  of  which  I  answered  in  the  best  possible  humour. 

Major  X  ,  abrupt  as  was  his  manner,  was,  I  must  confess,  a 

gentleman  entirely  devoid  of  any  affectation,  save  one — that  of 
using  an  eyeglass.  He  was  a  famous  man  in  India,  and  his 
sketches  of  'Life  in  the  Jungle'  were  most  artistically 
executed.  ^ 

In  the  afternoon  my  tent  was  pitched  close  to  Captain 

Z  's,  and  Ali,  my  servant,  was  sent  to  draw  five  days' 

rations,  as  I  intended  to  march  to  the  front  next  morning.  A 
baggage  mule,  and  an  Otago  saddle  and  gear  were  also  given 
to  me,  having  received  which,  I  imagined  myself  pretty  com- 
fortable, and  in  first  rate  trim  for  marching. 

Had  I  been  in  America,  or  following  some  army  in  Europe, 
I  should  have  certainly  been  very  well  off ;  but  in  Africa  it  was 
a  different  thing,  and  a  very  rude  awakening  out  of  my  illusion 
was  the  consequence  of  my  want  of  experience  on  a  British 
campaign  and  the  knowledge  of  proper  outfit. 

*  I  say,  old  boy ! '  shouted  Captain  Z  to  me ;  '  are  you 

off  to-morrow  ?   How  are  you  off  for  horse-flesh  and  servants  ? ' 

'  Well,  my  dear  Captain,  I  am  but  poorly  provided.  I  was 
not  aware  of  my  necessities  before  I  came  here,  but  I  now  find 
I  am  rather  short  in  everything.' 

.  *  Gad ;  that  won't  do,  you  know.  A  gentleman  should  never 
be  short  of  indispensables  you  know.  How  many  servants  have 
you? '  he  asked. 

*  I  have  only  one ; '  I  answered  with  humility. 

*  Good  Heavens !  only  one ;  and  how  many  horses  ! ' 
'  One  horse  and  one  mule.' 

*  Pooh,  pooh,  that  will  never  do.  You  must  have  a  cook,  a 
hay-cutter,  a  cutcha  wallah  (groom),  panee  wallah  (water- 
carrier)  to  waii,  and  then  you  must  have  one  horse  for  your 
personal  baggage,  one  horse  for  your  cooking  utensils,  one  horse 
to  'carry  your  rations,  one  horse  to  carry  your  tent,  and  two 
riding  horses ;  for  without  these  things,  you  know,  egad,  it  is 


A  GENTLEMATTS  BEQUIBEMENTS. 


269 


simply  impossible  to  live  in  this  coimtry,  and  people  will  only 
look  down  on  you,  you  know,'  said  he  compassionately. 

*  That's  so,'  chimed  in  the  rest,  *  to  be  somebody,  you  must 
have  these  things/ 

'Beally,'  said  I,  feeling  as  if  bound  to  say  something  in  my 
own  defence,  *I  have  been  on  many  an  expedition,  and  ac- 
companied many  an  army,  and  from  the  experience  gained  from 
previous  travels,  I  imagined  I  knew  what  I  should  want,  and 
what  would  be  necessary.  When  I  first  started  for  Abyssinia 
I  thought  Sir  Eobert  Napier  would  not  halt  long  anywhere, 
but  would  march  on  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  in  such  a  case, 
gentlemen,  unnecessary  baggage  would  be  an  encumbrance.' 

<  Ah,  but  you  do  not  mean  to  say  that  a  dozen  servants  are 
not  necessary  or  half  a  dozen  horses  too  maliy,  do  you  ?  If  you 
do,  you  know  nothing  about  the  country,  or  an  Anglo-Indian 
army  and  its  requirements.' 

The  above  was  a  portion  of  the  conversation  held  at  dinner. 
I  had  seen  enough  during  the  day  to  make  me  aware  that 
servants  were  very  plentiful  in  camp,  and  from  the  life  English 
officers  lead  in  India,  one  can  well  imagine  how  extremely  ne- 
cessary they  are.  Another  reason  for  their  multiplicity  is, 
that  an  Indian  servant  when  employed,  has  a  certain  task  or 
business  allotted  to  him,  and  that  one  only  will  he  perform ;  for 
instance,  the  syce  will  only  look  after  your  riding  horse ;  the 
cutcha  wallah  after  the  baggage  animal ;  the  panee  wallah  will 
but  carry  water ;  the  hay-cutter  will  but  cut  hay,  and  so  on. 
Each  of  these  servants  would  consider  it  derogatory  to  his  dig- 
nity to  perform  any  other  duty  than  that  for  which  he  was 
engaged. 

It  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  introduce  here  an  introductory 
explanation  of  the  events  and  causes  which  led  to  this  assem- 
blage of  British  soldiers  on  the  Zoulla  sands. 

An  Abyssinian  prophecy,  uttered  ages  ago,  and  handed 
down  from  generation  to  generation,  had  gathered  strength, 
until  the  people  had  come  to  believe  that  the  frdlness  of  time 
had  arrived,  and  grew  accustomed  to  expect  a  Messiah.  It 
became  known  to  an  ambitious  young  fellow,  named  Kussai, 


270 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  only  son  of  a  widow,  a  kousso  seller  dwelling  in  Kuara,  west 
of  Dembea.  The  prophecy  rang  in  his  ears  day  after  day,  and 
month  after  month.  It  haunted  him  in  his  dreams  and  in  his 
waking  hours,  imtil  he  finally  became  imbued  with  the  belief 
that  he  was  the  chosen  instrument  who  should  deliver  Canaan 
from  the  Moslems. 

The  prophecy  was  as  follows : — 

*And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  a  king  shall  arise  in 
Ethiopia,  of  Solomon's  lineage,  who  shall  be  acknowledged  the 
greatest  on  earth,  and  his  powers  shall  extend  over  all  Ethiopia 
and  Egypt.  He  shall  scourge  the  infidels  out  of  Palestine,  and 
shall  purge  Jerusalem  clean  from  the  defilers,  he  shall  destroy 
all  the  inhabitants  thereof,  and  his  name  shall  be  Theodorus.' 

Kussai,  being  a  kinsman  of  Dembea's  governor,  Dedjatch 
Comfu,  was  accorded  instruction  which  otherwise,  in  his  plebeian 
rank,  he  would  never  have  received.  Upon  finishing  his  edu- 
cation, which  was  limited  to  learning  the  art  of  reading  and 
writing,  young  Kussai  was  persuaded  to  enlist  under  Dedjatch 
Comfu's  banner,  with  a  promise  of  swift  promotion.  Great 
qualities  became  immediately  apparent  in  him.  His  conduct 
as  a  soldier  was  such  as  to  call  forth  his  kinsman's  warmest 
admiration.  Comfu  promoted  liim  to  a  captaincy,  and  he 
began  to  regard  him  as  one  of  his  most  faithful  adherents.  Dis- 
tinguished valour,  and  a  quickness  of  comprehending  the  best 
points  of  a  battle  field,  which  he  exhibited  in  a  fierce  engage- 
ment in  the  neighbouring  province  of  Begemder  during  an  ex- 
pedition there,  accelerated  his  further  promotion,  and  endeared 
him  greatly  to  tlie  governor,  insomuch  that  he  gave  Kussai  his 
favourite  daughter  in  marriage,  and  appointed  him  governor  of 
a  district. 

After  a  short  period  of  faithful  service,  during  which  he  felt 
his  way  carefully,  Kussai  suddenly  threw  off  the  mask,  and  de- 
clared vrar  against  his  kinsman  and  benefactor. 

Dedjatch  Comfu  mustered  his  troops  and  marched  against 
the  rebel.  In  a  pitched  battle  his  army  was  defeated  with 
great  slaughter,  and  he  himself  killed  by  the  hand  of  Kussai ; 
who  thereupon  marched  upon  Gondar,  the  capital  of  Dembea, 
numbering  some  sixty  thousand  inhabitants,  as  some  ti*avellers 
will  have  it,  which  city  capitulated  without  bloodshed  to  the 
conqueror.   Upon  this  event  he  proclaimed  himself  governor 


EARLY  LIFE  OF  THEODORE. 


271 


of  the  province,  marched  an  army  he  had  trained  to  the  other 
districts,  and  subjugated  them  in  succession,  replacing  the 
district  governors  with  faithful  captains  of  his  army. 

He  was  now  fairly  established  upon  his  gubernatorial  chair, 
and  by  his  heroic  conduct  in  the  field,  and  the  extraordinary 
celerity  of  his  movements,  ascribed  by  some  of  the  most  super- 
stitious to  supernatural  ubiquitousness,  and  after  a  year  of 
peace,  following  up  the  principle  of  training  soldiers  to  war, 
and  inuring  them  to  a  martial  life,  he  found  cause  to  quarrel 
with  the  governor  of  Begemder.  Forthwith,  he  marched  his 
army  into  the  country,  and  after  repeated  victories  in  that 
mountainous  country,  the  Begemder  troops,  commanded  by  the 
governor,  were  conquered,  and  all  put  to  the  sword  except  the 
governor,  whom  Kussai  consigned  to  one  of  the  state  prisons  of 
that  province.  Upon  the  news  of  his  victory  spreading  abroad 
the  chiefs  of  the  neighbouring  provinces  made  common  cause 
against  him. 

Before  proceeding  to  meet  his  enemies,  who  were  indeed 
numerous,  he  augmented  his  own  army  considerably,  by  pro- 
claiming his  name  to  be  Theodorus  (pronounced  *  Todoros '  by 
the  natives),  of  the  line  of  Solomon,  and  declaring  that  he  was 
the  Messiah  who  the  prophecy  foretold  should  come  and  destroy 
the  Mahomedan  nations. 

This  proclamation  had  a  wider  eftect  than  even  he  coidd 
have  imagined.  Deserters  from  the  other  provincial  armies 
flocked  to  his  standard,  and  considerably  elated  by  his  prospects, 
he  marched  to  give  battle.  This  tremendous  assumption  of 
*  Todoros '  or  Theodore  as  we  must  now  call  him,  the  governors 
who  were  inimical  to  him  at  first  affected  to  laugh  at  and 
regard  in  the  light  of  a  good  joke ;  but  when  they  found  their 
legions  reduced  to  mere  skeletons  by  wholesale  desertion,  and 
heard  through  their  spies  of  the  growing  power  of  their  am- 
bitious enemy,  they  altered  their  tone.  Some  laid  down  their 
arms  and  resigned  submissively  to  him ;  others  advanced  to 
meet  him,  but  were  all  defeated,  and  those  who  were  not  slain 
in  battle  were  sent  to  keep  company  with  the  governor  of  Be- 
gemder, in  the  living  tomb  in  the  Begemder  mountains.  Thus 
one  province  after  another  was  subjugated  until  the  whole  of 
Abyssinia,  with  the  exception  of  Tigre,  claimed  Theodore  as 
master.   It  was  after  these  victories  that  he  assumed  the  name 


272 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


and  title  of  Emperor  Theodorus  by  the  Power  of  God,  This 
took  place  in  the  year  1851. 

When  he  had  made  himself  master  over  all  Abyssinia,  he 
was  about  thirty-five  years  old,  in  the  vigour  of  lusty  manhood, 
active  as  a  panther,  brave  as  a  lion,  beloved,  nay,  almost  adored 
by  all  war-loving  soldiers. 

Having  acquired  from  historical  and  traditional  accounts  of 
past  governments,  and  from  liis  own  experience,  a  knowledge  of 
the  intrigues  and  dangers  which  beset  an  Abyssinian  crown,  he 
conceived  a  distaste  for  life  in  the  city  of  Gondar.  He  said  to 
himself,  *  I  will  have  no  capital ;  my  head  shall  be  the  empire, 
and  my  tent  my  capital.' 

His  talents  and  militaiy  ability  enabled  him  to  successfully 
repress  all  revolutions.  The  Gallas  were  many  times  defeated, 
but  they  were  such  roving  nations  that  he  was  unable  to  make 
his  victories  good.  He  could  only  make  his  name  dreaded, 
and  command  peace  with  them  by  his  prowess. 

Merchants  were  invited  to  Abyssinia,  and  manufactures  were 
encouraged.  European  workmen  hearing  of  his  liberality,  flocked 
in  numbers  to  Gondar,  where  they  received  employment,  favour 
and  riches.  Military  men  were  also  regarded  with  special 
favour,  and  many  were  the  travellers  who  were  invited  to  reside 
in  the  country. 

Consul  Plowden  was  a  great  favourite  with  him  and  resided 
with  Theodore  five  years,  during  which  time  the  Emperor 
strengthened  his  power  and  government  in  every  possible  way. 
But  though  he  was  undoubtedly  a  great  soldier,  far  in  advance 
of  his  people,  he  knew  not  the  way  to  make  his  victories  sub- 
serve for  the  interests  of  the  coimtry.  ^  No  sooner  was  he  con- 
queror of  a  rebel  province  than  he  was  compelled  to  overrun 
another,  and  in  the  war  he  was  continually  harassed,  until 
gradually  his  whole  nature  changed.  He  became  embittered  at 
the  ingratitude  of  the  people,  whose  welfare  he  so  ardently 
desired  and  for  whom  he  laboured  so  assiduously. 

Some  Eussian  and  German  engineers  came  to  the  country 
and  they  requested  service  with  him.  They  told  him  of  the 
wonderful  cannon  and  monstrous  mortars  they  could  make,  until 
his  imagination  rioted  in  the  belief  that  the  time  was  drawing 
nigh  when  he  could  undertake  his  contemplated  conquest  of 
Egypt,  Palestine,  and  Arabia,   Differently  constituted  from  the 


THEODORE'S  GREAT  AMBITION. 


273 


fieibulous  Brobdingnag  Emperor,  he  only  saw  the  means  to  eflFect 
his  great  and  darling  project  by  these  deadly  weapons,  and  he 
at  once  closed  with  the  offer. 

Large  powder  manufactories  were  erected,  Greek  merchants 
were  commissioned  to  buy  muskets  for  him,  and  foundries  were 
constructed  for  the  casting  of  cannon,  and  all  augured  well  for 
his  prosperity. 

Theodore  regarded  the  Viceroy  of  Egypt  as  his  most  deadly 
enemy.  Aggressions  were  frequently  committed  by  the  Egyp- 
tians, and  captured  Ahyssinians  were  taken  down  the  Nile  and 
sold  as  slaves  to  the  Pachas  of  Cairo  and  Alexandria,  while  many 
were  shipped  to  their  worthy  brothers  in  Constantinople.  Nor 
were  these  the  least  of  the  crimes  committed  by  the  Egyptians, 
of  which  Consul  Plowden  made  the  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs 
aware. 

When  Mr.  Plowden  was  appointed  Consul,  it  must  be  dis- 
tinctly remembered  that  it  was  to  Abyssinia  he  was  accredited, 
and  his  position  therefore  was  with  the  reigning  monai'ch.  The 
monarch  happened  to  be  the  Emperor  Theodore.  Through  his 
kindness  of  heart  and  desire  to  cultivate  friendship  and  amity 
between  the  English  Government  and  Theodore,  he  won  the 
latter's  affection  and  good  will.  His  duties  in  the  interior  of 
Abyssinia,  were  to  '  watch  and  counteract  foreign  intrigue ;  to 
suppress  the  slave-trade,  and  to  promote  commerce  as  much  as 
lay  in  his  power.'  Towards  these  objects,  he  mged  upon  Theo- 
dore to  send  an  embassy  to  England,  that  the  Legation  might 
be  able  to  see  for  itself  how  advantageous  commercial  relations 
between  the  two  countries  would  be.  But  the  Emperor  was  so 
perpetually  engaged  in  Nvar  that  he  found  it  impossible,  so  he 
said,  to  pay  the  attention  to  it  that  the  subject  demanded. 

Consul  Plowden  was  killed  by  some  of  the  rebel  chiefs'  forces 
while  on  a  journey  to  Massowah  in  March  1860.  Theodore 
mourned  for  him  greatly,  and  punished  the  rebels  who  were  the 
cause  of  his  death.  For  his  kindness  to  the  Consul,  Queen 
Victoria  sent  several  presents  to  him,  among  which  was  a 
revolver,  whereon  the  following  was  inscribed  on  a  silver  plate 
upon  the  stock  :  '  Presented  to  Theodore,  Emperor  of  Abyssinia, 
by  Victoria,  Queen  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  for  his  kind- 
ness to  her  servant  Plowden,  1861.'  These  presents  were  carried 
to  him  by  Plowden's  successor — Captain  Cameron — a  gentleman 

T  • 


274 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


who  bad  formerly  served  in  India  as  a  commissioned  captain  in 
Her  British  Majesty's  Service. 

Theodore  still  followed  up  the  idea  of  manufacturing 
cannon,  and  one  after  another  was  turned  out  of  the  foundry, 
tested,  and  proved  to  his  imbounded  delight  to  be  terrible 
weapons  of  warfare,  by  their  tremendous  noise  and  the  huge 
shot  that  they  hurled  out  of  their  wide  mouths.  Certainly  the 
day  was  coming  when  he  would  be  able  to  make  war  upon  the 
cursed  Egyptians. 

Egypt,  under  Abbas  Pacha,  was  a  very  poor  disorganised 
country,  and  it  was  not  until  Said  Pacha  ascended  the  viceregal 
throne  that  it  visibly  improved  and  began  to  be  the  compact  ^ 
power  that  it  now  is. 

On  February  9,  1862,  Captain  Cameron,  the  new  Consul 
gazetted  for  Abyssinia,  arrived  there,  presenting  himself  before 
Theodore  with  his  credentials,  and,  better  than  all,  with  rich 
presents.  The  Emperor  was  dressed  in  royal  robes  and  sur- 
rounded by  gorgeously  apparelled  fimctionaries  of  state. 

The  same  kindness  and  courtesy  extended  to  Plowden  was 
shown  to  Cameron,  and  all  things  for  a  while  went  well.  Soon 
after,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stern  and  Rev.  Mr.  Rosenthal,  mission- 
aries, arrived  and  were  equally  well  received.  Other  mission- 
aries also  found  their  way  there  by-and-bye  from  the  Scottish 
Mission  and  the  Society  for  Promoting  Christianity  among  the 
Jews.    They  were  all  welcomed  by  the  Emperor. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  his  cruelties  began  to  be  notorious. 
The  disaffections  of  tlie  provinces  embittered  his  life  greatly, 
his  whole  nature  underwent  a  violent  change.  He  also  began 
to  lead  a  very  intemperate  life,  and  in  his  drunken  fits  his 
atrocities  were  absolutely  fiendish.  Brands  were  impressed 
upon  the  foreheads  of  deserters,  and  traitors  were  laid  on  the 
ground  and  stakes  driven  through  their  hearts. 

Severe  punishments  for  treason  are  common  enough  in  the 
history  of  civilised  nations ;  but  Theodore  practised  his  cruelties 
upon  innocent  people.  The  least  suspected  had  his  back  flayed 
with  the  courhachy  or  had  his  stomach  ripped  open.  People 
were  crucified  and  shot  without  mercy.  As  a  consequence  his 
name  began  to  be  execrated  by  all  his  subjects. 

A  short  while  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  British  Consul 
in  Abyssinia,  Earl  Russell  withdrew  British  protection  from  the 


HOW  EARL  RUSSELL  TREATED  THEODORE. 


276 


Abyssinian  Convent  at  Jerusalem,  at  the  same  time  that  a  com- 
missioned agent  was  en  route  to  the  Emperor  of  Abyssinia, 
whose  favour  was  certainly  worth  cultivating,  while  the  Govern- 
ment incurred  the  expense  of  sending  an  agent  there ;  but  Lord 
Bussell  thought  otherwise. 

Consul  Cameron,  according  to  instructions,  followed  in  the 
footsteps  of  his  predecessor,  and  urged  the  Emperor  to  agi'ee  to 
an  amicable  treaty  between  the  two  nations,  and  entreated  him 
ip  send  an  embassy  to  the  Queen  of  England. 

Theodore  finally  did  consider  upon  the  subject.  He  wrote 
a  letter  to  Queen  Victoria,  wherein,  after  the  usual  grandiloquent 
phrases  of  Abyssinian  Emperors  were  passed,  he  declared  his 
intentions  of  attacking  the  Turks  (or  the  Egyptians,  which  are 
precisely  the  same  in  the  Abyssinian  language,)  for  their  unpro- 
voked attacks  upon  his  people  at  Bogos,  and  for  their  repeated 
depredations,  which  were  as  unwarrantable  as  they  were  unjust, 
and  for  many  other  things  all  clearly  told  and  succinctly  set 
forth.  In  the  same  letter  he  expressed  a  hope  '  that  lasting  good 
will  may  exist  between  their  two  countries,  which  must  re- 
dound to  the  glory  and  advantage  of  both,'  and  at  the  close  of 
the  missive  he  requested  Her  Majesty  to  prepare  the  means 
whereby  his  ambassadors  may  reach  England,  '  for  so  soon  as  he 
shall  be  made  acquainted  that  all  is  ready,  the  embassy  shall 
proceed  to  the  sea  coast.' 

Consul  Cameron,  while  on  his  way  to  Massowah,  was  stopped 
by  some  rebel  chief,  but  he  contrived  to  send  the  letters  of  the 
king  by  a  native  courier. 

The  letter  arrived  in  England  safely  in  Februaiy,  1863 ;  was 
received  by  Earl  Russell,  opened,  read,  thrown  upon  the  table, 
docketed,  and  in  the  pigeon-hole  it  rested. 

The  Consul  was  released  after  a  short  confinement  among 
the  rebels ;  and  he  afterwards  interested  himself  in  the  suppres- 
sion of  slavery,  until  he  became  a  very  thorn  in  the  side  of  the 
Pacha.  Representations  and  complaints  from  the  Pacha  to  Earl 
Russell  were  immediately  attended  to.  Said  Pacha  was  condoled 
with  for  his  inconvenience,  and  Cameron  was  told  to  deport  him- 
self to  Massowah,  an  Egyptian  trading  port  near  Annesley  Bay ; 
and  there  '  to  follow  the  occupation  of  his  consular  duties.' 

Not  long  afterwards,  as  the  war  in  America  caused  great 
distress  in  England,  and  a  new  field  for  growing  cotton  was 


276 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


eagerly  sought  after,  the  Foreign  OflBce  sent  instructions  to 
Cameron  to  visit  the  Soudan  and  report  on  the  prospects  and 
capabilities  of  that  country  for  the  purpose. 

The  visit  of  Cameron  to  an  Egyptian  province  was  inter- 
preted wrongly  by  Theodore.  When  they  met  again  the 
Emperor  questioned  him  in  a  cold  imperious  tone  as  to  where 
he  had  been,  to  which  the  Consul  replied,  that  he  had  been 
sent  to  the  Soudan  to  find  out  about  the  prospects  of  cotton- 
growing  and  trade.  Theodore  asked  him  if  he  had  brought 
him  an  answer  from  the  Queen  to  his  letter,  which  he  had  sent 
nearly  a  year  before.  Cameron  replied  in  the  negative,  and 
Theodore  flew  into  a  passion,  and  said  that  since  '  the  Queen 
could  send  him  to  visit  his  enemy  the  Turks,  perhaps  to  con- 
spire against  him,  and  could  not  write  a  civil  answer  to  a  civil 
letter,  then  he  (Cameron)  should  not  leave  him  until  the 
answer  came.  Thus  in  July,  1863,  Cameron  became  a  prisoner. 
Not  long  after  the  answer  from  the  French  Government  arrived. 
Very  unsatisfactory,  it  .seems,  were  the  contents,  for  the  French 
Consul  Munsinger  was  hustled  out  of  Abyssinia  immediately. 

Three  months  after  his  imprisonment  Cameron  received  an 
answer  from  Lord  Eussell. 

But  the  excellent  old  state^an  had  forgotten  one  important 
point — there  was  no  allusion  to  the  request  of  Theodore,  nor 
even  a  word  in  reference  to  his  letter.  Maddened  at  the  slight, 
the  Emperor  ordered  Cameron's  servant  to  be  beaten.  At  the 
same  time,  the  missionary  Stern's  two  servants  were  beaten  so 
cruelly,  that  they  both  died  the  following  night.  The  poor 
missionary,  horrified  at  the  spectacle,  put  his  hand  on  his  mouth  . 
to  repress  the  rising  cry  of  hon'or.  This  simple  movement  was 
understood  by  the  suspicious  Emperor  as  a  revengeful  threat^ 
and  he  at  once  cried  out  to  his  men,  '  Beat  that  man,  beat  him 
as  you  would  a  dog  ;  beat  him  I  say.'  The  soldiers  at  once  fell 
upon  him,  threw  him  upon  his  face  on  the  ground,  and  they 
beat  him  with  their  sticks  until  he  fainted.  From  this  month 
of  October  Missionary  Stern  dates  his  long  imprisonment. 

In  the  employ  of  the  Emperor  was  a  Frenchman  named 
Bardel.  He  was  particularly  conspicuous  for  his  hatred  to  all 
Englishmen,  and  he  suggested  to  Theodore  that  he  should 
open  the  missionaries'  trunks  and  make  a  search  among  their 
papers  to  find  out  their  real  business  in  the  country. 


TELAMONIAN  AJAX :  SPEEDY. 


277 


All  Europeans  in  Abyssinia,  particularly  Englishmen,  were 
regarded  with  suspicion  by  Tlieodore.  He  ascribed  the  silence 
of  Queen  Victoria  to  the  representations  of  Stern,  and  the 
indifferent  lett-er  from  the  Emperor  Napoleon  to  European 
intrigues.    Indeed  he  had  cause  to  think  so. 

The  Vice-Consul,  or  assistant  to  Cameron  at  Massowah,  was 
a  Captain  Charles  Speedy,  a  giant  of  a  man,  fully  six  feet  six 
inches  in  height.  After  a  year's  trial  of  consular  duties  at 
Massowah,  he  gave  them  up  and  started  for  the  interior  of 
Abyssinia  to  shoot  elephants.  He  was  accompanied  by  a 
young  cousin  of  his  named  Kerens,  an  Irishman  by  birth.  It 
seems  they  were  both  highly  successful  in  the  pursuit  of  '  big 
game,'  and  the  Telamonian  Ajax,  from  his  gigantic  size  and 
strength,  acquired  quite  a  reputation.  When  Cameron  com- 
menced the  term  of  his  imprisonment  Speedy  arrived  at  the 
Emperor's  court.  His  herculean  proportions  excited  the 
admiration  of  Theodore.  He  was  invited  to  serve  him  in  the 
capacity  of  a  centurion.  Speedy  won  his  favour,  but  not  to  the 
same  degree  that  Plowden  did  formerly. 

The  Emperor  had  lost  much  of  the  impulsive  kind-hearted- 
ness that  was  once  his  prominent  characteristic.  In  a  battle 
the  English  centurion  distinguished  himself  so  much  by  his 
desperate  courage  and  great  strength  that  Theodore  made 
him  a  commander  of  a  tliousand  men  and  called  him  by  the 
prenomen  of  Basha — '  Basha  Felecca' — or  the  Speedy  com- 
mander. Speedy  by  and  by,  became  ambitious,  or  at  least 
Theodore's  Ministers  thought  so,  and  many  intrigues  were  put 
in  operation  to  oust  the  white  favourite.  Basha  Felecca  had  a 
Turkish  scimitar,  the  gift  of  an  Indian  Eajah,  with  him.  With 
this  weapon,  a  pure  Damascus  blade,  he  used  to  amuse  Theo- 
dore with  splitting  sheep  in  two  from  head  to  tail,  which  feat 
no  Abyssinian  could  imitate.  By  such  strength  of  liand-work 
he  kept  Theodore's  attachment  to  himself  for  a  long  time. 

After  residing  with  the  Emperor  some  eighteen  months, 
Speedy  was  despatched  on  an  expedition  to  Gondar.  While  on 
the  way  thither,  he  was  met  by  a  dozen  men,  under  the  leader- 
ship of  Ras  Feet  Oiu-arie  Guvrie,  who  for  some  reason — probably 
jealousy — hated  him  thoroughly.  He  was  commanded  by  the 
Ras  to  give  up  his  arms  and  return  with  him  to  Theodore,  who 
was  at  Debra  Tabor.    Speedy  demurred,  and  invited  the  Ras 


278 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


to  come  and  take  his  arms,  warning  him  at  the  same  time  that 
if  he  came  within  reach  of  his  arm  he  would  split  him  in  two 
with  his  scimitar  in  the  same  way  as  he  had  seen  him  split 
sheep.  Tlie  Eas  said  that  he  did  not  want  to  have  recourse  to 
violence.  '  Well  then,'  replied  Speedy,  with  an  ominous  flourish 
of  his  keen  weapon, '  return  to  your  master,  and  tell  him  that  so 
soon  as  I  finish  my  duties  at  Gondar  I  shall  return  to  him.' 

Basha  Felecca  went  on  his  way,  and  Ourarie  Guvrie  returned 
to  the  Emperor's  camp  where  he  enlarged  upon  Speedy's 
obstinacy,  and  gave  in  detail  a  long  story  of  the  meeting  and 
conversation  he  had  had  with  him,  which,  according  to  Guvrie, 
was  not  complimentary  to  His  ]\Iajesty. 

In  the  course  of  time,  after  he  closed  the  Gondar  business 
with  full  satisfaction  to  the  Emperor  and  himself.  Speedy 
presented  himself  before  Theodore  at  his  camp  on  Debra  Tabor 
(Debra  means  mountain),  and  the  following  dialogue  is  said  to 
have  taken  place  between  them  : — 

Speedy.  Well  I  have  come  back. 

Theodore.  I  see  you  have ;  why  did  you  not  come  when  I 
sent  for  you  ? 

Speedy.  Because  I  did  not  believe  you  could  reward 
faithful  services  by  punishment. 

Theodore.  What,  did  Ourarie  Guvrie  tell  you  that  I  was 
going  to  punish  you  ? 

Speedy.  He  did. 

Theodore.  Then  he  told  you  more  than  I  knew  myself. 

Speedy.  That  may  be  very  true  ;  but  I  have  finished  your 
business  at  Gondar  well  and  faithfully ;  I  now  ask  for  my  pay 
and  a  discharge  from  your  service. 

Theodore.  Oh,  no,  that  cannot  be.  I  cannot  part  with  the 
best  soldier  in  my  army. 

Speedy.  King,  you  may  be  a  great  man,  you  may  have  a 
heart  and  reason ;  but  though  I  am  not  a  king,  I  have  a  heart 
and  reason  also.  When  I  came  here  first  you  requested  my 
service,  promising  me  good  pay  and  promotion.  I  agreed  to 
serve  you  ;  I  have  served  you  faithfully.  I  have  been  on  the 
battle-field,  and  with  your  own  eyes  you  saw  my  conduct,  and 
promoted  me  there  and  then,  but  no  money  have  I  received  from 
you  since  I  have  been  with  you.  The  bread  and  salt  I  have 
eaten  I  purchased  with  my  own  money ;  the  servants  I  had  I 


THEODORE  AND  SPEEDY  QUARREL. 


279 


paid  out  of  my  own  money.  While  on  my  road  to  do  your 
bidding,  you,  listening  to  lies  told  in  your  ears  by  such  fellows 
as  Ourarie  Guvrie,  sent  men  to  fetch  me  back,  for  what  purpose 
you  know  best.    I  demand  my  money  and  discharge. 

Theodore.  And  where  will  you  go  to  ? 

Speedy.  I  will  go  home. 

Theodore.  Suppose  I  choose  that  you  shall  not  leave  the 
country  ? 

Speedy.  Then  somebody  will  get  killed,  for  I  will  fight,  and 
you  know  I  am  not  an  infant. 

Theodore.  Will  nothing  persuade  you  to  remain  with  me  ? 

Speedy.  Nothing.  I  am  tired  of  the  treacheiy  and  intrigue 
that  I  have  seen  around  me. 

The  Emperor,  finding  that  nothing  would  move  Speedy's 
determination  to  leave,  paid  all  the  money  that  was  due  to 
him,  gave  him  a  horse,  a  shield  and  spear,  and  took  an  affec- 
tionate leave  of  him. 

Captain  Speedy,  ex-Basha  Felecca,  took  Kerens  along  with 
him  to  Massowah.  Young  Kerens  went  to  London  with  a  letter 
from  Consul  Cameron.  Speedy,  roving  in  search  of  fresh  ad- 
ventures, like  another  Quixote,  went  to  New  Zealand,  where  he 
was  made  a  captain  of  militia  and  distinguished  himself  in  the 
Maori  war.    We  shall  hear  soon  of  him  again. 

Kerens  was  despatched  back  to  Abyssinia  with  a  letter 
from  the  Foreign  Office  to  Cameron.  He  arrived  in  Abyssinia 
in  November  1863.  The  letter  made  no  mention  of  having 
received  any  communication  from  Theodore.  This  long  silence, 
regarded  by  the  emperor  as  a  purposed  insult  to  his  dignity, 
rendered  him  fiercely  indignant ;  and  the  consequence  of  Lord 
Ilussell's  diplomacy  was,  that  Consul  Cameron,  the  missionaries, 
and  attendants  were  put  in  chains. 

Kerens  was  also  very  unfortunate,  for  he  brought  a  carpet 
as  a  present  to  the  emperor,  and  on  the  carpet  was  a  picture  of 
Jules  Gerard,  in  Arab  costume,  about  to  kill  a  lion.  Theodore 
fell  into  a  rage  at  what  he  regarded  as  an  insulting  absurdity. 
To  his  oblique  vision,  the  lion  about  to  be  shot  by  Jules  Gerard 
represented  the  '  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah '  (the  Abyssinian 
crest)  about  to  be  conquered  by  the  Egyptians,  and  Kerens  was 
therefore  unmercifully  flogged  and  put  in  chains  with  the 
rest. 


280 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Some  eflForts  were  made  to  release  the  prisoners  by  philan- 
thropic Englishmen.  Mrs.  Stern,  on  being  informed  of  the 
captivity  of  her  husband,  petitioned  the  Queen  to  send  a  letter 
under  the  sign-manual  to  Theodore.  Lord  Shaftesbury  kindly 
interested  himself  in  their  behalf,  and  presented  the  letter  to 
the  Premier,  but  it  was  returned  with  a  *  I  don't  think  it 
advisable  that  the  Queen  should  write  to  the  Abyssinian 
Emperor.' 

Continued  persistence  in  this  harsh  policy,  if  policy  we 
must  call  it,  brought  a  concatenation  of  punisliments,  in- 
dignities and  hardships,  upon  the  heads  of  the  persons  who 
were  languishing  in  captivity.  Theodore  became  more  morose, 
more  cruel,  and  writhed  imder  the  insult  to  his  high  imperial 
dignity,  offered  to  him,  too,  by  a  woman.  He  avenged  himself 
upon  the  captives,  and  most  lamentable  are  the  tales  of  their 
life  in  bondage. 

With  money  a  man  may  do  anything  almost  in  Abyssinia, 
and  ^Samuel,'  a  chief  who  was  a  great  favourite  with 
Theodore,  and  who  had  followed  Cameron  to  and  fro  through 
Abyssinia  before  his  incarceration,  was  foimd  amenable  to 
bribes.  For  money,  Aytoo  Samuel  would  undertake  to 
take  letters  to  Massowah,  or  secure  trustful  couriers  to  convey 
them  for  him.  In  one  of  these  letters  thus  sent,  Cameron  ex- 
plained at  length  the  causes  of  his  captivity  and  his  sufferings, 
and  said,  '  There  is  no  hope  of  my  release  unless  a  letter  is  sent 
as  an  answer  to  his  Majesty's.' 

This  letter  of  Cameron's  found  its  way  to  the  '  Times ' 
newspaper,  and  then  went  through  all  the  ramifications  of  the 
British  Press.  The  '  Times  '  thundered  and  uttered  indignant 
censures  upon  the  imbecility  of  the  Government,  which  were 
echoed  with  more  or  less  noise  by  innumerable  papers.  The 
Minister  succumbed  before  the  storm  of  indignation.  He 
immediately  advised  Her  Majesty  to  write.  The  letter  was 
written  and  sent  off. 

Mr.  Layard,  M.P.,  while  pursuing  his  search  for  antiquities 
on  the  shores  of  the  Tigris,  had  a  secretary  who  acted  as  pay- 
master to  his  workmen. 

This  secretary  was  the  Armenian  Hormuzd  J.  Eassam. 

When  the  author  of '  Nineveh '  arrived  in  England  ;  he  did 
not  forget  his  paymaster.    Eassam  in  the  meantime  found  em- 


RASSAM,  THE  AKMENIAN,  BECOMES  ENVOY  EXTKAORDINARY.  281 

ployment  with  Colonel  Merewether,  Political  Eesident  at  Aden, 
after  the  denunciation  by  the  Press,  of  the  policy  of  the  English 
Ministry.  Eassam  confidentially  wrote  to  Layard  and  stated 
his  readiness  to  convey  the  Queen's  answer  to  Tlieodore, 

The  grateful  antiquarian  bestired  himself  to  get  Eassam 
appointed  as  the  messenger.  He  was  successful,  and  Eassam 
was  the  man  who  was  sent  off  with  the  long-delayed  letter. 
He  was  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Prideaux,  and  Surgeon 
Blanc,  both  British  officers,  and  his  title  was  *  Envoy  Extra- 
ordinary,' rather  a  high  office  for  an  '  antiquarian  scribe  '  and 
paymaster. 

When  Eassam  arrived  at  Cairo,  in  February  1865,  there 
was  discovered  that  an  important  feature  was  omitted  in  the 
construction  of  the  state  despatch,  viz.  the  Queen's  signet. 
The  messenger  was  recalled.  With  the  document  complete,  the 
envoy  started  anew  for  Abyssinia,  having  received  instructions 
to  render  an  explanation  of  the  delay  favourable  to  the  English 
Government. 

After  due  time  the  envoy,  whilom  paymaster,  arrived  at 
Massowah.  At  this  place  Eassam  remained  nearly  one  round 
year,  for  what  reason  is  not  very  obvious. 

During  these  long  weary  months  the  captives  languished 
in  horrible  durance.  Things  went  on  with  them  from  bad 
to  worse.  They  were  fed  on  bread  and  water,  beaten,  chained 
to  a  wall.  Cameron  was  tortured.  He  says,  'Twenty  Abys- 
siniaus  tugging  lustily  on  ropes  tied  to  each  limb  until  I 
faint.  My  shoulder  blades  were  made  to  meet  each  other.  I 
was  doubled  up  until  my  head  appeared  under  my  thighs,  and 
while  in  this  painful  posture,  I  was  beaten  with  a  whip  of  hip- 
popotamus hide  on  my  bare  back,  imtil  I  was  covered  with 
weals,  and  while  the  blood  dripped  from  my  reeking  back,  I 
was  rolled  in  sand.'  Yet  Eassam  lingered  at  Massowah.  In  con- 
sequence of  debates  in  Parliament,  wherein  many  things  leaked 
out  not  very  complimentary  to  Layard's  protege,  Lord  Eussell 
found  himself  obliged  to  commission  Mr.  Palgi*ave,  the  noted 
traveller,  to  proceed  to  Abyssinia  to  endeavour  to  efifect  the 
release  of  the  captives,  and  Eassam  was  recalled. 

The  recall  found  the  envoy  in  Massowah.  He  at  once 
set  out  for  Suez,  and  from  there  he  telegraphed  to  the  Consul 
General  at  Alexandria  that  Cameron  was  released.   The  glad 


282 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


news  was  flashed  along  the  cable  to  England,  where  it  was  re- 
ceived by  all  with  joyful  hearts.  Palgrave's  mission  was  ended 
of  course,  though  he  had  arrived  at  Cairo.  The  presents  which 
he  had  with  him  he  gave  to  Eassam,  who  immediately  started 
for  Massowah  to  deliver  them,  probably  to  the  chiefs  who 
should  accompany  the  released  Consul  to  that  port. 

From  Massowah  the  envoy  proceeded  to  the  interior,  ac- 
companied by  his  companions  Blanc  and  Prideaux,  and  never 
halted  until  he  arrived  at  Debra  Tabor,  January  28,  1866. 
'  Illustrious  Potentate,  may  you  live  for  ever  I '  was  the  saluta- 
tion of  the  man  chosen  to  represent  England  before  Theodore, 
Emperor  of  Abyssinia.  The  letter  of  the  Queen  was  not  what 
it  ought  to  be  ;  it  was  not  respectful  enough,  and  Cameron  was 
not  released,  but  Eassam,  Prideaux  and  Blanc  were  added  to 
the  batch  of  captives  Theodore  already  held.  Kassam  was  not 
beaten  however,  he  was  too  cunning  a  diplomat  for  that,  and 
what  was  lacking  of  respect  in  the  Queen's  despatch,  Mr.  Bassam 
voluntarily  supplied.  Theodore's  savage  bosom  was  a  welcome 
receptacle  to  flattery ;  and  so  much  kindness  as  it  was  possible 
to  exhibit  to  a  prisoner  was  shown  to  the  Envoy.  Cameron's 
condition  was  bettered  also  through  Eassam's  influence. 

Three  months  after  the  detention  of  the  mission,  Mr.  Flad 
arrived  in  Alexandria,  and  gave  the  first  information  of  its  fate. 
Subsequently  he  returned  to  Abyssinia,  and  he  also  became 
numbered  with  the  captives. 

Theodore  perceived  his  power  gliding  away  surely  from  his 
hands.  Neither  his-  strength,  his  ability,  the  prestige  of  his 
former  prowess,  nor  his  cruelties,  could  keep  his  provinces  intact. 
One  by  one  the  governors  rebelled.  The  Gallas  mustered  their 
forces,  and  attacked  him  in  the  rear.  For  a  time  Theodore 
bore  up  stoutly,  but  the  many  reverses  which  he  sufiered  elated  v 
his  enemies  and  discouraged  himself.  But,  wherever  Theodore 
pitched  his  camp  there  he  was  impregnable,  because  of  his 
cannon.  His  European  workmen  had  manufactured  for  him 
twenty  cannon,  some  of  them  of  monstrous  size.  Monster  gims 
became  an  infatuation  with  him.  Twelve  and  fifteen  inch 
mortars  were  what  his  soul  delighted  in.  The  roar  of  their 
discharge,  he  calculated,  would  affright  his  enemies.  The 
reputation  of  these  huge  guns  spread  abroad  through  the  land, 
and  no  army  was  found  bold  enough  to  attack  him  in  his  camp, 


DECLARATION  OF  WAR. 


283 


but  they  rebelled  all  tlie  same,  and  his  cruel  punishments,  as 
he  was  a  rigorous  martinet,  drove  his  soldiers  away  from  him  by 
the  hundreds. 

We  are  now  come  to  the  circumstances  through  which  war 
was  declared.  The  causes  have  been  plainly  set  forth.  The 
English  prisoners  were  still  in  captivity.  The  mission  for  their 
release  had  failed.    Where  would  it  all  end  ?    Let  us  see. 

In  1866  the  Conservative  party  came  into  power;  the  Earl 
of  Derby  became  Premier ;  Lord  Stanley,  his  son,  filled  the 
Foreign  Office  chair.  Before  proceeding  into  extremes  the 
Ministers  made  one  more  effort  to  procure  the  release  of  the 
prisoners  by  proposing  a  ransom.  This  also  failed.  Theodore, 
seeing  how  anxious  the  British  Government  was  to  get  the 
prisoners,  thought,  as  a  natural  sequence,  that  the  English 
people  would  do  anything  rather  than  have  them  kept  in  cap- 
tivity. One  part  of  Theodore's  supposition  was  correct— the 
English  people  would  indeed  do  anything  rather  than  the  cap- 
tives should  long  remain  in  durance ;  go  to  war  even,  but 
never  help  him  to  keep  the  throne  he  had  disgraced.  And  so 
the  Grovemment  declared  war. 

It  is  remarkable  that  there  was  not  the  least  enthusiasm 
shown  by  the  people  of  England  upon  the  announcement  of 
war.  Its  prospects  were  discussed  calmly,  nay  philosophically. 
The  least  approach  to  anything  like  a  kindling  interest  in  it 
brought  down  upon  the  unfortunate  editors  a  host  of  letters 
croaking  about  omens,  signs,  and  dangers.  One  correspondent 
signing  himself  *  True  John  Bull '  declared  it  his  opinion 
that  not  a  man  of  the  army  would  ever  return  from  the  country ; 
the  '  British  Taxpayer '  saw  visions  in  the  heavens ;  the 
farseeing  '  Hertfordshire  Inciunbent  prophecied  that  the  rain 
would  sweep  every  trooper  into  the  sea ;  the  '  Jolly  Briton ' 
affirmed  most  positively  that  the  British  troops  could  never 
capture  Theodore ;  while  the  '  Cambridge  Student,'  having  in 
his  mind's  eye  Trojan's  works,  asked  whether  the  general  that 
was  to  be  was  to  build  bridges  across  the  ravines ;  remarked 
that  if  so  Abyssinia  was  not  Greece,  nor,  as  a  self-evident 
axiom,  was  Greece  Abyssinia,  and  he  could  not  imagine  how 
ravines  four  thousand  feet  in  depth  could  be  crossed  without 
bridges.  This  intelligent  person  also  observed  that  English 
generals  wer^  certainly  superior  to  Trojan,  but  even  they, 


284 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


adopting  Trojan's  tactics,  could  never  hope  to  bridge  such  wide, 
deep  gaps  in  the  earth  as  Abyssinian  ravines. 

In  short,  there  was  no  known  horror,  danger,  or  disease, 
which  was  not  prophesied  would  befall  the  Expedition.  The 
tsetse,  the  cerastes,  the  deadly  adder,  were' to  be  amongst  the 
blankets  and  clothes  of  the  troops.  Physicians  warned  the 
soldiers  to  beware  of  a  certain  small  pink-headed  fly ;  not  to 
touch  honey  on  the  roadside ;  not  to  taste  any  water  found  in 
old  wells ;  to  look  out  for  ophthalmia ;  to  keep  a  flannel  belt 
round  the  waist ;  to  apply  instantly  for  medicine  when  afflicted 
with  symptoms  of  diarrhoea,  and  to  make  the  best  they  could 
of  the  society  of  hyenas  and  hippopotami,  the  common  pests 
of  the  country.  Dysentery,  disease,  and  discomfort  were  to 
dog  the  footsteps  of  the  British  rank  and  file. 

Men  who  had  travelled  in  other  countries  proposed  multitu- 
dinous absurdities,  and  people  who  had  never  travelled  any- 
where except  to  the  London  theatres,  drew  wise  corollaries  from 
their  own  experiences,  which  they  offered  gratis  to  the  Foreign 
Office.  Again,  loyal  Englishmen  offered  their  services  to  release 
the  captives  by  their  own  unaided  efforts.  They  were  all  con- 
fident they  could  perform  the  task  without  the  least  danger  or 
inconvenience  to  themselves.  Tlicy  would  undertake  to  do  so 
simply  for  the  fun  of  the  thing.  Others  ventured  to  hope  that 
the  Foreign  Office  would  accept  a  plan  which  could  not  fail  of 
success — that  of  taking  a  company  of  cavalry  and  dashing  into 
the  camp  of  the  A])yssinian  Emperor,  take  them  off"  by  force ; 
even  the  '  Times '  special  correspondent  avowed  his  belief  that 
were  Colonel  Merewether  sent  with  a  squadron  of  cavalry  the 
whole  thing  could  be  accomplished  in  less  than  a  month. 

Captain  Smelfungns  wrote  to  the  '  Times '  and  Lord  Stanley 
stating  that  an  English  army  could  not  exist  in  Abyssinia  with- 
out an  auxiliary  force  of  Houssas  to  assist  as  an  irregular 
detachment,  to  scour  the  country  for  forage,  and  to  be  sent  as 
Ecouts  ahead  of  the  regular  troops.  He  offered  his  services  as 
Colonel  of  the  force.  As  Houssas  are  only  found  near  Lagos, 
the  Foreign  Secretary  could  not  see  how  Houssas  were  pro- 
curable in  Abyssinia.  But  why  follow  the  improbabilities  and 
impossibilities  further ;  are  they  not  all  chronicled  in  the 
Abyssinian  Blue  Book  ?  Where  was  the  army  to  come  from  ? 
It  was  decided  that  they  should  all  be  Indian  troops,  European 


THE  INVADING  ARMY. 


285 


and  Sepoy  regiments  serving  in  Bombay,  and  England  should 
only  supply  the  stores  and  baggage  animals.  Accordingly,  Sir 
Seymour  Fitzgerald  the  Governor  of  Bombay,  and  Sir  Eobert 
Napier,  Conmiander-in-Chief  of  the  Bombay  army,  after  being 
notified  of  the  decision  of  the  Foreign  OflBce,  made  their  pre- 
parations. The  army  was  to  consist  of  about  12,000  soldiers; 
2,000  men  for  the  sea  depot  at  Zoulla,  and  Senafe  on  the 
Abyssinian  Highlands,  2,000  men  for  the  post  of  Antalo,  half- 
way between  Zoulla  and  Magdala,  2,000  men  to  keep  open 
commimication,  and  6,000  men  for  the  marching  column. 

Officers  were  despatched  to  Spain,  Egypt,  and  Syria,  to  buy 
animals.  The  great  arsenals  of  England  were  to  furnish  the 
cannon,  saddles,  chains,  and  halters,  tents,  and  stores  of  all 
kinds.  Hospital-ships  were  to  be  sent  to  Annesley  Bay  for  the 
reception  of  the  sick,  and  men-of-war  were  to  guard  the  port 
of  Zoulla. 

The  plan  of  the  campaign  was  laid  down  by  Sir  Eobert 
Napier  with  great  distinctness.  There  was  no  possibility  of 
failure  if  once  Theodore  could  be  found.  Sir  Eobert,  himself, 
chose  the  regiments,  and  though  the  other  presidencies — 
Madras  and  Bengal — were  anxious  to  furnish  some  small  portion 
of  the  necessary  quota,  the  General  thought  that,  to  ensure 
harmony,  it  would  be  best  the  troops  should  all  belong  to  the 
same  Presidency.  The  point  of  debarkation  was  to  be  chosen 
by  Lieut.-Colonel  Merewether,  the  Political  Eesident  at  Aden, 
a  most  gallant,  brave,  and  skilful  officer.  He  surveyed  the 
whole  Abyssinian  coast.  Annesley  Bay,  though  the  furtliest 
from  Magdala,  was  chosen  for  its  fine  commodious  harboiu',  its 
proximity  to  the  mountains,  and  for  its  water  supplies. 

The  distance  from  Tajurrali  Gulf  to  Magdala  was  150  miles ; 
from  Amphilla  Bay,  250  miles ;  Howakil,  325  miles  ;  and  from 
Annesley  Bay  the  distance  was  a  little  under  400  miles. 

The  next  step  was  to  procure  interpreters  who  could  speak 
both  the  English  and  the  Abyssinian  languages.  The  Eevd. 
Louis  C.  Krapf,  an  Abyssinian  traveller,  was  selected  for  one, 
but  he  was  rather  elderly  for  a  campaign.  Mr.  Henry  Dufton, 
another  traveller,  professed  to  know  something  of  the  language, 
and  was  appointed  to  the  Intelligence  Department  to  help  the 
Commissariat  and  the  Quarter-Master  General  with  his  few 
phrases.    His  duties  were  somewhat  anomalous.    Lord  Stanley 


286 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


was  finally  made  acquainted  with  the  name  of  one  who  was 
thought  would  prove  the  right  person — Captain  Charles  Speedy, 
formerly  the  'Basha  Felccca'  of  Theodore's  army,  just  then 
serving  as  a  militia  captain  in  New  Zealand.  A  telegram  was 
sent  to  him,  via  Bombay,  to  repoit  himself  to  Sir  Robert 
Napier.  The  invaluable  services  which  he  rendered  the  English 
army  will  be  found  clearly  detailed  in  the  following  pages. 

In  the  month  of  November  1867,  the  Advance  force  of  the 
Abyssinian  expedition  landed  upon  the  beach  of  Zoulla. 

Now,  reader,  having  been  so  explicit  upon  the  series  of 
accidents  that  led  to  this  modem  Crusade,  and  having  traced 
the  consequences  of  mis-diplomacy,  and  prepared  you  by  a 
brief  outline  of  the  preparations  for  the  campaign,  and  having 
launched  the  Advance  fairly  upon  the  shores  of  Annesley  Bay, 
I  propose  that  we  go  together  to  this  fabled  land,  and  follow 
the  adventurous  soldiers  and  gallant  old  Chief  to  the  planting 
of  their  banners  upon  the  heights  of  Magdala. 


ANNESLEY  BAY. 


287 


CHAPTER  ir. 

ANITESLEY  BAY— COLONEL  MEREWETHER. 

Anneslet  Bat  is  formed  by  an  island  named  Dissee  running 
parallel  to  the  coast  of  Abyssinia  for  a  length  of  twenty  miles, 
separated  from  it  by  the  Bay,  which  is  between  one  and  five 
miles  broad. 

No  better  choice  could  have  been  made  for  a  pioneer  than 
Lieut.-Colonel  W.  L.  Merewether,  a  cavalry  officer  serving  in 
India,  and  the  Political  Resident  at  Aden.  This  gentleman, 
probably  from  previous  intimacy  with  Hormuzd  J.  Rassam,  as 
soon  as  he  was  made  aware  of  his  captivity,  bestirred  himself 
to  release  him.  He  sent  money  to  the  prisoners,  he  bribed 
Abyssinians  to  carry  despatches  to  Magdala  and  Debra  Tabor, 
he  wrote  several  articles  in  the  most  influential  London  journals, 
he  published  a  treatise  or  two,  calling  on  Great  Britain  to 
save  herself  from  disrepute  in  India,  and  threatening  that  the 
knowledge  of  the  captivity  of  the  English  envoy  at  Magdala, 
once. known  among  the  Mahomedan  tribes  of  Hindostan,  would 
be  the  means  of  exciting  a  universal  rebellion  among  the 
subjects  of  the  Queen  in  the  East. 

Merewether,  a  most  valuable  officer,  who  had  proved  him- 
self brave  and  skilful,  dashing  and  intrepid,  in  various  battles 
in  the  East,  was  selected  to  command  the  Pioneer  Force,  which 
was  to  land  on  the  coast  of  Abyssinia,  to  institute  enquiries 
among  the  inhabitants,  and  to  prosecute  an  examination  into 
the  difficulties  to  be  met,  and  means  of  access  to  the  country. 
Yoimg  and  energetic,  he  lost  no  time  in  scouring  the  coast  to 
seek  a  landing-place,  whereon  was  planted  the  Cross  of  St. 
George  for  the  first  time  by  his  own  hands. 

The  Abyssinian  coast  bordering  the  bay,  was  a  stretch  of 
sandy  beach,  fourteen  to  fifteen  miles  wide,  extending  from 


288  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA,  ! 

Massowah  twenty  miles  above,  to  far  below  the  southern  ex- 
tremity of  Annesley  Bay.  About  three-fourths  of  the  distance 
from  the  embouchm*e  of  the  bay  to  its  extreme  southern  end, 
on  the  low  sandy  beach,  just  four  miles  from  the  village  of 
ZouUa,  Licut.-Col.  Merewether  pitched  his  Head-quarters.  A 
more  inhospitable  looking-spot  could  hardly  have  been  found. 
But  this  spot  was  chosen  for  two  reasons :  first,  because  it 
bordered  a  fine  deep  bay,  where  the  material  of  war  could 
easily  be  landed ;  secondly,  because  a  great  gap,  or  a  lengthy 
chasm,  splitting  the  Black  Highlands  in  two,  allowing  free 
access  through  its  cavernous  recesses  to  the  summit  of  the 
table-land  had  been  found — the  entrance  to  which  lay  exactly 
fifteen  miles  direct  west  of  Merewether's  Head-quarters. 

Colonel  Merewether  upon  landing  had  despatched  his  let- 
ters, containing  the  fruits  of  the  rigorous  researches  and  the 
results  of  his  investigations,  to  the  Governor  of  Bombay  and  Sir 
Stafford  Northcote  of  the  India  Ofiice  in  London ;  but  unfortu- 
nately he  had  painted  tlie  prospects  far  too  glowingly.  Ac- 
cording to  this  statement  water  and  wood  were  abundant, 
grass  was  plentiful,  the  verdure  was  most  refreshing,  the  Pass  to 
the  table-land  was  comparatively  easy,  and  the  country  was 
rich  with  game  of  all  kinds. 

After  the  receipt  of  the  Colonel's  despatches  the  gentlemen 
at  the  India  OflSce  in  London  and  the  authorities  at  Bombay 
vied  with  each  other  in  getting  ready  the  expedition  for  this 
bright  and  heavenly  country.  Sir  Kobert  Napier,  Lieutenant- 
General,  was  chosen  as  chief  of  the  force.  By  his  advice  and 
counsel  the  number  of  men  necessary  to  accomplish  the  under- 
taking was  fixed  upon.  The  various  regiments  were  collected 
together  at  Bombay  before  starting,  and  reviewed  by  the  com- 
manding powers,  whereat  glowing  speeches  were  declaimed. 

So  much  were  the  expectations  of  the  powers  at  Bombay 
raised,  that  they  actually  wished  to  send  the  soldiers  at  once  to 
Zoulla,  with  only  a  few  days'  rations ;  they  limited  the 
supplies  in  each  and  every  particular  to  a  starving  amount,  and 
had  it  not  been  for  the  dilatory  policy  and  firm  resistance  to 
the  nonsense  of  civilians  on  the  part  of  Sir  Robert  Napier,  grave  ' 
and  disastrous  evils  must  have  ensued. 

The  Advance  Brigade — consisting  of  Head-quarter  wing 
3rd  Light  Cavalry,  10th  Bombay  Native  Infantry,  3rd  and  4th 


COU)NKL  SIR  W.  L.  MRBEWFrTHRR,  C.B..  K.S.I. 


I 


MISFORTUNES  OF  THE  ANIMALS. 


289 


Companies  Native  Sappers  and  Miners — was  finally  landed 
at  Zoulla,  as  a  garrison  and  a  nucleus  for  the  expected  force. 
With  this  brigade  there  were  two  correspondents  of  influen- 
tial English  journals — the  London  *  Times '  and  the  *  Daily 
News' — and  the  suflFerings  which  the  reporter  of  the  '  Times ' 
underwent,  are  they  not  graphically  recorded  in  the  columns 
of  that  journal  ? 

There  was  but  one  Brigade  landed  at  Zoulla  when  several 
transports  conveying  some  thousands  of  mules  and  camels  and 
homed  cattle,  without  muleteers  or  drivers  to  attend  them, 
arrived  in  the  bay  and  began  to  discharge  their  living  cargoes. 
When  landed  on  the  beach  the  animals,  unhaltered,  roamed 
around  in  search  of  pasturage  after  their  sea  voyage,  and  not 
finding  either  grass  or  water,  wandered  about  in  the  wilderness 
of  baubool  shrubs  and  juniper  bushes,  until  they  fell  down  and 
died  by  the  hundreds.  Many  of  them  were  stolen  by  the 
Shohoes,  and  had  a  smart,  cunning  horse-dealer  been  present 
with  a  vessel  at  Massowah,  he  might  have  been  able  to  convey 
the  mules  and  camels  away  back  to  India  nearly  as  fast  as  they 
were  landed  in  Abyssinia. 

It  was  not  until  two  or  three  thousand  animals  had  died  or 
got  lost,  that  the  commanding  ofiicer  began  to  perceive  that  a 
remedy  for  all  this  mortality  was  necessary  and  easily  pro- 
curable. 

The  steam  transports  then  in  the  bay  were  detained,  and 
set  to  work  at  once  to  condense  water.  A  despatch  boat  was 
sent  to  Bombay  for  a  dozen  American  condensers  and  two  or 
three  score  of  Norton's  American  pumps. 

Three  or  four  weeks  after  the  order  for  condensers  had  been 
given,  they  arrived  at  Zoulla  ;  at  the  same  time  several  thou- 
sand coolies  arrived  in  ships.  These  were  set  to  work  at  once 
to  prepare  the  piers  and  bunders  for  the  reception  of  other 
lieavy  stores  about  to  be  landed. 

The  piers  and  bunders  were  completed  in  an  incredibly 
short  space  of  time.  Then  the  Stone  Island  was  constructed 
for  one  of  the  largest  condensers,  and  a  trough  was  made  to 
convey  the  fresh  water  to  the  water-butts  inshore,  where  it  was 
collected  and  stored  for  use. 

The  arrangements  now  determined  upon,  were  carried  on 
with  vigour ;  more  camels,  and  mules,  and  horses,  were  con- 

u 


290 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


tinually  arriving,  and  though  the  mortality  among  the  animals 
was  still  great,  it  was  evident  that  it  was  greatly  lessened  by 
the  water  supply.  With  these  new  shipments  of  animals, 
which  came  from  Suez,  and  which  had  been  sent  there  from 
Spain,  Italy,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  came  Turkish  and  Arab  mule- 
teers. This  was  another  unfortunate  and  most  unwise  act  of 
those  in  command.  * 

Any  traveller  who  has  had  any  dealings  with  these  men, 
knows  well  the  terrible  annoyance  and  disagreeableness  which 
Turks  and  Arabs  provoke. 

Shortly  the  troops  under  Colonel  Merewether,  who  were 
pushing  ahead  to  occupy  the  Higlilands  were  made  aware  that 
their  baggage  and  commissariat  animals  had  disappeared  with 
their  drivers. 

The  wholesale  desertion  of  men  and  animals  took  place 
daily,  until  the  commanding  oflBcers  of  detachments,  bound  for 
the  front,  were  made  aware  by  frequent  losses  of  sucli  kind,  that 
armed  and  disciplined  soldiers  were  necessary  for  other  piu^oses 
than  to  march  in  solemn  column  in  the  front,  and  that  it  would 
be  an  extremely  wise  thing  to  detail  a  few  to  guard  the  rear 
and  baggage.  Experience  in  all  things  is  dearly  bought,  and 
the  English  army  had  rusted  so  long  in  their  barracks  in 
Bombay  and  Chatham,  that  very  many  things  appertaining 
most  essentially  to  campaigning  had  been  forgotten. 

Troops  were  being  concentrated  rapidly  at  Zoulla,  when, 
after  a  reconnaisance  of  the  Pass  ahead,  the  general,  Sir  Charles 
Staveley,  decided  that  the  head  of  the  Pass — Senafe — a  village 
situated  on  the  highlands,  should  be  occupied,  and  be  the  second 
depot  on  the  route  to  Magdala.  A  small  force  was  already  iu 
possession  of  the  place  under  Merewether,  but  as  the  situation 
was  reported  healthier  than  Zoulla,  and  fresh  water  was  in  a 
plentiful  quantity,  and  grass,  and  straw,  and  barley,  and  oats, 
were  procurable  from  the  natives,  the  major  part  of  the  force 
was  also  sent  on  to  Senafe. 

A  passage  to  the  Highlands  had  been  made  comparatively 
easy  after  a  great  deal  of  labour.  In  order  that  readers  may 
understand  it  thoroughly,  and  to  simplify  its  description,  I  will 
state  that  the  Pass  of  Koomaylee  was  a  deep  ravine,  cut  by  the 
force  of  torrents  across  several  ranges  of  mountains  from  the 
Highlands  of  Senafe,  which  rose  7,000  feet  above  the  level  of 


ARRIVAL  OF  SIR  ROBERT  NAPIER. 


291 


the  sea.  This  pass  or  ravine  descended  for  a  distance  of  63 
miles  to  the  beach  of  Zoulla,  along  the  bed  of  a  river  which, 
during  the  rainy  season,  was  swollen  to  a  powerful  body  of 
water. 

In  the  summer  season,  however,  it  was  dry,  and  at  the  time 
the  pioneers  passed  through,  it^  whole  course  was  choked  with 
great  boulders  and  d&yris  from  the  hills.  For  the  passage  of 
the  troops  the  most  unobstructed  portions  of  the  ravine  had 
been  selected  to  form  a  wagon  road,  but  in  some  places — as  the 
Sooroo,  the  narrowest  part  of  the  pass — a  road  had  to  be  cut 
through  solid  granite.  To  the  Engineers,  who  hiad  charge  of 
this  work,  great  praise  is  due.  Taking  into  consideration  the 
time  which  they  had  at  command  for  this  work,  no  better  road 
could  have  been  made.  The  soldiers  marched,  and  baggage, 
animals,  artillery,  and  wagons,  passed  over  with  the  greatest 
facility  to  the  heights  at  Senafe. 

In  about  two  months  everything  was  ready  for  an  onward 
movement,  and  Sir  Eobert  Napier'arrived.  After  reviewing  all 
that  had  been  done — the  erection  of  warehouses,  bunders,  pier- 
heads, condensers,  and  the  railway — he  passed  on  to  Senafe  to 
enjoy  the  cool  mountain  breezes. 

A  short  railway  had  been  laid  from  Zoulla  to  the  extreme 
end  of  the  camp,  a  distance  of  five  miles.  Two  locomotives 
had  been  landed,  and  these  proved  very  serviceable  in  removing 
the  va&t  and  rapid  accumulation  of  stores  to  more  convenient 
sites  and  to  different  commissariat  sheds  along  the  line. 

The  next  morning  after  my  arrival  in  Abyssinia,  before 
anyone  was  stirring  in  camp,  my  servant  Ali  and  myself  left 
Zoulla  in  excellent  condition  for  rapid  marching,  but  scantily 
furnished  for  a  long  campaign. 

My  ideas  concerning  Abyssinia  and  the  English  manner  of 
conducting  a  campaign  were  yet  crude,  as  will  no  doubt  be 
perceived  as  I  proceed. 

From  Zoulla  to  Koomaylee  was  a  distance  of  14  miles. 
The  route,  after  passing  the  camp  at  Zoulla,  lay  over  a  desert  of 
sand,  dotted  at  intervals  with  clumps  of  baubool  shrubs,  furze 
and  juniper  bushes. 

After  passing  the  native  village  of  Zoulla,  we  began  to  as- 

V  2 


292 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


cend  wild  and  uncultivated  eminences,  overgrown  with  low 
shrubs,  and  broken  here  and  there  into  deep  furrows  by  the  tor- 
rents which  plough  their  resistless  way  during  the  rainy  seasons. 
Now  and  then  we  crossed  the  dry  bed  of  one  of  these  spring- 
time springs,  choked  up  with  round  stones,  and  then  were  com- 
pelled to  ascend  a  steep  hill,  and  shortly  cross  another  deep 
gully  channelled  in  the  soil.  Not  a  drop  of  water  could  be 
found  anywhere,  and  we  learned  at  Koomaylee,  that  no  water 
fit  to  drink  was  found  on  any  part  of  the  beach ;  that  Colonel 
Merewether  had  been  misled  when  he  reported  that  water  was 
plentiful,  from  the  fact  that  the  rainy  season  had  but  just 
closed  before  he  arrived  there. 

He  had  found  standing  pools  in  certain  places,  but  those  in 
a  few  days  had  disappeared  entirely,  owing  to  the  sandy  nature 
of  the  soil,  which  had  soon  absorbed  moisture. 

After  about  five  hours'  toilsome  march  we  arrived  at  the 
base  of  the  mountains,  and  mounting  the  summit  of  a  small 
plateau,  the  camp  at  Koomaylee  became  visible.  Here  was  the 
entrance  to  the  Great  Pass  which  cleft  the  moimtain  in  two, 
and  admitted  the  invaders  into  Abyssinia. 

A  great,  wide,  yawning  gap  was  visible  flanked  on  each  side  by 
rising  ranges  whose  precipitous  sides  were  clothed  in  tangled 
brushwood  and  kolquall  trees.  Grey,  weather-beaten  rocks  jutted 
here  and  there  out  of  the  mass  of  dark  verdure,  with  lichens  and 
mosses  clustering  about  their  sides.  Above  the  nearest  range  of 
mountains  rose  others  loftier,  grander,  till  the  summits  of  the 
furthest  seemed  to  kiss  the  very  clouds,  and  these  appeared  to 
enwrap  and  fold  those  within  into  a  vast  amphitheatre,  through 
the  centre  of  which  the  Pass  ran  its  black  and  gloomy  way. 
Had  this  deep  gorge  not  been  thus  temporarily  inhabited,  a 
more  mysterious  looking  spot  could  scarcely  be  found. 

The  site  of  the  camp  was  three-fourths  of  a  circle.  Two 
great  hills  at  either  end  stood  like  Titan  warders  to  guard  the 
entrance.  These  two  great  hills  were  connected  by  narrow 
ridges  with  the  lofty  heights  beyond. 

Before  going  within  the  amphitheatre  thus  formed  we 
turned  around  to  bid  our  adieus  to  the  sea  and  view  the  prospect. 
No  brighter  one  could  have  been  imagined.  At  our  feet  ex- 
panded a  plain  covered  over  with  baubool  bushes  and  other 
shrubs,  which  hid  the  sand  from  \dew.     Beyond  the  dark 


BAZAAKS  OF  KOOMAYLEE. 


293 


green  an  expanse  of  white,  glistening,  burning  sand ;  beyond 
this  again  were  the  tents  of  the  camp,  looking  like  snow- 
heaps  scattered  far  around ;  further  oflF  a  noble  fleet  of  ships 
riding  at  anchor  in  the  bay,  each  shroud  and  rope  seen 
distinctly,  so  clear  was  the  air,  so  cloudless  the  sky ;  bound- 
ing their  domain  and  sleeping  sluggishly  under  the  noonday 
sun,  was  the  island  of  Dissee.  From  our  elevated  position, 
the  eye  skimmed  across  the  island  and  traced  the  blue  and 
placid  surface  of  the  Red  Sea,  burying  itself  in  the  distant 
horizon.  Twenty  miles  or  so  to  our  left,  the  flat-roofed  build- 
ings of  the  Arabic  town  of  Massowah  rose  to  view,  nestling  in 
groves  of  green  trees. 

A  few  steps  forward,  and  we  were  hidden  within  the  confines 
of  the  dark  Pass,  severed  from  what  we  fondly  imagined  home, 
friends,  civilisation,  and  by  a  ridge  of  hills  which  interposed 
themselves  as  obstacles  to  the  view. 

Norton's  American  pumps  had  worked  wonders  in  the  camp 
at  Koomaylee.  Water  spurted  up  in  fine  style.  The  sickly 
camels  and  mules  enjoyed  the  precious  beverage,  and  under 
the  influence  of  the  cool  shadows  flung  over  the  camp  by  the 
stupendous  heights  above,  and  the  soft  and  pure  airs  which  blew 
down  the  Pass  from  the  Highlands,  they  improved  in  a  very 
short  time.  The  sick  soldiers  in  the  hospitals  recovered  after  a 
short  residence  here  from  the  languor  and  general  debility  a 
few  weeks  stay  at  ZouUa  had  generated  in  their  frames.  In 
fact  the  whole  camp  appeared  dififerent  from  Zoulla. 

The  natives,  who  were  of  the  Shoho  tribe,  flocked  around 
the  camp  with  their  goats,  their  sheep  and  cattle  giving  a  tmly 
pastoral  appearance  to  the  scene.  The  goats  climbed  the  grey 
rocks  on  the  heights  above,  overhung  with  tufted  trees,  nibbled 
the  creepers  and  clusters  of  shrubs  growing  under  their  umbrage; 
the  sheep  bleated  in  melancholy  tones  below;  the  cattle  lowed, 
and  the  swart  and  naked  Shoho  children  shouted  lustily  or 
played  upon  their  reed  pipes. 

Bazaars  had  already  assumed  vast  proportions  on  the  ground 
that  but  a  few  short  weeks  since  was  the  home  of  howling  beasts 
of  prey.  The  booths — made  of  straw  mats — were  laid  out  in 
two  parallel  lines  to  form  an  open  street,  and,  but  for  the  flimsy 
material  of  the  dwellings,  it  would  well  have  borne  comparison 
with  a  street  in  Pekin.    Looking  up  the  bazaar,  we  commanded 


294 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


a  view  of  the  multitude  of  commodities  with  which  it  was 
supplied.  Nets  of  onions,  tobacco  in  leaf,  and  brown  heaps  of 
the  fragrant  weed  grown  in  Latakiah  and  imported  from  &r 
Stamboul,  were  temptingly  arrayed  on  wooden  trays,  in  vari- 
coloured paper ;  figs  strung  together  on  rushes,  and  figs  in 
round  cases ;  pipes  with  amber  mouth-pieces,  pipe-bowls  with 
quaintest  figures  engraved  on  them;  common  English  clay 
pipes,  narghilehs  from  Grand  Cairo,  and  hubble-bubbles  from 
Persia  and  Delhi  ;  jars  full  of  black  olives,  pocket  glasses,  in 
red  pasteboard  cases ;  pickles,  gherkins,  sweets,  jellies,  cognac, 
claret,  soda-water  and  innumerable  other  things  from  Paris  and 
London. 

Those  things  not  to  be  found  here  were  of  no  use  to  soldiers 
on  a  campaign. 

There  were  no  books,  no  lamps,  no  newspapers,  no  post-oflSce— 
people  never  perceived  the  want  of  them — while  dates,  figs,  nuts, 
raisins,  and  all  sorts  of  liquors  proved  to  be  very  saleable  articles, 
and  there  was  an  abimdance  of  these  things.  The  bazaar  was 
often  frequented  by  the  Shohoes  and  camp  followers.  Here  the 
dark-coloured  maidens  of  that  country  came  unadorned  and 
unclothed  ;  here  the  wild  children  romped  childishly  gleeful  in 
complete  nudity  ;  here  the  camp  followers,  men  from  Berbera, 
Donakil,  Aden,  from  up  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  jungles  of 
India,  dispensed  with  superfluous  clothes,  and  sought  the  shelter 
of  their  open  booths  to  loll  in  undisturbed  freedom. 

As  I  intended  to  make  forced  marches  to  overhaul  the 
advance  force,  then  at  a  station  called  Attigratt,  I  made  out  an 
indent  on  the  commissariat  department,  and  sent  my  boy  Ali  to 
draw  the  rations  it  called  for. 

It  must  not  be  thought  for  one  moment  that  we  received 
what  was  demanded  by  tlie  indent ;  the  thieving  Parsees  who 
had  charge  of  the  distribution  of  rations  managed  to  retain 
very  often  one-half  of  what  was  our  due.  Very  often,  also,  as 
we  advanced  into  the  interior,  we  were  deprived  of  rice,  ghee, 
sugar,  tea,  coffee,  rum,  potatoes,  and  vegetables,  and  at  one 
time  we  were  two  months  without  either  of  the  above-named 
rations. 

When  Ali  returned  from  the  commissariat  it  was  nearly 
sunset,  and  instead  of  the  light-hearted  boy  that  he  usually  was, 
he  appeared  much  depressed  and  very  sorrowful.    On  asking 


THE  GREAT  PASS. 


295 


the  cause  of  his  gloomy  looks  he  answered  in  his  broken 
English : — 

'Arab  man  tell  me  in  bazaar  Ingliliz  man  kill  me  in 
Habesh  land,  me  want  paper,  me  go  back  to  Suez.'  And  here 
he  broke  down  and  cried. 

It  seems  that  an  Arab,  restless  and  uneasy  under  the  strict 
discipline  of  the  English  camp,  had  been  telling  him  how 
English  officers  were  so  cruel  that  they  generally  flogged  their 
unfortunate  servants  to  death,  and  All's  fears  were  so  excited 
at  the  idea  of  leaving  his  bones  in  Habesh  land — an  Arabic 
name  for  Abyssinia — that  he  had  determined  to  apply  to  me 
for  permission  to  return  to  Suez,  where  I  had  picked  him  up. 
I  managed  to  soothe  and  calm  his  fears  for  the  time  by  bribing 
him  to  go  with  me  as  far  as  Senafe. 

On  leaving  Zoulla,  I  had  not  biuiihened  myself  with  a  tent, 
satisfied  that  I  could  purchase  one  whenever  I  wished  it,  and 
deemed  one  really  necessary.  I  was  partly  right  and  partly 
wrong.  Had  I  procured  my  horses,  and  mules,  and  tents  at 
Zoulla,  I  should  have  been  more  independent,  but  the  rumour 
of  the  dash  to  be  made  upon  Magdala,  had  completely  upset 
my  better  judgment,  and  caused  me  to  wish  to  hurry  on  at 
railway  speed.  But  as  the  weather  was  mild,  and  I  possessed 
a  treasure  of  a  buffalo  robe  to  protect  me  from  the  dews,  so 
long  as  I  was  marching  I  felt  no  inconvenience — I  rather  liked 
it  than  otherwise. 

After  a  light  supper,  cooked  by  my  nimble  adjunct  Ali,  I 
lighted  a  cigar,  and,  folding  my  buffalo  robe  around  me,  lay 
down  to  think — ^not  to  sleep — I  was  too  excited  for  that. 

At  early  dawn  we  were  in  the  saddle,  and  plunged  into  the 
yawning  Pass.  We  left  the  camp,  with  its  confused  murmur 
breaking  the  stillness  of  the  morning,  far  behind.  We  were 
led  around  abutments  of  rock,  through  jungles  of  mimosa  and 
laurel  bushes,  past  patriarchal  sycamores,  whose  wide-spreading 
branches  seemed  alive  with  birds  of  gayest  plumage.  Bound 
acute  angles  formed  by  forward  hills,  up  along  the  base  of 
precipices  of  sheet  rock,  and  then  through  paths  cut  through 
dense  jxmgle,  we  wended  our  way. 

Anon  the  smnmits  and  slopes  of  the  hills  flanking  our 
defile  had  undergone  a  magical  change.    From  a  dull  grey 


296 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


they  had  assumed  an  orange  hue,  which  rapidly  discolouring, 
became  silver.  Gradually  the  silvery  tints  overspread  the 
western  slopes,  and  stole  up  the  eastern  side.  Above,  in  the 
very  centre  of  the  heavens,  the  sun — a  ball  of  liquid  fire — ^was  set, 
pouring  his  fiery  rays  remorselessly  on  our  heads,  denoting  mid- 
day. At  the  same  time  we  knew  by  the  noise  of  voices  that 
the  next  station,  Sooroo,  was  near,  and  as  we  turned  sharply  to 
the  right,  round  an  abutment  of  earth  and  rock,  the  tents  of 
the  garrison  appeared  in  view. 

Dismounting  from  my  horse,  I  sought  out  a  shadowy  spot, 
under  a  giant  mulberry  tree,  and  spreading  a  carpet  there,  lay 
down  to  rest.  Ali  first  attended  to  the  animals  and  provided  a 
most  bounteous  feed  for  them,  then  a  bright  fire  was  made,  the 
cofiee  kettle  was  next  brought  out  and  filled  with  water,  and  as 
it  was  mounted  upon  the  glowing  embers  by  its  very  extreme 
homeliness  it  evoked  a  smile  of  contentment  from  me,  and  white 
it  rung  its  merry  bubbling  noise,  the  rich  aroma  of  the  coffee 
stole  upon  my  wandering  senses. 

The  two  hours  siesta  over,  we  pushed  on  again  to  the  next 
station,  Undel-Wells. 

For  three  miles  each  side  of  the  Sooroo,  the  most  difficult 
and  dangerous  positions  of  the  Pass  were  seen.  For  six  miles 
the  traveller  passes  through  a  very  narrow  defile,  flanked  by 
walls  of  sheet  granite  soaring  up  in  all  the  glorious  majesty  of 
a  height  of  800  feet  on  each  side.  Between  these  seeming 
infinities  of  stone  we  crawled  on,  not  certain  but  that  a  rock 
might  become  displaced,  or  a  branch  of  the  pine  which  crowned 
their  lofty  extremities  might  be  swept  down  into  the  yawning 
chasm.  The  least  murmxu:  of  the  human  voice  sounded  in  this 
awful  depth  like  thunder,  and  the  tread  of  the  horses  feet  like 
artillery  rumbling  over  a  bridge.  For  a  height  of  ten  feet 
above  us,  were  to  be  seen  traces  of  the  water  which  surged  down 
the  pass  during  the  rainy  season.  .  Its  extreme  width  was  not 
more  than  twenty-five  feet,  while  its  narrowest  was  barely  fifteen. 
In  some  places  it  looked  as  if  Titans  had  been  employed  for 
centuries  in  chiselling  and  channelling  the  solid  granite  to  pre- 
vent another  deluge  of  the  country.  With  all  the  thousands  of 
ravines,  and  gullies,  and  fissures  emptying  into  the  Sooroo 
defile,  for  a  distance  of  fifty  miles,  some  idea  of  the  vast  body  of 


THE  WONDERS  OF  THE  SOOROO  PASS.  297 


water  thus  collected  may  be  had,  and  the  terrible  force  of  the 
whirling  torrent  may  be  imagined. 

Out  of  the  darkness,  out  of  the  gloomy  depths  of  the  Sooroo, 
we  emerged  at  last,  into  a  more  extended  and  much  wider  defile. 
Instead  of  the  perpendicular  walls  of  stone,  lately  passed,  a 
hundred  fantastic-shaped  hills  presented  themselves,  with  their 
gently  sloping  sides  covered  by  woody  kolquall,  groves  of 
firs  and  pine,  with  low  brushwood,  juniper  and  furze.  Then 
we  travelled  between  ridges  of  stupendous  mountains,  with 
their  crowns  cut  into  shattered  pinnacles,  of  dun-coloured  rock, 
until  we  came  to  masses  of  ribbed  rock  and  earth  lying  diagon- 
ally along  the  bottom  of  the  defile,  looking  as  if  they  were  cast 
down  purposely  by  some  mighty  power.  Now  and  then  the  eye 
was  attracted  by  the  crystals,  sparkling  like  diamonds  when  the 
slanting  sunbeam  lit  up  the  cyclopean  masses  of  granite  and 
c[uartz ;  and  then  again,  the  vision  wandered  to  the  splintered 
peaks  and  sharp  and  ragged  outlines  which  they  presented 
against  the  pure  cerulean  tints  of  the  sky. 

As  the  glorious  sunset  flushed  the  loftiest  crags  and  tinted 
the  boldest  hills  with  all  the  prismatic  lines  of  the  rainbow, 
away  at  the  furthest  extremity  of  an  avenue  of  firs,  appeared 
the  welcome  fires  of  the  camp  of  Undel-Wells,  the  termination 
of  our  double  march  on  that  day. 

Another  long  day's  march  through  scenes  like  those  already 
described  brought  us  to  the  base  of  a  stupendous  mountain  up 
which  the  military  road  wound  itself  until  it  reached  a  gradu- 
ally slewing  ridge.  Along  this  ridge  we  continued  for  half  a 
mile,  when,  forcing  our  way  up  another  steep  hill,  we  arrived  at 
last  on  the  table-lands  of  Abyssinia,  the  altitude  of  which  is 
fully  8,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea. 

A  wide  scope  was  here  given  to  the  vision.  A  great  plateau 
slightly  rolling,  dotted  here  and  there  with  isolated  cliflFs  of 
bizarre  aspect,  honey-combed  with  numerous  caves  and  dismal 
looking  holes,  split  into  wide  yawning  fissures,  seemingly  by 
volcanic  action,  torn  into  masses  of  the  most  unsightly  crags, 
were  things  seen  at  the  first  glance. 

At  the  base  of  the  very  highest,  a  mass  of  grey  rock,  upright 
and  frowning,  like  another  Acro-Corinthus,  was  Senafe — just  a 
mile  from  the  edge  of  the  Highlands — the  first  village  of  any 
importance  we  had  seen  in  Abyssinia. 


298 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Directly  in  front  of  the  village,  a  few  hundred  yards  off, 
and  under  the  shadow  of  the  tall  grey  rocks,  in  the  fast  ap- 
proaching twilight,  and  covering  a  gentler  eminence,  was  the 
camp  of  the  advance  force.  Behind  the  eminence,  and  pro- 
tected by  a  battery  of  field-pieces,  moimted  so  as  to  command 
all  approach,  were  the  commissariat  and  the  mule  lines.  Here 
and  there  on  grassy  knolls,  some  gentleman  idler  or  privileged 
officer  had  planted  his  tent,  so  as  to  have  the  full  benefit  of 
the  bracing  breezes,  the  enjoyment  of  the  charming  prospect, 
or  that  exclusiveness  Englishmen  in  general  so  delight  in. 

At  respectable  distances  from  the  white  tents  were  flocks  of 
goats  and  broad-tailed  sheep,  attended  by  dusky  urchins  clad 
in  dressed  goat-skin,  thrown  very  lightly  over  their  backs,  who 
from  afar  surveyed  with  silent  wonder  and  admiration  the  red 
coats,  bright  steel  muskets,  and  the  prancing  horses  of  the 
British  soldiery. 

As  I  had  heard  it  said  that  it  was  extremely  cold  at  night 
at  Senafe,  I  determined  to  apply  for  a  tent  at  once,  and  full  of 
that  prudent  resolution,  I  directed  my  steps  to  the  Conmianding 
Officer's  sumptuous  marquee,  which  stood  in  the  centre  of  the 

camp.     The  commanding  officer  was  General  M  ,  with 

whom  I  had  an  interview,  of  which  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say 
that  I  left  him  with  *  good  evening,'  and  an  assurance  that  if 
ever  I  rested  in  his  tent  again  it  would  be  because  he  had  sent 
for  me. 

From  General  M  's  tent  I  galloped  away  with  feelings 

of  no  great  love  for  Englishmen,  when  I  was  accosted  by  a 
smartly-dressed  officer,  who  asked  me  if  I  was  in  search  of 
anyone. 

'  Oh,  no  ;  no  one  in  particular,'  said  I,  with  a  laugh  ;  *  I  am 
simply  looking  up  a  hostelry,  where  I  can  stay  during  the  night.' 

'Hostelries,  my  dear  sir,  are  not  very  plentiful  around 
Senafe,  but  there  are  several  good-natured  fellows  who  would 
be  glad  to  take  you  in.' 

*  Oh,  I  believe  you,  sir,  most  certainly  I  do  ;  but,  could  you 
name  anyone  in  particular  ?' 

'Why,  yes;  there  is  Captain  Smelfimgus.'  (Readers  of 
Sterne's  '  Sentimental  Journey '  will  not  have  forgotten  that 
name).    *  He  has  a  big  tent  and  is — ' 

What ! '  said  I, '  is  the  famous  Captain  Smelfimgus  here  ? 


THE  WORTHY  CAPTAIN  SMELFUNGU8.  299 


I  have  heaxd  of  that  gentleman  everywhere.  First  at  Alexandria 
then  at  Suez,  Zoulla,  Koomaylee,  and  now  he  turns  up  at 
Senafe.  Can  you  direct  me  to  his  tent  ?  He  is  such  a  remark- 
able character  that  I  must  make  his  acquaintance  while  there 
is  a  chance.' 

'  Oh,  yes ;  you  see  that  tent  on  that  little  knoll  all  alone  ? 
you  will  find  the  captain  there.  As  I  see  you  are  in  a  hurry, 
I  will  wish  you  good  evening.' 

*Grood  evening,  and  many  thanks  to  you,'  I  responded 
heartily;  and  then  putting  spurs  to  my  horse,  I  soon  found 
myself  before  the  captain's  tent. 

Coming  down  the  slope  from  camp-ward,  on  "horse-back, 
was  a  short,  bushy-whiskered  man,  dressed  in  a  brown  suit, 
with  a  gun  stuck  in  a  saddle-bag,  swinging  very  ostenta- 
tiously a  couple  of  ibis  he  had  shot,  from  which  it  was 
evident  he  had  been  out  on  a  sporting  excursion.  Dismounting, 
and  delivering  his  horse  and  the  ibis  into  the  charge  of  a 
couple  of  servants,  who  stepped  officiously  forward  to  aid  him, 
and  turning  round,  he  for  the  first  time  saw  a  stranger  in  me, 
and  stepping  up  with  the  blandest  of  smiles  and  gracefulest  of 
apologies,  this  great  man — this  remarkable  man — demanded 
of  me,  if  he  could  in  any  way  be  of  service  to  me. 

'  I  came  here  to  seek  Captain  Smelfungus,  sir,'  said  I ;  *  I 
presume  you  are  the  gentleman.' 

Drawing  his  podgy  fingers  through  his  bushy  whiskers, 
and  allowing  his  face  to  expand  into  another  exceedingly  bland 
smile,  he  said :  '  Yes,  sir ;  I  am  the  gentleman.' 

Smoothing  with  open  palm  all  traces  of  the  discomfort 
that  had  lately  put  me  out  of  temper,  pulling  my  beard- 
less cheeks  in  imitation  of  his  whisker-pulling,  forcing 
a  tremendous  smile,  and  adopting  his  style  of  empreesementj 
I  informed  him  that  I  had  heard  so  much  of  liis  talents,  his 
charming  eccentricities  and  his  glorious  achievements,  that, 
I  could  not  retire  to  rest  without  first  paying  my  respects  to 
him. 

'  Ah,  sir,'  said  he  in  feeling  accents ;  '  you  do  me  too  much 
honour ;  but  may  I  ask  to  whom  I  have  the  pleasure  of 
speaking  ? ' 

I  gave  him  freely  the  pleasure  he  sought.  At  the  declar- 
ation of  my  being  an  American  he  pricked  his  ears,  rolled  his 


298 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Directly  in  front  of  the  village,  a  few  hundred  yards  off, 
and  under  the  shadow  of  the  tall  grey  rocks,  in  the  fast  ap- 
proaching twilight,  and  covering  a  gentler  eminence,  was  the 
camp  of  the  advance  force.  Behind  the  eminence,  and  pro- 
tected by  a  battery  of  field-pieces,  moimted  so  as  to  command 
all  approach,  were  the  commissariat  and  the  mule  lines.  Here 
and  there  on  grassy  knolls,  some  gentleman  idler  or  privileged 
oflScer  had  planted  his  tent,  so  as  to  have  the  full  benefit  of 
the  bracing  breezes,  the  enjoyment  of  the  charming  prospect, 
or  that  exclusiveness  Englishmen  in  general  so  delight  in. 

At  respectable  distances  from  the  white  tents  were  fiocks  of 
goats  and  broad-tailed  sheep,  attended  by  dusky  urchins  clad 
in  dressed  goat-skin,  thrown  very  lightly  over  their  backs,  who 
from  afar  surveyed  with  silent  wonder  and  admiration  the  red 
coats,  briglit  steel  muskets,  and  the  prancing  horses  of  the 
British  soldiery. 

As  I  had  heard  it  said  that  it  was  extremely  cold  at  night 
at  Senafe,  I  determined  to  apply  for  a  tent  at  once,  and  full  of 
that  prudent  resolution,  I  directed  my  steps  to  the  Commanding 
Officer's  sumptuous  marquee,  which  stood  in  the  centre  of  the 

camp.     The  commanding  officer  was  General  M  ,  with 

whom  I  had  an  interview,  of  which  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say 
that  I  left  him  with  *  good  evening,'  and  an  assurance  that  if 
ever  I  rested  in  his  tent  again  it  would  be  because  he  had  sent 
for  me. 

From  General  M  's  tent  I  galloped  away  with  feelings 

of  no  great  love  for  Englishmen,  when  I  was  accosted  by  a 
smartly-dressed  officer,  who  asked  me  if  I  was  in  search  of 
anyone. 

'  Oh,  no  ;  no  one  in  particular,'  said  I,  with  a  laugh  ;  '  I  am 
simply  looking  up  a  hostelry,  where  I  can  stay  during  the  night.' 

'Hostelries,  my  dear  sir,  are  not  very  plentiful  around 
Senafe,  but  there  are  several  good-natured  fellows  who  would 
be  glad  to  take  you  in.' 

'  Oh,  I  believe  you,  sir,  most  certainly  I  do  ;  but,  could  you 
name  anyone  in  particular  ?' 

'Why,  yes;  there  is  Captain  Smelfungus.'  (Eeaders  of 
Sterne's  '  Sentimental  Journey '  will  not  have  forgotten  that 
name).    '  He  has  a  big  tent  and  is — ' 

What ! '  said  I, '  is  the  famous  Captain  Smelfungus  here  ? 


THE  WORTHY  CAPTAIN  SMELFUNGU8.  299 


I  have  heard  of  that  gentleman  everywhere.  First  at  Alexandria 
then  at  Suez,  Zoulla,  Koomaylee,  and  now  he  turns  up  at 
Senafe.  Can  you  direct  me  to  his  tent  ?  He  is  such  a  remark- 
'  able  character  that  I  must  make  his  acquaintance  while  there 
is  a  chance.' 

'  Oh,  yes ;  you  see  that  tent  on  that  little  knoll  all  alone  ? 
you  will  find  the  captain  there.  As  I  see  you  are  in  a  hurry, 
I  will  wish  you  good  evening.' 

*Good  evening,  and  many  thanks  to  you,'  I  responded 
heartily;  and  then  putting  spurs  to  my  horse,  I  soon  found 
myself  before  the  captain's  tent. 

Coming  down  the  slope  from  camp-ward,  on  "horse-back, 
was  a  short,  bushy-whiskered  man,  dressed  in  a  brown  suit, 
with  a  gun  stuck  in  a  saddle-bag,  swinging  very  ostenta- 
tiously a  couple  of  ibis  he  had  shot,  from  which  it  was 
evident  he  had  been  out  on  a  sporting  excursion.  Dismounting, 
and  delivering  his  horse  and  the  ibis  into  the  charge  of  a 
couple  of  servants,  who  stepped  officiously  forward  to  aid  him, 
and  turning  round,  he  for  the  first  time  saw  a  stranger  in  me, 
and  stepping  up  with  the  blandest  of  smiles  and  gracefulest  of 
apologies,  this  great  man — this  remarkable  man — demanded 
of  me,  if  he  could  in  any  way  be  of  service  to  me. 

'  I  came  here  to  seek  Captain  Smelfungus,  sir,'  said  I ;  '  I 
presume  you  are  the  gentleman.' 

Drawing  his  podgy  fingers  through  his  bushy  whiskers, 
and  allowing  his  face  to  expand  into  another  exceedingly  bland 
smile,  he  said :  '  Yes,  sir ;  I  am  the  gentleman.' 

Smoothing  with  open  palm  all  traces  of  the  discomfort 
that  had  lately  put  me  out  of  temper,  pulling  my  beard- 
less cheeks  in  imitation  of  his  whisker-pulling,  forcing 
a  tremendous  smile,  and  adopting  his  style  of  empreasement, 
I  informed  him  that  I  had  heard  so  much  of  his  talents,  his 
charming  eccentricities  and  his  glorious  achievements,  that, 
I  could  not  retire  to  rest  without  first  paying  my  respects  to 
him. 

'  Ah,  sir,'  said  he  in  feeling  accents ;  '  you  do  me  too  much 
honoxu: ;  but  may  I  ask  to  whom  I  have  the  pleasure  of 
speaking  ? ' 

I  gave  him  freely  the  pleasure  he  sought.  At  the  declar- 
ation of  my  being  an  American  he  pricked  his  ears,  rolled  his 


300 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


eyes,  and  almost  ruined  his  whiskers ;  but  when  I  modestly 
hinted  that  I  was  a  newspaper  correspondent,  indeed,  I  never 
imagined  that  such  beatified  feelings  as  seemed  to  possess  him 
could  be  so  eloquently  expressed  by  signs,  for  his  emotions 
apparently  were  such  that  words  seemed  to  choke  him. 

He  declared  that  I  was  a  fellow-countryman — ^that  I  was 
his  brother,  not  only  by  nationality,  but  by  profession.  His 
tent  was  mine,  he  affirmed,  his  servants  were  mine  also,  his 
cooking  utensils  were  mine,  and  his  rations  were  mine.  What 
more  could  a  gentleman  of  the  Press  wish  ?  Here  was  a  home, 
here  were  servants,  plenty  of  cooking  utensils,  an  abundance  of 
rations,  and  an  estimable  countryman  and  brother. 

*  But  come  in,  my  friend ;  enter  my  canvas  domicile.  Why 
stand  we  out  in  the  twilight,  when  a  supper  meet  for  the  gods 
is  spread  ready  for  the  guest.'  After  delivering  his  magnilo- 
quent, but  hospitable  address,  my  new  found  friend  and  my- 
self entered  the  tent,  where,  in  truth,  a  most  savoury  meal 
was  laid  out.  At  the  same  time  my  precious  Ali  arrived  with 
his  two  animals,  and  these  were  immediately  relieved  of  their 
burdens,  and  also  fed  out  of  the  captain's  abundance. 

Feeling  necessitated  to  say  something,  I  said  blandly — 

*  Pardon  me.  Captain;  but  you  hinted  something  to  me 
about  your  being  connected  with  the  Press,  if  I  mistake  not.' 

In  what  way  the  great  Captain  Smelfungus  made  out  his 
claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  very  important  and  Protean  Member 
of  the  Press;  or  what  high  commission  from  the  British 
authorities  he  was  charged  with,  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  divulge. 
I  became  from  that  time  the  messmate  of  Smelfungus,  the 
recipient  of  all  his  old  stories  of  life  in  India,  and  of  service  in 
the  Confederate  army;  and  much  could  I  tell  of  his  eccen- 
tricitieB  and  little  failings,  but  the  sacred  claims  of  hospitality 
condemn  me  to  be  silent.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  I  never 
was  more  instructed,  amused,  or  astonished  than  I  was  that 
first  evening  at  Senafe.  It  was  at  a  late  hour  of  the  night 
when  we  both  rolled  ourselves  in  our  rugs  and  finally  dropped 
asleep. 

The  sun  was  high  in  the  heavens  when  I  awoke  next  morn- 
ing. The  gallant  Captain  was  in  his  brown  suit,  on  bended 
knees,  above  a  lengthy  despatch  box  marked  'Sir  X.  Y.,' 
bristling  with  the  many  knick-nacks  that  so  distinguished  a 


THE  ENORMOUS  WEALTH  OF  SMELFUNGUS.  301 


gentleman  should  be  supposed  to  possess.  Now  he  tenderly 
handled  *  stars,'  *  orders,'  in  silver  and  gold ;  then  a  curious 
dirk  which  he  exhibited  to  me  as  a  present  from  the  Maharajah 
of  Putiala ;  then  a  scimitar  given  to  him,  so  he  said,  by  the 
Nizam  of  Hydrabad ;  a  fancy  Malacca  cane  from  the  Guicowar 
of  Baroda ;  an  amber  necklace  from  the  Begum  of  Bhopaul ; 
a  sword  presented  to  him  by  the  Duke  of  Cambridge ;  then  a 
pair  of  wide-mouthed  duelling  pistols,  presented  to  him  by 
General  Benedek,  two  days  after  the  battle  of  Konigratz;  a 
silver-mounted  Colt's  revolver,  a  parting  gift  from  General 
Robert  E.  Lee,  and  hosts  of  other  things  too  numerous  to 
mention. 

*  Is  Sir  X.  Y.  a  relative  of  yours  ? '  I  asked  him,  after  again 
glancing  at  the  box. 

'  Yes,  he  was  a  first  cousin  of  mine.  He  lately  died,  and 
left  me  a  handsome  estate  worth  TfiOOL  a  year,  situated  in 
Dorsetshire.' 

'  Oh,  indeed !  a  very  handsome  property  that,  and  no  mis- 
take ;  but  gentlemen  well-connected  like  you.  Captain,  always 
drop  into  something  handsome.' 

*  Yes,  that's  so,'  said  he,  and  then  in  a  careless  tone  added, 
'  but  I  have  half-a-dozen  very  pretty  little  estates  like  that,  in 
different  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom.'  .  .  . 

I  asked  him  when  he  intended  to  leave  for  the  front. 

*  To-night,  by  all  means,'  said  he. 

*  Then  that  arrangement  will  suit  me  perfectly,  for  I  am  in 
first-rate  trim  for  rapid  marching.' 

*  I  see  you  are,'  said  he  with  a  smile,  *  but  I  have  quite  a 
host  of  things,  and  I  doubt  very  much  whether  my  five  animals 
will  carry  what  I  have ;  but  it  is  an  axiom  with  travellers,  that 
what  they  cannot  take  with  them  they  can  always  leave 
behind.' 

Captain  Smelfungus  was  indeed  well  provided  with  every 
requisite  of  camp  equipage.  He  possessed  a  large  American 
wall-tent,  and  a  small  tent  d'abri,  any  number  of  camp  kettles, 
and  dishes,  besides  being  well  supplied  with  provisions ;  curry- 
powder,  pickles,  cracknel  biscuits,  brandies,  a  keg  of  patent 
punch,  and  to  cap  all,  five  servants  to  wait  on  him. 

Throughout  the  day  the  Captain  seemed  busy  with  his 
baggage,  ever  restless,  ever  shifting  from  one  place  to  another, 


302 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


now  attending  to  his  horses,  now  packing  one  thing  carefully 
away,  destroying  another  as  superfluous,  and  so  long  as  he  was 
in  this  state  of  incertitude  so  long  would  the  falcon-eyed 
Abyssinian  urchins  stay  in  the  vicinity  to  eye  his  preparations 
for  departure,  ready  to  swoop  upon  the  trash  which  is  in- 
variably left  when  a  person  is  on  the  march. 

It  wanted  half  an  hour  of  sunset  before  our  little  caravan 
was  fairly  on  the  way ;  and,  having  heard  that  a  magnificent 
view  could  be  had  from  the  top  of  a  peak  standing  close  to  the 
gap  which  led  down  to  the  pass  of  Sooroo,  I  started  in  that 
direction  to  see  it. 

When  I  had  actually  surmounted  the  summit  of  the  peak, 
and  prepared  myself  to  behold  the  scene,  I  looked  towards  the 
east,  and  beheld  such  a  one  as  painter  never  sketched. 

Those  who  saw  it  will  be  for  ever  haunted  by  that  one 
moment  when  the  flashing  glare  of  departing  day  lighted  up 
the  Adowa  peaks,  and  bathed  the  endless  chain  of  rising  hills 
in  a  sea  of  light,  before  the  sun  dipped  beyond  them  to  shine 
on  other  worlds. 


STRANGE  FORMS  IN  THE  DARKNESS. 


803 


CHAPTER  III. 

AN  ADVENTUROUS  JOURNEY  BY  NIGHT — AN  ABYSSINIAN  AREOPAGUS — V^JTVB 

ORATORY. 

There  is  nothing  to  interest  a  man  on  a  night  travel.  He  is 
continually  striving  to  penetrate  the  gloom  around  him,  look- 
ing on  into  dim  vacancy. 

On  this  our  first  joiurney  in  Abyssinia  Proper,  and  by  night 
too,  our  thoughts  and  fancies  were  anything  but  agreeable.  It 
was  scarcely  dark,  and  we  had  not  been  on  the  road  an  hour, 
before  we  perceived  ourselves  followed  by  troops  of  animals, 
bounding  upright,  giving  vent  to  angry  snarls,  and  flitting 
past  with  supernatural  swiftness.  Shortly,  a  chorus  of  un- 
earthly yells  broke  the  solemn  stillness  of  the  night,  which 
was  caught  up  and  echoed  eagerly  all  around  us.  Another 
deep  silence  prevailed,  to  be  in  a  short  time,  however,  broken 
by  a  savage  roar,  uttered  evidently  in  our  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood. It  gave  us  all  an  involuntary  start.  I  had  heard 
frequently  the  lion,  the  tiger,  and  the  panther ;  but  I  was  posi- 
tive that  this  one  we  heard  was  neither,  and,  thinking  so  great 
a  traveller  as  the  Captain  should  know,  I  propounded  the  ques- 
tion to  him.  The  Captain,  I  remarked,  had  been  riding 
forward  previous  to  the  sharp  cries  that  preceded  the  roar, 
like  a  man  bound  to  clear  the  way  for  the  troop  behind,  couch- 
ing a  large  boar  spear  in  true  knightly  style;  but  he  had 
gradually  slackened  his  pace  afterwards,  imtil  he  was  riding 
alongside  with  me. 

'  What  animal  is  that,  Captain  ? '  As  I  asked  the  question 
my  own  fugitive  presence  of  mind  returned  instantly,  as  if  I 
felt  emboldened  by  my  own  voice. 


304 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


'  It's  a  hysGna,'  answered  tliat  gentleman. 

'  Is  it  a  dangerous  animal  ?  ' 

'  Very,'  was  his  reply. 

<Will  it  attack  us?' 

*  No ;  unless  we  attack  it.' 

'  But  suppose  you  try  his  mettle  with  your  spear  ?  ' 

*No,  thank  you,'  replied  he,  loftily ;  *he  is  not  worthy  of 
my  steel.  I  mean  to  reserve  this  spear  for  gorillas  and  wild 
boars,  or  lions  and  hippopotami.' 

I  urged  him  no  further ;  and  feeling,  I  suppose,  that  his 
presence  gave  me  courage,  he  never  quitted  my  side  until  we 
reached  Goom-Gooma  foiu-  hours  after. 

The  hyaenas'  and  jackals'  cries  sounded  close  to  us  the  whole 
night,  and  it  was  evident  that  they  followed  us,  or  that  they 
were  in  plentiful  numbers  around  us. 

Around  the  camp  at  Goom-Gooma  resounded  their  hideous 
cries ;  and,  as  we  were  new  and  strange  to  the  country  as  yet, 
the  Captain  exhibited  a  tender  thoughtfulness  for  our  safety  by 
having  our  tent  pitched  in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  where  we 
felt  perfectly  safe  from  any  attack  of  wild  beasts. 

Before  we  retired,  however,  we  crowded  around  a  blazing 
camp  fire,  for  the  nights  were  very  cold  on  the  table-land  of 
Abyssinia,  and,  attracted  by  the  friendly  blaze,  several  of  the 
garrison  came  also  to  see  and  greet  the  new  arrivals.  The 
Captain  attracted  the  most  attention  by  his  brown  garb  his 
cool  oflf-handedness  and  his  military  title,  with  which  every- 
body was  made  acquainted  before  we  had  been  five  minutes  in 
camp. 

The  busy  stir  of  the  camp  and  the  neighing  of  our  animals, 
picketed  close  to  the  tent,  awoke  us  to  the  duties  and  realities 
of  another  day,  far  advanced  already ;  and  quickly  we  stepped 
from  under  our  canvas  roof  out  into  the  delicious  summer  air 
to  enjoy  another  scene,  which  called  forth  our  warmest  admi- 
ration. 

The  camp  at  Goom-Gooma  was  situated  in  one  of  the  most 
lovable,  delightful  little  vales  that  could  possibly  be  found. 
So  enthusiastic  was  one  young  Scotchman  upon  its  beauties, 
that  he  said  it  eclipsed  Scotland's  fairest  dell  in  its  pastoral 
and  quiet  loveliness. 

Above,  on  a  rocky  platform,  half  way  up  the  cliffs  that 

I 


AN  ABYSSINIAN  AREOPAGUS. 


305 


nearly  surrounded  the  valley,  was  the  Shoho  village,  from 
whence  the  name  Goom-Gooma  was  derived. 

Let  us  climb  up  and  enter  for  the  first  time  an  Abyssinian 
village.  What  a  queer  place!  From  a  distance  how  pic- 
turesque I  but  close  by,  how  very  disenchanting !  A  huddle  of 
low,  flat-roofed,  mud  houses,  populous  with  queer  inhabitants, 
dressed  in  queer  style.  Every  available  patch  of  shadow  ex- 
hibits a  cluster  of  greasy  swart  heads  of  male  and  female 
children.  The  youngest  people  were  all  naked;  the  oldest 
people  scantily  clad.  They  looked  at  me  with  all  their  might 
as  soon  as  I  stood  in  their  village  square.  In  the  centre  of  the 
square  was  a  Bema  where  the  patriarch  sat,  surrounded  by  the 
other  dignitaries — the  sub-patriarch,  or  the  next  oldest ;  the 
lawyer  or  orator  sat  on  his  right ;  and  the  man  that  was  talking 
— for  there  was  a  man  talking — was  the  lawyer,  near  whom  sat 
a  young  man,  whom  I  judged  to  be  the  plaintiflf.  It  was  a 
court,  then — tliat  square — or  an  Abyssinian  Areopagus,  and  a 
trial  was  being  held.  Though  I  was  such  a  remarkable-looking 
stranger,  the  elders,  and  lawyers,  and  court  were  too  much 
engrossed  in  their  own  business  to  look  at  me  long ;  but  the 
Kttle  ones  formed  themselves  into  a  circle  around  me,  and  kept 
their  innocent  jet-black  eyes  inexorably  fixed  upon  me.  My 
cigar  attracted  particular  attention ;  the  slightest  roll  of  my 
eyes,  or  a  wink,  had  a  certain  charm  for  these  aborigines.  A 
cough  set  them  all  to  pondering  earnestly,  and  the  sound  of 
my  voice  was  an  unaccountable  phenomenon.  Then  the  colour 
of  my  face  was  a  thing  they  endeavoured  to  analyse.  The  form- 
ation of  my  hands  set  them  to  meditate  upon  the  principles 
of  comparative  anatomy.    But  I  am  forgetting  the  Areopagus. 

I  have  often  wondered  what  were  the  words  the  speaker 
used  to  cause  him  to  spread  his  arms,  and  stamp  his  feet,  and 
spring  forward  so,  uttering  some  sentences  with  such  wild 
emphasis. 

From  the  Abyssinian  Areopagus — long  may  it  stand  I — I 
proceeded,  followed  by  the  whole  village,  to  examine  more 
closely  the  material  of  their  huts.  They  were  built  of  reddish 
mud,  detached  from  each  other  ;  the  walls  were  from  six  to  ten 
feet  high,  roofed  over  with  poles  on  which  bamboos  were  laid  \ 
then  a  layer  of  straw,  over  which  earth  was  laid  to  the  depth 
of  half  a  foot  or  more. 

X 


306 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Occupying  the  scant  sh^ide  aflforded  by  the  projections  of 
the  houses  were  the  wizened  old  grandmothers,  toothless  and 
bevrrinkled,  wearily  crooning  in  the  low  doorways  some  ditty 
that  had  just  crossed  their  eccentric  memories  ;  while  in  the 
low  doorways  might  be  seen  the  very  oldest  great-grandfathers, 
centenarians,  profoundly  meditative. 

From  other  parts  of  the  village,  where  the  cry  '  Hail !  the 
conqueror  cometh '  had  already  preceded  us,  came  scores  of 
women  and  children,  and,  as  I  turned  my  eyes  around,  I  per- 
ceived that  the  tattooed  and  swarthy  matrons  had  also  squatted 
themselves  around  us.  Encouraged  by  the  presence  of  their 
mothers,  fifties  of  round-eyed  little  m*chins  rollicked  and  tum- 
bled in  the  dust,  and  piled  it  into  tiny  castles  and  pyramids, 
like  our  own  more  elegant  children  do  at  our  watering-places 
with  the  sand  on  the  sea-shore.  After  viewing  all  that  was 
worth  seeing — that  was  not  much,  to  be  sure,  but  then  it  was 
a  matter  of  necessity — I  descended  the  hill,  and  found  the 
Captain  ready  for  another  day's  march. 

Hastily  swallowing  a  cup  of  tea  which  my  prudent  Ali  had 
left  for  me,  and  lighting  a  cigar,  I  mounted  my  horse,  and, 
bidding  adieu  to  the  vale  and  refreshing  scenery  of  Goom- 
Gooma,  I  followed  my  party. 


A  WONDERFUL  COUNTRY. 


807 


CHAPTER  IV. 

A  SAlTDSTOmS  PLATBAr—STRANOE  FREAKS  OF  NATXJBE— EXPLOITS  OP  SMBIr 
FUNGUS  AT  FOCADA— AN  ABYSSINIAN  CHURCH  4ND  A  FUNERAL. 

When  I  overtook  the  Captain  and  our  little  caravan,  I  found 
him  in  an  extremely  bad  temper  with  a  servant  named  Hassan, 
who  seemed  indisposed  to  proceed  further. 

The  black-looking  country  wore,  in  truth,  a  very  portentous 
aspect.  It  was  destitute  of  all  vegetation,  save  a  few  dried 
shrubs.  We  rode  over  a  solid  sheet  of  sandstone  miles  in  ex- 
tent. To  our  left  was  a  labyrinthine  ravine,  a  gully  channeled 
in  the  rock,  which  ran  along  for  many  a  mile,  forming  a 
thousand  acute  angles ;  and  on  our  right,  forty  miles  oflF,  rose 
the  Adowa  peaks,  dark  and  undefined. 

Four  hours'  travelling  brought  us  to  the  base  of  a  hill  which 
rose  high  and  grim,  like  another  Gibraltar,  above  the  sterile 
plateau  we  had  just  crossed.  On  all  sides  it  was  rendered  easily 
defensible,  on  account  of  its  scarped  cliflFs,  the  lowest  point  of 
which  was  about  three  hundred  feet  above  the  level  ground. 

Excepting  a  conical  peak  a  thousand  yards'  distance  to  the 
south  of  it,  there  was  no  spot  that  commanded  it,  and  from  its 
vast  size  I  judged  it  was  capable  of  accommodating  a  garrison  of 
10,000  men.  Why  such  a  place  as  this,  by  nature  impregnable, 
was  not  occupied  by  Theodore,  Emperor  of  Abyssinia,  was  a 
source  of  much  speculation  to  me  at  the  time ;  but  it  was  not 
until  after  I  arrived  at  Antalo  that  the  politics  of  the  country 
became  intelligible  to  me. 

On  the  south-eastern  extremity,  a  ridge  of  rock  a  mile 
and  a  half  in  length  connected  this  fortress-like  hill  with  a 
range  of  rolling  mounds  covered  with  short  firs  and  juniper. 
On  either  side  of  the  neck,  which  at  its  widest  part  was  not  a 

X  2 


308 


QOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


mile  wide,  were  ravines  of  the  perpendicular  depth  of  600  feet, 
gradually  expanding  into  broad  valleys,  rich  in  meadow  lands 
and  groves,  and  watered  by  running  streams.  Grame  of  all 
kinds  was  foimd  in  these  valleys.  On  this  neck  of  ground 
was  the  village  and  church  of  Focada,  and  close  to  it,  on  a  rising 
ground,  were  situated  the  tents  of  a  company  of  cavalry,  the 
garrison  of  the  place.  Water  had  been  obtained  here  by  sink- 
ing several  wells,  and  from  these  was  drawn  a  sufficient  quantity 
to  fill  an  extensive  reservoir,  whereat  the  animals  were  watered. 

We  arrived  at  Focada  camp  two  hours  before  sunset,  where 
we  speedily  forgot  our  toils  in  copious  draughts  of  the  finest 
Bohea,  and  savoury  platters  of  curry  and  fricandeaus  cooked 
by  my  epicm^ean  friend  the  Captain. 

Focada  was  so  very  pleasant  and  interesting,  that  the 
Captain  and  I,  after  protracted  consultations,  agreed  to  stay  there 
two  or  three  days,  as  no  movement  of  the  advance  was  expected 
for  a  week  longer. 

The  first  day  was  occupied  by  my  distinguished  friend  and 
companion  in  overhauling  his  miscellaneous  baggage,  which 
was  in  a  sad  pickle  after  the  march  from  Goom-Gooma. 
Several  bottles  of  chutney  and  ciury  powder  were  found  to  have 
been  broken  by  the  jostling  they  had  received,  and  the  volleys 
of  oaths  which  fulminated  about  the  ears  of  his  unlucky  ser- 
vants would  have  gone  far,  if  scientifically  directed,  towards 
blowing  Magdala  to  pieces. 

Fortunately  my  remarkable  and  extraordinary  friend  who  was 
my  messmate  was  an  ardent  admirer  of  the  chase,  and  a  great 
part  of  the  time  we  halted  at  Focada  he  spent  in  hunting. 
At  night  he  would  return,  and  the  feats  of  hunting  he  per- 
formed according  to  his  relations  would  fill  a  very  respectable 
column.  The  first  day  he  shot  two  panthers,  eleven  species  of 
the  gigantic  toucan,  seven  dozen  pigeons,  one  hyaena,  one 
jackal,  and  one  hare,  out  of  which  he  brought  home — that  I, 
his  comrade  and  best  friend,  might  behold  them — one  scraggy- 
looking  hare,  three  shattered  pigeons,  and  one  immense  bird 
which  he  called  the  gigantic  toucan.  The  last-mentioned  bird 
measured  five  feet  from  the  tip  of  the  posterior  feathers  to  the 
beak's  point.  On  questioning  Ali,  who  had  accompanied  him, 
the  boy  said  he  didn't  see  the  Captain  shoot  any  more  than  he 
brought ;  which  probably  was  owing  to  Ali's  defective  vision. 


A  NATIVE  FUNERAL. 


309 


On  the  second  morning  of  our  stay  at  Focada  we  heard  a 
great  noise  which  seemed  to  issue  from  the  village  from  whence 
the  name  of  the  camp  was  derived.  The  village  of  Focada  was 
situated  on  a  hill  a  little  to  our  left,  commanding  the  neck  of 
ground  on  which  our  camp  was  situated.  At  its  base  was  a 
church — the  first  Abyssinian  church  to  be  seen  on  the  road  from 
Senafe  to  Antalo.  This  church,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  trees, 
stood  almost  on  the  brink  of  a  deep  gulf  or  chasm,  which,  start- 
ing from  a  point  a  few  yards  beyond  the  church,  gradually 
widened  into  a  broad  and  extensive  valley.  Between  the  village 
and  the  church  lay  the  little  graveyard  of  the  natives  who  dwelt 
there. 

Our  tent  was  pitched  half  way  between  the  village  and  the 
camp  of  the  garrison,  so  that  we  could  have  a  good  view  of  the 
camp  and  village.  The  noise  and  shouting  drew  near,  and  we 
observed  the  head  of  a  column  of  people  of  both  sexes,  coming 
down  the  hill  at  a  slow  pace ;  every  now  and  then  halting  to 
rest,  giving  utterance  to  some  most  ear-piercing  shrieks  and 
doleful  howls.  After  enquiring  as  to  its  cause,  and  ascertaining 
that  it  was  a  funeral  procession,  I  went  up  to  get  a  clear  view 
of  the  ceremony. 

There  were  about  a  himdred  and  fifty  people,  old  and  young, 
in  the  procession,  preceded  by  a  few  priests.  These  ministers 
of  the  Abyssinian  Church,  clad  in  the  usual  apparel  of  a  well-to- 
do  Abyssinian — viz.,  a  cotton  robe,  with  a  broad  scarlet  band 
running  along  its  entire  length — were  conducting  themselves  in 
a  frantic  manner.  They  tore  oflf  their  turbans,  pulled  at  their 
hair,  and  then,  folding  their  hands  across  their  bosoms,  looking 
inexpressibly  miserable.  Well-thumbed  parchment  books, 
written  in  the  Arabic  tongue,  and  illuminated  with  all  sorts  of 
grotesque  figures  and  devices,  were  in  their  hands,  out  of  which 
they  now  and  then  selected  a  long  prayer  to  some  of  their 
favourite  saints,  and  chanted  it  with  strong  lungs,  with  a  nasal 
twang,  in  the  most  lugubrious  manner.  This  ceremony  went 
on  for  the  space  of  a  few  minutes,  when  they  again  started  on 
their  march,  the  priests  bending  their  bodies.  At  every  few 
paces  they  performed  various  genuflections,  and  lifted  up  their 
voices  in  long-drawn  howls,  expressive  of  extreme  agony. 

When  they  drew  near  the  grave,  the  grey-headed  elders  who 
were  carrying  the  corpse,  carefully  folded  in  its  cerements  made 


810 


COOXA5SIE  A5D  ICAGDAUL 


of  the  cotton  cloth  which  it  wore  daring  life,  advanced  to  the 
edge  of  the  exca^-ation,  and  lowered  the  body  dowly  into  it; 
then  the  priests  chanted  a  prayer  which,  inteqnreted,  read  as 
follows : — 

'  Werkena,  son  of  Yasons,  who  was  the  son  of  Tekee,  is  dead 
Kejoice,  oh  ye  people  I  he  has  gone  to  his  rest,  with  Abraham, 
with  Isaac,  and  with  Jacob.  Let  as  pray  for  those  who  still 
live,  and  pray  for  the  soal  jast  gone  to  doom.  From  vengeance 
and  stem  jadgment  pray  that  his  sool  be  delivered.  How  can 
the  soals  be  delivered  from  tribulation?  By  long  prayers. 
Pray,  then,  that  he  be  sheltered  by  Father  Abraham,  that  he 
may  walk  in  safety  by  the  side  of  Moses,  and  the  prophets. 
Amen,  and  Amen  ! ' 

The  grave  was  then  closed,  an  oblong  mound  of  earth  raised 
over  it  faced  round  with  rocks,  and  a  long  slab  of  slate  stone 
was  placed  at  each  end.  The  company  tlien  scattered,  the  major 
part  following  in  the  wake  of  a  man  who  discoursed  merry 
tunes  on  the  oboe  or  hautbois.  From  the  newly-made  grave 
I  strolled  to  the  church  just  mentioned.  One  of  the  priests, 
who  had  been  chanting  lustily  and  laboriously  at  the  late 
funeral,  promptly  offered  to  be  my  escort  and  cicerone  through 
the  building  for  a  slight  consideration. 

The  consideration  had  to  be  paid  first,  in  the  shape  of  a 
new  Maria  Theresa  dollar,  which  is  worth  eight  cents  more  than 
the  American  dollar. 

A  tower-shaped  construction,  overarched  by  the  branches  of 
two  fine  sycamore  trees,  admitted  us  into  the  building,  set  apart 
for  the  solemnisation  of  Christian  rites  and  ceremonies. 

Of  a  certainty  nothing  in  the  shape  of  a  church,  from  a 
cathedral  down  to  a  backwoods  meeting-house,  found  in  any  other 
quarter  of  the  globe,  save  Africa,  could  have  presented  such  a 
scene  of  filth  and  slovenliness  as  the  building  dedicated  to 
Holy  St.  Michael,  at  Focada.  At  only  a  single  step  from  the 
door,  within  the  structure,  one  realised  the  unutterable  forlom- 
ness  and  abjectness  of  the  place. 

On  the  third  morning  of  our  arrival  at  Focada,  we  packed 
up,  and  started  for  Attigratt,  the  next  station,  which  was  said 
to  be  ten  miles  off. 

The  labours  of  the  pioneers  on  this  road  were  to  some 
purpose.   A  more  diflScult  piece  of  ground  for  the  march  of  an 


SIR  ROBERT  NAPIER  AT  ATTIGRATT. 


311 


army  could  hardly  have  been  found.  Every  mile  of  it  was 
across  an  almost  solid  bed  of  rock,  whose  jagged  points  shot  up- 
ward in  every  direction.  The  levers  and  blasting  tools  were 
very  necessary  here,  and  much  skill  and  tact  were  requisite  to 
convert  the  most  easily  convertible  portion  of  the  rocky  plateau 
into  a  road.  The  road  lay  also  through  forests  of  scrub  oak, 
tamarisk,  and  kolquall.  When  it  was  completed  it  presented 
a  very  fair  specimen  of  military  engineering.  It  was  fifteen 
feet  in  width,  and  made  as  smooth  as  the  circumstances  of  its 
siuToundings  would  permit.  Marching  columns  with  their 
baggage  could  move  easily  along,  and  even  the  carts  of  the 
lowland  train  could  travel  from  the  sea-coast  to  Attigratt. 

A  mile  or  so  beyond  this  village  we  came  to  a  plain,  or  a 
valley  rather,  to  which  we  descended  by  a  gentle  declivity.  In 
this  valley  we  observed  the  first  green  com  visible  on  our  march. 
It  was  an  extensive  patch,  well  watered  by  a  system  which 
answered  its  pui-pose  very  well,  the  furrows  being  fed  by  a  small 
stream. 

In  the  midst  of  this  broad  and  smiling  scene  a  cluster  of 
low-roofed  houses  was  visible,  whither  I  directed  my  steps. 
Larks  sang  merrily  above ;  the  com  was  all  in  a  ripple  and  flow 
before  the  westem  wind,  and  the  tremulous  heat  danced  upon 
it,  as  upon  a  sea,  or  like  the  shadows  of  moving  waters. 

At  my  approach,  nut-brown  girls  with  cunning  chignons  at 
the  back  of  their  heads  crowded  up  to  meet  the  pale-faced 
strangers,  with  as  much  noise  and  vivacity  as  a  bevy  of  school- 
girls returning  home  from  school  in  any  American  city.  Naked 
urchins  came  wriggling  and  wheeling,  delighted,  no  doubt,  at 
the  opportunity  of  exhibiting  their  gymnastic  powers  before 
discerning  persons.  I  requested  some  *haleeb,'  or  milk,  for 
which,  I  said,  I  would  be  willing  to  pay  the  usual  tribute — 
a  bright  new  '  gourshi,'  or  dollar. 

A  young  girl,  graceful  as  a  Hebe,  bore  the  '  haleeb '  to  me, 
and  out  of  it  I  drank  as  deep  a  draught  with  as  much  relish  as 
that  which  the  Sim-god  drank  at  the  hands  of  the  herdsmen  of 
old  Admetus. 

We  came  in  sight  of  Attigratt,  the  head-quarters  of  Sir 
Eobert  Napier,  about  noon. 

The  distance  that  we  had  marched  was  so  short  that  we 
made  up  our  minds  to  travel  another  march  before  halting 


312 


COOMASSIE  AKD  MAGDALA. 


and  endeavour  to  catch  up  with  the  pioneer  party  under  Colonel 
Phayre.  The  Captain  had  shot  two  dozen  pigeons  on  the  road, 
to  present  to  Sir  Robert  Napier.  As  he  departed  to  the  camp, 
I  struck  oflF  to  the  right  to  view  the  village  of  Attigratt. 

Attigratt  is  situated  on  a  gentle  eminence  in  the  middle  of 
a  plain.  The  feature  of  the  place  is  a  castle  built  of  adobes. 
At  one  end  of  it  is  a  square  tower,  surmounted  by  four  turret- 
like  projections  built  on  projecting  rafters.  To  civilised  eyes  it 
seemed  more  like  a  caricature  than  a  house  for  defence  and 
built  for  strength. 

At  the  time  we  passed  by  this  castle,  it  was  inhabited  by 
tlie  wife  of  a  chief  who  was  in  the  power  of  Theodore.  This 
lady  considered  herself  inconsolable  because  her  princely  hus- 
band was  absent,  and  had  vowed  the  foolish  vow  that  she  would 
never  allow  the  sun  to  shine  or  the  rain  to  beat  upon  her  head 
again  until  her  lord  should  return  to  cheer  her  heart.* 

Near  the  stronghold  was  a  church — undoubtedly  the  finest 
I  have  seen  in  Abyssinia,  save  one  at  Chelicut.  It  was  surrounded 
by  magnificent  kolquall  trees,  whose  shade  was  truly  grateful, 
and  cast  a  kind  of  soothing  calm  about  the  place.  The  priests — 
very  respectable  old  fellows,  with  turbans,  larger  than  ordinary, 
rising  high  and  steep  above  the  face — came  and  greeted  me  with 
many  a  salutation  and  salaam. 

My  desire  to  visit  their  church  was  intimated  to  them  with 
the  usual  backsheesh,  and  a  pantomimic  explanation  of  the 
reason  of  my  gift.  This  pantomime  one  learns  very  easily,  and 
is  a  great  aid  to  acquaintance,  making,  when  thorough  in  it, 
the  luxuries  of  the  country — such  as  milk,  eggs,  ghee,  bread, 
and  oats — fiow  in  upon  you  so  long  as  your  treasury  box 
permits. 

The  priests  understood  the  use  of  the  gift,  and  I  followed 
them  as  they  proceeded  through  the  grove  in  the  direction  of 
the  portals,  then  wide  open.  Through  a  clean  coiurtyard,  and 
then  to  a  square  entrance  leading  to  the  interior,  the  priests 
shuflSed  themselves  along,  as  if  walking  were  an  exercise  not 
much  in  their  province. 

After  passing  through  the  entrance  or  porch  of  the  building, 

>  For  the  satisfaction  of  readers,  I  will  state  that  the  chief  was  delivered  from 
bondage  at  the  capture  of  Magdala.  The  author  arrived  at  Attigratt  the  same  day 
that  the  chief  came  in  sight  of  his  castle  walls. 


SANCTA  SANCTORA  OF  A  NATIVE  CHURCH. 


313 


we  descended  one  step  into  a  ^lobby  or  hall  running  around 
the  entire  circumference  of  the  church.  The  walls  of  this 
circular  building  were  constructed  of  stone,  plastered  over  with 
an  inch  of  mud  laid  as  evenly  as  possible. 

On  this  altar  was  painted  with  queerest  devices  the 
Abyssinian  cartoons.  First,  there  was  the  picture  of  St.  George 
for  ever  threatening  the  dragon  writhing  under  his  horse's  feet, 
with  an  admiring  group  of  noble  ladies  and  gentlemen  viewing, 
with  intensest  satisfaction  on  their  faces,  the  death-throes  of 
the  man-devouring  enemy.  The  interesting  crowd  of  ladies 
and  gentlemen  with  their  red,  blue,  and  green  garnitures,  and 
enormous  feathers,  was  supposed  to  represent  Pharaoh  and  his 
court.  The  second  cartoon  illustrated  in  a  remarkable  way 
the  'Last  Supper,'  whereat  thirteen  apostles  were  supposed 
to  be  partaking  of  the  feast.  The  third  represented  the  cruci- 
fixion of  poor  St.  Peter,  whose  agonies  must  have  been  intense, 
so  faithfully  had  the  native  artist  endeavoured  to  paint  the 
contortions  of  the  man  undergoing  such  a  cruel  maftyrdom. 
Others  there  were,  sketched  on  the  wall,  who  suffered  torments 
in  their  martyrisation  for  their  faith.  Before  I  could  view  with 
my  sacrilegious  eyes  the  Sancta  Sanctora  of  the  church,  another 
dollar  was  demanded  from  me,  the  tribute  was  paid,  and  the 
priest  led  me  into  the  Holy  of  Holies — the  interior  of  the 
charmed  circle,  round  which  I  had  been  promenading  preceded 
by  the  cicerone. 

There  was  nothing  very  edifying  in  the  sight — a  rough  desk, 
with  a  large  Maltese  cross  of  brass  fronting  it,  before  which 
the  priests  offered  their  orisons  when  officiating  on  the  Sabbath, 
kept  every  Saturday.  There  was  also  a  big  book  very  like  a 
Bible,  bound  strongly  in  leather,  and  clasped,  lying  on  a  stand. 
The  floor  was  not  very  clean ;  in  some  places  it  was  so  littered 
with  straw,  that  I  imagine  some  imholy  vagrants  must  have 
laid  down  to  sleep  there. 

From  the  church  I  stepped  out  into  the  open  air,  and  from 
the  eminence  whereon  the  church  and  castle  was  built  the 
entire  plain  of  Attigratt  was  visible.  In  the  centre  of  it,  like 
snow-heai>s,  stood  the  cleanly  white  tents  of  the  English  army, 
who  had  marched  thus  far  imder  their  General  to  release  their 
countrymen. 

Now  and  then  a  stray  laugh  could  be  heard,  very  English- 


314 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


like,  so  hearty  and  sonorous  it  was — a  side-splitting  laugh, 
sounding  at  that  distance  as  if  a  strong  frame  were  in  a  laughing 
paroxysm.  Guards  and  sentries  in  scarlet  imiform,  with 
gleaming  steel  in  their  hands,  paced  backwards  near  some 
official  head-quarters,  or  with  watchful  eye  guarded  the  commis- 
sariat containing  the  real  sinew  of  the  campaign.  Officers  in 
splendid  uniforms,  with  rattling  sabres  and  jingling  spurs, 
hurried  to  and  fro  on  horseback,  conveying  orders  to  different 
regimental  head-quarters ;  horses  and  mules,  tethered  in  rows  by 
the  himdreds,  neighed  and  brayed  hungrily  for  their  scanty 
rations — for  it  was  now  noon-day,  the  period  when  they  are  all 
fed  and  watered.  Scores  of  curious  natives  stood  in  groups 
round  some  sight  extraordinary  for  them,  and  I  daresay  were 
commenting  wisely  on  the  queer  things  they  saw. 

A  few  miles  beyond  this  exciting  and  strange  scene  on  an 
Abyssinian  plain,  the  bold  mountains,  curved  into  bays  and 
headlands,  loomed  up  like  a  coast  of  cloudland  veiled  in 
amethytft  light,  serene  in  the  noonday  sun.  An  indefinable 
sense  of  melancholy  crept  over  you  while  you  looked.  Beyond 
this,  again,  in  tier  upon  tier  rose  the  dim  mountains,  sublime 
and  mysterious  in  their  lofty  height,  serving  as  an  effectual 
barrier  between  the  Abyssinians  and  the  cruel  tribes  of  the 
Donakil  plains. 

After  gazing  on  this  scene  I  bethought  myself  of  my  servants 
wending  their  way  uncaring  and  imcared  for ;  and,  though  I 
wished  to  make  myself  known  to  Sir  Eobert  Napier,  I  thought 
it  better,  as  the  Advance  Brigade  would  march  upon  the 
morrow,  to  proceed  on  my  way  and  endeavour  to  keep  ahead  of 
them  and  close  up  with  the  pioneer  force,  who  were  then  far  in 
advance  making  the  roads.  So  I  galloped  on,  my  horse's  heels 
kicking  up  a  cloud  of  dust,  to  the  intense  delight  of  the  rabid 
urchins  who  rushed  forward  before  him  as  he  approached  them, 
with  much  of  the  same  defiance  and  daring  on  their  features  as 
our  more  civilised  children  at  home  exliibit  when  with  mad 
audacity  they  await  the  approach  of  the  thundering  locomotive, 
and  then  bound  off,  barely  escaping  being  crushed  to  death. 

My  reveries  and  visits  to  the  grotesque  castle  and  church  of 
Attigratt  had  consumed  some  time,  and  had  enabled  my 
servants  to  proceed  several  miles  before  I  caught  up  with 
them. 


A  DINNER  FIT  FOR  THE  IMMORTALS. 


315 


From  Atiigratt  the  road  led  through  a  grove  of  fir  and 
juniper,  and  clumpB  of  the  kolquall,  very  picturesque  to  look 
at,  but  withal  very  lonely,  and  suggestive  of  suitable  places  for 
ambuscade  by  the  robber  bands  of  which  we  had  heard  often 
from  the  timid  natives,  who  mysteriously  hinted  of  ambulant 
Gallas  waiting  in  secret  places  for  the  unwary. 

No  such  bands,  however,  did  we  encounter  on  om*  march 
that  day,  and  we  arrived  at  a  leafy  grove  situated  chiefly  imder 
the  shadow  of  amorphous  and  massive  rocks,  over  which  our 
route  lay  the  next  day.  In  the  centre  of  tliis  grove  we  pitched 
our  little  tent,  and  against  a  fallen  sycamore  log  built  our  camp 
fire.  The  cooks  prepared  their  pots  and  pans  and  dishes.  Ali 
took  the  leathern  bottles  to  a  spring  of  clear  fresh  water.  The 
syce,  though  tired  and  sulky  after  his  long,  weary  march  over 
the  rough  rocks,  vented  his  ill-humour  by  volleys  of  objurgating 
adjectives  freely  bestowed  upon  the  horses  and  himself,  but 
finally  led  the  animals  to  the  water ;  and  I,  part  lord  and 
master  of  the  encampment,  revelled  on  the  warm  blankets  and 
bufialo  robes,  and  waited  patiently  for  the  arrival  of  the  Captain, 
who  had  already  arrogated  to  himself,  undisputed  by  me,  the 
chief  control  of  our  caravan. 

In  the  midst  of  an  intensely  interesting  soliloquy,  the 
Captain's  squat  form  suddenly  broke  the  perspective  of  my 
vision  radiant  with  unusual  good  humour. 

'  By  the  bye,'  said  he,  abruptly,  '  what  have  you  for  dinner  ? 
Let's  have  a  roaring  dinner  fit  for  the  Immortals ;  I  will  be 
cook,  and  you  be  bottle-washer.  What  shall  we  have,  eh  ?' 
And,  raising  his  fingers,  he  proceeded  to  enumerate  delect- 
able dishes,  which  were  concoctable  from  the  box  of  stores  in 
his  possession. 

'  First  of  all  we'll  have  mulligatawny  soup  ;  and  for  entries, 
we'll  have — let  me  see :  a  bufialo  hump  chop ;  roast  hind-quarter 
of  a  kid,  supplied  by  the  commissariat  to-day  out  of  piure 
regard  for  me ;  roast  duck — one  I  saved  from  a  lot  I  shot 
to-day.  Oh,  yes  ;  and  then  there  are  the  ibis.  By  Jove,  we'll 
have  hashed  ibis,  boiled  commissariat  beef,  rice,  onion  sauce, 
and  ciu-ry,  all  of  them  to  be  finished  up  with  real  Mocha  cofiee  ; 
and  before  tumbling  in  for  the  night  we'll  have  a  drink  together 
from  my  visitor's  flask,  eh  1    What  say  you,  old  boy  ? ' 

*  Glorious ! '  said  I ;  *  and,  to  use  the  words  of  the  Bard  of 


316 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Avon,  may  good  digestion  wait  on  appetite,  and  health  on 
both!' 

'  Bravo  I  ah-haw  I  ah-haw  I  oh  my  ! '  shouted  the  old  boy, 
rubbing  his  bald  head,  and  pulling  his  side  whiskers,  and 
kicking  his  stumpy  legs  quite  frantically,  through  an  enthu- 
siastic impulse. 

Mohammed,  Hassan,  Habibullah,  and  Ali  were  at  once  set 
to  work.  The  fire  roared  and  crackled,  and  the  servants  flitted 
backwards  and  forwards;  and  as  day  settled  gradually  and 
kindly  into  night,  and  the  toweriilg  cliflfs  and  lonely  plain  ex- 
panding from  view,  teeming  with  green  groves,  became  bathed 
in  the  glow  of  the  declining  sun,  delighting  the  eye,  supper,  or 
rather  dinner,  was  announced. 

Every  dish  was  delicious.  We  both  had  good  appetites  and 
healthful  digestion,  and  we  lingered  over  the  feast  till  far  into 
the  night — the  Captain  recounting  marvellous  adventures,  hair- 
breadth escapes,  love  stories  truly  romantic,  gallops  over 
glorious  plains  by  moonlight  in  India ;  stories  of  his  Nilotic 
experiences,  wherein  Fatima  and  Zuleika  figured  conspicuously ; 
Don  Juan  scrapes  with  Miss  Something ;  tales  of  forlorn  hopes 
at  Sebastopol ;  of  a  white  face  resembling  the  Captain's  lying 
for  two  weeks  in  the  trenches  at  Inkermann  ;  of  being  resus- 
citated from  that  two  weeks'  death-like  sleep,  and  a  four  months' 
lying  in  bed  at  Scutari  Hospital ;  of  his  gallant  Arab  '  Emir,'  of 
the  matchless  Nedjed  breed  ;  of  his  exploits  as  aahreur  on  the 
Texan  prairies  against  Federals  and  Comanches ;  of  bush- 
fights  in  miasmatic  swamps,  and  many  other  wild,  interesting, 
marvellous,  astounding  novelties.  Are  they  not  all  written  on 
the  books  of  the  recording  angel?  who,  no  doubt,  is  well 
acquainted  with  phonography ;  otherwise,  hard  indeed  must 
have  been  his  task  to  write  down  all  the  interesting  stories  of 
my  dear  friend  and  brave  messmate.  Captain  the  Honourable 
Mr.  Smelfungus. 

From  Attigratt  to  Mai-Wahiz  is  a  distance  of  fourteen 
miles.  On  this  stage  we  passed  through  an  exceedingly  wild 
country.  For  three  hours  our  road  lay  over  a  vast  platform  of 
sandstone  rock,  and  through  its  extreme  ruggedness  it  proved 
very  fatiguing  to  both  men  and  animals.  But  halfway  to 
Mai-Wahiz  the  scene  changed.  Another  plain  similar  to  that 
near  Attigratt,  of  the  same  arid  features,  expanded  before  us, 
with  its  dead  level  only  relieved  by  a  few  green  clumps. 


ROBBER  STRONGHOLDS. 


317 


To  this  plain  we  descended,  picking  our  way  daintily  to 
avoid  unsettling  the  toppling  boulders  on  the  hill  flank. 

As  we  descended,  the  sandstone  platform  over  which  we  had 
been  travelling  receded  shai-ply  to  the  right  into  lofty  and 
scarped  sierras,  rifted  and  split  into  many  a  fissure.  These 
rifts  and  abradations  form  excellent  coverts,  from  whence  issue 
numerous  carnivorous  animals  every  evening  on  their  nocturnal 
ranges  in  quest  of  food. 

The  poorest  class  of  peasants,  like  the  ancient  Troglodytes, 
also  find  these  cavernous  recesses  in  the  cliffs  admirable  habita- 
tions, and  a  protection  against  cruel  chiefs  and  imjust  masters. 
But,  growing  bold  from  impunity,  and  waxing  stronger  and 
insolent  with  numbers,  the  peasants  generally  select  a  chief 
from  amongst  themselves,  and  become  the  oppressors  instead  of 
the  oppressed.  After  amassing  wealth  through  the  success  of 
their  depredations,  they  not  unfrequently  take  to  building  a 
town  upon  the  top  of  the  most  inaccessible  hill,  and  fortify  it 
xnih  palisades  and  moats,  whence  they  issue  out  periodically, 
and  pounce  upon  a  confiding  farmer  and  take  from  him  his 
wives,  children,  cattle,  and  substance. 

This  is  the  history  of  most  of  the  towns  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood, and,  in  fact,  of  those  of  the  whole  of  Abyssinia. 
What  the  Abyssinians  are  to-day,  not  many  centuries  ago  the 
warlike  British  barons  were  ;  or  the  Highlanders  who  used 
to  make  many  a  wild  foray  upon  the  more  peaceful  burghers 
of  the  Lowlands;  or  the  robber  counts  and  barons  of  the 
Ehine. 

I  was  led  to  make  these  reflections  by  seeing  the  numerous 
fortified  towns,  built  like  eyries  on  the  numerous  conical  hills 
rising  far  above  the  level  of  the  plain,  in  every  direction.  The 
warning  voice  of  the  watchful  native  warder  bawled  out  in  un- 
mistakeable  accents  of  anger  if  we  advanced  near  the  base  of 
tlie  fortified  cone  with  the  intention  of  purchasing  any  neces- 
saries, such  as  eggs,  butter,  milk,  whey,  or  bread.  Near  each 
hill  was  a  well  belonging  to  the  village  on  its  summit,  and 
these  wells  were  the  only  places  where  water  was  procurable  on 
the  marcli.  We  generally  camped  near  some  pools  of  very 
dirty  water — compelled  to  do  so,  because  there  were  no  others  ; 
and  it  was  considered  imsafe,  imtil  the  army  had  passed  through, 
to  place  much  confidence  in  the  Abyssinians. 


818 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Instead  of  stopping  at  Mai-Wahiz,  as  we  had  designed  when 
we  started  in  the  morning,  we  pushed  on  to  Ad-Abaga,  where 
a  plentiful  supply  of  water  was  to  be  found. 

Ad-Abaga  is  situated  in  a  basin-like  valley  two  miles  in 
extent,  surrounded  by  a  range  of  heights,  crowned  by  ^dllage8 
inhabited  by  very  predatory  and  fighting-loving  people  ;  who 
strange  to  say,  though  all  more  or  less  related  to  one  another, 
manage  to  live  on  wonderfully  good  terms  with  themselves, 
though  not  with  the  rest  of  the  outside  world. 

We  camped  one  night  at  this  place,  and  pushed  on  to 
Dongola  next  morning,  a  station  situated  just  twelve  miles  from 
Ad-Abaga.  This  march  lay  through  a  very  interesting  country. 
Much  labour  had  been  employed  upon  some  portions  of  it  to 
make  it  available  for  the  coming  army.  For  the  first  three 
miles  we  travelled  through  a  very  tame  and  uninteresting 
country,  mere  up-hill  and  down- hill  work,  with  a  village  of 
conical  huts,  standing  on  the  siunmit  of  every  eminence, 
proudly  exclusive  from  the  people  of  the  plain. 

Then  we  journeyed  over  a  road  cleared  through  a  perfect 
jungle  of  low  brushwood.  Towering  above  the  shiubs  were 
tall  columnar  juniper  and  fir  trees,  their  branches  darkly 
waving  and  crooning  under  the  strong  gusts  of  wind  which  at 
certain  hours  of  the  day  blew  from  the  Eastern  seas  across  the 
Donakil  desert ;  then  through  a  wilderness  of  boulders,  some  of 
gigantic  size,  some  small,  all  lying  aroimd  in  the  utmost  con- 
fusion imaginable ;  anon  through  a  dark  gorge  where,  on  the 
summits  of  the  flanking  rocky  walls,  a  small  band  might  put 
to  flight  an  army ;  and  again  through  a  forest  of  shrubs  and 
through  long  avenues  of  noble  sycamore  trees,  in  whose  branches 
disported  the  monkeys,  whence  issued  the  warbling  notes  of  the 
butcher-bird,  and  whence  the  gay  clock-bird  flung  his  glad 
piping  abroad,  as  if  to  welcome  the  white  strangers  who  were 
invading  their  eoimtry. 

Sadly  at  variance  with  these  scenes  were  the  buflf-coloured 
masses  of  granite,  gneiss,  and  the  dark  patches  of  slate-stone 
looming  up  grim  and  silent,  whereon  no  bird  hopped,  whence 
no  lively  song  of  the  feathered  choristers  issued. 

Passing  rapidly  by  these  scenes  and  turning  round  an  angle, 
the  towering  baobab  was  seen,  whose  branches  were  heavy  with 
scores  of  Abyssinian  monkeys,  who,  upon  our  approach,  snarled 


VIEWS  OF  THE  LAND. 


319 


their  disapprobation,  and  irreverently  retired  up  the  slope  of 
the  nearest  mountain,  barking  and  growling  their  discontent. 

We  passed  the  baobab  trees  also,  and  our  path  woimd  its 
way  around  the  slopes  of  a  mountain  so  high  that  its  sunamit 
seemed  to  strike  the  clouds,  and  of  a  depth  so  profound 
that  the  head  became  giddy  on  beholding  it.  We  hugged  the 
slope  and  resolutely  turned  our  gaze  away,  to  admire  rather 
the  varieties  of  rock  of  which  the  mountain  is  composed ;  to 
look  at  diagonal  layers  of  porphyry,  half-biu^ied  masses  of  scoria 
and  soapstone  ;  to  examine  the  clay,  slate,  and  quartz  running 
in  serpentine  veins  far  up  out  of  sight ;  to  pick  up  cornelians 
and  pieces  of  jasper  stone;  and  thus  we  travelled  imtil  the 
green  valley  of  Dongola  was  visible,  in  the  centre  of  which  two 
or  three  tents  were  to  be  seen  like  lime-heaps  pitched  in  the 
midst  of  luxurious  grass. 

From  Dongola,  after  one  night's  rest,  we  journeyed  on  to 
Agulla  river,  a  distance  of  ten  miles.  Before  the  sun  was 
fairly  up  we  were  on  the  road,  having  contented  ourselves  with 
a  simple  cup  of  tea  before  starting  again  up  steep  hills,  rough 
with  craggy  obstructions.  Over  rolling  plateaus,  past  smiling 
pastoral  valleys,  by  robbers'  roosts  and  peasants'  caves,  we 
marched  ever  southward.  The  sun  rose ;  its  rays  pierced  the 
seeming  belt  of  mist  ahead  of  us,  mantling  it  in  tints  of 
exquisite  loveliness,  and  flushing  it  with  delicate  hues. 

When  the  mist  disappeared  a  line  of  dark  hills  clothed  with 
kolquall  distinctly  made  themselves  known  to  us  by  their  height. 
We  crossed  the  horizon  that  we  saw  an  hour  previous  only  to  see 
another  cloud-fenced  range,  grimmer  in  aspect,  bleaker  and 
more  terrible,  and  inconceivable  as  the  sea  to  him  who  has  not 
beheld  Ethiopian  mountains. 

We  were  aware  that  stretching  and  expanding  far  away  and 
wide  as  space  lay  other  lands  beyond  that,  and  unknown  deserts, 
where  yet  no  man  had  trod.  Still  the  sun  beat  remorselessly 
on  our  heads;  still  the  same  scenes  repeated  themselves  over 
and  over  again. 

Patient  and  uncomplaining,  the  animals  keep  their  regular 
walk,  seemingly  immindful  of  the  heat  or  the  blows  heavily  be- 
stowed upon  them  by  our  cutcha  wallahs. 

Smelfimgus  was  ahead  of  the  little  colunm ;  his  wide-spread- 
ing solar  topee  shadowed  his  head  and  face,  and  nothing  of 


320 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


either  was  visible;  nor  could  I  guess  whether  he  was  sleeping  or 
dreaming,  or  with  eyes  wide  awake  diligently  observant  for  a 
chance  to  do  or  say  something  to  break  the  dead,  imjoyous 
silence,  while  I  brought  up  the  rear. 

My  horse  looked  as  dejected  as  I  felt  sure  I  must  have  looked. 
I  had  examined  the  blue  sky,  and  even  winked  fiercely  once  or 
twice  at  the  fierce  sun,  and  scanned  the  horizon  dozens  of 
times ;  I  had  looked  in  vain  for  something  wrong  in  the  har- 
ness of  the  mules  ;  I  had  watched  carefully  the  conduct  of  the 
servants,  to  find  cause  for  reprimand,  and  show  who  was  master; 
I  had  mentally  sketched  scores  of  caricatures  on  the  squat 
broad  back  of  the  Captain,  and  imaged  himself  sitting  in  his 
huge  solar  topee  rowing  on  liake  Ashangi,  for  he  had  promised 
seriously  to  do  it. 

What  could  I  do  to  relieve  the  distressing  tedium  of 
marching  ?    The  question  resolved  itself. 

With  my  eyes  wide  open  in  the  broad  hot  sunlight,  I  fell  to 
day-dreaming — most  beatified  of  luxuries,  fancying  something 
novel  and  strange,  something  exciting  and  interesting.  A 
queer  thought  struck  me,  and  I  laughed  ;  at  which  Ali,  my 
bold  siuTujee,  tuined  on  me  a  pair  of  large  black  eyes,  surveying 
me  in  mute  astonishment,  as  if  asking  *  What  can  you  find  to 
laugh  at,  master,  in  Habesh  Land  ? ' 

The  Captain  tm*ned  his  bullet  head  around,  and  the  green 
topee  swung  aroimd  like  a  tuna-table.  He  looked  upon  me 
with  the  greatest  astonishment ;  I  blushed,  looking,  however, 
far  away  in  advance  of  him.  I  shouted  *  Camp !  Camp  1 ' 
Wonderful  resuscitation  I 

The  mules  brayed,  our  horses  whinnied,  the  Captain  trolled 
out  a  song, '  La-la-la-ety,'  positively  the  first  tune  I  ever  heard 
him  sing  I  Our  Arab  surrujees  and  Hindostanee  cutcha  wallahs 
crooned  out  most  doleful  notes  out  of  four  pairs  of  lips,  expres- 
sive of  great  relief  and  heartfelt  thankfulness,  to  be  increased 
when  we  arrived  at  camp,  which  was  on  the  banks  of  a  river, 
the  first  river  we  had  seen  in  Abyssinia,  under  the  shade  of  a 
sycamore,  near  the  ruins  of  a  temple. 

The  ruins  near  to  which  we  were  encamped  were  those  of  a 
temple  erected  by  King  Lala-ba  in  the  eleventh  century  to  St. 
Dorcas,  a  Greek  saint.  This  was  one  of  several  built  by  that 
pious  monarch  in  different  parts  of  the  empire.   It  had  been 


CASTLE  BET^'KEN  MAI  TTAHIZ  AND  AD-ABAGA. 


A  BUINED  TEMPLE. 


821 


falling  gradually  to  decay  on  account  of  the  incursions  made 
by  the  Mahomedan  tribes  into  the  province  of  Enderta,  through 
a  portion  of  which  the  river  AguUa  runs  ;  and,  upon  King  Saba- 
gadis'  accession  to  the  throne  of  Abyssinia,  that  monarch 
heard  it  rumoured  that  much  treasure  was  buried  in  the  place 
by  his  predecessor,  and  at  once  ordered  search  to  be  made. 
This  search,  of  course,  necessitated  the  demolition  of  the  build- 
ing. The  treasure  was  found,  however,  and  the  ancient  fane 
remains  in  precisely  the  same  condition  as  the  workmen  of  the 
greedy  king  left  it.  Two  pillars  only  are  left  standing  now, 
but  in  some  portions  the  marble  pavement  is  still  intact.  The 
river,  called  solely  by  that  name  from  courtesy,  as  rivers  were 
so  scarce  in  the  coimtry  we  were  travelling,  was  a  rapid  little 
stream,  only  ankle  deep  in  its  deepest  parts,  and  but  a  few 
yards  in  width,  into  which  our  animals  and  ourselves  plunged^ 
and  where  we  revelled  for  half  an  hour  or  so. 

At  the  camp  of  AguUa  we  found  Colonel  W.  L,  Merewether 
and  Mr.  Clements  Markham,  the  distinguished  geographer  of 
the  Expedition. 

Colonel  Merewether,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  the  pioneer 
officer  who  first  landed  in  Abyssinia  to  discover  a  feasible  route 
to  Magdala.  A  gentleman  more  suitable  for  the  work  in  hand — 
after  seeing  him  face  to  face — would,  I  judged,  have  been  difficult 
to  find.  He  seemed  incarnate  activity,  and  the  very  embodi- 
ment of  promptitude;  he  had  such  extraordinary  perceptive 
faculties,  so  quick  and  decided  a  spirit. 

Colonel  Merewether  was  a  Colonel  of  the  Scinde  Horse,  but 
acted  as  Political  fiesident  at  Aden  before  coming  to  Abyssinia. 
Hassam  was  a  former  secretary  of  his  while  at  Aden,  and  it  was 
through  the  influence  of  Layard  of  Nineveh  that  that  Armenian 
gentleman  was  appointed  as  envoy  to  Theodore.  That  selection, 
in  my  opinion,  was  most  unfortunate ;  but  Merewether  adhered 
to  the  belief  that  no  better  could  have  been  found. 

The  Colonel  was  the  very  soul  of  politeness  and  affability ; 
and  it  was  delightful  to  hear  a  man  who  could  talk  without 
any  affectation,  and  act  in  a  natural  way. 

During  the  three  days  we  rested  at  Agulla  the  Captain  went 
shooting.  At  nightfall  he  generally  returned  with  dozens  of 
guinea-fowl,  quail,  ducks,  ibis,  wild  geese,  and  turkeys.  He 

Y 


322 


GOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


said  he  had  shot  three  wild  boars,  but  I  never  saw  one  bristle  of 
them  though  I  should  much  like  to  have  seen  them. 

On  the  fourth  morning  we  struck  our  tent,  packed  our 
baggage,  loaded  our  animals,  and  started  on  our  journey  to 
Antalo. 

.  Very  uninteresting  was  the  march  from  Agulla  river  to 
Antalo.  We  arrived  at  Dorello,  19  miles  distant  from  Agulla, 
on  the  evening  of  the  first  day ;  Haikhullut,  9  miles,  the  second 
day ;  thence  to  Antalo,  14  miles,  on  the  third  day. 


NAPIER'S  PROCLAMATION. 


323 


CHAPTER  V. 

NAPIER*fi  PEOCLAMATION— DIPLOMACY — ^MAJOR  GRANT— MBBTINO  BETWEBH 
NAPIER  AND  PRINCOS  KU88AI — AFFECTING  SCENES. 

While  the  redoubtable  Captain  and  myself  were  travelling  to 
Antalo  with  what  cheer  and  good  humour  we  might,  an  in- 
teresting scene  was  being  enacted  a  few  marches  back,  in  which 
an  English  general  and  an  Abyssinian  prince  were  the  prin- 
cipal actors  ;  and  no  better  place  can  be  found  in  this  book  to 
describe  it  than  in  this  chapter. 

His  Excellency,  Lieut.-Gen.  Sir  Robert  Napier,  Com- 
mander-in-Chief of  the  Abyssinian  Expedition,  on  landing  in 
Abyssinia,  issued  the  following  proclamation  to  the  governors, 
the  chiefs,  the  religious  orders,  and  the  people  of  Abyssinia  : — 

*It  is  known  to  you  that  Theodorus,  King  of-  Abyssinia, 
detains  in  captivity  the  British  Consul,  Cameron  ;  the  British 
Envoy,  Rassam  ;  and  many  others,  in  violation  of  the  laws  of 
all  civilised  nations.  All  friendly  persuasion  having  failed  to 
obtain  their  release,  my  Sovereign  has  commanded  me  to  lead 
an  army  to  liberate  them.  All  who  befriend  the  prisoners  or 
assist  in  their  liberation  shall  be  well  rewarded ;  but  those  who 
may  injure  them  shall  be  severely  pimished  when  the  time 
shall  arrive  for  the  march  of  a  British  Army  through  your 
country.  Bear  in  mind,  people  of  Abyssinia,  that  the  Queen 
of  England  has  no  imfriendly  feelings  towards  you,  and  no 
design  against  your  country  or  your  liberty.  Your  religious 
establishments,  your  persons,  and  property  shall  be  carefully 
protected.  All  supplies  for  my  soldiers  shall  be  paid  for.  No 
peaceable  inhabitants  shall  be  molested.  The  sole  object  for 
which  the  British  force  has  been  sent  to  Abyssinia  is  the  liber- 

T  2 


324 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


ation  of  Her  Majesty's  servants  and  others  unjustly  detained  as 
captives ;  and  as  soon  as  that  object  shall  have  been  effected, 
it  will  be  withdrawn. 

'  There  is  no  intention  to  occupy  permanently  any  portion 
of  the  Abyssinian  territory,  or  to  interfere  with  the  government 
of  the  country. 

(Signed)  *R.  Napier/ 

A  copy  of  this  well-worded  and  modest  proclamation  was 
received  by  Dajatchmatch  Kussai,  Eas  of  Tigre,  who  in  plain 
Anglo-Saxon  is  entitled  General  Kussai,  Prince  of  Tigre.  On 
the  receipt  of  the  letter  the  Prince  manifested  his  admiration 
of  it,  and  desired  to  see  the  writer,  or  an  envoy  from  him,  who 
should  have  the  power  to  arrange  for  a  meeting  between  the 
writer  and  the  Prince  ;  as  he,  the  writer,  would  be  compelled 
to  travel  througli  his  country  to  Magdala,  and  it  would  be 
highly  politic  for  both  sides  to  be  friends.  The  following  is 
the  letter  sent  by  Prince  Kussai  to  Sir  Robert  Napier,  which 
to  my  taste  is  as  well  worded  as  the  English  chief's  : — 

'In  the  name  of  THt  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holt 
Ghost. 

'  Letter  sent  by  Dajatchmatch  Kussai,  head  of  the  Chiefs  of 
Ethiopia,  to  reach  the  Chief  of  the  English  soldiers. 
'  How  are  you  ? 
'  Very  well  ? 

'  By  Christ's  grace  I  have  recovered  the  throne  of  my  ances- 
tors, of  Mikael,  of  Welda  Selasse,  of  Sabagadis.  Of  old  we  are 
house  friends,  from  Consul  Salt  till  down  to  Plowden.  I  expected 
to  receive  a  letter  from  you ;  but,  as  it  has  been  retarded,  I  have 
sent  myself.  I  know  not  what  you  have  come  for ;  if  I  knew, 
it  would  please  me.  We  are  home  friends.  I  am  sending  by 
Muroja,  the  son  of  Atu  Waiku,  who  knows  my  language  and 
yours.  I  am  sending  (what  I  have  in)  my  heart,  and  you  too 
send  to  me  (what  you  have  in)  your  heart.  In  the  year  1860 
from  Christ  in  the  time  of  John  the  Evangelist,  in  the  month 
of  Hadar  the  18th  written  Wednesday. 

(Signed)       Dajatchmatch  Kussai.* 
Head  seal  of  the  Chief  of  (Levi  of  India)  Ethiopia. 


NAPIER  AS  A  DIPLOMAT. 


325 


In  the  above,  Prince  Kussai,  we  are  led  to  believe,  lias 
laid  bare  his  heart — in  short,  sent  (what  he  has  in)  his  heart ; 
and  Sir  Bobert  Napier  is  politely  requested,  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  (what  he  has  in)  his 
heart. 

For  purposes  of  polity — and  the  English  General  will  show 
himself,  as  we  proceed,  to  be  not  only  a  warrior  chief,  but  a 
diplomat  of  the  first  rank — a  gentleman,  Major  James  Grant, 
C.B.,  of  Nile  Exploration  notoriety,  was  sent  with  much 
backsheesh  to  the  head  of  all  the  chiefs  of  Ethiopia- 
Major  Grant  was  well  received  as  the  English  chief's  envoy — 
treated  to  the  best,  and  shown  every  civility,  and  a  meeting 
was  finally  arranged  to  be  held  between  the  English  and  the 
Tigrean  chiefs. 

Sej  Muroja  was  sent  as  the  Tigrean  ambassador,  and  he 
was  received  with  all  due  solemnity  by  the  solemn-looking 
General  Napier  and  his  solemn-looking  staflF,  all  looking 
specially  solemn  and  decorous  for  the  occasion.  Complicated 
military  evolutions,  sham  fights,  long  rolls  and  much  trumpet- 
blowing  and  drum-beating  were  shown  to  him  ;  and  the  decorous 
Tigrean  ambassador  departed  on  his  way  back  to  his  chiefs 
thoroughly  perplexed  and  mystified  by  what  he  had  seen,  but 
certain  of  one  certainty,  that  the  *Feringhees'  were  the  most 
remarkable  people  he  had  ever  beheld — which  was  very  true. 
But  it  seemed  to  those  suspicious  of  his  friendly  intention* 
that  Prince  Kussai  was  a  kind  of  a  Fabius  Cunctator. 

He  sent  messengers  again,  and  from  afar  viewed  the  result. 
The  hearty  and  kind  reception  which  they  one  and  all  re- 
ceived finally  decided  the  cunctative  Kussai,  and  a  day  was 
named  and  a  place  appointed,  whereat  the  two  *  home  friends ' 
should  meet. 

On  the  evening  previous  to  the  day  of  the  meeting.  Sir  Robert 
Napier  moved  on  with  the  2nd  Ikigade  to  occupy  the  station 
called  Ad-Abaga.  The  Tigrean  chief  was  to  have  encamped  at 
a  place  called  Haussein ;  but  he  did  not,  and  gallant  Sir  Eobert 
was  compelled  to  cool  his  heels  at  Ad-Abaga  until  the  savage 
potentate,  who  arrogated  to  himself  the  title  of  '  Chief  of  the 
Chiefs  of  Ethiopia '  should  arrive.  He  waited  eight  days ;  and, 
when  his  patience  was  well-nigh  exhausted,  another  messenger, 


826 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


arrived  at  a  most  happy  moment,  and  annomiced  the  arrival  of 
the  king  at  Haussein. 

On  the  next  morning  Sir  fiohert  Napier  sallied  out  of  his 
camp,  in  the  comfortable  basin-like  valley  of  Ad-Abaga,  with  a 
column  consisting  of  500  infantry,  300  cavalry,  a  small  party  of 
the  Eoyal  Engineers,  and  four  12-pounders — a  most  compact, 
soldierly  little  force,  but  ridiculously  at  variance  with  the  esti- 
mate at  which  the  princely  chief  of  Tigre  had  placed  the  English 
army. 

With  Snider  rifles  thrown  over  their  shoulders,  with  a  day's 
rations  in  their  haversacks,  and  with  a  military  band  preceding 
them,  playing  some  lively  tune,  the  little  army  marched  on. 
The  shining  steel  rifles  glimmered  against  red  uniforms  and 
sun  helmets,  and  dazzled  the  eye ;  the  steel  scabbards  rattled, 
spurs  jingled,  as  the  blare  of  the  tnunpet  gave  the  signal  to 
the  Brigade  to  march.  Behind  these  came  the  little  gun 
battery,  the  cannon  looking  demure  enough  on  the  backs  of 
the  mules;  and  slouching  and  shuflBing  in  the  rear,  waving 
their  trunks  from  side  to  side,  were  the  elephants,  with  houdahs 
on  their  backs,  and  mahouts  snugly  seated  on  the  napes  of  their 
necks. 

The  Commander-in-Chief,  mounted  on  a  magnificent  charger, 
with  a  brilliant  staflf,  dressed  in  their  best,  towards  making  the 
greatest  impression'  on  the  susceptible  minds  of  the  barbarian, 
cantered  on  ahead  of  the  column. 

In  good  order,  as  trim  and  neat  and  compact  as  when  they 
started,  the  little  army  arrived  upon  the  field  of  the  expected 
durbar,*  Mai-Debar.  Happy  place  I  most  auspicious  for  the 
interchange  of  courtesy  and  goodwill  between  man  and  man, 
were  they  ever  so  much  separated  by  race  or  religion  I  a  fair 
half  mile  in  circumference,  varied  by  green  knolls  and  grassy 
slopes,  with  a  stream  bubbling  through  its  centre,  was  the 
vallejf  of  Mai-Debar. 

The  muskets  were  stacked,  the  cavalry  dismounted,  and  the 
soldiers,  after  drinking  the  pure  liquid  from  the  stream  hard  by, 
stretched  themselves  upon  the  sward,  and  awaited  with  admirable 
unconcern  the  advent  of  the  barbarian  Prince. 

The  General  and  his  staff  sauntered  up  and  stood  upon  the 

*  Durtar :  HindoBtanee  term  for  lev^e,  or  council. 


AUSPICIOUS  COURTESIES. 


327 


spire  of  the  highest  eminence,  to  watch  the  approach  of  the  ex- 
pected cavalcade- 
Far  away  the  rolling  plain,  dotted  here  and  there  with 
sharp  peaks  and  clumps  of  kolquall,  expanded  into  purplish 
infinitude.  The  moimtainous  Debra  Demba  pierced  with  his 
hoary  head  the  storm-clouds  I  Ambitious  ambaa  towered  in 
every  direction  above  plains  and  valleys  and  lesser  mounts. 
Amba  Shukulat  in  the  rear,  like  a  giant  shorn  of  his  locks,  struck 
at  a  mass  of  cloud  with  his  sublime  head  ;  Mount  Masoba  was 
in  front,  and  Mount  Arnedin  disputing  with  his  bristling  sides 
the  Dongola  defile ;  and  directly  ahead  was  another  shaped  like 
a  spur,  with  pensile  puffs  of  white  ether  hanging  near  its  base ; 
no,  it  was  not  ether,  it  was  dust.  A  squall  of  wind  dissolved  it, 
and  the  British  videttes  discovered  that  for  which  the  galaxy 
of  stars  stood  waiting  near  Mai-Debra  —  Prince  Kussai's 
army. 

*  Every  one  to  his  place,  clap  your  knapsacks  upon  your 
backs,  snatch  your  rifles !  fall  in,  dress  up  soldiers,  and  look 
your  best  I '  In  an  instant  of  time  the  orders  were  obeyed.  A 
solid  line  of  stout  armed,  scarlet-dressed  infantry;  on  their 
right  picturesque  squadrons  of  cavalry ;  to  their  left  a  battery 
of  field-gims,  manned  by  tall  fellows  with  swab  and  rammer  at 
their  side,  stand  ready,  drawn  up  on  one  side  of  the  little 
stream  in  admirable  order. 

The  English  chief  hurried  to  his  tent  and  made  his  toilette 
deliberately.  His  staff  surrounded  the  tent,  and  some  mys- 
terious conversation  was  held ;  after  which  three  officers,  at- 
tended by  a  detachment  of  the  3rd  Light  Cavalry  in  blue  and 
silver  uniform,  suddenly  dashed  off  towards  the  Prince,  and  in- 
formed him  that  the  English  Creneral  would  advance  simul- 
taneously with  him. 

A  sonorous  rumbling  of  kettledrums  and  sharp  words  of 
command  were  heard  on  the  heights  opposite.  The  Abyssinian 
force  deployed,  and  presented  an  extended  line  of  cavalry  and 
infantry.  Two  or  three  stalwart  long-armed  fellovrs  were  seen 
galloping  about,  aligning  its  front.  A  scarlet  tent  was 
pitched,  and  some  one,  who  was  probably  the  Prince,  was  seen 
entering. 

Ten  minutes  of  expectancy  and  patient  waiting,  and  the 
Prince  had  mounted  a  gaily-caparisoned  pony,  and  an  English 


328 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


officer  rode  with  hot  haste  to  inform  the  General  that  the  Prince 
was  coming. 

The  General  issued  out  of  his  tent,  and  a  lai^  elephant 
decked  in  holiday  ribbons  and  trappings,  that  was  standing 
near  the  door,  was  mounted  by  him. 

On  this  elephant,  followed  by  another,  and  surrounded  by 
his  staff  and  a  select  body  of  cavalry.  General  Napier  proceeded 
towards  the  stream. 

The  Prince  bore  down  the  hill  with  500  choice  warriors, 
forming  a  wing  on  each  side  of  him.  Over  his  head  was  held 
the  state  imibrella,  of  maroon-coloured  plush  velvet,  heavy  with 
silver  ornaments,  by  a  very  handsome  man.  At  his  right  side 
was  his  spear  and  shield  bearer ;  at  his  left  his  fusil  bearer — 
the  son  of  a  Tigrean  grandee.  His  generals  preceded  him  on 
foot,  being  preceded  in  their  turn  by  two  of  the  English  officers 
who  went  to  meet  him. 

On  the  banks  of  the  tiny  stream  Napier  met  his  princely 
ally.  Both  dismounted,  and  a  loving  embrace  followed  ;  much 
after  the  style  of  American  Indian  sachems  embracing  peace 
commissioners.  The  Prince  was  apparently  fervent ;  Napier 
exceedingly  passive,  almost  ungraceful,  in  this  new  mode  of 
friendship-acting. 

Together,  both  Prince  and  Napier  entered  the  durbar  tent. 
Five  head  princes  of  Kussai's  retinue,  with  shield-bearer  and 
*  gold  stick '  privileged  by  their  position,  entered  the  coxmcil 
tent,  with  a  dozen  of  Napier's  principal  officers.  At  the  same 
time  a  salute  was  fired  by  the  artillery,  the  noise  of  which 
caused  visible  commotion  among  the  array  of  horses  and  men 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  stream  ;  and  great  uneasiness  among 
the  dusky  warriors,  who,  with  tilted  lances,  looked  down  upon 
the  red-coated  army  below. 

Sej  Muroja,  the  consequential  ambassador  already  men- 
tioned, when  all  were  seated  in  the  tent,  broke  the  silence  first, 
by  initiating  a  most  formal  Ute-a-tSte  between  the  English 
General  and  Prince  Kussai. 

The  Tigrean  Prince,  through  whose  dominions  we  were 
about  travelling  to  the  southward,  was  dressed  in  a  silken  robe 
with  immense  flowers,  as  variegated  as  the  coat  of  Joseph,  with 
a  lion-skin  cape,  from  which  three  pendicles  hung  down  the 
back.    His  head  was  bare,  being  well  supplied  with  the  boon- 


PRINCE  KUSSAI— THE  UNREADY. 


329 


tiful  covering  Nature  has  provided  all  Abyssinians  with ;  and 
this  was  plaited  into  numerous  ridges,  well  oiled,  which  hung 
over  his  neck.  Over  the  Prince's  head  was  borne  the  state 
umbrella,  by  a  youth  who,  though  black,  was  exceedingly  well- 
favoured. 

Kussai  had  a  very  gentle,  amiable  countenance,  but  appeared 
as  if  he  might  have  been  termed  the  ^  Unready,'  from  the  irre- 
solution apparent  on  his  features. 

'Greet  the  Feringhee  Negus  for  me,'  said  he  to  his 
satellite,  Sej  Muroja ;  and  Muroja  forthwith  related  to  Napier, 
with  some  embellishment,  the  words  of  his  master. 

Sir  Eobert  replied  that  he  was  very  happy  to  see  him,  and 
said  that  it  was  with  great  pleasure  a  Christian  nation  like  the 
English  beheld  people  professing  the  same  creed  in  Abyssinia. 

In  answer,  Kussai  said  that  he  did  not  much  like  to  see 
strangers  in  his  country ;  but,  since  come  strangers  must,  he 
preferred  they  should  be  Christians. 

This  certainly  did  not  seem  to  portend  very  amiable  feelings 
towards  the  English,  while  it  was  evident  that,  in  spite  of 
Major  Grant's  diplomacy,  much  suspicion  was  entertained  of 
the  crusaders'  intentions.  '  But,'  Sir  Eobert  said, '  if  we  came 
here,  it  was  because  bad  men  held  our  countrymen  in  captivity. 
When  we  have  released  them,  we  shall  go  back  to  our  own 
country  without  disturbing  your  dominion  in  the  least.' 

'  That's  right,'  replied  Kussai.  '  Theodore  is  a  bad  man ;  I 
hope  sincerely  you  will  punish  him  as  he  deserves.' 

The  General  then  kindly  enquired  the  names  of  the  Tigrean 
chiefs  in  his  retinue,  and  it  was  ascertained  that  one  of  them 
was  an  elder  brother,  and  two  were  his  uncles.  All  the  chiefs 
wore  vantbraces  of  gold,  and  lion-skin  tippets. 

The  presents  which  were  intended  for  the  Prince  were  then 
brought  out  and  exhibited,  to  the  undisguised  admiration  of  all. 
These  consisted  of  one  double-barrelled  rifle  by  Purdy  of 
London,  some  Bohemian  glass  vases,  and  an  Arab  charger 
belonging  to  Sir  Eobert's  excellent  stud.  They  were  all  accepted 
by  the  Prince  with  profuse  thanks. 

At  this  juncture  the  meeting  broke  up ;  that  is,  all  the 
chiefs  and  officers  left  the  tent,  excepting  Sir  Eobert  Napier, 
his  military  secretary,  and  the  adjutant-general  on  one  side ; 
and  Prince  Kussai,  his  biother,  and  Sej  Muroja  on  the  other  side. 


330 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


What  followed  cannot  be  given  in  detail ;  but  the  result  of 
the  secret  conference  was,  that  Prince  Kussai  agreed  on  his 
part  to  allow  free  passage  to  the  English  troops  through  his 
country ;  and,  furthermore,  promised  to  aid  and  abet  them  as 
much  as  lay  in  his  power  with  supplies  of  food,  which  the  Com- 
missariat Department  was  of  course  to  purchase  and  pay  for  at 
reasonable  rates.  He  furthermore  expressed  a  wish  that  some 
aid  might  be  given  to  him  after  the  result  of  Theodore's  defeat, 
as  he  would  then  need  it.  To  which  Sir  Robert  promised  every- 
thing,  except  in  the  matter  of  constituting  himself  the  safe- 
guard or  an  ally  of  the  Prince,  as  he  was  bound  but  to  obey  the 
Queen  of  England's  behests ;  which  were  to  release  his  coimtry- 
men  and  leave  the  country  as  he  found  it,  without  committing 
himself  in  any  such  way  as  the  Prince  desired.  With  this 
Kussai  was  obliged  to  be  content,  satisfied  that,  if  he  could  not 
get  the  aid  of  the  English,  no  other  potentate  or  Ras  could. 

The  interview  then  over,  and  good  will  and  friendly  under- 
standing prevailing  among  the  heads  of  the  party,  wine  and 
spirits  were  partaken  of^  and  the  parties  hobnobbed  with  each 
other,  after  the  Saxon  custom  of  drinking  '  Waes  Hael.' 

The  troops  were  then  paraded  and  drilled  for  the  edification 
of  the  Prince  and  his  army. 

The  British  soldiers  marched  and  countermarched,  wheeled 
to  right  and  left,  deployed,  marched  by  columns  of  companies 
on  the  double  quick,  all  at  the  sound  of  drum  and  fife,  and 
other  military  music,  to  the  intense  admiration  of  the  guest, 
who  critically  viewed  these  proceedings. 

In  his  tiun  Sir  Robert  Napier  crossed  the  stream,  accom- 
panied by  the  king,  to  see  the  Abyssinian  troops. 

They  were  a  fine  body  of  men,  well  formed  and  athletic, 
and  certainly  well  adapted  for  irregular  warfare.  There  were 
between  five  and  six  himdred  of  them,  armed  with  muskets, 
matchlocks,  double-barrelled  guns,  Portuguese  fusils,  and  guns 
of  all  nations.  The  infantry  were  simply  armed  with  spear, 
shield,  and  sword,  according  to  their  means.  They  might  make 
as  formidable  antagonists  in  a  mountainous  country  as  any 
trained  troops  would  wish  to  encounter ;  but,  with  all  their  fine 
appearance,  they  had  never  been  able  to  stand  before  the 
Emperor  Theodore's  troops. 

The  Prince,  after  a  review  of  his  troops,  invited  the  English 


THE  PRINCES  REVIEW  THE  BRITISH  TROOPS.  331 


General  to  enter  his  gorgeous  tent,  where  every  one  was  seated 
on  the  carpets,  spread  on  the  ground.  Cakes,  tej  (fermented 
honey),  herbs,  and  arrachi  were  produced,  and  all  partook  of 
them.  Before  leaving,  Kussai  declared  Napier  a  great  general 
and  a  great  man,  and,  doffing  his  own  lion-skin  cape,  clothed 
the  Greneral's  shoulders  with  the  hide  of  the  forest  king.  He 
also  presented  him  with  his  shield  and  spear.  The  shield  was 
a  masterpiece  of  Gondar  genius.  Its  umbo  was  covered  with 
solid  gold,  and  the  edges  of  the  shield  were  decorated  with 
tuberous  masses  of  filagree  gold  and  silver.  From  its  centre  ^ 
drooped  a  strip  of  lion's  mane. 

The  opinion  which  the  Abyssinian  soldiers  had  of  the 
English  army  was,  that  on  an  open  field  English  troops  would 
be  perfectly  unattackable,  but  that  on  the  moimtains  they  could 
do  nothing.  The  cannon  were  not  so  large  as  what  they  had 
been  led  to  expect  by  their  camp  gossips.  (Breech-loading 
Armstrongs  with  double  shells  they  had  no  very  high  praise  to 
bestow  upon.)  They  had  heard  also,  through  the  same  dubious 
autliority,  that  the  English  army  had  a  species  of  weapon 
which  could  tlirow  whizzing  balls  of  fire  through  the  air  for  the 
purpose  of  setting  fire  to  houses  two  or  three  miles  oflf.  These 
(rockets)  were  weapons  of  enchanters.  The  English,  according 
to  their  ideas,  practised  enchantment  in  many  things ;  and 
though  they  had  not  such  big  cannon  as  the  Emperor  had,  and 
could  not  fight  very  wl41  on  mountains,  still,  when  they  could 
not  conquer  by  force  of  arms,  they  could  have  recourse  to  their 
enchantments,  and  were  therefore  invincible  and  entitled  to 
respect. 

Had  Sir  Eobert  Napier  only  expended  half-a-dozen  shells 
and  rockets  in  exhibiting  the  real  power  of  the  contemned 
Armstrongs,  much  lasting  benefit  would  have  accrued  there- 
from ;  but  little  was  known  of  what  Theodore's  power  was,  or 
of  what  sort  of  fortress  he  had  at  Magdala,  and  he  cared  not, 
in  such  a  case,  to  waste  his  projectiles  of  war  in  a  mere  exhibi- 
tion. 

There  was  a  general  embracing  before  the  head  dignitaries 
departed,  and  each  chief  vowed  to  do  his  best  in  behalf  of  the 
other. 


332 


COOMASSIE  AKD  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

ANTALO— MODE  OP  MARKBTIKO. 

At  Antalo,  Smelfungus  and  myself  found  the  pioneer  force, 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Phayre,  Quartermaster-General  of 
the  Expedition.  We  were  no  more  to  travel  alone  at  will 
across  the  country ;  our  future  marches  would  be  made  with 
the  army. 

I  have  been  minute  in  describing  our  personal  experiences 
from  ZouUa  to  Antalo,  because  we  were  detached  from  all  other 
company  on  the  route.  We  had  not  yet  become  initiated  into 
the  reality  of  the  campaign. 

Until  the  army  appeared  at  Antalo,  I  enjoyed  myself  in 
chasing  jackals  and  hyaenas  riding  over  the  country  at  break- 
neck speed ;  visiting  the  towns  in  the  vicinity ;  buying  ghee 
(native  lard),  bread,  milk,  chickens,  or  in  other  words,  foraging 
as  I  used  to  do  during  the  American  war. 

A  fair  occurred  every  Wednesday  at  the  town  of  Antalo,  at 
which  all  the  peasantry  of  the  country  assembled. 

The  first  Wednesday  that  occurred  after  our  arrival  at  this 
camp,  I  accompanied  the  Captain  and  some  others  to  see  one  of 
these  gatherings,  where  it  was  said  the  elite  of  Abyssinian 
society  was  to  be  found. 

The  ground  marked  out  as  the  intended  site  of  the  camp 
was  in  the  very  centre  of  a  plain  which  stretched  from  Aiitalo 
on  the  west  to  Afgool,  15  miles  distant  eastward,  and  was 
nearly  equidistant  between  the  former  town  and  the  ancient 
and  interesting  town  of  Chelicut.  The  stream  Gundwa,  or  the 
remains  of  it  during  the  dry  season,  ran  round  the  western  ex- 
tremity of  the  camp.  All  this  luxuriant  country  was  covered 
with  tall  grass,  which  afforded  admirable  grazing  for  the  animals 
of  the  Expedition. 


THE  MARKET-PLACE  OF  ANTALO. 


338 


Once  over  the  Gundwa,  we  put  our  horses  to  a  smart  gallop, 
and  in  about  an  hour  we  found  ourselves  at  the  base  of  a  series 
of  mountains,  which  rose  higher  and  higher,  until  they  were 
crowned  by  the  scarped  peaks  of  Amba  Antalo,  where,  imder 
the  shelter  of  an  overhanging  mass,  the  town  was  built. 

The  ascent  was  fully  2,000  feet  from  the  plain.  As  we  sur- 
moimted  the  level  whereon  Antalo  was  built  we  passed  two 
turreted  buildings,  which  crowned  the  summit  of  the  plateau. 
These  we  found  to  be  churches ;  on  the  top  of  each  building  was 
a  cross  formed  of  ostrich  eggs,  looking  very  like  alabaster 
balls.  Ascending  still  higher  a  steep  hill,  we  entered  a  narrow 
street  flanked  on  each  side  by  adobe  walls  some  10  or  12 
feet  in  height ;  and  passing  along  this  for  a  himdred  paces  or 
so  we  found  ourselves  in  the  naarket-place— a  large  open  quad- 
rangle, enclosed  on  all  sides  by  the  houses  of  the  people,  all  of 
which  were  curtained  from  public  view  by  mud  walls.  The 
square  was  filled  to  overflowing  with  people  of  all  ages,  who 
had  come  to  the  fair  from  the  villages  around.  The  men 
were  dressed  in  robes  of  cotton  cloth  bordered  by  a  deep  band 
of  crimson;  the  wonxen  were  clothed  in  a  cotton  chemise, 
xmzoned,  hanging  limp  and  loose  about  their  persons,  uni- 
versally dingy  with  dirt.  The  young  girls  and  boys  were 
naked. 

Near  by  was  the  straw  manufactured  goods  market,  where 
umbrellas  of  straw,  exquisitely  plaited ;  baskets,  cups,  jars, 
cradles,  plastered  outside  with  bois-de-vache,  baked  hard.  Near 
this,  again,  the  market  for  the  sale  of  tobacco  was  held.  The 
weed  had  been  compressed  into  a  cake  resembling  a  ^  buffalo 
chip,'  and  emitted  a  horrible  odour.  Next  to  this  was  a  mis- 
cellany of  various  conamodities — iron,  hair  and  shawl  pins,  silken 
neck  strings,  iron  crosses,  without  which  no  Abyssinian  Chris- 
tian would  be  seen ;  strings  of  wax,  jet,  and  amber  beads ; 
pumpkins,  chillies,  water-cresses,  onions,  honey,  potatoes,  gailic, 
leathern  garments,  goat-skin  bags,  water-sacks,  and  a  long  cata- 
logue of  other  vendibles. 

Everjrthing  that  a  European  wanted  was  priced  at  a  dollar, 
though  the  article  might  barely  be  worth  twopence ;  were  it  a 
bundle  of  wood,  a  few  cakes  of  bread,  a  jar  of  milk,  a  dozen  of 
eggs,  the  invariable  price  would  be  a  dollar  for  each.  The 
Abyssinians  are  a  very  apt  people.    Ten  weeks  before,  a  stranger 


334 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


coming  to  Antalo  might  have  had  the  whole  lot  for  a  dollar ;  but 
the  English  strewed  their  dollar  coins  so  very  extravagantly  1 

From  the  town  we  went  to  visit  the  churches,  which 
looked  picturesque,  surrounded  by  the  deep  green  of  the 
sycamore.  Like  many  other  things  which  from  a  distance 
seem  enchanting,  the  picturesqueness  of  the  churches  faded 
away  as  we  approached.  The  outside  resembled  a  cowshed, 
and  the  inside  appeared  not  much  better.  In  an  adjacent  house 
lived  the  priest.  Seeing  Europeans  around,  after  showing  us 
into  the  interior  he  begged  us  to  enter  his  house,  and  after 
we  had  seated  ourselves  he  proffered  us  horns  of  butter  and 
goat's  milk.  We  were  rather  astonished  at  this  hospitality — 
unusual  in  our  experiences  from  ZouUa  to  Antalo  ;  but  never- 
theless drank  our  fill  of  the  delicious  beverage.  He  then 
brought  us  some  parchment  books  and  manuscripts,  which  he 
offered  to  sell.  Not  the  least  disinclined  to  add  to  our  stock 
of  curiosities,  my  friend  and  I  purchased  some  half-a-dozen. 
When  we  were  about  to  leave,  the  priest  asked  us  if  we  did  not 
intend  to  pay  for  the  '  haleeb '  (milk).  We  had  not  intended  ; 
but,  since  he  had  kindly  hinted  to  us  that  the  money  for  it 
would  be  acceptable,  we  paid  him  without  much  demurring, 
though  we  had  given  two  dollars  for  the  books. 

Before  entering  the  camp,  my  friend  the  Captain  and  I 
struck  off  over  the  mountains  for  a  hunt.  Hares  were  in 
abundance,  quails  were  plentiful,  guinea-fowls  flew  in  every 
direction,  antelopes  sprung  up  all  around  us,  and  my  com- 
panion made  me  almost  believe  he  had  seen  a  wild  boar. 

It  was  late  that  afternoon  before  we  turned  our  faces  home- 
waVds.  We  had  ranged  over  considerable  ground,  and  had  seen 
some  very  lovely  dells  and  mountain  scenery.  The  day 
was  tending  to  a  close ;  sweet  evening  was  fast  coming  on  ;  the 
sun  was  declining  gloriously  over  the  far  extended  landscape, 
gleaming  with  a  mellow  light  over  the  plain,  purpling  distant 
moimtains,  and  flinging  long  shadows  upon  the  grass  from  the 
tall  cliffs  overhanging  the  road. 

My  dear  friend  the  Captain  tried  to  interest  me  in  recapitu- 
lating his  wonderful  adventures,  and  from  the  manner  in  which 
he  related  them  to  me  it  was  evident  that  he  was  a  very  vera- 
cious person.  Indeed,  his  propensities  to  relate  exhibited 
themselves  at  all  hours  and  in  all  places.     The  knowledge  of 


ADVENTURES  OF  MY  FRIEND  SMELFUNGUS.  335 


the  existence  of  genius  in  his  person  was  mine  by  slow  degrees ; 
for,  whenever  a  thought  passed  across  my  mind  in  regard  to  my 
friend,  the  memory  of  his  high  rank  and  his  vast  riches  caused 
obliviousness  of  what  I  was  pleased  to  think  was  but  a  mere 
aberration  of  mind. 

We  had  arrived  within  five  miles  of  camp.  The  footpath 
to  it  was  visible  under  the  brightness  of  a  full  moon,  except 
when  now  and  then  some  projecting  peak  or  crag,  around  the 
base  of  which  we  were  riding,  slightly  shadowed  the  ground. 
A  ravine  or  gully  lay  before  us ;  and  in  following  the  serpentine 
path  we  were  compelled  to  describe  an  arc,  so  as  to  avoid  a 
deep  hole  close  by,  which  led  us  imder  the  shadow  of  a  high 
rock.  So  soon  as  we  neared  the  rock  a  deep  growl  was  heard ; 
and  singular  to  relate,  my  Nimrodian  companion  who  had  had 
such  terrible  combats  with  a  boa-constrictor,  a  tiger  and  tigress, 
hastily  backed  his  horse  behind  mine  so  as  to  more  leisurely 
reconnoitre  before  making  any  further  advance. 

'  What  is  the  matter  ? '  I  asked. 

*  Did  you  not  hear  the  panther's  growl  ? '  he  asked  me  in 
return. 

'  Are  you  sure  it  is  a  panther  ?  * 
'  Quite  positive.' 

^  Well,  there  he  is,  then,  right  close  to  your  horse's  1^,*  I 
said. 

'  A^Tiere  ?  where  ? '  he  asked,  hastily  pulling  his  horse  back- 
ward. 

'There  he  is  in  that  bush,  close  to  you  on  your  right. 
Look  out  with  that  gim  ;  you  will  shoot  me  if  you  don't  take 
care.  Why,  man  alive,  can't  you  see  him  ?  He  is  going  to 
spring.  Shoot  him  now,  or  you  will  be  too  late,'  I  yelled  out 
to  him. 

'  I  can't  see  him,  I  can't  see  him  1 '  he  shrieked  out,  despair-, 
ingly. 

'Don't  you  see  him  crawling  up  to  you? — about  twenty 
yards  off,  on  your  right  ? ' 

'  Oh,  yes  1 '  and  pop — bang  went  both  barrels.  '  Is  he  dead  ? ' 
he  asked. 

'  He  is  down,'  I  replied. 

'  Ah  ha  1  the  right  hand  of  the  "  old  joker  "  hath  not  for- 
gotten its  cunning,'  he  said,  with  a  biu^  of  exultation.    '  Did 


836 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


I  not  tell  you,  my  boy,  I  never  failed  when  I  once  drew  a 
bead?' 

'  Yes,  often  and  often,'  was  my  response  ;  '  but  how  was  it 
you  could  not  see  the  animal  until  he  was  close  upon  you  ? 
Are  you  afflicted  with  dysopsy  ?' 

'  Sometimes,  in  moments  of  great  excitement.' 

'  You  don't  mean  to  admit  that  you  were  excited  just  now, 
do  you  ? ' 

^  Faugh  1  me  excited  ?  My  dear  fellow,  I  never  was  excited 
in  my  life.' 

'  Ah !  I  beg  your  pardon,  I  thought  you  were  ;  yet  it  might 
have  been  an  illusion  of  the  senses.  But  what  sort  of  animal 
have  you  shot  ?  ' 

*  Please  see  what  it  is,  there's  a  good  fellow,  while  I  finish 
loading  my  gun.' 

'  Why,  it's  a  hyaena,'  said  I,  after  looking  upon  the  animal 
awhile,  and  internally  wishing  he  had  examined  it  himself. 

'  A  hysena,  is  it  ?  Oh  ho  I  very  often  the  hyaenas  are  more 
dangerous  than  panthers;  for  instance,  if  they  get  a  hold 
upon  anything  with  their  teeth,  they  never  let  go.'  And  as  he 
was  talking  thus,  he  drew  closer,  and  just  as  he  stood  near  its 
head  the  animal  started  up,  and  the  Captain,  though  he  had  a 
double-barrelled  gim  in  his  hands,  was  indisputably  though 
slightly  startled.  It  was  only  a  death  spasm  in  the  case  of  the 
hyaena,  and  ja  hunter's  spasm  in  the  case  of  the  Captain.  When 
the  beast  had  ceased  to  breathe  the  *  old  joker '  came  up  and 
deliberately  shot  the  carcase  in  the  head,  '  to  make  sure  pop  of 
him,  you  know.' 

It  was  late  when  we  got  back  to  the  camp,  having  met  with 
no  adventure  on  the  way  save  the  shooting  of  a  hyaena  by  my 
friend. 

On  March  3  the  2nd  Brigade,  General  Napier,  and 
General  Sir  Charles  Staveley  arrived  at  our  camp  at  Antalo. 
It  was  a  most  exciting  scene.  The  news  of  the  approach  of 
the  '  burra,  burra  Sahib '  (big,  big  master)  with  the  Feringhee 
army  had  roused  the  whole  province  of  Enderta,  of  which 
Antalo  was  the  capital.  Thousands  of  scantily-costumed 
warriors,  women  with  huge  unzoned  and  ungarbed  bodies,  and 
brown-skinned  little  Cupids  lying  in  litters  on  the  roadside ; 
old  age  and  youth,  male  and  female,  priests  and  laymen,  had 


THE  'BURRA  SAHIB,'  AND  HIS  'BURRA*  ARMY.  337 


ranged  themselves  on  both  sides  of  the  road  for  a  mile  or  so,  to 
await  the  advent  of  the  Grand  Sahib  and  his  host. 

Begimental  bands  had  gone  forth  to  salute  their  comrades 
with  welcoming  music. 

^  General  CoUings  and  staff,  Colonel  Merewether,  and  other 
oflScers  had  ridden  out  to  meet  Sir  Robert  Napier. 

The  much-looked-for  General  and  his  army  came  at  last, 
preceded  by  a  host  of  musicians,  who  distracted  the  welkin 
with  harmonious  and  inharmonious  strains.  As  the  first  regi- 
ment appeared,  the  Antalo  garrison  vented  their  joy  in  loud 
cheers  and  greetings.  Responsive  to  their  voices  rose  the 
huzzas  of  the  succeeding  regiments,  while  the  rearguards  flimg 
the  echoes  far  over  the  plain ;  and  the  natives,  catching  it  up, 
changed  the  tones  to  the  exhilarating  Lululu  in  honour  of  the 
occasion. 

First  came  an  Irish  regiment,  each  soldier  bearded  like  a 
pard,  and  bronzed  by  the  tropic  sun,  all  weather-beaten 
veterans  inured  to  life-long  campaigns  in  India,  to  Himalaya 
snows,  and  fervid  days  in  Scinde.  Above  their  heads  waved 
the  regimental  banner  which  was  tossed  several  times  on  the 
deadly  fields  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula,  and  had  received  rever- 
ence from  Wellington. 

Then  came  the  4th  Regiment,  the  ^  King's  Own,'  with  a 
regimental  flag  tattered  and  torn  by  the  gushing  storms  of 
fire  and  lead  in  the  Crilnean  campaign.  After  these  came 
the  Native  troops,  the  27th  Native  Infantry,  called  the  Pun- 
jaubees,  tall,  well-formed  men  from  the  Punjaub  districts  of 
India  ;  the  Belooch  Regiment  —  Beloochees  with  ample  green 
turbans,  and  red  fezes  round  their  heads,  dressed  in  gi-een  uni- 
forms with  red  facings ;  and  the  10th  Native  Infantry,  com- 
posed of  sepoys,  who  were  taken  from  particular  districts  and 
tribes.  Each  man  of  the  latter  regiment  had  thirty  or  forty 
kinsmen  in  the  ranks. 

After  them,  again,  came  the  cavalry,  the  Scinde  Horse,  with 
plaited  crimson  cloth  folded  round  their  heads  like  turbans. 
They  were  dressed  in  green  cloth  uniforms,  and  their  horses 
had  green  shabracks.  Each  man  was  armed  with  a  short 
double-barrelled  rifle  and  tulwar.* 


*  Indian  sword. 


338 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


The  officers  wore  silver  helmets  on  their  heads.  Bo- 
hind  the  cavalry  regiment  came  Sir  Kobert  Napier  and  Sir 
Charles  Staveley,  attended  by  their  respective  staflFs,  well 
dressed  and  well  mounted.  A  good  deal  of  eflfeminacy  was 
visible  here  which  detracted  much  from  their  otherwise  martial 
bearing.  One  young  lordling  wore  kid  gloves  and  a  green 
veil. 

The  Head-quarter  staff  was  followed  by  a  company  of 
the  3rd  Light  Cavalry,  Native  Indian,  all  smart,  soldierly- 
looking  men,  though  some  of  them,  native  officers,  bobbed 
along  in  their  saddles  as  if  they  were  riding  to  rackets  on  a 
hard-mouthed  native  tattoo,^  displaying  immense  calves  through 
the  lack  of  straps  to  their  trousers.  The  uniform  of  this  troop 
was  a  bluish  grey,  with  white  shoulder-straps  and  cuffs. 

In  the  rear  of  these  came  the  artillery,  a  battery  of  six 
Armstrong  guns ;  the  elephants  and  the  transport  train,  the 
whole  stretching  over  a  distance  of  seven  miles.  The  muleteers 
formed  quite  an  army  by  themselves. 

There  were  7,000  mules  in  the  transport  train  attached  to 
the  2nd  Brigade  of  the  1st  Division,  commanded  by  Sir  C. 
Staveley,  and  for  these  were  required  at  least  3,000  men  ;  but 
including  the  camp  followers,  mahouts,  elephant  attendants, 
and  camel  drivers,  this  force  was  increased  to  nearly  5,000  men. 

Besides  these  people  may  be  added  the  native  settlers, 
vendors  of  tobacco,  ghee,  haleeb,  barley,  bread,  and  herdsmen 
driving  the  beeves  and  goats  for  the  conmiissariat.  They  were  a 
prominent  part  of  the  procession,  and  figured  conspicuously  by 
their  numbers  and  motley  appearance.  I  must  not  forget,  also, 
the  multitude  of  dhoolie  bearers,^  dhobies,^  and  the  bheasties,^ 
who  swelled  to  a  large  extent  the  strange  multitude  called  to- 
gether for  the  crusade.  Such  varied  physiognomies  were  never 
seen  in  one  modern  army  ;  while  the  colour  of  their  uniform, 
clothes,  rags,  turbans,  tarbooches,  was  of  the  most  kaleido- 
scopic kind. 

Poles  from  the  Bastamic  Alps  and  bearded  stalwart  fellows 
from  the  Sarmatian  wilds  chatted  gaily  with  voluble  French- 
men and  staid-looking  Germans.  The  turbaned  Turk,  with 
the  passionate  fires  of  his  temperament  sonmolent  under  the 

*  Pony.  *  Hand  ambulances.  ■  Washor  men. 

*  Drivers  of  oxen  bearing  water. 


THE  HETEROGENEOUS  CAMP  FOLLOWEES.  339 


virtues  of  his  inseparable  narghileh,  trudged  along  leisurely, 
with  no  desire  on  earth  save  that  which  he  was  then  exercising ; 
and  swarthy  Arabs  inhaling  fumes  of  a  sweet  morsel  of  Latakieh. 
The  olive-cheeked  Jew,  remarkable  for  his  mysterious  limpid 
eyes  of  jet,  stalked  onward  at  the  head  of  his  little  string  of 
mules — for  the  nonce  oblivious  of  the  country,  the  crusade,  and 
his  occupation,  indulging  in  day-dreams  of  some  treasure  he 
had  hidden  somewhere,  or  of  his  elevation  into  the  business  of 
a  diamond-merchant  on  his  return  from  African  territory. 
Esurient- looking  Parsees  or  Guebres  from  Persia  ever  on  the 
look-out  for  a  chance  to  turn  an  honest  rupee  into  two,  plodded 
onward  industriously  side  by  side  with  parlous  Jewish  mule- 
teers. Well-oiled  Sikhs  from  the  Mahrattas  held  animatifig 
conversations  with  gentlemanly  Sepoy  guards  from  the  Deccan ; 
and  rolling  on  in  never-ending  succession  were  ferocious  Sou- 
malis  from  Soumali  Land,  ugly-faced  Berbera  men,  Janus- 
hearted  Bengalees,  wild-looking  Shohoes,  athletic  Nubians, 
and  daring  Hazortites. 

The  column,  in  spite  of  its  martial  air,  had  something  of  a 
piebald  look.  There  were  white  men,  red,  tawny,  yellow,  and 
black  men,  all  mingled  up  confusedly.  Cockneys  from  London, 
Celts  from  Ireland,  and  sandy-haired  Scotchmen  marched  side 
by  side  with  Hindoos. 

The  commissariat  mules  were  unloaded  of  their  treasures  at 
the  park  of  the  department ;  the  baggage  animals  emptied  their 
miscellaneous  packs  near  their  owners'  tents,  and  were  then 
marched  off  to  their  encampment  near  the  river  Gundwa. 

The  artillery  wheeled  leftward  to  their  quarters  on  an  emi- 
nence, and  the  furbishing  of  steel  cannon  and  gear,  the 
watering  of  horses  aud  distributing  of  rations  began,  and  the 
audible,  contentious  bustle  and  the  droning  hum  of  a  vast  camp 
commenced  in  this  encampment  on  African  soil,  as  it  would  in 
any  other  coimtry. 

Aroxmd  the  commissariat  was  shortly  seen  a  strange  sight, 
which  I  might  have  witnessed  many  a  time  on  the  march  to 
Antalo  had  I  accompanied  the  army  thither. 

The  dollar  bags  were  brought  out  by  the  Parsees  who 
transacted  business  with  the  natives.  Some  order  amid  such 
a  concourse  was  necessary  when  hundreds  of  Abyssinians,  having 
heard  of  the  liberal  payments  made  by  the  English,  contended 

K  2 


340 


OOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


who  should  first  dump  his  goat-skin  bag  full  of  barley  into  the 
scales,  and  handle  the  bright  new  coins,  their  favourite  money, 
the  sight  of  which  always  made  their  eyes  sparkle  with  unusual 
brightness.  Chuprasses  ^  were  already  on  the  groimd,  arrang- 
ing— with  almost  futile  attempt  at  order — ^the  eager,  expectant 
Abyssinians,  The  natives  brought  barley,  flour,  oats,  grain, 
bread,  honey,  herbs,  wood,  cattle,  goats,  sheep,  mules,  mussucks,' 
leather  straps,  &c. 

There  were  about  a  dozen  Parsees  employed  by  the  assistant 
commissariat  to  purchase  the  provisions  for  the  force.  To 
avoid  confusion,  they  were  set  apart  ten  paces  from  each  other, 
so  that  the  bread  should  not  be  thrown  with  the  flour,  and  the 
chickens  and  ghee  should  not  get  mixed  up  with  the  bread ;  and 
the  wood  should  not  be  thrown  among  the  chickens. 

Each  man  was  siurounded  then  by  the  market  people,  and 
he  and  his  bag  of  dollars  was  shrouded  from  all  obtrusive  obser- 
vation. To  men  who  from  childhood  are  trained  to  deception  and 
lying,  the  tempting  bag  of  dollars  was  irresistible.  Any  person 
watching  the  scene  for  a  moment  would  have  been  able  to  detect 
go-betweens — Parsee  boys — mixing  in  with  the  crowd,  and  by- 
and-bye  receiving  a  certain  quantity  of  dollars,  and  who,  upon  re- 
ceiving the  money,  slowly  edged  out  again  to  disappear  among 
some  black  tents,  the  homes  of  their  employers,  which  were 
situated  near  the  commissariat  park.  During  one  day  these 
by-plays  would  occur  very  often,  and  probably  each  of  the 
sellers  of  provisions  cleared  something  between  seventy-five 
and  a  himdred  dollars. 

Strange  to  say,  I  never  heard  of  a  Parsee  being  brought  up 
on  a  charge  of  theft.  Their  influence  was  so  great  that  I 
suppose  it  would  not  have  been  politic  to  be  very  harsh  to  them. 
There  were  but  few  officers  who  were  not  indebted  to  some  one 
or  other  of  these  clannish  people.  Little  bills  could  not  be 
cashed  without  their  aid ;  and,  as  military  oflBcers  are  generally 
freer  with  their  money  than  any  other  people,  in  an  extrava- 
gantly priced  coimtry  like  Abyssinia  applications  of  that  nature 
were  frequent.  To  have  applied  to  the  military  chest  would 
have  been  an  abnormal  proceeding ;  and  they  therefore  chose  to 
pay  high  discount  to  those  Indian  usurers,  rather  than  take  a 

*  Policemeiw  '  Bags  made  of  animal  hides. 


THE  TRANSPORT  TRAIN  AND  ITS  COMPOSITION.  841 


little  trouble  to  check  the  nefarious  proceedings  of  the 
Parsees. 

I  stated  above  that  the  transport-train,  after  unloading,  had 
been  withdrawn  to  their  encampment  near  the  river.  For  the 
better  understanding  of  the  term  transport-train,  I  shall  pro- 
ceed to  a  description  of  it,  as  in  the  following  pages  the  words 
will  be  frequently  repeated. 

The  general  transport-train  was  raised  in  Bombay  for  sendee 
in  Abyssinia  on  February  14,  1868,  but  it  may  be  said  to  have 
derived  its  origin  from  the  two  Punjaub  trains  specially  organ- 
ised in  October  of  the  preceding  year  for  the  campaign  in  Africa, 
to  which  it  owes  its  foundation  and  organisation. 

The  Highland  tranpport-train  was  organised  for  service  in 
the  Highlands  of  Abyssinia,  a  portion  of  which  conveyed  the 
baggage  and  provisions  for  the  first  and  second  Brigades  of  the 
First  Division,  under  Sir  Charles  Staveley,  now  marching  towards 
Magdala,  while  the  lowland'transport-train  was  reserved  for  ser- 
vice between  Senafe  and  ZouUa. 

The  Highland  transport-train  consisted  of  fomr  divisions  of 
2,000  mules,  each  subdivided  into  troops  of  150,  and  the  follow- 
ing was  the  scale  of  the  establishment  of  each  division : — 


1 

Captain, 

3 

Subalterns. 

4 

European  inspectors  (elected  from  British  regiments). 

20 

Jemadars,  or  Troop  Sergeant-Majors. 

80 

Duffadars,  or  Serjeants, 

667 

Muleteers. 

2 

First-class  Nalbimds,  or  Farriers. 

10 

Second-class  Assistant  Nalbunds,  or  Farriers. 

1 

Head  native  Blacksmith. 

10 

Second  Assistant  Blacksmiths. 

10 

Bheasties,  or  '  Water  Carriers.' 

2 

Bope-makers. 

1 

Salootrie,  ^  Native  Veterinary  Surgeon.' 

1 

Moonshie,  or  Native  Writer. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  campaign  one  man  had  charge 
of  two  mules  only  ;  and  they  were  as  much  as  he  could  look  after 
properly.  Stable,  watering,  and  all  other  line  duties  at  fixed 
hours  were  conducted  with  the  sam^  routine  as  in  the  Bengal 


342 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


irregular  cavalry  regiments.  The  muleteers  were  trained  and 
drilled  to  their  work  and  kept  in  as  strict  a  state  of  discipline 
as  the  circumstances  of  its  being  a  newly-raised  corps  would 
admit  of.  The  Jemadars  kept  in  Persian  the  nominal  roll  of 
each  man  in  their  troop,  also  the  pay  account.  The  '  long 
roll '  of  every  man  was  kept  in  Persian  by  the  moonshie ;  the 
pay  account,  was  kept  in  English  by  the  captain. 

The  officers  commanding  the  Punjaub  trains  had  summary 
powers,  and  could  sentence  to  two  years'  imprisonment  in  addi- 
tion to  corporal  punishment.  The  whole  was  imder  the  direc- 
tion of  a  sub-director,  who  was  one  of  the  head-quarter  staff, 
and  reported  direct  to  the  assistant  quartermaster-general, 
army  head-quarters,  assisted  by  a  staff  officer  and  officer  in- 
spector, the  latter  of  whom  constantly  travelled  from  one 
station  to  another,  and  reported  direct  upon  all  matters  that 
might  come  under  his  observation.  The  train  worked  regularly 
between  Attigratt  and  Magdala,  principally  in  carrying  baggage, 
ammunition,  hospital  stores,  and  commissariat  supplies  for  the 
force  for'  one  month.  At  intermediate  large  stations  a  staff 
officer  had  been  permanently  appointed  to  receive  all  reports 
from  officers  in  charge  of  convoys,  and  he  forwarded  the  same  to 
head-quarters.  At  these  posts  several  reserves  were  kept,  from 
which  sick  and  weakly  mules  were  replaced.  Mules  purchased 
in  Spain,  Egypt,  India,  Persia,  and  Abyssinia  were  employed. 

The  Spanish  mules  were  principally  large  and  ill-bred ; 
and,  from  my  own  observations,  were  naturally  of  a  weak 
constitution,  and  unable  to  bear  great  changes  of  climate. 
They  suflFered  much  from  a  want  of  a  sufficiency  of  food,  es- 
pecially of  grass,  of  which  they  did  not  eat  enough,  even  when 
it  was  procurable ;  for  that  which  was  obtained  was  dry  and 
coarse,  and  they  did  not  relish  it.  When  once  in  low  condition 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  bring  them  round,  even  with  rest 
and  grazing,  abundance  of  which  they  got  at  the  sick  depots. 
The  few  well-bred  Spanish  mules  there  were  answered  well.  The 
Persian,  Indian,  and  Egyptian  mules,  on  the  contrary,  were  very 
much  more  enduring,  required  less  grain,  would  eat  any  descrip- 
tion of  grass,  and  thrive  vipon  it. 

The  Abyssinian  mules  were  not  very  enduring  ;  all  those  pur- 
chased were  in  good  condition  and  fresh  ;  still  they  broke  down 
in  larger  numbers  than  any  others.    On  March  1  there  were 


MAJOR-OENERAL  SIR  C.  STAVKLKV,  K.C.B. 


MULES  AND  SADDLES.  343 

5,412  animals  in  the  Highland  train,  and  of  those  1,002  were 
sick.  On  April  1  there  were  6,691  and  of  these  1,002  were 
sick.  On  May  1  there  were  7,690,  and  of  these  1,944  were 
sick.  Since  March  1  there  were  purchased  in  the  country  on 
the  Highlands  2,720,  and  1,740  were  transferred  from  the  Low- 
lands. Since  the  same  date  there  were  lost  on  the  road  449, 
and  1,257  were  sent  to  the  Lowland  sick  depot  at  Koomaylee 
and  struck  off  returns ;  and  309  were  destroyed  or  died  at  High- 
land sick  depots.  2,418  were  discharged  from  hospital  and 
sent  to  work.  The  mules  had  scarcely  a  fair  start,  for  they  were 
generally  put  to  work  the  day  of  disembarkation. 

A  marked  difference  was  apparent  in  the  working  of  the 
men  who  were  sent  to  follow  the  army.  Those  who  had  the 
advantage  of  the  experience  resulting  from  the  long  march  frona 
Eawul  Pindee,  in  India,  to  Kurrachee,  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  a 
distance  of  nearly  1,000  miles,  kept  their  mules  in  admirable 
condition,  taking  into  consideration  the  difficulties  and  annoy- 
ances enumerated  by  Dr.  Hallen ;  while  those  men  selected  from 
the  low  rabble  of  Cairo  and  Alexandria,  in  Egypt,  and  sent  by 
the  hundreds  for  actual  and  necessitous  service,  soon  had 
their  animals  in  a  most  woful  plight.  They  were,  besides 
being  fractious  and  turbulent,  entirely  unequal  to  the  task  of 
climbing  the  rugged  mountains,  from  their  previous  indolent 
habits. 

The  saddles  in  use  were  various ;  the  three  principal  were 
the  Bombay  pad,  the  cumbersome  Turkish;  an  English  saddle 
termed  the  ^  Otago,'  and  the  McMahon. 

The  Otago  saddle  in  my  opinion  is  the  best  that  can  be  in- 
vented. It  is  made  of  good  stout  English  leather.  The  sides  are 
made  of  English  leather  sewn  over  two  square  pads  which  overlap 
the  flanks  of  the  animal.  These  are  connected  by  strong  curved 
iron  bows  enclosed  with  leather,  which  rise  three  inches  above 
the  spine  of  the  animal.  Two  hooks  are  fixed  on  each  side,  to 
which  stout  straps  of  the  necessary  lengtli,  folding  any  kind  of 
baggage,  are  slung.  Its  weight  is  but  28  lbs.  The  McMahon 
is  also  a  very  compact  saddle,  but  its  excessive  weight  of 
66  lbs.  precludes  all  possibility  of  its  ever  being  adopted  for 
general  use. 

The  veterinary  surgeon  attached  to  the  first  division  of  the 
army  of  Abyssinia,  whose  report  I  have  consulted  concerning 


344 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  cases  of  sickness  and  mortality  so  frequent  among  the 
animals,  said  that  they  were  owing  principally  to  ^hard  work  at 
great  altitudes ;  constant  exposure,  with  want  of  rest ;  insuffi- 
ciency of  food  and  bad  quality  of  the  grass,  irregularity  in 
feeding,  galls  owing  to  bad  saddles,  and  want  of  time  and  means 
for  repairing  the  same,  and  carelessness  of  muleteers  in  saddling 
and  loading.  The  muleteers  were  employed  as  ghora  wallahs 
(grooms),  in  the  position  of  public  followers  from  the  Punjaub, 
for  the  divisions  raised  in  that  district ;  and  men  from  the  same 
part  of  India  were  subsequently  substituted  after  their  arrival 
at  Antalo  for  the  Arabs  and  Turks,  as  the  latter  were  found  to 
be  indolent,  apathetic,  and  totally  unmanageable. 

The  Jemadars  and  Duflfadars  were  selected  from  the  most 
intelligent  of  the  muleteers. 

The  officers  of  the  transport-train  were  gentlemen  who 
volunteered  for  the  service  out  of  regiments  retained  in  India* 
1'hey  were  a  most  abused  set  of  men,  by  those  who  were  not 
capable  of  appreciating  tlie  tremendous  sacrifices  they  had  made. 

It  will  readily  be  perceived  by  the  nature  of  their  duty  that 
they  had  nothing  of  that  brittle  stuflf  I  found  at  Zoulla  and 
Senafe,  but  real,  manly  officers,  devoted  to  their  duty,  who  had 
entered  heart  and  soul  into  what  tliey  believed  to  be  a  good 
cause.  They  were  always  in  the  saddle,  riding  liither  and 
thither,  from  troop  to  troop,  uiging,  coaxing,  and  threatening 
to  keep  the  muleteers  at  their  posts,  and  up  to  late  hours  of 
every  night,  as  may  be  imagined  from  the  condition  of  the 
coimtry. 

As  soon  as  the  road  between  Zoulla  and  Senafe  had  been 
made  passable  for  wheeled  carriages  the  train  was  strengthened 
l)y  a  supply  of  Bombay  bullocks  and  Maltese  mule-carts.  But 
lor  this  timely  assistance  it  would  have  been  sorely  straitened, 
as  mule-carriage  in  the  Lowlands  began  to  fail,  and  the  supply 
of  camels  collected  in  Aden  and  Persia,  which  had  for  a  while 
revived  in  quality  and  numbers,  also  began  to  diminish.  The 
first  passage  of  carts  up  the  Senafe  Ghaut,  consisting  of  a  convoy 
of  eighty  carts,  in  sole  charge  of  a  native  military  inspector,  was 
so  successful,  that  every  eflfort  was  made  to  increase  this  kind 
of  carriage.  Captain  L.  A.  M.  Graeme,  102nd  Foot,  was  chosen 
to  raise  and  organise  the  cart  division,  and  his  efforts  were 
crowned  with  the  utmost  success. 


VETERINARY  DEPARTMENT. 


845 


As  the  supply  of  draught  mules  had  ceased,  and  those  in  use 
beginning  to  fail  from  hard  work,  with  the  sanction  of  the 
controller  of  supply  and  transport.  Captain  Graeme  commenced 
converting  mule-carts  with  broken  neaps  into  bullock-carts 
with  the  ordinary  yoke.  This  was  a  great  success,  as  those  in 
charge  were  enabled  to  purchase  a  very  fair  supply  of  draught 
bullocks  from  the  natives  of  the  country,  and  thus  they  had  as 
many  as  600  carts  at  a  time  available. 

The  veterinary  department  was  a  source  of  great  anxiety 
to  head-quarters,  for  on  leaving  Bombay  the  establishment  was 
miserably  insufficient.  However,  among  the  French  and  Italian 
muleteers  there  were  collected  some  eight  or  ten  men  who  had 
a  fair  knowledge  of  tlie  first  principles  of  veterinary  practice. 
This  was  the  utmost  help  that  could  be  rendered  to  the  surgeons, 
many  of  whom  were  yoimg  men  who  had  but  recently  entered 
the  army,  but  who  nevertheless  by  dint  of  energy  and  willing- 
ness did  good  service.  These  oflBcers  were  imder  the  immediate 
orders  of  Veterinary  Surgeon  Lamb,  whose  charge  was  an 
enormous  one,  consisting  of  upwards  of  30,000  animals,  even  at 
a  very  early  period,  but  which  rose  eventually  to  the  nimiber  of 
53,000  animals,  with  only  ten  surgeons  to  assist  him.  These 
,  gentlemen  had  to  perform,  under  the  existing  state  of  things, 
extraordinary  and  unusual  duties,  having  constantly  to  com- 
pound their  own  medicines,  administer  them,  and  attend  in- 
dividually to  the  washing  and  dressing  of  the  animals  in  the 
sick  depots,  for  want  of  subordinates  to  assist  them. 

The  eflForts  made  to  procure  suflScient  animals  for  the  Expe- 
dition cost  much  labour  and  money.  The  English  consuls  at 
Malaga,  Alicante,  Cadiz,  Barcelona,  Genoa,  Tripoli,  Beyrout,  Con- 
stantinople, Smyrna,  Gibraltar,  and  Malta  were  specially  directed 
to  use  all  means  to  procure  mules.  Officers  accompanied  by 
veterinary  surgeons  were  despatched  to  examine  and  select 
those  fit  for  service  as  they  were  brought  to  the  several  depots. 
Under  the  complicated  system  of  English  departmental  govern- 
ment a  larger  number  of  oflBcers  was  required  for  this  work 
than  were  really  needed,  and  as  a  consequence  the  whole  be- 
came very  expensive. 

To  expedite  as  much  as  possible  the  forwarding  of  stores  to 
the  front,  and  to  aid  the  Lowland  Transport  Train,  a  short 
railway  was  laid,  extending  from  Zoulla  to  Koomaylee.  This 


346 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


prevented  the  possibility  of  the  mules  being  kept  on  the  Zoulla 
beach,  which  liad  proved  so  fatal  to  them  when  they  first 
arrived;  and  obviated  the  necessity  of  sending  the  bullock- 
carts  to  travel  over  the  hot  sands. 

As  fast  as  each  ship  unloaded  its  cargo  on  the  bunder  *  the 
coolie  gangs  loaded  the  railway  cars,  after  which  the  locomotive 
rushed  with  its  train  to  Koomaylee  Station,  a  distance  of 
twelve  miles.  Koomaylee  was  thus  made  a  vast  depot,  and  the 
arrangements  were  such  that  two  or  three  hundred  carts  could 
load  at  the  same  time ;  and  from  thence  to  Senafe  and  Atti- 
gratt  was  a  good  road.  The  rails  used  in  the  construction  of 
the  railway  were  very  slight,  weighing  only  301bs.  per  yard,  or 
25  tons  per  mile.  The  sleepers  were  six  feet  long,  and  three- 
fourths  of  a  cubic  foot  in  diameter.  The  locomotives,  three  in 
number,  were  poor,  rickety  things,  but  still  well  adapted  to  the 
task  in  hand.  They  managed  to  haul  twelve  or  fifteen  freighted 
cars  from  Zoulla  to  Koomaylee  in  an  hour. 

The  telegraph  proved  most  useful  to  everyone;  to  the 
general  officers  as  well  as  to  the  various  depot  superintendents. 
If  there  was  a  deficiency  of  provisions  at  one  post,  a  telegraph 
message  sent  to  the  superintendent  at  Senafe  or  Koontiaylee 
would  bring  a  fresh  supply  in  two  or  three  days,  or  a  news 
despatch  could  be  sent  to  the  mail  steamer  directly  from  the 
front,  at  the  very  last  minute  of  her  departure  from  Annesley 
Bay. 

It  was  proposed,  when  the  Abyssinian  Expedition  was  first 
organised,  to  lay  a  Eed  Sea  cable  from  Souakin,  on  the 
coast  of  Egypt,  as  far  as  Annesley  Bay.  From  Souakin  a 
telegraph  could  have  been  laid  to  Cairo,  where  it  would 
meet  with  the  Suez,  Cairo,  and  Alexandria  line,  whicli 
connects  with  the  London,  Malta,  and  Alexandria  cable.  But 
the  enonnous  outlay  that  the  construction  of  the  proposed  line 
would  demand  deterred  the  English  Government  from  pursuing 
this  enterprise. 

From  Antalo  to  Magdala  was  but  seventeen  days'  march^ 
allowing  ten  miles  for  each  day.  General  Napier,  then,  with 
some  reason  believed  that  thirty  days  would  bring  him  before 
Magdala.  For  the  transporting  of  the  provisions  for  10,000 
men,  inclusive  of  muleteers  and  camp  followers,  for  thirty  days, 

>  Pier. 


NAPIER'S  FORETHOUGHT  AND  SKILL. 


847 


allowing  150  lbs.  for  each  animal,  would  require  4,000  mules  ; 
for  conveying  baggage,  tents,  rocket  and  mountain  guns, 
ammunition  &c.,  rather  more  than  that  number. 

It  would  not  do  by  any  means  to  trust  entirely  to  the  sup- 
plies procurable  from  the  country.  With  fifteen  days'  forage  on 
hand,  we  might  well  hope,  from  previous  experience,  that  we 
could  keep  starvation  away.  Halts  might  be  frequent,  extend- 
ing the  seventeen  days'  march  to  two  months',  perhaps.  Some 
flour  and  bread  might  also  be  expected  from  the  country 
people,  when  once  they  had  seen  the  glimmer  of  real  silver 
coin.  From  which  the  reader  may  perceive  that  against  con- 
tingencies the  army  was  very  well  guarded  by  the  calm  and 
skilful  foresight  of  the  veteran,  Greneral  Napier.  What  did 
happen  on  the  eventful  march  will  be  seen  in  the  following 
pages. 

How  far  wrong  and  how  far  right  Napier  was  in  his  calcula- 
tions will  also  be  seen.  With  one  hundred  thousand  dollars  in 
his  treasury.  Sir  Eobert  Napier  could  do  wonders.  Backsheesh 
to  chiefs  and  presents  to  village  magnates  were  necessary,  and 
would  ensure,  if  it  were  possible,  supplies  of  all  kinds.  Dollars 
were  oiur  only  coin. 

The  currency  in  Abyssinia  is  coticular  blocks  of  rock  salt 
eight  inches  long,  one  inch  in  width,  and  one  in  thickness. 
These  are  dug  out  from  the  salt  plains  of  Hashed.  No  coin  is 
recognised  except  the  Austrian  dollar  of  the  year  1780,  intro- 
duced, since  that  year,  to  replace  the  native  gold  withdrawn. 

Getieral  Napier  tried  hard  to  introduce  rupees  or  shillings 
in  the  country,  and  even  wrote  to  Prince  Kussai  about  it ;  but 
it  soon  proved  impracticable.  Had  he  been  successful,  the  cost 
of  articles  would  probably  have  been  just  one-half  the  prices  that 
were  paid. 

The  natives,  besides  being  veiy  tenacious  for  the  dollar, 
were  also  very  careful  that  the  distinguishing  marks  were 
visible  on  the  coin  ;  otherwise  they  were  refused  altogether. 
These  are  a  portrait  of  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa,  with  a 
diadem  of  pearls  around  the  head,  a  pearl  brooch  on  the 
shoulder,  and  the  mint  mark  S.F.  It  was  very  essential, 
therefore,  that  all  the  dollars  were  of  the  true  orthodox  stamp. 
As  there  were  not  enough  dollars  of  that  reign  extant  new 
ones  had  to  be  coined,  and  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  500,000 


348 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


of  this  obsolete  coin  were  struck  at  the  Imperial  Mint  at  Vienna 
expressly  for  the  Abyssinian  Expedition, 

The  first  morning  after  the  arrival  of  the  army  at  Antalo, 
I  determined  to  call  upon  tlie  General-in-Chief,  it  being  the 
custom  in  all  countries  for  civilians  to  report  themselves  at  the 
head-quarters  of  a  military  cantonment.  Hitherto  he  had  been 
as  invisible  to  me  as  the  Mikado  of  Japan  or  the  Grand 
Llama  of  Thibet,  engirt  as  he  was  by  the  reverence  due  to  his 
high  position,  and  surrounded  by  an  impenetrable  cordon  of 
guards,  and  a  barrier  of  brilliant  uniformed  officers,  with  high- 
sounding  titles. 

^  Can  I  see  the  General  ? '  I  asked  Captain  S  ,  who  was 

acting  aide-de-camp,  a  fine,  handsome,  sturdy  gentleman. 

^  WTiat  General  ? '  said  he,  enquiringly. 

*  Sir  Robert  Napier,  sir,'  I  answered,  blandly. 

*  Oh !  you  mean  His  Excellency  Sir  Robert  Napier  ?'  said  he, 
slightly  lifting  his  eyeln-ows. 

*  Certainly,  sir,'  I  responded ;  '  I  mean  His  Excellency  Sir 
Robert  Napier,  Lieutenant-General,  Commander-in-Chief  of  the 
Abyssinian  Expeditionary  Field  Force,  now  in  Abyssinia.' 

*  You  cannot  see  him  just  now,'  he  replied,  with  the  ghost  of 
a  smile  upon  his  features.    ^  He  is  at  breakfast.' 

In  the  evening  I  called  again,  but  His  Excellency  was  busy 
with  some  native  chiefs  who  had  called  to  pay  their  respects. 

The  next  morning  I  repeated  my  call,  but  unfortunately 
the  Conmiander-in-Chief  was  again  at  breakfast.  In  the  after- 
noon I  called  once  more,  but  he  was  taking  his  siesta. 

The  third  morning  I  presented  myself  at  the  hour  of  nine, 
but  he  was  asleep,  having  been  very  busy  until  midnight  the 
night  before.  In  the  afternoon,  at  two  o'clock,  I  paid  a  visit  at 
head-quarters,  but  he  was  at  tiflBn. 

The  fourth  morning  I  called  at  the  hour  of  eleven,  and 

presented  myself  at  Captain  S  's  tent  for  the  seventh  time, 

with  the  view  to  obtain  permission  to  call  upon  Sir  Robert. 

'Is  His  Excellency  Sir  Robert  Napier  engaged,  sir?'  I 
asked,  very  politely. 

'  Ah  1  may  I  ask  your  name,  sir  ? '  said  Captain  S  . 

*  There  is  my  card,  sir.' 

'  H'm  1  yes,  I  see.  Mr.  Stanley,  Correspondent  of  the  "  New 


MY  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  OLD  SOLDIER  OP  CHINA.  349 


York  Herald."  If  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  seat  yourself,  I 
will  go  and  inform  Sir  Robert.' 

I  seated  myself,  and  began  to  imagine  what  sort  of  a  recep- 
tion I  should  receive  from  the  Commander-in-Chief. 

'  Sir  Kobert  Napier  will  be  happy  to  see  you,  sir,'  broke  in 
Captain  S  . 

Following  this  officer,  I  entered  a  commodious  tent  used  as 
an  ante-chamber,  lined  with  yellow  cotton  and  carpeted  with 
Persian  carpets,  and  partitioned  from  the  interior  by  a  silken 
curtain.  Sitting  at  a  table  covered  with  newspapers  and  docu- 
ments was  a  man  in  an  undress  uniform,  with  a  slightly  greyish 
head  and  moustache,  looking  as  serene  and  contented  as  a 
farmer  who  had  just  been  over  his  estates,  and  was  satisfied 
with  the  expectation  of  a  good  harvest. 

'  Mr.  Stanley — Sir  Robert,'  was  the  introduction  of  Captain 
S  . 

At  the  sound  of  a  voice  the  serene-looking  gentleman  rose 
and  acknowledged  the  introduction  with  an  affable  inclina- 
tion of  the  head,  inviting  me  to  a  seat  by  a  motion  of  his 
hand. 

^  Allow  me,  Sir  Robert,  to  show  you  what  introductory  letters 
I  may  have  for  your  examination.' 

After  reading  them,  he  said  that  he  was  most  happy  to  see 
me,  and  inquired  whether  I  had  been  accorded  every  facility 
for  accompanying  the  Expedition. 

'  No,  sir  ;  not  quite,'  said  I.  '  I  was  informed,  by  a  telegram 
from  the  Secretary  of  the  India  Office,  that  all  facilities  would 
be  afforded  me,  but  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  experienced  any 
yet.  What  I  have  is  my  own,  save  one  baggage  animal  given  me 
at  ZouUa.  I  was  misled  when  I  arrived  at  ZouUa  by  persons 
who  said  that  you  were  about  to  make  a  dash  upon  Magdala, 
and  I  refused  a  tent  upon  that  account ;  but  I  soon  found  my 
error,  and  applied  for  one,  but  without  success.  If  you  can  let 
me  have  a  tent  and  a  baggage  animal,  I  should  feel  quite 
comfortable.' 

'  How  did  you  come  from  Senafe  ? '  he  asked,  in  a  kind 
tone. 

*  With  Captain  Smelfimgus.  He  and  I  live  together  in  a 
tmte  cCabri.^ 


350 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


'  How !  Is  Captain  Smelfungus  in  this  camp  ? '  he  asked,  in 
astonishment. 

*  Yes,  sir  ;  I  have  just  left  him.' 

'  H'm  !  I  was  not  aware  of  that ;  but  to  recur  to  yourself. 
Eeally  I  do  not  believe  that  I  can  spare  you  a  tent  for  yourself 
alone,  as  I  intend  to  make  forced  marches  towards  Magdala. 
All  oflScers  are  expected  to  live  there  in  a  tent ;  and,  if  you  can 
content  yourself  with  your  friend's  accommodation,  it  will  be  by 
far  the  best  plan.  However,  if  you  want  a  tent  very  badly  the 
quartermaster-general  is  authorised  to  sell  to  civilian  gentle- 
men what  they  need.  Horses,  also,  you  can  purchase  from  the 
natives  about  here.  As  for  rations,  I  can  give  you  an  order 
upon  the  commissariat,  and  you  can  settle  there  every  month, 
or  whenever  they  call  upon  you.  I  must  not  show  more  par- 
tiality to  you  than  I  do  to  the  correspondents  of  the  English 
Press ;  but  whatever  privileges  they  have  shall  be  extended  to 
you.  I  would  advise  you  to  take  as  little  baggage  as  possible, 
because  to-morrow  the  Adjutant-General  will  issue  an  order  to 
reduce  all  baggage  to  seventy-five  pounds.  In  that  case  you 
have  all  you  need  in  your  two  horses  and  the  tente  d'oftri.' 

^  Thank  you,  General.  I  also  wished  to  ask  you  if  you  will 
be  kind  enough  to  let  me  see  any  precis  of  intelligence  con- 
cerning political  matters  you  may  think  fit  to  send  around  to 
the  other  correspondents,  as  the  "  New  York  Herald  "  expects 
me  to  telegraph  any  news  you  may  give  me,  or  I  may  become 
acquainted  with.' 

'  I  shall  be  delighted.  Certainly ;  you  may  see  whatever 
the  Adjutant-General,  or  Political  Secretary,  may  give  out  to 
the  other  gentlemen.' 

Before  parting,  the  General  kindly  offered,  if  my  ready  funds 
failed,  to  supply  me  with  any  reasonable  amount  on  a  draft,  and 
extended  an  invitation  to  me  to  dine  with  him  that  evening. 

At  seven  in  the  evening  precisely,  the  invited  guests  of  Sir 
Robert  Napier  were  assembled  around  tlie  lengthy  camp-table, 
heavy  with  plate,  mugs  and  glasses,  decanters  and  cruets. 
Smelfungus  was  of  the  party,  profusely  and  wonderfully  de- 
corated with  medals  and  orders  of  all  nations.  Before  seating 
ourselves,  Sir  Robert  made  his  appearance,  dressed  very  im- 
pretendingly  in  the  dark  undress  uniform  which  he  generally 
wore.    Introductions  followed  his  appearance.   Colonel  Penn, 


A  GALAXY  OF  BRAVES. 


351 


of  the  Mountain  Train  Battery ;  Colonel  Frazer,  of  the  11th 
Hussars  ;  Captain  Speedy,  from  New  Zealand,  the  interpreter 
for  the  English  army,  and  whilom  commander  of  King  Theo- 
dore's army ;  Mr.  Eichard  Holmes,  archaeologist  from  the  British 

Museum  ;  Captain  S  ;  Lord  C         H  ,  aide-de-camp ; 

Captain  Harden  ;  Captain  Smelfungiis,  of  Universal  Notoriety, 
and  myself  were  then  seated.  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  be 
placed  next  to  the  gigantic  Ajax — Speedy,  and  opposite  to 
General  Napier. 

Every  one  had  provided  himself  with  his  own  drinking-horn 
or  glass,  knife  and  fork,  spoon,  camp-castor,  and  napkins.  The 
plate  and  other  ware  were  the  General's.  His  khansamah,* 
khitmigar,^  and  hamili,^  were  very  well-bred,  quiet,  and 
attentive  servants,  who  knew  by  intuition  the  wants  of  each 
guest,  and  administered  to  them  without  any  noise  or  disturb- 
ance to  break  or  distract  the  harmonious  clatter  of  table  ' 
implements.  The  soup  was  brought  in ;  it  proved  to  be  an  ad- 
mirable and  most  nutritious  dish,  concocted  out  of  compressed 
vegetables  from  the  commissariat.  Scarcely  a  word  was  uttered 
by  anyone  during  the  business  of  imbibing  the  soup. 

The  soup  being  despatched,  the  entrees  were  brought  in  by 
the  white-robed  and  cleanly  servants,  while  the  gentlemen  leaned 
back  in  their  chairs  to  obtain  fresh  strength  for  a  renewal  of 
their  eflForts. 

The  camp-manufactured  wax  candles  diflfused  a  soft  light 
over  the  table  in  harmony  with  the  pale  yellow  of  the  tent 
lining ;  outside  was  heard  the  dull  boom  of  bass  drums,  and 
tho  shrill  sound  of  the  fifes ;  and  now  and  then  the  cry  of 
'  Post — all  is  well  I '  prosaic  sounds  in  comparison  with  the 
romance  of  tlie  scene  enacted  in  General  Napier's  tent. 

Indian  patties,  brain  cutlets,  and  veal  pies  artistically 
gotten  up  were  laid  before  us.  As  there  was  nothing  of  that 
chilliness  apparent  in  set  dinners,  neighbours  helped  each 
other  freely  with  the  various  viands. 

Conversation  was  not  very  lively,  nor  do  I  believe  it  is 
good  during  dinner  to  speak  much  ;  it  generally  cools  the 
dishes,  engenders  a  little  distaste  for  food,  and  appears  very 
much  as  if  people  contemned  the  culiuary  skill  of  the  chef 

*  Butler.  *  Under  butler. 

'  Bearer  or  keeper  of  bangalows  in  India. 


352  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

de  cuwine.  All  the  gentlemen  present  were  epicures  in  Indian 
cookery,  and,  like  well-bred  people,  paid  particular  attention 
to  the  grateful  dinner. 

Then  followed  ragouts,  potato  cakes,  vegetables  and  herbs 
of  every  description,  cotelettes  and  fricassees,  all  of  which 
received  due  attention.  After  these  came  beefsteak  pie,  boiled 
hump,  roast  fowls,  and  roast  sirloin,  cooked  a  VAnglaise.  As 
well  as  circumstances  permitted  these  edibles  were  also  excel- 
lent. 

To  close  up  the  substantials  came  the  ciiri^j  de  poulet  and 
snowy  rice,  elipiting  from  the  bearded  gentlemen  unqualified 
encomiums  upon  its  delicate  and  piquant  flavour.  In  my 
opinion  the  curry  was  abominable,  giving  me  a  foretaste  of 
the  liquid  Are  which  is  said  to  be  the  portion  of  all  sinners  in 
the  Hereafter.  When  it  was  despatched  it  appeared  to  have 
unlocked  the  conversational  powers  of  the  whole  party. 

'  The  pleasure  of  a  glass  of  Abyssinian  tej  *  with  you, 
Captain  Smelfungus,'  said  Sir  Eobert  Napier,  blandly. 

^  With  the  greatest  pleasure.  Sir  Robert,'  replied  the  Cap- 
tain, in  blander  accents ;  '  I  am  a  great  admirer  of  tej.' 

Simultaneously  we  all  inclined  our  glasses  to  the  Greneral 
and  to  each  other,  and  each  imbibed  with  satisfaction  a  hom- 
ful  of  the  native  brewed  beer. 

A  slight  sketch  of  each,  as  they  were  all  most  notable 
persons  in  the  campaign,  and  will  be  heard  of  often  as  we  pro- 
ceed, will  not,  I  hope,  be  out  of  place  here. 

The  General-in-Chief  was  a  man  of  fifty  or  fifty-five  years 
of  age,  stout  and  well  built.  His  face  was  remarkable  for  the 
kindliness  of  the  blue  eyes,  the  genuine  gentleness  of  the  coun- 
tenance lit  up  by  them,  and  the  smile  that  continually  played 
around  his  lips.  To  all  Sir  Kobert  was  extremely  bland, 
affable,  and  kind ;  sometimes  there  lurked  in  his  tones  some- 
thing akin  to  a  sarcastic  polite^se,  and  at  such  times  he  was 
more  plausibly  phrased  than  ever. 

Colonel  Frazer  was  the  very  picture  of  a  military  chevalierj 
grand,  yet  polite  at  all  times;  a  steady,  vigorous  being, 
endowed  with  frankness,  good  natiure,  and  redundant  health. 
Colonel  Penn  was  a  veteran  in  military  matters,  but  not  in 

'  Abyssinian  beer. 


PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 


353 


age,  being  a  youngish  person.  A  frank  and  hearty  cordiality 
and  an  irresistible  energy  were  his  principal  characteristics. 

Captain  Charles  Speedy  was  an  Ajax  in  truth.  His  limbs 
might  have  challenged  the  envy  of  a  Hercules ;  he  stood  six 
feet  six  inches  in  his  stockings.  The  adjective  '  long '  could  be 
aflSxed  with  justice  to  anything  appertaining  to  him;  he  was 
long-shanked,  long-handed,  long-bearded,  and  long-wise  in 
every  way,  shape,  and  form,  except  being  long-sighted.  He 
was,  in  fact,  extremely  short-sighted,  and  wore  glasses  at  all 
times.  The  prominent  features  of  his  face  were — high,  salient 
cheek  bones,  a  sloping  brow,  red  bushy  beard,  and  kindly  blue 
eyes  strangely  contrasting  with  tlie  determined  expression  of 
his  mouth. 

Lord  C          H          was  a  manly-looking  boy  of  twenty, 

with  a  full  chest  and  a  tall,  robust  figure. 

Mr.  Holmes  was  a  specimen  of  the  British  volunteer,  on  all 
occasions  ready  to  uphold  British  dignity.  He  was  out  in 
Abyssinia  to  collect  manuscripts  and  antique  articles  for  the 
British  Museum. 

^Ah!  that's  a  jolly  drink,'  said  Speedy,  uttering  a  pathetic 
sigh,  and  wiping  his  beard  after  the  tej  ;  '  a  very  jolly  drink, 
say  I.' 

*  How  do  the  natives  make  it,  Mr.  Speedy  ? '  asked  General 
Napier. 

'  Well,  General,  there  are  different  ways  of  making  tej  in 
this  country.  In  this  province  they  put  a  quart  of  honey  in  a 
five-gallon  jar,  also  a  quart  of  strongest  arracki ;  they  then  fill 
the  jar  with  water,  and  let  it  stand  for  about  five  days,  wlien  the 
whole  will  be  well  fermented  and  ready  for  use.  The  Emperor 
Theodore  is  a  famous  man  for  the  manufacture  of  good  beer, 
but  he  seasons  it  pretty  strongly  with  the  arracki.' 

The  dessert  was  brought  after  this  extraordinary  revelation; 
and,  while  the  delicious  blancmange  and  custards  were  dis- 
cussed, topics  of  conversation  were  skilfully  introduced  by  the 
Chief. 

With  Mr.  Holmes  Sir  Robert  started  a  conversation  about 
spiritualism,  during  which  it  transpired  that  the  General  knew 
much  about  that  cabalistic  science. 

When  the  cofiee  was  brought,  and  our  Habanas  (the  gift  of 
Sir  Kobert)  were  fairly  lit,  the  General  commenced  on  other 

A  A 


351 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


subjects.  It  must  not  be  imagined  that  he  monopolised  the 
conversation  ;  quite  the  contrary.  Nor  was  conversation  confined 
to  any  one  subject ;  it  embraced  literature,  fine  arts,  poetry, 
sculpture,  philology.  From  tliese  subjects  we  drifted  by  easy 
stages  to  a  learned  dissertation  upon  Governments,  where  the 
living  wrongs  committed  by  dysnomic  legislation  were  most 
graphically  related;  relative  comparisons  between  Monar- 
chical Governments  and  Republics,  where  the  General  most 
strenuously  maintained  his  opinions  by  multifarious  quotations 
from  classical  lawgivers  and  modem  essayists,  of  course  in 
favour  of  the  supreme  excellence  of  the  Constitutional  Mon- 
archism  of  England. 


1 


FAREWELL  TO  MY  FRIEND  SMELFUNGUS. 


355 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SMELFUITGUS  AJn>  I  PART— THE  BBITISH  PBESS — IKRB8P0N8IBLES  AUTD  THBIB 
PBOPHEGEBB — ^DISMAY  OF  THE  ANGLO-INDIANS — UNHAPPY  THEODORE! — 
POOR  CAPnVBS  I — POLITICAL  INTELLIGENCE — SIR  ROBERTAS  ABLE  GENERAL- 
SHIP AND  DIPLOMATIC  TALENTS — DELAY  IS  EXPLVINED — THE  *  ELEPHANTS 
OP  ASIA  '  IN  ABYSSINIA — THE  TRANSPORT  TRAIN. 

Immediately  after  the  events  recorded  in  the  last  chapter  I 
found  it  expedient  to  dissolve  my  connection  with  my  good 
friend  Smelfungus.  Accordingly  I  purchased  of  him  his  tent, 
and,  moving  up  to  head-quarters,  pitched  it  close  to  Captain 
Speedy's,  the  place  appointed  me  by  the  Quarter-Master-General. 

After  the  dinner  at  the  Commander-in-Chief's  quarters, 
during  the  two  weeks  the  army  remained  at  Antalo  the  invita- 
tions to  mess  came  thick  upon  me. 

The  English  Press  was  very  ably  represented  in  Abyssinia, 
and  the  correspondents  consisted  of  some  remarkable  literary 
lights.  I  do  not  mean  remarkable  in  any  invidious  sense ;  but 
each  one,  really  and  truly,  was  remarkable,  after  his  own  kind. 
They  all  messed  together ;  and  though  there  were  contrasting 
elements  in  their  natures,  yet  they  seldom  disagreed ;  in  fact 
there  was  more  harmony  in  the  Press  tent  than  in  any  other 
bell-shaped  domicile  in  the  army.  I  hope  I  shall  not  be  tra- 
ducing these  good  gentlemen,  as  I  bear  them  much  love  and 
respect,  if  I  give  them  the  credit  of  being  the  most  sociable 
mess  in  the  army,  as  well  as  the  most  lovable  and  good- 
tempered.' 

The  wheels  of  the  campaign  plaustrum,  in  spite  of  the  dark- 

*  The  British  Press  was  represented  by  my  friends  Dr.  Charles  Austin,  D.C.L., 
Times;  George  A.  Henty,  Esq.,  Standard;  W.  Owen  Whiteside,  Esq.,  Morning 

Post ;  Alex.  Shepherd,  Esq.,  Daili/  News ;  Adare,  jDoi/y  TelegrapK 

A  A  2 


356 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


some  prognostications  of  legions  of  irresponsibles,  moved  on 
with  dignifierl  pace,  like  the  car  of  fate,  slowly  but  surely. 

Very  few  indeed  had  as  yet  fallen  victims  to  the  voracious 
carnivorous  animals  that  were  said  to  infest  every  mountain, 
forest,  patch,  and  plain  in  Abyssinia. 

Not  one  had,  as  yet,  mistaken  poison  for  honey,  or  died  by 
eating  the  delicacy  ;  neither  liad  a  soul  suffered  any  great  in- 
convenience from  drinking  water  from  old  wells. 

Xo  Houssas  had  been  found,  neitlier  liad  the  Shohoes,  the 
Agames,  or  the  Hazortites  proved  unfriendly;  rather  the  reverse. 
Wliatever  the  commissariat  chose  to  buy  co|^J|g.  baMgbW 

'No  liippopotami  had  darkened  the  su^iyit  of  our  patba, 
nor  liad  any  esurient  lions  and  cheetahs  Jjoghteiied  any  quo 
of  us  with  their  glaring  eyeballs  in  the  o^^Ho  loEthaQme 
cerastes  had  nestled  in  our  blankets ;  no  ^Hhtilig  y^** 
spotted,  pink-headed  fly  had  been  seen.  ^^^^t 

The  murderous  totse  had  vanished  out|Pi|pit  and  cmi 
our  minds ;  the  tzaltzalya  had  spread  his  t^'birrxEg  wings 
had  hastily  stolen  away ;  the  earth  had  oM}me  fair  to  1 
upon ;  the  mountains  looked  down  benignBt^J  uptyti  ua ; 
2)lains  laughed  joyously  for  us;  the  water  flowed  abum 
from  the  spouts  of  N'or1x)n's  pumps ;  even  the  air  appeared 
lucent  after  our  arrival  at  Antalo. 

Lo !  it  was  miraculous  !  All  England  &tooil  amazed ;  the 
false  prophets,  with  their  false  vaticination^  mmi  need  buflh 
their  everlasting  moan  I 

A  general  order  was  issued  that  a  furtlier  advance  would  be 
made  in  two  or  three  days,  with  the  command  that  a 
should  reduce  their  kits  to  seventy-five  pounds, 
ofHcers  must  positively  limit  their  baggage  to  seventy-five 
pounds,  and  their  studs  to  two  horses.  It  was  further  decreed 
that  twelve  soldiers  should  club  together  in  one  tent,  and  that 
two  officers  must  be  contented  to  live  together  in  a  tent. 

*  Oh,  Anglo-Indian  officers !  dainty,  heaven-bom  children  I 
f-cions  of  patrician  parents !  had  it  come  to  this  ?  Uneasy  and 
wrathful  were  they  in  this  extremity  1  The  prudent  old  Chief 
had  reserved  this  painful  determination  until  they  had  arrived  at 
Antalo.' 

'  Seventy-five  pounds — seventy-five  ;  just  think  of  it !  It  is 
a  most  preposterous  order !    I  declare  I  will  resign  sooner  than 


FAREWELL  TO  MY  FEIEND  SMELFUNGUS. 


355 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SMELFUVOTJS  AND  I  PART — THE  BRITISH  PRESS — IRRESPONSIBLES  AKD  THEIR 
PROPHECOXS — ^DISMAT  OP  THE  ANGLO-INDIANS — UNHAPPY  THEODORE! — 
POOR  CAPTIVBS  I — POLITICAL  INTELLIGENCE — SIR  ROBERTAS  ABLE  GENERAL- 
SHIP AND  DIPLOMATIC  TALENTS — DELAY  IS  EXPLAINED — THE  '  ELEPHANTS 
OP  ASIA  '  IN  ABYSSINIA — THE  TRANSPORT  TRAIN. 

Immbdiatelt  AFTER  the  events  recorded  in  the  last  chapter  I 
found  it  expedient  to  dissolve  my  connection  with  my  good 
friend  Smelfungus.  Accordingly  I  purchased  of  him  his  tent, 
and,  moving  up  to  head-quarters,  pitched  it  close  to  Captain 
Speedy's,  the  place  appointed  me  by  the  Quarter-Master-General. 

After  the  dinner  at  the  Commander-in-Chief's  quarters, 
during  the  two  weeks  the  army  remained  at  Antalo  the  invita- 
tions to  mess  came  thick  upon  me. 

The  English  Press  was  very  ably  represented  in  Abyssinia, 
and  the  correspondents  consisted  of  some  remarkable  literary 
lights.  I  do  not  mean  remarkable  in  any  invidious  sense ;  but 
each  one,  really  and  truly,  was  remarkable,  after  his  own  kind. 
They  all  messed  together ;  and  though  there  were  contrasting 
elements  in  their  natures,  yet  they  seldom  disagreed ;  in  fact 
there  was  more  harmony  in  the  Press  tent  than  in  any  other 
bell-shaped  domicile  in  the  army.  I  hope  I  shall  not  be  tra- 
ducing these  good  gentlemen,  as  I  bear  them  much  love  and 
respect,  if  I  give  them  the  credit  of  being  the  most  sociable 
mess  in  the  army,  as  well  as  the  most  lovable  and  good- 
tempered.' 

The  wheels  of  the  campaign  plaustrum,  in  spite  of  the  dark- 

»  The  British  Press  was  represented  by  my  friends  Dr.  Charles  Austin,  D.C.L., 
Times;  George  A,  Henty,  Esq.,  Standard;  W.  Owen  Whiteside,  Esq.,  Morning 

Post ;  Alex.  Shepherd,  Esq.,  Daili/  News ;  Adare,  Dailt/  TUegraph, 

A  A  2 


35(5 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


some  prognostications  of  legions  of  irresponsibles,  moved  on 
with  dignified  pace,  like  the  car  of  fate,  slowly  but  surely. 

Very  few  indeed  had  as  yet  fallen  victims  to  the  voracious 
carnivorous  animals  that  were  said  to  infest  every  mountain, 
forest,  patch,  and  plain  in  Abyssinia. 

Not  one  had,  as  yet,  mistaken  poison  for  honey,  or  died  by 
eating  the  delicacy  ;  neither  had  a  soul  suffered  any  great  in- 
convenience from  drinking  water  from  old  wells. 

No  Houssas  had  been  found,  neither  had  the  Shohoes,  the 
Agames,  or  the  Hazortites  proved  unfriendly;  rather  the  reverse- 
Whatever  the  commissariat  chose  to  buy  could  be  bought. 

No  hippopotami  had  darkened  the  sunlight  of  Oitt  paths, 
nor  had  (iny  esurient  lions  and  cheetahs  frightened  any  one 
of  us  with  their  glaring  eyeballs  in  the  dark ;  no  loathsome 
cerastes  had  nestled  in  our  blankets;  no  disgusting  yellow- 
spotted,  pink-headed  fly  had  been  seen. 

The  murderous  tetse  had  vanished  out  of  sight  and  out  of 
our  minds ;  the  tzaltzalya  had  spread  his  whirring  wings  and 
liad  hastily  stolen  away ;  the  earth  had  become  fair  to  look 
upon ;  the  mountains  looked  down  benignantly  upon  us  ;  the 
plains  hmghed  joyously  for  us;  the  water  flowed  abundantly 
from  the  spouts  of  Norton's  pumps ;  even  the  air  appeared  more 
lucent  after  our  arrival  at  Antalo. 

Lo !  it  was  miraculous  I  All  England  stood  amazed ;  the 
false  prophets,  with  their  false  vaticinations,  must  need  hush 
their  everlasting  moan  I 

A  general  order  was  issued  that  a  further  advance  would  be 
made  in  two  or  three  days,  with  the  command  that  all  soldiers 
should  reduce  their  kits  to  seventy-five  pounds,  and  that 
uflScers  must  positively  limit  their  baggage  to  seventy-fivo 
pounds,  and  their  studs  to  two  horses.  It  was  further  decreed 
that  twelve  soldiers  should  club  together  in  one  tent,  and  that 
two  oflicers  miLst  be  contented  to  live  together  in  a  tent. 

'  Oh,  Anglo-Indian  officers  I  dainty,  heaven-bom  children  1 
i'cions  of  patrician  parents  !  had  it  come  to  this  ?  Uneasy  and 
wrathful  were  they  in  this  extremity  1  The  prudent  old  Chief 
liad  reserved  this  painful  determination  until  they  had  arrived  at 
Antalo.' 

'  Seventy-five  pounds — seventy-five  ;  just  think  of  it !  It  is 
a  most  preposterous  order !    I  declare  I  will  resign  sooner  than 


ANGLO-INDIANS'  DISMAY  ! 


357 


go  on  with  a  miserable  seventy-five  pounds  of  baggag^e  I '  and 
fluffy  old  majors  and  colonels,  who  had  served  twenty-five  years 
in  India,  vented  their  indignation  in  fine  style.  Sir  Robert 
was  inexorable;  but  the  Anglo-Indians  were  equally  deter- 
mined to  take  as  much  as  possible — on  tlic  sly !  Nimierous 
were  those  who  threatened  to  writ^  to  the  War  J)ffice  ;  but  in 
the  meantime  the  Expedition  would  be  over. 

The  Pioneer  Forc(.»,  under  (iuartcr-Master-General  Phayi'e, 
was  ordered  ahead  to  clear  tlie  road,  remove  obstructions,  and 
report  on  the  prospects  in  tlie  front.  Two  days  passed  ])y,  and 
the  report  was  presented  by  a  courier  from  Colonel  Pliayre. 
It  was  admirably  written:  ponderous  and  learned,  elaborate 
also,  though  a  little  too  florid,  with  a  clause,  however,  that  a 
road  GOiild  not  be  made  across  the  Aleggie  range  in  less  than  a 
week. 

'  It  cannot  be  accomplished  sooner,'  wrote  Phayre ;  *  the 
country  before  us  is  nothing  but  a  succession  of  ranges  inter- 
sected by  deep  gaps  and  tangled  ravines.  The  slopes  of  the 
mountains  are  almost  perpendicidar ;  a  series  of  terraces,  or 
escarpments,  must  be  cut  through  before  the  army  can  liopo  to 
proceed  further,' 

'  So,  this  is  bad  news,'  said  Napier  to  Speedy  ;  '  I  wonder  if 
no  other  way  can  be  found  without  going  too  far  out  of  our  way.' 

Speedy  asked  of  some  of  his  spies  tlie  best  way  to  Lake 
Ashangi,  our  first  objective  point. 

'  Oh,  the  road  was  easy ;  tliere  was  a  path  would  take  the 
army  clear  to  the  Lake,'  replied  the  spies. 

These  sanguine  people  were  sent  with  Captain  McGregor ; 
and  assuredly  a  path  was  found,  both  straiglit  and  clear,  with- 
out any  deviation  from  the  intended  route.  Colonel  Phayre 
had  relied  too  implicitly  on  tlie  information  of  natives. 

It  is  a  noticeable  fact  that  the  literal  truth  was  never  told  in 
Abyssinia.  All  Abyssinians  are  the  most  stupendous  liars,  and 
everything  related  of  the  country  ahead  was  certain  to  be  found 
false  as  we  journeyed  along.  Colonel  Phayre's  reports,  when 
based  upon  native  information,  became  as  incredible  as  the  effu- 
sions of  the  Lond<m  seers ;  and  the  rumours  that  were  wafted 
one  day  of  the  political  aftairs  or  the  whereabouts  of  Theodore, 
were  sure  to  be  belied  by  the  official  jj^'i  cia  of  the  following  day. 

We  were  as  ignorant  of  the  next  day's  station  as  though  a 


358 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Qiiarter-Master-General  had  not  been  sent  before  us  to  explore 
and  lay  down  the  line  of  march. 

One  day  we  received  intelligence  that  the  vineyards  of 
Abyssinia  had  been  fouod ;  that  the  country  presented  the 
aspect  of  superlative  civilisation  ;  that  the  maidens  were  very 
Cleopatras  and  Judiths  in  their  nut-brown  beauty  and  queenly 
graces ;  tliat  cultivated  fields  expanded  as  far  as  vision  could 
penetrate — in  short,  that  everything  was  diametrically  opposite 
to  what  we  discovered  it  to  be  when  the  army  came  upon  the 
scene.  All  tliis  was  as  wonderful  as  fable,  as  enigmatical  as  a 
rebus  I 

I  am  not  singular  in  these  opinions.  All  the  correspondents 
remarked  the  same  peculiarities ;  and  it  was  passing  strange,  in 
sucli  a  deceptive  atmosphere  and  illusive  mirage,  how  anybody 
could  ever  say  again  one  word  of  truth. 

'  Theodore  was  coming.'  '  He  was  not  coming.'  '  He  was 
sending  presents.'  'He  was  retreating  to  Kuara.'  'He  was 
fortifying  near  Lake  Haik.'  '  He  was  going  to  dispute  the 
Bechilo  Crossing.'  '  He  was  sending  presents  and  praying  for 
reconciliation.'  And  he  was  doing  neither.  Such  a  compound 
of  inscrutable  mysteries  was  never  manufactured  without  some 
legerdemain  of  the  Evil  One. 

Now  that  we  have  brought  the  Expeditionary  Force  to  the 
point  of  moving  forward,  let  us  glance  for  a  moment  at  the 
political  affairs  of  the  country,  and  see  whether  Theodore  has 
been  prospering  since  the  date  Britain  declared  war  against  him. 

We  left  him  in  our  introduction  struggling  manfully 
against  a  cursed  fate ;  beating  back  his  Briarean-handed  foes 
which  beset  him  round  about.  His  vast  empire  was  dissolving 
like  the  waxen  wings  of  Icarus  before  the  fierce  light  of  revolu- 
tion. The  lurid  fires  of  towns  and  hamlets  burning  flashed 
their  portentous  blaze  athwart  the  midnight  sky ;  the  wails  of 
widowed  women  and  fatherless  children  rent  the  air ;  the 
groans  of  dying  warriors,  murdered  by  cruel  hands,  called 
loudly  to  Heaven  for  vengeance  1 

It  is  said  that  30,000  men,  women,  and  children  were  de- 
stroyed by  crucifixion,  the  relentless  courbach,^  or  by  shooting, 
stabbing,  or  decapitation,  within  three  months.    At  such  times 

'  Courbach :  a  whip,  made  out  of  hippopotamiiB  hide. 


UNH.\PPY  THEODORE  ! 


359 


he  appeared  like  a  demon.  He  was  crazed  with  drunkenness 
and  despair.  He  slew  his  best  friends  and  councillors,  and 
condemned  to  death  tried  and  trusted  warriors.  Truly  is  it 
*  whom  God  purposeth  to  destroy,  He  taketh  away  his  imder- 
standing.'  Unhappy  Theodore!  None  was  more  wretched 
than  he ! 

The  captives  were  in  chains.  His  hatred  of  them  was  in- 
creasing. Three  or  four  of  them  had  been  condemned  to  death, 
but  the  sentence  had  been  commuted  to  imprisonment.  The 
batch  of  English  and  German  prisoners  lived  on,  having  but  a 
precarious  tenure  of  life  at  the  best  so  long  as  they  lay  at  the 
mercy  of  the  tyrant  Emperor.  Theodore  but  retained  them 
imder  the  impression  that  his  own  ends  were  attainable  only 
through  their  safety. 

The  captives  were  supplied  with  money  through  Colonel 
Merewether's  indefatigable  exertions  in  their  behalf.  Money 
was  powerful  even  in  prison,  and  their  otherwise  painful  condition 
was  greatly  ameliorated  through  the  luxuries  which  the  money 
purchased. 

The  British  Head-quarters  now  and  then  received  letters 
from  Consul  Cameron,  the  Enyoy  Rassam,  Lieutenant  Prideaux, 
Surgeon  Blanc,  the  reverend  gentlemen  St^m,  Flad,  and 
Waldmeier,  all  symphoniously  choral  in  their  lamentations, 
teeming  with  an  agony  which  seemed  to  have  become 
chronic. 

Cameron,  in  his  letters,  indulged  in  harrowing  phrases,  and 
was  nearly  certain  that  he  would  never  experience  the  joys  of 
liberty  again ;  but  he  was  resigned,  though  melancholy.  Poor 
Cameron  I 

Rassam  prayed  earnestly,  in  the  agony  of  his  spirit,  that 
Sir  Robert  Napier  would  deal  leniently  with  Theodore,  lest 
his  vengeful  temper  should  cause  him  to  wreak  murder  on 
them.    Poor  Rassam ! 

Mr.  Stem  relieved  his  misery  in  inditing  florid  accoimts  of 
the  country,  and  highly  interesting  descriptions  of  the  cruelty 
of  the  '  Wild  Boar  of  Ethiopia,'  upbraiding  the  British  Govern- 
ment for  its  unaccountably  apathetic  movements.  His  letters 
were  truly  pathetic,  in  composition.    Unhappy  Stern ! 

Messrs.  Flad,  Prideaux,  Blanc,  and  Waldmeier  wrote  very 
interesting  epistles,  wherein  they  endeavoured  to  enlighten 


360 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  British  public  as  much  as  possil)le  concerning  the  habits 
and  customs  of  the  people. 

The  Emperor  Theodore  received  the  war  proclamation  with 
well-acted  calmness,  and  showed  his  contempt  by  not  replying 
to  it,  or  to  any  letter  sent  by  Sir  Robert  Napier.  For  a  time 
the  man  was  a  mystery ;  but  information  was  smuggled  into 
camp  of  his  movements  and  his  intentions  through  the  aid  of 
funds  which  Eassam  possessed. 

The  following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  news  received  up  to 
March  12,  the  date  tlie  army  left  Antalo  for  Magdala  : — 

December  9,  1867. — Theodore  was  at  Debra  Tabor,  continu- 
ing his  evil  and  imbecile  course  of  alienating  the  affections  of 
his  men  by  '  killing  them  in  great  numbers.'  He  made  in^ 
cessant  efforts  to  increase  his  army,  but  the  largest  number  he 
could  rally  round  him  was  8,000  men. 

December  15.— A  messenger  arrived  from  Mr.  Bassam, 
bearing  a  letter  which  stated  that  a  large  force  under  Menilek, 
King  of  Shoa,  was  between  Magdala,  the  prison  fortress,  and 
the  Emperor's  camp,  and  that  there  was  an  intention  on 
Menilek's  part  to  make  a  conp  d'etat  in  favour  of  the  prisoners. 
Kussai,  of  Tigre,  was  professing  friendship,  but  there  were 
sinister  reports  that  under  the  mask  of  friendship  he  intended 
some  mischief. 

December  19. — The  reports  about  the  Prince  of  Tigre  were 
proved  to  be  unfounded.  A  message  came  to  camp  from  him 
wherein  he  asked,  very  naturally,  why  the '  Feringhees '  *  and  he 
should  not  be  friends?  That  his  foes  were  Napier's  foes, 
his  interests  British  interests.  '  Take  therefore  forage,  and  my 
prayers.' 

December  20. — Kussai's  ambassador  arrived  at  Senafe^  and 
was  delighted  with  his  reception.  He  returned  home  a  sworn 
friend  of  the  English. 

December  22. — An  important  messenger  from  Mr.  Flad 
arrived  at  Senafe.  Theodore  had  swept  down  from  the  heights 
of  Debra  Tabor,  and  with  one  fell  blow  had  annihilated  unready 
Menilek,  whose  coup  detat  was  to  liberate  the  prisoners.  He 
had  reached  Magdala,  and  was  then  about  to  return  to  Debra 
Tabor  with  his  captives. 


1  Ethiopian  for  '  English.' 


POLITICAL  INTELLIGENCE. 


361 


December  25. — Dr.  Krapf,  the  interpreter  at  that  time  for 
the  army,  returned  from  an  exploring  tour,  and  cross-questioned 
the  messenger  who  brought  the  startling  tidings  on  the  22nd 
inst.  The  man  confessed  it  was  all  a  falsehood,  after  it  was 
proved  to  be  so  by  the  date  of  letters  at  hand.  The  attack 
upon  Menilek  had  occurred  in  October  according  to  the 
false  tale-bearer ;  but  the  last  letter  received  from  Mr.  Flad 
was  dated  November  7. 

January  6,  1868. — Authentic  information  arrived  through  a 
letter  received  from  the  prisoners  at  Magdala,  stating  that 
Menilek  had  retired  to  his  own  country  of  Shoa  without  having 
accomplished  any  caup  d'etat.  The  country  intervening 
between  Magdala  and  the  Emperor's  camp  at  Debra  Tabor  was 
clear  of  all  enemies. 

Januai^y  15. — Information  received  that  Theodore  was 
moving  upon  Magdala  with  a  force  of  10,000  men  and  20  cannon, 
and  that  Gobayze,  Prince  of  Samen,  was  following  cautiously 
up  with  the  view  to  watch  his  movements. 

January  20. — Major  Grant,  the  Nile  explorer  and  com- 
pagnon  de  voyage  of  Speke,  stalled  on  his  mission  to  the  Prince 
of  Tigre  with  presents.  Major  Grant  did  good  service  in 
Abyssinia. 

January  21. — A  letter  arrived  from  Eassam,  stating:  *  Theo- 
dore is  moving  slowly  upon  Magdala.  Wagshum  Gobazye  has 
run  away.  Theodore  writes  to  me,  "  How  are  you  ?  Are  you 
very  well  ?  I  am  quite  well.  Fear  not,  I  am  coming  to  your 
assistance.  Keep  up  your  head  ;  I  shall  soon  be  with  you#  I 
have  one  big  mortar  and  plenty  of  long  cannon.  They  make 
a  terrible  noise  ;  but  they  are  heavy  to  move."  '  Dr.  Blanc 
wrote  in  this  wise :  '  We  are  delighted  to  hear  you  are  coming 
to  liberate  us.  How  it  will  end  no  one  can  say.  We  have  all 
prepared  for  the  worst ;  but  we  have  at  least  the  satisfaction  of 
knowing  that  our  deaths  will  be  avenged.' 

February  2. — Captain  Charles  Speedy  arrived  from  New 
Zealand,  to  act  as  interpreter  for  the  English  army. 

February  9. — Pricis  of  intelligence  furnished  by  officials 
read  as  follows :  '  Letters  were  received  te-day  by  Colonel  Mere- 
wether,  the  political  officer,  from  Mr.  Rassam  and  Dr.  Blanc, 
dated  Magdala,  January  17,  with  enclosures  from  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Flad,  dated  King's  Camp,  en  rmUe  to  Magdala,  January  9. 


362  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

All  the  captives  are  reported  well  up  to  date.  A  detachment  of 
troops,  which  had  left  Magdala  January  8,  had  joined  the  King 
in  his  camp,  and  had  received  charge  of  a  party  of  about  four 
hundred  prisoners  from  the  camp  to  Magdala.  The  imprisoned 
Europeans  were  among  the  number.  Their  leg-fetters  had 
been  removed,  and  handcuffs  substituted,  so  that  they  might 
march.  It  is  said  that  Mr.  Rosenthal  would  accompany  them. 
The  king  was  using  every  endeavour  to  have  the  road  made — 
working  with  his  own  hands,  and  making  the  free  Europeans 
(his  gun  manufacturers)  help.  He  had  made  some  slight  pro- 
gress, and  had  arrived  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley  of  the  Jeddah 
river.  Mr.  Rassam  calculates  he  would  reach  Magdala  about 
the  end  of  February  with  his  camp,  though  by  abandoning  the 
latter  he  could  in  one  day  arrive  there.  Tlie  people  of  Dalanta 
continued  submissive,  but  others  had  rebelled  again.  His 
soldiers  had  suffered  from  the  scarcity  of  provisions  and  trans- 
port. It  was  leported  at  Magdala  that  Menilek,  King  of 
Shoa,  had  again  set  out  for  Magdala,  better  prepared  to  act 
against  Theodore  than  on  his  former  visit.  A  detailed  com- 
mimication  from  one  of  the  captives  sent  to  one  of  his  friends 
in  England,  and  there  published,  has  by  some  means  reached 
the  King's  camp,  and  is  in  the  hands  of  ]\Ir.  Bardel.  Apprehen- 
sions are  entertained  that  it  may  do  injury.' 

Fehruanj  12. — Ambassador  of  Tigrean  Prince  arrived. 
Loud-sounding  blare  of  trumpets  and  thunderous  welcome  to 
the  dusky  representative  of  His  Sable  Highness  by  the  English 
army.    Friendly  sentiments  interchanged. 

Februa'iy  25. — Prince  Tigre  arrived  at  the  English  camp  at 
Houssein,  and  confirmed  with  his  own  lips  friendly  intentions. 

F^ruary  27. — Another  precis  issued  out,  stating  that 
Wagshum  Gobazye  and  King  Menilek  were  both  near  the 
Emperor  Theodore ;  so  near  that  the  camp  fires  of  Oobazye 
could  be  seen  from  Theodore's  camp.  The  Wagshum  had  sent 
him  a  message  which  was  deemed  impertinent,  and  Theodore 
therefore  put  the  herald  to  death.' 

March  6. — Monsieur  Munzinger,  French  consul  at  Mas- 
sowah,  accompanying  the  field  force  as  political  adviser  and 
interpreter,  started  on  a  mission  to  Gobazye's  camp  to  endeavour 
to  ally  him  with  the  English. 

As  we  have  traced  in  a  compact  manner  the  politicl^l 


SIR  ROBEHT'S  ABLE  GENERALSHIP. 


363 


features,  I  may  be  allowed  to  pass  a  few  comments  upon  the 
position  in  which  Sir  Eobert  Napier  found  himself  in  the  midst 
of  these  little  by-plays  of  Theodore,  Wagshum  Gobazye,  King 
Menilek,  and  the  Prince  of  Tigre  ;  and,  as  the  condition  of  the 
prisoners  is  improved,  we'll  let  them  rest  until  we  come  before 
Magdala. 

Sir  Robert  Napier's  aptness  for  command  was  established 
no  less  by  his  prudent  advance  into  the  interior  of  an  apparently 
unknown  country  than  in  his  skilful  diplomacy  with  the 
Ethiopian  potentates. 

Theodore,  the  Emperor,  by  his  misgovemment  and  unfit- 
ness to  rule  over  Abyssinia  through  his  unbridled  passions, 
alienated  from  him  every  prince  and  ras,  or  chief,  of  any  con- 
sequence in  what  was  once  his  empire. 

It  therefore  remained  for  Sir  Robert  to  take  advantage  of 
this  fact,  and  endeavour  to  retain  that  which  Theodore  had  lost 
— the  friendship  of  the  natives.  His  well-balanced  mind  was 
admirably  adapted  for  this  task. 

The  chiefs  gradually  became  stipendiaries  of  Sir  Robert,  and 
exercised  but  little  their  own  wills,  save  in  what  was  acceptable 
to  his  policy.  Prince  Kussai  had  been  already  secured.  Wag- 
shimi  Gobazye,  Prince  of  Samen,  was  said  to  be  inimical  to 
Theodore,  and  it  was  reported  that  he  had  an  army  of  40,000 
men  prepared  to  fight  him  at  any  moment.  Now  that  the 
army  was  approaching  his  coimtry,  attention  must  be  paid  to 
him,  and  his  services,  alliance,  and  good  will  secured. 

Monsieur  Munzinger  was  despatched  with  presents  and 
peaceable  overtures  to  him. 

Between  Lasta  and  Enderta,  in  which  latter  province  Antalo 
lay,  another  warlike  chief  was  encamped  on  a  precipitous  mount 
thirty  miles  distant  from  Antalo.  This  man's  name  was  Welda 
Yasous-Welda,  son  of  Jacob — who  was  more  like  a  robber  chief 
than  a  recognised  power.  To  this  person  Napier  also  sent 
invitations  to  visit  him,  with  proposals  for  alliance  and 
neutrality..  Warlike  Welda  gave  equivocal  replies ;  and  Wag- 
shum Gobazye  was  inclined  to  be  more  of  a  braggart  than  ever. 
With  40,000  men,  thought  he,  what  could  he  not  do  ? 

Still  his  answers  were  not  literally  menacing  to  the 
English ;  they  contained,  however,  unsatisfactory  bombast  as 
to  his  power,  and  his  intentions  towards  Theodore. 


364 


COOMASSIE  AND  IVUGDALA. 


He  was  more  inclined  to  neutrality  than  alliance. 

'  But  would  he  promise  to  permit  his  people  to  sell  pro- 
visions to  us  if  they  were  adequately  remunerated  V  asked  Sir 
Robert. 

'  Yes  ;  the  people  could  sell  what  they  wislied ;  he  would 
not  prevent  them.  Was  not  Theodore  his  deadly  enemy,  as  well 
as  Napier's  ? ' 

Sir  Robert  was  too  patient  a  man  to  be  flustered.  There 
was  a  perpetual  sending  of  despatches,  and  an  endless  series  of 
complimentary  letters  issuing  from  Head-quarters  to  him ; 
presents  were  sent,  with  innumerable  kind  greetings  and  well- 
wishes.  No  prince  could  well  withstand  such  forethought  of  his 
success  and  such  magnificent  presents  without  feeling  that  it  was 
incumbent  upon  him  to  reciprocate.  The  vanity  of  the  Wag- 
shum  was  flattered  by  the  attentions  and  kindness  of  the  British 
Negus,  and  he  succumbed  as  well  as  a  man  of  his  suspicious 
mould  could  well  do. 

He  wrote  back  a  most  gracious  reply,  declaring  his  intention 
to  aid  Napier  as  much  as  lay  in  his  power,  and  his  determina- 
tion to  attack  Theodore  as  soon  as  circumstances  permitted. 

There  was  another  person  in  the  Trans-Magdala  country 
whom  it  was  wise  to  conciliate  ;  this  was  Menilek,  King  of 
Shoa.  He  had  also  an  army  of  40,000  men  ready  to  attack 
Theodore.  But  he  was  such  a  peripatetic  and  fabulous  po- 
tentate, believed  to  be  in  existence  somewhere,  but  not  a  settled 
entity  like  Gobazye  and  the  Tigrean  Prince.  It  was  doubtful 
whether  communication  could  be  had  with  him. 

In  the  Cis-Magdala  country,  to  the  left  of  the  route  to 
Theodore's  prison  fortress,  ranged  the  ubiquitous  Gallas  under 
their  respective  queens — Ambo  Gallas,  under  Queen  Walkeit ; 
the  WoUo  Gallas,  governed  by  Queen  Regent  Musteval.  These 
professed  Mahomedanism,  while  we  were  Christians. 

Sir  Robert  was  prepared  for  all  sorts  of  castes,  nationalities, 
and  religious  faiths.  In  his  train  was  a  Mahomedan  prince, 
Meer  Akbar  Ali,  who  had  requested  permission  to  follow  the 
General.  He  was  taken  under  the  supposition  that  he  would 
be  useful.  This  Hindoo  prince  was  a  most  proper  person  to 
enter  into  negotiations  with  Mussulman  governors.  His  dark 
skin,  his  faith,  his  native  love  of  finery  and  gorgeousness, 
was  in  his  favour,  and  he  was  selected  for  the  business,  to 


DELAY  IS  EXPLAINED. 


365 


depart  only  when  we  should  have  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Galla  lands. 

Major  Grant  was  also  accredited  to  Welda  Yasous ;  and  so 
well  did  he  succeed  in  his  mission,  that  Welda  sent  his  brother 
to  see  the  Feringhee  General  and  accept  proposals  for  peace. 

Captain  Moore,  Arabian  and  Persian  traveller  and  Arabic 
interpreter,  was  despatched  with  letters  and  presents  to  the 
local  chiefs,  and  to  assure  them  that  there  was  no  intention  on 
the  part  of  the  English  General  to  molest  them  in  any  way. 
His  eflForts  were  signally  successful.  The  chiefs  were  unanimous 
in  expressing  a  hope  that  the  English  General  would  conquer 
and  occupy  the  country,  as  the  liberal  policy  which  guided  him 
throughout  in  his  intercourse  with  the  natives  was  so  completely 
at  variance  with  their  preconceived  notions  of  his  object,  that 
out  of  their  very  hearts  they  desired  that  they  could  always 
experience  the  same. 

Thus  the  seeming  dilatoriness  of  the  Old  Soldier  of  China 
is  explained.  Besides  the  prosaic  tactics  of  the  march,  there 
were  delicate  diplomatic  tasks  for  him  to  perform  before  he 
could  advance  with  confidence  into  the  far  interior.  An 
audacious,  self-reliant  general  like  Sherman  would  very  pro- 
bably have  marched  directly  on  to  Magdala  long  before  Napier 
would;  but  whether  the  happy  consimimation  which  finally 
rewarded  the  effort  of  the  cunctative  English  General  would 
have  been  shared  by  xagorous  Sherman  is  extremely  doubtful. 

When  the  report  of  the  Quarter-Master-General  with  the 
Pioneer  Force  arrived,  the  army  broke  camp  and  marched  for 
Musgee,  eight  miles  disfant  from  Antalo. 

On  account  of  the  stupendous  barriers  said  to  be  ahead, 
much  anxiety  had  prevailed  among  us  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
country  through  which  our  route  lay.  From  the  summit  of 
the  Amba  of  Antalo  an  extensive  view  of  the  country  was 
obtainable. 

From  all  we  could  see  from  that  elevated  position,  it  seemed 
a  very  region  of  precipitous  mountains.  Huge  reddish  pinncicles 
shot  upward  against  the  pale  blue  sky  ;  slate-coloured  reefs  of 
granite  rocks  lay  piled  one  upon  another ;  hills  upon  hills  were 
tumbled  into  platoons,  or  were  rolled  into  abrupt  serrated 
ridges.  Through  a  ravine  plunged  the  whitened  road  that  led  to 


866 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  dark  defiles  from  Antalo  plain,  which  could  be  detected  like 
a  milky  waj  through  the  opacity  of  its  surface. 

The  march  to  Musgee  did  not  warrant  the  word  '  arduous.' 
It  ran  over  a  strip  of  the  plain  whereon  our  camp  was 
situated  near  Antalo.  Musgee  was  situated  at  its  extremity, 
on  a  triangular  area  of  ground  washed  by  two  streams  of  purest 
water. 

As  I  said  before,  the  oflBcers  managed  to  elude  the  strict 
letter  of  the  order  relating  to  baggage.  Out  of  six  servants  the 
major  part  of  the  officers  had  at  Antalo,  only  two,  perhaps,  were 
actually  left  behind  ;  and  out  of  five  baggage  animals  three  had 
been  retained,  exclusive  of  their  chargers ;  so  that  an  immense 
train  of  followers  and  animals,  extending  over  the  whole  distance 
between  the  two  camps,  accompanied  the  army,  and  by  its 
exceedingly  encumbering  length  retarded  any  rapid  advance. 

Marching  with  the  army  proved  almost  intolerable.  The 
hardships  of  tho&e  whose  business  it  was  to  keep  up  a  lengthy 
correspondence  after  arrival  at  camp  were  but  now  commencing. 
After  being  in  the  saddle  close  to  our  baggage,  to  protect  and 
escort  it,  for  twelve  or  fifteen  hours,  as  the  case  would  be  some- 
times, it  was  no  light  task  to  sit  down  and  hanmier  away  at  a 
letter,  jotting  down  the  incidents  of  the  route,  and  raking  up 
latest  political  intelligence.  Then  to  snatch  a  sleep  of  three 
hours,  hastily  swallow  a  cup  of  sugarless  tea  and  dry  azinous 
bread,  and  mount  saddle  again  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  to 
undergo  the  same  experience,  was  no  joyous  picnicking.  All 
this  might  have  been  easily  remedied. 

One  can  perceive  that  an  army  of  5,000  men  and  a  train  of 
10,000  animals,  travelling  along  a  footpath  by  single  file, 
would  necessarily  occupy  the  day  in  journeying  ten  miles,  even 
if  nothing  went  wrong  and  no  baggage  got  displaced.  Then, 
if  the  steady  marching  of  such  an  army  and  its  baggage  train 
would  occupy  a  day,  what  must  it  be  when  there  is  an  in- 
cessant halting  to  remedy  tlie  packs  of  two  or  three  hundred 
mules,  which  flounder  and  sprawl  at  every  third  step,  causing 
displacement  of  baggage  and  unmitigable  wrath  ? 

The  general  mode  of  watching  was  similar  to  that  followed 
in  all  expeditions.  The  reveille  sounded  at  daybreak ;  the 
vanguard  bestirred  itself,  and  in  half  an  hour  would  be  en  routej 
accompanied  by  an  officer  of  the  Quarter-Master-O^eneral's  de- 


'  THE  ELEPHANTS  OF  ASIA.' 


867 


partment,  who  went  ahead  to  select  and  mark  out  camps  near 
the  place  designated  as  a  station  by  Lieut.-CoL  Phayre,  in 
charge  of  the  pioneers  two  days  in  advance. 

The  transport  train,  through  assiduous  pricking  and  slashing 
by  the  officers,  was  drawn  out  before  the  respective  regiments ; 
the  baggage  was  packed  and  slung  on  the  mules,  after  which  it 
would  form  line  along  the  road  until  the  column  should  have 
passed. 

By  six  o'clock  all  would  be  ready ;  the  military  band  struck 
up  a  merry  tune  ;  the  infantry,  cavalry,  artillery,  naval  brigade, 
the  elephants,  and  the  transport  train,  were  then  fairly  moving 
onward. 

By  noon  the  head  of  the  column  generally  arrived  at 
their  new  camp.  Two  hours  afterwards  the  head  of  the  baggage 
train  appeared,  and  imtil  midnight,  and  even  next  morning 
frequently,  laggard  animals  would  be  arriving.  Sometimes  we 
were  compelled  to  halt  one  day,  that  the  animals  might  recruit 
their  strength.  When  a  short  march  of  five  or  six  miles  was 
made — unless  the  road  was  very  steep— the  last  of  the  baggage 
train  would  manage  to  reach  camp  before  simset. 

At  the  end  of  every  day's  march  the  natives  would  begin 
to  pour  in  with  their  supplies  of  grain  and  straw,  meal  and 
bread.  Visits  of  chiefs  were  made ;  and  on  such  occasions  the 
General-in-Chief  would  hold  a  levee,  whereat  officers  were  ex- 
pected to  be  present. 

On  steep  marches  the  elephants  toiled  up  laboriously  with 
their  ponderous  burdens,  and  the  other  baggage  animals  in- 
variably passed  them ;  but  on  moderate  roads  these  gigantic 
animals  with  their  1,800  pound  loads  were  masters  of  the  situa- 
tion, and  made  excellent  time.  They  were  at  once  the  terror 
and  delight  of  the  natives  who  crowded  aroimd  them,  who 
seemed  never  tired  of  watching  their  uncouth  and  unwieldy 
forms  alMJending  or  descending  mountains.  An  ascent  of  1,500 
feet  told  seriously  upon  them,  and  their  hard  puffing  and  loud 
trumpeting  were  eloquent  of  their  suflFerings.  They  were  in- 
valuable on  the  campaign.  They  were  fed  with  about  thirty- 
five  pounds  of  bread  and  forty  pounds  of  straw  or  the  coarse 
yellow  grass  of  the  country  per  diem.  There  were  some  a 
great  deal  larger  than  the  renowned  '  Hannibal '  of  Bamum's, 


368 


COO>LVSSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


but  the  majority  of  them  were  comparatively  young,  and  stood 
the  fatigue  a  great  deal  better  than  the  old  patriarchs. 

Upon  first  arriving  in  a  camp,  while  the  regimental  cooks 
prepared  the  meals,  the  soldiers,  after  their  ablutions,  busied 
themselves  in  various  ways.  They  were  very  fond  of  gymnastic 
exercises,  and  tlic  Campus  ]\Iartius  at  such  periods  presented  a 
very  curious  and  animating  scene. 

About  sunset  martial  strains  of  music  invariably  burst  forth 
from  the  brazen  instruments  of  the  military  bands.  For  the 
first  time  the  circumambient  mountains  eclioed  to  the  wondrous 
sounds ;  and  each  Dative,  leaning  on  his  spear,  wrapt  in  silence, 
would  drink  in,  with  undisguised  pleasure  and  intense  delight, 
the  harmonious  sounds  which  soothed  his  soul.  Twilight  was 
a  time  which  imparted  pleasure  to  all.  The  music  from  a  dis- 
tance sounded  indescribably  sweet,  and  infused  a  delicious 
melancholy  into  the  soul,  causing  our  minds  to  wander  over 
rugged  ranges  of  Abyssinian  mountains,  across  the  blue  seas, 
into  our  own  far-off  liomcs,  where  we  imagined,  in  fancy  free, 
the  social  family  circles  arrayed  around  the  cheerful  fire,  dis- 
coursing of  the  absent  ones. 

We  left  Antalo  on  March  14.  ■\Iesheck  lay  eight  miles 
above  Musgee.  From  the  latter  camp  the  road  wound  upward 
along  a  ravine  which  was  flanked  by  to^^rering  ranges  of  hills 
clothed  with  the  most  verdant  vegetation. 

Every  kind  of  wild  scenery  was  around  us  as  we  journeyed. 
On  the  conical  hills  blazed  the  bale-fires,  to  warn  the  master  of 
Aleggie,  who  sat  on  his  knoll  of  strength  like  a  caged  tiger,  of 
our  coming.  From  their  summits  mounted  smoky  columns — 
lurid  and  high — like  smoke  from  burning  sacrifices  to  appease 
avenging  deities.  Dark,  suspicious  faces,  looked  down  upon  us 
from  behind  bristling  palisades,  wrathy  and  eager  for  prey 
and  plunder;  but,  like  crafty  wolves,  they  bided  but  auspicious 
opportunities  to  pounce  ruthlessly  downward  from  their  giddy 
fortresses  to  kill  and  devour. 

The  people  dwelling  in  hamlets  on  the  lesser  hills  did  not 
seem  to  have  taken  umbrage  at  the  overflow  of  pale-fiaiced 
strangers,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  appearance  of  the  apparently 
enchanted  village  throngs  who  lined  the  slopes,  dizened  out  in 
their  grotesque  finery. 

When  within  two  miles  of  camp  we  were  obliged  to  cross 


WELDA,  SON  OF  JACOB. 


369 


the  meandering  brook  every  few  minutes  because  of  its  exceed- 
ing deviousness.  The  ravine,  also,  at  this  place  widened  into  a 
valley  of  respectable  width,  wherein  vivid  green  patches  of  com 
were  visible,  interspersed  with  noble  groves  and  low-lying 
meadow-land,  studded  with  tussocks  teeming  with  flowers  of 
varied  hue  in  full  blossom.  The  moimtains  still  towered 
higher,  fully  1,500  feet  above  us,  on  each  side.  Their  uneven 
sides  were  hung  with  an  abundance  of  tamarisk  trees,  now  and 
then  varied  with  a  clump  of  kolquall  or  fir.  Immense  boulders 
at  times  projected  boldly  above  the  tree  tops,  and  numerous 
ravines  chequered  the  slopes. 

After  travelling  eight  miles  the  camp  was  seen  beyond, 
and  at  the  extremity  of  a  noble  avenue  of  trees.  It  was  called 
Mesheck,  from  a  fortified  village  of  that  name  which  crowned  a 
hill  hard  by.  It  was  a  picturesque  spot,  like  a  small  park, 
begirt  with  high  mountains.  A  running  stream,  a  level  lawn, 
and  patriarchal  sycamores,  were  its  principal  features. 

The  1st  Brigade  arrived  at  it  on  the  15th,  while  the 
2nd  Brigade  rested  at  Musgee,  and  did  not  arrive  at  Mesheck 
xmtil  the  following  day. 

The  next  march  was  that  to  Atzala,  past  the  robber  roosts 
on  Amba  Aleggie,  inhabited  by  the  vulpine  Welda  Yasous, 
alias  Welda  son  of  Jacob,  to  the  cei-tain  detriment  of  travel- 
lers in  general.  The  chief  possessed  at  his  beck  and  call,  in  the 
beehive  dwellings  on  the  hills,  some  1,000  stout-armed  spear- 
men and  500  musketeers.  This  was  the  capital  of  Woggerat, 
in  which  province  we  were  now  travelling.  The  amba  ^  was  a 
rhomboidal  mass  of  grey  granite  and  limestone,  crowned  by  an 
elliptic  cone  several  hundred  feet  high ;  each  side  of  the 
rhomb  rose  to  a  perpendicular  height  of  100  feet  above  the 
spine  of  the  mountain  on  which  it  rested.  The  base  of  the 
peak  covered  an  area  of  perhaps  200  square  yards.  Half  way 
up  was  a  ledge  or  terrace  on  which  the  dwellings  of  the 
garrison  were  built,  appearing  at  their  altitude  like  eyries. 

Through  a  field-glass  several  swart  faces  could  be  de- 
tected glowering  upon  us  as  we  passed.    I  opine  that  the  chief, 
Welda  Yassous,  himself  looked  down  from  behind  some  friendly 
coverture,  though  it  was  believed  that  he  had  deported  himself 
'  Amba  is  a  native  term  for  Mount. 
B  B 


370 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDAUL 


away  from  his  home,  suspicious  jof  some  sinister  design  on 
Napier's  part  in  passing  directly  by  the  base  of  his  fortress. 

For  the  first  six  miles  the  road  led  through  scenes  of  forest 
shades  and  intervening  spots  of  quaking  quagmire,  by  mant- 
ling stream  and  by  patches  of  cultivated  land  that  lay  within 
the  environed  valley.  Then  suddenly  it  inclined  upward,  and 
a  long  pull  of  two  miles  up  the  slope  of  the  amba  already  men- 
tioned was  gotten  over  before  we  finally  surmounted  the  spire 
of  the  ridge  directly  underneath  the  mount,  which  was  fully 
1,500  feet  above  our  camp  at  Mesheck. 

From  this  high  eminence  we  could  discover  our  new  camp 
at  Atzala,  situated  on  an  oval-shaped  plain,  2,500  feet  below  us, 
looking  like  an  emerald  set  in  wood,  so  the  comparison  suggested 
itself  by  the  striking  contrast  between  the  verdant  plain  and 
the  engirdling  hills,  each  of  a  height  with  that  upon  which  we 
stood  looking  downward  with  astonished  countenances  at  the 
extraordinary  freaks  of  nature. 

Without  climbing  the  opposite  heights,  which  appeared  to 
be  of  equal  altitude  witli  that  of  the  amba,  fiulher  progress 
from  that  valley  seemed  to  be  impossible. 

The  prospect  of  the  morrow^s  march  could  not  therefore  be 
very  captivating.  Captain  J.  Sidney  had  reported  *  One  hun- 
dred and  sixty-six  animals  belonging  to  the  Abyssinian  Trans- 
port Train  died  on  the  last  march  from  Mesheck  to  Atzala  I ' 

Tlie  last  of  tlie  transport  train  did  not  arrive  until  next 
morning  after  tliat  fatal  march.  One  or  two  *  specials '  passed 
the  night  on  the  top  of  the  hill. 

*  Welda,'  son  of  Jacob  Chevalier  de  Furioso,  who  kept  airy 
lodgings  on  the  lofty  amba  of  Aleggie,  at  an  altitude  of  10,000 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  after  much  coaxing  condescended 
to  come  down  and  visit  the  chief  of  the  crusade,  not  in  an 
Icarian  manner,  but  in  J upiterian  state,  surrounded  by  tawny 
blackguardism,  as  exhibited  in  the  polished  faces  of  some  three 
hundred  musketeers,  who  travelled  to  head-quarters  as  if  they 
were  imbued  with  the  idea  that  they  were  just  as  good  as  any 
of  the  English  soldiers.    Oh,  the  unbaptised  canaille ! 

Welda  sauntered  into  Sir  Robert's  marquee  in  true  lordly 
style,  and  sat  on  a  camp-stool  in  a  dignified  manner. 

He  was  accompanied  by  his  brother,  who  looked  a  worthy 
scion  of  the  same  parent — a  stately-browed,  frizzly-haired,  rest- 


NAPIER  AT  HIS  DIPLOMACY. 


less,  rat-eyed,  high  cheek-boned,  heavily-auricled,  thin-lipped 
and  oval-chinned  rascal. 

Welda  himself  was  an  intelligent  looking  man  enough,  of 
medium  height,  robust  form,  muscular  limbs,  and  not  of  a  bad 
countenance  by  any  means.  But  his  conduct  betrayed  an  in- 
sufferable pomposity.  His  love  of  state  and  barbarous  magnifi- 
cence was  indicated  by  the  golden  armlets  which  he  wore,  and 
the  collar  of  silver  filigree  work  enriching  his  tower-like  neck ; 
in  the  splendour  of  his  shield,  draped  with  the  lion's  mane ; 
and  the  circimistance  of  state  with  which  he  had  surrounded 
himself.  His  musketeers  were  armed  with  the  Portuguese 
fusils  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  double-barrelled  shot-guns. 

A  long  conference  then  ensued.  Welda  promised  to  allow 
his  people  to  sell  provisions  to  the  army  ;  and  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  presented  him  with  a  double-barrelled  gun  with  ball 
and  caps  ;  besides  thirty  new  dollars  for  himself  and  twenty  for 
his  brother.  When  questioned  about  Theodore,  Welda  said  at 
last  that  he  did  not  think  Theodore  would  fight ;  but  Welda's 
brother,  having  received  the  presents,  spoke  differently.  He 
said,  *  I  shall  now  advise  you  differently  from  what  my  brother 
Welda  said  just  now.  Todoros  will  fight,  fight  as  long  as  he 
has  breath  in  his  body;  he  is  cunning  as  a  fox,  quick-sighted  as 
a  lynx,  brave  as  a  lion.  He  will  sweep  down  upon  you  in  the 
dead  of  night.  Beware  of  him;  he  never  shuts  his  eyes,  neither 
does  he  dream.' 

Napier.  'Your  brother  Welda  said  that  he  would  not 
fight.' 

Welda.  *  I  said  it  only  to  try  you.  It  is  the  custom  before 
we  open  our  hearts  to  strangers.  My  brother  has  said  well. 
Todoros  is  brave ;  he  will  meet  you ;  he  will  not  run  away. 
Beware  of  him  in  the  night  before  the  mist  vanishes,  or  dawn 
of  day.' 

Napier.  '  I  am  obliged  to  you.  But  come  with  me  and  you 
shall  see  our  elephants  and  big  guns.' 

They  went  out  together,  and  the  elephants,  in  obedience  to 
the  mahouts,  performed  many  manoeuvres,  such  as  lying  down, 
kneeling,  trumpeting  and  charging,  which  amazed  the  two 
chiefs  greatly.  The  military  bands  discoursed  liveliest  strains 
of  music,  and  the  33rd  Regiment  performed  many  evolutions 
for  their  benefit.    Two  chargers  were  then  brought  up  and 


372 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


presented  one  to  each  of  the  brothers,  after  which  they  departed 
to  their  amba,  protesting  their  sincere  friendship.  They  were 
preceded  by  their  own  martial  band  blowing  through  cow-horns, 
playing  on  pandean-pipes  and  flutes,  and  twanging  tliree-stringed 
guitars.  Their  presents  to  Sir  Robert  consisted  of  two  shields, 
two  fine  spears,  pots  of  honey,  and  two  dozen  oxen. 

Mukhan,  the  next  position  to  Atzala,  and  distant  from  it 
sixteen  miles,  was  occupied  on  March  16  by  the  1st  Brigade. 

As  Amba  Aleggie  towered  upward  to  a  height  of  10,000  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  as  the  valley  of  Atzala  was  2,500 
feet  below  the  summit  of  the  amba,  the  camp  at  Atzala  was 
then  just  7,500  feet  above  the  sea.  The  valley  was  about  two 
miles  broad,  bounded  on  the  opposite  side  by  the  range  of  Debra 
Musa,  whose  sloping  rugged  sides  looked  formidable  indeed, 
when  we  arrived  at  the  base,  and  scanned  its  ambitious  height.  It 
was  much  steeper  than  Amba  Aleggie,  and  the  road  had  therefore 
to  be  made  to  run  in  zigzag  fashion  before  the  army  could 
attempt  to  scale  it. 

Within  two  hours  after  it  had  started  the  head  of  the 
column  appeared  upon  the  brow  of  the  mountain,  and  below 
them  on  the  southern  side  (for  we  were  marching  due  south) 
another  plain,  but  infinitely  larger  and  still  deeper  than 
Atzala  valley. 

Half  way  downward  we  passed  the  village  of  Pilago,  and 
directly  above  the  village  appeared  one  of  the  most  extraordi- 
nary natural  formations  I  ever  saw.  It  was  a  polygonal- 
shaped  mountain,  upright  on  each  side  nearly  1,000  feet,  the 
summit  of  which  covered  an  area  of  three  square  miles.  It  was 
named  by  the  natives  Mount  Debar,  and  it  appeared  to  be  of 
equal  height  with  that  of  Amba  Aleggie.  Why  Theodore  should 
have  neglected  such  an  impregnable  position  was  a  question 
only  to  be  answered  by  the  supposition  that  Magdala  was 
still  more  impregnable. 

After  reaching  the  plain  on  the  southern  side  of  Debra 
Musa,  and  on  the  left  of  Mount  Debar,  we  crossed  a  stream,  and 
our  route  lay  over  undulating  ground  covered  with  luxuriant 
grass.  Gradually  we  left  the  open  plain  and  tmvelled  through 
avenues  of  shrubbery.  Again  and  again  the  scene  changed  to  a 
more  or  less  wildly  romantic  one,  past  amphitheatres,  through 
sylvan  groves,  over  tiny  jewelled  rivulets,  across  open  fields, 


GLOEIES  OF  ABYSSINIAN  SCENERY. 


3?3 


downward  through  dells  embosomed  by  tall  firs  and  oaks,  and 
up  to  the  broad  sunlight  again.  Eefreshingly  picturesque 
ravines  and  nullahs,  teeming  with  undergrowth,  were  passed  in 
quick  succession,  until  we  had  journeyed  sixteen  miles,  when 
the  camp  of  Mukhan  appeared  upon  an  open  groimd,  just  as 
day  deepened  into  twilight. 


374 


GOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ABYSSINIAN  SCENERY — LAKE  ASIIANGI  IN  THE  LAP  OF  THE  IfOVNTAINS  ! — 
A  HOrEFUL  HEIR-ArPARENT — OUR  GROG  IS  STOPPED. 

As  might  be  expected,  after  such  a  long  march,  the  troops  were 
obliged  to  halt  at  Mukhan  the  following  day. 

The  district  aroimd  the  new  camp  was  a  very  populous  one, 
and  the  natives  came  pouring  in  in  great  numbers  to  see  the 
strangers,  bringing  with  them  at  the  same  time  various  com- 
modities to  sell.  The  people  hereabouts  were  slightly  paler  in 
complexion  than  the  Tigreans  and  the  inhabitants  of  Attigratt. 
They  were  more  muscularly  formed  and  of  a  wilder  appearance 
than  any  we  had  yet  seen. 

Presently  there  appeared  three  turbaned  Mussulmen  from  the 
Galla  lands,  blowing  their  prodigiously  long  cow-homs.  They 
were  avant-couriers  of  a  Gralla  chief,  who  came  in  the  name  of 
his  people  to  offer  peace  and  friendship  to  the  British  Negus, 
Sir  Robert  Napier,  which  I  need  not  aver  was  gratefully  accepted 
by  the  *  old  man,'  who  reciprocated  the  goodwill  of  the  Galla 
chief  and  bestowed  upon  him  pecuniary  rewards  for  his  fnendly 
promises. 

Antelopes,  hares,  and  other  varieties  of  game  were  abundant 
around  Mukhan,  and  the  English  officers  turned  out  en  masse  as 
amateur  sportsmen,  and  great  was  the  devastation  they  committed 
upon  the  preserves  of  nature.  Some  one  (name  unknown)  shot  a 
wild  elephant  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  left  the  huge  carcase 
where  it  fell  to  sicken  the  country.  There  were  some  graphic 
accounts  rendered  of  successful  himts,  and  every  one  had  a  trophy 
or  two  of  the  chase. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th  the  army  broke  camp  and 
marched  for  Lake  Ashangi. 


LAKE  ASHANGI  IN  THE  LAP  OP  MOUNTAINS  I 


375 


For  the  first  six  miles  our  route  lay  across  an  undulating 
country  bordered  by  groves  and  airy  heights,  until  we 
came  to  the  base  of  Mount  Mosobo,  where  shortly  overlapping 
ranges  enclosed  us  as  we  laboured  up.  It  was  a  region  like 
unto  what  I  have  seen  travelling  a-foot  through  the  southern 
Pyrenees — ^a  region  of  tropical  beauty,  opposite  in  character  to 
any  we  had  as  yet  beheld  in  Abyssinia.  Upward  we  toiled, 
around  the  base  of  successive  slanting  gradines  covered  with 
tall  pineries.  Virgin  forests  sprung  up  on  all  sides,  feathering 
upward  to  an  infinity  of  height  spreading  out  to  right  and 
left,  and  intervened  o'erhead  into  pleasantest  of  frescades. 
In  their  shades  sprouted  flowers  of  rarest  hue. 

The  road  up  the  mountain  was  very  bad,  and  in  some  places 
highly  dangerous. 

After  foiu*  miles  of  an  ascent  we  emerged  out  of  the  shade 
of  the  grove,  and  saw  the  sky  above  us,  and  another  slight 
acclivity  clothed  with  myrtle  and  sweet-briar,  and  "presently  we 
stood  upon  the  topmost  height  of  Mount  Mosobo. 

There,  beneath  us  3,000  feet,  slumbered  Lake  Ashangi,  en- 
closed in  the  lap  of  mountains. 

An  army  is  of  too  prosaic  and  commonplace  a  temperament 
to  stand  long  idly  looking  down  upon  scenery ;  and  so,  though 
we  all  should  have  dearly  loved  to  have  stopped  hours  longer 
upon  Mount  Mosobo,  and  enjoy  the  tropic  beauty  of  the  scene, 
up-pouring  troops  upon  troops  swarmed  around  us ;  pressed 
onward,  and  in  the  irresistible  current  swept  us  with  them. 

Soon  began  a  series  of  convolutions  around  bases,  of  projec- 
tions, past  segregated  masses  of  quartz  and  rock,  whose  varied 
colours  became  all  intensated  by  the  vivid  brightness  of  the 
sunlight  or  the  deep  shadows  of  overhanging  cliffs,  and  pendent 
boughs  of  pine. 

Roimd  and  round  we  felt  our  way  by  the  side  of  looming 
walls  of  gneiss,  flanking  all  wayward  mounts,  and  cours- 
ing in  a  serpentine  stream  over  bridal  paths  running  along 
giddy  precipices,  until  at  last  we  arrived  upon  the  plain  of 
Ashangi. 

We  camped  close  to  the  lake  on  a  park-like  plain,  after  our 
march  of  foiurteen  miles.  The  nature  of  the  route  prevented 
an  early  arrival  of  the  baggage  trains.  In  the  meantime  the 
smooth  placid  water  tempted  us  to  plunge  in  and  cool  our  bodies 


876 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


after  the  fatigues  of  the  journey.  There  were  not  the  slightest 
indications  of  any  hippopotami  ever  having  been  there  ;  or  of 
any  other  animal  more  ferocious  than  man,  which  proved  the 
instability  of  all  the  rumours  that  had  prevailed. 

It  is  true  there  were  two  or  three  sedgy  pools  near  the  lake, 
but  the  piscatorial  and  amphibious  tribes  were  limited  to  a  few 
small  fish.  The  whole  surface  of  the  lake  itself  was  dotted  with 
innumerable  wagtails,  ducks  and  wild  geese,  the  shores  teemed 
with  numerous  species  of  hom-bills,  herons,  and  several  kinds 
of  large  rostral  birds — ibis,  snipe,  pelicans  and  toucans. 

Across  on  the  Galla  side  of  the  lake  there  were  plenty  of  • 
antelope  in  the  abundant  woods,  and  panthers,  hyaena  and 
jackal ;  but  that  was  a  region  where  the  Afrit  *  of  the  Mussul- 
man held  sway ;  at  least  so  the  natives  endeavoured  to  make  us 
comprehend  as  they  appeared  very  anxious  that  no  Feringhee 
should  go  there  lest  bad  afrits  should  ciit  our — ugh  1  (they  drew 
their  fingers  across  their  throats,  an  intelligible  sign  enough). 

Had  it  not  been  for  the  refreshing  bathe  and  swim  we  had 
enjoyed,  very  probably  we  should  have  felt  too  languid  to  dis- 
pute the  existence  of  the  evil  spirit ;  but  aroused  from  slothful 
torpor  by  a  healthy  ablution,  we  disputed  the  point  with  as 
much  ardour  as  any  *  Jack  Easy,'  and  in  the  very  headstrongness 
of  our  natures  rode  around  the  lake.  The  Galla's  side  was 
undoubtedly  mysterious  and  sombre-looking  enough  to  have 
been  the  home  of  all  the  demons  known  in  mythology,  and  we 
for  that  reason,  bearing  also  in  our  memory  the  significant 
sign  across  the  throat,  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  explore 
its  penetralia. 

Several  specimens  of  petrified  wood  were  found  along  the 
eastern  shore  of  the  lake.  The  northern  side  of  it,  a  little  to 
the  east  of  where  our  camp  was  situated,  and  covering  an  area 
of  nearly  five  miles,  was  a  most  treacherous  piece  of  ground. 
It  was  one  vast  quagmire,^  a  stagnant  marsh  of  Cocytus.  It 
was  cut  up  by  numerous  fossulates,  full  of  Stygian  slime.  My 
Arab  horse  sank  to  his  middle  before  I  was  aware  of  the 

*  Tho  Afrit  of  the  Mussulman  is  analogous  to  the  Ahriman  of  the  Persians,  and 
the  Ix)krt  f)f  tho  Scandinavians — an  evil  spirit,  a  had  geni. 

*  Thoro  is  a  tradition  among  tho  natives,  that  three  hundred  Galli  horsemen  in 
the  heat  of  a  charge  upon  the  Abjssinians  TToro  caught  in  this  quagmire,  that  they 
sank  quickly  out  of  sight*  not  one  of  whom  escaped. 


A  HOPEFUL  HEIB-APPARENT. 


37? 


treacherous  nature  of  the  ground,  and  a  wide  circuit  had  to  be 
made  before  I  was  enabled  to  reach  camp.  The  circumference 
of  the  lake  was  about  ten  miles. 

It  was  fully  midnight  before  the  last  of  the  transport  train 
arrived  at  camp ;  my  baggage  was  unfortunately  one  of  the 
hindmost,  and  I  had  therefore  to  wait  about  ten  hours  before 
my  tent  was  pitched. 

The  next  day  we  were  obliged  to  halt ;  the  animals  were 
unable  to  travel.  Our  forage  was  giving  out,  and  a  fresh  supply 
had  to  be  procured  before  we  could  move.  The  rations  were 
therefore  reduced  one  half. 

About  midnight  an  envoy  arrived  from  the  paramount 
chieftain,  the  Ulema — priest  and  king,  spiritual  and  temporal 
ruler,  over  the  nomadic  Mussulmen  tribes  in  the  immediate 
district  of  Ashangi.  This  envoy  was  the  hopeful  son  and  heir 
of  the  Ulema,  a  vacuous-eyed  individual — hare-brained  too,  if 
I  am  any  judge  of  physiognomy. 

He  bore  a  letter  to  Sir  Robert  Napier,  wherein,  after  the 
usual  circumlocutory  addresses  and  well  wishes — a  peculiar 
custom  of  the  country — the  Ulema  stated  his  desire  to  have 
peace  with  the  Feringhees,  and  he  asserted  his  theological 
opinion,  how  that  the  Old,  the  New  Testament,  and  the  Koran, 
were  part  and  parcel  of  the  religious  belief  held  in  common 
between  us  Christians  and  themselves  Mussulmen ;  he  also  pro- 
mised to  remember  us  in  his  prayers ;  commended  us  to  the  care 
and  watchfulness  of  Allah,  and  warned  us  to  watch  carefiilly 
against  our  enemies,  as  they  were  many  and  strong.  In  accord- 
ance with  the  custom  of  his  coimtry  he  sent  presents  in  the 
shape  of  one  pot  of  honey  equivalent  in  value  to  a  silver  dollar. 

Sir  Eobert,  having  read  this  effusion  of  the  Gralla  priest, 
presented  the  envoy  with  robes,  such  as  should  adorn  the  person 
of  one  in  his  high  station.  Not  a  quiver  of  a  muscle,  or  the 
wink  of  an  eyelid,  or  the  dawning  of  a  smile  betrayed  the 
pleasure  he  must  have  felt,  as  he  was  being  enrobed  with  a  gilt 
stole  and  a  gorgeous  robe  of  coloured  muslin,  but  remained  as 
passionless  and  as  immobile  as  a  waxen  doll. 

In  the  afternoon  another  Gtilla  chief,  accompanied  by 
warriors  carrying  headless  lances  in  token  of  amity  and  good- 
will to  the  army,  arrived  at  the  camp.  •  The  chief  was  a  perfect 
specimen  of  a  coloured  'John  Bull.'   This  god-like  son  of 


378 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Mars  also  stated  his  wish  to  be  on  amicable  terms  with  our 
Negus,  and  he  in  like  manner  was  treated  with  the  greatest 
deference,  as  was  due  to  his  Boyal  Heaviness. 

Towards  evening  a  different  scene  was  enacted.  A  native — 
a  Gralla — was  detected  pilfering  by  a  keen-eyed  Hindostanee 
camp  chuprassee,  and  he  was  forthwith  dragged  before  his 
Provost-Marshalship,  Colonel  Fraser,  to  be  tried  for  thefL  A 
great  wow- wow  was  instantly  created.  His  countrymen — de- 
cidedly of  clannish  proclivities — hastened  to  surround  him,  and 
endeavoured  to  bear  him  off.  One  young  man,  supposed  to  be 
his  brother,  made  the  greatest  outcry.  The  culprit  had  his 
arms  pinioned  behind  him,  and  the  formula  of  a  drum-head 
court-martial  was  gone  through.  Colonel  Fraser  wished  to 
give  him  three  dozen  on  his  bare  back,  well  laid  on  by  his 
satellites.  Captain  Speedy,  hurrying  there  from  a  durbar,  sug- 
gested that  it  would  be  better  to  permit  him  to  be  tried  by  a 
jury  of  his  own  countrymen.  Fraser  demurred,  arguing  for 
the  force  of  example ;  Speedy  maintained  his  suggestions  on 
the  ground  that  peace  had  just  been  made  with  their  chief, 
and  that  it  would  be  highly  derogatory  to  it  and  impolitic  to 
be  too  harsh  at  the  offset. 

*  But  what  am  I  to  do  ? '  urged  Fraser. 

'  Let  his  countrymen  decide ;  they  will  punish  bim  worse 
than  you  will,'  said  Speedy. 

'  Very  well  then,  let  it  be  as  you  say,'  replied  the  Provost- 
Marshal.  Accordingly,  a  jury  of  the  culprit's  countrymen  was  con- 
vened, and  at  it  they  went,  argufying  and  speechifying  with  ten 
times  more  empressement  than  the  same  number  of  New  York 
lawyers  would  have  done.  Such  fervour  !  such  style  1  and  such 
action  I 

The  gist  of  the  address  of  a  grey-bearded  elder  was  that 
nobody  could  prove  that  the  man  meant  to  steal  it,  and  that 
he  might  have  taken  it  in  his  hands  merely  to  look  at  it. 
'Is  that  a  crime?'  he  inquired.  '  Yet,'  he  added,  '  must  we 
punish  him,  lest  the  Feringhees  say — Ah !  these  people  will  not 
punish  their  countryman,  our  trust  in  them  has  been  mis- 
placed. Therefore,  I  adjudge  him  to  receive  six  blows  with 
a  stick,  and  to  pay  one-fourth  of  the  article  he  intended  to 
steal.'  And  according  to  the  letter  of  the  sentence  was  it 
carried  out,  to  the  great  disgust  of  certain  martinets* 


A  GRIEVOUS  BLOW  TO  OUR  EQUANIMITY. 


379 


On  the  20th  the  English  army  occupied  a  plain,  which 
was  but  a  continuation  of  the  low  land  around  Lake  Ashangi, 
near  Muzzageeta,  at  a  point  seven  miles  from  our  camp  on  tiie 
northern  side  of  the  lake.  The  route  to  this  camp  lay  along 
the  western  side  of  the  lake,  and  about  four  miles  to  the  south 
of  it  was  Muzzageeta. 

From  Muzzageeta,  the  English  army  journeyed  to  Lat,  a 
distance  of  eleven  miles. 

For  the  description  of  this  route,  to  avoid  a  tiresome  repeti- 
tion, let  me  say  at  once  that  it  has  a  certain  resemblance,  on 
account  of  the  many  hills  we  passed  (to  use  a  low  comparison, 
but  yet  a  very  apt  one),  to  the  teeth  of  a  saw,  or  a  succession 
of  traverses,  or  marching  up  and  down  a  line  of  inverted 
stalactites.  Had  we  been  condemned  to  undergo  Sisyphean 
tortures  we  could  not  have  fared  worse;  it  was  very  like  a 
series  of  Sisyphean  laboiurs — the  going  up  a  steep  hill  and  de- 
scending it  a  score  of  times  on  a  day's  march. 

To  those  mounted  upon  ambling  nags  the  journey  was  not 
so  very  bad,  but  to  those  travelling  on  foot,  with  fifty  or  sixty 
pounds  of  a  load,  it  was  indescribable  torment ;  more  comfort- 
able to  imagine  such  a  thing  than  to  experience  it.  The  heat 
was  intense;  that  means  that  it  was  on  an  average  of  98^ 
Fahrenheit;  From  ZouUa  to  Lat  during  the  day  it  had  never 
been  less  than  84° ;  at  night  there  was  often  a  decline  of  from 
30**  to  40^ 

Rich  compensation  it  was  to  cavalry  men  and  foot  soldiers 
when,  after  surmounting  a  moimtain  top  which  had  tasked  their 
energies  for  three  or  four  hours,  they  were  allowed  to  breathe 
the  pure  air  of  upper  regions,  and  to  rest  for  a  while. 

No  sooner  had  we  planted  our  tents  on  an  uneven,  slanting 
terrace  of  ground,  where  we  were  about  to  enjoy  ourselves  after 
our  sorrowful  toil,  than  another  blow  was  given  to  our 
equanimity,  by  the  threatened  "  order  "  of  the  Adjutant-General, 
Colonel  Thesiger,  relative  to  the  abandonment  of  rum — 
vulgarized  "  grog " — with  a  codiciliary  "  order,"  announcing 
the  intention  of  the  Conunander-in-Chief  to  abandon  his  tents 
and  baggage  at  Lat,  our  present  camp,  and  decreeiog  that 
twenty  men  should  be  apportioned  to  each  tent,  and  twelve 
oflBcers  should  batch  together. 

The  order  was  a  second  e<UtiQn  of  the  one  issued  at  Antalo, 


380 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


except  that  it  was  sterner  and  more  peremptory  in  its  tone.  Sir 
Robert  Napier  was  aware  the  first  one  had  been  evaded  by  the 
Anglo-Indian  officers.  Moreover,  no  baggage  was  to  be  per- 
mitted to  go  to  the  front.  Every  mule  being  required  to  convey 
commissariat  stores,  immounted  officers  were  to  be  allowed  to 
carry  only  a  greatcoat,  blanket,  and  an  indiarubber  sheet. 

Staff  officers  and  ^tat-major  of  cavalry  could  take  what  they 
pleased  on  their  chargers,  but  then — as  Sir  Robert  Napier  sug- 
gested— '  When  sent  upon  duty  requiring  speed  they  must  make 
no  complaints  to  him  of  their  horses  being  wearied  out.' 

With  such  an  understanding  they  might  take  their  tents 
.  and  baggage  along.    Sugar,  rum,  cofiee,  tea,  potatoes,  onions, 
and  such  luxuries,  must  also  be  left  behind,  as  '  a  forced  march 
is  to  be  made  upon  Magdalal' 

The  next  morning,  with  a  slightly  diminished  train  and  a 
singular  paucity  of  tents  and  baggage,  we  broke  camp,  and 
started  for  Marowar,  stated  to  be  ten  miles,  according  to 
Colonel  Phayre's  computation,  who  said  he  measured  it. 

The  order  issued  at  Antalo  was  but  a  tentative  order  to 
fathom  the  feelings  of  the  officers ;  but  the  last  was  peremptory, 
ste^  and  inevitable.  Hence  there  was  discontent,  and  an  under- 
/Current  of  querulousness  among  the  soldiers,  who  were  begin- 
nipg  to  grumble  with  a  significance  which,  imless  checked,  might 
p^ove  subversive  of  discipline. 

;  The  long  marches  in  prospect  seemed  to  make  matters 
"Vforse.  Men  talked,  and  there  were  others  to  carry  the  tale  to 
Uead-quarters.  Emboldened  by  the  continued  silence  in  regard 
jto  their  murmurings,  the  soldiers  spoke  fearlessly  in  presence  of 
/the  commissioned  officers,  even  before  those  who  were  on  Sir 
Robert's  staff.  Colonel  McLeod,  Assistant  Adjutant-General, 
passed  some  soldiers  on  the  route,  and  was  not  recognized  any 
more  than  if  his  ghost  had  hovered  invisibly  near.  He  became 
enraged,  and  sternly  questioned  them  as  to  where  their  respect 
for  officers  of  the  staff  had  fled  to  ?  The  Adjutant-General 
reported  the  facts  to  Sir  Robert  Napier. 

We  halted  at  Marowar  that  night  after  a  march  of  thir- 
teen miles.  Next  morning  we  started  for  Dildee.  Higher  and 
higher  rose  the  mountains,  wilder  grew  the  region  !  WTiither, 
and  in  what  way,  was  the  march  to  end  ? 

What  could  Magdala  be  like  if  Theodore  had  passed  by 


THE  DISGRACE  OF  THE  33RD  FOOT. 


381 


these  legions  of  peaks,  each  one  of  which  would  have  been 
unscalable  ?  Yet  the  soldiers  but  gnunbled — those  of  the  33rd, 
however,  in  a  noticeable  way.  Col.  Phayre  had  reported  this 
inarch  to  be  ten  miles  only.  It  turned  out  to  be  more  than 
eighteen.  The  soldiers,  muleteers,  and  animals,  fell  down  by 
the  way  in  dozens,  in  scores ;  yea,  in  fifties,  out  of  sheer  ex- 
haustion. 

Towards  the  latter  part  of  the  march  we  passed  several 
picturesque  ravines,  through  all  of  which  meandered  streams. 
Under  the  banks  the  tired  people  rested,  almost  despairing  of 
ever  being  able  to  make  camp. 

At  five  o'clock  in  the  evening  only  the  skeleton  of  an  army 
had  arrived  at  camp.  A  thousand  men  dashing  from  behind 
the  hills  would  have  annihilated  the  whole  force  by  attacking 
them  in  detail  as  they  came  straggling  along  in  weary  groups. 
It  was  midnight  when  the  soldiers  finally  reached  their  new 
rendezvous  at  Dildee.  The  baggage  trains  did  not  come  in 
until  ten  o'clock  next  morning,  thoroughly  worn  out  with 
hunger  and  travelling. 

As  a  consequence  of  the  protracted  march,  we  were  obliged  to 
halt  again  for  one  day  at  Dildee,  the  army  sadly  in  need  of  it. 

In  the  morning  soldiers  of  the  bSrd  Regiment  of  Foot 
were  drawn  up  before  Sir  Robert  Napier,  who  reproached  them 
for  their  conduct — saying  that  they  were  a  disgrace  to  the 
army  of  Abyssinia ;  that  he  had  heard  through  officers'  reports 
of  their  murmurings  and  grumblings  on  the  last  march,  and 
that  since  they  had  been  pleased  to  conduct  themselves  in  such 
imseemly  manner  he  could  not  permit  them  to  have  the  honour 
of  being  the  Advance  of  the  column,  and  he  would  therefore 
reduce  them  to  Rear  Guard  under  Sir  Charles  Staveley,  and 
the  4th  '  King's  Own '  should  replace  them.  Anyone  would 
have  pitied  them,  as  they  stood  with  unmoved  countenances, 
but  with  hearts  almost  bursting  with  sorrow,  listening  to  their 
General's  reproaches. 

The  33rd  Regiment  is  one  of  the  finest  bodies  of  men  in  the 
British  army,  and  it  was  a  great  blow  to  its  reputation  to  be 
thus  summarily  disgraced.  But  even  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
who  formerly  belonged  to  it,  had  occasion  in  the  Peninsular 
campaigns  to  punish  this  regiment  on  account  of  the  reckless 
spirits  in  it. 


382 


COOMASSIE  AND  HAOBAUL 


The  camp  at  Dildee  was  a  very  beautifiil  and  pictnreaqiie 
spot.  It  was  in  a  narrow  valley  enclosed  between  two  high 
hills  covered  with  wood,  through  which  ran  a  small  river — fle 
Mya.  This  little  river  seemed  like  a  river  of  Eden  to  us  after 
yesterday's  fatigues.  We  all  disported  in  it,  with  the  fireedom 
and  enjoyment  of  boyhood.  It  was  the^  first  real  river  we  had 
seen  in  Abyssinia,  and  we  grew  suddenly  poetical  about  it 
There  was  another  feature  about  the  river  which  made  it 
•interesting.  It  had  worn  itself  a  channel  deep  into  the  earth, 
and  its  banks  were  from  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet  in  upright 
height.  These  banks  were  clothed  luxuriantly  with  rarest 
vegetation. 

General  Field,  in  command  of  the  pioneer  force,  had  waited 
two  days  for  our  arrival  at  Dildee.  The  day  we  rested  at  this 
last  camp  he  moved  on  with  Quartermaster-General  Phayre  to 
tlie  next  rendezvous,  which  was  said  to  be  a  place  called 
Wandach,  so  as  to  be  one  day  ahead  of  the  1st  Brigade. 

The  next  morning  tlie  army  continued  its  nuurch  along  the 
slope  of  a  mountain  called  Mezgar  Aml)a.  It  ascended  in  a 
consecutive  succession  of  slanting  ridges,  imtil  we  were  led  to 
believe  that  tliere  was  actually  no  end  to  its  height. 

About  mid-day  we  surmounted  Mezgar  Amba,  which  rose 
10,700  feet  above  the  sea.  The  change  of  temperature  from 
summer  heat  to  sul>arctic  cold  was  experienced  at  this  high 
altitude.  Cold  drizzly  sleet  and  rain,  and  gusts  of  icy  wind, 
which  met  us,  made  us  shiver  in  our  summer  linen. 

Misery  loves  companionship  it  is  said.  To  impart  our 
miserable  feelings  one  to  another  we  left  our  tents,  and  in  the 
cold  wet  mud  such  converse  as  utter  wretchedness  evokes 
was  entered  into.  Those  who  by  a  wise  foresight  had  provided 
themselves  with  wood,  while  in  Dildee  Valley,  and  had  seciu'ed 
it  in  their  tents  during  the  rain-storm,  immediately  had  hosts 
of  friends  who  warmed  themselves  by  the  friendly  fire-blaze, 
and  allowed  their  hearts  to  expand  into  intense  admiration  of 
the  owner  of  the  camp-fire. 

The  slopes  of  the  hills  were  bare  of  wood.  The  only  kind 
of  slirubs,  or  plants  bearing  any  resemblance  to  wood,  were 
several  green  palmated-leaf  trees,  which  could  never  be  used 
for  firewood  unless  well  baked  first.  The  natives  were  asked  to 
bring  firewood  to  the  Commissary ;  and  in  about  an  hour. 


A  SOUBOE  OF  THE  BLUE  NILE. 


388 


directly  after  sunset,  a  bevy  of  zoneless  damsels,  bearing  on 
their  heads  huge  loads  of  wood,  arrived  at  the  camp,  causing 
all  men's  hearts  to  rejoice.  Late  in  the  night  the  4th  ^  King's 
Own,'  reached  camp  to  replace  the  33rd. 

About  ten  o'clock  the  army  struck  camp,  and  still  following 
the  slanting  declivity  of  Mezgar  Amba,  marched  to  Muja,  a 
distance  of  six  miles.  The  road  ran  over  the  same  slope, 
gradually  descending,  above  the  Takazze,  or  the  Blue  Nile.  On 
the  left  of  the  road  the  Takazze  flowed,  of  course,  only  a  small 
stream  at  its  source,  but  a  hundred  miles  to  the  westward  it 
was  a  considerable  river. 

The  camp  of  Muja  was  situated  between  the  Takazze  and 
another  deep  ravine  whose  precipitous  banks  prevented  us  from 
getting  any  very  large  supply  of  water. 

From  Muja  we  travelled  next  morning  to  Santarai,  a  camp 
named  after  a  village  which  crowned  one  of  the  grassy  dunes 
on  the  Wadela  plateau. 

It  was  one  of  the  brightest  days  of  the  spring  time  in 
Abyssinia,  the  day  we  marched  from  Muja.  For  the  first  seven 
miles  the  route  led  over  the  continuation  of  the  slope  of 
Mezgar  Amba,  gradually  descending  to  the  Takazze.  A  most 
gradual  descent  it  was  as  may  be  imagined  from  thp  fisict  of  the 
slope  extending  over  a  distance  of  fourteen  miles.  It  may  be 
likened  to  a  sectar,  the  two  radii  being  the  ravine  on  our  left 
and  the  one  on  our  right,  through  which  the  Takazze  ran. 
Between  the  two  radii  our  route  lay.  After  travelling  fourteen 
miles  from  the  siunmit  of  Mezgar  Amba,  or  seven  miles 
from  the  camp  at  Muja,  the  Takazze  suddenly  made  a  bold 
curve. 

Upon  arriving  at  the  Takazze  we  found  we  were  hemmed 
in  unless  we  retreated  backward  from  whence  we  came,  or 
followed  the  zigzag  windings  of  the  Blue  Nile. 

*We  neither  intend  to  go  back  nor  follow  the  Takazze,' 
said  Captain  Speedy  ;  '  but  we  intend  to  scale  that  apparently 
interminable  wall  you  see  before  you  I ' 

*  Great  Caesar ! ' 

In  very  truth  most  men  would  have  uttered  the  same  ex- 
clamation, upon  seeing  the  lengthy  sky-wrapt  walls  of  granite. 
But  what  has  been  done,  will  be  done  by  Napier  and  his  army 
and  the  horde  of  followers ;  even  if  it  takes  two  days  to  do  it. 


384 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Already  tlie  iron  souls  of  the  4th  Foot  are  half  way  up 
the  perpendicular  walls,  serpentining  at  right  and  acute  angles 
with  each  other,  and  round  and  round  like  the  windings  to  the 
summit  of  a  cathedral  spire.  The  staflf  is  also  determined  to 
try  itj  and  spurring  our  horses  we  fly  tugging  up  the  slope.  A 
short  half-hour,  and  we  have  surmoimted  the  first  terrace.  A 
gradual  acclivity  is  in  our  front,  for  three  or  four  hundred 
yards,  and  another  terrace  of  equal  height  and  formation  is  to 
be  scaled,  and  having  accomplished  this  we  stop  to  breathe, 
and  get  a  glimpse  at  the  bewildering  variety  of  nature. 

The  higher  we  ascend  the  grander  the  scene !  Under  a  sky 
of  gorgeous  sunshine,  as  blue  as  ever  vaunted  Italy  boasted, 
spreads  the  wildest  land,  growing  each  day  wilder  and  more 
rugged  as  we  advanced  upon  Magdala.  The  moimtain  tops  are 
tinged  with  the  brightest  colours  of  the  solar  light  1 

Upward  unceasingly  we  toil,  but  often  pause  to  rest. 
Fleetest  and  most  hardy  of  Arab  horses  become  blown; 
hardiest  of  iron  frames  relax  the  firm  tension  of  their  nerv'ea ; 
the  stoutest  ruttiers  succumb,  and  nought  but  good  long  rests 
will  save  them  I 

Each  highest  angle  or  curve  of  road  formed  a  perfect 
fortress.  The  slightest  effort  would  overturn  a  ton  weight  of 
rock.  Through  the  excessive  boulderiness  of  the  slope,  ten 
stout-hearted  men  could  have  defied  a  thousand,  and  added 
another  worthy  Thermopylae  to  history ! 

The  English  army  shall  profit  by  it,  and  all  things  that 
end  well  must  be  well.  Uttering  Napier's  pious  ejaculation, 
'  God  with  us,'  we  will  even  ascend  higher,  and  view  the  upper 
world  once  more,  and  inhale  the  breezes  from  the  topmost 
elevation  of  a  height  of  11,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
ocean.  A  plateau,  like  another  Laramie  region,  undulating  as 
far  as  vision  of  man  can  reach,  in  nude  dunes,  bereft  of  the 
least  signs  of  shrub,  rolling  like  a  vitrified  sea — such  was 
the  Wadela  plateau  rising  above  the  nether  world :  strangest 
freak  of  nature  this !    A  country  combining  all  temperatures  I 

Having,  like  heroic  souls,  surmounted  fairly  the  Wadela  pla- 
teau, Colonel  Cameron  requested  of  his  regiment,  the  4th  Foot, 
to  give  three  [cheers,  saying  that  it  was  a  worthier  feat  to  have 
marched  up  this  height  of  3,000  feet  than  to  have  conquered 
Theodore;  but  the  men,  though  willing,  were  too  much 


ON  THE  SUMMIT  OF  A  MOUNTAIN  WORLD. 


385 


wearied  to  give  more  than  the  feeblest  dithyrambic  expres- 
sions, and,  from  the*  state  of  their  feet,  it  was  cruelty  to  prevent 
them  from  lying  down  the  moment  they  arrived  upon  the  soft 
sward  of  the  plateau.  Far  into  the  night  the  brow  of  Wadela, 
at  the  entrance  of  the  exit  from  the  Pass,  was  covered  with  the 
forms  of  tired  men. 

Two  miles  from  the  edge  of  the  plateau  our  camp  was 
pitched,  near  the  village  of  Santarai,  on  an  amphitheatrical- 
looking  spot,  just  twelve  miles  distant  from  Muja. 

At  this  place  we  foimd  the  Pioneer  Brigade,  under  General 
Field  and  Colonel  M  ,  than  whom  none  was  oftener  men- 
tioned by  the  gossips  of  the  press — never  in  a  flattering 
sense,  which  was  a  great  pity  and  a  cruel  omission  on  the 
part  of  those  sent  to  report  upon  the  events  of  the  march  to 
Magdala. 

At  this  camp  of  Santarai,  within  the  bosom  of  an  amphi- 
theatre of  gentle  hills,  there  was  not  a  particle  of  wood  to  be 
procured,  as  the  whole  plateau  of  Wadela,  a  hundred  miles  in 
circiunference,  has  not  above  two  or  three  dozen  trees  upon  its 
surface. 

But  the  dollar  in  Abyssinia  is  an  omnipotent  genius ;  it 
causes  water  to  flow  from  solid  rocks ;  it  brings  forth  food  in 
abundance  for  20,000  men  and  60,000  animals  ;  it  makes  the 
plains  to  overflow  with  goats  and  bleating  kids ;  it  causes  the 
inhabitants  to  pull  down  their  houses,  and  give  their  rafters  to 
the  Commissariat  Department,  that  the  food  which  they  had 
brought  for  the  soldiers  should  also  be  cooked !  This  latter 
was  the  case  in  Santarai. 

Two  rafters — that  might  support  a  light  roof — about  ten 
feet  long,  were  sold  for  a  dollar.  Those  who  had  a  suflBciency 
of  dollars,  purchased  as  much  as  they  needed ;  but  one  day's 
fuel  cost  a  whole  dollar.  The  rations  were  decreasing  rapidly. 
Our  animals  were  on  half  rations ;  very  often  on  quarter. 

Private  gentlemen  wishing  to  keep  their  animals  in  a  sale- 
able condition,  were  compelled  to  buy  from  natives  such 
quantities  of  grain  as  were  procurable.  Then  there  were  the 
servants,  who  required  a  dollar's  worth  of  bread  extra  of  the 
rations  received  from  the  Commissary.  A  quart  of  milk  or  a 
little  honey  would  be  another  dollar ;  so  that  it  may  be  safely 
concluded  that  our  expenses,  including  Commissariat  bills,  since 


c  c 


386 


COOMASSDZ  AM)  3UGDALA. 


lea\ing  Antalo,  averaged  seven  dollars  per  dion.  A  \mg  of  two 
handrei  dollar^  seemed  to  last  but  a  short  time. 

Thi^  high  plateau  of  Wadela  has  seen  stonnj  times.  Veij 
many  times  did  Theodore  ravage  it  when  his  power  was  in  its 
zenith.  It  now  belonged  to  Wagshum  Gobazye,  aad  Dajai 
Mashesha.  hi?  p>t-valoroiis  uncle  and  o>mmander-in-€faie^  the 
dav  we  arrived  at  Santarai  was  making  an  expedition  a  few 
miles  to  the  eastward  with  a  force  of  1,500  men  to  pmiish  a 
rebellious  \illage  which  had  demurred  paying  the  heavy  taxes 
imposed  upon  them  by  His  Highness  the  Prince  of  Lasta  and 
iSamen. 

His  arrival  at  the  village  to  the  eastward  occurred  while 
we  were  arriving  at  Santarai,  and  friendly  messages  were  at  once 
interchanged  Ijetween  the  respective  commanders-in-chieL 

Mimzinger,  long  since  reported  missing  by  rumour,  is  again 
in  the  land  of  the  li\ing,  feasting  upon  Habesh'  cabobe,  and 
imbibing  His  Excellency  Dajaz  Mashesha's  tej  safe  in  a  friendly 
camp.  The  French  Consul  has  been  playing  the  polite  diplomat 
in  a  satisfactory  ^-ay :  he  has  won  the  heart  of  the  suspicious 
Halxr^h  General :  and,  in  accordance  with  an  inWtation  from 
8ir  Koliert  Xapier,  Mashesha  promises  to  pay  a  \'isit  on  the 
morrow. 

We,  safely  housed  on  the  other  hand  in  our  camp,  on  the 
bare  plateau  snugly  embosomed  by  bare  hills,  fieure  as  weU  as 
might  be  expected  with  people  sufifering  from  half  rations,  no 
grog,  and  bad  bread.  The  mountain  air  of  Wadela  is  chilling, 
and  acts  like  a  refrigerator  upon  frames  acclimated  to  the 
rigour  of  oven-like  valleys.  Hoar-frost  crowned  every  slope  and 
eminence  on  the  morning  following  our  arrival.  By  reason  of 
our  blankets  left  behind,  we  suffered  very  much  from  the 
sudden  change  of  temperature,  and  six  blankets  were  required 
before  anything  like  comfort  was  obtained.  These  we  were 
obliged  to  purchase  from  the  natives  at  a  dollar  each. 

The  Quarter-Master-General  announced  that  we  were  but 
seven  days'  march  from  Magdala.  At  Lat  it  was  only  six 
days'  march  to  Magdala,  so  now,  after  marching  five  days, 
we  found  we  were  seven  according  to  Phayre;  but  Charles 
Speedy,  interpreter-in-chief,  declared  it  as  his  opinion  that  we 

'^Arabic  term  for  Abysfrinxa.  ' 


RECALCITRATING  FRIENDS. 


387 


were  twelve  days,  if  we  allowed  margin  days,  to  guard  against 
accidents  adverse  to  rapid  travelling. 

The  intelligence  and  political  departments  busied  them- 
selves in  feeing  chiefs — in  bribing  them  to  good  conduct ;  the 
Commissiariat  were  always  busy  in  purchasing  what  was  brought. 
Abyssinian  chiefs,  proud  in  their  cloud-begirt  ambas,  were  as 
slippery  as  eels ;  no  sooner  had  the  army  left  the  depot  than 
they  became  clamorous  for  more  gifts,  though  they  were  already 
paid  in  cleanest  brand-newest  coin,  their  specialty.  The  super- 
numaries  were  immediately  sent  back  to  satisfy  rapacity  and 
rectify  errors,  or  restrain  with  strong  hand  what  couldn't  be 
appeased  by  soft  words. 

Major  Grant  and  Captain  Moore  were  sent  toDildee  because 
of  some  complications  occurring  consecutively  there — nothing 
in  themselves,  but  very  e\'il  imchecked. 

Colonel  Merewether,  political  officer,  in  his  head-piece  of 
silver,  and  clothed  with  due  authority,  obtained  permission,  or 
rather  was  commanded,  to  satisfy  pugnacious  Welda  Yassous, 
who  in  spite  of  his  earnest  promises  and  solemn  covenant  with 
Napier,  ratified  by  breaking  of  bread  and  eating  of  salt,  had 
departed  from  the  straight  path,  and  ever  since  our  absence 
had  been  diverging  wider  and  ftu^her  from  his  plighted  faith, 
until  he  had  broken  out  into  downright  hostility. 

It  was  even  said  that  the  couriers  of  Sir  Robert  Napier  had 
been  captiured  and  ill-treated ;  that  if  they  made  stout  deter- 
mined resistance,  they  were  emasculated.  That  Welda  Yassous 
and  his  brother  had  peremptorily  forbidden  their  people  from 
selling  their  provisions  was  indubitable.  That  they  had  pro- 
hibited native  carraiges  or  country  people  with  provender  to 
sell,  from  passing  through  their  territory  of  Woggerat,  between 
Mesheck  and  Atzala,  was  equally  indisputable. 

Since  Sir  Robert  Napier  had  determined  to  trust  to  native 
carriage  for  the  daily  subsistence  of  his  troops  and  immense 
trains,  such  checks  and  hindrances  were  replete  with  serious 
consequences  to  the  advance  columns.  Harsh  treatment  of 
every  petty  chief  would  not  avail  us  ;  rather  the  reverse.  Each 
Ras  on  his  own  peaky  amba  imagined  himself  as  good  as  the 
next  one,  or  the  High  Wagshum,  or  the  kingly  Prince  of  Tigre. 

Plaints  of  this  sort  were  clearly  not  inaudible  when  such  a 
personage  as  Col.  Wm.  L.  Merewether  was  sent  to  relieve  them. 


388  COOMlASSIE  AND  MAGDALA-. 

On  the  second  day  of  cur  stay  at  Santarai,  at  eleven  of  the 
forenoon,  the  pickets,  standing  like  shadows  on'  the  highest 
points  of  the  embosoming  hills,  shivering  amid  the  drizzle 
and  mist  of  a  foggy  morning,  discovered  an  armed  body  of 
men.  approaching  from  the  westward,  and  at  once  fired  their 
muskets  to  signal  the  camp.  Busy  nmiour  inmiediately 
announced  it  as  the  approach  of  Theodore  with  50,000  men ! 
Rimiour  had  been  very  imeasy  ever  since  our  arrival  at  Santaiai. 

At  the  first*  signal  of  the  picket.  Colonel  Fraser,  then  officer 
of  the  day,  galloped  up  to  the  outposts  and  scanned  the 
strangers  closely,  after  which  he  informed  the  outposts  not  to 
fire,  as  they  were  friends  who  were  approaching.  Head-quarters 
had  known  since  the  previous  evening  that  these  strangers, 
who  were  no  other  than  the  troops  imder  Dajaz  Mashesha, 
Commander-in-chief  of  Wagshimi  Gobazye's  army,  were  to  come 
into  camp  on  the  morrow  to  pay  a  visit  to  Sir  Robert  Napier ; 
for  Munzinger,  the  envoy,  had  sent  several  couriers  to  inform 
Sir  Robert  of  Mashesha's  intention. 

When  therefore  the  vedettes  of  the  Scinde  horse  and  infismtry 
pickets  had  fired  'their  guns  to  warn  the  cSmp,  the  infantry 
had  thrown  themselves  forward,  in  skirmishing  order,  and  were 
advancing  upon  the  supposed  enemy;  and  had  not  Colonel 
Fraser  arrived  at  the  most  opportime  moment,  the  consequences 
would  not  only  have  been  disastrous  to  the  native  cavalry,  who 
were  marching  with  careless  confidence  towards  the  friendly 
camp,  but  it  would  have  arrayed  against  the  English  Wagshum 
Gobazye  and  his  army  of  40,000  men,  who,  believing  that  he 
had  been  treacherously  dealt  with,  would  no  doubt  have  eagerly 
sought  alliance  with  Theodore  to  avenge  the  murder  of  his  men. 
The  British  army  would  then  have  had  Theodore,  with  his 
30,000  men  in  front,  and  Wagshum  Gobazye,  with  40,000  men, 
in  flank  and  rear. 

When  it  was  known  at  head-quarters  that  the  Abyssinian 
General-in-chief  was  coming,  the  various  regiment.s  were  called 
to  quarters  instantly  by  beat  of  drum  and  fife.  The  soldiers 
put  on  their  cleanest  coverings  for  their  sun  helmets  and  white 
cotton  gloves.  The  3rd  Light  Cavalry  advanced  towards  Sir 
Robert'^  tent,  turned,  and  faced  about  to  front.  They  were  all 
in  spick  and  span  silvered  and  belaced  uniforms.  Their  officers, 
mounted  on  their  finest  chargers,  drew  near,  and,  selecting  a 


'      AN  ABYSSINIAN  GENERAL  VISITS  NAPIER.  389 

small,  troop  of  the  cavalry  to'  accompany  them,  at  jthe  word  of 
command  dashed  oflf  to  meet  Mashesha.  In  the  meantime  four 
regiments  imder  arms  were  marched  up  to  the  western  extre- 
mity of  the  camp,  where  they  were  drawn  up  in  lines.  All 
looked  expectant  to  the  summits  of  the  MuflFs  ^n  our  left,  for 
from  that  direction  they  were  to  come.> 

At  the  end  of  about  half  an  hoiiif  a  long  line  of  cavalry 
crested  the  ridge.  After  a  pause,  during  which'  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  they  examined  tUe  strange  camp  below,  with  its 
thousands  of  men  and  animals,  the  whole  of  the  cavalry  marched" 
down  the  steep  sides  of  the  blufif  as  coolly  and  as  deliberately  as 
if  they  were  on  a  level  plain.  There  was  no  appearance  of 
commotion  or  jostling,  though  the  precipitous  faces  of  the  ele- 
vation were  uneven  enough  with  rough  boulders  and  toppling 
stones.  No  European  cavalry  could  have  done  so  without  being 
huddled  together  in  groups,  and  in  stumbling  and  sprawling 
masses. 

The  appearance  of  Mashesha's  force  was  very  imposing, 
though  the  imevenness  of  the  ground  caused  one  end  of  the 
advancing  line  to  be  fifty  feet  below  the  olher ;  but  it  kept 
admirable  order  and  ranks.  As  they  reached  the  base  of  the 
bluffs  they  halted  and  formed  column.  The  English  oflScers 
and  their  body-guards  surrounded  the  Abyssinian  general ;  and 
as  he  crossed  a  little  stream  which  separated  the  camp  ground 
from  the  heights,  the  artillery  conmienced  thundering  a  salute 
which  caused  the  native  ponies  to  leap  with  afiright,  and 
disarranged  the  colunm. 

The  regiments  presented  arms  to  the  princely  General,  and, 
forming  column,  preceded  in  advance  of  the  native  army.  The 
military  bands  struck  up  'Garryowen,'  which  delighted  the 
ears  of  the  dusky  soldiers  with  its  martial  strains.  In  this 
manner  they  marched  up  to  where  Napier's  tent  stood,  when 
the  English  formed  open  square,  through  which  Mashesha 
was  conducted  towards  Sir  Robert's  marquee.  The  English 
General  came  to  the  door,  and  immediately  both  generals 
embraced  each  other. 

Greneral  Mashesha  was  a  medium-sized  man,  about  five-and- 
thirty  years  old,  with  a  kindly  good-humoured  face,  full  of  lively 
intelligence.  He  was  dressed  in  a  flowing  syma  of  silk.  His 
vest  and  wide  trousers  were  of  richly-coloured  silk  brocade,  a 


390 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


necklace  of  amber  beads  was  around  his  neck,  and  an  elegant 
torque  made  of  filigree  gold  set  with  vari-coloured  glass  was 
worn  roimd  the  head.  He  had  just  come  from  a  successful 
expedition  against  the  rebels  in  western  Wadela,  and  wore  the 
torque  with  a  horn  in  the  centre,  as  a  sign  that  he  was  exalted 
on  high.  This  wearing  of  the  horn  after  victory  is  an  allusion 
to  the  scriptural  description  of  the  horn  of  the  righteous,  and  to 
the  '  lifting  up  of  the  horn  on  high,  while  the  wicked  man 
speaketh  with  a  stiff  neck.' 

The  Abyssinian  force  numbered  probably  800  mounted  men, 
composed  of  the  elite  of  the  army  of  the  Wagshum.  They  were 
all  fine  stalwart  natives,  dressed  uniformly  in  robes,  with  a 
broad  scarlet  band  around  the  hem.  Gaudy  bracelets  were 
aroimd  their  arms,  necklaces  of  amber  and  beads  about  their 
necks,  and  anklets  adorned  their  ankles.  Each  soldier  carried 
a  couple  of  spears  and  a  shield  of  ox-hide,  while  about  half  of 
them  were  armed  with  matchlock  muskets.  Not  one  of  the 
horses  was  shod. 

It  is  not  known  what  took  place  between  the  English  and 
Abyssinian  generals  after  they  entered  the  tent,  nor  is  it  very 
material.  The  substance  of  the  conversation  was  doubtless 
that  Napier  wished  well  to  Gobayze,  and  Gobayze  wished  well 
to  Napier ;  Napier  hoped  that  Mashesha  was  well,  and  Mashesha 
expressed  his  hope  that  Napier  was  well.  Fmthermore, 
Mashesha  expressed  his  undoubted  belief  that  Theodore  would 
fight — a  cause  for  infinite  gratification  to  the  British  general. 
He  (Mashesha)  said  he  was  very  much  afraid  of  Theodore — 
which  we  had  all  guessed  long  before  he  told  Sir  Robert.  Then 
Munzinger,  Speedy,  Thesiger,  and  Mashesha  were  invited  to 
drink  a  little  rum  with  Sir  Robert, 

The  interview  ended,  Mashesha  was  presented  with  a  horse 
and  a  double-barrelled  gun,  of  which  latter  he  seemed  to  be 
very  proud,  and  the  horse  attracted  the  general  admiration  of 
the  native  soldiers. 

Dajaz  Mashesha  had  his  shield  borne  by  a  youth  of  high 
degree — a  perfect  young  Adonis ;  as  handsome  in  his  dusky 
beauty  and  aspect  as  any  page  who  carried  the  shield  and  spur 
of  tlie  steel-clad  barons  of  old.  The  shield  was  similar  to  that 
owned  by  Prince  Kussai. 

-From  these  people  we  were  able  to  form  some  idea  of  the 


THE  WADELA  PLATEAU. 


391 


strength  and  power  of  the  Emperor  Theodore.  If  his  troops 
were  armed  only  a  little  better  than  Mashesha's,  Magdala  was 
certainly  a  place  that  would  task  the  strength  of  the  British 
force  to  the  utmost  to  capture  it.  There  was  reason  to  believe 
that  they  were,  as  Theodore  was  always  victorious  in  combat 
with  native  chiefs  and  princes.  All  about  Theodore  was, 
however,  involved  in  mystery.  Whenever  spies  came  into 
camp  with  reports  of  him,  they  were  so  exaggerated  that  it  was 
impossible  to  arrive  at  the  truth.  The  prisoners'  letters  were  also 
as  vague  productions  as  would  task  the  keenest  diplomat  to 
imderstand  anything  about  Magdala  and  its  surroundings.  In 
such  a  case  there  was  nothing  left  for  General  Napier  but  to 
tramp  onward,  with  the  hope  that  before  many  days  the  whole 
problem  would  be  resolved,  and  all  the  stories,  and  doubts,  and 
surmises  ended  for  ever. 

On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  General  Sir  Charles 
Staveley,  with  the  33rd  Foot ;  Punjaub  Pioneers,  six  com- 
panies ;  Twiss'  Steel  Battery ;  a  company  of  the  3rd  Native 
Cavalry ;  the  Naval  Brigade,  in  charge  of  the  rockets  ;  another 
regiment  of  Eiuropean  Infantry,  the  46th  Foot ;  the  3rd  Dra- 
goon Guards  (Europeans),  and  the  left  wing  of  the  Belooches, 
arrived  upon  Wadela. 

On  the  third  morning  after  our  arrival  at  Santarai,  the 
1st  Brigade  broke  camp,  and  started  for  Gazoo,  sixteen  miles 
distant. 

The  whole  surface  of  Wadela  plateau  resembled  the  same 
amount  of  land  on  the  Illinois  or  Nebraska  prairie,  except  that 
rocks  protruded  a  little  oftener  above  the  soil  and  grass  on  the 
Abyssinian  plain.  Several  fields  of  green  wheat  were  passed, 
while  adjacent  to  them  were  patches  of  vetches  and  teff  ready 
for  the  sickle.  Small  villages  rose  here  and  there,  surrounded 
by  an  abattis  of  wattled  fence-work.  There  was  always  a 
pleasant  breeze,  which,  with  solar  topees  on  the  head,  obviated 
the  efifects  of  the  extreme  heat. 

Charles  Speedy,  our  interpreter,  the  quondam  General-in- 
Chief  of  the  Emperor  Theodore,  was  conmianded  by  Sir  Eobert 
Napier  to  go  to  the  diflferent  villages  on  the  plain  to  buy  grain 
and  flour.  Mr.  Speedy  proposed  to  me  to  accompany  him,  that 
I  might  see  something  of  the  people  untainted  by  British 
dollars.    I  very  gladly  acquiesced  in  the  proposal. 


392 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


The  first  village  Captain  Speedy  and  I  entered  was  Wota, 
on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  road  over  which  the  army  travelled, 
and  about  three  miles  from  it. 

When  the  inhabitants  saw  us  approach,  two  or  three  of  the 
elders  came  forward  and  bowed  themselves  to  the  groimd  before 
us.  Speedy  delivered  his  'Didwal  achoo,'  which  means  ^Health 
to  you,'  or  '  How  are  you,'  the  customary  morning  greeting  of 
the  people.  They  prostrated  themselves  with  their  hands  to 
their  heads  three  times,  and  Speedy  salaamed  likewise  in  true 
Ethiopian  style. 

By  their  gestures,  which  I  interpreted  to  an  invitation 
according  to  the  Scriptural  texts : 

'"Come,  Sooltan,"^  if  now  we  have  found  favour  in  your 
sight ;  pass  not  away,  I  pray  ye,  from  your  servants.* 

'  Turn  in  to  us.  Here  is  a  pleasant  shade  imder  our  village 
trees,  "  rest  yourselves,"^  and  we  will  fetch  a  moi:sel  of  bread, 
and  comfort  ye  your  hearts ;  after  that  ye  shall  pass  on.' 

My  friend  consented  to  the  arrangement,  saying  at  the 
same  time  that  it  was  all  very  pleasant. 

We  sat  ourselves  under  a  beautiful  green  kousso  tree,  and 
'  directly  they  set  before'  us  bread,  butter,  and  milk,  and  the 
hind  quarter  of  a  kid.  They  stood  by  us  'imder  the  tree,' 
holding  their  robes  before  us,  so  that  evil  eyes  should  not  rest 
upon  us  while  we  partook  of  their  hospitality,  and  we  'did 
eat.'  The  milk  was  delicious,  the  bread  was  excellent,  and 
the  kid  was  rich  and  tender. 

After  the  extempore  meal  had  been  despatched,  damsels 
arrived,  bringing  their  com  and  flour  for  sale,  while  we  spread 
our  silver  dollars  before  us  in  tempting  array.  The  first 
quantity  of  flour  we  bought  barely  weighed  six  pounds,  for 
which  we  paid  one  dollar,  but  from  this  Tnim'Tnnm  we  gradually 
rose  to  the  maximum  of  thirteen  poimds  for  a  dollar.  The 
heaps  of  flour  and  grain  became  larger,  slowly,  until  they 
formed  a  miniature  illustration  of  the  great  pyramids  of  Ohizeh 
in  Egypt.  We  also  purchased  goatskin  bags,  thongs,  and 
mules. 

Before  we  departed  from  Wota,  Captain  Speedy  and  I  had 
4,000  lbs.  of  flour,  and  3,500  lbs.  of  grain.    When  we  left 


'  My  lord. 


*  Genesis  xviii.  3. 


'  Genesis  xviii.  4. 


THE  AUTHOE  SERVES  THE  BRITISH  GOVERNMENT.  393 


we  could  hear  the  ardent  blessings  as  they  were  showered  upon 
us  by  the  kindly  villagers. 

From  Wota  we  went  to  Mai-Ayni,  where  the  extraordinary 
stature  of  Captain  Speedy  excited  unusual  attention  and  respect. 
When  he  moved  among  them,  they  all  moved  away  precipitately 
from  before  him;  but,  jocularly  disposed,  this  son  of  Anak  would 
swing  one  of  the  young  men  aloft  with  his  powerful  arms,  just 
to  show  them  what '  Basha  Felecca '  could  do. 

The  Syndic  at  Mai-Ayni  was  a  singular  being.  He  had 
been  suflfering  a  long  time  from  a  cachectic  disease,  probably  the 
tabes — ^until  now  he  seemed  to  be  nothing  more  than  an 
automaton  skeleton.  He  welcomed  us  with  many  salaams. 
'  Aroimd  him  skipped  and  danced  a  dozen  laughing  girls. 
Merry  boys  and  youths  sauntered  out  of  the  village  at  the 
soutd  of  our  voices,  leaning  on  each  others'  arms,  like  so 
many  Davids  and  Jonathans.  Such  interesting  tableaux 
vivants  were  not  witnessed  by  me  in  Abyssinia  before  this 
day.  Pitchers  and  jars  full  of  richest  cream  were  brought 
before  us,  and  one  young  damsel,  as  rich  in  graces  as  Cleopatra 
could  boast,  out  of  honour  to  me — so  said  Speedy — insisted 
on  my  drinking  cream  while  she  held  her  pitcher  to  my 
lips. 

We  managed  to  secure  at  this  village  40  mules,  30  horses, 
1,700  lbs.  of  flour,  3,000  lbs.  of  grain,  300  cakes,  bread,  75 
goatskin  mussucks,  and  about  100  fathoms  of  hide  rope.  Late 
in  the  evening  we  arrived  at  Gazoo,  the  camp  of  the  English 
army.* 

From  Gazoo  the  army  moved  on  to  Abdecoom,  distant 
fifteen  miles. 

The  aspect  of  the  country  was  precisely  similar  to  that 
between  Gazoo  and  Santarai ;  if  there  was  the  slightest 
diflference  it  was  in  being  a  little  more  level. 

Accounts  of  starvation  in  store  for  us  between  Abdecoom  and 
Magdala  were  rife.    Theodore,  it  was  said,  had  burnt  the 

'  This  was  very  important  service  which  I  assisted  Speedy  to  perform  for  the 
British  Government.  Yet  I  regret  to  say  the  magnanimous  British  Government 
have  never  even  thanked  me  for  it,  least  of  aU  have  they  given  me  a  medal, 
such  as  all  Ahyssinian  heroes  obtained,  which  I  consider  to  be  a  strange  oversight 
on  the  part  of  the  British  Government,  and  deserving  of  gravest  reproof  from  the 
author  of  this  history. 


394 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


country  throughout,  and  taken  every  pound  of  grain  away,  so 
that  all  Napier's  iinely-wrought  plans  seemed  to  be  destined  to 
sudden  misfortuner  But  then  so  very  many  unfounded  stories 
had  been  in  circidation  that  people  would  not  place  any  great 
confidence  in  anything  said  in  Abyssinia. 

Still  rations  were  scarce,  our  supplies  had  long  since  been 
devoured.  For  a  week  before  we  had  had  no  coffee,  sugar, 
potatoes,  nun,  vegetables,  or  ghee.  We  were  living  on  the 
toughest  of  beef — one  pound  per  day,  sugarless  tea,  ten  ounces 
of  tlour,  four  ounces  of  rice,  and  half  an  ounce  of  rock  salt, 
while  our  servants  got  but  half  of  the  soldiers'  ,  ration.  Our 
horses  were  living  on  eight  pounds  of  grass,  and  four  pounds  of 
bsirley  grain,  and  mules  on  foiu*  pounds  of  grass  and  three 
pounds  of  grain.  Ahead  the  prospect  was  still  darker.  Two 
days  at  the  furthest  would  consume  all  our  stores.  If  our 
Commissariat  Department  was  not  replenished  daily,  starvation 
would  certainly  ensue,  imless  we  killed  our  animals.  Yes,  by 
that  method  we  might  be  able  to  live  a  month,  until  fiuther 
supplies  could  be  brought  from  Antalo.  The  idea  was,  however, 
anything  but  pleasant. 

From  Abdecoom  the  army  on  the  next  day  moved  on  to 
Sindhe  ;  only  three  miles  distant  from  the  former.  Sir  Charles 
Staveley's  second  brigade  reached  that  same  evening  Abdecoom ; 
thus  the  two  brigades  were  but  three  miles  apart. 

General  Mashesha,  uncle  to  Gobayze,  in  the  afternoon  called 
upon  Sir  Robert  Napier.  He  was  accompanied  by  about  three 
liundred  cavalry.  He  came  to  inform  Sir  Robert  that  he  had 
purchased  6,000  lbs.  of  flour  and  grain,  and  would  send  it  to 
his  camp  directly.    Tliis  was  very  satisfactory  news. 

It  being  late  in  the  day,  Mashesha  proceeded  to  a  village 
on  an  eminence  not  very  far  from  camp,  and  quartered  some  of 
his  men  among  the  villagers.  Leaving  that  village,  he  was 
proceeding  with  the  remnant  of  his  band  to  another  about 
three  miles  north,  when  he  accidentally  came  upon  an  outpost 
of  General  Staveley's  camp,  consisting  of  a  corporal  and  four 
men  of  the  3rd  Light  Cavalry. 

These  soldiers  did  not  know  Mashesha ;  it  is  doubtful 
•  whether  they  ever  heard  of  him ;  but  greatly  exercised  in 
'  their  minds  by  the  many  rumours  they  heard  each  day 
about  the  dash  and  enterprise  of  Theodore,  they  believed 


EmpesK-r  iiin»t-iL  i-r  t-Jsi-  rm?^  cc  ii*  jgcmgt.crriag  pinSfs*  and 

therQ  i-^  Ex::  -riiL  liiK  otiscziaifT  -wii^  I  twlSfT^r*  iH 
sorts  £M  ocJiiinicmf  l€  nteai  iiitaa  li-n*  wiroed  pH«np- 
toiiir  Munis.  liCT  icill  fcOTsiicsciii.  TLi*  ^leirzaM  to  cc«Tif*rm 
them  iit  iLtdr  FSi-picic^ifw  Tirr  M-Tj»>3il  ord^rei  ii  pEckeT  to 
fire.  TLc  irrxtij' ?  si*  -BTtt  ii«5LBi:ijy  an^vened  by  two  ftv^m 
Ma&bftsxa'i  P"<Tr-  eic^rpC'riu  i^irred  bis  xnes  u>  dischu^ 

a  volltrT  ai  iLsrin-  and  iLesi  gave  ibe  w:.rd  to  charge.  These 
five  dkar^eid  i^p:*^  XKarij  ffnr  Abvsdniai^  5woi>i  in  hand. 
JIasheaha  perofciving  ibe  eiT>r.  gave  the  order  to  retreats  hut 
the  pickecs  were  upcen  the  rcanD*:«st«  curdng  and  srahhing 
anay  like  her.>e5.  Thev  pursued  the  rest  for  some  di^tance^ 
and  seeing  that  thev  oonld  not  overhaul  them«  the  little  out* 
post  squad  returned  tcT  their  pt>§t*  having  killed  two  and 
wounded  two  others. 

As  might  be  expected,  the  noise  of  the  firing  caused 
great  excitement  among  the  refrpective  camps  of  Napier 
and  Stavelev.  The  second  brigade  was  instantly  under  arms 
and  drawn  up  in  line  outeide  of  their  camp,  while  the  3rd 
Light  Cavalry  scoured  the  adjacent  hills  in  pursuit.  Tlie 
4th  European  Foot,  and  the  Beloochees,  were  marched  out  of 
the  camp  of  the  Ist  Brigade,  to  take  post  on  an  elevation 
that  conunanded  a  large  sur^Eice  of  ground  near  it.  Every  one 
believed  for  a  short  time  that  the  firing  had  been  between  the 
pickets  and  the  enemy. 

Mr.  Munzinger,  the  interpreter,  sallied  out,  however,  with 
a  portion  of  the  Scinde  Horse,  to  enquire  into  i^  The  village, 
whither  Mashesha  and  his  men  had  fled  for  refuge,  was  forti- 
fied, and  its  walls  were  manned  by  an  infuriated  body  of  mon, 
who  believed  that  the  Feringhees  were  treacherous  people  who 
had  professed  friendship  for  their  chief,  that  they  might  mur- 
der Jmn,  and  it  was  with  some  difficulty  that  they  could  l>o 
persuaded  from  firing  upon  the  Scinde  Horse. 

After  many  expostulations  on  the  part  of  patient  Mun- 
zinger,  Mashesha  was  induced  to  come  to  the  gate  to  listen 
to  him,  and  after  a  fund  of  logic  had  been  exhausted,  tho 
mistake  was  forgiven  by  the  Abyssinian  chief.  Throe  hundred 
dollars  were  given  to  the  families  of  the  deceased  as  blood- 


396 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


money,  which  satisfied  them,  as  the  dead  men  were  no  chiefs, 
and  common  peasants'  lives  are  held  but  lightly  in  Ethiopia. 
The  wounded  were  taken  to  the  British  hospital  tent  and  ten-  . 
derly  cared  for. 

From  Sindhe,  the  army  marched  the  next  day  down  the 
Jeddah  ravine,  and  up  again  on  to  the  sunmiit  of  the  opposite 
plateau  of  Dahonte  Dalanta,  which  was  also  11,000  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  ocean. 

From  Sindhe  was  six  miles  to  the  edge  of  the  ravine.  A 
ravine  is  defined  as  a  long,  deep  and  narrow  hollow.  It  is  a 
good  definition,  but  were  I  to  describe  the  Jeddah  as  a 
long,  deep  and  narrow  hollow  between  two  plateaus  of  equal 
height,  few  would  imderstand  the  true  depth  and  extent  of  the 
Jeddah  ravine ;  were  I  to  say — as  I  must  say — that  this  ravine 
that  yawned  beneath  our  feet  as  we  stood  on  the  extreme  edge 
of  Wadela  was  thirty  miles  long,  3,8O0rfeet  deep,  and  two  miles 
across  from  Wadela  to  Dalanta,  I  should  convey  to  the  mind  of 
the  reader  the  true  proportions  of  the  Jeddah. 

To  many  even  this  exact  description  of  it  would  not  enable 
them  to  realize  its  awful  depth  and  appearance ;  and  as  I  believe 
it  incumbent  on  me  to  endeavour  to  make  it  comprehensive,  I 
shall  proceed  to  details. 

Two  miles  from  the  camp  we  left  the  grassy  district,  and 
an  expanse  of  scorched  plain  lay  in  front  of  us — the  handiwork 
of  Theodore's  soldiers.  As  we  surmoimted  a  gentle  rolling 
ridge,  a  huge  and  gloomy  wall  of  rocks  looming  up  on  the 
opposite  side  of  Wadela  was  seen.  On  approaching  the  brow 
we  discovered  the  remains  of  Theodore's  camp.  This  was  the 
Bet  Hor,  so  often  heard  of  in  the  newspapers,  where  his  camp 
stood  while  the  road  down  the  deep  Jeddah  ravine  was  con- 
structed. 

Around  the  old  camp  was  the  blackness  of  desolation, 
which  invariably  follows  in  the  train  of  ruthless  war.  There 
were  still  to  be  seen  the  booths,  or  arboured  branches  in- 
terweaved  with  the  yellow  grass,  which  served  as  tents  for 
the  soldiers.  The  bleached  bones  of  sheep  and  oxen  covered 
the  ground.  Here  and  there  were  scattered  pieces  of  the 
black  native  blankets  ;  kneading  troughs  of  wood  ;  horn  spoons 
and  bottomless  horn  cups  ;  head-rests  for  girls,  and  innumerable 
pieces  of  leathern  aprons  or  loin-cloth.    Here  were  renmants 


THEODORE  AS  A  ROAD-MAKER. 


397 


of  quern  and  other  stones,  by  which  the  camp  women  ground 
their  com ;  and  broken  Ethiopian  distaffs  strewed  the  whole 
place.  A  significant  sign  to  us  of  the  cruelty  with  which 
*  Theodore  governed  his  people  was  a  human  arm  in  the  last 
.  stages  of  corruption,  and  a  scull  with  a  great  hack  across  it, 
which  was  found  in  the  very  centre  of  the  camp. 

Upon  arriving  at  the  brow  of  the  plateau,  the  road  which 
Theodore  had  caused  to  be  made  through  the  solid  syenite  and 
basalt  rock  opened  before  us,  through  which  the  head  of  the 
column  at  once  passed.  For  the  first  hundred  yards  the  decli- 
vity was  very  steep  ;  when  measured,  it  was  foimd  to  be  1  foot 
at  the  base  to  3  feet  in  height.  We  could  perceive  the  marks 
of  Theodore's  drills  in  the  rock  throughout-the  whole  length  of 
this  pass.  It  must  have  been  tedious  work  to  him,  working  as 
he  did  with  imperfect  tools,  an  enemy  hovering  about  him,  in 
the  form  of  Wagshmn  •Gobazye,  and  another  one  advancing 
upon  him  in  his  rear,  in  the  shape  of  the  British  force.  The 
natives  say  that  he  worked  as  hard  as  any  of  his  men  ;  that  he 
was  constantly  riding  about  on  a  white  mule,  to  observe  his 
Inen  while  at  work.  Now  he  would  encourage  and  praise, 
anon  would  he  threaten ;  at  times  would  he  flog ;  and  at 
another  place  he  would  order  a  man  out  to  instant  execu- 
tion ;  then  again  he  would  dismoimt,  and  proceed  to  show  what 
real  earnest  work  could  do.  After  five  weeks'  hard  work,  he 
had  constructed  from  the  height  of  the  Wadela  to  the  hollow 
of  the  Jeddah,  and  up  to  Dalanta  plateau,  a  road  8  miles  long 
and  30  feet  wide.  Over  this  road  we  travelled,  from  terrace  to 
terrace,  down  slanting  gradines,  and  down  the  side  of  ledges, 
which  in  some  places  were  almost  perpendicular,  until  we 
arrived  at  the  bottom  of  the  ravine.  The  bottom  was  covered 
with  pebbles  and  round  boulders.  In  deep  hollows  alone  could 
be  discovered  any  water. 

About  two  P.M.  the  head  of  the  colunm  was  once  more  put 
in  motion,  and  it  was  almost  piteous  to  watch  the  faces  of 
the  soldiers  as  they  tugged  manfully  up,  with  a  certain  air  of 
half  despair  and  resignation  depicted  on  their  features.  It  is 
of  no  use  to  follow  them  up  step  by  step ;  suffice  it  that  they 
halted  every  fifty  paces,  and  about  four  p.m.  they  surmounted 
the  plateau  of  Dalanta. 

From  here  we  could  trace  the  army  baggage  trains  along 


398 


OOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


the  whole  length  of  the  ascent  and  descent  from  Wadela  down- 
ward and  upward  to  Dalanta.  We  were  slightly  astonished  to 
find  that,  though  we  had  started  from  Sindhe  camp  as  early  as 
six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  last  of  the  baggage  train  had 
not  yet,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  eonmienced  the 
descent  of  Wadela.  Those  who  had  their  baggage  so  &r 
behind  might  at  once  make  up  their  minds  that  they  must 
pass  the  night  without  their  tents,  blankets,  or  suppers,  unl^ 
good  Samaritan  souls  could  be  found  to  feed  them  for  that  one 
night. 

At  six  o'clock  Ali  came  up,  triumphant,  with  my  baggage. 
Captain  Sweeny  had  stopped  him  twice,  but  on  the  road  so 
niunerous  were  the  mishaps  that  occurred  that  the  Arab  boy 
brought  his  two  animals  clear  of  them  and  without  hardly  a 
pause,  except  to  breathe. 

Not  one-half  of  the  baggage  trains  arrived  at  our  new 
camp  on  Dalanta  that  evening.  When  once  night  fell,  those 
who  were  still  toiling  among  the  convoluting  defiles  became 
enwrapped  in  thick  gloom,  and  each  man  had  to  make  the  best 
of  what  he  could  in  the  premises.  They  unstrapped  the 
saddles,  and  dumping  the  packs  down  on  the  ground,  they  tied 
their  mules  or  horses  to  some  bush  close  by,  threw  themselves 
down  under  the  shelter  of  a  tree  or  shrub,  and  slept  their 
fatigue  oflf  as  best  they  might. 

It  was  very  late  even  next  day  before  the  over-strained 
transport  train  arrived  upon  Dalanta  plateau.  Animals  had 
died  by  scores  in  the  ravine. 

Further  movement  for  two  or  three  days  was  impossible. 
There  were  no  rations  on  hand.  According  to  a  Commissary^s 
report  there  were  only  4,000  lbs.  of  grain!  This  amount 
divided  amongst  the  5,000  animals  of  the  1st  Brigade  would 
give  each  one  about  six  and  a  half  ounces  of  grain,  after  nearly 
thirty-six  hours  fasting  1  Sir  Charles  Staveleys  Brigade,  with 
5,000  more,  was  to  come  up  this  day,  and  there  would  be  none 
left  for  it.  Captain  Speedy  was  therefore  despatched  with 
haste,  to  see  the  Chief  of  Dahonte  Dalanta,  who  had  always 
reftised  Theodore  supplies,  and  had  been  the  most  rebellious  of 
all  rebels,  to  enquire  whether  provisions  could  be  bought.  His 
mission  was  very  successful.    He  returned  with  one  hundred 


THEODORE  IN  MAGDALA  ! 


399 


mules  loaded  with  grain,  which  amounted  to  the  gross  weight 
of  10,000  lbs.,  and  a  promise  from  him  of  100,000  lbs.  on  the 
following  day. 

This  was  indeed  joyful  news  for  a  portion  of  coimtry  that 
was  said  to  be  ravaged  by  Theodore.  The  chief  showed  unmis- 
takable enthusiasm  for  the  British  cause,  and  all  hearts  were 
elated.  The  next  day,  which  was  April  7,  witnessed  an  abun- 
dance pouring  in,  from  all  sections  of  the  province  of  Dalanta, 
of  grain,  flour,  bread,  honey,  chickens,  grass,  chopped  straw, 
oxen,  and  goats. 

On  the  evening  of  April  7  the  long-expected  45th  Regiment 
and  3rd  Dragoon  Guards  arrived  at  our  camp  upon  Dalanta. 

The  army  was  now  concentrated,  and  numbered  over  5,500 
fighting  men.  The  quick  march  performed  by  these  two 
bodies  of  men  from  Antalo  to  Dalanta  showed  what  the  two 
brigades  could  have  done  had  they  been  divided  into  regi- 
ments on  the  route. 

About  ten  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  April  8  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  accompanied  by  his  staflF  and  an  escort  of 
cavalry,  proceeded  to  the  southern  side  of  Dalanta  plateau  to 
reconnoitre  Magdala,  which  was  plainly  seen  from  the  extreme 
height  of  the  plateau.  He  reported  that  he  saw  the  tents  of 
Theodore's  army  on  a  plain  below  Magdala,  and  many  guns  in 
position  on  the  fortress.  There  were  also  many  thousands  of 
people  seen  moving  about  there,  as  well  as  smoke  curling 
upwards  from  the  camp  fires. 

Sir  Robert  called  it  a  very  strong  place,  stronger  than  any 
amba  we  had  as  yet  seen ;  which  confirmed  everybody  in  his 
impression  that  the  Emperor  would  never  have  neglected  the 
strong  places  we  had  passed  on  our  road,  had  he  not  held  a 
much  stronger  position.  The  great  desideratmn  was  satisfac- 
torily answered.    Theodore  was  in  Magdala ! 

When  Sir  Robert  came  back  from  his  reconnaissance,  the 
Engineers  were  set  to  work  to  make  escalading  ladders  and 
torpedoes,  in  readiness  for  an  assault  up  the  clifis  of  their 
numerous  strongholds. 

Our  minds  were  at  ease.  Plenty  reigned  in  the  camp. 
Theodore  was  known  to  be  in  his  fortress.  To-morrow  we 
should  see  Magdala  from  our  camp  on  the  southern  brow  of 


400 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAODALA. 


Dalanta.  All  felt  happy  at  the  thought,  and  such  merry 
laughter  and  ringing  heartiness  was  never  heard  in  Abyssinia 
as  was  heard  in  the  English  camp  upon  Dalanta. 

The  rival  bands  of  the  different  regiments  played  their 
most  enlivening  music.  The  Naval  Brigade  had  invited  the 
Punjaubee  band.  The  members  of  it  squatted  themselves  in 
two  decorous  segments  of  circles,  between  which  the  lively 
'  Jack  Tars '  tripped  the  light  fantastic  to  the  really  charming 
music  the  band  discoursed. 

The  natives  left  the  camp  bazaar  and  their  trading  to  gaze 
open-eyed  at  the  strange  actions  of  the  sailors,  which  they 
could  not  understand,  believing  them  to  be  part  of  a  worship 
to  their  divinity. 

By  and  by  the  music  ceased,  and  all  retired  to  thdr 
quarters.  The  last  tap  of  the  tattoo  was  sounded,  lights  were 
put  out ;  but  in  the  effulgence  of  the  summer  night  who  could 
sleep? 

The  gentle  winds  came  whispering  over  the  upper  regions 
of  the  earth.  The  Southern  Cross  could  be  traced,  with  its 
base  resting  upon  the  Bechilo  confines,  the  Pleiades  shone  out 
clear.  A  profound  repose  brooded  over  the  camp;  the  very 
angel  of  rest  seemed  to  have  laid  his  hand  upon  the  sleeping 
hosts! 


PRICES  OF  POLITICAL  INTELLIGENCE.  401 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

POLITICAL  INTELLIGENCE — MAODALA — THE  LAST  ACT  OF  THE  DRAMA — THEO- 
DORE OPENS  FIRE — CHARGE  OF  ABT88INIAN8 — COLONEL  PEHN*8  LAST 
SALUTE — THE  JACKALS  AND  HYJENAS  AT  WORK. 

Before  proceeding  with  the  description  of  the  march  from  the 
northern  brow  of  Dalanta  to  its  southern  side,  let  us  glance  at 
the  political  tidings  which  have  reached  camp  since  leaving 
Antalo.    The  last  news  I  have  quoted  is  dated  March  6,  1868. 

March  16. — A  letter  came  from  Mr.  Sassam,  stating  that 
Theodore  had  at  last  informed  his  soldiers  of  our  coining, 
adding  that  the  English  were  a  nation  of  traders,  and  that 
although  they  could  manufacture  good  guns,  and  could  use 
them  at  a  great  distance,  they  were  wanting  in  courage,  and 
no  match  for  Abyssinians  in  a  hand-to-hand  fight.  He  promised 
that  his  soldiers  should  defeat  the  English  with  great  slaughter, 
and  that  all  their  rich  treasure  should  be  divided  among  them. 

March  19. — We  heard  from  Mr.  Munzinger  that  he  had 
arrived  at  Wagshum  Gobazye's  camp,  and  had  been  received  in 
a  very  gracious  manner  by  that  prince.  He  also  stated  that 
Gobazye  extended  the  hand  of  friendship  to  Sir  Robert  Napier ; 
and  that  whatever  he  could  do  to  forward  his  expedition,  he 
had  promised  would  be  willingly  done. 

Theodore  was  at  Bet  Hor,  working  as  hard  as  possible  to  get 
his  gims  across  the  Jeddah  ravine.  He  had  burnt  the  country 
and  ravaged  it  round  about.  The  Chief  of  Dahonte  Dalanta, 
had  also  rebelled,  and  a  few  skirmishes  had  taken  place 
between  the  Emperor's  forces  and  the  men  of  Dalanta. 

March  20. — Another  despatch  came.  Theodore  had  arrived 
upon  Dalanta  plateau,  and  was  marching  on  to  Magdala. 

March  29. — Colonel  Phayre,  with  the  Pioneer  Force, 
despatched  a  note  to  General  Sir  Kobert  Napier,  informing 

D  D 


402 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


him  of  the  capture  of  Munzinger  by  some  of  Theodore's  scouts, 
and  that  Theodore  himself  was  recrossing  the  Bechilo  Kiver, 
which  lay  between  his  fortress  and  Dalanta  plateau,  with  the 
intention  of  fighting  the  English. 

March  31. — Munzinger  sent  a  note,  written  by  his  own 
hand,  from  Dajaz  Mashesha's  camp,  that  Gobazye's  Greneral 
would  visit  Sir  Robert  Napier,  upon  his  arrival  at  Santarai. 
Theodore,  it  was  said,  was  still  at  Magdala ;  had  never  re- 
crossed  the  Bechilo  since  his  arrival  at  his  fortress. 

April  4. — News  came  that  the  people  of  Dalanta  had  sub- 
mitted to  Theodore. 

ApHl  8. — Rassam  sent  a  letter  to  Colonel  W.  L.  Mere- 
wether,  who  had  come  up  with  the  army  again  from  his  suc- 
cessful mission  to  Welda  Yassous,  saying :  '  Beware !  the 
Emperor  is  moving.  Be  very  careful ;  he  may  attack  you  in 
the  night.  Deal  leniently  with  him  for  our  sakes.  The  least 
burst  of  temper  that  he  may  be  in,  may  end  our  lives.  Have 
you  any  good  Champagne  and  Havannas  in  the  camp  ?  Keep 
some  for  me,  dear  Colonel,  by  the  time  I  am  with  you.  God 
bless  you.' 

On  the  morning  of  April  9  both  brigades  moved  from  our 
camp  above  the  Jeddah  ravine  to  the  southern  extremity  of  the 
phiteau  overlooking  Magdala.  The  plateau  being  but  six 
miles  across,  and  smooth  and  level  as  a  billiard-table  almost^ 
we  reached  the  southern  brow  of  Dalanta  in  a  couple  of  hours, 
and  pitched  our  camps  just  half  a  mile  from  the  road  leading 
downward  to  the  Bechilo. 

Join  me,  reader,  on  the  extreme  brink  of  Dalanta  plateau, 
and  let  me  show  you,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  the  famous 
Magdala  and  its  surroimdings.  Open  your  eyes  and  behold 
the  scene ! 

From  the  edge  of  the  plateau  on  which  I  stand  I  look  down 
directly  below  my  feet  and  see  a  wall  of  sheer  rock  about  fitly 
feet  in  depth,  then  a  sloping  terrace  running  forward  a  hundred 
feet  or  so,  abruptly  terminated  by  another  precipice  of  a  like 
depth,  along  the  base  of  which  winds  a  well-made  road  for  a 
hundred  yards,  when  it  turns  and  descends  another  terrace,  and 
so  on  from  ledge  to  ledge  it  winds  through  its  tortuous  convolu- 
tions until  the  eyes  rest  on  a  river — the  Bechilo,  4,000  feet 
below ! 


THE  FAMOUS  MAGDALA,  AT  LAST  ! 


403 


Across  this  turbid  stream  the  vision  traces  another  road, 
whitened  by  travel,  inclining  up  another  ravine — the  Aroje, 
for  about  five  miles  ;  when  it  is  lost  from  the  view  by  a  jutting 
abutment  of  an  aslanting  hill,  until  we  find  the  road,  fainter 
than  before,  ascending  at  a  sharper  incline,  a  high  hill  topped 
by  a  small  plateau.  From  this  plateau  arises  apparently  per- 
pendicular to  us,  at  eight  or  ten  miles  distance,  a  frowning 
mass  of  rocks,  divided  into  two  differently  shaped  mountains. 
The  one  to  the  right  is  Fahla ;  the  other  is  Selasse ;  a  low ' 
ridge  connects  them.  Behind  Selasse  I  am  told  is  Magdala. 
Not  a  particle  of  it  is  visible.  The  obtruding  proportions  of 
Selasse  prevent  us  from  seeing  it.  Move  a  mile  leftward  of 
where  the  camp  is,  and  the  massive  outline  of  the  royal  fortress 
is  distinctly  seen.  These  triple  scarped  heights  contain 
Theodore,  his  army,  and  the  captives.  Theodore  has  certainly 
selected  the  most  impregnable  heights  for  his  eyrie  I 

The  Becbilo  valley  must  be  seen  to  be  realised.  Away  to 
the  right  and  left  horizons  of  the  sky  trend  indistinct  and 
interminable  groups  of  peaks,  which  have  their  numerous 
points  biuried  in  the  blue  firmament.  Mountains  crossing 
mountains,  hills  set  upon  hills,  shoot  upward  as  if  purposely 
placed  one  upon  another  by  a  race  of  Titans  in  a  vain  en- 
deavour to  pierce  the  boundless  bulwark  of  ether  which  God 
erected  between  the  immortal  realms  and  the  globe.  Stream- 
girdled  ranges  appear  like  vaporous  masses  in  the  dim  far-away 
distance,  aching  the  eyes  in  the  attempt  to  define  their  extent 
and  reach.  From  these  giant  heights  decline  in  gradation  the 
l^ser  heights,  imtil  they  reach  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  in  the 
centre  of  which  rises  isolated  the  colossal  triple  fortresses  of 
Theodore. 

Night's  shadows  sink  at  last,  and  gradually  envelope  the 
yawning  gulf,  until  its  gloomy  profundity  becomes  as  dark  as 
the  fabled  realm  of  Pluto.  In  the  centre  of  the  circle,  environed 
as  it  is  by  the  deep  valley  on  all  sides,  and  by  the  circum- 
ambient mountains,  which  recede  from  all  points  to  a  distance 
of  ten  miles,  is  dimly  seen  through  the  sabling  twilight  the 
lofty  head  of  Selasse,  illumined  by  thousands  of  twinkling  fires, 
and  with  all  its  precipitous  escarpments  made  visible  by  the 
many  fires  ranged  around  it. 

While  standing  on  Dalanta,  we  almost  imagined  we  could 

D  D  2 


404 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


hear  the  sounds  of  revelry  in  which  the  eneniy's  host  indulged. 
With  a  powerful  night-glass  wild  fantastic  figures  could  be 
made  out,  capering  round  the  flickering  lights,  and  we  could 
distinctly  distinguish  groups  squatting  around  them,  as  if  they 
were  discussing  the  events  which  the  morrow  foreshadowed. 
As  the  altitude  of  Magdala  and  its  sister  fortresses  of  Selasse 
and  Fahla  was  the  same  as  that  of  Dalanta,  had  the  night  been 
clear  the  different  positions  of  the  camps  on  their  summits 
might  have  \)een  easily  distinguishable. 

I  am  a  soldier,  and  my  craft  demands, 
Th.'it  wliereso  duty  calls  within  earth's  compass, 
Or  the  unmeasured  scope  of  fathomless  ocean, 
I  do  forthwith  obey. — Hydaspes. 

So  might  all  British  soldiers  have  said,  as  they  were  paraded 
for  roll-call  before  their  tents  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  April, 
which  was  Good  Friday,  in  1868. 

Breakfast  was  despatched  early  that  morning,  and  at  the 
sharp  blare  of  a  bugle  the  tents  were  struck.  Colonel  Phayre, 
with  his  six  companies  of  Bombay  and  Madras  Sappers  and 
Miners,  were  sent  forward  long  before  daylight,  to  remove 
obstructions  and  prepare  the  road,  where  the  late  rains  had 
destroyed  it. 

Another  sudden  startling  blare  was  sounded,  and  the  head 
of  the  2nd  Brigade  commenced  the  long  descent  to  the 
Bechilo. 

Lo !  now  the  last  act  of  the  drama  was  about  to  be  enacted ! 
In  spite  of  the  little  blunders  and  impediments  of  the  march 
*from  ZouUa  to  the  Bechilo  ;  in  spite  of  the  mysterious  warning 
conveyed  to  the  Political  Officer — Colonel  Merewether — by 
a  messenger  from  Eassam  the  captive  envoy,  '  Beware  !  the 
King  is  moving ' ;  in  spite  of  the  rumours  of  the  sudden  sweep 
down  meditated  by  Theodore;  the  army  had  survived  the 
march,  the  alarms  and  terrors  of  the  night,  and  the  head  of 
the  column  had  actually  started  on  the  descent  in  full  view  of 
Selasse  and  Fahla,  whereon  Theodore  stood,  with  his  eye-glass, 
surveying  the  scene ! 

Sir  Charles  Staveley  had  fully  recovered  from  his  rheu- 
matism, and  imbued  with  energy  and  spirit,  led  the  1st 
Brigade,  which  consisted  of  the  4th  European  Foot  (King^s 
Own),  Colonel  Cameron ;  a  company  of  the  Royal  Engineers, 


ENGLAND  EXPECTS  EVERY  MAN  TO  DO  HIS  DUTY !  405 

commanded  by  Major  Pritchard ;  two  regiments  of  native 
Indian  Infantry — the  Belooches  and  27th  Punjaub  Pioneers; 
two  companies  10th  Native  Indian  Infentry.  They  were  all 
dressed  in  their  newest  and  best  uniforms,  and  presented  a  very 
gay  and  animated  appearance. 

The  tactics  and  plans  of  the  battle  and  the  storming  had 
been  discussed  till  late  on  the  previous  evening,  and  all  the 
heads  of  departments  and  commands  fully  understood  what 
was  expected  of  them.  England  and  Sir  Robert  Napier 
expected  every  man  to  do  his  duty!  The  programme  seems 
to  have  been  as  follows  : — 

Colonel  Phayre  was  to  take  his  sappers  and  miners  to  repair 
roads  and  clear  obstructions,  to  occupy  and  to  hold  the  head  of 
the  Aroje  ravine  directly  beneath  Selasse. 

General  Sir  Charles  Staveley,  commanding  the  division,  was 
to  march  the  Ist  Brigade  across  the  Bechilo  River,  then  to 
make  a  detoiur  to  the  right,  march  up  a  steep  hill  intervening, 
and  occupy  the  little  plateau  below  Fahla. 

The  2nd  Brigade,  consisting  of  the  celebrated  Irish 
regiment,  the  33rd,  or  the  '  Duke  of  Wellington's  Own,'  600 
strong;  the  45th  Regiment  Infantry  (Europeans),  500  men; 
Colonel  Penn's  six-gun  battery  of  Mountain  Train  Artillery,  100 
men ;  the  Naval  Brigade  in  charge  of  the  Rocket  Battery,  100 
men ;  the  Armstrong  Battery  of  six  12-pounders,  two  8-inch 
mortars,  manned  by  about  200  men,  were  to  proceed  up  the 
Aroje  Valley,  the  Mountain  Train  Artillery  in  advance,  and 
endeavour  to  secure  a  small  knoll  and  a  narrow  ridge  directly 
imder  Selasse,  at  the  distance  of  1,500  yards  to  the  left  of  the 
hill  known  as  the  objective  point  of  General  Snyder's  (First) 
Brigade. 

The  after  conduct  of  General  Napier  was  to  be  ruled  by 
circumstances.  When  he  should  arrive  in  camp  he  intended  to 
write  another  appeal  to  Theodore  to  consider  well  his  position, 
and  the  dread  consequences  of  refusal  to  deliver  up  his  captives 
safe  and  unharmed. 

Thus  man  proposes  always,  but  the  Almighty  disposes, 
and  our  vdsest  intentions  are  very  often  frustrated  by  chances 
inimical  to  them.  Sir  Robert,  with  the  calnmess  of  an  educated 
General,  had  theorized  much  upon  the  glorious  science  of  war 
the  evening  previous  at  the  Council  Board,  and  had  supported 


406 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


his  tactics  by  choicest  logic,  proving  thereby  his  perfected 
attainments  in  the  abstruse'  details  of  military  engineering, 
and  through  the  whole  there  glimmered  enough  light  to  de- 
monstrate to  us  that  he  intended  at  the  first  opportunity  to 
transform  theory  into  practice,  and  become  master  of  Magdala ! 

At  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  we  who  stayed  behind  to  eat 
at  our  leisin-e  comfortable  breakfasts,  and  smoke  the  very  last 
of  our  cheroots,  had  our  tents  struck  and  rolled  up.  The  last 
of  the  1st  Brigade  had  disappeared  beyond  the  brow.  The 
English  Commander-in-Chief  mounted  his  charger,  the  Staff 
sprang  nimbly  to  saddle,  the  specials "  en  masse  order  their 
horses  up,  and,  booted  and  spurred,  mount  also. 

Under  the  warm  sun-blaze  the  2nd  Brigade,  led  by  the 
Chief  himself,  followed  by  his  brilliant  well-dressed  retinue, 
defiled  statelily  down  the  slope.  In  all  the  gorgeous  panoply 
and  glory  of  numbers,  the  living  stream  of  warriors  commenced 
their  descent  for  the  Bechilo  River.  Eegiments  well-known 
to  the  world  were  in  this  compact  army.  This  might  not  be  a 
great  battle,  but  the  victory  would  be  the  same,  and  the  glory 
of  it  appreciated  as  much. 

Down,  down,  and  still  down  the  lengthy  slope  they  de- 
scended, slipping,  stumbling,  sliding,  amid  dense  clouds  of  dust. 
Round  and  round  in  a  hundred  convolutions  an  hour,  from 
terrace  to  terrace,  with  a  train  of  elephants,  camels,  mules, 
horses,  asses,  and  camp  followers,  extending  far  away  out  of 
sight  over  the  summit  of  Dalanta.  Strangely  bevrildering 
was  the  continuity  of  the  descent,  and  exceedingly  provocative 
of  thirst  was  the  fierce  sunshine,  which  increased  its  heat  as  we 
neared  the  Bechilo  from  the  incandescent  rocks  and  fervid  dust ; 
but  the  soldiers  heeded  it  but  little. 

After  two  hours  we  found  ourselves  at  the  bottom  of  the 
ravine  close  to  the  Bechilo — a  river,  muddy  and  swift,  about 
fifty  yards  wide,  and  four  feet  deep.  The  head  of  Snyder's 
column  had  already  forded  the  river,  and  was  at  that  time 
debouching  to  the  right.  In  a  short  half  hour  it  had  crested 
the  first  hill. 

The  scene  of  confusion  in  and  on  both  sides  of  the  river 
was  somewhat  alarming.  Three  hundred  men  with  a  field- 
piece  or  two  appearing  suddenly  above  this  arena  .of  strife 
might  have  ensured  a  decided  victory  for  that  one  day  at  least, 


AT  THE  BECfllLO  RIVER. 


407 


against  the  crusaders.  The  soldiers  still  waiting  for  their  tin-n 
to  ford  the  Bechilo  were  squatted,*  or  were  recumbent  upon  the 
river  banks,  thickly  covering  acres,  while  the  2nd  Brigade, 
following  in  the  rear  of  General  Napier,  only  added  to  the 
tumult,  hurrying  as  they  did  to  the  stream  to  assuage  their  thirst- 
The  animals  of  the  Rocket  JBattery,  and  those  conveying  the 
mountain  artillery  of  Penn's  Company,  plunged  eagerly  into 
the  water  for  the  same  purpose,  and  when  restrained,  kicked 
and  plunged,  and  made  the  confusion  wor83  confounded. 

On  arriving  at  the  river,  the  2nd  Brigade  were  ordered 
to  cross.  They  accordingly  took  off  their  shoes  and  stockings, 
rolled  up  their  trousers,  and  walked  boldly  in,  getting  a  very 
efficient  wetting  up  to  the  midriff,  which  slightly  diminished 
their  ardour.  After  crossing  they  formed  column  again,  and 
preceded  by  the  Naval  Brigade  and  Penn's  Battery  they 
marched  slowly  up  the  Aroje  ravine,  at  the  head  of  which  it 
was  supposed  the  Bombay  and  Madras  Sappers  and  Miners,  and 
the  companies  of  Punjaub  Pioneers,  stood  guard. 

There  were  no  outlying  pickets  or  scouts  posted  on  the 
flanking  ranges  of  heights.  Seemingly  the  English  army 
feared  no  enemy  lying  in  the  rear  of  those  frowning  crests, 
that  rose  up  on  each  side  of  the  ravine  like  walls.  The  regi- 
ments' careless  mood  and  bearing  at  this  time  were  very 
noticeable. 

Slowly  the  Ist  and  2nd  Brigades  wended  their  respec- 
tive ways,  marching  on  two  radii,  forming  a  V,  the  base  of 
the  figure  being  the  embouchure  to  the  ravine  close  to  the 
river.  The  Ist  Brigade  was  even  then  swarming  over  the 
brow  of  a  steep  hill.  If  all  went  well,  both  brigades  were  to 
join  below  Selasse  and  Fahla. 

The  Commander-in-Chief,  staff,  and  followers,  lunched  on 
the  river  banks.  After  resting  an  hoiu*,  they  struck  off  to  tho 
right,  joining  Snyder's  column,  then  labouring  up  the  slope. 
At  2  P.M.  both  brigades  arrived  at  the  bases  of  their  objective 
points,  very  much  fatigued.  There  was  still  a  tremendous 
mountain — whose  slope  was  nearly  a  mile  in  length — to  climb, 
before  they  could  surmount  their  positions. 

I  was  riding  with  Colonel  Milward — the"  senior  officer  of  the 
artillery— in  advance  of  the  2nd  Brigade,  marching  up  the 
Aroje  ravine,  when  I  saw  him  beckon  to  Lieutenant  Nolan  of 


408 


GOOMASSI£  AND  MAGDALA« 


the  Armstrong  Battery,  and  heard  him  whisper  to  him  to  go 
forward,  and  ascertain  whether  there  were  any  signs  of  the 
enemy  in  front.  We  were  at  that  time  three  miles  up  the 
ravine,  and  had  as  yet  seen  or  heard  nothing  from  Colonel 
Phayre  or  his  Pioneers,  though  he  had  reported  to  Sir  Sobert 
Napier  that  he  held  the  '  head  of  the  ravine.' 

A  dead  silence  brooded  over  the  hills  and  narrow  valley. 
It  was  a  suspicious  silence ;  so  it  seemed  to  us,  knowing  as  we  did 
that  a  wily  enemy  with  a  large  force  was  in  front.  An  ambush 
might  have  been  planted  somewhere  on  our  flanks.  There 
were  many  available  places  where  the  enemy  could  have  hidden 
and  taken  us  at  disadvantage.  The  hills  in  the  hands  of  a 
civilised  force  defended  by  modem  engineering  would  have 
rendered  the  ravine  as  fatal  to  a  dense  column  as  the  Afghan 
Passes  were  to  the  British  forces.  From  the  prominent  points 
in  front,  in  rear,  and  flanks,  we  might  have  been  subjected  to 
enfilade,  slant,  and  reverse  fires.  In  the  way  we  were  pro- 
ceeding, it  appeared  to  me  we  were  going  blindfold,  and  I 
suppose  the  idea  struck  Colonel  Milward. 

Lieutenant  Nolan,  after  buckling  his  waist-belt  tighter 
round  his  loins  and  preparing  his  sa])re  and  pistols,  spurred 
forward  on  liis  errand.  I  requested  to  be  allowed  to  accompany 
him,  which  request  Colonel  Milward  politely  granted. 

For  another  couple  of  miles  we  travelled  along  the  ravine 
at  a  sharp  pace,  looking  keenly  to  the  right  and  left,  until  we 
arrived  at  the  bottom  of  a  hill  which  terminated  the  great 
ravine  of  Aroje,  where  a  narrow  tangled  gorge  deviated  in  an 
oblique  direction  to  the  left  and  beyond  the  eastern  extremity 
of  Selasse. 

As  the  king's  road  ran  up  this  jutting  abutment  of  a  hill, 
we  spurred  upward  without  hesitation.  Lieutenant  Nolan  taking 
the  lead,  pistols  in  hand.  For  a  few  hundred  feet  the  rise  of 
the  slope  was  one  foot  in  two,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty 
we  clambered  up.  Upon  surmounting  its  summit  we  discerned 
Selasse  looming  up  high  and  vast  o'erhead  in  dangerous  con- 
tiguity, if  a  few  expert  sharpshooters  were  on  the  watch  above. 

There  appeared,  singular  enough,  no  indications  of  an 
enemy  on  the  heights.  That  there  ^  were  inhabitants  was 
obvious  from  the  many  colunms  of  smoke  observable  ;  but  why 
they  permitted  the  strangers  to  mount  the  plain  below  them 


LOOKING  UP  TO  FROWNING  MAGDALA ! 


409 


was  a  problem.  Judging  from  their  perpendicular  escarpments, 
they  appeared  imscalable  to  us.  Tough  work  we  imagined 
was  in  store  for  the  British  army  when  they  should  attempt  to 
storm  Selasse  and  Fahla — those  twin  giants  that  guarded  the 
entrance  to  Magdala — if  they  were  in  any  way  protected  as 
they  ought  to  be. 

To  our  surprise  we  discovered  a  group  of  officers  reposing 
on  an  open  green  sward,  in  full  view  and  range  of  both  hills. 
This  group  of  recumbent  forms  we  found  directly  were  Colonel 
Phayre  and  a  few  young  officers. 

When  Lieutenant  Nolan  arrived  at  the  scene,  I  heard 

M'G  ,  *  the  best  sabreur  in  the  army,'  utter  the  opinion 

that  he  for  one  did  not  believe  there  was  anyone  in  Magdala. 

'  By  George,  neither  do  II'  exclaimed  another  officer. 
'  Nor  I,'  was  echoed  around. 

*  0,  pshaw  I '  said  Colonel  Phayre ;  '  even  last  night  there 
came  a  messenger  from  Rassam  bearing  a  letter  reiterating  his 
warning,  and  stating  his  belief  that  Theodore  intended  to 
fight.' 

*  But  I  have  ridden  up  that  road  that  you  see  there  within 
pistol-shot  of  the  summit,  and  don't  you  think,'  expostulated 

warmly  Captain  M'G  ,  Hhat  if  people  were  there  they 

would  have  fired  upon  us  ?  ' 

*  That  proves  nothing,'  responded  the  sceptical  Quarter- 
Master-General.  Theodore  is  cautious  and  sly  as  a  fox.  He 
was  not  going  to  sacrifice  any  good  chance  which  he  may  think 
he  has,  for  the  sake  of  bagging  a  couple  of  men.  He  may  have 
decided  upon  giving  up  the  prisoners,  and,  of  course,  in  that 
event  he  would  not  fire ;  and,  stop  I  by  Jove,  there  is  the  Chief 
and  his  Staff!' 

Looking  in  the  direction  indicated  by  Colonel  Phayre,  we 
saw  the  Chief  surveying  with  his  field-glass  the  precipitous  faces 
of  Selasse  and  Fahla ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  head  of  Penn's 
Battery  appeared  in  our  rear,  panting  and  breathless  after  their 
vigorous  clamber  up  the  slope  of  the  steep  mount  which  Nolan 
and  myself  had  come  up  but  a  short  time  previous. 

These  two  positions,  intended  to  be  occupied  respectively 
by  the  two  brigades,  were  connected  with  each  other  by  an 
almost  level  ridge,  along  which  ran  the  road  constructed  by 
the  Emperor  on  his  march  from  the  Bechilo  to  his  fortress. 


410 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


The  site  of  the  camp  of  the  2nd  Brigade  was  the-  round 
summit  of  the  hill  at  the  termination  of  the  Aroje ;  from  it  ran 
the  road,  undulating  and  dipping  into  slight  hollows,  until  it 
reached  the  plateau  directly  at  the  base  of  Fahla,  where  it  was 
protected  by  scant  copses  of  underbrush  and  scrub  oak,  when  it 
suddenly  emerged  again  into  view  on  the  surface  of  the  plateau. 

This  level  ground  was  but  a  narrow  neck  connecting  the  base 
of  Fahla  with  a  group  of  termite  hills  whose  cones  had  been 
eroded,  and  were  unevenly  connected  together  by  the  debris 
which  almost  filled  the  different  depressions  that  existed  for- 
merly between  them,  until  now  they  represented  but  a  series 
of  imdulations  dotted  at  intervals  by  clumps  of  low  bushes. 
This  ground  had  been  chosen  by  Sir  Eobert  for  the  camp  of  the 
Ist  Brigade  while  viewing  it  eight  miles  oflF  from  the  heights 
of  Dalanta.  It  was  a  happy  selection,  protected  as  it  was  by 
the  steep  slopes  in  the  rear,  and  commanding  ae  it  did  all 
approaches  to  it  while  still  well  out  of  range  of  any  artillery 
that  the  Emperor  might  have  upon  Fahla.  Ten  24-pounders 
(Armstrong's)  mounted  upon  Selasse  and  Fahla  would  im- 
doubtedly  have  rendered  both  positions  completely  unten- 
able ;  but  then  Sir  Eobert  was  but  measuring  himself  against 
Theodore,  an  African  potentate. 

Scattered  over  the  ground  between  the  two  positions  were 
the  remains  of  the  Emperor's  old  camp  of  wicker-booths  still 
standing,  and  broken  native  crockery  lying  about,  with  the 
filth  and  oflFal  emitting  a  fearful  smell. 

Colonels  Milward  and  Penn  busied  themselves  in  looking 
for  the  cleanest  place  to  pitch  the  tents  that  were  expected  to 
appear  during  the  night,  and  the  Artillery  sergeants  followed 
them  about,  to  measure  the  camp  when  selected.  The  two 
colonels  then  rode  to  the  edge  of  the  eminence  nearest  the 
fortress,  and  began  to  comment  leisurely  upon  its  appearance, 
and  the  probability  of  battle. 

It  was  3.30  P.M.,  my  attention  being  called  to  that  fact  by 
hearing  Colonel  Penn  utter  the  remark  aloud  after  looking  at 
his  pocket  chronometer. 

*  I  wonder  if  that  fellow  Theodore  intends  to  fight  at  all,' 
said  Colonel  Milward. 

'  Not  he,'  replied  Colonel  Penn,  bluntly. 

'  There  are  men  on  top  of  the  hill,  sir !'  exclaimed  a  sergeant. 


THEODORE  OPENS  THE  BALL! 


411 


who  had  been  examining  the  stupendous  mountains  with  great 
interest. 

'What?'  bawled  out  Colonel  Penn ;  *aye,  by  Jove!  I 
see  them.' 

'  Egad,  they  line  the  whole  summit  from  one  end  to  the 
other  I '  said  Colonel  Milward,  aroused  now  to  activity. 

'  And  by  Jove,'  added  Penn,  *  Theodore  has  opened  the  ball! 
See  you  the  puff?    D'ye  hear  the  music  of  chain-shot  ?' 

Two  seconds  of  expectancy,  '  boom ! '  came  the  loud  report, 
and  half  a  second  later  a  huge  chain-shot  flew  over  our  heads, 
burying  itself  fifty  feet  in  our  rear. 

'  They  are  coming  down,  sir  I '  roared  the  sharp-eyed 
sergeant. 

*  Where?  W^here?  Ah!  I  see  them,'  responded  each  of 
the  colonels. 

'  Bring  up  those  guns,  boys!  Get  ready  for  action!'  shouted 
Colonel  Penn,  bounding  towards  his  company,  waving  his  sword 
and  uttering  various  commands  in  true  syntonic  military 
style.  *  Look  smart,  boys!  Bear  a  hand  quickly !  Keep  your 
eyes  open,  my  lads  ! ' 

'Boom!  boom!  boom!'  went  three  monstrous  guns  in 
quick  succession  from  the  most  salient  angle  of  Fahla,  dis- 
charging 68-pound  chain-shot  over  towards  where  stood  Napier 
and  his  staff.  Again  the  huge  cannon  vomited  their  thunders 
and  iron  balls,  and  one  continued  blaze  of  fire  and  globular 
wreaths  of  white  smoke  announced  to  us  below  that  he  had 
ten  guns  at  work  in  real  earnest. 

One  more  glance  at  the  charging  squadrons  of  the  enemy 
told  too  plainly  that  there  was  no  time  to  lose,  if  a  reception 
d,  VAnglaise  were  intended  to  be  given  them. 

'  Down  with  those  guns,'  commanded  Colonel  Penn,  swinging 
his  sabre  ominously  above  some  laggards'  heads.  '  Lead  the  mules 
to  the  rear.  Man  guns.  Here,  you  sir,  what  are  you  driving 
at  ?  keep  your  wits  bright,  or  by  Jove  I'll  spur  you  to  it.'  A 
very  prompt,  forceful  man  was  Colonel  Penn,  though  he  did 
use  energetic  language;  but  what  of  that?  it  was  life  and 
death  with  them  all  now.  Over  3,500  of  the  enemy  were 
galloping — animated  by  wild  fury— down  the  hill. 

At  this  crisis  an  aide-de-camp  arrived  upon  the  scene,  with 


412  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDAT^. 

instructions  for  the  Naval  Brigade,  which  had  just  come  up,  to 
hurry  up  to  where  Sir  Robert  Napier  was. 

Captain  Fellowes  of  the  Royal  Navy,  commander  of  the 
frigate  '  Octavia's '  crew  which  formed  the  brigade,  touched  his 
hat  upon  hearing  the  order,  and  giving  the  word  to  his  men, 
drew  his  sword,  and  led  them  at  a  quick  pace  to  occupy  the 
position  designated.  In  a  short  time  they  emerged  upon  the 
crest  of  the  plateau,  whereon  Sir  Robert  Napier  stood  siu:- 
veying  the  advance  of  the  enemy. 

All  this  differed  toto  coelo  from  the  well- concocted  plans 
of  the  last  evening.  Not  thus  had  Sir  Robert  intended  to  act. 
By  a  wayward  fate  his  schemes  were  suddenly  quashed,  and  we 
may  well  imagine  the  confusing  consequences.  Happy  is  he, 
however,  who  is  always  prepared  for  emergencies  1 

Following  the  route  taken  by  the  1st  Brigade  from  the 
Bechilo  Valley,  Sir  Robert  had  overtaken  Sir  Charles  Staveley, 
the  divisional  commander,  with  whom  he  entered  into  conver- 
sation, and  in  company  they  had  continued  their  march  up  the 
consecutive  gradines  of  the  interminable  slope.  After  an  hour 
they  had  siumounted  the  eminence  already  mentioned,  whence 
they  obtained  a  good  view  of  the  extreme  edges  of  both  for- 
tresses— Selasse  and  Fahla.  Near  this  elevation  the  six  com- 
panies of  Sappers  and  Miners  were  found. 

Immediately  after  his  arrival  upon  the  summit,  Greneral 
Staveley  decided  that,  as  the  steepness  of  the  road  up  which 
he  had  climbed  presented  £0  many  obstacles  to  the  rapid  ad- 
vance of  the  baggage  trains  of  his  column,  it  would  be  wise 
for  them  to  take  the  more  accessible  route  up  the  Aroje 
Valley,  and  with  that  order  an  aide-de-camp  was  despatched 
to  the  conductors  and  superintendents  of  the  trains. 

For  a  thorough  conception  of  what  these  two  fortresses 
represented,  I  must  state  that  they  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
line,  or  an  arc  of  a  circle,  with  3,000  yards  for  a  radius.  The 
centre  of  this  line  was  a  low  gorge,  w^ith  a  depression  of  100 
feet  between  Fahla  and  Selasse,  by  which  easy  communication 
was  maintained  between  the  two  fortresses.  The  salients  of 
Selasse  and  Fahla  were  about  1,000  yards  apart.  That  of 
Selasse  commanded  all  approaches  from  the  east  and  the 
Aroje  Valley,  and  its  fire  was  easily  convergible  upon  the  road 
which  led  up  to  the  gorge  which  divided  it  from  its  counter- 


A  GROUP  OF  COOL  ENGLISH  GENTLEMEN.  413 


part  Fahla.  The  salient  point  of  Fahla  commanded  the 
western  approaches,  and  the  exposed  smnmits  of  the  midu- 
lating  ground — upon  which  General  Napier  stood — so  could  it 
sweep  the  road  which  led  to  Magdala.  The  camp  site  of  the 
1st  Brigade  was  distant  1,500  yards  from  Fahla,  and  2,500 
yards  from  Selasse.  The  rounded  plateau  whereon  Penn's 
battery  was  posted  was  distant  900  yards  from  the  most  salient 
point  of  Selasse,  and  from  Fahla  1,900  yards.  So  that  if  the 
two  fortresses  were  defended  by  guns  of  modem  construction, 
the  sites  chosen  for  the  camps  of  the  brigades  would  have  been 
within  range  of  the  guns  on  the  heights ;  in  fact,  they  could 
not  be  tenable  for  half  a  minute. 

The  prolongations  of  the  natural  lunar  formation  of  the 
heights  commanded  so  well  the  road  leading  to  the  intermedi- 
ate gorge,  that  it  would  be  simply  an  impossibility  for  an  army, 
except  at  the  risk  of  annihilation,  to  have  marched  up ;  and  on 
all  other  sides  the  slopes  were  almost  perpendicular,  so  that, 
were  the  enemy  but  armed  with  rocks,  barely  one  of  a  storming 
party  could  live  to  reach  the  summit.  There  were  no 
prominent  hills  in  the  neighbourhood  from  which  an  efficient 
slant  or  reverse  fire  could  be  maintained  by  the  assaulting 
colimin.  A  traverse,  again,  planted  along  the  prolongation  of 
the  intermediate  gorge,  would  have  perfected  one  of  the  most 
defensible  places  in  the  world  ;  and  a  concentric  fire  wpuld 
thus  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  the  only  entrance  to 
Magdala. 

About  3.30  P.M.  two  men  were  seen  going  from  gun  to  gun 
on  the  salient  of  Fahla — the  summit  of  which  rose  to  the  per- 
pendicular height  of  1,000  feet  above  the  ground  on  which 
Napier  and  his  Staff  stood.  It  was  supposed  that  they  were 
loading  them  ;  and  a  critical  survey,  made  through  a  field-glass, 
verified  the  supposition.  Still  the  group  of  English  gentlemen 
did  nothing  but  stare,  even  when  they  saw  that  six  cannon 
which  they  had  counted  were  being  got  ready. 

Supposing,  a  dash  was  made  from  the  heights  upon  the 
group  I  Their  rapiers  would  have  availed  them  nought.  In- 
evitably they  would  have  been  captured — Napier  and  his  gold- 
epaidetted  Staff — unless  they  would  ingloriously  flyl  The 
Ist  Brigade  had  not  yet  come  up.  The  hills  were  very  steep ; 
the  soldiers  were  very  thirsty  and  tired. 


414 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Suppose  an  ambuscade  among  the  underbrush  on  the  slope 
to  their  right,  which,  indeed,  was  well  adapted  for  such  a 
sinister  purpose !  What  would  have  become  of  the  General-in- 
Chief,  Sir  Charles  Staveley,  General  Milby,  and  their  respective 
staffs  ?  Certain  capture,  so  long  as  they  were  armed  with 
dress  swords  only  I 

Was  there  anything  to  prevent  such  a  catastrophe  ?  No  1 
certainly  not  I  The  body  of  the  colunm  was  still  half  a  mile 
behind,  clambering,  almost  in  despair,  the  rugged  steeps ! 

The  grove  and  underbrush  had  not  been  examined  by  any- 
body. There  was  no  telling  what  might  happen.  No  keen- 
eyed  and  cautious  scouts  had  gone  over  the  ground.  Those 
numberless  little  gullies,  covered  with  tangled  bushes,  had  not 
been  penetrated.  The  Sappers  and  Miners,  fatigued  with  hard 
climbing,  had  as -soon  as  they  reached  the  top  of  the  plain 
below  Fahla  thrown  themselves  on  the  ground  inert  and  appa- 
rently lifeless. 

With  the  exception  of  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  Sir  Robert 
Napier  and  other  chiefs  of  the  crusade  had  no  help  at  hand. 
And,  '  Just  God  I '  the  enemy  were  seen  pouring  down  Fahla 
slope  en  masse ;  and  a  pearly  wreath  of  smoke,  a  thundering 
report,  and  a  chain-shot,  shrieked  the  Emperor's  defiance  1 

In  quick  succession  flashed  the  fire-flames  from  the  rude 
mouths  of  his  cannon — in  quick  succession  rolled  the  white 
smoke — in  quick  succession  a  series  of  hideous  wailing  sounds 
was  heard  in  the  air  ;  indubitably,  Theodore  was  in  earnest  1 

His  sullen,  defiant  silence  so  long  kept  in  reserve  had  burst 
its  bonds,  and  lol  the  concentrated  thunders  of  his  deter- 
mination shook  the  heavy  mountains  round  about,  and  the 
little  upper  world  around  Magdala  gave  tongue  now  for  action  1 

'  Away,  you  sir,'  Sir  Robert  commanded  in  sharp  tones ; 
'  bring  up  the  "  King's  Own  "  on  the  double  quick ;  and  you, 
sir,'  to  another  aide-de-camp,  '  order  the  Naval  Brigade  here 
instantly ;  and  you.  Sir  Charles  Staveley,  let  the  Punjaubees 
deploy  across  that  narrow  plateau  in  front,  but  do  not  fire  until 
the  enemy  are  within  two  hundred  yards  of  you.' 

*  Ah,  is  that  you.  Colonel  Phayre  ?'  Colonel  Phayre  had 
now  come  up  from  the  hill  at  the  head  of  Aroje.  '  Have  you 
examined  those  ravines?'  Colonel  Phayre  responded  indis- 
tinctly. 


THE  CHAKGB  OF  THE  ABYSSINIAKS. 


415 


Nearer  and  nearer  was  the  advent  of  the  enemy,  3,500 
strong.  They  all  appeared  confident  of  the  issue.  Their  war 
songs  came  pealing  towards  us.  We  could  see  their  cavalry 
caracoling  and  bounding  joyously  along;  the  foot  soldiers 
leaping  and  brandishing  long  spears  and  swinging  their  black 
shields.  With  loud  chorus  all  sang  the  death-doom-  of  the 
invader. 

Onward,  still  onward  they  came,  horsemen  and  foot  soldiers 
vieing  with  each  other.  They  flung  their  flowing  symas, 
their  bezans,  and  many  flung  their  loin  clouts  away,  and  with 
lances  and  shields  in  rest  they  bore  down  the  hill,  reached  the 
plateau,  and  inundated  it  with  their  dusky  bodies.  A  clear 
open  plain  was  before  them,  over  which  they  rolled  like  a  huge 
wave! 

\^liere  was  the  opposing  force  to  sunder  and  dash  this 
furious  wave  backward  ?  Sir  Robert  Napier  sat  on  his  charger 
serene  and  impassible,  surrounded  by  a  group  of  men  who 
were  not  nearly  so  unafiected  as  their  chief.  There  was  but  a 
thin  line  of  men  ;  and  in  these  confidence  could  not  be  placed. 
Each  and  all  might  be  brave,  but  had  there  been  six  companies 
of  the  Irish  regiment  with  their  utter  abandon  and  quick 
scientific  manipulation  of  cartridge  and  bayonet,  there  was 
room  to  hope  a  check  at  least  until  their  comrades  could  come 
to  their  relief — but  six  companies  of  Bombay  and  Madras 
Indians  armed  with  the  ancient  muzzle-loading  Brown  Bess ; 
*  Rather  dubious '  was  everybody's  internal  comment.  A  crisis 
stared  the  General  in  the  face  ! 

Closer  the  Abyssinians  drew,  imtil  we  momentarily  expected 
to  see  them  launch  their  spears,  and  annihilate  the  Sappers  and 
Miners. 

*  Here  it  is.  General ;  the  Naval  Brigade  has  arrived  I'  said  a 
smartish  aide-de  camp. 

'  Very  good,'  responded  Napier ;  '  let  Captain  Fellowes  take 
position  on  that  little  knoll  in  front.' 

Not  a  minute  too  soon  did  the  little  band  of  sailors  appear 
on  the  scene.  Quick  as  lightning  and  prompt  as  powder  are 
sailors  when  they  hear  the  well-known  voice  of  their  com- 
mander I    No  useless  time  was  wasted  here  I 

'Action,  Front  1'  shouted  the  naval  captain.  'Action, 
Front!'  repeated  the  lieutenant  and  boatswain;  and  hardly 


416 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Lad  the  words  died  away  from  their  lips  before  the  sailors  had 
unstrapped  rocket  tubes  and  carriages,  and  had  them  arrayed 
on  the  knolls  ;  muleteers  in  the  rear  with  their  animals ;  rocket 
carriers  with  their  anmiunition ;  rocket  men  ready  with  their 
pry  poles. 

'Fire!'  and,  even  in  the  act  of  laimching  their  spears, a 
stream  of  fire  darted  along  the  enemy's  ranks,  ploughing  its 
fiery  way  through  their  swaying  masses.  Another,  and  another, 
rushed  through  them ;  and  cheer  after  cheer  issued  from  the 
lips  of  the  sailors  and  marines. 

The  battle  had  begim  I  The  cheers  of  the  Naval  Brigade 
were  echoed  fiercely  behind ;  and  as  the  General  turned  his  head, 
he  saw  the  '  King's  Own '  coming  up  on  the  double  quick,  with 
cartridge-boxes  rattling  on  their  hips,  and  men's  fingers  mani- 
pulating cartridges  and  fixing  their  Sniders  for  the  strife  as  they 
ran. 

When  they  first  heard  the  loud  boom  of  Theodore's  cannon, 
these  soldiers  were  a  mile  to  the  rear,  reclining  on  the  slope — 
peevish  and  fretful — disposed  to  curse  themselves  and  the  world. 
But  no  sooner  had  the  sound  of  cannon  vibrated  on  their  ears, 
than  with  a  bound  they  sprang  to  their  feet,  expectant  as  a  hare 
when  listening  to  danger.  An  aide-de-camp  galloped  up,  and 
delivered  his  orders.  The  effect  was  magical  I  The  limping 
gait  was  dropped,  and  the  woe-begone  features  became  lit  up 
with  an  intense  pleasurable  excitement.  In  an  instant  of  time 
they  were  on  the  double  quick  like  hounds  in  full  cry.  There 
were  only  300  of  the  *  King's  Own '  together ;  the  others  of  the 
regiment  were  on  duty  as  baggage  guards,  but  they  were  pure 
Britons  I 

The  enemy,  from  very  astonishment  at  the  novel  sound 
caused  by  the  rockets,  halted  and  cast  inquiring  glances  at  each 
other,  as  if  to  ask  '  WTiat  manner  of  things  are  these  ?'  but  urged 
by  their  chiefs  they  made  another  desperate  essay  to  advance. 

A  low  ridge  of  ground  rising  but  a  few  feet  above  the 
narrow  plain,  and  a  hollow,  divided  the  enemy  from  the  Rocket 
Battery.  The  Sappers  and  Miners  had  been  withdrawn  for  the 
support  of  its  flanks,  and  thus  a  clear  space  was  kept  for  the 
rocket  guns  to  do  good  execution,  and  incessantly  they  vomited 
tlieir  fiery  darts  at  the  enemy,  now  but  fifty  paces  from  the  battery. 

Without  pause  or  hesitation  the  '  King's  Own '  kept  on 


THE  *KING*S  OWN'  IN  BATTLE. 


417 


their  way,  forming  line  the  while.  Into  the  little  hollow  in 
front  of  the  battery  they  shook  themselves,  with  their  arms. 
Into,  and  through  the  scrub  oak,  and  underbrush,  and  in  a 
second  almost,  the  head  of  the  4th  Foot  crested  the  slope  and 
confronted  the  enemy,  a  few  of  whom  were  on  the  rise  on  the 
other  side. 

*  Commence  firing  from  both  flanks,'  rang  out  clear  as  a 
silver  bell  from  Colonel  Cameron ;  and,  instantaneously,  two 
quick  volleys  of  musketry  were  flashed  in  the  faces  of  the  dusky 
foe,  and  like  a  stream  of  tire  volleys  ran  from  side  to  side 
without  a  pause,  raining  such  a  storm  of  leaden  hail,  that  for 
the  second  time  the  enemy  halted  from  sheer  astonishment. 
It  was  as  if  they  were  paralysed  at  the  very  moment  they  in- 
tended to  launch  out  their  spears,  and  one  could  almost  fancy 
that  these  weapons  vibrated  in  their  hands,  from  the  impetus 
they  were  about  to  give  them.  Slowly  they  seemed  to  regain 
consciousness,  and  horrified,  they  gazed  upon  the  awful  result. 
Strangest  sight  was  it  to  them,  who  had  ever  been  victorious 
in  the  field  of  battle,  to  see  their  own  men  tumble  by  the 
dozen,  by  scores,  by  fifties,  into  the  embrace  of  death. 

*  Retreat  I'  cried  the  chiefs.  The  enemy  did  retreat,  but 
not  fast  enough.  They  broke  out  en  tiralleur,  and  endeavoured 
to  take  vantage  of  boulders  to  escape  the  whizzing  bullets; 
but  the  bullets  found  them  out,  searched  out  each  bush  and 
mound  and  rock,  and  stretched  the  men  behind  dead  upon  the 
ground. 

Here  was  one  running  for  dear  life  for  a  copse;  but 
suddenly  you  saw  him  leap  into  the  air  and  fall  on  his  face, 
clutching  the  ground  savagely.  Here  was  another  one  with 
head  bent  low,  in  the  vain  thought  that  if  his  head  escaped  he 
would  be  safe,  making  all  haste  to  get  into  a  hollow,  out  of 
reach  of  the  leaden  storm  ;  but  even  as  the  haven  dawned  upon 
his  frenzied  eyes,  a  whirring  pellet  caught  him,  and  sent  him 
rolling  down  the  incline.  There  was  another  one,  just  about  to 
dodge  behind  a  massive  boulder,  from  where  he  could  take 
slight  revenge,  but  before  he  could  ensconce  himself,  the  un- 
erring ball  went  crashing  through  his  brain ;  and  there  was 
another  one  about  to  plunge  in  hot  haste  dcrwn  a  ravine  to  the 
left,  who  had  his  skull  shattered  by  a  rocket,  and  with  a  dull 
sound  the  body  fell  down  the  precipice. 

E  £ 


418  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

Some  chiefs  there  were  who  turned  round  to  take  a  parting 
shot,  and  some  who,  not  entirely  panic-struck,  strove  to  re-form 
the  natives.  They  were  partly  successful,  and  under  their 
leadership  a  thousand  of  them  precipitated  themselves  down 
the  steep  sides  of  the  narrow  plain,  and  seemed  determined  to 
capture  Penn's  Battery,  still  isolated  on  their  little  knoll  below 
Selasse. 

Leaving  the  '  King's  Own,'  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  and  the 
Eocket  Battery,  to  work  their  will  upon  the  few  left  on  the 
plain,  I  took  advantage  of  the  lull  of  the  skirmish  to  hasten 
down  along  the  road  towards  gallant  Colonel  Penn,  to  see 
how  that  officer  was  prepared  to  meet  the  impetuous  onset 
of  the  Abyssinians. 

Not  so  much  confused  as  they  appeared  to  be  were  the 
men  of  the  Battery.  The  guns  of  the  Mountain  Train  Artillery 
were  ranged  in  a  semicircle,  and  when  the  enemy  were  within 
500  yards  of  them.  Colonel  Penn  smilingly  gave  the  word  to 
*  Fire.'  A  sharp  yelp-like  report,  and  six  shells  flew  through 
the  clear  air  with  a  strange  diapason,  and  directly  burst  among 
the  advancing  masses.    Another  astonished  pause ! 

Here  were  other  strange  things  for  the  Abyssinians.  Music 
like  tliat  of  distant  harps;  while  missiles  were  tearing  and 
rending  men  to  pieces.  Simultaneously  the  enemy,  instead  of 
advancing,  turned  their  faces  upward  to  listen  to  the  novel  music, 
and  seek  the  solution  of  what  was  a  dark  enigma  to  them ;  and 
while  they  were  halting,  and  listening,  and  dubitating,  they  heard 
a  concatenation  of  sharp  cracks  above  their  heads,  and  imme- 
diately afterwards  a  thousand  pieces  of  iron  were  flying  amongst 
them,  laying  whole  groups  of  them  level  with  the  ground. 

They  ascertained  at  last  that  the  horrible  hubbub  proceeded 
from  the  little  knot  of  men  on  the  knoll.  '  Forward ! '  yelled 
a  bull-hearted  chief,  Dajatch  Deris,  using  his  spear  freely  among 
the  most  craven.  Coerced  into  activity  by  gesture  and  ex- 
ample, they  leaped  downward  like  tigers,  mad  rage  in  each 
heart,  up  and  across  knolls  and  curves,  and  down  again  into  a 
ravine  choked  with  wild  olive  and  tamarisk,  until  they  were  at 
the  base  of  the  hill  whereon  the  Battery  was  posted^ 

When  first  this  demonstration  on  the  part  of  the  enemy 
was  observed,  the  Punjaub  Pioneers,  who  had  come  up  soon 
after  the  first  volleys  were  fired  by  the  '  King's  Own/  were 


THE  ROYAL  ARTILLERY  IN  ACTION.  419 

ordered  to  its  support,  and  just  as  the  Abyssinians  were  coming 
up  towards  the  battery,  they  showed  themselves  to  the  enemy 
on  each  flank  of  the  guns. 

^  Commence  firing '  was  the  command ;  and  again  rattling 
volleys  were  discharged  in  the  faces  of  the  sorely  harassed 
natives — who  had  almost  made  sure  of  capturing  the  cannon — 
dashing  them  backward,  and  downward  into  the  bottom  of  the 
ravine  many  times  quicker  than  their  advance.  A  moment's 
consultation  was  enough  to  convince  them  that  here  there  was 
no  hope.  Against  shell-vomiting  cannon,  and  against  a  very 
wall  of  fire,  discharging  bullets  by  the  hundred  to  their  one, 
what  could  matchlocks  and  spears  effect?  So,  in  spite  of 
strong-lunged  Dajatch  Deris,  the  Abyssinians  retired  precipi- 
tately, firing  as  they  went,  and  sad  to  relate,  the  poor  Dajatch,^ 
before  he  reached  the  bottom,  felt  a  sharp  twinge,  and  inconti- 
nently tripped  and  rolled  helpless  down  the  slope,  with^  a 
broken  leg. 

Round  the  base  of  the  battery  knoll  the  ravine  ran  a  ser- 
pentine course,  emptying  itself  a  few  hundred  yards  below  into 
the  Aroje.  It  was  overgrown  with  tangled  brake  and  dense 
jungle.    Along  this  ravine  the  baffled  enemy  crawled. 

'  They  are  going  after  our  baggage,  sir,'  said  an  expostu- 
lating voice. 

'  Ah,  are  they  indeed  ?  so  they  are  ! '  said  Colonel  Penn  after 
an  examination. 

'Right  about!  Left  oblique!  Forward,  march!'  were  the 
sharp,  firm,  composed  orders  given  at  once,  and  understood. 
The  Punjaubees  went  sweeping  across  the  knoll  in  an  oblique 
direction  towards  the  brow  overlooking  the  Aroje. 

Up  the  Aroje  were  advancing  long  trains  of  baggage, 
ammunition,  and  commissariat  stores ;  pell-mell ;  in  confused 
masses  and  in  straggling  lines.  Our  involimtary  thought  at  the 
sight  was,  '  What  if  Theodore  had  only  200  men  with  muskets  in 
their  hands,  on  some  of  those  hills  overlooking  the  Aroje  valley ! ' 

Warned  by  the  thousand-fold  echoes,  that  the  embosoming 
hills  flung  far  and  near.  Captain  Roberts,  who  was  at  the  time 
commander  of  the  baggage-guard,  mustered  a  few  companies 
of  the 'Duke  of  Wellington's  Own,' and  two  companies  of  the 
4th  Foot,  and  stationed  them  at  the  head  of  the  valley,  which — 
'  Dajatch  is  an  Abyssinian  term  for  General. 


420 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


it  was  supposed  a  few  hours  previous — Colonel  .Phayre  and 
his  men  were  guarding.    No  sooner  had  they  done  so  than  a^ 
confused  noise  was  heard  a  little  above,  and  presently  a  large  •> 
body  of  men  issued  out  of  a  narrow  gloomy  gully ;  and,  as 
Captain  Roberts  said,  ^  By  Jove  I '  the  enemy  was  upon  them. 

^  About  face  ;  fire ! '  and  along  the  line  of  soldiers  flrawn 
across  the  Aroje  ravine  there  ran  a  rattle  of  muskets ;  a  ^ek- 
ing of  triggers ;  and  a  roar  of  sharp  musketry  ; — steady,  ieep- 
toned,  like  the  thunder  rush  of  an  express  train '  through  a 
tunnel.  Practised  men  were  at  work  with  the  Snider  ftfle. 
The  latest  invented  breech-loader  was  in  expert  hands — oie 
could  tell  the  difference  by  the  mere  sound;  there  was  no 
break,  no  pause,  no  hesitation  in  it ;  it  was  continuously  rolling. 

The  Punjaubees  came  directly  upon  the  scene,  looking  down 
from  the  summit  of  the  knoll,  with  their  dusky  faces  as  dark  as 
the  Ethiops'.  They  saw  the  enemy,  and  again  the  dreadful 
word  for  slaughter  was  given — a  word  which  will  be  remem- 
bered by  Abyssinians,  and  handed  down  to  their  posterity  1 

Again  and  again  the  loud-sounding  muskets  boomed  loudly  - 
on  the  ear,  and  there  was  sure  *  Death  in  the  front,'  and  '  cer- 
tain Destruction  in  the  rear ! ' 

The  English  had  caught  the  enemy,  where,  had  they  known 
anything  about  military  science,  the  Abyssinians  should  have 
caught  the  English.  The  enemy  dropped  dead  on  all  sides.  Their 
experience  here  was  worse  than  any  they  had  undergone  as  yet. 
Had  they  stopped  ten  minutes  longer,  not  a  man  would  have 
been  left  alive  to  tell  the  tale  of  the  grievous  disaster  that  met 
them.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  they  seemed  to  be  too  much  astonished 
to  fire  in  return.  I  did  not  hear  a  single  Abyssinian  musket  fired  ; 
they  seemed  to  wish  to  fight  hand  to  hand,  but  the  rapidity  of 
the  Sniders  gave  them  no  chance. 

They  wanted  the  baggage,  it  seems,  but  the  Irishmen  of  the 
33rd  stood  between,  and  the  passion  fit  of  ungovernable  fury, 
which  racked  the  enemy  previously,  gave  way  now  to  the 
sentiment  of  dull  despair.  Some  six-hundred — all  that  seemed 
left  of  the  thousand — turned  swiftly  about,  when  they  foimd 
that  no  impression  could  be  made.  They  dived  back  into  the 
jungles  from  whence  they  came ;  keen-eyed  riflemen  following 
them  up — ^  potting '  the  fugitives  unerringly. 

The  Punjaubees,  fleet  of  foot  and  prompt  at  command, 


THE  PUNJAUBEES  DISTINGUISH  THEMSELVES.  421 


swept  to  their  old  position  near  the  battery,  and  deploying 
along  the  prolongation  of  the  slope,  calmly  waited  the  flying 
foe  to  emerge  out  of  the  bushes.  Not  long  had  they  to  wait ;  as 
the  dark  forms  bounded  out  of  the  recesses,  the  Punjaubees 
commenced  their  withering  fire  upon  them  once  more,  descend- 
ing the  slope  as  they  fired.  The  position  in  which  the  Abyssi- 
nians  now  found  themselves  was  a  perilous  one  indeed.  It  was  an 
open  hollow  with  clear  slopes  rising  abruptly  about  a  hundred 
feet  from  the  bottom.  On  one  side  were  the  Punjaubees,  600 
in  number — up  the  opposite  side  some  fifty  paces  across 
scrambled  the  Abyssinians,  with  the  main  desire  now  simply  to 
get  away  as  quickly  as  possible  from  the  dangerous  place. 
How  easy  to  imagine  the  result  of  the  unequal  contest,  where 
slope  lined  with  cool  riflemen  fronted  counter  slope  clear  and 
open  as  an  artificial  glacis ! 

The  fight  became  a  battue — a  massacre  I  Down  the  slope 
rushed  the  Sepoys,  with  bayonets  fixed  to  their  guns,  and  fresher 
than  the  tired  natives,  they  soon  came  up  with  them  as  breathless 
they  panted  up  the  deadly  steep.  Out  of  that  very  despair 
which  the  most  craven  heart  feels  when  hard  driven  they 
mustered  new  courage,  and  determinedly  they  turned  round,  at 
bay. 

The  fiery,  hot-blooded,  impulsive  Sikhs  came  hand  to  hand 
with  Ethiopian  mountaineers,  fierce  and  as  impulsive  as  they. 
Now  came  the  tug  of  a  genuine  contest !  The  Abyssinians 
launched  their  spears,  drew  their  curved  shotels,  and  charged 
down  with  loud  cries.  The  Sikhs,  undismayed,  rushed  up  to 
meet  them  with  their  bayonets,  and  deftly  crossed  weapons 
with  them.  Blows  were  nimbly  warded,  stroke  was  met  by 
counter-stroke,  and  murderous  thrusts  skilfully  parried. 

Two  companies  of  the  10th  Native  Indian  Infantiy  rushed 
down  from  the  battery  knoll  to  the  support  of  the  Sikhs.  No 
mercy  was  asked  ;  no  high-toned  sentiment  found  utterance ;  no 
puny  blows  were  dealt ;  heads  were  chopped  oS*,  arms  and  limbs 
severed  from  trunks,  and  dead  men  lay  stark  and  stiff  plentifully. 
But  they  were  all  Abyssinians;  very  few  of  the  Punjaubees  were 
wounded. 

From  the  summits  of  Fahla  and  Selasse,  enraged  Theodore 
belched  his  war  thunder,  and  in  active  reply  might  be  heard 
the  rockets — ^their  magic  tails  of  fire  singing  shrilly  their  death 


422 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


errands — the  shells  with  their  harp-like  music  and  sequent 
fatal  boom,  the  cracking,  ripping  volleys  of  musketry  which 
mowed  men  down  in  heaps. 

While  the  spine  and  rim  of  Selasse  and  Fahla  were  yet 
fitfully  blazing  with  fire  from  Theodore's  large  guns,  I  turaed 
away  from  the  battery  hill  after  victory  had  declared  itself  in 
favour  of  the  Punjaubees,  and  the  poor  renmants  of  the 
thousands  were  sullenly  retiring  from  before  them,  to  witness 
the  action  on  the  plain  below  Fahla,  which  had  again  burst 
forth  as  loudly  as  ever.  I  noticed  that  the  sky  had  become 
suddenly  overcast,  murky  masses  of  cloud  scudding  wildly  across 
it,  and  that  there  was  every  appearance  of  a  tempest  being  at 
hand.  As  I  reached  the  plain,  the  thunder  rattled  over  the 
whole  wide  concave,  the  lightning  lighted  up  ghastlily  the 
upper  world  of  rocks  and  mountains,  and  as  it  disappeared,  left 
a  deep  gloom  in  the  valley.  Shortly  the  rain  fell  in  torrents, 
and  a  gust  of  wind  sent  it  pelting  in  our  faces. 

However,  it  was  not  for  long ;  the  thunder  of  heaven's 
artillery  soon  cease4;  .tright  sunblinks  pierced  the  clouds, 
illumining  for  a  short  time  t^C;  Bechilo  valley,  until  the 
gorgeous  tints  of  the  rainbow  were  revealed  when  the  sun  came 
in  his  setting  glory  to  take  a  parting  look  and  dye  with  hues 
of  gold  the  sad  scenes  visible*  iQ.  this  rugged  spot. 

The  4th  Foot  during  my  absence  had  been  reinforced  by 
the  Beloochees,  600  in  number,  and  at  the  time  I  arrived  upon 
the  scene,  they  were  about  to  move  closer  to  Fahla,  as  some  of 
the  enopay  were  ensconced  behind  some  of  the  rocky  projections 
of  the  >lope,  maint9ining  a  scattering  fire  lipon  their  ranks. 


and  one  or  two  had  been  wounded.  When  tbiy  had  advanced 
to  within  300  yards  of  the  base  of  the  fortress,  they  opened  fire 
once  more  upon  every  suspicious  rock  and  bush  dump  until 
they  searched  every  foot  of  its  vast  surface. 

Several  of  the  enemy  stood  boldly  forward  and  used  their 
matchlocks  and  double-barrelled  guns  bravely,  but  to  little 
purpose.  Horses  and  riders  were  seen  rolling  down  hill  from 
the  effects  of  the  British  fire.  Of  little  avail  were  baniboo 
bushes,  or  tamarisk  and  kantuffa  shrubs,  to  stay  the  seardilpg 
bullet. 

Three  hundred  Snider  rifles,  six  hundred  Enfields,  and  a  doien 


COLONEL  PENN'S  LAST  SALUTE. 


423 


rocket  guns  plied  fearfully  rapid,  raked  the  whole  length  and 
breadth  of  the  grim  steep  with  their  murderous  fire ;  even  upon 
the  very  height  of  Fahla  itself  the  rockets  did  considerable 
damage,  destroying  several  of  the  cannoneers. 

Theodore  narrowly  escaped  death  from  one  of  these  missiles, 
as  he  was  superintending  the  gunners  on  Fahla. 

The  Abyssinian  musketry  was  pretty  loud  and  brisk  at  this 
time,  and  was  readily  distinguishable. 

Amid  his  gay  staff,  Sir  Eobert  Napier's  snowy  sun-jacket 
was  seen.  Eiding  near  to  the  group,  I  found  him  bending 
over  the  pommel  of  his  saddle  encouraging  the  soldiers.  His 
usual  placid  smile  had  returned.  Taking  up  his  field-glass,  he 
noted  carefully  the  most  prominent  points  of  interest.  The 
obstinate  native  combatants  still  firing  away  from  behind  hut- 
ments of  rock  and  mounds  of  earth;  Battery  Hill  and  the 
numerous  ravines  lay  between  the  plain  and  it.  The  defeated 
enemy,  sullenly  retiring  from  before  the  Punjaubees,  attracted 
his  attention,  and  he  saw  groups  of  them  still  hesitating  as  if 
undecided  whether  to  retreat  up  Fahla  or  make  another  attempt 
at  the  Battery.  Shutting  his  glass,  he  beckoned  to  him  an 
aide-de-camp,  and  said,  '  Bide  over  to  Colonel  Penn,  and  tell 
him  to  play  his  Battery  well  upon  those  fellows  below.' 

Upon  receipt  of  the  order  Colonel  Penn  directed  his  '  Steel 
Pens' (as  they  were  facetiously  termed)  upon  the  enemy,  and 
his  ricochetting  balls  quickly  dissipated  the  last  remnant  of 
hope  that  the  Abyssinians  might  have  entertained  of  capturing 
his  Battery. 

It  was  5.30  P.M.  Theodore's  guns  had  ceased  their  fire; 
because,  as  he  said,  '  the  English  are  not  afraid  of  my  chain 
shot ;  they  march  up  in  spite  of  my  big  balls ; '  and  because  he 
could  not  depress  his  guns  enough  to  bear  upon  the  soldiers  as 
they  were  directly  under  him,  1,000  feet  below ;  besides  he  was 
so  furious  (so  we  learned  subsequently)  at  the  terrible  overwhelm- 
ing disaster  that  he  met,  that  he  could  not  reason  or  decide 
upon  anything. 

Quietness  was  restored  as  the  twilight  deepened.  The  death 
storm  abated  after  lasting  two  hours.  Slowly  we  returned  to 
our  camps,  or  rather  where  we  intended  to  make  our  camps,  to 
Battery  Knoll,  and  the  patch  of  table-land  beyond  the  plaifl. 


424 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


We  stumbled  over  the  thickened  dead,  who,  lying  stxipped, 
were  of  the  colour  of  the  soil.  Among  the  thickets  the  slain 
warriors,  enrobed  in  their  cotton  togas,  appeared  like  white 
splotches  upon  the  dim  and  indistinct  ground,  and  in  crossing 
the  sinuosities  of  the  ground  we  were  often  startled  by  the 
spectral  gleam  of  the  linen  and  silken  kirtles  with  which  many 
of  the  dead  were  enwrapped. 

We  reached  our  positions  and  found  that  the  tents  had  not 
come  up ;  no  provisions  had  arrived,  save  those  belonging  to  the 
staff.  But  the  camp  followers  had  arrived  by  the  hundreds, 
and  were  now  swearing  discordant  symphonies  of  wicked  invec- 
tives and  uproarious  jabble.  Hungry  mules  brayed  most  dole- 
fully, and  horses  neighed  impatient  for  their  rations  of  grain, 
and  there  was  neither  grain  for  animals  nor  provisions  for  men. 
The  tired  soldiers  came  and  questioned  one  another  eagerly 
about  food.  They  were  answered  in  the  negative.  They  would 
have  to  wait  until  midnight,  they  were  told  ;  their  tents  would 
not  come  until  morning.  Then  there  rose  a  fierce  murmur  of 
discontent,  not  loud  but  very  deep. 

^  There  had  been  no  obstacles,'  said  they, '  to  prevent  them 
from  coming,  and  why  did  they  not  come  ? '  Why^  oh  people,  are 
blunders  committed  everywhere  ?  why  is  it  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  a  blunder  ?  why  can't  all  the  world  be  right  at  all 
times  ? 

As  to  the  officers,  nature's  cordial  abhorrence  of  a  vacuum 
was  mitigated  by  a  supply,  which  their  servants  brought  in  their 
haversacks,  specially  for  their  consumption.  When  stomachs 
are  filled  and  appetites  appeased,  people  are  disposed  then,  if 
ever,  to  be  loquacious,  and  so  was  it  here.  A  social  circle  was 
formed  round  each  camp-fire,  and  the  novel  battle  and  its  scenes 
were  hotly  discussed. 

About  midnight  most  of  the  baggage  was  up,  but  the  tents 
could  not  be  pitched,  and  the  only  resource  left  for  us  was  to 
bivouac  close  to  the  smoky  and  uncomfortable  fires. 

Sentries  were  posted  plentifully  around  camp,  and  soldiers 
slept  with  their  arms  ready  for  immediate  use. 

Before  rolling  ourselves  up  in  our  rugs,  and  while  thinking 
of  the  events  that  marked  the  day,  our  ears  caught  the  soimds 
that  betokened  the  presence  of  the  beasts  of  prey.  In  ravenous 


THE  JACKAI^  AND  HY^'AS  AT  WORK. 


425 


packs,  the  jackals  and  hysenas  had  come  to  devour  the  abundant 
feast  spread  out  by  the  ruthless  hand  of  war. 

Stranger  lullaby  than  that  which  lulled  us  to  sleep  that 
night  man  never  heard,  and  the  last  sounds  our  dulled  ears 
caught  were  the  jackal's  shrill  whelp,  the  hyaena's  sonorous  bay, 
mingling  with  the  lichowl's  mournful '  tu-whit-tu-whoo ! ' 


426 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

CASUALTIES  AFTEB  THE  BATTLE — A  WELL-DRESSED  CAPTIVE — THEODORE  DT 
DESPAIR— RA88AM — STRANGE  RECEPTION  OF  THE  CAPTIVES — THE  FINAL 
SUMMONS  TO  SURRENDER. 

Above  the  stormy  field  of  yesterday ;  above  the  strange  valley 
with  its  dead  and  dying ;  above  the  English  camp ;  and  above 
the  rocky  citadels,  the  sun  shone  with  its  usual  tropic  warmth 
and  brightness,  the  morning  after  that  fatal  Good  Friday. 

The  clock-bird  loudly  sang  in  the  groves,  the  swallow 
chirped  merrily  in  the  gladsome  light,  and  the  lark  soared  high 
in  the  diaphonous  air  of  those  high  altitudes  trilling  the 
sweetest  notes,  which  strikingly  contrasted  with  the  hoarse  cries 
of  the  owls  that  lulled  us  to  dreams.  Peaceful  heights !  happy 
valley,  was  it  not  ? 

In  the  camp  the  soldiers  lolled  about  as  usual,  and  inter- 
changed their  salutations  and  petty  gossip. 

'  Chokra  idher  ao,'  ^  I  heard  General  Napier  say  to  a  Hindo- 
stanee  servant.  *  Compliments  to  Surgeon  Sahib,  and  tell  him  I 
should  like  to  see  him.' 

'  Surgeon  Sahib  come,'  reported  the  chokra. 

'  Ah,  all  right.  Good  morning,  Doctor.  Beautiful  day,  is  it 
not  ?    Have  you  your  report  ready  ? ' 

'  Yes,  Sir  Robert,'  answered  the  surgeon,  drawing  a  paper 
out  from  his  pocket.  '  Here  it  is,  sir  ;  one  oflScer — Captain 
Eoberts — and  thirty- one  privates  wounded ;  Captain  Roberts 
severely,  eight  privates  severely  also.' 

Curiosity  satisfied  on  this  point,  we  congratulated  mutually. 
*  Only  think  of  it,  my  dear  old  fellow ;  not  one  man  killed,  and 
but  thirty-two  wounded  ! '  Let  us  now  ascertain  the  casualties 
on  the  other  side. 

Captain  Sweeny,  of  the  4th  Foot,  was  sent  with  a  detachment 
*  *  Boy,  oome  here.' 


THE  CASUALTIES  AFTER  THE  BATTLE.  427 


to  bring  in  to  the  camp  hospital  all  wounded  Abyssinians  that 
might  be  found  on  the  battle-ground.  I  went  with  him.  A 
frightful  scene  was  presented  to  our  eyes.  The  significant 
sounds  of  the  past  night  had  prepared  me  in  a  measure  for  some 
horrors,  but  reality  exceeded  my  conception  tenfold.  The  beasts 
of  prey  had  been  at  work  upan  the  bodies.  They  had  revelled 
in  the  unusual  abundance  of  flesh.  It  is  said  there  never  was 
a  famine,  that  plenty  for  carnivorous  animals  reigned  roimd 
Magdala  always,  that  these  useful  scavengers  saved  the  country 
from  a  pestilence.  But  the  night  following  the  battle  of  Aroje 
there  was  a  rare  feast  for  panthers,  jackals,  and  hyaenas. 

Carefully  the  dead  were  counted  and  buried  where  they  fell, 
and  most  carefiilly  the  wounded  fellows,  who  had  lain  in  torture 
and  pain  the  livelong  night  and  had  feebly  warded  oflF  savage 
jaws,  were  conveyed  in  dhoolies.and  hammocks  to  the  hospital, 
and  after  three  hours  of  such  work  the  following  report  was 
handed  in  at  head-quarters  : — 

*  Seventy-five  wounded  Abyssinians  carried  to  hospital,  560 
dead  of  the  enemy  buried  by  detailed  party.'  Dajatch  Deris, 
the  stout  chief  who  had  been  so  persistent  in  his  attacks,  was 
carried  to  the  hospital  with  his  leg  broken  by  a  bullet,  just 
above  the  knee.  The  body  of  Ras  Ourary  Guvrie,  supposed  to 
have  been  shot  by  Captain  Speedy,  was  sent  to  the  fortress  duriug 
the  night  by  General  Napier  that  his  own  relations  might 
bury  him,  and  that  Theodore  might  see  the  end  of  one  of  the 
best  of  his  coimsellors.' 

After  breakfast  I  strolled  to  where  the  banner  of  St.  George 
proudly  waved  above  Sir  Eobert  Napier's  tent. 

'  What  is  in  the  wind,  captain  ? '  I  asked  Captain  Holland, 
the  Assistant  Quai'ter-Master-General. 

'Nothing  but  rumours  and  flighty  twaddle  flying  loose 
around  camp.  I  know  nothing  myself;  but  I  believe  Sir  Robert 
will  send  a  demand  for  a  surrender  to  Theodore,  and  after  that 
I  dare  say  he  will  move  upon  the  enemy,'  answered  Captain 
Holland  readily  enough. 

Captain  Holland  guessed  rightly.  Sir  Robert  Napier  did 
intend  to  send  a  peremptory  demand  to  Theodore,  and  decide 
what  was  best  to  be  done  after  the  receipt  of  his  answer.  What 
had  been  accomplished  had  diflfered  in  toto  from  what  he  had 
conceived  would  happen,  and  he  was  not  going  to  act  hastily. 


428 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


If  Theodore  was  frightened  by  the  exhibition  of  his  prowess 
yesterday,  then  he  was  in  a  fit  mood  to  listen  to  proposals. 
'  Agitel-el-Shaitan ' — '  hurry  is  the  devil ' — is  the  Arab  proverb. 

Upon  Napier's  forbearance  depended  the  lives  of  the  captives, 
and  the  signal  success  of  the  campaign.  A  precipitate  move- 
ment upon  either  Fahla,  Selasse,  or  Magdala  would  have 
deprived  the  desperate  Emperor  of  every  ray  of  hope  that  his 
present  tristful  mind  might  have  clung  to,  which,  no  doubt, 
would  have  caused  him  to  order  the  immediate  execution  of  the 
captives.  Besides,  it  were  perhaps  easy  for  him  to  deport  him- 
self to  the  inaccessible  mountains  of  Kuara,  hundreds  of  miles 
north-westward  of  Magdala,  in  which  case  the  objects  and  aims 
of  the  crusade  would  have  been  irretrievably  nullified. 

Having  ended  these  few  remarks,  let  us  trace  the  bearer 
of  the  surrender  summons,  sent  by  Sir  Robert.  The  key  of  all 
doubts  and  surmises  must  be  held  by  that  messenger. 

Upon  arriving  half  way  up  the  road  that  led  to  the  gorge 
between  Fahla  and  Selasse,  the  messsenger  to  his  great  surprise 
discovered  two  strangers  coming  down  the  hill,  who  in  a  short 

time   proved  to  be  L          P          and  the  Reverend  Mr. 

Flad — missionary — who  were  on  their  way  to  Sir  Robert,  with 
a  message  from  the  Emperor.  The  messenger  from  the  camp 
returned  without  performing  his  errand  with  the  prisoners. 

The  camp,  at  the  sight  of  the  strangers,  was  instantly  in  a 
state  of  commotion ;  the  social  coteries  dissolved,  the  soldiers 
hurried  in  tumultuous  crowds ;  but  suddenly,  the  whole  relapsed 
into  astonished  silence  at  the  apparition  of  a  cocked  chapeau, 
new  red  uniform,  and  a  gold-rimmed  eye-glass  and  cane. 

*  Who  is  he  ?'  said  one. 

^  Where  the  deuce  is  he  from  ? '  said  another. 

'  Egad,  this  fellah  must  have  dropped  from  the  clouds.' 

P  was  indeed  apparelled  grandly — a  very  military  Beau 

Brummel. 

But  it  was  to  pay  proper  respect  to  the  illustrious  General 
that  he  dressed  himself  so  I  Was  it  very  wrong  then,  that 
when  Mr.  Rassam  notified  to  him  that  he  must  go  to  the 
English  camp  and  see  the  Chief,  that  he  bedecked  himself  with 
all  the  bravery  and  paraphernalia  of  a  British  officer ;  that  he 
shaved  himself  carefully ;  that  he  anointed  his  head  and 
whiskers  with  the  very  last  drops  of  perfumery  and  Rowland's 


A  WELL-DRESSED  CAPTIVE. 


429 


macassar  that  he  had  in  his  dressing-case ;  that  he  blacked  his 
boots  until  they  shone  like  a  mirror;  polished  his  spurs; 
brushed  up  his  uniform  until  it  was  spotless ;  cleaned  his  eye- 
glass so  long  imused  in  his  trunk ;  and,  to  cap  the  tout 
enaemble^  unveiled  his  chapeau,  and,  after  furnishing  himself 
with  a  dainty  cane,  without  which  no  British  oflficer's  outfit  is 
complete,  sallied  forth  to  see  him  in  whose  hands  his  life  was  ? 

With  elegant  imouciance  and  eye-glass  fixed,  young 

P  *  sauntered  up  to  the  General-in-Chief  s  tent  twirling 

his  cane,  when  he  was  met  by  the  General  himself,  who  had 
already  been  apprised  of  the  captives'  coming. 

L         made  a  bow  and  introduced  himself  as  Mr.  P  

of  the  English  Mission  to  Theodore,  and  his  compagnon  de 
prison  as  Mr.  Flad.  It  was  evident  that  during  his  incarce- 
ration he  had  not  forgotten  the  rules  of  propriety. 

In  the  presence  of  the  General  an  evanescent  bashfulness 
was  apparent,  but  it  soon  disappeared;  Napier's  proverbial 
suavity  being  a  wonderful  panacea  against  such  youthful  in- 
disposition. He  was  invited  inside  the  tent,  and  after  a  few 
preliminary  observations  about  the  weather — which  were  per- 
haps entirely  unnecessary — the  object  of  the  visit  was  broached. 

Began  L  :  '  I  have  been  sent  down  to  you,  Sir  Robert, 

by  the  Emperor,  to  ask  why  it  is  you  have  come  to  this  country  ? 
What  it  is  you  want  ?  Whether  you  will  return  to  your  own 
country  if  the  captives  are  released  ? ' 

'  Thank  you,'  said  Sir  Robert  quietly ;  '  my  message  you 
shall  carry  with  you  on  your  return  ;  but  tell  me  of  the  result 
upon  Theodore  of  yesterday's  battle.' 

Then  L         P          told  of  how  Theodore  had  seen  the 

gigantic  elephants,  with  their  ponderous  loads  upon  their 
backs,  coming  down  from  Dahonte  Dalanta,  besides  a  long 
picturesque  line  of  men  in  red,  men  in  white,  men  in  all  colours 
of  dress,  followed  by  an  interminable  line  of  animals,  winning 
admiration  from  him  as  he  gazed  upon  the  proud  martial  scene, 
causing  him  to  exclaim  that  the  great  wish  of  a  lifetime  was 
about  to  be  gratified.  He  was  proudly  elated  at  the  thought 
that  he  should  see  how  soldiers,  real  soldiers,  would  conduct 
themselves  in  battle. 

When  the  General  and  his  stafi"  had  appeared  upon  the 


430 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


plateau  below,  he  was  instantly  beset  by  his  chiefs  and 
warriors,  who  persuaded  him  to  let  them  go  and  fight  the 
Feringhees.  After  hesitating  a  long  time  he  had  seen  the  Bat- 
tery of  Mountain  Train  Artillery  coming  up,  and  thinking  the 
ammunition-boxes  on  the  mules  contained  the  specie,  he  said : 
'  Go,  my  children ;  capture  the  treasure,  and  drive  the  Ferin- 
ghees away.'  He  had  intended  to  lead  them  himself,  but  was 
dissuaded  by  his  faithful  chiefs. 

He  then  had  made  the  German  engineers  and  gun-manu- 
facturers in  his  employ  fire  the  first  guns.  One  of  the  big 
cannon  had  burst  at  the  first  discharge,  killing  a  great  many 
of  his  men  wlio  had  crowded  around  it.  The  Germans,  un- 
willing cannoneers,  fired  widely  from  the  mark,  which  enraged 
him  so  much  that  he  pointed  the  guns  himself.  But  when  he 
saw  that  English  soldiers  advanced  upward  steadily  in  spite 
of  his  chain-shot  and  200-pound  balls,  he  fell  to  weeping 
violently,  gnashing  his  teeth  and  stamping  upon  the  ground ; 
and  his  rage  was  increased  when  he  saw  his  best  army  melt 
away  before  the  withering  volleys  of  the  English. 

He  then  began  to  threaten  that  the  captives  should  pay 
for  his  defeat  with  their  heads.  When  night  came  and  the 
battle  had  ended,  he  took  to  drinking  arachi  to  drown  his 
bitter  agony  of  spirit. 

Oblivion  would  not  come,  as  his  sufferings  of  mind  were 
so  acute.  He  had  thrice  attempted  suicide,  but  his  adherents 
kept  good  watch  and  prevented  him.  He  moaned  in  his  deep 
distress,  calling  for  his  favourite  Generals ;  for  Ras  Feet  Ourary 
Guvrie,  Dajatch  Deris,  Dajatch  Workee;  but  not  a  word  could 
his  attendants  answer,  contenting  themselves  with  gazing  upon 
the  wreck  of  the  once  mighty  ruler  of  Ethiopia. 

Then  lie  would  querulously  say  that  he  had  an  army  of 
brave  men  once,  but  had  only  women  now,  and  a  paroxysm 
of  hysterics  would  seize  upon  him  as  he  thought  of  the  fatal 
battle;  and  much  more  to  the  same  efiect  did  Messrs.  Flad 
and  P  repeat,  to  the  wonder  of  Sir  Robert. 

Well  might  he  pause,  with  starting  eyeballs,  to  listen  to 
the  agonising  shrieks  of  widows  bereft  of  husbands. 

^  Stop  those  women  from  crying  I '  he  yelled  furiously. 

So  crushing  the  defeat,  so  sudden  and  overwhelming  was  it, 
that  he  could  barely  realise  its  extent  or  depth. 


THEODORE  PLUNGED  IN  DESPAIR. 


431 


*  Gro  and  kill  those  Feringhee  captives,  the  cause  of  this 
ruin  I '  he  shouted  to  his  soldiers. 

'  No,'  whispered  a  grey-headed  counsellor,  '  Preserve  them. 
Send  two  of  them  down  to  the  English  general,  and  find  out 
what  he  has  to  say.' 

'  Ah  I  yes,'  said  he  musingly,  '  that  is  best.  Send  Sooltan 
Bassam  to  me.' 

This  took  place  about  midnight  of  that  fatal  day  of  Aroje, 
the  night  of  Good  Friday.  Rassam,  as  I  have  said  in  the 
Introduction,  was  one  well  fitted  to  soothe  a  monarch's  soul. 

Mr.  Rassam  appeared  on  the  scene  and  made  his  low 
reverential  obeisance  before  his  sable  majesty.  Humble  were 
his  salaams.  Sincere  was  the  hope  he  expressed  that  the 
'Illustrious  Potentate,'  'The  Ruler  of  the  Universe,' 
'  Cherisher  of  the  People,'  '  The  Shadow  of  the  Omnipotent,' 
'  Defender  of  Christendom,'  '  King  of  Kings,'  and  '  Just  one 
of  the  Earth  ; '  would  live  for  ever. 

Repressing  all  traces  of  the  emotions  that  filled  his  being 
but  lately,  with  kingly  comtesy  Theodore  rose,  and  proflfered 
him  a  seat  on  his  own  silken  couch,  besides  native  wine,  arachi, 
and  tej.  With  prodigious  suavity  and  wonderful  heartiness, 
Rassam  drank  the  Emperor's  health. 

After  complimenting  him  upon  the  bravery  of  his  (adopted) 
countrymen,  of  which  he  was  a  representative,  Theodore  pro- 
posed the  question  to  him,  'What  shall  I  do ?' 

Various  things  Rassam  urged  upon  him,  but  the  Emperor 
could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  do  any  of  them,  but  he  thought 
it  would  be  best  to  send  two  of  the  .most  trustwoilhy  of  the 
captives  to  the  Feringhee  Chief,  and  ascertain  his  intentions. 

Rassam  came  to  think  so  also,  and  suggested  that  L  

P  and  Mr.  Flad,  as  suitable  and  trustworthy  men  he  knew. 

'  Very  well,'  answered  Theodore,  his  mind  greatly  at  ease. 
'  Tell  them  to  prepare  themselves  to  convey  my  compliments 
and  my  message  to  the  General.' 

A  fraternal  embrace  took  place  between  the  two,  and  many 
loveable  phrases  were  interchanged,  before  they  parted  for  tlie 
night. 

So  much  I  learned  from  the  other  captives  when  they  came 
to  camp. 

L  P  and  Missionary  Flad  lunched  with  Sir  Robert 


432 


COOM.iSSIE  AND  MAGD.VLA. 


Napier,  during  which  most  of  the  above  story  was  repeated 
to  the  General  and  the  few  of  his  staff  who  lunched  with  him. 
Never  meal  was  dispatched  with  more  infinite  relish  than  that 
was  by  the  two  captives. 

After  P          had  communicated  with  the  officers  of  the 

army,  both  envoys  were  instructed  with  the  message  they  were 
to  convey  to  Theodore.  '  Tell  him  from  me,'  said  Sir  Bobert, 
'  that  I  require  an  instant  surrender  of  the  prisoners  with  their 
property,  of  himself  ^nd  the  fortresses  of  Selasse,  Fahla,  Mag- 
dala  and  all  therein.  He  may  rest  assured  that  honourable 
treatment  shall  be  accorded  him.' 

About  3  P.M.  the  two  captives  before-mentioned  returned 
from  the  presence  of  Theodore  (who  had  been  infuriated  for  a 
short  time  at  the  answer  they  had  brought  him  from  Napier), 
with  the  prayer  that  the  English  commander  should  give  him 
better  terms,  as  he  was  a  king  and  he  could  not  surrender  him- 
self to  any  chief  who  served  a  woman.  ^Rather,'  stated 
Theodore  in  his  letter,  '  than  surrender,  I  would  fight  to  the 
death.  Can  you  not  be  satisfied  with  the  possession  of  those  you 
came  for,  and  leave  me  alone  in  peace  ? ' 

They  were  sent  back  again,  on  their  return  to  the  fortress, 
about  five  o'clock,  with  the  same  reply  as  before.  '  You  must 
surrender  yourself  imconditionally  to  the  Queen  of  England. 
Be  assured  that  honourable  treatment  shall  be  accorded  to  you.' 

The  whole  English  army  looked  upon  them  with  compas- 
sionate tenderness,  anticipating  for  them  the  very  worst  of 
calamities  that  Theodore's  vengeful  rage  would  pour  on  their 
heads. 

When  P          and  Flad  had  commenced  their  retium  to 

camp  with  the  second  prayer  for  favourable  terms,  Kassam's 
greatness  of  soul  shone  out  through  the  mist  of  doubt  and  im- 
certainty  which  environed  him. 

'  Trust  to  me,  your  Majesty.  Grant  that  all  the  captives 
go  free  to  the  English  camp,  and  I  will  guarantee  that  the 
English  chief  shall  return  to  his  own  country.' 

My  candid  opinion  is  that  Mr.  Sassam  in  his  heart  of  hearts 
believed  in  a  great  measure  what  he  said,  and  unreasonably 
assumed  that  he,  and  he  alone,  was  the  great  object  of  the  ex- 
pedition ;  the  release  of  his  contemporaries  and  the  punishment 
of  the  Emperor  being  matters  of  secondary  importance.  Suffice 


RASSAM  THE  PROT^G^  OV  LAYARD  OF  NINEVEH.  433 


it  that  his  Majesty  believed  in  Eassam,  and  trusted  to  his 
postulated  influence  and  persuasive  powers  to  reconcile  him 
with  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Crusade,  and  gave  him 
orders  to  assemble  immediately  all  the  European  captives, 
with  every  article  of  property  that  belonged  to  them,  at  the 
Thafurbar  Grate  of  the  main  fortress,  and  when  all  would  be 
ready,  he  would  be  there  to  bid  them  good-bye. 

In  an  incredible  short  space  of  time  the  captives  had  grouped 
themselves  en  masse  at  the  gate  with  their  servants  and  their 
servants'  servants,  and  their  slaves. 

Strange  hubbub  the  piebald  group  kept  up.  White  and 
black  faces  commingled  together,  and  a  very  Babel  of  languages 
was  used  in  this  confusion,  consequent  upon  their  intense  hurry 
to  get  away.  There  was  no  order  in  the  mass.  They  had  been 
told  by  Eassam  that  they  were  to  get  ready  within  half-an-hour 
to  leave  Magdala,  with  its  horrible  memories  and  bloody  asso- 
ciations for  ever !  At  once  danced  before  their  vision — Home, 
no  matter  where  it  lay ! 

They  had  not  long  to  wait.  Theodore  arrived  at  the  gate, 
clad  in  his  proudest  robes,  surrounded  by  his  principal  men. 
All  the  captives  salaamed  to  him  except  one.  His  Majesty 
then  gave  the  orders  to  open  the  gate,  and  the  prisoners  defiled 
before  him,  bowing  low  as  they  passed  him. 

'  Adieu  Cameron.'  Theodore  addressed  the  Consul.  '  We  part 
friends,  I  hope  ?  ' 

It  was  on  the  Consul's  tongue  to  return  cordially  the  parting 
salute ;  the  knowledge  Of  the  man's  coming  doom  awakened  a 
kind  of  repentant  pity  in  him  for  the  fallen  potentate  ;  but  the 
word  could  not  issue  smoothly.  Like  a  phantom  rose  before 
him  the  wasted  years  of  his  life ;  he  remembered  his  former 
condition,  enwrapped  in  a  dingy  gray  blanket  chained  firmly  to 
the  wall ;  the  fiendish  tortures  practised  upon  him ;  the  cutting 
whip ;  the  fate  which  impended  over  him  for  so  long ;  and  oh, 
the  live-long  days  of  mental  agony  and  utter  misery  which  he 
had  passed  as  he  witnessed  the  days  flitting  by,  one  by  one,  an 
interminable  round  of  punishments ;  apparently  uncared  for,  by 
his  vacillating  and  unready  government.  What  wonder,  then, 
that  the  spirit  of  the  Saxon  shrank  from  forgiving  the 
wretched  tyrant.     But  his  position  was  still  hazardous  in  the 

F  F 


434 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA, 


extreme,  and  policy  compelled  him  to  acknowledge  the  concili- 
atory farewell  to  Thefodore. 

*  Adieu,  your  Majesty;'  and  statelily  salaaming,  Consul 
Cameron  passed  on. 

*  Fare  you  well,  Mr.  Stem.  Forgive  me  for  what  I  did  to 
you.' 

"WTiether  it  was  the  Christian  spirit  that  inrged  him  to  for- 
give, or  whether  it  Vas  the  deadly  fear  he  entertained  of  Theo- 
dore that  caused  him  to  respond  to  the  salutation  is  not 
known ;  sure  fact  is  it,  that  Mr.  Stem  salaamed  low,  saying, 
^  Farewell,  yoiu*  Majesty.' 

'  Ah,  Kerens,  is  that  you  ?  Good-bye ;  I  shall  not  see  you 
any  more.' 

Young  Kerens,  mth  his  fresh  youthful  impulses,  with  all 
his  suflFerings  still  strong  in  his  mind,  went  up  to  Theodore, 
and  clasping  his  hand,  bent  his  head  in  obeisance,  and  said, 
'  Good-bye,  your  Majesty  ;  I  wish  you  well.' 

*  Ah,  Sooltan  Rassam,  Good-bye.  I  depend  upon  you  to 
reconcile  me  with  the  English  Chief.  Be  sure  to  come  to  me 
to-morrow  with  good  news.' 

^  Rest  assured,  your  Majesty.  I  shall  be  certain  to  come 
to-morrow  with  good  news.  A  good  night  to  you,  my  Em- 
peror ; '  saying  which,  he  walked  through  the  gate,  passed  the 
barriers,  passed  the  lowest  barbican,  and  then  breathed  freer 
and  healthier,  he  and  the  rest  of  them,  from  Magdala  along 
Islangi,  rounding  Selasse,  close  to  Fahla,  and  then  in  a  long 
deflux  until  the  twinkling  lights  of  the  British  camp  awoke 
fondest  hopes  within  them,  and  in  hearty  unison  rose  on  the 
clear  night  air  the  thanks  from  their  relieved  hearts. 

Instantly  the  news  flashed  through  the  army,  and  soldiers 
hurried  to  head-quarters  by  the  hundi'eds  to  wait  for  the  re- 
leased captives. 

About  7  P.M.  the  first  of  the  little  column  arrived  at  the 
camp,  and  halted  before  the  Commander-in-Chiefs  tent. 

A  guard  of  soldiers  with  bayonets  bore  back  the  curious 
crowds,  to  allow  space  for  the  caravan  within  the  circle.  As 
they  came  in  there  was  a  faint  attempt  at  cheering  heard,  but 
it  died  away  in  an  indistinct  murmur,  as  soon  as  he  that 
started  it  found  no  one  to  second  him. 

There  were  women  and  children  amongst  them,  and  when 


A  STRANGE  RECEPTION  OF  THE  CAPTIVES,  435 


the  thin  treble  voice  of  a  child  was  first  heard,  instead  of  cheer- 
ing enthusiastically  the  great  burly  soldiers  laughed.  Yes, 
actually  laughed  I 

Assuredly  there  must  have  been  something  wrong.  This 
could  not  be  the  reception  the  captives  anticipated  before  being 
released ;  this  did  not  appear  as  the  Salem  of  their  hopes  I 

Neither  was  it,  I  confess,  what  I  had  limned.  I  had  imagined 
that  the  whole  army,  as  one  man  would  have  lifted  up  their 
voices  at  the  sight  in  loud  and  glorious  huzzahs,  amid  loud- 
sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbals ;  that  everybody  would 
appear  delirious  with  joy ;  that  the  captives  would  weep  copious 
tears,  and  rush  simultaneously  towards  Sir  Robert's  knees 
to  hug  them  and  kiss  his  hands  in  a  perfect  transport  of 
thankfulness ;  and  that  Sir  Robert,  catching  the  spirit  of  the 
moment,  would  have  delivered  a  lecture  or  a  sermon  upon 
a  beneficent  Providence ;  and  afterwards  with  uplifted  hands 
and  upturned  face  would  call  down  the  blessings  of  God  upon 
the  liberated  and  the  liberators.  English  people  have  done 
such  things ;  but  it  is  passing  strange  they  did  not  do  it  here  1 

The  officers  produced  their  eye-glasses,  and  one  gazing  upon 
the  scene  might  have  witnessed  nine-and-ninety  lustrous  reflec- 
tors arranged  upon  nine-and-ninety  eyes,  belonging  to  nine-and- 
ninety  different  gentlemen,  busily  scanning  the  appearance  of 
the  captives,  critically  viewing  their  clothes,  making  dead  sets 
at  their  buttons,  coolly  commenting  upon  the  appearance  of 
the  women  and  children,  and  last  of  all,  prosaically  reckoning 
up  how  old  the  '  ladies '  were. 

Generally  the  captives  looked  in  much  better  condition 
than  we  had  been  led  to  expect.  Save  three,  all  looked  well ; 
these  were  young  Kerens,  McElvey,  an  Irish  boy  servant  of 
Cameron,  and  a  middle-aged  man  named  Schi'ieber,  one  of 
Theodore's  engineers.  These  latter  looked  Very  pale,  and  were 
clothed  like  Romans,  in  lengthy  togas,  and  straw  hats  of  their 
own  manufacture  ^la-Crusoe.  McElvey,  the  Irish  boy,  was 
exceedingly  vivacious  and  merry. 

In  the  hurry  of  departure  Mrs.  Flad  had  been  left  be- 
hind by  Mr.  Rassam,  she  being  slightly  ailing  in  health. 

Mr.  Flad  had  to  go  back  to'  Magdala  in  the  dead  of  night 
to  get  his  wife  and  children,  for  he  and  P         met  the 

F  V  2 


436 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


captives  coming  down  Fahla  slope,  as  they  were  the  second 
time  returning  to  Magdala. 

These  were  the  captives — sixty-one  the  total  number  of 
them — for  whom  the  Crusade  had  been  imdertaken  ;  these  were 
those  whose  graphic  letters  had  drawn  tears  from  Christendom. 

Their  accounts  had  led  us  all  to  believe  they  were  about 
to  die ;  that  they  were  flogged  every  day ;  that  they  were  for 
ever  in  manacles  ;  naked ;  a  mass  of  sores  and  corruption ;  and 
yet  here  they  were  healthy,  well-clad  people,  four  of  whom 
sported  those  *  everlasting  quizzing-glasses !    Extraordinary ! 

The  second  day  dawned,  after  the  pyrotechnical  exercigjss  of 
Good  Friday  which  proved  fatal  to  so  many  of  the  Abyssinians. 

The  captives  were  all,  with  the  exception  of  Mrs.  Flad  and 
Bardel,  who  were  ill,  in  our  camp.  Their  black  and  white  and 
red  tents  outnumbered  the  army's.  According  to  the  list, 
there  should  have  been  sixty-one  persons ;  there  were  forty-eight 
tents  I 

With  these  captives  there  were  187  servants  and  323 
animals.  Mrs.  Flad  arrived  safely  by  9  a.m.  that  morning. 
The  only  one  left  in  Magdala  was  A.  Bardel,  Artist  and  Pro- 
fessor, who  was  sick  of  a  fever.  It  will  be  remembered  tliat 
tliis  man  was  the  one  who  was  accused  of  translating  to  Theo- 
dore the  letters  and  papers  of  the  Missionaries,  causing  them 
to  be  flogged  for  writing  defamatory  articles  about  the 
Emperor.  I  have  stated  that  there  were  sixty-one  to  be  re-r 
leased,  number  sixty-two  was  Theodora  Morritz,  bom  at  10 
o'clock  the  next  morning  after  their  arrival  in  the  English 
camp,  and  was  named  Theodore,  after  the  Emperor. 

The  astonishment  of  Political  Secretary  Tweedy  was 
very  great  when  he  read  the  list  of  captives  and  followers,  and 
still  greater  when  he  found  that  about  one-third  of  the 
servants  were  Abyssinian  women. 

Such  facts  as  these  caused  a  revulsion  of  feeling  amongst 
all  who  heard  of  them.  Many  other  interesting  facts  came  to 
light  which  proved  that  too  much  credence  must  not  be  placed 
in  those  agonising  letters  written  by  some  of  the  captives. 
When  they  had  beef,  bread,  honey,  milk,  houses,  gardens,  wine 
&c.,  we  wondered  what  more  they  wanted  ? 

Since  we  had  taken  position  before  Magdala,  no  wat^r 
could  be  found  nearer  than  two  miles ;  but  on  the  second  day 


A  FINAL  SUMMONS  TO  SURRENDER. 


437 


that  supply  failed  us,  and  the  road  thither  was  so  beset  by  the 
thieving  Gallas  that  mules  were  constantly  being  stolen  from 
the  muleteers  by  those  unscrupulous  natives.  When  it  was 
perceived  that  the  supply  of  water  in  the  neighbourhood  was 
totally  inadequate  for  the  large  number  of  animals  attached  to 
the  expedition,  the  whole  10,000  were  taken  to  the  Bechilo 
Eiver,  about  seven  miles  off.  500  bheesties  (bullocks  for  carry- 
ing water)  were  constantly  employed  in  carrying  water  from 
the  river  for  the  use  of  the  army. 

Of  such  luxuries  as  grog,  cigars,  tobacco,  sugar,  tea,  coffee, 
rice,*'&c.,  we  had  none,  as  all  had  been  left  at  our  camp  near 
Lat. 

It  was  mid-day  when  1,000  beeves  and  500  sheep  were 
sent  by  Theodore  to  Sir  Robert  Napier,  with  the  hope  that,  as 
this  day  was  Easter  Sunday,  the  British  soldiers  should  eat 
their  fill,  for  were  we  not  all  Christians  ? 

As  soon  as  Sir  Robert  heard  this  message  he  sent  an  oflBcer 
up  to  Magdala,  to  say  that  he  could  not  think  of  accepting 
anything  from  His  Majesty,  until  himself,  his  family,  and  the 
fortresses,  were  surrendered  to  the  Queen  of  England. 

In  the  afternoon  more  escalading  ladders  were  made  out  of 
the  dhoolie  poles,  the  rungs  being  pickaxe  handles.  Powder 
charges,  hand  grenades,  &c.,  were  also  prepared  ready  for  use. 

The  elephants,  forty-two  in  number,  having  brought  up 
the  Armstrong  battery  to  the  camp,  conveyed  the  guns  in  the 
evening  to  the  ridge  which  divided  our  camp  from  the  plain 
below  Fahla.  The  mules  were  brought  up  from  the  Bechilo 
with  two  days'  rations  of  grain,  so  that  all  would  be  in  readi- 
ness for  the  assault  upon  Magdala,  which  was  expected  to  take 
place  at  noon  of  the  next  day. 

Before  going  to  sleep.  Sir  Robert  Napier,  unwilling  to  be 
harsh  when  there  was  the  least  chance  for  an  amicable  settle- 
ment, despatched  a  native  coiu-ier  with  the  final  summons  to 
sunender.  He  explained  in  his  letter  how  useless  and  vain  was 
resistance,  and  promised  Theodore  that  he  would  be  well 
treated  if  he  delivered  himself  up,  winding  up  with  his  declar- 
ation that  if  an  aflBrmative  answer  was  not  received  by  him  by 
9  o'clock  next  morning,  he  would  move  forward  to  the  attack. 


438 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  X. 

prepare  q  por  the  end — a  welcome  from  thirty  thousakd — 
Theodore's  last  challenge— the  bombardment— at  the  gates  of 
magdala — suicide  of  the  emperor — within  magdala. 

Resplendently  glowed  the  proud  summits  of  Fahla  and  Selasse 
in  the  sunsliine  on  Easter  Monday  morning,  April  13,  1868. 

Directly  the  reveille  was  sounded,  with  bugle  blare  and 
drum  beat,  teeming  life  sprang  forth.  Soldiers  shook  them- 
selves outside  their  tents,  with  many  a  sleepy  yawn  and  growl, 
mingled  with  jest  and  laugh.  The  respective  companies 
mustered  themselves  before  their  quarters  ;  the  roll  was  called, 
names  were  answered  to ;  ranks  were  then  broken,  and  the 
soldiers  retired  to  breakfast. 

Down  the  slope  of  Fahla,  about  the  hour  of  eight  in  the 
morning,  came  eight  Abyssinians  apparelled  in  all  the  frippery 
of  chiefs  of  high  rank — silken  boddices  and  brocade  gowns, 
with  hair  variously  gotten  up,  according  to  taste,  in  plaits, 
curls,  or  frizzles,  necks  heavy  with  pendent  ornaments,  breasts 
glittering  with  silver  decorations.  They  advanced  before  Sir 
Robert's  tent,  and  were  immediately  surrounded  by  a  ring  of 
soldiers,  who  were  summoned  to  preserve  order  and  keep  an 
open  space  clear  for  the  council. 

On  the  English  commander  presenting  himself  before  them 
they  salaamed  lowly  before  him,  and  then  announced  to  him, 
through  their  spokesman  Aytoo  Salnuel  (the  favourite  of  the 
Emperor),  that  they  came  down  to  deliver  Fahla  and  Selasse 
into  his  hands  upon  the  simple  condition  that  they  be  allowed 
to  depart  unmolested.  Their  conditions  met  with  the  approval 
of  Sir  Robert,  and  he  accordingly  gave  solemn  promise  that  he 
would  protect  them  until  they  crossed  the  Bechilo  on  their 
way  home. 


PREPABINa  FOB  THE  LAST  STRUGGLE. 


439 


On  being  questioned  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  His  Majesty, 
the  chiefs  made  known  the  fact  that  Theodore  had  departed 
soon  after  the  receipt  of  the  last  summons  from  Sir  Robert 
Napier,  which  must  have  been  about  midnight.  They  said 
that  they  expected  that  he  had  either  gone  to  Gojam  or  to  the 
camp  of  the  Gralla  queen,  Mastevat-,  in  which  latter  case,  though 
the  Mahomedan  queen  was  his  deadly  enemy,  still,  according 
to  Mahomedan  custom,  his  life  was  perfectly  safe  while  in  her 
camp. 

This  was  a  thing  that  General  Napier  had  never  dreamt  of; 
at  least  that  he  woruld  be  able  to  get  away  clear  of  the  cordon 
of  cavalry  pickets  that  he  had  stationed  rearward  of  Magdala, 
in  the  valley  of  the  Melkaschillo,  another  mountain  stream  run- 
ning parallel  with  the  Bechilo.  He  immediately  issued  a  pro- 
clamation that  he  would  pay  the  sum  of  50,000  dollars  for 
Theodore,  dead  or  alive ;  and  messengers  were  at  once  de- 
spatched with  it  to  the  camps  of  Wagshum  Gobozye  Mastevat, 
Mahomedan  queen  of  the  WoUo  GuUas,  and  Walkeit,  Christian 
queen  of  the  Asubo  Gallas. 

Sir  Robert  next  determined  upon  occupying  Fahlar  and 
Selasse,  and  moving  upon  Magdala,  after  strengthening  him- 
self in  the  former  fortresses,  and  Sir  Charles  Staveley  was  com- 
manded to  muster  his  division  on  the  plain  below  Fahla. 

There  was  created  a  buzz  of  excitement  among  the  soldiers; 
much  talk  among  the  officers;  servants  and  sowars  flitted 
about  with  astonished  faces ;  specials,  electrified  at  the  news 
of  the  prospective  battle,  ran  hither  and  thither  rapturous. 

The  great  event  upon  which  the  campaign  hinged  was 
about  to  transpire  ;  that  for  which  we  had  all  toiled  drew  near 
its  accomplishment. 

Then  there  was  heard  a  concatenation  of  bugle  sounds 
answering  to  each  other  as  the  different  regimental  bugles 
repeated  the  commands,  and  the  grey  hills,  majestic  and  vast, 
flashed  them  abroad  and  across  to  the  far  away  ranges;  and 
then  there  was  long  rolling  drum-beating,  angry  trumpet- 
blaring,  and  stem,  brusque,  military  orders ;  and  lastly,  regi- 
ments forming  columns  of  fours  debouched  past  their  respective 
camps  towards  Fahla  plain,  preceded  by  a  small  army  of 
musicians. 

The  33rd  Irish  Regiment,  '  Duke  of  Wellington's  Own,' 


440 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


now  restored  to  favour  by  their  subsequent  good  conduct  and 
prompt  obedience  since  leaving  Dildee,  of  awkward  memory, 
marched  to  the  exhilaratory  quick  step  sounds  of  'Yankee 
Doodle.'  This  regiment  was  destined  to  play  an  important 
part  in  the  last  scene  of  the  trinoctial  act  of  the  drama.  It 
was  to  lead  the  assaulting  column. 

This  day  the  regiment  knew  their  conduct  was  to  be  watched 
closely  by  the  Chief,  and  their  walk  and  manner  seemed  to  say, 
'Never  mind,  we'll  show  you  that  fighting  and  marching  are 
two  different  things,  and  that  we  aspire  to  the  reputation 
of  being  the  best  fighting  regiment  in  the  world  1. ' 

Following  the  33rd  Foot  went  the  4th  King's  Own,  the  band 
playing 'Garry  Owen.' Then  went  the  45th  Foot  (European), 
the  band  playing '  Cheer  Boys,  Cheer.'  After  these  splendid  well- 
equipped  regiments,  numbering  in  the  aggregate  1,600  Emb- 
peans,  went  the  Sepoy  regiments,  the  Belooches,  800  strong, 
the  Punjaubees,  800  strong,  two  companies  10th  Native  Indian 
Infantry,  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  followed  by  Penn's  Mountain 
Train  Battery,  with  two  mortars,  and  the  Naval  Brigade  in 
charge  of  the  Eocket  Battery.  The  cavalry  numbered  two 
companies  3rd  Light  Native  Cavalry.  The  3rd  Dragoon  Guards 
were  sent  rearward  of  Magdala  as  pickets  to  prevent  the 
retreat  of  Theodore. 

The  road  up  to  the  low  gorge  or  connecting  ridge  between 
Fahla  and  Selasse  was  very  steep ;  probably  it  inclined  one  foot 
in  three,  but,  like  all  roads  that  the  Emperor  had  made,  it  was 
too  steep  a  gradient  for  an  easy  ascent.  Presently  Sir  Robert- 
Napier  and  staff  made  their  appearance,  and  I  made  bold  to 
ascend  with  them.  From  a  thousand  points  on  the  heights 
the  road  up  Fahla  slope  was  commanded,  and  all  the  officers 
admitted  that  a  few  Europeans  stationed  behind  the  projecting 
masses  of  rock  to  contest  the  approach,  would  have  materially 
changed  the  aspect  of  affairs. 

So,  we  defiled  by  fours  past  enormous  boulders,  as  we  went 
toiling  up ;  dipped  into  paths  between  echoing  rock,  and  emerged 
sharply  in  full  view  of  a  sloping  gradine  bossy  with  toppling 
stones ;  round  a  projecting  butment  of  a  hill  we  woimd  upward, 
and  then  at  steady  pace  tramped  along  a  bit  of  level  road,  to 
fetch  up  at  the  base  of  another  steep  acclivity ;  and  then  up,  up, 
and  still  up,  imtil  we  found  ourselves  full  under  the  noonday 


A  WELCOME  FROM  30,000  PEOPLE. 


441 


sun  on  the  crest  of  the  gorge  between  Fahla  and  its  sister-fortress 
of  Selasse.  . 

The  3rd  Light  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Loch,  had  been  de- 
spatched, soon  after  the  chiefs  came  down  to  surrender  the  two 
fortresses,  to  take  possession  of  them,  and  drive  the  natives  out. 

When  the  33rd  Foot  arrived  upon  the  heights,  six  companies 
were  detailed  to  aid  the  cavalry.  They  were  marched  to  the 
extreme  eastern  end  of  Selasse,  where  they  faced  right  about, 
and  deploying  across  the  height,  advanced  westward,  steadily, 
with  fixed  bayonets,  driving  the  natives  before  them  out  of  the 
fortress  as  they  came  towards  the  road,  on  the  top  of  which  the 
English  army  halted.  Captain  Speedy  was  with  Colonel  Loch 
riding  hither  and  thither,  assuring  the  chiefs  and  principal  men 
that  they  would  not  be  harmed,  but  that  they  must  leave  at  once 
for  the  Fahla  plain.  Near  the  mouth  of  a  pass,  through  which  the 
natives  must  travel,  a  company  of  soldiers  was  seen  drawn  up  on 
each  flank  of  it,  for  the  purpose  of  disarming  them  as  they  emerged 
out  of  it.'  After  descending  through  this  pass,  the  natives  ap- 
peared upon  the  terraced  ridge  where  the  army  was  being  halted. 

At  sight  of  the  long  lines  of  soldiers  coming  up,  the  natives 
recoiled  in  dismay,  hut  reassured,  they  again  advanced  and 
halted  on  the  terrace,  until  the  road  should  be  cleared  for  them 
to  descend  to  the  plain.  Upon  being  satisfied  by  their  chiefs 
that  the  Feringhees  were  their  best  friends,  they  came 
on  the  terrace  between  the  army  and  the  scarped  sides 
of  Selasse,  and  raised  the  welcome  Li-li-li-li,  which  proved  im- 
mediately evocative  of  other  welcome  chants — imtil  nearly 
thirty  thousand  people  caught  the  joyous  diapason,  and  wafted 
it  skyward  in  a  grand  and  exciting  chorus. 

Men,  women,  and  children,  eager  to  greet  the  conquerors, 
rushed  downward  from  Selasse,  adding  force  and  power  to  the 
mass  until  it  covered  the  whole  area  between  the  twin  fortresses  ! 

It  was  noonday,  and  the  hottest  sun  that  we  had  experienced 
rested  directly  centrally  in  the  azure  concave. 

So  soon  as  the  elephants  loaded  with  the  Armstrong  battery 
had  surmounted  the  ridge,  at  the  word  of  command  from  a 
mounted  oflBcer,  the  soldiers  urged  the  mob  onward  with  their 

*  It  will  be  seen  that  Napier^s  conduct  at  Magdala  was  different  from  that 
which  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  followed  at  Coomassie  six  years  later. 


442 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


bayonets.  The  road  became  filled  with  the  hurrying  fugitives, 
then  the  slopes  began  to  .teenoi  with  them.  In  the  place  of 
the  welcome  Li-li-li,  rose  high  and  shrill  a  sorrowful  threnody, 
which  thrilled  even  our  souls  as  we  gazed  on  the  departing 
multitudes. 

While  these  scenes  were  passing  in  view  of  the  ridge  whereon 
we  halted,  Colonel  Loch  and  Captain  Speedy  were  manoeuv- 
ring and  bye-playing  at  the  extremity  of  Selasse,  on  the  road 
which  encircled  that  fortress,  and  hence  led  to  Magdala. 

A  number  of  men  were  seen  careering  about  on  the  plateau 
of  Islamgee,  which  connected  Selasse  with  Magdala.  They 
were  Abyssinians,  mounted  on  ponies,  dressed  like  chiefs ;  one 
was  specially  noticeable  from  the  gorgeousness  of  his  robes  and 
the  majesty  of  his  person.  This  one  rode  a  white  horse  very 
gaily  caparisoned.  When  they  beheld  the  cavalry  rounding 
the  angle  of  Selasse  they  retired  slowly  towards  Magdala, 
firing  as  they  went. 

Once  fairly  upon  the  isthmian  plateau  of  Islamgee,  lynx- 
eyed  Speedy  discovered  that  the  object  of  that  detachment  of 
Abyssinian  cavaliers  was  to  secure  a  number^of  cannon  and 
mortars  lying  at  the  Selasse  end  of  the  intimitis  a  few  score  of 
yards  to  his  right.  Coming  towards  them  from  the  direction 
of  Fahla,  were  some  artillery  officers  and  two  special  correspond- 
ents of  the  London  Press.  Colonel  Loch's  cavalry  and  this 
other  detachment  of  officers  and  specials  met  each  other  at  the 
artillery  park,  or  arsenal  of  the  Emperor.  The  cannon  were 
seized  at  once,  and  declared  to  be  the  property  of  Her  Majesty 
Queen  Victoria.  Most  of  the  guns  were  of  French  and  English 
manufacture  ;  others  there  were  evidently  made  by  the  Russian 
employ^  of  Theodore. 

After  retiring  to  the  base  of  Magdala,  a  few  of  the  Abys- 
sinian cavaliers  made  demonstrations  as  if  they  were  anxious  to 
charge,  but  were  dubious  of  the  result,  and  contented  them- 
selves with  galloping  about  at  the  Magdala  end.  Standing  by, 
apparently  irresolute,  were  a  hundred  native  foot-soldiers  ;  and 
a  line  of  dark  heads  gloomed  darkly  along  the  brow  of  the 
famous  fortress,  and  now  and  then  musket  shots  woke  loud 
echoes. 

Suddenly  the  horsemen  made  a  dash  towards  Speedy  and 
his  companions  in  charge  of  the  artillery  park,  and  among  them 


THEODORE'S  LAST  CHALLENGE. 


443 


figured  conspicuously  the  princely  rider  of  the  white  horse. 
Aifter  coming  within  three  himdred  yards  of  them,  the  natives 
halted ;  and  then  Speedy  discovered  that  the  gorgeous  rider  of 
the  white  horse  was  no  less  a  personage  than  Theodore, 
Emperor  of  Abyssinia! 

Captain  Speedy  affirmed  that  the  savage  potentate  shouted 
out  a  challenge :  '  Come  on ;  are  ye  women,  that  ye  hesitate  to 
attack  a  few  warriors  ? ' 

This,  of  course,  made  all  minds  easy  at  once  concerning  his 
whereabouts,  which  was  very  satisfactory  to  the  army.  A  mes- 
senger was  despatched  to  Sir  Robert  Napier  to  apprise  him  of 
the  fact.  No  attention  was  paid  to  the  challenge  until  he 
manifested  a  disposition  to  make  an  advance  upon  them, 
together  with  the  foot-soldiers  and  horsemen  that  were  on  the 
plateau.  Then  some  soldiers  of  the  33rd  were  signalled  to 
approach  and  take  position,  so  as  to  command  all  paths  lead- 
ing to  the  valleys  on  either  side  of  the  plateau,  and  a  company 
of  the  33rd,  who  had  ascended  Selasse  to  plant  the  colours 
thereon,  were  invited  by  signals  to  come  and  aid  them  in  the 
defence  of  the  ^ptured  artillery.  Six  of  the  guns  were  also 
loaded,  and  a  few  |)alls  were  sent  hurtling  amongst  the  natives, 
who  had  commeliced  a  desultory  firing.  This  had  the  desired 
eflfect ;  for  they  immediately  retired  behind  some  low  booths, 
temporarily  erected  for  the  accommodation  of  his  people  when 
the  Emperor  first  returned  from  Debra  Tabor.  A  few  more 
cannon-balls  ousted  them  from  their  hiding-places  there  also  ; 
and  the  little  force  of  soldiers  and  Press  gentlemen  had  the 
satisfaction  of  seeing  Theodore  and  his  men  make  a  precipitate 
retreat  up  to  Magdala  Amba. 

But  from  his  rocky  eyrie.  Theodore  kept  sputtering  his 
rage  with  sharp  musket-balls  at  all  that  came  within  range 
of  his  mountain  citadel,  and  the  detachment  of  the  33rd 
Infantry  were  finally  teased  into  murderous  activity  by  the 
sullen  shots  from  Magdala.  An  aide-de-camp,  however,  shortly 
galloped  up  with  express  orders  from  Sir  Charles  Staveley  to 
cease  firing. 

It  was  the  noise  of  this  firing  that  induced  Sir  Robert 
Napier  to  ride  forward  to  reconnoitre.  The  33rd  Infantry  were 
ordered  to  hoist  the  colours  above  Selasse,  and  the  45th  to  do 
the  same  above  Fahla.    The  British .  flag  was  hoisted  in  both 


444  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

citadels  at  the  same  time,  and  though  it  was  a  bloodless  afiair, 
still  the  event  being  honourable,  naturally  elicited  admiring 
cheers,  and  so  was  this  sight  also  evocative  of  much  enthusiasm. 
Two  of  Theodore's  strongholds  had  thus  fallen. 

Crossing  over  to  the  southern  side  of  the  intermediate 
ridge,  the  real  magnitude  and  strength  of  Magdala  became  in- 
stantly apparent. 

Suppose  a  platform  of  rock,  oval  in  shape,  a  mile  and  a 
half  in  length,  and  from  a  half  to  three-quarters  of  a  mile  in 
width,  rising  500  feet  perpendicularly  above  a  narrow  plateau 
which  connected  its  northern  end  with  Selasse.  The  rock  was 
Magdala — the  plateau  was  Islamgee.  On  the  western  and 
southern  sides  Magdala  towered  above  the  valley  of  the 
Melkaschillo  2,000  feet ;  the  eastern  side  rose  in  three  terraces 
of  about  600  feet  in  height  one  above  another.  Its  whole  summit 
was  covered  with  houses  straw-thatched  of  a  conical  shape. 
The  extreme  brow  of  the  fortress  was  defended  by  a  stone  wall, 
on  the  top  of  which  a  hurdle  revetment  was  planted  ;  but  the 
side  fronting  Islamgee  was  defended  by  a  lower  wall  and  revet- 
ment, constructed  nearly  half  way  up  the  slope.  In  the  centre 
of  the  revetment  was  a  barbican,  up  to  which  led  the  only 
available  road  to  the  fortress. 

Leaving  only  a  sufficient  garrison  to  guard  Fahla  and 
Selasse,  all  the  other  troops  were  withdrawn  to  Islamgee, 
where  they  were  massed  behind  the  captured  artillery. 

Sir  Robert  Napier  had  taken  much  pains  to  ascertain  the 
exact  strength  of  the  enemy  and  its  defences.  From  one  point 
only  was  Magdala  attackable,  and  that  was  the  side  which 
fronted  us,  as  we  stood  upon  Islamgee.  Longer  and  stronger 
escalading  ladders  than  the  army  had  made  would  have  been 
requisite.  But  it  was  believed  that  though  no  attack  was 
meditated  upon  any  other  point  than  tlie  northern  front,  that 
all  avenues  of  egress  were  blocked  ;  the  investment  being  made 
by  regular  European  cavalry,  the  3rd  Dragoon  Guards. 

Penn's  Battery  of  Mountain  Train  Artillery  was  ordered  to 
take  position  to  the  riglit  of  the  captured  pieces  at  a  distance 
of  800  yards  from  Magdala.  Twiss'  Battery  of  Mountain  Train 
Artillery  was  posted  on  Selasse  a  full  thousand  yards  from  the 
object  of  attack.  The  Armstrong  Battery  was  posted  on  the 
intermediate  ridge  between  Fahla  and  Selasse  at  a  distance  of 


«  i 

BOMBAKDMENT  OF  MAGDALA.  445 

2,500  yards  from  Magdala ;  thus  the  Armstrong  battery  and 
Penn's  were  posted  each  on  the  horn  of  a  crescent  curving 
towards  Magdala,  which  would  give  a  convergent  fire.  The 
eight  inch  mortars  had  also  been  posted  to  the  left  of  the  Arm- 
strong Battery. 

At  2  P.M.  Penn's  battery  piped  for  battle,  and  its  notes  rang 
out  clear  and  loud.  In  the  meantime  Sir  Robert  Napier  was 
on  Selasse  height  to  observe  what  means  were  taken  by  the 
besieged  for  defence,  as  the  tiring  went  on. 

Following  the  howitzer  shells  flew  a  tentative  Armstrong 
conical  shell,  singing  a  tune  an  octave  higher  with  a  slight 
quaver  in  its  tone  as  it  went  twirling  and  bowling  through  the 
air,  bursting  directly  over  Magdala.  Then  followed  the  mortar's 
shell,  wailing  mournfully  as  if  it  detested  its  errand,  but  yet 
was  bound  to  perform  it  by  inexorable  fate. 

The  Artillery  then  warmed  into  action ;  and  soon  twenty 
guns  of  all  calibres  were  thundering  with  might  and  main  at 
the  gates  of  Magdala,  while  a  chorus  of  fierce  hisses  burst  from 
the  Rocket  Battery. 

During  the  energetic  bombardment  one  of  the  correspon- 
dents asked  me  if  I  had  seen  Theodore's  last  handiwork.  I 
replied  in  the  native.  He  then  said  that  he  could  show  it 
to  me;  leading  me,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  edge  of  the 
precipice,  when  he  pointed  downward,  and,  looking  in  that 
direction,  I  saw  a  sight  which  for  ever  beggars  description. 

Of  a  verity,  reader,  I  am  no  lover  of  the  horrible  or  tlie 
disgusting.  But  if  you  can  conceive  308  dead  people,  piled 
one  upon  another,  stripped  naked,  in  a  state  of  corruption,  with 
gyves  and  fetters  round  their  limbs,  you  will  save  me  the  un- 
pleasant task  of  describing  the  scene  ! 

Is  it  possible  to  award  fitting  punishment  to  such  a  whole- 
sale murderer  ?  A  man  who  takes  another  man's  life  is  sacri- 
ficed at  once  by  the  avenging  laws  of  civilisation.  But  what 
can  be  done  to  him  who  murders  over  300  people  ? 

The  late  captives  said  that  they  were  present  during  the 
execution ;  that  the  prisoners  were  manacled  hand  and  foot, 
and  that  they  were  sabred  and  shot  by  Theodore  and  his  men 
as  they  lay  helpless  on  the  ground.  Many  of  them,  it  is  said, 
struggled  to  their  knees,  and  entreated  in  the  wild  '  fervour 
and  passion  of  prayer '  for  mercy,  but  it  was  of  no  avail.  They 


446 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


were  butchered  to  the  last  soul.  This  took  place  the  day  we 
arrived  upon  the  Dahonte  Dalanta  plateau,  April  9. 

Sir  Robert  Napier  perceived  during  the  bombardment, 
which  lasted  two  hours,  that  the  defenders  were  weak,  and  that 
his  troops  would  suffer  no  great  loss  in  the  assault.  He  therefore 
ordered  the  Royal  Engineers,  the  33rd,  the  45th,  and  the 
*  King's  Own,'  to  prepare  for  the  final  work. 

The  musketry  from  the  fortress  had  ceased  soon  after  the 
British  artillery  had  opened  fire.  The  troops  destined  for  the 
storming  were  drawn  out  in  battalions  at  quarter  distance,  across 
Islamgee,  facing  Magdala.  The  Engineers,  under  the  command 
of  Major  Gordon  Pritchard,  were  in  the  front  of  the  battalions 
deployed  as  skirmishers.  -  Soon  signals  for  rapid  firing  were 
made  to  the  artillery,  and  under  th6  furious  cannonade  which 
now  commenced,  the  troops  began  their  march  along  the 
plateau  with  trailed  arms.  Upon  arriving  within  fifty  jrards 
of  the  base  of  Magdala  the  artillery  ceased  firing,  and  the 
Royal  Engineers  at  once  opened  fire  with  their  Sniders,  which 
was  taken  up  by  the  33rd  and  45th,  who  plied  their  breech- 
loading  rifles  with  admirable  rapidity,  raining  a  storm  of  leaden 
pellets,  for  ten  minutes.  The  volleys  of  musketry  were  as 
continuous  and  rolling  as  ever  an  army  of  20,000  men,  armed 
with  the  ancient  muzzle-loaders,  produced. 

Theodore  and  his  faithful  adherents  had  lain  concealed 
during  the  artillery  fire ;  but  so  soon  as  it  ceased,  up  he  sprang, 
sounding  his  war  cry,  and  with  his  followers  he  hurried  to  the 
gates  and  defences,  determined  to  give  the  advancing  columns 
the  benefit  of  a  reception  worthy  of  an  Emperor  who  was  about 
to  conquer  or  die. 

So  long  as  Theodore  was  wedded  to  the  idea  that  there  was 
no  forgiveness  for  him,  so  long  would  he  have  manifested  the 
same  implacable  rancorous  spirit  towards  the  English  had 
the  siege  lasted  as  many  months  as  it  did  hoiu*s.  Now,  seeing 
no  avenue  open  for  him  to  escape,  with  his  faithful  men  willing 
to  shed  their  blood  for  him,  nerved  with  the  deepest  courage 
bom  out  of  his  extreme  despair,  he  arrived  at  the  barbacan 
and  lowest  revetment,  posted  his  men  at  the  loopholes  and 
along  the  wall  topped  with  the  wattled  hurdles.  As  he  saw 
the  soldiers  still  firing  while  they  faced  right,  and  wheeled 
into  columns  of  fours  for  the  purpose  of  ascending  the  path 


AT  THE  GATES  OF  MAGDALA. 


447 


that  led  up  to  the  barbacan,  his  signal  was  given,  and  their 
presence  was  known  to  the  English  by  sharp  shot  falling 
amongst  them,  wounding  several. 

InstAntly  the  British  fire  was  concentrated  on  the  barbacan 
and  the  suspicious  revetment,  through  the  interstices  of  which 
wreaths  of  pearly  smoke  issued,  indicating  the  presence  of  the 
dogged  riflemen.  At  this  time,  as  on  Good  Friday,  lightning 
and  thunder  played  and  rattled,  as  fit  concomitants  of  a  battle, 
and  the  rain  fell  in  large  warm  drops,  splashing  heavily  on  our 
heads.  But  through  the  pelting  shower  the  soldiers,  invincible 
seemingly,  undreading  certainly,  .advanced,  making  their 
Sniders  keep  fatal  music  to  their  steps,  scrutinising  suspiciously 
granite  embrasures  and  natural  basalt,  battlements  that  shot  up 
here  and  there  on  the  brow  of  the  cliff  of  Magdala. 

Still  preceded  by  the  Engineers,  and  still  sowing  the  deadly 
missiles  over  every  inch  of  the  superjacent  slope,  they  arrived 
at,  and  halted  near  the  barbacan. 

For  a  minute  there  was  a  pause,  and  again  a  dozen  shots 
hurtled  amongst  the  more  advanced  of  the  Engineers,  wounding 
Major  Pritchard  and  three  or  four  of  the  Engineers ;  but  they 
were  immediately  replied  to  by  a  thousand  directed  at  each 
spot  from  whence  the  reports  came,  and  Major  Pritchard  and 
Lieutenant  Morgan — the  latter  a  most  enthusiastic  officer — 
made  a  dash  upon  the  barbacan  to  effect  an  entrance.  They 
found  the  gate  closed,  and  the  inside  of  the  square  tower  com- 
pletely blocked  up  with  stones  to  the  depth  of  ten  feet,  so  that 
a  passage  through  was  not  readily  available. 

'  Hasten  up  with  the  powder ! '  shouted  the  Major. 

'  Hasten  up  with  the  powder  1  hasten  up  mih  the  powder ! ' 
was  passed  along  the  contiguous  colunms. 

But  who.  was  to  bring  up  the  powder  ?  Why  were  those 
canvas  bags  with  fuses  attached  made  ?  Were  they  not  for  the 
purpose  of  blowing  up  this  place?  Where  were  the  heavy 
hammers  and  iron  wedges  for  breaking  open  the  barrier  and 
knocking  off  the  bolts  or  drawing  the  hinges?  Where  the 
handsaws  and  the  axes  to  cut  the  hurdle  revetment  down? 
Where  the  pickaxes  to  demolish  or  sap  the  wall  ?  Where  the 
escalading  ladders,  constructed  for  the  purpose  of  scaling  the 
walls  and  stockades  or  any  raised  defences  there  might  be? 


448 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Echo  answered,  'Where?  oh  where?'  No  mortal  voice 
answered  the  eager  question. 

Private  M'Griiire  of  the  33rd  thought  lie  would  climh  up 
the  cliflF  wall.  Surmounting  a  ledge,  witliout  pause  he  ascended 
another  in  the  same  way,  and  then  turned  round  and  shouted 
aloud  that  he  had  found  an  opening.  With  a  fierce  cheer  which 
was  faintly  heard  on  Islamgee,  he  faced  the  wall  on  the  height, 
hotly  seconded  by  Private  Bergin  of  the  same  regiment. 

The  whole  regiment,  now  urged  by  the  bold  example  of 
their  daring  comrades,  scrambled  up  the  almost  perpendicular 
slope,  and  after  a  few  minutes  of  breathless  work  they  sur- 
mounted the  ledges,  and  seeing  men  suspiciously  moving 
about  on  the  summit  of  Magdala  they  opened  fire,  at  once 
sweeping  them  away  as  with  a  breath. 

Intruding  their  rifles  into  the  interstices  of  the  hurdle  fence 
which  topped  the  wall,  they  lifted  it  up,  and  in  a  second  had 
passed  over  the  lower  defences.  Scattering  themselves  over 
the  ground,  they  made  simultaneously  for  the  other  defence, 
which  was  seventy-five  feet  above  them,  passing  over  several 
ghastly  relics  of  the  battle. 

Shortly  we  heard  them  firing  quickly,  eagerly,  as  they  dis- 
covered their  enemies  moving  about.  Then  ji^ere  heard  their 
clubbed  muskets  beating  a  fierce  '  rat-tat-tat '  upon  the  gates. 
Big  rocks  were  thrown  by  them  with  a  crashing  force  against 
the  gates,  and  now  and  again  they  pertinaciously  fired  through 
every  crevice  and  loophole.  Neither  gate,  nor  fence,  nor  stone 
wall,  nor  brush  heap,  nor  even  sheer  rocks  and  strong  barriers 
could  stop  the  excited  Irishmen;  and  no  sooner  had  their 
bayonets  gleamed  through  the  fence  than  it  was  laid  prostrate, 
and  a  wild  '  huzza ! '  '  hurrup !'  and  '  hoorah !'  was  shouted  out  as 
they  leaped  over.  P^orward  before  them  they  flung  their 
bristling  rifles,  and  fired  volleys  into  the  very  faces  of  the 
Abyssinians  ! 

But  we  must  not  forget  the  Icarian  charge  of  Drummer 
M'Guire  and  Private  Bergin  upon  Magdala.  The  two  men 
were  advancing  onward,  a  few  paces  from  each  other,  to  the 
upper  revetment,  when  they  saw  about  a  dozen  fellows  aiming 
at  them.  They  instantly  opened  fire,  and  so  quick  and  so  well 
delivered  was  it  that  but  few  of  their  assailants  escaped.  See- 
ing a  host  of  redcoats  advancing  upward,  the  others  retreated 


THE  IMPERIAL  SUICIDE. 


449 


precipitately.  Over  the  upper  revetment  both  men  made  their 
way,  and  at  the  same  time  they  observed  a  man  standing  near 
a  haystack  with  a  revolver  in  his  hand.  When  he  saw  them 
prepare  to  fire  he  ran  behind  a  haystack,  and  both  men  heard 
plainly  a  shot  fired.  Marching  on  with  their  Sniders  on  the 
present,  they  came  to  the  haystack,  and  saw  the  man  who  had 
run  behind  lying  prostrate  on  the  ground,  dying,  with  the  re- 
volver still  convulsively  clutched  in  his  right  hand.  To  their 
minds  the  revolver  was  but  their  proper  loot,  and  without  any 
ceremony  they  took  up  what  they  considered  their  own ;  but 
on  a  silver  plate  on  the  stock,  during  an  examination  of  it, 
they  perceived  an  inscription  which  read  thus  : — 

PRESENTED 
BY 

VICTORIA 

QUEEN  OF  GREAT  BRFTAIN  AND  IRELAND 
TO 

THEODORUS 

EMPEROR  OF  ABYSSINIA 
AS  A  SLIGHT  TOKEN  OF  HER  GRATITUDE 
FOR  ni&  KINDNESS  TO  HER  SERVANT  PLOWDEN 

1854 

*  Fwhat  d'ye  think,  Pat ;  can  this  be  that  unblessed  deevil 
of  a  Theodorus,  the  No-goose  as  they  call  him?'  asked 
M'Guire. 

'  Meb-be,  Mac ;  can't  say ;  but  we  had  better  shtop  near 
him  till  the  Sergeant  shows  his  phiz  inside  Mag-kl6-la.  Och, 
here  he  comes  I ' 

They  saw  a  swaying  line  of  Irish  soldiers  advancing,  and  at 
once  these  two  heroes  raised  their  sun  helmets,  and,  swinging 
them  round  their  heads,  they  shouted  the  warlike  cry  of  the 
Anglo-Saxons,  '  Hurrah  I '  with  the  strength  of  unusual  lungs, 
to  greet  their  comrades. 

With  heads  bent  low,  like  charging  bison,  the  *  Duke's 
Own '  came  surging  up  almost  intact ;  the  colour-bearer  in  tie 
centre ;  officers  cool  and  martial  like  to  the  rear  of  their  com- 
panies, all  striding  audaciously  forward,  alert,  keen-eyed,  and 
prompt  as  tinder,  to  burst  into  a  white-heat  blaze  upon  the 


450 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


sliglitest  provocation.  Near  the  spot  where  the  dying  man,  who 
liad  been  drawn  out  to  the  open,  lay,  tlie  centre  of  the  regiment 
lialted. 

At  this  moment  the  rain  ceased,  and  the  sun  shone  forth 
into  the  fidl  power  of  his  departing  splendour. 

Eagerly  stepped  out  the  standard-bearer  at  the  word  of 
command,  and  high  and  triumphant,  in  all  its  silken  bravery, 
streamed  the  '  Wavy  Cross '  emblem  of  Britannia's  majesty  and 
power,  above  tlie  surrounding  world  of  mountains — an  omen  to 
all  l^^holders  that  the  tyrant  Emperor  had  been  humbled,  and 
tliat  his  proudest  stronghold,  Magdala,  had  passed  into  the 
strangers'  hands.  As  it  fluttered  and  rippled  in  mid  air,  the 
'Duke's  Own'  doffed  helmets,  and  simultaneously,  in  the 
acme  of  enthusiasm,  they  raised  their  voices  in  cheers,  which 
soimded  to  those  on  Islamgee,  500  feet  below,  like  the  deep  roar 
of  an  ocean's  tide.  The  cheers  were  recognised,  caught  up,  and 
flung  from  Magdala  to  Selasse,  thence  to  Fahla,  and  that  grey 
crag  sent  it  (jiiivt^ring  far  }>elow  ;  finally  the  British  camp  nearly 
two  miles  off  caught  the  sounds,  and  strengthened  the  universal 
"  Ifurrah  "  by  tlieir  own  exulx'rant  voices.  Strains  of  music  burst 
from  tlie  martial  ban^ls.  The  National  Anthem  of  England^ 
*  (rod  Save  Ihe  Queen,'  was  never  played  or  sung  with  greater 
efftrct  or  vigour  than  when  the  hoary  crags  of  Magdala  re- 
spondcid  to  its  notes  in  an  overwhelming  chorus  of  echoes ! 

A  few  unarm(»d  Abyssinians,  attracted  by  the  clamour  of 
music  and  shouting,  mustered  courage  enough  to  approach  the 
standard,  which  wa\  ed  so  gaily  in  the  mountain  gale ;  and,  on 
beholding  one  of  their  countrymen  on  the  ground,  they  bent 
over  the  body,  but  quickly  recoiled  with  fearful  dismay  on  their 
faces,  exclaiming  '  Todros  I  Todi'os  !' 

The  words  attracted  the  attention  of  every  one,  and  together 
they  strode  towards  the  body,  jostling  each  other  eagerly  in  the 
endeavour  to  obtain  a  glimpse  of  him  the  natives  styled  *  Todros, 
Negus,  Negashi  of  Itiopia  ! ' 

And  what  did  they  see  ?  The  body  of  a  native  seemingly 
half  famished ;  clad  in  coarse  upper  garments,  dingy  with  wear, 
and  ragged  with  tear,  covering  under  garments  of  clean  linen  I 

The  face  of  deep  brown  was  the  most  remarkable  one  in 
Abyssinia ;  it  bore  the  appearance  of  one  who  had  passed  " 


<JOlN0   IP  Ti>  ATTACK   MAO  OA  I. A. 


THE  DEAD  EMPEROR  DESCRIBED. 


451 


through  many  anxious  hours.  His  eyes,  now  overspread  with  a 
deathly  film,  gave  evidence  yet  of  the  piercing  power  for  which 
they  were  celebrated.  The  mouth  was  well  defined  and  thin- 
lipped.  The  lower  lip  seemed  well  adapted  to  express  scorn, 
and  a  trace  of  it  was  still  visible.  As  he  gasped  his  last^  two 
rows  of  whitest  teeth  were  disclosed.  Over  his  mouth  two 
strong  lines  arched  to  a  high  aquiline  nose.  The  nostrils 
expanded  widely  as  he  struggled  to  retain  the  breath  which  was 
rapidly  leaving  him.  The  face  was  broad,  high-cheek-boned, 
with  a  high,  prominent  forehead,  and  overhanging  eyebrows. 
The  hair  was  divided  into  three  large  plaits  extending  from  the 
forehead  to  the  back  of  the  neck,  which  latter  appeared  to  be  a 
very  tower  of  strength.  The  body  measured  five  feet  and  eight 
inches,  and  was  very  muscular  and  broad-chested.  There  was 
a  character  about  the  features  denoting  great  firmness  or 
obstinacy  mingled  with  ferocity;  but  perhaps  the  latter  idea  was 
suggested  upon  remembering  the  many  cruelties  ascribed  to  him. 
And  thus  was  it,  that  we  saw  the  remains  of  him  whom  men  called 
Theodorus,  Emperor  of  Abtssinia,  the  Descendant  oj?  Mbni- 
LEK ;  Son  of  Solomon,  King  of  Kings,  Lord  of  Earth,  Con- 
queror OF  Ethiopia,  Ebgenerator  of  Africa,  and  Saviour  of 
Jerusalem,  now  dying — dead  by  his  own  hand !  * 

Fitting  pimishment  was  it  that  the  red  right  hand,  which 
had  bereft  so  many  hapless  ones  of  their  lives,  should  have  de- 
prived that  of  its  outlawed  owner  I  Fitting  was  it  also  that  the 
banner  of  St.  George  should  first  shadow  his  body,  as  it  fiirst 
proclaimed  his  downfall ! 

The  Irish  soldiers  took  hold  of  his  legs,  and  roughly  dragged 
him  to  a  hammock,  where,  after  two  or  three  gasps,  he  breathed 
his  last. 

Curious  remarks  were  passed  upon  the  body  by  the  dense 
groups  which  surrounded  it.  One  man,  with  a  spice  of  Latin  in 
him,  uttered  sententiously,  *  Sic  semper  tyrannis,'  to  which  many 
a  one  responded  heartily  '  Amen  and  amen  I '    Another  Celtic 

*  At  the  post-mortem  examination  the  surgeons  found  that,  .excepting  a  slight 
flesh  wound  in  the  right  leg,  he  was  uninjured  by  foreign  missiles.  The  palate  was 
destroyed  and  the  roof  of  the  mouth  scorched,  and  a  hole  was  found  through  the 
back  of  the  head.  The  united  opinion  of  the  medical  authorities  was  that  a 
pistol  fired  in  the  mouth  had  caused  the  death. 


452 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


warrior  hoped  the  scoundrel  would  trouble  *  nobody  no  more ; ' 
and  another  with  some  regard  for  decency  covered  up  the  bared 
abdomen,  evened  the  nether  limbs,  and  folded  the  arms  upon 
the  breast. 

Larger  grew  the  crowds  around  the  body.  OflBcers  and 
privates  as  they  came  up  hastened  to  get  a  glimpse  of  it.  The 
released  captives  hurried  to  obtain  a  farewell  glance  at  their 
dead  captor,  and  when  they  recognised  him  all  doubts  as  to  his 
identification  were  at  an  end.  Theodore  had  been  fighting  in 
disguise,  knowing  that  bright  colours  attracted  England's 
marksmen.  The  Commander-in-Chief  with  his  staflF  rode  up  to 
view  the  corpse,  but  not  one  kind  word  of  sympathy  for  the 
dead  Emperor's  fate  was  uttered.  He  who  had  been  merciless 
to  others  was  not  deserving  of  sympathy. 

Not  until  the  last  moment,  when  on  the  threshold  of  certain 
defeat,  did  he  surrender  his  life.  Seeing  speedy  death  in  the 
levelled  muskets  of  the  advancing  soldiers,  he  quickly  retired 
behind  the  haystack,  and  with  the  revolver — the  Queen's  gift — 
into  his  mouth  the  Imperial  Suicide  had  fired,  and  died. 

The  advance  was  sounded,  and  the  regiments  with  arms 
aslope  filed  off"  in  columns  through  the  narrow  streets  of 
Magdala,  the  Commander-in-Chief  and  staflF  following. 
Passing  through  a  long  lane  flanked  on  each  side  by  store- 
houses with  conical  thatched  roofs,  they  came  to  a  large  open 
space  on  the  southern  side,  which  was  probably  used  by  the 
Emperor  as  a  parade  or  drill  ground. 

At  the  upper  extremity  of  this  open  area,  near  a  group  of 
black  tents,  were  seen  several  groups  of  armed  natives,  who 
fired  two  or  three  shots  as  they  perceived  the  soldiers.  The 
23rd  formed  line,  deploying  across  its  whole  \ridth,  and  opened 
fire  upon  them,  steadily  advancing  the  while.  Before  the 
determined  approach  of  the  soldiers  and  their  withering  fire, 
the  last  remnants  of  Theodore's  army  incontinently  fled  down 
the  cliflfs,  led  by  his  illegitimate  son  Dajatchmatch  lEasheshai. 

When  the  Irish  regiment  arrived  at  the  eastern  extremity, 
having  traversed  its  whole  length,  another  flag  was  raised  to 
announce  the  complete  capture  of  the  fortress ;  and  the  Prince 
with  his  flying  warriors  must  have  heard  the  glorious  cheers 
that  greeted  the  flag  as  it  was  waved,  as  well  as  the  martial 
strains  of  '  Bule  Britannia ; '  the  Gallas  on  the  alert  on  the 


WITHIN  MAGDALA. 


458 


opposite  mountains  of  the  Walla  Galla  country  must  have 
heard  it  also. 

When  Sir  Robert  Napier  appeared,  the  music  was  changed 
to '  See  the  Conquering  Hero  Comes and  other  rousing  cheers 
and  anthem  chants,  amid  mutual  congratulations,  closed  the 
Storming  of  Magdala. 


454 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THE  emperor's  nOUSEHOLD— LOOT — THE  GENTLEMEN  IN  BLACK — THE 
DEAD  TYRANT. 

After  the  important  incidents  recorded  in  the  last  chapter 
the  soldiers  strayed  away  from  their  respective  regiment^s  by 
twos  and  threes,  and  commenced  an  assiduous  search  for  loot. 
They  moved  off  slyly  in  squads  or  singly,  peering  into  every 
house,  overturning  household  furniture,  and  recklessly  des- 
tropng  the  Lares  and  Penates  of  the  departed  garrison. 

In  their  wanderings  the  soldiers  came  to  the  Imperial  resi- 
dence— a  bam-like  dwelling,  two  storied — very  strong,  and 
thatched  with  straw.  Close  by  were  the  Imperial  kitchens, 
the  harems,  the  stables,  the  store-houses,  and  the  great  prison, 
which  enclosed  a  quadrangular  area. 

In  the  open  space  a  multitude  of  females  were  discovered 
gathered  together.  These  females  composed  the  women  of  the 
Emperor's  household.  Surrounded  by  the  ladies  of  her  court, 
apparelled  and  non-apparelled,  was  found  the  Empress  Etegie 
Torenachie — daughter  of  Prince  Ubie  of  Samen  and  Tigre— 
a  nut-brown  lady  of  six-and-twenty,  or  thereabouts,  the  loveliest 
of  all,  but  pale  and  consumptive-looking.  Her  character, 
bruited  abroad  already  by  the  captives,  caused  the  soldiers  when 
they  perceived  her  to  pay  her  every  respect.  For  a  long  time — 
at  least  so  long  as  Theodore  was  sober — the  Empress  was  as  a 
guardian  angel  to  him ;  advising  him  like  the  '  Good  Book,'  as 
a  soldier  pertinently  expressed  it ;  watchful  and  assiduous  in 
his  interest ;  brave  and  courageous  as  her  husband,  when  lier 
duty  called  her  attributes  forth.  While  Theodore  was  at  Debra 
Tabor,  preparing  for  his  expedition  to  Magdala,  she  resided 
at  the  latter  fortress.    Twice  during  the  time  it  was  besieged 


'LIQUOEIlfG  UP'  AFTER  THE  CAPTURE. 


455 


by  that  mythical  being,  King  Menilek  of  Shoa,  with  an  army 
of  40,000  (perhaps  an  extravagant  number),  the  chiefs  and 
elders  mshed  to  surrender  the  place;  but  the  Empress  was 
ubiquitous,  and  untiring  in  her  devoirs  to  her  Imperial  husband ; 
and  Menilek's  demonstrations  were  set  at  naughty  and  evil 
coimsels  were  confuted. 

Playing  about  her  maidens,  was  the  heir-apparent  to  the 
throne  of  Ethiopia — ^Prince  Ala  Mayu — a  sturdy,  intelligent 
little  boy  of  eight  years  old.  So  soon  as  Sir  Robert  Napiei* 
was  made  aware  of  their  presence  in  the  fortress.  Captain 
Speedy  received  orders  from  him  to  take  them  in  charge  and 
pay  them  every  attention. 

As  the  soldiers  perambulated  about,  a  party  of  them 
stumbled  upon  the  store-house,  where  scores  of  twenty-gallon 
jars  were  found  brimful  of  tej  of  exquisite  flavour ;  and  the 
joyful  cries  which  they  uttered  brought  down  fifties  of  others 
to  join  in  the  '  liquoring  up.' 

Over  all  Magdala  were  scattered  different  kinds  of  military 
mobs :  mob  appropriative,  mob  reckless,  mob  bibulous,  mob 
demoralised,  mob  humane,  mob  decently  respectable,  menadic 
mob,  and  prisoner  mob.  To  describe  all  these  mobs  would,  of 
course,  be  tedious,  so  I  shall  only  touch  upon  those  most  in- 
teresting. 

The  mob  bibulous  was  gathered  in  the  Aulic  quarters,  pre- 
pared to  quaff  the  grateful  beverage  bountifully  provided  by 
his  Majesty  for  his  own  and  harem's  necessities.  Several  jars 
of  very  line  arrachi,  as  strong  as  brandy,  were  found,  and  of 
coiurse  eagerly  seized  and  tasted  by  men  who  were  connoisseurs 
in  the  business  of  tasting  liquor.  They  tasted  and  tasted  again 
and  again ;  and,  as  might  be  expected,  the  effects  of  the  copious 
drinks  taken  by  the  men  became  distinctly  visible  in  a  very 
short  time ;  but  not  to  any  extravagant  extent,  as  military  law 
is  rather  strict  in  the  English  army,  and  severe  penalties  are 
always  awarded  to  dnmkenness. 

Another  party  of  soldiers,  diving  into  the  barn-like  dwelling 
yclept  Imperial  Palace,  perceived  innumerable  articles  of  furni- 
ture strewn  about.  One  thing  upon  another  the  men  picked 
up  ;  then,  examining  the  article,  pocketed  it  or  threw  it  down ; 
to  be  picked  up,  examined,  and  pocketed  or  thrown  away  by 
others  coming  after  them.    Little  of  the  whole  was  worth 


456 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA, 


carrying  away  by  soldiers  who  would  be  obliged  to  convey 
l^^ggage  on  their  backs  hundreds  of  miles. 

Opposite  the  Palace  was  the  Penitentiary  of  Magdala— a 
strong  double-storied  dwelling — from  whence  cries  were  heard. 
With  lengthy  leaps — quickened,  no  doubt,  by  a  drop  or  two  or 
three  of  arrachi — a  score  of  soldiers  sprang  at  the  doors,  and  in 
a  twinkling  or  so  battered  them  down.  As  the  rays  of  the 
declining  sun  fell  slantingly  inwards,  a  chamber  of  horrors  was 
revealed ! 

The  long  disused  room  was  crowded  to  overflowing  with 
native  prisoners.  Some  of  them  were  of  high  rank  in  the 
diflferent  provinces.  Princes,  Generals,  peasants  stood  in  ex- 
pectant and  surprised  groups,  heavily  manacled  and  fettered. 
Appalled  for  a  moment,  the  soldiers,  no  less  bewildered  than 
the  prisoners,  gazed  at  the  scene.  They  were  recalled  to  their 
duty  by  a  mute  appeal  to  their  sympathies — an  exhibition  of 
manacled  limbs.  With  desperate  haste  the  soldiers  tore  their 
fetters  and  manacles  oflF,  and  with  hearts  full  of  gratitude  the 
people  stepped  out  into  the  glad  sunlight,  once  more  free! 

Many  of  them  were  so  weak  they  could  scarcely  stand.  For 
several  days  they  had  cowered  in  horrible  suspense  in  the  loath- 
some dungeon,  hoping  against  hope,  longing  passionately  for 
the  end,  while  expectant  that  the  great  day  of  deliverance  was 
at  hand.  It  was  so  suggested  to  them  through  hearing  bye 
conversations  between  jailors,  who,  ignorant  of  the  strength  of 
the  British  anny,  dubious  of  the  result,  yet  gossiped  about  it 
as  foolish  gossips  generally  do.  Prisoners  of  all  classes  ap- 
proached and  kissed  the  hands  of  the  soldiers. 

Could  gratitude  be  better  expressed?  Could  any  words 
equal  this  silent  yet  touching  conduct?  The  glad  mass 
wended  their  separate  ways  as  best  they  could,  gathering 
strength  as  they  inhaled  the  fresh  breezes.  According  to  their 
usual  custom  upon  a  joyful  event,  they  clapped  their  hands, 
quaveringly  chanted  a  welcome  anthem,  and  lifted  on  high 
their  voices  in  the  joyous  '  Li-li-li,'  in  honour  of  the  Feringhee 
Liberators. 

Some  provisions  found  in  the  store-rooms  were  distributed 
amongst  the  people,  and  they  were  then  ushered  out  of  the  gates. 

These  scenes  are  really  what  passed  around  the  Aulic  por- 
tions of  the  fortress.    But  the  tabular  surface  of  this  mountain 


THE  GENTLEMEN  IN  BLACK! 


457 


plateau  contained  other  sights,  though  not  as  virtuous,  yet  as 
interesting.  There  were  an  endless  variety  of  dwellings — 
silken  and  canvas  tents,  Koord-like  domiciles,  cotes,  and  such 
like;  and  each  of  these  had  around  it  a  knot  of  men  com- 
menting, gossiping,  pocketing,  analysing,  breaking  into  pieces, 
or  tearing  into  shreds,  whatever  thing  their  vision  or  fancy 
lit  upon. 

Upon  approaching  nearer  I  saw,  not  a  Bedlam  broken  loose, 
but  an  extempore  pandemonium  enacted  round  the  Koord 
tentfi,  which  I  learnt,  to  my  astonishment,  were  the  treasure- 
tents.  The  ground  was  strewn  with  an  abundance  of  seemingly 
costly  things.  The  glitter  certainly  could  not  bfe  surpassed, 
were  all  the  treasures  of  Windsor  Castle  and  the  Tuileries 
exposed  on  their  velvet  lawns,  side  by  side,  by  what  were 
here.  If  all  that  glittered  among  these  tons  of  treasure  were 
gold,  the  English  Government  need  not  have  entertained  much 
concern  about  the  cost  of  the  expedition.  But  taking  up  a 
shining  candlestick — massive  and  curiously  gotten  up — I  per- 
ceived the  worthlessness  of  the  material ;  and  though  there 
were  a  very  considerable  number  of  wares  manufactured  out  of 
the  precious  metal,  the  major  part  of  them  were  gilt. 

Over  these  trivialities  the  people  sprawled  and  cuffed ;  and 
prominent  amongst  them,  with  their  voices  raised  to  an  unplea- 
santly high  pitch,  and  their  coat-tails  fluttering  in  the  breeze, 
were  the  gentlemen  in  black  coats,  endeavouring  to  pack  off  the 
silken  marquees.  They  would  for  ever  have  remained  immen- 
tioned  by  me,  had  they  not  sought  unenviable  notoriety  by  their 
unseemly  conduct  and  screeching  voices  of  aroused  avarice. 
These  gentlemen  in  black,  with  fluttering  coat-tails — hear  it, 
oh,  ye  philanthropists  I — were  the  captives  1  Not  all  of  them, 
but  several  of  them.  Some  of  the  British  subjects;  three 
missionaries;  the  Prussian,  German,  and  Bussian  mechanics. 

Several  of  these  gentlemen  had  secured  this  loot  long 
before  the  soldiers  had  arrived.  It  lay  in  piles  at  their  feet,  or 
had  been  already  spirited  away  imder  the  envious  coat-tails. 
It  was  reported  that  one  of  these  wretches,  who  had  neither  the 
fear  of  God  nor  of  the  devil  before  his  unholy  eyes,  had  the 
audacity  to  break  open  the  coflSn  of  the  most  holy  Abuna,  and 
snatch  from  the  neck 'of  the  putrid  corpse  a  diamond  cross 
worth  many  thousand  dollars. 


458 


C003(LiSSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


The  fame  of  the  treasures  brought  new  comers  by  the  hun- 
dred, and  General  Sir  Robert  Napier,  Generals  Staveley, 
Wilby,  Snyder,  and  their  respective  staffs,  came  to  visit  them ; 
and  these  gentlemen,  together  with  the  members  of  tlie  press 
— to  the  honour  of  the  Fourth  Estate  be  it  said — were  the 
only  ones  exempt  from  the  picking  and  poc)s:eting  mania  which 
had  taken  possession  of  all  heroes. 

To  enumerate  even  the .  one-tenth  of  the  articles  scattered 
about  would  be  a  tiisk  as  tiresome  as  it  would  be  fruitless.  In 
one  of  the  tents  was  found  the  Imperial  standard  of  Ethiopia— 
a  lion  rampant,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,Vorked  in  variegated 
colours.  In  another  was  found  the  Imperial  seal,  with  the 
same  distinctive  figure  of  a  lion  engraved  on  it.  A  chalioe,  of 
pure  gold,  was  secured  by  Mr.  Holmes,  on  which  was  engraved 
in  ancient  Ethiopic  : — 

THE  CHALICE  OP 
KINO  ADAM  LEGUD  CALLED  GAZOO 
THE  SOX  OF 
QUEEN  BEHAN  MOGUSSA 
PRH8ENTED  TO  K08KWAN  SANCTUARY  GONDAR 
MAY  MY  BODY  AND  SOUL  BE  PURIFIED 

15th  Centuxy. 

The  Abuna's  mitre,  300  years  old,  of  pme  gold,  probably 
weighing  six  or  seven  pounds  troy  weight ;  four  royal  crowns, 
two  of  which  were  very  tine  specimens  of  workmanship,  and 
worth  a  round  smn  of  money  ;  were  worthy  tilings  to  be  placed 
in  a  niche  of  the  Britisli  iluseum.  A  small  escritoire,  richly 
ornamented  witli  motlier  of  pearl,  was  found  also,  full  of  com- 
plimentary letters  from  European  sovereigns,  and  state  papers ; 
besides  various  shields  of  exquisite  beauty.  There  were  also  an 
infinite  variety  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass  crosses,  and 
censers,  some  of  extremely  elegant  design ;  golden  and  silver 
pots,  kettles,  dishes,  pans  ;  cups  of  miscellaneous  descriptions ; 
richly  chased  goblets,  of  the  precious  metal ;  Bohemian  glasses, 
Sevres  china,  and  Staflfordsliire  pottery;  wine  of  Champagne, 
Burgiuidy,  Greece,  Spain,  and  Jerusalem;  bottles  of  Jordan 
water ;  jars  of  arrachi  and  tej ;  chests  full  of  ornamental 
frippery ;  tents  of  rose,  purple,  lilac,  and  white  silk  ;  carpets 
of  Persia,  of  Uschak,  Broussa,  Kidderminster,  and  Lyons; 
robes  of  fiu:;  war  capes  of  lion,  leopard,  and  wolf  skins; 


THE  LOOT. 


459 


saddles,  magnificently  decorated  with  filigree  gold  and  silver ; 
numerous  shields  covered  with  silver  plates ;  state  umbrellas 
of  gorgeous  hues,  adorned  with  all  the  barbaric  magnificence 
that  the  genius  of  Bejemder  and  Gondar  could  fashion ;  swords 
and  claymores;  rapiers,  scimetars,  yataghans,  tulwars,  and 
bilboes ;  daggers  of  Persia,  of  Damascus,  and  of  Ind,  in  scab- 
bards of  crimson  morocco  and  purple  velvet,  studded  with 
golden  buttons;  heaps  of  parchment  royally  illuminated; 
stacks  of  Amharic  Bibles ;  missals,  and  numberless  albums ; 
ambrotypes  and  photographs  of  English,  American,  French, 
and  Italian  scenery;  bureaus,  and  desks  of  cunning  make. 
Over  a  space  growing  more  and  more  extended,  the  thousand 
articles  were  iBcattered  in  infinite  bewilderment  and  confusion 
imtil  they  dotted  the  whole  surface  of  the  rocky  citadel, 
the  slopes  of  the  hill,  and  the  entire  road  to  camp  two  miles 
off! 

From  this  scene  I  strolled  away  to  the  northern  gate,  to 
where  the  dead  body  of  the  late  Master  of  Magdala  lay,  on  his 
canvas  stretcher.  I  found  another  mob — mob  indiscriminate 
— of  oflBcers  and  men,  rudely  jostling  each  other  in  the  endea- 
vour to  get  possession  of  a  small  piece  of  Theodore's  blood- 
stained shirt. 

No  guard  was  placed  over  the  body  until  it  was  naked,  nor  was 
the  slightest  respect  shown  it.  Extended  on  its  hanmiock,  it 
lay  subjected  to  the  taunts  and  the  jests  of  the  brutal-minded. 
An  oflBcer,  seeing  it  in  this  condition,  informed  Sir  Kobert 
Napier  of  the  fact,  who  at  once  gave  orders  that  it  should  be 
dressed  and  prepared  for  interment  on  the  morrow. 

From  this  place  I  went  to  examine  the  dead  bodies  of  the 
faithful  followers  who  had  died  at  their  posts,  defending  to  the 
last  their  strange  master,  who  had  elements  in  his  composition 
that,  surrounded  by  happier  circumstances,  might  have  made 
him  a  loved,  revered,  and  renowned  monarch.  The  dead  chiefs 
were  doubled  in  all  postures,  but  with  singularly  serene  coun- 
tenances. Their  wounds  were  many  and  ghastly.  The  head 
chiefs  were  seven  in  number,  and  they  lay  close  to  the  barbacan 
which  they  had  so  determinedly  contested.  Their  garments  of 
silk  and  brocade  were  steeped  in  their  life-blood,  and  the  rocks 
around  them  were  marked  with  the  same  evidences  of  the 
struggle. 


460 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Along  the  lower  revetment  which  flanked  in  parabolic 
curves  the  barbacan,  were  nearly  a  dozen  warriors,  some  with 
brains  imroofed  and  nether  limbs  sheared,  and  others  bearing 
frightful  wounds.  Near  the  upper  barrier  were  thirteen  dead 
natives,  and  dotting  the  interior  of  Magdala  were  perhaps  a 
dozen  more. 

The  barrier  that  defended  the  ingress  to  the  fortress,  though 
rudely  constructed,  was  as  well  designed  as  the  best  military 
engineer  of  Europe  or  America  could  have  done  it ;  that  is,  of 
course,  taking  into  consideration  that  it  must  be  bmlt  with  the 
tools  and  materials  which  Theodore  used.  The  passage  to  it 
ran  below  two  walls  of  sheer  basalt  rock,  rising  from  15  feet  at 
the  embouchure  to  30  feet  over  the  barrier.  The  gate  was 
6  feet  high,  constructed  of  solid  wood,  composed  of  two  upright 
stiles  and  two  horizontal  rails,  strengthened  by  diagonal  braces 
on  each  side  of  the  stiles.  It  opened  internally,  and  was 
fastened  by  a  bar  of  wood  running  from  post  to  post  and  from 
wall  to  wall.    It  was  8  feet  wide  at  the  clear. 

In  the  interior  of  the  passage  were  built  two  or  three  short 
stone  traverses,  and  along  the  sunmiit  of  each  basalt  wall  was 
erected  an  abattis. 

Taken  altogether,  it  was  a  very  defensible  place,  and  one 
12-pounder  would  have  rendered  it  impassable ;  but  Theodore 
had  planted  his  cannon  upon  Fahla  and  Selasse,  and,  defeated 
at  Aroje,  he  had  delayed  their  removal  to  Magdala  because 
for  two  days  he  was  not  without  hope  that  peace  was  being 
negotiated  by  his  dear  Armenian  friend  Rassam.  When  finally 
he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  peace  was  impossible,  he  had 
commenced  their  removal  on  the  third  morning ;  but,  as  I  have 
described  already,  he  was  surprised  in  the  act  by  Speedy  and 
Loch  in  command  of  the  3rd  Cavalry. 

The  number  of  dead,  as  described  variously,  amounted  to 
about  sixty  natives,  and  double  that  number  wounded.  The 
British  loss  was  seventeen  wounded,  none  mortally.  The 
bombardment  of  the  fortress  continued  for  over  two  hours,  and 
it  is  wonderful  that,  out  of  the  4,000  people  which  inhabited 
it,  innocent  lives  were  not  sacrificed.  But  out  of  the 
wounded  of  Aroje  battle  there  were  himdreds  who  had  taken 
shelter  in  the  straw  cotes  on  Islamgee.  Every  alternate  house 
was  a  hospital,  housing  one  or  more  meagre  yrretches. 


THE  MILITANT  CURRENT  OF  ENGLAND  AND  INDU.  461 


The  rockets  had  wrought  utter  desolation  among  some  of 
the  villages  below  Islamgee,  eastward.  One  rocket  in  particular 
diverged  widely  from  its  intended  mark,  and  darted  through 
one  of  these  combustible  houses,  setting  fire  to  it  instantly,  and 
the  wind  fanned  it  until  it  reduced  the  whole  group  of  villages 
in  a  short  time  to  ashes. 

Bardel,  the  French  professor,  the  only  European  who  had 
not  arrived  at  camp  with  the  others,  because  he  was  sick  with 
fever  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  was  found  in  high  delirium, 
in  a  little  booth  at  the  Selasse  end  of  Islamgee,  surrounded  by 
offal  and  filth,  and  covered  with  verminous  rags.  He  was  taken 
so  soon  as  found  to  the  military  hospital,  where  he  received 
every  attention,  and  finally,  after  a  week's  severe  illness,  he 
recovered  his  health. 

All  that  I  have  related  took  but  three  hours.  It  was 
optional  with  civilians  either  to  remain  upon  Magdala  and 
rough  the  night  out  in  some  hut,  or  proceed  to  the  camp  below 
Fahla,  two  miles  off;  but,  after  an  examination  of  several  huts, 
we  decided  to  proceed  to  camp. 

On  Islamgee  we  met  the  camp  followers  and  the  equipage 
of  glorious  war  rolling  slowly  upward  to  the  soldiers  encamped 
on  the  summit  of  Magdala — mules  and  horses,  dhoolies  and 
stretchers,  in  never-ending  continuity.  Below  Islamgee  we 
met  the  elephants  with  their  enormous  packs  on  their  backs, 
looking  like  phantoms  in  the  dark ;  and  in  the  friendly  shadows 
of  the  night  the  flitting  forms  of  the  Magdala  fugitives  press- 
ing forward  to  the  valley  of  Aroje,  without  regard  to  the 
militant  current  of  England  and  India. 

Once  past  Fahla,  we  stumbled  down  the  slope  with  reckless 
force,  imtil  we  came  in  full  view  of  the  camp  of  the  Abyssinians 
— who  left  Fahla  and  Selasse  early  in  the  morning — aU  aglow 
with  fires.  Far  away  in  the  eastern  horizon  a  long  belt  of  flame 
was  visible — a  warning  beacon  to  native  stragglers;  for  there 
the  versute  and  ferocious  Grallas  looked  wid#*eyed  and  won- 
dering upon  the  sea  of  fire  about  our  camp. 

We  passed  right  through  the  Abyssinian  camp,  which  was 
pitched  on  the  plain,  where  the  battle  of  Aroje  first  began — 
around  the  graves  of  hundreds  of  their  people — and  half  a  mile 
beyond  was  our  own.  On  approaching  it  we  heard  bacchanalian 
songs,  and  shouts  for  lost  friends,  and  a  combination  of  novel 


462 


GOOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


sounds.  While  travelling  through,  at  the  imminent  risk  of 
crushing  some  one  to  death  under  our  horses'  feet,  we  came 
suddenly  upon  the  white  snowy  tents,  rearing  themselves  in 
ghostly  silence  from  the  ground,  around  which  we  saw  whole 
multitudes,  who,  adopting  the  bivouac,  had  stretched  them- 
selves on  the  earth  and  were  already  deep  in  slumber,  dream- 
ing, no  doubt,  of  acknowledgments  by  grateful  England  of  their 
conduct  at  the  fall  of  Magdala  I 


INTBEMENT  OF  THEODORE. 


463 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

INTERMENT  OF  THEODORE — THE  RIVAL  QUEENS — FAREWELL  TO  MAGDALA — 
GENERAL  NAPIER's  ORDER— THE  AUCTION  OF  LOOT — OFFICIAL  REPORTS. 

Before  quitting  the  neighbourhood  of  Magdala  there  were 
various  things  to  be  performed:  Theodore's  body  had  to  be 
interred  ;  his  Empress  was  to  be  consoled ;  the  young  Prince's 
fate  had  to  be  decided  ;  the  himgry  hordes  of  Gallas,  called  into 
unpleasant  activity,  and  now  loud-mouthed  for  prey,  had  to 
receive  their  quietus;  the  Abyssinian  fugitives  had  to  be 
escorted  across  the  Bechilo;  the  revetments,  barbacans,  and 
watch-towers,  palace,  prison,  and  peasant  houses,  had  to  be 
demolished ;  and,  lastly,  the  triple  mountain  citadels  had  to  be 
delivered  over  to  some  responsible  authority. 

The  first  day  was  occupied  in  marching  the  victorious  troops 
back  to  camp,  ynth  the  exception  of  a  regiment  which  was  left 
as  garrison  ;  in  burying  the  dead  chiefs  who  fell  within  Mag- 
dala ;  in  distributing  provisions  to  the  homeless  Abyssinians — 
numbering  over  30,000 — who  were  camped  a  bullet's  flight 
from  us. 

The  Imperial  relict's  wislies  concerning  the  interment  of 
her  husband  were  ascertained  before  Sir  Robert  Napier  decided 
upon  Theodore's  funeral.  She  replied  that  she  was  willing 
that  the  Commander-in-Chief  might  do  as  he  felt  disposed, 
but  hoped  the  prayers  of  his  own  church  might  be  read  over 
him  by  his  favourite  chaplain.  To  this  the  General  made  no 
objection,  and  accordingly  directed  a  party  to  decently  swathe 
the  body  in  silken  cerements  preparatory  to  burial.  That 
task  done,  the  body  was  extended  on  a  rough  bier,  and  conveyed 
to  the  church  wherein  Sir  Robert  Napier  had  directed  he  should 
be  biuried.    A  shallow  grave  had  been  dug  in  the  centre  of  the 


462 


COOMASSIfi  AND  HAGDALA. 


sounds.  While  travelling  through,  at  the  imminent  risk  of 
crushing  some  one  to  death  under  our  horses*  feet,  we  came 
suddenly  upon  the  white  snowy  tents,  rearing  themselves  in 
ghostly  silence  from  the  ground,  around  which  we  saw  whole 
multitudes,  who,  adopting  the  bivouac,  had  stretched  them- 
selves on  the  earth  and  were  already  deep  in  slumber,  dream- 
ing, no  doubt,  of  acknowledgments  by  grateful  England  of  their 
conduct  at  the  fall  of  Magdala  I 


INTBEMENT  OF  THEODORE. 


463 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

INTERMENT  OF  THEODOBB — THE  RIVAL  QUEENS — PAREWELL  TO  MAGDALA — 
GENERAL  NAPIER'S  ORDER — THE  AUCTION  OP  LOOT— OPPICIAL  REPORTS. 

Before  quitting  the  neighbourhood  of  Magdala  there  were 
various  things  to  be  performed:  Theodore's  body  had  to  be 
interred  ;  his  Empress  was  to  be  consoled  ;  the  young  Prince's 
fate  had  to  be  decided  ;  the  himgry  hordes  of  Gallas,  called  into 
unpleasant  activity,  and  now  loud-mouthed  for  prey,  had  to 
receive  their  quietus;  the  Abyssinian  fugitives  had  to  be 
escorted  across  the  Bechilo;  the  revetments,  barbacans,  and 
watch-towers,  palace,  prison,  and  peasant  houses,  had  to  be 
demolished ;  and,  lastly,  the  triple  mountain  citadels  had  to  be 
delivered  over  to  some  responsible  authority. 

The  first  day  was  occupied  in  marching  the  victorious  troops 
back  to  camp,  with  the  exception  of  a  regiment  which  was  left 
as  garrison  ;  in  burying  the  dead  chiefs  who  fell  within  Mag- 
dala ;  in  distributing  provisions  to  the  homeless  Abyssinians — 
nimibering  over  30,000 — who  were  camped  a  bullet's  flight 
from  us. 

The  Imperial  relict's  wishes  concerning  the  interment  of 
her  husband  were  ascertained  before  Sir  Robert  Napier  decided 
upon  Theodore's  funeral.  She  replied  that  she  was  willing 
that  the  Commander-in-Chief  might  do  as  he  felt  disposed, 
but  hoped  the  prayers  of  his  own  church  might  be  read  over 
him  by  his  favourite  chaplain.  To  this  the  Greneral  made  no 
objection,  and  accordingly  directed  a  party  to  decently  swathe 
the  body  in  silken  cerements  preparatory  to  burial.  That 
task  done,  the  body  was  extended  on  a  rough  bier,  and  conveyed 
to  the  church  wherein  Sir  Robert  Napier  had  directed  he  should 
be  buried.   A  shallow  grave  had  been  dug  in  the  centre  of  the 


464  COOMASSIE  ANU  MAGDALA. 

buflding.  The  chaplain — an  old  decrepit  monk — was  called 
in  and  yeqiiested  to  read  prayers  over  the  body.  Apparently 
very  distasteful  was  the  task,  for  he  used  exceeding  haste  in  its 
performance.  The  body  was  then  lowered  by  two  stout  soldiers 
into  the  grave ;  the  monk  took  and  scattered  a  handful  of  soil 
over  it ;  shovels  deftly  handled  rattled  the  clods  over  the  coffin 
until  it  was  hidden  well  out  of  sight. 

A  messenger  was  despatched  that  day  to  Wagshum  Gobazye, 
proffering  him  Magdala.  The  General  received  an  answer  on 
the  third  morning  from  that  wily  prince  that  he  did  not  want 
it ;  that  he  had  been  smart  enough  to  keep  out  of  Magdala 
while  Theodore  was  alive,  and  now  that  he  was  dead  he  did  not 
care  to  make  himself  a  voluntary  prisoner  in  it,  as  he  would  be, 
he  thought,  surrounded  as  the  Bechilo  valley  was  by  the 
Galla  forces.  He  added,  moreover,  that  if  Sir  Robert  would  be 
kind  enough  to  present  him  with  Theodore's  cannon,  as  well 
as  the  fortress,  he  might  think  better  of  the  gift,  as  he  would 
then  be  furnished  with  the  means  for  its  defence. 

So  reasoned  the  Wagshum  in  his  epistolary  correspondence 
with  the  British  General.  Gobazye  was  distinguished  for  nothing 
else  than  masterly  retreats,  or  acting  the  part  of  a  detective  from 
a  distance,  always  from  safe  positions.  During  two  months  he 
kept  himself  engaged  in  viewing  Theodore's  camp  from  some 
inaccessible  peak  or  another,  and  the  last  movement  on  the  part 
of  the  Emperor  was  sufficient  to  send  the  bombastic  Wagshum 
winging  a  precipitate  flight  to  furthest  regions.  Napier  could 
not  see  the  benefit  accruing  to  him  or  to  the  country  by  a 
change  of  masters.  Wagshum  Gobazye  was  more  unprincipled 
than  Theodore,  and  but  a  trifle  less  cruel,  so  neither  Magdala 
nor  cannon  was  given  to  him. 

On  the  second  day  the  two  rival  queens,  Walkeit  and 
Mastee\'at,  came  forward  as  candidates  for  Alagdala,  \mder  the 
ciceroneship  of  Meer  Akbar  Ali,  who  had  been  despatched  to 
evoke  their  aid  in  hemming  Theodore  in.  Masteevat,  the 
younger  of  thtf'two — fat,  fair,  and  forty — was  preferred  by  Sir 
Robert.  During  her  stay  in  the  British  camp  she  was  received 
with  all  due  honours,  and  apportioned  a  silken  tent  as  a  resi- 
dence. She  and  her  little  son,  a  boy  of  six,  very  handsome,  of 
the  colour  of  a  Spaniard,  were  arrayed  in  the  most  gorgeous 
finery  that  native  genius  could  manufacture. 


HER  MAJESTY  QUEEN  MASTEEVAT.  466 

The  Generars  cooks  had  their  culinary  knowledge  taxed  to 
the  utmost  to  provide  dainties  for  the  Royal  family ;  and  the 
Queen,  nothing  loth  to  show  her  appreciation  of  each  talent 
and  skill  in  the  cuisvne,  ate  like  a  gourmande  of  each  and  every 
article,  never  deigning  to  examine  the  materials,  but  disposing  of 
what  came  before  her,  without  regard  to  the  horrified  looks  of 
the  Political  Secretary — pudding  before  beef,  blancmange  with 
potatoes,  drinking  coflfee  before  finishing  her  Mcandeau, 
emitting  labial  smacks  like  pistol  cracks  when  a  more  savoury 
dish  than  common  pleased  her  palate. 

Her  llajesty  often  vented  her  satisfaction  by  hearty,  bois- 
terous guffaws,  and  proceeded  deliberately  to  wipe  her  unctuous 
mouth  with  the  tail  end  of  her  turban,  for  which  she  specially 
untied  it ;  while  a  tawny-faced  Hebe,  with  the  bust  and  form 
of  a  Venus,  brought  her  a  horn  of  tej  strongly  mixed  with  arrachi 
(her  usual  quantum  being  a  quart),  which  she  quaffed  with 
infinite  gusto,  looking  more  imposing  after  it  than  before. 

Some  lago  of  an  oflScer,  possessed  of  a  tongue  that  would 

charm  the  d  1,  managed  to  persuade  the  Queen  to  sit  for  her 

portrait ;  and  after  three  or  foiu:  trials,  during  which  she  looked 
awry  and  unnatural,  a  very  good  one  was  taken,  and  copies  of 
the  same  have  been  sent  to  all  the  Governments  of  Europe,  as 
well  as  to  the  United  States. 

The  third  day  was  employed  in  destroying  the  cannon  of  . 
Theodore,  thirty-three  in  number. 

All  this  time  we  were  suffering  severely  from  want  of  water 
and  scarcity  of  pro\asions.  However,  the  hearts  of  all  were 
gladdened  on  the  fourth  morning  at  the  gladsome  tidings  that 
the  army  would  leave  the  Bechilo  valley  for  Dalanta  plateau  on 
the  next  day. 

On  the  fourth  morning  after  the  fall  of  Magdala,  the 
Abyssinians,  to  the  number  of  30,000,  commenced  their  march 
for  Dalanta.  The  Gallas,  it  seems,  were  aware  of  the  fiujt ;  for 
like  vultures,  keen-eyed,  and  eager  for  the  prey,  they  hovered 
on  their  flanks  and  rear,  sometimes  dashing  boldly  into  the 
main  body,  and  capturing  many  prisoners. 

At  3  P.M.  I  rode  up  along  with  several  others  to  see  the  last 
of  the  fortress.  Two  hours  afterwards,  every  living  soul  being 
driven  out  by  the  Koyal  Engineers,  those  deputed  for  the  task 
of  destruction  began  their  work.    The  Kafurbar,  or  southern 

H  H 


466 


COOMASSIE  AND  HAGDALA. 


gate,  was  blown  up  first ;  then  the  eastern  towers  and  magazines ; 
and,  as  the  wind  was  from  the  eastward,  fire  was  set  to  the 
houses  at  the  extreme  eastern  end  of  the  fortress,  and,  retro- 
grading quickly,  the  nimble  Engineers  touched  each  hoose  with 
their  fiery  wands.  The  spectators  made  haste  to  secure  good 
positions,  from  whence  the  mighty  conflagration,  soon  destined 
to  appear,  could  be  seen  to  advantage  ;  and  the  best  place  they 
could  select  was  the  southern  end  of  Selasse,  which  looked  into 
Magdala  from  a  distance  of  1,000  yards. 

The  easterly  wind  gradually  grew  stronger,  fanning  the 
incipient  tongues  of  flame  visible  on  the  roofs  of  houses  until 
they  grew  larger  under  the  skilful  nursing,  and  finally  sprang 
aloft  in  crimson  jets,  darting  upward  and  then  circling  round 
on  their  own  centres  as  tlie  breeze  played  with  them.  A 
steady  puff  of  wind  levelled  the  flaming  tongues  in  a  red 
wave,  and  the  jets  became  united  into  an  igneous  lake  1 

The  heat  became  more  and  more  intense;  loaded  pistols 
and  gims,  and  shells  thrown  in  by  the  British  batteries,  but 
which  had  not  been  discharged,  exploded  with  deafening 
reports,  and  projectiles  whistled  ominously  near  us.  Three 
thousand  houses^  and  a  million  of  combustible  things,  were 
burning.  Not  one  house  could  have  escaped  destruction  in  the 
mighty  el)b  and  flow  of  that  deluge  of  fire. 

Cheerily  sounded  the  bugle,  merrily  rattled  the  drum, 
loudly  piped  the  fife,  gaily  sang  the  birds,  brightly  dawned 
the  day  on  the  welcome  morning  of  April  18,  1868. 

We  had  all  seen  the  drama  of  the  Abyssinian  Campaign 
enacted.  On  this  day  we  turned  our  faces  northward  for  the 
homeward  march. 

At  8  A^M.  the  vanguard  defiled  down  the  slope  of  the  plain 
of  Fahla  towards  the  Aroje  ravine  and  the  Bechilo.  The 
baggage  trains  were  then  started,  and  by  10  a.m.  the  road  was 
clear  for  the  army. 

The  regiments  were  drawn  up  as  if  on  parade — Infantry, 
Cavalry,  Artillery,  Engineers,  Sappers  and  Miners,  in  order.  As 
the  chief  mounted  his  horse  the  order  '  March ! '  was  heard,  and 
preceded  by  its  band  the  45th  Regiment,  with  sloped  muskets, 
trod  proudly  down  the  slope  to  mai-tial  tunes  ;  then  the  Native 
Indian  regiments,  horse  and  foot ;  then  the  Artillery  and 


KJilffiWELL  TO  MAODALA. 


467 


Naval  Brigade ;  and  lastly  went  the  '  Duke  of  Wellington's 
Own.'  As  the  most  rearward  of  the  regiment  took  up  the  step 
and  got  firmly  under  way,  cheer  after  cheer  burst  forth  from 
over  six  thousand  voices,  which  went  reverberating  among 
the  deserted  and  desolate  heights,  until  the  Crallas,  on  the 
qui  vive  ten  miles  oflF,  were  made  aware  by  these  sounds  that 
the  soldiers  had  said  their  *  Farewell  1 ' 

Magnificently  stern  and  sombre  the  triple  citadels  raised 
their  lofty  heads  far  above  the  moimtains  forming  the  southern 
horizon,  which,  mingling  with  the  morning  sky,  glowed  in 
radiant  colours,  and  would  have  served  for  a  rare  background 
for  any  landscape.  Magdala,  the  far-famed  one,  was  covered 
with  a  haze,  the  smoke  of  the  still  smouldering  embers  rising 
upward  like  that  of  an  incense  oflFered  to  appease  Divine  wrath  1 

It  was  determined  to  allow  the  animals  of  the  transport 
trains  to  recruit  their  strength  with  the  aid  of  the  plenitude  of 
provender  and  other  supplies  gathered  on  the  plateau  during 
our  absence  before  Magdala.  Accordingly,  a  gentle  depression 
in  the  centre  of  the  plateau  was  fixed  upon  as  the  camp  site. 

An  important  matter  remained  to  be  attended  to.  The 
mass  of  trophies  collected  at  Magdala  were  to  be  sold  to  those 
gentlemen  who  had  either  a  superfluity  of  cash,  or  who  leaned 
to  antiquarian  tastes,  for  the  benefit  of  the  soldiers  engaged  at 
the  front.  Commanding  officers  were  requested  to  select  what 
things  they  thought  most  appropriate  as  mementoes  for  their 
regiments  or  troops.  Fifteen  elephants  and  nearly  200  mules 
were  loaded  with  these  miscellaneous  articles. 

At  9.30  A.M.,  to  the  solemn  beat  of  drum,  the  different 
regiments  marched  out  of  their  respective  camps  to  a  level 
eminence  200  yards  off",  where  they  formed  one  large  hollow 
square,  with  the  captives,  officers,  and  generals  in  the  centre. 

There  was  hardly  a  dry  eye  in  the  vast  assembly  when  the 
clergyman  finished  a  discourse  which  referred  feelingly  to  the 
position  of  the  captives  and  the  triumph  of  our  oftuse.  It  made 
a  deep  impression  upon  all  who  heard  it ;  and  the  tones  of  the 
voice,  tlie  glad  sunlight,  the  wall  of  mountains  in  the  far 
distance  like  a  dark  shadow,  the  warblings  of  the  birds  above 
and  aroimd,  and  the  drifting  dpuds,  will  be  remembered  by 
those  present  as  a  Sunday  unequalled  in  the  calendar ! 


468 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAODALA. 


On  the  next  day  there  was  a  brilliant  and  impressive  general 
review  of  the  army  of  Abyssinia. 

The  division  lastly  formed  a  hollow  square  six  deep ;  the 
captives,  foreign  oflScers  and  civilians,  were  invited  within. 
The  Adjutant-General,  Colonel  Fred.  Thesiger,  then  read  aloud 
the  General  Order,  reviewing  in  glowing  language  the  objects 
and  the  incidents  of  the  campaign  : — 

*  Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  ABYSSINIA,—The  Queen  and  the 
people  of  England  entrusted  to  you  a  very  arduous  and  diflBcult 
expedition — to  release  our  countrymen  from  a  long  and  painful 
captivity,  and  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  our  country,  which 
had  been  outraged  by  Theodorus,  King  of  Abyssinia. 

'  I  congratulate  you  with  all  my  heart  on  the  noble  way  in 
which  you  have  fulfilled  the  commands  of  our  Sovereign. 

'  You  have  traversed,  often  under  a  tropical  sun,  or  amid 
storms  of  rain  and  sleet,  400  miles  of  mountainous  and  difficult 
country. 

'  You  have  crossed  many  steep  and  precipitous  ranges  of 
mountains,  more  than  10,000  feet  in  altitude,  where  your  sup- 
plies could  not  keep  pace  with  you. 

*When  you  arrived  within  reach  of  your  enemy,  though 
with  scanty  food,  and  some  of  you  for  many  hours  without 
either  food  or  water,  in  four  days  you  passed  the  formidable 
chasm  of  the  Bechilo,  and  defeated  the  army  of  Theodorus, 
which  poured  down  upon  you  from  their  lofty  fortress  in  full 
confidence  of  victory. 

'  A  host  of  many  thousands  have  laid  down  their  arms  at 
your  feet. 

*  You  have  captured  and  destroyed  upwards  of  thirty  pieces 
of  artillery,  many  of  great  weight  and  efficiency,  with  ample 
stores  of  anmiunition. 

*  You  have  stormed  the  almost  inaccessible  fortress  of  Mag- 
dala,  defended  by  Theodorus  with  the  desperate  renmant  of  his 
chiefs  and  followers. 

'After  you  forced  the  entrance,  Theodorus,  who  never 
showed  jnercy,  distrusted  the  offer  of  mercy  held  out  to  him, 
and  died  by  his  own  hand. 

*  You  have  released  not  only  the  British  captives,  but  those 


THS  QENERAL  ORDEK.  469 

of  other  friendly  nations.  You  have  unloosed  the  chains  of 
more  than  ninety  of  the  principal  chiefs  of  Abyssinia. 

*  Magdala,  on  which  so  many  victims  have  been  slaughtered, 
has  been  conmiitted  to  the  flames,  and  remains  only  a  scorched 
rock. 

*  Our  complete  and  rapid  success  is  due,  first,  to  the  mercy 
of  God,  whose  hand  I  feel  assured  has  been  over  us  in  a  just 
cause.  Secondly,  to  the  high  spirit  with  which  you  have  been 
inspired. 

*  Indian  soldiers  have  forgotten  the  prejudices  of  race  and 
creed,  to  keep  pace  witli  their  European  comrades. 

*  Never  has  an  army  entered  on  a  war  with  more  honourable 
feelings  than  yours :  this  has  carried  you  tlirough  many  fatigues 
and  difficulties;  you  have  been  only  eager  for  the  moment 
when  you  could  close  with  your  enemy. 

*  Tlie  remembrance  of  your  privations  will  pass  away  quickly, 
but  your  gallant  exploit  will  live  in  history. 

'  The  Queen  and  the  people  of  England  will  appreciate  your 
services. 

'  On  my  part,  as  your  conmiander,  I  thank  you  for  3  our 
devotion  to  yoiu*  duty,  and  the  good  discipline  you  liave  main- 
tained. Not  a  single  complaint  has  been  made  against  a 
soldier,  of  fields  injured,  or  villagers  wilfully  molested  in  person 
or  property.  We  must  not  forget  what  is  due  to  our  comrades 
who  have  been  labouring  for  us  in  the  sultry  climate  of  Zoulla 
and  the  pass  of  Komaylee,  or  in  the  monotony  of  the  posts 
which  have  maintained  our  commimications.  Each  and  all 
would  have  given  all  they  possessed  to  be  with  us.  But  they 
deserve  our  gratitude. 

*  I  shall  watch  over  your  safety  to  the  moment  of  your 
re-embarkation,  and  to  the  end  of  my  life  remember  with  pride 
that  I  have  commanded  you. 

^  E.  Napier,  Lieutenant-General, 

*  Commander-in-Chief. 

*  Camp,  Dalanta,  April  20,  1868.* 

(The  above  Order  is  true  in  each  and  every  particular.  The 
General  has  not  overstrained  himself  whatever  in  its  compo- 
sition.   It  is  as  simple  and  as  modest  as  himself.) 


470 


COOMA^IE  AND  MAGDALA. 


On  the  third  day  of  our  stay  in  our  cantonment  upon 
Dahonte  Dalanta  plateau,  the  articles  for  sale  were  ready  for 
the  auctioneer. 

Tlie  perambulatory  roll  of  the  drum,  which  in  all  weU- 
governod  and  systematical  military  encampments  announces  a 
new  move  or  new  event,  assembled  all  the  officers  and  crowds 
of  on-lookers  around  the  piled  trophies  of  Magdala,  which 
covered  half  an  acre  of  ground. 

The  auctioneer  selected  was  Lieutenant  S.,  an  inde- 
fiatigJible  oflScer  who  had  been  gifted  by  natiure  with  the 
physiognomy  characteristic  of  the  first  Napoleon.  Fathoms  of 
finest  carpets  of  all  coimtries  were  spread  about,  and  all  the 
paraphernalia  of  a  thousand  churches  glittered  in  the  morning 
sunlight ;  and  jostling  each  other  in  the  characteristic  confusion 
of  mo])8  (and  the  most  belligerent  mob  in  the  world  is  an 
English  one),  were  the  gentlemen  buyers,  who  for  the  nonce 
were  connoisseurs  in  antiquities,  and  displayed  remarkable 
acumen  in  discerning  tinsel  from  real,  glitter  from  gold, 
Tlic  many  things  scattered  round  about,  evidences  of  Theo- 
dore's pampered  selfishness  or  harem  folly,  evoked  queer 
remarks  from  the  vulgar-minded  and  the  rude. 

Bidders  were  not  scarce.  Every  officer  and  civilian  desired 
some  souvenir  of  ]Magdala.  One  bought  a  cross  of  silver  or 
bniss,  another  a  censer,  another  chose  a  sword.  Goblets  and 
cups,  pixcs  and  chalices  of  silver,  there  were  in  plenty ;  silks, 
umbrellas,  saddles  resplendent  with  golden  filigree,  and  starred 
witli  rare-coloured  stones;  tent^»,  carpets,  richly  illuminated 
liibk'S  and  manuscripts,  trinkets,  and  jewellery,  found  ready 
purchaiiers. 

jMr.  Holmes,  as  the  worthy  representatk'e  of  the  British 
Museum,  was  in  his  full  glory.  Amied  with  ample  funds,  he 
outdid  all  in  most  things;  but  Colonel  Frazer  ran  him  hard 
because  he  was  buying  for  a  wealthy  regimental  mess — 11th 
Hussars — and  when  anything  belonging  personally  to  Theodore 
was  offered  for  sale,  there  were  private  gentlemen  who  outbid 
botli. 

When  Theodore's  shield,  used  by  him  in  his  younger  days, 
was  oftered  for  sale,  tliougli  only  garnished  by  a  few  silver 
plates,  the  biddiug  became  very  energetic,  and  from  ten  dollars 
it  speedily  went  up  to  200  dollars,  for  which  sum  it  was 
purchased  l)y  Colonel  Frazer. 


Sm  BOBERT  NAPIER'S  REPORT. 


471 


Mr.  Holmes  secured  many  interesting  articles. 

The  auction  lasted  two  days.  The  total  receipts  amounted 
to  5,000i.  This  simi  was  divided  among  the  non-commissioned 
oflBcers  and  men  who  were  southward  of  the  Bechilo,  which 
gave  each  man  a  trifle  over  four  dollars. 

On  the  fourth  morning  after  our  arrival  upon  Dalanta  the 
late  captives  started  on  their  route  home,  under  the  charge  of 
*that  best  gentleman  in  the  world,'  Captain  S.,  commissariat 
officer. 

From  Dalanta  camp  Lieutenant-General  Sir  Robert  Napier 
dated  his  luminous  despatches,  which  made  known  to  the  world 
the  rapid  and  conclusive  events  that  had  transpired  before 
Magdala. 

Sir  RobeH  Napier's  Military  Despatch. 

Commandep-in-Chiors  Offices,  Head-quarters,  Camp,  Antalo : 

May  42,  1868. 

Right  Hon.  Sir, — On  April  3,  when  encamped  on  the  Wadela 
plateau,  I  received  intimation  from  the  chiefs  of  Dalanta  that  Theodore, 
having  moved  from  Magdala,  and  encamped  on  the  plain  of  Aroje,  was 
preparing  for  an  expedition.  Letters  from  the  captives  also  warned 
me  to  be  on  my  guard.  Between  the  British  force  and  the  plain  of 
Dalanta  lay  the  Jedda  ravine,  3,400  feet  deep.  As  the  passage  of  this 
formidable  obstacle,  so  easily  defensible,  could  not  have  been  effected 
in  the  face  of  an  enemy  without  serious  loss,  I  made  a  forced  march  of 
eighteen  miles,  crossed  the  Jedda,  and  established  myself  on  the  plain 
of  Dalanta.  The  mere  disfcmce,  in  miles,  gives  little  idea  of  the 
labour  and  fatigue  of  the  march;  the  excessively  steep  descent  and 
ascent,  and  the  great  heat,  were  very  distressing  for  troops  heavily 
weighted.  Theodore,  however,  did  not  cross  the  Bechilo,  but  plundered 
and  burnt  the  villages  between  that  river  and  Magdala,  which  had 
always  been  faithful  to  and  trusted  him.  From  the  edge  of  the 
Dalanta  plain,  I  obtained  a  distant  but  clear  view  of  the  position  of 
Magdala  and  its  approaches.  I  was  able,  with  a  good  telescope,  to 
appreciate  the  formidable  character  of  the  whole  position,  and  became 
aware  that  1  should  require  all  the  infantry  that  I  could  possibly 
collect  to  make  the  attack  effective,  and  that  every  cavalry  soldier  that 
I  could  bring  forward  would  be  necessary  for  the  investment.  Even 
with  all  the  force  that  I  could  hope  to  gather  up,  I  felt  that  I  could  not 
complete  the  investment  by  sending  a  column  to  close  the  Kaffurbar 
or  southern  gate  of  Magdala,  but  I  deputed  an  officer  of  the  Intelli- 
gence Department,  Meer  Akbar  Ali,  to  Masteevat,  the  queen  of  the 


472 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


Wollo  Gallas,  to  engage  her  to  bring  every  man  she  could  muster  to 
close  all  escape  on  that  side.  Meer  Akbar  All's  report  will  be  for- 
warded, and  will  show  how  effectually  he  accomplished  his  mission. 
Beluctant  as  I  was  to  incur  any  delay  so  near  to  Magdala,  these  con- 
siderations of  the  necessity  of  having  supplies  sufficient  to  carry  me 
through  the  operations  against  that  fortress  obliged  me  to  defer 
crossing  the  Bechilo  for  several  days.  I  had  not  overlooked  the  proba- 
bility of  the  unstable  Abyssinian  people  despising  the  small  postal 
detachments  and  the  pacific  demeanour  of  our  troops ;  but  the  various 
difficulties  of  our  transport,  and  scarcity  of  our  supplies,  kept  me 
without  sufficient  troops  to  make  posts  of  communication  as  strong  as 
the  circumstances  required.  Each  day,  however,  was  bringing  forward 
some  accession  of  strength,  and  in  the  meantime  I  had  endeavoured 
by  liberality  and  every  means  of  conciliation  to  engage  the  petty  chiefs 
between  Antalo  and  the  Takasse  River  to  maintain  their  friendly  assist- 
ance in  forwarding  native  convoys  for  supplies.  It  was  the  only 
course  that  gave  chance  of  success;  unfortunately  it  succeeded  but 
partially.  Relieved  from  the  pressure  of  our  main  force,  the  chiefs 
commenced  to  interfere  with  the  Abyssinian  carriers  of  our  supplies,  and 
to  make  attacks  on  our  posts  and  convoys,  so  that  the  local  carriage, 
which  had  enabled  me  to  advance  from  Antalo,  was  suspended  just  at 
the  time  when  its  maintenance  was  most  important.  Thus  it  happened 
that  on  April  4  I  had  only  a  few  days'  supplies  to  depend  upon.  This 
force  had  left  all  its  baggage  at  Lat,  100  miles  in  the  rear,  taking  on 
merely  the  clothes  in  which  they  marched,  and  carrying  great  coats, 
blankets,  and  water-proof  sheets ;  they  had  no  other  incumbrance  than 
a  bell-tent  for  twelve  officers  or  twenty  soldiers;  the  daily  storms 
which  we  experienced  rendered  this  shelter  indispensable ;  the  carriage 
so  released  was  sent  back  for  provisions  to  the  points  where  native 
transport  was  doubtful,  and  gave  me  some  hope  of  ultimate  relief  from 
my  commissariat  difficulties,  but  the  immediate  urgency  was  pressing. 
On  the  2nd  instant  I  deputed  Brigadier-General  Merewether  to  the 
Takasse,  to  arrange  with  the  chiefs  there  to  bring  in  supplies  of  flour. 
Major  Grant  was  directed  to  return  to  Lat,  and  Captain  Moore  to  Lake 
Ashangi,  to  remove  obstructions  which  had  arisen  at  these  places. 
Captain  Speedy  and  Mr.  Munzinger  proceeded,  the  former  to  Dabonte, 
the  latter  to  the  borders  of  Dalanta,  that  had  been  ravaged  by  Theo- 
dorus ;  and  through  the  exertions  of  these  officers  I  was  enabled  to  feed 
my  cattle  and  to  obtain  flour  enough  for  eleven  days*  supply  at  8  oz. 
for  each  soldier.  The  native  followers  received  wheat  in  the  grain 
instead  of  flour. 

Relying  on  the  admirable  spirit  of  my  foij^,  I  was  prepared  to 
commit  myself  against  Magdala  with  these  means.    Besides  the  view 


OFFICIAL  EEPORT. 


which  I  had  obtained  of  Magdala  and  its  approaches,  I  reoehred  mofll 
valuable  information  from  a  chief  named  Beitwuddun  Hail0|  irho 
had  recently  deserted  from  Magdala.  Having  engaged  in  eome  in- 
trigues with  Menilek,  Bling  of  Shoa,  he  knew  well  that  his  lot  would 
be  instant  death  on  his  master^s  arrival.  It  is  difficult  to  give,  by  de- 
scription alone,  a  sufficient  idea  of  the  formidable  position  which  we 
were  about  to  assail. 

The  fortress  of  Magdala  is  about  twelve  miles  from  the  right  bank 
of  the  Bechilo,  but  the  great  altitude  and  the  purity  of  the  atmosphere 
exhibited  the  whole  outline  distinctly.  The  centre  of  the  position  is 
the  rock  of  Selasse,  elevated  more  than  9,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and 
standing  on  a  plateau  called  Islamgee,  which  is  divided  into  several 
extensive  terraces,  with  perpendicular  scarps  of  basalt ;  a  saddle  con- 
nects these  terraces  with  the  hill  called  Fahla.  Fahla  is  a  gigantic  na- 
tural bastion,  level  on  the  top,  entirely  open,  and  commanded  by  Islam- 
gee.  It  domineers  completely,  at  an  elevation  of  1,200  feet,  over  all 
approaches  to  Islamgee ;  the  sides  appeared  precipitous,  and  the  sum- 
mit, surroimded  by  a  natural  scarp  of  rock,  accessible  only  in  a  few 
places,  and  from  eighteen  to  twenty  feet  in  height.  Nearly  concealed 
from  view  by  Selasse  and  Fahla,  the  top  of  Magdala  was  partially 
visible.  The  road  to  Magdala  winds  up  the  steep  sides  of  Fahla,  subject 
to  its  fire,  and  to  the  descent  of  rocks  and  stones.  One  part  of  the  road 
is  so  steep  that  few  horses,  except  those  bred  in  the  country,  could 
carry  their  riders  up  or  down  it.  The  whole  road  is  flanked  by  the 
end  of  Selasse  and  the  broadside  scarp  of  Islamgee.  Altogether,  with- 
out taking  into  account  Magdala  itself,  the  formidable  character  of  its 
outworks  exceeded  anything  which  we  could  possibly  have  anticipated 
from  the  faint  description  of  the  position  which  had  reached  us.  The 
refugee  chief,  Beitwuddun  Hailo,  was  very  anxious  that  1  should  try 
the  south  side,  at  the  Kafinrbar  (gate),  from  the  opposite  range  called 
Lanta,  saying,  ^  If  you  want  to  take  Selasse  go  from  hence ;  but  if  you 
want  Magdala  you  must  go  from  Lanta.*  This,  however,  would  have 
been  impossible.  I  had  not  force  enough  to  divide,  and  I  could  not 
place  this  vast  combination  of  natural  fortresses  between  me  and  my 
direct  line  of  communication.  I  also  perceived  that  the  real  point  to 
be  taken  was  not  Magdala,  but  Islamgee,  where  Theodore  had  taken 
post  with  all  his  guns,  and  that  Fahla  was  the  key  to  the  whole. 

On  the  7th  I  descended  to  the  bed  of  the  Bechilo,  and  reconnoitred 
the  crossing.  The  ordinary  approach  to  Magdala  is  by  the  Aroje 
ravine,  which  commences  under  Islamgee,  and  is  boimded  on  its  right 
by  a  spur  which  extends  from  Islamgee,  in  a  serrated  ridge,  to  the 
Bechilo.  A  similar  spur  from  Fahla  stretches  to  the  water  of  the 
Bechilo,  and  bounds  the  ravine  on  its  lefl.    The  highest  point  of  this 


474 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


ridge  is  about  2,000  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  Aroje  ravine.  The 
grand  features  of  the  ground  rendered  it  impossible  for  me,  with  my 
small  force  of  infantry,  to  hold  both  sides  of  the  ravine.  I  considered 
Fahla  the  key  of  the  position,  and  determined  to  occupy  the  ridge 
bearing  in  different  parts  the  names  of  Gimborgi  and  Affijo,  which 
leads  to  that  imposing  outwork.  Established  on  this  ridge,  I  could 
operate  on  either  side  of  Fahla,  as  might  seem  expedient  on  closer  ex- 
amination. 

Between  the  4th  and  9  th  inst.  my  force  was  increased  by  six  com- 
panies of  the  45th  Regiment,  under  Lieut.-Colonel  Parish,  which,  though 
long  delayed  for  want  of  carriage,  had  marched  li-om  Zoulla  in  twenty- 
five  days.  A  wing  of  the  3rd  Bombay,  No.  1,  under  Lieut.-Colonel  Camp- 
bell, was  detained  seven  marches  in  rear,  owing  to  the  urgent  want  of 
carriage ;  and  I  thus  lost  the  services  of  an  able  officer  and  an  excellent 
body  of  soldiers,  on  whom  I  had  calculated  for  the  attack.  On  the  9th 
the  whole  force  concentrated  on  the  edge  of  the  plateau  overlooking  the 
Bechilo,  which  flows  3,900  feet  below  it.  Major  Chamberlain,  with 
the  23rd  Punjaub  Pioneers,  supported  by  a  wing  of  the  Beloochees, 
occupied  the  bed  of  the  Bechilo,  and  repaired  Theodore's  road.  The 
signallers  of  the  10th  company  Eoyal  Engineers  maintained  communica- 
tions. The  Royal  Engineers  and  the  Madras  and  Bombay  Sappers, 
under  Captain  Goodfellow,  made  up  the  necessary  provision  of  sand 
bags,  scaling  ladders,  and  bags  filled  with  powder  for  the  demolition  of 
gates,  stockades,  &c.  As  the  only  supply  of  water  between  the  Bechilo 
and  Magdala  was  under  the  enemy^s  fire,  all  the  water-carriers  of  the 
force  were  organised  under  command  of  Captain  Bainbridge,  Transport 
Corps,  with  two  subalterns,  and  Lieutenant  Ramsbottom,  Ti*ansport  Corps, 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  forward  regular  supplies  from  the  Bechilo. 
The  bandsmen  and  a  party  of  Punjaub  muleteers  were  also  organised 
under  command  of  Captain  Griffith,  aided  by  Lieutenant  Gaselee,  Trans- 
port Corps,  and  furnished  with  stretchers  for  the  removal  of  wounded 
men  from  the  field.  All  preparations  having  been  completed,  I  placed 
the  cavalry  under  Colonel  Graves  to  hold  the  Bechilo,  but  ready 
to  advance,  and  moved  the  remainder  of  the  force  across  the  river 
under  the  immediate  command  of  Sir  C.  Staveley  ;  the  2nd  Brigade, 
under  Brigadier- General  Wilby,  to  remain  in  the  bed  of  the  Bechilo 
in  support ;  the  1st  Brigade,  under  General  Snyder,  to  occupy 
the  Gimborgi  spur,  and  advance  to  a  suitable  place  for  encampment, 
and  also  to  cover  a  reconnaissance  by  the  Deputy-Quartermaster-Gene- 
ral of  the  enemy^s  position.  The  Deputy-Quartermaster-General  re- 
ported that  the  ascent  to  Gimborgi  was  extremely  steep  and  difficult, 
and  that  the  King's  road  up  the  Aroje  ravine  was  easy  and  secure  for 
the  mountain  guns  and  baggage.  They  were  therefore  ordered  to  take 
that  route. 


OFFICIAL  REPORT. 


476 


When  the  leading  part  of  the  column  had  reached  Affijo,  I  arriyed 
at  the  front.  The  King's  road  emerges  from  the  Aroje  pass  at  a  dis- 
tance of  1,200  yards  from  AflSjo,  and  700  feet  below  it.  I  ordered 
Major  Chamberlain's  Punjaub  Pioneers  to  be  sent  immediately  to  cover 
the  head  of  the  pass,  and  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  to  be  closed  up 
as  soon  as  possible.  The  men  were  greatly  distressed  by  the  heat,  the 
severe  ascent,  and  want  of  water.  Shortly  after  Major  Chamberlain 
had  taken  up  his  position,  the  Naval  Rocket  Brigade,  under  Captain 
Fellow es,  appeared  rising  from  the  pass,  followed  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Penn's  Steel  Battery,  escorted  by  detachments  of  infantry.  At  this 
time  the  enemy  opened  his  guns  from  Fahla  and  Islamgee,  making 
good  practice  at  the  Punjaubees  and  at  the  position  of  AflSjo.  Not- 
withstanding the  distance,  which  was  more  than  3,000  yards,  the 
enemy's  shot  ranged  well  into  the  positions,  owing  to  the  great  com- 
mand, and  probably  to  excessive  charges  of  powder ;  but,  the  fire  being 
a  plunging  one,  no  casualties  ensued.  Almost  simultaneously  with  the 
opening  of  the  enemy's  artillery,  a  large  force  was  seen  pouring  down 
from  Islamgee  and  the  side  of  Fahla,  descending  at  speed  the  steep  road 
and  the  faces  of  the  moimtains,  until  they  filled  the  whole  plain  of 
Aroje.  Many  of  the  enemy  were  dressed  in  red,  and  almost  bore  the 
appearance  of  our  own  troops  in  the  distance.  About  500,  principally 
chiefs,  were  mounted.  The  Naval  Brigade  hastened  up  to  Aflijo,  and 
as  each  rocket- tube  came  into  position  it  opened  on  the  advancing 
masses  of  the  enemy,  who  were  startled,  checked,  and  driven  back  at 
some  points,  but  only  to  press  forward  at  others.  I  directed  Sir  Charles 
Staveley  to  bring  forward  the  remaining  infantry,  which  by  this  time 
had  closed  up,  to  repel  the  attack.  The  4th  (King's  Own)  regiment, 
under  Colonel  Cameron,  closely  followed  by  Beville's  Beloochees  and 
the  Royal  Engineers  commanded  by  Major  Pritchard,  and  the  Bombay 
Sappers  under  Captain  McDonnell,  R.E.,  descended  rapidly  the  steep 
path  leading  down  to  the  Aroje  plain,  with  imrestrained  expressions  of 
delight  in  having  at  last  their  enemy  before  them.  Opening  into 
skirmishing  order,  they  ascended  a  small  slope  which  separated  them 
from  the  plain  of  Aroje,  and  immediately  came  in  contact  with  the 
enemy,  drove  them  back  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  their  leaders,  in  masses 
on  which  the  fire  of  the  Snider  told  with  terrible  effect.  Several  gal- 
lant attempts  were  made  by  the  Abyssinians  to  rally,  but  many  of  their 
chiefs  fell,  and  they  were  driven  down  the  slopes  of  Aroje  towards  the 
ravines  on  our  left  front.  A  portion  of  them  withdrew  up  the  sides  of 
Fahla,  and,  taking  cover  in  a  thicket  of  cactus  trees,  opened  a  teasing 
fire  on  Staveley's  right,  causing  some  casualties.  Captain  Fellowes, 
liaving  maintained  the  fire  of  his  rockets  until  masked  by  the  advance 
of  the  infantry,  had  been  sent  to  support  Sir  Charles  Staveley.  The  fire 


476 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


of  the  rockets,  together  with  some  volleys  from  Beville's  Beloochees 
and  the  Eoyal  Engineers,  supported  by  two  of  Penn's  guns  under 
Lieutenant  Taylor,  cleared  Staveley's  flank  from  further  annoyance.  The 
rockets  were  then  turned  on  the  summit  of  Fahla.  They  were  well 
directed,  and,  as  I  subsequently  learned,  produced  a  very  great  effect 
A  party  of  the  enemy  attempted  to  pass  roimd  the  sides  of  Affijo  to 
turn  our  right,  but  were  checked  by  a  few  rockets,  and  dispersed  by 
the  K  company,  Madras  Sappers,  under  Major  Prendergast,  V.C.,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Loch,  with  a  detachment  of  the  3rd  Bombay  Cavalry, 
accompanied  by  the  infantry  in  support.  Towards  the  left  Colonel 
Milward  ascended  from  the  Aroje  pass  with  Penn's  Battery,  escorted  by 
detachments  of  the  4th  (K.O.)  Regiment,  under  Captain  Kittoe,  and 
the  23rd  Pioneers  under  Captain  Pat^rson,  at  the  time  when  the  guns 
opened  from  Fahla  and  Islamgee. 

On  perceiving  the  troops  of  Theodore  descending  from  Ldamgee, 
Colonel  Milward  took  up  a  strong  position  and  opened  fire  from  Penn's 
Battery.    Major  Chamberlain,  who  was  holding  the  Pioneers  in  hand 
to  cover  the  head  of  the  pass,  moved  to  his  left  and  joined  Colonel 
Milward.    A  considerable  body  of  Abyssinians  bore  down  upon  Mil- 
ward's  position.    Notwithstanding  the  evident  effect  of  Penn's  guns, 
they  continued  to  advance  with  much   determination   and  order. 
Chamberlain  with  his  Pioneers  met  this  attack  in  a  most  prompt  and 
spirited  manner,  driving  them  with  great  slaughter  into  tlie  ravines  to 
his  left  front,  not,  however,  without  gallant  resistance  on  the  part  of 
the  Abyssinians,  who  closed  fearlessly  with  the  Punjaubees,  the  ^ear- 
wounds  received  bearing  witness  to  the  closeness  of  the  conflict.   On  tlie 
extreme  left  the  enemy  pressed  in  large  numbers  towards  the  head  of 
the  Aroje  ravine,  where  the  baggage  had  arrived.    The  baggage- 
master,  Lieutenant  Sweeny,  4th  (K.O.)  Regiment,  with  great  readiness 
massed  the  baggage  in  a  safe  position ;  and  the  baggage-guards,  con- 
sisting of  two  companies  of  the  4th  (K.O.)  Regiment  and  one  of  the 
10th  (N.I.),  under  Captain  Roberts,  of  the  former  corps,  until  disabled, 
and  subsequently  under  Lieutenants  Abadie  (  11th  Hussars),  and  Sweeny, 
were  brought  forward  and  most  effectually  checked  the  attempt  of  the 
enemy  to  penetrate  into  the  Aroje  ravine.    Arrested  at  the  head  of  the 
ravine,  and  driven  back  by  the  baggage-guards,  closed  in  upon  by 
Chamberlain  8  Pioneers  and  two  companies  of  the  4th  (K.O.)  Regiment, 
whom  Sir  C.  Staveley  had  wheeled  on  to  their  flank,  the  enemy 
suffered  most  severely.    Large  numbers  were  seen  to  fall  from  the 
admirably  directed  fire  of  the  mountain  guns.    Theodore's  troops  had 
advanced  with  the  full  confidence  of  men  accustomed  to  victory ;  they 
had  cast  themselves  off  from  their  vantage-ground,  to  which  there  was 
no  return.    They  had  been  promised  by  Theodore  that  they  should  be 


OFFICIAL  REPORT. 


477 


enriched  by  the  spoils  of  the  English  ;  and  it  was  not  without  a  stout 
resistance  that  they  were  finally  driven  off  the  field.  A  heavy  rain 
continued  through  the  greater  part  of  the  action.  The  troops,  thoroughly 
wet  and  tired,  but  highly  elated  with  their  victory,  bivouacked  for  the 
night,  covering  the  road  to  Aroje  pass,  and  before  daylight  had  re- 
occupied  their  conunanding  position  on  AflSjo,  from  which  they  had 
descended  to  meet  the  enemy.  The  wounded  were  promptly  attended 
to,  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Currie,  C.B.,  Inspector-General  of  Hos- 
pitals. Many  wounded  Abyssinians  were  also  carried  off  the  field  by 
our  troops,  and  were  carefully  attended  to  in  our  hospital.  The  2nd 
Brigade,  which  came  up  in  the  night,  occupied  the  ground  which 
had  been  held  after  the  action  by  the  Ist  Brigade.  According  to  the 
best  information  the  probable  number  of  the  enemy  was  not  less  than 
5,000,  of  whom  at  least  3,000  were  the  regular  musketeers,  and  the 
remainder  less  efficiently  armed.  Theodore  distributed  new  arms  to 
the  troops  on  the  day  preceding  the  battle.  The  loss  of  the  enemy 
cannot  be  correctly  estimated;  349  dead  were  buried  in  front  of 
the  left  of  our  position  alone,  and  exclusive  of  those  who  fell  in 
Staveley's  first  attack.  Thirty  very  badly  wounded  Abyssinians  were 
carried  to  our  hospital.  Theodore^s  lieutenant,  Fetaree  Grobazye,^  and 
many  chiefs  of  note,  were  amongst  the  slain.  Nearly  all  night  the  calls 
of  the  Abyssinians  to  their  wounded  friends  were  heard,  and  the  greater 
number  of  the  latter  were  carried  from  the  field.  We  saw  a  large 
number  of  wounded  when  Theodore's  army  surrendered.  The  British 
loss  was  only  twenty  wounded,  two  mortally.  This  disparity  of  loss 
resulted  firom  the  determined  and  persistent  attack  of  the  Abyssinians 
against  a  better- disciplined  and  better-armed  force ;  not  better  armed, 
however,  as  regarded  the  23rd  Pioneers,  whose  smooth-bore  is  hardly 
equal  to  the  double-barrelled  percussion  gim  of  the  Abyssinians. 
There  was  no  hasty  flight ;  the  enemy  returned  again  to  the  attack 
wherever  the  ground  favoured  them.  I  issued  orders  to  provide 
against  the  pmrsuit  being  carried  too  far  up  the  hill,  which  could 
only  have  ended  by  our  retiring,  and  giving  renewed  confidence  to 
the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  Lieutenant  Prideaux  and  Mr.  Flad 
arrived  in  my  camp,  accompanied  by  Dajatch  Alema,  a  son-in-law 
and  confidential  chief  of  Theodore,  with  a  request  for  peace.  I  replied 
that  if  Theodore  would  bring  all  the  European  captives  to  my  camp, 
and  submit  to  the  Queen  of  England,  I  would  promise  honourable 
treatment  for  himself  and  family.  Lieutenant  Prideaux  returned  to 
Magdala  with  the  letter  containing  these  terms.    In  the  course  of  the 


'  Feot  Oupary  Guvrie, 


478 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


forenoon  he  returned  again  to  the  British  camp  with  Mr.  Flad,  but 
without  Dajatch  Alema.  He  brought  a  letter  without  seal  or  signature 
from  Theodore,  refusing  my  terms.  My  letter  was  returned.  I  sent 
back  Lieutenant  Prideaux  and  Mr.  Flad  to  intimate  that  no  other 
terms  would  be  granted.  I  considered  that  a  fuller  atonement  than 
the  surrender  of  the  captives,  when  they  could  be  reteined  no  longer, 
was  absolutely  required,  and  must  be  exacted  ;  and,  painful  as  was  the 
thought  of  the  possible  consequences  to  the  captives  if  Theodore's 
rage  should  become  excited,  I  relied  for  their  safety  on  the  apprehen- 
8i9n  of  a  renewal  of  the  conflict,  which  demoralised  Theodore's  troops, 
and  from  which  Theodore  himself  was  not  free,  as  he  was  involuntarily 
betrayed  by  Dajatch  Alema.  I  relied  also  on  my  threat,  which  I 
impressed  on  Dajatch  Alema,  of  unrelenting  pursuit  and  punishment 
of  all  who  might  in  any  way  be  concerned  in  the  ill-treatment  of  the 
European  captives.  I  pointed  out  how  the  power  of  Great  Britain  had 
already  reached  Magdala,  and  that  no  comer  of  Abyssinia,  however 
remote,  could  screen  any  one  whom  we  wished  to  punish.  Lieutenant 
Prideaux  was  met  on  his  return  to  Magdala  by  Mr.  Kassam  and  the 
remainder  of  the  British  prisoners,  and  several  of  those  of  other 
nations,  all  of  whom  arrived  in  my  camp  before  evening.  At  the 
request  of  Dajatch  Alema,  I  had  promised  to  abstain  from  hostilities 
for  twenty-four  hours.  After  the  lapse  of  forty-eight  hours  Theodore 
had  not  surrendered  himself.  Reliable  information  reached  me 
that  his  army  was  recovering  irom  their  defeat,  that  many  sol- 
diers who  had  been  unable  to  return  to  Magdala  on  the  night 
of  the  10th  had  since  rejoined  their  ranks,  that  fresh  defensive 
arrangements  were  being  made,  and  that  Theodore  and  his  chiefs  even 
contemplated  a  night  attack  on  the  2nd  Brigade,  encamped  on  the 
lower  ground.  I  therefore  prepared  to  attack  the  enemy's  position. 
I  had  originally  intended  first  to  assault  Fahla  from  the  side  which 
fronted  our  camp,  and  was  screened  from  the  fire  of  Islamgee  and 
Selasse.  But  under  the  altered  condition  of  the  enemy,  Theodore 
having  by  death,  wounds,  and  desertion  lost  half  of  his  army  and  his 
bravest  chiefs,  I  determined  to  attack  Islamgee  by  the  King's  road. 
All  arrangements  for  this  had  been  considered,  and  the  positions  for 
the  artillery  reconnoitred  and  fixed  upon,  when  information  was 
brought  to  me  that  Theodore  had  left  Magdala,  and  that  many  of  the 
chiefs,  with  their  followers,  wished  to  surrender.  I  agreed  to  accept 
their  submission,  and  ordered  Sir  Charles  Staveley  to  advance  on 
Islamgee,  relaxing  no  precautions  that  I  had  considered  necessary  for 
the  attack. 

The  scarcity  of  water  rendered  it  impossible  to  retain  any  con- 
siderable body  of  cavalry  before  Magdala.  My  personal  escort,  under  a 
native  officer,  only  remained,  and,  with  a  few  details  of  other  corps, 


OFFICIAL  REPORT. 


479 


was  sent  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Scott,  A.D.C.,  to  watch  the 
west  side  of  Magdala,  where  they  took  up  a  good  position,  until  the 
arrival  of  the  cavalry,  under  CJolonel  Graves,  who  completed  the  invest- 
ment up  to  the  Kafurbar  gate,  which  was  watched  by  the  Gallas.  The 
Bechilo  was  held  by  the  head-quarter  detachment  of  the  Scinde  Horse, 
under  Major  Briggs,  and  detachments  of  the  3rd  Dragoon  Guards, 
3rd  and  12th  Cavalry,  under  Major  Miller,  to  secure  that  point  and 
provide  against  the  escape  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction  by  the 
Minjerra  ravine.    A  detachment  of  the  Beloochees,  under  Lieutenant 
Beville,  ascended  by  the  spurs  of  Fahla,  and  occupied  that  im- 
portant position,  where  they  were  reinforced  from  the  2nd  Brigade 
by  the  head-quarters  wing  of  the  10th  N.  1.  under  Colonel  Field. 
The  artillery  was  placed  in  position,  and  the  troops  advanced, 
preceded  by  Captain  Speedy,  of  the  Intelligence  Department,  with 
a  small  escort  of  the  3rd  Light  Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant- Colonel 
Loch,  to  communicate  with  the  chiefs  who  wished  to  surrender,  and 
to  prevent  any  misunderstanding.    No  resistance  was  offered.  Sir 
Charles  Staveley  effected  an  entrance  to  Islamgee  and  Selasse  through 
a  difficult  crevice  in  the  rocky  scarps.    It  would  be  impossible  to 
arrive  at  any  correct  estimate  either  of  the  number  of  .armed  men  who 
laid  down  their  weapons,  or  of  the  masses  of  people— men,  women, 
and  children — whom  we  found  on  Islamgee.    It  was  necessary  to  collect 
and  guard  the  arms  that  were  surrendered.    It  was  also  necessary  ,to 
send  down  all  the  disarmed  soldiers,  and  the  miscellaneous  multitude 
that  followed  them,  to  the  plain  below,  before  I  could  proceed  actively 
-against  Magdala.    Theodore  himself,  having  abandoned  his  attempt  to 
escape,  was  making  preparations  for  defence,  and  offering  us  defiance 
in  front  of  Magdala.    By  three  o'clock,  the  Abyssinians  having  nearly 
all  cleared  away  from  Islamgee,  I  ordered  the  attack  upon  Magdala  to 
be  at  once  carried  out.    The  entrance  of  Magdala  is  300  feet  above 
the  terre- plain  of  Islamgee,  and  the  ascent  is  by  an  extremely  steep  and 
rugged  path.    Viewing  the  very  difficult  nature  of  the  approach  I  made 
the  attack  as  strong  as  possible,  and  massed  the  whole  of  my  artillery 
fire  to  cover  it,  in  order  to  overpower  the  enemy's  resistance,  and 
prevent  the  heavy  casualties  which  I  should  otherwise  have  incurred. 
The  assaulting  force  consisted  of  the  2nd  Brigade,  led  by  the  33rd  (Duke 
of  Wellington's)  Regiment,  accompanied  by  detachments  of  the  Royal 
Engineers,  and  Madras  and  Bombay  Sappers  and  Miners,  to  clear 
away  obstacles,  the  1st  Brigade  to  be  a  close  support.    I  concentrated 
the  fire  of  the  artillery  on  the  gateway  and  the  north  end  of  the  fort, 
which  were  crowded  with  the  houses  of  the  soldiers,  avoiding,  as  much 
as  possible,  the  higher  part  of  the  interior,  occupied  by  the  Abyssinian 
prisoners  and  non-combatants.    The  enemy  carefully  concealed  them- 
selves from  view,  so  that  the  place  seemed  almost  deserted,  though. 


480 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


when  entered  by  our  troops,  it  was  found  to  be  thronged  with  soldiers 
who  had  thrown  away  their  arms,  released  prisoners,  and  the  numerous 
voluntary  and  involuntary  followers  of  Theodore's  fortunes.  The 
artificial  defences  consisted  of  stone  walls,  loopholed  and  surmounted  by 
strong  and  thick  barricades  of  thorny  stakes,  with  narrow  stone  gate- 
ways; the  lower  one  built  upon  the  interior,  the  higher  one  being 
seventy  feet  above  the  lower,  and  approached  by  a  very  steep,  narrow 
path  winding  amongst  the  soldiers*  huts.  The  attack  was  ably  con- 
ducted by  Sir  Charles  Staveley,  whose  report  is  annexed,  and  gallantly 
carried  by  the  troops.  Fortunately  the  defences  were  very  unscien- 
'  tifically  constructed  ;  and  though  the  attack  was  met  by  a  stout  fire  from 
the  enemy,  yet  they  could  not  direct  it  on  the  head  of  the  storming 
party  without  exposing  themselves  to  the  rapid  and  fatal  fire  of  the 
Snider  rifles,  and  our  loss  was,  in  consequence,  very  small.  The  Royal 
Engineers  and  Sappers,  and  leading  sections  of  the  3drd  Regiment,  were 
long  before  they  could  force  an  entrance,  and  during  this  time  nine 
officers  and  men  received  wounds  and  contusions. 

At  length  an  entrance  was  forced  by  means  of  the  ladders  near  the 
gate,  and  by  the  leading  men  of  the  3drd,  who  scaled  a  rock  and 
turned  the  defences  of  the  gateway.  The  enemy  were  driven  to  the 
second  barricade,  and  when  that  was  carried  all  resistance  ceased. 
Amongst  the  dead  near  the  outer  gateway  were  found  a  number  of 
Theodore's  most  devoted  chiefs ;  one  of  them,  Dajatch  Enjeda,  had 
urged  Theodore  to  murder  all  the  captives,  a  course  from  which  he 
was  dissuaded  by  others.  Close  to  the  second  gateway  lay  the  body 
of  Theodore.  At  the  moment  when  the  barricade  was  forced  by  the 
dSrd,  Theodore  fell,  as  I  have  since  learned,  by  his  own  hands ;  the 
troops  immediately  fled,  some  by  the  Kafurbar  gate,  which  we  found 
choked  with  arms  that  had  been  cast  away  in  their  flight  Of  these 
fugitives,  the  greater  part  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Gallas,  and  the 
remainder  seeing  the  fate  of  their  comrades,  and  hearing  the  vaunting 
invitations  of  the  Gallas,  returned  to  Magdala  and  surrendered. 

The  command  of  Magdala  was  entrusted  to  Brigadier-General 
Wilby,  who  held  it  with  the  33rd  and  wing  of  the  45th  R^ments. 
So  thickly  was  the  fortress  inhabited,  and  so  great  was  the  crowd  of 
people,  that  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  establish  order.  Guards  were 
placed  at  the  gates  and  at  such  places  as  required  protection.*  The 
family  of  Theodore  were  committed  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Rassam,  who 
was  requested  to  do  all  that  was  in  his  power  for  their  comfort  and 
protection.  The  Abyssinian  prisoners  were  released  from  their  chains, 
and  the  numerous  body  of  Abyssinians,  whose  histories  and  condition 

*  Napier's  conduct  at  Magdala  is  in  broad  contrast  to  that  of  Wolseley  s  at 
Coomassifl. 


OFFICIAL  REPORT. 


481 


it  was  impossible  at  the  time  to  investigate,  were  collected  in  an  open 
space  in  the  centre  of  the  fortress,  where  they  could  be  protected, 
and  where  they  quickly  threw  up  huts  for  themselves,  and  remained 
until  their  final  departure.  On  the  15th  the  4th  (K.O.)  Regiment 
relieved  the  33rd  in  Magdala,  and  the  45th  were  moved  to  Islamgee 
to  reinforce  the  detachment  of  the  10th  N.I.,  under  Colonel  Field, 
for  the  protection  of  the  captured  arms  and  ordnance,  and  to  furnish 
working  parties  for  their  destruction.  The  inhabitants  of  Magdala 
were  collected  at  Aroje,  where  great  vigilance  was  necessary  to  pro- 
tect them  from  the  Gallas,  who  were  lying  in  wait  both  day  and  night 
for  opportunities  of  plundering  and  destroying  them. 

Notwithstanding  the  friendly  relations  with  the  queens  of  the 
Gallas,  their  people  were  so  little  under  restraint  that  it  was  frequently 
necessary  to  fire  upon  them  to  drive  them  from  molesting  our  water- 
parties  and  carrying  off  our  mules.  A  party  of  them  in  search  of 
plunder  even  dared  to  make  their  way  into  Magdala,  where  they  were 
captured  by  the  guard  of  the  33rd  Regiment.  On  the  15th  and  16  th 
the  disarmed  soldiers  and  people  of  Magdala  made  their  exodus  from 
Aroje.  Every  consideration  was  shown  them,  and  they  were  allowed 
to  take  all  their  property.  The  Aroje  defile  was  guarded  by  infantry, 
and  their  procession  after  crossing  the  Bechilo  was  guarded  by  cavalry 
patrols  until  they  reached  Wadela.  No  doubt  many  of  these  people 
deserved  little  mercy  at  the  hands  of  the  peasants  of  Dalanta,  who  had 
suffered  so  much  misery  from  Theodore's  troops ;  but,  having  sur- 
rendered to  the  British  forces,  it  was  incumbent  on  us  to  protect  them 
until  they  reached  a  point  of  safety  from  whence  they  could  go  to  their 
native  districts.  On  the  morning  of  the  17th  orders  were  issued  to 
clear  every  one  out  of  Magdala  by  4  p.m.  At  that  hoiu:,  the  whole,  of 
the  captured  ordnance  having  been  destroyed,  the  gates  of  Magdala 
were  blown  up,  and  the  whole  of  the  buildings  were  committed  to  the 
fiamcs.  The  wounded  Abyssinians,  who  had  no  fiiends  to  take  charge 
of  them,  were  conveyed  to  our  hospital.  The  elephants  and  heavier 
ordnance  having  been  sent  in  advance  on  the  15th,  on  the  18th  of 
April  the  force  recrossed  the  Bechilo  on  its  return  to  the  coast.  I  have 
the  honour  to  enclose  plans  and  photographs  to  illustrate  the  course  of 
the  operations.  I  regret  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  complete  my 
despatch  earlier;  but  owing  to  the  marching  in  a  difficult  country, 
which  has  occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  days,  and  the  many  de- 
mands upon  my  time,  it  has  been  quite  out  of  my  power.  By  the  next 
mail  I  hope  to  submit  the  conclusion  of  my  despatch,  which  will  in- 
clude the  re- embarkation  of  the  greater  part  of  the  forces,  and  I  shall  then 
have  the  satisfaction  to  represent  for  the  favourable  consideration  of 
Her  Majesty's  Govt^rnment  the  services  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the 
force  which  I  have  had  the  honour  to  command,  of  which  it  is  inipos- 


482  COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 

mble  for  me  to  write  in  too  high  terms,  and  to  which  I  could  not  now 
do  adequate  justice. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

R.  Napier,  Lieutenant-General, 

Commander-in-Chief. 

Return  of  Ordm^nce  captured  in  the  Mxigdcda  Fortress 
on  April  13,  1868. 

Three  brass  56-poimders  5  in,  smooth  bore,  one  brass  18-pounder 
ditto,  four  brass  6-pounders  ditto  (Turkish),  two  brass  6-poimders  ditto 
(English)  cast  at  Cassipore,  one  brass  6-poimder  ditto  (French),  five 
brass  24-pounder  howitzers  (native  and  French),  three  brass  12-pounder8 
ditto,  one  brass  3-poimder,  four  iron  1 -pounder  howitzers. 

Appended  to  the  despatch  of  Sir  Robert  Napier  is  Sir 
Charles  Staveley's  report  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  narrating 
the  capture  of  Magdala.  It  goes  over  the  incidents  already 
recorded  by  Sir  Robert,  and  ends  with  a  list  of  names  of  officers 
brought  under  the  notice  of  His  Excellency. 

I  wish  to  bring  the  names  of  the  following  officers  to  the  notice  of 
His  Excellency  : — Brigadier-General  Wilby,  who  commanded  the  2nd 
Brigade  and  led  the  assault.  He  mentions  the  very  effective  service 
rendered  him  by  Captain  Hicks,  his  Brigade-Major ;  Captain  James, 
Deputy- Assistant  Major-General ;  and  Captain  Capel,  12th  Bengal 
Cavaliy,  A.D.C. ;  Major  Pritchard,  R.E.  (who  was  wounded),  the 
senior  officer  with  the  Royal  Engineers  and  Sappers,  and  who  mentions 
the  able  assistance  he  received  from  Captain  Elliot,  commanding  K 
company,  Madras  Sappers.  Captain  Foord,  Lieutenant  Bird,  Comet 
Dairy  mple,  and  Surgeon  Pearl  of  the  Madras  Sappers;  Sergeants  Har- 
rold  and  Dean,  E.E.,  Corporal  M^Donagh,  and  Sapper  Bailey ;  Major 
Cooper,  commanding  33rd  Regiment,  who  led  this  regiment  to  and  over 
the  gate.  And  I  beg  here  to  bring  especially  to  notice  No.  3,691, 
Drummer  Michael  M^Guire,  and  No.  949,  Private  James  Bergin,  33rd 
Regiment,  the  two  men  who  first  forced  an  entrance  to  the  extreme  and 
turned  the  gate ;  Captain  Elliot,  who  commanded  the  Madras  Sappers ; 
Captain  McDonnell,  commanding  Bombay  Sappers ;  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Parish,  commanding  45th  Regiment;  Colonel  Field,  commanding  10th 
Regiment  Native  Infantry  ;  Brigadier-General  Snyder,  commanding  1st 
Brigade  ;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cameron,  commanding  4th  (King's  Own) 
Royal  Regiment ;  Major  Beville,  commanding  wing  Belooch  Regiment ; 
Major  Chamberlain,  commanding  23rd  Punjaub  Pioneers;  Brigadier- 
General  Petrie,  commanding  Royal  Artillery;  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wallace,  commanding  division  Royal  Artillery;  Lieutenant- Colonel 


OFFICIAL  REPORT.  483 

t 

Mil  ward,  commanding  division  Royal  Artillery ;  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Penn,  commanding  A-21,  Royal  Artillery ;  Commander  Fellowes,  com- 
manding Naval  Rocket  Batteries ;  Captain  Twiss,  commanding  B-21, 
Royal  Artillery  ;  Colonel  Graves,  3rd  Brigade  Light  Cavalry,  command- 
ing Cavalry  Brigade;  Lieutenant- Colonel  Tower,  commanding  3rd 
Dragoon  Guards;  Major  Grough,  V.C.,  commanding  12th  Bengal  Cavalry ; 
Major  Briggs, commanding  Scinde  Horse;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Loch, com- 
manding details  of  Cavalry ;  Captain  Moore,  commanding  3rd  Brigade 
Light  Cavalry ;  Lieutenant  W.  Scott,  A.D.C.,  commanding  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chiefs Escort ;  Lieutenant  A.  Le  Messurier,  Royal  Engi- 
neers; Captain  Leslie  and  Lieutenant  Leacock,  Bombay  Sappers; 
Captain  Bainbridge,  commanding  Land  Transport  Corps,  who  had  the 
very  difficult  duty  of  providing  water  for  the  troops  throughout  the 
operations  since  leaving  the  Bechilo  river;  Captains  Ross,  GriffithSi 
and  Twentyman,  20th  Hussars,  commanding  divisions  Land  Trani^ort 
corps;  Major  Mignon,  Assistant-Commissary- General,  1st  Brigade, and 
Major  Goldsworthy,  Brigade-Major  of  Cavalry,  acting  as  Assistant- 
Commissary-General  2nd  Brigade;  Dr.  Mahafiy,  principal  medical 
officer  1st  Division,  whose  arrangements  for  the  field  hospitals  were  all 
that  could  be  desired ;  Surgeon-Major  Wyllie,  in  charge  of  the  field 
hospitals,  2nd  Brigade. 

I  desire  also  to  bring  to  notice  the  officers  of  my  staff :  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Wood,  Assistant  Adjutant ;  Major  Baigrie,  Assistant-Quarter- 
master-General ;  Lieutenant  Saunders,  20th  Hussars,  Aide-de-Camp ; 
and  Captain  George  Arbuthnot,  extra  Aide-de-Camp. 

These  officers  rendered  me  great  assistance  in  carrying  out  the 
orders  of  His  Excellency  the  Commander-in-Chief  during  the  day,  and 
have  served  with  me  since  my  arrival  at  Zoulla  with  the  first  arrived 
brigade. 

Li&utenant-Oeneral  Sir  R.  Napier,  0.  C.  5.,  0.  C.  8.  to 
the  Secretary  of  State  for  India. 

Commander-in-Chiefs  Office,  Camp,  Koomaylee : 
June  1,  1868. 

Right  Hon.  Sir,  —  In  continuation  of  my  despatch.  No.  40, 
dated  May  12,  I  have  the  honour  to  report  that  I  this  day  passed  the 
Sooroo  defile  with  the  last  column  of  the  Abyssinian  Expeditionary 
Force,  the  25th  Bombay  Native  Light  Infentry,  and  the  27th  Belooch 
battalion. 

The  march  from  Dalanta  to  Antalo  was  trying,  from  the  frequent 
severe  storms  of  rain  which  appeared  to  accompany  us,  and  from  which 
our  troops,  in  some  degree,  and  more  especially  the  followers  and  trans- 
port animals,  could  not  fiul  to  suffer. 

1 1  2 


484 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAQDALA. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

HOMEWARD — MABCH  TO  TAXAZZE — DEATH  AND  BURIAL  OP  LrBTTTEWANT 
MORGAK — THE  ARK — THE  PRIESTS*  SONG  OP  THANKSGIVING — THE  HEAD- 
WATERS OP  THE  GREAT  NILE — PARTING  WITH  THE  PXTGlTlVJiS  FROM 
MAODALA — STILL  HOMEWARD  REJOICING — aUEEN  VICTORIA  CONORATULATBS 
THE  CRUSADERS — DEATH  AND  BURIAL  OF  THE  EMPRESS  OP  ABYSSINIA — 
PRINCE  ALA  MAYU— KUSSAI'S  GOOD  FAITH  AND  ITS  REWARD — HIS  PART- 
ING WITH  NAPIER — THE  GREAT  FLOOD  IN  THE  SOOROO  PASS  AND  A 
MIRACULOUS  DELIVERANCE — MY  ARAB  HORSE— HOSPITABLE  FRIEND — 
MORNING — THE  TENDER  FAREWELLS — ON  THE  SEA — HOMEWARD  BOUND — 
THE  LAST  OF  THE  ABYSSINIAN  EXPEDITION. 

On  April  24  the  army  broke  up  its  encampment  on  the  plateau 
and  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  home. 

The  British  army,  after  the  plenty  that  reigned  in  the  camp 
the  last  four  days,  wth  the  good  rest,  so  necessary,  that  they  had 
enjoyed,  felt  as  blithe  and  merry  as  could  be  desired  for  a 
rapid  march  to  the  sea-coast. 

And  with  all  dangers,  all  anxieties  removed,  with  home  and 
its  delightful  associations  rising  before  us,  so 

'  No  foe,  no  dangerous  pass  we  heed, 
Brook  no  delay, — but  onward  speed 
With  loosened  rein  ;  * 

and  with  the  lively  tune  of  *  Garry  Owen '  ringing  in  their  ears, 
wliat  could  the  gallant  Irishmen  of  the  *  Duke  of  Wellington's 
Own '  do  but  spur 

*  O'er  the  hills  like  hayroes  fighting 
And  tayring  all  before  them/ 

followed  by  their  war-comrades  the  *  King's  Own,'  the  45th,  the 
3rd  Dragoon  Guards,  the  thousands  of  native  Indian  soldiers, 
and  the  thousands  of  camp  followers. 


DEATH  OF  LIEUT.  MORGAN. 


485 


The  army  was  in  excellent  health  when  it  started  from 
Dalanta.  There  were  but  eighty  in  the  dhoolies,  inclusive  of 
those  wounded  at  Magdala  and  Aroje. 

But  the  marching  en  masse  by  brigades  soon  exhibited  the 
weakness  of  the  animals,  superinduced  by  the  sufferings  they 
had  undergone  in  the  Bechilo  valley.  We  passed  the  Jeddah 
ravine,  and  terrible  were  the  effects  the  next  day.  OflScers  and 
men  began  to  suffer  from  a  relaxation  of  their  whole  bodily 
system,  occasioned  by  the  removal  of  the  objects  for  which  the 
campaign  was  imdertaken. 

From  Sindee  we  passed  on  unhalting  to  Abdecoom ;  thence 
to  Gazoo  and  Santarai ;  thence  downward  to  the  Takazze,  on 
the  banks  of  which  we  encamped  on  the  28th  April. 

At  this  place  the  British  army  suffered  a  loss  in  the  death 
of  one  of  its  most  promising  officers — Lieutenant  Morgan,  of 
the  10th  Company  of  the  Eoyal  Engineers.  He  was  a 
young,  able,  courageous,  and  energetic  officer  at  all  times,  be- 
sides being  a  true  Christian  gentleman.  He  was  buried  on 
the  banks  of  the  Takazze  river,  under  the  shade  of  pleasant, 
umbrageous  trees  which  surrounded  the  church  of  St.  Grabriel. 
All  the  officers  and  civilians  attached  to  the  1st  Brigade 
followed  the  body  to  the  grave,  to  pay  the  last  sad  respects  to 
one  who  was  entitled  to  the  goodwill  of  all  who  knew  him. 
The  services  read  over  him  were  very  affecting,  and  those  who 
stood  by  during  the  interment  felt  that  indeed  a  bright  soldier 
had  departed.  Under  the  waving  trees  his  grave  was  made, 
which  in  future  years,  when  another  generation  shall  have  come 
and  gone,  will  b6  an  object  of  veneration  to  European  travellers, 
as  the  resting-place  of  one  of  the  famous  Crusaders  who  marched 
to  Magdala. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  issued  an  order  commendatory  of 
his  high  excellence,  his  unflagging  zeal  and  energy,  and  expres- 
sive of  his  regret  at  the  loss  the  British  army  sustained  in  his 
death.  Lieutenant  Morgan  was  interred  with  all  military 
honours. 

In  the  evening  we  had  signal  evidence  of  the  feelings  with 
which  the  natives  regarded  the  conquerors. 

While  we  were  marching  southward  they  held  their  fingers 
to  their  ears  and  their  hands  before  their  faces  whenever  the 
soldiers  spoke  to  them  of  what  they  intended  to  do ;  but  now 


486 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


that  they  saw  that  the  soldiers  had  reduced  the  fortress  to  a 
scorched  rock,  and  dispersed  Theodore's  grand  army  of  In- 
vincibles  to  the  four  winds,  they  came  out  to  tender  ovations. 

Their  pride  and  arrogance  gave  way  before  the  stupendous 
fact  that  they  beheld  the  conquerors  of  *Theodorus.'  They 
approached  in  masses  to  sing  our  praises,  taking  for  the  subject 
of  their  psalmody  David's  thanksgiving  psalm  for  '  powerful 
deliverance  and  manifold  blessings,'  which  conmiences  with 
'  The  Lord  is  my  rock,  my  fortress,  and  my  deliverer ;  the  Grod 
of  my  rock ;  in  Him  will  I  trust ;  He  is  my  shield  and  the  horn 
of  my  salvation,  my  high  tower  and  my  refuge,  my  Saviour ; 
Thou  savest  me  from  violence '  (2  Samuel,  xxii). 

It  was  chanted  with  due  Davidic  fervom*.  ^  David  played 
before  the  Lord  on  all  manner  of  instruments  made  of  fir  wood, 
even  on  harps,  and  on  psalteries,  and  on  timbrels,  and  on 
cornets,  and  on  cymbals,'  while  leaping  and  dancing,'  as 
Michal,  daughter  of  Saul,  saw  him,  girded  with  the  linen  ephod 
• — with  the  people  shouting  with  all  their  might  and  with  the 
*  sound  of  trumpets ' — so  the  Abyssinian  priest«,  deacons,  elders, 
and  children  of  the  church,  brought  forth  an  imitation  of  the 
Ark. 

Five  yards  was  its  length,  a  yard  its  breadth,  and  a  foot  was 
the  height  of  this  Ethiopic  image  of  the  Ark.  It  was  covered 
with  a  scarlet  cloth  embroidered  with  gold,  and  on  the  top  of 
it  there  was  a  semblance  of  the  Mercy  Seat — not  of  pure  gold, 
but  of  wood  covered  with  crimson  silk.  Above  it  there  was  a 
canopy  of  this  silk,  like  unto  a  crown  with  rich  embroidery 
round  about  it,  with  a  border  of  two  hands'  breadth  pendant 
from  its  sides. 

On  the  ark  there  were  neither  cherubim  ncr  the  sheckina 
visible.  In  these  things  the  ark  was  deficient,  and  came  not  up 
to  the  original.  High  above  the  heads  of  the  psalmodising  mass 
were  held  the  garments  and  the  vessels,  the  candlesticks,  the 
laver,  priests'  robes,  hyssops  and  communion  cups,  pixes  and 
chalices,  crosses  of  brass,  and  of  silver,  and  of  gold,  together 
with  other  officiating  instruments  denominated  *  holy  things.' 

The  head  priest  wore  his  ephod — a  short  vest  without 
sleeves — over  his  stole,  with  the  semblance  of  a  mitre  enfolded 
by  an  enormous  turban  round  his  head.    The  breast-plate  of 


TRIUMPHAL  LAYS  OF  THE  ABY8SINIANS. 


487 


this  sub-hierarch  was  a  richly  decorated  square  piece  of  tanned 
ox  hide. 

The  neophytes,  clothed  with  their  cotton  togas,-  held  the 
belts  and  kept  up  with  him — to  the  intense  admiration  of  the 
boys — a  deafening  jingling  clamour ;  their  instnunents  of  jimiper 
wood  and  brass,  one-stringed  banjoes,  clanking  brass  cymbals 
(stuck  on  the  players'  numerous  joints),  keeping  symphonious 
time,  while  high  rose  the  epopese  as  they  advanced,  towards 
head-quarters. 

Amongst  them,  chanting  with  vigour,  were  several  arrant 
rogues,  who,  with  unparelleled  mendacity  indexed  on  their 
grotesque  features,  beseeched  the  mighty  Feringhee  Sooltans 
to  give  them  backsheesh. 

In  the  mazy  crowd  of  dusky  men,  women,  and  children  there 
was  a  remarkable  paucity  of  honest  faces.  I  fear- 1  should  be 
flattering  them  if  I  admitted  that  there  was  even  one  who 
possessed  a  soul  which  could  have  resisted  the  temptation  of 
picking  and  stealing  if  opportunities  had  been  forthcoming. 

The  inherent  human  failing  to  acquire  things  by  superior 
cunning  was  stamped  by  nature  on  each  tawny  physiognomy. 
After  all  the  romance  of  the  land  had  become  stale  with 
familiarity ;  no  one  in  the  army,  I  believe,  could  '  abide '  to  see 
one  Abyssinian  near  his  tent. 

However,  as  they  came  to  sing  a  lay  in  the  Feringhees' 
honour,  no  one  had  the  heart  to  object,  provided  they  kept  at 
a  respectable  distance  from  the  tent  doors.  As  Sir  Eobert 
Napier  in  his  triumph  over  them  and  in  his  large-heartedness 
believed  them  -to  have  been  faithful  auxiliaries  in  the  matter 
of  furnishing  the  various  camps  with  provisions,  the  soldiers  and 
officers  put  as  good  faces  on  the  matter  as  they  could,  and 
found  humour  enough  left  in  their  bosoms  to  enjoy  the  singing, 
and  applaud  the  Terpsichorean  performances. 

As  the  priests  command  by  far  the  greatest  respect  among 
the  natives,  they  of  course  took  the  front  of  the  assembly. 
When  they  were  all  grouped  in  their  respective  positions — fifty 
paces  in  front  of  head-quarters — a  strong-limged  priest,  evi- 
dently the  choragus  of  the  native  choir,  struck  up,  with  a 
serio-ludicro  air,  the  first  note  of  the  impromptu  stanzas  about 
to  be  sung  in  our  honour,  descriptive  of  the  Feringhee  conquest 
over  the  Negus. 


488 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


As  he  warmed  in  his  theme,  and  his  voice  rose  to  enthusiasm, 
the  motley  assembly,  at  the  waving  of  a  crucifix,  chimed  in  with 
chorus,  which,  sung  with  stentorian  lungs,  had  a  tremendous 
eflfect. 

After  the  chorus,  six  priests  clad  in  cotton  stoles,  headed 
by  the  sub-hierarch,  took  the  eulogy  up  at  a  very  low  key, 
which  soon,  however,  ros§  so  high  .and  shrill  in  a  protracted 
continuity  of  sound,  that  one  momentarily  expected  to  hear 
their  lungs  crack,  ending  with  a  stormy  chorus  as  before. 

Then,  forming  themselves  into  a  circle,  a  hundred  of  them 
commenced  a  dignified  sailing  roimd  their  neighbours  to  the 
right  and  left,  their  togas  getting  inflated  with  the  move- 
ment, weaving  each  into  another,  until  it  might  have  been 
imagined  they  had  manufactured  some  complicated  knot  on  the 
Q-ordian  principle  ;  but,  soon  taking  the  reverse  method,  they 
reached  their  former  positions  in  time.  The  singing  went  on 
louder  and  louder,  and,  the  choragus  giving  the  warning  clap, 
the  whole  multitude  clapped  their  hands ;  the  women  and 
children  struck  up  the  silver-toned '  Li-li-li,'  performing  a  dance 
similar  to  the  Chinese  hop  and  skip. 

They  then  formed  triplets,  and  massed  themselves  together, 
when  a  shrill  note  from  the  boys  sent  them  all  into  a  confused 
whirl,  round  and  round,  the  sub-hierarch  and  his  six  assistants 
going  faster  and  faster,  as  they  acquired  momentum,  clap- 
ping their  hands,  singing  louder  than  ever,  the  head  priest 
ducking  his  body  lower  and  lower,  and  more  energetic,  until 
the  dance,  in  the  excitement  which  they  all  laboured  imder, 
assumed  the  appearance  of  a  Jubilee  medley,  composed  of 
waltzes,  Dervish  dances,  sarabands,  fendangoes,  pirouettes,  and 
chassis — the  three  latter  performed  by  the  most  youthfid  of  the 
assembly. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  all  this  time  the  Ark  and 
Mercy  Seat — minus  the  cherubim — stood  on  the  groimd  near 
the  priests,  while  a  choice  number  of  infantine  neophytes  man- 
fully rung  the  merriest  chimes,  and  the  instruments  of  juniper 
wood,  the  one-stringed  banjoes,  and  cymbals,  made  as  much 
discordant  music  as  was  possible  under  the  circumstances. 
The  Ethiops,  before  concluding  the  entertainment,  raised  once 
again  the  Canto  Ti^nfcde  ! 

Situated  as  our  camp  was,  near  the  fountain-bead  of  the 


THE  CANTO  TRIONFALE  1 


489 


mysterious  Nile,  on  the  banks  of  the  Takazze,  a  di-eaming 
stream,  flashing  and  murmuring  at  our  feet  in  the  bright 
evening — the  men's  voices  resonant  among  the  sinuosities  of 
the  heights,  the  children  anil  women's  voices  toned  in  harmony 
with  the  deep  bass,  like  the  piping  of  a  living  gale  through  a 
ship's  shrouds,  to  the  deep  roar  of  the  storm — one  may  well 
imagine  that  there  was  a  charm  in  the  scene,  that  it  was 
another  event  to  be  remembered  in  the  drama. 

Perhaps  the  thought  of  heroic  Morgan's  grave,  the  magic 
tints  of  the  sunset,  or  the  pleasurable  emotions  which  the  weird 
music  aroused,  or  all  combined,  tended  to  heighten  the  enjoy- 
ment. 

One  himdred  and  twenty-three  mules,  which  were  crippled 
and  galled  till  past  service,  were  presented  to  these  people  for 
their  favours,  besides  an  abundance  of  com  and  grass  which  had 
been  collected  during  our  absence,  and  which  the  army  trans- 
port train  could  by  no  manner  of  means  take  with  them. 

At  this  camp  we  parted  from  the  last  of  the  fugitives  from 
Magdala — they  continuing  their  march.  Lake  Tzana-ward,  via 
Lalibala,  while  we  jogged  on  northwards.  While  in  company 
with  the  army  they  were  fed  out  of  the  abundance  gathered  at 
each  station. 

There  was  no  scarcity  of  food  on  the  return.  The  garrisons, 
during  the  absence  of  the  army,  had  collected  stacks  and  heaps 
of  provisions  of  all  sorts ;  for  when  once  the  silver  dollar  had 
touched  the  palms  of  the  natives,  whatever  they  possessed 
became  immediately  vendible.  It  was  really  marvellous  how 
the  supplies  rolled  in,  considering  the  insuflScient  tillage  of  the 
ground,  their  natural  timidity  and  distrust  of  strangers,  as  well 
as  the  narrow  band  of  country  from  which  the  provisions  were 
raised. 

Forward  the  army  went  rejoicing  by  the  way  from  the 
Takazze  to  Muja — Muja  to  Wandach,  over  cloud-fenced  Mezgar 
Amba,  bidding  adieu  to  the  Takazze  valley,  and  downward  to 
Dildee,  where  we  recovered  our  clothes  and  eflfects,  and  once  more 
revelled  in  Bohea,  whose  essence  and  aroma  were  as  water  to 
parched  lips  1  From  Dildee  to  Marowar  was  a  sore  march ;  the 
mules  died  by  hundreds.  From  Marowar  to  Lat,  where  the 
1st  Division  had  stopped  for  action  on  its  way  to  Magdala — 
thence  to  Muzzageeta — and  next  to  beautifiil  Lake  Ashangi, 


490  COOMASSI£  AND  MAGDALA. 

where  the  wide  Syrtus  on  its  further  side  was  smiling  with  every 
green  thing ! 

At  Ashangi  we  received  news  that  the  floods  in  the  Sorroo 
Pass  and  Senafe  Ghaut  had  begun ;  that  the  military  road  through 
the  pass  had  been  destroyed  ;  and  that  there  was  every  appear- 
ance that,  now  the  rains  had  commenced  in  earnest,  the  road 
could  not  be  rendered  available  for  the  passage  of  troops  to  the 
sea-coast. 

Miles  of  telegraph  wire  had  been  swept  away,  and  much 
hay  had  been  destroyed.  Various  suggestions  were  of  course 
started  for  the  amelioration  of  the  evil. 

It  was  proposed  to  build  huts  on  Senafe,  wherein  the  troops 
could  stay  during  the  rainy  season  ;  and  again  it  was  proposed 
that  the  camps  should  remain  as  they  were  in  the  ghaut,  and 
that  each  station  should  cook  provisions  for  the  soldiers  by  the 
time  they  should  arrive — the  telegraph  to  warn  the  respective 
stations  of  the  hour  the  regiments  might  be  expected.  But 
rthese  suggestions  fell  to  the  ground,  on  account  of  the  diflSculty 
of  decision  until  Sir  Eobert  was  thoroughly  posted  as  to  the 
extent  of  the  damage  done  by  the  floods. 

That  night  at  Ashangi  we  experienced  a  heavy  shower  which 
made  the  tents  very  wet  and  cumbersome ;  but  by  10  o'clock 
next  morning  they  were  perfectly  dry,  and  the  army  continued 
its  march.  There  was  a  large  amount  of  forage  burnt  at  the 
lake,  the  General  preferring  to  burn  it  rather  than  distribute 
it  to  the  wretches  who  had  repaid  his  kindness  with  so  much 
ingratitude.  They  had  taken  every  opportunity  to  retard  the 
conveyance  of  supplies  to  the  posts  beyond  while  Colonel 
Milward  was  practising  his  battery,  the  day  before,  upon  points 
near  the  lake  and  on  its  waters. 

The  groves  of  Haya,  on  the  southern  slope  of  Mount 
Masobo,  were  reached  three  or  four  hours  after  we  left 
Ashangi. 

Here  we  met,  on  our  return,  the  officers  of  the  Trigono- 
metrical Survey,  Lieutenants  Carter,  Dummler,  and  Holdich, 
Eoyal  Engineers,  who,  by  the  most  strenuous  exertions  and  at 
the  cost  of  great  fatigue  and  privations,  had  succeeded  in 
surveying  nearly  6,000  square  miles,  carrying  their  work  ifrom 
the  sea-coast  to  the  interior,  as  far  as  Dalanta. 

At  Haya,  though  surroimded  by  wet  dingles  and  mist  and 


HOMEWARD  1  NOW  EVER  HOMEWARD  I 


491 


fog,  our  stomachs  were  gratified  with  port  wine,  brandy,  and 
the  pure  Jamaica — the  results  of  a  necessary  distribution  of  the 
hospital  stores,  as  their  carriage  demanded  more  animals  than 
any  benefits  that  could  accrue  from  their  preservation  were 
worth. 

From  Haya  to  Pilago  was  a  short  march,  owing  to  the 
rains  and  mire.  Five  of  the  transport  elephants  were  shot 
here — a  necessity  that  could  not  be  obviated  because  of  their 
extreme  weakness. 

The  next  day  the  army  left  Pilago  for  Mukhan,  thence  to 
Atzala.  It  was  thought  that  Sir  Robert  Napier,  upon  arriving 
at  the  latter  place,  would  have  thrown  a  few  shells  at  the  amba 
of  Aleggie'  out  of  compliment  to  its  owner,  who  had  been 
assiduous  in  his  efforts  to  retard  the  native  carriage  of  supplies; 
but  Welda  Yassous  had  fortunately  taken  wings  and  deported 
himself  away,  in  which  case  any  demonstration  made  against 
the  amba  would  have  been  deprived  of  its  effects. 

From  Atzala  the  prudent  Napier  marched  his  heterogeneous 
army  still  northward,  unhalting,  homeward.  The  pleasant 
glades  and  bubbling  stream  near  Mesheck  were  reached  and 
passed ;  the  wild  and  weird  amphitheatre  before  Musgee  was 
seen  as  soon  as  we  passed  the  portals  of  Aleggie  ravine;  and  the 
next  day,  to  our  great  relief,  the  fortified  camp  and  plain  of 
Antalo  dawned  upon  the  view.  We  were  half  way  to  the  sea- 
coast.  The  rearmost  brigade  arrived  at  Antalo  at  noon.  May 
12,  1868. 

The  march  from  Magdala  to  Antalo  proved  very  fatal  to 
the  animals  of  the  transport  train.  The  road  was  literally 
strewn  with  them.  In  a  proportionate  sense  the  retreat 
from  Moscow  could  not  have  proved  more  adverse  to  animal 
life  than  this  march.  Hundreds  of  mules  died  daily.  Camels 
succumbed  the  most  readily,  and  even  the  elephants  suffered. 
The  cavalry  horses  died  by  dozens. 

The  crossing  of  the  Jeddah  ravine  and  the  Dildee  moim- 
tains  cost  the  lives  of  700  animals.  A  single  glance  at  a  route 
chart  will  at  once  explain  how  trying  so  many  consecutive 
ranges  of  mountains  would  naturally  be  to  loaded  animals. 

From  Antalo  to  the  sea-coast,  instead  of  the  bimgling  dis- 
orderly mass  that  the  army  presented  on  the  previous  marches. 


492 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


it  was  to  be  divided,  eacli  regiment  of  foot  and  horse  having 
its  appointed  days  of  marching. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  the  army  at  Antalo  the  following 
General  Orders  and  telegrams,  received  from  the  Queen  of 
England  and  the  Soyal  Duke  of  Cambridge,  were  read  to  the 
regiments  by  their  commanding  oflBcers  : — 

*  Camp  Antalo,  May  12,  1868. 

'  The  Commander-in-Chief  has  jbhe  highest  satisfaction  in 
conveying  to  the  army  of  Abyssinia  the  following  message 
received  this  day  by  telegraph. 

*  Sir  Eobert  Napier  heartily  congratulates  all  under  his 
command  on  the  flattering  recognition  of  their  services  by  Her 
Most  Gracious  Majesty  Queen  Victoria : — 

* "  The  Queen  sends  hearty  congratulations  and  thanks  to  Sir 
Eobert  Napier  and  his  gallant  force  on  their  brilliant  success." ' 

*  Camp  Antalo,  May  12,  1868. 

^  The  Commander-in-Chief  has  much  satisfaction  in  pub- 
lishing to  the  troops  under  his  conamand  the  following  messages 
received  by  telegraph  from  His  Eoyal  Highness  the  Field 
Marshal  Commanding-in-Chief,  and  from  the  Eight  Honourable 
the  Secretary  of  State  for  India,  respectively  : — 

* "  We  all  rejoice  in  your  great  success,  and  in  that  of  your 
gallant  and  enduring  army." 

*  "  I  congratulate  your  Excellency  with  all  my  heart.  You 
have  taught  once  more  what  is  meant  by  an  arniy  that  can  go 
anywhere  and  do  anything.  From  first  to  last  all  has  been 
done  welV^ ' 

Thus  were  the  first  blasts  of  the  universal  Jubilee  that 
convulsed  all  England  wafted  to  the  interior  of  Abyssinia. 
Well  might  Her  Gracious  Majesty  Queen  Victoria  be  pleased 
to  congratulate  Sir  Eobert  and  his  Crusaders ;  well  might  His 
Eoyal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Cambridge  transmit  greetings  by 
cable  to  meet  the  army  of  Abyssinia.  Though  a  little  war,  it 
was  a  great  campaign ;  and  not  in  Abyssinia — mountain-locked 
though  it  were — was  there  a  revulsion  of  feeling  experienced  ; 
the  fame  of  it  sounded  with  loud  reverberations  over  wide 
Asia.  Princes  and  potentates,  scattered  far  apace,  heard  the 
noise  or  it  and  trembled ;  a  peaceful  epoch,  they  saw,  had  not 


DEATH  OF  THE  EMPRESS. 


493 


vitiated  England's  strength;  and  this  last,  this  beat,  this 
greatest  of  victories,  seemingly  made  so  little  of,  established 
her  prestige  on  a  firmer  ba^is  than  ever. 

From  Antalo  to  Senafe  the  army  continued  its  way  im- 
falteringly  and  without  intermission.  The  only  event  on  the 
route  was  the  death  of  Empress  Egenie  Torenachie,  relict  of 
the  Emperor,  from  consumption.  Very  genuine  grief  was 
exhibited  by  her  dependants  at  her  funeral.  She  died  on  May 
15,  at  Haikhullut,  where  she  was  buried.  The  military  band 
of  the  '  King's  Own '  played  the  *  Dead  March  in  Saul,'  pre- 
ceding the  coflBn  to  the  grave.  Near  the  coflSn  were  her  maids 
of  honour,  weeping  violently  at  what  they  considered  an  irre- 
parable loss.  Behind  came  the  oflSciating  priests  of  her  church ; 
the  young  Prince,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Bassam,  besides  one  of 
the  Commander-in-Chiefs  aide's-de-camp,  and  several  of  his 
staflF,  followed  by  a  great  number  of  Abyssinians. 

She  had  purposed  to  go  to  Bombay  with  her  little  son, 
believing  that  course  the  wisest,  since  such  was  the  advice  of 
Sir  Eobert  Napier. 

The  young  Prince  Ala-Mayu,  which  name  means  *I  am 
seeing  the  world,'  was  now  left  an  orphan;  but  the  Commander- 
in-Chief's  intentions  concerning  him  were  in  no  wise  changed — 
rather  strengthened  than  otherwise. 

The  last  of  the  army  of  Abyssinia  arrived  at  Senafe  on  May 
24.  In  spite  of  the  monotonous  journey  from  Antalo  to  this 
first  highland  post,  it  every  day  grew  more  and  more  evident 
that  the  campaign  was  drawing  to  its  close ;  that  the  sea  was 
nearing  us,  or  that  we  were  nearing  it;  and  that  once  on  the 
sea,  Home,  Sweet  Home,  lay  not  far  distant. 

Six  months  before  the  army  had  left  Senafe  with  bosoms 
steeled  for  their  duty,  and  nerves  braced  for  what  was  to  be  done* 
Two  harvests  had  been  reaped  since  we  had  left  this  initial  post, 
and  it  was  the  vernal  period  with  every  blade  of  grass  and 
stalk  of  com  for  the  third  time. 

Prince  Kussai  of  Tigre,  whom  I  have  imintentionally  left  in 
silence  for  so  long,  deserves  one  more  notice  from  me.  Loyal 
ally  of  a  loyal  man  he  was,  and  had  remained  so  since  first  he 
plighted  his  faith  by  the  side  of  that  stream  near  Haussein. 
Whatever  prince  could  have  done  was  done  by  him.  Con- 
stantly assiduous  in  furthering  the  British  General's  intentions. 


494 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


deftly  energetic  in  raking  supplies  of  forage  and  provender  for 
both  man  and  beast,  not  a  particle  of  dereliction  of  duty  could 
be  charged  to  him ;  but  what  thanks  could  be  clothed  in  words 
were  certainly  due  to  him.  Wagshum  Gobazye  had  been  as 
full  of  promises  as  the  Prince ;  but  his  promises  were,  as  a  rule, 
but  fruitless  words  for  the  entertainment  of  the  British  Greneral. 
While  in  his  country  of  Lasta  and  Samen,  Sir  Robert  Napier 
could  not  say  that  he  knew  thoroughly  the  insincerity  of 
Gobazye's  pseudo-friendships ;  but  when  the  open,  manly, 
sincere  face  of  the  Tigrean  Prince  and  the  recollection  of 
his  courtesy  flashed  across  his  mind,  it  is  of  course  unneces- 
sary to  say  that  Kussai  could  claim  the  preference  in  his 
favour. 

The  second  day  after  the  British  army  arrived  at  Senafe, 
Prince  Kussai,  with  a  chosen  body  of  300  cavalry,  came  to  bid 
adieu  to  the  British  army.  He  was  rapturous  at  the  great 
success  of  Napier,  and  complimented  him  with  all  the  courteous 
phrases  that  the  Abyssinian  vocabulary  admits  of.  He  said  he 
wished  Napier  *  all  the  happiness  that  Paradise  can  bestow,  the 
applause  of  his  countrymen,  all  and  highest  honours,  plenty  of 
wives  and  children,  years  of  life,  and  a  comfortable  seat  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  patriarchs — Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.' 
Amen  I  says  the  author. 

It  is  an  indubitable  fact  that  Sir  Robert  Napier,  though  a 
British  General,  discarded  all  frigid  conventionalities,  recipro- 
cated the  glowing  compliments,  and  lovingly  embraced  him  for 
his  fealty. 

There  was  another  review  held  at  Senafe  in  honour  of 
the  Queen's  birthday,  and  the  admirable  and  intelligent 
manoeuvring  excited  the  Prince's  warmest  admiration.  He, 
also,  desirous  of  appearing  in  the  best  light  before  Sir  Robert 
Napier,  the  gentlemen  of  his  staff,  and  the  groups  of  foreign 
ofiicers,  drew  his  men  up  in  two  lines  and  went  through  the 
evolutions  of  a  sham  meUe, 

The  Prince  performed  his  part  very  well,  his  horsemanship 
being  by  far  the  best.  Once  the  signal  was  given,  the  intended 
sham  battle  became,  as  I  term  it,  a  sham  TneUe,  where  each  man 
dashed  against  his  opponent  without  regard  to  the  order  of  the 
formation,  fiercely  assailing  with  the  blunt  end  of  his  spear 
whoever  came  across  his  path.  The  retreating  party,  which  soon 


WITHIN  THE  SOOROO  PASS. 


495 


made  itself  recognisable,  were  almost  as  dangerous  in  their  re- 
treat as  in  their  onset,  for,  Parthian-like,  they  shot  imaginary 
bullets  while  flying  from  the  field. 

For  his  good  faith  Sir  Kobert  Napier  was  pleased  to  bestow 
a  valuable  guerdon  on  Kussai— especially  valuable  for  one  in  ' 
his  straits — namely,  1,500  muzzle-loading  musket«,  '  Brown 
Besses,'  400,000  rounds  of  cartridges,  and  six  pieces  of  artillery 
with  shot  and  ammunition  to  match.  With  this  magnificent 
present  there  was  no  doubt  that  he  would  be  able  to  make  his 
own  terms  with  the  depredating  Egyptians  who  had  too  long 
been  allowed  to  perform  nameless  crimes  upon  Abyssinians 
unchecked.  Kussai,  with  the  aid  of  several  Europeans  who 
wanted  to  go  back  to  him,  might  now  dictate  terms  to  both 
Wagshum  Q-obazye  and  the  "Egyptmns. 

I  started  down  the  Senafe  Ghaut  with  five  animals  loaded 
with  baggage  and  trophies,  attended  by  as  many  servants,  three 
or  four  days  prior  to  the  advent  of  the  army  within  its  confines 
on  the  return.  The  pass  appeared  as  when  I  first  started  on 
the  campaign  ;  but  I  thought  the  birds  sang  blither  notes  of 
welcome,  and  the  steep  slopes,  garnished  with  numberless  shrubs, 
looked  greener  and  more  joyous  in  the  light.  Rayra  Q-uddy 
was  reached  by  noon,  and  after  an  hour's  rest  we  continued  our 
way  downward,  threading  patiently  the  nimierous  angles  and 
labyrinth  of  curves,  until  we  arrived  at  Undel  Wells. 

The  next  day,  after  despatching  a  breakfast  cooked  long  be- 
fore dawn,  we  continued  our  journey,  arriving  at  Upper  Sooroo 
station  at  noon.  Here  we  rested  a  couple  of  hours  while  the 
animals  were  feeding  and  our  lunch  was  being  cooked. 

About  2  P.M.  my  little  kafilah  was  on  the  road  again,  fol- 
lowed in  the  rear  by  two  or  three  officers  and  their  baggage 
animals,  who  were  as  eager  to  reach  Zoulla  as  I  was. 

The  heat  at  this  time  was  intense,  increased  as  it  was  by 
the  incandescence  reflected  by  the  white  walls  of  quartz, 
granite,  marble,  and  limestone,  between  which  the  pass  ran  its 
serpentine  course.  Two  miles  from  Sooroo  the  extreme  width 
of  the  pass  is  about  30  feet,  and  for  five  miles  afterwards  it 
contracts  itself  at  intervals  to  within  20  feet,  the  walls  of 
sheer  rock  rising  to  a  dead  height  of  800  feet. 

As  we  advanced,  the  heat  became  more  intense,  and  I 
noticed  that  the  sun  had  become  obscured  by  drifting  murky 


496 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


masses  of  clouds.  Whole  gusts  of  torrid  wind  occasionally 
swept  towards  us. 

When  about  three  miles  from  Sooroo,  these  prenaonitory 
symptoms  of  a  storm  had  been  noticed  with  much  anxiety  by 
the  party  in  our  rear.  As  we  rounded  an  abrupt  curve  of  the 
gorge  we  met  a  multitude  of  officers  and  men,  numbering 
somewhere  about  a  thousand,  advancing  to  meet  us  on  the 
run,  as  for  dear  life. 

As  we  neared  each  other  the  officers  shouted  out  for  us  to 
return  to  Sooroo,  saying  that  it  was  impossible  to  proceed 
further  because  of  the  deep  pits  the  cataracts  had  formed  in 
the  road,  which  had  been  left  unfilled. 

They  said  they  had  been  busy  with  the  working  parties  to 
try  and  make  the  road  passable  by  the  time  the  army  should 
arrive  from  Senafe,  but  were  obliged  to  retreat  up  again  to  the 
station  ;  for  during  the  rains  nothing  could  live  in  the  pass,  as 
it  filled  up  in  three  hours  to  the  depth  of  ten  feet,  sweeping  on 
its  impetuous  course  '  boulders  weighing  hundreds  of  pounds.' 

The  lurid  clouds,  the  close  atmosphere,  and  general  gloom 
that  prevailed,  predicted  beyond  a  doubt  the  approach  of  the 
diurnal  rain-storms ;  and,  said  they,  '  It  is  impossible  even  now 
to  reach  Sooroo  before  the  water  will  be  two  feet  deep  in  the 
pass.' 

Their  earnest  expostulations  and  the  evident  danger  to  be 
apprehended  had  the  desired  eflfect  upon  the  officers  who  were 
in  my  company,  and  they  retreated  back  to  the  depot ;  but  I 
was  determined  to  proceed,  and  my  only  reason  for  doing  so 
was  the  fact  that  the  mail  steamer  departed  from  ZouUa  for 
Suez  on  the  next  evening,  and  a  delay  of  half  a  day  would  pre- 
vent me  from  reaching  Zoulla  in  time  for  making  my  prepa- 
rations for  departure,  the  distance  being  nearly  thirty  miles 
of  roughest  road.  The  officers  hurried  on  their  way,  satisfied 
that  I  was  a  doomed  man. 

The  Irish  soldiers,  at  all  times  ready  with  their  jibes,  saluted 
toe  with  numberless  witticisms,  to  all  of  which  I  replied  good- 
humouredly.  They  made  up  their  minds  that  in  about  ten 
hours  I  would  find  myself  in  '  Davy  Jones's  locker.'  Some  ot 
them  seriously  remonstrated  with  me  ;  but,  I  suppose,  remem- 
bering the  adage  that '  a  wilful  man  must  go  his  own  way,' 
they  left  me.    The  Coolies  sung  out  in  chorus, '  Rah  Naheen 


THE  DANGERS  OF  THE  SOOKOO. 


497 


Sahib,  Sahib — Rah  Naheen  (there  is  no  road,  sir) ;  but  when 
they  saw  that  I  was  deaf  to  their  cries,  they  also  felt  assured 
that  th^y  saw  the  last  of  the  Yankee  Sahib,  and  went  on  their 
way  saying,  *  Khooda  hafiz  Sahib ' — *  Sir,  may  Q-od  be  your  pro- 
tector ! '  I  thanked  them  for  their  prayers,  but  nevertheless 
whipped  my  animals  to  a  quicker  pace. 

The  riband  of  sky,  seen  betwixt  the  two  walls  of  the  pass, 
assumed  the  blackness  of  a  velvet  pall,  and,  before  the  last 
of  the  working  party  had  barely  passed  beyond  view,  the  rain 
began  to  fall. 

Down  came  the  drops  slowly,  of  almost  the  size  of  a  dollar  as 
they  fell  on  the  stones  and  pebbles  ;  then  thicker,  larger,  faster. 
The  confined  thunder,  low,  muttering  at  first,  like  the  rumble  of 
artillery  over  a  wooden  bridge,  suddenly  broke  forth  in  loud 
peals.  The  forked  lightning  became  vivid  and  fierce.  The 
clouds  unfolded  themselves ;  the  *  windows  of  heaven '  were 
opened  ;  and  the  rain  poured  in  an  unbroken  flood. 

Forward  for  our  lives  we  travelled,  almost  on  the  gallop, 
plunging  into  already  formed  puddles,  leaping  into  pits  still 
left  unfilled,  over  round  boulders,  and  smooth,  slippery  rocks, 
looking  keenly  around  for  some  sheltering  rocky  ledge  conve- 
nient for  halting  during  the  storm. 

We  were  drenched  to  the  skin  in  an  instant,  and  the  water 
dripped  from  us  as  if  we  were  mermen.  The  luggage  was  also 
rendered  so  wet  that  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  animals 
could  not  carry  their  loads.  The  mule  which  carried  the  tent 
was  already  staggering  imder  the  weight,  and  the  one  which 
bore  Theodore's  carpet  looked,  as  it  were,  suddenly  broken- 
backed.  The  road  became  choked  with  streams.  A  current  was 
created  which  swelled  and  raved  and  washed  deep  ruts  in  it. 
As  yet  there  was  not  a  sign  of  any  place  that  could  afford  shelter 
to  a  mouse — the  walls  on  either  side  of  us  were  as  upright  as  if 
constructed  by  line  and  plummet. 

From  each  summit  of  these  walls  a  few  tiny  slender  strings 
of  water  poured  downward  of  the  colour  of  molten  glass ;  but 
before  a  second  thought  could  have  been  taken,  the  tiny  water- 
falls had  become  cataracts  which  fell  from  either  height  along 
the  whole  extent  of  the  walls,  deafening  to  the  ears  by  the 
terrific  roar  which  filled  all  space  with  its  thimder.  This  new 
danger  made  itself  apparent  directly;  Zahoorka,  one  of  my 

K  K 


498 


COOMASSIE  'AND  MAGDALA. 


Hindostanee  servants,  carelessly  went  too  near  the  base  of  one 
of  the  cliff  walls,  and  was  caught  by  one  of  the  cataracts,  which 
instantly  bore  him  to  the  earth,  and  the  current,  now  ominously 
strong,  swept  him  with  the  speed  of  an  arrow  over  a  lot  of  great 
rocks  into  a  pool  of  water  a  few  paces  ahead  of  us. 

By  timely  aid  he  was  saved,  but  not  before  he  had  been 
severely  wounded  on  the  head,  and  had  received  serious  bruises 
on  the  body.  The  pool  of  water  halted  my  party  ;  we  could  go 
no  further.  Upon  examination  it  was  found  to  be  8  feet 
deep  and  50  feet  long,  extending  across  the  pass.  A  rocky 
platform,  whose  side  and  surface  were  worn  smooth  as  a  flag- 
stone by  the  action  of  many  a  century  of  torrents,  jutted 
about  ten  feet  into  it,  leaving  a  space  of  five  feet  between  the 
sides  of  the  projection  and  the  pass  walls.  The  ground  at  its 
upper  end  was  composed  of  gravelly  soil,  the  loose  friable  nature 
of  which  offered  no  impediment  to  the  powerful  torrent  that 
now  flowed  towards  the  sea  irresistibly. 

On  this  rock  I  massed  my  party.  It  was  to  us  a  very  rock 
of  refuge,  unless  the  debacle,  as  the  British  officers  said,  should 
fill  the  whole  passix)  the  depth  of  ten  feet,  in  which  case  there 
would  be  nothing  for  us  to  do  but  to  swim  our  horses  adown 
it  at  the  rate  of  twenty  knots  an  hour,  or — drown  ! 

While  our  minds  were  excited  by  the  dangers  which  beset 
us,  their  nature  and  magnitude  were  not  so  apparent  as  now  that 
we  had  found  a  halting-place,  and  were  condenmed  of  a  neces- 
sity to  inactivity  upon  our  friendly  e}{^*.  Our  knowledge  of 
them  hitherto  partook  of  vague  formless  presentiments,  which 
animal  instinct  served  to  convey  to  minds  already  all  absorbed 
in  the  problem  of  how  to  evade  the  effects  of  the  flood.  But 
now  that  we  were  providentially  rescued  from  instant|  t.,-^th, 
my  mind  was  soon  engaged  in  the  analysis  of  the  causes  of  this 
diluvial  phenomenon.  Here  is  not  the  place  to  enter  into  a 
detailed  description  of  them ;  let  it  suffice  for  the  general 
reader  that  this  sudden  flood  so  powerfully  disruptive — as  we  may 
be  assiu-ed  of  that  when  we  know  that  it  had  formed  a  chasm  of 
800  feet  in  depth — is  the  collected  rain  from  an  area  of  a  hundrejj  , 
miles  in  extent,  and  the  unaccountable  doughs  and  ravines 
that  disembogued  their  contents  into  this  great  pass  which  is 
the  main  duct  for  the  passage  of  tlie  water  to  the  sea. 

Naturally,  man  cannot  long  philosophise  when  surrounded 


AN  AWFUL  HOUR. 


499 


by  an  element  risen  to  the  destructive  pitch,  and  mind  and 
body  suffer  from  its  effects.  We  were  led  to  note  the  action  of 
the  current  fast  rising  into  a  deluge  ;  and  the  more  we  gazed 
upon  the  scene  the  more  certain  was  our  fate  defined  should 
the  rain  long  continue.  How  bitterly  I  repented  not  having 
conformed  to  the  prudent  admonitions  of  the  working  parties, 
will  be  known  only  to  myself.  The  time  and  place  were  very 
adverse  to  vain  r^ets.  What  remained  for  us  to  do,  was  to 
be  as  patient  as  possible  ;  to  watch  with  aching  eyes  the  pro- 
gresB  of  the  flood,  listen  with  awe  to  its  roar,  and  mutely  ad- 
mire the  sublime  grandeur  of  the  scene. 

Downward  poured  the  rain  unceasingly,  and  the  thunder 
roared  above,  the  echoes  of  which  deafened  our  ears,  multiplied 
ten  thousandfold  as  they  were  flung  from  wall  against  wall, 
while  the  lightning  illiunined  with  its  ghastly  green  flames  the 
rifted  edges  and  pinnacles  of  each  colossal  height. 

Still  downward  plimged  the  watery  sheets,  now  silvered  with 
foam.  Onward  adown  the  pass  swirled  the  turbulent  current, 
growing  higher,  ever  higher,  bearing  everything  before  it  but 
our  own  firm  granite  eyot,  tearing  the  friable  gravelly  soil  away 
by  tons,  rioting  round  abrupt  curves  and  angles  in  raging 
confluxes,  foaming  over  obstructions,  forming  powerful  rapids, 
whitened  cascades,  and  cataracts,  which  roared  like  ten  thousand 
bass  dmms  beating  the  battle-call  I 

These  infinite  sounds  and  multiplex  echoes  were  enough 
in  all  conscience  to  apf  1  the  stoutest  man ;  and  my  Arab  and 
Hindoo  servants  were  far  from  laying  claim  to  such  distinction. 
They  expressed  their  fears  and  the  wild  alarm  which  had  taken 
possession  of  them  in  prolonged  shrieks. 

St  Jie  rain  fell  unceasingly,  plashing  timiultuously  in  our 
faces,  blinding  us  with  the  spray.  The  current  rose  higher, 
ever  higher,  every  instant  waxing  mightier,  every  drop  adding 
more  force  to  it,  and  increasing  its  violence.  There  were  three 
feet  of  water  in  the  pass. 

The  current  became  a  river — a  mighty  one—  all  powerful — 
bJ'Hng  towards  us  in  an  irresistible  flow,  its  placidity  only  ruflBed 
when  it  came  surging  against  oiu:  rocky  islet ;  for  it  had  been 
made  one  long  before,  the  bank  of  gravel  by  which  we  came 
he*  ing  been  eroded  and  torn  away  so  soon  as  the  current  had 
gathered  any  strength.    Well  for  us  it  was,  and  yet  we  could 

KK  2 


600 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGDALA. 


not  by  any  means  be  deemed  safe.  The  water  was  fast  rising ; 
it  was  even  then  within  eight  inches  of  the  surface,  and  half- 
an-hour's  more  rain  would  cover  the  rock  three  inches,  according 
to  computation  made. 

Engirt  as  we  were  by  those  looming  heights,  shedding 
powerful  cataracts  which  resoimded  like  the  advent  of  doom, 
and  shrouded  as  we  were  in  the  deep  gloom,  made  darker  by 
the  spray  and  vaporous  masses  which  sailed  majestically 
upward,  our  condition  was  truly  pitiable. 

To  add  to  the  horrors  of  the  scene,  corpses  of  men  rolled  by 
with  outstretched  arms  appearing  above  the  turbid  waves,  and 
carcases  of  oxen,  horses,  and  mules  tumbled  headlong,  colliding 
heavily  with  rocky  obstructions  ;  telegraph  poles  shot  past  with 
lightning  speed,  dragging  long  lines  of  wire  after  them  ;  carts 
and  wheels  crushed  against  our  granite  islet ;  bales  of  hay  and 
yellow  straw,  clumps  of  bushes,  and  again  corpses  of  men,  all 
commingling  in  the  turgid  stream. 

These  ghastly  evidences  of  the  ruin  and  death  created  by 
the  wild  element  increased  the  terrors  of  my  servants,  and 
their  shrieking  prayers  to  'Allah'  were  heard  far  above  the 
tumult  of  either  tempest  or  flood. 

After  raining  steadily  for  an  hour  and  three-quarters,  there 
was  an  instant's  pause,  when  it  recommenced  more  furious  than 
before.  The  water  became  level  with  the  top  of  the  rock,  and 
was  still  rising.  We  looked  upward ;  the  mist  was  gradually 
clearing.  Then  a  few  sun-blinks  stole  through  the  dark  vapour 
tinging  the  rain-drops  with  a  mysterious  shimmer,  transform- 
ing them  as  it  were  to  showers  of  brilliants,  and  the  dripping 
projections  glistened  with  a  breatliing  lustre ;  and  there  was 
revealed  also  to  us  a. few  scant  bushes,  which  dotted  the 
Alpine  summit,  quivering  and  flapping  under  the  battery  of 
the  storm,  like  forlorn  souls  tossing  on  the  verge  of  eternal 
death.  There  was  something  inexpressibly  grand  in  this 
sudden  lighting  of  the  gloom. 

The  water  touched  our  feet  and  washed  our  baggage  resting 
on  the  rock.  The  animals  became  restive  and  whinnied  piteously, 
the  muleteers  prayed  with  unusual  volubility,  and  I  gave 
up  hope.  I  felt  certain  that  in  a  few  seconds  at  most  we  should 
be  battling  for  life  in  the  waters,  which  were  still  rising  higher 
and  liigher.   But  suddenly  the  rain  ceased.   The  mist  dissolved 


"V^E  AKg  SAVED. 


501 


before  the  splendour  of  the  returning  sun,  and  a  segment  of  the 
Bow  of  Promise  was  seen  spanning  the  zenith !  We  were 
saved  I 

Within  five  minutes  the  cataracts  had  diminished  into  a 
few  weakly  jets,  which  soon  ceased  altogether,  and  within  ten 
minutes  the  water  had  receded  two  inches. 

At  five  o'clock  there  were  but  tiny  rivulets  where  but  an 
hour  previous  a  river  had  flowed. 

But  how  were  we  to  descend  from  our  rocky  pedestal,  the 
Burfiice  of  which  was  four  feet  above  the  water  ?  I  had  five 
baggage  animals  and  my  riding  horse,  with  all  the  luggage,  on 
an  island  in  the  centre  of  a  pool  of  water  8  feet  deep.  Most 
uncomfortable  position  to  remain  all  night  there,  shivering  in  wet 
clothes ;  and,  imless  matters  were  hurried,  it  would  be  dark 
before  we  could  get  to  the  Lower  Sooroo  station,  three  miles 
below.  As  it  was  evident  I  should  have  to  sacrifice  the  greater 
portion  of  the  baggage,  I  at  once  set  about  selecting  such 
things  that  I  could  best  dispense  with.  So  Theodore's  carpet, 
which  I  had  bought  at  the  auction  for  fifty  rupees,  now  of  a 
weight  of  nearly  800  pounds,  was  tumbled  over  into  the  pond^ 
though  with  many  regrets  at  the  loss  of  my  money,  the  dissolv- 
ing of  my  romance,  and  the  futility  of  the  trouble  I  had  taken 
with  it  over  a  journey  of  350  miles ;  then  the  servants'  tent 
and  half  their  bedclothes  were  discarded ;  a  trunk  full  of 
clothes,  curiosities,  a  lion  skin  or  two ;  all  superfluous  camp- 
kettles.  Two  days'  rations,  and  two  other  trunks,  with  their 
contents,  I  divided  in  light  loads  among  the  animals.  My  tent 
was  next  cut  in  two,  and  the  poles  thrown  away,  rendering  the 
carriage  of  the  canvas  easy  enough. 

It  now  remained  for  me  to  get  the  animals  away  from  the 
rock.  They  could  not  go  of  themselves,  because  the  sides  of  the 
rock  were  perpendicular  and  as  smooth  as  glass,  and  coaxing 
ihem  into  it  pioved  futile.  The  plan  had  been  tried  and  it 
would  not  answer. 

I  was  therefore  obliged  to  have  them  pushed  in  so  that  they 
could  swim  for  the  road,  which  was  but  15  yards  below  us. 
The  first  one  upon  which  we  tried  the  experiment  was  an 
Abyssinian  *  mare.  She  fell  in  with  a  heavy  splurge,  but 
soon  came  up  swimming  bravely  for  the  shore  below,  which 
she  reached  in  good  order.    The  n^xk  one  was  a  mule,  a 


502 


COOMASSIE  AKD  MAaDALA. 


thick-skulled  animal,  and  decidedly  muleisfa  in  every  way. 
It  required  the  united  efforts  of  all  my  servants  to  push  it 
from  the  rock.  In  falling  it  turned  a  somersault,  fell  with  a 
heavy  sound,  and  never  came  up  again — so  much  for  incor- 
rigible stupidity.  The  other  three  animals  reached  shore  in 
fine  style.  Then  tying  a  hitch  rope  to  the  baggage,  it  was  aU 
thrown  into  the  water,  and  dragged  through  safe  to  land. 

My  indispensable  adjunct  ALL  of  happy  memory,  my  Arab 
charger  Sayed,  and  myself,  were  all  that  now  remained  on  the 
rock.  It  therefore  devolved  on  Ali  and  myself  to  remove  Sayed 
from  his  rocky  pedestal  whereon  he  stood.  Unsaddling  him, 
and  fastening  the  bridle  well  around  his  neck,  we  led  him  close 
to  the  edge  of  the  rock,  and  tried  to  push  him  over  ;  but  this 
was  an  ignominious  style  of  treatment  which  Sayed's  noble 
spirit  could  ill  brook,  and  with  his  heels  and  teeth  he  at  once 
set  about  to  inform  us  that  he  could  not  and  would  not  put  up 
with  it. 

After  debating  that  question  with  Ali — who  was  a  wise- 
acre concerning  horses,  especially  Arabian  ones — it  was  decided 
that  the  '  Yankee  Sahib '  should  ride  him  in.  Now,  I  am  a 
capital  rider  on  a  smooth,  level  prairie,  or  even  on  an  Abys- 
sinian road ;  but  it  is  quite  a  different  thing  to  leap  a  horse 
into  a  deep  pool  of  water  from  a  height,  and  it  was  with  con- 
siderable misgiving  that  I  mounted  him — after,  however,  first 
seeing  well  to  saddle  gear — ^while  Ali,  in  pure  Arabic,  had  be- 
stow^ any  nimiber  of  endearments  upon  him. 

Cautiously  taking  up  the  bridle  reins  and  requesting  Ali  to 
jump  in  and  swim  away,  I  urged  Sayed  gently  to  the  edge  of 
the  rock,  and  permitted  him  to  smell  and  snuff  and  snort  as 
much  as  he  pleased  for  three  or  four  minutes.  Then  backing 
him  two  paces  and  setting  myself  well  in  the  saddle,  I  dug  my 
spurs  simultaneously  into  each  flank,  lifting  him  up  at  the 
same  time  with  the  bridle.  The  effect  of  the  spurs  on  the 
blooded  horse  was  instantaneous;  he  couched  himself  for  a 
spring  for  one-eighth  of  a  second,  and  like  a  panther  he  boimded 
off  the  rock  clean  into  the  air  and  into  the  turgid  water.  Sayed, 
after  flapping  his  ears,  headed  for  the  shore,  half  swimming. 

When  he  landed  the  lively  Ali  warmly  hugged  Sayed,  and 
in  honour  of  the  triumph  which  he  felt  the  noble  Arab  horse 


OUR  HOSPITABLE  RECEPTION. 


503 


had  won  he  extemporised  an  eulogistic  lay  of  his  high  courage 
then  and  there. 

We  had  soon  packed  up  again,  and  resumed  our  journey, 
the  pass  being  now  ahnost  dry.  After  struggling  over  two  miles 
of  boulders,  and  pits,  and  flat  rocks,  the  chasm  widened  into  a 
ravine,  flanked  by  sloping  ridges,  wet  crags,  and  dripping 
dingles  stretching  away  in  vague  and  mystic  perspective. 

We  arrived  at  the  Lower  Sooroo  station  about  7  o'clock  in 
the  evening,  just  as  twilight  became  night.  An  officer  who 
was  in  command  of  the  post  came  out  very  much  astonished  to 
find  that  we  had  survived  the  dangers  of  the  pass.  The  bodies 
of  five  men  had  been  found  drifting  when  the  flood  was  at  its 
maddest,  from  which  the  garrison  had  presaged  greater 
calamities.  After  I  had  concluded  my  tale,  the  officer  said  he 
was  '  distwessed  beyond  meashaw,'  but  would  I  '  take  a  peg — 
something  warm,  you  know ;  or  a  glawss  of  bwandy  and  sodawh ; 
do  you  good,  you  know — 'pon  word,  vewwy  sowwy,  vewwy  sowwy.' 

The  hospitable  officer's  invitation  to  *  take  a  peg,'  need  I  say, 
was  accepted  with  many  thanks ;  but  it  was  not  imtil  we  had 
pitched  upon  our  camp  and  built  a  roaring  fire,  and  had  gorged 
ourselves  to  repletion  with  a  bountiful  supper,  drunk  quan- 
tities of  hot  cofiee,  and  had  lit  our  pipes  and  bubble- 
bubbles,  that  we  could  talk  and  laugh  at  our  ease  at  the  walled 
Pass,  the  mighty  deluge,  and  the  terrible  dangers  of  the  Great 
Sooroo. 

Warmed  by  the  glow  of  the  cheerful  fire,  and  fortified 
against  rheumatic  fevers  by  the  hot  liquids  we  had  taken,  we 
sat  and  talked  together  in  broken  English — for  I  always  make 
friends  of  my  servants  when  they  are  inclined  to  be  good.  For 
hours  we  chatted  in  the  lurid  shadows  of  the  shelving  rocks, 
imtil,  unconsciously,  we  were  wafted  between  the  portals  of  the 
ivory  gate  into  the  phantom  realm, '  the  wide  pathless  desert  of 
dim  sleep.'  . 

At  4  A.M.  the  next  morning  we  were  on  the  road  for 
Koomaylee,  and  we  reached  that  camp  at  the  embouchure  of 
the  Sooroo  Pass,  about  an  hour  later. 

Breakfast  despatched,  we  defiled  past  Koomaylee,  and 
emerged  into  the  fulness  of  the  day  with  the  fervid  plain  of 
Zoulla  expanding  to  the  right  and  left,  and  for  twelve  miles  in 
our  front ;  and  beyond  the  snowy  cantonment  gleamed  the  azure 


504 


COOMASSIE  AND  MAGBALA. 


waters  of  the  Eed  Sea,  with  the  leviathans  of  the  deep  riding 
on  the  surface  in  magnificent  array  1 

About  noon  we  all  arrived  at  ZouUa,  glad  at  heart  at  the 
prospective  rest  before  us. 

ZouUa  appeared  very  diflferent  from  the  complicated  turmoil 
and  chaotic  disorder  that  reigned  there  when  I  first  landed. 
Immense  warehouses  had  been  erected,  which  contained  tons 
upon  tons  of  stores  and  every  known  requisite  of  a  well-ordered 
campaign.  Bazaars  were  numerous ;  and  a  half  restaurant  and 
half  grog  shop,  euphoniously  named  'Annesley  Hall,'  had 
been  built  to  accommodate  the  ofiicers,  suffering  from  the 
atmospheric  fervour  which  averaged  120°  Fahrenheit,  with 
delectable  '  pegs,'  'bwandys  and  sodawhs,' '  smiles,'  and  such  like 
refreshers.  All  the  hospitals  had  been  removed  to  Koomaylee, 
which  was  undoubtedly  as  good  a  location  for  a  sanatorium  as 
could  be  procured  between  the  highlands  of  Senafe  and  the 
sea. 

By  6  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  had  sold  my  baggage  animals 
for  a  mere  cypher,  discharged  my  servants,  and  seen  Ali  and  my 
Arab  horse  Sayed^  safe  on  board  the  transport  steamer  *  Indore.' 
She  was  to  leave  early  next  morning  for  Suez,  with  Colonel 
Milward  of  the  Koyal  Artillery,  who  had  been  chosen  by  Sir 
Kobert  Napier  to  convey  his  long  delayed  despatches  and  the 
four  crowns  of  Theodore  to  the  Queen  of  England. 

Our  *  mutual  friends '  of  the  Commissariat,  and  Captain 
Dawes,  Bunder-master,  did  the  honours  of  a  recherche  table  to 
the  returned  Crusader.  Before  I  embarked  there  wei:e  uttered 
some  solemn  promises  of  friendship  between  us,  and  we  each 
covenanted  over  a  last  brimming  *  peg '  to  correspond  with  one 
another  while  life  lasted ;  and  then  there  were  affecting  leave- 
takings  ;  and,  would  you  believe  it,  before  I  had  gone  ten  yards 
from  the  door  I  had  to  return  to  take  one  more  '  peg '  for  a  ban 
voyage  ? — and  so  was  it  done,  after  which  we  all  breathed  our 
final '  Farewells.' 

Next  morning  at  daybreak  the  steamer  *  Indore '  got  under 
weigh.  The  sun  rose  above  the  eastern  horizon  to  accompany 
us  on  our  way,  tinging  the  clouds  above  and  around  with  an 
intense  carmine  tint.    The  low  sandy  shores  of  Annesley  Bay^ 

>  The  Arab  horse  Sajed  was  shipped  to  New  York,  where  he  still  lives  in 
liurary  after  his  Abyssinian  toils,  a  honoured  inhabitant  of  a  InxnriouB  stable. 


FINIS  CORONAT  OPUS. 


505 


the  vast  camp  of  Zoulla,  and  the  proud  fleet  of  England's 
marine  receded  in  the  distance,  and  finally  vanished ;  but  it 
was  three  hours  afterwards  before  the  gigantic  heights  of  the 
Haddas  and  Hazorta  ranges,  through  which  the  Senafe  and 
Sooroo  Ghauts  run,  were  lost  to  the  view  as  they  blended  indis- 
tinctly with  the  vast  mountain  ranges  of  Nubia. 

The  army  arrived  safely  at  Koomaylee,  and  came  by  the  rail- 
way to  Zoulla  on  June  1,  iiaving  lost  only  ten  men  in  the  floods 
altogether.  Eight  days  afterwards  the  different  regiments 
embarked  for  Suez  and  Bombay,  according  to  their  respective 
destinations. 

A  month  later  the  great  camps  had  disappeared  from  Abys- 
sinia ;  the  transport  fleet,  had  spread  its  wings,  departing  for 
ever  from  Abyssinian  waters ;  and  thus  the  Modem  Crusade 
became  numbered  with  past  events,  to  be  remembered  of  all 
men,  in  all  lands,  among  the  most  wonderfully  successful  cam- 
paigns ever  conducted  in  history.    Finis  coronal  opus. 


THE  END. 


APPENDIX. 


STATISTICS  RELATING  TO  THE  TRANSPORT  SERVICE. 

The  following  statistics  in  connection  with  the  Transport  Service  were 
coarteooflly  supplied  bj  Captain  Tryon,  R.N.;  the  able  Director  of  Trans- 
ports:— 

Troop  Ships, 

Number  of  airivals  in  Annesley  Bay  669 

f,      „      „     at  Aden  of  ships  that  did  not  proceed  to 
Annesley  Bay  10 

Ships  chartered   ....*..  688 

Number  of  vessels  arrived  at  Aden  that  did  proceed  to 

Annesley  Bay  465 

Number  of  departures  from  Annesley  Bay     ....  669 

Total  tonnage  taken  up  at  Bombay,  Eurrachee, 

Aden^&c.    219,299 

Total  tonnage  taken  up  at  Calcutta       ....  45,427 

ff       f,        f,     f,  in  England       ....  30,225 

„       „        „     „  at  Suez           ....  6,972 

301,923 

Tonnage  of  Bombay  and  Bengal  Marine  Ships,  in- 
cluding *  Semiramis,'  *  Hyderabad,'  tugs,  and  steam 
tank  vessels,  but  not  lighters  ....  9,605 

Total  tonnage    ....  311,528 

Cost  per  month  of  transports,  supposing  that  all 
the  transports  that  were  engaged  were  under 
employ  at  one  time  ^£433,028  17  6 

Amount  paid  to  freight,  excepting  'Vine'  and 
'Columbine,'  chartered  in  England,  as  far  as 
Annesley  Bay,  the  particulars  of  which  are  not 
known  £10,710  12  0 

Amount  paid  for  line  of  bugalows  at  Bombay,  and 
Bushire,  to  convey  animals  and  fodder      .      .  £55,585  16  0 


608 


APPENDIX. 


Coal 

Coal  supplied  at  Aden 
,j       „      in  Annesley  Bay 

Total 

Coal  expended  in  condensing  in  Anneslej  Bay  on  board 
transports  *  Semiramis '  and  *  Hyderabad '    ^      .      .   8,020 J 

When  the  expedition  was  at  its  height,  coal  was  dis- 
charged from  colliers  at  the  rate  of,  per  day,       •      .  191 


Water, 

OaUons 

Water  supplied  at  Aden  by  P.  and  0.  Company,  from  a 
return  furnished  by  Mr.  Davis,  their  agent .      .      .  854,706 

Water  condensed  at  Annesley  Bay  by  Transports  spe- 
cially detained  for  the  purpose,  and  by '  Semiramis'  and 
'Hyderabad'   7,286,926 

Total      ....  87141,722 


Water  supplied  in  Annesley  Bay,  condensed  by  trans- 
porfs  and  condensing  ships  

Water  supplied  by  men-of-war,  taken  out  of  sailing 
transports,  sent  from  Suez  and  Bombay,  about  . 

Total      .      .      .  . 


Cost  of  water  condensed  by  transports  in  Annesley  Bay, 
supplied  by  condensing  steamers,  including  the  cost 
of  the  four  steamers  always  detained  there  for  the 


purpose  (per  gallon)  4'^6d. 


Actual  number  of  troops,  &c.|  that  landed : — 

Troops. 

Officers   520 

European  troops   4,250 

Native  troops   9,447 

Followers   26,214 

Civilians   433 

Women  followers   140 

Total  41,004 


Tons 

.  62,647 
.  19,651 

.  82^1 


28,018 

11,000 
397918 


APPENDIX. 


509 


Animals. 

Hones  2,638 

Elephants  44 

Mules  16,022 

Ponies  1^661 

Camels  4,735 

Donkeys  1^759 

BullodLS  7,071 

Slieep  12,839 

Total      ....  46,659 


Number  of  Troops,  &c.,  that  returned.  The  following  is  the  number 
of  soldiers,  &c.,  conveyed  to  Bombay  at  the  close  of  the  expedition ; — 

Troops. 

Officers  869 

European  troops  2,258 

Native  troops  9,606 

Followers  21,896 

Civilians  286 

Total      ....  34,416 
Animals, 

Horses  ^122 

Mules  and  ponies  4,126 

Bullocks  1,076 

Elephants  39 

Camels  40 

Total      ....  7,402 


MEMORANDUM,  showing  the  amount  of  Sickness  and  Mortality  in 
the  British  Troops,  Abyssinian  Expeditionary  Force,  during  the  entire 
Campaign : — 

Average  strength   2,688-8 

Average  daily  sick  166*62 

Ratio  per  cent.,  sick  to  strength  6*8 

,,       deaths  1'3 


510 


APPENDIX. 


Casualties, 

Offloers  Men 

Highlands  7  17 

Lowlands       .      ^  4  20 

Total      .      .   U  sT 


Officers^  Deaths  caused  as  follows  : — 

Difleaaes 
Dysenteria  Acuta  . 
Insolatio  . 

Vulnus  Sclopetarium 
Morb.  Valv,  Cordis  . 
Apoplexia 
Emenio  . 
Febris  Continua 
Angina  Pectoris 

Total 


Men's  Deaths, 

Diseasei 

Dysenteria  Acuta  .... 

„  Chronic 
Vulnus  Sclopetarium 

Insolatio  

Febris  remitt  

„    intermitt  .... 

„    typhoid  .... 

„  Continua  .... 
Ilepatatis  Acuta  .... 

Aneurisma  

Nephria  

Nephritia  

Verrcnatio  

Paralysis  

Total      .      .      .  .S7 
*  One  accident,  one  suicide.  *  Accidental  drowning. 


Number 

.  17 


LONDOirt  PKnrrxD  bt 

BPOTTISWOOra  AKD  CO.,  irxW-RTHKICT  IQUABI 
▲9D   PAHLIAMUrr  HTIIBT 


4 


• 
