John Stearne, A Confirmation and Discovery of Witchcraft (1648)
====================================================================
John Stearne (c. 1610-1670), associate of Matthew Hopkins in the East Anglian witch-hunt. A Confirmation and Discovery of Witchcraft — defending the reality of witchcraft and the hunt's methods, with confessions of those executed since May 1645. Text: 1648 first edition. Raw OCR via Internet Archive. Public Domain.

And Diſcovery of .

Containing thefe ſeverall particulars ;

That there are Witches called
bad Witches, and Witches untruely called

od or white Witches, and what manner of

people they be, and how they may bee knowne,
with many ‘particulars thereunto tending.

Together with the Confeſſions of many of thoſe executed fince
May 1645. in the ſeverall Counties hereafter mentioned.
As alſo fome objections Anſwered.

B Siearne, now of Larſball neere eBurie

Saint Edmonds in Suffolke, ſometimes of
Manningtree in Eſſex.

or

Prov. 17.15. He that juſtifieth the osha and he that ilonni the juſt, even they

both are an abomination to the Lord.

Devt 13. 14. Thou ſhalt therefore inquire, and make fearclf, and -aske diligently,
whether it be truth, and the thing u certaine.

“Printed by William Wilfon, dwellingin| Little Saint Bartholom

DEtre Sm N:


on
s” — — — — — -

- á

we
~ "he ice
7
*
*
t 6. —
e >
4 2 —
J *
*
7 * >
7
*
ts
we e }
*
j /
m
*
.
*
*
oe
„„ 2
—— é “a
4”
ä
e,
f *
*
*
f
*
4
-
.
.

p
t
F
fas
“4
*
*
*
92
is
5
*
S $
*
N
N

Courteous R EADER,

$829 0 the end Iwighͤt fatisfie the opinions of fuch as
deſire to be further [atisfied concerning the dia-
bolicall art, or crying fin, of Witch-craft (as I
u ſo call it;) For the ſinne of Witch-craft, and
the diabolical praGife thereof, is omnium {celerum atrociſſi-
mum, and in ſuch as have the knowledge of God, the greateſt
Apoftacie from the faith; for they renounce God and Chrift,
and give themfelves by a covenant to the Devill, the utter e-
nemy to God and all mankind, for in Deut.18.10,11,12.God
gave command to all the children of Ifrael that none amoneft
his fhould bee fuch. For thofe abominations were the
children of Canaan driven out from before them, and utterly
deftroyed aud plagued.As alfo Manaſſeth, 2 Cron.33.6.which
wickedueße of his was fo abhorred of God, asin his dif-
pleafure hee mentions it many yeares after by Jeremy, as cauſe
of removing the Iewes from their land, and fo leading them a-
way captive into a ftrange land, ler. 15. 4, 5. Idola-
ters ought to dye, as in Exod. 22. 20. and 32. 28, 29. Nay in-
ticers to Idolatrie, Deut. 13.9. becaufe they wor{hip Devills,
Pſal. 106.37. 1 Cor. 10. 20. Revel. 9. 20. But Witches wor-
Ship Devills, they invocate them, crave helpe of them, worke
22 and doe them homage, ſacriſice to them, and they
o it not to ftockes and ſtones, and fo mediately to the De vill,
as other Idolaters doe, but immediately to the Devill
himfelfe,and therefore the greateft Idolaters that can beʒ and

7 SS \ N \ U — — A — / ? are. 1 Ar
7 BOY, AY 2 {

$

A

“ad

4

— *

are not they then more worthyof death And to convince others
who are J fuch an erronens opinionas to fay, notwithftan -
ding Gods lam againft them, and the holy Scripture {peaking
of them, befides the lawes of Nations, both heathen apd Chri-
an made to punifh them, that there are no witches, but that
there are many poore filly ignorant people hanged wrong fully,
and that thofe whohave gone or beene in ftruments in finding
out or di{covering thofe of late made knowne have done it for
there owne private ende, for gaine and ſuch like, favouring
fome where they thought good, and unjuftly proſecuting o-
thers; Itherefore (as my leaſure hath permitted me) have
given my felfe to the reading of fome. approved Pelations
touching the arraignement and condemnation of Witches; As
alfo treatifes of learned men concerning the devilifh art of
Witchcraft; adding withall fome few things which other-
wife Ihave learned and obſerved fince the 25.0f March 1645
as being in part an agent in finding out or difcovering fome
of thofe fince that time, being about two hundred in number,
in Effex, Suffolke, Northamptonſhire, Huntingtonſhire,
Bedfordfhire, Norfolke, Cambridgefhire, and the lle of
Ely in the County of Cambridge, befides other places, juft-
ly and defervedly executed upon their legall tryalls. Now the
occafion being thus offered, and Mafter Hopkins dead, I de-
fireto give fome ſaticfaction tothe world, that it may ap-
peare, what hath beene done, hath beene for the good of the
common wealth, and we free from thoſe aſperſions caſt upon
us, and that Inever favored any, or unjuſtiy proſecuted o-
thers hut that all that be guilty of this, onght to dieʒ aſwell the
good or white witches fo called as the other: and that ther? is,
and hath beene more favour fhewed, or at leaft lefe care taken
for the difcovery of (uch as be guilty, then by the word of God
there ought. For how many are there now adaies which could
be contented to paffe by many of them, as Magicians, Negro-
wancers and fuch like? of whom his late Majefty of famous

** of ‘al
š
| >
éy
*
*
.
—
4
*
2
*
| y
| “N
~
| 1

To thë Reader,
renomne in his Demonologie giveth adreadfull cenfure,
who f. aith they axe to be dealt wit hall, as with Socerers and e-
fpecially the curing witch , commonly called the good witeb.
Nay the fe rather get credit and eft imation,love and likina as
did the Magicians and Sorcerers with Pharaoh, Exod. 7.8.
with Nabuchadnexer and Belfhazzar,. Iſa. 47. 12. Ezek. 22.
did alfo Simon Magus with the Samaritans, wha held
to be the great power of God, Acts g. a Elimas with
Sergius Paulus, Acts 13. And the Pythonetle with her Ma-
fer, Acts 16. And will not many fay, furely they worke by
God, becauſe they ufe good prayers and good words, aud often
name God? but let thoſe remember that the Devill himſelfe
can uſe good words, Mar. f. 24. and 5. 7. Acts 17. that hee
can counterfeit the habit and words of an holy man, Sa-
muel. 1 Sam. 28.13,15, 17. that hee can turne himfelfe into
an Angell of light, 2 Cor. 11. Therefore hee not teach his
fervants to feigne holineſſe and yet be thefe in many refpeds
worſe then the others, and the holy Scripture exempts none,
but utterly forbids any going to them, or asking counſell of
them. I hope this my labour will excufe mee, and give fome
better fatisfadion to thoſe who are not yet fully fatisfied
herein, for that Iſball make it plainely appeare, that I neither
formerly, in any of my proceedings concerning this matter,
or in penning of this 775 at mine owne private ends rather
then the publique good, for that I fhall diſcover, fo far forth
as I au able, or at leaſt, ascivilityand modeftie fhall give
way; yet Iam not ignorant hom dangerous it is for me to put
my ſelffe ſo farre forth into the Sea of common opinion, and I
cannot fee that by reafon of the fhelves and rocks of injuricus
conceits which are ready to be found on every hand Iam like
to paffe any adv:nture having had experience already hom
forward many bee in taking part with many of thofewho
have been detected to promote them forward to take the leaſt
advantage by fuit of law, thereby to aquitt themfelves, whin
as many times it hath fallen out otherwife, and been a

- d m ̃ NÜx —
4

ý
fi

—

*
*

-

Š
y>

>

+

*

Ri

g

*
y
z

iN

2

EEE To the Reader.
_meanes to bring to their deferved puniſbment, but let fuch
remember, the Devill needs no provoker. And though
` Balack fent to Balaam to purſus the people, yet we find the
contrary, for furely faid Balaam, there is no enchantment in
Iacob, nor divination againft Ifrael. And yet neverthelefe .
craving pardon if in any thing herein Ihave taken too much
upon me, I have once ventured to commit my ſelfe to thy ſen-
ſure, & doubt uot of proſperout acceptance, if but a charitable
conftruction be had of my true intent & meaning therein, as
from a plaine country man, who intend not to pen any thing
but what I ſpall be able to make appeare plainely to bee truth,
and then I ſpall reckon it asa fi peim recompence for my
N and paines. And fo with my due reſpects I take

JoHN STEARNE.

1

= *

—

| 92
25
$
3
13
| 5

i
| i
| *

i
b
E |
j
| A
7
| *
4
$
UE
'
rag
r,
*

$6 An being borne in finne, hath thereby ſince the
fall of our firft parents loft the Image of God
in which he was created, through the tempta-
Is tion of Satan, and is naturally, wholy pollu-
ted with finne and corruption, whereby he is
| become of very neere kin unto the Devill, even
4 kat Gg his owne child, 1 John 3. 10. And that beeing
18 = his child, he will doe the luks of his Father,
John 8. 44. and that no doubt in one thing as well as in another, for
men love darkeneſſe more than light, lobn 3. 19. Vea, and naturally
are given to worke all uncleanneſſe even with greedineſſe, fo capti-
voated are they to their luſts, Epbe/. 4. 19. For Satan hath his wiles,
> Epbef. 11. his devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11. his depths and policies. Rexel. 2.
24. hls {nares to catch people at unawares. 1 Tim.3.7. 2 Tim. 2.26.
And being thus furnifhed, hee dare fet upon any, yea upon our
Saviour Chrif himfelfe, to ſolicit him, yea, and to a moft execrable
> impiety, even to have Chrift to fall downe and to worthip him a
~~ Devill, Mat. 4. for he watcheth enen he ſeeketh occaſions,
and the leaſt offer he efpieth and quickly taketh the fame, and fo.
ßprevaileth often, not only with the rude and fottifh, but with the
greateſt ſpirits and ſharpeſt witts many times. For man beeing given
cover to his unruly paſſion, is violent, inconſiderate and vehement-
ly greedy to have his defired ends, by what meanes ſoever he can at-
taine them; which maketh him feeke meanes of the Devill to be-
come injoyer of his inordinate defires, regarding more the ha-
ving of his prefent will, than reſpecting his future ftate af-

ter death,and is more taken up to obtaine what he liketh for the e

ÀA

| and Difcovery of

WITCHCRAFT.

ARO Al OTT

dy and outward eftate in this world, than with the care of his ſpiri -

tuall condition and eſtate before God in the world to come, which
the naturall man very little or nothing at all regardeth. This be-
| ing the condition of a naturall man who remaines ſtill unregenerate
| | and given over of God unto Satans temptation in this kind, how

can they refit ? Man is weake, Satan is ſtrong, and withall ſubtill
to begulle, they may eaſily yeeld, for that he hath over meere natu -
| rall men a ruling power, Epbeſ. 2. 2. who are already in his ſnare,
| and at his owne will are taken captive, 2 Tim. 2. 26.

| Here fome will ſay, you goe about to make all ſubject to Witch- `
| craft, or at leaſt all unregenerate perſons.
| I anfwer, it ſaid in Iobn 3.6. That which is borne of theflehis
| fiefh, and that which isborneof the fpirit is ſpirit: and therefore
Witch - craft being as Saint Paul faith, the fruits ofthe
| flelh, Gal.5.20. one may fall into this finne aſwell as into any other,
f if God prevent it not. Wherefore it behooves man(if he would pre-
E vent the power of the Devill and whatſoever Witches can doe) to
E labour to entertaine and uphold the preaching of the Gofpell. For

| | where it commeth, downe goeth the power of Witcherie, Ais 8.
4

Hiftorie likewifetells us, where the Goſpel came among thé hea
then, there the hellifh power of Devils and ſpirrts greatly dimini-
fhed, and we heare now by travellers,that in other Countries where
the Gofpel is not preached,& where they ſtill remaine,(as I may fay)
according to the abominations of the Canaanites, I meane in fuch
places where the Heathens ftill remaine, as in the Indies, where they
by travellers relations, worfhip the Sunne, Moone and Starrs, Nay
T have heard in fome places, the Devill himfelfe, and where popery
and prophaneneſſe is, with contempt of Preaching or vile neglect
thereof, there Witch~craft is moft rife. Therefore it behooves men
to labour to bring forth fruits worthy the Goſpell and amendment
of life. For God hedgeth the vertuous man about, Job 1. fo as Satan
cannot come at him, without very ſpeciall licence from God, and
that onely for a tryall. The Angels of God doe alfo pitch their
tents about fuch, Pſal. 34. yea, and have charge over them to keepe
them in their waies, Pſal. 91. 11,12. And to have religious duties in
our families : and as th: Apoftlefaith, to pray continually. 1 Thef,
5. And as Saint James telleth us, Fam. 5. 16. that the prayer of a
righteous man availeth much ititbe fervent. David did not Only |

ſerye

a

H

.

j

`

| a

iZ

i

*
K-
1

-ferve God openly in the Tabernacle, but returned home to bleſſe his

and Dijcovery of Witch-crajt.

3
houſe, 2 Sam. 6. 20. And Job every day facrificedto God, and ſan-
ified his children and family. Job 1. 5. And God gave to Ifrae] a
law to ſanctiſie their houtes. And fo going ever well armed
againſt theſe rulers of dar keneſſe, devills and evill {pirits, furniſhed
with the heavenly furniture and ſpirituall weapons, of which the A-
poſtle ſpeaketh, Epb. 6.14.18. and being thus qualified, and armed,
to truſt in God only, who will ma thee under the fhadow of his
wings, Pſal. 91. No man {hall neede to feare Witches or Devills ;
knowing ever this, that they cannot doe the very leaſt harme unto |
any of the leaft creatures of God without leave from him:no, not to
enter into the heard of {wine of the very Gardarens, for furely there
is no inchantment in Jacob, nor any Divination againſt Iſrael. It is
the Lord, let him doe what feemeth him good, 2 Sam. 15. 26. It is
the Lord that giveth, it is the Lord that taketh away, bleſſed bee the
name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. And therefore many yeeld thus farre as
that Satan needes no provoker to fet him forward, as the Scripture
tells us. For the text faith, that he compaſſeth the world to, and fro,
Iob 1. going up and downe like a roaring lyon ſeeking whom hee
may devoure, 1 Pet. 5. 8. e is ready (if God give waie)to bee a ly ing
{pirit in the mouth of Ababs Prophets to ſeduce him, 1 King.22. and
to beguile; and that the people which brought the poſſeſſed to our
Saviour, complained only of the Devill, Mat. 15.2. Luk. 9.39. They
made no mention of Witches, nor(for ought we know yhad any fùt-
pition of them, for we find that God hath often fent the Devill, as

the executioner of his difpleafure without any meanes of a Witch,

as amongſt the Egyptians, he fent evill Angells, P/al.78.49. between
Abimelech and the Sichemites, Judg.9.23.So upon Saul, 1 Sam.16.15.
Andfo we reade of a Legion ſent by Chriſt into the heard of ſwin,
Mat. 5. 12. Thus we fee Devills immediately fent from God with-
out any inftigation of Witches. And therefore conclude that all is
from the Devill by Gods permiflion, and that there areno Witches
at all. But whofoever thou beeft that art of this opinion, & although
many have gone about to prove that there are no Witches: yet be-
fides the former reaſon, the contrary tenet is undeniable true, tt art
there are Witches. |

Firſt, from the lawes that God himfelfe hath made againft them.

Firſt, in forbidding the practice of VVitch- eraft, and that none a-

mongſt his fhould be VVitches, VVIzzards, Negromancers and fuch
like, Deut. 18. 10, 11, 12. Secondly in forbidding any to go to them,
Levit.

7
*
1.
d
E
*
a$
€
=
è
4
pa
è
t
$
à
*
*
3
*
22
1
5
— —

.
— —
— —

4 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witch-crojt.

Levit. 19.20. Ifa 8. 19. Thirdly, his commandement to put Wi:ches
to death, Exod. 22. 18. Fourthly, Gods judgements againſt them,
Deu. 18. 12. which if there were no VVitches what neede theſe lawes?
Secondly, from the hiſtot ie of the Bible, which nameth to us cer-
taine VVitches, as the Socerers of Egypt, Exod. 7. Iannes and Iam-
bres, 2 Tim. 3. 8. Thoſe in Babylon and Perſia, Dan. 2.5.7. Ifa. 47
12. And amongſt the Nations driven out before the children
of Iſrael, Deut. 18. 12, 13. So wee reade of other VVitches which
were, of Balaam Numb. 22. Iof. 13. 22. Of Ffrael, 2 King. 9. 22. Of
Manaffes, 2 Chron. 33. 6. Of Simon Magus, Adis 8. 9. And Elimas, Acls
13.8.Secondly,it maketh mention of the practizes of Witches, Exod.
7. 2 Chron. 33. 6. Jſa. 47. 9. Exe. 21 21. Thirdly, it ſpeaketh of fome
going to them, 1 Sam. 28. 7. and fending to them, Numb. 22.5. Iof.
24.9. Fourthly, it relateth how fome Kings put them to death,
a Fam. 28.3, 9. and cut them off, 2 King.23.24. all this ſhould be falſe
if there were no Witches. a Eas
- Thirdly, from fome Comparifons or Similies fetched from
witch-craft, by Samuel, 1 Sam. 15. and by Ifa. 29. 4. which were
abſurd if there were no Witches. rat

Fourthly, (as before) St Pauls mentioning Witeh- craft amongſt 1

the workes of the flefh, Gal. 5. 20. . | :
Fifthly, Gods threatning damnation upon S ocerers, Rev. 21. 8.
= the Lawes of Nations both Heathen and Chriftian againſt
them.
Seventhly, the truth of Hiftories, and manie relations of their Ar-
raignement and conviction.
Eightly, experience amongſt our ſelves, and in other Countries,
together with the confeſſion of ſome of thoſe Witches condemned
and executed fince May 1645 -in the ſeveral l Counties afore mentio-
ned, Hereafter, herein hope will give all ſufficient fatif-
faction that there are Witches.

Now here fome may fay, this is ſufficient to prove that there are
Witches in fome Countries, or at leatt have beene in formes times -

with us here in this Country; but how will you make it appeare
that there have been any ſince the Gofpel preached amongitus è For
many are of oppinion that there are Witches in other Countries

where the Gofpel is not at all, or very little regarded, but where the

Gofpel is faithfally preached as with us in England and Scotland, &c.
that there are not any, no not fince the comming of our Saviour. p

84

i

1

1

E

14

1

H

ij

1
1
it
IE

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 5

1 anfwer that if any man can make it appear that the Goſpell frees
us from finrie, more then the Law did our forefathers, that then it

might be fo. But the Gofpell frees us not, and therefore we are

as like to have ſuch mifcreants amongſt us as our Forefathere.
For we are as ſinful as in the time of the E Satan ſtil remains
amongſt us. And we are as impatient, profane, and unconſcionable
as ever, having diftenspered paſſions, violent in affection, given to
ill company, and vain curiofities, not having reſpect of Religion,
by which occafions the Devill taketh advantage and works to have

his will, for he goeth thither where he is either {ure or hopeth well
for entertainment, Mat. 12. 44. He therefore watcheth the time

when he may beſt offer his ſervice to ſuch as any way he finds the
leaſt kind of preparedneſſe in, as when any fall into a paſſionate
ſorrow, accompanied with ſolitarineſſe for ſome loſſe, as husband,
wife, children or fuch like, the Devill offers himfelf to comfort
fuch in their forrowfull melancholy mood. So in time ofdearth
through extreme poverty it many times cauſeth many to be deſpe-
rately impatient ; or fo impatient through Sater when they

would needs be rich, even againſt Gods providence, as that

they be in fuch a dift.mpered paſſion, as they would have their
wants fatisfied and their defires fulfilled, be it by what means it
poſſible can be, (as I may fay ) right or wrong; or when one is en-
raged with anger, plotting revenge, oris familiar with fuch as be
Witches; As likewife when any are addicted to the reading and
ftudie of dangerous books, inticing to the practice of hidden myſte-
ries, of Magick and Inchantments. Thus by cheſe and ſuch other
like means as may be gathered from the confeflions of Witches,they
prepare themfelves for Satans temptations ,to draw them to Witch-

craft, as I could inſtance in thofe innumerable examples, as you ſhall

read hereafter more at large when } come to {peak of what forts of
people are moſt addicted to Witchcraft; and therefore do you not
conceive that there are {till fuch people remaining amongſt us? yea
certainly there are, and Witches likewife.

But you will ſtill ſay ĩt doth not yet plainly appear to be ſo ſince
the Goſpell, though all theſe ſinnes ſtill remain, for the Devil needs
no provoker as before, for he can, if God permit, greatly trouble
us, and can bereave one of his wits, and make one lunatick, deaf,
dumb and blind, bow the body together, ſo that one ſhall not be a-
ble to lift up himſelf, ho can even enter in and poſſeſſe any really

| | B 2 and

17
e
2
E
8
€
r
8
C a

— ——— ——e—ä——ũð — —

6

Confirmation and Difcovery of Witch craft. |

and make them invincibly trong, and work cther effects. Ot all
which you may read in Matrh.9.32.and 12.22.and 15.2 2. and 17. 15.
Mark.1.23 and 5.5,7.and 7 26.and 9. 17, 18, 19,20, 22,25,26.2nd in
Luke 4.35. and 7.2. and 8. 29, 39. and 11. 14. and 13.11, 16. and can
enter into children, Luke 13. 16. young folks, Mark 7. 26. Men, Mark
515253. women, Luke 13. 16. Matt. the 15.22. Yea through the per-
million of God, ſuch as be the elect of Gode Fob 1. and 2. A daughter
of Abraham, Luke 13.11. & Mary Magdalene, Luke 7. 2. & can counter-
feit the refemblance of an holy man, 1 Sam. 28. 12. 14. 19. yea and for
along time, Luhe 8.27 from a child till one be grown up, Mark 9.21.
even eighteen yeares, Luke 13.16. and ſo we reade in Luke 7.2. of
feven Deviils in one at once, and more Luke 11.26. Vea a whole le-
gion, Mark 5. 9, 165 14. and fometimes the Lord is pleaſed to fend De-

vills as executioners of his diſpleaſure, as is before apra. i

To this I anfwer,and grant it for truth, and not to be denyed, but
yet notwithſtanding all this, there are Witches likewife, and yet the
Devill doth al! this, and more if God permit, for in Gen.3.Wemay
Jearne there that the Devill may enter into a dumbcreature, & come
out of the fame, utter a voice intelligible,& offer conference (if any
will hea ken) to deceive as our Witches now a dayes confeſſe, and
that he chooſeth the fubtileft creature to deceive by, and the weak-
er veſſell to confer with, but by the confeſſions of Witches now
lately detected, he choofeth ſuch creatures as they themſelves are
mott addicted to, as you fhall hereafter find by their confeſſions, by
the feverall ſhapes he appears in, but how ever we may read there, it
was a powerfull pet ſwaſion to overcome, and yet work by Witch-
es, Wizzards, Necromancers, Sorcerers, Southfayers, and all kind
of Magick art, As we may reade in Exod. 7. 11, 12. and 8. 7. Where
we may fee that Pharaoh called the Wifemen, the Sorcerers, and the
Magicians of Egypt, who did with their inchantments in like man-
ner as Mofesand Aaron. But! paſſe bythe proofs out of the Old
Teſtament for this becaufe I defire to give fuch ſatisfaction (as lam
able) that it may appear that there be Witches now as in former a-
ges. And if what hath been already ſpoken will not give < reg
étion herein, you may read in the 2. Tim. 3 S. who they were, tha
were the oppfors of the truth, but fuch as Fannes and Jambres,
who withſtood Mofes, and then ſearch who they were, and ycu
ſhall 2 were ſuch as Pharaob called to him, as in the before

a

ment ioued placee, who with their inchantments did the like as Mofes
had done. 80

1%

*.
t

a

— — s
—
fe
A
2 f,
<>
425
,
ys
.
2
4
vl
ate
5
3
i
“f
`
a
*
“>
ý
*
+.
if
| %
*
* X
i
12
=
x

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 7
So you may read of Elymas the Sorcerer, Alt. 13. 8. who refilled

the Apoftles in the time of the Gofpell.
So likewiſe in A. S 9. you fhall read of Simon Magus a iorcerer,

to whom in the 10 verſe it is ſaid, they all gave heed from the leaſt

to the greateft,” ſay ing, this man is t e great power of God, For in
the 11. verſe ĩts is faid, becauſe that of long time he had bewitch-
ed them with ſorcerĩes, and in the 13 verfe we read he was baptifed,
but read the 20, 2 1, 22, and you ſhall read what Peter {aid to him,
and f read no more of himin all the New Teſtament.
Allo in the Rev. 2 1. 8. you may read how Sorcerers fhall with o-
ther ſinners there reckoned up, have their part in the lake which
burneth with fire and brimſtone. |

And fo likewife we read in the Epiftle of Fude the Apoſtle ſpeak-
ing there of falfe Teachers, whick were crept into the Church to
ſeduce them, for whofe damnable doctrine and manners, horrible
judgement was prepared, in the 11. verfe pronounceth woe un-
to them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ranne greedily

after the error of Balaam, by which we may plainly fee that there

were Witches in the time of the Goſpel, and after the coming and
aſcenſion of our Savionr, and do any doubt then, whether there
be any now? do any think that we be free from ſuch, where ſinne
and ignorance befides fo much abounds ? or do you deſire to have
n a. Witches ſince then, you fhall have enough of their con-
feflions to make this evident, beſides the relations of learned men
writing concerning Witchcraft. But if you would but rightly ob-
ferve that place in 2. Tim. 3. I and fo on to the 8. you thall find that
in the lat dayes ſhall come perillous times, . And in the 8.
verſe it is ſaid, And as Fannes and Fambres withſtood Mofes, fo do
thoſe alfo reſiſt the truth. There you may fee plainly that there
ſnould be fuch to the latter end, beſides in divers other places ſpeak-
ing expreſſely of Witchcraft ; as 1. Tim. 4. 1. and Jude 18.

Likewiſe of the Pythoneſſe which brought her miftris much gain

| = Aits16.16.Alfoia Rev 21.8. And fo I might nominate divers other

places, for thofe which remain doubtfull either of being bewitched

or of Witches themſelves, but becauſe their own cenfeſſions clear

this evidently, beſides the forenamed places, I proceed to diftinguith

between thofe called bad Witches,and thofe called white or good

Witches, which is eafily to be diſcerned and known.

But yet | fay all Witches be * and ought to fuffer alike, being
3 both

Ae
Fy
a
>
*
2
T AN
j,
*
TRTO
* A
ae
a
.
22
~
¥
ad
y
F,
. y *
>
PA
8
N
„

and 20. 6.

8 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.

both in Jeague with the Devill : for fo is the good, fò untruly

called, afwell as the other, either open or ee. And therefore

Devill ought to
die. And the Scripture maketh mention onely of ten forts, which
{peakes rather of thoſe called the good, which the world ſo much
1unnes after, then the other. As we may read: Firſt in Deut. 18.
10.2 Kings 17. I. of a Diviner foreſnewing things to come. Such the

conclude, all that be in open league wi

people delighted in and conſulted with, Fer. 27. 9. Ezek, 21. 22.

Such an one Was Balaam, Iof 13. 22 kb
Secondly, We read in Deut. 18. 10. of an Obferver of times,
or Soothfayer, one which by gaping on the Heavens could alfo
foretell fomething. To theſe likewite did che people give eare,
Jer. 27. 9. And fuch an one was Manaſſet, 2 Chron.33.6.And what

was Elimas the Sorcerer ſpoken of in the Ais ?

Thirdly, we read in Deut. 18. 10. of an Obferver of times,

or ſearcher out; One which obſerved times to know when it was

beft to begin a buſineſſe: as Hamans Witches did by cafting of

lots before hime Of this Manaffes alfo was guilty , 2 Chro. 33. 6.

To which might be added that in Hefter. 3. 7. and 9. 24.
Fourthly, we read in Deut. 18. 10. Ifa. 47. 12. of a Magician,

one that could deceive the Eye · ſight by making fomething to ap-

peare otherwiſe then it is. Such Pharaoh called to him to oppoſe
Moles. Herein, Fannes and Jambres, of whom Saint Paul ſpeak-
ech of; were guilty, and fo likewife was Manaffes, 2 Chron. 33. 6.
Fifchly, we read in Deut. 18. 11. of an Inchanter, or Con-
jarer; one joyned in league with another , as the Witch is with
the Devill. Such an one uſed Charmes to tame Serpents, Pfal. 5 8.
5: Many tach were in Babylon, Ifa. 47. 9. and Eccl. 10. 11.
Sixthly, we read in Deut. 18. 11. Lev. 20. Of one which hatha
{pirit in him or her which doth give anſwer to fitch as come to in-
quire of them. Such an one was the Witch of Endor, Sam. 28.
Such an one was the Pythoneſſe which brought her Miſtris much
caine, Ads 16. In Iſa. 29. 4 called a Whiſperer. To fuch: the
people had reguard, Lev. 19. 21. and incouraged one another

thereunto, Ifa. 8. 19.

Seventhly, wee read in Deut.18.11. ofa Wizzard, 1 Sam. 28.
9. One alſo which could foretell fome things, and ſo called for
his or her foreknowledge ; as now we terme them a wile man, or
a wife woman. After this fort the people fought alfo, Lev. 19.31%

d
$
i
| Fa
1
i ig
ia
i A
| HA
{
$
—
4
d
$
ia
if i
4
$
1
+.
i
£
$ >.

Eighithly, we read in Peu. 18. 41. of a Negromancer, one that
conſulteth with the dead. Fe 8. 0ũ˖0.
Ninchly, we read in Iż. 1 9. 3. Of a VVhiſperer, with fecret
or foft words, as our white VVitches doe, indcavouring to
help man or beaſt. To thefe the e£¢ yptians fought after, as they did
to their Idolls; as in the laft forementioned place is expreſſed.
Theſe are now ( as I have read) tranſlated Charmer s.

Tenthly, we read in Exod. 8. 11. of ſuch as Pharaob fought to,

as we call them m 5 , déceivers, beguiling the eye · ſight. Some
bold them to be Nativities, which tell people their for-
tune by the time of heir birth. Theſe are onely ee in the
Old Teſtament: But the New ſpeaketh, as I may fay , onely in
generall againſt VVitch - craft, which comprehends all the ten a-

drementioned. And therefore it cannot be denyed , befides their
confeſſions herafter herein expreſſed but that there are ſuch to this
time, and that they all ought to ſuffer alike, which have made an
expreſſe league with the Devill. An art fo execrable, to renounce
God, and to betake themſelves to the Devill, as for this thing
onely they deſerve death in the higheſt degree : for the Law of
God faith without exception, Thou fhalt not ſuffer a VVitch to
live, Exod 22. 18. Ifa Witch juftly convicted, Death is due to ſuch
an one, Levit. 20. 27. For, for thofe abominations the Lord ur-
= the Canaanites, and plagued Manaſſes, which wick-

neſſe of his was fo abhorred of God, as in his difpleafure hee
mentioned it many yeares after, as a cauſe of removing the
Fewes from their Land, and of leading them away captive into a
ſtrange Land, Fer. 15. 4. And did not good King Fofiah put ſuch
ſorts to death, that he might fulfill the Law? 2 Kings 23.24. And
fo did Saul, Sam. 28. Nay , bath not the Lord threatned great
— 4. — in the aforementioned places? Vea, and doth he not
by the Prophet promiſe to cut off VVitch-crafts and Soothſay-
ers, when he intends to bleſſe a Nation ? Mich. 5. 12.

Now, who they be that make this expreſſe or open league, are
both forts. But for the hurting and curfing VVitch, there is but
one ſort. All which makes this expreſſe or open league; and the
doe it onely for miſchief, though feverall wayes : for they take
their Familiars; Some for one mifchief,fome for another. VVhen
as there be two ſorts of the other; the one in —_— and open

league, for {oI tearme it, though made never fo fecret, becauſe it
| is

è
4
„
-
‘a
5
ive
a4
8
*
é
}
$
*
9
*

for the other, t

is done by oe with the Devill; And the other is by im-
plicit, or ſecret 5 onely by confidence in believing, that ſuch

or ſuch a thing fhall produce fuch, or {uch an eſſect. Now the

firſt of theſe two have Familiars, as well as the other, or at leaſt
a brand, by which they may be known and diſcerned by, as well

as the firſt. Some to fet ſpells; Some Charmes; Some to cure dif-
eales ſeverall wayes, either by words, or waſhing clothes, or a-
anoynting the Totan which gave the wound to cure the
wound; Some onely by laying on oft their hands; Some by u-
fing and faying fuperftitious words, or forme of prayers, ufing
good words to bad ends; Some by both; Some by herbes; Some =
to know where ſtolen goods be, either by raifing the Devill, or
Familiar Spirits; Some onely by words, and fo likewife the fame
for loft goods, or man or beaſt, and to bring them againe ; and
fo by many fuch like wayes and meanes doe theſe worke by: Vet
many times they erre, all of theſe: For the Devill cannot per-
forme his promiies at all times. So that it is not to be queſtioned,
but all theſe ſorts are in league with the Devill. For it is not to
be doubted, but before any of them can have power to doe any
thing, againſt, or for any parry, or have any deſired ends effe-
&ed, Mi, id expreſſe or implicit is firt made; bee it expreffe
then confirmed; but for the Confirmation hereof their confeſſi-
ons will make it plainely appeare, and plaine proofes and reaſons
w they confidently truft that their defires fhall
be effected accordingly to their beliefe, as the curing Witches
doe of them which come to them for help. All which I will make
plainely appeare, when l come to ſpeake how they may be known,
For here ſome may firft demand of mee what forts of people they
be of either forts? beat
I anfwer, as for the firſt fort moft women, and for the other
moft men. And albeit there be of both forts of both: as Elimas
the Sorcerer, and Simon Mayus, and fo likewiſe Balaam , and the
Witch of Endor, and of theſe young, middle, and old age, of
which inſtances may be given; Vet of Witches in generall , there
be commonly more women then men. This is evident. |
Firft, from Gods Law againſt Witches, Exod. 22. In the femi-
nine gender, preftigiatricem ne finito vivere.
Second!y, from Sauls ſpeech, when he ſaid, Seeke one out,
a woman that hath a familiar fpirit,Sam.28 7.1 Chron. 10 13, 14
in naming a woman and not a man. Thi rdly,

i
}
|] $
2
1
i
*
4
14
í
a 4
j |
$ | f
!
>
ig
il
7 *
ij
$ | |
?
$
f
2
; *
a
i
$
i}
mie
it
1
i
— ——Ü— —ͤ———— — —

A -AConfirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft. 11
Thirdly , from experience it is found true here, and in all 6
Countries, efpecially of hurting Witches, that they are moſt in
number, as appeares by their owne confeſſions, with the fiories
and relations even from theſe in our owne Kingdome. As of
thoſe of Burton-Old, where there met above foureſcore at a time;
And at Tilbrooke buſhes in Bedfordſbier, necre adjacent to Catworths
in Huntingtonſpeir, where there met above twenty at one time, as
Fobn Vynick, and others confeſſed who ſuffered at Huntington laſt
May was two yeares: As alſo by the confeſſions of ſome others
which ſuffered at Northampion not long before; So likewife were
thofe which met at Manningtree in Effex, as Elizabeth Clarke,
and Anne Leech confeſſed, and thofe which were condemned,
there being about twenty eight, at Chelmsford, in the ſummer
x 1645. were (as I remember ) all women. And thoſe at Bu-
K rie Saint Edmunds, where fixtie eight were (as | likewiſe remem-
ber) condemned, moft women, All at one Goale delivery, in the
ſummer 1645. So ] could nominate farre more inftances in other
places , and of about two hundred executed fince the faid May,
1645. in the feverall Counties aforementioned, the women farre
exceeded the men in number. And as I have read, thofe in
Lancafbeire, where ninteene aſſembled, and but two men, and that
th ofe that bewitched the Earle of Rutland were women; and that
thoſe of Warboyes were women, and but one man. Women there-
fore without queftion exceed men, efpecially of the hurting
f Witches ; but for the other, I have knowne more men, and have
heard fuch as have gone to them fay ,almoft generally they be men,
and {o likewife finde them to be fo in Authors, which ſpeake of
ſuch, and never knew any women queſtioned in that way but
men, and of them as hitherto not many; For as before, men ra-
ther uphold them, and fay, why ſhould any man be queftioned
for doing good; but J am certaine the word of God is con-
trary.
Now why it fhould be that women exceed inen in this kiud, | T
will not ſay, that Satans letting upon thefe rather then man is, or
like to be, becauſe of his unhappy onſet and prevailing with Eve;
or their more credulous nature, and apt to bee miſled, for that
they be commonly impatient, and being diſpleaſed more malici- g
ous, and fo more apt to revenge according to their power, and

thereby more fit inſtruments for the Devill; or that, becauſe they
| be

On

2.

l

12 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witch-craft.

be more ready to be teachers of Witchcraft to others, and to

leave it to Children, fervants, or to fome others (but that you
fhall finde to bea great inducement thereto by their Confeſſions)

or that, becauſe, where they can command they are more fierce in

their rule, and revengefull in fetting ſuch on worke whom they
can command,wherefore the Devil] laboureth moft to make them
Witches: for Satan is ſubtill, and feeketh whom he may devoure,
and if falſe teachers.

But as Saint Faul faith, VVitchcraft being amongſt the fruits
of the flefh, one may fall into this ſinne as well as into any other
(if God prevent it not) and therefore whether men or women,
Theſe forts following are the apteſt, as by experience plainely ap-
peares amongſt us now a dayes.

I paffe by Infidels, and Heathen people in former times (from
whom theſe abominations mentioned in Deut. 18. 10, 11. came

into Ifrael, and ſavage Nations now (amongſt whom) by Tra-

vellers relations, VVitchcraft is moft rife ) and will ſpeake onely
of {uch forts as be called Chriſtians, and thefe be,

Firft, ignorant people whofe eyes are blinded by Satan, 2 Cor. 4.
4. and are led captive by him, as is faid in another place.

This appeareth in thoſe VVitches commonly detected amongſt
us, filly ignorant perſons many of them. Elizabeth Deekes of
Ratleſden, in Suffolk, a filly ignorant young woman being found
withthe markes, confeſſed that fhe was guilty , and had two
crop eared Impes, as fhe faid , which had fucked two or three
times upon thoſe markes found upon her, which Impes (ſhe
faid came like Mice; the one white, which fhe called Birds, being
the leaſt, the other gray, which fhe called Teates,which Impe asked
her to denye God , and Chrif, and told her if fhe would the fhould
never want, but (he faid fhe then refuſed. Whereupon (the faid )
her mother asked her to give her {foule from God to the Devill,
which( fhe faid ) the likewife refuſed: but as fhe was going to bed,
either upon a paire of ftaires, or ladder, her mocher pulled her
back in much danger of her life, and canfeſſed many other things
then more at large. But for her ignorance fhe was faved at firſt,
when her mo her fuffered, yet afterward, notwithſtanding this,
and her refuſing thofe temptations, ſhe confeſſed, fhe did make a
League and Covenant with the Devill, and fealed it with her
bloud, and imployed thoſe Impes , to the much prejudice of her

3 Neigbbours

4
ji
p
i
| RE
| 1
43 *
$
4
1
f
t
at
E
4 |
1
| 178
1
4
4 —
| 13
850
| “the
| *
¢
of
j
7
‘
*
$
f

4 Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 13
Neighbours and Tounſmen, as fhe confeſſed before the Juftice
of Peace. Alfo Joane Wallis of Keyſton, in Hunt ingtonſbeir, a ve-
ry ignorant, fottifh woman, confeſſed the Devill came to her in
the Iikeneſſe of a man, in blackiſh cloathing , but had cloven feet,
which the called Blackman, who uſed to lie with her, and have the
ufe of her body, yet fhe confeſſed he was more uglier then man, and
not as her husband, which {peaks to her like a man, but he as he
had been fome diftance from her when he was with her, who told
her, if ſhe would be ruled by him fhe fhould never want, but
ſhould have what fhe deſired, and brought her two others the
third time he came, which (the faid )the called Grizzell, and Gree-
digut, for ſo (the ſaid) they called themfelves, and that thofe, af-
ter {hee had conſented to the other his demands, and confirmed
the Covenant, fhe could and did imploy as fhee then further
confeſſed, both to the Townfemen, and after to the Juftice of
Peace, and fome of the mifchiefes fhe had done. Ennumerable of
thefe inſtances I could nominate in many of their Confeflions, as
you fhall finde in ſome of thoſe following. But I delire to Anſwer
one objection before | proceed further (that is) fome fay, and
many will and doe fay ; But you watched them, and kept them
from meat,drinke, or reſt, and fo made them fay what you would.
A very unnatural] part to {o ufe Chriftians.] anfwer fo it were. But
I never knew any deprived of meat, drinke or reft, but had what
was fitting till they were carried before fome juſtice of Peace to be
examined, and had proviſion to reſt upon, as bolſters, pillowes,
or Cuſhions, and luch like, if they were kept where no beds were;
yet I doe not deny but at firſt, ſome were kept two, three, or foure
dayes, perchance fomewhat bafer, but then it hath been, either
when no Juftice of Peace was neere, or when the witneſſes againſt
them could not goe ſooner, but then they have had beds, and for
other provifion, | never knew any kept, of what ranke or qua-
lity ſoever, but that they had better proviſion, either meate or
drinke,then at their own houſes. For the watching, it is not to ufe
violence, or extremity to force them to confeſſe, but onely the
keeping is, firſt, to fee whether any of their ſpirits, or familiars
come to or neere them; for I have found, that if the time be come,
the ſpirit or Impe fo called fhould come, it will be either viſible
or inviſible, if vifible, then it may bee diſcerned by thoſe in the
Roome, if invifible, then by the party. Secondly , it is for this

2 end

s
y
1.
$ 4 ¥
**
TAL
3
„
2
SE
5. +
1
*
í af
ae
§
*
s
He
*
2
15
k
*

14 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.
; end alſo, that if the parties which watch them, be fo carefull that
| none come vilible, nor inviuble but may be diſcerned, it they
| a follow their directions, then the party preſently atte: the time

their Familiars ſhould have come, if they faile, will preſently con-
feſſe, for then they thinke they will either come no more, or at
leaft have forſaken them.
l Thirdly, it is alfo to the end, that Godly Divines and o-
+ `. thers might difcourfe with them, and idle perfons be kept from
| them, for if any of their ſociety come to them to difcourfe with
i them, they will never confeſſe; This was obferved at Bury Saint
| Edmunds in Suffolk, as i remember, when there were eighteene to
* be executed; molt ot them kept in a Barne together, they made
l a Covenant amongſt themſelves, not to confeſſe a word next day
at the gallowes, when they were to be hanged, notwithſtanding
they had formerly confeſſed, and ſome of them after they came
into the Goale, and fome before the Bench and Country, but
5 moſt of them (ĩf not all) before the Juftices of the Peace, and
| ſo dyed next day accordingly very deſperately, except one pe-
„ nitent woman which refuſed their Covenant or agreement: fo
it fhe made it knowne, and how they made: a ſinging of a Pſalme
if after they had done it. But if honeft godly people difcourfe with
E them, laying the hainoufnefle of their fins to them, and in what
1 condition they are in without Repentance, and telling them the
. ſubtilties of the Devill , and the mercies of God, theſe wayes
pi will bring them to Confeflion without extremity , it will make
it them breake into Confeflion hoping for mercy. | |
it Now that the Impes come viſible, it is true and apparent, and
| ſo watching hath produced true and ſtrange effects, and is a great
) meanes (under God) to bring them to confeflion, as for exam-
IE ple; Elizabeth Clarke of Manningtree in Effex, being kept three
dayes and three nights , fhee confefled many things, but how
i fhe was kept I know not well, for I came not at her during that
| time, notwithſtanding I lived then in Towne, and was one which
| caufed her to be queſtioned, who did accafe fome others which

lived in their ſeverall Parifkes, the Townfemen deſired me to goe
with her confeflion taken in writing by another, to the juſtices
i of the Peace fora warrant for thofe fhe accufed , the warrant was
Ji made for the fearching of fuch perfons as I fhould nominate,
4 whereupon, l wou'd firſt goe to her before the Warrant ſhould

be

l
a
t
—
*
2
é
3
*
*
EA
2
*
¥,
*
**
* è
*
*
i”
*
i
14
‘ x

| A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 15

be ſerved, to know of her who fhe did accufe ; Mr. Hopkin be-
ing with mee went together, and when! had asked her who thee"
had accufed , we were agoing away; but fbe faid tous, if you
will ſtay, | will fhew you my Impes, for they bee ready to come.
Then faid Mr. Hopkin , Beffe, will they doe us no harme? no faid
fhe, what? did you thinke | am afraid of my children? you fhall
fit downe, fo wee did, where fhe appointed us. Then one of the
company which was appointed to be with her that night, faid to
her, Beffe, I asked you a queſtion of late, but you anſwered not,
then fhe faid, what is it? Then he replyed and faid, tell the truth,
if it be the truth, fay fo, but if not truth, then fay fo, Hath not
the Devill had the ufe of your body? fhe faid, why ſhould you
aske fuch a queſtion? he anſwerd, | deſire to know the truth and
no otherwiſe, then fhe fetched a figh, and faid, itis true, then ſaid
Mr. Hopkin, in what manner and likchelfe came he to you? shee
faid, like a tall, proper, black haired gentleman, a properer man
then your felfe, and being asked which fhe had rather lie withall,
fhee faid the Devill , and fo particularized every thing, and
how heecame in, and his habit, and how he lay with her,
and {poke to her, as fhethen affirmed to bee truth, and fo
prefently fell a ſmacking with her lips and called Lought two
or three times, which preſently appeared to us eight ( For there
were fix which were appointed to bee with her that night before
we went) in the likeneſſe of a Cat, as fhe had formerly told us;
for fhe told us before what ſhapes they ſhould come in, and fo that
preſently vaniſned; then fhe called againeas before, Jermarah,
then appeared another, like a red or fandic {potted dog, with legs
not fo long as a finger (to our perceivance ) but his back as broad
astwo dogs, or broader, of that bigneſſe, and vanilhed, and fo
after that called more, as before, by their ſeverall names, which
came in ſeverall fhapes , One like a Greyhound, with legs as long
as aStagges Another like a Ferrit; And one like a Rabbit, and
ſo in feverall ſnapes they appeared to us, till there were ſome ſe-
ven or eight feen ; Some by fome of us, and others by other fome
of us; then I asked her if they were not all come, for there were
more come then fhe {poke of, the anſwered that they came dou-
ble in ſeverall ſnapes, but faid, one was ftill to come, which was
to teare mee in peeces, then I asked her why, fhe faid , becauſe I
would have fwome her, and told me that now (kee would bee

~

even,

3
4 ~
4
à
ty
g
>
Y
Ey
of,
d
~
*
*
tly)
4.
i
ae
4
+
N
28
a
TA
ki
4

—

IES
{
i
if
HE
ii
4
i
ti
4

|.

16 4 Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.
even with mee, and fo told in what manner it fhould come, black,
and like a Toade, and fo afterward did come, as the reſt averred

that faw it , and fo fhe confeſſed their meetings, and the manner
how they worfhipped the Devill at their meetings, and ſaid to
us, they that be found with thefe markes that l am found with-
all, are without queſtion Witches, yet ſaid, that there might be
{ome Witches which had not thoſe markes; but affirmed it over
and over again, that all thoſe that had thoſe markes were Witches,
and had familiar {pirits which fucked of them, and fo confeſſed
what mi(chiefe fhe had done with her Impes, in a very large man-
ner, and fo did next day, after fhe had ſlept; for the Juſtice gave
me order that fhe fhould ſleepe before he examined her, left ſhee
had not ſſept before, and fo Í did accordingly, and yet fhee then
confeſſed at large before two Juttices of the Peace, and how thee
would have been my death; this was the firft accuſed, and her

markes and confeflion, the beginning of our knowledge: Yet I

confeſſe, the markes be difficult to finde from naturall markes, as
I thal] hereafter declare. Rebecca Weft of Lamford, in Effex , who
was (as fhe confeffed ) married to the Devill, and the manner,
had an Impe came to her in the time fhe was kept, but of her
confeflion more at large hereafter. Allo Elizabeth Finch of Wat-
{on J Suffolke, confeſſed, that about twenty yeares before {hee
was found with the markes, the Devill appeared to her in the
likeneſſe of a ſmoaky coloured Dog, which asked her to deny
God and Chriſt, which the faid, upon his promiſes fhe did, and
let him have bloud to ſeale, or confirnie the Covenant or agree-
ment; and that ſoone after that, there came two more, black on

tlie backs and reddith on the belli:s, which fucked her two or

three times a week, upon thoſe markes that were found on her,
and that (ometimes fhe teccheT bloud in other places for them,
and gave it to them; fhee alfo had her Impes came viſible; For

the confeſſed in the time {hes was kept, one which was wich her

to looke to her, law one of them, and fung it into the fire,
which fhe afirmed was one of her Impes , and that whileſt they
were bule about that, thinking to burne it, fhe contefled the o-
ther came, and threw her out of the chaire fhe fate in, which hurt
her forehead and wreit, which was done accordingly, and fo
further confelled. Of theſe I could bring dierſe inſtances, but I

will proceed They come likewiſe invilible; as one Binkes of Ha-

veril,

}

~ *
isa
*
*
»
` ka
.
SH

ty
*

“i

*

4

, sp

i
’ å
| | „ y
1
1
jji
4
à
3
1
i
if
|}
i
i
ak
1
th
ji
j

A Confirmation and Difcovery-of Witchcraft. 17

verill had an Impe fucking of her whilit fhe was talking with o-
thers, and preſently confeſſed it Another whileft! was in the
roome with her, at Huntington, I perceived by her carriage that
fhe was afucking her Impes, Spirits, or Familiars fo called; I lay-
ed it to her charge, but the denied it: Yet preſcutly after fhe con-
feſſed it was truth, when fhe was asked by the juſtice of Peace.
And as I remember, it was the fame woman; but j am fure of
Keyfton in Huntingtonſhier, and fo was fhe, that to the thinking of
two which were with her, the fate ſtill in her chaire, when two

more in the yard faw her goe out into the yard, and her going in

againe ; This woman confeſſed the Devill fate in her likeneſſe,
and fhe went out, and ſuckled her Impes in the yard, as the other
two affirmed. So in the fame Towne, one Clarkes wife skipped

out at a hole in a ftone wall, above halfe a foot thick, which was

fome nine Inches Jong, and fome foure and a halfe broad, all the
one fide head and all, and but little to bee feen of her but one
leg; and the hole was neere a yard and halfe from the ground,
and yet one pulled her back againe, and afterward went away,
no body knew how: yet I fay, if thoſe which looke to them be
carefull, it is to be diſcerned; this is apparent by that | nomina-
ted at Huntington. And ſo at Codman in Syffolke, being told how
a woman there carried her felfe , ] caufed her to be fearched a-
gaine, and there was alteration of the markes, and the woman
prefently confeſſed it, and made a large confeſſion; and ſo it hath
been common in all our proceedings, and a great cauſe for keep-
ing them; for the bloud hath fometimes been found on the end
of the marke, or to be ftroked ou't when they be taken on a fud-

daine, As I could inftance the one halfe of their confeſſions; but
becauſe it is fo apparent, ] inſtance no furuher. But now to ma-
nifeft that good Couníell will doe it, and fo likewife without
keeping; for I hold they two depend moft upon one: Then ſay],
that upon good exhortations aiter the markes found, they may

be brought to confeſſion, either by keeping, though every thing
neceſſary be aftorded them, as | never did otherwife , but now

lately keepe none, or not above one night till we goe thence, and

yet have their confeflions. Witneſſs thoſe executed at Elie, a litle
before Michaelmas laſt, who made large confeſſions. Alſo one
at Chatteriſh there; One at March there; And another at Wim-

blington there; now Iately found, ſtill to be tryed, who made very
large

Hg
*
*
“at é
a
*
—
1
yi
*
AZ
<$
‘Re
4
Ty
*
~
3
g
ar
—
3
—
*
4
à
>

18  AConfirmation and diſcovery of Witchcraft.

large confeflions , efpecially the firt two; Nicholas Hempftead of
Creeting in Suffolke, being found, upon exhortations, and laying
the hainouſnelſe of the ſinne, and Gods Judgements, and Gods
mercie,and the like, notwithſtanding hee at firt railed on me in
very approbious tearmes, yet prefently fent for me, and would
have asked mee forgiveneſſe, he prefently confeſſed that hee had
made a league and Covenant with the Devill, and how hee had
confirmed it with his bloud; And the thape of his Impes, and of
the Devill when they covenanted, and how he killed a horſe of

one of the Conſtables, becauſe he preſſed him for a fouldier, and
five of the beſt horſes in Colonell Rocheſters Troope; And di-
vers other things he had done, making a very large confeſſion,
with a great deale of penitency and ſorrow, which hee fo conti-
nued in (as I fince heard) to his very execution without alte-
ration. To this I might adde, Henry Carrs hereafter mentioned;
And the boyes next, after the objections anſwered, and diverfe o-
thers which you ſhall here finde; but becauſe it falleth out better,
when I hall {peake how to diſcover them, I leave here, hoping
this is fuficient for that objection, if not, I will anſwer more ful-
ly, as occafion fhall ferve. But then fome will fay, you ſwome
ſome of them, efpecially at the ſirſt, was not that extremity ? I an-
ſwer, that hath been ufed, and I durſt not goe about to cleere my

{elfe of it, becauſe formerly | ufed ic, but it was at fuch time of

the yeare as when nonetooke any harmebyit, neither did I ever
doe ic but upon their owne requeſt; and were to fuch as firſt were
found with the markes; but now lately, l sear hath been no fuch
courte taken that I know of. For Jam of opinion, that itis one
way of diſtruſting of Gods providence, putting confidence that
that ſnall bring ſuch or ſuch an effect, or event; neither was it e-
ver given in or taken, chat I know,as an evidence againſt any, nor
uſed by any of us but the firft{ummer, from March, or May 1645.
to about the middle of - uyu? next following; when Judge Cor-
bolt that now is, forwarned it; When Divines gave their opinion
of the unlawfuineffe thereof, ic hath ever fince been left, and not

many before fo uſed: Notwichſtanding, it was then the defire of

fuch perfons themfelves, thinking thereby to cleare themſelves,
whereas ic fell out otherwiſe. Vet under favour, Let me ſpeake
one thing that I have found in that way; that it is a true rule in
one reſpect, that the v vater entreth not into any of them, when

It

if
P i
4
1
if
ig
| | t
p”
| 4
i
if
1
EX
W
it
1
ti! }
H
H
| *
P
ip
4
1 A |
i |
, *
H g
if

— 1 U

7
N
J
is
H
>
1
>

AConfirmatiognand Difcovery of Witchcraft. — 19

it will into a free perkt though they ſwimme both alike; for
ío they will, if the water be inchanted, but the free perfon will
prefently be choaked, when the other lye topling on the water,
iiriving to get their heads, or themfelves under the water, but
cannot , neither can they bring out water in their mouthes,
though they be foretold of ir, nor {pic cleare water; for the water
enters them not when it will the other Thus farre I have obferved,
or further: But becaufe it is held unlawtull, | fhould be forry to
ſpeake any thing, either to give offence to any, or to bea meanes
to animate any in ſuch courſes. For if any did confeſſe, rather
then to goe into the water, or to come out of the water, or pre-
ſently after, except they had been ſhifted, and refrefhed every
way, and knowne to be in perfect memory, it hath been taken
as no evidence; and ſo hath all other forcement been. But there
is one, a very remarkable thing concerning this, that was done at
Saint Neotts,in Huntingtenfbire, ofa woman that had been ſearched
two or three times, and not found, for they can hide their markes
ſometimes, as you ſhall heare after herein, yet was ſtill in great ful-
picion of many of the Townfmen to be guilty (the brand is diffi-
cult to finde if fbe had notice) and the rather, for that fhe fled, or
went away after fhe was fearched twice, for fome are not found
at firſt, yet be in the end: So at her returne ſome vvould {wim her,
and did, ſhe {wum apparently, where they had formerly caſt a free-
man in, tyed after the ſame manner, ſhe was not further medled
with then. But as I have heard, and in part from the man himfelf,
where the act fhould be done, A Dog was feen in his yard, which a
Maſtie Dog would not ſeize on, but his fon ſtroke at the Dog, and
hatt him two or three blowes over the back, up to the fhoulders-
ward, preſently a gelt bitch ſeized on him, and bit him on the
neck, and gave him fome fhuckes, and then the Dog got away.
ſo it remained, but this woman not being ſeen in the ſtreet as
formerly , was cauſed to be viewed ; and found bitten on the
neck, or bruifed on the other parts in a moft fearfull manner.
Theſe are ſome fimilitudes, that there is fomething in {wimming
(if lawfull) but to proceed. This one more, that ignorant peo-
ple are moft apt to be Witches, as afore faid. Of a Boy in Ratleſ-
don aforeſaid, who was accuſed, when he was under nine yeares
of age, when all know he could not be of much capacity, hee

without watching, or keeping, voluntarily confeſſed, that hee
D fuckled

¢
ae
i
E
*
* 4
‘ í ¥
LET:
5
7 5.
*
é
à 3
i
4
FA
5
*
le
ay

20 onpirmation ana Difcoverpes Witch-craft.

ſuckled an Impe, and had it at command Moe mifchiefe, and no-
minated ſome, as the killing of ſome Chickings, and ſome c-
ther mifchiefes he had then done, as he confeſſed, together with
the reaſons he cauſed his Impe to kill the Chickens, which
was , becaufe the man which owed them had chidden him for
ſpoyling his graſſe, when, as he faid, they did it, fo the next time
he faw them there, he did it. This boy being young, I (ſuppoſe
the Jury had hopes of his amendment, as ! confeſſe I then had)
he was then releaſed, and vvent to the Towne againe, where he
-continued ſome time, and was ſuſpected againe for further mif-
chiefe, and ſo apprehended againe, and put into priſon, where he
then voluntarily confeſſed likewife his renewing of the league
and Covenant with the Devill, and the ſealing of it with his
bloud, after his mother vvas hanged; for fhe ſuffered for Witch-
craft, about the Michaelmas 1645. and then was he firſt queſtio-
ned, and that he had more familiar {pirits, or Impes, as they call
them, and that the Devill appeared to him, in the likeneſſe of a
black brovvne Mare, and would carrie him whither hee deſired,
and confeſſed abundance of mifchiefe he had done, between the
time he was releafed, and committed againe. But after hee was
in Burie Goale, not long before the Affizes, the firſt ſince theſe
warres , the Goaler mifling a Priſoner in the morning, which he
had over night, a notorious offender, whom he kept double
ſhackled, the Goaler queftioned this boy, and upon ſome threat-
ning ſpeeches, the boy confeſſed, that he was gone home on his
Mare over the walls, and ſnewed where, and told him he fhould
finde him with his wife; whereupon, the Goaler fent forthwith
tothe Priſoners houſe, being at leaf twelve miles, and there
found him at his houfe, as the boy had faid, having fhackles on
as he went out. Will this with the other give you ſatisfaction?
but I might adde to this, ſuperſtitious and Idolatrous perfons.
But I paffe, intending onely to take the heads, agreeing with
the confeſſions of Witches. 3
Secondly, malicious people, full of revenge, having hearts
{wolne with rancour, upon the leait diſpleaſure, with bitter ban-
nings and curfes , threatning revenge , or reqnitalls ; this is
manifeſt by the nature, quality, words, and deeds of Witches
convicted, who have fhewed themfelves to be fuch, as ever found
fo to be, asthe faid ahn Wyanick confeſt „ that when hee lived
* at

A Confirmation ana Diſcovery of Witchcraft. 1

at- Thrapſton in Northamptonfbeir , he having loſt his purſe with
fgme feven ſhillings in it, as he was in a Barne, where he lived,
there in’ an Inne, as hee was making up of bottles of hay , hee
was in a paſſion for his purſe and money, and in fuch a rage of
banning and curſing, that he was ſaying to himſelfe, would hee
knew where he might goe to a cunning man for it, for have it
he would, though he went to the Devill for it; (here was a pre-
aredneſſe for the Devill) for he conteſſed, the Devill appeared to
bim immediately, in the likeneſſe of a Beare, but not above the
bigneſſe of a Rabbit, vvhich told him, if hee would fall downe
and worſhip him, he would help him to his purſe, and money a-
gaine, and that he ſnould have it where he ſtood, next day about
the fame time; fo he did fall downe and worfhip him; And next
day he came againe, to fee for his purfe and money, aud found it
accordingly , but confeſſed, thatbefore he could tell it, the De-
vill in the fame fhape appeared to him againe, and told him, hee
muſt fall downe and worſhip him againe, and then he fell downe,
and faid, Oh my Lord, my God, I thanke thee, and then hee
asked him to deny God, and Chriſt, and to ſerve him as Lord,
and then he ſhould never want, vvhich he confefled he con-
ſented to, then he demanded bloud, and he bade him take it, ſo
he skipped on his fhoulder, and fetched bloud with his claw, on
the ſide of his head, which marke was ſeen at his Tryall; Then
he confeſſed, there appeared two more, vvhich the firſt told him
hee muſt worfhip alfo, and take them for his Gods, and they
ſhould be at his command, and fo he faid, he did; then that like
_ aBeare turned like a Ratt, and fo thoſe ſucked on the three marks
found on him, after to the time he was taken, at their times ap-
pointed, and vvere at his command, as he then confeſſed more at
large, before the juſtices of the Peace, and confeſſed at the Gal-
lowes likewife, the laſt words he ſpoke. Alſo one Moores wife of
Sutton, in the Ille of Elie, in the County of Cambridge, after the
had confeſſed the league and Covenant made, and ſealed vvith her
bloud, confeſſed, that fhe fent one of her Impes to kill a man, or
at leaſt to hurt to him; for that she had bought a Pigge of him,
for two shillings and two pence, and paid him two shillings, and
afterward he comming by her dore, asked her for it, which man,
was ſoone after taken fick, and in his ſickneſſe, cryed out of her,
faying, he could not depart this life, untill hee had ſpoken with

2 her,
*

— ' — — —
-

a
4

22 onfit mation and Dif covery of Witchcraft. —
her, ſo she was fent for, but she refuſed, whereupon Che lying
in fuch extremity) she was by ſome of his friends, at his requeſt,
being fo deſirous to {peake with her in fuch extremity, forced to
goe to him, and then ſoone after he dyed, according as hee for-
merly faid; So this woman confeſſed divers other things, and
ſeemed to be very penitent, and ſorry for it; for she wept ¿t her
tryall, and confeſſed her felfe guilty before the Judge, Bench,
and Country; But what she did after, or at her Execution, l know
not. Thoma ine Ratcliffe of Shellie, in Suffolke, confeſſed, that it
was malice that had brought her to that she was come to, meaning
Witchcraft; for she confefled, that ſoone after her husbands de-

ceafe, above twenty yeares before her confeflicn , there came
one in the likeuefle of a man, into bed to her, which {poke
with ahollow, shrill voyce, and told her, he would be a loving
husband to her, if she would confent to him, which she ſaid, she

did, and then he told her, he would revenge her of all her ene-
mies, and that she should never miſſe any thing, in which she
faid, she found him a Iyer, but ſaid, that Satan often tempted —

her to banning , ſwearing, and curfing , which shee confeſſed

she did uſe a long time, and that many times it fell out accord-
ingly, and that she, falling out with one Martins wife, who had
a child drowned, for that she called her Witch, faying, she was
the cauſe of the childs drowning, she bad her goe home and look
to the reſt, leſt she loſt more, and one died ſuddenly after. Alſo
Anne Randall of Lauenbam in Suffolke, after she had confeſſed the
Covenant, for ſtill you muft remember, t hat is firt done, before
the Devill, or their Familiars, or Impes, act, or doe any thing,
confefled that she had two Impes, which were heavie and ſoft, but
came in the likeneſſe of Cats, or Kitlins, of a blew colour, cal-
led Hangman, and Jacob, and that thoſe fucked on the markes
were found upon her body, fome thirty yeares together: fome-
t mes once a weeke, ſometimes once a fortnight, and that shee
fent her Impe Hangman to kill a horſe of one William Baldwins
of Thorpe, fome two miles trom Lauenbam, for that she asked
him to bring her in fome wood and he bad her pay for that she
had had firt; and the Impe returned, and told her he had done,
he had killed two, fer they were lanquelled together, ſo he killed
them both, which horſes were killed (but in fuch a tempeſt ) as
was ſuppoſed by a Devill in Thunder, untill she confeſſed it of
| | „„ her

e

j
i
$
!
A
Í
| $

Acovnfirmat ion and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 23

her felfe. Alfo she confeſſed, that being at Stephen Humfries
in Thorpe aforeſald, and a begging for Almes, hee came home
well, and the being at the doore, he chid her, or gave her fuch words
as fbe liked not of; As fhe went over the way from the houfe, her
Impe Hangman appeared to her, and asked her what he ſhould
doe, and she bad him goe and kill one of his Hogs, which thee
law, which fhe faidhe did before the was out of fight, which
Hog died accordingly. Likewife the further confeſſed, that the
being angry with one Mr. (Coppinger of Lavenham , fhe fènt her
[mpe Jacob to carry away buthes, which he had cauſed to be laid
to tence his fences, above one load, here fome „ and there fome,
all along by the hedge fide, as they were to be hedged out, and
in one night they were gone, no man knew what way, until!
ſuch time as fhe confeſſed her Impe did it. But as 1 have fince heard,
they were knowne to be in another mans ground, who confeſſech
they came the fame night, but how, he knew not till then. Alo
a young man of Denford, in Northampuonſbire, who ſuffered for
Witchery fince the faid time, at Northampton , Confefled, that
he fent one of his Impes, to one Cockes Cattell of Denford, be-
cauſe he would not let him keep them, andthe Cattell ranne fo
violently away foming» that the owner had much adoe to catch
them witha horfe; and more to get them home into his yard a-
gaine; and fo many other things he confeſſed, as I could parti-
cularly inftance. And fo for this, I hope it is ſufficient, to give
all ſatisfaction, for all confeſſions, or moſt of them at leaſt,
tend to prove this in ſome part. Thoſe that are given to
over much curiofity, to feeke after vaine Knowledge , in pride
of heart to goebeyond others, to underftand fecret and hidden
things, to know things to come. Such are thoſe, as not bound-
ing themſelves within the limits of reaſon, nor of Gods reveal-
edwill, fall fowle unawares upon the Devill , and are in great
danger to be intrapped by him, and made his ſlaves by his intice-
ments. Thus was Parfon Lowis taken, who had been a Miniſter,
(as! have heard) in one Parith above forty yeares , in Suffolhe,
before he was condemned, but had been indited for a common
imbarriter, and tor Witchcraft, above thirty yeares before,and the
grand jury (as l have heard) found rhe bill for a common im-
barriter, who now, aſter he was found with the markes, in his
confeflion, he confeſſed, thar in pride of heart, to be equall, or
D 3 rather

—
3
+ t
*
f
*
£ +
‘
¢
ee «
$
`

24
rather above God, the Devill too ke advantage of him, and hee

A Confirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft.

covenanted with the Devill, and fealed it with his blaud, and

had three Familiars or fpirits , which fucked on the markes
‘ound upon his body, and did much harme , both by Sea and

Land, eſpecially by Sea; for he confeſſed, that he being at Lan-

„garfort in Suffolke, where he preached, as he walked upon the wall,

or workes there, he ſaw a great faile of Ships pafe by, and that
as they were ſailing by, one of his three Impes, namely his yel-
low one, forthwith appeared to him, and asked him what hee
ſhould doe, and he bade it goe and iinke fuch a Ship, and fhew-

ed his Impe a new Ship, amongit the niiddle of thereit (asl re-

member) one that belonged to Ipſwich, ſo he confeſſed the Impe
went forthwith away, and he ſtood fill, and viewed the Ships
on the Sea as they were a ſayling, and perceived that Ship immedi-
ately, to be in more trouble and danger then the ret ; tor he faid,

the water was more boyſtrous nsere that then the reit, tumbling

up and downe with waves, as if water had been boy led in a pot,

and ſoone after (he faid) in a fhort time it fanke directly downe

into the Sea, as he ſtood and viewed it, when all the reit fayled
away in ſafety, there he conſeſſcd, he made fourtecn widdowes
in one quarter of an hcure. Then Mr. Hef kin, as he told me
(for he tooke his Confeflion ) asked him, if it did not grieve
him to fee fo many men caft away, in a hort time, and that he
ſhould be the caufe of fo many poore widdowes on a fuddaine;
but he {wore by his maker, no, he was joytull to fee what power
his Impes had, and fo likewiſo confefled many other milchiefes,
and had a charme to keep him out of Goale, and hanging, as
he paraphraſed it himſelfe, but therein the Devill deceived him;
tor he was hanged, that Michaelmas time 1645. at Burie Saint
Edmunds, but he made a very farve larger confeſſion, which I have

heard hath been printed; but if it were ſo, it was neither of

Mr. Hopkins doing, nor mine owne; for we never printed any

ching untill now. ] doe this (he being dead) but make no ufe

of any confeſſions taken by him, but only this, for that ic fal-
leth out fo fit for this purpoſe: Yet | have heard, that other con-
feſſions have been W and ſome other things beſides, as if
it had been of ours, or one of our doings, or at leaſt, by one of
our conſents; when asl know, he never had any hand in any,

and for my part J utterly renounce all for mer. Alfo I may adde
to

15
i
ul
i
1
1
Í
J]
1
%
| f
—

to this, one Henry Carre of Ratlefden, in Snffolke, who I have
heard was a Scholler fit for Cambridge, (if not a Cambridge
Scholler) and was well educated; yet fell into this grievous
finne, and confeffed, that he had two Impes, which ſucked on
thoſe markes I found upon him, two yeeres together, and came
in the likeneſſe of Mice, which he felt oft, and ſaid, they were
hairy and heavie, and ſo ſee ming to bewaile his condition, faid,
that he had forſaken God, and God him, and therefore would
confeſſe no more, he faid> untill he came on the Gallowes to
be hanged, for he had confeſſed enough for that, and then be
would confeſſe all, and make all other knowne he knew of,
but in the meane time, he would confeſſe no more, nor did;
yet he was much importuned to it, but that was alwayes his an-
{wer , and was arraigned at the Barre, three or foure times, and
yet by reaſon of an Allarum at Cambridge, the Goale delivery at
Burie Saint Eduunds was adjourned, for about three weekes, and
he died in the Goale in that time: So it was conceived to be
pride of heart, which was the firt originall caufe, by reafon ot
his knowledge; yet | confefle, he fell into poverty before his
death, but as for that, thinke it is ſeldome or never knowne,
that any get eſtates, or thrive, that thus give themfelves over to
Satan, but rather conlume their eſtates, if they have any; yet
the word of God (ayes, The witked man thriveth as well as the
godly in this world: But for Witches, I never Knew any. To
cheſe lixewiſe might be added, thoſe obfervers of times, Deut. 18.
And fuch as profeſſe to cure diſeaſes, by fazh meanes as have no
reafon, or worke of nature to doe the Cure, nor have by any
ordinance of God, from his word, any fuch operation to heale
the infirmity. And therefore fuch remedies maft be Diabolicall,
& che practifcrs either Witches already, or by their implicit faith,
the next dogre to Witchchraft. Such be they that ufe Spells,
Charmes, andiuch like; and what be Juglers and legerdemain |
Companions ? For that they ſport with {uch refemblances, and
utter words, as the invocating of a Spirit, the reality whereof,
is called an abomination before God, and as Saint Paul {peaketh,
Children of ditobedience. What be the Fortune tellers, and ſuch
like ? but apt to be Satans ſlaves in Witchery, as they be his o-
therwile in impiety; For through curiofity of knowledge, if
reaſon and Art faile, will it not move men to ſeeke help of a Spi-

*
4
j
>

è ALTON 0 * .

rit, who is ready at hand to attend, to draw them into the pit
of Magick, and Sorcery, and Witchchraft? as one Mr. Cooper
ſpeaketh of, in his boołe, called, The Myftery of Witchcraft, Whom
himſelfe was delivered from, by Gods preventing grace; but be-
cauſe as yet, theſe have not been fo commonly found out now a-
dayes , | forbeare further, though I might inſtance diverie exam-
ples more. Thofe who with greedineſſe gape after worldly wealth,
or feare poverty. As Meribell Bedford of Ratleſden aforeſaid con-
feffed , that above fix yeares before (he was found wich the
markes, which Witches ufually have, There came a black thing
to her, and called Meribell, which asked her to denieGod, and
Chriſt, and told her, ifthe would, fhe ſhould never want, but
fhould bee avenged of all her enemies, which the confented
to: then fhe faid, he had bloud of one of her little fingers, to
ſeale the Covenant, which being done, fhe faid, foure more came,
One like a Dow, called 715; One like a Miller called Jom ; One
like a Spider, or a Spinner called focne; and the other like a
Waſpe called Nann; Theſe fhe confeſſed were at her command,
to performe the Covenant, and did fuck upon thofe markes
found upon her body, two or three times a week, during the
faid fix yeares, and did much harme, as fhe freely confeſſed with
much penitency. To this Imay adde, one Elisabeth Hubbard,
widdow, of Stow Market in Suffolke, who confeſſed, that above
thirty yeares, ſhe had three things came to her in the likeneſſe of
Children , which asked her whiſpering to deny God, Chrift,
and all his workes, and to cleave to them; and fhe fhould want
nothing; Thefethe faid, as they named themſelves, were called,
Thomas, Richard, and Hobh, and chat they ſcratched her back,
and fetched bloud to feale the Covenant, and that they uſe to
fuck on thoſe markes which were found upon her, two or three

times a week, about breake of the day, and that fhe did fay, |

pray to God to doe to him as he dealt by me (meaning a man of
the ſame Towne) and he languiſhed and died, and many other
things fhe faid the did, but was aſh imed to tell them. Alice the
wife of Edmund Wright of Hitcham, in Suffolke , confeſſed that
ſhe had foure Impes above threeſcore yeares ; two like little
Boyes ; one like a Lambe, and the fourth like a gray Buzz ard, and
that the biggeſt boy (poke to her witha great Whorc: voyce, as
if he had been griev d, and asked her to goe into the field, and

$
i
ji

A Confirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft. 2

_ fke fhould have money, and fhould never miffe or want any thing,
and asked her to deny God, and Chriſt, and to curſe God two
or three times, and that fhe tooke her elder brother with her, and
went into the field, but when they came to the place where they
appointed her to goe , they found none, and that the ufes often
to be in paine and trouble, after they had nipped or fucked her,
where her markes were found, ſometimes once a week, fome-
times once a fortnight, and that fhe felt on them, and that they
were foft, and that they came fometimes teverally, fometimes al-
together, and that they often asked her to goe and doe mifchief,
which the confefled, to fome Cattell of her Neighbours, and faid,
that fhe was much troubled and tormented , and in extreame
paine, which they have put her to for denying their demands.
Furthermore, Foane Ruce ulver of Pomſtead in Suffolke, confeſſed,
that in the field called Horfecroft or Hog-Marfh, there appeared
in a bufhthings like Chickens, about five or ſix, and that fhe
catched three of them and the reft ranne away, and that fhe car-
ried three home, which foone after turned to the likeneſſe of
Mice , whofe names fhe called Touch, Pluck, and Take, which
fpoke to her with a great hollow voyce, and asked her to denie

od, and Chrift, and told her, if fhe would, fhe fhould never
want meat, drinke, or clothes, or money, but fhe faid fhe cold
them, that if fhe denied God and Chrift, the ſhould lofe her
foule, but fhe faid, they told her againe, they were more able to

fave her foule then God, and that they would doe more for her

then fhe re for, if fhe would confent to them, which then
fhe confeſſed fhe did, and then they demanded bloud , and fhe nip-
ped her fore-finger, and they pricked her finger with apin , and
there dropped fix drops of bloud which they catched , and fo
had it againe after the fame manner thaice, and that fhe did agree
to give them her foule ; Then I asked her whether they
brought her any money or no, and fhe faid, fometimes foure fhil-
lings at a time, and fometimes fix fhillings at a time, but that is
but feldome, for I never knew any that had any money before,
except of Clarkes wife of Manningtree, who confeſſed the fame,
and ſhewed fome which fhe faid her Impe brought her, which was
perfect money: But this Ruce, further confeſſed the fucking of
her markes, and how fhe ſent her Impe Touch to kill a Bullock,

and that he came back againe, and told her he had ftuck it on the
right

—

~

right fide, and it died accordingly, and ſo many other things,

20 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witch-craft.

and faid fhe was {topped and could not confeſſe when fhe would,
but after had eafe. Here you may obſerve, that if he cannot pre-
vailefor want,, then he promifes to free them of hel]: torments,
and {o delude them that way. Ashe did Ellen the wife of Nicho-
las Greenliefe of Barton, in Suffolke, who confeſſed that three
things came to her; one like a Rat, cold and ragged as fhe felt
on him; The next like a Mole, ſoft and cold; The third like a
Mouſe; and that the Mole ſpoke to her with a great hollow
voyce, and asked her to give her ſoule and body to him, for he
could ſave her, and bad her not be afraid of him, for he could per-

forme what he promifed, whereupon fhe conſented, then he told
her fhe fhould never want, but Be avenged of all her enemies, and

fo fhould continue her life time, if the did not bewray him, for if
fhe did he would have the upper hand of ber, and confeſſed that
her wifhes came to paffe; as for example: fhe wifhed one good-
man Garnebam might be lame, and ſo he was, and that Maſter
Lockweed might have Lice, becauſe he formerly accufed her for

ſending, orcaufing him to havefome'when fhe did it not, and

fo he had, and that her Impesufed to {ack her two or three times
a week, for nineteene yeares together; And that the Mole faid fhe
thould be queſtioned in fome ſhort time, but adviſed her to ſtand
out and not to confeſſe, for if ſne did he would cauſe her to
drowne her felfe , or put her felfe to death, and then he ſhould

have her ſoule, and after when (he was kept, before {he went to
the Juftices of Peace, her Impe in the ſhape of a Mole came to
her, when thoſe which were with her faw it mot, and tore her
as fhe confeſſed, as if he would have torne her in pieces, becaufe

fhe had confeſſed. This woman alſo confeſſed, that when fhe

prayed fhe prayed to the Devill and not to Gad, and that fhe
had her Impes from her mother in Law, who fhe {aid ſpoiled
her; And further confeſſed that the Devil] had the uſe of her
body, and uſed to come to bed to her, but was ſoft, cold, and
heavier, fo heavie as ſhe could not {peake , And that her Impe
like a Rat went upon her, wifhing to Jame Ralph Roggards Horſe
or Mare, becauſe he ſaid he would goe for the Searchers, and ſo
it was. Beſides the former markes know this, that it is more eaſi-
er to finde them on the breſt then in any other place, for that the
breſt is all ſnrunke up, and the Teate thereof extended a

then

*
$
1
E

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witcheraft. >}
then any womans that gives fuck, be it on man or woman, with
a-Circkle round about it asif it were fucked, and infenfible as a-
forefaid, and ifona woman that = fuck, that breſt is drye,
for where the Impes fuck there will come no milke, but the teate
will ſtick out longer there then the other, and is nothing but
skinne, and will be much extended as aforefaid, and eaſily to bee
difcerned by feeling of it. I fhould thinke this ſhould give all fa-
tisfaction ; that gaine, Revenge, feare of want, or poverty, or
fearefulneſſe of hell torments, or ill parents, or company, yea
and luft alſo, or any one may bee a meanes to draw one to

As for ill company, bad and wicked parents, and ſuch as are
over-much given to luſt, I will put them together, and inſtance
{ome few more examples; As one Buſb of Barton aforefaid wid-
dow, confeffed that about three weekes after her husbands de-
ceafe, being above fiteene yeares before fhe was queſtioned, the
Devill appeared to her in the fhape of a young black man, ſtand-
ing by her bed fide, which {poke to her with a hollow voyce, and
came into bed to her, and had the ufe of her body, and asked
her to deny God and Chriſt, and ſerve him, and then the fhould
never want, but ſhould beavenged of all her enemies, which she
confented to, then she faid he kiffed her and asked her for bloud,
which he drew out of her mouth, and it dropped on a paper,
and that he us’d to have the ufe of her body two or three times a
weeke, and then us’d to kiffe her, and at no other time but as be-
forefaid, but fhe faid he was colder then man, and heavier, and
could not performe nature as man, and that foone after she had
confented to the Covenant and given her bloud, there came twa
things more like Mice, which ufed to fuck her about twice a week
during that time, and confeſſęd how fhe -fent an Impe to tor-
ment a Maiden, who she — was againſt her having reliefe
at her Maſters, which was done, but afterward this Maiden
went to her and ſcratched her till she got bloud of her, and then
she confeffed she had no further power over her ( but this is not
alwayes true, nor to be obſerved, though it tooke effect there)
But she confeſſed the killing of three and twenty Turkies at one
time, and Cowes, and how her Impes returned and told her it
was done, and other things then at large. One more which I

should thinke should be a warning to others, to have a care to
E 2 bring

¢
d

30 AConfirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.

bring their Children up in the nurture and feare of God.
Of one Anne Cricke of Hiicham aforeſaid widdow , that {he had
three linpes about feven yeares together; The one in the likeaefie -
of a Sparrow called Harrie ; the other two in the likeneſſe of
reddifh dunne Mice, called Fack and Will, and they fucked her
twice a weeke ſeverally, all in one-night, and the Devill fetched
bloud on her left Arme to ſeale the Covenant, which was to de-
nie God and Chrift, and to ferve him, which she faid fhe pro-
mĩſed faintly, but confeſſed the promife was firſt made by her, be-
fore the Devill had her bloud; Then | asked her if she did grieve
for it after she had done it, she anſwered, when it was done it
was too late to repent ; then asked her why she did it, she faid
f dhe was left weake, and the Devill-got the upper hand of her for
want of faith, through want and otherwiſe, she alſo confeſſed
the Devill had the ufe of her body, but she faid she could not
tell whether he performed nature or not, and ſaid she could not
confeſſe before much company , but faid the Devill ſpoke in a
hollow voyce, and confeſſed the imployment of her Impes, as
the fending of her Impe Harry to Jobn Leverifbes of the fame
Tone, to kill him a Hog, becaufe she was denyed Egges and fuch
like things, and they burnt his eares, and she could not keepe

from going; it being asked her why she went, she ſaid they mnft
needs goe the Devill drives, and fo many fuch like things. Alfo
Sufan Scot of Lauenham aforefaid , complained of one Sweeting
comming to her with one Golding, who confeſſed the Devill us’d
to have the uſe of her body, and fpoke to her with a great eaſie
voyce, and that she had two lmpes like Cats and Dogs, which
fucked on thofe markes found upon her, and how she wasthe
Death of Thomazine, the daughter of one Mr. Coppinger there,
and diverfe other things. Alfo one Richmond, a woman which
lived at Brampford, confeſſed the Devill appeared to her in the like-
ueſſe of a man, called Danie! the Prophet, who bad her not be
afraid of him, for he was fo, and tooke her by the hand, and
bad her truftin him and he would avenge her of all her enemies,
and he should miſſe nothing, for he would curfe her enemies, and
that she after falling out with her neighbour, curſed her and bad
the Devill take her, and she dyed after she had lyen {fome eight
weekes, as {he faid, by her meanes , becauſe the Devill promiſed
her revenge; ſhe confeſſed her Covenant was to deny God, Chriſt

and

a
1

Acoufirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 31
and his Miniſters, and to ferve him, fhe faid the Devill, forthe
faid ſo he was that fhe called Daniel the Prophet, none fhall need
queſtion it; and ſhe confeſſed fhe had three more, One like a
rugg red brinded Dog with cloven feet, One like a Hog called
Jack, and another like a Dog called James, and confeſſed the
Devill defired her to ufe curfing, and whatſoever ſne deſired fhould
come to her, and fo confeſſed many things fhe did. Alfo Anne
Goodfellow ot Woodford, in Nortbamptonſbire widdow , confeſſed
that foone after her Aunts deceafe, about three yeares before fhe
was queſtioned, the Devill in the fhape of a white Cat appeared
to her, and {poke to her with a lowvoyce, and bad her not be
afraid of it, for he was her Aunts ſpirit, and asked her to deny
God, Chrift and her Baptiſme, which fhe faid she did, for he pro-
mifed her that she should be faved , and would doe for her what
she defired, and then asked her for bloud to feale the Covenant,
and she further confeſſed that he bit her on the fecond finger,
and got bloud into his mouth, but what he did with all she
knew not, but faid amongſt other things that she found him a
lyer, for she often wanted after. Alſo Elizabeth Gurrey of Rif-
den, in Bedfordſbire Widdow , confeſſed that the Devill had the
ufe of her body, and lay heavie upon her, and that through her
wilfulneſſe, and poverty, with delire of revenge, she denied God,

and Chrift, and fealed it with her bloud, about five or feven
yeares before she was found with the markes, and confeſſed what
fhe had done to one William Dickens, and another there, and the
manner how, but afterward | heard she made a very large con-
feſſion. Anne Hammer neere Needham in en „of Creeting
there (as l remember) confeſſed that ſoone after her mothers de-
~ gale » which was above twenty yeares before she was queſtioned,
there came two Impes to her, which she called Tom, Robbin, and
Tom like a Mole, and Robbin like a Dorr, which she fent to
kill Mr. Campe achild, which she faid did (very like to be true,)
for Matter Campe averred that a Mole to their thinking was
feen in the houfe, going towards the roome where the child lay,
and that they had much adoe to keep itout, nor could tell what
became of it in the end, and that they uſed to fuck her twice a
fortnight on thoſe markes found upon her, during that time, and
that the Devill in the likeneſſe of a Calfe asked her to denie God,
and Chriſt, and to ſerve him as Lord, and told her that if she
| E 3 would

*
‘

—

4

1

1

1

would he would free her of hell torments, and that she should

A Confirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft-

never want any thing, but be faved, and she confented , then he
told her he would avenge her of her enemies, but she ſaid the

Devill never performed any thing but revenge, and that the De-

vill in the likeneſſe of a black man us’d to come in at the key
hole, and to bed to her, and have the uſy of her body, but was
heavier and colder, and lay allo ver her as man, and us'd not to
ſpeake but onely to aske tc lie with her, and as she thought per-
formed nature: But if I should goe to pen all of theſe ſorts, then
should have no end, or at leaſt too big a volume, and therefore
but this one more; that Anne Borebam of Sudbury, in the Coun-
ty of Suffolke widdow , confeffed that as she awoke out of a
dreame she faw uglie men (as she thought) a fighting, and asked

them why they fought , who anſwered that they would fight for

all her, and then one vanished away, and then came to her in-
to bed and had the uſe of her body, but faid he was heavier and
colder then man, and lay onely on part of her, and that man
asked her to deny God and Chriſt, and to ſerve him, but she ſaid
she told him she was a poore widdow , and then he ſaid if she
woud ſerve him she should never want, but have her deſire, and
then she conſented, for he promifed her to free her of hell tor-
ments, yet she ſaid he told her she muſt goe to hell, but should

not be tormented ( a fearefull and ſubtill delufion ) for I have

been with ſome who have confeſſed the ſame, and that he pro-
mifed them that they should onely walke too and fro the earth
as their Impes did, and never ſuffer or feele torments. Now fome

may fay, if all thefe forts be Witches, then moft part of the world

be fo. lantwer no; for honeſt perſons may bee given to theſe,
and yet free from Witchcraft ; But this is onely to shew when
any are given to be extreame in any of thefe, then is the Devill
buſie to worke upon them, for hedoth not upon all that be gi-
ven to thefe wayes, but upon ſuch as he findes ſome kinde of

reparedneſſe in, as for example, Was there not a preparedneffe
in Bonebam, and Mr. Parlon Lowis, and fo if you doe but truly
obferve little or more in all their confellions , as take but this

laſt when she faw that fight of fighting (as she thought) would

not a good Chriſtian have had ter thoughts upon God, rather
then to have ſuffered one to come to bed to her, which she knew
could be no leſſe but the Devill, and no man, for then he could

not

32

1

11

not have come into the roome, for Satan 2 net to them
in pe K pa untill he finde ſome preparedneſſe, and then as you
have by theſe confeflions patt he appe res in ſeverall ſnapes,
and then maketh the league, and confirmes it with bloud, and
then fends them Familiars more or leſſe, and fo proceedes by de-
grees: So you may finde as I faid before, extreme poverty, palli-
onate forrow accompanied with ſolitarineſſe, too much inraged
wich anger and defire of revenge, thofe of ſuch parents, and all

that I have formerly reckoned ; you fee by their confefhons, that
the extreame makes a preparedneſſe, and | have heard of fome
ſchollers for want of Learning, to be learned have growne to it,
and fome through overmuchi, as is inſtanced before. Likewife
Jobn Scarfe of Ratleſden aforeſaid, confeſſed that about three
yeares before he was accuſed to be ſearched, there came a thing
into his houſe of a gray colour, of the bigneſſe of a great Rat,
of about a quarter of an ell long, which he tooke up and put in-
to a box, and kept it ſome certainetime there, and then tooke
it out, and laid it downe on his belly, and put ie to the place
where the markes were found, where he faid it fucked halfe an
houre ; ( Did he prepare himfelfe, or was he deſirous to be one?)
I conceive he did deſire to be one, for he was a heatheniſh man,
and fo the agreement pat; but to thew his willingneſſe to put ic
to the place, for in his confeſſion more at large, he confeſſed that
within a fortnight after there came two more, of a whitifh dunne
colour, and leſſe then the other, which he called Tom, and Vill;
but the firſt he called Harrie, and fo proceeded. Now 1 will pro-
ceed to prove that Witches may be found out.

Firſt, from God in the giving of his Law againſt Witches. Ex-
od. 2 1. 18. Thou fhalt not ſufſer a Witch to live; which implyeth
a Difcovery of them, elſe it could never be put in execution, and
ſo should be a Law to no purpofe.

Secondly from the Hiſtory, Fick Divine. For it is faid Saul
found out Witches, and executed the Law upon them, or put
them to death, and fo good King Joſiab, 2 King. 3. 14. |

Secondly, we have Chronicles, and many relations made of the
evident diſcourſe of Witches.

“Thirdly, the many Tryalls in our owne Country at many Af-
ſizes: So ĩt is cleere that Witches may be difcovered, though it
cannot be denyed but that there is — difficulty therein, be-

cauſe

~
>
`
1
7
1
1
1
1
H
1

ZALOT ATEU G pila m Ve Tall.

caufe the fecrefie of the grounds of Witchcraft is fo clofe and
hidden, as being one of the greateſt workes of darkneſſe commit-
ced this day under the Sanne: for that naturall caufes may arife
very ftrong,and many may cunningly, countertet outward appear-
ances, and Witneſſes may feigne their accuſations out of malice,
being traniported witb rage and uncharitablenefle, and defire of

revenge, becauſe of the ftrange imagination they have through

many feeming probabilities ; Some for words, or deeds, taken in
the worſt ſenſe; Some upon fome fuddaine fight of fome crea-
ture, and fo likewife upon burning any thing of the party fuf-
pected to be bewitched,if any ſhall come( though peradventure ac-
cidentally ) and ſo ſometimes ſomething elfe , as thatch over the
doore or ſuch like of the parties ſuſpected to be a Witch, and fo
could reckon divers inftances of feverall wayes, which many
times have produced ftrange and fometimes true effects, which
meanes have partly been the cauſe of the queſtioning of many,
who have been found no leſſe then Witches, and have ſuffered
{ince the aforementioned time: but I forbeareto ſpeake any fur-
cher of thofe wayes, for Iconceĩve them to be unlawfull altoge-
ther, and not to be ufed, forit cannot be conceived any leſſe
then adiftruft in Gods providence, in putting confidence that
ſuch meanes will make the Witch knowne , and effect their de-
fires: Vet to proceed as I have faid, I cannot deny but thoſe may
be juft grounds of ſuſpicion, and caufe of queſtioning them, but
not al wayes certaine, beſides the unlawfulneſſe held by Divines.
But theſe cannot be · denyed to be jut grounds as aforeſaid. As
when one fhall be given to curſing and banning, with imprecati-
ons upon flight occafion , and withall ufe threatnings to be re-
venged, and thereupon evil! to happen. As Cherrie of Ti brapfton,
in Northamptonfbire, a very aged man, who upon a ſmall occafi-
on, of falling out with one of his Neighbours in the field, where
they kept Cattell, one of the two (I doe not now well remem-
ber which) {cared fome Cattell off the ground, where the Cat-
tell the other kept was to goe, with a Dog; the faid Cherrie and
the other fell at odds and worded, whereupon Cherrie wiſhed

that his tongue might rot out of his head, the man was foone

after ftrangely taken, andhis tongue did come out of his mouth,
hanging onely bythe rootes thereof within his mouth , but

could not be kept all in his mouth, and fo continued to his death,

and

{
}
i
{

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 5

and died in a miferable condition. This Cherrie confeſſed himſelt,
and that he was his death, onely upon thet occafion. After which
Confeſſion, that it came to be known, many of thetownfmen of
Thrapſtone aforeſaid averred that he died with his tongue out,
and that in a manner it rotted. A fearful thing to be thought of,
what a miferable condition the poor man died in.

Cherrie likewife confeſſed the death of two more, which by
his confeſſion, and thoſe that knew their deaths, died in a ſtrange
and miſe rable condition, through his wicked curling (as he con-
feſſed;) and fo confeſſed many other notorious facts he had done.
And being asked whether he did not do Sir John Wafbington, a
Knight which lived in the fame town, any harm in his cattel or
otherwiſe, for that he had ſuffered ſtrange loſſes, he confeſſed he
did, and particularized the death of much cattel; ſaying, when
he had reckoned up as many as he could well remember, That he
had been the death of ſo many of his, that he could not reckon
them all. |

Then it was demanded of him, Why he would offer it to Sir
John, who had been fo loving to him in affording him relief con-
ſtantly. He anſwered; The more he gave him, the more power
he had over him to do him miſchief: for he fal his Imps muſt be
employed, elſe they would not let him be quiet, but torment him.

This Cherrie alſo confeſſed divers other things and harms he
had done, and the ſealing of the Covenant with the devil with
his blood, to deny God and Chriſt, and to ſerve him the devil for
revenge, with promife of freedom from hell-torments*: and that
his Imps, the laſt time they fucked him, not long before he was
fearched , told him they would not fuck himany more but that
time, becaufe he was an old man, and had but little blood. `

This Cherrie confeſſed preſently after he was fearched,who died
at Northampton in the Goal there, the fame day he ſhould have
beed tried, much about the time the Grand Jury had found the
Bill of Indi&ment againtt.him, Billa vera, as it was reported, mife-
rably. A juft judgement of God: for it was reported, that a night
or two before, his coat was all rent right down on the back, and
his mouth ftopped full: and when it was pulled out, he confeffed |
chat he had been at a bridge going into Thrapſton town, and had

2 cord found about his neck.

F

ji
— — |

mation Aka Dijccvery o Witca-cratt.

To this] might adde the aforenamed Thomazin Ratcliff, who
upon the falling out with another woman about the death Ot a
childe, bade her go home and look to the reſt, leſt fhe lott more.
And one died ſuddenly after, as before is expreſſed.

Of theſe kindes I could nominate divers more, as you may ob-

ferve in many of their Confeſſions, and might adde implicite con-

feflions : As, when a queſtion is asked the ſuſpected party, If he or
{he were not the cauſe of ſuch or ſuch a thing; anſwer is made,
He or fhe might have let me alone, or not done fo and ſo; or ſuch
like. As for example, you may obſerve in moſt of their Confeſſi-
ons, they did it becauſe they had not {uch things as they defired,

or uſed to have: as Anne Leech of Hawford in Effex confeſſed in
her Confeſſion, beſides the death of two or three, the laming of a
childe of one Turners. It being asked her why fhe did it, fhe an-

ſwered, Her mother might have paid her for work fhe had done.

Likewife onc Anne Parker, being asked why fhe did one Pryer mif-
chief; fhe anſwered, He might have given her money upon a
Thankſgiving-day, as well as he gave to others; but would not
give her any, becauſe fhe was not at Church: whereupon fhe ſent
her {pirit to him, who did accordingly. And fo confeſſed how the
devil in the likeneffe of a dun Dog, had three drops of blood un-
der her tongue, to ſeal the Covenant; and had a piece of paper in
his hand, and wrote her name thereon with her conſent, and ſo
romifed her money, and that fhe fhould never want, but fhould
be avenged of her enemies, according as is expreſſed in others.
Hereto I might adde fuch as faid they have fuch things as Fami-

lars fuck on them, but cannot help it. Alexander Suſſums of Mel-

ford in Suffolk, confeſſed that he had things which did draw
thofe marks I found upon him, but faid he could not help it, for
that all his kinred were naught. Then I asked him how it was
poſſible they could ſuck without his conſent. He ſaid he did con-
fent to that. Then I asked him again why he ſhould do it, when
as God was fo merciful towards him, as I then told him of, being
aman whom I had been formerly acquainted withal, as having
livedin Town. He anſwered again, He could not help it, for that
all his generation was naught ; and fo told me his mother and
aunt were hanged, his grandmother burnt for Witchcraft, and fo
others of them queſtioned andhanged. This man is yet living,

notwithſtanding he confeſſed the fucking of fuch things above

Uxteen

¢ :
E
| 4

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 37

ſixteen yeers together, but was ſuſpected for doing of miſchiet,
yet never queſtioned, but as he came into a honie accidentally
where I was, and fo profered himfelf to be tearched, and prefently ,
conteſſed thefe particulars, and fo by that means brought to trial,
but freed, and living, as atorefaid. 7
Likewiſe I may adde, When the party ſuſpected makes enquiry
after the party taken fick, or defires to vilit the party, or the party
the ſuſpected : For many have confeſſed that * they have done
a thing, they are ſorry for it, but cannot help it; as King of Acton
in Suffolk confeſſed, to 2 woman whom he had bewitched, in
the time fhe was in her extremity, long before he was quefiioned : -
but this woman defired him to undo what he had done; and he
told her he could not undo what he had done, but told her he was
forry for it, and told her of another that could, as he faid, and as
fhe affirmed , that was one, as we untruly call them, White or
goor Witches, and one that was then ſuſpected, who accordingly
did it. |
To confirm this, I can tell you of a very remarkable example
much tending to this particular, of one at Heddenham in the Ifle
of Ely in the County of Cambridge, where a childe ſuſpected to
be bewitched, was carried to the Juſtice of Peace his houle, where
the party ſuſpected was to be carried to be examined. This childe
being very ſick, was ſet in a chair, and held in it; but as ſoon as
the party who was ſuſpected came in, on a ſudden it aroſe of it ſelt,
and got hold of her face to ſcratch her, as its ſtrength would af-
ford, fhe not ſtirring. Here you may obſerve the former Confef-
fions, where the Witch confeſſed, that after fhe was ſcratched, the
had no further power over that party; for this woman ſtood ftill:
and fo you may perceive that many of them, after they have done
mifchiefs, are forry for it, and cannot help it: ( This it is to re-
nounce God and Chriſt) for this woman preſently confeſſed, that
it was fhe that had hurt the childe, through her diabolical practice,
and told him what Imp fhe had fent to hurt the childe, and the oc-
caſion why fhe did it; and how fhe had fent one of her Imps alit-
tle before fhe was accuſed, (for the had been fearched, and found
with the marks) to deftroy or ſpoil a whole field of corn in that
Pariſb; and fo made a very large Confeſſion, with the fuckling of
her Imps upon thofe marks found upon her, and the Covenant
ſealed with her blood, (as aforefaid in other Confeſſions) befides
F 2 other

38  AConfirmation and Difcevery of Witchcraft.

_ other mifchiefs which the did. May not Spell- ſetters and Charmers

be alſo added? for I cannot conceive any leſſe, when they fhall fay
that by words they can charm, fet Spells, and help or cure mad

Dogs, or any thing bitten by them, and fuch-like ; though it be
by their implicite league, (as fome of them do) yet itis a diſtruſt
of Gods providence, putting their confidence in their words, ta-
ther then in the living God, who faith it is an abomination to
him. And ] have heard tomeof theſe, not long ſince, boat of
their doings therein, ſaying they had it from their parents, ‘and

were not their parents good Chriftians ? and they do but ufe the
words for good ends. So likewiſe of thoſe born of ill parents, if
their carriage be not otherwife ; as I have inſtanced enough of
thofe, elfe ! could inſtance more, as the aforenamed Rebecca Weft,
who was drawn to it by Her mother, (as fhe confeffed ) after a
ſtrange manner, as fhe faid : for her mother asked her to go to

- Manningtree with her, which was about amile, and bade her

work hard that fhe might go: and as they went, fhe told her fhe
muſt not fay any thing whatfoever fhe faw, but confent to them,
and do as they did, and then fhe fhould be a happie woman; or
fuch-like inticements. But when fhe came there, at the houle
where her mother went, there were her confederates met; then,
betore fhe could be entertained, her mother wasasked whether her
daughter was acquainted with the matter in hand; who anſwered
She was. Then fhe was entertained; and as fhe confeſſed, the de-
vil appeared, and firft kiffed the woman of the houſe, and fo one
after another, and at laft her ſelf; and ſo fhe was asked then if fhe
were willing to be entred into their fociety ; who faid, She was.
Then appeared Familiars, which ſhe confeſſed, alſo the ſucking of
her body on the marks, and the ſealing of the Covenant with her
blood. This young woman confeſſed the naming of their Imps,
aud the manner, which I am afhamed to expreſſe; and the initia-
tion of a Witch, and every particular thing at large; efpecially,
the confeſſed how the devil took her by the hand, and the manner
and words were ufed at her Marriage, when ihe was married tothe
devil (as the confeſſed:) a feartul thing to declare. But one thing
oblerve, That the devil imitates God in all things as he can, much
after the book of Common: prayer, then in his outward Worfhip.

She likewife confeſſed that her mother prayed conftantly, (and, as

the world thought, very ſeriouſly) but ſhe faid it was to the devil,
| ufing

i
7
H
f
i
{
{
b {
1
i
è
}
+

Acoufirmat ion and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 39

ufing thefe words, Ob my God, my God, meaning him, and not the
LORD. This I put in the rather, becauſe you may take notice,
where fuch meetings be, there are juſt grounds of {ufpicion : for
they cannot always do their miſchiefs according to their defires,
without their meetings, and the help one of another.

I might adde the apparition of the party ſuſpected to the party
fick, and could nominate fome inſtances thereof, as in Northam-
pton-fhire, andelfewhere : but becaufe apparitions may proceed
from the phantafie of fuch as the party ufe to fear, or at leaſt fuf-
pect, I forbear, becauſe I would not that any ſhould be accuſed, but
where there are juſt grounds of ſuſpicion. But thoſe called Wiſe-
men, or Wiſe- women, called your White Witches, which will hew
the other in glaſſes, or undo what the other have done, {if pro-
ved) is it not fufficient ?

But I hope there it none fo ignorant orchlinde, as to think or
believe it is lawful for any to go or fend to ſuch, much leſſe to put
any confidence or truſt in them, who require faith to believe they
can cure, before they will undertake it ; ſeeing by the Law ot God
they ought to die, as well as the other. And the holy Scripture
utterly forbids any going to them, Levit. 2. 6. where it is faids,
that he will fet bis face againft fuch as fhall feek after thofe that have fa-
miliar ſpirits, and will cut them of from among ft his people ; much
more then fuch as fhould be guilty themfelves. |
Then fome will fay, How fhal! they be known one from ano-
ther, or how ſhall they be found out, if thefe difficulties be? For
it cannot be denied but that many of them have made great ſhews

— Af Religion.

lanfwer, It is truth: as the devil can transform himſelf into
an Angel of light, ſo have many of theſe Witches made outward
ſnews, as if they had been Saints on earth, and fo were taken by
fome;as one of Catworth in Huntingtonthire,who made as large a
Confeſſion, in a manner, as ever any did, & confeffed at the gallows
before her death, in my hearing. Likewiſe one Lendal/ of Cam-
bridge, who ſuffered alſo, carried her ſelf as if fhe had been no leſſe:
and fo did the mother of the ſaid Rebecca Weft, aud many others,
which by their carriage ſeemed to be very religious people, and
would conſtantly repair to all Sermons neer them: yet notwith-
ftanding all their ſhews of religion, there appeared fome of thefe
probabilities, whereby they were ä and fo ſearched, and fo
3 by.

1

—— — —

by that means

*

difcovered and made known. For if you do but
obferve thefe and ſuch- like other reafons as may be thereby ga-

thered, together with their Confeſſions, you fhall finde that they
prepare themſelves in ſome kinde or other, and chat by their out-

ward carriage, either by ill company keeping , maliciouſneſſe, re-

vengeful perſons, or ſuch as be born of ſuch parents, or go un-

der a general ſuſpicion of Witchcraft, or one way or other as
aforeſaid, there will appear juſt grounds of ſuſpicion, either by
words or deeds, whereby they may be brought to be queſtioned,
whereby it may appear there is a league made with the devil: for
notwithſtanding all former reaſons, to convict or prove one guil-
ty of Witchcraft, is to prove a League made with the devil: in
this onely act, ſtandeth the very reality of a Witch; without
which, (notwithſtanding great ſhews of probabilities ) I know
not, nor cannot conceive how any can be properly ſaid to be
Witches: For the devil (through Gods permiſſion) may hurt
mens bodies, and kill their cattel ; and ill haps may fall out upon
his or her curfing , and but grounds to make enquiry and ſearch,
which muft be fonthis League; which though never fo fecretly
made, yet it is to be difcerned , feeing it is that which maketh a
Witch, and not to fome of their own fociety : For befides the
former reafons, it is an heatheniſn practice to ſeek to fuch, Ifa. 19.
3. and 65.4. 2 King 17. 17. Now we fhould not be like the abo-
minable heathen in any evil, much leſſe in thefe abominations.
And they which ſeek to them, are commonly wicked and ev il peo-

ple, haunted themfelves by an evil ſpirit, who ſuggeſteth this

courfe into them, as he did into Saul, 1 Sam.28. Yea, ſuch as e-
ſteem of thefe, and think they work in Gods Name, and by his
power, are bewitched in fo thinking, Ads 3.9,11, For it is found

true by daily experience amongſt our felves, that thoſe which moft

ufe them, moft need them, as I might inſtance; but onely I deſire

to prove the League, which is to be proved: for they that make

this League, if expreſſe as before, have a familiar or {pirit, more
or leſſe: For as foon as the League is made, the Spirit or Familiar,
one or more, is familiar, as was before ſufficiently proved by Saul
and Fofiah in the forementioned places, when Witches were known
to have Familiars , beſides the Confeflions of Witches lately exe-
cuted herein expreffed , and fo they have now adays ; by which,
after their League made, they wok their miſchief, as is —
prove

7 imation ana Dijcovery of Witchcraft.

A Confirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft. 41
proved by their Confeſſions; as the faid Elizabeth Clark eonfeſſed,
who averred that all were Witches who had ſuch marks as the
was found withal, and had familiar ſpirits more or leſſe; and that
there were fome which had none; which! have found true; for
they have onely the brand, or devils mark, as | may {o call it: but
for the other, you may obſerve it as a genetal rule in all their Con-
feflions ; as John Byſack, alias Gleede, of Waldingtield magna in
the County of Suffolk, confeſſed that the devil came in at his win-
dow in the fhape of a rugged ſandy- coloured dog, which asked
him to deny God, Chriſt, and his Baptifm, which he ſpake with a
great hollow voice ; and he conſented. Then he faid Satan asked:
him for blood to ſeal and confirm the covenant or agreement; and
he bade him take it; and that Satan with his conſent had, in the
ſhape of ſuch a coloured dog, thorow his leather doublet, with
his claw. Then I asked him whereaway Satan had it: and he
ſaid, From his heart; and that Satan promifed to free him of hell-
torments, aud that he would ſend him other things which he muſt
let ſuck his blood, and they ſhould avenge him of all his enemies.
All which he ſaid he conſented to, and was willing withal; and
then ſoon after thofe came, which he called his Imps, and fucked
on thofe marks or teats which I found on his body, neer twenty
yeers together, fometimes once a week, ſometimes once a fort-
night, which he confeſſed came in the likeneſſe of Snails, onely
they differed one from another in colour and bignefle. Then I
asked him how they could fuck on that part of his body I found
the marks on: and he faid he ufed to lie down on his right fide
to let them fuck, and was willing withal : for he confeſſed he of-
tentimes arofe out of his bed, and made a fire, and lay down by it
to Jet them fuck his blood; which rifing outof his bed, and fire
making, his wife averred to be truth; yet fhe faid fhe never knew
or thought him to be fuch a manner of perſon; for fhe faid he
uſed to tell her he was ſick, and uſed to be troubled with a diſcaſe
which he could not help himfelf better for to eaſe himſelf of his
pain he uſed to be in, then by that means, and could not endure
his bed, his pain was fo troubleſome. But to clear all ſuſpicion
which after might fall on her thereby, fhe was ſearched, and found
clear, and no leſſe thought to be by her neighbours before and
ſince, as I have heard. He likewife confeſſed his Imps names

were Sydrake, leffry, Peter, Aylewardy Sacar, and Pyman 3 for he
ix

f

42 A Confirmation ana dijcoveryof Witchcraft.

fix by his confeſſion, and no leſſe by the number of his marks.
The firft was to kill all manner of fowls, which was the firit he
confeſſed he employed. The fecond was to kill ſneep and fuch-like
cattel. The third, hogs, and ſuch- like. The fourth, Cows, and
ſuch · like beats, The fifth, all manner of horſes. And the fixch,
Chriftians: and fo particular ized many miſchiefs he had done.

Sothey have their Familiars, ſome for one thing, and ſome for

another; ſome to help them at their needs, (though many times

therein they fail them) and others to work their mi(chiefs and
revenge, as the aforefaid John Wynnicke and many others have con-
feſſed. But lonely inftance their Confeflions in fhort, and but in
part onely, tending to that I quote them for as neer as cans For
could adde divers more to this, but many of the other in effect

tend to prove this; ſo do moſt of tlie Confeſſions little or

more depend one upon another: fo that I do but inftance part
of them, and of the effect of them, and not the third part of thoſe
Lhave ; for if 1 ſhould, I have many larger Confeflions; which
perchance might give better ſatisſaction to ſome: but I onely aim

at the principal heads, and to clear and make it appear, that what

hath been done, hath been in a legal way, and not unjuſtly, as ma-
dy have furmifed, but for the good of the Common- wealth, and
doubt not but agreeable to the Word of God. And that all chat
be thus in league, (as expreſſe or open league as aforeſaid) are to

be found out and Known by theſe evidences, be they of either

fort, bad, or white or good Witches fo called; firſn, by Witches
marks, which are moft commonly upon thofe bafer forts called
the bad and curſing Witch; and ſo upon the other called the good

or white Witch, though not fo eaſily found, (if but onely the

brand, or devils mark, as it may well be termed) but the other,

which the {pirits fuck of, are eaſily to be diftinguifhed and known

. 0 the other marks, but yet have as before (if an expreſſe
eague.

This is not to be doubted of; it isthe devils cuſtom to mark
his: God will have his mark for his, Ezek. 9. Rev. 7. the Beaſt
will have his mark, Rev. 13. So the devil himſelf will have his
mark, as you may ſee as well by the relations and confeſſions of
Witches, as alfo the witnefles of many learned men, writing of
Witches and Witchcraft. Therefore, where this mark is, there is

a league and familiar ſpirĩts more or leſſe; which marks are to be

found by ſearching. Now

8
i
j
i
j
1

Eai will fay , How fhall they be difcerned from natural
marks?
I anfwer : Firſt, as for that mark which comes by the fucking
or by the drawing of the {pirit or familiar, more or leſſe, which
is moſt commonly upon the baſer fort called the bad witch, and fo
many times upon the other ſo untruly called the good or white
witch, for all witches are bad indeed, though peradventure for the
moft part they have not commonly fo many Familiars as the o-
ther, yet I fay moft of them work by Familiars as well as the o-
ther, and fuckle them likewife,though not commonly above one.
They are to be known by thefe tokens, as by the inſenſibleneſſe of
them, ſometimes like a little teat or big, that is when it remains
as the Imp or Familiar fucks thereof : if outward, then nothin
to be difcerned but as a little bit of skin, which may be katur
and drawn out, and wrung, much like the finger of a glove, and
is very limber, and hath no ſubſtance in it, except it be when their
Imps have newly fucked them, and then it may be there may
a little watrith blood perceived, but may be known from natural
mar ks feveral ways; for it hath no fcar, but at the very top a lit-
tle hole, where the blood cometh out. But if ĩt be inward, then
it is beyond all natural marks, or where no fuch-like (if og
could poſſibly be, and remains but as a little red ſpot, much like, dr
licttle differing from a flea-bite ; onely it is out of the flefh above
it, when as the other is flat, but this as I fay is out above it, with
a whitifh end at the top, and may be known both of them by a.
ciccle about them, much like the circle of a womans breſt which
hath been tucked, and one may difcern the place where the blood
comes out: and many times it falleth out, if new fucked, the wa-
trifh blood may be ftroaked out, eſpecially in the time they be
Kept, if the watchers be careful to difcern when they be in moft
trouble, though their Familiars come never fo inſenſible: and
therein (as before) watching hath done good (though not depri-
ved of any thing neceſſary, as before.) And the skin may be pul-
led one fide from the other, and differeth from the other parts in
colour, and remains as if it were a dead place, and ſo it is infenfi-
ble of pricking and other ufage, if it be done in a direct manner;
and fo may be eafily difcerned from any natural mark other-
wife, if this were not fufficient to give ſatisfaction, which I doubt

not but it will, as I could a » if it were —
| or

44 Onjirmation ana Difcovery of Witch-crajt.

for giving offence to fome, nor a means to give fome of fuch per-
fons infight {o far, as thereby they might grow more experienced
to make away their marks, for that hath been too common a-
mongſt them already; for which I could inſtance many examples:
but you finde by their Confeſſions, that all of them tend to ma-
nĩfeſt, that their Familiars fuck upon thoſe marks which we firk
finde, which are before expreſſed, and therefore | forbear to in-
{tance any to that particular.
Sometimes they be like a blue ſpot, that is, when they make
them away, and then no more to be difcerned beſides the inſenſi-
bleneſſe thereof; but will grow or be drawn again by the ſucking
of their Imps or Familiars more or leſſe, for they cannot hide
them always : as one Marfb a woman ef Brampford confeſſed,
who had been ſearched two or three times one afte r another, and

no other marks could be found upon her: at length, the being ac-

cuſed by another of the fame town, was forthwith before fhe had
any knowledge thereof, or thoughts (as I ſuppoſe) of being fear-
ched again, taken by the Conſtables there in the ftreets, as fhe was
coming homeward to her own houſe, and brought to be ſearched
again, upon the others accufation : but as fhe came by her own
houſe, fhe defired to go in, {as fhe faid) to thift her ſelf, for that
8 was very unwilling (as fhe pretended) to go to the women to

fearched with a foul fhift on her back > bat the Conttable ha-
ving had notice of it formerly, not to fuffer her to go to do it, it
being known fhe did it before her former ſearching, brought her
forthwith away to the place where fhe was to be fearched ; and
when fhe was a ſearching, fhe was prefently found to have the
marks very apparent, and had a clean Shift on her back. But not
Jong after, in her Confeſſion, amongſt other things, {he confeſſed
that if fhe had been let go home to have ſhifted her feif , fhe had
not been found with the marks, for that fhe had a ſhift fo dreſſed,
that her marks could not have been found at preſent, and that ſhe

thereby ſo eſcaped by the ſame means the former ſearches; yet ſhe

was ſearched by thoſe which were the firſt that ever to my know-

ledoe found any of thoſe marks; and fo confeſſed that fhe had

made a covenant with the devil, and ſealed it with her blood, and
fet a round O to the paper the devil brought her, and confefled \
her Familiars, wick the fucking of them, and the miſchief fhe had
done by her Witchcraft, or at leaſt part of them, as fhe then yë
th er

)
| 4
| \
4

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 45

ther confeffed, and fuffered for the fame. Here you may obferve,
that the diligentneſſe of fearching is a great matter, and one of
the chiefeit points of their difcovery: For I have obferved this
one thing in my proceedings herein, that if all their marks,though
in feveral places, be not found, they will hardly confeſſe: but
when all are found, and the juit number of them more or lefe į
laid to their charge, aceording as they have, it is a great induce-
ment to bring them to confeſſion; and that hath made me careful
when apparent marks have not been ſeen at firſt, that a ſecond or
third ſearch be made : for itis a matter of concernment of life
and death; and therefore, as | conceive, it were fitting that thoſe
which ſearch, and thoſe with them, they having ſome intelligence
of the marks firſt given them, were ſworn before ſearching, that
diligent ſearch might be made in all places of ſuch as be ſuſpected
in ſuch a caſe of life and death, for the detection of ſo great a
height of ſin and impiety, that none that be guilty might eſcape
the punifhment due according to their deſerts here; and fo thoſe
likewiſe that wrongfully go under that aſperſion, be freed there-
of. To which endd it were fitting that fuch as did it might be fuch
as know what belongs to an Oath, and who make conſcience to
perform the ſame likewiſe; and ſuch as be at the ſearching, able
people, of difcretion and good carriage; for | fear that money
hath fwayed fome, and want of knowledge others.

Sometimes the flefh is funk in a hollow, that is, when they pull
them off, and pull them out with their nails, or otherwife caufe
them to be pulled off ; as one of Over in Cambridge-thire con-
feſſed, it being fo found and laid to her charge, that fhe heard of
our coming to town, and plucked her marks off the night be-
fore, becaufe fhe would not have been found, as fhe confeſſed be-
fore a juſtice of Peace of the fame town at large, both of the
Covenant and her Imps, and the harms fhe did both to him and
others by her Imps.

But fome will fay , It is ſtrange they fhould know when they
ſhould be fearched, if it be kept private.

I anfwer, Let it be kept never {o private, it hath been common,
and as common as any other thing, as they themfelves have con-

\ feffed : for fo did they of Fenny-Drayton in Cambridge-fhire,
who made very large Confeſſions, as, that the devil told them
of our coming to town, but =a told them 1 —
arche

1
‘|

46 Aconſirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft.

ſearched, but ſnould not be found; wherein they ſaid they found
him a lyar; and ſo they faid they did in his promiting them they
ſhould never want, which they did : and fo likewiſe chat is uſual
with others; but thofe made very large Confeſſions.

Alſo fometimes there is nothing to be diſcerned but red ſpots,
as if the skin were periſhed, (and {o itis ) for that is when they
onely cut them off, and apply no medicine at all to it; yet the
blood will appear all round within the circle, as afore is expreſſed.
And of thefe I have found divers; but for the moft part, thoſe
have been left for a fecond ſearch, or a third, as occafion or ground
ſufficient required. And of theſe though IHave found divers, yet
I have but one example by confeflion, and that is of one Clarke of

Keyſton in Huntington- hire, a young man, who was fo found,

and ſet at liberty, expecting to have been ſearched another time,
when he fhould not know of it; but he ſoon after confefled he
had cut off his marks, ſaying they were fools that were found
with the marks, for he had made fure he could not be found with
them, for he had cut off his two or three days before I fearched
him. But I perceived the blood, and{hewedit to the townſmen,
and told them that I thought he was naught, and guilty of that
fin, and doubted not thereof, but would not take oath , unleffe
the marks had been apparently feen upon him. |
` Now fome will fay, notwithftanding all this that is faid, There
may be and are natural marks like all theſe afore ſpoken of.

I antwer , For natural marks, as l conceive, there be Wens of
divers forts but view theſe well, and next adjacent to the flefh
they are very {mall, and hang like a thred, but from thence like a
teat or big; but feel of it, and ic is flefhie, and will not extend as
the other will do. | eit
: But fome will fay , It may be a rent, and ſo a piece of skin may

ang.

[ p This, though it be nothing but as a skin, yet it com-
eth firmly out of the flefh,and fiicks out like a big or teat,and not
hang down, when I conceive rents will either hang, or lie flat;
but if hang, then I believe a {car is to be ſeen, and feels flefhlike
befides: but theſe have no ſcar, onely as it were a little hole on
the top, where the blood comes out, which is eaſily to be difcern-
ed, for I have nipped blood out. And then likewife they be inſen-
fible, when the other be not: But | confeffe,if theſe be not pricked

tne

i
{
*
i
¢

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witcheraft. 47

the right way, they will feel ic likewife. Some have Warts ; but!

anſwer, They be out of the flefh as well as the other, but they are
flat and flefhie, and ſenſible, and will not any way extend: but fo
far unlike the other, zs I will not further ſpeak of them. Some
have Mouls; it is truth, I believe moft men have, though they be
of ſeveral colours; but thofe be flat to the fieh always, which is
nothing like the other, nor will extend, but is ſenſible.

But ſome will fay, It may be like the brand.

Tanfwer, No : for it differeth as well in colour, as alfo it hath
no circle about it, but is as the reſt of the skin is on the other
parts of the body onely differs fometimes in colour, but not like
the other, and is ſenſible: neither for the moft part have any of
the marks of thoſe which have fuffered been found, where there
were either Warts, Wens, or Mouls, or commonly rents, efpecial-
ly of the men.

But then fome will fay, There are Emrod- marks, and piles.

Tanfwer, True, but the Emrod-marks are upon the veins,
though they iffue out, and are to be diſcerned either by the co-
lour, or by the lying up of the veins; but if the veins be down,
ſtill, the colour remains in part, and are to be known that way:
But however, they will not extend to be drawn out and twiſted,
as the other will; if at all, l am ſure not ſo much; and if a little,
then it is pain, and the other none: for therein the inienſibleneſſe

dleers this expreſly; for ic cannot be conceived that any (hould be

Inſenſible upon their veins , and the other are meerly out of the
fleſn ; for I conceive if they were upon the veins, they would
bleed after they were fucked , and would not eafily be ſtenched a-
gain; neither be they fo inward as the Emrods marks, except the
inward marks, which are beyond them, and where no natural
caufe can be of that colour, and inſenſible And as for the Piles, I
think this is a ſufficient anſwer for that lixewife ; for they be out
of the veins, and are fenfible without queltion , and be flat, and
will not be extended as the other will. |

And then fome others will fay , But women have rents and o-
ther mifcarriages by childe-bearing.

I anfwer partly as before, and grant it for truth; but yet if that
way will neither ſcar appear, nor will it feel fleſhie, but will it be
extended as the other; admit all this were truth, | will afirm the

G 2 no.

colour differs, and that there will be no circle about it, nor twiſted

1
1
ih
Hg
1
1
i |
H:
a

48 4 Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.

nor have a hole as the other have, and be infenfible likewiſe, and
otherwife, as I could further explain more at large, if it were fit-
ting: for, All things (as the proverb is) ought not to be ſpoken at all
times, much leſſe printed. :
But if any fhall hereafter make any Objections againſt me (as
expect they will) I will then explain my ſelſ (through permitli-

on) as far as by experience Ihave found, or by reading or other-

wife my knowledge ſhall extend to. For I am confident, and my
confcience tells me, that thofe who {hall be found with thefe

marks; are exprefly guilty of that diabolical art or practice of

Witchcraft, whether they have done mifchief or not, but onely
for that they have renounced God and Chrift, and betaken them-

{elves to the devil, the utter enemy of God and all the world.
And I had rather be an intrument Cif any fuch thing ought to be)

to fave one who fhould confeſſe and humble himſelf, as Manaſſeb

did, then any of thoſe who, being found wich the marks upon

them, ſhall deny: but I fhal! forbear herein, where it nothin
concerns me, but thofe in authority; for I would not give of
fence to any, onely defire to cleer my ſelf, in giving ſatisfaction
to the world that my confcience is, that none of thefé forts ought
to live amongſt us; for by the Laws of God and the Realm, they
ought to die, as it is faid in the 18 of Deuteronomy. And then re-
member this one place, which is in Micah 5, where it is faid , that
when God intends to bleſſe a Nation, he will cut off or root out
all Witchcrafts and Inchantments: which I ſhould think ſhould
give all ſufficient ſatisfaction, that thofe which have thefe marks,
are in league and covenant with the devil, and that it is not to be
doubted but that there are Witches, and that thofe which have
the brand be alfo guilty as aforefaid , be they of either fort , and
are to be found as well as the other, by ſeai ching alfo ; yet 1 con-
feffe that is very difficult to be known, and very few ever attained
to the difcovery thereof: but it is to be known by the infenfible-
neſſe thereof, and otherwiſe, being drawn or fbrunk up fo with a
circle about it, as if the skin were ſtretched to that place, or
ſhrunk up aboutit; but very little by the colour, for that is as if
it were or had been fome natural cauſe, or where fome iflue had
been, when as the skin was never periſhed, as may be eafily difcer-
red; oncly it fhewsin the middle thereof, for the moft part, as if
a little hole had been, except it be {uch as the places mae ~
| 00

:
F

blood is fetched to feal the Covenant, which is onely like a natu-
ral mark, either long or otherwife,as natural marks be; onely it
ſeemeth to be deader and harder, and fo it is, and not fo tender as
other places be, or where plailiers have been ufed; but the other
is for the moft part round, but however, it hatha little circle a-
bout it, juſt adjacent to it, as if it were funk in all the circle a-
bout, and then within that, next adjacent to the circle, fomewhat
higher then the fleſh, and harder; and in the middle thereof, a lit-
tle hole ot pit fomewhat funk. Thisbrand or mark, if it come to
be tried for the inſenſibleneſſe, will ſoon be felt, if greater care be
not had in pricking of it; for though it be inſenſible a little way,
yet it is not ſo deep into the flefh as the others be, but fhews dead-
like, much like as if it had been ſeared with a hot-iron, and is

a the body, and in no fecret place, as the other be, but

differs a little in colour, as a feared place doth from another ; as I
might fomewhat inlarge, but I will not prefume too far, left others
fhould unadvifedly and raſhly proceed in the difcovery of ſuch
perfons wrongfully , and then fault me for the inſight; as hath.
been formerly done by ſome, who when they have done that they
are not able to give an account of, or render a reafon for, or per-
chance fay thoſe be guilty , where they finde fome other evidence
may be given that they be guilty, or where money will be largely

given that they are guilty , when as if they come to be further

queſtioned, they can onely fay they be fuch marks as ſuch a one
told me; and {o likewife can fay, I have feen fome have fuch marks
in the Jail, of his finding out, or fome who have confeffed:when
as they themſelves cannot diftinguifh between natural marks, and
thoſe, neither indeed know them afunder, but however, know but
one fort of the marks, and fo let many eſcape, and I fear wrong-
fully thereby, or for lucre, accufe ; a fearful thing to be conſidered
of: And therefore I conceive it were fitting, that when ſuch come
to their trials in this Kinde, it might be done by thofe of know-
ledge and difcretion, and upon good grounds, and not by every
light-carriag’d houſwife, who regards more her own ends then
the life of a Chriftian ; who can render no other reafon, but that

they do but what they have learned (ome infight in, & fo go where

they are fent for, or elſe they would not do it; indeed for mo-
ney, and not for the Common-wealths yood, as may be ſeen by
their want of knowledge therein: For, as I faid, it had need be

done

~
a U y 7 í, 7 è
P
* 4
4
i
4
il
i
H
1
d
d H
pe
i}
H
1
HE
"E
1
7 1.
H |
1 |
J
1
: a
$ |
4 i |
2
f

—

finde an effect anſwerable to their expectation.

pie 41 UOT 7

done by able, difcreet, honeſt perfons, efpecially for theſe laſt men-
tioned, and upon good grounds, and other cleer evidences con-
curring with them. Yet I affirm that all that have theſe, or any of
theſe marks, are guilty of Witchcraft, if plainly made appear: for
could have ſpoken fomewhat more, both of wrongtully accu-

ſiag, and excuſing, onely 1 know it will then be judged that | do
it to take off all others, and that none, or but fuch as | like of,

were fitting to do it, and fo thereby take all upon my {elf ; which
know many in the world will be ready enough to cenſure of
me: But for my part, where one hath the leaſt infight herein, 1
wich there were hundreds in all Countries which had the whole,

and more then any now have; but onely that ſuch as be idle, or
unconſcionable of their ways, and careleſſe of men and womens

lives, or at leaſt unskilful in theſe ways, might not be ſuffered to

meddle {fn ſuch a buſineſſe of concernment of life and death, as
this is. As for this, and the lucre of money, l ſhall more fully clear
in the lat Objection in the cloſe hereof, to acquit my ſelf
thereof
Now for the implicite or ſecret League, if it be asked what theſe
be which thus work by Satan:
Ianſwer, in fome fort, by way of fimilitude, from the direction
of that place in Mark 9. 38, 40. and Luke 9. 49. For Satan will be
Gods ape in all things whatſoever he can, and therefore will he
alio imitate Chrift herein. They are {uch as invocate the devil by
certain ſuperſtitious forms of words, and prayers, believing that
theſe means can effect what they have offered them for, and do
withal earneſtly deſire to have them eſfectual. Now the devil
herein confenteth , and affordeth his power, at the utterance of
the words, to bring the thing to paffe which is deſired. Here there-
fore is a Covenant and mutual conſent on both fides : for if a

man or woman be content to uſe ſuperſtitious forms of invocati-
on for help in time of need, and in uſing them deſireth in heart to

have the thing effected; if the devil work the feat, there is a fecret
compact for they have deſired and he hath conſented. They are
ſuch as do know, that neither by Gods work in nature, nor by

Gods ordination from his Word, the things they do are warrant- |

able, (but rather hear fuch things forbidden) and that they alfo are
abſurd to common reaſon, aud yet will do them, becauſe they

Hereto

*

Hereto I might adde the healing of a wound by anointing the
inftrament which gave the wound , Spell-fetters, and Charmers,
and fuch-like, who many of them are in expreſſe league as afore-
{aid : for the devil contenteth himfelf ſometimes, to wit; there
where he well perceiveth the party will not be brought to the o-
ther, and lets them pleaſe themfelves with hope of Gods mercy,
employing them onely about ſeeming- good things, for that in fo
doing they ſuppoſe they fin not, nor are in danger ot the devil,
nor under Gods wrath. as the other are, becauſe they fall not fo
foully into the pit of deſtruction by an expreſſe league, as the o- |
ters do, and make an outward fhew of Religion as well as o- f

«thers.
For what can be faid of thoſe who onely cure diſeaſes by laying 1
on their hands, and ufing certain words or forms of prayers? lTs p
it not done by this fecret Compact, though ignorantly they think i |
otherwiſe? For if che remedy be not natural, then it is ſuperna-
tural; if ſupernatural, then either from God, and ſo hath war-
rant from his Word, and is ordinary, not miraculous; for that
work of God hath ceaſed long ſince: or elſe is from the devil, as |
works wrought by Spells and Charms, and ſuch- like, forbidden |
by God. Yetthefe forts of perfons, finding their practices ſucceſ- |
ful, are not againſt Satan, nor can lightly {peak ill of his working
ower, becaufe of their fecret and implicite league they have with
im, and efpecially becaufe of the profit they findecome to them
thereby. And herein alfo doth the devil imitate Chriſt, who al-
lowed ſome, which openly as yet did not follow him, to have |
power to caſt out devils, Mark 9. 38, 39. who were not, as he faid, | | |
againſt him, nor could lightly {peak ill of him, nor of his power, |
by reafon of their fecret andimplicite faith, and covenant with |
Chrift; yet didit, becasf they found ſucceſſe in it. 1
So likewife in the Scripture is found the cutting off hair, and I
burning it, Numb. 6. 18. the writing of words, and the blotting fi
of them out again, and to give them unto one, Numb. 5. 23. Al-
fo the giving of aportion, Numb. 5.27. So Satan teacheth his
to cut off hair and burn it; as the White-Witch will do to fuch
as come to them, advifing them to cut hair, orfuch-like, off the
beaſt they ſuſpect to be bewitched, and to write a Charm, and to
blot it out, and then give it one; alſo to uſe portions; thus
feeming, by thefe imitations, to ar Scripture for their warrant.

And

82 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witch-cra ft.
And fo after this manner l might reckon up ſeveral other ways:
as, the Lord had ſome which by curſing and threatning procured
evil upon others, 2 Kings 2.24. Ads 13. fo Satan hath fuch,
which by curling and threats proeefre mifchiefs upon others, as
you may plainly fee by their Confeſſions. ANA |

Alſo the Lord tied histo certain Rules and Ordinances in his
Service, and ſometimes to a certain number, Joſb. 6. 15. 1 Kings 17.
21. So Satan tieth his Witches to certain words and deeds in
going about his ſervice, and to obſerve numbers, and to do a
thing fo and fo often, three times, feven times, or ſuch- like, as
! the White Witches do: and fo intitate Chrift in many things, as
| his Aſſemblies and Sabbaths , Baptifm and Covenants ; fo Satan
-hath all his, after his manner, as Rebecca Weft and Elizabeth Clarke
| _confeffed, as well in thefe as in other particulars, as you may finde
| as well by theirs and others Confeſſions, as alfo by the Writings
| a of learned men who have writ concerning the fame. 2
And further, as the Lord had fuch as cured diſeaſes by words,
by prayers , and did anoint the party infirm ; as by fomething
btought them from the fick, and carried to the fick again, James 5.
‘Mark 6. 13. s 19. 12. So hath Satan fuch as feem by words to
cure difeafes, by forms of prayers, and by oils ; and alfo by bring-
ing fomething from the fick party, and carrying the fame back
So the Lord by his ſervants raifed ſome from the dead, 1 Kings
17. 2 1. A€is9. 40. and likewife Satan maketh fhew by his fer-
vants to raile up the dead, 1 Sam.28. ea
And as the Lord maketh ſome to be his, either by hisimmediate
inſpiration, and {peaking to them, or winneth them to him by
his inſtruments: fo Satan maketh ſome Witches by inward fug-
| geſtions, and his {peaking to them, or by uling other Witches to
| gain them to him; as you may finde alfo by their Confeſſions. And
| that as the Lord ſpake by a beaſt unto a Witch, Numb. 22. 28. fo
Satan ſpeaketh to Witches, fometimes in one ſbape, and fonie-
times in another.
So likewiſe, as the Lord ordained Sacrifices to be offered to
him, Satan hath taught his to do {o too, Numb. 23.
And as the Lord promifed earthly bleſſings, to ftir up people to
ſerve him; fo Satan, as you may finde, is very large in his pro-
miles to fuch as will ferve him, Matth. 4. Paes

And

| a all

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. $3

And fo it is in many i as might well be obfer-
ved, if you do but rightly obſerve their Confeſſions, with their
carriages, and Satans doings. 5
But here ſome will ſay; Is there no other way to finde them
out, but onely by ſearching?

fanfwer, That is both the mof ready and certain way, and
ſuch a way, as that, if they which undertake it be careful, there
can be no miſtake, eſpecially in thoſe who ſnall be found to have
the marks; and for the other, if in expreſſe league, then by the
brand; if implicite, then by the aforeſaid reaſons, and by their
carriages. Yet they may be found dy Witches words alſo, as
when he or fhe hath been heard to call upon their ſpirits, or to
ſpeak to them, or talk of them to any, inticing them to receĩve
fuch Familiars. As fome of thoſe of Rattleſden confeſſed that
they had their Familiars from old mother Orvis ; {o had Elizabeth
Clarke from Anne Weft, and ſo had her daughter from her, Anne
Clarke from her mother, and her mother from another; fo in ma-
ny other particulars. As alfo, when they have been heard telfing
of killing of fome man or beaſt, or of the hurting of them; or
when they. have not onely threatned revenge upon any or their
cattel, but have told particularly what ſhall happen to ſuch a one,
and the fame found true ; and their boaſting afterward thereof.
Furthermore, if they have been heard to fpeak of their tranſpor-
tation from home to certain places of their meetings with others
there, as was at Manningtree , Burton, Old, Trilbrook-buthes,

Theſe and ſuch like, as you may finde by their Confeſſions,
prove a leagne and familiarity alſo with the devil.

So alio by Witches deeds, as when any have feen them with
their {pirits, or feen to feed fome creatures ſecretly; or where the
Witch hath pat ſuch, which may be known by the ſmell of the
place; for they will fink deteſtably, which we have often found
true in the time they have been kept , if their Imps or Familiars
came to ſuck in the mean time, as you may finde they often have.
Alſo when it can be found that they have made pictures; as I
have credibly heard of one of Yarmouth, who ſince the afore-
mentioned time fuffered there, and confeſſed that fhe had made
a picture of wax or clay, I do not well remember which, of the
proportion of a childe which ge was intended to work her rev

chie

— —

1

54 A confirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft.
chief againft, and had thruſt a nail in the head thereof, and fo had
buried it in a place, which fhe then confeſſed; and that as that con-
fumed, fo ſhould the childe, and did, a long time, as I was told
by Maſter Hopkins, who was there, and took her Confeſſiou, and
went to look for the picture; and that the childe (as | have
heard) did foon after mend, and grew luſty again. A helliſh in~
vention. |

And fo many fuch Witchery-tricks, both of this kinde and o-
therwiſe, have thus been lately found out: as, the giving any
thing to any man or other creature, which immediately caufed
either pains or death ; as was at Brampford and other places, as
you may alfo finde by their Confeflions. So likewife by laying
on their hands, or by ſome one or more fellow-Witches confeſ-
fing their own Witchcraft, and bearing witneſſe againſt others,
ſo as they can make good the truth of their witneſſe, and give
ſufficient proof thereof, as, that they have {een them with their
{pirits, or that they have received their ſpirits from them, as be-
forefaid ; or that they can tell when they uſed their Witchery-

tricks to do harm, or joyned with them; as thoſe of Manning-

tree and other places at their meetings uſed to do: or that they
told them what harm they had done, or that they can fhew the
mark upon them, or ſuch- like; or by the Witches confeſſing of
giving their ſouls to the devil, and of the ſpirits which they have,
and how they come by them, and the ſuckling of them, and ſuch
other like ways, as y ou may gather by their Confeſſions.

All which, notwithſtanding, principally depends upon ſearch-
ing, which is the readieft way to bring them to theſe Confeſ-
fions.

Alſo fome witneſſe of God himfelf happening upon the exe-
crable curfes of Witches upon themfelves , praying God to fhew
{ome token, if they be guilty; who by bitter curſes upon them-
ſelves, think thereby to clear themfelves : as one Binkes of Ha-
verill in Suffolk, who confeſſed to me that ſhe was guilty, and
amongſt other things told me, that the Fly which was ſeen to
fiie about the chamber, was one of her Imps ; but defired to ſpeak
with one Matter Faireclioth, who lived not above two miles, or
thereabouts, from the Town, being an able Orthodox Divine;
who was immediately ſent for, and came. This woman, not-
withſtanding her confeſſing to me, denied all to him, me

j

j

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witcheraft. 53
and defiring wichal, that if the were fuch a manner of per-
fon, that the Lord would fhew an example upon her; and
that if fhe had any Imps, that they would come whilft he was
there: prefently after, fhe cries out, A juſt judgement of
God, they are come indeed, faid fhe. This Imp, in the fame
ſhape it was feen formerly flying in the room, was feen faſten-
ed upon another place of her body, not tar from the other
matks, but not upon them, aud fo remained above half a quar-
ter of an hour, till fome women came neer a quarter of a
mile, who ſaw it faſtened on her body, ſhe onely crying out
to have it pulled off, which at firſt they were fearful to do; but
at length they wiped it off, as they fay, with a cloth; and what
became of it after, they knew not; but it had drawn a new
mark, like the other.

Was this woman fitting to live, this evidence, with others,
being againſt her, by eredible witneſſes? I am fure fhe was li-
ving not long fince, and acquitted upon her trial: for fhe ne-
ver confeſſed any more, but denied what fhe had formerly con-
feſſed.

Here you may take notice, firſt, that if they have their Fami-
liars come to them either before or after confeſſion, they will
not confeſſe till another time, or deny, and therein watching
is of ſome confequence, till they be examined by a Juftice of
Peace, or elle they muk expect but few conſeſſions. This was
obſerved as well by thoſe at Bury, as indeed for the moſt part
of all thoſe now lately detected. And ſecondly, the extreme
pain they put them to, efpecially when they firſt draw their
marks, as moft of them generally confeſſt: ie :

And Fhave obferved in the time they have been kept, that
if thé Imps be a fucking, it is eaſie to be diſcerned and known;
for then they will either covet to ruck or fit down upon the
ground, or will lie fhrinking up all of a heap, making fowre
faces, as if they were in extreme pain: fo that they may be
eafily difcerned by their carriage and geſtures, whether any
thing come to them, or not, while they be kept. |

Alo I have read that a Witch, in fome cafes, hath been
brought to a dead party, who hath been ſuſpected to have been
bewitched by that Witch., to 1 71 the dead corps; which

was

j 1
4

f

55 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.

. rsa ri ſooner touched by the Witch, but the corps bled fieth
ood. 7 |
Theſe and fuch-like evidences may ſometimes, though per-
adventure not always be gjven from God, when he is pleafed to
detect fuch malefactors guilty of blood, as well as in other ca-
{es of murther.
And thus you may plainly fee that Witches may be difcover-
ed, albeit there be ſome difficulty therein, and may likewife
be brought to confeſſe their Witchcraft; as alfo , that there be
Witches in thefe our days, nay I rather think more frequent
then formerly : for if Satan be fuch a powerful deceiver and
ſeducer, who can make an Eve in Paradiſe ( being in the ftate
of perfection) to believe him, the devil, before God; can he
not ſeduce now ? Yes certainly, more deſperately, to manifeft
his bloody malice ia theſe later times againſt mankinde, and
therefore he hath now adays ſtirred up fuch. cruel Witches as
be wholly fet upon revenge, tormenting men and women, and
their cattel, and making a trade of killing and murdering : of
which fort the Scripture hardly gives an inftance, except it be in
Balaam, hired to curſe Gods people.

Let us therefore learn to follow the Lord, and hate Witches,
Wizzards, Magicians, Soothfayers, Fortune-tellers, Inchanters,
Japling companions, andall others that deal in Sorcery and

itchcraft, beholding in them a ſpectacle of mans miſery, as
being left of God unto the power of the devil, and fo be mo-
ved with compaſſion towards them, and pray for their conver-
ſions. Yet confider, though they be left of God for a time, yet
not all ſo left, nor ſo dreadſully catched by Satan, but that they
may, through the mercy of God, be his fervants, and convert-
ed, as none can deny but Manaffeh was; and fo put a diffrence
between their fearful fin and their perfons ; hate the one, but
not the other ; hate the one in confcience to Gods command-
ment, utterly forbidding to regard fuch, Levit.19.31. for it is
{piritual whoredomand defilement, Levit. 26. 6. becaufe fuch
as ufed them were Heathens, as, the Egyptians, Canaanites,
Philiſtines, and Caldeans. Such as in lirael followed the Hea-
thenifh cuſtoms, were wicked and ungodly; as Saul, who was
amurderer, 1 Sam. 22. a profane neglecter of Gods 3

1 Chron.

A

A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft. 57
1 Chron. 13. 3. and one whom God had forſaken, and taken
his Spirit from, 1 Sam. 16. 14. an evil ſpirit Iixewiſe was up-
on him, neither did God vouchſaſe him any an{wer by ſacred
means, 1 Sam. 18. 16. and therefore he fell to Witches. |
And what was Manaſſeb, but an idolater, and an obſerver of
times, and fo fell co Witchery, and to {fuch as had Familiars ?
And the people which delighted in thefe, were haters of true
Teachers, and believed falfe Prophets, Dreamers, and Diviners,

Ferem. 27. 9. and with us, what are they, but vain loofe li-

vers, fuperftitious Neutrals, and fuch-like ? But let them re-
member, that it will be but bitterneſſe in the end. |
Let Saul and Manaſſeb be a warning to all of this kinde, be-
fides examples abroad, and in Hiſtories, with thoſe amongſt
our felves, which may ferve to terrifie all good Chriftians
from feeking unto or regarding fuch : for it is plainly faid,
Tube Lord ſetteth his face againſt {uch , to cut them eff, Levit. 20. 6,
And if God be againſt them, what nfay they look for in the
end, ſeeing the leaſt of theſe do intice people from God, in
requiring faith of them, and do caufe the people to runa
whoring after them? as Mofes fpeaketh, Levit.20. 6
Being therefore in league with Satan and abominable ide la-
ters, inticing people from their faith inGod, they are there-
in worthy to die, or at leaſt to receive punifhment according
to the Statutes ; for many of them are hurting Witches, as
well as curing, and certainly to be difcovered and known,
with far leſſe difficulty then the other; for they are to be dif-
cerned by their practices here, working openly by their cares,
Sc. when as the other work onely fecretly and in darkneſſe.
And ſurely let no man doubt but that the finding out of fuch
mifcreants is an acceptable fervice before God, ele why
fhould the Lord have given ſuch command to the children of
2 „and to have driven out the Nations from before them
for thoſe abominations , and to cauſe his owne people to
be led into captivity for thofe fins, threatning judgements
upon them, and likewiſe againit thofe who ſhould ſuffer any

ſuch abominations amongſt them; as in divers places bot

in the Prophecies of Jeremiah and Iſaiab, befides many other

places of Scripture both in the Old and New Teſtament, afore-
7 menti-

| =
?

58 . AConfirmation and aijcovery of Wrichcrajt.

mentioned. Nay, there are threatnings againſt fuch as fhall
but refort unto them, as in Exod. 20. 6. and fo in divers other
places before mentioned. |

And doth not the Lord by the Prophet Micah promife to
cut off Witchcraft out of the land, and that they ſhould have
no more Soothſayers, in the time that he intended to bleſſe a
Nation? Mica) 5. 12.

And in truth, was there no alteration in England at the
beginning and continu :nce of the ſuppreſſion of this fin, and
in fome Counties more then others? And who are they
chat have been againſt the proſecution of, or been partakers
with ſuch, but onely fuch as (without offence | may {peak
it } be enemies to the Church of Ged ? 1 dare not inſtance,
not onely for fear of offence, but alfo for ſuits of Law.
For was there not above fourty in Effex, (as take it) all

in Tendring- hundred, there where fome were diſcovered, il-
legally outlawed, contrary to the Law of this Realm, upon
a Writ of Confpiracy (as I have been credibly informed) 14
being one of the number, as I was likewife informed by fome
which were my neighbours when I lived there, by the means
of one who is reported to have been one ef the greateſt a-
gents in Colcheſter- buſineſſe, within the Town; when as there
was never any notice given to any upon the Proclamations,
asought, I am fure? This man, with another who is like-
wife reported to have been fellow-agent with him in that
buſineſſe, and the two chiefeft in it, was the cauſe that fome
were not queſtioned in that Town: but for his part, I faw
him labour and endeavour all he could to keep this woman,
whom he fo much held withal from her legal Trial, and
likewife heard him threaten both me and all that had given
evidence againſt her, or informed what manner of woman
fhe had been in her life and converſation, to their know-
ledge, or as they had heard: Yea, as I fince have heard, the
was condemned at thet Aſſize, and by his procurement re-
prieved. Since which time, on her behalf, this hath been
done.

Was not this an animation to all ſuch people in thofe
parts, when fo many Gentlemen and Yeomen thereabouts

ſhould

>

%,
ə
*
t
*
5
a

AConfirmation and Diſcovery of Witchcraft. 59
fhouldbe thus queftioned for teltifying their knowledge? And
was it not a fit object for the devil, to work upon others?
Let the world judge. For! have heard many of them fay, that
the devil hath inticed them to Witchcraft by fome Sermons 4
they have heard preached; as when Miniſters will preach of
the power of the devil, and his tormenting the wicked, and
fuch-like : as I have heard fome fay (I will not fay, in the |
place where now live) that the devil will fit and laugh at ſuch
and ſuch offenders when he torments them, and will jeer at
chem in tormenting them, when he hath got them. A fearful _
thing! whenas the devil is tormented himſelf, and torment 5
eth none; for it isthe wrath of God for ſins committed, and
the judgements of God for his mercies abuſed.
Theſe and ſuch · like ſpeeches, I have keard them fay, the de-
vil hath made uſe of to perſwade them to Witchery; coming
to them, and asking them, How do you think to be faved? | |
for your ſins are fo and fo , (as he can fet them out large e- :
nough ) and you heard the Miniitec fay that I will torment
you: Give me your foul , and agree with me, and | will free |
you of helf-torments. Ignorant people have been thus feda-
ced. Therefore it behovcs all to be careful in giving the devil
the leaſt advantage, and to put a difference between their fear-
ful ſin and their perſons, hating the one, but not the other,
for that by corrupt nature we are no leſſe apt to be miſled by
him then they, wal king in fins and treſpaſſes, Epbeſ. 2. 1.
But in obedience to the Law of God, and accomplifhment:
of all things in the Scripture contained, ſuch ought not to live
amongſt us, leſt the Lord ſhould deal with us as he did with
others for the fame abominations; much leſſe ſhould any har-
bour fuch thoughts, as that there are not any: for did not the
Lord leave ſome of the nations, to try and prove Iſtael? Judg.
2 and 3. and doth not 8. John fay, (Matth. 3. 7.) O generation
of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wraih to come ? Do
not they, when they covenant with the devil to free them of
hell-torments, who cannot free himſelf of them, flee ( as
much as in them lieth) from the wrath to come?
As for you that are of fuch an opinion, furely, if neither
all the chreatnings and judgements 7 God againft ſuch, be-

i
8
i
i

58 A Confirmation and diſcover of Witchcraft.

mentioned. Nay, there are threatnings againſt ſuch as ſhall
but reſort unto them, as in Exod. 20. 6. and ſo in divers other
places before mentioned.
And doth not the Lord by the Prophet Micah promife to
cut off Witchcraft out of the land, and that they ſhould have
no more Soothſayers, in the time that he intended to blefie *
Nation? 5. 12.
And in truth, was there no alteration in England at the
beginning and continue nce of the ſuppreſſion of this fin, and
in ſome Counties more then others? And who are they
that have been againſt the proſecution of, or been partakers
with ſuch, but onely fuch as (without offence | may ſpeak
it } be enemies to the Church of Ged ? | dare not inſtance,
not onely for fear of offence, but alfo for ſuits of Law.
For was there not above fourty in Effex, (as take it) all
in Tendring- hundred, there where fome were diſcovered, il-
legally outlawed , contrary to the Law of this Realm, upon
a Writ of Confpiracy (as I have been credibly informed) I
being one of the number, as I was likewife informed by fome
which were my neighbours when I lived there, by the means
of one who is reported to have been one ef the greateft a-
gents in Colcheſter- buſineſſe, within the Town; when as there
was never any notice given to any upon the Proclamations,
as ought, I am ſure? This man, with another who is like-
wiſe reported to have been fellow- agent with him in that
buſineſſe, and the two chiefeft in it, was the cauſe that ſome
were not queſtioned in that Town : but for his part, I faw
him labour and endeavour all he could to keep this woman,
whom he ſo much held withal from her legal Trial, and
likewiſe heard him threaten both me and all that had given
evidence againſt her, or informed what manner of woman
fhe had been in her life and converſation, to their know-
ledge, or as they had heard: Yea, as I ſince have heard, the
was condemned at thet Aſſize, and by his procurement re-
ganat Since which time, on her behalf, this hath been
one.
Was not this an animation to in ſuch people in thoſe
parts, when fo many Gentlemen and Yeomen thereabouts

- — — —— — - ꝗ—zdd11U—Um — — — j—P] ̃ — -
+
4
—

AConfirmation and Difeovtry of Witchcraft. 59°
fhouldbe thus queftioned for teſtifying their knowledge? And
was it not a fit object for the devil, to work upon others?
Let the world judge. For! have heard many of them fay, that

the devil hath inticed them to Wicchcraft by fome Sermons
they have heard preached ; as when Miniſters will preach of
the power of the devil , and his tormenting the wicked, and
fuch-like : as I have heard fome fay (I will not fay, in the
place where I now live) that the devil will fit and laugh at fuch

and fach offenders when he torments them, and will jeer at
chem in tormenting them, when he hath got them. A fearful
thing! whenas the devil is tormented himſelf, and torment-
eth none; for itis the wrath of God for ſins committed, and
the judgements of God for his mercies abuſed.

Theſe and ſuch · like ſpeeches, I have keard them fay, the de-

vil hath made uſe of to perſwade them to Witchery ; coming
to them, and asking them, How do you think to be faved >?

for your fins are fo and fo , (as he can fet them out large e-
nough ) and you heard the Miniter (ay that I will torment
you: Give me your foul , and agree with me, and I will free
you of hel- torments. Ignorant people have been thus feda-
ced. Therefore it behovcs all to be careful in giving the devil
the leaſt advantage, and to put a difference between their fear-
ful ſin and their perſons, hating the one, but nőt the other,
for that by corrupt nature we are no leſſe apt to be miſled by
him then they, walking in fins and treſpaſſes, Ephe/.2.1.

But in obedience to the Law of God, and accompliſhment
of all things in the Scripture contained, ſuch ought not to live
amongſt us, leſt the Lord ſhould deal with us as he did with
others for the ſame abominations; much leſſe ſhould any har-
bour ſuch thoughts, as that there are not any: for did not the
Lord leave ſome of the nations, to try and prove Iſtael? Fudge
2 and 3. and doth not S8. John fay, (Matth. 3. 7.) O generation
of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wralb to come ? Do
not they, when they covenant with the devil to free them of
hell-torments, who cannot free himſelf of them, flee (a
much as in them lieth) from the wrath to come?

As for you that are of fuch an opinion, ſurely, if neither
all the threatnings and judgements * God againft ſuch, be-

ſides

60 A Confirmation and Difcovery of Witchcraft.

fides their own Confeflions , will not prevail with you, me-
thinks the mercies of God ſhould, in that fifth of Micab; for it
is undeniably true, that there was, is, and {hall be Witches,
till Chrifts conqueſt there fpoken of, agreeable with that in
Revel. 20. 1, 2, 3. which as yet cannot be: for without doubt
the devil is bule in deceiving of Nations, and that not onely
ſuch as know not Chriſt, but others alſo; which could not
be, if he were bound; nor the Jews or other Nations ſtill to
come: but other places of Scripture would be contradicted.
And therefore every one muſt conclude with me, that (as yet)
of Witchcraft there is no end.
Now whofoever thou beeft that thinkeft I ever. made fuch
gain of the way, or favoured any, and perfecuted others, or
took bribes, I call God to witneſſe, that conſidering the charge
of going to feveral places, and Aſſizes, and Goal-deliveries,
and the cime I expended thereabouts, I never, one time with
another, got fo much as] did by my Calling and Practice, to-
wards the maintenance of my family. And as for taking any
money, or other thing, by way ot bribe or gift, I never did, to
the value of one peny, neither one way nor other, but what
I openly took in the view of the Townfmen where l came;
and that in many places I never received peny as yet, nor any
am like, notwithſtanding I have hands for fatisfaction, except
I ſhould fue ; but many rather fall upon me for what hath been
received: but I hope {uch Suits will be difannulled , and that
where I have been out moneys for Towns in charges and other-
wife, ſuch courfe will be taken, that ] may be ſatisfied and
paid with reafon. And for ever accuſing one wrongfully, my
conſcience is clear before the Almighty: and ] ever defired
equal punifhment to all that were guilty , or at leaſt, if any fa-
vour, that ic might be to thoſe who coufeſſed: but thoſe ftill
fuffered, and others, though never fo uilty, efcaped. The rea-
fon why! did thus, was, becaufe I defired fo to ſatisfie the
world in this particular, that ic muſt needs be a great errour
to fave fuch, and not to queſt ion others at all, as before men-
ticned, they being all guilty alike. Foi
Andin truth, concérning him who is dead, who likewife
Was

<
12
d
Å
a
*
-

A Confirmation and Difcovery of V itchcraft. 61

Was an agent in the buſineſſe, for my part, I never knew that
he either unjuſtly favoured any, or received bribes, or ufed fuch
-extremity as was reported of him; onely at firſt, before he or
Tever went, many Towns uled extremity of them̃ſelves, which
after was laid on us. And! do not deny but at firſt he might
watch ſome; but to my knowledge, he ſoon left it, or at leaſt
in (ich a way as not to make them uncapable : but if he
ever did at firſt, evidence was not taken till after they reſted.
And for my part, I never watched any at firſt, fo as any way
at all to diſturb them in their brains; but when ſome have
been watched before I have come to them, I have cauſed them
to tall their reſt, before I would ever queſtion with them: but
now lately, and ever fince the Michaelmas after the firſt begin-
ning, I never ufed any but as aforeſaid, with confent of the
Juftices, and not otherwife, norever did But tomy know-
ledge, we have been both much injured in words, and he ſince
his death: but I am certain ( notwithftanding ‘whatfoever
hath been faid of him ) he died peaceably at Manningtree, after-
along ſickneſſe of a Conſumption, as many of his generati-
on had done before him, without any trouble of confcience
for what he had done, as was falſly reported of him. And
though many of theſe things may ſeem very ſtrange, and hard-
ly to be believed, yet this is the very truth; and that he was
the fon of a godly Miniſter, and therefore without doubt with-
inthe Covenant. Therefore let no man take upon him either
to fpeak or write more then he knoweth to be truth; ſor this

am able to maniĩfeſt and prove to be truth.

And fo I leave my ſelf to the cenſure of the world, yet
detire ic might be left to the Almighty, who knoweth the le
crets of alfhearts: For, dleffed are they that do his command-
ments, Revel. 22. 14.

